==PAGE:1==
Identification of Structural Damage
Through Dynamic Excitation
Master’s Thesis, January 2023
Authors:
Nicolai Søndergaard Jensen (s173749)
Tobias Lykke Pinndal (s165508)
==PAGE:2==
NICOLAI SØNDERGAARD JENSEN (S173749)
TOBIAS LYKKE PINNDAL (S165508)
Identification of Structural Damage
Through Dynamic Excitation
- Comprising Impact Hammer Testing for EMA and Random
Vibration Testing for OMA
Supervisors:
Holger H. Koss, Associate Professor, Department of Civil &
Mechanical Engineering
Sandro Diord Rescinho Amador, Assistant Professor, Department of
Civil & Mechanical Engineering
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2023
==PAGE:3==
Identification of Structural Damage Through Dynamic Excitation
This report was prepared by:
Nicolai Søndergaard Jensen (s173749)
Tobias Lykke Pinndal (s165508)
Supervisor(s):
Holger H. Koss, Associate Professor, Department of Civil & Mechanical Engineering
Sandro Diord Rescinho Amador, Assistant Professor, Department of Civil & Mechanical En-
gineering
DTU Construct
Department of Civil & Mechanical Engineering - Structures & Safety
Technical University of Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 45 25 19 60
Project period:
August 2022 - January 2023
ECTS:
30
Education:
Civil Engineering (MSc)
Field:
Structural Engineering
Class:
No confidentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for
graduation in the above education at the Technical University of Den-
mark.
==PAGE:4==
Preface & Acknowledgement
This thesis constitutes the final assignment as a partial fulfillment of the requirements for the
degree of Master of Science (MSc) in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Den-
mark (DTU). The project period lasted from August 2022 - January 2023 and is credited to
30 ECTS points for both Nicolai Søndergaard Jensen (s173749) and Tobias Lykke Pinndal
(s165508). Both authors acknowledge to have contributed equally to the work and take equal
responsibility. The theme of this thesis was suggested by the supervisors and is an extension
of several projects involving vibration-based methods to detect structural damage in traditional
balcony structures.
The authors would like to express their deepest gratitude to the supervisors of this thesis, Asso-
ciate Professor Holger H. Koss and Assistant Professor Sandro Diord Rescinho Amador, from
the department of Civil & Mechanical Engineering (DTU). Our weekly meetings with discus-
sions, advice, and feedback have been of immeasurable value. They have been showing a great
interest in the project including their availability which has been highly appreciated. Also a
great thanks to the technical staff team at DTU test facilities in building 119. They have as-
sisted with experimental test setup, purchase of materials, and additional preparation. Lastly,
a big thanks to our family and friends who have been supportive and helpful professionally as
well as socially throughout the process.
Kgs. Lyngby January 29, 2023
Nicolai Søndergaard Jensen (s173749)
Tobias Lykke Pinndal (s165508)
i
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The majority of balcony structures built in Denmark before the 1950s have proved to be in very
poor condition due to corrosion in the outrigger steel beams. This has led to several danger-
ous incidents over the past years where balconies have collapsed. The current method used to
assess the safety of balconies is both destructive, costly, and requires construction expertise.
Thus, there is an unmet need for a more effective and non-destructive method to assess the state
and safety of old balconies.
This thesis aims to investigate dynamic excitation as a non-destructive solution to detect struc-
tural damage in traditional balcony structures. This investigation involves a scaled balcony
setup which is examined at four different states ranging from undamaged (O) to complete
degradation of the top flanges in the steel beams (F3). This examination includes different
identification and excitation techniques as well as modal analysis methods. The modal anal-
ysis approach is used to identify the dynamic properties of the first five global modes of the
scaled balcony replica. The experimental investigation includes Experimental Modal Analy-
sis (EMA) through impact hammer testing and Operational Modal Analysis (OMA) through
random vibration testing. OMA utilizes two different identification techniques: Frequency Do-
main Decomposition (FDD) and Time Domain Poly Reference (TDPR). Concurrently with the
experimental investigation, a numerical model is computed in ANSYS for the scaled balcony
structure to support the application of digital twinning in association with dynamic testing.
The experimental work in this thesis revealed that the two non-destructive excitation methods,
OMA and EMA, can be utilized to detect decreases in the dynamic properties of a degraded
balcony structure. For both methods, it applies that one should be aware that the dynamic pa-
rameters obtained from vibrational analysis appear to be very insensitive to damage. This is
due to the small change in frequency compared to the change in static properties which exposed
to the same damage had a significantly larger reduction of the static load capacity. The neces-
sity of awareness and enhanced collection of data is prominent, thus, to get a holistic picture
of a balcony’s modal parameters, it is recommended to perform both the OMA and the EMA
test as each method offers unique advantages. This study supplies the potential for using both
OMA and EMA methods to detect decreases in the dynamic properties of a degraded balcony
structure. However further studies of the digital twin as well as the balcony’s scalability and
adaptation to real balconies are required in order to assess the state and safety of old balconies.
ii
==PAGE:6==
Table of Content
1
Introduction & Hypothesis
1
1.1
Background & Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Sstate of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objectives of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
7
2.1
General Dynamic Theory for MDOF Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
25
3.1
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Material Parameters - Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Material Parameters - Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Material Parameters - Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.5
Degradation of Steel Beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.6
Dynamic Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4
Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
79
4.1
Digital Twinning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
4.2
Static Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
4.3
Dynamic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5
Comparison of Results
97
5.1
Comparison Between OMA Results & EMA Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
5.2
Comparison Between OMA Results & ANSYS (OMA) Results . . . . . . . . .
98
5.3
Comparison Between EMA Results & ANSYS (EMA) Results . . . . . . . . . 102
5.4
Total Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
6
Discussion of Results
106
7
Conclusion & Further Work
109
7.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
iii
==PAGE:7==
7.2
Further Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Appendices
113
A Project Management
114
A.1 Time Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
B
Scaled Model
116
C The Density of the Wood Beams
119
D The E modulus of the Wood Beams
124
E
The Density of the Steel Beams
133
F
The E modulus of the Steel Beams
136
G Concrete Casting
141
H The Density of the Concrete Cylinders
147
I
The E modulus of the Concrete Cylinderes
151
I.1
Compression Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
I.2
Statistical Analysis for Normaldistribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
J
The Degradation of Balcony Steel
156
K The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in O State
159
L
The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F1 State
167
M The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F2 State
175
N The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F3 State
183
O The OMA Results Comparison
191
P
The EMA Results in O State
197
Q The EMA Results in F1 State
208
R The EMA Results in F2 State
219
S
The EMA Results in F3 State
230
T
The EMA Results Comparison
241
iv
==PAGE:8==
U The mode shape in ANSYS when tuned to EMA
244
U.1 Results O
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 244
U.2 Results F1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 246
U.3 Results F2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 248
U.4 Results F3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250
V ANSYS – Different Mode Degradation
252
W Comparison – Different Mode Degradation
255
Nomenclature
257
List of Figures
263
List of Tables
271
Bibliography
274
v
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction & Hypothesis
This chapter will deal with the basis of the experiment, prior research, and the main purpose of
this thesis.
1.1
Background & Motivation
Balconies are an increasingly popular attribute to apartments across Denmark as they offer
an outdoor space for people living in compact and high-density cities. Despite the fact, that
a significant percentage of the more than 550,000 balconies in Denmark were built before
the 1950s, no legislation currently exists that ensures regular inspection of the condition of
the balcony (Altana, 2023). Unfortunately, this has led to several dangerous incidents over
the past years where balconies have collapsed due to corrosion damages that have developed
over time. A preliminary example was the collapse of a balcony back in 2016 in Nykøbing
Falster (Færch, 2016), and recently the collapse of a balcony in 2020 in Kolding (Bentsen,
2020). The common denominator for the two collapses was the specific construction type of
the balconies, which was common in the period from 1890-1945 (Nielsen, L. Petersen, and T.
Petersen, 2020a). At this time, the balconies were constructed as continuous cantilevered steel
profiles going through the bearing brick wall where the steel profile are embedded in concrete
and forms the balcony deck. Inside the facade, the cantilever steel beams are clamped to the
supporting wooden beams that span under the floor. Inevitably, different degradation mech-
anisms influence the construction over time. These include nature impacts such as wind and
weather that allow key factors including moisture, chlorides, and air to trigger the degradation.
A critical issue associated with degradation is the fact, that degradation is not always visible to
the naked eye which constitutes a major risk of potentially lethal accidents. Since the corro-
sion is most likely to occur in the area where the largest section forces exist, it will result in a
reduction of the carrying capacity leading to a collapse and extensive damage, making it a key
point of interest. In this regard, the point where the cantilever steel beams penetrate the brick
wall is critical due to insufficient casting around the profiles through the brick facade (ibid.).
This gives rise to a thermal bridge, where the unprotected steel is exposed to air and moisture
1
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1 – Introduction & Hypothesis
from condensation and potentially also chlorides from the brickwork causing an accelerated
corrosion process (Nielsen, L. Petersen, and T. Petersen, 2020a). Eventually, this leads to an
unpredictable reduction of the steel cross-section, without any visual signs of degradation, such
as cracks in the brick wall. Subsequently, the construction will not get a warned breach before
failure.
Although the recommendation for the construction of new balconies has been adjusted to avoid
these issues (Nielsen, L. Petersen, and T. Petersen, 2020b), the industry and the residents are
still dealing with potential accidents based on the large numbers of old damaged balconies in
Denmark. In fact, Technological Institute at the end of December 2022 was in the news to
draw attention to the potential danger of these balconies where safety cannot necessarily be
guaranteed by visual inspection. Based on an investigation of 100 balconies, they found that
only 58 % had visible damage in form of cracks in concrete or masonry. From the remaining
42 balconies, they discovered comprehensive corrosion damage in 17 of them, corresponding
to 40 % of the visible intact balconies, which could be due to aesthetic superficial concrete re-
pairs (Teknologisk Institut, 2022). An estimation showed that there are up to 50,000 balconies
of this type in Denmark and it is a fact, that there are limited professional resources, as well
as a time-consuming and economical aspect. Today’s method to assess safety is destructive
and costs 30,000-60,000 DKK (Lillevang, 2016). Thus, a solution will have to be found. En-
trenched in the investigation, Technological Institute suggested a temporary prevention called
the "cascade model" ("Kaskademodel"), which in short involves making a sample survey to
assess whether the entire property’s balconies need to be replaced or renovated. This can be
seen as a statistical solution, but it still possesses the risk of overlooking potentially damaged
balconies.
Based on the information provided above, one declares that there is an unmet need for a non-
destructive method to assess the state and safety of old balconies. Furthermore, one such
method would potentially constitute a key tool in the future renovation of balconies.
1.2
Sstate of the Art
In this thesis, there is acquired and applied relevant experience and knowledge from previous
theses and papers, which is elaborated to supplement this thesis. The following papers are
shortly presented to outline the relevance of our project.
"Experimental investigation of traditional balcony structures" by Yunus Salah (Saleh, 2020).
The thesis studies the influence of corrosion on traditional balcony structures. In addition to
this, physical experimental static testing was compared to different numerical FE models, cre-
ated using the software tool ANSYS APDL. During the static testing, the displacements were
2
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1 – Introduction & Hypothesis
measured in six different positions on the balcony, respectively. Three different positions on
the wooden beams, and three different positions on the concrete deck. The test only examined
the quasi-static loading of the undamaged structure. Concluding that the numerical model did
not precisely reflect the exact displacement. Their argumentation and explanation for this lie
within the refinement and simplifications of the FE model. The other part, the dynamic testing,
was conducted with Operational Modal Analysis (OMA) on a simply-supported steel I-beam
for estimating the modal properties and the frequency of an I-beam. The testing was made for
comparison of the dynamic behavior of an undamaged beam and a systematically controlled
damaged beam through corrosion. Results for the modal parameter in terms of the natural
frequency were found for the two first modes in the undamaged state and for the electrolytic
corrosion degradation exposed in 4 and 22 days, respectively. The results indicated that the
corrosion process did have an impact, lowering the eigenfrequency of the steel beam, for the
first and second modes. Additionally, the impact of the corrosion made some changes in terms
of the reduced cross-section. This could be utilized in a 2D and 3D FE model, respectively, to
simulate the change in frequency, thus, be compared to the results from the dynamic testing in
the three corrosion states. The paper showed that a 3D model was significantly better than a
model with 2D beam elements, to estimate the dynamic properties in comparison to the eigen-
frequency found from experimental testing.
"Experimental and Numerical Investigation of Structural Deterioration" by Kasper Vitten
and Martin Jørgensen (Vitten and Jørgensen, 2021). This thesis is a further investigation of the
corrosion influence on traditional balcony structures conducted by Y. Salah. The main purpose
of the thesis was to make dynamic testing of a full-scale balcony setup to detect structural dete-
rioration. Firstly, the dynamic tests were made with a random excitation and OMA analysis on
the balcony in its undamaged state. This was used as a reference point. Then the cantilever steel
structure was damaged by a controlled corrosion process called electrolytic corrosion at the be-
ginning of the brickwork facade. The modal parameters from the dynamic tests are found with
two different identification techniques; the Frequency Domain Decomposition (FDD), and the
Time Domain Poly-Reference (TDPR). The two techniques determine almost identical values
for the frequencies in the undamaged and damaged states, respectively. The results from the
dynamic tests show that there are only very small differences in the frequencies for the four
modes in the undamaged state compared to the damaged state. One of the explanations for the
limited changes in the frequency could be that the load cell that was exciting the wood beam
could have been moved or clamped in a slightly different way. Another explanation was that
temperature was stated to possibly have an undesirable influence on the results.
The results from the experimental test are compared to a digital twin, which was made as a FE
model created in ANSYS APDL. The full balcony was modeled in an undamaged and damaged
state. In the damaged state the cross-section was reduced due to the corrosion process. The
locations, where the corrosion resulted in holes in the steel beam, were modeled in ANSYS
3
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1 – Introduction & Hypothesis
APDL as a cross-section with a relatively small thickness (0.1 mm) for simplification. The re-
sults from the numerical model showed that all the frequencies for the four mode shapes would
decrease due to corrosion, contradictory to the experimental results. The difference between
the numerical model and the experimental results could be explained by the variation of the
material properties and especially the wooden beams which were only estimated based on one
wooden beam and resulted in a potential variation of the cross-section, density, and moment of
inertia. Another possible explanation is that the experimental test was made for the undamaged
structure in October and the damaged structure was made in December. Thus, a difference in
the temperature and humidity between the tests can have affected the stiffness of the materials.
The dynamic characteristics of a structure can be determined by the method Experimental
Modal Analysis (EMA) as realized in the journal Experimental modal parameter identifica-
tion and validation of cantilever beam by Ishan Nadkarni, Ritvik Bhardwaj, Stephen Ninan
and S.P. Chippa (Nadkarni et al., 2020). The purpose of the journal was to determine the first
three modal parameters for a cantilever beam, and afterward, the experimental approach was
compared with a numerical modal. The experimental approach was conducted by measur-
ing the specimen with an accelerometer when an impact hammer is used on seven equidistant
points. The subsequent processing was accomplished by finding the Frequency Response Func-
tion (FRF). The numerical method is modeled as a two-dimensional quadrilateral element with
a standard P-shell formulation modeled in Hypermesh 13.0. The difference between the three
natural frequencies for the two approaches was within a 3.6-6.2 % difference. Where the max-
imum deviation was for the third mode. The results show that the numerical model can be a
more efficient way to analyze the dynamic system.
Another investigation of the EMA method was made on a rectangular cantilever beam in the
journal "Investigation on modal parameters of a rectangular cantilever beam using Exper-
imental modal analysis" by Prashant S. Walunj, Vikas N. Chougule and Anirban C. Mitra
(Walunj Prashant, Chougule, and Mitra, 2015). As seen in the previous journal, the object is
to determine the modal parameters both experimentally and theoretically but in this case, it is
for both a Mild Steel and Aluminium cantilever beam. The natural frequency from the experi-
mental approach is compared to the theoretical value. The experimental and theoretical results
have a reasonable correlation, and therefore, the EMA method can be seen as an effective and
non-destructive method for estimating the dynamic characteristics of a beam.
Additional conduction of the EMA method as the previous papers can be seen in the "The-
oretical and Experimental Modal Analysis of a beam" by J. Sharma (Sharma, 2019). In this
paper, the modal parameters are found for a simply supported beam and a beam with free-free
boundary conditions. The difference from the two previous journals is that the modal analysis
is conducted in the time domain instead of the Frequency Response Domain (FRD) by convert-
4
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1 – Introduction & Hypothesis
ing using Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). The EMA method is conducted by an impact hammer
and with the use of a laser vibrometer to find the first three modes. The results were compared
with a FE model in ANSYS workbench 14.5 and the calculation of theoretical modal analy-
sis. The results showed a reasonable correlation between the experimental analysis, theoretical
analysis, and numerical analysis. The small error results from the physical dimensions and the
variation of the E modulus.
"Risk of failure in existing RC balcony and strength verification under degradation phenom-
ena" by G. Campione and F. Cannella (Campione and Cannella, 2020). The article investigates
degradation phenomena in existing reinforced balcony structures. The balcony construction is
very common in Italy and is made of light-aggregate concrete with embedded T-beams of
Reinforced Concrete (RC). For the study, several balcony structures have been exposed to
carbonation in terms of chlorides and water infiltration. Thus, corrosion is detected, and the
reinforcement bars in the T-beams will alter the cross-section in the form of reduction. This im-
plies several effects which can reduce the safety of the balcony. The paper emphasizes among
others that the ductility is reduced for the material, indicating a loss of bound strength between
the reinforcement bars and the concrete, as well as degradation of the concrete compression
strength. The results are obtained by static testing of an RC T-beam indicating an analytical
expression for the moment and shear capacity of existing balcony structures under influence of
corrosion effects. In their conclusion for a typical RC balcony structure in Italy, a reduction of
mass above 25 % in the reinforcement bars will increase the risk of failure of the balcony. This
further emphasizes the importance of the subject.
1.3
Objectives of the Study
The relevant papers presented in the previous section constitute the potential use of vibrational
Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) methods to insure Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) and
determine the dynamic properties of a structure. The scope of this thesis is to verify that vi-
brational testing can be utilized to determine dynamic properties and responses, and further
be applied for digital twinning by FE modeling to evaluate structural deterioration. The struc-
tural degradation will be an asset for a traditional balcony structure exposed to damage at the
bearing steel profiles. Based on uncertain deviations in previous full-scale testing (Vitten and
Jørgensen, 2021), it is prioritized to minimize any uncertain or varying parameters, leading
to potentially inexplicable and large deviations. Consequently, the balcony is scaled down
1:4, which makes the test setup moveable and the testing more durable. More specifically,
the degradation will be applied by controllable and precise cutting to reduce the cross-section.
The humidity and temperature will be a more or less constant factor, which is important when
dealing with an arbitrary material such as wood. Furthermore, the study will for the dynamic
experimental investigation be performed with the OMA and the EMA method to support the
5
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1 – Introduction & Hypothesis
results. Simultaneously, an enhanced and more detailed numerical study will be conducted,
based on previously utilized FE models in ANSYS APDL. The FE model will serve as a digi-
tal twin of the balcony test setup and will contribute to the inspection of the balcony’s dynamic
and static parameters, as well as further support the use of FE modeling and digital twinning
of deteriorated balconies in the industry.
To summarize, the thesis aims to investigate the following: "Identification of Structural Dam-
age Through Dynamic Excitation, Comprising Impact Hammer Testing for EMA and Random
Vibration Testing for OMA".
To address and achieve the aim of this thesis, a general theoretical understanding, relevant
and relatively precise experimental and computational results, as well as a rational and critical
approach to the discussion and results are crucial. In the following, a short description of each
chapter is outlined to give a broad overview of the content of the thesis.
Chapter 2 comprises the basics of all the theoretical and methodical background required in
terms of analytical considerations regarding structural dynamics, including vibration analysis.
Chapter 3 comprises the theory that forms the basis for processing results and methods for
experimental investigation of the structural material and its parameters, as well as dynamic
testing of the balcony test setup and different degradation states.
Chapter 4 comprises the general theory and methods for setting up a numerical modal of
the balcony to numerically investigate the results for the static and dynamic properties.
Chapter 5 comprises several comparisons of the results between the different experimental
methods, identification techniques, and results between the numerical model and experimental
model.
Chapter 6 comprises the discussion part of the report, in which a reasonable clarification of
any differences and ambiguities of the results are critically and reflectively reviewed.
Chapter 7 comprises all main results and findings of the study summarized into a conclu-
sion. Furthermore, presenting interesting subjects for further studies regarding the balcony
project.
6
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theory & Method for Analytical
Considerations
In this chapter, more advanced analytical theory is accounted for. This includes general and
advanced dynamic theory together with statistical methods for analyzing and dealing with data.
However, simple calculations related to the experiments are elaborated in chapter 3.
2.1
General Dynamic Theory for MDOF Systems
This section will introduce general dynamic theory in order to get a fundamental understanding
of OMA and EMA. The main focus, in this case, will be the Multi Degree of Freedom (MDOF)
system. The MDOF system consists of several Single Degree of Freedom (SDOF) systems that
are coupled. This gives rise to focusing on the equations of motion (EOM) for a damped and
excited system since the dynamic properties can be found by solving the equation. The multi
degrees of freedom system is represented as seen in equation 2.1.
M¨y(t)
| {z }
Inertia term
+
C˙y(t)
| {z }
Damping term
+ Ky(t)
| {z }
Stiffness term
=
f(t)
|{z}
Load term
(2.1)
Here, M is the mass matrix, C is the damping matrix, K is the stiffness matrix, f(t) is the exter-
nal load, and y(t) is the response of the system where (˙) indicates the derivative with respect
to time (Krenk, 2018).
From the Equation of motion, it is possible to determine if the frequency is high or low. When
adding mass, the frequency will increase. On the other hand, if the stiffness is increased, then
the frequency will decrease. If the inertia and stiffness term is balanced, then resonance will
occur (ibid.).
In a system without damping and with no external load, the EOM can be expressed as seen
7
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
in equation 2.2 also known as free undamped vibrations.
M¨y(t) + Ky(t) = 0
(2.2)
With the use of the method of separation of variables and with the assumption that the free
response is the product of the spatial solution (b) and a harmonic function (eiωt), the EOM
can be solved with the time-varying solution in equation 2.3, presented in complex exponential
form (Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
y(t) = beiωt
(2.3)
Where b is the mode shape and ω is the angular frequency.
The generalized eigenvalue problem (EVP) can, by substituting equation 2.3 into 2.2, be ex-
pressed as equation 2.4.
(K −ω2M)b = 0
(2.4)
The EVP can be solved by finding the determinant of the system, thus uncovering the dynamic
properties. However, the nontrivial solution b can only be found when the matrix is singular,
meaning that the determinant of the system matrix is zero as expressed in equation 2.5 (Krenk,
2018).
det(K −ω2M) = 0
(2.5)
Solving the eigenvalue problem for an MDOF system can lead to heavy analysis time. This
is because the MDOF system is solved as if it was a multiple SDOF system, which initiates a
system in a computational model, containing thousands of degrees of freedom. Thus, it makes
sense to introduce the modal analysis. In the modal analysis, the objective is to transform
the mass and stiffness matrix into modal components, which are connected to a specific mode
(Brincker and Ventura, 2015). It is essential for the modal analysis that the orthogonality
conditions are fulfilled. One way of validating the orthogonality conditions is by computing
the orthogonality relations for the distinct eigenvalues, ωk ̸= ωj, as seen in equation 2.6, which
is based on the generalized eigenvalue problem seen in equation 2.5.
bT
j Mbk = 0
bT
j Kbk = 0
for j ̸= k
(2.6)
When the orthogonality conditions are fulfilled, the stiffness and mass matrices are diagonal,
defining the system as uncoupled (Krenk, 2018). Thus, the mode shape vector can be utilized
to define the modal mass and modal stiffness for mode j, as seen in equation 2.7.
mj = bT
j Mbj
kj = bT
j Kbj
(2.7)
By pre-multiplicating, the generalized EVP in equation 2.4 with bT
j , the scalar equation ω2
j can
be determined by rearranging the formula. This is entirely analogous to an SDOF system and
is perceived in equation 2.8.
ω2
j = bT
j Kbj
bT
j Mbj
= kj
mj
⇒
ωj =
s
kj
mj
(2.8)
8
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
Thus, the essential crucial point that one should perceive is to know the mass of a system and
adapt a method to measure the natural angular frequency of a system in order to determine the
stiffness.
2.2
Modal Analysis
Vibrational testing and modal analysis of structures are essential methods when investigating
the dynamic properties of structures. Two of the most common methods are the OMA and
EMA tests, both methods process the measured response. OMA is characterized by using
operational forces and EMA is characterized by using controlled input forces. In general,
the OMA method can be approached easier, since it is based on operational natural excitations,
such as wind, waves, or traffic. Especially for large structures, which can be hard and expensive
to excite, this tool is beneficial. On the contrary, the EMA method has the advantage that the
induced vibrations can be carefully controlled, which means that the sensors are not as sensitive
to unknown influence as the OMA method, even though it can be significantly more complex.
Further clarification of the two methods will be elaborated in the following section, where the
theory is mainly derived from "Introduction to Operational Modal Analysis" by Rune Brincker
and Carlos E. Ventura (Brincker and Ventura, 2015) and "Noise and Vibration ANALYSIS" by
Anders Brandt (Brandt A., 2010). Subsequently, some theory and understanding, are found
from Modal Testing by D. J. Ewins (Ewins D. David, 2000) and Theoretical and Experimental
Modal Analysis by Nuno M. M. Maia and Júlio M. M. Silva (Nuno M. M. Maia and Júlio M.
M. Silva, 1998).
OMA & EMA
When adapting the OMA and EMA method on a vibrating structure, the response can be mea-
sured as either accelerations, velocities, or displacements. For the OMA, the vibrations are
introduced by any unknown, ambient loading. Thus, one of the main conditions is that the ex-
citations have white noise characteristics, meaning that it has to be random in time and space.
The essence is, that the frequency range of the modal characteristics, can be captured by mea-
surements for all the modes of interest, by utilization of the correlation functions (Brincker
and Ventura, 2015). On the other hand, EMA is conducted by the measured excitation and ac-
celeration response from an impulse. Thus, using free decays (like impulse response function
(IRF)) to construct the Frequency Response Function (FRF) between a measured point and the
point of input. (Zimmerman, 2019). An essential realization is that the FRF can be converted
to fit the spectrum-driven methods and the IRF can be converted to fit the correlation functions
method for OMA (Brincker and Ventura, 2015). Hence, the natural frequencies can be deter-
mined. This is based on the response, which is obtained by the convolution Y(ω) =H(ω)X(ω),
thus the Frequency Response Function is defined for OMA. However, for the EMA the very
short impulse excitation is represented in terms of the Dirac delta function, meaning that if
9
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
x(t) = δ(t), then the response is obtained as y(t) = h(t), where the Fourier Transformed con-
stitutes that the response is equal to the FRF Y(ω) =H(ω).
There are some general prerequisites, which should be noted before obtaining any measured
responses. First of all, the output data will usually be defined as a discrete time series, but in
theory, OMA can also be applied to continuous time series. Next, each sensor placed on the
structure matches a Degree of Freedom (DOF), where the total amount matches the number
of modes the system can conduct. For the vibrational testing, it is advantageous to have some
general knowledge about classical dynamics, concerning the modes of interest in order to deter-
mine the sensor configuration and sampling parameters properly. Likewise, it is indispensable
to know how the algorithms for the post-processing of the data should work in order to separate
the physical modes from the noise modes. Due to a high degree of difficulty utilizing relevant
knowledge about probability theory when dealing with a stochastic framework, an FE model
is often put together with the purpose of validating the vibration analysis. Additionally, the
following section will deal with the stochastic process and used algorithms when dealing with
OMA and EMA (Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
Correlation
It is usually assumed that all random responses are Gaussian, or described in another way, it
is assumed to be normally distributed according to the central limit theorem. If this is valid,
only two parameters come into play, namely the mean and the covariance. For random signals,
it is always assigned to have zero mean, thus, only the covariance is left, indicated as the cor-
relation for practical reasons when looking at vibrations. The first step when dealing with the
vibrational or modal analysis is to understand the correlation functions (CF) of the responses
since the desired dynamic properties are hidden in the correlation between the variables (ibid.).
Auto Correlation functions
When looking at the signal response, it should be realized that every point or measurement
in time, is actually a random variable. Thus, autocorrelation becomes applicable to find the
correlation between the time t and the time lag t+τ as seen in the signal for a random response
in figure 2.1.
10
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
Figure 2.1: Random response illustrating the autocorrelation between two arbitrary points.
When two points are relatively close in the signal, the correlation can be estimated to be rela-
tively high between the two points. Contrary, if the points are more separated, the correlation
will be lower between the two points. The first point is at the time t giving the signal x(t) and
the second point is after a time lag (τ), giving the signal x(t + τ) (Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
The autocorrelation function will be used to extract the information from the response and can,
by time averaging for continuous time, be defined as seen in equation 2.9.
Rx(τ) = E[x(t)x(x + τ)] = 1
T
Z T
0
x(t)x(t + τ)dt
(2.9)
Where E represents the expectation or average over time, which in practice is described by the
time integral (ibid.). However, the autocorrelation function is only valid inside the measured
data sample, and to ensure the correlation is within the sampling data, the equation can be
defined as expressed in equation 2.10.
Rx(τ) =
1
T −τ
Z T−τ
0
x(t)x(t + τ)dt
(2.10)
Secondly, one should keep in mind, that measurements are not obtained in continuous time, but
in discrete time, where the correlation can be rewritten as seen in equation 2.11.
Rx(m) =
1
N −m
N−m
X
n=1
x(n)x(n + m)
(2.11)
Where t = n∆t and τ = m∆t.
Keeping in mind that the response has zero mean (µx = 0), the limits can be considered
analytically. The autocorrelation function is equal to the variance (σ2
x) as seen in equation 2.12
when the equality progresses for the lower limit τ=0 (ibid.).
Rx(0) = E[x(t)x(t + 0)] = E

x(t)2
= σ2
x
(2.12)
11
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
And for the upper limit τ →∞, the variables become independent, thus resulting in the
autocorrelation function approaching the mean squared (µ2
x), which was stated to be zero in
equation 2.13.
lim
τ→∞Rx(τ) = E[x(t)]E[x(t + τ)] = µ2
x
(2.13)
Lastly, the autocorrelation function is symmetrically and defined as seen in equation 2.14 when
it is assumed that the signals are stationary (Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
Rx(τ) = E[x(t −τ)x(t)] = Rx(−τ)
(2.14)
Hereby, the autocorrelation function can be illustrated in figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Auto correlation function.
Figure 2.2 validates that, if the time lag (τ) is equal to zero, the correlation is equal to the
variance (σ2
x). Additionally, it is decaying towards zero, for increasing positive or negative
time lag, thus formulating a free decay, symmetric around τ=0 (ibid.).
Cross Correlation Functions
When analyzing two different random signals, an x-signal and a y-signal, one arbitrary point
from each signal can be utilized to determine the dependency between the two signals, as
illustrated in figure 2.3.
12
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
Figure 2.3: Cross correlation of two signals.
This is also quantified as the cross-correlation between two signals (Brincker and Ventura,
2015). Still assuming that the signals are stationary, the correlation function can be calculated
as in equation 2.15.
Rxy(τ) = E[x(t)y(t + τ)] = E[x(t −τ)y(t)] = Ryx(−τ)
Ryx(τ) = E[y(t)x(t + τ)] = E[y(t −τ)x(t)] = Rxy(−τ)
(2.15)
As for the autocorrelation function, it also applies that the cross-correlation function is sym-
metric (ibid.).
As for the autocorrelation function, it also applies that the cross-correlation function is iden-
tified as a continuous time function, but as before, it is denoted as a time integral, where the
integration is limited to staying within the sampling data, expressed as seen in equation 2.16
(ibid.).
Rxy(τ) = 1
T
Z T
0
x(t)y(t + τ)dt ⇒
1
T −τ
Z T−τ
0
x(t)y(t + τ)dt
Ryx(τ) = 1
T
Z T
0
y(t)x(t + τ)dt ⇒
1
T −τ
Z T−τ
0
y(t)x(t + τ)dt
(2.16)
And again, expressed in relation to discrete-time as seen in equation 2.17.
Rxy(m) =
1
N −m
N−m
X
n=1
x(n)y(n + m)
Ryx(m) =
1
N −m
N−m
X
n=1
y(n)x(n + m)
(2.17)
13
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
Correlation Function Matrix
In practice, working with measured data, the response is quantified in a discrete time series,
with N measurements, and can quickly become completely chaotic. An effective way to handle
this is by matrix formulation. By covering the responses in a vector y(t)={y1(t),y2(t),...,yN(t)}T,
it is possible to form a matrix which can capture both the autocorrelation functions represented
in the diagonal and the cross-correlation functions represented in the off-diagonal, also known
as the correlation function (CF) matrix, given as in equation 2.18 (Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
R(τ) = E

y(t)yT(t + τ)

= 1
T
Z T
0
y(t)yT(t + τ)dt
(2.18)
Equation 2.18 entails that time averaging also applies here. This can also be presented in a
more illustrative way, where all information from the signals is utilized as shown in figure 2.4
(ibid.).
Figure 2.4: Cross correlation with multiple signals.
The N multiple signals can be combined in a total of N 2 correlation functions. Where the cor-
relation function, in this case, is calculated in equation 2.19 between signal xc and xr (Brincker
R., 2019).
Rrc(τ) = E[xr(t)xc(t + τ)]
(2.19)
The correlation function (CF) matrix is gathered as in equation 2.20 when it is performed for
all columns and rows.
R(τ) = [Rrc(τ)]
(2.20)
Fourier Transformation
In the previous section, the physical information from the random responses is found using the
correlation functions, which were found in the time domain. However, in some cases, it is more
optimal to be in the frequency domain. The Fourier Transformation (FT) is the key element
when going from the time domain (TD) to the frequency domain (FD). In this section, the
Fourier transformation from continuous time to continuous frequency is explained. It is mainly
used in theoretical analysis and with the use of the Fourier series, it is possible to go from
14
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
continuous time to discrete frequency. Additionally, the Fourier transformation from discrete
time to discrete frequency is also elaborated, since it is common to work with discrete time
when conducting experimental work.
Real Fourier series
The central principle of a Fourier series is when a periodic signal is expressed as a harmonic
component. When the signal y(t) is a periodic function of time, with a period (T) as seen in
figure 2.5, then the signal can be expressed as a Fourier series as seen in equation 2.21 (Brincker
and Ventura, 2015).
Figure 2.5: Continuous periodic function in the time domain.
y(t) = a0 +
∞
X
k=1

ak cos 2πkt
T
+ bk sin 2πkt
T

(2.21)
Where a0, ak, and bk are all constant Fourier coefficients. The coefficients can be found for
each harmonic component of the series when the orthogonality conditions are satisfied for the
periodic harmonious function and the periodic harmonies have a mean of zero (ibid.). In the
equation 2.22, the constant Fourier coefficients are given.
a0 = 1
T
Z T/2
−T/2
y(t)dt
ak
k≥1 = 2
T
Z T/2
−T/2
y(t) cos 2πkt
T
dt
bk
k≥1 = 2
T
Z T/2
−T/2
y(t) sin 2πkt
T
dt
(2.22)
Where 2πk
T
is the spacing between the harmonic components (ak, and bk) in the frequency
domain as illustrated in figure 2.6. The components are separated with a constant frequency
15
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
between them which can be seen in equation 2.23.
∆ω = 2π
T
(2.23)
Figure 2.6: Discrete infinite function in the frequency domain.
Complex Fourier series
Equation 2.21 can be simplified to get a more manageable mathematical formulation written as
the summation of the terms from minus infinity to plus infinity as seen in equation 2.24.
y(t) =
∞
X
k=−∞

Akcos2πkt
T
+ Bksin2πkt
T

(2.24)
In this formula, the negative frequencies for the harmonic terms are introduced, which are
associated with the negative value of k and will lead to an unrealistic concept. Thus, the
coefficient associated with negative frequencies can be defined as in equation 2.25 (Brincker
and Ventura, 2015).
A−k = Ak
B−k = −Bk
(2.25)
The Fourier coefficients Ak and Bk can be written as complex Fourier coefficients, with a real
and imaginary part as described in equation 2.26.
Yk = Ak −iBk
(2.26)
Euler’s formula is applied to equation 2.24 and the complex notation from equation 2.26 can
be written in a more compact format and thereby find the Fourier series for the signal in the
time domain 2.27.
y(t) =
∞
X
k=−∞
Ykei∆ωkt
(2.27)
Meanwhile, when the signal is going from the continuous time domain to the discrete frequency
domain, the complex Fourier coefficients can be used as seen in equation 2.28 (ibid.).
Yk = 1
T
Z T/2
−T/2
y(t)e−i∆ωktdt
(2.28)
16
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
Discrete time
For experimental work, the data is often found in the discrete-time domain, and therefore it is
common practice to transform the data to the discrete frequencies domain, where the discrete
Fourier series is used. Working in the discrete-time domain, the Fourier transformation is often
denoted as the Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT).
Firstly, when conducting an experiment, the focus is on the adjustable parameter ∆t, repre-
senting the sampling step, and T, representing the time duration. Thus, the total number of
samples (N) can be determined as in equation 2.29.
N = T
∆t
(2.29)
The bandwidth Bf in terms of Hz, also known as the sampling frequency fs is essential to
know, in order to assess if the desired frequency is within the sampling frequency, as seen in
equation 2.30.
Bf = fs = 1
∆t
(2.30)
The Nyquist frequency (fν) is defined when the bandwidth is placed symmetrically around the
y-axis in the frequency domain. Thus, the periodic frequency function will span from half the
length on both sides as seen in equation 2.31, keeping in mind that the desired frequency now
should be within the Nyquist frequency (Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
fν = Bf
2 = fs
2 =
1
2∆t
(2.31)
Because of symmetry, the information related to the negative frequencies represents the same
as the information from the positive frequencies. Thus, only the positive frequencies are con-
sidered. The sampling step in the frequency spectrum is determined in equation 2.32.
∆f = 1
T = Bf
N
(2.32)
Assumed working with discrete signals, where the frequency in Hz, the frequencies can be
changed to the angular frequency measured in rad/s, which is typically the case, as seen in
equation 2.33.
ω = 2πf
∆ω = 2π∆f
(2.33)
Like the Fourier pair, going from continuous time to discrete frequency as seen in equation
2.28, the Fourier pair, going from discrete-time to discrete frequency can be established as seen
in equation 2.34, also denoted as the discrete representation of the Fourier transform (ibid.).
Yk = 1
N
N/2
X
n=−N/2+1
yne−iωktn
(2.34)
Derived by substituting the integral with the sum of a finite number of sample points and
restricting time to the sample point t = n∆t, thus y(n∆t) = yn and dt becomes ∆t. Lastly,
knowing that k∆ω = ωk and n∆t = tn.
17
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
Spectral Density Functions (SD)
The Spectral Density (SD) defines the Fourier transform of the correlation function (CF) ma-
trix. Like the correlation function (CF) matrix, the spectral density functions are separated into
two parts, namely the auto spectral density represented in the diagonal and the cross-spectral
density represented in the off-diagonal. In simple terms, this means that the spectral density
functions can be interpreted as the corresponding frequency domain functions. Thus, the es-
sential information regarding the physics, which is hidden in the correlation, is carried on into
the spectral density functions (Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
Auto Spectral Density
The auto spectral density function is assessed for a given signal x(t) as in equation 2.35.
Gx(ω) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
Rx(τ)e−iωτdτ
(2.35)
Conversely, the correlation function is obtained by the inverse relation of the auto spectral
density function (ibid.). Thus, the autocorrelation function can be obtained by the Fourier
integral for the complex Inverse Fourier Transform (IFT), going from the frequency domain to
the time domain as seen in equation 2.36.
Rx(τ) =
Z ∞
−∞
Gx(ω)eiωτdω
(2.36)
Cross Spectral Density
The same approach is utilized regarding the cross-spectral density. The cross-spectral density
function is assessed between two signals x(t) and y(t), as expressed in equation 2.37 (ibid.).
Gxy(ω) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
Rxy(τ)e−iωτdτ
(2.37)
Controversy, the cross-correlation function can be obtained by the Fourier integral for the com-
plex Inverse Fourier Transform (IFT), as seen in equation 2.38.
Rxy(τ) =
Z ∞
−∞
Gxy(ω)eiωτdω
(2.38)
Parseval Theorem
A major advantage of dealing with spectral density is the Parseval theorem (ibid.). This can be
demonstrated by evaluating the auto spectral density at the initial value, i.e. where the time lag
is zero (τ = 0) as expressed in equation 2.39.
Rx(0) = E

x2
=
Z ∞
−∞
Gx(ω)dω = σ2
x
(2.39)
18
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
If the signal has zero mean, it can be observed that the area under the auto spectral density
curve corresponds to the variance of the signal. Mathematically, the variance corresponds to
the energy, thus, the auto spectral density describes the energy distribution of a signal as a
function of frequency (ω). This explains why the spectral density is often called the Power
Spectral Density (PSD) (Brincker and Ventura, 2015). An illustration of this can be seen in
figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Parseval’s theorem.
Likewise, Parseval’s theorem is utilized for the cross-spectral density, which yields in equation
2.40.
Rxy(0) = E[xy] =
Z ∞
−∞
Gxy(ω)dω = cov[x, y]
(2.40)
In this case, the area under the cross-spectral density corresponds to the covariance between
two signals (ibid.).
Like in equation 2.18, where all the correlations were covered in a matrix, the same viable
solution is conducted for the spectral density, resulting in the following equations 2.41.
Rx(0) = E

xxT
= Cx =
Z ∞
−∞
Gx(ω)dω
Ry(0) = E

yyT
= Cy =
Z ∞
−∞
Gy(ω)dω
Rxy(0) = E

xyT
= Cxy =
Z ∞
−∞
Gxy(ω)dω
(2.41)
For a signals with zero mean, the Cx, Cy, and Cxy represents the covariance matrix. Due to
the symmetry in the correlation matrix and the definition of the Fourier transformation, it is
feasible to conclude that the spectral density matrix is always Hermitian, meaning that any
spectral matrix is equal to its complex conjugate transpose as given in equation 2.42 (ibid.).
GH(ω) = G(ω)
(2.42)
19
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
Furthermore, the use of the reversal property of the Fourier transformation on the spectral
density matrix is expressed in equation 2.43.
GT(ω) = G(−ω)
(2.43)
Identification Techniques
The amount of modal identification techniques are many and can be performed either in the
time domain or in the frequency domain. In general, there are advantages and disadvantages
to both and it is, therefore, worth considering which technique should be applied in the re-
spective situation. For the time domain, the method relies solely on the correlation functions,
meaning that it identifies all modes in the signal at any time during the free decays from where
the physical information is extracted. The drawback is that it constitutes the full rank of the
identification problem. The advantage is that the minimum of biased data on the free decays
is obtained. On the other hand, the frequency domain is a method that only considers a small
frequency band of interest where some modes dominate. The advantage can be described as
the "natural modal decomposition". This makes it easier, since considering the frequency band
where the desired modes are dominating. A drawback is therefore that the data is in some way
more biased. Before going deeper into the two methods, it is beneficial to know, that the iden-
tification problem often becomes highly problematic when dealing with shaker input in one
point or hammer input in one point (Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
Frequency Domain Decomposition (FDD)
The identification technique (FDD) is a method where the singular value decomposition (SVD)
is used on the spectral density (SD) matrix in the frequency domain. The identification method
can be used to determine modal parameters such as the natural frequencies, periods, and mode
shapes of a structure exposed to vibrations. As mentioned earlier, the correlation functions
(CF) contain information about the physics that is preserved in the spectral density functions,
and thus, the physical information can be found by the FDD (ibid.).
Initially, the response can, in the basics of linear systems, be expressed in terms of the mode
shapes and modal coordinates as seen in equation 2.44.
y(t) = a1q1(t) + a2q2(t) + ... = Aq(t)
(2.44)
Where A is the mode shape matrix A=[a1,a2,...] and q(t) is a vector containing the modal
coordinates qT(t)={q1(t),q2(t),...}. Equation 2.45 is based on the definition of the CF matrix in
equation 2.18.
Ry(τ) = E

y(t)yT(t + τ)

= ARq(τ)AT
(2.45)
Where Rq(τ) is the correlation function (CF) matrix of the modal coordinates. By utilizing the
Fourier transform on both sides of the equation, the spectral density (SD) matrix (Gq(f)) with
20
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
respect to the frequency is derived as expressed in equation 2.46.
Gy(f) = AGq(f)AT
(2.46)
For the FDD technique, it is further assumed that the modal coordinates are uncorrelated, mean-
ing that the cross-correlation functions (off-diagonal) in the CF matrix of the modal coordinates
Rq(τ) is zero. This constitutes that the SD matrix Gq(f) of the modal coordinates must be both
diagonal and positive valued. Since the SD matrix is Hermitian and the mode shapes can con-
tain complex values, the transposed mode shape matrix is replaced with the Hermitian mode
shape matrix as expressed in equation 2.47 (Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
Gy(f) = A

g2
n(f)

AH
(2.47)
Where g2
n is the auto spectral densities (in-diagonal) of Gq(f). To obtain the final form of the
SD matrix as seen in equation 2.47, the approach of taking an SVD of the SD matrix is utilized.
In equation 2.48 the decomposition of the singular values can be seen (ibid.).
Gy(f) = USUH = U

s2
n

UH
(2.48)
Where the singular values s2
n in the diagonal matrix S represent the auto spectral densities of
the modal coordinates and the singular vectors U represent the mode shapes (ibid.).
However, this introduces an error, since the SVD in equation 2.48 is only an approximation of
the theoretical SVD of the SD matrix. Thus, the FDD will introduce bias. The error introduced
is due to the fact that the SVD defines the singular vectors U to be geometrical orthogonal. This
is not necessarily true since in structural dynamics the eigenvectors are orthogonal, but with
respect to the mass matrix. When going from equation 2.47 to equation 2.48, a transformation
is seen where the spectral density of the modal coordinates (g2
n(f)) depends on the frequency,
and the mode shapes are independent of the frequency. Resulting in an equation where the
mode shapes U are frequency depended since it is estimated for each frequency. In order to
minimize the error as much as possible, the aim is to find the mode shapes, where the forced
orthogonality has the least impact on the results. This is accomplished by finding a frequency
where the ratio between the two singular values s1/s2 is as large as possible, meaning that
the influence of s2 to the mode shape is minimized. Thus, the main rule is stated as finding
the peaks for each singular value in the SD plot, or in other words, "Any mode shape in FDD
should be estimated as the first singular vector at a frequency line where the corresponding
singular value is dominating." (ibid.). This concept is depicted in the spectral density plot in
figure 2.8 for two singular values as a function of the frequency f (ibid.).
21
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
Figure 2.8: Principle of minimizing the error due to the approximations of the mode shapes utilizing
SVD (Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
Time Domain Poly Reference (TDPR)
The Time Domain Poly Reference (TDPR) is an identification technique that is used to make
the OMA analysis in the time domain. The original way to use the TDPR method is to analyze
a free decay that follows an impulse response function. However, in this case, a correlation
function is used instead (Brincker and Ventura, 2015). The response y(n) is measured between
multiple channels in discrete time which can be estimated as a model called Auto Regressive
Moving Average (ARMA), where the response is in vector format as seen in equation 2.49.
y(n) =
N
X
k=1
Aky(n −k)
|
{z
}
AR
+
M
X
k=0
Bkx(n −k)
|
{z
}
MA
(2.49)
Where x(n) is the input into the system in a discrete-time vector. The estimated ARMA model
can be separated into two forms. The first part is the auto-regressive matrix (AR) which con-
tains A1, ..., AN that describes the physical properties and the other part is the moving average
matrix (MA) that contains B1, ..., BN which describes the statistics and external forces (ibid.).
Equation 2.49 can be expressed as equation 2.50 because there are no external forces in the
correlation function when analyzing a free decay. Therefore, the MA part is equal to zero.
y(n) −A1y(n −1) −A2y(n −2) −· · · −Anay(n −na) = 0
(2.50)
For a free decay, it is given that n = 1, 2...np, where np is the maximum number of samples.
The estimation of the AR matrix can be accomplished by introducing two different blocks of
22
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
Hankel matrices, one with na block rows as seen in equation 2.51 and the other block Hankel
matrix with only a single block row as seen in equation 2.52 (Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
H1 =


y(1)
y(2)
· · ·
y(np −na)
y(2)
y(3)
y(np −(na −1))
...
...
...
...
y(na)
y(na + 1)
y(np −1)


(2.51)
H2 =
h
y(na + 1)
y(na + 2)
· · ·
y(np)
i
(2.52)
The equation can be formulated as equation 2.53 for all the possible np-na values for n, where
the AR matrix is A = [Ana, Ana−1, . . . A1] (ibid.)
H2 −A H1 = 0 ⇐⇒A H1 = H2
(2.53)
To estimate bA as seen in equation 2.54, equation 2.53 is solved by transposing it to form an
overdetermined problem. Thus, determining an estimate of A containing the AR matrix.
HT
1 AT = HT
2 ⇐⇒bA =
 HT+
1 HT
2
T = H2H+
1
(2.54)
where ()+ is the pseudo inverse.
For an OMA analysis, the system is always exposed to some noise. Therefore, to make sure
the procedure works, the problem is always well overdetermined which requires the following
expression 2.55 (ibid.).
np −na ≫na × nc
(2.55)
The AR matrix is now estimated and the next step in the procedure is to find the modal pa-
rameters by solving equation 2.50. To solve the equation, the discrete state vector (ud) and
companion matrix (AC) in discrete time is introduced as seen in equation 2.56 and 2.57, re-
spectively.
ud(n) =











y(n −N + 1)
...
y(n −1)
y(n)











(2.56)
AC =


0
I
0
0
...
0
...
...
0
...
I
AN
AN−1
· · ·
A1


(2.57)
Where I is the identity matrix at the same size as the AR matrix (ibid.). Thus, equation 2.50
can be expressed as seen in equation 2.58 when n is replaced with n+1.
y(n + 1) = A1y(n) + · · · + ANy(n −N + 1)
(2.58)
23
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2 – Theory & Method for Analytical Considerations
Then, by using the discrete state vector and companion matrix seen in equation 2.56 and 2.57,
the following can be expressed:
ACud(n) = ud(n + 1)
(2.59)
It can be seen that the companion matrix advances the state vector with a time step of one
(Brincker and Ventura, 2015). Advantageously the eigenvalue problem can be estimated, as-
suming that a free decay can be written as y(n) = beλn∆t, thus, the state vector in equation
2.56 can be written as seen in equation 2.60 (ibid.).
ud(n) =











beλ(−N+1)∆t
...
beλ(−1)∆t
b











eλn∆t = φdµn
(2.60)
Where λ is the continuous time pole, µ = eλ∆t is the discrete-time pole, and φd is the discrete
eigenvector (ibid.). Then, the discrete-time eigenvalue problem can be estimated from equation
2.59 as seen in equation 2.61
ACφd = µφd
(2.61)
This means that the discrete mode shapes (φd) and discrete poles (µ) can be determined to
the companion matrix AC as the eigenvectors and eigenvalues. Thus, the modal properties are
found for the system (ibid.).
The MAC Matrix
The Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC) is a method used to compare different mode shapes
as a classical validation. This enables the comparison of the results between FDD and TDPR
techniques. The MAC value is a normalized correlation coefficient (between zero and unity)
describing the similarity between two modes as expressed in equation 2.62 (Brandt A., 2010).
MAC(a, b) =
aHb
2
(aHa) (bHb)
(2.62)
Where a and b are the two modes (Brincker and Ventura, 2015). When comparing the same set
of modes, it is called the auto-MAC, and when two different modes are compared it is called
cross-MAC.
24
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Methods & Results for Experimental
Investigations
In this chapter, the experimental procedure of this thesis is provided. Furthermore, the test setup
and results are elaborated on and discussed in order to establish the sources of any potential
errors observed.
3.1
Model
In the previous project (Vitten and Jørgensen, 2021), a traditional balcony was constructed
for the purpose of investigating structural deterioration. The setup is illustrated in figure 3.1,
where the wood beams represent the floor structure inside the building. The steel profiles
are connected by bolts to the wood beams, where the steel beam is a continuous beam with
a cantilever end embedded into the concrete deck. The wood beams and concrete deck are
supported by a masonry facade made of bricks.
Figure 3.1: Full scale balcony (Vitten and Jørgensen, 2021).
The original full-scaled balcony was documented in the two previous reports. The full-scale
model intended to replicate the scenario of a life-like balcony, however, several uncertainties
25
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
resulted in some unexpected and unreliable test results. Thus, a different approach was consid-
ered and a new strategy was elected.
Scaling
Based on the undesirable influence from the weather and temperature as stated by Vitten and
Jørgensen, 2021 and summarized in section 1.2. The apparent choice in this report was to
scale the model as means of getting a better match between the experimental testing and the
numerical digital twin. Some of the reasons for scaling the balcony are manageability and
mobility. By scaling the model 1:4, the model can be placed on a euro pallet, which makes
the model easier to transport. This entails, that the testing can be performed inside, meaning
that the results will not be influenced by any inexplicable or unintentional factors such as
weather and temperature. Another advantage of this experimental setup is that the materials
used to construct the balcony are based on standard-produced products from suppliers in the
construction industry. This makes it easier to reproduce or mass-produce the model for further
investigation. As a result, the economical aspect is reduced as fewer and cheaper products are
used for the experiment. On the occasion of this change in scale, an interesting aspect will
occur. Namely, if or how the scaling would impact the construction results in order to validate
if the construction and vibration analysis are scalable.
Scaled Model
The scaling is 1:4 from the full-scale model applied in preceding studies. The scaling is based
on two main decisions. Firstly, the model should be about the same size as a euro pallet, to
make transportation of the setup more convenient. Secondly, the steel profiles IPE120 and
UNP120 should be scaled to a corresponding standard profile. Thus, scaling the dimensions of
the concrete deck, the steel beams, and the wood beams, as presented in figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: 1:4 scaled balcony.
26
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
However, the scaling lead to some complications, one of them being that the manufacturer
had a limited selection of small structural steel beams. Thus, the steel profiles were changed
from IPE120 and UNP120 profiles to cold-formed uneven U-profiles with the dimensions
15x30x15x2. Besides that, the masonry acting as the brick wall facade was reduced to one
brick with the intention that the concrete deck and wood beams should still have a sufficient
remuneration depth. The bolts used for the experimental setup were half the size of the original
setup as their sole purpose was to sustain the steel and wood beams, thereby, constraining them
from any incoherent behavior. The concrete deck was 50 mm instead of 40 mm as the scaling
claim. This is due to the required minimum distance of the cover layer for the steel beam in the
concrete. Lastly, some reinforcement was added, with the sole purpose of taking any potential
tension in the concrete, but so small that it would not have any significant influence. The con-
ceptual work drawing plan of the balcony is illustrated in figure 3.3, indicating the dimensions
of the scaled balcony.
Figure 3.3: Dimensions of the 1:4 scaled balcony.
The specifications of the structural elements of the balcony setup are clarified in table 3.1.
27
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Table 3.1: The structural elements in the balcony setup.
Structural elements
Type
Class
Cross-section
Steel beams1
Cold-formed U-profile
EN10162 - S235JR
15x30x2x910
Wood beams2
Pinewood
C18
50x50x1220
Concrete plate3
Concrete
C20 - CEM I 52.5 N
460x337x50
Brick wall4
Yellow Tile
Brick WB W 301 MS
228x108x54
Bolts5
Galvanized Steel
ISO 4017 - 8.8
M8x80
Detailed pictures of the different elements of the experimental setup are depicted in appendix
B.
3.2
Material Parameters - Wood
The following tests represent an experimental investigation of the utilized wood and its prop-
erties.
Wood Density
The density (ρwood) of the pinewood beams is investigated with the purpose to get more accurate
values of the material properties for digital twinning. The experiment is conducted for five
beams, of which three of them are utilized in the balcony setup and the two remaining beams
are utilized to find the E modulus by dynamic testing. A more comprehensive elaboration of
the process and results is presented in appendix C. However, the main results utilized later for
the FE model are presented in equation 3.1.
ρwood = 507.33 kg
m3 ± 22.80 kg
m3
(3.1)
Wood E modulus
In this section, the E modulus is determined for the wood beams. The purpose of the investi-
gation is to get more accurate values of the material properties for digital twinning. The exper-
iment is conducted on two wood beams with dynamic testing. The dynamic method applied is
the OMA testing where the supporting conditions are free on both ends (free-free).
1https://www.lemu.dk/da/catalog/products/koldformede-u-profiler\
-uligesidede-en10162-15x30x15x20-mm-6-m/JSB%206320
2https://www.silvan.dk/ft-spaertrae-c-18?id=7700-9708394
3https://www.aalborgportland.dk/produkter/rapid-aalborg-cement/
4https://www.johannesfog.dk/byggematerialer/konstruktion/
mursten-og-tilbehoer/mursten/mursten-wb-w-301-ms-gul-massiv-1964352
5https://eshop.wuerth.dk/Sekskantet-bolt-med-gevind-op-til-hoved-STBOLT\
-ISO4017-88-NV13-FZB-M8X80/00578%20%2080.sku/da/DK/DKK/
28
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Test Program
The test program for the E modulus determination of the wood beams is presented in table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Test program for wood E modulus.
Test type
OMA testing
Date
06/10/2022
Type of specimens
Pinewood beams
Number of tested specimens
2
Number of test
20
Comments
Steps
The steps involved to investigate the E modulus of the wood are listed in numbered order below:
1. Placement of eight uni-axial accelerometers is marked and distributed with equal distance
on two sides as seen in figure 3.4.
2. Super glue is used to place Clip Adhesive on the specimens.
3. The specimens are hung in the spring, which is attached to the top of the stand.
4. Brüel & Kjær Piezoelectric type 4508B accelerometers with a sensitivity of 100 mV/g ±5
% are placed in the clip adhesive.
5. The accelerometers are connected, via cables, to the NI-9234 acceleration acquisition mod-
ules with four slots each, thus, two moduli are used.
6. Acceleration acquisition modules are connected to the NI-CompactDAQ chassis of type
cDAQ-9178.
7. NI-CompactDAQ chassis is connected to a local computer.
8. The accelerometers are calibrated with the calibration constant for each individual accelerom-
eter in the acquisition software NI-SignalExpress software.
9. The sampling frequency (fs) and duration time (T) of the test are specified in NI-SignalExpress.
10. One metal file tool is used to make random vibrations by scatting the surface minimum of 2
seconds before, under, and 2 seconds after the test is ended.
11. The test is started in NI-SignalExpress software and runs for 30 seconds.
12. The data results, in terms of acceleration [g], from all the channels, are saved in a .txt file
on the computer.
29
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Test Setup & Performance
The determination of the E modulus for the wood beam is conducted on the basis of frequency.
The test setup can be seen in figure 3.4. In the picture, it is shown how the wood beam 1 , is
placed in a stand 2 , hanging in a spring 3 , with the purpose of getting free-free boundary
conditions. The Clip Adhesive
4
is attached to the specimen where eight Brüel & Kjær
Piezoelectric type 4508B accelerometers 5 are placed. The accelerometers are connected to
the NI-9234 acceleration acquisition modules with four slots 6 , which are used to collect the
data. The connection between the accelerometers and the module consists of low-noise coaxial
cables 7 . The NI-9234 acceleration acquisition modules are placed in the NI-compactDAQ
chassis of type cDAQ-9178 8 . The data collection consists of two moduli, with four slots, in
total eight slots, which are converted to a local computer 9 . To make the random vibration,
the metal file tool is used 10 .
Figure 3.4: Setup for E modulus determination of wood beam 4.
Analysis & Results
The OMA test is conducted 20 times on both wood beam 4 and 5. The spectral density is
examined with the identification technique FDD, where the first global eigenfrequency is de-
termined with peak picking. As an example, the SVD plot for wood beam 5 test 1 is illustrated
in figure 3.5.
30
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Figure 3.5: SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for response in test 1, wood beam 5.
It is documented that there are several peaks in the SVD. Normally, the physical modes are
hidden in the first or second singular value meaning the highest or second highest frequency
line in the SVD plot. Keeping that in mind, one also needs to take nonphysical and local modes
into account. Here, the first peak is seen around 4 Hz, which is a nonphysical mode and there-
fore excluded. Thus, the second peak is identified as the first mode.
As a result of the tests, the mean and standard deviation of the first frequencies for both beams
are illustrated in figure 3.6a and 3.7a, respectively. Additionally, under the assumption of a
normal distribution of the samples, the relative frequency can be used to conduct a histogram
and the probability density function (PDF) as seen in figure 3.6b and 3.7b.
(a) Analysis of experiment series of measured frequencies.
(b) Histogram with the PDF.
Figure 3.6: Results from OMA tests on wood beam 4, where the continuous line indicates the mean
value and the dotted line indicates the upper and lower standard deviation.
31
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(a) Analysis of experiment series of measured frequencies.
(b) Histogram with the PDF.
Figure 3.7: Results from OMA tests on wood beam 5, where the continuous line indicates the mean
value and the dotted line indicates the upper and lower standard deviation.
From the figures above, it is observed that both samples generally follow a normal distribution.
There are a few outliers, but none of major importance, since the standard deviation in the fre-
quencies only perceives ±0.51 Hz and ±0.55 Hz from the mean frequency of 151.93 Hz and
171.89 Hz for wood beam 4 and 5, respectively.
From the frequencies, the E modulus of the wood beams is calculated with the well-known
Bernoulli-Euler beam theory, as seen in equation 3.2.
ωj = λ2
j
L2
EI
mL
 1
2
⇒
E = ω2
jL4mL
λ4
jI
(3.2)
Only looking at the first mode j = 1, then it is known that λj = 4.73 (Thomsen, 2021). λj
is the roots of the first eigenvalue, which in this case is for a free-free beam. Furthermore, the
first angular frequency is ωj, which also can be expressed as the frequency f = ω2π. Lastly,
the mass per length of the beam is equal to mL = ρA.
The results of the E modulus for each wood beam are illustrated in figure 3.8, where the gener-
ally defined value spectrum of the E modulus for pinewood is illustrated as the blue thresholds.
32
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Figure 3.8: E modulus determination of each frequency sample for wood beam 4 and 5.
To compare the different mean E modulus of each wood beam, the results are shown in table
3.3.
Table 3.3: The mean results from the two different beam tests, determining the E modulus.
F
L
λ
mL
I
E
[Units]
[Hz]
[m]
[-]
kg
m

[cm4]
[GPa]
Beam 4
151.93
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.34
9.15
Beam 5
171.89
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.11
Mean
161.91
1.22
4.73
1.26
52.34
11.13
SD
±14.11
±0.00
±0.00
±0.06
±1.48
±2.80
The mean E modulus (11.13 GPa) of the wood beams has a relatively large standard deviation
of ±2.80 GPa. However, the difference between the two individual mean E modulus is 3.96
GPa, which constitutes a relatively large variation. The variation of the E modulus could be
explained by the fact that wood is an orthotropic material, thus, the stiffness depending on the
frequency is affected by how the wood is cut and how the fibers are structured. The results
were expected and since the stiffness is within the defined range for pinewood (8.50-13.70
GPa) (Engineering ToolBox, 2023b), the results can be accepted and utilized later for the FE
model with the range as seen in equation 3.3.
Ewood = 11.13GPa ± 2.80GPa
(3.3)
Comprehensive documentation of the 20 tests made on each wood beam is presented in ap-
pendix D.
33
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
3.3
Material Parameters - Steel
The following tests represent an experimental investigation of the utilized steel and its proper-
ties.
Steel Density
The density (ρsteel) of the steel beams is investigated with the purpose to get more accurate
values of the material properties for digital twinning. The experiment is conducted on a single
beam representing the three beams utilized in the balcony construction. A more comprehensive
elaboration of the process and results is presented in appendix E. However, the main results
utilized later for the FE model are presented in equation 3.4.
ρsteel = 7943.53 kg
m3
(3.4)
Steel E modulus
In this section, the E modulus is determined for the steel beam. The purpose of the investigation
is to get more accurate values of the material properties for digital twinning. The experiment
is conducted on a single steel beam with dynamic testing. The dynamic method applied is the
OMA testing, where the supporting conditions are free on both ends (free-free).
Test Program
The test program for the E modulus determination of the steel beam is presented in table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Test program for steel E modulus.
Test type
OMA testing
Date
06/10/2022
Type of specimens
Steel beams
Number of tested specimens
1
Number of test
20
Comments
Steps
The steps involved to investigate the E modulus of the steel are identical to the earlier proce-
dures, and therefore, references are made to section 3.2.
Test Setup & Performance
To determine the E modulus of the steel beam, the frequency is found. The test setup can be
seen in figure 3.9. In the picture, it is shown how the steel beam 1 , is placed in a stand
2 , hanging in a rubber band 3 with the purpose of getting free-free boundary conditions.
34
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
The Clip Adhesive 4 is attached to the specimen where eight Brüel & Kjær Piezoelectric
type 4508B accelerometers 5 are placed. The accelerometers are connected to the NI-9234
acceleration acquisition modules with four slots 6 , which are used to collect the data. The
connection between the accelerometers and the module consists of low-noise coaxial cables
7 . The NI-9234 acceleration acquisition modules are placed in the NI-compactDAQ chassis
of type cDAQ-9178 8 . The data collection consists of two moduli, with four slots, in total
eight slots, which are converted to a local computer 9 . To make the random vibration, the
metal file tool is used 10 .
Figure 3.9: Setup for E modulus determination of steel beam 4.
Analysis & Results
The OMA test is conducted 20 times on steel beam 4. The spectral density is examined with the
identification technique FDD, where the first global eigenfrequency is determined with peak
picking. The SVD plot for steel beam 4 test 1 is illustrated in figure 3.10.
35
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Figure 3.10: SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for response in test 1, steel beam 4.
From the SVD plot, several peaks are observed. Here, the appearance of the peaks is even more
clear, than for the wood beams. Assessing the same precautions as for the wood beams, the
second peak can be identified as the first mode.
Based on the result of the tests, the mean and standard deviation of the first frequencies for
steel beam 4 are illustrated in figure 3.11a. Additionally, under the assumption of a normal
distribution of the samples, the relative frequency can be used to conduct a histogram and the
probability density function as seen in figure 3.11b.
(a) Analysis of experiment series of measured frequencies.
(b) Histogram with the PDF.
Figure 3.11: Results from OMA test on steel beam 4, where the continuous line indicates the mean
value and the dotted line indicates the upper and lower standard deviation.
Firstly, it is detected that the sample follows a normal distribution. A few outliers are observed,
but none are of major importance since the standard deviation in the frequencies only perceives
±0.46 Hz from the mean frequency of 107.52 Hz for steel beam 4.
36
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
From the frequencies, the E modulus of the steel beam is calculated with the well-known
Bernoulli-Euler beam theory, like for the wood beams, as seen in equation 3.2.
The results for the E modulus for the steel beam are illustrated in figure 3.12, where the gen-
erally defined value spectrum of the E modulus for construction steel is illustrated as the blue
thresholds.
Figure 3.12: E modulus determination of each frequency sample for steel beam 4.
The mean E modulus (203.06 GPa) of the steel beam has a minor standard deviation of ±1.74
GPa. Although the density was found to be a little higher than prescribed by the manufacturer,
the stiffness was found to be within the defined range for construction steel (190.00-215.00
GPa) (AmesWeb, 2023b). Thus, the results can be accepted and utilized later for the FE model
with the range as seen in equation 3.5.
Esteel = 203.06GPa ± 1.74GPa
(3.5)
Comprehensive documentation of the 20 tests made on the steel beam is presented in appendix
F.
3.4
Material Parameters - Concrete
The following tests were performed to investigate the properties of the concrete used in the
subsequent experiments. A more comprehensive elaboration of the creation of the concrete
elements used is presented in appendix G.
37
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Concrete Density
The density (ρconcrete) of the concrete cylinders are investigated with the purpose of getting
more accurate values of the material properties for digital twinning. The determination of the
density is made for five cylinders. Since the same mortar was used for all five cylinders and the
balcony plate, the density of the concrete will be the same. A more comprehensive elaboration
of the process and results is presented in appendix H. However, the main results utilized later
for the FE model are presented in equation 3.6.
ρconcrete = 1848.79 kg
m3 ± 9.98 kg
m3
(3.6)
Concrete E modulus
The investigation of the E modulus of the concrete is presented in this section. The purpose
of the investigation is, similarly to the experiment with wood and steel, to get more accu-
rate properties for the digital twin. The experiment is performed with a compression test on
five concrete cylinders, where the concrete compression and the displacement are measured in
terms of stress and strain, respectively. From the produced stress-strain curve, the E modulus
can be determined.
Test Program
The test program for E modulus determination of the concrete cylinder is presented in table
3.5.
Table 3.5: Test program for compression of concrete specimens.
Test type
Compression test
Date
02/12/2022
Type of specimens
Concrete cylinders Ø10
Number of tested specimens
5
Number of test
1
Comments
Steps
The steps involved to investigate the E modulus of the concrete are listed in numbered order
below:
1. The extensometer is mounted in the center of the specimen.
2. The specimen is placed centrally in the SHY-002-MTS-311.31 test machine.
3. The expected compressive strength is calculated with Bolomeys equation seen in equation
3.7.
38
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
4. The loading rate and stop criteria are specified according to DS/EN 12390-13 method A
(Dansk Standard, 2021).
5. The E modulus test can then be started on the local computer.
6. The obtained data can be utilized to generate the stress-strain curve.
Test Setup & Performance
The internal secant modulus of elasticity in compression for the specimen is determined ac-
cording to DS/EN 12390-13 method A. First, the wiring stability is checked, and then the
positioning of the specimen is controlled. The compression test is divided into two cycles.
The first segment is a preloading cycle that occurs three times. The second segment is the
load cycle, also occurring three times, where the stabilized secant modulus of elasticity (EC,S)
is calculated (ibid.). After the upper-stress value has been measured, the DS/EN 12390-13
method A states that the compressive strength of the specimen should be determined and noted
if the measured compressive strength differed from fc by more than 20 %. Since compression
strength is not considered crucial for the desired characteristics, this is not accomplished.
The test is conducted in a servo-hydraulic test machine SHY-002-MTS-311.31 1 and the
test setup can be seen in figure 3.13. The extensometer 2 is mounted on the test specimen 3
which is placed on the fixed bottom plate of the machine. Contrary, at the top of the machine,
a movable load cell is placed. The machine is controlled by a local computer.
Figure 3.13: Setup for E modulus determination of the concrete cylinders.
39
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Analysis & Results
The expected compression strength is calculated by Bolomeys equation when knowing the w/c
conditions (estimated in table G.2 to 0.50), as seen in equation 3.7.
fc = k ·
 1
w
c
−α

,
for
0.45 < w
c < 1.25
(3.7)
Where fc is the expected compressive strength, k is Bolomeys constant (k = 30), and α is a
constant (α = 0.5), that depends on both the cement type (Rapid cement) and the age of the
concrete (68 days). The concrete is assumed to be fully hardened after 28 days (Poulsen W. H,
2011). The expected compressive strength (fc) is calculated to be 45 MPa.
The E modulus is found according to DS/EN 12390-13 method A, where the stabilized se-
cant modulus of elasticity is determined. The data collected in the experiment contains the
displacement from the extensometer and the applied load. The data is utilized to calculate the
stress-strain curve for each specimen.
First, the stress can be calculated as seen in equation 3.8.
σ = P
Ac
(3.8)
Where P is the applied load for each measurement. Secondly, the strain can be calculated as
seen in equation 3.9
ε = ∆l
l0
(3.9)
Where ∆l is the changes in the length and l0 is the original length of the specimen. The stress
from the preloading and loading cycles in the experimental work can be seen in figure 3.14a
for specimen 1.
(a) Compression cycles according to DS/EN 12390-13
method A for specimen 1, where the marked blue box
represents the last load cycle.
(b) Last load cycle in the stress-strain curve, where
the slope coefficient represents the E modulus.
Figure 3.14: Data results for E modulus of concrete.
The stabilized secant modulus of elasticity is determined from the stress-strain curve. The
corresponding slope coefficient of the last cycle for the five test specimens as seen in figure
40
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
3.14b can be determined with the use of equation 3.10.
EC,S = ∆σ
∆εS
= σm
a −σm
b
εa,3 −εb,2
(3.10)
Where σm
a is the measured stress corresponding to the nominal upper stress in the third cycle
and σm
b is the measured stress corresponding to the nominal lower stress in the third cycle. εa,3
is the average strain at upper stress on the third loading cycle, and εb,2 is the average strain at
lower stress on the second loading cycle (Dansk Standard, 2021).
Additionally, statistical analysis of the data is conducted by using order statistics to ensure
that the data is normally distributed as claimed in appendix I. The results from the tests of the
concrete cylinders are seen in figure 3.15.
Figure 3.15: The E modulus from the experimental work compared to the generally defined E modules
for concrete.
The mean E modulus (19.65 GPa) of the concrete cylinders has a minor standard deviation of
±0.36 GPa. The difference between the smallest and largest E modulus is 0.75 GPa, which is
a relatively small difference. Since the concrete used for all cylinders originates from the same
casting, only a small difference in the E modulus was expected. However, the E modulus is
in the lower end which might be due to the low-density value found in the previous section.
The results of the E modulus are in the range of the generally defined E modulus for concrete
(14-41 GPa) (Engineering ToolBox, 2023a). Though, the results can be accepted and utilized
for the FE model with the range defined in equation 3.11.
Econcrete = 19.65GPa ± 0.36GPa
(3.11)
41
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Comprehensive documentation of the five concrete tests is presented in appendix I.
3.5
Degradation of Steel Beams
The following section presents the degradation states of the steel beams in the balcony struc-
ture. The degradation is performed by controlled damage of the upper flange to incrementally
see the effect, while, at the same time, having some tangible damage that can be modeled more
precisely in the numerical model.
Degradation of Steel Beams
The degradation process can be divided into four states and defined as follows:
• O - The undamaged original state.
• F1 - The first damaged state, where 6 mm of the top flange of the center steel beam is
removed.
• F2 - The second damaged state, where 6 mm of the top flange of all the steel beams is
removed.
• F3 - The third damaged state, where the entire top flange of all the steel beams is re-
moved.
Test Program
The program for the degradation of the balcony steel beams is presented in table 3.6.
Table 3.6: Program for degradation of steel beams.
Date
22/12/2022
Type of specimen
Scaled balcony structure
Number of states
4
Degradation states
O state
F1 state
F2 state
F3 state
Comments
Steps
The steps involved in systematically damaging the steel beams in the balcony are listed in
numbered order below:
1. Marking the degradation points on all three steel beams for all states.
42
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
2. Wearing safety equipment.
3. Cut the degradation in the steel beams according to the different states between testing
respectively. Between each degradation state the OMA and EMA tests are performed.
Test Setup & Performance
For the degradation of the steel beams, the setup can be seen in figure 3.16. In the picture, it is
seen how the steel beam 1 is damaged using an angle grinder 2 . The person who performs
the work is wearing proper safety equipment 3 .
Figure 3.16: Setup for damage of steel beam 3 in degradation state F2.
Analysis & Results
The degradation states F1 and F2 are presented in figure 3.17, followed by the last degradation
state F3 presented in figure 3.18.
43
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(a) Captured picture of the damage
in steel beam 1 according to the F2
state.
(b) Captured picture of the damage
in steel beam 2 according to the F1
and F2 state.
(c) Captured picture of the damage
in steel beam 3 according to the F2
state.
Figure 3.17: Captured pictures of the damage in the three steel beams according to the F1 and F2
state.
(a) Captured picture of the damage
in steel beam 1 according to the F3
state.
(b) Captured picture of the damage
in steel beam 2 according to the F3
state.
(c) Captured picture of the damage
in steel beam 3 according to the F3
state.
Figure 3.18: Captured pictures of the damage in the three steel beams according to the F3 state.
It is known from equation 2.8 presented in the theory section that the frequency of the system
depends on the ratio between the stiffness and mass of the structure. This was later utilized in
conjunction with Bernoulli-Euler beam theory in equation 3.2, where k = EI and m = ρAL.
However, the balcony structure is far more complex requiring the whole system to be more
accurate as both wood, steel, and concrete interact in a more complex way than a free beam
composed of just one single material. However, since the change in frequency only depends on
the locally damaged steel profile, a rough simplification considering the entire balcony struc-
ture was made. This approach might still give a careful indication of how the deterioration of
44
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
the steel will affect the frequency of the balcony in a decreasing or increasing manner.
Adapting the relation in equation 3.12 clarifies that a change in the cross-sectional area (A)
and the moment of inertia (I) must have an impact on the frequency since the length (L),
density (ρ), and E modulus (E) are more or less constant throughout the tests. This demon-
strates that a decrease in the cross-sectional area results in a decrease in the mass (m) leading
to a higher frequency (f). Likewise, a decrease in the moment of inertia causes a decrease in
the stiffness (k) resulting in a lower frequency. Acknowledging this, the relation between the
original state (denoted with the subscript notation O) and the damaged state (denoted with the
subscript notation state equal to F1, F2, or F3), can be expressed as seen in equation 3.12. Note
that a reduction in stiffness mass ratio can result in a corresponding frequency even though
there has been a deterioration of inertia and cross-sectional area.
fstate
fO
=
q  k
m

state
q  k
m

O
=
r
EI
ρAL

state
r
EI
ρAL

O
=
q  I
A

state
q  I
A

O
=
√αstate
√αO
(3.12)
Due to a damage width of 4 mm corresponding to the angle grinder blade thickness, there will
be a small change in the length of the steel beam. However, since it only constitutes 0.42 %
of the length, it is neglected in the simplification. The roughly estimated simplification for the
given state is presented in table 3.7.
Table 3.7: Change in the cross-sectional area, the moment of inertia, and the frequency due to the
several deterioration states of the steel beams.
A
Area Ratio
I
Inertia Ratio
√α
Frequency Ratio
[Units]
[mm2]
[%]
[mm4]
[%]
[mm]
[%]
O State
117.00
100.00
15900.00
100.00
11.66
100.00
F1 State
105.00
96.58
13300.00
94.55
11.25
98.85
F2 State
105.00
89.74
13300.00
83.65
11.25
96.54
F3 State
88.80
75.90
8500.00
53.46
9.78
83.93
It is observed that the area ratio

Astate
AO

is decreasing and the inertia ratio

Istate
IO

is decreas-
ing. Converting this to the frequency ratio

fstate
fO

, which also seems to decrease since the
deterioration of the inertia is percentage-wise larger than the cross-sectional area. The essen-
tial point to withdraw from this is that even though the damages are relatively large, the change
in frequency ratio is not as high, especially when the moment of inertia is not triggered in
form of bending or torsion. An additional simplification is conducted for state F1, where at-
tention is drawn to the fact that the properties are the same as for state F2. The reason why
the ratios are different for the two states is linked to the fact that F1 only damages one of the
three steel beams, which constitutes 1/3 of the simplified deteriorated properties i.e. shown by

fO+fF 1+fO
fO+fO+fO

= 98.85 %. Lastly, it is important to emphasize, once again, that this should
45
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
not be equivalent to the corresponding decrease in the frequency of the full balcony struc-
ture. Based on these considerations and simplified calculations, it is only valid to state that
the global frequency might decrease based on the local decrease of the steel beam frequencies
when the steel is damaged. Comprehensive documentation of the damages and the calculations
are presented in appendix J.
3.6
Dynamic Tests
This thesis aims to find and validate a non-destructive way of investigating modal properties
before and after a certain degree of structural deterioration. As a part of the investigation, two
different experiments are conducted on the scaled balcony setup. The first experiment is per-
formed by exciting the balcony with random vibrations, conducted with a shaker, after which
the measured responses are examined by an Operational Modal Analysis (OMA). The proce-
dure of the second experiment is to excite the balcony with impulse force, conducted with an
impact hammer, after which the measured responses are examined by an Experimental Modal
Analysis (EMA). Both methods are utilized to describe, understand, and model the dynamic
behavior of a balcony. Furthermore, the methods are applied to determine the dynamic charac-
teristics of the balcony including the eigenfrequencies and mode shapes.
Both experiments are performed for four different states of the balcony in order to understand
how structural deterioration, i.e. corrosion of the outrigger steel beam, can be tracked. This
is accomplished by following a presumed decrease in the balcony eigenfrequency, simultane-
ously with an increase in structural deterioration. The presumed frequency changes for the four
states are identified as the four abbreviations defined in the previous section 3.5. An in-depth
explanation of each experiment is reviewed in the following sections.
OMA Tests
In this section, the eigenfrequencies and mode shapes are estimated for the balcony using the
OMA test. The purpose of the investigation is to measure a presumed decreasing response in
frequency as the damage or deterioration of the steel beams in the balcony increases.
Test Program
The test program for random vibrations and OMA of the balcony is presented in table 3.8.
46
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Table 3.8: Test program for OMA test.
Test type
Random vibrations OMA
Date
22/12/2022
Type of specimen
Scaled balcony structure
Number of tested specimens
1
Number of test for each state
5
Degradation states
O state
F1 state
F2 state
F3 state
Comments
Steps
The steps involved to investigate the frequency of the balcony by random vibrations and OMA
are listed in numbered order below:
1. The balcony is placed on and clamped to a larger metal plate in order to abstract it from any
outside vibrations or structures.
2. The 13 points of interest are marked along the structure.
3. Super glue is used to place Clip Adhesive on the balcony.
4. Brüel & Kjær Piezoelectric type 4508B accelerometers with a sensitivity of 100 mV/g ±5
% are placed in the clip adhesive.
5. The accelerometers are connected, via cables, to the NI-9234 acceleration acquisition mod-
ules with four slots each, thus, four moduli are used.
6. Acceleration acquisition modules are connected to the NI-CompactDAQ chassis of type
cDAQ-9178.
7. NI-CompactDAQ chassis is connected to a local computer.
8. The accelerometers are calibrated with the calibration constant for each individual accelerom-
eter in the acquisition software NI-SignalExpress software.
9. The sampling frequency (fs) and duration time (T) of the test are specified in NI-SignalExpress.
10. A shaker is mounted to the wood beam and the shaker’s load cell is configured to white
noise characteristics in terms of a Gaussian/random signal.
11. The test is started in NI-SignalExpress software and runs for 240 seconds.
12. The data results, in terms of acceleration [g], from all the channels, are saved in a .txt file
on the computer.
47
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Test Setup & Performance
To determine the frequency of the balcony structure, the OMA analysis is conducted. The
test setup can be seen in figure 3.19. The picture shows the balcony structure 1 . The Clip
Adhesive 2 is attached to the specimen where 13 Brüel & Kjær Piezoelectric type 4508B
accelerometers 3 are placed. The accelerometers are connected to the NI-9234 acceleration
acquisition modules with four slots 4 , which are used to collect the data. The connection
between the accelerometers and the module consists of low-noise coaxial cables
5 . The
NI-9234 acceleration acquisition modules are placed in the NI-compactDAQ chassis of type
cDAQ-9178 6 . The balcony structure is exposed to random vibration with the use of a small
modal exciter 7 which is connected to an amplifier 8 . The amplifier is connected to the
NI-compactDAQ chassis. The data collection consists of four moduli with four slots each.
In total, 13 out of the 16 slots are utilized and connected to a local computer 9 . The NI-
SIGNALEXPRESS software is used to collect the response and afterward saved as a .txt file.
The low-noise coaxial cables are carried by a rubber band that is attached to the stand 10 .
A very thin steel bar 11 is mounted at the end of the wooden beam in order to replicate free
rotation as a simply supported beam. Lastly, the balcony is attached to a steel plate to add some
weight and thereby reduce the noise from external factors. This is accomplished with the use
of clamps 12 .
Figure 3.19: Setup for the OMA test excited by random vibrations.
The criteria for the total length of the time series (Ttot) is expressed in equation 3.13 and must
48
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
be fulfilled.
Ttot >
10
ζfmin
(3.13)
The damping ratio (ζ) is assumed to be 1 % which is a reasonable assumption for a balcony
structure. The first eigenfrequency (fmin) is presumed from the FE model which is introduced
in chapter 4. Based on this, the minimum length of the time series can be determined as
expressed in equation 3.14 (Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
Tmin =
10
0.01 · 78.26 = 12.78s
(3.14)
The criteria for the time length in the series is fulfilled because the total time series (Ttot) is cho-
sen to be 240 s. This gives a better result when averaging the data in the pre-processing process.
The specified sampling frequency (fs) defines the upper limit of the frequency band. The
Nyquist frequency is defined as half of the sampling frequency, defined in equation 2.31. In
equation 3.15 it is claimed that the highest desired frequency (5th eigenfrequency) presumed
from the FE Model in chapter 4 is within the Nyquist frequency (ibid.).
fs = 1652Hz →fν = 826Hz
(3.15)
Furthermore, it should be considered that filters, such as antialiasing filters, have an effect
on the frequencies in the vicinity of the Nyquist frequency during post-processing. Thus, the
precautions
fs
2.4 > fmax is taken, which is still fulfilled for the presumed 5th eigenfrequency
(ibid.). Lastly, from the sampling frequency, the corresponding time step can be calculated as
mentioned in equation 2.30 (see chapter 2) and seen in equation 3.16.
fs = 1
∆t →∆t = 0.000605s
(3.16)
Analysis
The frequencies in the balcony structure were determined with the use of OMA, where two
different identification techniques (IDT) were used. The two identification techniques FDD
and TDPR were conducted in the frequency domain and in the time domain, respectively. The
analyses for FDD and TDPR, respectively, were accomplished with the modified Matlab script
"FDD_Ident_Example" (Amador, 2020a) and "TDPR_Ident_Example" (Amador, 2020b) both
made by Sandro Amador. The scripts are operating the Matlab toolbox "OMAtoolsA1_5" for
general OMA experiments made by Rune Brincker (Brincker R., 2012).
The filter factor (r) and the number of frequency lines (Nf) can be adjusted in both the TDPR
and FDD scripts. The filter factor can be described as r = 2n which is a radix 2 number,
whereas n is a natural number. The filter factor is chosen to be r=2 which makes it possible
to find the first five eigenfrequencies inside the bandwidth from 0 to 413 Hz. The number of
49
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
frequency lines has been modified to get well-defined peaks in the SVD plot. Nf is also a radix
2 number plus one (Nf = 2n + 1), which in this case equals 2049.
In the FDD technique, the modal parameters are estimated with a technique called peak pick-
ing. This can be accomplished when the structure is exposed to ambient excitations where a
strong response will occur near the natural frequencies. The peaks can then be determined in
the SVD plot (Brincker and Ventura, 2015). A disadvantage of the FDD technique is that the
modal damping is not estimated. Furthermore, when performing peak peaking, it is important
not to choose the nonphysical frequencies and one should be aware of the difference between
local and global frequencies of the structure.
Two additional parameters can be modified in the TDPR script. The first one is the number
of Infinite Impulse Response (IIR) filter coefficients (na) that describe the number of roots in
a polynomial. This number can be used to fit the correlation functions, but to avoid too much
overfitting of the curve, na is chosen to be 5. Furthermore, it should be checked if the curve
is overdetermined which depends on the na value chosen as mentioned previously in section 2
equation 2.55. The number of channels in the system depends on the number of sensors on the
balcony structure which in this case is nc=13. The number of samples (np) can be determined
from the time step and the total time duration, which can be seen in equation 3.17.
np = N = T
∆t =
240s
0.000605s = 396, 694 measurements
(3.17)
Thereby, the criteria from equation 2.55 can be checked in equation 3.18.
np −na ≫na · nc ←→396, 694 −5 ≫5 · 13 ←→396, 689 ≫65
(3.18)
From this, it can be confirmed that the system is overdetermined since the condition is satisfied.
The second parameter is the utilized range of the correlation function. The decay of the corre-
lation functions is the only part that should be included. Therefore, it is common practice to
remove the first five time-lags and furthermore choose a cut-off limit between 30 %-50 % of
the full length. In this case, a cut-off limit of 40 % has been chosen. This way, the utilized part
of the decay can be seen in the correlation function plot presented in figure 3.20.
50
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Figure 3.20: The auto-correlation function of sensor 1.
Results O
Before any degradation state is applied to the steel profiles, dynamic testing is performed. Thus,
the initial global eigenfrequencies of the balcony were obtained by peak picking with the FDD
technique and computed estimation with the TDPR technique. Five tests are conducted by the
procedures elaborated on in the analysis section. The SVD plot for the first test is illustrated in
figure 3.21 where the chosen peaks with the use of FDD are highlighted.
51
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(a) Zoom box 1.
(b) Zoom box 2.
Figure 3.21: SVD plot of test 1 for O state, with zoom on peaks.
Before going deeper into the SVD plots, one should acknowledge that it requires a thorough
investigation when the system is highly complex - such as for a balcony. As illustrated in the
SVD, the balcony generates a lot of peaks that can be difficult to distinguish between. The
reason for the high complexity lies partly in the combination of a lot of material and nonlinear-
ities, and partly in the fact that the balcony is only dealing with excitation from a single shaker
input.
The investigation procedure conducted is equivalent to the one conducted in section 3.2 for
the wood beam. Thus, the physical modes are extracted from the highest frequency line. Fur-
thermore, the nonphysical, transverse, and local modes that appear between 0 Hz and 60 Hz
are excluded. The local modes are immediately local modes from the underlying wood plate,
which are excited although it was tried to be avoided by clamping it to the solid steel plate.
Still, several peaks are present which implies that the identification in the SVD is also biased
from compatible eigenfrequencies seen for both the FDD and TDPR technique, as well as for
the EMA test (section: EMA Tests) and the numerical model in chapter 4. Thus, the peaks
are identified inside the red boxes as the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth modes, which are
clarified in the two zoomed illustrations. Lastly, the validation of the minimum duration time
is highly fulfilled according to mode 1 (240.00s > 12.78s), based on equation 3.14 and the val-
idation of the Nyquist frequency is highly fulfilled according to mode 5 (688.70 Hz> 372.26
Hz), based on equation 3.15, with the filter reduction introduced.
Pointed peaks are utilized to illustrate the first five excited global mode shapes for the balcony.
These mode shapes are illustrated in figure 3.22a-3.22j for the FDD identification technique on
the left side and the TDPR identification technique on the right side.
52
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
53
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure 3.22: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 1 in the O state.
The corresponding mode shapes for the TDPR identification technique are identified directly
from the correlation functions. Since the number of roots in the polynomial is set to 5, all the
nonphysical, transverse, and local modes are again excluded here. The first and most essential
thing to notice is that the mode shapes are relatively similar for the FDD and TDPR when car-
rying out the five mode shapes. Additionally, it should be noted that the deflection amplitude
varies between the three wood beams. This is partly due to the variation of the stiffness and
density between the beams as established in section 3.2, and partly due to the single shaker
input being connected to the most distant wood beam when looking at the illustrations, giving
more enhanced responses. The following guides through a detailed examination of each mode
shape.
The first mode shape is illustrated in figure 3.22a and 3.22b. As expected, the illustrations
show the first bending mode, where the displacement is zero at the supports. Thus, the simply
supported wood beams are bending upwards and the cantilever concrete deck is bending the
opposite way. Based on this, it can be argued that the first global mode is obtained since the
two identification techniques look relatively similar and as anticipated.
The second mode shape is illustrated in figure 3.22c and 3.22d. The illustrations show a bend-
ing mode for the wood beams, where the displacement is zero at the supports and almost zero
for the concrete plate. This is due to the outermost wood beams which are bending down-
wards and the center wood beam in the opposite directions, resulting in no displacement for
the concrete deck as just claimed. Based on this, it can be argued that the second global mode
is obtained since the two identification techniques look relatively similar and as anticipated.
The third mode shape is illustrated in figure 3.22e and 3.22f. As expected, the illustrations
show the first twisting mode, where the outer wood beams deflect in opposite directions and
the center wood beam is almost straight, due to symmetry-like behavior. This will introduce
a twisting behavior in the concrete deck which can be observed for the FDD and faintly seen
for the TDPR. The fact that the center beam is not perfectly straight was expected since the
54
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
balcony is not completely symmetric and the parameters of the wood are presumed to vary.
Given that, it can be argued that the third global mode is obtained since the two identification
techniques look relatively similar and as anticipated.
The fourth mode shape is illustrated in figure 3.22g and 3.22h. As the modes get higher,
the complexity becomes equally higher and therefore more difficult to predict. Thus the pre-
sumed mode shapes from chapter 4 are utilized for detecting the mode shapes. The illustration
shows a bending mode similar to the first mode, but contrary the deflection goes in the same
direction. Thus, both the simply supported wood beams and the cantilever concrete deck are
bending upwards, causing the rotation around the x-axis for the line support between the wood
and concrete deck to be zero. Given that, it can be argued that the fourth global mode is ob-
tained since the two identification techniques look relatively similar and as anticipated.
The fifth mode shape is illustrated in figure 3.22i and 3.22j. The figures show a twisting mode,
similar to the third mode. However, in this case, the second harmonic oscillation, at one octave
higher, is present for the wood beams. The twisting behavior in the concrete deck is explained
by the two nearest wood beams bending one way and the distant wood beam bending in the
opposite direction. Thus, the asymmetry again has an effect. Because of this, it can be argued
that the fifth global mode is obtained as the two identification techniques look relatively similar
and as anticipated.
For the obtained mode shapes in the OMA test, some additional simplifications made in the
OMA script should be noticed, mainly in conjunctions with the aspect of visual comparison.
Here, the 18 cm long free end of the wood beam, seen in the backend of the balcony in figure
3.2 is not included in the mode shape plots for the OMA tests. At the opposite end of the bal-
cony, at the free end of the concrete deck, the accelerometers are mounted 2.5 cm from the tip,
thus, the concrete deck’s length in the mode shape plot is reduced with 2.5 cm. Furthermore,
the wood and steel beams are simplified to one beam in the script, connected directly to the
concrete deck, thus the steel in the 2 cm gap between the wood beams and concrete deck is
excluded. Lastly, the beams are modeled without a cross-section, meaning that for the beams
to go as a continuous beam into the concrete deck, the concrete deck was forced to have a width
of 510 mm. However, the simplification should not affect the results significantly.
The MAC validation between the FDD and TDPR identification techniques is additionally
conducted to confirm the similarity of the mode shape or mode shape correlation as seen in
figure 3.23.
55
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Figure 3.23: MAC validation of the mode shape correlation between the FDD and TDPR technique for
the O state in OMA testing.
As previously discussed, the responses utilized to determine the eigenfrequencies of the bal-
cony, are taken from 13 different accelerometers. Comprehensive documentation of the SVD
plots and mode shapes for the remaining four tests are found in appendix K, but the main results
are summarized in table 3.9.
Table 3.9: The O state results for the five modes in the five tests of the OMA test.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
IDT
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
79.09
78.78
107.34
107.53
126.51
126.48
144.06
143.80
372.26
371.73
Test 2
78.69
78.67
107.54
107.99
126.91
126.36
143.86
143.75
370.85
371.31
Test 3
78.49
78.35
107.54
108.00
126.71
126.32
143.66
143.68
370.65
371.57
Test 4
78.89
78.37
107.74
107.51
127.11
126.55
143.86
143.71
371.26
371.64
Test 5
78.08
78.29
107.54
108.85
126.91
126.37
143.66
143.69
372.06
371.76
Mean
78.65
78.49
107.54
107.98
126.83
126.42
143.82
143.73
371.42
371.60
SD
±00.39
±00.22
±00.14
±00.54
±00.23
±00.10
±00.17
±00.05
±00.72
±00.18
The determined mean frequency for the global mode shapes of the balcony is classified as very
accurate since the standard deviations for both identification techniques are very low for the five
tests. Furthermore, the two identification techniques give very close results, which emphasizes
the validity of the results.
Results F1
After the first degradation state F1 has been applied to the center steel profile, the dynamic
testing is performed once again. As before, five tests are conducted by the exact same procedure
operated in state O. The SVD plot for the first test is illustrated in figure 3.24, where the chosen
peaks with the use of FDD are highlighted.
56
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(a) Zoom box 1.
(b) Zoom box 2.
Figure 3.24: SVD plot of test 1 for F1 state.
From the SVD plot above, it is observed that the balcony again generates a lot of peaks. Ide-
ally, the SVD is roughly distributed in the same way as for the first state (O), but with a small
decrease in frequency. Thus, the same precautions as for the first state (O) are taken, and the
peaks are identified inside the red boxes as the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth modes,
which is clarified in the two zoomed illustrations.
Pointed peaks are utilized to illustrate the first five excited global mode shapes for the balcony.
These mode shapes are illustrated in figure 3.25a-3.25j for the FDD identification technique on
the left side and the TDPR identification technique on the right side.
57
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
58
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure 3.25: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 1 in the F1 state.
It is important to note that the mode shapes are relatively similar to the mode shapes for the
first state (O). Like the first state, the mode shapes are again relatively similar for the FDD and
TDPR when carrying out the five mode shapes. That said, it should be emphasized that the
fifth mode bends inversely when FDD and TDPR are compared. However, this is not of major
importance since the response is just mirrored.
The MAC validation between the FDD and TDPR identification techniques is additionally
conducted to confirm the similarity of the mode shape or mode shape correlation as seen in
figure 3.26.
Figure 3.26: MAC validation of the mode shape correlation between the FDD and TDPR technique for
the F1 state in OMA testing.
As previously discussed, the responses utilized to determine the eigenfrequencies of the bal-
cony, are taken from the 13 different accelerometers. Comprehensive documentation of the
SVD plots and mode shapes for the remaining four tests are found in appendix L, but the main
results are summarized in table 3.10.
59
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Table 3.10: The F1 state results for the five modes in the five tests of the OMA test.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
IDT
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
77.08
76.80
107.54
106.77
126.51
125.77
143.46
143.43
369.64
370.54
Test 2
77.28
76.91
107.54
107.56
126.51
125.95
143.66
143.48
370.04
370.61
Test 3
77.28
76.86
107.54
107.47
126.51
125.76
143.46
143.49
370.65
370.21
Test 4
76.87
76.86
107.54
108.26
124.90
125.67
143.26
143.53
370.65
369.87
Test 5
77.28
76.85
107.54
107.73
125.30
125.79
143.66
143.50
369.84
370.19
Mean
77.16
76.86
107.54
107.56
125.95
125.79
143.50
143.49
370.16
370.28
SD
±0.18
±0.04
±0.00
±0.54
±0.79
±0.10
±0.17
±0.04
±0.47
±0.30
The determined mean frequency of the global mode shapes of the balcony is again classified
as very accurate since the standard deviations for both identification techniques are very low
among the five tests. Furthermore, the two identification techniques give very close results,
which supports the validity of the results.
Results F2
After the degradation state F2 has been applied to the steel profiles, the dynamic testing is
performed once again. As before, five tests are conducted by the exact same procedure operated
in state O. The SVD plot for the first test is illustrated in figure 3.27, where the chosen peaks
with the use of FDD are highlighted.
60
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(a) Zoom box 1.
(b) Zoom box 2.
Figure 3.27: SVD plot of test 1 for F2 state.
From the SVD plot above, it is observed that the balcony again generates a lot of peaks. Ide-
ally, the SVD is roughly distributed in the same way as for the second state (F1), but with a
small decrease in frequency. Thus, the same precautions as for the first state (O) are taken, and
the peaks are identified inside the red boxes as the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth modes,
which is clarified in the two zoomed illustrations.
Pointed peaks are utilized to illustrate the first five excited global mode shapes for the balcony.
These mode shapes are illustrated in figure 3.28a-3.28j for the FDD identification technique on
the left side and the TDPR identification technique on the right side.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
61
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure 3.28: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 1 in the F2 state.
It is important to note that the mode shapes are relatively similar to the mode shapes for the
first state (O). Like the first state, the mode shapes are again relatively similar for the FDD and
TDPR when carrying out the five mode shapes.
The MAC validation between the FDD and TDPR identification techniques is additionally
conducted to confirm the similarity of the mode shape or mode shape correlation as seen in
figure 3.29.
62
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Figure 3.29: MAC validation of the mode shape correlation between the FDD and TDPR technique for
the F2 state in OMA testing.
As previously discussed, the responses utilized to determine the eigenfrequencies of the bal-
cony, are taken from the 13 different accelerometers. Comprehensive documentation of the
SVD plots and mode shapes for the remaining four tests are found in appendix M, but the main
results are summarized in table 3.11.
Table 3.11: The F2 state results for the five modes in the five tests of the OMA test.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
IDT
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
77.08
76.83
107.34
105.58
124.49
124.64
142.85
142.53
369.24
369.13
Test 2
77.08
77.04
107.34
106.45
125.10
124.81
142.65
142.63
369.84
369.35
Test 3
77.08
77.12
107.34
106.92
124.69
124.69
142.85
142.70
369.64
369.58
Test 4
77.68
77.05
107.34
106.48
124.90
124.76
142.65
142.64
369.44
368.99
Test 5
77.28
77.15
107.14
106.27
124.90
124.82
142.45
142.68
369.64
369.80
Mean
77.24
77.04
107.30
106.34
124.82
124.74
142.69
142.64
369.56
369.37
SD
±0.26
±0.13
±0.09
±0.49
±0.23
±0.08
±0.17
±0.07
±0.23
±0.33
The determined mean frequency for the global mode shapes of the balcony is again classified
as very accurate since the standard deviations for both identification techniques are very low
for the five tests. Furthermore, the two identification techniques give very close results, which
emphasizes the validity of the results.
Results F3
After the last degradation state F3 has been applied to the steel profiles, the dynamic testing is
performed once again. As before, five tests are conducted by the exact same procedure operated
in state O. The SVD plot for the first test is illustrated in figure 3.30, where the chosen peaks
with the use of FDD are highlighted.
63
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(a) Zoom box 1.
(b) Zoom box 2.
Figure 3.30: SVD plot of test 1 for F3 state.
From the SVD plot above, it is observed that the balcony again generates a lot of peaks. Ide-
ally, the SVD is roughly distributed in the same way as for the third state (F2), but with a small
decrease in frequency. Thus, the same precautions as for the first state (O) are taken, and the
peaks are identified inside the red boxes as the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth modes,
which is clarified in the two zoomed illustrations.
Pointed peaks are utilized to illustrate the first five excited global mode shapes for the balcony.
These mode shapes are illustrated in figure 3.31a-3.31j for the FDD identification technique on
the left side and the TDPR identification technique on the right side.
64
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
65
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure 3.31: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 1 in the F3 state.
It is important to note that the mode shapes are relatively similar to the mode shapes for the
first state (O). Like the first state, the mode shapes are relatively identical for the FDD and
TDPR when carrying out the five mode shapes. However, it should be noted that like in the F1
state, the fifth mode bends inversely when FDD and TDPR are compared. This is not of major
importance since the response is just mirrored. Furthermore, the second and fourth mode for
the TDPR diverges significantly from the FDD. This can be because of the significant degra-
dations starting to influence the mode shapes and eigenfrequencies, as seen in the enhanced
surrounding peaks in the SVD figure 3.30.
The MAC validation between the FDD and TDPR identification techniques are additionally
conducted to confirm the similarity of the mode shape or mode shape correlation as seen in
figure 3.32.
Figure 3.32: MAC validation of the mode shape correlation between the FDD and TDPR technique for
the F3 state in OMA testing.
As previously discussed, the responses used to determine the eigenfrequencies of the balcony
are taken from 13 different accelerometers. Comprehensive documentation of the SVD plots
66
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
and mode shapes for the remaining four tests are found in appendix N, but the main results are
summarized in table 3.12.
Table 3.12: The F3 state results for the five modes in the five tests of the OMA test.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
IDT
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
FDD
TDPR
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
74.65
74.54
104.31
103.30
123.28
123.10
135.59
135.42
363.99
363.98
Test 2
74.65
74.67
104.52
100.99
123.28
123.12
135.79
135.38
364.80
364.10
Test 3
74.45
74.95
104.52
100.82
123.28
123.11
135.99
135.57
365.40
364.44
Test 4
74.65
75.08
104.72
102.24
123.08
123.18
135.79
135.59
363.59
364.24
Test 5
74.86
74.95
104.31
100.76
123.48
123.20
135.79
135.48
364.40
364.50
Mean
74.65
74.84
104.48
101.62
123.28
123.14
135.79
135.49
364.44
364.25
SD
±0.14
±0.22
±0.17
±1.12
±0.14
±0.04
±0.14
±0.09
±0.70
±0.22
The determined mean frequency for the global mode shapes of the balcony is again classified
as very accurate since the standard deviations for both identification techniques are very low
for the five tests. Furthermore, the two identification techniques give very close results, except
for the second mode, which strengthens the validity of the results. This can be supported in
the MAC analysis in figure 3.32, where the similarity in the second mode is also lower. The
difference between the frequency for FDD and TDPR in the second mode is relatively high and
complemented by the enhanced surroundings peak frequencies in the SVD figure 3.30.
Comparison of Degradation States
The frequency change for the four states, which have been defined previously as O, F1, F2, and
F3, respectively, can all be identified with respect to the two different identification techniques,
FDD and TDPR, for the OMA test in table 3.13.
Table 3.13: The four state’s results are facilitated by each identification technique for the five modes of
the OMA test.
Mode
State
O
F1
F2
F3
Change (O→F3)
Change (O→F3)
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[%]
1
FDD
78.65
77.16
77.24
74.65
4.00
5.08
TDPR
78.49
76.86
77.04
74.84
3.65
4.66
2
FDD
107.54
107.54
107.30
104.48
3.06
2.85
TDPR
107.98
107.56
106.34
101.62
6.35
5.88
3
FDD
126.83
125.95
124.82
123.28
3.55
2.80
TDPR
126.42
125.79
124.74
123.14
3.27
2.59
4
FDD
143.82
143.50
142.69
135.79
8.03
5.58
TDPR
143.73
143.49
142.64
135.49
8.24
5.73
5
FDD
371.42
370.16
369.56
364.44
6.98
1.88
TDPR
371.60
370.28
369.37
364.25
7.35
1.98
67
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
From the table, it can be deduced that all frequencies decrease between the undamaged state
(O) and the final damaged state (F3). Also, a relatively large reduction in the frequency is
revealed with a minimum of 3.27 Hz for mode 3 identified by the TDPR. This is significantly
larger than the standard deviation, which is less than ±1.12 Hz across all modes and identifica-
tion techniques. However, for mode 1 it should be noted that the degradation between F1 and
F2 shows an increase in frequency for both FDD and TDPR. While for mode 2, no decrease
occurs between O and F1 for the FDD. Although this is the case, a compelling explanation is
not needed, since the results between the two states are within each other’s standard deviation
and the overall change of the modes shows a decrease in frequency. This is further illustrated in
the appendix O, where the change in frequency between state O and state F3 is clearly outside
the standard deviation, but the change in frequency between the O state as well as F1 state and
F2 state are less clear since they are within each other’s standard deviation. This is assumed to
be because of the relatively small damage between the states.
Ideally, the two identification techniques express almost the same value (less than 1 Hz) for
change in frequency for all modes in all states except mode 2 in the F3 state. Likewise, the
overall change in frequency is less than 0.37 Hz and 0.43 % for all modes except mode 2.
The reason for the large deviation in mode 2 is not quite clear, but could be caused by other
frequencies which the structure starts to resonate with as seen in the adjacent left peak relative
to the picked peak for the FDD in the SVD figure 3.30. So, since the TDPR mode shape in the
F2 (figure 3.28d) and F3 (figure 3.31d) states are not as characteristic as the FDD and earlier
TDPR figures, they are neglected. Besides the neglected mode shapes, the biggest and smallest
changes are of interest.
An investigation of the FDD shows that the biggest overall change in frequency in terms of
Hz and % is occurring at mode 4. This points to the fact that the bending in the deteriorated
area must be very high since only damaging the flanges will mainly affect the balcony in bend-
ing or torsion in deteriorated areas. This is detected when looking at figure 3.22g, where both
the wood and the concrete plate are bending in the same direction at the deteriorated area, re-
sulting in more bending than in the other modes. This implies that mode 4 is particularly good
when investigating the damage in balconies in terms of change in frequency. Conversely, the
smallest overall change in frequency in terms of Hz is occurring at mode 2, which indicates
that mode 2 is less optimal when investigating the damage in balconies in terms of change in
frequency. The smallest change in % is obviously mode 5 since the frequency is much higher.
When neglecting mode 2, the investigation of the TDPR shows almost the same overall re-
sults as FDD. However, it should be noted that mode 2, which for FDD had the lowest change
in frequency, is neglected because of the conflicting results. Now the lowest change in fre-
quency in terms of Hz is mode 3. Therefore it is claimed that neither mode 3 are the optimal
68
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
choice when trying to identify any damages in the balcony based on the change in frequency.
Complementary to the table, several illustrations of the results are presented in appendix O.
EMA Tests
In this section, the eigenfrequencies are estimated for the balcony, by using the EMA test. The
purpose of this investigation is similar to the OMA test, namely to measure a decreasing re-
sponse in frequency as the damage or deterioration of the steel beams in the balcony increases.
Thus, two different methods for investigating the eigenfrequencies for a structure are utilized
and can later be compared.
Test Program
The test program for random vibrations and EMA of the balcony is presented in table 3.14.
Table 3.14: Test program for EMA test.
Test type
Random vibrations EMA
Date
22/12/2022
Type of specimen
Scaled balcony structure
Number of tested specimens
1
Number of test for each state
1
Degradation states
O state
F1 state
F2 state
F3 state
Comments
Steps
The steps involved to investigate the frequency of the balcony by random vibrations and EMA
are listed in numbered order below:
1. The balcony is placed on and clamped to a larger metal plate in order to abstract it from any
outside vibrations or structures.
2. The 13 points of interest are marked along the structure.
3. Super glue is used to place Clip Adhesive on the balcony.
4. Brüel & Kjær Piezoelectric type 4508B accelerometers with a sensitivity of 100 mV/g ±5
% are placed in the clip adhesive.
5. The accelerometers are connected, via cables, to the NI-9234 acceleration acquisition mod-
ules with four slots each, thus, four moduli are used.
69
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
6. Acceleration acquisition modules are connected to the NI-CompactDAQ chassis of type
cDAQ-9178.
7. NI-CompactDAQ chassis is connected to a local computer.
8. The accelerometers are calibrated with the calibration constant for each individual accelerom-
eter in the acquisition software NI-SignalExpress software.
9. The sampling frequency (fs) and the number of hits are specified in NI-SignalExpress.
10. An impact hammer is connected to one of the slots in the acquisition modules, in order to
measure the impact force when hitting the structure.
11. The test is started in NI-SignalExpress software and runs until 10 hits are conducted.
12. The 10 hits are conducted on the same hit location, after which the impact is moved to
another hit location. In total, there are six hit locations, one on each wood beam and three
on the concrete plate as seen on the red marked numbered locations in figure 3.33.
13. The data results, in terms of acceleration [g], from all the channels and the impact force [N],
are saved in two .txt files on the computer.
Test Setup & Performance
To determine the frequency of the balcony structure, an EMA analysis is conducted. The
test setup can be seen in figure 3.33. The picture shows the balcony structure 1 . The Clip
Adhesive 2 is attached to the specimen where 13 Brüel & Kjær Piezoelectric type 4508B
accelerometers 3 are placed. The accelerometers are connected to the NI-9234 acceleration
acquisition modules with four slots 4 , which are used to collect the data. The connection
between the accelerometers and the module consists of low-noise coaxial cables
5 . The
NI-9234 acceleration acquisition modules are placed in the NI-compactDAQ chassis of type
cDAQ-9178
6 . The balcony structure is exposed to an impact hammer force 7 , which
is also connected to the acquisition modules to collect the impact force. The data collection
consists of four moduli with four slots each. In total, 14 out of the 16 slots are utilized and
connected to a local computer 8 . The NI-SIGNALEXPRESS software is used to collect the
response and impact force and afterward saved as two .txt files. The low-noise coaxial cables
are carried by a rubber band that is attached to the stand 9 . A thin steel bar 10 is mounted
at the end of the wooden beam in order to mimic the free rotation as a simply supported beam.
Lastly, the balcony is attached to a steel plate to add some weight that reduces the irregular
influence from the euro-pallet and ground accelerations. This is accomplished with the use of
clamps 11 .
70
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Figure 3.33: Setup for the EMA test excited by an impact hammer.
The excitation results for 10 hits on a single hit location can be seen in figure 3.34.
(a) Hit force for impact hammer.
(b) Acceleration response for all 13 sensors.
Figure 3.34: EMA excitation results for hit 1-10 on hit location 1 in the O state.
As for the OMA test, the sampling frequency (fs) of the EMA test is 1652 Hz, and the Nyquist
frequency (fν) is 826 Hz. Thus, the same time step (∆t) of 0.000605 s is attained by taking
4096 samples from each free decay initiated by the impact. This is illustrated for the force and
sensor response for the first hit in figure 3.35.
(a) Hit force for impact hammer.
(b) Acceleration response for all 13 sensors.
Figure 3.35: EMA excitation results for the first hit on hit location 1 in the O state.
Analysis
Encountered in chapter 2, the responses obtained are equal to the FRF. Thus, storing the FRF
for each excitation point (hit location) in a series of vectors, forming the FRF matrix as seen in
71
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
equation 3.19.
[A]Lxnp = [H11(ω)Lx1H21(ω)Lx1...Hnp(ω)Lx1]
(3.19)
Where n and p represent the maximum number of measured DOFs (sensors) and the number
of excitation points (hit locations), respectively, and L represents the number of frequencies at
which the FRF data are defined. Thereafter, the SVD is performed on the FRF matrix (A), from
which the singular values are computed and depicted in order to obtain the natural frequencies
by peak picking (Ewins D. David, 2000). Thus, the principles are very similar to the FDD
approach for OMA. However, since the impact hammer requires a high degree of precision
and technique in order to excite the balcony structure appropriately, the hit on each hit location
(excitation point) is conducted 10 times. From this, the average responses of each location are
utilized to obtain more reasonable results. Furthermore, the importance of hitting the same
point, with the same force, without any double hits is prioritized in order to obtain a high
correlation by conducting as uniform hits as possible. The analyses were accomplished with
the self-created Matlab script "Ema_Final". The scripts are operating the self-created Matlab
scripts "EmaLoad", "EmaPlot", and "EMA_Data_FFT". Again, the Matlab scripts are dealing
with the filter factor (r = 2) and the number of frequency lines (Nf=2049), so half of the sample
size plus one.
Results O
Before any degradation state has been applied to the steel profiles, dynamic testing is per-
formed. Thus, the initial global eigenfrequencies of the balcony were obtained by peak pick-
ing. One test is conducted by the procedure elaborated in the previous section. The SVD plot
for the first test is presented in figure 3.36, where the chosen peaks are highlighted.
72
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(a) Zoom box 1.
(b) Zoom box 2.
Figure 3.36: SVD plot for all six hit locations for O state, with zoom on peaks.
From the SVD plot above, it is observed that the balcony generates fever peaks in the EMA test
than in the OMA test. This is due to the free decays that mainly excite the balcony eigenfre-
quency, without any influence from irregular factors such as the boundary conditions. Further-
more, it is seen that all the frequency lines are excited since the impact is made at six different
locations rather than one single location as for the OMA test. However, the same procedure for
peak picking as in section 3.6 for the OMA test is conducted. As for the OMA, the physical
modes are extracted from the highest frequency line. Likewise, the nonphysical, transverse,
and local modes are excluded. Still, several peaks are present, which implies that the identifi-
cation in the SVD is also biased from compatible eigenfrequencies seen for both the OMA test
as well as for the numerical model in chapter 4. Thus, the peaks are identified inside the red
boxes as the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth modes, which are clarified in the two zoomed
illustrations.
Comprehensive documentation of the measured response from the impact hammer, the 13 ac-
celerometers attached to the balcony, and the FRF plots are found in appendix P. As previously
discussed, the responses utilized to determine the eigenfrequencies of the balcony, are taken
from the 13 different accelerometers, where the mean of 10 continuous hits are performed at
six different hit locations on the balcony. The results are summarized in table 3.15.
Table 3.15: The O state results for the five modes of the EMA test.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
73.02
105.70
124.66
142.01
368.34
Results F1
After the first degradation state F1 has been applied to the center steel profile, the dynamic
testing is performed once again. As before, one test is conducted by the exact same procedure
operated in state O. The SVD plot for the first test is illustrated in figure 3.37, where the chosen
peaks are highlighted.
73
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(a) Zoom box 1.
(b) Zoom box 2.
Figure 3.37: SVD plot for all six hit locations for F1 state, with zoom on peaks.
From the SVD plot above, it is observed that the balcony again generates a lot of peaks. Ide-
ally, the SVD is roughly distributed in the same way as for the first state (O), but with a small
decrease in frequency. Thus, the same precautions as for the first state (O) are taken, and the
peaks are identified inside the red boxes as the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth modes,
which is clarified in the two zoomed illustrations.
Comprehensive documentation of the measured response from the impact hammer, the 13 ac-
celerometers attached to the balcony, and the FRF plots are found in appendix Q. The results
are summarized in table 3.16.
74
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
Table 3.16: The F1 state results for the five modes of the EMA test.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
71.81
105.30
123.86
141.20
366.73
Results F2
After the degradation state F2 has been applied to the steel profiles, the dynamic testing is
performed once again. As before, the exact same procedure is used. The SVD plot is illustrated
in figure 3.38, where the chosen peaks are highlighted.
(a) Zoom box 2.
(b) Zoom box 2.
Figure 3.38: SVD plot for all six hit locations for F2 state, with zoom on peaks.
From the SVD plot above, it is observed that the balcony again generates a lot of peaks. Ide-
ally, the SVD is roughly distributed in the same way as for the second state (F1), but with a
75
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
small decrease in frequency. Thus, the same precautions as for the first state (O) are taken, and
the peaks are identified inside the red boxes as the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth modes,
which is clarified in the two zoomed illustrations.
Comprehensive documentation of the measured response from the impact hammer, the 13 ac-
celerometers attached to the balcony, and the FRF plots are found in appendix R. The results
are summarized in table 3.17.
Table 3.17: The F2 state results for the five modes of the EMA test.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
71.01
104.89
123.45
140.80
366.32
Results F3
After the last degradation state F3 has been applied to the steel profiles, the dynamic testing is
performed once again. As before, one test is conducted by the exact same procedure as in state
O. The SVD plot is illustrated in figure 3.39, where the chosen peaks are highlighted.
76
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
(a) Zoom box 1.
(b) Zoom box 2.
Figure 3.39: SVD plot for all 6 hit locations for F3 state, with zoom on peaks.
From the SVD plot above, it is observed that the balcony again generates a lot of peaks. Ide-
ally, the SVD is roughly distributed in the same way as for the third state (F2), but with a small
decrease in frequency. Thus, the same precautions as for the first state (O) are taken, and the
peaks are identified inside the red boxes as the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth modes,
which is clarified in the two zoomed illustrations.
Comprehensive documentation of the measured response from the impact hammer, the 13 ac-
celerometers attached to the balcony, and the FRF plots are found in appendix S. The results
are summarized in table 3.18.
Table 3.18: The F3 state results for the five modes of the EMA test.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
69.80
102.07
121.44
138.38
363.50
Comparison of Degradation States
The frequency change for the four states, which have been defined previously as O, F1, F2, and
F3, respectively, can all be identified for the EMA test in table 3.19.
Table 3.19: The four state’s results for the five modes of the EMA test.
Mode
O
F1
F2
F3
Change (O→F3)
Change (O→F3)
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[%]
Mode 1
73.02
71.81
71.01
69.80
3.22
4.41
Mode 2
105.70
105.30
104.89
102.07
3.63
3.43
Mode 3
124.66
123.86
123.45
121.44
3.22
2.58
Mode 4
142.01
141.20
140.80
138.38
3.63
2.56
Mode 5
368.34
366.73
366.32
363.50
4.84
1.31
From the table, it can be deduced that the frequency decreases for all the modes between all
the different damage states. This implies that frequency generally decreases between the un-
damaged state (O) and the final damaged state (F3).
77
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 3 – Methods & Results for Experimental Investigations
It can be regarded that there is a fairly small reduction in the frequency, where the first four
modes have a frequency change between 3.22 Hz and 3.63 Hz. However, mode 5 still has a
change of 4.84 Hz. This implies that the EMA test generally detects minor changes in the
frequency than the OMA test, but the change is equally shown across the five modes and more
consistent relative to the damage made. From the results, it is claimed that there is no mode
particularly better than the others for estimating the size of the damage in the balcony structure.
Complementary to the table, several illustrations of the results are presented in appendix T.
78
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 4
Method & Results for Numerical
Investigations
In this chapter, the rationale behind the numerical model is provided. The order in which the
information is presented is consistent with the process of creating the FE model. The relevant
considerations when modeling the structure include the selection of elements, materials, cross-
sections, scaling, meshing, and boundary conditions which will be explained in detail.
4.1
Digital Twinning
FE modeling has become an important tool and in general a necessity in the building industry.
One advantageous part of a numerical replica or digital twin is that the system can continuously
be updated or tuned, based on wear and tear, damage, or structural changes. Thus, providing
a better representation of the current physical system. In this case, a numerical model is made
in the Finite element program ANSYS APDL in order to determine the dynamic properties of
the scaled balcony. Thus, the purpose is to replicate the findings from the experimental tests -
a so-called digital twin. An illustration of the model can be seen in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: FE Model of balcony structure.
79
==PAGE:88==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
The colors in the model relate to the different structural elements of the balcony. The wood
beams are red, the steel beams are turquoise, and the concrete plate is purple.
For every structural element in the model, there should be chosen a relevant element type
to replicate it. This should be modeled, based on the desired level of detail. Different utilized
elements are listed in table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Element types used for structural elements in the FE Model.
Structural element
Element type
Wood beams
BEAM188 (2-node)
Steel beams
BEAM188 (2-node)
Concrete plate
SHELL181 (4-node)
Rotational springs
COMBIN14 (spring-damper 14)
Bolted connections
Coupling Equations (Couple DOFs)
The wood beams and steel beams are modeled with 3D beam elements, specified as BEAM188
(2-node) elements in ANSYS. This element type is suitable for analyzing slender to stout beam
structures. The element can obtain bending and axial forces such as compression and tension.
Each element consists of two nodes, with corresponding six Degrees of Freedom (DOF) for
each node. The six DOFs represent the translation in the x, y, and z-axis and the rotation
around the x, y, and z-axis. With further optional configurations, the element is set to be a
linear element with one integration point along the length. As a result, the element evaluates
the solutions as constant along the element length (ANSYS, 2023a).
The concrete plate is modeled with shell elements, specified as SHELL181 (4-node) elements
in ANSYS. This element type is suitable for analyzing thin to moderately thick shell struc-
tures. Each element consists of four nodes with corresponding six Degrees of Freedom (DOF)
for each node. The six DOFs represent the translation in the x, y, and z-axis and the rotation
around the x, y, and z-axis. With further optional configurations, the element is set to have three
integration points over the thickness. However, reduced integration is utilized to minimize the
computational time (ANSYS, 2023e).
Rotational springs are modeled at the masonry brick support line in order to replicate the phys-
ical rocking effect that the concrete will have on the bricks. The rotational springs are modeled
as a COMBIN14 element, to which a real constant is coupled, containing a spring constant
(kspring) of 1.55 kNm/rad and 1.15 kNm/rad for the OMA and EMA model, respectively. The
spring constant is utilized as a tuning device to give a better match between the results of the
first mode seen in the OMA experimental analysis and the OMA ANSYS model, as well as a
better match between the results seen in the EMA experimental analysis and the EMA ANSYS
model. The COMBIN14 element is defined between two nodes as a linear solution, with a
torsional capability around the x-axis. These optional configurations imply that the element is
80
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
a purely rotational spring and is distributed corresponding to a mesh size of 5 mm. This results
in a total of 91 rotational springs modeled along the brick support of the concrete (ANSYS,
2023b).
The bolted connections between the wood and steel beams are modeled by Coupling Equations,
specified as Coupling DOFs in ANSYS APDL. This feature enables the static and kinematic
relations between two nodes to be coupled. Thus, having a perfectly rigid link means that the
wood and steel will have the same displacement and rotation in the x, y, and z-axis. With three
bolts going through each of the three wood-steel beams, the total number of coupled DOFs is
54 (ANSYS, 2023c).
Three different materials have now been defined: wood, concrete, and steel. As a starting point,
the properties of these materials are based on the pre-described properties from the manufac-
turer. Subsequently, these are adjusted according to the experimental investigations and results
addressed in section 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 for wood, steel, and concrete, respectively. Common to
all the materials is that they are defined as linear elastic isotropic materials with a stiffness (E),
a Poisson’s ratio (ν), and a density (ρ) as seen in table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Experimental obtained material properties utilized in the numerical model.
E
ν
ρ
[Units]
[GPa]
[-]
kg
m

Steel
202.39
0.30
7943.53
Concrete
19.65
0.20
1848.79
Pinewood
11.13
0.33
507.33
In the previous sections regarding material properties, it was justified that the parameters are
fairly close to generally considered material of that type. However, a conspicuous assumption
is that pinewood is a linear elastic isotropic material when it is indisputably an orthotropic ma-
terial. Because of the unknown fiber direction and for simplicity, it is set to be isotropic and is
compared with the longitudinal stiffness and Poisson’s ratio.
The section tool in ANSYS are defining the cross-section of the structural element, whereas
the steel is defined as an uneven U-profile (CHAN in ANSYS), where the flanges are 15 mm
long, the web is 30 mm long, and the thickness is 2 mm, illustrated in figure 4.2a. It should be
noticed that this is a simplification of the physical beam, which is a cold bent. The simplifica-
tion is made where the corners are right-angled in ANSYS instead of curved. The concrete is
defined as a plate with a height of 50 mm, containing three integration points as seen in figure
4.2b. The wood is defined as a squared beam with the sides being 50 mm as seen in figure
4.2c. The cross-section is provided with section-relevant quantities automatically. This is ac-
complished by dividing the cross-section into a number of area cells where each is an assembly
81
==PAGE:90==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
of nine node cells. Then, the section is created with different area cells, where every cell has
four integration points as seen in the figures 4.2 (ANSYS, 2023a).
(a) Steel beam cross-section.
(b) Concrete deck section.
(c) Wood beam cross-section.
Figure 4.2: Structural element cross-section (ANSYS, 2023d).
When the primary setup is defined, the modeling can start. Initially, there is defined a number of
key points for the location of the desired elements and how they should be connected. The key
points can then be utilized to connect any desired lines and areas, making sure not to have any
double lines on top of each other. In the essence of having an easily manageable and scalable
FE Model, the model key points are built up by a script, where the dimensions are scalable in
the nature of replicating different balconies with different dimensions. To get an overview and
some general understanding of the script, the parameters are documented on drawing 4.3. The
dimensions are set for the purpose of defining any relevant points, as mentioned before, due to
the actuality of the origo located in the lower right corner. Thus, any key point in the model is
defined from origo.
Figure 4.3: Adjustable parameters facilitating a scaling possibility in the source code (ANSYS APDL).
82
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
The discretization of the meshing is extremely important for the accuracy of the results in
the FE model. Therefore, the discretization is set with an element length of 0.005 m for all
elements as illustrated in figure 4.4.
(a) Top view of balcony mesh.
(b) Side view of balcony mesh.
Figure 4.4: Balcony mesh .
An important necessity for provoking the concrete deck to behave together with the embedded
steel beam is to ensure that the two structural elements share the same nodes. Setting the key
points to be the same for both the steel and concrete, as well as setting the same discretization
for the meshing, entails that the two structural elements have coinciding nodes, after which
ANSYS automatically merges the nodes.
The supporting boundary conditions (BC) are modeled as constraints in the FE Model by set-
ting the desired DOFs to 0. Thus, constraining the node for any given displacement or rotation,
depending on the current DOF constraint. The constraints are illustrated in figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Boundary conditions in FEM-model.
83
==PAGE:92==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
As illustrated above, the ends of the wood beams pointing away from the concrete plate are
constrained for any displacements (UW1) in the x, y, and z-axis represented by the turquoise
supports. Additionally, any rotations (ROTW1) around the y and z axis are represented by the
orange supports. The bolts are also illustrated by Coupling Points (CP), which transfer all
displacement and rotations in the x, y, and z-axis between the wood beams and steel beam,
represented by light green supports. The other ends of the wood beams pointing towards the
concrete plate are constrained for any displacements (UW2) in the x, y, and z-axis, represented
by the turquoise supports. Furthermore, any rotations (ROTW2) around the y-axis are repre-
sented by the orange supports. The masonry brick wall facade constrains the edge of the con-
crete plate against any displacements (UM) in the x, y, and z-axis, represented by the turquoise
supports. Lastly, any rotations (ROTM) around the y and z-axis are represented by the orange
supports. This means that the rotation around the x-axis is restricted by the rotational springs
(kspring) which represents an artificial stiffness. This is also documented in table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Supports in FE Model.
DOF
W1
CP
W2
M
ux
×
×
×
×
uy
×
×
×
×
uz
×
×
×
×
θx
÷
×
÷
kspring
θy
×
×
×
×
θz
×
×
÷
×
×
÷
kspring
Fixed
Free
Spring
∆
∆
∆
CP
U
ROT
4.2
Static Analysis
To find the correlation between changes in dynamic and static properties across the damaged
states, this section will investigate the static load capacity of the balcony structure made in the
FE model. The investigation will be performed to reach the failing point of the steel beam in
the O, F1, F2, and F3 states, respectively.
The balcony structure is affected by three-point loads at the edge of the concrete plate. Hence,
one point load in the center and one in each corner as illustrated in figure 4.6.
84
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
Figure 4.6: Setup for the static load.
The purchased steel has a yield strength (fy) of 235 MPa to which a safety factor (γM0 = 1.1)
for an elastic beam is utilized to reduce the bearing capacity. Thus, the design yield strength
for steel is calculated by equation 4.1.
fyd = fy
γM0
= 213.63MPa
(4.1)
When the balcony is affected by three-point loads at the edge of the concrete plate, the largest
moment force will occur in the exposed steel close to the concrete plate’s support at the ma-
sonry. This means that the stresses in the balcony structure will develop here. By increasing
the force of the three-point loads, the steel will reach a point where it yields as seen in figure
4.7.
Figure 4.7: Von Mises Stress for a static three-point load in O state.
The red color in figure 4.7 indicates that the largest stresses (213 MPa) are in the upper flange
of the steel beams as expected. This area is close to where the damage occurred, stating it as a
85
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
critical location. It is concluded that the steel will start to yield (fyd ≤σV ) when the three-point
loads reach 1905 N for the undamaged state. Thus, an iterative process will be approached by
modeling the damaged cross-section for each state. Hence, investigate to which maximum
load the balcony may be exposed, before reaching its bearing capacity. The maximum loads
for each point load and the overall load for the three points at the different damaged states of
the balcony structure are presented in table 4.4.
Table 4.4: The load capacity for each of the four states and the total reduction of maximum load
facilitated by the numerical model.
State
O
F1
F2
F3
Change (O->F3)
Change (O->F3)
[Units]
[N]
[N]
[N]
[N]
[N]
[%]
Force
All point loads
1905
1200
1185
675
1230
65
Each point load
635
400
395
225
410
65
From the table, it can be deduced that the load capacity of the balcony is decreasing between
the undamaged state (O) and the final damaged state (F3). However, the total reduction of 65
% in load capacity is considered substantial. Therefore, a degradation in the balcony steel of
this type will have a major impact on the static load capacity and therefore on the safety of
the structure. In other terms, assuming the weight of a person is 70 kg, the balcony goes from
being able to carry almost three people in the undamaged state (O) to less than one person in
the final damaged state (F3).
4.3
Dynamic Analysis
This chapter investigates the dynamic properties of the balcony structure made in the FE model.
This is accomplished by a numerical modal analysis where the EOM is solved by using the
theory described in chapter 2. The balcony’s properties are investigated in the four states O,
F1, F2, and F3, respectively, like in the experimental part. Two FE models have been modeled,
one tuned to the results of the first mode in the OMA test and one tuned to the results of the
first mode in the EMA test. The two FE models behave in the same way, and therefore, only
the OMA-tuned FE model will be considered in this section. The EMA-tuned FE model can
be seen in appendix U.
Results O
The dynamic properties are determined in the undamaged state (O) of the FE model. The first
five global eigenfrequencies and mode shapes oscillating in the z-direction (not transverse) are
determined in the FE model. The determined eigenfrequencies can be seen in table 4.5.
86
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
Table 4.5: The O state results for the five global eigenfrequencies from the OMA-tuned FE Model.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
78.27
113.25
115.74
124.80
339.72
The eigenfrequencies determined in the numerical model were tuned to be close to the experi-
mental results. The tuning has been performed in proportion to mode 1 with a spring constant.
This has led to a spring constant of 1.55 kNm/rad for the OMA-tuned FE model. However, the
results show that the spring constant has the most impact on the first eigenfrequency and does
not affect the remaining modes as hoped. Concurrently with a variation in the wood beams as
seen in section 3.2, which in the FE model are referred to as a mean value, and further sim-
plification in the boundary conditions a deviation from the experimental model is still expected.
The mode shapes from the determined eigenfrequencies in table 4.5 are illustrated in the figure
series from 4.8a to 4.8e.
(a) 1st mode shape.
(b) 2nd mode shape.
(c) 3rd mode shape.
(d) 4th mode shape.
87
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
(e) 5th mode shape.
Figure 4.8: Five mode shapes for the O state.
The first mode shape is illustrated in figure 4.8a and represents the first bending mode, where
the wood beams are bending upwards and the cantilever concrete plate is bending in the oppo-
site direction. The displacement is zero at the supports.
The second mode shape is illustrated in figure 4.8b where the first twisting mode shape is
seen. The exterior wood beams are bending in opposite directions and no bending is seen in
the central wood beam and the concrete plate. Therefore, there should be a twist in the concrete
plate, which in this case is almost imperceptible. The reason why the central wood beam does
not bend, as well as the reason for the symmetric distribution of the shapes, could be related to
the material properties in the FE model. The stiffness of the wood beams is based on the mean
value which has an impact on the wood beams.
The third mode shape is illustrated in figure 4.8c. The illustration shows a bending mode
for the wood beams. The outer wood beams are bending in the opposite direction to the central
wood beam. Hence, the concrete plate shows no sign of bending.
The fourth mode shape is illustrated in figure 4.8d and represents a bending mode. In con-
trast to the first bending mode, both the wood beams and the concrete plate bend in the same
direction, which initiates a rather large bending of the steel beam, near the masonry support.
The fifth mode shape is illustrated in figure 4.8e and represents a twisting mode. Compared
to the second mode shape, a double harmonic oscillation is present in the wood beams. Fur-
thermore, the bending continues into the concrete plate leading to a twist. The reason is that
the wood beams are bending in opposite directions. This could mean that the stiffness of the
concrete has a more specific impact on the fifth eigenfrequency. The impact is assumed to be
more significant than the second mode, based on the fact that the torsion in the concrete plate
is notable.
88
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
Results F1
The damaged state in F1 is implemented in the FE model by cutting 6 mm of the upper flange
of the center steel beam as seen in section 3.5 figure 3.17. The reduction of the cross-section
is modeled with a width of 5 mm based on the mesh size. In contrast, the real damage is 4 mm
and therefore a simplification of the reduction in the cross-section. The cross-section of the
damaged state F1 in the FE model can be seen in figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: The reduction of the cross-section in the F1 state.
The modal analysis is conducted again, but this time, the reduced cross-section is implemented
for the damaged state F1. The first five global eigenfrequencies are determined and presented
in table 4.6.
Table 4.6: The F1 state results for the five global eigenfrequencies from the OMA-tuned FE Model.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
78.25
113.25
115.53
124.53
339.72
The related mode shapes in the damaged F1 state are illustrated in the figure series from 4.10a
to 4.10e. It can be argued that the mode shapes are relatively similar to the ones seen in the
undamaged state (O). Only a small change in the size of the deformation can be seen in the
numerical analysis which is caused by the damage.
89
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
(a) 1st mode shape.
(b) 2nd mode shape.
(c) 3rd mode shape.
(d) 4th mode shape.
(e) 5th mode shape.
Figure 4.10: Five mode shapes for the F1 state.
Results F2
In the F2 state, the damage size is similar to the F1 state. However, the damage is applied to
the remaining outer steel beams. This is captured for all three beams in section 3.5 figure 3.17.
90
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
Similarly, the reduction of the cross-section is modeled with a width of 5 mm as in the F1 state.
The cross-section of the damaged state F2 in the FE model can be seen in figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: The reduction of the cross-section in the F2 state.
The modal analysis is conducted again, but this time, the reduced cross-section is implemented
for the damaged state F2. The first five global eigenfrequencies are determined and presented
in table 4.7.
Table 4.7: The F2 state results for the five global eigenfrequencies from the OMA-tuned FE Model.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
78.21
112.95
115.36
124.22
339.72
The related mode shapes in the damaged F2 state are illustrated in the figure series from 4.12a
to 4.12e. Again, it can be argued that the mode shapes are relatively similar to the ones seen in
the undamaged state (O). Only a small change in the size of the deformation can be seen in the
numerical analysis which is caused by the damage.
91
==PAGE:100==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
(a) 1st mode shape.
(b) 2nd mode shape.
(c) 3rd mode shape.
(d) 4th mode shape.
(e) 5th mode shape.
Figure 4.12: Five mode shapes for the F2 state.
Results F3
The damaged state in F3 is implemented in the FE model by cutting the rest of the upper flange
of all three steel beams as captured in section 3.5 figure 3.18. Similarly to the F1 and F2 states,
92
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
the reduction of the cross-section is modeled with a width of 5 mm. It should be noted that a
change occurs in the section type from a U section to an L section as seen in figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13: Steel beam in F3 cross-section.
Here, the bottom flange and the web still have the same length as state O. The cross-section of
the damaged state F3 in the FE model can be seen in figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: The reduction of the cross-section in the F3 state.
The modal analysis is conducted again, but this time, the reduced cross-section is implemented
for the damaged state F3. The first five global eigenfrequencies are determined and presented
in table 4.8.
Table 4.8: The F3 state results for the five global eigenfrequencies from the OMA-tuned FE Model.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
77.98
111.75
113.86
121.83
339.72
The related mode shapes in the damaged F3 state are illustrated in the figure series from 4.15a
to 4.15e. It can be argued that the mode shapes are relatively similar to the ones seen in the
93
==PAGE:102==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
undamaged state (O). Only a small change in the size of the deformation can be seen in the
numerical analysis which is caused by the damage.
(a) 1st mode shape.
(b) 2nd mode shape.
(c) 3rd mode shape.
(d) 4th mode shape.
(e) 5th mode shape.
Figure 4.15: Five mode shapes for the F3 state.
The ongoing development in the mode shape trends across the different states is more or less
identical. Thus, investigation near the damaged cross-section is essential to understand why
94
==PAGE:103==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
the damage of the top flanges affects some mode shapes more than others.
For mode 1, it is noticed that the bending of the steel beam near the damaged cross-section
is almost zero since the steel beam runs continuously across the line support due to the steel
beams attached to the wood beams having an upwards displacement and the steel beams em-
bedded in concrete have a downwards displacement. Thus, the flanges are almost not activated
in bending, hence, it is deemed that the damage will only influence the mode to a small extent.
For mode 2, it is noticed that the bending of the center steel beam near the damaged cross-
section is almost zero since the steel beam runs straight across the line support into a concrete
plate with almost zero displacements. However, the outermost steel beams have a bending
across-the-line support since the steel beams attached to the wood beams have an up- or down-
wards displacement and the steel beams embedded in concrete have almost no displacement.
Thus, the flanges are activated in bending, hence, it is deemed that the damage will influence
the mode to a moderate extent.
For mode 3, almost the same modal deformations are noticed as for mode 2. However, the
center beam bends as well. Thus, the flanges are activated slightly more in bending, hence, it
is deemed that the damage will influence the mode slightly more than for mode 2.
For mode 4, it is noticed that the bending of the steel beam near the damaged cross-section
is bending significantly across the line support since both the steel beams are attached to the
wood beams and the steel beams embedded in concrete have a downward displacement. Thus,
the flanges are activated greatly in bending, and thus, it is deemed that the damage will influ-
ence the mode to a great extent.
For mode 5, it is noticed that the bending of the center steel beam near the damaged cross-
section is almost zero like in mode 2, however, the outermost steel beams have a double bend-
ing, and the concrete plate is clearly seen to have torsional twisting. This implies that the steel
beams run continuously across the line support where the steel beams attached to the wood
beams and the steel beams embedded in concrete have an opposite corresponding up- or down-
wards displacement. Thus, the flanges are almost not activated in bending, hence, it is deemed
that the damage will only influence the mode to a small extent.
Comparison of Change in Frequency
The frequencies and changes between the four states O, F1, F2, and F3 are all identified by
FE modeling in ANSYS. The obtained frequencies presented in table 4.9 are based on two FE
models, where the spring constant is tuned in order to be as similar to the OMA and EMA test,
respectively.
95
==PAGE:104==
Chapter 4 – Method & Results for Numerical Investigations
Table 4.9: The four states results facilitated by each ANSYS model for the five modes.
Mode
State
O
F1
F2
F3
Change (O→F3)
Change (O→F3)
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[%]
1
OMA
78.27
78.25
78.21
77.98
0.29
0.37
EMA
72.55
72.52
72.47
72.11
0.44
0.61
2
OMA
113.25
113.25
112.95
111.75
1.50
1.32
EMA
113.16
113.16
112.87
111.68
1.48
1.31
3
OMA
115.74
115.53
115.36
113.86
1.88
1.62
EMA
115.71
115.50
115.33
113.83
1.88
1.62
4
OMA
124.80
124.53
124.22
121.83
2.97
2.38
EMA
124.09
123.82
123.52
121.15
2.94
2.37
5
OMA
339.72
339.72
339.72
339.72
0.00
0.00
EMA
338.36
338.36
338.36
338.36
0.00
0.00
From table 4.9 it is observed that the change in the frequency between the undamaged state (O)
and the final damaged state (F3) is almost identical for both FE models. In general, the EMA
model has a slightly lower change in frequency for all the modes, except in mode 1, where the
OMA model has the smallest change in frequency. Likewise, the EMA model has a slightly
lower frequency for all the modes at all states, except in mode 1, where the frequency is signif-
icantly lower. The only difference between the FE models is the tuning of the spring constant.
For OMA, the spring constant is 1.55 kNm/rad, while it is 1.15 kNm/rad for the EMA model.
Taking a closer look into the individual modes and mode shapes, a clear change in frequency is
seen in modes 2, 3, and especially 4. This indicates that these modes are more sensitive to this
particular degradation according to the FE model. The reason could be that the bending near
the damaged area in mode 4 is larger compared to the other modes. This is supported when
investigating the mode shapes further. It is clear that for modes 2, 3, and 4 the damaged section
close to the spring support is bending more since the concrete plate does not bend (modes 2
and 3) or bends in the opposite direction of the wood beams (mode 4). Thus, the damaged
flanges with reduced stiffness are activated particularly compared to modes 1 and 5. Contrary
to the bending in the other modes, modes 1 and 5 have a roughly linear replication of the steel
profile, thus, the stiffness in the flanges is not activated. This results in no change in frequency
for mode 5 and only a small change in frequency for mode 1.
When looking at the impact of the different degradation states, it can be noted that in mode
2 no degradation occurs in the first damaged state (F1). This may be caused by the damage
happening in the center beam, where there is no deformation as seen in figure 4.10b. However,
a deterioration in the frequency of mode 2 occurs in the second damaged state (F2) where the
damage is extended to the exterior beams. Here, there is a deformation as seen in figure 4.12b.
Complementary to the table, several illustrations of the results are presented in appendix V
96
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 5
Comparison of Results
In this section, the investigation methods applied in previous sections will be compared to
form a better overview and put the results into a broader perspective. The results of relevance
are limited to the two experimental investigation methods OMA and EMA, where OMA is
conducted using the FDD identification technique and the numerical studies are tuned to fit the
OMA and EMA results, respectively. Thus, the numerical studies contain two separate models
with distinct results.
5.1
Comparison Between OMA Results & EMA Results
The two experimental investigation methods OMA and EMA have been conducted in section
OMA Tests and EMA Tests, respectively. The EMA results are compared with the OMA results
that were found with the use of the FDD method. The reason why the FDD method is used
is that the frequency value was almost the same between FDD and TDPR. Furthermore, both
EMA and OMA FDD are using peak peaking in the frequency domain. From table 5.1 it can
be seen that the results between the two methods are fairly similar.
Table 5.1: Comparison of eigenfrequencies between EMA test and OMA (FDD) test.
Mode
State
O
F1
F2
F3
Change (O→F3)
Change (O→F3)
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[%]
1
OMA
78.65
77.16
77.24
74.65
4.00
5.08
EMA
73.02
71.81
71.01
69.80
3.22
4.41
RD [%]
7.16
6.93
8.07
6.50
2
OMA
107.54
107.54
107.30
104.48
3.06
2.85
EMA
105.70
105.30
104.89
102.07
3.63
3.43
RD [%]
1.71
2.08
2.25
2.30
3
OMA
126.83
125.95
124.82
123.28
3.55
2.80
EMA
124.66
123.86
123.45
121.44
3.22
2.58
RD [%]
1.71
1.66
1.09
1.49
4
OMA
143.82
143.50
142.69
135.79
8.03
5.58
EMA
142.01
141.20
140.80
138.38
3.63
2.56
RD [%]
1.26
1.60
1.32
-1.91
5
OMA
371.42
370.16
369.56
364.44
6.98
1.88
EMA
368.34
366.73
366.32
363.50
4.84
1.31
RD [%]
0.83
0.93
0.88
0.26
97
==PAGE:106==
Chapter 5 – Comparison of Results
For the OMA method, the frequencies are higher than for the EMA method with a relative
deviation (RD) below 2.5 % for all the modes except mode 1 in the different states. The first
mode has a somewhat larger RD between 6.50 % and 8.07 %. One of the reasons why the first
mode has a more considerable deviation in % can be explained by how much the deviation in
frequency makes up for the total frequency, thus having a higher impact.
Furthermore, it should be noticed that the total change in frequency between the original un-
damaged state (O) and the final damaged state (F3) is lower for the EMA method compared to
the OMA method, except for the second mode. As stated in section 3.6, the second mode is not
particularly good for investigating the damage in the balcony structure when using OMA since
the FDD and TDPR were contradictory.
Between the original undamaged state (O) and the final damaged state (F3), the two test meth-
ods have an average change in frequency of 5.12 Hz against 3.71 Hz and a maximum of 8.03 Hz
against 4.84 Hz for OMA and EMA, respectively. Thus, OMA is regarded as a better method
for detecting frequency changes based on damage in the balcony structure. On the other hand,
EMA is considered a more reliable method since the changes in frequency between the dif-
ferent states are always decreasing. Furthermore, the frequency changes detected using EMA
are more or less proportional to the degree of degradation and unbiased from any irregular
factors such as the boundary conditions and the fluctuating temperature as seen in Vitten and
Jørgensen, 2021. That said, it should be noted that these observations are based solely on this
balcony structure where degradation has occurred of the flanges.
5.2
Comparison Between OMA Results & ANSYS (OMA)
Results
The experimental investigation with the use of the OMA method when using the FDD indica-
tion method is compared to the numerical studies in ANSYS. The numerical model is tuned to
be as similar to the first mode for OMA FDD as possible by adjusting the spring constant. The
experimental OMA FDD results have been presented in section 3.6 and the numerical OMA
tuned results are presented in chapter 4. In figure 5.1, the first five global mode shapes are
compared in their undamaged state between the numerical studies and the experimental OMA
FDD investigation.
98
==PAGE:107==
Chapter 5 – Comparison of Results
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - ANSYS.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - ANSYS.
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - ANSYS.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - ANSYS.
99
==PAGE:108==
Chapter 5 – Comparison of Results
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - ANSYS.
Figure 5.1: The OMA FDD mode shape compared with the ANSYS mode shape of the 1st-5th global
mode shape for the undamaged balcony .
The mode shape in the first and fourth modes is rather similar between the experimental inves-
tigation and the numerical model. However, the wood beams do not have the same bending
amplitude. This is because the balcony is not perfectly symmetric and the wood beams proba-
bly hold different stiffnesses. Furthermore, the farthest wood beam is attached to the underlying
wood plate, providing some stiffness to the beam. This attachment goes through an angle pro-
file which is mounted on the wood beam. From the angle profile, a stinger is mounted which
is attached to the shaker, which is fixed to the underlying wooden plate (illustrated in appendix
B). Thus, it is claimed that the first and fourth global mode is nearly identical for the balcony
model and the numerical model.
When comparing the mode shape in the second and third modes, it should be observed that
the second mode from the experimental work (figure 5.1c) is reminiscent of the third mode in
the numerical model (figure 5.1f). This agrees with the third mode from the experimental work
(figure 5.1e) which is reminiscent of the second mode in the numerical model (figure 5.1d). A
possible explanation for the switch in mode shape order could be due to the following. Firstly,
the difference in frequency between mode 2 and 3 in the numerical model is remarkably small.
Secondly, the assumptions made in the numerical model imply that the masonry is modeled
as a linear line support instead of a nonlinear support. Thirdly, the bolts are modeled as com-
pletely rigid, thus constrained without any friction. Fourthly, the fact that the stiffness of the
wood may vary. For practical reasons, the second and third modes switch places when com-
paring the frequencies between the experimental and numerical results (see table 5.2). Thus,
it is claimed that the second and third global modes compared across the two mode shapes are
nearly identical for the balcony model and the numerical model.
Lastly, the fifth mode shape is compared between the OMA test and the numerical model.
Both mode shapes clearly show a double bending mode for two of the wood beams, where the
two beam oscillations are contrary. In the experimental plot, the oscillations are seen in the
center wood beam and the farthest wood beam. The last beam also shows the oscillations, but
100
==PAGE:109==
Chapter 5 – Comparison of Results
with a smaller amplitude. The reason for this asymmetric mode shape of the actual balcony
could be due to the natural variation in the material parameters, particularly the wooden beams,
and the variation in the bolt connection tightness between steel and wood beams.
The numerical model, on the hand, is more symmetric, since the oscillations occur in the outer
wood beams. This could be due to the similarity in the material parameters which are modeled
with the same mean value. Further, all connections between the wood beams and steel beams
are identical. Thus, it is claimed that the fifth global mode is nearly identical for the balcony
model and the numerical model.
In table 5.2 the results from the experimental OMA test and the OMA-tuned numerical model
are presented.
Table 5.2: Comparison of eigenfrequencies between OMA test and ANSYSOMA
Mode
State
O
F1
F2
F3
Change (O→F3)
Change (O→F3)
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[%]
1
OMA
78.65
77.16
77.24
74.65
4.00
5.08
OMA ANSYS
78.27
78.25
78.21
77.98
0.29
0.37
RD [%]
0.48
-1.42
-1.26
-4.46
2
OMA
107.54
107.54
107.30
104.48
3.06
2.85
OMA ANSYS (mode 3)
115.74
115.53
115.36
113.86
1.88
1.62
RD [%]
-7.63
-7.43
-7.51
-8.98
3
OMA
126.83
125.95
124.82
123.28
3.55
2.80
OMA ANSYS (mode 2)
113.25
113.25
112.95
111.75
1.50
1.32
RD [%]
10.71
10.08
9.51
9.35
4
OMA
143.82
143.50
142.69
135.79
8.03
5.58
OMA ANSYS
124.80
124.53
124.22
121.83
2.97
2.38
RD [%]
13.22
13.22
12.94
10.28
5
OMA
371.42
370.16
369.56
364.44
6.98
1.88
OMA ANSYS
339.72
339.72
339.72
339.72
0.00
0.00
RD [%]
8.53
8.22
8.07
6.78
From table 5.2 it can be seen that there is a rather large deviation between the experimental
investigation and the numerical model, where mode 4 has an RD up to 13.22 %. It is suspected
that this is due to the assumptions made to simplify the numerical model. Thus, the relative
deviation value is acceptable in relation to the goal of the thesis.
The changes in frequency between the original state (O) and the last damaged state (F3) for
the numerical analysis show that the second, third, and fourth modes are the most promising
to detect damage in the balcony structure since this is where the largest frequency changes are
seen. However, the experimental investigation shows that the first, fourth, and fifth modes are
the most promising to detect damage in the balcony structure. The results imply that the best
mode to detect the damage in the balcony structure is the fourth mode based on the two meth-
ods, even though the fourth mode has the largest deviation in frequency between the balcony
model and the numerical model. However, all of the modes are still particularly useful to give
101
==PAGE:110==
Chapter 5 – Comparison of Results
a holistic image of changes in the physical and modal parameters that have been affected due
to the impact on the balcony structure.
5.3
Comparison Between EMA Results & ANSYS (EMA)
Results
The experimental investigation using the EMA method is compared to the numerical studies in
ANSYS. The numerical model is tuned to be as similar to the first mode for EMA as possible by
adjusting the spring constant. The experimental EMA results have been conducted in section
EMA Tests and the numerical EMA tuned results are presented in chapter 4. In table 5.3 the
results from the experimental EMA test and the EMA-tuned numerical model are presented.
Table 5.3: Comparison of eigenfrequencies between EMA test and ANSYSEMA
Mode
State
O
F1
F2
F3
Change (O→F3)
Change (O→F3)
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[%]
1
EMA
73.02
71.81
71.01
69.80
3.22
4.41
EMA ANSYS
72.55
72.52
72.47
72.11
0.44
0.61
RD [%]
0.64
-0.99
-2.06
-3.31
2
EMA
105.70
105.30
104.89
102.07
3.63
3.43
EMA ANSYS (mode 3)
115.71
115.50
115.33
113.83
1.88
1.62
RD [%]
-9.47
-9.69
-9.95
-11.52
3
EMA
124.66
123.86
123.45
121.44
3.22
2.58
EMA ANSYS (mode 2)
113.16
113.16
112.87
111.68
1.48
1.31
RD [%]
9.23
8.64
8.57
8.04
4
EMA
142.01
141.20
140.80
138.38
3.63
2.56
EMA ANSYS
124.09
123.82
123.52
121.15
2.94
2.37
RD [%]
12.62
12.31
12.27
12.45
5
EMA
368.34
366.73
366.32
363.50
4.84
1.31
EMA ANSYS
338.36
338.36
338.36
338.36
0.00
0.00
RD [%]
8.14
7.74
7.63
6.92
From table 5.3 it can be seen that there is a rather large deviation between the experimental
investigation and the numerical model, where mode 4 has an RD up to 12.62 %. It is suspected
that this deviation is caused by the simplifying assumptions applied to the numerical model.
Thus, the relative deviation value can be considered acceptable in relation to the goal of the
thesis.
The changes in frequency between the original state (O) and the last damaged state (F3) for
the numerical analysis show that the second, third, and fourth modes are the most promising
to detect damage in the balcony structure since this is where the largest frequency changes are
seen. However, the experimental investigation shows that all the modes are equally promising
to detect the damage in the balcony structure. Therefore, the results imply that the best mode
to detect the damage in the balcony structure is either the second, third, or fourth mode based
on the two methods. The results obtained for the third mode lie within close proximity of one
102
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 5 – Comparison of Results
another with an RD of 8.04 % to 9.23 %. The results obtained for the fourth mode are more
conservatively estimated for the numerical model and have a change in frequency that is more
similar to each other. In combination, all modes are useful to give a holistic image of changes
in the physical and modal parameters that have been affected due to the impact on the balcony
structure.
5.4
Total Comparison
As a final declaration of all the results conducted for the experimental investigations and the
numerical studies, a set of comparison illustrations are presented from figure 5.2 to 5.6, for
each mode, respectively, for the undamaged state (O) and the total damaged state (F3).
Figure 5.2: Comparison mode 1.
Figure 5.3: Comparison mode 2.
103
==PAGE:112==
Chapter 5 – Comparison of Results
Figure 5.4: Comparison mode 3.
Figure 5.5: Comparison mode 4.
104
==PAGE:113==
Chapter 5 – Comparison of Results
Figure 5.6: Comparison mode 5.
In general, two assumptions can be drawn from the overall comparison. Firstly, the EMA
test generally detects lower frequencies than OMA, which is valid for all modes, except mode
4, where it is lower before a deterioration state, O, but not after the final deterioration state,
F3. This may indicate that EMA results are more conservative than OMA results, with the
relation that a lower frequency equals a lower stiffness. Secondly, the numerical model in
ANSYS generally detects lower frequencies than the experimental tests as seen in modes 3,
4, and 5. However, mode 2 shows the opposite, and mode 1 only shows a lower frequency
before any deterioration. Thus, the results are a bit more ambiguous, but still, point to that
the numerical model results are lower than the experimental results. Furthermore, it can be
stated that the percentage change in frequency is much smaller regardless of which method or
mode is considered when compared to the static changes. From section 4.2, the changes in
load capacity constituted 65 %. This indicates that the dynamic modal parameters conducted
by vibrational analysis are very insensitive to damage which otherwise has a large reduction
of the static capacity. Based on this, one must be aware of the significant reduction in load
capacity and safety resulting from small frequency changes due to corrosion.
105
==PAGE:114==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion of Results
So far, the procedure and results of various experiments have been presented with the aim of
investigating dynamic excitation as a non-destructive solution to identify structural damage in
a balcony. The aforementioned has been examined in the majority of the previous sections
and culminated in a comparative summation between the results in chapter 5. Regardless, this
chapter will deal with a reasonable clarification of the obtained results and discuss the trustwor-
thiness of the results based on the estimated quantitative sources of errors and simplifications.
The comparisons in chapter 5 are based on the global frequencies and mode shapes, and any
deviation of these can have many reasons- these will be reviewed systematically. The first test
conducted was the OMA test, where it was presumed from the previous project (Vitten and
Jørgensen, 2021), that the temperature, air humidity, and humidity in the wood could influence
the stiffness and density of the wood beams, constituting a change in frequency. Thus, all tests
and damages were conducted inside and on the same day to prevent significant changes in these
parameters: temperature, air humidity, and humidity in the wood (Larsen, 1971). Furthermore,
it was presumed from the same previous project that a change in location and attachment of
the shaker could influence the frequency. An attempted prevention was to attach the shaker to
an underlying wood plate and to one of the wood beams with a screwed-in angle profile with a
stinger. However, this led to other problems, since the eigenfrequencies of the wood plate were
incorporated in SVD making the identification of the balcony’s eigenfrequency more challeng-
ing. Likewise, the excitation of one single shaker could have led to additional identification
problems. Lastly, the attached stinger could have added some stiffness to this particular wood
beam.
The second, but concurrent, conducted test was the EMA test. This test is particularly dif-
ficult to perform since the impact hammer requires a high degree of precision and technique in
order to excite the balcony structure appropriately. It was attempted to hit with the same force
for all the hits (10x6 hits), with the same angle, on the exact same excitation point per hit lo-
cation, and without any double hits. If accomplished, a correlation of 1 is achieved. However,
106
==PAGE:115==
Chapter 6 – Discussion of Results
this is more or less inextricable as experienced shown for the force response and acceleration
response in appendix P for the test in the O state, appendix Q for the test in the F1 state, ap-
pendix R for the test in the F2 state, and appendix S for the test in the F3 state. Fortunately,
this seemed to have no significant influence on the results.
Yet some reasonable results were obtained with both the OMA test with FDD identification, the
OMA test with TDPR identification, and the EMA test. The sources of errors and simplifica-
tions applicable to the numerical model were significantly higher, thus resulting in a relatively
large deviation between the experimental model and the numerical model. This is supported
by table 7.2 Brincker and Ventura, 2015 but is further considered for this particular model in
the following.
First of all, the material properties in terms of density and stiffness for wood, steel, and con-
crete are considered to vary or not be completely identical to the real values. Hence, the FE
model results will enhance when the parameters are more accurate, the importance of these
is indisputable. Starting with the most debatable material, wood, where both the density and
stiffness vary significantly, one prominent source of error is that the wood stiffness is based on
tests conducted on two beams that were not actually used in the balcony setup. Even though the
beams came from the same wood plate as the ones used in the setup, the significant variation
in the stiffness for the two tested wood beams suggests that the stiffness may not reflect the
stiffness of the used wood beams perfectly. However, the applied E modulus in the three wood
beams in the FE model was based on the mean between the two additional beams. Further, the
density applied for the three wood beams in the FE model was based on the mean density of all
five wood beams. These simplifications meant that three identical beams were operating in the
FE model which could lead to more symmetric mode shapes as seen in figure 5.1. Furthermore,
noting that wood is an orthotropic material, but for simplicity modeled as an isotropic material.
Thus, a summation of these simplifications could give rise to considerable uncertainty in the
frequency estimation.
Subsequently, the steel should not cause any particular degree of uncertainty, since steel tends
to have fairly consistent material properties. However, the cross-section of the steel is modeled
with only perpendicular elements. Thus, simplifying the curved corners which normally occur
for a cold-bended cross-section. Furthermore, the width of the damage was estimated to be 4
mm, but to avoid any discontinuities in the FE model’s mesh, the damage was set to match the
mesh with a width of 5 mm.
Thereon, the final material that needed to be modeled was concrete. The balcony was con-
structed with a cover layer on the sides of the outermost steel beams, but in the FE model, this
gave rise to local transverse buckling of the steel beams embedded in concrete. Thus, the cover
layer was excluded for simplification making the concrete plate’s width 25 mm smaller. That
said, it is assumed that the reduced mass only has a small effect on the results in mode 5.
107
==PAGE:116==
Chapter 6 – Discussion of Results
Besides the wood, equal uncertainty is associated with the boundary conditions or assumed
supports. Revisiting the support in terms of the masonry wall, it is clear that the uncertainty
lies within the linear modeled line support instead of nonlinear support. Therefore, the numer-
ical model neglects this rocking effect that the experimental model is presumed to have. This
is especially noticed for modes 1 and 5, where the change in frequency is very small. This
is due to the stiffness of wood, concrete, and especially steel, which is activated to a much
lesser extent. The modeled spring constants along the entire support counteract the effect of
the simplification, but since the spring constant is tuned to fit the experimental model and not
obtained by independent experiments, the quality of the numerical model and its results are
compromised.
Additionally, the bolted joints between the wood beams and steel beams are modeled as com-
pletely rigid without any friction which neglects the nonlinear influence of the response. Like-
wise, any damping of the balcony is also excluded from the numerical model which can influ-
ence the accuracy, and thus the reliability, of the model negatively (Lacayo et al., 2019).
Some final considerations of potential factors that have influenced the deviation are inaccura-
cies during the construction process. Herein lies that the three beams are modeled with the
same start and end point to which the bolts are placed at the same location for all beams. This
implies, among other things, that the concrete deck is 1.3cm longer in the numerical model
than in the experimental model. The simplifications are due to the desire of preserving some
sort of parametric symmetry in the numerical model.
Despite the fact that the numerical model differs due to the simplification and assumption dis-
cussed in the above section. The FE model is still considered an acceptable numerical model,
however, referring to it as a digital twin may not be entirely accurate yet.
108
==PAGE:117==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion & Further Work
7.1
Conclusion
The research conducted in this study aimed to investigate if dynamic excitation can be utilized
as a non-destructive solution to identify different structural damage states in a balcony struc-
ture. The identification of the different deterioration states is accomplished by dynamic excita-
tion, comprising impact hammer testing for Experimental Modal Analysis (EMA) and random
vibration testing for Operational Modal Analysis (OMA). For a scaled balcony construction,
four different damage states were investigated ranging from undamaged (O) to complete degra-
dation of the top flanges in the steel beams (F3). Additionally, a Finite Element (FE) model was
made to compare the results from the experimental findings with the results from a numerical
model.
The OMA test provided the opportunity to detect a decrease (1.88 % to 5.58 %) in frequency
for all five modes, between an undamaged state (O) and the final damaged state (F3). This was
true for both of the identification techniques applied, FDD and TDPR, where all modes except
mode 2, were approximately equivalent (less than 1 Hz difference) in frequency at the given
state. Thus, also approximately equivalent to the change of frequency for each degradation
state. Especially mode 4 showed a significant change in frequency (8.03 Hz), characterizing
both the method and mode to be most promising when investigating a change in frequency for
degradation of this type in the balcony structure.
The EMA test was also applied to detect a decrease (1.31 % to 4.41 %) in frequency for all
five modes. This method was found to be more consistent in the size of the change in the
frequencies between all modes as it was approximately proportional to the degree of the dam-
aged state. Although the change in frequency was less obvious for this method, it showed a
minimized deviation due to irregular factors such as the boundary conditions and the fluctuat-
ing temperature. Thus, the EMA method is considered to be more consistent between all five
modes than OMA when investigating a degradation of this type in a smaller construction such
109
==PAGE:118==
Chapter 7 – Conclusion & Further Work
as this balcony structure with these boundary conditions.
The numerical model provided the possibility to detect a decrease (0 % to 2.38 %) in fre-
quency for all five modes, between the undamaged state (O) and the final damaged state (F3).
However, the decrease was remarkably low for the first and fifth modes and in general signif-
icantly lower than the experimental results. This entangles the scope of having a digital twin
further, which is confirmed by having a deviation from -8.98 % to 13.22 % and from -11.52
% to 12.62 % between the experimental model and the numerical model, for OMA and EMA,
respectively.
Despite the fact that the numerical model differs from the experimental obtained global eigen-
frequencies, the FE model still reproduces identical mode shapes and some proper eigenfre-
quencies which decreased due to the degradation. Thus, it is still considered an acceptable
numerical model. However, further studies should be conducted to improve the model by in-
corporating the components addressed in the discussion in order to achieve a better and more
accurate digital twin.
It is further important to be aware that the dynamic modal parameters obtained from the vi-
brational analysis are very insensitive to damage which otherwise has a large reduction of the
static load capacity estimated to be 65 % from the undamaged state (O) to the final damaged
state (F3).
Based on the experimental work conducted in this thesis, it can be concluded that the two
non-destructive excitation methods and analysis, OMA and EMA, can be utilized to detect de-
creases in the dynamic properties of a degraded balcony structure. To get a holistic picture of a
balcony’s modal parameters, it is recommended to perform both the OMA and the EMA test as
each method offers unique advantages. Where OMA is more manageable to perform on large
structures and detects the most pronounced changes in frequency, EMA provides consistency
and is less affected by irregular factors. However, to fully prove the potential of this methodol-
ogy as the basis for assessing the state and safety of old balconies, further studies of the digital
twin as well as the balcony’s scalability and adaptation to real balconies are required.
7.2
Further Work
The research conducted in this study to investigate the damaged state in a balcony structure has
led to a lot of tests including two non-destructive methods and the development of a numerical
model. The investigation has triggered a series of new research fields that further studies could
seek to explore further.
It could be relevant to investigate further damage to the balcony structure. Here, it would
110
==PAGE:119==
Chapter 7 – Conclusion & Further Work
be essential to continue the damage to the web in three steps similar to the ones conducted in
the upper flange. For the first damaged state, one approach could be to remove half of the web
in the center steel beam. For the second damaged state, remove half of the web in all of the
steel beams. For the third damaged state, remove the entire web of all the steel beams. Lastly,
a static test for failure should be conducted. In this case, it would be interesting to determine
the compressive strength of the concrete with the use of the cylinders and further, a tension test
of the steel could also be of relevance.
Another area that calls for further investigation is a better replication of the material parameters
in the balcony structure. In the present study, the E modulus of the concrete was determined
solely based on a compressive test. However, these measurements could be defined with higher
accuracy if more tests were conducted to support the results. Additionally, it would be inter-
esting to validate the obtained data by finding the E modulus of the additional casted concrete
beam using the OMA method conducted on the wood and steel beams.
As mentioned earlier, some of the uncertainties detected in the OMA test are due to the use
of only one shaker. Therefore, it could be relevant to use more shakers to get more exact re-
sults. For instance, one of the extra shakers could be attached to the concrete plate. Another
reason for the uncertainties, which also took part in the discussion, is the influence of air hu-
midity, material humidity, and temperature. Thus, it could be relevant to assess the impact of
these parameters.
To get further validation of the EMA method and the results, it could be interesting to con-
firm the results with the use of the TDPR identification technique, plot the mode shapes, and
find the accelerance FRF.
A more accurate digital twin of the balcony structure could be achieved by improving the
numerical model developed in this study. One such improvement could be to determine the
stiffness of the specific wooden beams used in the balcony model. This is due to the natural
variation of the material parameters seen in the wood. To improve the digital twin further, a fo-
cus area should be to optimize the support condition at the masonry. This can be accomplished
by finding the real spring stiffness by static loading as seen in the thesis by Yunus (Saleh, 2020).
Another way could be to model the nonlinear rocking problem as mentioned in the discussion.
A third improvement would be to implement nonlinear friction at the bolt connection between
the steel and wood beams.
As mentioned in section 3.1, this model is scaled and has some adaptation modifications in the
components. Therefore it could be interesting to further investigate the impact on the frequen-
cies between scaling and the change of components in the balcony structure. Thus, provide the
111
==PAGE:120==
Chapter 7 – Conclusion & Further Work
possibility to scale the numerical model in order to estimate the deterioration of any balcony
structure.
Lastly, it could be interesting to find the eigenfrequencies either by using the mass and stiffness
matrix from ANSYS to solve the eigenvalue problem manually or by introducing a dynamic
load to the numerical model to replicate the hammer load as seen in the EMA test and from
there find the eigenfrequencies.
112
==PAGE:121==
Appendices
113
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX A
Project Management
A.1
Time Schedule
Figure A.1: Project plan part 1.
Figure A.2: Project plan part 2.
Figure A.3: Project plan part 3.
114
==PAGE:123==
Chapter A – Project Management
Figure A.4: Project plan part 4.
115
==PAGE:124==
APPENDIX B
Scaled Model
(a) Brick wall representing the facade.
(b) The steel beams and reinforcement before casting
the concrete in the formwork.
(c) The cold-formed U-profile, where the area critical
to corrosion is covered with silicone.
(d) The cold-formed U-profile with bolt connections to
the wood beams.
116
==PAGE:125==
Chapter B – Scaled Model
(e) Embedding of steel beams in concrete, with
necessary repairs due to lack of concrete filling.
(f) Embedding of steel beams in concrete, with
necessary repairs due to a too-small cover layer.
Figure B.1: The setup of the scaled balcony.
Figure B.2: Scaled model after removing mold from concrete.
117
==PAGE:126==
Chapter B – Scaled Model
Figure B.3: Stinger attached to the wood beams and the bottom plate to induce random vibrations in
the OMA test.
118
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX C
The Density of the Wood Beams
Wood Density
In this section, the density (ρwood) of the pinewood beams is investigated with the purpose to
get more accurate values of the material properties for digital twinning. The experiment is
conducted for five beams, of which three of them are utilized in the balcony setup and the two
remaining beams are utilized to find the E modulus by dynamic testing.
Test Program
The test program used for density determination of the wood beams are presented in table C.1.
Table C.1: Test program for wood density.
Test type
Measuring geometry and weighting the mass
Date
20/09/2022
Type of specimens
Pinewood beams
Number of tested specimens
5
Number of test
1
Comments
Steps
The steps involved to investigate the density of the wood are listed in numbered order below:
1. Calibration of the scale with 1 kg and 2 kg calibration plumbs.
2. Weighting the specimens on a scale.
3. Measuring the length, width, and height of the test specimen at three different locations.
4. The mean of the dimensions is then calculated.
119
==PAGE:128==
Chapter C – The Density of the Wood Beams
Test Setup & Performance
To determine the density of the wood beams, the mass and dimensions are found. The test
setup can be seen in figure C.1. In the picture, it is shown how the wood beam 1 is placed on
the weight 2 , from which the mass can be read.
Figure C.1: Setup for density determination of wood beam 1.
Analysis & Results
The density of the wood beams is calculated by equation C.1.
ρ = m
hwl
(C.1)
120
==PAGE:129==
Chapter C – The Density of the Wood Beams
Where m is the mass, h is the height, w is the width, and l is the length. The mass and dimen-
sions are shown in the following section and utilized to find the resulting densities, which are
presented statistically in figure C.2.
Figure C.2: Densities of the wood beams.
The mean density (507.33 kg
m3) of the wood beams have a relatively small standard deviation
of ±22.80 kg
m3. However, the difference between the largest and smallest density is 49.40 kg
m3,
which constitutes a relatively large difference. One expected reason is a natural variation in
the number of fibers and cracks across the beams which would impact the density. That said,
the densities of all five wood beams were found to be within the range generally defined for
pinewood (350-590 kg
m3) (Engineering ToolBox, 2023b). Thus, the results can be accepted and
utilized later for the FE model with the range seen in equation C.2.
ρwood = 507.33 kg
m3 ± 22.80 kg
m3
(C.2)
121
==PAGE:130==
Chapter C – The Density of the Wood Beams
Comprehensive Documentation of Wood Density
(a) Wood beam 2.
(b) Wood beam 3.
(c) Wood beam 4.
(d) Wood beam 5.
Figure C.3: Setup for determination of density of wood beams.
122
==PAGE:131==
Chapter C – The Density of the Wood Beams
Table C.2: The dimensions, masses, and densities of the wood beams.
Beam Name
Height
Width
Length [cm]
Mass
Density
[Units]
[cm]
[cm]
[cm]
[g]
 kg
m3

1
5.00
4.93
122.05
1557.08
517.20
2
5.03
5.03
122.10
1507.18
487.23
3
5.03
5.03
122.05
1624.59
525.41
4
5.03
5.03
122.00
1479.59
478.71
5
5.00
4.93
122.05
1589.90
528.11
Mean
5.02
4.99
122.05
1551.67
507.33
SD
±0.02
±0.05
±0.04
±59.12
±22.80
123
==PAGE:132==
APPENDIX D
The E modulus of the Wood Beams
(a) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 1, wood beam 4.
(b) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 2, wood beam 4.
(c) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 3, wood beam 4.
(d) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 4, wood beam 4.
124
==PAGE:133==
Chapter D – The E modulus of the Wood Beams
(e) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 5, wood beam 4.
(f) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 6, wood beam 4.
(g) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 7, wood beam 4.
(h) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 8, wood beam 4.
(i) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 9, wood beam 4.
(j) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 10, wood beam 4.
125
==PAGE:134==
Chapter D – The E modulus of the Wood Beams
(k) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 11, wood beam 4.
(l) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 12, wood beam 4.
(m) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 13, wood beam 4.
(n) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 14, wood beam 4.
(o) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 15, wood beam 4.
(p) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 16, wood beam 4.
126
==PAGE:135==
Chapter D – The E modulus of the Wood Beams
(q) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 17, wood beam 4.
(r) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 18, wood beam 4.
(s) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 19, wood beam 4.
(t) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 20, wood beam 4.
Figure D.1: SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for response in all tests, wood beam 4.
127
==PAGE:136==
Chapter D – The E modulus of the Wood Beams
(a) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 1, wood beam 5.
(b) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 2, wood beam 5.
(c) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 3, wood beam 5.
(d) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 4, wood beam 5.
(e) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 5, wood beam 5.
(f) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 6, wood beam 5.
128
==PAGE:137==
Chapter D – The E modulus of the Wood Beams
(g) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 7, wood beam 5.
(h) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 8, wood beam 5.
(i) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 9, wood beam 5.
(j) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 10, wood beam 5.
(k) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 11, wood beam 5.
(l) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 12, wood beam 5.
129
==PAGE:138==
Chapter D – The E modulus of the Wood Beams
(m) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 13, wood beam 5.
(n) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 14, wood beam 5.
(o) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 15, wood beam 5.
(p) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 16, wood beam 5.
(q) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 17, wood beam 5.
(r) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 18, wood beam 5.
130
==PAGE:139==
Chapter D – The E modulus of the Wood Beams
(s) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 19, wood beam 5.
(t) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 20, wood beam 5.
Figure D.2: Response spectra for all Fast Fourier Transform Spectrum Analysis, wood beam 5.
Table D.1: The results from the 20 different tests, for the E modulus of the wood beam 4.
Test no.
Frequency
Length
lambda
mL
I
E
[Units]
[Hz]
[m]
[-]
[kg pr m]
[cm4]
[GPa]
1
151.73
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.12
2
151.73
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.12
3
152.13
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.17
4
152.54
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.22
5
151.73
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.12
6
152.13
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.17
7
151.33
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.07
8
151.73
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.12
9
150.52
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.98
10
151.73
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.12
11
152.13
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.17
12
152.13
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.12
13
152.54
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.17
14
151.73
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.22
15
151.73
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.12
16
151.33
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.07
17
152.54
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.22
18
152.13
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.27
19
152.54
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.22
20
152.54
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.12
Mean
151.93
1.22
4.73
1.21
53.49
9.15
SD
±0.51
±0.00
±0.00
±0.00
±0.00
±0.06
131
==PAGE:140==
Chapter D – The E modulus of the Wood Beams
Table D.2: The results from the 20 different tests, for the E modulus of the wood beam 5.
Test no.
Frequency
Length
lambda
mL
I
E
[Units]
[Hz]
[m]
[-]
[kg pr m]
[cm4]
[GPa]
1
171.50
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.05
2
171.50
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.05
3
171.50
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.05
4
172.31
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.17
5
171.10
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
12.99
6
170.70
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
12.93
7
171.91
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.11
8
172.31
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.17
9
171.50
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.05
10
173.12
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.30
11
172.31
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.17
12
172.31
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.17
13
171.50
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.05
14
172.31
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.17
15
171.91
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.11
16
172.31
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.17
17
171.50
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.05
18
171.91
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.11
19
172.31
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.17
20
171.91
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.11
Mean
171.89
1.22
4.73
1.30
51.39
13.11
SD
±0.55
±0.00
±0.00
±0.00
±0.00
±0.08
132
==PAGE:141==
APPENDIX E
The Density of the Steel Beams
Steel Density
In this section, the density (ρsteel) of the steel beams is investigated. The purpose of the in-
vestigation is to get more accurate values of the material properties for digital twinning. The
experiment is conducted on a single beam representing the three beams utilized in the balcony
construction.
Test Program
The test program for the density determination of the steel beam is presented in table E.1.
Table E.1: Test program for steel density.
Test type
Measuring geometry and weighting the mass
Date
28/10/2022
Type of specimens
Steel beams
Number of tested specimens
1
Number of test
1
Comments
Steps
The steps involved to investigate the density of the steel are identical to the earlier procedures,
and therefore, references are made to appendix C.
Test Setup & Performance
To determine the density of the steel beam, the mass and dimensions are found. The test setup
can be seen in figure E.1. In the picture, it is shown how the steel beam 1 , is placed on the
weight 2 , from which the mass can be read.
133
==PAGE:142==
Chapter E – The Density of the Steel Beams
Figure E.1: Setup for density determination of steel beam.
Analysis & Results
The density of the steel beam is calculated by equation E.1.
ρ =
m
(t((h −2t) + 2w) + 2π
4t2)l
(E.1)
Where m is the mass, h is the height, w is the width, t is the thickness, and l is the length. The
mass and dimensions are shown in the following section and utilized to find the density. The
result is illustrated in figure E.2.
134
==PAGE:143==
Chapter E – The Density of the Steel Beams
Figure E.2: Densitiy of the steel beam 4.
The density of the steel beam has a difference from the supplier’s indication value at 7850 kg
m3,
equivalent to a difference of 93.53 kg
m3. The difference in the density is mainly believed to be
caused by small uncertainties in the measurements of the dimensions since the steel is cold-
formed. The results were expected, and since the density is within the range defined for steel
(7750-8050 kg
m3) (AmesWeb, 2023a), the results can be accepted and utilized later for the FE
model with the range as seen in equation E.2.
ρsteel = 7943.53 kg
m3 ± 0 kg
m3
(E.2)
Comprehensive Documentation of Steel Density
Table E.2: The dimension, mass, and density of the steel beams.
Beam Name
Height
Width
Length
Thickness
Mass
Density
[Units]
[cm]
[cm]
[cm]
[cm]
[g]
 kg
m3

1
3.03
1.61
91.00
0.20
794.91
7943.53
135
==PAGE:144==
APPENDIX F
The E modulus of the Steel Beams
(a) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 1, steel beam 4.
(b) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 2, steel beam 4.
(c) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 3, steel beam 4.
(d) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 4, steel beam 4.
136
==PAGE:145==
Chapter F – The E modulus of the Steel Beams
(e) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 5, steel beam 4.
(f) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 6, steel beam 4.
(g) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 7, steel beam 4.
(h) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 8, steel beam 4.
(i) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 9, steel beam 4.
(j) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 10, steel beam 4.
137
==PAGE:146==
Chapter F – The E modulus of the Steel Beams
(k) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 11, steel beam 4.
(l) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 12, steel beam 4.
(m) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 13, steel beam 4.
(n) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 14, steel beam 4.
(o) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 15, steel beam 4.
(p) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 16, steel beam 4.
138
==PAGE:147==
Chapter F – The E modulus of the Steel Beams
(q) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 17, steel beam 4.
(r) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 18, steel beam 4.
(s) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 19, steel beam 4.
(t) SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for
response in test 20, steel beam 4.
Figure F.1: Response spectra for all Fast Fourier Transform Spectrum Analysis, steel beam 4.
139
==PAGE:148==
Chapter F – The E modulus of the Steel Beams
Table F.1: The results from the 20 different tests, for the E modulus of the steel beam 1.
Test no.
Frequency
Length
lambda
mL
I
E
[Units]
[Hz]
[m]
[-]
[kg pr m]
[m4]
[GPa]
1
106.53
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
199.34
2
107.34
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
202.38
3
106.94
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
200.86
4
107.34
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
202.38
5
106.94
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
200.86
6
107.34
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
202.38
7
107.34
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
202.38
8
106.94
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
200.86
9
107.34
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
202.38
10
107.34
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
202.38
11
108.15
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
205.43
12
108.15
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
205.43
13
107.75
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
203.90
14
108.15
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
205.43
15
107.74
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
203.88
16
107.74
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
203.88
17
108.15
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
205.43
18
107.74
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
203.88
19
107.74
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
203.88
20
107.74
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
203.88
Mean
107.52
0.91
4.73
0.87
0.27
203.06
SD
±0.46
±0.00
±0.00
±0.00
±0.00
±1.74
140
==PAGE:149==
APPENDIX G
Concrete Casting
Concrete Casting
This section deals with the casting of the concrete plate and some additional test specimens.
The purpose of casting the additional specimens is to investigate the concrete properties of the
balcony structure which can be used for further investigation. All casts are made from the same
concrete batch mixture.
Test Program
The test program for the concrete casting is presented in table G.1.
Table G.1: Test program for the casting of concrete specimens.
Test type
Casting
Date
26/09/2022
Type of specimens
Shaped concrete specimens
Number of tested specimens
8
Number of test
1
Comments
Steps
The steps involved in creating the concrete specimens are listed in numbered order below:
1. Make the formwork with desired dimensions.
2. Assemble the forms for the construction, support them, and give them oil.
3. Make a concrete mixture by adding all dry components and mixing them for 1 minute, then
add water and mix for 3 minutes while adding the superplasticizer gradually to obtain the
right texture.
4. Fill up the formwork, vibrate the form to evenly distribute the concrete in the form, level/smooth
out the surface, and cover the surface with plastic.
141
==PAGE:150==
Chapter G – Concrete Casting
5. After 24 hours, separate the additional concrete specimens from the formwork and place
them into a water bath to induce accelerated curing of the concrete. For the concrete plate,
the formwork should remain as long as possible to stabilize the structure.
Test Setup & Performance
The concrete specimens were cast in time so that the concrete had at least 28 days of curing
before the experimental tests began. To obtain an acceptable concrete mixture for the scaled
balcony, the aggregate needed to be particularly fine. The concrete prescription used is docu-
mented in table G.2.
Table G.2: Concrete prescription.
Mass
Density
Volume
[Units]
[kg]
 kg
m3

[l]
Cement
12.12
3160
3.84
Aggregate 0/4
47.57
2650
17.95
Water
6.01
1000
6.01
Superplasticizer
0.15
1200
0.13
Air
0.45
Sum
65.85
28.18
w/c
0.50
The process for casting the specimens is illustrated in a series of pictures from figure G.1a to
G.1f.
(a) Concrete mixer machine.
(b) Final concrete mixture.
142
==PAGE:151==
Chapter G – Concrete Casting
(c) Leveling of the concrete surface after vibration.
(d) Cylinder molds for compression test.
(e) Vibration of concrete in scaled balcony deck.
(f) Covering of concrete plate under curing.
Figure G.1: The concrete casting process.
Additionally, the amount of concrete needed for the casting of all specimens can be seen in the
following section.
143
==PAGE:152==
Chapter G – Concrete Casting
Analysis & Results
The primary casting results are presented in figure G.2.
(a) Concrete cylinder 1.
(b) Concrete balcony plate.
Figure G.2: Resulting concrete specimens from casting.
Additional pictures of the casting results can be seen in the following section.
Comprehensive Documentation of Concrete Casting
Table G.3: Required concrete quantities.
Amount
Size
Volume
[Units]
[-]
[cm]
[l]
Balcony
1
47x34x5
7.99
Beam
1
5x50x7
1.75
Plate
1
20x20x6
2.40
Cylinder
5
10x10x20
10.00
Sum
8
22.14
144
==PAGE:153==
Chapter G – Concrete Casting
(a) Concrete cylinder 2.
(b) Concrete cylinder 3.
(c) Concrete cylinder 4.
(d) Concrete cylinder 5.
145
==PAGE:154==
Chapter G – Concrete Casting
(e) Concrete beam.
(f) Concrete plate.
Figure G.3: Resulting concrete specimens from casting.
146
==PAGE:155==
APPENDIX H
The Density of the Concrete Cylinders
Concrete Density
In this section, the density (ρconcrete) of the concrete cylinders are investigated. The purpose of
the investigation is to get more accurate values of the material properties for digital twinning.
The determination of the density is made for five cylinders. Since the same mortar was used
for all five cylinders and the balcony plate, the density of the concrete will be the same.
Test Program
The test program for the density determination of the concrete is presented in table H.1.
Table H.1: Test program for concrete density.
Test type
Measuring geometry and weighting the mass
Date
28/10/2022
Type of specimens
Concrete cylinders Ø10
Number of tested specimens
5
Number of test
1
Comments
Steps
The steps involved to investigate the density of the concrete are identical to the earlier proce-
dures, and therefore, references are made to appendix C.
Test Setup & Performance
To determine the density of the concrete, the mass and dimensions are found. The test setup
can be seen in figure H.1. In the picture, it is seen how the concrete cylinder 1 is placed on
the weight 2 , from which the mass can be read.
147
==PAGE:156==
Chapter H – The Density of the Concrete Cylinders
Figure H.1: Setup for density determination of concrete cylinder 1.
Analysis & Results
The test specimen has been shaped as a cylinder and therefore the cross-section can be calcu-
lated by equation H.1.
Ac = D2
4 π
(H.1)
Where D is the diameter of the cylinder. The density of the concrete cylinders is calculated by
equation H.2.
ρconcrete = m
Ach
(H.2)
Where m is the mass, Ac is the cross-sectional area of the cylinders and h is the height of the
cylinders. The mass and dimensions are shown in the following section. The results of the
density tests can be seen in figure H.2.
148
==PAGE:157==
Chapter H – The Density of the Concrete Cylinders
Figure H.2: Densities of the concrete cylinders.
The mean density
 1848.79 kg
m3

of the concrete cylinders has a relatively minor standard devi-
ation of ±9.98 kg
m3. The difference between the smallest and largest density is 22.81 kg
m3, which
is a relatively small difference. This small difference was expected as the concrete used for all
cylinders originated from the same casting. However, the density is in the lower end, making
its characteristics comparable to lightweight concrete. With that in mind, the results of the den-
sity are still compared to the range of the generally defined density for concrete (2240-2400
kg
m3) (Engineering ToolBox, 2023a). Thus, the results can be accepted and utilized for the FE
model in the range expressed in equation H.3.
ρconcrete = 1848.79 kg
m3 ± 9.98 kg
m3
(H.3)
Comprehensive Documentation of Concrete Density
(a) Concrete cylinder 2.
(b) Concrete cylinder 3.
149
==PAGE:158==
Chapter H – The Density of the Concrete Cylinders
(c) Concrete cylinder 4.
(d) Concrete cylinder 5.
Figure H.3: Setup for determination of density of wood beams.
Table H.2: The dimensions, masses, and densities of the concrete cylinder.
Beam Name
Height
Width
Mass
Density
[Units]
[cm]
[cm]
[g]
 kg
m3

1
20.00
10.00
2919.71
1858.75
2
20.13
10.00
2940.05
1859.30
3
20.02
10.00
2897.80
1843.26
4
20.00
10.00
2899.91
1846.14
5
20.05
10.00
2891.96
1836.49
Mean
20.04
10.00
2909.89
1848.79
SD
±0.06
±0.0
±19.83
±9.98
150
==PAGE:159==
APPENDIX I
The E modulus of the Concrete
Cylinderes
I.1
Compression Tests
Figure I.1: Compression cycles according to DS/EN 12390-13 method A for specimen 2, where the
marked blue box represents the last load cycle.
151
==PAGE:160==
Chapter I – The E modulus of the Concrete Cylinderes
Figure I.2: Compression cycles according to DS/EN 12390-13 method A for specimen 3, where the
marked blue box represents the last load cycle.
Figure I.3: Compression cycles according to DS/EN 12390-13 method A for specimen 4, where the
marked blue box represents the last load cycle.
152
==PAGE:161==
Chapter I – The E modulus of the Concrete Cylinderes
Figure I.4: Compression cycles according to DS/EN 12390-13 method A for specimen 5, where the
marked blue box represents the last load cycle.
I.2
Statistical Analysis for Normaldistribution
Firstly, the data is sorted from lowest to highest stabilized secant modulus of elasticity for all
five specimens. Secondly, the data is assigned with a rank number n, from 1 to the total number
of test specimens N. Thirdly, the relative frequency is calculated for each specimen as seen in
the equation, where the purpose is to procure the density distribution.
F(x) =
n
N + 1
(I.1)
Then, the stabilized secant modulus of elasticity is plotted against the relative frequency on a
normal distribution probability paper. Subsequently, a regression line is plotted between the
points with the use of the "by-eye fitting" method (Koss H. H & Christian Berggreen, 2020).
Then, the mean value(µ) of the stabilized secant modulus of elasticity can be determined
with the corresponding value of the relative frequency of 50 %. Furthermore, the standard
deviation(σ) can be determined from the probability paper as seen in equation I.2.
σ = x1 −µ = µ −x2
(I.2)
Where x1 and x2 are the stabilized secant modulus of elasticity when the relative frequency is
F(x1)=84.1 % and F(x1)=15.9 %. The test is illustrated in figure I.5 (ibid.).
153
==PAGE:162==
Chapter I – The E modulus of the Concrete Cylinderes
Figure I.5: Test results illustrated on a normally distributed probability paper.
It can be seen that the line from the by-eye fitting follows the data points and therefore indicates
that the stabilized secant modulus of elasticity follows the normal distribution. Furthermore,
the statistical parameters can be determined from the probability paper. The statistical param-
eters are also calculated and seen in table I.1.
154
==PAGE:163==
Chapter I – The E modulus of the Concrete Cylinderes
Table I.1: Stiffness results from the two statistical analyses.
Mean (µ)
F(x1)
F(x2)
SD (σ)
[Units]
[GPa]
[GPa]
[GPa]
[GPa]
By-eye fit
19.63
19.16
20.14
0.49
Calculated
19.65
-
-
0.36
It can be seen from the table that the results from the two different methods give almost the
same results, especially when looking at the mean value. The variance in the standard deviation
may be due to the size of the sampling size.
155
==PAGE:164==
APPENDIX J
The Degradation of Balcony Steel
Figure J.1: Damage of half of the top flange in all steel beams.
156
==PAGE:165==
Chapter J – The Degradation of Balcony Steel
Figure J.2: Damage the whole top flange in all steel beams.
157
==PAGE:166==
Chapter J – The Degradation of Balcony Steel
Figure J.3: Damage width.
158
==PAGE:167==
APPENDIX K
The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes
for the OMA Tests in O State
Figure K.1: SVD plot of test 2, for O state.
159
==PAGE:168==
Chapter K – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in O State
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
160
==PAGE:169==
Chapter K – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in O State
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure K.2: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 2 in the O state.
Figure K.3: SVD plot of test 3, for O state.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
161
==PAGE:170==
Chapter K – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in O State
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure K.4: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 3 in the O state.
162
==PAGE:171==
Chapter K – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in O State
Figure K.5: SVD plot of test 4, for O state.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
163
==PAGE:172==
Chapter K – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in O State
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure K.6: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 4 in the O state.
164
==PAGE:173==
Chapter K – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in O State
Figure K.7: SVD plot of test 5, for O state.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
165
==PAGE:174==
Chapter K – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in O State
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure K.8: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 5 in the O state.
166
==PAGE:175==
APPENDIX L
The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes
for the OMA Tests in F1 State
Figure L.1: SVD plot of test 2, for F1 state.
167
==PAGE:176==
Chapter L – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F1 State
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
168
==PAGE:177==
Chapter L – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F1 State
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure L.2: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 2 in the F1 state.
Figure L.3: SVD plot of test 3, for F1 state.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
169
==PAGE:178==
Chapter L – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F1 State
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure L.4: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 3 in the F1 state.
170
==PAGE:179==
Chapter L – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F1 State
Figure L.5: SVD plot of test 4, for F1 state.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
171
==PAGE:180==
Chapter L – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F1 State
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure L.6: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 4 in the F1 state.
172
==PAGE:181==
Chapter L – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F1 State
Figure L.7: SVD plot of test 5, for F1 state.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
173
==PAGE:182==
Chapter L – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F1 State
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure L.8: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 5 in the F1 state.
174
==PAGE:183==
APPENDIX M
The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes
for the OMA Tests in F2 State
Figure M.1: SVD plot of test 2, for F2 state.
175
==PAGE:184==
Chapter M – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F2 State
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
176
==PAGE:185==
Chapter M – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F2 State
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure M.2: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 2 in the F2 state.
Figure M.3: SVD plot of test 3, for F2 state.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
177
==PAGE:186==
Chapter M – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F2 State
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure M.4: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 3 in the F2 state.
178
==PAGE:187==
Chapter M – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F2 State
Figure M.5: SVD plot of test 4, for F2 state.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
179
==PAGE:188==
Chapter M – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F2 State
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure M.6: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 4 in the F2 state.
180
==PAGE:189==
Chapter M – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F2 State
Figure M.7: SVD plot of test 5, for F2 state.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
181
==PAGE:190==
Chapter M – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F2 State
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure M.8: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 5 in the F2 state.
182
==PAGE:191==
APPENDIX N
The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes
for the OMA Tests in F3 State
Figure N.1: SVD plot of test 2, for F3 state.
183
==PAGE:192==
Chapter N – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F3 State
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
184
==PAGE:193==
Chapter N – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F3 State
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure N.2: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 2 in the F3 state.
Figure N.3: SVD plot of test 3, for F3 state.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
185
==PAGE:194==
Chapter N – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F3 State
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure N.4: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 3 in the F3 state.
186
==PAGE:195==
Chapter N – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F3 State
Figure N.5: SVD plot of test 4, for F3 state.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
187
==PAGE:196==
Chapter N – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F3 State
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure N.6: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 4 in the F3 state.
188
==PAGE:197==
Chapter N – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F3 State
Figure N.7: SVD plot of test 5, for F3 state.
(a) 1st mode shape - FDD.
(b) 1st mode shape - TDPR.
(c) 2nd mode shape - FDD.
(d) 2nd mode shape - TDPR.
189
==PAGE:198==
Chapter N – The Eigenfrequencies & Mode Shapes for the OMA Tests in F3 State
(e) 3rd mode shape - FDD.
(f) 3rd mode shape - TDPR.
(g) 4th mode shape - FDD.
(h) 4th mode shape - TDPR.
(i) 5th mode shape - FDD.
(j) 5th mode shape - TDPR.
Figure N.8: Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 5 in the F3 state.
190
==PAGE:199==
APPENDIX O
The OMA Results Comparison
Figure O.1: The degradation for mode 1 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utilizing the
FDD identification technique.
191
==PAGE:200==
Chapter O – The OMA Results Comparison
Figure O.2: The degradation for mode 2 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utilizing the
FDD identification technique.
Figure O.3: The degradation for mode 3 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utilizing the
FDD identification technique.
192
==PAGE:201==
Chapter O – The OMA Results Comparison
Figure O.4: The degradation for mode 4 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utilizing the
FDD identification technique.
Figure O.5: The degradation for mode 5 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utilizing the
FDD identification technique.
193
==PAGE:202==
Chapter O – The OMA Results Comparison
Figure O.6: The degradation for mode 1 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utilizing the
TDPR identification technique.
Figure O.7: The degradation for mode 2 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utilizing the
TDPR identification technique.
194
==PAGE:203==
Chapter O – The OMA Results Comparison
Figure O.8: The degradation for mode 3 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utilizing the
TDPR identification technique.
Figure O.9: The degradation for mode 4 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utilizing the
TDPR identification technique.
195
==PAGE:204==
Chapter O – The OMA Results Comparison
Figure O.10: The degradation for mode 5 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utilizing the
TDPR identification technique.
196
==PAGE:205==
APPENDIX P
The EMA Results in O State
Figure P.1: Impact force, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
197
==PAGE:206==
Chapter P – The EMA Results in O State
Figure P.2: Impact force, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
Figure P.3: Impact force, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
198
==PAGE:207==
Chapter P – The EMA Results in O State
Figure P.4: Impact force, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
Figure P.5: Impact force, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
199
==PAGE:208==
Chapter P – The EMA Results in O State
Figure P.6: Impact force, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
Figure P.7: Impact force, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
200
==PAGE:209==
Chapter P – The EMA Results in O State
Figure P.8: Impact force, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
Figure P.9: Impact force, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
201
==PAGE:210==
Chapter P – The EMA Results in O State
Figure P.10: Impact force, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
Figure P.11: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
202
==PAGE:211==
Chapter P – The EMA Results in O State
Figure P.12: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
Figure P.13: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
203
==PAGE:212==
Chapter P – The EMA Results in O State
Figure P.14: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
Figure P.15: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
204
==PAGE:213==
Chapter P – The EMA Results in O State
Figure P.16: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
Figure P.17: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
205
==PAGE:214==
Chapter P – The EMA Results in O State
Figure P.18: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
Figure P.19: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
206
==PAGE:215==
Chapter P – The EMA Results in O State
Figure P.20: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
Figure P.21: FRF for all sensors for the original state.
207
==PAGE:216==
APPENDIX Q
The EMA Results in F1 State
Figure Q.1: Impact force, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
208
==PAGE:217==
Chapter Q – The EMA Results in F1 State
Figure Q.2: Impact force, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
Figure Q.3: Impact force, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
209
==PAGE:218==
Chapter Q – The EMA Results in F1 State
Figure Q.4: Impact force, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
Figure Q.5: Impact force, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
210
==PAGE:219==
Chapter Q – The EMA Results in F1 State
Figure Q.6: Impact force, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
Figure Q.7: Impact force, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
211
==PAGE:220==
Chapter Q – The EMA Results in F1 State
Figure Q.8: Impact force, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
Figure Q.9: Impact force, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
212
==PAGE:221==
Chapter Q – The EMA Results in F1 State
Figure Q.10: Impact force, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
Figure Q.11: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
213
==PAGE:222==
Chapter Q – The EMA Results in F1 State
Figure Q.12: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
Figure Q.13: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
214
==PAGE:223==
Chapter Q – The EMA Results in F1 State
Figure Q.14: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
Figure Q.15: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
215
==PAGE:224==
Chapter Q – The EMA Results in F1 State
Figure Q.16: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
Figure Q.17: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
216
==PAGE:225==
Chapter Q – The EMA Results in F1 State
Figure Q.18: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
Figure Q.19: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
217
==PAGE:226==
Chapter Q – The EMA Results in F1 State
Figure Q.20: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
Figure Q.21: FRF for all sensors for the F1 state.
218
==PAGE:227==
APPENDIX R
The EMA Results in F2 State
Figure R.1: Impact force, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
219
==PAGE:228==
Chapter R – The EMA Results in F2 State
Figure R.2: Impact force, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
Figure R.3: Impact force, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
220
==PAGE:229==
Chapter R – The EMA Results in F2 State
Figure R.4: Impact force, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
Figure R.5: Impact force, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
221
==PAGE:230==
Chapter R – The EMA Results in F2 State
Figure R.6: Impact force, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
Figure R.7: Impact force, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
222
==PAGE:231==
Chapter R – The EMA Results in F2 State
Figure R.8: Impact force, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
Figure R.9: Impact force, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
223
==PAGE:232==
Chapter R – The EMA Results in F2 State
Figure R.10: Impact force, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
Figure R.11: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
224
==PAGE:233==
Chapter R – The EMA Results in F2 State
Figure R.12: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
Figure R.13: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
225
==PAGE:234==
Chapter R – The EMA Results in F2 State
Figure R.14: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
Figure R.15: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
226
==PAGE:235==
Chapter R – The EMA Results in F2 State
Figure R.16: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
Figure R.17: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
227
==PAGE:236==
Chapter R – The EMA Results in F2 State
Figure R.18: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
Figure R.19: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
228
==PAGE:237==
Chapter R – The EMA Results in F2 State
Figure R.20: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
Figure R.21: FRF for all sensors for the F2 state.
229
==PAGE:238==
APPENDIX S
The EMA Results in F3 State
Figure S.1: Impact force, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
230
==PAGE:239==
Chapter S – The EMA Results in F3 State
Figure S.2: Impact force, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
Figure S.3: Impact force, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
231
==PAGE:240==
Chapter S – The EMA Results in F3 State
Figure S.4: Impact force, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
Figure S.5: Impact force, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
232
==PAGE:241==
Chapter S – The EMA Results in F3 State
Figure S.6: Impact force, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
Figure S.7: Impact force, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
233
==PAGE:242==
Chapter S – The EMA Results in F3 State
Figure S.8: Impact force, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
Figure S.9: Impact force, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
234
==PAGE:243==
Chapter S – The EMA Results in F3 State
Figure S.10: Impact force, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
Figure S.11: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
235
==PAGE:244==
Chapter S – The EMA Results in F3 State
Figure S.12: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
Figure S.13: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
236
==PAGE:245==
Chapter S – The EMA Results in F3 State
Figure S.14: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
Figure S.15: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
237
==PAGE:246==
Chapter S – The EMA Results in F3 State
Figure S.16: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
Figure S.17: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
238
==PAGE:247==
Chapter S – The EMA Results in F3 State
Figure S.18: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
Figure S.19: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
239
==PAGE:248==
Chapter S – The EMA Results in F3 State
Figure S.20: Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
Figure S.21: FRF for all sensors for the F3 state.
240
==PAGE:249==
APPENDIX T
The EMA Results Comparison
Figure T.1: The degradation for mode 1 from the original state to F3 state for the EMA test.
241
==PAGE:250==
Chapter T – The EMA Results Comparison
Figure T.2: The degradation for mode 2 from the original state to the F3 state for the EMA test.
Figure T.3: The degradation for mode 3 from the original state to F3 state for the EMA test.
242
==PAGE:251==
Chapter T – The EMA Results Comparison
Figure T.4: The degradation for mode 4 from the original state to the F3 state for the EMA test.
Figure T.5: The degradation for mode 5 from the original state to the F3 state for the EMA test.
243
==PAGE:252==
APPENDIX U
The mode shape in ANSYS when
tuned to EMA
U.1
Results O
Table U.1: The O state results for the five global eigenfrequencies from the FE model test which is
tuned to EMA.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
72.55
113.16
115.71
124.09
338.36
(a) 1st mode shape.
(b) 2nd mode shape.
244
==PAGE:253==
Chapter U – The mode shape in ANSYS when tuned to EMA
(c) 3rd mode shape.
(d) 4th mode shape.
(e) 5th mode shape.
Figure U.1: The EMA tuned FE model of the 1st-5th global mode shape in O for the undamaged
balcony.
245
==PAGE:254==
Chapter U – The mode shape in ANSYS when tuned to EMA
U.2
Results F1
Table U.2: The F1 state results for the five modes, of the ANSYS test which is tuned to EMA.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
72.52
113.16
115.50
123.82
338.36
(a) 1st mode shape.
(b) 2nd mode shape.
(c) 3rd mode shape.
(d) 4th mode shape.
246
==PAGE:255==
Chapter U – The mode shape in ANSYS when tuned to EMA
(e) 5th mode shape.
Figure U.2: The EMA tuned FE model of the 1st-5th global mode shape in F1 for the damaged balcony.
247
==PAGE:256==
Chapter U – The mode shape in ANSYS when tuned to EMA
U.3
Results F2
Table U.3: The F2 state results for the five modes, of the ANSYS test which is tuned to EMA.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
72.47
112.87
115.33
123.52
338.36
(a) 1st mode shape.
(b) 2nd mode shape.
(c) 3rd mode shape.
(d) 4th mode shape.
248
==PAGE:257==
Chapter U – The mode shape in ANSYS when tuned to EMA
(e) 5th mode shape.
Figure U.3: The EMA tuned FE model of the 1st-5th global mode shape in F2 for the damaged balcony.
249
==PAGE:258==
Chapter U – The mode shape in ANSYS when tuned to EMA
U.4
Results F3
Table U.4: The F3 state results for the five modes, of the ANSYS test which is tuned to EMA.
Mode
1
2
3
4
5
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
Test 1
72.11
111.68
113.83
121.15
338.36
(a) 1st mode shape.
(b) 2nd mode shape.
(c) 3rd mode shape.
(d) 4th mode shape.
250
==PAGE:259==
Chapter U – The mode shape in ANSYS when tuned to EMA
(e) 5th mode shape.
Figure U.4: The EMA tuned FE model of the 1st-5th global mode shape in F3 for the damaged balcony.
251
==PAGE:260==
APPENDIX V
ANSYS – Different Mode Degradation
Figure V.1: ANSYS mode 1.
252
==PAGE:261==
Chapter V – ANSYS – Different Mode Degradation
Figure V.2: ANSYS mode 2.
Figure V.3: ANSYS mode 3.
253
==PAGE:262==
Chapter V – ANSYS – Different Mode Degradation
Figure V.4: ANSYS mode 4.
Figure V.5: ANSYS mode 5.
254
==PAGE:263==
APPENDIX W
Comparison – Different Mode
Degradation
Table W.1: Comparison of first eigenfrequencies between all respective tests.
State
O
F1
F2
F3
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
OMA SD
0.39
0.18
0.26
0.14
OMA Mean
78.65
77.16
77.24
74.65
ANSYSOMA
78.27
78.25
78.21
77.98
EMA
73.02
71.81
71.01
69.80
ANSYSEMA
72.55
72.52
72.47
72.11
Table W.2: Comparison of second eigenfrequencies between all respective tests.
State
O
F1
F2
F3
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
OMA SD
0.14
0.00
0.09
0.17
OMA Mean
107.54
107.54
107.30
104.48
ANSYSOMA
113.25
113.25
112.95
111.75
EMA
105.70
105.30
104.89
102.07
ANSYSEMA
113.16
113.16
112.87
111.68
Table W.3: Comparison of third eigenfrequencies between all respective tests.
State
O
F1
F2
F3
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
OMA SD
0.23
0.79
0.09
0.14
OMA Mean
126.83
125.95
124.94
123.28
ANSYSOMA
115.74
115.53
115.36
113.86
EMA
124.66
123.86
123.45
121.44
ANSYSEMA
115.71
115.50
115.33
113.83
255
==PAGE:264==
Chapter W – Comparison – Different Mode Degradation
Table W.4: Comparison of fourth eigenfrequencies between all respective tests.
State
O
F1
F2
F3
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
OMA SD
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.14
OMA Mean
143.82
143.50
142.69
135.79
ANSYSOMA
124.80
124.53
124.22
121.83
EMA
142.01
141.20
140.80
138.38
ANSYSEMA
124.09
123.82
123.52
121.15
Table W.5: Comparison of fifth eigenfrequencies between all respective tests.
State
O
F1
F2
F3
[Units]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
OMA SD
0.72
0.47
0.23
0.70
OMA Mean
371.42
370.16
369.56
364.44
ANSYSOMA
339.72
339.72
339.72
339.72
EMA
368.34
366.73
366.32
363.50
ANSYSEMA
338.36
338.36
338.36
338.36
256
==PAGE:265==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
AR
Auto Regressive, page 22
ARMA Auto Regressive Moving Average, page 22
BC
Boundary Conditions, page 83
CF
Correlation Functions, page 10
CP
Coupling Points, page 84
DOF
Degree Of Freedom, page 10
EMA Experimental Modal Analysis, page 4
EOM Equations Of Motion, page 7
EVP
Generalized Eigenvalue Problem, page 8
F1
The first damaged state, where 6 mm of the top flange of the center steel beam is re-
moved, page 42
F2
The second damaged state, where 6 mm of the top flange of all the steel beams is
removed, page 42
F3
The third damaged state, where the entire top flange of all the steel beams is removed,
page 42
FD
Frequency Domain, page 15
FDD
Frequency Domain Decomposition, page 3
FE
Finite Element, page 3
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform, page 5
257
==PAGE:266==
FRD
Frequency Response Domain, page 5
FRF
Frequency Response Function, page 4
FT
Fourier Transformation, page 15
IDT
Identification Technique, page 56
IFT
Inverse Fourier Transform , page 18
IIR
Infinite Impulse Response, page 50
MA
Moving Average, page 22
MAC Modal Assurance Criterion, page 24
MDOF Multi Degree Of Freedom, page 7
NDT
Non-Destructive Testing, page 6
O
The undamaged original state, page 42
OMA Operational Modal Analysis, page 3
PSD
Power Spectral Density, page 19
RC
Reinforced Concrete, page 5
RD
Relative Deviation, page 98
ROT
Rotations, page 84
SD
Spectral Density, page 18
SDOF Single Degree Of Freedom, page 7
SHM Structural Health Monitoring, page 6
SVD
Singular Value decomposition, page 20
TD
Time Domain, page 15
TDPR Time Domain Poly-Reference, page 3
Symbols - Greek
α
Constant related to Bolomeys equation depends on cement type and age of concrete,
page 40
∆ω
Sampling steps in augular frequency, page 16
258
==PAGE:267==
∆f
Sampling steps in frequency, page 17
∆l
Change in length, page 40
∆t
Sampling steps in second, page 16
γM0
Safety factor, page 85
λ
Continuous time pole, page 24
λj
Roots of the eigenvalue, page 32
µ
Discrete-time pole, page 24
µx
Mean, page 11
ν
Poisson’s ratio, page 81
ω
Angular frequency, page 8
ρ
Density, page 121
σ
Stress, page 40
σm
a
Measured stress corresponding to nominal upper stress, page 41
σm
b
Measured stress corresponding to nominal lower stress, page 41
σV
Von Mises stress, page 85
σ2
x
Variance, page 11
τ
Time lag, page 10
ε
Strain, page 40
εa,3
Average strain at upper stress on loading cycle 3, page 41
εb,2
Average strain at lower stress on loading cycle 2, page 41
φd
Discrete eigenvector, page 24
ζ
Damping ratio, page 49
Symbols - Latin
()+
Pseudo inverse, page 23
()H
Hermitian, page 20
()T
Transposed, page 8
259
==PAGE:268==
bA
AR matrix fitting solution, page 23
kspring Spring constant, page 81
(˙)
Derivative with respect to time, page 7
Ac
Companion matrix, page 23
B
Mode shape, page 24
b
Mode shape vector, page 8
C
Damping matrix, page 7
Cx
Auto covariance matrix for x, page 19
Cy
Auto covariance matrix for y, page 19
Cxy
Cross covariance matrix, page 19
f(t)
External load, page 7
Gy(f) Spectral density (SD) matrix, page 21
H
Block Hankel matrix, page 23
I
Identity matrix, page 23
K
Stiffness matrix, page 7
M
Mass matrix, page 7
P
Observation matrix, page 24
Rq(τ) Correlation function (CF) matrix of the modal coordinates, page 21
R(τ)
Correlation function matrix, page 14
S
Diagonal matrix, page 21
U
Singular vectors, page 21
Ud
Discrete state vector, page 23
x(n)
Discrete time vector, page 22
y(n)
Measured response vector, page 22
y(t)
Response, page 7
a0
Fourier coefficients, page 15
260
==PAGE:269==
Ak
Fourier cosine coefficients of each harmonic component, page 16
ak
Fourier cosine coefficients of each harmonic component, page 15
Bf
Frequency bandwidth in terms of Hz, page 17
Bk
Fourier sine coefficients of each harmonic component, page 16
bk
Fourier sine coefficients of each harmonic component, page 15
E
Average over time, page 11
E
E modulus, page 32
EC,S
Stabilized secant modulus of elasticity, page 39
fs
Sampling frequency, page 17
fy
Yield strength, page 85
fyd
Design yield strength, page 85
fν
Nyquist frequency, page 17
fc
Compressive strengt, page 40
g2
n
Auto spectral densities, page 21
Gx
Auto spectral density function, page 18
Gxy
Cross spectral density function, page 18
h
Height, page 121
I
Moment of inertia, page 32
i
Imaginary number, page 8
k
Bolomeys constant, page 40
k
Harmonic component, page 15
kj
Modal stiffness, page 8
L
Number of frequencies in FRF in EMA, page 72
l
Length, page 121
l0
Original length, page 40
m
Mass, page 121
261
==PAGE:270==
mj
Modal mass, page 8
mL
Mass pr. length of the beam, page 32
N
Number of total signals, page 14
n
Number of measured DOFs in EMA, page 72
Nf
Number of frequency, page 50
na
Number of IIR filter coefficients, page 23
nc
Number of channels, page 50
np
Total number of points from a signal, page 23
P
Applied load, page 40
p
Number of excitation points in EMA, page 72
r
Filter factor, page 50
Rx(0) Parseval Theorem, page 19
Rx
Auto correlation function, page 11
Rxy
Cross correlation function, page 13
s2
n
Singular values, page 21
T
Time period, page 13
t
Thickness, page 134
t
Time, page 10
U
Displacement, page 84
w
Width, page 121
Yk
Complex Fourier coefficient, page 16
262
==PAGE:271==
List of Figures
2.1
Random response illustrating the autocorrelation between two arbitrary points. . . .
11
2.2
Auto correlation function. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Cross correlation of two signals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Cross correlation with multiple signals.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Continuous periodic function in the time domain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Discrete infinite function in the frequency domain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.7
Parseval’s theorem. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.8
Principle of minimizing the error due to the approximations of the mode shapes
utilizing SVD (Brincker and Ventura, 2015). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1
Full scale balcony (Vitten and Jørgensen, 2021). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
1:4 scaled balcony.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Dimensions of the 1:4 scaled balcony.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Setup for E modulus determination of wood beam 4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.5
SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for response in test 1, wood beam 5. . .
31
3.6
Results from OMA tests on wood beam 4, where the continuous line indicates the
mean value and the dotted line indicates the upper and lower standard deviation. . .
31
3.7
Results from OMA tests on wood beam 5, where the continuous line indicates the
mean value and the dotted line indicates the upper and lower standard deviation. . .
32
3.8
E modulus determination of each frequency sample for wood beam 4 and 5. . . . .
33
3.9
Setup for E modulus determination of steel beam 4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.10 SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for response in test 1, steel beam 4. . . .
36
3.11 Results from OMA test on steel beam 4, where the continuous line indicates the
mean value and the dotted line indicates the upper and lower standard deviation. . .
36
3.12 E modulus determination of each frequency sample for steel beam 4. . . . . . . . .
37
3.13 Setup for E modulus determination of the concrete cylinders. . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.14 Data results for E modulus of concrete. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
263
==PAGE:272==
3.15 The E modulus from the experimental work compared to the generally defined E
modules for concrete. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.16 Setup for damage of steel beam 3 in degradation state F2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.17 Captured pictures of the damage in the three steel beams according to the F1 and
F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.18 Captured pictures of the damage in the three steel beams according to the F3 state. .
44
3.19 Setup for the OMA test excited by random vibrations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.20 The auto-correlation function of sensor 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.21 SVD plot of test 1 for O state, with zoom on peaks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.22 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 1 in the O state. .
54
3.23 MAC validation of the mode shape correlation between the FDD and TDPR tech-
nique for the O state in OMA testing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.24 SVD plot of test 1 for F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.25 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 1 in the F1 state.
59
3.26 MAC validation of the mode shape correlation between the FDD and TDPR tech-
nique for the F1 state in OMA testing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
3.27 SVD plot of test 1 for F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.28 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 1 in the F2 state.
62
3.29 MAC validation of the mode shape correlation between the FDD and TDPR tech-
nique for the F2 state in OMA testing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
3.30 SVD plot of test 1 for F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
3.31 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 1 in the F3 state.
66
3.32 MAC validation of the mode shape correlation between the FDD and TDPR tech-
nique for the F3 state in OMA testing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
3.33 Setup for the EMA test excited by an impact hammer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
3.34 EMA excitation results for hit 1-10 on hit location 1 in the O state. . . . . . . . . .
71
3.35 EMA excitation results for the first hit on hit location 1 in the O state.
. . . . . . .
71
3.36 SVD plot for all six hit locations for O state, with zoom on peaks.
. . . . . . . . .
73
3.37 SVD plot for all six hit locations for F1 state, with zoom on peaks. . . . . . . . . .
74
3.38 SVD plot for all six hit locations for F2 state, with zoom on peaks. . . . . . . . . .
75
3.39 SVD plot for all 6 hit locations for F3 state, with zoom on peaks. . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.1
FE Model of balcony structure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
4.2
Structural element cross-section (ANSYS, 2023d).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
4.3
Adjustable parameters facilitating a scaling possibility in the source code (ANSYS
APDL).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
4.4
Balcony mesh .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
4.5
Boundary conditions in FEM-model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
4.6
Setup for the static load.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
4.7
Von Mises Stress for a static three-point load in O state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
264
==PAGE:273==
4.8
Five mode shapes for the O state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
4.9
The reduction of the cross-section in the F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
4.10 Five mode shapes for the F1 state.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
4.11 The reduction of the cross-section in the F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
4.12 Five mode shapes for the F2 state.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
4.13 Steel beam in F3 cross-section. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
4.14 The reduction of the cross-section in the F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
4.15 Five mode shapes for the F3 state.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.1
The OMA FDD mode shape compared with the ANSYS mode shape of the 1st-5th
global mode shape for the undamaged balcony . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
5.2
Comparison mode 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
5.3
Comparison mode 2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
5.4
Comparison mode 3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
5.5
Comparison mode 4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
5.6
Comparison mode 5.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
A.1 Project plan part 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
A.2 Project plan part 2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
A.3 Project plan part 3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
A.4 Project plan part 4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
B.1
The setup of the scaled balcony.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
B.2
Scaled model after removing mold from concrete. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
B.3
Stinger attached to the wood beams and the bottom plate to induce random vibra-
tions in the OMA test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
C.1
Setup for density determination of wood beam 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
C.2
Densities of the wood beams. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
C.3
Setup for determination of density of wood beams.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
D.1 SVD plot of the FT spectral density matrix for response in all tests, wood beam 4. . 127
D.2 Response spectra for all Fast Fourier Transform Spectrum Analysis, wood beam 5.
131
E.1
Setup for density determination of steel beam. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
E.2
Densitiy of the steel beam 4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
F.1
Response spectra for all Fast Fourier Transform Spectrum Analysis, steel beam 4. . 139
G.1 The concrete casting process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
G.2 Resulting concrete specimens from casting.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
G.3 Resulting concrete specimens from casting.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
265
==PAGE:274==
H.1 Setup for density determination of concrete cylinder 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
H.2 Densities of the concrete cylinders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
H.3 Setup for determination of density of wood beams.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
I.1
Compression cycles according to DS/EN 12390-13 method A for specimen 2,
where the marked blue box represents the last load cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
I.2
Compression cycles according to DS/EN 12390-13 method A for specimen 3,
where the marked blue box represents the last load cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
I.3
Compression cycles according to DS/EN 12390-13 method A for specimen 4,
where the marked blue box represents the last load cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
I.4
Compression cycles according to DS/EN 12390-13 method A for specimen 5,
where the marked blue box represents the last load cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
I.5
Test results illustrated on a normally distributed probability paper.
. . . . . . . . . 154
J.1
Damage of half of the top flange in all steel beams.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
J.2
Damage the whole top flange in all steel beams. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
J.3
Damage width.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
K.1 SVD plot of test 2, for O state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
K.2 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 2 in the O state. . 161
K.3 SVD plot of test 3, for O state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
K.4 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 3 in the O state. . 162
K.5 SVD plot of test 4, for O state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
K.6 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 4 in the O state. . 164
K.7 SVD plot of test 5, for O state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
K.8 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 5 in the O state. . 166
L.1
SVD plot of test 2, for F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
L.2
Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 2 in the F1 state. 169
L.3
SVD plot of test 3, for F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
L.4
Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 3 in the F1 state. 170
L.5
SVD plot of test 4, for F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
L.6
Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 4 in the F1 state. 172
L.7
SVD plot of test 5, for F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
L.8
Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 5 in the F1 state. 174
M.1 SVD plot of test 2, for F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
M.2 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 2 in the F2 state. 177
M.3 SVD plot of test 3, for F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
M.4 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 3 in the F2 state. 178
M.5 SVD plot of test 4, for F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
266
==PAGE:275==
M.6 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 4 in the F2 state. 180
M.7 SVD plot of test 5, for F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
M.8 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 5 in the F2 state. 182
N.1 SVD plot of test 2, for F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
N.2 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 2 in the F3 state. 185
N.3 SVD plot of test 3, for F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 185
N.4 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 3 in the F3 state. 186
N.5 SVD plot of test 4, for F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187
N.6 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 4 in the F3 state. 188
N.7 SVD plot of test 5, for F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
N.8 Mode shapes conducted by the FDD and TDPR technique for test 5 in the F3 state. 190
O.1 The degradation for mode 1 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utiliz-
ing the FDD identification technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
O.2 The degradation for mode 2 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utiliz-
ing the FDD identification technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192
O.3 The degradation for mode 3 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utiliz-
ing the FDD identification technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192
O.4 The degradation for mode 4 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utiliz-
ing the FDD identification technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
O.5 The degradation for mode 5 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utiliz-
ing the FDD identification technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
O.6 The degradation for mode 1 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utiliz-
ing the TDPR identification technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 194
O.7 The degradation for mode 2 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utiliz-
ing the TDPR identification technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 194
O.8 The degradation for mode 3 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utiliz-
ing the TDPR identification technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
O.9 The degradation for mode 4 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utiliz-
ing the TDPR identification technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
O.10 The degradation for mode 5 from the original state to F3 state for OMA test utiliz-
ing the TDPR identification technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 196
P.1
Impact force, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the original state. . . . . . . . . . . . 197
P.2
Impact force, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the original state. . . . . . . . . . . . 198
P.3
Impact force, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the original state. . . . . . . . . . . . 198
P.4
Impact force, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the original state. . . . . . . . . . . . 199
P.5
Impact force, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the original state. . . . . . . . . . . . 199
P.6
Impact force, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the original state. . . . . . . . . . . . 200
P.7
Impact force, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the original state. . . . . . . . . . . . 200
267
==PAGE:276==
P.8
Impact force, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the original state. . . . . . . . . . . . 201
P.9
Impact force, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the original state. . . . . . . . . . . . 201
P.10 Impact force, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the original state. . . . . . . . . . . . 202
P.11 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
. . . 202
P.12 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
. . . 203
P.13 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
. . . 203
P.14 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
. . . 204
P.15 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
. . . 204
P.16 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
. . . 205
P.17 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
. . . 205
P.18 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
. . . 206
P.19 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the original state.
. . . 206
P.20 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the original state. . . . 207
P.21 FRF for all sensors for the original state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207
Q.1 Impact force, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 208
Q.2 Impact force, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
Q.3 Impact force, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
Q.4 Impact force, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210
Q.5 Impact force, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210
Q.6 Impact force, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
Q.7 Impact force, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
Q.8 Impact force, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 212
Q.9 Impact force, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 212
Q.10 Impact force, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 213
Q.11 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . 213
Q.12 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . 214
Q.13 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . 214
Q.14 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . 215
Q.15 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . 215
Q.16 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . 216
Q.17 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . 216
Q.18 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . 217
Q.19 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state. . . . . . . 217
Q.20 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the F1 state.
. . . . . 218
Q.21 FRF for all sensors for the F1 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
R.1
Impact force, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219
R.2
Impact force, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220
R.3
Impact force, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220
268
==PAGE:277==
R.4
Impact force, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
R.5
Impact force, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
R.6
Impact force, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 222
R.7
Impact force, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 222
R.8
Impact force, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223
R.9
Impact force, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223
R.10 Impact force, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
R.11 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . 224
R.12 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . 225
R.13 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . 225
R.14 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . 226
R.15 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . 226
R.16 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . 227
R.17 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . 227
R.18 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . 228
R.19 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state. . . . . . . 228
R.20 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the F2 state.
. . . . . 229
R.21 FRF for all sensors for the F2 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 229
S.1
Impact force, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 230
S.2
Impact force, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
S.3
Impact force, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
S.4
Impact force, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
S.5
Impact force, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
S.6
Impact force, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
S.7
Impact force, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
S.8
Impact force, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234
S.9
Impact force, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234
S.10 Impact force, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
S.11 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 1 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . 235
S.12 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 2 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . 236
S.13 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 3 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . 236
S.14 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 4 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . 237
S.15 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 5 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . 237
S.16 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 6 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . 238
S.17 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 7 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . 238
S.18 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 8 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . 239
S.19 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 9 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state. . . . . . . 239
S.20 Acceleration for all sensors, for hit 10 on hit location 1-6 for the F3 state.
. . . . . 240
S.21 FRF for all sensors for the F3 state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240
269
==PAGE:278==
T.1
The degradation for mode 1 from the original state to F3 state for the EMA test. . . 241
T.2
The degradation for mode 2 from the original state to the F3 state for the EMA test. 242
T.3
The degradation for mode 3 from the original state to F3 state for the EMA test. . . 242
T.4
The degradation for mode 4 from the original state to the F3 state for the EMA test. 243
T.5
The degradation for mode 5 from the original state to the F3 state for the EMA test. 243
U.1 The EMA tuned FE model of the 1st-5th global mode shape in O for the undamaged
balcony. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 245
U.2 The EMA tuned FE model of the 1st-5th global mode shape in F1 for the damaged
balcony. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
U.3 The EMA tuned FE model of the 1st-5th global mode shape in F2 for the damaged
balcony. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249
U.4 The EMA tuned FE model of the 1st-5th global mode shape in F3 for the damaged
balcony. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
V.1
ANSYS mode 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 252
V.2
ANSYS mode 2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 253
V.3
ANSYS mode 3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 253
V.4
ANSYS mode 4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 254
V.5
ANSYS mode 5.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 254
270
==PAGE:279==
List of Tables
3.1
The structural elements in the balcony setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Test program for wood E modulus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
The mean results from the two different beam tests, determining the E modulus. . .
33
3.4
Test program for steel E modulus.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5
Test program for compression of concrete specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.6
Program for degradation of steel beams. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.7
Change in the cross-sectional area, the moment of inertia, and the frequency due
to the several deterioration states of the steel beams. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.8
Test program for OMA test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.9
The O state results for the five modes in the five tests of the OMA test. . . . . . . .
56
3.10 The F1 state results for the five modes in the five tests of the OMA test.
. . . . . .
60
3.11 The F2 state results for the five modes in the five tests of the OMA test.
. . . . . .
63
3.12 The F3 state results for the five modes in the five tests of the OMA test.
. . . . . .
67
3.13 The four state’s results are facilitated by each identification technique for the five
modes of the OMA test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
3.14 Test program for EMA test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
3.15 The O state results for the five modes of the EMA test.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
3.16 The F1 state results for the five modes of the EMA test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
3.17 The F2 state results for the five modes of the EMA test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
3.18 The F3 state results for the five modes of the EMA test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
3.19 The four state’s results for the five modes of the EMA test. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.1
Element types used for structural elements in the FE Model.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.2
Experimental obtained material properties utilized in the numerical model. . . . . .
81
4.3
Supports in FE Model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
4.4
The load capacity for each of the four states and the total reduction of maximum
load facilitated by the numerical model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
271
==PAGE:280==
4.5
The O state results for the five global eigenfrequencies from the OMA-tuned FE
Model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
4.6
The F1 state results for the five global eigenfrequencies from the OMA-tuned FE
Model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
4.7
The F2 state results for the five global eigenfrequencies from the OMA-tuned FE
Model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
4.8
The F3 state results for the five global eigenfrequencies from the OMA-tuned FE
Model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
4.9
The four states results facilitated by each ANSYS model for the five modes. . . . .
96
5.1
Comparison of eigenfrequencies between EMA test and OMA (FDD) test. . . . . .
97
5.2
Comparison of eigenfrequencies between OMA test and ANSYSOMA
. . . . . . . 101
5.3
Comparison of eigenfrequencies between EMA test and ANSYSEMA . . . . . . . . 102
C.1
Test program for wood density. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
C.2
The dimensions, masses, and densities of the wood beams. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
D.1 The results from the 20 different tests, for the E modulus of the wood beam 4. . . . 131
D.2 The results from the 20 different tests, for the E modulus of the wood beam 5. . . . 132
E.1
Test program for steel density.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
E.2
The dimension, mass, and density of the steel beams. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
F.1
The results from the 20 different tests, for the E modulus of the steel beam 1.
. . . 140
G.1 Test program for the casting of concrete specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
G.2 Concrete prescription. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
G.3 Required concrete quantities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
H.1 Test program for concrete density.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
H.2 The dimensions, masses, and densities of the concrete cylinder. . . . . . . . . . . . 150
I.1
Stiffness results from the two statistical analyses.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
U.1 The O state results for the five global eigenfrequencies from the FE model test
which is tuned to EMA. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 244
U.2 The F1 state results for the five modes, of the ANSYS test which is tuned to EMA.
246
U.3 The F2 state results for the five modes, of the ANSYS test which is tuned to EMA.
248
U.4 The F3 state results for the five modes, of the ANSYS test which is tuned to EMA.
250
W.1 Comparison of first eigenfrequencies between all respective tests. . . . . . . . . . . 255
W.2 Comparison of second eigenfrequencies between all respective tests. . . . . . . . . 255
W.3 Comparison of third eigenfrequencies between all respective tests. . . . . . . . . . 255
W.4 Comparison of fourth eigenfrequencies between all respective tests.
. . . . . . . . 256
272
==PAGE:281==
W.5 Comparison of fifth eigenfrequencies between all respective tests.
. . . . . . . . . 256
273
==PAGE:282==
Bibliography
Altana (Jan. 2023). "Renovering af nedstyrtningstruede altaner". URL: https://altana.
as/blog/nedstyrtningstruede-altaner/.
Amador, Sandro (Mar. 2020a). "FDD_Ident_Example".
— (Mar. 2020b). "TDPR_Ident_Example".
AmesWeb
(Jan.
2023a).
"DENSITY
OF
STEEL".
URL:
https
:
/
/
amesweb
.
info
/
Materials
/
Density
_
of
_
Steel
.
aspx
?
fbclid
=
IwAR1sEEjhuvRqP8hJly4JA
_
R8itAAITKJ9HCqt515nfePRJf6Etm0BbVlKy8.
— (Jan. 2023b). "YOUNG’S MODULUS OF STEEL". URL: https : / / amesweb .
info / Materials / Youngs - Modulus - of - Steel . aspx ? fbclid =
IwAR378Q4lnX7ToUZOgjvizZ5YS8gFwqbPLgZjdnTeiCzw9hPFZYqTiz8DS3s.
ANSYS, Inc (Jan. 2023a). "BEAM188". URL: https://www.mm.bme.hu/~gyebro/
files/ans_help_v182/ans_elem/Hlp_E_BEAM188.html.
— (2023b). "COMBIN14". URL: https://www.mm.bme.hu/~gyebro/files/ans_
help_v182/ans_elem/Hlp_E_COMBIN14.html.
— (Jan. 2023c). "CP". URL: https://www.mm.bme.hu/~gyebro/files/ans_
help_v182/ans_cmd/Hlp_C_CP.html.
— (Jan. 2023d). "SECDATA". URL: https://www.mm.bme.hu/~gyebro/files/
ans_help_v182/ans_cmd/Hlp_C_SECDATA.html.
274
==PAGE:283==
ANSYS, Inc (Jan. 2023e). "SHELL181". URL: https://www.mm.bme.hu/~gyebro/
files/ans_help_v182/ans_elem/Hlp_E_SHELL181.html.
Bentsen, Julie Greve (2020). "Unge fra altanulykke: Vi havde joket med, at det ikke var den
mest stabile altan". URL: https : / / www . tvsyd . dk / kolding / unge - fra -
altanulykke - vi - havde - joket - med - det - ikke - var - den - mest -
stabile-altan.
Brandt A. (2010). "Noise and Vibration Analysis". First Edition. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Brincker, Rune. and Carlos. Ventura (2015). "Introduction to operational modal analysis". John
Willey. ISBN: 9781119963158.
Brincker R. (May 2012). "OMAtoolsA1_5".
— (2019). “"Random Vibrations Course"”. In.
Campione, G. and F. Cannella (Jan. 2020). “Risk of failure in existing RC balcony and strength
verification under degradation phenomena”. In: Engineering Failure Analysis 109. ISSN:
13506307. DOI: 10.1016/j.engfailanal.2019.104248.
Dansk Standard (2021). "Prøvning af hærdnet beton – Del 13: Bestemmelse af elasticitetsmodul
(sekantmodul) under trykpåvirkning". URL: www.ds.dk.
Engineering ToolBox (Jan. 2023a). "Concrete Properties". URL: https : / / www .
engineeringtoolbox.com/concrete-properties-d_1223.html.
— (Jan. 2023b). "Wood, Panel and Structural Timber Products - Mechanical Properties".
URL: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/timber- mechanical-
properties-d_1789.html.
Ewins D. David (2000). "Modal Testing theory, practice and application". Second. Hereford-
shire: Research Studies Press LTD. ISBN: 0863802184.
Færch, Emil (2016). "Politi: Derfor styrtede altan med seks unge ned". URL: https://
nyheder.tv2.dk/samfund/2016-08-02-politi-derfor-styrtede-
altan-med-seks-unge-ned.
Koss H. H & Christian Berggreen (2020). “"DTU Course 11331 Exercise Instructions & Com-
pendium"”. In.
Krenk, Steen (2018). "Dynamics of Structures". Second.
275
==PAGE:284==
Lacayo, Robert et al. (Jan. 2019). “"Nonlinear modeling of structures with bolted joints: A
comparison of two approaches based on a time-domain and frequency-domain solver"”.
In: Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 114, pp. 413–438. ISSN: 10961216. DOI:
10.1016/j.ymssp.2018.05.033.
Larsen, H.J. (1971). "Materialer og forbindelsesmidler til trækonstruktioner". Teknisk forlag.
ISBN: 9788757103922.
Lillevang, Liv Bjerg (2016). "Gamle altaner med skjulte fejl risikerer at kollapse under ejerne".
URL: https://ing.dk/artikel/gamle-altaner-med-skjulte-fejl-
risikerer-at-kollapse-under-ejerne-187644.
Nadkarni, Ishan et al. (2020). “Experimental modal parameter identification and validation of
cantilever beam”. In: Elsevier.
Nielsen, Christian, Linda Petersen, and Thea Petersen (2020a). "ER MIN ALTAN SIKKER?".
Teknologisk Institut and Grundejernes Investeringsforening.
— (2020b). "SKAL I HAVE NY ALTAN?". Teknologisk Institut and Grundejernes Investerings-
forening.
Nuno M. M. Maia and Júlio M. M. Silva (1998). "Theoretical and Experimental Modal Anal-
ysis". Hertfordshire: Research Studies Press LTD. ISBN: 0863802087.
Poulsen W. H (June 2011). "Betons_Elasticitetsmodul_og_Trykstyrke". Tech. rep.
Saleh, Yunus (2020). "Experimental investigation of traditional balcony structures". Tech. rep.
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark: Technical University of Denmark.
Sharma, Jai Kumar (2019). “Theoretical and experimental modal analysis of beam”. In: Lecture
Notes in Electrical Engineering. Vol. 478. Springer Verlag, pp. 177–186. DOI: 10.1007/
978-981-13-1642-5{\_}16.
Teknologisk Institut (Dec. 2022). "Skader på altaner er ikke altid synlige". URL: https:
//via.ritzau.dk/pressemeddelelse/skader-pa-altaner-er-ikke-
altid-synlige?publisherId=1732641&releaseId=13667331.
Thomsen, Jon Juel (2021). "Vibrations and Stability". Third. ISBN: 978-3-030-68045-9.
Vitten, Kasper and Martin Jørgensen (2021). "Experimental and Numerical Investigation of
Structural Deterioration". Tech. rep. Kgs Lyngby: Technical University of Denmark.
276
==PAGE:285==
Walunj Prashant, S., V. N. Chougule, and Anirban C. Mitra (2015). “Investigation on Modal
Parameters of Rectangular Cantilever Beam Using Experimental Modal Analysis”. In: Ma-
terials Today: Proceedings 2.4-5, pp. 2121–2130. ISSN: 22147853. DOI: 10.1016/j.
matpr.2015.07.214.
Zimmerman, Kristian (2019). "Dynamics of Civil Structures, Volume 2". Ed. by Pakzad
Shamim. The Society for Experimental Mechanics. ISBN: 978-3-319-74421-6. URL:
http://www.springer.com/series/8922.
277
