==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
Danish titel: 	
Integrering af leg i det Københavnske bymiljø
Major: 	 	
Design and Innovation (Msc)
	
	
Department of Technology, Management and Economics 
	
	
The Technical University of Denmark
Supervision: 	
Michael Deininger and Roberto Flore
Partner: 	
Gehl Architects ApS 
Project period: 	5th of September 2022 - 5th of Febuary 2023
Pages: 	 	
114 
Emilie Helligesøe Haahr 
s175384
	
Signature
Sofie Stewart-Vaz Wallin
s173884
	
 
Signature
I
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis examines the integration of play into the urban environment and its impact on livability in the 
city of Copenhagen, particularly for children. Several strategies for designing play spaces in cities, includ­
ing traditional playgrounds, public parks and squares, and city interiors, were evaluated for their impact on 
social interaction, child development, and community engagement.
In partnership with Gehl Architects, human behavior in the city was observed using their tools and met­
hods. The study also delves into the challenges of incorporating the proposed solution, the Interactive Bo­
ard, into densely populated areas such as limited space, safety, and conflicting public space use. Through a 
bottom-up approach, the research analyses how to successfully design a solution that promotes play and 
social interaction among different age groups and communities, making it inclusive and accessible.
The conclusion highlights the importance of play in urban environments and suggests three design pro­
posals for the Interactive Board, as a means of enhancing the quality of life for its inhabitants. The solution 
aims to promote play by intervening on the curbside to help shape the play culture in the urban environ­
ment. 
II
==PAGE:4==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Management at the Technical University of Denmark to 
fulfill the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering in Design & Innovation. The proje­
ct accounts for 30 ECTS credits with guidance from the supervisor, Michael Deininger, and co-supervisor, 
Roberto Flore. 
Acknowledgement 
A special note of gratitude and appreciation to both of our supervisors Michael Deininger - Associate Pro­
fessor at the Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark; and 
Roberto Flore - Founder and head of DTU Skylab FoodLab;  for your guidance throughout the project. Thank 
you for challenging us and contributing with your expertise and knowledge to help us reach our goal with 
this project.  
A big thank you to Gehl Architects, especially Olivia Flynn - Urban Designer; and Nina Cecilie Højholdt - Inte­
raction Designer & Developer; for your guidance throughout the project. Thank you for challenging us and 
contributing with your expertise and knowledge to help us reach our goal with this project.   
Lastly, a to the pedagogues from Fritids- Junior- og Ungdomsklubben Filippa, thank, for the time spent and 
for providing useful knowledge on the subject of children. To all the kind children in 4.A from Skolen ved 
Søerne, a thank you for participating with great engagement in all the activities.
III
Reading manual
The report is divided into 12 chapters and ends with the appendix.
01 Introduction
An overview of the problem statement, research question, and motivation. 
02 Literature Study
Detailing the research and analysis of existing literature and studies previously conducted on the topic of the 
project.
03 Methodology
Describes the methods used to conduct research and data analysis, including research methods, data collecti­
on methods, and data analysis techniques.
04 Explorative User Study
Presents the results of the user study conducted to understand the needs and requirements of the target group.
05 Project Scope
Definition of the scope of the project, the intervention approach, and the development arena.
06 Project Define
Summarization of the literature and user study, using the information to define the problem, and to whom, that 
the project is trying to solve.
==PAGE:5==
07 Ideation and Concept Development
Describes the process of idea generation and development of concepts.
08 Concept Evaluation
Evaluation of the concepts developed in the previous chapter, using criteria such as feasibility and play oppor­
tunities.
09 Prototype Development
Describes the process of developing prototypes of the final solution, including the design, development, and 
testing.
10 Final Solution
Describes the final solution proposals, including detailing of technical and mechanical aspects of the solution.
11 Implementation Plan
A plan for the placement of the three proposals of the final solution, an assessment of potential barriers, and 
recommendations for future work.
12 Outro
Summarization and discussion of the key findings and outcome of the project and reflection of the process.
Throughout the report, important findings are framed and marked with a magnifying glass. In addition, 
the report contains an appendix, which is structured using different icons that represent what the appen­
dix is related to. The icons are as follows: 
Glossary
CPC: The Children’s Play Council
HCD: Human-Centered Design 
MVP: Minimal Viable Product
UCD: User-Centered Design 
UD: Universal Design
UN CRC: United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
Methods & 
tools
Co-creation
Observations
Interviews
Figures
Prototypes
Preface
IV
The report is set up as two-sided, it is recommended to view it as such if read digitally. 
==PAGE:6==
Table of
Contents
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
1 Introduction
1.1 Motivation
1.2 Gehl - Project Partner
1.3 Problem Statement
1.4 Research Question
1.5 Definitions
01
01
02
03
03
2 Literature Study
2.1 Play
2.2 Child Development
2.3 Designing Cities for People 
06
09
13
3 Methodology
3.1 Double Diamond
3.2 Interview
3.3 Observations
3.4 User Involvement
24
25
26
27
5 Project scope
5.1 Project Scope
5.2 Problem Overview
5.3 Development Arena
5.4 Conflicts
48
50
52
53
6 Define
6.1 Persona
6.2 Product Requirement
6.3 Product placement
56
58
61
9 Prototype Development
9.1 Physical Prototype
9.2 Digital Prototype
9.3 Alternative Designs
80
85
88
7 Concept Development
7.1 Results from Co-creation
7.2 Ideation Process
7.3 Concept Development
64
65
67
8 Concept Evaluation
8.1 Decision matrix
8.2 Iterations
8.3 Three Selected Concepts
8.4 Minimum Viable Product Testing
8.5 Selected Concept 
70
72
72
74
77
4 Explorative User Studies
4.1 Stakeholders
4.2 Behavioral Mapping
4.3 User Study through Co-creation
31
36
41
V
10 Final Solution 
10.1 Function
10.2 The Design
10.3 Digital Complexity 
10.4 Expected Outcome
92
93
95
98
==PAGE:7==
Table of Contents
11 Implementation 
11.1 Implementation plan
11.2 Potential Barriers
11.3 Future Work  
101
103
104
12 Outro
12.1 Discussion
11.2 Conclusion
11.3 Reflection
108
111
112
VI
Appendices
Appendix 01 Methods and Tools
Appendix 02 Figures
Appendix 03 Interviews
Appendix 04 Observations
Appendix 05 Co-creation Workshop
Appendix 06 Prototyping
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
01
01
INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:10==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
01
Introduction
01
1.1 Motivation
The growth in the global population and the resultant concentration of people in urban areas has led to an 
increased number of children being raised in urban environments. Based on current trends, approximately 
70 percent of the global population will live in urban areas, and a majority of these citizens will be under 
the age of 18 years old (Weedy, 2020). As a result of the rapid growth, the children’s lives, health, and future 
will be determined by urban development in the coming decades. It is crucial to understand the needs and 
demands of the new inhabitants, the children, to be prepared to adapt to them. 
The need that this project emphasizes is children’s play and the developmental gains that come from 
playing in the city. Play is an important aspect of children’s development, both in the areas of motor skills, 
cognitive learning, and social understanding. Through play, it is possible to create a gathering point for 
social acquaintances, as play can help break down the barriers between different groups of people across 
identity, race, language barriers, social class, and whatever else can create division between people (Scar-
lett et al., 2005). The increased social engagement can help create connection, well-being, and cohesion 
within a local community (Innocent & Stevens, 2021).
The aim of the project is to bring play out of the playground to encourage more momentarily, playful 
interactions for children in the urban environment. Thus, hoping to encourage exploration and social en-
counters and to break the barriers that create division within the community. The integration of play is to 
be used as a means of creating an attachment and belonging to the city for the children. Hopefully, the 
children’s participation in and interaction with the city help foster a change in the general play culture, in-
spiring communities to gather in the hopes of increasing the general playfulness of the city and, as a direct 
consequence increasing feelings of safety and well-being in an ever-expanding city.
1.2 Gehl - Project Partner 
Over the last several years, Gehl Architects has had an increased focus on children-centered urban plan-
ning and development, leading to growing expertise in designing cities that supports children (Gehl Archi-
tects, n.d.). As the project partner, Gehl Architects presented the challenge of extending play beyond the 
playground.
Gehl Architects is an urban research and -design company offering expertise and consultancy in city plan-
ning, landscape architecture, and urban design with a people-focused approach (Gehl Architects, 2019). 
The company is committed to increasing people’s quality of life through the design of the urban environ-
ment. The co-founder of the company, Jan Gehl, is an advocate for the pacification of trafficked urban spa-
ces and their transformation into pedestrian environments (Gehl, 1996). This has had a significant influence 
on the perspective of the project and how it has been approached. 
Gehl Architects has adapted the tools used to collect data on public life to better understand how the 
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Problem Statement 
The problem statement has been formulated based on the research and knowledge collected throughout 
the project. It has gone through multiple iterations as more insights were gathered and the underlying 
problems were revealed. The final problem statement being: The urban environment is not designed 
for children to play on their own terms.
The change in play culture means that play is currently being controlled by multiple factors, such as city- 
planning and development and parental involvement and as a consequence, it ends up being restricted 
to playgrounds.
Play is an essential part of children’s development, but it is not seen as competency-building, why it is not 
being prioritized by different stakeholders (Churchman, 2003). This is despite play being directly linked to 
the progression of motor, cognitive, and social development in children. 
city is experienced through the lens of children from the age of zero to five (Bernard van Leer Foundation, 
2018). Gehl has been a part of several projects and initiatives that focus on the children-centered expe-
rience in urban planning, which has generated a new understanding and inspired cities to turn public 
spaces into more engaging PLAYces, whether it being a sidewalk, a bus stop, or a pocket park. This has led 
to initiatives such as painted street games, interactive hangout installations, and painted staircases (Gehl 
Architects, n.d.).
Image 1: Kaboom and Gehl, Happy Lane, San Francisco. Play Everywhere Playbook. (Kaboom, n.d.). 
Introduction
02
==PAGE:12==
1.5 Definitions
This section briefly defines frequently used terms throughout the report. It is important that the reader 
become familiar with the definitions to have the best conditions for understanding the report, as the terms 
may vary in other contexts. The definitions are based on the discovery made in the research of the project, 
otherwise, the source is cited.
03
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
1.4 Research Question
The research question has been developed to address the concerns outlined in the problem statement. 
Based on the knowledge gained throughout the project, the initial challenge posed was: How to imple-
menent play into the city outside playgrounds. This thesis, focusing on design and concept development, 
addresses the following question:
	
How can we encourage momentarily playful interactions for children between the age 	 	
	
of seven to ten on the curbside in the urban environment of Copenhagen?
This includes the following underlying question to research: 
•	How do we encourage children to play for 5-10 minutes on their daily commute?
•	How can we create a solution that accommodates others outside the target group?
•	How can we implement the solution homogeneously into the urban space?
•	
Play: Play is an engagement in an activity for enjoyment and recreation initiated by the child. 
The motivation for engagement is intrinsic behavior without an intention of practical purpose. 
•	
Momentarily play: Momentarily play is a shorter play experience that lasts between five and ten 
minutes. 
•	
Playground: A playground is a delimited area designed to provide children with a safe environ-
ment for physical play. The play area and the equipment, such as swingset, slide, etc., may vary 
from the different playgrounds. The playground does not cover other types of play spaces, 
such as sports facilities or non-detective play areas where play occurs, e.g. Den Sorte Plads.  
•	
Game principles: Game principles comprise of the engagement and challenges set and required 
of the player. The principles are expressed differently depending on the learning environments, 
including strategies, memory, sequence recognition, repetition, problem-solving, reacting to 
stimuli, etc.  
•	
Copenhagen: Copenhagen is delimited to the metropolitan area. This includes the city center, 
and the boroughs; Nørrebro, Østerbro, and Vesterbro. 
 
==PAGE:13==
Introduction
04
•	
Curbside and -zone: Curbside is the side of a street limited to pedestrians. The curbside can have 
different sizes and appearances through various pavement materials. The curbside zone is the 
area where the buildings meet the city (København Kommune, 2018). 
•	
Community: A community is a social group living in a common territory having one or more 
additional common ties. With the common territory being a geographically defined neigh-
borhood, and common ties being social relationships (Hillery, 1982). The feeling of community 
is the subjective measure of positive feelings that inhabitants have for each other and their 
community. 
•	
Children: Children are defined as human beings under the age of 18 years old. However, the 
main focus of this report is the average, able-bodied children between the ages of 7-10 living 
in the metropolitan area of Copenhagen. 
•	
Pedagogue:  A pedagogue is a person who is educated to take care of and support children’s 
formation and development in different age groups in their daily appearance in various institu-
tions. The word is used as the direct translation of the danish pædagogue, instead of the English 
equivalent educator.
Image 2: Den Storte Plads at Nørrebro.
==PAGE:14==
02
 LITERATURE STUDY
==PAGE:15==
02
Literature Study
The aim of this chapter is to provide an understanding of play and its effect on children’s development. 
Only by understanding play, can we begin to understand how to shape better city environments for chil-
dren. Several design principles and approaches have been examined to apply relevant terminology and 
methods to the design process. 
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
2.1 Play
From early childhood, children are seen engaging in play regardless of their gender, nationality, culture, or 
economic status (Unicef, 2018), which makes play universal. The United Nations Convention on the Rights 
of the Child (UN CRC) acknowledges play as a fundamental human right. It is explicitly stated in article 31 
(UN Committee, 2013): 
	
“State Parties recognize the right of the child to rest and leisure, to engage in play and recreational                  	
	
activities appropriate to the age of the child and to participate freely in cultural life and the arts.” 
This statement is backed up by the president of the National Institute for Play, Dr. Stuart Brown, who states, 
”play is as fundamental as any other aspect of life, including sleep and dreams” (Henig, 2008).
In the investigation of the literature, it became clear that experts from different fields of study have sepa-
rate definitions of play, making it difficult to define. This is primarily because the definitions are based on 
subjective or emotional criteria such as ’fun’, which can be difficult to apply in theory, as it is based on pre-
sumption, which makes it a non-adaptive value. However, it has been possible to identify a general agree-
ment on the key characteristics of play based on Lester and Russell’s (2010) examination, which is build on 
contemporary research. First, play brings feelings of enjoyment, motivation, and pleasure. Secondly, the 
act of play is done without the intention of a valuable output but rather for the joy and entertainment of 
the action. Lastly, play is more than enjoyment, as it is essential to children’s well-being and development 
(Lester & Russell, 2010; Burghardt, 2005).
Furthermore, UN Committee (2013) defines play as “any behaviour, activity or process initiated, controlled 
and structured by children themselves.”  This is, however, not equal to adults not engaging in play. Actually, 
adults also benefit from the positive impact play brings (Bentway, 2021).
Definition of Play
Based on the research and literature on the topic, we define play in this report as engagement in an 
activity for enjoyment and recreation initiated by the child. The motivation for engagement is intrinsic 
behaviour without an intention of practical purpose. Play is a fundamental and important aspect of 
childhood enjoyment and a crucial part of children’s development.
06
==PAGE:16==
Vertigo play:
Vertigo play is the perception that you 
or your surroundings are spinning or 
moving (Merriam-Webster, n.d.). Ver-
tigo play gives a thrill and can create 
an adrenaline rush from the body’s perception 
of potential danger. It is a sensation that can be 
obtained through physical, rough-and-tumble 
play, with the challenge of maintaining equi-
librium. Examples of vertigo play throughout a li-
fetime are being thrown in the air as a baby, being 
swung around, or climbing a tree.
Challenge play:
A challenge is stimulating a task or 
problem, a thing to overcome, which 
suggests the result of improvement 
of oneself after a struggle (Merri-
am-Webster, n.d.). This type of play often in-
volves rules, with the goal being overcoming 
the challenge rather than winning or losing. 
Examples of challenge play are participating in a 
football match or playing a game of solitaire with 
cards.
Construction play:
Constructing is the act of combining, 
arranging, or using various elements 
to create something different (Merri-
am-Webster, n.d.). This type of play 
is considered to be a creative form of play that 
often involves objects. Examples of construction 
play are building a tower out of bricks or using pen 
and paper to create a drawing.
Simulation play:
Simulation can be described as the 
act of pretend or imitation (Merri-
am-Webster, n.d.). Simulation play 
involves socio-dramatic, symbolic, or 
imaginative play. It is often seen with a child 
pretending to be a different character in an ima-
ginative situation. An example is children playing 
house, where they imagine themselves as parents, 
babies, dogs, etc.
2.1.1 Type of Play
Play manifests itself in many ways (Lester & Russell, 2010), with various definitions and dissections of nume-
rous types of play. One of the more common definitions is by Bob Hughes (1996), who divides play into 
15 categories (Appendix 01.3). This division is used, among others, by professional organizations such as 
The Children’s Play Council (CPC) to understand the benefits children obtain from different types of play 
(Children’s Play Council, 2000). 
It can be difficult to identify one type of play from another, as children do not distinguish between them 
(Loudoun, Boyle, & Lund, 2022). A child can build with bricks, constructive play, while pretending it is an 
imagined city they are part of, simulation play, creating a smooth transition between the different types. 
Therefore, in this project, the different types of play are perceived as a broader spectrum of activities that 
can be combined crosswise. The spectrum is divided into four main types of play based on Bonham’s disse-
ction (Bonham, 2014), which embrace multiple different play styles. The activities range from highly active 
physical play to static fantasizing. The four types of play are; vertigo-, challenge-, simulation- and construc-
tion play. 
07
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
Figure 1 - Play spectrum.
==PAGE:17==
Literature Study
The insufficient amount of time children spend playing freely is cited by the UN CRC as of the most concer-
ning emerging trends relating to play (UN Committee, 2013). The societal tendency to focus on educational 
demands and organized competitive recreation, activities imposed by adults, results in limiting the ability 
of many children to realize the rights defined in article 31. The imposed activities reduce the time available 
to self-directed activities and sometimes force or pressure the children into participation, not of their own 
choosing. This is concerning, given that the absence of time in which children are free of demands and 
activities that are not determined or controlled by adults can be damaging to their well-being and devel-
opment (UN Committee, 2013). Furthermore, the children’s ability to engage in play becomes limited and 
negatively affected when structured by adults (Skår & Krogh, 2009). 
Play being universal is demonstrated by the fact that play patterns are similar across cultures and nations, 
despite possible disparities in play styles, rules, and equipment used (Castella, 2018). The current generati-
on of children engages in the same kinds of play as the ones prior, but the play is usually disguised in new 
styles (Appendix 03.7). LEGO (2018), discovered through a cross-cultural survey that the current generati-
on’s preference for play differed from their parents. Where the parents preferred physical play, the current 
generation had a preference for digital play. This difference might be a symptom of the general societal 
development and technological advancement between the generations (Lego, 2018). Thus it can be argu-
ed, that play has been significantly impacted by digital development. However, physical play in the role of 
sports activities was still ranked as the second most preferred type of play among the current generation 
of children (Lego, 2018). 
Figure 2 - Children’s preferred play activities Denmark (Lego, 2018).
08
Quite games: 
board games, puzzles and play that 
involves building things
Sport activities: 
bike rides, football, dancing and 
swimming
Digitial play: 
all forms of screen time including 
watching the TV, films or YouTube 
videos, browsing the internet, play-
ing online games or apps, playing 
computer games or taking pictures.
==PAGE:18==
Motor abilities:
Motor skills are the function that uses muscle movements to carry out specified activities. These 
activities involve being able to bike, run or walk. Motor skills are achieved by cooperating with the 
body’s nervous system, muscles, and brain. The ages of three to five are considered critical for chil-
dren’s development of motor skills (Castella, 2018; Tilley, Anning & Welles, 2002). There are two types 
of major motor skills; gross and fine motor skills. 
Gross motor skills require the use of large muscle groups, and these allow for the performance of 
activities such as walking, balancing, and crawling. These are the first of the two to be developed 
in the child. Fine motor skills are the use of smaller muscle groups, such as fingers and toes. They 
are developed to perform tasks that require more precision, such as tying a shoelace or brushing 
one’s teeth (Stallings, 1973).
2.2 Child Development
Child development refers to the sequence of physical, cognitive, and emotional changes that happens 
in a child from birth until the conclusion of adolescence. Childhood can be divided into three stages of 
life; early childhood, middle childhood, and late childhood (National Research Council, 1984). Each of the 
phases has a different degree of development in motor, cognitive, and social-emotional development. The 
age span of the phases varies throughout different studies as they are based on the children’s level of skill 
development.
Middle childhood spans the ages 6-12 and is universally marked as a distinct period between major devel-
opmental transition points (National Research Council, 1984). Among other reasons, for the development 
of the child’s cognitive and social-emotional skills, as they encounter a new educational system and social 
connections (Castella, 2018).
Sigmund Freud described this stage as the latency stage and argued that sexual impulses are repressed 
during this stage. He believed that the repressed sexual energy instead is channeled into industrious, 
asexual activities such as learning, hobbies, and social relationships. Consequently, making this the stage 
where healthy social- and communication skills are developed (Mannoni, 2015). Jean Piaget’s cognitive 
development theory also argues for the importance of this period, given that the child begins to develop 
a more logical and systematic understanding of the world (Wadsworth, 1996).
The child’s skills are divided into the three following categories; motor-, cognitive and social-emotional 
skills.
09
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:19==
Literature Study
Cognitive abilities:
Studies have found evidence suggesting that play helps foster and build cognitive processes and 
assist learning. Researchers claim that play allows children to interact with the environment to 
construct their own knowledge of the world and adapt to it by creating new learning experiences 
(Gleave & Hamilton, 2012).  
Through play, children learn how to handle difficult situations and recover from or adapt to them, 
which helps them to develop strategies for reacting to the equivalent real situations (Lester & Rus-
sell, 2008). Play can therefore help to create the framework for children to better prepare them for 
the real world. Because of the difficulty of measuring cognitive learning and therefore the cogniti-
ve influence that play can have, the studies on the subject are complex and not entirely consistent.
Social-Emotional abilities:
Social-emotional abilities are fostered throughout childhood and encompass the child’s capacity 
for understanding, experiencing, and managing their emotions, which then enables them to form 
relationships with others. A study done by Gleave and Hamilton (2012) found that the primary 
motive of children’s engagement in physical play is for social and enjoyment reasons. Play has the 
power to energize a wide audience, prompt connections, and foster relationships between people 
of different ages and abilities (Bentway, 2021). 
Additionally, play can remove cultural barriers and other boundaries helping children understand 
others who differs from themselves (Gleave & Hamilton, 2012). Friendships are important for sup-
porting mental health, social- and psychological development in children (Guroglu et al., 2008). 
Children who are able to play freely with their peers, learn about social dynamics and develop so-
cial skills that help them with cooperating, negotiating, sharing, and resolving conflicts (Ginsburg, 
2007). 
10
==PAGE:20==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
11
Distress, disgust 
& smile
Unresponsive to 
outside stimulation
Inborn reﬂexes
Open to simulation,  
showing interest & curiousity
Beginning of sensory information coordination
Showing anticipation & disappointment
Show interest in surroundings. R
Sits without 
Stands whil
Increase s
Begins pr
Walks up and down steps
18 mo
19 mo
20 mo
21 mo
22 mo
Well-coordinated manipulation of the objects
2.5 y/o
3 y/o
2 y/o
2 y/o
Make decisions based on prior experiences
10 y/o
Beginning of logical thinking
Seperation anxiety and adapt through simulation play
18 mo
Follows simple two-step instructions
Increasingly ability to handle smallere objects with hands
Beginning of conversation
8 y/o
9 y/o
Begins logical thinking 
Begins to understand others can have a different perception
Reciprocal awareness
11 y/o
11 y/o
Understand the course and effect relation, able to distinguishing reality from fantasy
7 y/o
Can understand several different point of views
Abstract thinkin
Better sense of responsib
Development of hand-ey
Birth
1 mo
2 mo
3 mo
4 mo
5 mo
23 mo
8 y o
9 o
10 y o
Easily inﬂuenced by peers. Wants to ﬁt in with peer group rules. Strong group identity
10 y/o
Increased empathy and ability to interact with others 
Show signs of more responsible behaviour; takes better care of possessions
Ability to engage in competition
7 y/o
9 y/o
Understanding their own self
Understands game strategy, competition, and rules 
7 y/o
Figure 3 - The stages of the childs development* (Castella, 2018; Tilley, Anning, & Welles, 2002)
*The graph is based on information from studies done in the US in the 1990s, why it is not representative of the whole world population.
==PAGE:21==
Repeats enjoyable or interesting behaviors.
support
e holding on
Interacts with others & shows emotions like joy, fear, & anger
Stands alone
10 mo
Walk
11 mo
seperation from parent
roblem solving through trial and error
16 mo
15 mo
14 mo
13 mo
12 mo
17 mo
3.5 y/o
4 y/o
5 y/o
6 y/o
Thinks their view is the only possibility
6 mo
Improved coordination
Reﬁned ﬁne 
motor skills
5 y/o
Difﬁculties following rules
5 y/o
6 y/o
7 y/o
Balancing
12 y/o
13 y/o
ng
Begins to understand non-verbal ques
14 y/o
bility
ye coordination
6 mo
7 mo
8 mo
9 mo
10 mo
Social developement and emotions expressions 
11 mo
Cognitive development
Motor development
Literature Study
12
==PAGE:22==
2.2.1 Play Deprivation in Child Development
Considering the connection between play and the child’s development, it is crucial to understand the high-
cost consequences of neglecting play throughout childhood (Pellis & Pellis, 2006; Siviy et al., 2003; Bateson, 
2005). The importance of play is present in how children’s overall physical and/or mental well-being is eva-
luated, where the absence of play is used as a diagnostic indicator, with a lack of interest in playing consi-
dered a great concern (Loizillon et al., 2017). This is a contradiction to the general association of play being 
relegated as non-essential or an elective luxury (Brown, 2014).
Through multiple studies, Brown (2014) found that the deprivation of play, especially during the first 10 years 
of childhood, was linked to major emotional dysregulations, such as depression, a tendency for non-adap-
tability, diminished impulse control, less self-regulation, diminished aggression management, shallowness, 
and fragility in relation to other people. This was compared to subjects with play-sufficient backgrounds, 
who tended to have better strategies and adaptability for managing stressful situations (Brown, 2014). 
In experiments carried out on rats, the rat pups that were subjected to deprivation of rough play had dif-
ficulties in becoming functional adult rats (Pellis & Pellis 2013). The comparison between human and rat 
development through play is too far to bridge scientifically. However, as Brown (2014) also mentions, the 
connection between the social inability to differentiate appropriate from inappropriate aggression, is fasci-
nating.  
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
13
2.3 Designing Cities for People
Designing cities for people is a human-oriented approach that prioritizes the needs of the citizens throug-
hout the planning and development, rather than concentrating on the buildings and the traffic (Frisk, 2013). 
Planning and developing from the perspective of the everyday citizen, considering the life and the space in 
between the buildings, enables the ability to provide the best physical framework for a livable environment 
(Frisk, 2013).
Historically temples and monuments were designed to impress, suggesting that the drive for the urban 
environment to favor the public is not entirely new (Bonham, 2014). One of the modern pioneers in desig-
ning cities for people is the architect and urban planner, Jan Gehl, and critic of suburban development 
Jane Jacobs. Both emphasize that the design of the cities impacts citizens’ actions (Bonham, 2014), why it is 
important to develop cities on a human scale. Gehl (2010) argues that the issues of gathering or dispersing 
people can be perceived in a broader planning context from a larger scale; the city and regional plans, on 
a medium scale; the neighborhood and urban plans, and on a small scale; where people move. Especially, 
the small scale is interesting, with the importance the sidewalks have in a neighborhood in relation to the 
safety, contact, and assimilation of children. Sidewalks, where people move, sit and play, are all involved in 
creating a viable and safe neighborhood (Jacobs, 1961). 
	
”A good city is like a good party – you stay for longer than you plan” (Gehl, 2010).
One of the architectural theories that support the development of attractive urban space for people, is
==PAGE:23==
Literature Study
14
12 Urban Quality Criteria (Appendix 01.1), which originates from 3 central values: Protection, Comfort, and 
Enjoyment identified by Gehl (2010). The criterion, Opportunities for Play and Exercise, which emphasizes 
”physical activity, exercise, play, and street entertainment by day and night in summer and winter”, is particularly 
relevant for this project.
The general activities in the city fall into three main categories; necessary-, optional-, and social activities, 
see figure 4 (Gehl, 2010). The necessary activities are the movement from A to B in everyday life, for instance, 
to and from school, the grocery shop, etc., in a direct route. Optional activities occur when there is a desire 
to participate, and a time and a place favorable to participating, e.g. sitting on a bench to rest or observe 
others. Social activities emerge in interaction and conversations with others, e.g. children playing and pe-
ople meeting for socializing (Gehl, 2010). 
Optional- and social activities are conditioned by the physical setting of the space (Gehl, 1996). Bonham 
(2014) further relates the aesthetics of the urban space to the amount of optional- and social activities ta-
king place. 
Figure 4 - Three types of activities (Gehl 2010).
By creating the conditions for optional- and social activities to occur, the probability of a more livable en-
vironment will be greater, as these types of activities often result in an extended stay (Gehl, 2010). The urban 
environment should be designed for the speed of walking rather than at the speed of riding vehicles (Gehl, 
2010). When people walk, it is uncomplicated to stop, change direction, manoeuvre, or switch to different 
activities, such as standing, sitting, running, or playing, which benefits life in the city (Gehl, 2010). The urban 
environment becomes more interesting with the lingering of people, as it leads to the attraction of busines-
ses and activities in the streets, which in turn attracts more people, creating a virtuous cycle (Bonham, 2014).
==PAGE:24==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
15
2.3.1 Play in the City
Everyday life in public spaces offers opportunities for numerous different types of activities. This is impor-
tant, especially for children, as the opportunity for play and recreation is essential (UN Committee, 2013). In 
the planning and development of urban spaces, children’s needs are often ignored in broad development 
policies, strategies, and practices, as they do not recognize the significance of play for child development 
(Churchman, 2003). Furthermore, the quality of the environment influences children’s ability to play (Lester 
& Russell, 2010).
The increase in the commercialization of public spaces has resulted in children becoming more excluded 
(UN Committee, 2013). Children’s play has become increasingly limited to playgrounds, compared to earlier 
generations recalling the streets and sidewalks as the locations where most of their play occurred (Karsten, 
2006). Playgrounds function as a great meeting spot for children, initiating other social activities. However, 
the playgrounds have limited use, as the spaces are unsuccessful in meeting children’s needs or expectati-
ons, and children between the age of 8-13 prefer to spend their time in a variety of other locations (Brock-
man, Fox, & Russell, 2011).
Play in the city is about reconsidering what and for whom the public spaces are created, and how the spaces 
can be transformed to inspire and invite to play (Day, 2017). Besides the constructed play areas, such as the 
playgrounds and ball courts, the city can be the host for more spontaneous, playful activities by re-purpo-
sing the urban environment. 
Generally, there is a decreasing tolerance for children in public spaces (UN Committee, 2013). The opinion is 
that children disturb the public order, but according to Blinkert (2004), it is rather the opposite, the public 
order often disturbs children. In the urban setting, traffic becomes more prioritized and occupies more of 
the scarce space, leading to a decline in children’s outdoor play and causing a reduction in independent 
mobility (Atkin, Gorely, Biddle, Marshall, & Cameron, 2008). Greater independence to play outside, without 
adult supervision, has been linked to higher levels of physical activity in children (Brockman, Fox, & Russell, 
2011). When play is predominately structured by adults, the children’s activity level decreases and their crea-
tive expression becomes limited and affected (Skår & Krogh, 2009). The caregivers’ safety concerns restrict 
the space the children have and push the play activities into playgrounds (Carver, Timperio & Crawford 2008; 
Gehl, 2010). 
The playground is built to create a safe space for the children to play. However, it also means that the chil-
dren are not included in the urban space and end up being ”hidden away”. This increases the amount of time 
children spend in spaces designed and controlled by adults (Spencer & Blades, 2006). Particularly in public 
life, where the adult is responsible for the design and development of spaces for play, typically without al-
lowing the children the opportunity to express their wants and their needs (Churchman, 2003).
==PAGE:25==
Children’s play belongs to children, and play areas should not be destroyed by adults’ agendas or insensitive 
planning and creations that segregate children and restrict and control their play (Lester & Russell, 2010). This 
segregation and exclusion of children in urban development has significant implications for their develop-
ment as citizens (UN Committee, 2013). This impact the strength of civil society as the children are not con-
sidered citizens with rights. Therefore, it is essential that development policies and planners acknowledge 
children as rights holders to a greater extent when cities are developed.
2.3.2 Seasons in the City
As Copenhagen experiences all four seasons, it is important to address the various factors that come with 
a change in weather. The winter season, with weather like snow, can help break down the barriers of playg-
rounds (Brockman, Fox, & Russell, 2011). Especially, the snow blurs the line between the children’s and adults’ 
places and changes the visual expression of the playground (Gudova, 2016). Play equipment that previously 
had a specific function, such as swings, can have other functions as the children’s imagination is set wild. An 
issue with removing the physical barriers around play areas is that it can be difficult for children to determi-
ne whether the space is safe/unsafe or appropriate/inappropriate for play (Gudova, 2016).
It is also important to note, that when it is rainy, windy, or cold, citizens tend to spend less time in public spa-
ces and move more quickly - on average, with a speedup of 1.5 km/h - and reserved primarily for necessary 
tasks (Gehl, 2010).
Literature Study
16
2.3.3 Inclusive City
Inclusive design principles are fundamental in designing cities that aim to embrace anyone. The child’s 
independent movement is limited in the city, due to inadequate physical abilities such as height, strength, 
balance, flexibility, movement speed, etc. (Clarkson, Coleman, Keates & Lebbon, 2003). The children do not fit 
into the margins of what the city is designed for, which limits their use of the city. As they develop, they get 
a better view, and their other physical abilities improve, giving them the possibility to make better use of 
the city (Gehl, 2010).
The inclusive design principles help design and develop environments which everyone can access. Whether 
it is children of every age to the elderly with poor physical capability. The key aspect of inclusive design is to 
expand the target group, including as many users as possible, without compromising the user experience. 
The needs of that target group should be adequately met. However, the ability of the product or service 
to meet the needs and demands of others outside the target group may be compromised if the design is 
tailored too closely to the requirements of the specified group (Clarkson, Coleman, Keates, & Lebbon, 2003).
==PAGE:26==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
17
Equitable Use: Useful to individuals with diverse abilities. The play experience and features must 
be accessible in several ways, and the physical effort should be minimized. 
Flexibility in Use: Accommodates a variety of individual preferences and abilities. Play experien-
ces should include adaptable features to accommodate users of different dimensions, abilities, 
and paces. 
Simple and Intuitive Use: Easy to understand, regardless of individuals’ experience, knowledge, 
language skills, or current concentration level, e.g. simple signs that are easy for most to interpret.
Perceptible Information: Communicate necessary information effectively to the user, regardless 
of the user’s sensory abilities, e.g. extruding symbols to help those with visual impairment.
Tolerance for Error: Reduce risks and negative consequences of accidental or unintended actions. 
The child should be able to use the play equipment and features in unintended ways without 
compromising the experience.
Low Physical Effort: The product should provide a comfortable and effective experience, where 
the user experience as little fatigue as possible while using the product. The entrance to the play 
experience needs to be a low physical effort to create the same experience for all children.
Size and Space for Approach and Use: The product should be appropriately sized and spaced for 
approach, reach, manipulation, and use, regardless of the user’s body size, posture, or mobility. 
2.3.4 Universal Design
The Universal Design (UD) principles are ideal when designing for inclusivity, as they advocate design that 
recognizes and acknowledges the demands of a wide variety of users (Clarkson, Coleman, Keates, & Lebbon, 
2003). To apply UD principles successfully, one is required to have an understanding of how abilities vary 
with age, disability, environment, or circumstances (Story, Mueller, & Mace, 1998). The principles support in-
dependence, as they aim to engage play opportunities in a barrier-free environment 
The seven principles of UD, including examples for play spaces, are as follows (Story, Mueller, & Mace, 1998; 
The Center for Universal Design, 1997);
==PAGE:27==
2.3.5 Design for the Senses
Developing a design that can activate multiple senses creates an experience that embraces people who 
might be limited in their sensory reception, thus making it more inclusive. Furthermore, designing for dif-
ferent senses can support the individual’s abilities to receive information, aiding them in exploring and 
learning about their surroundings.
Our childhoods are spent trying to understand and learn to navigate the world by using our senses (Castella, 
2018). Children receive information through the use of their senses by touching, seeing, moving, hearing, 
etc., helping develop motor-, cognitive-, and social skills, such as language development, social interaction, 
etc. (Castella, 2018). The information received physically through our senses is processed into an understan-
ding by our cognition, which then shapes the basis of our reality (Castella, 2018). 
In an interview with neurobiologist, Schilhab, it was mentioned, that we associate and connect objects with 
more than their abstract meaning. For instance, a banana is associated with the visualization, taste, smell, 
and texture of it or can even be connected to a situation. This supports that interactions with artifacts are 
experiences that are sensory-based (Beckett, 2019). Therefore, it is essential to consider how the senses are 
affected in the interaction, and how the influence of the senses can support a child’s development. In the 
following section, some of the common senses used to explore the city are discussed, they are based on the 
descriptions provided by Castella (2018).
Literature Study
18
Visual - the sense of seeing. 
The visual sense is the sense of seeing. Design for sight includes factors related to seeing color, 
visual composition, light, and form. Sight is a sense that develops and changes throug hout life. 
As children grow, they will use their visual senses to look for patterns that can help their cognitive 
schemes, skills, and memory. The monocular sight is divided into the central vision, which is used for loo-
king at details, and the peripheral vision, which creates an understanding of the context of what is being 
seen. There are, in particular, two factors that are interesting when looking at designing for the vision. The 
first is the ability to capture the attention of the sight by using movement. The second is how colors can 
have an influence on our perceptions, decisions, and behaviors.
Auditory - the sense of hearing. 
The ears are constantly taking in information about our surroundings and how we should act 
accordingly. This information is collected automatically and then processed in the cognition, 
creating an understanding of where the sound is coming from and what it means. In the audi-
tory sense, there is a distinction between hearing and listening. Whereas hearing is a constant, 
listening takes practice and is important for the child’s development, as listening is used to receive infor-
mation from others and keep safe. Listening is a vital skill for learning when the child is not yet able to read. 
Important factors of the auditory sense are, firstly, the ability to grab the attention by using loud noises and 
secondly, that people can become habituated to sounds, meaning that after a while, they will completely 
ignore certain sounds.  
==PAGE:28==
Olfactory - the sense of smell.
The sense is automatically gathering information to be processed, like the sense of hearing. This 
sense is closely connected to parts of the brain that register memories, why it can evoke feelings 
of comfort, excitement, and fright. Because of the connection between the center for memory 
and the sense of smell is often used by companies to evoke memories, emotions, and associations with a 
brand or product. 
Vestibular - the sense of movement, balance, and spatial orientation.
The sense prevents humans from falling over when walking or standing still. It is developed in 
early childhood, where it is in a rough shape and is refined with the child’s development. This is 
seen by children learning to, e.g. balance and walk. 
Proprioception - the sense of bodily awareness. 
Proprioception is the sense of bodily awareness. It refers to the knowledge of the positioning and move-
ment of limbs and muscles (Tuthill & Azim, 2018). The sense of proprioception is present in every muscle mo-
vement, making it possible to walk without consciously thinking about it, touch the elbow with eyes closed, 
or steer a fork into the mouth whilst looking at a phone. The refinement of this sense is developed along 
with gross and fine motor skills and allows children to interact with the physical world.
Whether there are five, seven, or twenty-one senses is a subject of debate in the literature. The first menti-
on of the five senses is credited to Aristotle in his work De Anima (Aristotle, 350 BC), and are; sight, hearing, 
smell, taste, and touch. In recent times, more senses have been added, contributed by multiple studies, in 
particular, vestibular and proprioception. Six of seven senses have been discussed above; the seventh, the 
sense of taste, has been left out given its unimportance to the project.
2.3.6 Human-Centered Design
Designing products, services, and systems requires a fundamental understanding of the human perspecti-
ve. The Human-Centered Design (HCD) approach puts human needs, capabilities, and behavior first, then 
aims to design to accommodate those, leading to more usable solutions (Norman, 2013).
The principles of HCD apply even if the HCD process is not followed. The designer must design with not
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
19
Tactile - the sense of touch. 
The sense of touch is stimulated when the skin has contact. There are receptors all over the body, 
with areas such as fingers, lips, and feet having the most. The four types of receptors are the 
sensing of vibration, slippage, the stretching of the skin, and sensing textures. It is one of the first 
physical senses that is developed. Children use it to explore and learn by touching materials with different 
textures and temperatures. There is a special system for the social and emotional touch, which is developed 
throughout childhood, this touch system is essential for building healthy relationships, for example giving 
hugs to feel safe and loved. When designing for the tactile sense, it is important to think about the material 
temperature, surface, form, and texture and how the body is able to interact with it.
==PAGE:29==
2.3.7 User-Centered Design
A methodology that is closely related to HDC principles is User-Centered Design (USD) principles. Both prin-
ciples make use of a similar approach and are used interchangeably in the literature. The UCD approach 
concentrated on the specific target group and the development of a solution that fulfills the user’s need 
through ongoing user involvement  and evaluation (Gould & Lewis, 1985).
Generally, UCD follows three principles, which are defined as follows (Gould & Lewis, 1985): 
1. Early focus on users and tasks: implies an understanding of who the users will be.
2. Empirical measurement: intended user should use simulations and prototypes in actual usage scenarios, 
and their performance and reactions should be observed, recorded, and analyzed. 
3. Iterative design proceeding: the problems that would be found through user testing must be fixed, crea-
ting a cycle of design, test, measure, and redesign, repeated as often as necessary.
Literature Study
Designing for children
Designing for children differs from designing for the general adult. Some of the unique factors that make 
designing for children different are listed in the box beneath (Castella, 2018). It is important to accommodate 
these factors, and the developmental level of the child, to prevent them from exclusion.
•	
Children’s specific thoughts can be challenging to understand, given their inability to express 
themselves verbally. 
•	
Children experience rapid development both physically, cognitively, socially, and emotional-
ly.
•	
Children’s interests change frequently.
•	
Children are unpredictable and chaotic, making it harder to predict their interactions, percep-
tion, and response. 
•	
Children enjoy challenges because it can lead to feelings of accomplishment or success from 
trying.
•	
Children enjoy repetition.
•	
Children are less forgiving and patient and will easily get frustrated compared to adult users.
•	
Children appreciate feedback through interaction.
•	
There are higher safety standards for children’s toys and equipment comparatively.
•	
Children’s physical dimensions vary greatly and are very different from the average adult’s
only the end-user in mind but with users as a system in which everything is interconnected (Norman, 2018). 
The HCD process begins with understanding people and the needs the design intends to meet. Observati-
on is a great tool for providing this understanding, as people themselves often are unaware of their actual 
needs (Norman, 2013). Additionally, the HCD principles are about finding the real problem rather than the 
symptom of the problem. If the fundamental problem is solved, the symptom will disappear (Norman, 2018). 
20
==PAGE:30==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
21
2.3.8 Behavioral Design
To change behaviors, in our case, children’s interactions with their surroundings in the urban environment, 
it is essential to understand the underlying factors that drive human behavior for the sake of designing for 
purposeful change. As the project aims to change the current behaviors identified in the city, it is exami-
ned how frameworks, principles, and tools, within behavioral design, can be used to design for a desired 
behavior change. Behavioral design pursues to actively change problematic behaviors through purposeful 
interventions (Cash et al., 2017) or as described by Khadikar et al. (2020):
”Behavioural design has the goal to explicitly and ethically realise positive behaviour, desired by both the indi-
vidual and society; the object of design is behaviour itself, which is explicitly understood and designed for using 
behavioural theories and brought into effect by actively changing user psychology with the help of artifacts.” 
Meaning that certain behaviors, that are desired both by the individual and the society at large, can be 
obtained through the use of inspiration, nudging, persuasion, or motivation in artifacts (Tromp, Hekkert, & 
Veerbeek, 2011). To be able to understand and describe human behaviors, the following two are being in-
vestigated the behavior (Antecedent-Behavior-Consequence, ABC) and the cognition (Dual process theory).
Behavior
To understand certain behavioral interactions and understand where and when they can be influenced, Mil-
tenberger’s (2011) ABC model can be used. Applying the model allows for an understanding of behaviors as 
actions, with the antecedent being the trigger of the behavior and the consequence being a result thereof. 
According to the model, it is possible to change the behavior in all three steps using different strategies. 
Antecedent strategies rely on interventions prior to the unwanted behavior, motivating it in a desirable 
direction. Consequence strategies rely on interventions after the performance of the undesired behavior 
(Abrahamsen et al., 2005). The breakdown of the model allows the designer to describe the behavioral inte-
ractions and explain when and where the behavior can be influenced. Examples of interventions could be 
rewards, fees, and feedback. It is important to note that consequence strategies primarily rely on the indivi-
dual’s own self-reflection on their actions.
Cognition
To understand how thoughts and behaviors are linked, the dual process theory (Vaisey, 2009) states that 
thoughts arise as a result of two different processes. The two processes are implicit, automatic responses 
also described as an unconscious process, and explicit, controlled responses, recognized as a conscious 
process.
Given that the implicit system is automatic, it guarantees quick decision-making. The system builds on asso-
ciative responses to situations and builds on intuition. The explicit system is controlled and is also referred 
to as the rational mind. It requires working memory, thus making the decision-making processes compara-
tively slower and more deliberate. The system builds on introspection and explicit reasoning. According to 
Kahneman (2011), design interventions can target the two systems, with either conscious or 
==PAGE:31==
unconscious interventions. The two systems help explain why it might be challenging to alter human be-
havior because it rarely is enough to target the explicit system. To achieve an understanding of how intera-
ctions can lead to changes in human behavior, Cash et al. (2017) developed a model that combines Vaisey’s 
dual process theory and Miltenberger’s ABC model. The model shows how the path of the interaction th-
rough the behaviors has an influence on which of the two cognitive systems is affected.
Figure 5 - Combination of the ABC model and the Dual Process Theory as proposed by Cash et. al (2017).
Literature Study
22
The paths leading from the artifact to the person indicate a strategy coupled with a behavior and a cogniti-
on. Depending on the type of artifact, or the kind of exerting influence used, the strategy can be modified 
for the intended outcome. When designing for behavioral change, there are unforeseen elements that can 
affect the intended outcome of the strategy, this includes culture and context. 
The strategies can be considered either structural or informational. Where the structural aim to change con-
textual factors, such as limiting access, informational strategies are more focused on changing knowledge, 
awareness, norms, and attitude (Cash, et al. 2017). Though it might be very efficient, structural intervention 
strategies often aim at removing choice, which is deemed highly unethical. 
==PAGE:32==
03
METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:33==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
03
Methodology
This chapter describes the overall methodology of this project’s design process. The limitations of the cho-
sen approach and methods will be discussed continuously as these are reviewed. 
3.1 Double Diamond
The project has followed the Double Diamond design process. The process is divided into two diamonds, 
the first focusing on the problem space and the second on the solution space. The first diamond aided 
in understanding and uncovering the root of the problem, with the following diamond consisting of the 
development of a solution to solve it. Each diamond consists of two phases, a divergent and a convergent. 
The Double Diamond framework is beneficial to a design project, as it works similarly to a map through 
the development from problem to solution. It consists of four phases; Discover, Define, Develop, and Deliver 
(Drew, 2019). The use of the framework has helped create an overview of the design process and models 
used throughout and has supported the planning, management, and execution of the project, see figure 6.
Figure 6 - The Double Diamond process of the project.
Discover
Deﬁne
Desk
research
Case
studies
Field
research
Stakeholder
map
Interviews
Observations
Behaviroral
mapping
Afﬁnity
diagram
Interest vs.
impact matrix
Research
question
Co-creation
workshop
Product
requirements
Personas
User
journey
Product
placement
Ideation
Mind
map
Brainstorm
Vision
board
Develop
Prototype
planner
Pretotyping
Prototype
testing
Proof of
concept
Prototype
Deliver
Mock-ups
Implementation
plan
Conceptualize
The Double Diamond is represented as a linear process, moving through the four phases from left to right. 
However, the process of this project has been iterative, going back and forth between the phases when 
new information has been discovered. Despite the visual depiction of the phases being equal, the diver-
ging phases require more time, compared to the convergent phases, with a time variation between three 
to eight weeks.
Given that the Double Diamond does not consider the logistical aspect of a design process, a Gantt Chart 
has worked as a supplement in determining the time frame of activities, along with the designation of 
clear deadlines in the completion of the four phases (Appendix 01.2). The strict deadlines have meant that 
some decisions had to be made and forced us to continue to the next phase.
24
==PAGE:34==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
The strict deadlines have meant that some decisions had to be made and forced us to continue to the 
next phase. This has impacted the outcome of each phase and, ultimately, the outcome of the project. 
Within each phase, different methods and tools have been applied. Several methods and figures have 
evolved and re-applied through several phases as the project has progressed and been iterated.
3.1.2 User Centered Design
This project has been addressed with a User Centered design approach. This is aligned with Gehl Archite-
cts working principles, ensuring an understanding of the users’ needs and experience in the public space 
(Gehl Architects, 2019). The principles of the approach have helped decrease the possible mistakes that can 
be caused by designs that do not consider the users’ needs (see section 2.3.6 and 2.3.7). 
To develop a satisfying solution, the focus has been on the user since the inception of the project. This has 
been done by selecting a specific target group, in this case, children between the ages of seven to ten. The 
inclusion of the target group has proved beneficial in the design process, especially in the development, 
testing, and evaluation of the solution. The involvement of the target group in the design process led to a 
better understanding of the children’s perception of play in the city and directly allowed them to influence 
the initial development and the final adjustment of the solution. The UCD approach involves several ite-
rations, as the users bring new information and feedback that may influence the process of the project in 
a new or different direction. The methods of UCD that have been used in the project include, but are not 
limited to; background interviews, personas, user scenarios, various types of prototyping, and user testing.
3.1.3 Universal Design Principles
With a solution that aims for integration into the public space, there is a potential for anyone to interact 
with it, hence the importance of considering designing a solution that emphasizes the UD principles (see 
section 2.3.4). The goal of the UD principle is to create usable, inclusive designs that do not discriminate 
on age, nationality, disability, etc. (Story, Mueller, & Mace, 1998). The main target group has been average, 
non-disabled children between the ages of 7 and 10. Given that the development level varies significantly 
in these years, the UD principles are very relevant, as the speed of development varies notably. The chil-
dren within the age group might not be on the same level of physical-, cognitive- or social development, 
given the explosive development of children’s physique, wit, and interpretation skills at this age span (see 
section 2.2). For instance, some children might be able to read at the age of nine, whilst some might not.
3.2 Interview
To investigate the problem area and gain deep insight and knowledge of children’s play in the city, se-
mi-structured interviews were conducted with stakeholders, including pedagogues, play experts, and city 
development architects. The interviews were used to collect firsthand personal accounts of experience, 
perceptions, and opinions (Martin & Hanington, 2012). The semi-structured approach meant that we tried 
to stick to the script of questions but allowed for detours in a conversational format. When conducting the 
interviews, we tried to remain passive, not leading the participants to an answer that might fulfill our hy-
pothesis and expectations. We decided on the semi-structured interviews to have consistency across the 
different sessions with different stakeholders. 
25
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Observations
Throughout the project, observation has been a preferred method to collect data on people’s behavior 
and movements, not only to gain preliminary insight into the Copenhagen urban environment but also 
in meeting with various proposed solutions in a setting of testing with users. All the observations can be 
found in Appendix 04. The observations were done both overtly, meaning that the subject knew they were 
being observed, and covertly, where the observer has been concealed and out of sight (Martin & Haning-
ton, 2012). 
The covert observation allowed us to unobtrusively gather data and information by observing without di-
rect participation or interference with the people or their behaviors and activities being observed (Martin 
& Hanington, 2012). To minimize the possible influence of our presence, the observations were conducted 
from a distance at a vantage point. The method is a qualitative research methodology that records the 
use of the observed public space, what people use the area, and how they use it. The observations were 
to some degree planned and structured but allowed for flexibility. As part of the Gehl methodology, we 
collected both quantitative and qualitative data from our observations. Amongst others, we measured the 
number of people within the public space, and the perceived age, we noted down their activities and their 
use of the space.
Methodology
The interviews were conducted as the first phase of uncovering the problem. To encompass different per-
spectives and get an overview of the problem, three groups of stakeholders were interviewed; pedagogu-
es, play experts, and city development architects. The full interviews can be found in Appendix 03.
The three groups of stakeholders were chosen based on their knowledge and experience on the subject of 
play in the urban environment. The pedagogues were interviewed because of their intensive knowledge 
of children and their development, as well as their first-hand experience and daily contact with our specific 
target group. The play experts were interviewed to gain an understanding of relevant factors to consider in 
the development of play equipment and an insight into methods used in the development and testing of 
play solutions. Lastly, the city development architects were interviewed to gain an understanding of their 
development strategies, how they currently target children and in the future, in addition, opportunities 
and what rules apply for integrating play into the urban space.
The interviews were conducted through various media, such as on a phone call, by zoom, and physically. 
The flexibility in the conduction method ensured the participation possibility for the interviewees. Con-
ducting the interviews through phone calls had the disadvantage of not being able to experience the 
participants’ facial expressions. The facial expressions would have allowed for the decoding of when the 
participants felt particularly excited or began to hesitate, which could have led to follow-up questions. 
However, this disadvantage was weighted against the number of participants who would not have had the 
opportunity to participate under other conditions. Additionally, some of the interviews might have been 
influenced by the personal relationship between the participant and the interviewer, given the familiarity 
between the two and the knowledge of the project. Lastly, the interviews were all conducted in Danish 
and were later translated, which creates the possibility of data getting lost in the translation.
26
==PAGE:36==
Behavioral Mapping, a place-based mapping was used to record the movement in the public space, focu-
sing on observation to identify locational patterns of behaviors (Martin & Hanington, 2012). The maps de-
pict the citizens’ engagement in various activities in a specific setting (Ng, 2016). The essential physical 
features of interest in the locations were mapped out, and the behavior recorded was categorized into 
behavioral actions, such as using play equipment and interacting with other children. Behavioral Mapping 
has the benefit of depicting people’s actions rather than their words. People may not provide an honest 
answer when asked about their daily lives and certain activities. This can be caused by several factors, such 
as; people being aware of a behavior that is against the social norm (Ng, 2016).
The initial observations took place between the 9th of September to the 1st of October 2022, with a total 
of nine rounds of observations, where children and adults’ movements were observed in selected public 
areas. These areas included paths and parks near schools. It is important to note that the observations 
were done at different times during different days in shorter periods of time. Consequently, it is not possi-
ble to see the complete picture, as the activity and behavior change based on parameters like the weather 
and the day of the week (see section 2.3.2). Details and insights from the observations were noted during 
the stakeout to ensure proper documentation.
3.4 User Involvement
With a UCD approach to the project, it has been essential to involve different stakeholders throughout the 
project. The early, continual focus and involvement of both the end-users and stakeholders have benefited 
the project with valuable insight and confirmed the requirement for a solution. The stakeholders were in-
volved through interviews and observations at the beginning of the design process and were later invited 
to a co-creation workshop, and user and usability testing of the prototypes.
 
3.4.1 Co-creation
In the development phase, the target group was invited to contribute with their knowledge, creativity, and 
opinions through a facilitated co-creation workshop. The results obtained from Co-creation be found in 
Appendix 05. The results of a workshop are heavily reliant on planning and execution. Factors such as the 
type of participants, time span, location, and resources available are all necessary to keep in mind when 
planning, due to the impact they have on the desired outcome (Mattelmäki & Visser, 2011).
The workshop was executed under the following conditions:
 
Stakeholders: 17 fourth-grade students
Location: Classroom at Skolen ved Søerne
Time: Held during a lesson
Duration: Approximately 90 minutes
27
During the workshop, we received assistance from the class’ two teachers. They helped us keep control of 
the class and rearticulate certain tasks for the children to better understand our intention. 
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:37==
28
 
The articulation might have influenced the output and could have been avoided by a briefing with the tea-
cher beforehand. It would have proven beneficial for us to have had a better pedagogical understanding 
of how to deliver tasks, and of the target group’s developmental progress in understanding abstraction 
and logical thinking. As the participants were children, we were aware of selecting and creating activities 
that were not too complex and remained playful. This was done to maintain their engagement and enhan-
ce their mindset in a playful and creative matter. 
The objective of the co-creation was to encourage the participants to ideate on design ideas, as they are 
the experts on their own experiences. During the workshop, we were able to gather valuable insight into 
the children’s own opinions and the thoughts behind their ideas and creations. Given the number of chil-
dren versus two facilitators, the time available to talk about the thoughts behind their ideas was limited. 
By analyzing and interpreting the children’s ideas and creations, we had a better understanding of the 
children’s preferences and needs to be required for a final solution. Using this method ensured that the 
children had the possibility to express their needs and wishes, and proved a useful inspiration in the de-
velopment of concepts. It’s important to keep in mind that the 17 students are a small sample of a larger 
demographic, their ideas and thoughts are not considered a common opinion for the entire target group. 
The children’s background and upbringing might have had an impact on the final outcome.
3.4.2 User Testing
By testing with the users, it has been possible to gain insights into, how the end-user experience and 
interact with both our concept and prototype before the development of the final solution. It has proven 
beneficial for improving solutions both rapidly and iteratively (Martin & Hanington, 2012), as we have 
been able to gather quick feedback. Testing with the users has created a foundation for making more 
informed decisions in the design process. 
Testing with users was performed twice. The first test was an MVP test (Martin & Hanington, 2012) of the 
prototypes executed under the following conditions:
 
Stakeholders: Approximately 80 fourth to sixth-grade students
Location: Public pavement outside of Fritids- og Juniorklub Filippa
Time: After school at 12.00-15:00
Duration: 3 hours
The aim was to test which of the concepts had greater success in engagement from the children. The 
outcome of the test was limited due to the children’s hesitation to interact with the pretotypes* and their 
placement.
The second test was a usability test of the prototype executed under the following conditions:
Methodology
*A rapid experiment that aims to test ideas quickly, simply and at low scost, gathering data to validate ideas 
before building the actual prototype (Savoia, 2011)
==PAGE:38==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
29
The goal of the test was to create a proof of concept and test the usability of the prototype. The chil-
dren were asked to perform several tasks, that were designed to simulate and reflect the principle of the 
concept. The test was divided into two parts, a testing of the physical prototype and the game principle 
through a digital prototype. The aim of the test was to reveal possible frustrations or confusion at uni-
dentified pitfalls when interacting with the prototypes. This helped identify improvements in the design, 
thus creating a better user experience. 
 
Stakeholders: 16 fourth-grade students
Location: Common area at Skolen ved Søerne
Time: Held during a lesson
Duration: Approximately 90 minutes
==PAGE:39==
04
EXPLORATORY USER STUDY
==PAGE:40==
04
Exploratory User Study
This chapter presents the key stakeholders and the significant influence they had on the design process. 
The main findings, which have been collected through various methods, such as interviews, observati-
ons, and a co-creation workshop, are elaborated and reviewed with the presentation of each stakeholder. 
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
4.1 Stakeholders
To gain a visual representation of all the stakeholders, a stakeholder map was developed (Martin & Haning-
ton, 2012). This helped with identifying the key stakeholder, the stakeholders who would be affected by the 
project. It should be noted that the stakeholder map has evolved and adjusted as the project progressed 
and will continue to evolve and expand with future work. The stakeholder map initially featured a wider 
range of stakeholders, but as the project advance and the scope narrowed, so did the relevant stakehol-
ders.
The key stakeholders of the project are identified as; children, parents, teachers/pedagogues, Copenhagen 
Municipality, landscape architects, Gehl Architects, and play experts. These stakeholders had different in-
volvement in the project, but all contributed with different methods, knowledge, and insights that helped 
the project progress through the uncovering of the different perspectives on the topic of child play in the 
cityscape.
Figure 7 - Stakeholder map. The key stakeholders are highlighted.
31
Internal stakeholders
Eksternal stakeholders
Governmental 
==PAGE:41==
Exploratory User Study
Governmental: Copenhagen Municipality
Urban designers and planners at Copenhagen Municipality are key stakeholders in the development of 
urban space in Copenhagen. Two landscape architects, Helle Hagelund and Claus Borre were interviewed. 
They work in the Park and Urban Space department of The Technical and Environmental Administration at 
Copenhagen Municipality and therefore work firsthand with developing the urban space. They both work 
with a focus on creating spaces for children in the urban environment, in particular, parks and squares. The 
full interview can be found in Appendix 03.9. 
The landscape architects provided insight and details on different initiatives and projects, mainly in parks 
and squares, that aim to accommodate children in the city. Furthermore, the two representatives acknow-
ledge that the Copenhagen Municipality does not succeed in developing a city that embraces everyone, 
despite it being the aim of their strategies.  With the strategies striving to target everyone, it ends up tar-
geting no one, as mentioned by themselves in reflection of the conversation.  
The absence of children’s play in the city is partially due to Copenhagen Municipality’s policies, agendas, 
and priorities. They recognize the children’s play outside the playgrounds as an important area, and they 
found it beneficial to incorporate it into future strategies and visions. The insights from the landscape 
architects contributed to a general understanding of the policies and strategies that currently affect the 
urban development of Copenhagen. 
The following are the main findings from the interview:
•	
In general, Copenhagen’s urban space is not designed for children, as it does not offer inventory 
suitable for children outside of playgrounds.
•	
In urban development, landscape architects are required to follow the strategies of Copenhagen 
Municipality, as they serve as a guide for what can and must be done. Providing that the strategies 
do not cover children’s play outside of the playground, it neither will be planned nor developed 
for. 
•	
The urban space of Copenhagen is limited, which leads to strong competition for the available 
space. Other areas, such as traffic, are given higher priority in the logistics of planning and de-
veloping the city compared to children and play. To address this issue, Copenhagen Municipality 
intends to design the available spaces for multipurpose use. This is also a strategy for reaching a 
diverse range of people and bringing citizens across generations together.
32
==PAGE:42==
Play experts: Kompan
Kompan is one of the manufacturers of playgrounds, that design and install public playgrounds for Copen-
hagen Municipality. Therefore, the company is an interesting stakeholder as they have extensive experi-
ence in bringing play into the city through playgrounds and play equipment. Kompan has an interest in 
developing the best play solutions for children, to support a happier community. Additionally, it is affili-
ated with Kompan Play Institute, which conducts research on children’s development and play benefits. 
Hence, their valuable knowledge on the topic. An interview with a play consultant from Kompan helped 
clarify the factors that are necessary when developing play experiences for children. The full interview 
can be found in Appendix 03.7. The factors are further elaborated in figure 8. The main findings from the 
interview are as follows; 
33
•	
Kompan identified that cross-generational play is missing from the urban space. This brought on 
the current focus on the development of play experiences outside the playgrounds, with the aim 
of gathering citizens across generations.
•	
There are two emerging trends in play, one emphasizes bringing children into nature to play with 
natural elements, and the other emphasizes increased use of technological and digital platforms.
•	
There is a significant difference in play culture and behavior between countries - even cities. Play 
on the streets has been observed to be less confined outside of the metropolitan area of Copen-
hagen. Parental anxiety is viewed as a city phenomenon in which parents are more observant of 
their children during play activities. The anxiety is believed to come from the number of residents 
in a limited space, and the traffic. 
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:43==
Exploratory User Study
34
Successful experience:
A good play solution creates a 
successful experience for chil-
dren, where the child can achie-
ve challenges on their own. A 
play space should accommoda-
te and fit different age ranges 
while ensuring that the children 
can still achieve feelings of suc-
cess by accomplishing goals on 
their own. 
Safety standards:
The play value and the safety of 
the play space must be aligned. 
When designing playgrounds 
or equipment for children’s play, 
the safety standards must follow 
the Dansk Standard. 
Play value: 
A typical mistake made when 
designing play opportunities is 
that the visual is weighed above 
the value of the play. Focusing 
too much on the aesthetic lead 
to failed play spaces, as factors 
such as dimensions are not pro-
perly considered to fit children’s 
dimensions. 
Play starter: 
Children need a play starter, 
especially in places where 
they do not have much time 
to spend. A play starter can, 
among other things, be a 
thematization, which helps ini-
tiate the play, allowing the child 
to play immediately. A play star-
ter initiates the play but does 
not limit the subsequent devel-
opment or freedom of play. 
Transparency: 
Children benefit from playing 
on their own terms without pa-
rental interference. Transparent 
play space allows the children to 
play independently while care-
givers still have the opportunity 
to keep an eye on them from a 
distance.
Different types of play:
A good solution offers children 
the opportunity to engage in 
many play opportunities to sup-
port their development.
Figure 8 - Play factors necessary when developing play experiences for children. 
==PAGE:44==
Caregivers: parents and pedagogues
Typically, children’s play behavior is supervised and controlled by their caregivers, namely the parents. 
They have a significant impact on children’s play in the city, as the children often depend on their parents’ 
companionship and time to be escorted to and from play spaces. The parents are, therefore, considered 
interesting stakeholders. Attempts were made to interview the parents or make them participate in sur-
veys. However, they were difficult to reach, which resulted in failed attempts. Yet their behavior related 
to children’s play has been observed throughout Behavioral Mapping. This has been advantageous, as it 
provided an unbiased insight into the parents’ involvement in the children’s movement in the city. 
To gain the caregivers’ perspective on the children’s play behavior and movement in the city, four peda-
gogues were interviewed. All four pedagogues are daily involved with children in the age of the target 
group. Given their educational background in handling tasks that relate to children’s care and develop-
ment, they, in general, have a more theoretical approach to the engagement with the children, compared 
with the other caregivers. The pedagogues have contributed to a greater understanding of the target 
group’s ability, need, play behavior, and movement in the city. All interviews can be found under Appendix 
03.2-03.5.
The main findings from the four interviews are summarized as the following:
35
•	
The children are comfortable and accustomed to moving around safely in the city, as they were ra-
ised there. Additionally, the children are taught to move independently in the city by institutions. 
Fritidsklubben teaches the children to safely walk from the school to the institution as a part of the 
initial introduction. 
•	
The pedagogues assist and teach the children to become more independent individuals. At Fritids-
klubben, the children are more or less left to themselves and in charge of their own decisions. At 
this age, they generally play by themselves.
•	
Fritidsklubben uses the city’s facilities to play, e.g. Fælledparken, where the bigger area offers an op-
portunity for other types of play. The pedagogues define a clear area through an imaginative fence 
where the children are allowed to play to avoid being a nuisance to others in the public space. The 
children are reminded to be considerate of others when playing in public places, as they can take 
up a lot of it.
•	
The pedagogues had different concerns about children’s play. One of them is children not having 
enough time for independent play. Nowadays, children have longer school days and have many 
leisure activities multiple times a week. According to the pedagogues this is not necessarily bad, 
but it should not affect the children’s time for self-chosen play. This concern is shared by the UN 
CRC which emphasizes it as concerning development, that reaches globally (UN Committee, 2013).
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:45==
Exploratory User Study
Children
The children, especially the target group, are crucial stakeholders, as the project aims to develop a solution 
that includes them in the urban space of Copenhagen. The solution, therefore, pursues to fulfill the chil-
dren’s needs and requirements, thus hoping to create an enjoyable experience. 
It has been crucial for the project to involve the children to gain an understanding of their behaviors and 
needs from the city. This has been accomplished by observing their patterns using Behavioral Mapping 
and receiving their input and expertise through a co-creation workshop and testing. The findings from the 
use of methods will be discussed in further detail in the following two sections.
4.2 Behavioral Mapping
Behavioral Mapping was used to record behaviors and movements systematically by observing specific 
settings in the urban environment of Copenhagen. The two settings which have been mapped are; (1) 
children’s play behavior in the urban space, and (2) children’s commute to school.
As younger children often have difficulty verbalizing their thoughts, feelings, and behaviors (Ng, 2016), 
Behavioural Maps have been a great tool to collect insight into children’s movement and play behavior in 
the chosen settings. 
The maps depict the facilities in the environ-
ment, divided into general facilities and play 
area facilities. The orange circles with numbers 
indicate the location of the facilities, with the as-
sociated actions being marked with letters, see 
figure 10. Behavioral actions are categorized into 
general and play actions, look rigth. In addition, 
the maps of  ’children’s commute to school’, con-
tain the flow of movement of the different mo-
des of transportation to gain an understanding 
of the general flow in the urban space, and how 
it possibly disturbs children’s play behavior. 
36
Figure 9 - Behavioral actions.
==PAGE:46==
•	
The urban environment has the potential to serve as a great alternative play space (see section 
2.3.1). It was observed that children play with their environment. They balance on elevations, run 
up and down hilly terrains, and climb and jump between stone installations. 
•	
The children interact with the facilities in the urban space. Children use skate ramps, installations 
to climb on, or use as hangout spots, swings, etc. 
•	
A high number of bicycles crossed the areas for observation in a short period of time, even though 
there was no indication of cycle paths. Especially, at Enghave Plads where there was no clear path, 
which made it difficult for the others to predict the directions of the bicycles. It was observed that 
the traffic flow had a direct negative effect on the children’s play in the designated area.
•	
The caregivers were constantly surveilling and controlling the children’s movements. Especially, 
when the children approached the water foundations at Enghave Plads or the crossing path at 
Folket’s park, where bicycles likewise crossed.
To record children’s play behavior, the locations Enghave Plads and Folket’s Park were chosen as these ur-
ban spaces are located close to schools (Appendix 04.1-04.3). Furthermore, the space offers opportunities 
for structured and unstructured play. The aim of the Behavioral Map in these settings was to track the citi-
zen’s activities, with a focus on children and their interactions, see figure 10. The Behavioral Map provided a 
better understanding of the distribution of behaviors in the urban space at the given time; when children’s 
school day was over. This helped identify possible controversies and prospective actions to improve the 
use of space. The main findings identified from Behavioural Maps of ’children’s play behavior in the urban 
space’ are as follows:
37
Image 3 - Folkets Park and Enghave Plads
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:47==
Exploratory User Study
38
Figure 10 - Behavioral map of Folkets Park. 
==PAGE:48==
39
To record children’s behavior in their daily commute, locationsin proximity to schools were chosen at the 
time children were heading for school (Appendix 04.4-04.8). By observing in this setting, it was possible to 
collect a lot of data. The observations were executed in four different locations nearby schools at Nørrebro, 
see figure 11 and 12. The Behavioral Mapping provided insight into the target group’s independent move-
ment, as several of the children moved without caregivers to school, as anticipated. The main findings from 
these observations were: 
•	
The children moved on their daily commute alone, together in groups of peers, or with caregivers. 
•	
The mode of transport varied from walking, riding scooters, bicycling, skating, and carried in Cargo 
Bikes driven by guardians. Scooters, in particular, were a popular mode of transport among the 
target group.
•	
The children interacted with each other on the way to school. When the children were in the com-
pany of a caregiver, they did not interact much with other children, leading to the social interacti-
on being primarily with the caregiver. 
•	
A lot of the children who were walking alone were busy interacting with their phones.
•	
Children carried different types of play objects.
•	
In a few cases, the children used the urban environment for playful interactions. This included 
using elements that were not necessarily made for play. The children used poles as obstacle cour-
ses, raced between trees on their scooters, and balanced on the edge of flowerbeds.  
•	
Generally, the children moved carefully in the traffic and checked before crossing the roads. 
•	
The caregivers physically shielded their children with bikes to protect them from the traffic or limi-
ted their movement by holding their hands.
•	
The children’s play behavior became less constrained as they entered spaces they were accusto-
med to.
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:49==
Exploratory User Study
40
Walk the dog
H
Exercising
Walking 
Biking
Active caregiving 
J
Interact with 
other children
Running 
Interacting 
with objects
Nørrebro Park
Skole
Blågård 
Skole
Balance walk
Walk the dog
H
Walking 
Biking
Active caregiving 
J
Interact with 
other children
Running 
Interacting 
with objects
Using the 
play equipment
Climbing
Guldberg Skole
Figure 11 - Behavioral map near Nørrebro Park Skole and 
Blågaards skole. 
Figure 12 - Behavioral map near Guldberg Skole.
==PAGE:50==
4.3 User study through Co-creation
Co-creation was used to involve the target group in the design process. The methodology and proce-
dure of the execution have been previously explained (see section 3.4.1). The co-creation workshop was 
conducted relatively early in the design process, as it was desirable to gain knowledge about the target 
group’s perception of play in the city. Play changes with time and lifestyles, but children remain experts in 
play in an evolving world (Appendix 03.7).
The co-creation was divided into two main parts; understanding the target group’s play behavior and 
ideation on solution proposals. This section focuses on the findings from the first part. The outcome of the 
second part was used for developing concepts and will be further explained later (see section 7.1).
To gather a lot of data in a short amount of time, the activity play-run was used. The objective of the acti-
vity was to gain a better understanding of the children’s play behavior. To encourage the children to write 
as many statements as possible, the activity contained an element of competition. The statements were to 
be given on the following topics; where do you play best?; what does play mean to you?; and when is play 
not fun? The data is visualized as circles, where the size is determined by the repetition of answers, and the 
colors define the category, see figure 13  and 14.
At friends
Places where you
can be together
With
 
others
’Klubben’
Outside
Home
School
library
Schoolyard
School
My room
Playground
Trampoline
Slide
Sandbox
Playhouse
Jungle gym
Swing
Field
Nature
Everywhere
My familly
My cousin
Vacation
Other 
countries
Skates
Skiing
Beach
Swimming hall
KU.BE
Eksperimentariet
Tivoli
Shooting
range
Jump hall
VR world
Street
party
Birthdays
Cosy
places
Sports
hall
Climb hall
Football ﬁeld
Sports
Figure 13 - Results from play run; where do you play best?
41
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
Where do you play best?
==PAGE:51==
Exploratory User Study
 Make 
things up
Imagination
Pretend
play
Fun with
each other
Fun
Having
fun
Entertaining
Playing 
with freinds
Friendship
Getting
friends
Playing with
the class
Social
Company
Play with 
everyone
Find a play 
everyone wants
Cooperation
Not becoming
enemies
Talk
Running
Movement
Outside
Games you
make yourself
Activity
Sport
Football
Basket
Climbing
Boksing
Fun for
the brain
Joint play
’Dåseskjul’
Hide &
seek
Prison
game
’BankeBøf’
E-sport
Reality
Play
Toy
F
U
N
S
O
C
I
A
L
I
N
T
E
R
A
C
TI
O
N
S
P
O
R
T
I
M
A
G
I
N
A
T
I
O
N
G
A
M
E
S
Violence
People 
beat
People 
kick
Fight
Being pulled
Whenever the 
play goes wrong
Be alone
Boredom
Not fun
to play
Disagreement
Bad 
friendship
Not a
good play
Unwanted
play
Don’t know
what to do
People
get angry
People
leave the play
Being too
many in the play
Being left
out
Unfair play
Getting
hurt
Hard to 
understand
Someone
destroys the play
Someone
teases
Friends don’t 
say sorry
Someone
say ugly things
Annoying
freinds
Enemies
People
being mean
People
being stupid
Only
one decides
People
argue
People
discuss
You want
something different
Someone
curse
Someone shout
very loudly
S
te
Peo
be
le
U
N
KI
N
D I
N
TE
R
A
CT
IO
N
B
A
D
C
O
M
M
U
N
I
C
A
T
I
O
N
V
I
O
L
E
N
C
E
A
B
A
N
D
O
N
E
D
D
U
L
L
42
Figure 14 - Results from play run; what does play mean to you? and when is play not fun?
What does play mean to you?
When is play not fun?
==PAGE:52==
43
The main findings from the first part of co-creation were:
•	
The enjoyment of the play is not determined by the type of play or activities, but rather by the 
quality of the social interaction. Social interaction, especially with peers, is important for the target 
group. This is supported by Castella (2018), who claims that social development dominates at ages 
seven to eleven. The target group’s perception of the play is also heavily influenced by the type 
of interactions, with unkind social interaction being detrimental to the experience. The children 
characterize this interaction as being abandoned by peers, bad communication such as a disagre-
ement or use of swear words, violent behavior, etc. 
•	
Children’s play is not limited to a specific location, as they see the opportunity to play everywhere. 
School, including the schoolyard, Fritidsklubben, home, and friends’ houses were frequent answers 
to the preferred locations for play. None of the children stated the city as a possibility for play, but 
playgrounds and other play spaces, such as Tivoli and KUBE were mentioned.
•	
Play was primarily classified as social interaction and fun. This aligned with the definitions of play 
in the literature, which states; ”play is driven by intrinsic motivation and undertaken for its own sake, 
rather than as a means to an end” (UN Committee, 2013).
Image 4 - The children performing the play run activity during co-creation workshop. 
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:53==
Exploratory User Study
44
4.4 Affinity Diagram
The most important findings from the fieldwork were gathered and structured into an affinity diagram to 
ensure that data was easy to apprehend later in the process (Martin & Hanington, 2012). The affinity dia-
gram is divided into seven overarching categories including play, development, interaction, play in the 
city, community, culture, and safety, see figure 15. Each of these categories contains the statements and 
insights gathered through the other methods used in the fieldwork. The affinity diagram was used as a 
tool in the ideation and development of concepts, as the preliminary data collected, created the overview 
needed for the development of the solution.
==PAGE:54==
45
Figure 15 - Affinity diagram.
Children seek adult 
help for solving 
Play can be an 
opportunity to 
create new relati-
onships
A child's relation to 
peers
r
outreach to adults
Girls often want 
facilitation in public 
spaces
Children do not 
need the adult
participation in play
Citizens are not 
keen on a change 
in their environ-
ment
Children attract 
other children
Sensory 
exploration
Play support motor, 
cognitive and social 
skills
Children seek 
thrills, tension, and 
adrenaline rushes
Play is using 
the body
Lack of repetition 
games
Play must be fun
Play is freedom
Children like 
independent play
It is not possible to 
play wrong
Play is 
incredible as it 
appeals to all ages, 
sexes, cultures, etc.
Play is the same, 
packed in a 
different 
package
A puddle is an 
indicator that play 
doesn’t require 
much
Children prefer free 
but real life relata-
ble pretend play
Much play arise 
from the children’s  
imaginations
Children don’t have 
enough time to 
play on their own 
terms
It is important that 
the play is initiated, 
when there is not 
much time
Less of a curb-play 
culture in the city
Play is being 
protected from the 
city 
surrounding it
Play contains many 
learning 
opportunities
Play is used as a 
practice for real life
Imaginative play 
creates an opportu-
nity for 
self-discovery
Successful 
experiences evolve 
with age
Children learn 
through 
play experiences
Lack of logic creates 
frustration
Children need 
successful interacti-
ons with the world
Play is divded in 
the public space
Play in th
Interaction
Play
Development
The strategies of 
Copenhagen 
Municipality do not 
cover play outside 
of playground
Two emerging 
trends in play; play 
in nature and 
digital play
The pedagogues 
support the 
children to become 
more independent 
individuals
The quality of the 
social interaction 
determine the 
enjoyment of the 
play
Children and their 
play need to be 
recognized in the 
urban space
Community are key 
to valuable play
Activities differ by 
present participants
Use public parks to 
bring children 
together from 
different instituti-
ons
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:55==
Exploratory User Study
46
Locals attending 
commitee 
meetings are not 
very 
representative
The locals are the 
experts
”We usually say 
that the public 
space is for everyo-
ne, but is it really?”
Public space is not 
created for children, 
elders and different 
etnicities
School 
playgrounds are 
being opened up 
for public use
Dimensions are 
important when 
designing for 
children’s play
Quick play vs. 
spending a day 
playing
Visual vs. value of 
the play
Different 
interest requires 
prioritising in 
Copenhagen
Local recycling 
stations are used as 
community 
grounds
Need for multifunc-
tionality in the 
public space
Curbs, fences and 
safeguards are used 
for play and seating
Need for spaces 
that gather people 
across generations
Parental anxiety is 
most 
prevalent in the 
metropolitan areas
Transparent 
playgrounds makes 
parents feel safe 
letting their kids 
play
Safety rules are 
made to protect 
children from harm
Access to 
beverages creates a 
stay factor for 
parents
Divsion of the 
playground by age
Development 
projects can last 10 
years, while trends 
change
Children were 
played on the 
streets back in the 
day
Play has 
disappeared from 
the city scape
Culture has a big 
impact on play
Children are 
restriced in their 
movement in city
Traf
re an 
essential factor for 
safety
Gehl says ”safer city 
for children is 
ultimately a safer 
city for all”
The curbside should 
be recognizable as 
possible to ensure 
safety
Real safety vs. 
perceived safety
For play to happen 
it needs to feel safe
Rules made by 
Dansk Standard 
must be kept
Playgrounds are a 
safe base for play
he city
Community
Culture
Safety
Strong competition 
for the available 
space
Difference in play  
behavior and 
culture between 
cities.
The children are 
comfortable 
moving around 
safely in the city
The urban environ-
ment can serve as a 
great alternative 
play space 
Caregivers surveil-
ling and controlling 
the children's 
movements
Children's play is 
not limited to a 
Traf
play behavior
==PAGE:56==
05
PROJECT SCOPE
==PAGE:57==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
05
Project Scope
The project scope section outlines and explain the intervention made on the city scale, when observed as 
a system. The purpose is to proivde an overview of the project, including its purpose, goals and conflicts, 
and to define how the project will be executed. 
5.1 Project Scope
In our investigations, we found that the reason for children refraining from playing outside of playgrounds 
in Copenhagen was due to a couple of different factors. These include the neighborhood culture, infra-
structure, and equipment available. This discovery proved that we found a problem, which was both very 
nuanced and complex. Blatantly, the problem lies in the need for a change in the social culture and, thus, 
the public opinion surrounding children’s play in the urban environment.
 
According to Gehl (1996), the rapid development of the city over the past decades means that buildings 
were built to contain people rather than for people. With this rapid development and expansion of the city, 
came a change in culture. The increase in population density, which amounts to a 37% increase from 1995 
to 2022 (Københavns Kommune, 2022), has affected how the city has developed. As the buildings have got-
ten taller, the feeling of community and neighborliness has gotten less (Gehl, 2010).
Image 5 - Copenhageners at Droning Louise’s Bro.
We found the statement confirmed through our initial fieldwork, where we observed the behaviors of  
Copenhageners with their children in the urban environment. The caregivers, especially, showed little 
to no engagement with fellow adults. While the children seemed curious about each other, they usually 
kept in close proximity to their guardians, which hindered them from interacting with other children 
(see section 4.2)
To envision how this problem could be solved, we have taken inspiration from The Impact Scale (Gehl, 
2010). This framework helps to explain how we aim to change the play culture through a curbside inter-
vention. But it also highlights what other initiatives could be taken at other intervention points to solve 
the same problem.
48
==PAGE:58==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
As illustrated by the figure, there is a possibility for intervention on the three levels; curbside, neighbor-
hood, and city scale. Depending on what level of intervention is investigated, a different solution would 
be necessary.
 
On the curbside level, the discovered issue was the lack of motivation to linger. Previously the pavement 
has been a gathering spot for people to meet but has been downgraded to the route leading from A to B 
(Jacobs, 1961). The problem could be solved through the implementation of artifacts, sculptures, or other 
means of beautification and interaction. Installing, e.g. artifacts on the curbside that encourage playful in-
teractions might contribute to facilitating social interactions in a diverse neighborhood and thereby create 
community cohesion (Bentway, 2021; Day, 2017). Furthermore, it is possible through art to create a space for 
exploration and self-development, in addition to providing a sense of belonging for children (Weitz, 1996).
On the neighborhood scale, the issue at hand is the lack of culture around letting children play on the 
street. To create this change in cultural behaviors, a community feeling would need to be developed. 
Examples of how this could be solved would be through events, communal projects, or other reasons 
for social gatherings. Lowe’s (2000) research found that by having neighborhood residents participate 
in community art, they were able to identify similar experiences and strengthen their feelings of solida-
rity by being able to voice and identify common concerns. 
49
Curbside
Neighborhood
City
Figure 16 - The Impact Scale (Gehl, 2010).
==PAGE:59==
Project Scope
50
Encouraging a community feeling has the possibility to lead to a change in the attitude of the adults, which 
could lead to children having more freedom and opportunity for play in public spaces (Churchman, 2003).
Lastly, on a city scale, regulations and strategies would need to be made and implemented in the ur-
ban development of cities. Through our interview with Copenhagen Municipality, (see section 4.1) 
we found that no regulations or strategies have been established to ensure that play is possible on a 
curbside level. The strategies would need to be changed also to encompass the children’s needs. Inter-
vening at the city scale would be a top-down approach to solving the problem. Although this appro-
ach would be useful and simplify the implementation process of installing artifacts, it is a tedious af-
fair, as the writing of strategies is tied to both municipal and governmental policies and policymakers. 
Without taking into account revised statutes or strategies, the construction of a playground may take 
up to 10 years, according to Helle Hagelund from the Municipality of Copenhagen (see section 4.1). 
To increase play in the city, it would thus be necessary to change the perception of children’s presence and 
movement in the public space.  
As explained, this culture change can happen through different outlets, with the above being pos-
sible examples. They would need further investigation as they are based on theoretical knowledge. 
The figure is based on the research and findings and is a snapshot of the situation during the term of the 
project and, why the impact of other future city development strategies has not been taken into account.
5.2 Problem Overview
The initial problem proposed was to integrate play outside of the playground. This led to the investigation 
of children’s play behavior and patterns in the urban environment of Copenhagen. Through this investiga-
tion, we realized that a cultural shift brought about by the city’s development was the true issue. With the 
public space no longer encouraging neighborhood interaction as it once did, the play was relocated from 
the street to the security of the fenced-in playground. 
The research revealed that children seldom left their immediate neighborhood without an adult unless, 
and only on commutes, such as to and from school, leisure activities, the grocery store, etc. The adult su-
pervision was heavily based on the safety concern of the child getting hurt by traffic. Consequently, the 
children have to be accompanied to and from the playground. This results in the play experience being 
less enjoyable for the child, due to the supervision while playing. 
We further found that children were enrolled in various extracurricular activities to fill their free time, 
as opposed to playing on playgrounds. The UN Committee views this as worrisome as it indicates that 
the children are not given enough time to play on their own terms (UN Committee, 2013). We thus saw 
an opportunity to develop a solution that would target children during these unsupervised moments. 
We aimed to solve the problem through intervention on the curbside level with a bottom-up approach. 
We believe that a systematic change in the play culture in Copenhagen can be effected through the inter-
vention of an artifact targeting children in the public space. As previously mentioned, this is simply one 
of many ways to address the issue. However, we believe this is where we can make the biggest impact 
on the systematic change, given our position, skill set, and expertise. Additionally, this aligns with Gehl’s 
approach to designing cities for people, where qualified decisions are made through the awareness of the 
individual’s utilization of the public space (Gehl, 2010).
==PAGE:60==
51
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
*This observation is made from a Danish perspective. Cultural allowances for independence might differ.
Figure 17 - Problem overview.
We discovered that the ages seven to ten are a critical period in the child’s development. At this time, chil-
dren become more independent in terms of their allowance to roam the city*, social interactions are at 
their peak, and the interest in playgrounds is declining. This age range also represents a transitional stage 
before pre-adolescence, which is connected to a loss of interest in play, and compared to a younger target 
group, they are able to convey their wants and requirements (Castella, 2018). Based on these parameters, 
the target group was chosen. With the possibility of affecting this group’s sense of belonging in the city, 
we see a strong prospect for intervention. Implementing a solution designed for them could offer a greater 
sense of ownership in an environment planned and developed for adults. 
As the saying goes, Rome was not built in a day. A change in culture within a demographic will not either. 
Our decision to create a solution that fosters momentarily play is based on multiple factors. One is the de-
licate space of parental worry. As mentioned, we saw that parental concern for their children’s safety con-
sequently affects the children’s possibilities of exploring their local environment (see section 2.3.1 and 4.2).
Therefore, we see the need for a solution that does not keep the children lingering on their commutes. 
Furthermore, by encouraging short-term play, there is an opportunity for more users to engage with the 
solution. We see this as an opportunity, as the quantity of user interactions could contribute to enhancing 
the product’s appeal.
==PAGE:61==
52
Project Scope
5.3 The Development Arena
A development arena was created to map actors and artifacts that influence or can be influenced by the 
solution. It is worth noting that with the progression of the project, the arena has evolved. As can be deri-
ved from the map, there are many different categories within the project, with 10 major and several smaller 
ones. To illustrate their connection, they overlap each other. Given the project’s focus on the implementa-
tion of play in the urban environment, the cityscape is the largest of these categories. There, we observe a 
multitude of stakeholders and artifacts interacting, both on and through various constellations. 
 
Figure 18 - The development arena.
The main subject of the Children category was children who roam and interact with the urban space, main-
ly independently. Through our observation, and general social knowledge, we found that children begin 
to move through the city without a guardian at the ages of seven to eight. This independency depends on 
parental permission, which is often determined based on factors such as culture.
 
Before being granted permission, the children move with caregivers, another central category. The actors 
in this category strongly influence how the children interact with the city. We observed the children being 
shielded, controlled, or otherwise limited by parents, etc (see section 4.2).
 
Overall, we have two subcategories within Children; the independent child and the controlled child. The 
subcategory, independent child, contains; free and playful children. We observed that these behaviors 
were exhibited in familiar environments, such as at playgrounds, the schoolyard, parks, or on the commute 
to school. Our presumption is that this familiarity is gained from repeatedly walking the same route. This 
group of children showed trust and confidence in getting around.
Legal matters
Politicians
==PAGE:62==
53
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
On the other hand, the controlled child was strongly connected to their primary caregivers. They exhibited 
more restraint and spent less time interacting with their surroundings. This was caused, in part, by the 
children being physically limited in their independent mobility by being carried on or strapped into cargo 
bikes, or held by the hand.
 
The role of authority of the caregivers greatly impacted the children’s interaction with the city. When in 
the company of an elder sibling, they showed less strict, curious behavior toward both the city and other 
children. When with parents, they showed more restraint, especially in their interaction with others. We 
generally observed that the parents physically shielded their children from the world, which led to the chil-
dren being limited in their playful interactions with the city. We presumed that this fear of the child getting 
hurt, can be projected onto the children, who thereby gain an insecure attachment to the environment.
5.4 Conflicts
We identified the four following conflicts in the development arena.  
Children & City scape
We discovered that children were not considered in urban development planning at a govern-
mental level. The strategies do not include children’s needs, which comes to show in how the 
city space has needed to be redesigned to provide space for the children. As a result, parks, 
squares, and playgrounds had to go through a makeover to accommodate the children (Appendix 03.9). 
Unfortunately, this has harmed the children’s sense of belonging to the city outside of the areas specifically 
designed for them. For instance, we found that the children we observed did not engage much in playful 
behaviors before getting to the schoolyard’s cobblestone.
Children, Caregivers & Traffic
We discovered a conflict between the traffic, the children, and their caregivers. Recent deca-
des have been spent improving the traffic conditions, leading to a less walkable city. Traffic 
signs, guard poles, street light, etc., has gradually encroached into the already narrow pave-
ments. As a result, children’s play is shielded from not only the traffic but also from the rest of the urban 
space. Moreover, as previously stated, we observed, that the caregivers physically shield the children. As 
a result, the parents gained control over their children’s movements. We suspect, that a significant factor 
in the parent’s need to restrain their children’s movement is their concern about traffic (see section 2.3.1). 
Fearing their child’s injury, they ended up restricting them from interacting with the city. 
 
With the parent’s precautions, the children receive little independence in their movements through the 
city. This is despite our findings, that children generally show greater caution on their own, compared to 
the adults we observed. It might be presumed, that the parents’ anxiety influences the children’s perceived 
safety in their environment. This presumption is based on the observations we made of the children’s he-
sitations in interacting with the city.
==PAGE:63==
54
Project Scope
We assume that the prevailing perception is, as Gehl (2010) explained it, that with the increase in traffic in 
the city, a rise in the frequency of accidents followed. And although heavy traffic might make the roads feel 
hazardous, the fact is, according to the Copenhagen Municipality, statistics show the contrary. The majori-
ty of the time, few accidents occur in densely trafficked areas (Appendix 03.9). Therefore, it can be argued 
that the perception of the risks by traffic might be inaccurate.
City Development & Regulations
When architects plan urban development, they are subjected to the legislation, rules, and 
regulations made by the state. This leads to a conflict between the two. In our interview with 
Copenhagen Municipality, we learned that, despite their desire, it is not feasible at a given 
time to plan the city with children in mind. Though their current strategies aim to embrace all citizens, they 
are aware of their shortcomings. As they are subjected to following these policies, the strategies would 
need altering to ensure that the children’s meets were met. 
Traffic & Events
The conflict between event and traffic stems from the traffic having to be stopped or deri-
ved for the activities to take place. This is evident during, amongst other events, the Copen-
hagen marathon. However, there is an opportunity, when the traffic is temporarily halted. 
At the half marathons, the locals usually make creative use of the closed streets. Without cars on the 
roads, they become a canvas for painting with chalk, which is seen as a communal activity to partici-
pate in. The events are good opportunities for altering people’s perception of the street as more than 
a pathway for transportation.
 
The imperative conflict in the project is the Children & Cityscape, which is considered to be the root cause 
of changing the culture of children’s play in the city. The behavior in public spaces cannot be changed if 
the children are not given the space and opportunity to play. Hence, it is not possible to start the virtuous 
cycle described by Gehl (1996). Adding additional curbside experiences might lead to the opportunity 
of recreating the use of the pavement as a gathering point. By solving the problem, the corresponding 
conflicts should be resolved, given their nature of being a symptom of the same problem (Norman, 2018). 
Creating a change in culture that emphasizes play on the streets might encourage a reduction in traffic, 
thus leading to a change in the parent’s perception of safety in the city.
==PAGE:64==
06
DEFINE
==PAGE:65==
06
Define
The chapter summarizes the findings from the literature and user study, using this information to define 
key aspects of the problem space. This includes a definition of the requirement, the target group, and 
product placement for the final solution.
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
56
6.1 Persona
A persona was developed to acquire an understanding of the target group, and through that, make infor-
med decisions in relation to the project. The method was utilized as a supplementary tool for understan-
ding the target group’s behavior. To gather an in-depth understanding of the target group, a map of the 
children’s development was created. The map is based on the research done by Tilley, Anning, & Welles 
(2002) and Castella (2018), and highlights the three parameters, motor, cognitive, and social-emotional 
development. 
Figure 19 - Persona.
The persona is based on information acquired through desk research and fieldwork. The findings made it 
apparent that the ages seven to ten were particularly interesting for the project scope. This was, among 
other factors, because of the children’s newly gained independence for moving through the city unsuper-
vised. Another intriguing factor was that, in contrast to earlier stages of child development, where motor 
skills are predominated, the cognitive and social-emotional abilities were the ones in focus, see figure 3. 
==PAGE:66==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
57
Figure 20 - The child development stage at seven to ten years old.
As it is possible to deduce from the figure, the most dominant categories of development are cognitive 
and social-emotional skills. At this stage, children begin to learn and understand rules and develop logical 
thinking. Children become able to tell the difference between reality and illusion and start to understand 
the relationship between cause and effect.
 
At this point in the child’s development, the majority of the motor skills have matured, indicating that 
only fine motor skills are under development. Additionally, the social and interpersonal relationships are 
significant at this time, which comes to show with the children choosing social play interactions over inde-
pendent ones to a higher extent. The same conclusion was made in the co-creation workshop (see section 
3.4) which demonstrated that the enjoyment of the play was not determined by the activity, but rather by 
the quality of the interaction. 
Developmental stage at 7 to 10 years old
The model below was created to gain a better understanding of the target group’s level of development.
Developmental stage at 7 to 10 years old
When designing a solution, certain constraints are important to keep in mind. This includes the children’s 
ability to understand abstract thinking (Castella, 2018), and the rapidity of the child’s development, which 
differs from individual to individual. As previously mentioned (see section 2.2), children’s physical charac-
teristics and their social, logical, and cognitive intellect might differ substantially. 
Inclusivity beyond the target
One of the advantages of the selected target group is that a successful solution also would benefit a larger 
demographic, given the large difference in children’s development at the ages seven to ten. In this span, 
a wide range of abilities is developed within cognitive, social, and motor skills. As children’s development 
rate is not equal, two seven-year-olds might not share the skill sets and might also have extremely diverse 
7 y/o
8 y/o
9 y/o
10 y/o
Increased empathy and ability to interact with others 
Easily inﬂuenced by peers. Wants to ﬁt in with peer group rules. Strong group identity
Begins to understand others can have a different perception
Begins logical thinking
Reciprocal awareness
Balancing
Understand the course and effect relation, able to distinguishing reality from fantasy
6 y/o
Ability to engage in competition
Can understand several different point of views
Show signs of more responsible behaviour; takes better care of possessions
7 y/o
8 y/o
9 y/o
10 y/o
11 y/o
13 y/o
Understanding their own self
Understands game strategy, competition, rules 
Social developement and emotions expressions 
Cognitive development
Motor development
==PAGE:67==
Define
58
physical characteristics. The solution is, therefore, required to function with little to no language needed, 
which also reduces the barrier of usage by those who lack communication abilities. Additionally, if the 
solution has to be adaptable to children with an average height between 123 and 138 cm (Tilley, Anning, & 
Welles, 2002), a wheelchair user could utilize the solution as well. 
6.2 Product Requirements
The Product Requirement is based on the desk research and the findings acquired through fieldwork. Espe-
cially, the principles of inclusive- and universal design are embraced, as it has been important to develop a 
solution that can be utilized by a diverse range of citizens. Additionally, insights collected from experts during 
the fieldwork are used as a basis for the Product Requirement to meet the needs of stakeholders and users. 
 
The purpose of the Product Requirement is to get an overview of all the requirements and criteria the final 
solution has to fulfill, with the criteria being the measurements of success (Appendix 01.3). The factors 
outline the solution’s functionality, usability, design, etc.
Some of the requirements, Usability, and Inclusivity, have been emphasized in the section that follows, 
given their particular importance to the final solution.
Usability
The final solution targets children between the age of seven to ten. Therefore, it is required that the solu-
tion is suitable for the target group’s dimension and abilities, with a particular emphasis on their develop-
mental stage (see section 6.1). To accommodate the target group’s developmental stage, the functionality 
of the solution needs to be logical, to not lose the children’s interest immediately when interacting with 
the solution. This means that the solution must not break the framework that has been set (Appendix 03.8).
Additionally, the fieldwork showed that the type of play did not have much impact on the play experience, 
but was instead affected by the quality of social interaction (see section 4.3). Therefore, the solution must 
be usable by more than one user at a time, while not requiring multiple users in order to provide the chil-
dren with a playful experience when they move alone. 
Inclusivity
As the solution will be integrated into the public space, the principles of UD, have acted as a guideline that 
helps remove barriers to enable a wide range of citizens to participate equally, thus preventing feelings 
of exclusion from the community. The solution should accommodate citizens of various abilities and di-
mensions. A criterion is that citizens at a height of 95 cm should be able to use the solution, as it embraces 
children down to the age of three years old (Tilley, Anning, & Welles, 2002).
 
The solution must be intuitive in use and should not require instructions to understand how it is utilized, 
as to include as many citizens as possible regardless of their language barriers, reading ability, and con-
centration level. 
 
==PAGE:68==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
59
6.2.1 Black Boxed Requirements
Some factors have been necessary to black box, due to limited resources. These factors are included in 
the Product Requirement presented for future work, as they are crucial in the development of a successful 
solution, why, they must not be completely neglected. 
 
Quality
The quality of the solution determines whether the final solution can tolerate long time use in outdoor 
conditions. This is dependent on a variety of parameters, including material selection, construction robust-
ness, maintenance, and so on.
These parameters have not been investigated in the project, hence they can not be determined. Although, 
it is assessed that the solution should be kept with minimal to no maintenance. This requires that the so-
lution can cope with repeated use and tolerates seasonal changes with variations in temperature, wind, 
humidity, etc. The solution should at least be durable for three years in Danish weather conditions, where 
it is essential to consider that the cold and rainy months are predominant.
 Safety & Legal matter
Safety is, likewise, an important factor to include in the Product Requirement to ensure the user’s safety 
when using the final solution. The solution should not put any users at risk of injury or danger when utili-
zed.
 
Particularly, when targeting children and their play, the regulations and requirements become increasingly 
stringent. Playgrounds and equipment are required to follow Dansk Standard (Appendix 03.9), to ensure 
the children’s safety when playing. The Dansk Standard is a basic guideline and collection of standardiza-
tions and regulations (Dansk Standard, 2018), that a final solution characterized as play equipment has to 
follow to be implemented in Copenhagen Municipality.
Due to limited resources, it has not been investigated what the standard specifically entails, as it inclu-
des several factors related to manufacturing, construction, etc., which have not been determined for the 
final solution in this project. However, if the solution is not characterized as play equipment, but instead, 
as installation or sculpture, it is exempted from the Dansk Standard’s safety criteria, even though it may 
encourage playful interaction. Allowing for a variety of design opportunities, and enabling a more feasi-
ble implementation opportunity. This has been a consideration, which has affected the ideation process. 
Particularly, there has been a focus on installations, which can be composed of different elements such as 
sound, light, and texture, and is adapted to the environment in which it is placed. The interaction between 
the installation and the spectator is often emphasized.
  
The Dansk Standard’s regulations can, to some extent, be a barrier to the development of the final soluti-
on. Risk-taking is a key component of play. Children have the opportunity to explore risks and the conse-
quences when exposed to them as a part of a stimulating, challenging, and controlled environment, and 
it is considered greatly beneficial for development (Dansk Standard, 2017). Therefore, it is important that 
security and benefits are balanced. However, the safety of the children must be prioritized, even if it might
 
==PAGE:69==
Define
60
affect the play value. This relates to considerations of the environment and surroundings in which the 
solution is placed. It is necessary that the placement of the solution is protected from both bicycle and 
car traffic, but allows room for children to expand their playful behavior (Gehl Playscapes, n.d.). A factor, 
included in the Product Requirement, that addresses the safety issues, is Transparency, which states that 
the solution must be transparent to ensure that the surroundings have visibility of the child interacting 
with the solution.
 
Factors
Requirement
Criteria
Comment
Usability
The solution should be 
usable for children bet-
ween 7-10 years old.
The interaction with the 
solution needs to be logi-
cal to accommodate the 
children’s developmental 
stage.
The solution must be sui-
table for the target group’s 
dimensions and abilities.
Multiple users should be 
able to engage with the 
solution at once.
The solution should be 
usable by more that one 
user at a time, but should 
not require multiple users 
for interaction.
The users must want to 
engage with the solution 
repeatedly.
The solution should enga-
ge repeating visits.
Inclusivity
The solution needs to fol-
low safety regulations set 
by Dansk Standard.t.
To be legally implemen-
ted in the public space of 
Copenhagen, it needs to 
follow the national stan-
dard requirements. These 
standards are followed by 
the Copenhagen Munici-
pality.
Factors
Requirement
Criteria
Comment
Quality
The solution should be 
kept functional with 
minimal to no mainten-
ance.
The solution should 
be durable for at least 
three years outside in all 
seasons.
Safety & 
Legal matter
The solution needs to 
follow safety regulations 
set by Dansk Standard.t.
To be legally implemen-
ted in the public space 
of Copenhagen, it needs 
to follow the national 
standard requirements. 
These standards are 
followed by the Copen-
hagen Municipality.
Figure 22 - The black boxed product requirements.
Figure 21 - A snippet of the product requirement. See Appendix 01.3, for a full version of the product requirement.
==PAGE:70==
Kapelvej
Griffenfeldsgade
Nørrebrogade
Stengade
Korsgade
Korsgade
Struenseegade
Rantzausgade
Hans Tavens Gade
Kapelvej
Folkets Park
Assistens
Kirkegård
Hans Tavens
Park
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
61
6.3 Product Placement
The streets and their sidewalk have a big impact on the city with Jacobs (1961), even crediting them as 
the most vital organ of the city. The captivation of the streets is directly linked to the city and vice versa 
(Gehl, 2010). According to Jacobs (1961), the sidewalk has a significant role in the safety and assimilation of 
children, with the safest places for children to play being crowded neighborhood sidewalks. Research has 
shown that 70 percent of all life in the city takes place in the curb zones (København Kommune, 2018). The 
curbsides, therefore present an obvious placement opportunity for integrating play in the city. Focusing 
on larger sidewalks reduces the disturbance of the general flow of the city. This also excludes areas with 
the busiest traffic, e.g. Nørrebrogade, guaranteeing a perceived safer play experience.
 
In our observations, we found that children move independently between neighborhoods and schools, 
why this would be an advantageous placement for the solution. A small sample of the observed children 
also showed playful behavior interacting with the environment on these commutes.
 
Examples of specific areas that fit the requirements are:
Figure 23 - Solution placement.
Examples of specific areas that fit the requirements are: The sidewalk in front of Hellig Kors Kirke, as it is 
placed between a school, Blågård Skole and an after-school leisure-time club. As opposed to a typical 
two-lane sidewalk, this one is wider and situated in a less trafficked area. Our firsthand familiarity with the 
area lets us know that pedestrians avoid following the pavement, and rather stroll directly across the road. 
The solution would, therefore, not only be protected, but it might also influence other pedestrians’ move-
ments, fostering safer pedestrian traffic.
 
==PAGE:71==
Define
62
Another possibility would be by Korsgade 63, Nørrebro. At this location, the sidewalk is relatively large and 
in front of a residential area. The area is partly blocked by bicycle stands and thereby reasonably secured 
from traffic. Moreover, with the church, Hellig Kors Kirke, nearby, this location is also centered in between 
schools and institutions. excludes areas with the busiest traffic, e.g. Nørrebrogade, guaranteeing a percei-
ved safer play experience.
 
In our observations, we found that children move independently between neighborhoods and schools, 
why this would be an advantageous placement for the solution. A small sample of the observed children 
also showed playful behavior interacting with the environment on these commutes. 
Figure 24 - Solution placement at Korsgade 63, Nørrebro.
Figure 25 - The curbside zone in an area of Nørrebro marked with white.  
==PAGE:72==
07
CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT
==PAGE:73==
07
Concept Development 
The chapter provides a description of the ideation process that has been inspired, amongst others, by 
the children’s contribution throughout the co-creation. The ideation process resulted in six overall design 
concepts that are described briefly. 
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
64
7.1 Results from co-creation
A co-creation workshop was held with the target group as a means to develop a solution based on a qu-
alified foundation. Our research claimed, that children are seldom advised, nor get the chance to voice 
their wants and needs when urban areas are designed and developed, even when intended for them (see 
section 4.1). Thus we found it necessary to involve them in the design process. Following a UCD approach., 
led to a greater possibility of avoiding repeating failures, as the exclusion of children. The involvement 
ensured that we fulfilled the target groups’ actual needs.
The workshop created an opportunity to empower the target group to take part in the design process. 
With more time available, it would have been beneficial for the project to include more stakeholders in 
the ideation process. An interesting proposition would be to invite stakeholders from different fields, to 
inspire, cooperate and co-create together. Given the children’s expertise in their play, they were prioritized.
Their insights provided different perspectives on play and a better understanding of the factors that make 
play enjoyable. 
 
The co-creation workshop was divided into two main sessions, the first part described in a previous sec-
tion (see section 4.3). The second part’s objective was to engage the target group to ideate and develop 
concepts. The concepts represented what they wanted to play with on a daily commute. To create an ima-
ginative setting, they were asked to pretend they were going home from school and crossing a new play 
item along the way.
12 creations were made by the 17 present students (Appendix 05.9). They were allowed to group up, to 
ensure that they could inspire each other and felt comfortable. The children were encouraged to explain 
their concepts and share their thoughts on the key elements, either verbally or through cartoons. This was 
an attempt to accommodate the children’s abilities and ensure several communication opportunities.
Image 6 - Some of the creations presented by the students.
Creation 1
Made by two girls
Creation 3
Made by two girls
Creation 2
Made by a boy
==PAGE:74==
65
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
The main findings from the analysis of the children’s creations are as follows: 
•	
Nearly all the creations embraced social interactions. This aligned with the findings from the first 
part of the workshop (see section 4.3). Examples of social interactive solutions were slides for ra-
cing against each other and a camera recording people’s movements on the other side of the world. 
•	
Competition was a repeating element in the children’s creations. At this age, the children en-
joy challenges and are able to engage in competition and follow rules (Castella, 2018), and they 
find it particularly enjoyable, as it leads to feelings of accomplishment or success from trying. 
•	
The target group had a lot of different interests, that they practiced after school, which was refle-
cted in their solutions.  It is worth noting, that their interest varied significantly, despite sharing 
age and area of residency. 
•	
The target group had not developed a mature level of abstract thinking. Resulting in many of the 
children’s creations resembling known objects, that might be found at a playground. However, some 
creations held unpredictable elements, such as a teddy bear doubling as a vending machine.
7.2 Ideation process
Our ideation process led to ideas and solutions generated through sessions with mind mapping (Appen-
dix 02.2) and brainstorming techniques. The information acquired throughout the project influenced the 
outcome and resulted in the process being done iteratively. The outcome of the process was six concepts 
derived from over 50 distinct ideas, totaling 11 separate design proposals.
Initially, the information gathered throughout the project was collected and sorted in the Affinity Diagram, 
see figure 15. The key statements were then placed in the Mind Map to be further ideated on. These state-
ments include, amongst others; ”Play starter”, ”Feeling of success”, ”Use of the environment”, and ”Change 
in trends”. By allowing us to draw inspiration from the data gathered, the mind map marked the beginning 
of the ideation process, as it aided in structuring and exploration. Ideas that sprung from the mindmap 
included; guiding paths to learn how to move in the city, lines guiding from a to b, and vegetables for a 
playful learning experience.
 
To further ideate, several brainstorming sessions were conducted. These sessions contained different met-
hods and techniques including, silent and collective brainstorming, to ensure that no ideas were lost in the 
process. The aim of the silent brainstorming was not to influence each other and thus broaden the solution 
space, and the collective’s was to inspire new ideas. The ideas were reviewed and clustered afterward, crea-
ting different categories of ideas. This proved to be the ”optimal” framework for producing as many ideas 
as possible within a short time frame.
==PAGE:75==
66
Concept Development
Three keywords were identified; Simple, Feedback, and Installations, creating categories under which the 
ideas were clustered. This created the foundation for another session of brainstorming. By creating catego-
ries, the aim var diverged, thus narrowing down the framework to ideate within. The new ideas generated 
were then clustered with similar ideas and possible combinations, see figure 26. These were the basis for 
further concept development, which resulted in eight conceptual ideas.
  
Each of the clusters was further investigated with various design proposals, varying in shape, size, and fun-
ction, thus creating multiple proposals within one concept. This led to a collection of 11 different design 
proposals. Drawings were created to describe possible features, functionality, play principles, etc. see figure 
27 and 28. 
 
Through continuous learning, the design proposals have undergone multiple iterations, where they have 
been reevaluated and redesigned as new knowledge has been gathered.
Figure 26 - Brainstorming session based on the keywords; installation, simple, feedback (light).
==PAGE:76==
67
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
7.3 Concept Development
In the ideation process, we developed multiple ideas that all sought to solve the problem. This led to six 
concepts with eleven different design proposals. The concepts are briefly described;
Stepping stone
The Stepping Stones are pathways that aim to direct or encourage different movements. They 
have a texture, shape, etc., that differs from the pavement. While interacting with the pathway, 
the user can receive feedback such as light, sound, colors, patterns, etc., to enhance the enjoy-
ment of the play.
Light Strip
The Light Strip is a strip of light integrated along or in between the pavement, and it is con-
trolled by interaction. These interactions could be the speed of the light controlled through 
repeating pressure or the universal game of don’t step on the crack.
Light Poles
The concept encompasses light poles that are scattered around, making a path where the 
light can be turned off and on by pushing a button on the poles. The light can both be turned 
on and off randomly or systematically in different colors or create different patterns on the 
ground.
Swirly Rail
The concept is a rail that is in different shapes, which encourages various interactions. These 
interactions include encouraging movement along the way or more static interactions, such 
as climbing or using it as a hangout spot.
Interactive Board
The board is covered in switches. The switches react when the user interacts with them, which 
allows the user to leave a mark on the environment, like writing a message, creating an image, 
etc. Different games could be incorporated, such as whack-a-mole or memory games. 
Playful Installations
The playful installations aim to encourage activity by being changeable through interactions, 
leading to people having the power to change the appearance of the city. The interaction 
could be by turning plates, having light illuminate when passing through arches, and more.  
==PAGE:77==
68
Concept Development
Figure 27 - Sketching of the installation concepts.
==PAGE:78==
08
CONCEPT EVALUATION
==PAGE:79==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
70
08
Concept Evaluation
In this section, we will conduct a thorough evaluation of the 11 concepts. The objective is to provide a 
comprehensive analysis that will enable us to make informed decisions about the choice of concept.
8.1 Decision Matrix
A Decision Matrix was utilized to decide which of the concepts should be further developed, prototyped, 
and tested. The purpose of the method is to compare the concept proposal to the established criteria, thus 
leading to well-considered decisions. The matrix has two axes, imposing as the criteria; play potential and 
feasibility.
 
Play potential refers to the possibility for alternative play options within a single solution, as well as the 
duration of which the solution experience will continue to be enjoyable for the target group.
 
Feasibility represents the possibility of developing, creating and testing the solution within the given time 
frame and availability of resources. This criterion also refers to the possibility of implementation without 
disturbing the environment and flow of the city. As a consequence, the concept proposals have been pla-
ced on the matrix, with the previously specified placement in mind (see section 6.3).
Figure 28 - Some of the concepts evaluated by the pedagogues. 
To get a better grasp of the possible play potential of each of the concepts, two of the previously inter-
viewed pedagogues were advised. This dialogue was considered a minimum viable product test, why it is 
further explored in a later section. The pedagogues’ insights, understanding of children’s play, and sugges-
tions gave us new ideas for the concepts and provided us with an understanding of what elements might 
be necessary to keep the children intrigued time after time of use. 
==PAGE:80==
71
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
Three design proposals were selected using the matrix. They were chosen as they offered the most poten-
tial for the implementation of various play potentials within the solution, and because of their feasibility 
in being testable and able to be implemented in the designated areas of our choosing. Additionally, we 
found that the three options had the best chance of meeting the product specifications (Appendix 01.3). 
 
The larger installations, as can be deduced, are situated in the matrix’s lower quarter. These had the least 
potential as they did not fulfill the criteria. They proved to have the least play potential, given our target 
group’s need for interaction and feedback, as pointed out by the pedagogues consulted (see section 8.4). 
Furthermore, it was observed that the proposals would be challenged in trying to achieve the product 
requirements, which impacted the likelihood of the solutions being feasible. Especially the criteria of trans-
parency and avoiding inconvenience for others would be hard to fulfill with the larger installations.
Figure 29 - Decision Matrix.
==PAGE:81==
72
Concept Evaluation
8.2 Iterations
The decision matrix underwent a number of iterations as the design proposals were positioned in accor-
dance with our gathered knowledge, expectations, and experience. The iterations were mainly based on 
the experiences we had while developing and planning the prototypes for testing.
  
One of the discoveries made was that the rail proved too complicated an installation than we initially 
anticipated. To test the principle, which was to climb, sit and hang out on, it would require a certain dura-
bility, which we did not have the resources available to ensure. This gave us the indication that the rail was 
positioned too high on feasibility compared to other proposals. This made room for other solutions, such 
as the Interactive Board, which was moved up significantly, making it one of the solutions to be further 
developed and investigated.  
8.3 The Three Selected Concepts
Three concepts were selected using the Decision Matrix. They all share some of the same game principles, 
as well as sharing other parameters, such as fostering the same developmental skills. Memory and se-
quence recognition are game principles that are repeated in all of the selected concepts, as this practice 
supports the development of cognitive skills, providing the children with better short-term memory skills. 
These practices are important, as they align with the target group’s developmental stage, where cognitive 
development is at its peak (see section 6.1), and fostering cognition leads to better academic development 
(Gleave & Hamilton, 2012). 
Some of the feasible games encourage psychical activity, such as wack-a-mole, which can support motor 
development with skills like coordination, strength, and balance. All the concepts can be played alone or 
in interaction with others in games that are either cooperative, collaborative, or competitive. This strengt-
hens the child’s social understanding and -skills, which is also particularly important for the target group. 
 
The following is a detailed description of the three concepts and how these differ from each other in sup-
porting the child’s development. Furthermore, each of the concepts is labeled with play type and practices 
identified in the co-creation workshop. 
Concept 1 - The Interactive Board
The Interactive Board is a bigger installation that invites citizens to interact. The board has several devel-
opment opportunities, that can vary from the user having to turn a switch on and off or flip fields to create 
a pattern or message. Through interaction with the board, the citizen has the opportunity to leave a mark 
in the urban space. The next time the citizen passes the board, others’ interactions might have changed or 
modified the appearance of the board, thus creating an element of surprise.
This can assist in fostering a sense of community as the citizens can interact with the board collaboratively. 
The concept can double as an interactive game with different game opportunities, like four in a row, wack-
a-mole, path memorization, etc. The games have the potential to be of various degrees of difficulty to 
appeal to different age groups. This can encourage competitive and collaborative interactions with peers, 
or across generations.
==PAGE:82==
73
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
Several of the play practices identified at the co-creation workshop can be applied to the concept, this 
includes, interactive, social, competition, and collaboration.
In interaction with the concept’s switches, the child’s motor skills can be challenged to improve develop-
ment. More specifically, the child must use fine motor skills, as the interaction with the switches requires 
a certain precision. With creativity, the child can create all kinds of patterns or messages. This supports 
the child in expressing themselves artistically and articulating their feelings and thoughts in the public 
environment. 
Concept 2 - The Stepping Stone
The Stepping stone encourages citizens to step on the paths, these paths can have the appearance of a 
raised stone or otherwise differ from the pavement on which it is placed. As citizens interact with the ele-
ment, it activates feedback, such as light or sound. This allows for the opportunity of different games such 
as races, follow a path, minesweeper, etc. Through the use of different colors, the user interacting with the 
path can be challenged on different levels of difficulty. Based on the description, the following play prac-
tices could be applied to the concept; interactive, social, and competition.
The interactions with the stepping stone enable the children to develop their motor skills, as they would 
be required to jump or climb between the stones. Engaging the children in physical activities disguised as 
play leads to an increase in strength, coordination, balance, and well-being. Additionally, it is feasible to 
challenge the cognitive sense, in the same manner as described in the previous concept, by integrating 
similar games.
Concept 2 - The Light Poles
The Light Poles are several poles placed with distance, creating a path. Each pole is a source of light that can be 
turned on and off by the push of a button. As the citizens push the button, the light is activated systematically 
or randomly, meaning one light pole’s button can turn on or off another pole’s light. This can create different 
types of play interacting with the Light Poles, with games previously mentioned such as, races, wack-a-mole, 
path memorization, etc. This concept also allows for competition or collaborations between different users. 
The play practices that can be applied to the concept are; interaction, social, competition, collaboration, 
and unpredictability.
==PAGE:83==
74
Concept Evaluation
Similarly to the previous concepts, in the interaction with the Light Poles, the child’s motor skills are de-
veloped, in particular the gross motor skills, with the child physically moving between the poles. As the 
light can be turned on and off in a systematic pattern, it can challenge the child’s logical thinking and 
understanding of the relationship between cause and effect, which is a cognitive skill that is developed at 
the stage of the target group.
 
Each concept would be able to satisfy the requirements of the final solution. Therefore, we found it crucial 
to assess the solutions with the target group and examine their interest in the proposed solutions.
8.4 Minimum Viable Product Testing
To evaluate the concepts’ function and to obtain feedback from the end users and other relevant stakehol-
ders, a test of the minimum viable product was conducted. The testing was done before and after selecting 
the three concepts. This allowed for testing the children’s interest in one of the potential prototypes and 
professional evaluation from pedagogues. The intended goal was to specify important qualities found in 
all three prototypes and to clarify what solution should be the final.
8.4.1 Feedback From Dialogue With Pedagogues
We brought the 11 design proposals to an open discussion with Christian and Louise, two pedagogues, 
who had previously been interviewed, in order to gather expert feedback. The pedagogues’ opinions and 
experience led to new knowledge and idea development when they identified multiple opportunities for 
different proposals.
A significant insight gained from their feedback was that various age groups have varied interests, hence 
they would have different demands from interactions. While younger children would be satisfied with 
simply exploring a solution without feedback, older children need more interactive solutions that en-
courage competition and socializing.
In Christian’s opinion, the children would easily feel intrigued to interact with all the proposed solutions, 
given that the game principles seemed recognizable in all of them. The final solution, therefore, needs a 
sufficient degree of visual recognition.
The feedback did not provide a definite answer as to which of the concepts was better, comparatively, but 
instead led to a discussion of what elements are crucial for the optimal play experience. As a result, we 
decided to evaluate the concepts on other parameters, as previously mentioned, see figure 29.
8.4.2 Testing Play Principles
The purpose of the testing was to gain a better understanding of the play potential and key characteristics 
of each of the three concepts, thus helping to decide which concept to develop further.
 
A low-fidelity prototype was developed to simulate the concepts’ game principles. As a result of the MVP 
principle fail fast, fail cheap, the prototypes were produced from inexpensive and available resources. This 
enabled an opportunity for quickly creating and evaluating prototypes, thus learning from the process 
and potential failures.
==PAGE:84==
75
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
The three prototypes were all tested simultaneously, in the same location and under the same conditions 
(Appendix 06.7-06.9). The prototypes were placed outside of Klub Filippa as the children arrived at the insti-
tution after school. Each prototype was accompanied by a sign with illustrations that represented several 
play suggestions, see image 7. This allowed the children’s interactions with the prototype to be observed 
from a distance without causing unnecessary interference. 
The length of time the children spent interacting with the prototype was used as an indicator of their level 
of interest, and the play potential was observed by the children’s interactions. Lastly, their engagement 
was used to identify interactions that differed from the predicted use. 
Image 7 - Play suggestions for the MVP prototype testing.
Image 8 - MVP prototype testing in front of Fritids- Junior- og Ungdomsklubben Filippa.
==PAGE:85==
76
Concept Evaluation
Results
The goal was to observe the children’s interactions with the prototype and thus determine which concept 
had the most traction. This, however, was not the outcome. We observed that the prototypes went unno-
ticed, which may be a result of a variety of reasons:
•	
The children appeared to be focused on getting to Klubben Filippa and were not aware of their sur-
roundings. They showed no signs of veering off the path connecting the school and club.
•	
The prototypes were visually too simple; the fact that the function worked was not enough to capture 
the children’s interest. This might be a result of the level of abstraction at this stage of development, 
see figure 3. 
•	
The area in front of Klub Filippa did not seem like a space the children felt comfortable claiming, 
without an adult present, as seen when a pedagogue went outside of the border of the club. His pre-
sence gave the children the confidence to flock outside on the pavement. This conclusion is in line 
with previous findings, which showed that children only begin playful behavior in safe settings.
•	
 Few children engaged with the prototype, but it usually resulted in other children shooing them 
away. Indicating that, despite the signs encouraging interactions, they felt uncomfortable dealing 
with something unknown.
Learnings
Despite the test not procuring the anticipated results, we found an opportunity to learn from the errors 
and observations we made. The majority of the children did not spend time reading the instructions and 
game suggestions, which indicated that a play starter was needed to entice interactions with the prototy-
pes. The light poles, the most visible of the prototypes, were also the only ones that garnered significant 
attention, which led to the conclusion of how crucial visibility is for the solution to encourage play.
 
The results of the test were impacted by a variety of factors. The duration of the testing session was one. 
We anticipate that the children would have behaved differently, ideally, more explorative if they had been 
left for a longer period of time. The children were shooing each other away from the prototypes, which 
signals that they were cautious of getting reprimanded for engaging with it. 
 
Regardless of the absence of anticipated interactions, we were able to identify the advantages and disad-
vantages of each of the concepts. We discovered that the final solution can not occupy too much space, 
through our testing, as bicycles had trouble passing the prototypes. However, the solution still needs to be 
visible to grab the children’s attention. Additionally, we found that the solution needs to have an obvious 
play starter to communicate the playability without instructions.
==PAGE:86==
77
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
8.5 Selected Concept
Throughout the ideation process, it became clear the problem can be solved in various ways, the final con-
cept selected is, therefore, just one of many solutions. Furthermore, if the problem was to be resolved at 
a different level (see section 5.1), it would need other approaches or interventions that are not within the 
scope of this project.
 
The selection of the final concept was based on the opportunity for the fulfillment of several criteria. As the 
MVP test did not provide insight into the preference of the target group, the selection was based on the 
following factors; understanding the target group’s needs from previous work, the various stakeholders’ 
input, product and placement requirements, and a professional assessment based on gathered 
knowledge.
As the solution aims to be implemented on curbsides in areas of children’s daily traffic, a crucial factor has 
been that the solution must not conflict with the traffic flow in the urban space. Meaning that the solution 
can not occupy too much space on the curbside. The first concept, the interactive board, comparatively 
best fulfilled these criteria, as the solution is horizontal rather than vertical. However, as the MVP test reve-
aled, the solution need to be noticeable to ensure engagement from children (see section 8.4).
 
The game principles constitute a significant role for whom the solution appeals, where the board is supe-
rior, as it is presumed to have more play opportunities, as the play principles from the other two concepts 
could be implemented. However, the physical activity would be isolated to a smaller area. It should be 
noted that the interactions with the solution should not disturb the environment in which it is placed, but 
this will be explored later.
Figure 30 - Comparison between the three concepts.
In the conversation with the pedagogues, it was mentioned that the target group would become disinte-
rested in the interactions with the stepping stone more rapidly compared to the other two concepts. They 
believed that the solution would be more appreciated by a younger audience, who might be entertained 
simply by the simplicity of the design. To preserve the target groups’ interest, the solution needs another 
level of complexity and encourage social interactions, like competition and cooperation as identified
==PAGE:87==
78
Concept Evaluation
as key elements to a successful play experience. Both the Light Poles and the Interactive Board have the 
potential to fulfill this need. 
 
Of the three solutions, the Interactive Board is the only concept that enables the children to have an im-
pact on their environment. Throughout the project, it was evident how crucial it is for children to claim 
urban spaces and be recognized as fellow citizens (see section 2.3.1). The ability for children to leave their 
mark on the urban environment is therefore considered a significant opportunity for the integration of 
them and their play into the city.
Initiatives by the children, such as small artworks, can make the curbside more fascinating and can foster 
other social interactions on the curbside level. Additionally, the Interactive Board is believed to support 
and encourage playful interactions cross-generational, which both the municipality of Copenhagen and 
Kompan mentioned is a need that is currently unfulfilled in the city.
==PAGE:88==
09
PROTOTYPE DEVELOPMENT
==PAGE:89==
09
Prototype Development
Three distinct prototypes were developed; a physical, a digital, and a design proposal. The collected objec-
tive was to create two functional models, that could be tested for proof of concept, and to test and decide 
on different design proposals in collaboration with the target group.  
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
80
Given the children’s availability, as we took them from class, the testing of all three prototypes was conduc-
ted simultaneously. The sixteen students were split into two groups of six and one of four, with each group 
having twenty minutes to complete all three rounds of testing. When the children arrived in their groups, 
they were separated into two groups and sent to either the physical or the digital prototype testing. After 
trying both, they were then brought together to decide and develop in collaboration with us, the appea-
rance of the prototype. 
The prototype was tested on the children, who previously participated in our co-creation workshop, the 
fourth grade from Skolen ved Søerne. The goal was to observe and learn from the children’s interactions 
with the prototypes, thus helping us create a foundation for our decisions.
9.1 Physical Prototype
To test the idea for proof of concept, it was required to construct a physical prototype. This would provide 
us with the opportunity to gain direct and honest feedback from our target group. The mechanical proto-
type had to simulate the functionalities intended for the final solution, in order to assess the target group’s 
interactions and whether the solution contributed with an entertainment value.
Following an MVP strategy, a mechanical prototype was selected, as it could be rapidly and cheaply crea-
ted with the available resources. After the initial MVP testing (see section 8.4), we discovered that the so-
lution needed to be more complex and eye-catching to capture the interest of our target group. Thus we 
decided to create a solution that incorporated a light element that could be controlled, as it could act like 
feedback during the interaction.
9.1.1 Description
The mechanical prototype consisted of MDF sheets in the dimensions 650mm in height times 500mm in 
width, which was laser cut into the desired shape, see image 9. The front sheet had 6x6 circles and cutouts 
big enough to fit the opening and closing mechanism. This simulated the light switches, allowing the user 
to create patterns or letters. A LED strip was placed inside of the board, peaking out of the circles, when 
the gate was opened up. With a remote, the light could be changed into a variety of colors and nuances. To 
reflect the light, aluminum foil was placed behind the opening and closing mechanism. To ensure that the 
prototype would be able to be placed on a table, thus suitable for children’s height, two feet were created 
to stabilize it. Lastly, the board was cut in an organic shape in order to create a more finished look, as well 
as make it more appealing to the children. 
==PAGE:90==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
81
Image 9 - The physical prototype.
9.1.2 Other Prototype Development Possibilities
When developing the physical prototype, several other development possibilities were considered. A se-
mi-digital prototype that required Arduino and programming was assumed the most ideal for testing a 
prototype that included the function of games, as these could be programmed into the light switches. 
However, this was assessed to be too time-consuming and costly, given the time and resources available. 
It was also considered to use bigger lights that could be turned on and off by push. This would require a 
much bigger board, as the dimension of the lights that we could get a hold of had an average diameter 
of 100 mm. The lights were also expensive, as the solution required a minimum of 36, and ordering bulk 
was deemed too risky, as it was presumed that it would not arrive within the time frame for development. 
Furthermore, it was questioned whether the light sources were strong enough to light up in daylight and, 
thereby, fulfill the intended function. 
On this basis, it was determined that the MVP approach would be the most viable solution to rapidly create 
a mechanical prototype and test the solution with our target group.
9.1.3 Testing
The physical prototype was tested as part of the proof of concept. The overall purpose of the test was to 
determine if the children were entertained by the board. This was measured by observing whether it kept 
their interest during the test. We were interested in seeing and experiencing the children’s initial reactions 
and interactions with the prototype, however, given their hesitation, this was not possible.
==PAGE:91==
Prototype Development
82
The children showed much care for the prototype in the beginning and asked for allowance to interact.
During the test, the children were facilitated through two tasks; (1) remembering the pattern made by 
another child and recreating it in collaboration, and (2) creating a letter for the next group to recognize. 
This was done to simulate the game principles on the board and test if the functioning made logical sen-
se for them, or if it was too abstract (see section 2.2 and 6.1). By asking them to create letters, we directly 
encouraged them to try one of the key features of the final prototype, testing if it was possible for the 
children to create letters with a sequence of dots. 
Image 10 - Testing the physical prototype on the target group.
To create a collaborative experience, the children who made the pattern were allowed to change the color 
of the LED strip to red, when the child recreating it made an error. This helped them assist each other in 
creating the correct pattern, and it provided visual feedback. Given the limited time available for testing, 
the children had to decide who made the pattern and who recreated it, as they would not be able to take 
turns. After each pattern was created and photographed, all doors were pushed shut, creating a blank 
slate, for the child to recreate it. Since only one look at the photographed pattern was insufficient, the chil-
dren were allowed to see it numerous times.
==PAGE:92==
9.1.4 Results
The following objectives were to be met when testing the prototype;
1. If the children intuitively understood how to interact with the board 
2. If the children interacted with the board differently than anticipated
3. If the board proved to be entertaining
4. If the game principles could be utilized when interacting with the board
Because the children did not interact with the board on their own initiative, the 1st and 2nd objectives 
could not be confirmed.
The children were surprisingly good at collaborating on each task and gave each other space to interact 
with the board. Some of the children were faster at figuring out the mechanism than others. Again proving 
that children are very different at this stage.  All the children understood how to interact with the board, 
some were not afraid of trying or asking, while others felt more comfortable observing the others’ intera-
ctions first.
83
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
Figure 31 - The test results collected from testing the physical prototype.
==PAGE:93==
84
Prototype Development
The main findings from the tests were:
•	
The children were entertained by the solution. The indicator of this was that all the children kept 
their interest in the interactions during the test period. Furthermore, a majority of the children also 
expressed disappointment when they had to stop, as they wanted to continue playing. 
•	
Some of the children were intrigued simply by the mechanism of the prototype, as they could 
have spent a long time just opening and closing the gates. In two cases where the children were 
asked to create a pattern, it was necessary to rush them to ensure enough time to complete the 
test.
•	
The children were easily able to create and recognize letters. They started out with simple letters, 
such as I and L, and then changed to more challenging letters, such as Æ, and Ø. All the groups 
were able to identify what letter the other group had made.
•	
The size of the board worked well for two children collaborating, but anything past was too exces-
sive with the amount of space available. 
•	
Other children, both ones performing the other test and children passing by, showed interest and 
curiosity in the interactions with the prototype.
•	
The prototype was very noticeable due to the LED light, as it was bright and able to change colors, 
it is presumed to have added to the appeal.
9.1.5 Limitations
During the testing of the prototype, we experienced some limitations. The children’s confidence in en-
gaging with the prototype might have been impacted by our observations of their behavior. This was 
demonstrated by their apprehension to interact with the prototype, and how the majority sought allow-
ance to engage. While the observer tried to remain neutral, they responded to the children’s questions, 
to ensure that they felt comfortable. This meant that the children’s initial interactions with the prototype 
could not be determined, and the outcome is, therefore, a reflection of the interactions being facilitated. 
It cannot be determined whether the children would have been equally entertained if they were to play 
freely without facilitation.
It can be assumed that the result and the perceived entertainment value have been influenced by the 
children’s collaborative, thus social interactions, and this aligns with our previous findings. However, some 
children could immerse in creating patterns and letters for a considerable amount of time without others 
being present.
==PAGE:94==
In relation to the mechanical limitations, we found that the opening and closing mechanisms of the pro-
totype did not function as smoothly as desired. This proved a challenge for some children when creating 
patterns, as they did not want to use force and risk breaking the prototype. The circles were larger than 
anticipated for the final solution, making it challenging to recognize the letters up close, but it proved not 
to be an issue when stepping back. As a result, the children had to step back several times to ensure that 
their letter was constructed correctly. 
9.2 Digital Prototype
To simulate the digital games, that the solution would be able to facilitate, we created a digital prototype 
of the game whack-a-mole and a pattern memory game. The prototype was developed in Figma, which 
is a collaboratory web application for interface design. The program allowed us to create every wireframe 
and the interactions between them, which provided us with full control of the functions that would be 
required for the test. 
The prototype was created in Danish, as it was assumed that the native language of the children would 
be most suitable, given the uncertainty surrounding their English skills. However, the amount of written 
explanation was reduced, and instead, other tools were used to make the game more intuitive. This was 
done by creating an avatar that served as a guide. 
To adhere to the MVP method, the prototype’s function was relatively simple, this allowed us to develop it 
rapidly, allowing us to learn from it fast and identify failures that could occur throughout the test. As pre-
viously mentioned, the target group found it difficult to interact with concepts if they were too simple or 
abstract, meaning that appearance is an important aspect of the experience (see section 8.4). As a result, 
the game had a theme; in this case, UFOs and aliens, which was inspired by the children’s own inventions 
from the co-creation workshop (see section 7.1). 
9.2.1 Description
The landing page consisted of a menu with two options, asking to choose a game; Catch the Light or Me-
mory Game.  Catch the Light was an interpretation of the game whack-a-mole, where the goal was to catch 
the most amounts of lights, with a total of 12 being catchable. The light was set to pick up the speed, with a 
beginning delay of 2000ms between the wireframes and a final delay of 1000ms, thus increasing the level 
of difficulty.
Every time the light was caught, a motivational message would appear covering the screen accompanied 
by a character. This served as feedback, letting the children know that they had achieved the objective. Gi-
ven that the light was not captured, no messages would appear, and after the determined delay, it would 
switch to the next wireframe.
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
The objective of the Memory Game was to recall the correct sequence of lights. The game began with dis-
playing a text instructing the player to look closely, as a certain sequence was demonstrated, and required 
to be imitated. Two separate levels of difficulty were created, substantiating the children’s identified need 
for a challenge (Appendix 03.5). 
85
==PAGE:95==
Prototype Development
86
Image 11 - Wireframes of the digital prototype.
The first level consisted of four fields, with four lighting up in a pattern as seen in and the second had nine 
fields, where five lit up in another alternative pattern, see image 11. On both levels, the first light was being 
pointed out by a character, as to aid and explain the concept without written or verbal instructions. In 
terms of feedback, the Memory Game was a contrast to the other game, as it operated oppositely. It uses 
feedback for unfavorable interactions rather than giving feedback for the intended ones. When the chil-
dren entered the wrong sequence, they would be sent to a wireframe that asked them to try again. 
9.2.2 Testing
Testing the digital prototype was one part of testing for the proof of concept. The purpose was to deter-
mine whether the children enjoyed the game principles, what level of challenge would be required, and 
whether they found it acceptable as a social interaction. 
The children were introduced to the game and were told to just give it a try and see if they could figure 
it out on their own. They were also informed that they were allowed to freely ask any questions as well as 
voice any comment or discuss the game with one another.
Our assumptions were that the children would relatively easily be able to navigate the game, given that 
there were only a few buttons to press and characters highlighting the initial actions that had to be taken. 
The presumption proved accurate, but on different grounds than anticipated. The children learned how to 
navigate the game through collaboration, and trial and error, and showed little interest in reading the few 
instructions available. 
==PAGE:96==
9.2.3 Results
The following objectives were to be met when testing the pro-
totype;
1. If the level of difficulty matched the need of the target group
2. If the solution satisfied the need for social connection
3. If the solution was entertaining
The children’s differences in cognitive ability to recall the se-
quence in the memory game and their difference in motor skills 
when having to catch the lights in the game of the same name, 
were extremely evident. This support previous findings, which 
highlight how much the children differ from each other in this 
development stage. As a result, some children found the games 
more challenging, and others quickly understood and comple-
ted the objectives, and asked for more challenging levels.
The children who found the games the most challenging were assisted by their classmates, who showed 
great patience while letting their peers try to complete the objectives. This demonstrated that it is possi-
ble to promote social interactions between children by providing games such as the ones present in the 
digital prototype.
Last but not least, we interpreted the children’s inquiries about more levels as interest in continuing to 
play, thus an indication that they found it entertaining. However, it would be a requirement that the levels 
changed frequently, in order for the children to keep their interest.
In addition, we found the following; 
87
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
•	
The children had trouble concentrating on the digital prototype because they could watch what 
happened in the testing of the physical prototype. Even with the computer being the initial most 
alluring, they quickly lost interest when they watched their peers sprint back and forth. This indi-
cated that the children found the aspect of physical activity interesting.
•	
The children were truly fascinated by the realization that we created the prototypes ourselves and 
showed great excitement for the opportunity to look into the underlying mechanics. Although 
they quickly lost interest in the lack of variety and levels, they were deeply fascinated with the 
development because it provided them with a whole new level of complexity, which they found 
intriguing. This gives us an indication that we should bear in mind, that it might provide an excit-
ing experience for our target group to be able to observe the complexity of the system.
Image 12 - Children testing the digital prototype.
==PAGE:97==
88
Prototype Development
•	
In Catch the Light, the children became frustrated when positive feedback appeared on the screen. 
They expressed that it disrupted the game, and did not connect that it was a sign that they com-
pleted the objective. Instead, it was proposed that it would be more sensible with a score, as it 
would also allow for competition against peers.
9.2.4 Limitations
The development and testing of the prototype revealed a number of limitations. During the development, 
a technological issue arose, when the prototype could not be conducted on an iPad. Using the iPad was 
the initial thought, as it had a closer resemblance to the final solution compared to using a computer 
with a separate mouse. Accordingly, the game of Catch the Light became more challenging for the target 
group, given that their fine motor skills and coordination are not as developed as those of an adult, who 
served as the benchmark for the prototype.
The prototype also had the restriction that sound could not be implemented. It would have been valuable 
insight to evaluate if the target group thought it a superior alternative compared to the feedback provided. 
9.3 Alternative Designs
Three alternative design proposals for the solution’s appearance were created, to test the children’s pre-
ferences. It is important to note that the solution has unlimited design opportunities, limited only by the 
imagination. The three design proposals were created to show how the appearance of the solution can dif-
fer in themes, and how these can embrace different features and play opportunities. The design proposals 
were used to gain insight into what would be appealing to the target group.
9.3.1 Description
The three design proposals were suggested appearances based on the same concept, and thus the same 
key features as demonstrated in the other two prototypes. The three suggestions made were; a spaceship, 
a potato, and an apartment building, see figure 32. To support the potential for a play starter, see figure 8, 
each theme included many play possibilities. An opportunity with the apartment building was to create 
shadows in the windows, only visible when turned on. This would enable the product to be also used 
without other game mechanics, and still facilitate simulation play. In regards to the spaceship, an ideal 
opportunity would be to include games space related, such as recreating constellations. Lastly, the potato 
could open up the conversation about science and physics.
==PAGE:98==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
89
Figure 32 - Alternative designs proposals.
9.3.2 Testing
The testing of the three design proposals was performed as a simple A/B test (Martin & Hanington, 2012), 
with the purpose of determining the preferred design. The children were presented with a drawing of each 
of the proposals lined up next to each other, with a brief introduction to each of them. The children were 
then given a ballot, where they could set their vote and add their own proposal, given that they had any 
ideas. 
9.3.3 Results
The following objectives were to be met when testing the possible proposal for the appearance of the 
solution;
1. If one of the design proposals were preferred
2. Input and inspiration for other design proposals
We found that the children preferred the apartment building, compared to the two others, with nine out of 
the sixteen votes. The potato came in second with five votes and lastly, the space theme gathered the last 
two. Besides getting a vote on the preferred design, we had the opportunity to receive the children’s feed-
back and insight into their preferences for the appearance of the solution and the interaction possibilities.
The children’s own design proposals included, among others; a spaceship, a Christmas tree, and cheese, 
see image 14. We noticed that the children were heavily influenced by Christmas being right around the 
corner at the time of testing, hence several of the proposals were Christmas related.
The different themes fostered interesting conversations between the children and us, as facilitators. To-
gether, they began imagining several tales that could be related to the different proposals. This led to new 
ideas of how the design could be further developed and was noted on the ballots for documentation
==PAGE:99==
Prototype Development
90
purposes. One of these ideas was related to the apartment building, where a story was built around how 
the light could be turned on and off at the child’s neighbor’s house when using the solution. Other con-
versations sparked, because of the children’s knowledge of potatoes being able to create electricity. This 
knowledge was gladly explained by the children, who knew of the concept, to their peers.
9.3.4 Limitations
The A/B test of the design proposals was performed after both the digital and physical prototypes had 
been tested. As the time schedule slipped at several rounds of testing, only a limited amount of time was 
left, for the children to create their own proposals. Furthermore, as the children were divided into two se-
parate groups and did not finish at the same time, the last test had to be repeated multiple times, which 
caused disturbance for the children, who had already been told what to do. 
The children were allowed to discuss and question the proposals openly, leaving room for both them and 
us to answer. This, in connection with the children being able to see each other’s answers on the ballot, 
might have led to the children influencing each other. For some of the children, it was a bit too abstract to 
understand that the same solution they had just interacted with, could have a completely different appe-
arance, and that was what they had to vote on. They had a hard time connecting the three solutions, and 
this might have directly affected the outcome of the test.
Image 13 - The children performing A/B test of the designs proposals.
Image 14 - The childrens proposals for designs.
==PAGE:100==
10
FINAL SOLUTION
==PAGE:101==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
92
10
Final Solution
The final solution proposal for the Interactive Board has been developed and adapted based on the fin-
dings presented in this report. The findings have manifested in product requirements, and product place-
ment and the results have been obtained through testing.
10.1 Function
The solution function as an interactive communication and game board. The solution is rather simple, as 
the interaction opportunity consists of a number of fields. The fields change when the user interacts with 
them, e.g. by changing colors or turning on or off a light source. The fields are placed orderly allowing the 
user to create pixellated images, patterns, or smaller messages by changing the fields’ characters, encoura-
ging open-ended play.
The solution’s functionality fosters social interaction among both the target group and across genera-
tions. Social interactions arise as the target group is able to interact on the board with others, by either 
competing in games or cooperating to make artwork. The solution invites momentarily play and thereby 
becomes a meeting spot where citizens can interact with each other.
Figure 33 - ’Hello World’ created on the Interactive Board.
In earlier involvement of the target group, the children showed great interest in being creative as they 
were immersed in idea creation. The board assists the target group in thinking more abstractly, by creating 
the pixellated images. It was noticed that this could be challenging, but after a few attempts, they mana-
ged to create rather complex letters, such as Æ, and Ø compared to letters with simpler shapes such as I 
and L. The child’s fine motor skill is also challenged,  which is beneficial for the target group, as this skill is 
still being refined.
==PAGE:102==
As children appreciate feedback through interaction (see section 2.3.7), the interaction with the solution, 
provides the user feedback through a change in the aversion of the fields. The feedback can help increase 
the user experience, as it can assist the user through the interaction, and promote entertainment. Children 
are fascinated by sound and light, and this can be a great tool to include several senses, to make the inte-
raction more inclusive. Furthermore, the solution remains relatively simple, without too many features, to 
both avoid feature creep and maintain a momentary interaction. 
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
93
10.1.1 Game Opportunities
The number of fields on the board allows for multiple interaction opportunities, with a greater focus on 
communication and game opportunities. There are many game opportunities - limited only by the ima-
gination. The games should challenge the children’s development, focusing on different skills or create a 
high level of entertainment, containing elements that are appealing to the target group.
We believe that open-ended play can foster unintended play and games. In the dialogue with the peda-
gogues about the concept, they saw several opportunities that had not been considered. One example is, 
having two users compete against each other to turn on and off the light button, which emphasizes that 
the game aspect does not require facilitation or programming. 
10.2 The Design
Requirements have been made to ensure that the board fulfills its purpose and follows the principles of 
inclusive design. It is necessary to have an understanding of materials to be able to develop and build a 
prototype that can handle the outdoor condition for a longer period of time, to test the solution. This inve-
stigation has, however, been out of scope. Through a brief interview with a former Copenhagen Light Festi-
val participant, we received valuable insights on considerations when creating installations for the urban 
space. One of these insights was that polymers that are not biodegradable are solid performers in all kinds 
of weather. It is important that the construction has a drain that allows water to flow out regardless of the 
choice of material, as condensation cannot be avoided. As a result of this, potential electronics should be 
placed at the top of the construction. 
The construction also needs to be robust enough for multiple and various interactions over a longer pe-
riod. A robust construction and design can help prevent vandalism. Additionally, urban spaces that invite 
lingering, provide life and eyes in the neighbourhood that will mitigate the risk of vandalism (København 
Kommune, 2018). 
The shape of the board might vary greatly. However, it is critical that the shape is eye-catching to attract 
the target group. This can be done, by creating a theme for the board’s appearance, see figure 32, which can 
also function as a play starter.
The function of the solution can create attention in the urban space, through created artwork, or included 
features that react to citizens passing. This can create curiosity, especially for the target group (see section 
9.1), aiming for playful interactions.
The board is placed on two feet, lifting it 50 cm above the ground. To accommodate a broader range of
==PAGE:103==
94
citizens, a suggested dimension would be a height of 150 cm, to allow adults to also participate in the in-
teraction see figure 34. The target group are able to reach all the fields as their height is between 120-140 
cm, as the lowest can reach a height of 150 cm with an extensive arm. It was determined from prototype 
testing that a minimum of 50 cm was adequate for two children to interact next to each other. The solution 
should, therefore, not be less than 100 cm wide to allow four children, within the target group, to interact.
Final Solution
Figure 34 - Proposed dimensions for the solution.
The fields have the size 150mm x 150mm, corresponding to a keyboard button. It is crucial that the fields 
are small enough in size to allow the user to create smaller messages to each other. Making the letters, E 
and S, require 5x3 fields, see figure 35.
Figure 35 - Pixellated letters, E and S.  
==PAGE:104==
The size of fields will lead to around 1500 fields on a board of 100 cm x 100 cm. With this amount of fields, 
it is possible to create around 42 letters and unleash creativity in creating images on the board. To make 
fields usable for different users, the fields must be easily accessible and require low physical effort to inte-
ract with (see section 2.3.4). 
The use of buttons will presumably make the interaction intuitive for a broader range of people, as it is 
familiar if the button is simple and embraces tactile recognition (Plotnick, 2018). It is essential that the user 
understand how to interact with the solution immediately, to avoid instructions. However, to assist the 
user in the interaction, simple symbols can be applied, as these are easy for most to interpret and under-
stand, regardless of individuals’ language skills, or concentration level. 
A physical button stimulates the aspect of touch and promotes a sensation of physical feedback (Plotnick, 
2018). Any type of feedback can support the user in the interaction. Feedback, whether sound or tactile 
simulation, can, for instance, function as a confirmation, by a ’click’-sound or smaller vibration. Thus simu-
lating more than one sense, e.g. tactile and auditory, which makes the solution more inclusive.
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
95
10.3 Digital Complexity
The final solution includes three distinct design proposals for the concept. Offering an idea of just how 
many various ways this solution could be developed. In our conversation with Kompan, we learned about 
the current opposing trends in play; nature versus digitalization. Where one trend urges the utilization of 
nature, the other urges how to incorporate digitalization in outdoor activities with solutions.
The final solution can encompass both trends depending on the approach for future work. To prove this 
point, we have opted to create three design proposals, each at a different level of complexity; ranging from 
mechanical, and semi-digital to full digital. Each of the proposals is based on the prerequisites previously 
described but with each their own development po-
tential and complications.
10.3.1 Mechanical Solution
The mechanical solution is, in contrast to the other two 
proposals, entirely devoid of digital complexity. This 
implies that the interactive fields, instead of electrical 
components, are flippable fields with different colors 
on each side. This allows for the same opportunity to 
create images or messages. 
The target group of the mechanical solution, as cur-
rently envisioned, would appeal more to the younger 
demographic of our target group.
Figure 36 - Mechanical solution proposal.
==PAGE:105==
10.3.2 Semi-digital Solution
The semi-digital solution is a compromise bet-
ween the mechanical- and the digital proposal. 
The fields are buttons, similar to those of a 
keyboard, that light up when being pushed. As 
the board needs to be connected to power, there 
is an ideal opportunity to incorporate games.
The solution covers the entire target group, as 
it provides a complexity that challenges and 
maintains the children’s interest in recurring in-
teractions. It provides the same opportunities 
as the mechanical solution, which still allows for 
open-ended play.
Final Solution
96
This is mainly because it lacks a level of complexity that the children of the older part of the target group 
desire (see section 8.4.1). To ensure their entertainment at every encounter, they would need to be conti-
nually challenged, which might be hard to achieve without a technical aspect in the solution. 
The design’s simplicity means that facilitation could be necessary to enable various play interactions. This 
could affect the children’s interest in the artifact, as aspects of open-ended play might seem less noticeable, 
in contrast to already established games. As a result, it might be necessary to help facilitate certain games, 
which could be done by having accompanying guidelines. However, the observations showed, that the 
children do not necessarily read these guidelines, which might prove a problem.
Pattern recognition, a game principle tested with the prototype (se section 9.2), would be possible to 
facilitate through this solution. Users would be able to jointly challenge each other, thus creating an exer-
cise that covers all the developmental skills; motor, cognitive, and social. The absence of too many game 
features may, however, also prove beneficial as it brings attention to the solution’s core function, com-
munity building through drawings and notes. By not having game mechanics, the solution might end 
up with something resembling an art installation, that can support the children in leaving their mark on 
their environment. Therefore, the mechanical solution solves the absolutely essential need that has been 
identified, the need for fostering a sense of community in the cityscape. Aside from potential vandalism, 
it would require little to no upkeep, and the installation would be rather simple, as it would not require 
power to function. 
The primary issue with the solution is that it might be challenging to maintain the target group’s interest, 
especially over a longer period of time, as there is a chance that it won’t offer enough excitement or play 
opportunities. In general, the solution provides 
more sedentary activities and would require ad-
ditional facilitating features, such as guidelines 
to provide examples of play activities.
Figure 37 - Semi-digital solution proposal.
==PAGE:106==
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
97
In contrast to the mechanical proposal, the semi-digital allows for the possibility of facilitating different 
games. One of the solution’s key features is light, which is not only beneficial for entertainment but can 
also prove beneficial to the general urban environment. Light not only draws attention and makes the so-
lution exciting, but it is also well-recognized that light has a direct impact on the population’s perception 
of security. 
The semi-digital solution is ideal for games such as whack-a-mole, because of the design of the buttons 
and light features. Implementing this game would, however, require the right feedback. This feedback 
could be various different options, such as using light or sound. Using sound would be ideal, as it would 
provide instant feedback on how well the children do in regard to reaching the objective, but this feature 
could also be done with either blinking lights or a change in color. It is also important to keep in mind, that 
we focus on creating momentarily play, where implementing a high score may increase the competitive 
aspect, but it will also lengthen the game’s amusement. Without feedback, such as a high score, the chil-
dren will be limited to utilizing their own logical thinking and cognitive abilities, which could benefit their 
development.
The semi-digital solution holds several benefits, as explained in the other proposals. One of the main be-
nefits of this solution is that it is able to facilitate the game. This was mentioned by YOLI as one of the main 
findings from their product development, as this was a huge motivator for play seen in their investigations.
Maintenance is one of the primary issues with the solution. Given its electric components, it would com-
paratively need to be kept, to ensure that the lights work and it doesn’t impose a risk if broken. Another 
challenge would be the need for the implementation of other games when the children have a change in 
interest as a result of trends changing.
10.3.3 Digital Solution 
In the digital solution, the fields are touchscreen, 
which is operated by touching the screen. The 
fields are, however, still shaped similarly to the 
previous alternatives, which creates the appe-
arance of a large pixel. This signifies that several 
options in regard to color change are available in 
this solution. 
As the target group requires to be challenged and 
enjoys elements of unpredictability, the solution 
could satisfy their needs and maintain their inte-
rest. Additionally, it was found that children have 
a preference of digital play (Lego, 2018), which can 
be deemed a beneficial factor. 
Figure 36 - Digital solution proposal.
==PAGE:107==
Final Solution
98
The solution allows for both customization and experimentation with feedback and other features, pro-
viding a range of versatile communication options for the target group. Additionally, there is the poten-
tial of saving the messages written on the boards as data, which can allow for the solution to be used as 
a communal wishing well. This could allow stakeholders to ask questions to their community and then 
gather the data, allowing for interaction between, e.g. the children and adults in a neighborhood and the 
municipality.
The solution offers countless options for incorporating games over time and the flexibility of evolving the 
games through various themes and visual styles, thus practically offering endless play opportunities. And 
with its similarities to other tech solutions that the children are already familiar with, it has a higher chance 
of capturing the children’s initial interest compared to the other solution proposals. 
There are several concerns with the solution that would have to be considered and dealt with, for it to fulfill 
its purpose. One of these issues may be the parents’ apprehension about letting their children play with a 
computer outside, as a general concern is that children spend too much time looking at screens (Appendix 
03.2). Another key issue is the requirement of upkeep and the likelihood of being exposed to vandalism. 
Our general observations are that objects of higher technology are more likely to be exposed to vanda-
lism, comparatively, e.g. the newly installed digital bus stops.
Lastly, the fully digital solution proposal is assumed to be more fragile compared to the other proposals 
and would require more maintenance. This is deemed a risk, as children tend to be unforgiving, resulting 
in a malfunction directly influencing the children’s perception of the solution, thus creating hesitation to 
interact at another time.
All three proposals have the potential to solve the final problem, and the final decision thus depends on 
preference and placement. A common aspect in all three design proposals is that a variety of game oppor-
tunities could be implemented, and the required maintenance depends on the digital complexity. 
10.4 Expected Outcome
We find that implementing the solution, no matter its level of digital complexity, can provide important 
advantages to the cityscape. First, it allows the children the opportunity to leave their mark on their neigh-
borhood, which can lead to an increase in their autonomy and, as a result, a greater sense of independence 
when roaming in the city. The Interactive Board furthermore, has the potential to serve as a meeting place, 
where children can meet up with one another in their immediate environment, in a similar fashion as the 
playground. By bringing the play to the street, there is an opportunity for it to happen spontaneously as 
opposed to having to be planned (see section 2.3). We assume that there is a possibility, that the children 
might be intrigued or convinced to play outside if they can spot their peers playing on the street in their 
neighborhoods from their homes.
Long-term, it is anticipated that the solution could contribute to promoting more play on the curbside. By 
implementing play opportunities, there is a chance to influence the current play culture in the city. Using 
the behavioral change method proposed by Cash et. al (2017), the artifact aims to intervene directly in 
==PAGE:108==
the behavior, hoping to reach the implicit system, through the use of informational strategies, focused on 
creating awareness and changing norms and attitudes of playing on the curbside (see section 2.3.8). 
The behavioral change in children’s play in the street might then influence the play culture for a positive 
change. Furthermore, a rise in activity on the streets increases the likelihood that competing interests, 
such as traffic, might be forced to be reduced in the living areas of the city. Considering traffic is one of the 
major concerns of the parents, a reduction would most likely lead to the parents beginning to have a gre-
ater sense of safety in regard to their children and their mobility in the city (see section 4.2). Implementing 
more play on the curbside, will not only be beneficial to children but will also benefit the community as a 
whole since if the environment is safe for children, it is safe for everyone (Rogala & Stokols, 2015).
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
99
==PAGE:109==
11
IMPLENTATION PLAN
==PAGE:110==
101
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
11
Implementation Plan
This section outlines the specific steps needed to be considered for the implementation of the final solu-
tion proposal. The implementation plan takes into consideration factors, such as placement and potential 
barriers. Lastly, a plan for future work has been considered.
11.1 Implementation Plan
To clarify the precise locations the proposed solutions could be applied, an implementation plan was de-
veloped. Through the development of this plan, we discovered that the preferred location of placement 
is significantly impacted by the chosen proposal. Some of the proposals’ ideal locations might make it dif-
ficult to achieve the ultimate purpose, which is to encourage a change in play culture in neighborhoods, 
by promoting play on the curbside. Amongst others, we found that the implementation of the digital so-
lution is most viable in areas of more technological advancement. This solution is also perceived as more 
fragile in the exposure of long-term use, and outdoor conditions, compared to the other two proposals, 
thus an aspect that needs to be considered.
 
Additionally, there are certain potential barriers and risks that need to be considered for the successful 
execution of the solution, which is being taken into account through this implementation plan.
Figure 37 - Solution proposal placement at Indre Nørrebro.
==PAGE:111==
102
Placement of the Mechanical Proposal
Similarly to the semi-digital proposal, the mechanical one can be implemented almost anywhere in the 
cityscape, as it has the benefit of not requiring power. However, given that it provides no light, it is at a 
higher risk of being vandalized, meaning that it would benefit from being placed in a visible, lit-up area. 
The solution would be very suitable in environments of nature, as well as in areas that younger children 
frequent with their parents. Excellent options for placement would therefore be areas such as Møllegade 
and ByOasen at Nørrebro, because of the closer proximity to nurseries, kindergartens, and schools.
 
Besides the digital complexity defined, the solution still has the possibility to be customized for the given 
setting that it is implemented. With the basic elements being the same, the overall appearance is adapta-
ble to the intended environment.  
Placement
Considering potential locations for the solution is crucial when discussing implementation. Common to all 
three solution proposals is that they need to be located in the curbside zones, see figure 37. Therefore the 
solution must be situated along buildings, to ensure that the traffic has the best possible overview of the 
citizens interacting. Furthermore, it is evident that all proposals must be implemented in locations where 
the curbside is wider, and where the traffic is lighter. This is to guarantee that the solution will not put the 
children at risk while playing. As two of the proposed solutions require power sources to perform properly, 
this is also a necessary factor to consider in deciding what areas were deemed suitable for the solution.
Placement of the Digital Proposal
We see a possibility for the digital solution proposal to be implemented in more technologically advanced 
and metropolitan regions, which would mean that it is moved a bit from the neighborhoods, where the 
solution was initially thought to be placed. With the final solution, we aim to implement it in settings bet-
ween schools and residential areas, however, this proposal might need to be placed closer to schools, to 
avoid vandalism. Areas we find that the solution would fit in, include areas such as close to Nørrebroparken 
by Jagtvej, because of nearby schools and extracurricular activities. However, it would need to be further 
explored and investigated, whether children independently walk around in these areas, which are often 
busier than the neighborhoods we targeted in our research.
Placement of the Semi-digital Proposal
The semi-digital solution proposal is assessed to be suitable in most areas. A good opportunity would be 
to implement it in areas where we have done our observations, such as the residential areas of Nørrebro, as 
they are close to schools and other institutions. Because of the proximity to the schools, there is less busy 
traffic leading up to wider pavements.
Implementation Plan
==PAGE:112==
103
11.2 Potential barriers
It is crucial to assess potential risks and barriers that could be present in connection with the implementa-
tion of the proposed solution in the urban environment. In the assessment of the feasibility of the imple-
mentation of the solution, it should be determined what reservations need to be made and what factors
 should be further investigated for a successful implementation.
The following risks have been identified in the investigation of the implementation of the proposed 
solution:
Maintenance
The amount of maintenance required to keep the solution operating needs to be taken into 
account. Therefore, it is crucial to consider the proposals’ construction, materials, usage, and 
durability.
Acceptance
The children’s independent interactions with the solution are granted on the basis of the pa-
rent’s permission. This implies that the placement of the product should be carefully planned 
to fit the areas where children are allowed to roam independently, which can be observed as 
the places with the heaviest activity on the curbside of children. We have observed that these areas typi-
cally are in and around schools and leisure-time institutions. 
Culture Change
It is necessary to expect that the implementation of the proposed solution will not lead to a 
direct change in the play culture. Changing a play culture in the city would require a change 
in behavioral habits, they both need time and effort. The solution should be perceived as one 
of many tools to help the children become more comfortable with claiming the city as their own. Thus 
encouraging them to ”dare” interact with the solution implemented.
 
Disturbance
For the solution to meet the criterion of the product requirement, it is important that the so-
lution is not a nuisance to other people. This emphasizes that the solution is required to not 
cause other citizens to feel restrained in their behaviors in the city, or cause unnecessary anno-
yance. It is crucial to take into account if the location of the solution can result in an excessive amount of 
traffic on the curbside. 
Safety
The issue of safety is one of the major barriers to the solution’s implementation on the curbside. 
The solution needs to adhere to regulations set by Dansk Standard to be allowed implementa-
tion in the public space. Despite safety being a factor that has been black-boxed in the scope 
of the project, it is crucial to mention, because of its significant impact on the ability for implementation. 
 
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:113==
Implementation Plan
104
Traffic
Implementation of the solution is impeded by the surrounding infrastructure and the amount 
of traffic. This ties into the safety issue, with parents’ concerns about their children’s movement 
in the city, is mostly attributed to traffic (see section 4.2). For the children’s safety, parents pro-
hibit their children from playing in traffic-dense areas. As a result, it is important to consider the volume of 
traffic in the region where the solution is intended to be implemented. When referring to traffic, it implies 
both cyclists and cars.
Black Boxed Areas
In this project, we have chosen to blackbox elements of the implementation plan, due to a lack of time and 
resources. Some of the elements that have been disregarded, is among other things, the choice of mate-
rials and a financial implementation plan. These two aspects have, although important, been assessed as 
being more relevant in future work.
11.3 Future Work
The project has been scoped to ensure to completion of 
the defined objectives within the given time frame. Cer-
tain tasks have been out of scope, but are crucial for the 
completion of a successful project, thus recommend to 
be done as future work. This section provides recommen-
dations for concrete goals to be achieved in the next six 
months. This includes an investigation of the design spe-
cifications of the solution and development possibilities, 
such as testing interactions, feedback, and material opti-
ons. These investigations are conducted in order to make 
well-considered and informed decisions. To ensure that 
the final solution can be implemented successfully, these 
concrete tasks are essential to perform. 
Test of Functionality and Game 
Principles
The immediate task would be to test the 
functionality of the prototype. This includes 
testing a variety of buttons to decide which one works 
ideally with the purpose of the solution. By inviting a 
focus group, that represents the target group, it would 
be possible to determine both the functionality and what 
game principle, should be chosen and developed into 
the solution for further testing. When testing the game 
principles, it is necessary to create a prototype that allows 
for more than one user to interact with the solution at a 
time,
Figure 38 - Roadmap for the next six months.
==PAGE:114==
Build a To-Scale Prototype
The next stage would be to create a to-scale prototype of the semi-digital design proposal, 
as it best simulates the functionality of both ends of the digital complexity. The prototype 
would be built with the results previously gathered in mind. Final decisions in regard to the 
prototype’s size, height, design, and appearance would need to be made. The construction 
and material choice are important to consider when building the prototype, as the solution is to be tested 
outside over a longer period of time. 
105
to evaluate if the entertainment value is related to social interaction, as related to social interaction, as is 
assumed. 
Placement Considerations
The ideal placement for the solution can be found through the use of Gehl’s methods 
(Gehl Playscapes, n.d.). It should be kept in mind, that the solution is to be placed on the 
curbside, and to be placed between residential areas and schools. Once the ideal locati-
on has been determined, authorization of installation needs to be requested for legal 
implementation. Both the municipality and private citizens would be possible to contact in this regard. 
It would be beneficial to monitor and evaluate whether the positioning in the given location affects play, 
if some aspects of the solution should be more apparent, and if the surrounding interior, such as benches, 
has an impact.
Test of Interactions
We wish to test if the prototype functions in the intended space and if the target group and 
their interactions align with our expectations. Testing of the prototype can provide useful 
insights, and a better understanding of the use of the solution in the urban space, thus hel-
ping to eliminate pitfalls.
We want to explore the interactions through two different approaches. Firstly, we want to test it through 
direct facilitation. This would allow us to introduce the solution and assist them through its use. This would 
be ideal for gathering data and insights, both by observing up close and by asking questions. 
Secondly, we would want the solution implemented in the space over a longer period of time, approxi-
mately three-plus weeks, in a location that matches the placement requirements. This would allow for the 
solution to be observed in its natural environment and allow for the collection of unbiased data, as the 
behaviors could be observed. Data collection of the interactions, such as those described in the digital 
solution proposal (see section 10.3.3), should be considered to gain an understanding of the interactions 
happening when no one is observing.
Detailing
Lastly, it would be advantageous to test the detailing of the product, which includes the 
functionality design, game mechanics, and overall appearance. It would be beneficial to 
build multiple prototypes to test factors, such as the size, shape, texture, and feedback of 
the solution.
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:115==
Implementation Plan
As a summarization, the following objectives should be completed at the end of the six months period: 
106
Determine if the citizens, with a focus on the target group, show interest in the solution
Objective: Measure if the citizens approach or have any type of interaction with the solution. 
•	 Would it be necessary to attract the citizens’ interest in another way?
•	 Would the solution require an introduction phase?
•	 Does the solution require more or less facilitation? And through what means?
Determine if the citizens engage in momentarily play or stay for longer
Objective: Measure through observation if interactions are within five to ten minutes. 
Determine if the solution engages repeated visits
Objective: Measure through surveys or observations
Determine if a change of placement has an effect on the interactions
 Objective: Observe the solution in different location and surroundings to determine if e.g.
 interior close to the solution have an impact on more independent play.
 
Determine if the interaction with the solution disturbs the general flow in the urban space
•	 Does it obstruct citizens walking on the pavement?
•	 Is it causing annoyance for the residents of the area?
Determine the space required for the user to safely interact with the solution
Objective: Measure and observe the area needed for the user to interact with the board
•	 Is there enough distance from the traffic?
•	 Is the chosen area perceived as safe enough?
Identify potential pitfalls
Objective: Measure through observation of the user’s interaction. 
This section provided a suggestion of what could be further worked on in the following six months. Fun-
ding opportunities, potential collaborations, and cost-benefit analyses of the product have not been taken 
into account, as this is something that is suggested to be worked on after six months of developing a final 
concept.
==PAGE:116==
12
OUTRO
==PAGE:117==
12
Outro
12.1 Discussion
The final solution has been greatly impacted by a number of decisions made during the design process. 
Some of these choices were decided before the project’s official beginning, one was to focus on devel-
oping an artifact that would encourage play in Copenhagen outside of playgrounds. Alternative strategies 
for changing prevailing behaviors could have included removing the boundaries surrounding playgrounds 
or looking into modifying the traffic patterns in the vicinity of play areas. Instead of focusing on solving a 
possible symptom, we set out to develop a solution to address the root cause.
The most significant decisions and influences on the design process are to be covered in the following 
sections:
Partnership with Gehl
In connection with our partnership with Gehl Architects, there have been some very clear controversies 
from the start, when working with urban spaces. One of these controversies has, among other things, been 
traffic. In Gehl’s ideologies, traffic is seen as the antithesis of a functioning and present city for community 
development and pedestrians.
Had we chosen to focus on traffic and infrastructure in this project, it would have been ideal to work on 
changing traffic behavior to achieve more play in the streets.
108
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
Intervention Area
A bottom-up approach was used in the development of the final solution. This has greatly affected our 
choice of intervention within the selected scope. We chose to focus on the intervention on the curbside, as 
we saw the potential for implementing a tangible change. If the process, had followed a top-down appro-
ach, it would have been ideal to create an intervention at the city scale and work directly with Copenhagen 
Municipality. The project would then have required changing and developing of new strategies rather 
than developing a tangible solution for direct implementation on the curbside. 
The choice of the curbside was decided for a number of reasons, including that play has previously taken 
place there, children move about independently on their commutes, and it abuts residential buildings, 
where 70% of public engagement occurs (København Kommune, 2018). Given that children typically do not 
have much independent free time to play throughout the day, the last two points are especially important. 
As a result, we believed it crucial to implement the solution in the space the children already reside. This 
creates the opportunity to play without having to commute to parks or playgrounds; instead, they have to 
option on their daily commutes in the city. It is presumed that providing playful interactions on the curb-
side can have an impact on the spontaneity of play. Furthermore, Copenhagen Municipality has already 
placed a high priority on developing parks and squares, as they are deemed vital community hubs for all 
generations. 
If parks and squares had been chosen in favor of the curbside, one of the key aspects to look into would 
how to attract children to visit these parts of the urban space. 
==PAGE:118==
A more spacious available area would consequently allow for a variety of different solutions possibilities. 
Additionally, parks and squares are generally void of traffic, which presents a completely different safety 
aspect compared to the curbside. 
By focusing on implementing the solution on the curbside, we saw an opportunity to shed light on the 
problem of the absence of play and impose a direct influence on the culture, providing an opportunity for 
the change that is needed. Moreover, it offers a chance to promote open and visible play. 
Had the placement been on heavily trafficked roads, it would have been an obvious opportunity to work 
on solutions that aimed to avoid accidents and promote traffic safety, to the extent mentioned in the in-
terview with Camilla from YOLI.
Country Dependent Culture
Copenhagen, as the selected region for the scope, has also had a significant role in the outcome of the 
project. The overall attitude towards children and safety in Copenhagen differs significantly from that of 
many other places. For instance, it is typical to leave babies in strollers outside of cafés unattended. The 
bicycle traffic is also vastly different from that of other cultures, meaning that children are exposed to it a 
lot sooner and become a part of the traffic at an early age as a result. One of the key findings we found was 
that it was shocking to others with different cultural backgrounds, how early children commute indepen-
dently to and from school. But even within Denmark, the play culture is immensely different, travelling 30 
minutes outside of Copenhagen it is common for children to play on the residential streets. As noted by 
Kompan, this does not currently occur in the metropolitan area, hence our focus on bringing it back.
If the solution would be implemented elsewhere, in other cities, regions, or countries, the solution would 
require tailoring to the environment in which it is to be used. As a result, a thorough examination of the 
setting would be required, taking into consideration factors such as culture, traffic, and general behavior, 
to prevent the failure of the solution. It is possible that the investigated area does not require the same 
solution, given that they might not share the same issues. 
Target Group and User Involvement
In the design process, we got the opportunity to incorporate a fourth-grade class from Skolen Ved Søerne 
at Frederiksberg. They had a huge influence on the outcome of the final solution, as they helped us obtain 
an understanding of our target group, as well as aided us in the design and testing of prototypes. They 
represent the elder segment of the target group, as the class consisted of students between the ages of 
nine and ten. Obviously, they cannot represent the entire target group. The children residing in the neig-
hborhood of Frederiksberg is another consideration to take into account, as naturally, there is a cultural 
variation that is different between the boroughs. Additionally, it is important to keep in mind that the chil-
dren’s identities and interests are greatly influenced by the class culture, meaning that if we had spoken to 
the parallel class, the outcome might have been completely different.
Besides the impact of the location, the time of year of our conducted investigations also influenced the
109
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:119==
outcome. We discovered in the literature that general outdoor activities usually drop in the fall and winter, 
directly affecting play behavior and general traffic.
Outro
Parental Influence
Understanding how to shape the culture and behavior surrounding play in the city has posed a significant 
challenge. Our research has revealed that children are a sensitive topic for parents, with numerous rules 
and opinions about child-rearing creating substantial pressure for them. Comprehending the concerns 
of parents and the factors that impact their influence on children and play behavior could be a subject 
worthy of its own study. In this project, we had no direct contact with parents we, therefore, view them 
as silent stakeholders. Instead, we have relied on literature, accounts from pedagogues, and our observa-
tions. Because of the complexity of humans, and the amount of anthropological research that would be 
required, it has been challenging to fully comprehend parenting styles and child-related behavior in such 
a limited period of time. However, as a great deal of societal pressure and uncertainty among parents have 
been observed, we can assume that we might not have received honest responses on the subject of chil-
dren if they were to be interviewed. We do not consider this a great loss because as opposed to directly 
including the parents, we opted for other approaches, like observations, to analyze their behaviors. How-
ever, due to their significant influence on the project, would be considered vital to include the parents in 
the long term.
Inclusivity Principles
Throughout the course of the project, we have sought to incorporate principles of inclusivity to enga-
ge the target audience. However, in working with a diverse range of individuals, it is acknowledged that 
complete attainment of this objective may not be possible. This is evident in our persona, which is a gene-
ralized depiction of the children and their development in the designated age span. Targeting too many 
individuals at once creates the risk of missing all, resulting in the incompletion of the actual objective. This 
is demonstrated by the strategies imposed by the Copenhagen Municipality that aims to benefit everyone 
but as they admit, have no real impact on anyone. Therefore, it is preferable to concentrate on a minority 
and then meet their requirements, as doing so can provide the opportunity for a variety of users to still be 
able to have valuable interactions.
In short, there are many ways the project could have been approached, leading to numerous ways it could 
have been solved. During the project, we had to iterate multiple times when new knowledge or insights 
were discovered. All choices made have been at the expense of other choices, thus emphasizing, that the 
solution is completely dependent on our approach to the problem. The final solution, with the three de-
sign proposals, should be seen as a stepping stone towards the development of an artifact that is set out 
to change the play culture in Copenhagen.
110
==PAGE:120==
12.2 Conclusion
As a result of the city’s development, in the last couple of decades, play has been relocated off the stre-
et and onto playgrounds spread across the cityscape. This is an inconvenient development, given that 
both parents’ and children’s everyday life are increasingly getting busier. When play is then designated 
for certain locations, the children might be deprived of the opportunity to engage in independent play. 
This is an issue, as play has a direct impact on children’s development. Play eventually becomes limited to 
playgrounds, parks, and the confinement of the house. The common denominator of these venues is the 
parents’ presence. 
In addition to being important for the child’s development, play is also crucial for the perception of the city. 
Children playing on the street fosters a sense of security and helps create a common ground for citizens to 
meet, thus helping build a thriving community. These two elements are essential for developing a functi-
oning city for people. Increasing enjoyment on the street is viewed as an opportunity to foster a general 
feeling of well-being amongst the cities entire population. 
The project went through a bottom-up approach to solve the matter of creating an intervention that ai-
med to contribute to the change of play culture in Copenhagen. The proposed solution was an artifact 
installed on the curbside that sought to encourage children to momentarily play interactions on their daily 
commutes. These interactions are assumed to help alter the behaviors of the users, incorporating more 
independent play for children in their everyday life.
The specific target group was chosen on the basis, that this is when the children begin to move indepen-
dently in the city, on their daily routes. What was discovered was that concurrently this is the time when 
they attend numerous leisure activities, and, as a result, do not have much spare time to play on their own 
terms.
An important discovery, that influenced the project greatly was that the solution had to accommodate 
social interactions. Given the social interactions’ significant impact on the children’s interest in play in these 
formative years. Therefore, if the solution is to be applied in an urban setting, it is absolutely vital that it can 
accommodate these interactions.
With an urban space that is not designed for children, we saw that it was necessary to create a solution for 
them and their play, and therefore came up with the following problem statement: How can we encourage 
momentarily playful interactions for children between the age of seven to ten on the curbside in the urban en-
vironment of Copenhagen?
The solution has been developed with best practices in mind, with the problem being solvable through 
a variety of efforts. Through evaluation and testing of the concepts developed, we chose the best-suited 
option, which was the Interactive Board. This was assessed based on factors such as the target group’s 
interest, product requirement, product placement, and project scope. The interactive board aims to en-
courage play and social interactions, but its most essential feature is its ability to enable children to leave 
their imprint on the city. This ability can foster sentiments of inclusion, which can lead to autonomy in the
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
111
==PAGE:121==
Outro
112
city and feelings of independence. Given that children are capable of adapting and utilizing their surroun-
dings in imaginative ways when provided adequate space, the core challenge is not limited to a specific 
solution.
As we discovered that children do not have enough leisure time, it was important that the proposed solu-
tions facilitate brief, yet meaningful play experiences. Furthermore, this was relevant given the location of 
the planned implementation, the curbside. As this space is currently deemed unsafe, it would be difficult 
to convince parents to let their children interact for longer periods of time.
We want to foster momentary play, five to ten minutes of interaction, through the implementation of the 
solution on the curbside. The solution is to be placed in an area of high traffic of children, such as between 
residential areas and schools. We anticipate that by minimizing the features offered, the interactions can 
be balanced to be within the established five to ten minutes. These features include feedback, level of dif-
ficulty, and complexity.
By developing a solution around universal and inclusive design principles, an attempt has been made to 
create a solution that accommodates beyond the target group. The selected target group does not narrow 
the reach of the solution. On the contrary, it widens it, as children don’t fit the average standard in terms of 
physical dimensions or level of development. Three distinct solution proposals were created to ensure that 
the solution could be implemented homogeneously in the urban environment. These suggested solutions 
offer the potential for various aesthetics and functions, in addition to various degrees of complexity.
Before the implementation of the final solution on the curbside, it needs to be further developed and te-
sted. Function, feedback, and final appearance are some of the work that needs to be done. It should also 
be investigated whether the target group can be nudged into interaction with the solution in the public 
domain. After this work, the goal is that the solution can be provided as an opportunity for a change in the 
play culture on the curbside in Copenhagen.
12.3 Reflection
The project’s focus underwent several modifications as a result of the iterative process of gathering and 
analyzing information. The complexity of play culture became apparent during the design process, which 
prompted the choice of developing an intervention through a solution proposal for the curbside, with the 
aim of creating change within the system.The process of design would have been streamlined if the curb-
side had been the original focus of the project. 
The project’s direction has shifted multiple times as a result of the iterative nature of the process. Implying 
that we initially focused on issues such as children’s lack of independent play in cities to arrive at incorpo-
rating and encouraging playful interactions on the curbside level for children to play on their own terms. 
Thus hoping to potentially alter the play culture identified and ensure a return of play to the curbside. 
Our goal was to gain a comprehensive understanding of various aspects pertaining to children and their 
play in urban environments. To accomplish this objective, we adopted a multi-faceted approach that en-
compassed desk research, interviews, observations, behavioral mapping, and co-creation. 
==PAGE:122==
Thus getting an understanding of the behaviors observed in the city and their relation to the culture, the 
city, and the children’s development. To evaluate concepts and ideas, we used methods such as MVP pro-
totype testing and concept evaluation with the stakeholders.
During the process, we encountered challenges with the execution of some methods, which consequently 
led to unexpected or a lack of outcomes. 
We discovered that using the MVP method allowed us to quickly establish solutions ready for testing, 
however, the children were not able to comprehend the solution, given that they were too abstract for 
their level of logical thinking. This prevented the children from interacting with the solution, as they were 
neither able to interpret the use nor understand the context. Naturally, we made other discoveries while 
observing the interactions and the lack thereof, but it would have been intriguing to discover the possible 
interactions that the children might have with the prototype.
The approach to the selection of stakeholders could have looked vastly different with another take on the 
project. We were especially fascinated by the psychology and research done on play and had the oppor-
tunity to get in contact with experts. However, we decided to concentrate on play as an integrated part of 
the cityscape, meaning that our focus was on urban environmental development. If we had changed our 
focus, we might have had the opportunity to create solutions that more specifically targeted the children’s 
development of motor, cognitive, and social skills. We opted for involving the children instead, which led 
to the acquirement of ideations and feedback, as opposed to relying on the theory and assumptions of 
scholars.
The project planning involved a high level of optimism regarding the expected outcomes and the devel-
opment of a comprehensive solution.  We had high ambitions for the outcome and development of a final 
solution, as well as striving to involve the target group in the process. This required extensive planning 
of co-creation workshops and prototype testing. This may have led to occasionally hasty decisions being 
made, without considering important factors such as the children’s perception of the world. 
Fortunately, we chose an MVP approach, which allowed us to fail fast and learn quickly. Had less time been 
spent on determining the ultimate scope, more time might have been available for the development of a 
solution. Instead, the final outcome led to three proposals at different levels of complexity with an under-
standing of potential implementation possibilities.
The partnership with Gehl Architects greatly influenced the project, the methodologies employed, and 
the way the city has been examined and perceived as a system. Throughout the whole project, the colla-
boration has been effective and incredibly helpful, as we got full access to their tools and resources as a 
result. Given that the Gehl ideologies and theories were used in the construction of the project; it can be 
presumed that the scope would have been vastly different if in partnership with another actor. Lastly, the 
project has been greatly influenced by the viewpoints of Copenhagen Municipalities landscape architects, 
the play specialists from YOLI and Kompan, and the pedagogues from Skolen ved Søerne, whose ideas and 
methods of operation have a bearing on how the project has been perceived.
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
113
==PAGE:123==
Outro
114
==PAGE:124==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:125==
1.	
Abrahamsen, W., Steg, L., Vlek, C., & Rothengatter, T. (2005). A review of intervention studies aimed at household energy conservation. Journal of Environ-
mental Psychology, 25(3), 273-291.
2.	
Aristotle. (350 BC). De Anima.
3.	
Atkin, A. J., Gorely, T., Biddle, S. J. H., Marshall, S. J., & Cameron, N. (2008). Critical hours: physical activity and sedentary behavior of adolescents after school. 
Pediatric Exercise Science, 20, 446e456.
4.	
Bateson, P. (2005). The role of play in the evolution of great apes and humans. In: Pellegrini, A.D. and Smith, P.K. (Eds) The Nature of Play: Great Apes and 
Humans. London: Guildford Press.
5.	
Beckett, T. (2019). Børn udvikler sig med kroppen forrest. Danmark Evalueringsinstitut. Online: https://www.eva.dk/dagtilbud-boern/boern-udvik-
ler-sig-kroppen-forrest (Accessed 20 January 2023) 
6.	
Bernard van Leer Foundation. (2018). Toolkit – For measuring urban experiences of young children, 1-40.
7.	
Bentway. (2012). Play Provocations: What play can do for a city. The Bentway and Daily Tous Les Jours. 1-34. Online: https://play.thebentway.ca/wp-con-
tent/uploads/2022/02/Play-Provocations-by-The-Bentway-Daily-tous-les-jours.pdf (Accessed 25 October 2022)
8.	
Bonham, A. (2014). Play and the City: How to Create Places and Spaces To Help Us Thrive.
9.	
Blinkert, B. (2004). Quality of the city for children: chaos and order. Children, Youth and Environments 14(2): 99–112.
10.	
Brockman, R., Fox, K. R., & Russell, J. (2011). ‘What is the meaning and nature of active play for today’s children in the UK?’, International Journal of Behavioral 
Nutrition and Physical Activity,  8(15). 1–7. 
11.	
Brown, S. L. (2014). Consequences of Play Deprivation. Scholarpedia, 9(5):30449.
12.	
Burghardt, G. M. (2005). The Genesis of Animal Play: Testing the Limits. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chapter Play: Many Meanings, Few Answers & Chapter 
3 Defining Play: Can We Stop Playing Around.
13.	
Carver, A., Timperio, A., & Crawford, D. (2008). Playing it safe: the influence of neighbourhood safety on children’s physical activity A review. Health & Place, 
14, 217e227.
14.	
Cash, P., Hartlev, C. G., & Durazo, C. B. (2017). Behavioural Design: A Process for Integrating Behaviour Change and Design. Design Studies, 48(January). 
96–128. Online: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/128524763/Behavioural_Design_Process_Post_Print.pdf
15.	
Castella, K. (2018). Designing for Kids: Creating for Playing, Learning, and Growing (1st ed.). Taylor and Francis
16.	
Children’s Play Council. (2000). Design for Play - Free Play Network. Online: http://www.freeplaynetwork.org.uk/pubs/bestplay.pdf (Accessed 23 January 
2023)
17.	
Churchman, A. (2003). Is There a Place for Children in the City? Journal of Urban Design, 8(2), 99–111.
18.	
Clarkson, J. Keates, S., Coleman, R., & Lebbon, C. (2003). Inclusive Design: Design for the Whole Population. Springer Science & Business Media. 1-40. 
19.	
Dansk Standard. (2018). Online: https://www.ds.dk/da/nyhedsarkiv/2018/6/sikre-legepladser-med-standarder (Accessed 5 Febuary 2023)
20.	
Dansk Standard. (2017). Legepladsredskaber og -underlag – Del 1: Generelle sikkerhedskrav og prøvningsmetoder. DS/EN 1176-1:2017
21.	
Day, J. D. (2017). Play. Gehl Architects Blog Post.  Online: https://gehlpeople.com/blog/play/ (Accessed 11 October 2022)
22.	
The Double Diamond: 15 years on. Design Council. Online: https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/our-work/news-opinion/double-diamond-15-years/ (Acces-
sed 5 Febuary 2023)
23.	
Frisk, R. (2013). Designing cities for people. TEDxUWollongong. 
24.	
Ginsburg, K. R. (2007). The Importance of Play in Promoting Healthy Child Development and Maintaining Strong Parent-Child Bonds. American Academy 
of Pediatrics 119(1). 182–191. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2006-2697
25.	
Gehl Architects. (2019). Gehl Company Profile - Making Cities for People. Online: https://issuu.com/gehlarchitects/docs/gehl_company_profile. (Accessed 
30 Januar 2023).
26.	
Gehl Architects. (n.d.)  Towards child friendly cities 2. Gehl People. Online: https://www.gehlpeople.com/blog/towards-child-friendly-cities-2. (Accessed 2 
December 2022) 
27.	
Gehl Playscapes. (n.d.). Everyday Spaces, Playscapes. The Playbook 16th Street Mall
28.	
Gehl, Jan. (2010). Byer for mennesker. Bogværket. 1. udgave.
Bibliography
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:126==
30.	
Gleave, J., & Hamilton, I. C. (2012). A literature review on the effects of a lack of play on children’s lives. 1-34.
31.	
Gould, J. D., & Lewis, C. (1985). Designing for Usability: Key Principles and What Designers Think Association for Computing Machinery, 28 (3), 300–311 - 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3166.3170
32.	
Gudova, E. A. (2016). ‘Slow! Children at Play’: Localization of Childhood in Moscow Playgrounds in Winter. 
33.	
Guroglu, B., Haselager, G., van Lieshout, C., Takashima, A., Rijpkema, M., & Fernandez, G. (2008). Why are friends special? Implementing a social interaction 
simulation task to probe the neural correlates of friendship. Neuroimage 39(2). 903–910. 
34.	
Henig, R. M. (2008). Taking Play Seriously. The New York Times Magazine. 
35.	
Hillery, G. Jr. (1982), A research odyssey: Developing and testing a community theory
36.	
Hughes, B. (1996). A Playworker’s Taxonomy of Play Types.
37.	
Innocent, T., & Stevens, Q. (2021). Urban Play as Catalyst for Social Wellbeing Post-Pandemic.
38.	
Jacobs, J. (1961). The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New York: Random House. 29-88.nhttp://www.petkovstudio.com/bg/wp-content/
uploads/2017/03/The-Death-and-Life-of-Great-American-Cities_Jane-Jacobs-Complete-book.pdf
39.	
Kaboom. (n.d.). Play Everywhere Playbook: How to champion and create kid-friendly, playful cities. Online: https://kaboom.org/playbook (Accessed on 4 
February 2023).
40.	
Kahneman, D. (2011), Thinking, fast and slow, Macmillan.
41.	
Karsten, L. (2006). It all used to be better? Different generations on continuity and change in urban children’s daily use of space. 
42.	
Khadilkar, P. R., & Cash, P. (2020). Understanding behavioural design: barriers and enablers, Journal of Engineering Design; IN PRESS. https://backend.orbit.
dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/223405291/Postprint_Understanding_behavioural_design_barriers_and_enablers.pdf
43.	
Københavns Kommune. (2022). Status på København 2022. Den Tværgående Analyseenhed.
44.	
København Kommune, Teknik- og Miljøforvaltningen (2018), Kantzoner i København. Administrationsgrundlag 2018, 1-40.
45.	
LEGO foundation. (2018). LEGO Play Well Report 2018, 1-94. 
46.	
Lester, S., & Russell, W. (2010) Children’s right to play: An examination of the importance of play in the lives of children worldwide. Working Paper No. 57. 
The Hague, The Netherlands: Bernard van Leer Foundation
47.	
Loizillon, A.,Petrowski, N., Britto, P., & Cappa, C. (2017). Development of the Early Childhood Development Index in MICS surveys. MICS Methodological 
Papers, No. 6, Data and Analytics Section, Division of Data, Research and Policy, UNICEF New York. 1-52. Online:  https://mics.unicef.org/files?job=W1siZiI-
sIjIwMTcvMDkvMTUvMjEvMTUvNDMvMzc4L01JQ1NfTWV0aG9kb2xvZ2ljYWxfUGFwZXJfNi5wZGYiXV0&sha=85c096f0b2c5b0c8 (Accessed on 12 Novem-
ber 2023).
48.	
Loudoun, F. M., Boyle, B., & Lund, M. L. (2022). Children’s experiences of play in digital spaces: A scoping review. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0272630
49.	
Lowe, S. S. (2000). Creating Community: Art for Community Development
50.	
Mannoni, O. (2015). Freud: The Theory of the Unconscious (Radical Thinkers). Verso. Online: https://www.amazon.com/Freud-Theory-Unconscious-Radi-
cal-Thinkers/dp/178168894X (Accessed 31 January 2023)
51.	
Martin, B., & Hanington, B. (2012). Universal Methods of Design. Rockport Publishing. 
52.	
Mattelmäki, T., & Visser, F.S. (2011). Lost in CO-X - Interpretations of Co-Design and Co-Creation.
53.	
Merriam-Webster. (n.d.). Challenge. In Merriam-Webster.com dictionary. Online:  https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/challenge (Accessed 13 
January 2023)
54.	
Merriam-Webster. (n.d.). Construct. In Merriam-Webster.com dictionary. Online: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/construct (Accessed 13 
January 2023)
55.	
Merriam-Webster. (n.d.). Simulation. In Merriam-Webster.com dictionary. Online: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/simulation (Accessed 13 
January 2023)
56.	
Merriam-Webster. (n.d.). Vertigo. In Merriam-Webster.com dictionary. Online: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/vertigo (Accessed 13 January 
2023).
Integrate play into the urban environment of Copenhagen
==PAGE:127==
57.	
Miltenberger, R. G. (2011), Behavior modification: Principles and procedures, Cengage Learning.
58.	
National Research Council (US). (1984). Development During Middle Childhood: The Years From Six to Twelve. Washington (DC): National Academies Press 
(US). Online: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK216770/ (Accessed 28 September 2022)
59.	
Ng, Cheuk Fan. (2016). Behavioral Mapping and Tracking, 29-51. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119162124.ch3
60.	
Norman, D. A. (2018). Principles of Human-Centered Design (Don Norman). Nielsen Norman Group. Online: https://www.nngroup.com/videos/princip-
les-human-centered-design-don-norman/ (Accessed on 3 January 2023).
61.	
Norman, D. A. (2013). The Design of Everyday Things. The MIT Press. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
62.	
Pellis, V. &, Pellis, S. (2013). Rough and Tumble Play. Scholarpedia, 8(3):30363. doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.30363
63.	
Pellis, S., & Pellis, V. (2006). Play and the development of social engagement. In: Marshall, P. and Fox N. (Eds) The Development of Social Engagement. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
64.	
Plotnick, R. (2018). Power button: A history of pleasure, panic, and the politics of pushing. MIT Press.
65.	
Rogala, A., & Stokols, A. (2015). Making Cities Safer by Design: A Conversation with Jan Gehl and Ani Dasgupta. World Resources Institute. Online: https://
www.wri.org/insights/making-cities-safer-design-conversation-jan-gehl-and-ani-dasgupta (Accessed 5 Febuary 2023)
66.	
Scarlett, W. G., Naudeau, S., Pasternak, D. S., & Ponte, I. (2005). Children’s Play. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. https://dx.doi 
org/10.4135/9781452232393
67.	
Siviy, S., Love, N., DeCicco, B., Giordano, S. & Seifert, T. (2003). The relative playfulness of juvenile Lewis and Fischer-344 rats. Physiology and Behaviour 80.
68.	
Skår, M. & Krogh, E. (2009).  Changes in children’s nature-based experiences near home: from spontaneous play to adult-controlled, planned and organi-
sed activities. 339-354. https://doi.org/10.1080/14733280903024506
69.	
Spencer, C. P., & Blades, M. (2006). Children and their Environments: Learning, Using and Designing Spaces. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Stati-
stics New Zealand, 2013.
70.	
Stallings, L. M. (1973). Motor Skills: Development and Learning. ISBN 0-697-07263-0.
71.	
Story, M. F., Mueller, J. L., & Mace R. L. (1998). The Universal Design File:  Designing for People of All Ages and Abilities. North Carolina State Univ., Raleigh. 
Center for Universal Design.
72.	
Tilley, A. R., Anning, J., & Welles, R. (2002). The measure of man and woman. human factors in design. Wiley & Sons.
73.	
Tromp, N., Hekkert, P., & Verbeek, P. P. (2011). “Design for Socially Responsible Behavior: A Classification of Influence Based on Intended User Experience.” 
Design Issues 27(3): 3–19.
74.	
The Center for Universal Design. (1997). The Principles of Universal Design (Version 2.0). Raleigh, NC: NC State University, Author. 
75.	
Tuthill, J. C., & Azim, E. (2018). Proprioception. Current Biology, Volume 28, Issue 5. R194-R203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.01.064. 
76.	
UN Committee on the Rights of the Child. (2013). General comment No. 17 on the right of the child to rest, leisure, play, recreational activities, cultural life 
and the arts (art. 31). 1-22. 
77.	
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). (2018). Learning through play: Strengthening learning through play in early childhood education programmes, 
1-36. 
78.	
Vaisey, S. (2009). Motivation and Justification: A Dual-Process Model of Culture in Action.
79.	
Wadsworth, B. J. (1996). Piaget’s theory of cognitive and affective development: Foundations of constructivism (5th ed.). Longman Publishing. 
80.	
Weedy, S. (2020). Child in the city: Play access in cities is critical to children’s development.
81.	
Weitz, J. (1996). Coming up taller: Arts and humanities program for children and youth at risk.
Bibliography
==PAGE:128==
!"
#$$%&'()*
&+,
==PAGE:129==
!"#$%&'()*&(#%%+'
,--"*&./(*%0(1202(
!"#$%&'%()*#)+,)-%!!
Source: Gehl, J., 2010. Cities for people. Washington, DC: Island Press. 
!"#$%&''$
!"#$%&'(#)*'+,-.#/%,-0%,'
==PAGE:130==
!"#$%&'()*&(#%%+'
,--"*&./(*%0(1203(
.#$%&'%/),01-2%!3
!()&&%*#(+&%
1-%*2-*%,(3#-44+
==PAGE:131==
==PAGE:132==
!"#$%&'()*&(#%%+'
,--"*&./(*%0(1204
4.#$%&'%5&6)+,)-%!!
,+'-.*&%+"/.0+"1")&2
5,('+#60%7,4(
==PAGE:133==
==PAGE:134==
!"#$%&'()*&(#%%+'
,--"*&./(*%0(1204
4"#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
&3,"2%'4%,$(3
8.#84&#9*3:07#;!<<=>
==PAGE:135==
!-
!-
#$$%&'()*
&+,
==PAGE:136==
!"#$%&' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
())&*+",-*./-01/2
!9:%&'%5&6)+,)-%!;!!
-"5"$',1")&%2&(!"2
5%4?#&,%-:#-4#!@#.0'%7#4+A
Distress, disgust 
& smile
Unresponsive to 
outside stimulation
Inborn reﬂexes
Open to simulation, 
showing interest & curiousity
Beginning of sensory information coordination
Showing anticipation & disappointment
Show interest in surroundings
Sits witho
Stands wh
Increas
Begins 
Walks up and down steps
18 mo
19 mo
20 mo
21 mo
22 mo
Well-coordinated manipulation of the objects
2.5 y/o
3 y/o
2 y/o
2 y/o
Make decisions based on prior experiences
10 y/o
Beginning of logical thinking
Seperation anxiety and adapt through simulation play
18 mo
Follows simple two-step instructions
Increasingly ability to handle smallere objects with hands
Beginning of conversation
8 y/o
9 y/o
Begins logical thinking 
Begins to understand others can have a different perception
Reciprocal awareness
11 y/o
11 y/o
Understand the course and effect relation, able to distinguishing reality from fantasy
7 y/o
Can understand several different point of views
Abstract thin
Better sense of respon
Development of hand
Birth
1 mo
2 mo
3 mo
4 mo
5 mo
23 mo
8 y/o
9 y/o
10 y/o
Easily inﬂuenced by peers. Wants to ﬁt in with peer group rules. Strong group identity
10 y/o
Increased empathy and ability to interact with others 
Show signs of more responsible behaviour; takes better care of possessions
Ability to engage in competition
7 y/o
9 y/o
Understanding their own self
Understands game strategy, competition, and rules 
7 y/o
==PAGE:137==
s. Repeats enjoyable or interesting behaviors.
out support
hile holding on
Interacts with others & shows emotions like joy, fear, & anger
Stands alone
10 mo
Walk
11 mo
se seperation from parent
problem solving through trial and error
16 mo
15 mo
14 mo
13 mo
12 mo
17 mo
o
3.5 y/o
4 y/o
5 y/o
6 y/o
Thinks their view is the only possibility
6 mo
Improved coordination
Reﬁned ﬁne 
motor skills
5 y/o
Difﬁculties following rules
5 y/o
6 y/o
7 y/o
Balancing
12 y/o
13 y/o
king
Begins to understand non-verbal ques
14 y/o
nsibility
d-eye coordination
6 mo
7 mo
8 mo
9 mo
10 mo
Social developement and emotions expressions 
11 mo
Cognitive development
Motor development
==PAGE:138==
!"#$%&' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
())&*+",-*./-01/1
10)-%1(,
BA0'-,4(#C%42077
44#$%&'%5&6)+,)-%!;!!
==PAGE:139==
==PAGE:140==
!.
#$$%&'()*
&+,
==PAGE:141==
5*#"67."8'
,--"*&./(*%0(1402
34#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
0)&"+50"6%!.0-"
<):1=&=0)>
59:;<=>?:5<9
!"
#$%&"'(")*+,"-%./0
!"
#$%&"'(")*+,"%1/0
!"
#$%&"'(")*+,"$'1$/(&"2/1,//0
!"
#$%&"'(")*+,"3,*4/(('*-0
!"
#$%&"2*")*+"2*0
?@5A=;B9(,9=(,?:5C5:5BD
!"
5*6".%-)"7'2("2*")*+"&%7/"8%,/"*4"2+,'-1"&$/"2%)0
!"
#$%&"'("&$/',"%1/",%-1/0
!"
#$%&"7'-2"*4"%8&'9'&'/("2*")*+"2*"6'&$"&$/"7'2(0
!"
:,/"(*./"%8&'9'&'/(".*,/"3*3+;%,"&$%-"*&$/,(0
!"
#$)"2*")*+"&$'-7"&$/)"%,/".*,/"3*3+;%,0
!"
<*"&$/"8$';2,/-"*4&/-"+(/"*=>/8&("*,"/?+'3./-&"6$/-"&$/)"3;%)0
@/A&"%=*+&"$*6"&$/"'-&/,9'/6"1+'2/"'("&*"=/"+(/2B
<>:=<<;(EA,F
!"
#$%&"7'-2"*4"*+&2**,"3;%)"%,/%"2*")*+"$%9/"%9%';%=;/0
!"
C("'&",/?+',/2"&*"$%9/"%-"%2+;&"(+3/,9'('-1"%&"%;;"&'./(0
!"
<*"&$/"8$';2,/-"6%-&"%2+;&"/1%1/./-&"'-"&$/',"1%./(0
!"
:,/")*+",/?+',/2"&*"/-1%1/"'-"&$/"8$';2,/-D("3;%)0
!"
5*6"*4&/-"2*")*+"3;%)"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"'-(&'&+&'*-0
!"
#$/,/"2*")*+"1*0
!"
#$)"2*")*+"1*"&*"&$'("(3/8'E8"(3*&0
?<9?B;9D
!"
#$%&"'(")*+,"='11/(&"8*-8/,-"6$/-"3;%)'-1"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"'-(&'&+&'*-0
!"
:,/"&$/,/"%-)"&**;("4,*.")*+,"/2+8%&'*-"&$%&")*+"+(/"6$/-"3;%)'-1"6'&$"
&$/"7'2(0
!"
C("&$/,/"%-)&$'-1")*+"%,/"/(3/8'%;;)"%6%,/"*4"6$/-"&$/"8$';2,/-"3;%)0
!"
<*")*+"$%9/"3,*4/(('*-%;"8*-8/,-("6$/-"'&"8*./("&*"3;%)0
!"
<*")*+"E-2"&$%&")*+"-//2"&*"/(&%=;'($"&$/"1%./("4*,"&$/"8$';2,/-0
!"
<*")*+"*4&/-"-//2"&*"'-&/,4/,"6'&$"&$/"8$';2,/-"3;%)'-10
==PAGE:142==
0)&"+50"6%'5"+50"6
<):1=&=0)>
?9#)-6@)A%B4
!"#$%&'(")*%+',)#*"-.%/*012'2(*%1#%34"#"0)5%62%7(-"'48,(9%3","//1
?9#)-6@)A%B!
!"#$%:;","*%<"4=$.%/*012'2(*%1#%>*09?8)8',*%@36
?9#)-6@)A%B3
A1-1%!*))*,.%/*012'2(*%1#%34"#"0)5%'2%7(-"'48,(9%3","//1
?9#)-6@)A%BC
B4")#"1-.%/*012'2(*%1#%34"#"0)5%'2%7(-"'48,(9%3","//1
==PAGE:143==
,--"*&./(*%0(1403
34#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
0)&"+50"6%78
D@#$%E&0@>)%F&G>#)@9H%*):1=&=0)%1#!"#$%$&'(!)*!+,-$.#/0,1!"$0$223
G,?:D
@$/"'-&/,9'/6"6%("8*-2+8&/2"*9/,"&$/"3$*-/"*-"&$/"FG(&"*4"H/3&/.=/,B"C&"6%("%"(/I
.'I(&,+8&+,/2"'-&/,9'/6J"&$%&"4*;;*6/2"&$/"'-&/,9'/6"1+'2/B"
59:;<=>?:5<9
!"#$%&'%()*+%,#-./
K*+'(/"5*;(&/'-"
!"#$%&'%()*+%#0./
FL")/%,("*;2
!"#$%&'%()*+%"&0".'$%1.0+../
K*+'(/D("$'1$/(&"2/1,//"'("%"3,*4/(('*-%;"=%8$/;*,D("%("%"(8$**;I=%(/2";/'(+,/I&'./"4%8';'&)"
3/2%1*1+/"4,*."M%.3+("M%,;(=/,1B"@$'("6%("E-'($/2"'-"FNGOJ"1'9'-1"$/,"&$,//")/%,("*4"
3,*4/(('*-%;"/A3/,'/-8/B
P/4*,/"&$%&J"K*+'(/"1*&"%"&/%8$'-1"%(('(&%-&"2/1,//"8%;;/2"%"Q:R"'-"5';;/,S2B
!"#$%&'%()*+%2+)3.''&),/
H8$**;I=%(/2";/'(+,/I&'./"4%8';'&)"3/2%1*1+/B"
!"#$%1)%()*%1)/
H$/"6*,7("%("%"3/2%1*1+/"'-"T,'&'2(I"U1"V+-'*,7;+="T';'33%J"6$'8$"'("8*--/8&/2"&*"H7*;/-"
9/2"HS/,-/B"K*+'(/"%;(*"2*/("(+33*,&'9/"&/%8$'-1"4*,"L&$IW&$"1,%2/,("%-2"'("3%,&"*4"&$/"
'-(&'&+&'*-D("2%';)"*3/,%&'*-(B
5*#"67."8'
==PAGE:144==
?@5A=;B9(,9=(,?:5C5:5BD
4)5%-#,(%6"&71+.,%1)%()*%$#8.%6#+.%)3%1*+&,0%$".%1#(/
X%8$"*4"&$/"3/2%1*1+/("'("%(('1-/2"&*"%"6*,7($*3Y,**."%&"&$/"4%8';'&)J"6$'8$"%;;*6("&$/."
&*"4*8+("*-"&$/"8$';2,/-"6$*"2/8'2/"&*"8*./"=)B"@$/)"%,/"%(('1-/2"&*"(/9/,%;"3,'.%,)"
8$';2,/-"Z/(3/8'%;;)"9+;-/,%=;/"8$';2,/-"6$*"-//2"'-2'9'2+%;"%1,//./-&("*,"8$';2,/-"6$*"
,/?+',/"(3/8'%;"%&&/-&'*-"&*"=/"%8&'9%&/2[B"K*+'(/"'(",/(3*-('=;/"4*,"('A"8$';2,/-J"6'&$"&$/"1/I
-/,%;"3/2%1*1+/"=/'-1",/(3*-('=;/"4*,"4*+,"&*"/'1$&B"
@$/,/"'("-*"(3/8'E8"-+.=/,"*4"8$';2,/-J"%("&$/)">+(&"8*./"%-2"1*"2+,'-1"&$/"2%)B"P+&"&$/,/"
'("%=*+&"GNN"8$';2,/-"&$%&"8*./"'-"2%';)B
!"#$%&'%$".&+%#0.%+#,0./
M$';2,/-"=/&6//-"&$/"%1/("*4"GNIGW"$%9/"%88/(("&*"&$/"8;+=B"@$/"8;+="'(".%'-;)"=/'-1"+(/2"
=)"&$/"\&$"%-2"]&$"1,%2/,(B"
!"#$%8&,1%)3%#6$&9&$.'%1)%()*%1)%5&$"%$".%8&1'/
K*+'(/"'("'-"8$%,1/"*4"&$/"8,/%&'9/"%8&'9'&'/(B"@$/"3/2%1*1+/("8$%-1/"=/&6//-"&$/"2'^/,/-&"
,**.("/9/,)"2%)B"K*+'(/"*4&/-"%8&'9'&'/("2'^/,/-&"1%./("(+8$"%("_C"2/8;%,/"6%,`J">+.3'-1"
,*3/"'-"&$/"1%,2/-"*,"3;%)'-1"=*%,2"1%./("6$/-"4/6/,"8$';2,/-"%,/"3,/(/-&B"P/('2/(J"&$%&"
'("&$/"2%';)"&%(7(J"(+8$"%("3,*9'2'-1"(-%87("%-2"/-(+,'-1"&$/"8$';2,/-"%,/"6/;;B"U88%('*-%;;)J"
3%,&'/("%-2"/9/-&("%,/"3;%--/2J"(+8$"%("%""1$*(&"3,*8/(('*-"4*,"5%;;*6//-B"
:+.%')-.%#6$&9&$.'%-)+.%2)2*7#+%$"#,%)$".+'/
a*(&"*4"&$/"8$';2,/-"%,/"%&"&$/"8,/%&'9/"6*,7($*3("*,"%&"&$/"&%=;/"&/--'("%-2"Q;%)H&%&'*-"
,**.B"a%-)"*4"&$/"8$';2,/-"('&"%-2"3;%)"6'&$"&$/',"3$*-/("6$/-"&$/)"%,/"%&"&$/"4%8';'&)B"
@$/"8,/%&'9/"6*,7($*3"'("3*3+;%,"%("'&"'("%"8%;."(3%8/"6$/,/"&$/"8$';2,/-"%,/"%;;*6/2"&*"
8,/%&/"4,//;)B"@$/"%2+;&("%,/"-*&"%;;*6/2"&*"(%)J"_)*+"8%-"-*&"8,/%&/"&$%&`B"@$/"%2+;&(D",*;/"'("&*"
$/;3"%-2"1+'2/"&$/."'-"/A3%-2'-1"&$/',"'2/%(B"
@$/"Q;%)H&%&'*-",**."'("3*3+;%,"=/8%+(/"&$/"8$';2,/-"*4"&$/"&'./"E-2"'&"&$/".*(&"'-&/,/I
(&'-1"=/'-1"*-;'-/B"C&"'("%-"%22'8&'*-B"@$/"8$';2,/-"3;%)"&*1/&$/,"=+&"%,/"*-;)"%;;*6/2"&*"3;%)"
\]".'-+&/("%&"%"&'./J"*-8/"2%';)B
K*+'(/"/A3/,'/-8/(".%-)"*4"&$/"8$';2,/-"('&&'-1"6'&$"&$/',"3$*-/J"%-2"($/"(//("'&"%("%"6%)"
4*,"&$/"7'2("&*"+-6'-2"%4&/,"%";*-1"2%)"%&"(8$**;B"H$/"E-2("'&"3%,%2*A'8%;J"%("&$/)"%,/"=/'-1"
=*.=%,2/2"6'&$"'.3,/(('*-("4,*."&$/"*-;'-/"6*,;2B
H*./"7'2("%,/"=/&&/,"%&"3;%)'-1"6'&$"/%8$"*&$/,"*-"&$/',"3$*-/(B"@$/"4%8';'&)"'.3;/./-&/2"
%"3$*-/"3*;'8)"%4&/,"3%,/-&("8*.3;%'-/2"%=*+&"$*6".+8$"&$/',"8$';2,/-"+(/"&$/',"3$*-/(B"
@$/"1*%;"*4"&$/"4%8';'&)"'("&*"&/%8$"&$/"8$';2,/-"&*"=/8*./"'-2/3/-2/-&"%-2"6$)"&$/"3%I
,/-&("%,/",/(3*-('=;/"4*,"&/;;'-1"&$/',"8$';2,/-"6$%&"&$/)"%,/"%;;*6/2"&*"2*"%-2"6$%&"&$/)"
%,/"-*&"%;;*6/2"&*"2*"6$';/"%&"&$/"4%8';'&)B"@$/"3/2%1*1+/("&,)"&*"%8&'9%&/"&$/."*,"2/9'(/"
%;&/,-%&'9/("&*"=/'-1"*-"&$/',"3$*-/("4*,"$*+,(B"@$/)"%87-*6;/21/"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-".'1$&"
-//2"&*"+-6'-2"+('-1"&$/"3$*-/B
;)%$".%6"&71+.,%)3$.,%*'.%)<=.6$'%)+%.>*&2-.,$%5".,%$".(%27#(/
a**-8%,(J"=%;;("Z4**&=%;;J"=%(/=%;;(J"/&8B[""%-2"&%=;/"&/--'(B
==PAGE:145==
<>:=<<;(EA,F
!"#$%8&,1%)3%)*$1))+%27#(%#+.#%1)%()*%"#9.%#9#&7#<7./
:"1%,2/-"6'&$"&6*"(6'-1("Z=',2-/(&"(6'-1(["%-2"%"=*-E,/"%,/%B"C-"&$/"(8$**;)%,2J"&$/,/"'("%"
(*88/,"E/;2J"6$'8$"&$/"4%8';'&)"8%-"+(/J"%-2"&6*"=%(7/&=%;;"-/&(J"&$/"1%./"_*(&`"'("2,%6-"*-"
&$/"8*-8,/&/J"%-2"&$/-"&$/,/"%,/"&%=;/("%-2"=/-8$/(B"
C-"&$/"(+../,J"(7%&/=*%,2("%,/"%9%';%=;/"&*"+(/"'4"&$/"7'2("%,/"'-&/,/(&/2"'-"&$/.B"
@$/"4%8';'&)"$%("6//7;)",*;/3;%)"'-"HS-2/,.%,7/-J"6$/,/"&$/)"E1$&"%1%'-(&"*&$/,"%4&/,I
(8$**;";/'(+,/I&'./"4%8';'&'/(B
?'%&$%+.>*&+.1%$)%"#9.%#,%#1*7$%'*2.+9&'&,0%#$%#77%$&-.'/
:"8*I6*,7/,"'("%;6%)("%9%';%=;/"'-"&$/"1%,2/-"'4"&$/"7'2("-//2"&$/."&*"(&%,&"%8&'9'&'/("*,"
3%,&'8'3%&/B"@$/)"2*"%8&'9'&'/("(+8$"%(";%(/,"1%./("%-2"(*88/,B"@$/"8$';2,/-"%,/"-*&"+-2/,"
8*-(&%-&"(+,9/';;%-8/B"
;)%$".%6"&71+.,%5#,$%#1*7$%.,0#0.-.,$%&,%$".&+%27#(/
@$/"7'2("%,/"'-&/,/(&/2"'-"&$/"%2+;&("3%,&'8'3%&'-1B"C&"'("./-&'*-/2"%&"./.=/,(D".//&'-1(J"
6$/,/"8*-9/,(%&'*-("%,/"$%2"/%8$")/%,B"@$/"8$';2,/-"8%-"3,*9'2/"4//2=%87J"%-2"&$/"3%,/-&("
%,/"'-9'&/2B"H*./"*4"&$/"8*../-&("./-&'*-/2"%,/"&$%&"&$/)";'7/"&$/"%2+;&(D"3%,&'8'3%&'*-B"
K*+'(/"E-2("&$%&".*,/"8$';2,/-"3%,&'8'3%&/"'4"&$/"%2+;&("%,/"&$/,/B"
:+.%()*%+.>*&+.1%$)%.,0#0.%&,%$".%6"&71+.,@'%27#(/
@$/"3/2%1*1+/("%,/"/.3;*)/2"&*"%8&'9/;)"3%,&'8'3%&/J"6$)"'&D("-%&+,%;"&*"'-&/,%8&"6'&$"&$/"
8$';2,/-"%-2"&$/',"3;%)B"@$'("'("$'1$;)"9%;+/2"=)"&$/"4%8';'&)"%-2"'("(*./&$'-1"&$%&"&$/)"$%9/"
%("%"4*8+("%,/%B
4)5%)3$.,%1)%()*%27#(%)*$'&1.%)3%$".%&,'$&$*$&),/
</&/,.'-/2"=)"&$/"(/%(*-J"'-"&$/"(+../,"$*;'2%)J"&$/)"1*"&*"Tb;;/23%,7/-"*,"HS-2/,.%,I
7/-"%("6/;;"%("/(&%=;'($"%"(6'..'-1"&/%.B
Q;%)"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"'-(&'&+&'*-"'("-*&"2*-/"2%';)"=+&"'("%-"%8&'9'&)"&$%&"'("3;%--/2"'-"%29%-8/B
!".+.%1)%()*%0)/
@$/)"$%9/"8;'.='-1"%-2",'2'-1"&/%.("/9/,)"6//7B"C-"&$/"6'-&/,J"&$/)"%,,%-1/"'8/"(7%&'-1"
&,'3(B"U88%('*-%;;)"&$/)"3;%-"6//7/-2"1/&%6%)("&*"1*"&*"3;%8/("(+8$"%("1*"$'1$B
@$/)"+(/"&$/"E/;2"=)"T*,+."./&,*"(&%&'*-"4*,",*+-2"=%;;"%-2";%(/,"1%./(B"@$/)"%;(*"+(/"&$/"
(8$**;"4*,"&$'("3+,3*(/"%-2"2%,7"$'2/I%-2I(//7B
@$/"3/2%1*1+/("2*-D&"-/8/((%,';)"3,/4/,"&*"1*"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"8'&)J"=+&"%((/(("6$%&"&$/"8$';I
2,/-"%,/"'-&/,/(&/2"'-"2*'-1B"C4"'&("3*(('=;/"&*"1*"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"8'&)"&$/)"6';;J"=+&"'&"2/3/-2("
*-"%";*&"*4"3;%--'-1",/1%,2'-1"&,%-(3*,&"%-2"8;*('-1"$*+,(B
@$/"E/;2("8;*(/"&*"4*,+."./&,*"(&%&'*-"'("+(/2"4*,",*+-2=%;;"*,";%(/,&%1B"
==PAGE:146==
?<9?B;9D
!"#$%&'%()*+%<&00.'$%6),6.+,%5".,%27#(&,0%)*$'&1.%)3%$".%&,'$&$*$&),/
K*+'(/"$%("-*"8*-8/,-("=/8%+(/"($/"%-2"$/,"8*;;/%1+/("$%9/"%1,//2"&*">+(&"&%7/"'&"%("'&"
8*./(B"@$/"8$';2,/-"&,%9/;"'-"&$/"&,%c8"2%';)J"%-2"$/,"1/-/,%;"*3'-'*-"'("&$%&"_&$/"7'2("$%9/"'&"
+-2/,"8*-&,*;`B
@$/,/"%,/"3,/9/-&'9/"./%(+,/("&$%&"%,/"+(/2"&*".%7/"'&"4//;"(%4/,J"(+8$"%("&$/"='8)8;/"&/(&"
'-"&$/"d&$"1,%2/"%-2"&$/"4%8';'&)"3'87'-1"&$/"8$';2,/-"+3"4,*."(8$**;"'-"&$/"E,(&"6//7("*4"
(8$**;"(&%,&J"&*"&/%8$"&$/."&$/"6%)"%-2"$*6"&*"=/$%9/"'-"&,%c8B
#$/-"&$/)"%,/"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"4%8';'&)J"&$/"3/2%1*1+/("$%9/"&$/"4%8';'&)"3$*-/"6'&$"&$/.J"
%-2"%;;"*4"&$/"8$';2,/-"$%9/"&$/"-+.=/,"8*2/2"'-&*"&$/',"3$*-/(B"@$/)"%;(*"%,,%-1/"8$/87I
'-"&'./("Z%-2".//&'-1"&'./(["6$/,/"&$/"7'2("%,/"&*".//&"+3B"@$/)"%,/"%(7/2"&*"(/&"%;%,.("*-"
&$/',"3$*-/("&*"/-(+,/"&$%&"&$/)".%7/"'&B":&"&$/"8$/87I'-J"&$/"3/2%1*1+/("/-(+,/"&$%&"&$/"
7'2("%,/"%8&'9/;)"/-1%1/2"'-"%8&'9'&'/("%-2"$%33)B
:+.%$".+.%#,(%$))7'%3+)-%()*+%.1*6#$&),%$"#$%()*%*'.%5".,%27#(&,0%5&$"%$".%8&1'/
:&"&$/"Q:RJ"K*+'(/"$%2"%"8*+,(/"8%;;/2"3;%)"%-2".*9/./-&J"6$/,/"($/";/%,-/2"%=*+&"2'^/I
,/-&"%8&'9'&'/("&*"/-1%1/"8$';2,/-B"H$/"(%)("&$%&"&$/)"3;%)/2"%";*&"'-"&$%&"/2+8%&'*-B"U-/"*4"
&$/"&/%8$/,("6%("7//-"&$%&"&$/)"($*+;2"&/%8$"&$/"8$';2,/-"&$/"*;2"1%./("4,*."&$/"(8$**;I
)%,2B"C-"%22'&'*-J"&$/)"%;(*"1*&"3,%8&'8/"'-"$*6"&*".%7/"%-2"3;%-"%-"%8&'9'&)B"
K*+'(/"&$'-7("($/"+(/("&$/"&$/*,'/("+-8*-(8'*+(;)B"H$/"&$'-7("&$%&"$*6")*+"+(/"&$/"&$/*,'/("
2/3/-2("*-")*+,"3/,(*-%;'&)"&)3/"'4")*+"%,/"%"3/,(*-"&$%&";'7/("&*"3;%)"%";*&"*,"-*&B
K*+'(/";'7/("&*",/%2"&*"&$/"8$';2,/-"&*"(//"6$/,/"&$/)"%,/"%-2"6$%&"&$/)"6*+;2";'7/"&*"2*"'-"
&$/".*./-&B
?'%$".+.%#,($"&,0%()*%#+.%.'2.6&#77(%#5#+.%)3%5".,%$".%6"&71+.,%27#(/
H$/"'("/(3/8'%;;)"%6%,/"*4"$*6"&$/"8$';2,/-"3;%)"&*1/&$/,J"$*6"&$/)"%,/"4//;'-1"%-2"'4"&$/)"
&%;7"&*"/%8$"*&$/,B"C&"'("'-2'9'2+%;J"2/3/-2'-1"*-"&$/"8$';2"%-2"&$/',"-//2(B"H$/"4*8+(/("$/,"
%&&/-&'*-"*-"8$';2,/-"&$%&"%,/"%;*-/"%-2"&,'/("&*"/-(+,/"&$%&"&$/)"=/8*./"3%,&"*4"*&$/,(D"
3;%)B"H$/"6';;"&,)"&*"/-1%1/"&$/"8$';2"'-"%-"%8&'9'&)"&$/)"/->*)J"6$'8$"'("2*-/"&$,*+1$"%",/I
;%&'*-J"*=(/,9%&'*-("*4"&$/"8$';2J"*,"&%;7'-1"6'&$"&$/.B"H$/"./-&'*-("&$%&"3;%)"'(".%-)"2'^/I
,/-&"&$'-1(B
;)%()*%"#9.%2+)3.''&),#7%6),6.+,'%5".,%&$%6)-.'%$)%27#(/
@$%&"8$';2,/-"%,/"*-"&$/',"3$*-/("%";*&J"'&"'("%;6%)("&$/"3,'*,'&)"'-(&/%2"*4"=/'-1"3%,&"*4"&$/"
%8&'9'&'/("*,"&$/"8*..+-'&)B"e*+"8%-"*-;)"=/8*./"%"3%,&"*4"&$/"8*..+-'&)"=)"%8&'9/;)"/-I
1%1'-1B"
;)%()*%)3$.,%,..1%$)%&,$.+3.+%5&$"%$".%6"&71+.,%27#(&,0/
U-;)"'4"%"8*-f'8&"%,'(/("&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"8%--*&",/(*;9/"&$/.(/;9/(J"*,"'4")*+J"%("%"3/2%I
1*1+/J"$%9/"%-"'-&/-&'*-"6'&$"'&J"(+8$"%("1/&&'-1"%-*&$/,"8$';2"&*"3%,&'8'3%&/B":-2";%(&;)J"
*-;)"1/&"'-9*;9/2"'-"&$/"3;%)"&*"1/&"%",/;%&'*-($'3"6'&$"&$/"8$';2,/-J"&$%&"'(J"=)"3%,&'8'3%&'-1"
)*+,(/;4B
==PAGE:147==
,--"*&./(*%0(1404
34#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
0)&"+50"6%79
D@#$%I+@G@)%J@-8$H%*):1=&=0)%1#%45&16/'/.05!7")
G,?:D
@$/"'-&/,9'/6"6%("8*-2+8&/2"*9/,"&$/"3$*-/"*-"&$/"Fd&$"*4"H/3&/.=/,B"C&"6%("2*-/"6'&$"
%"(/.'I(&,+8&+,/2""%33,*%8$"4*;;*6'-1"&$/"'-&/,9'/6"1+'2/B"
59:;<=>?:5<9
!"#$%&'%()*+%,#-./
X.';'/"P',8$"
!"#$%&'%()*+%#0./
FO")/%,("*;2
!"#$%&'%()*+%"&0".'$%1.0+../
X.';'/"1,%2+%&/2"4,*."M%,;(=/,1"M%.3+("'-"FNGLB
Q/2%1*1+/"(3/8'%;'(/2"'-"(8$**;"%-2";/'(+,/"&'./B
!"#$%&'%()*+%2+)3.''&),/
Q/2%1*1+/B
!"#$%1)%()*%1)/
X.';'/"'("%"3/2%1*1+/J"6'&$"%"8**,2'-%&'*-"4+-8&'*-"4*,"g/2=b7(7*;/"%-2"%4&/,I(8$**;"
;/'(+,/I&'./"4%8';'&)"ZHTU[B"H$/"8**,2'-%&/"&$/"2%';)"%8&'9'&'/("'-"&$/"HTU"%-2"'("%"&/%8$/,D("
%(('(&%-&"'-"&$/"N&$"1,%2/B
5*#"67."8'
==PAGE:148==
?@5A=;B9(,9=(,?:5C5:5BD
4)5%-#,(%6"&71+.,%1)%()*%$#8.%6#+.%)3%1*+&,0%$".%1#(/
H$/"'(",/(3*-('=;/"4*,"FN"8$';2,/-"'-"&$/"N&$"1,%2/B"@$/,/"%,/"%=*+&"hN"8$';2,/-"&*"*-/"3/2%I
1*1+/B"M+,,/-&;)J"&$/,/"'("*-;)"*-/"3,*4/(('*-%;"3/2%1*1+/"%&"&$/"HTUJ"6'&$"&$/",/(&"=/'-1"
(+=(&'&+&/(B":,*+-2"F]N"8$';2,/-"8*./"=)"2%';)J"%-2"&$/)"%,/"'-"&$/"%1/",%-1/"*4"]IGN")/%,("
*;2B
!"#$%8&,1%)3%#6$&9&$.'%1)%()*%1)%5&$"%$".%8&1'/
<%-8'-1J"=%;;3;%)J"=*-E,/(J"=*%,2"1%./(J"3;%)'-1"6'&$"3/%,;(J"8**7'-1J"1*"*-"&,'3("Z.*(&;)"'-"
9%8%&'*-([J"*+&2**,"%8&'9'&'/("%-2"=/'-1"'-"&$/"(3*,&($%;;B"
:+.%')-.%#6$&9&$.'%-)+.%2)2*7#+%$"#,%)$".+'/
C&"'("9/,)"3*3+;%,"1*'-1"&*"&$/"(3*,&"$%;;J"6$/,/"&$/"7'2("%,/"%=;/"&*"+(/"&$/',"=*2'/(B"@$/)"
1*"&6*"&'./("%"6//7"6'&$"&6*"%2+;&(B"@$/".*(&"3*3+;%,"Z&$/"*-/("6'&$"&$/"$'1$/(&"=*2)"
8*+-&["%8&'9'&'/("%,/"&$/"*-/("6$/,/"&$/"%2+;&("%,/"/-1%1/2B"@$/,/"'("%"='1"2'^/,/-8/"'-"
6$/&$/,"&$/"%2+;&"'("(+3/,9'('-1"*,"3%,&'8'3%&'-1"'-"&$/"1%./(J"%(".*,/"8$';2,/-"6%-&"&*"=/"
%"3%,&"*4"&$/"1%./("%-2"&$/"8*..+-'&)B
!"(%1)%()*%$"&,8%$".(%#+.%-)+.%2)2*7#+/
@$/)"%,/".*9'-1J"%-2"'&"'("4+-"6'&$"&$/"4%8';'&'/("Z&$/",'=("%-2"&$/".%2,%((%([B"@$/"(3*,&("$%;;"
%;;*6("&$/."&*"1*"6';2"%-2"=,/%7";**(/B
;)%$".%6"&71+.,%)3$.,%*'.%)<=.6$'%)+%.>*&2-.,$%5".,%$".(%27#(/
]Ni"*4"&$/"&'./"&$/"7'2("6';;"+(/"/?+'3./-&J"&$/",/(&"*4"&$/"&'./"&$/)"%,/"3;%)'-1"6'&$"&$/',"
'.%1'-%&'*-B"#$/-"&$/)"%,/"'-2**,("&$/)"%,/".*,/";'7/;)"&*"+(/"*=>/8&(J"8*.3%,/2"&*"*+&2*I
*,("6$/,/"&$/"3;%)"'(";/(("=*+-2B
<>:=<<;(EA,F
!"#$%8&,1%)3%)*$1))+%27#(%#+.#%1)%()*%"#9.%#9#&7#<7./
@$/"3;%)1,*+-2"%&"&$/"(8$**;J"6$'8$"./%-("&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"2*"-*&"$%9/"%"8;/%,"2/.%,8%I
&'*-"*4"6$/-"&$/)"%,/"%&"(8$**;"%-2"6$/-"&$/)"%,/"%&"&$/"HTUB
?'%&$%+.>*&+.1%$)%"#9.%#,%#1*7$%'*2.+9&'&,0%#$%#77%$&-.'/
:"3/2%1*1+/"$%("&*"(+3/,9'(/"&$/"8$';2,/-"*+&('2/J"=+&"'&"'("'.3*(('=;/"&*"=/"/9/,)6$/,/"%&"
*-8/B"#$/-"&$/)",/%8$"%"8/,&%'-"%1/"%-2"1*"&*"&$/"_8;+=`J"&$/)"%,/"%;;*6/2"&*"3;%)"6'&$*+&"
(+,9/';;%-8/B"
;)%()*%.A2.+&.,6.%$"#$%6"&71+.,%5#,$%#1*7$%2#+$&6&2#$&),%&,%$".&+%27#(/
<'^/,/-&'%&/"%";*&"%-2"'("2/3/-2/-&"*-"&$/"8$';2,/-J"(*./"8$';2,/-"%,/"1**2"%&"3;%)'-1"=)"
&$/.(/;9/(J"*&$/,("%,/"-*&"9/,)"1**2"%&"3;%)'-1"4,//;)J"%-2"(*./"2*-D&"3;%)"4,//;)"%&"%;;B
:+.%()*%+.>*&+.1%$)%.,0#0.%&,%$".%6"&71+.,@'%27#(/
H$/"&$'-7("&$%&"'&"'("/A3/8&/2"*4"&$/."&*"/-1%1/J"=+&"'&"'(-D&"-/8/((%,)"&*"'-&/,4/,/"%-2",+'-"
&$/"3;%)B
==PAGE:149==
?<9?B;9D
!"#$%&'%()*+%<&00.'$%6),6.+,%5".,%27#(&,0%)*$'&1.%)3%$".%&,'$&$*$&),/
K%87"*4",/(*+,8/("%-2";%87"*4"3,*4/(('*-%;"(&%^B"@$/"7'2("1/&"*^";%&/J"6$'8$".%7/("'&"2'c8+;&"
&*"&%7/"&$/."*+&J"%("&$/"&'./"'(";'.'&/2B"C&"'("%;(*"%"8*-8/,-"&*"&%7/"&$/"3/2%1*1+/("*+&"*4"
&$/"'-(&'&+&'*-"%("&$%&";/%9/(";/(("(&%^"%=;/"&*"%&&/-2"&$/"*-/("%&"&$/"4%8';'&)B
:"='1"8*-8/,-"'(";*('-1"%"8$';2"6$';/"*+&B"P+&"&$/)"1/-/,%;;)"&%7/"'&"%("'&"8*./(B"
:+.%$".+.%#,(%$))7'%3+)-%()*+%.1*6#$&),%$"#$%()*%*'.%5".,%27#(&,0%5&$"%$".%8&1'/
H$/"&$'-7("($/"2*/("'&".*,/"(+=8*-(8'*+(;)J"%("($/"2*/(-D&"$%9/"%-)"8*;;/%1+/("&*"(3%,"6'&$"
%-2"=/8%+(/"&$/,/"'("-*"&'./"4*,"'&B"C&"'("/%()"&*"4*,1/&"6$/-")*+"2*-D&"+(/"'&B"H$/"4//;("&$%&"
($/";/%,-("6$';/"2*'-1B
?'%$".+.%#,($"&,0%()*%#+.%.'2.6&#77(%#5#+.%)3%5".,%$".%6"&71+.,%27#(/
H$/"/-(+,/("&$%&"%;;"8$';2,/-"$%9/"/'&$/,"=//-"(//-"*,"$/%,2"&$,*+1$*+&"&$/"2%)"%&";/%(&"
*-8/"=)"%-"%2+;&B"
;)%()*%"#9.%2+)3.''&),#7%6),6.+,'%5".,%&$%6)-.'%$)%27#(/
@$/)"1,*6"+3"&**"4%(&J"(&%,&"6/%,'-1"/A3/-('9/"8;*&$/("%-2"$%9/"8/;;3$*-/(J"($/"&$'-7("&$%&"
$/,"1/-/,%&'*-"3;%)/2".*,/B"H$/"%;(*"&$'-7("&$%&"&$/";%87"*4",/(*+,8/("8%-"-/1%&'9/;)"'.I
3%8&"&$/"8$';2,/-J"%("($/"'("8*-8/,-/2"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"2*-D&"1/&"/-*+1$"8%,/B
;)%()*%3..7%$".%,..1%$)%.'$#<7&'"%$".%27#(%3)+%$".%6"&71+.,/
H$/"&$'-7("&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"($*+;2"=/"*^/,/2"2'^/,/-&"%8&'9'&'/("&$%&"(+'&"&$/.J">+(&"%(")*+"
6*+;2"%-"%2+;&B
;)%()*%)3$.,%,..1%$)%&,$.+3.+%5&$"%$".%6"&71+.,%27#(&,0/
j*J"&$/)"%,/"9/,)"1**2"%&"3;%)'-1"=)"&$/.(/;9/(B"C4"&$/)"8*-&%8&"%-"%2+;&J"'&"'("*4&/-"&*"(*;9/"
%"8*-f'8&"&$%&"&$/)"8%-D&"(*;9/"&$/.(/;9/(B"C&"'("*4&/-"8*-f'8&("6$'8$"%,/".*,/"/A&,/./B"
%C4"&$/"%2+;&("%,/"-*&"/-1%1/2J"6$)"6*+;2"&$/"8$';2,/-0"
@$/"3%,/-&("./22;/"%";*&"'-"&$/',"8$';2,/-D("%^%',("=*&$"%&"(8$**;"%-2"%&"&$/"HTUJ"&$/)"
/A3,/(("6$%&"&$/)"6%-&"&$/"2%';)",*+&'-/("&*"=/B
<>:=<<;(EA,F
4)5%)3$.,%1)%()*%27#(%)*$'&1.%)3%$".%&,'$&$*$&),/
@$/)"2*-D&"3;%)"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"(8$**;D("3;*&"=/8%+(/"*4"&$/";%87"*4"(&%^B
!".+.%1)%()*%0)/
@$/"(8$**;"'("8;*(/"&*"%"=/%8$J"=+&"&$/)"8%-D&"&%7/"&**".%-)"8$';2,/-"%&"*-8/"=/8%+(/"&$/)"
%,/")*+-1B"
==PAGE:150==
5*#"67."8'
,--"*&./(*%0(140H
34#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
0)&"+50"6%7:
D@#$%5191%D)>>)GH%*):1=&=0)%1#%"#$%$&'(!)*!+,-$.#/0,1!"$0$223
G,?:D
@$/"'-&/,9'/6"6%("8*-2+8&/2"&$,*+1$"/I.%';"*-"&$/"h,2"*4"U8&*=/,B"j%-%"6%("(/-&"&$/"
?+/(&'*-(J"%-2"6/"%(7/2"'4"'&"6%("3*(('=;/"&*"2*"&$/"'-&/,9'/6"*-"&$/"3$*-/J"=+&"=/8%+(/"
*4"%"=+()"(8$/2+;/J"($/"6%-&/2"&*"%-(6/,"&$/"?+/(&'*-"9'%".%';B":("6/"6/,/"-*&"%=;/"&*"
(3/%7"6'&$"$/,J"6/"2'2"-*&"%(7"4*;;*6"+3"?+/(&'*-(B
59:;<=>?:5<9
!"#$%&'%()*+%,#-./
j%-%"T,/>%"#/((/;
!"#$%&'%()*+%#0./
C"%."hG")/%,("*;2B
!"#$%&'%()*+%"&0".'$%1.0+../
C"%."/2+8%&/2"%("%"3/2%1*1+/"'-"FNGLB
!"#$%&'%()*+%2+)3.''&),/
H8$**;"3/2%1*1+/B
!"#$%1)%()*%1)/
C"6*,7"4+;;&'./"'-"%-"HTU"%&"T,/2/,'7(=/,1J"6$/,/"C"3%,&'8'3%&/"'-"&$/"8;%((/("%&"(8$**;"'-"h,2"
8B"%-2"6*,7"%&"&$//"HTU"2+,'-1"&$/"%4&/,-**-B"P/('2/("&$%&"C"%."-%&+,/"%.=%((%2*,"4*,"&$/"
HTUB"@$'("6*,7"/-&%';(".//&'-1"%"8*+3;/"*4"&'./("2+,'-1"&$/")/%,"6'&$"*&$/,"-%&+,/"%.=%(I
(%2*,("4,*."T,/2/,'7(=/,1(".+-'8'3%;'&'/("HTUD(B
:("%"3/2%1*1+/"'-"T,/2/,'7(=/,1".+-8'3%;'&)"6/"$%9/"*+,"*6-"8;%((/("8%;;/2"Q\"M"ZQ$';*(*I
3$)"4*,"M$';2,/-[B"@$/"8;%((/"%,/"(8$/2+;/2"%(";/8&'*-"&6'8/"%"6//7J"&6*"&'./("\]".'-+&/(B
==PAGE:151==
?@5A=;B9(,9=(,?:5C5:5BD
4)5%-#,(%6"&71+.,%1)%()*%$#8.%6#+.%)3%1*+&,0%$".%1#(/
C-".)"2/3%,&./-&"&$/,/"%,/"%33,*A'.%&/;)"ON"7'2("'-"&$/"%1/"*4"]IO"ZN&$"&*"h,2"1,%2/[B"C"%."
3/,.%-/-&;)"'-"h,2"8B
!"#$%8&,1%)3%#6$&9&$.'%1)%()*%1)%5&$"%$".%8&1'/
#/"+(/"&$/"%4&/,-**-("'-"&$/"HTU"%&"2'^/,/-&"6*,7($*3(J"%8&'9'&'/("%-2"1%./(J"6$'8$"%,/"
./%-&"&*"=/"3*3+;%,"4*,"=*&$"1',;("%-2"=*)(B"C"8%-"=/",/(3*-('=;/"=*&$"4*,"3$()8'%;"%8&'9'&'/("
'-"&$/"1)."$%;;"%-2"(&%&'*-%,)"%8&'9'&'/("'-"&$/"8,/%&'9/"6*,7($*3(B
:+.%')-.%#6$&9&$.'%-)+.%2)2*7#+%$"#,%)$".+'/
@$/"%8&'9'&'/("*+&('2/"*4"&$/"(8$**;("3/,'./&/,"%,/"9/,)"3*3+;%,B":-"/A%.3;/"'("&$/"&$,'9/"
)/%,;)"%8&'9'&)"*4",*;/3;%)'-1"4*,"&$/"F-2Ih,2"1,%2/,("'-"5%,/(7*9/-J"6$'8$"'("&%7/-"8%,/"*4"=)"
3/2%1*1+/(J"%-*&$/,"/A%.3;/"'("&$/"4**&=%;;"&*+,-%./-&("%8,*(("*4"T,/2/,'7(=/,1("HTUD(J"
6$'8$"'("%;(*"&%7/-"8%,/"*4"=)"&$/"3/2%1*1+/(B"T+,&$/,.*,/J"&$/,/"'("%")/%,;)"-%&,+%;"(8'/-I
8/("2%)J"6$/,/"%;;"*4"&$/"3/2%1*1+/("&%7/"8%,/"*4"&$/"8$';2,/-"4*,"&$/"/-&',/"2%)"%-2"%;;"*4"
&$/"f**,("Z2'^/,/-&"2/3%,&./-&(["1*"*-"&,'3("&*".+;&'3;/"2'^/,/-&";*8%&'*-(B
!"(%1)%()*%$"&,8%$".(%#+.%-)+.%2)2*7#+/
C"&$'-7"&$/(/"%8&'9'&/("%,/"3*3+;%,J"=/8%+(/"*4"&$/"%.*+-&"*4"8$';2,/-"3%,&'8'3%&'-1J"%("'&"
8,/%&/("8*..+-'&)J"8**3/,%&'*-B"@$/(/"%8&'9'&'/(">+(&"6*,7"=/&&/,"&$%-"*&$/,(J%(";*-1"%("&$/"
%8&'9'&)"'("=%(/2"*-"&$/"8$';2,/-("3,/,/?+'('&/B
;)%$".%6"&71+.,%)3$.,%*'.%)<=.6$'%)+%.>*&2-.,$%5".,%$".(%27#(/
#/"$%9/"%"=,*%2"(/;/8&'*-"*4"&*)("4*,"%;;"%1/("%-2"'-&/,/(&(B"#/"*4&/-"(//"8$';2,/-"3;%)"6'&$"
2'^/,/-&"&*)("/9/,)"2%)B"a%-)"*4"&$/"1%./("%-2"3;%)("%,/".%2/"4,*."&$/"8$';2,/-("4%-&%()J"
6$/,/"%"3'/8/"*4"3%3/,"%-2".%,7/,("8%-"=/"&+,-/2"'-&*"/9/,)&$'-1B"@$/)"+(/"&$/"8;%((,*I
*.("'-"&$/"HTUI&'./J"6$/,/"&$/"8$';2,/-"3;%)"_(8$**;`B"@$/)"+(+%;;)"2*-D&"=,'-1"&$/"&*)(J"=+&"
+(/"&$/"(/&&'-1"*4"&$/"8;%((,**."4*,"&$/',"3;%)B
<>:=<<;(EA,F
!"#$%8&,1%)3%)*$1))+%27#(%#+.#%1)%()*%"#9.%#9#&7#<7./
@$/"(8$**;"1*&"%"-/6"(8$**;)%,2"&$,//")/%,("%1*J"6$'8$"./%-("&$%&"'&"6%(",/-*9%&/2"%-2"
.*,/"/?+'3./-&"4*,"3;%)"$%("=//-"=*+1$&J"8*.3%,/2"&*"=/4*,/B"P/('2/("&$%&"'("&$/"HTU"
;*8%&/2"8;*(/"&*"&$/";%7/(J"'&"'("&$/"=%87)%,2J"%-2"'&"'("*4&/-"+(/2"'-"&$/",/8/((B"T+,&$/,.*,/J"
'("&$/,/"(.%;;/,"1,//-"3;%)1,*+-2("%-2"%,/%("'-"8;*(/"3,*A'.'&)"&*"&$/"(8$**;J"6$'8$"6/"&,)"
&*"4,/?+/-&;)"9'('&B
?'%&$%+.>*&+.1%$)%"#9.%#,%#1*7$%'*2.+9&'&,0%#$%#77%$&-.'/
#/"%,/",/?+',/2"&*"(+3/,9'(/"&$/"8$';2,/-"6$/-"&$/)"%,/"'-"&$/"(8$**;"8*+,&)%,2J"./%-'-1"
&$%&"&$/,/"'("%;6%)("%"_1k,29%1&`"3,/(/-&J"=*&$"'-"&$/",/8/(("%-2"'-"&$/"HTUI&'./B"#$/-"&$/"
8$';2,/-"%,/"'-('2/J"'&"'(",/?+',/2"&$%&"%-"%2+;&"'("%9%';%=;/"*-"/%8$"*4"&$/"f**,(J"1'9'-1"&$/"
8$';2,/-"&$/"*33*,&+-'&)"&*"1/&"$/;3"*,"%29'8/"4,*."%-"%2+;&"'4"-//2/2B
==PAGE:152==
?<9?B;9D
!"#$%&'%()*+%<&00.'$%6),6.+,%5".,%27#(&,0%)*$'&1.%)3%$".%&,'$&$*$&),/
@$/,/"%,/"-*"8*-8/,-("%=*+&"3;%)'-1"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"(8$**;"%(";*-1"%("%-"%2+;&"'("3,/(/-&B
:+.%$".+.%#,(%$))7'%3+)-%()*+%.1*6#$&),%$"#$%()*%*'.%5".,%27#(&,0%5&$"%$".%8&1'/
#/"+(/"%";*&"*4"8*-f'8&",/(*;9'-1B
?'%$".+.%#,($"&,0%()*%#+.%.'2.6&#77(%#5#+.%)3%5".,%$".%6"&71+.,%27#(/
5*6"&$/"8$';2,/-"'-&/,%8&"6'&$"/%8$"*&$/,B"C"%."/(3/8'%;;)"%6%,/"*4"$*6"&$/)"&%7/"8%,/"*4"
/%8$"*&$/,J"&$/',";%-1+%1/"%-2"&$/',"%=';'&'/("&*",/(*;9/"&$/',"*6-"8*-f'8&("%-2"&$/',"%=';'&)"
&*"(//"&$/',"*6-",*;/"'-"&$/"8*-f'8&B
C"%."%6%,/"*4"6$%&"&$/)";'7/"&*"3;%)"6'&$"%-2"6$%&"&*)("6/"%,/",+--'-1"*+&"*4J"'-"8%(/"-/6"
*-/("-//2"&*"=/"*,2/,/2B
U-8/"%".*-&$J"6/"$%9/"%"8$';2,/-D(".//&'-1J"6$/,/"&$/"8$';2,/-"$%9/"&$/"*33*,&+-'&)"&*"
8*-&,'=+&/"6'&$"&$/',"'2/%("&*"&$/"HTUB"@$'("8*+;2"=/"&$/"3+,8$%(/"*4"&*)(J"6'($/("4*,"4**2"
(/,9/2J"*,"(+11/(&'*-("4*,"'.3,*9/./-&("*4"&$/"HTUB"C&"'("2*-/"&*"/-(+,/"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"
3%,&'8'3%&/"'-"6$%&"&$/"HTU"8%-2"%-2"($*+;2"3,*9'2/"2+,'-1"&$/"%4&/,-**-B
;)%()*%"#9.%2+)3.''&),#7%6),6.+,'%5".,%&$%6)-.'%$)%27#(/
U-;)"'4"&$/"8$';2,/-"%,/"(3/%7'-1"$%,($;)"&*"/%8$"*&$/,B
<>:=<<;(EA,F
;)%()*%.A2.+&.,6.%$"#$%6"&71+.,%5#,$%#1*7$%2#+$&6&2#$&),%&,%$".&+%27#(/
C"/A3/,'/-8/"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-".*(&"*4&/-"6%-&"&*"3;%)"=)"&$/.(/;9/(B"@$/)"$%9/"&$/"*33*,I
&+-'&)"&*"%(7"4*,"$/;3"6'&$",/(*;9'-1"8*-f'8&("*,"$/;3"*+&"6'&$"8*.'-1"+3"6'&$"3;%)J"=+&"%("%"
(&%,&'-1"3*'-&"&$/)".*(&;)"3;%)"%;*-/"Z6'&$*+&"%2+;&([B
H*./"*4"&$/"8$';2,/-"$%9/"%-"/A&,%"-//2"4*,"%2+;&"8*-&%8&B"@$'("'("*4&/-"&$/"-/6".%)"8$';I
2,/-J"6$*">+(&"(&%,&/2"%-2"(&';;"-//2"&*"1/&"8*.4*,&%=;/B
:+.%()*%+.>*&+.1%$)%.,0#0.%&,%$".%6"&71+.,@'%27#(/
j*J"'&"'("-*&",/?+',/2B
4)5%)3$.,%1)%()*%27#(%)*$'&1.%)3%$".%&,'$&$*$&),/
#/"3;%)"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"'-(&'&+&'*-("3,/./('("*-8/"%"2%)"2+,'-1"&$/",/8/((B":&"&$/"(8$**;"&$/"
,/8/(("'("8%;;/2"%"_=%-2"*4".*&'*-`"Z=/9b1/;(/(=k-2[B"@$/"8$';2,/-"8%-"%(('1-"&$/.(/;9/("
&*"2'^/,/-&"%8&'9'&/("(+8$"%("$%-1*+&"'-"&$/"1)."$%;;J"'-"&$/"%+;%"*,"1*"*-"&,'3(B"@$/(/"2%';)"
&,'3("1*"&*"-/%,=)"3;%)'-1"%,/%("(+8$"%("T*,+."3;%)1,*+-2J"%"6%;7"%,*+-2"&$/";%7/J"*,"%"&,'3"
&*"<%-%("3;%2(J"6$'8$"'("%"3;%)1,*+-2"%,*+-2"]N"./&/,("4,*."&$/"(8$**;B"#/",/.*9/"(*./"
*4"&$/"8$';2,/-"4,*."&$/"(8$**;)%,2"'-"&$/",/8/(("&*"-*&"$%9/"%;;"&$/"8$';2,/-"1%&$/,/2"&*"
,/.*9/"&$/"3,/((+,/B"5%9'-1"%;;"&$/"8$';2,/-"1%&$/,/2"'-"&$/"(8$**;")%,2"'&"6*+;2"=/"&**"
8$%*&'8"%-2"-*'()"4*,"(*./"8$';2,/-B
==PAGE:153==
?<9?B;9D
;)%()*%B,1%$"#$%()*%,..1%$)%.'$#<7&'"%$".%0#-.'%3)+%$".%6"&71+.,/
j*"2/E-'&/;)"-*&B"C"%.".*,/"&$%-"6';;'-1"&*"$/;3"&$/."E-2"&$'-1("&$%&"&$/)"8%-"+(/"4*,"&$/',"
3;%)"*,"8*./"+3"6'&$"'2/%("4*,"$*6"'&"($*+;2"=/"2*-/J"=+&"&$/"8$';2,/-"-//2"&*"%(7"&$/.I
(/;9/("4*,"$/;3".*(&"*4&/-B
5*6/9/,J"C"(*./&'./("2/8'2/"6$/,/"%"1%./"6*+;2"=/".*(&"%33,*3,'%&/"3;%)B"T*,"/A%.3;/J"
.*9'-1"%"1%./"'-&*"%"8;%((,**."*,"(*./6$/,/"/;(/B"#/"$%9/"2'9'2/2"&$/"f**,(J"'-"(+8$"%"
6%)"&$%&"(/2/-&%,)"%8&'9'&'/("%,/"8;*(/"&*"&$/"(*4%"%,/%"6'&$"=**7("%-2"2,%6'-1"&$'-1(B"@$'("
8,/%&/("3/%8/4+;"(+,,*+-2'-1("4*,"&$/"8$';2,/-"6$*"6%-&"'&B
l%./("(+8$"%("KXlUJ"=%;;"&,%87"%-2"*&$/,"(;'1$&;)"-*'('/,"%8&'9'&'/("&%7/"3;%8/"'-"*&$/,",**.(J"
.%7'-1",**."4*,"/9/,)*-/"&*"=/"*-"&$/"f**,B"C-"&$/"%4&/,-**-J"6/"%,/"%;.*(&"ON"8$';2,/-"
6$*"$%9/"&*"=/"%=;/"&*"$%-2;/"&$/"-*'(/J"%-2"&$/,/4*,/"6/"$%9/"&*"2'(&,'=+&/"&$/"1%./("
'-&*"(/9/,%;",**.(B
==PAGE:154==
5*#"67."8'
,--"*&./(*%0((140I
34#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
0)&"+50"6%7;
D@#$%K-@>#@19H%*):1=&=0)%1#%"#$%$&'(!)*!+,-$.#/0,1!"$0$223
G,?:D
@$/"'-&/,9'/6"6%("8*-2+8&/2"*9/,"&$/"3$*-/"*-"&$/"\&$"*4"U8&*=/,B"H/.'I(&,+8&+,/2"
'-&/,9'/6"4*;;*6'-1"&$/"'-&/,9'/6"1+'2/B"
59:;<=>?:5<9
!"#$%&'%()*+%,#-./
m,'(&'%-
!"#$%&'%()*+%#0./
C"%."hG")/%,("*;2B
!"#$%&'%()*+%"&0".'$%1.0+../
:4&/,I(8$**;";/'(+,/I&'./"3/2%1*1+/"ZHTU["%-2"%".%(&/,"'-"1/-/,%;"3/2%1*1)B
!"#$%&'%()*+%2+)3.''&),/
C"%."%"3/2%1*1+/B"C"6*,7"%&"&$/"HTU"T';'33%"'-"T,/2/,'7(=/,1J"%-2"&$/-"C"%."%-"/2+8%&*,"%&"
&$/"3/2%1*1+/"(&+2'/("'-"5';;/,S2B
!"#$%1)%()*%1)/
XA%.'-/"&$/"8$';2,/-D(";/%,-'-1"%-2"6/;;I=/'-1J"%-2"/-(+,/"&$%&"&$/)"/A3/,'/-8/"%"2/I
.*8,%&'8"2%';)";'4/"6$/,/"&$/)"($%,/",/(3*-('=';'&)"4*,"&$/',"*6-";/%,-'-1"%-2"&$/"8*..+-'&)"
&$/)"%,/"%"3%,&"*4B"C-"3,%8&'8%;"&/,.(J".)"&%(7("8*-8/,-"3,*.*&'-1"&$/"8$';2D(";/%,-'-1"%-2"
/2+8%&'*-"&$,*+1$"&$/',"3,*1,/(("6'&$"*&$/,"8$';2,/-B
==PAGE:155==
?@5A=;B9(,9=(,?:5C5:5BD
4)5%-#,(%6"&71+.,%1)%()*%$#8.%6#+.%)3%1*+&,0%$".%1#(/
C&"8$%-1/("2/3/-2'-1"*-"6$'8$"Z%8&'9'&)[",**.")*+"%,/"'-"8$%,1/"*4B"H*./",**.("%,/".*,/"
3*3+;%,"&$%-"*&$/,(B"@$/,/"'("%-"%9/,%1/"*4"GNN"8$';2,/-"8*.'-1"&*"&$/"8;+="2%';)J"=+&"%("
%"(+3/,9'(*,J")*+"(3/%7"6'&$"&$/"8$';2,/-"&$%&"%,/"'-"&$/",**.")*+"%,/"'-"8$%,1/"*4B"@$/"
%.*+-&"*4"8$';2,/-"2/3/-2("*-"6$%&"%8&'9'&'/("%,/"'-"&$/",**.n"&$/"%8&'9'&'/("8%-",%-1/"
4,*."8*-&%'-'-1"%"$%-24+;"*4"8$';2,/-"&*"%";*&"*4"&$/.B
#$/-"C"%."'-"8$%,1/"*4"(+33*,&'9/"&/%8$'-1J"C"%."*=;'1%&/2"&*"(+3/,9'(/"%33,*A'.%&/;)"FN"
(&+2/-&(n"&$'("'("2*-/"'-"%"(/(('*-"*4"GJ]"$*+,(J"/?+'9%;/-&"&*"F";/((*-("*4"\]".'-+&/(B
!"#$%8&,1%)3%#6$&9&$.'%1)%()*%1)%5&$"%$".%8&1'/
C"8*-8/,-".)(/;4"6'&$"2*'-1"&$/"&$'-1("&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"%,/"'-&/,/(&/2"'-J"6$/&$/,"'&"'("3;%)I
'-1"Q;%)H&%&'*-J"*-"&$/"3$*-/J"4**&=%;;J"&%=;/"&/--'("*,"8**7'-1"&*1/&$/,B"T**2"'("3,/3%,/2"
2%';)J"%-2"C"%.",/(3*-('=;/"4*,"3,/3%,'-1"'&"*-8/"%"6//7"6'&$"&$/"8$';2,/-B"C"%;(*"%8&'9/;)"+(/"
=*%,2"1%./("&*"'-&/,%8&"6'&$"&$/"8$';2,/-B
:+.%')-.%#6$&9&$.'%-)+.%2)2*7#+%$"#,%)$".+'/
a%-)"8$';2,/-"%,/"'-&/,/(&/2"'-"3;%)'-1";%(/,"&%1"'-"&$/"2%,7J"6$'8$"'("3;%)/2"'-"&$/"/9/-'-1"
%&"&$/"(8$**;"1,*+-2"6$/-"&$/,/"'(";'.'&/2";'1$&"*+&('2/B"@$/,/"%,/"*4&/-"hNI]N"8$';2,/-"3%,I
&'8'3%&'-1J"%-2"'&"'("&$/"3/2%1*1+/(D">*="&*"(/%,8$"4*,"&$/."%-2"8%&8$"&$/.B
!"(%1)%()*%$"&,8%$".(%#+.%-)+.%2)2*7#+/
C"&$'-7"'&"'("%"3*3+;%,"%8&'9'&)"=/8%+(/"'&"$%("%"6'2/";/9/;"*4"&/-('*-"%-2"8,/%&/("%-"%2,/-%;'-"
7'87J"'&".*9/("&$/"8$';2,/-D(";'.'&("=/8%+(/"*4"'&("+-3,/2'8&%=;/"-%&+,/B"#';;"&$/)"=/"4*+-20"
#';;"&$/)"=/"8%+1$&0"@/-('*-"'("%-"'.3*,&%-&J"=%('8"/;/./-&"'-"3;%)B
;)%$".%6"&71+.,%)3$.,%*'.%)<=.6$'%)+%.>*&2-.,$%5".,%$".(%27#(/
e/(J"(*./&'./("6/"3;%)";%(/,"&%1"1%./(J"6$/,/"&$/)"+(/"&*)"1+-(B"C&"'("+(/2"*+&('2/"%-2"'("
%".*2/,-"6%)"*4"3;%)'-1"6%,B"@6*"&/%.("6';;"E1$&"/%8$"*&$/,J"%-2"&$/"1*%;"'("&*"=/"&$/";%(&"
.%-"(&%-2'-1"*,"&$/"6'--'-1"&/%.B"@$/,/"%,/"2'^/,/-&"9/,('*-("*4"&$/"1%./J"*-/"&$%&"'("
('.3;/,"%-2"*-/"&$%&",/?+',/(")*+,"3$*-/B"@$/,/"'("4//2=%87"=*&$"6$/-"($**&'-1"&$/"1+-J"
,/8$%,1'-1"'&"%-2"6$/-")*+D9/"=//-"($*&B
<>:=<<;(EA,F
4)5%)3$.,%1)%()*%27#(%)*$'&1.%)3%$".%&,'$&$*$&),@'%0+)*,1'/
@$/"HTU"'("%"3%,&"*4"&$/"(8$**;J"=+&"'&"'("(/3%,%&/2B"@$/)"+(/"&$/"(8$**;)%,2"(/9/,%;"&'./("
%"6//7J"=*,2/,'-1"&*"2%';)B"H*./&'./("&$/)"1*"&*"&$/"3;%)1,*+-2"%-2"3%,7"&$%&"'("8;*(/"&*"
T*,+."H&B"C&"'("-*&"2*-/"%("%",*+&'-/J"=+&"$%("=//-"2*-/"%,*+-2"E9/"&'./("'-"('A".*-&$(B":"
4/6"&'./("%")/%,J"&$/)"6';;"1*"&*"HS-2/,.%,7/-"%-2"Tb;;/23%,7/-B
!"(%#+.%()*%0)&,0%$)%$".'.%27#6.'/%
@$/(/"3;%8/("$%9/"%";*&"*4",**."4*,"3;%)"%-2"%,/"8;*(/"&*"&$/"'-(&'&+&'*-B"@$/"*&$/,"3;%8/("
oTb;;/23%,7/-"%-2"HS-2/,.%,7/-p"%,/"6$/-"6/"$%9/".*,/"&'./B"
==PAGE:156==
<>:=<<;(EA,F
!"#$%#+.%()*+%6),6.+,'C%5".,%27#(&,0%)*$'&1.%$".%&,'$&$*$&),/%
j*"-*&"'../2'%&/;)B"j*&"*&$/,"8*-8/,-("&$%&"C".'1$&"$%9/"4*,"&$/"8$';2,/-"%-2"&$/',"6/;;I
=/'-1B"5*6/9/,J")*+"8%-"1/&"(&';;"1/&"$/;3"/9/-"&$*+1$")*+"%,/"*+&('2/"&$/"'-(&'&+&'*-B
:+.%()*%#5#+.%)3%)$".+%3#6$)+'%+.0#+1'%27#(%)*$'&1.%$".%&,'$&$*$&),/%
CD.".*,/"%6%,/"*4"&$/"(+,,*+-2'-1("%-2"&%7/"'-&*"%88*+-&"&$%&"&$/,/"%,/"*&$/,("'-"&$/"3+=I
;'8"(3%8/B"#/"&%7/"%";*&"*4"(3%8/J"=+&"6/"&,'/2"-*&"&*"&%7/"%;;"&$/"(3%8/B"#/"&%;7"6'&$"&$/"8$';I
2,/-"%=*+&"'&J"%-2"&$%&"&$/)"$%9/"&*"&%7/"*&$/,("'-&*"%88*+-&"6$/-"&$/)"3;%)"'-"&$/"3+=;'8B"
#/"2/E-/"%-"%,/%J"6$/,/"*+,"8$';2,/-"%,/"%;;*6/2"&*"3;%)J"(*"%;(*"*&$/,("%,/"6/,/"&$%&"&$/)"
%,/"3;%)'-1"'-"&$'("(3/8'E8"%,/%B"
C&"'("8;/%,"4*,"&$/"8$';2,/-J"6/,/"&*"E-2"&$/"3/2%1*1+/(J"6$/-"6/"%,/"*+&"'-"&$/"3+=;'8"
(3%8/B
?<9?B;9D
!"#$%&'%()*+%<&00.'$%6),6.+,%5".,%27#(&,0%)*$'&1.%)3%$".%&,'$&$*$&),/
@$/,/"%,/"-*"8*-8/,-("%=*+&"3;%)'-1"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"(8$**;"%(";*-1"%("%-"%2+;&"'("3,/(/-&B
:+.%$".+.%#,(%$))7'%3+)-%()*+%.1*6#$&),%$"#$%()*%*'.%5".,%27#(&,0%5&$"%$".%8&1'/
@$/",/%(*-"4*,"3;%)'-1"'("=%(/2"*-"&$/*,)"2/(8,'='-1"&$/"'.3*,&%-8/"4*,"8$';2,/-D("2/9/;*3I
./-&"%-2"6/;;I=/'-1"I"-*&"-/8/((%,';)"*-/"3%,&'8+;%,"&$/*,)J"=+&")*+"$%9/"%-"*9/,%;;"+-2/,I
(&%-2'-1J"6$/-")*+"3;%)"6'&$"&$/"8$';2,/-"%-2"6$)")*+"2*"'&0"
?'%$".+.%#,($"&,0%()*%#+.%.'2.6&#77(%#5#+.%)3%5".,%$".%6"&71+.,%27#(/
l/-/,/;J"C"3;%)"6'&$"8$';2,/-"&*"8,/%&/"3%,&'8'3%&'*-"*33*,&+-'&'/("'-"2'^/,/-&"8*..+-'&'/(J"
&*"/-(+,/"&$/)"3%,&'8'3%&/J"&%;7"&*"/%8$"*&$/,"%-2"8,/%&/"-/6",/;%&'*-($'3(B"C"3%)"%&&/-&'*-"&*"
$*6"&$/"8$';2,/-"&%7/"/%8$"*&$/,"'-&*"%88*+-&"%-2"/-(+,/"&*"1'9/"/%8$"*&$/,"*33*,&+-'&'/(B"
Q,'.%,';)J"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"4//;"&$%&"&$/"%,/"3%,&"*4"&$/"8*..+-'&)J"&$/)"%,/"'-"%-2"6'&$B"
;)%()*%"#9.%2+)3.''&),#7%6),6.+,'%5".,%&$%6)-.'%$)%27#(/
@$/)"o&$/"8$';2,/-p"2*-D&"3;%)"/-*+1$B"@$/,/"%,/"-*&"/-*+1$"&'./"&*"3;%)B"CD."8*-8/,-/2"
%=*+&"8$';2,/-"1*"&*".%-)";/'(+,/"%8&'9'&'/("I"%.*-1"*&$/,J"4**&=%;;J".%-)"&'./("%&"6//7J"
6$'8$"'("1**2J"=+&"8$';2,/-".+(&"%;(*"$%9/"&'./"4*,"3;%)"(/;4I8$*(/-"3;%)(B"C&"'("6*,,)'-1J"
&$%&"&$/)"$%9/";*-1/"(8$**;"2%)("%-2";/'(+,/"%8&'9'&'/(J"6$'8$"./%-"&$/)"2*-D&"$%9/"&$/"
(%./"&'./"4*,"'../,('*-"3;%)B"C&"/9/-"%^/8&"8$';2,/-"'-"2%)8%,/J"6$/,/"&$/)"2*-D&"3;%)"
/-*+1$B"e*+"4*,1/&"&$/"3;%)J"=/8%+(/"'&"2*/(-D&"-/8/((%,';)"$%9/"&*"=/"%";/%,-'-1"3/,(3/8I
&'9/B"C&"'("-*&"(//-"%("%"8*--/8&'*-"=/&6//-"3;%)"%-2";/%,-'-1J"2/(3'&/"&$/"4%8&"&$%&"&$/,/"'("
.+8$"&*";/%,-"&$,*+1$"3;%)B
;)%()*%3..7%#%,..1%$)%.'$#<7&'"%27#(%3)+%$".%6"&71+.,/%
C&"'(".)">*="o%("3/2%1*1p"&*"8,/%&/"(*./"%8&'9'&'/("'-"8*;;%=*,%&'*-"6'&$"&$/"8$';2,/-"J"&$%&"
&$/"8$';2,/-"8%-"8$*(/"=/&6//-B"@$/"%8&'9'&'/("/-%=;/("&$/."&*"3%,&'8'3%&/"'-"8*..+-'&'/("
6'&$"*&$/,"I"'&"'("'-"&$/"3;%)J"6/"$*3/"&$%&"4,'/-2($'3("8%-"%,'(/B"
==PAGE:157==
;)%()*%)3$.,%,..1%$)%&,$.+#6$%5".,%6"&71+.,%#+.%27#(&,0/%
j*J"&$/,/"'("-*"-//2"4*,"&$%&B"U4&/-"&$/,/"%,/".%-)"8$';2,/-J"6$*"%,/"1**2"%&"E1+,/"*+&"
6$%&"&*"3;%)B"g/,)"4/6"8$';2,/-"(//7"*+&"4*,"&$/"%2+;&(J"=+&"&$/,/"%,/"(*./B"@$/(/"8$';2,/-"
-//2"&*"=/"'-&/1,%&/2"'-"&$/"8*..+-'&)B"C"&$'-7"&$/",/%(*-"6$)"&$/)"(//7"4*,"%2+;&("%&&%&'*-"
'("=/8%+(/";%87"*4"3%,&'8'3%&'*-
*33*,&+-'&'/("'4"&$/"8$';2,/-"$%9/"(/9/,%;"4,'/-2(J"&$/)"%,/";/(("*+&,/%8$'-1B"C4"&$/)"2*-D&"
4//;"(%4/"'-"&$/"8*..+-'&)"%-2",/;%&'*-(J"&$/)"&/-2"&*"=/8*./".*,/"*+&,/%8$'-1"4*,"%2+;&("
%&&%&'*-J"%("&$/)"7-*6"&$/"%2+;&("%;6%)("6%-&"&*"/-1%-1/"6'&$"&$/."I"'-"&$/(/"('&+%&'*-"'&"'("
*+,">*="&*"/-1%1/"6'&$"&$/."'-"%8&'9'&'/(Y3;%)"%-2"1/&"*&$/,"8$';2,/-"&*"3%,&'8'3%&/B
?<9?B;9D
==PAGE:158==
5*#"67."8'
,--"*&./(*%0((140J
34#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
0)&"+50"6%!.0-"
<G12%(*)8@1G@>#>
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(EA,F
!"
5*6"6*+;2")*+"2/(8,'=/"3;%)0
!"
#$)"2*")*+"&$'-7"'&D("'.3*,&%-&0
!"
#$%&"7'-2"*4"3;%)"2*")*+"E-2"&$%&"8$';2,/-"3,/4/,0
!"
<*")*+"4//;"&$%&"(*./"&)3/("*4"3;%)"%,/".'(('-10
!"
C("'&"(*./&$'-1"&$%&")*+"&,)"&*"4*8+("*-"&$,*+1$*+&")*+,"2/('1-0
!"
5*6"2*")*+"/-(+,/"&*"/-8*+,%1/"2'^/,/-&"&)3/("*4"3;%)0
!"
#$%&"&)3/("*4"3;%)"2*")*+"/-8*+,%1/0
!"
<*")*+"=/;'/9/"&$%&")*+,"3,*2+8&("'-9'&/"&*"*3/-I/-2/2"3;%)0
!"
#$)Y6$)"-*&0
!"
#$%&"2*")*+"&$'-7"&$/"4+&+,/"*4"3;%)";**7(";'7/0
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(;BDB,;?@
!"
#$%&"&)3/"*4",/(/%,8$"*-"3;%)"2*")*+"8*-2+8&"'-")*+,"2/9/;*3./-&"3,*8/((0
!"
:,/"&$/,/"%-)"%(3/8&(")*+"2//.".*,/"'.3*,&%-&"4*,"2/('1-/,("&*"7-*6"%=*+&"&$/"
8+;&+,/"*4"8$';2$**20"Z#$%&"'("/((/-&'%;"&*"+-2/,(&%-2"%=*+&"8$';2,/-0[
!"
5*6"2*")*+"'2/-&'4)"&$/"8$';2,/-D("6'($/("%-2"-//2(0
!"
5*6"2*")*+"/-(+,/"&$%&"&$/(/"6'($/("%-2"-//2("%,/"./&0
!"
<*")*+"'-9*;9/"8$';2,/-"'-"&$/"2/9/;*3./-&"3,*8/((0
!"
#$)Y6$)"-*&0
!"
:-2"'4")*+"2'2J"6$%&"6%("&$/"1*%;"6$/-"2/8'2'-1"&*"'-9*;9/"&$/"7'2(0
!"
5*6"2'2")*+"'-9*;9/"&$/.J"8$';2,/-0
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(=BD5M959M(EA,F
!"
#$%&"%,/"&$/".*(&"'.3*,&%-&"4%8&*,("6$/-"2/('1-'-1"3;%)0
!"
#$%&"2*")*+"&$'-7"%,/"&$/".*(&"3,*.'-/-&".'(&%7/("&$%&"%,/".%2/"6$/-"2/('1-'-1"
3;%)0
!"
<*")*+"/A3/,'/-8/"%"2'^/,/-8/"'-"6$%&"%1/",%-1/")*+"2/('1-"4*,0
!"
C("&$/,/"%-"%1/",%-1/"6$'8$"'("/%('/,"&*"2/('1-"4*,0
!"
#$)Y6$)"-*&0
!"
:,/"&$/,/"%-)"(%4/&)"(&%-2%,2("&$%&")*+"$%9/"&*"4*;;*60
!"
<*"&$/)"8$%-1/"6'&$"&$/"%1/",%-1/0
!"
<*")*+"/9/,"4//;";'7/"&$/)"$'-2/,")*+,"2/('1-0
!"
<*")*+"&$'-7"&$%&"&$/)".'1$&"%^/8&"8$';2,/-D("'-2/3/-2/-&"3;%)0
!"
M%-")*+,"3,*2+8&"=/"+(/2"'-2/3/-2/-&;)"=)"8$';2,/-0
!"
C("'-2/3/-2/-&"3;%)"%"8*-8/,-")*+"$%9/"6$/-"2/('1-'-1"%"3,*2+8&0
!"
5*6"2*")*+"/-(+,/"3%,/-&("4//;"(%4/";/&&'-1"&$/',"8$';2,/-"3;%)"'-2/3/-2/-&;)0
==PAGE:159==
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(E>LA5?(EA,F
!"
#$%&"%,/"&$/".*(&"8,'&'8%;"&*3'8("2/('1-/,("($*+;2"=/"6*,7'-1"*-"'-"3+=;'8"(3%8/("
4*,"3;%)0
!"
#$%&"%,/"&$/".*(&"'.3*,&%-&"&$'-1("&$%&"8'&'/("8*+;2"2*"4*,"8$';2,/-"*9/,"&$/"-/A&"
8*+3;/"*4")/%,(0
!"
#$%&",*;/"2*")*+"(//"&$%&"&$/"8'&)"3,*9'2/("'-"8$';2,/-D("3;%)0
!"
#$%&"8+;&+,%;"($'4&("'-"(*8'/&)"6';;"%^/8&")*+,"2/8'('*-("%-2"2/9/;*3./-&"'-"&$/"
8*.'-1")/%,(0
==PAGE:160==
4)5%5)*71%()*%1.'6+&<.%27#(/
Q;%)"'("&$/"6%)"&$%&"8$';2,/-",/;%&/"&*"&$/"6*,;2"%-2";'4/"'&(/;4B
!"(%1)%()*%$"&,8%&$@'%&-2)+$#,$/
C&"'("'.3*,&%-&"=/8%+(/"'&"'("6$/-"&$/"4%-&%()"'("(/&"&*"3;%)J"%-2"'&"1'9/("8$';2,/-"&$/"*33*,I
&+-'&)"&*"+-2/,(&%-2"&$/.(/;9/(B"@*"E1+,/"*+&"&$/',"*6-"9%;+/(B"5*6"&$/)"8*3/"6'&$"&$/',"
4//;'-1(J"%-2"$*6"&$/)",/%8&"&*"*&$/,(D"9%;+/("%-2"4//;'-1(B"Q;%)"8%-"=/"+(/2"&*"+-2/,(&%-2"
*&$/,(D",/%8&'*-(B
!"#$%8&,1%)3%27#(%1)%()*%B,1%$"#$%6"&71+.,%2+.3.+/
@$/,/"'("%";*&"*4",/(/%,8$"2*-/"*-"&$/"(+=>/8&J"%-2"'&"8$%-1/("6'&$"&$/")/%,(B"@$/"2'1'&%;"
3;%)(8%3/"'("9/,)"&,/-2)",'1$&"-*6J"6$'8$"$%("%"2',/8&"'-f+/-8/"*-"8$';2,/-D("6%)"*4"3;%)I
'-1B"M$';2,/-"%,/"%;(*"9/,)"4*-2"*4"+('-1"-%&+,/J"/(3/8'%;;)"4*,"$'2'-1J"8;'.='-1"%-2"+('-1"
2'^/,/-&"&/,,%'-".%&/,'%;(J"(+8$"%("(%-2"%-2"2',&B"P+&"-%&+,/"8%-D&"(&%-2"%;*-/J"%("&$/"8$';I
2,/-"-//2"%"3;%)"(&%,&/,J"/(3/8'%;;)"'-"3;%8/("6$/,/"&$/)"2*-D&"$%9/".+8$"&'./"&*"(3/-2B"
C-"&$/(/"'-(&%-8/(J"%"3;%)"(&%,&/,"'("/((/-&'%;J"%("&$/"8$';2,/-"8%-"=/"'-'&'%&/2"'../2'%&/;)"
=/8%+(/"&$/)"8%-"2/E-/"%"_1%./`"*,"3;%)"%&"*-8/B
;)%()*%3..7%$"#$%')-.%$(2.'%)3%27#(%#+.%-&''&,0/
Q;%8/("4*,"%8&'9'&'/("&$%&"1%&$/,"%;;"1/-/,%&'*-("%,/".'(('-1B":"3;%8/"6$/,/"%"4%.';)"8*+;2"
(3/-2".%-)"$*+,(J"6'&$"&*';/&(J"8*^//"($*3(J"E&-/(("/?+'3./-&J"%"3/&%-?+/"8*+,&"%-2"
.*,/B"H*./&$'-1",/(/.=;'-1"Tb;;/23%,7/-"*-"%"1**2"2%)B
?'%&$%')-.$"&,0%$"#$%()*%$+(%$)%3)6*'%),%$"+)*0")*$%()*+%1.'&0,/
e/(J"6/"4*8+("*-"8,/%&'-1"&**;("&$%&"8,/%&/"(+88/((4+;"/A3/,'/-8/("4*,"8$';2,/-J"(*./&$'-1"
&$%&"&$/)"8%-"%8$'/9/"*-"&$/',"*6-J"%-2"/-(+,/"&$%&"&$/"&**;("E&"2'^/,/-&"%1/",%-1/(B"
D#,%()*%.7#<)+#$.%),%5"(%&$@'%&-2)+$#$%$"#$%$".%6"&71+.,%6#,%27#(%<(%$".-'.79.'/
"H+88/((4+;"/A3/,'/-8/("%,/"'.3*,&%-&"%("'&",/%((+,/("&$/"8$';2"&$%&"&$/)"8%-"3/,4*,."&%(7(B"
:&"&$/"3;%)1,*+-2J"8/,&%'-"8$%;;/-1/(".'1$&"&%7/"&'./"&*"(+88/((4+;;)"8*.3;/&/J"*-/".'1$&"
=,'-1"&$/"8;'.='-1"-/&J"6$'8$"&$/)"8*-&'-+*+(;)";/%,-"$*6"&*"+(/B""@$/(/"(+88/((4+;"/A3/I
,'/-8/("%;(*"/9*;9/"6'&$"%1/J"6$/-"&$/"8$';2"8%-"2*"%-2"3/,4*,.".*,/"&%(7(B
5*#"67."8'
,--"*&./(*%0((140N
34#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
0)&"+50"6%78
D@#$%LGG1%M1$G%52+1-NH%*-&O)8#%8&9>0G#19#%1#%K&+*19
59:;<=>?:5<9
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(EA,F
@$/"'-&/,9'/6"6%("8*-2+8&/2"*-"q**."'-"%"(/.'I(&,+8&+,/2"6%)B
C"%."%"3,*>/8&"8*-(+;&%-&"%-2"$%9/"=//-"%"3%,&"*4"m*.3%-"4*,"&$/";%(&"Gh")/%,(B"C-"%;;"*4"
&$/(/")/%,(J"CD9/"6*,7/2"'-"&$/"%,/%"*4"M*3/-$%1/-"%-2"j*,&$/,-"q/%;%-2B"a)"8;'/-&("%,/"
.+-'8'3%;'&'/(J"6$'8$"./%-("C"%."'-"8$%,1/"*4"3%,7("%-2"3+=;'8"3;%)1,*+-2("%-2"$*+I
('-1"%((*8'%&'*-("%-2"&$/";'7/B"H*./"*4".)"8*;;/%1+/("&%,1/&"(8$**;("%-2"'-(&'&+&'*-%;"
3;%)1,*+-2(B
==PAGE:161==
4)5%1)%()*%.,'*+.%$)%.,6)*+#0.%1&E.+.,$%$(2.'%)3%27#(/
#/"8,/%&/2"%"3*'-&"()(&/."4*,"*+,"3,*2+8&"8%&%;*1+/B"#$/-"2/8'2'-1"*-"6$%&"/;/./-&("
6/"6%-&"&*"=/"'.3;/./-&/2"%&"%"3;%)1,*+-2J"6/"/-(+,/"&$%&"&$/",'1$&"%.*+-&"*4"3*'-&("
%,/"=/'-1"'-8*,3*,%&/2"&*"/-(+,/"&$%&"2'^/,/-&"&)3/("*4"3;%)"%,/"3*(('=;/B"@$/(/"3*'-&("%,/"
8,/%&/2"=%(/2"*-"&$/",/(/%,8$"2*-/J"6$'8$"$%("=//-"2*-/"&$,*+1$"*=(/,9'-1"&$/"8$';I
2,/-D("3;%)B
;)%()*%<.7&.9.%$"#$%()*+%2+)1*6$'%&,9&$.%$)%)2.,F.,1.1%27#(/
e/(J"(*./"3,*2+8&("%,/".*,/"&$/.%&'(/2"&$%-"*&$/,(J"/-8*+,%1'-1"&$/"3;%)"&*"4*;;*6"%"
&$/./B"C&".'1$&"=/"%-"%.=+;%-8/J"6$'8$".'1$&"(&%,&"&$/"3;%)J"=+&"6'&$"-*";'.'&("&*"&$/"
4*;;*6'-1"(&/3("*,"&$/"4,//2*."*4"&$/"3;%)B"@$/"%.=+;%-8/".'1$&"$%9/"3%-/;("*4"2'^/,/-&"
&/A&+,/(J"=/"8;'.=%=;/"*,"*&$/,6'(/"'-9'&/"&*"2'^/,/-&"/A3/,'/-8/(B"@$%&"6%)J"6/"/-8*+,%1/"
*3/-I/-2/2"3;%)J"6$'8$"'("2'^/,/-&"4,*.">+(&"$%9'-1".*-7/)"=%,("%-2"(;'2/(B"
!"(%&'%&$%&-2)+$#,$/
C&"'("'.3*,&%-&"%("'&"8,/%&/("%"(&%)"4%8&*,J"./%-'-1"&$%&"&$/"3;%)1,*+-2"7//3("=/'-1"'-&/,/I
(&'-1"&*"3;%)"6'&$B"C&"($*+;2-D&">+(&"=/"'-&/,/(&'-1"9'('&'-1"*-8/B
!"#$%1)%()*%$"&,8%$".%3*$*+.%)3%27#(%7))8'%7&8./
C"(//"&6*"&/-2/-8'/(J"*-/"'("3+;;'-1"%6%)"4,*."&$/"8'&)"%-2"/.=,%8'-1"-%&+,/".*,/J"C"&$'-7"
&$/,/"'("%"&/-2/-8)"&*".*9/"&*"r,S"*,"*&$/,"'(;%-2("*+&('2/"*4"M*3/-$%1/-J"6$'8$"'("%"
8*-(/?+/-8/"*4"&$/"'2/%("%-2"8*-8/,-("%=*+&"&$/"8;'.%&/B"@$%&"&,/-2"'("9/,)".+8$"%=*+&"
1'9'-1")*+,"8$';2"%"($*9/;"%-2"%"(%-2=*A"%-2";/%9'-1"&$/."&*"'&J"1/-/,%;;)"/-8*+,%1'-1"
&$/."&*"'-&/,%8&".*,/"6'&$"-%&+,/B
@$/"*&$/,"&,/-2"'("&$/"&/8$-*;*1'8%;"%-2"2'1'&%;"3;%&4*,.(J"*-/"/A%.3;/"=/'-1"Q*7/.*-"
l*B"
;)%()*%'..%#,(%2)''&<&7&$&.'%5&$"%$".%$+.,1%)3%1&0&$#7%27#(/
C&D("1**2"6$/-"2'1'&%;"3;%&4*,.("%,/"8*.='-/2"6'&$"*+&2**,"%8&'9'&'/(J"(+8$"%("&$/"/A%.3;/"
6'&$"Q*7/.*-"l*B
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(EA,F
==PAGE:162==
!"#$%$(2.%)3%+.'.#+6"%),%27#(%1)%()*%6),1*6$%&,%()*+%1.9.7)2-.,$%2+)6.''/
C-"3,*2+8&"2/9/;*3./-&J"6/"%,/"9/,)"%6%,/"*4"(%4/&)"(&%-2%,2(J"/-(+,'-1"&$%&"&$/"3;%)"
9%;+/"%-2"&$/"(%4/&)"*4"&$/"3,*2+8&("%,/"%;'1-/2B"#$/-"&$/".*2/;"'("E-'($/2J"'&"'("/(&%I
=;'($/2"'-"%"$%;;J"%-2"4*8+("1,*+3("*4"8$';2,/-"%,/"&$/-"'-9'&/2"'-"&*"'-&/,%8&"6'&$"&$/"
.*2/;B"#/"$%9/"8*;;%=*,%&'*-("6'&$"&$/"-/%,=)"7'-2/,1%,&/-"%-2"(8$**;("&$%&".%7/"&$/"
8$';2,/-"%9%';%=;/J"6'&$"&$/"3%,/-&(D"8*-(/-&J"*4"8*+,(/B"@$/"8$';2,/-D("'-&/,%8&'*-"6'&$"
&$/"3,*2+8&"'("&$/-"*=(/,9/2J"%-2"3*&/-&'%;"%2%3&'*-("%,/".%2/"&*"E&"&$/"8$';2,/-D("-/I
/2(B":4&/,6%,2(J"m*.3%-("3;%)"'-(&'&+&/"8,/%&/("&$'("3*'-&"()(&/."4*,"&$/"8,/%&'*-B"K%(&;)J"
'&"-//2("&*"=/"(%4/&)"%33,*9/2"6$'8$"'("2*-/"=)"%-"*+&('2/"8*.3%-)B"
4)5%1)%()*%&1.,$&3(%$".%6"&71+.,@'%5&'".'%#,1%,..1'/
#/"$%9/"m*.3%-"Q;%)"C-(&'&+&/J"6$/,/"&$/)",/(/%,8$"3;%)J"%-2"6/"&$/-"+(/"&$'("2%&%"
&*"1%&$/,"'-3+&("4*,"*+,"6*,7B"#/"%;(*"$%9/"8+(&*./,("6$*"1'9/"+("'-3+&"*-"$*6"&$/)"
6%-&"&$/"3,*2+8&"&$/)"*,2/,B"#/"%;(*"1%&$/,"'-(3',%&'*-"4,*."*+,"8*.3/&'&*,(J"6$/-"6/"
(//"(*./&$'-1"&$%&"6*,7(J"6/"(&%,&"2/9/;*3'-1"'&B
;)%()*%&,9)79.%6"&71+.,%&,%$".%1.9.7)2-.,$%2+)6.''/
#/"2*-D&"'-9*;9/"&$/."'-"&$/"2/9/;*3./-&"3,*8/(("*4"&$/"3,*2+8&(J"=+&"6/"2*"'-9*;I
9/"&$/."6$/-"6/"2/('1-"&$/"3;%)1,*+-2(J"%("&$/)"%,/"&$/"/-2"+(/,(B"#$/-"6/"$%9/"%"
8;'/-&J";'7/"%"$*+('-1"%((*8'%&'*-J"&$/)"*4&/-"6%-&"+("&*"'-9*;9/"&$/"8$';2,/-"'-"2/('1-'-1"
&$/"3;%)1,*+-2B"#/"&$/-"8,/%&/"&6*"*,"&$,//"3;%)1,*+-2(J"%-2"6/"&$/-"1/&"&$/."&*"
3'87"*+&"6$%&"&$/)";'7/"%-2"6$%&"&$/)"2*-D&";'7/B
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(;BDB,;?@
!"#$%1)%()*%$"&,8%#+.%$".%-)'$%2+)-&,.,$%-&'$#8.'%$"#$%#+.%-#1.%5".,%
1.'&0,&,0%27#(/
#/'1$'-1"&$/"9'(+%;"%=*9/"&$/"9%;+/"*4"&$/"3;%)B"@$/,/"%,/".%-)"/A%.3;/("*4"%,8$'&/8&("
8,/%&'-1"+,=%-"(3%8/("./%-&"4*,"3;%)J"6$'8$"4%';"=/8%+(/"&$/"2'./-('*-("%,/"6,*-1J"%-"
/A%.3;/"=/'-1"*+&"'-"S,/(&%2/-"I".%7'-1"'&"'.3*(('=;/"&*"3;%)B
;)%()*%.A2.+&.,6.%#%1&E.+.,6.%&,%5"#$%#0.%+#,0.%()*%1.'&0,%3)+/
e/(J"6/"+(+%;;)"6*,7"6'&$"6$%&"6/"8%;;"&$/"1*;2/-"%1/J"6$'8$"'("&$/"%1/"=/&6//-"\"%-2"
WIGN")/%,("*;2B"@$/)"+(+%;;)"/->*)"3;%)'-1"6'&$"&**;("%-2"/?+'3./-&"%-2"$%9/"4%-&%()"
%-2",*;/3;%)'-1"1%./(J"6$'8$"8%-"=/"(&%,&/2"=)"3;%)$*+(/("%-2"&$/";'7/B"C&"=/8*./("
.*,/"2'c8+;&"6$/-"$%9'-1"&*"2/('1-"4*,"8$';2,/-"%=*9/"&$/"%1/"*4"&/-J"6/"8%;;"&$/."
&6//-("%-2"&//-(B"@$/)"%,/"'-&/,/(&/2"'-"&$'-1("*&$/,"&$%-"3;%)1,*+-2(J"&$/)"-//2"
(3%8/"&*"$%-1"*+&"%-2"2*"%8&'9'&'/(";'7/"=%;;1%./(B"@$/)"%,/"&$/"$%,2/(&"%1/"1,*+3"&*"
2/('1-"4*,J"'-".)"*3'-'*-B
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(=BD5M959M(EA,F
==PAGE:163==
?'%$".+.%#,%#0.%+#,0.%5"&6"%&'%.#'&.+%$)%1.'&0,%3)+/
e/(J"6/"2*"$%9/"&*"4*;;*6"(%4/&)"(&%-2%,2(J"=+&"&$/)"2*-D&"8$%-1/"4,*.".%7'-1"'&"4*,"%"
&$,//I)/%,I*;2"&*"%-"/'1$&//-I)/%,I*;2B"P+&"'4"&$/"/?+'3./-&"'("%"E&-/(("3,*2+8&"%-2"-*&"
%"3;%)"3,*2+8&J"&$/"(&%-2%,2("8$%-1/(J"/9/-"&$*+1$"&$/)"8%-"=/"+(/2"'-"3;%)"=)"8$';I
2,/-B
;)%()*%.9.+%3..7%7&8.%$".(%"&,1.+%()*+%1.'&0,/
e/(J"'&"8%-"=/"'4"(*./&$'-1"$%("%"(3/8'%;"2/('1-B"C4"%-"%,8$'&/8&+,%;"E,."$%("%"1**2"'2/%"
&$%&".'1$&"=/"%";'&&;/"6';2J"%-2"'&"(&';;"$%("&*";'9/"+3"&*"&$/"(%4/&)"(&%-2%,2(J"'&"8%-"=/"?+'&/"
&*+1$"&*"E1+,/"*+&"$*6"&*"2*"'&"3,*3/,;)B"
;)%()*%$"&,8%$"#$%$".(%-&0"$%#E.6$%6"&71+.,@'%&,1.2.,1.,$%27#(/
C"6%-&"&*"(%)"-*J"=+&"C"8%-"&$'-7"%=*+&"%"8*+3;/"*4"/A%.3;/("6$/,/"'&"2*/(",+'-"&$/',"4,//"
3;%)B"C&"8%-"=/",/%;;)"%--*)'-1"-*&"=/'-1"%=;/"&*"3+&"2*6-"/?+'3./-&"=/8%+(/"*4"%"(&+I
3'2",+;/"%=*+&"$*6"4%,"%6%)"'&"($*+;2"=/"4,*."&$/"8+,=(&*-/B"@$%&".'1$&",+'-"&$/"2/('1-"
*4"&$/"_&$/"1,*+-2"'(";%9%`"1%./J"%("'&"8%-D&"=/"8*--/8&/2";'7/"6/"6*+;2"6%-&"'&"&*B"#/"
+(+%;;)"E-2"%"6%)"*4"(*;9'-1"'&B
D#,%()*+%2+)1*6$%<.%*'.1%&,1.2.,1.,$7(%<(%6"&71+.,/
e/(J"'4"&$/)"7//3"&*"3;%)'-1"6'&$"&$/"/?+'3./-&".%2/"4*,"&$/',"%1/",%-1/B"C4"&$/)"6%-&"&*"
3;%)"6'&$"(*./&$'-1"&$%&"'("4*,"='11/,"7'2(J"&$/)".'1$&"-//2"$/;3"&*"1/&"&$/,/J"%-2"&$/)"
6*+;2"-//2"&$/',"3%,/-&D("$/;3B"C4"&$/)"+(/"&$/"/?+'3./-&"./%-&"4*,"&$/',"%1/",%-1/J"
&$/)"($*+;2"=/"%=;/"&*"+(/"'&"&$/.(/;9/("%-2"/A3/,'/-8/"&$/"4//;'-1"*4"(+88/(("6$/-"
+('-1"'&B
4)5%1)%()*%.,'*+.%2#+.,$'%3..7%'#3.%7.$$&,0%$".&+%6"&71+.,%27#(%&,1.2.,1.,$7(/
P)".%7'-1"&$/"/?+'3./-&"&,%-(3%,/-&J"(*"&$/"3%,/-&("8%-"7//3"%-"/)/"*-"&$/',"8$';2B"C4"
%"8$';2"'("3;%)'-1"*-"%"8;'.='-1"&*6/,J"&$/"3%,/-&"($*+;2"=/"('&&'-1"2,'-7'-1"8*^//"*-"%"
=/-8$"%-2"(&';;"=/"%=;/"&*"6%&8$"&$/.B"X-(+,'-1"&$%&"&$/)"2*-D&"1/&"*+&"*4"('1$&B"
:-"/A%.3;/"*4"'&"=/'-1"%-"'((+/"6%("%&"@$/"M*3/-$%1/-"q**J"6$/,/"&$/)"$%2"%"3;%)"
%,/%"6$/,/"&$/"8$';2,/-"8*+;2"1*"'-&*"%"&+--/;Y.%s/"%-2"(&'87"&$/',"$/%2("+3"*+&"*4"
(*./"$*;/(B"@$/"3%,/-&("6*+;2"3%-'8"=/8%+(/"&$/)";*(&"('1$&"*4"&$/',"8$';2,/-J"%-2"&$/)"
6/,/-D&"%=;/"&*"(3*&"&$/."%1%'-B"
#/"8,/%&/2"%"-/6"3;%)1,*+-2"%=*+&"4*+,")/%,("%1*J"6$'8$"$%("%"(%4%,'"&$/./B"@$/,/"%,/"
.%-)"*33*,&+-'&'/("&*"3;%)"6'&$"&$/"2'^/,/-&"/?+'3./-&J"=+&"'&"'("%;(*".*,/"&,%-(3%I
,/-&J"%-2"6/"8,/%&/2"(/%&'-1"%,/%("*-"&$/"3;%)1,*+-2B"@$'(".%2/"'&"3*(('=;/"4*,"3%,/-&("
&*"7//3"%-"/)/"*-"&$/',"8$';2,/-B"#/"%;(*"2'9'2/2"&$/"3;%)1,*+-2"'-&*"*-/"4*,"(.%;;/,"
%-2"*-/"4*,"='11/,"8$';2,/-B"@$'("%;(*"$/;3/2"6'&$"&$/"3%,/-&("=/'-1"%=;/"&*"8*-&,%&/"*-"
E-2'-1"&$/',"8$';2B"
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(=BD5M959M(EA,F
==PAGE:164==
!"#$%#+.%$".%-)'$%6+&$&6#7%$)2&6'%1.'&0,.+'%'")*71%<.%5)+8&,0%),%&,%2*<7&6%'2#6.'%
3)+%27#(/
R(+%;;)J"6/"%;6%)(";**7"%&"3*(('=';'&'/(J"=+&"C"&$'-7"'&D("%;(*"'.3*,&%-&"&*"8*-('2/,"&$/"
6*,(&"3*(('=;/"8%(/B":-"/A%.3;/"6*+;2"=/"2/('1-'-1"4*,"2/3,'9/2"%,/%(J"6$/,/"'&".'1$&"
-*&"=/"%"1**2"'2/%"&*"3+&"+3"&**".%-)"3;%)$*+(/("%("'&"8,/%&/("$'22/-"8*,-/,(J"6$'8$"
8*+;2"=/"+(/2"4*,"(/;;'-1"2,+1("%-2"&$/";'7/B"#/"&,)"&*"%2%3&"&*"&$/"%,/%("%-2"&$/-"8,/%I
&/"%".*,/"&,%-(3%,/-&"3;%)1,*+-2B"P+&"'&"'("%;(*"'.3*,&%-&"&*"-*&">+(&"8,/%&/"(*./&$'-1"
9'(+%;;)"3;/%('-1"=+&"%;(*"8,/%&/"3;%)B"U-/"&$'-1"'("&$/"'-'&'%;"6*6"4%8&*,J"%-*&$/,"'("&$/"
(&%)"4%8&*,J"6$'8$"'-8;+2/("-*&"*-;)"8,/%&'-1"&$/"6%-&"&*"(&%)J"=+&"%;(*"2/9/;*3./-&"
*33*,&+-'&'/("4*,"&$/"8$';2B
4)5%&-2)+$#,$%&'%'#3.$(C%&,%+.0#+1'%$)%$+#G6C%5".,%()*%1.'&0,%27#(0+)*,1'/
@$%&"'("9/,)"'.3*,&%-&"%-2"(*./&$'-1"&$%&"6/"2'(8+(("6'&$"&$/"8;'/-&J"*4&/-"&$/".+-'8'I
3%;'&)B"@$/,/"'("%"&,/-2"%=*+&"*3/-'-1"+3"&$/"(8$**;("%-2"3;%)1,*+-2("/9/-".*,/"%-2"
.%7'-1"&$/.".*,/"%9%';%=;/"&*"&$/"+,=%-"(3%8/"%-2"&$/"(+,,*+-2'-1"/-9',*-./-&J"
6$'8$"'("1,/%&"=/8%+(/".*,/"3/*3;/"6';;"=/-/E&"4,*."&$/"3;%)1,*+-2B"@$/,/"%,/"(*./"
2%-1/,("&*"'&J"%-"/A%.3;/"'("%"(8$**;"=)"H&S=/,'1%2/"'-"H)2$%9-J"6$/,/"&$/"8$';2,/-"8%-"
4%;;"'-&*"&$/"6%&/,B"@$/,/"'("%;(*"&$/"3*(('=';'&)"*4",+--'-1"(&,%'1$&"'-&*"&$/",*%2J"=+&"&$/"
8*-(/?+/-8/"'("&$%&"&$/"3%,/-&("%,/"6'&$"&$/."%&"%;;"&'./(B
!"#$%#+.%$".%-)'$%&-2)+$#,$%$"&,0'%$"#$%6&$&.'%6)*71%1)%3)+%6"&71+.,%)9.+%$".%,.A$%
6)*27.%)3%(.#+'/
:("6/"%;,/%2)"&%;7/2"%=*+&J"8*-&'-+'-1"'-"*3/-'-1"+3"&$/"(8$**;"3;%)1,*+-2"%-2".%I
7'-1"&$/.".*,/"%9%';%=;/"&*"&$/"3+=;'8B":;(*J"'-&/1,%&/".*,/"3+=;'8"3;%)"'-&*"&$/"8'&)"
(8/-/"%-2"8,/%&/".*,/"8*..*-"3;%8/("6'&$",**."4*,"=*&$"3;%)"%-2"%8&'9'&'/(J"(+8$"%("
=%;;1%./(J"&,%'-'-1"%-2".*,/B"@$/".+-'8'3%;'&)"$%("=/1+-".%7'-1".*,/"*+&2**,"E&-/(("
%,/%(J"6$'8$"&$/)"2'2"'-"8*,,/;%&'*-"6'&$"8*,*-%B"P+&"&$/)"8*+;2"=/"=/&&/,"%&"8,/%&'-1"%"
8*..*-"1,*+-2"6'&$"=*&$"'-(&%;;%&'*-("3,/(/-&J"8,/%&'-1"%"8*..*-"3;%8/"4*,"&$/"6$*I
;/"4%.';)B"C"E-2"&$%&"&$/,/"'("%"2/9/;*3./-&"3*&/-&'%;"&$/,/B
!"#$%+)7.%1)%()*%'..%$"#$%$".%6&$(%2+)9&1.'%&,%6"&71+.,@'%27#(/
@$/)"$%9/"%"$+1/",*;/"%-2"%",/(3*-('=';'&)"'-"/-(+,'-1"&$%&"&$/"7'2("8*./"*+&"%-2"$%9/"
2'^/,/-&"3*(('=';'&'/("&*"/A3;*,/"'-"&$/',"-/%,=)"/-9',*-./-&B"C"&$'-7"'&"($*+;2"=/"/%(';)"
%88/(('=;/"&$,*+1$*+&"&$/"8'&)J"%("-*&"%;;"3%,/-&("$%9/"&$/"*33*,&+-'&)"&*"&%7/"&$/',"7'2("
%;;"&$/"6%)"&*":.%1/,"Tb;;/2"*-"%"@+/(2%)"&*"/-(+,/"&$%&"&$/)".*9/B"
!"#$%6*7$*+#7%'"&3$'%&,%')6&.$(%5&77%#E.6$%()*+%1.6&'&),'%#,1%1.9.7)2-.,$%&,%$".%
6)-&,0%(.#+'/
#/"6';;"6*,7".*,/"*-"8;'.%&/"8*-&,*;"'-"&$/"2/9/;*3./-&"*4"&**;(J"/?+'3./-&"%-2"
3;%)1,*+-2(B
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(E>LA5?(EA,F
==PAGE:165==
?$%5#'%-.,$&),.1%&,%#%5"&$.%2#2.+%$"#$%$".%2#+.,$'%#+.%.A2.+&.,6&,0%2#+.,$#7%
#,A&.$(%#<)*$%7.#9&,0%$".&+%8&1'%)*$%)3%'&0"$C%&'%$"#$%')-.$"&,0%()*%"#9.%+.'.#+F
6".1/
@$/,/"'("%"$+1/"2'^/,/-8/"'-"8+;&+,/J"6$/&$/,")*+";'9/"'-"</-.%,7"*,"%("%-"/A%.3;/"
'-"&$/"RHB"C-"&$/"RH")*+"6*+;2"-/9/,"2,/%."*4";/&&'-1")*+,"8$';2"(;//3"*+&('2/"'-"&$/',"
&,%.B"C"(//"&$/"3%,/-&%;"%-A'/&)"%("%"./&,*3*;'&%-"3$/-*./-*-J"6$'8$"'("&$%&"6/"&%7/"
.*,/"8%,/"*4"*+,"8$';2,/-"6$/-"'&"8*./("&*"3;%)B"C-"V+&;%-2J"&$/,/"'(".*,/"4,//"3;%)B"C-"
&$/"8'&)"&$/"%-A'/&)".'1$&"8*./"4,*."&$/"%.*+-&"*4"3/*3;/"=/'-1"1%&$/,/2"%-2"&$/"
(3,/%2'-1"*4"(8%,)"(&*,'/("%=*+&"6$%&"$%33/-("&*"8$';2,/-B"@$/)"%,/"-*&"'-&/,/(&/2"'-"
(/-2'-1"&$/',"7'2("2*6-"&*"&$/"8*+,&)%,2"'4"&$%&"./%-("&$/)".'1$&"1/&"$+,&B
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(E>LA5?(EA,F
==PAGE:166==
4)5%5)*71%()*%1.'6+&<.%27#(/
@$/"E,(&"&$'-1"C"&$'-7"%=*+&"'("8,/%&'9'&)J"/A3/,'./-&'-1"%-2"&,)'-1"*+&B"C"&$'-7"&$/,/"-//2("
&*"=/"%"8*--/8&'*-"6'&$"4,//2*."'-"3;%)B"C"E-2"&$%&"3;%)"%;6%)("/-2"+3"%("3,%8&'8/"4*,",/%;"
;'4/B":-2"*4"8*+,(/"&$/".*(&"=%('8"&$%&"3;%)"($*+;2"=/"4+-B
!"#$%1)%()*%-.#,%5&$"%3+..1)-%&,%27#(/
@$/";%87"*4",+;/("%-2"-*&"=/'-1"%=;/"&*"2*"'&"6,*-1;)B"e*+"8%-"(3/;;"6,*-1J"=+&")*+"8%-D&"
3;%)"6*-1B
!"(%1)%()*%$"&,8%27#(%&'%&-2)+$#,$/
C"&$'-7"'&"'("'.3*,&%-&"4*,"&$/"1/-/,%;"2/9/;*3./-&"*4"8,/%&'9'&)J"%("6/;;"%("&$/"2/9/;*3./-&"
*4"3$)('*;*1'8%;"(7';;(J"&$/"(/-(/("%-2">+(&"'-"1/-/,%;"&$%&"3;%)";/%2("&*"%";*&"*4";/%,-'-1B"C"
&$'-7"&$%&"3;%)"'("%=(*;+&/;)"4+-2%./-&%;"&*";/%,-'-1B
!"#$%8&,1%)3%27#(%1)%()*%B,1%$"#$%6"&71+.,%2+.3.+/
j*&"=%(/2"*-".)"6*,7J"=+&"C"&$'-7"&$/)"3,/4/,"4,//"3;%)J"=+&",/%;";'4/",/;%&%=;/"3,/&/-2"1%I
./(B"@,)'-1"&*".'.'8",/%;'&)J"*,"(*./&$'-1"&$/)"(%6"'-"@gB"@$%&"6%)"&$/)"6*,7"6'&$'-"&$/',"
*6-"4,%./J"=+&"(&';;"$%9/"&$'("4,//"8$*'8/"*4"6$%&"&*"3;%)B"
;)%()*%3..7%$"#$%')-.%$(2.'%)3%27#(%#+.%-&''&,0/
C"4//;";'7/"('-1I%;*-1"3;%)("%,/".'(('-1J"=/8%+(/",/3/&'&'*-"'("9/,)"'.3*,&%-&"4*,"8$';2,/-B"
@$/)";/%,-"/A&,/./;)"6/;;"4,*.",/3/&'&'9/"1%./(J"&$%&"&$/)"8%-"3;%)"*9/,"%-2"*9/,J"(+8$"%("
('-1I%;*-1(B"@$%&"%;(*"/-8*+,%1/("8*..+-'&)B"X9/,)=*2)"'("/?+%;J"&$/,/"'("-*",*;/("&*"4+;E;;B"
@$/)"%,/"*4&/-"8*-&,*;;/2"=)"%2+;&("&$*+1$B"P+&"C"&$'-7"'&"'("'.3*,&%-&"&*";**7"%&"1%./("&$%&"
$%9/"&$/"/;/./-&("*4",/3/&'&'*-"%-2"8*..+-'&)B
?'%&$%')-.$"&,0%$"#$%()*%$+(%$)%3)6*'%),%$"+)*0")*$%()*+%1.'&0,/
j*&"&$/"('-1I%;*-1"3%,&J"=+&"&$/"(*8'%;"%-2"1%&$/,'-1"&$/"8$';2,/-"%,*+-2"%"8*..*-"
1%./"'("(*./&$'-1"&$%&"6/"4*8+("1,/%&;)"*-B"#/"6%-&"&$/"1%./"&*"=/"(*8'%;J"/9/-"&$*+1$"
(*./"*4"&$/."8%-"=/"3;%)/2"%;*-/J"&$/"3+,3*(/"*4"'&"&$%&"'&"($*+;2"=/"3;%)/2"=)"%"1,*+3"*4"
8$';2,/-B
5*#"67."8'
,--"*&./(*%0((140O
34#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
0)&"+50"6%79
D@#$%P1+@GG1%KQG#R)9%<):)->)9H%*-&O)8#%8&&-:@91#&-%1#%S7E?
59:;<=>?:5<9
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(EA,F
@$/"'-&/,9'/6"6%("8*-2+8&/2"*-"q**."'-"%"(/.'I(&,+8&+,/2"6%)B
C"%."%"3,*>/8&"8**,2'-%&*,"%&"eUKCJ"%-2"CD9/"=//-"/.3;*)/2"4*,"&$/";%(&"&$,//")/%,(B"eUKC"'("
%"(&%,&I+3"8*.3%-)J"6$/,/"6/D9/"8,/%&/2"%"1%./"&$%&"4*8+("*-";/%,-'-1"&$,*+1$"3;%)'-1B
==PAGE:167==
4)5%1)%()*%.,'*+.%$)%.,6)*+#0.%1&E.+.,$%$(2.'%)3%27#(/
#/"$%9/"8,/%&/2"%"('-1;/"1%.;/J"6'&$"%"('-1;/"3+,3*(/"*-"$*6"&*"3;%)"'&J"=+&"6/"4*+-2"
&$%&"&$/"1%./"8$%-1/2"2/3/-2'-1"*-"$*6"&$/"3/2%1*1+/"+-2/,(&**2"'&B"H*./"*4"&$/."
$%2-D&",/%2"&$/"'-(&,+8&'*-"%-2">+(&"2/8'2/2"*-"(*./",+;/("*,"(*./&'./("&$/"8$';2,/-"
&$/.(/;9/("2/8'2/2"*-"6$%&"&$/",+;/("($*+;2"=/B"@$,*+1$"&$%&"6/"%2%3&/2"&$/"1%./"%"='&J"
4*,"'&"&*"=/".*,/"*3/-I/-2/2B"#/"/-2/2"+3"6'&$"%"3,*2+8&"6$/,/"&$/"3;%)/,("Z&$/"8$';2,/-"
%-2"&$/"3/2%1*1+/["'("%=;/"&*".%7/"&$/',"*6-".%,7B"P)"$%9'-1",/(/%,8$/,(",/(/%,8$"&$/"
3,*2+8&"'-"&$/"7'-2/,1%,&/-J"6/"6/,/".%2/"%6%,/"*4"$*6"&$/"7'2("6/,/"+('-1"'&"%-2"&$I
,*+1$"&$%&"/A3/,'/-8/"6/"6/,/"%=;/"&*"%2%3&"&$/"1%./"&*"=/".*,/"*3/-I/-2/2B
?'%&$%2)''&<7.%$)%5&,%()*+%0#-./
C&"2/3/-2("*-"6$'8$"*-/"'("=/'-1"3;%)/2B"@$/"3/2%1*1+/("%(7/2"4*,"=*&$J"6$/-"%(7/2"
=)"&$/",/(/%,8$/,(B"P/8%+(/"6/"8%;;"'&";/%,-'-1"&$,*+1$"3;%)"%-2"%"1%./"%&"&$/"(%./"&'./B"
P)".%7'-1"=*&$"&$/"3/2%1*1+/("%,/"%=;/"&*"2/8'2/"$*6"'&"($*+;2"=/"3;%)/2B"@$/"1%./"'("
&$/,/4*,/"%=;/"&*"%2%3&"&*"&$/"('&+%&'*-J"&$/,/"'("=*&$">'1(%6(J"=+&"&$/"3/2%1*1+/"8%-"%(;*"
8*+-&"2'^/,/-&"3*'-&"6$'8$"6*+;2".%7/"'&".*,/"8*.3/&'&'9/B":-2"'&"8*+;2"%;(*"=/"+(/2"%("
>+(&"%"4+-"%8&'9'&)J"6$/,/")*+"8%-D&"3+&"2*6-"&$/"3+ss;/3'/8/"6,*-1B
!"#$%1)%()*%$"&,8%$".%3*$*+.%)3%27#(%7))8'%7&8./
C"&$'-7"&$%&"&$/"3+,3*(/"6';;";**7"9/,)"%;'7/"&*"6$%&"'&"2*/("-*6B"P+&"C"&$'-7"('-1I%;*-1"
1%./(".'1$&"2'/"*+&J"=/8%+(/"&$/)"%,/"-*&"=/'-1"+(/2B"C"&$'-7"&$%&"%";*&"*4"&$/"*;2"1%./(J"
(+8$"%("&%1J"%,/"(&';;"=/'-1"3;%)/2"=+&"'-"%"-/6"3%87%1/B":-"/A%.3;/"=/'-1"&$%&"*-/"*4"
*+,"1%./("6*,7";'7/"&$/"(&*3"2%-8/"1%./J"=+&"4*,"1).-%(&'8("'-(&/%2"*4"2%-8/B""#/"(%6"
&$%&"&$/"7'2("=/8*./"/A&,/./;)".*&'9%&/2"=)"&$'(";'&&;/".%8$'-/"&/;;'-1"&$/."6$%&"&*"2*B"
P/8%+(/"'&"6%(-D&"%-"%2+;&"'-8$%,1/"*4"&$/".+('8J"6$*"6*+;2"=/"%=;/"&*";**7"%&"&$/.J"&$/)"
%,/"=;%./2"%"='&"'4"*-/"*4"&$/"8$';2,/-";*(/"&$/"1%./B"#$/-"'&("&$/".%8$'-/"'&"=/8*./("
.*,/"-/+&,%;B
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(EA,F
==PAGE:168==
!"#$%$(2.%)3%+.'.#+6"%),%27#(%1)%()*%6),1*6$%&,%()*+%1.9.7)2-.,$%2+)6.''/
@$/"'-'&'%;"'2/%"6%("2/9/;*3/2"=/4*,/".)"&'./J"=+&"6%("2*-/"%("%"8*;;%=*,%&'*-"6'&$"&$/"
3/2%1*1+/(B"P)"'-9*;9'-1"&$/",/(/%,8$/,("6/"6/,/"%=;/"&*"+-2/,(&%-2"$*6"'&"6*,7/2"'-"
3,%8&'8/B"#/"2'2-D&",/%;;)"8$%-1/"&$/"3,*2+8&J"=+&"6/"2'2",/2/('1-"$*6"'&"6%("+(/2"%4&/,"
&$/",/(/%,8$/,(">*'-/2B"@$/".%8$'-/"$%("(&%)/2"&$/"(%./"%-2"&$/-"6/"$%9/">+(&"%22/2"
1%./"%-2"&$/./("&*"'&B"
!"#$%&'%()*+%$#+0.$%0+)*2/
U+,"&%,1/&"1,*+3"'("7'-2/,1%,&/-"8$';2,/-J"=+&"&$/"3,*2+8&"'("%;(*"=/'-1"+(/2"'-"-+,(/,)"
(8$**;"%("6/;;"%("'-"&$/"E,(&"8;%((/("*4"/;/./-&%,)"(8$**;B"P+&"3,'.%,';)"7'-2/,1%,&/-"8$';I
2,/-B"@$'("'("6$/,/"6/"(//"&$/"='11/(&"2/.%-2"*-";/%,-'-1"3;%)&**;(B"@$%&"'("&$/")/%,("
&$%&"&$/)"%,/"&$/".*(&",/8/3&%8;/J"%-2"%;(*"6$/-"&$/)"(&%,&";/%,-'-1"%=*+&"$*6"&$/"
6*,;2"6*,7(J"4,*.";/%,-'-1"$*6"&*"6%;7J"&*"(3/%7'-1"%-2"/9/,)&$'-1J"'&("%;;"%"9/,)",%3'2"
2/9/;*3./-&B
4)5%1&1%()*%6)77.6$%$".%1#$#%3+)-%$".%2.1#0)0*.'%#,1%$".%+.'.#+6".+'/
#/"8*;;/8&/2"'-4*,.%&'*-"4,*."&$/"3/2%1*1+/("&$,*+1$"(+,9/)("%=*+&"6$%&"6*,7/2"
%-2"6$%&"2'2-D&"6*,7B"#/",/8/'9/2"%";*&"*4"2'^/,/-&",/%8&'*-(J"2/3/-2'-1"*-"6$%&"7'-2"
*4"'-&/,/(&"&$/,/"6%("'-"+('-1"&$/"1%./B"@$/",/(/%,8$/,("6/"1*&"'-"8*-&%8&"6'&$"&$,*+1$"
&$/"C--*9%&'*-(2'(&,'7&"H>b;;%-2"3,*1,%.J"%-2"6/"6/,/"3+&"'-"8*-&%8&"6'&$"t*(7';2/"
R-'9/,('&)"%-2"Q,*4/(('*-($S>(7*;/-":=(%;*-B"@$/)"6/,/"'-9/(&'1%&'-1"%-2"*=(/,9'-1"*-"
*+,"=/$%;4B":-2"&$,*+1$"&$/',",/(/%,8$"6/"6/,/"%=;/"&*",/9'(/"&$/"3,*2+8&"%-2"8$%-1/"
6$%&"-//2/2"&*"=/"8$%-1/2B":-"/A%.3;/"6%("%"3+ss;/3'/8/"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"2'2-D&"
+-2/,(&%-2J"&$%&"*=9'*+(;)"2*/(-D&"6*,7B"@$'("'("%;(*"6$/,/"6/"4*+-2"*+&"&$%&"6/"2*-D&"
-//2"&*"&/;;"&$/."$*6"&$/)"($*+;2"3;%)"&$/"1%./"%-2",%&$/,".%7/"(+11/(&'*-("&*"$*6"
'&"8*+;2"=/"3;%)/2B
@$/"7'-2/,1%,&/-"$%("2'^/,/-&"2/9/;*3./-&"&%,1/&("&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"-//2"&*"=/",/%I
8$/2"&$,*+1$"%";/%,-'-1"3;%-J"6$)"&$/"3/2%1*1+/("%,/"4*-2"*4"(*;+&'*-("&$%&"8%-"$/;3"
&$/."$/;3"&$/"8$';2,/-",/%8$"&$/(/"&%,1/&(B":-"/A%.3;/"*4"%"&%,1/&"8*+;2"=/",'./(B%
4)5%1)%()*%.,'*+.%$"#$%$".%0#-.%$#8.'%27#6.%),%$".%6"&71+.,@'%$.+-'/
#/".%7/"(+,/"&*"3,/(/-&"&$/"1%./"'-"%"6%)"&$%&".%7/("'&"8;/%,"&$%&"'&"'("'.3*,&%-&"&$%&"
&$/"8$';2,/-"&,)"'&"*+&"&$/.(/;9/(J"=/8%+(/"&$/";/%,-"%";*&"4,*.".%7'-1"&$/',"*6-"/A3/I
,'/-8/(B":&"&$/"(%./"&'./"6/"%,/"8,/%&'-1"&$'("(*8'%;"1%./J"%-2"6/"4*+-2"&$%&"1%&$/,I
'-1"8$';2,/-"%,*+-2"%"&%=;/"&$/)"%,/"-*&"1**2"%&"E-2'-1"/%8$*&$/,B"a/%-'-1"&$%&"&$/)"
6*-D&";**7"/%8$*&$/,"'-"&$/"/)/B"#$%&"6/"4*+-2"6%("&$%&"'&"6%("&$/"%2+;&"6$*"-//2/2"
&*"1%&$/,"&$/.B"P+&"%4&/,"=/'-1"1%&$/,/2"%-2"%8&'9%&/2"6/"4*+-2"&$%&"&$/)"%,/"9/,)"
1**2"%&"'-&/,%8&'-1"6'&$"/%8$*&$/,B"@$/)"6%-&"&*"$/;3"/%8$*&$/,J"'4"&$/"1%./"'(".%2/"
=%(/2"*-",*+-2(B"C4"&$/"%2+;&"$%("%8&'9%&/2"&$/"1%./J"&$/)"+-2/,(&%-2"$*6"&*"'-&/,%8&"
6'&$"/%8$*&$/,J"1'9'-1"/%8$*&$/,"(3%8/"%-2"$/;3'-1"/%8$*&$/,"*+&B
"
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(;BDB,;?@
==PAGE:169==
:+.%$".+.%#,(%#'2.6$'%()*%1..-%-)+.%&-2)+$#,$%3)+%1.'&0,.+'%$)%8,)5%#<)*$%$".%
6*7$*+.%)3%6"&71"))1/%H!"#$%&'%.''.,$&#7%$)%*,1.+'$#,1%#<)*$%6"&71+.,/I
@$%&"'&"8%-"=/"2'c8+;&"4*,"&$/"8$';2,/-"&*"%8&'9%&/"&$/.(/;9/(J"/(3/8'%;;)"4*,"*+,"&%,1/&I
1,*+3B"P+&"&$/)"=/8*./"=/&&/,"%&"'&"6$/-"&$/)",/%8$"(8$**;J"&$/)"=/8*./"=/&&/,"%&"
'-'&'%&'-1"1%./(B"
4)5%1)%()*%&1.,$&3(%$".%6"&71+.,@'%5&'".'%#,1%,..1'/
#/";**7"%&"&$/"/A3/,'/-8/"&$%&"6/"$%9/"1%&$/,/2"&$,*+1$"*+,"3,/9'*+("1%./(B":-2"
&$/-"6/"&/(&"&$/"3,*2+8&"'-"7'-2/,1%,&/-J"6/";**7"4*,"'4"&$/"'-&/-&'*-"&$%&"6/"3+&"'-&*"
&$/"1%./"'("4+;E;;/2"%-2"'4"'&"4+;E;;("&$/"6'($"&$%&"6/"1*&"4,*."&$/"8$';2,/-B
J)%()*%1)%&,9)79.%$".%6"&71+.,%&,%$".%1.9.7)2-.,$%2+)6.''/
e/(J"%-2"6/"2*"'&"=)"2',/8&;)"%(7'-1"&$/.B"P+&"'&"8%-"=/"2'c8+;&"+('-1"&$/',"%-(6/,(J"%("
&$/)".'1$&">+(&"%-(6/,"2'-*(%+,J"%-2"&$/-"6/"$%9/"&*"E1+,/"*+&"$*6"&*".%7/"&$%&"'-&*"
%"1%./B"#$/-"6/"=,'-1"*+&"*;2"1%./("%-2"&,)"&*"1/&"&$/."&*"'2/-&'4)"6$'8$"3%,&"*4"&$/"
1%./"&$%&"&$/)"/->*)J"&$/)"%,/"-*&"%=;/"&*"1'9/"+("%-"%-(6/,"Z=/8%+(/"*4"&$/',"%1/[B"P+&"
&$/-"6/"+(/"*=(/,9%&'*-J"%-2"%(7"&$/."?+/(&'*-("6$';/"+('-1"'&B"
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(;BDB,;?@
!"#$%#+.%$".%-)'$%&-2)+$#,$%3#6$)+'%5".,%1.'&0,&,0%27#(/
T*,"+("6$/-"2/('1-'-1"%"1%./J"'&"'("'.3*,&%-&"&$%&"'&"'("4+-"%-2"(*8'%;"%-2";*1'8%;B"@$/";*I
1'8"'("%-"'.3*,&%-&"4%8&*,J"=/8%+(/"6/"$%9/"/A3/,'/-8/2"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"=/8*./"4,+I
(&,%&/2"'4"&$/";*1'8"'(".'(('-1B"#$/-"8,/%&'-1"%"1%./"'&"'("'.3*,&%-&"&$%&"&$/"4,%./6*,7"
$%("=//-"(/&"%-2"'("7/3&"&$,*+1$*+&"&$/"1%./B
!"#$%1)%()*%$"&,8%#+.%$".%-)'$%2+)-&,.,$%-&'$#8.'%$"#$%#+.%-#1.%5".,%1.'&0F
,&,0%27#(/
C"&$'-7"'&"'(".*(&;)"=,/%7'-1"&$/";*1'8B"P+&"'&"'(";+87';)"/%(';)"EA/2"%4&/,"$%9'-1"&/(&/2"'&"'-"
3,%8&'8/B"
:+.%$".+.%#,(%'#3.$(%'$#,1#+1'%$"#$%()*%"#9.%$)%3)77)5/
X9/,)&$'-1"%=*+&"&$/"1%./"'("4*;;*6'-1"&$/"-/8/((%,)"(%4/&)"3,/8%+&'*-(J"&$/"*-;)"&$'-1"
&$/)",/%;;)"8$%-1/".'1$&"=/"&$/"3'8&+,/"*-"&$/"3+ss;/3'/8/B"C&"6%("=/'-1"&/(&/2"%-2"
%33,*9/2"&$,*+1$"%"6$*;/")/%,B
D#,%()*+%2+)1*6$%<.%*'.1%&,1.2.,1.,$7(%<(%6"&71+.,/
#/"%,/"-*&"%1%'-(&"'-2/3/-2/-&"3;%)J"=+&"6/"8%,/".*,/"%=*+&".%7'-1"(+,/"&$%&"'&"'("%"
(*8'%;"1%./J"&$%&"8%-"=/"2*-/"&*1/&$/,"%("%"1,*+3B
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(=BD5M959M(EA,F
==PAGE:170==
!"#$%#+.%$".%-)'$%&-2)+$#,$%$"&,0'%$"#$%6&$&.'%6)*71%1)%3)+%6"&71+.,%)9.+%$".%,.A$%
6)*27.%)3%(.#+'/
C"&$'-7"'&"6*+;2"=/"1**2"'4"6/"1**2"1'9/"8$';2,/-"%"(/-(/"*4",/(3*-('=';'&)"6$/-"&$/)"
.*9/"%,*+-2"'-"&$/"3+=;'8"(3%8/B"j*&"&$%&"6/"($*+;2".%7/"&$/."1*"%,*+-2"%-2"8*;;/8&"
1%,=%1/J"=+&"/-(+,'-1"&$/."&$%&"&$/"(3%8/"%;(*"=/;*-1("&*"&$/.B":-"/A%.3;/"8*+;2"=/"
&$%&"'4"&$/"1,//-.%-"%&"&$/"&,%c8";'1$&"6%("(*./&$'-1"+-/A3/8&/2";'7/"%"2*1"*,"%"=+;;B"
H*./&$'-1"&*";**7"*+&"4*,"%-2".%7/"&$/."%6%,/"6$';/".*9'-1"'-"&$/"3+=;'8J"'-(&/%2"*4"
>+(&"6%'&'-1"4*,"&$/',".*."&*"&/;;"&$/."&$%&"&$/)"%,/"%;;*6/2"&*"8,*((B"l'9/"&$/."/-&'8/I
./-&"&*"3%,&'8'3%&/B"C"&$'-7"'&"6*+;2"=/"'-&/,/(&'-1"&*"8,/%&/"(*./&$'-1"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"
8*+;2"=/"%6%,/"*4"6*+;2"=/"./%-'-14+;"%-2"8,/%&/"1,/%&";/%,-'-1"*33*,&+-'&'/(B"C"&$'-7"
'&("'.3*,&%-&"&*"($*6"&$%&"*+,"(*8'/&)"'("%"8*..+-'&)J"&$%&"'&"'("%"(*8'%;"(3%8/"4*,"/9/,)*I
-/B
!"#$%+)7.%1)%()*%'..%$"#$%$".%6&$(%2+)9&1.'%&,%6"&71+.,@'%27#(/
C"%."GNNi"='%(/2"=)")*+,"'-&,*2+8&'*-J"=+&"C"&$'-7"'&"6*+;2"(&,/-1&$/-"&$/"8'&)"'4"6/"
8*+;2"=,'-1"&$/"3;%)"*+&"*4"&$/"3;%)1,*+-2(B":-2"C"&$'-7"'&"6*+;2"=/"'.3*,&%-&"&*";**7"%&"
&,%c8"%-2"-*&".%7/"'&";/(("(/,'*+(J"=+&"
#$%&"8+;&+,%;"($'4&("'-"(*8'/&)"6';;"%^/8&")*+,"2/8'('*-("%-2"2/9/;*3./-&"'-"&$/"8*.'-1"
)/%,(0
K>BD:5<9D(,L<>:(E>LA5?(EA,F
==PAGE:171==
5*#"67."8'
,--"*&./(*%0((140P
34#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
0)&"+50"6%7:
D@#$%F)GG)%F1=G09:H%G19:>81*)%1-8$@#)8#%T%PG10>%UG>#-0*%J&--)H%1-8$@#)8#%
1#%<1-N%19:%L-,19%>*18)%@9%#$)%+09@8@*1G@#2%&'%P&*)9$1=)9
59:;<=>?:5<9
@$/"'-&/,9'/6"6%("$/;2"'-"3/,(*-"%&"&$/".+-'8'3%;'&'/("*c8/("%&"C(;%-2("P,)11/"%-2"6%("
8*-2+8&/2"'-"%"(/.'I(&,+8&+,/2"%33,*%8$B"@$/"'-&/,9'/6//("$%2",/8/'9/2"&$/"?+/(&'*-("
'-"%29%-8/"%-2"&$+("$%2"&'./"&*"3,/3%,/"&$/',"%-(6/,(B"#/",/8*,2/2"&$/"%+2'*"*4"&$/"
'-&/,9'/6"4*,"+("&*";%&/,"=/"%=;/"&*"6,'&/"%"(+..%,)"*4"&$/"%-(6/,(",/8/'9/2B"
@$'("(+..%,)"'("=%(/2"*-"&$/"$*+,"%-2"%"$%;4";*-1"'-&/,9'/6B"@$/"%-(6/,("4,*."&$/"&6*"
'-&/,9'/6//("6/-&"=/)*-2"&$/"?+/(&'*-("*4"&$/"'-&/,9'/6"1+'2/".%2/"4*,"3;%)"
(3/8'%;'(&(B
D#,%()*%.7#<)+#$.%),%$".%2+)=.6$'%()*%<+&.K(%$#78%#<)*$%&,%()*+%-#&7/%
!"
C&"'("8,+8'%;"&$%&"&$/"-/6"'-'&'%&'9/("E&"'-&*"&$/"+,=%-"(3%8/n"4*,"/A%.3;/J"-*&"$%9/"%"
&,%2'&'*-%;"4/-8/"=+&".%7/"(*./&$'-1"&$%&"E&("'-&*"&$/"/-9',*-./-&B"
!"
a//&'-1"3;%)"%;*-1"&$/"6%)"'("9/,)"'-&/,/(&'-1J"=+&"+-4*,&+-%&/;)J"&$/"&,%c8"'("%"('1-'I
E8%-&"4%8&*,B
!"
:88/(('=';'&)"'("'.3*,&%-&B"#/"$%9/"8,/%&/2";'&&;/"8*,-/,("-/%,"2'^/,/-&"(8$**;(J"%("
$%-1I*+&"(3*&(J"=/8%+(/"*4"&$/"(.%;;"%,/%"'-"&$/"(8$**;)%,2(B"#/"&,)"&*"8,/%&/"(*I
./&$'-1"4*,"&$/"8$';2,/-"=)"(/&&'-1"+3"&$/"(8+;3&+,/("u"6/"8%-"(//"&$/)"%,/"=/'-1"
+(/2n"&$/"8$';2,/-"3/&"&$/"3*;%,"=/%,"*-"&$/"3*&B"
!"#$%&'%&$%$"#$%2#+8'%#,1%'>*#+.'%6#,C%$"#$%27#(0+)*,1'%6#,,)$/
!"
C&"'("'-4*,.%;"u"'&"'("-*&"2/('1-/2"4*,"%"(3/8'E8"3+,3*(/"=+&"8%-"=/"+(/2"4*,".%-)"
2'^/,/-&"('&+%&'*-("%-2"3+,3*(/(B"#/"6*,7"6'&$"&$/"3+=;'8"/-9',*-./-&J"6$'8$"'("
3+=;'8;)"%9%';%=;/"%-2"8%-"=/"+(/2"4*,"%-)&$'-1n"6$)"'&".+(&"=/"%=;/"&*"6'&$(&%-2"
=/'-1"+(/2"4*,"%-)&$'-1B
!"
#/"%,/"-*&"1**2"/-*+1$"%&"(//'-1"&$/"8'&)"4,*."&$/"8$';2D("3/,(3/8&'9/B"l/$;"(%)("%"
8'&)"(%4/"4*,"8$';2,/-"'("%"1**2"8'&)"4*,"/9/,)*-/B
!"
#/"2*"-*&"$%9/".+8$"(3%8/n"6/"/A3/,'/-8/"%"(&,+11;/"4*,"(3%8/"%;;"&$/"&'./"'-"%;;"
*+,"3,*>/8&("u"6$%&"($*+;2"6/"3,'*,'&'(/0"#/"&,)"&*"%8$'/9/"(*./".+;&'4+-8&'*-%;'&)"
'-"&$/"(3%8/(B"#/".+(&"&$'-7"*4"&$/"/;/./-&("'-"%"$*;'(&'8"*9/,9'/6"I"%(".%-)"8'&'s/-("
%("3*(('=;/".+(&"=/"%=;/"&*"+(/"&$/"/;/./-&("6'&$*+&"8,/%&'-1"%"8*-f'8&"6'&$"&$/"
*&$/,"8*-2'&'*-("%-2"(+,,*+-2'-1(B
!"
R(+%;;)J"6/"(%)"&$%&"6/"8,/%&/"+,=%-"(3%8/("4*,"/9/,)*-/"=/8%+(/"&$/"+,=%-"(3%8/"
'("3+=;'8;)"%88/(('=;/n"%;;"&$/"8'&'s/-("*4"M*3/-$%1/-"3%(("&$,*+1$B"5*6/9/,J"'&"$%("
=/8*./"8;/%,"&$%&"6/"%,/"-*&"%6%,/"*4"4%8&*,(";'7/n"(/AJ"*&$/,"/&$-'8".'-*,'&'/(J"2'^/I
,/-&"%1/",%-1/(J"/&8BJ"=/8%+(/"6/"%,/"-*&"(3/8'E8"'-"*+,"3*;'&'8(B"C("6$%&"6/"2*"1**2"
4*,"/9/,)*-/0"#/"8%-"(//"&$%&"'&"'("-*&B"a%-)"*4"&$/"+,=%-"(3%8/("%,/"-*&"4*,"8$';2,/-B
5*6/9/,J"6/".%-%1/2"&*"'-&/1,%&/"(*./&$'-1"4*,"&$/"8$';2,/-"'-"3,*>/8&(",/1%,2'-1"
,/8)8;'-1"(&%&'*-(B"T%.';'/("8*./"$/,/J"6$/,/"&$/)"8%-"/A8$%-1/"&$'-1(J".%7/""
='8)8;/(J"%-2"8/;/=,%&/"5%;;*6//-B"@$'("8,/%&/("%"8*..+-'&)"6$/,/"3;%)"*88+,(B
D>!!,;F
==PAGE:172==
!"#$%&'%27#(%$)%()*%HD)2.,"#0.,%L*,&6&2#7&$(I/
%
!"
Q;%)"'("4,*."NION")/%,("*;2B"e*+"1/&"(/-(*,)"8$%;;/-1/2"%-2"8%-"+(/".*&*,"(7';;(n"&*"
.%7/")*+,"$/%2"(3'-B"#/"6%-&"&*"8,/%&/"%"(3%8/"6$/,/")*+"8%-".//&")*+,"4,'/-2("
%-2"3/*3;/"%8,*(("1/-/,%&'*-(B
!"
:,*+-2"FNNdJ"M*3/-$%1/-"a+-'8'3%;'&)"1*&"%"-/6".%)*,"%-2"%"-/6"(&,%&/1)v"(3%8/"
4*,"3;%)B"@$/"3;%)1,*+-2("6/,/"9/,)"6*,-J"%-2"-/6"'-'&'%&'9/("6/,/"8,/%&/2""
8*-8/,-'-1"$%9'-1"%"8'&)"4*,"/9/,)*-/n"&$/"3;%)1,*+-2("($*+;2"-*&"*-;)"=/"4*,"&$/"
8$';2,/-B
!"
@$/"3;%)1,*+-2("%,/"+(+%;;)"(+,,*+-2/2"=)"(*./"7'-2"*4"4/-8/n")*+"/-&/,"&$/"
"3;%)1,*+-2J"(*"=/'-1"%=;/"&*"3;%)"(*./6$/,/"/;(/J"(+8$"%("&$/"(&,//&"*,"%"8*,-/,J"
*,"(*./&$'-1"/;(/"&$%&"'("-*&"2/E-/2"%("%"3;%)"%,/%J",/?+',/("(*./"7'-2"*4"(/8+,'&)"
%(3/8&B"#$/-"&$/,/"'(".+8$"&,%c8J"=*&$"8$';2,/-"%-2"%2+;&("4//;".*,/"'-$'='&/2"'-"
+('-1"&$/"8'&)"%-2"(&,//&"4*,"3;%)'-1B"GNN")/%,("%1*J"6$/-"&$/,/"6/,/"-*&"%(".%-)"
8%,(J"8$';2,/-"6/,/"(//-"3;%)'-1"*-"&$/"(&,//&("%-2"(&/33'-1"(&*-/(B"P%87"&$/-J"&$/"
)%,2(J"(*"&$/"(&,//&J"6%("+(/2"4*,"3;%)B"@$/"3;%)1,*+-2("=/8*./"%"=%(/"6$/,/"&$/"
(&,//&"(3%8/"'("2*6-1,%2/2n")*+"2*-D&">+(&"(&*3"%-2"3;%)"=)"&$/"8+,="*,"6%;7"%"=%;%-I
8/"6$/,/")*+"%,/"%&"&$/".*./-&B
!"
#/"(//"$*6"'&"8%-"$/;3"-+21/"8'&'s/-("%,*+-2"&$/"+,=%-"(3%8/B
!"
#$/-"&$/"8'&)"'("($+&"2*6-J".%)=/"=/8%+(/"*4"&$/".%,%&$*-J"&$/"8$';2,/-"%,/"*+&"
*-"&$/',"='7/("%-2"3;%)'-1"%,*+-2"&$/"(&,//&(B
%
!"#$%1)%()*%1)%$)%2)2*7#+&M.%27#(C%#,1%5"#$%1)%()*%-#&,7(%3)6*'%),/
!"
C"$%9/"4*8+(/2"*-"&$/"1',;(B"l/&"&$/"1',;("*+&B"C&"'(".*,/"8$%;;/-1'-1"&*"&%,1/&"&$/"1',;(J"
,/1%,2("6$%&"&$/)"2*B"#/"8,/%&/"$%-1I*+&"(3*&("4*,"&$/.J"=+&"'("'&"6$%&"&$/)"-//2"
%-2"6%-&0"a%)=/J"6/"($*+;2"&$'-7"%=*+&"8,/%&'-1"3;%8/("%-2"(3%8/("4*,"&$/."&*"
2%-8/"%-2"3/,4*,.B"
!"
@$/,/"2*/("-*&"$%9/"&*"=/"/;/./-&("%-2"/?+'3./-&J"=+&"&$/"-//2/2"(3%8/"&*"2%-I
8/n"4*,"/A%.3;/J",/8*,2"@'7&*7B":".*,/"3,'9%&/"(3%8/"6'&$*+&"=/'-1"8*.3;/&/;)"8;*I
(/2"(*"&$%&"'&"2*/("-*&"=/8*./"%"3;%8/"*4",/('2/-8/"4*,"('-'(&/,"%8&'9'&)B""
C4"&$/,/"'("(3%8/"4*,"&$/"8$';2,/-J"&$/)"%,/"1**2"%&"+('-1"'&"I"&$/)"(&%-2"*-"&$/',"$%-2(J"
$/;3"/%8$"*&$/,".%7/"%"8*%;"=+87/&"%-2"%;;"&$%&B
!"
:("(**-"'&"'("-*&"%=*+&"&$/"3;%)1,*+-2(J"'&"8%-D&"=/"4*+-2"'-"*+,"3*;'&'8("%-2"(&,%&/1'I
/(J"=+&"C"8%-"'.%1'-/"'&"=/'-1"'-&/,/(&'-1"4*,"=*&$"%2.'-'(&,%&'*-("%-2"3*;'&'8'%-(B"C&"'("
%"8$%;;/-1/"&$%&"&$/,/"%,/"(*".%-)"2'^/,/-&"'-&/,/(&(J"%-2"6/"$%9/"9/,)";'&&;/"(3%8/"
I"(*"$*6"2*")*+"3,'*,'&'s/"3;%)0"a%7'-1"(*./&$'-1"1**4)"&$%&"%33/%;("&*"3;%)J"6$'8$"
8*+;2"%;(*"=/"4*,"%2+;&(B"Q;%)"'("4%-&%(&'8"'-"&$/"6%)"&$%&"'&"8%-"%33/%;"&*"%;;"%1/(J"1/-I
2/,("%-2"/9/,)&$'-1B
!"
a%-)"1',;("6*+;2";'7/"&*"=/"4%8';'&%&/2"'-"&$/"+,=%-"(3%8/n"4*,"/A%.3;/J"%"(/&"*4",+;/(B"
C&"'("'-&/,/(&'-1"6$%&"'&"&%7/("&*"%33/%;"&*"2'^/,/-&"1,*+3(B"l',;("%,/"3/,$%3(".*,/"
%4,%'2"*4"=/'-1";%+1$/2"%&"*,"2*'-1"(*./&$'-1"(&+3'2B"g/,)")*+-1"8$';2,/-"%,/"3,*I
=%=;)"-*&"(*"%^/8&/2"=)"&$/(/"7'-2("*4"&$*+1$&(J"=+&"%("(**-"%("&$/)"1/&"*;2/,J"&$/)"
%,/"$'-2/,/2"=)"*&$/,"3/,8/3&'*-("*4"&$/.B
!"
#/"/A3/,'/-8/"8',8;/("*4"3;%)"I"&$/"8$';2,/-"2*-D&"%;;"3;%)"&*1/&$/,B"
D>!!,;F
==PAGE:173==
D),$&,*.1N%!"#$%1)%()*%1)%$)%2)2*7#+&M.%27#(C%#,1%5"#$%1)%()*%-#&,7(%3)6*'%),/
!"
#%&/,"+(/2"&*"=/"%"-%&+,%;"/;/./-&"'-"%"8'&)J"=+&"-*6"'&"8%-"=/8*./"%"3,*=;/.B"C&"
$%("&*"2'(%33/%,"6'&$'-"F\"$*+,(J"%88*,2'-1"&*"&$/"*c8'%;"3$)('8'%-B"#/"8%-D&"%;;*6"
(*./&$'-1"2%-1/,*+(J"=+&"'&"%;(*"./%-("&$%&"(*./"&$'-1(".%)"-*&"*88+,"'-"&$/"
(%./"6%)"%("=/4*,/B"@$/,/"'("-*&$'-1"=/&&/,"&$%-"6%&/,"3+&&/,(J"=+&"(+8$"&$'-1("8%-"
(+22/-;)"=/8*./"%"-*I1*n"M$';2,/-"8%-"=/"('87"'4"&$/"6%&/,"'("3*;;+&/2J"*,"&$/"3%I
,/-&("2*-D&"-/8/((%,';)"6%-&"&*"$%9/"2',&)"8;*&$/(B"@*2%)J"6/"(//"%-*&$/,"3;%)"8+;&+,/"
I".%)=/"%"8+;&+,/"+-2/,"3,/((+,/B
!"
%4)5%1)%()*%&1.,$&3(%#%,..1%)+%5&'"%3)+%$".%*+<#,%'2#6./%
!"
@$/";*8%;"8*..'&&//(n"@$/(/"8*..'&&//("%,/"'-"2'%;*1+/"6'&$"&$/"8'&'s/-B"@$/)"$%9/"
.//&'-1("6'&$"&$/"8'&'s/-(J"6$/,/"&$/"8'&'s/-("8%-"/A3,/(("&$/',"-//2("%-2"6'($/(B
!"
#$/-"6/"(&%,&"8*-(&,+8&'*-"3,*>/8&(J",/1%,2;/(("*4"6$/&$/,"&$/,/"'("%"&,%-(4*,.%&'*-"
*4"%",*%2J"(&,//&"*,"(?+%,/J"6/"'-9*;9/"&$/"*+&('2/"6*,;2J"6$/,/"6/"&%;7"&*"&$/"+(/,(J"
=+('-/(("*3/,%&*,("%-2"'-(&'&+&'*-("'-"&$/"%,/%(B
!"
:&"&$/";*8%;"8*..'&&//(".//&'-1J"C"8%-",/./.=/,"%-)"6$*"$%9/"./-&'*-/2"
%-)&$'-1"%=*+&"3;%)B"C&".%)"=/"=/8%+(/"*4"6$*"($*6("+3"&*"&$/(/".//&'-1(B"@$/"
.//&'-1("%,/".*(&"*4&/-"4,*."GdvNN"&*"GWvNNJ"6$/-"&$/"4%.';'/("6'&$"8$';2,/-"('&"%&"
$*./"%-2"/%&B"T%.';'/("6'&$"8$';2,/-"3,*=%=;)"4*8+("3,'.%,';)"*-"(%4/&)"%-2"(/8+,'I
&)v"4*,"/A%.3;/J"3/2/(&,'%-"8,*(('-1"*-"&$/"8$';2,/-D("6%)"&*"(8$**;B"C"&$'-7"&$/,/"'("%"
2'^/,/-&"8+;&+,/"4*,"+('-1"+,=%-"(3%8/("%-2"&$/"3;%)"*-"&$/"(&,//&("$%("2'(%33/%,/2"
%"='&B"@*2%)J"3;%)"&%7/("3;%8/"*-"&$/"3;%)1,*+-2("I"&$'(",/f/8&("&$/"8'&'s/-(D"6'($/("%&"
&$/".//&'-1(n"&$/)"6%-&".*,/"3;%)1,*+-2("*,"-/6"/?+'3./-&"4*,"&$/"3;%)1,*+-2(B
!"
C"&$'-7"'-".*(&"3/*3;/D(".'-2(J"3;%)"'("(*./&$'-1"&$%&".+(&"=/"3,*&/8&/2"4,*."
/9/,)&$'-1"&$%&"8%-"$%33/-"'-"&$/"8'&)"I"&$/,/4*,/J"'&"6*+;2"=/"'-&/,/(&'-1"'4"6/"8*+;2"
1/&"%"8+;&+,/"=%87"6$/,/")*+"8%-"8*-9'-8/"3/*3;/"&$%&"'&"'("%;(*"(%4/"&*"3;%)"'-"&$/"
(&,//&(J"(&%',(J"$%-2,%';("%-2"*&$/,"3;%8/("'-"&$/"8'&)B""
!"
#/"2*-D&"(//"3;%)"*-"%"8)8;/",*+&/"*,"&$/"('2/6%;7"%,/%"I"&$/"8+,=('2/B"U-"&$/".*,/"
3,*.'-/-&"(&,//&(J"jS,,/=,*1%2/"*,":.%1/,=,*1%2/J"6$/,/"&$/,/"%,/".%-)"8$';2,/-"
%-2"(8$**;",*%2(J"'&"'("8$%;;/-1'-1"&*"1/&"3;%)"'-&/1,%&/2B"
!"
H/9/,%;"(8$**;("$%9/"*3/-/2"+3"&$/',"(8$**;)%,2("%-2"3;%)1,*+-2(B""
;)%()*%"#9.%.A2.+&.,6.%&,9)79&,0%$".%6"&71+.,/
!"
j*&".+8$B"#/"$%2"(*./"6*,7($*3("6'&$"(8$**;"8$';2,/-B"@$'("1'9/"(*./"'-(3',%&'I
*-"%-2"%-"+-2/,(&%-2'-1"*4"6$%&"&*"=/"8%,/4+;"6'&$B"5*6/9/,J")*+".+(&"=/"%6%,/"
*4"-*&"1/&&'-1"(&+87"&*"*-/"3/,(3/8&'9/n"4*,"/A%.3;/"'4")*+"$%9/"&%;7/2"&*"%"8/,&%'-"
1,*+3"*4"3/*3;/J"&$/',"-//2("%-2"6'($/("8%-"=/"9/,)"2*.'-%-&B"
!"
:"3,*>/8&"8%-"&%7/"+3"&*"GN")/%,("I"&$/-"&$/)"%,/"-*&"&$/"8$';2,/-"%-).*,/"%-2"&$/"
&,/-2"8$%-1/(B"@$*(/"6/"'-&/,9'/6/2"%-2"$%2"%"6*,7($*3"6'&$"3,*=%=;)"2*-D&"1*"&*"
(8$**;"%-).*,/"I"-*6"&$/,/"%,/"*&$/,"8$';2,/-"6$*"$%9/"&*"+(/"'&B"
C&D("%"(-%3($*&"*4"%"1'9/-"&'./B
D>!!,;F
==PAGE:174==
D),$&,*.1N%";)%()*%"#9.%.A2.+&.,6.%&,9)79&,0%$".%6"&71+.,/
!"
:4&/,"%;;J"'&"'("8'&'s/-"6$*";'9/J"6*,7"*,"1*"&*"(8$**;"'-"%-"%,/%"6$*"%,/"&$/"/A3/,&(J"
%-2"6/"-//2"&*"&%;7"&*"&$/."'4"6/"6%-&"&*"2*"(*./"1**2"3,*>/8&(n"2/3/-2'-1"*-"
$*6"=*+-2"&$/"&%(7"'("6/"'-8;+2/"&$/"&$/."'-"&$/"3,*>/8&(B"C&"$%("%"1,/%&"'-f+/-8/"
*-"6$*")*+";'(&/-"&*n"8$';2,/-"%,/"2'^/,/-&n"&$/)"$%9/"2'^/,/-&"'-&/,/(&(J"2'^/,/-&"
%1/(J"2'^/,/-&"-//2(J"/&8B"
C-"&$/"/-2J")*+"$%9/"&*"8$**(/"%"2',/8&'*-n"&$/-"(*./"6';;"4//;"'-8;+2/2J"6$';/"*&$/,("
.%)"4//;"/A8;+2/2"'-"&$/"3,*>/8&B
!"
@$/"3%9/./-&("*,"6%;7'-1"%,/%(".+(&"=/",/8*1-'s%=;/J"(*"/9/,)*-/"7-*6("6$/,/"&*"
1*J"%-2"6$/,/"&$/)"8%-"4//;"(%4/B"@$/,/"'("%"9/,)"='1"2'^/,/-8/"'-"3/,8/'9/2"(/8+,'&)B"
e*+"8%-"4//;"+-(%4/J"=+&"%88*,2'-1"&*"(&%&'(&'8("%22'2/-&("-/9/,"$%33/-B"X(3/8'%;;)"
&$/"2/-(/,"&,%c87/2",*%2("(//.".*,/"2%-1/,*+(J"=+&"4/6"%88'2/-&("%8&+%;;)"&%7/"
3;%8/B
!"
@$/"/A3/,'/-8/"&$/)"$%9/"*4"'-(/8+,'&)"'("('.3;)"-*&",/%;"'-",/;%&'*-"&*"&$/"4%8&"&$%&"
-*&$'-1"/9/,"$%33/-("'-"&$'("3;%8/J"=+&")*+"8%-"&$/-"%(7"6$)"-*&$'-1"$%33/-("
$/,/J"%,/"3/*3;/"1/-/,%;;)".*,/"8%,/4+;"'-"&$'("3;%8/"*,"2*"&$/)"%9*'2"'&0
!"
@$/"&,%c8"'("$/8&'8"'-"&$/"8'&)J"=*&$"&$/"8%,I"%-2"&$/"='8)8;/"&,%c8"I"&$'("./%-("&$%&"
=*&$"&$/"8$';2,/-"%-2"&$/',"3%,/-&("$*;2"=%87"4,*."+('-1"&$/"(3%8/"%("%"3;%),**.w"
@$/"(3%8/"'("%2*3&/2"=)"*&$/,(J"6$'8$"'("%"=%2"&/-2/-(n"&$/"8%,"&%7/"+3"&**".+8$"*4"
&$/"(3%8/B"
!"
C-"l,'^/-4/;2(1%2/"6/"$%9/"2/('1-/2"(*./"8+,=('2/J"6$'8$"'("6'2/,J"(.%;;"(?+%,/(J"
6$/,/".*,/"(3%8/"$%("=//-"8,/%&/2"4*,"3;%)B
!"
#/"2*-D&"$%9/"%-)"8$';2,/-"4+,-'&+,/"'-"&$/"+,=%-"(3%8/"I"/9/,)&$'-1"'("2/('1-"4*,"%"
.%-"6$*"'("%"GWN"8."&%;;B"
!"#$%&'%$".%-)'$%&-2)+$#,$%$"&,0%D)2.,"#0.,%L*,&6&2#7&$(%6#,%1)%3)+%$".%6"&7F
1+.,%&,%$".%6)-&,0%(.#+'/%
!"
5%9'-1"'&"2/E-/2"=/&&/,"'-"*+,"3*;'8'/(J"&$/-"'&"'(".%2/"9'('=;/"&$/,/"6';;"=/".*,/"
%&&/-&'*-"&*"'&"%8,*(("&$/".+-'8'3%;'&)"
!"
@$/"3*;'&'8%;"2/8'('*-("%-2"(&,%&/1'/("%,/"*+,"4,%./6*,7"2*'-1"3,*>/8&(B"@$/,/4*,/"'&"
'("/((/-&'%;"&$%&"'&"'(".%2/"8;/%,"'-"&$/(/J"-*&"*-;)"(//'-1"&$/"8'&)"4,*."&$/"8$';2,/-"
3/,3/8&'9/J"=+&"%;(*"+-2/,(&%-2'-1"&$/"8'&)"4,*."&$/"3/,(3/8&'9/"*4"*&$/,"1,*+3(B"
#/"8%-D&"7//3"(%)'-1"6/".%7/"+,=%-"(3%8/("4*,"/9/,)*-/J"=/8%+(/"&$/-"6/"/-2"+3"
-*&"&%,1/&"%-)*-/B
!"
R-4*,&+-%&/;)J"C"&$'-7"&$/"&,%c8"%-2"8+;&+,/"%,/"&$/"='11/(&"=+,2/-"*-"3;%)J"'4"&$/"
3%,/-&("3+;;"&$/"8$';2,/-"%-)6%)"%-2"2*-D&";/&"&$/."3;%)J"&$/-"%"(*;+&'*-".'1$&"-*&"
.%&&/,B"
!"
H*;+&'*-("%&"(&,//&"3;%-"8%-"=/"2'c8+;&"&*"(*;9/B"
!"#$%+*7.'%#,1%'#3.$(%'$#,1#+1'%1)%()*%3)77)5/%
!"
<%-'($"H&%-2%,2"u";'-7/2"&*"=+';2'-1",/1+;%&'*-(B"
!"
C-(&%;;%&'*-"%-2"(8+;3&+,/"%,/"%-"'-&/,/(&'-1"8,*(("E/;2B"Q;%)&**;(Y/?+'3./-&"%-2"
3;%)1,*+-2("%,/"(+=>/8&"&*"(&,'8&/,",+;/("&$%-J"4*,"/A%.3;/J"6*,7("*4"%,&"%-2"
!"
(8+;3&+,/(J"6$'8$"%33/%;"&*"3;%)B
D>!!,;F
==PAGE:175==
!/
#$$%&'()*
&+,
==PAGE:176==
<Q'"67)#.%*'
,--"*&./(*%0(1H02
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
!.0-0)!%4+(1"6'+<
/:,+A%0(D7#C+'.#,(#-:0#2,-.
3&44"*#
V$)%&,>)-61#@&9>%A)-)%*)-'&-+):%@9%1-)1>%A$)-)%8$@G:-)9%$19=%&0#%&-%*G12%:0-@9=%1'#)->8$&&G%$&0->W%V$)%
&,>)-61#@&9>%@98G0:)%8$@G:-)9H%'&80>@9=%&9%8$@G:-)9%*)-8)@6):%1>%,)@9=%,)#A))9%#$)%1=)%&'%XY4;H%#$)@-%
,)$16@&0-%19:%$&A%#$)2%@9#)-18#%A@#$%#$)%)96@-&9+)9#%19:%#$)%1-#)'18#>W%U::@#@&91GG2%#$)%=01-:@19>%19:%
&#$)-%*)&*G)%#$)%8$@G:-)9%@9#)-18#%A@#$%&-%1Z)8#>%#$)@-%,)$16@&0-%$16)%,))9%@98G0:):W%
5$%).'&
V$-&0=$%#$)%&,>)-61#@&9>H%A)%1@+%#&%09:)->#19:%[01G@#1#@6)%19:%[019#@#1#@6)%@9'&-+1#@&9%1,&0#\
K>,9:5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D(
!"
@$/"-+.=/,"*4"8$';2,/-"'-"&$/"(3/8'E8"%,/%B""
"
I"C-"&$/"%1/"*4"dIGN""
"
I"U&$/,"%1/(
!"
@$/"-+.=/,"*4"%2+;&("'-"&$/"(3/8'E8"%,/%B
!"
@$/"1/-2/,"*4"&$/"8$';2,/-"Z8$';2,/-"'-"&$/"*4"dIGN[B
!"
U=>/8&("8%,,'/2"=)"&$/"8$';2,/-B
!"
@$/"-+.=/,"*4"3/*3;/"='7'-1"%8,*(("&$/"%,/%B
K>,A5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D
!"
5*6"2*"&$/"8$';2,/-"'-&/,%8&"6'&$"&$/"/-9',*-./-&"*4"&$/"8'&)0
!"
5*6"%-2"6$%&"2*"&$/"8$';2,/-"3;%)0
!"
#$%&"2'^/,/-8/"'-"8$';2,/-D("3;%)"6'&$"%-2"6'&$*+&"(+3/,9'('*-0
E&0%70%6'-,4(#460%6,0F
6*#789&-5:8+'-
I9=$16)%<GW%4]H%
4X";%K^,)9$169%_
V$0->:12%#$)%4.#$%&'%()*#)+,)-
4C\;;%Y%4.\3;
V$)%A)1#$)-%>A@#8$):%,)#Y
A))9%,)@9=%>0992%19:%-1@92%
1#%1**-&`@+1#)G2%4.%:)=-))>W
(1#0-:12%#$)%4"#$%&'%()*#)+,)-
4;\3;%Y%4!\;;
(0992%A)1#$)-%1#%1**-&`@Y
+1#)G2%4X%:)=-))>W
!.:;&4'-58%;
<-@9>%a^-=)9>%b1:)H%
!!;;%K^,)9$169%5
V0)>:12%#$)%!;#$%&'%()*#)+,)-
4C\;;%Y%4X\;;
(0992%A)1#$)-%1#%4XY4]%
:)=-))>W
(1#0-:12%#$)%4>#%&'%78#&,)-
4;W3;%Y%4!\;;
PG&0:2%A)1#$)-%1#%4!%:)Y
=-))>W
==PAGE:177==
<Q'"67)#.%*
,--"*&./(*%0(1H03
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
'=2"+5(&0')
G(3:'60#H+'A7
<='&%984".*-8%&8-8*+-').4
V$)%1-)1%1-&09:%I9=$16)%<G1:>%@>%#-1c8N):%,2%81->H%,@N)>H%*):)>#-@19>%19:%*0,G@8%#-19>*&-#%d+)#-&%>#1#@&9eW%
P1')>%19:%-)>@:)9#@1G%1-)1>%>0--&09:%#$)%1-)1%&'%#$)%>[01-)W
?9%#$)%&,>)-6):%1-)1H%#$)%'&GG&A@9=%'18@G@#@)>%819%,)%'&09:\
(N1#)%*1-N
(+1GG%A1#)-%'&09#1@9
(#&9)Y%@9>#1GG1#@&9>%19:%19@+1G>
U%>80G*#0-)%G&&N@9=%G@N)%1%+&G)80G)
<0,G@8%#&@G)#
79)%>)1#@9=%>*&#W
:$"(-%#"*#.)+('%R6S"'(%T("66%6'
D)%,G)9:):%@9#&%#$)%)96@-&9+)9#H%1>%A)%A)-)%)@#$)-%>@##@9=%1#%1%81')%&-%&9%1%-&8N%@9%#$)%>09%Y%#$)%8$@G:-)9%
#&&N%9&%9&#@8)W%%
f%
U>>0+*#@&9>%1,&0#%#$)%)`*)8#):%&0#*0#W
f%
V$)%*0,G@8%#&@G)#%&9%#$)%>[01-)%A1>%&'#)9%0>):%,2%1:0G#>W%V$)%#&@G)#%A1>%9&#%0>):%1>%+08$%:0-@9=%#$)%
&,>)-61#@&9%&9%(1#0-:12W
f%
V$)%=01-:@19>%>*)9:@9=%+&-)%#@+)%@9%#$)%1-)1%>#1-#):%#&%9&#@8)%0>%1>%A)%>1#%A@#$%*1*)-%19:%*)9W
f%
V$)%8$19=)%@9%#$)%A)1#$)-%:0-@9=%#$)%&,>)-61#@&9%&9%V$0->:12g%@#%A1>%$)16@G2%-1@9@9=%'&-%1%>$&-#%*)-@&:%
A$@8$%+12%$16)%1Z)8#):%*)&*G)%G)16@9=%&-%9&#%8&+@9=W
!"#$%&#'$()*+$,"#$*-.#)%/,&*0$.1*,2$ $$
==PAGE:178==
'=2"+5(&0')
G(3:'60#H+'A7
K>,9:5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D
2>47-.?-3&)4&@=&%-
A7$%'+8B
2C47-.?-3&)4&@=&%-
384$%+8B
50+,)-%&'%8$@G:-)9%d1=)%XY4;e
!4
3"
50+,)-%&'%8$@G:-)9%d&#$)-%1=)>e
3.
CC
50+,)-%&'%1:0G#>
4!h
4X]
b)9:)-%&'%#$)%8$@G:-)9%d1=)%XY4;e
"%=@-G>
4C%,&2>
44%=@-G>
!X%,&2>
7,O)8#>%81--@):%,2%8$@G:-)9
(8&&#)->%19:%*$&9)>W
(8&&#)->H%>N1#),&1-:>H%*$&9)>H%19:%
,1GG>%d'&&#,1GG%19:%,1>N)#eW
50+,)-%&'%*)&*G)%,@N@9=%18-&>>%
#$)%1-)1
!4%1:0G#>
h%1:0G#>
K>,A5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D
2>47-.?-3&)4&@=&%
F&A%8$@G:-)9%@9#)-18#%A@#$%#$)%
)96@-&9+)9#%&'%#$)%8@#2
U%8$@G:%@9#)-18#>%,2%>@##@9=%&9%1%>#&9)%d>$1*):%G@N)%1%'-&=eW
U%8$@G:%*G12>%A@#$%1%+@GN%8-1#)%19:%@9#)-18#>%A@#$%#$)%>#&9)H%0>@9=%#$)%
8-1#)%#&%=)#%&9#&%#$)%>#&9)W
()6)-1G%8$@G:-)9%d.e%A1GN%&9%#$)%@9>#1GG1#@&9>%19:%>80G*#0-)>%@9%#$)%1-)1H%
*-@+1-@G2%2&09=)-%8$@G:-)9W%
()6)-1G%8$@G:-)9%d3e%R@=R1=>%,)#A))9%#$)%#-))>W
M@Z)-)98)%@9%*G12%A@#$%19:%
A@#$&0#%>0*)-6@>@&9
5&%:@Z)-)98)%A1>%:)#)8#):i9&%8$@G:-)9%A)-)%*G12@9=%09>0*)-6@>):W
F&A%19:%A$1#%8$@G:-)9%*G12
]%,&2>%&9%>8&&#)->%19:%!%,&2>%&9%,@N)>%d9&#%>0*)-6@>):eH
"%8$@G:-)9%>N1#)%&9%#$)%-1+*W
!%8$@G:-)9%>N1#)>%&6)-%#$)%@9>#1GG1#@&9>%@9%#$)%1-)1W
VA&%=@-G>%:198)%V@NV&N%dA@#$&0#%>0*)-6@>@&9eW
7#$)-%9&#)>
U9%1:0G#%>12>%#&%1%C%2)1-%&G:\%
89.,!:3-;%!*.!<.=5!30.-5>!?5!*5%!@5#A!:.-:5#-5&!B<5-!A.,!:#.''!%<5!#.3&>C%
V$)%1-)1%@>%$)16@G2%0>):%'&-%A1GN@9=%A@#$%:&=>%19:%1:0G#>%0>@9=%#$)%
*0,G@8%#&@G)#W%
U%G&#%&'%#$)%8$@G:-)9%A1GN%@9%#$)%1-)1H%$&A)6)-H%#$)2%>#@8N%#&%#$)%>@Y
:)A1GN>%A$)9%=&@9=%'-&+%U%#&%JW
==PAGE:179==
'=2"+5(&0')
G(3:'60#H+'A7
K>,A5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D
2C47-.?-3&)4&@=&%
F&A%8$@G:-)9%@9#)-18#%A@#$%#$)%
)96@-&9+)9#%&'%#$)%8@#2
VA&%=@-G>%dhY44%2i&e%19:%#A&%,&2>%d:@Z)-)9#%1=)>e%8G@+,%#$)%,@=%>#&9)W%U%
2&09=)-%=@-G%@>%81--@):%&9#&%#$)%>#&9)W%
V$)%2&09=)-%8$@G:-)9%G12H%>@#H%19:%*)#%#$)%>#&9)%d>$1*):%G@N)%1%'-&=eW%
79)%,&2%8G@+,>%1%#-))W
M@Z)-)98)%@9%*G12%A@#$%19:%
A@#$&0#%>0*)-6@>@&9
V$)%=01-:@19>%1-)%>@##@9=%1#%#$)%>N1#)%*1-N%19:%A1#8$@9=%#$)%8$@G:-)9%
>N1#@9=W%
U%+1G)%=01-:@19%19:%1%,&2%>N1#)%#&=)#$)-%&9%>N1#),&1-:>W%
U%')+1G)%=01-:@19%19:%1%=@-G%1-)%1#%#$)%>N1#)%*1-Ng%#$)%=@-G%>N1#)>%&9%1%
>8&&#)-W%
U%')+1G)%=01-:@19%19:%1%2&09=)-%,&2%-09%,)#A))9%19:%&9%#$)%@9>#1GG1Y
#@&9>W%
F&A%19:%A$1#%8$@G:-)9%*G12
()6)-1G%8$@G:-)9%$16)%,-&0=$#%#$)@-%>8&&#)->%#&%#$)%>N1#)%*1-NW%P$@G:-)9%
0>)%-&GG)-,G1:)>H%,@828G)>%&-%>N1#),&1-:>W%
V$)%2&09=)-%8$@G:-)9%0>)%#$)%@9>#1GG1#@&9>%#&%A1GNH%8G@+,H%&-%>@#%&9W%
V$)%2&09=)-%8$@G:-)9%1-)%@9#)-)>#):%@9%#$)%A1#)-%'&09#1@9W%
()6)-1G%8$@G:-)9%dXe%8G@+,%&9%#$)%,G0)%>80G*#0-)W%VA&%&'%#$)+%A)-)%
A@#$&0#%>0*)-6@>@&9%'&-%1%A$@G)W%
VA&%,&2>%A1GN%#$-&0=$%A@#$%1%,1>N)#,1GGW%
79)%,&2%G)16)>%A@#$%1%'&&#,1GGW%
VA&%,&2>%d4;%2i&e%1-)%A1GN@9=%19:%=1#$)-@9=%#-1>$W%
79)%,&2%@>%8-&>>@9=%#$)%1-)1%A$@G)%,)@9=%&9%$@>%*$&9)W%
7#$)-%9&#)>
j&-)%8$@G:-)9%A@#$%#$)@-%=01-:@19>%8&+*1-):%#&%#$)%&,>)-61#@&9%V$0->Y
:12W%
==PAGE:180==
<Q'"67)#.%*'
,--"*&./(*%0(1H04
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
'=2"+5(&0')
54+I0-7#C'%I
<='&%984".*-8%&8-8*+-').4
M)>8-@,)%#$)%1-)1%&'%/&GN)#>%*1-N%
:$"(-%#"*#.)+('%R6S"'(%T("66%6'
V$)%&,>)-61#@&9>%A)-)%:&9)%'-&+%1%>+1GG%$@GG%@9%#$)%+@::)G%&'%#$)%*1-NW%?#%=16)%0>%1%8G)1-%&6)-6@)A%&'%#$)%
*1-N%,0#%A1>%9&#%1>%$@::)9H%A$@8$%8&0G:%$16)%:@>#0-,):%&-%8$19=):%#$)%,)$16@&0-%&'%>&+)%&'%#$)%&,>)-Y
6):%>0,O)8#W%
f%
U>>0+*#@&9>%1,&0#%#$)%)`*)8#):%&0#*0#
f%
V$)%:1#1%A1>%9&#):%&9%*1*@-%A$)9%*)&*G)%A1GN):%*1>#%0>%&-%@9#&%&0-%k)G:%&'%6@>@&9W
f%
V$)%#@+)%&'%#$)%:12%+@=$#%$16)%,))9%#&&%)1-G2%:0-@9=%#$)%&,>)-61#@&9%&9%(1#0-:12H%1>%#$)%8$@G:-)9%
>#1-#):%8&+@9=%#&%#$)%*1-N%A@#$%#$)@-%=01-:@19>%1-&09:%44\;;W
!"#$%&#'$()*+$,"#$*-.#)%/,&*0$.1*,2$ $$
==PAGE:181==
'=2"+5(&0')
54+I0-7#C'%I
K>,9:5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D
1047-.?-3&)4&@=&%-
A$&'+8B
2'4-.?-<D4.=&%
384$%+8B
50+,)-%&'%8$@G:-)9%d1=)%XY4;e
3!
4C
50+,)-%&'%8$@G:-)9%d&#$)-%1=)>e
3X
4X
50+,)-%&'%1:0G#>
433
"!
b)9:)-%&'%#$)%8$@G:-)9%d1=)%XY4;e
4"%=@-G>
4.%,&2>
X%=@-G>
]%,&2>
7,O)8#>%81--@):%,2%8$@G:-)9
U%-0,,)-%,1GG%19:%19%?*1:W
5&9)W
50+,)-%&'%*)&*G)%,@N@9=%18-&>>%
#$)%1-)1
]%1:0G#>
4;%1:0G#>
K>,A5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D
1047-.?-3&)4&@=&%
F&A%8$@G:-)9%@9#)-18#%A@#$%#$)%
)96@-&9+)9#%&'%#$)%8@#2
V$)%8$@G:-)9%-18)%)18$%&#$)-%&9%#$)%*1#$W
V$)%8$@G:-)9%*G12%A@#$%#$)%'18@G@#@)>H%A$@8$%@98G0:)%1%8G@+,@9=%A1GGH%
>A@9=>H%1%=@19#%A&&:%8&9>#)GG1#@&9%19:%$@GG>W%
U%8$@G:%*G12):%@9>@:)%#$)%+)#1G%@=G&&W
M@Z)-)98)%@9%*G12%A@#$%19:%
A@#$&0#%>0*)-6@>@&9
V$)%09>0*)-6@>):%8$@G:-)9%A)-)%)@#$)-%$19=@9=%&0#H%A1GN@9=%&9%#$)@-%
*$&9)>%&-%-18@9=%)18$%&#$)-W
F&A%19:%A$1#%8$@G:-)9%*G12
V$)%8$@G:-)9%*G12):%A@#$%#$)%'18@G@#@)>H%,0#%#$)%&9)>%A@#$%=01-:@19>%A)-)%
)98&0-1=):%#&%0>)%#$)%'18@G@#@)>%,2%$16@9=%#$)%=01-:@19%*0>$%#$)+%&9%
#$)%>A@9=>%&-%>@#%A@#$%#$)+W
7#$)-%9&#)>
j192%:@Z)-)9#%*)&*G)%&'%1GG%1=)>%A)-)%@9%#$)%*1-Ng%>&+)%A)-)%N9@##@9=H%
&#$)->%A)-)%>@##@9=%19:%8$1##@9=H%19:%>&+)%A)-)%$16@9=%1%*@89@8W%
b)9)-1GG2H%*)&*G)%@9%#$)%*1-N%>))+):%-)G1`):W
j192%8$@G:-)9%A)-)%9&#%>0*)-6@>):%A$@G)%,)@9=%@9%#$)%*1-NW
==PAGE:182==
'=2"+5(&0')
54+I0-7#H'%I
K>,A5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D
2'4-.?-<D4.=&%
F&A%8$@G:-)9%@9#)-18#%A@#$%#$)%
)96@-&9+)9#%&'%#$)%8@#2
V$)%8$@G:-)9%*1-N%#$)@-%,@828G)>%19:%>8&&#)->%
VA&%8$@G:-)9%1-)%8G@+,@9=%1%#-))%
V$)%8$@G:-)9%1-)%-099@9=%0*%19:%:&A9%#$)%$@GG>W
M@Z)-)98)%@9%*G12%A@#$%19:%
A@#$&0#%>0*)-6@>@&9
5&%:@Z)-)98)%A1>%:)#)8#):i9&%8$@G:-)9%A)-)%*G12@9=%09>0*)-6@>):W
F&A%19:%A$1#%8$@G:-)9%*G12
V$)%8$@G:-)9%*G12%&9%#$)%O09=G)%=2+W%
V$)%8$@G:-)9%*G12%A@#$%#$)%>A@9=>%Y%#$)2%>#&*%#&%#1GN%#&%)18$%&#$)-W%
V$)%8$@G:-)9%*G12%A@#$%)18$%&#$)-%Y%&9)%8$@G:%2)GG>H%8%<5#5!3#5!.%<5#!:<$0(
&#5-D!A53<EC
7#$)-%9&#)>
V$)-)%1-)%1%G&#%&'%:-09N%19:%G&0:%1:0G#>%,2%/&GN)#>%$0>W%
<)&*G)%0>)%#$)%1-)1%#&%A1GN%A@#$%#$)@-%:&=>W%
==PAGE:183==
<Q'"67)#.%*
,--"*&./(*%0(1H0H
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
!.0-0)!%4+(1"6'+<
/:,+A%0(D7#?460?0(-#,(#-:0,%#A',+.#+,J0#K#-4#72:44+
3&44"*#
V$)%&,>)-61#@&9>%A)-)%*)-'&-+):%@9%1-)1>%9)1-,2%>8$&&G>%G&81#):%@9%5^--),-&%@9%#$)%#@+)%*)-@&:H%A$)-)%
#$)%8$@G:-)9%1-)%=&@9=%#&%>8$&&G%,)#A))9%"\3;%Y%]\4;W%
V$)%&,>)-61#@&9>%&9G2%@98G0:)>%8$@G:-)9%*)-8)@6):%1>%,)@9=%@9%#$)%1=)%&'%XY4;H%#$)%=01-:@19>%&'%#$)%8$@G:-)9%
19:%,@N)828G)->W%
5$%).'&
?9%#$)>)%&,>)-61#@&9>%A)%1-)%1,>#1@9@9=%'-&+%=1#$)-@9=%[019#@#1#@6)%@9'&-+1#@&9W%D)%A@GG%16&@:%8&09#@9=H%
)W=W%$&A%+192%8$@G:-)9%*1>>):%)#8WH%1>%A)%1-)%+&-)%@9#)-)>#):%@9%#$)%,)$16@&0-%&'%#$)%&,>)-6):%>0,O)8#>W
V$-&0=$%#$)%&,>)-61#@&9>H%A)%1@+%#&%09:)->#19:%[01G@#1#@6)%@9'&-+1#@&9%1,&0#\%
K>,A5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D
!"
<*/("&$/"8$';2,/-"3;%)"*-"&$/',"6%)"&*"(8$**;0
!"
5*6"8$';2,/-"'-&/,%8&"6'&$"&$/"/-9',*-./-&"*-"&$/',"2%';)"6%)"&*"(8$**;0
!"
5*6"&$/"8$';2,/-"%,/"7/3&"(%4/"4,*."&$/"/-9',*-./-&0
E&0%70%6'-,4(#460%6,0F
EF%%&=%.-58%;-3;.:&
a1=#6)O%3CH%
!!;;%K^,)9$169%5
/-@:12%#$)%h#$%&'%()*#)+,)-
;"\3.%Y%;]\4;
l1@92%A)1#$)-%1#%1**-&`@+1Y
#)G2%4!%:)=-))>W
EF%%&=%.-58%;-3;.:&-8*+-
G:H#8%+-3;.:&-
F19>%V16>)9>%b1:)H%
!!;;%K^,)9$169%5
V0)>:12%#$)%!;#$%&'%()*#)+,)-
;"\3.%Y%;]\;.
J@#%>0992%A)1#$)-%1#%1**-&`@Y
+1#)G2%4;%:)=-))>W
I$:+=&%#-3;.:&-J)%"@8%B-
'D7..:K-
(OmGG19:>=1:)%4;H%
!!;;%K^,)9$169%5
j&9:12%#$)%4!#$%&'%()*#)+,)-
;"\3;%Y%;]\;.
J@#%>0992%A)1#$)-%1#%1**-&`@Y
+1#)G2%4.%:)=-))>W
I$:+=&%#-3;.:&-J)%"@8%B-
'D7..:K-
(OmGG19:>=1:)%!]H%
!!;;%K^,)9$169%5
V0)>:12%#$)%43#$%&'%()*#)+,)-
;"\3;%Y%;]\;.
PG&0:2%A)1#$)-%A@#$%-1@9@9=%
>&+)%$&0->%)1-G@)-W
==PAGE:184==
<Q'"67)#.%*'
,--"*&./(*%0(1H0I
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
'=2"+5(&0')
LM%%0&%4#H'%I#1I4+0
<='&%984".*-8%&8-8*+-').4
V$)%1-)1%&'%&,>)-61#@&9%@>%@9%#$)%+@::G)%&'%5^--),-&%<1-N)9%A@#$%1%>@:)A1GN%19:%,@N)%G19)%18-&>>%#$)%*1-NW%
?9%#$)%+&-9@9=H%,)#A))9%"W3;YhW;;H%#$)%,@N)%G19)%@>%6)-2%,0>2W%V$)%*1-N%@>%>0--&09:):%,2%-)>@:)9#@1G%1-)1>%
19:%)9:>%1#%a1=#6)OH%A$)-)%#$)%5^--),-&%<1-N%>8$&&G%@>%G&81#):W%
:$"(-%#"*#.)+('%R6S"'(%T("66%6'
V$)%&,>)-61#@&9>%A)-)%:&9)%'-&+%1%,)98$%09:)-%#$)%8&6)-W%V$)%>*&#%A1>%1#%1%:@>#198)%'-&+%#$)%*)&*G)%
,)@9=%&,>)-6):H%+1N@9=%0>%G)>>%9&#@8)1,G)%
f%
U>>0+*#@&9>%1,&0#%#$)%)`*)8#):%&0#*0#W
f%
V$)%-1@92%A)1#$)-%+12%$16)%@+*18#):%$&A%#$)%8$@G:-)9%A)-)%#-19>*&-#):%#&%>8$&&GW
!"#$*-.#)%/,&*0$.1*,2$
$$
==PAGE:185==
K>,A5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D
G6.&)U(#$"(P#$(%T(D"-#"VQ"6
j&:)%&'%#-19>*&-#
<):)>#-@19H%>8&&#)-H%,@828G)H%>N1#)>H%P1-=&%J@N)>%:-@6)9%,2%=01-:@19>W%
V2*)>%&'%*G12
VA&%,&2>%A)-)%A1GN@9=%19:%*G12@9=%A@#$%#$)@-%l0,@Nn>%80,)>
U%,&2%A1GN):%A@#$%$@>%*G12%>A&-:H%A$@8$%$)%>A09=W
U%8$@G:%*G12>%A@#$%19%0+,-)GG1%0>@9=%@#%1>%1%A)1*&9%1=1@9>#%#$)%>@,G@9=>%
A1GN@9=%,)$@9:%$@+W%
U%8$@G:%19:%1%=01-:@19%*G12%+0>@8%A$@G)%:-@6@9=%#$)%P1-=&%J@N)>
7,O)8#>%#$)%8$@G:-)9%81--2
/@6)%8$@G:-)9%A1GN):%1G&9)%@9%#$)%1=)%=-&0*%XY4;\%'&0-%&'%#$&>)%A)-)%
0>@9=%#$)@-%*$&9)>%A$@G)%A1GN@9=W%79)%8$@G:%@9%#$)%P1-=&%J@N)>%A1>%
G&&N@9=%1#%#$)%*$&9)W%
l0,@Nn>%80,)>
U%>A&-:%
U9%0+,-)GG1%
U%#)::2
F&A%#$)%8$@G:-)9%1-)%N)*#%>1')%
'-&+%#$)%)96@-&9+)9#%
V$)%8$@G:-)9%1-)%o*-&#)8#):p%,2%#$)%>@:)A1GN%A$)9%A1GN@9=%#&%>8$&&GW%
F&A)6)-H%@#%@>%9&#%1GG%8$@G:-)9%#$1#%0>)%@#H%>&+)%8$@G:-)9%8-&>>%#$)%G1A9W%
P$@G:-)9%A1GN@9=%A@#$%#$)@-%=01-:@19>%1-)%*-&#)8#):%,2%#$)+g%#$)%=0Y
1-:@19>%*G18)%#$)+>)G6)>%#&A1-:>%#$)%#-1c8W%V$@>%1**G@)>%@9%+&>#%81>)>%
,&#$%A$)9%#$)2%,@828G)%19:%A1GN>W%
V$)%8$@G:-)9%1-)%6)-2%81-)'0G%@9%#$)%#-1c8H%19:%#$)2%8$)8N%,)'&-)%8-&>Y
>@9=%#$)%-&1:W
7#$)-%9&#)>%
V$)%A12%#&%>8$&&G%>))+>%G@N)%19%&**&-#09@#2%'&-%#$)%8$@G:-)9%19:%#$)@-%
=01-:@19>%#&%#1GN%#&=)#$)-W
'=2"+5(&0')
LM%%0&%4#H'%I#1I4+0
==PAGE:186==
<Q'"67)#.%*'
,--"*&./(*%0(1H0J
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
'=2"+5(&0')
LM%%0&%4#H'%I#1I4+0#'(A#8+N3'%A7#1I4+0
<='&%984".*-8%&8-8*+-').4
V$)%1-)1%&'%&,>)-61#@&9%@>%19%)`#)9>@&9%#&%F19>%V16>)9%<1-N%G&81#):%,)#A))9%5^--),-&%<1-N%>8$&&G%19:%
JGq=1-:>%>8$&&GW%V$)%*1-N%$1>%>)6)-1G%*1#$>%A$@8$%,&#$%*):)>#-@19>%19:%,@828G)>%0>)W%V$)%*1-N%)9:>%19:%@>%
:)G@+@#):%,2%1%,@N)%G19)%19:%>@:)A1GNW%
:$"(-%#"*#.)+('%R6S"'(%T("66%6'
V$)%&,>)-61#@&9>%A)-)%:&9)%'-&+%1%,)98$%&9%1%>+1GG%>[01-)%@9%'-&9#%&'%1*1-#+)9#%,0@G:@9=>W%V$)%>*&#%A1>%
>$@)G:):%,2%,0>$)>H%+1N@9=%0>%G)>>%9&#@8)1,G)%#&%#$)%*)&*G)%A$&%A)-)%&,>)-6):W%%
f%
U>>0+*#@&9>%1,&0#%#$)%)`*)8#):%&0#*0#W
f%
l)G1#@6)G2%G@+@#):%&6)-6@)A%&'%#$)%*1-NW
f%
l&1:%A&-N%1#%#$)%)9:%&'%#$)%828G)%G19)%+12%$16)%*-)6)9#):%>&+)%'-&+%#1N@9=%#$@>%-&0#)W
!"#$*-.#)%/,&*0$.1*,2$
$$
==PAGE:187==
K>,A5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D(
:R"'&)U(#$"(31#$(%T(D"-#"VQ"6
j&:)%&'%#-19>*&-#
<):)>#-@19>H%>8&&#)->H%,@828G)>H%19:%P1-=&%J@N)>%:-@6)9%,2%=01-:@19>W%
j192%8$@G:-)9%>@#%&9%#$)@-%=01-:@19>n%,@828G)>%A$@G)%#$)%=01-:@19%:-1=>%
#$)%,@828G)W
V2*)>%&'%*G12
U%=@-G%-18)%,)A#))9%#$)%=01-:%*&G)>
7,O)8#>%#$)%8$@G:-)9%81--2
()6)-1G%8$@G:-)9%d#A&%=@-G>%19:%>@`%,&2>e%A1GN%1G&9)%&9%#$)@-%*$&9)>W
U%=@-G%81--@)>%$)-%#)::2W
()6)-1G%&'%#$)%8$@G:-)9%81--2%#$)@-%=2+%,1=>H%A$@8$%#$)2%>A@9=%&-%N@8N%
A$@G)%A1GN@9=W
U%=@-G%A1GN>%A@#$%$)-%:&=W%
F&A%#$)%8$@G:-)9%1-)%N)*#%>1')%
'-&+%#$)%)96@-&9+)9#%
V$)%1-)1%@>%G)>>%#-1c8N):W%V$)%81->%8199&#%)9#)-%#$)%828G)%G19)%&-%*1-NW%
F&A)6)-H%#$)%,@828G)>%d1G>&%=01-:@19>%A@#$%8$@G:-)9e%828G)%&9%#$)%*1#$>%
&'%#$)%*1-NW%
V$)%8$@G:-)9%A)-)%9&#%*-&#)8#):%'-&+%#$)%#-1c8%1>%)`*)-@)98):%)1-G@)-W%
j&-)%8$@G:-)9%d19:%2&09=)-%8$@G:-)9e%A)-)%A1GN@9=%&-%828G@9=%1G&9)W%
7#$)-%9&#)>%
U%G&#%&'%8$@G:-)9%$&G:%#$)@-%=01-:@19>n%$19:>W%
'=2"+5(&0')
LM%%0&%4#H'%I#1I4+0#'(A#8+N3'%A7#1I4+0
==PAGE:188==
<Q'"67)#.%*'
,--"*&./(*%0(1H0N
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
'=2"+5(&0')
O*+A&0%377I4+0
<='&%984".*-8%&8-8*+-').4
V$)%1-)1%&'%&,>)-61#@&9%@>%1#%#$)%)9:%&'%#$)%b0G:,)-=%J2*G1:>%@9%'-&9#%&'%#$)%b0G:,)-=%>8$&&GW%V$)%>[01-)%@>%
19%)`#)9>@&9%&'%#$)%>8$&&Gn>%*G12=-&09:%A$@8$%,&#$%*):)>#-@19>%19:%,@828G)>%8-&>>W%V$)%>[01-)%@>%>0--&09Y
:):%,2%-)>@:)9#@1G%1-)1>W
:$"(-%#"*#.)+('%R6S"'(%T("66%6'
V$)%&,>)-61#@&9%>*&#%A1>%6)-2%8G&>)%#&%#$)%>8$&&GW%V$)%&,>)-61#@&9>%A)-)%:&9)%'-&+%1%,)98$%&9%#$)%>[0Y
1-)%d#$)%>8$&&Gn>%8&0-#21-:eW%?#%+@=$#%,)%*)-8)@6):%1>%1,9&-+1GH%)>*)8@1GG2%:0)%#&%#$)%#@+)%*)-@&:%&'%>@##@9=%
&9%#$)%>[01-)W%
f%
U>>0+*#@&9>%1,&0#%#$)%)`*)8#):%&0#*0#W
f%
V$)%+1@9%-&1:%A1>%,)$@9:%0>H%#$)-)'&-)H%A)%:@:9n#%&,>)-6)%#$)%+&6)+)9#%19:%,)$16@&0-%&0#>@:)%#$)%
>[01-)%d#$)%>8$&&G%8&0-#21-:eW%
!"#$*-.#)%/,&*0$.1*,2$
$$
==PAGE:189==
K>,A5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D(
!%*&)U(#$"(23#$(%T(D"-#"VQ"6
j&:)%&'%#-19>*&-#
<):)>#-@19H%>8&&#)-H%,@828G)H%19:%P1-=&%J@N)>%:-@6)9%,2%=01-:@19>W%%
V2*)>%&'%*G12
V$)%8$@G:-)9%0>):%#$)%>8&&#)->%#&%-18)%#&%>8$&&GW%
(&+)%8$@G:-)9%,@N@9=%0>):%#$)%#-))>%1>%19%&,>#18G)%8&0->)W%
VA&%8$@G:-)9%d1%=@-G%19:%1%,&2e%*G12):%A@#$%#$)%*16)+)9#g%#$)%=@-G%&9G2%
>#)**):%&9%#$)%:1-N)-%*16)+)9#>g%#$)%,&2%A1GN):%&9%#$)%:-1A9%G@9)W%
()6)-1G%8$@G:-)9%d1-&09:%4;eH%8-1AG):%0*%#$)%>G@:)-%&-%&9%#$)%>@:)W%
5&%8$@G:-)9%0>):%#$)%>G@:)%1>%@9#)9:):%,2%A1GN@9=%0*%#$)%>#1@->%19:%
>G@:@9=%:&A9W%
()6)-1G%8$@G:-)9%0>):%#$)%#-1+*&G@9)%19:%$@GG>%1>%1%-099@9=%G19)%#&A1-:>%
#$)%)9#-2%&'%#$)%>8$&&GW%
V$)%8$@G:-)9%>#1-#):%#&%-09%1>%>&&9%#$)2%)9#)-):%#$)%>[01-)W
()6)-1G%8$@G:-)9%-18)%A@#$%19:i&-%)18$%&#$)-%#&%=)#%#&%>8$&&G%k->#W
U%8$@G:%19:%@#>%=01-:@19%-18)%1=1@9>#%)18$%&#$)-%#&%1%>@=9W%
7,O)8#>%#$)%8$@G:-)9%81--2
/@6)%#&%>@`%8$@G:-)9%0>):%#$)@-%*$&9)>H%>&+)%G@>#)9@9=%#&%+0>@8W%
J1GG%d#A&%81>)>e
V)::2
F&A%#$)%8$@G:-)9%1-)%N)*#%>1')%
'-&+%#$)%)96@-&9+)9#%
V$)%81->%:@:%9&#%$16)%188)>>%#&%#$)%>[01-)W%
V$)%A1>%9&%,@N)%G19)g%#$)%,@828G)>%A)-)%,@N@9=%1+&9=%#$)%8$@G:-)9W%
F&A)6)-H%#$)%,@828G)>%A)-)%,@N@9=%>G&AG2H%19:%,&#$%,@828G)>%19:%#$)%
8$@G:-)9%>#&**):%'&-%)18$%&#$)-W%
7#$)-%9&#)>%
V$)%8G&>)-%@#%=)#>%#&%]%&n8G&8NH%#$)%G)>>%*G12%#$)-)%@>%@9%#$)%1-)1%d&9%#$)%
>[01-)eW
?#%>))+):%G@N)%#$)%>[01-)%A1>%19%1-)1%A$)-)%#$)%8$@G:-)9%')G#%8&+'&-#1Y
,G)W%
==PAGE:190==
<Q'"67)#.%*'
,--"*&./(*%0(1H0O
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
'=2"+5(&0')
O*+A&0%377I4+0
<='&%984".*-8%&8-8*+-').4
V$)%1-)1%&'%#$)%&,>)-61#@&9%@>%1%-&1:%A@#$%>@:)A1GNH%,@N)%G19)%19:%1%[0@)#%)9:%&'%1%-&1:W%V$)%>@:)A1GN%)9:>%
1#%1%8-&>>-&1:%A$)-)%+192%*):)>#-@19>%19:%,@828G)>%8-&>>W%b0G:,)-=%>8$&&G%@>%>*G@#%1#%#$@>%8-&>>-&1:H%A@#$%
#$)%*-@+1-2%>8$&&G%G&81#):%@9%#$)%8&9#@901#@&9%&'%#$)%-&1:W%V$)%1-)1%@>%>0--&09:):%,2%-)>@:)9#@1G%1-)1>W%
:$"(-%#"*#.)+('%R6S"'(%T("66%6'
V$)%&,>)-61#@&9>%A)-)%:&9)%'-&+%1%,)98$%&9%#$)%-&1:W%V$@>%+1:)%0>%,G)9:%+&-)%91#0-1GG2%@9#&%#$)%)9Y
6@-&9+)9#%Y%A)%+12%$16)%,))9%*)-8)@6):%1>%>&+)&9)%A1@#@9=%-1#$)-%#$19%>&+),&:2%&,>)-6@9=W%
f%
U>>0+*#@&9>%1,&0#%#$)%)`*)8#):%&0#*0#W
f%
U%,@=%,0>%>$@)G:):%$1G'%#$)%-&1:H%A$@8$%,G&8N):%>&+)%&'%&0-%6@)A>W
f%
V$)%8G&0:2%19:%-1@92%A)1#$)-%+@=$#%$16)%@+*18#):%$&A%#$)%8$@G:-)9%A)-)%#-19>*&-#):%#&%>8$&&GH%
A$@8$%+@=$#%$16)%@9r0)98):%#$)%1+&09#%&'%*):)>#-@19>%A$&%A1GN):%,2W
f%
V$)%8-&>>-&1:%@>%1%+@9&-%8)9#-1G%-&1:H%A$@8$%+)19#%+192%8$@G:-)9%A1GN):%*1>#H%,0#%A)%:@:%9&#%$16)%1%
8&+*G)#)%&6)-6@)AW
!"#$%&#'$()*+$,"#$*-.#)%/,&*0$.1*,2$ $$
==PAGE:191==
K>,A5:,:5CB(<LDB;C,:5<9D(
:R"'&)U(#$"(24#$(%T(D"-#"VQ"6
j&:)%&'%#-19>*&-#
<):)>#-@19H%>8&&#)-H%,@828G)H%19:%P1-=&%J@N)>%:-@6)9%,2%=01-:@19>W%%
U%G&#%&'%#$)%8$@G:-)9%1-)%-099@9=%@9>#)1:%&'%A1GN@9=W
V2*)>%&'%*G12
U%,&2%A1GN):%19:%>19=W%
U%,&2%N@8N):%1%,-198$W%
VA&%=@-G>%19:%&9)%,&2%1-)%A1GN@9=%&9%#$)%-1@>):%r&A)-%,):W%
7,O)8#>%#$)%8$@G:-)9%81--2
5&%&,O)8#>%A)-)%&,>)-6):W
F&A%#$)%8$@G:-)9%1-)%N)*#%>1')%
'-&+%#$)%)96@-&9+)9#%
V$)%8$@G:-)9%*12%1##)9#@&9%1#%#$)%@9#)->)8#@&9%,)'&-)%8-&>>@9=W%V$)%@9Y
#)->)8#@&9%@>%6)-2%#-1c8N):H%,0#%)6)-2&9)%d8$@G:-)9H%#$)@-%=01-:@19>%19:%
&#$)-%#-1c8%O1+>%81-)'0GG2%8-&>>%#$)%@9#)->)8#@&9eW
V$)%=01-:@19>%$&G:%#$)@-%8$@G:-)9n>%$19:>%19:%=0@:)%#$)+%@9%#$)%#-1c8W
7#$)-%9&#)>%
()6)-1G%d3e%8$@G:-)9%1-)%&9%#$)@-%*$&9)>%&9%#$)@-%A12%#&%>8$&&GW%
()6)-1G%8$@G:-)9%1-)%G@>#@9=%#&%+0>@8%d#$)2%1-)%A)1-@9=%)1-*$&9)>e%&9%
#$)@-%A12%#&%>8$&&GW%
E)>>%*G12%8&+*1-):%A@#$%#$)%:12%,)'&-)%Y%@#%A1>%8G)1-%#$1#%#$)%8$@G:-)9%
19:%#$)@-%=01-:@19>%A)-)%A1GN@9=%'-&+%U%#&%JW
'=2"+5(&0')
O*+A&0%377I4+0
==PAGE:192==
<Q'"67)#.%*'
,--"*&./(*%0(1H0P
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
="#(50'+($%1(,,0)!
E60%6,0F#4J#-:0#0(6,%4(?0(-#'(A#'2-,4(7
The enviroment
The actions
Play area facilities
1
Playground
2
Alternative
play area
3
Hilly terrain
4
Varied 
seating options
6
Public facilities
5
Installations
General facilities
Play actions
General actions
e.g. toilets
Using the 
play equipment
B
Balance walk
C
Climbing
A
Interacting 
with objects
E
Interact with 
other children
F
Running 
D
Walk the dog
H
Exercising
I
Walking 
G
Sitting
K
Biking
L
Active caregiving 
J
==PAGE:193==
<Q'"67)#.%*'
,--"*&./(*%0(1H021
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
="#(50'+($%1(,,0)!
!"#$%&'()*%+,
E
J
A
2
5
5
2
6
E
4
4
4
A
C
J
G
E
H
A
F
K
3
D
5
L
D
6
==PAGE:194==
B
C
G
K
A
L
K
K
2
1
3
4
K
5
4
4
4
4
A
C
D
F
B
A
5
5
I
L
H
K*
B
J
J
K*
J
<Q'"67)#.%*'
,--"*&./(*%0(1H022
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
="#(50'+($%1(,,0)!
-.*/'0,()%1/
==PAGE:195==
<Q'"67)#.%*'
,--"*&./(*%0(1H023
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
="#(50'+($%1(,,0)!
2311'41.()%1/(5/.*'(6(7*8#81+,(5/.*'
Walk the dog
H
Exercising
Walking 
Biking
Active caregiving 
J
Interact with 
other children
Running 
Interacting 
with objects
Nørrebro Park
Skole
Blågård 
Skole
==PAGE:196==
<Q'"67)#.%*'
,--"*&./(*%0(1H024
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
="#(50'+($%1(,,0)!
2311'41.()%1/(5/.*'
Nørrebro Park
Skole
Walk the dog
H
Walking 
Biking
Active caregiving 
J
Interact with 
other children
Running 
Interacting 
with objects
==PAGE:197==
<Q'"67)#.%*'
,--"*&./(*%0(1H02H
4;#$%&'%78#&,)-%!!
="#(50'+($%1(,,0)!
9:*+4'1#(5/.*'
Balance walk
Walk the dog
Walking 
Biking
Active caregiving 
J
Interact with 
other children
Running 
Interacting 
with objects
Using the 
play equipment
Climbing
Guldberg Skole
==PAGE:198==
!0
!0
#$$%&'()*
&+,
==PAGE:199==
Detailed plan 
for workshop with children
Activity
Time
Purpose
Input/output
Steps
Materials
Introduction
5 - 10 min
Introduction of the 
facilitators, project and the 
workshop - ensure that the 
participants know the 
workshop's purpose and 
why their participation is 
essential. 
Input: Powerpoint 
presentation.
Output: Comfortable
 
participants.
1. Present PowerPoint
 
slides one to four.
Each facilitator 
introduce themself.
Powerpoint 
presentation
Name game
10 minM
ake the workshop more
 
comfortable by getting to 
know the participants and
 
understanding the 
activities the participants 
enjoy. Ensure that the 
participants are in a 
creative mindset within
 
the topic. 
Input: Instructions, 
tand templates.
Output:
 
Nametags and
 
an understanding of
 
enjoyable activities.
Templates 
Pens
Play mind map
10-15 min 
Understand the partici-
pant's perception of play
Input: Questions on 
the topic of play.
 
Output: Insight on the 
topic play.
The participant has 2
 
minutes to place at
 
least one post-it note 
on each of the three 
questions - there is no 
limit to how many 
post-its notes the 
participant can place in
 
each question. They are 
allowed to write or draw 
on the notes.
Break
10 min 
Keep up the energy level 
and motivation for the 
next part of the workshop. 
Input: Participants are
 
low on energy.
Output: Energy level
 
up.
Make sure that the 
participants leave the 
classroom to prepare
 
for the next activity.
Questions
Post-it notes
Pens
1
*'>*+"(&0')
P0-',+0A#C+'(
Co-creation workshop
Co-creation workshop 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
Appendix no. 05 .2
%!C#$%&'%78#&,)-%!;!!
==PAGE:200==
Detailed plan 
for workshop with children
Activity
Time
Purpose
Input/output
Steps
Materials
Co-create section
30-35 minT
he participants visualize 
their ideas of play 
elements that they would 
enjoy playing on/with. The 
visualizations will be used  
as inspiration for further 
ideation. 
The participants will have  
to share their thoughts 
during the activity for us to 
understand what they  
think is enjoyable about 
their creation and play in  
general.
Input: Materials.
Output: Visualizations 
and creations of their  
ideations on play 
elements.
1. Introduction to the  
exercise and the 
materials available.
2. The participants are 
free to ideate and 
create within a timefra-
me.
3. The facilitators will 
ask the participants  
about their creations  
and their thoughts  
behind their creations - 
questions like:
How do you play 
on/with it?
What makes it  
enjoyable?  
4. Wrapping up with  
the participants 
showcasing their 
creations.
Scissors
Play dough
Cardboard
Paper
Pens
Colors
Glue
Wire
Scissors 
Templates for  
story boards
Small questi-
onnaire  
Energizer 
5 minK
eep up the motivation.
Input: The motivation 
of the participants are  
low.  
Instructions on number 
representations.
Output: Motivation 
level up.  
1. The facilitator 
explains the rules
Each number 
represents a action.
2. The facilitator says 
the different numbers, 
and the participants 
follow the instructions - 
the facilitator may also 
say jump or clap, etc., 
but this is not a  
command; the 
participant is excepted  
not to react. 
Powerpoint 
presentation
2
Co-creation workshop
Co-creation workshop 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
Appendix no. 05.3
%!C#$%&'%78#&,)-%!;!!
*'>*+"(&0')%
P0-',+0A#C+'(
==PAGE:201==
Co-creation workshop
Co-creation workshop 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
Appendix no. 05.1
Contact us: stewartsof@gmail.com or 53 34 33 73
Co-creation 
workshop with children
Target group
Time frame
4th grade at Skolen ved Søerne, Frederiks-
berg.  There are around 20-25 children in the 
class in the age range of 9 to 11 years old, and 
we expect that all who are present will 
participate in the workshop.
The co-creation workshop will be done in the 
lecture slot of supportive teaching (Understøt-
tende Undervisning), which lasts two times 
45 minutes in the timeframe 12.25-13.55 on 
a Thursday in late October or early November.
This workshop is conducted as a part of our Master’s Thesis at DTU, which is about integrating play into the city. The purpose 
of the workshop is to include children and their opinions in the development process of our project. The children will be 
included in creative activities that aim to support them children in the ideation process of their ideal elements of and for 
play.
Procedure
Materials
Materials include; playdough, crayons, paper, 
post-its, cardboard, pipe cleaners and more.
Expected outcome
Requirements
The outcome of the workshop is expected to be a large amount of 
qualitative data on the children's thoughts and models that can support 
our own ideation process. We expect a minimum of one model per 
participating child but have no requirements about its execution or the 
scale of it. Furthermore, we expect to gather the children's thoughts on 
what play is and what they most enjoy about play. 
We would like parental permission to collect data and take pictures of 
the workshop. It is required that at least one teacher or pedagogue is 
present while we conduct the workshop to ensure that the children feel 
comfortable and safe. We require that a classroom is available, with 
tables and chairs for all of the children and that the necessary technical 
equipment for presenting a PowerPoint is available. 
%!C#$%&'%78#&,)-%!;!!
*'>*+"(&0')%
E(0#C'30%
==PAGE:202==
Co-creation workshop
Co-creation workshop
A snippet of PowerPoint slides from the Co-creation workshop  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
Appendix no. 05.4
%!C#$%&'%78#&,)-%!;!!
*'>*+"(&0')%
H4F0%H4,(-#7+,A07
!"#$%&'$(')$
!"#$%&'$*#+)$
,-%*&+.
,-%*$(#&/0"#1$(23"$%$04'.%&2#
==PAGE:203==
?%WS6")#.%*(8%6X'$%-
?%WS6")#.%*(8%6X'$%- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
V$)%8&Y8-)1#@&9%A&-N>$&*%A@#$%CWU%1#%(N&G)9%6):%(^)-9)%A1>%8&9:08#):%&9%#$)%!"#$%&'%78#&,)-%!;!!W%?#%A1>%:&9)%@9%
#$)%G)8#0-)%>G&#%&'%>0**&-#@6)%#)18$@9=%pL9:)->#^##)9:)%L9:)-6@>9@9=H%LL_pH%A$@8$%G1>#>%#A&%#@+)>%C.%+@90#)>W
4"%>#0:)9#>H%:@6@:):%,)#A))9%4;%,&2>%19:%"%=@-G>H%@9%#$)%1=)%-19=)%&'%hY4;%2)1->%&G:H%*1-#@8@*1#):%@9%#$)%A&-N>$&*W%U%
#)18$)-%19:%1>>@>#@9=%#)18$)-%'-&+%/@G@*1%A)-)%*-)>)9#%#&%>0**&-#%#$)%8G1>>W%5&9)%&'%#$)%*1-#@8@*19#>%A@GG%,)%@:)9#@k):%,2%
91+)H%19:%1GG%'18)>%@9%#$)%*@8#0-)>%A@GG%,)%,G0--):%#&%*-&#)8#%#$)@-%@:)9#@#2%1>%*-&+@>):%'&-%#$)@-%*1-#@8@*1#@&9W%V$)-)'&-)H%
A@GG%1GG%#$)%*1-#@8@*19#>%,)%1::-)>>):%1>%,&2%19:%=@-GW%
51+)%#1=
J)G&A%1-)%>&+)%)`1+*G)>%'-&+%#$)%)`)-8@>)W%V$)%8$@G:-)9n>%91+)>%1-)%-)+&6):W%
,--"*&./(*%0(1I0I
5#*$"%0$6&%(.$%$4"%7'-'#.$4-2782.9:
;2&-$"%0$6&%(.$%$&%<'.$&262.9$%$"#&0':
;2&-$"%0$6&%(.$0126'&$=+712.9$3&%71#-2.:
5#*$"%0$6&%(.$%$8+--$7%/2.9$%$7#<2'$#.$%$9&''.$
04&''.:
5#*$"%0$6&%(.$4%30$1-%*2.9$8%0/'38%--:
5#*$"%0$6&%(.$%$"#&0'$6&%(2.9:
V$)%-)>#%&'%#$)%91+)%#1=>n%:-1A@9=>%1-)%:)>8-@,):%,)G&AW
b@-G%:-)A%1%>*@:)-%,)@9=%1#%F1GG&A))9%@9%(A):)9W%ss%b@-G%:-)A%1%+&9N)2%>@**@9=W%ss%b@-G%:-)A%1%>91N)%:-1A@9=W%
b@-G%:-)A%1%'&`%:198@9=W%ss%J&2%:-)A%1%-188&&9%*G12@9=%>&88)-W%ss%J&2%:-)A%1%+&9N)2%8G@+,@9=W%ss%J&2%:-)A%1%81#%*G12@9=%
>&88)-W%ss%J&2%:-)A%1%=&1#%:-1A@9=W%ss%J&2%:-)A%1%,@-:%*G12@9=%,1GGW%ss%J&2%:-)A%1%$1+>#)-%8&&N@9=W
1
2
3
4
6
5
34>#%&'%78#&,)-%!;!!
+"2.$&2%
L'?0#-'3
==PAGE:204==
?%WS6")#.%*(8%6X'$%- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
V$)%*&>#Y@#%9&#)>%'-&+%#$)%18#@6@#2
”Where do you enjoy playing?”
,--"*&./(*%0(1I0J
34>#%&'%78#&,)-%!;!!
At friends
Places where you
can be together
With 
others
’Klubben’
Outside
Home
School
library
Schoolyard
School
My room
Playground
Trampoline
Slide
Sandbox
Playhouse
Jungle gym
Swing
Field
Nature
Everywhere
My familly
My cousin
Vacation
Other 
countries
Skates
Skiing
Beach
Swimming hall
KU.BE
Eksperimentariet
Tivoli
Shooting
range
Jump hall
VR world
Street
party
Birthdays
Cosy
places
Sports
hall
Climb hall
Football ﬁeld
Sports
+"2.$&2%
H+'.#%*(
==PAGE:205==
L.MD%&84".*-N.%;'7.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
V$)%*&>#Y@#%9&#)>%'-&+%#$)%18#@6@#2W 
”What does play mean to you?”  
())&*+",-*./-0>/C
 Make 
things up
Imagination
Pretend
play
Fun with
each other
Fun
Having
fun
Entertaining
Playing 
with freinds
Friendship
Getting
friends
Playing with
the class
Social
Company
Play with 
everyone
Find a play 
everyone wants
Cooperation
Not becoming
enemies
Talk
Running
Movement
Outside
Games you
make yourself
Activity
Sport
Football
Basket
Climbing
Boksing
Fun for
the brain
Joint play
’Dåseskjul’
Hide &
seek
Prison
game
’BankeBøf’
E-sport
Reality
Play
Toy
F
U
N
S
O
C
I
A
L
I
N
T
E
R
A
C
TI
O
N
S
P
O
R
T
I
M
A
G
I
N
A
T
I
O
N
G
A
M
E
S
34>#%&'%78#&,)-%!;!!
+"2.$&2%
H+'.#%*(
==PAGE:206==
?%WS6")#.%*(8%6X'$%- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
V$)%*&>#Y@#%9&#)>%'-&+%#$)%18#@6@#2W
”When is play not fun?”  
,--"*&./(*%0(1I0O
Violence
People  
beat
People  
kick
Fight
Being pulled
Whenever the 
play goes wrong
Be alone
Boredom
Not fun
to play
Disagreement
Bad 
friendship
Not a
good play
Unwanted
play
Don’t know
what to do
People
get angry
People
leave the play
Being too
many in the play
Being left
out
Unfair play
Getting
hurt
Hard to
 
understand
Someone
destroys the play
Someone
teases
Friends don’t 
say sorry
Someone
say ugly things
Annoying
freinds
Enemies
People
being mean
People
being stupid
Only
one decides
People
argue
People
discuss
You want
something different
Someone
curse
Someone shout
very loudly
U
N
KI
N
D I
N
TE
R
A
CT
IO
N
B
A
D
C
O
M
M
U
N
I
C
A
T
I
O
N
V
I
O
L
E
N
C
E
A
B
A
N
D
O
N
E
D
D
U
L
L
34>#%&'%78#&,)-%!;!!
+"2.$&2%
H+'.#%*(
==PAGE:207==
L.MD%&84".*-N.%;'7.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
V$)%8$@G:-)9n>%8-)1#@&9>W%
())&*+",-*./-0>/O
?6")#.%*(2
3$,#445$.&,,&06$&0$/$1/)78$'"&9"$9/0$-#$
#+-)/9#4$/04:*)$./,$*02$;,$/<.*$(=09,&*0.$
/.$/$.*4/$%#04&06$+/9"&0#2$
!"#$%&'%()*%+,-./
?6")#.%*(4
3$>?@$/-.*)-.$"=+/0.$&0,*$/$)**+$'&,"$
.*/1$-=--<#.8$,)/0.1*),&06$,"#+$,*$/$
9*+1#,&,&%#$'*)<4$'"#)#$&,$&.$1*..&-<#$,*$
'&0$/'/)4.2$$$
!"#$%&'%()*%+,-./
?6")#.%*(3
3$A=06<#$65+$'&,"$4&B#)#0,$9<&+-&06$
*1,&*0.$/04$'&,"$)*1#.$&0$,"#$+&44<#$,*$
.'&06$/9)*..2$
!"#$%&'%"%&*'
?6")#.%*(H
3$9/+#)/$,"/,$C<+.$/04$."*'.$,"#$
/9,&*0.$*($1#*1<#$()*+$,"#$*,"#)$.&4#$*($
,"#$'*)<42
!"#$%&'%"%&*'
?6")#.%*(J
D/.#)$6=0.$'&,"$,/)6#,.$,"/,$)#/9,$'"#0$
-#&06$."*,8$-=<<.#5#$)#<#/.#.$/$+*0#5$
1)&E#$(*)$,"#$'&00#)2
!"#$%&'%()*%&*'/
?6")#.%*(I
!'*$.<&4#.$0#F,$,*$#/9"$*,"#)8$'"&9"$
9/0$-#$9<&+-#4$/04$.<&4$*02$!"#$.<&4#.$
#09*=)/6#$.1##4$9*+1#,&,&*0.2
!"#$%&'%()*%+,-./
34>#%&'%78#&,)-%!;!!
+"2.$&2%
/4K2%0'-,4(#'2-,6,-.
==PAGE:208==
L.MD%&84".*-N.%;'7.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
Appendix no. 05.10
?6")#.%*(N
G/4&*$9/).8$'"&9"$9/0$,)/0.1*),$*0#$
"*+#$()*+$.9"**<2
!"#$%&'%()*%&*'/
?6")#.%*(P
3$DHI@$9/.,<#$C<<#4$'&,"$%&4#*$6/+#.$
/04$$-)&97.$,*$-=&<4$/$"&4&06$.1*,$'"#0$
1</5&06$"&4#J/04J.##72$$$$
!"#$%&'%"%&*'
?6")#.%*(O
3$.9=<1,=)#$*($/$+/0J9)#/,=)#$'&,"$
"/04.$+/4#$*($.9&..*).8$'&,"$0*$4&.,&09,$
/-&<&,&#.2
!"#$%&'%"%&*'
?6")#.%*(21
3$C6=)#$+#/0,$,*$/00*5$1/..#).J-5$'&,"$
,"#$"/04.$)*,/,&06$/04$"&,,&06$1#*1<#2
!"#$%&'%"%&*'
?6")#.%*(23
3$+&0&/,=)#$,)/&0$,)/97$,"/,$,)/0.1*),.$
9"&<4)#0$.*+#$*($,"#$'/5$"*+#2
!"#$%&'%"%&*'
?6")#.%*(22
3$4)/6*0$.9=<1,=)#$,"/,$C6=)#.$/.$/$.<&4#$
/04$A=06<#$65+2$!"#$#5#.$/04$,"#$+*=,"$
<&6",$=1$'"#0$&,$&.$-#&06$1</5#4$*02
!"#$%&'%"%+,-.
34>#%&'%78#&,)-%!;!!
==PAGE:209==
!1
#$$%&'()*
&+,
==PAGE:210==
E6%#%#U-.*Y
,--"*&./(*%0(1J02
4]#$%&'%5&6)+,)-%!!
2?@AABCD%E?FC@E
I`*G191#@&9
4GCH?BFCIJB?K
,JIKLGJ%@J@M@C?
'AAFN?GCB?B@E
OIEO?IDE
:"3%&$6%)"6$/,/"&$/"2/('1-"2'^/,("4,*."&$/"3%9/./-&J"
6$/&$/,"'&"=/'-1"&$/"(&,+8&+,/J"8*;*,"*,"&/A&+,/B"@$/"3%&$"
'("&*"3,*9'2/"4//2=%87"&*"&$/"+(/,"/'&$/,"8*-(&%-&;)"*,"=)"
'-&/,%8&'*-B
@$/"3;%)4+;"/;/./-&"8*./("6'&$"&$/"%33/%;"*4"%-"%33/%I
,%-8/"&$%&"2'^/,("4,*."&$/"6/;;I7-*6-B@$/"4//2=%87"8%-"
=*&$"=/";'1$&J"(*+-2J"8*;*,("*,"3%&&/,-(B
P)"8,/%&'-1"%-"*3/-"2/('1-J"'&".'1$&"/-8*+,%1/".%-)"
2'^/,/-&"&)3/("*4"3;%)",%&$/,"&$%-"%"8/,&%'-B"
@$/"3%&$("8*+;2"/-8*+,%1/"1%./(";'7/"&$/"1,*+-2"'("
;%9%J"&%1J"=/'-1"8%&8$/2"=)"&$/";'1$&"*,"8*;;%=*,%&*,)"3%&$"
1%./(B
'-&/,%8&'9/J"+-3,/2'8&%=;/J"(*8'%;J"8*.3/&'&'9/J"8**3/,%&'9/
==PAGE:211==
==PAGE:212==
E6%#%#U-.*Y
,--"*&./(*%0(1J03
4]#$%&'%5&6)+,)-%!!
$BDO?%E?NBA
I`*G191#@&9
4GCH?BFCIJB?K
,JIKLGJ%@J@M@C?
'AAFN?GCB?B@E
4@I?GN@E
:"(&,'3"*4";'1$&J"&$%&"'("8*-&,*;;/2"&$,*+1$"'-&/,%8&'*-("%-2"
2',/8&;)"'-&/1,%&/2"'-&*"&$/"3%9/./-&B"@$/"'-&/,%8&'*-"
8*+;2"=/",/3/%&'-1"3,/((+,/"*-"&$/"(&*-/B
@$/"3;%)"'("(&%,&/2"=)"'-&/,%8&'-1"6'&$"&$/"(&/33'-1"(&*I
-/J"%"3,/((+,/"6';;"3,*9'2/"&$/"4//2=%87"&$,*+1$"&$/"
;'1$&(&,'3B"
P)"$%9'-1"&6*"(&*-/("-/A&"&*"/%8$*&$/,"'&"'("3*(('=;/"&*"
8,/%&/"%"8*.3/&'&'9/"/;/./-&B"C&"'("3*(('=;/"&*"8,/%&/"%"
;/%,-'-1"*33*,&+-'&)J"=)"&,%-(;%&'-1"&$/"%.*+-&"*4"/-/,I
1)"+(/2"&*"8,/%&/"&$/";'1$&"&*"%",/%;";'4/"/A%.3;/B"@$/";'1$&"
8*+;2"%;(*"'.'&%&/"&$/"(3//2"*4"2'^/,/-&"%-'.%;(B
x'-&/,%8&'9/J"x(*8'%;J"x8*.3/&'&'9/
==PAGE:213==
==PAGE:214==
E6%#%#U-.*Y
,--"*&./(*%0(1J04
4]#$%&'%5&6)+,)-%!!
$BDO?%,FJ@E
I`*G191#@&9
4GCH?BFCIJB?K
,JIKLGJ%@J@M@C?
'AAFN?GCB?B@E
4@I?GN@E
K'1$&"3*;/("6'&$"=+&&*-("&$%&"8%-"=/"&+,-/2"*-"%-2"*^B
P)".%7'-1"&$/";'1$&"'-&/,%8&'9/"%-2"8$%-1%=;/J"2'^/,/-&"
3;%)"*33*,&+-'&'/("%,/"3*(('=;/B"@$/";'1$&"8*+;2"%;(*"=/"
8*-&,*;;/2"=)"2'^/,/-&"%8&*,("%&"&$/"(%./"&'./B
@$/"3;%)"*33*,&+-'&'/("8*+;2"=/"&%1J"1+/(('-1"1%./J",%8/J"
4*;;*6"&$/"3%&$"*,"&$/"8,/%&'*-"*4"2'^/,/-&"8*-E1+,%&'*-("
.%2/"4,*."&$/";'1$&"=)";'1$&J"($%2*6"*,"3%&&/,-/2"/;/I
./-&(B
xC-&/,%8&'9/J"x+-3,/2'8&%=;/J"x(*8'%;J"
x8*.3/&'&'9/J"x8**3/,%&'*-
==PAGE:215==
==PAGE:216==
E6%#%#U-.*Y
,--"*&./(*%0(1J0H
4]#$%&'%5&6)+,)-%!!
2PBNJK%+IBJ
I`*G191#@&9
4GCH?BFCIJB?K
,JIKLGJ%@J@M@C?
'AAFN?GCB?B@E
4@I?GN@E
:",%';'-1"&$%&"'("&6'(&/2"%-2"8+,9/2"%&"2'^/,/-&"3*'-&(B"
@$/"8+,;/2"%-2",*;;/,8*%(&/,";'7/"%33/%,%-8/"($*+;2"
/-8*+,%1/"&*"(&*3"+3"%-2"3;%)"6'&$"&$/",%';'-1"'-"%"
4*,6%,2I.*9'-1"6%)B":"3%,&"*4"&$/"2/('1-"&$%&"
/-8*+,%1/("3;%)"'("&$/"2'^/,/-8/"&*"&$/"7-*6-"/;/./-&B
@$/,/"%,/".%-)"*33*,&+-'&/("4*,"'-&/,%8&'*-J"(+8$"%("$%-I
1'-1"*-"%-2"*+&"%&"'&J"8;'.='-1"&$,*+1$"%-2"*9/,J",+--'-1"
%"$%-2"*,"=,'-1'-1"*&$/,"*=>/8&(J"(+8$"%("&*)"8%,("*,"(&'87(B"
xC-&/,%8&'9/J"x9/,&'1*J"x(*8'%;J"x8*.3/&'&'9/J"
Zx8**3/,%&'*-[
==PAGE:217==
==PAGE:218==
E6%#%#U-.*Y
,--"*&./(*%0((1J0I
4]#$%&'%5&6)+,)-%!!
0C?@NIH?BQ@%=FINR
I`*G191#@&9
4GCH?BFCIJB?K
,JIKLGJ%@J@M@C?
'AAFN?GCB?B@E
4@I?GN@E
:"=';;=*%,2"6'&$"9%,'*+("(6'&8$/,("&$%&",/%8&"+3*-"'-&/,%8I
&'*-B
P)"'-&/,%8&'-1"6'&$"&$/"(6'&8$/,("&$/"4//2=%87"8%-"8,/%&/"
2'^/,/-&"3%&&/,-("%-2"./((%1/B
P)".%7'-1"'&"%88/('=;/"&*"/9/,)*-/J"&$/,/"'("%-"*33*,&+-'I
&)"&*"8,/%&/"%"8*..+-'&)"4//;'-1"%-2"%"4//;'-1"*4"3%,&'8'I
3%&'*-B":22'&'*-%;;)J"&$/,/"'("%-"*3&'*-"&*"'-&/1,%&/"2'^/I
,/-&"1%./(J"(+8$"%("8,/%&'-1"%"3%&$"=/&6//-"=+&&*-("=)"
&$/"3,/(('-1"%"8/,&%'-"(6'&8$B
x(*8'%;J"x'-&/,%8&'9/J"Zx+-3,/2'8&%=;/[J"
x8**3/,%&'9/
==PAGE:219==
==PAGE:220==
E6%#%#U-.*Y
,--"*&./(*%0(1J0J
4]#$%&'%5&6)+,)-%!!
0CE?IJJI?BFC
I`*G191#@&9
4GCH?BFCIJB?K
,JIKLGJ%@J@M@C?
'AAFN?GCB?B@E
4@I?GN@E
:-"'-(&%;;%&'*-"6$/,/"&$/"2/('1-"/-8*+,%1/("&*"'-&/,%8I
&'*-B"@$'("'("2*-/"=)"$%9'-1"%"=*%,2"6'&$"/'&$/,"*,1%-'8"
$*;/("*,"3;%&/("&$%&"8%-"=/"&+,-/2B
@$/"3;%)4+;"/;/./-&"'("$*6"'&"8$%-1/("&$/"/-9',*-./-&"
%-2"$*6"'&"8%-"=/"8$%-1/2"=)"&$/"3/2/(&,'%-(B"T+,$&/,I
.*,/J"&$/,/"'("%-"*33*,&+-'&)"&*"+(/"'&"4*,"$'2/"%-2"(//7"*,"
8$%-1/"*4"%33/%,%-8/B
@$/"'-(&%;;%&'*-"8*+;2"$%9/"&$/",/(/.=;%-8/"*4"6/;;I
7-*6-"/;/./-&("(+8$"%("%"8$//(/"%-2"8*+;2"$%9/"'.3;/I
./-&/2";'1$&"%-2"(*+-2"&*"8,/%&/"%"4//2=%87"6$/-"'-&/,I
%8&'-1"6'&$"'&B
xC-&/,%8&'9/J"x(*8'%;J"x8**3/,%&'*-
==PAGE:221==
==PAGE:222==
E6%#%#U-.*Y
,--"*&./(*%0((1J0N
4]#$%&'%5&6)+,)-%!!
*FCH@A?S
-I?@S
5@NEBFCS
,NF?F?KA@%,JICC@N
,NF?F?KA@S
(#)**@9=%>#&9)>
E&A%k:)G@#2\%(#)**@9=%>#&9)>
4W4
4>#%Y%X#$%&'%M)8)+,)-%!;!!
&#0)<
=.0$-
"T,'2"
@$/"8*,/"4/%&+,/(J"6$'8$"'("1%./("(+8$"%("&$/"1,*+-2"
'(";%9%"%-2"*=(&%8;/"8*+,(/("*4"2'^/,/-&"2'c8+;&)";/9/;("
($*+;2"=/"3,/(/-&J"B
C&"($*+;2"=/"2+,%=;/"/-*+1$"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"8%-"3;%)"
6'&$"'&"'-"%-)"6/%&$/,"*+&('2/B
C("&$/"8*-8/3&".*,/"%33/%;'-1"8*.3%,/2"&*"&$/"
*&$/,"&6*"=/'-1"&/(&/20":-2"2*"&$/"8$';2,/-"
'-&/,%8&"6'&$"'&"*9/,"%"($*,&/,"3/,'*2"*4"&'./0
@/(&'-1"'4"&$/,/"'("%-"'-&/,/(&"4,*."&$/"8$';2,/-"%-2"'4"
&$/)"/-1%1/"'-"3;%)B
'UV@H?BQ@
*NB?BHIJ%/G@E?BFC
1BCBMIJ%5BIUJ@%,NF?F?KA@%+@WGBN@M@C?E
M$';2,/-"'-"&$/"%1/"1,*+3"*4"LIGN")/%,("*;2B
&IND@?%DNFGA
&@E?
</(',/%=';'&)
T/%('=';'&)
g'%=';'&)
,NF?F?KA@
K**7(I;'7/
a*87I+3
#*,7(I;'7/
XA3/,'/-8/
Q,/&*&)3/
#/"%,/"+('-1"8*;*,/2"3%3/,"&$%&"$%("=//-";%.'-%&/2B"C&"
$%("=//-"8+&"*+&"'-"*,1%-'8"($%3/("%-2"6';;"=/"3;%8/2"
*-"&$/"1,*+-2B"
=GBJR%AJIC
2?NI?@DK
Q%,%;;/;
C&/,%&'9/
H+=
T+;;
Q$)('8%;
g',&+%;
@*"(8%;/
H8%;/2
2HFA@
2KE?@M
2HIJ@
1@RBI
+@EFGNH@E
M*;*,/2"3%3/,J";%.'-%&'*-"($//&(J"3*(&/,"4*,"
'-(&,+8&'*-(B
#/"/A3/8&"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"/-1%1/"6'&$"&$/"3,*&*I
&)3/"'-"%"3;%)4+;".%&&/,B
@$/"2+,%&'*-J"/A8'&/./-&"%-2"%8&'9'&/("2*-/"6$';/"
+('-1"&$/"3,*&*&)3/B
1@?NBHE
"XA@H?@R%FG?HFM@
&@E?%AJIC
#/"6';;"(/&"+3"&$/"3,*&*&)3/"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"8;+="T';'3I
3%J"'-"&$/"&'./"3/,'*2"4,*."GFvhN"&*"GdvhNB"C&"6';;"=/"(/&"
+3"-/A&"&*"&6*"*&$/,"3,*&*&)3/(J"&*"&/(&"%.*-1"*&$/,"
&$'-1("&$/"'-&/,/(&"4*,"&$/"8*-8/3&B
@$/"8*;*,/2"3%3/,("%,/"(3,/%2"*+&"*-"&$/"1,*+-2"'-"
2'^/,/-&"3%&$(J"6'&$"2'^/,/-&";/9/;("*4"2'c8+;&)B"Q;%)"
(+11/(&'*-("6';;"=/"9'('=;/"*-"%"3*(&/,"-/A&"&*"&$/"
3,*&*&)3/B
y+%-&'9/"2%&%"%=*+&"&$/"%.*+-&"*4"8$';2,/-J"&$/"
&'./"&$/)"+(/"'&J"&$/"/A8'&/./-&"%-2"'-&/,%8&'*-(B
*FJJ@H?
x
x
x
x
x
x
==PAGE:223==
!
.
*
.
V
)
+
(
7
.
)
Q
+
"
(
-
6
%
&
R
S
#
(
#
"
'
#
.
*
Y
,+'&'&3,"%Y%&"2&0)!
2
3
4
E+)U('RYY"'#.%*'
==PAGE:224==
E6%#%#U-.*Y
,--"*&./(*%0(1J0O
4]#$%&'%5&6)+,)-%!!
*FCH@A?S
-I?@S
5@NEBFCS
,NF?F?KA@%,JICC@N
,NF?F?KA@S
?9#)-18#@6)%J&1-:
E&A%/@:)G@#2\%J&1-:
4W4
4>#%Y%X#$%&'%M)8)+,)-%!;!!
&#0)<
=.0$-
"T,'2"
@$/"8*,/"4/%&+,/(J"6$'8$"'("=/'-1"%=;/"&*"3;%)"%1%'-(&"
/%8$*&$/,"%-2"8,/%&/"3%&&/,-(B"
C&"($*+;2"=/"2+,%=;/"/-*+1$"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"8%-"3;%)"
6'&$"'&"*+&('2/"'-"&$/"&/(&'-1"&'./"3/,'*2B
C("&$/"8*-8/3&".*,/"%33/%;'-1"8*.3%,/2"&*"&$/"
*&$/,"&6*"=/'-1"&/(&/20":-2"2*"&$/"8$';2,/-"
'-&/,%8&"6'&$"'&"*9/,"%"($*,&/,"3/,'*2"*4"&'./0
@/(&'-1"'4"&$/,/"'("%-"'-&/,/(&"4,*."&$/"8$';2,/-"%-2"'4"
&$/)"/-1%1/"'-"3;%)B
'UV@H?BQ@
*NB?BHIJ%/G@E?BFC
1BCBMIJ%5BIUJ@%,NF?F?KA@%+@WGBN@M@C?E
M$';2,/-"'-"&$/"%1/1,*+3"*4"LIGN")/%,("*;2B
&IND@?%DNFGA
&@E?
</(',/%=';'&)
T/%('=';'&)
g'%=';'&)
,NF?F?KA@
K**7(I;'7/
a*87I+3
#*,7(I;'7/
XA3/,'/-8/
Q,/&*&)3/
#/"+('-1"8+&I+3"8*;*,/2"3%3/,J"&$%&"E&("'-"=/&6//-"
&$/"$*;/("*4"&$/"./&%;"4/-8/"(+,,*+-2'-1"&$/"8;+="
T';'33%J"6',/("%,/";%)/2"'-"=/&6//-"&6*"3'/8/("*4"3%3/,"
%-2"&%3/2"&*1/&$/,B
=GBJR%AJIC
2?NI?@DK
Q%,%;;/;
C&/,%&'9/
H+=
T+;;
Q$)('8%;
g',&+%;
@*"(8%;/
H8%;/2
2HFA@
2KE?@M
2HIJ@
1@RBI
+@EFGNH@E
Q%3/,J"6',/"%-2"&%3/B
1@?NBHE
"XA@H?@R%FG?HFM@
&@E?%AJIC
*FJJ@H?
x
x
x
x
x
x
#/"/A3/8&"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"/-1%1/"6'&$"&$/"3,*&*I
&)3/"'-"%"3;%)4+;".%&&/,B
@$/"2+,%&'*-J"/A8'&/./-&"%-2"%8&'9'&/("2*-/"6$';/"
+('-1"&$/"3,*&*&)3/B
#/"6';;"(/&"+3"&$/"3,*&*&)3/"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"8;+="T';'3I
3%J"'-"&$/"&'./"3/,'*2"4,*."GFvhN"&*"GdvhNB"C&"6';;"=/"(/&"
+3"-/A&"&*"&6*"*&$/,"3,*&*&)3/(J"&*"&/(&"%.*-1"*&$/,"
&$'-1("&$/"'-&/,/(&"4*,"&$/"8*-8/3&B
@$/"F]"3'/8/("*4"&$/"3,*&*&)3/"6';;"=/"&'/2"&*"&$/"
4/-8/J"%-2"%"3*(&/,"6'&$"3;%)"(+11/(&'*-("6';;"=/"$+-1"
-/A&"&*"'&B
y+%-&'9/"2%&%"%=*+&"&$/"%.*+-&"*4"8$';2,/-J"&$/"
&'./"&$/)"+(/"'&J"&$/"/A8'&/./-&"%-2"'-&/,%8&'*-(B
==PAGE:225==
!
.
*
.
V
)
+
(
7
.
)
Q
+
"
(
-
6
%
&
R
S
#
(
#
"
'
#
.
*
Y
,+'&'&3,"%Y%&"2&0)!
2
3
4
E+)U('RYY"'#.%*'
==PAGE:226==
E6%#%#U-.*Y
,--"*&./(*%0(1J0P
4]#$%&'%5&6)+,)-%!!
*FCH@A?S
-I?@S
5@NEBFCS
,NF?F?KA@%,JICC@N
,NF?F?KA@S
E@=$#%*&G)
E&A%k:)G@#2\%E@=$#%*&G)
4W4
4>#%Y%X#$%&'%M)8)+,)-%!;!!
&#0)<
=.0$-
"T,'2"
@$/"8*,/"4/%&+,/(J"6$'8$"'("=/'-1"%=;/"&*"8$%-1/"&$/"
8*;*,"%-2"=/'-1"%=;/"&*",+-"4,*."*-/"&*"%-*&$/,B"
C&"($*+;2"=/"2+,%=;/"/-*+1$"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"8%-"3;%)"
6'&$"'&"*+&('2/"'-"&$/"&/(&'-1"&'./"3/,'*2B
C("&$/"8*-8/3&".*,/"%33/%;'-1"8*.3%,/2"&*"&$/"
*&$/,"&6*"=/'-1"&/(&/20":-2"2*"&$/"8$';2,/-"
'-&/,%8&"6'&$"'&"*9/,"%"($*,&/,"3/,'*2"*4"&'./0
@/(&'-1"'4"&$/,/"'("%-"'-&/,/(&"4,*."&$/"8$';2,/-"%-2"'4"
&$/)"/-1%1/"'-"3;%)B
'UV@H?BQ@
*NB?BHIJ%/G@E?BFC
1BCBMIJ%5BIUJ@%,NF?F?KA@%+@WGBN@M@C?E
M$';2,/-"'-"&$/"%1/1,*+3"*4"LIGN")/%,("*;2B
&IND@?%DNFGA
&@E?
</(',/%=';'&)
T/%('=';'&)
g'%=';'&)
,NF?F?KA@
K**7(I;'7/
a*87I+3
#*,7(I;'7/
XA3/,'/-8/
Q,/&*&)3/
#/"6';;"8+&"*+&"%",/8&%-1;/"'-"&$/"3*(&/,"&+=/(J"6$/,/"
6/"$%9/"'-(/,&/2"%"8);'-2/,".%2/"*4"8*;*,/2"3%3/,J"
6$'8$"$%("4*+,"2'^/,/-&"8*;*,(B"@$/"$%-2;/"6';;"=/"
.%2/"=)"%"(8,/6"&$%&"6';;"=/"8*9/,/2"'-"(/;4I2,)'-1"
8;%)B
=GBJR%AJIC
2?NI?@DK
Q%,%;;/;
C&/,%&'9/
H+=
T+;;
Q$)('8%;
g',&+%;
@*"(8%;/
H8%;/2
2HFA@
2KE?@M
2HIJ@
1@RBI
+@EFGNH@E
M*;*,/2"3%3/,J"3*(&/,"&+=/J"8;%)"$%-2;/(J"(8,/6("%-2"
8%,2=*%,2"=*A/(B
#/"/A3/8&"&$%&"&$/"8$';2,/-"/-1%1/"6'&$"&$/"3,*&*I
&)3/"'-"%"3;%)4+;".%&&/,B
@$/"2+,%&'*-J"/A8'&/./-&"%-2"%8&'9'&/("2*-/"6$';/"
+('-1"&$/"3,*&*&)3/B
1@?NBHE
"XA@H?@R%FG?HFM@
&@E?%AJIC
#/"6';;"(/&"+3"&$/"3,*&*&)3/"*+&('2/"*4"&$/"8;+="T';'3I
3%J"'-"&$/"&'./"3/,'*2"4,*."GFvhN"&*"GdvhNB"C&"6';;"=/"(/&"
+3"-/A&"&*"&6*"*&$/,"3,*&*&)3/(J"&*"&/(&"%.*-1"*&$/,"
&$'-1("&$/"'-&/,/(&"4*,"&$/"8*-8/3&B
@$/"&+=/("6';;"=/"(/&"+3"6'&$"%"2'(&%-8/"=/&6//-"/%8$"
*&$/,"%-2"%"3*(&/,"6'&$"3;%)"(+11/(&'*-("-/A&"&*"'&B
y+%-&'9/"2%&%"%=*+&"&$/"%.*+-&"*4"8$';2,/-J"&$/"
&'./"&$/)"+(/"'&J"&$/"/A8'&/./-&"%-2"'-&/,%8&'*-(B
*FJJ@H?
x
x
x
x
x
x
==PAGE:227==
!
.
*
.
V
)
+
(
7
.
)
Q
+
"
(
-
6
%
&
R
S
#
(
#
"
'
#
.
*
Y
,+'&'&3,"%Y%&"2&0)!
E+)U('RYY"'#.%*'
2
3
4
==PAGE:228==
E6%#%#U-.*Y
,--"*&./(*%0(1J021
4!#$%&'%M)8)+,)-%!!
*FCH@A?S
-I?@S
5@NEBFCS
,NF?F?KA@%,JICC@N
,NF?F?KA@S
?9#)-18#@6)%J&1-:
j)8$19@81G%'098#@&91G%*-&#&#2*)
?4
4!#$Y4X#$%&'%M)8)+,)-%!;!!
&#0)<
=.0$-
"T,'2"
@$/"3,*&*&)3/"-//2("&*"=/"%=;/"&*"$%9/"1%&/("&$%&"8%-"
*3/-"%-2"8;*(/J"'.'&%&'-1"&+,-'-1"*-"%-2"*^"&$/";'1$&B"
C&"-//2("&*"$%9/"%"8/,&%'-"('s/"%-2"=/"%88/('=;/"4*,"&$/"
&%,1/&"1,*+3"&*"+(/B
<'2"&$/)"+-2/,(&%-2"&$/"'-&/,%8&'*-"6'&$"&$/"(*;+&'I
*-0":-2"2'2"&$/)"(//"3*&/-&'%;"4*,"3;%)"'-&/,%8&'*-(0
@*"E1+,/"*+&"'4"&$/"(*;+&'*-"8*+;2"7//3"&$/"8$';2,/-"
/-&/,&%'-/2B
'UV@H?BQ@
*NB?BHIJ%/G@E?BFC
1BCBMIJ%5BIUJ@%,NF?F?KA@%+@WGBN@M@C?E
@$/"4*+,&$"1,%2/"%&"H7*;/,-/"9/2"HS/-B
&IND@?%DNFGA
&@E?
</(',/%=';'&)
T/%('=';'&)
g'%=';'&)
,NF?F?KA@
K**7(I;'7/
a*87I+3
#*,7(I;'7/
XA3/,'/-8/
Q,/&*&)3/
K%(/,8+&"&$/"a<T"=*%,2"'-&*"3'/8/(J"&$/-"3+ss;/"'&"
&*1/&$/,"%-2"1;+/"'&B":;+.'-'+."4*';"&*",/f/8&"&$/";'1$&"
%-2"KX<I(&,'3"=/&6//-"&$/",*6("$*;2'-1"&$/"1%&/(B"
=GBJR%AJIC
2?NI?@DK
Q%,%;;/;
C&/,%&'9/
H+=
T+;;
Q$)('8%;
g',&+%;
@*"(8%;/
H8%;/2
2HFA@
2KE?@M
2HIJ@
1@RBI
+@EFGNH@E
a<TJ"KX<I(&,'3J"%;+.'-+."4*';J"%-2"6**21;+/B
Q,**4"*4"8*-8/3&B
@$/"2/1,//"*4"/-&/,&%'-./-&J"6$/&$/,"'&"&$/"+(/"
6%("'-&+&'9/"%-2"&'./"(3/-2"'-&/,%8&'-1B
1@?NBHE
"XA@H?@R%FG?HFM@
&@E?%AJIC
@$/"&/(&"6%("8*-2+8&/2"*-"&$/"FN&$"*4"</8/.=/,J"
2+,'-1"%"<%-'($"8;%((J"6'&$"&$/"4*+,&$"1,%2/J"3,/9'*+(;)"
&/(&/2B""
y+%;'&'9/"2%&%"%-2"4//2=%87"*-"&$/"8*-8/3&B
*FJJ@H?
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
==PAGE:229==
,+'&'&3,"%Y%&"2&0)!
==PAGE:230==
,--"*&./(*%0((1J022
E6%#%#U-.*Y
43#$%&'%M)8)+,)-%!!
*FCH@A?S
-I?@S
5@NEBFCS
,NF?F?KA@%,JICC@N
,NF?F?KA@S
?9#)-18#@6)%J&1-:
M@=@#1G%b1+)%<-@98@*G)>%<-&#&2*)
4
43#$Y4X#$%&'%M)8)+,)-%!;!!
&#0)<
=.0$-
"T,'2"
@$/"3,*&*&)3/"$%2"&*"3,*3/,;)"4+-8&'*-J"$%9/"&$/"
%(&$/&'8"%33/%,%-8/"*4"%"1%./J"%-2"3,*9'2/"4//2=%87B
C4"&$/"1%./(".%2/"(/-(/"'-"&$/"8*-(&/;;%&'*-0
@*"E1+,/"*+&"'4"&$/"1%./"3,'-8'3;/("6/,/"/-&/,&%'I
-'-1"&*"&$/"8$';2,/-
'UV@H?BQ@
*NB?BHIJ%/G@E?BFC
1BCBMIJ%5BIUJ@%,NF?F?KA@%+@WGBN@M@C?E
@$/"4*+,&$"1,%2/"%&"H7*;/,-/"9/2"HS/-B
&IND@?%DNFGA
&@E?
</(',/%=';'&)
T/%('=';'&)
g'%=';'&)
,NF?F?KA@
K**7(I;'7/
a*87I+3
#*,7(I;'7/
XA3/,'/-8/
Q,/&*&)3/
@$/"3,*&*&)3/"6%("8,/%&/2"'-"T'1.%B
=GBJR%AJIC
2?NI?@DK
Q%,%;;/;
C&/,%&'9/
H+=
T+;;
Q$)('8%;
g',&+%;
@*"(8%;/
H8%;/2
2HFA@
2KE?@M
2HIJ@
1@RBI
+@EFGNH@E
T'1.%n":"RzI3,*&*&)3'-1"&**;B
Q,**4"*4"8*-8/3&B
C4"&$/"1%./"3,'-8'3;/("6/,/"'-&+'&'9/"%-2"/-&/,&%'I
-'-1"4*,"&$/"8$';2,/-B
1@?NBHE
"XA@H?@R%FG?HFM@
&@E?%AJIC
@$/"&/(&"6%("8*-2+8&/2"*-"&$/"FN&$"*4"</8/.=/,J"
2+,'-1"%"<%-'($"8;%((J"6'&$"&$/"4*+,&$"1,%2/J"3,/9'*+(;)"
&/(&/2B""
T*,"&$/"&/(&"%"8*.3+&/,"%-2".*+(/"6%("-//2/2B
y+%;'&'9/"2%&%"%-2"4//2=%87"*-"&$/"8*-8/3&B
*FJJ@H?
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
==PAGE:231==
,+'&'&3,"%Y%&"2&0)!
