==PAGE:1==
 
U N I V E R S I T Y  O F  C O P E N H A G E N  
F A C U L T Y  O F  H E A L T H  A N D  M E D I C A L  S C I E N C E S  
 
==PAGE:2==
Author
Louis Lech Nissen, BSc Eng, Technical University of Denmark & University of Copenhagen
Supervisors
Ivan Richter Vogelius, Professor of Clinical Oncology, Medical Physicist, PhD, Dr Med, Dept.
of Oncology, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen.
Flemming Littrup Andersen, PhD, Associate Professor, Lead Computer Scientist, Dept. of Clin-
ical Physiology, Nuclear Medicine & PET, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen.
Censor
Faisal Mahmood, PhD, Associate Professor, Department of Clinical Research, University of
Southern Denmark
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
University of Copenhagen
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences
Blegdamsvej 3B,
2200 København N, Denmark
Department of Oncology
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen
Blegdamsvej 9
2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Purpose
Cancer is commonly treated with external beam radiotherapy (RT). With RT,
it is essential to accurately deliver the radiation dose in order to obtain disease control and
minimize toxicity. Recently, adaptive RT (ART) has gained significant interest due to the abil-
ity to adapt the treatment to the daily anatomy. This thesis aims to develop and evaluate a
pseudo-online ART algorithm in which displacement vector fields (DVFs) are used to predict
the daily CBCT image allowing for in-advance calculation and assessment of the treatment plan.
Methods
The study indcluded 17 patients receiving RT as treatment for head and neck
cancer. Prior to treatment a planning CT (pCT) was conducted and a replanning CT (rCT)
was performed for eight patients during treatment. A cone beam CT (CBCT) was acquired for
all treatment fractions. The planning CTs (or rCTs) were registered to the subsequent CBCTs
using affine and deformable image registration. Registration was conducted via Advanced Nor-
malization Tools (ANTs). A comparison between provided ANACONDA-masks and generated
ANTs-masks were conducted in terms of Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) and maximum Haus-
dorff distance (HD) as well as qualitatively by a visual inspection.
Prediction of image and mask volumes were conducted by applying a predicted DVF to the latest
image. DVFs were predicted using simple exponential smoothing (SES). The predictive ability
of the algorithm was evaluated using mean absolute error (MAE), mean error (ME) and DSC.
A comparison between the prediction algorithm and use of the prior days image was performed.
Results
Quantitative and qualitative differences between the ANACONDA-masks and
ANTs-mask were observed.
The mean DSC and mean HD were 0.879 ± 0.059 and 5.92 ±
6.61 mm, respectively. The predicted masks compared to the ground truth masks resulted in
an average DSC of 0.929 ± 0.028. The algorithm achieved an average MAE and average ME
of 49.1 ± 14.3 HU and -15.4 ± 16.9 HU when comparing predicted image volumes with the
respective ground truth. Comparing predicted and prior days masks to the ground truth, the
DSC of prior days masks (0.938 ± 0.023) showed a significant increase in predictive ability (p
= 0.03, Wilcoxon signed-rank test).
Conclusion
The developed algorithm demonstrates feasibility of using SES to predict DVFs
as well as CT image and mask volumes with acceptable results. Hence, daily pseudo-online
ART is possible. However, using the prior days image results in significantly higher DSCs, thus,
potential clinical implementation requires further development and seems far-fetched.
==PAGE:4==
Resum´e
Form˚al
Cancer behandles ofte med ekstern str˚aleterapi. For at opn˚a sygdomskontrol og
minimere uønskede bivirkninger, er det essentielt at levere str˚aledosen med s˚a høj præcision som
muligt. Adaptiv str˚aleterapi (AST) har i de senere ˚ar f˚aet stor opmærksomhed grundet mu-
ligheden for at tilpasse behandingen til patientens anatomi p˚a daglig basis. Form˚alet med denne
specialeafhandling er at udvikle og evaluere en pseudo-online AST algoritme, som p˚a baggrund
af forskydningsvektorfelter (eng: displacement vector fields (DVFs)) kan prædiktere daglige cone
beam CT (CBCT) billeder og tumor masker. Via prædikterede billeder kan tilpassede behan-
dlingsplaner genereres og kvalitetssikres inden patientens ankomst.
Metode
Studiet inkluderede 17 patienter diagnosticeret med hoved-hals kræft og ordineret
str˚aleterapi som behandling.
Inden behandling blev der foretaget planlægnings-CT (pCT)
billeder og otte patienter fik foretaget et genplanlægnings-CT (genCT) billede under behan-
dlingen.
Cone beam CT (CBCT) billeder blev taget ved alle fraktioner.
Ved brug af affin
og deform billedregistrering, blev pCT (eller genCT) billederne registreret til de efterfølgende
CBCT billeder. Registrering blev udført med Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTs) software.
Tumor masker genereret med ANACONDA-algoritmen blev stillet til r˚adighed for dette projekt
og ANTs-makser blev generet i projektet. Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) og den maksimale
Hausdorff distance (HD) blev udregnet mellem maskerne.
Prædiktion af billeder og tilhørende masker foregik ved at deformere det seneste billede med det
prædikterede DVF. Til at prædiktere DVFs blev simple exponentiel smoothing (SES) anvendt.
Mean absolute error (MAE), mean error (ME) og DSC blev brugt til at evaluere algoritmens
prædikative egenskaber. Effekten af at bruge det prædikterede billede versus det forudg˚aende
billede blev undersøgt.
Resultater
B˚ade kvantitative og kvalitative forskelle mellem ANACONDA- og ANTs-
maskerne blev observeret. Den gennemsnitlige DSC var 0.879 ± 0.059 og gennemsnitlige HD
fundet til 5.92 ± 6.61 mm. En sammenligning mellem de prædikterede masker og ground truth-
maskerne viste i gennemsnit en DSC p˚a 0.929 ± 0.028 samt gennemsnitlige MAE og ME p˚a
49.1 ± 14.3 HU og -15.4 ± 16.9 HU ved sammenligning af de præditerede billeder og ground
truth-billederne. Brugen af masken fra forudg˚aende billede viste en signifikant bedre DSC (0.938
± 0.023) end den prædikterede maske (p = 0.03, Wilcoxon signed-rank test).
Konklusion
Den udviklede algoritme, og evaluering heraf, demonsterer muligheden for at
prædiktere DVFs ved brug af SES. Algoritmen prædikterer billeder og masker med en acceptabel
præcision. Dermed vises muligheden for daglig pseudo-online ART. P˚a trods af dette, er brugen
af forudg˚aende billedes maske signifikant mere sammenligneligt med ground truth-masken end
ved brugen af de prædikterede billeders masker. Derfor bør algoritmen forbedres inden potentiel
klinisk implementation.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was conducted at the Department of Oncology at Rigshospitalet, Univer-
sity of Copenhagen in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in
Biomedical Engineering. The degree is to be obtained from the Technical University of Denmark
in collaboration with the University of Copenhagen.
In this project, an algorithm was developed with the aim of predicting medical images and asso-
ciated tumor masks. The purpose was to enable daily pseudo-online adaptive radiotherapy for
in-advance calculations of a treatment plan.
The workload of this thesis was 35 ECTS points and the work was performed from August
2022 to February 2023. The thesis is directed readers of similar or higher educational level and
background.
Supervisors
Ivan Richter Vogelius, Professor of Clinical Oncology, Medical Physicist, PhD, Dr Med, Dept.
of Oncology, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen.
Flemming Littrup Andersen, PhD, Associate Professor, Lead Computer Scientist, Dept. of Clin-
ical Physiology, Nuclear Medicine & PET, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen.
Censor
Faisal Mahmood, PhD, Associate Professor, Department of Clinical Research, University of
Southern Denmark
Submission date: February 1st 2023
Examination date: February 8th 2023
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest appreciation to my wonderful supervisors Ivan Richter Vo-
gelius and Flemming Littrup Andersen. Both of you have truly provided competent guidance
and supervision. Thank you both for having open doors, always being willing to discuss my
work and answer any questions I might have had.
Thanks to Dr.
Robert Jeraj and Dr.
Manju Sharma for providing an incredibly organized
dataset. Also, thanks to Luciano Rivetti for early introduction to the dataset.
Thanks to everyone at the Department of Oncology for daily inspiration and comfortable com-
pany during the period of writing this thesis.
Finally, thank you very much to my beloved Cathrine and my family who have provided emo-
tional support throughout this process.
Thanks to all of you and I wish you the best in the future.
- Louis
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms and Abbreviations
ANACONDA
Anatomically Constrained Deformation Algorithm
ANTs
Advanced Normalization Tools
ART
Adaptive Radiotherapy
CBCT
Cone Beam Computed Tomography
CT
Computed Tomography
CTV
Clinical Target Volume
DIR
Deformable Image Registration
DL
Deep Learning
DSC
Dice Similarity Coefficient
DVF
Displacement Vector Field
Fx
Fraction
GTV
Gross Tumor Volume
HD
Hausdorff Distance
HN
Head and Neck
HU
Hounsfield Unit
IGRT
Image-Guide Radiotherapy
IMRT
Intensity-modulated Radiotherapy
IR
Image Registration
kV
Kilovoltage
Linac
Linear Accelerator
MAE
Mean Absolute Error
ME
Mean Error
MI
Mutual Information
MLCs
Multileaf collimators
MR
Magnetic Resonance
MV
Megavoltage
OARs
Organs at risk
pCT
Planning Computed Tomography
PI
Predictability Index
PTV
Planning Target Volume
rCT
Replanning Computed Tomography
regCT
Registered Computed Tomography
regCTGT
Ground Truth Registered Computed Tomography
regCTpred
Predicted Registered Computed Tomography
RT
Radiotherapy
SES
Simple Exponential Smoothing
SyN
Symmetric Normalization
==PAGE:8==
Symbols
Deformable Image Registration
D
Distance
I
Image I
J
Image J
L
Velocity field regularizer
Ω
Domain
ϕ
Diffeomorphic map
t
Time
v(x,t)
Velocity field of point x and time t
v*
Optimal velocity field
x
Position in image I
z
Position in image J
Linear Transformations
Taffine
Affine Transformation Matrix
Trotation
Rotational Transformation Matrix
Tscale
Scaling Transformation Matrix
Tshear
Shearing Transformation Matrix
Ttranslation
Translational Transformation Matrix
Simple Exponential Smoothing
α
Weight of last observation
Fn
Predicted value
yn
Observed value
Vector Analysis
⃗f(t)
Systematic component of observed displacement
⃗ϵ(t)
Observed displacement
⃗R(t)
Random component of observed displacement
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Computed Tomography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Cone Beam CT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Image Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Linear Transformations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2
Deformable Image Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.3
Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTs)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Radiotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
Modern Radiotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Adaptive Radiotherapy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Image Similarity Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Materials & Methods
11
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Masks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Data Processing and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Image Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Mask Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4.1
Mask Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4.2
Mask Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4.3
Mask Similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
ANTs Registration Repeatability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.6
Vector Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.6.1
Displacement Vectors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.6.2
Modeling Displacement Vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.7
Predicting DVFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.8
Predicting regCTs and Masks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Results
17
4.1
Image Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Mask Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.1
Mask Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.2
Mask Similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
ANTs Registration Repeatability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:10==
4.4
Vector Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4.1
Displacement Vectors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4.2
Modeling Displacement Vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.5
Predicting DVFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6
Predicting regCTs & Masks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Discussion
35
5.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Image Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Conclusion
39
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
With an estimated 19.3 million new cases together with close to 10 million deaths in 2020 [1, 2],
cancer is an immense global health issue. On an individual level, in addition to the diagnosis
of cancer, many experience material and psychological stress related to the financial aspects of
treatment [3].
Cancer is commonly treated with external beam radiotherapy (RT), chemotherapy or a com-
bination hereof. While chemotherapy presents a mean to treat systematically, RT provides a
localized treatment for example in early stages of cancer, adjacent to surgery or for specific
sites of cancer. For example, in head and neck, brain and breast cancer, proportions of patients
suggested RT was 74%, 80% and 87%, respectively in 2012 [4].
In its essence, RT serves by destroying the DNA of cancer cells, however, the DNA of healthy
cells are inevitably affected as well [5]. Hence, it is necessary to conform the radiation dose
to the tumor and deliver it with as high precision as possible to limit undesired side effects.
In many clinical practices, this is achieved by delivering the treatment with image-guided RT
(IGRT). As an indispensable part of IGRT, medical imaging is used throughout the workflow
contributing with various elements of information. Importantly, a cone beam CT (CBCT) image
is acquired preparatory to the daily treatment. Daily CBCT imaging ensures precise localization
of tumor and alignment of the patient which facilitates reduced PTV margins leading to sparing
of healthy tissue [6, 7].
Among the most important recent innovations in RT is adaptive radiotherapy (ART) in which
the treatment is adjusted to accommodate for changes in patient anatomy through information
gained from in-room imaging. To do so, ART relies on image registration (IR) techniques in
which information can be transferred between images obtained with different modalities or at
different points in time.
Essentially, IR consists of mathematical tools to align and deform
image matrices thereby obtaining displacement vector fields (DVFs). Ideally, ”online” ART is
performed in which the daily acquired CBCT image is used the generate an adapted treatment
plan prior to each fraction.
This allows the treatment plan to account for daily changes in
anatomy, however, at the expense of substantial increase in resources needed and demanding
highly skilled personnel. Furthermore, the patient has to be immobilized on the treatment couch
throughout the processes of ART which not all patients are suitable for as well as occupying the
linear accelerator decreasing the throughput of patients. Nonetheless, ART offers great potential
for advancements in RT by minimizing treatment-related toxicity through sparing of organs at
risk while supporting dose escalation to the tumor throughout treatment [8].
In recent literature, deep learning (DL) models have been suggested to predict spatial changes
over time in lung [9, 10] and pancreatic tumors [11] as well as in the esophagus [12]. Despite
creditable performance of these models, they most often rely on weekly images thereby failing
to provide information on daily changes. This thesis propose an algorithm where the day-of-
delivery image is predicted based on DVFs of previously acquired images allowing for in-advance
calculation of the treatment plan. This has the advantage of predicting daily images and, in
contrast to current DL algorithms, permitting analysis of the daily increments of the images for
further understanding of how tumors spatially change during fractionated RT treatment.
Page 1 of 39
==PAGE:12==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Aim
The overall goal of this project is to enable daily pseudo-online ART by developing predictive
models of random and systematic anatomy changes which can be used for calculating treatment
plan prior to patient arrival.
Sub-aim 1: To develop an algorithm that predicts anatomical changes and infers the image
that will be acquired in the day of delivery by prediction based on the images previously acquired
during course of treatment.
Sub-aim 2: To evaluate the predictive performance of the developed algorithm based on a
dataset of CBCT images of head and neck cancer patients.
Page 2 of 39
==PAGE:13==
2
BACKGROUND
2
Background
2.1
Computed Tomography
Medical imaging, specifically computed tomography (CT), plays an essential role in today’s
treatment of cancer. The generated electron density map by the CT is indispensable to the
treatment planning system as it provides information on how the radiation will be attenuated
as it traverse the patient during treatment. In the X-ray tube electrons are accelerated to bom-
bard an anode which, through the interaction between these electrons and atoms of the anode
metal, generates photons of X-ray energies. The anode is at an angle so that the photons are
directed towards the patient. The primary interactions between X-ray photons and the tissue
occurs through the photoelectric effect and Compton scattering. The outcome of the photo-
electric effect is absorption of the photon, hence the contrast in the image emanate from this
phenomenon [13] and as the electron density increase so does the attenuation. The photons
exiting the patient are collected by a detector which converts the photon to an electric signal.
The image is generated by a reconstruction algorithm which since the early 2010’s primarily has
been performed by iterative reconstruction algorithms [14]. Figure 1a depicts the X-ray tube
which is shared between the CT and the cone beam CT systems.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: Illustration of (a) principles and selected components of CT and cone beam CT
(CBCT) imaging including anode, cathode, flat-panel detector and accelerated electrons (orange)
and (b) CBCT equipment mounted on linear accelerator (Modified from [15]).
2.1.1
Cone Beam CT
Cone beam CT (CBCT) utilizes many of the same principles and hardware as described above,
however, the geometric shape of the beam is a cone compared to fan beam CT in which the
beam is collimated to take shape of a fan. For this reason, the detectors used in CBCT are flat-
panel detectors as shown in Figure 1a. CBCT allow for two-dimensional collection of photons
and less radiation dose [16, 17], however, more in-patient scattered photons are recorded which
increase the level of noise in the image. In relation to RT, the CBCT can be either of mega or
kilo voltage, denoted MV or kV. The MV-CBCT utilizes the treatment head and an electronic
portable imaging device to generate a CBCT image. For the kV-CBCT, the CBCT unit is placed
perpendicular to the treatment head and collects 2D radiographs from numerous angles which
Page 3 of 39
==PAGE:14==
2
BACKGROUND
are reconstructed to the 3D CBCT image [18, 19]. Figure 1a illustrates the cone beam shape and
selected components from the X-ray tube including anode, cathode, and accelerated electrons.
Figure 1b displays the mounting of CBCT equipment on the linear accelerator (modified from
[15]).
2.2
Image Registration
The goal of image registration (IR) is to obtain a set of functions that describe the relationship
between anatomical points in two images [20]. In other words, the objective is to find a trans-
formation that maps a point in one image domain to a point in another image domain. This is
often formulated as an optimization problem so that such transformation when applied to the
image volume minimize the difference between the two images. A transformation of such kind,
i.e. a single function applied to the entire image volume, is known as a global transformation [21].
Among the important components of an image registration algorithm is the transformation
model, optimization method and similarity metric (sometimes referred to as dissimilarity metric)
[22]. The transformation model is the algorithm that generates the transformation so that the
set of points are mapped from one domain to another. One common distinction is linear versus
deformable transformation models which are described in the following sections. As mentioned,
many transformations models are constructed so that IR can be considered as an optimization
problem which yields an objective function to be either minimized or maximized depending on
the formulation of the function. The goal of the optimizer is to search for parameters which
yields optimal matching between images according to the similarity metric [22]. The similarity
metric is a measure that evaluates the matching of the images and should be chosen depending
on the problem at hand. For multi-modal IR, mutual information can be applied as it relies on
intensity probabilities (see Section 2.4 for formula).
2.2.1
Linear Transformations
Linear transformations are a subset of transformations in which the grid lines remain paral-
lel, however, other features such as image size and grid angles are alterable depending on the
transformation class [21]. In addition, linear transformations are multiplicative meaning a com-
bination of classes like Translation, Rotation, Shearing and Scaling in a single matrix can be
achieved. Combining these four classes is known as an affine transformation which is depicted
in Equation 2.1 (modified from [23]).
Taffine(x, y, z, 1) = Tscale · Tshear · Ttranslation · Trotation · (x, y, z, 1)T
(2.1)
Linear transformations are computationally fast as few degrees of freedom are available compared
to deformable transformations where potentially millions are present [24].
Figure 2 depicts
the matrices of the individual transformation classes in homogeneous format together with an
illustration of the effect of the class.
2.2.2
Deformable Image Registration
In deformable image registration (DIR) the image grid is not required to remain parallel making
DIR suitable for local variations in the images, however, a priori alignment using linear transfor-
mations is often necessary [21, 26]. In the literature, DIR is considered a multi-solution problem
Page 4 of 39
==PAGE:15==
2
BACKGROUND
Ttranslation =


1
0
0
∆x
0
1
0
∆y
0
0
1
∆z
0
0
0
1


Trotation =


r11
r12
r13
0
r21
r22
r23
0
r31
r32
r33
0
0
0
0
1


Tshear =


1
hxy
hxz
0
hyx
1
hyz
0
hzx
hzx
1
0
0
0
0
1


Tscale =


sx
0
0
0
0
sy
0
0
0
0
sz
0
0
0
0
1


Deformable image registration
Figure 2: Linear transformation matrices [23, 25] and examples shown on a sagittal slice of a
patient. For Trotation, the r-elements indicate multiples of the three rotation matrices around
the x, y and z axis. For rotation matrices see [25]. Last row depicts an axial slice of a patient
overlayed with the associated displacement vector field (shown as a grid) acquired using Ad-
vanced Normalization Tools (ANTs).
Page 5 of 39
==PAGE:16==
2
BACKGROUND
and hence a variety of algorithms have been developed including algorithms based on demons
and B-splines, introduced by Thirion [27] and Rueckert et al. [28], respectively.
Symmetric normalization
Avants and colleagues have developed a DIR algorithm which utilize diffeomorphic maps and
the integration of velocity fields named symmetric normalization (”SyN”).
A diffeomorphic
transformation is a transformation in which both the transformation itself and its inverse are
differentiable ensuring that the transformation is symmetric thus can be decomposed into two
maps. In the following, a description of the SyN-algorithm is presented based on the work con-
ducted by Avants and colleagues [26], [29] and [30]. In Figure 2, an example of an DIR image
grid obtained with the SyN-algorithm is shown.
First, ϕ, a diffeomorphic map of domain Ωand an image, I, is defined so that I can be trans-
formed into a new coordinate system by:
ϕI = I ◦ϕ(x, t = 1)
(2.2)
where the parameters of the transformation are time, a spatial coordinate and a square-integrable,
continuous velocity vector field, namely t, x and v(x,t), respectively.
The diffeomorphic map, ϕ, which describes the displacement is obtained by integrating the
velocity field v(x,t) with respect to time:
ϕ(x, 1) = ϕ(x, 0) +
Z 1
0
v(ϕ(x, 1), t)dt
(2.3)
Using diffeomorphic maps yields two elegant features. One is, when restricting the optimization
time to t ∈[0, 1], the algorithm aims at connecting the two images (I and J) on a geodesic path
such that ϕ1(x, 1)I = J and ϕ2(z, 0)J = I and as a result the geodesic path can be formulated
as in Equation 2.4.
ϕ1(x, t)I = ϕ2(z, 1 −t)J
(2.4)
where x and z are identical anatomical points in image I and image J, respectively.
Secondly, it allows for decomposition of the diffeomorphic map (ϕ) so that two subsets can be
defined as equally large subsets of the map, denoted ϕ1 and ϕ2. In addition, decomposition of
the diffeomorphic map permits decomposition of the associated parameters, t and v(x,t). This
can be expressed as:
ϕ →ϕ1 & ϕ2
t ∈[0, 1] →t1 ∈[0, 0.5] & t2 ∈[0.5, 1]
v(x, t) →v1(x, t) & v2(x, 1 −t)
As a result, the velocity fields v1 and v2 are identical at time t = 0.5 and the diffeomorphic
maps are of equally long distances (D), expressed as D(ϕ1(x,0.5)) = D(ϕ2(x,0.5)).
Page 6 of 39
==PAGE:17==
2
BACKGROUND
The second elegant feature allows Equation 2.3 to be reformulated as a symmetric optimization
problem [26]. This is shown in Equation 2.5 in which the first term (compared to equation 2.3)
describes the decomposition of ϕ and its parameters time, anatomical position and vector field.
Finally, regularization and a similarity metric is introduced in the optimization problem. In
Equation 2.5, the regularization, L, is introduced to smooth the velocity field. Regularization
of the velocity field can be obtained by, for example, convolution with a Gaussian smoothing
kernel which due to easy implementation is considered to be the standard regularization method,
however, other methods are available [30]. For simplicity, the similarity metric (second term of
Equation 2.5) is the squared intensity difference. This is simple and fast, however, not suitable
for multi-modal images. In [26] Avants and colleagues present similarity metrics modified to fit
the SyN-algorithm and include mean squared intensity difference, cross-correlation and mutual
information.
{v∗
1, v∗
2} = argmin
v1,v2
Z 0.5
t=0
{||Lv1(x, t)||2 + ||Lv2(x, t)||2}dt
+
Z
Ω
|I ◦ϕ1(0.5) −J ◦ϕ2(0.5)|2dΩ
(2.5)
where v∗indicate optimal velocity fields.
To summarize, the SyN-algorithm obtains a deformed image through two equally sized but
in opposite direction diffeomorphic maps.
Conceptually, the combined map between image
I and image J is composed of velocity fields that describe time incremental displacements.
The displacement vector field is obtained by integrating the velocity fields in time.
This is
schematically illustrated in Figure 3 (inspired by and vector fields from [29]). Mathematically,
it is formulated as an optimization problem, as in Equation 2.5, where a regularization term and
similarity measure has been added.
Figure 3: Schematic illustration of the SyN-algorithm and the map between image I and J. The
top row shows the velocity fields (from [29]). The second row shows images I and J and the
deformed images of arbitrary time points on the map that connects I and J.
Page 7 of 39
==PAGE:18==
2
BACKGROUND
2.2.3
Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTs)
Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTs) is a software framework utilizing the SyN-algorithm con-
sidered to be among the state-of-the-art optimization based algorithms [31]. The open-source
software is implemented as an extended version of the Insight ToolKit (ITK) [32, 33]. Sev-
eral studies has investigated the performance of the SyN-algorithm including the evaluation of
14 deformable methods conducing by Klein et al. [24]. In this study, the SyN-algorithm was
together with one other algorithm found to have the best performance on MRI brain images.
Using thoracic CT images, Murphy et al. conducted the EMPIRE10 challenge in which a total
of 30 images were registered [34]. A modification of the SyN-algorithm, termed greedy SyN was
in two sub-competitions ranked first and second, having the lowest (i.e. best) average placement.
2.3
Radiotherapy
2.3.1
Modern Radiotherapy
The linear accelerator (linac) is at the heart of modern external beam radiotherapy (RT). Using
radio frequency waves, the linac accelerates electrons discharged from heating of a metal filament.
Through the wave-guide, the electrons are directed into a metal target which in turn generates
high-energy photons. These photons are focused at the patient, more specifically targeting the
tumor, nevertheless, surrounding healthy tissue is affected as well. A leap in healthy tissue
sparring was made with the introduction of intensity-modulated RT (IMRT) [35, 36]. In IMRT,
the treatment plan is generated by a clinician who specifies which anatomical structures are to
receive a high dose and which are to be spared. To construct a treatment plan, the treatment
planning system utilize multileaf collimators (MLCs) to shape the beam and modify the intensity
of the photon fluence from various gantry angles in a process known as inverse planning [18].
This allows the dose to be conformed to the target while a rapid dose fall-off outside the PTV
margin can be obtained to spare surrounding tissue [37]. Image-guided RT (IGRT) introduces
inter or intra-fractional images to localize tumor and organs at risk (OARs) through various
imaging systems in addition to the techniques of IMRT. As an example, modern linacs are
equipped with an on-board kV CBCT imaging system. For inter-fractional displacement of the
tumor, acquisition of a CBCT image allows for localization of the tumor. Consequently, this
reduces the uncertainties in patient and tumor positioning further reducing PTV margins.
2.3.2
Adaptive Radiotherapy
In its essence adaptive radiotherapy (ART) aims to adjust the treatment plan based on observed
changes in patient or tumor anatomy. These changes might be observed visually on the patient
but are most often depicted via imaging techniques such as CBCT images. From the information
gained through imaging, the clinical personnel will decide whether an adapted plan is needed,
and if so, generate a new treatment plan based on the newest image. Such generation requires
IR to transfer information such as contours of tumor and OARs. Before delivery of the adapted
plan, the clinical personnel must review and ensure that the plan performs as intended. These
four steps are described as imaging, assessment, replanning and quality assurance by Green et al.
[38]. The workflow of offline and online ART is depicted in Figure 4 (modified with illustrations
from [38]).
Page 8 of 39
==PAGE:19==
2
BACKGROUND
Figure 4: Schematic depiction of offline and online ART workflow. Blue arrows indicate chrono-
logical implementation of processes within a fraction. Orange arrows mark ”between fractions”
while green arrows indicate process is repeated in multiple consecutive fractions. Inspired by
and illustrations from [38].
Typically, three schemes of ART are considered, namely offline, online and real-time (also re-
ferred to as in-line) ART. These schemes are fundamentally similar, however, are distinguished
by the time scale of which they are performed. In its simplest form, ART is conducted between
fractions which is referred to as offline ART. Adaption to anatomical changes can occur with
a certain frequency, e.g. weekly or once mid-treatment, or scheduled based on observations of
the clinical personnel. The typical adaptation process is similar to initial treatment planning
[8, 38] in which a new planning CT is obtained potentially with MR image in addition. The
team of clinicians perform tasks such as delineation of tumor mass and OARs, calculation of
treatment plan and quality assurance. After approval the adapted plan is delivered. Due to
the time scale of offline ART, the adapted plan might not be implemented for the subsequent
fraction but potentially several days later. Though not necessarily adapting daily, offline ART
has shown improved tumor coverage and OAR sparing in several sites [8]. Many of the steps
and processes are shared between offline and online ART, however, online ART is often per-
formed on a daily basis or as a response to a significant anatomical change observed on the daily
CBCT. In contrast to offline ART, online ART is performed while the patient is positioned on
the treatment couch. Consequently, the processes are compressed into a shorter time frame.
Online ART advantageously offers the possibility to adapt the daily treatment to anatomical
changes, for example, emerging from inter-fractional bladder and rectum filling or significant
weight loss. By continuously monitoring the patient during treatment, real-time ART can ac-
count for intra-fractional changes such as respiratory motion or peristalsis [8]. As an example,
gating is a technique where the treatment beam is only active given certain conditions [39]. As
such, real-time ART distinguishes from online and offline ART by adapting the treatment plan
as it is delivered with very limited human-interaction [8].
Page 9 of 39
==PAGE:20==
2
BACKGROUND
2.4
Image Similarity Metrics
The Hausdorff distance computes the maximum distance between to sets (A and B) using the
definition in Equation 2.6 [40].
dH(A, B) = max{sup inf
a∈Ab∈B d(a, b), sup inf
a∈Ab∈B d(a, b)}
(2.6)
where d denotes the distance measure of choice and sup and inf denote the least upper bound
and great lower bound, respectively. An illustration is presented in Figure 5a.
The Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) is a metric that computes the similarity between two
datasets and can be computed according to Equation 2.7 [41]. Figure 5b displays a graphic
illustration.
DSC =
2h
a + b
(2.7)
where a and b refers to the length of the two data sets and h denotes the number of samples
intersecting the datasets.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: Illustration of (a) maximum Hausdorff distance and (b) Dice similarity coefficient.
In mutual information (MI) for IR, the assumption is that features between two images are
similar. This is evaluated by measuring the statistical dependence of intensities excluding the
voxel-wise comparison of intensities [42]. Mattes and colleagues formulated an alternative MI
in which the negative MI is computed based on probability distributions according to Equation
2.8 (modified from [43]):
MI(µ) = −Σ
i Σ
j p(i, j|µ) log
p(i, j|µ)
pm(i|µ)pf(j)
(2.8)
where p, pm and pf are the probability distributions of the joint, moving and fixed images,
respectively. The transformation parameters are denoted as µ and i and j are given intensity
values of the image histogram.
Page 10 of 39
==PAGE:21==
3
MATERIALS & METHODS
3
Materials & Methods
3.1
Data
The dataset consists of CT and CBCT images of patients (n = 17) suffering from head and
neck (HN) cancer.
Patients were diagnosed and enrolled for RT at University of California
San Francisco (UCSF). In Table 1 a summary of patients are presented.
For acquisition of
CT images, the patient were immobilized with a thermoplastic mask covering the head and
shoulders and imaged with a Siemens 64-slice AS4 (SOMATOM Sensation Open, Siemens) with
a slice thickness of 3 mm. Various organs including selected organs at risk together with GTV,
CTV and PTV were delineated by a team including a HN neuroradiologist which were conducted
based on the CT images and other functional images available and appropriate. Patients received
radiation treatment of a Varian TrueBeam linac and had daily CBCT images taken for IGRT.
A total of 26 CT images were collected with unknown settings and various voxel spacing and
dimensions. Twenty of the CT images had a voxel spacing of 0.98 x 0.98 x 3.0 mm3. Of the
remaining CT images one, four and one CT image had voxel spacings of 1.17 x 1.17 x 3.0 mm3,
1.27 x 1.27 x 3.0 mm3 and 1.37 x 1.37 x 3.0 mm3, respectively. The (x,y)-image dimensions were
512x512 and the number of z-slices (axial) varied from 111-199 with a mean of 179 slices. The
majority of the CBCT images had a voxel spacing of 0.51 x 0.51 x 1.99 mm3 and dimensions
were 512x512x93. Data was acquired by others than the author of the thesis.
Table 1: Summary of patient data. In total 17 patients were included each with between 27 and
37 fractions for a total of 548 fractions. Mask name indicates the mask referred to when analysis
of the tumor.
GTV: Gross Tumor Volume, GTVp: Gross Tumor Volume of Primary tumor, GTVpreop: Gross
Tumor Volume prior to surgery, GTVpostop: Gross Tumor Volume following surgery, GTVp-
prechemo: Gross Tumor Volume of Primary tumor prior to chemotherapy treatment, CTV 5412:
Clinical Target Volume with prescribed dose 5412 cGy.
Patient summary
Patient ID
No. of fractions
Replan fraction(s)
Mask name
Patient 01
33
No replan
GTV preop
Patient 02
33
No replan
GTVp
Patient 03
33
No replan
GTVpprechemo
Patient 04
33
No replan
GTV Preop
Patient 05
30
No replan
GTVp
Patient 06
33
No replan
GTVp
Patient 07
30
Fraction 17
GTV
Patient 08
32
No replan
GTVp
Patient 11
37
Fraction 2
GTV postop
Patient 13
34
Fraction 2, 10
GTVp
Patient 15
33
Fraction 13
GTVp
Patient 24
32
No replan
GTVp
Patient 30
27
Fraction 5
GTVp
Patient 31
29
No replan
GTV Preop
Patient 32
33
Fraction 22
GTV Preop
Patient 33
33
Fraction 18
GTV
Patient 35
33
Fraction 20
CTV 5412
Page 11 of 39
==PAGE:22==
3
MATERIALS & METHODS
3.1.1
Masks
As mentioned, masks for various structures were generated for the CT image spaces. The CT-
masks were propagated to the CBCT image of each fraction using ANACONDA[44] and provided
for this project by others. Henceforth, these masks will be denoted ”ANACONDA-masks”. The
ANACONDA-masks of five patients were reviewed by a physician.
3.2
Data Processing and Analysis
Data processing and analysis was conducted using Python (version 3.9.7) with the Spyder IDE
(version 5.1.5). In doing this, python libraries including NumPy (version 1.20.3), MedPy (version
0.4.0) and SciPy (version 1.7.1) have been used.
Image registration is performed using the
pythonic version of Advanced Normalization Tools (antspyx version 0.3.3).
3.3
Image Registration
Registration of images and application of the transformations were performed using Advanced
Normalization Tools (ANTs).
In general, the default settings were used in registration and
application of the transformations with some exceptions described in the following together se-
lected default settings.
Registration algorithm: The applied image registration algorithm was the deafult SyN-algortihm
with a CT (planning or replanning) as moving image and CBCT n (CBCT of a given fraction
of a given patient) as the fixed image. The regularizer of the velocity fields was a Gaussian
kernel of size 3x3x3 voxels. As the CT and CBCT were selected as the moving and fixed image,
respectively, the output is technically a CT (denoted as ”regCT” - short for ”registered” CT).
The dimensions, voxel spacing and physical space of the regCT image were defined as those of
the CBCT image. The SyN-algorithm initially performs affine registration for alignment of the
images before deformable registration is conducted.
Similarity metric: As image registration between CT and CBCT images can be considered as
inter-modality registration [45] the choice of similarity metric is not arbitrary. Mattes mutual
information was used as similarity metric for both affine and deformable registrations.
defaultvalue: The defeaultvalue is a scalar which is given to the voxels outside of the image
domain. For example, if an image is translated three pixels to the left, the three columns on
the right side is given the defeaultvalue. For regCT images, the defeaultvalue was set to -1000
(assuming air) while for binary masks it was set to 0 (mask negative).
When conducting registrations, the planning CT (pCT) was registered to the CBCT images
of each fraction with affine and deformable registration using the SyN-algorithm resulting in a
regCT. For 8 patients, a replanning CT (rCT) was performed. From the fraction of the rCT,
the rCT was registered to the remaining CBCTs of the treatment. Figure 6 displays the image
registration scheme used in this project.
The output is a 12x1 vector describing the affine
transformation, while the displacement vector field (DVF) is contained in a 3-channel nifty-
image where each channel describes a component of the displacement vector for a particular
voxel.
Page 12 of 39
==PAGE:23==
3
MATERIALS & METHODS
Figure 6: Schematic of the registration scheme. Green and purple squares indicate planning
and replanning CTs, respectively, which are registered to the subsequent CBCTs (orange). The
output is a displacement vector field (top row) and an affine transformation matrix (not shown).
3.4
Mask Analysis
3.4.1
Mask Generation
Masks of the tumor volumes were generated with ANTs, denoted ”ANTs-masks”. Practically,
ANTs-masks were generated by applying the obtained transformation between pCT and CBCT
n to the pCT-mask. For patients with an rCT, the pCT was substituted with the rCT trasnfor-
mations for the subsequent fractions. The defaultvalue was set to 0 and a linear interpolator was
used to determine voxel values of non-grid points. The image volume were then re-binarized by
assigning voxel values equal to or above half of the maximum value to 1 and the remaining to 0,
resulting in positive mask values of 1 and negative values of 0. Lastly, the masks were converted
to 8bit for storage purposes.
3.4.2
Mask Volume
For the tumors, masks were generated by the ANACONDA-algorithm (”ANACONDA-masks”)
and the ANTs algorithm (”ANTs-masks”). The volume of the masks were normalized to the first
of the respective masks of the patient, and plotted as a function of registration (i.e. treatment
fraction). The calculations were conducted by dividing the number of voxels part of the n’th
mask with the number of voxels part of the first mask according to Equation 3.1. A linear
regression model was used to determined the slope, a, and the coefficient of determination, R2.
This was done using the SciPy-library.
Vn = pn
p1
(3.1)
where Vn is the normalized volume of mask n. pn and p1 indicates the number of voxels part of
the n’th and the first CBCT mask, respectively.
3.4.3
Mask Similarity
A comparison between the ANACONDA-masks and ANTs-mask was performed. For the tumor
masks, the Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) and maximum Hausdorff distance (HD) were cal-
culated. Prior to the calculations, the masks were rigidly aligned (translation + rotation) using
the ANTs algorithm. ANTs-masks were the moving images and the ANACONDA-masks were
the fixed images. For the DSC, the image volumes were converted to an 1D array. The DSC
was calculated according to Equation 2.7. The maximum HD was according to Equation 2.6
calculated using the MedPy module. A visual inspection and evaluation were conducted using
Page 13 of 39
==PAGE:24==
3
MATERIALS & METHODS
3D Slicer and Python.
3.5
ANTs Registration Repeatability
Image registration with ANTs is non-deterministic resulting in variations in output DVFs. To
estimate the variability and repeatability of the ANTs-algorithm, 10 additional registrations
(denoted ”additional registrations”) were performed for each fraction of Patient 04. The reg-
istration scheme and application of transformations were identical to previous work described
above. The first registration (not included in the additional 10 registrations) was denoted ”orig-
inal registration”. The variability and repeatability were evaluated with regards to the volume
and DSC of the original mask compared to each of the 10 additional registrations. The volume of
each of the masks was normalized with the average of the additional masks of the first fraction.
This was similar to Equation 3.1, however, with p1 indicating the average number of voxels in
the masks of the first fraction. The DSC was calculated using Equation 2.7 for the original mask
compared to each of the additional masks.
3.6
Vector Analysis
The output of the deformable registration is a three-channel image of the same dimension as
the input (fixed image) where the three channels describe the dx, dy, and dz component of the
displacement vector for each voxel. Thus, the displacement vectors of each voxel were derived
from the deformable registrations. In this section, the methods associated with the analyses of
the displacement vectors are presented.
3.6.1
Displacement Vectors
The displacement vectors describe the movement of the particular voxel between two images. To
gain information regarding this movement, 3D displacement vectors were plotted from the edge
voxels of the tumor. Edge voxels were defined in 2D as mask positive voxels where one of the
four neighboring voxels, i.e. voxels in positions -1 and +1 in the x and y-direction, were mask
negative. The displacement vectors were plotted as a function of time for every other (axial)
slice of the tumor volume. Note that the tumor masks change slightly as a function of time,
hence, edge voxels are displaced between fractions.
3.6.2
Modeling Displacement Vectors
It was assumed that the observed displacement vector (⃗R(t)) to time point t (i.e. treatment
fraction) were derived from a systematic component and a random component according to
Equation 3.2.
⃗R(t) = ⃗f(t) + ⃗ϵ(t)
(3.2)
where ⃗f(t) is the systematic component and ⃗ϵ(t) is the random component.
For this report, it was assumed that the systematic component could be described by a linear
function. Thus, ⃗f(t) was modeled as a linear fit of each component of the displacement vector
for a given voxel as a function of time:
Page 14 of 39
==PAGE:25==
3
MATERIALS & METHODS
⃗f(t) =





a0 + a1t
b0 + b1t
c0 + c1t





(3.3)
where a, b and c indicates intercept and slope for each of the three dimensional components of
the displacement vector.
As a result, the magnitude of the random component can be derived from the fit subtracted
from observed value of the displacement vector for all time points, mathematically expressed as
⃗ϵ(t) = ⃗R(t) −⃗f(t). An example is shown in Figure 15.
Consequently, Equation 3.2 can be re-written as vectors:


dx(t)
dy(t)
dz(t)

=


a0 + a1t
b0 + b1t
c0 + c1t

+


ϵx(t)
ϵy(t)
ϵz(t)


where dx, dy, and dz are the displacements in the three dimensions to time t.
Predictability Index
For each voxel inside the tumor mask, the magnitude of the systematic component was deter-
mined and compared to the magnitude of the observed displacement. This was termed pre-
dictability index (PI) and calculated according to Equation 3.4. The systematic component was
determined using the polyfit-function of the NumPy-library.
PI =
|⃗f(t)|
⃗|f(t) + ⃗ϵ(t)|
(3.4)
3.7
Predicting DVFs
To predict the displacement vector field (DVF) of the n + 1 registration, a time series forecast
algorithm using the DVFs of 1 .. n was used. For patients where replanning was performed at
fraction m, the prediction of n + 1 DVF was made using DVFs 1 .. n and again for m .. n or
m + 1 .. n if no CBCT was available at fraction m. This ensures that the fractions before the
rCT is not included in the prediction of DVFs after the replanning.
For the dx, dy and dz components of the displacement vector of each voxel, the components
of the subsequent displacement vector was predicted using simple exponential smoothing (SES)
according to Equation 3.5. An in-house algorithm applying SES was developed. In SES, the
latest observed value (i.e. displacement) is weighted between 0 and 1 with the weights of the
previous predicted values (which include the previous observed values) exponentially decreasing.
SES was selected as it is suitable for predicting short-term data points in data with no clear
seasonality and trends [46].
Fn+1 = α yn + (1 −α) Fn
(3.5)
where Fn+1 and Fn are the predicted values of next and current fraction, respectively. The cur-
rent observed value is denoted yn. The smoothing factor, α, is limited to between 0 and 1. Note
that y0 is not defined, hence the first prediction, i.e. Fn+1 = F1, cannot be made according to
Equation 3.5. Consequently, the first prediction was set equal to the first observation: F1 = y1,
Page 15 of 39
==PAGE:26==
3
MATERIALS & METHODS
and as a result, the second prediction will be equal to the first observation. For this reason,
predictions were made from the third observation after either the CT or the rCT using DVFs
for m or m + 1 fraction as described above.
It is suggested that the value of α is chosen according to a grid search where predefined mea-
sures guide the selection of the optimal value [47]. In this report, five values (α = 0.2, 0.35, 0.5,
0.65 and 0.8) were tested as optimal α for fraction 15 using DVFs n = 1 .. 14 for Patient 04.
The optimal alpha was selected based on the mean absolute error (MAE) and mean error (ME)
between the predicted and ground truth image of fraction 15.
3.8
Predicting regCTs and Masks
The n + 1 regCT and mask were predicted by deforming the n’th CT and mask with the
predicted n + 1 DVF. Rigid alignment of predicted and ground truth regCT and mask was
performed using ANTs. For patients with no rCT, prediction of regCTs and masks were con-
ducted for fractions n = 3 .. N, where N indicates the number of fractions for the individual
patient. For patients with an rCT, predictions were conducted for fraction n = 3 .. m and n
= m + 3 .. N or m + 4 .. N according to presence of a CBCT as described in Section 3.7.
The performance of the prediction algorithm was evaluated using ME and MAE for the regCT
images and with DSC for the masks.
Predicted versus prior days mask
To assess the value gained of attempting to predict the n + 1 image, the DSC between the
prior days image (i.e. fraction n) and n + 1 image is calculated for the tumor masks. This was
compared with the DSC between the predicted n + 1 and the ground truth n + 1 tumor masks.
All masks were rigidly aligned using ANTs prior to DSC calculation. Wilcoxon signed-rank test
was performed to evaluate differences in mean DSCs (of patients) between prior days image and
predicted images. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was implemented using SciPy-library.
Page 16 of 39
==PAGE:27==
4
RESULTS
4
Results
4.1
Image Registration
For the analysis, patient 31 was excluded as the ANTs algorithm generates anatomically incorrect
images despite several re-registrations. In Figure 7, examples of registered CTs for patient 31
fraction 7 are presented. As depicted, the SyN-algorithm generates CTs that were anatomically
incorrect. The affine transformation was applied to the pCT and a visual inspection confirmed
its validity (not shown). Hence, it is the deformable registration or the application hereof that
fails.
(a) Axial slice
(b) Coronal slice
(c) Sagittal slice
Figure 7: Example of failed registrations with ANTs in Patient 31 fraction 7.
Not all image registrations generated CTs or masks that were anatomically viable according
to a visual inspection. A total of 65 fractions (11.9%) were excluded. Selected fractions were
excluded due to a variety of reasons which are summarized in Figure 8 and described in the
following. Due to a failed CBCT, fraction 10 of patient 11 was excluded. In patient 13 fraction
1 and patient 32 fraction 3, 16 and 21, errors in the generation of the mask when applying
the transformations resulted in failed masks. Thus, these fractions are excluded. As described
above, patient 31 was excluded due to registrations failures. Due to errors in the registered CT
in fraction 13, 23 and 25 of patient 32, these fractions were excluded. Fraction 26-33 of patient
32 were excluded as no ANACONDA-masks were available for the GTV.
For the prediction of regCTs and masks, the 9’th fraction of Patient 30 was excluded due to an
unknown failure occuring during prediction. Patient 32 was excluded as too many fractions were
excluded prior to predicting resulting in only seven non-consecutive fractions being predictable.
Page 17 of 39
==PAGE:28==
4
RESULTS
Figure 8: STROBE diagram displaying exclusion criteria of fractions. Initially, 45 fractions were
excluded including all fractions of patient 31 before image prediction. For the image prediction
task, an additional 20 fractions were excluded. In total, 65 fractions (11.9% of all fractions)
were excluded.
4.2
Mask Analysis
4.2.1
Mask Volume
The volume of the tumor masks was estimated according to Equation 3.1 and are together with a
linear regression model presented in Figure 11 for ANTs-masks (blue) and ANACONDA-masks
(orange). The results show that the normalized volume of the masks fluctuate as a function of
time. Both tumor growth (n = 7) and shrinkage (n = 8) is observed as depicted by both positive
and negative slopes, a. One patient had according to the linear model no change in volume.
The individual plots of Figure 11 show discrepancies between the ANTs and ANACONDA
algorithm. For 14 of the 16 included patients, ANACONDA and ANTs agrees on the sign of
the slope, however, 12 hereof have different magnitudes when evaluating using three significant
decimals. For the ANTs-masks, the largest R2 is observed in patient 04 (R2 = 0.75) while for
Page 18 of 39
==PAGE:29==
4
RESULTS
the ANACONDA-masks the largest R2 is observed in patient 07 (R2 = 0.75). From these initial
results, Patient 04 is selected as primary patient of investigation. The average volumes of the
ANTs-masks are presented in Table 2.
4.2.2
Mask Similarity
Quantitative Evaluation
The DSC and HD for the aligned ANACONDA and ANTs-masks are presented in Table 2 and
box plots of DSCs and HDs are presented in Figure 9a and 9b, respectively. Patient 05 has the
masks with the highest mean DSC (0.949), however, the highest maximum DSC (0.967) and
minimum DSC (0.914) are observed in other patients. Patient 06 has the lowest mean HD (2.26
mm) and maximum HD (3.4 mm) while three patients has a minimum HD of 1.99 mm. Across
all patients, the mean DSC and mean HD are 0.879 ± 0.059 (one standard deviation) and 5.92
± 6.61 mm, respectively. The range of the volume of the masks is 1.43 to 151.5 cm3.
Table 2: Minimum, mean and maximum Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) and maximum Haus-
dorff distance (HD) for each patient sorted according to volume of ANTs generated masks. The
gray cells indicate the highest and lowest value of the column for DSC and HD, respectively.
Volume [cm3]
DSC
HD [mm]
mean
min
mean
max
min
mean
max
Patient 02
1.43
0.715
0.782
0.814
2.11
2.95
4.18
Patient 32
1.68
0.773
0.823
0.884
1.99
2.47
3.62
Patient 06
2.51
0.828
0.877
0.916
1.99
2.26
3.4
Patient 13
4.2
0.763
0.864
0.927
1.99
3.97
6.79
Patient 11
5.5
0.791
0.849
0.915
2.05
2.81
4.84
Patient 15
6.8
0.832
0.884
0.923
2.17
3.42
5.89
Patient 04
7.35
0.847
0.883
0.908
2.29
2.89
4.06
Patient 35
18.78
0.423
0.726
0.924
2.94
29.82
68.35
Patient 24
22.37
0.904
0.924
0.946
2.12
3.08
4.09
Patient 01
24.62
0.857
0.897
0.940
2.24
3.67
7.59
Patient 05
24.69
0.892
0.949
0.962
2.04
2.6
4.37
Patient 03
30.46
0.908
0.926
0.944
2.56
3.76
5.58
Patient 30
41.04
0.841
0.886
0.952
2.56
6.23
7.96
Patient 08
54.14
0.914
0.933
0.952
3.98
4.57
6.46
Patient 33
123.57
0.831
0.922
0.967
2.56
9.98
29.18
Patient 07
151.5
0.855
0.938
0.959
3.98
10.23
60.65
Page 19 of 39
==PAGE:30==
4
RESULTS
(a) Dice Similarity Coefficient
(b) Maximum Hausdorff distance
Figure 9: Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) and maximum Hausdorff distance (HD) for included
patients and fractions. Across all patients, the mean DSC and mean HD are 0.879 ± 0.059 and
5.92 ± 6.61 mm, respectively. Note the broken axis of both figures.
Qualitative evaluation
A visual inspection and evaluation of the masks was performed and selected results are presented
in the following.
In Figure 11g and 11o, it can be seen that the ANACONDA algorithm (orange) differs from the
ANTs algorithm (blue) with regards to the sudden drop in volume. Patient 07 has an rCT at
fraction 17 while Patient 33 has an rCT at fraction 18. In Figure 10, selected slices in the sagital
plane of the regCT overlayed with the ANACONDA-mask (red) and the ANTs-mask (green)
are shown for patient 07 and 33. Overlapping regions are white with an orange border. Blue
arrows indicate regions of interest. From these images it can be seen, that the two algorithms
disagree with the tumor volume and placement. For Patient 07 the ANACONDA-mask includes
voxels that according to the regCT are air voxels, shown in Figure 10a. Figure 10b displays how
the ANACONDA algorithm additionally captures a tumor volume inferior to the largest tumor
mass which the ANTs algorithm misses. Furthermore, compared to the ANACONDA-mask, the
ANTs-mask divides the large tumor into four smaller segments.
Page 20 of 39
==PAGE:31==
4
RESULTS
(a) Patient 07
(b) Patient 33
Figure 10: Sagittal slices of the pCT registered to the CBCT of fraction 18 for both Patient
07 and Patient 33, respectively. ANACONDA-masks (red), ANTs-masks (green), and overlap
(white with orange border) are overlayed. Figure shows discrepancies in tumor masks between
ANACONDA and ANTs algorithm.
Page 21 of 39
==PAGE:32==
4
RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
Figure 11: Volume of ANACONDA-masks (orange) and ANTs-masks (blue) normalized to the
first mask of each patient and plotted as a function of registration (i.e. treatment fraction). The
slope of the linear regression fit, a, and R2-values are shown for both registration algorithms.
The fraction at which a potential replan is conducted is shown above the individual plots.
Page 22 of 39
==PAGE:33==
4
RESULTS
4.3
ANTs Registration Repeatability
For Patient 04, the normalized volume of the tumor masks for each fraction for additional 10
registrations is shown in Figure 12. The normalized volume of the 10 registrations are shown as
vertical data points (blue) for each fraction and the solid line (orange) is the ”original” regis-
tration used in Figure 11d, displayed for comparability. The fraction with the lowest difference
in included voxels is fraction 11 with 29 voxels separating largest and smallest mask. This cor-
responds to 0.21 % of the average mask volume for the 10 additional registrations. Fraction 20
shows the largest difference with 365 voxels (2.40 % of average mask).
Figure 12: Distribution of volumes for tumor mask (normalized to mean of first tumor mask) for
10 registrations for each fraction (fx) of patient 04 (blue) compared to the original registration
of Figure 11d (orange). Note that not all data points are visible due to overlap between markers.
The figure show low variability and high repeatability of the ANTs algorithm.
The DSC of the ”original” mask compared to each of the additional masks can be seen in Figure
13. The fraction with the largest and smallest interval between maximum and minimum DSC
is fraction 22 (0.054) and fraction 7 and 26 (0.003). The mean range interval of all fractions is
0.016 and the mean DSC for all fractions is 0.991.
Figure 13: Distribution of DSC calculated between ”original” mask and each of 10 ”additional”
masks for each fraction (fx) of Patient 04. Note, that the lowest value of the Y-axis is 0.94. The
figure show low variability and high repeatability of the ANTs algorithm.
Page 23 of 39
==PAGE:34==
4
RESULTS
4.4
Vector Analysis
In this section, the analysis conducted on the displacement vector field is presented. Due to
time limitations, analysis is restricted to selected patients.
4.4.1
Displacement Vectors
For Patient 04, the displacement vectors of the edge voxels of nine fractions are presented in
Figure 14. The plots present every other axial slice of the tumors for each displayed fraction.
Though not all fractions are shown, the following analysis is made by visual inspection of the
plots for all fractions of Patient 04.
The displacement vectors for edge voxels generally have similar direction through fractions with
various length. Fraction 1 through 15 tended to have shorter vectors compared to 16 through
33. Note, that the tumor of Patient 04 is divided in three masses. Through all fractions, the
two smaller masses had short displacement vectors. The mean length of the edge voxels and all
tumor voxels were 2.94 ± 1.53 mm and 1.24 ± 1.16 mm, respectively. The maximal displacement
vector length was 6.41 mm observed in 18 edge voxels of fraction 16.
Page 24 of 39
==PAGE:35==
4
RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 14: Displacement vectors (light blue) for registrations of pCT to CBCT 1, 2 and 3 (left
to right, top row), 15, 16 and 17 (left to right, middle row) and 31, 32 and 33 (left to right,
bottom row) of Patient 04. Dark blue dots indicate edge voxels of tumor as defined in Section
3.6.1. Note, that the individual plots displays the edge voxels of the tumor of the particular
fraction. Axes are presented in voxel index of the image.
4.4.2
Modeling Displacement Vectors
The observed displacement was modelled assuming a systematic and a random component ac-
cording to Equation 3.2. For Patient 04, the left-to-right displacement (dx) is plotted for two
voxels of the first mask, for the center of mass voxel and for an edge voxel, in Figure 15a and
15b respectively. For the voxels depicted in Figure 15, the direction of displacement changes
from left to right (negative to positive displacement values) as a function of fractions, however,
this was not the case for all observed voxels.
Page 25 of 39
==PAGE:36==
4
RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 15: Left-to-right displacement of (a) center of mass voxel and (b) an edge voxel of the
first mask of Patient 04 as a function of fraction. Blue graph indicates the observed displace-
ment where negative values indicates displacement to the left whereas positive values indicates
displacement to the right. Orange dotted line shows the linear fit (referred to as systematic
component) and red vertical lines depicts the error between observed and fitted value (referred
to as random component).
Predictability Index
To estimate the magnitude of the systematic and random components of the observed values, the
predictability index (PI) from Equation 3.4, was plotted for each voxel inside the tumor mask.
Though the following results is a generalization across selected patients1, Patient 04 is selected
as representative for the figures. In the following, low PI values will be referred as values below
0.5 and high PI values above 0.5, visually represented as blue and red, respectively.
When viewed axially, the central region of the tumors generally has high PI values with gradu-
ally decreasing values towards the edge. However, as depicted in Figure 17, which depicts the 12
of 16 slices for Patient 04 (fraction 16), this was not the case for all tumors. Some tumor slices
show a steep gradient between high and low values while other showed a more slower change.
These two scenarios are depicted in Fraction 32 and 13 of Figure 16, respectively. With limited
exceptions, the outermost edge voxels has low PI values, when viewed axially. The PI values
of inferior and superior edges, i.e. bottom and top of tumor, are generally higher with seven of
nine analyzed top slices being predominantly red. No concepts of general tumor development
that could aid later prediction is identified. It is recognized that more time would be required
for this analysis.
Time analysis
For the analysis of the time aspect, i.e. fractions, the median slice of the tumor is analyzed.
For Patient 04, the PI index changes more between primarily low and high values throughout
the first 16 fractions whereas fraction 17 to 33 are primarily high PI values. An example of 12
fractions of Patient 04 is shown in Figure 16. For Patient 01 and 06, the central region of the
tumor is generally less dynamic, meaning less change between high and low PI values.
Slice analysis
Generally for the analyzed patients, the PI values through the slices changes somewhat fluently,
meaning no voxels are obviously alternatively changing between high and low.
Direction of
this fluently changing voxels were not predictable through visual inspection. No other obvious
1Patients analyzed: 01, 04 and 06.
Page 26 of 39
==PAGE:37==
4
RESULTS
trends or concepts are identified. In Figure 17, 12 axial slices of the 16’th fraction of Patient 04
is shown.
Figure 16: Predictability Index (PI) for median tumor (axial) slice of Patient 04 for fractions 1, 2
and 3 (left to right, top row), 13, 14 and 15 (left to right, second row), 22, 23 and 24 (left to right,
third row) and 31, 32 and 33 (left to right, bottom row). Note, that PI-values approaching 1
(shown as red) indicates high systematic component compared to random component of observed
voxel value.
Page 27 of 39
==PAGE:38==
4
RESULTS
Figure 17: Predictability index (PI) for selected axial slices of the 16’th fraction of Patient 04.
The selected slices include the two most inferior, two most superior and 8 consecutive central
of the tumor.
Note, that PI-values approaching 1 (shown as red) indicates high systematic
component compared to random component of observed voxel value.
Heatmap histograms
The PI for each voxel in the tumor masks is presented in a histogram format in Figure 18. The
patient with the highest and lowest mean PI were 0.63 and 0.32, respectively. The mean PI
across all included patients was 0.49.
Page 28 of 39
==PAGE:39==
4
RESULTS
(a) Patient 01
(b) Patient 02
(c) Patient 03
(d) Patient 04
(e) Patient 05
(f) Patient 06
(g) Patient 07
(h) Patient 08
(i) Patient 11
(j) Patient 13
(k) Patient 15
(l) Patient 24
(m) Patient 30
(n) Patient 33
(o) Patient 35
Figure 18: Predictability index (PI), for included patients shown as histograms for entire tumor
volume. Note, that PI-values approaching 1 indicates high systematic component compared to
random component of observed voxel value. The minimum, mean and maximum PI values are
0.32 (Patient 11), 0.49 and 0.63 (Patient 05), respectively.
Page 29 of 39
==PAGE:40==
4
RESULTS
4.5
Predicting DVFs
The search for an optimal α was conducted using values of 0.20, 0.35, and 0.50, 0.65 and 0.80.
Figure 19 displays MAE and ME between ground truth regCT (regCTGT ) and predicted regCT
(regCTpred) of fraction 15 of Patient 04. The MAE and ME are presented for individual axial
slices of the regCT volume, excluding five slices in bottom and top of the volume. The dotted
vertical lines depicts the slices of which tumor is present. The results show that an α-value of
0.20 yields the lowest mean MAE and the mean ME closest to zero.
(a)
(b)
Figure 19: (a) Mean absolute error (MAE) and (b) mean error (ME) for slice 5 to 88 of Patient 04.
MAE and ME are shown for examined α-values associated with simple exponential smoothing.
Vertical dotted lines indicate slices of which tumor mask is present.
Figure 20 displays an axial slice of the regCTGT of fraction 15 of Patient 04. The selected slice
is the median slice of the tumor. In addition, difference plots are made between the regCTGT
and regCTpred for α values of 0.20, 0.35, and 0.50, 0.65 and 0.80. Plots are shown as regCTpred
subtracted from regCTGT such that red indicate high values in regCTGT and low values in
regCTpred. The figure shows no visual difference in predictions using investigated α values and
that the major differences are located in the outline of structures e.g. mandibles.
Based on these results, the optimal α-value is selected to be 0.20, and henceforth, predictions
are made using this value.
Figure 20: Axial slices of ground truth (GT) registered CT compared to difference in GT and
predicted registered CTs for five tested α values: 0.20, 0.35, 0.50, 0.65 and 0.80. Unit of colorbars
is Hounsfield Units and difference-images are shown as predicted subtracted from GT.
Page 30 of 39
==PAGE:41==
4
RESULTS
4.6
Predicting regCTs & Masks
In Table 3, the results of predicting the n + 1 image or mask are presented showing the minimum,
mean and maximum of the evaluation metrics for included patients. The grey cells highlight
the highest mean DSC, lowest mean MAE and the mean ME closest to zero. On average, 28.2
fractions (Fx) [range: 18-31] are included. Patient 33 has the highest minimum, mean and
maximum DSC of 0.953, 0.968 and 0.981, respectively. Thirteen of 15 patients have mean DSC
values above 0.900, with only Patient 06 (0.895) and Patient 35 (0.862) below. The average DSC
across all patients is 0.929 ± 0.028. The mean MAE across all patients is 49.1 [range: 29.1-71.2]
with Patient 02 having the lowest observed mean MAE. The mean ME closest to and furthest
from zero is 1.2 and -39.9 observed in Patient 06 and Patient 08, respectively.
Table 3: Results of predicting with simple exponential smoothing using α = 0.20.
Average
and range of DSC values between predicted and ground truth mask. Average and range of mean
absolute error and mean error for predicted and ground truth registered CTs. For the 15 included
patients, the number of fractions are presented in the Fx-column.
Fx
DSC
MAE
ME
min
mean
max
min
mean
max
min
mean
max
Patient 01
31
0.881
0.937
0.967
15.1
31.2
53.3
-5.4
3.5
13.1
Patient 02
31
0.866
0.914
0.95
17.8
29.1
45.9
-29.4
-16.4
5.5
Patient 03
31
0.915
0.936
0.967
42.2
71.2
118.5
-75.1
-34.7
-10.3
Patient 04
31
0.868
0.912
0.949
19.4
49.4
377.1
-2.2
18.0
374.4
Patient 05
28
0.878
0.962
0.979
21.4
60.9
295.0
-222.0
-33.1
14.1
Patient 06
31
0.839
0.895
0.932
15.6
30.2
52.0
-9.0
1.2
13.6
Patient 07
25
0.833
0.906
0.97
26.4
57.0
108.4
-42.7
-15.6
7.3
Patient 08
30
0.941
0.961
0.976
30.2
67.9
389.0
-326.0
-39.9
-6.4
Patient 11
29
0.883
0.921
0.962
24.6
49.5
76.6
-38.2
-20.7
-6.8
Patient 13
26
0.881
0.929
0.966
27.7
45.7
137.2
-100.2
-21.0
-5.2
Patient 15
26
0.87
0.918
0.962
24.1
34.2
48.4
-4.5
1.6
8.1
Patient 24
30
0.939
0.953
0.973
30.7
48.0
82.1
-47.2
-20.4
-3.5
Patient 30
18
0.938
0.956
0.976
17.7
34.3
54.1
-9.9
5.7
26.5
Patient 33
28
0.953
0.968
0.981
31.5
59.8
127.2
-69.5
-25.8
-6.5
Patient 35
28
0.538
0.862
0.94
48.7
68.6
141.4
-98.6
-33.4
-12.3
In Figure 21, the mean DSC is plotted compared to the mean MAE where one data point
represents one patient. The vertical and horizontal lines displays one standard deviation in each
direction for the individual patients DSC and MAE, respectively. The figure shows no obvious
correlation between DSC and MAE. As depicted, few patients have large standard deviations as
a result of one or more outliers. Patient 35 has the lowest mean DSC and the largest associated
standard deviation. In Figure 22, boxplots of DSC, MAE and ME are presented. Four fractions
of Patient 35 has DSC values considered as outliers (defined as more than 1.5x the interquartile
range), hereof three fractions below 0.650 corresponding to approximately 25% below the mean
DSC. Patient 04, 05, and 08 has one, three and two outliers that were more than three times
higher than the median of the MAE values, respectively. These fractions are also considered
outliers according to the ME.
Page 31 of 39
==PAGE:42==
4
RESULTS
Figure 21: DSC versus MAE for included patients. Vertical and horizontal lines depicts the
standard deviation associated with the DSC and MAE for the individual patient, respectively.
The plot shows no obvious correlation between DSC and MAE.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 22: Boxplots of (a) mean absolute error (MAE), (b) mean error (ME) and (c) Dice
similarity coefficient (DSC) for predicted images compared to the respective ground truth image.
Across the included patients, the average MAE, ME and DSC was 49.1 ± 14.3 HU, -15.4 ± 16.9
HU 0.929 ± 0.028, respectively. Note, that ’±’ indicates one standard deviation.
Page 32 of 39
==PAGE:43==
4
RESULTS
To evaluate if accuracy of predictions is increasing as more images are included in the prediction,
the evaluation metrics are plotted as a function of fraction in Figure 23. No analyzed patient
shows an obvious trend in either evaluation metric as a function of time. This is illustrated for
Patient 06 by the fluctuating metrics shown in Figure 23. Predictions are made using simple
exponential smoothing with α = 0.20.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 23: Evaluation metrics between ground truth and predicted regCT and mask for (a) mean
absolute error, (b) mean error, and (c) Dice similarity coefficient as a function of fraction for
representative patient (Patient 06). Images and masks were predicted using simple exponential
smoothing (α = 0.20) including 1 .. n images to predict the n + 1 image. Predictions are made
from 3 .. n (see Section 3.7 and 3.8 for prediction details).
Predicted versus prior days mask
In Figure 24, the average DSCs for the predicted (blue) and prior days (orange) tumor masks
when compared to the respective ground truth are presented. Compared to ground truth masks,
the average DSC for prior days masks was 0.938 ± 0.023 (versus predicted masks DSC of 0.929
± 0.028). The results show that for 11 of the 15 included patients, the DSC is higher when
using the prior days image compared to the predicted image. For these 11 patients, the average
difference is 0.014 whereas for the remaining four patients the average difference is 0.003. The
largest difference is 0.055 observed in Patient 07.
The Wilcoxon signed-rank test displays a significant difference (p = 0.03), showing that using
prior days image results in significant better DSC values compared to the proposed predicting
method.
Page 33 of 39
==PAGE:44==
4
RESULTS
Figure 24: Scatter plot of average DSC when comparing the predicted n + 1 mask (blue) and
the mask of prior days image n (orange) to the ground truth n + 1 mask for each patient. The
average DSC for prior days mask was 0.938 ± 0.023 whereas the average DSC for the predicted
mask was 0.929 ±0.028 when compared to the ground truth mask. Wilcoxon signed-rank test
showed significant difference (p = 0.03).
Page 34 of 39
==PAGE:45==
5
DISCUSSION
5
Discussion
The results obtained in this work show that it is possible to use displacement vector fields (DVFs)
predicted by simple exponential smoothing to predict a regCT (CT registered to a CBCT). The
mean DSC was 0.929 ± 0.028 and no patient had a mean DSC below 0.850. Compared to the
recommendations of the American Association of Phycisist in Medicine (AAPM) Task-Group
report 132 [20], which recommends that the DSC of two contours on registered images should
be between 0.8 to 0.9, the predictive ability of the developed algorithm seems reasonable with
regards to the masks. However, the results show that it is more beneficial to use the prior days
image instead of predicting as per the conducted Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
It is contradicting that the highest predictive ability was found in the prior days image (corre-
sponding to α = 1 in Equation 3.5) compared to the findings of Figure 19 which suggests that a
lower α of 0.20 is optimal. However, this is potentially an ill-comparison as the prior days image
is evaluated with DSC across included patients and Figure 19 evaluates MAE and ME across
slices of a single patient. In hindsight, the results of Figure 19 should have been confirmed in
other patients and with DSC, too. Nevertheless, the clinical workflow requires an accurately
predicted image in addition to the masks. If the magnitude of the random component cannot be
mitigated, predicted images are likely to have a considerable residual which limits the possibility
of clinical implementation regardless of predicting method.
A potential advantage of this DVF-based method is the ability to analyze the DVFs across time
and patients. However, the immense amount of data proved to be a limiting factor of this study
given the time frame.
This limited the analysis to selected patients and exclusively tumors
despite other structures being relevant from a clinical perspective.
As an example, the mean tumor volume of Patient 04 was 7.35 cm3, almost a factor of 5 less
than the mean tumor volume of all patients. Despite this, Patient 04 had 159 100 data points
generated for the predictability index, 466 442 displacement vectors each with 3 components
and for prediction of the images a total of 755 761 152 voxels to be predicted. In total, 1.15 TB
of data was generated.
5.1
Related work
Using B-spline-based DIR, Zhang et al. [48] developed two models to predict the anatomical
changes in HN cancer patients receiving proton therapy by registering weekly CT images to the
planning CT. Similar to Equation 3.2, they hypothesized that the observed changes were derived
from two components, however in contrast to this report, they suggest that the systematic
component was an average across all patients and the random component was an individual
component. In other words, they assume that the tumors share a common rate of shrinkage plus
an individual. They obtain the individual component by subtracting the observed individual
shrinkage from the average deformation. Their results showed, that including the individual
component in the model resulted in higher predicative ability on average, unfortunately not
using any metrics comparable to this report.
The major difference between [48] and this report, is the underlying assumption of the observed
changes. This report assumes that the observed changes in tumor geometry are independent
of other patients supported by the both positive and negative slopes in Figure 11 whereas
Zhang and colleagues derives the systematic component from the patient population. Secondly,
the results when registering CT to CT images is likely better compared to CT to CBCT as the
Page 35 of 39
==PAGE:46==
5
DISCUSSION
inter-modality registration posses difficulties for example in the similarity metric and the smaller
field-of-view of the CBCT [45, 49, 50]. In the perspective of this report, CT to CT registration
could lead to less noise in the DVFs potentially increasing the predictive ability, however, at the
cost of increased resources as daily CTs are unavailable directly from the linac and issues with
transferring the predictive knowledge to the daily CBCT.
For 10 patients with lung tumors, Wang et al. [9] developed a DVF-based method and a deep
learning (DL) model to predict geometric and temporal trajectories of tumors. By means of
Plastimatch, they performed DIR on weekly MR images registering the 2nd and 3rd MR images
to the first MR image thereby obtaining two DVFs which are extrapolated using a linear-log
model when predicting. For the DL model, the first three weeks were used as training input.
Their results show that the DL model outperforms the DVF-based model in terms of DSC and
root-mean-square surface distance (RMSSD), obtaining DSC values of 0.78 ± 0.22, 0.69 ± 0.24
and 0.69 ± 0.26, when predicting week 4, 5 and 6, respectively. In comparison, the DVF-based
model achieves DSCs that are 0.10, 0.19 and 0.31 lower for week 4, 5 and 6, respectively.
Their DVF-based model yield noticeably lower DSCs compared to the results obtained in this
report. This is most likely explained by a combination of factors. First, and maybe most impor-
tant, Wang and colleagues use three weekly images compared to approximately 30 daily images.
As depicted in Figure 15, displacement might be difficult to predict using a linear model, and
due to noise, one could have data points that significantly changes the slope if weekly images
are used. With a significantly different slope, the DSC should decrease when predicting later
weeks potentially explaining their observations of a decreasing DSC which is not observed in
this report (Figure 23c). This suggest, that weekly imaging is likely insufficient when predicting
geometric changes of tumors by extrapolating DVFs. Next, the ground truth volumes in [9]
were delineated by radiation oncologists whereas this report relies on ANTs propagated con-
tours. The affect of this is currently unknown, nonetheless, might contribute to a difference in
DSC.
With increased availability and applicability, DL is gaining popularity in medical imaging. Using
a Conv-LSTM network, Lee et al. [10] predicted the changes in lung tumor and esophagus using
weekly CBCT images. When comparing the predicted GTV to the ground truth, they obtained
DSC values between between 0.71 ± 0.17 and 0.83 ± 0.10, decreasing when predicting fractions
further away from last fraction included in training.
This study illustrates the necessity of
developing flexible models, as depicted in their Figure 2, where it can be seen that incorporating
the latest obtained data results in better predictive ability in terms of DSC. Similarly, Li and
colleagues [51] developed a CNN and RNN-based DL model to predict spatial changes of lung
tumors in six weekly CBCT registered to the planning CT. By comparing the predicted GTV and
the observed GTV, their results showed an average HD of 10.98mm and an average DSC of 0.80
through the final three CBCTs. The prediction-based reoptimized plans showed satisfactory dose
prescriptions in the four patients evaluated. Moreover, significant improvements were observed
in dose sparing of OARs in three of the four analyzed patients.
The studies above show that it is feasible to predict image volumes using DL models with CBCT
images as input, though currently DSC might not be at desired levels. However, one aspect that
likely could improve their results is the use of daily imaging, compared to weekly imaging in
both studies above.
Given the complexity of cancer, it is reasonable to think that many factors influence the shrinkage
(or growth) of tumors explaining why the shrinkage might not be linear. One major advantage of
DL models is its duality between simplicity and complexity, meaning, the ability to learn simple
growth/shrinkage and more complex patterns. In addition, DL models theoretically posses the
Page 36 of 39
==PAGE:47==
5
DISCUSSION
ability to learn features preceding sudden changes of shrinkage rate. Therefore, it is expected
that DL models would outperform DVF-based given equal circumstances.
5.2
Image Registration
Image registration (IR) is the basis of this work and several flaws of IR are obvious from this
work and affects the results and applicability.
The choice of an IR algorithm affects the results. As presented in Section 4.2, selecting two
acknowledged IR algorithms generally produces similar masks in terms of DSC. However, results
are not consistent and have surprisingly large discrepancies as depicted for the volume changes
in Figure 11 and dissimilar masks in Figure 10 and by the DSC and HD values in Table 2.
In contrast to this, the results presented in Section 4.3 show that inter-registration variability
seems to be reasonably low, implying that the non-deterministic nature of optimization in ANTs
has relatively low variance and influence on the results.
The discrepancies between IR algorithms, and the fact that both algorithms generates incor-
rect registrations, highlight the necessity of human interaction.
In current clinical practice,
contours propagated using IR are reviewed by clinical personnel and, if necessary, corrected
before approved. In this work, only the reviewing of propagated contours was possible despite
the need of correcting the masks was necessary, cf. Figure 10. In essence, this means that this
report trusts IR propagated contours more than a physicians which as shown is far from optimal.
The selection of initial non-deformable registration, i.e. rigid or affine, is of importance. For this
work, an affine registration was selected as it is the preferred method of contour propagation
and more degrees of freedom should in theory allow better conformity of the image volumes.
One very important distinction between rigid and affine transformations, is the scaling ability
of the later. As the analysis conducted in this work only considers DIR, there is a substantial
risk that part of the tumor deformation signal is lost in the scaling of the affine transformation.
Not only this, random noise (from the non-deterministic nature of registration) is also intro-
duced to the DIR deformation signal. The results presented in this work indicates that the later
noise introduced to the deformation signal is low (Section 4.3), however, the impact cannot be
determined directly from this as the scaling is not analyzed. From this, one could hypothesize
that more optimal conformity would be obtained through affine registration while more purified
tumor deformation signal would be obtained through rigid registration. Considering scaling nor-
mally is applied globally (i.e. to the entire image), potentially optimizing the registration to the
tumor volume could provide a more accurate estimation of the tumor scaling, which could then
be accounted for during analysis. Hence, selecting affine over rigid should be chosen carefully
and further investigation in this area is endorsed.
Two of the relevant general limitations of DIR are illuminated in the following. First, it has
been shown that DIR is more prone to errors in regions of smaller intensity gradient, i.e. homo-
geneous tissue [52, 53, 54]. The tumor tissue when displayed via both CT and CBCT is fairly
homogeneous. Furthermore, the tumor often has comparable intensity to surrounding structures
in HN cancer patients. This might cause issues when registering the CT to CBCT or vice versa.
Considering the case of registering the CT to a CBCT, despite being fairly homogeneous the
tumor and its edge is occasionally distinguishable on the CT image, whereas the CBCT displays
very limited differentiation between tumor and surrounding tissue. This could potentially ex-
plain the low predictability indices of the edge voxels presented in Section 4.4.2.
Page 37 of 39
==PAGE:48==
5
DISCUSSION
Secondly, DIR is susceptible to substantial errors when registering open-to-closed (or closed-
to-open) cavities and vanishing structures [20, 55].
The later phenomenon can partially be
explained by the regularization of the vector fields which constraints the variation between
proximate voxels [20]. In other words, regularization ensures smoother vector fields, however,
potentially at the cost of accuracy at cavities. Errors derived from cavities are difficult to reduce
as internal structures change involuntary of the patient. The frequency of imaging theoretically
affects the errors due to vanishing voxels which should be mitigated using daily compared to
weekly imaging as the magnitude of changes are likely smaller in size.
5.3
Future work
To improve the work conducted in this report, several aspects could be investigated. Intra-
modality registration could potentially enhance performance for reasons described earlier. There-
fore, implementation of another registration scheme could be beneficial. For example, the scheme
conducted by Brink et al. [56] in which the first CBCT is registered to the pCT and the subse-
quent CBCTs are registered to the first CBCT. Future work should further investigate α-values
as well as other predicting methods than exponential smoothing. In this work, the optimal
α-value is in contradiction to the result of the prior days image having more predictive ability.
Of other predicting methods, linear extrapolation as conducted in [9], is likely beneficial if (even
weak) linear trends are observed.
The DL models of the literature presented above achieve lower predictive capabilities compared
to the results of this report in terms of DSC, though one should be careful with comparing DSC
between structures [57] and studies. Nonetheless, the only identified study which concurrently
compares a DVF-based and a DL model found improved performance of the later [9]. Therefore,
it is suggested that future work research this and potentially develops a DL model trained on
images acquired daily.
5.4
Perspectives
This work show that predicting the n + 1 DVFs and applying those to the n regCT is less
accurate that using the n regCT in it self, at least in terms of DSC of tumor masks. The potential
of predicting ’tomorrows’ image is to be able to perform daily pseudo-online ART thus having the
adapted treatment plan ready as the patient enters the treatment room. Currently, no proposed
method is able or seemingly able to (i) predict subsequent images with accuracy necessary for
clinical implementation and (ii) predict sudden and dramatic spatial tumor changes. Therefore,
the current algorithms, including the proposed in this work, are limited to identification of
these changes, hence, changing its potential relevance from using predicted images in treatment
planning to alerting clinical personnel of when to do replanning.
Page 38 of 39
==PAGE:49==
6
CONCLUSION
6
Conclusion
The desire for improving cancer treatment is ever more important and research largely aim to
solve this by developing and advancing technology. Therefore, this thesis propose to use IR to
obtain DVFs for prediction of subsequent images. Theoretically, this permits the procedures
of daily pseudo-online ART to be conducted prior to patient arrival thus reducing time that
patient spends one the couch while still adapting the plan to altered anatomy.
This work highlights several difficulties of enabling pseudo-online ART. The comparison between
IR algorithms displayed discrepancies between masks, thus, the choice of IR algorithm likely af-
fects the outcome to a currently unknown extend. With regards to the DVFs, the systematic
component explains only 49% of the observed changes on average suggesting the displacement is
heavily influenced by random factors including noise. In addition, the immense volume of data
makes the analysis extremely time-consuming.
Nonetheless, the algorithm developed in this thesis competently predicts the subsequent image
and tumor mask, thereby enabling daily pseudo-online ART. Though the predictive ability of
the developed algorithm was acceptable, it was found significantly inferior to the use of the prior
days image when DSC of masks were evaluated. Therefore, further development, investigation
of potential improvements and optimization is required before a clinical implementation. It is
also recommended that further work investigates deep learning models.
Page 39 of 39
==PAGE:50==
References
[1] Jacques Ferlay, Murielle Colombet, Isabelle Soerjomataram, Donald M. Parkin, Marion
Pi˜neros, Ariana Znaor, and Freddie Bray. Cancer statistics for the year 2020: An overview.
International Journal of Cancer, 149(4), 2021.
[2] Hyuna Sung, Jacques Ferlay, Rebecca L. Siegel, Mathieu Laversanne, Isabelle Soerjo-
mataram, Ahmedin Jemal, and Freddie Bray. Global Cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN
Estimates of Incidence and Mortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries. CA: A
Cancer Journal for Clinicians, 71(3), 2021.
[3] Grace L. Smith, Maria A. Lopez-Olivo, Pragati G. Advani, Matthew S. Ning, Yimin Geng,
Sharon H. Giordano, and Robert J. Volk. Financial burdens of cancer treatment: A sys-
tematic review of risk factors and outcomes, 2019.
[4] Michael B. Barton, Susannah Jacob, Jesmin Shafiq, Karen Wong, Stephen R. Thompson,
Timothy P. Hanna, and Geoff P. Delaney. Estimating the demand for radiotherapy from
the evidence: A review of changes from 2003 to 2012. Radiotherapy and Oncology, 112(1),
2014.
[5] Michael C. Joiner and Albert J. van der Kogel, editors. Basic Clinical Radiobiology. CRC
Press, Fifth edition. — Boca Raton, FL : CRC Press/Taylor & Francis Group, [2018], 8
2018.
[6] Laura A. Dawson and Michael B. Sharpe. Image-guided radiotherapy: rationale, benefits,
and limitations, 2006.
[7] Meetakshi Gupta, Poonam Gamre, Sadhana Kannan, Ganesh Rokde, Rahul Krishnatry,
and Vedang Murthy. Effect of imaging frequency on PTV margins and geographical miss
during image guided radiation therapy for prostate cancer. Practical Radiation Oncology,
8(2), 2018.
[8] Carri K. Glide-Hurst, Percy Lee, Adam D. Yock, Jeffrey R. Olsen, Minsong Cao, Farzan Sid-
diqui, William Parker, Anthony Doemer, Yi Rong, Amar U. Kishan, Stanley H. Benedict,
X. Allen Li, Beth A. Erickson, Jason W. Sohn, Ying Xiao, and Evan Wuthrick. Adaptive
Radiation Therapy (ART) Strategies and Technical Considerations: A State of the ART
Review From NRG Oncology, 3 2021.
[9] Chuang Wang, Andreas Rimner, Yu Chi Hu, Neelam Tyagi, Jue Jiang, Ellen Yorke, Sadegh
Riyahi, Gig Mageras, Joseph O. Deasy, and Pengpeng Zhang. Toward predicting the evo-
lution of lung tumors during radiotherapy observed on a longitudinal MR imaging study
via a deep learning algorithm. Medical Physics, 46(10), 2019.
[10] Donghoon Lee, Yu chi Hu, Licheng Kuo, Sadegh Alam, Ellen Yorke, Anyi Li, Andreas
Rimner, and Pengpeng Zhang.
Deep learning driven predictive treatment planning for
adaptive radiotherapy of lung cancer. Radiotherapy and Oncology, 169, 2022.
[11] Ling Zhang, Le Lu, Xiaosong Wang, Robert M. Zhu, Mohammadhadi Bagheri, Ronald M.
Summers, and Jianhua Yao. Spatio-Temporal Convolutional LSTMs for Tumor Growth
Prediction by Learning 4D Longitudinal Patient Data.
IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging, 39(4), 2020.
[12] Chuang Wang, Sadegh R Alam, Siyuan Zhang, Yu Chi Hu, Saad Nadeem, Neelam Tyagi,
Andreas Rimner, Wei Lu, Maria Thor, and Pengpeng Zhang. Predicting spatial esophageal
==PAGE:51==
changes in a multimodal longitudinal imaging study via a convolutional recurrent neural
network. Physics in Medicine and Biology, 65(23), 2020.
[13] Nadine Barrie Smith and Andrew Webb. Introduction to Medical Imaging. 2010.
[14] Martin J. Willemink and Peter B. No¨el. The evolution of image reconstruction for CT—from
filtered back projection to artificial intelligence. European Radiology, 29(5), 2019.
[15] Brandon A. Dyer, Chithra K. Nair, Charles E. Deardorff, Cari L. Wright, Julian R. Perks,
and Shyam S. Rao. Linear Accelerator-Based Radiotherapy Simulation Using On-Board
Kilovoltage Cone-Beam Computed Tomography for 3-Dimensional Volumetric Planning
and Rapid Treatment in the Palliative Setting. Technology in cancer research & treatment,
18, 2019.
[16] J. Davies, B. Johnson, and N. A. Drage. Effective doses from cone beam CT investigation
of the jaws. Dentomaxillofacial Radiology, 41(1), 2012.
[17] Gang Li. Patient radiation dose and protection from cone-beam computed tomography.
Imaging Science in Dentistry, 43(2), 2013.
[18] John P. Gibbons. Khan’s the physics of radiation therapy. 2019.
[19] Kavitha Srnivasan, Mohammad Mohammadi, and Justin Shepherd. Applications of linac-
mounted kilovoltage Cone-beam Computed Tomography in modern radiation therapy: A
review. Polish Journal of Radiology, 79:181–193, 2014.
[20] Kristy K. Brock, Sasa Mutic, Todd R. McNutt, Hua Li, and Marc L. Kessler. Use of image
registration and fusion algorithms and techniques in radiotherapy: Report of the AAPM
Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 132: Report. Medical Physics, 44(7):e43–
e76, 2017.
[21] Lisa Gottesfeld Brown. A survey of image registration techniques. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), 24(4), 1992.
[22] L. Ib´a˜nez, L. Ng, J. Gee, and S. Aylward. Registration patterns: The generic framework
for image registration of the insight toolkit. In Proceedings - International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging, volume 2002-January, 2002.
[23] Daniel Rueckert and Julia A Schnabel. Medical Image Registration. In Biomedical Image
Processing, pages 131–154. 2010.
[24] Arno Klein, Jesper Andersson, Babak A. Ardekani, John Ashburner, Brian Avants,
Ming Chang Chiang, Gary E. Christensen, D. Louis Collins, James Gee, Pierre Hellier,
Joo Hyun Song, Mark Jenkinson, Claude Lepage, Daniel Rueckert, Paul Thompson, Tom
Vercauteren, Roger P. Woods, J. John Mann, and Ramin V. Parsey.
Evaluation of 14
nonlinear deformation algorithms applied to human brain MRI registration. NeuroImage,
46(3), 2009.
[25] Donald H. House and John C. Keyser.
Foundations of Physically Based Modeling and
Animation. Foundations of Physically Based Modeling and Animation, 2016.
[26] Brian B. Avants, Nicholas J. Tustison, Gang Song, Philip A. Cook, Arno Klein, and
James C. Gee. A reproducible evaluation of ANTs similarity metric performance in brain
image registration. NeuroImage, 54(3), 2011.
[27] Jean Philippe Thirion.
Non-rigid matching using demons.
In Proceedings of the IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1996.
==PAGE:52==
[28] D Rueckert et al. Nonrigid Registration Using Free-Form Deformations: Application to
Breast MR Images. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 18(8), 1999.
[29] B. B. Avants, C. L. Epstein, M. Grossman, and J. C. Gee.
Symmetric diffeomorphic
image registration with cross-correlation: Evaluating automated labeling of elderly and
neurodegenerative brain. Medical Image Analysis, 12(1), 2008.
[30] Nicholas J. Tustison and Brian B. Avants. Explicit B-spline regularization in diffeomorphic
image registration. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 7(DEC), 2013.
[31] Mingyuan Meng, Lei Bi, Michael Fulham, David Dagan Feng, and Jinman Kim. Enhancing
medical image registration via appearance adjustment networks. NeuroImage, 259(June
2021):119444, 2022.
[32] Matthew Mccormick, Xiaoxiao Liu, Julien Jomier, Charles Marion, and Luis Ibanez. Itk:
Enabling reproducible research and open science. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 8(FEB),
2014.
[33] Terry S. Yoo, Michael J. Ackerman, William E. Lorensen, Will Schroeder, Vikram Chalana,
Stephen Aylward, Dimitris Metaxas, and Ross Whitaker. Engineering and algorithm design
for an image processing API: A technical report on ITK - The Insight Toolkit. In Studies
in Health Technology and Informatics, volume 85, 2002.
[34] Keelin Murphy, Bram Van Ginneken, Joseph M. Reinhardt, Sven Kabus, Kai Ding, Xiang
Deng, Kunlin Cao, Kaifang Du, Gary E. Christensen, Vincent Garcia, Tom Vercauteren,
Nicholas Ayache, Olivier Commowick, Grgoire Malandain, Ben Glocker, Nikos Paragios,
Nassir Navab, Vladlena Gorbunova, Jon Sporring, Marleen De Bruijne, Xiao Han, Mat-
tias P. Heinrich, Julia A. Schnabel, Mark Jenkinson, Cristian Lorenz, Marc Modat, Jamie R.
McClelland, Sebastien Ourselin, Sascha E.A. Muenzing, Max A. Viergever, Dante De Ni-
gris, D. Louis Collins, Tal Arbel, Marta Peroni, Rui Li, Gregory C. Sharp, Alexander
Schmidt-Richberg, Jan Ehrhardt, Ren´e Werner, Dirk Smeets, Dirk Loeckx, Gang Song,
Nicholas Tustison, Brian Avants, James C. Gee, Marius Staring, Stefan Klein, Berend C.
Stoel, Martin Urschler, Manuel Werlberger, Jef Vandemeulebroucke, Simon Rit, David
Sarrut, and Josien P.W. Pluim. Evaluation of registration methods on thoracic CT: The
EMPIRE10 challenge. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 30(11), 2011.
[35] Bin S. Teh, Shiao Y. Woo, and E. Brian Butler. Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy
(IMRT): A New Promising Technology in Radiation Oncology. The Oncologist, 4(6), 1999.
[36] Lei Xing, Brian Thorndyke, Eduard Schreibmann, Yong Yang, Tian Fang Li, Gwe Ya Kim,
Gary Luxton, and Albert Koong. Overview of image-guided radiation therapy. Medical
Dosimetry, 31(2), 2006.
[37] A. Taylor and M. E.B. Powell. Intensity-modulated radiotherapy - What is it?
Cancer
Imaging, 4(2), 2004.
[38] Olga L. Green, Lauren E. Henke, and Geoffrey D. Hugo. Practical Clinical Workflows for
Online and Offline Adaptive Radiation Therapy. Seminars in Radiation Oncology, 29(3),
2019.
[39] Paul Keall, Per Poulsen, and Jeremy T. Booth. See, Think, and Act: Real-Time Adaptive
Radiotherapy. Seminars in Radiation Oncology, 29(3), 2019.
[40] Reinhard Klette and Azriel Rosenfeld. Digital Geometry: Geometric Methods for Digital
Picture Analysis. 2004.
==PAGE:53==
[41] Lee R. Dice. Measures of the Amount of Ecologic Association Between Species. Ecology,
26(3), 1945.
[42] David Mattes, David R. Haynor, Hubert Vesselle, Thomas K. Lewellen, and William Eu-
bank. PET-CT image registration in the chest using free-form deformations. IEEE Trans-
actions on Medical Imaging, 22(1), 2003.
[43] David Mattes, David R Haynor, Hubert Vesselle, Thomas K Lewellyn, and William Eubank.
Nonrigid multimodality image registration. Proc. SPIE Medical Imaging, 4322, 2001.
[44] Ola Weistrand and Stina Svensson.
The ANACONDA algorithm for deformable image
registration in radiotherapy. Medical Physics, 42(1):40–53, 2015.
[45] Xin Zhen, Xuejun Gu, Hao Yan, Linghong Zhou, Xun Jia, and Steve B. Jiang. CT to
cone-beam CT deformable registration with simultaneous intensity correction. Physics in
Medicine and Biology, 57(21), 2012.
[46] Rob J Hyndman and Athanasopoulos George. Forecasting: Principles and Practice. Prin-
ciples of Optimal Design, (September), 2014.
[47] Xixi Li, Yanfei Kang, and Feng Li. Forecasting with time series imaging. Expert Systems
with Applications, 160, 2020.
[48] Ying Zhang, Stacey McGowan Holloway, Megan Zo¨e Wilson, Jailan Alshaikhi, Wenyong
Tan, Gary Royle, and Esther B¨ar. DIR-based models to predict weekly anatomical changes
in head and neck cancer proton therapy. Physics in Medicine and Biology, 67(9), 2022.
[49] Xiaohuan Cao, Jianhuan Yang, Li Wang, Zhong Xue, Qian Wang, and Dinggang Shen.
Deep learning based inter-modality image registration supervised by intra-modality simi-
larity. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), volume 11046 LNCS, 2018.
[50] Xin Zhen, Hao Yan, Linghong Zhou, Xun Jia, and Steve B. Jiang.
Deformable image
registration of CT and truncated cone-beam CT for adaptive radiation therapy. In Physics
in Medicine and Biology, volume 58, 2013.
[51] Ruiqi Li, Arkajyoti Roy, Noah Bice, Neil Kirby, Mohamad Fakhreddine, and Niko Papaniko-
laou. Managing tumor changes during radiotherapy using a deep learning model. Medical
Physics, 48(9), 2021.
[52] Carri K. Glide-Hurst and Indrin J. Chetty.
Improving radiotherapy planning, delivery
accuracy, and normal tissue sparing using cutting edge technologies, 2014.
[53] Hualiang Zhong, Jinkoo Kim, and Indrin J. Chetty. Analysis of deformable image registra-
tion accuracy using computational modeling. Medical Physics, 37(3), 2010.
[54] Neil Kirby, Cynthia Chuang, and Jean Pouliot. A two-dimensional deformable phantom for
quantitatively verifying deformation algorithms. Medical Physics, 38(8), 2011.
[55] Donghoon Lee, Pengpeng Zhang, Saad Nadeem, Sadegh Alam, Jue Jiang, Amanda Caringi,
Natasha Allgood, Michalis Aristophanous, James Mechalakos, and Yu Chi Hu. Predictive
dose accumulation for HN adaptive radiotherapy. Physics in Medicine and Biology, 65(23),
2020.
[56] Carsten Brink, Uffe Bernchou, Anders Bertelsen, Olfred Hansen, Tine Schytte, and
Soren M. Bentzen. Locoregional control of non-small cell lung cancer in relation to au-
tomated early assessment of tumor regression on cone beam computed tomography. Inter-
national Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics, 89(4), 2014.
==PAGE:54==
[57] Rasmus L. Christiansen, Jørgen Johansen, Ruta Zukauskaite, Christian R. Hansen, An-
ders S. Bertelsen, Olfred Hansen, Faisal Mahmood, Carsten Brink, and Uffe Bernchou.
Accuracy of automatic structure propagation for daily magnetic resonance image-guided
head and neck radiotherapy. Acta Oncologica, 60(5):589–597, 5 2021.
