==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis in
Materials and Manufacturing Engineering
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic
components
Author:
Olga Markaki - s202849
Supervisors:
Professor Rajan Ambat
Ph.D. candidate Ioannis Mantis
February 7, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Professor Rajan Ambat, who gave me
the initial opportunity to work on this really interesting and important project.
I would also like to express my special thanks to my co-supervisor Ph.D. candidate Ioannis
Mantis who was helping me through the whole semester to understand every detail of my
project, advising me, and always suggesting ideas that would support my initiatives.
I would like to acknowledge the support of several people from the Mechanical Depart-
ment dynamic, Niklas Brinckman Gammeltoft-Hansen, Peter Jacob Schwencke Westermann,
Ph.D. candidate Anish Rao Lakkaraju, and Postdoc Feng Li who were there always to assist
with carrying through equipment training or samples preparation and solving all kinds of
problems that may have arisen in the laboratory environment.
Last but not least, I would like to say a huge thank you to my family and my friends that
were always by my side from the beginning of this master’s long journey till the end, for the
good as well as for the bad moments.
==PAGE:3==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Nomenclature
AF
Anti-Sulfurated
CT-scan Computerized Tomography scan
Cu
Copper
DI
De-ionized
DUT Device Under Testing
LOM Light Optical Microscope
Ni
Nickel
O
Oxygen
PCB Printed Circuit Board
S
Sulfur
SEM Scanning Electron Microscope
SIR
Surface Insulation Resistance
SM
Solder Mask
SMD Surface Mounted Device
Sn
Tin
XPS
X-ray Photo-electron Spectroscopy
XRD X-ray Diffractometer
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Acknowledgements
1
1
Introduction
6
2
Background and Theory
7
2.1
Corrosion in electronics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Types of corrosion in electronics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Copper based electronics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Silver-based electronics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Test methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Answering the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Materials and Methods
14
3.1
Test samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Experimental Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Characterization techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.1
Imaging Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2
Chemical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.3
Scaling and Hydrophobicity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.4
Cross-section Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Results
23
4.1
Corrosion process confirmation and solder mask effectiveness using PCB . . .
23
4.1.1
Corrosion product confirmation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.2
Solder mask effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.3
Applying voltage effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.4
Test duration effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Conformal coating performance using SIR boards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.1
Coating effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.2
Applying voltage effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.3
Test duration effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Anti-sulfurated over conventional SMD resistors performance . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.1
Anti-sulfur over conventional resistors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.2
Test duration effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Discussion
45
6
Conclusions
50
7
Future Work
51
References
52
3
==PAGE:5==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
A Appendix A: LOM pictures
I
B Appendix B: SEM pictures and EDS analysis
VI
Page 4 of 57
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Nowadays, electronic devices have taken over a significant place in our everyday life.
Among the electronic devices that are used every day, are devices related to telecommu-
nications, computers, sensors, and automotive. A common threat to all these devices
is failure caused by atmospheric corrosion. Even the smallest electronic component in
these devices can suffer corrosion due to high temperatures, high humidity, and corro-
sive gases. Therefore, it is extremely important the understanding of all the different
corrosion processes occurred in humid, warm, and gaseous environments. That is the
reason different tests simulating corrosive environments as well as several accelerated
tests have been developed.
In the current project, the aim is to investigate corrosion in electronics under the con-
ditions of sulfur gas (using Flowers-of-Sulfur testing), 85% humidity, and 85℃temper-
ature. The work included confirmation of the corrosion process itself on PCB, SIR, and
thick film resistors, using the aforementioned conditions, focusing on Copper and Silver
corrosion. The work included also an investigation of the solder mask effect on the cor-
rosion of PCB, an investigation of the coating effect on SIR, and a comparison between
conventional and anti-sulfurated resistors. The analysis of the experiments contained
electrochemical measurements, Light Optical Microscope (LOM), Scanning Electron
Microscope (SEM), X-ray Photo-Spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray Diffraction (XRD), and
CT scan. As a result, corrosion was confirmed, solder mask’s and coating’s protective
effect was proved and anti-sulfurated reinforcement protection was verified. However,
an important conclusion was that moisture levels and exposure duration appeared to
be very important factors.
==PAGE:7==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
1
Introduction
Over the years, electronics have become an integral part of everyday life and so has been
the need for their miniaturization and sophistication. Electronics’ worst enemy, corrosion,
may have been limited to these days though still remains uncontrollable and can cause severe
failures that could lead to total malfunction of the devices. Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs),
the heart of electronics function, in devices such as mobile phones, computers, or electric
cars, are constantly being reported to have failed because of corrosion. Copper and silver
corrosion has become really famous because of their importance in a PCB structure. The
combination of high temperatures, high levels of humidity, and the presence of corrosive
gases such as sulfur gas consists in a common recipe for working failure after some time.
Therefore, this project’s main objective is the investigation of corrosion on electronics
under the conditions of sulfur gas, 85% humidity - 85℃, as well as different exposure duration.
The electronics will be PCBs, Surface Insulation Resistance (SIR) electrodes, and SMD
(Surface Mount Device) resistors. The study will focus on electrochemical measurements and
subsequent imaging observations for the corrosion morphology. Imaging will be conducted
using Light Optical Microscope (LOM) and Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). Imaging
will focus on the undercut of the solder mask in the areas of the copper pads.
Several
further analytical methods that will be conducted are X-ray Photo-Spectroscopy (XPS), X-
ray Diffraction (XRD), and CT scan. The study will also contain a cross-section analysis of
the samples.
More specifically, the plan will be divided into 3 parts. In the first part, copper (Cu)
substrates, with or without a solder mask are exposed to sulfur gas, 85% humidity - 85℃, but
different exposure duration, and voltages, to investigate the protection against corrosion, that
a solder mask can offer, and which one offers the best. In the second part, Cu SIR electrodes
are exposed to a voltage-controlled study with the same conditions as PCBs, while uncoated
or with different thicknesses of the coating. The purpose will be to investigate the protective
effect of the coating. Finally, the third part contains the same experimental procedure, while
exposing four different types of resistors in order to investigate the corrosion of silver.
Page 6 of 57
==PAGE:8==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
2
Background and Theory
2.1
Corrosion in electronics
Electronics are getting a more and more important role in daily life. The need of sizing
down the electronics and thus the electronic components has also increased in the last two
decades. This way electronic devices would be more affordable. More specifically, the size
reduction can be quantified up to 70%. However, the biggest enemy of electronics has always
been and still remains the climate. Climatic reliability issues can cause severe corrosion that
leads to working failure and hence economic loss to both the industry and the consumer [1].
PCBA is a printed circuit board assembly holding all the important electronic micro-scale
and nano-scale features that complete a working device such as a mobile phone, a computer,
or an electric car. A PCBA can hold resistors, capacitors, diodes, transistors all wiring con-
nected. The presence of those several metallic components, of high potential and most likely
humidity, high temperature, and corrosive gases can all build an environment of flourishing
corrosion [1]. Among all the corrosive gases the most commonly found one either in an out-
door or an indoor environment is sulfur. There are several chemical compounds containing
sulfur that can cause corrosion in electronics. Some of them are elemental sulfur (S8 [2]), sul-
fur dioxide (SO2), and hydrogen sulfide (H2S). A sulfuric environment can be found in the
farming industry, in places where automotive oils are, volcanic areas, rubber manufacturing
industries, vehicle exhaust fumes, coal-generation power plants, and petroleum refineries [3].
PCB is a blank PCBA without any components which can also be corroded if exposed
to the same conditions. PCBs not only carry and connect electrical components, but they
must also have efficient electrical insulation between the conductors, otherwise, severe prop-
agating working failures can arise. Some of the most common failures of a PCB could be an
overheated connection which will lead to an increase of resistance or overcurrent and thus
burning of the PCB, contaminants that can also affect the resistivity or the conduction of
the components, component failure or electrochemical migration assisted by the presence of
humidity and electric field [4]. As pointed out also by Haley Fu and her team ([5]), the most
common failures are electrical short circuits due to creep corrosion, electrical open circuits
due to corrosion of silver terminations in resistors, and electrical short circuits due to silver
migration on PCBs. Corrosion is believed to be the first failure cause for chip resistors.
Surface mount thick chip resistors are considered to be among the least expensive and
simple electronic components and are used in several industries such as the automotive
and telecommunications industry. However, because of their high susceptibility to sulfur
corrosion, their presence on a PCB can be very determinant [6].
Electronic parts as well as soldering materials used to contain lead (Pb) which is a highly
toxic chemical element. Over the years lead was replaced with Sn, Ag, and Cu [5]. That is
the reason most of the research around electronics’ corrosion refers to Ag, Sn and Cu.
Page 7 of 57
==PAGE:9==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
2.2
Types of corrosion in electronics
The most frequent corrosion types in electronics are galvanic, uniform, electrochemical, gas-
induced, creep, and fretting. Galvanic or anodic corrosion is an electrochemical process and
in order to occur needs humidity and thus the formation of a water layer which will have the
role of the electrolyte. Once this water film connects two dissimilar metals, one will have
the role of the anode (the most reactive or the least noble one) and the other the role of the
cathode, causing the first one to corrode faster. Fretting corrosion is met on the edges of the
contact surfaces under the presence of loading or repeated movement. Finally, in uniform
corrosion there is a metal loss over the entire metal area, homogeneously. Uniform corrosion
mostly occurs in Ag [7, 8, 9, 10].
However, the most important corrosion types are electrochemical migration and creep cor-
rosion. Gas-induced corrosion is actually connected to creep corrosion. Among the harmful
gases can be sulfur chemical compounds, ozone, or ammonia. Creep corrosion will occur
once the electronic component is exposed to a gaseous environment. It actually starts with
the growth of the corrosion product on the metal surface. The metal surface thickness will
increase, thus resistance will decrease and a leak current or an electric short will appear.
Moisture condensation can add up to gaseous corrosion causing further degradation due to
the dissolution of the ions into the water layer [1, 11]. A creep-humidity corrosion example
can be seen in Figure 2. As seen in Figure 1 of a similar study on PCB, the process of creep
corrosion starts with the absorption of water on the surface, followed by the dissolution of
corrosive ions in it, the diffusion on the Cu substrate, and finally, the re-deposition of the
corrosion product on the surface and extending over the metal edges in the form of dendrites
[12].
Figure 1: Creep corrosion process [12]
Generally, humidity can cause the presence of a water layer on the surface of a PCB. This
layer can facilitate the movement (migration) of metal ions between two oppositely biased and
near electrodes, building pathways called dendrites. This process is called electrochemical
migration (ECM). During ECM, the current is transferred by electrons in the metallic parts
and by ions through the laminate. Several metals such as Sn, Pb, Cu, Ag, and Au are more
susceptible to this process. ECM can lead to an electric short.
Page 8 of 57
==PAGE:10==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Moreover, the presence of process-related contamination ionic residues on the surface,
which can absorb moisture, will turn the existing water layer more conductive, finally leading
to a leak current too. In the scenario of a water gateway into the polymer laminate of the
PCB, the laminate materials interface (glass fiber-resin interface) might debond, ECM might
grow and conductive anodic filament (CAF) will form. CAF is a process taking place in the
sub-surface of the PCB [13, 14].
Two things should be clarified. The first one is the difference between the ECM paths
which are surficial whereas the CAF paths are growing underneath the surface. The second
one is the dendritic formation that occurs in creep corrosion along with humidity can have
multiple starting points compared to the dendritic growth that leads to the ECM paths con-
necting two electrodes and has fewer starting points Figure 3. Moreover, for the dendritic
formation due to creep corrosion, there is no need for potential and thus an electric field.
However, the formation of the ECM paths can take place only in the presence of an electric
field.
Figure 2: Creep corrosion growing on a PCB [3]
Figure 3: Dendritic paths caused by electrochemical migration between two Cu electrodes
[15]
Page 9 of 57
==PAGE:11==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
2.3
Copper based electronics
Copper is one of the most commonly used metals for electronic devices because of its high
electrical and thermal conductivity, ductility, and low cost. However, it is also one of the
most reactive ones [16]. The two most relevant to the current project corrosive environments
(Humidity and Sulfur gas) are mentioned below.
Humidity
As reported ([17]), the interaction between Cu and humidity is simple. During the oxidation
of Cu, several copper oxides are created such as cupric oxide CuO or cuprous oxide Cu2O
[16]. The following chemical reactions display the creation of these oxides.
Cupric oxide (Copper(II) Oxide):
Cu + O2−> 2CuO
Cuprous oxide (Copper(I) Oxide):
2Cu + O2 + H2O−> 2Cu(OH)2
followed by:
2Cu(OH) -> Cu2O + H2O
Sulfur gas
When copper ions react with sulfur ions, in a dry environment, form a layer of copper sulfide
on the surface [18]. Copper sulphidation is a creep corrosion process that lowers the Cu
corrosion resistance, followed by a darkening in the surface’s color. The following chemical
reactions display the creation of Copper(II) Sulfide (CuS) and Copper(I) Sulfide (Cu2S)
[16]. CuS has the properties of a semiconductor whereas Cu2S is non-conductive. If the
corrosion product is removed a green-coloured corroded surface will be revealed [19, 20].
Copper(II) Sulfide:
Cu + S -> CuS
Copper(I) Sulfide:
2Cu + S -> Cu2S
In the presence of humidity, sulfur corrosion may be accelerated, forming different copper
sulfides. In the case that condensation is high and a water layer is built on the surface, then
gas might be dissolved, and sulfur oxides such as SO3 and SO4 can be produced, making
the environment more conductive [16]. However, it also reported that if Cu is exposed to
Page 10 of 57
==PAGE:12==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
humidity, then a passivation layer can also be formed delaying further corrosion processes
containing sulfur [3].
2.4
Silver-based electronics
Dry silver does not react with air and that is the reason it was characterized as a noble
metal. Some of the properties of Ag are high thermal conductivity, electrical conductivity,
and reflectivity [21]. The two most relevant to the current project corrosive environments
(Humidity and Sulfur gas) are mentioned below.
Humidity
As it was mentioned before, Ag does not react with air, thus oxygen. Even under a humid
environment, Ag does not react with oxygen easily. Silver oxides can be created but only
through different indirect processes. Anywise corrosion is a multifactorial complex process.
In the current project, Ag is found on the SMD resistors. In that case, Ag is covered by
Sn/Ni terminations which work as a protective barrier. Therefore, Sn/Ni terminations are
the ones exposed to the environment and subjected to the electrochemical migration effect
[22], creating several oxides.
Sulfur gas
The sulfur reacts with Ag, likewise with Cu but to a smaller extent. In a dry environment, Ag
reacts with sulfur and tarnishes, forming a layer of a black corrosion product. This corrosion
product is actually silver sulfide (Ag2S) [23].
Silver sulfide is non-conductive, hence its
presence will increase the resistance and finally will cause an open circuit or a short circuit
[24]. Silver sulfide (Ag2S) can derive from the following chemical reaction [25]:
2Ag + S2−−> Ag2S + 2e−
As mentioned, silver Sulphide (Ag2S) is not conductive, so even in the presence of humidity
it will remain non-conductive. It will increase the resistivity. However, high humidity levels
can support its dendritic growth and thus the formation of silver sulfide whiskers [21].
2.5
Test methods
Mixed flowing gas and Flowers of Sulfur testing are two of the most common tests regarding
creep corrosion of Cu and Ag. In the decade of 90s organizations like Electronics Industry
Association and the International Electrochemical Commission (IEC) patented tests with
which DUTs would be exposed in different, controlled, and monitored gases amount, tem-
perature, and humidity levels [26].
Page 11 of 57
==PAGE:13==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Mixed-Flowing gases
The idea behind the mixed-flowing gas tests was to reproduce the environmentally corrosive
gases. The first mixed-flow gas test was conducted by Battelle Memorial Institute in the early
1980s in order to visualize Cu and Ag corrosion that occurs in industrial environments [27].
Other similar research took place, involving single or mixed flowing gases [28, 29, 30]. Possible
combinations of the gases were: Hydrogen Sulfide H2S, Chlorine Cl2, Nitrogen Dioxide NO2,
Sulfur Dioxide SO2, Sulfur Trioxide SO3, Ozon O3, Ammonia NH3, Hydrochloric acid HCl,
Hydrofluoric acid HF, or H2S, Carbonyl Sulfide OCS, Carbon Disulfide CS2, SO2 [19].
Hydrogen Sulfide
Single-flowing gas testing was mainly conducted using Hydrogen Sulfide H2S. It is consid-
ered to be one of the most corrosive gases and it is highly toxic to human health as well
as to the environment [31, 16, 32, 33]. Flowing gas testing in slightly different conditions
of temperature and humidity showed that Cu was more corroded in the presence of only
H2S whereas Ag was more corroded under the combination of H2S and NO2 [34]. Addition-
ally, Ag displayed a higher reactivity in lower concentrations of H2S, whereas Cu in higher
concentrations [12].
Flowers of Sulfur
Flowers of sulfur testing (FOS) is a test method for simulating corrosion processes and even
though it was developed later than the mixed-flowing gas tests, it has been proved that it
is a more cost-effective and easy approach than mixed-flowing gas tests, as well as more
successful in revealing creep corrosion [35]. Sulfur vapor is also preferred instead of sulfur-
containing gases such as H2S because sulfur vapor reacts more easily with Cu and Ag to
form (Cu2S) and (Ag2S) respectively [21].
The flowers of sulfur test is conducted inside a sealed box containing a petri dish with sulfur
powder (flowers of sulfur) as sulfur gas source, and the device under testing [36]. Inside the
box, the conditions of temperature and humidity are controlled accordingly to the desired
test.
It has been reported that thermodynamically, sulfur vapor concentration depends
exclusively on the temperature [36]. Usually, humidity is kept stable using a saturated salt
solution and in some cases bleach is used as chlorine gas source [5, 37, 38, 35].
Highly accelerated tests
Last but not least, over the years it was developed the idea of accelerated tests. The purpose
of corrosion accelerated test methods is to simulate years into several days. One commonly
used highly accelerated corrosion test consists of constant 85℃temperature and constant
85% relative humidity. The first time that it was tested was in early 1980s by Jeffrey E.
Gunn [39]. 85℃- 85% testing conducted for different amount of days of exposure and along
with implementation of potential is reported in the literature [40, 41].
Page 12 of 57
==PAGE:14==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
2.6
Answering the problem
Among the remedies for mitigating the effect of atmospheric corrosion in electronics, are the
application of conformal coatings and the alloying of the metals used in electronic parts.
Conformal coatings
Literature findings display a tendency on choosing conformal coatings as a solution to corro-
sion. However, it is also reported that coatings don’t counteract totally corrosion processes,
they just delay them by delaying the absorption of moisture in case of humidity and the
contact of corrosive gases and contaminants with the metal surface. Conformal coatings
can have different thicknesses and can be achieved by brushing, spraying, submerging, or
sputtering for acrylic, epoxy, silicone, urethane, soft silicone gel, and perylene materials
[42, 43, 44, 45]. Conformal coatings can also be metallic and the implementation process
could be electroplating.
An example of metallic coating is a coating (Au, Ni) on a Cu
substrate, having the role of a protective barrier [29].
Alloying
Alloying has displayed an excellent anti-tarnishing effect, especially in the case of silver.
Silver-indium solid solution has been proved to be effective. Moreover, alloying silver with
copper has shown strengthening of silver. Other similar metallic elements chosen in the
literature are palladium (Pd), silicon (Si), tin (Sn), germanium (Ge), and zinc (Zn) [21].
Page 13 of 57
==PAGE:15==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Test samples
The experiment is divided into three parts, and in each one of them, different test samples
are used. In the first part, the devices under testing are PCBs with Cu substrate. There are
3 types of PCBs to be tested, the totally covered PCB with solder mask, the partially covered
PCB, where only the substrate is covered by the solder mask, but not the copper pads and
lines, as well as a bare type of substrate without solder mask (Figure 4). Two different
types of solder masks (SM10, SM14) Table 1 are tested. In the second part, the devices
under testing are Cu SIR electrodes with Acrylate coating and without coating (Figure 5).
More precisely, the coating that was applied on the SIR electrodes was either one layer,
meaning one submerging in a volumetric glass filled with Acrylate, or two layers, meaning
two submergings. Finally, in the third part, the devices under testing are four types of SMD
thick resistors (Table 2), an Anti-Sulfurated Automotive Grade 56.3K Ohm of Yageo, a
conventional thick film 56.3K Ohm of Yageo, a pulse proof 56Ohm of Vishay and a standard
thick film 68Ohm of Vishay.
Figure 4: LOM pictures of 50 magnification from PCBs before testing; (a)bare PCB, (b)PCB
totally covered with SM10, (C)PCB partially covered with SM10, (d)PCB totally covered
with SM14, (e)PCB partially covered with SM14
Figure 5: SIRs before testing; top figure - (a)SIR with coating, bottom figure - (b)SIR
without coating
Page 14 of 57
==PAGE:16==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
PCB
The PCBs structure is displayed in the picture Figure 6.
The substrate of the PCB is
a high-temperature flame retardant type material (HTFR-4) laminate consisting of epoxy
resin material, talc, and reinforced glass fibers. The copper areas contain pads connected
with copper lines, while the solder mask is made out of the materials shown in the Table 1
for each one respectively. Both the laminate and the solder masks materials are penetrable
to water [17].
Figure 6: PCB substrate cross-section structure design.
Solder mask
Coating thickness
Surface energy
Remarks
SM10
22-25µm
40mN/m
Filler barium sulphate & talc,
Poly(Ethylene:Propylene:Diene),
Tygon Polymer,
Ethanesulfonic acid,
Ammonium Thiosulphate
SM14
32-36µm
34mN/m
Solvent developable solder mask,
PMMA,
Polyurethane,
Diallyl maleate, filler talc
Table 1: Types of solder masks used in the experiment; their coating thickness, surface
energy and material details
SIR
The SIR substrate is the same as described for the PCBs. The only difference is the design
of the copper area which contains nothing other than single lines with a smaller distance
between them compared to the ones of the PCBs. Because of its structure, it is commonly
used to test failure resistance regarding current leakage and short circuits caused by dendritic
growth [46].
Page 15 of 57
==PAGE:17==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
SMD Resistors
The structure of the SMD thick film resistors, that are used, is divided in the ceramic
substrate, the internal electrodes separated by a resistive element thick film (usually made
out of a noble metal), a glass protective covering, an epoxy protective covering and the
surrounding nickel/tin terminations (Figure 7).
[a]
[b]
Figure 7: SMD resistor structure [47, 48, 49, 50]; (a)SMD design, (b)SMD cross section
analysis
Resistor name
Sulfur resistance
Manufacturer
Details
Y AF
Anti-sulfurated
AF-series
Yageo
Anti Sulfur,
0603 1% 56.3KOhm
Y Thick
Conventional
Yageo
Thick film,
0603 1% 56.3KOhm
V 56R
Conventional
Vishay
Pulse proof,
0603 1% 56Ohm
V 68R
Conventional
Vishay
Thick film,
0805 1% 68Ohm
Table 2: Resistors used in the experiment; their resistance, size, type, and manufacturer
[47, 48, 49, 50]
3.2
Experimental Methods
The initial idea of the experiment throughout the whole project is based on the Flowers of
Sulfur testing setup. The standard procedure includes the DUT (PCB, SIR, resistor), 100gr
of sulfur powder, and 120mL of DI water in two different volumetric glass cups, respectively,
and an aluminum box, with screws on the lid, where everything is placed in (Figure 8a). The
aluminum box, in the case of biased testing would have a hole on the side letting the cable
out, to connect with a potentiostat. Moreover, the potentiostat settings are 3Volts with a
current limit of 1kA, in order to avoid any burning of the components.
It must be noted that all the test samples are cleaned with DI water and Isopropanol and then
dried prior to any testing. When the box is ready and shielded, is moved into a humidity
Page 16 of 57
==PAGE:18==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
chamber (Figure 8b) where the conditions are kept stable at 85℃temperature and 85%
relative humidity.
[a]
[b]
Figure 8: Experimental setup; (a)Aluminum box containing a bare PCB, a cup with water
and a cup with sulfur powder, (b)Humidity chamber loaded with 4 aluminum boxes
Before starting the experiments, the stability of the conditions inside the boxes is tested
using a Sensirion SHT4x series Smart Gadget. The purpose is to succeed the same temper-
ature and humidity values inside the boxes as it is adjusted in the chamber and that was
monitored by the Sensirion application where all the data are transferred via Bluetooth from
the gadget (Figure 9). The results proved that the conditions were stabilized inside the box
too, after some time.
Figure 9: Aluminum box containing a bare PCB, a cup with water, a cup with sulfur powder,
and the Sensirion SHT4x series Smart Gadget
Page 17 of 57
==PAGE:19==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
PCB testing conditions
Sample/
Exposure time
Unbiased
Biased
No SM
3, 7, and 25 days
3 days
SM10 B2
(Partially covered)
3 and 7 days
3 and 7 days
SM10 B1
(Covered)
3, 7, and 37 days
-
SM14 B2
(Partially covered)
3 and 7 days
3 days
SM14 B1
(Covered)
3, 7, and 37 days
3 and 7 days
Table 3: Experimental plan matrix for PCBs
Regarding PCB exposure at 85% - 85℃, the duration of the tests of this part is decided
to start from 3 days and probably extend to 7 days. Additionally, it is decided to compare
the results of the same test samples with voltage (Biased), and without voltage (Unbiased)
as well as with testing of the bare substrate. After finishing the initial testing plan for 3 and
7 days, the samples that are totally covered by the solder masks will be also exposed for a
longer time, 30 days. This is applied to SM10 B1 and SM14 B1 that are already exposed
for 7 days, unbiased. A long time exposure of 25 days is also applied to the bare type of the
PCB substrate in order to build a weight gain corrosion graph and characterize the corrosion
product.
SIR testing conditions
Sample /
Exposure time
Biased
Unbiased
SIR no coating
3 and 7 days
3 and 7 days
SIR coated 1 layer
3 and 7 days
3 and 7 days
SIR coated 2 layers
3 days
3 days
Table 4: Experimental plan matrix for SIRs
SIRs are also tested at 85% RH - 85℃for 3 and 7 days either biased and unbiased, after
applying one layer of Acrylate coating or as bare substrates. Testing of SIRs with double
coating takes also place biased and unbiased but only for 3 days.
Page 18 of 57
==PAGE:20==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
SMD Resistors testing conditions
Continuing the same exposure settings of 85% RH - 85℃, SMD resistors are exposed for 3,
7, and 10 days. Because of their small size, each resistor is placed inside a petri dish, while
testing, in order to avoid losing it.
Samples/
Exposure Time
Unbiased
Biased
PCB
No SM
3, 7, and 25 days
3 days
SM10 B2 (Partially covered)
3 and 7 days
3 and 7 days
SM10 B1 (Covered)
3, 7, and 37 days
-
SM14 B2 (Partially covered)
3 and 7 days
3 days
SM14 B1 (Covered)
3, 7, and 37 days
3 and 7 days
SIR
SIR uncoated
3 and 7 days
3 and 7 days
SIR coated 1 layer
3 and 7 days
3 and 7 days
SIR coated 2 layers
3 days
3 days
Resistor
Y AF, Y Thick, V56R, V68R
3, 7 and 10 days
-
Table 5: Table showing all tested samples
Page 19 of 57
==PAGE:21==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
3.3
Characterization techniques
All test samples undergo several characterization methods including imaging and chemical-
elemental analysis. A certain number of samples is tested through an electrochemical en-
vironment as it was mentioned in the previous part subsection 3.1, and finally, an even
less amount of them undergoes cross-section analysis, CT scans, hydrophobicity, and scaling
measurements (Table 6). The reason that not all the samples were characterized with all
the methods was the time limitation of the current thesis project realization.
PCB
SIR
Resistors
LOM, SEM,
EDS, XRD, XPS,
Electrochemical measurement,
Scaling, Contact angle
measurement
LOM, SEM,
EDS,
Electrochemical
measurement
LOM, SEM, EDS,
CT scan
Table 6: Characterization techniques used for each electronic component
3.3.1
Imaging Analysis
Imaging analysis is taking place after exposure using Light Optical Microscope (LOM) as
well as using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). However, pictures from unexposed sam-
ples, called references, from all the different kinds of test samples, are also captured using
LOM and SEM. Light optical microscopy helps understand the DUT microstructure and
is conducted with a Keyence Digital Microscope VHX-6000 series. Scanning electron mi-
croscopy gives access to higher-resolution imaging and is conducted with Quanta FEG 250
Analytical ESEM. The conditions that were used while imaging in SEM were 20kVolts and
4 for beam spot size. Samples before entering the SEM chamber were gold coated using
Quorum Coater to increase conductivity. However, when samples were covered with a solder
mask or with an Acrylate coating, even gold coating couldn’t help the conductivity needed
inside SEM’s chamber, that is why lower potential around 15kVolts was applied and lower
spot size of about 3 or 3.5 too. Last but not least, another imaging method that is used
only to analyze the corrosion deformities on resistors is the 2D CT scan for which a Zeiss
XRADIA Versa XRM-410 was used.
3.3.2
Chemical Analysis
After SEM imaging, all samples are subjected to Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy
(EDS or EDX) analysis which gives a better insight into identifying the elements and the
compounds existing on the surface of the DUT. Following the chemical analysis, X-ray
Diffraction (XRD) analysis is also used to analyze only a little amount of powder acquired
Page 20 of 57
==PAGE:22==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
from PCBs of the first part. The PCBs exposed to both high temperature - humidity and
FOS environment, are used to scratch off the corrosion product from the Cu pad surface and
collect the powder to be tested with XRD. The equipment used is a Bruker D8 Advance X-
ray diffractometer with CrKa radiation source of λ = 0.229nm. Moreover, another chemical
characterization method is X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), and it was conducted
on two PCBs prior to XRD analysis. The equipment used is a K-Alpha X-ray Photoelectron
Spectrometer.
3.3.3
Scaling and Hydrophobicity Analysis
Additional to the previous characterization techniques, a scaling measurement is conducted
in one PCB without a solder mask in order to produce a corrosion rate graph. The corrosion
rate analysis followed the procedure of weight gain over time that is also documented in the
literature [51, 52, 53]. Furthermore, hydrophobicity is also measured, for the two different
solder masks of the first part by applying a single droplet of DI water on the non-metal
part of the PCB and observing it over 5 minutes while taking pictures and noting down the
inner angle of each side of the droplet. Fundamentally, if the inner angle is lower than 90°,
it is considered hydrophilic, whereas if it is higher, hydrophobic ([54]). In the case that all
measured angles are lower than 90°, conclusions can be made over the level of hydrophilicity.
The equipment used for the hydrophobicity test is a contact angle machine.
3.3.4
Cross-section Analysis
The samples mentioned in Table 7 are chosen to test their cross-section. Firstly, among the
PCBs, the idea is to show the difference in the corrosion of the minimum and the maximum
time of exposure always compared to a reference sample too. Additionally, regarding the
resistors, the corrosion deformities started being visible in LOM after seven days of exposure
(Appendix A) and that is the reason that all types of resistors exposed for seven days, as
well as the corresponding unexposed ones, are chosen for the cross-section analysis.
For the cross-section analysis, the PCBs are cut into smaller lines to gain better access to
the areas of the pads and the lines between them (Figure 10a) whereas for the resistors the
whole device was used for each cross-section.
All the samples used for the cross-section analysis, are cold embedded in an epoxy resin
(Figure 10b,c). The embedded samples are ground down first with 1000 grid paper and then
4000 grid paper to approach the desired area of the cross-section. Following that, the samples
are polished firstly using Mol 300 polishing plate and Mol R3 lubricant with 3µm diamonds
and afterward using Nap polishing plate and Nap R1 with 1µm diamonds. The procedure is
continuing until the surface has as less scratches as possible. Finally, the embedded samples
are subjected to imaging analysis including LOM and SEM, as well as EDS for elemental
Page 21 of 57
==PAGE:23==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
analysis (Table 8).
[a]
[b]
[c]
Figure 10:
(a) cutted lines from PCB ready for embedding, (b)embedded PCB lines,
(c)embedded resistors
Cold embedded samples
PCBs
Resistors
SM10 covered reference
Y AF 7 days
SM10 covered 85℃/85% 3 days
Y Thick 7 days
SM14 covered 85℃/85% 3 days
V 56R 7 days
SM10 covered 85℃/85% 37 days
V 68R 7 days
SM14 covered 85℃/85% 37 days
Table 7: Samples chosen to be cold embedded
Cold embedded samples
PCBs
Resistors
LOM, SEM, EDS
LOM, SEM, EDS
Table 8: Characterization techniques used for cold embedded samples
Page 22 of 57
==PAGE:24==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
4
Results
4.1
Corrosion process confirmation and solder mask effectiveness
using PCB
4.1.1
Corrosion product confirmation
The most important question during the testing, using the present setup, was whether there
is any corrosion effect on the electronic components. Therefore, in the first experiments that
were conducted using PCB, a bare PCB without any solder mask was exposed for 25 days in
order to investigate the weight gain that would be induced by the corrosion product build-
up on the surface. An XPS analysis was first conducted on the same sample, and finally
an XRD analysis on the powder of its corrosion product, in order to identify the elemental
synthesis of the corrosion product.
Corrosion rate
A bare PCB was exposed for 25 days to 85% −85℃and sulfur powder.
The purpose
was to check whether corrosion is taking place and to build a corrosion rate (weight gain
rate) graph. Therefore, the days 1, 2, 4, 7, 15, 21, and 24 the aluminum box with the
PCB was taken out to measure PCB mass. The weight gain was calculated by subtracting
the measured mass each time from the initial one. Following, the corrosion rate or weight
gain rate was calculated by dividing the weight gain, by the total surface of the exposed
copper area (164mm), and by the time (Figure 11). In the beginning, the weight gain graph
started having a high slope but continued with a lower slope, which means the weight gain is
increasing over time in the start, but then the corrosion product build-up started decreasing.
That comes along with the slope of the corrosion rate which is also larger at the beginning
but then becomes smaller.
XPS
As far as the corrosion product is concerned, it was first tested using XPS on the PCB
copper area. The measurement was conducted on a bare PCB sample exposed for 3 days
biased and on an SM10 partially covered sample exposed for 7 days biased. In Figure 12,
the results of the XPS focusing on Cu, O, and S binding energies are displayed. The energy
peaks of Cu for the range 931eV to 934eV , approximately, show the presence of Cu, Cu2S
(Copper(I) Sulfide), CuS (Copper (II) Sulfide) and Cu2O (Copper Dioxide). Additionally,
the energy peaks of S for 160eV to 164eV confirm the presence of Sulfides. Finally, the
energy peaks of O for the range of 528eV to 533eV show the presence of Sulfates (SO4
2−).
The experimental results confirm what was expected from the chemical elements involved in
the setup.
Page 23 of 57
==PAGE:25==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 11: Weight gain rate graph of bare PCB exposed for 25 days; left y axis: weight gain
over surface and time, right y axis: Weight gain, x axis: time
[a]
[b]
[c]
Figure 12: XPS results; (a)Binding energies for Cu, (b)Binding energies for S, (c)Binding
energies for O; Top row showing the acquired findings for sample SM10 B2 after 7 days
biased; Bottom row showing the acquired findings for sample Bare PCB after 3 days biased
XRD
The corrosion product was also tested with XRD using the powder acquired after scratching
the copper area from the surface of the bare PCB that was exposed for 25 days to 85%−85℃
and to sulfur environment. In Figure 14, an area on the exposed surface of the specific PCB
can be also seen. As is expected, underneath the scratched area, where the corrosion product
Page 24 of 57
==PAGE:26==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
was taken from, the color of the substrate is light green, which has also been mentioned in
the literature [19, 20].
The characteristic peaks acquired from XRD are displayed in the following Figure 13. Af-
ter running through the corresponding XRD library, EVA, the identified characteristic peaks
(in star) are belonging to the following compounds CuS, Cu4(S2)2(CuS)2, Cu2S, Cu4O3,
Cu2O, CuO. It is observed that several Copper Oxides and Copper Sulfides are confirmed.
However, a specific copper sulfide called Covellite in this state Cu4(S2)2(CuS)2, is the one
chemical compound that prevails over the rest, for the higher intensity peaks.
Figure 13: XRD characteristic peaks of bare PCB exposed for 25 days; Axis: Intensity over
2-Theta angle ranging from 20° to 75°; at the bottom of the figure the 6 identified compounds:
CuS, Cu4(S2)2(CuS)2, Cu2S, Cu4O3, Cu2O, CuO
Figure 14: Corroded copper substrate of bare PCB after 25 days exposure time to humidity
turns green
Page 25 of 57
==PAGE:27==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
4.1.2
Solder mask effect
Following, while testing the PCBs, the difference in the existence and the quality of a solder
mask was investigated first, comparing unbiased samples only. Taking a look at the LOM
findings of Figure 15(i), it is apparent that No SM sample (bare PCB) after 7 days of
exposure has a built black layer over the whole copper area which means it is totally corroded
(Figure 15 (i)j), compared to its reference one. The same happens for SM10 and SM14 B2
samples that have uncovered the copper area of the pads (Figure 15(i)d, h). However, for
the samples SM10 and SM14 B1 the only thing that is changed is the color of the solder
mask from green to an orange shade (Figure 15(i)d, f).
In Figure 15(ii), SEM pictures of specific samples exposed for 7 days are selected to
be displayed, compared to a reference one of a bare PCB Figure 15(ii)a. In all of them,
corrosion build-up seen in LOM pictures, is confirmed. In the samples that have a solder
mark surrounding the copper pad, the build-up is much more centralized (Figure 15(ii)b,
c) than in the bare PCB (Figure 15(ii)d), where it is concentrated near the interface of the
copper pad with the laminate.
EDS analysis as it is shown in the Appendix B, indeed for the PCBs with uncovered
copper areas, presents a high weight percentage of Cu (80%) and a lower of O and S (10%),
for the 7 days of exposure. However, in totally covered PCBs, it is impossible to detect any
Cu but O.
Finally, for the investigation of the two solder mask efficiency, hydrophobicity was also
tested using a contact angle machine. The results are displayed in Figure 16. The contact
angles (inner angles) of SM10 either in t0 or after 5 minutes are still slightly higher than
the ones of SM14.
From this result, it is understood that SM10 must be slightly more
hydrophobic. Further analysis will take place in the Discussion (section 5).
Page 26 of 57
==PAGE:28==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
[i]
[ii]
Figure 15: (i)LOM pictures of 50 magnification from different unbiased PCBs; each row a
different PCB mentioned to the left; 1st column: unexposed (reference) PCBs; 2nd column:
PCBs after 7 days of exposure, (ii)SEM pictures of 26 magnification from different PCBs;
each row a different PCB mentioned to the left; 1st column: unexposed PCB; 2nd column:
PCBs after 7 days of exposure
Figure 16: Contact angle results of unexposed PCBs laminate; First row: sample SM10 B1
and second row: sample SM14 B1 as described to the left; First column: both samples at
time 0 and second column: both samples at t=5min as described to the top
Page 27 of 57
==PAGE:29==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
4.1.3
Applying voltage effect
Another investigation that took place while testing, was the ascertainment of whether voltage
would have a determinant role in the corrosion process or not. In Figure 17, pictures of three
different samples exposed for three days, either biased or unbiased, can be seen. Bare PCB
(Figure 17a, b) presents in both tests the black color of the corrosion product as well as a
dendritic growth of it on the laminate. However, it is obvious that the dendritic growth is
larger while being biased. That is not the case for SM14 B2 where in both tests the corrosion
product build-up seems to be the same and confined on the copper pad borders. Last but not
least, for SM14 B1, three days of exposure were not enough to show any change compared
to the reference picture of this specimen (Figure 15 (i)e).
Figure 17: LOM pictures of 200 magnification from PCBs exposed for 3 days; each column:
different sample; first row: Unbiased samples; second row: biased samples
The corresponding SEM pictures (Figure 18) to the LOM confirm the findings. Something
to be noted is that the image of SM14 B1 in both tests, couldn’t be clear because of the
solder mask layer which is a polymer and hence not conductive enough to be detected in
SEM.
EDS analysis for 3 days biased or unbiased as it is shown in the Appendix B, indicates
a high weight percentage of Cu (80%) and a lower and approximately the same for O and
S. However, in totally covered PCBs, it is impossible to detect any Cu, except the sample
SM14 B1 where it is detected an amount of approximately Cu-20%, high percentage of O
and a small amount of S.
In Figure 20 a graph of current over time is displayed for PCB samples exposed for 3
days. Apart from one sample SM14 B2 (uncovered pads), the current of all the rest was
measured using the same potentiostat. In Figure 21 a graph of current over time is also
Page 28 of 57
==PAGE:30==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
displayed but for PCB samples exposed for 7 days. Both samples were measured with the
same potentiostat, though due to potentiostat’s failure, the measurement was stopped and
restarted for both of them. The only and common outcome for both figures is that there
was no high current in any case and the differences are really small.
Figure 18: SEM pictures of 26 magnification from PCBs exposed for 3 days; each column:
different sample; first row: Unbiased samples; second row: biased samples
Figure 19: SEM picture of bare PCB exposed for 3 days unbiased at x25 and x200 magnifi-
cation along with EDS mapping proving the existence of Copper sulfides and Copper oxides
in the dendrites on the surface of the laminate
Page 29 of 57
==PAGE:31==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 20: Current over time graphs for biased exposed PCBs for 3 days
Figure 21: Current over time graphs for biased exposed PCBs for 7 days
Page 30 of 57
==PAGE:32==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
4.1.4
Test duration effect
Figure 22: LOM pictures of 200 magnification from PCBs; each column: different sample as
described from the top; first row: 3 days exposure; second row: 37 days exposure
The last investigation subject for the PCBs was the effect of the test duration. As it can
be seen in Figure 22, after 37 days even totally covered PCB samples had visible changes.
LOM pictures of PCBs from the Appendix A can confirm that deformities started being
detectable from 7 to 14 days. SM14 B1 of 37 days presents a more yellowish color compared
to the one of 3 days and a blistering formation all over the area of the solder mask with no
apparent corrosion growth, whereas SM10 B1 of 37 days has some obvious corroded areas
as the one showed in the figure, as well as extended blisters.
In the following figure (Figure 23), SEM pictures do not have a nice imaging result because
of the polymer solder mask covering, as it is mentioned before. However, the results of LOM
can be confirmed. Focusing on the corrosion product of SM10 B1 exposed for 37 days, in
Figure 23 it is presented the EDS maps and elemental analysis of Cu, S and O for the black
marked rectangular area of the sample surface. The EDS maps show clearly the growth of
Cu and S over the solder mask which indicates the creation of a path from the substrate to
the surface. The weight percentage of Cu, S, and O are also high, leading to the assumption
of some copper sulfides and copper oxides formation. During EDS analysis for the rest of
the samples, no Cu or S could be detected (Appendix B).
Page 31 of 57
==PAGE:33==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 23: (a) SEM picture (26 magnification) of SM14 B1 exposed for 3 days; (b) SEM pic-
ture (26 magnification) of SM14 B1 exposed for 37 days; (c) SEM picture (26 magnification)
of SM10 B1 exposed for 3 days; (d)SEM picture (26 magnification) of SM10 B1 exposed
for 37 days, along with EDS maps of the black marked rectangular area and EDS counted
weight percentage of Cu, O, and S in the area
Cross-section study
A cross-sectional analysis was decided to take place on the samples that developed corrosion.
Currently, the SM10 B1 of 37 days cross-section is selected to be presented as in Figure 24.
Compared to the reference image, it is clearly seen that there is a growth of corrosion. Maybe
if the sample underwent more grinding, corrosion growth would be more visible.
However, the deformities of SM10 B1 exposed for 37 days are also visible in SEM picture
(Figure 25), where the white-marked rectangular surface area is magnified x1000 and ana-
lyzed in EDS. EDS maps indicate the presence of Cu on the top of the PCB and a spread
presence of S. The solder mask, in that case, could have a crack leading to an outflow of Cu
but that does not happen for the S too.
Page 32 of 57
==PAGE:34==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 24: LOM pictures of 200 magnification for SM10 B1 unexposed (left picture) and
exposed for 37 days (right picture)
Figure 25: (a) SEM picture (200 magnification) of SM10 B1 unexposed; (b) SEM picture (300
magnification) of SM10 B1 exposed for 37 days, along with SEM picture (1014 magnification)
of SM10 B1 exposed for 37 days, EDS maps of the white marked rectangular area and EDS
counted weight percentage of Cu, O and S in the area
4.2
Conformal coating performance using SIR boards
4.2.1
Coating effect
The first thing that was investigated for SIRs was the corrosion growth on unbiased SIR
boards with coating compared to corrosion growth on bare boards. The following LOM
pictures of a SIR with no coating after 3 days of exposure, present clearly corrosion growth
(Figure 26b) compared to the reference boards. SIR with 1 layer coating (Figure 26d) also
has the repetitive black color over the Cu pads, but in this case, it is more confined and it
doesn’t grow over the SIR laminate. In all the cases the board and the coating color turned
more yellow. Even though in the SIR with the double layer coating (Figure 26d), the coating
has turned nontransparent too, it is still visible that the Cu substrate has also turned black
due to sulfur.
Page 33 of 57
==PAGE:35==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 26: LOM pictures of SIRs with different coating layers at 200 magnification; each
row: different sample as described to the left of the figure; first column: unexposed samples;
second column: exposed for 3 days
In Figure 27, it can be seen that SEM pictures of coated SIRs are difficult to be captured
because of the non-conductive coating. Bare SIR reproduces clearly the LOM results over
the corrosion growth. However, SIR with 1 layer and double layer coating look like they are
intact. EDS analysis (Figure 28) confirms that. SIR with no coating shows the Cu and S
presence around the tip of the Cu line and EDS elemental analysis gives the high Cu weight
percentage followed by S and last O. That does not happen for the SIR with coating, neither
with 1 layer nor with 2 layers (Appendix A).
Page 34 of 57
==PAGE:36==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 27: SEM pictures of SIRs with different coating layers at 30 magnification; each
row: different sample as described to the left of the figure; first column: unexposed samples;
second column: exposed for 3 days
Figure 28: EDS maps and elemental analysis of the black marked rectangular area from the
two first samples from Figure 27, respectively
Page 35 of 57
==PAGE:37==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
4.2.2
Applying voltage effect
Following that, the effect of applying voltage was also tested for SIR. The optical difference
between the SIRs exposed for 3 days with the SIRs exposed for 3 days biased is really small
(Figure 29). Biased bare SIR has a larger dendritic growth around the interface of Cu lines
and laminate. Biased SIR with 1 layer coating seems to be delaminated from the surface
compared to the unbiased one which has only some blisters. Finally, biased SIR with double
coating seems to be more transparent but still corroded.
Figure 29: LOM pictures of SIRs with different coating layers at 200 magnification; each
row: different sample as described to the left of the figure; first column: samples exposed
for 3 days unbiased; second column: samples exposed for 3 days biased
As it is already mentioned in subsubsection 4.2.1, SEM pictures for coated samples are
not well captured but still, it can be seen the corrosion growth in the biased bare SIR after 3
days of exposure (Figure 30). EDS analysis (Figure 31) confirms the presence of Cu, O, and
S around the tip of the Cu line for the bare SIR but not for the coated ones. EDS detected
again only a high percentage of O for the former cases.
Page 36 of 57
==PAGE:38==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 30: SEM pictures of SIRs with different coating layers at 200 magnification; each
row: different sample as described to the left of the figure; first column: samples exposed
for 3 days unbiased; second column: samples exposed for 3 days biased
Figure 31: EDS maps and elemental analysis of the black marked rectangular area from the
two first samples from Figure 30, respectively
In Figure 32 a graph of current over time is displayed for SIR samples exposed for 3 days.
In Figure 33 a graph of current over time is also displayed but for PCB samples exposed
for 7 days. All samples were measured with the same potentiostat. The common outcome
again for these two graphs is that there was no high current in any case and the differences
are really small.
Page 37 of 57
==PAGE:39==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 32: Current over time graphs for biased exposed SIRs for 3 days
Figure 33: Current over time graphs for biased exposed SIRs for 7 days
4.2.3
Test duration effect
Investigating if test duration would affect the corrosion results also applied for SIRs. Based
on Figure 34, 7 days exposure created much more corrosion than the 3 days exposure.
Dendritic growth in bare SIR seems to be larger. It also starts appearing in 1 layer-coated
SIR along with a high substrate darkening.
Page 38 of 57
==PAGE:40==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 34: LOM pictures of SIRs with different coating layers at 200 magnification; each
row: different sample as described to the left of the figure; first column: samples exposed
for 3 days; second column: samples exposed for 7 days
In Figure 35, SEM pictures, it can be seen the corrosion growth over the bare SIR after
3 and 7 days of exposure, as well as the also larger corrosion growth around the lines of
the exposed for 7 days coated SIR compared to the one that was exposed for 3 days. EDS
analysis (Figure 36) indeed confirms the presence of Cu, O, and S for the bare SIRs. It
also gives a high percentage of Cu for the coated SIR which agrees with the larger corrosion
growth of SEM and LOM pictures leading to the outcome of possible cracks over the coating
surface.
Figure 35: SEM pictures of SIRs with different coating layers at 30 magnification; each row:
different sample as described to the left of the figure; first column: samples exposed for 3
days; second column: samples exposed for 7 days
Page 39 of 57
==PAGE:41==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 36: EDS maps and elemental analysis of the black marked rectangular area from the
two first samples from Figure 35, respectively
4.3
Anti-sulfurated over conventional SMD resistors performance
4.3.1
Anti-sulfur over conventional resistors
The efficacy of the targeted anti-sulfurated resistors over the conventional ones is the first
thing to be investigated for this part. Observing the LOM pictures of Figure 37, indeed it is
visible that all the resistors displayed deformities on their surface after 7 days of exposure,
whereas Yageo AF did not. As it is pointed out by the red circles, blistering occurred on the
glass layer / overcoat of the resistors.
Figure 37: LOM pictures of different resistors after 7 days of exposure compared to reference;
Each column: different resistor type; First row: unexposed resistors; Second row: resistors
exposed for 7 days; In red circles any deformities are marked. Magnification for a-f is x200
whereas for g-h is x150.
Page 40 of 57
==PAGE:42==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
CT scan was conducted in order to have further insight into the corrosion that might have
occurred in the internal structure of the resistors. CT-scan (Figure 38) shows that there are
some deformities on the edge of the darker grey areas in Yageo AF, Yageo conventional 56K,
and Vishay 56R. These darker grey areas could be the Ni/Sn termination or the inner actual
Ag electrode. Since the resolution of the images is not high, it is not so easy to produce an
accurate outcome. Most likely this is the area of the Ni/Sn termination, though Yageo AF
did not show any surficial change in the termination and in the same concept, Vishay 68R
showed surficial deformities that are not visible here.
Figure 38: CT scan pictures of different resistors after 7 days of exposure compared to
reference; Each column: different resistor type; First row: unexposed resistors; Second row:
resistors exposed for 7 days; In red circles any deformities are marked.
However, there was a further investigation on the resistors, that were exposed for 7 days,
by embedding them and analyzing their cross-section to the areas it seems there is corrosion
as presented in Figure 37. Surprisingly, LOM pictures (Figure 39) of Yageo AF confirmed
there were no corrosion deformities, Yageo Conventional K and Vishay 68R also confirmed
their deformities in the interface of the termination with the overcoat, whereas Vishay 56R
cross-section did not show something.
Figure 39: LOM pictures of cold embedded resistors’ cross-section that were exposed initially
for 7 days; Magnification for a-c is x200 whereas for d is x150.
Page 41 of 57
==PAGE:43==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
SEM pictures were taken for all the samples (Appendix B). Nevertheless, it was decided
to show the ones of the samples with confirmed corrosion-induced deformities. The blisters
of Yageo conventional 56K are presented in x50 in Figure 40a and in x500 magnification
in Figure 40b, focusing on the left blister or void. EDS mapping (Figure 40a) reveals the
existence of S in the center of the resistor which is probably above the overcoat and a spread
presence of Ag in a longer area than that of the electrodes’ position. In (Figure 40b) it
is apparent that Ag has cracked inside the blister/void but S doesn’t show any clear path
of entering in the blister from the surface. That is also confirmed by the EDS elemental
analysis.
[a]
[b]
Figure 40: SEM pictures along with EDS maps of the red marked circled areas as displayed
in Figure 39b (sample Yageo Conventional 56K); (a)SEM picture and EDS maps of sample
Yageo Conventional 56K at x50 magnification; (b)SEM picture, EDS analysis, and EDS
maps of sample Yageo Conventional 56K at x500 magnification
The blister of Vishay 68R is displayed in x500 magnification in Figure 41.
The EDS
mapping for the white marked area of the image indicates the crack over the Ag electrode
inside the blister/void, as well as the presence of S on the surface of the cross-section of the
blister/void. It could be that there is a path for the sulfur to enter into the void right in the
interface of the Sn/Ni terminations and glass overcoat. It could also be again that sulfur
was just spread over the surface while grinding and polishing. Anywise, the EDS elemental
analysis showed that the Ag weight percentage is high, whereas the S weight percentage is
Page 42 of 57
==PAGE:44==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
again too low.
Figure 41: SEM picture along with EDS maps and elemental analysis of the red marked
circled area as displayed in Figure 39d (sample Vishay 68R) at x500 magnification
4.3.2
Test duration effect
The second and last investigation conducted on the resistors was about the duration of the
exposure, which showed that seven days of exposure caused as many deformities as ten days
did (Figure 42). Yageo Anti-sulfurated resistor still doesn’t show any visible sign of corrosion
on the overcoat surface or the interface with the Ni/Sn terminations. The only difference is
that in 10 days, the Ni/Sn termination has started to get a yellow shade, for all the resistors.
CT scan (Figure 43) shows that there are some deformities on the edge of the darker
grey areas in Yageo AF, Yageo conventional 56K, and Vishay 56R. These darker grey areas
could be the Ni/Sn termination or the inner actual Ag electrode as it was discussed before
(subsubsection 4.3.1). However, since the resolution of the images is not high, it could be
assumed that this is the area of the Ni/Sn termination. Yageo AF now does show changes
whereas in LOM pictures there wasn’t any and Vishay 68R showed surficial deformities
before that are not visible here.
Page 43 of 57
==PAGE:45==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 42: LOM pictures of different resistors after 7 10 days of exposure; Each column:
different resistor type; First row: resistors exposed for 7 days; Second row: resistors exposed
for 10 days; In red circles any deformities are marked. Magnification for a-f is x200 whereas
for g-h is x150.
Figure 43: CT scan pictures of different resistors after 7 10 days of exposure; Each column:
different resistor type; First row: resistors exposed for 7 days; Second row: resistors exposed
for 10 days; In red circles any deformities are marked. Magnification for a-f is x200 whereas
for g-h is x150.
Page 44 of 57
==PAGE:46==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
5
Discussion
Corrosion process confirmation and solder mask effectiveness using PCB
Regarding Cu corrosion, it was clearly visible (Figure 11) that the weight gain of the PCB is
increasing over time until it reaches a saturation point where the corrosion product together
with moisture could flow down the PCB and then weight gain starts decreasing. The reasons
for the weight gain are the corrosion product build-up over the copper surface, as well as
any possibly absorbed moisture in the laminate surface area of the PCB.
XPS and XRD confirmed perfectly the presence of several types of copper oxides and
copper sulfides that were expected as corrosion products. The binding energy peaks of XPS
results correspond to the documented peaks from the XPS handbook [55] as shown in the
following Figure 44 as well as in further literature using XPS [56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64].
Figure 44: Characteristic binding energies for 2p3/2 Copper, 2p3/2 Sulfur and 1s Oxygen as
given by the literature [55]
However, there are some apparent differences in the expected characteristic binding en-
ergies of each element, firstly between the literature energy values and the experimental
findings as well as between the measurements of the two different samples even though they
have the same corrosion product (Figure 12). A possible reason for the differences in the
intensity or the width of the peaks as well as maybe the small peak shifting between the
literature and the experiment could be the confusion of different electron energies, whereas
the differences between the results of the two samples could be simply the different surface
morphology. An important issue to be mentioned is the splitting of the main and characteris-
tic peaks of each element which is basically due to the detection of two states of the element.
Moreover, the additional peaks that are not highlighted, represent the satellite peaks, where
the same corresponding element is detected but with different binding energies.
As far as the XRD analysis is concerned, the texture-type form that the graphs Figure 13
display, with different peaks and intensities that are recorded for the same phases in the
Page 45 of 57
==PAGE:47==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
literature [56, 57], could be the result of different grain sizes on the sample surface which are
blocking the detection of all the possible characteristic peaks.
Corrosion product growth was obvious in LOM pictures of all uncovered samples. The
copper and sulfur reaction is what gives the dark grey-black color after sulfur is dissolved
in copper and represents creep corrosion. Solder masks definitely offered protection either
on the whole PCB, when it was totally covered or only in the lines, when it was partially
covered, by preventing the further expansion of the corrosion from the pads to the lines.
Nevertheless, no significant information can be made about the quality of each solder mask
just from those results. That agrees also with the armlock that the EDS analysis reached,
as well as the contact angle analysis, as will be mentioned below.
Regarding contact angle analysis, from Table 1 in subsection 3.1, it is expected that
since SM10 has higher energy it will have a smaller inner contact angle and it will be more
hydrophilic than SM14 which does not confirm the contact angle results (Figure 16) but
confirms the imaging results. Moreover, the smaller coating thickness of SM10 comes along
with the fact that it is the more corroded one since water molecules could penetrate easier the
surface and build a larger moisture layer. Furthermore, an important note to make is that
Ethanesulfonic acid which is a component of the solder mask 10 material might function
as a source of sulfur which could easily accelerate the corrosion process and darken the
corrosion product. Therefore, thickness and chemistry do agree on the idea of SM10 being
easily corroded compared to SM14, whereas the technical information does not. All of the
above amplify the fact that the difference in the experimental results from the contact angle
test, between the two solder masks, is really small to lead to an accurate hydrophobicity
conclusion, even more, when the comparison takes place among two different solder masks.
When applying voltage, it did not have any impact on the current as it is presented
in Figure 20 and Figure 21. Yet still, LOM pictures revealed that dendritic growth was
amplified [22]. Therefore, creep corrosion exists since there is a graduate dendritic growth
[12]. However, the dendrites do not seem to bridge the conducting pads or lines in any sample
of the current project. This could lead to the conclusion that probably the condensation was
not enough to help the electrochemical migration take place.
As it is also stated in the literature ([3]), when Cu is exposed to humidity and oxygen,
a passivation layer can form on the surface, delaying further corrosive reaction between Cu
and S. However, in this case, probably in the presence of Sulfur gas, the copper is engaged
in a reaction with sulfur and so copper oxides do not flourish, leading to weakening the
electrochemical effect [16].
Test duration has definitely a high impact on the results.
After almost a month (37
days), the corrosion had started being visible on the totally covered PCBs too (Figure 22b,
d). SM10 B1 presented a high growth of corrosion having extended areas of blistering and
several areas turning black, whereas SM14 B1 displayed only several blistering formations
all over the surface and a sign of a crack on the laminate area. Laminate blisters found to be
Page 46 of 57
==PAGE:48==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
already documented in the literature [17]. Corrosion in PCBs, apparently, most likely occurs
depending on the solder mask thickness, chemistry, microstructure, porosity, and roughness
[65].
One of the initial goals was to focus on the corrosion happening on the undercut of the
PCB, the area between Cu lines, and the laminate. In general, plane PCB makes it difficult
to see any corrosion in the undercut. However, in this case of SM10 B1 exposed for 37 days
unbiased, it can be assumed that the corrosion growth started from the undercuts of the line
Figure 22d.
As far as the EDS analysis is concerned, so far, it could not show anything important
regarding the totally covered solder masks, but it gave information for the partially covered
as expected with the higher weight percentage of Cu, then S and last O. For the case of
SM10 B1 exposed for 37 days, EDS maps, as well as elemental analysis, showed activity
of Cu, S, and O on the surface (Figure 23), which was confirmed by the EDS maps of the
cross-sectional area of the same sample (Figure 25). EDS analysis of the cross-section showed
Cu and O but not S. More specifically, it did not actually present a connection path of the
surface to the substrate that could be linked to S migration. As it seems further inside
the embedded sample there is a bigger dark area (Figure 24). Maybe that means that if
grinding was continued then the spot where corrosion started it could have been revealed.
Cross-sectional analysis showed the corroded Cu line of SM10 B1 but not the blisters of
SM14 B1.
From all the above, the most rational outcome would be that solder masks indeed are
efficient and that the thicker the solder mask is, the longer it takes to corrode.
Conformal coating performance using SIR boards
Since the structure of a SIR is similar to that of a PCB, many things are the same considering
the analysis. After investigating the protective effect of a coating, it arises that a coating
definitely sustains Cu corrosion, mostly from moisture rather than from S, as it is apparent
that the Cu lines have acquired a dark color even underneath 2 layers of coating (Figure 26).
Applying voltage did not have almost any effect on the current as it is presented in
Figure 32 and Figure 33. Yet still, LOM pictures revealed that dendritic growth was amplified
(Figure 29), as was also seen in the PCB study.
Nonetheless, test duration was again important. LOM pictures (Figure 34) showed larger
corrosion growth after 7 days even for the sample with 1 layer of coating (Appendix A).
EDS analysis showed clearly the presence of Cu, S, and O, for the uncoated samples,
revealing the presence of some copper oxides or copper sulfides. EDS analysis was not clear
for the coated samples either with one or 2 layers of coating. However, for the sample with 1
layer of coating exposed for 7 days unbiased, EDS mapping, as well as, the elemental analysis
Page 47 of 57
==PAGE:49==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
indicated a high weight percentage of Cu together with O, not as high as for the uncoated
but high enough to highlight (Appendix B).
In total, the coating fulfilled its purpose of protecting the board, since corrosion on the
coated SIR is less than on the uncoated ones. However, it was noticed a weird behavior of the
double-layer coating wherever it was applied. Firstly, in Figure 29e, the double layer seemed
to get non-transparent and expanded while testing for 3 days without voltage, whereas in
Figure 29f, it appeared to be more transparent and clear. Since coloring is a sulfur-induced
effect, it was expected either way. Nevertheless, the expansion result and thus transparency
problem could be attributed to a coating application mistake. Therefore, not solid conclu-
sion regarding coating thickness effectiveness can be made out of that.
Anti-sulfurated over conventional SMD resistors performance
In the last part, testing of resistors was conducted in order to investigate also Ag corrosion
in a sulfuric and humid environment.
Anti-sulfurated resistors definitely showed higher corrosion resistance than the rest con-
ventional ones. LOM pictures of the resistors (Figure 37), as well as their cross-sections of
them (Figure 39) revealed some kind of deformities like blistering or volumetric expansion
(voids) close to the interface of the overcoat and the terminations. SEM pictures followed by
EDS mapping revealed that inside those voids there were cracked Ag traces spread. However,
there was no evidence of sulfur inside the voids or any sign of an inflow path for the sulfur
to penetrate from the surface or even if it could be as in Figure 40b, it was not confirmed
by EDS analysis. Regarding the extended trace of S over the surface of the resistor in the
cross-section Figure 40a, the actual deposition of sulfur could be one reason, though grinding
could have helped for that too.
Since there was no clear evidence of sulfur involvement in the corrosion process either in
the EDS mapping or in the EDS elemental analysis, it means that the overcoat and the glass
layer fulfilled in a great extent the initial protective role they initially had.
For a longer duration of exposure, all of the resistors, even the AF resistor, had a coloring
change over the Ni/Sn terminations Figure 42. Other than that the voids-blisters were still
apparent.
Due to its resolution, the CT scan did not help in confirming the exact same corrosion
areas discovered by LOM/SEM. However, it displayed some kind of metal wear on the edges
of the terminations (Figure 38, Figure 43) that is not clearly visible with the rest means of
imaging.
The corrosion of the resistors at the interface of the overcoat and the bright termination
as well as the possible empty voids, and cracks of Ag underneath, which were observed in
the current project, are also documented in similar tests from the literature ([6, 25]). It
Page 48 of 57
==PAGE:50==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
is possible that if there was higher condensation on the surface of the resistors or if the
exposure duration was longer then the corrosion effect could have penetrated the surface.
Page 49 of 57
==PAGE:51==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
6
Conclusions
To conclude, firstly it needs to be highlighted that using the accelerated test of 85℃−85%
RH while in sulfur environment, corrosion was succeeded to some extend in all 3 different
electronic components. Tarnishing of the metal surfaces was visible and thus creep corrosion
in the form of dendritic growth.
However, electrochemical migration was not succeeded. The hydrophobic nature of sulfur
element might explain why the FoS tests did not help the electrochemical effect to grow and
just induced creep corrosion [3]. Low voltage while biased, and limited duration of exposure
could have assisted in restraining ECM effect. Moreover, it was mentioned multiple times in
section 5, that observing the results, it is assumed that probably not so much condensation
was built over the surface of the electronic components, even if the humidity was high enough.
Solder masks proved to be an important protective factor for the PCB, likewise, coating
proved to be for the SIR. More specifically, it was proved that the thicker the solder mask, the
more protection it offers. In addition, anti-sulfurated reinforcement verified the protection
that offers against a sulfur environment.
Last but not least, applying a voltage of 3Volts while testing PCB or SIR, did not have
any significant impact on the visible results, at least. The duration of the exposure time
appeared to play an important role in the corrosion results for all electronic components.
Page 50 of 57
==PAGE:52==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
7
Future Work
Corrosion results were not so obvious in the current project. Tarnishing of samples was
visible though humidity didn’t lead to an effective electrochemical migration. There could
be many reasons for that. That leads to the final conclusion that further investigation must
be done. There are several things that could be tried in order to have better results but they
weren’t because of the limited duration of the master project.
Therefore, by causing more concentrated condensation on the surface of the electronic com-
ponent, electrochemical migration would be indeed more accelerated, and corrosion growth
would be continued. More condensation could have been succeeded using a heat exchanger
under all DUT or lowering the temperature. Moreover, higher voltage and longer exposure
time as well as some thermal or electrical stresses could have induced a higher rate of corro-
sion, making it possible to visualize a threshold of corrosion starting point and rate. Cyclic
testing between two different temperatures could also help in building enough amount of
condensation. Additionally, in case the gas amount was blocking the humidity effect, one
idea would have been to lower the amount of sulfur powder or decrease the temperature in
the chamber.
Another idea would be to also try exposing the same samples only in a humid environment
without sulfur gas to verify the effect of humidity and a possible electrochemical migration
process with the existing setup.
Apply and test different coating thicknesses by doing more submergings, change the way
of applying coatings either by spraying or sputtering to make it more homogeneous, could
be some ideas for parametrizing and better mapping of the corrosion process for the SIR
boards.
Last but not least, regarding characterization techniques, two things that can be done,
is 3D CT scan with higher resolutions that should give much more information, as well as
check of the resistivity of resistors by properly connecting them to a board or by soldering
them to cables dierclty.
Page 51 of 57
==PAGE:53==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
References
[1] R. Ambat, “Perspectives on climatic reliability of electronic devices and components,”
IMAPS Nordic Annual Conference Proceedings 2012, pp. 1–18, 2012.
[2] “Octathiocane | S8 - PubChem.”
[3] P. Isaacs, J. Zhang, and T. Munson, “Understanding Creep Corrosion Field Fails,” 2020
Pan Pacific Microelectronics Symposium, Pan Pacific 2020, 2020.
[4] D. Slee, J. Stepan, W. Wei, and J. Swart, “Introduction to printed circuit board failures,”
2009 IEEE Symposium on Product Compliance Engineering, PSES 2009 - Proceedings,
2009.
[5] H. Fu, P. Singh, D. Lee, J. Lee, S. Lee, K. Guo, J. Liu, G. Tong, and C. Xu, “iNEMI
White Paper : Qualification Test Development for Creep Corrosion Using Flower-Of-
Sulfur ( FOS ) Chamber,” iNemi Project Report, Qualification Test Development for
Creep Corrosion, 2018.
[6] M. Reid, J. Punch, C. Ryan, J. Franey, G. E. Derkits, W. D. Reents, and L. F. Garfias,
“The corrosion of electronic resistors,” IEEE Transactions on Components and Packag-
ing Technologies, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 666–672, 2007.
[7] M. S. Jellesen, V. Verdingovas, S. Davidsdottir, and R. Ambat, “Sulphur induced cor-
rosion of electronics,” European Corrosion Congress, EUROCORR 2015, vol. 1, no. x,
pp. 498–508, 2015.
[8] “Corrosion Types with Different Cathodic Reactions,” Corrosion and Protection, pp. 65–
87, 2007.
[9] “Different Forms of Corrosion Classified on the Basis of Appearence,” Corrosion and
Protection, pp. 89–191, 2007.
[10] A. Corrosion, “Corrosion in Different Environments,”
Corrosion and Protection,
pp. 193–217, 2007.
[11] R. Ambat, H. Conseil-Gudla, and V. Verdingovas, Corrosion in electronics. Elsevier
Inc., 2018.
[12] C. Chen, J. C. B. Lee, G. Chang, J. Lin, C. Hsieh, J. Liao, and J. Huang, “The surface
finish effect on the creep corrosion in PCB,” Ipc Apex Expo 2012, vol. 3, pp. 1842–1873,
2012.
[13] B. Sood and M. Pecht, “The effect of epoxy/glass interfaces on CAF failures in printed
circuit boards,” Microelectronics Reliability, vol. 82, no. November 2017, pp. 235–243,
2018.
Page 52 of 57
==PAGE:54==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
[14] D. J. Lando, J. P. Mitchell, and T. L. Welsher, “Conductive Anodic Filaments in Rein-
forced Polymeric Dielectrics: Formation and Prevention.,” Annual Proceedings - Relia-
bility Physics (Symposium), pp. 51–63, 1979.
[15] X. He, M. H. Azarian, and M. G. Pecht, “Analysis of the kinetics of electrochemical mi-
gration on printed circuit boards using Nernst-Planck transport equation,” Electrochim-
ica Acta, vol. 142, pp. 1–10, 2014.
[16] B. Valdez Salas,
M. Schorr Wiener,
R. Zlatev Koytchev,
G. López Badilla,
R. Ramos Irigoyen, M. Carrillo Beltrán, N. Radnev Nedev, M. Curiel Alvarez,
N. Rosas Gonzalez, and J. M. Bastidas Rull, “Copper Corrosion by Atmospheric Pollu-
tants in the Electronics Industry,” ISRN Corrosion, vol. 2013, pp. 1–7, 2013.
[17] H. Conseil-Gudla, V. C. Gudla, S. Borgaonkar, M. S. Jellesen, and R. Ambat, “Investiga-
tion of moisture uptake into printed circuit board laminate and solder mask materials,”
Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics, vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 6138–6151,
2017.
[18] S. Shaikh and M. K. Rabinal, “Rapid ambient growth of copper sulfide microstruc-
tures: Binder free electrodes for supercapacitor,” Journal of Energy Storage, vol. 28,
no. February, p. 101288, 2020.
[19] T. E. Graedel, J. P. Franey, and G. W. Kammlott, “The corrosion of copper by atmo-
spheric sulphurous gases,” Corrosion Science, vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 1141–1152, 1983.
[20] A. E. Martell and M. Calvin, Chemistry of the Metal Chelate Compounds. Prentice-Hall
chemistry series, Prentice-Hall, 1952.
[21] Y. Huo, S. W. Fu, Y. L. Chen, and C. C. Lee, “A reaction study of sulfur vapor with
silver and silverâindium solid solution as a tarnishing test method,” Journal of Materials
Science: Materials in Electronics, vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 10382–10392, 2016.
[22] D. Minzari, M. S. Jellesen, P. Møller, and R. Ambat, “Morphological study of silver cor-
rosion in highly aggressive sulfur environments,” Engineering Failure Analysis, vol. 18,
no. 8, pp. 2126–2136, 2011.
[23] N. N. Greenwood and A. Earnshaw, Chemistry of the Elements. Elsevier Science, 2012.
[24] J. M. Ingman, J. P. Jormanainen, S. K. Jarvinen, N. I. Kanko, J. A. Leppanen, A. M.
Vulli, T. J. Karkkainen, J. Rautio, J. Jappinen, and P. Silventoinen, “Detection of
corrosion in thick film resistors by x-ray imaging,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 133795–
133808, 2021.
[25] M. Reid, M. N. Collins, E. Dalton, J. Punch, and D. A. Tanner, “Testing method
for measuring corrosion resistance of surface mount chip resistors,” Microelectronics
Reliability, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1420–1427, 2012.
Page 53 of 57
==PAGE:55==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
[26] M. Reid, J. Punch, L. F. Garfias-Mesias, K. Shannon, S. Belochapkine, and D. A. Tan-
ner, “Study of Mixed Flowing Gas Exposure of Copper,” Journal of The Electrochemical
Society, vol. 155, no. 4, p. C147, 2008.
[27] W. H. Abbott, “The Development and Performance Characteristics of Mixed Flowing
Gas Test Environment,” IEEE Transactions on Components, Hybrids, and Manufac-
turing Technology, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 22–35, 1988.
[28] G. K. Morris, C. Genthe, and R. A. Lukaszewski, “Challenges and best practices in
mixed flow gas corrosion testing of electronics,” Proceedings - Annual Reliability and
Maintainability Symposium, vol. 2019-Janua, no. January, 2019.
[29] M. N. Collins, M. Reid, E. Dalton, K. Shannon, and L. F. Garfias-Mesias, “Corro-
sion under mixed flowing gas conditions of various connector coatings,” Materials and
Corrosion, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 7–13, 2013.
[30] C. Hillman, J. Arnold, S. Binfield, and J. Seppi, “Silver and Sulfur : Case Studies,
Physics, and Possible Solutions,” STMA International Conference, 2007.
[31] B. Valdez, M. Schorr, G. Lopez, M. Carrillo, R. Zlatev, M. Stoycheva, J. d. D.
Ocampo Diaz, L. Vargas, and J. Terrazas, H2S Pollution and Its Effect on Corrosion
of Electronic Components. No. January 2012, 2012.
[32] C. Leygraf, “Graedel_Leygraf-Pages 24-30,” 2001.
[33] T. E. Graedel, “Corrosion Mechanisms for Silver Exposed to the Atmosphere,” Journal
of The Electrochemical Society, vol. 139, no. 7, pp. 1963–1970, 1992.
[34] C. O. Muller, “Multiple contaminant gas effects on electronic equipment corrosion,”
Corrosion, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 146–151, 1991.
[35] T. Kiraly, J. S. K. Tan, R. Rangaraj, G. Woods, and T. Chang, “COMPAR-
ING FLOWERS-OF-SULFUR AND MIXED-FLOWING GAS CREEP CORROSION
TESTING OF PRINTED CIRCUIT BOARDS Prabjit Singh and Marie Cole,” SMTA
International Conference, pp. 25–29, 2016.
[36] B. T. Reagor and J. D. Sinclair, “Tarnishing of Silver by Sulfur Vapor: Film Charac-
teristics and Humidity Effects,” Journal of The Electrochemical Society, vol. 128, no. 3,
pp. 701–705, 1981.
[37] P. Singh, “Flowers of Sulfur Creep Corrosion Testing of Populated Printed Circuit
Boards,” no. d, pp. 5–10.
[38] P. Singh, L. Palmer, H. Fu, D. Lee, J. Lee, K. Guo, J. Li, S. Lee, G. Tong, and C. Xu, “A
flowers of sulfur corrosion chamber for testing electronic hardware,” 2018 Pan Pacific
Microelectronics Symposium, Pan Pacific 2018, vol. 2018-Janua, pp. 1–10, 2018.
Page 54 of 57
==PAGE:56==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
[39] J. E. Gunn, S. K. Malik, and P. M. Mazumdar, “Highly Accelerated Temperature and
Humidity Stress Test Technique (HAST),” in 19th International Reliability Physics Sym-
posium, pp. 48–51, 4 1981.
[40] C. Zorn and N. Kaminski, “Acceleration of temperature humidity bias (THB) testing
on IGBT modules by high bias levels,” Proceedings of the International Symposium on
Power Semiconductor Devices and ICs, vol. 2015-June, no. December, pp. 385–388,
2015.
[41] R. Ambat and K. Piotrowska, Corrosion reliability testing, standards, and failure anal-
ysis. 2022.
[42] H. Conseil, H. Azarian, G. Pecht, Ä. Baylako, A. Fortier, S. Kyeong, R. Ambat, and
H. Conseil-gudla, “The detrimental effects of water on electronic devices Publication
date : Publisher ’ s PDF , also known as Version of record e-Prime - Advances in Elec-
trical Engineering , Electronics and Energy The detrimental effects of water on electronic
devices,” e-Prime - Advances in Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Energy, vol. 1,
p. 100016, 2021.
[43] U. Rathinavelu, M. S. Jellesen, and R. Ambat, “Effect of solder flux residue on the per-
formance of silicone conformal coatings on printed circuit board assemblies,” Corrosion
Engineering Science and Technology, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 436–444, 2013.
[44] “Acrylic Coatings | Specialty Coating Systems.”
[45] R. Ambat and K. Piotrowska, Preventive measures for corrosion in electronics: intrinsic
and extrinsic strategies. 2022.
[46] “SIR Testing | Surface Insulation Resistance Testing | NTS.”
[47] L. To, A. Resources, and T. Specifications, “D / CRCW-IF e3 Vishay Pulse Proof
Thick Film Chip Resistors LINKS TO ADDITIONAL RESOURCES ARE SUBJECT
TO SPECIFIC DISCLAIMERS , SET FORTH AT www.vishay.com/doc?91000 D /
CRCW-IF e3,” pp. 1–10, 2022.
[48] L. To, A. Resources, and T. Specifications, “D / CRCW e3 Vishay Standard Thick
Film Chip Resistors ARE SUBJECT TO SPECIFIC DISCLAIMERS , SET FORTH
AT www.vishay.com/doc?91000 D / CRCW e3,” no. 2, pp. 1–10, 2022.
[49] A. Pcr and L. Kit, “Data Sheet Data Sheet,” vol. 31402, no. September 2004, pp. 0–1,
2012.
[50] A. Pcr and L. Kit, “Data Sheet Data Sheet,” vol. 31402, no. September 2004, pp. 0–1,
2012.
[51] H. Fu, P. Singh, L. Campbell, J. Zhang, W. Ables, D. Lee, J. Lee, J. Li, S. Zhang, and
S. Lee, “Testing printed circuit boards for creep corrosion in flowers of sulfur chamber,”
Ipc Apex Expo 2014, 2014.
Page 55 of 57
==PAGE:57==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
[52] L. Hao, S. Zhang, J. Dong, and W. Ke, “Rusting evolution of MnCuP weathering steel
submitted to simulated industrial atmospheric corrosion,” Metallurgical and Materials
Transactions A: Physical Metallurgy and Materials Science, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 1724–
1730, 2012.
[53] L. Hao, S. Zhang, J. Dong, and W. Ke, “Evolution of corrosion of MnCuP weathering
steel submitted to wet/dry cyclic tests in a simulated coastal atmosphere,” Corrosion
Science, vol. 58, no. March 2020, pp. 175–180, 2012.
[54] G. Commentary, “De fi nitions for Hydrophilicity, Hydrophobicity, and Superhydropho-
bicity: Getting the Basics Right,” Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, vol. 5, no. 4,
pp. 686–688, 2014.
[55] J. F. Moulder, W. F. Stickle, P. E. Sobol, and K. D. Bomben, “Handbook of X-ray
Photoelectron Spectroscopy Edited by,” Google Scholar, pp. 1–261, 1993.
[56] V. Krylova and M. Andruleviçius, “Optical, XPS and XRD studies of semiconduct-
ing copper sulfide layers on a polyamide film,” International Journal of Photoenergy,
vol. 2009, no. Ii, 2009.
[57] M. Kundu, T. Hasegawa, K. Terabe, K. Yamamoto, and M. Aono, “Structural studies of
copper sulfide films: Effect of ambient atmosphere,” Science and Technology of Advanced
Materials, vol. 9, no. 3, 2008.
[58] A. C. Miller and G. W. Simmons, “Copper by XPS,” Surface Science Spectra, vol. 2,
no. 1, pp. 55–60, 1993.
[59] L. Xu, Y. Yang, Z. W. Hu, and S. H. Yu, “Comparison Study on the Stability of Copper
Nanowires and Their Oxidation Kinetics in Gas and Liquid,” ACS Nano, vol. 10, no. 3,
pp. 3823–3834, 2016.
[60] S. Poulston, P. M. Parlett, P. Stone, and M. Bowker, “Surface oxidation and reduction of
CuO and Cu2O studied using XPS and XAES,” Surface and Interface Analysis, vol. 24,
no. 12, pp. 811–820, 1996.
[61] S. Jain, J. Shah, N. S. Negi, C. Sharma, and R. K. Kotnala, “Significance of interface
barrier at electrode of hematite hydroelectric cell for generating ecopower by water
splitting,” International Journal of Energy Research, vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 4743–4755,
2019.
[62] “X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) Reference Pages: Copper.”
[63] “X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) Reference Pages: Oxygen.”
[64] “X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) Reference Pages: Sulphur.”
Page 56 of 57
==PAGE:58==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
[65] K. Piotrowska, R. U. Din, M. S. Jellesen, and R. Ambat, “Effect of solder mask surface
chemistry and morphology on the water layer formation under humid conditions,” IEEE
Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology, vol. 8, no. 10,
pp. 1756–1768, 2018.
Page 57 of 57
==PAGE:59==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
A
Appendix A: LOM pictures
PCB
Figure 45:
LOM pictures of bare PCB (with no solder mask) at x50 magnification;
(a)reference sample image; (b)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days; (c)Exposed at 85℃-
85% for 3 days biased; (d)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days
Figure 46: LOM pictures of SM10 B1 at x200 magnification; (a)reference sample image;
(b)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days; (c)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days biased; (d)Exposed
at 85℃- 85% for 14 days; (e)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 22 days; (f)Exposed at 85℃- 85%
for 31 days biased; (g)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 37 days
Page I of XV
==PAGE:60==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 47: LOM pictures of SM14 B1 at x200 magnification; (a)reference sample image;
(b)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days; (c)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days biased; (d)Exposed
at 85℃- 85% for 14 days; (e)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 22 days; (f)Exposed at 85℃- 85%
for 31 days biased; (g)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 37 days
Figure 48: LOM pictures of partially covered PCB at x200 magnification; (a)SM10 B2
reference; (b)SM10 B2 exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days; (c)SM10 B2 exposed at 85℃- 85%
for 7 days; (d)SM10 B2 exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days biased; (e)SM14 B2 reference;
(f)SM14 B2 exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days; (g)SM14 B2 exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days
biased; (h)SM14 B2 exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days
Page II of XV
==PAGE:61==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 49: LOM pictures of SM14 B1; (a)reference sample image (b)exposed at 85℃- 85%
biased for 3 days; (c)exposed at 85℃- 85% biased for 7 days
Figure 50: LOM pictures of embedded PCB cross-sections; (a)SM10 B1 reference sample;
(b)SM14 B1 exposed at 85℃- 85% biased for 3 days; (c)SM14 B1 exposed at 85℃- 85%
biased for 37 days; (d)SM10 B1 exposed at 85℃- 85% biased for 3 days; (e)SM10 B1 exposed
at 85℃- 85% biased for 37 days
Page III of XV
==PAGE:62==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
SIR
Figure 51: LOM pictures of all SIR tests at x200 magnification; each row represents the
uncoated SIR, coated with 1 layer, and coated with 2 layers, respectively, as it is stated on
the right of the matrix; each column represents the reference and the exposure conditions,
respectively, as it stated on the top of the matrix
Resistors
Figure 52: LOM pictures of all resistor tests at x200 magnification; each row represents the
reference and the exposure conditions, respectively, as it stated on the left of the matrix;
each column represents the type of the resistor, as it stated on the top of the matrix
Page IV of XV
==PAGE:63==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 53:
LOM pictures of all four types embedded SMD resistors cross-sections at
x200 magnification; (a)Yageo Anti-Sulfurated; (b)Yageo thick conventional; (c)Vishay 56R;
(d)Vishay 68R
Page V of XV
==PAGE:64==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
B
Appendix B: SEM pictures and EDS analysis
PCB
Figure 54: SEM pictures of bare PCB at x200 magnification; (a)PCB with no solder mask
unexposed (reference); (b)PCB with no solder mask exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days;
(c)PCB with no solder mask exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days; (d)PCB with no solder mask
exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days biased
Figure 55: SEM pictures of SM10 B2 at x26 magnification; (a)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3
days; (b)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days; (c)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days biased
Figure 56: SEM pictures of SM14 B2 at x26 magnification; (a)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3
days; (b)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days biased; (c)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days
Page VI of XV
==PAGE:65==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 57: SEM pictures of SM10 B1 at x24 magnification; (a)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3
days; (b)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 37 days
Figure 58: SEM pictures of SM14 B1 at x26 magnification; (a)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for
3 days; (b)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days biased; (c)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days
biased
Figure 59:
SEM pictures of embedded SM10 B1 cross-section at x200 magnification;
(a)reference sample; (b)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days; (c)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for
37 days
Figure 60:
SEM pictures of embedded SM14 B1 cross-section at x200 magnification;
(a)reference sample; (b)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days; (c)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for
37 days
Page VII of XV
==PAGE:66==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Figure 61: EDS table of all PCB samples containing the weight percentages of Cu, S, and
O findings in each sample
Page VIII of XV
==PAGE:67==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
SIR
Figure 62: SEM pictures of uncoated SIR at x30 magnification; (a)reference sample image;
(b)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days; (c)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days biased; (d)Exposed
at 85℃- 85% for 7 days; (e)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days biased
Figure 63: SEM pictures of SIR coated with 1 layer at x30 magnification; (a)reference sample
image; (b)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days; (c)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days biased;
(d)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days; (e)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days biased
Figure 64: SEM pictures of SIR coated with 2 layers at x30 magnification; (a)reference
sample image; (b)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days; (c)Exposed at 85℃- 85% for 3 days
biased
Page IX of XV
==PAGE:68==
Investigation of Sulfur corrosion on electronic components
Resistors
Figure 65: SEM pictures of the cross-sections of all four types embedded SMD resistors
exposed at 85℃- 85% for 7 days in x200 magnification; (a)Yageo Thick resistor; (b)Yageo
Anti-Sulfurated; (c)Vishay 68R; (d)Vishay 56R
Page X of XV
