==PAGE:1==
AI approaches to index spot diffraction pat­
terns acquired using scanning electron mi­
croscopy
Master Thesis
DTU Nanolab
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron
microscopy
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Kevin Thor Fleming
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Ørsteds Plads ­ Bygning 347,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.nanolab.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Nanolab, at the Technical Univer­
sity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science.
Kevin Thor Fleming ­ s202742
Signature
Date
ii
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The goal of this thesis is to create an artificial intelligence to predict crystal orientation
from the spot diffraction pattern of that crystal produced by an SEM. The purpose for this
is to research how viable it is to use artificial intelligence to index crystal patterns in a
wider context. To make this problem easier to solve it was restricted to fcc gold crystals.
To have enough labelled training data for the neural network it was necessary to simulate
spot diffraction patterns. This was done using a python package call abtem that simulates
TEM images. It was difficult to get the abtem images close enough to the experimental
SEM images therefore. The images were enhanced through image processing. Using
Gaussian filters for background removal and thresholding to deal with the differences in
intensity of spots. Finally different NN architectures were applied to the training data in an
attempt to get out useful data. This revealed that quite a large network and a lot of training
data was probably necessary for the network to learn the ground truth. The conclusion is
that the advantages that NN bring like generalisability is not very useful for this specific
problem. Therefore algorithmic solutions to this problem will likely outperform AI solutions
in the near future.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Kevin Thor Fleming, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Eriks Markevics, Student, Collaborator
This thesis was written in collaboration with Eriks Markevics who worked on the Kikuchi
diffraction patterns within the same images.
Alice Bastos da Silva Fanta, Senior researcher, supervisor
Alice provided the problem that this thesis is trying to solve as well as the experimental
data as well as the necessary knowledge of microscopy.
Jakob Schiøtz, Professor, co­supervisor
Jacob provided knowledge necessary for the simulations as well as advice on AI and other
topics.
iv
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Solid state physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Electron microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Euler angles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Image processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Artificial intelligence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Simulation
23
3.1
Generating and rotating the crystal structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Electron wave simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3
Matching simulation angles to experimental angles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Image processing
33
4.1
Background removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Removing Kikuchi pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.3
Thresholding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Artificial Intelligence
41
5.1
training structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Datagenerator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.3
Loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.4
Model structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.5
Hyperparameter tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Discussion
49
6.1
expanding the solution to more problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
Success of and improvements to simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.3
Usefulness of thresholding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.4
Expected time and data amounts necessary for successful training . . . . . 50
7
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
A Appendix
57
A.1 Simulation script from Jacob Schiøtz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.2 Function for generating circular masks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.3 NN models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.4 Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
For this project the goal is to perform image analysis on images obtained from an scanning
electron microscope. in order to identify the orientation of the crystal structure in the
sample being imaged by the electron microscope.
In the images from the electron microscope, there are two useful patterns that crystal
structures can be discerned from; namely, a Kikuchi pattern and a dot pattern. This thesis
will concern itself with solving this problem of analysing the dot pattern. This thesis has
been written in collaboration with a fellow masters student Eriks Markevics who focused
on the Kikuchi pattern.
Today spot pattern images are primarily produced by the electron microscope through a
method called convergent beam electron diffraction (cbed). However, spot patterns can
also be captured using the method known as transmission Kikuchi diffraction (TKD). TKD
images however contain a lot more noise than cbed images. Therefore this thesis at­
tempts to develop a new method for analysing spot patterns that can be used on TKD
images. TKD images have the advantage that they are much easier to generate com­
pared to cbed images. While the Kikuchi patterns can also be used to extract the crystal
orientation that this thesis is interested in the spot pattern contains additional information
that can be used if the analysis methods discussed in this thesis are further developed.
To achieve this goal it was decided to use machine learning, more specifically neural
networks to develop a model that can identify the rotation of a crystal structure from a
TKD image. For this purposes we first needed to generate a dataset of simulated TKD
images that the model can be trained on. Then perform image processing to make sure
that the simulated images look like the real images from the microscope and lastly we
need to actually train the model on this simulated dataset and iterate this last step to find
the ideal structure of our neural network model.
Due to a lack of labelled training data it was necessary to generate all the training data
ourselves. This puts significant demands on computational resources. We were limited
to the DTU servers accessible to students through their gbar system. This as well as the
time restraints inherent to a master thesis, means that the problem has been restricted to
looking at FCC crystals of gold and even then there were still quite significant restraints
in the amount of training data we could generate and store.
Due to the constraints and difficulty of the problem the goal of this thesis is to research
the viability solving indexing of spot diffraction problem using the methods covered in this
thesis.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
1
==PAGE:10==
2
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
2.1
Solid state physics
To understand what goes on under the microscope and to be able to simulate this we need
to understand what goes on when the electrons fired by the microscope interact with the
atoms of the sample to be studied. To understand this we first need to understand crystal
structures which describe the different lattice structures that the crystals can exist in. The
reciprocal lattice describes how the electron wave ”looks” after interacting with the lattice
of the sample.
2.1.1
Crystal structure
The atoms of the sample being analysed are arranged in a crystal lattice formation. The
definition of a lattice is given as:
A lattice is an infinite set of points defined by integer sums of a set of linearly
independent primitive lattice vectors.
[20]
in our case the atoms within the sample correspond to points in the lattice and the lattice
vectors correspond to the placement of these atoms within the lattice.
Figure 2.1: lattice example [20]
Above can be seen a 2d example of a lattice where a1 and a2 are the independent primitive
lattice vectors. To make this a 3­dimensional lattice we simply have to add a vector a3
that is linearly independent from the other two. Therefore the formula n1a1 + n2a2 + n3a3
where all n are integers can describe any point that is reachable by the vectors a. What
we are actually interested in is describing the unit cells of a 3 dimensional lattice as this
will allow us to describe the crystal structures within the sample. The definition of the unit
cell is given as:
A unit cell is a region of space such that when many identical units are stacked
together it tiles (completely fills) all space and reconstructs the full structure.
[20]
given this definition of a unit cell a 3­dimensional unit cell could be triangular, cubic, or
any other shape that would allow you to tile the lattice. For our purpose we are however
only interested in the cubic lattices as this is sufficient and the simplest way to describe
the crystals we will be working with. It is also only useful to look at the smallest possible
sub­lattice that is cubic and fulfils the definition above therefore we get a basic unit lattice
that looks like this:
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Cubic unit cell [20]
In the image above the cubic unit cell represents a crystal with one point at each corner.
The position of the corner points can be described using the vectors a1, a2, a3. this means
that like before we can describe any of the points of the cubic lattice as: n1a1+n2a2+n3a3.
This however is not necessarily the structure that a crystal takes another possible shape
is the face centred cubic (FCC) structure. The FCC has a point at the centre of each face
on the cube like the example below:
Figure 2.3: FCC unit cell [20]
The points at the centre of the FCC unit cell are no longer an integer multiple of the
vectors a1, a2, a3 but they are always defined as being in the centre of the face pf the cube.
Therefore the points on the face of the cube can be describe by adding [1
2, 1
2, 0],[1
2, 0, 1
2] or
[0, 1
2, 1
2] to the scalars [n1, n2, n3].
2.1.2
The reciprocal lattice
When the electron beam interacts with our sample we do however not see the lattice
exactly as it really is. What we can observe is the reciprocal lattice which is a Fourier
transformed version of the real lattice. The reciprocal lattice must be defined in relation to
the direct lattice given in the previous chapter. The definition of a point in the reciprocal
lattice can be given by the definition:
given a (direct) lattice of points R a point G is a point in the reciprocal lattice if
and only if
eiG·R = 1
(2.1)
for all points R of the direct lattice
[20]
In the previous chapter any position in the direct lattice could be described using: n1a1 +
n2a2 + n3a3 likewise any position in the reciprocal lattice can be described using m1b1 +
4
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:13==
m2b2 + m3b3 where b1,b2 and b3 are vectors defining the reciprocal lattice and m1, m2 and
m3 are integer scalars and the reciprocal equivalent of n.
The reciprocal lattice can be described as the Fourier transform of the direct lattice. This
also means that the inverse Fourier transform when applied to the reciprocal lattice results
in the direct lattice.
2.1.3
Bragg diffraction
Bragg diffraction is a type of elastic scattering that occurs when the waves, in our case
electron waves, intersect with the crystal lattice. Elastic scattering is a form of scattering
where the energy of the beam does not change after scattering. As opposed to inelastic
scattering where the electrons do lose energy.[7]
The angle of scattering that happens through Bragg diffraction is called θ. θ is the angle
between the electron beam and the crystal lattice plane. Where as the loss of energy from
inelastic scattering that can happen when an electron wave interacts with the crystal lattice
and can result in a different scattering angle. The difference in the distance travelled for
the electrons striking lower layers is determined by the formula 2dsin(θ). Where d is the
distance between those crystal layers. and θ is the angle between the vector travelled by
the electron and the crystal plane and example can be seen in figure:2.4
Figure 2.4: Bragg diffraction [20]
after Bragg diffraction is applied the resulting shape of the diffracted electron wave re­
sembles the reciprocal lattice. [20]
2.2
Electron microscopy
The experimental images of the sample is generated by an electron microscope. Electron
microscope used to generate the experimental images used for this thesis is called a
scanning electron microscope or (SEM). The method for generating these images with
the SEM is named transmission Kikuchi diffraction or (TKD). The experimental images
used in this thesis are generated through a further development of the TKD method that
introduces a filter to the centre of the image that allows the spot pattern to be imaged
using TKD as well as Kikuchi pattern.
2.2.1
SEM
The SEM is an electron microscope that scans across a sample by directing a series of
electron beams onto different areas of a sample one after another. the result of this scan­
ning operation is a 2­dimensional matrix with dimensions corresponding to the dimensions
of the sample. The actual image is then generated from the data within this 2­dimensional
matrix.[8]
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.5: Example of an SEM [3]
The figure 2.5 of an SEM shows the electron beam going through a series of lenses
to finally arrive at the sample to be studied. This sample will generally be angled with
the purpose of deflecting Bragg diffracted electrons into the detector. There is another
detector used for back scattered electrons. It is this back­scatter detector that is used for
the SEM to image the sample surface with the back­scattered electrons rather than the
transmitted electrons of the TKS. this however is not relevant to TKD as back scattered
electrons are by definition not transmitted.
When a SEM images a sample it takes man images like that of figure: 2.6 Which together
create a map of the crystal structure of the sample. It is the features of this map like the
boundaries between the different crystal structures that researchers are most interested
in when using the SEM. Current algorithmic methods can perform both a less accurate
real time analysis of the images from the SEM to create this map. As well as a more
computationally costly but more accurate offline analysis of the images to create a more
accurate map.
2.2.2
Kikuchi pattern
Figure 2.6: Experimental image processed to make Kikuchi patterns more visible
6
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:15==
The Kikuchi pattern are the lines that can be seen all over the image above. Information
about the crystal structure and orientation can be derived from the Kikuchi pattern by
looking at the orientation of the Kikuchi lines.
Figure 2.7: Shows how the electrons making up the Kikuchi pattern, the red line, are first
inelastically scattered within the sample, then Bragg scattered. Where as the blue line that
makes up the electrons, that become the spot pattern only go through Bragg scatering
For TKD to generate a Kikuchi pattern first the electron has to interact with the crystal
through inelastic scattering. The inelastically scattered electron then has to interact with
the sample through Bragg scattering. 2.7
2.2.3
Spot pattern
Spot patterns can be seen in figure 2.6 as the high intensity spots in the centre of the im­
age. The spot patterns as shown in figure 2.7 only undergo Bragg scattering and therefore
is a much more direct image of the reciprocal lattice.
Spot patterns are usually generated in a different kind of electron microscope called a
transmission electron microscope (TEM).
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.8: A raw experimental image clearly showing the spot pattern
Figure 2.8 is a raw experimental image meaning that no image processing has been
applied in this figure the spots are very clear and the Kikuchi pattern is so weak it might
not even be noticeable to the naked eye although it is still there. The size of the spots
themselves are determined by the angle of the beam exiting the objective lens of the SEM
as seen in figure 2.5.
For the TEM it is especially important to choose a beam angle that is in phase with the
distance d of the crystal lattice mentioned in the Bragg diffraction chapter. if the wrong
angle is chosen and the possible area of the beam interacting with the sample is to wide
the dots in the image will bleed into one another and data is lost.
Another difference of spot patterns and Kikuchi patterns is that spot patterns contain infor­
mation from more layers of the crystal. Therefore a spot pattern could contain information
about the crystal layers that a Kikuchi pattern could not.
2.2.4
TKD
TKD can capture Kikuchi patterns if it is performed on a thin sample or spot patterns if it is
performed on a very thin sample. However both of the images shown so far contains both
Kikuchi and spot patterns this is due to a further development on TKD by Alice Bastos da
Silva Fanta where a gold film is placed over the sample. This allows both spot and Kikuchi
patterns to be captured from a thick sample. Another advantage of TKD over other similar
methods in the SEM is the higher resolution of the TKD image. [9]
8
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:17==
2.3
Euler angles
Euler angles is a way of defining rotation. In 2 dimensions Euler angles are quite simply as
a single value modulus 360 where 2πrad = 360◦rotation. [24] In 3 dimensions however
there are 3 possible dimensions of rotation namely: x,y and z. Having 3 possible rotations
rather than 1 means that we need to consider whether the coordinate system are fixed
or rotated. In a rotated coordinate system the direction of the axis of rotation is defined
based by the object being rotated. A fixed coordinate system rotates the object around
fixed axis in space.
In a fixed coordinate system the angle of rotation relative to the object changes depending
on which rotations have been performed previously. this means that to be able to reach
any rotation on the sphere it can be advantageous to use the same rotational axis twice.
One example of such a rotation is a z −x −z rotation. To conceptualise this z1 −x −z2
imagine an infinitely small camera positioned above a sphere at the centre of the x and
y axis and viewing the sphere at an angle parallel to the z axis. The z1 rotation will spin
the sphere around the camera. therefore if a line is drawn straight from the centre of the
camera to the centre of the sphere the point at which this line intersects the sphere won’t
change regardless of the z1 rotation. with the x rotation the camera is moved along the
surface of the sphere at an angle that was determined by z1 and a distance determined
by x. This means that the 2 rotations z1 and x can move the intersection of the line from
the camera and sphere. Reach any point on the surface of the sphere as long as one of
z1 or x is at least a 180◦rotation and the other a 360◦rotation. Lastly the z2 rotation again
does not change the intersection of the line but simply rotates the surface of the sphere
the camera is already exposed to.
Figure 2.9: example of fixed coordinate system (blue) and rotated coordinate system (red)
[23]
2.4
Image processing
The purpose of image processing is to make the simulated images look more like the
experimental images. This is very important for the AI as even small differences between
the 2 can result in totally useless results from the model.
2.4.1
Background removal
The type of background removal used is called Gaussian filter. Gaussian filters work
by performing a mathematical matrix operation called a convolution. In the case of a
convolution an image should be viewed as a 2­dimensional matrix with a value for each
pixel in the image. If an image has several different channels they must each be treated as
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
9
==PAGE:18==
a separate 2­dimensional matrix. in this 2­dimensional matrix each pixel can be defined
by an x and y position. A convolutional operation has a kernel this kernel has a size that
defines the number of pixels it spans across. In the case of the Gaussian filter this kernel
size is defined by σ which can be defined as the number of pixels between the centre
pixel of the kernel and the edge of the kernel. The values within the kernel are defined by
a Gaussian distribution with the centre being the centre of the kernel figure: 2.10.
Figure 2.10: Example of a kernel for a Gaussian filter with σ 1,2 and 3 respectively.[6]
The kernel is placed on the image matrix in such a way that the centre of the kernel cor­
responds to a specific x, y position in the image with each surrounding cell in the kernel
containing the value for the corresponding for the corresponding pixel in the matrix mul­
tiplied by the value of the kernel cell. all the values of the kernel are then summed and
divided by the sum of the gaussian distribution values of the kernel as can be seen in
figure 2.10. This process is then repeated for each pixel in the image. The result on this
operation depends greatly on the σ value if sigma is small it can be used as a form of edge
detection. If σ is big it will apply to large areas of the image and can remove background
areas that contain no useful information. [10]
2.4.2
Thresholding
Thresholding is a process that looks at a set of values and splits them into 2 sets with one
set containing all values above a threshold and another set all values below the threshold.
In the case of images the value being thresholded would usually be the intensity of the
pixel by assigning each pixel either a true or false value.
Figure 2.11: Example of thresholding with the histogram showing the distribution of values
on the image
10
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:19==
[19]
to automatically find the value to be thresholded one can use a method called Otsu. The
purpose of the otsu method is to choose to thresholding sets with the greatest variance.
Mathematically Otsu can be described as:
σ2(t) = ωbg(t)σ2
bg(t) + ωfg(t)σ2
bg(t)
Where bg and fg define the 2 different sets of pixels, ω are the weights and can be simply
understood as the percentage of the total pixel values that is currently in the corresponding
set. ω is the variance and the variance is described as:
σ2(t) =
∑(xi −x)2
N −1
Where xi is the value of the i’th pixel in the set and x is the mean value for the set. N is
the total number of pixels in the set. This means that each pixel values of the given set is
subtracted from the mean of the same set of pixels and these results are summed over
and finally divided by the size of the set −1. The σ result from these calculation is then
multiplied with the weights as seen in: 2.4.2
Finally this operation is repeated over all possible sets. Which for an image with pixel
values between 0 −255 would evaluate each value up to 255. At the end the separation
value with the lowest σ is chosen as the solution.
Otsu is essentially a clustering method and is specifically very good for sorting clusters of
values in an image. Figure 2.11 is an example of Otsu being applied to an image where
the red line in the histogram is the final solution chosen by the method.
[16]
2.4.3
array Mask
The goal of an array mask is to control what data is read in an array this is very useful
when the shape of an array is very important. An array mask is simply an array with
the same shape as the array it is masking but only containing binary values true or false
values to mark which values in the array should be read.
[17]
2.5
Artificial intelligence
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is often ill defined and there are frequently disagreements within
academia of exactly what constitutes as an AI. This is due to the difficulty of defining the
word intelligence and when something is intelligent. Merriam Webster defines intelligence
as:
the ability to learn or understand or to deal with new or trying situations
[15]
Through this definition any algorithm that can handle situations its creator did not specifi­
cally define when it was created could be defined as an artificial intelligence, since it can
be said to deal with new or trying situations. The learning part of intelligence though only
applies to algorithms that are generated through machine learning.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
11
==PAGE:20==
2.5.1
Machine learning
Machine learning algorithms are algorithms that try to adjust a mathematical model to
match a desired outcome. These Mathematical models can be something as simple as a
line separating 2 sets or a neural network (NN) that is so complex that the largest com­
mercial gpus struggle to store them.
Figure 2.12: A diagram comparing classical programming with machine learning [5]
A comparison between classical programming and machine learning can be seen in figure:
2.12 Classical programming works by having a human make a set of rules that will take
in data from a user and spit out the desired answers to this data. Machine learning takes
in data and the answers for said data it then outputs rules by fitting a mathematical model
to these rules over iterations. These rules can then be applied to new data in the same
fashion as the rules of classical programming.
Machine learning can be split into 4 types depending on which type of answers that are
available.
1. Unsupervised learning is a type of learning where the answers are not known and
the mathematical model is instead fitted to look like the data. K­means clustering
is an example of this where a line is fitted to a dataset to best separate clusters of
values. Otsu mentioned previously is also clustering but unlike k­means it does not
do any fitting instead it simply applies exactly the same mathematical model to each
image.
2. In supervised learning each point of data is accompanied by a label that describes
that data point. This could for example be images of dogs and cats and labels
corresponding to each image describing whether the specific image is a dog or a
cat. this way the model can be adjusted based on its response to each image.
3. Semi­supervised learning is a type of learning where some of the data is labelled.
An example of this could be the clustering problem where you are trying to fit data
sets into different clusters. If some of this data was labelled with the cluster they
belonged to semi­suppervised models can use this to achieve greater accuracy than
unsupervised models.
12
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:21==
4. in Reinforcement learning the AI is rewarded when performing well and punished
when performed poorly. The goal of reinforcement learning is to create a model that
can optimise towards long term gain. Examples of this might be a game like chess
where giving up pieces is usually bad but winning the game is very good. There­
fore the machine learning algorithm punishes the model a little for losing pieces but
rewards it a lot for winning the game. The hope is then that the model learns that it
should avoid giving up pieces but if it thinks it can win the game by giving up pieces
it should do so.
Figure 2.13: The 4 types of machine learning with examples of sectors where they might
be useful[11]
2.5.2
Neural networks
A neural network (NN) is a type of mathematical model that the machine learning algorithm
is optimising. NNs were originally modelled on the biological structures of neurons found
in the brains of animals. In animals neurons work by sending electrochemical signals to
one another through biological structures. One neuron can receive an arbitrary number
of connections each of which sends signals in 1 direction and either passes or receives
a signal from one other neuron. each of the connections is weighted with a value ω. ω is
one of the values within the NN that the machine learning algorithm is trying to optimise
towards. The other value is b for the bias which affects the activation function. For now ω
can be thought of as only affecting 1 of the connections while b affects all connections that
a neuron is sending signals from. NNs also require an optimiser which is the mathematical
function used to improve the result of the NN this will be explained further later.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.14: example of a basic neural network with 1 hidden layer [12]
A NN can be understood as a black box as it is very unclear to researchers what the NN
has actually learnt. One can open up the network and see which fire based on a given
input but it is still very unclear what the ω and b of each neuron represents within the
specific neuron.
2.5.3
Activation function
Activation functions are applied after ω of the connections are multiplied to the data being
calculated represented as x in the figure: 2.15. The bias can be seen in this figure as b
where its function is to shift the x axis of the neurons activation function.
Figure 2.15: Example of all the operations happening within a single neuron [2]
The simplest type of activation function is a step function which can either output 1 or 0
as seen in figure: 2.16. The effect of changing b for the step function would be to move
threshold of the step function left or right. One can question the usefulness of b for a step
function as multiplying b by a value n has exactly the same effect as multiplying all ω by
14
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:23==
the same amount n as long as b is not 0. Which you would not want it to ever be as this
would mean the neuron is always firing and no decision is being made. For this reason
the step function is usually not very useful as it decreases the options available to the
optimiser when trying to improve the network.
Figure 2.16: example of a basic neural network with 1 hidden layer [18]
Activation functions are really just a mathematical function applied to the input of the
neuron. Therefore the number of possible activation functions is as infinite as the number
of mathematical functions. But the 3 considered for use in this thesis was sigmoid, relu
and linear activation functions. These are especially useful for regression problems.
Figure 2.17: linear, sigmoid and relu activation functions respectively [2]
2.5.4
Feed forward network
A feed forward network is a NN in which information is never cyclic and therfore always
moving in one direction figure: 2.14 is an example of such a network. The first and last
layers of a feed forward network are called input and output layers respectively the layers
in between are known as hidden layers. There is always only 1 input and output layer
in a feed forward network but there can be an arbitrary number of hidden layers. The
number of neurons in the input layer of a feed forward network has to match the number
of data points in your data. The number of neurons in the output data likewise has to
match the number of desired data points from the output. The hidden layer between can
be of any size. The feed forward network is a very powerful model due to any model with
one or more hidden layers being Turing complete. This one extra layer is necessary to
achieve Turing completeness as the network would have no way to perform xor operations
without it. The simplest form of feed forward network is one where each neuron in a layer
is connected to each neuron in the next.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.18: Example of a feed forward network with 3 hidden layers[4]
The simplest type of feed forward network is the fully connected feed forward network
where every neuron in one layer of the network, is connected to every neuron in the next
layer of the network. An example of this can be seen in figure 2.18
2.5.5
Tensor
A neural network can be described using the mathematical construct of a tensor. A tensor
is a container for data in our case this always be numbers. Tensors are defined by ranks
where each rank describes a degree of freedom. Therefore a tensor of rank 0 is effectively
a scalar describing 1 degree of freedom. A tensor of rank 1 is a vector and a tensor of
rank 2 is a matrix. A rank 2 tensor is all that is necessary to describe an image with 1
channel like the experimental images from the SEM.
This means that ω, b, the activation function and the data values that exist in each layer
can all be represented as a matrix and the operations performed on each of them can be
represented as matrix operations.
2.5.6
Deep neural networks
Deep NNs are simply networks with more than one hidden layer therefore the network of
2.18 would qualify as a deep NN. It is not immediately clear why having more hidden layers
is actually useful if NNs with one hidden layer are Turing complete as mentioned in the
feed forward network chapter. Adding more layers obviously doesn’t add any functionality
if a NN with 1 hidden layer can do anything a computer can do. The challenge in machine
learning however is not to create a structure that could theoretically contain the rules
necessary to solve the problem. The real challenge lies in getting the NN to learn the
rules that are necessary for it to give the desired answers.
There is no clearly agreed upon practice for finding the best depth of a NN for a given
problem the ideal network structure is often determined through simple human intuition.
But simple algorithms like a greedy algorithm or a genetic algorithm could also be used.
Training the network is however, already very computationally intensive therefore running
through the many training session that these methods require can increase the computa­
tional intensity for finding a good network by several orders of magnitude.
2.5.7
CNN
A convolutional neural network (CNN) is a type of feed forward network that uses convo­
lutional layers. These convolutional layers function like the convolutions mentioned in the
background removal chapter. However the neurons of the CNN acts as the cells within the
kernel, this is done by having connections in the shape of the kernel. The values within
16
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:25==
the kernel are therefore determined by the combination of ω and b. compared to fully
connected Feed forward networks where every neuron in one layer is connected to every
neuron in the next layer deal with information globally. A CNN is able to deal with local
information this is especially useful for images as the individual pixel values themselves
are not necessarily that useful but combinations of pixel values can represent meaningful
structures within the image as shown in figure 2.19.
Figure 2.19: Picture showing an idealised version of how a CNN might work on an image
of the face of a cat. With the first layer detecting edges of the image and the second layer
combining these edges to features leading to the network classifying this image as a cat.
[5]
As well as a kernel size, a convolutional layer has a filter size which extra kernels to
the same layer of the CNN. Having more kernels apply to the same area means that
the network can extract different types of patterns from the same part of the image. The
convolutional layer’s number of filters determine the depth of the convectional layer as can
be seen in figure 2.21 with the second convolutional layer having more filters. This means
that if we have a rank 2 tensor like the one that represents an image from the SEM and a
convolutional layer with a depth of 4 filters is applied to this rank 2 tensor it would turn into
a rank 3 tensor with 4 dimensions in the new rank. After the convolutional layer has been
applied a pooling layer is usually applied. The goal of the pooling layer is to reduce the
number of parameters of the CNN while loosing as little information as possible. Reducing
the number of parameters reduces the space complexity of the network this is necessary
due to the number of parameter images contain already being rather memory demanding
and this was just multiplied by the filters. The most popular pooling method is called max
pooling. Max pooling works by taking each of the filters and dividing them into matrices
of a given size. Then selecting the highest value from each of the matrices and inputting
this to a now smaller matrix example can be seen in figure 2.20.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.20: Example of maxpooling [22]
Figure 2.21: Example of a CNN [21]
If the output we are interested in is not another image it is necessary to flatten the output
of all the convolutional and max pooling layers as can be seen in figure 2.21. This is
necessary due to output layer still needing to be a fully connected layer like the output layer
of figure 2.18. This flattening layer simply works by having each neuron in the previous
layer connect to 1 neuron in the flattening layer. The CNN and the fully connected feed
forward network can be viewed as 2 different neural networks with the flattened layer
functioning as the input layer to the fully connected feed forward network. it might also be
useful to add hidden layers to the fully connected layers as there might be useful global
information that the CNN could not see.
2.5.8
Loss function
the loss function is the metric a supervised learning model uses to predict how well it
performed. this is done by applying a mathematical function comparing the predicted
output ˆβ to the expected output β to find the errorϵ. A simple example of a loss function
could be the linear loss function β −ˆβ = ϵ. This ϵ is then used by the optimiser to predict
18
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:27==
which ω and b should be changed most based on which ω contributed most to the ϵ. An ϵ
must be found for each output as the ω and b contributing to to each ϵ might be different.
Therefore β, ˆβ and ϵ are described as vectors with the dimensions equal to the number of
output neurons.
2.5.9
Optimiser
Optimisers are the mathematical functions that try to ”teach” the AI. For neural networks
all optimisers are based off of the concept of gradient descent. gradient descent is simply
a mathematical function that tries to find the lowest point in a space. this is essentially
done by simulating a ball rolling down a hill. Where the hill is the entire possible space
of values and the only points in space that the optimiser function can see are the points
where the ball has previously been.
Figure 2.22:
Example showing how an optimiser might theoretically navigate a 3­
dimensional space [5]
Optimisers have a learning rate which describes how large steps it takes every time it
adjust the weights. A learning rate that is too high means that the optimiser risks adjusting
the ω and b of the model so much that it never settles in any useful model. Where a learning
rate that is too low means that the model would get stuck in local minima.
The space that the optimiser is trying to navigate in is the space of all possible values for
b and ω. In other words a network with 1000 weights and 10 biases will have the optimiser
function navigating a 1010 dimensional space.
2.5.10
local minima
Local minima represent represent sets of rules that might have some success in predicting
the correct values but not the best ones possible. However to reach the better minimum
the optimiser would either have to jump really far or adjust the model to perform worse.
To avoid local minima the learning rate can be increased or other optimisers can be tried.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.23: Example of a local minima that the opimiser might get stuck in [5]
2.5.11
Overfitting
Overfitting is when a model learns the specific data it has been trained on but not the rules
to be able to generalise its answers to the problem itself. this frequently happens if the
network is so large that instead of learning the rules it can simply memorise the individual
datasets. This can be solved by using a smaller model that can represent fewer data
points. However this is not always an option as the data points might be necessary to
represent the rules that the model is supposed to learn. Therefore the best solution might
be to increase the amount of data available to train the network on. This is the reason
you might hear about AI researchers saying the main obstacle to them is the amount of
available data.
Figure 2.24: Example of a model overfitting [5]
Dropout layers can be added to models as a method to combat overfitting. The dropout
layer randomly sets weights to 0 during training. This should help combat overfitting as
an overfitted network usually has individual weights contribute a lot to specific outputs.
Where as a well fitted network would usually have these contributions spread out across
the network.
2.5.12
Hyperparameter tuning
The purpose of hyperparameter tuning is to have the computer figure out the optimal
model structure with minimal input from a human. Hyperparameter tuning is most use­
20
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:29==
ful when a network has been found that works somewhat well. It is a method that can
be introduced to achieve an optimal network. When performing hyperparameter tuning
any number of variables and any variable of the network can theoretically be adjusted.
Whether it is a global setting affecting the whole network like an optimiser or something
super local like the kernel size of the 3rd convolutional layer.
one way of performing hyperparameter tuning is as a sports competition where the differ­
ent settings for the model compete to win a given round against another model. The model
that gets the best score in the given metric, which would usually be validation score. Is
allowed to continue to the next round to compete against another winner. These compe­
titions will usually be concluded early if the hyperparameter tuning algorithm determines
that there is a clear winner. Otherwise even a small competition could take very long.
Figure 2.25: One way of organising hyperparameter tuning is a bracket structure where
the networks would start all the way to the left. As they win rounds they would increasingly
move right encountering better networks.
[5]
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
21
==PAGE:30==
22
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:31==
3
Simulation
The goal of the simulation is to generate a dataset that the AI can be trained on. This
means that the range of possible angles and rotations of the crystal in the training data
has to cover the same range as the possible angles in the experimental data. It is also
important that the information about the crystal positions contained within the simulation
images line up with the information from the experimental images. Although the simulated
image does not have to look exactly like the experimental image when it is generated, as
image processing can be applied later. It is at the very least necessary that the spot
positions match, as this is part of the ground truth that the model is supposed to use
to calculate the crystal rotation, and cannot be gained through image processing. The
closer the simulated image is to the experimental image, the easier it will be to perform
the necessary image processing, to have a network trained on the simulated data be
able to understand the experimental data. To achieve this we were given a python script
by our supervisor Jacob Schiøtz that was used as an outline to construct the final script
performing the simulation. A.1
Code mentioned in this chapter can be found in the ”simulation_image_generator.ipynb.
Figure 3.1: example of experimental image that we would be training for
3.1
Generating and rotating the crystal structure
For generating the crystals a python environment named (Atomic Simulation Environ­
ment) or ASE.
1
atoms = Atoms(wulff_construction('Au', surfaces , esurf, size, 'fcc',
rounding='above'))
In the code above we can see the function that constructs the crystal. It creates an atom
object from the ase package. This object is created based on the restrictions mentioned
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
23
==PAGE:32==
in the previous chapter the first argument ’Au’ defines the crystal as a gold atom. The size
being passed to the function defines the number of atoms in the crystal and therefore the
thickness of the sample that the simulated electron beam will pass through. The thickness
of the simulated crystal was approximately 80 at 16000 atoms and an 8 fold increase
in the number of atoms roughly results in a doubling in the thickness of the sample in
accordance with the square cube law. We tested the effect of the different number of
atoms on the image generation and found that the shape of the dots resembled the dots
of the experimental data best at 64000 atoms. This can be seen in the pictures below
where the dots look more spotty in the 16000 atom image and more solid and smoother
in the 64000 atom image. The 64000 image as well manages to generate dots where the
outer part of the dot has higher intensity than the inner where the 16000 image will usually
have pixels of high intensity in the center of these dots as well.
Figure 3.2: zoomed in simulated image generated with 16000 total atoms in the crystal
structure
Figure 3.3: zoomed in simulated image generated with 64000 total atoms in the crystal
structure
24
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.4: zoomed in example of experimaental image
Another effect of increasing the number of atoms is also that a smaller area is captured by
the wave function. These two factors together meant that the better 64000 atom pictures
took longer to generate. Therefore the extra time it took to generate simulated images
meant that it was decided to use 16000 atom simulation images.
The piece of code below rotates the crystal according to the fixed coordinate system
z1 −x −z2 rotation explained in the euler angles chapter. each of the z1 −x −z2 are
independently randomised for each simulation image generated. As a fcc crystals are
rotationally symmetric every 90◦around the x, y, z axes each of the rotational axes z1 −
x −z2 are randomised between 0◦and 90◦of rotation as that is sufficient to cover the
whole space of possible images.
1
atoms.rotate(randZ[iteration], 'z', center='cop')
2
atoms.rotate(randX[iteration], 'x', center='cop')
3
atoms.rotate(randZ2[iteration], 'z', center='cop')
3.2
Electron wave simulation
To simulate the small inaccuracies that might happen when setting up a real life exper­
iment a few other factors were randomly changed. The variations in the probe position
seemed to have little to no effect on the images generated within the parameters set.
the gridpoints essentially determines how large an area the wave simulation is applied
to. The result of size changes in gridpoints therefore essentially functions as a zoom out
while maintaining dots per inch or (DPI) where the I in DPI refers to the physical size of
the simulated area of the crystal being imaged or in other words the angstrom area being
imaged. DPI is used to describe the size relations as this is the unit being used by the
matplotlib object figure which used to store the images as they are being manipulated.[14]
The result is that increasing gridpoints results in a zoomed out image with more pixels and
therefore the computational time increases as the number of gridpoints increase. The final
number for gridpoints is a randomised number in the range of 3596 to 4596 to simulate
the different levels of zoom that might be applied to an experiments.
1
probe_pos = np.random.rand(repetitions , 2) * 90
2
3
random_gridpoints = np.random.rand(repetitions)*1000
Later an object named ”frozen_phonons” is created this is an object from a package
named abtem the purpose of abtem is to simulate the SEM affecting our virtual crystal
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
25
==PAGE:34==
generated previously. The purpose of the frozen phonon object is to simulate the slight
jiggling that atoms within a crystal lattice. This is done by calculating possible positions
that the atoms can take based on the given input. Then storing a given number of per­
mutations each with different atom positions that are within the possible values. Then
basically performing the entire electron beam simulation on each permutation. [13]
1
frozen_phonons = FrozenPhonons(atoms, num_configs=num_configs , sigmas=
sigmas)
figures 3.5 3.6 show images generated with 1 and 10 frozen phonons respectively. The
image with 10 frozen phonons results in a much smoother noise distribution which is
advantageous for training an AI as it makes dots easier to distinguish and image data
more consistent. However setting frozen phonons to 10 is of course very costly as it
takes roughly 10 times as much time to generate an image. This trade off was however
considered wort it for better images with noise levels closer to that of the experimental
images.
Figure 3.5: image generated with 1 set of frozen phonons
26
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.6: image generated with 10 sets of frozen phonons
The probe is another abtem object. The purpose of the prope object is to generate the
electron waves that will interact with our sample. The probe takes a number of parameters
of note is the energy which defines the energy of the electron beam. This is 30000 in the
case of all experimental and simulated images. The semi angle cutoff is how the probe
represents the beam angle mentioned in the spot pattern chapter.
The value for the semiangle_cutoff is set to 2 ∗4.7e −3 and multiplied by 1000 based on
the distance between crystal layers as explained in the spot pattern chapter. The effect
of a lower semiangle_cutoff is that spots become much more faint and conentrated at
smaller points as can be seen in figure 3.7a. Making the semiangle_cutoff bigger has the
opposite effect and causes the dots to bleed into one another making it difficult to see
where a given spot begins and ends.3.7b
1
angle = 2*4.7e-3
2
defocus = 40/np.sin(angle)
3
probe = Probe(sampling=potential.sampling ,
4
device='gpu',
5
semiangle_cutoff=angle*1000 ,
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) angle multiplied by 500
(b) angle multiplied by 2000
Figure 3.7
6
extent=potential.extent ,
7
defocus=defocus ,
8
energy=30000 # acceleration voltage in eVhttp://localhost:8080/
notebooks/Kikuchi.ipynb#
Lastly there is the defocus where a lower defocus smears out the dots a higher defocus
has the opposite effect but although at very high values it also creates artefacts in the
image and for example causes the dots to lose intensity in small areas near the centre.
the effects can be observed in figure­ 3.8
When the image is converted from the cbed object to a matplotlib object the values of
the individual pixels are raised by the power of 0.15 this raises lower values a lot while
not effecting higher values much. It has little to no effect on the information contained
within the image from the computers perspective but it makes the images easier to read
from a human point of view. Performing this power operation before the image is saved
rather than during image processing means that the higher resolution of the 2­dimensional
matrix that the ”cbed_diffraction_pattern.show” function uses. The very sharp differences
between pixels generated by the power function are essentially averaged out by reducing
the resolution of the image to be saved in other words it works as a form of anti­aliasing.
28
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:37==
(a) defocus = 10/np.sin(angle)
(b) defocus = 200/np.sin(angle)
Figure 3.8
Figure 3.9: Image generated with no power applied
When the final image is saved it is necessary to reduce the resolution of the final image
as we are restricted to using 30 GB of storage space on the gbar server. To do this the
dpi is set to 240 which reduces the image to a 935x935 pixel image. The image is saved
with a timestamp and iteration as well. Right after the image is saved a new line is written
in a csv file that has already been created with the same timestamp as the image and the
new line corresponds to the iteration of the image. This csv file storesallthe random data
for each image.
1
ax, im = cbed_diffraction_pattern.show(cmap='gray', power = 0.15)
2
plt.savefig(path + '/' + timestamp + '_iteration:' + str(iteration) + '.
png', dpi = 240, bbox_inches='
tight')
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
29
==PAGE:38==
(a) experimental image
(b) simulation image
Figure 3.10: similar experimental and simulated images
3
with open(path + '/data' +
timestamp + '.txt', 'a') as f:
4
f.write('\n' + str(randZ[iteration]) + ',' + str(randX[iteration]) + '
,' + str(randZ2[iteration]) +
',' +
5
str(probe_pos[iteration][0]) + ',' + str(probe_pos[iteration][
1]) + ',' + str(
gridpoints))
6
f.close()
3.3
Matching simulation angles to experimental angles
Throughout this project there have been difficulties matching the rotation of crystals in the
simulation images to supposed rotation of the crystals in the experimental images. The
experimental data that was provided by Alice included a document explaining the crystals
z1, x, z2 rotation. When these same rotations were applied to simulated images however
they yielded no similarity between the 2. Once I managed to rotate a simulated image
to align with an experimental image this was done solely through manually changing the
rotations of the crystal until the images looked similar. The resulting images can be seen
in figures: 3.10
The rotations for the 2 images are, simulation: 137.4, 54.8, 199 and experimental: 140.4, 49.8, 224.8.
This gives a difference of −3, 5, −25.8. When this adjustment is applied to other images
also supplied by Alice it results in simulation images that are very far of from their exper­
imental counterparts. It is unclear what is actually going wrong here there is supposedly
some error on the numbers from the experimental images however this error is not large
enough to explain the differences. The rotations are defined the same for both experi­
mental and simulation images but another possibility is could be that the axis defined by
the experimental images could be defined differently. it could also be due to some error in
generating simulated images. As the abtem package used for generating the simulated
images is meant to sim TEM imagery which is a different type of microscope from the
SEM used to obtain the experimental images. This meant that even though I had access
30
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:39==
to all the preconditions used to generate the experimental images it is not clear how well
the simulated preconditions match the experimental preconditions.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
31
==PAGE:40==
32
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:41==
4
Image processing
My goal with image processing is to make the simulated images look more like the exper­
imental images. Another goal with image processing is to eliminate information from the
image that the AI could learn from that is not the dots. Kikuchi patterns are an obvious
example of this as this project is specifically looking at creating an AI that can learn from
the dot pattern the Kikuchi pattern should not be present.
Code mentioned in this chapter can be found in the ”image_processing.ipynb”
4.1
Background removal
The background I want to remove is the decreasing intensity from the centre of the beam.
the Gaussian filter is pretty good for this as the increased intensity in the image very closely
matches a Gaussian distribution. To avoid any effects on the spots it is ideal to choose
a big θ. On the other hand the theta shouldn’t be too big as this causes the Gaussian
filter to not properly match the the actual background as the values near the edges would
become too big. This can be seen in figure: 4.1
1
Image_circles = Gaussian_filter(image_arr , sigma=30)
Figure 4.1: sigma=30 Gaussian filter
It is important to perform this background removal before the mask is applied to the image.
The reasoning for this will be explained later.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
33
==PAGE:42==
4.2
Removing Kikuchi pattern
The problem with removing the Kikuchi pattern is that it is not easy to tell where it stops or
starts as it slowly fades from the centre therefore there is no clear edge to it. The solution
chosen is simply to cut out the outer parts of the image as that is where the Kikuchi pattern
is most prominent. This is best done using a masked array which allows me to maintain
the shape. To do this I first need to find the centre of the beam in the image as that is
where the spot pattern is most prominent. Although for both the experimental image and
the simulated image the centre of the beam is not necessarily the centre of the image.
The centre of the beam is instead the brightest part of the background. To find this centre I
used the a Gaussian filter with very high σ this way the brightness of the filter is much less
affected by small inconsistencies like the spots and Kikuchi patterns. Now by locating the
brightest pixel of the figure: 4.2 a very close approximation to the beam can be found.
1
result = gaussian_filter(Image_circles_mono , sigma=100)
Figure 4.2: sigma=100 gaussian filter
This surprisingly works better for experimental images than simulated images with the sim­
ulated images seemingly being approximately 4 pixels off on average and around 2 pixels
for experimental images. This could be due to the power function essentially smoothing
out the background of the image. It could also be due to the differences between simula­
tion images and experimental images as can be seen in figures: 3.9 3.1 The experimental
image is brighter and therefore has a greater range of intensity. However for both types
of image the accuracy should be sufficient.
After the centre has been found 2 circular area can be cut out to remove most of the
Kikuchi pattern. This is done using the function for the circular mask. A.2 The first area
removed is an inner circle area with radius of 5 pixels. This is done to remove the high
34
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:43==
exposure area that exists on most experimental image but none of the simulated images
as can be seen on 3.1. The second circle is the one that can be seen on the outside of.
4.3
Figure 4.3: Simulated image with a masks applied
As can be seen in figure: 4.3 the background removal is still applied outside the circle but
this doesn’t matter as it will be removed later.
4.3
Thresholding
The purpose of thresholding was to make the the simulated and experimental images look
similar enough to train the AI on them. Performing thresholding risks losing information
as it removes intensity and information about the crystal structure is contained within the
intensity of the dots. However due to the intensity of the dots of the experimental and
simulated images not matching, this information would be useless for evaluating the ex­
perimental images even if the AI did learn from it. This thresholding was performed using
an automatic thresholding method called Otsu.
Otsu was useful for generalising the solution for both the experimental and simulated
images as both of them had quite different distributions of pixel values.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.4: Experimental image being thresholded
Figure 4.5: Simulated image being thresholded
As seen in figures 4.5 and 4.4 Otsu is almost unreasonably effective. Despite the his­
tograms for the images being quite different and the bumps in the histogram that repre­
sent the spot values being invisible to the human eye. Otsu still manages to find them
quite effectively. Some noise might be included although this could also be the peaks of
fainter spots.
Initially the thresholding was applied after the mask this with the expectation that not
thresholding all the parts that were not being used would lead to better results. With this
expectation I started training all my AI models with this set of images and even though I
was applying models very similar to that of Eriks Markevics I was not seeing useful results.
It turned out that while about 19
20 of the images thresholded produced good data like that
of figure 4.6 but one in 20 would produce images like 4.7.
36
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.6: Well thresholded image with local thresholding
My expectation was that this happened because the Kikuchi pattern and spots was very
prominent in the centre of the badly thresholded images. Meaning that more values be­
longed to the Kikuchi and spot pattern than belonged to the background and therefore
Otsu could achieve greater variance by putting Kikuchi and spots together in a set. The
simple solution to this problem is to preform thresholding on the entire image as the back­
ground becomes more prominent closer to the edge of the image.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.7: Poorly thresholded image with local thresholding
Finally 4 different types of images were generated for training the AI The code generat­
ing these images can be seen below in 4.3. here 4 images are being generated the first
uses the Otsu value. The second multiplies this Otsu value by 2 moving the threshold
further away from the centre of the Gaussian distribution. The third multiplies by .5 mov­
ing the threshold closer to the centre. The last one generates an image entirely without
thresholding.
1
thresholded_image = no_background > val
2
thresholded_image = ma.filled(thresholded_image , fill_value=False)
3
4
thresholded_imagex2 = no_background > val*2
5
thresholded_imagex2 = ma.filled(thresholded_imagex2 , fill_value=False)
6
7
thresholded_imagex05 = no_background > val*0.5
8
thresholded_imagex05 = ma.filled(thresholded_imagex05 , fill_value=False)
9
10
no_thresholded_image = no_background
11
no_thresholded_image = ma.filled(no_thresholded_image , fill_value=False)
The resulting images can be seen in the figures 4.8 and 4.9.
38
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:47==
(a) Simulated image with the otsu value
multiplied by 2 resulting in a high
threshold image
(b) Simulated image with the otsu value
multiplied by 1 resulting in a moderately
thresholded image
Figure 4.8
(a) Simulated image with the otsu
value multiplied by .5 resulting in a low
threshold image
(b) simulated image with no threshold­
ing
Figure 4.9
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
39
==PAGE:48==
40
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:49==
5
Artificial Intelligence
The python package used for this thesis is named Keras. Keras is a part of the tensorflow
package. Keras simplifies many of the processes for constructing models compared to
its parent package.
Code mentioned in this chapter can be found in the ”neuralnet.ipynb” unless oetherwise
stated.
5.1
training structure
The goal of the 4 different types of images from the image processing chapter is to find
out what type of image the AI learns best on. Therefore it is necessary to train the same
network on each set of data to see which one each AI performs best on. A directory is
made for each model structure each of these directories contains 4 further directories with
a trained model and the training data for each type of image that the network is trained on.
The first directory is created before any training takes place and each of the sub folders
are created after training. 5.1
1
os.makedirs(os.path.join(output_path , timestamp))
Keras requires a specific directory structure which separates the data into training data,
validation data and test data. This needs to be done separately for each of the 4 types
of training images. However this directory only needs to be created once and then an
arbitrary number of images can be trained on it. 5.1
For each of the 4 images the training folder contained 8000 images. The validation folder
contained 900 images and the test folder 90.
1
for folder in image_folders:
2
make_folder(os.path.join(image_path ,folder), os.path.join(ai_image_path ,
folder))
After all the directories the data has been created the model itself can be generated this is
done by call the get_model function which will be further explained in the model structure
chapter.
The paths for the data is loaded next. Here the labels are still found in the original folder
that was created. While the purpose for these paths is to feed them to the data loader
which is run during the fitting of the network and periodically loads different batches of
data. the paths variables in the code 5.1 is a list of paths to all the training data. Where
the labels variable is a list of vectors with all the expected values for each of the images.
1
train_paths , train_labels = path_loader(text_path , os.path.join(
ai_image_path ,folder), "train")
2
validation_paths , validation_labels = path_loader(text_path , os.path.join(
ai_image_path ,folder), "validation
")
3
test_paths , test_labels = path_loader(text_path , os.path.join(
ai_image_path ,folder), "test")
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
41
==PAGE:50==
Next for this data to be useful it must be loaded into the model the inbuilt Keras datagen­
erator can be used however this datagenerator will simply load all the data into memory.
This is obviously a problem if the data we have takes up more memory than is avail­
able. To solve this problem it is necessary to override the inbuilt Keras datagenerator.
For this purpose I have created the datagenerator function which will be explained in the
datagenerator chapter. 5.1
1
train_generator = datagenerator(32, (800,600), train_data , 1, 3)
2
validation_generator = datagenerator(32, (800,600), validation_data , 1, 3)
3
test_generator = datagenerator(32, (800,600), test_data , 1, 3)
after the data generation is done the model training begins here the data generators are
provided to the model and the epochs define the number of times the model should be
trained on the entire dataset. verbose simply defines what sort of output the model should
give.
1
history = model.fit(train_generator ,
2
epochs = 100,
3
validation_data=validation_generator ,
4
verbose = 2
5
)
After the model has been fitted the data to the the results of the training are returned in
the form of a graph over the loss results like the example of figure 5.1. This is used to
evaluate the performance of the network.
Figure 5.1: An example of how a graph might be printed where the line plot represents the
validation loss score on each epoch and the circle plots represent the respective training
loss.
5.2
Datagenerator
The inputs to my datagenerator function can be seen in 5.1. these are respectively: (batch
size, image shape, data array, image channels, output channels). for the first epoch the
datagenerator goes. the entire set of data and separates out the path to the images and
the label values into arrays of batch size. These being batch_data_paths and batch_labels
these are then passed on to the dataloader.5.2
42
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:51==
1
def __getitem__(self, index):
2
batch_data_paths = self.data[index : index + self.batch_size ,0]
3
batch_labels = self.data[index : index + self.batch_size , 1:]
4
5
return self.__dataloader(self.img_size ,
6
batch_data_paths , batch_labels ,
7
self.input_channels , self.output_channels)
The job of the dataloader is then to actually load the batches of data that was created by
get item. Then return them as the correct datatype.
1
x = np.zeros((len(data_paths), img_size[0], img_size[1]))
2
y = batch_labels
3
4
for i,data_path in enumerate(data_paths):
5
with open((data_path), 'r') as image:
6
image = Image.open(image.name)
7
x[i,:,:] = image
8
x[i,:,:] = x[i,:,:]/255
9
return x.astype("float32"), y.astype("float32")
To avoid the the neural network ending up in local minima it is useful to shuffle the data
set. Such that different series of data points are given to the network each time. This is
done in 5.2.
1
def on_epoch_end(self):
2
np.random.shuffle(self.data)
5.3
Loss function
due to the rotational symmetry of the crystal we restricted our rotations to 90 degrees as
was mentioned in the simulation chapter. This same rotational symmetry means that a
rotation of 1◦and one of 89◦are actually only 2◦off. Where most loss functions would
consider this to be 88◦degrees off. Therefore we had to design our own loss function the
code snippet can be seen at 5.3. This function takes the expected output y_true and the
predicted output y_pred. Then it returns a vector of ϵ with the dimensions of neurons in
the output layer of the model in our case 3.
1
def abs_loss_function(y_true, y_pred):
2
abs_diff = tfmath.abs(y_true - y_pred)
3
abs_diff_reversed = tfmath.abs(tf.ones_like(y_true) - abs_diff)
4
minimum_from_two = tfmath.minimum(abs_diff , abs_diff_reversed)
5
return tf.math.reduce_mean(minimum_from_two , axis=-1)
mathematically 5.3 can be described as 5.3 for a single dimension of the final vector.
Where ˆβ is y_pred and β is y_true.
min(
√
(β −ˆβ)2,
√
(ˆβ −β)2) = ϵ
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
43
==PAGE:52==
With this loss function an ϵ of 0.25 should represent a difference between ˆβ and β of 45◦
which would be the average error if random guesses where performed. With 0 epsilon
representing an ϵ of 0◦.
5.4
Model structure
There were 6 different model structures used in the final iteration of neuralnet script. Prior
to this more models had been run but they had all suffered from problems with the loss
function or datagenerater. The 6 models can be found in the appendix: A.3.1. they will
be called model 1 to 8 respectively. There are some things all these models have in
common all them have input of shape (800, 600, 1). all them have an output layer of size
3 as the crystal position consists of 3 rotations. The output layer also doesn’t have an
activation function specified in any of the networks. In Keras this means it defaults to a
linear activation function this is useful for us due to the ideal output itself being linear as
any angle of rotation should be as likely as any other. For models 1­2 only data from the
no thresholding images, 2 times thresholding and 1 times thresholding are available as
the server shut them down before they finished running. All 6 models are trained using
the optimiser named rmsprop.
Of note is the figure 5.2. all the data from model 3 looks like this figure no matter what
type of image is being analysed. This is a clear sign of overfitting as the types of data I
am feeding the network are very different and should give different results. As well as the
clear divergence of the loss scores of the validation and training sets. Which is not too
surprising as these networks are very large and simply too large for the available data.
Figure 5.2: Here is a clear case of a training that was overfitted.
Figure 5.3 shows the model being trained on a dataset with high thresholding and the
model basically learning nothing. It is not too surprising that the model would not be able
to learn very little as there is very little information in the highly thresholded images as can
be seen in figure 4.8a. What this allows us to say is that there is certainly less overfitting
than model 3.
44
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.3: model 1 trained on the data with a high threshold
Figures 5.3 and 5.5 shows some learning occurring. with the model performing better on
the not thresholded images. This is however still very modest learning as it would only
represent an improovement of a couple of degrees.
Figure 5.4: model 1 trained on the data with a moderate threshold
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.5: model 1 trained on the data with no threshold
Models 3 through 5 perform very similarly to model 1 with the no real gain in the learning
rate. Model 6 however did show some tangible improvement as can be seen in figures:
5.6 and 5.7. While this model shows a very modest gain it still points in the direction
of what changes might be necessary to get a useful model. While model 6 looks very
similar to model 2 through 5 it is actually a much larger model as there are 12 filters
in each convolutional layer rather than the 3 of the other models. This means that the
convolutional layers are actually 4 times as deep for network 6. This tells us that a model
capable of understanding the ground truth of the data might need to be a much larger
model than model 6.
Model 6 was also tested on the data with low threshold which performs close to the image
with no threshold. Although not quite as well.
Figure 5.6: model 6 trained on the data with a no threshold
46
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.7: model 6 trained on the data with a low threshold
Each training epoch of training on 8000 images took about 1 minute for each epoch on
all the models. This leads to the conclusion that the size of these models did not have
much of an effect on training time even with the very big model 2. It was likely the the
loading of the training and validation images into memory that took up the majority the
computational time during training. This could possibly be improved. However the details
of how the data was handled by the servers performing the training is not covered by this
thesis.
If more training was to be conducted I would like to test larger networks with dense lay­
ers after the convolutional layer and possible more convolutional layers with more filters.
Removing the dropout layer might be a good idea aswell as it can cause problems.
5.5
Hyperparameter tuning
Code mentioned in this section can be found in the ”hyper_parameter.ipynb”
Keras hyperparameter tuning uses system reminiscent of as sports tournament like that
explained in the theory section on hyperparameter optimisation. Like the the regular Keras
training it is necessary to have a training set to train the hyper tuned model on. Therefore
the hyperparameter tuning script for this thesis contains all the folder structures and loss
functions and datagenerator previously explained.
Hyperparameter tuning only diverges once we get to the hyperband. This is a Keras
object that defines the range of tuning as can be seen in figure 5.5. Here the model
builder defines the model_builder is a function I wrote that defines the model to be trained
as well as the the parameters to be tested on the model. The objective defines value that
detirmines the winner of the competition. For the purposes of regression problems like
the one this thesis concerns itself with validation loss works as a very good predicter of
the performance of a model. The last 2 interesting factors is the maxepochs which defines
the maximum number of epochs any 2 models can compete before one moves on in the
brackets. factor is the number that defines the rate at which the number epochs ”played”
between the networks increases as the networks move up the brackets. In this way it is
reminiscent of how humans playing a tournament might have to win a best of 3 to advance
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
47
==PAGE:56==
when the human is in the round of 32. But by the time of the finals it is now a best of 7 to
win.
1
tuner = kt.Hyperband(model_builder ,
2
objective='val_loss',
3
max_epochs=15,
4
factor=3,
5
directory=output_path ,
6
project_name='Hyper_NN')
Fundamentally the model builder functions like the model object defined previously. How­
ever as well as the functionality of the regular model the model builder is also able to
define ranges values that a desired model could inhabit. Examples of these ranges can
be seen at 5.5. If hpkernel is taken as an example the possible values for this variable
3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13. This value can then be assigned to a network. hpkernel is essentially
just an integer it has no relation to the kernel of the network until a layer is added to the
network with hpkernel as an input.
1
hp_kernel = hp.Int('units', min_value=3, max_value=13, step=2)
2
hp_filters = hp.Int('units', min_value=1, max_value=12, step=1)
3
model.add(layers.Conv2D(filters=hp_filters , kernel_size=hp_kernel , activation=
"relu"))
48
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:57==
6
Discussion
6.1
expanding the solution to more problems
The problem of crystal rotation of gold in one specific crystal structure as looked at for
this thesis is not very useful for real world applications. As there are many types of atoms
that crystals can be composed of. As well as even more types of crystal structures that
those atoms can take. Which is not to mention it would be very desirable if spot pattern
analysis was able to identify several different crystal structures in the same image. This
thesis was simply a study in the possible viability of an AI solution to these problems.
While expanding the size of the problem will undoubtedly require far more resources in
the form of data and training time. It is important to note that these costs do not scale
linearly with the size of the problem.
6.2
Success of and improvements to simulation
Somewhat greater accuracy could probably be achieved with Abtem although it would
increase the time complexity of the simulations. But really what is actually desirable is
a method for simulation that is actually designed for the SEM as the TEM objective lens
simulated by abtem seems to have fundamentally different properties to the objective lens
of the SEM. Which has a huge effect specifically on spot patterns.
The images generated for this thesis were generated over the span of 3 days running
simultaneously on 4 nvidia v100 gpus. Some of most powerful gpus on the market and
this was only to generate 8000 images. Large NN networks are very data hungry therefore
data generation times would likely have to be reduced. There are 3 promising possibilities
when it comes to reducing the time complexity of the simulation.
• The first and simplest thing to do is to reduce the gridpoints variable of abtem. The
images for this thesis have been capturing the Kikuchi pattern as well as the spot
pattern. If the simulation is restricted to the area of the spot pattern a factor of
approximately 4 can be gained in this way.
• The resolution of the final cbed_diffraction_pattern has more than 4 times the resolu­
tion of the experimental image. This thesis did not cover specifically how the image
generation of abtem worked. But the time complexity of generating computer sim­
ulated images like those of abtem tend to scale linearly with resolution so another
factor of 4 reduction in time complexity could likely be gained here.
• Lastly while this thesis has shown how increasing the number of atoms of the sim­
ulation in the beam direction is very important for the spot patterns. The same is
not true of the axes perpendicular to the beam direction. Therefore the computa­
tional complexity can be reduced by simulating the beam through a cylindrical crystal
structure instead. While the advantage for the case of 16000 atoms that were sim­
ulated in this thesis would not be much larger than a factor of 8 improvement to
time complexity. If larger atoms are used for the simulation which was established
as desirable in the simulation chapter as greater depth gave better spot patterns.
This would mean that the atom would only grow in one direction as the depth is in­
creased and therefore computational complexity would scale linearly as well rather
than exponentially.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
49
==PAGE:58==
Generative adversarial networks are an interesting possibility for generating more ”sim­
ulated images” image. Put simply generative adversarial networks are 2 NN where one
attempts to create images that are as close to a set of training images as possible. The
second NN would attempt to guess whether the images generated by the first NN or simu­
lated. This way you would ideally end up with a neural network that can generate images
that contain spot patterns that correspond to a crystal rotation. And this NN would be
much faster than a full simulation of the physics simulation.
It should still be mentioned though that if the problem was to be expanded to many other
types of atoms and crystal structures like previously mentioned. It might be too costly
to generate enough data to properly train an artificial intelligence. Without significant
advances within the simulation of crystal structures.
6.3
Usefulness of thresholding
Thresholding was of interest to this thesis due to the difficulty and cost of getting simulated
images that looked more like the experimental images. However it is clear that a thresh­
olded image would contain less information than one not thresholded. The models tested
in the artificial intelligence chapter show that they are able to learn from the thresholded
images. Although the models do learn less well than the images with no thresholding.
It is unclear whether this difference between the types of images represent a small in­
crease in error in many images or a large error in a few images. An improved model
would be necessary to give any definitive answer to this question. If the result of thresh­
olding would be a small in error on many images. Thresholding might be desirable as it
would increase the resilience of the model against noise. In this scenario it would also
result in a model that would be more generalisable to different types of SEMs. As the
differences in intensity of the images that might occur would have much less of an effect
on the network.
However if the thresholded images give a large error in a few images it might not be as
desirable.
6.4
Expected time and data amounts necessary for
successful training
The training sessions performed in this thesis show that a network considerably larger
than model 6 is probably required. This will mean both slower training and slower data
processing when the model is trained. The larger models will require significantly more
data than was available for this thesis. The requirement for more data will only grow as the
problem is expanded but this growth will not be linear with the space of possible problems.
For example if the problem is expanded to include predicting rotation for 50 different types
of molecules this should not require 50 times as much data to solve. As the ground truth
that the NN is supposed to learn from these different molecules is correlated between
one another. This is to say that the model does not need to learn a specific spot pattern
for each molecule The model could possibly learn an offset for the molecules instead.
Although all this is guess work even if we had a working model it would not be clear how
it arrives at the correct result.
Real time analysis of thousands of SEM images is a useful feature for microscopists there­
fore it would be desirable if the network could do that as well. The main obstacle for the
network in this regard is actually loading the images into memory. However this is just
as much of a problem for current algorithmic methods as they would of course need the
50
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:59==
images in memory to be able to analyse. Methods like reducing the precision of the cal­
culations of the network could also be used to improve the run time while having little
effect on the error of the network. However it is still seems unlikely that a network could
be constructed that would make real time analysis of thousands of images possible with
any reasonable degree of accuracy.’
While this discussion chapter has been mostly concerned with the difficulty that comes
with expanding the problem considered in this thesis. The models created for this thesis
have been dealing with series of crystals with random angles that have no relations to
one another. This is not the case when a microscopist is looking at the map of a crystal
adjacent images are often slightly different but contain the same crystal. This way having
a few images that are predicted wildly wrong might not be a problem as long as a slightly
different image with the same rotation would be predicted correctly. This could be used
to adjust the predictions that are wildly wrong.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
51
==PAGE:60==
52
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:61==
7
Conclusion
To train a network that can successfully learn even the ground truth of the crystal rotations.
A lot more data is likely is necessary this problem only gets worse when considering a
network trained to a degree that would actually be useful to microscopists. Therefore
a faster method for generating training data would likely be necessary. The usefulness
of the simulated data generated by abtem is also dependent on the effectiveness that
training a NN on the thresholded data might have. This is due to thresholding being the
only method found that could be applied to properly account for the minor differences in
an image that can give a NN problems. As other image processing methods found did
not equalise the differences that different lenses could cause to images.
Even from the limited success of this thesis it seems apparent that any network large
enough to learn the ground truth. would be too large to be able to be able to perform real
time analysis. This is not too surprising as there are many cases where AI isn’t useful be­
cause it is faster than algorithmic methods but because it is more generalizable. However
the spots pattern images do have quite similar features when compared to images that
might be taken by a regular camera. Therefore much of the networks ability to generalise
is wasted. Although it might still be possible to generate a NN that could be more accurate
than current methods.
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
53
==PAGE:62==
54
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Alkasm. circular mask. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/44865023/how-can-i-
create-a-circular-mask-for-a-numpy-array. [Online; accessed 08­February­2023].
2018.
[2]
Pragati Baheti. activation­functions. https://www.v7labs.com/blog/neural-networks-
activation-functions. [Online; accessed 11­February­2023].
[3]
Editorial Board. Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). https://microscopewiki.com/
scanning-electron-microscope/. [Online; accessed 08­February­2023]. 2023.
[4]
UC Business. Deep feed forward NN. http://uc- r.github.io/feedforward_DNN.
[Online; accessed 11­February­2023].
[5]
François Chollet. Deep Learning with Python. Manning, Nov. 2017. ISBN: 9781617294433.
[6]
Abdulhadi Mohammad Din Dawrayn and Muhammad Bilal. “SVM­Based Switching
Filter Hardware Design for Mixed Noise Reduction in Digital Images Using High­
Level Synthesis Tools”. eng. In: International Journal of Computer Vision and Im­
age Processing 12.1 (2022), pp. 1–16. ISSN: 21556989, 21556997. DOI: 10.4018/
IJCVIP.2022010106.
[7]
Joseph I. Goldstein et al. Scanning electron microscopy and x­ray microanalysis.
eng. Springer New York, 2018, p. 4. ISBN: 149396674X, 149396674x, 1493966766,
9781493966745, 9781493966769. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6676-9.
[8]
Joseph I. Goldstein et al. Scanning electron microscopy and x­ray microanalysis.
eng. Springer New York, 2018, pp. 94–95. ISBN: 149396674X, 149396674x, 1493966766,
9781493966745, 9781493966769. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6676-9.
[9]
Joseph I. Goldstein et al. Scanning electron microscopy and x­ray microanalysis.
eng. Springer New York, 2018, pp. 29–30. ISBN: 149396674X, 149396674x, 1493966766,
9781493966745, 9781493966769. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6676-9.
[10]
R.A. Haddad and A.N. Akansu. “A class of fast Gaussian binomial filters for speech
and image processing”. und. In: Ieee Transactions on Signal Processing 39.3 (1991),
pp. 723–727. ISSN: 19410476, 1053587x. DOI: 10.1109/78.80892.
[11]
javatpoint. ML types. https://www.javatpoint.com/types-of-machine-learning. [On­
line; accessed 11­February­2023].
[12]
Rabindra Lamsal. NN example. https://theneuralblog.com/forward-pass-backpropagation-
example/. [Online; accessed 11­February­2023].
[13]
Jacob Madsen. Abtem frozen phonon. https://abtem.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
walkthrough/08_temperature.html. [Online; accessed 08­February­2023]. 2019.
[14]
Matplotlib.pyplot.figure¶. ”[Online; accessed 06­February­2023]”. ”2023”. URL: https:
//matplotlib.org/3.2.1/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.figure.html.
[15]
merriam­webster. intelligence. https : / / www . merriam - webster . com / dictionary /
intelligence. [Online; accessed 11­February­2023].
[16]
Muthukrishnan. Otsu. https : / / muthu . co / otsus - method - for - image - thresholding -
explained-and-implemented/. [Online; accessed 10­February­2023].
[17]
numpy. Masked array. https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/maskedarray.generic.
html. [Online; accessed 09­February­2023].
[18]
Saed Sayad. Step example. https://www.saedsayad.com/artificial_neural_network.
htm. [Online; accessed 11­February­2023].
[19]
scikit­image. Thresholding. https://scikit-image.org/docs/stable/auto_examples/
applications/plot_thresholding.html. [Online; accessed 09­February­2023].
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
55
==PAGE:64==
[20]
Steven H. Simon. The oxford solid state basics. oxford university press, 2013. ISBN:
978­0­19968076­4.
[21]
Iuliana Tabian, Hailing Fu, and Zahra Sharif Khodaei. “A convolutional neural net­
work for impact detection and characterization of complex composite structures”.
eng. In: Sensors (switzerland) 19.22 (2019), p. 4933. ISSN: 14243210, 14248220.
DOI: 10.3390/s19224933.
[22]
Computer Science Wiki. Max­pooling / Pooling. https://computersciencewiki.org/
index.php/Max-pooling_/_Pooling. [Online; accessed 12­February­2023].
[23]
Wikipedia. Euler angles — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. http://en.wikipedia.
org/w/index.php?title=Euler%20angles&oldid=1135476793. [Online; accessed 05­
February­2023]. 2023.
[24]
Wikipedia. Radian — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Radian&oldid=1136373770. [Online; accessed 05­February­2023].
2023.
56
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:65==
A
Appendix
A.1
Simulation script from Jacob Schiøtz
1
# notebook last tested with abtem version 1.0.0beta8
2
3
from abtem import __version__
4
print('current version:', __version__)
5
6
from ase.io import read
7
from ase.cluster import wulff_construction
8
from ase import Atoms
9
import ase.data
10
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
11
from scipy import constants
12
from abtem import *
13
import numpy as np
14
15
surfaces = [(1, 0, 0), (1, 1, 0), (1, 1, 1)] # Nanoparticle facets
16
17
esurf = [1.0, 1.1, 0.9] # Relative surface energies
18
19
size = 16000 # Target number of atoms
20
21
atoms = Atoms(wulff_construction('Au', surfaces , esurf, size, 'fcc', rounding=
'above'))
22
23
atoms.rotate(45, 'x', center='cop')
24
25
atoms.center(vacuum=5)
26
27
show_atoms(atoms)
28
29
print("Number of atoms:", len(atoms))
30
31
gridpoints = int(max(atoms.cell[0,0], atoms.cell[1,1]) / 0.05)
32
print("Grid points:", gridpoints)
33
# Probably wise to round to a power of two
34
gridpoints = 2048
35
36
potential = Potential(atoms,
37
gpts=gridpoints ,
38
slice_thickness=1,
39
parametrization='kirkland',
40
projection='infinite')
41
42
potential.sampling
43
44
phonons = False
45
46
if phonons:
47
mass = ase.data.atomic_masses[ase.data.atomic_numbers['Au']]
48
TD = 165
# Kittel
49
T = 300
50
U_squared = (3 * constants.hbar**2 / (2 *
mass * ase.units._amu *
constants.k * TD)
51
* (1/4 + T / TD))
52
sigmas = {'Au': np.sqrt(U_squared) * 1e10} # standard deviations of
thermal vibrations
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
57
==PAGE:66==
53
print(sigmas)
54
num_configs = 30 # number of frozen phonon configurations
55
56
frozen_phonons = FrozenPhonons(atoms, num_configs=num_configs , sigmas=
sigmas)
57
potential = Potential(frozen_phonons , gpts=gridpoints , slice_thickness=1,
parametrization='kirkland',
projection='infinite')
58
59
wave = PlaneWave(
60
energy=300e3 # acceleration voltage in eV
61
)
62
63
exit_wave = wave.multislice(potential)
64
65
exit_wave.array.shape
66
67
print(exit_wave.array.shape, exit_wave.array.dtype)
68
69
if phonons:
70
fig,(ax1,ax2)=plt.subplots(1,2,figsize=(12,5))
71
exit_wave.intensity().show(figsize=(6,6), ax=ax1, cmap='inferno')
72
exit_wave.intensity().mean(0).show(figsize=(6,6), ax=ax2, cmap='inferno')
73
else:
74
fig,ax1=plt.subplots(1,1,figsize=(6,6))
75
exit_wave.intensity().show(ax=ax1, cmap='inferno')
76
# plt.savefig('test.png')
77
78
ctf = CTF(
79
energy = wave.energy,
80
semiangle_cutoff = 20, # mrad
81
focal_spread = 40, # Å
82
defocus = -160, # Å
83
Cs = -7e-6 * 1e10, # Å
84
)
85
86
#ctf = CTF(energy=100e3, **{'defocus':10})
87
88
ctf.show(max_semiangle=50);
89
90
image_wave = exit_wave.apply_ctf(ctf)
91
92
if phonons:
93
image_wave.intensity().mean(0).show()
94
else:
95
image_wave.intensity().show()
96
97
if phonons:
98
image_wave.diffraction_pattern(max_angle=30, block_zeroth_order=2, ).mean(
0).show(power=.25)
99
else:
100
image_wave.diffraction_pattern(max_angle=30, block_zeroth_order=2, ).show(
power=.25)
101
102
from abtem.noise import poisson_noise
103
104
measurement = image_wave.intensity()
105
noisy_measurement = poisson_noise(measurement , 5000)
106
107
noisy_measurement.show();
58
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:67==
A.2
Function for generating circular masks
code for generating a circular mask for a numpy array lifted from stackoverflow
1
def create_circular_mask(h, w, center=None, radius=None):
2
3
if center is None: # use the middle of the image
4
center = (int(w/2), int(h/2))
5
if radius is None: # use the smallest distance between the center and
image walls
6
radius = min(center[0], center[1], w-center[0], h-center[1])
7
8
Y, X = np.ogrid[:h, :w]
9
dist_from_center = np.sqrt((Y - center[0])**2 + (X-center[1])**2)
10
11
mask = dist_from_center <= radius
12
return mask
[1]
A.3
NN models
This is a list of the different models used.
A.3.1
Model 1
1
inputs = keras.Input(shape=(800, 600, 1))
2
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=4, kernel_size=5, activation="relu")(inputs)
3
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
4
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=4, kernel_size=5, activation="relu")(x)
5
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
6
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=4, kernel_size=5, activation="relu")(x)
7
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
8
x = tf.keras.layers.Dropout(0.5)(x)
9
x = layers.Flatten()(x)
10
outputs = layers.Dense(3)(x)
A.3.2
Model 2
1
inputs = keras.Input(shape=(input_size1 , input_size2 , 1))
2
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=32, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(inputs)
3
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
4
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=32, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
5
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
6
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=32, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
7
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
8
x = layers.Flatten()(x)
9
x = layers.Dense(128, activation="relu")(x)
10
x = layers.Dense(16, activation="relu")(x)
11
outputs = layers.Dense(3)(x)
A.3.3
Model 3
1
inputs = keras.Input(shape=(800, 600, 1))
2
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=3, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(inputs)
3
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
4
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=3, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
5
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
59
==PAGE:68==
6
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=3, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
7
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
8
x = tf.keras.layers.Dropout(0.5)(x)
9
x = layers.Flatten()(x)
10
outputs = layers.Dense(3)(x)
A.3.4
Model 4
1
inputs = keras.Input(shape=(800, 600, 1))
2
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=3, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(inputs)
3
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
4
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=3, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
5
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
6
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=3, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
7
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
8
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=3, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
9
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=4)(x)
10
x = tf.keras.layers.Dropout(0.5)(x)
11
x = layers.Flatten()(x)
12
outputs = layers.Dense(3)(x)
A.3.5
Model 5
1
inputs = keras.Input(shape=(800, 600, 1))
2
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=3, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(inputs)
3
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=3)(x)
4
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=3, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
5
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=3)(x)
6
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=3, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
7
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=3)(x)
8
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=3, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
9
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=3)(x)
10
x = tf.keras.layers.Dropout(0.5)(x)
11
x = layers.Flatten()(x)
12
outputs = layers.Dense(3)(x)
A.3.6
Model 6
1
inputs = keras.Input(shape=(800, 600, 1))
2
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=12, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(inputs)
3
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=3)(x)
4
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=12, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
5
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=3)(x)
6
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=12, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
7
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=3)(x)
8
x = layers.Conv2D(filters=12, kernel_size=3, activation="relu")(x)
9
x = layers.MaxPooling2D(pool_size=3)(x)
10
x = tf.keras.layers.Dropout(0.5)(x)
11
x = layers.Flatten()(x)
12
outputs = layers.Dense(3)(x)
A.4
Project plan
When this project started we did not expect generating the simulated images to be as
difficult as it was. Image processing was not even mentioned as it was though to be
60
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:69==
possible to generate identical images with abtem. These extra difficulties pushed back
the entire project as it was a necessary preamble to performing the rest of the project.
Therefore the expectations for the network also changed from one that could be applied
to the experimental data to simply looking at how well it could handle the simulated data
I had generated.
Figure A.1: Gantt diagram created at the start of the project
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
61
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads ­ Bygning 347
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.nanolab.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:71==
AI approaches to index spot diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
63
