==PAGE:1==
Machine learning for EEG
Interpretability of EEG models using
Concept Activation Vectors
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Machine learning for EEG
Interpretability of EEG models using
Concept Activation Vectors
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Áshildur Jónsdóttir, Bergdís Arnardóttir
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Margrét Halla Valdimarsdóttir, 2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Áshildur Jónsdóttir ­ s202068
Signature
Date
Bergdís Arnardóttir ­ s202059
Signature
Date
ii
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Self supervised learning techniques that utilize massive amounts of unlabeled EEG data
are promising for improving the diagnosis support of neurological deceases. Interpretabil­
ity of these complex models is important when giving a diagnosis. This thesis explores
the interpretability of EEG models based on BERT inspired neural data representations
(BENDR). Three different approaches are explored in EEG modeling, an anomaly detec­
tion of epileptic patients, a binary classification of motor movement imagery task, and a
binary classification of seizure data. It was found that the BENDR representations based
on summarized pre­trained BENDRs did not prove sufficient in the anomaly detection task.
However, when fine­tuning on a binary classification task, testing with Concept Activation
Vector (TCAV) gave insightful information for how these models could be better designed.
For the use of TCAV, human­friendly EEG concepts were defined based on EEG events
annotated by trained professionals, from different subjects and sessions.
Machine learning for EEG
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would like to give special thanks to our supervisor Lars Kai Hansen for the continuous
support and crucial insight through out this process. His patience and enthusiasm through
our learning process was a key component in our work. We would like to acknowledge
the hard work behind the data corpus we used, provided by the team at Temple University,
and especially Joseph Picone for working hard on releasing the data even with the delays
that occurred in the process. A final thanks is to some of the members of Brain Capture,
allowing us to see EEGs in action, where we were able to participate in an EEG session,
and the technician for giving us a closer look at her work with epilepsy patients at the
Filadelfia hospital.
iv
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory and Illustrations
8
2.1
Transformers: Self­Attention Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
BERT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3
Wav2vec 2.0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4
BENDR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.5
TCAV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
2.6
EEG Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.7
One­class Support Vector Machine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3
Method
36
3.1
Data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.2
TCAV implementation on Linear Head BENDR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.3
Discovery of Linear Head BENDR and TCAV on MI dataset . . . . . . . . . 41
3.4
Anomaly detection of epileptic behavior using BENDR representations . . . 41
3.5
Classification of seizures using Linear Head BENDR . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4
Experiment and Results
48
4.1
TCAV investigation of motor imagery classification using Linear Head BENDR 48
4.2
Anomaly detection of epileptic behavior using OC­SVM­BENDR
. . . . . . 58
4.3
Classification of seizures using Linear Head BENDR . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
4.4
TCAV investigation of seizure classification using Linear Head BENDR . . . 69
5
Discussion
82
Bibliography
87
Machine learning for EEG
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This thesis explores Self­Supervised learning methods for unlabeled Electroencephalo­
gram (EEG) data to learn informative representations that can be transferred to assist
with the downstream task of identifying abnormalities in EEGs. The goal is to introduce
interpretability to the complex models used for diagnosis support making them more reli­
able.
1.1
Motivation
Electroencephalograms (EEG) is an essential tool in detecting and investigating epilepsy.
Epilepsy is a neurological disorder in which brain activity becomes abnormal causing re­
curring seizures to arise. EEG’s provide recordings of brain activity which help identify
the type of epilepsy, what may be triggering the seizures and how best to treat the con­
dition [1]. Epilepsy effects 50 million people worldwide where 80% of those live in low
and middle­income countries and 75% of people living in low­income countries do not get
the proper diagnosis and treatment they need. The treatment can help around 70% of
epilepsy patients live seizure free and the treatment can cost as little as 5 euros per year.
One of the biggest issues is the lack of accessibility to properly trained professional for
diagnosis of epilepsy [2].
The use of deep learning (DL) architectures for analyzing these EEG recordings can have
a significant impact on improving the accessibility of diagnosis support, minimizing the
need for trained specialist. The recent availability of large EEG datasets has led to deep
learning frameworks being utilized for EEG decoding and classification. DL algorithms ex­
ploit learning features from raw data without depending completely on preprocessing and
can handle the high dimensionality and size of EEG datasets. The challenge with these
massive available EEG datasets is the lack of labeling, which is both a time­consuming
process and requires human expertise. In recent years the use of self­supervised models
has shown promise in overcoming this challenge. They exploit the latent structure in raw
unlabeled data, to learn informative representations for downstream classification tasks
on smaller labeled datasets.
A field in which the use of these self­supervised learning methods has advanced most
rapidly in the last few years is in Natural Language Processing (NLP). In 2021, Kostas
et al. introduced an approach to effectively use those techniques on EEG data to learn
compressed representations of the raw data signals, called BENDR [3]. They show that
their approach is capable of capturing latent structures in raw EEG data which can then be
fine­tuned to different downstream classification tasks, outperforming prior work in more
task­specific self­supervision. To be able to use these complex models as a diagnosis
support tool the importance of understanding how and why the model makes its decision
is of high importance, understanding the structure of the latent space and the biases that
might have been introduced from the datasets it was trained on [4]. A promising simple
method to interpret the layers of a neural net in terms of ”human­friendly” concepts was
introduced in 2018 called testing concept activated vectors TCAV [4].
We ask if TCAV can be introduced to models based on BENDR, giving us an inter­
pretation of their structure and decision making process with the prospect of using
them as diagnosis support for abnormalities in EEGs, such as seizures.
Machine learning for EEG
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
State of the art
1.2.1
EEG signals
Electroencephalograms (EEG) are used to test for different brain disorders by measuring
electrical activity in the brain. An EEG is most commonly used to diagnose epilepsy, but
is also used for sleep disorders, brain tumors and injuries as well as other diseases [1]. It
is typically performed by attaching small electrodes to the scalp using a conductive gel or
paste. The electrodes read the electrical impulses that go through neurons in the brain.
The electrical activity in the brain comes from neurons which are firing synchronously with
electric charge which is picked up at the scalp by the electrodes. These signals will then
need to be amplified and other biological and electrical activity will need to be filtered
out [5]. Biological activity includes artifacts such as blinking and jaw clenching which
induce a large spike in amplitude within the signal. Other biological activity which needs
to be taken into account is the heartbeat which can be measured by an electrocardiogram
(EKG). Other electrical activity includes filtering out the power line noise which is either
50 Hz or 60 Hz depending on the geographical location of the recordings. The electrical
activity of the brain is measured in hertz (Hz) and is typically divided into five different
frequency bands and is outlined in table 1.1 [6].
Frequency band
Frequency
Brain states
Gamma (γ)
> 35 Hz
Concentration
Beta (β)
12 −35 Hz
Anxiety dominant, active, external attention, relaxed
Alpha (α)
8 −12 Hz
Very relaxed, passive attention
Theta (θ)
4 −8 Hz
Deeply relaxed, inward focused
Delta (δ)
0.5 −4 Hz
Sleep
Table 1.1: Characteristics of five different frequency bands for measurements of brain waves.
These frequency bands can be filtered out by their given frequencies. It is important to note that
these can vary person to person.
The EEG signal displays the difference in voltages between electrodes. There can be
different arrangements of the electrodes on the scalp, this is called montages [7]. An
example is the Bipolar montage, where two electrodes are placed on the scalp and the
electrical activity between the two electrodes is recorded. This montage is useful for
isolating activity in specific brain regions or for comparing activity between two different
areas of the brain. Another example is the Referential montage, where a single reference
electrode is placed on the scalp and the electrical activity of all other electrodes is recorded
relative to the reference electrode. This montage is useful for comparing activity across
different areas of the brain and for identifying abnormal activity that may be present in only
one specific region. Similar to this is the Average reference montage, where the electrical
activity of all electrodes is recorded relative to the average activity of all electrodes. This
montage is useful for identifying global patterns of activity across the entire brain.
EEG signals are informative of brain activity which helps distinguish normal patterns of the
brain waves from abnormal activity. A patient with epilepsy might have abnormal patterns
even though they did not experience a seizure during the time of the EEG recording [8].
When diagnosing epilepsy, a doctor may give instructions during or prior to an EEG scan to
induce a seizure, which are very evident in the amplitude of the signals [9]. The diagnosis
requires a professional to look through all the EEG recording and be able to distinguish
between artifacts and abnormalities. These sessions can result in hours of data which
needs to be looked at in detail with a trained eye [5]. Figure 1.1 shows an example of
2
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:11==
EEG signals which highlights the difference between normal and abnormal waveform of
the electrical signal.
Figure 1.1: Two exemplar EGG data. Each EEG consists of multiple sequences from different
channels. Left: one normal EEG data; Right: one abnormal (epileptic) EEG data [10].
Analyzing EEGs is a manual time consuming task and has led to development of many
algorithms and techniques. Traditional machine learning approaches to detect this epilep­
tic behavior in the EEG recordings require a manually designed feature extraction pro­
cess, where the features can then be used to train a classifier for seizure detection. The
Fourier transform and wavelet transform are commonly used to extract frequency­based
features from EEG data [11]. However, manually extracting features from EEG data may
not capture all potentially relevant features for a specific task. In contrast, deep learning
approaches can learn features directly from the EEG data without requiring manual fea­
ture extraction. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been found to be particularly
effective for epilepsy detection [12, 13].
1.2.2
Self­supervised learning for EEG data
Self­supervised learning (SSL) makes use of unlabeled data by learning the inherent
structure of the data. A common use case is performing an unsupervised learning task
using unlabeled data which is followed by a supervised learning task with labeled data.
SSL models can be used to predict the next time point in a sequence of EEG signals, or
used to reconstruct the original signal from a masked version of the unlabeled input signal.
The representation learned on this task can then be applied to a supervised downstream
task, potentially requiring much fewer labeled examples [14]. The use of self­supervised
models for EEG analysis has recently gained interest due to its recent success in com­
puter vision and language modeling. A lot of work has been done in the advancement
in DL for EEG data but only recently have we seen self­supervised methods. Due to the
cost and skilled labour required to label medical data, the use of self­supervised learning
within the medical industry is extremely promising. There are many models which utilize
the power of self­supervised learning when it comes to unlabeled EEG data [15, 10, 3,
16, 17, 18], and they differ widely when it comes to architecture and downstream tasks,
e.g seizure detection.
In a paper published in 2020 researchers propose a self­supervised method for anomaly
detection on EEG signals, which would allow for epilepsy diagnosis support. The method
trains in normal EEG data and from there can label epileptic EEG data as abnormal if
it were to encounter it. They show that the self­supervised method outperforms classic
anomaly detection methods [10]. The approach is inspired by self­supervised learning
Machine learning for EEG
3
==PAGE:12==
techniques for detecting abnormalities in image data. The approach is to create multiple
pseudo­labels based on normal EEG data and training a classifier to identify each of these
labels. The classifier is trained on normal EEG data, so it is expected to correctly identify
the labels for normal data, but may incorrectly identify the labels for abnormal EEG data
due to differences in frequency between normal and abnormal EEGs. The inconsistency
between the predicted labels and the real labels can be used as a measure of abnormality
for new EEG data.
Contrastive learning was used for EEG data in a paper that came out in 2019 [15]. Con­
trastive learning is a powerful tool for training models to understand relationships between
inputs, where the goal is to determine whether the two inputs are similar or dissimilar.
Contrastive learning allows for learning the different attributes which are informative of
the different classes [19]. That is, we try to maximize the similarity between samples of
the same class and minimize the similarity of different classes by introducing them during
the learning process [20].
A contrastive learning method for EEG data introduced in 2019 [15] proposed two ap­
proaches for self­supervised sleep stage classification (SSC) using contrastive learning
on EEG data split into different time windows. The first approach, called ”relative posi­
tioning,” is a binary classification task that distinguishes whether a pair of representations
are within a local or positive window or outside a long­range or negative window. The
second approach, called ”temporal shuffling,” adds a third window or representation to
contrast with the others and involves a binary classification task to determine whether the
three representations are ordered sequentially or out of order. Both approaches improved
SSC classification performance over fully supervised methods, but the shortest time win­
dows used in the study were 2 minutes, which may be too long for applications outside of
SSC, such as brain­computer interface (BCI) trials, which tend to be no more than several
seconds.
There are many transformer based methods when it comes to self­supervised learning
within EEG­modeling, such as Transformer­based Spatial­Temporal feature learning [16],
BENDR [3], Gated Transformer [17] and Transformer­Based approach with Deep learning
networks and Spatial­Temporal information. [18]. Both Song et al. [16] and Toa et al.
[17] use versions of the famous transformer which has proven successful in the NLP
world while Kostas et al. [3] and Xie et al. [18] use a combination of both transformers
and Convolutions neural network. As we will focus on a CNN and transformer based
architecture, we will highlight the two models named here which utilize these methods.
The BENDR (BERT­inspired Neural Data Representations) model, introduced in 2021, is
a transformer based method that utilizes a CNN for feature extraction and reducing the
dimensionality of the inherently highly dimensional EEG­data [3]. It inputs raw EEG sig­
nals to the model and pre­trains by learning a representation of the data using contrastive
learning which then allows for different specified downstream tasks to be performed. This
method will be described in detail in section 2.4 BENDR.
The method introduced by Xie et al. [18] builds on the learning’s of these prior methods.
One of the main attributes that this paper focuses on is the spatial and temporal charac­
teristics of EEG­datasets, by introducing different methods of handling the data through
their transformer layer and CNN layer. This means they had the input data either in a
spatial­wise or temporal­wise input. The spatial­wise way means that the EEG data along
the time axis from each channel is regarded as features and channels are regarded as
features for the temporal­wise. They introduce five variations of their model; s­Trans,
t­Trans, s­CTrans, t­Ctrans and f­CTrans.
4
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:13==
1. s­Trans: Spatial­wise inputs go through positional encoding which are input to the
transformer before a final classification layer.
2. t­Trans: Temporal­wise inputs go through positional encoding which are input to the
transformer before a final classification layer.
3. s­CTrans: Spatial­wise inputs go through 2 convolutional layers with average pool­
ing before positional encoding which are then input to the transformer before a final
classification layer.
4. t­CTrans: Temporal­wise inputs go through 1 convolutional layer then average pool­
ing which is then transformed before positional encoding which are then input to the
transformer before a final classification layer.
5. f­CTrans: Both the spatial­wise and temporal­wise inputs are split to go through the
same steps as in s­CTrans and t­CTrans. The outputs of these are then concate­
nated before a final classification layer.
This method seems to improve upon the prior methods by using similar structures as
BENDR but with an emphasis on the spatial and temporal characteristics of the data. It
also explores different positional encoding (PE) methods within the s­Trans model; relative
PE Channel, correlation PE, learned PE and a control of no positional embedding for
comparison.
All of these self­supervised methods highlight the valuable information we can gather
from large amounts of EEG data available to us without the need of trained professionals
labeling the data. This opens the door for more diagnosis support tools which could assist
with a variety of tasks when it comes to the interpretation of EEG recordings.
1.2.3
Explainability
Through out this paper we will refer to explainability and interpretability interchangeably.
Explainable Machine Learning is when predictions and decisions made by machine learn­
ing models and methods can be fully interpreted and explained. As ML models can be
very powerful and give great accuracy it becomes important to explain the black­box to
trust and interpret the model. Explainability or interpretability methods are vital for the
practical use of ML models, this is especially true in the medical industry [21].
As deep learning methods are showing great promise in the medical industry, the need
for interpretable methods is crucial [22, 21]. There are ethical implications to using deep
learning models where the decisions of the predictions are not fully explained. The im­
plementation of interpretability in these models used for medical predictions is necessary
for assessing their robustness and to ensure that they can be used by people lacking
machine­learning expertise.
There are two types of interpretability techniques when it comes to looking into complex
ML models, global interpretability and local interpretability. Global interpretability tech­
niques focus on the concepts that are in the model as a whole. Local interpretability tech­
niques look into each prediction made by the model. Local interpretability is important
when looking at individual observations, where global interpretability allows for a deeper
understanding of the decision making as a whole [23].
When it comes to interpretability of deep learning methods, self supervised methods in
particular, it is important to be critical in looking at global versus local interpretation, es­
pecially when we have different downstream tasks. An example of this was highlighted in
the paper ”An Interpretability Illusion for BERT” [24] where the authors looked into BERT,
Machine learning for EEG
5
==PAGE:14==
a Self­supervised learning method which is introduced in detail in 2.2 [25]. They take
a look at a specific neuron 221 in layer 12 to see which examples activated the neuron
the most. Their goal was to see if individual neurons in BERT might have human inter­
pretable meaning. However, they showed that based on three different input datasets,
the examples which activated the neuron the most were very different:
• 164,246 sentences from the Quora Question Pairs dataset lead to these examples
activating the neuron the most
– ”What is the meaning behind the song ””Angel”” by Eric Clapton?”
– ”What’s the meaning of Johnny Cash’s song ””King of the Hill””?”
– ”What is the meaning behind the Tears for Fears song””Mad World””, such as
the lyric, ””All around me are familiar faces””?”
• 58,645 sentences from Wikipedia dataset lead to these examples activating the neu­
ron the most
– On 16 June 2006, it was announced that Everton had entered into talks with
Knowsley Council and Tesco over the possibility of building a new 55,000 seat
stadium, ex­pandable to over 60,000, in Kirkby
– On 15 September 1940, known as the Battle of Britain Day, an RAF pilot, Ray
Holmes of No. 504 Squadron RAF rammed a German bomber he believed
was going to bomb the Palace
– On 20 August 2010, Queen’s manager Jim Beach put out a Newsletter stating
that the band had signed a new contract with Universal Music.
• 198,085 sentences from the Toronto BookCorpus dataset lead to these examples
activating the neuron the most
– Lara pulled out the document Reed had supplied from Gresham’s briefcase.
– I take Kellan’s business card from my pocket and stretch it over to Realm.
– Pilcher took a walkie­talkie out of his coat and spoke into the receiver
We can see here that there is a large difference between the interpretation of this neuron
depending on the datasets. They highlight this as an interpretability illusion, that is that
there can be a pattern but it might only be applicable in some cases and not as an over
arching interpretability of the model it self, but for the specific downstream task [24].
There are various different machine learning methods used for interpretability.
Inter­
pretability has been explored in different tasks which use EEG data. For example, prob­
ing has been used in deep learning for brain signals where they look at CNNs and RNNs
which are used for EEG decoding problems [26]. Sensitivity analysis of a deep convo­
lutional neural network for EEG sleep staging has also been done [27]. This is a very
visual method where they take a look at each class of sleep staging (Wakefullness (W),
Non­Rem 1 (N1), Non­Rem 2 (N2), Non­Rem 3 (N3), REM (R)) using a spectrogram and
compare this to the sensitivity map of each class.
An interpretability method was introduced in 2018 is called Testing Concept Activation
vectors [4]. This method is very promising with medical data as it uses human concepts
to understand the different layers of a neural network. Its simplicity allows for easy expla­
nation of the decision making of a network which is great when relaying this information
to non­experts of machine learning. This method will be outlined in detail in section 2.5.
6
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:15==
1.3
Objective
As we have seen there are many different methods available for the investigation of DL
models. We also see that there are many DL methods available for different EEG related
tasks. BENDR is a very promising model which utilizes both CNN and transformers to
learn from large EEG databases as well as perform a variety of downstream tasks. TCAV
is a very attractive option for interpretability due to its simplicity and allows for human
defined concepts to be investigated.
The main objective of this thesis is to discover the decision structure of the models based
on BENDR. Interpretability of this model is an important aspect as we are working with
medical data. We hope to use the TCAV technique to understand whether the latent
spaces of the model can be explained, given human defined concepts. One of the reason
TCAV can be useful for this discovery is because of its simplicity and this is especially
important when it comes to communicating the results. This will help us see if the model is
making decisions which align with the way medical professional make decisions based on
the downstream tasks, in our case the identification of abnormalities in EEG data relevant
for medical diagnosis. One of the challenges we will face is discovering and defining
the human concepts that will be looked at with TCAV. This would include concepts that
are related to artifacts, anatomical, behavioural or even frequency/wave related concepts
within EEG data. The aim is to use labeled datasets which include annotations of specific
EEG related events.
We will look at the theory behind the BENDR model in detail from the original architecture
of a transformer to the design of downstream tasks performed on BENDR. From there, we
will investigate the interpretability method TCAV and define concepts based on labeled
EEG datasets. These concepts will be used for investigating different downstream tasks
for BENDR through multiple experiments. There are three main experiments that will
be investigated. First we will look at motor imagery task which focuses on classifying
between subjects imagining opening and closing the left or right fist. The second task is
to look abnormalities in epileptic patients EEGs. The final investigation will be to classify
between seizure EEG signals and background signals. For all of these tasks we will use
the BENDR representations.
Machine learning for EEG
7
==PAGE:16==
2
Theory and Illustrations
The following chapter outlines the theory behind the methods and architectures that sup­
port the contents of this thesis. We will outline the different elements within the BENDR
model which will be the model of investigation throughout this thesis. As BENDR is a CNN
and transformer­based model, we will show the origin of the model and walk through the
theory behind them. BENDR is built on a method called wav2vec 2.0 [28] used for au­
dio recordings. The wav2vec 2.0 model is built on a NLP model called BERT [25] which
is a transformer­based model. Therefore, we will begin to walk through the transformer
model, move on to BERT and wav2vec 2.0, and finally outline BENDR. We will also outline
the TCAV method and the theory behind it, as it is the method that will be used to take a
closer look at the interpretability of BENDR. As TCAV requires human defined concepts,
we will outline some of the concepts available to us and explain them. We formulate our
concepts based on labeled datasets with annotations from trained professionals. Finally,
we will take a quick look at OC­SVM, a method for anomaly detection which can be used
for detection of abnormal behavior in data.
8
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:17==
2.1
Transformers: Self­Attention Mechanism
The following section will outline the transformer architecture and walk through the math­
ematics behind it. A transformer is a deep learning method introduced in 2017 for natural
language processing which uses a new method called self­attention. Self­attention was
used in the architecture called Transformer by the authors of the paper ”Attention is all
you need” [29]. The transformer model utilizes attention mechanism which is based on
human attention. Attention allows for an understanding of the overall context of the input
data. One of the reasons this method was introduced was to handle data inputs differently
from classical language­modeling methods. This method is different from the classical
recurrent neural network (RNNs) for natural language processing, as they use more of
a short­term memory of only referring to recent inputs, allowing data only to be fed in a
temporal context. Attention allows for all data to be fed in at once, learning the overall
context of the data. The transformer uses self­attention for self­supervised learning in a
encoder­decoder network.
Figure 2.1: Transformer: Illustration of the transformer architecture. 1. Input embedding & Posi­
tional encoding for the Encoder, 2. Encoder, 3. Output embedding & Positional encoding for the
Decoder, 4. Decoder, 5. Linear layer, 6. Soft­max
Machine learning for EEG
9
==PAGE:18==
To understand the mechanism behind this method we will introduce the process in a few
steps. We will highlight the general structure and then move on to a detailed understand­
ing of self­attention mechanism. The process can be loosely introduced in multiple steps
and figure 2.1 should be used to guide through the process:
Transformer process
1. Input embedding & Positional encoding for the Encoder
2. Encoder
(a) Multi­head Attention
(b) Add & Normalize
(c) Feed forward
(d) Add & Normalize
3. Output embedding & Positional encoding for the Decoder
4. Decoder
(a) Masked Multi­head Attention
(b) Add & Normalize
(c) Multi­head Attention
(d) Add & Normalize
(e) Feed forward
(f) Add & Normalize
5. Linear layer
6. Soft­max
1. Input embedding & Positional encoding for the Encoder
The input data is fed through an embedding to go through the positional encoder.
Since attention is used to have an over­arching context of the data, inputs need
to be encoded to identify the positions of the inputs. This is done using positional
encoding. There are many types of positional encoding, the one used in ”Attention
is all you need” is a sine and cosine method which is a linear operation given by:
PE(pos, 2i) = sin

pos
n2i/dmodel

PE(pos, 2i + 1) = cos

pos
n2i/dmodel

where pos is the position in the input sequence, dmodel is the output dimension of the
embedding, n is a scalar defined as 10, 000 by the authors, and i is the dimension.
2. Encoder
The encoder network has two main components, a Multi­head Attention and a feed
forward layer. The encoder is the left component in figure 2.1. The encoder has N
stacks of identical layers where the following is performed.
(a) Multi­head Attention: First, the positional encoded data will go through a multi
head Attention mechanism. In short this involves representing the data in three
different vectors (value, key and query) which will go through attention scoring
and will output one final vector. This mechanism will be explained in detail in
section 2.1.1.
(b) Add & Normalize: This is a residual connection where the output data from the
self­attention is added to the input followed by a layer normalization.
10
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:19==
(c) Feed forward: Simple feed forward layer which the output of the normalized
Multi­head Attention goes through.
(d) Add & Normalize
3. Output embedding & Positional encoding for the Decoder
The output data is fed through an embedding to go through the decoder. Positional
encoding is added as in step 1.
4. Decoder
The decoder also has N stacks of identical layers, as the encoder, and can be seen
on the right in figure 2.1. The decoder network has an extra step to the encoder,
the Masked Multi­head attention. Masking is used to train the model to predict the
hidden parts of the data.
(a) Masked Multi­head Attention: Same as the Multi­head attention but now parts
of the inputs are masked in an extra step.
(b) Add & Normalize
(c) Multi­head Attention: Attention mechanism will be described in detail below. It
will use outputs from the decoder as the query and key vector but the value
vector will come from the masked multi­head attention.
(d) Add & Normalize
(e) Feed forward: Simple feed forward layer as above.
(f) Add & Normalize
5. Linear layer
This linear layer takes the outputs from the decoder and passes through to the final
classification using soft­max.
6. Soft­max The soft max will output the predicted next­token probabilities.
σ(z)i =
ezi
PK
j=1 ezj , i = 1, ..., K and z = [z1, ..., zK] ∈R
where K is the total number of tokens and z is the output vector from the linear
layer.
This encoder­decoder network is illustrated in figure 2.1, it is important to note that the
encoders and decoders are connected by the multi­head attention within the decoder.
2.1.1
Self­Attention
The self­attention mechanism in the encoders and decoders is performed in multiple
heads, denoted as h. Within these heads we have multiple steps that can be seen in
figure 2.2; linear layer, matrix multiplication, scaling, a softmax and finally another matrix
multiplication. To look into this process in detail we will look at one input vector xi going
through these steps. Note that figure 2.2 can be used as reference when walking through
these steps.
Machine learning for EEG
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.2: Multi­Head Self­attention illustration which is within the transformer. Note that if we
have Masked self­attention then a masking component is placed between the scaling component
(yellow) and softmax component (green).
A input matrix X is created from the input embeddings and translated into three different
matrices. First a Query matrix Q, a Key matrix K, and a Value matrix from V , that all
have a corresponding weight matrix, denoted by W Q ∈Rdmodel×dk, W K ∈Rdmodel×dk and
W V ∈Rdmodel×dv respectively, where dv = dk = dmodel/h. These matrices are created by
a matrix multiplication:
Q = XW Q
K = XW K
V = XW V
Where X ∈RN×dmodel and Q, K, V ∈RN×dmodel/h are matrices of the xi, qi, ki and vi
vectors.
X =


|
x1
|
|
x2
|
...
|
xN
|

, Q =


|
q1
|
|
q2
|
...
|
qN
|

, K =


|
k1
|
|
k2
|
...
|
kN
|

, V =


|
v1
|
|
v2
|
...
|
vN
|


Let us continue with the idea of one vector xi being transformed to the vectors qi, ki and
vi. Next we have to calculate the score sj for all elements in the vector ki. This is done
by matrix multiplication, that is the dot product of the query and all the key vectors
qi · kj = sj, j ∈J = N
12
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:21==
This score is then scaled with respect to the dimension of the key vectors dk. This is done
to have more stable gradients.
sj,scaled =
sj
√dk
The next step is to normalize using a soft­max:
scorei = softmax(s1,scaled, s2,scaled, ..., sJ,scaled)
This is performed to all of the inputs. From here we multiply the value vectors with the
respective soft­max score.
zi = scorei × vi
This can be simply put with matrix formulation:
Z = Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QKT
√dk

V
(2.1)
All of these attention matrices Z from each head are then concatenated and multiplied
with a weight matrix W O, where W O ∈Rh·dv×dmodel
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat (Z1, . . . , Zh) W O
where Zi = Attention

QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i

As the transformer uses Multi­head self attention we have h weight matrices W Q
i
∈
Rdmodel×dk, W K
i
∈Rdmodel×dk and W V
i
∈Rdmodel×dv where i ∈1, ..., h which will result
in h Zi matrices that will be concatenated at the end.
There can be an additional step if there is masking, this would be done in between the
scaling and soft­max steps.
2.2
BERT
Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Transformers (BERT) was introduced in 2018
as a new language representation model [25]. This masked language modeling method
pre­trains unlabeled text allowing for an easy implementation of downstream tasks using
only one additional output layer.
Deep bidirectional methods allow for context to be learned from both directions simultane­
ously where as methods that are not will learn context sequentially. The BERT architec­
ture is a multi­layer bidirectional Transformer encoder based on the transformer described
in 2.1. It is important to note that Transformers have this bidirectional nature by taking in
all of the information at once while prior language models (LM) for NLP process data
sequentially. BERT was designed to fine­tune downstream tasks on pre­trained deep
bidirectional representations from unlabeled text. Utilizing massive datasets, the model
learns the deep bidirectional representations to learn attributes of the data, which allows
for less training when it comes to a supervised downstream task, hence smaller sets of
labeled data are required.
The pre­training process involves taking in a pair of sentences which are masked; Masked
sentence A and Masked Sentence B. The sentences are tokenized and separated by a
[sep] token and a [CLS] token is added at the beginning of the sequence. The sentences
have a positional embedding and segment embedding indicating the sentences order.
Machine learning for EEG
13
==PAGE:22==
The [CLS] token allows for a classification task. In the case of the pre­training there are
two unsupervised tasks performed simultaneously:
1. Masked Language Modeling (MLM) trains deep bidirectional representation by
masking a fraction of the input tokens and then predicting these masked tokens.
2. Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) is similar to a binary classification task as it is to
determines if sentence A is before sentence B. This task uses the [CLS] token.
After the model is pre­trained, various supervised tasks can be fine­tuned.
Figure 2.3 shows the process, on the left hand side we have the pre­training and on
the right hand side we have the fine­tuning based on downstream tasks. By utilizing the
power of a transformer, BERT is a stronger architecture compared to the classical NLP.
Furthermore, BERT makes use of large amounts of unlabeled data to support downstream
tasks which require less data to be labeled.
Figure 2.3: The BERT architecture with the pre­training (left) and fine­tuning displayed (right).
[25]
2.3
Wav2vec 2.0
Wav2vec 2.0 is a state­of­the­art self supervised speech representation learning model
developed by researchers at Facebook AI introduced in 2020 [28]. It is designed to au­
tomatically learn contextual representations of speech from raw audio waveform data,
without the need for explicit transcription and can be fine­tuned for specific downstream
speech recognition tasks.
It uses similar framework as BERT which is explained above in 2.2 but with an additional
step in the beginning using a feature extraction with a convolutional neural network. The
architecture consist of a multi­layer convolutional neural network which is passed on to a
quantization step before being masked for a masked learning task within the transformer
encoder. The model is trained using contrastive learning where the loss of the task is
defined by the quantized representation and the final output of the transformer.
2.3.1
Wav2vec 2.0 model architecture
The following process is described in three steps and figure 2.4 can be followed along.
14
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.4: The wav2vec 2.0 architecture illustrated for a raw waveform input [28].
Wav2vec 2.0 process
1. Feature encoder
(a) 1D Temporal convolution with 512 channels:
(b) Layer normalization
(c) GELU activation function
2. Quantization module
3. Contextualized representations with Transformers
1. Feature encoder f : X 7→Z: This encoder processes the input audio, X, and
converts it into a sequence of latent representations, or ”features”, that capture the
underlying structure of the audio, z1, . . . , zT for T time steps.
First X is normalized to zero mean and unit variance. For pre­traing, seven sequen­
tial blocks are used, containing:
(a) 1D Temporal convolution with 512 channels: The CNN processes the input
data in a sliding window fashion, moving the window across the input data and
applying the convolutional filters at each step. This allows the CNN to capture
local patterns in the data and learn features that are relevant.
(b) Layer normalization
(c) GELU activation function:
GELU(x) = xϕ(x)
where ϕ(x) is the cumulative density function of the standard normal distribu­
tion. One of the key benefits of the GELU activation function is that it has a
smooth, continuous derivative, which can help to improve the stability of the
model during training [30].
2. Quantization module f : Z 7→Q: This module converts the continuous represen­
tations from the feature encoder Z into finite quantized representations Q.
Machine learning for EEG
15
==PAGE:24==
As the number of phonemes in a language is finite, all possible pairs of phonemes is
finite. Therefore, we can create a codebook containing all possible pairs of phonemes.
G codebooks containing V codewords are created. One entry from each codebook
that best represents zi is chosen, resulting in e1, . . . , eG entries, which are concate­
nated together before a linear transformation is applied to obtain qi. The entries
from the codebook are chosen using a Gumbel softmax [31] which allows for the
selection of discrete codebook entries in a way that is fully differentiable.
3. Contextualized representations with Transformers f : Q 7→C: The output Q is
fed to a transformer architecture as described in 2.1, but with a relative positional
embedding instead of a fixed positional embedding[32]. The relative positional em­
beddings are learned during training using a convolutional layer and than passed
through a GELU activation function. They are then added to the input features,
Q, and a layer normalization applied before they are processed by the transformer
layers. The final output of the transformer is the context representation C.
During pre­training, a certain proportion of time steps in the latent feature encoder space
Z are masked. The training objective is to identify the correct quantized latent audio
representation in a set of distractors at each masked time step.
The Contrastive loss is defined as:
Lm = −log
exp (sim (ct, qt) /κ)
P
˜q∼Qt exp (sim (ct, ˜q) /κ)
(2.2)
Used to identify the correct quantized latent speech representation qt in a set of K +
1 candidate representations ˜q ∈Qt. Qt includes the correct representation qt and K
distractors, which are uniformly sampled from other masked time steps.
The operator sim is the cosine similarity and κ is a temperature which is constant during
training.
16
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:25==
2.4
BENDR
As seen above, a field were the use of SSL techniques has advanced most rapidly in the
last few years is in Natural Language Processing (NLP) where big companies like Google
and Facebook have huge interest in improving the quality of their speech recognition al­
gorithms. The question then arises if it is possible to utilize these techniques and architec­
tures in other data domains. In 2021 an approach to effectively use those techniques on
EEG data to learn compressed representations of the raw data signals was introduced,
called BENDR, BERT inspired neural data representations [3]. Their approach closely
followed the architecture of wav2vec 2.0 described in 2.3.
The authors point out the challenges of using DL such as deep neural networks DNNs for
classifying raw EEG signals, they lack generality as they struggle to learn ”lower­level”
features that are transferable to specific tasks. Using SSL could overcome this problem,
modeling the input distribution of unlabeled EEG data recorded with different hardware
from different subject preforming different tasks.
BERT, as described in 2.2, is a masked language model that learns to reconstruct lan­
guage tokens using surrounding text to create context. The authors discuss applying this
approach using individual samples of raw EEG data rather than text tokens. They con­
clude that the approach may not be effective as the highly correlated nature of neighboring
samples in EEG would likely result in the model simply learning to average neighboring
samples rather than producing general features. Masking a contiguous span of tokens
could avoid this issue, but reconstructing time­series data is difficult due to the challenges
of capturing the degree of error in time and the assumption of independence in the error
between elements in the series made by commonly used loss functions such as mean
squared error or mean absolute error.
Contrastive predictive coding (CPC) is an contrastive learning approach that is used to
learn representations of sequences of data, and has been shown to be effective for tasks
such as self­supervised sequence classification (SSC) [33]. The correct representation for
a particular position in a sequence is learned by predicting it relative to the representations
of other positions in the same sequence, which act as distractors.
Researchers have previously combined elements of contrastive predictive coding (CPC)
and masked language modeling (MLM) to create self­learning methods for raw waveform
data in the field of self­supervised speech recognition, as is done in wav2vec 2.0. The
authors adapt this approach and in their pre­training task, raw EEG segments are encoded
as a sequence of learned vectors called BERT­inspired Neural Data Representations
(BENDR). After pre­training on massive amounts of unlabeled EEG data the paper aims
to investigate the transferability of BENDR to unseen EEG datasets and to determine how
suitable BENDR are for a range of downstream EEG classification tasks seen in table 2.1.
2.4.1
Data
This section outlines the data used for pre­training and downstream tasks in the paper.
The model is pre­trained on versions 1.1. and 1.2 of the the Temple University Hospi­
tal EEG Corpus (TUEG) [34]. It contains 1.5TB of raw EEG recordings, of over 10,000
people ranging from age 1 to 90, 51% male and 49% female. Most of the recordings are
collected using a conventional recording configuration, monopolar electrodes in a 10–20
configuration. The TUEG dataset consist of two types of monopolar montages: Average
Reference (AR) and Linked Ear Reference (LE). Figure 2.5 shows the electrode place­
ment for the EEG recording. The AR montage uses an average of a number of electrodes
as the reference. The LE montage uses a lead adapter to connect the left and right ear
(A1 and A2) to use as reference [41].
Machine learning for EEG
17
==PAGE:26==
Use
Dataset
Description
Subjects
Pre­training
TUEG [34]
Unlabeled
10.000
Down­stream
MMI [35, 36]
Labeled (2 classes; MI ­ L/R)
105
Down­stream
BCIC [37]
Labeled (4 classes; MI ­ L/R/F/T)
9
Down­stream
ERN [38]
Labeled (2 classes; Error related negativity)
26 (10)
Down­stream
P300 [35, 39]
Labeled (2 classes; Donchin speller)
9
Down­stream
SSC [35, 40]
Labeled (5 classes; Sleep staging)
83
Table 2.1: The model is pre­trained on the Temple University Hospital EEG Corpus (TUEG), 1.5
TB of raw EEG recordings of over 10,000 subjects containing multiple sessions per subject. For
the downstream classification task 5 datasets are used: MMI (2 classes), BCIC (4 classes), ERN
(2 classes), P300 (2 classes) and SSC (5 classes).
Figure 2.5: 10­20 electrode placement with 21 electrodes. Electrodes beginning with Fp refer to
electrodes in the pre­frontal area, F to the frontal area, T to the temporal area, C to the center, P
to the parietal, O to the occipital area and A to the Mastoid process (bone near the outer ear) [41].
All of the data outlined in table 2.1 is annotated with the different events at specific time
intervals. These events are used as targets in the classification downstream tasks. The
motor imagery (MI) and brain­computer­interface (BCI) datasets, MMI and BCIC, are tasks
where the patient gets a specific instruction at a specific time interval. In both cases the
subjects got instructions flashing on a screen indicating which MI task they should perform.
ERN and P300 dataset were collected using a version of the Donchin speller task [35, 39].
This task also included instructions which flashed on a screen to indicate what word was
to be spelled. All annotation intervals have the same length for the MI, BCI, ERN and
P300 datasets. The Sleep staging (SSC) dataset is different as the annotations do not
occur periodically as the repeated tasks above. The SSC dataset is annotated by trained
technicians, labeling the sleep stages at 30 second intervals.
18
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:27==
Pre­processing
The downstream datasets were configured to match the configurations of the TUEG data.
The authors decided to focus on the 19 EEG channels of the UI 10/20 [42] channel set, that
is excluding the A1 and A2 for reference see figure 2.5, as the pre­training data (TUEG)
roughly follows that scheme.
Each training sequence was scaled to the interval [−1, 1] to remove differences in channel
amplitude. A single relative amplitude channel was added, with the constant value of the
interval of the trial divided by the interval of the entire dataset to account for the lost am­
plitude information relative to the entire dataset. To achieve a target sampling frequency
of 256 Hz, over and undersamping was done following nearest­neighbour interpolation to
get the exact frequency. The TUEG dataset contains some high sampling rate signals.
The Nyquist criterion is a fundamental principle in digital signal processing that relates to
the sampling of continuous signals. It states that in order to accurately reconstruct a con­
tinuous signal from its samples, the sampling frequency must be at least twice the highest
frequency present in the signal. This is known as the Nyquist frequency [43]. The signals
that violated this criterion were ignored, e.g. 1000Hz signals. We note that the authors
do not do any low or high pass filtering except for the P300 dataset which is low pass fil­
tered below 120Hz. Including the relative amplitude channel every sequence from every
downstream dataset uses 20 channels, where other channels are ignored and missing
channels set to 0.
2.4.2
BENDR model architecture and pre­trianing
The BENDR model architecture is similar to the one of wav2vec 2.0, but here we have 20
channels, instead of the single raw audio file. For simplicity they decide to convolute over
all the channels with 1D convolutions as in wav2vec 2.0.
During pre­training on the TUEG data 60 seconds of raw EEG recording segments with
sampling frequency 256Hz are taken as input to the model, that is a tensor of dimension
15.360 × 20. Below is the model architecture and how this 60s sample travels trough the
network and figure 2.6 can be used as reference.
BENDR pre­training process
1. Feature encoder
(a) 1D Temporal convolution with 512 filters
(b) Group Norm
(c) GELU activation function
2. Masking during Pre­training
3. Modified Transformer Encoder
Machine learning for EEG
19
==PAGE:28==
1. Feature encoder f : X 7→B: Processes the 20 channel raw EEG recording, X,
and converts it into a sequence of latent representations, that capture the underlying
structure of the data, b1, . . . , bT for T timesteps. Six convolution blocks are used,
containing:
(a) 1D Temporal convolution with 512 filters: first block has a stride and receptive
field of 3 and the other five have stride and receptive field of 2.
(b) Group Norm: Divides the channels into groups and computes within each
group the mean and variance for normalization.
(c) GELU activation function
After the first convolution we have 512 new ”filtered” time series of length 15.360/3 =
5.120. The remaining five have stride and receptive field of 2, so the resulting down­
sampled output are 512 new ”filtered” time series of length 160. This means that
the effective sampling frequency of BENDR is 15.360
160
= 96 times smaller than the
original sampling frequency, or 256
96 = 2.67Hz. After this downsampling we have a
resulting latent space representation called BENDR, B.
2. Masking during Pre­training: For each sample 10 contiguous sequences are masked
with probability pmask = 6, 5%, where overlap is allowed.
3. Modified Transformer Encoder: The output B is fed to a transformer architecture
as described in 2.1, with 8 layers, 8 heads, model dimension of 1,536 and an internal
feed­forward dimension of 3,076. These modifications are made to the standard
architecture:
(a) The relative positional embeddings are learned during training using an additive
(grouped) convolutional layer with receptive field of 25 and 16 groups followed
by a GELU activation. This makes the model sequence­length independent,
so in the downstream tasks the input doesn’t have to be the same length as it
was pre­trianed on. They are then added to the input features, B, and a layer
normalization applied.
(b) Internal batch normalization layers removed
(c) Internal layers initialized with T­Fixup [44], to help ensure that the gradients of
the network are well behaved and do not vanish or explode.
(d) During pre­training a LayerDrop is added with probability 1% and Dropout with
probability 15%.
In order to use a transformer for classification tasks as described in BERT 2.2, a
fixed [CLS] = −5 token is added to the beginning of B before being processed by
the transformer. The transformer outputs the final vectors cn.
20
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.6: BENDR architecture illustrated for pre­training. The input passed through a convo­
lutional neural network which results in the BENDR representation of the data. These are not
quantized as in wav2vec 2.0 as here the entire sequence is classified. From here the data is
masked and will be passed through a modified Transformer encoder which will ultimately return
the vectors to calculate the loss from.
To produce outputs that are most similar to the un­masked input at position t a contrastive
Machine learning for EEG
21
==PAGE:30==
loss function is used for a masked token at position t as in wav2vec 2.0:
L = −log
exp (cossim (ct, bt)) /κ
P
bi∈BD exp (cossim (ct, bi)) /κ
(2.3)
ct is the output of the transformer and bt is the un­masked BENDR vector at position t.
BD is a set of 20 uniformly selected distractors, from the same sequence, plus bt. The
cosine similarity function is used to calculate how similar the output is to the input and
the sensitivity is set to κ = 0.1. This allows the transformer to learn a general model of
BENDR which represents its position, t, well.
Evaluation of pre­training generalization of BENDR
The accuracy of the contrastive task, that is the accuracy of the transformer at creating
a representation that is closest to the correct representation at masked sequence posi­
tions, was consistent at around 90% for the ERN, BCIC, SSC and MMI datasets, while the
P300 dataset had a noticeably lower contrastive accuracy of around 75%. The notable
difference is that for the P300 dataset the raw EEG input was 20s compared to 60s for
the other datasets. Using 20s input sequences for the other datasets resulted in a similar
75% accuracy. This indicates that a longer evaluation context makes the contrastive task
easier, suggesting that the task is in fact solved by learning signal­relevant features. The
explanation could be that the distractors used in the contrastive task for these shorter
contexts are still too similar to the input bt, implying that there is still disposable informa­
tion encoded in bt, so the latent space sampling rate, that is the number of filters in the
convolutions, could be lowered.
2.4.3
Downstream tasks
The authors considered six different approaches to the transfer learning of the down­
stream EEG classification tasks of the five different datasets. Two approaches preformed
notably best:
1. BENDR classifier
(a) To use the first output token of the transformer, that came from the class
token [CLS] learned throughout the network, and pass it trough a new linear
layer with softmax activation to find the most probable class. Then fine­tune
the entire model, both the pre­trained and the new classification layer, to
classify the downstream targets.
2. Linear Head BENDR
(a) Linear Head BENDR uses the pre­trained BENDRs, ignoring the transformer.
This model is described in detail in section 2.4.4 Linear Head BENDR Archi­
tecture.
During fine­tuning contiguous sections of 10% of the entire BENDR of a trial were masked
with the mask token learned during pre­training with probability pmask = 1%. Additionally
contiguous sections of 10% of the channels (51) were dropped (set to 0) with a probability
of 0.5%. The BENDR classifier can be visualized like the pre­training figure seen in 2.6
where the last yellow vector output from the transformer is used for classification while
the Linear Head BENDR can be see in figure 2.7.
2.4.4
Linear Head BENDR Architecture
We will experiment with the Linear Head BENDR (LHB) architecture in our discovery. The
following process describes the downstream fine­tuning of LHB and the figure 2.7 can be
22
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:31==
used as a reference.
1. Feature encoder: The parameters learned from the pre­training task are used and
then fine tuned. Six convolution blocks are used as above, containing:
(a) 1D Temporal convolution with 512 filters
(b) Group Normalization
(c) GELU activation function
The feature encoder returns lB BENDRs of length 512.
2. Encoding Augment
(a) Masking
i. 10% of the entire BENDRs of a trial of dimension 512×lB are masked with
the mask token learned during pre­training.
ii. Contiguous sections of 10% of the channels (51) are dropped with a prob­
ability of 0.005.
(b) Contexualizer
i. Relative positional embeddings from the pre­trained task are used and not
modified during fine tuning.
ii. Positional embeddings are added to the BENDRs.
iii. They are then preprocessed the same way as for input to the transformer.
A. Layer normalization
B. Dropout layer
C. 1D convolution with receptive field and stride of 1. The input is 512×lB
features and output results in 1536 × lB features (the dimension of the
transformer).
3. Summarizer: The summarizer uses 1D Adaptive Average pooling to create four
contiguous sub­sequences and averaging each sub­sequence. This is done to en­
sure that the model is independent of input length of the EEG recordings which
determines lB.
4. Extended classifier
(a) Flattens the four sub­sequences of dimension 1536 × 4 to 6144
(b) Passes the sequence through a fully connected layer which reduces the di­
mension from 6144 to 2048
(c) A Dropout layer is applied
(d) Relu activation function is used
(e) Finally the output is normalized using batch normalization
5. Classifier: A Linear layer with soft­max activation.
Machine learning for EEG
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.7: LHB (Linear Head BENDR) architecture illustrated for downstream task. 1. Feature
encoder of six convolutional blocks, 2. Encoding Augment comprised of masking and convolu­
tional contextualizer, 3. Summarizer creates four contiguous sub­sequences using 1D adaptive
average pooling, 4. Extended classifier reduced dimensionality for classifier, and 5. Classifier
24
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:33==
2.4.5
BENDR discovery
Replication of results
For better understanding of the BENDR model we replicate the results from the paper.
We use the pre­trained BENDR and run the downstream task on the EEG Motor Move­
ment/Imagery Dataset [35], using the LHB (Linear Head BENDR).
The experiments consists of four different tasks and in the paper they perform classifi­
cation on task number two: ”A target appears on either the left or the right side of the
screen. The subject imagines opening and closing the corresponding fist until the target
disappears. Then the subject relaxes” [35].
The authors of BENDR decide to take the first 6 second from the annotation, so every
imaginary left and right movement is a labeled 6s window in the EEG recording. Each
subject has three recorded sessions, with 15 annotation, resulting in 42 trials per subject
as the last task of each session is not included. The dataset consists of 105 subjects so
we have 4410 trials. The sampling frequency of the data is 160Hz but as described in the
pre­processing it is re­sampled to 256Hz and uses 20 channels so the input to BENDR is
a 1536 × 20 dimensional tensor.
The data is split up into five Cross Validation (CV) folds to evaluate the performance of
the model on the hold out set. A ”Leave­multiple­subject­out” split is used, where each
person’s data is not split into different folds. The training CV set contains four sets and
is then split by using one of the four as a validation set. The set that was last used as
a test set is used as a validation set. The Adam optimization algorithm [45] is used to
train the model with learning rate 0.00001 and weight decay (a regularization term) 0.01.
During training 7 epochs are used and a batch size of 4. The training results can be seen
in figure 2.8 which shows the average balanced accuracy over the 7 epochs of the first
CV fold.
Figure 2.8: Balanced accuracy plots for the training and validation trials for the first fold,
with 7 epochs.
The paper states an average balanced accuracy performance across all subjects being
86.7% so we seem to have been able to replicate the results with 86.2% balanced accu­
racy. The balanced accuracy for all hold out folds can be seen in table 2.2.
Machine learning for EEG
25
==PAGE:34==
Fold
Subjects
Balanced Accuracy (bac)
loss
1
1­21
0.874
0.303
2
22­42
0.844
0.378
3
43­63
0.91
0.225
4
64­84
0.834
0.392
5
85­105
0.849
0.422
All folds
All patients
0.862
0.345
Table 2.2: Average BAC and loss across subjects and CV folds for linear head BENDR on the
binary classification task in the MI dataset of subjects imagining opening and closing their right or
left fist.
Latent Space
We are interested in discovering patterns within the BENDR representations. We begin
by looking at the representations from LHB on the MI dataset introduced above. The
latent space is four averaged 512 length BENDRs concatenated so the resulting space is
of dimension 2048.
To visualize the space in 2D we use TSNE [46] and UMAP [47].
Figure 2.9: t­SNE for train set in fold 3
Figure 2.10: UMAP for train set in fold 3
Figure 2.11: t­SNE for validation set in fold 3 ­ no
projection
Figure 2.12: UMAP for validation set in fold 3 pro­
jected on the UMAP for the train set
In figure 2.10 we see a clear boundary separating the different classes for the training data
using UMAP. Figure 2.12 shows that this separation is performing well on the validation
data projected on the UMAP of the training set, where the two classes appear as distinct
clusters with some overlap. We see some classes appearing in the ”wrong” clusters and
recall that the linear softmax classifier had a accuracy of 86.2%. This might indicate that
the data is not truly linearly separable, and it may be making incorrect predictions for a
26
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:35==
Figure 2.13: t­SNE for all five test CV folds ­ all patients
subset of the data. We also see that UMAP is showing a clearer separation between
the classes than t­SNE in figures 2.9 and 2.11, which could be because the data has
a more non­linear structure and the UMAP is better at preserving this structure in the
low­dimensional space.
The final TNSE plot in figure 2.13 shows the 5 folds for the test datasets in the cross
validation. We see that there is an obvious separation between the folds, and we can see
the distinct separation between the two classes in each fold. This indicates that the data
is not independent and identically distributed (iid) across the folds. EEG can have a high
degree of variability between patients and it seems that individual variability does effect
the construction of the BENDRs.
Machine learning for EEG
27
==PAGE:36==
2.5
TCAV
Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (TCAV) was introduced in 2018 as an interpretabil­
ity method [4]. This method aims to interprets the layers of a neural network in terms of
”human­friendly” concepts. Th method allows for interpretation of the model by defining
concepts that are assumed to have an effect on the decision making of the model. For
example, if the classification task at hand was to classify images of zebras then the con­
cept used to investigate the network would be ”stripes”. The concept ”stripes” is used by
humans to distinguish zebras from horses and ideally the model would use the same con­
cept to classify zebras. The simplicity of the TCAV method allows for more accessibility
to the understanding of these complex neural networks.
TCAV is a general method in the sense that it gives a global explanation for the network
layers. For each layer of the network we can investigate if the concept being looked at
has an effect on the activations in the layer. This can both show us if the model as a
whole is using these concepts through the network as well as where the importance of
these concepts arises, that is which layers use these concepts the most for their decision
making.
Simply put, this method trains a linear classifier at each layer to separate concepts from
negative­concepts (such as random examples) to create a Concept Activation Vector
(CAV) orthogonal to the decision boundary.
The method can be broken down to five steps. Let us assume a simple neural network
with inputs x ∈Rn and a feed­forward layer l with m neurons, such that input inference
and its layer l activations can be seen as a function fl : Rn →Rm. The rest of the network
from layer l is given by the function hl,k : Rm →R where k is the target class. Figure
2.14 is an illustration of this process and should be used as reference when looking at the
process introduced below.
Figure 2.14: TCAV [4]: a) Define concepts and get external labeled concept data examples and
random data examples, b) Gather target concepts from training data c) Run concepts through the
model to get a vector representation based on the activation layers with function fl d) The CAVs
are calculated based on the linear classifier trained to separate the concept examples from the
random e) The sensitivity is found calculating the directional derivative of the target class along
the CAV
28
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:37==
TCAV process
1. Data collection
2. Concept Activated Vectors
3. Sensitivity
4. Testing CAVs
5. Hypothesis testing
1. Data collection: First there must be user­defined concepts that will be used to in­
vestigate the model layers. A collection of these examples need to be gathered, the
paper suggests between 10­30 examples. There also needs to be a set of exam­
ples of the target class itself that will be used to evaluate the concepts relevance to
the target. The target concepts can be collected from independent datasets or the
dataset used to train the model. To be able to define the CAV for each concept we
need a comparative collection of random/negative examples.
2. Concept activation vectors: To distinguish between concept inputs and random
inputs to the model in each layer, activations for those examples need to be col­
lected. These activations are found by fl(x) for layer l and example x. Then a
binary linear classifier is trained to separate the layer activations of the positive set
of examples {fl(x) : x ∈PC} (defined concept examples) from the layer activations
of the negative set of examples {fl(x) : x ∈N} (random examples). The concept
activation vector (CAV) vl
c is defined as the orthogonal vector to the hyperplane
which separates the two classes, see figure 2.14(d).
3. Sensitivity: Using the directional derivatives for a given target class k along the
learned CAV for class C, a sensitivity for a prediction to changes in input can be
found in respect to the direction of the concept. First let us define directional deriva­
tives for function f(x1, x2, ..., xn) along a vector v = (v1, v2, ..., vn), they are given
by
∇vf(x) = lim
ϵ→0
f(x + ϵv) −f(x)
ϵ
= v1
∂f
∂x1
(x1, ..., xn) + ... + vn
∂f
∂xn
(x1, ..., xn)
=


∂f
∂x1 (x1, x2, ..., xn)
∂f
∂x2 (x1, x2, ..., xn)
...
∂f
∂xn (x1, x2, ..., xn)


·


v1
v2
...
vn


= ∇f(x) · v
(2.4)
In TCAV we define hl,k as the function that maps the activations in layers l trough
the rest of the network giving us the prediction for class k and vl
C as the vector we
are to find the directional derivative along. From this we get the sensitivity given
by the directional derivative SC,k,l(x) where we are looking at concept C for given
target class k in the layer l represented in equation 2.5.
SC,k,l(x) = lim
ϵ→0
hl,k
 fl(x) + ϵvl
C

−hl,k (fl(x))
ϵ
= ∇hl,k (fl(x)) · vl
C
(2.5)
Machine learning for EEG
29
==PAGE:38==
Equation 2.5 is a quantitative measure of the sensitivity of the model predictions
with respect to concept C in any model layer l for given concept k.
4. Testing CAVs: Testing with CAVs (TCAV) uses the directional derivative to compute
the conceptual sensitivity for a set of target examples. Assuming k is a class label
for a supervised learning task and Xk is the set of examples with the k class label,
the TCAV score can be computed as
TCAVC,k,l = |{x ∈Xk : SC,k,l(x) > 0}|
|Xk|
(2.6)
The score TCAVC,k,l is a value between 0 and 1 which indicates the fraction of inputs
from class k whose activation layer l vector is positively influenced by the concept C.
That is the fraction of how many inputs have a positive sensitivity, SC,k,l, compared
to all of the inputs.
5. Hypothesis testing: Finally the concepts need to be evaluated based on statistical
significance. This helps insure that we do not learn a meaningless concept activa­
tion vectors. Two prevent this, a two­sided t­test of the TCAV scores from multiple
samples is performed. The samples come from multiple training runs to ensure that
that the TCAV scores are consistent over the training runs. Training runs are defined
by the number of random example sets which are used. The null­hypothesis being
tested in the t­test is:
H0 : TCAVC,k,l = 0.5
Given that the hypothesis is rejected then the resulting concept is related to the
class prediction in a significant way. This means that random concepts should get a
0.5 fraction of positive sensitivities while concepts of influence should have a TCAV
score significantly different from 0.5 to be of importance in the decision making of
the model. The paper also performs a Bonferroni correction of the hypothesis at
p < α/m with m = 2. This allows for reduces chances of false positives in the
testing.
Overall, this method gives a intuitive way of looking at how human­defined concepts influ­
ence the decision making of model layers in complex neural networks. More importantly
this can be done post­training, so interpretability can be introduced to deep neural net­
works trained on massive amounts of data.
2.5.1
Linear classifier
The linear classifier is the basis for the Concept Activation Vectors, as CAV is defined
as the vector orthogonal to the hyperplane that separates the two classes. The binary
linear classifier that is used is a linear Support Vector Machine and is implemented using
Stochastic Gradient Decent [48]. There can be different implementation of a linear classi­
fier such a Logistic Regression. For the implementation code provided by Kim et al. they
use a regularized linear SVM with α = 0.01 that multiplies the regularization term, with a
maximum of 1000 epochs and stopping criterion of 0.001 [49].
2.5.2
TCAV Discovery
To better understand the TCAV method we will look at one of the results from the paper.
We will look into the Zebra task using the model inceptionv3 that was investigated in the
paper, and compare the results. The concept that the authors looked at for the Zebra
task were stripes, zigzagged and dotted. Their results highlighted that the stripes had
the highest significance in explainability in one of the last layers of the network as can be
seen in figure 2.15. It seems that the stripes pattern is discovered in layer 10.
30
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:39==
Figure 2.15: TCAV result from paper for the interpretability of inceptionv3 classification of Zebras.
They used 500 random example folders [4]
Using a version of their code [49] we ran a similar experiment which included looking
at the last three layers as shown in figure 2.15.
The layers in figure 2.15 are called
mixed_8, mixed_9 and mixed_10. The naming convention of the model has since been
changed and the corresponding layers are now called called mixed_7a, mixed_7b and
mixed_7c.
Figure 2.16: TCAV result for the interpretability of inceptionv3 classification of Zebras recreated
using 20 training run. The error bars show the variability in the different runs.
We can see that there is a big difference between figures 2.16 and ??. Considering that
500 training runs are needed to obtain the results in the paper and with 20 training runs
the results are not comparable. However, the stripes concept has more influence in all
of the layers compared to the other concepts. This indicates two things, first using more
random comparison examples allows for more defined and confident results as this allows
for meaningful examples to be found significant. However, even when only using a few
examples we can still see that the concept stripes does have more significance at first
look and is the only concept that has significance in the final layer.
2.6
EEG Concepts
As we are looking into the interpretability of BENDR using TCAV, we need to define
human­interpretable concepts to investigate. The definition of concepts will be based
on collecting EEG events from annotated datasets. This means collecting time­windows
which include the EEG events that would be defined as concepts.
EEG recordings can show abnormal electrical activity that can help indicate the presence
of epilepsy or other neurological diseases. Seizures are one of the main symtoms of neu­
rological problems and EEGs can be used to identify their behaviour. There are EEG
events that can be interictal (between seizures) or ictal (during seizures). The concepts
Machine learning for EEG
31
==PAGE:40==
we will use in our TCAV investigation are the annotations available in the TUH EEG Event
Corpus [34]. While there are various other patterns to consider, these are useful for proof
of concept as we have access to well defined labeled recordings of these events. There
are three types of abnormal wave forms: Spike and slow wave, Generalized periodic
epileptiform discharges and Periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges. These are typ­
ically seen in the interictal (between seizures) periods, although they can also be seen
during seizures. We will also be using artifacts, eye movement and muscle movements
as concepts. These are summarized in table 2.3
Event
label
Spike and/or slow wave
spsw
Generalized periodic epileptiform discharges
gped
Periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges
pled
Eye movement
eyem
Muscle artifact
musc
Artifact
artf
Background
bckg
Table 2.3: Events available from annotations in Temple university EEG corpus
• Spike and/or slow wave A short duration epileptiform event involving an electro­
graphic spike in activity and/or a slow wave (low frequency wave), SPSW. Usually
around 1 sec. in duration. This short epileptiform events is usually around 1 second
and starts with a spike and followed by a wave. This can include only a spike or a
spike with a slow wave afterwards.
• Generalized periodic epileptiform discharges Periodic diffuse spike/sharp wave
discharges across multiple regions or hemispheres in the brain. GPEDs are syn­
chronous repetitive spikes/waves that happen periodically. These discharges can
be seen in multiple channels of the EEG. They typically last for a few seconds to a
minute.
• Periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges
A regular, periodically occurring
spike/sharp wave seen in a certain locality of the scalp. PLED is repeated spike/wave
can be seen specifically in regions of the brain. They typically last for a few seconds
to a minute.
•
Eye movement
A very common frontal/prefrontal artifact seen when the eyes
move.
•
Muscle artifact A very common, high frequency, sharp artifact that corresponds
with agitation/nervousness in a patient.
• Artifact Any non­brain activity electrical signal, such as those due to equipment or
environmental factors.
• Background All other non­annotated cerebral signals
32
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:41==
Figure 2.17: Concepts Backgroumd, Spike and wave, Generalized periodic epileptiform dis­
charges, Periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges, visually represented. ”Horizontal scale bars
show 100ms, and vertical scale bars show 100µV ”[50].
Figre 2.17 shows examples of some of the concepts we have. The concepts PLED and
GPED show one example which then occurs periodically in the recording. The example
of spike and wave shows a variation where there is a sharp wave and not a slow wave.
Then we have examples of backgrounds. Eye movement and muscle movement present
differently form these concepts and are not represented in this figure.
The concepts we will be using for epileptic behaviour are spike and slow wave, generalized
periodic epileptiform discharges and periodic lateralized epileptiform discharge. These
concepts are usually observed during interitcal periods, however all of these concepts
have some attributes which can be seen during seizures. Spikes are a common wave form
which can be seen during a seizure, this can also be said about slow waves which can
be seen in Focal Non­Specific Seizures. Focal Non­Specific Seizures and General Non­
Specific Seizures show a regular pattern of spikes which can be described as periodic.
The periodic behavior of PLEDs and GPEDs is something that can be seen in seizures
as well. Some seizures only occur in parts of the brain such as Simple/Complex partial
seizures and PLEDs have a lateralized behavior which only shows up in a part of the brain
[51].
These concepts will be useful for interpretation of models which look at abnormalities in
patients that experience seizures. They can help us to see if the neural network uses
these concepts as indicators for classifying abnormalities in EEG recordings.
2.7
One­class Support Vector Machine
The following theory behind One­class Support Vector Machine (OC­SVM) is a summary
from Estimating the Support of a High­Dimensional Distribution by Schölkopf [52]. One­
class Support Vector Machine (OC­SVM) is a unsupervised or semi­supervised method
used for anomaly or novelty detection. It is built on the classical support vector machine
(SVM) which finds an optimal hyperplane to separate classes, where support vectors are
found with a maximized margin between them which can be seen in figure 2.18.
Machine learning for EEG
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 2.18: A visualization of the Support Vector Machine method where an optimal hyperplane
is found in the space and the margin is maximized so to create the clearest boundary between the
two classes represented in red and green.
The OC­SVM is used in cases where we have one class and want to obtain an area
where this data lies and from there be able to detect abnormal data which lies outside of
the boundary of the area. This means the method learns the input training data of this
one class and then evaluates new data to distinguishes if it is an anomaly or not. This
algorithm returns a +1 if the value is within the region which captures most of the data
and −1 if is lies outside this region.
The data is mapped out in reference to a kernel function to separate the data form the
origin with maximum margin. The following problem is to be solved to separate the data
from the origin, that is maximize the distance from hyperplane to the origin:
min
w∈F,ξ∈Rℓ,ρ∈R
1
2||w||2 + 1
ν
X
i
ξi −ρ
subject to
(w · Φ(xi)) ≥ρ −ξi, ξi ≥0
(2.7)
The hyperplane is characterised by w and ρ in the feature space F, the ν ∈(0, 1] param­
eter represents the upper­bound on the fraction of outliers which are acceptable to have
outside the region of the training data and ξi are non­zero slack variables that are penal­
ized in the objective function. Φ(x) is the mapping form the dimension space to a high
plane for the separation. We solve the optimization problem for ν ∈(0, 1]. The decision
function is given then by solving parameters w and ρ:
f(x) = sign((w · Φ(x) −ρ)
= sign(
X
i
αiK(x, xi) −ρ)
(2.8)
This means if the decision function (2.8) returns a negative value −1 if the input data x is
outside the region and a positive value +1 if it is within the region. We can also represent
the decision function with a kernel expansion, where K(x, xi) is a kernel function and αi
is a Lagrangian multiplier. The mapping Φ(x) can be used to evaluate a simple kernel K
by the dot product:
K(x, y) = Φ(x) · Φ(y)
(2.9)
34
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:43==
such as the Gaussian kernel or the Radial basis function kernel (2.10)
K(x, y) = e−||x−y||2/2σ2
(2.10)
where γ =
1
2σ2 is the parameter that can be adjusted as needed for the problem at hand.
We can also represent the data in the spherical feature space where we have a radius R
and center a and still have the ν ∈(0, 1] parameter and the ξi slack variable we can see
the problem presented in equation 2.11.
min
R∈R,ξ∈Rℓ,a∈F
R2 + 1
ν
X
i
ξi
subject to
||Φ(xi)) −a|| ≥R + ξi, ξi ≥0
for i ∈[ℓ]
(2.11)
The dual leads the solution is given by a = P
i αiΦ(xi) and the decision function is given
in equation 2.12 and uses the Lagrangian multiplier and kernel function as above.
f(x) = sign

R2 −
X
ij
αiαjk (xi, xj) + 2
X
i
αik (xi, x) −k(x, x)


(2.12)
This can be visualized in figure 2.19 where we have data points with­in and outside the
sphere.
Figure 2.19: Here is a visualization of the OC­SVM where an optimal region given by center a
and radius R is found to create a boundary between the one class represented in green and the
abnormal data point in red.
Machine learning for EEG
35
==PAGE:44==
3
Method
In this section we will describe the data preparation, the approach to the problem at hand
and experiments that will be reported.
1. An implementation of TCAV on Linear Head BENDR with the motor movement im­
agery (MMI) downstream classification tasks form the BENDR paper as a proof of
concept.
2. Anomaly detection of epileptic behavior using the pre­trained learned BENDR rep­
resentations.
3. TCAV on Linear Head BENDR with the classification task between seizure and back­
ground EEGs.
In section 3.1 we describe the datasets used in our experimentation. In section 3.2, TCAV
will be implemented on Linear Head BENDR to study its interpretability. In section 3.3, a
proof of concept method will be described. In section 3.4, we focus on anomaly detection
in epileptic EEGs using the OC­SVM (One­class Support Vector Machines) method on
the learned BENDR representations. Finally, in section 3.5, a seizure classification task
using Linear Head BENDR is outlined.
3.1
Data preparation
The datasets that will be used for the experiments are listed in table 3.1.
Use
Data
Description
Subj.
Sess.
Anomaly detection
TUEP
Labeled (Non­ vs epilepsy patients)
200
665
Classification
TUSZ
Annotated (Seizure vs background)
579
1,175
Concept
TUEV
Annotated (spsw, gped, pled, bckg, artf)
290
359
Concept
TUAR
Annotated (eyem, musc)
213
259
Testing
MMI
Annotated (Left, Right)
105
4410
Table 3.1: The TUEP, TUSZ, TUEV, and TUAR datasets have been sourced form Temple Univer­
sity EEG Corpus TUEG [34] and the MMI data is the same as used in the BENDR paper from [35,
36]. All of the EEG recordings are on a European Data Format (edf). The labels and annotations
are given in .cvs formats either for each .edf file or all as a list for all .edf files for the TUEG corpus.
For MMI dataset the labels are given as annotation channels.
Below we list information on these datasets and the preprocessing done before our ex­
periments.
3.1.1
Datasets
The following is a quick overview of basic statistic for each of the datasets.
EEG Motor Movement Imagery Dataset (MMI)
The MMI dataset includes 105 subjects with 4410 sessions. For more details on the
dataset, refer to section 2.4.5.
TUH EEG Artifact Corpus (TUAR) v2.0.0
The TUAR dataset includes .edf files for 213 patients with 259 sessions and .csv files for
annotations. It includes annotations of the events describes in table 3.2
36
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:45==
Annotation
Event
No. of files
Percentage of events
musc
Muscle movement
283
37.07%
eyem
Eye movement
256
24.67%
elec
Electrode pop
231
15.00%
chew
Chewing
38
5.35%
shiv
Shivering
6
0.31%
Table 3.2: Basic information of the event that will be used as concepts from the TUH EEG Artifact
Corpus (TUAR). The rest of the events are combinations of the events listed above which comprise
of 17.60% of the total.
TUH EEG Epilepsy Corpus (TUEP) v2.0.0
The TUEP dataset includes 200 subjects, 100 with epilepsy, and 100 without. It contains
multiple sessions per patients and the total numbers can be seen in table 3.3.
Diagnosis
No. Patients
No. Sessions
No. Files
Epilepsy
100
530
1,785
No epilepsy
100
135
513
Totals
200
698
423
Table 3.3: Basic information of the TUH EEG Epilepsy Corpus (TUEP)
TUH EEG Event Corpus (TUEV) v2.0.0
The TUEV dataset consist of 359 EEG recordings in .edf format which have annotations
of six events in .csv format. Table 3.4 shows details about the total number of files with the
annotations. For more details about the events listed here, refer to the concepts section
2.6.
Annotation
Event
No. of files
spsw
Spike and sharp wave
27
gped
Generalized periodic epileptiform discharges
51
pled
Periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges
48
artf
Artifact
164
eyem
Eye movement
46
bckg
Background
211
Table 3.4: Basic information of the events that will be used as concepts from the TUH EEG Event
Corpus (TUEV)
TUH EEG Seizure Corpus (TUEZ) v. 2.0.0
The TUSZ dataset includes .edf, .csv, and .csv_bi files of subjects containing labels of
both background and seizures signals. The basic statistics of this dataset is outlined in
table 3.5. The corpus contains train (56.3 GB) , dev (22.2 GB) and eval(7.1 GB) datasets.
The train directory contains data allowed to use for the development of technology. The
dev data is disjoint from the training set and should only be used for testing. Eval is a blind
evaluation set [34]. For our analysis we only use the train corpus, for training, validating
and evaluation due to computational restrictions.
Machine learning for EEG
37
==PAGE:46==
Description
Nr.
number of files (edf/csv/csv_bi)
4,664
number of sessions
1,175
number of patients
579
number of files with seizures
872
number of sessions with seizures
352
number of patients with seizures
208
total number of seizure events
2,474
total duration (secs)
3,277,229.00
total duration of files with seizures (secs)
677,091.00
total background duration (secs)
3,262,167.00
total seizure duration (secs)
175,062.00
Table 3.5: Basic statistics for the TUH EEG Seizure train Corpus (TUEZ). Total seizure duration
is 5.34% of the data.
3.1.2
Data preprocessing for BENDR
We prepare the data for input into BENDR the same way as the authors of the original
paper, described in 2.4.1. We recall the preparation to match the configuration of the
pre­training dataset:
1. The deep1010 channel mapping from the python library DN3 [53] is used to map
the channels of the recordings to a consistent index in the 10/20 channel scheme
(see figure 2.5) for each loaded trial.
2. Over and undersampling following nearest­neighbor interpolation to get a frequency
of 256Hz, and recordings dropped that violate the Nyquist criterion.
3. Each trial sequence is scaled to [−1, 1] and a relative amplitude channel added,
giving us 20 channel inputs.
We recall that during pre­training no low­pass or high­pass filter was applied to the signals
as the aim is for the BENDR representations to learn this filtering, and the input should
be the raw signal. We stick to this hypothesis and do not apply any low­pass or high­pass
filtering before input to the model.
3.1.3
Data prepossessing for TCAV of BENDR
As described in section 2.5 the TCAV requires examples of concepts that have been
selected as well as examples of random concepts.
Concept collection
We collect time­windows of EEG recording for each example of length tlen, which can vary
for the different concepts.
The annotations used to retrieve the concepts are in .csv format containing a start time
tstart and end time tend. To get a concept of desired length tlen with start time t1 and end
time t2 we have:
t1 = tstart −tlen · c
and
t2 = tstart + tlen · (1 −c)
where c is a fraction of time to included before the start time. We use a fraction c to account
for the fact that some annotations are at the start or end of recordings, and adjusting c
allows us to capture these concepts.
38
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:47==
The concepts are then pre­processed as in 3.1.2 to use as concepts for interpretation of
the LHB model.
Random collection
The random concepts need to represent a negative class concept for the statistical testing.
For this we collect non­annotated EEG recordings. Using non­annotated EEG recordings
ensures we have negative concepts to the concepts themselves for reference in the test­
ing.
For the random concepts we collect recording time windows of length tlen which do not
have any annotations on them. As the TUAR dataset is heavily annotated, we will use
TUAR as a source of random concepts. To ensure more variety in this selection, examples
are randomly picked from different subjects and sessions.
The choice in the TCAV paper is to use random images from the ImageNet database, this
allows for the negative examples to be truly random as there is such a large sampling pool.
However in the case of EEG we have TUEG, one of the largest data corpus for EEGs,
we still have a higher chance of the random samples having signals which resemble the
concepts themselves. We therefore decide to explicitly select random concepts as non­
annotated events to ensure the random examples are of a negative class to the concept
being investigated.
Target collection
The target class concepts are obtained from the respective training sets. This is to ensure
that the target examples have accurate concept activation vectors. These concepts will
be of the same length as the input to LHB according to the downstream task.
3.2
TCAV implementation on Linear Head BENDR
In this section we outline the implementation of TCAV on LHB. The original code of the
TCAV paper is written in Tensorflow so we translate and adjust the code to pytorch as
BENDR is implemented in pytorch [54].
The following process describes Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (TCAV) on the
Linear Head BENDR downstream task alongside the diagram in figure 3.1.
1. The data is collected to implement TCAV on LHB
(a) Concept examples are collected for the respective concept and their EEG
recordings trimmed to the desired length. In the figure we represent multiple
examples of concepts as three green EEGs.
(b) Random examples are collected from EEG recordings described in 3.1.3, rep­
resented in blue in the figure.
(c) Target examples are collected from the training data used for the downstream
task at hand. They are represented as red EEG recordings in the figure.
2. The examples are passed through the network. For each bottleneck l we have
functions fl : Rn →Rm and hl,k : Rm →R, where n is the dimension of the input
data and m is the dimension of the bottleneck and k is the target class. In the figure
we show the layer activation of the CNN encoder layer. We have a mapping from the
EEG example x of length T with 20 channels R20×T to the BENDR representations
R512×S where S =
T
96, see 2.4. The layer is flattened to a vector of activations of
length m = 512 × S.
3. The layer activations for each example are collected and a binary linear classifier
is trained to separate the layer activations of the positive set of examples {fl(x) :
Machine learning for EEG
39
==PAGE:48==
x ∈PC} (defined concept examples) from the layer activations of the negative set
of examples {fl(x) : x ∈N} (random examples). The concept activation vector,
orthogonal to the hyperplane separating the two classes, for concept C is the red
vector vl
C in the figure where the green concept EEGs are located, with the blue
random EEGs on the other side. The expected result would show that the relation­
ship between a relevant concept C and the target class k is that the CAV for that
concept vl
C in layer l will point in the same direction as the gradient ∇hl,k(fl(x)).
4. Finally the sensitivity SC,k,l for concept C in layer l for target class k is calculated
using the directional derivative given by ∇hl,k(fl(x)) · vl
C. Here hl,k is the function
representing the rest of the layers in the network from bottleneck l. This is used to
calculate the fraction of positive and negative sensitivities to create the TCAV score.
Figure 3.1: A visualization of the TCAV implementation on Linear Head BENDR(LHB). Yellow
indexes: 1. Concept collection, 2. Activations collected from LHB, 3. Linear classifier trained
to define CAV, and 4. Sensitivity calculated. The bottlenecks l are labeled in blue the figure as
follows: A. Feature encoder, B. Encoding Augment, C. Summarizer, D. Extended classifier, and
E. Classifier.
For further details of the TCAV method see section 2.5.
The main challenges within
this implementation lie within the actual coding implementation between Tensorflow and
pytorch as well as the computational and memory restrictions. In the paper 500 runs are
done to avoid learning a meaningless CAVs, whereas we are restricted to fewer runs in
this implementation.
40
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:49==
3.3
Discovery of Linear Head BENDR and TCAV on MI dataset
To investigate the two architectures and how they function together we will look at TCAV
on Linear Head BENDR for the downstream task of motor imagery classification.
The implementation of TCAV on Linear Head BENDR we will follow the procedure sug­
gested by the TCAV paper to look at the different bottlenecks in BENDR. We will keep
to the original set up of Linear Head BENDR as described in section 2.4 for the motor
imagery task classifying between left and right. The bottlenecks of investigation are the
five bottlenecks defined in table 3.6.
Bottleneck
Description
Output dim.
encoder
Six sequential blocks of 1D convolutions
1 × 512 × 16
enc_augment
Masking and Contextualizer (1D convolution)
1 × 1536 × 16
summarizer
1D Adaptive Average Pooling
1 × 1536 × 4
extended_classifier
Flatten, Linear, dropout, ReLu and batch norm
1 × 2048
classifier
Linear, softmax
1 × 2
Table 3.6: Bottlenecks for Linear Head BENDR for 6 second inputs. Refer to section 2.4.4 for a
detailed overview of the LHB architecture and bottlenecks.
We will be looking at how the two architectures work together for discovery. We will look
at the concepts eye movement and muscle movements as well as the two targets them­
selves as concepts. The hypothesis is that the artifacts do not have an effect on the model
predictions and that the target concept will have a significant effect. This means we will
have the following set up described in table 3.7. We will try 10 and 50 examples of each
concept as well as 20 sets of 10 and 50 random examples.
Description
Source
Nr. Exmp. Exp. 1
Nr. Exmp. Exp. 2
Target
Left MI
MMI
10
50
Concept
Eye movement (eyem)
TUAR
10
50
Concept
Muscle movement (musc)
TUAR
10
50
Concept
Left MI
MMI
10
50
Concept
Right MI
MMI
10
50
Random
Non­annotated signals
TUAR
20 × 10
20 × 50
Table 3.7: Proof of concept: experiment setup for TCAV on LHB for MI dataset. We will look at
the concepts eye movement and muscle movements as well as the two targets themselves as
concepts. Our target class is left MI. We experiment with 20 runs, using 10 examples and 50
examples.
The length of all concepts will be the same length as the target classes, tlen = 6 seconds.
3.4
Anomaly detection of epileptic behavior using BENDR
representations
We now focus on if can use the BENDR representations to identify epileptic behavior.
We will use the TUEP dataset described above where we have 200 subjects with multi­
ple sessions of EEG recordings per subject. Half of the subjects have been diagnosed
with epilepsy and the other half are controls. A patient with epilepsy will most likely have
multiple sessions with a trained professional to see if there might be any abnormal wave­
forms during that session. This can be seen in table 3.3 where there are a total of 530
session for 100 epileptic patients but only 135 for the 100 control subjects. One of the
Machine learning for EEG
41
==PAGE:50==
challenges within this dataset is that a session from a epileptic patient might contain a ma­
jority of normally behaved EEG data with some minor abnormal behavior. Furthermore,
the abnormal behavior is not labeled so it is not possible to turn this into a supervised
downstream classification task. The classification task of epileptic patients then becomes
an anomaly detection task for identifying the patterns that can arise in epileptic EEGs.
We now explore if we can use the BERT inspired neural data representation (BENDRs)
for this anomaly detection task instead of the raw EEG recordings. The BENDRs are pre­
trained on the TUEG dataset so our hypothesis is that they will give a good representation
of the EEG recordings in the TUEP corpus.
We use the pre­trained encoder and contextualizer to get BENDR representations of the
normal control subjects. As is done in LHB, we use 1D adaptive average pooling for
dimensionality reduction. We fit a one­class SVM, described in chapter 2.7, to create
a region which outlines normal data. We then predict on the BENDR representations
from the epileptic patients to identify abnormal behavior. The hypothesis is that the fit
OC­SVM will find more outliers in the epileptic patients sessions than the non­epileptic
(normal) patient session.
We decide to take 60 second segments of recordings as input to BENDR. We do this
as the authors of BENDR had shown that the model was better at reconstructing longer
sequences and as it is pre­trained on 60 second segments.
Figure 3.2: One­class SVM anomaly detection based on BENDR representation
Figure 3.2 illustrates this method. We begin by fitting a OC­SVM with a RBF kernel on the
BENDR representation of the normal EEG recordings while tuning ν and γ. This gives
us a hyperplane parameterized by γ which outlines the normal EEGs with the fraction of
outliers given by ν. From there we will use the BENDR representation of the abnormal
data on the fit OC­SVM to categorize the anomalies found in the epileptic EEG recordings.
We fit the OC­SVM using multiple γ’s with five different ν’s, ν ∈[0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005, 0.001].
We will look at 44 values for the γ given by increments from
1
No. of features ·10 to
1
No. of features ·
100 with step size 0.001. The dimensionality of the input to the OC­SVM is the size of the
summarized BENDRs which is 2048 (No. of features). As the OC­SVM is an unsupervised
42
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:51==
model we note that this tuning of parameters is not standard but more of an exploration
of the region giving an adequate representation of the normal data.
After tuning the parameters, we predict on the epileptic patient data to see if sections of
their EEG recordings are predicted as outliers.
3.5
Classification of seizures using Linear Head BENDR
The next method of discussion is a classification task of seizures using LHB (Linear Head
BENDR). This task involves using the pre­trained encoder and contextualizer and fine­
tuning the LHB for the downstream task of classifying between seizure EEG signals and
background EEG signals. The data is presented in table 3.5, note that the total duration
of seizures in all files is 175,062 seconds and total background duration is 3,262,167
seconds, making seizures a total of 5.34% of the entire dataset. This means we have a
an unbalanced dataset with two classes.
Seizures can be categorized into three types of seizures. These three types are Focal,
General and Unknown. Focal seizure originate from one side of the cerebral hemisphere
yet only some seizures will present in the other half as well. General seizures start in both
hemispheres simultaneously and spread to other regions of the brain [55].
The TUSZ dataset contains 12 different annotations for 8 different types of seizure, the
are listed in table 3.8. These annotations both give general labels for the categories listed
above as well as specific types of seizure which can fall within both categories.
As the dataset is already quite imbalanced we will only focus on classifying seizures from
background signals. However, it is important to note that these seizures can present very
differently as we can see in the table 3.8.
To perform this downstream task we will need to fine­tune LHB for classifying seizure
segments vs. background segments. The model will be trained on 60s recordings of EEG
where we indicate whether those 60s are background signals or include seizure signals.
We will have to account for the imbalance in the dataset by using a balancing method.
We will also have to find the optimal parameters for this model. The parameters we will
be tuning is batch size, dropout, learning rate, weight decay and balancing methods.
3.5.1
Training set up
Seizures can vary in duration, with most lasting around 30 seconds to 2 minutes. To
improve the training efficiency, we want to process the input data in batches so we want
to keep the input of a fixed length. We decided to label 60­second time windows as
seizures if a seizure is annotated within that time frame, and as background if not, as
BENDR is also pre­trained on 60s sequences. Our task is then to predict if a 60­second
time window contains a seizure or not. With this labeling, we have 5.7% of the total trials
(60­second time windows) labeled as seizures.
To evaluate the performance of the model on the entire dataset, we use a technique called
Leave Multiple Subjects Out (LMSO) cross­validation, in which we divide the dataset into
20 folds. During each iteration, one fold, representing 1/20 of the dataset, is set aside as
a hold­out set, while the remaining 19 sets are used for training and validating the model.
We then use the hold­out set to evaluate the model performance on unseen data. This
allows us to get an estimate of the model’s performance on unseen data, as well as to
identify any subject­specific patterns that may affect the model’s performance.
After preprocessing the data, that is dropping recordings that violate the Nyquist criterion
when re­sampling to 256Hz for input to BENDR or are shorter than 60­seconds, we were
Machine learning for EEG
43
==PAGE:52==
Event
label
Description
Background
bckg
All other non­seizure cerebral signals.
Seizure
seiz
A basic annotation for seizures.
Focal nonspecific seizure
fnsz
A large category of seizures occurring in a spe­
cific focality.
Generalized seizure
gnsz
A large category of seizures occurring in most if
not all of the brain.
Simple partial seizure
spsz
Brief seizures that start in one location of the brain
(and may spread) where the patient is fully aware
and able to interact.
Complex partial seizure
cpsz
Same as simple partial seizure but with impaired
awareness.
Absence seizure
absz
Brief, sudden seizure involving lapse in attention.
Usually lasts no more than 5 seconds and com­
monly seen in children.
Tonic seizure
tnsz
Tonic seizure. A seizure involving the stiffening
of the muscles. Usually associated with and an­
notated as tonic­clonic seizures, but not always
(rarely there is no clonic phase).
Clonic seizure
cnsz
A seizure involving sustained, rhythmic jerking.
Not seen in our datasets, as it is always associ­
ated with tonic clonic seizures and is annotated
as such.
Tonic­clonic seizure
tcsz
A seizure involving loss of consciousness and vi­
olent muscle contractions.
Atonic seizure
atsz
A seizure involving the loss of tone of muscles in
the body. Also never seen as it is always associ­
ated with an occasionally occurring phase before
a tonic clonic seizure.
Myoclonic seizure
mysz
A seizure associated with brief involuntary twitch­
ing or myoclonus.
Non­epileptic seizure
nesz
Any non­epileptic seizure observed. Contains no
electrographic signs.
Table 3.8: Seizure types available from annotations in Temple university EEG corpus [34].
left with 366 subjects. By splitting the data into 60­second segments, we obtained 33,888
trials.
With the 20 fold LMSO approach, we have 329 subjects in the training set, and 18 or 19
people in the hold­out test set. It’s important to note that the number of trials in these sets
can vary significantly, as the length of the recordings is very diverse, ranging from a few
minutes to many hours, with an average length of around 12 minutes, equivalent to 12
trials of 60 seconds.
As the dataset is very unbalanced, the model will likely be biased towards the class with
more examples, so we need to choose a balancing method, which will be described in the
chapter on hyperparameter tuning below.
Our approach to tune the model was to first take out a small training dataset of 15 patients
(3GB) and validate on 4 patients, to look at what parameters had the most effect on the
44
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:53==
validation F1­score with a few random tests. We saw that the learning rate, batch size,
weight decay and balancing method seemed be the biggest contributors to the perfor­
mance of the model. The set of hyperparameter values that we look at are given in table
3.9 . We perform hyperparameter tuning by training on 329 patients and validating on 19
patients.
Hyperparameter
Values
Batch size
b ∈[8, 16, 32, 64, 80]
Learning rate
l ∈[0.000001, 0.000010, 0.000050, 0.0001, 0.001]
Weight decay
w ∈[0.01, 0.05, 0.001]
Balancing method
Undersample or LDAM
Table 3.9: Parameters for hyperparameter tuning and their respective values
3.5.2
Hyperparameter tuning
There are different methods for hyperparameter tuning, the three commonly used are:
• Grid search which looks at all possible combinations of hyperparameters from sets
of parameter values. This is very time consuming especially with models that take
a long time to train.
• Random search defines distributions for each hyperparmeter to sample from and
randomly selects from these distributions to create combinations to try.
• Bayesian hyperparameter optimization uses informed search, that is it learns
from former combinations of parameters to choose the next set of parameters to
use for an improved model.
We tuned the models parameters using Bayesian hyperparameterization to search for the
optimal set of hyperparameters. Bayesian hyperparameter tuning follows four steps:
1. Select a combination of hyperparameter values from the set of values and train the
model using those
2. Obtain the evidence of that model
3. Update the model hyperparameters with the next combination which would result in
an improved model
4. The process terminates when we meet the stopping criteria
Bayesian hyperparameter tuning utilizes the objective function of what is being maximized
or minimized to find the next best set of parameters. In our case we choose the validation
F1 score to be maximized as our objective function. The F1 score is the harmonic mean
of precision (Positive Predictive Rate) and recall:
precision =
TP
TP + FP
recall =
TP
TP + FN
F1 = 2 × precision · recall
precision + recall
We do this to minimize the number of seizures being incorrectly classified as background
and minimize the number of background being incorrectly classified as seizures, and as
the dataset is very unbalanced.
Machine learning for EEG
45
==PAGE:54==
Equation 3.1 shows us the main principal behind the baysian hyperparamter tuning method:
P(F1val | Ch) = P(Ch | F1val)P(F1val)
P(Ch)
(3.1)
where Ch is the hyperparameter combination. P(F1val | Ch) is the probability of our
metric, F1, being maximized given the combination of our parameters, vice­versa applies
for P(Ch | F1val), and finally P(Ch) the probability of that specific parameter combination.
This representation is referred to as a surrogate model for the objective function and is
an approximation. In our case the surrogate model is a Gaussian Process Regression
which will be an approximation of the objective function using the hyperparameters that
are chosen from a combination. Using an expected improvement (EI) we can find the
next set of hyperparameters to choose for the next model, EI is given in equation 3.2.
EIy∗(x) =
Z y∗
−∞
(y∗−y) p(y | x)dy
(3.2)
where p(x | y) is the surrogate model, y∗is the threshold value of the objective function
and y value of the objective function. While y > y∗the tuning will continue until y∗≥y.
For the implementation of this method we use the Weights and Biases tool ”Sweeps” [56].
3.5.3
TCAV on Linear Head BENDR for seizure classification
We will utilize TCAV again for interpreting and understanding the decision­making of the
model, similar to how we employed it for the left and right classification downstream task.
This process is described in section 3.2. We will perform two experiments. Experiment 1
will use shorter recordings of concepts and experiment 2 will use 60s recordings outlined
in table 3.10. The reason for this approach is that the output dimensions of the first two
bottlenecks (see table 3.11) are dependent on the length of the input data, which was
60s. We therefore only look at the final 3 layers for experiment 1 but we can look at all
bottlenecks in experiment 2.
Description
Source
Exp. 1 (sec)
Exp. 2 (sec)
Target
Seizure
TUSZ
60
60
Target
Background
TUSZ
60
60
Concept
spsw
TUEV
2
60
Concept
pled
TUEV
8
60
Concept
gped
TUEV
8
60
Concept
arft
TUEV
6
60
Concept
bckg
TUEV
6
60
Concept
eyem
TUAR
6
­
Concept
musc
TUAR
6
­
Random
Non­annotated signals
TUAR
6
60
Table 3.10: Seizure classification data setup for TCAV for two experiments depended on concept
recording length.
The reason we will perform two experiments is to see what effect this will have on the
concepts significance. Short concepts such as spike and slow wave usually only lasts 0.5­
2 seconds. Artifacts also usually have shorter time windows and do not last 60 seconds.
Both GPED and PLED can last from a few seconds up to a minute so it will be interesting
to see both results.
46
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:55==
Bottleneck
Description
Output dim.
encoder
Six sequential blocks of 1D convolutions
1 × 512 × 160
enc_augment
Masking and Contextualizer (1D convolution)
1 × 1536 × 160
summarizer
1D Adaptive Average Pooling
1 × 1536 × 4
extended_classifier
Flatten, Linear, dropout, ReLu and batch norm
1 × 2048
classifier
Linear, softmax
1 × 2
Table 3.11: Bottlenecks output dimension for Linear Head BENDR with 60 second inputs
One of the restrictions we have with these experiments is the number of examples us­
able to us. For the purpose of discovery we will look at the difference between these
experiments with increasing number of random sets, that is trial runs. This will help us
understand the stability of the results. Due to the lack of examples we will only have
26 examples of each concept which means we will use 50 sets of random examples for
the final interpretation of the concepts. This means we will have 50 sets of 26 random
examples and 26 examples of each concept for both experiments.
Machine learning for EEG
47
==PAGE:56==
4
Experiment and Results
This chapter outlines the results of the experiments outlined in Method, chapter 3.
4.1
TCAV investigation of motor imagery classification using
Linear Head BENDR
The following results are from the proof of concept experiment. This experiment looks at
testing with concept activation vectors of the motor imagery downstream task trained on
Linear Head BENDR (LHB). The model results from the MI classification using LHB are
presented in section 2.4.5. Let us recall that the target of investigation is left and we will
be testing all of the bottlenecks in LHB.
4.1.1
TCAV score
Table 4.1 shows the results from the experiment outlined in section 3.3, where we test
four concepts on the five layers presented in table 3.6. The table gives an overview of
the TCAV score for the two types of experiments performed with 10 examples and 50
examples of concepts and targets, with 20 sets of random examples.
Note that the significance for a α = 0.01 and α = 0.05 hypothesis test is shown in table 4.1.
Recall that the hypothesis test looks at significant difference from a TCAV score equal to
0.5. The random examples should give a TCAV score of ≈0.5 which we see in the table in
gray. This indicates that the random sets of examples do represent an insignificant class
which is good for comparison in the hypothesis test.
Figure 4.1:
TCAV score for each of the con­
cepts using 10 examples at α = 0.01 for MI clas­
sification with LHB.
Figure 4.2:
TCAV score for each of the con­
cepts using 50 examples at α = 0.01 for MI clas­
sification with LHB.
Figure 4.1 shows the TCAV score for all of the bottlenecks and concepts when only using
10 examples, while figure 4.2 shows the results when using 50 examples. This bar chart
shows the TCAV scores on the y­axis and if the concept is insignificant (indicated with a
∗), its TCAV value has been reduced to 0. In both cases, 20 random sets of examples are
used for comparison. Note that the error bars are not very large in the 50 examples but
larger in the 20 examples, the error bars are given by
q
(TCAV score)∗(1−(TCAV score))
N
.
We see that with more examples, more significance arises in the target concept left. We
see that the bottlenecks extended classifier and classifier do not show significance with
10 examples. However, we see significance for these bottlenecks when we use 50 exam­
ples.The TCAV score for the right concept is always zero except in the feature encoder,
see table 4.1. However, the TCAV scores are always significant in the hypothesis test.
This is because we are testing if it is significantly different from random and as it is the
48
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:57==
Bottleneck
Concept
TCAV score 10 Exmp.
TCAV score 50 Exmp.
Encoder
random
0.483
0.492
left_MI
0.870**
0.996**
right_MI
0.040**
0.029**
eyem
0.105**
0.122**
musc
0.240**
0.503
Encoding Augment
random
0.486
0.471
left_MI
0.975**
1.000**
right_MI
0.000**
0.000**
eyem
0.000**
0.251*
musc
0.205*
0.255
Summarizer
random
0.520
0.519
left_MI
1.000**
1.000**
right_MI
0.000**
0.000**
eyem
0.010**
0.083**
musc
0.310*
0.355
Extended Classifier
random
0.439
0.516
left_MI
0.700*
0.900**
right_MI
0.000**
0.000**
eyem
0.000**
0.300
musc
0.200*
0.400*
Classifier
random
0.518
0.471
left_MI
0.650
0.950**
right_MI
0.000**
0.000**
eyem
0.100**
0.150**
musc
0.650
0.500
Table 4.1:
TCAV score results for proof of concept experiment on motor imagery left and right
classification with LHB. TCAV score for each of the bottlenecks using 10 and 50 examples where
(*) indicates if the score is significant for α = 0.05 and (**) indicates if the score is significant for
α = 0.01 hypothesis test. Concepts that are significant at α = 0.01 for the 50 example in bold.
opposite target class to left in the downstream task we get that it is significant. This will
be further investigated when we take a closer look at the directional derivatives in section
4.1.3. We also see that the artifact concepts eye movement and muscle movement have
a low TCAV score, however only muscle is deemed insignificant in all bottlenecks in the
50 example test with α = 0.01. Eye movement in bottlenecks extended classifier and
encoding augment is insignificant in the 50 example test with α = 0.01. These results in­
dicate that with more examples we obtain more convincing results as the linear classifier
that defines the CAV trains on more data. To investigate this further we will look at the
accuracies of the linear classifiers that determine the CAVs.
Machine learning for EEG
49
==PAGE:58==
4.1.2
Linear classifier
Figure 4.3: 10 examples
Figure 4.4: 50 examples
Figure 4.5: Proof of concept CAV linear classifier accuracy. The x­axis displays the bottlenecks
in order of layers in the model and the y­axis displays the average accuracies of the linear classifier
separating the concepts and the random sets.
The mean accuracies of the linear classifier which determines the CAVs can be seen
in figure 4.3 and 4.4 by bottleneck in sequential order, for each concept. The feature
encoder, containing 6 sequential 1D convolutional blocks resulting in the BENDR repre­
sentations, linearly separates the target classes right and left better for 50 examples than
10 examples. For the 50 examples we see that the accuracy is consistent in our baseline
concepts left and right with accuracies between 0.7 and 0.8 in all layers. The 10 example
classifiers seem to be less stable as the accuracy varies more through out the layers. We
see an interesting dip in accuracy for eye movement and muscle movement in the sum­
marizer. Recall that the summarizer is inputting dimensions 1 × 1536 × 16 and reducing
the dimension to 1×1536×4 using 1D adaptive average pooling which would explain that
some information is lost.
Now we take a closer look at the TCAV results by looking at histograms of the TCAV
scores, as well as some statistics of directional derivatives used for these calculations.
50
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:59==
4.1.3
Investigation of TCAV scores and directional derivatives for all
concepts and bottlenecks
The following results are from a 50 example run with 20 training runs. In this section we
will delve further into what is happening behind the TCAV scores reported. We will look
at the distribution of the TCAV scores as well as look into some statistics of the direc­
tional derivatives used to calculate the TCAV scores. Figure 4.6 shows the TCAV score
histograms for each bottleneck by concept, more detailed histograms will be presented
in the next sections for each concept. The concepts are indicated in different colors and
each plot represents the bottlenecks in order.
Figure 4.6: Histograms of TCAV scores of for all the concepts for each of the bottlenecks
We see right away that the distribution has a lot of values in both extremes, 0 and 1.
However, the extended classifier and classifier only show TCAV scores of value 0 and 1.
A TCAV score of 1 means that all of the gradients in the target class left are pointing in
the same direction as the CAV for that concept while a TCAV score of 0 means that all of
the gradients in the target class left are pointing in the opposite direction.
We will investigate this further for each concept as we look at some statistics of the direc­
tional derivatives.
The next four sections display detailed results from this investigation. The four figures
4.7, 4.8, 4.9 and 4.10 have the following format:
• The columns indicate the bottlenecks from left to right. We have encoder, encoding
augment, summarizer, extended classifier, and classifier. This is the order of layers
in the LHB network.
• The concept is indicated in a color and the random is indicated in gray.
• The first row shows the histograms of the TCAV scores.
• The box­plots show statistics of the directional derivatives for the concept vs. the
random concepts. The second row shows the standard deviation and the third row
shows the mean.
Machine learning for EEG
51
==PAGE:60==
Left MI as concept
Figure 4.7: Proof of concept Detailed Histograms and box­plots for left MI. The first row
shows that the distribution for the TCAV score is around the value 1. This means that most
of the gradients of the target examples are pointing in the same direction as the CAVs.
When looking at the mean of the directional derivatives we see that the concept has a
consistently higher mean than the random concept for all layers. These findings show
what we expected, the target concept left is significant to the classification of the target
left for all layers. Another attribute to notice is the standard deviation of the directional
derivatives for the classifier and extended classifier. We see there in row 2 and columns
4 and 5 that we always have a standard deviation of 0 where the axis is at 1e −16. This
implies that all of the directional derivatives for each run of examples have the same value.
Overall we see promising results from the base line concept and all of the TCAV scores
are significant which can be easily seen from the histograms. The directional derivatives
have a consistent higher mean than the directional deviates for the random examples,
this implies that the layer is truly picking up on this concept. This concept is meaningful
and it consistently shows a unimodal behavior in all layers.
52
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:61==
Right MI as concept
Figure 4.8: Proof of concept Detailed Histograms and box­plots for right MI. The results
are as expected for this concept. The TCAV score is almost always 0 which indicates
the target gradients are always pointing in the opposite direction of the concept activation
vector for the concept right. This is expect as the downstream task is a binary classification
between left and right. The box plots of the mean of the directional derivative in row 3 are
always below the mean of the random examples which is opposite to the left concept. The
same behavior can be seen in the classifier layers as presented in the figures of concept
left, except we get all values at zero for the TCAV scores.
To summarize, here we see that the right concept shows a strong indication of being a
meaningful concept which explains the opposite behavior compared to the target class
left, as expected. Furthermore we see that this concept is meaningful in all layers.
Machine learning for EEG
53
==PAGE:62==
Eye movement
Figure 4.9: Proof of concept Detailed Histograms and box­plots for eye movement. For
the eye movement artifact we assume that it should not have an influence on the target
class left. Eye movement seems to have majority of the TCAV scores around 0 as we see
in the histograms. However, this concept is more distributed compared to the right con­
cept. In the third row we see that the mean of the directional derivatives of eye movement
is a bit lower than the random concepts. This indicates that eye movement could have
some significance to the opposite class right. This could imply that when a subject moves
their eyes it positively influences the classification of a subject thinking about making a
fist with their right hand. Again we see the interesting behavior in the two classifiers of
extreme bimodal distributions.
Overall there seems to be some significance to this artifact in layers encoder, summarizer
and classifier, however not positively influencing the class left. What is interesting to
note about this concept is that it shows significance in every other layer. First it shows
significance in the encoder, next it shows no significance in the encoding augment and so
on. This is interesting behavior as LHB is like a feed forward network and the information
should be carried out through the whole network. There is no indication that the linear
classifier behaves very differently in these layers as we saw in figure 4.5 the accuracies are
all between 0.5 and 0.6. The CAVs in the encoder and the classifier have accuracies below
0.5 which indicates that the significance of this concept is not interpretable. However, it is
important to note that it does show a consistent left skewed behavior through out.
54
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:63==
Muscle movement
Figure 4.10: Proof of concept Detailed Histograms and box­plots for muscle movement.
The muscle movement concept is insignificant in all layers when testing the 50 examples
with α = 0.01. We see here that the in the histograms of TCAV score of the muscle
movement concepts it is most similar to the random distribution compared to all other
concepts explored above. This is also highlighted in the directional derivatives where we
see the mean is very close to the random mean in the third row. Yet again we see the
same behavior for the classifier layers.
The muscle movement concept shows results that align with our hypothesis when it comes
to an artifact concept. That is, artifacts should have little to no significance to the classifi­
cation task at hand.
As all of the concepts showed the same behavior for the last two bottlenecks, we will now
try to understand the reason behind this behavior.
Machine learning for EEG
55
==PAGE:64==
4.1.4
Discussion of bimodal distribution of TCAV scores
One of the biggest concerns when looking at the distribution of the TCAV scores is the
bimodal behavior of these histograms, which are very evident in the classifier layers. This
type of behavior can be further analyzed in the box plots of the directional derivatives
seen in all of the figures 4.7­ 4.10. We see there that the variance of the directional
derivatives is 0 for both the extended classifier and the classifier layers. This indicates
that the directional derivatives are all the same for each training run while we see the
mean varying between training runs.
It is important to note that the extended classifier and classifier are the final layers in the
network. In neural networks we can often see the behavior of the final layers becoming
more linear than the layers before it. For example, most classification layers are linear
where we have have the simple task of classifying one target class. The typical head
in these types of layers is the ”softmax” which implements a linear classifier. This is
the case in our model where there is a soft­max classifier of the two classes. In our
case the mapping from the activations of the extended classifier layer to the logit layer
is a linear mapping so the gradient is constant. The mapping from the activations of the
summarizer layer to the logit layer is however going trough a non linear layer (extended
classifier) and a linear layer (classifier). It seems that as the model trained, it resulted
in giving an approximation of a linear layer for this specific downstream task in the non­
linear layers. This can be seen in the less defined bimodal distributions in summarizer,
encoding augment and encoder.
As the model trains the earlier layers seem to do most of the heavy lifting when it comes to
feature extraction which allows the final layers to have simpler linear formulations. When
layers become more linear, variability is dominated by the gradient term (first order deriva­
tives), c.f., Taylor’s theorem. Let us recall Taylor’s second order expansion in equation 4.1
where we have a function f : Rn →Rn that is 2 times differentiable at the point a ∈Rn.
f(x) ≈f(a) + (x −a)T ∇f(a)
|
{z
}
const.
+ 1
2(x −a)T Hf(a)(x −a)
|
{z
}
0
(4.1)
where Hf(x) = ∇∇f(x) is the second order derivative. If the layer is approximately linear
the first order derivative will be close to constant and the second order derivative will be
approximately 0. That is, if a layer is dominated by the first order derivatives, the gradient
vector does not depend on the input, hence it is a constant vector for linear layers. We
recall the formula for the TCAV score:
TCAVC,k,l = |{x ∈Xk : SC,k,l(x) > 0}|
|Xk|
(4.2)
and remind that the sensitivity is given by
SC,k,l(x) = ∇hl,k (fl(x)) · vl
C.
(4.3)
We know that the CAV, vl
C, is a constant vector for each concept example collection. Now,
if the gradient of hl,k (fl(x)) is a constant vector, g, then all samples x will lead to the same
sensitivity value, since it is an inner product of two constant vectors. In mathematical
terms,
SC,k,l(x) = ∇hl,k (fl(x)) · vl
C ≈g · vl
C = const.
(4.4)
This means SC,k,l(x) > 0 will always be either true or false (for all x) in the given set,
hence we get a TCAV score of either 1 or 0, respectively. This explains the strongly
56
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:65==
concentrated distributions of the TCAV scores in the final layers extended classifier and
classifier. There are two ways in which randomness affects the collection of examples.
First, we have the examples being used in the concept. These examples are collected at
random from the concept sets and will be used to calculate the concept activation vector
vl
C. Next we have the random examples being input to the sensitivity, x. This means we
have two scenarios:
1. If the concept is well defined, the concept vectors vl
C will be approximately constant
for all example collections too (same vector for different random sets), hence the
sign of SC,k,l(x) will be constant for all random sets. This will lead to all statistics
being either ≈0 or ≈1, hence a unimodal distribution of the TCAV scores for the
well defined concepts.
2. For the random vs. random baseline, on the other hand, the concept vectors will be
in random directions depending on the specific random sets, hence, SC,k,l(x) = 0
or = 1 with probability p = 0.5. This will show a bimodal, symmetric distribution of
the TCAV scores for random concepts.
The best example of this can be seen for the target concepts left and right in figures 4.7
and 4.8. This explains the unimodal behaviour of the well defined concepts, such as
left/right, in the TCAV score histograms in the last two layers and the random concept
displays a bimodal distribution in these histograms.
It is also important to note that if we have unimodal behaviour when the gradient is con­
stant it does not implicitly mean that the concept is significant to the target, as it could
simply mean that the concept is well defined and ends up pointing slightly in the same
direction as the target. We see that all of the 5 layers have this bimodal behavior for the
random concepts. We know that our model is trained on a binary classification between
the targets left and right. So all of the layers are being trained to separate these two
classes. If the encoder layer (the 6 sequential 1D convolutional blocks) is getting good at
separating these two targets, as we can see in the accuracy plot for our baseline concept
left and concept right on figure 4.5, it is not surprising that we get this bimodal behavior.
As most of the activations result in a clustering between two target classes , that is the
gradient is more stable for our target examples, this results in a clustering of TCAV scores
as well.
In the case of left and right we can be pretty certain that the targets as concepts are
significant, but in other investigations it is important to be vary of this behavior.
Machine learning for EEG
57
==PAGE:66==
4.2
Anomaly detection of epileptic behavior using
OC­SVM­BENDR
This section shows the results of the method described in section 3.4. In this experiment
we look at the capabilities of the pre­trained BENDR representations in a simple One­
class SVM detecting anomalies in epileptic EEG data. We tested 220 combinations of ν
and γ for fitting the one class SVM.
Let’s begin by looking at the BENDR representation with some histograms of the max­
imum, minimum, mean and variance of each dimension of the data in figure 4.11. We
see that the magnitude is very small and the variance is almost zero in the bottom right
figure. The only difference we see between the distributions of normal and epileptic rep­
resentations is in the maximum values and variance. In both cases it shows the normal
representations having a bit higher values shifting the distribution to the right. However,
this is almost negligible in the variance as the values are all in the magnitude of 10−7.
Figure 4.11:
Histograms of BENDR representation of each dimension of Normal and Epileptic
EEGs. Top left: Maximum values, Bottom Left: Mean values, Top right: minimum values, Bottom
right: variance.
We tested 220 different combinations of ν and γ to test the sensitivity of the OC­SVM.
We found that for all cases there were very few outliers in the epileptic representations
compared to the normal outliers. Out of all of the combinations only 7 of them had more
outliers in the epileptic representations compared to the normal representations which
can be seen in table 4.2.
58
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:67==
Test
nu
gamma
normal fraction
epilepsy fraction
209
0.001
0.037883
0.341643
0.341728
213
0.001
0.041883
0.341643
0.341728
215
0.001
0.043883
0.306488
0.311899
216
0.001
0.044883
0.306168
0.311666
217
0.001
0.045883
0.306008
0.311534
218
0.001
0.046883
0.306168
0.311899
219
0.001
0.047883
0.306008
0.311467
Table 4.2: One class SVM results with higher outlier fraction for epileptic representations
Here we can see that the difference is negligible between the fraction of outliers for normal
and epileptic representations. We see that the summarized BENDR representations being
used do not give a good enough representation to allow for this type of anomaly detection.
We would expect that in comparison to normal representations, epileptic representations
would have more outliers. Another issue we see is that the fraction of outliers is much
higher, around 30%, than the fraction we allow, ν = 0.001. All of these OC­SVM are not
fitting the normal region well and are underfitting the representations.
Figure 4.12 shows the fractions of outliers found by the OC­SVM for both epileptic and
normal representations for different γ’s for a fixed ν = 0.01. As an example we took a
closer look at ν = 0.01 as it shows γ’s varying from 80% to 1% fraction of outliers. An issue
that arises is in the lower γ values, the fraction of outlier is very high. This is because when
we have a small γ we are defining a broader region for the normal data to be confined in.
This means, we have a simpler boundary which would mean more data could be outside
the region. That is, the relationship between γ and ν will define the number of outliers
given by the decision function, negative decision function values identify the data point
as an outlier. The resulting models show that the epileptic representations always have a
slightly lower fraction of outliers than the normal representations.
Figure 4.12:
Fraction of outliers for ν = 0.01 for both epileptic representations and normal
representations
Machine learning for EEG
59
==PAGE:68==
As we are fitting the OC­SVM on high dimensional data (2048), the OC­SVM might be
capturing noise in the representations along with the normal representation pattern, re­
sulting in a broader definition of the normal class. The epileptic representations therefore
fit within this overfit region for the normal representations, and seem to have less ”noise”
then the normal representations. Even though these results are not what we expected
we will further investigate why this is happening in the section below. Overall we see that
the summarized pre­trained BENDR representations do not allow for a separation of the
normal and abnormal data as we expected.
4.2.1
Further investigations
For a more detailed look at the method we will take one example of ν and γ. As we saw in
figure 4.12 the fraction of outliers varied between 0.001 and 0.8. However, we can use the
decision function to define another threshold. As the normal approach sets all decision
values that are negative as outliers we can set a different threshold by only looking at
a set fraction of decision values as outliers. As the method above did not give us good
results, we looked at one example with ν = 0.01 and γ = 0.02, forcing a threshold at 3%
for the normal data. We want to investigate the outliers which the region is defining and
see if there are any patterns to these outliers. The normal data resulted in 3.00% outliers
and the epileptic data resulted in 1.24% outliers which is in line with the results we saw
when we tried 220 combinations.
First we have the histogram of the decision function values for both normal and epileptic
data in figure 4.13 to visualize the chosen model.
Figure 4.13: Left: Histogram of decision function for OC­SVM with ν = 0.01 and γ = 0.02. Right:
Histograms of outliers only, given by the 3% threshold.
Here we see that most values are around zero for all of the data and on the right we have
a histogram of the outliers only, which show negative values. The decision function puts
all negative values as outliers and positive as inliers given the 3% threshold. We do not
see any huge significance here, which aligns with the results of fraction of outliers. The
only thing to note here is that there are more extreme outliers in the normal data which
have a higher magnitude of the decision function values.
Next we want to visualize the representations using UMAP to see if there is any obvi­
ous clustering which would show us outliers. Each data point in the UMAP represents
a BENDR representation of a 60 second trial of an EEG recording. Figure 4.14 shows
the outliers colored in red and inliers in blue. We see that the OC­SVM is picking up on
outliers in two regions; at the top we see a tail where the end of it is identified as outlier
60
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:69==
and at the bottom we have outliers in a small cluster. This applies for both normal and
epileptic data.
Figure 4.14: UMAP visualization for one class SVM with ν = 0.01 and γ = 0.02 for normal and
epileptic data. Left: UMAP of normal data with outliers labeled Right: UMAP of epileptic data with
outliers labeled. We see that the OC­SVM is picking up on outliers in two regions; at the top we
see a tail where the end of it is identified as outlier and at the bottom we have outliers in a small
cluster. This applies for both normal and epileptic data.
To identify what abnormalities are within the epileptic data, we will take a further look to see
if these data points have anything in common. We wanted to see if these abnormalities
had anything to do with the recording times. As each point in the plot indicated a 60
second trial of an EEG recording, we decided to investigate if the beginning or ends of
sessions would have any indication of outliers in the data. Often, some calibration is in
the beginning of recordings and the electrodes might be stabilizing, making sure they are
connected properly. Hence, we will look at the UMAP of the data where we labeled all the
first 60 seconds of sessions for all patients. The results of this can be seen in figure 4.15
where red indicates the beginning of a session and others are indicated in blue.
Figure 4.15:
UMAP visualization for epileptic data labeled by beginning of session. We see
here the red marked point represent the first 60 s of a session. The bottom cluster identifies these
outliers as the beginning of sessions which would indicate that the abnormalities being picked up
on are related to abnormalities in the beginning of recordings.
Machine learning for EEG
61
==PAGE:70==
We see that the bottom cluster does identify these as beginnings of sessions as outliers.
However, this does not explain the tail which we see at the top. This shows us that some
of the outliers found by the OC­SVM might show signs of technical abnormalities rather
than physiological abnormalities. We also took a look at the ends of sessions to see if
there might be any indication to technical abnormalities there but found that they were
evenly distributed within the UMAP representation of the data and were not located in the
bottom cluster or the tail.
As this did not explain the tail we investigated further to see if this had anything to do with
a specific patient or session. We labeled all data points by patient id from 0­99 as we had
100 patients.
Figure 4.16: UMAP visualization for epileptic data labeled by patient id.
Figure 4.16 shows a representation of all 60 s EEG recordings labeled by patient id.
There seems to be no indication that this is one specific patient which is why this inves­
tigation leads us to looking at individual EEGs for some of the data in the tail. We found
that this tail represented 0.5% of the data, only 150 60 s recordings out of 30,138 60 s
recordings. There are 40 different individuals that make up the 150 trials.
By only visualizing the tail, we get figure 4.17. We see there are only a few patients that
pop up repeatedly in the tail, two of them being ”aaaaabhz” (yellow) and ”aaaaajqo” (dark
blue). The ”aaaaabhz” patient has a total of 6762 trials which is 22% of the whole dataset
and has 30 trials in the tail which is also around 20% of the tail. The ”aaaaajqo” patient
62
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:71==
was the second highest in number of trials in the tail with 15 trials, which is 10% of the
tail, and in the whole dataset they had 2100 trials, which is around 7%. The median of the
number of trials per subject was 2 in the tail. Overall, we see that there is no significance
to subjects in the tail which leads us to investigate the individual EEG recordings for our
most extreme outliers.
Figure 4.17: UMAP visualization for epileptic data labeled by patient id, outliers only.
From here we investigated the five outermost outliers for both normal and epileptic data
in the respective tails. From these files we only saw one pattern emerge. The pattern we
saw was a simultaneous lower frequency dips/peaks in all channels in that specific trial.
Machine learning for EEG
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 4.18: Raw EEG recording of two different patients from outlier tail in BENDR represen­
tations. The image shows the 60 second interval representing the data points. These raw EEG
recordings have no filters on them, as BENDR takes in the raw recording. Top and bottom Left:
Two different patients that do not have epilepsy, Top and bottom Right: Two different patients that
have epilepsy.
Figure 4.18 shows us 4 examples from the tail of data. First of all it is important to note that
there are no filters on the data. The data here is raw as it is when it is input into BENDR.
Some issues that can be easily handled here can be fixed with a high pass filter of for
example 1 Hz, however this does not eliminate all of the behavior. This would remove
some of the behaviour we see here as there are low frequency dips that happen in all
channels at once. As the authors of BENDR do not do any high pass or low pass filtering
of the TUEG dataset during pre­training, we see these features not being dealt with at this
stage. However, as there is no specific downstream task which would allow the model to
identify these frequencies as insignificant it is not surprising that a low frequency in the
EEG data still remains a part of the BENDR representations. To understand this behaviour
a few EEG scientists were spoken to get their insights, L.K. Hansen [57], K.H. Madsen
[58], T. Andersen [59]. They found that as these abnormalities show very low frequencies,
which is something that does not occur in brain activity, we can assume that these outliers
come from an external source. This could be for example touching something that charges
or discharges the electric signal.
64
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:73==
4.3
Classification of seizures using Linear Head BENDR
In this section we will present the results of the classification task of seizures vs. back­
ground in the TUSZ dataset and an interpretability investigation with TCAV outlined in
section 3.5.
4.3.1
Hyperparameter tuning
We tuned the parameters in 3.9 using Bayesian hyperparameter optimization as described
in 3.5.2, by maximizing the validation F1 score. We looked at the accuracy, balanced ac­
curacy, precision and recall to see how the model is performing. We ended up choosing
the model with a validation F1 score of 0.206, balanced accuracy of 0.731, specificity 0.841,
positive predictive value of 0.123 and recall 0.622 after training for 30 epochs. The param­
eters that led to these results are shown in table 4.3.
Hyperparameter
Values
Batch size
b = 80
Learning rate
l = 0.0001
Weight decay
w = 0.001
Balancing method
Undersample
Table 4.3: Parameters chosen in the hyperparameter tuning and their respective values.
4.3.2
Performance metrics
To evaluate the performance on the whole dataset, we use 20 fold cross validation where
each person’s data is not split up into different folds. The training fold is then split up into
a training set and validation set where the previous fold is used as a validation set.
Let us begin by looking at the training performance of one of the folds. Figure 4.19 shows
the performance metrics of the training and validation set for fold 1 as a hold out set, in
the cross validation. We see that the validation F1 score increases with the number of
epochs and stabilizes right before 40 epochs with a validation F1 score around 0.251.
Figure 4.19: Performance metric plots for training (blue) and validation (red) sets for seizure
classification. Top left: F1­score, Bottom left: Precision, Top right: Balanced accuracy, Bottom
right: Recall. If we look at the F1 score and the Percision we see that the model seems to be
overfitting to the training data.
Machine learning for EEG
65
==PAGE:74==
We see that even after Bayesian hyperparameter tuning, that was concluded after 48
hours, the performance metrics are still rather unstable, indicating that better hyperpa­
rameters could be chosen to fit the model. We did not experiment with all possible hyper­
parameters in the model, but only the hyperparameters found to have the most effect on
the validation loss in a test with a small subset of the patients.
The mean balanced accuracy over all folds is 0.729, however the standard deviation is
0.233, so the models seems to be inadequate at generalizing to new unseen subjects, as
EEG data is very patient specific. This dataset is very unbalanced (5.7% seizures) so we
will report the metrics based on two groups. The first group consists of subjects that have
seizures and the other of patients without seizures. This gives us a balanced accuracy for
those with seizure of 0.555 with standard deviation 0.223. Patients with no seizures have a
balanced accuracy of 0.791 and standard deviation 0.217. As the standard deviation for all
BAC is very high, we will look at the box plots for a better understanding of the uncertainty.
We will focus on BAC and the precision score of the group of patients that have seizures.
Figure 4.20: Left: Mean balanced accuracy for the 20 folds for LHB on the binary classification
of seizure and background in the TUSZ dataset for patients with seizures. Right: Mean patient
specific precision (Positive predictive rate) across the 20 folds for LHB on the binary classification
of seizure and background in the TUSZ dataset for patients with seizures. The balanced accu­
racy shows a wide distribution which centers around 0.5. We see that the precision has a mean
of 0.241.
Figure 4.20 shows the patient­specific precision (Positive predictive rate) across the 20
folds, each point representing a patient. The balanced accuracy shows a wide distribution
which centers around 0.5. Some of the patients have a precision of 0.00 while others reach
1.00, giving us an average of 0.241.
66
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:75==
To evaluate the model further we will be looking at the patient­specific BAC for the 20 folds
as well as the overall performance across all folds.
Figure 4.21: Balanced Accuracy for the 20 folds for LHB on the binary classification of seizure
and background in the TUSZ dataset. The x­labels show fold number and below we see the
percentages of seizure trials presented within each fold.
Figure 4.21 shows the BAC for each hold­out fold. We see that one fold stands out in this
figure. Fold 14 shows high accuracy, and we note that the percentage of seizure in this
hold out fold is 0.2%, which were two trials of length 60 seconds containing a seizure.
Figure 4.22:
Confusion matrix across CV folds for LHB on the binary classification of seizure
and background in the TUSZ dataset. The large number displays the number of 60 second trials
and the number in brackets represents the rate for the class.
Figure 4.22 shows the confusion matrix for the whole dataset. The positive predictive
value is given by
763
(763+5941) = 0.114 and the negative predictive value is given by
26182
(26182+1002) =
0.963. Note that this evaluates the model as a whole and not on a patient­specific level.
Machine learning for EEG
67
==PAGE:76==
4.3.3
Latent spaces
We recall that the latent space is of dimension 2048 before input to the linear classification
layer. We will visualize this space in 2D to see how the BENDR representations are
separating the two classes.
Figure 4.23: UMAP for train data with hold out
fold nr. 8.
Figure 4.24:
Validation data projected on the
UMAP fitted on the train data.
We see in figure 4.23 that the two classes seem to be leaning in separate directions on the
2D UMAP plot, with the seizure data clustered to the right. When we look at the validation
data projected on this space in figure 4.24, we see that it clusters to the far right.
The current model is not performing well in terms of classification accuracy and is not on
par with state­of­the­art models. However, it is still managing to detect around 43% of
seizures when tested on unseen subjects, which is an improvement from simply classi­
fying all seizures as background. The positive predictive rate is however only 24.1% for
seizure patients. Recall that the input for this model is a 60­second EEG signal, labeled
as seizure if it contains seizure activity and labeled as background if not. It is worth noting
that seizures can manifest in different ways, and combining all types of seizures into one
class may not be ideal. Additionally, using a linear classifier as the final layer of the model
may not be the best choice. As we can see in the latent space, there is a tendency to­
wards the right for the seizure recordings but it could be that a non linear classifier would
perform better on this space. We recall that this space is a 1D adaptive average pooling
summarization of the 512 BENDRs to a 2048 dimensional space and some important in­
formation could be lost. Despite these limitations, we will continue to use this model as
we want to focus on implementing TCAV on the LHB (Linear Head BENDR) model, using
predefined epileptic behavioral concepts from a labeled dataset.
68
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:77==
4.4
TCAV investigation of seizure classification using Linear
Head BENDR
In this section, we will explore two different approaches to concept definitions to look at
the interpretability of the different bottlenecks of the LHB model for seizure classification.
One of the challenges with LHB is that the dimensions of the layers are dependent on the
length of the input data. The first two layers which have this limitation are the encoder
and the augmented encoder. Hence, we use two methods to investigate how concepts
are significant in the model. The first methods only allow for investigation of the final three
bottlenecks of the model with short length concepts, while the second approach looks at
60 second recordings of the concepts so that we can look at all bottlenecks.
4.4.1
TCAV on short concepts
We will begin by looking at concepts with short length recordings. The concepts spike
and/ short wave (spsw) are of length 2 seconds, periodic lateralized and general period
epileptic discharges (pled, gped) are of length 8 seconds, and our artifacts (arft, eyem,
musc) and background are of length 6 seconds. These are the concepts which are used to
look at the last three bottlenecks of the model, given by table 3.11, summarizer, extended
classifier and classifier.
TCAV results for different random sets
The following figure 4.25 shows the results from different experiments based on different
numbers of training runs. These range form 20 runs to 50 runs, always looking at 26
examples. As we are limited by our concept collection and do not have the capabilities of
training our CAV linear classifier on more data, this investigation will allow us to see the
stability of more training runs to detect meaningful concepts that are consistent between
runs.
Figure 4.25: TCAV results of short concepts on seizure classification with α = 0.01. Top left: 20
runs, Top right: 30, Bottom left: 40, Bottom right: 50. The results seem to be stable when it comes
to the extended classifier for all concepts. The only concept that is stable in the classifier is the
background concept, while the summarizer is only stable for the gped concept. A ∗indicates that
the concept is deemed insignificant by the hypothesis test compared to random. Note that the
error bars are not very large and remain similar throughout the experiments as they are given by
q
(TCAV score)∗(1−(TCAV score))
N
, where N is the same in all experiments.
Machine learning for EEG
69
==PAGE:78==
The results seem to be stable when it comes to the extended classifier for all concepts.
The only concept that is stable in the classifier is the background concept, while the sum­
marizer is only stable for the generalized periodic epileptic discharge (gped) concept.
We will rely on the most robust result which is given by the 50 random sets of experiments.
The following results are built on this experiment.
TCAV score results
Table 4.4 shows the TCAV scores for the three bottlenecks and all concepts. It indicates
if the score is significant by the hypothesis test at α = 0.01 with a ∗and in bold.
Bottleneck
Concept
TCAV score
Summarizer
random
0.509
spsw
0.811*
pled
0.992*
gped
0.995*
artf
0.421
bckg
0.092*
eyem
0.194*
musc
0.854*
Extended Classifier
random
0.498
spsw
0.700*
pled
0.940*
gped
0.900*
artf
0.600
bckg
0.340
eyem
0.440
musc
0.620
Classifier
random
0.504
spsw
0.020*
pled
0.700
gped
0.740*
artf
0.620
bckg
1.000
eyem
0.560
musc
0.520
Table 4.4: TCAV score results form seizure classification on BENDR on short concepts for
the last three bottlenecks using 26 examples where (*) indicates if the score is significant
in an α = 0.01 hypothesis test.
The random concepts have a TCAV score of ≈0.5, which means the set of examples is
a good baseline for statistical testing.
Recall that the layers we are looking at are the summarizer which is a 1D adaptive average
pooling, the extended classifier which flattens the output of the summarizer, reduces the
dimensions with a linear layer and has a drop out, ReLu and batch normalization and
finally we have a linear classifier.
We first look at the epileptic concepts spsw, gped, and pled. Spike and/or slow wave
(spsw) concept shows significance in all layers with high TCAV scores of 0.8 and 0.7 in the
summarizer and extended classifier respectively. However, it has a TCAV score of 0.02
in the classifier layer. It seems as if the model picks up on the concept but it is positively
70
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:79==
related to the target class seizure only in prior layers. We will discuss this further when
looking at the spsw results in detail.
We see that the generalized periodic epileptiform discharges (gped) concept is significant
in all layers, with TCAV scores between 0.7 and 0.99. This implies that the CAVs of the
gped examples have the same direction as the target gradients in all layers.
The final epileptic form concept is periodic lateralized epileptiform discharge (pled) which
shows significance in both the summarizer layer and the extended classifier layer. In the
classifier layer we see that it has a TCAV score of 0.70 which is high, however deemed
insignificant when compared to the random concepts.
Next we can take a look at the artifacts; artf, eyem and musc. Right away we see that
the artifacts artf (technological artifacts) have TCAV scores closer to the random (which
should always be around 0.5). This indicates that the artifact concepts do not have much
influence on the classification of seizures as they are also deemed insignificant. The other
two artifacts, eyem and musc, have significant TCAV scores in the summarizer. The TCAV
score for eyem is 0.19 which tells us it has the opposite direction to the seizure class, in
most comparisons, while musc is positively related to the target class with a TCAV score
of 0.85.
The background concept is a bit different in this case, as it is the opposite of the tar­
get class. However, the data comes from another dataset (TUEV) than the seizure data
(TUSZ) which includes background labels and seizure labels. The expectation is that the
background CAV should have opposite direction to the target gradient in all layers in a
significant way. We see this case only in the summarizer with a significant TCAV score of
0.092 but it has a TCAV score of 1.0 in the classifier. A TCAV score of 1.0 in the classifier
indicates that if these 6 second recordings were to be predicted, it would be classified
as a seizure. The false positive rate in our model is 18%. The model was trained on 60
second recordings so it seems as using only 6 second inputs as background examples is
not resulting in good performance, as the model always classifies these 26 background
examples as seizures.
When it comes to looking at how these concepts appear significant from the point of the
layers, we see that the summarizer shows most insights with these concepts. This is
important as we know there are some interpretation issues with linear layers such as the
classifier layers as the gradient is constant for all examples. However, as this experiment
only allows us to interpret the final layers in the model, we can rely on the 60 second
experiment for more insights into layers that are less linear.
This interpretability investigation clearly highlights the issue with the classification model,
however it does show us that the model is going in the right direction and picking up on
some abnormal behavior which could indicate a seizure.
Linear Classifier
Figure 4.26 shows the average accuracy of the linear classifier which determines the CAVs
for each concept in each bottleneck. We see that spike and/or slow wave (spsw) has the
highest accuracies throughout the network. It also seems that all the epileptic concepts
peak in accuracy in the extended classifier, between 0.7 and 0.8. The extended classifier
seems to be informative for this separation task in the epileptic concepts. We see that
the average accuracy for muscle movement is always below 0.5 even though the TCAV
score shows significance in the summarizer. We note that this behavior is abnormal as
we would expect the TCAV score to find this concept insignificant, as the linear classifier
can not distinguish this concept from other random concepts.
Machine learning for EEG
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 4.26: Mean accuracy of linear classifier that determines CAV for Seizure classification on
LHB. The x­axis displays the bottlenecks in order of layers in the model and the y­axis displays
the average accuracies of the linear classifier separating the concepts and the random sets.
Detailed look at the TCAV scores
To investigate the TCAV scores further we will take a look at their histograms in figures
4.27 ­ 4.33 all concepts in Seizure classification on LHB.
Figure 4.27:
TCAV score Histograms for spsw concept in Seizure classification on LHB. The
spike and wave spsw concept shows a skewed distribution in the summarizer with most TCAV
scores with value 1 while it is a bit more balanced in the extended classifier. In the classifier layer
we see all examples have the target gradient in the opposite direction to the spsw CAV, that is a
negative directional derivative. This concept includes spikes and/or short waves, an event that can
occur both between seizures (Background signals from for example epileptic patients) and during
seizures. This might explain why this concept shows significance in both directions for the layers.
Even though it seems that this concept has some relation to the target class seizure in prior layers
we see that in the final classification layer the model predicts the spsw concepts as background.
As the summarizer is using adaptive average pooling, we could assume that it is picking up on
high amplitudes such as a spike and feeding that information forward to the extended classifier,
but the classifier deems this as irrelevant to the classification task at hand.
72
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:81==
Figure 4.28: TCAV score Histograms for pled (periodic lateralized epileptic discharge) concept
in Seizure classification on LHB. The pled concept shows a skewed distribution towards 1 in all
layers but seems more balanced in the classifier and less defined. This concept behaves similarly
to focal seizure as they both originate from one part of the brain. This indicates that some of
this focal behaviour might be a concept used in the summarizer and extended classifier when
using these short concepts and the classifier is split between classifying the concept as seizure or
background. Recall that this is a concept that is defined as interictal but shows similar indicators
as seizures.
Figure 4.29:
TCAV score Histograms for gped concept in Seizure classification on LHB. The
generalized periodic epileptiform discharges gped concept shows a skewed distribution towards
1 in all layers but seems more balanced in the classifier and less defined. A very similar statement
can be said here as in the pled concept. This concept has a similar behaviour to general seizure
which originates in all regions of the brain. It seems that the model is identifying this as behavior
which is similar to seizures and the classifier identifies this as significant.
Figure 4.30: TCAV score Histograms for artifact concept in Seizure classification on LHB. The
technical artifacts artf have a very similar distribution to random for all layers. This indicates that
the model is not using this concept for the classification task at hand, which is as expected.
Machine learning for EEG
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure 4.31:
TCAV score histograms for the background concept in Seizure classification on
LHB. The background bckg concept shows a tendency to 0 in the summarizer and extended
classifier layers. However, it is most obvious in the summarizer. The background concept is well
defined in the classifier layer as significant to the classification which indicates that the classifier
needs further improvement. We recall that the false positive rate in our model is 18%. The model
was trained on 60 second recordings so it seems as using only 6 second inputs as background ex­
amples is not resulting in good performance, as the model always classifies these 26 background
examples as seizures.
Figure 4.32:
TCAV score Histograms for eye movement concepts in Seizure classification on
LHB. The eye movement concept eyem shows significance in the opposite direction to the concept
class in the summarizer otherwise it is insignificant as it has a very similar distributions to normal.
Figure 4.33:
TCAV score Histograms for muscle movement concepts in Seizure classification
on LHB. The muscle movement concept musc shows significance in the same direction to the
concept class in the summarizer. We recall that the average accuracies for creating these CAVs
was below 0.5 so we can not be confident in these scores.
74
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:83==
As we have seen before in our investigation of the left and right downstream task in section
4.1, we have this bimodal behavior of the TCAV score in the final layers of the model.
We can deduce several points from these results. First of all, the epileptic form concept
showed positive significance in the summarizer and extended classifier. Both pled in fig­
ure 4.28 and gped in figure 4.29, which have a similar behaviour to focal and general
seizures respectively, show significance in the summarizer and extended classifier. The
difference being in the classification task, where gped is significantly classified as seizure
with TCAV score 0.74 but pled fluctuates between being classified as seizure and back­
ground. The spike and/or slow wave concept in figure 4.27 shows negative significance
in the classifier. As mentioned in the concepts section 2.6, these are interictal events
which can be present in seizures but are usually present between seizures, which would
indicate they might have some significance to the background target. This would mean
some of the background data in the training could be from epileptic patients which could
include some of these events during their EEG recordings, like spike and slow wave.
Secondly, we can be confident that the model has been able to filter out the technical
artifacts in figure 4.30, as they show no significance in the layers.
Finally, we can see from our other target class background in figure 4.31 that it has signif­
icant similarities to the direction of our target class seizures. As was highlighted above,
we know that there is a 18% false positive rate which reflects in this test of concept acti­
vation vectors. Overall, the model needs improvement, especially in the classifier layer
as it highlights the bias that background has on the target class, seizure.
We see that when concepts show consistency in the direction their distribution skews
throughout the bottlenecks, we can be more confident that they have a significance in the
decision making of classification task. However, as stated, the linearity of these layers
does not allow for as confident results, due to the nature of the sensitivity score, that is
the directional derivative.
Now we will explore how this data will present when the concepts are of length 60 seconds.
Machine learning for EEG
75
==PAGE:84==
4.4.2
TCAV on 60 second concepts
The 60 second concepts will have more noise to them than the short concepts since the
concepts can vary widely in length. This is something that needs to be kept in mind when
reviewing these results.
TCAV score results
Table 4.5 shows the TCAV scores and their significance for the TCAV test for 50 runs of
60 second concepts, for the binary classification of seizures and background using LHB.
Bottleneck
Concept
TCAV score
Encoder
random
0.497
spsw
0.802*
pled
0.952*
gped
0.979*
artf
0.489
backg
0.365
Encoding Augment
random
0.499
spsw
0.473
pled
0.882*
gped
0.970*
artf
0.571
backg
0.561
Summarizer
random
0.498
spsw
0.594
pled
0.994*
gped
0.999*
artf
0.486
backg
0.512
Extended Classifier
random
0.496
spsw
0.640
pled
1.000*
gped
1.000*
artf
0.380
backg
0.440
Classifier
random
0.506
spsw
0.300*
pled
0.800*
gped
0.720*
artf
0.880*
backg
0.640
Table 4.5: TCAV score results from Seizure classification on LHB on 60 s concepts for all
bottlenecks using 26 examples where (*) indicates if the score is significant in an α = 0.01
hypothesis test. The Bottlenecks are in order of appearance in the network.
Recall that we are now looking at all five bottlenecks in the model which are described in
detail in table 3.11 and are presented in order (encoder, encoding augment, summarizer,
extended classifier, classifier) in the table and histogram figures below.
The random concepts all show a TCAV score of ≈0.5 here which gives confidence to
the results. The epileptic concepts pled (which present in certain regions in the brain)
and gped (which present in most of the brain) have a high significance in all layers in this
76
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:85==
experiment. This consistency allows for more confidence in their significance in this type
of model. This is likely due to the fact that these concepts can be longer than 8 seconds, as
was the length of these concepts in the experiment above, and a 60 second concept might
be more informative for this task. One other explanation might be that these concepts are
now of the length the model is trained on, which might lead to more significance. All of
their TCAV scores are between 0.7 and 1.0. The spsw (pike and short wave) concept
shows significance in the encoder layer and the classifier layer with TCAV scores 0.802
and 0.3 respectively. It does not show any significance in the other three layers. This
concept includes the most noise as it is usually only a few seconds long. The classifier
layer indicates that the model would classify this concept as a background. However, we
should stay vary of interpretation in these linear layers as has been discussed.
One surprising result from this test is that artifacts seem to show a lot of significance in
the classification layer, with TCAV score 0.88, while in all other layers it has a TCAV score
close to 0.5. However, the performance of the classifier is not ideal and the linearity of
the layer might have an effect on the significance. If a concept only has significance in
the final layer it is important to think about how that information came through all other
layers in the model. As this model has a feed forward nature, the information comes from
all prior layers in order, meaning that if artifacts only have significance in the last layer,
its attributes have only been magnified in the final layer and have not been identified as
important in the prior layers.
Figure 4.34: TCAV results of 60 s concepts on seizure classification with α = 0.01. Note that the
error bars are very similar throughout concepts but the ones with lower TCAV scores are larger.
Recall the error bars are given by
q
(TCAV score)∗(1−(TCAV score))
N
.
Finally, we have the background concept which is similar to the opposite class of seizures
in the classification task. This concept shows no significance in all layers expect for the
first, the encoder. Here we see that background has no significance in the final four
layers encoding augment, summarizer, extended classifier and classifier, while it was
significant as a short concept in the classifier and extended classifier. This can be due
to two reasons. The first could be the unreliability of these linear layers or the model has
a harder time with concepts which are not of the length of the model input. So when the
model is presented with concepts of input length 60 seconds, it is able to identify their
importance more clearly. In this case we have that the background concept should not be
Machine learning for EEG
77
==PAGE:86==
positively significant in the classification of seizures.
Linear Classifier
Figure 4.35:
CAV linear classifier 60 second examples for Seizure classification on LHB. The
x­axis displays the bottlenecks in order of layers in the model and the y­axis displays the average
accuracies of the linear classifier, separating the concepts and the random sets.
Figure 4.35 shows the average accuracies for the linear classifier that determines the
CAVs for all bottlenecks and concepts. Here, we see similar behaviour to the classifiers
in prior experiments, where the concepts with the most significance have the highest
accuracies. In this case pled and gped have accuracies between 0.6 and 0.7. The epileptic
concepts pled and gped show an increase in accuracy of their classifiers as we move
through the layers. This implies that throughout the model, the representations that are
significant are becoming more easy to separate.
78
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:87==
Detailed look at the TCAV scores
To investigate the TCAV scores further we will take a look at their histograms in figures
4.36­4.40.
Figure 4.36: TCAV score Histograms for spsw (spike and/or slow wave) concept in Seizure
classification on LHB. The spsw concept seems to have a very similar distribution to the random
concept except for the skewed distribution in the encoder. This might imply that the encoder is
picking up on some spikes which are often seen in seizures. However, this concept seems to lack
importance as we go through the network.
Figure 4.37: TCAV score Histograms for gped (generalized periodic epileptic discharge) concept
in seizure classification on LHB. The gped concept seems to be very well defined in the first
four layers where the distribution is almost unimodal. There seems to be less confidence in the
classifier layer where around 28% of the examples get a TCAV score of 0. Let us recall that gped
are periodic spikes that originate from all regions of the brain. This is something that can also
be seen in generalized seizures so this indicates that the model seems to pick up on this type of
behavior in seizures.
Figure 4.38: TCAV score Histograms for pled (periodic lateralized epileptic discharge) concept
in Seizure classification on LHB. The pled concept is similarly distributed as gped but has a bit
more confidence in the classifier with only 20% TCAV scores of zero in the classifier. This concept
is one that originates only from a certain region in the brain, similar to focal seizures. This gives
us some confidence that the model is picking up on this lateralized behaviour in our target class
seizures.
Machine learning for EEG
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure 4.39: TCAV score Histograms for artf (technical artifacts) concept in Seizure classification
on LHB. The artifact concept shows similar behavior to random but it seems to be skewed to
the right for the classifier layer. This is not ideal, as we would expect this concept to have no
significance, as it did for the short artifact concept.
Figure 4.40: TCAV score Histograms for bckg (background) concept in Seizure classification on
LHB. The background concept is similarly distributed to random for all layers except for the first
layer, encoder. Otherwise, this concept is insignificant to the seizure classification.
Overall, we see that the results show some promise to this model. This TCAV investigation
does highlight that the model is on the right path and can be improved in the later layers.
The encoder layer seems to make sense of most of these concepts and most of the layers
carry the representation importance through. This showed us that the classifier is where
our problem lies and could do with a lot of improvement.
When it comes to the difference between these two experiments with different lengths
of concepts, we can see that there is an importance to the concept lengths and its inter­
pretability of the model. When we use the shorter concept we might have some disconnect
with the actual model as it is trained on 60 seconds and the lack of information in the short
concepts can have an effect on concepts which have the potential to be longer. However,
when investigating naturally shorter concepts it is important to recognize the limitation of
its significance in a longer context. As explored in the BENDR paper, the model is better
at reconstructing longer sequence lengths, which could be why the behavior of the short
concepts is not as meaningful. Their architecture supported flexible input lengths by de­
signing a positional encoder with a receptive field of 25 and stride of one, which came
with a trade­off as this means a little over 9 seconds of input.
Finally we would like to highlight the bimodal or unimodal distribution of most of the layers
as we also saw in the classification task of left and right in LHB. However, the distribution
for the encoder does not seem to exhibit this behavior for the random concepts. The
encoder shows an almost uniform distribution which is more in line with what we would
expect of a non­linear mapping from a layer to the final logit layer in a binary classification.
After this analysis we see that the encoder layer (6 sequential 1D convolutional blocks)
and the Encoding Augment layer (adds the positional embeddings to the BENDR repre­
sentations) are giving significance to the seizure concepts ”gped” and ”pled”. They show
that the technical artifact concept and the background concept are not significant in the
classification task. This indicates that the BENDR representations are in fact picking up
80
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:89==
on concepts that can be helpful in identifying seizure behavior and filtering out noise. The
conclusion is that the classification layers of the model, extended classifier and classifier
need to be redesigned as we also saw with the performance metrics of the model.
Machine learning for EEG
81
==PAGE:90==
5
Discussion
We asked if TCAV could be introduced to models based on BENDR, giving us an interpre­
tation of their structure and decision making process with the prospect of using them as
diagnosis support for abnormalities in EEGs, such as seizures. We will now summarize
the findings that were discovered in trying to answer this question.
Key Results
One of the key results of this paper were found through quantitative testing with concept
activation Vectors (TCAV) on a classification that utilizes pre­trained BENDR representa­
tions, referred to as Linear Head BENDR (LHB). The creation of human­friendly concepts
for EEG data was based on labeled datasets from the Temple University EEG Corpus.
The labeled datasets allowed us to create concepts based on annotations of expert de­
fined EEG events. We began with our proof of concept experiment of classifying between
two motor imagery tasks, subjects imagining making a fist with their left and right hand,
which resulted a balanced accuracy of 86.2%. The TCAV analysis of the concepts influ­
ence on the prediction showed that the target concepts themselves were well defined and
meaningful concepts in all layers. The concept left showed TCAV scores between 0.90
and 1.00 through all bottlenecks. We saw that the concept right was significant with a low
TCAV score between 0.00 and 0.03 as this concept should not have a positive influence
on the classification of target left. TCAV also identified artifacts as mostly insignificant to
the task of classifying motor imagery, with TCAV scores around 0.50, except for concept
eye movement which showed significant low TCAV scores around 0.10 in the encoder,
summarizer and classifier layers. This experiment gave us a sanity check of using TCAV
on LHB as we used the targets themselves as concepts.
Utilizing the concepts defined from annotated events also allowed us to explore epilep­
tic events when looking at the seizure classification task on LHB where 5.7% of the data
was seizures and the rest was a background class. This classification task had a aver­
age balanced accuracy across all patients of 72.9% and only a positive predictive value
of seizures of 11.4%. However, when evaluated only on seizures patients the positive
predictive value was 24.1%. As the model’s performance was not on par with state­of­
the­art models, we were able to use TCAV to highlight its biases and identify where in the
model this issue mainly lied. We tried two different approaches for evaluating concepts.
The first was using short length concepts of different lengths, that should be more repre­
sentative of the concept. The other approach used a standardized length of 60 seconds
for all concepts, as the model was trained on 60 second inputs. We saw that the only
epileptic concept that was consistently significant in the short concept experiment was
spike and/or slow wave (spsw) with TCAV scores ranging widely between 0.02 and 0.80.
This inconsistent behavior between layers points to issues in the model, as well as the
method of investigating concepts of different lengths from the input to the model. We saw
the most consistency in concepts in the 60 second experiment, where the concepts gen­
eralized periodic epileptic discharges (gped) and periodic lateralized epileptic discharges
(pled). They had significant TCAV score between 0.72 and 1.00. We also saw that arti­
facts showed a high significant TCAV score of 0.88 in the classifier layer in this experiment,
while no significance in any layers in the short experiment. This again highlights some of
the issues with the model architecture. The TCAV implementation revealed a significant
finding of bimodal and unimodal behavior in the TCAV scores across the model layers.
82
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:91==
This pattern was most noticeable in the last layers but was also present to some extent
in earlier layers.
Evaluating the performance of the summarized BENDR representations showed limita­
tions in using them directly to extract meaningful information, as evidenced by the results
of an anomaly detection task using a One Class SVM to distinguish epileptic EEGs from
normal EEGs.
Interpretation of findings
As our sanity check experiment showed, we are capable of utilizing TCAV as an inter­
pretability method for Linear Head BENDR. We saw that the method clearly showed the
target classes as important concepts in the classification task of left and right and the
artifacts as insignificant concepts. This gave us insights into the model and which layers
were most impactful on identifying the behaviors that were expected. We also saw the
importance of looking at concepts that show significantly meaningful impact on the oppo­
site class in a binary classification task. It is also important to note that when it comes to
training the linear classifier, which defines the CAVs, that the size of the training data can
have an impact, as is expected. The TCAV paper states that 10­30 examples should be
sufficient, and we saw in our experiment with 10 and 50 examples that the results were
more stable with 50 examples. However, this is not always an option with EEG datasets
as they do not have the same accessibility as image datasets, which were explored in the
TCAV paper.
The capabilities of TCAVs insights were furthermore solidified in a new downstream task
that we designed for seizure classification. Using predefined labeled epileptic concepts
and TCAV on seizure classification seems to be promising even with a smaller collection
of examples, in our case 26 examples. We also saw how using TCAV can highlight the
biases in our model, seen in the last classification layer. As our classifier was not per­
forming well, we saw that when we changed the input to the model towards the direction
of the opposite class it had a significant positive influence on the target class prediction
of seizure. This supports what we had already seen in the performance metrics but also
allows for pin­pointing in which layers the issue lies. As we saw, most of the epileptic
concepts had mostly positive directional derivatives in earlier layers showing significantly
high TCAV scores. We saw in the 60 second concept experiment that the encoder layer (6
sequential 1D convolutional blocks) and the Encoding Augment layer (adds the positional
embeddings to the BENDR representations) gave significance to the seizure concepts
gped and pled. They also showed that the technical artifact concept and the background
concept are not significant to the prediction of seizures. This indicates that the BENDR
representations are in fact picking up on concepts that can be helpful in identifying seizure
behavior and filtering out noise when trained for a specific downstream classification task.
The conclusion is that the classification layers of the model, extended classifier and clas­
sifier need to be redesigned. We recall that the extended classifier is a fully connected
layer with dropout regularization, a RELU activation function and normalizes the activa­
tions using batch normalization. The classifier layer is linear layer with softmax activation.
We tried adjusting these layers with more hidden layers but our experiments did not lead
to better performance. Looking at the UMAP of the 2048 dimensional latent space of the
extended classifier we saw that the space was not completely linearly separable. How­
ever, the classes trended in two distinct directions. This investigation also highlights that
the design of the classifiers could be improved.
As the concept definition was based on annotated datasets, this allowed us to create sets
of examples and defining certain time­frames containing the concept. This allowed for
Machine learning for EEG
83
==PAGE:92==
an investigation of the sensitivity to concept length on the concept activation vectors that
were created. We saw that applying TCAV to the model was sensitive to the length of the
predefined concepts. The BENDR representations are indifferent to sequence length in­
put due to the architecture of the positional embeddings. However, when exploring TCAV
we saw that keeping the pre­defined concepts of the same input length led to more stable
results for the epileptic concepts. This highlighted an issue with events that are by nature
of different lengths than the input to the model. This investigation shed light on the sen­
sitivity the BENDR representation have on input length. Another point worth discussing
when it comes to concept definition is how random concept should be designed. This
raises the question of what should be in a random dataset in the TCAV method. If it is
to create concepts which show different behavior to the defined concepts or truly random
behaviour. It is easier to assume that random images will vary a lot from the concept
but when it comes to EEG it is more likely we will stumble on the same behavior as the
concept, especially when access to data is limited. Our approach to create a random set
was to use unlabeled data from the Temple University artifact corpus, making sure that
our random examples did not contain concepts of investigation.
An important discovery from the implementation of TCAV on LHB was the bimodal distri­
bution of the TCAV scores. As this research led us to deep dive into the behavior of TCAV
we found that the assumption for the t­test of a normally distributed TCAV score does not
apply in all cases. We found that when the TCAV scores were distributed in this bimodal
way, the standard deviations of the directional derivatives was 0. That is, for each run the
directional derivatives of a mapping from the layer of investigation to the logit layer along
the defined CAV had the same value. The mean across runs did however vary, as the
CAV designed in each run will vary across different random sets. This implied that the
gradient w.r.t. to the target was constant. The limitation here is that we did not explicitly
test if the gradient was constant but made an assumption based on this behavior and
when looking at the gradient values during code runs. We saw that the TCAV scores for
each layer had a more bimodal distribution as the concepts traveled through the network.
We derived that that the layer mappings to the logit layer were becoming more and more
linear and therefore their gradient dominated by their first order derivatives, hence a con­
stant. If the CAV is well defined this means that we have to be vary about the interpretation
of the TCAV scores, with out looking at the angle between the gradients and the CAV, as
a TCAV score of 1 in this case simply could mean that the CAV is pointing slightly in the
direction of the target class.
Using only the summarized pre­trained BENDRs had it’s limitations in anomaly detection
of epileptic data. We saw that without a downstream task they did not provide us with
valuable information. When investigating the issues with this method, the nature of some
outliers being picked up by the OC­SVM were brought to light. For example, the outliers
that populated one region of the data were identified as the beginning of sessions and
other external factors. This showed that the pre­trained BENDRs did not filter out these
external abnormalities. However, this is something that a downstream task could poten­
tially identify as irrelevant and be removed as an attribute in the BENDR representations
as we would continue to train the feature encoder. The authors of BENDR decide to not
use any low or high pass filters during pre­training and in most downstream task which
our findings might indicate necessary.
Limitations and Future work
As the TCAV method proved very insightful for interpretability of Linear Head BENDR
classification we do still have the concern of the bimodal distribution of TCAV scores. In
a t­test the assumption is that the data is normally distributed, but in this case we have
84
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:93==
a bimodal distribution. An improvement of this would be to use a different statistical test
that does not assume normality. We saw that when dealing with linearity in the layers that
it would be more beneficial to look at a different version of the TCAV score. This could
be an approach that uses the magnitude of the sensitivities to distinguish between the
degree of the gradient and the CAV, as this would allow us to see not only if the concept
points in the same direction as the target gradient but to what extent.
As the research question states, we were to investigate whether we could utilize the
BENDR architecture to spot abnormal EEGs such as seizures. The classification task
between seizures and background is inherently difficult as seizures can present very dif­
ferently from both types of seizures as well as individuality in EEG recordings between
subjects and as the classification task is very unbalanced. The focus of the experiments
here was Linear Head BENDR, which was the model that performed best on the down­
stream tasks in the BENDR paper. An improvement to the investigation would be to look
the BENDR classifier to see if it would be able to perform better on the seizure data as it
utilizes the transformer encoder. Another feature of seizures is often identified by where
a seizure originates in the brain. This is crucial in identifying the different types of seizure
such as general (which originate from all regions of the brain) and focal (which originate
from a specific region of the brain). This is something that BENDR does not utilize as they
only focus on the temporal features of the EEGs. There are methods which are based
on CNNs and transformer which utilize the channels as features as well [18]. A final note
to this classification task is the definitions of the targets. As we use a standardized 60
second trial as our input, labeled as seizure if there is an annotation of a seizure with in
that time window. An improvement could be using the annotation times directly as the
trials.
When using the pre­trained compressed BENDR representations to extract meaningful
information from the EEG recordings we saw the limitations of those representations.
Even though the information learned during pre­training might be impactful for specific
downstream task, using the pre­trained BENDR representations directly does not seem
to be insightful. An improvement would be to use all of the BENDRs directly and not
reducing their dimensionality with a 1D adaptive average pooling layer.
Using labeled data from other datasets as a way of defining the concepts is intuitive and
easy to interpret. Other methods can be used to gather pre­defined concepts such as
EEG microstates, frequency concepts or anatomical behaviour. Microstates are stable
moments of EEG that occur in a specific time frame [60]. Frequency concepts that could
be used are for example looking at different frequency bands for measurements of brain
waves such as alpha waves [6]. Anatomical concepts could be pin­pointing different re­
gions in the brain as concepts such as frontal signals that come from specific channels.
As a final note, we would like to mention some of the hurdles we encountered on our
journey in writing this thesis. One of the main issues we encountered was the availability
of the data that we used for most of our investigation, as we were not able to access it
until in the final 6 weeks of this thesis. This was a very unusual for the Temple University
EEG corpus and it was the longest down time of their center going back 40+ years. We
also ended this process with one of our computers crashing days before the hand in which
was a great final hurdle.
Machine learning for EEG
85
==PAGE:94==
Conclusion
This thesis explores EEG models, using BERT­inspired Neural Data Representations
(BENDR), and their interpretability. One of the main findings highlights the capabilities
of using pre­trained BENDRs for both anomaly detection and downstream classification.
The anomaly detection task of epileptic patient data was performed on summarized BEN­
DRs which were pe­trained on 1.5Tb of data from the TUEG corpus. The aim was to
identify epileptic abnormalities in EEG recordings from epileptic patients, from a fit region
of normal data as a control, using a One Class SVM. This task did not perform well and
we found that the representations did not give insight to epileptic abnormalities. How­
ever, we found that the anomalies detected were from external factors and not related
to epileptic abnormalities. The BENDRs did however seem insightful when fine­tuned on
specific binary classification downstream tasks using Linear Head BENDR, which imple­
ments a summarization of the BENDR representations and simple classification layers
added. We experimented with classifying motor movement imagery data and seizure
data. The Linear Head BENDR model for the motor movement task resulted in a suf­
ficient representation. The seizure classification was based on an unbalanced dataset,
which resulted in accuracies which were not up to state of the art models. To introduce in­
terpretability to the models decisions, we explored testing with concept activation vectors
(TCAV). This method has been proven to perform well on image data but implementing
it for models with EEG data has not been explored to a large extent. We have devel­
oped a strategy for design of concepts to investigate in EEG recordings based on labeled
EEG datasets. Our approach was to create concepts based on labeled EEG events from
trained technicians. The concepts used in the investigation of the motor imagery task
were the target classes themselves as a sanity check and two artifacts. We found that
the targets themselves as concepts had significant TCAV scores and the artifacts were
mostly deemed insignificant. In the classification of seizures we defined epileptic event
concepts as our main concepts of investigation along with a few artifact concept. Overall
we saw that the TCAV investigation highlighted which layers could be improved for better
classification accuracy and that the BENDR representations are picking up on concepts
that can be helpful in identifying seizure behavior and filtering out artifacts when trained
for a specific downstream classification task. One of the main findings when using TCAV
for interpretability in our model was the bimodal and unimodal distributions of the TCAV
scores. This finding showed us some of the issues with the TCAV method on binary clas­
sifications where the target classes layer activations are well separated and their layer
mappings to the logit layer are becoming more linear. If the concepts are well defined, we
need to be critical with interpreting these TCAV scores and look at to which degree the
concepts are influencing models decision. To conclude we saw that the interpretability of
EEG models using concept activation vectors with labeled EEG event concepts allowed
us to get a deeper understanding of their decision making.
86
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
Mayo Clinic Staff. EEG (electroencephalogram). 2022. URL: https://www.mayoclinic.
org/tests-procedures/eeg/about/pac-20393875 (visited on 09/24/2022).
[2]
Amir Ghaiyoumi. Epilepsy. 2022. URL: https://www.who.int/news- room/fact-
sheets/detail/epilepsy.
[3]
Demetres Kostas, Stephane Aroca­Ouellette, and Frank Rudzicz. “BENDR: using
transformers and a contrastive self­supervised learning task to learn from massive
amounts of EEG data”. In: Frontiers in Human Neuroscience (2021), p. 253.
[4]
Been Kim et al. “Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with
concept activation vectors (tcav)”. In: International conference on machine learning.
PMLR. 2018, pp. 2668–2677.
[5]
Jeffrey W Britton et al. “Electroencephalography (EEG): an introductory text and
atlas of normal and abnormal findings in adults, children, and infants”. In: (2016).
[6]
Priyanka A Abhang, Bharti Gawali, and Suresh C Mehrotra. Introduction to EEG­
and speech­based emotion recognition. Academic Press, 2016, p. 21.
[7]
Jayant N Acharya and Vinita J Acharya. “Overview of EEG montages and principles
of localization”. In: Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology 36.5 (2019), pp. 325–329.
[8]
Mayo Clinic Staff. Epilepsy. 2021. URL: https : / / www . mayoclinic . org / diseases -
conditions/epilepsy/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20350098 (visited on 09/20/2022).
[9]
Soheyl Noachtar and Jan Rémi. “The role of EEG in epilepsy: a critical review”. In:
Epilepsy & Behavior 15.1 (2009), pp. 22–33.
[10]
Junjie Xu et al. “Anomaly detection on electroencephalography with self­supervised
learning”. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine
(BIBM). IEEE. 2020, pp. 363–368.
[11]
Giulia Fiscon et al. “Combining EEG signal processing with supervised methods
for Alzheimer’s patients classification”. In: BMC medical informatics and decision
making 18.1 (2018), pp. 1–10.
[12]
U Rajendra Acharya et al. “Deep convolutional neural network for the automated
detection and diagnosis of seizure using EEG signals”. In: Computers in biology
and medicine 100 (2018), pp. 270–278.
[13]
Ihsan Ullah, Muhammad Hussain, Hatim Aboalsamh, et al. “An automated system
for epilepsy detection using EEG brain signals based on deep learning approach”.
In: Expert Systems with Applications 107 (2018), pp. 61–71.
[14]
Longlong Jing and Yingli Tian. “Self­supervised visual feature learning with deep
neural networks: A survey”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence 43.11 (2020), pp. 4037–4058.
[15]
Hubert Banville et al. “Self­supervised representation learning from electroencephalog­
raphy signals”. In: 2019 IEEE 29th International Workshop on Machine Learning for
Signal Processing (MLSP). IEEE. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[16]
Yonghao Song et al. “Transformer­based spatial­temporal feature learning for eeg
decoding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11170 (2021).
[17]
Yunzhe Tao et al. “Gated transformer for decoding human brain eeg signals”. In:
2021 43rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine &
Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE. 2021, pp. 125–130.
[18]
Jin Xie et al. “A Transformer­Based Approach Combining Deep Learning Network
and Spatial­Temporal Information for Raw EEG Classification”. In: IEEE Transac­
tions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 30 (2022), pp. 2126–2136.
Machine learning for EEG
87
==PAGE:96==
[19]
Nikunj Saunshi et al. “Understanding contrastive learning requires incorporating in­
ductive biases”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.14037 (2022).
[20]
Ting Chen et al. “A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representa­
tions”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2020, pp. 1597–
1607.
[21]
Muhammad Aurangzeb Ahmad, Carly Eckert, and Ankur Teredesai. “Interpretable
machine learning in healthcare”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 ACM international
conference on bioinformatics, computational biology, and health informatics. 2018,
pp. 559–560.
[22]
Feng­Lei Fan et al. “On interpretability of artificial neural networks: A survey”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Radiation and Plasma Medical Sciences 5.6 (2021), pp. 741–
760.
[23]
Leon Kopitar et al. “Local vs. global interpretability of machine learning models in
type 2 diabetes mellitus screening”. In: Artificial intelligence in medicine: Knowledge
representation and transparent and explainable systems. Springer, 2019, pp. 108–
119.
[24]
Tolga Bolukbasi et al. “An interpretability illusion for bert”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07143
(2021).
[25]
Jacob Devlin et al. “Bert: Pre­training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[26]
Tonio Ball. “Deep Learning for Brain Signals: Performance and Interpretability”. In:
Biomed. Eng 66.s1 (2021), S343–S348.
[27]
Albert Vilamala, Kristoffer H Madsen, and Lars K Hansen. “Deep convolutional neu­
ral networks for interpretable analysis of EEG sleep stage scoring”. In: 2017 IEEE
27th international workshop on machine learning for signal processing (MLSP).
IEEE. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[28]
Alexei Baevski et al. “wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self­supervised learning of
speech representations”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
33 (2020), pp. 12449–12460.
[29]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is all you need”. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems 30 (2017).
[30]
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. “Gaussian error linear units (gelus)”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.08415 (2016).
[31]
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. “Categorical reparameterization with gumbel­
softmax”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01144 (2016).
[32]
Abdelrahman Mohamed, Dmytro Okhonko, and Luke Zettlemoyer. “Transformers
with convolutional context for asr”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.11660 (2019).
[33]
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 (2018).
[34]
Iyad Obeid and Joseph Picone. “The temple university hospital EEG data corpus”.
In: Frontiers in neuroscience 10 (2016), p. 196.
[35]
Ary L Goldberger et al. “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: components
of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals”. In: circulation 101.23
(2000), e215–e220.
[36]
Gerwin Schalk et al. “BCI2000: a general­purpose brain­computer interface (BCI)
system”. In: IEEE Transactions on biomedical engineering 51.6 (2004), pp. 1034–
1043.
[37]
Michael Tangermann et al. “Review of the BCI competition IV”. In: Frontiers in neu­
roscience (2012), p. 55.
88
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:97==
[38]
Perrin Margaux et al. “Objective and subjective evaluation of online error correction
during P300­based spelling”. In: Advances in Human­Computer Interaction 2012
(2012).
[39]
Luca Citi, Riccardo Poli, and Caterina Cinel. “Documenting, modelling and exploit­
ing P300 amplitude changes due to variable target delays in Donchin’s speller”. In:
Journal of Neural Engineering 7.5 (2010), p. 056006.
[40]
Bob Kemp et al. “Analysis of a sleep­dependent neuronal feedback loop: the slow­
wave microcontinuity of the EEG”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
47.9 (2000), pp. 1185–1194.
[41]
Sean Ferrell et al. “The temple university hospital eeg corpus: Electrode location
and channel labels”. In: Institute for Signal and Information Processing Report 1.1
(2020).
[42]
Valer Jurcak, Daisuke Tsuzuki, and Ippeita Dan. “10/20, 10/10, and 10/5 systems
revisited: their validity as relative head­surface­based positioning systems”. In: Neu­
roimage 34.4 (2007), pp. 1600–1611.
[43]
Ramesh Srinivasan, Don M Tucker, and Michael Murias. “Estimating the spatial
Nyquist of the human EEG”. In: Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Com­
puters 30.1 (1998), pp. 8–19.
[44]
Xiao Shi Huang et al. “Improving transformer optimization through better initializa­
tion”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2020, pp. 4475–
4483.
[45]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[46]
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. “Visualizing data using t­SNE.” In:
Journal of machine learning research 9.11 (2008).
[47]
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. “Umap: Uniform manifold approx­
imation and projection for dimension reduction”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426
(2018).
[48]
Fabian Pedregosa et al. “Scikit­learn: Machine learning in Python”. In: Journal of
machine learning research 12.Oct (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[49]
K. Been. Interpretability Beyond Feature Attribution: Quantitative Testing with Con­
cept Activation Vectors (TCAV). https://github.com/tensorflow/tcav. 2021.
[50]
DF Wulsin et al. “Modeling electroencephalography waveforms with semi­supervised
deep belief nets: fast classification and anomaly measurement”. In: Journal of neu­
ral engineering 8.3 (2011), p. 036015.
[51]
Domenic Ochal et al. “The temple university hospital eeg corpus: Annotation guide­
lines”. In: Institute for Signal and Information Processing Report 1.1 (2020).
[52]
Bernhard Schölkopf et al. “Estimating the support of a high­dimensional distribu­
tion”. In: Neural computation 13.7 (2001), pp. 1443–1471.
[53]
Demetres Kostas and Frank Rudzicz. “DN3: An open­source Python library for
large­scale raw neurophysiology data assimilation for more flexible and standard­
ized deep learning”. In: bioRxiv (2020).
[54]
lcylmhlcy. TCAV implementation, based on Pytorch1.8 and TF2.3. https://github.
com/lcylmhlcy/TCAV_pytorch. 2021.
[55]
Shah T Sarmast, Abba Musa Abdullahi, and Nusrat Jahan. “Current classification of
seizures and epilepsies: scope, limitations and recommendations for future action”.
In: Cureus 12.9 (2020).
[56]
WandB Baysian hyperparameter optimization. https : / / wandb . ai / site / articles /
bayesian-hyperparameter-optimization-a-primer. Accessed: 2022­12­16.
Machine learning for EEG
89
==PAGE:98==
[57]
Lars Kai Hansen. private communication. Jan. 20, 2023. URL: https : / / scholar .
google.com/citations?user=gQVuJh8AAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao.
[58]
Kristoffer Haugaard Madsen. private communication. Jan. 20, 2023. URL: https:
//scholar.google.dk/citations?hl=en&user=2SFcdW0AAAAJ.
[59]
Tobias Andersen. private communication. Jan. 20, 2023. URL: https : / / scholar .
google.dk/citations?hl=en&user=XvMDbHkAAAAJ.
[60]
Christoph M Michel and Thomas Koenig. “EEG microstates as a tool for studying
the temporal dynamics of whole­brain neuronal networks: a review”. In: Neuroimage
180 (2018), pp. 577–593.
90
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:99==
List of Figures
1.1
Example of normal vs epileptic waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Transformer illustration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Multi­Head Self­attention illustration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3
BERT illustration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4
wav2vec 2.0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.5
10­20 Electrode placement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.6
BENDR pre­training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.7
Linear Head BENDR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.8
Balanced accuracy plots for the training and validation trials for the first fold,
with 7 epochs.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.9
t­SNE for train set in fold 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.10 UMAP for train set in fold 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.11 t­SNE for validation set in fold 3 ­ no projection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.12 UMAP for validation set in fold 3 projected on the UMAP for the train set . . 26
2.13 t­SNE for all five test CV folds ­ all patients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
2.14 TCAV illustration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
2.15 Been Kims TCAV Zebra results using inceptionv3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.16 Reproduction of TCAV Zebra results using inceptionv3 . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.17 Concepts SPSW, GPED, PLED, BCKG
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
2.18 Support Vector Machine Visualized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
2.19 One Class Support Vector Machine Visualized
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.1
TCAV implementation on BENDR Visualized
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.2
One­class SVM anomaly detection based on BENDR representation . . . . 42
4.1
MI classification on LHB TCAV results 10 examples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.2
MI classification on LHB TCAV results 50 examples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.3
Proof of concept CAV linear classifier accuracy 10 examples
. . . . . . . . 50
4.4
Proof of concept CAV linear classifier accuracy 50 examples
. . . . . . . . 50
4.5
Proof of concept CAV linear classifier accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.6
Proof of concept TCAV Histograms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.7
Proof of concept Detailed Histograms for left MI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.8
Proof of concept Detailed Histograms for right MI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.9
Proof of concept Detailed Histograms for eye movement . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.10 Proof of concept Detailed Histograms for muscle movement . . . . . . . . . 55
4.11 Histograms for BENDR representation of Normal and Epileptic EEGs
. . . 58
4.12 Fraction of outliers for ν = 0.01 for both epileptic representations and nor­
mal representations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
4.13 Histogram of decision function for one class SVM with ν = 0.01 and γ = 0.02. 60
4.14 UMAP visualization for one class SVM with ν = 0.01 and γ = 0.02 for
normal and epileptic data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
4.15 UMAP visualization for epileptic data labeled by beginning of session. . . . 61
4.16 UMAP visualization for epileptic data labeled by patient id. . . . . . . . . . . 62
4.17 UMAP visualization for epileptic data labeled by patient id, outliers only. . . 63
4.18 Raw EEG recordings of two different patients from outlier tail in BENDR
representations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Machine learning for EEG
91
==PAGE:100==
4.19 Performance metric plots for training and validation sets for seizure classi­
fication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
4.20 Mean Positive predictive rate and BAC for the 20 folds . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
4.21 Balanced Accuracy for the 20 folds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
4.22 Confusion matrix across CV folds for LHB on the binary classification of
seizure and background in the TUSZ dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
4.23 UMAP for train data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
4.24 Validation data projected on the UMAP fitted on the train data . . . . . . . . 68
4.25 TCAV results of short concepts on seizure classification . . . . . . . . . . . 69
4.26 Mean accuracy of linear classifier that determines CAV for Seizure classi­
fication on LHB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
4.27 TCAV score Histograms for spsw concept in Seizure classification on LHB . 72
4.28 TCAV score Histograms for periodic lateralized epileptic discharge pled
concept in Seizure classification on LHB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
4.29 TCAV score Histograms for gped concept in Seizure classification on LHB . 73
4.30 TCAV score Histograms for artifact concept in Seizure classification on LHB 73
4.31 TCAV score Histograms for background concept in Seizure classification
on LHB
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
4.32 TCAV score Histograms for eye movement concepts in Seizure classifica­
tion on LHB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
4.33 TCAV score Histograms for muscle movement concepts in Seizure classi­
fication on LHB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
4.34 TCAV results of 60s concepts on seizure classification . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
4.35 CAV linear classifier 60 second examples for Seizure classification on LHB
78
4.36 TCAV score Histograms for spsw concept in Seizure classification on LHB . 79
4.37 TCAV score Histograms for gped concept in Seizure classification on LHB . 79
4.38 TCAV score Histograms for pled concept in Seizure classification on LHB . 79
4.39 TCAV score Histograms for artf concept in Seizure classification on LHB . . 80
4.40 TCAV score Histograms for bckg concept in Seizure classification on LHB . 80
92
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:101==
List of Tables
1.1
Characteristics of five different frequency bands for measurements of brain
waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Data used for BENDR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.2
Replication of results from BENDR paper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.3
Annotated events for concept definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.1
Data for experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.2
TUEV Concepts for experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.3
TUEP data information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.4
TUEV Concepts for experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.5
Basic statistics for the train set in the TUH EEG Seizure Corpus (TUEZ) . . 38
3.6
Bottlenecks for Linear Head BENDR for 6 second inputs . . . . . . . . . . . 41
3.7
Proof of concept: experiment setup for TCAV on LHB for MI dataset . . . . 41
3.8
Seizure types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
3.9
Parameters for hyperparameter tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
3.10 Seizure classification data setup for TCAV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
3.11 Bottlenecks output dimension for Linear Head BENDR for 60 second inputs 47
4.1
TCAV score results for proof of concept experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.2
One class SVM results with higher outlier fraction for epileptic representations 59
4.3
Parameters chosen for hyperparameter tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
4.4
TCAV score results form Seizure classification on BENDR on short concepts 70
4.5
TCAV score results from Seizure classification on LHB on 60s concepts . . 76
Machine learning for EEG
93
==PAGE:102==
Acronyms
BCI Brain­computer­interface. 18
BENDR BERT inspired Neural Data Representations. 1
BERT Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Transformers. 13
CNN Convolutional neural networks. 4
CPC Contrastive predictive coding. 17
DL Deep learning. 1
DNN Deep neural networks. 17
EEG Electroencephalogram. 1
GELU Gaussian Error Linear Unit. 15
GPED Generalized periodic epileptiform discharges. 32
LHB Linear Head BENDR. 48
LM Language modelling. 13
MI Motor imagery. 18
ML Machine Learning. 5
NLP Natural language processing. 1
OC­SVM One Class Support Vector Machine. 8, 33
PE Positional Embedding. 5
PLED Periodic lateralized epileptiform discharge. 32
SPSW Spike and/or short wave. 32
SSL Self­supervised learning. 3
TCAV Testing with Concept Activation Vectors. 1
TSNE t­distributed stochastic neighbor embedding. 26
TUEG Temple University EEG Corpus. 19
UMAP Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction. 26
94
Machine learning for EEG
==PAGE:103==
Machine learning for EEG
95
==PAGE:104==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
