==PAGE:1==
easyG:
A
Mobile
Application
for
Crowd­
sourced Electrocardiography Annotation
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Bastian Højbjerre
Martin Sander
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Health Technology,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Bastian Højbjerre ­ s202788
Signature
Date
Martin Sander ­ s202782
Signature
Date
ii
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
04/02/2023
04/02/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master thesis presents easyG, a mobile application for crowdsourced ECG annota­
tion that uses game design elements to increase motivation. The thesis reviews the state
of the art in ECG annotation, investigates the feasibility of using crowdsourcing for ECG
annotation, and examines the factors that motivate people to participate in crowdsourc­
ing. The thesis employs user­centered design methods to design the mobile application,
and a small study is conducted to assess the usability and ease of use of the system. The
results of the study show that the test participants scored the system high in usability,
with a Simple Usability Scale score (SUS) of 82. Furthermore, the results of the Effort
Expectancy questionnaire (EE) showed that users scored the system highly in learnabil­
ity and ease of use, while some negative feedback was received regarding the feeling
of skillfulness in the system. Finally, the thesis includes debrief interviews with the study
participants to gather qualitative data on the experience of using easyG. This showed that
different game design elements motivated different users. However, it was also empha­
sized that for game design elements to have a positive effect on motivation and to prevent
demotivation, it is crucial to ensure that all other aspects of the system work well, such as
bug­free functionality and data quality.
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First of all, we would like to thank our supervisor Jakob E. Bardram for the thesis idea
and for the guidance throughout the whole process. His expertise and insights have been
invaluable in making this thesis.
Additionally, we would like to thank Maria Helena Dominguez Vall­Lamora, for teaching
us about ECG and the annotation hereof, giving us the possibility to visit Frederiksberg
Hospital, connecting us with individuals in the cardiology department, and assisting with
design choices for easyG.
Also, we would like to thank Kristian and Andreas from Cortrium for letting us see how
they do ECG annotation in their company, and discussing ECG annotation in general.
Finally, we would like to thank the participants in the study.
iv
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
ECG
electrocardiography
UCD
user­centered design
HCI
human computer interaction
UI
user interface
ERD
entity relationship diagram
WFDB
Waveform Database Software Package
XP
experience points
SUS
Simple Usability Scale
EE
Effort Expectancy
PSSUQ Post­Study System Usability Questionnaire
UTAUT Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Question and Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background and Related Work
3
2.1
ECG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
ECG Annotation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
ECG Annotation Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Motivation Theory and Crowdsourcing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Gamification in Crowdsourcing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Design Process
9
3.1
User­Centered Design Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Design Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Personas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4
Design and Design evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Implementation
15
4.1
Conceptual Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
System Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Data and Data Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Study
31
5.1
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Recruitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Discussion
35
6.1
Main Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2
Alternative Annotation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.3
Motivational Factors in easyG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7
Conclusion
39
Bibliography
41
A Appendix
47
A.1 Interview with Cardiologist: Notes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.2 Interview with Danish Medical Equipment Manufacturer: Notes . . . . . . . 47
A.3 Prototype Test 1: Wireframes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
A.4 Prototype Test 2: Screenshots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.5 Prototype Test 2: Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
vi
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:9==
A.6 Prototype Test 2: Interview Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A.7 easyG ­ Supplementary Screenshots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.8 System Usability Scale Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.9 Effort Expectancy Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.10 Debriefing Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.11 Distribution of Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The invention of the string galvanometer by Dutch physiologist Willem Einthoven in 1901
marked the beginning of electrocardiography (ECG) as a crucial tool for identifying heart
conditions such as arrhythmia, enlargement of the heart, and heart inflammation [1]. Since
then, the ECG technique has been the primary choice for the assessment of the heart as
it is cost­effective, easy to implement, and noninvasive [2].
Currently, the clinically standard practice is manual analysis of the ECG signals [2], but
manual analysis of ECG data is a time­consuming task, which requires both a lot of man­
power and expert knowledge [3] [4]. To overcome the issues with time, repeatability and
costs, supervised learning methods had been widely used for the recognition and classi­
fication of ECG [5] [6]. However, in order to use such applications of supervised learning,
one has to establish ground truths for the data.
It is common to use the method of expert labeling which is gathering experienced anno­
tators to evaluate the data to acquire the required labels. This method is known to be the
current gold standard in medical practice [6]. However, there are limiting factors to the
use of expert labeling. These include challenges in finding many qualified annotators and
the costly and time­consuming process of annotating records. One way to solve this is
to crowdsource the ECG annotation as seen in several studies [6] [7] [8]. The next chal­
lenge, in crowdsourcing solutions, is to find participants and maintain their motivation [9].
Participants in crowdsourcing can be motivated by various factors, including financial re­
wards, altruism, social recognition and personal growth [10] [11]. An alternate way of
increasing motivation among users, which has been increasingly studied as a potential
way to engage and motivate crowds in various tasks, is gamification [12] [9] [13], which
is the integration of game elements into non­game contexts.
This thesis presents a solution for crowdsourced ECG annotation that utilizes game design
elements to engage and motivate its users. The solution will be deployed in the form of a
mobile application, designed to reach a large group of people that should have the system
ready at hand when looking to kill time with short sessions.
1.1
Research Question and Goals
What is the design of a mobile application for crowdsourced ECG an­
notation?
Sub questions:
1. What is the state­of­the­art in ECG annotation?
2. Is it a feasible solution to crowdsource the annotation of ECG?
3. What is the UX design of an application that motivates users to do ECG annotations?
In order to answer these questions, this master thesis will accomplish the following goals.
Goals:
• Review the state of the art within ECG annotation
• Investigate the feasibility of using crowdsourcing for ECG annotation by reviewing
relevant literature and interviewing individuals with knowledge of ECG annotation.
• Examine the factors that motivate people to participate in crowdsourcing
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
1
==PAGE:12==
• Employ user­centered design methods for the design and usability evaluation of a
mobile application.
• Implementation of a mobile application to do crowdsourced ECG annotation
• Run a small study for the feasibility of the system
1.2
Thesis Overview
This section provides an overview of the chapters of this thesis.
Chapter 2: Background and Related Work ­ This chapter will present the theory of ECG
and the various annotation methods that are used. Next, a run­through of existing
ECG annotation tools developed in previous research will be given. Key concepts
within motivation theory, such as intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation and a­
motivation will be explained and how they relate to crowdsourcing. The section will
also examine the effects of gamification in crowdsourced ECG annotation. Lastly,
a section about gamification in crowdsourcing will be presented.
Chapter 3: Design Process ­ This chapter will present the user­centered design method
used to guide the development of the mobile application. The method includes cre­
ating personas of target users, conducting background research on ECG theory,
interviewing an experienced cardiologist, and conducting two prototype tests with
relevant users at various development stages to ensure user preferences are con­
sidered.
Chapter 4: Implementation ­ This chapter aims to provide an understanding of the im­
plementation of the mobile application. It presents the conceptual design from the
design process and describes the application’s interface. Additionally, the chapter
includes the system design in the form of deployment, class and entity relationship
diagrams, and a review of the data management and structure.
Chapter 5: ­ Study ­ This chapter describes the study that will be conducted after finish­
ing the development of the mobile application. It will include details on recruitment,
test setup, and questionnaires to evaluate the developed application. Lastly, the
results from the study will be presented.
Chapter 6: Discussion ­ In this chapter, several points that arose during the project will
be discussed, including the main findings from the study, other annotation methods,
the motivational aspects of the system, and the limitations of the thesis.
Chapter 7: Conclusion ­ A conclusion of the project will be built based on the findings.
Furthermore, additions and improvements to the current solution will be presented
as feasible future work.
2
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:13==
2
Background and Related Work
In this section, we will cover ECG, its annotation methods and tools. We will also review
studies about ECG annotation using crowdsourcing. Furthermore, we will examine the
theory of motivation and how this can be used in crowdsourcing. Finally, we will go into
gamification in crowdsourcing.
2.1
ECG
The ECG is a non­invasive technique used to detect cardiovascular disease [14]. It is
a graphic record of voltage changes transmitted to the body surface by electrical events
in the heart muscle [1]. The ECG is composed of several waveforms, including the P­
wave, QRS complex, and T­wave [15] [1]. The P wave represents depolarization of the
atrial myocardium, the QRS complex represents depolarization of the ventricles, and the
T wave represents repolarization of the ventricular myocardium [14]. Figure 2.1 shows an
example of an ECG waveform with P, Q, R, S, and T characteristics and the PQ interval,
ST interval and QRS complex.
Figure 2.1: Example of an electrocardiogram signal ­ from Lyakhov et. al. [14]
2.2
ECG Annotation
ECG Annotations are labels that describe the characteristics of an ECG. ECG can be
annotated in different ways. The two main arrhythmia categories beat­level arrhythmia
for a single heartbeat being irregular and rhythm­level arrhythmia for a series of heart­
beats being abnormal [16]. Hence, annotation of ECG signals can be done on a beat­
level and rhythm­level [16] [17]. However, fiducial points can also be annotated as seen
in the arrhythmia database ”DeepQ” by Wu et al. [16]. Beat­level annotation involves
assigning an arrhythmia class to a single heartbeat.
Atrial premature beat, Ventricu­
lar fusion beat, Normal beat and ventricular premature beat are examples of beat­level
annotations [17]. Rhythm­level annotations involve categorizing an ECG sequence into
classes [18]. Normal sinus rhythm, atrial fibrillation and noise are examples of rhythm­
level annotations [19] [20]. Fiducial point annotation involves identifying key markers in a
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
3
==PAGE:14==
heartbeat. These key markers are the onset, the peak, and the offset of the P­wave, the
QRS complex, and the T­wave [15]. This annotation method is different from the other two
as it does not annotate arrhythmia but marks the position of the different fiducial points.
In addition to these three main categories, ECG annotation is also supported by data
analysis tools such as histograms, time series analysis and other statistical methods which
can be used to identify patterns in the ECG data that may not be apparent through visual
inspection alone [21] [22].
Other ways of dividing the categories can also be found, for example in PhysioNet1, a
repository for medical research data that is managed by The MIT Laboratory for Com­
putational Physiology. Here, they divide the annotations into two categories: beat anno­
tations and non­beat annotations [23]. The beat annotations are beat­level annotations
and non­beat annotations are everything else such as start/end of ventricular flutter/fib­
rillation, waveform onset/offset, peak of waves, change in signal quality and comments.
These annotations can be placed at any time step of the ECG signals.
2.3
ECG Annotation Tools
Hermes (TM)
In the paper ”A web­based tool for visualization and collaborative annotation of phys­
iological databases” Oefinger et. al presents Hermes (TM)2, a web­based service for
point­and­click ECG annotation. The service is connected to all ECG databases on Phys­
ioNet. The service can be accessed through a web browser and enables the user to view
waveforms and annotate points and intervals. The user also has the option to extract time
series and create histograms for data such as heart rate, QT interval, and ST­segment
deviation [24]. We were not able to access Hermes (TM), so it was not tested in this
thesis.
Figure 2.2: Interface of Hermes (TM) (Oefinger et al. [24])
1PhysioNet ­ https://physionet.org/ [Accessed: 1/2/2023]
2Hermes
(TM)
­
https://archive.physionet.org/physiotools/hermes/applet/hermes.html
[Accessed:
01/02/2023]
4
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:15==
LightWAVE
LightWAVE3 is an open­source web­based software developed as part of PhysioNet for
viewing and annotating ECGs and other physiologic waveforms [25]. With LightWAVE
you can view data from any database on PhysioNet and annotate the ECG signals with
beat annotations and non­beat annotations.
Figure 2.3: Interface of LightWAVE
WaveformECG
WaveformECG4 is a web­based ECG data management and analysis tool. Individual or
groups of digital ECG waveforms can be selected through the file chooser on the left and
viewed as paper chart recordings. Available algorithms5 can be applied to the ECG for
analysis through the ”Analyze” button in the menu. For example, annotations can be done
with the use of sqrs/sqrs2csv which detects the onset and offset times of the QRS complex
in single leads, and features of interest can also be annotated at points or time intervals
manually. Annotations are stored together with waveforms [26]. WaveformECG could not
be accessed through the link provided and was therefore not tested in this thesis.
Figure 2.4: Multilead Visualization Interface of WaveformECG (Winslow et al. [26])
LabelECG
LabelECG is a web­based tool for ECG viewing and annotating [27]. It is built upon the
LightWave system, to visualize the ECG data and adds a user management system and
3LightWAVE ­ https://physionet.org/lightwave/ [Accessed: 01/02/2023]
4WaveformECG ­ https://waveform.cvrgrid.org/ [Accessed: 01/02/2023]
5Available
Algorithms
­
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5476937/table/T1/?report=
objectonly [Accessed: 03/02/2023]
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
5
==PAGE:16==
an annotation management system on top of that. The user management system sup­
ports user registration and user information management. The annotation management
system supports uploading and storing ECG data and their corresponding parameters,
automatic diagnoses and user annotations. Users of LabelECG are able to upload, visu­
alize, annotate and revise ECG records with the web browser on computers, tablets or
cell phones. LabelECG supports functions such as zooming and panning and the ability
to revise all personal annotations. Furthermore, users can label annotations as either
”confirmed” or ”unsure”. LabelECG does not have a publicly available link to download
the software, so it was not tested in this thesis.
Figure 2.5: The functions of LabelECG. (A) Register and login; (B) Select a dataset to
ECG annotating; (C) Visualize and annotate diagnoses; (D) Personal accounts. (Ding et
al. [27])
ECG Annotation Using Crowdsourcing
In the paper ”Crowd­Sourced Annotation of ECG Signals Using Contextual Information” [6],
Zhu et al. create a framework to do ECG annotation in a crowdsourced manner for the
estimation of the QT interval. The crowdsourcing framework is originally developed in the
works of Raykar et al.’s ”Learning From Crowds” [28]. The framework uses multiple anno­
tators to do labeling while combining it with a supervised machine learning model to learn
the annotator’s accuracy and assign a higher weight to the best annotators. Zhu et al. use
this framework in their paper ”CrowdLabel: A Crowdsourcing Platform for Electrophysi­
ology” [7], where they develop a web­based system for crowdsourcing ECG annotation
from multiple expert and/or non­expert annotators. With CrowdLabel the annotators are
able to annotate the QT intervals of the ECG signal and the weight of the annotations is
then based on the accuracy of the user.
In the paper ”Non­invasive foetal ECG signal quality assessment by experts and non­
experts” [29], Weiss et al. test the use of non­experts for annotation of ECG with a mo­
bile application. They investigate factors such as annotation methods and display time,
where they found swiping to be the superior annotation method, and display time where
they found sequences longer than one second to result in better evaluations. In general,
their findings support the method of crowdsourcing to non­experts, because non­experts
6
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:17==
selected the correct or adjacent category most of the time. However, as expected experts
performed better and showed more reliable ratings than non­experts.
In the paper ”Rethinking Crowdsourcing Annotation: Partial Annotation with Salient Labels
for Multi­Label Image Classification” [8], Rad et al. investigate whether they can improve
the data quality of crowdsourced image labeling. They ask the annotators to partially
annotate multi­label images with salient labels. With this, they hypothesize that there
will be fewer annotation errors and annotators will spend less time on uncertain labels.
Their findings show that a multi­label image classifier, when trained on images with salient
annotations, performs better than models trained on fully annotated images, given the
same annotation budget.
2.4
Motivation Theory and Crowdsourcing
In the 2012 paper, ”Users’ Motivation to Participate in Online Crowdsourcing Platforms” [10],
M. Hossain classifies motivation into two main groups: extrinsic and intrinsic. Intrinsic
motivation refers to the task itself. People do something because of the task and do not
expect anything else in return, for example, interest or enjoyment. Extrinsic motivation
refers to the factors that bring something in return other than the task itself. For example
money, career advancement or recognition. Extrinsic motivation can be further classified
into three groups: (1) financial, (2) social, and (3) organizational while intrinsic motivation
cannot be classified further as the intrinsic motivation originates from a particular task
itself.
Another paper that looks at motivational aspects of crowdsourcing is the paper ”How to get
and keep citizens involved in mobile crowd sensing for water management? A review of
key success factors and motivational aspects” [30]. In this, Rutten et al. research the mo­
tivational aspects involved when crowdsourcing water monitoring to citizens. More specif­
ically, they define different phases and their success factors in a citizen science project:
project formulation phase, launch phase and during project execution. Furthermore, they
define motivations according to self­determination theory. Similarly to Hossain [10], they
define intrinsic motivation as ”interest in the topic and pastime” and extrinsic motivation
includes ”social contacts, reputation, learning, and payment”. Lastly, they define the term
”a­motivation”, which is factors that make citizens not want to participate in crowdsourcing
projects, such as data not being used, lack of confidence in the use of the data or lack of
resources.
In the 2018 paper ”Trait motivations of crowdsourcing and task choice: A distal­proximal
perspective” [11], Pee et al. try to extend the understanding of the primary motivators
further than the intrinsic­extrinsic perspective. They do this by distinguishing among par­
ticipation in unstructured tasks, high­commitment tasks, and interdependent tasks. The
findings of the study showed that those motivated to develop competence tend to choose
high­commitment tasks that require more effort and offer more opportunities for improve­
ment, rather than focusing on task structure or interdependence. On the other hand,
those motivated to foster social affiliation tend to focus on highly interdependent tasks
that require coordination and collaboration with others. Finally, those motivated by pay­
ment tend to focus on demonstrating competence relative to others and are more likely
to choose structured tasks with clear, comparable outputs.
2.5
Gamification in Crowdsourcing
Gamification is the integration of game design elements into non­game contexts. Since
an engaged amount of participants is crucial to the success of crowdsourcing, the moti­
vation of the users is critical. One of the most popular developments in recent years to
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
7
==PAGE:18==
increase motivation in crowdsourcing is gamification [13]. In a study, Morschheuser et
al. review 28 papers that have investigated the use of gamification in crowdsourcing and
analyze how different game design elements can increase motivation. The authors found
that most of the studies that directly compared gamified and non­gamified approaches re­
ported several positive effects, such as an increase in engagement, quality of the output
and reduction in cheating compared to traditional paid crowdsourcing. They found that
points/scores are used in nearly all gamification approaches, leaderboards/rankings can
be a very effective way to motivate certain crowdsourcing users, and public­level systems
(allowing comparison among users) are slightly more effective than personal ones in the
case of level systems.
In the 2020 paper, ”Gamification for Mobile Crowdsourcing Applications: An Example
from Flood Protection” [9], Todtenhausen et al. investigate motivators in crowdsourcing
and identifies which motivators that are effective in mobile crowdsourcing specifically.
They investigate game elements and arrange each of them into sub­categories of extrin­
sic motivation ranging from external to internal. The game design elements investigated
are labeled with different motivators, for example, in­game points are a motivator for users
seeking direct feedback and reputation, whereas the implementation of virtual gifts is a
motivator for users that seek reputation and community impact involvement. After cate­
gorizing the motivators they investigate a specific use case of flood protection where they
are dependent on volunteers to report water levels and precipitation. They identify project­
specific motivational barriers and develop an application to test the motivational impact
of points, badges, teams, progress bars and levels to overcome these barriers. Their
findings showed that user surveys are necessary to determine the motivational impact of
specific game design elements on mobile crowdsourcing users [9].
The paper ”Motivation mechanism of gamification in crowdsourcing projects” [31] investi­
gates which motivational mechanisms are involved in gamification in crowdsourced projects.
Zhiyuan Zeng et al. explore how specific intrinsic and extrinsic motivators influence users’
engagement with games. Their findings show game elements like rewards, progress bars,
virtual gifts, points and leaderboards enhance user engagement. However, they also find
that if the task is complicated, the effects of game elements on extrinsic motivation and
intrinsic motivation will be less pronounced.
In the paper ”Mobile Gamification for Crowdsourcing Data Collection: Leveraging the
Freemium Model”, Dergousoff et al. make use of the freemium model to make users
do experimental tasks. They do this by implementing their mobile game ”Sugar Rush”,
where players are in control of a continuously bouncing cupcake, which they guide through
platforms and enemies to collect candy, coins, and obtain a high score. Players are then
able to purchase useful ’powerups’ by completing the experimental tasks. In the study,
the authors compared a gamified laboratory version and a non­gamified laboratory version
and found that players who used the in­game rewards were motivated to do experimental
tasks.
The paper ”Games with a Purpose” [32] introduces an idea of a game concept designed to
solve large­scale problems by the use of crowdsourcing. The objective of the multiplayer
online game is to have fun while completing work that is simple for humans but beyond
the capability of computers in 2006. The game randomly pairs players together and the
goal is to guess what label your partner would give to an image shown. Once the two
players have given the exact same string as result, the image is annotated and a new
image is shown.
8
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:19==
3
Design Process
The design process is a crucial part of developing any product. It consists of various steps
which the designer or developer needs to go through in order to create a functional and
effective product. There are several methodologies and frameworks that can be followed
in the design process. In this chapter, we will go over the method that was used in this
thesis to guide the process and the different stages of the design process that were fol­
lowed during the development of the system. The chosen design method for this thesis
is the user­centered design (UCD) method, as recommended by Roy et al. in their pa­
per ”Development of Usability Guidelines for Mobile Health Applications” [33], where they
state that a mobile health application, whether for clinicians or patients, should undergo
robust, iterative evaluations that follow a user­centered design process.
3.1
User­Centered Design Method
User­centered design evolved from human computer interaction (HCI) and is a software
design methodology for developers and designers. UCD essentially works by actively
involving users, to create applications that meet the needs of their users [34]. According
to Lowdermilk et al. [35], UCD works by prioritizing the user, improving the overall user
experience, and reducing mistakes through the inclusion of users in the early stages of
the design process and the incorporation of their suggestions.
Overall, the UCD process can be divided into three phases: (1) design research, (2)
design, and (3) design evaluation [36]. During the first phase, a variety of research meth­
ods were employed, including a review of the state of the art, interviews with relevant
stakeholders, and the creation of personas. Based on the gained knowledge from this
introductory phase, a design was created in Figma1. The design and the overall concept
were then tested with a focus group of cardiologists and medical students. In the next
iteration, a prototype was developed using Flutter2 and tested with users. Based on feed­
back from this test, the design was refined and iterated until a final version of the system
was designed and developed in Flutter. In the next sections, the methods of each step
will be elaborated.
3.2
Design Research
Background Research
For background research of this master thesis, we conducted a review of the literature on
ECG and how to interpret ECG readings. This gave us a solid foundation of knowledge
on the basics of ECG.
In addition to the literature review, we also conducted an interview with a cardiologist to
gain a deeper understanding of ECG interpretation, including how it works, what it mea­
sures, and how it is used to diagnose various cardiovascular conditions. The cardiologist
also provided valuable insights into the practical aspects of ECG reading and invited us
to a hospital to see how it is used in daily clinical practice. Here, the hospital technician­
s/nurses also shared their experiences and challenges in interpreting ECG readings and
how they use their tools to diagnose ECG.
1Figma ­ www.figma.com [Accessed: 3/2/2023]
2Flutter ­ www.flutter.dev [Accessed: 3/2/2023]
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
9
==PAGE:20==
We also visited a danish company that makes wireless ECG monitors. They demonstrated
how they perform annotations through the help of AI, as well as manually within the com­
pany. Moreover, they explained that ECG can be annotated at various levels, including
rhythm­level, beat­level, and specific interest points such as P wave, QRS complex, and
T wave.
The state of the art in ECG annotation was assessed by conducting a literature review on
papers about ECG annotation and ECG annotation tools. We mainly looked at tools that
have manual annotation features and visualization of the ECG, to draw inspiration for the
functionality and user interface (UI) of the system.
In addition, we also looked at the literature on the topics of crowdsourcing in ECG anno­
tation, motivation theory and gamification. We reviewed the literature on these topics in
order to learn how they have been used in similar contexts and how they might be useful
in our own research.
Interview with Cardiologist
With our newly gained knowledge of ECG, ECG annotation tools, motivation theory, crowd­
sourcing and gamification, we started designing the interface for the system, by creating
a wireframe in Figma. We wanted to have someone that works with ECG annotation to
have a look at the initial design of the system before setting up a test with multiple users.
Therefore, we conducted an interview with a cardiologist to display the app. The inter­
view was conducted online with video call and screen sharing. During the interview, we
provided a demonstration of the design and walked the cardiologist through its various
features and functions. While doing this, we asked the cardiologist for her feedback on
the application interface and general concept. The cardiologist provided valuable insights
and suggestions for improvements, that we were able to incorporate into the next version
of the system. The notes from the interview can be found in the Appendix A.1.
3.3
Personas
A persona is an imaginary presentation of the target user, designed to help remember the
needs and characteristics of the target user as the application is built. By personifying the
actual users through the creation of personas, it will be easier to adjust the application
to suit their preferences [35]. The characters listed below are personas derived from the
interview with the cardiologist.
10
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.1: Personas
During our interview with the cardiologist, we discovered that she believed that younger
individuals within the health field would be more interested in our application, which aligns
with the personas we have created. Furthermore, we imagine that the goals of the target
users for our system would have similar goals to these personas.
3.4
Design and Design evaluation
Two prototypes were tested in the design process. First, a wireframe prototype was cre­
ated with Figma and then a prototype made with Flutter. The feedback from the two tests
was used to design and develop the last version of the system.
Prototype Testing 1
The first prototype testing involved presenting the concept and initial wireframes of the
application to a focus group of cardiologists and medical students in order to gather feed­
back on the concept and insights on how to improve the design. The focus group method
is a good approach to discover what users want from the system [37], which was the main
goal for this test session.
The Prototype ­ The prototype for this test was a wireframe created in Figma. The wire­
frame consisted of all the screens we imagined should be included in the final version
of the system. These screens were linked together to simulate the user flow through
the application. Screenshots of the prototype can be found in Appendix A.3.
Test Setup ­ The focus group session was conducted in a meeting room where everyone
sat at a long table with a big screen at the end. The focus group consisted of 11
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
11
==PAGE:22==
participants, including 7 researchers from a department of cardiology and 4 medical
students. The wireframes were shown on the big screen and the concept of the
application was presented while going through the wireframes in the intended order.
The focus was encouraged to provide feedback on the concept, as well as the user
interface.
Outcome ­ The focus group provided valuable feedback on the overall concept and user
flow, as well as specific suggestions for improving the design of the interface. Based
on this feedback, the design was refined and iterated upon, resulting in a more user­
friendly and effective application. One of the more valuable lessons we got from
this test, was that experienced cardiologists might not be interested in using the
system because it would be too trivial for them. Medical students however could be
interested, but the system had to have a learning aspect to it, in order for it to be
motivating for students. Based on this feedback we decided to have two ways to use
the system: training and annotating. In the application, this resulted in having two
kinds of projects: Training projects, where we know the diagnosis of the ECG and
you would get correct/incorrect feedback and annotation projects, where we do not
know the diagnosis of the ECG and the feedback you get is what other users have
annotated the same ECG as. Furthermore, we received feedback that the game
design elements could be a good addition to the application for medical students to
compete with each other within their classes for example.
Overall, the first prototype testing process was crucial in ensuring that the system
was tailored to meet the needs and preferences of its intended users, and pointed
us in the right direction with the design of the system.
Prototype Testing 2
The second prototype test was conducted to gather more detailed feedback on the func­
tionalities and usability of the app developed using the Flutter framework. The method
used was thinking aloud testing [38], which was chosen to understand how the users
interact with the prototype and identify any misinterpreted design elements.
The prototype ­ The prototype for this test was an app developed using the Flutter frame­
work. The prototype was designed with the feedback from the previous prototype
testing, but this time it was a fully functional mobile application. Screenshots of the
prototype can be found in Appendix A.4.
Test Setup ­ The test participants consisted of 3 medical students, who were also a part
of the focus group in the first prototype testing. The test setup involved conducting
individual user testing sessions with the prototype app. During these sessions, the
users were asked to complete a series of tasks while thinking aloud, providing insight
into their thought processes and any challenges they encountered while using the
app. The tasks can be found in the Appendix A.5.
Outcome ­ The outcome of the second prototype test was overall positive, with the testers
providing valuable feedback on the functionalities and usability of the app. All three
test participants suggested that the feedback system of the training projects should
be color­coded, with red indicating an incorrect response and green indicating a
correct one. This would make it easier for users to quickly understand the feedback.
In addition, they suggested that it would be helpful to be able to see the ECG after
receiving feedback, in order to better understand the correct interpretation. These
features were implemented in the final version of the app. Other new ideas that were
suggested during the prototype testing included adding a streak feature that would
12
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:23==
tell the user how many days in a row they had been using the application. This idea
was also included in the final version of the app. One new idea that was suggested
but ultimately not implemented in this project was a social aspect, which would allow
users to see other users’ profiles, add friends, and participate in challenges together.
While this idea had potential, we decided that it was outside the scope of the current
project and was not included in the final version of the app. To see the full feedback
from each individual test participant, see Appendix A.6.
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
13
==PAGE:24==
14
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:25==
4
Implementation
In this chapter, we present the implementation of easyG, a mobile application for ECG
annotation, that uses game design elements to motivate its users.
The chapter is divided into four main sections: conceptual design, user interface, system
design and data and data management.
The purpose of the conceptual design section is to give an overview of the functions and
goals of the system. It provides an introduction to the key concepts of the application
and its functionalities, which will be further discussed and elaborated upon in the User
Interface section.
The User Interface section will focus on the design and layout of the application. In this
section images of the UI will be presented, along with a description of the functionality of
those UIs.
The system design section presents the technical design of the application. It includes a
description of the system architecture and the relationships between the components and
classes that make up the system, as well as an overview of the flow of the application.
Finally, the data and data management section provides a description of the data used
in the system and how it is managed. Specifically, this includes information on how the
ECG data was collected and handled to be used by the mobile application and how data
is stored.
4.1
Conceptual Design
The main purpose of easyG is to annotate ECG data. However, during the design phase,
it became apparent that incorporating learning elements into the system was necessary
to engage and motivate our target audience, medical students and young cardiologists.
Because of this, easyG was decided to be project­based and have two types of projects:
annotation projects and training projects. These two types of projects would serve two
different purposes: annotation projects for annotating ECG data, for the collection of data
sets to be used for training of AI models and training projects for training users to become
better at recognizing diagnoses in ECG data.
There are multiple ways to do annotations of ECG. For example, beat­level, rhythm­level
and fiducial points annotation, as seen in the dataset by [16]. For easyG, we chose to go
with a rhythm­level method similar to the one used in the works by Kumar et al. [19], where
a 10­second long ECG­waveform is manually annotated, by assigning it to a specific heart
rhythm class.
The system is designed to be flexible, meaning that the project owner can decide whether
a project should be for annotation or training purposes, what data should be used and
which diagnoses the users should be able to choose for the specific project.
Upon creation of the project, the project owner also provides basic information about the
project such as organization, project team, responsible researcher, sponsor, patient group
and description of the project.
As already stated, annotation projects are specifically created to collect data for the train­
ing of AI models. Each ECG recording will be annotated by a fixed amount of users. In
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
15
==PAGE:26==
the current system, we have chosen the number of annotations by unique users to be 5,
but this could be any number depending on the data and goal of the data set. When 5
annotations for an ECG have been made, it will no longer be available for users to anno­
tate. During the second prototype test, the participants requested a feedback mechanism
to indicate whether the annotation was correct or incorrect. As annotation projects are a
source of data collection, the correct answer is not known, so the user will be presented
with the responses of fellow annotators for the particular ECG image, to have an idea of
whether they agree with the other users or not.
For the user, the functionality of the training project is very similar to the annotation project.
The main difference is the feedback they receive when they have submitted an annota­
tion. In the annotation projects, they could not get a correct/incorrect response for their
annotation, whereas, in the training project, they receive feedback on whether their an­
notation was correct or incorrect. Furthermore, when submitting an incorrect annotation
in the training projects, the user has the option to view ”Quick tips”, which is information
about how to better recognize the specific diagnosis that they could not recognize for the
particular ECG.
Whilst annotating, users are able to pan and zoom as required, choose one of the diagno­
sis options and lastly, select one of three options; submit, submit with uncertainty or skip.
The submit with uncertainty button was used in LabelECG [27] and was requested from
test subjects, as they would often encounter situations where they would want to give a
qualified guess, although they were not completely confident of the submission. The data
obtained will be stored in two different types: certain submissions through the ”Submit”
button and uncertain submissions through the ”Submit with uncertainty” button. The idea
is to increase data quality by directing users towards submitting with uncertainty if they
are not completely confident. Project owners will then be able to decide to which degree
they want to use the data connected with uncertainty.
In an effort to enhance user motivation, the five most commonly used game design el­
ements: points, badges, leaderboards, levels, challenges [9], were selected to be inte­
grated into easyG. These game design elements were shown by Todtenhausen et al. to
have motivational impacts on users in mobile crowdsourcing. The elements were added
to easyG, where the ”challenge” element was implemented as a ”daily goal” of 5 anno­
tations and points resulted in experience points (XP) that you could accumulate in order
to go up in level. The leaderboard was included, to show the users who have annotated
the most with functionality to filter by the time frames: daily, weekly and all time. Finally,
badges can be obtained by completing a certain amount of annotations in a day, a week
or all time.
Another game design element that was included was progress bars to show the amount
of annotated ECGs for a project and the amount left. This was included, as progress bars
can be a good reminder for users of how much work they have done and still have left [31].
One element that is not a game element in its essence but we still decided to include is
accuracy percentage. We decided that this was important to have to ensure data quality
by having the possibility to use the accuracy of the user as a weight of the annotation as
seen in the work by Zhu et al. [6].
To motivate users to have high accuracy and annotate correctly, the accuracy was incor­
porated into the way that the XP is calculated. This resulted in basing the gained XP on
the accuracy, so that for example, if you have an accuracy of 85%, you will gain 85 XP
for each annotation.
16
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:27==
When testing the prototype, multiple users requested a day streak functionality, which
could show how many days in a row a user has been using the app. This was included
in the final version of easyG.
4.2
User Interface
The user interface section aims to provide insight into the design decisions and to present
the final user interface.
The UI consists of three main pages, home page Figure 4.1a, leaderboard page Figure 4.2
and profile page Figure 4.3 that can be navigated through the bottom navigation bar1 at
the bottom of the screen.
On the home page, Figure 4.1a, the primary focus is to display the list of projects in the
form of cards. As mentioned in section 4.1, projects can be either training or annotation
projects with subtle differences in terms of design between the two.
(a) Home Page
(b) Training Project
(c) Annotation Project
Figure 4.1: Home Page & Project Pages
The cards make use of progress bars to display the advancement in the project and to
motivate users to continue annotating [9]. The card for a training project includes two
progress bars at the bottom, one for the number of annotations performed by the user and
the other for the percentage of correct annotations. In addition, a red label with the text
’Training’ is displayed at the top right of the training project card to highlight the difference
between the two types of projects.
In the case of an annotation project, the top progress bar is the number of annotations
performed by the user. The lower progress bar displays the total annotations done by all
users in the project. Similarly, a blue label with the text ’Annotation’ is displayed in the top
right corner of the annotation project card.
1BottomNavigationBar
­
https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/material/BottomNavigationBar-class.html
[Ac­
cessed: 2/2/2023]
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
17
==PAGE:28==
At the top of the home page, we have the daily goal bar, which gives the user a goal of 5
annotations per day, and the day streak, which shows how many days the user has been
annotating in a row.
Progress bars and labels are carried into the project description page, Figure 4.1b and
Figure 4.1c, where general information about the project is displayed. By displaying in­
formation such as project owner, sponsor and description of the project we try to increase
transparency and demonstrate the purpose of the data collection, which according to Rut­
ten et. al. [30] helps combat a­motivation, a term for a demotivating factor.
(a) Daily
(b) Weekly
(c) All Time
Figure 4.2: Leaderboards
The leaderboard displays the top 10 users’ annotations in a simple list view in descending
order. The list can be altered through the top navigation bar to switch between the time
frames: daily, weekly and all time.
The profile page is where the user’s information is displayed. The page consists of three
separate sub­pages which are navigated through the top navigation bar. In Figure 4.3a we
present the achievements page, where we display the level, experience, accuracy, total
annotations, day streak, badges and an information button that opens the explanation
of the level and accuracy system (fig. 4.3b). For visually displaying the users level, a
CircularPercentIndicator2 is used to take up most of the screen. The user’s experience
is also displayed below the level indicator to clarify how much experience is needed to
level up. Below, the overall accuracy percentage is displayed along with the total number
of annotations, and current day streak. Lastly, all badges are shown in a grid view with
darkened badges representing the badges that are not yet obtained.
2CircularPercentIndicator ­ https://pub.dev/packages/percent_indicator [Accessed: 2/2/2023]
18
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:29==
(a) Achievements
(b) Level System
Figure 4.3: Profile ­ Achievements & Level System
In Figure 4.4a, the list view follows a similar format to the Home Page, but only contains
projects in which the user has made an annotation. Lastly, in Figure 4.4b we display the
user information page, where the user is able to view their basic profile information and
sign out.
(a) My Projects
(b) User Info
Figure 4.4: Profile Page ­ My Projects & User Info
When clicking ”Start Annotating” on the project page (Figure 4.1c and Figure 4.1b), the
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
19
==PAGE:30==
screen of the application will change its screen orientation to horizontal and display the
annotation page (Figure 4.5). This is the page where users can annotate ECG. On the
right side of the screen, the diagnosis list is displayed as a list of ChoiceChips3 on top of
a grey transparent background. These buttons can be toggled and are limited to only one
choice. At the bottom, a bar is displayed containing three buttons; Submit, Submit with
uncertainty and Skip. The buttons are positioned toward the edge of the screen for easier
accessibility. Upon submitting, the user is presented with different feedback, based on
the type of project.
Figure 4.5: Annotation Page
If it is a training project, the user will be presented with feedback stating whether the anno­
tation is correct (Figure 4.6) or incorrect (Figure 4.7). The color of the text and buttons are
displayed in green or red depending if the annotation is correct or incorrect, respectively,
which was something that was requested by the users in the prototype testing.
Figure 4.6: Correct Annotation
3Flutter ChoiceChips ­ https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/material/ChoiceChip-class.html [Accessed: 2/2/2023]
20
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.7: Incorrect Annotation
Additionally, if the annotation is correct, the user is awarded XP displayed in the bottom
left corner. If an annotation is incorrect, the user will not be granted any XP but will have
a button ’Quick Tips’, which the user can click to see pointers and images that can help
the user identify the correct diagnosis (Figure 4.8).
Figure 4.8: Quick Tips
When the user makes an annotation in an annotation project, the user is awarded XP
and presented with a button to show a list of the annotations of other users, as seen in
Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.9: Annotation
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.10: List of Other Annotations
Upon panning or zooming in, the chips will disappear to free up the screen for easier
examination, as seen in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Panning/Zooming
Finally, every time the user unlocks a badge, the pop up seen in Figure 4.12 will be dis­
played with the specific badge and the corresponding description.
Figure 4.12: Badge Unlocked
4.3
System Design
In this section, we will present the system design of easyG. To help with this, we will
present a variety of diagrams, including a deployment diagram, class diagram, activity
diagram, entity relationship diagram and a visual representation of the folder structure.
These diagrams will be presented in a logical sequence, beginning with a deployment
diagram that provides an overview of the nodes and components of easyG. This will be
22
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:33==
followed by a class diagram that illustrates the classes of the system, their attributes, and
their operations. Subsequently, we will present an activity diagram that explains the flow
of the application. Finally, we will explain the ECG data used in the application and the
data management, utilizing an entity relationship diagram and a visual representation of
the folder structure.
Components
Figure 4.13 shows an overview of the nodes and main components of easyG. As seen
in the figure we have two nodes in the system: The mobile device and Google’s cloud
computing and development platform; Firebase4. In the mobile device node, we have the
easyG application component, which is made with the flutter framework. The application
presents the user interface and handles user interactions. The two nodes communicate
through a set of SDKs provided by Firebase for Flutter, which allows requests from the
mobile application to access and modify data stored in Cloud Storage and Firestore, as
well as authenticate users.
Figure 4.13: Deployment diagram of easyG
Three services from Firebase are used in the system: Cloud Storage, Firestore Database
and Authentication. Cloud Storage is used to store images. These are ECG images of
10­second duration and project images. The Firestore Database stores all data related to
projects and users (For content and structure of the data, see Section 4.4). Authentication
handles the authentication of users with email and password.
Classes
The class diagram in Figure 4.14 shows the most important classes and their relation­
ships within the easyG system. The diagram illustrates the association between classes,
4Firebase ­ https://firebase.google.com/ [Accessed: 3/2/2023]
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
23
==PAGE:34==
represented by lines connecting them, and the multiplicity of the relationship, represented
by numbers or symbols on the line.
Figure 4.14: Class diagram of easyG
For example, in the class diagram, the class ”Project” is associated with the class ”ECG”
with a multiplicity of ”1 to many” indicating that one project can be associated with multiple
ECGs, while an ECG can only be associated with one Project.
Additionally, the class diagram also illustrates the most important attributes and meth­
ods of the classes, represented by the rectangle with the class name at the top and the
attributes and methods listed inside.
24
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:35==
The diagram is separated into three packages: Pages(UI), Data models, and Utilities.
The ”Pages” package represents the user interface of the easyG system. It contains
classes that are responsible for creating and managing the visual elements of the appli­
cation, handling the navigation of the application and presenting the data to the user. It
should be noted that most of the methods and variables related to presenting the UI have
been abstracted away from these classes. Instead, the focus is on what kind of data is
used in the UI classes and how they relate to the data models.
The ”Data models” package represents the classes that define the data models used
in the easyG system. These classes define the attributes and methods for each data
model. Each of the data models has the fromJson() and toJson() methods, which do the
conversion of JSON structured data from the Firestore database into a Dart object for
use in the application code, and the conversion of a Dart object into a JSON structure for
storage in the database, respectively.
The ”Utilities” package contains classes that provide utility functions that can be used by
other classes in the system. The most important class here is the FirebaseUtils, which
contains methods to retrieve data from the Firestore database. Again, it is worth noting
that the methods and attributes in the classes are abstracted to the most essential ones
to enhance readability.
Application Flow
In Figure 4.15 an activity diagram is presented to illustrate the flow of easyG. With this
diagram, the user creation process is abstracted away as the user is already assumed to
have been created.
We start the flow of activities with the initial node at the top. Here, the user starts by log­
ging in to the application and if there are no errors, the user will continue to the ”Show
Homepage” activity, which is the page seen in Figure 4.1a. From there, the user can either
select a project with the ”Click on a project” activity or navigate to one of the other pages by
the ”Click LeaderboardPage” or ”Click ProfilePage” activities through the bottom naviga­
tion, which will show the LeaderboardPage (Figure 4.2) or the ProfilePage (Figure 4.3a),
respectively.
If a user clicks on a project, they will be shown the ProjectPage (Figure 4.1c) and can
choose either ”Click ’Start annotating’” or go back to the HomePage. If the user chooses
to start annotating, they will be shown the AnnotationPage. From here, the user can either
skip the current ECG or choose a diagnosis and do one of the three activities Click ”Skip”,
Click ”Submit with Uncertainty” or Click ”Submit”. If the user chooses to click ”Skip”, the
AnnotationPage will refresh and a new ECG from the project will be shown.
The two options Submit with Uncertainty and Submit has a similar outcome, except that
an uncertain boolean will be true on the annotation for the former option and false for the
latter. If the user chooses to submit, three different actions can take place depending on
the type of project. If it is an annotation project, the user’s annotation and XP gain will
be displayed, as seen in Figure 4.9, while several updates to the user and the project will
happen concurrently. These updates are: updating the user’s XP, adding the project ID
to the user’s project IDs, adding the annotation to the user’s annotation list, adding the
annotation to the ECG’s annotation list, incrementing the project’s annotated ECG count
by 1, and updating the user’s badge list. It is important to note that an update to the user’s
accuracy does not occur, as this is an annotation project and the system cannot determine
if the annotation is correct or not.
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.15: Activity Diagram of easyG
From the ”Display Annotation + XP Gain” activity, the user can choose to view other users’
annotations for the same ECG by clicking the ”Other Annotations” button or continue to a
new ECG.
If the project is a training project, the annotation can be either correct or incorrect as the
diagnosis of the ECGs in training projects is already known. If the annotation is incorrect,
the system will display that the annotation was incorrect and give the right annotation as
seen in Figure 4.7, while also doing updates to the user and project concurrently. The only
difference to the updates is that, instead of updating the user’s XP, the user’s accuracy will
be updated. This is done as the user should not receive XP from incorrect annotations,
but should have their accuracy updated when annotating training data.
The user can then choose to continue to the next ECG or access ”Quick Tips” for tips
26
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:37==
on recognizing the diagnosis for that type of ECG, as seen in Figure 4.8. If the user’s
annotation is correct, ”Correct!” and the amount of XP gained will be displayed. Again,
concurrent updates will be made. This time, we do all the other updates as before, includ­
ing both the user XP and the user accuracy update. The user can then click ”Continue”
to get a new ECG and continue to annotate.
In the LeaderboardPage the user has the option to click on the Daily, Weekly or All Time,
to filter the leaderboard by these time frames. In the ProfilePage the user has similar
functionality and can choose to go to Achievements, My Projects or User Info. In the
Achievements page, the user has another option, which is to click on the info button,
which will show an info dialog with information about how the level is calculated as seen
in Figure 4.3b. On the My Projects page, the user can go to the ”Show Projectpage”
activity by clicking on a project, and from there either choose to start annotating or go
back to ”My Projects”. Lastly, on the User Info page, the user can choose to ”Click ”Sign
out”, which will sign the user out of the application.
4.4
Data and Data Management
In this section, we will explain the data used in easyG, how it is stored, and how the data
relates to each other. First, we will go over the data we use, where we got it from, and
how we obtained it. Next, we will show how we manage the data by displaying how it
relates to each other using an entity relationship diagram (ERD) and how it is stored in
the database.
ECG data
The ECG data used in this thesis was obtained from two sources: The CACHET­CADB [19]
and the MIT­BIH Arrhythmia Database [39]. The CACHET­CADB is a 259 days long con­
textualized single­channel ECG arrhythmia database from 24 patients recorded under a
free­living ambulatory setting and contains ECG samples of atrial fibrillation, normal sinus
rhythm, and noise, each with a duration of 10 seconds. The MIT­BIH Arrhythmia Database
was obtained from PhysioNet and contains ECG recordings of various arrhythmias. To
obtain the ECG data from the CACHET­CADB, we used the CACHET­CADB ToolKit5,
which is a repository that contains Python scripts and other tools to access the data in
the CACHET­CADB. These scripts enabled us to extract images of ECG samples of 10­
second duration and categorize them into separate folders based on their diagnosis. For
example, if an ECG sample was diagnosed with atrial fibrillation, it was placed in the atrial­
Fibrillation folder in the Cloud Storage database. To obtain the ECG data from the MIT­BIH
Arrhythmia Database, we used the Waveform Database Software Package (WFDB) for
Python [40], which is a library of tools for reading, writing, and processing WFDB sig­
nals and annotations. This package enabled us to extract images of the ECG recordings
into folders based on the diagnosis. From this database, we collected ECG recordings
that contained premature ventricular contractions, premature atrial contractions or were
normal sinus waves.
Examples of ECG images from the two datasets can be found in Figure 4.16. The im­
ages from both of the sources were used as data in easyG for the study of this thesis
(Chapter 5).
5CACHET­CADB ToolKit ­ https://github.com/cph-cachet/cachet-ecg-db [Accessed: 2/2/2023]
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.16: Examples of ECG images. Left: Sample ECG from CACHET­CADB [19].
Right: Sample ECG from MIT­BIH Arrhythmia Database [39]
Data Management
In Figure 4.17 a peek into the data stored in the Firestore database can be found. Fire­
store is a NoSQL, document­oriented database, where each document contains a set of
key­value pairs and is stored in collections6. In Figure 4.17 we can see that we have
two collections: ”users” and ”projects”. Each collection contains documents that are ref­
erenced with their unique IDs and each of these documents contains all related data in a
set of key­value pairs.
(a) Projects
(b) Users
Figure 4.17: Preview of data in Firestore database
To illustrate the data management of easyG, we have created an ERD, that shows the
relations between five objects that are used in the easyG application and stored in the
database. These objects are Project, ECG, Annotation, UserProfile and Badge. The
ERD uses crow’s foot notation [41] to represent the cardinality of the relationships.
The Project entity is a document in the database as seen in Figure 4.17a. It contains string,
integer and boolean data such as title and totalECG, but it also has a list of ECG objects
”ecgList”. The project, therefore, has a one­to­many relationship with the ECG object,
as one project can have multiple ECGs associated with it. The ECG object represents
a single ECG recording and has a one­to­many relationship with the Annotation object.
This is because one ECG recording can have 5 annotations made by different users,
which are stored in the ”annotationList” of the ECG. The Annotation object has properties
such as userID and dateTime as well as the diagnosis that was annotated, whether it was
uncertain and the projectID.
The UserProfile entity is also a document in the database as seen in Figure 4.17b. It
contains information about the user such as their name, email, level etc., as well as a list of
annotations, badges, projectIDs and an accuracyList. The UserProfile has a one­to­many
relationship with the Annotation object, as one user can make multiple annotations on
different ECGs. It also has a one­to­many relationship to Project and Badge, as one user
6Cloud
Firestore
Data
model
­
https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore/data-model
[Accessed:
2/2/2023]
28
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:39==
can have multiple badges and multiple projectIDs. The accuracyList of the UserProfile is
a list of maximum 20 boolean values, which is used to calculate the user’s accuracy. A
user can for example have 20 ”true” in their accuracyList, which results in an accuracy of
100%. If the user then does one more annotation in a training project and gets incorrect,
we will remove the oldest input in the accuracyList and add a ”false”, which will result in
an accuracyList of 19 ”true” and 1 ”false” and an accuracy of 95%.
Figure 4.18: Entity Relationship Diagram of easyG
The Cloud Storage database is where the ECG images and project images are stored.
In Figure 4.19 we have a diagram of the folder structure of the Cloud Storage database
and on the right side of the figure we have a part of the ECG and Project entities from the
ERD in Figure 4.18. This is included in the figure to give an overview of how the data in
the Firestore database relates to the data stored in the Cloud Storage database. As seen
in the folder structure diagram it is organized into three main folders: trainingProjects,
annotationProjects, and projectImages.
The trainingProjects folder contains sub­folders that correspond to the different projects
in the Firestore database. These sub­folders are referenced by the ecgImagesFolder
string of the Project object in the Firestore database. Within each project sub­folder, there
are further sub­folders that correspond to the different diagnoses of the ECG recordings.
These sub­folders are referenced by the diagnosis string of the ECG object in the Firestore
database. Furthermore, each ECG image is referenced by the imagePath string. This
structure makes it easy to know which diagnosis each ECG image has for the training
projects.
The annotationProjects folder contains sub­folders that correspond to the different projects
in the Firestore database, which are also referenced by the ecgImagesFolder string of the
Project object in the Firestore database. However, in contrast to the trainingProjects, all
the ECG images are put at the same level, as we don’t know the diagnosis of these.
Again, all the images are referenced by the imagePath string of the ECG object in the
Firestore Database.
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
29
==PAGE:40==
The projectImages folder contains the banner images for the projects. These images are
referenced by the projectImage string of the Project object in the Firestore database.
Figure 4.19: Folder structure of the Firebase Cloud Storage and the connections to the
data in the Firestore Database
30
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:41==
5
Study
In this chapter, we present our study to investigate the usability and ease of use. This
study was conducted with the final version of easyG, which had been developed and
refined based on the feedback received from previous prototype tests.
5.1
Methods
The test participants were asked to download the app onto their own phones and use it
for a week. At the end of this period, they completed two questionnaires using a Likert
scale [35], with options ranging from ’strongly disagree’ to ’strongly agree’. The ques­
tionnaires were delivered through Google Forms questionnaires. After finishing the ques­
tionnaires, the participants were invited to a 12­question debrief interview. The results
of the study will be used to inform future development and updates to easyG, in order to
continually improve its usability and effectiveness.
Simple Usability Scale (SUS) Questionnaire [42] ­ SUS is a standardized 10­item ques­
tionnaire that is used to assess the overall usability of a product or system. The
questionnaire is created with the aim of being simple and applicable to a variety of
different systems and products.
Based on the questionnaire, a SUS score can be calculated which is a numerical
value that indicates the usability of a system.
The first step in calculating the SUS score is the conversion stage. This involves
taking the scale position minus 1 for questions (1, 3, 5, 7, 9) and taking 5 minus the
scale position for questions (2, 4, 6, 8, 10) to convert them into values between 0
and 4. Lastly, you multiply the sum of the scores by 2.5 to obtain the overall SUS
score. The SUS score will range from 0­100.
Effort Expectancy (EE) [43] ­ The EE questionnaire is a combination of questions from
the Post­Study System Usability Questionnaire (PSSUQ) [44] and Unified Theory
of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) [45]. The 5 questions from PSSUQ
are designed to address usability, information quality, interface quality, pleasure and
features and the 4 questions from UTAUT are used to measure the participants’
perceptions of understandability, learnability, ease of use and potential ability.
Debriefing Interviews ­ Interviews are conducted with participants after they completed
the questionnaires and are used to gather feedback and additional insights about
their experience. Furthermore, the purpose of these interviews is to allow the partic­
ipants to elaborate on which features they liked and disliked about the application,
what was easy or difficult to use, and what could be improved. Moreover, the in­
terviews deal with gathering insight into the users’ perception of the motivational
impact of the gamification elements employed in the system.
5.2
Recruitment
During the design process (section 3.2), we were introduced to three medical students
through the focus group in prototype test 1, who assisted with insights throughout the
development of easyG. These medical students were also the three test attendees in
prototype testing 2. In addition, two additional test attendees were recruited through our
own network for the final usability study. A full demographic view of the test attendees for
the usability study can be seen in Table 5.1
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
31
==PAGE:42==
Subject 1
Subject 2
Subject 3
Subject 4
Subject 5
Age
22
28
­
25
26
Recruitment Via
Hospital
Hospital
Hospital
Own Network
Own Network
Gender
Male
Female
Female
Female
Male
Nationality
Danish
Danish
Danish
Norwegian
Danish
Education Level
Bachelor
Master’s
Master’s
Master’s
Master’s
Occupation
Med. Student
Med. Student
Med. Student
Doctor
Med. Student
Table 5.1: Test Attendees and Demographic Information.
5.3
Results
In this section, the results from the study will be presented. First, we will present the
results from the Simple Usability Scale (SUS) Questionnaire with a SUS score. Then the
results from the Effort Expectancy Questionnaire will be presented, along with a diverging
stacked bar chart to visualize the results. Finally, the main takeaways from the debrief
interviews will be presented.
The Simple Usability Scale (SUS)
Evaluating the usability of easyG is a central focus point of this thesis. In order to give an
idea of the usability, we present the results from our SUS questionnaire [42], which yields
a single score that represents the overall usability of the system.
In Table 5.2 we display the Curved Grading Scale, a method presented by Lewis and
Sauro for evaluating systems by use of the SUS score [46].
Grade
SUS
Percentile range
A+
84.1­100
96­100
A
80.8­84
90­95
A­
78.9­80.7
85­89
B+
77.2­78.8
80­84
B
74.1­77.1
70­79
B­
72.6­74
65­69
C+
71.1­72.5
60­64
C
65.0­71.0
41­59
C­
62.7­64.9
35­40
D
51.7­62.6
15­34
F
0­51.6
0­14
Table 5.2: Curved Grading Scale for the SUS. The middle column displays the range of
total SUS scores, and the corresponding grade level is shown in the left column. The
range that represents the score obtained for easyG is highlighted.
The SUS score for easyG is 82 and the scale positions for each subject can be found
in Appendix A.1. According to the grading scale provided in Table 5.2, this score corre­
sponds to an A grade in usability, falling within the 90­95 percentile range [46].
Effort Expectancy
The results from the Effort Expectancy questionnaire can be found in Table 5.3. In the
table, the figures in the center are the number of respondents in each category, while total
and average scores are displayed on the right. The full questionnaire questions can be
found in Table A.2.
32
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:43==
#
Question
Strongly
disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly
Agree
Total
Avg.
EE1
Usability
0
0
1
2
1
16
3,2
EE2
Understandable
0
1
0
1
2
16
3,2
EE3
Learning
0
0
0
1
3
19
3,8
EE4
Easy
0
0
0
1
3
19
3,8
EE5
Skillful
1
1
0
1
1
12
2,4
EE6
Information
0
1
1
2
0
13
2,6
EE7
Interface
0
1
1
1
1
14
2,8
EE8
Pleasure
0
0
1
1
2
17
3,4
EE9
Features
0
0
4
0
0
12
2,4
Table 5.3: Table of the results from Effort Expectancy questionnaire
In Figure 5.1 a diverging stacked bar chart is presented to visualize the Likert scale data
in Table 5.3 as recommended by Robbins et al. [47].
Figure 5.1: Diverging stacked bar chart of the results in Table 5.3
The chart visualizes how the test subject answered the different questions, which corre­
sponds to the numbers on the y­axis.
Debrief Interviews
After answering the questionnaires, the users were asked to answer an interview to get
feedback on specific features implemented in easyG. The findings from the debrief inter­
views are summarized, to give an overview of the participants’ experiences through the
testing period and highlight relevant observations made during the interviews.
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
33
==PAGE:44==
• The users found the overall experience of using the app to be good and easy to use
and found the user interface and design to be intuitive.
• The users felt that the system lacks an introduction to the diagnoses before start­
ing to annotate. Users felt intimidated by having to annotate with no introductory
information about how to distinguish heart arrhythmia.
• One user felt that the app compared roughly the same to systems they use profes­
sionally in the hospital, however, lacked a feature to measure the distance between
QRS­complexes. Other users had been doing introductory programs to ECG, which
involve a similar format of diagnosing heart arrhythmia based on ECG signals.
• The users encountered issues with the app being slow at loading a new ECG image
when the continue button was clicked. This could result in the user looking at an
’old’ ECG and submitting an annotation for another ECG.
• Generally, users found the app easy to navigate and had no trouble finding key
features. However, one user did not notice the Quick Tips feature in the annotation
feedback.
• One user could not imagine themselves using annotation projects as long as they
do not receive money or learn anything. They would only consider participating in
an annotation project if the cause was very specific and it was something they are
passionate about. On the other hand, they could imagine themselves using the
training projects.
• The users liked the game elements implemented and found that they had a moti­
vating impact on creating more annotations. One user found it helpful to see other
people’s annotations. One user did not find the badges to be motivating, whilst
other users liked that a badge popped up when achieved. One user liked to view
the leaderboard continuously to check how they and other users ranked.
• In general, the users suggested promoting the social aspect of the application by
adding more features such as the ability to view friends’ profiles and creating chal­
lenges with colleagues.
• Some users felt that even though the game elements had a positive effect on their
motivation, they felt that elements were hidden away in the profile page and should
perhaps be more visible whilst annotating or shown on the home page.
• One user found it annoying that the y­axis was stretched to fit the phone screen.
• Some of the more experienced users requested that all 12 leads should be available
as you cannot exclude all diagnoses without all the information
• Two users requested that the visual format of the ECG representation should be the
same as in the hospital; checkered in red and black colors.
• Some users suggested having a clinician create projects with diagnoses that look
more similar to increase difficulty.
34
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:45==
6
Discussion
The results obtained from the SUS questionnaire, the EE questionnaire and the debrief
interviews will be discussed in this chapter. Furthermore, alternative annotation methods
and motivation aspects of easyG will be discussed. Lastly, the limitations of this master
thesis will be discussed.
6.1
Main Findings
Simple Usability Scale Score ­ In general, the results of the questionnaire showed that
the test participants found the system easy to use and well­integrated. Furthermore,
they felt confident in using the system and believed that others would be able to
learn it. There were some inconsistencies in the responses to question 10, which
was about the need to learn a lot of things before using the system. This could be a
result of some users being less experienced in ECG annotation, while others were
more experienced. In the response to question 6 ”I thought there was too much
inconsistency in this system” there were some mixed responses as well. While not
receiving disastrous results, one person agreed with this statement, one was neutral
and the rest either disagreed or strongly disagreed. It is hard to tell what made the
system inconsistent to the one user, but by looking at the responses to the debrief
interview it could be the case of slow loading of a new ECG, which would result in
the user annotating the previous ECG or that the look of the data was not identical
to the one they use at the hospital.
Overall, the responses to the questionnaire were mostly positive while some nega­
tive outliers were present. This resulted in a SUS score of 82.
One thing to note when looking at this score is that only five test participants were
recruited for the study. As stated by Nielsen [48], it requires at least 20 test subjects
to produce statistically significant results in quantitative studies, which means that
the sample size of 5 is too small. In order to produce statistically significant results
for the usability of easyG we would, therefore, need to have significantly more test
participants.
Effort Expectancy ­ The first thing to mention about the Effort Expectancy questionnaire
results is that we were only able to get answers from 4 out of 5 of the test subjects,
which is the reason why we have 5 answers in the SUS questionnaire and only 4
answers in the EE questionnaire.
The 4 answers that we have, which are visually represented in Figure 5.1, showed
that the respondents overall had a positive view of easyG’s ease of use. However,
in some of the questions, some test participants had negative feedback. In question
6, about if the feedback provided in easyG was clear and useful, one subject out of
the four responded that they did not agree with this. Furthermore, one subject did
not agree with the statement that the interaction with easyG is clear and useful and
one subject did not agree that the interface is effective in helping them complete
annotations. To the former question, all other participants were positive, while in the
latter, one was neutral and the rest was positive. Question 5 ”I would be skillful at
using easyG” was the question with the most negative responses. Here, one subject
strongly disagreed, one person disagreed, and the other two agreed and strongly
agreed. This question is very similar to question 10 of the SUS questionnaire ”I
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
35
==PAGE:46==
needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system”, which also
received the most negative feedback out of the 10 questions. Again, even though
we cannot tell for sure, a reason for these answers could be that the subjects did
not think they are experienced enough in annotating ECG.
Similarly, to the results of the SUS questionnaire, it should be noted that 4 test
participants are not enough to produce statistically significant results.
Debrief Interviews ­ During the debrief interviews, participants had positive comments,
mentioned missing features, and raised issues. These included compliments about
the intuitive design, the absence of more data annotation features, frustrations re­
garding slow data loading and ECG data not being visually identical to the one at
the hospital.
A concern in the debrief interviews for two test subjects relates to the slow loading
time of the ECG recordings. This is probably a result of not testing the app in con­
ditions with bad connectivity. One way of solving this could simply be to load one
or more ECG images in advance so that they would be ready for the user instantly
when they press the continue button.
Another suggestion from one participant is the inclusion of a short introduction to
the relevant diagnoses on the project page. This is a valid point, as the results of
the SUS and EE questionnaires, related to being skillful and needing to learn a lot
of things before using easyG, scored the worst. This could indicate that users with
limited experience may want more introduction to key annotation concepts before
starting to annotate.
During the second prototype test, the participants recommended enhancing the so­
cial aspect of the application by incorporating features such as the ability to view
friends’ profiles and creating challenges with other users. This was also mentioned
in the debrief interview, but despite these recommendations, the scope of this project
was limited to not include these features.
One major concern from two test subjects, which also resulted in demotivation, was
that the ECG data did not look exactly like the data they were trained on in their stud­
ies and the data they were supposed to learn for the hospital. This would demotivate
them to use easyG as they did not feel like they would get better at annotating ECG,
by using the app. They reported that the data in the hospitals had red checkered
paper with black ECG waves and 12 leads.
6.2
Alternative Annotation Methods
As pointed out in Chapter 2 there are other ways to annotate ECG data than the one
currently used in easyG [16].
Beat­level annotation is a method used in other ECG datasets [16] [17] as covered in
the background research. This method refers to the annotation of individual heartbeats
in an ECG waveform. The method is good for the collection of data to train a model in
classifying individual heartbeats but may be less feasible for implementation in a mobile
application as one could argue that it is a task that can be considered more complex
because it requires more input and precision than annotation at a rhythm­level [49]. As
stated by Moran et al., unless we can make important tasks easy and fail­proof, people
will avoid doing them on mobile devices, which could become a problem.
Another annotation method covered in the research is the annotation of the fiducial points.
36
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:47==
One advantage of this method is that it could be a possibility to crowdsource the annotation
to users without medical knowledge. The argument for this is that to annotate where the P
wave, T wave and the onset/offset of the QRS complex, users would not need knowledge
of diagnoses but only be able to recognize patterns in the ECG. However, similarly to beat­
level annotation, it is a task that can be considered more complex because it requires more
input and precision than annotation at a rhythm­level.
Some ECG annotation tools reviewed in Chapter 2 included features for annotating time
intervals and annotating specific points in a time series. This is useful when annotating
most diagnoses, as the arrhythmia typically only applies to a particular time interval of the
ECG recording. On the other hand, annotation speed would be significantly reduced, as
it would require zooming and adjusting of time intervals for every annotation, which would
likely result in fewer total annotations and cause the user to not want to do the task [49].
Ultimately, no annotation method can be considered superior to the other, as it all depends
entirely on the goal of the data collection and what the model is being trained to detect [50].
6.3
Motivational Factors in easyG
The findings from the debrief interviews of the users who tested the easyG app showed
a mixed experience regarding motivation to annotate ECG.
Regarding the game design elements, some users found the leaderboard motivating, oth­
ers found badges nice to collect and some found day streak a nice addition to the appli­
cation. Daily goals and XP/levels were not mentioned by test subjects when asked about
game elements. Some users even felt that the game elements were hidden away on the
profile page and should be more visible while annotating or shown on the home page.
Some users reported that the slow data loading had a negative impact on the overall ex­
perience, which made them pay less attention to the game design elements. Additionally,
users suggested that enhancing the social aspect of the app by adding features such as
the ability to view friends’ profiles and creating challenges with other users, would increase
their motivation.
The interviews show that users are motivated by different game elements. This might
show that it is important to consider a variety of motivators that can appeal to different
users to maintain their engagement and motivation.
The interviews also showed that it is important that the ECG data shown in easyG is
identical to the data they are used to from the hospital. If this is not the case, it can be
a big demotivating factor as it does not make sense for the user to learn to recognize
patterns in data that do not look like what they will be working with as professionals. Also,
bugs were reported in the interviews regarding zooming and the aforementioned slow
data loading which are critical issues that need addressing for the user to stay motivated.
6.4
Limitations
Positive Bias ­ As described in the Recruitment section 5.2, three test subjects were
recruited through Frederiksberg Hospital, whilst two test subjects were recruited
through our personal network. This may lead to a positive bias in the results and it
is important to be aware of this potential issue.
Number of Testers ­ The number of test attendees used in the first prototype test in­
cluded a focus group of 11 potential users, which is plenty to get the majority of
usability issues. According to Nielsen [48], having 5 test participants lets you find
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
37
==PAGE:48==
almost as many usability problems as you would find using many more test partici­
pants. However, in the second prototype test, we only made use of 3 test attendees.
Including more test attendees in this prototype test would have provided a more di­
verse range of experiences and views, allowing the identification of potential issues
and gathering more detailed feedback. This could have improved the usability and
effectiveness of the final prototype.
In our final study, we ensured to have 5 test attendees. As discussed in Section 6.1,
this number is sufficient for obtaining qualitative data through debrief interviews but
not enough to produce statistically significant results from the SUS questionnaire
and Effort Expectancy questionnaire, which are both quantitative in nature [48].
Researcher Side Client ­ For this thesis, the focus was to develop an application that
motivates and has high usability for the annotating user. Another type of user for
easyG is the project owner or researcher, who creates and manages projects and
uploads data. Although this aspect of easyG was not specifically addressed in this
thesis, a project creation page was created for internal use, which can be found in
Appendix A.7. Currently, projects can be created by uploading ECG image data
to the Cloud Storage in the format specified in Figure 4.19 and creating a project
through the project creation page. This process automatically retrieves the data
from the Cloud Storage and creates ECG objects in the Firestore database based
on the data. If easyG were to be released as a full product, a client would need to
be developed for the project owner or researcher to facilitate the upload of data and
management of projects. This client could take the form of a web application that
allows researchers to upload data easily and manage their projects.
Social Aspect ­ In the second prototype test and in the debrief interviews of our study,
users suggested that it would increase motivation if the social aspect of the appli­
cation was enhanced. This included viewing other users’ profiles and having group
challenges. While being a good idea for future work, we decided that developing
these features was out of the scope of this project due to time constraints.
Streamlining the data ­ The data used in the current version of ECG are first extracted
as a 10­second image, then uploaded to the Cloud Storage and then retrieved to be
viewed in easyG. One could streamline this process by having the raw ECG data
available in a database and showing the data directly, ultimately making the process
more effective. This was decided not to be a focus of this thesis.
38
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:49==
7
Conclusion
This study aimed to design, develop and evaluate easyG, a mobile application for crowd­
sourced ECG annotation.
To get an idea of how to develop easyG, we conducted a review of the state of the art
in ECG annotation, including studies using crowdsourced annotations. Furthermore, we
reviewed the topic of motivation theory and an approach of gamification was chosen to
motivate users to use easyG.
In the design process, user­centered design methods were utilized, by involving users
in two iterations of prototype testing. In this process, we discovered that crowdsourcing
ECG annotation could be feasible, however, the primary user group consists of students
or less experienced doctors and to make the system appealing to these users, it was
necessary to incorporate a learning aspect.
A study was conducted for the final version of easyG, using the Simple Usability Scale
(SUS) questionnaire [42], the Effort Expectancy (EE) questionnaire [43] and debrief inter­
views. The results of the SUS questionnaire showed a score of 82, which is considered
a grade level A in the 90­95 percentile range, according to the curved grading scale for
SUS. The results from the EE questionnaire showed mainly positive responses, however,
a few negative responses were also present in the understandability, skillful, information
quality, and interface quality categories. The debrief interviews show that the users in
general found the design intuitive and the system easy to use. Furthermore, the users
found the game design elements implemented in easyG to have a positive impact on
the motivation to create more annotations, though the users were motivated by different
specific elements.
However, some major drawbacks were also present in easyG, such as a bug when the
loading of ECG images was slow, the users could by mistake annotate ’old’ ECGs and
data not being identical to what they are used to work with in the hospital.
In the discussion, it was highlighted that the sample size of 5 test participants was too
small to produce statistically significant results.
For future work, a bigger study on easyG to produce statistically significant results could
be conducted. Additionally, social features could be integrated into easyG to see how this
would affect the motivation of its users. Furthermore, an effort into making easyG able to
read raw ECG data from sources such as PhysioNet and other ECG recording databases
could be taken. Lastly, a system for the researcher could be developed, in order to have
a complete system.
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
39
==PAGE:50==
40
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Jos L. Willems. “Computer analysis of the ECG”. In: World health 1989 ; Aug­Sep
: 21­23 (1989). URL: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/47038 (visited on
09/20/2022).
[2]
Jen Hong Tan et al. “Application of stacked convolutional and long short­term mem­
ory network for accurate identification of CAD ECG signals”. In: Computers in Bi­
ology and Medicine 94 (Mar. 2018), pp. 19–26. ISSN: 00104825. DOI: 10.1016/
j . compbiomed . 2017 . 12 . 023. URL: https : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii /
S0010482517304201 (visited on 09/20/2022).
[3]
Lucie Maršánová et al. “ECG features and methods for automatic classification
of ventricular premature and ischemic heartbeats: A comprehensive experimental
study”. In: Scientific Reports 7.1 (Sept. 11, 2017), p. 11239. ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI:
10.1038/s41598-017-10942-6. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-017-
10942-6 (visited on 01/30/2023).
[4]
Junxian Cai et al. “Multi­ECGNet for ECG Arrythmia Multi­Label Classification”.
In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pp. 110848–110858. ISSN: 2169­3536. DOI: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2020.3001284. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9113436/ (visited
on 09/20/2022).
[5]
Yan Yan, Xingbin Qin, and Lei Wang. “ECG Annotation and Diagnosis Classification
Techniques”. In: Health Informatics Data Analysis. Ed. by Dong Xu et al. Series
Title: Health Information Science. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017,
pp. 129–154. ISBN: 978­3­319­44979­1 978­3­319­44981­4. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
319-44981-4_9. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-44981-4_9
(visited on 09/14/2022).
[6]
Tingting Zhu et al. “Crowd­sourced annotation of ecg signals using contextual infor­
mation”. In: Annals of Biomedical Engineering 42.4 (Apr. 2014), pp. 871–884. ISSN:
1573­9686. DOI: 10.1007/s10439-013-0964-6.
[7]
T. Zhu et al. “CrowdLabel: A crowdsourcing platform for electrophysiology”. In: Com­
puting in Cardiology. Vol. 41. ISSN: 2325­8861 Issue: January. 2014, pp. 789–792.
[8]
Ali Bahrami Rad et al. “Atrial fibrillation detection in outpatient electrocardiogram
monitoring: An algorithmic crowdsourcing approach”. In: PloS One 16.11 (2021),
e0259916. ISSN: 1932­6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259916.
[9]
Leon Todtenhausen and Frank Fuchs­Kittowski. “Gamification for Mobile Crowd­
sourcing Applications: An Example from Flood Protection”. In: Advances and New
Trends in Environmental Informatics. Ed. by Rüdiger Schaldach et al. Progress in
IS. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 37–53. ISBN: 978­3­030­
30862­9. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-30862-9_3.
[10]
Mokter Hossain. “Users’ motivation to participate in online crowdsourcing platforms”.
In: 2012 International Conference on Innovation Management and Technology Re­
search. 2012 International Conference on Innovation Management and Technology
Research. May 2012, pp. 310–315. DOI: 10.1109/ICIMTR.2012.6236409.
[11]
L.G. Pee, E. Koh, and M. Goh. “Trait motivations of crowdsourcing and task choice:
A distal­proximal perspective”. In: International Journal of Information Management
40 (June 2018), pp. 28–41. ISSN: 02684012. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.01.008.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0268401217303821 (visited on
01/31/2023).
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
41
==PAGE:52==
[12]
K. Dergousoff and R.L. Mandryk. “Mobile gamification for crowdsourcing data col­
lection: Leveraging the freemium model”. In: Conference on Human Factors in Com­
puting Systems ­ Proceedings. Vol. 2015­April. 2015, pp. 1065–1074. ISBN: 978­
1­4503­3145­6. DOI: 10.1145/2702123.2702296.
[13]
Benedikt Morschheuser, Juho Hamari, and Jonna Koivisto. “Gamification in Crowd­
sourcing: A Review”. In: 2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sci­
ences (HICSS). 2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS). Koloa, HI, USA: IEEE, Jan. 2016, pp. 4375–4384. ISBN: 978­0­7695­
5670­3. DOI: 10.1109/HICSS.2016.543. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
7427729/ (visited on 09/20/2022).
[14]
Pavel Lyakhov, Mariya Kiladze, and Ulyana Lyakhova. “System for Neural Network
Determination of Atrial Fibrillation on ECG Signals with Wavelet­Based Preprocess­
ing”. In: Applied Sciences 11.16 (Aug. 5, 2021), p. 7213. ISSN: 2076­3417. DOI:
10.3390/app11167213. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/11/16/7213 (visited
on 01/27/2023).
[15]
Seungmin Lee et al. “Efficient Fiducial Point Detection of ECG QRS Complex Based
on Polygonal Approximation”. In: Sensors 18.12 (Dec. 19, 2018), p. 4502. ISSN:
1424­8220. DOI: 10.3390/s18124502. URL: http://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/
12/4502 (visited on 01/27/2023).
[16]
Meng­Hsi Wu and Edward Y. Chang. “DeepQ Arrhythmia Database: A Large­Scale
Dataset for Arrhythmia Detector Evaluation”. In: Proceedings of the 2nd Interna­
tional Workshop on Multimedia for Personal Health and Health Care. MM ’17: ACM
Multimedia Conference. Mountain View California USA: ACM, Oct. 23, 2017, pp. 77–
80. ISBN: 978­1­4503­5504­9. DOI: 10.1145/3132635.3132647. URL: https://dl.acm.
org/doi/10.1145/3132635.3132647 (visited on 01/27/2023).
[17]
G.B. Moody and R.G. Mark. “The impact of the MIT­BIH Arrhythmia Database”. In:
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine 20.3 (June 2001), pp. 45–
50. ISSN: 07395175. DOI: 10.1109/51.932724. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/932724/ (visited on 01/28/2023).
[18]
Benjamin A. Teplitzky, Michael McRoberts, and Hamid Ghanbari. “Deep learning
for comprehensive ECG annotation”. In: Heart Rhythm 17.5 (May 2020), pp. 881–
888. ISSN: 15475271. DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2020.02.015. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S154752712030117X (visited on 01/30/2023).
[19]
Devender Kumar et al. “CACHET­CADB: A Contextualized Ambulatory Electrocar­
diography Arrhythmia Dataset”. In: Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine 9 (2022),
p. 893090. ISSN: 2297­055X. DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.893090.
[20]
Gari Clifford et al. “AF Classification from a Short Single Lead ECG Recording:
the Physionet Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2017”. In: 2017 Computing in
Cardiology Conference. Sept. 14, 2017. DOI: 10.22489/CinC.2017.065-469. URL:
http://www.cinc.org/archives/2017/pdf/065-469.pdf (visited on 02/01/2023).
[21]
Pratik Kanani and Mamta Padole. “ECG Heartbeat Arrhythmia Classification Using
Time­Series Augmented Signals and Deep Learning Approach”. In: Procedia Com­
puter Science 171 (2020), pp. 524–531. ISSN: 18770509. DOI: 10.1016/j.procs.
2020.04.056. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1877050920310231
(visited on 01/24/2023).
[22]
B. Halder, S. Mitra, and M. Mitra. “Detection and identification of ECG waves by his­
togram approach”. In: 2016 2nd International Conference on Control, Instrumenta­
tion, Energy & Communication (CIEC). 2016 2nd International Conference on Con­
trol, Instrumentation, Energy & Communication (CIEC). Kolkata, India: IEEE, Jan.
42
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:53==
2016, pp. 168–172. ISBN: 978­1­5090­0035­7. DOI: 10.1109/CIEC.2016.7513749.
URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7513749/ (visited on 01/24/2023).
[23]
PhysioBank Annotations. PhysioBank Annotations. July 2016. URL: https://archive.
physionet.org/physiobank/annotations.shtml (visited on 01/31/2023).
[24]
M.B. Oefinger and R.G. Mark. “A web­based tool for visualization and collaborative
annotation of physiological databases”. In: Computers in Cardiology, 2005. Com­
puters in Cardiology, 2005. Lyon, France: IEEE, 2005, pp. 163–165. ISBN: 978­0­
7803­9337­0. DOI: 10.1109/CIC.2005.1588060. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/1588060/ (visited on 09/20/2022).
[25]
George B Moody. “LightWAVE: Waveform and Annotation Viewing and Editing in
a Web Browser”. In: Computing in cardiology 40 (Sept. 2013), pp. 17–20. ISSN:
2325­8861. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4627786/ (visited
on 09/20/2022).
[26]
Raimond L. Winslow, Stephen Granite, and Christian Jurado. “WaveformECG: A
Platform for Visualizing, Annotating, and Analyzing ECG Data”. In: Computing in
science & engineering 18.5 (2016), pp. 36–46. ISSN: 1521­9615. DOI: 10.1109/
MCSE.2016.91. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5476937/
(visited on 09/20/2022).
[27]
Zijian Ding et al. “LabelECG: A Web­based Tool for Distributed Electrocardiogram
Annotation”. In: (2019). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.
1908.06553. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.06553 (visited on 09/20/2022).
[28]
V.C. Raykar et al. “Learning from crowds”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Re­
search 11 (2010), pp. 1297–1322. ISSN: 1533­7928.
[29]
Jonas Weiss, Hagen Malberg, and Martin Schmidt. “Non­invasive foetal ECG signal
quality assessment by experts and non­experts”. In: 2020 11th Conference of the
European Study Group on Cardiovascular Oscillations (ESGCO). 2020 11th Con­
ference of the European Study Group on Cardiovascular Oscillations (ESGCO).
Pisa, Italy: IEEE, July 2020, pp. 1–2. ISBN: 978­1­72815­751­1. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
ESGCO49734.2020.9158177. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9158177/
(visited on 09/20/2022).
[30]
Martine Rutten, Ellen Minkman, and Maarten van der Sanden. “How to get and keep
citizens involved in mobile crowd sensing for water management? A review of key
success factors and motivational aspects”. In: WIREs Water 4.4 (July 2017). ISSN:
2049­1948, 2049­1948. DOI: 10.1002/wat2.1218. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/10.1002/wat2.1218 (visited on 09/20/2022).
[31]
Zhiyuan Zeng, Jian Tang, and Tianmei Wang. “Motivation mechanism of gamifi­
cation in crowdsourcing projects”. In: International Journal of Crowd Science 1.1
(Mar. 6, 2017), pp. 71–82. ISSN: 2398­7294. DOI: 10.1108/IJCS- 12- 2016- 0001.
URL: https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/IJCS- 12- 2016-
0001/full/html (visited on 12/28/2022).
[32]
L. von Ahn. “Games with a Purpose”. In: Computer 39.6 (June 2006), pp. 92–94.
ISSN: 0018­9162. DOI: 10.1109/MC.2006.196. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/1642623/ (visited on 09/20/2022).
[33]
Bidisha Roy, Mark Call, and Natalie Abts. “Development of Usability Guidelines for
Mobile Health Applications”. In: HCI International 2019 ­ Posters. Ed. by Constan­
tine Stephanidis. Vol. 1034. Series Title: Communications in Computer and Informa­
tion Science. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 500–506. ISBN:
978­3­030­23524­6 978­3­030­23525­3. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-23525-3_68. URL:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-23525-3_68 (visited on 01/28/2023).
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
43
==PAGE:54==
[34]
Christian Rohrer. “When to use which user­experience research methods”. In: Nielsen
Norman Group (2014).
[35]
Travis Lowdermilk. User­centered design: a developer’s guide to building user­friendly
applications. First edition. OCLC: ocn821218574. Beijing: O’Reilly, 2013. 135 pp.
ISBN: 978­1­4493­5980­5.
[36]
Ashley Williams. “User­centered design, activity­centered design, and goal­directed
design: a review of three methods for designing web applications”. In: Proceed­
ings of the 27th ACM international conference on Design of communication ­ SIG­
DOC ’09. the 27th ACM international conference. Bloomington, Indiana, USA: ACM
Press, 2009, p. 1. ISBN: 978­1­60558­559­8. DOI: 10.1145/1621995.1621997. URL:
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1621995.1621997 (visited on 12/28/2022).
[37]
J. Nielsen. “The use and misuse of focus groups”. In: IEEE Software 14.1 (Feb.
1997), pp. 94–95. ISSN: 07407459. DOI: 10.1109/52.566434. URL: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/566434/ (visited on 02/02/2023).
[38]
Janni Nielsen, Torkil Clemmensen, and Carsten Yssing. “Getting access to what
goes on in people’s heads?: reflections on the think­aloud technique”. In: Proceed­
ings of the second Nordic conference on Human­computer interaction. NORDICHI02:
NORDICHI 2002, The second Nordic conference on Human­Computer Interaction.
Aarhus Denmark: ACM, Oct. 19, 2002, pp. 101–110. ISBN: 978­1­58113­616­6.
DOI: 10.1145/572020.572033. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/572020.572033
(visited on 02/02/2023).
[39]
George B Moody and Roger G Mark. MIT­BIH Arrhythmia Database. Type: dataset.
1992. DOI: 10.13026/C2F305. URL: https://physionet.org/content/mitdb/ (visited
on 01/25/2023).
[40]
Chen Xie et al. Waveform Database Software Package (WFDB) for Python. Ver­
sion 4.1.0. DOI: 10.13026/9NJX-6322. URL: https://physionet.org/content/wfdb-
python/4.1.0/ (visited on 01/25/2023).
[41]
Richard Barker. CASE method: entity relationship modelling. Reprint. Computer
aided systems engineering. Harlow: Addison­Wesley­Longman, 1999. ISBN: 978­
0­201­41696­1.
[42]
John Brooke et al. “SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale”. In: Usability evaluation
in industry (1996), pp. 4–7.
[43]
Jakob E. Bardram. “CACHET Unified Methodology for Assessment of Clinical Fea­
sibility”. In: (2018).
[44]
Venkatesh et al. “User Acceptance of Information Technology: Toward a Unified
View”. In: MIS Quarterly 27.3 (2003), p. 425. ISSN: 02767783. DOI: 10 . 2307 /
30036540. URL: https : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 10 . 2307 / 30036540 (visited on
01/13/2023).
[45]
James R. Lewis. “Psychometric Evaluation of the PSSUQ Using Data from Five
Years of Usability Studies”. In: International Journal of Human­Computer Interac­
tion 14.3 (Sept. 2002), pp. 463–488. ISSN: 1044­7318, 1532­7590. DOI: 10.1080/
10447318.2002.9669130. URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
10447318.2002.9669130 (visited on 01/13/2023).
[46]
James R. Lewis and Jeff Sauro. “Item Benchmarks for the System Usability Scale”.
In: (Journal of Usability Studies 13.3 2018), pp. 158–167. URL: https://uxpajournal.
org/item-benchmarks-system-usability-scale-sus/.
[47]
Naomi B Robbins and Richard M Heiberger. “Plotting Likert and other rating scales”.
In: Proceedings of the 2011 joint statistical meeting. Vol. 1. American Statistical
Association, 2011.
44
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:55==
[48]
J Nielsen. How many test users in a usability study? Jakob Nielsen’s Alertbox. 2012.
2012. URL: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-many-test-users/ (visited on
01/28/2023).
[49]
K Moran and K Salazar. Large devices preferred for important tasks. Publisher:
Nielsen Norman Group. 2019. URL: https : / / www . nngroup . com / articles / large -
devices-important-tasks/ (visited on 01/28/2023).
[50]
Tina Tseng, Amanda Stent, and Domenic Maida. “Best Practices for Managing Data
Annotation Projects”. In: (2020). Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1. DOI: 10.48550/
ARXIV.2009.11654. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.11654 (visited on 01/28/2023).
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
45
==PAGE:56==
46
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix
A.1
Interview with Cardiologist: Notes
1. Change ”fellow” occupation to “Cardiologist in training” or “trainee in cardiology”.
2. You should be able to zoom/pan and see the whole ECG
3. 2 channels in the ECG would be nice to have
4. Change “all time project contributions” to “Number of annotations”
5. Change “contribution” to “annotations”
6. Change the number of ECGs in the introduction to 20
7. We should have a larger of the number of known ECGs to test the users
8. We could maybe use FYC ”Foreningen af yngre cardiologer” as test persons?
9. You should be able to set your confidence level on your annotation. And then we
could choose to only use the annotation of high confidence level.
10. We could have submission categories of ”uncertain”, ”probably” and ”certain”
11. We could also have Submit certain diagnose or submit uncertain diagnose
A.2
Interview with Danish Medical Equipment Manufacturer:
Notes
1. Maybe make use of tinder swipe annotations for sequence­level annotations
2. Three types of annotation: annotation at a sequence level, beat­by­beat annotation
and annotation of the individual waves (P, Q­R­S, T) of the cardiac cycle
3. Have a yes/no questionnaire­type system that checks if; p­wave is present, p­wave
is consistent, there is QRS complex, there are varying distances between the QRS
complexes, t­wave is present
4. Read LITFL.com
5. get free data from PhysioNet
6. Kaggle dataset challenges
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
47
==PAGE:58==
A.3
Prototype Test 1: Wireframes
(a) Sign In
(b) Sign Up
Figure A.1: Sign In & Sign Up
(a) First Home Page
(b) Home Page
(c) Project Page
Figure A.2: Home Page & Project Pages
48
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:59==
(a) Daily
(b) Weekly
(c) All Time
Figure A.3: Leaderboards
(a) Badges
(b) Level System
(c) Level System
Figure A.4: Profile ­ Badges, My Projects & User Info
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
49
==PAGE:60==
(a) Badges
(b) Level System
(c) Level System
Figure A.5: Profile ­ Badges, My Projects & User Info
Figure A.6: Level System
50
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.7: Annotation Page
Figure A.8: Annotation Feedback
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
51
==PAGE:62==
A.4
Prototype Test 2: Screenshots
(a) Home Page
(b) Training Project
(c) Annotation Project
Figure A.9: Home Page, Training Project & Annotation Project
(a) Daily
(b) Weekly
(c) All Time
Figure A.10: Leaderboards
52
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:63==
(a) My Badges
(b) Level System
Figure A.11: Profile ­ My Badges & Level System
(a) My Projects
(b) User Info
Figure A.12: Profile ­ My Projects & User Info
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.13: Annotation Page
Figure A.14: Pan/Zoom
Figure A.15: Annotation Feedback
Figure A.16: Correct Annotation
54
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.17: Incorrect Annotation
Figure A.18: Badge Unlocked
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
55
==PAGE:66==
A.5
Prototype Test 2: Tasks
1. Sign up as a new user
2. View a training project
3. Annotate an ECG from a training project
4. View an annotation project
5. Annotate an ECG from a regular project
6. View the leaderboard
7. Check your profile
8. View the information on how level, experience, and accuracy are calculated by click­
ing the small info button in the top right corner
9. Read the provided information
10. View your own projects
11. Do you have any additional thoughts about the prototype?
A.6
Prototype Test 2: Interview Notes
A.6.1
Test Subject 1
1. Increase the number of leads if annotating more than rhythms
2. Make it possible to go back to the ECG signal after being shown feedback
3. Show some pointers or guidelines to the relevant diagnoses after incorrect submis­
sion
4. Include ”Other” as an annotation if user does not agree with the options listed
5. ”Add Friend” feature would be good
6. Include the option of being able to click each other on the leaderboard to view profiles
7. Include challenges
8. Notifications to keep users interested
A.6.2
Test Subject 2
1. ”Submit with uncertainty” is a good feature
2. Show text and experience in green when a correct submission is performed and red
if incorrect
3. Info button is too small
4. Include ”XP” under the experience indicator
A.6.3
Test Subject 3
1. Have the option to remove the annotation options with a swipe
2. Increase font size and change colour to emphasize if the response is correct or
wrong
3. The list of annotation options is messy if all categories are present
56
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:67==
4. Have normal sinus rhythm at the top, as it is going to be the most used annotation
category
5. ”Correct!” and experience is all that is needed when a correct annotation is submitted
6. Leaderboard is a good feature to compare with colleagues and friends
7. Include a streak feature and a streak badge
8. Level looks cool but is not motivating
9. Badges is a nice feature and look cool
10. Make groups and collect XP as a group
11. Show profiles for other users
A.7
easyG ­ Supplementary Screenshots
(a) Create Project 1
(b) Create Project 2
Figure A.19: Create Project Page
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
57
==PAGE:68==
(a) Login Page
(b) Create Project 2
Figure A.20: Register Page
58
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:69==
A.8
System Usability Scale Scores
Subject 1
Subject 2
Subject 3
Subject 4
Subject 5
Q1:
I think that I
would like to use this
system frequently
1
4
3
3
4
Q2: I found the sys­
tem
unnecessarily
complex
1
2
1
1
1
Q3: I thought the sys­
tem was easy to use
5
4
5
5
5
Q4:
I think that I
would need the sup­
port of a technical
person to be able to
use this system
1
1
1
1
1
Q5: I found the vari­
ous functions in this
system were well in­
tegrated
5
4
5
4
4
Q6:
I thought there
was too much incon­
sistency in this sys­
tem
1
4
1
3
2
Q7:
I would imag­
ine that most peo­
ple
would
learn
to
use this system very
quickly
5
3
5
5
4
Q8:
I
found
the
system very cumber­
some to use
1
1
1
1
4
Q9:
I felt very con­
fident using the sys­
tem
5
4
5
4
4
Q10:
I
needed
to
learn a lot of things
before I could get go­
ing with this system
1
4
1
1
4
Score
90
67.5
95
85
72.5
Total Score
82
Table A.1: SUS scores for the five test subjects
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
59
==PAGE:70==
A.9
Effort Expectancy Scores
Subject
1
Subject
2
Subject
3
Subject
4
Subject
5
Q1: Overall, I would be satisfied
with how easy it is to use easyG
5
4
­
3
4
Q2:
My interaction with easyG
would be clear and understand­
able
5
5
­
2
4
Q3: It would be easy for me to
learn to use easyG
5
5
­
5
4
Q4: I would find easyG easy to
use
5
5
­
5
4
Q5: I would be skillful at using
easyG
1
5
­
2
4
Q6: The feedback provided with
easyG when annotating is clear
and useful
2
3
­
4
4
Q7: The interface would be effec­
tive in helping me complete an­
notations
2
5
­
3
4
Q8: easyG would be pleasant to
use
5
5
­
3
4
Q9: easyG has all the functional­
ities that I expect it to have
3
3
­
3
3
Table A.2: Effort Expectancy scores for the five test subjects
A.10
Debriefing Interviews
A.10.1
Test Subject 1
1. Q: How did you find the overall experience of using the app?
• Good experience. Easy to use.
2. Q: How intuitive did you find the app’s user interface and design?
• Intuitive.
• Simple and manageable amount of features.
3. Q: How long did it take you to learn to use the application?
• Instantly understood the purpose of the application.
• Not difficult to understand with a medical background.
4. Q: Were you aware of the game elements (level, daily goals, leaderboard, total
annotations, accuracy, streak, badges)? If yes, which ones?
• Leaderboard was key for motivation, as the subject was competing with col­
leagues.
• Accuracy was nice as it has a direct impact on your experience per annotation.
• Badges pop­up was nice, but not very motivational apart from the visual effect.
60
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:71==
• It would make sense to have more pop­ups in general.
5. Q: Did the game elements have a positive or no effect on your motivation?
• Generally had a very positive effect, however not positive enough to make you
want to visit the profile page to show it. Should have accuracy, streak etc.
visible whilst annotating or on the home page.
6. Q: Were there any features that you feel were missing?
• Having a short introduction to the diagnoses on the project page, so that you
knew how to distinguish between the categories before starting would have
been nice.
7. Q: How does the app compare to other means of annotating ECG data that you
have used in the past?
• Roughly the same as in the hospital.
• Lacks a feature to measure how many millimetres are between the QRS­complexes.
8. Q: Did you find the feedback understandable in training projects and annotation
projects, respectively?
• Nice and easy to understand
• Like the feedback in the annotation page with correct/wrong and XP.
9. Q: Did you encounter any issues or bugs while using the app?
• The image did not load in time when ’submit’ button was clicked. Very frustrat­
ing.
10. Q: Did you find any of the app’s features overwhelming or confusing?
• No. Everything was simple.
11. Q: Did you find the app easy to navigate? Were there any specific areas that you
had trouble finding?
• Easy to navigate. If you are used to the icons of the bottom navigation, then it
is not an issue.
12. Q: Do you have any additional feedback or suggestions for how the app could be
improved?
• The user could only consider participating in an annotation project if financially
compensated or if the cause was very specific and in a project that the user
was very passionate about. On the other hand, the user could imagine using
the training projects.
• Perhaps promote the social aspect of the application.
• Challenges.
• View friends’ profiles.
A.10.2
Test Subject 2
1. Q: How did you find the overall experience of using the app?
• Really good, easy to understand.
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
61
==PAGE:72==
• Do not agree with all the training data.
• Would have been nice with an introduction to the diagnoses before annotating.
• Like the rewards.
• Fun to see other people’s annotations.
• Generally, a good user­experience.
2. Q: How intuitive did you find the app’s user interface and design?
• The image loading was slow.
• Sometimes it won’t change the ECG image.
3. Q: How long did it take you to learn to use the application?
• Roughly the same duration as with other mobile applications ­ a few minutes.
4. Q: Were you aware of the game elements (level, daily goals, leaderboard, total
annotations, accuracy, streak, badges)? If yes, which ones?
• Noticed that the badges were unlocked, but it did not have a big impact. Not a
big motivator.
5. Q: Did the game elements have a positive or no effect on your motivation?
• Game elements were not a big motivator.
6. Q: Were there any features that you feel were missing?
• No.
7. Q: How does the app compare to other means of annotating ECG data that you
have used in the past?
• Have tried similar introductory programs earlier where the difficulty of the an­
notations gets increasingly more difficult.
8. Q: Did you find the feedback understandable in training projects and annotation
projects, respectively?
• The red and green colors were good indicators that made it easy to understand
if the annotation was correct or wrong.
• did not notice the quick tips.
9. Q: Did you encounter any issues or bugs while using the app?
• The zooming was kind of buggy at times.
• Thought it was a mistake when a ”training annotation” was shown in an anno­
tation project.
• Loading can be slow when ’continue’ is pressed.
10. Q: Did you find any of the app’s features overwhelming or confusing?
• No.
11. Q: Did you find the app easy to navigate? Were there any specific areas that you
had trouble finding?
62
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:73==
• Very easy to navigate ­ apart from the quick tips, which was difficult to find.
12. Q: Do you have any additional feedback or suggestions for how the app could be
improved?
• Good application.
• If everyone annotates the same diagnose, then the ECG should be updated
and the users should be notified.
• Get notified if every other user submitted a different diagnose for an ECG.
A.10.3
Test Subject 4 & Test Subjects 5
1. Q: How did you find the overall experience of using the app?
• User­friendly.
• Purpose is easy to understand.
2. Q: How intuitive did you find the app’s user interface and design?
• Intuitive.
• Y­axis was stretched.
• You need all 12 leads.
3. Q: How long did it take you to learn to use the application?
• Instantly.
• Not difficult to understand with a medical background.
4. Q: Were you aware of the game elements (level, daily goals, leaderboard, total
annotations, accuracy, streak, badges)? If yes, which ones?
• Especially badges, as they had a pop­up which made you notice.
5. Q: Did the game elements have a positive or no effect on your motivation?
• Positive. But the fact that the ECG recordings didn’t look like the ones they
have learned and need to learn for the hospital was demotivating.
6. Q: Were there any features that you feel were missing?
• No.
7. Q: How does the app compare to other means of annotating ECG data that you
have used in the past?
• It is exactly the same procedure as in the hospital. You get an ECG signal and
determine if its normal or contains arrhythima. If there is an arrhythmia, you
determine the diagnosis.
8. Q: Did you find the feedback understandable in training projects and annotation
projects, respectively?
• Didn’t put much thought into the feedback
• Would have liked 12 lead ECG signal, as you cannot exclude all diagnoses
without all the information.
9. Q: Did you encounter any issues or bugs while using the app?
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
63
==PAGE:74==
• Sometimes the next ECG signal wouldn’t load in time, so you would still be
seeing the old ECG signal which makes it impossible to annotate.
10. Q: Did you find any of the app’s features overwhelming or confusing?
• No.
11. Q: Did you find the app easy to navigate? Were there any specific areas that you
had trouble finding?
• Easy to navigate.
12. Q: Do you have any additional feedback or suggestions for how the app could be
improved?
• Feels that it is important that it is the exact same visual format as in the hospital
­ red checkered paper with black ECG waves and 12 leads. It is demotivating
to annotate data that is not visually equivalent to the one that is used in the
hospital.
• Arrhythmia may be located in a different lead ­ therefore 12 lead is necessary.
• atrial fibrillation vs normal sinus wave project is probably too easy.
• Premature ventricular contraction vs premature atrial contraction on the other
hand was too difficult.
• Make projects containing ECGs that look similar would be fun.
• Have a clinician do the projects would be beneficial, as they would be able to
group diagnoses that look similar, which would make annotation more fun and
challenging.
• It would be more fun if data quality and data loading was better
• The app is a great idea.
• In a hospital setting: would be a helpful feature if ECG signals were sent out
to more hospital staff through the application, so that you would get multiple
opinions on each ECG signal.
64
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
==PAGE:75==
A.11
Distribution of Contributions
1. X indicates key responsibility for the chapter, section or empirical activity.
2. (X) indicates strong direct support.
3. If two Xs appear on a row, it means that the contribution was equal.
Contribution
Bastian
Martin
Report
1 Introduction
X
X
2 Background and Related Work
X
X
3 Design Process
X
X
3.1 User­Centered Design Method
X
3.2 Design Research
X
(X)
3.3 Personas
X
3.4 Design and Design Evaluation
X
4 Implementation
X
X
4.1 Conceptual Design
(X)
X
4.2 User Interface
X
4.3 System Design
X
4.4 Data and Data Management
X
5 Study
X
X
5.1 Methods
X
X
5.2 Recruitment
X
(X)
5.3 Results
(X)
X
6 Discussion
X
X
6.1 Study Results
X
X
6.2 Alternative Annotation Methods
(X)
X
6.3 Motivational Factors in easyG
(X)
X
6.4 Limitations
X
Empirical
Flutter ­ Home
X
(X)
Flutter ­ Annotation
X
Flutter ­ Profile Implementation
(X)
X
Flutter ­ Leaderboard
(X)
X
Flutter ­ Project Page
X
X
Flutter ­ Utilities
X
(X)
Data Models
X
(X)
Firebase Integration
X
(X)
Usability Tests
X
X
Expert Interviews
X
X
Table A.3: Distribution of Contributions
easyG: A Mobile Application for Crowdsourced Electrocardiography Annotation
65
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
