==PAGE:1==
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Con­
trol: Web App
Master Thesis
DTU Computer Science
Department of Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
Master Thesis
Date, year
By
Sahas Arora
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Computer Science, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, De­
partment of Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Computer Science
and Software Engineering concepts including but not limited to Full­Stack Web Develop­
ment, Front­End technologies (client domain), Back­End technologies (server domain),
Blockchains, and Data and Network Security.
Sahas Arora ­ s202555
Signature
Date
ii
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Sahas Arora, MSc. Computer Science, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Limitations & Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Architecture considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory: Blockchain
7
2.1
What is and why blockchain? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Comparison with non­blockchain solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Decentralized Applications (dApps) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Limitations of Blockchains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Related Existing Work
14
3.1
Decentralized Identity Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Secure Data Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Digital Asset Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Practical: Summary, Analysis, Design
18
4.1
Brief overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2
Functionalities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4
Blockchain Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.5
Enhancing Our App: Multiple Blockchains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.6
Proposed Technical Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Implementation and Evaluation
25
5.1
Authentication: MitID and HyperLedger Fabric
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Permission Exchange: Solana
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6
Conclusion
29
7
Future Work
30
Bibliography
31
A Title
35
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Domain
Imagine an application that aims to provide the user with an unambiguous view and com­
plete control of ”their” data which is accessible to and in use by companies and corpo­
rations via their various products, such as web and mobile applications. Moreover, the
power to retract that data if they wish to do so would also lie with the user.
If we were to consider the established and in­place web2 paradigm, one approach to de­
velop such an application could involve having a client­server architecture, a very widely
used and a common architecture pattern for web applications, to create a centralized app
that allows its users to log in and view a ledger or table of all the data that belongs to
them, and then to also allow them access to the functionality of retracting the permission
to access their data. The following would be a brief overview of the steps involved in the
implementation of such an application:
1. User authentication and authorization
2. Database technologies
3. Server­side languages and frameworks
4. Front­end technologies
5. API technologies
6. Security technologies
7. Compliance technologies
1.1.1
User authentication and authorization
It goes without saying that a platform with confidential information should have authenti­
cation and authorization mechanisms such as login credentials, OAuth, or Single Sing­On
(SSO). To handle these requirements, one could use JSON Web Tokens (JWTs) or OAuth
login/signup protocols along with a host of libraries such as PassportJS.
1.1.2
Database technologies
To store and retrieve user data, a database such as MySQL, MongoDB or PostgreSQL.
A possible approach is using Mongoose, which is an Object Data Modeling (ODM) library
for MongoDB, in order to define the schema and perform CRUD operations on the user’s
data.
1.1.3
Server­side
To facilitate communication with the database and handle server­side logic, one would
likely use a server­side language such as NodeJS, Python or Ruby and a web framework
such as ExpressJS, Django or Ruby on Rails.
1.1.4
Front­end technologies
To build a user interface, standard UI ecosystem that include HTML, CSS, and Javascript,
along with front­end frameworks such as ReactJS or VueJS and Redux or React Context
for state management.
1.1.5
API technologies
For communication to be allowed amongst the different applications or organizations and
the user’s data, a RESTful API or GraphQL needs to be implemented.
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
1
==PAGE:10==
1.1.6
Security Technologies
An application with significantly confidential data on it must have a solid layer of security
technologies in order to ensure that only the authorized user has access to the portal.
Access controls, HTTPS, and encryption are a few ways to add security to the platform.
One can think of user authentication and authorization being synonymous with security
technologies, and they indeed are. It is via a process of verification that an entity gains
access control to a system. Along with the authentication, a middleware to set HTTP
headers for additional security on a website is a viable option for our case. For eg. an
ExpressJS middleware called Helmet.
1.1.7
User authentication and authorization
It goes without saying that a platform with confidential information should have authentica­
tion and authorization mechanisms such as login credentials, OAuth, or Single Sing­On
(SSO). To handle these requirements, one could use JSON Web Tokens (JWTs) along
with libraries such as PassportJS, which are efficient in JWT generation and validation.
1.1.8
Compliance
Since the application at its core deals with personal data within the EU, compliance would
be necessary. As a controller or processor, HIPAA or GDPR compliance technologies
would have to be in place within the app ecosystem.
1.2
Limitations & Problem Statement
Before going into the limitations of the client­server architecture, it must be noted that
these limitations, to a certain extent, are more related to the implementation of the archi­
tecture and the technologies used, rather than being inherent to the architecture itself.
Moreover, given the specific use­case that is in question, which is the development of an
application with highly sensitive data on it, some limitations exist solely because of the
nature of this application, and because we are giving a higher importance to security than
any other factor. When it comes to the client­server architecture, a few limitations are (not
limited to):
• Limited processing power: The server may become a bottleneck in terms of pro­
cessing power, leading to slower performance
• Security: The centralization of the server makes it a single point of failure, making
it more vulnerable to attacks and security threats
• Scalability: When the amount of data coupled with the traffic on the application
becomes large, it can get tricky and difficult to handle that
Even though scalability was mentioned as a benefit of the client­server architecture, that
factor changes drastically depending on the context and the specific implementation. To
reiterate, it can be easier to scale the server component as the client and the server re­
side separately, thereby allowing the server to be horizontally scaled (eg. adding more
servers) to handle the increasing load.
However, this separation is what may act as a limitation, as the communication between
the client and the server can create a bottleneck as the users or the amount of data in­
crease. This architecture can also be more complex to manage and deploy at scale,
as each server component needs to be configured and maintained individually. This ul­
timately begs the question: Which approach is the most secure for developing an
application wherein a user can see which external parties have access to their
data, and should they choose to retract that access they can? Could the answer be
blockchain?
2
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:11==
1.3
Architecture considerations
As described in the section above, the specific requirements and constraints of the prob­
lem at hand ultimately determines which architectural pattern should be applied and put
to use. Regardless, there are trade­offs as well as limitations of each approach. For eg.
The client­server method can indeed be used to develop this application, however it pro­
poses limitations. These issues can be mitigated by incorporating different architectural
patterns within an application’s ecosystem. However, that may pose other problems such
as maintenance of the segregated components, as well as rendering the code to be more
complex. As a result, it boils down to these particular requirements and compromises that
have to be made in order to have a smoother development experience, as well as making
the application scalable and secure.
That being said, there are two software development architectural patters that are good
contenders given the context of the application that we are trying to build namely:
• Client­Server Architecture
• Microservices Architecture
• Serverless Architecture
1.3.1
Client­Server Architecture
Figure 1.1: Client­Server Overview
Being a widely accepted and one of the most used architecture patterns, some of the
benefits of a client­server architecture include:
• Scalability: The client and server components can be developed and deployed
independently, allowing for horizontal scaling of each component, as and when
needed
• Split Application Processing: The client is responsible for presenting data to the
user, and the server is responsible for storing and retrieving data, leading to a clear
segregation. This allows the app to be split and processed across multiple ma­
chines.
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
3
==PAGE:12==
• Improved Security: This architecture can provide improved security compared to
monolithic architectures. It does that by limiting the amount of code that runs on the
client side, thereby reducing the attack surface
• Reliability: By allowing for multiple servers to be used for serving the same data, it
reduces the impact of a single server failure, thereby providing better reliability
However, for the implementation of an application that aims to give full control to the user
over highly confidential data, along with tackling situations where that data is essentially
going to be viewed and referred to by entities other than the user themselves, there are
a few limitations that come in the way.
1.3.2
Microservices architecture
Figure 1.2: Overview
This pattern invloves breaking down the application into smaller, independent services that
communicate with each other through well­defined APIs. The benefits of this approach in
the context of our application are as follows:
• Improved Scalability: By breaking down a complex system into smaller, loosely
coupled services, it is undeniably easier to scale specific parts of the system inde­
pendently, as and when the demand changes
• Improved Resilience: Because each microservice runs in its own process, failure
of one service does not bring down the entire system. Aditionally, monitoring can
be targeted at individual services, making the overall system more resilient, as well
as allowing for a richer error handling
• Increased Deployment Flexibility: Microservices can be deployed and updated
independently, without having any impact on the rest of the system. This allows for
4
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:13==
a quicker delivery of new features and bug fixes, thereby reducing the time to market
• Better Technology Alignment: Microservices can be built using the most appro­
priate technology for each specific task, rather than being limited by a monolithic
architecture.
1.3.3
Serverless architecture
Figure 1.3: Overview
The Serverless pattern allows for running the code without provisioning or managing
servers. Some of its benefits are as follows:
• Cost effieciency: With serverless architecture, only the exact amount of computing
resources used are paid for, which can to lead to cost savings when compared to
traditional, always­on server setups
• Flexibility: Serverless architecture allows for easy scale up or down based on the
demands of the application, which can especially be beneficial when it comes to
handling varying levels of traffic
• Faster development and deployment: The development and deployment of smaller,
independent functions can lead to faster development times and a more agile de­
velopment process
• Improved reliability: By abstracting away the underlying infrastructure, serverless
architecture can offer improved reliability, wherein the only focus is on writing and
deploying code
Now even though these patterns will lend themselves well to develop the kind of applica­
tion we wish to develop, there still remain a few shortcomings. These include, but are not
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
5
==PAGE:14==
limited:
• Complexity: The distributed nature of microservices and serverless architectures
makes it harder to secure all components of the system, and manage communica­
tion between them
• Increased Attack Surface: With the division of an application into multiple mi­
croservices or functions, there is an increased risk of security vulnerabilities due
to a larger attack surface
• Configuration Management: Inconsistent or incorrect configuration management
can render a microservice or serverless architecture vulnerable to security threats
• Data Privacy: Because there is a high chance that data flowing in an application
running on a microservice or serverless architecture will often be stored and pro­
cessed at different locations in the app ecosystem, privacy of that data is a cause
for concern
• Skilled Expertise: Most of these architectures require skill to setup. Hence, not
having a well­thought out architecture of the app can lead to many issues concerning
security, scale and all the points mentioned here
It is established that in the given context, security is a critical concern. Given these short­
comings, another paradigm and technology that permits the implementation of such an
application along with all the security demands and requirements in tact, is a decentralized
application on the Web3 platform. With the main aim to provide users with more control
over their data, reduce central points of failure and increase trust and transparency in on­
line transactions. Because the nature of the application changes drastically when shifting
from a centralized server­ed web2 application to a dApp (decentralized app) running on a
blockchain network, including the methods of implementing the application, it is important
to list out the pros as a result of which this new approach came to be chosen for the task
at hand.
6
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:15==
2
Theory: Blockchain
2.1
What is and why blockchain?
Blockchain is a decentralized, distributed ledger technology that provides a secure and
transparent way of recording and verifying transactions. There are an array of features
that it brings to the table.
• Immutable Ledger: Once a block is added to the blockchain, it cannot be altered
or deleted. This ensures the integrity of the data and protects it against tampering
or fraud [1]
• Decentralization: In a blockchain network, there is no central authority or third
party responsible for maintaining and verifying transactions. Instead, the network is
maintained by a network of nodes, making it more secure and resistant to downtime
or single points of failure [2]
• Security: Blockchain uses cryptographic algorithms to secure transactions and
maintain the integrity of the data. Additionally, the decentralized nature of the net­
work makes it more resistant to attacks or hacking attempts
• Transparency: In a network which set up on a blockchain, all participants have
a copy of the ledger, making it easier to verify transactions and track the flow of
information
• Traceability: Each transaction is recorded in a block and linked to the previous
block. This creates an immutable, or unchangeable chain of events, allowing for
easy traceability and audibility of transactions
• Automation: With the use of smart contracts, business processes can be auto­
mated, reducing the need for intermediaries and increasing efficiency [3]
Immutability is one of the key features of blockchain tech, and it is achieved through the
use of consensus mechanisms. These are methods to reach an agreement among par­
ticipants in a network on the state of the system and the validity of transactions. In the
context of a blockchain network, consensus is used to validate transactions and add them
to the shared ledger in a secure manner. Once added, the transaction cannot be altered
or deleted.
Moreover, different blockchain platforms use different consensus mecha­
nisms, which include Proof of Work(PoW), Proof of Stake(PoS), Delegated Proof of Stake
(DPoS), and Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance(PBFT). [4]
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: Types of Blockchain
Blockchains also comes in four different types where they come with different security
protocols and access controls in place, these are:
• Public Blockchains: Everyone who’s a part of the network can check the transac­
tion and verify it, along with participating in the process of getting consensus [5]
• Private Blockchains: Not every node that is a part of the network can participate
in the blockchain, with strict access control mechanisms in place for data access [5]
• Consortium Blockchains: They can be seen as the chains that share the charac­
teristics of a centralized ecosystem. This is because it is privately owned, but the
ownership resides with a group of individuals, or an organization or business instead
of a singular user. As a result, the data can be public or private [5]
• Hybrid Blockchains: A combination of public and private blockchains. Here, an
individual joining the network will remain anonymous for as long as they don’t par­
ticipate in transactions with other users. [6]
There are certain considerations and comparisons that are necessary to evaluate in or­
der to better understand the technology as well as to consider it as the choice for the
development of the application.
2.2
Comparison with non­blockchain solutions
Even though it appears to be a viable solution for developing our application, there are
certain trade­offs that come with the use of a blockchain. The technology has been around
for over a decade and has made significant advancements over that time, but the appli­
cation of blockchain technology, especially in the realm of decentralized applications is
still in its early stages, albeit rapidly evolving.
8
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:17==
• The blockchain app development community is active and growing, however it is still
relatively smaller compared to other ones. When it comes to developer experience,
it may not be as smooth or straightforward, as the amount of resources such as
forums, tutorials, support and documentation available may be sparse. The time it
takes for the development of the project is directly impacted as a result.
• The use of cryptographic algorithms and methods such as public­key cryptography,
digital signatures and hash functions throughout a blockchain ensures the security
and the integrity of the data stored on the network. [7]
• The decentralized nature of blockchain provides a high level of security as it elimi­
nates the risk of a single point of failure. Transactions (or in the context of our app,
user inputs or actions) are recorded and validated on multiple nodes, making it near
impossible for the data to be tampered with. [8] This luxury would not exist if we
were to use any other architectural pattern. If one were to consider serverless ar­
chitecture, it’s security is often provided by the underlying cloud service provider. [9]
This means that security is managed and maintained by a third party, which could
be a strength as well as a weakness.
• Blockchain applications can be challenging to scale as they rely on a decentralized
network of nodes to validate transactions and maintain consensus. [7] This makes it
considerably difficult to achieve the same level of scalability as a centralized system.
On the other hand, microservices and serverless architectures have been designed
with scalability in mind, by breaking down a monolithic application into smaller, inde­
pendent services that can be scaled individually. This allows for horizontal scaling
and makes it easier to handle large amounts of traffic. [10]
Keeping security as a higher preference, it makes sense to approach the application with
a blockchain based solution, with the trade­off being ease of development, and scale.
That being said, there are ways to achieve scalability with blockchains as well. These
methods will be explored further.
2.3
Decentralized Applications (dApps)
A dApp, or a Decentralized Application is a software application which is built on top of a
decentalized network, such as a blockchain. The defining characteristics of a dApp are
as follows:
1. Decentralized storage
2. Decentalized consensus mechanisms
3. Decentralized control mechanisms
In other words, simply connecting our app to a blockchain would not deem it the stature of
being a dApp. However, given the infancy of the project and well blockchain technology
itself, the aim is to perhaps leverage these mechanisms to incorporate a decentralized
aspect in our application that can then be scaled, or be completely decentralized. Given
the context of the application that we’re building, it would definitely work in our favour if we
were to have a decentralized storage mechanisms like Interplanetary File System (IPFS)
or Swarm in place for the user data.
• IPFS: It is content­addressable, distributed file system that uses a distributed hash
table (DHT) to store file data across a network of nodes. Files and directories in
IPFS are identified via a unique hash, and is retrievable through a network­based
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
9
==PAGE:18==
URL. [11] Seeing the existing use cases, IPFS is often used as a back­end storage
solution for dApps
• Swarm: Swarm is another distributed file storage platform and content distribu­
tion network. It provides a decentralized storage that cater to applications that are
built on the Ethereum network (dApps). Swarm uses a striped log abstraction to
store data on the storage servers. [12] This abstraction simplifies storage allocation,
improves file access performance, balances server loads, provides fault­tolerance
through computed redundancy, and simplifies crash recovery. [13]
The paper ”IPFS ­ Content Addressed, Versioned, P2P File System” by Juan Benet, pub­
lished in 2014, provides an overview of IPFS [11], and how it aims to replace HTTP as the
primary way of accessing the web. A few key takeaways from the paper are as follows:
• It is designed to solve some of the problems that exist in the current traditional and
centralized web architecture, such as scalability, reliability and security
• It uses a content­addressed file system that allows for files to be identified and re­
trieved based on their content, instead of their location
• It uses a distributed hash table to index the files added to the system, allowing them
to be found and retrieved by the nodes in the network
• IPFS is designed to be self­certifying, meaning that files can be verified without
relying on trusted third parties
• It provides a number of features that make it a powerful tool for distributed data
storage and retrieval, including versioning, file pinning, and data de­duplication
Swarm is very similar to IPFS in terms of what it offers, and how data is stored, retrieved
and structured in the platform, wherein decentralized hash tables and content­addressed
storage are used. However, there are certain differences that provide a better insight into
how they function. For example, Swarm is designed to be a complementary layer to the
Ethereum ecosystem. As such, it uses Ethereum addresses as a naming system and
leverages the Ethereum blockchain for addressing and discovery. [12]
Technically, they can be used together to increase the reliability and scalability of the sys­
tem, as they’re already on their way to becoming more widely used in the decentralized
app development ecosystem. For example, IPFS can be used as a means to store and
retrieve content­addressed files, while Swarm can be used to share those files. But as is
the case with the blockchain world and development within it, it is uncertain to comment on
the complexity of such a system, as both the platforms were designed with differing goals
in mind. Therefore, interoperability and compatibility might become issues. Moreover,
IPFS and Swarm have different security models and assumptions in place. To ellabo­
rate on that further, IPFS counts on a trust­based network where nodes are assumed
to be well­behaved, while Swarm has certain built­in mechanisms to detect and counter
malicious attacks. [11] [13] [12]
2.4
Limitations of Blockchains
2.4.1
Scalability
• As touched upon is section 2.2, what having a blockchain backed app adds in terms
of security to the ecosystem, it takes away from scalability. Scalability in blockchain
is a challenge because it is designed to be secure, decentralized and a transparent
ledger of transactions, which requires a lot of computational power to maintain.
10
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:19==
• The consensus mechanism used by most blockchains requires multiple participants
to validate each transaction before it is added to the chain, which can result in slow
processing times and high latency.[14] In proof of work consensus mechanisms, this
need for validation of transactions can be especially time­consuming and resource
intensive, as the participants compete to validate transactions and add them to the
chain.[14] As a result, the number of transactions that can be handled per second
gets reduced and makes it difficult to handle a surge in the number of users.
• Furthermore, the size of the blockchain itself can be a crucial factor in scalability. As
more transactions are added to the chain and the blockchain grows, it can become
difficult to manage that data.[15]
2.4.2
Threats
Figure 2.2: 51% attacks at a glance
Blockchain security is based on cryptographic algorithms and consensus mechanisms,
but it is not completely foolproof. Some of the attacks that may occur are as follows:
• 51% Attack: In a 51% attack, a group of miners controlling more than 50% of the
computing power in a blockchain network can manipulate the network by rewriting
the blockchain’s history. This enables the attacker to either double­spend their coins,
or prevent new transactions from being confirmed [16]
• Double­Spending Attack: A double­spending attack is an attack in which an at­
tacker spends the same digital currency twice by sending it to two different recipients
in quick succession [17]
• Sybil Attack: In the case of a Sybil attack, an attacker creates multiple fake identi­
ties in a network to gain control over the network and then manipulate it somehow
[18]
• Forking: Fork problems are related to node versioning agreements when a software
upgrade takes place. [19]
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
11
==PAGE:20==
• Regulation: The incorporation and acceptance of blockchain technology globally in­
arguably comes at the cost of central banks loosing some hold on economic policies
and the amount of money in regulation. [20]
Understandably, the probability of these attacks occurring on a blockchain network de­
pends on several factors, including the size of the network, the level of security measures
in place, and the motivations of potential attackers. For example, smaller networks with
a comparatively fewer number of nodes may be more vulnerable to attacks. One reason
for this may be that there are a fewer number of resources available to detect and then
respond to security threats.
Meanwhile, larger networks with more number of nodes are difficult to attack, as they have
stronger measures in place to deal with the threats, and that would significantly increase
the cost and effort to compromise such a network.
At the end of the day, it is difficult to estimate the probability of a specific activity taking
place on the network, as a lot of variables are involved that would determine the likelihood
of that happening. However, research has been conducted on the potential vulnerabili­
ties of different types of blockchain networks and the security measures that can be put
in place to mitigate these risks.
2.4.3
Existing Threat Analysis
”An Analysis of Anonymity in Bitcoin Using P2P Network Traffic”, Meiklejohn et
al.[21]
This research paper by Meiklejohn et al. studies the anonymity of transactions in the
Bitcoin network, by analyzing traffic patterns on the Bitcoin network. The authors of the
paper aimed to test whether or not it was possible to create mappings between Bitcoin
addresses to IPs. They highlight certain functionalities of the existing Bitcoin clients, as
well as pointing out that these functionalities themselves were the cause of hindrance.
These include
1. Balancing and receiving bitcoins
2. Examining and rejecting transactions
3. Mine bitcoins
4. Maintain a user’s wallet
5. Disconnect from misbehaving networks
This led the team to develop a custom Bitcoin client over which they monitored each
transaction that took place along with a record of that transaction’s IP address. They
observe that, despite the cryptographic functions in place to protect the identity of the
users operating on the network, it is still possible to predict the identity of users. The
authors were able to identify 21% of the transactions correctly to their owners by analyzing
certain relay patterns that were being exhibited by the transactions.
”A Survey of Blockchain Security Issues and Challenges”, Kshetri et al.[22]
• This research paper happens to be a comprehensive survey of the not only the secu­
rity issues and challenges with the blockchain technology, but also how a blockchain
works, the different kinds of blockchains at our disposal, and how to achieve con­
sensus on the network.
The overview gives an insight into public, private and
consortium blockchains (the paper was published in 2017 and since then, Hybrid
Blockchains, which is a mixture of public and private blockchains have been es­
tablished as well), Proof of Work(PoW), Proof of Stake(PoS), smart contracts in the
12
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:21==
context of Ethereum. The paper dives deep into the potential security threats on
this ecosystem, in particular, the Fork Problem.
• But when it comes to the topic of issues such as scalability and time confirmation
of blockchain data, the authors provide sensible solutions to tackle the problems to
a certain extent. Elaborating upon that further, scalability can be tackled via Sim­
plified Payment Verification (SPV) technology, wherein only the block header is
used to record information about a transaction. A significant benefit of this is that
it reduces the user’s storage in blockchain payment verification, thereby mitigating
some worries from the process if and when the transactions increase in the future.
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
13
==PAGE:22==
3
Related Existing Work
As the value that the blockchain technology brings to the table is being realized more
with time, more work in the field is getting established by not only startups, but existing
corporate and technological giants. A prominent contributor of work in the field, IBM has
been conducting research as well as offering blockchain solutions to its clients.[23] It’s
blockchain solution is the commercial distribution of the HyperLedger Fabric, which is
in turn a blockchain framework developed by Linux Foundation.[24] Furthermore, a few
categories relevant to our application and the inherent goals that our project are as follows:
3.1
Decentralized Identity Management
One of the primary use cases of blockchain tech is in the realm of decentralized identity
management. Self­sovereign identity platforms like uPort, Civic, and Sovrin are using
blockchain to provide secure and transparent identity management solutions to individu­
als and organisations. But how does this work? Taking uPort as an example, it is a way
of registering identity on the Ethereum blockchain. It enables users to identify themselves
and send either information or value to other users.[25]
Blockchains are based around public and private keys, where the public key is publicly
visible and used to facilitate transactions, and the private key is the bit that the user holds
on to, and uses to sign those transactions.[26] Similarly, a uPort public identity is a public
key. This identity is verified by trusted parties and linked to attributes such as personal
information, addresses and other relevant data. Once the digital identity is established,
the users can interact with various decentralized applications (dApps), and leverage their
digital identity for various purposes such as authentication, authorization and/or secure
data sharing.
The paper ”A survey on blockchain­based identity management and decentralized pri­
vacy for personal data”[27] provides a comprehensive overview of the current state of
decentralized identity management research and development, including a discussion of
the various approaches, challenges, and opportunities in the field. A few key takeaways
from the paper are as follows[27]:
1. Blockchain technology provides a secure and transparent means for managing and
storing identities, making it a relevant and attractive solution for DID
2. DID can be used for various applications such as online transactions, access control
and e­governance
3. Decentralized identity management systems can be classified into self­sovereign
identity, user­centric identity, and consortium­based identity systems
4. Decentralized identity management has the potential to revolutionize the way iden­
tities are managed, especially in the context of the Internet of Things (IoT) and other
emerging technologies
5. DID can improve security and privacy by removing the need for central authorities
to control and store identity information
14
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.1: Digital Identity Management solution[28]
There is a product however, that needs to be discussed when it comes to digital asset
management using the blockchain, and most importantly because it is quite similar to the
application we are trying to build. Dock.io is a decentralized platform that enables secure
data sharing and digital asset management. It uses the blockchain technology to store
user data securely and provide users with control over their personal information. Dock.io
allows users to connect their data from various platforms and apps, and then use that
data to gain access to new services and products. It also enables to users to share their
data with partners, and gain rewards from doing so. Ultimately, it is platform powered by
blockchain that is designed to make it easier for users to manage their digital identity and
online presence in a secure and decentralized way.[28]
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
15
==PAGE:24==
3.2
Secure Data Sharing
Figure 3.2: Electronic Health Records: An illustration
Secure data sharing via blockchain involves blockchain to ensure the privacy and security
of sensitive data that is being shared between multiple parties. A prime example of this is
the healthcare industry where electronic health records (EHRs) are being shared securely
using blockchain. One of the ways in which EHRs are being securely shared through
blockchains is via Health Information Exchanges (HIEs). The decentralized nature of a
blockchain ensures that the EHRs are tamper­resistant and secure. An example of this is
the use of blockchain technology in the MedRec project, which is a decentalized medical
record management system that was developed at MIT Media Lab.[29] This system uses
blockchain technology to securely store and manage medical records, allowing for secure
and efficient sharing of medical information among authorized parties.
3.3
Digital Asset Management
This is a growing field, where blockchain is being utilized to securely manage various dig­
ital assets such as stocks, bonds, and other assets that have a value attached to them.
16
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:25==
The aim here is to provide a secure and transparent platform for the creation, issuance and
trading of security tokens. This helps in streamlining the entire process, reducing inter­
mediaries and the risk of fraud. Platforms like Harbor and Polymath are using blockchain
for digital asset management by aiming to simplify the process of simplifying and selling
security tokens. Security tokens happen to be the digital assets that represent ownership
of the user. [30] [31]
Moreover, the concept of digital asset management can be applied to several industries
such as gaming, finance and real estate. However, it is important to highlight that there
is a common theme that can be felt across most of the studies in blockchain applications
including digital asset management. The pros of this commonality include is the removal
of intermediaries from the picture, and enable a much more tamper­proof mechanism.
The cons, or areas where more research needs to be done, include scalability and inter­
operability.
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
17
==PAGE:26==
4
Practical: Summary, Analysis, Design
4.1
Brief overview
As stated in the previous sections as well, we’ve established the fact that we wish to
build a web application that provides it’s users with visibility over which external parties,
including government organizations and companies, have access to their data. We’ve
also established that we wish to add decentralized aspects to the app, potentially with a
blockchain to facilitate some functionalities and key features. Moreover, the application
should be secure given the confidentiality of the data on it, and the users should they want
to, can retract that access to their data if they choose to do so. Given these characteristics,
it would be fair to assume that the ultimate goal of the application is become a self­service
solution for the public, similar to what MitID is, and how it acts a door between the public
and organizations, both private and public.
4.2
Functionalities
The key functionalities can be divided into the following parts:
• A login via a secure digital identification provider/platform such as MitID
• An unambiguous view, perhaps in a tabular form, with each section displaying infor­
mation about an external party, and a UI element that indicates whether or not they
have access to the user’s data
• When the user wishes to retract and give permission to authorized use of their data
to a company, a clear message that warns them about the action that they’re about
to perform
• Once performed, a confirmation message that renders the action’s results
4.3
Analysis
4.3.1
Why Full­Stack?
Technically, what needs to be achieved, can be achieved via just a front­end applica­
tion deployed on a hosting service. As described in the Functionalities section, our app
incorporates a handful of steps, which might lead one to wonder whether a back­end is
even necessary, or whether that would over complicate the process. However, a lot of our
decisions and findings have revolved around themes of security and scalability. Having
distinct access controlled channels is one of the bare bones requirement of such an ap­
plication, and a dedicated server to handle requests from the client and delegate access
accordingly allows for the application to be scaled. If the amount of users or the number
of requests on the application were to surge, a simple front­end solution would be a weak
one, more prone to performance issues as well as attacks on the system. As a result, a
full­stack web application seems to be the solution. [32]
Analysing and selecting which technologies to use for the development of these function­
alities in a web application is a rather straightforward task. When it comes to the front­end
of the application, React is a framework that arguably sits somewhere at the top of the
chain. It has an extremely large ecosystem backing it, along with a very plug­and­play
approach that not only allows you to incorporate open­source packages in the app, but
also to build and iterate over UI interfaces fast.
Similarly, a NodeJS and Express server was a simple choice given our aim to make a
18
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:27==
secure and scalable application. There are a few good reasons to choose the combina­
tion of React on the client coupled with a Node­Express server on the backend. These
include:
• JavaScript Consistency: Both React and Node are programmed using JavaScript.
Moreover, having the same language on the front­end and back­end makes it easier
to write and maintain code
• Performance and Scale: Node uses an event­driven and non­blocking I/O model.
In other words, through these event loops Node allows asynchronous operations to
take place, which can significantly increase performance[33]
• Reduce Time to Market: React allows you build and roll­out UI quick, and having a
simple yet customizable server on the backend would give us room to develop and
iterate quicker
4.3.2
Authentication: MitID
At it’s core, the main idea of our application was to be a self­service one, that too aiming
at the public sector. As a result, MitID could very well be the personal key that grants
the user access to our self­service solution. Moreover, while accessing multiple services
such as changing your address, seeing your tax, seeing your banking details, as well as
reading the digital mails sent forth from the government, etc. it is an obligation to use
MitID in most of these scenarios. [34]
But, it is our responsibility to be skeptic in order to remain objective and make decisions
about incorporating these tools on merit and their ability to add to our goals as well. As
their official website states, MitID is designed to comply with the NSIS­protocol, the Danish
version of eIDAS­protocol. The eIDAS protocol is essentially a European Union regulation
surrounding cross­border transactions for digital identification and trust based services.
[34]
One of the reasons why MitID adds a significant layer of security is not because it adds
Two­Factor Authentication (2FA), but because of a certain kill­switch mechanism that it
has in place. MitID uses hardware security modules to generate the cryptographic keys
used in the transactions taking place on the platform. The modules provide access con­
trol, and include sensors which are responsible for detecting system break­ins. Once
detected, it destroys all the keys pertaining to an account. [34]
criipto.dk provides SDK’s to incorporate eID solutions like MitID, DigiD, bankID, Sofort,
etc. in your web or mobile application. Since we’re developing the application keeping
Denmark’s laws and services in mind, it seems to be the straightforward choice to incor­
porate MitID as it would allow for a smoother integration for a user to our platform. There
are two major pros of using MitID as one of the first security layers in the application. [34]
• Integration: Since MitID is connected with a Danish resident’s CPR (social­security
number), we would easily be able to identify the users and their authenticity in the
first place
• Public Service: Because of the fact that only a valid and registered citizen is using
the application, and that too via a method that they use for their accessing their
other public services, our aim for this app to be a public service institution remains
preserved [35]
4.4
Blockchain Limitations
At the end of the day, we will not be dealing with blockchains directly at the root level.
We would essentially be leveraging their functionalities and incorporate them in our appli­
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
19
==PAGE:28==
cation’s ecosystem through the means of APIs or SDKs. As a result, the analysis we’re
performing on blockchains is only to aid us in choosing which blockchain to incorporate
in our application. We’re not proposing ways to mitigate these issues. However, we are
shedding light on them so that our decisions to use the tools that we do are justified, and
are rooted in understanding the systems at play in the app ecosystem.
So far, we have discussed that a blockchain can face certain issues in terms of se­
curity and scalability. This leads us to a broader problem surrounding the blockchain
ecosystem, called the Blockchain Trilemma. [36] Blockchain trilemma is in fact an ac­
cepted and ’taken­for­granted’ theory that essentially states that blockchain developers
can only effectively prioritise two of the following terms when it comes to the development
of blockchains:
1. Security
2. Scalability
3. Decentralization
As the blockchain trilemma states, if Security and Scalability were to be prioritized, De­
centralization would be compromized, and vice versa.
In a decentralized network, a transaction would have to propagate through n number of
nodes in order for it to be validated and approved. If the number of transactions on that
network were to increase, it would most certainly cause throughput issues. For example:
Bitcoin has a maximum theoretical throughput value of 7 TPS, and it currently process 3
to 20 transactions per second (TPS). [37]
On the other hand, VISA’s network has the capability to process 2000 TPS (which has
also gone through a period where stress­tests were done on the network and it was found
to have handled 47,000 TPS, 2013).[37] However, VISA is built on a centralized payment
system, wherein the transactions flow through a central point of control. This arguably
puts the security of the transactions into question.
No one solution eradicates the problem entirely. However, one of the ways in which
not just scalability, but other facets of blockchain limitations are being tackled, is through
Blockchain Interoperability. Moreover, it must be duly noted that most of the metrics sur­
rounding blockchains having cracked the trilemma issue are based on claims. Therefore,
it falls unto us to use leverage these blockchains in our app, and build a scalable and
secure infrastructure with the means that are in our control such as:
• Application architecture
• Access controlled routes
• Security mechanisms in place (login, 2FA, MitID)
• Maintainable code
4.5
Enhancing Our App: Multiple Blockchains
There are two areas in our application where scalability concerns need to be addressed
from the start, namely:
• Design/Architecture of the web application
• Blockchain Frameworks in our application
Given the fact that we have a Node­Express server in charge of the backend duties and
a React application on the client side, it would be easier to scale the application since the
20
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:29==
server can be scaled horizontally, and React allows us to build User Interfaces quickly.
But blockchain frameworks on our app do not allow for solutions on our end to increase
their scalability. We are simply using them for their existing benefits, and their internal
scale depends on the developments taking place within that blockchain ecosystem.
That being said, we could technically use two blockchains of different natures on our
platform to handle authentication, and database operations. This would also play a
role in addressing the scalability concerns we have.
• Having two blockchains mitigates the use of a database on the server
• We would be leveraging the power of two different blockchains depending on their
private, public or consortium natures
Hence, the analysis leads us to find which blockchains would help us tackle these issues,
and at the same time be better than existing traditional solutions such as basic OAuth au­
thentication, or database storage (MySQL or MongoDB). Moreover, this is where choosing
to build with JavaScript enhances the development, since these tools are available to us
via npm packages or CLI tools. Without question, some blockchain APIs are documented
far better and are far less complicated to ‘plug­and­play‘, than many others.
4.5.1
Shortlisting Blockchains
Choosing which blockchain to leverage for our purpose is a tricky and daunting task,
since, not only are there multiple ones to think about and consider, but also because they
each bring something different to the table. As a result, there are trade­offs that will have
to be made keeping our use­cases in mind. One of the criterion that help evaluate a
blockchain network is it’s TPS metric. Transactions Per Second, as the name suggests
is the amount of transactions the network can handle in a second. There are a number
of open source packages that would allow our app to establish connections with the re­
spective blockchains. However, keeping scale and security in mind, we could tackle the
two criterion individually:
• For Security: It makes sense to use a permissioned or a private blockchain network
to facilitate authentication and access control within the app. Of all the available
blockchains, HyperLedger Fabric promises to offer most in that regard.[38] With a
good documentation, and NodeJS SDKs as well, it must be looked into further
• For Scalability: There are a few blockchains whose claim to fame has been scale.
But in our context, scale also encapsulates the ease at which the existing software
can continue developing, and how quickly can we iterate over new functionality and
different versions of our app. Therefore, it makes sense to look at blockchains that
have a continuous and growing ecosystem, with more projects and applications
showing up on their ecosystem
4.5.2
Ethereum VS Solana
If one were to judge based solely on these metrics, Solana’s claim to be able to handle
65,000 TPS lands it at the top. This number, if true, beats VISA’s transaction throughput
of 24,000 TPS. Keeping scale in mind as well, it would be interesting to see how Ethereum
and Solana would compare with another.
Ethereum
The Ethereum blockchain, along with Bitcoin were one of the firsts to arrive on the scene,
and as a result, arguably the maximum work and research has been conducted on and
using these blockchain networks. It would be fair to assume that Ethereum has become
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
21
==PAGE:30==
the go­to platform for developing blockchain­centric decentralized applications and smart­
contracts (Solidity). The Ethereum ecosystem is already a well­developed one with mul­
tiple projects already developed using it. These include the following:
1. dApps: Many decentralized applications like MeataMask, Uniswap, OpenSea and
MakerDAO (a commercial Decentralized Autonomous Organization) are built us­
ing Ethereum. The nature of these applications include exchanges, online market­
places, etc. [39]
2. NFTs: Non­Fungible Tokens or NFTs which have been gaining traction since the
past few years, are nothing but digital identifiers. These could be in the form of im­
ages, videos, or any other form of digital art, and their ownership can be transferred
over a blockchain network. Not all blockchains support NFT handling, however,
Ethereum is at the spear­head of the ones that can. [39]
3. Decentralized Finance: Defi or Decentralized Finance is basically the same as
traditional finanace system, but the biggest difference here is that it does not rely on
centralized authorities such as brokerages or traditional exchanges, but instead use
smart contracts to transfer or gain ownership to their digital assets. The maximum
amount of DeFi related projects have been carried out using Ethereum (176 Eth
projects, as opposed to 9 in EOS, and 17 in Bitcoin). [40]
Solana
The Solana blockchain is a very young player in the blockchain game, with it’s release
taking place in April, 2020. However, even within it’s short time frame, it has cemented
it’s place as one of the next biggest blockchain networks. There are a lot of claims under
Solana’s belt that, if true, would greatly impact the scalability of any application utilizing
Solana.
1. Unique Consensus: Solana uses Proof­of­History(PoH) which verifies orders.
Moreover, when used alongside other consensus algorithms such as Proof­of­Work
or Proof­of­Stake, PoH can reduce messaging overhead in a Byzantine Fault Toler­
ant replicated state machine, resulting in sub­second finality times. [41]
2. High Performance: With claims of facilitating 65,000 TPS, it stumps many other
blockchain networks. If true, it could be the answer to many scalability issues with
using a blockchain.
3. Cost Effective: Nodes that run a transaction on a blockchain network require a
fee to perform them. These exist no matter the blockchain, no matter the consen­
sus. Comparing with Ethereum, the transaction fees and processing times for the
transactions are lower, which make it an enticing choice
4.5.3
HyperLedger Fabric
• HyperLedger Fabric is an open source, permissioned blockchain platform that is de­
signed for enterprise use cases such as digital identities, supply chain management,
and/or B2B applications. A distinction, however, needs to be made. Hyperledger
Fabric can be considered as a platform that allows for implementing a permissioned
network where members are known, and transactions occurring are validated by a
network of approved peers. Given our scope and requirements, it was a suitable
fit given that it caters for use cases requiring a high level of security, privacy and
compliance [24]
22
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:31==
4.6
Proposed Technical Architecture
We introduced the Front­end and Back­end technologies that we could use, as well as
the blockchains we intend to use via their APIs and SDKs. As a result, the following are
the technologies at play within the app ecosystem:
• ReactJS: A JS library for building User Interfaces. It uses JSX or Javascript XML,
which is a syntax extension of JavaScript. It allows you to write HTML within JS
code, and that’s one of the qualities that it make it robust. With a huge community
already backing React, and arguably, with ReactJS being regarded as one of the
most used client­building libraries, it was an easy choice to go forward with it [42]
• Typescript: A super­set of JavaScript, it adds type support for syntax. Adding Type­
script can save developers hours of debugging, make the developing experience
smoother, and React incorporates Typescript support
• NodeJS: A JS run­time that is widely used to write server­side code in JavaScript.
It is a widely adopted piece of tech that, since it’s initial release in 2009, has made
tremendous advancements, with Node and Express frameworks becoming one of
the most used in order to develop servers for web applications [33]
• ExpressJS: Express is a framework that is used alongside node to develop RESTful
APIs. At this point, Express has become the standard server framework for NodeJS
backed applications. It is a simple and straightforward way to implement REST
endpoints, as well as implement caching and redirection
• MitID: MitID is Denmark’s national eID (formerly NemID) which grants the citizens
access to self­service solutions. eID solutions such as MitID, FTN, bankID, etc. and
the SDKs to integrate them in a web/mobile application are provided by criipto.dk.
• Solana: An open­source high­performance blockchain for storing user data related
to the permissions.
• HyperLedger Fabric: An open­source permissioned blockchain network designed
for enterprise use­cases such as digital identities, supply chain management, and/or
B2B applications.
• Rust: A low­level programming language which has a type­based system in place.
When it comes to writing software that is safe, efficient, scalable, and the ability to
run multiple computations in parallel, Rust fits the bill. However, in our application,
Rust will be used for the purpose of writing smart contracts built for the Solana
network.
A proposed design for the flow and architecture of the app is as follows:
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.1: Proposed Architecture
24
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:33==
5
Implementation and Evaluation
The different components described in Figure 4.1, their roles and how they would interact
with each other are as follows:
• Authentication channel: Authentication would be performed by using MitID (via
@criipto/verify­react npm package) on the client, coupled with running a chaincode
to link HyperLedger Fabric’s network to the app
• Permission Exchange channel: The READ and WRITE operations on the blockchain(i.e.
permission retraction as well as allowance) would take place via a smart contract
for Solana getting invoked on the Express server
5.1
Authentication: MitID and HyperLedger Fabric
As established in the analysis section, using MitID for JWT generation and creating a user
on the application is a good starting point. Once a MitID login attempt is successful, a JWT
is generated on the client. The server would use this token to establish a connection with
the HyperLedger Fabric via a Channel (Fabric requires a channel setup to allow clients
to interact and connect with the blockchain network)and invoking a chaincode on that
channel. The chaincode for defining a User’s attributes are written in NodeJS.
5.1.1
MitID
For MitID to be made available in the app, the app had to be registered in criipto.dk’s
portal. This generates a clientId and a domain for your application. These strings are
used in our app when we use MitID via ‘@criipto/verify­react‘ and ‘criipto/verify­express‘
packages on the client and server respectively. This generates a JWT. A code snippet
showing this is as follows:
1 import React from "react";
2 import { useCriiptoVerify
} from "@criipto/verify -react";
3 export const Login = () => {
4
5
const [data, setData] = React.useState(null);
6
7
const {result, loginWithPopup , isLoading} = useCriiptoVerify();
8
9
const awaitLogin = React.useCallback(async () => {
10
await loginWithPopup({
11
responseType: "id_token",
12
acrValues: "urn:grn:authn:dk:mitid:low",
13
}).then(() => {
14
axios.get("http://localhost:3002/jwt-protected -route", {
15
headers: {
16
"accepts": "application/json",
17
"Authorization": `Bearer ${result.id_token}`
18
}
19
})
20
.then((res) => setData(res.data))
21
.catch(e => console.log("e : ", e));
22
})
23
}, [loginWithPopup , result]);
24
25
return...
26 }
27
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
25
==PAGE:34==
5.1.2
HyperLedger Fabric Configurations
Fabric makes its services available via open source Docker images and binaries. In order
to make transactions (in our case, authenticating a user) through Fabric, a test network
needs to be deployed over which the smart contracts (Fabric chaincode) are invoked. For
the purpose of developing a basic prototype, we are using Fabric’s test network, which
comes with a basic configuration of two peer organizations and an ordering organization.
The peers are the fundamental components that take care of storing a copy of the ledger
and validating transactions by running the smart contracts before the transactions are
recorded and committed to the ledger.
5.2
Permission Exchange: Solana
There are two operations taking place on our app that update a ledger rooted in Solana.
• READ: Operation to retrieve the current state of data on the ledger
• WRITE: Operation to change access permission of a user’s data
Solana’s Web3 Javascript API along with a basic example for running a smart contract on
the chain was used as the starting point for our development. This allowed for a better
plug­and­play strategy for developing the permission exchange mechanism. The code for
solana’s Rust smart contract to change a user’s permission when triggered by the user
through the /user/change_permission route on our Express server:
1 use borsh::{BorshDeserialize , BorshSerialize};
2 use solana_program::{
3
account_info::{next_account_info , AccountInfo},
4
entrypoint ,
5
entrypoint::ProgramResult ,
6
msg,
7
program_error::ProgramError ,
8
pubkey::Pubkey,
9 };
10
11 /// Define the type of state stored in accounts
12 #[derive(BorshSerialize , BorshDeserialize , Debug)]
13 pub struct UserAccount {
14
pub permission: bool,
15 }
16
17 // Declare and export the program 's entrypoint
18 entrypoint!(process_instruction);
19
20 // Program entrypoint 's implementation
21 pub fn process_instruction(
22
program_id: &Pubkey ,
23
accounts: &[AccountInfo],
24
_instruction_data: &[u8],
25 ) -> ProgramResult {
26
msg!("Permission Exchange Rust program entrypoint");
27
28
// Iterating accounts is safer than indexing
29
let accounts_iter = &mut accounts.iter();
30
31
// Get the account to give or take access permissions
32
let account = next_account_info(accounts_iter)?;
26
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:35==
33
34
// The account must be owned by the program in order to modify its data
35
if account.owner != program_id {
36
msg!("Greeted account does not have the correct program id");
37
return Err(ProgramError::IncorrectProgramId);
38
}
39
40
// Record permission changes
41
let mut permission_account = PermissionAccount::try_from_slice(&account.
data.borrow())?;
42
permission_account.permission = !permission_account.permission;
43
permission_account.serialize(&mut &mut account.data.borrow_mut()[..])?;
44
45
msg!("Permission changed to {} !", permission_account.permission);
46
Ok(())
47 }
The flow for the app interaction with Solana is as follows:
1. When the client logs in to the app, a READ operation gets triggered
2. This operation is triggered via Express identifying the user and invoking the contract
3. A READ operation is performed and the fetched data is rendered to the user via the
client
4. Similarly, if the user wishes to change the access permissions for a third party ac­
cessing their data, the flow would be identical, but a WRITE operation would be
triggered this time
Figure 5.1: React­Express­Solana interaction
5.2.1
Limitations: Incorporating Blockchain in a Web App
As is clear from the development process, integrating any blockchain in a web app is a
complex task. Moreover, there are a few reasons as to why, as it currently stands, having
multiple blockchains in the same environment is an issue.
1. Increased complexity
2. Not a very smooth developer experience
3. High number of configurations for Blockchains
• Communication with a blockchain is conducted via the use of smart contracts. These
contracts generate transactions which are subsequently distributed to every peer
node in the ledger. These nodes immutably record the contracts on their copy of the
ledger. (https://hyperledger­fabric.readthedocs.io/en/release­2.4/network/network.html).
Therefore, smart contracts can be seen as policies set in stone i.e. once they’re on
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
27
==PAGE:36==
the chain, they are immutable. Moreover, implementing smart contracts requires a
good understanding of how blockchains work themselves
• HyperLedger Fabric is a vast framework with multiple system concepts and a shal­
low learning curve. Identifying the concepts that cater to our use case, using them
in our business login, the configuration of channels, peer nodes and their depen­
dencies, and Certificate Authorities (CAs) that issue the keys for granting access
to a user to our app after a MitID login, add a lot of extra configuration layers in
the application. It was never as straightforward as plugging a simple package with
configuration options that allow you to set up a connection straight away
• Given the time constraints for the development of the application, as well as the dif­
ficulties/limitations that came up with learning to work with blockchain tech, it proved
to be insufficient to implement scalability and reduce complexity in our app with the
proposed design which has both Solana as well as HyperLedger Fabric.
5.2.2
Updated Design: Without HyperLedger Fabric
The updated flow that we went ahead with is as follows:
Figure 5.2: Updated Architecture
The only change that we have is the absence of HyperLedger Fabric. Moreover, authen­
tication is being managed by the client and the server using criipto’s verify packages.
Everything else stays intact as we use Solana for the permission mechanisms.
28
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:37==
6
Conclusion
We set out to build a secure and scalable web application that houses confidential data,
along with researching the different architectures and technologies that we could use to
develop it. That led us to identifying the blockchain network and make that the choice of
technology that we leverage to incorporate security and scalability in our app. Then we
shortlisted the blockchains we could use for our purposes, and settled on HyperLedger
Fabric and Solana. After having gone through the development process for the applica­
tion, we observed a few key things namely:
• Having multiple blockchain networks connected with web applications increases the
complexity of the app
• The systems are tricky to incorporate and require a good understanding of Blockchains
and smart contracts
• Having React and Node as the tools for web development proved to be beneficial,
as it increased the scale at which development took place, and made the process
faster
• Having blockchains in a web app eradicates the use of Database Management Sys­
tems, as you query data directly from the chain
We have observed that Blockchain Interoperability is the answer to easing the incorpora­
tion of blockchains in web apps. Currently, there aren’t any solid solutions that through
a singular source, provide a blockchain API which uses two or more blockchains in it­
self. This would result in more easy­to­use APIs and SDKs that would in turn promote
open­source development, along with more organizations and individuals being able to
use blockchains in their web apps, no matter their experience with blockchain tech.
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
29
==PAGE:38==
7
Future Work
There is in­arguably more work that can be done when it comes to certain aspects of the
application, the first and foremost being the scalability aspect of our application, as well as
imporove upon existing security measures within the app. More users on the application,
as well as having a decentralized affiliation with legitimate organizations such as SKAT, or
healthcare systems, would exponentially increase the amount of the transactions taking
place on the network, which is where a single blockchain handling all the load would
hamper the performance and other aspects of the app. However, Solana as discussed in
the Practical section of the report was the blockchain of choice because it was designed
with scalability in mind.
Moreover, even though we’ve got some security measures in place in our app, no system
can ever be ”too secure.” Regardless, all roads point towards the Blockchain Trilemma
and Blockchain Interoperability.
• With blockchain interoperability, more blockchains would be able to interact with
one another. This means that blockchain APIs and SDKs will be richer, and more
open source projects and products would be able to have interoperable Blockchain
solutions powering their web/mobile applications.
• Blockchain Trilemma being addressed would certainly lead to blockchain being a
more accepted technology itself. Currently, blockchain tech is still considered im­
mature, and is not as widely used because of its infancy.
In the context of our application, there are a few immediate milestones that could be
achieved that would strengthen our case to choose blockchains for web development.
• Prometheus­Grafana Monitoring
• HyperLedger Fabric Authentication
With a firmer grip on HyperLedger Fabric and performing authentication on a Fabric Net­
work successfully would make it a much safer and secure platform. Moreover, getting a
better sense of the performance of the app can be achieved via Prometheus’ monitoring
solutions. These metrics would include:
1. System Metrics: CPU, memory and disk usage
2. Application Metrics: Prometheus allows for custom metrics to be recorded as well,
which may include network request counts, response times and error instances
3. Error Metrics: Prometheus can generate alerts when certain metrics fall outside
the threshold limit specified for them
At the end of the day, blockchains and their applications are disrupting the existing web
ecosystem in a positive way by introducing more efficient methods to handle existing
problems related to scale, decentralization and security. Their incorporation in web apps
has yet to become a widely accepted stack, but sooner rather than later, that gap shall be
bridged.
30
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
[1]
Petri Helo and Yuqiuge Hao. “Blockchains in operations and supply chains: A model
and reference implementation”. In: Computers & Industrial Engineering 136 (2019),
pp. 242–251.
[2]
Javad Zarrin et al. “Blockchain for decentralization of internet: prospects, trends,
and challenges”. In: Cluster Computing 24.4 (2021), pp. 2841–2866.
[3]
Maxat Kassen. “Blockchain and e­government innovation: Automation of public in­
formation processes”. In: Information Systems 103 (2022), p. 101862.
[4]
Miguel Correia. “From byzantine consensus to blockchain consensus”. In: Essen­
tials of Blockchain Technology. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2019, pp. 41–80.
[5]
Harsh Sheth and Janvi Dattani. “Overview of blockchain technology”. In: Asian Jour­
nal For Convergence In Technology (AJCT) ISSN­2350­1146 (2019).
[6]
Ahmed Alkhateeb et al. “Hybrid blockchain platforms for the internet of things (IoT):
A systematic literature review”. In: Sensors 22.4 (2022), p. 1304.
[7]
“Blockchain as a Foundation for Sharing Healthcare Data”. In: 1 (). DOI: 10.30953/
bhty.v1.13. URL: https://www.blockchainhealthcaretoday.com/index.php/journal/
article/view/13.
[8]
Adiseshu Hari and TV Lakshman. “The internet blockchain: A distributed, tamper­
resistant transaction framework for the internet”. In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM
workshop on hot topics in networks. 2016, pp. 204–210.
[9]
Nilton Bila et al. “Leveraging the serverless architecture for securing linux contain­
ers”. In: 2017 IEEE 37th International Conference on Distributed Computing Sys­
tems Workshops (ICDCSW). IEEE. 2017, pp. 401–404.
[10]
Wilhelm Hasselbring and Guido Steinacker. “Microservice architectures for scala­
bility, agility and reliability in e­commerce”. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference
on Software Architecture Workshops (ICSAW). IEEE. 2017, pp. 243–246.
[11]
Juan Benet. “Ipfs­content addressed, versioned, p2p file system”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1407.3561 (2014).
[12]
Swarm Ethereum. “Swarm for Ethereum”. In: (). url: https://ethersphere.github.io/
swarm-home/#.
[13]
J.H. Hartman, I. Murdock, and T. Spalink. “The Swarm scalable storage system”.
In: Proceedings. 19th IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing Sys­
tems (Cat. No.99CB37003). 1999, pp. 74–81. DOI: 10.1109/ICDCS.1999.776508.
[14]
Parma Bains. Blockchain consensus mechanisms: A primer for supervisors. Inter­
national Monetary Fund, 2022.
[15]
Christopher Ehmke, Florian Wessling, and Christoph M Friedrich. “Proof­of­property:
a lightweight and scalable blockchain protocol”. In: Proceedings of the 1st interna­
tional workshop on emerging trends in software engineering for blockchain. 2018,
pp. 48–51.
[16]
Fredy Andres Aponte­Novoa et al. “The 51% attack on blockchains: A mining be­
havior study”. In: IEEE Access 9 (2021), pp. 140549–140564.
[17]
Afsana Begum et al. “Blockchain attacks analysis and a model to solve double
spending attack”. In: International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing 10.2
(2020), pp. 352–357.
[18]
Shijie Zhang and Jong­Hyouk Lee. “Double­spending with a sybil attack in the bit­
coin decentralized network”. In: IEEE transactions on Industrial Informatics 15.10
(2019), pp. 5715–5722.
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
31
==PAGE:40==
[19]
Jonas Valbjørn Andersen and Claire Ingram Bogusz. “Self­organizing in blockchain
infrastructures: Generativity through shifting objectives and forking”. In: Journal of
the Association for Information Systems 20.9 (2019), p. 11.
[20]
Mitsuru Iwamura et al. “Can we stabilize the price of a cryptocurrency?: Understand­
ing the design of Bitcoin and its potential to compete with Central Bank money”. In:
Hitotsubashi Journal of Economics (2019), pp. 41–60.
[21]
Philip Koshy, Diana Koshy, and Patrick McDaniel. “An analysis of anonymity in bit­
coin using p2p network traffic”. In: Financial Cryptography and Data Security: 18th
International Conference, FC 2014, Christ Church, Barbados, March 3­7, 2014, Re­
vised Selected Papers 18. Springer. 2014, pp. 469–485.
[22]
Iuon­Chang Lin and Tzu­Chun Liao. “A survey of blockchain security issues and
challenges.” In: Int. J. Netw. Secur. 19.5 (2017), pp. 653–659.
[23]
HyperLedger Fabric Ibm. “Ibm with HyperLedger Fabric”. In: (). url: https://www.
ibm.com/topics/hyperledger.
[24]
HyperLedger Fabric. “HyperLedger Fabric”. In: (). url: https://www.hyperledger.org/
use/fabric.
[25]
Christian Lundkvist et al. “Uport: A platform for self­sovereign identity”. In: URL:
https://whitepaper. uport. me/uPort_ whitepaper_DRAFT20170221. pdf (2017).
[26]
Akanksha Kaushik et al. “Blockchain—literature survey”. In: 2017 2nd IEEE Interna­
tional Conference on Recent Trends in Electronics, Information & Communication
Technology (RTEICT). IEEE. 2017, pp. 2145–2148.
[27]
Komal Gilani et al. “A survey on blockchain­based identity management and de­
centralized privacy for personal data”. In: 2020 2nd Conference on Blockchain Re­
search & Applications for Innovative Networks and Services (BRAINS). IEEE. 2020,
pp. 97–101.
[28]
Dock.io. “Dock.io”. In: (). url: https://docs.dock.io/intro-to-dock/why-dock/benefits-
for-organizations-and-individuals.
[29]
Asaph Azaria et al. “Medrec: Using blockchain for medical data access and per­
mission management”. In: 2016 2nd international conference on open and big data
(OBD). IEEE. 2016, pp. 25–30.
[30]
Harbor. “Harbor”. In: (). url: https://harbor.com/.
[31]
Polymath. “Polymath”. In: (). url: https://polymath.network/polymesh.
[32]
Saba Alimadadi, Ali Mesbah, and Karthik Pattabiraman. “Understanding asynchronous
interactions in full­stack JavaScript”. In: Proceedings of the 38th International Con­
ference on Software Engineering. 2016, pp. 1169–1180.
[33]
NodeJS. “NodeJS”. In: (). url: https://nodejs.org/en/docs/guides/blocking-vs-non-
blocking/.
[34]
MitID. “MitID”. In: (). url: https://www.mitid.dk/en-gb/security/security-behind-mitid/.
[35]
MitIDBorger. “MitIDBorger”. In: (). url: https://lifeindenmark.borger.dk/apps-and-
digital-services/mitid.
[36]
Paul Dunphy. “A Note on the Blockchain Trilemma for Decentralized Identity: Learn­
ing from Experiments with Hyperledger Indy”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05784
(2022).
[37]
Bojana Koteska, Elena Karafiloski, and Anastas Mishev. “Blockchain implemen­
tation quality challenges: a literature”. In: SQAMIA 2017: 6th workshop of soft­
ware quality, analysis, monitoring, improvement, and applications. Vol. 1938. 2017,
pp. 8–8.
[38]
FabricSpecs. “FabricSpecs”. In: (). url: https://hyperledger.github.io/caliper-benchmarks/
fabric/resources/pdf/Fabric_1.4.0_javascript_node.pdf.
32
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:41==
[39]
Liew Voon Kiong. DeFi, NFT and GameFi Made Easy: A Beginner’s Guide to Un­
derstanding and Investing in DeFi, NFT and GameFi Projects. Liew Voon Kiong,
2021.
[40]
DeFi. “DeFi”. In: (). url: https://defiprime.com/ethereum.
[41]
Anatoly Yakovenko. “Solana: A new architecture for a high performance blockchain
v0. 8.13”. In: Whitepaper (2018).
[42]
Sanchit Aggarwal et al. “Modern web­development using reactjs”. In: International
Journal of Recent Research Aspects 5.1 (2018), pp. 133–137.
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
==PAGE:43==
A
Title
Scaling Blockchain for Secure Access Control: Web App
35
==PAGE:44==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
