==PAGE:1==
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
A Deep Reinforcement Learning Method
Master Thesis
DTU Human­Centered Artificial Intelligence
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
A Deep Reinforcement Learning Method
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Adam Søe Beilin
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng, in Human­Centered Artificial
Intelligence.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of machine learning.
Adam Søe Beilin ­ s170780
Signature
Date
ii
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Reinforcement learning is a powerful approach to solving decision­making problems, by
providing models with the ability to learn difficult tasks, without the need for human input
or bias. Deep reinforcement learning has shown great ability to generalize to unknown
environments, and further shows potential in domains such as robotics and control. Dif­
ferentiable planning methods aim to overcome the limitation of relying on hand­designed
features by using deep neural networks to represent and learn the underlying reward and
transition functions. One challenge reinforcement learning faces, is that it often requires
a lot of data and time for training in order to converge or learn an optimal policy.
This thesis presents an implementation and evaluation of a deep differentiable planner,
specifically the Value Propagation Network, in both single and multi agent settings. The
performance of VPN was compared to a corresponding non­planning method, the Asyn­
chronous Advantage Actor­Critic, in two environments: a gridworld and a speaker­listener
environment. The objectives of this research were to explore the potential of differentiable
planning in multi agent reinforcement learning and to evaluate its performance relative to
non­planning methods.
The implementation was carried out using a high performance machine learning platform,
Ray’s RLlib, which assisted in optimizing and parallelizing training. The environments
were built using the toolkit of Facebook’s Mazebase and OpenAI’s Gym.
The results of the thesis show that VPN is capable of effectively solving planning problems
in both single and multi agent settings, and outperforms the A3C in both of them, by
requiring significantly less training to converge. These findings demonstrate the potential
of VPN as a promising approach to differentiable planning in reinforcement learning, with
definite potential when extended into the multi agent domain.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Adam Søe Beilin, MSc Human­Centered Artificial Intelligence, DTU
I would like to express my gratitude for my supervisor Tue Herlau for his feedback and
advice throughout the process of writing this thesis. His help and guidance has been a
tremendous factor in the completion of this project.
iv
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Methods
5
2.1
Gridworld Domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Artificial Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Reinforcement learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Value Iteration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Value Iteration Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Value Propagation Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.7
Multi Agent Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Implementation
17
3.1
Gridworld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Ray ­ RLlib
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Value Propagation Module Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Multi Agent Domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Experiments
23
4.1
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Discussion
33
6
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
37
A Appendix
39
A.1 GitHub Repository . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In the field of reinforcement learning and artificial intelligence, there are two approaches
that are most commonly used when solving a problem: The planning approach which
includes techniques such as the value iteration algorithm, and the trail­and­error learning
approach which includes Q­learning and Actor­Critic algorithms [1, 2].
Planning in the context of artificial intelligence typically refers to the process of determining
a sequence of actions which will create a solution from an initial position to a goal position.
Sutton and Barto [1] describe planning as ”any way of deciding on a course of action
considering possible future situations before they are actually experienced”.
Planning algorithms usually focus on the computation of value functions. While a reward
signal specifies what is good in the immediate sense, on a single action basis, a value
function specifies what is good in the long run. It represents the expected long­term
reward an agent will receive from being in a certain state or taking a specific action. The
planning methods are based on looking ahead to future events, computing backed­up
values and using them as an update target for an approximate value function [1].
The value iteration algorithm, mentioned as following the planning approach, works by
finding an optimal value function for a given environment. It does this by assigning a
value to all states and iteratively updating them based on its neighbors using the Bellman
equation [1].
The paper ”Value Iteration Networks”(VIN), published in 2016 [3], won a best a paper
award at NIPS 2016 [4] by combining the planning approach with the learning approach
and implementing a fully differentiable approximation of the value iteration algorithm into
a neural network.
Being fully differentiable allows the network to train end­to­end using standard backprop­
agation, which is a key requirement for most reinforcement learning algorithms to work.
This makes it possible for the VIN to use reinforcement learning algorithms such as the
Actor­Critic to learn to produce solutions to systems that require planning­based reason­
ing [1]. Additionally, it makes them well­suited for tasks where it is difficult to specify a
good value function or where the value function may be complex or high­dimensional.
VINs can solve some tasks much more efficiently than the classical value iteration al­
gorithm, particularly tasks that require a large number of iterations to converge. This is
because VINs can learn to perform value iteration internally, rather than requiring the ex­
plicit computation of each iteration. These networks can generalize to new environments
or tasks, even if they have not seen those environments or tasks during training. This
is because they learn a generalizable representation of the value function, rather than
recording a specific solution. This makes the VIN a powerful and efficient way to solve
sequential decision­making tasks,with great potential in a wide range of tasks in the fields
of robotics and control[3, 5].
There are several reasons why it makes sense to use the value iteration network instead
of a standard planning algorithms such as the traditional value iteration algorithm. In
domains that are too large, have a continuous state space, or the transition function, or
rewards functions are unknown, traditional planning algorithms cannot be applied. This
is where the Value Iteration Networks are an interesting option [3].
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Two instances of 10 by 10 gridworld environments
Consider an environment such as the gridworld, depicted in figure 1.1. The gridworld
is a two dimensional rectangular space, consisting of an agent (represented by the blue
pacman), a single goal (represented as the square containing a 1) and obstacles (all the
gray boxes). Here the task is for the agent to reach the goal location in the fewest possible
steps, while avoiding the obstacles.
In the gridworld, if the underlying transition properties are unknown to the agent, or the
state space is too large, the VIN is much more suitable than traditional planning algorithms.
The VIN algorithm has since its first publishing been extended upon in another paper:
”Value Propagation Networks” (VPN) in 2019 [5]. This paper focused on optimizing the
VIN in order to improve its performance when using reinforcement learning as the training
approach. The main difference between the two architectures is the use of a ”Value Prop­
agation” module as opposed to the ”Value iteration” module from the initial paper. This
value propagation module takes advantage of the constraints of the environment to mini­
mize parameterization which will result in better sample complexity and generalization.
1.0.1
Multi Agent Systems and Planning
Multi agent systems are interesting because they are more complex than the correspond­
ing single agent systems, and often translate more accurately into application in the real
world. Consider a warehouse with robotic movers, or even self­driving cars. These sce­
narios would benefit greatly from multi agent coordination to optimize performance and
limit collision [6]. A multi agent system, in its essence, simply implies that there are more
than one agent observing, acting or somehow affecting an environment [7]. Evaluating a
reinforcement learning algorithm’s ability to extend into the multi agent domain, not only
gives a better understanding of its real­world applications, it also gives an indication as to
how flexible it is in terms of being applied to a greater variety of problems.
Neither the VIN nor the VPN have been applied in a multi agent setting, though the tech­
niques appear viable in such a setting. The gridworld lends itself well to creating a multi
agent system, having multiple agents and multiple goals. Because of that, it provides a
good opportunity to investigate how well the VPN architecture can be expanded from the
single agent domain into the multi agent domain.
While in the single agent case, the agent simply has to move toward the single goal, in
the multi agent case, the problem is more complicated. The gridworld environment is now
subject to multiple goals and multiple agents. This now forces the VPN to accommodate
2
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:11==
for communication between these agents in order to be able to successfully complete the
task of the multi agent gridworld environment.
The main objectives of this thesis are:
• To implement and test a deep differentiable planner
• To examine differentiable planning in a multi agent setting
• To compare the differentiable planning method to a corresponding non­planning
method
The differentiable planner mentioned, is a VPN, for which the background and theory will
be discussed in the method section 2, while the specific implementation will be discussed
in the subsequent section 3.
Similarly, the multi agent aspect of this report, which encompass both the inter­agent
communication and the environments for evaluating it, are outlined in the methods section
with more technical detail discussed in the implementation section.
A comparison between the VPN and a standard A3C algorithm will be carried out in both
single agent setting and an emulated multi agent setting, of which the findings are dis­
cussed in section 4.2.
The evaluation finds that the proposed VPN converges in both the single agent and multi
agent environments, and is able to do this significantly faster than the A3C is able to in
either domain.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:13==
2
Methods
2.1
Gridworld Domain
2.1.1
Markov Decision Process
A Markov Decision Process is a mathematical framework for modeling decision­making
systems in which the current state of the system, the decision maker’s actions, and the
resulting future states of the system have an element of uncertainty influenced by transi­
tion variables. In reinforcement learning, environments used for training typically qualify
as Markov Decision Processes (MDP), this is to say that they satisfy the Markov Property
[1]. The gridworld domain is an example of an MDP. The Markov Property is satisfied in
a system where the distribution of future states depends entirely on the current state and
not on earlier states [1].
Considering the gridworld environment, it is clear that knowing the previous position of the
agent will provide no further information about which next move is optimal as compared
to not having that information.
An MDP is defined by a set of 5 quantities:
• States
• Actions
• Transition Function
• Reward Function
• Discount Factor (γ)
States, being a representation of the possible conditions or situation of an environment. In
the gridworld, a state would be the layout of the grid with the locations of all obstacles, the
goal and agent at any given time. States will be denoted as s0, s1, s2, etc. corresponding
to the order at which they appear, s0 being the initial state of the environment.
Actions, which are any of the possible moves, or options to affect the environment that
the agent has access to. Within the gridworld, the actions available to the agent are to
move up, down, left, right, or maintain its current position. Actions, similarly to the states,
are denoted as a0, a1, a2, etc.
The transition function, defines the change in a state based on the action of the agent.
It determines the probability of moving into a specific cell, given an action. If the domain
is deterministic, the action will simply become a mapping to a new state. The transition
function will be denoted as p(s′, r|s, a).
A reward function, that serves as a feedback mechanism to allow the agent to know that
it is acting favourably. The agent’s objective is to maximize this reward in the long term.
In the gridworld domain, a positive reward is only given to the agent once it reaches the
goal, while a negative reward is given for every step taken. The rewards will be denoted
as r1, r2, r3, etc. Rewards start at index 1 because they are associated with the state s1.
The last quantity is the discount factor γ, which determines the importance of future
rewards relative to immediate rewards [5, 8]
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
5
==PAGE:14==
This means that at the start of any episode, the agent is in state s0, it will then take action
a0, and based on the transition function will enter s1 and doing so the agent is given a
reward r1. It will now choose action a1 to enter s2 and receive reward r2. This process
continues until the agent reaches a terminal state, at which point the decision­making
process ends [8].
The goal of the agent in an MDP is to find a policy, which is a sequence of actions that
maximizes the expected cumulative reward. This is typically done using dynamic pro­
gramming algorithms, such as the value iteration algorithm, which iteratively improves an
estimate of the optimal value function for the MDP.
2.1.2
Mazebase
For all tasks in this thesis, a domain referred to as ”gridworld” will be considered. The
gridworld is, in its simplest form, a 2d grid navigation environment. Within this domain,
an agent will observe a map, such as the one pictured in 1.1, and be required to navigate
through it, from its initial position to the goal position, in the fewest steps possible. This
domain is inherently fully observable, with dynamics of transitions between cells being
deterministic.
An agent will have five potential actions at any given state, remaining in its current position
or moving into any one of its four neighbors (not allowing the agent to move diagonally).
If a cell is blocked by an obstacle, or blocked due to being in an edge cell, an attempt to
move in that direction will simply result in the agent retaining its current position.
When implementing the VIN or VPN for an episodic task such as the gridworld, it is rele­
vant to account for absorbing states. These are states for which the only allowed transition
is to remain in its current location with a reward of 0 [1, 5]. Such a state will be found in
the goal location of the gridworld domain.
The specific gridworld domain to be used in this thesis will be implemented using the
”sandbox MazeBase” [9], a tool to implement environments intended specifically to train
reinforcement learning. This will be implemented in combination with OpenAI’s Gym [10].
This will be further explained in section 3.
2.2
Artificial Neural Networks
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are a popular technique to deal with non­linear functions
approximations. Specifically deep neural networks, or deep learning, has been at the
forefront of machine learning research for the past many years [1].
An ANN with even just a single hidden layer, if containing a sufficient number of non­linear
units, can approximate any continuous function to any level of accuracy [11]. Having
additional layers will typically result in an even more powerful computational tool, which
gives an indication as to how deep learning has become so popular.
6
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1: A generic fully connected feed­forward neural network with four input units,
two output units, and two hidden layers [1].
Figure 2.1 shows an example of a somewhat simple feed forward neural network. Each
circle represents a unit, or a node, and each arrow is a connection with an associated
weight.
A node typically represents a semi­linear unit, which means they compute some weighted
sum of their input and apply a non­linear function, an activation function, to this result to
produce the node’s output. These activation functions are parameterized by the weights of
the network’s connections. Such a network can then be trained, which means to update
the weights in a direction of a more favorable output, typically towards maximizing or
minimizing the result of an objective function. This is therefore a way to generate features
suitable for a given problem without having to manually engineering such features [1].
2.3
Reinforcement learning
The fundamental idea of Reinforcement Learning is for an agent to develop a method of
how to act, given a current state within a specific environment with the intent to maximize
a reward signal [1]. This reward signal usually corresponding to the γ­discounted reward,
also known as the reward function, and is defined as:
Gt =
T−t
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1
(2.1)
The R in this equation represents the reward received from a single state. Referencing
back to the MDP section 2.1.1, we recall that this reward is dependent on which state is
entered, which in turn is affected by the transition function. This makes Rt a stochastic
variable representing the reward at time­step t, and therefore Gt is then also a stochastic
variable.
For a given policy, the expected γ­discounted reward, also known as the value function,
is defined as the average
Vπ(s) = Eπ [Gt+1 | st = s]
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
7
==PAGE:16==
Reinforcement Learning can be considered a way of trial­and­error learning, because an
agent is not told which sequence of actions are good or bad, but rather the agent must
attempt to learn this by exploring the environment.
In this work, the agent will refer to the decision maker, or the learner, and the environ­
ment refers to everything outside of the agent, which it can interact with or observe; the
gridworld. A state is a current ”snapshot” of the environment, and an observation is how
the agent perceives the current state. In a fully observable environment, the state and the
observation will typically be identical.
In reinforcement learning, solving a task essentially means to find a policy that achieves a
high reward in the long run. A policy, is a decision­making rule, that represents a mapping
from a current perceived state of an environment to all possible actions in this given ob­
servation. A policy might be as simple as a look­up table with state­action pairs and their
associated values [12], whereas in deep reinforcement learning it is often a probability
distribution over these actions requiring extensive computation [1].
Letting s be a state in the environment, and θ be policy parameters, or weights, a policy
can be specified as:
πθ(a|(s))
(2.2)
A policy π is said to be better or equal to π′ if its expected cumulative reward is greater or
equal to that of the other policy for all states in an environment. This is to say that a policy
π is only better than another if, and only if, the value function of this policy has a higher or
equal return for every state, compared to the value function of this other policy π′ [1].
vπ(s) ≥vπ′(s), ∀s ∈S
(2.3)
For any given task, there will always exist at least one optimal policy. One that is at least
as good as all others, though there might also be multiple. All optimal policies are denoted
as π∗. They all have an optimal state­action function, a value function for each state­action
pair, denoted as v∗[1].
v∗(s) = max
π
vπ(s), ∀s ∈S
(2.4)
In the MDP setting, the optimal policy is defined as the distribution over the state­action
space in which the sum of discounted rewards is maximised: ∑
k γkrk, here rk represents
the reward after a single step [5].
2.4
Value Iteration
Value iteration is an algorithm used to calculate the optimal policy for a given MDP, by
finding the optimal value function [13].
This algorithm works by iteratively improving an estimate of the optimal value function
for all states. The algorithm initializes these values as zeros, or random values, then
repeatedly updates value function for each state until they converge. The updating of this
value function is done by turning Bellman’s optimality equation into an update rule, as
shown in equations 2.5 and 2.6. It states that the value of a state is equal to the expected
value of the next state plus the reward for the current state [3, 1].
8
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:17==
v∗(s) = max
a
E [Rt+1 + γv∗(St+1) | St = s, At = a]
(2.5)
<=>
vk+1(s) = max
a
E [Rt+1 + γvk (St+1) | St = s, At = a]
(2.6)
One of the key advantages of the value iteration algorithm is that it is guaranteed to con­
verge to the optimal value function for the MDP. Formally, this can require infinite steps to
converge to exactly v∗[1]. However, in practice a finite number of iterations will achieve
an accurate approximation. This means that the value iteration algorithm can be sure to
find the optimal policy for the MDP, assuming it is run for a sufficient number of iterations.
Figure 2.2: An example of how the Value Iteration could unroll, after 0, 7 and 14+ itera­
tions.
The figure 2.2 shows an example of how the value iteration might unroll in a gridworld
environment. On the left we can see that all values are initialized to 0. As the algorithm
iterates across the grid, the cells get updated values, with higher values closer to the
goal. These higher values are represented with bright green, where the lower values are
darker or black. The numbers on the cells are merely example values to suggest how a
cell closer to the goal will have a higher value than one that is further away.
2.4.1
Policy Gradient
A classic group of algorithms for reinforcement learning is the Policy gradient algorithms,
which aims to learn a parameterized policy as opposed to action­value methods which
have polices directly tied to estimated action values[1]. A well­known example of such an
algorithm is the REINFORCE algorithm, which uses neural network in order to determine
which actions to take in a given state [14].
Policy gradient algorithms are on­policy, model­free algorithms in which the dynamics of
the environment are often unknown or non­stationary. The agent starts with a policy,
which is often randomly initialised to prevent bias. If we let θ denote the all policy parame­
ters, ρ will represent the performance of this policy, and α is a positive­definite time step.
Then the policy will update following a policy gradient ascent, updating the weight of θ
proportionally to the gradient: [15]
∆θ ≈αδρ
δθ
(2.7)
In other words; an agent will follow a given policy within a specified environment. The
actions of this policy that lead the agent to a positive reward will become increasingly
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
9
==PAGE:18==
likely to happen, while the actions that lead to a negative reward will become less likely
[16]. This process is repeated until the policy has converged to the optimal policy, or
locally optimal, for the MDP.
2.4.2
Backpropagation
Among the most successful ways to create artificial neural networks is with the backprop­
agation algorithm, which consists of alternating between forward passes and backward
passes throughout the network [1].
Each forward pass will calculate its activation function iteratively through each layer given
the current network inputs. The backward pass will then compute a partial derivative for
each of the weights now iterating through the layers backwards from the last to the first
layer. In gradient learning algorithms, the vector of these partial derivatives is an estimate
of the true gradient.
2.4.3
Actor­Critic
Actor­Critic algorithms are a type of algorithm that builds upon the ideas of policy gradient
[17], an example is the Asynchronous­Advantage­Actor­Critic algorithm (A3C) [18].
The Actor­Critic algorithms consist of two components: the actor, which is responsible
for choosing actions, and the critic, which is responsible for estimating the value of each
action.
The actor by itself can be understood as a policy gradient algorithm, as explained in sec­
tion 2.4.1, using a policy, parameterized by a set of weights, learned using gradient­based
optimization. Actions are selected at random from a probability distribution over the action
space, where the probabilities are updated in the direction of improvement during learning
[17, 19].
The critic uses a value function, which is a function that estimates the expected cumula­
tive reward for each state­action pair. The value function is also parameterized by a set
of weights, which are learned by the critic using gradient­based optimization. The critic
updates the value function by backpropagating the reward received at each step of the
MDP through the sequence of actions taken, and computing the gradient of the expected
cumulative reward with respect to the value function parameters at each step [17, 19].
The actor and critic work together to learn the optimal policy for the MDP. Actor­critic
methods are superior to critic­only algorithms, as they have more favourable convergence
properties due to the gradient ascent/descent of the actor, while delivering faster conver­
gence than actor­only algorithms due to the variance reduction of the critic [17].
The actor uses the value function estimated by the critic to guide its exploration of the
state space, and the critic uses the actions taken by the actor to improve its estimate of
the value function. This process is repeated until the policy has converged to the optimal
policy for the MDP.
2.4.4
A3C
The Asynchronous Advantage Actor­Critic (A3C) is a reinforcement learning algorithm
that combines the Actor­Critic framework with an asynchronous, parallel update mecha­
nism. This approach uses deep neural networks to implement both the actor and critic. It
has been shown to be able to scale to large complex MDPs and to learn optimal policies
more quickly than other Actor­Critic algorithms in domains such as OpenAI’s Atari [18,
10], which is comparable to the domains explored in this thesis.
As previously mentioned, the A3C utilizes deep neural networks for both the actor and
critic, but one of its key features, which separates it from other Actor­Critics, such as the
10
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:19==
A2C, is the use of asynchronous updates. In A3C, multiple agents work simultaneously
and independently on different instances of the environment. This allows for more efficient
training, as the agents can continue to learn even when one agent gets stuck in a tricky
situation [18].
Another important feature of A3C is its use of the advantage function. In Actor­Critic
algorithms, the critic estimates the value of the current state­action pair, which is then
used to update the actor’s policy. In A3C, the critic estimates the advantage function,
which is the difference between the value of the current state­action pair and the average
value of all possible actions in the current state [18]. More specifically, the A3C advantage
function is given by:
k−1
∑
i=0
γirt+i + γkV (st+k; θv) −V
(2.8)
This allows the actor to focus on improving the policy only in states where there is a
significant advantage to be gained. The ideal advantage function is one with minimal
variance, without introducing bias into the algorithm [20].
A3C also benefits from its shared network architecture. In A3C, the actor and critic share
a common network architecture, which allows for more efficient training and better gen­
eralization. This feature makes it easy to train the actor and critic simultaneously and on
the same data.
The A3C is an off­policy algorithm, which means that it can learn from past experiences
stored in a replay buffer, rather than only learning from the current episode. This helps
the agent learn more efficiently and avoid getting stuck in local optima.
Lastly, A3C is designed to be run on multiple parallel threads, which can significantly
speed up training. This feature makes A3C an efficient algorithm that can be used to
solve a wide range of reinforcement learning problems. Due to the benefits outlined, the
A3C has been selected for the implementation in this thesis.
2.5
Value Iteration Networks
The Value Iteration Network is a fully differentiable neural network containing a value itera­
tion approximation module. It is designed to solve tasks where planning based reasoning
is required to predict optimal outcomes [3].
The VIN uses a combination of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and an approxima­
tion of the value iteration algorithm in order to create a fully differentiable function that can
be passed through a neural network. The CNN is used to learn a representation of the
environment, while the value iteration is used to compute the optimal action to take in a
given state.
One of the key advantages of the VIN is that it can handle stochastic environments, where
the dynamics, or the MDP, of the environment are not fully known or are subject to ran­
dom variations. The VIN can be trained using either imitation learning, or reinforcement
learning, though it produces superior result with the former [3].
2.5.1
The Value Iteration Module
The value iteration module is shown to be especially good in navigation and path­finding
domains. In these cases, the value iteration can be unrolled as a graph convolutional neu­
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
11
==PAGE:20==
ral network where nodes represent possible positions of agents with edges representing
potential actions of these agents [5].
If we consider an environment, such as the gridworld domain, it follows an MDP M, for
which we aim to learn a policy π. The assumption is then made, that some other MDP
M exists which contains useful information about the optimal policy π∗of the original task
M. Note that both M and M are unknown in advance, though the idea is that the value
iteration module will be able to learn and solve this M, and by extension be able to solve
the original task of M [3].
Because the gridworld is a fully observable environment, we can let both the state spaces
and action spaces of M and M be identical. Additionally, in MDPs such as the gridworld,
the policies only need to process the states neighboring the agent in order to predict the
optimal actions. This idea can be applied to limit the features of the model and simplify
training [3].
If we let s represent the current state of the gridworld environment, q is a tensor of di­
mensions (A, N, N), where N is the height and width of the gridworld instance and A the
size of the action space of an agent. Then the value iteration module can be condensed
to a transition function, T, and an embedding function: Φ(s) = RR×N×N, where R de­
pends on the rewards structure of the model. It then performs the computations for steps
k = 1...K, K being the depth, or number of iterations, of which the value iteration module
will compute [5]:
∀i, j ∈[1, N],
vk
ij = max
a=1..A qk
a,i,j,
qk = T
(
Φ(s), vk−1)
.
(2.9)
If we now define the agents positions as (x0, y0), and the current state of the gridworld
environment as s, then we can define π as π(s, (x0, y0)) = argmaxa=1..A(qK
a,x0,y0)
Letting N(i, j) be the neighborhood of (i, j), we can further rewrite the transition function
h convolutional layer [5]:
¯ri,j = Φ(s)i,j
(2.10)
v0
i,j = 0,
qk
a,i,j =
∑
(i′,j′)∈N(i,j)
p(v)
a,i′−i,j′−j ∗vk−1
i′,j′ + p(r)
a,i′−i,j′−j ∗¯ri′,j′,
vk
i,j = max
a
qk−1
a,i,j
(2.11)
Examining the equation 2.11, it aligns quite accurately with Bellman’s optimality equa­
tion previously described in section 2.6. Both feature a sum over neighboring values
and rewards for a state. Bellman’s equation incorporates probabilities p for these values,
whereas in the equation 2.11, they purely represent parameters of the VI module.
12
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.3: VIN Module [3].
The figure 2.3 shows on the left the general policy representation that combines value
function elements from a planning approach with those of a reactive policy. On the right,
a CNN representation of the VI­module [3].
The figure of the Value Iteration network employs the use of parameters, denoted as θ,
which encompasses the parameters of the functions fR, fP , and πre. It is important to note
that the value function, represented by ψ(s), is dependent on the feature representation
of the state, ϕ(s). Thus, the policy can be represented in the form πθ(a|ϕ(s)) [3], similar
to that explained in section 2.3.
2.6
Value Propagation Networks
As mentioned in both papers [3, 5], the VIN struggles with reinforcement learning in com­
parison to imitation learning, as it struggles with generalization in larger environments.
This motivates the conceptualization of the Value Propagation Network (VPN).
The VPN is, as the VIN, a type of artificial neural network that incorporates fully differen­
tiable planning modules based on value iteration and VIN.
Instead of using the value iteration module of the VIN, it incorporates a value propagation
module. It is intended to have better sample complexity, and perform better at gener­
alization. This is in part done by removing the assumption that the VIN makes, about
the transition function being translation­invariant, which is done by making it a function
of the current state instead. They further minimize the parameterization of the this state­
dependent transition function, based on the context of the gridworld domain [5].
As the VPN is built with the VIN in mind, they share a lot of the underlying characteristics.
The most notable difference between the two is the aforementioned value propagation
module. It can be represented as follows:
¯rin
i,j, ¯rout
i,j , pi,j = Φ(s)i,j
(2.12)
v0
i,j = 0,
v(k)
i,j = max
(
v(k−1)
i,j
,
max
(i′,j′)∈N(i,j)
(
pi,jv(k−1)
i′,j′
+ +¯rin
i′,j′ −¯rout
i,j
))
,
(2.13)
π (s, (i0, j0)) =
argmax
i′,j′∈N(i0,j0)
vK
i′,j′.
(2.14)
The equation 2.12 describes the embedding, or propagation, function Φ which contains all
parameters of the VPN. It encompasses the three variables for each position (i,j). The first
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
13
==PAGE:22==
two are r−in and r−out which are used to model the full reward function. They represent
the cost of the agent entering a new a state, which is usually high for goal states, and the
cost of leaving a current state, which can represent a living cost, respectively. By doing
this we can represent absorbing states as r−in = r−out [5]. Absorbing states are those
that once entered cannot be escaped, such as the goal state in the gridworld environment
[1].
The other variable from Φ is p, the propagation parameter associated with the position
(i,j). This is essentially a state­dependent discount factor. A value of p(i,j) ≈1 indicates
that the values of neighboring positions can propagate through position i, j, while a value
of p(i,j) ≈0 means that position (i, j) blocks the propagation of these values (which typically
occurs for cells containing obstacles).
Equation 2.13 shows the deterministic algorithm that allows the values learned in the Φ
network to propagate across the gridworld environment. In the first iteration, when k = 0,
the value of a cell is also 0. For every iteration of K, the propagation algorithm is carried
out and new values are updated for each cell in the grid, based on its neighbors values.
The last equation 2.14 shows the policy of selecting the next move to take. The mapping
of actions to states is assumed in this equation, which can be done as the agent is only
able to move into a neighboring cell, and thus the available actions match the potential
new positions. The neighboring location with the highest value, based on the k’th iteration
of the value propagation algorithm, is selected.
According to [5], the VPN is able to achieve superior results compared to the reinforcement
learning implementation of the VIN, with performance differences increasing as the size
of the environment increased.
2.7
Multi Agent Systems
We now consider an environment similar to the gridworld described previously, but now
in a multi agent setting. A multi agent system, in its essence, simply implies that there are
more than one agent observing, acting or somehow affecting an environment [7]. In the
context of this thesis we are interested in a type of ”speaker­listener” environment.
This means, that two agents will be observing the environment, the gridworld, but only one
of them will be navigating through it. This will be the listener. The other agent is then the
speaker, whose objective is to communicate to the listener what its task is. In this domain,
there will be multiple goals visible to the listener, the navigating agent, but only one of them
will result in a reward. This means that what was before a fully observable environment
is now considered a partially observable environment for the navigating agent, as it will
no longer be able to tell which goal it should focus on, without communication.
This is a collaborative task, which is to say that the two agents have a shared objective of
the listener navigating to the correct goal in the fewest steps possible, in order to maximize
their collective reward. This can only be done by going directly to the correct goal every
time, which requires the speaker to communicate which one is correct, accurately and
effectively.
The main consideration, when determining how agents should communicate, is how to
make it differentiable. This is crucial, as the policy will be differentiable, and has to be in
order to train through the Actor­Critic, and thus the communication should follow a similar
structure [21]. The literature suggests a range of approaches for inter agent communi­
cation. One approach is for the agents to learn their own way of communication. This
is to say that agents learn to communicate with each other through trial and error. This
14
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:23==
means that agents learn to communicate by receiving rewards or penalties based on the
success or failure of their actions [22]. This approach is appealing as it removes the need
to consider any engineering of agent communication, as it simply consists of learned pa­
rameters. Another approach is to let messages consisting of real values to pass between
agents, treating the communication as a connection between the agents. This would allow
gradients to be passed between agents, resulting in a system that is end­to­end trainable
across agents [22].
A much simpler approach, would be to just allow the speaker to alter the input of the
listener in the form of providing an additional dimension to the input consisting of a kind
of reference to which goal is correct. If the standard format of the input is a tensor with
one dimension for the obstacle location, one for the agent location, and two dimensions
for goals, the speaker would then provide an additional dimension which has a specific
reference to one of the two goal dimensions, to imply which of them to pursue.
A challenging aspect of training in the multi agent setting, is that the reward signal is purely
tied to the listener agent reaching the goal, making this a sparse reward environment [1].
There is no reward for correct communication by the speaker agent, unless the listener
is also able to successfully navigate. At the same time, the listener will have a hard time
learning to navigate to a goal as it only gets rewards when it reaches the correct one,
which will only be about half of the time if the speaker is not communicating well enough.
One could consider implementing a separate reward signal for the speaker agent, in order
to provide additional assistance with learning to communicate in form of a supplementary
feedback system. The downside of this is that it might introduce bias in the form of en­
couraging the agent to communicate in a certain way, which perhaps is sub optimal.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:25==
3
Implementation
3.1
Gridworld
In order to create the gridworld environment in a format that is useful for the RL agent, a
combination of the toolkit openai Gym [10] and the platform Mazebase [9] will be used.
3.1.1
MazeBase
Mazebase is a software platform for developing and evaluating reinforcement learning
algorithms. It was developed by researchers at Facebook AI Research as a tool for testing
and comparing RL algorithms on a wide range of tasks [9].
Mazebase provides a toolkit, allowing users to implement mazes as 2 dimensional grids,
containing obstacles, agents and goals, which can be used as environments for RL agents
to interact with. These mazes can be modified in size, complexity, and structure, and can
be customized by users to suit their specific needs. The platform also includes a set
of tools and libraries for building and training RL agents, as well as for evaluating their
performance on the various mazes.
The specific gridworld environment used in this project is a modified version of the stan­
dard Mazebase grid, taking advantage of their agent, goal, and block objects to create a
maze that is appropriate for the specific evaluations of the VPN.
The majority of Mazebase is implemented in Lua, and only an experimental, partial, imple­
mentation is available in Python. In order to optimize compatibility, the choice was made
to work with the Python version. This meant that much of the documentation for this plat­
form was mismatched with the python version used in this project, and some features
where not at all available.
3.1.2
Gym
OpenAI Gym is a toolkit for developing and comparing reinforcement learning algorithms.
It includes a growing collection of environments and benchmark problems that expose a
common interface [10].
Using Gym provides functionality to create compatibility between the Mazebase environ­
ment and the RLlib framework. Gym allows for registering a custom environment, such as
the gridworld created with mazebase, as a gym environment. By default, environments in
RLlib are interpreted as Gym environments, thus using this toolkit allows for minimal use
of workarounds [23].
On a reproducibility note, specifically gym version 0.21.0 is required, as some features
used in the implementation of this project have been removed in later versions.
3.1.3
Observations and states
As mentioned previously, the base environment is fully observable, which is to say that
the agent has full access to all the information about the state. The agent, or the neural
network, will be given observation of shape (N, N, 3), N denoting the height and width of
the environment. This means that if the given instance of an environment is five­by­five,
the observation will be a tensor of shape (5, 5, 3).
The observation can be handled as a set of three layers. The first layer corresponds to
the location of obstacles in the grid. 1’s in any location where an obstacle appears and 0
otherwise. The second layer is then the agent location. This is a matrix of all 0s, except
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
17
==PAGE:26==
for the single 1 being the location of said agent. The third layer is then the goal position,
again having just a single 1 for the goal location and 0s everywhere else.
When considering the multi agent setting, the speaker­listener domain, there will still be
just a single agent in that layer as the speaker does not appear within the grid, but rather
as an observer.
How the multi agent gridworld will differ from the single agent case, will be by it containing
two goals. An additional fourth layer will be added to the multi agent observation, con­
taining a single 1 representing its location. There will also be a fifth layer, denoting which
of the two goal layers is the chosen goal, to be pursued by the listener agent.
3.2
Ray ­ RLlib
Because of the intention of making this project multi agent oriented, the concern of com­
putational power and training times required to produce any useful results and models
was considered. A framework such as Ray can make such a project more feasible.
Ray is an open­source unified distributed computing framework for scaling AI and Python
applications. It provides an API for parallel computing, allowing faster and more efficient
processing of large amounts of data. Ray also provides a toolkit of libraries for simplifying
machine learning and enabling large scale data processing [24].
The main purpose of Ray is to provide an interface for optimizing their computing. It
abstracts away the complexity of managing resources, such as memory and CPU, across
multiple machines, allowing users to focus on the logic of their computations.
The specific library of Ray being used in this implementation is RLlib. RLlib is a collection
of reinforcement learning algorithms, environments, and utilities for training reinforcement
learning agents [23]. On top of these features, it integrates the above mentioned compu­
tational optimization tools of Ray.
3.2.1
Callbacks ­ Weights & Biases
Weights & Biases, or WandB, is a machine learning platform for developers to track, log,
and visualize experiments allowing evaluation of model performance [25].
In order to facilitate remote training of the model, callback functions needed to be imple­
mented. In this context, they are functions that are called at specific points during the
training process, such as at the end of an iteration or when a specific metric is reached.
For this project they were specifically implemented to make logging calls for WandB during
training, in order to monitor training rewards, episode lengths and to visualize the value
propagation across the gridworld instance.
3.2.2
A3C
One of RLlib features that is made use of is their implementation of the A3C algorithm.
They provide several modern reinforcement learning implementations ready to use, and
since the VPN is originally trained on an Actor­Critic architecture, and the A3C has shown
superior performance to other Actor­Critics, this specific algorithm has been chosen [23,
18].
While the use of the standard implementation of A3C is somewhat simple, and ”plug­
and­play”, customizing a network and using a custom policy on top of this architecture
requires some amount of modification. While not many things from the ”standard” A3C
configuration need to be changed, understanding exactly which aspects of it that needs
changing is not entirely straight forward from the RLlib documentation.
18
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:27==
It is essential to define the custom model, the Value Propagation Network. The custom
model must be registered in a model catalog, with an associated label. The underlying
algorithm, being the A3C, must be specified. The A3Cconfig is then given this model’s
label, in a dictionary object, along with the model’s hyper parameters. Resources must
then be specified, such as number of GPUs and rollout workers. The rollout workers
essentially determine how many parallel training runs the training will contain [23].
One interesting aspect of how RLlib’s training function works, is that the number of steps
for training and sampling within each call is not constant. It is instead determined by either
resources required, or wall­time taken per training step. This means that for the sake of
reproducibility and comparability, these must be specifically constrained to ensure that
each run is as similar as possible. A parameter must be defined to set a fixed minimum
sample and training timesteps within a single train call. If one episode is completed before
this limit is reached, then an additional run will be performed. However, this does not affect
the maximum number of steps per training call [23].
3.3
Value Propagation Module Implementation
The process of developing a useful implementation of the value propagation algorithm,
included multiple iterations and gradual improvement of the code for increasing efficiency.
3.3.1
First iteration of the VPN
The first implementation was the simplest, and is mainly used as a proof of concept and
as a tool to compare the accuracy of the later implementations. It was implemented in
Numpy for the sake of simplicity. The algorithm begins by defining three variables rout,
rin, and p, which represent the cost of transitioning out of a state, the cost of transitioning
into a state, and the propagation parameter, respectively.
Initially, these three variables are defined based on the input observations. rin, rout are
both defined based on the dimension of the observations that represent the goal state,
rin also including a ”cost of living” value subtracting 0.05 from every cell. The p value is
simply calculated from where the walls are placed, giving any cell with a wall a 0, and cells
without walls are given a 1. When this version is used for accuracy comparisons, these
values are all extracted from the Φ neural network.
A 3D array, v, is initialized to all zeros, which will be used to store the updated value
function. It has the dimensions of (height, width, k).
The algorithm then enters a loop that iterates K times. Within this loop, there are two
nested loops that iterate over the rows and columns of the height and width of the obser­
vation dimensions. At each iteration, the value of the current state is updated based on
the values of its neighboring states. This is done by considering the possible actions that
can be taken from each state (in this case, moving up, down, left, or right) and selecting
the action that maximizes the expected value of the next state.
For each neighbor, the value is calculated as the propagation value of a cell multiplied by
the calculated value of the current state plus the rin value of the neighbour minus the rout
of the cell. Alternatively expressed as:
value′ = pi,j · vi′,j′,k + rini′,j′ −routi,j
(3.1)
At the end of the algorithm, the last dimension of the tensor V, meaning the last k iteration,
is returned. This represents a 2d grid of all the calculated values of the grid.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
19
==PAGE:28==
This implementation was then converted to using tensors in order to introduce learning,
as opposed to keeping the whole algorithm deterministic. The tensor implementation is
nearly identical to the previously mentioned Numpy version. The only significant differ­
ence is that it uses Torch Tensors instead of Numpy arrays, which allows it to be used
along with the implemented Actor­Critic architecture, and be passed through neural net­
works.
With this implementation, the module could now be combined with the A3C, making it
possible to produce results that could be compared with later iterations of the algorithm.
1
function VP_module(phi,K):
2
for k in range(K):
3
for i in range(N):
4
for j in range(N):
5
v[i,j, k+1] = v[i,j,k]
6
for di, dj in [ (-1, 0), (1, 0), (0, -1), (0, 1)]:
7
if di + i < 0 or dj + j < 0:
8
continue
9
10
if di + i >= h or dj + j >= w:
11
continue
12
13
ip = i + di
14
jp = j + dj
15
p_ij,rij_in,rij_out = phi[i,j,:]
16
p_p,rp_in,rp_out = phi[ip,jp,:]
17
new_v = p_ij * v[ip, jp,k] + rp_in - rij_out
18
v[i,j,k+1] = max( v[i,j,k+1], nv)
19
20
return v[:,:,K]
The code section above shows the aforementioned first tensor implementation of the VPN
algorithm. The values di and dj are used to iterate over the neighborhood of i,j and the
value p_p, rp_in, rp_out are used as the Φ values of that same neighborhood.
3.3.2
Neighborhood function
In order to speed up the training process, and minimize the parameters that the model
needs to learn, a ”neighborhood” function is created. The purpose of this is to take the
input that the model is normally given, and now only return the 3x3 neighborhood around
the agent, of the ”v­layer” containing the propagated values. This neighborhood is the
agent’s current position as well as the eight­value neighborhood directly around the agent,
a total of nine cells. In case of an edge or corner location, the environment will be padded
with walls, to avoid suggesting possible moves in that direction. This function is applied
after the value propagation module, right before passing the observations on to the Actor­
Critic.
Now, regardless of the size of the environment, the input to the Actor­Critic algorithm
will be nine, being the neighborhood around the agent in the matrix of the propagated
values only. This is instead of giving the network an input of size (N*N*4), which would be
the dimensions of obstacles, the agent itself, the goal, and the propagated values. This
is significantly more effective, especially in larger instances such as perhaps a 10 x 10
environments, where the input size would be 400.
3.3.3
Second Iteration of the VPN
In an attempt to further optimize the performance and training time of the model, a new
approach to calculating the value propagation is implemented.
20
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:29==
The first iteration provided good results, but was not very fast. This was a limiting factor,
and thus the second iteration was idealized.
Instead of iterating across the neighborhood of the agent, by looping over the height and
width and neighbors, using a ”roll” method would allow the algorithm to more efficiently
access the values of the agent’s neighboring cells. The roll method circularly shifts values
of a tensor along a chosen dimension, in this case just a single position along either axis
0 or 1 [26].
1
function VP_module(phi, K):
2
p,rin,rout = phi
3
v = torch.zeros_like(p)
4
r_in_pad = pad(rin, with_0)
5
6
for tt in range(K):
7
vm = []
8
if tt > 0:
9
vm.append(v)
10
11
v_pad = pad(v, with_0)
12
for ax, shift in [ (1, -1), (1, 1), (2, -1), (2, 1)]:
13
v_shift = roll(v_pad, dims=ax)[:,1:-1, 1:-1]
14
r_shift = torch.roll(r_in_pad , dims=ax)[:,1:-1, 1:-1]
15
vm.append(p * v_shift + r_shift - rout )
16
17
v, _ = stack(vm)
18
return v
The code above depicts the optimized, final version of the value propagation module,
utilizing the roll to reduce nested for­loops. The code has been slightly simplified for the
purpose of ease of reading. The full code can be found on the GitHub repository linked
in the appendix A.1.
3.4
Multi Agent Domain
Due to a limitation of time, as well as troubles with RLlib’s multi agent configurations, a
simplified version of the initially planned multi agent setting was implemented.
Instead of implementing the full speaker­listener environment, the simplified version would
just include a single agent, the listener. The speaker would now become a part of the en­
vironment, arbitrarily deciding upon which of the two existing goals is to be the ”correct”,
or reward­giving, one. This means that instead of the speaker receiving an input of which
goal is correct, and having to learn how to communicate this information onto the listener,
it simply decides on a goal and passes that to the listener as an indication of which goal
to pursue. This way, it is possible to evaluate if the VPN can learn to interpret the com­
munication, and integrate it into its learning to find the optimal path to the correct goal,
while emulating what the intended multi agent system would do.
Adapting the implemented VPN to solve the multi agent setting consists of three parts:
updating the environment which essentially means creating the speaker­listener domain,
modifying the VPN to pass additional communication parameters, and updating the con­
figuration for RLlib to allow multi agent training. The last of which was not possible due to
the implementation challenges with RLlib’s multi agent configuration system, as well as
the constraint of time.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
21
==PAGE:30==
The first step, the speaker­listener environment is created by adding two additional ”lay­
ers” to the observation space. Recall that the observations were in the shape (N, N, 3),
N representing the height and width of the gridworld, and last dimension separating the
”layers” of walls, goal, and agent. The two new layers will then be another goal and an
indicator of which goal is correct.
The VPN modifications are relatively minor. Originally, the input is the (N, N, 3) observa­
tion. The listener will now instead get a (N, N, 5) observation, the first three layers being
the same as before, the fourth being the second goal, and the fifth being the ”communica­
tion from the speaker” ­ information about the correct goal, such as described in section
3.1.3.
The speaker agent would, in the full implementation, have gotten the last layer as input,
and have to learn how to communicate this to the speaker. In the simplified speaker­
listener domain, this information is conveyed directly to the listener in form a matrix of 0s
or 1s depending on which goal is the correct one.
This simplified speaker­listener environment allows for non­trivial evaluation of the VPN
in an emulated multi agent domain, where the findings can be expected to extrapolate
into an actual multi agent system.
22
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:31==
4
Experiments
4.1
Training
All training was done using a learning rate of 0.001, and gradient clipping of 30, across a
neural network work of 24 hidden layers of 24 units.
Training was carried for up to 2000 epochs of at least 200 steps, but was cut short in most
cases as convergence appeared significantly earlier than that.
The gridworld used was of size 8 by 8 for all experiments, except for a few in the multi
agent, where a variation was specifically expressed.
4.2
Experiments
In this section the VPN implementation will be evaluated, measuring its performance
through a series of experiments. An isolated evaluation of the performance of the VPN
will be done, looking at its training behavior and results in the gridworld domain. In order
to achieve a clearer understanding of this performance, the VPN will be compared to a
standard implementation of an Actor­Critic network, specifically the A3C. This will give
good perspective as the two networks will have the same general architecture, excluding
the policy, the value propagation module.
The performance of the VPN within the simplified speaker­listener environment will then
be evaluated. This will be done on the same 8 by 8 grid as the other experiments, as well
as on a slightly smaller grid, in order to see a clear learning ability in this emulated multi
agent setting.
When carrying out experiments and comparisons, the performance will be considered
in terms of episode length. Though the model aims to maximize the reward signal, the
episode length values are more informative to compare performance, and as the figures
4.1 and 4.2 shows, there is a direct inverse relationship between the two values, thus
conveying the same idea.
Figure 4.1: Shows how episode length
decreases as number of epochs trained
increases.
Figure 4.2:
Shows how episode re­
ward increases with number of epochs
trained, an inverse relationship with the
episode length.
All of the following plots will depict the number of epochs trained against episode length
per epoch, on the x axis and y axis respectively. A logarithmic scale has been chosen for
the y axis to create a clearer separation of good and bad performances. This has been
done because the difference between 50 and 100 steps is much less relevant than what
we can decipher in the 5 to 10 steps range.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
23
==PAGE:32==
A further note to add meaning to these performance plots: In an 8 by 8 grid, which all of
the following plots are representing, the expected minimum steps required to solve this is
5.25 steps. Thus, a steps value in that area will suggest that the model has reached an
optimal performance.
4.2.1
VPN in isolation
The first experiment evaluates the performance of the VPN. Looking at figure 4.3, it is
apparent that the VPN is able to converge to an optimal, or near optimal performance.
The learning curve is somewhat varied between training runs, though follows a trend of
converging near the 200 epoch mark. This can also be seen when referring to figure
4.4. Here we can see the mean performance of the six runs shown in figure 4.3, with the
standard error highlighted.
Figure 4.3: Six runs of the VPN, with 10 step moving average smoothing, displayed on a
log axis. We see that the VPN is able to converge to a policy that solves the environment
in a minimum of moves, but with some variability in convergence time.
Figure 4.4: The mean, and standard error of the six runs of the VPN. We see that the
VPN is able to converge to a near optimal policy at close to 250 epochs.
The variation between runs is not unexpected. Reinforcement learning agents train with a
24
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:33==
certain level of randomness and exploration which cause the individual runs to converge
and learn at different rates.
Figure 4.5 shows an RGB interpretation of the gridworld environment given to the agent.
Comparing that with figure 4.6, which shows how the values have propagated throughout
the gridworld instance after successful training. Light squares represent relatively high
values, while the dark squares represent lower values. One can see that the values closer
to the goal are lighter, and get increasingly dark as the distance to the goal increases. This
aligns very well with the expectation, and what one would expect to see from a traditional
value iteration algorithm.
Figure 4.5: Layout of gridworld instance,
green is the agent, blue is the goal, red
are corner blocks.
Figure 4.6: The propagated values. The
lighter boxes represent higher valued
positions.
Figure 4.7 shows the progression of the value propagation throughout training, from the
first epoch, until it has converged at around 200 epochs. At the very beginning of train­
ing, and for the first many epochs, only the immediate neighborhood around the agent
appears to have high values. As the model trains, these values are able to propagate
throughout the grid. Once the model has converged, or is close to converging, the entire
gridworld environment will have assigned values that clearly suggest which direction, or
which neighboring cell, to move into in order to reach the goal as fast as possible. While
every run converges after a different training length, and in turn the value propagation
appears at different times, a trend that could be noticed across the runs was that the
value propagation grid would reach its final stage earlier than the model would have con­
verged. This suggests that even after the Φ network from the VPN has converged, the
A3C algorithm would still spend some epochs learning to optimally navigate this value
grid.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.7: Visual representation of the progressive learning of the value propagation
over the gridworld, seen at steps 0, 50, 80, 120, 140 and 200. The plot specifically shows
that after sufficient training, each cell will have assigned a value representing its position’s
value. This makes it clear which neighbor to move to, by going towards the highest value.
4.2.2
Standard A3C
Now we consider the performance of a standard implementation of the A3C, on the same
environment as that which we evaluated the VPN.
This comparison gives a good understanding of the effectiveness of the VPN, as the two
models are identical in all aspects other than the value propagation module of the VPN.
Figure 4.8: Six runs of the Standard A3C with 10 step moving average smoothing. We see
that the A3C is able to converge to a near optimal policy, similarly to the VPN. Compared
to figure 4.3, it appears that A3C has less variation between its runs, though consistently
converges slower than the VPN.
26
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.9: The mean and standard Error of the A3C over six runs. Comparing this to the
figure 4.4, we see that the VPN is able to converge at nearly half the epochs trained of
the A3C.
As we can see from the figure 4.8, the standard implementation of the A3C algorithm,
without the value propagation module, is also able to solve the gridworld environment and
find a near optimal policy. One can see that the variation of the curves is less dramatic
during learning, than what was observed for the VPN experiments. This is to be expected,
as the A3C has fewer parameters for which it must learn and optimize, and thus fewer
values to differ from the expectation.
What is more interesting is to see that the VPN implementation seems to converge sig­
nificantly faster than the standard A3C. If we compare the figures 4.4 and 4.9 we see that
the convergence of the VPN appears at approximately half the number of epochs run.
The mean convergence of the VPN seems to begin at around 250 epochs, while the A3C
does not see convergence until nearly 600 epochs. Seeing the difference in convergence
is not surprising. From the results of the both VIN and VPN papers [3, 5], we understand
that this should be expected, we now simply confirm that it is indeed the case.
Another interesting observation, which can be seen in figure 4.10, is that the A3C trains
much more per epoch, than the VPN does. This is due to an interesting feature in RLlib’s
training function, also mentioned in section 3.2.2, as well as the fact that the A3C has fewer
parameters to learn and thus require less computation to do a single training step that the
VPN. Considering this discrepancy in steps per epochs further underlines the superiority
of the VPN as compared to the A3C when considering the gridworld domain. It is able to
converge in nearly half the epochs, even though the epochs on average contain close to
five times more steps when training the A3C.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.10: Steps trained against Epochs trained for VPN and A3C. We see that the A3C
is able to consistently perform nearly five times as many steps per epochs compared to the
VPN. This means that the difference in performance of the VPN and A3C, as measured per
environment steps observed, is even more significant than the previous figures indicate.
4.2.3
Multi Agent Setting
As mentioned in section 3.4, the initially proposed multi agent setup was turned into
a slightly simplified version, thus the following experiments will focus on this simplified
speaker­listener environment. In the set of multi agent experiments, the VPN will be given
a gridworld as similar to the other experiments as possible. This means an 8 by 8 grid,
where the only significant difference is the environment having two goals.
Looking at the figure 4.11, it is clear that the VPN struggles to solve this environment. The
performance is not as good as one could have hoped. The agent does not appear to be
able to learn very well in environments of this size. This is a sparse reward environment,
and this can be part of the reason why the VPN struggles so much in the multi agent
setting compared to the single agent version. There are now more parameters to learn,
and since there is no reward signal indicating correct interpretation of the communication,
without also being able to solve the path to that goal, it is a much more challenging task.
28
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.11: The mean performance of several VPN runs in the multi agent setting on
the eight­by­eight grid. This performance is quite poor, and the policy does not appear to
converge. The performance does appear to get better toward the 1500 epochs, though it
worsens again after additional training.
In order to get a more comprehensive evaluation of the multi agent VPN, the same exper­
iment will be carried out on a smaller grid. This will make the learning significantly easier.
With the rewards being less sparse, the agent will be more likely to randomly arrive at the
correct goal and receive a reward, which will help the learning of the network.
The figures 4.12 and 4.13 show the performance of the VPN when trained in a slightly
smaller 5 by 5 grid instead. It is now clear that the VPN is actually able to learn to navigate
this environment sufficiently.
Figure 4.12: Six runs of the VPN in the multi agent domain, on a 5 by 5 grid. There
appears to be some variation in performance between runs, though after about 1000
epochs they all seem to consistently reach performances below five steps, sometimes
even down to four. This is an indication that the communication is being interpreted as
useful information, allowing the VPN to target the correct goal.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.13: The mean and standard Error of the VPN in the multi agent domain, on a 5
by 5 grid. Variation in training does not appear to be quite as significant as it was seen in
the single agent domain, on the larger grid. This is likely due to the smaller grid needing
fewer steps to solve, even for a random policy.
If we compare it to the results we saw in the single agent domain, it now takes significantly
more epochs for the model to converge, even though the grid size is smaller. As men­
tioned, it now has to interpret the location of two separate goals, as well as decipher from
the input which of the two goals should be pursued. This is to say that it is not surprising
that it takes longer for the VPN to converge in this domain.
Figure 4.14:
Layout of gridworld in­
stance, green is the agent, blue is the
correct goal, pink is the fake goal, red
are corner blocks.
Figure 4.15:
The propagated values.
The lighter boxes represent higher val­
ued positions.
Refer now to figures 4.14 and 4.15, depicting the layout and the corresponding value prop­
agation in this speaker­listener environment. It appears that the VPN is able to accurately
propagate values across the grid, assigning better values to locations closer to the real
goal. An interesting observation is that it assigns an even lower value to the fake goal,
than that cell would likely have received if it had just been any regular position. Note that
no penalty is given for reaching the fake goal, though it might appear that way from the
30
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:39==
propagation matrix. This means that rather than simply ignoring the wrong goal, the agent
will likely choose to avoid the location of this false goal, which might in some instances
make the path to the correct goal longer than necessary.
4.2.4
A3C in the Multi Agent Setting
Now, subjecting the A3C to the same speaker­listener environment that the VPN was
tested on. As the VPN was mostly evaluated on the five­by­five grid, the same will be
done for the A3C.
The figures 4.16 and 4.17 show how the A3C is able to perform in the speaker­listener
environment. It appears that it is also able to learn to navigate this grid, however it strug­
gles more with finding a near optimal policy. After close to 700 epochs, the curve begins
to converge, but the number of steps required to solve the multi agent setting is not quite
as low as it was in figures 4.12 and 4.13. The A3C was trained up to 3000 epochs, to try
to achieve an optimal performance, but even then, it was unable to consistently achieve
episode lengths of less than five, which could be seen from the VPN constantly after just
1000 epochs.
Figure 4.16: Six runs of the A3C in the multi agent domain, on a 5 by 5 grid. The variation
in performance appears to be quite minimal, though it appears that in a couple of runs it
is able to reach slightly better performance after 2500 to 3000 epochs. Compared to the
VPN’s performance in figure 4.12, the performance tends to be less good, while requiring
significantly more epochs to converge.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.17: The mean and standard Error of the A3C in the multi agent domain, on a 5
by 5 grid. After 1000 epochs, very little improvement is seen from the A3C, even though
it is allowed much more training in hopes for convergence to an optimal policy.
Similar to the single agent domain, the A3C is more uniform between runs. This is clear,
even in the more complicated speaker­listener domain, where additional parameters need
to be accounted for.
Having now compared the A3C and the VPN in both single agent and multi agent gridworld
domains, it is clear that the VPN is able to out­perform the more traditional A3C. This is
to be expected, as it is more advanced and an additional computational module.
The VPN is able to converge faster in both the single agent and the multi agent domain,
and is seen to reach superior peak performances in the multi agent domain even after
training the A3C for much longer.
32
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:41==
5
Discussion
In this thesis the Value Propagation Network has been discussed and implemented. The
advantages of such an algorithm, as compared to traditional planning algorithms, has
been outlined. Its performance relative to a more traditional, or acknowledged, reinforce­
ment learning algorithm has been documented.
The clear performance advantages of the VPN, compared to the A3c were outlined during
the experiments. Additionally, it was shown to be able to navigate the speaker­listener
environment, again doing so better than the A3C was able to. This gave an indication
toward the potential benefits of expanding the VPN algorithm into a full multi agent system,
in order to take advantage of its benefits in additional domains and future applications.
A choice was made early in this project, to develop the implementation of the VPN through
the use of the high­performance computing platform Ray, specifically RLlib. This was
done in order to take advantage of its parallelization features, as well as ensure a strong
underlying A3C implementation to build the VPN upon.
This decision also came with its own set of challenges. The first being to understand how
this large platform worked, and to further combine it with the other toolkits used such as
Mazebase and Gym. RLlib is quite new, and is not as well documented as one could have
wished. Its use is not very widespread, which made it difficult to find other working ex­
amples making use of the platform. On top of that, Mazebase also turned out to be quite
troublesome to work with. The implementation available in Python was only an experi­
mental and without any decent documentation. Since the beginning of this project, this
version of the toolkit has been archived, no longer being supported or receiving updates.
While the environments were made using this toolkit, some of its features were not readily
usable, and the integration with RLlib turned out to be a difficult task.
During the multi agent implementation phase, the lack of user examples of RLlib became
more apparent. The documentation itself had no real available multi agent examples,
and there seemed to be few user examples to draw inspiration from. These challenges,
in combination with the time constraint, forced the project to focus on the simplified multi
agent system discussed.
In order to compensate for the challenges mentioned, the modified version of the pro­
posed multi agent system was implemented. This simplified speaker­listener environ­
ment, though not in the strictest sense a real multi agent system, allowed for an evaluation
of the VPN in a domain that corresponded to a multi agent system from the perspective
of the navigating agent of the VPN.
Rather than trying to create multiple agents that would each learn to communicate, the
focus was on the single agent, which would receive information that it would itself have to
learn to interpret.
As we saw in section 4.2.3, the VPN struggled to perform in the larger instances of the
speaker­listener domain, though it was able to quite adequately learn to perform within
a smaller instance. It would be interesting to experiment with curriculum learning, to see
if the VPN would be able to learn in the larger grids, after having successfully trained on
smaller instances.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
33
==PAGE:42==
What was most interesting was to see the VPN perform better and converging faster than
the A3C was able to do within the same speaker­listener environment.
It is not surprising that it is more difficult for the VPN to learn when it has to account for
multiple goals. The input observation space is now larger, meaning there are additional
details that the network must be able to learn to interpret. The Φ network now has to be
able to learn to differentiate between the correct and the fake goal, based on an additional
input. In some instances of the training, it could be seen that the propagation would appear
around both goals, before eventually learning to focus on the correct one.
One could imagine that the performance in this setting would be better if the speaker was
able to learn to communicate in a more sophisticated manner. The binary indicator might
not be as clear as some learned form of communication could have been.
This evaluation shows that there is potential for using the VPN in the multi agent setting,
though it does also suggest that further modification of the algorithm would be necessary
in order to achieve optimal performance.
34
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:43==
6
Conclusion
The objectives of this thesis were to implement and test the deep differentiable planner, to
examine differentiable planning in a multi agent setting, and to compare the differentiable
planning method to a corresponding non­planning method.
The first objective was successfully achieved and documented thoroughly through sec­
tions 3 and 4. The performance of this VPN was evaluated up against another high per­
forming reinforcement learning algorithm, the A3C. While they were both able to navigate
and solve the gridworld environment, the VPN showed superior performance in terms of
convergence time, both regarding the number of steps and epochs trained. It should be
noted that the authors of the original paper on the VPN never published the code for their
own implementation of the VPN, which then makes this project the first to provide a fully
functional, and publicly accessible, version of the algorithm.
Another objective was to examine differentiable planning in a multi agent setting. The
intention was to see how the VPN could be extended into the multi agent domain by
giving it the access, or ability, to communicate between agents. While the initial plan to
implement multiple agents that would learn their own method of communication through
training was limited, what was instead evaluated was the ability for the VPN to receive a
source of information, representing a communication channel, and learn to interpret it as
useful information.
The results show that the VPN is indeed capable of learning useful information from a
communication source and apply it to the value propagation module in a matter that can
produce useful results, within an emulated multi agent setting. It was shown that the VPN
was not only superior to the A3C in the single agent domain, but the performance was
also clearly better in the speaker­listener domain.
The multi agent environment, the speaker­listener domain, was proposed and a simplified
version was implemented and evaluated. Yet again, proper evaluation of the multi agent
setup in this environment was not quite as thorough as hoped. More importantly, it was
shown that the VPN could actually learn to interpret the information indicating which of the
two goals was the correct one. It was able to learn, in response to this ”communication”,
how to handle the multi goal setup and focus on just the correct one of them. The most
significant finding was how the proposed differentiable planner, the VPN, was able to do
this more effectively than the non­planning based A3C algorithm.
To conclude, the VPN is able to converge within both single agent and multi agent environ­
ments and shows favorable results as compared to the A3C. This suggests the possibility
to further expand the VPN into more complicated environments and settings, and even­
tually apply it in real world applications.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. “Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction”.
en. In: (2018).
[2]
S. Russell and P. Norvig. Artificial Intelligence, a Modern Approach. 1995.
[3]
Aviv Tamar et al. “Value Iteration Networks”. In: (2016). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1602.
02867. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.02867.
[4]
NIPS 2016. URL: https://nips.cc/Conferences/2016/Awards (visited on 01/24/2023).
[5]
Nantas Nardelli et al. Value Propagation Networks. 2018. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.
1805.11199. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.11199.
[6]
Seung Hyun Kim et al. Disentangling Successor Features for Coordination in Multi­
agent Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:2202.07741 [cs]. Feb. 2022. URL: http://
arxiv.org/abs/2202.07741 (visited on 02/04/2023).
[7]
Wiebe van der Hoek and Michael Wooldridge. “Chapter 24 Multi­Agent Systems”.
en. In: Foundations of Artificial Intelligence. Ed. by Frank van Harmelen, Vladimir
Lifschitz, and Bruce Porter. Vol. 3. Handbook of Knowledge Representation. El­
sevier, Jan. 2008, pp. 887–928. DOI: 10 . 1016 / S1574 - 6526(07 ) 03024 - 6. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574652607030246 (visited on
01/31/2023).
[8]
M. L. Littman. Markov Decision Processes. en. 2001.
[9]
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar et al. MazeBase: A Sandbox for Learning from Games. arXiv:1511.07401
[cs]. Jan. 2016. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.07401 (visited on 10/05/2022).
[10]
Greg Brockman et al. OpenAI Gym. arXiv:1606.01540 [cs]. June 2016. URL: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1606.01540 (visited on 01/13/2023).
[11]
G Cybenkot. “Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function”. en. In: (1989).
[12]
Christopher J. C. H. Watkins and Peter Dayan. “Q­learning”. In: (1992).
[13]
Richard Bellman. Dynamic Programming. Princeton University Press, 1957.
[14]
Ronald J Williams. “Simple statistical gradient­following algorithms for connectionist
reinforcement learning”. en. In: (1992).
[15]
Richard S Sutton et al. “Policy Gradient Methods for Reinforcement Learning with
Function Approximation”. en. In: (1999).
[16]
David Silver et al. “Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms”. In: Proceedings of
the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by Eric P. Xing and
Tony Jebara. Vol. 32. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 1. Bejing, China:
PMLR, 22–24 Jun 2014, pp. 387–395. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v32/
silver14.html.
[17]
Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. “Actor­Critic Algorithms”. In: Advances in Neural In­
formation Processing Systems. Vol. 12. MIT Press, 1999. URL: https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/1999/hash/6449f44a102fde848669bdd9eb6b76fa-Abstract.html (vis­
ited on 01/12/2023).
[18]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. Asynchronous Methods for Deep Reinforcement Learning.
arXiv:1602.01783 [cs]. June 2016. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.01783 (visited
on 01/12/2023).
[19]
Andrew G. Barto, Richard S. Sutton, and Charles W. Anderson. “Neuronlike adap­
tive elements that can solve difficult learning control problems”. In: IEEE Trans­
actions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics SMC­13.5 (1983), pp. 834–846. DOI:
10.1109/TSMC.1983.6313077.
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
37
==PAGE:46==
[20]
Laura Graesser and Wah Loon Keng. “Reinforcement Learning ­ The Actor­Critic
Algorithm”. In: Dec. 2019. URL: https://www.informit.com/articles/article.aspx?p=
2995356&seqNum=2 (visited on 01/13/2023).
[21]
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Learning Multiagent Com­
munication with Backpropagation. arXiv:1605.07736 [cs]. Oct. 2016. URL: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1605.07736 (visited on 02/03/2023).
[22]
Jakob N. Foerster et al. Learning to Communicate with Deep Multi­Agent Reinforce­
ment Learning. arXiv:1605.06676 [cs]. May 2016. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1605.
06676 (visited on 01/16/2023).
[23]
RLlib: Industry­Grade Reinforcement Learning — Ray 2.2.0. URL: https://docs.ray.
io/en/latest/rllib/index.html (visited on 01/17/2023).
[24]
Welcome to the Ray documentation — Ray 2.2.0. URL: https://docs.ray.io/en/
latest/ (visited on 01/17/2023).
[25]
Weights & Biases ­ Documentation. URL: https://docs.wandb.ai/ (visited on 01/31/2023).
[26]
torch.roll — PyTorch 1.13 documentation. URL: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/
generated/torch.roll.html (visited on 02/04/2023).
38
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
==PAGE:47==
A
Appendix
A.1
GitHub Repository
The full code for this project can be found on my GitHub repository at:
GitHub.com/Adamasb/Mavi
Differentiable Planning in Multi Agent Systems
39
==PAGE:48==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk/
