==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Cyber-physical inspired Design of an API Pilot Facility 
 
Master’s Thesis – 30 ECTS 
Bertil Donsted Engberg, s174052 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
University supervisor 
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet 
 
 
 
Gürkan Sin 
Department of Chemical Engineering 
 
 
Department of Chemical Engineering 
PROSYS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROSYS 
 
Novo Nordisk BA 
 
 
 
 
 
Company supervisors 
API Manufacturing Development  
 
 
Deenesh Kavi Babi 
Bioprocess Improvement-Optimization 
 
 
Maria-Ona Bertran 
(API MDev BIO) 
==PAGE:2==
 
i 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
ii 
 
Abstract 
In an industry where products are expensive to develop, have short lifecycles, and demands 
for new products are ever increasing, it is of utmost importance for a to ensure that there is 
sufficient capacity to meet the demands. Building new production facilities for APIs is a long 
process due to heavy regulations and getting a product to market as fast as possible is of 
highest priority. This calls for flexibly designed facilities that can produce multiple products 
and can be easily adapted when new products are developed. However, flexibility requires that 
facilities are designed to change set points and operation, and the design, control and sched-
uling problem should therefore be considered in an integrated manner. 
In this thesis, a method is developed to solve the design problem while incorporating decisions 
from the control and scheduling problems, and then the method is applied to recommend the 
design of an API Pilot Facility in Novo Nordisk. 
The first step in the method is to develop a Value Stream Map of the facility to obtain process 
understanding and identify design-control-scheduling interactions. Next, the process under-
standing is used to develop a flowsheet model for the facility. The flowsheet model is first 
applied to develop a baseline design, considering the design problem alone.  
Next, both local and global sensitivity analysis is applied to determine the design-control-
scheduling decisions with the highest impact. The local analysis was used to get an initial idea 
of which decisions were important and it showed that decisions around the limiting process 
step had the greatest effects, which corresponded with process understanding. Furthermore, 
non-influential variables were identified and fixed to a value, to reduce the computational com-
plexity of the global analysis. The global analysis was performed using the Monte Carlo-based 
Standardised Regression Coefficients method, sampling 500 times for uniform distributions of 
the decision variables. The coefficient of determination for the linear regression model was R2 
= 0.78, which meant that the method could be applied to the system, since 78% of the output 
variance could be explained by the regression model. The result of the global analysis showed 
that the decisions related to step 11, 12, and 13 of the process were the most significant. The 
step 11 area alone constituted 55% of the total output variance.  
The critical decisions from the sensitivity analyses were used to recommend an integrated de-
sign considering all three problems. The integrated design had a 17% higher capacity than the 
baseline design, for the same unit sizes but different operation.  
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
iii 
 
Resumé på dansk 
I en industry hvor nye produkter er kostbare at fremstille, har korte livscyklusser og 
efterspørgslen på nye produkter kun stiger, er det yderst vigtigt at sikre den nødvendige 
produktionskapacitet for at møde efterspørgslen. Opførelsen af nye produktionsfaciliteter for 
API’er er en længerevarende process grundet mange kvalitetsmæssige reguleringer, og det at 
få et produkt hurtigt på markedet er højeste prioritet. Dette kalder på fleksibelt designede 
fabrikker, der kan producucere flere forskellige product, og som nemt kan tilpasses til nye 
produkter der udvikles. For at opnå denne fleksibilitet, kræver det at fabrikkerne er designede 
til at kunne skifte set-points og operation, og derfor bør design-, kontrol- og 
schedulingproblemet løses på en integreret måde. 
I dette speciale er en metode til at løse designproblemet på en måde hvor beslutninger fra 
kontrol- og schedulingproblemet inkorpoereres i løsningen. Denne metode bliver derefter 
anvendt til at anbefale designet af en API Pilot Facilitet i Novo Nordisk. 
Det første trin i metoden er at udvikle et Value Stream Map af faciliteten, for at opnå 
procesforståelse og identificere design-control-scheduling-interaktioner. Herefter anvendes 
den 
opnåede 
procesforståelse 
til 
at 
udvikle 
en 
flowsheetmodel 
af 
faciliteten. 
Flowsheetmodellen anvendes først til at udvikle et baseline-design, hvor designproblemet 
betragtes isoleret. 
Herefter anvendtes både lokal og global sensitivitetsanalyse for at bestemme design-kontrol-
scheduling-beslutningerne med den største effekt. Den lokale analyse blev anvendt til at få en 
tidlig ide om hvilke beslutnigner der var vigtige, og viste at beslutnigner omkring det 
begrænsende procestrin havde den største effekt, hvilket stemte overens med 
procesforståelsen. Derudover blev ikke-indflydelsesrige variable bestemt og fikseret til en fast 
værdi for at reducere den beregningsmæssige kompleksitet af den globale analyse. Den 
globale 
analysis 
blev 
udført 
ved 
brug 
af 
Monte 
Carlo-baseret 
Standardiserede 
Regressionskoefficienter metoden, og der blev samplet 500 gange for uniforme distributioner 
af beslutningsvariablene. Bestemmelseskoefficienten for den lineære regressionsmodel var R2 
= 0.78, hvilket betød at metoden kunne anvedes til analysen, siden 78% af outputvariansen 
kunne forklares af regressionsmodellen. Resultatet af den globale analysis viste, at 
beslutninger relateret til trin 11, 12 og 13 af  processen var de mest signifikante. Trin 11 
filterarealet alene udgjorde 55% af den totale outputvarians. 
De kritiske beslutninger fra sensitivitetsanalysen blev anvendt til at anbefale et integreret 
design der tog hensyn til alle tre problemer. Det integrerede design havde en 17% højere 
kapacitet end baselinedesignet for de samme enhedsstørrelser, men forskellig operation.  
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
iv 
 
Preface 
This thesis is submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the Master of Science de-
gree in Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). 
The work has been carried out as a collaboration between the Process and Systems Engineer-
ing Centre (PROSYS) at DTU and Novo Nordisk A/S from September 1. 2022 to February 1. 2023, 
under the supervision of Gürkan Sin and Deenesh Kavi Babi. 
I want to thank my Novo Nordisk supervisor, and manager, Deenesh for the last two years. 
Thank you for always pushing me to be the best I could be, and for believing in my potential. 
The last two years of my studies have also been the hardest but looking back I have learned 
so much. 
I would like to my DTU supervisor Gürkan Sin for letting the thesis take shape at Novo Nordisk, 
and for the valuable inputs and perspectives from the meetings that we had. 
Thank you, Mariona for all the help and sparring that you have provided during my time here 
at Novo Nordisk and especially during the thesis. This project would not have been where it is 
today without our discussions. 
Thank you to all my wonderful colleagues in MDev BIO. It has been a real pleasure working 
with all of you. Especially thank you, Oscar, for taking the time to help me with the process 
control part during my thesis. 
I want to thank my family, my mom and dad, for all their support during my studies and un-
derstanding of my absence the last 5 months. I’m looking forward to seeing you much more 
in the future. 
And thank you, most of all, Petrea, for your love, care, and support, always and especially dur-
ing my thesis. Thank you for picking me up when I was down, for letting me vent my frustra-
tions, for taking care of our home, and believing in me at all times. None of this would have 
been possible without you. 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
v 
 
List of abbreviations 
Abbreviation 
Full name 
API 
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient 
BS 
Batch size 
Chrom 
Chromatography column 
CPS 
Cyber-Physical System 
CV 
Column Volume 
Cvar 
Controlled variable 
DCF 
Dynamic Crossflow Filtration 
DES 
Discrete Event Simulation 
DF 
Diafiltration 
Dvar 
Disturbance variable 
FEL 
Future Event List 
LB 
Lower Bound 
LHS 
Latin Hypercube Sampling 
MFAT 
Multiple-factors-at-a-time 
MIDO 
Mixed-integer-dynamic-optimization 
MILP 
Mixed-integer linear programming 
MINLP 
Mixed-integer nonlinear programming 
Mod 
Modification 
MPP 
Modular Purification Plant 
Mvar 
Manipulated variable 
NVA 
Non-Value Adding 
OFAT 
One-factor-at-a-time 
PPF 
API Pilot Purification Facility 
PPP 
Production Planning Problem 
PSE 
Process Systems Engineering 
PSP 
Production Scheduling Problem 
QbD 
Quality-by-Design 
RTN 
Resource-task network 
SA 
Sensitivity Analysis 
SC 
Supply Chain 
SD 
Spray Dryer 
SRC 
Standardised Regression Coefficients 
STN 
State-task network 
UB 
Upper Bound 
UF 
Ultrafiltration 
VA 
Value Adding 
VBA 
Visual Basics for Application  
VSM 
Value Stream Map 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
vi 
 
Table of Contents 
Abstract ............................................................................................................................................... ii 
Resumé på dansk .............................................................................................................................. iii 
Preface ................................................................................................................................................ iv 
List of abbreviations ........................................................................................................................... v 
Table of Contents .............................................................................................................................. vi 
1 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................. 1 
2 
Literature Review ........................................................................................................................ 3 
2.1 
Defining Capacity ................................................................................................................. 3 
2.2 
Process Design ..................................................................................................................... 4 
2.3 
Cyber-Physical Systems ....................................................................................................... 7 
2.4 
Scheduling .......................................................................................................................... 11 
2.5 
Sensitivity Analysis ............................................................................................................. 19 
2.6 
Integration of Scheduling, Design and Control .............................................................. 22 
2.7 
Problem scope and definition .......................................................................................... 27 
3 
Method ....................................................................................................................................... 30 
3.1 
Value Stream Mapping ...................................................................................................... 31 
3.2 
Model Development .......................................................................................................... 31 
3.3 
Baseline design .................................................................................................................. 34 
3.4 
Sensitivity Analysis ............................................................................................................. 34 
3.5 
Integrated design .............................................................................................................. 34 
3.6 
Tools .................................................................................................................................... 34 
4 
Case Study ................................................................................................................................. 38 
5 
Discussion .................................................................................................................................. 39 
6 
Future work ............................................................................................................................... 44 
7 
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................. 45 
8 
References ................................................................................................................................. 46 
9 
Appendices .................................................................................................................................. a 
9.1 
Literature Review ................................................................................................................. a 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
1 
 
1 Introduction 
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) production is the process of synthesizing and purifying 
the active ingredients used in pharmaceutical drugs and is typically carried out in batch pro-
cesses, where a specific quantity of API is produced in a single production run. In biopharma-
ceutical production the API-precursor is often generated using Fermentation of genetically 
modified microorganisms, whereafter the precursor undergoes a series of modification and 
purification steps before it exits as the pure API. The isolation of the precursor after fermenta-
tion is often divided into Recovery and Purification, where the precursor is isolated from the 
microorganisms in the recovery and is then purified, to meet quality regulations, in purification. 
An illustration of the production landscape in Novo Nordisk is seen in Figure 1-1: 
 
Figure 1-1: The API production landscape in Novo Nordisk 
One of the main challenges in API production is generating enough capacity to meet demand. 
This can be particularly challenging in the pharmaceutical industry, where demand for certain 
drugs can fluctuate significantly over time and where people’s lives depend on the medicine. 
To address this challenge, pharmaceutical companies may need to invest in additional produc-
tion equipment or modify existing equipment to increase capacity. 
Flexible design is important in API production as it allows for the production of a wider range 
of API products with minimal changes to the production process. For example, a production 
facility with a flexible design may be able to produce both small and large batch sizes of differ-
ent API products without requiring significant changes to the equipment or process.   
Flexible facilities offer benefits in terms of facility utilisation and eases the process of introduc-
ing new products. This is especially important for pharmaceutical companies that are driven 
by constantly developing new products, since patent protection of drugs is limited to 20-25 
years. The first 10-15 years of the patent is usually spend developing and testing the product, 
which means that the companies have a relatively short time to earn back the research and 
development costs, since when the patent expires, competitors are often ready with a much 
==PAGE:9==
 
2 
 
cheaper alternative since they didn’t have to pay any expenses for research and development 
[1]. One way of introducing flexibility is the modular design concept, where facilities are built 
from modules that themselves are self-contained processes and can be moved around or ex-
changed with other operations, thus leaving some degrees of freedom in the topology of the 
facility. 
Production planning and scheduling are crucial aspects of API production and involves decid-
ing which API products to produce and in what quantities. Effective production planning and 
scheduling can help to ensure that enough API is produced to meet demand, while minimizing 
waste and costs. The production planning problem allocates production plans to the different 
facilities of a company, and the more products that can be produced in each facility, the more 
freedom and flexibility is available to the production planning. Flexible design is therefore im-
portant for the company to generate good productions plans that can satisfy the demand at a 
low cost. 
The production planning problem requires facilities to produce enough API to meet the de-
mand. To produce in a facility, it must be designed first and for batch processes, the capacity 
of a facility is both dependent on the design and the schedule, since batch processes are dy-
namic. The schedule is at a lower time level translated into actions for the control system to 
perform, to maintain the desired production rate. Traditionally these three problems: design, 
control, and scheduling, have been solved in a sequential manner where the output of one 
problem is the input to the next. However, looking at the problems in an integrated approach 
can provide process insights on how the different resolution layers affect each other, and lead 
to potential better solutions that consider the interaction between the layers. 
Therefore, the scope of this thesis is to develop a method for solving the design problem while 
accounting for control and scheduling interactions, and then apply the approach to a case 
study to recommend the design of an API Pilot Purification Facility. 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
3 
 
2 Literature Review 
The relevant literature for contextualising, scoping, and solving the problem is reviewed in the 
following sections. 
2.1 Defining Capacity 
A production system converts raw materials into products and waste through the consump-
tion of energy and labour. The capacity is a defining metric for the economic potential and 
inherent value of a production system [3], and the capacity defines how much a production 
system can produce over a given period in time, and thus lies in the domain of mass and time 
[1]. The throughput of a batch production system is a dynamic quantity that fluctuates due to 
process variance, ramp-ups, and ramp-downs. Therefore, the capacity of the system should be 
based on an average of the throughput, and not the maximum of the throughput. A formal 
definition of capacity can be given as [3]: 
The maximum average throughput of the system that can be maintained for an extended period of 
time 
subject to accounting for quality requirements for the products, safety limits for the facility, and 
restrictions imposed on equipment, materials, and labour.  
A batch production system can be decomposed into a sequence of steps, and the performance 
of each step can be evaluated through the time it takes for the step to process a batch, i.e., the 
cycle time. The throughput of a step can then be found as the relationship between the batch 
size and the cycle time [4]. The step with the highest cycle time will be the bottleneck of the 
process and will limit the overall capacity of the facility.  
Managing the capacity of a facility to ensure that the demand can be met is of utmost im-
portance, and thus identifying and improving bottlenecks is crucial for the success of a com-
pany. Chemical and biochemical manufacturing systems have complex system interactions 
and large flowsheets, making simple, analytical bottleneck analysis difficult [5]. Instead, simu-
lation tools capable of determining equipment utilization and throughput can facilitate the 
identification of bottlenecks, aid in developing improvement ideas for debottlenecking, and 
test the ideas through simulation of what-if scenarios [6]. 
To generate a capacity of a batch process three aspects should be considered: design, control, 
and scheduling. The design problem is solved for a given capacity target, but because batch 
processes are dynamic the time element has to be considered too, and the scheduling problem 
arises. The design is generated for set point operation, but to ensure stability in the operation 
control is required. Therefore, to ensure a stable design that is operated properly, scheduling 
and control decisions, and hence design, control and scheduling will be reviewed in the follow-
ing. 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
4 
 
2.2 Process Design 
Chemical process design is a systematic decision-making process, where the output is a pro-
cess that can convert a raw material R into a product P. The design process is complex and 
requires decisions on the sequencing and connectivity of reactions and separations as well as 
specifications for equipment sizing, typically constrained by economic, sustainability, control-
lability, flexibility or safety objectives [22]. To manage the complexity of the design problem it 
can be divided into the sub-problems Synthesis, Design and Optimization as illustrated in Fig-
ure 2-1: 
 
Figure 2-1: The Design Problem of a chemical process illustrated, and how it can be divided into Synthesis, Design and 
Optimization to manage the complexity 
Flowsheet synthesis is the first step in process design and consists of sequencing reactions 
and separation steps to get from R to P [23]. The flowsheet generation is driven by the reaction 
and product specifications and requirements. 
 
Figure 2-2: Flowsheet synthesis 
==PAGE:12==
 
5 
 
First the reaction pathway is chosen from fx. the literature that will convert the raw materials 
to the product, and then the separation steps are sequenced based on the product specifica-
tions and requirements such as concentration, purity, and composition. The scope of the sep-
arations is to remove impurities, up-concentrate the product and ensure the correct composi-
tion for desired product stability and chemical or physical properties. The appropriate unit op-
erations are selected based on reaction kinetics or thermodynamic insights. 
Initial flowsheet synthesis methods were based on heuristics, adding, or modifying one unit at 
a time; however, this strategy limited the options of exploration to the close vicinity of the base 
case. To address these limitations two classes of methods have been developed: decomposi-
tion-based and optimization-based methods [24]. Decomposition methods were the first to be 
developed, and optimization-based methods came later on and are the state-of-the art today. 
The optimization-based methods will therefore be described in detail here, and a deep dive on 
the decomposition-based methods can be found in Appendix 9.1.3. 
Optimization-based flowsheet synthesis methods uses a superstructure to represent the alter-
native processing routes [26] and then applies mathematical optimization methods to select 
the best flowsheet, based on a performance metric such as profit or sustainability [24]. The 
superstructure can be derived from engineering judgment, heuristics or thermodynamical 
considerations, as well as experience from similar processes [23].  
 
Figure 2-3: Generic superstructure of flowsheet alternatives. Adapted from [26]. 
These methods can account for all the interactions in the system, which the Douglas method 
could not [26], but are limited by other aspects. First of all, these methods require the gener-
ation of a superstructure containing the flowsheet alternatives, and thus the solution will be 
limited by the size of the superstructure [23, 24, 26]. Another limiting aspect is the ability to 
solve the resulting optimization problem that typically is in the form of an MILP or MINLP due 
to the discrete decisions of which unit to use.  
==PAGE:13==
 
6 
 
After the flowsheet has been determined, the next step is to specify the unit-operation design 
variables, such as equipment sizes. The sizing of the unit-operations is driven by the desired 
throughput, and the design process can iterate back to synthesis if it turns out that an opera-
tion cannot be performed in a single unit, due to size or safety constraints. Subsequent analy-
sis of the selected design can be used to identify process bottlenecks that can then be consid-
ered in the third step of the design problem: the design optimization step. In this step the 
baseline design is considered subject to potential improvements, based on the analysis of from 
the design step.  
2.2.1 Design of Batch Processes 
A batch process carries out a series of operations over time on a separate identifiable items or 
material. Batch processes are dynamic and therefore requires consideration of the time ele-
ment while designing, in contrast to continuous processes that are designed for a steady state 
[1]. In the chemical industry, continuous processes are mainly featured in the production of 
bulk chemicals, whereas batch processes are focused on the fine and speciality chemistry sec-
tors, as well as the pharmaceutical industry. 
The design of batch processes for pharmaceuticals is significantly different from the design of 
large-scale continuous processes [1]. One of the most defining aspects of a pharmaceutical 
process is the route selection from raw material to product, which is usually performed by 
chemist or biotechnologist with little interaction from the chemical engineer. When the reac-
tion scheme has been selected, which is usually the starting point for traditional process de-
sign activities, the process is usually well defined and further flowsheet synthesis is not re-
quired [1]. The role of the process engineer therefore shifts focus to equipment sizing and 
scheduling. 
Since batch processes are dynamic, it is necessary to not only consider the design but also the 
duration and timing of the individual activities. Scheduling is therefore vital to predict and 
maximize the capacity of a process, since the capacity is a function of both the amount of ma-
terial that is processed per batch and the time it takes. A bad schedule can leave units idle for 
long periods of time, which is inefficient and can be costly [1]. 
2.2.2 Modular Design 
Another aspect of process design is the amount of flexibility that is incorporated into the de-
sign. In the pharmaceutical industry products typically have shorter lifecycles when compared 
to bulk chemicals due to patents only protecting for a limited period [1]. This raises the demand 
for getting products quick to market to take advantage of the patent protection as much as 
possible. Traditional, build-for-purpose pharmaceutical facilities can take up to three to five 
years from design before they are ready for production, losing valuable time to profit from the 
product. Furthermore, these facilities are typically product specific and requires major modifi-
cations to produce other products once the lifecycle of the original product is over [27]. Mod-
ular facilities offer a solution to these problems. 
==PAGE:14==
 
7 
 
A modular facility consists of building blocks called modules, where each module is a self-con-
tained process [28]. The flexibility lies within the ability of modules to be changed, thus altering 
the facility topology. If a new product were to be introduced in a build-for-purpose facility, it 
requires a rebuild of the facility to produce the product, unless the facility already has the 
required units for the process. In a modular facility, a rearrangement of the modules can solve 
the problem. 
 
Figure 2-4: Build-for-purpose vs Modular facility 
From Figure 2-4 it the concept of the self-contained process in the modes can be seen. Each 
individual module independent of the rest of the process, and changes in the process can be 
implemented by rearranging the modules. The benefits of considering modular design is in-
creased flexibility to changing demands and new products, and faster execution of projects 
potentially leading to increased profits for the company [27, 28]. 
2.3 Cyber-Physical Systems 
A Cyber-Physical System (CPS) is an integration of a physical and a virtual process, where the 
physical- and cyber-system exchange information in real-time through sensors and actuators 
[29]. 
==PAGE:15==
 
8 
 
 
Figure 2-5: A Cyber-Physical System 
CPS integrate the physical world with the cyber-world through computing, communication, 
and control, and provide real-time sensing, information feedback and dynamic control. The 
core function of CPS is control [29], and an example of a CPS is a process control system, as 
shown in Figure 2-5. The physical part of the control system is the tank, the liquid, the pipes, 
the valve, the level transmitter which is measuring the filling level of the tank, and the level 
controller which is connected to the valve to adjust the filling level of the tank. The cyber part 
of the process control system is the software for the level controller that takes the filling level 
measurement from the level transmitter and calculates the valve-opening position, based on 
a filling level set point. Thus, the information from the physical system (the filling level) is trans-
lated to an action on the physical system (the valve-opening) through a cyber-system. 
If the core function of CPS is process control, then “a cyber-physical inspired design” is a design 
inspired by process control that considers the control-design interface. To determine the con-
trol-design interface the two problems must be defined. The process design problem has been 
defined in the section above, so what is missing is to define the process control problem. 
2.3.1 Process Control 
Process Control is defined as [30]: 
The adjustment of available degrees of freedom to assist in achieving acceptable operation of the 
plant 
Typical objectives for process control are stability, disturbance rejection, and set point 
tracking, where stability is the act of ensuring that no variables grow unboundedly, disturb-
ance rejection is the ability to generate the same output when the input changes, and set point 
==PAGE:16==
 
9 
 
tracking is the ability to follow a set point, also when it changes. These three typical objectives 
are illustrated in Figure 2-6: 
 
Figure 2-6: Typical process control objectives 
The process control problem is similar to the process design problem, in that the goal is to 
determine a process that converts a raw material to a product, but with the additional layer of 
considering the operation of the process subject to disturbances, whereas in process design 
the operation of the plant is considered at the set points. In control, the variables from process 
design are categorised as either controlled variables (Cvars), manipulated variables (Mvars), 
or disturbance variables (Dvars). The input variables becomes either Mvars or Dvars, whereas 
the output variables become Cvars. Cvars are the process variables that are controlled, and 
the desired value of a Cvar is referred to as the set point. Examples of Cvars are filling levels, 
temperatures, and pressures. Mvars are the variables that can be adjusted to maintain the 
Cvars at their set points, and usually the Mvars are flowrates. Dvars are inputs variables that 
affect the Cvars, but cannot be directly manipulated, such as ambient temperatures, feedstock 
compositions and cooling water temperatures [31]. 
In process design it is assumed that it is possible to operate the set point conditions, hence no 
disturbances. However, when a disturbance occurs in a unit it can propagate down the system, 
affecting the outputs of subsequent units, if not handled. A disturbance can affect the different 
layers of a process, depending on the severity of the disturbance and the sensitivity of the 
output to that disturbance. 
==PAGE:17==
 
10 
 
 
Figure 2-7: The different layers of a process and how a disturbance can propagate from the lower layers to the higher 
layers 
In Figure 2-7 the four layers of a modular facility is shown: the individual units, how a collection 
of individual units creates a module, how a processing step can consist of parallel modules, 
and how a processing section consists of a sequence of steps. For a non-modular facility, the 
module layer is removed, and the layers are unit-step-section. If a disturbance happens to a 
unit and it doesn’t change the output of the unit, then the disturbance has been mitigated 
within the unit. If the disturbance does change the unit output, then the disturbance will prop-
agate to the following unit, whose input is the output of the disturbed unit. If the disturbance 
cannot be controlled by the units in a module, then the disturbance will propagate to the mod-
ule layer, and the module output will change. It continues like this to the next layers; disturb-
ances not mitigated in the modules will affect the step-output, and if the disturbance propa-
gates all the way to output of the final step, then the section output will be affected. 
Thus, the severity of a disturbance can be determined based on how far up the layers it prop-
agates. An important part of process control is therefore to determine the critical disturbances 
by quantifying the effect on the Cvars [32]. Or in other words; quantify the output sensitivity 
to input changes. 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
11 
 
 
2.4 Scheduling 
In Appendix 9.1.1 a throughout review of the supply chain levels and the Production Planning 
Problem (PPP) is given, since it is connected to the scheduling problem.  
A key input to the PPP is the production capacities from the facilities. How much a facility can 
produce of a given product is dependent on how resources within the facility are allocated and 
how tasks are sequenced on the units. To determine this the Production Scheduling Problem 
(PSP) is solved [10].  
The goal of PSP for is to allocate limited resources, such as equipment units and utilities, to 
processing tasks, and the sequencing and timing of these tasks on the resources [9]. An illus-
tration of the input-output structure of the PSP can be seen in Figure 2-8: 
 
Figure 2-8: An illustration of the PSP. Made with inspiration from [9]. 
The inputs to the problem are production facility data and recipe of product i in facility j, equip-
ment suitability to perform certain tasks, the production costs, and the production target for i 
in facility j in time period t. The production facility data is the available units in the facility, their 
sizes, capacities, and connectivity, as well as the availability of utilities and manpower. The 
production recipes are detailed descriptions of produce each product, including processing 
times, and material and utility requirements. The equipment suitability defines what equip-
ment can carry out the specific tasks, and the production costs are the expenses related to raw 
materials, solvents, utilities, and cleaning. The production targets define how much should be 
produced in each time period [9, 10]. 
For scheduling of batch processes, the limited resources are the production units and the tasks 
to be assigned to these resources are the batches to be produced. Therefore, the main deci-
sions to make in the PSP for batch processes are Batching, Batch-unit Assignment, and Se-
quencing & Timing of tasks [10], as illustrated in Figure 2-9: 
==PAGE:19==
 
12 
 
 
Figure 2-9: Main decisions within batch process Production Scheduling. Adapted from [10]. 
Batching is the decision of how many batches to produce and the sizes of these batches to 
achieve the production targets. In some scenarios the production targets can be given in 
batches to be produced and in those cases the batching decision has already been made at 
the planning level, leaving only the assignment and sequencing decisions to the scheduling 
problem [10]. Batch-unit Assignment is the decision of where to produce a given batch and 
depends on whether all units can process all types of batches. The decision is relevant if there 
are multiple units capable of producing the same batch. Sequencing & Timing are the decisions 
of when and in which order the batches should be processed. Both are driven by the due dates 
for the batches set by the production plan, as well as the changeover times between batches 
of different products. In the pharmaceutical industry there are strict regulations for product 
quality, requiring extensive cleaning when changing between products in a multiproduct pro-
duction facility, thus leading to downtime where there is no production in the facility. Frequent 
product changes can lead to loss of production capacity in the facility [7]. 
2.4.1 Planning and Scheduling Connectivity 
Decisions made at the different levels of the supply chain are not independent [7, 9]. Higher-
level decisions affect the decisions made at lower levels, fx. facility location (long-term) will 
affect the potential for future capacity expansions (medium-term). Looking at Production Plan-
ning and Scheduling problems the connectivity is also clear, as illustrated in Figure 2-10: 
==PAGE:20==
 
13 
 
 
Figure 2-10: Connectivity between the PPP and PSP  
The output of the PPP is the production targets for each time period, and these targets are 
inputs to the PSP, thus influencing the scheduling decisions. Furthermore, to solve the PPP the 
production for each time period must be specified, as shown in Figure 9-3. The production 
amount in each time period is limited by the capacity of the facilities, and the facility capacities 
are dependent on the scheduling decisions.  
2.4.2 Solving the Scheduling Problem 
For many years the scheduling problem have been solved manually using spreadsheets, Kan-
ban or planning cards. Companies have then identified and documented the best operating 
practices for meeting a specific production target. However, in a complex production land-
scape with uncertain demands, multiproduct facilities and a high pressure to be more sustain-
able and reduce energy consumption and waste generation, the scheduling problem becomes 
challenging to solve by hand [10]. Numerous methods for solving the problem have therefore 
been developed using mathematical optimization from the Operations Research area.  
When solving the PSP using optimization there are two aspects to consider: (1) the system 
representation (the model) and (2) the solution method. The system representation has been 
mentioned several times in previous theses at Novo Nordisk, and a description can be found 
in Appendix 9.1.2. For now, the solution methods are reviewed. 
2.4.3 Solution Methods 
When the scheduling model has been developed it can be solved. A common way to address 
the scheduling problem is to solve it using optimization-based methods, more specifically as 
MILP or MINLP problems. A general MILP problem has the form [13]: 
==PAGE:21==
 
14 
 
 
min
𝑥,𝑦𝑍= 𝑐𝑇𝑦+ 𝑑𝑇𝑥 
𝑠. 𝑡.      𝐴𝑦+ 𝐵𝑥≤𝑏 
             𝑦∈[0,1],
𝑥≥0 
2-1 
Here y is a vector of discrete decision variables, x is a vector of continuous decision variables, 
b, c, and d are vectors of coefficients, and A and B are matrices of coefficients. y and x represent 
the decisions from the scheduling problem shown in Figure 2-9. Fx. could y be “should unit j 
product i in time period t” and x could be the batch sizes and number of batches to produce. 
The vectors c and d are related to the objective of the problem and could be costs of producing. 
A, B, and b are related to the constraints and an example could be the number of available 
units for a given operation, or the duration of a task. Both the objective function and all the 
constraints are linear equations. In case there is a non-linear equation in the constraints or the 
objective function the problem is extended to a MINLP problem.  
The solution methods for both MILP and MINLP problems can be into two classes: rigorous 
methods and heuristic-based methods [14]. The key difference between the two is that rigor-
ous methods guarantee a global optimum or at least quantifies the optimality gap, whereas 
heuristic methods cannot guarantee global optimality. So why even consider heuristics? Rig-
orous methods are computationally expensive and struggle to solve large problems in reason-
able time. Heuristic methods can provide a good, feasible solution within a shorter timeframe, 
and are thus desirable for solving large problems. The complexity of the scheduling problem 
for industrial processes often results in problems so large that finding an optimal solution 
within a reasonable timeframe is not feasible, using rigorous solution methods [10]. Instead, 
different heuristics and metaheuristics have been used to solve real world scheduling prob-
lems. 
Rigorous methods for MILP rely mainly on simplex-based branch and bound methods, apply-
ing linear relaxation at each node, solving the LP subproblem and eliminating nodes based on 
==PAGE:22==
 
15 
 
bounding properties [10, 15]. Several commercial solvers are available for solving complex 
MILP problems in a reasonable time, like CPLEX and Gurobi. 
Heuristic-based methods range from simple task-prioritization such as “first come first serve” 
and greedy algorithms to more elaborate search methods such as simulated annealing and 
evolutionary algorithms [10].  
 
Figure 2-11: Conceptual illustration of solution space for a maximisation problem with several optima 
Simple heuristics are also called local search methods since they tend to find a local optimum 
and get stuck there. As illustrated in Figure 2-11, a solution space can have several local optima, 
but only one of them is the global optimum, and there is no guarantee that the found local 
optimum is actually the global optimum. To work around this, meta-heuristics have been de-
veloped that apply stochastic search to broadly explore the solution space, with the purpose 
of trying to escape local optima and finding the global optimum. The algorithms switch be-
tween local and global search, trying to find the best solution without getting stuck in a local 
optimum. Meta-heuristics usually do not find the global optimum, and even if they did there 
is no way to prove optimality, but they often provide a good feasible solution within reasonable 
time [10]. Another feature of meta-heuristics that is attractive is that they can easily be inte-
grated with a simulation model of the system. 
2.4.4 Simulation-based Optimization 
Doing simulation is in general less computationally expense when compared to optimization. 
The reason becomes clear when looking at the relationship between simulation and optimiza-
tion as illustrated in Figure 2-12: 
 
Figure 2-12: The relationship between a model, simulation, and optimization 
==PAGE:23==
 
16 
 
A model is a mathematical representation of a system and consists of variables and equations 
representing the state of different entities in the system and their relationships [16]. A typical 
example of a model is a mass balance with variables representing what enters, leaves, and 
accumulates in the system and equations stating the relationship between these. Simulation 
is imitating the behaviour of the system over time and corresponds to providing the model 
with the required inputs to generate the output; in other words, the degrees of freedom must 
be equal to zero.  
Optimization can be described as simulation with an additional objective function that evalu-
ates the output of the simulation and based on that changes the inputs to generate a new 
solution, until some objective is met. Instead of having specified a single value for the inputs, 
degrees of freedom are introduced. The inputs that are free to vary are the decision variables 
for the optimization problem and constraints are defined for the decision variables to define 
the feasible space. The best solution within the feasible space is called the optimal solution to 
the problem. Simulation therefore inherently exists within optimization, and optimization is in 
principle using simulation to search the feasible space for the best solution. As mentioned in 
the section before, rigorous solution methods have been developed to navigate the feasible 
space and guarantee an optimal solution, but these methods can be very time consuming for 
large problems. Instead, simulation can be used to generate a good feasible solution much 
faster. 
2.4.5 Discrete Event Simulation 
Since simulation is the imitation of system behaviour over time, the question arises of how to 
manage the progress through time. There are two overall ways of progressing time in a simu-
lation: time-based simulation and event-based simulation [17, 18].  
Time-based simulation can be either continuous or discrete. In continuous-time systems the 
system states can change at any point in time, whereas in discrete-time systems changes only 
happens at discrete points in time. A time-based simulation will advance by moving the simu-
lation clock forward and then computing the values of the states in the system, and it will 
repeat until a certain condition is met, like a specific value of a state or a defined end-time. 
Discrete event systems are systems where the state variables only change at discrete points in 
time at which events occur [19]. Thus, the simulation clock is driven forward by these events. 
The difference between the time-progressing of time-based simulation and event-based sim-
ulation can thus be illustrated in Figure 2-13: 
==PAGE:24==
 
17 
 
 
Figure 2-13: Time advancement in time-based and event-based simulation 
A potential advantage of discrete event simulation (DES) is that computations are performed 
only when a state changes in the system, whereas time-based simulation have computations 
also when the system state is unchanged. A simple thought example is having guests over for 
dinner. With event-based progressing of time you open the door for your guests at 7 o’clock 
because that is when you agreed to meet, whereas a time-based progressing of time requires 
you to open your door every 10 minutes to check if your guests have arrived yet. An example 
related to the process industry could be the filling of a pool tank from a chromatography col-
umn that performs several runs: 
 
Figure 2-14: Event-based and time-based simulation  
The discrete event simulation computes the state changes and interpolates linearly in between 
them, and the time-based simulation computes both the state changes and also the dynamic 
filling profiles in between. Depending on the problem being solved, one method could be pre-
ferred over the other. If detailed information about filling dynamics is of interest, then the 
==PAGE:25==
 
18 
 
time-based method is more accurate. However, if filling the level is just a means to an end in 
a larger model structure, then the discrete event simulation provides the same information, 
but with fewer computations, and is therefore more desirable. 
DES models consists of the following core building blocks [17, 20]: 
- 
Entities are the individual elements of the system whose state is being tracked explic-
itly fx. material in a production line or airplanes in an airport. Entities change state and 
the overall system state is a result of the interactions between the states of the different 
entities. 
- 
Resources provide services to entities and entities can request one or more units of a 
resource for doing an activity. Examples of resources are units in a processing line or 
hangars in an airport. 
- 
Events are instantaneous occurrences that change the state of the system and are 
caused by the interactions between entities and resources. Examples of events are ini-
tiation of a process such as filling a tank, starting a filtration, or doing a pH-adjustment. 
- 
Activities are the smallest units of work and are the operations initiated or finished at 
each event. Activities have finite durations; they begin and end with an event and state-
changes in entities happen in the beginning and end of activities. 
 
Figure 2-15: The interactions of the core building blocks of DES 
An activity lasts for the duration it takes for the entity to process the resource, and ends with 
an event where the resource is released by the entity. A process can then be described by 
multiple activities happening in sequence and parallel. 
DES requires a simulation executive that has the task of scheduling and executing activities in 
the correct sequence and priority, by maintaining a simulation clock and a Future Event List 
(FEL). There are in general four approaches for how the executive progresses the simulation 
[20]. 
The activity scanning approach is the most primitive of the four approaches and is similar to 
discrete-time simulation. The simulation clock is progressed a discrete time step and the algo-
rithm checks if the conditions for any activities to start are met. Moving forward in discrete 
==PAGE:26==
 
19 
 
time intervals means that the algorithm advance the clock through longer periods of no activ-
ity, and the approach is therefore computationally heavy. The activity scanning approach is 
also the only of the four approaches that doesn’t utilize a FEL [17].  
The process-based approach uses the processes entities as building blocks. The processes con-
sist of a sequence of events separated by conditional delays (the entity is waiting in queue for 
a resource) and unconditional delays (the entity is processing a resource for the duration of an 
activity). The simulation executive holds a record of when an entity should move to the next 
event of its process, and the executive can maintain a FEL by combining the records of the 
individual entities [17].  
The event-based approach uses events to progress the simulation clock. At each event an 
event routine is triggered, which is a set of logical statements of what should happen in the 
event based on the system state. The FEL is updated and sorted chronologically at every event 
[17]. 
The three-phase approach classifies events into B-events and C-events. B-events are state 
changes scheduled in advance and C-events are conditional state changes independent of the 
simulation clock. In general, all activities begin with C-events and end with B-events, meaning 
that executing a C-event at the same time schedules a B-event, since activities have finite, pre-
determined durations. The advantage of categorizing the events is that it reduces the amount 
of logic statements in the system that has to be checked, thereby increasing the computational 
speed of the algorithm when compared to the activity-based or event-based approach [17]. 
2.4.6 Industrial Applications 
Scheduling problems in the chemical, biochemical or pharmaceutical manufacturing industry 
often become too large to solve rigorously in reasonable time [10]. Applying simulation-based 
optimization allows for faster solutions with the cost of optimality. Simulation has many appli-
cations such as performance prediction (utilization of units and identification of bottlenecks), 
identifying interactions between components of the system, generating process understand-
ing, what-if scenario analysis, and supporting decision-making [21]. DES captures with relative 
ease the system interactions, product flows, variability associated with different processing 
steps, and plant dynamics, making it well suited for system analysis and debottlenecking of 
batch processes [5]. 
2.5 Sensitivity Analysis 
Sensitivity analysis (SA) is the study of how uncertainty in the output of a model Y can be ap-
portioned to different sources of uncertainty in the model inputs (x1, x2,…,xJ) [33]. 
 
𝑌= 𝑓(𝑥1, 𝑥2, … , 𝑥𝐽) 
2-2 
SA can generate process insights on critical regions in the input space and which combinations 
of factors that corresponds to the highest risk, be used to simplify models by identifying com-
ponents that doesn’t have a significant effect on the output, and be used to evaluate the model 
==PAGE:27==
 
20 
 
based on knowledge of phenomena [34]. There exist two general categories for SA: local and 
global analysis. 
Local SA is performed by small perturbations of the model inputs around a base case, thereby 
determining the local impact of changes in inputs [35]. Local methods are also known as one-
factor-at-a-time (OFAT) methods, since the effect of changing a single input, while keeping all 
others fixed at their base case value, is examined [34]. Local methods are simple and low-costs 
analysis of the individual inputs effects, however they rely on assumptions on model linearity 
and additivity [36]. Local methods cannot account for input interactions and non-linearities, 
local variations are limited to neighbourhood of the base case and thus they leave the majority 
of the solution space unexplored [34-36]. To accommodate for these short-comings, global 
methods so SA are required. Global SA methods vary the inputs within the entire feasible space 
with the purpose of quantifying the global effects of each input on the model output, including 
interactive effects. Since the global methods do not require assumptions of linearity or addi-
tivity, they are usually model-independent, whereas local methods only are valid for specific 
models [34]. 
There are three main purposes of SA: factor prioritisation, factor fixing and factor mapping [34, 
35]. Factor prioritisation identifies and ranks the inputs that have the greatest impact on out-
put variability. Factor fixing is similar but aims to identify model inputs that have no or a neg-
ligible effect on the output. These inputs can then be fixed in further analysis, reducing the 
input space and model complexity. Factor mapping maps input values that produces specific 
output values. 
 
Figure 2-16: Methods for local and global sensitivity analysis. Adapted from [34]. 
DES models are usually linear as mentioned earlier. This is because the models are event-
driven, and events are used for linear interpolation of non-linear behaviour. Since SA will be 
performed on a DES model later, the model-dependent methods can be applied and will there-
fore be described. More on the model-independent methods can be found in [34]. 
==PAGE:28==
 
21 
 
2.5.1 Derivative-based Methods 
Differential analysis is a local SA method (OFAT) that generates sensitivity indices 𝑆𝑖(𝑥𝑗) by tak-
ing the first-order derivative of the outputs with respect to the inputs [37]. 
 
𝑆𝑖(𝑥𝑗) = 𝜕𝑌𝑖
𝜕𝑥𝑗
 
2-3 
If the Y is not known in an analytical form, the above partial derivative can be approximated: 
 
𝑆𝑖(𝑥𝑗) = 𝑌𝑖(𝑥1, … , 𝑥𝑗,0 + Δ𝑗, … 𝑥𝐽) −𝑌𝑖(𝑥1, … 𝑥𝑗,0, … 𝑥𝐽)
Δ𝑗
∗𝑐𝑖 
Δ𝑗= 𝑥𝑗−𝑥𝑗,0 
𝑐𝑗= 𝑥𝑗,0
𝑌0
 
2-4 
where 𝑥𝑗,0 is the base case value for input j, Δ𝑗 is a change in the jth input and  𝑌0 is the base 
case value for the output. The factor 𝑐𝑗 ensures that the sensitivity indices are scaled relatively 
to the size of the perturbation Δ𝑗, such that larger perturbation intervals doesn’t make an input 
look more significant. 
The purpose of the differential analysis factor prioritisation and factor fixing. It is to generate 
an initial idea of which inputs the output is most sensitive to, and identify non-influential vari-
ables, since fixing the value of these will reduce the computational complexity of the global SA. 
2.5.2 Standardised Regression Coefficients 
Standardised Regression Coefficients (SRC) is a method where the sensitivity indices are ob-
tained by performing linear regression between model inputs and outputs [38]. The outputs 
are obtained from Monte Carlo simulation [34, 37, 39], which is the act of performing many 
deterministic simulations with stochastic variation on the inputs to relate output sensitivity to 
a given input [40]. For each model output, a first order linear multivariate model is fitted, re-
lating the output 𝑌𝑖,𝑘 to model input 𝑥𝑖,𝑗 [37, 38]. For i samples, j input variables and k outputs 
the SRC 𝛽𝑗,𝑘 is calculated as following: 
 
𝑌𝑖,𝑘−𝜇𝑌𝑘
𝜎𝑌𝑘
= ∑𝛽𝑗,𝑘∗
(𝑥𝑖,𝑗−𝜇𝑥𝑗)
𝜎𝑥𝑗
𝐽
𝑗=1
     for 𝑖= 1. . 𝑁 
2-5 
Further regression analysis allows to determine the model coefficient of determination, 𝑅2 for 
output k [34, 38]: 
 
𝑅𝑘
2 = ∑𝛽𝑗,𝑘
2
𝑗
 for 𝑘= 1. . 𝐾 
2-6 
The coefficient of determination is representing the explanatory power of the linear fit be-
tween each output and set of inputs, and expresses the fraction of the model output variance 
explained by the regression [34, 39]. For an 𝑅2 = 1 the SRCs exactly quantify the amount of 
output variance explained by each input. For  𝑅2 < 1  the SRCs can still be applied to 
==PAGE:29==
 
22 
 
qualitatively evaluate the significance of the inputs, however if the value of 𝑅2 becomes too 
low then the SRCs cannot be considered a reliable sensitivity measure, and other non-linear 
methods must be considered. A commonly agreed upon lower bound for the value of the co-
efficient of determination is 𝑅2 ≥0.7, where 70% of the total output variance can be explained 
by the linear regression [34, 37, 38]. 
2.6 Integration of Scheduling, Design and Control 
In this section the relationships between scheduling, design and control are reviewed to iden-
tify where the interfaces of the concepts lie, and how they are integrated. 
2.6.1 Design-Scheduling 
The interaction between design and scheduling can be viewed both from the design- and the 
scheduling point-of-view. From the design point-of-view, as mentioned in the previous sections, 
the schedule is always there when determining the design of a batch process, due to the pro-
cess being dynamic. For a batch process multiple operations are performed in the same unit, 
leading to the natural question of when and where to perform the operations, which are two 
of the three main scheduling decisions (batch-unit assignment and timing & sequencing). For 
a given design many different schedules can be chosen, leading to different capacities from 
the same design. Thus, to consider the performance of a design the schedule must be consid-
ered. 
Looking at the interaction from the scheduling point-of-view, the input to the scheduling prob-
lem is the production facility data such as unit sizes and connectivity, i.e., the design. The prin-
cipal difference from the scheduling problem and the integrated design-scheduling problem 
is the relaxation of the design variables, such as number of units, sizes of units and topology 
[1]. The scheduling problem focuses on the utilization of production resources, and the batch 
process design problem is determining what the level of those resources should be [1]. Chang-
ing the size of a unit can affect the schedule, if the throughput is changed, since this will change 
the operation time. 
 
Figure 2-17: Design-scheduling interactions 
The way the plant is scheduled will determine its capacity, and the design problem can be seen 
as upper-level problem with the scheduling problem embedded within it [1]. To solve one the 
other must also be solved. 
==PAGE:30==
 
23 
 
2.6.2 Design-Control 
The traditional approach for process design and process control have been a hierarchical iso-
lation of decisions based on time scale and their effect on operation. First the design is locked, 
then control is considered [41-43]. During decision operation decisions such as control is as-
sumed to take a nominal value, to reduce the problem complexity. However, the performance 
of the control system is inherently dictated by the dynamics of the designed process.  [31], and 
the achievable dynamic performance of a process is dictated and constrained by the design. 
Designing without control in mind can lead to plants that are difficult to control and operate. 
The purpose of looking at the integrated control-design problem is therefore to consider in-
teractions between the two decisions layers [43]. 
 
Figure 2-18: Control-Design interactions 
The objective of the design problem is to determine a flowsheet, the size of the unit operations, 
and the operational conditions such as pressures and temperatures. In the sequential ap-
proach, these outputs become inputs to the control problem in the form of set-points. The 
control problem is then to maintain the desired operation at the set-points, subject to disturb-
ances. The effect of these disturbances will affect the dynamic performance of the system. A 
major part of control is therefore to is quantify output response to input changes, that is to 
test the open-loop response. Analysis of the input changes can the lead to closed-loop imple-
mentation of controllers, which is another major part of control. 
Conceptually, quantifying output response to input changes is a sensitivity analysis. A way to 
consider design and control in an integrated fashion is to test the sensitivity of the output to 
input variables while designing, thus leading to a better open-loop solution to the problem. An 
example of considering control while designing is a system where there is a rapidly changing 
input flowrate. An intermediate tank can then provide surge control and prevent disturbances 
from propagating down the system, thereby creating a better open-loop solution. 
2.6.3 Control scheduling 
Control and scheduling share the common goal of determining the optimal operational deci-
sions [44], and are connected through the process control hierarchy: 
==PAGE:31==
 
24 
 
 
Figure 2-19: Typical control hierarchy in a chemical plant. From [30, 32]. 
The different layers of the control hierarchy represent decisions separated by time scale. The 
output from scheduling is results of the decisions mentioned earlier (batching, batch-unit as-
signment, sequencing & timing). The execution of these decisions is governed by the control 
layer, and thus control is in principle the execution of the schedule [45]. The feedback from the 
control layer to the scheduling layer is information about equipment availability and duration 
of operations. These inputs from the control to the schedule can be used to evaluate whether 
a new schedule is required, or if the current operation can hold.  
 
Figure 2-20: Scheduling-Control interactions 
2.6.4 Design-Control-Scheduling 
The isolation of decisions relative to their time scales is common practice to solve complex 
problems in the process industry [41, 46]. The interactions between design, scheduling and 
control are shown in Table 1:
==PAGE:32==
 
25 
 
Design 
Control 
Scheduling 
Objective 
Determine a process that converts Rj to Pi 
Achieve the desired performance subject to 
the actual process disturbances 
Determine a production schedule that 
satisfies the demand  
Inputs 
Raw material(s) and/or product(s) 
Production target(s)  
Effect of disturbances 
Batching  
Batch-unit assignment  
Sequencing & timing 
Flowsheet topology  
Unit connectivity 
Equipment sizes 
Number of units 
Batching  
Batch-unit assignment  
Sequencing & timing 
Production target(s)  
Flowsheet topology – steps and their se-
quence 
Unit connectivity 
Equipment sizes 
Number of units 
Outputs 
Flowsheet topology – steps and their se-
quence 
Unit connectivity 
Equipment sizes 
Number of units 
Effect of disturbances 
Control structure – pairing of manipulated 
and controlled variables 
Control law selection – what model to use 
Control law parameters determination 
Tuning of control law parameters 
Batching – how many batches and what size? 
Batch-unit assignment – where is each 
batch processed? 
Sequencing & timing – in what sequence are 
batches processed and when? 
In the pharma-
ceutical indus-
try 
Driven by product quality and design flexibil-
ity due to strict regulations, uncertain de-
mands, and short product lifecycles 
Traditional approach: monitory control and 
extensive off-line laboratory batch-to-batch 
analysis (open loop) 
QbD: Focus shifted to real-time monitoring 
and control  
Batch scheduling for optimal utilization of 
shared multiproduct facilities. 
Integration 
Design-scheduling: A batch process is dynamic, meaning that time is an element to consider and therefore the schedule and design are inte-
grated, since the design cannot have a capacity without specifying the schedule. 
Design-control: The operation specified in the design becomes the set-points for control. Accounting for the effect of disturbances, determined 
in control, can lead to an improved design. 
Control-scheduling: Control and scheduling are in principle the same problem solved at different time scales. Scheduling generates a schedule 
and control executes the schedule and feeds back information to the scheduling layer that the scheduling layer can use to evaluate if a new 
schedule should be made. 
Table 1: Design-Scheduling-Control interactions
 
==PAGE:33==
 
26 
 
Design, scheduling, and control are all part of the same problem of determining a process that 
can fulfil the demand of one or more products, but each topic refer to decisions made at dif-
ferent time scales. The long-term decisions are related to design, the middle-term decisions 
are related to scheduling, and the short-term decisions are related to control [41]. In a tradi-
tional, sequential approach, the interactions between these decisions-levels are neglected with 
the benefit of reducing the complexity of each problem. A parallel can be drawn to the decom-
position of the Design Problem into Synthesis, Design, and Optimization, where a larger prob-
lem is decomposed to make the complexity of the problem more manageable. This practice of 
decomposing a problem into several sub-problems with different decisions at each layer is a 
common way of managing complexity, and is well illustrated by The Multiscale, a generic 
framework used in Novo Nordisk to solve problems at different levels of resolution: 
 
Figure 2-21: Multiscale modelling framework used by BIO-teams in Novo Nordisk 
The multiscale exists independently of the problems being solved, but both the design, control, 
and scheduling problem can be pinpointed on the multiscale: the design and scheduling prob-
lem resides in CAPS and the control problem resides in HAPS.  
The resolution varies dependent on the scale of modelling. When the scale increases the level 
of model complexity decreases, but the level of insights increases, and the overall goal of all 
levels is process understanding. In mechanistic analysis the resolution is high and process 
models are used to accurately describe complex phenomena, but the scope is on the unit-
operation level and therefore the level of insights generated is low. In hybrid analysis the goal 
is to combine mechanistic modelling and process data to capture process dynamics and im-
plement closed-loop control. In capacity analysis the scale is on the facility-level and thus con-
siders many connected unit-operations. The goal is process design and process debottleneck-
ing, focusing on the relationship between inputs and outputs of units and closing the mass 
==PAGE:34==
 
27 
 
balance. Linear relationships between inputs and outputs are considered, since the scope is 
capacity analysis, lowering the model complexity for faster computation. In decision analysis, 
long-term capacity planning is performed considering multiple facilities, and thus model com-
plexity is low, but the level of insights generated for decisions-making is high. X-ray analysis is 
placed on the bottom of the scale, but actually features on all levels performing data-driven 
modelling for the translation of data into knowledge, and the level of insights gained is de-
pendent on the level of scale the analysis has been performed on.  
All the levels of the scale are connected, and information is exchanged both ways, since the 
scale represents a larger problem decomposed into different decision-layers. Fx. are facility 
capacities an output from CAPS the DAPS use to generate production plans. On the other hand, 
a production generated in DAPS can show that more capacity is required, thus setting improve-
ment targets for process debottlenecking and design in CAPS. As mentioned, the reason for 
considering problems at different levels of resolution is to solve the right problem using the 
right level of complexity. Fx. for planning decisions such as production targets, it is unneces-
sary to consider the phenomena of each unit operation, since it (1) isn’t required for the output 
of the planning problem, and (2) increases the model complexity unnecessarily and makes it 
much harder to solve. Lower-level information is therefore aggregated to provide the right 
inputs to upper-level problems on the scale. 
In general, when looking to solve a problem at certain scale, the decisions of the higher levels 
of the scale are locked, and the information of the lower levels of the scale is aggregated. Fx. 
solving the control problem independently requires that the design and schedule have been 
decided. Solving the scheduling problem independently requires that the design has been de-
cided, and that information about the control is given through the actual durations of the op-
erations and the unit availability. 
2.7 Problem scope and definition 
Looking at design-scheduling-control, the scope of this thesis, decisions have already been 
made to lock the planning decision variables, and aggregate information from the phenomena 
level. 
==PAGE:35==
 
28 
 
 
Figure 2-22: Scope of the problem to be solved when related to The Multiscale 
What is trying to be done in the thesis, is to look at decisions made multiple decision-layers 
simultaneously to account for interactions between the different layers: specifically, between 
the layers of design, scheduling, and control. 
The topic of an integrated method for solving the design problem inspired by scheduling and 
control is quite well studied in the literature for continuous processes. The developed methods 
can be categorized into two overall categories: Projecting methods and Integrated optimiza-
tion methods [41, 43, 46-49]. Projecting methods apply indices for controllability, flexibility, 
and robustness to solve the problem, whereas integrated optimization methods solve the 
problem within an optimization framework, formulating the problem as a mixed-integer-dy-
namic-optimization (MIDO) problem due to the dynamics introduced by process control [41, 
46, 47].  
In terms of batch processes, not much has been done to integrate design and control [49]. 
Direction extensions of the optimization-based methods for integration from continuous pro-
cesses is not easy due to the nonlinear dynamic models characterizing the behaviour of batch 
processes [50]. For pharmaceutical batch processes, nothing was found on integration of de-
sign and control during the literature search. 
With all that, and the concepts in the literature that have been reviewed, in mind, the problem 
definition for this thesis is: 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
29 
 
Given the design problem, the control problem, and the scheduling problem 
Identify interactions between design, scheduling, and control 
Develop a systematic method for solving the design problem for a pharmaceutical batch pro-
cess, incorporating control and scheduling decisions into the design 
Then apply the developed method to recommend the conceptual design of an API process 
 
The core part of this thesis is to identify where control and scheduling can be incorporated in 
the design problem, and how that can be used to generate an integrated design. The interac-
tion between the problems lies within their decision variables, fx. how the design variables 
become manipulated and controlled variable in control. 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
30 
 
3 Method 
A method for solving the integrated design problem is proposed. The steps of the method are outlined in Figure 3-1: 
 
Figure 3-1: Method for solving the integrated design problem incorporating control and scheduling decisions 
==PAGE:38==
 
31 
 
3.1 Value Stream Mapping 
A Value Stream Map (VSM) is visualisation of the mass and information flows in a manufactur-
ing landscape, originating from LEAN manufacturing [51]. The original purpose of the VSM is 
to map the process at such a level that waste can be identified, however it can also be used as 
a valuable tool for generating process understanding. 
The outcome of the VSM is process understanding and identification of interactions related to 
design, scheduling, and control. To relate to the different layers of a facility that disturbances 
can propagate to, described in section 2.3.1, the VSM is performed for different levels of reso-
lution: the facility, step, module, and unit level. 
3.2 Model Development 
Based on the achieved process understanding and the scope of the project, a flowsheet model 
is developed for solving the integrated problem. The model development follows the CAPS 
infinity loop method developed by the BIO-teams in Novo Nordisk: 
 
Figure 3-2: CAPS infinity loop method 
The outcome of the model development is a validated DES model that can be used for simula-
tion and optimization studies, such as solving the design-scheduling problem or the design-
scheduling-control problem. The method is iterative and several iterations through the loop 
can be necessary. The first five steps of the method are for developing a validated model, 
whereas the sixth step, Application, is the further application of the validated model. 
3.2.1 Conceptual Flowsheet Model 
The first step in the CAPS method is to develop a conceptual flowsheet model. The flowsheet 
model is generated based on the process understanding achieved through the VSM and rep-
resents the topology of the system in question. If the flowsheet of the process is not given, 
then it can be generated using the methods from the flowsheet synthesis step of the process 
==PAGE:39==
 
32 
 
design problem mentioned in 2.2. A flowsheet model consists of models of the individual unit 
operations connected through inputs and outputs. 
 
Figure 3-3: The conceptual generation of a flowsheet model 
To generate the flowsheet model, mathematical models for each unit operation in the flow-
sheet must be generated, with the equations used in the model, the different variables and 
parameters, and the model assumptions. Furthermore, the complexity level of the model 
should match the scope of the problem. When the unit operation models have been developed, 
they are connected to generate the flowsheet model. 
3.2.2 Data Analysis 
Data analysis is the act of obtaining discrete value or distributions for the model inputs that 
should be specified, such as batch size, reaction duration, column loads, filter fluxes, yields, 
etc. Inputs such as loads, fluxes and yields are often specified in the product recipe as set point 
values, whereas batch sizes typically can be found from analysing production data. The gener-
ated inputs from data analysis are either stochastic (following a distribution) or deterministic 
(a single value, often generated from a statistical function like the average or median). 
3.2.3 Solution 
Model solution is simulation of the system. To perform simulation, it is required that the sys-
tem is fully specified such that the degrees of freedom in the model is equal to zero. The flow-
sheet model with all its equations is fully specified using the output from the data analysis, 
and the system can be solved. 
Another part of the solution step is evaluating whether the model behaves as expected. Does 
the mass balance close, is the model capturing all the important phenomena one would expect 
based on engineering knowledge, or should the model be changed slightly? If not, then step 
one of the CAPS method should be revisited and the model changed. Otherwise, the model 
development can proceed to the next step.  
==PAGE:40==
 
33 
 
3.2.4 Process Confirmation 
Process confirmation is a qualitative evaluation of the model output performed by a process 
expert. The solution is presented along with the model equations and assumptions, as well as 
the values for the model inputs specified in the data analysis. The objective of this step is to 
confirm that all relevant phenomena are accounted for, that the values and ranges for the 
inputs are valid, and that the output is realistic. 
3.2.5 Validation 
Where process confirmation is a qualitative evaluation of the model, the validation step is a 
quantitative evaluation of a model against data. The model output is compared against data, 
and for an accurate model there should be a linear relationship between the two with an R2 
close to 1. Since the model inputs generated in data analysis are deterministic values based 
on a statistical function, the validation can be performed in two steps: (1) single batch valida-
tion and (2) random batch validation. Single batch validation is performed to validate that the 
model can generate the exact same outputs as seen in the data, given the same inputs. If the 
model output can replicate the data output using inputs from the same batch, then the model 
structure is validated. Random batch validation is then performed where the inputs generated 
in the data analysis are used. The batches used in the data analysis belongs to a set S, and the 
model output is then validated against a batch M ∉ S to ensure that the model is valid in general 
and follows general trends. 
 
Figure 3-4: Single batch validation and random batch validation 
Small differences between the output of the model and the data from the random batch vali-
dation are fine if they can be explained as process variation in the random batch M.  
==PAGE:41==
 
34 
 
Validation can be performed both at the unit level and process level. The individual unit are 
validated first, to ensure that the unit models are valid. Then the process landscape is validated, 
to ensure that the unit connectivity is valid. 
3.2.6 Application 
The final step of model development is application, where the validated model is used for sim-
ulation and optimisation studies, such as sensitivity- and uncertainty analysis, and what-if anal-
ysis.  
In the scope of the problem of this thesis, the application step is used to solve the integrated 
problem and recommend a design of the API Pilot Facility. 
3.3 Baseline design 
A baseline design is generated from solving the isolated design problem to obtain process 
understanding, provide a reference point for further analysis, and be used to compare results 
from the integrated solution. Process understanding achieved in the baseline can be used to 
interpret and understand results from further analysis. Furthermore, the local sensitivity anal-
ysis requires a set point to perturbate around, and this set point is provided by the baseline 
design.   
3.4 Sensitivity Analysis 
The outcome of the sensitivity analysis is to determine the critical decisions when solving the 
integrated problem for the system. These are the decisions that should be focused on when 
determining the design and operation of the facility. 
Both a local and a global approach can be used to solve the problem. A local approach is sim-
pler to compute but investigate less of the decision space due to only looking at solution in the 
vicinity of the baseline. A global approach can investigate the entire input space but is more 
computationally expensive. The global approach requires sampling of inputs from distribu-
tions. 
3.5 Integrated design 
Based on the baseline design, and the local and the global sensitivity analysis, a future design 
is proposed considering the most important design, scheduling, and control decisions, which 
were determined in the sensitivity analysis.  
3.6 Tools 
To model the system of interest, perform simulations, and analyse and visualize the results, 
different software is used. 
3.6.1 INOSIM 
The flowsheet model of the system is developed in the DES software INOSIM, which is a soft-
ware developed for batch-processing of bioprocesses. INOSIM can simulate the mass flow 
through the system over time, while satisfying component balances. INOSIM captures the 
==PAGE:42==
 
35 
 
schedule of the system, logs when unit are performing specific operations and makes the in-
formation available through an interactive Gantt chart, exportable excel files or logging in the 
integrated parameter sheet. The key outputs that INOSIM can provide is the throughput 
(mass/time), unit utilization, unit cycle times and filling levels. 
There are 4 major elements in INOSIM: the process layout, the recipe layout, the integrated 
parameter sheet, and the option for customisation using the programming language Visual 
Basics for Application (VBA). 
In the process layout, the process flowsheet is defined by dragging unit operations and con-
necting them.  
 
Figure 3-5: A process layout in INOSIM 
If multiple units are available for a step, then all units must be visually represented in the flow-
sheet, fx. the three chromatography columns from Figure 3-5. 
In the recipe layout, the operations for each unit, synchronisations, and mass transfer between 
units are defined. A generic recipe layout can be seen in Figure 3-6: 
==PAGE:43==
 
36 
 
 
Figure 3-6: A generic recipe in INOSIM. Adapted from [52]. 
A recipe consists of unit procedures and the unit procedures are related to a unit, or a set of 
units, that the procedure is performed in. Fx. the precipitation tanks from the process layout 
in Figure 3-5 could be “Unit 1” in the generic recipe from Figure 3-6. Thus, the unit procedures 
describe what operations are performed in a given unit, and the building blocks of unit proce-
dures are therefore operations. There are three stages of operations: set-up (pink), production 
(yellow), and clean (green) and operations are executed in that order, so that first all set-up 
operations are performed, then production and then clean. Operations of many types exist, 
but the most commonly used are “process” and “transfer”. A “process”-operation represents a 
waiting time for a process to be performed and is defined by a duration. An example of a 
“process”-operation is a reaction or heating/cooling. A “transfer”-operation transfers material 
to and from recipe procedures and is defined by both the amount of mass transferred and the 
duration. Mass can be transferred between unit procedures, and thereby also units, by using 
a mass transfer link, illustrated using a dotted line and a “T” in the generic recipe. When a unit 
should start its procedure can be manipulated using synchronisation links, illustrated using a 
dotted line and an “S” in the generic recipe.  
Customisation is possible through “controls” which are represented by the small circles on the 
different operations in Figure 3-6. There are three different types of controls: Parameter, Start, 
and End. Parameter controls define the parameters for an operation, such as duration or mass 
amount, start controls trigger a function of code in the beginning of the operation, and end 
controls trigger a function of code at the end of an operation. The code for the controls is 
written in VBA editor. The final major element is the parameter sheet, where inputs for the 
model can be defined. 
==PAGE:44==
 
37 
 
 
Figure 3-7: Interactions between the different major elements of INOSIM 
The model can load parameters from the parameter sheet through code written in the VBA 
editor, thereby making it easier to define model inputs. Model outputs can also be written to 
the parameter sheet using VBA code, thereby making it easier to retrieve the desired output 
data, such as capacities, unit utilizations and filling levels. 
The parameter sheet is a Microsoft Excel file in which model inputs are given and model out-
puts are saved. Excel is furthermore used to analyse data and visualize results. When sampling 
is required in the sensitivity analysis, Python is used for sampling the inputs for the Monte 
Carlo simulations. 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
38 
 
4 Case Study 
Due to the case study containing sensitive information about Novo Nordisk facilities and 
products, it has been redacted from this version of the thesis, that is handed in at the DTU 
internal page. Instead, a summary of the case study is given below. 
In this case study, an API Pilot Purification Facility was designed, following the method devel-
oped in this thesis for solution of the integrated design-scheduling-control problem. Value 
stream mapping was performed on the process at four different layers of resolution to obtain 
process understanding for the modelling step, and identifying the connectivity between the 
design, scheduling, and control problems. Next, following the CAPS infinity loop method de-
veloped in Novo Nordisk, a flowsheet model was generated and validated. The model was then 
applied to generate a baseline design for the facility. The baseline design was determined from 
a superstructure of 1458 options. The size of the superstructure was managed by first reduc-
ing the number options to the ones with the highest capacity. This was done based on process 
understanding and running a single simulation where all unit sizes had been set to their max-
imum value. From there, the relative capacities of the steps were analysed and the design op-
tions that could give the maximum capacity was identified. Only these options were of interest 
and there were 27 of them. The 27 options were simulated and analysed, and due to filling 
levels only 6 of the options turned out to be feasible. The option with the smallest unit sizes 
was chosen as the baseline design. 
Following the baseline design, a local and global sensitivity analysis were performed on the 
system to determine the critical decisions in solving the integrated design-scheduling-control 
problem for the facility. The methods used for sensitivity analysis were differential analysis and 
standardised regression coefficients, both based on linear regression. That assumption was 
investigated for the SRC method, and it showed a coefficient of determination R2 = 0.78, which 
meant that the regression model could explain 78% of the output variance. This was above the 
level of 0.7 that was recommended from the literature, and therefore the results from the 
sensitivity analysis could be trusted. Based on the critical decisions, an integrated design was 
proposed. The integrate design had the same unit sizes as the baseline, but different operation 
which resulted in 17% more capacity when compared to the baseline design. 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
39 
 
5 Discussion 
The results and findings of the case study are discussed in this section, and how it connects 
with the developed integrated method for design and the problem definition of the thesis. 
The outcome of the VSM was understanding of mass and information flow of the PPF, at dif-
ferent levels of resolution. This information could be used to model the system and identify 
interactions between design, control, and scheduling. The interactions were seen in the infor-
mation flow between the layers, where production plans in the higher layer were converted to 
schedules and control actions in the lower layers. 
Waste was identified at the different levels and analysed both from a LEAN perspective and a 
PSE perspective. A lot of waste was identified at the unit level specifically, and it stemmed from 
the modular concept. Since every module was supposed to be its own independent process, 
there were many tanks in the process that filled the role of a pipe. In LEAN that was considered 
waste, and the pool tanks were unnecessary since there was an application right afterwards. 
However, looking at this from a PSE perspective, all the modules were decoupled which meant 
that a disturbance in one module could more easily be contained, thereby connecting the de-
sign and control problem. Decoupling could facilitate process control and prevent disturb-
ances from propagating down the system. Furthermore, the extra tanks brought flexibility 
since a unit doesn’t need to wait for the next unit’s application tank to be ready, before it can 
perform its own operation, due to having its own pool tank. This connected the design and 
scheduling problem since more flexibility in the scheduling was introduced. 
Based on the process understanding achieved from the VSM, a validated flowsheet model was 
developed for the PPF following the method of the CAPS infinity loop. This step was important 
since it formed the basis for system evaluation, when trying to solve the integrated problem 
later on. Had the modelling not been performed properly, then the results from the later anal-
ysis would have lost their trustworthiness. 
First a conceptual flowsheet model was generated, by modelling the individual unit operations 
and connecting them through their inputs and outputs to get the flowsheet. The level of model 
complexity was a considered, based on the purpose of the model and the problem being 
solved.  The problem to be solved was a design problem considering control and scheduling 
decisions that required a representation of the mass throughput of the facility. It was the how 
to generate the unit output based on the unit input that was desired to represent, and not the 
journey from input to output. Thus, linear relationships between input and output were fine, 
as long as they could accurately present the mass balance of the units. If the linear models 
could accurately represent the process throughput, then there was no need to add an addi-
tional layer of complexity and model the units mechanistically. However, if the linear models 
could not have accurately represented the system, then more complex models would have 
been required. The thought process was that it was easier to start with a simplified model and 
add complexity, if necessary, than the other way around. 
==PAGE:47==
 
40 
 
To obtain the required inputs for the model, data analysis was performed. Since the same 
process had been modelled for the same molecule before in the MPP, inputs had already been 
determined. The data analysis part in the case study therefore focused on confirming if the 
inputs could be reused by the developed model. To that end, the differences between the PF 
model and the MPP model were found to be the equipment sizes, and the data analysis con-
sisted of investigating if some of the inputs were not scalable with size. The outcome of the 
data analysis step was values for variables in the model. Whether the values were found in 
another model or from analysing raw data was in principle not important if the reasoning 
could be justified. It could actually be argued that doing the analysis of raw data again, when 
it had already been performed, was doing unnecessary work, and using the already cleaned 
data would be the preferred choice. 
The model was solved using the values of the specified variables found from the data analysis 
and the output was subject to qualitative analysis to examine if all desired phenomena was 
captured by the model. This part was done to perform an initial check of the model and its 
output, before it was shown to a process expert, to see if anything important had been missed. 
Afterwards, process confirmation was performed with a process expert. If the solution did not 
make sense or if important phenomena were missing, then this would have been a time to go 
back to conceptual flowsheet model development and add more complexity to the equations 
describing the system behaviour. One could argue why process validation is necessary when 
validation is performed afterwards. To this, it can be argued that the validation does quantify 
the difference between model output and data, but it does not give the “why”. Pulling on expert 
knowledge in process confirmation give the “why”. It does not make sense to validate, if not 
process confirmation has been performed, since the system representation might be missing 
important phenomena. 
The validation of the model consisted of comparing the model output with data from the sys-
tem the model was representing, to quantify how accurately the model represented the sys-
tem. Since the PPF is a future process that does not exist, the question arose of how to validate 
the model when there is no data available for the process. It was argued that a model can be 
validated at different resolution levels; for a flowsheet model there is both the flowsheet level 
and unit operation level. Even though the process does not exist, the unit operations have 
been implemented and ran with the same product as in the case study. There therefore exist 
data on the individual unit operations to validate against. Validation could therefore be per-
formed in two steps: (1) model the realised reality of the existing unit operations and validate 
the unit operation models against data (2) use the validated unit operation models to build the 
flowsheet model of the future process, the PPF. The argument for this approach is that a flow-
sheet model is a collection of unit operation models connected by inputs and outputs. There-
fore, if the individual unit operation models are validated, then the flowsheet model is also 
validated. One could argue that connecting the models also creates the dynamics of connec-
tivity and that part is not validated using the aforementioned two-step approach. However, 
since the PPF does not exist, it is not possible to validate the connectivity, and validating the 
==PAGE:48==
 
41 
 
unit operation models is the best that can be done. How much to validate is also a question of 
how much can be validated, and for the case of the PPF model, it is assumed that the flowsheet 
model is validated based on being built from validated unit operation models. 
After the model was validated, it could be used for studies on system behaviour, such as sen-
sitivity analysis. The model was used to solve the integrated design problem to recommend a 
design for the PPF. 
A baseline design was generated considering the isolated design problem. The reasoning for 
fixing the scheduling-control decisions and looking only at the design, was that the baseline 
then could be use later as a comparison to the solution of the integrated design problem. A 
baseline design is valuable, as it provides a reference point for the solution to the problem, 
and for generating process understanding that can be used to interpret the results of the in-
tegrated solution. 
The input to the problem solved in the case study was a flowsheet, hence the remaining design 
decisions to be made were related to unit sizing, following the Synthesis-Design-Optimisation 
framework of process design to manage complexity. A list of discrete equipment sizes was 
given and from that list the decision space was generated. This approach corresponded, con-
ceptually, to the superstructural approach commonly used on flowsheet synthesis. The total 
number of design options in the superstructure was 1458. Instead of spending a long time 
blindly running 1458 simulation where 98% of them were not interesting, process and problem 
understanding was used to reduce the solution space. The desired solution was the design 
with the highest capacity, and the upper boundary for the capacity could be found by analysing 
the design where all unit sizes took their maximum value. This approach was of course based 
on the assumption that the largest sizes give the highest capacity when operation is fixed. It 
is argued that this assumption is especially good for modular designs, since each step in the 
process is independent, reducing the interactions between the steps. For a build-for-purpose 
facility the interactions are stronger since the steps are connected and dependent on each 
other. 
Since process design is about determining the right size for the units and ensure that oversiz-
ing is not performed, the baseline design was chosen as the feasible solution with the highest 
capacity and smallest unit sizes. There is an economic cost of buying larger equipment, and if 
smaller units can perform the same job, then that is more desirable, seen from a pure design 
perspective. However, if control and scheduling are considered then there could be benefits 
in designing larger, but this will be discussed further for the integrated design. 
With a baseline design for the PPF determined by solving the design problem alone, the next 
step was to look at the integrated design problem. The outcome of the sensitivity analysis was 
the critical decisions that had the greatest impact on the output, where both design, schedul-
ing, and control decisions were considered. To perform a sensitivity analysis, the inputs that 
had a given value before had to be given a range instead. The ranges for the inputs were 
determined from the product recipe, where a set point, an upper, and a lower bound is given 
==PAGE:49==
 
42 
 
for the ranges of qualified operation. The idea of selecting the ranges from the product recipe, 
and not add a given uncertainty level to the input variables, was that the input variables were 
decision variables to the integrated problem and not random process variations. Hence, they 
have a range of values that can be chosen from, and these ranges defined the available deci-
sion space. 
A local and a global sensitivity analysis were performed. The advantage of doing both a local 
and a global analysis is that results can be cross-referenced between the two, and increased 
process understanding can be obtained. Furthermore, a local analysis can be used for factor 
fixing in determining non-influential inputs, reducing the decision space and thereby the com-
putational complexity for the global approach. The upper and lower bounds of the variable 
ranges were chosen as the perturbation intervals in the local analysis, as this was the maxi-
mum impact a decision could have in either direction. This assumed that there was a mono-
tonic relationship between the input variables and the output, which seemed like a plausible 
assumption since the DES model consisted of linear relationships 
The local analysis showed that inputs related to the limiting step or potential limiting steps of 
the process had the biggest impact, which correlated with the process understanding. Since 
the method of local analysis revolves around a baseline, the baseline has a big influence on 
what part of the space is explored. However, the line capacity is only one of the outputs, and 
step and unit capacities were also examined. Since disturbances can propagate from the unit-
section level, a variable could not be declared non-influential before it had been investigated 
on the lower layers as well. It might be that a variable did not affect the line capacity in the 
local analysis around the baseline, however it might have a large impact on a non-limiting step 
which could be significant in the global analysis, where a much larger decision space is inves-
tigated. 
8 out of 35 inputs had no effect on the output and were classified as non-influential in the local, 
which left 27 inputs for the global analysis. The method for global analysis was Monte Carlo-
based Standardised Regression Coefficients analysis. This method required sampling of the 
inputs, and it was decided to use a uniform distribution. The reasoning was that the input 
variables represent decisions, and it was desired to explore as much of the decision space as 
possible. Therefore, a uniform distribution was chosen to assign all values equal probability. 
Had some of the inputs been considered as disturbances in the classic process variation terms, 
then there should be accounted for the magnitude and frequency of the input change based 
on data analysis. However, in the case where they represent decisions, all decisions should be 
equally likely to be made, to explore the largest possible decision space. 
Based on literature, it was chosen to do 500 samples which might have been a little bit on the 
low end. The linear regression model had a coefficient of determination of 0.78, so the applied 
method was viable, however some of the SRCs did not meet the physical expectations. Fx. 
there was a somewhat significant negative correlation between the step 10 column diameter 
and the line capacity. Usually, increasing the size of a unit benefits capacity, so it was 
==PAGE:50==
 
43 
 
postulated that this could have been a coincidence. More samples could have given a better 
fit and more accurate representation of the relationship between the input changes and the 
output variance. Another way of increasing the quality of the analysis, could have been to clas-
sify even more inputs as non-influential, since only the inputs with zero influence had been 
removed, but some inputs that showed very little impact in the local analysis, even on the step 
and unit level, were included in the global analysis. Fewer inputs would have let to a more 
focused analysis on the inputs that actually had an impact. 
Based on the analysis, the input variables were ranked after largest contribution to output 
variance. The step 12 area clearly stood out as the most significant input and contributed to 
55% of the total output variance. However, since the coefficient of determination was 0.78 it 
meant that only 78% of the output variance could be explained by the regression model. This 
meant that 22% of the output variance could not be explained, and thus there is some uncer-
tainty left to what variables are significant. 0.78 is above the lower threshold of 0.7 recom-
mended by the literature, and if more resolution was wanted another global sensitivity method 
could have been applied that didn’t apply a linear regression model, like the Sobol method. 
Based on the quantification of critical design-scheduling-control decisions, a design was pro-
posed for the PPF with focus on the critical decisions. The design had the same unit sizes as 
the baseline design, but changing other critical decisions, such as the step 12 target concen-
tration, led to a capacity increase of 17% compared to the baseline. From a pure design per-
spective, it is desirable to achieve the target capacity in the smallest possible equipment, since 
larger equipment takes more space and is more expensive. However, when considering con-
trol and scheduling, it is important to have a clearly defined bottleneck, since that will dampen 
the effect of disturbances, compared to a completely balanced line. More and larger equip-
ment will provide a stronger mitigating effect; however, the cost should be considered. The 
integrated design is considering the step capacity landscape and ensuring that it is not too 
balanced, since it can cause problems with flexibility in operation. In the determined inte-
grated design have, the steps with the lowest capacity, except for the limiting step, are step 3, 
4, 11, and 12. For step 3, 4, and 12 the unit size is maxed to match the line capacity, and the 
sizes cannot be increased further. However, for step 11 the medium column size is used, and 
the step capacity is 1.5 times the line capacity. It could be argued that if operation is complex 
around that step and prone to changes, then a larger size should be chosen for the column, 
to ensure high enough step capacity to not limit the line capacity. From the results, it was 
observed that the step 11 load accounted for 9% of the total output variance, and it was the 
second most significant variable after the step 12 area. Quantification of how small a design 
can be before it influences the control and scheduling could be something to look into in the 
future. 
In this thesis, the state of the art on process design, control, and scheduling has been reviewed. 
Interactions between the three problems have been identified, and a systematic method have 
been developed for solving the design problem while considering control and scheduling in-
teractions. Through a case study it has been shown that the method can be used to generate 
==PAGE:51==
 
44 
 
a design where critical decisions are determined a priori, and interactions between design, 
control, and scheduling have been accounted for. The result of the case study showed that 
better design could be developed by solving the integrated design problem, compared to solv-
ing the isolated design problem. 
6 Future work 
The PPF is, as mentioned in the case study problem description, meant to be an innovation 
hub where new products and technologies can be tested. Now, the facility has been designed 
for a single product, but a logical next step would be to design for another product as well. 
This would also show the flexibility of the facility that is introduced with the modular design 
concept. This would require a revaluation of the process topology and required unit sizes, 
compared to how the product recipe states that the product should be manufactured. The PPF 
currently supports three different technologies for separation: DCF, UFDF and chromatog-
raphy and validated unit operation models exists of these. If new technologies are introduced, 
then new models representing those technologies should also be generated. 
Future work could also consider quantifying the relationship between designing as small as 
possible while having stable operation. It was found in this thesis that this was one of the major 
points of interaction between the design, control, and scheduling problems. 
In general, the method developed in this thesis is not specific to modular facilities and could 
also be applied to design a build-for-purpose facility. 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
 
45 
 
7 Conclusion 
The scope of this thesis was to develop a method for an integrated solution of the design 
problem, while considering control and scheduling decisions, and then apply the method to 
recommend a design for an API Pilot Facility. 
First, the interactions between the design, scheduling, and control problems were identified. 
It was found that the problems conceptually are the same problem, to determine a process 
that can convert a raw material to a product subject to some objective and constraints, but at 
different time scales. Design is the highest problem level, then scheduling and then control, 
since a design is a required input to solve the scheduling problem, and the schedule is trans-
lated to higher resolution level operations in control. This realisation made it clear that the 
problems can either be solved sequentially by fixing decisions of the higher-level problems, or 
they can be solved in an integrated fashion where nothing is fixed. 
A method was then developed to solve the integrated problem and applied to design the API 
Pilot Facility. The first step was to generate a Value Stream Map of the process, to obtain pro-
cess understanding and the VSM was performed at four layers of resolution to identify the 
interactions between the different problems. A flowsheet model of the process was then gen-
erated and validated using the CAPS infinity loop method. Using the validated model, a base-
line design was generated using a superstructure approach on the unit sizes similar to the 
approach typically used in flowsheet synthesis in process design. 
Next, a sensitivity analysis was carried out to identify critical decision variables. First, a local 
method was used to get an initial idea of which decisions were critical for the output by chang-
ing inputs one-at-a-time around the baseline design. Factor fixing was also a goal of the local 
method, to eliminate non-influential inputs and reduce the computational complexity in the 
global approach. This reduced the number of examined decision variables from 35 to 27. Then 
a global method was used to explore as much of the decision space as possible. Standardised 
regression coefficients were used to determine how much of the output variance could be 
explained by each input. It was found the 55% of the output variance could be explained by 
the step 12 area, making this the most critical decision variable. The coefficient of determina-
tion for the linear regression model was R2 = 0.78 > 0.7, which mean that the method was valid, 
but only 78% of the output variance could be represented by the model. 
Based on the quantification of critical decisions from the sensitivity analysis, an integrated de-
sign was proposed. This design had the same unit sizes as the baseline design, but changes in 
operation, corresponding to scheduling and control decisions, meant that the integrated de-
sign had an 17% increase in capacity compared to the baseline. 
The developed integrated method is general and can be used to solve design-scheduling-con-
trol problems for other types of facilities as well. Future work could consider quantifying the 
cost-benefits of designing as small as possible while still having stable operation. 
==PAGE:53==
 
46 
 
8 References 
1. 
Sharratt, P.N., Handbook of batch process design, ed. P.N. Sharratt. 1997: Blackie 
Academic & Professional. 
2. 
Seifert, T., et al., Small scale, modular and continuous: A new approach in plant design. 
Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process Intensification, 2012. 52: p. 140-150. 
3. 
Ogle, R.A. and A.R. Carpenter, Calculating the capacity of chemical plants. Chemical 
Engineering Progress, 2014. 110(8): p. 59-63. 
4. 
Manganaro, J.L., Estimate the capacity of simple batch processes. Chemical Engineering 
Progress, 2002. 98(8): p. 70-75. 
5. 
Sharda, B. and S.J. Bury. Bottleneck analysis of a chemical plant using discrete event 
simulation. in Proceedings of the 2010 Winter Simulation Conference. 2010. IEEE. 
6. 
Tan, J., et al., Debottlenecking of a batch pharmaceutical cream production. 
Pharmaceutical Engineering, 2006. 26(4): p. 72. 
7. 
Sung, C. and C.T. Maravelias, Production Planning in Process Systems Engineering. 2014, 
wiley. p. 269-284. 
8. 
Grossmann, I., Enterprise-wide optimization: A new frontier in process systems 
engineering. AIChE Journal, 2005. 51(7): p. 1846-1857. 
9. 
Maravelias, C.T. and C. Sung, Integration of production planning and scheduling: 
Overview, challenges and opportunities. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 2009. 
33(12): p. 1919-1930. 
10. 
Harjunkoski, I., et al., Scope for industrial applications of production scheduling models 
and solution methods. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 2014. 62: p. 161-193. 
11. 
Méndez, C.A., et al., State-of-the-art review of optimization methods for short-term 
scheduling of batch processes. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 2006. 30(6-7): p. 
913-946. 
12. 
Pinedo, M.L., Scheduling. Vol. 29. 2012: Springer. 
13. 
Grossmann, I.E., Advances in mathematical programming models for enterprise-wide 
optimization. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 2012. 47: p. 2-18. 
14. 
Vanderkam, R.P., Y.F. Wiersma, and D.J. King, Heuristic algorithms vs. linear programs 
for designing efficient conservation reserve networks: Evaluation of solution optimality and 
processing time. Biological conservation, 2007. 137(3): p. 349-358. 
15. 
Grossmann, I.E., S.A. Van Den Heever, and I. Harjunkoski. Discrete optimization 
methods and their role in the integration of planning and scheduling. in AIChE Symposium 
Series. 2002. Citeseer. 
16. 
Cameron, I.T. and R. Gani, Product and process modelling: a case study approach. 2011: 
Elsevier. 
17. 
Pidd, M., Computer simulation in management science. 2004: John Wiley and Sons Ltd. 
18. 
Sinha, R., et al., Modeling and simulation methods for design of engineering systems. J. 
Comput. Inf. Sci. Eng., 2001. 1(1): p. 84-91. 
19. 
Banks, J., Handbook of simulation: principles, methodology, advances, applications, and 
practice. 1998: John Wiley & Sons. 
20. 
Garrido, J.M., Practical process simulation using object-oriented techniques and C++. 
1998: Artech House, Inc. 
==PAGE:54==
 
47 
 
21. 
Agalianos, K., et al., Discrete event simulation and digital twins: review and challenges for 
logistics. Procedia Manufacturing, 2020. 51: p. 1636-1641. 
22. 
Biegler, L.T., I.E. Grossmann, and A.W. Westerberg, Systematic methods of chemical 
process design. 1997: Prentice Hall PTR. 
23. 
Babi, D.K., Sustainable Process Synthesis-Intensification. 2014, DTU Chemical 
Engineering. 
24. 
Chen, Q. and I.E. Grossmann, Recent Developments and Challenges in Optimization-
Based Process Synthesis. Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng, 2017. 8: p. 249-283. 
25. 
Douglas, J.M., A hierarchical decision procedure for process synthesis. Aiche Journal, 
1985. 31(3): p. 353-362. 
26. 
Bertran, M.-O., Modelling, synthesis and analysis of biorefinery networks. 2017, Technical 
University of Denmark. 
27. 
Biophorum Improving the Biomanufacturing Facility Lifecyle Using a Standardized 
Modular Design and Construction Approach. 2019. 
28. 
Roy, S., Consider modular plant design. Chemical Engineering Progress, 2017. 113(5): p. 
28-31. 
29. 
Tao, F., et al., Digital Twins and Cyber–Physical Systems toward Smart Manufacturing and 
Industry 4.0: Correlation and Comparison. Engineering, 2019. 5(4): p. 653-661. 
30. 
Larsson, T. and S. Skogestad, Plantwide control - A review and a new design procedure. 
Modeling, Identification and Control: A Norwegian Research Bulletin, 2000. 21(4): p. 
209-240. 
31. 
Seborg, D.E., Process dynamics and control. 2017: Wiley. 
32. 
Skogestad, S., Control structure design for complete chemical plants. Computers & 
Chemical Engineering, 2004. 28(1-2): p. 219-234. 
33. 
Saltelli, A., et al., Sensitivity analysis in practice: a guide to assessing scientific models. 
Chichester, England, 2004. 
34. 
Cariboni, J., et al., The role of sensitivity analysis in ecological modelling. Ecological 
modelling, 2007. 203(1-2): p. 167-182. 
35. 
Pichery, C., Sensitivity Analysis, in Encyclopedia of Toxicology (Third Edition), P. Wexler, 
Editor. 2014, Academic Press: Oxford. p. 236-237. 
36. 
Ferretti, F., A. Saltelli, and S. Tarantola, Trends in sensitivity analysis practice in the last 
decade. Science of the total environment, 2016. 568: p. 666-670. 
37. 
Sin, G., K.V. Gernaey, and A.E. Lantz, Good modeling practice for PAT applications: 
propagation of input uncertainty and sensitivity analysis. Biotechnology progress, 2009. 
25(4): p. 1043-1053. 
38. 
Sin, G., et al., Global sensitivity analysis in wastewater treatment plant model applications: 
prioritizing sources of uncertainty. Water research, 2011. 45(2): p. 639-651. 
39. 
Borgonovo, E. and E. Plischke, Sensitivity analysis: a review of recent advances. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 2016. 248(3): p. 869-887. 
40. 
Metropolis, N. and S. Ulam, The monte carlo method. Journal of the American statistical 
association, 1949. 44(247): p. 335-341. 
41. 
Burnak, B., et al., Integrated process design, scheduling, and control using 
multiparametric programming. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 2019. 125: p. 164-
184. 
==PAGE:55==
 
48 
 
42. 
Yuan, Z., et al., State‐of‐the‐art and progress in the optimization‐based simultaneous 
design and control for chemical processes. AIChE Journal, 2012. 58(6): p. 1640-1659. 
43. 
Koller, R.W. and L.A. Ricardez-Sandoval, A dynamic optimization framework for 
integration of design, control and scheduling of multi-product chemical processes under 
disturbance and uncertainty. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 2017. 106: p. 147-
159. 
44. 
Baldea, M. and I. Harjunkoski, Integrated production scheduling and process control: A 
systematic review. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 2014. 71: p. 377-390. 
45. 
Engell, S. and I. Harjunkoski, Optimal operation: Scheduling, advanced control and their 
integration. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 2012. 47: p. 121-133. 
46. 
Pistikopoulos, E.N. and N.A. Diangelakis, Towards the integration of process design, 
control and scheduling: Are we getting closer? Computers & Chemical Engineering, 2016. 
91: p. 85-92. 
47. 
Huusom, J.K., Challenges and opportunities in integration of design and control. 
Computers & Chemical Engineering, 2015. 81: p. 138-146. 
48. 
Burnak, B. and E.N. Pistikopoulos, Integrated process design, scheduling, and model 
predictive control of batch processes with closed‐loop implementation. AIChE Journal, 
2020. 66(10). 
49. 
Zhou, M., et al., A survey on applications of optimization-based integrating process design 
and control for chemical processes. Chemical Engineering Communications, 2018. 
205(10): p. 1365-1383. 
50. 
Shah, S.S. and K.P. Madhavan, Design of controllable batch processes. Computer Aided 
Chemical Engineering, 2001. 9(C): p. 743-748. 
51. 
Lasa, I.S., C.O. Laburu, and R. de Castro Vila, An evaluation of the value stream mapping 
tool. Business process management journal, 2008. 14(1): p. 39-52. 
52. 
Jepsen, S.B., Trigger point activation of simulation-based industrial capacity problems, in 
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering. 2021, Technical University of 
Denmark. 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
a 
 
9 Appendices 
9.1 Literature Review 
9.1.1 The Supply Chain 
A supply chain (SC) can be defined as [7]:   
A network of linked organizations that work together to provide a customer with a product or a 
service 
For a company like Novo Nordisk to be successful, it is of utmost importance that they man-
age their SC in an efficient way, to ensure that the correct raw materials are purchased in the 
right amounts, production capacity can meet the demand, inventories are managed 
properly, and goods are distributed. SC-management therefore requires decision-making on 
different levels and time scales [7]: from procurement of raw materials and production of 
products to management of sales. From long-term decisions, such as how to manage the 
supply network, to short-term decisions, such as scheduling of operations in the production 
facilities. 
 
Figure 9-1: Supply chain matrix: From procurement to sales, and long-term to short-term decisions. Adapted from [7]. 
In Figure 9-1 the different levels and time scales of decisions to be made are illustrated. 
Long-term planning decisions (years) are strategic of nature and are related the structure of 
the SC network such as sourcing of raw materials, selection of suppliers, and location of pro-
duction sites & warehouses. Mid-term planning decisions (months) are tactical and relate to 
production planning, flow of materials between production facilities, production targets and 
inventory levels. Short-term planning decisions (days, weeks) are operational and are related 
to sequencing of tasks in the individual units [7, 8], also referred to as scheduling at the pro-
duction level [9].   
Production Planning and Scheduling are crucial aspects of API production and supply chain 
management. Production planning involves deciding which API products to produce and in 
what quantities, while scheduling involves determining the specific time and resources 
needed to complete the production process [7, 10]. Effective production planning and 
==PAGE:57==
 
b 
 
scheduling can help to ensure that enough API is produced to meet demand, while minimiz-
ing waste and costs.  
The objective of the Production Planning Problem (PPP) is to fulfil the customer demand over 
a given time horizon at a minimum cost [7]. The objective is achieved by determining the pro-
duction and inventory targets that satisfies the demand. An illustration of the input-output 
structure of the PPP can be seen in Figure 9-2: 
 
Figure 9-2: An illustration of the PPP.  
The inputs are the planning horizon, the demand for the ith product in each time period, the 
capacity of the ith product in the jth facility, and the production costs. The outputs are, for 
each time period, the production target of the ith product in the jth facility and the inventory 
target of the ith product. The production and inventory targets constitute together the pro-
duction plan. To solve the PPP, the capacities of the different products in the different facili-
ties are required as an input, as well as the demand for each product over the time horizon. 
The production costs are used to find the best production plan from the space of feasible so-
lutions that satisfy the demand.  
A way to represent the PPP is as a network problem: 
 
Figure 9-3: Network-representation of the PPP. A node is representing a time period t, while arrows represent flow of 
mass between the time periods. Made with inspiration from [9].  
Illustrating the PPP as a network problem visualises the mass conservation between each 
time period. To satisfy the demand of a given time period, the required amount of product is 
generated from production and/or pulling from inventories. The inventory is there to ensure 
that the demand can be satisfied in time periods where the demand is higher than the pro-
duction capacity, and if the demand in a time period is low, excess production capacity can 
be used to refill the inventories. However, storing product in inventories comes with a 
==PAGE:58==
 
c 
 
holding cost [9], and the best solution to the PPP requires balancing of inventory levels such 
that the demand is met without overproduction.  
9.1.2 System representation for scheduling problems 
The main focus in the literature is representing the scheduling system using mixed-integer 
linear programming (MILP) models or mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) mod-
els [10]. The formulation of the specific model is problem-dependent, but work has been 
done to classify models based on how they represent time, material balances, events, and 
objectives, as shown in Figure 9-4: 
 
Figure 9-4: Classification of optimization models for scheduling of batch processes. Adapted from [11]. 
Time representation defines whether the events of the schedule can take place at any mo-
ment during the time horizon or only at predefined time points. Discrete time models divide 
the time horizon into a finite number of intervals with a predetermined duration, allowing 
events to happen at the boundaries of these time periods. This results in the model being 
evaluated only at known time points thereby reducing the problem complexity and making 
the model easier to solve [11]. However, discretizing the time horizon comes with some chal-
lenges, as illustrated in Figure 9-5: 
==PAGE:59==
 
d 
 
 
Figure 9-5: How discrete time intervals are specified can influence the schedule 
The main challenge is how many discrete intervals to define. Fewer intervals means that 
some events can be prolonged, and the initiation of new events are delayed, potentially lead-
ing to a less efficient schedule. However, specifying too many intervals can lead to unneces-
sary computation, as illustrated in the lower part of Figure 9-5. Of the 9 computations there 
are 5 where an event begins or ends, meaning that in 4 of the computations the system state 
is unchanged. The computational efficiency of the model is heavily dependent on the num-
ber of intervals defined, so determining the number of discrete time periods is a balance be-
tween solution quality and accuracy on one hand, and computational complexity on the 
other hand. 
Continuous time models do not face these challenges, allowing for events to occur at any 
given moment in time and thus also neglecting long time periods of no activity. However, for 
continuous time models the timing decisions are represented as continuous variables sub-
ject to optimization, hereby increasing the model complexity and does therefore not neces-
sarily perform better than discrete time models [10, 11].  
Material balances are used to describe the flow of mass through the system. Different mod-
els describing the mass flow are used depending on the decisions at hand. Recall from Figure 
2-9 that there are 3 major decisions in scheduling: Batching, Batch-unit Allocation and Se-
quencing & Timing. Whether Batching is decided simultaneously or beforehand gives rise to 
categories of models: network flow equations and lot-based models [10, 11].  
If the batching decisions are determined simultaneously with the allocation and sequencing 
& timing decisions, network flow equations are used to describe the system. These methods 
can handle arbitrary network processes with complex product recipes, but usually lead to 
large models, and therefore are their application limited to small processes or short time ho-
rizons. The most common representation of these simultaneous problems are the state-task 
network (STN) and the resource-task network (RTN).  
Considering a two-stage approach, where batching is determined in advance, allows for ad-
dressing larger problems with many tasks per batch compared to the simultaneous 
==PAGE:60==
 
e 
 
approach. Predetermining the batching problem turns the remaining problem into a detailed 
production scheduling problem, and this approach is widely used in the industry [10, 11]. 
This approach is best suited for sequential production environments with distinct production 
stages, distinct units in each stage and individual batches.  
Scheduling models are based on concepts that arrange events in the schedule in such a way 
that the maximum capacity of a shared resource is not exceeded. Event representation in 
the schedule then can be done in different ways based on the representation of time and 
material balances. The different event representations are typically targeted against either 
network processes requiring network flow equations or sequential batch-processes applying 
the two-stage approach, and whether the model is based on discrete or continuous time also 
defines what options for event representation are possible. A deep-dive into each type of 
representation can be found in [11]. 
The objective function is the final classification metric for scheduling models. The objective 
function evaluates the quality of the solution for the scheduling problem, and the objective 
to be either minimized or maximized is always a function of the completion time of tasks 
[12]. Common objectives are shown in Figure 9-4, such as makespan, which is the time it 
takes to process the tasks at hand. A minimized makespan usually means that the units have 
been utilized efficiently. A similar objective is to maximize the capacity of the facility. Eco-
nomic objectives such as maximizing profit or minimizing the costs are also common objec-
tives for the scheduling problem. Most objectives are of economic nature in general. Mini-
mizing makespan or maximizing capacity will lead to better utilization of the units hereby in-
creasing production potential, earliness can be related to increased inventory levels which 
can be costly, and lateness or tardiness can lead to loss of sales or failure to satisfy demand, 
again leading to economic losses.  
9.1.3 The Douglas Method 
Most known of the decomposition-based methods is the Douglas method for hierarchical de-
composition. The method decomposes the synthesis problem into a hierarchy of 5 decision 
levels [25]: 
Level 1: Batch vs Continuous. The first decision is whether the process should be run in 
batch or continuous mode. Batch and continuous processes have very different structures 
since batch-processes are time dependent and multiple operations can be performed in the 
same unit, whereas a defining feature of continuous processes is that the recipe steps and 
units have a one-to-one correspondence [1]. 
Level 2: Input-Output Structure of the Flowsheet. The decisions at this level relate to the 
feed streams and product streams of the flowsheet. Should raw materials be pre-treated and 
how many product streams are required? Should reversible by-products be recovered or re-
cycled? 
==PAGE:61==
 
f 
 
Level 3: Recycle Structure of the Flowsheet. The recycle structure of the flowsheet is im-
portant for efficient handling of materials. Decisions in this step include where to recycle ma-
terial, the number of reactors, and which feed and recycle streams that should go to each re-
actor 
Level 4: Separation System Specification. The separation system can be split into liquid 
separation and vapor recovery. For the vapor recovery system decisions relate to the location 
and type of the system. Where should the system be placed and should it be condensation-, 
absorption-, adsorption-, or membrane-based? For the liquid separation system, the focus is 
on deciding which separations can be made by distillation and which cannot, how the distilla-
tions should be sequenced and if the light ends should be vented to the atmosphere or recy-
cled to the vapor recovery system. 
Level 5: Heat Exchanger Network. Heat integration is the final decision level and has the 
purpose of reducing the energy costs through heat exchangers. 
To summarize, the Douglas method decision levels is structured such that the first level con-
siders the overall structure of the process, level two considers the overall mass flow of the 
process, level three and four focuses on the mass and energy flow of the individual units, 
and level five considers energy integration of the process. The Douglas method is straightfor-
ward and can provide a good initial flowsheet, however it cannot account for interactions be-
tween decision layers [24]. 
