==PAGE:1==
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a
musical sound field in a room
Master Thesis
DTU Engineering Acoustics
Department of Electrical Engineering - Acoustic Technology
==PAGE:2==
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
Master Thesis
February 2023
By
Justin Sabaté
Supervisors
Efren Fernandez Grande, Antonio Andrés Figueroa Durán, Xenofon Karakonstantis
Copyright
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo
Justin Sabaté, 2023
Published by
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering - Acoustic Technology, Ørst-
eds Plads, Building 352, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/research/research-areas/electro-technology/acoustic-
technology
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The purpose of this thesis is to examine the impact of early reflections on binaural sig-
nals synthesized using spatial impulse responses captured with the use of an ambisonics
microphone array. To achieve this, an auralization algorithm was developed to create
binaural signals from these responses. This framework was utilized to investigate how
modifications of the measured room response affect the perception of the binaural sig-
nals. Specifically, the influence of modifying the early reflections in the auralization pro-
cess was examined using both objective metrics and a subjective study with a limited
number of participants. The results suggest the significance of early reflections in spatial
perception and reveal that various modifications of early reflections in the room response
result in distinct and perceptible effects on the binaural signals.
ii
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my thesis supervisor Efren Fernandez
Grande, for his consistent involvement in his work and in the work of the people around
him. You motivated and encouraged me through your interest, support, and your benev-
olence. Thank you for your efforts to keep everyone moving forward, throughout the
learning process.
Huge thanks to both of my two other supervisors Antonio Andrés Figueroa Durán and
Xenofon Karakonstantis, for your smiles and your always positive attitude to allow peo-
ple to learn. Thank you Antonio for your great help, goodwill and for your willingness to
always take the time to do things right. Thank you Xenofon for showing such a strong
involvement by my side, for your kindness and for always being available for me and
sensible in your help.
The three of you made me engage in this work by your interest and your support. You
made those five month a memorable and enriching moment that has allowed me to learn
a lot.
I want to thank warmly my parents for showing a strong interest in the topics I am interested
in, and for supporting me all of those years. Finally, I would like to thank my family, my
friends, and most of all my partner for being such great individuals.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of abbreviations
The next list describes several abbreviations that will be later used within the body of the
document
BRIR binaural room impulse response
BRTF binaural room transfer function
DRIR directional room impulse response
FFT
fast Fourier transform
HRIR head related impulse response
HRTF head related transfer function
iFFT inverse fast Fourier transform
ILD
interaural level difference
ITD
interaural time difference
JND just noticeable difference
LS
least squares
MUSHRA multi stimulus with hidden reference and anchor
RIR
room impulse response
SH
spherical harmonics
iv
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
List of abbreviations
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Related work and applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Research focus
3
2.1
Focus on early reflections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Theory
4
3.1
Auralization and Reproduction techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Perceptual considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4
Mixing time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Measurements
12
4.1
Fixed parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2
Dry environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
Reverberant environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5
Implementation and methods
14
5.1
Auralization technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.2
Room Impulse Response modification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.3
Objective metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6
Subjective test
24
6.1
Test principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.2
Test framework and parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
7
Results and discussion
27
7.1
Early reflections modification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7.2
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
8
Conclusion
34
Bibliography
35
A Appendix: Reverberation time in third octave bands for the two rooms
39
B Appendix: Audio wheel for reproduced music from ITU-R norm [36]
41
C Appendix: Results for test participants in non ideal conditions
42
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Auralization
The term Auralization, ”the technique of creating audible sound files from numerical [...]
data” [1], is commonly found in recent expansion of spatial hearing solutions for various
applications and products. It enables the creation of sound scenes from data, allowing one
to listen to sound as if it were played under different conditions. Methods are developed
to allow spatial sound representations like the DirAC [2] and COMPASS [3] algorithms.
Applications such as simulating spaces before they are built, to proactively plan their
acoustic behavior, have proven the importance of auralizations.
1.1.2
Binaural hearing
Humans are able to gather information about their environment by utilizing their two ears.
The brain processes two channels that are different, this is called binaural hearing. This
natural way to hear can be modeled by creating two binaural signals, through measure-
ments with an artificial head [4], simulations of virtual and modeled environments [5, 1] or
auralizations.
Binaural auralization, also known as binauralization, involves accurately reproducing sound
separately for each ear, considering factors such as direction, distance, and the effects
of the head and torso on the sound [1]. In this thesis, a binaural auralization is created
from measurements of actual rooms using several signal processing techniques. This
binauralization is recreating the room effect for the listener. External perception of sound,
distance to the source, sound directions, and reverberations are taken into account and
perceived by the listener. Any signal can be played, and any room can be measured and
auralized. This listening experience is achieved through a simple pair of headphones.
1.1.3
Sound field in rooms
Sounds fields in enclosures are characterized using the Room Impulse Response (RIR).
They are influenced by the effects of the room on reflections of the sound, that can be ab-
sorbed, diffused or scattered for example, as described by Kuttruff in [6]. Either simulated
or measured, RIR are dependent on the positions of the source and the receiver. One
can separate three different parts in one given RIR: the direct sound, the early reflections,
and the late reverberations [6]. Early reflections are often mentioned as a very important
part of the RIR and their definition and their effects on perception are discussed.
If the RIR also includes knowledge regarding directions of arrival of the different sound
waves, it is called a Directional Room Impulse Response (DRIR) [7]. A Binaural Room
Impulse Response (BRIR) can be obtained if the RIR also includes the effect of the ears,
head and torso [8]. In this case, it is a two-channel response and it depends on the head
orientation.
1.1.4
Reproduction techniques
In this thesis, binaural signals are created using a BRIR. A BRIR can be obtained with an
artificial head (or dummy head) that modifies the measured room response, influenced by
the reflections of the sound on the ear, head and torso. However, this method requires
a lot of manipulations as every possible direction of arrival has to be measured [9], for
a given position of the listener in a given room. Indeed the room response has to be
measured once for every head direction.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
1
==PAGE:9==
The method used in this project is to measure the DRIR using a microphone array and
derive the BRIR from it, in a similar approach as the one described by Davis et al. [10]
used to create Binaural Head-Tracked Playback. Externalization, distance, and room
impression are obtained by using generic Head Related Transfer Functions (HRTF) [11]
that are combined with the DRIR measured in a specific room. Since sets of HRTF are
readily available, only the room measurement needs to be conducted. The measurement
process is similar to a regular RIR recording, where a single microphone is replaced with
an array of microphones, simplifying the room measurement process.
It is important to note that this project does not involve any simulation. The binaural
reproduction methods described in this document are based entirely on measurements
of actual rooms.
1.2
Related work and applications
1.2.1
Related work
This thesis is related to the work of Antonio Andrés Figueroa Durán, about Three-dimensional
capture and reproduction of acoustic spaces. Research is being conducted to reconstruct
the sound field in a room from spherical array measurements. In a context of binaural re-
production, the study of the influence of the early reflections in a single measurement can
be useful to characterize their importance in this reconstruction.
A thesis by Bernschütz [12], and a MSc thesis by Andersson [13] are describing and
comparing methods and techniques to create a binaural rendering from microphone array
measurements. Methods and tools described in these works establish a solid basis to
create a convincing auralization algorithm.
1.2.2
Applications
This project examines the significance of early reflections in a single microphone array
measurement. If aimed at reconstructing the sound field in a room, it enables the creation
of navigable sound fields. It allows for the capturing of ”acoustic pictures” of specific
spaces such as historic monuments or concert halls. The themes studied in this project
can also be applied to RIR generation in machine learning applications. Additionally,
they can be applied to provide a standardized format for describing accurately measured
spatial sound scenes, which can be used to improve the live music experience at home,
in meetings, and other applications where realistic immersive sound environments are
desired with minimal equipment.
2
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:10==
2
Research focus
2.1
Focus on early reflections
This project is focused on early reflections. In the literature, the role of individual reflec-
tions was studied by Bech in regards to spatial [15] or timbral [14] aspects for domes-
tic environments. Those studies were conducted with electroacoustic simulations, done
in anechoic environments where individual reflections are controlled and their effect is
studied. Bech studies in [15] the influence of the bandwidth of the energy of individual
reflections on spatial aspects of sound. The energy above 2kHz is said to determine the
importance of the reflection for the spatial aspect. Also, for those specific experimental
conditions, only the first floor reflection is said to contribute to spatial aspects. In [14] the
timbre is said to be changed mostly if the reflection has an energy in the bandwidth 500Hz
to 2kHz. More specifically, the reflections are studied individually and this observation is
made only for some reflections, such as floor reflections.
The important role of lateral or strong reflections in concert halls is highlighted in the
literature by Barron [16], and Pätynen et al. [17].
Some other studies suggest that considering multiple reflections together might be closer
to real world scenarios [18, 19]. More reverberant environments as well as continuous
sounds or real listening rooms are cited in [18] as being more realistic than anechoic
conditions to run experiments, as it was done in [15, 14].
The pieces of literature abovementioned, coupled to the choice of working on room mea-
surements instead of simulations, have influenced the scope of this thesis to be the role
of the early reflections in the RIR. Early reflections are considered from measurements
of actual rooms. More specifically, the effect of the early reflections on the auralization
will be studied both objectively and subjectively, with specific concerns around frequency
content and the importance of the main reflections.
2.2
Research question
The research question considered in this work is the following:
To what extent the spatio-temporal properties of early reflections in an im-
pulse response can be degraded or modified, without compromising percep-
tual quality on the auralized signal?
To try to answer to this question, this project will involve two main steps. The first one is to
create an auralization algorithm giving a realistic output over headphones, with fixed mea-
surements parameters and setup. The binauralization is a tool in regards to the second
step of the thesis which is to specifically try to answer the research question by studying
the influence of early reflections modifications on the perception of the auralized binau-
ral signal. The measured DRIR, input of the algorithm, will be modified and the binaural
output will be studied with both objective metrics, and a perceptual study.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
3
==PAGE:11==
3
Theory
This section describes the main theoretical tools used in this project. It starts with building
the theory around the binauralization. This is followed by a discussion of certain aspects of
human perception, from which metrics are derived, aiming at an evaluation of the auralized
signals. Finally, in relation with modification of early reflections, the mixing time is defined.
3.1
Auralization and Reproduction techniques
3.1.1
Wave equation in spherical coordinates
The principal equation describing the acoustic wave motion in a fluid is the wave equation
[20]
∇2p −1
c2
∂2p
∂t2 = 0 ,
(3.1)
where c is the speed of sound in the medium, t is the time in seconds, p is the sound
pressure in pascals, and ∇2 is the Laplace operator.
In spherical coordinates (r, θ, ϕ) and in harmonic sound fields, the amplitude of the sound
pressure p can be expressed as p(r, θ, ϕ, t) = p(r, θ, ϕ)eiωt, where ω is the angular fre-
quency in radians per second, and i2 = −1.
The homogeneous Helmholtz equation is derived by substituting the pressure by the har-
monic pressure in equation 3.1, as described in [20], where the time dependency is omit-
ted
∇2p + k2p = 0 ,
(3.2)
where k = ω
c is the wavenumber.
The homogeneous Helmholtz equation in spherical coordinates is derived in [20] as
1
r2
∂
∂r(r2 ∂
∂rp) +
1
r2 sin θ
∂
∂θ(sin θ ∂
∂θp) +
1
r2 sin2 θ
∂2
∂ϕ2 p + k2p = 0 .
(3.3)
3.1.2
Spherical harmonics
The sound pressure is derived from equation 3.3 around a rigid sphere of radius r0 in [20]
as being the sum of the incident sound field and the scattered sound field. The total sound
field is
p(k, r, θ, ϕ) =
∞
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
anm(k)4πin
"
jn(kr) −j′
n(kr0)
h(2)′
n
(kr0)
h(2)
n (kr)
#
Y m
n (θ, ϕ) .
(3.4)
It is common to define the mode amplitude bn as
bn(kr) = 4πin
"
jn(kr) −j′
n(kr0)
h(2)′
n
(kr0)
h(2)
n (kr)
#
,
(3.5)
where jn(kr) is the Bessel function, h(2)
n
is the spherical Hankel function of the second
kind and order n, j′ denotes the derivative of a function j, and anm(k) is derived as-
suming an incident field composed of plane waves having directional amplitude densities
4
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:12==
a(k, θk, ϕk) [20], where anm(k) is the spherical Fourier transform of a(k, θk, ϕk), defined
later in equation 3.7.
The angular functions Y n
m are called spherical harmonics (SH) [20] and can be expressed
as
Y m
n (θ, ϕ) =
s
(2n + 1)(n −m!)
4π(n + m)!
P m
n (cos(θ))eimϕ ,
(3.6)
where P m
n is the Legendre function of order n and mode m.
The low order SH can be represented in three dimensions. In figure 3.1, n refers to the
order and m to the mode of the harmonic. It can be seen that order n = 0 is represented
by a sphere with a constant, positive value. Consequently it encodes omnidirectional
information. In a similar manner, information in each of the three directions displayed in
the figure is encoded in order n = 1, with each of the modes m = −1, m = 0, and m = 1.
Figure 3.1: Representation of low order spherical harmonics, red accounts for negative
values and blue for positive values, picture taken from [21]
3.1.3
Spherical harmonics domain
Assuming a continuous sound pressure distribution p(k, r, θ, ϕ) that is square integrable
over (θ, ϕ), one can represent it in the SH domain [22] by rewriting equation 3.4 as follows
p(k, r, θ, ϕ) =
∞
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
pnm(k, r)Y m
n (θ, ϕ) ,
(3.7)
where pnm(k, r) is given by
pnm(k, r) =
Z 2π
0
Z π
0
p(k, r, θ, ϕ)Y m∗
n
(θ, ϕ) sin θ dθ dϕ ,
(3.8)
where ”∗” denotes a complex conjugate. Expression 3.7 is called the spherical Fourier
transform of p(k, r, θ, ϕ) [23].
A sound field can be described using SH, with this infinite sum of orthogonal functions
on the sphere. To achieve a perfect description of the sound field, the infinite sum is
needed. However, in practice the sum must be truncated due to a limited microphone
array resolution, consequences of which will be studied in section 3.1.6.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
5
==PAGE:13==
3.1.4
Plane wave decomposition and convolution in the SH domain
By using the principle of superposition, as described in [20, 12], the pressure distribution
p(k, r) presented in section 3.1.3 can be described as an infinite sum of unitary plane
waves having directional amplitude density a(k, θ, ϕ) coming from all directions evaluated
at one point described by vector r0 on a sphere
p(k, r0) =
Z 2π
0
Z π
0
a(k, θ, ϕ)eik·r0 sin θ dθ dϕ ,
(3.9)
where r0 = (x0, y0, z0) is a 3D vector expressed here in Cartesian coordinates.
The plane wave component a(k) for a specific integration direction (θ, ϕ) in equation 3.9
can be expressed as
a(k, θ, ϕ) =
∞
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
dnpnm(k, r0)Y m
n (θ, ϕ) ,
(3.10)
where dn is the radial filter, dependent on the spheres boundaries. It is described in further
detail in section 3.1.5.
As auralization of sound fields is involved in this thesis, a sufficient description of the
sound pressure at the listener’s ears can be obtained in the form of binaural signals.
Binaural signals refer to the pressure at the positions of both left and right ears. To acquire
these signals, noted P r(k) for the right ear and P l(k) for the left ear, one must integrate
coefficients a(k, θ, ϕ) from all directions and use the corresponding Head Related Transfer
Function (HRTF), noted Hl(k, θ, ϕ) for the left ear and Hr(k, θ, ϕ) for the right ear.
The binaural signal can be expressed [23] as
P l(k) =
Z 2π
0
Z π
0
a(k, θ, ϕ)Hl(k, θ, ϕ) sin θ dθ dϕ .
(3.11)
Finally, Rafaely and Avni show in [23] that the convolution in the SH domain can be written
P l(k) =
∞
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
dnp∗
nm(k)Hl
nm(k) ,
(3.12)
where Hl
nm(k) are the SH coefficients of the left Head Related Impulse Response (HRIR),
the time domain equivalent of the HRTF. The analog expression can be derived for the
pressure at the right ear.
3.1.5
Radial filter
Equations 3.10 and 3.12 include a term dn called the radial filter, that is induced by the
measurement array. It takes into account the sphere boundaries [12, 24] (rigid or open
sphere), the radius of the array and the type of sensors (omnidirectional, cardioid). Radial
filters are described by Bernschütz in [12] as ”N + 1 time-frequency filters that scale the
amplification gain of the spherical harmonic modes”. For a rigid array made of omnidirec-
tional microphones it can be expressed [12] as
dn(kr0) = [bn(kr0)]−1 ,
(3.13)
with bn(kr0) previously defined in equation 3.5.
6
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:14==
Some improvements of the radial filter are necessary to achieve a stable array response
[12]. Indeed, theoretical radial filter values can be large at low frequencies, leading to
strong amplification of the noise present there. Those implementation details are de-
scribed more in depth in section 5.1.5.
3.1.6
Limitations and sources of error
In this project, the maximum SH order is fixed by the equipment used to measure the room
response. A microphone array consisting of a finite number of microphones will result in a
finite number of SH that can be considered [22]. Consequently, the order of reconstruction
n in equation 3.12 is limited to the maximum order N. Equation 3.12 becomes
P l(ω) =
N
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
dnP ∗
nm(ω)Hl
nm(ω) .
(3.14)
Frequency bandwidth limitation
A plane wave approximated by a finite summation of SH of order N will not be recon-
structed accurately over the full frequency range. As a consequence, for frequencies
corresponding to kr > N (i.e. f >
cN
2πr), Avni et al. [22] describe an attenuation of the
reconstructed amplitude of the plane wave.
In this project, the equipment is fixing N = 4, and r = 4.2cm, it allows frequencies up to
5200Hz before attenuating the amplitude of the plane wave that is being reconstructed.
In the context of a linear convolution of the Room Impulse Response (RIR) with anechoic
signals, this frequency limit is enough to reproduce speech accurately but can start to be
a limitation to reproduce music content.
This frequency bandwidth limitation is fixed on the measurements of the Directional Room
Impulse Response (DRIR), that are then expressed in the SH domain, which is followed
by a reconstruction. Section 5 describes the algorithm implemented in this project. It in-
cludes several techniques to avoid this upper frequency limit, in the measurement of the
DRIR, to also be the upper frequency limit for the result of the auralization.
Spatial aliasing
Spectral aliasing is a common issue in signal processing. According to the Shannon-
Nyquist theorem [25, 26], given a sampling frequency fs, the maximum frequency that
can be sampled without frequency aliasing is given by fmax = fs/2. In an analog prin-
ciple, using a finite number of microphones can create spatial aliasing [22]. The limited
number of microphones on the array sets a high frequency limit above which spatial alias-
ing has a significant magnitude [27, 28]. As stated in the previous section, according to
Avni et al. [22], frequencies above cN
2πr will be attenuated. This fixes the maximum order
of reconstruction N that can be used before introducing spatial aliasing. For a Gaussian
arrangement of microphones, the order of reconstruction N can be reached with a micro-
phone array of 2(N +1)2 microphones [27]. If the reconstruction is made above this order
N, the spatial resolution of the measurement will not be high enough and spatial aliasing
will appear.
Spatial smearing
A single plane wave arriving on a sphere is considered. Performing plane wave decom-
position results in a delta function in the direction of arrival of the wave [22], If the re-
construction order is limited after expressing the plane wave in the SH domain, a similar
place wave decomposition will result in a smearing of the direction of arrival. Hence, spa-
tial resolution is reduced, this can have some effects on the result of the auralization. For
example two different waves coming from two close directions can be mixed [22].
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
7
==PAGE:15==
3.1.7
Equalization
As described in section 3.1.6, the limited order of reconstruction, fixed to avoid spatial
aliasing, implies attenuation over a certain frequency. In [29], a method is presented to
improve this limited frequency bandwidth. It can avoid coloration and enhance spatial
cues. Equalization is used in [29] to enhance high frequencies without amplifying the
higher orders that have already been truncated. In other terms, it ensures that no aliasing
is amplified, only the lower and aliasing-free orders are.
It is assumed in [29] that a receiver is placed at the surface of a rigid sphere, representing
the head. Under diffuse field conditions, the average pressure magnitude over all incident
wave directions is derived, as a function of the SH reconstruction order N
¯p(kr0)N = 1
4π
v
u
u
t
N
X
n=0
(2n + 1)|bn(kr0)|2 ,
(3.15)
with bn(kr0) being the mode amplitude described in section 3.1.2.
The equalization filter is defined [29] as the ratio of the average pressure for a high order
N = 30 to the reconstruction order N = 4. The frequency content up to fmax =
cN
2πr
is encoded using orders 0 to N, as explained in section 3.1.6. To compensate for the
truncation-caused frequency loss, the filter G(kr0) is applied to the low orders. The high
order N = 30 is chosen in [29] to correspond to a high frequency limit close to the human
highest perceivable frequency of 20kHz. The filter is defined as
G(kr0) = ¯p(kr0)Nhigh
¯p(kr0)Nlow
.
(3.16)
The frequency response of the filter is shown in figure 3.2 for r0 = 4.2cm.
Figure 3.2: Equalization filter magnitude spectrum
3.2
Perceptual considerations
Externalization and spatial impression mentioned in section 1.1.2 are achieved through
a combination of different phenomena that are part of human perception. In a real case
8
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:16==
scenario, the sound is modified by the environment and by the body, and the brain re-
ceives two signals coming from the ears as described in sections 1.1.2 and 1.1.4. Human
perception is complex and involves multiple phenomena to retrieve spatial information
from those two signals.
3.2.1
Spatial cues
Two cues used by the brain to access spatial information are Interaural Time Difference
(ITD) and Interaural Level Difference (ILD). ITDs are associated with the time difference
a wavefront takes to cover the distance between the two ears. ILDs are associated with
the sound level difference between the two ears, due to the shadowing of the head, if one
wavefront is coming from the side.
In addition, the brain uses HRTFs to know more specifically where the sound is coming
from. A unique pattern for each direction is filtering the sound, creating those HRTFs that
can be measured. Those are used by the brain to resolve ambiguities and determine
more specifically the direction of arrival of a wavefront. One important point to mention
is that HRTFs are specific to each individual. Therefore, a listening experiment with a
specific HRTF could work well with someone and not with someone else.
Just noticeable difference
The Just noticeable difference (JND) is a term used in psychoacoustics to describe the
smallest change in a physical quantity that can be perceived by the listener. In the context
of this thesis, the expression JND refers to noticeable change in the direction of arrival of
a sound.
The cues previously described in section 3.2.1 are leading to a JND that can reach one
degree [30]. In the scope of this project, the frequency bandwidth of the reconstructed
signal is limited by the order N. It can have an effect on HRTFs, which can affect exter-
nalization and smear spatial directions, leading to a reduced JND.
Duplex theory
In [31] and [32], spatial perception is described as relying mostly on ITDs at low frequen-
cies and ILDs at high frequencies. Indeed, if the time difference between the two ears
represents more than one wavelength, ITDs start being ambiguous. This limit is usually
set to 1.5kHz for ITDs. The low frequency limit, for which ILDs are said to stop being
used, is usually set to 500Hz. Between 500Hz and 1.5 kHz, both cues are used according
to this theory. This discussion is known as the duplex theory. This was one of the first
explanations of human perception of spatial sound. However, some recent approaches
[33] are refining this theory, with including more complex models. For example, Macpher-
son and Middlebrooks study in [33] the envelope of the wavefront. In this paper ITDs are
presented as important even at high frequencies, by considering time differences in the
envelope of the signal.
The duplex theory is important to relate to the frequency bandwidth limitation mentioned in
3.1.6. Indeed, the order N = 4 imposes an attenuation of frequencies over 5200Hz on the
measured room response when reconstructed from the SH domain. This limitation of the
high frequencies might induce some loss in spatial impression and externalization. This is
one of the reasons for using some improvements of the auralization algorithm presented
in section 5. More especially, refinements are used when reducing the order of the set
of HRTFs expressed in the SH domain. However, the cutoff frequency of 5200Hz is high
enough to still allow both ITDs and ILDs to be used by human perception to encode spatial
attributes, according to the Duplex theory.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
9
==PAGE:17==
3.2.2
Temporal cues
Forward masking
Temporal integration of human perception is important to mention. Elliott [34] describes
the concept of forward masking in detail. If one loud sound is presented before another
one, assuming that a short delay is separating them and under certain conditions, only the
first one will be heard. This is observed for two excitation signals approximately separated
by 100ms.
Precedence effect
Another important temporal phenomenon observed in human perception is echo suppres-
sion noticed in the precedence effect [35]. This is a binaural cue. Two sounds will be heard
as coming from the direction of the first one, if the interval between them is short enough.
If the time delay is under 5ms for two clicks, or 40ms for music or speech, they will not be
separated spatially as echoes. This is useful to explain the localization of a sound source.
The direct sound comes from the source and the reflections are usually merged into the
direction of the direct sound.
3.3
Metrics
Some metrics have been chosen to try to assess subjectively and objectively the quality
of the auralization. The aim is to characterize an altered binaural signal in comparison to
the signal that can be obtained with the most optimal quality achievable with the methods
and tools fixed in this project. Even though the perception is our center of interest, some
objective metrics will help us characterize the signals. A set of objective and subjective
metrics are chosen to achieve this comparison.
3.3.1
Subjective metrics
The ITU-R report [36] presents an audio wheel describing attributes that can be used in
the subjective characterization of reproduced sound, this wheel is shown in figure B.1 in
appendix B. Those attributes where compared to papers dealing with auralizations. In
[22], Principal Components Analysis is conducted to extract some perceptual attributes.
In [28] timbre and spaciousness are studied to characterize auralizations. In [37], [38]
and [39] room acoustics are described and some more specific attributes are used like
Auditory Source Width or Listener Envelopment.
The choice of subjective attributes is often divided between more or less specific spectral
characteristics (coloration, transparency, timbre), spatial attributes (spaciousness, envel-
opment, source width), and artifacts due to the auralization, for example in [22, 40]. As
the last point is often related to the setup (number of microphones, reproduction over
headphones, SH order of 4 maximum), and the setup is fixed from the start of this project,
it will not be studied. The literature is very broad, more especially about room acoustics,
and this project is not aimed at finding the perfect metrics, nor to characterize only huge
auditoriums. That is why this project will stay broad in the definition and usage of those
metrics.
The words spaciousness and transparency will be used to characterize the comparison
of the different auralizations subjectively. The rating of those metrics can be very differ-
ent from person to person, and listeners might need to be trained to reach this level of
precision when rating a signal. Therefore, the perceptual test described in section 6 will
only compare perceived difference between an altered signal and a reference.
3.3.2
Objective metrics
As the cues discussed in section 3.2 play a crucial role in spatial perception, the metrics
ITD and ILD were chosen to assess the impact of altering early reflections. In addition,
10
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:18==
some examples in the literature are using those two metrics to characterize binaural re-
production quality. This is the case in Ben-Hur et al. [41]. That is why ITDs and ILDs were
calculated as objective metrics, as a first step to characterize the auralizations.
3.4
Mixing time
As described in section 1.1.3, one can heuristically divide a RIR into three parts. Unlike
the direct sound which is clearly visible in the waveform, finding the transition time from
early reflections to late reverberations can be more complicated. Different approaches
and definitions are used throughout the literature to try to define mixing time. Lindau,
Kosanke, and Weinzierl [42] define mixing time as the starting time of the diffuse tail of a
given RIR. Different methods are compared to calculate it and the signal based mixing time
defined by Abel and Huang [43] is selected. The mixing time is determined by evaluating
how closely a segment of the signal conforms to a Gaussian distribution. This measure
is called echo density, and it is similar to another commonly used method called kurtosis
[44]. In [43] the echo density measure η(t) is said to be the fraction of impulse response
taps over a window which lie outside this window standard deviation. The echo density
η(t) is defined as
η(t) =
1
(2δ + 1)
1
erfc(1/
√
2)
t+δ
X
τ=t−δ
1{|h(τ)| > σ} ,
(3.17)
where h is the impulse response without the direct sound, the window length in samples
is 2δ + 1, and the window standard deviation is
σ =
"
1
2δ + 1
t+δ
X
τ=t−δ
h2(τ)
#1/2
.
(3.18)
The function 1{.} is an indicator function and returns one or zero whether the argument
is true or false. The similarity of the signal to a Gaussian distribution is determined by
comparing the number of samples that fall outside of the standard deviation to the ex-
pected number for a signal having a Gaussian distribution. This number for a Gaussian
distribution is expected to be erfc( 1
√
2), where erfc is the complementary error function.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
11
==PAGE:19==
4
Measurements
4.1
Fixed parameters
This section outlines the parameters related to measurements that were established at
the start of the project.
The measurements of the Room Impulse Response (RIR) are done using an EigenMike
em32 from the company MH acoustics [45]. It is a 32 microphones spherical rigid array.
Due to its compact size, it is easily portable, allowing for quick measurements of rooms
and positions within a room. The use of a limited number of microphones limits the highest
order of Spherical Harmonics (SH) to N = 4.
Measurements are conducted in two different rooms at the Technical University of Den-
mark (DTU). In both rooms, the floor is considered rigid. The loudspeaker used for the
measurement is the Dynaudio acoustics BM6. The loudspeaker can be elevated on a
stand and is moved around in the room while the 32 channel spherical array is placed at
different positions.
In the reverberant room, one needs to keep a manageable size in samples for the mea-
sured impulse response, to calculate the SH coefficients as described further in section 5.
That is why the sampling frequency of all measured and processed signals in this project
is set to 32kHz, allowing smaller signal sizes than 48kHz which is commonly used.
Figure 4.1:
Picture of the Eigenmike
em32, next to a reference pressure mi-
crophone (not used in this work)
Figure 4.2:
Picture of the Dynaudio
acoustics BM6 loudspeaker on a stand,
directed towards the Eigenmike
12
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:20==
4.2
Dry environment
Initially, the Directional Room Impulse Response (DRIR) measurements are conducted
in a damped room. The room is treated acoustically and has an average reverberation
time T30 of 0.24 seconds. A total of 12 loudspeaker positions are used and sweep signals
are played to measure the room response. T30 measured in frequency bands averaged
over the 32 channels and the 12 positions can be found in appendix A, in figure A.1. An
example of one recorded RIR can be found in figure A.2 in the same appendix.
The dimensions of the room are 6.12m x 5.34m x 3.07m. The floor is considered rigid sur-
face reflecting all the sound and the walls are fully covered with absorbing material. There
are windows on one side of the room, they are covered with curtains that are considered
to absorb sound too.
The excitation signal is an exponential sweep of 5.5 seconds, with sampling frequency
48kHz, followed by a 1 second silence.
4.3
Reverberant environment
Measurements of DRIRs are also done in a more reverberant environment, a large meet-
ing room. Meeting room M2 in building 101 at DTU was chosen due to its relatively long
reverberation time. T30 in this room is 1.08 seconds. Similarly, 12 distinct pairs of posi-
tions are recorded (consisting of loudspeaker and microphone array positions). A picture
of the reverberant environment is shown in figure 4.3.
In the appendix A, figures A.3 and A.4 provide T30 measurements for the reverberant
room, averaged across the 32 channels and 12 positions, as well as an illustration of one
recorded RIR.
The dimensions of the room are 10.36m x 10.39m x 2.97m. 9 domes are situated in the
ceiling, which increases the ceiling height up to 4.679m.
The excitation signal is also an exponential sweep of 5.5 seconds, with the sampling
frequency 48kHz, but this time a 2 seconds silence is needed afterwards due to the more
reverberant room.
Figure 4.3: Picture of the reverberant meeting room with the measurement setup
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
13
==PAGE:21==
5
Implementation and methods
5.1
Auralization technique
In this section the auralization implementation is described. After calculating the Spherical
Harmonics (SH) coefficients for the Directional Room Impulse Response (DRIR) and the
set of Head Related Impulse Responses (HRIR), the convolution in the SH domain de-
scribed in section 3.1.4 is implemented. It creates the Binaural Room Impulse Response
(BRIR). This BRIR is finally convolved with an anechoic recording to create the binaural
signal.
5.1.1
Recording principle
A straightforward method to measure BRIR is to record room responses with a dummy
head for several head positions and orientations. Another recording principle was cho-
sen in order to have access to easier and quicker measurements. A spherical array is
used and the combination of the measurements and the Head Related Transfer Functions
(HRTF) is done in the SH domain. It requires only one measure for a given microphone
position and a given loudspeaker position. This approach allows for head rotation by a
simple multiplication in the SH domain [13], reducing the size of the database significantly.
5.1.2
Reproduction
Reproduction technique
Spatial sound is sometimes reproduced over an array of loudspeakers positioned around
the listener. SH can be used to obtain the signal coming from a specific direction cor-
responding to a given loudspeaker. In case of reproduction over headphones, a virtual
loudspeaker is considered and the HRTF for the right direction is applied to each channel.
However, the method used in this project is to convolve the DRIR with the HRIR coef-
ficients directly the SH domain [22], as described more in depth in section 5.1.3. This
method is available only for headphone-based reproduction. Compared to reproduction
through virtual loudspeakers, computing equation 3.12 removes the processing steps of
rendering for a given direction and applying the corresponding HRTF. In [28], this method
is also presented as avoiding spatial aliasing on the rendering side. In other words, the
loudspeaker array or the virtual loudspeaker array could induce some spatial aliasing,
similarly to the one created by to the microphone array described in section 3.1.6, and
this is avoided.
Reproduction setup
Auralization is performed using headphones to simplify the setup on the listener’s side.
Head tracking, while not strictly necessary, is often used to improve perception and im-
mersion [12], but it was not implemented in this project due to cost and time investment.
The signals are computed for a specific position and direction of the head before being
played for the listener.
5.1.3
Auralization algorithm
The algorithm that was developed is aimed at creating a perceptually realistic auralization
of a room reproduced binaurally over headphones. It is described with a diagram in figure
5.1.
The algorithm inputs, shown in red in figure 5.1, are:
• the DRIR measured in a room. This was made using the 32 channels Eigenmike
microphone.
14
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:22==
• two sets of HRIRs corresponding to the left and right channels. These sets were
obtained online on Köln university’s website [46]. They are far field HRIR sets mea-
sured with the Neumann KU100 dummy head, over a full sphere equidistant Lebe-
dev grid of 2702 nodes [11]. These sets are composed of generic HRIRs, therefore
the perception of the sound might be affected, and differently perceived for various
listeners.
• an anechoic recording to be convolved to the BRIR. It is the signal that will be aural-
ized in the room (in this case two signals were chosen, music and speech recordings,
they are described in section 6.2).
The algorithm principle is shown in figure 5.1, and organized as follows. The DRIR and
sets of HRIRs are first transformed in the frequency domain. Then, they are expanded
in the SH domain which is done differently for the measurements and the HRIR sets.
The microphones positions on the spherical array are used to be able to express the SH
coefficients of the DRIR in the right mathematical basis. This SH expansion is achieved
by an inverse problem solved with Least Squares (LS) minimization. The HRIR sets are
expanded in the SH domain using a different method to solve the inverse problem which is
the magnitude LS minimization. The LS method and its improvement, the magnitude LS
method are further detailed in section 5.1.4. The radial filter, described in section 5.1.5, is
used during the convolution in the SH domain to account for the microphone properties.
This convolution is performed according to equation 3.14. As a result, the two channels of
the Binaural Room Transfer Function (BRTF) are created. The final step, after the signals
are converted back to the time domain, is to convolve the two BRIR channels with the
anechoic recording, result of which is the two-channel binaural signal.
The signal sizes are shown in relevant stages of the algorithm in figure 5.1. Coefficients
Pnm and Hnm correspond to the coefficients in equation 3.14. The term NFFT stands
for the size of the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) utilized in this framework, while iFFT”
refers to the inverse FFT. The letter L indicates the left channel, and R indicates the right
channel.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 5.1: Schematics of the auralization algorithm
16
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:24==
5.1.4
Inverse problem
The measured DRIR are used to determine the SH coefficients P ∗
nm(k) from equation
3.14. In the same manner, the coefficients Hl
nm(k) and Hr
nm(k) are derived from the sets
of HRIR.
In order to express signals in the SH domain, different techniques are presented in the lit-
erature [40, 47], and a very useful implementation is available in the Matlab SOFiAtoolbox
[48]. The main approach is to solve an inverse problem with a LS minimization algorithm
to retrieve the SH coefficients.
As mentioned in 3.1.6, the maximum SH order was fixed to N = 4 for the DRIR measure-
ments. Consequently, the HRIR SH coefficients Hnm must be reduced to the same order,
even if a higher SH order could be reached due to the numerous grid nodes of the HRIR
set. This implies a loss of information contained originally in the higher orders that are
truncated [29], which results in an alteration of spatial cues such as source localization or
externalization as well as a loss of content at high frequencies, inducing coloration.
Different techniques are available in the literature to express the HRIR set to a low SH
order with limiting the loss of content [40, 47]. In this work, the method described in [49]
and [50] is used. It involves a minimization of the inverse problem using magnitude LS
instead of the regular LS minimization, and the Python library spaudio [51]. This library is
implementing the magnitude LS minimization and was adapted in this work.
Originally, solving an inverse problem using the LS method aims at finding the best fitting
solution by minimizing the square error between the predicted values and the true values.
In this case, SH coefficients are predicted to fit as accurately as possible the data con-
tained either in the DRIR or in the HRIR.
The magnitude LS method is an improvement of the LS method which disregards the
phase above a certain frequency, to minimize only the sum of the squared magnitudes.
It is based on the duplex theory, where sound localization is explained through a pre-
dominance of Interaural Time Differences (ITDs) at low frequencies and Interaural Level
Differences (ILDs) at high frequencies, as described in section 3.2.1. Hence, the phase in-
formation in the HRIR is considered less important above a certain frequency and it helps
to find more accurate solutions for the SH coefficients of the HRIR at a low order N = 4.
The cutoff frequency is fixed to 2kHz in this project, based on the work of Schörkhuber,
Zaunschirm, and Höldrich [49].
As it highly improves the perception of binaural signals in term of externalization and col-
oration, the magnitude LS method was used for the determination of the SH coefficients
of the HRIR set. No assumption is made to apply the duplex theory to simple room mea-
surements, therefore the regular LS method was used to find the SH coefficients of the
DRIR.
5.1.5
Refinements
Several improvements, applied to auralization algorithms similar to the one described in
section 5.1.3, can be found in the literature. In the scope of this project, some were
implemented to obtain realistic binaural signals before testing any assumption on early
reflections.
Phase
It is important that the combination of different improvements do not alter the phase of
the signal. Otherwise the spatial cues can be altered, for example with time shifts of
reflections. That is why the result of the combination of the equalization and the radial
filter must have a linear phase.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
17
==PAGE:25==
Equalization
The equalization filter described in 3.1.7 was implemented using the python sound field
analysis toolbox [52] based on the Matlab SOFiA toolbox [48]. In practise, the equalization
filter of NFFT coefficients is applied at the convolution step in the SH domain.
Radial filter
An important item of the processing chain is the radial filter. It is implemented according
to equation 3.13. However, its implementation requires some refinements. The version
implemented in this project was made using the sound field analysis toolbox [52, 48]. More
especially, the radial filter has to be limited in the low frequencies to achieve a stable array
response [12], as mentioned in section 3.1.5.
At low frequencies, the aim of limiting the radial filter is to find a compromise between
limiting the amplification of the noise and keeping enough information for the limited fre-
quencies. Noise is observed at low frequencies because microphones are close to each
other in the array, and a phase mismatch phenomenon described in [53] can be observed.
The radial filter tends to have a very high theoretical value for low frequencies, for a rigid
array made of omnidirectional microphones. Therefore, it has to be limited.
Mid-high frequencies are important for spatial perception or sound. This is where HRTFs
are playing a crucial role. Moreover, less noise is present at high frequencies. Con-
sequently, high frequencies are not limited. Soft-nee limiting described in [12] is imple-
mented using the sound field analysis toolbox [52, 48] and the limit is set using [12] and
empirical testing to 18 dB, with informal listening of the auralizations. Implemented radial
filters spectra can be seen in figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Magnitude spectra of the radial filters for orders of interest
Limiting the radial filter at low frequencies does not alter the result of the auralization
significantly. In fact, as the radial filter is order dependent, the low orders are not limited,
18
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:26==
and the higher orders are progressively more limited. In figure 5.2, orders N = 0 and
N = 1 are not modified by the limiting which starts acting on N = 2. Besides, as low
frequencies are less directional than high frequencies, they are encoded in the low orders.
As a result, the low frequencies are not completely modified by a low frequency limiting
of the high orders, but the noise is reduced.
5.2
Room Impulse Response modification
The modifications described in this section are based on the observations of different
research axes derived from the literature and described in section 2.1.
5.2.1
Modification algorithm
A general framework for modifying the measurements was developed. It involves the
detection of the different parts of the response. Early reflections are separated from the
direct sound and from the late reverberations. Then the early reflections are windowed
and extracted, processed and recombined with the unchanged direct path and late rever-
berations.
5.2.2
Calculations of the mixing time
The detection of the direct sound and the calculation of the mixing time are based on
an adapted Python version of the Matlab code provided with paper [42] (Matlab code
available online [54]). The direct sound detection is made with a threshold calculated
from the maximum value.. The mixing time is calculated according to [43], as described
in section 3.4. In [42], the variability of different measurements done in a same room is
studied. Some variability is also observed in this project between the 32 different channels,
consequently the average mixing time is calculated and added to the time of arrival of the
direct path for each channel, as it is done in [42]. One example of the result of those
calculations is shown in figure 5.3, on one channel of the 32 channels available for each
measurement.
Figure 5.3: Room Impulse Response (RIR) with direct sound and mixing time tabel calcu-
lated according to Abel and Huang [43], measured in the reverberant environment
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
19
==PAGE:27==
5.2.3
Extraction of the early reflections
Once the time of arrival of the direct path and the mixing time are obtained, a window is
created and multiplied with the RIR to extract early reflections. A rectangular window is
used and modified with two half-sided Hanning windows of 16 ms. It is represented in
figure 5.4. The resulting extracted and remaining signals are shown in figure 5.5.
Figure 5.4: Window applied to the signal represented in figure 5.3 to extract the early
reflections shown in figure 5.5
20
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.5: Extracted early reflections and remaining part without early reflections
5.2.4
Processing of the early reflections
The reflections are processed in different ways to try to answer to the research question
presented in section 2.2: To what extend the spatio-temporal properties of early reflections
in an impulse response can be degraded or modified, without compromising perceptual
quality on the auralized signal?
Based on the observations made in section 2.1, the following scenarios are created to
evaluate the influence of the early reflections. The early reflections have been modified
by using:
• a zero phase low-pass filter with a cutoff frequency of 2kHz, as presented in figure
5.6.
• a threshold method that detects the 2 or 3 reflections with the largest amplitude
above a certain threshold, removes the other early reflections and keeps the direct
sound and late reverberations. Threshold determination is made by hand on the
waveform of the measured signals. Extraction is made using windows of 16ms. Dif-
ferent thresholds are fixed for the different measurements. The result is presented
in figure 5.7.
• a method that removes all early reflections, keeping the direct sound and late rever-
beration parts, as presented in figure 5.8.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5.6: Processed RIR from figure 5.3, lowpass filter applied to the early reflections
Figure 5.7: Processed RIR from figure 5.3, threshold applied to the early reflections
22
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.8: Processed RIR from figure 5.3, early reflections removed
The different methods are used directly on the measured data, i.e. applied on the 32
channels separately.
5.3
Objective metrics
Objective metrics are calculated on the BRIR before the convolution with anechoic signals
described in 5.1.3. Different methods are available in the literature to calculate ITDs and
ILDs.
5.3.1
ITD
Andreopoulou and Katz [55] compare different methods and present the method from
Algazi, Avendano, and Duda [56] as being a good ITD estimate. It is implemented using
a 3kHz lowpass filter applied to the BRIR. A threshold is then set to −30dB to detect the
time difference between the detected direct sound in the two channels.
5.3.2
ILD
Ben-Hur et al. [41] describe one way to obtain ILDs for frequency bands representing the
auditory filterbank model, to try to mimic perception in the calculation of the metric. A
Gammatone filterbank is used in this project. It is implemented using 39 bands between
50Hz and 20kHz, with considering only the bands having a center frequency below the
Nyquist frequency. In this specific case, the sampling frequency is 32kHz, thus the bands
up to 16kHz are considered only.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
23
==PAGE:31==
6
Subjective test
A subjective test with a limited number of participants was designed to assess the au-
ralizations. The aim of the test is to evaluate the alteration of the binaural signal when
obtained with DRIR whose early reflections are modified. For this purpose, altered bin-
aural signals are compared to a reference binaural signal, acquired using the measured
Directional Room Impulse Response (DRIR).
6.1
Test principle
In this project, an adapted version of the multi stimulus with hidden reference and anchor
(MUSHRA) test framework is used. In [40], a comparable test with similar algorithms and
techniques is presented, where participants are asked to evaluate various auralization
methods.
The MUSHRA test methodology was originally created to evaluate perceptually audio
quality from Bad (0) to Excellent (100). The test participant is asked to compare audio
files that are randomly selected, and include a hidden reference and an anchor. The
anchor is a signal that is significantly different from the other files, and is used to ensure
that the test participant understands the task. The anchor must be recognized and rated 0,
while the hidden reference must be rated 100. The other signals are rated freely between
0 and 100. A visible reference signal is always available to the listener, to evaluate each
scenario in comparison to this reference.
In this study, the MUSHRA test is modified to rate the signals from Extremely different (0)
to Identical (100) to the reference. It allows a perceptual comparison between the different
conditions.
6.2
Test framework and parameters
A training trial is implemented to familiarize the test participant with the test procedure.
The 8 trials are randomized, as well as the 5 different scenarios within each of the 8 trials.
The sound files are normalized to ensure that they have similar loudness level across all
scenarios and trials.
24
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:32==
Figure 6.1: Screenshot of the MUSHRA test implemented with the framework webmushra
[57]. Conditions 1 to 5 represent the different testing scenarios.
Two different anechoic recordings are used in this test to try to cover multiple types of
signals and frequency contents. The signals were taken from Odeon software’s website
[58]. Selected signals are the anechoic speech signal Frequency (english) as well as the
anechoic music signal including multiple instruments D. Ellington: Don’t Mean a Thing.
It can be seen in figure 6.2 that the music signal includes more low frequencies below
100Hz than the speech signal, and speech contains slightly more high frequency content
above 3kHz.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 6.2: Magnitude spectra of the two anechoic recordings to be convolved to the
Binaural Room Impulse Response (BRIR) to obtain binaural test signals
The anchor signal is a mono anechoic signal that has been convolved with one Room
Impulse Response (RIR). It corresponds to the response measured by one of the 32 mi-
crophones. This way, the listener should only hear the reverberation of the room, but no
externalization. This allows for the anchor to be clearly different from the other signals
without altering too much coloration. The remaining three scenarios are obtained by using
the modified DRIR as inputs of the algorithm. Modifications are done through threshold-
ing, zero-phase low-pass filtering, or by removing the early reflections entirely as outlined
in section 5.2.
The DRIRs are taken from the measurements described in section 4, at two different
positions (far and close to the loudspeaker) in each of the two rooms (reverberant and dry
environments). Combined to the 2 anechoic signals, a total of 8 trials were tested.
14 subjects have taken the test. For 8 of the test participants, the test was conducted in
an anechoic booth at DTU in the psychoacoustic labs, this is referred as ideal conditions.
The other 6 test subjects took the test in a quiet environment.
The headset Sennheiser HD 550 was used for all test participants. Results are shown in
section 7.
26
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:34==
7
Results and discussion
This section presents the evaluation of the auralizations. As described in 6, different sig-
nals are compared. A reference binaural signal is put side by side with several binaural
signals obtained by altering the reflections of the measured room response. This com-
parison is done through objective metrics and subjective testing. The results are then
compared in 7.2.
7.1
Early reflections modification
7.1.1
Objective metrics
During the measurements presented in section 4, the loudspeaker has been positioned
facing the Eigenmike for all positions. Consequently, directions of arrival of the direct
sound are almost in the median plane. The median plane is characterized by a distance
to both ears that is the same. It fixes ITDs to be close to 0s. Calculated ITDs are indeed
all around 1e −5s. The different reflection modifications are not implying any change in
these directions of arrival of the direct sound. Thus ITDs are not modified by the different
processing scenarios. They are therefore not relevant in this case and not presented in
this document.
On the other hand, ILDs are influenced by the different environments and are shown in
figures 7.1, 7.2, 7.3 and 7.4
Figure 7.1: ILD comparison in frequency
bands - dry environment position 1
Figure 7.2: ILD comparison in frequency
bands - dry environment position 2
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 7.3: ILD comparison in frequency
bands - reverberant environment position
1
Figure 7.4: ILD comparison in frequency
bands - reverberant environment position
2
It can be seen by comparing figures 7.1 and 7.2 obtained for 2 positions in the dry environ-
ment, that the measurement position has an influence on the ILD presented in frequency
bands. Indeed the frequency response itself is different depending on the position of the
source and the receiver in the room, and it has an impact on the ILD. This is due to the
room modes that create a certain coloration of the sound. Room modes are caused by
the reflection of sound waves on the room boundaries, leading to spatial interference pat-
terns that depend on the frequency and the geometry of the room. Therefore, each mode
will contribute to the sound field with a pressure distribution. It explains the uneven spa-
tial dependency of the frequency response [6]. Similarly, some differences are noticed
between figures 7.3 and 7.4. That is why several measurement positions are presented,
avoiding to hide some processing effects because of those room modes.
As mentioned for the ITDs, the positions of the loudspeaker were almost in the median
plane for the Eigenmike. Hence, the level difference between the two ears of a listener is
similar. This is why reference Binaural Room Impulse Responses (BRIRs) such as figures
7.3 and 7.4 are close to having 0dB ILDs. However, as opposed to ITD calculations, the
whole response is taken into account and not only the direct sound in the calculation of
this metric. Sound coming from all directions is affected by the room because reflections
are included. The effect of the Head Related Transfer Function (HRTF) applied during
the convolution in the Spherical Harmonics (SH) domain is also visible. Consequently
ILDs are showing different patterns and are, more importantly, affected by the Directional
Room Impulse Response (DRIR) modifications.
It can be seen by comparing dry environments (figures 7.1 and 7.2) to reverberant envi-
ronments (7.3 and 7.4) that the dry ILDs are more affected by the processings. Indeed,
ILDs are calculated on all the response. Therefore the relative part of the DRIR that is
modified is much more important in the dry environment where almost no reveberberant
tail is present. Additionally, direct sound includes all frequencies, but reflections have a
tendency to lose high frequency content that is being absorbed by the room. Therefore
reverberant environments are also less affected by the lowpass scenario. Indeed, in fig-
ures 7.1 and 7.2 at high frequencies, ILD drop for the lowpass and removed scenarios,
which is not observed in figures 7.3 and 7.4. It supports the observation that ILDs are
more affected by the processings in dry environments.
On all figures, it can be noted that scenarios removed and lowpass have the same ILD at
28
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:36==
high frequencies and the lowpass scenario share the same ILD values with the reference
at low frequencies.
No scenario is destroying completely the ILD pattern obtained for the reference. This is
interesting because one could think that the spatial properties like externalization may not
be altered too much when processing the early reflections, even when removing them
completely.
Surprisingly, at low frequencies, scenario threshold is having the biggest influence on the
ILDs, even bigger than the effect of removing all early reflections in the DRIR. This might
not have too much impact on our perception because it is below 500 Hz, according to the
duplex theory described in 3.2.1.
7.1.2
Subjective ratings
The results of the perceptual test described in section 6 are presented. A total of 14
subjects participated in the test, 8 of which were conducted in ideal conditions (in an
anechoic booth), while the other 6 tests were conducted in quiet environments. Results for
the non-ideal conditions are shown in appendix C. Results may be affected for participants
that were not in an anechoic booth.
General observations
Figure 7.5 presents the results on a histogram and figure 7.6 presents the mean and and
standard deviation of the results.
It can be seen in both figures that all scenarios can be distinguished from the reference
if measured across all trials (dry and reverberant environments and music and speech
signals are all included).
In figure 7.5, one can see that the anchor and reference are clearly identified, because
the spread of their distributions is low compared to the spread observed for scenario
removed, lowpass or threshold. This shows that the MUSHRA test principle is working,
and the reference and anchor are usually recognized within the scenarios presented to
the test participant.
Removing all the early reflections (removed scenario) is more easily noticed than pro-
cessing them (lowpass or threshold scenarios). The lowpass or threshold scenarios are
inducing the same perceived level of difference to the reference.
An interesting fact is that the removal of all early reflections is rated 50, which is the middle
of the scale between the reference and the anchor, where no externalization is encoded.
Consequently, it may be assumed that the direct and reverberant parts of the DRIR are
responsible for a certain amount of spaciousness, when processed in the auralization
algorithm, because the DRIR without early reflections can already induce some spatial
information. Some further studies could try to measure the accuracy of this assumption,
trying to evaluate how much spaciousness is related to each part of the DRIR. The role
of the early reflections is confirmed, as expected according to the literature.
Another interesting fact is that scenarios lowpass and threshold are rated between sce-
nario removed and the reference. It highlights the role of the main reflections and of the
low frequencies in encoding spatial and room information.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 7.5: Histogram of the results for all
scenarios and test participants under ideal
conditions
Figure 7.6: Figure of the result means and
standard deviations for all scenarios and
test participants under ideal conditions
One can also notice that no scenario is rated 100, except the reference. Consequently,
even with keeping some information about early reflections (threshold or lowpass scenar-
ios), a difference can be noticed when comparing to the non altered signal, in the general
case obtained across all scenarios.
Dry vs Reverberant environments
Reverberant and dry environments seem to give results close to the general case de-
scribed in section 7.1.2. Scenarios threshold and lowpass are rated between scenario
removed and the reference on both figures 7.8 and 7.10. However, in the reverberant
environment (figure 7.8) the threshold scenario is rated a bit below the lowpass scenario
on average. In the reverberant room, thresholding the reflections has a big impact on
it and it will be more different from the reference than the lowpass case. Indeed, for a
reverberant environment, a lot of reflections will reach the listener because most of them
are reflected by the room. Consequently, thresholding the reflections even only before
the mixing time, has the effect of removing a lot of content in the DRIR.
Moreover, reflections have a tendency to loose high frequency content as described in
section 7.1.1. Hence, the lowpass will have little effect on this DRIR. The lowpassed
DRIR is close to the original one that was used in the reference.
Additionally, some participants could hear an echo in some scenarios in the reverberant
environment. This is the result of the suppression of all the early reflections, or most
of them. As it can be seen in figure 5.3, the mixing time between the direct sound and
the late reverberations was approximately 50ms on the given reverberant RIR. Thus, the
temporal cues of human perception mentioned in section 3.2.2 are probably reaching the
integration time. Echo integration and the precedence effect are not happening anymore,
inducing an audible echo for the participant. This echo will have a different localization
than the direct sound. This has the consequence of making the removed case clearly
audible but also very similar to the threshold scenario, where most of the reflections are
removed too. This echo identification is clearly visible in figure 7.7, where the threshold
scenario is often rated the same around 75 whereas in the dry environment, in figure 7.9,
the threshold condition ratings are more spread.
The fact that the threshold scenario is still better rated than the removal of all reflections in
figure 7.8 highlights the important effect of the few remaining reflections. They will reduce
the length of the gap between the direct sound and late reverberations present for the
30
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:38==
removed scenario, probably making the echo harder to hear. They will also add content
about the room that will help the listener to perceive spatial information.
Figure 7.7:
Histogram of the results for
reverberant environment and test partici-
pants under ideal conditions
Figure 7.8: Figure of the result means and
standard deviations for reverberant envi-
ronment and test participants under ideal
conditions
Figures 7.9 and 7.10 present the results under dry-environment conditions. In opposition
to the reverberant case, seen in figures 7.8 and 7.7, they show higher ratings for the
threshold scenario compared to the ratings of the lowpass case. It is consistent with
the expectations. Indeed, for a dry environment, fewer reflections can reach the listener
because most of them are absorbed by the room. Consequently, the thresholded DRIR
is closer to the original one that was used in the reference. Also, no echo can be noticed
in this case, which avoids noticing more easily the threshold scenario.
Figure 7.9:
Histogram of the results for
dry environment and test participants un-
der ideal conditions
Figure 7.10: Figure of the result means
and standard deviations for dry environ-
ment and test participants under ideal con-
ditions
Music vs Speech
The auralizations obtained after convolution with the music and speech signals are com-
pared in this section, in both environments. The results are in accordance with the general
case described in section 7.1.2.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
31
==PAGE:39==
In figures 7.11 and 7.12 obtained for music, the threshold scenario is rated lower than
the lowpass case. On the contrary, the threshold scenario is rated as being closer to the
reference for speech in figures 7.13 and 7.14.
To try to explain threshold and lowpass ratings for music and speech, one can mention
again the echo that could be heard in the reverberant environment. It was more pro-
nounced on the music than on speech and therefore the listener could use temporal cues
to identify the processed signal. The double bass reflections in the music content were
heard distinctly, when the other instruments could be heard without proper echo, in a
comparable way as the speech was perceived. Here, the mixing time used in the early
reflections extraction is an important parameter, it is further discussed in section 7.2.3.
Another explanation can be made using the signals spectra in figure 6.2. The speech
signal has slightly more high frequency content than music between 4kHz and 10kHz. It
might be more affected than music when convolved to a DRIR which reflections are low-
passed. Also, more low frequencies are present in the music signal. This might induce
masking of the effect of the processing. This might be another reason for the lower rating
of the lowpass scenario in regards to the threshold scenario for speech, in figure 7.14.
Figure 7.11: Histogram of the results for
music signal and test participants under
ideal conditions
Figure 7.12: Figure of the result means and
standard deviations for music signal and
test participants under ideal conditions
Figure 7.13: Histogram of the results for
speech signal and test participants under
ideal conditions
Figure 7.14: Figure of the result means and
standard deviations for speech signal and
test participants under ideal conditions
32
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:40==
7.2
Discussion
7.2.1
Ideal vs non ideal conditions
The results in ideal conditions shown in section 7.1.2 are in accordance with the ones
obtained under non ideal conditions shown in appendix C. This emphasizes our observa-
tions with a bigger sample of participants.
7.2.2
Combination of objective and subjective metrics
An important point to mention is that objective metrics have been calculated on BRIRs,
where subjective ratings have been obtained with perceptual tests done on binauraliza-
tions of anechoic signals. However this section tries to draw general comments and to
merge takeaways from both objective and subjective analysis.
In 7.1.1, objective measures have shown that the main differences in ILD for dry environ-
ments are observed:
• at low frequencies for the threshold scenario
• at high frequencies for the lowpass scenario.
In 7.1.2, subjective measures have shown that, for dry environments, the threshold con-
dition is better rated than lowpass scenario.
The observations concerning objective and subjective metrics are consistent with the du-
plex theory discussed in section 7.1.1. Indeed, the impact of the lowpass processing in
dry environments is shown to alter perception more than the threshold processing. Thus
the difference in ILD at low frequencies due to the threshold processing is not a major
problem for perception, in dry environment.
No big difference in ILD is shown for the reverberant environment under the different
scenarios. However this time, the threshold case is rated lower than the lowpass case.
This can be explained by the fact that reflections tend to loose high frequency content,
making the lowpass scenario sound more similar to the reference. This might also be
explained by the echo phenomenon described in 7.1.2, making the threshold scenario
easy to recognize. A further study could be aimed at finding whether it is due to the echo
or not. If it is due to the echo, the threshold case might be less perceptible than the
lowpass scenario, as observed in the dry environment.
7.2.3
Mixing time considerations
As mentioned in section 5.2.2, the mixing time was calculated according to [43]. However,
determining the mixing time is a broad topic in the literature, and some refinements can
be brought to its definition. For example, in [42] different methods to calculate the mixing
time are compared. The mixing time is also derived through a perceptual experiment. An
empirical formula is extrapolated from the subjective and calculated mixing times. From
this a perceptual mixing time is defined. This new definition gives smaller calculated
values for the mixing time.
During this project, the mixing time definition has been chosen to be quite long on purpose,
from all the methods available in the literature. This was done to try to have an audible
effect when comparing different processing of the early reflections. A shorter mixing time
would make the listening test harder as the participants might not always hear differences.
In a further study, one could try to evaluate the impact of the different processings of the
RIR using a shorter mixing time. This would probably require trained subjects, and it could
lead to some results in which the difference is not noticeable.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
33
==PAGE:41==
8
Conclusion
In conclusion, this thesis has highlighted the crucial role that early reflections play in em-
bodying spatial cues in binaural signals. Through the use of an auralization algorithm and
array measurements in small, dry, and reverberant rooms, the study was able to demon-
strate the importance of the few early reflections having the largest amplitudes and the
low-frequency content of the reflections in encoding the overall spatial impression in the
binaural signal.
The findings of this research show that all modifications to the DRIR brought noticeable
differences in the auralized signals. Furthermore, the study suggests that exclusively
retaining the strongest and most significant reflections in the measured impulse response
can lead to small perceived differences between the original and modified binaural signals.
In future research, a subjective test could be conducted to determine the specific subjec-
tive attributes associated with the various modifications of early reflections examined in
this study. Another line of research would be to explore the potential impact of alterna-
tive definitions of mixing time on the encoding of spatial cues. More especially, a shorter
mixing time could lead to unnoticeable differences in the binaural signals obtained from
modified DRIR. It would be of great interest to investigate whether a lower level of pre-
cision in the room response could still achieve the same spatial impression in a binaural
signal.
34
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:42==
Bibliography
[1]
Michael Vorländer. Auralization. Springer, 2008.
[2]
Ville Pulkki. “Spatial sound reproduction with directional audio coding”. In: Journal
of the Audio Engineering Society 55.6 (2007), pp. 503–516.
[3]
Archontis Politis, Sakari Tervo, and Ville Pulkki. “Compass: Coding and multidirec-
tional parameterization of ambisonic sound scenes”. In: 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE. 2018,
pp. 6802–6806.
[4]
MD Burkhard and RM Sachs. “Anthropometric manikin for acoustic research”. In:
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 58.1 (1975), pp. 214–222.
[5]
Asbjørn Krokstad, Staffan Strom, and Svein Sørsdal. “Calculating the acoustical
room response by the use of a ray tracing technique”. In: Journal of Sound and
Vibration 8.1 (1968), pp. 118–125.
[6]
Heinrich Kuttruff. Room acoustics. Crc Press, 2016.
[7]
Dima Khaykin and Boaz Rafaely. “Acoustic analysis by spherical microphone array
processing of room impulse responses”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America 132.1 (2012), pp. 261–270.
[8]
Henrik Møller. “Fundamentals of binaural technology”. In: Applied acoustics 36.3-4
(1992), pp. 171–218.
[9]
Iwaki Toshima, Hisashi Uematsu, and Tatsuya Hirahara. “A steerable dummy head
that tracks three-dimensional head movement: TeleHead”. In: Acoustical science
and technology 24.5 (2003), pp. 327–329.
[10]
Larry S Davis et al. “High order spatial audio capture and its binaural head-tracked
playback over headphones with HRTF cues”. In: Audio Engineering Society Con-
vention 119. Audio Engineering Society. 2005.
[11]
Benjamin Bernschütz. “A spherical far field HRIR/HRTF compilation of the Neumann
KU 100”. In: Proceedings of the 40th Italian (AIA) annual conference on acous-
tics and the 39th German annual conference on acoustics (DAGA) conference on
acoustics. German Acoustical Society (DEGA) Berlin. 2013, p. 29.
[12]
Benjamin Bernschütz. Microphone arrays and sound field decomposition for dy-
namic binaural recording. Technische Universitaet Berlin (Germany), 2016.
[13]
Carl Andersson. “Headphone auralization of acoustic spaces recorded with spher-
ical microphone arrays”. MA thesis. 2016.
[14]
Søren Bech. “Timbral aspects of reproduced sound in small rooms. II”. In: The Jour-
nal of the Acoustical Society of America 99.6 (1996), pp. 3539–3549.
[15]
Søren Bech. “Spatial aspects of reproduced sound in small rooms”. In: The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 103.1 (1998), pp. 434–445.
[16]
Michael Barron. “The subjective effects of first reflections in concert halls—the need
for lateral reflections”. In: Journal of sound and vibration 15.4 (1971), pp. 475–494.
[17]
Jukka Pätynen et al. “Concert halls with strong lateral reflections enhance musical
dynamics”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111.12 (2014),
pp. 4409–4414.
[18]
Otavio Colella Gomes et al. “Perceptual Consequences of Direction and Level of
Early Reflections in a Chamber Music Hall”. In: Jahrestagung für Akustik. 2022.
[19]
Sean E Olive and Floyd E Toole. “The detection of reflections in typical rooms”. In:
Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 37.7/8 (1989), pp. 539–553.
[20]
Boaz Rafaely. Fundamentals of spherical array processing. Vol. 8. Springer, 2015.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
35
==PAGE:43==
[21]
Kristofer Schlachter et al. “Beyond photo realism for domain adaptation from syn-
thetic data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01960 (2019).
[22]
Amir Avni et al. “Spatial perception of sound fields recorded by spherical microphone
arrays with varying spatial resolution”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 133.5 (2013), pp. 2711–2721.
[23]
Boaz Rafaely and Amir Avni. “Interaural cross correlation in a sound field repre-
sented by spherical harmonics”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
127.2 (2010), pp. 823–828.
[24]
Israel Cohen, Jacob Benesty, and Sharon Gannot. “Speech processing in modern
communication: challenges and perspectives”. In: (2009).
[25]
Claude E Shannon. “Communication in the presence of noise”. In: Proceedings of
the IRE 37.1 (1949), pp. 10–21.
[26]
Ronald William Schafer and Alan V Oppenheim. Discrete-time signal processing.
Vol. 5. Prentice Hall Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989.
[27]
Boaz Rafaely. “Analysis and design of spherical microphone arrays”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on speech and audio processing 13.1 (2004), pp. 135–143.
[28]
Jens Ahrens and Carl Andersson. “Perceptual evaluation of headphone auralization
of rooms captured with spherical microphone arrays with respect to spaciousness
and timbre”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 145.4 (2019),
pp. 2783–2794.
[29]
Zamir Ben-Hur et al. “Spectral equalization in binaural signals represented by order-
truncated spherical harmonics”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
141.6 (2017), pp. 4087–4096.
[30]
AW Mills and Jerry V Tobias. “Foundations of modern auditory theory”. In: New York
2 (1972), p. 301.
[31]
Lord Rayleigh. “The Duplex Theory”. In: (1907).
[32]
John W Strutt. “On our perception of sound direction”. In: Philosophical Magazine
13.74 (1907), pp. 214–32.
[33]
Ewan A Macpherson and John C Middlebrooks. “Listener weighting of cues for lat-
eral angle: the duplex theory of sound localization revisited”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 111.5 (2002), pp. 2219–2236.
[34]
LL Elliott. “Backward and forward masking”. In: Audiology 10.2 (1971), pp. 65–76.
[35]
Hans Wallach, Edwin B Newman, and Mark R Rosenzweig. “A precedence effect
in sound localization”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 21.4
(1949), pp. 468–468.
[36]
BS Series. “Methods for selecting and describing attributes and terms, in the prepa-
ration of subjective tests”. In: (2017).
[37]
Masayuki Morimoto, Munehiro Jinya, and Koichi Nakagawa. “Effects of frequency
characteristics of reverberation time on listener envelopment”. In: The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 122.3 (2007), pp. 1611–1615.
[38]
Toshiyuki Okano, Leo L Beranek, and Takayuki Hidaka. “Relations among interaural
cross-correlation coefficient (IACC E), lateral fraction (LF E), and apparent source
width (ASW) in concert halls”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
104.1 (1998), pp. 255–265.
[39]
Masayuki Morimoto, Koichi Nakagawa, and Kazuhiro Iida. “The relation between
spatial impression and the law of the first wavefront”. In: Applied Acoustics 69.2
(2008), pp. 132–140.
[40]
Markus Zaunschirm, Christian Schörkhuber, and Robert Höldrich. “Binaural render-
ing of Ambisonic signals by head-related impulse response time alignment and a
36
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:44==
diffuseness constraint”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 143.6
(2018), pp. 3616–3627.
[41]
Zamir Ben-Hur et al. “Binaural Reproduction Based on Bilateral Ambisonics”. In:
Advances in Fundamental and Applied Research on Spatial Audio. IntechOpen,
2021.
[42]
Alexander Lindau, Linda Kosanke, and Stefan Weinzierl. “Perceptual evaluation
of model-and signal-based predictors of the mixing time in binaural room impulse
responses”. In: Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 60.11 (2012), pp. 887–
898.
[43]
Jonathan S Abel and Patty Huang. “A simple, robust measure of reverberation echo
density”. In: Audio Engineering Society Convention 121. Audio Engineering Society.
2006.
[44]
Rebecca Stewart and Mark Sandler. “Statistical measures of early reflections of
room impulse responses”. In: Proc. of the 10th int. conference on digital audio ef-
fects (DAFx-07), Bordeaux, France. 2007, pp. 59–62.
[45]
MH acoustics website. https://mhacoustics.com/products. Accessed: 2023-01-24.
[46]
Köln university Audiogroup website. https://audiogroup.web.th-koeln.de/. Accessed:
2023-01-24.
[47]
Christian Schörkhuber and Robert Höldrich. “Ambisonic microphone encoding with
covariance constraint”. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Spatial
Audio. 2017, pp. 7–10.
[48]
Benjamin Bernschütz et al. “SOFiA sound field analysis toolbox”. In: Proceedings
of the International Conference on Spatial Audio (ICSA). 2011, pp. 7–15.
[49]
Christian Schörkhuber, Markus Zaunschirm, and Robert Höldrich. “Binaural ren-
dering of ambisonic signals via magnitude least squares”. In: Proceedings of the
DAGA. Vol. 44. 2018, pp. 339–342.
[50]
Franz Zotter and Matthias Frank. Ambisonics: A practical 3D audio theory for record-
ing, studio production, sound reinforcement, and virtual reality. Springer Nature,
2019.
[51]
Spaudio python library. https://spaudiopy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html.
Accessed: 2023-01-24.
[52]
sound field analysis toolbox. https://pypi.org/project/sound- field- analysis/. Ac-
cessed: 2023-01-24.
[53]
Finn Jacobsen and Peter Moller Juhl. Fundamentals of general linear acoustics.
John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[54]
Berlin TU university website. https://www.ak.tu-berlin.de/menue/publications/open_
research_tools/mixing_time_prediction/. Accessed: 2023-01-24.
[55]
Areti Andreopoulou and Brian FG Katz. “Identification of perceptually relevant meth-
ods of inter-aural time difference estimation”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical So-
ciety of America 142.2 (2017), pp. 588–598.
[56]
Ralph Algazi, Carlos Avendano, and Richard O Duda. “Estimation of a spherical-
head model from anthropometry”. In: J. Aud. Eng. Soc. 49 (2001).
[57]
Michael Schoeffler et al. “webMUSHRA—A comprehensive framework for web-
based listening tests”. In: Journal of Open Research Software 6.1 (2018).
[58]
Odeon software company website. https://odeon.dk/downloads/odeon-zip-archives.
Accessed: 2023-01-24.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
37
==PAGE:45==
38
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:46==
A
Appendix: Reverberation time in third
octave bands for the two rooms
Figure A.1: Average T30 over the 32 channels of the eigenmike at 12 positions presented
in third octave bands for the dry room.
Figure A.2: Example of one measured impulse response in the dry room.
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure A.3: Average T30 over the 32 channels of the eigenmike at 12 positions presented
in third octave bands for the reverberant room.
Figure A.4: Example of one measured impulse response in the reverberant room.
40
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:48==
B
Appendix: Audio wheel for reproduced
music from ITU-R norm [36]
Figure B.1: Audio Wheel for reproduced sound, definitions available in [36]
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
41
==PAGE:49==
C
Appendix: Results for test participants
in non ideal conditions
Figure C.1: Histogram of the results for
all scenarios and test participants under
non ideal conditions
Figure C.2: Figure of the result means
and standard deviations for all scenar-
ios and test participants under non ideal
conditions
Figure C.3:
Histogram of the results
for dry environment and test participants
under non ideal conditions
Figure C.4: Figure of the result means
and standard deviations for dry environ-
ment and test participants under non
ideal conditions
42
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
==PAGE:50==
Figure C.5: Histogram of the results for
reverberant environment and test partic-
ipants under non ideal conditions
Figure C.6: Figure of the result means
and standard deviations for reverberant
environment and test participants under
non ideal conditions
Figure C.7: Histogram of the results for
music signal and test participants under
non ideal conditions
Figure C.8: Figure of the result means
and standard deviations for music sig-
nal and test participants under non ideal
conditions
Figure C.9: Histogram of the results for
speech signal and test participants un-
der non ideal conditions
Figure C.10: Figure of the result means
and standard deviations for speech sig-
nal and test participants under non ideal
conditions
Auralized reconstruction and perception of a musical sound field in a room
43
==PAGE:51==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/research/research-areas/electro-technology/acoustic-technology
