==PAGE:1==
Automatization of Attack Trees
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Automatization of Attack Trees
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Beatrice Spiga
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Computer Science at the University of Bologna.
Beatrice Spiga - s225953
Signature
Date
ii
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Nowadays cyber security is more critical than ever. The extensive use of electronic de-
vices expose our sensitive data to several threats and vulnerabilities. This may lead to
cyber attacks. The problem of protecting data and systems from cyber threats has not
trivial resolution because of the heterogeneity of existing systems and devices, which re-
quire different actions. Therefore, prevention and detection of potential threats in each
kind of system play a central role. The aim of this thesis is to develop a tool to automat-
ically analyze the logs of violated systems. We are obtaining the Process Tree in order
to depict the hacker’s actions and then we are using some translation rules to obtain the
Attack Tree. The latter can be seen as a graphical representation of the potential attacks.
This process can be useful for identifying the weaknesses of the system. The proposed
work can help to understand the vulnerabilities an attacker exploited in a system.
Automatization of Attack Trees
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my parents for the support that they always gave me during these two
important years of my life, especially during my months abroad. They never had doubts
about the fact that I would accomplish this goal.
I wish to extend my special thanks to my grandparents and my uncles because they have
always believed in me and in my journey, since I was a child in primary school until the
end my master degree.
I would like to say a special thank you to Fabrizio. He has always been my first supporter,
even when I had no motivation to continue he always gave me reasons to keep pushing
because he believed in me from the very beginning.
A big thank you also to my university mates for the complicity and for the moments that
we spent together. Without them all of the group projects would have been very boring.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to my thesis supervisors Stefano F. and Nicola
D. for making my thesis abroad possible and for helping me work on the topics I like the
most. I will bring this experience with me for a lifetime.
iv
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Contribution of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Related works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Process mining
9
2.1
XES event logs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Introduction to process mining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
Process trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Attack trees
17
3.1
The definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Quantitative security framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Attack-defense trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
The tool: from event logs to attack tree
23
4.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
A dummy example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Case studies
35
5.1
First example: attack trace concerning a single attack . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Second example: attack trace concerning multiple attacks . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.3
Third example: another attack trace of multiple attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.4
A ’bad’ example: malware infection logs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.5
Contribution w.r.t. related works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6
Validation
59
6.1
Validation from event logs to process tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.2
Validation from process tree to attack tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7
Conclusion and Future Works
61
Bibliography
63
Automatization of Attack Trees
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
The problem
Nowadays the digital and the physical universes are becoming more and more aligned
and today’s information systems log store enormous amounts of events. Companies,
hospitals and a lot of other information systems provide detailed information about the
activities that have been executed. We refer to such data as event logs. To be more pre-
cise, an event log can be seen as a chronological record of activities of a system that are
saved to a file on the system [1]. This type of file is useful for administrators because they
can monitor how users and processes behave within the system. Moreover, the ability to
reconstruct previous operations makes these logs interesting. Indeed, what makes them
such a valuable and powerful resource is not only that they give us a lot of information, but
they also provide additional data recorded automatically and independently of the person
who made the action. To give a more precise idea, Figure 1.1 depicts an example of
event log.
Figure 1.1: Example of event log.
In this context, monitoring the system for security reasons is a crucial part for its mainte-
nance, and the generated logs are the basis for discovering security breaches and other
issues. All the systems can produce log entries, and identifying malicious behaviors can
be very difficult. The larger the number of incoming logs, the more difficult and expensive
it becomes to perform manual analysis. Moreover, such data stored is usually stored by
information systems in an unstructured form or needs to be labeled with annotations which
indicate whether a log corresponds to malicious activity or not. However, the process can
be both challenging and costly. This has given rise to a demand for more automated
techniques to identify potential system threats. The notion of an Attack Tree is crucial in
this situation. For the sake of clarity, an example is depicted below in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Example of Attack Tree.
Automatization of Attack Trees
1
==PAGE:10==
Attack Trees [2] provide a systematic way of describing the vulnerability of a system,
taking into account various types of attacks. Two main aspects make them strong: they
combine intuitive representations of possible attacks with formal mathematical methods
of analyzing them qualitatively and quantitatively. ([3], [4]). Up to now, analysts and
technicians usually constructed Attack Trees manually, based on their knowledge and
experience. A large number of tools for editing and analyzing Attack Trees exist but,
unfortunately, their manual design is time-consuming and error-prone. Thus, the resulting
trees may be incomplete, i.e., may miss some relevant attack vectors. This can happen
especially if their become substantial and security experts may also run into trouble as
soon as the material they work on gets fairly big (lengthy log files, for example). Moreover,
the manual construction is very subjective and depends on the modeler’s expertise. This
means that trees designed by two different experts for the same system might differ in
their size, their structure, and even in the attack vectors that they capture. In addition,
a manual design is likely to be incomplete and unsound w.r.t. the security issues of a
system under consideration. Supported by automation, practitioners can obtain large
Attack Trees that are correct by construction and in line with the properties of the system.
The generation process can also be reiterated in case new kinds of attacks emerge or if the
system evolves. Even though starting from existing attack patterns may provide valuable
help in the design process, it may result in very generic trees that do not properly reflect
the subtleties of the analyzed system, which may impact possible attack vectors. Due
to the above-mentioned weaknesses of the manual construction, approaches for (semi-)
automated Attack Tree generation recently attracts the attention of researchers ([5], [6]).
In this thesis we introduce a tool that allows one to use various transformations to achieve
a final goal, which is the automatic generation of an Attack Tree, taking into account the
system’s event logs. As a result of this operation, it is possible to extract knowledge
from violated logs and discover the hacker’s steps. In the first step, a process discovery
algorithm is used to derive a Process Tree representing the data and operations collected
by the system from its log files. To be clearer, an instance of Process Tree is depicted in
Figure 1.3. The Process Tree is then translated into an Attack Tree according to specific
rules. The aim is to automate the entire Attack Tree generation process, starting from the
logs. Due to this work, vulnerabilities that were not considered during the design phase
can now be easily identified and mitigated. Moreover, we can have the same perspective
of the attacker: this allow one to anticipate and prevent the potential attacks. Furthermore,
this tool can also be used as a forensic tool for investigation, since investigators can
analyze the logs of an attacked system a posteriori, extracting information and drawing
conclusions based on them.
Figure 1.3: Example of Process Tree.
2
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Contribution of the thesis
In this thesis, we introduce a method to automatically generate Attack Trees by process-
ing event logs, giving the first step towards building an adequate tool for the complete
automatization of Attack Trees. Figure 1.4 depicts all the atomic steps. As a starting
point, we have three different possibilities. We may immediately start processing some
system-provided labeled event logs. Alternately, we can proceed with the generation of
some ’dummy’ event logs. As a final option, we can employ a model checking tool called
OFMC, which accepts protocol specifications as input and outputs attack traces. These
attack traces can be finally translated into labeled event logs. As a next step, the Process
Tree of the system represented by the logs can be obtained through the use of a Process
Mining algorithm. Finally, the system’s final Attack Tree can be generated using some
translation rules. This will be provided in two formats, one of which is suitable with the
security framework RisQFLan that we will examine later..
Figure 1.4: Transformations overview.
In particular, the contributions of the thesis are:
• Automatic conversion of OFMC’s attack traces, to obtain labeled event logs that can
represent the protocol specified as input to the model checking tool. The procedure
is introduced in the design part in Section 4.
• Generation of ’dummy logs’, which can serve as a good example to understand the
general functioning of the tool. Also this process is outlined in Section 4
• Use of a Process Mining algorithm to build a Process Tree from labeled event logs,
which can provide a graphical representation of the system’s history. The Inductive
Miner algorithm is presented in Section 2
• Use of translation rules on the obtained Process Tree to automatically generate the
final Attack Tree of the system. The conversion rules are deeply analyzed in Section
4
• Conversion of the Attack Tree into the format suitable for the graph-based security
framework RisQFLan. This enables one to have a different perspective of the same
tree, to better understand the overall situation. Also this process is introduced in
Section 4.
• Validation of the translation steps through the generation of traces starting from
Automatization of Attack Trees
3
==PAGE:12==
Process Trees, to ensure the validity of the work. This allows one to determine
whether the traces are correctly convertible to the translated model and vice-versa.
The validation steps are explained in Section 6.
As a result, this work may enhance the security of many systems, allowing security ana-
lysts to protect their assets by choosing proper countermeasures.
1.3
Thesis structure
The thesis is structured as follows. In the next Section the Process Mining technique is
described so that we can understand how to obtain the Process Tree of the anaylzed
system. Afterwards, Section 3 introduces Attack Trees which are the final result that we
want to obtain. In Section 4 the design and the functionalities of our tool are described
using a simple example, to better understand the operations involved. Moreover, the
OFMC model checking tool is introduced. Subsequently, Section 5 provides analysis of
some case studies. In Section 6 the soundness of the obtained model is proven, so that
the tool can be considered as validated. Finally, Section 7 draws some conclusions about
the presented thesis and considers future work that could improve the tool. Figure 1.5
depicts an overview of the thesis’s structure.
Figure 1.5: Overview of the thesis structure.
4
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:13==
1.4
Related works
Attack Trees are broadly used to depict threat scenarios in a succinct and intuitive man-
ner. They are also useful for providing security information to non-experts. Nevertheless,
errors can happen because their manual construction relies on the experience and cre-
ativity of specialists. This means that manual creation of Attack Trees is impracticable
for large system. However, their automated generation has not been fully investigated
yet. More specific and detailed related works about Attack Trees, Process Trees, and
other analyzed tools, like OFMC and RisQFLan, are mentioned in the related chapters
of this thesis. We want to emphasize that, in addition to working on the thesis, we per-
formed research to produce a survey and illustrate the current the status of automatic
generation of two different types of graphical security models, i.e. Attack Trees and At-
tack Graphs.  The paper’s purpose is to outline the existing approaches being used in the
field, compare them, and discuss the challenges and possible directions for the research
community’s future. The work is included in this thesis’ appendix. We also point out that
the survey is still under submission and should be published forthcoming. Hereinafter
some existing related works about automatic generation of Attack Trees are proposed.
Phillips et. al. [7] presents a system that generates the graph through the attack profile,
the input templates, and the system setup. The technique is built backwards, beginning
from the goal node. Next, looking through the templates, it is possible to identify an edge
whose head corresponds to the goal node. The routes that do not fit the profile of the
attacker are cut out. The procedure continues until an initial state that is not the head of
an edge is reached. The authors assert that by changing the network design, their method
may model dynamic characteristics. In addition to the network setting and the attacker’s
profile, a database of typical attacks is also necessary as a precondition. Moreover, code,
experiments, proofs, or references to scalability are not available. Because of this, the tool
developed in this thesis could contribute and complement the existing works, overcoming
these obstacles.
Lallie et al. [8] proposes an analysis of effectiveness in terms of graphical representa-
tion of Attack Trees. The quantitative analysis of the visual syntax of Attack Trees is
the main contribution of this study. This work examines how these visual structures rep-
resent actual cyber-attacks on a system. As a conclusion, it is stated that there is no
standard methodology for representing Attack Trees, and that this issue should be fixed
by researchers. Although there are many advantages to representing cyber-attacks as
Attack Trees, the paper demonstrates that there are inconsistencies regarding the way
cyber-attacks are represented in the tree, and by doing so, outlines the need to stan-
dardise their visual syntax. This article is the first to provide a thorough critique of attack
modeling approaches’ visual grammar. Despite this work constitute a good contribution,
the automatic creation of Attack Trees is still not really taken into account. For this reason
we decided to create a tool that allows their automatic generation.
Wojciech et al. [9] reviews recent developments in graphical security modeling, with a
particular emphasis on the use of formal methods for the interpretation, (semi-)automated
generation, quantitative analysis of Attack Trees and their expansions. A comprehensive
explanation of existing frameworks is provided in the work, along with a comparison of
their features and a list of interesting open questions. Essentially, the work provides for-
mal descriptions of Attack Trees and introduces formal methods to generate them (semi-)
automatically. This survey’s goal is to provide an overview of current methods that com-
bine formal methods and attack tree-based modeling in the three different dimensions,
i.e. semantical, generation and quantitative approaches. However, the suggested semi-
automatic generation methodologies rely on complex and sophisticated formal engines
Automatization of Attack Trees
5
==PAGE:14==
ignoring system’s event logs, which can represent a rich source of information for the au-
tomatic construction of Attack Trees. For these reasons we decided to move on with our
tool’s design
Kordy et al. [10] examines DAG-based graphical models in the field of security. Direct
Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) enable the hierarchical decomposition of complex scenarios into
straightforward, intelligible, and quantifiable actions. Two well-known techniques for se-
curity modeling are those based on threat trees and Bayesian networks. However, there
are more than 30 DAG-based techniques available, each with unique features and ob-
jectives. This work aims at providing an overview of DAG-based graphical attack and
defense modeling tools. This entails outlining the techniques that are now in use, con-
trasting their features, and proposing a taxonomy for the formalisms that have been pre-
sented. The article also encourages choosing a suitable modeling approach based on
user’s needs. Essentially, it sums up the current state of available methodologies, to
make comparisons and classify them on the basis of formalism. Also in this work there
is not a strong focus on the automatic generation of Attack Trees. Indeed, the focus is
only on the existing DAG-based graphical models. Because of this, we needed a tool that
produces Attack Trees automatically.
Sheyner et al. [11] uses Model Checking for the automatic construction of Attack Trees
or Graphs. The authors here depicts the network as a finite state machine. To auto-
matically produce the tree, the model checker NuSVM has been changed, creating  a
security property first. The property and the model M (the network) are the inputs for the
Model Checker, which returns true if the property is satisfied; otherwise, it gives a coun-
terexample. This counterexample shows a route an attacker could take to go against
the security property. The aim is creating Attack Trees for a broader range of features
in the future, apart from security properties. In this study, the network settings and the
attacker’s actions are represented as a set of booleans that express the model’s state as
state transitions. As a result, the state-space generated is exponential in proportion to
the system’s variable count. Attack Graphs with an emphasis on network-defined attacks
are employed in this work. Although the authors provide experiments and results, they
exclude the code and the scalability of their system.
Pinchinat et al. [12] introduced ATSyRA, which is a user-friendly Eclipse-based frame-
work that can help in designing Attack Trees. To secure military buildings, the security
expert must first define the system, including the description of the building, the strength
of the attacker, and the goal of their attack. The generation of the assault scenarios must
be run as the second phase. The input specification is assembled into an attack graph in
the current step. The security expert describes a set of high level actions as the third
phase (HLA). How it can be divided into smaller activities is implied by the HLA. The run
of the Attack Tree synthesis is the last step. The tree in this phase is constructed using
the data from Step 3 and the graph created in Step 2. A model checking algorithm is
the fundamental interface for achieving this. However, a negative aspect is that the work
omits discussing experiments, proofs, and scaling. Additionally, they claim that a fully au-
tomated process can produce results that are not sound. We point out that the solution
is not entirely automated. Indeed, the security analyst is actively participating in the pro-
cess. Consequently, a fully autonomous tool that produces sound results is becoming
more and more necessary.
Ibrahim et. al. [13] presents a method that comprises Hybrid Attack Graphs (HAG), which
show how an attacked system’s logical and actual parameter values can change, as well
as possible remedial measures. Automatically created HAGs can be seen using a Java-
6
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:15==
based tools. In order to complete this operation, the model of the system and the secu-
rity attribute must be formally described in the AADL language and verified by the JKind
model checker. This work provides evidence for how Automatic HAGs can influence the
parameters of the particular system being attacked. In order to create this graph starting
from some given information about an investigated system and a network, the authors
essentially propose a binary classification problem and a multi-output learning technique.
However, the work focuses on Hybrid Attack Graphs which have different characteristics
from Attack Trees.
David et. al. [14] describes a way for handling socio-technical systems and attacks using
timed automata and automated model checking. This type of systems is interrelated with
human behaviour. Also simulations and analysis are possible. Model checking is incor-
porated into this process so that we can identify assaults on the system under analysis.
Finally, a detailed example illustrating the use of this approach is given. Nevertheless,
the approach is only limited to attacks and system that handle human actions, while we
are interested in a more generic and inclusive approach.
We take these surveys as a starting point and, keeping them into account, we introduce
the work done in this thesis, which aims to contribute to the existing methods for the
automatic generation of Attack Trees. Figure 1.6 summarizes the related papers and
their main weaknesses, to better understand the motivation behind our work.
Figure 1.6: Related papers and weaknesses.
Automatization of Attack Trees
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:17==
2
Process mining
In this section, two concepts related to process mining are introduced, i.e. Process Trees
and event logs. Basically, they are needed to feed the involved process mining algorithm.
These elements make up the first transformation carried out by our tool. Understanding
the ideas presented in this section will enable one to fully comprehend chapters 4 and 5,
which discuss design and case studies taken under consideration for the thesis.
2.1
XES event logs
Defining the kind of event log required as input for this process is necessary before defin-
ing what Process Mining is. For this work we focused on logs in XES format. XES is the
successor of MXML (Mining eXtensible Markup Language), the former standard for stor-
ing and exchanging event logs [1]. Based on many practical experiences with MXML, the
XES format has been made less restrictive and truly extendible. In 2010 the format was
adopted by the IEEE Task Force on Process Mining and became the de facto exchange
format for process mining.
A XES document contains one log consisting of any number of traces. Each trace de-
scribes a sequential list of events corresponding to a particular case. The log, its traces,
and its events may have any number of attributes. Moreover, they may be nested. There
are five core types: String, Date, Int, Float, and Boolean. XES does not prescribe a fixed
set of mandatory attributes for each element: an event can have any number of attributes.
However, to provide semantics to such attributes, the log refers to so-called extensions.
An extension gives semantics to particular attributes. For example, the Time extension
can define a timestamp attribute of type xs:dateTime. A log declares the set of exten-
sions to be used. Each extension may define attributes that are considered to be standard
when the extension is used.
XES may declare particular attributes to be mandatory. For example, it can be speci-
fied that any trace should have a name or each event should include a timestamp. For
these reasons, a log holds two lists of global attributes: one for the traces and one for
the events. The example log in Figure 2.1 specifies two lists of global attributes. Traces
have one global attribute: attribute concept:name is mandatory for all traces. Events have
three global attributes: attributes time:timestamp, concept:name and org:resource are
mandatory for all events.
Automatization of Attack Trees
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.1: Example of a log in XES format.
A subset of the standard attributes defined by the aforementioned extensions is provided
in the list below:
• The concept extension defines the name attribute for traces and events. Note that
the example XES file in Figure 2.1 uses concept:name attributes for traces and
events. For traces, the attribute typically represents some identifier for the case,
while for events the attribute typically represents the activity name.
• The time extension defines the timestamp attribute for events. Since such a times-
tamp is of type xs:dateTime, both date and time are recorded.
• The life-cycle extension defines the transition attribute for events.
• The organizational extension defines three standard attributes for events: resource
(resource that triggered or executed the event), role and group (they characterize
the required capabilities of the resource and its position in the organization).
Moreover, XES logs are supported by a large variety of tools. Therefore, this type of file
serves as a view of the event data. The availability of high-quality event logs is essential
for process mining. Furthermore, good quality event logs can serve many other purposes.
High-quality logs that cannot be tampered with make sure that ’history cannot be rewritten
or obscured’, and serve as a solid basis for process improvement and auditing.
2.2
Introduction to process mining
The variety of notations available today for process modeling illustrates its relevance.
Some organizations may use only informal process models to structure discussions and
to document procedures. At the same time, others operating at a higher maturity level
may use models that can be analyzed and used to enact operational processes. Today,
10
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:19==
most process models are made by hand and are not based on a rigorous analysis of exist-
ing process data. There exists a multitude of problems that companies face when making
models by hand. Only experienced designers and analysts can create models that have
good predictive value and can be used as a starting point for implementation or redesign.
An inadequate model can lead to wrong conclusions. Therefore, it’s more appropriate
to use the event data. Process mining enables the extraction of models based on facts.
Moreover, it does not aim to create a single model of the process. Instead, it provides
several views of the same reality at various abstraction levels. This is useful also because
information systems are becoming more and more intertwined with the operational pro-
cesses they support. In addition, nowadays multitudes of events are recorded by today’s
information systems and stored as log files. A log can be seen on various levels, ranging
from the meta-level of stored information of the information system itself, to a less abstract
level of stored information about what occured in the analyzed device. Regardless of the
level we are looking at, the log keeps track of everything that happened in a system and,
most importantly, it contains contextual data that is beyond the control of the person who
performed the operations. Nevertheless, organizations have problems extracting value
from this data. The goal of Process Mining is to use event logs to extract process-related
information, e.g., to automatically discover a process model by observing events recorded
by an enterprise system. Process mining can be considered as the missing link between
data science and process science. The procedure starts from event data and then a pro-
cess model (representing the process collected in the log) is used in various ways. This is
a relative young research discipline that sits between machine learning and data mining
on the one hand, and process modeling and analysis on the other hand [1]. The idea is to
discover, monitor and improve real processes, i.e. not assumed processes, by extracting
knowledge from event logs available in today’s systems.The data recorded by the infor-
mation systems can be used to provide a better overview on the actual processes, e.g.
deviations can be analyzed and the quality of the models can be improved. Until recently,
the information in these event logs was rarely used to analyze the underlying processes.
Process Mining aims to improve this, by providing tools and techniques for discovering
process, control, information, organizational, and social structures from event logs. In
general, system logs can be used to conduct three types of process mining: process dis-
covery, conformance checking and process enhancement.
For the first type, a discovery technique takes an event log and produces a model without
using a-priori information. If the log contains information about resources, it can also be
possible to discover resource-related models, e.g., a social network showing how people
work together in a company.
The second type is conformance: in this case an existing process model is compared with
an event log of the same process. The conformance checking can be useful to check if the
reality, as recorded in the logs, is conform to the model and viceversa. This examination
will show us whether this rule is followed or not. Moreover, the conformance checking
can be helpful to find, locate and clarify deviations, and to measure their level of gravity.
The third type of Process Mining is enhancement. In this case we try to improve or extend
an existing process model, using information about the actual process recorded in some
logs. Whereas conformance checking measures the alignment between model and real-
ity, the latter tries to extend or change the a-priori model.
Figure 2.2 depicts how Process Mining states connections between the actual processes
and their data on the one hand, and process models on the other hand. The Figure refers
to the amount of events recorded by information systems as event log.
Automatization of Attack Trees
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.2: Positioning of the three main types of process mining: discovery, confor-
mance, and enhancement.
Focusing on the first process discovery type, i.e. discovery, we aim at mapping the data
collected in a XES event log into a so-called Process Tree that explains the behaviors
seen in the event log. Several process discovery algorithm exist, such as the Heuristic
Miner [15] and the Inductive Miner [16]. Based on the need and the characteristics of the
evaluated process, the discovery algorithm is selected and each produces different types
of process models.
2.3
Process trees
The vast majority of the most common graph-based process notations, e.g. UML activ-
ity diagrams or WF-nets, can be affected by livelocks, deadlocks, and other anomalies.
Models having undesirable properties independent of the event log are called unsound.
One does not need to look at the event log to see that an unsound model cannot well
describe the observed behavior. Process discovery approaches using any of the most
common graph-based process notations may produce unsound models. Indeed, the ma-
jority of models in the search space are likely to be unsound and this complicates the
discovery. C-nets solve this problem by using a more relaxed semantic. It is also possi-
ble to use block-structured models, which are sound by construction. Hereafter, Process
Trees (PTs) are introduced as a notation to represent such block-structured models. A
Process Tree is a hierarchical process model where the inner nodes are operators such
as sequence and choice, and the leaves are activities [1].
Process Trees are tailored towards process discovery. A range of inductive process dis-
covery techniques exists for Process Trees [16], [17]. These approaches benefit from the
fact that the representation ensures soundness. A key ingredient of this extremely flexi-
ble genetic process mining technique is that the search space is restricted only to sound
models.
12
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.3: Process tree →(a, ⟳(→(∧(×(b, c), d), e), f), ×(g, h)) showing the different
process tree operators.
Figure 2.3 shows a Process Tree modeling the handling of a request for compensation
within an airline. Inner nodes of the tree are operators, while leaves represent activi-
ties. There is one root node. The image also shows the four types of operators that are
admitted in process trees: × (exclusive choice), →(sequential composition), ∧(parallel
composition), and ⟳(redo loop).
The sequence operator executes the children sequentially. The activity a is the first child
node of the root in Figure 2.3. Since this is a sequence node, every process instance
starts with activity a followed by the subtree starting with the redo loop (⟳). After this sub-
tree in the middle, the execution goes on with the rightmost subtree. The latter subtree
models the exclusive choice (×) between g and h. The Process Tree in Figure 2.3 can
also be represented in a textual way:
→(a, ⟳(→(∧(×(b, c), d), e), f), ×(g, h))
(2.1)
The rightmost subtree modeling the choice between the two activies g and h is repre-
sented as ×(g,h). The redo loop ⟳(→(∧(×(b, c), d), e), f) starts with the leftmost child
and can loop back to whichever of its other children. In this PT, the loop back operation is
possible through the ’redo’ activity f. The leftmowst child ’do part’ is →(∧(×(b, c), d), e),
namely a sequence that ends with activity e which is preceded by the subtree ∧(×(b, c), d
where d is executed in parallel with a choice between the two activities b and c. Finally,
subtree ∧(×(b, c), d) has four possible behaviors: ⟨b, d⟩, ⟨c, d⟩, ⟨d, b⟩, ⟨d, c⟩.
It can happen to find the same activity multiple times in a Process Tree, e.g. the tree
→(b, b, b) handles a sequence of three identical activities. If we analyze ∧(b, b, b) and
→(b, b, b), the behaviors are indistinguishable: they have both one only trace that is pos-
sible, namely ⟨b, b, b⟩.
τ is the so-called silent activity and is not observable, e.g. the Process Tree ×(a, τ) can
model an activity a that is skippable. Another example is (τ, a), which can model a pro-
cess that executes a any number of times. The ’do’ part is silent, and a is in the ’redo’
Automatization of Attack Trees
13
==PAGE:22==
part. Moreover, it is possible not to execute a. Process tree (a, τ) can model a process
which executes a at least once. The part of ’redo’ is silent: the process can loop back
withouth executing activities. The smallest Process Tree is composed by just one activity.
If that is the case, the root is also a leaf and there are no operator nodes.
Figure 2.4: Mapping process trees onto WF-nets
In addition, Process Trees allow the conversion in WF-nets (Petri nets) as shown in Fig-
ure 2.4. The silent activity τ can be mapped into the transition having the τ as label. The
sequential composition →, the exclusive choice × and the parallel composition ∧can be
converted in a straight way. In the parallel composition, the τ is used to model the start
and the end, to preserve the WF-net structure. The ⟳(redo loop) has one ’do’ part (ac-
tivity a in Figure 2.4) and one or more ’redo’ parts (activities b until z). In the Petri net, the
direction of the arcs indicates the difference in semantics between ’do’ and ’redo’ parts.
The τ is useful to model the entry and exit of a redo loop. This mapping (Figure 2.4) can
be used in a recursive way to turn any kind of process tree into a sound WF network.
Moreover, the mapping can also be tailored for other types of representation as YAWL,
BPML, UML diagrams, and so on. Due to the structured nature of Process Trees, the
conversion to other notations is fairly linear.
2.3.1
Inductive Miner
The discovery algorithm that we chose to use in this work is called Inductive Miner (IM)
[18]. The IM ensures the rediscoverability of the processes and uses a divide-and-conquer
approach. The basic idea is about detecting a ’cut’ in the log, e.g. sequential cut, parallel
cut, concurrent cut or loop cut, and then recur on sublogs, which were found applying
the cut, until a base case is found. Basically, the algorithm decomposes the event log
in smaller sublogs, in order to construct a Process Tree. The Inductive Miner ensures
that it can re-discover the process model from an event log, since it relies on the directly
follows relation between all pair of activities in the event log [1]. The Directly-Follows
14
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:23==
variant avoids the recursion on the sublogs but uses the Directly Follows graph. Inductive
Miner models usually make extensive use of hidden transitions, especially for skipping
or looping on a portion on the model. Furthermore, each visible transition has a unique
label: there are no transitions in the model that share the same label. The IM algorithm
returns a Process Tree, and for this reason we decided to consider it as a valid solution to
derive the final Attack Tree at the end of the whole process. The results returned by these
techniques can easily be converted to other notations, ranging from Petri nets and BPMN
models to process calculi and statecharts. Inductive mining is currently one of the leading
process discovery approaches due to its flexibility, formal guarantees and scalability.
Figure 2.5: WF-net (Petri net) N1 (left) and process tree Q1 (right) discovered for L1 =

⟨a, b, c, d⟩3, ⟨a, b, c, d⟩2, ⟨a, e, d⟩

To be clearer, we take as an example the event log L ∈B(A*). This represents a multi-
set of traces over some set of activities A. Our aim is the discovery of a Process Tree
Q ∈lA. Consider the following event log L1 =

⟨a, b, c, d⟩3, ⟨a, b, c, d⟩2, ⟨a, e, d⟩

consisting
of 6 cases and 23 events. The α-algorithm creates the WF-net N1 = α(L1) shown in
Figure 2.5 (left-hand side). The basic Inductive Miner (IM) will produce the equivalent
Process Tree Q1 = IM(L1) →(a, x(∧(b, c), e), d) also shown in Figure 2.5 (right-hand
side). The Process Tree can be automatically converted into the WF-net produced by the
α-algorithm using the conversion shown in Figure 2.4, followed by a reduction removing
superfluous silent transitions. Any Process Tree can be converted into an equivalent WF-
net, BPMN model, etc. Moreover, the basic Inductive Miner (IM) can discover a much
wider class of processes and learn “correct” process models in situations where the α-
algorithm and many others fail. For clarity we assume that there are no duplicate or silent
activities, i.e., in the Process Trees used to generate the example log we will not find two
leaves with the same activity label and leaves with a τ label (silent activity).
Given that we just described what a Process Tree is, we can see below in what Attack
Trees consist. By doing so, the translation process between these two types of graphs
can be better understood.
Automatization of Attack Trees
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:25==
3
Attack trees
This chapter introduces the concept of Attack Tree, compares it with Attack-Defense Tree,
and describes the RisQFLan security framework employed in the last part of the thesis.
By understanding these concepts, one can understand the final transformations that our
tool performs. Chapters 4 and 5, which are about design and analyzed case studies, will
make use of the notions introduced in this Section.
3.1
The definition
The term Attack Tree was first introduced by Schneier in [2]. ATs form a convenient mean
to systematically categorize the different ways in which a system can be attacked. An
Attack Tree is a graphical tree-structured representation of the system’s security showing
possible attacks. The main idea is to decompose a given task into smaller ones, making
easier to describe and quantify different metrics. Since Schneier introduced Attack Trees,
multiple approaches and formal semantics have been proposed in the literature. This
thesis will focus primarily on [3], since it presents the structure and foundations of this
tree in a formalized form, based on Schneier’s model.
The purpose of an Attack Tree is to determine and examine all the possible attacks against
a system in a structured way. This specific structure is expressed in the hierarchy of the
nodes that compose the tree, allowing the decomposition of an attack goal into a certain
number of concrete attacks or sub-goals. This structure brings us information about the
interpretation and grouping of attacks. Attack trees provide us with an easy way to define
a collection of possible attacks. They can also be called attack suite. These attacks
consist in components required to perform the attack. A certain component may occur
more than once, so an attack can be seen as a multi-set of attack components. As a
result, an attack is considered to be at the lowest level of abstraction, and it does not
have an internal structure. A simple example of Attack Tree is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: An attack tree representing stealing money from someone’s bank account.
In Attack Trees the nodes represent attacks, while the root is the global goal of the at-
tacker. Children of a node are refinements of this goal, and therefore leafs represent
attacks that can no longer be refined. The structure of the tree highlights the vulnerabil-
ities of the system and helps developers and analysts to focus on weak spots, so that
countermeasures may be implemented. With Attack Trees one can form multiple attacks
derived from physical, technical or human vulnerabilities. A refinement in the tree can be
Automatization of Attack Trees
17
==PAGE:26==
conjunctive (aggregation) or disjunctive (choice). If the arc connection of two components
is a conjuntive refinement, then all sub-goals have to be fullfilled, and the node is called
an AND node. On the other hand, disjuntive ones express that satisfying one sub-goal is
enough to achieve the parent goal, and these nodes are called OR nodes [3]. In addition,
another considered refinement is SEQUENTIAL-AND (SAND), in which all the subgoals
must be fulfilled to reach the parent goal, but with the additional constraint that the sub-
goals must be carried out in a given order [19].
As an example, we can observe in Figure 3.1 that the root node represents the main goal
of the attack, i.e. to steal money from a bank account. The attacker’s aim is disjunctively
refined into two alternative sub-attacks, namely the attacker may try to get money from an
automated teller machine (ATM), or he might attempt to hack the online bank account sys-
tem. The sub-goal that explores getting money at an ATM is further conjunctively refined
into two complementary activities: the attacker must steal the credit card of the victim
and he also needs to obtain the PIN code by shoulder-surfing. Note that a conjunctive
refinement is denoted graphically with an arc spanning the child nodes.
Once the possible attacks on a system have been modeled in the Attack Tree, this graph
can be used to analyze attributes about system’s security. Schneier [2] suggests several
such attributes, assigning values on the leaf nodes in order to make calculations about
the security of a goal. Some examples could be about the (im)possibility, the cost, and
whether special tools are needed. As soon as all the leaf nodes have a value, these
amounts are propagated to the root of the tree. The OR value of a node is Possible if
one of the sub-goals is Possible. On the other hand, an AND value of a node is Possible
if all its sub-nodes are also Possible. In addition, Attack Trees offer the opportunity to
calculate different metrics associated with a specific attack. To accomplish this, some
attributes can be added to the tree. These attributes could also be used for quantitative
analysis on the tree [20].
For the scope of this thesis, the introduction of the concepts formally introduced by Schneier
was necessary. Understanding these definitions is a prerequisite for introducing our tool.
3.2
Quantitative security framework
Quantitative modeling and analysis approaches are essential to support software and
system engineering in scenarios where qualitative approaches are inappropriate or un-
feasible, for example due to complexity or uncertainty. Automated approaches to support
quantitative modeling and analysis have been widely developed during the last years,
including both generic and domain-specific approaches (cf., e.g., [21]). QFLan [22] is
an example of successful domain-specific approach to support quantitative modeling and
analysis of configurable systems, like software product lines. It combines various well-
known rigorous notions and methods in an Eclipse-based domain-specific tool framework.
It consists of a domain-specific language (DSL) tailored for configurable systems, and an
analysis engine based on statistical model checking (SMC) [23] [24]. In the next subsec-
tion, we will introduce a new framework that can support quantitative security risk modeling
and analysis based on attack-defense diagrams, which originates from QFLan.
3.2.1
RisQFLan
In the present thesis, we used a novel tool, called RisQFLan [25], which is a framework
that can support graph-based quantitative security risk modeling and analysis. To be
precise, by combining distinctive characteristics of existing formalisms, this tool allows one
to build rich models for risk modeling and analysis. The DSL of RisQFLan was designed
to include the most significant features of existing formalisms based on Attack Trees. In
this way it is possible to combine them in the same model. Moreover, this framework
allows one to fine tune security scenarios by defining explicit attack behavior, implicitly
18
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:27==
constrained by an attack-defense diagram. Explicit attack behavior enables the analyses
of specific attacker types, like script kiddies, insiders, and hackers. The benefit of this
is that we are able to identify vulnerabilities for attacker types that are most appropriate
for the security situation at hand. Furthermore, this enables novel types of analysis that
complement the classic best- and worst-case evaluations of attack graphs. The attack
behavior is modeled as rated transition systems, whose transitions are labeled with the
action being executed and a rate (used to compute the probability of executing the action),
and possibly with effects (updates of variables) and guards (conditions on the action’s
executability).
Figure 3.2: The RisQFLan tool.
The tool’s architecture is organized in two layers: the Graphical User Interface (GUI),
devoted to modeling, and the CORE layer, used for the analysis. Both layers are wrapped
in an Eclipse-based tool embedding the third-party statistical analyzer, as we can see in
Figure 3.2.
Automatization of Attack Trees
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.3: The RisQFLan architecture [25].
In Figure 3.3 the RisQFLan architecture is shown [25]. Here the various elements of the
framework are depicted. Circles in red represent the probabilistic simulator and SMC: they
interact to estimate the models’ properties in a statistical way. RisQFLan also enables one
to specify a probabilistic attacker behavior. This allows one to make specific analyses on
certain typologies of attacker. The option that permits the specification of different attacker
types can help to evaluate the vulnerabilities of a system and allocate the right assets
needed to protect it. In this framework, transitions are labeled with the executed actions,
and the rates represent the probability computation of completing one action. Besides,
RisQFLan supports quantitative constraints to permit the imposition of limitations on the
attacker’s behavior by setting a total cost that he can spend during the offense. All the
attack attempts will cost the attacker even if he fails. Until the total cost is not reached,
he can keep trying to perform the attack. If the attacker run out of resources, he cannot
start any further attacks on the system. These quantitative constraints allow the testing
of a system against different types of attackers with various kind of assets. The next
subsection will introduce a straightforward visual language to describe an attack scenario
that RisQFLan employs, i.e. Attack-Defense Trees.
3.3
Attack-defense trees
We already introduced in Section 3.1 the notion of Attack Trees (AT). They have been
introduced by Schneier in 1999 and have been used for many years to analyze potential
attack scenarios. A limitation derived from the Attack Trees is that they cannot depict pos-
sible countermeasures that someone could take in order to contrast attacks. Taking this
limitation into account, Kordy et al. [26] proposed a variation of Attack Trees, i.e. Attack
Defense Trees (ADT), which also take into account defense mechanisms in the attack
context. Indeed, Kordy extended the Attack Tree proposed in [3]. Similar to ATs, Attack-
Defense Trees include refinements and countermeasures. Each node can be refined into
various sub-goals, and they can also have one child of the opposite type. Child nodes
are conditions that must be fulfilled to achieve the goal of the parent. Leaves represent
atomic steps that the attacker must take, that cannot be refined. What is different from
the Attack Tree model is that the goals of the actors involved can be countered by goals
of the adversary, which themselves can be countered again, and so on. Attack–Defense
Trees [26] are one of the most well-studied extensions of Attack Trees, and every year
20
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:29==
many new methods are developed for their analysis. They can enhance ATs with nodes
labeled with the goals of the defender, enabling the modeling of interactions between two
competing actors. Attack-Defense Trees have been used to evaluate the security of real-
life systems, like ATMs, cyber-physical systems and RFID managed warehouses. The
theoretical developments as well as the practical studies showed that Attack–Defense
Trees give us a good method for the security evaluation, but they also highlighted room
for improvements.
Both types of tree constitute a popular family of graph-based security models, for which
several approaches have been developed over the last years, e.g., [20].Their goal is to
provide scalable and usable methods for specifying vulnerabilities and countermeasures,
their interplay and their key attributes such as cost and effectiveness. Thus, Attack Trees
(and Attack-Defense Trees) provide a basis for quantitative risk assessment. In this way,
it can be determined whether the defensive assets are sufficient to protect a system or
whether they must be allocated differently. In Figure 3.4 a refined version for Attack De-
fense Trees is depicted. This type of ADT includes different nodes that dictate various
relations between parent and child nodes. The tree includes AND nodes, in which all the
sub-nodes or leaves need to be activated, i.e., the attacker has completed all the sub-
attacks. It also includes OR nodes that can be activated when at least one sub-attack
needs to be completed by the attacker. This version of tree also includes defense nodes,
such as countermeasure and defense nodes. The former are reactive defenses so that,
whenever an attack is detected, the countermeasure is activated. On the other hand,
defense nodes are always active on the vulnerability that the attacker wants to exploit.
RisQFLan offers also the possibility to model Attack-Defense Trees, and it can handle both
defense and countermeasure nodes. Furthermore, the refined version of ADT employed
in RisQFLan includes other two types of nodes, namely Ordered-AND and K-Out-of-N
nodes. For the former, the attack on the sub-goals should be completed in a particular
order to achieve the parent node. On the other hand, for the latter, it is enough for the
attacker to complete K out of N sub-goals to activate the parent node.
Figure 3.4: Refined Attack Defense Tree.
For the sake of clarity, we take as starting point the Attack Tree about the bank theft of
money, previously introduced in Figure 3.1, turning it into the Attack Defense Tree de-
picted in Figure 3.5. Note that now also defense nodes appear in the graph. In this tree,
the proponent is the attacker and the opponent is the defender. According to the At-
tack–Defense Trees convention that we just introduced, nodes that represent goals of an
attacker are depicted using red circles, while those about the defender using green rect-
angles. Every countermeasure is attached to nodes they should counter via dotted edges.
One way to protect against a PIN shouldersurf could be to memorize it, while hacking an
online bank account could be prevented by using a second authentication factor. This
defense node is refined into two distinct sub-nodes that represent two concrete defenses,
Automatization of Attack Trees
21
==PAGE:30==
i.e., key fobs or PIN pad.
Figure 3.5: An Attack Defense tree representing stealing money from someone’s bank
account.
The growing variety of methods for quantitative analysis of Attack–Defense Trees pro-
vides security experts with various tools for determining the most dangerous attacks and
the best ways of securing the system against those threats. Indeed, AD diagrams are a
useful tool for modeling and reasoning on contexts about security risks. Standard anal-
yses conducted on Attack-Defense diagrams are usually about the feasibility of attacks,
their likelihood or their cost. Techniques of analysis are often based on constraint solv-
ing, optimization and statistical techniques. Attack Trees (and Attack-Defense Trees) are
broadly used in various domains like, e.g., defense or aerospace.
For the scope of this thesis we will focus only on Attack Trees, also with respect to the
use of the RisQFLan tool, but future works could also include Attack-Defense Trees or
any other kind of attack diagram that includes countermeasures.
22
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:31==
4
The tool: from event logs to attack tree
4.1
Design
The main goal of this section is to explain the design of the created tool, which is composed
by several transformations, starting with an event log and leading to an Attack Tree. All
the translations were depicted also in the introduction section in Figure 1.4, and each will
be explained more in depth hereinafter. Subsequently, an example concerning a ’dummy’
log generation is provided.
4.1.1
Labeled logs
Figure 4.1: Transformations overview: system’s event logs.
To begin with, we need an event log related to a specific system as initial input to the tool.
An event log is a time-stamped record of a system’s actions, recorded into a file on the
system itself [1]. The admin can use this file to monitor how users and programs behave
within the system. The capacity to reconstruct previous processes makes these records
very noteworthy. They supply us with wealth information, but they also provide additional
data that is recorded automatically and independently from the individual who performed
the action. This is what makes them such a valuable and powerful resource. In our tool,
the Process Mining algorithm is fed with these logs, to obtain a Process Tree related to
the analyzed system, as we will see later in this chapter. It is also possible to generate
some ’dummy’ event logs as an alternative input for the tool. To make the Process Mining
technique work properly, the system’s log must include the following information:
• A case ID that identifies a sequence of simulated attacks.
• An activity name that indicates which action has been executed in each event. To
be more precise, we need labeled event logs in order to fill this field.
• A timestamp that identifies the time and date of the performed activities.
• (Optional) Information/content: includes a label about the specific atomic activity.
If real system’s event logs are available, the preliminary part about the creation of ’dummy’
logs can be skipped. The generation can be done using a Python library, as further intro-
duced in the next section.
Automatization of Attack Trees
23
==PAGE:32==
4.1.2
Dummy logs generation
In case we do not have real event logs, we can generate some fake ones by creating a
Pandas Dataframe containing the following information: ID, activity name (i.e. the label),
and timestamp. These are the most essential details that must be present in any event
log, regardless of whether they are generated or not, as we previously stated. An in-depth
description of the code for the generation can be found in the ’dummy’ example at the end
of this chapter.
Figure 4.2: Transformations overview: dummy log generation.
Afterwards, we need to convert the obtained Dataframe, exporting it as event log object
in XES format. To do this, the Python package PM4PY comes in handy. It uses the most
recent, effective, and thoroughly examined Process Mining techniques. The PM4PY func-
tion format_ dataframe can be used to accomplish this. Then, the converter can trans-
form the Dataframe by default into an Event Log object. The ’dummy’ example section
that follows will provide a thorough explanation of the code. Now, as a finishing part, the
write_xes function can be used to convert the log into a XES file. In this approach, the
event log is exported to an external file with the right format, so that the Process Mining
algorithm can use it as input data.
4.1.3
Opensource Fixedpoint Model Checker tool
The automated analysis of security protocols is a field that stands between formal meth-
ods and IT security, and it has been intensively studied during the last two decades. We
introduce now the Open-source Fixed-point Model Checker OFMC [27] for symbolic se-
curity protocol analysis. OFMC performs both falsification of protocols, namely detection
of attacks, and session verification by exploring the transition system resulting from an
IF specification. OFMC’s effectiveness is due to the integration of a various symbolic,
constraint-based techniques that are proper and terminating. This tool also permits the
analysis of security protocols with respect to an algebraic theory of the employed crypto-
graphic operators, which can be specified as part of the input [28].
The native input language of this tool is the AVISPA Intermediate Format IF [29], [30].
It describes a security protocol as an infinite-state transition system using set-rewriting.
However, for the purpose of this thesis we will use AnB, another language that is sup-
ported by OFMC. AnB specifications are automatically translated to IF and this translation
defines a formal semantics for AnB in terms of IF. This language consists in an Alice-and-
Bob-style language that describes how messages are exchanged between honest agents
acting in the different protocol roles. Its purpose is to extend previous similar languages
24
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:33==
supporting algebraic properties of cryptographic operators, with a simple notation for dif-
ferent kinds of channels that can be used as assumptions and as protocol goals. With
AnB, channels can be specified as assumptions (when the protocol is based on channels
with specific properties for the transmission of some of its messages) and as goals (when
a protocol should establish some kind of channel). This novel language can provide sup-
port for protocols that require algebraic properties for the protocol execution, and it can
also provide a notion of the different communication channels that can be used to achieve
a protocol’s goals and assumptions [28].
Figure 4.3: Transformations overview: OFMC attack trace conversion into logs.
Proceeding with the description of the design, we can obtain an attack trace involving one
or more attacks against a specific protocol after passing that protocol as an input to the
OFMC tool. Then, using the Pandas package from Python, we can translate the acquired
trace and produce a Dataframe of logs from it. Afterwards, the Dataframe can be exported
as a XES log file for Process Mining. As we outlined before, the specific columns of data
required in the log are:
• IDs: an identification number of a single activity in the logs, to distinguish it from
other events.
• Timestamps of activities: all events have a date and time associated. This is useful
when analyzing performance related properties, e.g., the waiting time between two
activities. If an event log contains timestamps, then the ordering in a trace should
respect these timestamps, i.e. they should be nondescending in the event log.
• Activity description: this field includes the label that describes what this line of log is
about, together with the content of the message exchanged between the two parties.
The content of the message is useful to understand why the weak authentication
attack is happening and what the intruder is doing. In this specific case, the intruder
is faking his real identity: he claims to be x29 with the server, but to the receiver
x401 he declarates to be x27. Here the authentication is broken.
• Information/content: this column contains the label to describe the single atomic
activity.
To isolate these information, a translation script was written so that the Pandas Dataframe
could be generated. The specific script is depicted and analyzed in the next section con-
Automatization of Attack Trees
25
==PAGE:34==
cerning the ’dummy’ log generation example. This is suitable to convert any kind of attack
trace generated by the OFMC tool, even the most complex ones.
4.1.4
From labeled event logs to process tree
Continuing, now the Process Mining technique can be applied on our event logs. It is
not important if the logs come from an actual system, an OFCM attack trace, or they are
generated. We already discussed process mining and process trees in chapter 2, to pro-
vide some background information for this portion of the design. Process mining tools can
be used to refine the analysis, e.g., by applying filters that help focus on specific proper-
ties. This can help identify undesirable behavior in the discovered process model. The
Process Tree of the examined system is obtained from the event log as a consequence
of Process Mining. This conversion allows process discovery using the Inductive Miner
algorithm. Indeed, the Inductive Miner aims at deriving a Process Tree which represent
the behaviour listed in the event log.
Figure 4.4: Transformations overview: from event logs to Process Tree through Process
Mining.
Using the same Python library mentioned before, i.e. PM4PY, we can apply Process
Mining to our event logs. An implementation of the Inductive Miner algorithm is provided in
this package. Petri Net and Process Tree are the two process models that can be derived
utilizing the IM. To do this, a log is read, the Inductive Miner is applied, and a Process
Tree (or a Petri Net) along with the initial and final marking are found. The ’dummy’ log
generation example in the following section will go more into detail about this process.
4.1.5
From process tree to attack tree
The next goal is the conversion of the obtained Process Tree into the related Attack Tree.
Also the vice-versa is possible, but for the scope of this thesis we are interested just in
the translation process from PT to AT. In chapter 3 we introduced the notions of Attack
Tree and Attack-Defense Tree, to better understand the part of the tool that performs this
translation. Now we introduce the characteristics of the Process Tree that is mapped into
an Attack Tree. Next in this section we also describe the translation rules for the two
languages involved in this process [31].
As already mentioned, Process Trees belong to the family of process models. A process
model describes the flow of executed activities to accomplish a certain goal. The goal of
a process model is to describe activities and relationships, and their execution order[1].
In a Process Tree, internal vertices are relations, and leaves represent activities. On the
other hand Attack Trees, by definition, are composed by a main goal (the root node),
26
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:35==
subgoals (intermediate nodes), and actions (leaves). The main goal is decomposed into
subgoals. Each attack consists of components required to perform the attack itself. The
main difference between these languages is that a Process Tree does not directly model
the goal, since it is the objective of the model representation itself, while an Attack Tree
directly models activities and goals. For the purpose of the translation, we consider the
last activity to be executed in the Process tree as the root node of the Attack Tree, i.e.
the goal. This is done in order to achieve the attack goal. Firstly, we need to execute
the list of activities required and, at the end, we reach the final node. Therefore, the
root node in the Attack Tree is replaced with the sequence operator in the Process Tree.
Note that the notion of observable and non-observable actions is presented in [31]. This
definition is needed since the concept of goal is not embedded in the Process Tree. This
diversification is useful because ATs have a goal-oriented and self-explainable structure,
while PTs require that each activity node is observable in the event log. For this reason,
we distinguish between:
• Observable action: individual action collected by an information system that can
contribute to the achievement of the goal. It can be perceived as an atomic event.
• Non-observable action: goal which cannot be directly mapped to an execution of an
activity. It can be viewed as a concept.
A non-observable action will be skipped in the Process Tree. As introduced in chap-
ter 3, Attack Trees also involve the conjunction (AND) and disjunction (OR) operators,
while Process Trees define four sequential operators (sequential, exclusive choice, par-
allel composition and redo loop), as described in chapter 2. In order to translate a Process
Tree into an Attack Tree, the latter must be able to represent the operators of the former.
While the conjunction operator (AND) already finds a definition in the Process Tree, that
is the parallel operator, the disjunction (OR) must be defined. In a Process Tree, the
OR operator is a node whose child-nodes can all be executed, or only partially, and the
execution order does not matter. Eventually, some operators from the Process Tree are
discarded because a correspondence in the Attack Tree is not found, e.g. the redo loop,
because for definition Attack Trees are directed acyclic graphs.
Once the translation rules are applied on the Process Tree, the related Attack Tree is
generated. The resulting tree is in XML format, but for the scope of this thesis another
translation is performed as the last step of the overall process.
Figure 4.5: Transformations overview: Process Tree to Attack Tree.
Automatization of Attack Trees
27
==PAGE:36==
Hereinafter, the translation rules from Process Tree to Attack Tree are presented. Note
that in this thesis we are interested only in the transformation of a Process Tree into an
Attack Tree, and not vice-versa, although the reversed process is also possible [31]. We
start analyzing each operator concerning Process Trees.
Figure 4.6 involves the sequence operator that is used to define the parent-child relation-
ship and the rightmost child in a PT: this will become the root node in the AT. Indeed,
activities in the Process Tree are executed to reach a final goal, namely the last action,
which is the root note in the Attack Tree. The procedure for 4.6 consists in the copy of T1
to all the leaves of T2.
Figure 4.6: From Process Tree to Attack Tree: sequence operator.
For what concerns the AND operator, the translation is done by keeping the same child
nodes involved in the process but the relation becomes a conjunction, and the root turns
into a non-observable action. The procedure is similar for the OR operator, because it is
translated into the disjunction between the same children. These two processes can be
viewed in Figure 4.7 and Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.7: From Process Tree to Attack Tree: AND operator.
Figure 4.8: From Process Tree to Attack Tree: OR operator.
To further explain the rules of translation, now we provide an example. In Figure 4.9 the
Process Tree contains the sequence operator as root, and the exclusive choice (OR) in
the rightmost child. Following the rules, the rightmost child of the sequence operator is
translated in root (in this case there are two nodes), and both of them have as child the
left part of the sequential composition in the Process Tree. The same case occurs when
the Process Tree is composed by the sequence operator and the inclusive choice (AND),
but the latter is translated into a conjunction in the Attack Tree.
28
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.9: Complete example of translation from PT to AT.
4.1.6
Conversion of the attack tree for RisQFLan
To better understand the last part of the tool, an introduction to the RisQFLan tool was
provided in chapter 3. This portion of work entails converting the obtained XML Attack
Tree into a format compatible with the RisQFLan framework, while maintaining the same
version of the tree. This operation allows one to exploit a programming-like environment
that is attractive to software developers, and that integrates at the same time a graphical
component which make it more appealing for security experts.
In RisQFLan’s Domain Specific Language (DSL), nodes are defined in specific blocks as
we can see in listing 4.1. Moreover, it is also possible to define defense and countermea-
sures nodes. This is feasible since the framework also considers Attack-Defense Trees,
but for the scope of this thesis we will focus only on Attack Trees. The operators OR,
AND and OAND (ordered AND) are offered. AND and OR refinements originate from the
seminal works on Attack Trees [2]. OAND refinements stem from enhanced and improved
Attack Trees [32] and are used to model ordered attacks: sub-nodes can be activated in
any order but only the correct one activates the parent node. Essentially, square brackets
of OAND in listing 4.2 indicate that order matters: Node1 requires Node2 and Node3 in
that order.
1
begin attack nodes
2
Node1 Node2
3
Node3 Node4
4
Node5 Node6 Node7
5
end attack nodes
Listing 4.1: Example of attack nodes in the RisQFLan framework.
1
begin attack diagram
2
Node1 -OAND-> {Node2, Node3}
3
Node2 -AND-> {Node4, Node5}
4
Node3 -OR-> {Node6, Node7}
5
end attack diagram
Listing 4.2: Example of attack diagram in the RisQFLan framework.
With the completed procedure, we are able to fully automate the process and produce
the examined system’s Attack Tree in two different formats, based on the analyzed event
logs.
4.2
A dummy example
In this section a straightforward example is provided, to better explain the general proce-
dure. Although we could have used some real event logs, in this instance we decided to
show the dummy log generation for the sake of simplicity. We start by creating a Pandas
Automatization of Attack Trees
29
==PAGE:38==
Dataframe containing ID, activity name and timestamp. An example of dummy log gen-
eration procedure is shown in listing 4.3. Figure 4.10 refers to the resulting Dataframe of
logs.
1
data = [['0', datetime.now(), "4624 - An account was successfully logged on"],
['0', datetime.now()+timedelta(minutes=1),
2
"4625 - An account failed to log on"], ['0', datetime.now()+timedelta(
minutes=2), "4626 - User/Device claims information"], ['0', datetime.
now()+timedelta(minutes=3), "4627 - Group membership information."],
3
['0', datetime.now()+timedelta(minutes=4), "4634 - An account was logged
off"], ['1', datetime.now(), "Eavesdropping"], ['1', datetime.now(), "
Malware"], ['1', datetime.now(), "Exploit IoT vulnerabilities"],
4
['1', datetime.now()+timedelta(minutes=1), "Take control of IoT device"],
['1', datetime.now()+timedelta(minutes=2), "Conduce DDoS on multiple
targets"],
5
['2', datetime.now(), "Malware"], ['2', datetime.now(), "Eavesdropping"],
['2', datetime.now(), "Exploit IoT vulnerabilities"],
6
['2', datetime.now()+timedelta(minutes=1), "Take control of IoT device"],
['2', datetime.now()+timedelta(minutes=2), "Conduce DDoS on multiple
targets"],
7
['3', datetime.now(), "Exploit IoT vulnerabilities"], ['3', datetime.now()
, "Malware"], ['3', datetime.now(), "Eavesdropping"],
8
['3', datetime.now()+timedelta(minutes=1), "Take control of IoT device"],
['3', datetime.now()+timedelta(minutes=2), "Conduce DDoS on multiple
targets"]]
9
10
df = pd.DataFrame(data, columns=['case:concept:name', 'time:timestamp', '
concept:name'])
Listing 4.3: Creation of a Pandas Dataframe for the generation of a dummy event log.
Figure 4.10: Example of generated Pandas Dataframe containing log instances.
As stated before in the design section, the next step is the conversion of the Pandas
Dataframe into an event log object. Our goal is to convert the DataFrame into a XES file.
30
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:39==
To do this, we can use PM4PY [33], which is a Process Mining package for Python. It
implements the latest, most useful, and extensively tested methods of Process Mining.
The code in listing 4.4 shows how to convert the obtained Pandas Dataframe into the
PM4PY internal event data object type. To do this, we refer to the format_dataframe
function available in PM4PY. By default, the converter transform the Dataframe into an
Event Log object. In this example, we observe three columns: case:concept:name for
the ID, concept:name for the name of the current activity, and time:timestamp for the
timestamp. The event log is then exported into an external XES file, so that it can be
used as input data for the Process Mining algorithm. Exporting an Event Log object to a
XES file is fairly straightforward with PM4PY. The last line of code in listing 4.4 depicts
this functionality. The event_log is assumed to be an Event Log object. The exporter
also accepts an Event Stream or DataFrame object as input. As a final step, the log can
be exported as XES file using the write_xes PM4PY function.
1
event_log = pm4py.format_dataframe(df, case_id='case:concept:name',
activity_key='concept:name', timestamp_key='time:timestamp')
2
3
# export log in .xes file
4
pm4py.write_xes(event_log , 'xesTest.xes')
Listing 4.4: Conversion of a Dataframe in an Event Log and exportation in .xes format.
In addition, PM4PY uses the Pandas library to enable the conversion of an event log into
a CSV file. Hence, a XES event log may be first transformed into a Pandas DataFrame
with the function convert_to_dataframe, and then the translation into CSV can be done
with the to_csv function from Pandas. Also the vice-versa is possible: CSV event logs
can be easily read through Pandas functions, and then a XES log can be obtained using
convert_to_event_log from PM4PY.
Now we can apply the Process Mining algorithm on the dummy logs that we just gener-
ated. We run the experiments to test our methodology using PM4PY. In this library an
implementation of the Inductive Miner is offered. Two process models can be derived
using the IM: Petri Net and Process Tree. To mine a Process Tree, as shown below in
Listing 4.5, a log is read, the Inductive Miner is applied and the PT along with the initial
and the final marking are found. The same reasoning may be applied to find a Petri Net
as an alternative. In this case the ’dummy’ log xesTest.xes is taken as input. Firstly,
the log is read and then the IM algorithm is applied. As we said, besides the Process
Tree, the provided code can also be used to obtain a Petri Net. The last two lines of code
are responsible for the PT visualization. The resulting tree is shown in Figure 4.11. If
necessary, it is also possible to convert a Process Tree into a Petri Net.
1
# A log is read, IM is applied and the Petri net with the initial and the
final marking are found
2
log = pm4py.read_xes(os.path.join("xesTest.xes"))
3
net, initial_marking , final_marking = pm4py.discover_petri_net_inductive(log)
4
5
# Visualization PT
6
tree = pm4py.discover_process_tree_inductive(log)
7
pm4py.view_process_tree(tree)
Listing 4.5: Use of Inductive Miner on the dummy event logs to generate a Process Tree
Automatization of Attack Trees
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.11: Process Tree generated by using the implementation of the Inductive Miner
on dummy event logs.
Now it is possible to follow the procedure presented before, to transform the obtained
Process Tree into an Attack Tree. In the previous section we outlined the main character-
istics and translation rules about the PT that is mapped into the final AT. As a result from
the application of the translation rules, we get an Attack Tree generated from the ’dummy’
logs. Figure 4.12 depicts the result of the translation process. Note that the sequence
operator is used to transform the relationship into a parent-child one. Finally, the AND
operator becomes the conjunction one, while the root is now the silent activity τ.
Figure 4.12: Resulting AT starting from generated dummy logs and passing through the
PT shown in section 4.2
The tool’s last component is a translation script designed to convert the obtained XML At-
tack Tree into the same one but in bbt format, which is suitable for the RisQFLan security
framework described in chapter 3. This is accomplished by using the rules of semantics
that were just discussed. The attack nodes are defined, together with the relationships
between them. What we obtain is a txt file containing the RisQFLan code. As a final
step, the conversion into a bbt file can be done. The code depicted in Listing 4.6 can be
passed to RisQFLan as input, so that the Attack Tree can be viewed in this framework as
well.
1
begin model AttackTree
2
3
begin attack nodes
4
tau
32
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:41==
5
ConduceDDoSonmultipletargets
6
TakecontrolofIoTdevice
7
ExploitIoTvulnerabilities
8
Eavesdropping
9
end attack nodes
10
11
begin attack diagram
12
ConduceDDoSonmultipletargets -> {TakecontrolofIoTdevice}
13
TakecontrolofIoTdevice -> {tau}
14
tau -> {ExploitIoTvulnerabilities}
15
tau -> {Eavesdropping}
16
end attack diagram
17
18
end model
Listing 4.6: Code referring to the XML attack tree in section 3.1 and suitable for the
RisQFLan tool.
After giving an overview of the tool proposed in this thesis, in the next chapter we will
provide some actual case studies. The last example uses real logs, as opposed to the
prior three that use the external tool OFMC, which allows one to obtain event logs starting
from attack traces.
Automatization of Attack Trees
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:43==
5
Case studies
In the prior chapter, an introduction to the design was necessary before the case stud-
ies were given. The Opensource Fixedpoint Model Checker (OFMC) tool was also intro-
duced in order to obtain an event log starting with an attack trace generated by this tool.
OFMC is used in our first three examples. On the other hand, the last case study starts
directly from a real system’s event log and it also serves as a ’bad example’. Indeed,
the selected log prevents one from constructing the system’s final Attack Tree from the
discovered Process Tree. The reasons will be addressed at the end of this chapter.
5.1
First example: attack trace concerning a single attack
5.1.1
Attack trace generation
To be clearer, now we make an example regarding the functioning of the tool. For the sake
of simplicity, in this first case study we generated an OFMC attack trace that takes into
account only one attack to the protocol. However, later we will analyze cases involving
attack traces with multiple attacks, so that the final Attack Tree can be as complete as
possible. To begin with, we introduce a simple key-exchange protocol that establishes a
shared symmetric key between two parties, i.e. Alice and Bob, that do not have a security
relationship so far. We want to protect the transmission of a secret key KAB shared
between A and B. The problem in this example is that between the transmission there is
an intruder called i. With this aim, we assume that all the agents (including the intruder)
initially have a shared key with the server s. We may think that s provides wireless access,
but everyone who wants to use it has to first register, for example with an offline operation
that involes the installation of username and secret shared key between the agent and the
server. Therefore, we assume that s has a strong shared key sk(A, s) with every user A,
i.e., chosen by a cryptographic random-number generator. Figure 5.1 shows the example
using the KeyEx protocol. Note that AnB language uses the notation {|Mes|}K for the
symmetric encryption of a given message Mes with the key K.
Figure 5.1: Example in AnB language about key exchange protocol.
Let’s start introducing the types section. Here A, B and KAB, together with other identi-
fiers that starts with upper case letters, are variables. They are placeholders for a concrete
value, e.g. the name of the agent. Identifiers that start with lower case letters, like s, are
called constants. Variables and constants that are declared to be of type Agent are called
Automatization of Attack Trees
35
==PAGE:44==
roles. It is important to use variables and constants: variables of type Agent cannot be
instantiated arbitrarily with agent names. This includes the special agent i, that is the in-
truder.
Moreover, for each role of the protocol, their initial knowledge must be specified. This is
done in the knowledge section. Note that the elements in the knowledge part must contain
only variables of type agent.
Finally, let’s analyze the action section: here the parties’ message exchanges are de-
scribed. First of all, A tells to the server s that he would like to communicate with B. Then,
s creates a new symmetric key and it also generates two encryptions: the first using the
shared key with A, and the other one exploiting the shared key with B. The two messages
are then encrypted and sent to A, which can only decrypt the first of the two. A is sup-
posed to forward this second message to B, who has the necessary knowledge to decrypt
it. Therefore, all agents have sufficient knowledge to produce all necessary messages,
and end up with a copy of the shared key KAB at least in a run when the intruder does not
interfere. Note that A cannot decrypt the second part of the message received from s.
Usually, cryptographers associate with ’symmetric encryption’ only the pure encryption,
without any protection of integrity such like the MAC, i.e., Message Authentication Code.
Sometimes, this pure encryption may be vulnerable to intruders that manipulate the ci-
phertext and change the encrypted text. By doing so, the recipient cannot detect that a
change was done. Therefore, AnB models {|Mes|}K as a primitive which includes in-
tegrity. When A receives the two encrypted messages from s, he will decrypt the first
one. Indeed, the integrity mechanism of the primitive allows to check that the received
message is encrypted correctly with the right symmetric key sk(A, s). If i sends other
messages that are not of the form {|Mes|}sk(A, s), A will detect a problem and will refuse
them.
If we run this OFMC example, we otbain the attack trace depicted in Figure 5.2. The
attack in question is a violation against weak authentication. In the attack trace, looking at
the comments that OFMC provides as part of the Reached State comment, we can note
three facts. They are often helpful in understanding an authentication attack, because
they reflect what the honest agents ’think’. Here, the intruder chose two random agent
names x29,x401 and sent them to s, who created a new shared key KAB(1) for these two.
Then, i sent this message to x401, but claiming to be x27, namely a different person than
who the server generated the key for. To x401 this message looks like a correct step 3 of
the protocol, so it will believe that KAB(1) is a shared key with x27. The intruder did not
discover any secrets in this case. However, he violated the authentication: s and recipient
x401 disagree on who is playing role A in this session, namely with who the key is shared
with. Therefore, this is a violation of the goal B authenticates s on A,KAB.
To be clearer, we say that we have a violation of weak authentication if there is a request
fact without a matching witness fact. If we consider a goal with the form B authenticates
A on M, the witness fact reflects the point of view of A. On the other hand, the request fact
reflects the point of view of B. Thus, this goal should be used if the protocol ensures the
authentic communication of a message Mes from A to B. Therefore, if B finishes believing
that A has sent message Mes for him, this is indeed an attack. This also includes a case
in which A has meant the message for somebody else, as the one we just analyzed.
36
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.2: Attack trace generated from the key exchange protocol example.
We have now generated an attack trace regarding a specific protocol. However, for the
purpose of this thesis we need some event logs to perform Process Mining and obtain the
Attack Tree of the system. To do this, we implemented some slight modifications to the
AnB example previously introduced in Figure 5.1. The aim is to produce some significant
labels for the conversion of the attack trace into an event log. To achieve this, a new Type
offered by OFMC, called Number, was used. This type allows one to define some ’labels’
that can be added in the list of Knowledge of the agents. Keep in mind that for the labeling
process to be effective, each agent participating must know all of the labels. The updated
code about the Key-exchange protocol is shown in Figure 5.3, while the resulting labeled
attack trace can be seen in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.3: Example in AnB language about key exchange protocol with labeling.
Figure 5.4: Labeled attack trace generated from the key exchange protocol example.
Automatization of Attack Trees
37
==PAGE:46==
We point out that, even though we reached the same attack trace as before, now there are
labels that describe what is happening in each line, which can be helpful for the creation
of a labeled event log.
5.1.2
Translation from attack trace to event log
Proceeding with the work, given as input the obtained attack trace, we can convert it
and generate a Dataframe of logs using the Pandas library from Python. Afterwards, it
is possible to export the Dataframe as XES log file for the Process Mining. The specific
columns of data required in the log are the same as those in the subsection 5.4.1 about
the ’dummy example’ that we introduced previously. To be precise, we need:
• IDs: an identification number of a single activity in the logs, to distinguish it from
other events.
• Timestamps of activities: all events have a date and time associated. This is useful
when analyzing performance related properties, e.g., the waiting time between two
activities. If an event log contains timestamps, then the ordering in a trace should
respect these timestamps, i.e. they should be nondescending in the event log.
• Activity description: this field includes the label that describes what this line of log is
about, together with the content of the message exchanged between the two parties.
The content of the message is useful to understand why the weak authentication
attack is happening and what the intruder is doing. In this specific case, the intruder
is faking his real identity: he claims to be x29 with the server, but to the receiver
x401 he declarates to be x27. Here the authentication is broken.
• Information/content: this column contains the label to describe the single atomic
activity.
To isolate all the information, a translation script was written so that the Pandas Dataframe
could be generated. The script can be seen in Listing 5.1. This is suitable to convert any
kind of attack trace generated by the OFMC tool, even the most complex ones.
1
# convert the initial attack trace generated by OFMC into csv
2
my_file = 'Attack traces/AttackTraceExample2.log'
3
base = os.path.splitext(my_file)[0]
4
os.rename(my_file , base + '.csv')
5
6
# convert the OFMC attack trace into Dataframe
7
df = pd.read_csv('Attack traces/AttackTraceExample2.csv')
8
print(df)
9
10
listaDF = df.values.tolist()
11
print(listaDF)
12
13
# loop every line of the trace to obtain single informations
14
for data in listaDF:
15
res = str(data).split("'", 1)[1]
16
res1 = res.split(":")[1]
17
label = res1.split(",")[0]
18
label = label.split("'")[0] # atomic activity label
19
res1 = str(data).split("'", 1)[1]
20
senderA = res1.split("-")[0] # sender
21
res2 = str(data).split(">", 1)[1]
22
receiverB = res2.split(":")[0] # receiver
23
res3 = str(data).split(":")[1]
24
# CASE 1: sender + receiver + message content
25
content = senderA + " -> " + receiverB + ", " + res3.split("'")[0]
26
# content = senderA + " -> " + receiverB # CASE 2: sender + receiver
38
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:47==
27
# content = senderA + ", " + res3.split("'")[0] # CASE 3: sender + content
28
time = datetime.now()+timedelta(minutes=i)
29
updatedRows.append([str(time), content , "0", label])
30
i = i+1
31
32
# creation of the Dataframe with the right data
33
updatedPD = pd.DataFrame(updatedRows , columns = ['time:timestamp','concept:
activity','@@index','case:concept:info'])
34
35
print("\nNew dataframe with proper columns: ")
36
print(updatedPD)
Listing 5.1: Translation script: from attack trace to event log
To be precise, a conversion from log to csv is needed. Afterwards, the trace can be read
by the Pandas library as a Dataframe, and subsequently converted into a List of List using
the tolist() function. We can now loop the list and isolate only the strings of data that
we need, to create a proper event log containing the following information: timestamp,
activity, index, info. In this case, the ’info’ is the description of the atomic activity,
i.e. the content of the exchanged message. On the other hand, the ”activity” column can
contain different elements, because we chose to split and analyze three distinct cases.
Indeed, the ’activity’ field can contain:
• Case 1: the sender, the receiver and the content of the message;
• Case 2: the sender and the receiver of the message;
• Case 3: the sender and the content of the message.
The three different scenarios are outlined in lines 24, 26 and 27 of Listing 5.1. Then, we
can put all the final information together in a Dataframe, e.g. updatedPD, that will become
the final event log when we export it to XES.
In Figure 5.5 the single components of the attack trace are summarized, while Figure 5.6
shows the obtained Dataframe containing the proper columns of data generated from the
key-exchange attack trace.
Figure 5.5: Translation summary from attack trace to event log.
Figure 5.6: Resulting Dataframe of logs starting from the key exchange attack trace.
Exporting a XES event log starting from the generated Pandas Dataframe is the last step
Automatization of Attack Trees
39
==PAGE:48==
of this phase. As we can see in Listing 5.2, it is possible to carry out the conversion by
employing the PM4PY library.
1
event_log = pm4py.format_dataframe(dataframe , case_id='case:concept:name',
activity_key='concept:name', timestamp_key='time:timestamp')
2
pm4py.write_xes(event_log , 'createdXes.xes')
# exports a xes log
Listing 5.2: Conversion from Pandas Dataframe to XES event log.
5.1.3
From event log to Process Tree and Attack Tree
The next step is Process Mining: our aim is to obtain a Process Tree starting from the
event logs. To do this, we can follow the rules outlined in Section 2.2. The code that
depicts this step can be seen in Listing 5.3.
1
# The inductive miner is applied to the log and the Petri net along with the
initial and the final marking are found
2
log = pm4py.read_xes(os.path.join("createdXes.xes"))
3
net, initial_marking , final_marking = pm4py.discover_petri_net_inductive(log)
4
5
# Visualization of PT
6
tree = pm4py.discover_process_tree_inductive(log)
7
pm4py.view_process_tree(tree)
Listing 5.3: Read of the log and generation of the Process Tree.
Basically, we can employ the PM4PY functions read_xes and discover_process_tree_i
nductive to respectively read the analyzed log as input and discover the related Process
Tree. Afterwards it is also possible to visualize it through view_process_tree. In addition
to Process Trees, another type of graph that is possible to discover is the Petri Net. This
is possible with the discover_petri_net_inductive function.
The resulting Process Tree is showed in Figure 5.7. The depicted tree refers to Case 1
in which we take into account sender, receiver and content of the message. To make the
tree more readable, hereinafter we explain the meaning of each node:
• To begin the message exchange, A sends the participants to the server S. The
content of the message is x29, x401, i.e., the first term is claimed to be A, while the
second is B.
• The server now generates a key KAB for the message exchange and sends it to A.
The content of the message is {|KAB(1)|}(sk(x29,s)), {|KAB(1)|}(sk(x401,s)),
namely s creates two encryptions: one using the shared key with A, and another
one using the shared key with B.
• A sends to B his encrypted part of the key, but claiming to be x27 and not x29 as he
told to the server. We can spot this problem looking at the content of the exchanged
message: x27, {|KAB(1)|}(sk(x401,s)). Indeed, the first term in the message
describes who A is, and in this case we can read x27 and not x29. The attack takes
place in this precise step: the intruder did not find out any secret, but he managed
to break the authentication.
Figure 5.7: Process Tree Tree about single authentication attack starting from OFMC
attack traces (Case 1).
40
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:49==
Instead, Figure 5.8 depicts the Process Tree that refers to Case 2, i.e. the activity nodes
contain only sender and receiver. Finally, Figure 5.9 shows Case 3 where the Process
Tree’s nodes take into account only sender and content of the message.
Figure 5.8: Process Tree Tree about single authentication attack starting from OFMC
attack traces (Case 2).
Figure 5.9: Process Tree Tree about single authentication attack starting from OFMC
attack traces (Case 3).
The Process Tree nodes can now be translated into Attack Tree nodes, to generate the
final Attack Tree of the system. To do this, we follow the translation rules introduced in
Section 4.2. As we said before, to be able to see different granularity levels, we decided
to consider three different cases for the ’activity’ field in the event log. Because of this,
we generated three distinct Attack Trees, each concerning the Process Trees that we
just showed. The one containing sender, receiver and content of the message can be
seen in Figure 5.10 (Case 1), while the one only about sender and receiver is shown in
Figure 5.11 (Case 2). Finally, the AT containing only sender and content of the message
is depicted in Figure 5.12 (Case 3). The trees are all about the same event log, but they
allow us to see different data from multiple perspectives.
Figure 5.10: Resulting Attack Tree about single authentication attack containing sender,
receiver and message content (Case 1).
Automatization of Attack Trees
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.11: Resulting Attack Tree about single authentication attack containing sender
and receiver (Case 2).
Figure 5.12: Resulting Attack Tree about single authentication attack containing sender
and message content (Case 3).
5.1.4
Generation of RisQFLan’s code
Lastly, to translate the three obtained Attack Trees from XML into bbt, a final translation
script was written. This extension is supported by the RisQFLan tool, previously intro-
duced in Section 3.2. First of all, the attack model was created and subsequently the
attack nodes were detected. To identify them, we iterated on all the nodes involved in the
XML tree, both parents and children. Finally, the types of relationship between them were
specified so that the code could be generated and could be given as input to the security
framework, to generate the tree for RisQFLan. To be able to obtain the relationships, an-
other iteration was done. If the parentRelationship of a given node is disjunction, it is
translated into an ’OR’ relationship, otherwhise if we have a conjunction, we obtain an
’AND’. The obtained code of the Attack Tree about Case 1, i.e. the one that includes con-
tent, sender and receiver, can be seen below in Listing 5.4. The generation of RisQFLan
code for the other two cases follows the same steps and reasoning.
1
begin model AttackTree
2
3
begin attack nodes
4
tau
5
Weakauthenticationattack
6
Sender:i ,SendEncryptedPartOfKey ,x27,{|KAB(1)|}_(sk(x401,s))
7
Sender:(s,1),SendFreshGeneratedEncryptedKey ,{|KAB(1)|}_(sk(x29,s)),{|KAB
(1)|}_(sk(x401,s))
42
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:51==
8
Sender:i ,SendParticipants ,x29,x401
9
end attack nodes
10
11
begin attack diagram
12
tau -> {Weakauthenticationattack}
13
Weakauthenticationattack -> {Sender:i ,SendEncryptedPartOfKey ,x27,{|KAB(1)
|}_(sk(x401,s))}
14
Sender:i ,SendEncryptedPartOfKey ,x27,{|KAB(1)|}_(sk(x401,s)) -> {Sender:(s
,1),SendFreshGeneratedEncryptedKey ,{|KAB(1)|}_(sk(x29,s)),{|KAB(1)|}_(
sk(x401,s))}
15
Sender:(s,1),SendFreshGeneratedEncryptedKey ,{|KAB(1)|}_(sk(x29,s)),{|KAB
(1)|}_(sk(x401,s)) -> {Sender:i ,SendParticipants ,x29,x401}
16
end attack diagram
17
18
end model
Listing 5.4: RisQFLan code for the Attack Tree containing sender
We emphasize the resulting trees’ simplicity as a way to wrap up this initial case study.
This is the result of a trace that considers one single attack at the authentication protocol.
However, the same logic and reasoning can also be applied for case studies that are
trickier. For this reason, hereinafter we include other examples of attack traces involving
multiple attacks to the same OFMC input protocol.
5.2
Second example: attack trace concerning multiple
attacks
For the sake of simplicity, we used the previous case study to generate a trivial Attack
Tree with sequential shape. To make this tool more realistic, we introduce now an ex-
ample in which another attack trace generated from OFMC is transformed into an event
log and then the previous procedure is followed. The distinction in this case study is
that, unlike the prior one, this trace considers various attacks against the same protocol,
and not only one. For this example we produced an OFMC trace concerning the Need-
ham–Schroeder Protocol (NSPK Protocol). The AnB code that allowed the generation of
the trace is depicted in Figure 5.13, while the obtained trace can be seen in Figure 5.14.
The Needham–Schroeder Public-Key Protocol is based on public-key cryptography. It
aims to establish a session key between two parties on a network, typically to protect
further communication, but in its proposed form is considered insecure.
Automatization of Attack Trees
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.13: Code for OFMC for the generation of the attack trace about protocol NSPK.
As we can see in Figure 5.13, in this case we take into account two agents, i.e. A and B,
and an encryption function called pk. Indeed, the communication happens only between
A and B without the presence of a third party. The key pk(A) is symmetric and known
only by A, while pk(B) only by B. Moreover, in this case study there are two new elements
called nonces: they are a way to ensure recentness in protocols of challenge-response.
To be precise, nonces are random numbers chosen by one or more parties. They ab-
breviate ’number once’, i.e. they should be used only once. The point is that, if another
party has to include the nonce in a response, the creator of the nonce can be sure that the
response is no older than the nonce it contains. The value of these guarantees depends
on the cryptographic operations in which the nonce is used.
First of all, in the code depicted in Figure 5.13, A begins creating his nonce NA and sends
it together with A, encrypting it with the encryption function of B, i.e. pk(B). Subsequently,
B does the same creating his nonce NB and sending it together with NA, encrypting every-
thing with pk(A). Finally, A can decrypt what he just received and can send NB encrypted
with pk(B). Basically, A re-encrypts it and sends it back to verify if that he is still alive and
that he holds the key.
44
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.14: Attack trace containing multiple attacks to NSPK protocol.
As confirmed by the obtained attack trace, the protocol is vulnerable to a replay attack. If
an attacker uses an older, compromised key, he could replay his message to B who will
accept it, being unable to tell that the key is not fresh. A part of the obtained attack trace
can be seen in Figure 5.14.
5.2.1
Translation from attack trace to event log
Similarly to the former example, the attack trace was first converted into a Pandas Dataframe
using the same translation script that was depicted in Listing 5.1. Figure 5.15 shows the
obtained Dataframe. For simplicity, in this case study we took into account the first 4
attacks that appear in the trace, but it is possible to consider any preferred number. We
chose to limit the selected attacks from the trace because, for the sake of our explanation,
a larger number would result in a wider and more chaotic Attack Tree.
Automatization of Attack Trees
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.15: Dataframe containing log entries concerning attacks agains NSPK.
Afterwards, the Dataframe was exported into a XES event log using the PM4PY Python
library, as previously shown in Listing 5.2. Also in this case study, the relevant data from
the log concern the following information: ID, timestamp, activity label and information.
Now, the obtained XES file can be given in input to the next step, i.e. the Process Mining
algorithm.
5.2.2
From event log to Process Tree and Attack Tree
Continuing our process, we can use the functions discover_process_tree_inductive
and view_process_tree from PM4PY, like we did before in Listing 5.3. By performing this
and using the event log as input, we can discover and visualize the related Process Tree
of the system.  In addition, we differentiated three different scenarios for the ’activity’ field
displayed in the tree’s nodes: first, the activity could include include the sender, the re-
cipient and the message’s content; second, it could include only the sender and receiver;
and third, it could only include the message’s sender and content. As a result, we were
able to create three alternative Process Trees. Figures 5.16 and 5.17 show the first two
Process Trees, as we decided to omit the third one for space reasons.
Figure 5.16: Process Trees about case 1 (activity nodes containing content of the mes-
sage, sender and receiver).
Figure 5.17: Process Trees about case 2 (activity nodes containing sender and receiver).
46
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:55==
The Process Tree nodes can now be transformed into Attack Tree nodes to construct
the system’s final Attack Tree. To do this, we followed the translation rules previously
outlined in Section 4.2. We attempted to develop three related Attack Trees, one for each
scenario, based on the three Process Trees we just introduced. Figure 5.18 displays
the scenario about message’s sender, receiver, and content (case 1), while Figure 5.19
depicts the one only about message’s sender and content (Case 3). Even though the trees
are all about the same event log, they allow us to view different pieces of information from
different perspectives. Regarding the second scenario, be aware that the Attack Tree is
missing. This happened because the second Process Tree contained several ’xor loops’
that could not be changed into other appropriate operators for the Attack Tree. As a result,
the transformation in this second case was not feasible. The final chapter of this thesis,
which discusses the results and potential future improvements, tries to address issue. We
will highlight that one alternative approach may be to consider the adoption of a different
kind of graph that can take loops into account, rather than an Attack Tree.
Figure 5.18: Attack Tree about NSPK attack (case 1: content, sender and receiver).
Figure 5.19: Attack Tree about NSPK attack (case 3: content and receiver).
Automatization of Attack Trees
47
==PAGE:56==
5.2.3
Generation of RisQFLan’s code
As a final part, also in this second case study, the equivalent code about the Attack Trees
for the RisFQLan tool was generated. The results are comparable to the first exam-
ple in Listing 5.4, with the exception that the tree in this study’s scenario is bigger and
slightly more complicated. In order to get a better understanding of the system and any
potential threats to it, it is also possible to depict the final trees in this example using the
graph-based security framework.
5.3
Third example: another attack trace of multiple attacks
To provide more truthfulness and reliability about our work with the OFMC tool, we chose a
third case study that is similar to the previous one. This time OFMC was used to generate
an attack trace concerning the Selfi protocol, i.e., an authentication protocol that allows
two parts A and B to authenticate themselves on their two nonces N1 and N2 respectively.
Figure 5.20 displays the code used as the model checker tool’s input with reference to
this protocol. As we outlined in the previous case study, nonces are useful because the
creator can be sure that the response is not older than the nonce contained in it, in case
a third party is required to include the nonce in his response. In the code for the attack
trace creation we can note that the message exchange begins with A transmitting to B
the following information: A together with B and his generated nonce N1. Afterwards, B
answers by transmitting the encrypted secret keys (both keys about A and B) together
with A, B and his created nonce N2. The nonces are then excluded from the final ex-
change because they have already completed their task of ensuring the freshness of the
messages sent between the parties. For this reason, in the last message exchange A
sends to B the encrypted keys along with A and B. By executing these steps, B can verify
the identity of A by using N1, and A can authenticate B as well but using N2.
Figure 5.20: OFMC code for the generation of the attack trace about protocol SELFI.
After running the code that was just described and shown in Figure 5.20, we reached an
attack trace that outlines multiple attacks to the Selfi protocol. The initial part of the ob-
tained trace is depicted below in Figure 5.21.
48
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.21: Attack trace containing multiple attacks to Selfi protocol.
The obtained attack trace confirms that the protocol is vulnerable to multiple attacks
against the same protocol. The potential threats concern an outsider who might com-
promise the parties’ message-exchange authentication. We go on to the next step, in
order to obtain the Attack Tree and overcoming the identified threats. As we observed
with the prior case studies, to perform process mining, the attack trace must be turned
into a suitable event log.
5.3.1
Translation from attack trace to event log
The attack trace was first transformed into a Pandas Dataframe using the same transla-
tion script that was shown in Listing 5.1, just like in the previous example. The resulting
Dataframe is displayed below in Figure 5.22. Again, we only included the first four attacks
that appear in the trace in order to keep things simple, but it is possible to keep any chosen
number. As we said before, we opted to minimize the attacks picked from the trace for
the sake of our explanation, because a greater number would result in a wider and more
chaotic Attack Tree.
Automatization of Attack Trees
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.22: Dataframe containing log entries about attacks against Selfi protocol.
In this instance as well, the PM4PY library was used to convert the Dataframe into a XES
event log. The code is equivalent to the one we illustrated and described in Listing 5.2.
Again, the relevant data required from the log is: ID, timestamp, activity label and informa-
tion. The generated XES file can now be used as input for the Process Mining technique
in the following phase.
5.3.2
From event log to process tree and attack tree
As we stated before in Listing 5.3, we can go on with the process by utilizing the PM4PY
functions view_process_tree and discover_process_tree_inductive. By carrying out
this, using the event log as input, we may learn about and see the system’s linked Process
Tree. Again , we distinguished three different possibilities for the ’activity’ field shown in
the nodes of the tree: first, the activity could include the sender, the recipient, and the
content of the message; second, it could include include only the sender and receiver;
and third, it could include only the sender and content. We were able to produce three
different Process Trees as a result. Due to space limitations, we opted to omit the first
and third Process Trees, leaving only the second one, depicted in Figures 5.23 , which
focuses only on sender and receiver.
50
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.23: Process Tree about Selfi attack (case 2: content and sender).
Also in this example, Figure 5.23 shows that the Process Tree about case 2 contains some
’xor loops’ operators that cannot be converted into Attack Tree operators for the same
reasons stated in the previous subsection. Because of this, in order to generate only two
Attack Trees, namely the one with nodes containing content, sender, and receiver, and
the one about content and sender, we only applied our translation rules to the first and
third Process Trees. The obtained ATs are shown in Figures 5.24 and 5.25 respectively.
Figure 5.24: Attack Tree about Selfi attack (case 1: content, sender and receiver).
Figure 5.25: Attack Tree about Selfi attack (case 3: content and receiver).
5.3.3
Generation of RisQFLan’s code
Concluding this third case study, also here the RisFQLan codes were generated, starting
from the obtained XML Attack Trees. What we achieved looks like the previous examples
(Listing 5.4), and also this case study generated wider and slightly more complicated trees
with respect to the first case. Essentially, also in this instance it is possible to convert the
Automatization of Attack Trees
51
==PAGE:60==
final Attack Tree. This allows one to use the RisQFLan graph-based security framework,
to achieve a better overview of the analyzed system and to identify possible threats that
could show up.
5.4
A ’bad’ example: malware infection logs
For the scope of our work we provide also another example in which real event logs are
used without the need of OFMC. To be precise, these logs are about malware infection
traffic and they are provided by Stratosphere IPS [34].The Stratosphere IPS feeds itself
with models created from real malware traffic captures. Their aim is to continuously moni-
tor the threat landscape for new emerging threats, retrieving malicious samples to capture
the traffic. The selected project is named ’Malware Capture Facility Project’ and it is re-
sponsible for making the long-term malware captures. This dataset of traffic logs provide
a real scenario in which a machine is not infected, then infected with a malware and after
some time this is cleaned up. Specially in network computer security it is really impor-
tant to have good datasets, because the data in the networks is infinite, changing, varied
and with a high concept drift. For this reason, this data traffic is about malware but also
about normal activities. The specific capture taken into account is about a normal com-
puter working with a real user for some time, then a malware infection happens, finally it
is cleaned and the user continues working normally for some time.
5.4.1
From real traffic logs to activity logs
Our initial aim is to translate this traffic log dataset into a proper activity log suitable for the
process mining algorithm. Note that in this case we do not use the OFMC tool because
we already have some traffic logs and therefore we do not need to start from an attack
trace generation. Firstly, the algorithm requires some logs in XES format and secondly
we have to pass the right columns of data needed in the process mining procedure. As
previously introduced, the specific columns of information that we want in the final XES
log are the following:
• ID: progressive numbers so that the different activities can be distinguished between
each others.
• Timestamp: date and time of the single line of log. For this specific traffic log
a translation of the timestamps is needed: in the original file they are stored as
total amount of seconds, while we need a real date and time for the purpose of the
process mining.
• Activity: it illustrates the typical information present in the original traffic log. In this
column the IP of the source, the IP of the destination, the used protocol and the
length are listed.
• Information: brief description of a specific atomic activity shown in a single line of
the logs.
The first step is accomplished through Pandas Python’s library. It allows the translation
of the original traffic logs depicted in Figure 5.27 into activity logs suitable for the Process
Mining. This transformation is shown in our translation script below in Listing 5.5. To
begin with, the initial traffic log in CSV format provided by the repository is imported and
converted into a Dataframe using the read_csv function from Pandas. The first problem
is that in the obtained Dataframe we do not have the proper columns of data that Process
Mining requires from an event log. As we saw before, the right structure that we choose
for our columns is the following: timestamp, activity, index, info. To achieve this,
the conversion of the Dataframe into a List of Lists was done using the tolist() function.
52
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:61==
This operation is helpful because now we can loop the List so that we can obtain the
strings of data needed and put them in the rows of a new Dataframe, i.e. updatedPD, that
is the final one. Note that, for what concerns the time, in the initial traffic logs we have
amount of seconds, while in the final log we need a proper date and time. To overcome
this, we imported datetime to set the starting date and timedelta to add the seconds to
an actual date, and convert everything into a proper date-time format. These translation
steps are also summarized in Figure 5.26.
Figure 5.26: From real traffic logs to activity logs.
1
# I read the initial CSV with the logs about the system BEFORE malware
2
df = pd.read_csv("Documents\Online malware dataset log\BeforeInfection.csv")
3
listaDF = df.values.tolist()
4
5
# Initial header about the first CSV with all the logs
6
headerRows= ['No','Time','Source','Destination','Protocol','Length','Info']
7
8
print("Dataframe with right portion of data but with original header: \n")
9
print(df)
10
11
# starting date and time according to the repository
12
startingDateTime = datetime(2015, 7, 25, 17, 51, 12)
13
updatedRows = [] # needed rows structure: timestamp , activity , index, info
14
15
# I create the new dataframe with the right columns and the right portion of
data in which I am interested
16
for data in listaDF:
17
for singleData in data:
18
res = singleData.split('"', 1)
19
res1 = res[1] # time, source , destination , protocol , length , info
20
res2 = res1.split('"', 1)
21
timeVariable = (res2[0])
# ONLY TIME
22
realTimeVariable = startingDateTime + timedelta(seconds = int(
timeVariable.split('.',1)[0])) # TIME IN DATE FORMAT
23
res3 = res1.split(',', 1)[1] # souce, dest, procotol , lenght , info
24
res4 = res3.split(',', 3)[3] length and info
25
info = res4.split(',',1)[1] # INFO
26
# ACTIVITY (SOURCE , DESTINATION , PROCOTOL AND LENGTH)
27
activity = res3.split(',', 7)[0] + "," + res3.split(',', 6)[1] + "," +
res3.split(',', 6)[2] + "," + res3.split(',', 6)[3]
28
singleRow = [realTimeVariable , activity , 0, info]
29
updatedRows.append(singleRow)
30
31
updatedPD = pd.DataFrame(updatedRows , columns = ['time:timestamp','concept:
activity','@@index','case:concept:info'])
32
33
print("\nNew dataframe with proper columns: ")
34
print(updatedPD)
Listing 5.5: Translation from real traffic logs to activity logs suitable for Process Mining
As we can see in Figure 5.28, with the translation script the information needed for Pro-
cess Mining are now together in specific columns and, as a result, a final DataFrame is
Automatization of Attack Trees
53
==PAGE:62==
obtained. This data will be used by the Inductive Miner algorithm provided by the PM4PY
library.
Figure 5.27: Initial table format of real traffic logs.
Figure 5.28: Final table of activity logs suitable for Process Mining obtained from the
translation script.
5.4.2
From activity log to Process Tree
After obtaining the event log DataFrame about the whole system, it is necessary to export
the data in the XES format. For this specific case it was considered appropriate to split the
obtained event log into two parts: one about the system’s behaviour before the infection
and another one concerning the post-malware. In this case this step is allowed because
the analyzed log repository provides the exact time and date in which the infection takes
place. This preliminary operation could help us notice which are the differences between
a system that is infected and another one that is not.
The next step is to apply the usual Process Mining procedure outlined in Section 2.2
using PM4PY library from Python, both for the data before and after the infection. The
two obtained Process Trees are depicted in Figure 5.29.
54
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.29: Process Trees respectively about before and after malware infection.
Automatization of Attack Trees
55
==PAGE:64==
5.4.3
The problem: Attack Tree generation
At this point we reach a problem concerning this specific case study. As we can see in the
two obtained Process Trees in Figure 5.29, a difference in the behaviour of the system
cannot be noticed just looking at what is happening into the Process Trees or into the event
logs. To be precise, in this example it is not possible to spot which are the steps of the
attacker that lead him to the goal of the attack, i.e. the malware infection. To make this tool
work properly, some activities or atomic steps about the attacker must be detected starting
from the analyzed event log, so that they can be depicted in the generated Process Tree.
For these reasons we tried our tool on other examples, i.e. the previous case studies,
and for the scope of this thesis we decided to use also an automated protocol verification
tool, i.e. OFMC, that allows one to generate attack traces from a given protocol in input.
From the attack traces we showed how it can be possible to obtain event logs as input for
our tool. However, many additional case studies may focus on conventional activity logs
produced by normal systems similar to the one just examined. Indeed, many others event
logs can be examined and can generate Attack Trees with the help of our tool, without
the usage of OFMC.
5.5
Contribution w.r.t. related works
The purpose of this section is to discuss the reasons behind the design of the tool that
was introduced in this thesis. To do this, we updated the initial scheme (Figure 1.6) about
the related papers and associated weaknesses that was discussed in the ’related work’
part (Section 1.4). Basically we added one new column on the right, namely the one that
refers to our tool. The updated version is now represented below in Figure 5.30. To be
more precise, we point out that our tool does not require complicated formal engines or
huge databases of typical attacks to work. In fact, what we require is either a protocol to
be provided as input to the OFMC tool in order to build a log from the trace, or an event
log from a real system that can represents some of the attacker’s actions. Additionally,
the emphasis is solely on Attack Trees and not on other kinds of graphs. By concentrating
on a single type of graph, we can better understand its advantages and drawbacks, as
well as propose alternatives based on the disadvantages of the Attack Tree. Finally, we
can say that we developed a fully automated tool that includes the code and does not
just analyze socio-technical systems; rather, we take a broader variety of possibilities into
account in our case studies.
56
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:65==
Figure 5.30: Related papers and weaknesses + the presented tool.
However, even though the tool has many advantages, while developing and analyzing
our case studies it revealed some considerable drawbacks related to some instances.
These issues will be also discussed and addressed in the final chapter of the thesis. Just
before we made clear that for the tool to function effectively and produce a meaningful At-
tack Tree, some visible attacker’s steps must be documented in the log. This prerequisite
is not trivial, because it is unlikely that the attacker will not take all the reasonable precau-
tions to hide his activities. Another important precondition is that we require a labeled log
in order to have some tags for the nodes shown in the final Attack Tree. Unfortunately,
the fact that various systems do not automatically label the logs makes this situation com-
plicated. Finally, we highlighted that the Attack Tree does not naturally support loops.
Thus, if we find this operator in the obtained Process Tree, we will not be able to convert
it into an Attack Tree. However, as we said before, chapter 7 will discuss and address
the discussed challenges related to our tool.
Automatization of Attack Trees
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:67==
6
Validation
As a way of proving the soundness and validity of this tool, we examined the two main
translation processes separately. Figure 6.1 shows the overall idea of this approach.
Our validation consists in two steps: the first phase (in blue) in which the event logs are
converted into a Process Tree, and verified; and the second phase (in pink) in which the
Process Tree is transformed into an Attack Tree and then validated.
Figure 6.1: Overview of the stages for the validation.
6.1
Validation from event logs to process tree
We used the PM4PY Python module to generate the Process Tree starting from the sys-
tem’s event log. It provides the most famous algorithm implementations in addition to
helpful functions connected to process mining. To get the Process Tree associated with
the input log, we utilized the discover_process_tree_inductive function. As introduced
in Section 2.3.1, The Inductive Miner algorithm that we employed has undergone exten-
sive testing and consolidation, as described in Section 2, and a sizable body of literature
is already available. [1] represents a good contribution to the truthfulness and reliability of
the Inductive Miner procedure, moreover all the steps are soundly illustrated and verified.
The same applies to the aforementioned Python library: in [33] the official documentation
of PM4PY is provided. As a result, one can gain a better understanding of all the available
features and functions that have been extensively demonstrated and tested in the existing
literature.
6.2
Validation from process tree to attack tree
Now that the PM4PY Python library has been used, we have a Process Tree. As an
XML file, the PT constitute the input for the translation rules that generate the final Attack
Tree. Then, as a final step in the verification process, a collection of traces was created
for each example taken into consideration, starting with one model. The aim was to see
if the translated model could make use of the traces as well. Hence, starting from the
Process Tree, it was possible to generate traces and save them as event log. A replay
algorithm was then used to determine whether the traces were correctly convertible to the
translated model. This was done translating the initial model into the other, and finally the
traces were obtained from the initial one. This will authenticate the final stage of the whole
process by demonstrating that the latter replicate the identical actions as the former. As a
result, the Process Trees were translated into Attack trees, and both the models managed
to execute the same traces. Figure 6.2 depicts the translation from Process Tree to Attack
Tree: on the left the PT is shown, while on the right we have the related AT.
Automatization of Attack Trees
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 6.2: From Process Tree to Attack Tree.
Throughout this thesis, we generated traces for each considered example to ensure the
validity of our work. Hereinafter we summarize the obtained results for each case study:
• Dummy log generation: from the PT we obtained 4999 traces, which are all suc-
cessfully replayed by the derived Attack Tree.
• OFMC attack trace about single attack: the Process Tree in this case generated
2999 traces that have been effectively reproduced by the AT.
• First OFMC attack trace about multiple attacks: for this example 9611 traces were
obtained and subsequently replicated by the Attack Tree.
• Second OFMC attack trace about multiple attacks: also in this case study the de-
rived Attack Tree successfully replayed all 7637 traces obtained from the Process
Tree.
• Malware infection logs: in this last example we have 45410 and 180274 traces
related to the before and after malware respectively.
To sum up, the validation process entailed examining the soundness of each stage of
translation, from the event logs to the final Attack Tree. This could guarantee the reliability
of each transformation. To do this, we divided the validation process into two stages, and
after that, we verified our tool.
60
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:69==
7
Conclusion and Future Works
In conclusion, the aim of this thesis was to introduce an automatic tool for generating At-
tack Trees. They can be seen as graphical representations of all the potential attacks to
a system. The generation can be done starting from dummy, i.e. artificially generated, or
real event logs. We also showed in our case studies that it is possible to use the model
checker tool OFMC to obtain an attack trace regarding a specific protocol, and then trans-
late it into an event log. Using the Inductive Miner algorithm and a Python library we can
then generate a Process Tree of the system starting from the logs, both from original or
translated ones. Using Process Trees, it is possible to depict all the information collected
by a particular system and understand what is happened in the past. Following some
translation rules, the Process Tree is transformed into the related XML Attack Tree. The
tree was then converted into a format suitable for a graph-based quantitative security risk
framework called RisQFLan, using a translation script that was written as a last step. The
decision to include also RisQFLan stems from the fact that it combines various well known
rigorous notions and methods in an Eclipse-based domain specific framework. This can
help to visualize and better understand the overall situation of the system.
As a future implementation, also Attack-Defense Trees, which consider both attacks and
countermeasures, could be taken into account starting from a selected event log. This
would be an interesting extension of the tool. It would make it more complete and infor-
mative for the security analyst that want to protect the security of a system, providing also
specific protection assets. Future integrations may also focus on finding a solution to the
issue of constructing the Attack Tree in the presence of xor loops in the Process Tree, e.g.
by producing a different type of graph that handles loops. Another future improvement
could be to overcome the issue regarding the last use case. In this way, the tool could
automatically generate Attack Trees starting from a more generic and less precise event
log, without the need for the attacker’s steps to be reported in the starting log. One last
interesting extension could be the use of Machine Learning for log labeling. By doing this,
the tool would not be limited solely to labeled logs, but it could also include those that are
not.
To conclude, in the present work a way for the automatic generation of Attack Trees has
been introduced, starting from labeled event logs or also from attack traces generated
by the model checker OFMC. The tool has interesting opportunities to be extended and
improved. This would further increase its features and would make it useful for many
more different cases. In this way, the tool might become even more frequently usable in
the real world and might support companies by helping them strengthen their defenses
against cyber threats.
Automatization of Attack Trees
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Wil van der Aalst. Process Mining. Springer, Data Science in Action, 2016.
[2]
B. Schneier. Attack trees. Dr. Dobb’s journal, 1999.
[3]
S. Mauw and M. Oostdijk. “Foundations of Attack Trees”. In: International Confer-
ence on Information Security and Cryptology (2005).
[4]
Radomirovic Kordy B. Mauw S. “Attack–Defense Trees”. In: Journal of Logic and
Computation (2014).
[5]
Nielson Vigo R. Nielson F. “Automated Generation of Attack Trees”. In: Computer
Security Foundations Symposium (CSF) (2014).
[6]
Pieters W. Kordy B. Mauw S. “Towards Automating the Construction Maintenance
of Attack Trees: a Feasibility Study”. In: GraMSec. EPTCS (2014).
[7]
L. Painton Swiler C. Phillips. “A graph-based system for network-vulnerability anal-
ysis.” In: In Proceedings of the 1998 Workshop on New Security Paradigms (1998).
[8]
J. Bal H. S. Lallie K. Debattista. “A review of attack graph and attack tree visual
syntax in cyber security.” In: Computer ScienceReview, 35:100219 (2020).
[9]
B Fila. W. Wideł M. Audinot. “Beyond 2014: Formal methods for attack tree–based
security modeling.” In: ACM Comput. Surv., 52(4) (2019).
[10]
P. Schweitzer B. Kordy L. Pietre-Cambac. “Dag-based attack and defense mod-
eling: Don’t miss the forest for the attack trees.” In: Computer Science Review,
13-14:1–38 (2014).
[11]
S. Jha O. Sheyner J. Haines. “Automated generation and analysis of attack graphs.”
In: Symposium on Security and Privacy (2002).
[12]
D Vojtisek S. Pinchinat M. Acher. “Atsyra: An integrated environment for synthesiz-
ing attack trees.” In: Graphical Models for Security (2016).
[13]
A. Alsheikh M Ibrahim. “Automatic hybrid attack graph (AHAG) generation for com-
plex engineering systems.” In: (2019).
[14]
R. Rydhof N. David A. David. “Modelling social-technical attacks with timed au-
tomata.” In: International Workshop on Managing Insider Security Threats (2015).
[15]
A. A. De Medeiros A. Weijters W. M. van Der Aalst. “Process mining with the heuris-
tics miner-algorithm”. In: Tech. Rep. WP, vol. 166 (2017).
[16]
W. M. Van Der Aalst S. J. Leemans D. Fahland. “Discovering block-structured pro-
cess models from event logs-a constructive approach”. In: International conference
on applications and theory of Petri nets and concurrency (2013).
[17]
W.M.P. van der Aalst S.J.J. Leemans D. Fahland. “Discovering Block-Structured
Process Models from Event Logs Containing Infrequent Behaviour”. In: International
Workshop on Business Process Intelligence (2013).
[18]
D. Fahland S. J. Leemans and W. M. Van Der Aalst. “Discovering block-structured
process models from event logs-a constructive approach”. In: International confer-
ence on applications and theory of Petri nets and concurrency, pp. 311–32 (2013).
[19]
B. Fila W. Wideł M. Audinot. Beyond 2014: Formal methods for attack tree–based
security modeling. ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 52, 2019.
[20]
P. Schweitzer B. Kordy L. Piètre-Cambacédès. Dag-based attack and defense mod-
eling: Don’t miss the forest for the attack trees. Computer Science Review, vol.
13-14, 2014.
[21]
A. Hartmanns M. Bozga A. David. “State-of-the-Art Tools and Techniques for Quan-
titative Modeling and Analysis of Embedded Systems”. In: Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Design, Automation and Test in Europe (DATE’12) (2012).
Automatization of Attack Trees
63
==PAGE:72==
[22]
A. Legay Maurice ter Beek A. Lluch Lafuente. “A framework for quantitative model-
ing and analysis of highly (re)configurable systems”. In: Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 46,
no. 3 (2020).
[23]
G. Agha and K. Palmskog. A survey of statistical model checking. ACM Trans.
Model. Comp. Simul., vol. 28, no. 1, 2018.
[24]
L. Traonouez A. Legay A. Lukina. “Statistical Model Checking”. In: Computing and
Software Science: State of the Art and Perspectives, vol. 10000 (2019).
[25]
A. Legay Maurice ter Beek A. Lluch Lafuente. Quantitative Security Risk Modeling
and Analysis with RisQFLan. Computers Security 109, 2021.
[26]
S. Mauw B. Kordy and P. Schweitzer. “Foundations of attack–defense trees”. In:
International Workshop on Formal Aspects in Security and Trust (2010).
[27]
OFMC download page. URL: www.avantssar.eu.
[28]
Sebastian Modersheim and Luca Viganò. “The Open-source Fixed-point Model
Checker for Symbolic Analysis of Security Protocols”. In: Foundations of Security
Analysis and Design (2009).
[29]
AVISPA Deliverable. URL: www.avispa-project.org.
[30]
AVISPA Library of Protocols. URL: http://www.avispa-project.org/library.
[31]
A. M. Konsta G. D. Federico. Process Trees to Attack Trees: Do Not Miss the Trees.
2022.
[32]
A. C¸ amtepe and B. Yener. “Modeling and detection of complex attacks”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Security and Privacy in Communi-
cation Networks (SecureComm’07) (2007).
[33]
PM4PY Python package documentation. URL: https://pm4py.fit.fraunhofer.de/docs.
[34]
Stratosphere IPS Malware Capture Facility Project. URL: https://www.stratosphereips.
org/datasets-overview/.
64
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:73==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:74==
66
Automatization of Attack Trees
==PAGE:75==
Survey: Automatic Generation of
Attack Trees and Attack Graphs
Alyzia-Maria Konsta
DTU Compute
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
akon@dtu.dk
Beatrice Spiga
DTU Compute
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
s225953@student.dtu.dk
Alberto Lluch Lafuente
DTU Compute
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
albl@dtu.dk
Nicola Dragoni
DTU Compute
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
ndra@dtu.dk
Abstract—Graphical security models constitute a well-known,
user-friendly way to represent the security of a system. These
kinds of models are used by security experts to identify vul-
nerabilities and assess the security of a system. The manual
construction of these models can be tedious, especially for large
enterprises. Consequently, the research community is trying
to address this issue by proposing methods for the automatic
generation of such systems. In this work, we present a survey
illustrating the current status of the automatic generation of two
kinds of graphical security models -Attack Trees and Attack
Graphs. The goal of this survey is to present the current
methodologies used in the field, compare them and present the
challenges and future directions for the research community.
Index Terms—Automatic Generation, Attack Trees, Attack
Graphs, Survey
I. INTRODUCTION
During the last few decades, the use of electronic devices
has spread significantly. Companies and individuals are using
technology for both personal and work-related reasons. As a
consequence, a huge amount of personal and sensitive data
is stored or processed on computer networks. The research
community has focused on finding ways to protect this data
from malicious actors.
One well-known solution for assessing the security of a sys-
tem is the graphical security models. These models represent
security scenarios and help security experts identify the sys-
tem’s weaknesses. Their graphical representation constitutes a
user-friendly way to analyze the security of the system. In the
scope of this paper, we are going to examine only two kinds
of these graphical representations -Attack Trees and Attack
Graphs. For a comprehensive overview of all the available
formalism, we suggest the reader refer to [15].
Security experts manually produce the graphical security
models. This procedure, especially for large systems, can
be tedious, error-prone, and non-exhaustive. Consequently,
the need for automatic procedures arose and the research
community has focused on addressing this issue.
In this work, we present an exhaustive survey on the
automatic generation of Attack Trees and Attack Graphs. The
main goal of this work is to provide an overview of the
field and to identify current challenges and future research
opportunities. The survey presents:
• state of the art on the automatic generation of Attack
Trees and Attack Graphs.
Fig. 1. Attack Tree [12]
• a quantitative study of the works included in these survey
and some important features to offer an overview of the
field.
• a classification of the works included in this survey based
on the methodologies used in every work to automatically
generate the Attack Trees/Graphs.
• a comparative study based on the main characteristics of
every work.
• limitations and future directions for the research commu-
nity.
The paper is structured as follows: Section II presents the
main concepts of Attack Trees and Attack Graphs, as well
as an overview to the categories used to classify the papers
under study, Section III presents the research method used to
structure our research, Section IV presents the related work,
Section V presents the quantitative study and the overview of
the categories, Section VI presents the classification of the
papers, Section VII discusses the challenges and proposes
future research directions and Section VIII concludes the
paper.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we are going to present the basic concepts
used in this survey.
A. Attack Trees
An Attack Tree is a graphical representation of potential
attacks to the system’s security in the form of a tree. Initially
introduced by Schneiner [25], this type of representation
enables developers to identify the vulnerabilities of the system
==PAGE:76==
Fig. 2. Attack Graph [ALB: from] [17] [ALB: Resolution is bad. Use a PDF.]
and facilitates the implementation of countermeasures. They
are modeled attack scenarios presented in a hierarchical way
with each labeled node corresponding to a sub-goal of the
attacker and the root being the main one - the global goal of
the attack. The rest of the labeled nodes can be either children
of a node, a refinement of the the parent’s goal into subsidiary
goals, or leaf nodes, representing attacks that cannot be
further refined in order to be implemented, also called basic
actions. The basic formal model of Attack Trees incorporate
two types of refinements: OR and AND. OR nodes represent
disjunction (choice) where the parent node’s goal is achieved
when at least one the children’s sub-goals is achieved, AND
nodes represent conjunction (aggregation) thus requiring for all
children’s sub-goals to be fulfilled. An additional refinement,
relating to the latter, is the SAND node, that pose the additional
condition for sequential realization [18], [31]. One example of
an Attack Tree is illustrated in Figure 1. In summary, there
are two separate ways for the attacker to accomplish his goal,
namely becoming a root: with or without authentication. The
two refined authentication options are ssh and rsa, and both
must be used because an AND arc is shown. On the other hand,
if no authentication is carried out, the user must first be granted
access using ftp and then rsh. Following the acquisition of
privileges, lobf comes next. It is readily apparent that the
tree notation is very appealing and convenient for a threat
analysis process since it can include multiple attacks derived
from physical, technical and even human vulnerabilities [31].
In view of this, an Attack Tree can be defined as exhaustive,
if it encompass all possible attacks, or succinct, if it covers
only network-related exploitation of the system by the attacker
[20].
B. Attack Graphs
Attack graphs are graphical representations of all the paths
through a system that end in a condition in which an attacker
has successfully achieved his malicious goal. They outline
all potential vulnerabilities and all possible attack paths in
a given network and they are frequently used to represent
complex attacks which have multiple paths and goals [17].
Attack Graphs play an important role in network security, as
they directly show the existence of vulnerabilities in network
and how attackers use these vulnerabilities to implement an
effective attack [33].
An Attack Graph or AG is a tuple G = (S, τ, S0, Ss), where
S is a set of states, τ ⊆S × S is a transition relation, S0 ⊆S
is a set of initial states, and Ss ⊆S is a set of success states
[26]. Intuitively, Ss denotes the set of states where the intruder
has achieved his goals. Unless stated otherwise, we assume
that the transition relation τ is total. We define an execution
fragment as a finite sequence of states s0, s1, ..., sn such that
(si, si + 1) ∈τ for all 0 ≤i ≤n. An execution fragment
with s0 ∈S0 is an execution, and an execution whose final
state is in Ss is an attack, i.e., the execution corresponds to a
sequence of atomic attacks leading to the intruder’s goal [26].
One example of an Attack Graph can be seen in Figure 2.
C. Attack Trees vs Attack Graphs
Attack graphs and attack trees suffer from a distinct lack of
standards, prescriptive methodologies and common approaches
in terms of their visual syntax. Attack trees are limited because
they only represent a single attack, whereas an attack graph
can represent multiple attacks. A full attack graph underlines
all potential weaknesses and all possible attack paths in a
certain network, while attack trees represent singular attacks,
and attack forest, i.e. set of ATs is a way to solve this problem.
[17]. Both attack graphs and attack trees are a graph-based
representation of a cyber-attack
Another important difference between the two models regards
their visual representation. First of all, in attack graphs the
event flow is represented top-down, while in the majority of
the attack trees this is depicted in a bottom-up way. [17].
Moreover, in the same sense, Attack Trees generally use
vertices to represent exploits and not preconditions, while
preconditions are assumed to have been met in the transition
from one exploit to the next. Attack graphs represent both.
Essentially, both Attack Trees and Attack Graphs have a graph
based structure. The main differences are: how the event flow
is depicted, the representation of full and partial attacks and
the representation of preconditions.
D. Network Security vs General case
During our research we identified two categories regarding
the attacks represented by the Attack Graphs/Trees: the Net-
work Defined attacks and the General case.
The first category is the Network Defined attacks. In this
case, the works under study are focused on dealing with
the Network Security, meaning that they engage only with
network related attacks. We classify in this category only the
papers that explicitly state that their work exclusively focus
on representing Netphwork related attacks.
The second category denoted the General case, where the
papers are also taking into account physical attacks or human
==PAGE:77==
interactions. In many cases, the security of the system is com-
promised by human errors. Especially in large organizations
where many people interact with extensive networks it is very
common for the attackers to use social engineering or take
advantage of human errors.
During our research we also discovered two papers [6], [7]
referring to the term Socio-technical system. This term refers
to a system involving: humans , machines and interaction with
the environment [3]. The Socio-technical systems have five
key characteristics as stated by Baxter et al. [3] and form
their own category. In terms of attacks types covered by the
Socio-technical systems, we found during our research that
they represent also physical attacks, like social engineering and
so we include them in the general case, but we state explicitly
that the papers are referring to Socio-technical systems.
E. Categories
One motivation for this work was to contribute to the
research community by identifying the tools and methods
commonly used in order to automatically produce Attack
Trees/Graphs. In view of this, we examined every paper and
identified the main underling technology or method used.
During this procedure we managed to identify 7 categories
among the papers included in this survey. Following, we
present a list of the categories:
• Logical Formulas: A paper falls into this category when
the main components used to represent the system are
logical formulas.
• Templates:
The
authors
are
generating
the
Attack
Trees/Graphs using templates.
• Library based: The Attack Tree/Graph is generated given
a library.
• Model Checking: A model checker is used to formally
describe the system and check some properties.
• Transformation Rules: A representation of the system
is already available and some transformation rules are
applied in order to obtain the Attack Tree/Graph.
• Artificial Intelligence: Artificial intelligence techniques
and algorithms are used in order to obtain the desired
result.
• Reachability: The Attack Tree/Graph is based on the
reachability of the nodes of the network.
We are going to examine 7 dimensions in each category:
• Proofs: If a paper includes formal proofs for the algo-
rithms applied.
• Code: If a paper includes a reference to the implementa-
tion of the proposed solution and if the code is available
online.
• Prerequisites: The prerequisites one should acquire in
order to be able to apply the proposed solution.
• Network Defined attacks, Sociotechnical or General: If
a paper proposed a Network Defined, Sociotechnical or
General solution.
• Graph or Tree: If the proposed solution results to a Tree
or a Graph.
• Experiments: If the authors conducted experiments.
• Scalability: If the authors present the scalability of their
solution.
III. RESEARCH METHOD
In this section we are presenting the research method
adopted in order to identify our final pool of papers we used
in this survey. Following, we describe the research method,
the study selection and the research questions.
A. Research Questions
Our work is aiming to examine and discuss the current
literature for automatic generation of Attack Trees and Attack
Graphs. Underlined below are the research questions that
motivated us to conduct this survey.
• RQ1:Which techniques are currently used in the field?
• RQ2:What kind of attacks are taken into account (Gen-
eral or Network Defined) and what kind of evidence are
presented to support the proposed solution (Experiments,
code, mathematical proofs, scalability)?
• RQ3:Which are the challenges/limitations we identified
in the field?
B. Research Method
We decided to conduct our research using the snowballing
technique [32]. The snowballing technique refers to the pro-
cedure of identifying relevant papers from the reference list
or the citations of a selected paper. Our final pool includes 21
papers. The steps of the procedure we followed in order to
identify our final pool of papers are the following:
1) Start Set: The first step is forming the start set of
papers. Firstly we had to identify relevant keywords to form
a query to the selected database. The keywords we selected
to use are: “Automatic Generation”, “Automated Generation”,
“Attack Trees” and “Attack Graphs”. We performed our re-
search in DTU Findit https://findit.dtu.dk, which is an open
(guest access) database and includes publications from well
known journals and databases. We used the following query:
title:(“Automatic generation” OR “Automated generation”)
AND title:(“Attack trees” OR “Attack graphs”). Our search
return 13 papers, from which 3 where not available online.
So based on relevance we formed our start set including five
papers [1], [19], [26], [30], [33].
2) Iterations: After finding the start set, we have to decide
which papers we are going to include in our final pool. For
this purpose we applied Backward and Forward Snowballing.
Backward snowballing refers to the examination of the refer-
ence list of the papers. In order to identify if a paper will be
included we extract some information regarding the title, the
author and the publication venue. Naturally, we should also
take into account the context in which the paper is referenced.
At this point, if a paper was still into consideration, we read the
abstract and other parts of the paper in order to decide if the
paper will be included. The forward snowballing is conducted
in order to identify papers from the citation list of the paper
being examined. Again, for each paper in the citation list, we
==PAGE:78==
extracted some basic information, we took into consideration
in which context the citation is taking place and for the final
decision we read parts of the paper [32].
IV. RELATED WORK
In this section we present other surveys focusing on the Au-
tomatic Generation of Attack Trees/Graphs. We also include a
table to graphically represent some main characteristics of the
paper included at the Related Work section. On Table I four
different characteristics are presented. We denote the symbol
✓when the referred paper fulfills the corresponding character-
istic. The first column includes the reference to the paper under
examination, the second column “After 2020” refers to the
papers that have been published after 2020, the third column
“Automatic Generation” refers to the papers that take examine
the Automatic Generation of Attack Trees/Graphs, the fourth
column refers to whether the paper present classification for
the papers included in their survey, based on the techniques
used in each paper and the last one if the paper indicates the
challenges identified in the field.
Kordy et al. [15] are presenting a survey focusing on DAG
based graphical models for security. Their work summarize the
state of the art of the existing methodologies, they compare
them and classify them based on their formalism. Although
this is a very extensive survey, they do not focus on the
Automated generation of these models.
Lallie et al. [17] are examining the effectiveness of the
visual representation of Attack Trees and Attack Graphs. They
analyse how these structures are representing the cyber-attacks.
They conclude that there is not a standard method to represent
the Attack Trees/Graphs and that the research community
should turn their attention on standardizing the representation.
Although this paper is a great contribution, it does not examine
the issue of the Automatic generation of these structures.
Wojciech et al. [31] are focusing on a survey regarding the
application of formal methods on Attack trees, their semi-
automated or automated generation and quantitative analysis
of Attack Trees. Although they are referring to the Automatic
generation, their research in not only focused in this part. Also
they are not referring to the automatic Generation of Attack
Graphs and their survey was conducted before 2020.
Taking everything into consideration, in our work we are
trying to provide a wider overview for the Automatic Gener-
ation of Attack Trees/Graphs.
V. OVERVIEW - QUANTITATIVE STUDY
In this section we are giving an overview of the field through
a quantitative study. The reader can find information regarding
the quantity of the papers taking into account specific char-
acteristics. The quantitative study allows us to have a better
view of the field and the lack of specific information.
A. Publisher and Publication Year
In this part we provide statistics regarding the publishers
and the publication year of the papers. Our goal is to identify
the most popular venues and how the interest of the scientific
Fig. 3. Percentage of papers published by each publisher
Fig. 4. Percentage of papers published each year
community regarding the Automatic lower case, check in other
places of the paper, please :) generation of Attack Trees and
Attack Graphs altered during the years.
We can observe in Figure 3 that the papers included in
this survey have been published by 4 different publishers -
IEEE, Springer, ACM, MDPI. The publishers with the most
publications on the filed is IEEE and Springer. Also in Figure
4 we can see the distribution of the papers through the years.
The research community turned their interest to the field on
1998 and, at intervals, it has been active since. The interest has
decreased between 2007 to 2012, but since then the research
community seems to be more active on the specific field. For
better visualisation the years with zero publications are not
presented in the diagram.
B. Percentage of papers in each category
In this work we classify the papers into 7 different cate-
gories. Here we provide information about how many papers
are in each category.
We can observe in Figure 5 that most of the papers fall
into the Model checking category. Signifying that he research
community preferred to use Model checking techniques for
the Automatic Generation of Attack Trees/Graphs.
Later, on the paper we examine each category separately
and provide the reader with proper information, in order to
establish a better understanding on each one.
==PAGE:79==
TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF THE PAPERS INCLUDED IN THE RELATED WORK
Paper
After 2020
Automatic Generation
Techniques’ Classification
Challenges
[15]
✓
✓
[17]
✓
✓
[31]
✓
✓
Our Work
✓
✓
✓
✓
Fig. 5. Percentage of papers on each category
Fig. 6. Percentage of papers on each category
C. Experiments, Proofs, Code, Scalability
In this section we are going to present how many papers
provide experiments, proofs, code or the scalability of their
solution. In our perspective, these four characteristics are key
information for the reader and a very supportive evidence
for the quality of the proposed solution. We also present
information about how many papers are referring to auto-
matic generation of Attack Graphs and how many papers are
referring to the Automatic Generation of Attack Trees. We
concluded that almost half of the papers are presenting Attack
Graphs and the other half Attack Trees. We can see the results
on Figure 6.
We can observe on Figure 6 that less than half of the papers
are presenting experiments or proofs and even less refers to
the scalability, in terms of complexity of their solution.
VI. CLASSIFICATION BASED ON THE CATEGORIES
In this section, we present out findings for each category. At
the beginning of each category we present a brief overview of
our findings, following with a detailed presentation of each
paper. We also include tables to graphically represent the
key characteristics of every paper. On Tables II-VIII eleven
different characteristics have been identified. We denote the
symbol ✓when the referred paper fulfills the corresponding
characteristic. The first column includes the reference to
the paper under examination, the second column “Network
Defined” refers to the papers only including network related
attacks, the third column “General Attacks” refers to the
papers that take into account multiple attacks at the automatic
generation procedure, the fourth column refers to whether the
paper presents Attack Trees and the fifth whether the paper
presents Attack Graphs, the sixth whether the paper presents
experiments, the seventh whether the code of the proposed
solution is available, the eighth whether the paper presents
proofs, the ninth if there is a reference to the scalability in
terms of complexity, the tenth if the proposed solution requires
any prerequisites and finally the eleventh indicates the year that
the paper was published. The later is the only one filled with
a number and not a ✓.
A. Logical Formulas
All of the papers falling in this category are using Logic as
the basic technique to generate the Attack Tree/Graph.
It may be a bit of an overkill to present this detailed statistics
when the category just consists of 2 papers. Let’s discuss
this. One way to go could be to provide a shorter summary,
focusing on what really is worth remarking. In this category
9.52% of the papers are included. We can see that the range of
publication years are from 2006 to 2014. All of the papers are
referring to the scalability of their solution. We also can see
that 1 out of 2 (50%) papers are generating Attack Trees and
1 out of 2 (50%) is generating an Attack Graph. Additionally,
it is worth pointing out that 1 out of 2 (50%) papers are
presenting solution only related to the network security and
only 1 out of 2 (50%) is presenting a general approach
regarding to attacks taken into account. Furthermore, 1 out
of 2 (50%) papers have the code available online and 1 out
of 2 (50%) papers present experiments. All of the papers are
providing formal proofs for their solution. Finally, 1 out of 2
(50%) papers present solutions that require some prerequisites.
Below we are presenting the papers included in this category.
Vigo et al. [30] propose a static-analysis approach. The
authors use the Quality Calculus as specification language. The
processes are translated to proposition formulae, demonstrat-
ing the connection between channel knowledge and program
point accessibility. Then, the authors propose a backward
==PAGE:80==
TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF THE PAPERS INCLUDED IN THE CATEGORY LOGIC
Paper
Network Defined
General Attacks
Attack Tree
Attack Graph
Experiments
Code
Proof
Scalability
Prerequisites
Year
[30]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
2014
[21]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
2006
chaining search to the formulae from a program point l in order
to generate the attack tree. The backward chaining exposes all
the paths leading to point l, thus unveiling all the information
needed to reach that point. The proposed way, defines the sys-
tem in a formal manner and the threat scenarios are derived au-
tomatically by the definition of the system. Moreover, process
calculi has been used broadly for defining software systems
and organizations in a coherent way. It is worth pointing out
that the authors are studying Attack Trees, but their approach
can be also applied to produce Attack Graphs. They also refer
to the scalability saying that the worst case is exponential,
but this case does not occurs systematically as in the model
checking approaches. The authors also share their code on
http : //www.imm.dtu.dk/ ∼rvig/quality −trees.html.
As a future work they state that they want to compare their
approach with existing ones. The limitation of this approach is
that they can only check if something has been received in the
channel, but not the content. Finally, their is not a reference
to the soundness of the result and the generated Attack Trees
are mostly used for quantitative analysis.
Ou et al. [21] present a work based on MulVAL. MulVAL
is a system for automatically identifying security vulnera-
bilities in networks. The central notion of MulVAL is that
the configurations can be represented as Datalog tuples and
security semantics and most attacks can be represented as
Datalog rules. Every rule can be viewed as a logical formula.
It evaluates the Datalog rules using XSB, a prolog system. The
authors modified the MulVAL system to record the trace of the
evaluations and send it to the graph builder. In every successful
query a function notes the successful deviation to the trace file.
The paper also introduces an algorithm to transform the traces
into an attack graph. The transformation takes every trace step
and transforms it to a part of a graph. This work is focused
on the Network Security, meaning that the Generated Attack
Graph do not include General Attacks. The proposed solution
is supported with related formal proofs and experiments, but
the code of the proposed solution is not available. Also, the
generation of the Attack Graph is taking place in quadratic
time. It is worth pointing out that the size of the generated
logical graph is polynomial to the size of the network. In
order to generate an Attack Graph using the proposed solution
the are three prerequisites: Network configuration, machine
configuration and security advisories.
B. Model Checking
All the papers in this category are using Model Checking
to automatically generate the Attack Tree/Graph.
In this category 28.57% of the total papers. We can observe
from the Table III that the chronological range of the pub-
lications is from 2002 to 2020. All of the papers have some
prerequisites. Only 1 out of 6 (16.67%) papers has a reference
to the scalability of the solution. Also, only 1 out of 6 (16.67%)
papers present proofs and provides the code of the proposed
solution. Furthermore, 4 out of 6 (66.67%) are presenting
experiments, but none of them provides the code. This is a
drawback since the reader cannot reproduce the experiments.
Concerning the attacks included, 4 out of 6 (66.67%) papers
are focused on the network security and the rest 2 out of 6
(33.34%) are presenting Attack Trees with general attacks.
On this note the papers presenting General Attacks are only
using Attack Trees as a graphical representation model and
the rest of the papers present Attack Graphs and are focused
on Network Defined attacks.
Sheyner et al. [27] in an earlier work presented a method
to generate attack graphs automatically, with the use of model
checking [26]. The authors choose six network components
in order to construct network attack models: a set of host,
a connectivity relation, a trust relation among the hosts,
an intruder model, a set of individual actions the intruder
can exploit to design an attack and an intrusion detection
system. In order to construct the set of actions the intruder
can exploit, the authors use real world vulnerabilities from
the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) database.
In order to construct the attack graph, the toolkit checks a
security property with model checking, in order to ensure
that the property is satisfied. An overview of the toolkit is
also presented, along with the main components and the user
interface. The authors focus on Network Defined attacks.
They do not present proofs, the scalability of the solution or
the code. However, they present experiments. The required
prerequisites are: the network topology, configuration data for
each networked host and a library of attack rules. As a future
work the authors want to specify a library of actions based
on a vulnerability database provided to us by SEI/CERT. The
current paper outlines a toolkit.
Sheyner et al. [26] their work present the network as a finite
state machine. They have modified the model checker NuSVM
in order to automatically generate the attack graph. First they
form a security property. The model checker takes as input
the property and the model M (the network). If the property is
satisfied the model checker returns true, otherwise it provides
a counterexample. The counterexample depicts a path that
the attacker can follow to violate the security property. As a
future work, they aim to generate attack graphs for a more
general class of properties, apart from security properties.
In this work the state of the model is depicted as a set of
booleans representing the configuration of the network and
==PAGE:81==
TABLE III
OVERVIEW OF THE PAPERS INCLUDED IN THE CATEGORY MODEL CHECKING
Paper
Network Defined
General Attacks
Attack Tree
Attack Graph
Experiments
Code
Proof
Scalability
Prerequisites
Year
[27]
✓
✓
✓
✓
2004
[26]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
2002
[23]
✓
✓
✓
✓
2016
[2]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
2020
[9]
✓
✓
✓
2019
[6]
✓
✓
✓
✓
2015
the attacker’s actions as state transitions. As a consequence,
the state-space created is exponential to the number of the
system’s variables. This work involves Attack Graphs focused
on Network Defined attacks. The authors present proofs and
experiments, but do not present the code and the scalability
of their solution.
Pinchinat et al. [23] present ATSyRA. ATSyRA is a tool
implemented on top of Eclipse to help the security experts
interact with a user friendly environment when designing
Attack Trees. The main motivation of the implementation of
the tool was the security of military buildings. As a first
step, the security expert has to define the system: the building
description, the attacker’s strength and their attack objective.
The second step is to run the generation of the attack scenarios.
The current step compiles the input specification into an attack
graph. As a third step, the security expert is specifying a set
of high level actions (HLA). The HLA imply how it can be
refined into sub actions. The final step is to run the Attack
Tree synthesis. This step uses the information given in step 3
and the graph produced in step 2, to construct the Attack Tree.
The underlying interface for achieving this is a model checking
algorithm. As a future work the authors want to examine other
inputs from other fields. The paper presents General Attacks
and create Attack Trees. The authors also provide the code
in the form of a tool (https://atsyra2.irisa.fr/). The scalability,
proofs and experiments are not provided in the paper. The
description of the system is set as a prerequisite. They also
state that a fully automated procedure may result in unsound
results. We can observe that the solution is not fully automated
since the security expert is also taking an active part in the
procedure.
Ghazo et al. [2] introduce an algorithm for automatic graph
construction and visualization that exploits an existing tool
of model checking. In this work a tool for the description
of architecture is taken into account. Its aim is creating the
attack graph list of existing sequences in which atomic-level
vulnerabilities could be used as a way to threaten the security
of the system under consideration. The present tool can
generate a representation of the system, i.e. network level, but
also atomic vulnerabilities, post conditions and properties re-
garding security that can be valuable for our security purposes.
Moreover, a model checker is used to identify in an automated
way, the sequence of the attack as a counterexample. Then the
counterexamples are parsed and iterated until attack sequences
are found. Finally, a tool for visualization is used, to generate
the graph. Essentially, this work introduces the development of
a tool in the form of a graphical model to capture the vulner-
abilities of an analyzed system by automatically constructing
a graph exploiting features of an existing model checker.
Ibrahim et al. [9] present a solution including Hybrid Attack
Graphs (HAG). Generally, HAGs illustrate the alteration of
logical and real parameter values of an attacked system, as
well as some recovery actions. Automated HAGs are generated
automatically and can be visualized with a Java based tool.
This procedure requires a formal description of the system’s
model and the security property (AADL language), validated
by a model checker named JKind. This work offers a proof
on how AHAGs can obtain logical changes in the parameters
of the specific system under attack. In essence, the authors
present a binary classification problem and a multi-output
learning algorithm in order to generate an attack graph starting
from some given information on an analyzed system and a
network.
David et al. [6] present a methodology for the modeling
of socio-technical attacks and systems, namely those that are
related to human behaviour. With the use of timed automata
and automated model checking, it is possible to obtain in an
automatic manner the possible attacks regarding the considered
model. You may also do simulations and analyze the obtained
attacks or the model itself. Finally, state-of-the-art tools can
be exploited to analyze models by employing timed automata
in this methodology. In this methodology, model checking
is included so that we can spot attacks against the analyzed
system. In the end, a complex example is provided, describing
an application of this procedure.
C. Templates
In this category belong the papers using templates to gen-
erate the Attack Trees/Graphs.
This category includes 23.80% of the total papers. We can
see that the year of publication vary from 1998 to 2020.
We can observe on Table IV that all of the papers require
prerequisites. Also, 3 out of 5 (60%) papers are limited to
Network Defined attacks, the rest of them (40%) are dealing
with General attacks. Furthermore, 2 out of 5 papers are
constructing an Attack Tree, while 3 out of 5 are constructing
an Attack Graph. Only 1 out of 5 (20%) of the papers is
presenting experiments, the same percentage includes proofs.
Additionally, 1 out of 5 (20%) papers are sharing the code
of their solution. It is important to point out that none of
==PAGE:82==
TABLE IV
OVERVIEW OF THE PAPERS INCLUDED IN THE CATEGORY TEMPLATES
Paper
Network Defined
General Attacks
Attack Tree
Attack Graph
Experiments
Code
Proof
Scalability
Prerequisites
Year
[5]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
2020
[28]
✓
✓
✓
2002
[29]
✓
✓
✓
✓
2014
[16]
✓
✓
✓
2020
[22]
✓
✓
✓
1998
TABLE V
OVERVIEW OF THE PAPERS INCLUDED IN THE CATEGORY LIBRARY-BASED
Paper
Network Defined
General Attacks
Attack Tree
Attack Graph
Experiments
Code
Proof
Scalability
Prerequisites
Year
[24]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
2020
[13]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
2018
the papers are referring to the scalability of their proposed
solution.
Bryans et al. [5] introduce a method to generate attack trees
automatically from the description of the network and a set
of templates. Each template represents an attack step. The
templates are using variables that have to be replaced by the
components of the system under investigation. The proposed
algorithm is recursive, at each step a leaf of the template trees
is investigated and expanded if the leaf contains an unbounded
variable. If the name of the child matches the name of the root
of one of the templates, it is replaced. When, the unbounded
variable matches multiple templates an OR node is introduced.
The authors are constructing an Attack Tree and the code
is available online at https://tinyurl.com/uoptgfb. They also
present the experiments conducted, but they do not refer to
the scalability and the proofs. As a future work they aim to
expand the method to support more networks, since right now
they are focused on automotive communication networks.
Swiler et al. [28] proposed a method to generate an attack
graph, in which each node represents a state of the network.
The tool has as an input the configuration of the network, the
attacker’s profile and the attack templates. The attack templates
represent steps of known attacks or strategies of moving from
one state to another. The tool combines the input information
and customizes the generic template attacks according to the
attacker profile and the network configuration. Every graph
includes some variables that represent the state of the network.
When a node in a graph matches the requirements of the
template a new edge is added to the network and new nodes are
created. This paper is dealing with Network Defined attacks.
The authors are not providing experiments, proofs, code or
refer to the scalability of their solution.
Tippenhauer et al. [29] are presenting a Goal System
Attacker graph. There is a 3-step procedure to generate it. At
first the security goal and the workflow of the system are used
to produce the G-graph. The result is used in combination with
the system description to generate the GS-graph, which is then
combined with the attacker model to generate the GSA graph.
The authors used the framework described above and noticed
that there is a series of patterns. These patterns were used
to implement some templates. Afterwards, they defined local
extensions to progressively generate these graphs using the
predefined templates. If there is a matching node, the template
is being integrated to the main graph. The authors are taking
into account General attacks and they present proofs for their
work. They do not give an input for the scalability, the code
or any experiments conducted.
Kumar et al. [16] introduce the use of an AT template
as a feature diagram, i.e. formal and graphical notations, to
solve the non-standardization problem of Attack Trees. This
problem states that, in general, a standard template for Attack
Trees design does not exist. The template considered in this
work is structured in layers each refining the previous ones,
in order to construct tree semi-automatically. This Attack Tree
template can be seen as an abstraction that can capture crucial
scenarios about attacks by refining hierarchical relationship
rules. Moreover, the template is constructed by going through
the literature on Attack Trees so that common characteristics in
their design can be found. Summing up, the authors present a
way for identifying proper meta-categories suitable for Attack
Trees by means of feature diagrams, in order to construct the
trees in a semi-automated manner.
Phillips et al. [22] present a system where the graph is
generated using the attack profile, the input templates and
the configuration of the system. The procedure starts from
the goal node and is built backwards. Then, we search the
templates to find an edge that the head matches the goal
node. The paths that do not satisfy the attacker profile are
eliminated. The procedure is being repeated until we reach an
initial state that is not the head of an edge. The authors claim
that their approach can model dynamic aspects by overwriting
the configuration of the network. As a prerequisite, besides
the configuration of the network and the attacker’s profile, a
database with common attacks is also required. They do not
present the code, proofs, experiments or a reference to the
scalability.
D. Library Based
All the papers included to this category are constructing the
Attack Trees/Graphs given a Library.
==PAGE:83==
TABLE VI
OVERVIEW OF THE PAPERS INCLUDED IN THE CATEGORY Artificial Intelligence
Paper
Network Defined
General Attacks
Attack Tree
Attack Graph
Experiments
Code
Proof
Scalability
Prerequisites
Year
[14]
✓
✓
✓
✓
2022
[4]
✓
✓
2019
TABLE VII
OVERVIEW OF THE PAPERS INCLUDED IN THE CATEGORY REACHABILITY
Paper
Network Defined
General Attacks
Attack Tree
Attack Graph
Experiments
Code
Proof
Scalability
Prerequisites
Year
[10]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
2006
[8]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
2013
In this category of the papers are included 9.52% . We can
see that the year of publication range from 2018 to 2020.
All of the papers are taking into account General Attacks
and are constructing Attack Trees. Also, all of the papers are
presenting the code and proofs supporting their solution and
require some prerequisites. Finally 1 out of 2 (50%) of the
papers are referring ti the scalability.
Pinchinat et al. [24] are constructing an Attack Tree. The
main goal of this work is to construct the attack tree that
explains a trace given a library L (a set of refinement rules).
This approach is also good for forensics, but one should
have the logs. The attack tree is being build according to
the refinements provided by the library. The algorithm that
handles the procedure is based on the CYK algorithm, which
answers whether some input context free grammar can gen-
erate some input world. The code is also available for the
readers on http://attacktreesynthesis.irisa.fr/. The procedure is
Semi-automatic to avoid unsound results. Also the Attack Tree
consists of AND, OR and SAND refinements. The authors
are also presenting proofs for their solution. The mentioned
scalability is that the algorithm is polynomial at the size of
the trace. The attacks taken into account are General. Finally,
the authors are not presenting experiments.
Jhawar et al. [13] presented a work focused on an semi-
automatic procedure for creating attack trees. The construction
of the Attack trees can be summed up in four steps: First
step: A group of experts define an initial version of the tree.
Second step: Some automatic mechanisms are used to enhance
the tree. Third step: The experts curate the new version of
the tree. Fourth step: Repeat step two and three. The paper is
focusing on implementing the second step. The authors express
a predicate based annotation of the tree, that to determine if
an attack tree can be attached to another attack tree as a sub-
tree. The authors construct a library of annotated attack trees
using the National Vulnerability Database. After that, they use
this library to extend attack trees manually constructed, using
the Common Attack Pattern Enumeration and Classification.
As a future work, they want to implement a dynamic library
and expand the idea in other fields like counterexamples. The
code is available online at https://github.com/yramirezc/lib-
annotated-attack-trees. The authors are also providing the
reader with proofs for their solution. Finally, they do not
present experiments or the Scalability of their solution.
E. Artificial Intelligence
All the papers assigned in this category are using Artificial
Intelligence in order to construct the corresponding Attack
Trees/Graphs.
In this category are included 9.52% of the papers included
in this survey. The range of the publication years varies
from 2019 to 2022. We can observe that all the papers are
dealing with Network Defined attacks and are constructing the
corresponding Attack Graph. Also none of the papers share the
code of their solution. Furthermore, 1 out of 2 (50%) papers
are presenting experiments and have prerequisites. None of the
papers in this category are presenting proofs or the scalability
of their approach.
Koo et al. [14] introduces a method to support the generation
of an attack path given a set of attack graphs by using Deep
Learning and Machine Learning. The attack graph is obtained
by training the model. It is important to note that, in order
to achieve our goal, the topology of the network and system
information are needed. We then apply feature extraction to
acquire an attack graph generation model by exploiting the
input data. Finally, the authors are using an evaluation metric
to evaluate the predicted path. To sum up, the authors present
a binary classification problem together with a multi-output
learning algorithm, in order to generate an attack graph starting
from information of the system and the network.
Bezawanda et al. [4] presented a tool that automatically
generates the PDDL representation of an Attack Graph from
descriptions found in the CVE or the NVD system. The
authors are using natural language processing to produce
the PDDL from the textual description. Also the tool offers
the transformation of the PDDL to the corresponding Attack
Graph for visualization purposes. The procedure can be ex-
plained in 4 steps. First step: Extract information from the
Vulnerability database and form the PDDL domain. Second
step: Form the PDDL problems using the PDDL domain and
event logs of the system. Third step: An Artificial Intelligence
algorithm is generating a PDDL plan for each PDDL problem.
Fourth step: The tool updates the content of the PDDL domain
in every modification of the input data. It is also worthy to
point out what is a PDDL domain and a PDDL problem. The
==PAGE:84==
TABLE VIII
OVERVIEW OF THE PAPERS INCLUDED IN THE CATEGORY TRANSFORMATION RULES
Paper
Network Defined
General Attacks
Attack Tree
Attack Graph
Experiments
Code
Proof
Scalability
Prerequisites
Year
[7]
✓
✓
✓
2016
[11]
✓
✓
✓
2016
PPDL domain is some problem descriptions with the corre-
sponding actions and constraints. The PPDL domain includes
abstract variables. When these variables take a specific value,
an instance of the PDDL domain is created which is called
PDDL problem. The PDDL problem is solved with the help
of the PDDL planner, that is trying to find a plan to satisfy
the PDDL problem (sequnce of action one must perform to
achive the end goal). The authors do not present experiments,
code, proofs or the scalability of their solution. Finally, we
should point out that there are no required prerequisites.
F. Reachability
All the papers included in this category are using the
Reachability of the nodes in the network in order to construct
the corresponding Attack Tree/Graph.
This category includes 9.52% of the papers. The years of
publication ranges from 2006 to 2013. All of the papers in this
category are presenting experiments and show the scalability.
Also, all of the papers require some prerequisites and deal
with Network defined attacks. Furthermore, 1 out of 2 (50%)
papers is constructing an Attack Tree and the other one an
Attack Graph. None of the papers are providing the reader
with their code or formal proofs of their solution.
Ingols et al. [10] proposed a system based on multiple
prerequisite graphs. They argue that this type of graphs are
better that the full graphs or the predictive graphs due to the
lack of dependencies. The system processes the input data
(Map of the network) and computes the reachability matrix.
The computation of the reachability matrix is equipped with
some improvements crucial to saving memory and time. Some
sections of the matrix are collapsed into reachability groups.
The filtering rules are replaced by Binary decision diagrams,
resulting to filtering rules in linear time. The graph is con-
structed using a breadth first technique. Multiple prerequisite
graphs consist of three different kinds of nodes; state nodes,
prerequisite nodes and vulnerability instance nodes. During
the construction, every type of node is being added differently
to the graph. Also, this work presents a graph simplification
for visual presentation. The proposed solution import data
from: Nessus, Sidewinder and Checkpoint firewalls, the CVE
dictionary and NVD. The generation of the Attack Graph
depends on data that can be obtained quickly. The data are
evaluated and reported as early sa possible. This work assumes
that the paths are monotonic, meaning that the attacker will
never go back. Also, the authors are not modelling Client
side attacks. The authors refer to the scalability in terms of
complexity as almost linear to the size of the network. Also,
they present experiments for their solution. Finally, it is also
worth mentioning that they do not present the code or proofs
for their work.
Hong et al. [8] identify all the paths in the network of
the system to construct the full AT, which consists of AND
and OR gates. After the construction of the full AT there
are two proposed methods: 1. Simplified Attack Tree with
Full Path Calculations 2. SATwIPC simplified Attack Tree
with Increental Path calculation. The first method requires a
logical expression of the attack tree and removes the sequence
information from the expression but it groups similar nodes.
The second method is maintaining attack path information
and is constructed by exploiting network configurations and
sequences of vulnerabilities. The authors present Attack Trees
that depict attacks concerning only the Network Security. The
authors do not present formal proofs or the code of their solu-
tion, but they present the scalability and experiments. Finally,
the proposed solution has one prerequisite the description of
the network.
G. Transformation Rules
In this category the papers that are using Transformation
Rules to obtain the corresponding Attack Tree are included.
This category include 9.52% of the papers included in this
survey. Also, the publication year for all the papers is 2016. All
of the papers included in this category are taking into account
General Attacks and construct the corresponding Attack Tree.
Furthermore none of the papers in this category are presenting
experiments, the code, proofs or scalability of the proposed
solution.
Gadyatskaya et al. [7] presents an Attack-Defense tree
generation for socio-technical models. These trees represent
both the attacker’s options and the available countermeasures.
This work presents the creation of a group of Attack-Defense
bundles given a so io-technical model. These bundles can
be used for generating Attack-Defense Trees. In this context,
socio-technical models are important because they can capture
General attacks, also in large organizations. Basically, the aim
of this work is the automation of Attack Tree construction,
exploiting socio-technical models.
Ivanova et al. [11] are aiming to transform a graphical
system model to a graphical attack model. The graphical
system model includes: locations, actors, processes, items. The
actors and the processes can be decorated with policies and
credentials. For every component the authors introduce some
guidelines for transforming the graphical representation to the
corresponding Attack Tree. As a future work the authors would
like to extend their model to include attacks aiming to disturb
the environment of the system, where current solution deal
with confidentiality and integrity.
==PAGE:85==
VII. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
After classifying and examining different characteristics of
every paper we identified some challenges in the field. In this
section we present the challenges identified that can serve as
future direction for the research community.
• Use of SAND: In the automatic generation of Attack Trees
only a few papers are including the SAND operator.
The SAND operator can represent multiple situations
that occur in different kind of attacks [12]. So we believe
that it is important to also include this operator at the
automatic generation.
• Use of XOR: There is no reference is the literature of
the exclusive choice operator. There are cases in some
attacks that an attacker will end up with an exclusive
choice. For example to break one out of two doors, due
to the equipment available - i.e. one bomb available. In
our opinion it is necessary for the research community
to include such an operator on the Attack Trees. With
the addition of the XOR operator the security experts or
the programs analysing the potential attacks can exclude
some paths or traces.
• Dynamic Solutions: The systems are being upgraded
constantly. New variables or configurations can make an
Attack Tree/Graph useless. The need for more dynamic
solutions are crucial. There are a few papers in the
literature dealing with this issue.
• Poor Semantics / Proofs: The use of semantics and
proofs is really important. There are some works that
do not use proofs or semantics to support their solution.
Neglecting the semantics can lead to poor or unsound
results. The use of proofs can help the reader better
understand the concepts used and help the researchers
expand the field. Semantics can help the community
develop the same language concerning the generation of
Attack Trees/Graphs.
• Forensics: Another field important to the security experts
are forensics. Forensics can help the security experts
identify vulnerabilities that did not previously taken into
account and secure better their systems. Using forensics
one can generate Attack Trees/Graphs to depict what
when wrong in a system.
• Sound Results: The automatic generation of Attack
Trees/Graphs provide a very good tool for the security
experts. But it might produce unsound results that are not
usable. There are not many works providing proper means
to prevent the generation of unsound results. Mostly semi-
automated procedures have been proposed to avoid the
generation of unsound results.
• Prerequisites: Most of the papers require some prerequi-
sites in order to generate the Attack Tree/Graph. This
might be tedious for the security experts (since they
might follow a semi-automated procedure, that requires
their involvement), but a fully automated procedure might
produce unsound results. Some prerequisites can be the
configuration of the system, which is a very important file
that an attacker can exploit to take control of the system.
So the prerequisites can themselves be a vulnerability.
It is important to find the right balance between the
amount of the prerequisites and the sound results. It is
also important to examine the nature of the prerequisite
and how crucial they can be for the security of the system.
• Scalability: The Scalability is one of the main character-
istics of a tool. Nowadays we use very large networks
to cover our needs. The automatic generation of Attack
Trees should be adapted to be able to perform under these
circumstances. So, it is important to study the scalability
and try to optimize the proposed algorithms.
• Attack Defence Trees: A few papers are investigating
the Automatic generation of Attack Defence Trees. After
the automatic generation of Attack Trees/Graphs, is it
natural to investigate the generation f the corresponding
defences/countermeasures.
VIII. CONCLUSION
Graphical Representation Models are widely used in the
security field to depict all possible attacks of a system. Two of
the most common Graphical representation models are Attack
Trees and Attack Graphs. These structures provide a user
friendly representation for the security experts and in parallel
they constitute a useful tool for analyzing the systems under in-
vestigation. Designing these kind of graphical representations
by hand can be error-prone and tedious for the security experts.
Consequently, the research community turned their interest in
finding ways to automatically generate these structures. In this
work we present the state of the art of the automatic generation
of Attack Trees/Graphs. We structured our survey to answer
3 research questions: RQ1, Which techniques are currently
used in the field, RQ2, what kind of attacks are taken into
account and the evidence the authors present to support their
solution (experiment, scalability, code, mathematical proofs),
RQ3, what kind of limitations we identified in the field. We
answered RQ1, by classifying the papers into 7 different
categories in Section VI and presenting the categories with
the percentage of their population in Section V. Following
that, we answered RQ2 in Section V, giving an overview of
how many papers included the corresponding parameters and
in Section VI we also present tables that show in detail which
paper include which parameters. Finally, taken everything
into consideration we answer RQ3 in Section VII, where we
present the limitations/challenges we identified in the field that
also constitute future directions for the research community.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by Innovation Fund Denmark
and the Digital Research Centre Denmark, through bridge
project “SIOT – Secure Internet of Things – Risk analysis
in design and operation”.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Ugur Aksu, Kemal Bicakci, M. Hadi Dilek, A. Murat Ozbayoglu,
and E. ıslam Tatli. Automated generation of attack graphs using nvd.
In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM Conference on Data and Application
==PAGE:86==
Security and Privacy, CODASPY ’18, page 135–142, New York, NY,
USA, 2018. Association for Computing Machinery.
[2] Alaa T. Al Ghazo, Mariam Ibrahim, Hao Ren, and Ratnesh Kumar.
A2g2v: Automatic attack graph generation and visualization and its
applications to computer and scada networks. IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 50(10):3488–3498, 2020.
[3] Gordon Baxter and Ian Sommerville. Socio-technical systems: From
design methods to systems engineering. Interacting with Computers,
23(1):4–17, 2011.
[4] Bruhadeshwar Bezawada, Indrajit Ray, and Kushagra Tiwary. Agbuilder:
an ai tool for automated attack graph building, analysis, and refinement.
In IFIP Annual Conference on Data and Applications Security and
Privacy, pages 23–42. Springer, 2019.
[5] Jeremy Bryans, Lin Shen Liew, Hoang Nga Nguyen, Giedre Sabali-
auskaite, Siraj Shaikh, and Fengjun Zhou. A template-based method
for the generation of attack trees. In Maryline Laurent and Thanassis
Giannetsos, editors, Information Security Theory and Practice, pages
155–165, Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing.
[6] Nicolas David, Alexandre David, Rene Rydhof Hansen, Kim G. Larsen,
Axel Legay, Mads Chr. Olesen, and Christian W. Probst.
Modelling
social-technical attacks with timed automata.
In Proceedings of the
7th ACM CCS International Workshop on Managing Insider Security
Threats, MIST ’15, page 21–28, New York, NY, USA, 2015. Association
for Computing Machinery.
[7] Olga Gadyatskaya. How to generate security cameras: Towards defence
generation for socio-technical systems. In Sjouke Mauw, Barbara Kordy,
and Sushil Jajodia, editors, Graphical Models for Security, pages 50–65,
Cham, 2016. Springer International Publishing.
[8] Jin Bum Hong, Dong Seong Kim, and Tadao Takaoka.
Scalable
attack representation model using logic reduction techniques. In 2013
12th IEEE International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in
Computing and Communications, pages 404–411, 2013.
[9] Mariam Ibrahim and Ahmad Alsheikh.
Automatic hybrid attack
graph (ahag) generation for complex engineering systems. Processes,
7(11):787, 2019.
[10] Kyle Ingols, Richard Lippmann, and Keith Piwowarski. Practical attack
graph generation for network defense. In 2006 22nd Annual Computer
Security Applications Conference (ACSAC’06), pages 121–130, 2006.
[11] Marieta Georgieva Ivanova, Christian W. Probst, Ren´e Rydhof Hansen,
and Florian Kamm¨uller.
Transforming graphical system models to
graphical attack models. In Sjouke Mauw, Barbara Kordy, and Sushil
Jajodia, editors, Graphical Models for Security, pages 82–96, Cham,
2016. Springer International Publishing.
[12] Ravi Jhawar, Barbara Kordy, Sjouke Mauw, Saˇsa Radomirovi´c, and
Rolando Trujillo-Rasua. Attack trees with sequential conjunction. In
Hannes Federrath and Dieter Gollmann, editors, ICT Systems Security
and Privacy Protection, pages 339–353, Cham, 2015. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing.
[13] Ravi Jhawar, Karim Lounis, Sjouke Mauw, and Yunior Ram´ırez-Cruz.
Semi-automatically augmenting attack trees using an annotated attack
tree library. In International Workshop on Security and Trust Manage-
ment, pages 85–101. Springer, 2018.
[14] Kijong Koo, Daesung Moon, Jun-Ho Huh, Se-Hoon Jung, and Hansung
Lee.
Attack graph generation with machine learning for network
security. Electronics, 11(9):1332, 2022.
[15] Barbara Kordy, Ludovic Pi`etre-Cambac´ed`es, and Patrick Schweitzer.
Dag-based attack and defense modeling: Don’t miss the forest for the
attack trees. Computer Science Review, 13-14:1–38, 2014.
[16] Rajesh Kumar.
An attack tree template based on feature diagram
hierarchy. In 2020 IEEE 6th International Conference on Dependability
in Sensor, Cloud and Big Data Systems and Application (DependSys),
pages 92–97, 2020.
[17] Harjinder Singh Lallie, Kurt Debattista, and Jay Bal. A review of attack
graph and attack tree visual syntax in cyber security. Computer Science
Review, 35:100219, 2020.
[18] Sjouke Mauw and Martijn Oostdijk. Foundations of attack trees. In
Dong Ho Won and Seungjoo Kim, editors, Information Security and
Cryptology - ICISC 2005, pages 186–198, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[19] K. Muthumanickam and E. Ilavarasan.
Automatic generation of p2p
botnet network attack graph. In Vinu V. Das, editor, Proceedings of the
Third International Conference on Trends in Information, Telecommuni-
cation and Computing, pages 367–373, New York, NY, 2013. Springer
New York.
[20] Vidhyashree Nagaraju, Lance Fiondella, and Thierry Wandji. A survey
of fault and attack tree modeling and analysis for cyber risk management.
In 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Technologies for Homeland
Security (HST), pages 1–6, 2017.
[21] Xinming Ou, Wayne F Boyer, and Miles A McQueen.
A scalable
approach to attack graph generation. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM
conference on Computer and communications security, pages 336–345,
2006.
[22] Cynthia Phillips and Laura Painton Swiler. A graph-based system for
network-vulnerability analysis. In Proceedings of the 1998 Workshop
on New Security Paradigms, NSPW ’98, page 71–79, New York, NY,
USA, 1998. Association for Computing Machinery.
[23] Sophie Pinchinat, Mathieu Acher, and Didier Vojtisek.
Atsyra: An
integrated environment for synthesizing attack trees. In Sjouke Mauw,
Barbara Kordy, and Sushil Jajodia, editors, Graphical Models for Secu-
rity, pages 97–101, Cham, 2016. Springer International Publishing.
[24] Sophie Pinchinat, Franc¸ois Schwarzentruber, and S´ebastien Lˆe Cong.
Library-based attack tree synthesis.
In Harley Eades III and Olga
Gadyatskaya, editors, Graphical Models for Security, pages 24–44,
Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing.
[25] Bruce Schneier. Attack trees. Dr. Dobb’s journal, 24(12):21–29, 1999.
[26] O. Sheyner, J. Haines, S. Jha, R. Lippmann, and J.M. Wing. Automated
generation and analysis of attack graphs. In Proceedings 2002 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy, pages 273–284, 2002.
[27] Oleg Sheyner and Jeannette Wing. Tools for generating and analyzing
attack graphs.
In International symposium on formal methods for
components and objects, pages 344–371. Springer, 2003.
[28] L.P. Swiler, C. Phillips, D. Ellis, and S. Chakerian. Computer-attack
graph generation tool. In Proceedings DARPA Information Survivability
Conference and Exposition II. DISCEX’01, volume 2, pages 307–321
vol.2, 2001.
[29] Nils Ole Tippenhauer, William G. Temple, An Hoa Vu, Binbin Chen,
David M. Nicol, Zbigniew Kalbarczyk, and William H. Sanders. Au-
tomatic generation of security argument graphs.
In 2014 IEEE 20th
Pacific Rim International Symposium on Dependable Computing, pages
33–42, 2014.
[30] Roberto Vigo, Flemming Nielson, and Hanne Riis Nielson. Automated
generation of attack trees.
In 2014 IEEE 27th Computer Security
Foundations Symposium, pages 337–350, 2014.
[31] Wojciech Wideł, Maxime Audinot, Barbara Fila, and Sophie Pinchinat.
Beyond 2014: Formal methods for attack tree–based security modeling.
ACM Comput. Surv., 52(4), aug 2019.
[32] Claes Wohlin. Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies
and a replication in software engineering. In Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software
Engineering, EASE ’14, New York, NY, USA, 2014. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[33] Shangqin Zhong, Danfeng Yan, and Chen Liu. Automatic generation
of host-based network attack graph. In 2009 WRI World Congress on
Computer Science and Information Engineering, volume 1, pages 93–98,
2009.
