==PAGE:1==
Conditional generative modeling for differ-
ential privacy
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sciencce
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Grigor Spalj
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sciencce,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In today’s world of advanced technology and high performing computations, data is stored
and processed by every company and in every field, and with the advances in machine
learning most of them use the data for prediction or other tasks. With most of them
handling sensitive data, researchers have developed various ways of ensuring privacy of
such data, one of them being differential privacy.
With differential privacy, we can ensure to the user that the privacy of their sensitive data
is less likely to be compromised. Therefore, we can use their data to train a generative
model which produces data resembling the real, but sensitive data, in order to have enough
samples to successfully train an accurate model used for further research.
We start by training a model which produces correlated noise values such that the pertur-
bations of the data resemble the original data distribution. In lower dimensions we show
how the model is quite effective and is able to generate new samples in different ways.
This will, however, be met with the curse of dimensionality, showing that the model is
data-dependent and requires more research in order to be effective for high dimensional
data manifolds.
ii
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to associate professor Siavash Arjomand
Bigdeli. Throughout the entirety of the thesis, he provided great advice and insight for
my work. Whenever I faced problems, he would provide excellent ideas and steer me in
the right direction.
I would also like to thank my family for their constant support. They helped me whenever
I would lack inspiration and have encouraged me to never give up. They are the reason
all of this was possible.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Work
2
2.1
Differential privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Differential privacy in machine learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Generative modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Differential privacy in generative modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Theory, methods and materials
5
3.1
Differential privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Generative models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Data generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Performance metrics and other experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Results
11
4.1
8gaussians dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Checkerboard dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Rings dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
MNIST dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Discussion
35
5.1
Training losses and σ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Comparison of trained model with its DP equivalent . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Random walk simulations and comparison with the 1-step perturbations . .
35
5.4
Quantifying differential privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.5
Why not simply use GANs for data generation? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.6
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Conclusion
37
6.1
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
References
38
A Source code for model trainin and evaluation
i
A.1 Code to generate 2D datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
A.2 2D datasets model and training script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
A.3 2D dataset model evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
A.4 Training and evaluation of models trained on MNIST dataset . . . . . . . .
ix
B Figures
xvii
B.1
Training losses and standard deviations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xvii
B.2
Model perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xx
B.3
Model vs DP-mechanism perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxv
B.4
KL divergence and correlation histograms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxxix
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
v
==PAGE:8==
B.5
Comparison of the original dataset and its perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . xliii
B.6
MNIST dataset: model perturbations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xlix
B.7
MNIST dataset: density plots of generated noise values
. . . . . . . . . . .
l
B.8
MNIST dataset: random walk simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
li
vi
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In today’s world, data is becoming more widespread than ever before. Every company
and institution handles vast amounts of data on a daily basis, consisting of millions of
datapoints in their databases. A good portion of such data is considered confidential,
so one requires an appropriate measure of protection. If one does not wish to share the
collected information with the public, they may secure the data by storing it someplace
which can only be opened using a ”special key”. This is an example of data security.
But what if we want to share some of the data with the general public? For example: if
we want to release a result of a medical study performed on a group of people. In this
case we are not explicitly talking about data security, but it is instead a problem of data
privacy.
With the rise of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), usage of a clients data
has become much more strict and cautious. The law is published in 2016 in order to
protect data and privacy of an EU citizen, both electronic and physical. When accessing
a website, they may give consent on which information the company (website) may use in
order to improve the user experience, both for the current user and the future ones. The
GDPR has also raised awareness for the general public on how to protect one’s own private
and sensitive information, which has also resulted in a level of scepticism. An important
example of a privacy breach is the case where the governor of Massachusetts, US had his
privacy compromised via a linkage attack [1]. This type of attack was done using 2 or
more datasets which are usually anonymized, i.e. with unknown first and last name, and
linking the non-anonymized information (e.g. address, date of birth, sex) to recover the
victim’s identity. This is one of many inference attacks in the adversary’s arsenal, and
with easy access to high-performing computational machines, the private information is
constantly at risk. This brings the need for industries to develop protection against these
types of attack and provide a guarantee of privacy to their clients.
It was not even 20 years ago, when researchers finally provided a mathematical definition
of privacy, along with algorithms which provide such a privacy guarantee.
With that
definition they were able to guarantee to a client that using their data, for whichever
purpose, should not compromise their privacy. Of course, they could only guarantee a
certain amount of privacy, however it may be quantified, as the privacy guarantee is met
with a trade-off with how good the private data is. In this work we attempt to create a
similar method which also provides such a privacy guarantee. If successful, we will have
a framework which would generate new data which resembles our original and sensitive
data, so that we are able to create further solutions which will be able to learn from
the generated data equally well as if we were to give it our sensitive data. This will be
explained in the following sections.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Related Work
2.1
Differential privacy
Differential privacy is a probabilistic property which has become famous in today’s private
data analysis. It relies on the promise: ”Whether or not the individual is included in a
study, the results of the study will not significantly change”. Formally, differential privacy
is achieved using a randomized mechanism, which is simply a function which outputs
random values, as opposed to a deterministic function. By including randomness in the
analysis, differential privacy makes the adversary less able to perform confident linkage
or other inference attacks on the dataset. One of the early examples of randomness in
data analysis is called randomized response and it has been implemented in social sciences
to make certain sensitive behaviour random, e.g.
smoking.
It is a simple example of
differential privacy since we add noise with some given probability, where noise is defined
as ”changing the indicator variable or not”.
Due to randomness, an adversary would
not be able to, with confidence, re-identify the individual, while the analyst could still
approximate the true proportion of smokers in the study. While providing the privacy
guarantee, the analyst hopes that an individual’s contribution does not greatly impact the
results of the study. Naturally, the concept of randomized response has its own limitations:
if the data is too extreme, one could draw conclusions based solely on the fact there are
outliers.
In a differentially private framework, too many outliers in the dataset may
completely “destroy” the data, since the noise level included which achieves a certain
privacy guarantee depends on the sensitivity of the dataset itself.
This can be shown in the following example: assume we have 5 working-class individuals
and their respective monthly salaries shown in table 2.1 below. One can see how their
salaries are not significantly different, nor do we have any extreme outliers. By including
randomness/noise into their salaries and anonymizing their names, the adversary is having
a hard time identifying any of the individuals. Not only that, we require a relatively low
level of noise to mask their information. On the other hand, by including the last individual
in the study whose salary is much greater than the rest, we not only require a higher level
of noise for the same privacy guarantee, but the newly added individual is at much greater
risk of his information being compromised by the adversary. If the dataset contained more
of the individuals information (e.g. postal code, birthday, sex), the adversary would be
able to re-identify the individuals using a linkage or other inference attack.
The earliest examples of differential privacy focused on releasing statistical summaries
about the dataset while maintaining confidentiality with the user. For example, extracting
Individual
Salary (1000 kr)
A
25
B
23
C
30
D
18
E
26
Individual
Salary (1000 kr)
A
25
B
23
C
30
D
18
E
26
F
150
Table 2.1: Example tables of salaries of individuals and their respective monthly salaries
in thousands of DKK
2
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:11==
some summary statistic from table 2.1 (mean, median) does indeed leak a certain amount
of private information, so adding noise to the statistic provides a level of privacy to each
user.
2.2
Differential privacy in machine learning
Later on, researchers have started integrating differential privacy in machine learning al-
gorithms, and one of the earliest examples is the Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient
Descent (DP-SGD) by Abadi et al. [2], where noise is added to the gradients in the Stochas-
tic gradient descent algorithm. This framework has been adopted by many industries, one
of them being Google given that it has access to a wide range of the users personal and
private information: name, age, address, sex, location, browsing history, fingerprint and
even voice tone used to identify speech. All of the above mentioned information is used
to improve user experience in various ways.
2.3
Generative modelling
In machine learning we categorize statistical models into 2 subclasses: discriminative and
generative models. The core difference between the 2 is:
1. Discriminative models attempt to discriminate between different datapoint labels
given their values x, i.e. this model attempts to learn the conditional probability
p(Y |X)
2. Generative models, like the name states, attempt to generate data, i.e. the goal of
a generative model is to learn the joint distribution p(X, Y ) or simply p(X) if there
are no labels [3]
There are numerous models within both categories and here we introduce the generative
models used in this paper. One of the most widely used generative models within image
generation is a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), proposed by Goodfellow et al in
2014 [4]. This novel framework was designed using 2 neural networks: a generator and
discriminator. The discriminator network is trained to distinguish fake samples from real
ones, while the generator is trained to generate ”fake” samples. To illustrate the framework
with an analogy: the generator can be considered as a counterfeiter trying to produce fake
currency while the discriminator is the police trying to determine whether the currency is
fake or not [4] The framework can be seen in figure 2.1.
However, the standard GAN has shown to have unstable training, so various modifications
to the framework have been introduced. One of them is the Wasserstein GAN with weight
clipping (WGAN), introduced by Arjovski et al. [5], with the following modifications to
the original framework: the objective function of the discriminator is calculated as the
Wasserstein distance between the true data and the data sampled by the generator, the
discriminator is trained multiple times while the generator is trained only once for each
batch update and the weights of the discriminator are clipped to a given range. This
framework can sometimes still fail to converge due to vanishing or exploding gradients, so
Gulrajani et al. proposed an alternative called Wasserstein GAN with Gradient Penalty:
instead of clipping the weights in the discriminator, they are updated by regularizing its
objective function with a value proportional to the gradient of the discriminator with
respect to the interpolation between the true and the generated data [6].
Still, GANs have a challenge in their training due to a variety of other phenomena like mode
collapse and posterior collapse [7, 8]. They also lack the ability for density estimation.
Therefore, the framework of Normalizing flows has been introduced by Tabak et al. [9]
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Framework of a Generative Adversarial Network. Given a random latent vec-
tor, the generator attempts to construct data resembling real data while the discriminator
determines whether the given sample is real or fake. The latent vector can be described
with the following analogy when creating hand-written digits: Assume we have several
10-sided dies. The 1st die we roll determines the digit the generator should ”draw”. The
2nd die roll determines how wide should the lines be in the digit. The 3rd die determines
whether the lines drawn should be more straight, resembling digits displayed in a digital
clock, or if they should be more ”life-like” etc.
and has been used in the context of generative modelling by Rezende and Mohamed [10]
and Dinh et al.
[11].
Normalizing flows are a novel method which utilizes the data
likelihood, being able to both sample from the data and perform density estimation. This
is achieved by constructing a series of invertible mappings, and the 2 most used mappings
are Coupling flows by Dinh et al. [11] and Autoregressive flows by Kingma et al. [12].
Compared to GANs and Variational autoencoders, flow-based generative models have so
far gained little attention in the research community [13].
Furthermore, Kingma and
Dhariwal have introduced a normalizing flow model which utilizes invertible convolutions
[13]. Finally, in order to utilize both maximum likelihood estimation from Normalizing
flows and adversarial learning from GANs, Grover et al introduced a Flow-GAN model,
where the generator is defined as a normalizing flow [14].
2.4
Differential privacy in generative modelling
The most closely related work to ours has been researched by Chen et al. [15], where
Differential Privacy is integrated into data generative models. In particular, they develop
2 differentially private models: a Differentially private autoencoder-based generative model
and a Differentially private Variational autoencoder-based generative model. Using private
and sensitive data, they constructed models which generate new data with high utility for
further machine learning tasks while ensuring a guarantee of differential privacy. They
have shown that using both public data and data generated from the trained models result
in superior performance of the machine learning tasks, as opposed to only using publicly
available data.
4
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:13==
3
Theory, methods and materials
In this section we define the architectures and the methods we use to achieve our results.
We first start by defining notions of Differential privacy.
3.1
Differential privacy
We define a property of differential privacy, as is defined in [16], below.
Definition 3.1.1. Let X ∈Rn×p be a dataset with n samples and p features.
With
X’ ∈R(n−1)×p we denote a neighbouring dataset, i.e. a dataset obtained by removing
an arbitrary sample from X. A randomized mechanism M : R·×p 7→Rk is said to be
ϵ-differentially private if for every neighbouring dataset X’ of X and every subset R ⊆Rk
the following holds:
P (M(X) ∈R)
P (M(X′) ∈R) ≤expϵ
(3.1)
The 2 most widely used randomized mechanisms used for continuous values are the Gaus-
sian and Laplacian mechanisms, which simply add noise drawn from the corresponding
distribution with mean µ = 0k ∈Rk and covariance structure Σ = σIk. We also call ϵ
the privacy budget. Differential privacy is also immune to post-processing: any further
processed output of an ϵ-differentially private mechanism is also differentially private with
the same privacy budget [16].
Formally, for any ϵ-differentially private mechanism M and any mapping f (whether
random or deterministic), the mapping f ◦M is also ϵ-differentially private. This is why
we can define the noise generation in the following manner: given a datapoint x we sample
noise (ηi)1≤i≤N from some distribution (e.g. Gaussian) and then reject all perturbations
x + ηi which do not ”belong” to the data distribution.
How to determine whether a
perturbation ”belongs” to a data distribution or not will be discussed in the next section.
3.2
Generative models
3.2.1
Generative adversarial networks
Definition 3.2.1. Let x1, . . . , xN ∈Rn. A Generative Adversarial Network is a model
consisting of 2 neural networks: the generator and discriminator. The generator G : Rl 7→
Rn maps values z1, . . . , zN ∼N(0, Il) from a latent space to attempt to generate data
G(z1), . . . , G(zN) whose distribution resembles the empirical distribution of x1, . . . , xN.
The discriminator D : Rn 7→R maps the data to a scalar value in order to discriminate
between real data and generated data. The 2 networks are simultaneously trained in a
min-max fashion in order to optimize the following:
minG maxD L(D, G) = minG maxD Ex [log(D(x))] + Ez [log(1-D(G(z))]
(3.2)
Additionally, a conditional GAN (cGAN) is a model where the generator (or both net-
works), take an additional condition as the input. This can either be an auxiliary input
or can be a class label (e.g. digit in the case of the MNIST dataset).
Arjovsky et al. [5] have shown that the objective function in 3.2 is not necessarily always
continuous, which leads to instability in training of GANs. This is why they impose a
Lipschitz continuity constraint on the discriminator.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
5
==PAGE:14==
Definition 3.2.2. Let (X, dX) and (Y, dY ) be 2 metric spaces. A function f : X 7→Y is
said to be K-Lipschitz continuous if for any 2 points x, y the following holds:
dY (f(x), f(y)) ≤KdX(x, y)
(3.3)
Along with the Lipschitz continuity, a Wasserstein GAN uses a different objective function,
the Wasserstein or the Earth-Mover distance, which is a measure for the distance between
2 distributions. The name comes from the following intuition: Given two distributions,
one can be seen as a mass of earth properly spread in space, the other as a collection of
holes in that same space. Then, the EMD measures the least amount of work needed to
fill the holes with earth [17].
Definition 3.2.3. Let x1, . . . , xN, z1, . . . , zN and D, G be defined as in 3.2.1. The Wasser-
stein GAN with Gradient Penalty (WGAN-GP) is a modification of the classical GAN,
where the objective to be optimized is the following:
L(D, G) = EG[D(G(z))] + ED[D(x)] + λE[(||∇ˆxD(ˆx)|| −1)2]
(3.4)
where ˆx are random interpolations between the pairs of points sampled from the Generator
G and the data distribution.
Due to tractability issues, instead of explicitly imposing the Lipschitz constraint, the gra-
dient penalty is imposed as its soft version, as well as imposing it along the interpolations
ˆx [6].
3.2.2
Normalizing flows
We now define Normalizing Flows, which are a family of generative models with tractable
distributions where both sampling and density evaluation can be eﬀicient and exact [18].
This is achieved by transforming an intractable distribution X to a tractable one Z using
some mapping f. Transforming a data distribution px(x) to a tractable distribution pz(z)
with z = f(x) requires to calculate the determinant of the Jacobian of the mapping f ,
which is a matrix of partial derivatives of f. Formally:
Let Z ∈RD be a random variable with a probability density function pz(z) and f an
invertible function with X = f(Z). The probability density function of X is then:
px(x) = px(f(z))| det Df(z)|
(3.5)
For ease of computation, the log density of px(x) is
log px(x) = log px(f(z)) + log | det Df(z)|
(3.6)
If Z is a tractable distribution, then f is a sampling direction, while the inverse f−1 is
called a normalizing direction since we normalize the data distribution to a tractable one.
The function f is also called a pushforward since in the context of generative modelling it
pushes a distribution towards a more complex data distribution [18]. Since a composition
of invertible functions is an invertible function as well, f can be composed of multiple
mappings f = f1 ◦f2 ◦. . . ◦fk. We call each of the mappings flows, and below we define
a coupling flow defined by Ho et al. [19].
Definition 3.2.4. Let x = (x1, x2) be a disjoint partition of the input. The coupling flow
(y1, y2) = f(x1, x2), as defined in [19] is:
y2 = x2 exp(aθ(x1)) + bθ(x1)
(3.7)
y1 = x1
(3.8)
The coeﬀicients a1, b1 are usually outputs of a neural network parametrized by θ with x1
as the input.
6
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:15==
It can be easily shown that this flow is invertible, and also has a tractable log-determinant
of the Jacobian matrix. The Jacobian matrix of this flow is:
J =

1
0
x2 exp(aθ(x1)) δ
δx1 (aθ(x1))
exp(aθ(x1))

(3.9)
therefore, the log-determinant is simply aθ(x1). We can also combine 2 flows into 1 by com-
puting a coupling flow (with a neural network parameterized by θ1) (y1, y2) = f(x1, x2)
and then computing the same flow (with a different neural network parameterized by θ2)
but on reverted partitions (z1, z2) = f(y2, y1). This again results in a flow whose log-
determinant is easy to compute, which is aθ1 for the 1st flow and aθ2 for the 2nd. Along
with including a condition to our input, we define the resulting flow below.
Definition 3.2.5. Let x = (x1, x2) be a disjoint partition of the input and c be a condi-
tion. We define the coupling flow (y1, y2) = f(x1, x2|c) as the following transformation:
y2 = x2 exp(aθ1(x1|c)) + bθ1(x1|c)
(3.10)
y1 = x1 exp(aθ2(y2|c)) + bθ2(y2|c)
(3.11)
As mentioned, GANs only have an ability of sampling data, while Normalizing flows
allow for both sampling and density estimation. While we don’t necessarily utilize the
capability of estimation, we still choose the normalizing flow architecture since its sampling
direction results in a tractable distribution like a Gaussian, and our goal is to sample noise
resembling some tractable distribution.
Formally, we wish to generate noise conditional on the input c, i.e. we define a generator
G with the following:
G(x|c) = c + f(x|c)
(3.12)
where f is a normalizing flow architecture.
When applying the model on image data, it is desirable to apply convolutions, so we take
inspiration from Kingma et al. [13] and use a Glow model, where each flow consists of the
following:
1. Activation normalization: this layer is proposed as an alternative to Batch Normal-
ization since the perfomance using batch normalization is worse for small batch sizes
per processing unit [13]. The parameters of this layer are also learnable and are
initialized depending on the data such that the per channel mean and variance are
0 and 1 respectively.
2. Invertible 1x1 convolution: this layer convolves the image with a filter of size [1, 1, c]
where c is the number of channels in an image
3. Coupling layer as defined in 3.2.5
3.2.3
Flow-GAN hybrids
In this research we define and train models which are hybrids of a GAN and a normalizing
flow: the generator in this model is simply a normalizing flow architecture. We describe
the 2 models below:
1. Flow-cGAN-GP for 2-dimensional datasets, where the generator consists of coupling
flows defined in 3.2.5 and the neural networks parametrized by θ1, θ2 consist of fully
connected layers. The activations in the coupling flows are hyperbolic tangent in ev-
ery layer except the last one which has a linear activation function. The discriminator
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
7
==PAGE:16==
also consists solely of fully connected layers with Leaky ReLU activation functions
everywhere except in the last layer which also has a linear activation function.
2. Glow-cWGAN-GP for the image dataset, where the generator is a Glow model and
the neural networks in the coupling layers consist of convolutional layers with hyper-
bolic tangent activation functions. We also apply padding in order to preserve the
shape of the image. The discriminator also consists of convolutional layers with the
Leaky ReLU activation function while the last layer is a fully connected one with a
linear activation function.
Both of these models are trained in the same fashion, the discriminator is trained with the
same loss function as in the case of a GAN or WGAN while the generator loss is a hybrid
loss defined as follows:
LTotal = (1 −λ)LGen + λLML(σ)
(3.13)
where LGen is a same former loss function and LML is a loss which forces the generator to
output values from a given distribution with a desired standard deviation. The choice of
λ will be small, as we favour the generated perturbation to resemble the original data dis-
tribution more than the additive noise resembling a desired distribution. We will compare
the results for varying λ and σ values.
3.2.4
ML Loss
We will investigate 2 such losses: the Gaussian and Laplacian since we wish to produce
values resembling the 2 distributions, ultimately ending with an alternative of the Gaussian
and Laplacian mechanism defined by Dwork et al. [16]. The 2 losses, with desired standard
deviation/scale σ are equivalent to minimizing the L2 and L1 norm of the additive noise
η, and they are given below:
LGauss = 1
n
n
X
i=1
 η2
i
2σ2

(3.14)
LLaplace = 1
n
n
X
i=1
ηi
σ

(3.15)
for 1-dimensional data, while for d-dimensional data the expressions are:
LGauss = 1
dn
n
X
i=1
ηT
i ηi
2σ2

(3.16)
LLaplace = 1
dn
n
X
i=1
d
X
j=1
ηij
σ

(3.17)
We will refer to these losses as Gaussian/Laplacian regularizers in the future, as they
resemble regularization in other machine learning frameworks. The only difference is that
here we penalize the output of the model while we most often penalize the parameters of
the model.
3.3
Data generation
Given the trained models, we define 2 ways to generate new data:
1. 1-step perturbations: given the entire dataset, we may generate noise for each sam-
ple, resulting in a perturbed dataset and ensuring differential privacy
8
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:17==
2. Random walk simulation: given an initial point or a subset of the data, we may per-
turb the point many times, resulting in a new dataset. Since the idea of the models
is to ensure the perturbations stay within the data distribution, we should expect
the random walk simulations to describe the entire dataset. Furthermore, applying
the perturbations many times should guarantee a higher level of differential privacy
due to immunity to post-processing [16]. This would, however, apply only if we save
the n-th iteration of the simulation while we aim to save the entire simulations.
3.4
Performance metrics and other experiments
3.4.1
Training losses
During training, we track 3 items: discriminator loss, generator loss and sample standard
deviation. For the discriminator/generator loss we track their respective losses, which can
be either the Cross-Entropy loss or the Wasserstein loss. The sample standard deviations
of the noise η are calculated along all d dimensions, i.e. they are calculated using the
below equation:
σ = 1
dn
d
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
(xij −µi)2
(3.18)
where µi denotes the mean value along dimension i.
3.4.2
KL-divergence
We evaluate the model performance of the generated data by calculating the Kullback-
Leibler divergence between the original dataset and the 1-step perturbed datasets, the
random walk simulated datasets along with the dataset perturbed using the standard dif-
ferentially private Laplacian/Gaussian mechanism. The KL-divergence between 2 proba-
bility distributions P and Q defined on some sample space X is given by the following, as
defined in [20]:
KL(P, Q) =
X
x∈X
P(x) log
P(x)
Q(x)

(3.19)
In order to calculate the above expression, we need to estimate the sample probability
distributions, which will be done using Kernel Density Estimation. This will be done both
for varying λ and σ from 3.13.
3.4.3
Comparison of the Gaussian/Laplacian additive noise with the
Gaussian/Laplacian mechanism using Maximum Likelihood
Estimation
As mentioned, the additive noise of the Gaussian and Laplacian mechanisms has equal
variance/scale along all dimensions, meaning their covariance matrix is of the form Σ =
σId, where Id is the identity matrix of shape d × d. With these assumptions, we estimate
the mean and the standard deviation σ of the perturbations given an initial datapoint.
The Gaussian MLE for the mean ˆµ of the perturbations x + ηi are given by:
ˆµ = 1
n
N
X
i=1
(x + ηi)
(3.20)
while the Laplacian MLE for the mean ˆµ corresponds to the geometric median of the
perturbations x + ηi:
ˆµ = argminy∈R2 ||(x + ηi) −y||2
(3.21)
The estimate for σ is calculated using 3.18.
In order to compare how much does the
distribution of the noise differ from the independently sampled noise used in classical
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.1: Visualization of the 3 2-dimensional datasets used in this project: 8Gaussians
(left), Checkerboard (middle) and Rings(right)
Figure 3.2: Visualization of the MNIST data
differentially private mechanisms, we calculate the KL-divergence between the 2.
We
visualize the histogram of KL-divergences to check for consistency of the values. We also
estimate the correlations of the model perturbations for each sample to see if there is any
high correlations in the sampled noise. This may give the adversary additional information
for their inference attacks.
3.5
Datasets
3.5.1
2-dimensional datasets
The 2D datasets used in this research consist of 3 datasets which can be called: 8Gaussians,
Checkerboard and Rings. The data is generated using a script written by Siavash Bigdeli
[21] and can be seen in figure 3.1
3.5.2
MNIST dataset
Since the idea of our model is to be applied on visual data, we test it on the multidimen-
sional MNIST dataset consisting of hand written digits [22]. The dataset consists of 60000
images, each of them consisting 28 × 28 pixels. We show several images in figure 3.2
10
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:19==
4
Results
In this section we show the results of our experiments. As mentioned, we train the models
on the 2-dimensional dataset, as well as on the MNIST dataset. We use the same model
architecture for the 2-D datasets and table 4.1 shows the number of parameters in the
models trained on the 2-D datasets and the MNIST dataset.
All the models trained
on the 2-D datasets use a gradient penalty coeﬀicient of 2, while we penalize the model
trained on the MNIST dataset with gradient penalty of 10. The models trained on the
2-dimensional datasets are trained for 200 epochs, while the models trained on the MNIST
dataset are trained for 500 epochs.
Dataset
Generator
Discriminator
2-D
350 336
14 928
MNIST
952 496
176 496
Table 4.1: Number of parameters in the models trained on the 2-dimensional datasets and
the MNIST dataset.
4.1
8gaussians dataset
4.1.1
Training losses and standard deviations
For models trained with 2 different adversarial losses and with 2 different noise regulariza-
tions, we show the training losses of the generator and discriminator along with the pro-
gression of the standard deviation. Figure 4.1 shows the comparison of the training losses,
between the Gaussian and Laplacian regularization, of the generator and discriminator
for different desired levels of the standard deviation σ and the regularization parameter λ
with the Cross-entropy loss; while figure 4.2 shows the analogous comparison, except for
the model trained with the Wasserstein loss. We can immediately see how the Wasserstein
loss provides a more stable training of the generator. Still, the losses are not quite stable,
which can either be explained by the hybrid loss function for the generator or simply a too
large learning rate of the model, while the training stability of the discriminator could ad-
ditionally be stabilized with an increase in gradient penalty. As for different regularizers,
we cannot identify any significant difference in the training.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 4.1: For a desired σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5} and regularization λ ∈{0.05, 0.1, 0.2}, we show
the comparison of the generator and discriminator losses of the model trained with the
Cross-entropy loss function and 2 different regularizations. The rows correspond to differ-
ent desired levels of σ, while the first 2 columns correspond to the Gaussian regularizer,
while the next 2 columns correspond to the Laplacian regularizer. We can see how higher
regularization corresponds to lower discriminator loss.
Figure 4.2: For a desired σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5} and regularization λ ∈{0.05, 0.1, 0.2}, we show
the comparison of the generator and discriminator losses of the model trained with the
Wasserstein loss function and 2 different regularizations. The rows correspond to different
desired levels of σ, while the first 2 columns correspond to the Gaussian regularizer, while
the next 2 columns correspond to the Laplacian regularizer. We can notice that the higher
regularization corresponds to more stable generator training.
12
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:21==
Additionally, figures 4.3 and 4.4 compare the progression of the empirical standard devi-
ation of the noise, given a Gaussian and Laplacian regularizer. Figure 4.3 corresponds to
the model trained with a Cross-entropy loss, while figure 4.4 corresponds to the model
trained with a Wasserstein loss. We can see how for both loss functions, we are able to
somewhat specify the level of desired σ and achieve more accurate desired result with in-
crease in λ; however, we can see that the Laplacian regularizer produces a slightly higher
level of noise than desired. Despite the fact of a slightly more stable generator training,
we omit the results of the models trained with the Wasserstein loss function, which can be
seen in the appendix, since the model trained with the Cross-entropy produces superior
results.
Figure 4.3:
For different values of desired noise level σ
∈{0.5, 1, 1.5} and λ ∈
{0.05, 0.1, 0.2}, we show the progression of the sample standard deviation during training
of the models with the Cross-entropy loss. Rows correspond to models trained with the
Gaussian and Laplacian regularizer respectively, while the columns correspond to different
regularization parameters λ.
Figure 4.4:
For different values of desired noise level σ
∈{0.5, 1, 1.5} and λ ∈
{0.05, 0.1, 0.2}, we show the progression of the sample standard deviation during train-
ing of the models with the Wasserstein loss. Rows correspond to models trained with the
Gaussian and Laplacian regularizer respectively, while the columns correspond to different
regularization parameters λ.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
13
==PAGE:22==
4.1.2
Comparison of perturbations for different desired σ and
regularization parameters λ
Here we compare the perturbations of 5 different points for different desired levels of the
standard deviations σ and regularization parameter λ. Figures 4.5 and 4.6 show the sam-
pled Gaussian and Laplacian perturbations of 5 points, along with their sample standard
deviations σ. We can see the effect of the regularizer, both qualitatively and quantita-
tively, that increasing the parameter λ results in sampled perturbations having a more
central tendency around the initial point and resembling their respective distributions.
This is of course met with some limitations, as we still desire the perturbations resemble
the original data distributions. We can also see how we achieve a standard deviation of
the samples closer to the desired one with the increase of λ.
Figure 4.5: Comparison of sampled perturbations of 5 samples with Gaussian regulariza-
tion. for different standard deviations σ and regularizations λ. The rows correspond to to
different regularizations λ ∈{0.05, 0.1, 0.2}, while the columns correspond to different de-
sired standard deviations σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}. The value in the corners indicate the estimated
standard deviations σ.
14
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.6: Comparison of sampled perturbations of 5 samples with Laplacian regulariza-
tion. for different standard deviations σ and regularizations λ. The rows correspond to
to different regularizations λ ∈{0.05, 0.1, 0.2}, while the columns correspond to different
desired standard deviations σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}.
Figure 4.7: Comparison of the the sample perturbations with their respective differentially
private mechanisms. The rows correspond to models trained with different desired levels
of σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5} The 1st and 3rd column correspond to the model perturbations with
the Gaussian and Laplacian regularizers respectively, while the 2nd and 4th show their
respective mechanisms with estimated parameters µ and σ.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
15
==PAGE:24==
4.1.3
Comparison of the noises generated by the model with the
corresponding differentially private mechanisms
We again visualize samples along with their generated perturbations, and use Maximum
Likelihood Estimation to estimate the location parameter ˆµ and the standard deviation
ˆσ in order to compare the additive noise generated by the model with their respective
mechanisms. We choose the value of λ = 0.1 as it produces most accurate desired empirical
values of σ with both the Gaussian and Laplacian regularizer, and is also the best trade-
off between data perturbations belonging to the original data distribution and the noise
values resembling the desired distribution, while the other choices of λ can be seen in the
appendix. Figures 4.7 and 4.8 show such comparisons for 2 different samples.
Figure 4.8: Comparison of the the sample perturbations with their respective differentially
private mechanisms. The rows correspond to models trained with different desired levels
of σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5} The 1st and 3rd column correspond to the model perturbations with
the Gaussian and Laplacian regularizers respectively, while the 2nd and 4th show their
respective mechanisms with estimated parameters ˆµ and ˆσ.
For the compared sample perturbations between our model and the corresponding mech-
anisms, we calculate the KL divergence between the 2 samples.
Figure 4.9 shows the
histogram of the calculated KL divergences between the sample perturbations obtained
using our model and the differentially private randomized mechanisms.
We also show
the estimated correlations of the sample perturbations, and their histograms can be seen
in figure 4.10. We can see how larger scales σ result in the perturbations being more
correlated, which may result in privacy leaks.
16
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.9: Histogram of KL divergences between the perturbations obtained with our
model and perturbations obtained using the respective differentially private mechanisms.
The columns represent different scale levels σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5} while the rows reperesent the
Gaussian and Laplacian mechanisms respectively.
Figure 4.10: For every sample, we calculate the sample correlation of its perturbations
obtained using the model trained with the Gaussian (top row) and Laplacian (bottom
row) for different scales σ.
4.1.4
Random walk simulation
We perform a random walk simulation, as described in the Methods section 3.3, and we
compare the results of the simulated data with the 1-step perturbations by comparing the
KL divergences between the original dataset and the respective generated datasets. Figure
4.11 shows 128 random walks on the data manifold with the same initial point, compared
for models trained with the Laplace regularization and with different desired level of σ.
We can see how simulating a random walk with too small σ may result in an imbalance
in the modes of the dataset, which can be especially seen in figure 4.12
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.11: Random walk simulations of the model trained with the Laplacian regularizer.
We show the random walk simulations after 10, 100 and 500 iterations with different rows
representing different scales σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}
Figure 4.12: For the value of the Gaussian regularizer λ = 0.05 and scale σ = 0.5, we
show a random walk simulation of the model trained with the Wasserstein loss function
where we experience an example of a ”mode collapse” where the random walk simulation
over-represents a mode of the distribution.
In figure 4.13 we compare the ground truth data with the 1-step perturbations, random
walk simulations and regular DP-mechanism for different scales σ.
18
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.13: Comparison of the ground truth data (1st column) with the 1-step pertur-
bation (2nd column), random walk simulations (3rd column) and classical DP mechanism
(4th column) with rows representing different scales σ.
In table 4.2 we show the calculated KL-divergences between the ground truth data and
1-step perturbations, random walk simulations and dataset obtained using the classical
DP-mechanism for various regularizations λ and scales σ.
σ
λ
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.175
0.039
0.156
1.0
0.098
0.061
0.255
1.5
0.115
0.148
0.261
(a) 1-step perturbations
σ
λ
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.634
0.093
0.228
1.0
0.158
0.098
0.307
1.5
0.175
0.149
0.287
(b) Random walk dataset
σ
KL
0.5
0.372
1.0
0.463
1.5
0.7
(c) DP dataset
Table 4.2: ”8gaussians” dataset: Kl-divergences between the ground truth data and the
corresponding perturbed datasets for differing parameters λ and σ.
The results of the further datasets will only focus on the models trained with the Laplacian
regularizer, as we have seen the results not being significantly different.
4.2
Checkerboard dataset
In this and the following sections we omit the progression of the training losses and stan-
dard deviations during training, as we wanted to compare them for different loss functions
and any further visualization would be redundant. They can be seen in the appendix.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
19
==PAGE:28==
4.2.1
Comparison of perturbations for different σ and λ
Figure 4.14 shows the perturbations with different penalization parameters λ and scales
σ using the models trained with the Cross-entropy loss.
Figure 4.14: Comparison of sampled perturbations obtained by the model trained with
the Cross-entropy loss function of 5 samples with Laplacian regularization for different
standard deviations σ and regularizations λ. The rows correspond to to different regular-
izations λ ∈{0.05, 0.1, 0.2}, while the columns correspond to different desired standard
deviations σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}. The values in the corners of the plots indicate the correspond-
ing estimated standard deviations σ.
4.2.2
Noise comparison of the model with its respective differentially
private mechanism
For the models with Laplacian regularization we compare the noise generated by our model
with the noise generated by the corresponding Laplacian mechanism. We again estimate
the geometric median ˆµ and ˆσ for the homoscedastic noise generated by the differentially
private mechanism. Figure 4.15 shows the comparison of the noise values generated by
our model and the Laplacian mechanism with standard deviation ˆσ respectively.
20
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.15: For 2 samples (1st and 3rd columns), we compare the model perturbations
with the Laplace mechanism with estimated ˆσ. The rows represent models trained with
the desired scale σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}.
In figure 4.16 we show the histogram of estimated correlations of the perturbations ob-
tained by our model, while we omit the histogram of KL divergences between the model
perturbations and the perturbations from the Laplace mechanisms, which can be seen
in the appendix. We can see how there is no significant correlation, as opposed to the
correlations in the ”8gaussians” dataset.
Figure 4.16: For every sample, we calculate the sample correlation of its perturbations
obtained using the model trained with Laplacian regularization for different scales σ.
4.2.3
Comparison of random walk simulations for models trained with
different losses
Here we show the difference in performance of the models trained with different loss
functions by comparing their respective random walk simulations. Figure 4.17 shows the
random walk simulations of the model trained with the Cross-entropy loss function while
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
21
==PAGE:30==
figure 4.18 shows the analogous result with the Wasserstein loss function. We can see
how we again encounter a phenomenon of mode collapse when applying the model with
the Wasserstein loss function and low scale σ. On the other hand, there is no significant
difference in the simulations with other scales, only that the generated values with the
Cross-entropy loss are confined slightly better within the data bounds.
Figure 4.17: Random walk simulations of the model trained with the Cross-entropy loss
function. We show the random walk simulations after 10, 100 and 500 iterations with
different rows representing different scales σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}.
Figure 4.18: Random walk simulations of the model trained with the Wasserstein loss
function. We show the random walk simulations after 10, 100 and 500 iterations with
different rows representing different scales σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}.
22
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.19 compares the ground truth data with the 1-step perturbations, random walk
simulations and the perturbations obtained from the classical DP-mechanism for different
scales σ, while we can see the calculated KL-divergences in table 4.3.
Figure 4.19: Comparison of the ground truth data (1st column) with the 1-step pertur-
bation (2nd column), random walk simulations (3rd column) and classical DP mechanism
(4th column) with rows representing different scales σ.
σ
λ
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.053
0.074
0.134
1.0
0.083
0.089
0.141
1.5
0.094
0.119
0.151
(a) 1-step perturbations
σ
λ
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.123
0.108
0.211
1.0
0.151
0.114
0.169
1.5
0.123
0.13
0.149
(b) Random walk dataset
σ
0.5
0.289
1.0
0.573
1.5
0.564
(c) DP dataset
Table 4.3: ”checkerboard” dataset: Kl-divergences between the ground truth data and the
corresponding perturbed datasets for differing parameters λ and σ.
4.3
Rings dataset
For the ”rings” dataset, we show identical results as in the ”checkerboard” dataset, also
with models trained with a Cross-entropy loss function and Laplacian regularizer.
4.3.1
Comparison of sample perturbation for different values of λ and σ
We start by comparing perturbations of samples for different values of regularization λ
and scale σ. Figure 4.20 shows the comparison for 5 sample perturbations.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.20: Comparison of sampled perturbations obtained by the model trained with
the Cross-entropy loss function of 5 samples with Laplacian regularization for different
standard deviations σ and regularizations λ. The rows correspond to to different regular-
izations λ ∈{0.05, 0.1, 0.2}, while the columns correspond to different desired standard
deviations σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}. The values in the corners of the plots indicate the correspond-
ing estimated standard deviations σ.
Figure 4.21: For 2 samples (1st and 3rd columns), we compare the model perturbations
with the Laplace mechanism with estimated ˆσ. The rows represent models trained with
the desired scale σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}.
24
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:33==
4.3.2
Noise comparison of the model with its respective differentially
private mechanism
In figure 4.21 we compare the additive noise from the model with the additive noise from
the Laplacian mechanism. We can see how the more complex the data distribution is, the
further we are in distribution from the homoscedastic Laplacian noise.
We again show the histogram of correlations of the perturbations of each sample for every
scale level σ in figure 4.22. We can see how there is again no significant correlation between
the perturbations, meaning we again encounter a modest amount of privacy leak.
Figure 4.22: Histograms of sample correlations of perturbations of each sample obtained
using the model trained with Laplacian regularization for different scales σ.
4.3.3
Random walk simulation and comparison with 1-step
perturbations
We simulate a random walk on the data manifold given an initial point. Figure 4.23 shows
the comparison of the random walk simulation of models with different scales σ. We can
see how we are not able to exactly describe the data as well as with the previous datasets;
however, we show that the simulations respect the data bounds very well.
Figure 4.23: For the models trained with the Cross-entropy loss function and Laplacian
regularization, we show the random walk simulations after 10, 100 and 500 iterations with
different rows representing different scales σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
25
==PAGE:34==
We also compare the results of the random walk simulations with the 1-step perturbations
in figure 4.24 and show the KL divergences between them and the ground truth data in
table 4.4
Figure 4.24: Comparison of the ground truth data (1st column) with the 1-step pertur-
bation (2nd column), random walk simulations (3rd column) and classical DP mechanism
(4th column) with rows representing different scales σ.
σ
λ
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.138
0.198
0.240
1.0
0.343
0.215
0.279
1.5
0.234
0.204
0.302
(a) 1-step perturbations
σ
λ
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.166
0.229
0.267
1.0
0.35
0.232
0.278
1.5
0.234
0.201
0.311
(b) Random walk dataset
σ
0.5
0.322
1.0
0.383
1.5
0.442
(c) DP dataset
Table 4.4: ”rings” dataset: Kl-divergences between the ground truth data and the corre-
sponding perturbed datasets for differing parameters λ and σ.
4.4
MNIST dataset
In comparison to the previous datasets, which had 2 dimensions, the MNIST dataset as a
dataset of 28 × 28 images, has 784 dimensions. This is a significant increase along with a
significant change in training stability. The training of such model is so unstable that it is
extremely diﬀicult to perform successful training without exploding gradients when using
the Cross-entropy objective function. This is why we turn to training with the Wasserstein
loss function, which is still unstable but much more feasible. The training is done for 500
epochs with Gaussian regularization parameter of λ = 0.05 and desired scale σ = 0.2. We
26
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:35==
also train a model with a desired noise level σ = 0.5; however we omit most of the results
except for the visualization of the losses and pixel variations.
4.4.1
Training losses and standard deviations
Here we show the progression of the generator and discriminator losses along with the
progression of the sample standard deviation during training of the model, which can be
seen in figure 4.25. We can see the training is extremely unstable, with losses ranging to
magnitudes of 1012. We can see how the development of the sample standard deviation σ
is unstable too, but much less in the case of σ = 0.5.
Figure 4.25: Progression of the generator/discriminator losses and sample standard devi-
ations of the model trained on the MNIST dataset with scale 0.2 (1st row) and 0.5 (2nd
row).
Figure 4.26 shows the perturbation of the same point during training when σ is large,
after epoch 300 and 350 to be precise. We can see how the noise dominates the data in
this case, so it makes no sense to call it noise anymore, but it produces images which can
very well be considered digits.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.27: Perturbed images given initial images from the MNIST dataset. Like in the
previous figure, the rows show the initial images, 1-step pertubations and generated noise
respectively.
Figure 4.26: Perturbed MNIST digit produced after the 300th (1st row) and 350th (2nd
row) epoch of training of the model. The first column shows the initial images, the second
column shows the 1-step perturbations while the last shows the generated noise.
4.4.2
Analysis of 1-step perturbations
Here we investigate the 1-step perturbations of the images using the trained model, both
qualitatively and quantitatively. Figure 4.27 shows the 1-step perturbations of a set of
images. We can see there is no visual change in the image; however, the amount of noise
is greater than 0. For 3 digits, we investigate multiple perturbations of that digit, which
can be seen in figure 4.28. With close inspection, we can see there is very little variation
in the additive noise. To confirm there is indeed variation in the additive noise, we show
in figure 4.29 the distribution of 16 perturbed pixels with highest standard deviations.
We can see most of the noise values do indeed resemble the Gaussian distribution but
with very low value of σ. We show the distributions of the perturbed digit 3, while the
distribution of the other digits can be seen in the appendix. For both scales 0.2 and 0.5
we visualize the pixels where we have the highest variation. This can be seen in figures
4.30 and 4.31, where we show a heatmaps of pixels’ corresponding variance. We can see
the most variation is achieved in the outlines of the digits. On the other hand, in the case
of σ = 0.5, we see there is also variation on the image boundaries. This can be explained
by the fact we desire a larger standard deviation, so the model compensates by changing
the corners which has no variation in any of the images, but ultimately outputs a digit.
28
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.28: Visualization of multiple pertubations of a single digit 10 times.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.29: Density plots of the generated noise for the 16 pixels with the highest standard
deviation.
30
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.30: For σ = 0.2 and the initial images, this figure shows heatmaps of the corre-
sponding pixel’s standard deviations of the generated noise.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.31: For σ = 0.5 and the initial images, this figure shows heatmaps of the corre-
sponding pixel’s standard deviations of the generated noise.
32
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:41==
4.4.3
Random walk simulation
For the 3 digits, we simulate a random walk as defined in section 3.3. We show a single
random walk given the ”initial image” in figure 4.32. We can see how after 100 iteration
we are looking at a rougher version of the image and it can still be considered a digit,
while after 500 iteration we completely change the image and in most cases it cannot
be considered a digit. In the case of the digit 3, we could say that we obtain a digit
resembling a 5. Nevertheless, the figure is a good illustration of the trade-off between
differential privacy guarantee and data utility, since with more iterations we achieve a
higher guarantee of differential privacy.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.32: Random walk simulation for for 6 different digits. We show the simulations
after 10, 50, 100 and 500 iterations.
34
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:43==
5
Discussion
5.1
Training losses and σ
Looking at the training losses, we have confirmed the training of the models is very un-
stable, as is usual in the case of Generative Adversarial Networks. In the case of training
the 2-D dataset with the Wasserstein loss, we have confirmed that the gradient penalty
helps with stabilizing the training. However, we have shown that the high-dimensional
equivalent of this problem still faces high instability of the training, resulting in different
outcomes during training, which was shown in figure 4.26 where the noise dominates the
data while the final model outputs values more appropriate to be called noise.
The progression of the standard deviations have shown us at first that we may be able
to manipulate the level of the additive noise. However, the high-dimensional problem has
shown us that manipulating the noise level is not quite feasible and it is limited by the
data distribution.
5.2
Comparison of trained model with its DP equivalent
When comparing the perturbation of some samples with the equivalent differentially pri-
vate mechanism, we have seen that the trained model outputs superior results, as expected.
We have to note that the additive noise is correlated as opposed to independent mech-
anisms, meaning we risk data accuracy for a level of privacy leak by having correlated
noise. We also see how the level of correlation is also data-dependent, as the additive
noise had higher correlations in the case of the ”8gaussians” than in the case of the other
2-dimensional datasets. From figure 4.9 we can also see how the Laplace regularization
produces perturbations which resemble the corresponding differentially private perturba-
tions slightly more than the Gaussian version. However, the KL-divergence values are still
very high for one to say the model perturbations and DP-mechanism perturbations are
the same.
5.3
Random walk simulations and comparison with the
1-step perturbations
These experiments have brought us appealing results, as both the random walks and 1-step
perturbations have generated data closely resembling the original data distribution. We
have even seen that with high regularization, the random walk has in some cases performed
better than the 1-step perturbation in the sense of the KL-divergence. The differences in
the distributions are miniscule, but ultimately the random walk data generation is superior
given that it provides a better privacy guarantee. This could have also been seen in the
case of the MNIST dataset, where the 1-step perturbation produced an image almost
identical to the original one, while the random walk generation produced a different image
after a large number of iterations.
5.4
Quantifying differential privacy
We have seen how well this model performs with regards to data generation, but have yet
to evaluate the level of privacy this model/mechanism achieves. In a usual DP setting
introduced by Dwork et al. [16], in order to achieve a ϵ-differential privacy, one needs to
add noise from the Gaussian or Laplacian distribution proportional to the sensitivity of
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
35
==PAGE:44==
the function which is, for neighbouring X and X′
∆f = maxX′,X ||f(X) −f(X′)||
(5.1)
where || · || is the l2-norm for the Gaussian and l1 norm for the Laplacian mechanism.
We, however, do not have an exact function f whose sensitivity can be estimated. We
could describe it as a function where we take a random sample from the dataset, then
the sensitivy would be dependent on the range of the dataset. This would, however, pose
a problem when estimating the sensitivity for high dimensional manifolds or images as
the range for the pixel values of the image is usually 1. This would mean a poor privacy
guarantee given the high sensitivity in the case of images.
5.5
Why not simply use GANs for data generation?
It is natural to ask oneself as to why does one not simply train a generative adversarial
network for data generation instead of training this noise generative model. As opposed to
GANs, with this model we have explicitly defined a mechanism composing of 2 mappings:
• The first mapping adds noise from the corresponding distribution, e.g. Gaussian, to
the given point
• The second mapping is an acceptance-rejection method: we reject the perturbation
if it does not belong to the original data distribution
With these 2 mappings and by composability of differentially private mechanisms, we say
this model achieves differential privacy by definition. Regardless of the privacy guarantee,
we have created a novel generative model which requires further research.
5.6
Future work
Given the time limit of the research, there is only so much one can investigate. Given more
time, we would attempt to train a model applied on a dataset of human faces. Despite
the fact such a dataset would have even more dimensions that the MNIST dataset, its
variability is also greater, as every person has many facial characteristic which can be
described: shape of the face or any part of the face, e.g. nose, mouth or eyes; eye color,
facial hair etc. With a well trained and finely-tuned model, we expect the model would
be able to perturb a face by changing any of those characteristics. This would also be the
most appropriate dataset to apply the framework in terms of data privacy.
36
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:45==
6
Conclusion
In the recent years, researchers have made great progress in the field of private data
analysis. The framework of Differential Privacy, has proven to be of great success in the
field. Given there is private data in various fields, it only makes sense to research its
applicability. Aside from that, professionals have been developing various differentially
private algorithms.
In this work, we attempted to construct a generative model which, given a datapoint,
generates noise such that perturbing the datapoint with the noise, ”keeps” the datapoint
on the original data manifold. We have defined this mechanism in the way that it satisfies
the condition of differential privacy. However, because there is correlation in the data,
our mechanism has been shown to leak this information which may prove useful for the
adversary. This, along others, is the reason why we were not able to precisely quantify
differential privacy.
Aside from that, we have seen how the developed model posed issues when applied on a
high-dimensional dataset. With little randomness, we can say we encounter an equivalent
of an issue of ”mode collapse” in generative networks. Still, we defined a novel framework
which generates data in a differentially private manner. The results on lower dimensions
have proven that this framework has many potentials and should be investigated much
further.
6.1
Contributions
In this paper, we developed a hybrid model of a Normalizing Flow and a Generative Adver-
sarial Network, where the Generator in the model is an invertible network, i.e. Normalizing
flow. With this model, we were able to perturb a datapoint such that its distribution still
belongs to the original data distribution. We have shown how this framework works suc-
cessfully given low dimensional datasets: by perturbing a datapoint we were not only able
to ”stay” in the data distribution, but were also able to generate noise with a desired
standard deviation. Of course, the desired scale of the noise has its own limitations, as we
are bounded by the data distribution itself, which we have seen in high dimensional data
manifolds. To conclude, there is much more to be researched in order to create a robust
method that is applicable to high dimensional datasets such as images.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
37
==PAGE:46==
References
[1]
Latanya Sweeney. “Weaving Technology and Policy Together to Maintain Confi-
dentiality”. In: Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics 25.2-3 (2021), pp. 98–110. doi:
10.1111/j.1748-720X.1997.tb01885.x.
[2]
Martin Abadi et al. “Deep Learning with Differential Privacy”. In: Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security.
ACM, Oct. 2016. doi: 10.1145/2976749.2978318. url: https://doi.org/10.1145%
2F2976749.2978318.
[3]
What is a generative model? https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/gan/
generative.
[4]
Ian J. Goodfellow et al. Generative Adversarial Networks. 2014. doi: 10.48550/
ARXIV.1406.2661. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661.
[5]
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein GAN. 2017. doi:
10.48550/ARXIV.1701.07875. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.07875.
[6]
Ishaan Gulrajani et al. Improved Training of Wasserstein GANs. 2017. doi: 10.
48550/ARXIV.1704.00028. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.00028.
[7]
Samuel R. Bowman et al. “Generating Sentences from a Continuous Space”. In:
(2015). doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1511.06349. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06349.
[8]
Tim Salimans et al. Improved Techniques for Training GANs. 2016. doi: 10.48550/
ARXIV.1606.03498. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.03498.
[9]
Esteban G. Tabak and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. “Density estimation by dual ascent of
the log-likelihood”. English (US). In: Communications in Mathematical Sciences 8.1
(2010), pp. 217–233. issn: 1539-6746. doi: 10.4310/CMS.2010.v8.n1.a11.
[10]
Danilo Jimenez Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational Inference with Normal-
izing Flows. 2015. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1505.05770. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1505.05770.
[11]
Laurent Dinh, David Krueger, and Yoshua Bengio. NICE: Non-linear Independent
Components Estimation. 2014. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1410.8516. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1410.8516.
[12]
Diederik P. Kingma et al. Improving Variational Inference with Inverse Autoregres-
sive Flow. 2016. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1606.04934. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.
04934.
[13]
Diederik P. Kingma and Prafulla Dhariwal. Glow: Generative Flow with Invertible
1x1 Convolutions. 2018. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1807.03039. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1807.03039.
[14]
Aditya Grover, Manik Dhar, and Stefano Ermon. Flow-GAN: Combining Maximum
Likelihood and Adversarial Learning in Generative Models. 2017. doi: 10.48550/
ARXIV.1705.08868. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.08868.
[15]
Qingrong Chen et al. Differentially Private Data Generative Models. 2018. doi:
10.48550/ARXIV.1812.02274. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02274.
[16]
Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth. “The Algorithmic Foundations of Differential Pri-
vacy.” In: Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science 9.3-4 (2014),
pp. 211–407. url: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/fttcs/fttcs9.html#DworkR14.
[17]
The Earth Mover’s distance. https://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/rbf/CVonline/LOCAL_
COPIES/RUBNER/emd.htm.
38
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:47==
[18]
Ivan Kobyzev, Simon J.D. Prince, and Marcus A. Brubaker. “Normalizing Flows: An
Introduction and Review of Current Methods”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 43.11 (Nov. 2021), pp. 3964–3979. doi: 10.1109/
tpami.2020.2992934. url: https://doi.org/10.1109%2Ftpami.2020.2992934.
[19]
Jonathan Ho et al. Flow++: Improving Flow-Based Generative Models with Vari-
ational Dequantization and Architecture Design. 2019. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1902.
00275. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.00275.
[20]
David J. C. MacKay. Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms.
Copyright Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[21]
Siavash Bigdeli. https://github.com/siavashBigdeli/DDE/blob/master/utils.py.
[22]
Li Deng. “The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning
research”. In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 29.6 (2012), pp. 141–142.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:49==
A
Source code for model trainin and
evaluation
A.1
Code to generate 2D datasets
1
import numpy as np
2
3
def sample_2d_data(dataset, n_samples):
4
5
z = np.random.normal(loc=0, scale=1, size=(n_samples ,2))
6
7
if dataset == '8gaussians':
8
scale = 4
9
sq2 = 1/np.sqrt(2)
10
centers = [(1,0), (-1,0), (0,1), (0,-1), (sq2,sq2), (-sq2,sq2), (sq2,-sq2), (-sq2,-sq2)]
11
centers = np.array([(scale * x, scale * y) for x,y in centers])
12
inds = np.random.random_integers(low=0, high=len(centers)-1, size=(n_samples ,))
13
x = sq2 * (0.5 * z + centers[inds])
14
return x.astype(np.float32)
15
16
elif dataset == '2spirals':
17
u1 = np.random.uniform(low=0, high=1, size=(n_samples // 2))
18
u2 = np.random.uniform(low=0, high=1, size=(n_samples // 2))
19
u3 = np.random.uniform(low=0, high=1, size=(n_samples // 2))
20
21
n = np.sqrt(u1) * 540 * (2 * np.pi) / 360
22
d1x = - np.cos(n) * n + u2 * 0.5
23
d1y =
np.sin(n) * n + u3 * 0.5
24
x = np.concatenate([np.stack([ d1x,
d1y], axis=1),
25
np.stack([-d1x, -d1y], axis=1)], axis=0) / 3
26
x = x + 0.1*z
27
np.random.shuffle(x)
28
return x.astype(np.float32)
29
30
elif dataset == 'checkerboard':
31
u1 = np.random.uniform(low=0, high=1, size=(n_samples))
32
u2 = np.random.uniform(low=0, high=1, size=(n_samples))
33
inds = np.random.random_integers(low=0, high=1, size=(n_samples ,))
34
35
x1 = u1 * 4 - 2
36
x2_ = u2 - inds * 2
37
x2 = x2_ + np.floor(x1) % 2
38
x = np.stack([x1, x2], axis=1) * 2
39
return x.astype(np.float32)
40
41
42
elif dataset == 'rings':
43
inds = np.random.random_integers(low=0, high=n_samples -1, size=(n_samples ,))
44
n_samples4 = n_samples3 = n_samples2 = n_samples // 4
45
n_samples1 = n_samples - n_samples4 - n_samples3 - n_samples2
46
47
# so as not to have the first point = last point, set endpoint=False in np; here shifted by one
48
linspace4 = np.linspace(0, 2 * np.pi, n_samples4 + 1)[:-1]
49
linspace3 = np.linspace(0, 2 * np.pi, n_samples3 + 1)[:-1]
50
linspace2 = np.linspace(0, 2 * np.pi, n_samples2 + 1)[:-1]
51
linspace1 = np.linspace(0, 2 * np.pi, n_samples1 + 1)[:-1]
52
53
circ4_x = np.cos(linspace4)
54
circ4_y = np.sin(linspace4)
55
circ3_x = np.cos(linspace4) * 0.75
56
circ3_y = np.sin(linspace3) * 0.75
57
circ2_x = np.cos(linspace2) * 0.5
58
circ2_y = np.sin(linspace2) * 0.5
59
circ1_x = np.cos(linspace1) * 0.25
60
circ1_y = np.sin(linspace1) * 0.25
61
62
x = np.stack([np.concatenate([circ4_x, circ3_x, circ2_x, circ1_x]),
63
np.concatenate([circ4_y, circ3_y, circ2_y, circ1_y])], axis=1) * 3.0
64
65
# random sample
66
x = x[inds]
67
68
# Add noise
69
x = x + np.random.normal(loc=0, scale=0.08, size=x.shape)
70
return x.astype(np.float32)
Code/generate_data.py
A.2
2D datasets model and training script
1
import os
2
import numpy as np
3
import tensorflow as tf
4
from tensorflow import keras
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
i
==PAGE:50==
5
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
6
import matplotlib.animation as animation
7
from tensorflow.keras.layers import Dense, Input, Flatten
8
from tensorflow.keras.models import Model
9
10
11
12
# Kernel and bias initialization for the layers
13
kernel_initializer = 'glorot_normal'
14
bias_initializer = 'zeros'
15
# Coupling residual layer inspired by:
16
# https://export.arxiv.org/pdf/1902.00275
17
18
dtype = tf.float32
19
# Define custom coupling layer
20
class CouplingResidualLayer(tf.keras.layers.Layer):
21
def __init__(self, dims):
22
super(CouplingResidualLayer , self).__init__()
23
self.dims = dims
24
25
def build(self, input_shape):
26
output_dims = 1
27
28
activation = 'tanh'
29
self.fnc1 = tf.keras.Sequential([
30
Dense(self.dims, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer),
31
Dense(self.dims, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer),
32
Dense(self.dims, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer),
33
Dense(self.dims, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer),
34
Dense(self.dims, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer),
35
Dense(self.dims, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer),
36
Dense(self.dims, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer),
37
Dense(output_dims*2, activation='linear', kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)
38
])
39
40
41
self.fnc2 = tf.keras.Sequential([
42
Dense(self.dims, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer),
43
Dense(self.dims, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer),
44
Dense(self.dims, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer),
45
Dense(self.dims, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer),
46
Dense(self.dims, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer),
47
Dense(output_dims*2, activation='linear', kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)
48
])
49
50
def call(self, inputs):
51
c, x = tf.split(inputs, 2, 1)
52
x1, x2 = tf.split(x, 2, 1)
53
54
a1, b1 = tf.split(self.fnc1(tf.concat([c,x1], axis=-1)), 2, -1)
55
y2 = x2 * tf.math.exp(a1) + b1
56
57
a2, b2 = tf.split(self.fnc2(tf.concat([c,y2], axis=-1)), 2, -1)
58
y1 = x1 * tf.math.exp(a2) + b2
59
# print(f"a1: {a1}")
60
61
return tf.concat([c,y1,y2], axis=1), tf.reduce_mean(a1 + a2)
62
63
def get_gen_model(shape=(2,), chs=32, num_blocks=8):
64
dims = shape[0]*2
65
inputs = Input((dims,), dtype=dtype)
66
layers = []
67
log_det = 0
68
output = inputs
69
for i in range(num_blocks):
70
layers.append(CouplingResidualLayer(chs))
71
output, ld = layers[i](output)
72
log_det += ld
73
74
_, output = tf.split(output, 2, -1)
75
model = Model(inputs, [output, log_det])
76
return model, layers
77
78
79
def get_disc_model(shape=(2,), chs=1):
80
inputs = Input(shape)
81
inputs2 = Flatten()(inputs)
82
activation = tf.keras.layers.LeakyReLU()
83
layer = Dense(8*chs, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(inputs2)
84
layer = Dense(32*chs, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(layer)
85
layer = Dense(16*chs, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(layer)
86
layer = Dense(8*chs, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(layer)
87
#layer = Dense(4*chs, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(layer)
88
layer = Dense(2*chs, activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(layer)
89
#layer = Dense(chs, activation=activation , kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(layer)
90
log_prob = Dense(1, activation='linear', use_bias=False, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(layer)
91
92
model = Model(inputs, log_prob)
93
return model
94
95
# Define the normalizing flow architecture
96
class MHGAN(keras.Model):
97
# gen is a Normalizing flow architecture
98
# disc is a discriminator
99
# noise_std is the desired std of the optimized additive noise egnerated be gen
100
def __init__(self, gen, disc, noise_std, disc_inner_loop=5, loss_weight=1., loss_type='kl', noise_type='gauss'):
101
super(MHGAN, self).__init__()
ii
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:51==
102
self.gen = gen
103
self.disc = disc
104
self.noise_std = noise_std
105
self.disc_inner_loop = disc_inner_loop
106
self.loss_weight = loss_weight
107
self.loss_type = loss_type
108
self.noise_type = noise_type
109
110
def compile(self, disc_optimizer , gen_optimizer):
111
super(MHGAN, self).compile()
112
self.gen_optimizer = gen_optimizer
113
self.disc_optimizer = disc_optimizer
114
115
# this generates input for the gen network
116
def get_batch_noise(self, batch_shape):
117
return tf.random.normal(shape=batch_shape , mean=0.0, stddev=1.0, dtype=tf.float32)
118
119
# this generates samples from the whole setup (image + noise)
120
def call(self, batch_input):
121
batch_noise = self.get_batch_noise(tf.shape(batch_input))
122
noise, log_det = self.gen(inputs=tf.concat((batch_input , batch_noise), axis=-1))
123
output = tf.add(batch_input , noise*self.noise_std)
124
return output, log_det
125
126
def gradient_penalty(self, real_images , fake_images):
127
# code from here: https://keras.io/examples/generative/wgan_gp/
128
batch_size = tf.shape(real_images)[0]
129
alpha = tf.random.normal([batch_size, 1], 0.0, 1.0)
130
diff = fake_images - real_images
131
interpolated = real_images + alpha * diff
132
133
with tf.GradientTape() as gp_tape:
134
gp_tape.watch(interpolated)
135
pred = self.disc(interpolated , training=True)
136
137
grads = gp_tape.gradient(pred, [interpolated])[0]
138
norm = tf.sqrt(tf.reduce_sum(tf.square(grads), axis=[1]))
139
gp = tf.reduce_mean((norm - 1.0) ** 2)
140
return gp
141
# This forces the network to output noise from a desired distribution
142
def get_max_likelihood_loss(self, real_images , fake_images , log_det):
143
if self.noise_type == 'gauss':
144
var = tf.reduce_mean(0.5*(fake_images - real_images)**2 / self.noise_std**2)
145
elif self.noise_type == 'laplace':
146
var = tf.reduce_mean(tf.math.abs(fake_images - real_images) / self.noise_std)
147
else:
148
raise ValueError("No such noise type.")
149
return var - log_det
150
151
# Discriminator loss
152
def get_disc_adversarial_loss(self, fake_images , real_images):
153
log_prob_real = self.disc(real_images)
154
log_prob_fake = self.disc(fake_images)
155
if self.loss_type == 'kl':
156
return tf.reduce_mean(-log_prob_real + tf.exp(log_prob_fake - 1))
157
elif self.loss_type == 'wgan':
158
return tf.reduce_mean(log_prob_real - log_prob_fake)
159
elif self.loss_type == 'ce':
160
BCE_loss = tf.keras.losses.BinaryCrossentropy(from_logits=True)
161
real_loss = BCE_loss(tf.ones_like(log_prob_real), log_prob_real)
162
fake_loss = BCE_loss(tf.zeros_like(log_prob_fake), log_prob_fake)
163
return real_loss + fake_loss
164
else:
165
raise ValueError("No such loss")
166
167
# Generator loss
168
def get_gen_adversarial_loss(self, fake_images , real_images):
169
log_prob_fake = self.disc(fake_images)
170
if self.loss_type == 'kl':
171
return tf.reduce_mean(-log_prob_fake)
172
elif self.loss_type == 'wgan':
173
return tf.reduce_mean(log_prob_fake)
174
elif self.loss_type == 'ce':
175
BCE_loss = tf.keras.losses.BinaryCrossentropy(from_logits=True)
176
fake_loss = BCE_loss(tf.ones_like(log_prob_fake), log_prob_fake)
177
return fake_loss
178
else:
179
raise ValueError("No such loss")
180
181
def train_step(self, input):
182
real_images = input
183
for i in range(5):
184
with tf.GradientTape() as tape_disc:
185
fake_images , _ = self.call(real_images)
186
loss_disc = self.get_disc_adversarial_loss(fake_images=fake_images , real_images=real_images)
187
gp = self.gradient_penalty(real_images , fake_images)
188
loss_disc_ = loss_disc + 2 * gp
189
gradient_disc = tape_disc.gradient(loss_disc_, self.disc.trainable_variables)
190
self.disc_optimizer.apply_gradients(zip(gradient_disc , self.disc.trainable_variables))
191
192
193
with tf.GradientTape() as tape_gen:
194
fake_images , log_det = self.call(real_images)
195
loss_gen_adv = self.get_gen_adversarial_loss(fake_images=fake_images , real_images=real_images)
196
loss_gen_gauss = self.get_max_likelihood_loss(fake_images=fake_images , real_images=real_images , log_det=
log_det)
197
loss_gen = (1-self.loss_weight)*loss_gen_adv + self.loss_weight*loss_gen_gauss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
iii
==PAGE:52==
198
gradient_gen = tape_gen.gradient(loss_gen, self.gen.trainable_variables)
199
self.gen_optimizer.apply_gradients(zip(gradient_gen , self.gen.trainable_variables))
200
201
202
return {"loss_disc": loss_disc, "loss_gen_adv": loss_gen_adv , "loss_gen_gauss": loss_gen_gauss , "log det":
log_det}
203
204
# Callback functions for visualization
205
class PlotSamplesAndLoss(keras.callbacks.Callback):
206
def __init__(self, dataset, n_epochs, plot_name, save_plots=True):
207
self.n_epochs = n_epochs
208
self.plot_name = plot_name
209
self.dataset = dataset
210
self.save_plots = save_plots
211
212
def on_train_batch_end(self, batch, logs=None):
213
if any(np.isnan(list(logs.values()))):
214
self.model.stop_training = True
215
216
def on_train_begin(self, logs=None):
217
self.losses = np.zeros((self.n_epochs, 3))
218
self.stds = np.zeros(self.n_epochs)
219
self.res_dir_plot =\
220
os.path.join(os.path.abspath(''),\
221
f'figures/{self.plot_name}/{self.model.loss_type}/weight{self.model.loss_weight}/{self.model.noise_type}
_noise/std{self.model.noise_std}/')
222
if not os.path.isdir(self.res_dir_plot):
223
os.makedirs(self.res_dir_plot)
224
self.res_dir_data = \
225
os.path.join(os.path.abspath(''),\
226
f'data/{self.plot_name}/{self.model.loss_type}/weight{self.model.loss_weight}/{self.model.noise_type}
_noise/std{self.model.noise_std}/')
227
if not os.path.isdir(self.res_dir_data):
228
os.makedirs(self.res_dir_data)
229
230
def on_epoch_end(self, epoch, logs=None):
231
self.losses[epoch, :] = list(logs.values())[:3]
232
ind = 50
233
batch_gt = self.dataset[:200,...] + 0
234
batch_input = batch_gt*0 + batch_gt[ind,...]
235
batch_transformed , _ = self.model(batch_input)
236
batch_transformed = batch_transformed.numpy()
237
self.stds[epoch] = tf.math.reduce_std(batch_transformed - batch_input)
238
if epoch % 5 != 0:
239
return
240
wdt = 6
241
plt.figure(figsize=(5, 5))
242
plt.plot(self.dataset[:1000,0], self.dataset[:1000,1], 'ob', label='GT samples')
243
plt.plot(batch_transformed[:,0], batch_transformed[:,1], 'xg', label='generated conditional samples')
244
plt.plot(batch_input[0, 0], batch_input[0, 1], 'sr', label='input condition')
245
plt.title(f'Epoch: {epoch + 1}/{self.n_epochs}\n' + r"$\sigma$" + f" = {self.stds[epoch]:.4f}")
246
plt.legend(loc=1)
247
plt.xlim([-wdt, wdt])
248
plt.ylim([-wdt, wdt])
249
try:
250
if epoch % (self.n_epochs // 10) == 0:
251
if self.save_plots:
252
plt.savefig(f"{self.res_dir_plot}checkpoint_{(epoch // (self.n_epochs // 10) + 1)}")
253
except:
254
pass
255
plt.show()
256
plt.close()
257
258
def on_train_end(self, logs=None):
259
fig, ax = plt.subplots(3)
260
ax[0].plot(self.losses[:, 0])
261
ax[0].set_title("Discriminator loss")
262
ax[1].plot(self.losses[:, 1])
263
ax[1].set_title("Generator loss")
264
ax[2].plot(self.losses[:, 2])
265
ax[2].set_title("Gaussian ML loss")
266
ax[2].set_xlabel("Epoch")
267
fig.subplots_adjust(hspace=0.75)
268
if self.save_plots:
269
plt.savefig(f"{self.res_dir_plot}Losses")
270
plt.show()
271
plt.close()
272
plt.figure()
273
plt.plot(self.stds)
274
plt.xlabel("Epoch")
275
plt.ylabel(r"$\sigma$")
276
if self.save_plots:
277
plt.savefig(f"{self.res_dir_plot}Standard_deviations")
278
plt.show()
279
plt.close()
280
if self.save_plots:
281
names = ["Discriminator_loss", "Generator_loss"]
282
for i, name in enumerate(names):
283
np.savetxt(f"{self.res_dir_data}{name}.txt", self.losses[:, i])
284
np.savetxt(f"{self.res_dir_data}Standard_deviations.txt", self.stds)
285
286
class PlotSamplesVideo(keras.callbacks.Callback):
287
def __init__(self, dataset, n_epochs, video_name):
288
self.n_epochs = n_epochs
289
self.video_name = video_name
290
self.dataset = dataset
291
iv
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:53==
292
293
def on_train_begin(self, logs=None):
294
self.fig = plt.figure(figsize=(5, 5))
295
self.ax = self.fig.add_subplot(1,1,1)
296
self.ims = []
297
298
def on_epoch_end(self, epoch, logs=None):
299
if epoch%5 != 0:
300
return
301
ind = 50
302
batch_gt = self.dataset[:64,...] + 0
303
batch_input = batch_gt*0 + batch_gt[ind,...]
304
batch_transformed , _ = self.model(batch_input)
305
batch_transformed = batch_transformed.numpy()
306
std = ((batch_transformed -batch_input)**2).mean()**.5
307
im1, = self.ax.plot(self.dataset[:1000,0], self.dataset[:1000,1], 'ob', label='GT samples')
308
im2, = self.ax.plot(batch_transformed[:,0], batch_transformed[:,1], 'xg', label='generated conditional
samples')
309
im3, = self.ax.plot(batch_input[0,0], batch_input[0,1], 'sr', label='input condition')
310
wdt = 6
311
self.ax.set_xlim([-wdt,wdt])
312
self.ax.set_ylim([-wdt,wdt])
313
if epoch == 0:
314
self.ax.legend(loc=1)
315
ttl = plt.text(0, 5.6, f'Epoch: {epoch + 1}/{self.n_epochs}\n', horizontalalignment='center', fontsize='large
')
316
self.ims.append([im1, im2, im3, ttl])
317
318
def on_train_end(self, logs=None):
319
ani = animation.ArtistAnimation(self.fig, self.ims, interval=50, repeat_delay=1000, blit=True)
320
ani.save(f"./videos/{self.video_name}.mp4", dpi=200, bitrate=-1)
321
plt.close()
Code/MHGAN2D.py
1
import os
2
import argparse
3
import tensorflow as tf
4
from generate_data import sample_2d_data
5
from MHGAN2D import get_gen_model , get_disc_model , MHGAN, PlotSamplesAndLoss
6
7
8
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
9
10
parser.add_argument("--weight", help="Gaussian loss weight")
11
parser.add_argument("--noise_std", help="Standard deviation of the noise")
12
parser.add_argument("--loss_type", help="Loss function to be used")
13
parser.add_argument("--n_epochs", help="Number of epochs to train")
14
parser.add_argument("--data_type", help="Data distribution to be used")
15
parser.add_argument("--noise_type", help="Whether to add Gaussian or Laplacian noise")
16
17
args = parser.parse_args()
18
19
# Load dataset
20
dataset = args.data_type
21
train_set = sample_2d_data(dataset, int(1e5))
22
23
gen_model, _ = get_gen_model(chs=32, num_blocks=32)
24
disc_model = get_disc_model(chs=4)
25
26
27
28
lr_gen = 2e-4
29
lr_disc = 2e-4
30
weight = float(args.weight)
31
loss_type = args.loss_type
32
noise_std = float(args.noise_std)
33
noise_type = args.noise_type
34
mhgan = MHGAN(disc=disc_model, gen=gen_model, noise_std=noise_std, loss_weight=weight, loss_type=loss_type,
noise_type=noise_type)
35
gen_optimizer = tf.optimizers.Adam(learning_rate=lr_gen, beta_1=0.5, beta_2=0.9)
36
disc_optimizer = tf.optimizers.Adam(learning_rate=lr_disc, beta_1=0.5, beta_2=0.9)
37
mhgan.compile(disc_optimizer=disc_optimizer , gen_optimizer=gen_optimizer)
38
39
40
n_epochs = int(args.n_epochs)
41
callback_plot = PlotSamplesAndLoss(dataset=train_set, n_epochs=n_epochs, plot_name=f"{dataset}")
42
# callback_video = PlotSamplesVideo(n_epochs=n_epochs, video_name="example_video")
43
mhgan.fit(
44
x=train_set,
45
epochs=n_epochs,
46
batch_size=256,
47
callbacks=[callback_plot],
48
verbose=0)
49
res_dir_model =\
50
os.path.join(os.path.abspath(''),\
51
f"models/{dataset}/{loss_type}/weight{weight}/std{noise_std}{noise_type}")
52
if not os.path.isdir(res_dir_model):
53
os.makedirs(res_dir_model)
54
mhgan.save(res_dir_model , save_format='tf')
Code/2D_training_script.py
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
v
==PAGE:54==
A.3
2D dataset model evaluation
1
import numpy as np
2
from scipy.stats import gaussian_kde
3
from scipy.special import rel_entr
4
def KL_divergence(x, y, delta=0.1, eps_=1e-8):
5
"""The following code calculates the KL divergence between 2 2-dimensional datasets x and y
6
by obtaining pdf estimates using KDE
7
Parameters:
8
x : First dataset
9
y : Second dataset
10
delta : value of the KDE estimator bandwidth
11
eps_ : value to add to avoid infinite values"""
12
13
kde_x = gaussian_kde(x.T, bw_method=delta)
14
kde_y = gaussian_kde(y.T, bw_method=delta)
15
# Extract data bounds
16
x1_min, x2_min = np.minimum(np.min(x, 0), np.min(y, 0))
17
x1_max, x2_max = np.maximum(np.max(x, 0), np.max(y, 0))
18
# Create grid on which to evaluate the KDE
19
x1 = np.arange(x1_min, x1_max, delta)
20
x2 = np.arange(x2_min, x2_max, delta)
21
pos = np.array(np.meshgrid(x1, x2)).T.reshape(-1,2)
22
# Extract pdfs of x and y
23
pdf_x = kde_x.evaluate(pos.T)
24
pdf_x /= sum(pdf_x)
25
pdf_x[pdf_x == 0] += eps_
26
pdf_y = kde_y.evaluate(pos.T)
27
pdf_y /= sum(pdf_y)
28
pdf_y[pdf_y == 0] += eps_
29
return sum(rel_entr(pdf_x, pdf_y))
Code/KL_divergence.py
1
import numpy as np
2
from scipy.spatial.distance import cdist, euclidean
3
# The following code calculates the geometric median of a set of points
4
# Code from: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/30299267/geometric-median-of-multidimensional -points
5
def geometric_median(X, eps=1e-5):
6
y = np.mean(X, 0)
7
8
while True:
9
D = cdist(X, [y])
10
nonzeros = (D != 0)[:, 0]
11
12
Dinv = 1 / D[nonzeros]
13
Dinvs = np.sum(Dinv)
14
W = Dinv / Dinvs
15
T = np.sum(W * X[nonzeros], 0)
16
17
num_zeros = len(X) - np.sum(nonzeros)
18
if num_zeros == 0:
19
y1 = T
20
elif num_zeros == len(X):
21
return y
22
else:
23
R = (T - y) * Dinvs
24
r = np.linalg.norm(R)
25
rinv = 0 if r == 0 else num_zeros/r
26
y1 = max(0, 1-rinv)*T + min(1, rinv)*y
27
28
if euclidean(y, y1) < eps:
29
return y1
30
31
y = y1
Code/geom_median.py
1
import os
2
import argparse
3
import tensorflow as tf
4
from tensorflow import keras
5
from generate_data import sample_2d_data
6
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
7
import numpy as np
8
import imageio
9
import shutil
10
from scipy.stats import expon, pearsonr
11
from KL_divergence import KL_divergence
12
13
# This script evaluates the model trained on a 2D dataset
14
15
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(formatter_class=argparse.RawTextHelpFormatter)
16
17
parser.add_argument("--weight", help="Gaussian/Laplacian loss weight")
18
parser.add_argument("--noise_std", help="Standard deviation of the noise")
19
parser.add_argument("--loss_type", help="Loss function to be used")
20
parser.add_argument("--data_type", help="Data distribution to be used")
21
parser.add_argument("--noise_type", help="Whether to add Gaussian or Laplacian noise")
22
parser.add_argument("--evaluations", help="""This argument specifies which types of evaluations to output, separate
with space ' '. Possible options:
23
5_SAMPLES: for 5 samples, visualize their perturbations
vi
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:55==
24
KL_COMPARISONS: compare the dataset with its 1-step perturbations , random walk dataset and the direct DP mechanism
with a former specified noise type. Calculate the KL divergence between them and the original dataset
25
SAMPLE_COMPARISONS: for 3 samples, visualize the difference between model perturbations and DP mechanism with
estimated scale
26
HISTOGRAMS: generate histogram of correlations of the model perturbations and histogram of KL divergences of the '
sample comparison' evaluation, must be evaluated with the SAMPLE_COMPARISONS evaluation
27
ALL: output all evaluations""")
28
29
30
args = parser.parse_args()
31
32
# Set seed for reproducibility
33
np.random.seed(1405)
34
# Generate dataset
35
data_dist = args.data_type
36
dataset = sample_2d_data(data_dist, int(5e3))
37
38
# Set parameters of model to load
39
loss_type = args.loss_type
40
weight = float(args.weight)
41
noise_type = args.noise_type
42
noise_std = float(args.noise_std)
43
44
evaluations = args.evaluations.lower().strip()
45
46
load_dir = f'models/{data_dist}' +\
47
f'/{loss_type}/weight{weight}/std{noise_std}{noise_type}'
48
49
my_model = tf.keras.models.load_model(load_dir)
50
if '5_samples' in evaluations or evaluations=='all':
51
# Below indices are good representative samples for the following data distributions:
52
if data_dist == '8gaussians':
53
idxs = [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]
54
elif data_dist == 'checkerboard':
55
idxs = [55, 14, 30, 50, 100]
56
elif data_dist == 'rings':
57
idxs = [0, 1, 5, 6, 7]
58
else:
59
raise ValueError("No such data distribution")
60
cols = ["darkorange", "red", "blue", "lime", "magenta"]
61
data_samples = dataset[idxs]
62
plt.plot(dataset[:, 0], dataset[:, 1], '.', color="lightgray", zorder=1)
63
for i in range(len(idxs)):
64
data_sample = tf.repeat(tf.expand_dims(data_samples[i], axis=0), 100, axis=0)
65
data_sample_transformed = my_model(data_sample)[0]
66
s = round(np.std(data_sample_transformed - data_sample), 2)
67
label_ = r'$\sigma$'
68
# print(s)
69
plt.plot(data_sample_transformed[:, 0], data_sample_transformed[:, 1], '.', markersize=7, color=cols[i],
zorder=2)
70
plt.plot(data_sample[0, 0], data_sample[0, 1], 'o', markersize=17, color=cols[i], label=f'{label_} = {s:.2f}'
, zorder=5)
71
72
plt.xlim([-5, 7.5])
73
plt.ylim([-5, 7.5])
74
plt.legend(loc=1, fontsize=13)
75
res_dir =\
76
os.path.join(os.path.abspath(''),\
77
f'figures_final/2D_model_plots/{data_dist}/{loss_type}/weight{weight}/std_{noise_std}{noise_type}/')
78
if not os.path.isdir(res_dir):
79
os.makedirs(res_dir)
80
plt.savefig(f"{res_dir}std{noise_std}.png", dpi=180)
81
plt.show()
82
plt.close()
83
84
if 'kl_comparisons' in evaluations or evaluations=='all':
85
# Perform a random walk simulation
86
ind = 10
87
wdt = 6
88
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(5,5))
89
batch_gt = dataset[0:128,...]
90
batch_input = batch_gt*0 + batch_gt[ind,...]
91
plt.plot(dataset[:,0], dataset[:,1], 'ob', label='GT', zorder=1)
92
plt.plot(batch_input[ind,0], batch_input[ind,1], '.', color="maroon", markersize=13, label='Initial point',
zorder=20)
93
batch_transformed = batch_input[0:10, ...]
94
plt.xlim([-wdt,wdt])
95
plt.ylim([-wdt,wdt])
96
num_iters = 500
97
dataset_MC = np.zeros((num_iters*len(batch_transformed), 2))
98
for i in range(num_iters):
99
batch_transformed , _= my_model(batch_transformed)
100
batch_transformed = batch_transformed.numpy()
101
plt.plot(batch_transformed[:,0], batch_transformed[:,1], 'xr', markersize=5, label="RW points", zorder=5)
102
if i == 0:
103
plt.legend(loc=2)
104
plt.title(f"Iteration: {i + 1}")
105
plt.savefig(f"figures/2D_model_plots/gifs/temp3/Iteration{i + 1}.png", dpi=180)
106
dataset_MC[i * len(batch_transformed): (i + 1)*len(batch_transformed), :] = batch_transformed
107
res_dir =\
108
os.path.join(os.path.abspath(''),\
109
f'figures_final/2D_model_plots/{data_dist}/{loss_type}/weight{weight}/std_{noise_std}{noise_type}/gifs/')
110
if not os.path.isdir(res_dir):
111
os.makedirs(res_dir)
112
with imageio.get_writer(f"{res_dir}animation.gif", mode='I') as writer:
113
for i in range(num_iters):
114
image = imageio.imread(f"figures/2D_model_plots/gifs/temp3/Iteration{i + 1}.png")
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
vii
==PAGE:56==
115
writer.append_data(image)
116
for i in range(num_iters):
117
if (i + 1) in [10, 50, 100, 200, num_iters]:
118
src_path = f"figures/2D_model_plots/gifs/temp3/Iteration{i + 1}.png"
119
dst_path = f'{res_dir}Iteration{i + 1}.png'
120
shutil.copy(src_path, dst_path)
121
os.remove(f"figures/2D_model_plots/gifs/temp3/Iteration{i + 1}.png")
122
plt.close()
123
124
# Get 1-step perturbation
125
dataset_perturbed = my_model(dataset)[0].numpy()
126
127
# Get perturbations via corresponding DP mechanism
128
cov_mat = np.eye(2) * noise_std
129
noise_sample = np.random.multivariate_normal(np.zeros(2), cov_mat, size=len(dataset))
130
if noise_type == 'laplace':
131
exp_sample = expon.rvs(size=(len(dataset)))
132
noise_sample[:, 0] *= np.sqrt(exp_sample)
133
noise_sample[:, 1] *= np.sqrt(exp_sample)
134
dataset_DP = dataset + noise_sample
135
136
# Calculate KL divergences for the 1-step perturbations and the RW simulations
137
KL_perturbed = KL_divergence(dataset, dataset_perturbed)
138
KL_MC = KL_divergence(dataset, dataset_MC)
139
KL_DP = KL_divergence(dataset, dataset_DP)
140
141
# Visualize the comparisons
142
wdt = 5
143
144
fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 4, figsize=(20,5))
145
ax[0].scatter(dataset[:, 0], dataset[:, 1], color='b')
146
ax[1].scatter(dataset_perturbed[:, 0], dataset_perturbed[:, 1], color='b')
147
ax[2].scatter(dataset_MC[:, 0], dataset_MC[:, 1], color='b')
148
ax[3].scatter(dataset_DP[:, 0], dataset_DP[:, 1], color='b')
149
150
ax[1].set_title(f'KL: {KL_perturbed:.4f}')
151
ax[2].set_title(f'KL: {KL_MC:.4f}')
152
ax[3].set_title(f'KL: {KL_DP:.4f}')
153
for i in range(4):
154
ax[i].set_xlim([-wdt, wdt])
155
ax[i].set_ylim([-wdt, wdt])
156
plt.subplots_adjust(wspace=0.1)
157
158
res_dir =\
159
os.path.join(os.path.abspath(''),\
160
f'figures_final/2D_model_plots/{data_dist}/{loss_type}/weight{weight}/std_{noise_std}{noise_type}/')
161
if not os.path.isdir(res_dir):
162
os.makedirs(res_dir)
163
plt.savefig(f'{res_dir}Comparison_new.png', dpi=180)
164
plt.close()
165
166
if 'sample_comparisons' in evaluations or evaluations=='all':
167
# Set figure width
168
wdt = 5
169
# These indices are good for the given datasets
170
if data_dist == '8gaussians':
171
idxs=[0, 3, 6]
172
elif data_dist == 'checkerboard':
173
idxs=[0, 3, 6]
174
elif data_dist == 'rings':
175
idxs=[0, 3, 6]
176
else:
177
raise ValueError("No such data distribution")
178
n = len(dataset)
179
rhos = np.zeros(n)
180
KL_divs = np.zeros(n)
181
for idx in range(n):
182
sample = tf.repeat(tf.expand_dims(dataset[idx], axis=0), 150, axis=0)
183
sample_transformed = (my_model(sample)[0]).numpy()
184
noise = (sample_transformed - sample).numpy()
185
if noise_type == 'gauss':
186
mu_est = np.mean(sample_transformed , axis=0)
187
var_est = np.mean((sample_transformed - mu_est)**2)
188
cov_est = np.eye(2) * var_est
189
elif noise_type == 'laplace':
190
mu_est = geometric_median(sample_transformed)
191
scale_est = np.mean(np.abs(sample_transformed - mu_est))
192
cov_est = np.eye(2) * 2*scale_est**2
193
rho_ = pearsonr(noise[:, 0], noise[:, 1])[0]
194
rhos[idx] = rho_
195
MLE_sample = np.random.multivariate_normal(np.zeros(2), cov_est, size=150)
196
if noise_type == 'laplace':
197
exp_sample = expon.rvs(size=150)
198
MLE_sample[:, 0] *= np.sqrt(exp_sample)
199
MLE_sample[:, 1] *= np.sqrt(exp_sample)
200
MLE_sample += mu_est
201
KL_divs[idx] = KL_divergence(sample_transformed , MLE_sample)
202
if idx not in idxs:
203
continue
204
fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(10, 5))
205
ax[0].scatter(dataset[:, 0], dataset[:, 1], color='lightgray', label='GT')
206
ax[0].scatter(sample_transformed[:, 0], sample_transformed[:, 1], s=50, color='red', marker='x', label='
Perturbed points')
207
ax[0].scatter(sample[0, 0], sample[0, 1], s=100, color='darkorange', label='Initial point')
208
handles,labels = ax[0].get_legend_handles_labels()
209
handles = [handles[0], handles[2], handles[1]]
210
labels = [labels[0], labels[2], labels[1]]
viii
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:57==
211
name = "Gaussian" if noise_type=='gauss' else 'Laplacian'
212
ax[0].legend(handles, labels, loc=1, fontsize=10)
213
ax[0].set_title(f'Initial point: ({sample[0, 0]:.2f}, {sample[0, 1]:.2f})', fontsize=15)
214
ax[0].set_xlim([-wdt,wdt])
215
ax[0].set_ylim([-wdt,wdt])
216
ax[1].scatter(dataset[:, 0], dataset[:, 1], color='lightgray', label='GT')
217
ax[1].scatter(MLE_sample[:, 0], MLE_sample[:, 1], color='b', s=50, marker='x', label=f'{name} MLE samples')
218
ax[1].scatter(mu_est[0], mu_est[1], color='cornflowerblue', label=f'{name} MLE ' + r'$\mu$', s=100)
219
ax[1].set_title(r'$\mu$' + f' = ({mu_est[0]:.2f}, {mu_est[1]:.2f})
'\
220
+ r'$\sigma$ = ' + f'{np.sqrt(cov_est[0, 0]):.3f}', fontsize=15)
221
handles,labels = ax[1].get_legend_handles_labels()
222
handles = [handles[0], handles[2], handles[1]]
223
labels = [labels[0], labels[2], labels[1]]
224
ax[1].legend(handles, labels, loc=1, fontsize=10)
225
ax[1].set_xlim([-wdt,wdt])
226
ax[1].set_ylim([-wdt,wdt])
227
plt.subplots_adjust(wspace=0.1)
228
res_dir =\
229
os.path.join(os.path.abspath(''),\
230
f'figures_final/2D_model_plots/{data_dist}/{loss_type}/weight{weight}/std_{noise_std}{noise_type}/')
231
plt.savefig(f'{res_dir}{noise_type}_MLE{idx + 1}.png', dpi=180)
232
plt.close()
233
234
if 'histograms' in evaluations or evaluations=='all':
235
# Visualize histogram of correlations
236
plt.hist(rhos, bins=25)
237
plt.xlabel(r'$\rho$')
238
plt.savefig(f"{res_dir}Correlations.png", dpi=180)
239
plt.close()
240
241
# Visualize the histogram of KL divergences
242
plt.hist(KL_divs[np.isfinite(KL_divs)], bins=25)
243
plt.xlabel('KL')
244
plt.savefig(f"{res_dir}KL_divergences.png", dpi=180)
245
plt.close()
Code/2D_model_eval.py
A.4
Training and evaluation of models trained on MNIST
dataset
1
import os
2
import sys
3
import tensorflow as tf
4
from tensorflow import keras
5
from tensorflow.keras.utils import Sequence
6
from tensorflow.keras.datasets import mnist
7
from tensorflow.keras.layers import Dense, Input, Flatten, Conv2D
8
from tensorflow.keras.models import Model
9
import numpy as np
10
11
# Load dataset
12
train_set, test_set = mnist.load_data()
13
14
# Data generator implementation for MNIST dataset
15
16
class DataGenerator(Sequence):
17
def __init__(self, batch_size=512):
18
'Initialization'
19
self.batch_size = batch_size
20
self.data = train_set[0]
21
self.sample_shape = self.data.shape[1:]
22
self.data = np.expand_dims(self.data,-1) / 255.
23
self.num_total_samples = self.data.shape[0]
24
np.random.shuffle(self.data)
25
26
def __len__(self):
27
'Denotes the number of batches per epoch'
28
return int(self.num_total_samples // self.batch_size)
29
30
def __getitem__(self, idx):
31
if not isinstance(idx, int):
32
raise ValueError("idx must be an integer.")
33
if not 0 <= idx < self.__len__():
34
raise ValueError("idx is out of bounds.")
35
36
# extract the current batch from dataset
37
batch = self.data[idx * self.batch_size:(idx + 1) * self.batch_size, ...]
38
return batch
39
def reshape_batch(self, batch):
40
return batch
41
return np.reshape(batch, newshape=(batch.shape[0],)+self.sample_shape)
42
43
generator = DataGenerator(batch_size=128)
44
batch_gt = generator.__getitem__(0)
45
46
47
48
class MHGAN(keras.Model):
49
# gen is a Normalizing flow architecture
50
# disc is a discriminator
51
# noise_std is the desired std of the optimized additive noise egnerated be gen
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
ix
==PAGE:58==
52
def __init__(self, gen, disc, noise_std, disc_inner_loop=5, loss_weight=1., loss_type='wgan', noise_type='laplace
'):
53
super(MHGAN, self).__init__()
54
self.gen = gen
55
self.disc = disc
56
self.noise_std = noise_std
57
self.disc_inner_loop = disc_inner_loop
58
self.loss_weight = loss_weight
59
self.loss_type = loss_type
60
self.noise_type = noise_type
61
62
def compile(self, disc_optimizer , gen_optimizer):
63
super(MHGAN, self).compile()
64
self.gen_optimizer = gen_optimizer
65
self.disc_optimizer = disc_optimizer
66
67
# this generates input for the gen network
68
def get_batch_noise(self, batch_shape):
69
return tf.random.normal(shape=batch_shape , mean=0.0, stddev=1.0, dtype=tf.float32)
70
71
# this generates samples from the whole setup (image + noise)
72
def call(self, batch_input):
73
batch_noise = self.get_batch_noise(tf.shape(batch_input))
74
noise, log_det = self.gen(inputs=tf.concat((batch_input , batch_noise), axis=-1))
75
output = tf.add(batch_input , noise*self.noise_std)
76
# output = (output - tf.math.reduce_min(output)) / (tf.math.reduce_max(output) - tf.math.reduce_min(output))
77
output = tf.clip_by_value(output, 0.0, 1.0)
78
return output, log_det
79
80
def gradient_penalty(self, real_images , fake_images):
81
# code from here: https://keras.io/examples/generative/wgan_gp/
82
batch_size = tf.shape(real_images)[0]
83
alpha = tf.random.normal([batch_size, 1, 1, 1], 0.0, 1.0)
84
diff = fake_images - real_images
85
interpolated = real_images + alpha * diff
86
87
with tf.GradientTape() as gp_tape:
88
gp_tape.watch(interpolated)
89
pred = self.disc(interpolated , training=True)
90
91
grads = gp_tape.gradient(pred, [interpolated])[0]
92
norm = tf.sqrt(tf.reduce_sum(tf.square(grads), axis=[1, 2, 3]))
93
gp = tf.reduce_mean((norm - 1.0) ** 2)
94
return gp
95
96
def get_max_likelihood_loss(self, real_images , fake_images , log_det):
97
if self.noise_type == "gauss":
98
var = tf.reduce_mean(0.5*(fake_images - real_images)**2 / self.noise_std**2)
99
elif self.noise_type == "laplace":
100
var = tf.reduce_mean(tf.math.abs(fake_images - real_images) / self.noise_std)
101
else:
102
raise ValueError("No such noise type.")
103
return var - log_det
104
105
def get_disc_adversarial_loss(self, fake_images , real_images):
106
log_prob_real = self.disc(real_images)
107
log_prob_fake = self.disc(fake_images)
108
if self.loss_type == 'kl':
109
return tf.reduce_mean(-log_prob_real + tf.exp(log_prob_fake - 1))
110
elif self.loss_type == 'wgan':
111
return tf.reduce_mean(log_prob_real - log_prob_fake)
112
elif self.loss_type == 'ce':
113
BCE_loss = tf.keras.losses.BinaryCrossentropy(from_logits=True)
114
real_loss = BCE_loss(tf.ones_like(log_prob_real), log_prob_real)
115
fake_loss = BCE_loss(tf.zeros_like(log_prob_fake), log_prob_fake)
116
return real_loss + fake_loss
117
else:
118
raise ValueError("No such loss")
119
120
def get_gen_adversarial_loss(self, fake_images , real_images):
121
log_prob_fake = self.disc(fake_images)
122
if self.loss_type == 'kl':
123
return tf.reduce_mean(-log_prob_fake)
124
elif self.loss_type == 'wgan':
125
return tf.reduce_mean(log_prob_fake)
126
elif self.loss_type == 'ce':
127
BCE_loss = tf.keras.losses.BinaryCrossentropy(from_logits=True)
128
fake_loss = BCE_loss(tf.ones_like(log_prob_fake), log_prob_fake)
129
return fake_loss
130
else:
131
raise ValueError("No such loss")
132
133
def train_step(self, input):
134
real_images = input
135
136
for i in range(5):
137
with tf.GradientTape() as tape_disc:
138
fake_images , _ = self.call(real_images)
139
loss_disc = self.get_disc_adversarial_loss(fake_images=fake_images , real_images=real_images)
140
gp = self.gradient_penalty(real_images , fake_images)
141
loss_disc = loss_disc + 10 * gp
142
gradient_disc = tape_disc.gradient(loss_disc, self.disc.trainable_variables)
143
self.disc_optimizer.apply_gradients(zip(gradient_disc , self.disc.trainable_variables))
144
145
# Take a step to optimize the generator
146
with tf.GradientTape() as tape_gen:
147
fake_images , log_det = self.call(real_images)
x
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:59==
148
loss_gen_adv = self.get_gen_adversarial_loss(fake_images=fake_images , real_images=real_images)
149
loss_gen_gauss = self.get_max_likelihood_loss(fake_images=fake_images , real_images=real_images , log_det=
log_det)
150
loss_gen = (1.0 - self.loss_weight) * loss_gen_adv + self.loss_weight * loss_gen_gauss
151
gradient_gen = tape_gen.gradient(loss_gen, self.gen.trainable_variables)
152
self.gen_optimizer.apply_gradients(zip(gradient_gen , self.gen.trainable_variables))
153
154
return {"loss_disc": loss_disc, "loss_gen_adv": loss_gen_adv , "loss_gen_gauss": loss_gen_gauss , "log det":
log_det}
155
156
157
158
159
kernel_initializer = tf.keras.initializers.RandomNormal(stddev=5e-2)
160
161
bias_initializer = 'zeros'
162
#https://export.arxiv.org/pdf/1902.00275
163
164
dtype = tf.float32
165
166
def get_disc_model(shape=(28,28, 1), chs=1):
167
activation = keras.layers.LeakyReLU(0.2)
168
inputs = Input(shape)
169
layer = Conv2D(filters=16*chs, kernel_size=(5,5), activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(
inputs)
170
layer = Conv2D(filters=32*chs, kernel_size=(3,3), activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(
layer)
171
layer = Conv2D(filters=16*chs, kernel_size=(3,3), activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(
layer)
172
layer = Conv2D(filters=8*chs, kernel_size=(3,3), activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(
layer)
173
layer = Conv2D(filters=4*chs, kernel_size=(3,3), activation=activation, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(
layer)
174
layer = Flatten()(layer)
175
log_prob = Dense(1, activation='linear', use_bias=False, kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer)(layer)
176
177
model = Model(inputs, log_prob)
178
return model
179
180
# code for normalizing floe generator (using affine coupling layers)
181
182
class ActNorm(tf.keras.layers.Layer):
183
def __init__(self):
184
super(ActNorm, self).__init__()
185
186
# Variable indicating whether the weight have been initialized
187
self.initiated = False
188
189
190
def build(self, input_shape):
191
self.channel_size = input_shape[-1]
192
193
self.s = self.add_weight('s', shape=(1, 1, 1, self.channel_size), initializer=tf.keras.initializers.ones(),
194
trainable=True)
195
196
self.b = self.add_weight('b', shape=(1, 1, 1, self.channel_size), initializer=tf.keras.initializers.zeros(),
197
trainable=True)
198
199
def call(self, inputs):
200
if not self.initiated:
201
std = tf.math.reduce_std(inputs, [0, 1, 2])
202
mean = tf.math.reduce_mean(inputs, [0, 1, 2])
203
self.s.assign(1 / std[None, None, None, :])
204
self.b.assign(-mean / std[None, None, None, :])
205
206
self.initiated = True
207
208
return self.s * inputs + self.b, inputs.shape[1]*inputs.shape[2]*tf.reduce_sum(tf.math.log(tf.math.abs(self.s
)))
209
210
class InvertibleConvolution(tf.keras.layers.Layer):
211
# inspiration from GLOW: https://ameroyer.github.io/portfolio/2021-04-12-Glow/
212
# and https://github.com/Discover304/SinGlow/blob/master/model.py
213
def __init__(self, filters):
214
super(InvertibleConvolution , self).__init__()
215
self.filters = filters
216
self.L_mask = tf.convert_to_tensor(np.tril(m=np.ones(self.filters, dtype=np.float32),k=-1))
217
self.U_mask = tf.convert_to_tensor(np.tril(m=np.ones(self.filters, dtype=np.float32),k=-1).T)
218
self.diag = tf.convert_to_tensor(np.eye(self.filters, dtype=np.float32))
219
220
self.weight_param = self.add_weight('w', shape=[filters,filters], initializer=tf.initializers.constant(np.eye
(filters)))
221
222
def build(self, input_shape):
223
assert(input_shape[-1]==self.filters)
224
super(InvertibleConvolution , self).build(input_shape=input_shape)
225
226
def _get_kernel_(self):
227
weight = self.weight_param
228
L = weight * self.L_mask + self.diag
229
U = weight * self.U_mask + self.diag
230
return tf.reshape(tf.matmul(L, U), (1, 1, self.filters, self.filters))
231
232
def call(self, inputs):
233
W = self._get_kernel_()
234
h, w = inputs.shape[1], inputs.shape[2]
235
return tf.nn.conv2d(inputs, W, [1, 1, 1, 1], padding="SAME"), \
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xi
==PAGE:60==
236
np.float32(h*w*np.sum(np.log(np.abs(np.diag(self.diag)))))
237
238
kernel_initializer = tf.keras.initializers.RandomUniform()
239
240
class CouplingResidualLayer(tf.keras.layers.Layer):
241
def __init__(self, dims):
242
super(CouplingResidualLayer , self).__init__()
243
self.dims = dims
244
245
def build(self, input_shape):
246
output_dims = input_shape[-1]
247
248
self.fnc1 = tf.keras.Sequential([
249
Conv2D(filters=self.dims, kernel_size=(5,5), activation='tanh', kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer ,
padding="same"),
250
Conv2D(filters=self.dims, kernel_size=(3,3), activation='tanh', kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer ,
padding="same"),
251
Conv2D(filters=output_dims*2, kernel_size=(3,3), activation='tanh', kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer
, padding="same")
252
])
253
254
self.fnc2 = tf.keras.Sequential([
255
Conv2D(filters=self.dims, kernel_size=(5,5), activation='tanh', kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer ,
padding="same"),
256
Conv2D(filters=self.dims, kernel_size=(3,3), activation='tanh', kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer ,
padding="same"),
257
Conv2D(filters=output_dims*2, kernel_size=(3,3), activation='tanh', kernel_initializer=kernel_initializer
, padding="same")
258
])
259
260
# input includes the input image as condition c, and the input noise instance x
261
def call(self, inputs):
262
c_, x = tf.split(inputs, 2, -1)
263
c = tf.nn.space_to_depth(c_, block_size=2)
264
x = tf.nn.space_to_depth(x, block_size=2)
265
266
x1, x2 = tf.split(x, 2, -1)
267
268
a, b = tf.split(self.fnc1(tf.concat([c,x1], axis=-1)), 2, -1)
269
log_det = tf.reduce_mean(a)
270
y2 = x2 * tf.math.exp(a) + b
271
272
a, b = tf.split(self.fnc2(tf.concat([c,y2], axis=-1)), 2, -1)
273
log_det += tf.reduce_mean(a)
274
y1 = x1 * tf.math.exp(a) + b
275
276
y = tf.concat([y1,y2], axis=-1)
277
y = tf.nn.depth_to_space(y, block_size=2)
278
return tf.concat([c_,y], axis=-1), log_det
279
280
def get_gen_model(shape=(28,28,2), chs=32, num_blocks=8):
281
inputs = Input(shape, dtype=dtype)
282
283
log_det = 0
284
output = inputs
285
for i in range(num_blocks):
286
output = tf.concat(tf.split(output, 2, -1), axis=1)
287
288
output, ld = ActNorm() (output)
289
log_det += ld
290
291
292
output, ld = InvertibleConvolution(1) (output)
293
log_det += ld
294
output = tf.concat(tf.split(output, 2, 1), axis=-1)
295
296
297
output, ld = CouplingResidualLayer(chs)(output)
298
log_det += ld
299
300
301
# we don need the condition to be in the output
302
_, output = tf.split(output, 2, -1)
303
model = Model(inputs, [output, log_det])
304
return model
305
306
307
gen_network = get_gen_model(chs=48, num_blocks=16)
308
309
310
disc_network = get_disc_model(chs=4)
311
312
# Helper functions and callbacks for visualization and writing of the resulting density
313
314
figsize = 5
315
316
from tensorflow import keras
317
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
318
class SamplesPlotCallback(keras.callbacks.Callback):
319
def __init__(self, n_epochs, plot_name, save_plots=False):
320
self.plot_name = plot_name
321
self.n_epochs = n_epochs
322
self.save_plots = save_plots
323
324
325
def on_train_batch_end(self, batch, logs=None):
326
if any(np.isnan(list(logs.values()))):
xii
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:61==
327
sys.exit("No numeric values")
328
329
def on_train_begin(self, logs=None):
330
self.losses = np.zeros((self.n_epochs, 3))
331
self.stds = np.zeros(self.n_epochs)
332
self.res_dir_plot =\
333
os.path.join(os.path.abspath(''),\
334
f'figures/{self.plot_name}/{self.model.loss_type}/weight{self.model.loss_weight}/{self.model.noise_type}
_noise/std{self.model.noise_std}/')
335
if not os.path.isdir(self.res_dir_plot):
336
os.makedirs(self.res_dir_plot)
337
self.res_dir_data = \
338
os.path.join(os.path.abspath(''),\
339
f'data/{self.plot_name}/{self.model.loss_type}/weight{self.model.loss_weight}/{self.model.noise_type}
_noise/std{self.model.noise_std}/')
340
if not os.path.isdir(self.res_dir_data):
341
os.makedirs(self.res_dir_data)
342
def on_epoch_end(self, epoch, logs=None):
343
self.losses[epoch, :] = list(logs.values())[:3]
344
ind = 50
345
batch_gt = generator.__getitem__(0)
346
batch_input = batch_gt*0 + batch_gt[ind:ind+1,...]
347
batch_transformed ,_ = mhgan(batch_input)
348
batch_transformed = batch_transformed.numpy()
349
self.stds[epoch] = tf.math.reduce_std(batch_transformed - batch_input)
350
if epoch%5 != 0:
351
return
352
batch_gt = generator.__getitem__(0)
353
batch_input = batch_gt*0 + batch_gt[ind,...]
354
batch_transformed ,_ = mhgan(batch_input)
355
batch_transformed = batch_transformed.numpy()
356
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 4))
357
for i in range(10):
358
plt.subplot(2, 5, i+1)
359
plt.imshow(np.minimum(1, np.maximum(0, batch_transformed[i, ...])))
360
plt.axis('off')
361
plt.title((np.abs(batch_input -batch_transformed)**2).mean()**.5)
362
plt.tight_layout()
363
try:
364
if epoch % (self.n_epochs // 10) == 0:
365
if self.save_plots:
366
plt.savefig(f"{self.res_dir_plot}checkpoint_{(epoch // (self.n_epochs // 10) + 1)}_perturbed")
367
except:
368
pass
369
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 4))
370
for i in range(10):
371
plt.subplot(2, 5, i+1)
372
plt.imshow(batch_input[0, ...])
373
plt.axis('off')
374
plt.tight_layout()
375
try:
376
if epoch % (self.n_epochs // 10) == 0:
377
if self.save_plots:
378
plt.savefig(f"{self.res_dir_plot}checkpoint_{(epoch // (self.n_epochs // 10) + 1)}_initial")
379
except:
380
pass
381
382
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 4))
383
for i in range(10):
384
plt.subplot(2, 5, i+1)
385
plt.imshow(batch_transformed[i, ...] - batch_input[0, ...])
386
plt.axis('off')
387
plt.tight_layout()
388
try:
389
if epoch % (self.n_epochs // 10) == 0:
390
if self.save_plots:
391
plt.savefig(f"{self.res_dir_plot}checkpoint_{(epoch // (self.n_epochs // 10) + 1)}_noise")
392
except:
393
pass
394
395
try:
396
if epoch % (self.n_epochs // 10) == 0:
397
if self.save_plots:
398
plt.savefig(f"{self.res_dir_plot}checkpoint_{(epoch // (self.n_epochs // 10) + 1)}")
399
except:
400
pass
401
plt.show()
402
403
def on_train_end(self, logs=None):
404
fig, ax = plt.subplots(3)
405
ax[0].plot(self.losses[:, 0])
406
ax[0].set_title("Discriminator loss")
407
ax[1].plot(self.losses[:, 1])
408
ax[1].set_title("Generator loss")
409
ax[2].plot(self.losses[:, 2])
410
ax[2].set_title("Gaussian ML loss")
411
ax[2].set_xlabel("Epoch")
412
fig.subplots_adjust(hspace=0.75)
413
if self.save_plots:
414
plt.savefig(f"{self.res_dir_plot}Losses")
415
plt.show()
416
plt.figure()
417
plt.plot(self.stds)
418
plt.xlabel("Epoch")
419
plt.ylabel(r"$\sigma$")
420
if self.save_plots:
421
plt.savefig(f"{self.res_dir_plot}Standard_deviations")
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xiii
==PAGE:62==
422
names = ["Discriminator_loss", "Generator_loss"]
423
for i, name in enumerate(names):
424
np.savetxt(f"{self.res_dir_data}{name}.txt", self.losses[:, i])
425
np.savetxt(f"{self.res_dir_data}Standard_deviations.txt", self.stds)
426
427
# Set paramaters of model to train
428
loss_type = "wgan"
429
loss_weight = 0.05
430
noise_type = "gauss"
431
noise_std = 0.5
432
433
mhgan = MHGAN(disc=disc_network , gen=gen_network , \
434
noise_std=noise_std, loss_weight=loss_weight , loss_type=loss_type, noise_type=noise_type)
435
gen_optimizer = tf.optimizers.Adam(learning_rate=5e-7, beta_1=0.5, beta_2=0.9, epsilon=1e-2)
436
disc_optimizer = tf.optimizers.Adam(learning_rate=1e-7, beta_1=0.5, epsilon=1e-2)
437
mhgan.compile(disc_optimizer=disc_optimizer , gen_optimizer=gen_optimizer)
438
439
# Set number of epochs
440
n_epochs = 500
441
# Define callback where we visualize the perturbations every 10% of training
442
callback = SamplesPlotCallback(n_epochs=n_epochs, plot_name='MNIST', save_plots=True)
443
444
mhgan.fit(
445
x=generator,
446
batch_size=256,
447
epochs = n_epochs,
448
callbacks=[callback])
449
450
mhgan.save_weights(f"models/MNIST/{loss_type}/weight{loss_weight}/std{noise_std}{noise_type}", save_format='tf')
Code/MNIST_training_script.py
1
import os
2
import imageio
3
from IPython import display
4
import shutil
5
import numpy as np
6
import tensorflow as tf
7
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
8
from matplotlib import colors
9
import seaborn as sns
10
from tensorflow.keras.datasets import mnist
11
from MHGANMNIST import MHGAN, get_disc_model , get_gen_model
12
13
# Load dataset
14
train_set, _ = mnist.load_data()
15
dataset = (train_set[0] / 255.0).astype(np.float32)
16
17
# Set seed for reproducibility
18
np.random.seed(1405)
19
# Take some random indices for simple visualization
20
n = 40
21
idxs = np.random.choice(len(dataset), size=n, replace=False)
22
23
# Visualize some samples
24
plt.figure(figsize=(20, 5))
25
for i, idx in enumerate(idxs):
26
plt.subplot(4, 10, i+1)
27
plt.imshow(dataset[idx])
28
plt.axis('off')
29
plt.subplots_adjust(wspace=-0.85, hspace=0.1)
30
plt.savefig("figures/MNIST_plot.png", dpi=180)
31
plt.show()
32
33
# Define networks
34
gen_network = get_gen_model(chs=48, num_blocks=16)
35
disc_network = get_disc_model(chs=4)
36
37
# Set hyperpareters
38
loss_type = "wgan"
39
loss_weight = 0.05
40
noise_type = "gauss"
41
noise_std = 0.5
42
# Build model and load weights
43
my_model = MHGAN(disc=disc_network , gen=gen_network , \
44
noise_std=noise_std, loss_weight=loss_weight , loss_type=loss_type, noise_type=noise_type)
45
my_model.load_weights(f"models/MNIST/{loss_type}/weight{loss_weight}/std{noise_std}{noise_type}")
46
my_model.build(input_shape=(None, 28, 28, 1))
47
48
# Load the training losses and standard deviations
49
generator_losses = \
50
np.loadtxt(f'data/MNIST/{loss_type}/weight{loss_weight}/{noise_type}_noise/std{noise_std}/Generator_loss.txt')
51
discriminator_losses = \
52
np.loadtxt(f'data/MNIST/{loss_type}/weight{loss_weight}/{noise_type}_noise/std{noise_std}/Discriminator_loss.txt'
)
53
standard_deviations = \
54
np.loadtxt(f'data/MNIST/{loss_type}/weight{loss_weight}/{noise_type}_noise/std{noise_std}/Standard_deviations.txt
')
55
56
# Visualize the training losses and standard deviations
57
fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 3, figsize=(15, 5))
58
ax[0].plot(generator_losses)
59
ax[0].set_title('Generator loss', fontsize=22)
60
ax[1].plot(discriminator_losses)
61
ax[1].set_title('Discriminator loss', fontsize=22)
xiv
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:63==
62
ax[2].plot(standard_deviations)
63
ax[2].set_title(r'$\sigma$', fontsize=22)
64
for i in range(3):
65
ax[i].set_xlabel('Epoch')
66
res_dir =\
67
os.path.join(os.path.abspath(''),\
68
f'figures/MNIST_model_plots/{loss_type}/weight{loss_weight}/std_{noise_std}{noise_type}/')
69
if not os.path.isdir(res_dir):
70
os.makedirs(res_dir)
71
plt.savefig(f'{res_dir}losses_and_stds.png', dpi=180)
72
plt.show()
73
74
# Take some random indices for analysis
75
np.random.seed(1405)
76
n = 10
77
idxs = np.random.choice(len(dataset), size=n, replace=False)
78
im_sample = dataset[idxs]
79
im_sample = tf.expand_dims(im_sample, axis=-1)
80
im_sample_perturbed , _ = my_model(im_sample)
81
im_sample_noise = im_sample_perturbed - im_sample
82
83
# Visalize samples, noise and perturbations
84
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(20, 10))
85
for i in range(n):
86
plt.subplot(3, n, i+1)
87
plt.imshow(im_sample[i])
88
plt.axis('off')
89
plt.subplot(3, n, i+1+n)
90
plt.imshow(im_sample_perturbed[i])
91
plt.axis('off')
92
plt.subplot(3, n, i+1+2*n)
93
cb = plt.imshow(im_sample_noise[i])
94
plt.axis('off')
95
cbar_ax = fig.add_axes([0.91, 0.26, 0.01, 0.15])
96
plt.colorbar(cb, cax=cbar_ax)
97
plt.subplots_adjust(hspace=-0.6, wspace=0)
98
res_dir =\
99
os.path.join(os.path.abspath(''),\
100
f'figures/MNIST_model_plots/{loss_type}/weight{loss_weight}/std_{noise_std}{noise_type}/')
101
if not os.path.isdir(res_dir):
102
os.makedirs(res_dir)
103
plt.savefig(f"{res_dir}1_step_perturbations.png", dpi=180)
104
plt.show()
105
106
107
# Perform visualization on some digit
108
# Take a sample digit
109
# digit 0: ind = 787
110
# digit 1: ind = 24
111
# digit 2: ind 117
112
# digit 3: ind = 31178
113
# digit 4: ind = 150
114
# digit 5: ind = 0
115
# digit 6: ind = 13
116
# digit 7: ind = 803
117
# digit 8: ind = 10001
118
# digit 9: ind = 4
119
120
ind = 4
121
sample = dataset[ind]
122
plt.imshow(sample)
123
plt.show()
124
sample = tf.expand_dims(sample, -1)
125
126
# Visualize multiple perturbations of one digit
127
im_sample_single = tf.repeat(tf.expand_dims(sample, axis=0), 1000, axis=0)
128
im_sample_single_pertubed , _ = my_model(im_sample_single)
129
im_sample_single_noise = im_sample_single_pertubed - im_sample_single
130
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(20, 10))
131
for i in range(10):
132
plt.subplot(3, 10, i+1)
133
plt.imshow(im_sample_single[i])
134
plt.axis('off')
135
plt.subplot(3, 10, i+1+10)
136
plt.imshow(im_sample_single_pertubed[i])
137
plt.axis('off')
138
plt.subplot(3, 10, i+1+20)
139
cb = plt.imshow(im_sample_single_noise[i])
140
plt.axis('off')
141
cbar_ax = fig.add_axes([0.91, 0.26, 0.01, 0.15])
142
plt.colorbar(cb, cax=cbar_ax)
143
plt.subplots_adjust(hspace=-0.6, wspace=0)
144
plt.savefig(f"{res_dir}1_step_perturbations_single.png", dpi=180)
145
plt.show()
146
147
# Extract the 100 most variable pixels
148
n = 100
149
noises = tf.reshape(im_sample_single_noise , (1000, -1)).numpy()
150
noises_stds = np.std(noises, axis=0)
151
sorted_stds_idx = np.argsort(-noises_stds)
152
top_n_stds_idx = sorted_stds_idx[:n]
153
top_n_stds_2D_idx = [[x // 28, x % 28] for x in top_n_stds_idx]
154
top_n_noises = noises[:,top_n_stds_idx]
155
156
157
# Visualize the densities of the top 16 pixel noises
158
fig, axes = plt.subplots(4, 4, figsize=(20, 20))
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xv
==PAGE:64==
159
for i in range(16):
160
stddev = np.std(top_n_noises[:, i])
161
sns.kdeplot(ax=axes[i // 4, i % 4], data=top_n_noises[:, i], label=r"$\sigma$" + f" = {stddev:.3f}")
162
axes[i // 4, i % 4].set_ylabel(" ")
163
axes[i // 4, i % 4].legend(loc=2, fontsize=16)
164
plt.subplots_adjust(wspace=0.15, hspace=0.1)
165
plt.savefig(f"{res_dir}top_{n}_std_densities_grid.png", dpi=180)
166
plt.show()
167
168
# Highlight the pixels in red
169
y = top_n_stds_idx // 28
170
x = top_n_stds_idx % 28
171
plt.imshow(im_sample_single[0])
172
plt.plot(x, y, 'sr', markersize=7)
173
plt.axis('off')
174
plt.savefig(f"{res_dir}top_{n}_std_pixels.png", dpi=180)
175
plt.show()
176
177
# Visualize the most variable pixels in a heatmap
178
noises_stds_img = noises_stds.reshape((28, 28)) + 1e-6
179
fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(13, 5))
180
ax[0].imshow(im_sample_single[0])
181
ax[0].axis('off')
182
cb = ax[1].imshow(noises_stds_img , cmap='hot', norm=colors.LogNorm(vmax=np.max(noises_stds)))
183
ax[1].axis('off')
184
cbar_ax = fig.add_axes([0.825, 0.13, 0.03, 0.75])
185
plt.colorbar(cb, cbar_ax)
186
plt.subplots_adjust(wspace=-0.35)
187
plt.savefig(f'{res_dir}colormap.png', dpi=180)
188
plt.show()
189
190
191
# Simulate a random walk and save some iterations along with creating a gif
192
res_dir_1 = f"{res_dir}gif/temp/"
193
if not os.path.isdir(res_dir_1):
194
os.makedirs(res_dir_1)
195
196
num_iter = 500
197
im_sample_MCMC = tf.expand_dims(sample, axis=0)
198
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(5, 5))
199
plt.imshow(im_sample_MCMC[0])
200
plt.title(f"Iteration: 1")
201
plt.axis('off')
202
display.display(fig)
203
plt.savefig(f"{res_dir_1}Iteration1.png", dpi=180)
204
plt.show()
205
display.clear_output(wait=True)
206
for i in range(1, num_iter):
207
im_sample_MCMC , _ = my_model(im_sample_MCMC)
208
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(5, 5))
209
plt.imshow(im_sample_MCMC[0])
210
plt.axis('off')
211
plt.title(f"Iteration: {i + 1}")
212
display.display(fig)
213
plt.savefig(f"{res_dir_1}Iteration{i+1}.png", dpi=180)
214
plt.show()
215
display.clear_output(wait=True)
216
217
with imageio.get_writer(f"{res_dir}/gif/animation.gif", mode='I') as writer:
218
for i in range(num_iter):
219
image = imageio.imread(f"{res_dir_1}Iteration{i + 1}.png")
220
writer.append_data(image)
221
for i in range(num_iter):
222
if (i + 1) in [10, 50, 100, 500, 1000, 5000, num_iter]:
223
src_path = f"{res_dir_1}Iteration{i + 1}.png"
224
dst_path = f'{res_dir}/gif/Iteration{i + 1}.png'
225
shutil.copy(src_path, dst_path)
226
os.remove(f"{res_dir_1}Iteration{i + 1}.png")
Code/MNIST_model_eval.py
xvi
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:65==
B
Figures
B.1
Training losses and standard deviations
Here we show training losses and standard deviations of the models trained on the ”checker-
board” and ”rings” datasets.
(a) Gaussian regularization
(b) Laplacian regularization
Figure B.1: ”Checkerboard” dataset: train losses for models trained with Cross-entropy
loss
(a) Gaussian regularization
(b) Laplacian regularization
Figure B.2: ”Checkerboard” dataset: train losses for models trained with Wasserstein loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xvii
==PAGE:66==
(a) Gaussian regularization
(b) Laplacian regularization
Figure B.3: ”Rings” dataset: train losses for models trained with Cross-entropy loss
(a) Gaussian regularization
(b) Laplacian regularization
Figure B.4: ”Rings” dataset: train losses for models trained with Wasserstein loss
xviii
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:67==
(a) Gaussian regularization
(b) Laplacian regularization
Figure B.5: ”Checkerboard” dataset: standard deviations for models with Cross-entropy
loss
(a) Gaussian regularization
(b) Laplacian regularization
Figure B.6: ”Checkerboard” dataset: standard deviations for models with Wasserstein
loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xix
==PAGE:68==
(a) Gaussian regularization
(b) Laplacian regularization
Figure B.7: ”Rings” dataset: standard deviations for models with Cross-entropy loss
(a) Gaussian regularization
(b) Laplacian regularization
Figure B.8: ”Rings” dataset: standard deviations for models with Wasserstein loss
B.2
Model perturbations
Here we show the sample and their estimated standard deviations.
xx
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:69==
Figure B.9: ”8gaussians” dataset: perturbations with Gaussian regularizer and Wasser-
stein loss
Figure B.10: ”8gaussians” dataset: perturbations with Laplacian regularizer and Wasser-
stein loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xxi
==PAGE:70==
Figure B.11: ”Checkerboard” dataset: perturbations with Gaussian regularizer and Cross-
entropy loss
Figure B.12:
”Checkerboard” dataset:
perturbations with Gaussian regularizer and
Wasserstein loss
xxii
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:71==
Figure B.13:
”Checkerboard” dataset:
perturbations with Laplacian regularizer and
Wasserstein loss
Figure B.14: ”Rings” dataset: perturbations with Gaussian regularizer and Cross-entropy
loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xxiii
==PAGE:72==
Figure B.15: ”Rings” dataset: perturbations with Gaussian regularizer and Wasserstein
loss
Figure B.16: ”Rings” dataset: perturbations with Laplacian regularizer and Wasserstein
loss
xxiv
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:73==
B.3
Model vs DP-mechanism perturbations
For 2 samples, we compare the model perturbations and perturbations obtained from the
corresponding DP mechanism. Each row corresponds to a model trained with desired scale
σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}.
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.17: ”8gaussians” dataset: λ = 0.05, Gaussian regularizer, Cross-entropy loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xxv
==PAGE:74==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.18: ”8gaussians” dataset: λ = 0.05, Laplacian regularizer, Cross-entropy loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.19: ”8gaussians” dataset: λ = 0.2, Gaussian regularizer, Cross-entropy loss
xxvi
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:75==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.20: ”8gaussians” dataset: λ = 0.2, Laplacian regularizer, Cross-entropy loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.21: ”8gaussians” dataset: λ = 0.05, Gaussian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xxvii
==PAGE:76==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.22: ”8gaussians” dataset: λ = 0.05, Laplacian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.23: ”8gaussians” dataset: λ = 0.1, Gaussian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
xxviii
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:77==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.24: ”8gaussians” dataset: λ = 0.1, Laplacian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.25: ”8gaussians” dataset: λ = 0.2, Gaussian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xxix
==PAGE:78==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.26: ”8gaussians” dataset: λ = 0.2, Laplacian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.27: ”Checkerboard” dataset: λ = 0.05, Gaussian regularizer, Cross-entropy loss
xxx
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:79==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.28: ”Checkerboard” dataset: λ = 0.05, Laplacian regularizer, Cross-entropy loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.29: ”Checkerboard” dataset: λ = 0.1, Gaussian regularizer, Cross-entropy loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xxxi
==PAGE:80==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.30: ”Checkerboard” dataset: λ = 0.2, Gaussian regularizer, Cross-entropy loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.31: ”8gaussians” dataset: λ = 0.2, Laplacian regularizer, Cross-entropy loss
xxxii
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:81==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.32: ”Checkerboard” dataset: λ = 0.05, Gaussian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.33: ”Checkerboard” dataset: λ = 0.05, Laplacian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xxxiii
==PAGE:82==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.34: ”Checkerboard” dataset: λ = 0.1, Gaussian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.35: ”Checkerboard” dataset: λ = 0.1, Laplacian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
xxxiv
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:83==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.36: ”Checkerboard” dataset: λ = 0.2, Gaussian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.37: ”Checkerboard” dataset: λ = 0.2, Laplacian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xxxv
==PAGE:84==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.38: ”Rings” dataset: λ = 0.05, Gaussian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.39: ”Rings” dataset: λ = 0.05, Laplacian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
xxxvi
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:85==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.40: ”Rings” dataset: λ = 0.1, Gaussian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.41: ”Rings” dataset: λ = 0.1, Laplacian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xxxvii
==PAGE:86==
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.42: ”Rings” dataset: λ = 0.2, Gaussian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
1st sample
2nd sample
Figure B.43: ”Rings” dataset: λ = 0.2, Laplacian regularizer, Wasserstein loss
xxxviii
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:87==
B.4
KL divergence and correlation histograms
Here we show histograms of KL divergences between the model perturbation and the DP-
mechanisms with estimated standard deviation σ of each sample along with the estimated
correlation ρ of each sample perturbation. Each row will corresponds to the model with
Gaussian and Laplacian regularization respectively and each column corresponds to the
model with desired σ ∈{0.5, 1.0, 1.5}. In each figure we show the KL divergences on the
left 6 plots, while the correlations are shown on the right 6 plots.
Figure B.44: ”8gaussians” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.05, Cross-
entropy loss
Figure B.45: ”8gaussians” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.2, Cross-
entropy loss
Figure B.46: ”8gaussians” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.05, Wasserstein
loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xxxix
==PAGE:88==
Figure B.47: ”8gaussians” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.1, Wasserstein
loss
Figure B.48: ”8gaussians” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.2, Wasserstein
loss
Figure B.49: ”Checkerboard” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.05, Cross-
entropy loss
Figure B.50: ”Checkerboard” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.1, Cross-
entropy loss
xl
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:89==
Figure B.51: ”Checkerboard” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.2, Cross-
entropy loss
Figure B.52: ”Checkerboard” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.05, Wasser-
stein loss
Figure B.53: ”Checkerboard” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.1, Wasser-
stein loss
Figure B.54: ”Checkerboard” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.2, Wasser-
stein loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xli
==PAGE:90==
Figure B.55: ”Rings” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.05, Cross-entropy
loss
Figure B.56: ”Rings” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.1, Cross-entropy
loss
Figure B.57: ”Rings” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.2, Cross-entropy
loss
Figure B.58: ”Rings” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.05, Wasserstein loss
xlii
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:91==
Figure B.59: ”Rings” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.1, Wasserstein loss
Figure B.60: ”Rings” dataset, KL divergences and correlations: λ = 0.2, Wasserstein loss
B.5
Comparison of the original dataset and its
perturbations
Here we show the comparison between the original datasets and the following: 1-step
perturbed datasets, random walk geerated datasets and datasets perturbed using the
classical DP-mechanism (Gaussian or Laplacian). They will respectively correspond to the
columns of the figures while the rows will correspond to different scales σ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}.
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.61: ”8gaussians” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.05, Cross-entropy
loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xliii
==PAGE:92==
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.62: ”8gaussians” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.1, Cross-entropy
loss
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.63: ”8gaussians” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.2, Cross-entropy
loss
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.64: ”8gaussians” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.05, Wasserstein
loss
xliv
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:93==
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.65: ”8gaussians” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.1, Wasserstein loss
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.66: ”8gaussians” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.2, Wasserstein loss
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.67: ”Checkerboard” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.05, Cross-
entropy loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xlv
==PAGE:94==
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.68: ”Checkerboard” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.1, Cross-
entropy loss
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.69: ”Checkerboard” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.2, Cross-
entropy loss
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.70: ”Checkerboard” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.05, Wasserstein
loss
xlvi
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:95==
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.71: ”Checkerboard” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.1, Wasserstein
loss
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.72: ”Checkerboard” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.2, Wasserstein
loss
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.73: ”Rings” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.05, Cross-entropy loss
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xlvii
==PAGE:96==
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.74: ”Rings” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.1, Cross-entropy loss
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.75: ”Rings” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.2, Cross-entropy loss
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.76: ”Rings” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.05, Wasserstein loss
xlviii
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:97==
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.77: ”Rings” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.1, Wasserstein loss
Gaussian regularizer
Laplacian regularizer
Figure B.78: ”Rings” dataset, comparison of perturbations: λ = 0.2, Wasserstein loss
B.6
MNIST dataset: model perturbations
Here we show model perturbations of a given the model with desired scale σ = 0.5.
Figure B.79: MNIST dataset, model with σ = 0.5: 1-step perturbations for multiple digits.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
xlix
==PAGE:98==
Figure B.80: MNIST dataset, model with σ = 0.5: 1-step perturbations for a single digit
B.7
MNIST dataset: density plots of generated noise
values
For the model trained on the MNIST dataset and digits 1, 3 and 4, we visualize density
plots of the top 16 pixels with the highest standard deviation of the generated noise.
σ = 0.2
σ = 0.5
Figure B.81: MNIST dataset: digit 1
l
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:99==
σ = 0.2
σ = 0.5
Figure B.82: MNIST dataset: digit 1
σ = 0.2
σ = 0.5
Figure B.83: MNIST dataset: digit 1
B.8
MNIST dataset: random walk simulations
Here we show random walk simulations for the other 5 digits given the model trained with
scale σ = 0.2. The simulations are shown after 10, 50, 100 and 500 iterations.
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
li
==PAGE:100==
Figure B.84: MNIST dataset: σ = 0.2
lii
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
==PAGE:101==
Conditional generative modeling for differential privacy
liii
==PAGE:102==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 45 25 30 31
www.compute.dtu.dk
