==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Load-Balancing in On-premise Data
Clusters
An Infrastructure for Dynamic Allocation
of Virtual Machines
Piotr Brzeziński (s202792)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis presents a comprehensive approach to the problem of dynamic virtual ma-
chine (VM) allocation and optimization of CPU utilization in on-premises data clusters.
The study leverages Design Science Research as the scientific method to address the
challenges of load balancing and provide a practical and effective solution. The thesis
builds upon existing literature about the problem of VM allocation and proposes a for-
mal mathematical notation of the load balancing problem model, further used in design
of the proposed artifact.
This paper proposes a Python application, which is able to automatically ingest his-
toric cluster state data to then find and perform VM migrations which produce benefi-
cial results with regards to CPU utilization. The proposed application uses Averaging
Threshold-based policy for detecting overloaded nodes in the cluster and Minimal Migra-
tions over Time (MMT) algorithm for selecting VMs. Apart from these heuristics, the
research also includes a proposal and implementation of a simulation framework, which
was designed to simulate the influence of an individual migration on a provided historic
cluster state, with an accuracy of around 91% evaluated by tests on a cluster setup in
the study case company.
The effectiveness of the tool was evaluated on the historic utilization records and infras-
tructure of the case study company, resulting in up to 78% decrease in the Service-level
Agreement violations per active host time metric, which was a significant improvement
compared to manual processes.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, February 5, 2023
Piotr Brzeziński (s202792)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Writing a thesis is a long and challenging process and I am grateful for the support and
guidance I received throughout this journey. I would like to express my sincere gratitude
to my supervisor, Ekkart, for his invaluable support and guidance. Ekkart’s weekly
meetings, his help in streamlining the project work and scope, and his knowledgeable
insights into the discussions about topic covered in this thesis have been instrumental
in ensuring the success of this work. I am deeply grateful for his dedication and support
throughout this process.
I would also like to extend my heartfelt thanks to my two friends, Kornel and Kuba,
for their unwavering support and encouragement during this journey. Their constant
motivation helped me stay focused and work hard to write this thesis.
Last but not least, I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to Kenny, who came up
with the idea for the thesis topic and helped me to better understand the topics and
challenges at the start of the thesis. His guidance and support at the initial stages of
my research have been essential in shaping the direction of this work.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Methodology
6
2.1
Design Science Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Research cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Relevant works
10
4
Analysis
13
4.1
Problem domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Load balancing model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
System Design
26
5.1
Requirements formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Data model design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Proposed architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Algorithm Design
38
6.1
Cost function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
VM and host selection strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
Load balancing algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Simulation
53
7.1
Simulation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.2
CPU Usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
7.3
Interference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8
Implementation
64
8.1
Project Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8.2
Data collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8.3
Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
9
Evaluation
72
9.1
Simulation framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
9.2
Load balancing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
9.3
Requirements evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
10 Conclusion
86
11 Future works
88
Bibliography
90
An Appendix
92
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Virtual Machines (VMs) are a powerful tool for modern computing, allowing multiple
operating systems and applications to run on the same physical hardware. This enables
eﬀicient resource utilization, as well as flexibility and isolation in a data center or cloud
computing environment. VMs are typically managed by a hypervisor, which is a soft-
ware layer that sits between the physical hardware and the operating systems, providing
virtualization and management services. This allows a single host machine to run mul-
tiple VMs, each with its own operating system and applications. However, managing a
large number of VMs on cluster can be challenging, as both the workload and resource
usage can vary over time. This calls for effective strategies to allocate and migrate VMs
in a way that optimizes the usage of hardware resources across the cluster.
Dynamic virtual machine allocation in itself is an optimization problem, which can
be abstracted to a more general mathematical model and addressed with a number
of existing or novel algorithms. Depending the specific sub problem and the desired
effects, different load balancing strategies are focused on optimising for various metrics.
Most of the existing strategies are focused on metrics such as: server CPU and memory
resource utilization, service-level agreement (SLA), network traﬀic prediction, quality of
service (QoS) or service response time prediction [19]. Selection of a correct strategy
and its implementation is a diﬀicult task which requires to consider many (sometimes
contradictory) factors, but is always driven by a simple business goal to better utilize
the already provisioned hardware resources without compromising on performance.
Explosive growth of cloud computing during recent years results in more and more tech
companies using cloud providers as their sole infrastructure1. In some cases, however, it
is more economically feasible or simply a requirement to utilize traditional on-premises
computation clusters instead.
For cloud platforms like AWS or Azure, which provide their services on an Infrastructure
as a Service (IaaS) or Function as a Service (FaaS) basis, an essential business goal is
to be able to reliably serve as many users as possible within the constraints of limited
physical resources and established Service Level Agreement (SLA). Because of such
1According to data from Eurostat https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/
index.php?title=Cloud_computing_-_statistics_on_the_use_by_enterprises last accessed on
03.10.22
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Problem Definition
2
economic incentive, all cloud platforms incorporate a set of tools and methods in their
data centers to better utilize hardware resources on their computation clusters, with load-
balancing for dynamic VM allocation and migration being one of them [12]. However, it
is not always the case for other popular on-premise VM management products - most of
the available VM management software does not come with off-the-shelf load balancers
or come at a considerable cost.
Without a load balancer present, the process of averaging out the resource utilization
across cluster is done manually, by hand-picking VMs eligible for migration, finding a
suitable node to migrate to and finally performing the migration. The same type of
evaluation is performed every time a new VM needs to be added or removed from the
cluster. This however is not a sustainable practice in the long run, as it generates tons
of repetitive, manual tasks, which is not only expensive but also leaves the engineers
with less time to focus on more long-term initiatives. Eﬀiciency of such manual method
of load balancing relies solely on the ability of the person to assess and take the correct
actions within a given timeframe, further making it a subject to a human-error and
human reaction time factors.
1.1
Problem Definition
The goal of this project is to develop a software application that is able to extract historic
resources utilization data from a live VM-based cluster to then find and automatically
perform VM migrations which result in a better overall use of CPU resources in the
cluster.
The overall load balancing approach is based on a heuristic algorithm that considers
the historic utilization records of each VM, as well as the available resources on each
host in order to simulate the effect of migrations and elicit the favourable ones. It is
then evaluated through simulations and experiments on a testbed with real VMs and a
workload trace from a production environment in a study case company.
In order to design such application, a more formal definition of the load balancing
problem and its components is first defined based on available literature. For testing and
validation purposes, an interface for the existing infrastructure tooling at the study case
company called Proxmox2 has been implemented. Different performance and quality
metrics of the load balancer are first evaluated in a testing environment, which aims
to reflect the different edge-case scenarios of a real-life workload and the migration
specifications associated with them. Final performance tests are done on real-life historic
cluster data from the case study company.
The developed application is also designed to seamlessly integrate into existing data
2ProxMox tool documentation, https://www.proxmox.com/en/ last accessed on 03.10.22
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Contributions
3
clusters by including an extendable framework for obtaining the data and performing
migrations automatically through systematic API interface calls.
1.2
Contributions
In this section, the key contributions of this thesis to the field of dynamic virtual machine
(VM) allocation and optimization of CPU resources in data clusters are briefly presented.
These contributions are as follows:
1. Formalization of the problem of dynamic VM allocation as an optimization prob-
lem. This involves identifying the objectives, constraints, and decision variables of
the problem, and defining the optimization criteria and metrics used to evaluate
solutions. This formalization provides a solid foundation for the development of
algorithms and tools for dynamic VM allocation and serves as a conceptual base
for further research in this topic.
2. Design of a cost function that can be utilized to assess the quality of cluster
states. This cost function is a vital component of the proposed allocation algorithm,
as it enables the evaluation of the relative merit of different solutions generated
by the simulation platform and guides the search for an optimal solution. The
design of the cost function is based on an analysis of the objectives and constraints
of the optimization problem, as well as the relevant metrics for evaluating the
performance of VM allocation strategies.
3. Design, implementation, and validation of a simulation platform that enables the
testing of different strategies for VM allocation and migration. This simulation
is essential for evaluating the performance of the proposed algorithms and their
ability to achieve the desired optimization objectives. The simulation platform
is designed to be modular and extensible, facilitating integration with various
algorithms and cost functions.
4. Implementation of all these elements in a form of a plug-and-play application for
VM allocation that can be easily integrated into an existing real-world data cluster.
The application is designed to be tool-agnostic and easy to use, enabling seamless
integration into existing data center infrastructure.
5. Evaluation of the developed application in the study case company to demonstrate
its effectiveness in practice.
Overall, this work presents a comprehensive approach to the problem of dynamic VM
allocation and optimization of CPU resources in data clusters. A set of algorithms, tools,
and techniques have been developed that are effective, eﬀicient, and practical, and that
can be applied to a wide range of real-world scenarios.
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Report Structure
4
1.3
Report Structure
This section briefly explains the layout of this report and the content of each individual
chapter.
Introduction chapter provides an overview of the problem of dynamic VM allocation and
optimization of CPU resources in data clusters, and introduces the main objectives and
contributions of this work.
The Methodology chapter describes the research methods and techniques used in this
work with an emphasis on the application of Design Science Research. This includes
the approach used to design and develop the simulation platform, algorithm, and cost
function. The Literature Review chapter presents a summary of the relevant literature
in the field of dynamic VM allocation and optimization of CPU resources, highlighting
key challenges and approaches.
The Analysis chapter identifies and explains all processes and terms within the problem
domain of VM allocation. It further serves as a basis for formulation of a mathematical
definition of the VM reallocation problem, along with the simplifications imposed on it
within the scope of this project.
The System Design chapter describes the architecture and design of the application
developed in this work. It starts by covering the current practices in the case study
company, which further serves as a basis for formulation of a high-level overview of the
proposed system in form of a System Description and a list of functional requirements.
Finally, the chapter covers the architecture of the proposed application, along with the
necessary discussion of the individual design choices.
The Algorithm Design chapter presents the methodology for the selection and imple-
mentation of the virtual machine selection algorithm, host detection policy, and cost
function for load balancing. It expands on the mathematical formulation introduced
in the Analysis chapter and draws upon relevant literature from the Relevant Works
section to provide a comprehensive overview of the design process.
The Simulation chapter details the design and implementation of the simulation frame-
work, a crucial component of the system that enables us to evaluate the performance of
the proposed solution through the simulation of migration scenarios based on historical
data. The chapter highlights all key design decisions made in constructing the simula-
tion environment and outlines the steps taken to ensure its accuracy and reliability in
producing relevant results.
The Implementation chapter describes the technical details of the implementation of the
simulation platform and the application.
==PAGE:12==
1.3 Report Structure
5
The Evaluation chapter presents and discusses the findings from the simulations, ex-
periments, and evaluations conducted in this work. It also includes a reflection on all
functional requirements of the system defined before in order to evaluate whether the
developed system satisfies them.
Conclusion chapter summarizes the main contributions and achievements of this work,
and provides a final assessment of its significance and impact
It is then followed by the Future Works chapter, which outlines potential future directions
for this research, including areas for further exploration and development along with the
estimates on the time required to achieve these goals.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Methodology
This section covers the reasoning behind the selection of tools and methods utilized to
conduct the study in a scientific way. First, the principles of Design Science Research
(DSR) methodology are briefly explained, followed by the rationale behind its selection
as a suitable methodology driving this project. It is then extended by introducing the
three design science cycles, along with their specific application in the study.
2.1
Design Science Research
Design Science Research (DSR) is a research paradigm that is commonly adopted as
a scientific method in the field of Information Systems. As opposed to e.g. natural
sciences, where scientist apply empirical methods to better explain the world as it is,
DSR focuses on solving problems present in the real world via the creation of innovative
artifacts.
The result of a Design Science Research is always an artifact - a tool that can be used by
humans to solve a specific problem in a given domain. The knowledge generated by this
research informs us how an artifact can be improved, is better than existing solutions,
and can more eﬀiciently solve the problem being addressed. The designed artifacts are
both useful and fundamental in understanding that problem. [9, p.5-6]
Since the end goal of this thesis is to solve the problem of load balancing via creation of
a software application artifact, Design Science Research methodology has been selected
as the research method utilized to conduct the study. There are several frameworks
and guidelines that can be used for conducting DSR. For this project, the concept of
Research Cycles, introduced by Hevner [11], is adopted.
2.2
Research cycles
In the 2004 MISQ paper [10], Hevner identifies three design research cycles, inherent
in every design science research. The three cycles: Relevance, Rigor and Design, are
visualized in Figure 2.1 below.
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Research cycles
7
Figure 2.1: Design Science Research cycles [11]
The figure highlights the fact that DSR is an iterative process, driven by the three sub-
cycles. While it does not constitute a strict research process model on its own, the
identification of the three research cycles in the context of a given Information System
research allows to better understand how to evaluate the artifact, both internally with
regards to the requirements, as well as its relation to the environment it is designed to
be used in and the contributions it provides to the knowledge base.
In the next sections, the purpose of the three cycles is briefly described, along with an
explanation on how are they used to conduct this thesis.
2.2.1
Relevance cycle
The relevance cycle begins the research process by identifying the environment and the
problem to be addressed in it. This further serves as a base for deriving requirements
for every design iteration. Additionally, the environment is also the source of acceptance
criteria for the final evaluation of the artifact - this is usually done in the form of field
testing. Results of field testing are used to determine whether additional research cycles
are needed to yield the desired improvement.
Environment
An application domain consists of the people, organizational systems, and
technical systems that interact to work toward a goal. [11, p. 3]
Application domain, that this project is aiming to improve, can be briefly described as
any organization which hosts and uses its own on-premises data cluster. More specifically,
it is aiming to assist people responsible for maintaining the cluster in working towards
the goal of more eﬀicient resources utilization. For the purpose of this thesis, a running
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Research cycles
8
example of such organisation is introduced. The example is a company that this project
is conducted in collaboration with and its case if further covered in the Case study
section of the report.
Requirements
The requirements for the automatic load balancer are based on the
process of manual VM allocation in the example organisation and its shortcomings.
Currently, the migrations are performed manually in several scenarios, which will serve
as a base for elicitation and further formulation of use cases for the application, while
ensuring that they remain general enough to be applicable in the broader landscape of
similar organisations.
Field testing
Field testing is an essential part of design science, as it allows to deter-
mine whether the developed artifact indeed yields improvement within specified domain.
In this project, field testing can be conceptually divided into three planned test activities.
Firstly, the application’s VM allocation policy will be tested by running simulations
of load balancing on a special test environment created for that purpose.
This will
be repeated in an iterative manner, with an aim of producing better results on each
development cycle. Such testing will be conducted on the same specified test suite in
order to document the improvement in each iteration. Testing by running simulations
is to be performed until time resources are exhausted according to the project plan.
Throughout the implementation phase of the project, user interface and applicable con-
figuration options will be designed and developed in parallel to VM allocation algorithm
development.
Finally, the finished artifact will be field tested using data from a real-life production
environment of the case study company. Final discussion about results will be drawn
by comparing resources utilization improvement from using the artifact as opposed to a
baseline formed from historic data.
2.2.2
Rigor cycle
Every design science research strives to develop artifacts that are innovative. In order
to avoid ”reinventing the wheel” with each DSR iteration, it is essential to draw from
existing scientific base and state-of-the-art artifacts where possible. Finally, equally im-
portant is to provide feedback to knowledge base in a form of explicit scientific contribu-
tions for other researchers to draw from and, ultimately, expand the scientific knowledge
base. The contributions should include any extension to original theories, artifacts and
selected methods [11, p. 4].
Applying scientific rigor is especially important throughout this thesis as the problem
of load balancing and VM allocation is not a new concept - there exists a plateau of
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Research cycles
9
available research, methods and theories that can be applied, which need to be carefully
selected and modified to fit the specific application domain of on-premise data center.
In this report, the section Related Works begins the process of applying scientific rigor
in order to elicitate relevant literature. Moreover, the existing knowledge base is further
used to formalize the load balancing process as an optimization problem first in the
Analysis section and then expanded later in the Algorithm Design chapter. Similarly,
contributions to the knowledge base based on results of this project are explicitly stated
and elaborated upon in Contributions section.
2.2.3
Design cycle
Design Cycle in the DSR methodology is related to the iterative approach to imple-
mentation of the artifact. In the context of this thesis, the Design cycle is applied in
development and evaluation of each of the main system components that constitute the
application. Since this is a software system, such iterations are usually achieved by first
organizing the desired features into a set of tasks, which then get addressed in a spe-
cific development sprint. Furthermore, when approaching a complex, multi-dimensional
problem such as the topic of this thesis, it is usually not expected to know all the re-
quirements beforehand, but rather discover and realign their priority throughout the
duration of the research.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Relevant works
This section introduces selected works from academic research related to the problem of
load balancing and VM allocation or scheduling. The goal of this review is to identify
the current state and trends in the problem landscape, along with general findings that
can be used later when designing the proposed application.
The concept of Load Balancing in the context of VM allocation, sometimes referred to
as VM scheduling, is not a new area of research. Ever since the popularization of cloud
technologies development and their adoption in mid 2000s by companies like Google,
Amazon and Netflix, scientists were trying to find new means to increase scalability and
eﬀiciency of the cloud infrastructure, one of which was searching for a way to better
utilize the limited hardware resources through virtualization. As a natural consequence,
the question of How to find the best assignment of VMs to physical nodes? emerged and
has been since then approached from many different perspectives.
Beloglazov et. al [5] in their research divide this problem into two separate concepts:
the initial VM placement and current VM allocation re-optimisation. The initial VM
placement is concerned with the allocation of VMs to Nodes when no previous assignment
exists. This is a computationally complex task, as it encompasses the NP-hard bin-
packing problem as a special case.
Thus, the existence of a polynomial-time exact
algorithm for a general formulation of the VM placement problem is highly unlikely, due
to its NP-hardness [14]. The two problems are however very much alike, with the main
difference being the cost of migrating a VM from its old host to a new one - in the case
of the initial placement, it is not a concern [15, p.4]. This thesis focuses only on the
second aspect of optimizing an existing VM allocation setup, which is an expansion of
the first problem domain with the concept of migration and its cost.
The wide variety of research in this field is unfortunately not consistent in terms of the
algorithm objectives, problem definition and the type of empirical tests performed [14].
In his research, Mann [13] formulated the different subproblems, which emerged from
these inconsistencies, with regards to the infrastructure topologies, metrics used and
general objectives. The case that this thesis covers can be classified as a on-premises
(private) single-datacenter, for which he further conducted a thorough review of used
approaches and their characteristics.
==PAGE:18==
3 Relevant works
11
Figure 3.1: Mann’s summary of approaches proposed for single-datacenter scenarios
[13, p. 11:14]
In order to limit the literature to only the subproblems resembling the study case com-
pany domain, the following constraints were applied to the summary in order to elicit
methods for further investigation:
• Resources: CPU and Cores
• Energy: None
• Placement: Reoptimization
• SLA: Soft or User-Level
• Other: Migration
==PAGE:19==
3 Relevant works
12
The resulting literature is further used as a reference for design of the algorithm in the
Algorithm Design section of the report.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 4
Analysis
Following the problem and research questions formulation in previous chapters, this
section starts by analysing the problem of load balancing. The analysis includes an
in-depth explanation of the domain, along with the necessary vocabulary and concepts
being summarized for further reference. Then the domain is formalized using mathe-
matical notation. In order to achieve the optimization goals within the scope of this
thesis, the general problem model requires some simplifications and assumptions, which
are justified in the Limitations section.
4.1
Problem domain
This section explains the background and necessary concepts related to virtualization
and VM allocation in computation clusters, which are required for further formulation
of the load balancing problem and its goals.
4.1.1
Virtualization
A computation cluster, also referred to as a Data Center, is a collection of physical
computation, storage and network resources [3, p. 5]. These resources are usually made
available to external customers on IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service) basis with the
underlying management being hidden from the end user [22, p.308].
A vital part fostering this management process is the concept of virtualization, which
allows to logically abstract the OS, storage and computation resources from the end
user via creation of virtual machines (VMs). Virtual machines typically emulate their
own separate ecosystem through hardware, OS, server or storage emulation. A top-level
operating system on which VMs are hosted and ran is referred to as a hypervisor; and
the machine itself as a host or a node.
==PAGE:21==
4.1 Problem domain
14
Figure 4.1: Diagram of the problem model
4.1.2
Allocation
The most relevant concept of virtualization in the scope of this thesis is the virtualization
of CPU cores and their scheduling. When a VM is created, it is configured to be allocated
with a certain number of CPU cores to it, which are known as virtual CPU (vCPU) cores.
The operating system and applications running on the VM are then able to use these
vCPU cores in the same way they would use physical CPU cores.
Similarly to how the operating system is responsible for allocating CPU cores to processes
running on a single machine, the hypervisor is responsible for determining which VM
will get CPU time in the next quantum. In the context of CPU scheduling, a quantum
is a unit of time that the scheduler uses to divide up the CPU time among the different
processes. It is typically a small, fixed duration of time, often measured in milliseconds.
For example, if the scheduler uses a quantum of 10 milliseconds, it will allocate 10
milliseconds of CPU time to each process before switching to the next process in the
queue. This allows the scheduler to ensure that each process gets a fair share of the CPU
time, while also allowing the system to respond quickly to changes in the workload.
The hypervisor uses a scheduling algorithm to determine how CPU time is allocated to
each VM in every quantum. There are several different types of CPU schedulers that
can be used by a hypervisor to manage the allocation of CPU time to VMs.
One type of scheduler is the first-come, first-served (FCFS) scheduler, which allocates
CPU time to VMs in the order that they have arrived at the processing queue. This
type of scheduler is simple to implement, but can lead to uneven allocation of CPU time
==PAGE:22==
4.1 Problem domain
15
and can cause VMs to wait a long time to receive CPU time if the system is heavily
loaded.
Another type of scheduler is the round-robin scheduler, which allocates a fixed amount
of CPU time to each VM in turn. This can help to ensure that each VM receives a fair
amount of CPU time, but can also lead to ineﬀicient use of CPU resources if some VMs
do not use all of their allocated time.
A third type of scheduler is the priority scheduler, which allocates CPU time based on
the priority of the VM. VMs with higher priority receive more CPU time than VMs with
lower priority. This can help to ensure that important VMs receive the CPU time they
need, but can also cause lower-priority VMs to be starved of CPU time.
Some hypervisors also support more advanced scheduling algorithms, such as those that
use dynamic feedback to adjust the allocation of CPU time based on the workload of
each VM. These algorithms can provide better resource utilization and performance, but
can also be more complex to implement and manage.
4.1.3
Resources overcommitment
Overcommitment is a technique used by some hypervisors to allow more VMs to be run
on a physical host than number of physical CPU cores available. This is achieved by
allocating more vCPU cores to VMs than the host has physical CPU cores, or threads
in case of a multi-threaded processor. The hypervisor then uses a scheduling algorithm
(discussed in the previous section) to ensure that each VM receives a fair share of avail-
able CPU time. This can improve resource utilization and cluster capacity as a single
node is able to host more VMs, but can also lead to reduced performance in case of an
overload, if there is not enough CPU time to go around.
Overcommitment is commonly used in data centers and can be expressed using an
overcommitment ratio, which is a ratio of the number of virtual cores to the underly-
ing physical cores. For instance, a ratio of 2:1 on a cluster would mean that for every two
vCPUs available to be provisioned to virtual machines, there is one underlying physical
core. While the overcommitment ratio can be selected to be arbitrarily high, it should be
chosen carefully to reflect the types of workloads that are being executed on the cluster.
This is due to the fact that, as the overcommitment ratio increases, so does the risk of
a particular node being overloaded.
4.1.4
Workloads
Workload in cloud computing is generally defined as any process, service or application
that is submitted for execution on a cluster, sometimes also referred to as a cloudlet. A
single workload has a starting time and is characterized by the amount of CPU, IO and
==PAGE:23==
4.1 Problem domain
16
network operations that need to be performed to complete it as well as the amount of
memory required. Such workload can be, for instance, a request arriving at the server,
a software build or a machine learning model training. Workloads ran on a node can be
presented on a graph showing the specific resource (e.g. CPU) utilization over time in
percentages.
Figure 4.2: CPU utilization records of a real cluster node
In state-of-the-art setups it is usually not relevant where the workload is physically
executed, as long as its resource and environment requirements are satisfied.
Such
approach yields many benefits to both users and cluster managers: it allows users to
avoid thinking about node assignment, but rather focus on only defining the environment
requirements for the application; and the cluster managers to see the computation center
as a collection of resource pools, each being a group of similarly set up VMs, rather than
single machines.
Workloads can be generally categorized as static, periodic or unpredictable, depending
on their occurrence pattern. In case of static workloads, the uptime and resource re-
quirements are either fully known in advance or can be predicted rather accurately and
remain consistent over time.
Periodic workloads represent services which experience
traﬀic spikes at specific times. Characteristics and total resources consumption of such
services can also be anticipated in advance, but accurately predicting them is a stochas-
tic process, not a deterministic one. If no apparent recurrence patterns can be found
in relation to a workload, it is considered unpredictable. By being able to classify and
distinguish between the types of workloads, it is possible to better anticipate resources
allocation in advance based on historic patterns.
In the world of cloud computing research, the workload in a big data center is usually
categorized as being uniformly distributed at random [5]. This represents the different
unknown usage patterns that occur when serving a arbitrary number of uncorrelated
workloads on a cluster, which is usually the case when providing infrastructure to many
different clients on an IaaS basis. This approach has been justified by Verma et al. [21]
==PAGE:24==
4.1 Problem domain
17
4.1.5
Migration
A migration is a process of moving a single VM from one host to another. The original
node is referred to as source host and the other one as target host. Migrations are usually
performed when the source host is found to exceed the agreed upon utilization thresholds
(or other selected measures) and there is an alternative node with spare capacity to
accommodate it better. The individual policies on when to perform a migration can
differ between organisations and clusters and are further elaborated on later in the
report.
From a technical point of view, it is usually done by turning the VM off, copying all the
files and currently used memory (RAM) associated with it to another node in the same
or other cluster and then starting it again. However, there are various other methods
for performing migrations, most notably differentiated by what is being transferred to
the new node. These migration types can generally be categorized as:
• Change compute resource only: Moving a virtual machine, but not its storage,
to another compute resource, such as a host, cluster or resource pool.
• Change storage only: Moving a virtual machine and its storage, including vir-
tual disks, configuration files, or a combination of these, to a new datastore on the
same host.
• Change both compute resource and storage: Moving a virtual machine to
another host and at the same time moving its disk or virtual machine folder to
another datastore.
The available methods depend on the functionalities offered by the VM management
server and the storage topology of the cluster.
No matter the selected method, the migrations can be quite costly in terms of the time
they take and the resulting QoS degradation, as the VM is not able to process any
requests while being migrated.
==PAGE:25==
4.1 Problem domain
18
Figure 4.3: Diagram of regular (cold) migration
In order to address this issue, most hypervisors, like VMWare, introduced a concept of
hot-migration (also known as live), which allows the VM to stay operational throughout
the whole process and therefore minimize the downtime. This is achieved by first copying
all the required files to the new host to then start the migrated VM simultaneously with
the deletion of the old one. The resulting downtime is only the difference between turning
off the original VM and starting up the new one, which is usually no more than couple
milliseconds.
Figure 4.4: Diagram of live migration
==PAGE:26==
4.2 Load balancing model
19
Nevertheless, it further poses a risk of corrupting the data that was generated or modified
on the source host during the migration process, as it would render it no longer in sync
with the new VM that is being launched on target host. Depending on the requirements
and the risk associated with them, a cold or hot migration can be found to be more
suitable.
4.2
Load balancing model
After introducing the necessary concepts in the problem domain, the main optimization
goal of this thesis can be defined more precisely. Therefore, a mathematical notation for
the problem model can be introduced.
Let N denote a set of all nodes existing in a cluster and R be a set containing all
resource types. A typical list of such resources would include: memory, disk, network
input, network output, disk I/O (input/output) operations.
Each node n ∈N can be characterized by the following numbers:
• cores(n) ∈N: number of physical processor cores
• maxResource(n, r) ∈R: maximum capacity of resource type r ∈R
In the following notation, the CPU utilization is treated explicitly, while the other re-
sources are denoted by the generic maxResource function.
This provides additional
flexibility in terms of the resource types that are included in the problem space, as many
different scenarios might call for different metrics to be included within the scope of load
balancing problem.
Additionally, the formulation can be extended to account for the existing network topol-
ogy and its capacity by defining the bandwidth for each pair of nodes n1, n2 ∈N in the
cluster:
bandwidth(n1, n2) ∈R+|n1, n2 ∈N
(4.1)
with the result being expressed in MB/s.
Following the definition of nodes, the notation can be further extended with the con-
siderations regarding VMs and their allocation. While nodes and their characteristics
remain static in most cases, the state, utilization and number of VMs is rather dynamic
and requires introduction of time t to represent these changes. Let T ⊆R denote the
set of investigated time instances.
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Load balancing model
20
Let a set of all VMs on the cluster be denoted as V . Then, each VM v ∈V is character-
ized by the following numbers:
• vCores(v, t) ∈N: number of virtual processor cores assigned to the VM at time t
• cpuUtil(v, t) ∈[0, 1]: CPU usage at time t, where 1 is 100% utilization and 0 is no
utilization
• maxResource(v, t, r) ∈R: maximum capacity of resource type r ∈R
• resourceUtil(v, t, r) ∈[0, 1]: usage of the resource type r ∈R at time t
Finally, the allocation of VMs to Nodes can be formally defined as a mapping:
α : {(v, t) : t ∈T, v ∈V } →N
(4.2)
Then, if
α(v, t) = n
(4.3)
the VM v ∈V is allocated to node n ∈N at time t ∈T
As mentioned before, performing a migration allows to create a new assignment α′ from
an existing α at a given time t. It is important to note that a migration performed at
time t has an influence on the allocation at all subsequent time points, as it becomes the
new ”existing allocation” for the given VM. In the proposed mathematical definition we
allow migration of only one VM at a time.
A migration can be therefore defined as a function mapping one (old) allocation to a
new one:
µt
v→n : α →α′
(4.4)
where v ∈V is the VM migrated at time t ∈T to a different node n ∈N|α(v, t) ̸= n
from the current allocation α, resulting in a new allocation α′.
µt
v→n(α) =
(
n
v′ = v, t′ > t
α(v′, t′)
otherwise
(4.5)
==PAGE:28==
4.2 Load balancing model
21
A set of all possible migrations from state α is defined as a set of all µ:
µt
v→n(α) ∈Mα
(4.6)
This set contains all the possible allocations that can be achieved by applying the migra-
tion function µ to the initial allocation α, for all possible combinations of VMs, nodes,
and timestamps.
Since the migration function µ only migrates a single vm at a time, an allocation that
results from performing multiple migrations can be represented as a composition of the
migration function.
An example could be migrating vm v1 from node n1 to node n2 at time t1, and then
migrating vm v2 from node n3 to node n4 at time t2, where the resulting allocation can
be represented as:
α′ = µt2
v2→n4(µt1
v1→n2(α))
(4.7)
Where α is the initial allocation, µt1
v1→n2(α) is the allocation after the first migration,
and α′ is the allocation after performing two migrations.
Alternatively, a functional composition notation can be used, which is denoted as
α′ = (µt2
v2→n4 ◦µt1
v1→n2)(α)
(4.8)
The function µt1
v1→n2 is applied to α first, then the output is passed to µt2
v2→n4
In general, composition of functions is only valid if the domain of the first function is a
subset of the codomain of the second function. In other words, the output of the first
function must be an acceptable input for the second function. In the case of the migration
function µ, it’s domain is the set of current allocation, vm, node, and timestamp and
the codomain is the set of all possible allocations.
Finally, one factor that was ommited in this definition is that migrations can be per-
formed only if the target node has enough resources to accommodate the new VM in
terms of disk storage, as the other resources like RAM and vCPUs can be overcommited.
This factor is however not covered here in order to keep the general definition simpler
and is addressed further by the cost function.
==PAGE:29==
4.3 Limitations
22
As discussed in the previous section, there are two general methods of performing migra-
tions - a cold or hot one. Again, this factor is ommited here in order to keep the model
general and will be further reflected in the cost function.
Load balancing, within the context of dynamic VM allocation on existing cluster, can
be then defined as a process of searching for and performing migrations that result in a
better allocation than the original.
A single scenario that the load balancing problem is attempting to avoid is a prolonged
overloading (utilization above threshold) of an overcommited node, when there are spare
CPU resources available on another node. In such scenarios, the cluster is considered
to be in a suboptimal state, as the resources are not being utilized eﬀiciently. As a
measure to reflect how long such state occurred over the time of interest, a cost function
is introduced.
The cost function, denoted as C(α), takes into account various factors such as the CPU
utilization of each node, the number of SLA violations, and the cost of performing a
migration. It defined and explained in detail later in the report.
Let C(α) be a cost function that takes as input an allocation of VMs to nodes, repre-
sented by the mapping α. The VM reallocation problem can be defined as finding a new
mapping α′ such that C(α′) is minimized, subject to the constraint that α′ represents a
valid migration of VMs. This can be written mathematically as:
α′ = arg min
α C(α)
s.t. α ∈Mα
Where Mα is the set of all possible migrations from state α defined previously.
This however covers only the case of finding one beneficial migration. In order to rebal-
ance the cluster, this process has to be repeated continuously until no better allocation
is found. In each iteration the allocation which is the result of found migration becomes
the new initial state α.
4.3
Limitations
This section covers the limitations and relaxation factors that are applied to the load
balancing problem in the scope of this thesis.
==PAGE:30==
4.3 Limitations
23
4.3.1
Workload predictions
Predicting the future workload on virtual machines (VMs) could be a beneficial aspect to
include in the load balancing problem, as it would allow for more accurate and eﬀicient
migration decisions to be made. By predicting the future workload, the algorithm would
be able to proactively migrate VMs before they become overutilized and cause service
disruptions. However, this thesis does not cover the topic of workload prediction on VMs.
Instead, it is assumed that the CPU utilization on VMs is known and only the historical
data is used to make the migration decision - if the adopted approach achieves better
resources utilization on historically, it should also achieve better results in the future.
Workload prediction is a complex problem on its own and requires a separate research.
It is an active area of research and many different approaches have been proposed in the
literature, such as time series forecasting, machine learning, and neural networks [16].
While incorporating workload prediction would likely improve the performance of the
load balancing algorithm, it is beyond the scope of this thesis.
4.3.2
Cloud vs On-premises
One could argue that a self-hosted computation cluster is virtually the same as one
hosted in cloud. While in essence this can be said to be true, as both are technically just
a collection of distributed resources, there are some subtle differences that arise when
looking at the management of such cluster. This section covers these differences and
their effect on the problem space and load balancer requirements.
One of the most apparent differences is that in case of third party cloud providers, an
organisation purchases a subscription of a service provided within bounds of the under-
lying Service Layer Agreement (SLA). Such agreement specifies the technical details of
the provided service and the accepted failure or downtime thresholds. In case of IaaS,
it can be the guarantee of i.e a certain uptime of VMs, their capabilities or response
times. This differs in on-premises setups, as SLAs are virtually either non-existent or
fairly relaxed due to the lack of legal obligation, but rather provided on a best-effort
basis.
Another difference between the cloud and on-premises setup is the inherent geograph-
ical distribution aspect. Geographical distribution is a limitation that is important to
consider in the load balancing problem, especially in a cloud computing scenario where
the cluster may be distributed across multiple data centers. The geographical distance
between data centers can have a significant impact on the performance of the load bal-
ancing algorithm, as it can affect the network latency and bandwidth when performing
migrations. This can lead to longer migration times and increased downtime for the
VMs.
When the cluster is distributed across multiple data centers, the load balancing algorithm
would need to consider the network latency and bandwidth when performing migrations.
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Limitations
24
This can be challenging, as the network latency and bandwidth may vary depending
on the location of the data centers and the network infrastructure. Additionally, the
network latency and bandwidth may also be affected by external factors such as network
congestion and outages.
Furthermore, geographical distribution also affects other aspects of load balancing, such
as data locality, compliance and security.
For example, it may be required to keep
certain data or services within specific geographical regions for regulatory compliance or
security reasons.
Additionally, the load balancing algorithm should also be aware of the physical infras-
tructure and availability of resources in different data centers, in order to make migration
decisions that take into account the available resources in each data center.
In summary, geographical distribution is an important aspect to consider when designing
a load balancing algorithm for a cluster that is distributed across multiple data centers.
However, this thesis does not take into account the geographical distribution of the
cluster and its impact on the load balancing problem as the resulting tool is designed
for single datacenter, on-premises setups. Therefore, the aspects of network latency and
response time are omitted when designing the cost function.
4.3.3
Other resource utilization
Another limitation of this thesis is that it is focused on CPU load balancing in a cluster
of virtualized machines and does not take into account other types of resource utilization
such as memory, storage or network. In a real-world scenario, the load balancing problem
is much more complex and involves balancing multiple resources, not just CPU.
For example, memory utilization can have a significant impact on the performance of
VMs, as a VM that is running out of memory may experience performance issues or
even crash. Similarly, storage utilization can also have an impact on the performance of
VMs, as a VM that is running out of storage may experience performance issues or data
loss.
Similarly, network utilization is also an important aspect to consider in the load bal-
ancing problem. A VM that is experiencing high network utilization may experience
performance issues or even become unresponsive.
Considering all these resources utilization is important to ensure that the VMs are
running optimally and that the cluster as a whole is running eﬀiciently. However, this
thesis only focuses on CPU utilization and does not take into account other types of
resource utilization.
==PAGE:32==
4.3 Limitations
25
Selecting CPU usage as a sole metric can be further justified by the fact that CPU
utilization is often considered the best metric to optimize for when considering VM
allocation because it is a measure of how eﬀiciently the physical resources of a datacenter
are being used. Most of the available research covered in the Relevant works section is
therefore focused on the CPU utilization aspects of the cluster.
Additionally, CPU
utilization is closely related to other important factors such as energy consumption and
SLA compliance [2]. Finally, considering additional resource types and metrics would
vastly increase the complexity of the load balancing problem and could potentially hinder
the ability to develop a working solution withing the thesis timeline.
4.3.4
Single data center deployment
Another limitation of this thesis is its scope of applicability. It is specifically tailored for
single data center deployments and does not account for distributed or multi-location
environments such as multi-cloud or edge computing.
In these types of deployment
scenarios, load balancing entails additional complexities and considerations, including
managing resources across different providers, ensuring data locality and compliance,
and addressing network latency and bandwidth constraints.
In a multi-cloud environment, the load balancing algorithm would need to be able to op-
erate seamlessly across multiple cloud providers, each with their own distinct resources,
constraints, and APIs. Similarly, in an edge computing scenario, the algorithm would
need to be able to operate across multiple edge locations, with considerations for the vary-
ing resources, constraints, and network topology between these locations and the data
centers. Furthermore, compliance and security concerns become increasingly complex
in distributed environments, requiring additional measures to maintain data sovereignty
and regulatory compliance.
In conclusion, while this thesis presents a load balancing algorithm tailored for single
data center deployments, it does not account for the additional complexities and consid-
erations present in distributed environments such as multi-cloud and edge computing.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5
System Design
Following the problem domain definition in previous chapter, this chapter starts by
formulating the requirements for the load balancing application. This is done by first
introducing the existing environment and processes regarding VM reallocation in the
study case company, which are further used to present a general System Description.
The description outlines the general high-level overview and initial requirements of the
proposed system, which are further formalized into a list of functional requirements.
Finally, this section presents the proposed architecture of the final system, with each
system component briefly elaborated on, along with the rationale behind their introduc-
tion.
5.1
Requirements formulation
This section explains how the individual requirements concerning the load balancing
application were gathered and formalized for later implementation and evaluation.
5.1.1
Case study
As discussed in Chapter 2, this thesis is conducted in collaboration with a Danish audio
solutions company - EPOS. The problem was first formulated as a mean to automate
the task of manual load balancing on an existing on-premises data cluster. Therefore, a
description of current practices will serve as a basis for formulation of a general System
Description, from which the final requirements are elicitated.
5.1.1.1
Existing infrastructure
EPOS is a company that develops and sells audio solutions for enterprise and gaming
industries. Its portfolio of products includes mostly hardware products, like headsets,
speakers and microphones. Due to limitations imposed by developing and testing hard-
ware using mostly low-level interfaces, it cannot fully migrate to cloud or use container-
ization eﬀiciently. As a result, only selected software products and services are hosted
using external cloud providers like Azure, while the rest of build jobs and testing are
performed on an on-premises data center.
==PAGE:34==
5.1 Requirements formulation
27
The data cluster consists of 13 physical machines hosting over 100 virtual machines. The
VMs are additionally organised into resource pools - a further clustering that allows for
easier categorization of the available resources in the future. Currently it is managed
internally by the DevOps and Operations team using a Virtualization Management
Server called ProxMox Virtual Environment (PVE). Proxmox is an open-source server
management platform based on KVM hypervisor for virtual machines and LXC (Linux
Containers) for containers integration1.
This thesis has been motivated by the fact that the allocation of VMs to hosts is currently
done manually on an ad-hoc basis and usually not thoroughly documented. This results
in a considerable amount of repetitive manual labour being required to eﬀiciently utilize
the resources invested in the infrastructure and a further need to automate this process.
Additionally, there are no pre-defined processes formalizing when and how should the
migrations be performed - it is based solely on the monitoring of the ProxMox web
user-interface by the DevOps engineers.
5.1.1.2
Current load balancing policy
Following an initial interview with one of the engineers responsible for the cluster man-
agement, several cases in which the VMs are reallocated have been identified:
• a new VM is requested to be added to the cluster
• a new node is added to the cluster
• there are complaints from the developers about particular VM or Node perfor-
mance in terms of CPU
• an ad-hoc cluster monitoring activity indicates that a particular Node is close to
100% CPU utilization several times over a week’s period
In all of these cases, the engineers attempt to find VMs eligible for migration in order
to achieve a better allocation, but use slightly different decision models and heuristics
for selecting the VMs and the target nodes for migration.
In the first case, the engineer responsible for adding the new VM attempts to find a node
which has the lowest average CPU utilization over the selected timeframe, either day or
week. Such node then becomes a target node candidate, for which it is further assessed
with regards to whether it has enough spare disk space and memory resources to add the
VM in question. If so, the VM is allocated to that node, configured and made available
in an appropriate resource pool. Both the VM and node are further ”checked” upon
1from ProxMox oﬀicial documentation https://www.proxmox.com/en/proxmox-ve
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Requirements formulation
28
after some time to see if the new allocation does not cause any performance degradation
due to overcommitment.
The same decision pattern is used when there is a complaint about a particular node or
VM, which covers the third reallocation scenario.
In the second case, the new node does not initially have any VMs allocated. In order
to start to utilize its resources, the person responsible attempts to find nodes which
experience occasional performance degradation due to overloading. If no such nodes
exist, the node with highest average CPU utilization is selected as a source node. Then
the engineer attempts to assess which single VM to migrate from this node to the new
one and repeats the process several times. Due to the limitations of human capacity to
assess whether the process can be said to be complete, the engineer performs as many
migrations as they see fit and, again, come back to monitor the new node after some
time.
In the last case, which is a routine monitoring of the cluster state, each node is separately
assessed to see whether it has been running close to 100% capacity over the selected
time period. If such a node exists, the engineer attempts to find a VM that can be
migrated in order to reduce the load to acceptable thresholds. Due to the nature of
workloads running in the study case company, which are mostly software builds and
tests, the acceptance threshold is around 90%-99%. This is due to such workload types
being characterized by rather relaxed Quality of Service (QoS) requirements - it is not
business critical for a software build to finish in 21 minutes instead of 25 minutes. The
search for an eligible VM is therefore not exactly based on any additional heuristic, but
rather a subjective decision of an engineer. Once a VM is found, the same decision flow
as in the first case is attempted to find a suitable node to migrate it to.
There are additional characteristics of the company that would allow to further narrow
down and relax the problem e.g. types of workload running on the cluster, some VMs
being required to run only on a specific node etc.
Nevertheless, it is important to
keep the example as general as possible for it to be representative of other, similar
environments. By ensuring that, the developed solution can be said to be applicable to
a general problem, when based and validated on a specific example.
5.1.2
System Description
The following section is a general, high-level description of the system based on the
initial Relevance Cycle discussed in the previous section. It highlights the desired func-
tionalities and the preferred form of the final tool.
The proposed system is a cross-platform desktop application, which allows to automat-
ically find and perform VM migrations on a specified cluster. The migrations found
==PAGE:36==
5.1 Requirements formulation
29
should result in a better utilization of CPU resources available in the datacenter. By
”better utilization” it is understood that the physical nodes in the cluster do not get
overcommited for extended periods of time - the shorter, the better. Cluster optimiza-
tion should be done periodically, with the frequency of the process being set by the user.
Additionally, all configuration options of the algorithm should be configurable by the
user as well.
In order to make predictions about possible migrations, the application needs to be able
to ingest historic cluster data in a form of a cluster state, as defined in the Problem
Domain section. Based on this, it is assumed that if a migration would improve the
CPU utilization over e.g. a past week, it would be also beneficial in the following weeks.
The historic data should be stored for later quick reference.
The system should be able to seamlessly integrate into an existing cluster infrastructure
and run periodically as a background service. This means that the installation overhead
should be minimal and allow usage of the application on a ”plug-and-play” basis. It
should also allow the user to provide configuration for the application settings where
applicable.
Finally, all migrations made by the application have to be transparent and easily trace-
able e.g. in form of logs or internal history.
5.1.3
Functional requirements
Based on the System Description, this section further narrows down the general system
overview into a list of more formally defined functional requirements for the tool. Final
list serves as a base for prioritization of the tasks for development iterations and final
project evaluation. Each of them is briefly elaborated on with regards to the rationale
behind their selection.
FR1
Automatically obtain cluster data: The system should be able to automati-
cally retrieve historic cluster data from existing data centers.
This requirement is derived from the general System Description and is an inherent
functionality in a system which attempts to conduct any predictions based on
historic data. The specific model for using and storing the data should be defined
in accordance with the notation discussed in the formal problem model definition
in previous chapter. Additionally, the data querying/retrieval process should have
a sampling frequency (distance in time between two utilization records) that is
high enough for further analysis.
FR2 Find migrations: The system must be able to automatically analyse the historic
cluster data and propose beneficial migrations that result in better CPU utilization
across the cluster.
==PAGE:37==
5.1 Requirements formulation
30
This requirement is derived from both the general System Description and the
initial Problem Formulation. Since this is a main functionality of the system, it
is critical that the migrations found are indeed beneficial with regard to CPU
utilization. Therefore, the system must incorporate an approach which is selected
and tailored specifically for CPU usage optimization scenario. Furthermore, the
selection of the approach should be made as a result of analysing the available
literature found in the Relevant works section.
FR3
Simulation: The system must be able to simulate the effects of a migration to
elicit beneficial ones.
This requirement is derived from the formal problem model formulation. In the
model, one of the key aspects of load balancing is finding alternative allocations
and assessing their score using a cost function. In order to be able to assess such
hypothetical cluster states, it is inferred that the system must be able to simulate
the behaviour of the cluster after migration without actually performing any on
the real cluster. Such simulation should be both accurate and eﬀicient.
FR4
Perform migrations: The system should be able to automatically perform the
beneficial migrations.
This requirement is derived from the initial Problem Formulation and the descrip-
tion of the current practices at the case study company. Since load balancing is
in itself an optimization problem, which requires analysis of many different factors
over extensive sets of data, completely removing the human actors from the pro-
cess is one of the main aims and benefits of the proposed system. Additionally,
manually performing a migration via a virtualization management server like Prox-
Mox or VMWare requires tool-specific knowledge to navigate the UI and find the
right functionality. In order to achieve a truly automated process, the migrations
should also be performed automatically.
FR5
Logging and history: The system must incorporate a mechanism for logging
all performed migrations and their results for transparency and traceability.
This requirement is derived from the System Description and has been brought up
by one of the engineers responsible for managing the data cluster in the study case
company. In some scenarios, the workload performed on a computation cluster
can be business critical and a bad migration can be highly disruptive. Due to that,
the process of VM allocation needs to be transparent, with the migrations history
easily traceable. This is even more relevant in context of a fully automated process
such as this tool, which is usually harder to keep track of if left unattended.
The history should include all metadata associated with the migration e.g. start
time, migrated vm id, source node, target node, duration, cost improvement etc.
FR6
Integration: The system should be able to seamlessly integrate into the existing
infrastructure at the case study company.
==PAGE:38==
5.1 Requirements formulation
31
This requirement is derived from the Problem Definition. Discussed in more details
in the Methodology section, this thesis is conducted in collaboration with the study
case company and further evaluated there. It is therefore essential that the tool
is initially designed to integrate with the technology stack used at the study case
company i.e. ProxMox.
FR7
Store historic data: The system should be able to store historic cluster data
for later reference.
This requirement is an extension of FR1. No matter the approach selected, the
data has to be obtained by making a request to some existing service - be it the
management server like ProxMox, a separate database or the nodes themselves.
In order to limit the network congestion and the performance overhead of the
requests, the system should allow the user to save, store and reuse historic cluster
data for later reference or analysis.
FR8
Balancing frequency: The system should be able to be configured to run at
specific time intervals.
This requirement is derived as a consequence of FR4 and the current practices at
the study case company. The desired frequency of the VM reallocation can vary
across organisations and can change over time. Based on the cases in which the
migrations are performed, it can be either cyclical or tied to a specific use case
e.g. adding a new VM. Therefore, the system should not only allow the user to set
and change the balancing frequency, but also make the system perform an ad-hoc
reallocation when necessary.
FR9
User Interface: The system should include a simple user interface.
This requirement is derived from the initial System Description and encapsulates
all cases in which the user interacts with the system. Incorporating a UI, be it a
Command Line Interface (CLI) or Graphical User Interface (GUI), is expected to
make usage of the tool easier for the user.
FR10
Extendability: The system’s architecture should be easily extendable.
This requirement is a direct consequence of the scientific method selected for this
project. In Design Science, the developed artifacts should be designed in a way
that allows them to be applicable to all users facing the issue. As discussed in
the Relevant works chapter, the problem of load balancing has many different
subproblems and subdomains in which it can be viewed and addressed, so it is not
possible to encapsulate them all in one tool within the scope of this thesis. It is
however important to keep the different components of the system conceptually
separated from each other where possible in order to keep the system expandable,
which is what this requirement is attempting to encapsulate.
FR11
Configurability: The system should allow the user to select and configure the
methods used for simulating and finding migrations.
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Data model design
32
This requirement, similarly to the previous FR10, is derived from the Relevant
works chapter findings about the different subproblems withing the load balanc-
ing research. In order to allow the user to tune the parameters of the simulation
and selected algorithm to better reflect their specific allocation process needs and
constraints, the system should abstract the constants used in the process of rebal-
ancing to a configuration file wherever possible.
FR12 Documentation: The system should be suﬀiciently documented in terms of its
installation process and usage.
This requirement is derived from the fact that the outcome of this thesis is a
working artifact, which by design should be well documented in order to be us-
able. Additionally, in order to ensure that it is extendable (as previously defined
in FR10), the source code should also be structured and documented in accor-
dance with the best-practices related the the selected implementation technology
or framework.
5.2
Data model design
This section covers the considerations made regarding the methods for obtaining the
historic data cluster utilization records.
As discussed in the Problem domain section, the ground truth for simulation is the
historic CPU utilization data derived from the cluster. In this project it is referred to
as a starting allocation αs, from which then alternative, hypothetical cluster states α′
are created through migrations. In order to make any predictions about CPU usage, the
input data needs to have a high enough sampling frequency, as discussed in FR1. For
instance, an average CPU utilization over a week being 22% does not indicate whether
a node was overloaded at any point.
This requirement is essential to consider before designing the initial architecture proposal,
as the different approaches to obtaining data can have an influence on the final system
components definition. Since most of the research discussed in Relevant works section is
purely academical and uses generators to obtain input data, the selection of a method
for approaching this problem in this thesis is first discussed. This problem could be
approached in many ways, two notable of which being either the top-down (hypervisor
API) and bottom-up (daemon) approach, each of them formulated and elaborated in
the next sections.
5.2.1
Top-down approach
In a top-down approach, the data points from all VMs and nodes would be obtained
indirectly from the hypervisor API, which in itself records utilization data in an internal
==PAGE:40==
5.2 Data model design
33
database. This yields many benefits, as it allows to obtain historic data instantly, with-
out the need to store the records locally; and is generally applicable to any virtualization
management server exposing an API.
Figure 5.1: Top-down approach for data ingestion (hypervisor API)
It further allows the installation and integration of the tool as a whole to be easier
in existing clusters, as only the API integration is required for the simulation setup.
There are however also downsides to such approach. Firstly, the insight into underlying
utilization is limited to a per-VM scope, rather than the underlying processes. While it
is not a requirement for the application per se, it could be a limitation when considering
the possible further extension of the solution. The other issue is related to the sampling
frequency - while e.g. ProxMox API allows to query for the utilization data from a
selection of available timeframes (day, week, month, year), the amount of data points
returned remains the same. As a result, a query for data from past month will return
70 data points, each representing an average of 1̃0 hours of utilization records, when a
data point from a last day represents 3̃0 minutes. This can be troublesome as e.g. a
single data point stating that the CPU utilization was 47% over the last 10 hours does
not indicate whether the node was running close to its capacity. Moreover, while it is
possible to also obtain the maximum recorded usage, instead of average, it still does not
provide any information on how long was the given VM running close to its capacity.
As a rule of thumb, the higher the sampling frequency, the more information is available
about the underlying workload, which further results in more accurate predictions.
5.2.2
Bottom-up approach
A bottom-up approach requires each node (or VM) to directly report its usage to an
external database or the load balancer. This can be done by implementing a daemon
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Data model design
34
agent - a simple program that can run continuously as a background process on the node
and report the desired metrics in predetermined intervals.
Figure 5.2: Bottom-up approach for data ingestion (daemon)
Such solution completely solves the problem of insuﬀicient data points resolution and the
level of detail reported, as it can be designed to be arbitrarily complex for the purpose
of simulation. However, it does create a necessity to distribute the daemon to each
node, which results in additional installation overhead and potential network debugging
necessary to allow the traﬀic of data reports on the network. Moreover, such approach
does not allow the usage of load balancer directly after its setup due to time required to
pass before the number of data points is big enough to make representative predictions.
5.2.3
Selected approach
Considering the two approaches, the architecture proposed in the next section is designed
in a way that utilizes both methods as a way to achieve a fair trade-off between obtaining
the required data resolution and reducing installation overhead.
Both of these methods create a necessity to set up a database, as the requirement
FR7 dictates that the historic cluster states should be stored for later reference. In the
selected approach, the database is chosen to be set up outside of the actual load balancer
application. This is motivated by two factors.
Firstly, many organisations might already have an existing database that stores cluster
state information for its further visualization e.g. using dashboards. In such case, it does
not make sense to introduce an additional, duplicate service and incur the maintenance
costs associated with it. The second factor is related to the fact that, even in a case
==PAGE:42==
5.3 Proposed architecture
35
where no such database exists, it is a good DevOps practice to create one in order to
capitalize on the possible monitoring benefits (one of the DevOps fundamentals).
Once the existence of an external database can be assumed, the application allows
the user to select and configure the tool to either assume that the database is already
populated with data through the daemon approach or populate it using a hypervisor
API (ProxMox).
The first case requires the user to first distribute the daemon script to each node. While
it can be a tiresome task in case of a large datacenters, such process can be further
automated using tools for remote script invokation e.g. Ansible.
In the second approach, the installation overhead is mitigated by the tool automatically
populating the database with data obtained through cyclical API calls to Virtual Man-
agement server. The frequency of API calls is then set to run on an hourly basis, which
should provide the necessary precision for later simulations. In case of ProxMox, on
which the application is tested, the input data then has a resolution of 1 data point
representing the average utilization over around 1 minute. As mentioned previously,
using API calls only allows to limit the potential setup overhead, but still requires the
application to run for some time and aggregate the stored results before any accurate
predictions can be made.
5.3
Proposed architecture
Following the definition of functional requirements of the system and the considerations
regarding the methods for obtaining cluster data, this section covers the proposed ar-
chitecture of the Load Balancing application and the reasoning behind the individual
design choices. Each of the system components is then briefly elaborated upon.
The application itself can be ran on any node that is in the same network as the hy-
pervisor node. It is conceptually divided into four main components, namely: the Load
Balancer, the Simulation Framework, the Management Server Interface and User Inter-
face. The components and the relations between them is illustrated on the diagram
below.
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Proposed architecture
36
Figure 5.3: System diagram
The Management Server Interface is responsible for all communication with the VM
management server. This communication includes getting the historic data for a given
cluster and performing the migrations on it. Within the scope of this thesis, the interface
is used for making API calls to the ProxMox server in study case company.
The Load Balancer component takes a role of a logical engine of the system, where
all computation, required to find favourable migrations, take place. This component
is responsible for solving the problem of VM reallocation, as previously formalized in
the Load balancing model section.
Internally, this process further incorporates the
two algorithms used to find favourable migrations - the algorithm for VM selection
and the host detection policy. Both of these core functionalities are further elaborated
on in separate chapters.
For its input data, the algorithm encapsulated within the
component uses the historic cluster state data obtained from the database and the
results of simulations provided by the Simulation Framework component. Finally, the
Load Balancer component is also responsible for loading the Configuration File provided
by the user and propagate the necessary values to other components.
While essentially also a part of a load balancing process, the Simulation Framework
is formulated as a separate component due to the amount of considerations related
to its design and the inherent complexity of this process. The Simulation Framework
component’s purpose is to, given an allocation and a migration, simulate the influence
of the migration and output a new resulting allocation. The new allocation is then fed
back to the Load Balancing component and assessed again using a cost function.
Finally, the User Interface is a part of the system that the end-user will directly interact
with. It consists of a Command Line Interface (CLI) and a set of operations that the
==PAGE:44==
5.3 Proposed architecture
37
user can perform on the system. The available commands are further presented in the
Implementation chapter.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Algorithm Design
In this section, the proposed approach for addressing the load balancing problem within
the Load Balancing component of the system will be presented. This includes a detailed
description of the cost function used to evaluate the quality of a cluster state, as well as
the algorithms and techniques used to search for and perform migrations that result in
a better allocation. It is then followed by a discussion about the different VM and host
selection strategies that were considered and the one that was adopted in the end.
6.1
Cost function
The cost function is an important component of the Load Balancer component as it
allows for the evaluation of different possible migration scenarios as defined in the model.
A cost function is a mathematical function that assigns a cost or a value to a given
solution of the problem. In the case of the VM reallocation problem, the cost function
assigns a value to a given VM allocation over a specified period of time, which reflects
the quality of the solution in terms of selected performance metrics. The goal is to
find a VM allocation that minimizes the cost function, or equivalently, maximizes the
performance of the system.
The use of a cost function allows for the application of heuristic algorithms to the
VM reallocation problem. A heuristic algorithm is a method that uses problem-specific
knowledge, such as domain-specific rules or heuristics, to find a good-enough solution in
a reasonable amount of time. Heuristic algorithms are not guaranteed to find the opti-
mal solution in polynomial time, but they can provide acceptable solutions in practice.
Heuristic algorithms are particularly useful for solving NP-hard problems, such as the
bin-packing problem, which the VM reallocation problem is a special case of.
In order to reliably guide the search for a better allocation, the cost function may take
into account a variety of factors that can impact the overall performance of the cluster.
The requirements for the cost function are that it should be able to accurately model
the current state of the cluster and the potential impact of different migration scenarios.
Furthermore, it should be computationally eﬀicient, allowing for the rapid evaluation of
different migration scenarios.
==PAGE:46==
6.1 Cost function
39
As mentioned in Chapter 3, there exists a number of approaches to the different load
balancing subproblems and scenarios. Depending on the focus, these metrics can in-
clude measures of resource utilization, energy consumption, and SLA violations. Some
examples of such possible metrics to be considered for the cost function include:
• CPU utilization of the physical hosts
• Memory (RAM) utilization of the physical hosts
• Network bandwidth utilization of the physical hosts
• Energy consumption of the physical hosts
• Number of SLA violations incurred by the VMs
• Migration overhead incurred by the reallocation process
• Latency and response time of the VMs
• The cost of leasing resources from external providers
While the cost function can be designed to be arbitrarily complex and possibly extended
to account for additional system behaviours and metrics, in the scope of this thesis
it has been limited to account for the two main cases stemming from the formulated
requirements : SLA violations as a result of CPU overcommitment and the migration
overhead. The scenarios in which these two events occur are further discussed below,
followed by the definition of the proposed cost function.
An SLA violation due to CPU overcommitment occurs when a given VM cannot get
the amount of Million Instructions Per Second (MIPS) that are requested.
From a
monitoring point of view, it is manifested by a node using close to 100% of its physical
CPU cores at a given time.
It is important to note that the SLA violation is not
caused merely by the fact that the node is overcommited - the allocated vCPU cores
are never actually ”reserved” for a given VM, but rather distributed to them based on
the scheduling algorithm. Therefore, the SLA violation occurs only in case where the
number of vCPUs requested is bigger than the number of vCPU cores available at the
time.
==PAGE:47==
6.1 Cost function
40
Figure 6.1: Schematic view for SLA violation as a result of CPU overcommitment
In such case, the VM still ”thinks” that it is allocated with an actual core, since it is
obscured from seeing the real hardware resources by virtualization, but the underlying
physical CPU time is instead shared with some other VM or multiple VMs. This results
in performance degradation, as the VMs requesting a full core do not receive the antic-
ipated number of CPU cycles and the currently running workload has to be extended
beyond the initially expected time frame.
The SLA violation in this scenario is therefore a result of too many VMs requesting
CPU time from the hypervisor at the same time, which can be generally due to one of
two reasons: either the cluster as a whole is reaching its computation capacity and has
to be expanded or the VMs are allocated in a suboptimal way. Since the only available
operation on a cluster within the problem model is a migration, the cost function should
account for the second reason only.
In order to formally define the set of nodes experiencing SLA violation, first a set of
VMs allocated to the node n ∈N at time t ∈T in allocation α is introduced as:
V t
n(α) = {v ∈V | α(v, t) = n}
(6.1)
Then, the number of vCPU cores requested at time t ∈T by VMs v ∈V t
n allocated to
node n ∈N can be expressed as:
==PAGE:48==
6.1 Cost function
41
coresreqt
n(α) =
X
v∈V tn(α)
vCores(v) × cpuUtil(v, t)
(6.2)
A set of overloaded nodes and the times in which they were overloaded in the current
allocation α can be then denoted as:
slanodes(α) = {(n, t) ∈(N × T) | coresreqt
n(α) ≥cores(n)}
(6.3)
A commonly used metric for measuring performance degradation is the percentage of
time during which active hosts have experienced SLA violation. The same metric is
used as the first factor of the cost function within this project. SLA violation Time per
Active Host (SLATAH)[2] is further computed as:
SLATAH = |slanodes(α)|
|tActive(α)|
(6.4)
where
tActive(α) = {(n, t) ∈(N × T) : coresreqt
n(α) > 0}
(6.5)
Set tActive denotes a set of such pairs of node n and timestamp t, where the node was
considered active at time t i.e. its utilization was above 0%. The total number of SLA
violations over the time domain T is equal to cardinality of the overloaded nodes set.
The second aspect of the cost function is related to the migration overhead. As discussed
in the Load balancing model section, the migration overhead depends on several factors:
• Size of the VM to be migrated, with regards to both the disk space and memory
occupied at the time of migration
• Bandwidth available between the source and target node of the migration
• Type of the migration (hot/cold)
• Method for performing migration
Within the scope of this thesis, the process of migration is relaxed to account for only
the first two factors i.e. the downtime caused by the migration. The type of migration
==PAGE:49==
6.1 Cost function
42
is omitted and assumed to be using cold migration instead. This is argued for by the
fact that the study case company does not currently utilize the live migration and using
cold migration accounts for a worst case scenario in terms of downtime. In case of a live
migration being available, the performance degradation due to migration downtime can
be omitted completely.
Finally, there exists a number of more specific technical methods for performing migra-
tions which were not covered earlier in the report. Chen et al. [7] identifies and compares
the performance of four migration methods: Parallel, Simultaneous, Delay and Sequen-
tial. While it would surely have influence on the actual migration and response time, due
to the complexity and scope of the considerations associated with them, which involve
analysing the underlying Transport Layer protocols, the differentiation between them
have also been omitted and assumed to utilize the default, Simultaneous model.
Taking the following considerations into account, the downtime as a result of migration
(and therefore migration cost) can be formulated using the mathematical notation used
before.
Downtime caused by migration µt
v→n(α) ∈Mα of VM v ∈V t
n1 at time t ∈T from node
n1 = α(v, t) to n2 = {n ∈N | n ̸= n1} be expressed as
downtime(µt
v→n2(α)) = ϵ + diskSize(v, t) + memUsed(v, t)
bandwidth(n1, n2)
(6.6)
for disksize(v) computed as
diskSize(v, t) = maxResource(v, t, ”disk”) × resourceUtil(v, t, ”disk”)
(6.7)
and used memory computed as
memUsed(v, t) = maxResource(v, t, ”memory”) × resourceUtil(v, t, ”memory”) (6.8)
where ϵ is used to denote the additional constant time required to stop the old VM
and start the new one up. Tests on the study case company cluster using ProxMox
indicate that it is around 5̃ seconds and remains within the error margin of 0̃.3 seconds
for different VM sizes. Logs documenting these tests can be found in An Appendix.
After formulating the two factors taken into account within the cost function, it can
be further defined as a weighted sum of these two factors. It has to be however noted,
==PAGE:50==
6.2 VM and host selection strategy
43
that the cost function does not only assess the goodness of a given allocation, but also
includes the cost of migrations (downtime) that lead to that state. With this in mind,
it can be formulated as:
Given a migration µt
v→n : α →α′ of VM v ∈V from node n1 to target node n2, and
initial allocation α, the cost function for the new allocation α′ is computed as
C(α′) = ω1 ∗SLATAH(α) + ω2 ∗νT(α) ∗downtime(µt
v→n)
(6.9)
A normalizing factor ν is introduced to bring the downtime factor of the cost function
to the same representative value and unit as the SLA one. As discussed previously, the
SLA factor denotes the fraction of time that the nodes were overloaded over the whole
time period of interest. The downtime, however, represents time in seconds that a VM
was down. A normalizing factor can be therefore computed as:
νT(α) =
1
interval(T) × |tActive(α)|
(6.10)
where interval(T) represents the amount of seconds in a single timeframe of the time
domain. E.g. If a single datapoint represents utilization over 1 minute, the interval
value is set to 60. The downtime factor multiplied with the normalizing factor can be
then regarded as the fraction of the whole time domain in which a VM was down due
to migration.
Then, the weights associated with these two factors allow to modify the significance of
each metric. E.g. if both weights are set to 1, an alternative state which allows a node to
be degraded for 1 minute, but results in 1 minute migration overhead, will have the same
cost as the original state. By also making them configurable by the user, the process of
assigning a score to each allocation can be then fine tuned to each specific application
needs.
6.2
VM and host selection strategy
This section will describe the strategy used to select the virtual machines and hosts for
migration, including the criteria used for selection and the methods used for evaluating
the potential benefits of a migration.
Definition of the cost function allows to assess ”how good” a specific migration and the
resulting allocation is. Nevertheless, it is not enough to elicit the favourable actions
==PAGE:51==
6.2 VM and host selection strategy
44
as the set of all possible migrations is still rather extensive. Following the previous
notations, cardinality of such set can be computed as:
|M| = |V | × (|N| −1) × |T|
(6.11)
To put the scale of such set into perspective, the values from the case study can be used.
For a cluster with 13 nodes, 100 VMs and the time period covering a week’s worth usage
data of 1 minute intervals, while assuming that no VM is removed or added over this
period, the number of possible migrations is around 12 million. This by itself presents a
problem, as for both the initial allocation, as well as the additional allocations generated
by the migrations, the search space grows exponentially, by the factor of the cardinality
of all possible migrations set.
Figure 6.2: Branching of the search state space diagram
In order to address this problem and limit the size of state search space, many re-
searchers introduce an additional set of algorithms and heuristics that allow to reduce
the branching factor.
By looking again at Equation 6.11, the branching factor is defined by three variables:
1. number of VMs eligible for migration
2. number of nodes that the VM can be migrated to
3. number of data points
Each of these factors can be reduced by formulating them into subproblems and limiting
the number of elements in each of these sets to only reflect the relevant options.
==PAGE:52==
6.2 VM and host selection strategy
45
6.2.1
VM Selection
The first factor is the number of VMs that can be selected as migration candidates. In
literature, the subproblem is usually reffered to as VM selection and can be addressed
with a number of existing algorithms, depending on the desired optimization metrics.
The result of the algorithm can be a selection of one or more VMs. A summary of the
found approaches [17], along with a short description is presented below.
• Minimization of Migrations (MM): The MM algorithm attempts to find a
minimum number of VMs that is required to be migrated in order to bring the
overloaded host below the SLA violation threshold. By minimizing the number
of migrated VMs, this approach attempts to lower the resulting overhead and
downtime in case of cold migrations. It is achieved by sorting the list of VMs
by their CPU utilization in a descending order, after which the one with highest
utilization is selected for migration. The process is then repeated until the desired
node utilization is achieved.
• Highest Potential Growth (HPG): This policy migrates VMs, which have
relatively the lowest value of CPU usage. The rationale is to reduce the total
likelihood of an increase in utilization and SLA violations in the future.
• Random Choice (RC): RC algorithm selects a VM to be moved according to a
uniformly distributed, discrete random variable.
• Minimum Migration Time (MMT): In this method, the VM with the lowest
anticipated migration time is selected.
• Maximum Correlation (MC): In this approach, the decision to select a VM is
based on a computed correlation of the CPU utilization with other VMs, where
the highest correlation value is selected. It is motivated by the fact that whenever
the correlation between the resource usage by applications running on an over-
subscribed host increases, then the likelihood of overloading will be higher. To
assess the prediction quality, a multiple correlation coeﬀicient is used in a multiple
regression analysis.
• Median Migration Time (MedianMT): This method selects a VM that has an
estimated migration time closest to the median one across all other VMs allocated
to the host.
• Maximum Utilisation (MaxU): This method selects the VM with highest pos-
sible usage of CPU, therefore expecting to minimize the number of migrations.
• Minimum Vm Migrated Count (MIMC): This method selects a VM that
historically has been migrated the least number of times, which attempts to address
the issue of repeated migration of a single VM.
==PAGE:53==
6.2 VM and host selection strategy
46
• Minimum Migration Time Minimum Vm Migrated Count (MmtMiMc):
This algorithm first computes the expected migration time for each VM and sorts
them in an ascending order. Out of the sorted list, a VM with the lowers migrated
count (as in MIMC) is then repeatedly selected until the utilization goal has been
reached.
All of the approaches mentioned have their benefits and downsides, which are also not
that easy to find without actually implementing them. This is due to the fact that
there does not exist a single consistent research scenario that reliably compares their
performance and results, as previously mentioned in the Relevant works section.
For this project, the default approach has been designed as a modified version of Mini-
mization of Migrations algorithm. The modification stems from the fact that the original
algorithm was designed to select VMs based on the utilization from a single point in
time, while the Problem model in this thesis takes into account records over an extended
time period.
The reasoning behind selection of this particular tool is three-fold. Firstly, out of all the
approaches proposed in the analysed literature, MM algorithm has been referenced and
used for validation the most often, with over 3200 citations 1. Secondly, it puts emphasis
on the metrics discussed in the cost function, which are the migration overhead and SLA
violations. Finally, it is not as complex and specific as some of the other approaches
e.g. MIMC, MmtMiMc; which attempt to tackle slightly different problems like the
migrations repetition. It is important to notice that, potentially, all other approaches
would also work better when compared to a process of simply analysing migration of all
possible VMs.
1number of citations of reference [6] on Google Scholar
==PAGE:54==
6.2 VM and host selection strategy
47
Algorithm 1: Minimization of Migrations over Time (MMT)
Data: nodeList, timeList
Result: migrationDict
foreach t in timeList do
for i = 0 to nodeList.length() do
vmList ←nodeList[i].getVmList(t)
vmList.sortDecreasingUtilization()
hUtil ←nodeList[i].getUtil(t)
bestFitUtil ←MAX
while hUtil < THRESH_UP do
foreach vm in vmList do
if vm.getUtil(t) > hUtil - THRESH_UP then
t ←vm.getUtil(t) - hUtil + THRESH_UP
if t < bestFitUntil then
bestFitUtil ←t
bestFitVm ←vm
else
if bestFitUtil = MAX then
bestFitVm ←vm
break
hUtil ←hUtil - bestFitVm.getUtil(t)
migrationList.add(bestFitVm)
vmList.remove(bestFitVm)
foreach culprit in migrationList do
migrationDict.set(culprit) += 1
return migrationDict
The designed MMT algorithm starts by initializing an empty dictionary (map), which
further represents a mapping v →N of VMs to the number of times they were found to be
”culprits” over the whole analysed time period. For each timestamp and each node, the
list of VMs existing on that node at the given time is then processed using a regular MM
algorithm, briefly explained before. The MM algorithm sorts the VMs in a descending
order of CPU utilization, upon which it then attempts to find the minimal number
of VMs that will bring the host node utilization closest to the predefined threshold
THRESH_UP. The THRESH_UP threshold is further elaborated on in the next section. The
result is a migration list, elements of which are then VMs that are considered ”culprits”.
Each culprit is then added to the general migration dictionary returned at the end of
the algorithm. The resulting dictionary contains a mapping of VMs to the number of
times they were selected to be migrated.
==PAGE:55==
6.2 VM and host selection strategy
48
6.2.2
Host Detection Policy
The MMT VM selection algorithm introduced in previous section allows to prioritize the
migration of VMs that are found to be culprits. However, it still does not specify where
should they be migrated to, which leaves the set of possible target nodes unchanged.
Additionally, the mathematical definition for cases in which the SLA violation occurs,
defined in Equation 6.3, set the utilization threshold at 100%. While this is technically
true for a continuous time domain T and was required for a formal definition, it does
not allow to detect all SLA violations when the data points represent an aggregation of
utilization over a given time period, which is the case in this project.
As an example, if we know the allocation of each vCPU core to physical core in each
epoch, an SLA violation occurs only when the number of requested cores is bigger than
the node capacity.
However, if a single data point represents an average utilization
in percentages over e.g.
last minute, we cannot be sure that an SLA violation did
not occur when the average node utilization was around 80%.
Therefore, an upper
utilization threshold needs to be defined, which in the previous section was referred to
as THRESH_UP.
In order to compute the value of the upper threshold to find overloaded hosts and further
reduce the number of possible nodes to migrate to by searching for underloaded hosts,
many approaches incorporate a method called Host Detection Policy.
The goal of such strategies is two-fold. Firstly, to compute an appropriate utilization
threshold and find nodes which are likely to be overloaded. Secondly, to elicit nodes that
make the best candidates for accommodating the migration of a selected VMs i.e. are
underloaded. Again, there is a number of existing techniques using which the problem
can be approached.
The different algorithms can be generally categorized as static,
adaptive or regression based, depending on the incorporated methods [1].
The first family of approaches are static CPU utilization threshold algorithms. A com-
monly used example is an Averaging Threshold-based algorithm (THR) [6], in which the
decision whether a node is overloaded is based on the mean of the last n CPU utilization
values. It is then compared to a previously predefined threshold - if the mean is lower
than the threshold, the node is said to be underloaded. Static threshold algorithms
are usually rather simple to implement and not computationally expensive. However,
they do not perform well in highly dynamic scenarios and large-scale datacenters as
they do not readjust the thresholds based on utilization patterns exhibited by executed
workloads.
Adaptive algorithms incorporate ways to readjust the utilization thresholds by perform-
ing statistical analysis on the historic utilization data of a given physical node. Their
main idea is to take into account the deviation of CPU usage records, by increasing
==PAGE:56==
6.2 VM and host selection strategy
49
the threshold when the deviation is high. This is further motivated by the fact that
high deviation increases the probability of an SLA violation occurring. Two examples
of such algorithms are the Median Absolute Deviation (MAD) and InterQuartile Range
(IQR) [4]. MAD looks at the standard deviation from the mean of the historic records,
but the final result can be skewed by high-utilization outliers. IQR incorporates another
statistical dispersion method reffered to as midspread [1]. Adaptive utilization threshold
algorithms generally perform better than static ones in large-scale or dynamic scenarios.
The last type of algorithms are the regression based ones, which make their decision based
on estimation of future CPU utilization. Example of such state-of-the-art algorithms
are Local Regression (LR) and Local Regression Robust (LRR) [4], based on the Loess
method [8]. Regression algorithms are much more complex than their alternatives, but
present better long-term results in highly dynamic environments, such as cloud clusters
serving many different users. Some novel approaches also involve Machine Learning as
a mean to extend the regression algorithms and address the Host Detection problem,
which allows to find additional patterns in workload and further increase the accuracy
of predictions [20].
Within the scope of this project, the selected approach is the static Averaging Threshold-
based algorithm. The reasoning behind the selection of this method is based on two
reasons. Firstly, a static host detection algorithm is much less complex than the other
options, which reduces the necessary implementation overhead required to have a work-
ing solution.
Secondly, the study case company’s environment is neither large-scale,
nor dynamic in terms of changing VM allocation which should allow to still achieve
improvement in terms of resources utilization.
In order to apply the THR algorithm, a predefined upper utilization threshold needs to
be selected first. In their research, Zhu et al. [23] studied the dynamic VM allocation
problem and applied a heuristic of setting a static CPU utilization threshold of 85% to
determine when a host is overloaded. For this research, the same threshold value has
been applied to find the overloaded hosts.
Then, the list of nodes that can potentially be good candidates for being a target for
migration is defined as a list of all nodes for which the mean of all utilization values
(average utilization) is below the threshold. They are also sorted in an ascending order,
to prioritize nodes with the lowest average utilization.
6.2.3
Time domain limitation
After defining methods that allow to reduce the number of potential nodes and VMs
eligible for migration, the last factor that contributes to the size of the branching factor is
the amount of data points that are considered, previously represented by the cardinality
of set T.
==PAGE:57==
6.3 Load balancing algorithm
50
As mentioned before, for all real-world applications each data point represents an average
utilization over a given time period, as it is not feasible to consider every individual CPU
quantum. It is however important to note that it is increasingly harder to consider the
potential QoS degradation due to SLA violations with smaller frequency of data points
gathering e.g. reducing the average utilization over week from 40% to 30% does not
indicate how much performance degradation was avoided. As a result, within this thesis
each utilization point has been chosen to represent a timeframe of 10 seconds.
The second simplification that is applied to the time domain is a constraint limiting the
range of relevant timeframe to only the records after the last known migration. This is
highly relevant in the practical application of the load balancing tool, as it is supposed
to be able to integrate to an already existing data cluster, which has possibly undergone
some migrations in the past. In such case, taking an arbitrarily selected time period of
e.g. week and finding an better allocation according to the cost function, might resolve
some historic SLA violations which occurred before a last manual migration was per-
formed. This would violate one of the assumptions mentioned in the Limitations section,
which states that improving historic utilization also improves the future utilization, as
the issues from the time before a manual migration might have been resolved by the
migration itself.
Finally, since due to the second simplification the allocation over the whole time period
remains the same (as no migrations were performed), the consideration on when is a
new migration performed can be omitted and assumed to just be performed at the
beginning of the time period. As an example, having the records of CPU utilization and
VM allocation to nodes over the last week and knowing that the assignment of VMs
to nodes remained the same (no migration has been performed), the simulation of an
alternative allocation over a week can be obtained by simply considering an alternative
scenario in which a single VM allocation was different from the beginning. Then such
alternative scenario explains how would the cluster utilization as a whole would look
like if the allocation was different, which is what the Simulation Framework component
is designed to mimick.
This further allows to completely remove the time factor from the definition of the set
of all possible migrations, therefore reducing the branching factor to only depend on the
possible nodes and VMs selection.
6.3
Load balancing algorithm
This section presents the final, general algorithm used for load balancing, which explains
how the methods described previously in this chapter are combined to find beneficial
migrations. It also covers the heuristics applied for exploring the state space of the
problem, which consists of the different allocations achievable through migrations.
==PAGE:58==
6.3 Load balancing algorithm
51
There exists a number of algorithms that describe how to traverse the state search space.
For this project, a modified Breadth First Search approach is used. As defined before, the
first factor for creating a new state is the selection of a VM, based on the VM selection
policy. However, due to the VM selection policy being applied over all timestamps in
the time domain, the result is not a single VM but rather a mapping of certain VMs
to the number of times they were considered culprits. Due to to complexity inherent in
simulation, this list also needs to be further filtered to only cover the most relevant VMs.
In order to achieve that, a parameter vmSearchDepth is introduced, which specifies for
how many VMs the algorithm will simulate the migration in each iteration.
As an
example, if the vmSearchDepth is 10, the 10 VMs that were declared culprits the most
times will be considered. Once a set of VMs is selected, they can possibly be migrated
to any node in the list of underloaded nodes presented by applying the Host Detection
Policy with a threshold of 85%. This further results in a branching factor equal to:
b = vmSearchDepth × (|N| −1)
(6.12)
in a worst case scenario, where all nodes (other than the source node) are underloaded
and taken into consideration.
Then, the algorithm moves to the alternative state with the lowest cost, as computed
by the cost function, and starts another iteration. The search is concluded once no
alternative state with lower cost can be found. Limiting the amount of considered VMs
in the Breadth First Search algorithm does not guarantee finding a global optimum, but
allows to find a better solution than a starting state fast, by moving on to the next
best found solution in each iteration [18]. As opposed to Depth First Search however,
it analyses all possible migrations of selected VMs first, so that the solutions with more
migrations are not favoured. The pseudocode for the algorithm is presented below.
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Load balancing algorithm
52
Algorithm 2: Load Balancing algorithm
Data: cluster, vmSearchDepth, weightSla, weightMig, timeout
Result: cluster, performedMigrations
performedMigrations = []
startTime ←getCurrentTime()
while getCurrentTime()-startTime < timeout do
nodesList ←cluster.getNodes()
timeList ←getOverloadTimestamps()
migrationDict ←MMT(nodesList, timeList)
migrationList ←migrationDict.toList()
migrationList.sortByCulpritCount()
allocations = []
for i = 0 to vmSearchDepth-1 do
currentMigration ←migrationList[i]
underloadedNodes ←cluster.getUnderloadedNodes()
underloadedNodes ←underloadedNodes.sortByAverageUtil()
costs = []
clusters = []
foreach j = 0 to len(underLoadedNodes)-1 do
if j = currentMigration.getTargetNodeIndex() then
continue
newCluster = migrate(currentMigration, cluster)
costs[j] = weightSla * newCluster.getCost() + weightMig *
getMigrationCost(currentMigration)
clusters[j] = newCluster
minCost = oldCost
bestCluster = cluster
for j = 0 to len(costs)-1 do
if costs[j] < minCost then
minCost = costs[j]
bestCluster = clusters[j]
tempPerfMigrations = copy(perfomedMigrations)
tempPerfMigrations.append(currentMigration)
allocations[i] ←(minCost, bestCluster, tempPerfMigrations)
minScore = oldScore
for j to len(allocations)-1 do
tempCost, tempCluster, tempPerfMigrations = allocations[j]
if tempCost < minScore then
bestCluster = tempCluster
minCost = tempCost
performedMigrations = tempPerfMigrations
if oldCost = minCost then
break
cluster = bestCluster
return (cluster, performedMigrations)
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 7
Simulation
Simulation modelling is a process of creating a digital computer simulation of a given
system in order to predict and evaluate its behaviour in the real world. It is commonly
used in many engineering areas e.g. civil engineering, traﬀic control or aviation, where
real-life evaluation would be either too costly or simply impractical. Such simulation
software is very often serving as a computation backbone of bigger programs and frame-
works, which can be then ran by providing parameters or even extended to fit specific
needs. A goal of every simulation is to represent the reality as closely as possible, which
is usually evaluated on real-life data and expressed in form of prediction accuracy - the
higher the better.
Cloud computing and data cluster management is one example of such problem, where
real-life testing is troublesome. There are some apparent limitations that arise when
attempting to test cloud computing scenarios, as most of them require to actually have
access to existing and currently used production environments, many of which consist
of hundreds or even thousands machines and virtual machines. Additionally, even with
an access to such data cluster, introducing any changes in a production environment
could possibly result in simply breaking the services and causing downtime or failures.
Due to impracticality inherent in the scale and cost of setting up such clusters, it is
not technically feasible to recreate them just for the sake of research. Because of that,
simulation is often incorporated as vital part of research when designing and testing
different algorithms and policies for cloud computing infrastructure and services.
In this project, simulation is a crucial part in the load balancing process. It allows
to reliably reproduce real-life migrations and their influence on specific cluster state
without the need to actually provision respective infrastructure. This is further essential
in the process of designing a VM selection policy algorithm, as it allows to analyse
effects of hypothetical migrations to elicit the beneficial ones. Depending on cluster
behaviours included in the simulation model, it can be also extended to support more
complex operations e.g. VM autoscaling, simultaneous migrations. List of behaviours,
functionalities and rationale behind including them in the simulation component of the
system is further summarized in the form of a simulation model.
==PAGE:61==
7.1 Simulation model
54
7.1
Simulation model
Simulation model is a high level overview on what system behaviours is the simulation
attempting to mimic. For this project, the simulation model developed is concerned
mostly with migration and its influence on CPU usage metrics for both the source and
target host as well as the whole cluster state. It is designed to help answer the question:
How would the cluster state change should one VM be migrated to another
host?
In relation to the previously defined mathematical definition of the problem model, the
simulation framework is responsible for creating the alternative allocation α′ as a result
of a given migration µt
v→n(α), which then serves as an input to the cost function.
In order to formulate a simulation model that can allow to answer this question with
satisfactory accuracy, there is a number of factors and simplifications that need to be
addressed, each of them explained and elaborated on in this chapter.
7.2
CPU Usage
Migration of a VM to a new host influences all remaining VMs that are previously hosted
on a machine. Additionally, the migration itself generates additional CPU stress on both
the source and target node. This is related to both the operations of copying necessary
files as well as the additional workload in a case where migrated VM is currently not
idle.
The additional CPU workload imposed on the source and target hosts due to migration-
related operations can be calculated using a combination of performance metrics, such
as CPU utilization, network bandwidth utilization, and disk I/O.
One way to calculate the additional CPU workload is to measure the CPU utilization
of the source and target hosts before and after the migration process. The difference
between the CPU utilization before and after the migration can be used as a rough
estimate of the additional CPU workload imposed on the source and target hosts due
to the migration process.
Another method is to use network bandwidth utilization to calculate the additional
CPU workload. This can be done by measuring the network bandwidth utilization of
the source and target hosts during the migration process and using this data to estimate
the amount of CPU resources required to transfer the data from the source to the target
host.
==PAGE:62==
7.3 Interference
55
In addition to these methods, the additional CPU workload can also be estimated by
measuring the disk I/O of the source and target hosts. This can be done by measuring
the disk I/O of the source and target hosts before and after the migration process and
using this data to estimate the amount of CPU resources required to perform the disk
I/O operations.
In order to quantify the additional resource load, the first method was used. In a test
scenario, a single and idle VM of size 32GB has been migrated to another node. Both the
source and target nodes had 32 physical cores. CPU utilization records from the source
and target host experienced the same spike during the migration, which is highlighted
in blue on the figure below.
Figure 7.1: Utilization records of source node with migration highlighted (in blue)
The migration can be therefore said to have caused a spike in CPU utilization of 5%
over the duration on both the target and source nodes.
In the simulation model defined within this thesis, simulating the actual overhead related
to performing the migration is chosen to be omitted, as it is already reflected in the
cost function by the migration downtime factor. While there still exists an additional
overhead related to CPU, it is assumed to be negligible as per results of the test.
7.3
Interference
Interference is a critical factor to consider when simulating the movement of a virtual
machine (VM) from one node to another in a cluster environment. Interference refers
to the impact that a VM has on the resources allocation of other VMs running on the
same node. It is an important consideration because, in a multi-tenant environment,
multiple VMs may share the same node and its resources, such as CPU, memory, disk,
and network bandwidth.
==PAGE:63==
7.3 Interference
56
As an example, we can consider a scenario where Node 1 has two VMs running on it:
VM1 and VM2. If VM1 is moved to Node 2, the remaining VMs on Node 1, in this case,
VM2, would have more resources available to it, such as CPU and memory, as a result
of the removal of VM1.
In the scope of this thesis, the focus is shifted to only cover the interference over CPU
resources, or more specifically, the allocation of vCPU cores. From an implementation
point of view, the migration of a single VM is a process of removing the VM and (its
utilization records) from an array of VMs assigned to the source node and appending
it to an array of VMs assigned to the target node. Nevertheless, the results will most
likely not reflect the reality very well, as for some timestamps the aggregated utilization
of the new VM assignments might then exceed 100%, which is not possible in reality. In
order to reliably predict the actual allocation of vCPU cores to VMs at a given time, a
concept of cores rescheduling is introduced.
For each timestamp t in the new simulated state, one of the three general scenarios can
occur. Each of them, along with the necessary considerations and explanation is covered
below.
The first case is when neither the source or target node was initially overloaded before
the migration i.e. the aggregated utilization records for all of their respective assigned
VMs was below 100% at time t. In such scenario, it can be assured that the migrated
VM initially has been allocated all the vCPU cores it has requested, as the node was
not at 100% (still had spare resources). Due to the definition of the cost function, it is
not allowed to migrate from an underloaded to an overloaded host. Therefore, it can
be assumed that the target host has the necessary amount of vCPU cores at time t
to allocate to the migrated VM. As a result, the VM utilization record does not need
to be readjusted to request a new cores allocation, as it has not changed, so the VM
can be simply appended to the array of VMs at the target host without any additional
considerations.
==PAGE:64==
7.3 Interference
57
(a) vCPU allocation before migration (source node)
(b) vCPU allocation after migration (target node)
Figure 7.2: Example of cores distribution upon migration from an underloaded to
another underloaded host
To visualize the first scenario, we can imagine a case in which VM2 is migrated from
an underloaded node to another empty node (for some timestamp). As can be seen in
Figure 7.2, if VM2 has requested 3 vCPU cores (its utilization was 75%) and the target
node had enough vCPUs to accomodate it, its utilization record for this timestamp will
remain the same.
The second case is more complicated as it covers the migration from an overloaded host
to an underloaded host. In such scenario, the aggregated VMs utilization at source host
is initially at 100% and is then reduced by the migration itself. However, because the
==PAGE:65==
7.3 Interference
58
source node was overloaded before the migration, all VMs might have not received the
amount of vCPUs requested, unless they have actually requested precisely all vCPU
cores and not more.
As mentioned before, the migration of a VM from overloaded host effectively frees up the
resources that would have been allocated to it on the source node. Since the simulation
is based on historic utilization data, and not the precise description of parameters of the
workload submitted to the VM, it is only possible to try to predict whether the VMs
would have requested more cores if there were any spare ones.
(a) vCPU allocation before migration (source node)
(b) vCPU allocation after migration (source node)
Figure 7.3: Example of cores redistribution upon migration from an overloaded host
On an example presented in Figure 7.3, VMs 1 and 2 were historically allocated 3 out
of maximum of 4 vCPUs. As mentioned before, this can be either because the workload
they have been executing did not require more than 3 vCPU cores simultaneously, or
more were requested but none available.
If a scenario in which a migration of VM
3 was performed is simulated, the remaining VMs 1 and 2 might be allocated with
additional cores and finish their current workload faster. This would be further reflected
by computing how much additional workload has been performed in this timeframe and
==PAGE:66==
7.3 Interference
59
”moving” it there from the subsequent timeframes.
Additionally, the VM in question that is migrated from a previously overloaded host to
an underloaded one would also be able to request additional cores. This is again due
to the fact that its previous CPU allocation might have been limited by the amount of
vCPUs available. In such case however, it is important to notice that the number of
cores requested by the remaining VMs on the target node would remain the same.
The final migration scenario covers the case in which a VM is migrated from an over-
loaded node to a less overloaded node i.e. the ratio of requested cores on the source node
to its capacity was higher than in the target node. Such migration is considered since
it is also beneficial in terms of reducing performance degradation due to overloading.
Similarly to the previous case, some of the CPU cores are freed up on the source node
and can be redistributed to the remaining VMs. However, in this scenario the cores on
the target node also need to be rescheduled, as the arrival of new VM would take up
some CPU cores from the VMs already being hosted there. In order to mimick such
case, a reverse process happens - VMs giving up some of their cores are able to perform
less workload in the given timeframe and need to delegate the additional workload to
be performed later.
In order to reflect the cores redistribution behaviour from both the second and third
scenario, a decision model for cores rescheduling is proposed.
The process of cores
rescheduling attempts to simulate the process of actual cores scheduling by a hypervisor,
but for an alternative set of VMs assigned to a node at some point in time t. As defined
previously, there exists a number of different scheduler types, which dictates how the
individual cores are allocated. Within the scope of this thesis, a modified version of a
round-robin scheduler has been used for cores rescheduling. The selection was arbitrary,
as the documentation of different hypervisors either does not specify which type of
scheduler is actually used or the schedulers implemented are highly complex in terms of
implementation.
The goal of a round-robin scheduler is to distribute the CPU time between several VMs
in a fair manner, by iteratively assigning a small portion of a vCPU to the next VM
until certain conditions are met or it runs out of cores to assign. From a technical point
of view, the scheduler does not actually reserve whole virtual or physical cores to VMs,
but rather allocates them with a certain number of processing time slots, not smaller
than a processor quantum.
==PAGE:67==
7.3 Interference
60
Algorithm 3: Round-robin Scheduler
Data: node, timestamp, core_coef, vmid
Result: scheduledCores
vmList ←node.getVms()
scheduledCores ←zeroes(len(vmList))
nodeCores ←capacity(n)
repeat ←nodeCores * (1/core_coeff)
wasCoreAssigned ←True
while repeat ̸= 0 and wasCoreAssigned = True do
wasCoreAssigned = False
for j = 0 to len(vmList) - 1 do
if repeat = 0 then
break
oldUtilization ←vmList[j].getUtilization(timestamp)
if scheduledCores[j] ≥vmList[j].maxCpu() then
continue
if scheduledCores[j] < oldUtilization then
scheduledCores[j] += core_coeff
repeat -= 1
wasCoreAssigned = True
else
if vmid = None or vmid = vmList[j].getId() then
workloadLeft = 0
for nextIndex = timestamp to len(vmList[j].utilizationRecords() -
1) do
if vmList[j].getUtilization(nextIndex) > idleThreshold[j] then
workloadLeft += vmList[j].getUtilization(nextIndex) -
idleThreshold[j]
break
if workloadLeft - (scheduledCores[j] - oldUtilization) > 0 then
scheduledCores[j] += core_coeff
repeat -= 1
wasCoreAssigned = True
return scheduledCores
The scheduling algorithm starts by assigning each VM with 0 vCPUs and then repeats
the process of allocating a CPU timeframe equal to predefined core_coeff number until
all cores were allocated or no CPU time was allocated in the last iteration. The schuduler
allocates a CPU timeframe in one of two cases:
1. When a VM is not yet scheduled with a number of cores allocated before
2. When a VM has been scheduled with a number of cores allocated initially, but has
==PAGE:68==
7.3 Interference
61
spare workload to take from the utilization in subsequent time instances
In the first case, it simply compares the two values and adds a CPU timeframe if the
scheduled cores number is smaller than the original allocation. This is justified by the
fact that if a VM has been allocated with a specific number of cores initially, it would
have requested at least the same number in an alternative allocation.
As for the second case, the algorithm attempts to find where the current workload finishes
by iterating over the subsequent utilization records until a value lower than a previously
defined idle threshold for this given VM is found. That indicates the end of a current
workload, with the remaining workload to be performed stored in workloadLeft variable.
It is important to note that the scheduler can only take enough workload to leave the
next utilization records at at least the idle value. The idle values can be computed using
various methods for each VM, but within the scope of the thesis they have been set as
a static threshold of 5%. Selection of this particular threshold is justified by looking
at the historic utilization of VMs in the study case company cluster - VMs have a an
average idle utilization of around 0.05-1% for Linux VMs and 0.5-3% for Windows VMs.
Therefore, a threshold of 5% allows to capture both cases with enough error margin.
At the end of the algorithm, a list of scheduled cores is returned. An example list: [2.2,
5.3, 7.7, 0.8] would then mean that the reallocation resulted in the VM1 being allocated
2.2 vCPU cores, VM2 with 5.3 vCPU cores etc.
Additionally, for both the cores rescheduling (presented later) and round-robin scheduler
algorithms, an additional input parameter vmid is defined. It is used to account for
the first scenario, in which a VM is migrated from a previously overloaded host to an
underloaded one and is therefore an only VM that can request additional cores.
In
order to account for that, the parameter vmid is passed in such case, where it is None
otherwise.
The round-robin scheduler does not actually perform the actions required to reallocate
the cores, but rather focuses only on computing the new assignment. In order to apply
the changes and ”move” the additional workload to or from records at other timestamps,
we define a cores rescheduling algorithm.
As mentioned previously, the process of cores rescheduling needs to be performed in all
cases where moving VM records from one node to another results in an illegal (over
100%) utilization for some timestamps. First, a list of such timestamps is formulated as
a list overloadTimestamps separately for both the source and target nodes. The goal of
the algorithm is then to modify the utilization records in the overload timestamps of the
VMs in accordance with the new allocation determined using a round-robin scheduler.
The process can be generally described in several steps:
==PAGE:69==
7.3 Interference
62
1. Find new cores allocation with round-robin scheduler for a given node at currently
investigated overloadTimestamp
2. For each VM, calculate the difference between the old allocation and the new one,
related to as additionalWorkload
3. If the additionalWorkload is positive, the VM has been allocated more cores than
initially. Therefore, the additionalWorkload needs to be taken from some subse-
quent records. The algorithm iteratively checks where the current workload ends.
This is done by analysing the VMs historic utilization at all subsequent timestamps
until one that is lower than an idle threshold is met. All availableWorkload,
which is the amount of workload over the threshold at all visited records, is summed
along the iteration. Then, starting from the last record in the workload, the work-
load is substracted from the subsequent records and added to the record being
rescheduled until all additionalWorkload has been moved.
4. If the additionalWorkload is negative, the VM is allocated with less cores than
initially.
Therefore, the additional workload that was not performed must be
delegated to be performed in the next utilization timestamp. The next timestamp
is also added to the list of overloadTimestamps for further rescheduling.
The whole rescheduling algorithm is further presented in the pseudocode notation.
==PAGE:70==
7.3 Interference
63
Algorithm 4: Cores Rescheduling
Data: node, overloadTimestamps, vmid
Result: node
j = 0
while j < len(overloadTimestamps) do
timeIndex ←overloadTimestamps[j]
scheduledCores ←roundRobinScheduler(node, timeindex, 0.01, vmid)
for i = 0 to len(scheduledCores) do
vmList ←node.getVms()
newCores ←scheduledCores[i]
oldCores ←vmList[i].getUtilization(timeindex)
additionalWorkload ←newCores - oldCores
if additionalWorkload > 0 then
workloadEndIndex = len(vmList[i].utilizationRecords()) - 1
for nextIndex = timeindex to len(vmList[i].utilization())-1 do
if vmList[i].getUtilization(nextIndex) idleThreshold[i] then
workloadEndIndex = nextIndex
break
for k = workloadEndIndex; k > timeIndex + 1; k– do
availableWorkload = vmList[i].getUtilization(k) - idleThreshold[i]
if availableWorkload < 0 then
continue
if additionalWorkload > availableWorkload then
additionalWorkload -= availableWorkload
vmList[i].setUtilization(k, idleThreshold[i])
else
vmList[i].setUtilization(k, vmList[i].getUtilization(k) -
additionalWorkload)
break
vmList[i].setUtilization(timeIndex, newCores)
else
if additionalWorkload < 0 then
vmList[i].setUtilization(timeIndex + 1,
vmList[i].getUtilization(timeIndex + 1) - additionalWorkload)
vmList[i].setUtilization(timeIndex, newCores)
if j ̸= len(overloadTimestamps) - 1 or overloadTimestamps[j+1]
̸= timeIndex + 1 then
overloadTimestamps.insert(j+1, timeIndex + 1)
j += 1
return node
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 8
Implementation
This chapter highlights and explains the most important technical details and program-
ming tasks during implementation stage. Each system component and functionality is
explained with regards to the methods and technologies that were used to implement
them, along with diagrams and code snippets where applicable.
8.1
Project Structure
This section explains how the source code of the load balancing application is structured.
Relevant technology and implementation choices are briefly explained.
8.1.1
Technology selection
Consideration of the programming language or framework is an important part of every
programming project, as it partially dictates the process of further implementation of
the system.
The load balancing tool developed in this project has been chosen to be written in
Python programming language. The selection was based on several considerations.
Firstly, Python is a popular language for data science due to its powerful and expressive
syntax, ease of use, and a large community of developers that continuously develop and
contribute libraries, tools and packages for various data science tasks. This is highly
relevant in relation to the problem of load balancing, as the tool is required to be able to
store, process and visualize big quantities of data. Another advantage of using Python
is that it allows to develop a working prototype quickly and iteratively, due to a lack of
enforced project structure, dynamic-typing and its script-like nature. Furthermore, the
Python community is large and active, which made it easier to not only find existing
tools and packages, but also get help with questions related to them. Finally, Python is
a cross-platform language by design, which means that the finished application is able
to run on Windows, Linux, and macOS without requiring any modifications.
While the project structure is more relaxed when developing Python projects, there are
still some ways of organizing the code which are widely considered as best-practice. Due
==PAGE:72==
8.1 Project Structure
65
to that, the project structure was organized in a form of a python package, which can
be then installed using pip package manager. The source code was further separated
into several Python scripts, each representing a logical component of the system.
• Data interface: Includes functions for loading the cluster state data from a database,
file, or ProxMox instance (depending on the configuration) and perform found mi-
grations.
• Model: Contains definition of model classes representing the data objects, visual-
ized on a class diagram in the next section
• Load Balancer: Includes implementation of the VM selection policy and Load
Balancing algorithm presented before
• Simulation: Contains all source code required for the algorithms required to sim-
ulate an alternative cluster allocation. This includes the definition of methods for
cores rescheduling and an implementation of the Round-Robin Scheduler
• Util: Contains all utilitiy functions used across all other components, such as
handling of the configuration file and logging.
• Main: Includes implementation of the command line interface and serves as an
entry point of the whole balancer Python package.
8.1.2
Class diagram
In order to make the source code easier to understand and extend, the different func-
tions and objects exchanged and processed within the system have been implemented
following an Object Oriented programming paradigm. A set of classes defined withing
the application code, along with their attributes, methods and relations between them
is presented on the diagram below.
==PAGE:73==
8.2 Data collection
66
Figure 8.1: Class diagram of the data model used
8.2
Data collection
This section explains how the data is collected, stored and processed within the system.
8.2.1
Database
Database is an essential component of the designed system and serves as a central storage
where the cluster utilization records are kept and can be obtained from. There exists
a number of different database types and a selection of one that can fit the desired
application is always an important design consideration.
For the specific application of storing and then querying the cluster utilization data, a
time-series database has been selected and configured. Time-series databases are well
==PAGE:74==
8.2 Data collection
67
suited for storing utilization records of nodes and VMs on a cluster due to several key
features:
1. Optimized for Time-Stamped Data: Time-series databases are specifically
designed to store time-stamped data, which makes them ideal for storing utilization
records of nodes and VMs in a cluster, where data is generated over time.
2. Scalability: Time-series databases are built to handle high volume, high velocity,
and high-variability data, which is common in a cluster environment where the
number of nodes and VMs can change dynamically.
3. Data Compression: Time-series databases can handle high data compression
rates, which means that they can store more data in less space. This is important
in a cluster environment, where the amount of data generated over time can quickly
become large, and data storage can become a bottleneck.
4. Query Performance: Time-series databases are designed to perform well with
time-based queries, which is essential for fast retrieval of the utilization records.
5. Integration: Many common monitoring services e.g. Grafana, are built to be
able to integrate with time-series databases
Out of the available time-series databases, this project utilizes one called Prometheus.
Prometheus1 is a popular open-source, time-series database, which was also already set
up at the study case company. The data of interest can be then obtained by using
queries declared in PromQL (Prometheus Query Language) that lets the user select and
aggregate time series data in real time.
8.2.2
Daemon
There are two ways in which the load balancer application can obtain historic utilization
records from the cluster. The first way is obtaining it from an external database, where
the records have been continuously uploaded by the daemon agents on each node.
For this project, an existing tool called prometheus-pve-exporter2 was used. With a min-
imal setup, this small python package has been manually deployed to each node on the
cluster and setup to run as a daemon running in the background. It then automatically
uploads all metrics from the ProxMox instance to the database specified in previous
section, where it can be further queried for.
1Prometheus documentation, www.prometheus.io
2Prometheus PVE Exporter GitHub, github.com/prometheus-pve/prometheus-pve-exporter
==PAGE:75==
8.2 Data collection
68
8.2.3
Data Interface
All system behaviours that are related to the process of obtaining data are conceptually
extracted to a separate Python file data_interface.py. The script contains functions
that allow to load cluster information, perform a specific migration and load or save a
cluster state to a file for testing purposes.
The first functionality allows to obtain a Cluster object from the data source specified
in the configuration file: either ProxMox or Prometheus.
When the ProxMox method is specified, the data is obtained by composing and sending
appropriate HTTP GET requests to the REST API of the ProxMox instance specified
in the configuration file.
For this purpose, a ProxMox API Python wrapper called
proxmoxer3 was used. The package allows to easily query the desired endpoints of the
ProxMox API without a need to manually construct the HTTP requests.
1 vm_usage_data = proxmox.nodes(node["node"]).qemu(vm['vmid']).rrddata.get(
timeframe=timeframe , cf=cf)
2 for data_entry in vm_usage_data:
3
try:
4
current_vm.utilization.append(
5
VmUsageRecord(
6
data_entry["time"],
7
data_entry["disk"],
8
data_entry["maxdisk"],
9
data_entry["cpu"],
10
data_entry["maxcpu"],
11
data_entry["netin"],
12
data_entry["netout"],
13
data_entry["diskread"],
14
data_entry["diskwrite"],
15
data_entry["mem"],
16
data_entry["maxmem"]
17
)
18
)
Listing 8.1: Proxmoxer usage example
The cluster state is then obtained by querying the ProxMox API for nodes data within
one of the available timeframes (day, week, month, year), querying the API again to get
records of VMs assigned to the obtained nodes, and then finally requesting the history
of migration tasks, in order to find when the last migration was performed. The data is
then filtered to only include the records since last migration, as previously discussed in
the Time domain limitation section. All records obtained in JSON format are further
converted to objects of their corresponding classess and added to the cluster state.
3Proxmoxer GitHub, github.com/proxmoxer/proxmoxer
==PAGE:76==
8.3 Configuration
69
In the second scenario, where the Prometheus method is specified as a data source, the
records are instead requested by querying the API of the Prometheus instance. Again,
an existing open-source Python package prometheus-api-connect4 is used as a wrapper
for all API requests. Each metric e.g. CPU usage, needs to be queried for separately
and is further converted to an object of an appropriate type.
1 cpu_usage_data = prom.custom_query_range(
2
'(pve_cpu_usage_ratio * on(id, instance) group_left(name, type, node)
pve_guest_info{instance = config["connection"]["prometheus"]["url],
type = "qemu"}) and on(id, instance) pve_up == 1',
3
start_time=start_time ,
4
end_time=end_time ,
5
step=chunk_size
6 )
Listing 8.2: Prometheus query example
Prometheus queries allow to specify the start and end time of the requested metric
records. The chunk_size parameter specifies how much time one aggregated record
should represent i.e. for chunk_size of 60, one record represents an average of utilization
over a minute.
8.3
Configuration
One of the requirements of the system was to make the tool configurable. Within the
balancer application, there are two ways to configure the tool to customize it to the
users needs - command-line arguments passed to the application and the configuration
file. The separation of available parameters between these two options, their format and
reasoning behind it is briefly explained in this section.
8.3.1
Command-line arguments
The CLI of the load balancer tool allows for running the simulation with specified config-
urations through the ”run” command. It takes the required argument ”–config” followed
by the path to the configuration file, which specifies the settings for the simulation and
load balancing algorithms. The tool also supports optional arguments for setting the
log level, enabling debugging, saving the results to a file or using a specified cluster
state snapshot as a data source. Additionally, it allows to run the application with an
argument ”–schedule X”, where the load balancing will be then performed automati-
cally every X minutes. Finally, the tool can be also ran with a flag ”–test”, where the
migrations are computed and logged, but not actually performed on a cluster.
4Prometheus API Connect wrapper, pypi.org/project/prometheus-api-client/
==PAGE:77==
8.3 Configuration
70
Additionally, the tool has a ”history” command, which allows the user to show the history
of performed migrations. This command supports optional arguments for filtering the
history by date and displaying it in a specified format. The history command allows
the user to see the details of past migrations, which is useful for troubleshooting and
analyzing the performance of the load balancer.
Implementing these two commands allows to conceptually seperate the configuration of
the tool and the way it is being executed, from the specific parameters of the underlying
simulation framework and load balancing algorithm.
8.3.2
Configuration
The configuration file for the load balancer tool is formatted in YAML, and specifies the
connection details and parameters necessary for the tool to perform its functions. The
YAML file should include the following information:
• Connection details:
– proxmox:
∗url:
· ip: The IP address of the proxmox instance. This is a required field
and should be entered in the format ”xx.xx.xx.xx”.
· port: The port number for accessing the proxmox instance. This is
also a required field, and should be entered as an integer.
∗auth:
· username: The username for accessing the proxmox instance. This
is a required field.
· password: The password for accessing the proxmox instance. This is
also a required field.
– prometheus:
∗url: The URL for accessing the Prometheus instance. This is a required
field and should be entered in the format ”http://xx.xx.xx.xx:port”.
• Method: Specifies the method for obtaining data for load balancing. This is a
required field and can be either ”proxmox” or ”prometheus”.
• Parameters:
– vm_selection_depth: Specifies how many VMs will be selected for simulation
during each iteration of the load balancing algorithm. This is a required field,
and should be entered as an integer. If set to 0, all VMs will be analysed.
==PAGE:78==
8.3 Configuration
71
– weight_sla: Specifies the weight of the Service Level Agreement (SLA) factor
in the cost function used by the load balancing algorithm. This is a required
field, and should be entered as a decimal number.
– weight_mig: Specifies the weight of the migration overhead factor in the cost
function used by the load balancing algorithm. This is a required field, and
should be entered as a decimal number.
– bandwidth: Specifies the bandwidth between nodes in the cluster, expressed
in Mb/s. This is a required field, and should be entered as an integer.
– timeout: Specifies the maximum time that the load balancing process should
take before being aborted, expressed in minutes. If set to 0, no timeout is set
and the algorithm will continue executing until it converges.
An example of a complete configuration file is shown below:
1 connection:
2
proxmox:
3
url:
4
ip: 192.168.0.1
5
port: 8006
6
auth:
7
username: username
8
password: password
9
prometheus:
10
url: http://xx.com:9090/prometheus
11 method: prometheus
12 parameters:
13
vm_selection_depth: 10
14
weight_sla: 1
15
weight_mig: 1
16
bandwidth: 10000
17
timeout: 120
Listing 8.3: Example configuration file
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 9
Evaluation
This chapter explains how the different elements of the implemented application were
tested and validated. It starts by covering the test scenarios used to evaluate the sim-
ulation framework accuracy, which was then used in the load balancing process. Then,
the tests performed on real-life cluster data are described and their results presented.
Finally, each of the system functional requirements defined before is discussed to reflect
upon the state of the developed tool.
9.1
Simulation framework
In order to verify whether the simulations match real-life scenarios and their correspond-
ing cluster state changes, it is essential to prepare a test suite for evaluation of predictions
accuracy early in the project. This is especially important, as all other measures used
for finding beneficial migrations are based on predictions from the Simulation Frame-
work. This section covers the configuration used to test the simulation frameworks in
different migration scenarios, presents a metric used for its evaluation and explains how
the accuracy of simulations was improved throughout the different development stages.
The results are further elaborated on.
9.1.1
Test Setup
The easiest and most apparent way to see whether the simulation framework produces
results that reflect reality is to perform real migrations and then compare the resulting
utilization records with the predicted ones. In order to perform migrations, the test
setup needs to be a cluster with at least 2 physical nodes and a freedom to set up VMs
with arbitrary workloads.
For the purpose of testing, the study case company allowed to use their existing clus-
ter, which is configured using ProxMox as a Virtualization Management Server. The
requirement was to not cause interference with existing operations i.e. use only nodes
which are underloaded and do not run business critical workloads. Because of that, the
test setup for simulations validation has been selected to consist of only two identical
physical nodes with id pve-g2n6 and pve-g2n8, each with the following parameters:
==PAGE:80==
9.1 Simulation framework
73
• CPU: AMD Ryzen 9 5950X 16-Core Processor
• vCPUs: 32
• RAM: 128 GB
• Bandwitdth: 10 Gbit/s
The two nodes were then used to host 3-7 VMs (depending on the test scenario) and
are further considered to be a separate cluster on its own, as the other nodes existing
in the bigger cluster were omitted in all tests. The VMs used for tests were provisioned
with Ubuntu 18.04 for their operation system, as it came prepackaged with stress-ng1
Linux tool. Ng-stress is a very popular tool for stress testing different resources, which
in the scope of the testing were CPU intensive workloads. It further allows to configure
the type of workload ran e.g. the number of required CPU operations, number of cores
used. For each stress test scenario, it also presents all performance metrics like the total
runtime, average load on each core or system I/O delay.
For each workload ran, the following configuration was used:
stress-ng -c C
--times
--verbose
--cpu-ops N
--metrics
--yaml scenarioX-V-(after/before).yaml
where C is the number of cores the workload is ran on, N is the number of CPU operations,
X is the scenario number, V is the id of the VM and after or before is selected depending
on whether the workload was ran before or after a migration. All of these variables
are defined in the description of the specific test scenario currently executed, with the
resulting metrics being stored in a YAML file for later evaluation.
9.1.2
Evaluation metrics
The evaluation metric for the validation tests is the prediction accuracy between the real
utilization records expected and the results obtained from simulation. Both of these are
in essence cluster states, which can be represented using CPU utilization graphs - with
the prediction accuracy being a measure of how similar or correlated these two graphs
are.
1Ng-stress tool documentation https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Kernel/Reference/stress-ng
==PAGE:81==
9.1 Simulation framework
74
The Pearson coeﬀicient is a useful measure for comparing the relationship between two
graphs. It is a measure of the linear relationship between two variables, and can range
from -1 to 1. A value of 1 indicates a perfect positive linear relationship, where one
variable increases as the other increases. A value of -1 indicates a perfect negative linear
relationship, where one variable decreases as the other increases. A value of 0 indicates
no linear relationship between the two variables.
To calculate the Pearson coeﬀicient, we first need to calculate the means and standard
deviations of the two variables. Let X and Y be the two variables, and let n be the
number of data points. The means of X and Y are calculated as follows:
¯X = 1
n
n
X
i=1
Xi
(9.1)
¯Y = 1
n
n
X
i=1
Yi
(9.2)
The standard deviations of X and Y are calculated as follows:
SDX =
v
u
u
t1
n
n
X
i=1
(Xi −¯X)2
(9.3)
SDY =
v
u
u
t1
n
n
X
i=1
(Yi −¯Y )2
(9.4)
Once we have calculated the means and standard deviations of X and Y, we can calculate
the Pearson coeﬀicient as follows:
r =
Pn
i=1(Xi −¯X)(Yi −¯Y )
SDXSDY
(9.5)
This gives us a value for r that tells us the strength and direction of the linear relationship
between X and Y.
Within the scope of the simulation testing, the aim is to maximise the value of Pearson
correlation, for it to be as close to 1 as possible. The Pearson coeﬀicient is computed
for the utilization records between the prediction state and the expected one.
==PAGE:82==
9.1 Simulation framework
75
9.1.3
Migration Scenarios
In order to accurately reflect reality, a reliable simulation would take into account many
measures that are associated with a migration. To make sure that all cases of migration
are covered, a set of migration scenarios has been devised. Each test scenario has been
conducted in accordance to the following plan:
1. Preparation: Create VMs and assign them to nodes according to scenario de-
scription
2. Establish baseline: Configure and run workloads on selected nodes. Store the
results and utilization records as a baseline to compare against later
3. Perform migration: Migrate selected VM to another node
4. Establish ground truth: Run workloads again. Store the results and utilization
records as expected results to compare to
5. Run simulation: Load baseline as historic data to the simulation model and
simulate performing the migration. Store the results as prediction
6. Compare and present results: Compute the accuracy of simulation by com-
paring utilization records in the prediction cluster state with expected one
Scenario 1
First scenario explains the case in which a single VM is migrated from a
node that is not overloaded to another node which is also not overloaded (aggregated
VM CPU utilization on node does not reach 100% of available cores at any time). It
is the simplest and arguably the most common scenario, in which no cores rescheduling
needs to be performed in the target node. Results of this scenario are also used as a
sanity test to verify that a workload takes the same time to complete on identical nodes,
which was previously assumed. As an example, moving a VM consuming close to 100%
of its 8 provisioned cores can be expected to also finish in the same time should the
target node have 8 cores available.
Characteristics of this testing scenario are therefore as follows:
VM ID
Node
vCPUs
Operations
Migrated to
1
pve-g2n6
16
10000000
pve-g2n8
3
pve-g2n6
8
10000000
4
pve-g2n8
8
10000000
5
pve-g2n6
8
10000000
==PAGE:83==
9.1 Simulation framework
76
Scenario 2
The second scenario covers the case in which the host machine is over-
loaded (or close to reaching its computing capacity) and the target node is not. In such
scenario, the cores freed from moving a single VM can be then made available to VMs
remaining, hence resulting in them finishing in a shorter time. Therefore, this scenario
incorporates a need to reschedule cores after migration on the source host and its result-
ing accuracy can be considered a measure of how well is this behaviour of the system
simulated.
Characteristics of this scenario are as follows:
VM ID
Node
vCPUs
Operations
Migrated to
1
pve-g2n6
16
10000000
pve-g2n8
3
pve-g2n6
8
10000000
4
pve-g2n8
8
10000000
5
pve-g2n6
8
10000000
7
pve-g2n6
8
10000000
Scenario 3
The last scenario explains the third possible case of migration, which
is from an overloaded node to a target node, which becomes overloaded due to the
migration. In such scenario, the cores freed from moving the VM from source node
can be redistributed to the remaining nodes, hence reducing their execution time. The
target node however has to accomodate the new VM and take some cores from the
VMs already assigned there. Therefore, this scenario incorporates a need to reschedule
cores after migration on both the source and target host. The accuracy can be again
considered a measure of how well this particular behaviour of the system is simulated.
The characteristics of this scenario are:
VM ID
Node
vCPUs
Operations
Migrated to
1
pve-g2n6
16
10000000
pve-g2n8
2
pve-g2n8
16
10000000
3
pve-g2n6
8
10000000
4
pve-g2n8
8
10000000
5
pve-g2n6
8
10000000
6
pve-g2n8
8
10000000
7
pve-g2n6
8
10000000
9.1.4
Results
This subsection presents and explains the results of the three test scenarios defined
previously.
As mentioned before, the simulation suite was developed early on as it
serves as the foundation for further load balancing. Due to that, the accuracy at the
first iteration was rather low, which resulted in the need to implement the concept of
==PAGE:84==
9.1 Simulation framework
77
cores rescheduling, using a round-robin scheduler. In order to reflect that improvement,
the results for all scenarios are presented for simulation framework with and without
the scheduler. Additionally, the corresponding utilization graphs of the expected and
simulated cluster states is presented for a better visualization of the differences in the
simulation framework’s predictions.
(a) Simulated utilization records
(b) Expected utilization records
Figure 9.1: Difference between simulation and expected cluster state for Scenario 1
(a) Simulated utilization records
(b) Expected utilization records
Figure 9.2: Difference between simulation and expected cluster state for Scenario 2
(a) Simulated utilization records
(b) Expected utilization records
Figure 9.3: Difference between simulation and expected cluster state for Scenario 3
==PAGE:85==
9.2 Load balancing
78
Test Scenario
Accuracy
(w/o cores rescheduling)
Accuracy
(with cores rescheduling)
1
0.8704
0.8704
2
0.7291
0.9260
3
0.7975
0.9409
From the results, it can be seen that the addition of cores rescheduling was a highly
important system behaviour to include within the simulation. It allowed to increase the
average correlation score across all scenarios from the 0.79 to 0.91. It did not however
influence the correlation in the first scenario, as cores rescheduling does not take place
in such type of migration.
The goal of the simulation framework was previously formulated as a separate system
requirement, where it was required to provide predictions which are both accurate and
eﬀicient. The project was conducted according to the project plan, where the simulation
framework and test suite had to be developed early in the scope of this thesis. Therefore,
due to the time limitations and the workload required to develop the remaining elements
of the system, the goal for accuracy was initially set to be above 90%. The framework was
then expanded iteratively until such improvement was achieved. All in all, the resulting
accuracy of the simulation framework is deemed satisfactionary for the purpose of this
thesis.
The second goal was to make the simulation eﬀicient. This is highly relevant in the
process of load balancing as a whole, as each migration evaluated by the cost function
needs to be simulated first. As a result, the simulation is performed many times while
exploring the state search space of the problem. Initially, the process of simulation has
been badly optimized in terms of time complexity, where performing a single migration
over 70 datapoints would take up to 10 minutes. Again, the goal was then to minimize
this time within the timeframe dedicated to the simulation framework. The final itera-
tion of the simulation framework is able to perform a single migration with 70 datapoints
in less than 1 second. This was also further deemed satisfactionary in relation the the
previously mentioned requirement.
There exists a number of additional factors addressing which might result in better
accuracy and better time eﬀiciency. They are further elaborated on in the Future works
section.
9.2
Load balancing
Upon validating the accuracy of predictions from the simulation framework, the final
tests are performed to evaluate the load balancing capabilities of the designed algorithms
==PAGE:86==
9.2 Load balancing
79
and the load balancer tool as a whole. As discussed in the Methodology chapter, field
testing is a highly important part of design science, so the evaluation of the finished tool
is performed on historic data from the real production computation cluster at the study
case company.
9.2.1
Test scenario
As discussed before, it was highly relevant to make sure that the prediction accuracy
of the simulation framework is deemed satisfactionary, as due to the cluster at the
study case company being a business critical element of the infrastructure, there was no
possiblity to verify the actual results of performing the migrations found. Additionally,
even if such permission was granted, there is no certainty that the results would be
clearly visible within a short timeframe after performing the migrations and due to the
amount of the dynamic, unknown behaviours of the system.
Therefore, the test tasks of these tests are to:
1. Prepare a configuration file containing all parameters for load balancing algorithm
2. Load historic cluster data from the computation cluster at study case company
3. Run the Load Balancer to find migrations that would improve the resources uti-
lization (minimize the cost function)
4. Present results
The goal of the evaluation is two-fold. Firstly, to find out whether the load balancer
can improve upon the CPU utilization as compared to a cluster managed manually,
by reducing the % of time the nodes were overloaded. The second goal is to validate
the influence of the vm_selection_depth factor, which should significantly reduce the
branching factor, and the execution time, while still resulting in a beneficial migration.
In order to validate that the limitation of the search space using VM selection algorithm
allows to produce results that are still better than the original in a shorter amount of
time, the tests were conducted for two scenarios. The first scenario is configured to
conduct an exhaustive search for the best migration in each iteration, analysing possible
migration of all VMs that were found to be culprits of an SLA violation at least once.
The second scenario represents a practical use of the algorithm, where the search space
is limited to migrations of vm_selection_depth VMs, that were declared culprits most
often.
==PAGE:87==
9.2 Load balancing
80
9.2.2
Configuration
The input data for both scenario was the same set of utilization records representing a
period of one week, where a single data point reflects a timeframe of 1 minute.
The following parameters were included:
Test Scenario
VM Selection Depth
weight SLA
weight migration
1
0 (Not limited)
1
1
2
10
1
1
9.2.3
Results
The results of the two test runs are further presented and elaborated on in this section.
Scenario
Total Time (min)
SLA %
No. Migrations
Downtime (sec)
1
189
0.06
4
134
2
38
0.17
5
193
Table 9.1: Load balancing test results
The table above summarizes the results in terms of the two metrics reflected in the cost
function i.e. the percentage of SLA violation per active host over the whole time period
and the number of performed migrations. Looking at the initial results summary, it
can be clearly seen that the Scenario 1 run, which was an exhaustive analysis of the
search space, has taken a significantly longer time to complete than the one limiting the
number of considered VMs. Nevertheless, the first run has also achieved lower value of
SLA violation percentage with a similiar number of migrations (only one more than in
Scenario 2).
In order to compare the achieved metrics with regards to the initial state and measure the
improvement, the SLA metric of the initial state, along with the improvement achieved
with each additional migration, are presented on a graph below.
==PAGE:88==
9.2 Load balancing
81
0
30
60
90
120 150 180 210 240
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Time (minutes)
SLA % × 0.01
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Figure 9.4: Test results graph
Each point on the graph represents the value of the SLA metric achieved after a mi-
gration, which was simulated and selected at a given time. Both scenarios started with
the same historic cluster state obtained from the utilization records of the study case
company, for which the SLA time % per active host (SLATAH) metric was initially
equal to 0.28%. It can be clearly seen that the scenario with an vm_selection_depth
defined converges significantly faster, but does not manage to find the best available
VM to migrate in each iteration. Nevertheless, it still manages to find a set of beneficial
migrations, which allow to lower the SLA metric from 0.28% down to 0.17% (by 39%).
Respectively, an exhaustive simulation of all VMs allowed to lower the SLA metric by
78%.
An amount of performance degradation avoided by such improvement can be
simply computed by multiplying the SLATAH value by aggregation of the amount of
timestamps in which a node was active for each node.
For utilization records with 4 nodes and time domain like the one in the historic cluster
data in the study case company, which represents a weeks worth of utilization records,
an improvement of 0.01% of the SLATAH metric allows to avoid around 4 minutes of
performance degradation. Therefore, assuming that the predictions of the simulation
framework are accurate (which has been tested in the previous section to be around
90%), the migrations performed in Scenario 1 allow to avoid around 44 minutes of CPU
performance degradation, while the ones found by Scenario 2 - around 88 minutes.
Changes to the initial cluster state and its historic utilization can be further visualized
by plotting the records of an alternative cluster state.
==PAGE:89==
9.2 Load balancing
82
(a) Utilization records of initial allocation
(b) Utilization records of best found allocation (Scenario 1)
Figure 9.5: Difference between initial allocation and best found allocation
It can be clearly seen that the new allocation (b) does not have as many records exceed-
ing the predefined threshold of 85% in all of the 4 nodes.
Following the results for the load balancing on the historic utilization records from a real
data cluster, it can be concluded that both of the test goals were satisfied. Firstly, both
scenarios allow to produce beneficial migrations, which result in better utilization of the
CPU resources due to lower SLATAH metric, reducing it by 78% and 39% respectively.
Secondly, scenario in which the vm_selection_depth is defined has a significantly re-
duced runtime. This is essential in terms of applicability of the load balancer solution
==PAGE:90==
9.3 Requirements evaluation
83
to bigger clusters, as the branching factor can become a bottleneck for data centers with
more VMs and nodes. In such case, it is up to the user to experiment with and find the
biggest vm_selection_depth that can produce results within the desired timeframe.
9.3
Requirements evaluation
Upon testing and validating the two main functionalities of the system, the final step
within the thesis is to evaluate whether all system requirements specified before have
been satisfied. Each functional requirement defined before is therefore discussed sepa-
rately in relation to how it was addressed and satisfied.
• FR1: Automatically obtain cluster data: The system should be able to auto-
matically retrieve historic cluster data from existing data centers.
This requirement has been first addressed in Data model design section of the
report, by considering the different approaches of data extraction from the existing
cluster. The selected approach has been then implemented and allows the user to
select one of two ways for obtaining cluster data - from ProxMox (API) or from a
database (daemon). Once a method is selected, and the necessary connection and
authentication options provided, the tool then automatically queries the selected
data source for the historic cluster data.
• FR2: Find migrations: The system must be able to automatically analyse the
historic cluster data and propose beneficial migrations that result in better CPU
utilization across the cluster.
This requirement has been evaluated in the previous section. The tool implemented
during this project is able to utilize the methods discussed earlier to process historic
cluster data and elicit favourable migrations.
• FR3: Simulation: The system must be able to simulate the effects of a migration
to elicit beneficial ones.
Similarly to the previous requirement, simulating alternative cluster allocations is
one of the main functionalities of the system and has been evaluated earlier in this
chapter.
• FR4: Perform migrations: The system should be able to automatically perform
the beneficial migrations.
This requirement has been implemented as one of the functionalities of the data
interface part of the system. The migrations found in the process of load balancing
are automatically requested to be performed on a ProxMox instance specified in
the configuration. The migration task, including the id of migrated VM, source
node and the target node, is submitted to ProxMox by performing a POST request
==PAGE:91==
9.3 Requirements evaluation
84
to a migrate endpoint of the ProxMox API using a previously mentioned ProxMox
Python wrapper. While no actual migrations were performed on the production
VMs in the study case company, the functionality has been separately validated
during the development phase by submitting and confirming success of arbitrary
migration tasks in the test setup prepared for simulation framework evaluation.
• FR5: Logging and history: The system must incorporate a mechanism for
logging all performed migrations and their results for transparency and traceability.
The application utilizes a default Python logger package for logging all application
runtime information, and a separate migration_logger for saving the history
of performed migrations.
Whenever a migration is submitted and finished, an
appropriate entry is added to history.log log file placed in the application’s
running directory.
An example of such log is attached in An Appendix.
The
implemented CLI of the tool also defines a set of two commands: run and history,
where the latter can be used to view the history of performed migrations.
• FR6: Integration: The system should be able to seamlessly integrate into the
existing infrastructure at the case study company.
Many system design and implementation decisions within the scope of this thesis
(e.g. database selection, data model design etc.) have been already based on the
assumption that they need to work with the infrastructure of the study case com-
pany. Additionally, all the evaluation scenarios were either performed directly on
the existing infrastructure of EPOS, or based on data obtained from it. Therefore,
the system can be said to be able to seamlessly integrate within the existing setup
at case study company.
• FR7: Store historic data: The system should be able to store historic cluster
data for later reference.
The application allows to store the analysed historic data by passing an additional
”–save” flag, where it can be later loaded by passing the ”–file” argument. This
functionality has been validated by saving and further reusing the cluster state
used for load balancing evaluation.
• FR8: Balancing frequency: The system should be able to be configured to run
at specific time intervals
The designed system allows the user to configure a scheduled execution.
The
”run” command of the load balancer application takes an optional ”–schedule X”
argument, which then makes the rebalancing process repeat every X minutes. The
requirement also specified that the user should be able to rebalance the allocation
only once, which can be done when no schedule or ”–schedule 0” is specified.
• FR9: User Interface: The system should include a simple user interface.
In order to the usage of the load balancer easier, without a need to manually run
a Python script or modify source code, the implemented system incorporates a
==PAGE:92==
9.3 Requirements evaluation
85
simple Command-Line Interface. The developed CLI allows the user to either run
the load balancer or show migrations history. The CLI of the tool has been used
throughout all development stages, and expanded along the way to include all the
necessary options.
• FR10: Extendability: The system’s architecture should be easily extendable.
This requirement has been brought up in almost all considerations when designing
the final system. Therefore, the data model (represented in a class diagram before)
is not bound to ProxMox, but is rather a practical implementation of the previ-
ously covered mathematical definition of the load balancing problem. If required,
an additional interface to another VM management server e.g. VMWare, could
be easily implemented as a separate entity, as long as the output is converted
to objects of the defined classes. Additionally, the methods used for simulation
(round-robin scheduler) and VM selection (MM policy) are implemented as sepa-
rate functions, which can be then replaced by another scheduler or policy, should
it be required.
• FR11: Configurability: The system should allow the user to select and configure
the methods used for simulating and finding migrations.
Both the design and implementation stages of the system were conducted in a way
that allows to extract all configurable parameters, be it related to load balancing or
the tool commands, where applicable. The available configuration of the system
is further split into two, conceptually separate means - the CLI arguments and
configuration file. The CLI arguments encapsulate all possible ways of running
the application and available system actions, where the configuration file includes
all technical parameters that are required to perform them.
• FR12: Documentation: The system should be suﬀiciently documented in terms
of its installation process and usage
In order to make the system easier to setup and use, all source code was organized
as a single Python package, with the set of instructions for installing and running
the application formulated into a standard README file. Additionally, the CLI
allows the user to call both available commands with a ”–help” argument, which
explains the list of available options.
Finally, the source code includes in-line
comments, which explain some relevant sections of the code.
Following the discussion presented in this section, all initially defined requirements for
the load balancing application have been satisfied within the scope of this thesis. Con-
siderations related to possible extensions of the system are further covered in Chapter
11 of the report.
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
In conclusion, this thesis presents a comprehensive approach to the problem of dynamic
virtual machine (VM) allocation and optimization of CPU resources utilization in an
on-premises data cluster. The main objective of this work was to address the challenges
associated with the process of load balancing and provide a practical and effective soft-
ware solution to automatically find and perform migrations which result in better VM
allocation in terms of CPU utilization, while minimizing the resulting SLA violations and
migration overhead. The research and development of the final artifact was conducted
using Design Science Research as a scientific method.
Based on the initial literature review covered in the Relevant Works chapter, the con-
cepts in the domain of load balancing have been explained and formalized as an opti-
mization problem using mathematical notation, along with the necessary assumptions
and simplifications applied to the problem within the scope of the thesis.
Mathematical formulation of the load balancing problem was then followed by an analysis
of the existing practices of manual cluster balancing in the study case company. The
description of these practices further served as a basis for a general System Description
of the desired load balancing application and the formulation of a set of functional
requirements for the developed system.
In accordance with the presented set of requirements and System Description, a system
architecture highlighting the different components of the system and their purpose has
been presented, with each architectural decision elaborated on.
Formalization of the problem model was further expanded with regards to the cost
function, VM selection and host detection methods used. The proposed solution incor-
porated Minimal Migrations over Time (MMT) VM selection algorithm and Averaging
Threshold-based host (THR) detection policy for node selection.
The designed cost
function considers two weighted factors - the Service-level Agreement (SLA) violation
percentage per active host and the migration overhead. All of the selected heuristics
were used to limit the branching factor of the search space and further guide the search
for beneficial migrations in the main load balancing algorithm.
In order to assess the benefits of found migrations, a simulation framework has been
==PAGE:94==
10 Conclusion
87
proposed. The simulation component of the system was designed to simulate the influ-
ence of an individual migration on a provided historic cluster state and reliably mimick
the real behaviours of the cluster related to CPU usage. Simulation further included
modelling of the virtual cores rescheduling process using a Round-Robin scheduler for all
possible cases of migration scenarios. Its accuracy was further evaluated by conducting
a set of tests on a cluster setup in the study case company, with the average predictions
accuracy across all scenarios being around 91%, which was slightly above the goal of
90% defined for it to be deemed satisfactionary.
In accordance with the declared system architecture, the proposed load balancing al-
gorithm and considerations related to the simulation framework, the final solution was
implemented in a form of a Command line application using Python programming lan-
guage. The implemented load balancer application is able to seamlessly integrate into
the existing infrastructure of the study case company utilizing ProxMox as as the Virtu-
alization Management Server and Prometheus as a database of choice. The tool further
allows the user to schedule the application to run automatically in a defined intervals,
view the migrations history and customize the parameters of the load balancing and
simulation elements of the system. All previously declared functional requirements of
the system have been also evaluated individually and have been further confirmed to
have been satisfied by the implemented solution.
Since the goal of the application was to be able to automatically find and perform
beneficial VM migrations based on historic cluster data, the effectiveness of the tool was
finally evaluated on the historic utilization records and infrastructure of the case study
company. Evaluation results showed that the application was able to find migrations
that resulted in 39% decrease in SLA violations over active host time in 38 minutes, and
up to 78% decrease within 189 minutes, which is a significant improvement in comparison
with a previously used manual process.
All in all, this thesis has satisfied all of the functional requirements for the developed
system and proved to be a success in addressing the challenges of load balancing in the
study case company. However, there are still areas that can be improved upon, which
are covered in the next chapter on Future Works.
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 11
Future works
In the Future Works section, the potential areas for further improvement of the load
balancing algorithm and its implementation are discussed. The aim of this chapter is to
identify potential limitations and challenges that the current system faces, as well as to
suggest directions for future research and development. The goal is to provide insights
into how the tool can be improved and optimized, and to highlight opportunities for
future innovation in the field of dynamic virtual machine allocation and load balancing.
The Future Works section provides a roadmap for future efforts aimed at enhancing
the effectiveness and eﬀiciency of the load balancing algorithm and its implementation,
and supports the ongoing evolution of the system towards meeting the ever-increasing
demands of the on-premises data clusters.
• Future workload prediction: System developed in this thesis uses an Averaging
Threshold-based host detection policy to identify overloaded and underloaded host.
While it was applicable for a medium sized and rather non-dynamic cluster like the
one in the study case company, an on-premise cluster serving more than one client,
and therefore more variations of workload types, would likely require an approach
which anticipates future workload prediction to some extent. This would possibly
make the tool more applicable to larger data centers and hence more generalized.
Due to the complexity of such approach, the additional timeframe required to
research, design and implement such solution would be estimated at another 2
months of work.
• Simulation framework: The accuracy of the simulation framework developed
within this thesis was evaluated to be around 90%, which was deemed satisfac-
tionary to make reliable predictions about the effect of migrations. Should the
project timeframe be extended, the additional time would be surely allocated to
increase this metric, as it serves as a base for further cluster state assessment. It
is hard to estimate what could improve the accuracy of the predictions without
additional tests and research, but some recommendations would surely include:
additional testing on a cluster with no interference from other VMs (dedicated
infrastructure); trying out other types of schedulers; identifying and implementing
additional system behaviours e.g. additional CPU load from migration or differ-
entiation between migration types. The next goal to achieve would be for the
average accuracy of predictions for all scenarios to reach 95%. Additionally, it is
==PAGE:96==
11 Future works
89
important to notice that such improvement would have to be achieved without
compromising on the time eﬀiciency of the simulation framework.
Again, it is hard to estimate how much time would this effort require. A rough
estimate of the required timeframe extension is at least another 2 months of work,
solely dedicated to this purpose, which is around the time it took to implement
the version present in the current system.
• Extension of functionalities: The developed tool was designed to be config-
urable, in order to allow the user to customize the parameters and methods used
for load balancing. This is highly relevant, as there does not exist a ”one-size-
fits-all” solution that would be applicable to all clusters. Within the scope of this
thesis, the focus was shifted towards the study case company, while keeping the
remaining elements of the system as general as possible for further extension with
additional configurable parameters and methods e.g. VM selection algorithms dis-
cussed, other host detection policies or scheduler types.
Additionally, the tool
currently contains an interface to communicate with ProxMox as its sole VM
Management Server available - interfaces for additional VM Management Servers
should be also added when there is a demand for them.
Should usability be the priority when moving forward, the additional time capacity
would surely be allocated towards expanding the number of supported methods
and tools. Adding new methods, along with the necessary testing and configuration
options required, would be estimated to take an additional month of work each.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1]
Amany Abdelsamea et al. “Virtual machine consolidation challenges: A review.”
In: International Journal of Innovation and Applied Studies 8.4 (2014), page 1504.
[2]
Amany Abdelsamea et al. “Virtual machine consolidation enhancement using hy-
brid regression algorithms.” In: Egyptian Informatics Journal 18.3 (2017), pages 161–
170.
[3]
Shijimol Ambi Karthikeyan. “Introduction to azure iaas.” In: Practical Microsoft
Azure IaaS. Springer, 2018, pages 1–38.
[4]
Anton Beloglazov and Rajkumar Buyya. “Optimal online deterministic algorithms
and adaptive heuristics for energy and performance eﬀicient dynamic consolidation
of virtual machines in cloud data centers.” In: Concurrency and Computation:
Practice and Experience 24.13 (2012), pages 1397–1420.
[5]
R. Buyya Beloglazov J. Abawajy. “Energy-aware resource allocation heuristics for
eﬀicient management of data centers for cloud computing.” In: Elsevier Future
Generation Computer Systems 28 (2012), pages 755–768.
[6]
R. Buyya Beloglazov J. Abawajy. “OpenStack neat: A framework for dynamic
and energy-eﬀicient consolidation of virtual machines in OpenStack clouds.” In:
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 27 (2015), pages 1310–
1333.
[7]
Yan-Ren Chen et al. “Selection Strategy for VM Migration Method.” In: Journal
of Robotics, Networking and Artificial Life 6.1 (2019), pages 66–70.
[8]
William S Cleveland. “Robust locally weighted regression and smoothing scatter-
plots.” In: Journal of the American statistical association 74.368 (1979), pages 829–
836.
[9]
Alan Hevner and Samir Chatterjee. Design research in information systems theory
and practice. Springer, 2010.
[10]
Alan Hevner et al. “Design Science in Information Systems Research.” In: Manage-
ment Information Systems Quarterly 28 (March 2004), pages 75–.
[11]
Alan R Hevner. “A three cycle view of design science research.” In: Scandinavian
journal of information systems 19.2 (2007), page 4.
==PAGE:98==
Bibliography
91
[12]
R Kamakshi and A Sakthivel. “Dynamic scheduling of resource based on virtual
machine migration.” In: WSEAS Transactions on Computers 14 (2015), pages 224–
230.
[13]
Zoltán Ádám Mann. “Allocation of virtual machines in cloud data centers—a sur-
vey of problem models and optimization algorithms.” In: Acm Computing Surveys
(CSUR) 48.1 (2015), pages 1–34.
[14]
Zoltán Ádám Mann. “Approximability of virtual machine allocation: much harder
than bin packing.” In: (2015), pages 21–30.
[15]
Zoltán Adám Mann and Máté Szabó. “Which is the best algorithm for virtual
machine placement optimization?” In: Concurrency and Computation: Practice
and Experience 29.10 (2017), e4083.
[16]
Suhib Bani Melhem et al. “Markov prediction model for host load detection and
VM placement in live migration.” In: IEEE Access 6 (2017), pages 7190–7205.
[17]
Suhib Bani Melhem et al. “Minimizing biased VM selection in live VM migration.”
In: 2017 3rd International Conference of Cloud Computing Technologies and Ap-
plications (CloudTech). IEEE. 2017, pages 1–7.
[18]
Mohsen Amini Salehi et al. “Preemption-aware energy management in virtualized
data centers.” In: 2012 IEEE Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing.
IEEE. 2012, pages 844–851.
[19]
Xin Sui et al. “Virtual machine scheduling strategy based on machine learning
algorithms for load balancing.” In: EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications
and Networking 2019.1 (2019), pages 1–16.
[20]
Imene El-Taani et al. “Robust approach for host-overload detection based on dy-
namic safety parameter.” In: 2022 9th International Conference on Future Internet
of Things and Cloud (FiCloud). IEEE. 2022, pages 266–271.
[21]
A VermaPmapper. “Power and Migration Cost Aware Application Placement in
Virtualized SystemsProc.” In: Ninth ACM/IFIP/USENIX Int’l Conf. Middleware
(Middleware). 2008, pages 243–264.
[22]
Yuping Xing and Yongzhao Zhan. “Virtualization and cloud computing.” In: Future
wireless networks and information systems. Springer, 2012, pages 305–312.
[23]
Fengchuan Zhu, Hao Li, and Joan Lu. “A service level agreement framework of
cloud computing based on the Cloud Bank model.” In: 2012 IEEE International
Conference on Computer Science and Automation Engineering (CSAE). Volume 1.
IEEE. 2012, pages 255–259.
==PAGE:99==
An Appendix
1 2022-11-30 15:11:04 starting migration of VM 114 to node 'pve-g2n6'
(10.71.172.6)
2 2022-11-30 15:11:04 found local disk 'local-fast:vm-114-disk -0' (in
current VM config)
3 2022-11-30 15:11:04 starting VM 114 on remote node 'pve-g2n6'
4 2022-11-30 15:11:06 volume 'local-fast:vm-114-disk -0' is 'local-fast:vm
-114-disk -0' on the target
5 2022-11-30 15:11:06 start remote tunnel
6 2022-11-30 15:11:06 ssh tunnel ver 1
7 2022-11-30 15:11:06 starting storage migration
8 2022-11-30 15:11:06 scsi0: start migration to nbd:unix:/run/qemu-server
/114_nbd.migrate:exportname=drive-scsi0
9 drive mirror is starting for drive-scsi0
10 drive-scsi0: transferred 0.0 B of 32.0 GiB (0.00%) in 0s
11 drive-scsi0: transferred 873.0 MiB of 32.0 GiB (2.66%) in 1s
12 drive-scsi0: transferred 1.7 GiB of 32.0 GiB (5.46%) in 2s
13 drive-scsi0: transferred 2.6 GiB of 32.0 GiB (8.10%) in 3s
14 drive-scsi0: transferred 3.4 GiB of 32.0 GiB (10.72%) in 4s
15 drive-scsi0: transferred 4.3 GiB of 32.0 GiB (13.38%) in 5s
16 drive-scsi0: transferred 5.1 GiB of 32.0 GiB (16.06%) in 6s
17 drive-scsi0: transferred 6.0 GiB of 32.0 GiB (18.68%) in 7s
18 drive-scsi0: transferred 6.8 GiB of 32.0 GiB (21.35%) in 8s
19 drive-scsi0: transferred 7.7 GiB of 32.0 GiB (24.01%) in 9s
20 drive-scsi0: transferred 8.5 GiB of 32.0 GiB (26.68%) in 10s
21 drive-scsi0: transferred 9.4 GiB of 32.0 GiB (29.35%) in 11s
22 drive-scsi0: transferred 10.2 GiB of 32.0 GiB (31.91%) in 12s
23 drive-scsi0: transferred 11.1 GiB of 32.0 GiB (34.56%) in 13s
24 drive-scsi0: transferred 11.9 GiB of 32.0 GiB (37.19%) in 14s
25 drive-scsi0: transferred 12.7 GiB of 32.0 GiB (39.59%) in 15s
26 drive-scsi0: transferred 13.5 GiB of 32.0 GiB (42.13%) in 16s
27 drive-scsi0: transferred 14.3 GiB of 32.0 GiB (44.79%) in 17s
28 drive-scsi0: transferred 15.2 GiB of 32.0 GiB (47.47%) in 18s
29 drive-scsi0: transferred 16.0 GiB of 32.0 GiB (50.14%) in 19s
30 drive-scsi0: transferred 16.8 GiB of 32.0 GiB (52.61%) in 20s
31 drive-scsi0: transferred 17.6 GiB of 32.0 GiB (55.00%) in 21s
32 drive-scsi0: transferred 18.4 GiB of 32.0 GiB (57.53%) in 22s
33 drive-scsi0: transferred 19.3 GiB of 32.0 GiB (60.17%) in 23s
34 drive-scsi0: transferred 20.1 GiB of 32.0 GiB (62.83%) in 24s
35 drive-scsi0: transferred 20.9 GiB of 32.0 GiB (65.28%) in 25s
36 drive-scsi0: transferred 21.7 GiB of 32.0 GiB (67.75%) in 26s
37 drive-scsi0: transferred 22.5 GiB of 32.0 GiB (70.28%) in 27s
38 drive-scsi0: transferred 23.3 GiB of 32.0 GiB (72.72%) in 28s
==PAGE:100==
An Appendix
93
39 drive-scsi0: transferred 24.1 GiB of 32.0 GiB (75.16%) in 29s
40 drive-scsi0: transferred 24.9 GiB of 32.0 GiB (77.81%) in 30s
41 drive-scsi0: transferred 25.7 GiB of 32.0 GiB (80.26%) in 31s
42 drive-scsi0: transferred 26.5 GiB of 32.0 GiB (82.88%) in 32s
43 drive-scsi0: transferred 27.4 GiB of 32.0 GiB (85.50%) in 33s
44 drive-scsi0: transferred 28.2 GiB of 32.0 GiB (88.03%) in 34s
45 drive-scsi0: transferred 29.0 GiB of 32.0 GiB (90.51%) in 35s
46 drive-scsi0: transferred 29.8 GiB of 32.0 GiB (92.97%) in 36s
47 drive-scsi0: transferred 30.5 GiB of 32.0 GiB (95.47%) in 37s
48 drive-scsi0: transferred 31.3 GiB of 32.0 GiB (97.96%) in 38s
49 drive-scsi0: transferred 32.0 GiB of 32.0 GiB (100.00%) in 39s, ready
50 all 'mirror' jobs are ready
51 2022-11-30 15:11:45 starting online/live migration on unix:/run/qemu-
server/114.migrate
52 2022-11-30 15:11:45 set migration capabilities
53 2022-11-30 15:11:45 migration downtime limit: 100 ms
54 2022-11-30 15:11:45 migration cachesize: 1.0 GiB
55 2022-11-30 15:11:45 set migration parameters
56 2022-11-30 15:11:45 start migrate command to unix:/run/qemu-server/114.
migrate
57 2022-11-30 15:11:46 migration active, transferred 681.4 MiB of 8.0 GiB VM-
state, 864.2 MiB/s
58 2022-11-30 15:11:47 average migration speed: 4.0 GiB/s - downtime 208 ms
59 2022-11-30 15:11:47 migration status: completed
60 all 'mirror' jobs are ready
61 drive-scsi0: Completing block job_id...
62 drive-scsi0: Completed successfully.
63 drive-scsi0: mirror -job finished
64 2022-11-30 15:11:48 stopping NBD storage migration server on target.
65
Logical volume "vm-114-disk -0" successfully removed
66 2022-11-30 15:11:52 migration finished successfully (duration 00:00:48)
67 TASK OK
Listing 1: Migration log
1 2023-02-05 14:13:59,521 INFO Application started
2 2023-02-05 14:14:01,178 INFO Started cluster balancing
3 2023-02-05 14:20:40,695 INFO Iteration: 0 Cost decrease: 0.88%. Current
cost: 112.
4 2023-02-05 14:20:40,695 INFO Iteration performed in --- 399.517 seconds
---
5 2023-02-05 14:30:13,403 INFO Iteration: 1 Cost decrease: 33.04%. Current
cost: 75.
6 2023-02-05 14:30:13,403 INFO Iteration performed in --- 572.707 seconds
---
7 2023-02-05 14:41:25,933 INFO Iteration: 2 Cost decrease: 4.0%. Current
cost: 72.
8 2023-02-05 14:41:25,949 INFO Iteration performed in --- 672.546 seconds
---
9 2023-02-05 14:49:08,413 INFO Iteration: 3 Cost decrease: 1.39%. Current
cost: 71.
10 2023-02-05 14:49:08,423 INFO Iteration performed in --- 462.474 seconds
---
==PAGE:101==
An Appendix
94
11 2023-02-05 14:56:01,040 INFO Iteration: 4 Cost decrease: 0.0%. Current
cost: 71.
12 2023-02-05 14:56:01,055 INFO Iteration performed in --- 412.633 seconds
---
13 2023-02-05 14:56:01,055 INFO [TEST] Successfully migrated VM 130 from node
DK-C-BLR-PMX3 to DK-C-BLR-PMX6. Score: 113 --> 112 (0.88% decrease)
14 2023-02-05 14:56:01,055 INFO [TEST] Successfully migrated VM 133 from node
DK-C-BLR-PMX1 to DK-C-BLR-PMX6. Score: 112 --> 75 (33.04% decrease)
15 2023-02-05 14:56:01,055 INFO [TEST] Successfully migrated VM 148 from node
DK-C-BLR-PMX6 to DK-C-BLR-PMX3. Score: 75 --> 72 (4.0% decrease)
16 2023-02-05 14:56:01,055 INFO [TEST] Successfully migrated VM 154 from node
DK-C-BLR-PMX3 to DK-C-BLR-PMX6. Score: 72 --> 71 (1.39% decrease)
Listing 2: Load balancer application log
