==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
End-to-end machine learning project on
classification of EEG signals of depressed
patients
Bekarys Gabdrakhimov
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
End-to-end machine learning project on classification
of EEG signals of depressed patients
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Bekarys Gabdrakhimov
Main supervisor:
Sadasivan Puthusserypady
Associate Professor
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Co-supervisors:
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen
Postdoc
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Cihan Uyanik
Ph.D. Student
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345B, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Depression is a common mental disorder affecting the lives of 280 million people and
increasing rates of suicidal deaths. The current methods of diagnosis of depression
are subjective, time-consuming, expensive, and inaccurate because depression has
heterogeneous symptoms that overlap with other disorders. Thus, this study’s main
aim is to propose an automatic diagnosis approach based on a non-invasive brain-
imaging technique called Electroencephalography (EEG).
This study includes two datasets: Dataset 1 is a private dataset containing a
sample of 46 participants (23 MDD and 23 Control), and Dataset 2 is a public dataset
containing a sample of 64 participants (34 MDD and 30 Control). Dataset 2 was
used to test the generalization of models trained on Dataset 1. Both datasets were
preprocessed in the same way to remove noise, and 7 linear and non-linear features
were extracted for classification. Several machine learning and deep learning models
were used. Machine learning models include k-NN, SVM, random forest, XGBoost
and an ensemble of those models combined using Dempster-Shafer theory, whereas,
for deep learning, the convolutional neural networks were used. The research also
includes the study on the effect of various hyperparameters, in particular channel
numbers, feature selection methods, number of features selected, and segmentation
length, on the model performance.
The results of the study showed that selecting more channels results in better
performance and insignificance of segmentation length. The best results were obtained
with an ensemble model using all 31 EEG channels with a 10-second segmentation
length and genetic algorithm, achieving an accuracy of 99.62%. Additionally, best
MLOps practices were followed, including reproducibility, version control, deployment,
and experiment logging. The models were deployed as an accessible web service, and
model predictions can be retrieved by sending an HTTP request. This proves the
potential of integrating machine learning models into the clinical environment.
Overall, this study demonstrates the effectiveness of EEG-based depression diag-
nosis using machine learning techniques, with an ability to generalize on varying EEG
data acquisition settings. Additionally, a better understanding of the effect of channel
numbers, feature selection methods, and segmentation lengths on model performance
were achieved.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Health Technology at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Kongens Lyngby, January 31, 2023
Bekarys Gabdrakhimov
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Profes-
sor Sadasivan Puthusserypady and co-supervisors Nicki Skafte and Cihan Uyanik for
their inspiration, guidance and constructive feedback throughout my thesis. I would
also like to thank Jonas Lynge, Rosa Louise and Amy Dempster for their discussions,
comments and advice, especially during our weekly meeting. Last and most impor-
tantly, I would also like to thank my parents, sister and my girlfriend, Aidana, for
their love, support and understanding.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis objectives and research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Human brain physiology
5
2.1
Human brain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Electroencephalography (EEG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
How depression affects brain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Literature review
13
3.1
Selection method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Machine learning based approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Deep learning based approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Methods
17
4.1
Proposed methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Dataset description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.6
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.7
Machine Learning Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Results
37
5.1
Machine learning method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Deep learning method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.3
Generalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Discussion
47
6.1
Future research directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Conclusion
51
A
An Appendix
53
A.1 Information about study participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.2 Example EEG recordings of excluded subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A.3 Generalization plots for other cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.4 Plots for CNN model for 19 channel data classification . . . . . . . . .
57
A.5 Link to a source code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.6 Feature importance analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Bibliography
61
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Problem statement
Major depressive disorder (MDD, also known as clinical or unipolar depression) is a
prevalent mental disorder affecting the lives of people of all genders and ages. The
symptoms of depression include feelings of sadness, despair, tiredness, lack of interest
in everyday activities, sleep disturbance, and slowed thinking. Further progression
of a disease may lead to acts of self-harm, in severe cases resulting in a suicide.
According to World Health Organization, approximately 280 million people worldwide
are suffering from depression, and it is responsible for over 700,000 deaths annually,
making depression the primary cause of death among people of the age group between
15 and 19 years old [1, 2]. Such consequences could have been avoided if depression
had been detected and treated in an early stage.
Currently, the diagnosis of MDD is based on psychiatric interviews conducted by
a doctor. The most popular diagnosing methods are the 10th revision of the Interna-
tional Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) developed by WHO [3] and the 5th revision
of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) developed by
the American Psychiatric Association (APA) [4]. Also, screening methods such as
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale
(CES-D), and Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D) are widely used as well.
However, because these diagnosis and severity scaling methods are mainly based on
interviews, they are subjective, and the effectiveness varies depending on the cooper-
ation from the patient and doctor. Also, depression symptoms are complex and vary
widely between people, which impedes its diagnosis. According to Østergaard et al.
[5], more than 1400 possible combinations of symptoms can result in the diagnosis
of MDD, and also, symptoms overlap with other similar disorders and syndromes.
Due to all of these complications, around 50% of all depressed patients are remained
untreated [6].
Therefore, to make the diagnosis of depression low-cost, effective, objective, and
reliable, researchers have been looking into physiological data to discover biomarkers
of MDD. There are various physiological measurement tools, such as functional mag-
netic resonance imaging (fMRI), electroencephalogram (EEG), and positron emission
tomography (PET), that have been used to diagnose depression [7, 8, 9]. EEG mea-
sures the electrical activity generated by the synchronized activity of thousands of
neurons via electrodes placed on the scalp surface. Out of mentioned measurement
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
tools, EEG has clear advantages since it does not involve invasive procedures, is easy
to administer, is tolerated well, and has a relatively low cost.
A lot of research has been done to diagnose depression, and studies report that
MDD and healthy subjects have differences in their brain activity [10, 11]. These
differences include amplitude, entropy, power in frequency bands, left and right hemi-
spheres, non-linear features, and functional connectivity between brain regions. Also,
with the advent of machine learning and deep learning techniques, it has been possible
to differentiate depressed and healthy patients accurately [12, 13, 14].
Even though current studies present ways to differentiate patients accurately, they
lack in three perspectives: generalization, reproducibility, and accessibility. For most
of the papers, the trained model is tested on the same dataset. However, there are
many other variables during data acquisition that can affect the model performance,
such as sampling frequency, number of electrodes, montage used, etc. Therefore, to
make models generalizable and accessible, they need to perform well on other datasets
as well. Also, many hyperparameters are required during model preprocessing and
training processes for reproducing the same results. These hyperparameters include
filter parameters, segmentation length, EEG channels selected, parameters for specific
artefact removal techniques, machine learning, and deep learning model parameters
(learning rate, data split ratio, batch size, activation function, etc.). Not properly
reporting these values makes reproducing and building on top of the results harder.
Furthermore, the effect of these values on the model performance should be tested
to propose a standard way of designing depression diagnosis methods. In addition,
to facilitate the further integration of the model into the clinical environment, easy
access point to the model should be provided for doctors or patients through a web
app or executable application. Although, most papers do not offer that.
1.2
Thesis objectives and research questions
The main objective of this thesis is to develop an accessible, generalizable and repro-
ducible machine learning based automatic depression diagnosis method. The following
are the main research questions:
• Can we accurately classify depressed and healthy patients?
In the medical domain, it is essential not only to have high accuracy but also
other performance metrics that need to be considered. Because misclassification
could result in healthy patients receiving treatment with major side effects and
further progression of symptoms for depressed patients. Thus, the main focus
of this work will be to develop a good-performing model with good generalization
ability.
• How do hyperparameters (number of channels, features, feature selection method,
segmentation length) affect the classification results?
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Thesis Outline
3
In the available literature, there are no agreed standards on how many and which
channels to use, which features to extract, and how long should the segmentation
length be. Thus, in this work effect of various hyperparameters on the model
performance will be extensively tested.
• How do deep learning models compare to classical machine learning models?
The accuracy that can be achieved by machine learning and deep learning models
vary significantly, and it is not obvious which method should be opted for. These
two methods will be compared not only in terms of accuracy but also in terms
of generalization, speed and simplicity.
• Can MLOps practices help in achieving reproducibility, version control, and
accessibility?
Can we overcome the challenges of turning a concept into a product by using
best MLOps practices. Based on those findings possibility of productionalization
of these models into the healthcare environment will be accessed.
In order to answer the above research questions, the following objectives are set
for the thesis:
• Preprocess the EEG data to make it suitable for modelling.
• Research on most important features, extract and select those features.
• Build machine learning and deep learning models for classifying depressed and
healthy patients.
• Use best MLOps practices for reproducibility, experiment tracking and version
control.
• Create an interface for easy access to model results and visualizations.
• Compare the effect of various parameters (channels, epoch length, features and
feature selectors) on final model performance
1.3
Thesis Outline
This thesis consists of 7 chapters. The first chapter introduces the main challenges
with current depression diagnosis methods, the motivation behind the project, and
the main goals.
Chapter 2 provides the necessary theoretical background on the physiology of
the brain, EEG, and depression.
Chapter 3 presents a review of literature related to the detection of MDD and
literature that has inspired the modelling of this work. Selection criteria for papers
will be given with an overview of machine learning and deep learning related papers.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Chapter 4 presents the overall methodology for ML and DL models and out-
lines the methods used for data preprocessing, feature extraction, feature selection,
machine learning models, and deep learning model with theoretical background and
reasoning why they were chosen. Also, description of the datasets will be provided
and theory behind each feature will be given.
Chapter 5 presents the modelling results for ML and DL models. The results
for ML models will be given with various model accuracy metrics depending on the
channel numbers, segment length and feature selection method. Also, generalization
tests with Dataset 2 will be given and deployed models will be presented.
Chapter 6 interprets and discusses the results obtained in the previous chapter,
followed by future research directions.
Chapter 7 concludes the thesis and reflects on the achievement of goals.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Human brain
physiology
This chapter intends to explain general concepts and background on the human brain
and electroencephalography. Section 2.1 presents the structure of the brain, functions
and neural activity contributing to EEG measurement. Section 2.2 gives a description
of the basic concepts of EEG, electrode placement standards and montage types.
Finally, section 2.3 talks about effect of depression on the brain and how those changes
can be detected with EEG.
2.1
Human brain
The brain is the most complex organ in the human body. The average adult brain
weighs around 1,400 grams and consists mainly of fat (60%) and combinations of
water, protein, carbohydrates, and salts [15]. Below structure of the brain and neurons
will be explained with emphasis on its effect on EEG measurements.
2.1.1
Brain structure
Anatomically, the human brain consists of the cerebrum, cerebellum, and brainstem
and the cerebrum is further divided into four lobes as illustrated in Fig. 2.1.
Cerebrum.
The cerebrum is the largest part of the brain and is associated
with functions such as movement, speech, reasoning, vision, and hearing. It consists
of the right and left hemispheres, each controlling the opposite sides of the body.
Hemispheres are divided into five lobes: frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal
[16].
• Frontal lobe is the largest lobe, located directly behind the forehead. It is
responsible for speech, emotions, movement, planning, and intelligence.
• Parietal lobe is the middle part of the brain and is involved in speech inter-
pretation, sense of touch, pain, and spatial perception.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Human brain physiology
(a) Three main brain parts
(b) location of the lobes in cerebrum
Figure 2.1: Three main brain parts (a) and four lobes located on cerebrum [15]
• Occipital lobe is the back part of the brain and manages vision.
• Temporal lobe is located at the sides and is responsible for memory and
hearing.
Cerebellum. The cerebellum is located under the cerebrum at the back of the
head and also has two hemispheres. Despite its size, it holds more than half of all
the neurons in the human body. It is responsible for functions such as coordination
of muscle movement, maintaining posture, and balance [15].
Brainstem. The brainstem connects the cerebrum and cerebellum to the spinal
cord, transmitting information between the brain and the body.
It controls vital
functions such as breathing, heart rate, sleep, body temperature, and blood pressure.
2.1.2
Neurophysiology
The human brain consists of around 100 billion neurons that are responsible for
receiving sensory input from the environment, sending motor commands to muscles,
and transmitting electrical signals between each other [18]. It has three main parts: a
soma (cell body), an axon, and a dendrite. The soma contains a nucleus that controls
cell activity. The axon carries messages from the cell. The dendrites extend from
the soma and receive messages from other neurons. A synapse is a contact point
between neurons where neurons pass information between each other. It is formed at
the connection points between axons and dendrites.
When neurons communicate with each other, the neuron sends an electrical im-
pulse (called an action potential) along its axon. Once this impulse reaches the end
of an axon, it leads to a release of neurotransmitters that diffuse across the synapse
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Electroencephalography (EEG)
7
Figure 2.2: Structure of a neuron [17].
and can be either excitatory or inhibitory.
Excitatory neurotransmitters such as
glutamine cause an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) and receiving (post-
synaptic) neuron is more likely to fire an action potential and ’pass’ the message to
the next neuron. Inhibitory neurotransmitters, such as GABA (gamma-Aminobutyric
acid), cause an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) and the postsynaptic neuron
is less likely to fire an action potential [19]. Summation of these EPSP and IPSP are
recorded by EEG electrodes [20]. In the following section, background information
on EEG will be given.
2.2
Electroencephalography (EEG)
Electroencephalography (EEG) is a non-invasive method to measure the electrical
activity of the brain by small metal discs (electrodes) placed on the scalp. Carlo
Matteucci and Emil Du Bois-Reymond were the first to study and document the elec-
trical signals emitted from muscle nerves using a galvanometer, thereby establishing
the field of neurophysiology [21]. However, in 1875, Richard Caton, a scientist from
Liverpool, England, was the first to record brain activity in the form of electrical
signals. He used a galvanometer and placed two electrodes over the scalp of a human
subject to measure the brain’s electrical activity [21].
Since then, EEG has been
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Human brain physiology
employed to investigate various conditions such as seizure disorders, brain tumours,
head injuries, sleep disorders, dementia, mental disorders, etc.
2.2.1
Electrode placement
The standard 10-20 system was recommended by the International Federation of
Societies for Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology [22]. This system
involves placing 21 electrodes on the scalp, as shown in Fig. 2.3a. The numbers
10 and 20 represent the distance between electrodes in the percentage of the total
distance between nasion and inion or between preauricular points [21].
The odd-
numbered electrodes are placed on the left side of the head, and the even-numbered
electrodes are placed on the right side. Additional electrodes may be added by evenly
distributing them between the existing electrodes. For example, the C1 electrode
would be placed between the C3 and Cz electrodes. The letters on each electrode’s
name represent the area of the brain that it is measuring: Fp (prefrontal), F (frontal),
T (temporal), P (parietal), O (occipital), and C (central). It is worth noting that
the “C” electrodes do not specifically measure activity from the “central lobe” of the
brain but rather can pick up a combination of activity from the frontal, temporal, and
parietal-occipital areas depending on the individual. The “Z” electrodes are placed
on the midline plane of the skull and are mostly used as reference points.
There are higher resolution systems for positioning electrodes, such as the 10-
10 [25] and 10-5 systems [26]. These systems use additional electrodes between the
electrodes of the standard 10-20 system to increase the electrode array’s density and
improve the measurement spatial resolution.
These systems are typically used in
research settings rather than in clinical practice because of the additional time and
effort required. The EEG data considered in this work uses 10-10 (Dataset 1) and
10-20 (Dataset 2) systems.
EEG measures the voltage difference between pairs of electrodes using a differen-
tial amplifier. The arrangement of channels (pairs of electrodes) is called a montage.
Some common montages include:
• Bipolar montage: Each electrode’s voltage is compared to the adjacent elec-
trode. There are various types of bipolar montage, but one of the most common
types is the double banana montage, in which each electrode is linked to the
one behind it to form two chains of electrodes: an outside temporal chain (Fp2-
F8-T4-T6-O2) and an inside parasagittal chain (Fp2-F4-C4-P4-O2). The “z”
electrodes also form a small central chain (Fz-Cz-Pz) [27].
• Referential montage: In this case, one electrode is used as a reference elec-
trode. There are various reference electrode placements: vertex (Cz), linked
ear, linked mastoids, a tip of the nose, etc.
• Average reference montage: The average activity of all the electrodes is
used as a reference for each channel. Some electrodes, such as Fp1 and Fp2, are
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Electroencephalography (EEG)
9
(a) 10-20 electrode placement system [23].
(b) 10-10 electrode placement system [23].
(c) EEG cap on head [24].
Figure 2.3: The standard (a) 10-20 and (b) 10-10 electrode placement systems and (c)
example of an EEG cap on head.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Human brain physiology
often excluded from the average to reduce the effect of eye movement artefacts
[28].
• Laplacian montage: Uses an average of surrounding electrodes (usually 4) as
a reference electrode. For example, for F4, the reference would be the average
of Fp2, C4, Fz and F8.
Each montage type has its own advantages and disadvantages. Laplacian montage
may be used to study the activity of highly localized brain regions, while a bipolar
montage may be used to compare the activity of different brain regions. An average
reference montage minimizes the effect of artefacts on a single electrode more than
a referential montage because it averages the activity of all electrodes. Thus, the
montage type should be selected based on specific research or clinical application.
2.2.2
EEG frequency bands
It has been found that energy in EEG signals is concentrated in specific frequency
bands depending on the mental state and cognitive processes that the subject is
undergoing. There are five main EEG frequency bands:
• Delta waves (0.5-4 Hz) are typically seen in deep sleep and may also be present
in the waking state.
• Theta waves (4-8 Hz) are often associated with drowsiness, deep meditation or
relaxed states.
• Alpha waves (8-16 Hz) are believed to indicate relaxed awareness without any
attention or concentration.
• Beta waves (16-32 Hz) are typically observed when a person is actively thinking
and focused and are thought to be involved in higher cognitive functions such
as problem-solving and decision-making.
• Gamma waves (32-100 Hz) are usually associated with intense concentration
and focus. It has a low amplitude and rarely occurs.
2.3
How depression affects brain
Depression is a mental health disorder characterized by persistent feelings of sadness,
hopelessness, and a lack of motivation or pleasure in daily activities.
It can also
cause various physical and cognitive symptoms, including changes in sleep patterns,
appetite, and energy levels.
Research has shown that depression can have a number of effects on the brain, in-
cluding structural and functional changes. For instance, a study found that the size of
specific brain regions can decrease for individuals with depression [29]. Also, another
==PAGE:21==
2.3 How depression affects brain
11
study has found that depression is associated with low levels of certain neurotransmit-
ters such as serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine [30]. Serotonin is involved in the
regulation of mood, sleep, and appetite. Norepinephrine regulates mood, attention,
and arousal, whereas dopamine is involved with motivation, memory and concentra-
tion. Low levels of those neurotransmitters could alter their functions, which are
consistent with symptoms of depression.
With developments in non-invasive EEG, it was shown that depression is associ-
ated with changes in EEG activity. Specifically, power in gamma and beta bands may
have good diagnostic capabilities as several studies have discovered increased activity
in those bands [31, 32, 33]. Also, signal-based features that quantify EEG signals’
characteristics may indicate depression. For example, a higher fractal dimension for
depressed patients was observed in two studies [10, 34]. Also, depressed subjects tend
to have lower detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) [35, 10].
Overall, the effects of depression on the brain are complex and not fully inves-
tigated, and more research is needed to fully understand this disorder’s underlying
neural mechanisms. But, it is clear that depression affects the brain and that those
changes can be detected using EEG.
==PAGE:22==
12
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Literature review
This chapter presents relevant and state-of-the-art research in the field of automatic
depression detection. First, a description of how the papers were selected is provided
with detailed inclusion and exclusion criteria. Afterwards, literature using machine
learning methods and deep learning methods will be discussed separately, consider-
ing data preprocessing, feature extraction, selection, and model performance results.
Table 3.1 provides a summary of all machine learning and deep learning based papers
selected for this literature review.
3.1
Selection method
For the review, papers related to automatic depression detection written in English
and published after 2012 were selected. The search for literature was performed on
IEEE Xplore, Scopus, and Science Direct databases using the following key search
terms: ”Depression”, ”EEG” or ”Electroencephalography”, ”Deep Learning” or ”Ma-
chine Learning.” These search criteria resulted in 105 papers and after the removal
of duplicates, studies that focus on other disorders than MDD, usage of other phys-
iological measurement tools (fMRI, PET, etc.), or cerebral activity alteration with
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) or transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS) 16 papers were left.
3.2
Machine learning based approach
Based on the findings, a large number of studies use machine learning approaches for
the diagnosis of depression. Hosseinifard et al. uses EEG signals from 19 channel
and have preprocessed it with bandpass (0.5-70 Hz), notch (50 Hz) filters, and arte-
facts were removed by visual inspection [36]. The authors have used power of four
bands and non-linear features (DFA, Higuchi fractal dimension (HFD), correlation
dimension, and Lyapunov exponent (LE)). They suggest that the usage of non-linear
features, especially the inclusion of fractal dimension, increases the accuracy signifi-
cantly compared to other features. Whereas Mahato et al. have achieved an accuracy
of 96.02% by using a combination of linear (band power, paired and hemispheric asym-
metry) and non-linear features (sample entropy (SE) and DFA) [37]. In their study,
authors filter signals from 6 channels located in the temporal region, remove the
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Literature review
artefacts with ICA and conclude that hemispheric asymmetry, band power in higher
frequencies, and DFA are the most significant features.
Zhu et al. [38] also used both linear and non-linear features and claimed that
features extracted from alpha and gamma bands are strongly related to the depression
state. On the other hand, Mohammadi et al. [39] uses only non-linear features and
claims that Katz fractal dimension has a better capability for depression prediction,
whereas [40] claims that Hjorth mobility and mean frequency parameters extracted
from the alpha band and from the frontal region has a good potential for subject
differentiation. The effectiveness of frontal electrodes was also proven in [41], where
classification is done with three frontal electrodes. The paper also compares various
segmentation lengths and the effect of segments with and without overlap.
The
authors come to the conclusion that longer segment length is preferred only when a
full band (1-40 Hz) power is used as a feature and that there is no significant difference
between overlapping and non-overlapping segments.
To reduce the computational time for the model, make it more interpretable,
and sometimes improve the accuracy of the model, feature selection techniques are
employed in various studies. Genetic Algorithm (GA) is used in [36], and the authors
are able to significantly increase model performance with it compared to other feature
selection methods. In [42], ANOVA is adopted for feature selection, whereas [43] has
used the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient.
Li et al.
[44] propose using a two-stage
feature selection method that combines Pearson correlation coeﬀicient (PCC) and
recursive feature elimination (RFE) in order to reduce the feature space significantly.
[37] has used the ReliefF algorithm that selects features that can differentiate samples
that are close to each other in Manhattan distance.
Overall, several authors have achieved more accurate results with SVM [37, 39, 38,
43, 44, 45]. Whereas [36] have used logistic regression for classifying depressed and
normal subjects. Seal et al. [42], by comparing DT, RF, NB, KNN, SVM, MLP, and
XGBoost, have achieved the highest accuracy with the XGBoost model. Reference
[46] has proposed an enhanced KNN that uses GA to scale the weights of important
or redundant features.
3.3
Deep learning based approach
Traditional machine learning techniques usually have poor performance and are worse
in generalization than deep learning models. Machine learning methods also require
complex and time-consuming feature extraction step. Thus, deep learning models
have been widely used in recent years. The literature shows that the most popular
deep learning models are CNN, LSTM, or their combination because they offer an end-
to-end approach with no feature engineering. Sandheep et al. [47] used a deep learning
structure consisting of 1 convolutional, 1 max-pooling, and three fully connected
layers achieving an accuracy of 99.31%.
Mumtaz et al.
[48] have compared the
CNN model with the CNN-LSTM model and have achieved higher accuracy with
the CNN model (98.32%). [49] has proposed DepHNN (Depression Hybrid Neural
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Deep learning based approach
15
Network) that uses CNN and LSTM and can attain an accuracy of 99.1%. All three
of these works use two dimensional EEG signal (time in the x-axis and channels in
the y-axis) as input to the model.
Whereas, [50] uses Non-Uniform Fast Fourier
Transform (NFFT) to generate the spectrogram for Fp1 and Fp2 channels and input
two vertically stacked spectrograms to a CNN to acquire an accuracy of 87.5%. On
the other hand, [51] uses the position of electrodes to reflect the spatial information
and extracts θ, α, β bands to form an image with three channels. The paper also
compares this method with traditional SVM and LSTM models but achieves the
highest accuracy (92%) with a CNN model.
It is interesting to note that, in some of the articles minimal noise or artefact
removal is applied. For example, in the article [47], where CNN is used to classify
EEG signals, the only preprocessing step used is Z-normalization as it is claimed
that deep neural networks can distinguish between signal and noise inherently, and
learn important underlying patterns themselves. Wang et al. [51] filters (bandpass,
notch) the signals but does not remove artefacts, and in the method proposed by
Kwon et al. [50], no preprocessing is done to the raw signal. However, in work by
Mumtaz et al. [48], before feeding data to the model, artefacts were removed using the
multiple source eye correction (MSEC) method implemented in BESA software [52].
Also, most of the literature available use the EEG signal as the input to the model,
whereas [50] uses Fourier transform and performs classification based on spectrogram.
According to findings from the literature review, bandpass, notch filter, and ICA
is frequently used for prepossessing. Authors can achieve good results by using both
linear and non-linear features and according to papers, some features (band power,
DFA, KFD, Hjorth parameters, etc.) seem to be more important compared to others.
In this work combination of both linear and non-linear features will be used. In terms
of models, various models can achieve high accuracy for traditional machine learning
models, and out of deep learning models, CNN seems to be one of the most popular
and accurate choices.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Literature review
Table 3.1: Overview of papers
Ref.
# of subjects
Pre-processing
Features
Feature selection
Model
Accuracy
[36]
45 MDD
45 HC
bandpass, notch,
visual inspection
band power, DFA, HFD,
FD, LE
GA
LR
83.3%
[37]
24 MDD
20 HC
bandpass,
CAR, ICA
Band Power,
Interhemispheric
and Paired Assymetry
SE,DFA
ReliefF
SVM
96.02%
[42]
15 MDD
18 HC
bandpass,
notch, ICA
statistical features
(mean, std, skewness, etc.)
mobility, complexity
ShE, alpha asymmetry
ANOVA
XGBoost
87%
[40]
42 MDD
42 HC
High, lowpass, ICA
band power, relative
band power, HjComp
skewness, var, ShE, etc.
NCA
Kernel NB
91.8%
[39]
60 MDD
High, lowpass, ICA
FuzzyEn, KFD, FFD
-
SVM
87.5%
[38]
-
bandpass, FastICA
10 linear(Power, Var, etc.)
12 non-linear(AE, LZC, etc.)
BF
SVM
83.42%
[43]
34 MDD
30 HC
ICA
Absolute power, band power,
Interhemispheric Asymmetry
PCC
SVM
82%
[44]
92
part.
Standardization
β/α, rhythm
features
PCC, RFE
SVM
98.95%
[46]
34 MDD
30 HC
Wavelet-based de-noising
Band power, AE, SE
GA
E-KNN
98.44%
[45]
30 MDD
30 HC
bandpass filter, ICA
Band power, Inter-
Hemispheric Asymmetry
MCFS
SVM
88.33%
[41]
81 MDD
89 HC
-
Band power, entropy, correlation
dimension, C0 complexity
-
SVM
83.07%
[47]
30 MDD
30 HC
Z-score normalization
EEG signals
-
CNN
99.31%
[51]
16 MDD
16 HC
bandpass, notch filter
brain map
-
CNN
92%
[50]
34 MDD
30 HC
-
Fourier transform
-
CNN
87.5%
[48]
33 MDD
30 HC
MSEC
EEG signals
-
CNN
98.32%
[49]
21 MDD
24 HC
ICA
EEG signal
-
CNN-LSTM
99.1%
DFA: detrended fluctuation analysis, HFD: Higuchi fractal dimension, FD: fractal dimension, LE: Lyapunov expo-
nent, GA: genetic algorithm, LR: logistic regression, CAR: common average referencing, ICA: Independent Com-
ponent Analysis, SE: sample entropy, SVM: support vector machine, ShE: Shannon entropy, HjComp: Hjort com-
plexity, KFD: Katz fractal dimension, FFD: fuzzy fractal dimension, AE: approximate entropy, LZC: Lempel-Ziv
complexity, BF: BestFirst, PCC: Pearson’s correlation coeﬀicient, RFE: Recursive Feature Elimination, NCA: Neigh-
borhood component analysis, NB: Naive Bayes, MCFS: Multi-Cluster Feature Selection, MSEC: multiple source eye
correction, LSTM: Long short-term memory
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
In this chapter, the proposed methodology will be presented with a description of
each stage. First, a summary of the methodology will be given with a visual block
diagram presentation.
Afterwards, a description of each stage including datasets,
preprocessing, feature extraction and selection, modelling, and MLOps practices will
be given.
4.1
Proposed methodology
By analyzing the available literature two methodologies shown in Fig. 4.1 were pro-
posed. The pipeline for machine learning based classification consists of 5 stages. The
first stage is data acquisition where the EEG data is gathered from healthy control
or subjects diagnosed with MDD in eyes closed or open state. The second stage is
preprocessing where physiological and non-physiological noise is removed from the
data. In the feature extraction stage, linear and non-linear features are extracted
from the preprocessed signal. In the next step, relevant features are selected from
the feature set to reduce the dimensionality. In the last stage, various classification
algorithms are trained and tested to determine the model’s accuracy.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: Block diagram of the proposed methodology for (a) machine learning
and (b) deep learning models
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Methods
The pipeline for the deep learning model consists of only 3 stages.
The deep
learning model used is a convolutional neural network and this model is able to
automatically extract features from data, learn and classify them. Thus, there is no
need for manual feature extraction and selection.
4.2
Dataset description
In this thesis, two datasets were included to prove the generalization ability of the
methodology. Below, a detailed description of data acquisition steps and information
about participants will be provided.
4.2.1
Dataset 1
Dataset 1 is a private dataset provided by Dr Abul Hassan, NED University of En-
gineering and Technology, Pakistan. The data contains resting-state EEG data ob-
tained from 46 participants (23 healthy and 23 depressive).
All participants are
between the ages of 20 and 35, and none have a self-reported neurological disease
history. EEG data were acquired for 2 minutes with 1-minute breaks between eyes
open and eyes closed state recordings. For measuring 31 channel Mitsar NVX-52 with
Ref 31 A1A2 ear linked montage is used. The sampling rate is 500 Hz.
The dataset contains recordings before and after tDCS treatment, but the data
after the treatment was not used as the main focus of this work is a diagnosis of
MDD. Also, some of the data were ignored due to high noise levels. An overview of
the excluded subject is given in Appendix A.1 and plots of some of the noisy EEG
recordings is given in Appendix A.2.
For scoring the depression level Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Scale - 21 Items
(DASS-21) questionnaire was used. It consists of 5 severity labels: normal (0 – 9),
mild (10 – 13), moderate (14 – 20), severe (21 – 27), and extremely severe (28 –
42). For this classification task, subjects with normal severity labels are considered
healthy, and subjects with a severity scale of moderate, severe, and extremely se-
vere are considered depressed. The depression score of each subject with additional
information is provided in Appendix A.1.
4.2.2
Dataset 2
In order to test the generalization ability of the models, another source of a dataset,
referred to as Dataset 2, was included in this work [53]. This dataset is a publicly
available data1, collected with 19 electro-gel sensors referenced with Linked Ear (LE)
and placed according to 10-20 international standard [22].
The data is collected from 34 MDD subjects (17 males and 17 females, mean age =
40.3 ±12.9) and 30 healthy controls (21 males and 9 females, mean age = 38.3±15.6).
1https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/EEG_Data_New/4244171
==PAGE:29==
4.3 Preprocessing
19
The recruitment of participants was conducted according to the experiment design
approved by the human ethics committee of the Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia
(HUSM), Kelantan, Malaysia, and all participants signed the consent form. MDD
patients were diagnosed using Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-IV (DSM-IV) [54].
The EEG data were acquired in eyes open (EO) and eyes closed (EC) states for 5
minutes each. The dataset also contains 10-minute ERP data involving a 3-stimulus
visual oddball task [55], but ERP data was not used in this work. The sampling rate
is 256 Hz.
4.3
Preprocessing
The raw EEG signal is contaminated with physiological artefacts (eye blinks and
movements, muscle or body movements, heartbeats, etc.) and non-physiological arte-
facts (line noise, electrode placement, device error, etc.).
To increase the model
classification accuracy on underlying EEG signals, removing those artefacts is crucial.
The preprocessing steps in this methodology consist of filtering, artefact removal with
ICA, and segmentation.
4.3.1
Filtering
EEG data is usually contaminated with low-frequency noise coming from head move-
ment, electrode wires, and scalp perspiration.
Also, high-frequency noise coming
from electromagnetic interference and muscle contractions. This noise is picked up
by human EEG consisting of the following frequency bands: delta (0.5–4 Hz), theta
(4–8 Hz), alpha (8–16 Hz), beta (16–32 Hz), and gamma-band oscillations (>32 Hz).
Gamma band activity can be present in the frequency range of 32 to 200 Hz, but in
this work, low gamma band (32-70 Hz) oscillations are considered [56]. To get rid of
these artefacts, band-pass and notch filters were used.
There are two major classes of digital filters: Infinite impulse response (IIR) and
Finite impulse response (FIR). As their names suggest, FIR filters have an impulse
response of finite length, whereas IIR filters have an impulse response of infinite
length that is achieved by its feedback structure. The main advantages of IIR filters
over FIR filters are speed and the ability to achieve sharper roll-off compared to FIR
filters for the same filter order [57]. The application of a filter can introduce a time
delay and phase distortion. To eliminate that filter can be applied twice in forward
and backward directions. Thus, for bandpass filtering, forward-backward (zero-phase)
IIR (Chebyshev type II) filter was used with a passband between 0.5 and 70 Hz. The
Chebyshev type II filter has ripples in the stopband compared to the Chebyshev type
I filter, which has ripples in the passband. Distortion of the original EEG signal in
the passband should be avoided. Thus, the Chebyshev type II filter was opted for.
EEG data is usually exposed to power line noise at 50 or 60 Hz, depending on
the location. To remove the line noise, a notch filter at 50 Hz was used (Hamming
window).
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Methods
0
50
100
150
200
250
−120
−100
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
20
Raw
Filtered
Frequency (Hz)
μV²/Hz (dB)
Figure 4.2: Power spectral density plot of raw (black) and filtered (notch+bandpass)
EEG signal (red). The dashed line is drawn at 70 Hz. The results are shown for
Subject 4 with eye closed state and before treatment.
Fig. 4.2 shows the power spectral density of raw and filtered EEG signals. The
filter is not distorting the original signal in the passband and has a sharp roll-off. It
also should be noted that the raw EEG signal was already bandstop filtered at 50 Hz,
thus the effect of notch filter can not be observed from Fig. 4.2.
4.3.2
Artefact removal with ICA
Filtering is not enough to eliminate all artefacts. EEG data is still contaminated
with eye blinks, movements, heartbeat, and muscle movement artefacts. Thus, they
should be removed by other means. As suggested by most of the relevant literature,
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) was used for that purpose in this work.
ICA is a computational method used for separating independent sources from a
mixed signal. The most common problem used to explain ICA is the ’cocktail party
problem’ or ’blind source separation’ [58]. We could imagine two people speaking
to two microphones located next to each of them, and as a result, we have two files
that contain mixed audio signals. If we want to get two unmixed speeches, ICA can
solve this problem by transforming two mixed audio files into maximally independent
audio files. As a result, the recording of each individual speaker is obtained. In the
same way, ICA is able to separate brain activity from other artefacts. ICA makes
three assumptions that need to be taken into account:
1. The number of inputs equals the number of outputs
2. Independent components are statistically independent
3. Distributions of independent components are non-Gaussian
The signal was divided into independent components with ICA and then each
component was visually analysed to seperate artefacts from cerebral components.
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Preprocessing
21
Afterwards, the signal was reconstructed without removed independent components.
Fig. 4.3 shows the filtered EEG signal and the same signal after application of ICA
for subject 9 recorded with EO state. It can be observed that EEG signal before
application of ICA contains eye blinks that are represented by high amplitude spikes,
primarily evident in frontal electrodes. But, ICA can successfully remove those.
In order to perform the ICA, FastICA implementation in MNE library was used
[59]. FastICA is a fast and eﬀicient implementation of ICA invented by Aapo Hyväri-
nen at Helsinki University of Technology [60].
This algorithm extracts indepen-
dent components by maximizing the non-Gaussianity through a fixed-point iteration
scheme.
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Before ICA
After ICA
Time (s)
Fp1
Fpz
Fp2
F7
F3
Fz
F4
F8
FT7
FC3
FCz
FC4
FT8
T3
C3
Cz
C4
T4
TP7
CP3
CPz
CP4
TP8
T5
P3
Pz
P4
T6
O1
Oz
O2
Channel name
Figure 4.3: Filtered EEG signal (black) and the same signal after application of
ICA (red). The results are shown for Subject 9 with EO state and before treatment.
4.3.3
Segmentation
It is common to divide the EEG signal into shorter segments to speed up the feature
extraction process and increase the amount of data. Segmentation is an essential part
of machine learning and deep learning model development for EEG data classification.
The segment lengths are inconsistent throughout the literature. For example, Mahato
et al. [45] use a segment length of 2 seconds. In contrast, Hosseinifard et al. [36]
use a 1-minute segment and, in literature, various segment lengths of 3, 6 seconds, or
even up to 5 minutes are used [42, 39, 37]. Shen et al. compare segmentation length
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Methods
from 2 to 10 seconds with a step of 2 and conclude that longer segment length has
better performance [41]. In this work, various segmentation lengths will be tried out
for machine learning models, namely 2, 4, 10, and 20 seconds. For the deep learning
model, a 1-second segment will be used. It was selected so that data size could be as
big as possible and a segment length of less than 1 second might not be long enough
to contain characteristics for classification.
The distribution of classes for various segmentation lengths for Dataset 1 is given
in Table 4.1. The data was divided into a train, test, and validation sets with a ratio
of 70:15:15 percent, respectively. For deep learning data (1s seg. len.) the 60:20:20
ratio was used. As observed, there are more healthy control subjects than depressed
subjects.
Table 4.1: Dataset distribution for various segmentation lengths.
Seg. len. [s]
Class
Total
Train
Test
Validation
1
Healthy
MDD
4589
3445
2755
2067
917
689
917
689
2
Healthy
MDD
2372
1803
1661
1262
355
270
356
271
4
Healthy
MDD
1194
910
836
637
179
136
179
137
10
Healthy
MDD
482
364
337
255
72
54
73
55
20
Healthy
MDD
255
194
178
136
38
29
39
29
4.4
Feature extraction
Feature extraction is used for revealing hidden patterns from the input signal that is
representative of the EEG signal. In this work, linear and non-linear features were ex-
tracted based on the most discriminative features proposed by relevant works. Each
feature will be described in sections 4.4.1 and 4.4.2. Those features were extracted
from 3, 6, 19, or 31 channels. The choice of those channels is based on proposed chan-
nels in literature, and electrode locations for each dataset with reference to literature
are given in Table 4.2. Also, there is some variance in electrode locations used in
Dataset 2. Thus, a similar set of channels was selected from Dataset 2 based on the
proximity.
Additionally, features will be extracted and classified from components extracted
using principal component analysis (PCA). PCA is a dimensionality reduction tech-
nique that reduces the number of variables by preserving maximum information. It
==PAGE:33==
4.4 Feature extraction
23
Table 4.2: EEG channels selected from Dataset 1 and 2 for various channel numbers.
# of ch
Dataset
Channels
Ref.
3
1
2
Fp1, Fpz, Fp2
Fp1, Fz, Fp2
[41]
6
1
2
FT7, FT8, T6, T5, TP7, TP8
F7, F8, T6, T5, T3, T4
[37]
19
1
2
Fp1, Fp2, F3, F4, F7, F8, Fpz, TP7, TP8,
T5, T6, P3, P4, FT7, FT8, O1, O2, C3, C4
Fp1, Fp2, F3, F4, F7, F8, Fz, T3, T4,
T5, T6, P3, P4, Pz, O1, O2, C3, C4, Cz
[36]
PC1
PC2
PC3
PC4
PC5
PC6
PC7
PC8
PC9
PC10
0
20
40
60
80
100
Explained variance
Cumulative sum
Explained variance
Figure 4.4: Variance explained by first 10 principal components and also the cumu-
lative variance explained by their combination.
does that by selecting principal components that account for the largest variance in
the data; in other words, the principal components have the most spread-out projec-
tion of points. Fig. 4.4 illustrates the variance explained by the first 10 principal
components and the cumulative variance of combining them. The mean and variance
are for each subject. The first 5 principal components explain approximately 93.5%
of the variance, and the contribution from the following principal components is not
significant (1.5% or less). Therefore, results from the 5 principal components derived
from all 31 channels will be presented in later sections.
4.4.1
Linear features
Below, a short description of each chosen linear feature, including statistical features,
band powers, and energy will be provided.
Fig.
4.5 shows the average values of
each linear feature over 19 channels with standard deviation for Datasets 1 and 2.
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Methods
From the plot, it could be observed that there is no significant difference in terms of
mean values for statistical features for MDD and Healthy classes. Also, for Dataset 1,
MDD subjects have higher alpha, gamma band energy and lower theta band power.
However, for Dataset 2 opposite trend is observed showing the inconsistency of those
features between the two datasets.
Delta
Theta
Alpha
Beta
Gamma
Mean
Var
Skewness Kurtosis
Energy
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Dataset 1 - MDD
Dataset 1 - Control
Dataset 2 - MDD
Dataset 2 - Control
Figure 4.5: Mean values and standard deviations of linear features for MDD and
healthy control subjects for Dataset 1 and 2.
4.4.1.1
Statistical features
Statistical features are the simplest features that can be extracted from EEG. Mean
is an average value of a time series. Variance is a measure of how spread the values
are from the mean. Skewness is a measure of the asymmetry of data distribution. It
is calculated as the Fisher-Pearson coeﬀicient of skewness:
skewness =
m3
m3/2
2
where
mi = 1
N
N
X
n=1
(xn −¯x)i
(4.1)
¯x is a mean value of time series x. Kurtosis is a measure of the tailedness of a
data distribution relative to normal distribution. It is defined as:
kurtosis =
PN
n=1 (xn −¯x)4/N
std(x)4
(4.2)
Finally, the energy is computed as:
energy =
N
X
n=1
|xn|2
(4.3)
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Feature extraction
25
4.4.1.2
Band power
The power is calculated for each distinct frequency band, such as delta (0.5–4 Hz),
theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–16 Hz), beta (16–32 Hz), and gamma (32–70 Hz). The Welch
method was used to estimate the power spectral density. The method divides the
signal into overlapping segments and averages the Fourier transform of each segment.
Afterwards, the power in each band is calculated from the estimated power spectral
density as an area under the curve.
4.4.2
Non-linear features
In this section description of each chosen non-linear feature will be given. Non-linear
features selected for this study are entropy, Hurst exponent, Hjorth parameters (mo-
bility and complexity), Higuchi and Katz fractal dimensions, and detrended fluctu-
ation analysis. The average values of each non-linear feature over 19 channels with
standard deviation for Datasets 1 and 2 are given in Fig. 4.6. From the plot, it could
be observed that there is a difference in terms of mean values of features, it is more
evident in the case of Hjorth mobility, both fractal dimensions and spectral entropy.
The general trend is the same for both datasets, i.e. if the mean of one feature is
higher for MDD subjects in Dataset 1 it is also higher in Dataset 2 and vice versa.
Hjorth mob
Hjorth comp
Hurst exp
Sample ent
HFD
KFD
PSE
DFA
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Dataset 1 - MDD
Dataset 1 - Control
Dataset 2 - MDD
Dataset 2 - Control
Figure 4.6: Mean values and standard deviations of non-linear features for MDD
and healthy control subjects for Dataset 1 and 2.
4.4.2.1
Entropy
Entropy is a dimensionless quantity that measures the uncertainty or randomness
in a signal and was conceptualized by Shannon [61].
There are various ways to
estimate entropy, but mainly they are classified as entropy measures in the time
domain or frequency domain. In the first case, the signal is divided into segments
and those segments are compared for similarity. In the latter case, the signal is first
transformed into the frequency domain and characteristics are compared. This work
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Methods
considers popular choices from both cases: sample entropy and power spectral entropy.
Sample entropy is calculated as:
SampEn = log
A(m, r)
A(m + 1, r)
(4.4)
m is the segment length, and r is the threshold for similarity. Each segment is
compared to the rest of the segments, and the number of segments within a similarity
threshold (r) are summed to obtain A. A(m + 1, r) is the same, but for a segment
length of m+1. Higher values indicate that the signal is irregular or random, whereas
lower values indicate regularity or repetitiveness.
For calculating sample entropy,
default parameters in the antropy library2 were chosen (m = 2, r = 0.2∗std(x)). The
metric used for calculating similarity is a Chebyshev distance.
For calculating the power spectral entropy, the power spectral density (PSD) is
calculated using discrete Fourier transform, and the entropy is the sum of normalized
PSD (P) over all frequencies between 0 and half of sampling frequency (fs/2):
PSE = −
fs/2
X
0
P(f) log2(P(f))
(4.5)
4.4.2.2
Hurst exponent
Hurst exponent (HE) is a measure of a long-term memory in a time series, meaning
the dependence of the current point on previous values. It is named after British hy-
drologist Harold Edwin Hurst, who developed this metric for selecting the appropriate
size for a dam for the volatile Nile river [62].
The values for HE are between 0 and 1 and can be classified into the following
categories:
• if HE < 0.5, the time series is anti-persistent (mean-reverting).
• if HE = 0.5, means a random walk (prediction on past data is impossible).
• if HE > 0.5, the time series is persistent (trending). An increase will most likely
be followed by an increase in the short term and vice versa.
HE is calculated from the equation given below:
R
σ = (N/2)HE
(4.6)
R is the range (difference between maximum and minimum value), σ is the stan-
dard deviation, and N is the length of the time series.
2https://raphaelvallat.com/antropy/build/html/index.html
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Feature extraction
27
4.4.2.3
Hjorth parameters
Hjorth parameters are statistical time-domain properties commonly used in feature
extraction from biomedical signals. It was first proposed by Bo Hjorth in 1970 and
consists of three parameters: activity, mobility, and complexity [63]. Activity is just
a variance of a signal. Mobility represents the mean frequency of the signal. It is
defined as the square root of the variance of the derivative of the signal divided by
the variance of the signal:
Mobility =
s
var( dx(t)
dt )
var(x(t))
(4.7)
Complexity gives an estimate of signal bandwidth and indicates how similar the
signal is to a sine wave.
Complexity = Mobility( dx(t)
dt )
Mobility(x(t))
(4.8)
4.4.2.4
Fractal dimension
Fractal Dimension (FD) is a measure that quantifies the complexity or self-similarity
(number of times the pattern repeats in a time series). In this work, Higuchi’s fractal
dimension and Katz’s fractal dimension algorithms were used to estimate the fractal
dimension.
Higuchi’s fractal dimension (HFD) was introduced by Higuchi to approximate the
value for the fractal dimension of a time-series data [64]. According to the algorithm, if
we are given a time-series data x1, x2, ..., xN consisting of N samples and a parameter
kmax ≥2, for each k ∈{1, ..., kmax} and m ∈{1, ..., k} the length of the curve Lm(k)
is given by:
Lm(k) =
N −1
⌊N−m
k
⌋k2
⌊N−m
k
⌋
X
i=1
|xm+ik −xm+(i−1)k|
(4.9)
The length of L(k) is average of k lengths: L(k) = 1
k
Pk
m=1 Lm(k). Finally, the
HFD of a time series is a slope of a best-fitting line on a plot log 1
k versus log L(k).
In this study, kmax was set to 10.
Katz Fractal Dimension is another less computationally demanding method of esti-
mating fractal dimension proposed by Katz [65]. For the same time series x1, x2, ..., xN,
the maximum distance from the first data point is calculated as d = max(|x1 −xj|)
where j is from 2 to N. The total length of the series is:
L =
N
X
i=2
xi −xi−1
(4.10)
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Methods
The average distance between two successive points is a = L/(N −1). KFD is
equal to:
KFD = ln L
a
ln d
a
(4.11)
4.4.2.5
Detrended fluctuation analysis
Detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) measures the self-aﬀinity and long-term mem-
ory of a time series similar to HE. However, the advantage of this method is that it
can be applied to non-stationary signals, such as EEG signals. To calculate DFA, we
first subtract the mean ¯x from the signal x of length N:
Xt =
N
X
i=1
xi −¯x
(4.12)
This new signal Xt is divided into segments of length n, then a straight line is
fit to each segment, and we denote the sequence of the straight line fits as Yt. The
fluctuation is calculated as follows:
F(n) =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
t=1
(Xt −Yt)2
(4.13)
Finally, DFA is given as a slope of a straight line fit to the log-log graph of F(n)
against n.
4.5
Feature selection
Feature selection is the process of selecting the subset of input features. It has become
a fundamental data processing step for the model building pipeline. The feature set
might contain redundant and noisy data, complicating model interpretation. Thus,
feature selection reduces over-fitting, increases accuracy, and speeds up model training
time. ANOVA, genetic algorithm, and mRMR feature selectors were considered in
this work, and below, the theory behind each of them will be provided.
4.5.1
Analysis of Variance
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) is a statistical test for checking if the means of two or
more samples differ. ANOVA calculates the F-value for each feature, which indicates
if the means for different classes are statistically and significantly different or not.
This could be used to select the best features with significantly different mean values
between the two classes. For example, if the Hurst exponent (HE) is considered and
it has a high F-value close to 1, then the mean of HE is different for Depressed and
==PAGE:39==
4.5 Feature selection
29
Healthy subjects. On the other hand, if F-value is low (closer to 0), then the means of
HE is similar for both classes suggesting it is not a good feature. To perform feature
selection with ANOVA, implementation of the algorithm in sklearn library was used3.
4.5.2
Genetic algorithm
The genetic algorithm (GA) is a method for solving both constrained and uncon-
strained optimization problems inspired by Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution.
According to this algorithm, the fittest individuals are selected for reproduction to
produce children for the next generation.
For feature selection, first, random subsets of features are selected to create pop-
ulations. The tournament is performed, where each population is evaluated with the
predictive model for a task at hand. The tournament winners (populations with the
best accuracy) are selected for the next generation with some crossover (tournament
winner populations are combined with other tournament winner populations to gen-
erate a new population) and mutation (new features are randomly introduced to the
population). These steps are repeated for a given number of generations (iterations).
The main advantage of GA is that it considers the feature selection problem in
terms of population (combination of features), not individual features, thus adding
robustness with respect to local minima/maxima. Also, it performs well in ‘noisy’
environments and can easily be parallelized. However, this method is usually time-
consuming and has many hyperparameters (generation number, population number,
crossover, mutation probability, etc.)
that need to be tuned to achieve the best
results.
To perform GA for feature selection, sklearn-genetic library was used4. For this
work, the following hyperparameters were used: number of population=100, crossover
probability=0.8, mutation probability=0.1, number of generations=100, and other
parameters were kept to default.
4.5.3
minimum Redundancy - Maximum Relevance
mRMR (stands for “minimum Redundancy - Maximum Relevance”) is a feature se-
lection method proposed in [66] where mRMR was applied to reduce the gene feature
set. However, the technique has gained popularity after publication by Uber engi-
neers, where the method’s effectiveness was proven in selecting features for marketing
applications [67]. These examples show the flexibility of mRMR in various fields.
At every iteration, the algorithm selects the features that have high correlation
with the target variable and a low correlation with features that have already been
selected in previous iterations. Thus, the score for each feature (f) is:
3https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.feature_selection.f_
classif.html
4https://github.com/manuel-calzolari/sklearn-genetic
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Methods
scorei(f) =
relevance(f| target)
redundancy(f| features selected)
(4.14)
The algorithm adds feature with the highest score to the selected feature set at
each iteration.
The relevance is calculated as F-statistic between the feature and
target, while redundancy is the average of Pearson correlations of feature f and
features selected at previous iterations. Intuitively, suppose we have two features, A
and B, which are highly correlated with the target variable but are also correlated
with each other. In that case, only one of the features could be selected to achieve
the same performance.
To perform mRMR, publicly available Python library5 was used.
4.6
Classification
Classification is the task of assigning observations to class labels. The task at hand is
a supervised binary classification task because the algorithm trains on labelled data,
and there are only two classes, healthy or depressed. This binary classification task
can be accomplished using deep learning or machine learning algorithms. Machine
learning is a subset of artificial intelligence that enables computers to learn from data
and accomplish tasks without being explicitly programmed. Deep learning is a subset
of machine learning based on artificial neural networks to mimic how the human brain
works. The main differences between machine learning and deep learning are that
machine learning can train on smaller data, requires human interventions, and makes
simple, linear correlations. In contrast, deep learning requires larger data, can work
with structured and unstructured data, and learns high-level, complex features on its
own [68].
Classification with ML models is done with seven linear and non-linear features
extracted from 3, 6, 19, 31 channels or 5 principal components. The results obtained
with ML models will be shown for k-fold cross-validation with k = 10. k-fold cross-
validation is a method for evaluating model performance. The data is divided into
k groups, and the model is tested in one of them and trained on the rest. This is
repeated for k times using a different data group until all data points are used for both
training and testing. The final performance metrics are the average of all individual
metrics [69].
Accuracy, precision, recall, and f1 score will be used for evaluation.
Accuracy represents the percentage of correctly classified data points out of all data
points. Precision represents the percentage of the positive predictions that are correct,
whereas recall represents the percentage of positive cases identified correctly. F1 score
is a combination of precision and recall, given by:
F1 = 2 precision ∗recall
precision + recall
(4.15)
5https://github.com/smazzanti/mrmr
==PAGE:41==
4.6 Classification
31
In the context of depression diagnosis, depressed class is a positive class, and
healthy is a negative class. Precision represents the percentage of actually depressed
subjects out of the ones classified by a model as depressed, whereas recall represents
what percentage of depressed patients were correctly predicted.
DL model takes 1-second EEG signals from 31 channels as input and understands
the complex patterns hidden in signals for a depression diagnosis. Model performance
evaluation will be done using a confusion matrix. A confusion matrix is a table with
predicted classes on one axis and true classes on the other. The primary diagonal
represents the correctly classified classes, and the secondary diagonal represents mis-
classified classes for binary classification.
4.6.1
Classical ML models
There are various machine learning algorithms available for supervised classification
tasks. k-nearest neighbours (k-NN), support vector machine (SVM), random forest
(RF), extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) and an ensemble of them were selected
in this work, and below theory behind them will be explained.
4.6.1.1 k-Nearest Neighbors
k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) is a simple algorithm that can be used for supervised
classification tasks. It assumes that samples from the same class are in close proximity
to each other. The algorithm calculates distances to its neighbours and selects k
closest neighbours. Then assign the new data point to the most common class in
selected k neighbours. The number of neighbours was set to 2, and euclidean distance
was used as a distance metric.
Figure 4.7: k-NN model accuracy vs number of neighbours.
An appropriate number of neighbours was found by grid search trying out a dif-
ferent number of neighbours from 1 to 9. Accuracy of a model against number of
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Methods
neighbours is shown in Fig. 4.7. The results are shown for 19 channels with a 10-
second segmentation length. From the results the best accuracy is with 2 neighbours
and as the value k increases accuracy drops.
4.6.1.2
Support Vector Machine
A support vector machine (SVM) is an algorithm that finds a hyperplane in an N-
dimensional space that distinctly separates the data points.
N is the number of
features, and a hyperplane’s dimension depends on N. If N = 2, the hyperplane is
just a line. If N = 3, the hyperplane is a 2-D plane. As the number of features
increases, it becomes hard to imagine the hyperplane.
To find the most optimal plane, the algorithm fits a hyperplane so that it has
maximum margin, or in other words, maximum distance from the hyperplane to data
points from either class. In cases when the data is not linearly separable, the kernel is
applied to transform data to linearly separable space. Mahato et al. have compared
sigmoid, polynomial, and radial basis function (RBF, also known as Gaussian) kernels
and found that RBF gives the best accuracy compared to other kernels [37]. In this
work, a polynomial kernel was used as suggested by grid search.
Figure 4.8: Optimal hyperplane with maximum margin [70].
4.6.1.3
Random Forest
Random forest (RF) is a model that consists of a large number of decision trees. A
decision tree is a model that asks true/false questions to arrive at a prediction. Each
individual decision tree in RF makes a prediction, and the class with the most votes
==PAGE:43==
4.6 Classification
33
is the final model prediction. Each decision tree in RF is diverse as it is trained on
a random subset of features. The logic behind this is that combining several diverse
models is more robust than any individual model.
4.6.1.4
Extreme Gradient Boosting
Extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) is similar to RF in the way that it also uses
decision trees. However, RF uses a bagging technique where each decision tree works
in parallel, combining predictions afterwards. XGBoost uses a technique called boost-
ing, where decision trees are combined sequentially. The subsequent model tries to
reduce the error of the previous model by focusing on samples on which the previous
model has performed poorly. The sequential combination of these models gives an
accurate and precise model in the end. Open-source implementation6 of the XGBoost
algorithm was used in this work.
4.6.1.5
Ensemble model
An ensemble model is a machine learning model that combines multiple individual
model predictions to make a single prediction. There are various ways to combine
multiple models, such as averaging predictions, weighted averaging or majority voting.
In this work, the outputs of four previously mentioned models will be combined using
the Dempster-Shafer combination rule.
The Dempster-Shafer combination rule is a way to combine uncertain or conflicting
evidence from multiple sources to make a decision [71].
The key concept in the
theory is a ’mass probability function’, that assigns a degree of belief to each possible
proposition or hypothesis. It is represented as:
m(X) = 2X →[1, 0]
(4.16)
For this work, we have two states ’Depressed’ or ’Healthy’ and the sum of the
masses assigned to all states must be equal to 1. The evidence from two sources, m1
and m2 can be combined using the following formula:
m1 ⊕m2 =
1
1 −K
X
B∩C=A̸=∅
m1(B)m2(C)
where
K =
X
B∩C=∅
m1(B)m2(C)
4.6.2
Deep learning model
As a deep learning model, convolutional neural networks (CNN) were chosen. CNN
has superior performance compared to other deep learning models on images and
audio data. They usually consist of convolutional, pooling, and fully connected layers.
6https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Methods
The convolutional layer is the core building block of CNN. It involves an input
image and kernel or feature detector. A kernel is a filter that extracts features from
the image. There are various techniques on how to initialize kernels; they could be
either set to an arbitrary constant value (for example, zeros or ones), sampled from a
distribution (normal or uniform), or using initialization methods like Glorot initializer
[72]. During the training process, the kernel values are optimized to minimize the
loss. The filter is applied to an area of an image, and the dot product is calculated.
The kernel then repeats the procedure shifting by stride.
Stride is by how many
pixels the kernel moves over the image. One convolutional layer can contain many
kernels and the number of kernels affects the depth of an output. For example, if the
input to a convolutional kernel consisting of 3 kernels is a one-dimensional grayscale
image, the output image will have a depth of 3.
After each convolutional layer,
activation functions, such as ReLU or hyperbolic tangent, are applied to introduce a
non-linearity.
The pooling layer reduces the dimension of the feature map resulting in faster
computation and fewer parameters to learn. Similar to the convolutional layer, it
applies kernels, but in this case, the kernel selects either maximum (max-pooling) or
average (average pooling) values within the receptive field. The final layer in CNN is
a fully connected layer. As the name suggests, all nodes from one layer are connected
to all nodes from the next layer.
This layer performs classification based on the
features generated in previous layers.
It is also usually followed by an activation
function, except for the last layer, which is followed by a sigmoid function that gives
the probability for each class from 0 to 1.
Other concepts that need an introduction are dropout and batch normalization.
Dropout is a simple regularization technique that reduces over-fitting. Dropout ran-
domly ignores the output of neurons with a chosen probability p. If neurons are ran-
domly dropped, other neurons will have to make predictions, resulting in a network
consisting of independent neurons that do not rely on a specific previous or neigh-
bouring neurons. Batch normalization is another technique that makes the training
more stable and faster by normalizing the layer inputs.
The final architecture of the CNN model is shown in Fig.
4.9.
EEG signals
were processed the same way as it was for training ML models, i.e., filtered and ICA
application. The network takes as input a 1-second length of raw EEG signal from
all 31 channels. The data is fed to 3 blocks consisting of convolutional, max-pooling,
batch normalization, and dropout layers, followed by a fully-connected layer and
output layer. The kernel size is 11x7, it was observed that a larger kernel size gives
better performance. To avoid overfitting, batch normalization and dropout with a 50
percent rate were added. The activation function is Leaky ReLU.
==PAGE:45==
4.7 Machine Learning Operations
35
Figure 4.9: CNN model architecture.
4.7
Machine Learning Operations
Machine Learning Operations (MLOps) is a set of best practices followed to deploy
an ML model to a production environment. Adopting these practices makes collabo-
ration easier and makes model development and deployment faster with continuous
integration and continuous deployment (CI/CD) practices, proper monitoring, and
validation. MLOps covers critical concepts such as data gathering, versioning, repro-
ducibility, modelling, experiment tracking, model deployment, validation, monitoring,
and re-training. This thesis covers versioning, deployment, reproducibility, and ex-
periment tracking.
Code versioning tools such as Git have become vital in software engineering, mak-
ing collaboration between engineers more effortless and organized. However, when
working on ML projects, it is also important to guarantee that everyone is working
with the same data and model versions with the ability to go back to previous versions.
Thus, additional tools are used to version not only the code but the data and model
weights. Reproducibility is another concept that needs consideration when discussing
versioning. It refers to the ability to replicate the ML workflow and ensures consis-
tency. Having reproducibility also promotes open research allowing the community to
access research findings and get inspired. To make the work reproducible, frameworks
and their versions, random seeds, and all hyperparameters should be logged.
For achieving versioning, popular open-source frameworks Git and DVC7 were
used, whereas, for reproducibility, config and requirements files were created, storing
all hyperparameters and libraries with versions.
Experiment tracking is the process of saving all experiment metadata (hyperpa-
rameters, metrics, architecture, etc.) in a single place for visualization and compar-
ison of experiments. Weights & Biases8, a quick and easy-to-integrate platform for
experiment logging, was used for that purpose. Deployment is the process of making
the model available to users. Both machine learning and deep learning models were
deployed using FastAPI, which allows making requests to API and getting model
predictions.
7https://dvc.org/
8https://wandb.ai/site
==PAGE:46==
36
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Results
This chapter presents the results obtained according to the methodology proposed
in the previous chapter. The first section will show the results of machine learning
models. In particular, the effect of channel numbers, segmentation length, and feature
selection algorithm on model performance will be evaluated. Furthermore, the results
obtained with the deep learning model will be presented. Finally, the generalization
ability of models will be tested on Dataset 2, and deployed model will be presented.
5.1
Machine learning method
The chosen four machine learning classifiers are k-NN, SVM, RF, and XGBoost. Also,
the ensemble of those models was created using Dempster-Shafer theory. This sec-
tion will present results obtained with those models for various channel numbers,
segmentation lengths, and feature selectors.
5.1.1
Number of channels
To identify an optimal number of channels for the diagnosis of depression, the per-
formance of five different classifiers was tested on various channel numbers.
The
segmentation length was fixed to be 10 seconds and all other parameters varied. The
summary of parameters used is listed below:
• Channels: 3, 5, 6, 19, 31
• Segmentation length: 10
• Feature selector: ANOVA, GA, mRMR
• Feature percentage: 25%, 50%, 75%, 90% or all features
• Classifier: k-NN, SVM, RF, XGBoost and Ensemble model
Table 5.1 provides the results obtained with accuracy metrics, with mean and
standard deviation for 10-fold cross-validation. Results are given for each classifier’s
best-performing feature selector and the percentage of selected features.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Results
Table 5.1: Model inference results on test data for various channel numbers. Seg-
mentation length is fixed to be 10 seconds, and results for the best-performing model
are shown with mean and standard deviation for 10-fold cross-validation results.
# of ch
Model
Feature selector
(% of features)
# of features
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 score
31
k-NN
SVM
RF
XGBoost
Ensemble
All features
ANOVA (90%)
mRMR (75%)
mRMR (75%)
GA (25%)
558 of 558
502 of 558
418 of 558
418 of 558
90 of 558
99.12±0.80
99.12±0.98
98.49±1.09
98.74±0.98
99.62±0.58
100.00±0.0
97.92±3.69
99.04±2.02
98.12±2.81
99.69±0.94
97.76±2.06
97.76±3.24
95.86±2.85
95.54±4.06
99.35±1.29
98.51±1.59
97.91±1.27
96.70±2.70
97.21±1.82
99.51±1.05
19
k-NN
SVM
RF
XGBoost
Ensemble
ANOVA (75%)
ANOVA (90%)
All features
mRMR (90%)
GA (90%)
256 of 342
307 of 342
342 of 342
307 of 342
106 of 342
98.56±1.50
97.84±1.85
98.09±1.43
98.44±1.43
99.28±1.09
99.18±1.74
98.29±1.85
99.15±1.30
98.66±3.12
99.20±1.70
97.14±2.56
96.30±2.58
95.45±2.58
97.17±2.84
99.14±1.31
97.68±1.18
97.55±1.84
97.25±1.92
97.68±2.27
98.86±0.86
6
k-NN
SVM
RF
XGBoost
Ensemble
GA (50%)
GA (90%)
All features
ANOVA (75%)
ANOVA (90%)
25 of 108
37 of 108
108 of 108
81 of 108
97 of 108
97.36±1.19
93.64±2.35
96.53±2.23
97.01±1.62
98.44±1.07
98.86±1.87
95.60±3.30
96.85±2.81
96.83±2.73
98.54±1.99
96.02±1.89
90.05±5.00
94.02±2.98
96.01±3.18
96.03±3.15
96.69±1.84
92.24±3.07
95.64±1.68
95.98±2.12
97.10±2.11
5
k-NN
SVM
RF
XGBoost
Ensemble
GA (90%)
mRMR (90%)
All features
All features
All features
24 of 90
81 of 90
90 of 90
90 of 90
90 of 90
97.04±1.61
90.65±3.86
95.63±1.59
96.45±2.18
97.29±1.58
98.58±1.87
89.65±4.72
97.23±3.55
95.89±3.45
97.51±2.26
93.39±4.32
84.88±6.66
92.82±4.35
94.21±4.20
97.26±2.11
96.03±1.53
87.90±3.14
92.96±5.07
94.80±3.03
97.27±2.09
3
k-NN
SVM
RF
XGBoost
Ensemble
ANOVA (90%)
mRMR (75%)
ANOVA (75%)
mRMR (90%)
ANOVA (90%)
48 of 54
40 of 54
40 of 54
48 of 54
48 of 54
85.48±3.55
78.53±3.79
90.16±3.84
92.33±2.21
91.25±3.50
91.11±5.83
75.10±7.51
88.61±5.20
90.40±5.89
90.53±5.10
71.87±6.54
69.60±3.59
84.67±5.26
89.46±7.25
90.05±2.95
81.23±2.34
72.39±8.47
87.31±3.97
90.94±4.03
89.65±3.68
From the obtained results, features extracted from 31 channels give the best results
when only a quarter of the features are selected with the genetic algorithm. The
highest accuracy of 99.62±0.58% is obtained with an ensemble model. However, for
31 channel EEG classification the accuracies of other classifiers are all also high, above
98%. Among all channels, 3 channel case has the lowest accuracy (92.33% with the
XGBoost classifier and 90% features selected with mRMR). In general, as the number
of channels increases, there is also an increase in model performance. Classification
based on 5 principal components does not show significantly high results compared
to features extracted from 6 channels, thus indicating that the application of PCA
to reduce computational time and extract fewer features might not be necessary.
Additionally, the ensemble model performs better for all cases except 3 channel case
where XGBoost outperforms other classifiers.
5.1.2
Segmentation length
The effect of segmentation length on model performance was tested. Selected segmen-
tation lengths are 2, 4, 10, or 20 seconds and the results are provided for 19 channel
case. A summary of the different sets of parameters used is provided below:
• Channels: 19
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Machine learning method
39
• Segmentation length: 2, 4, 10, 20
• Feature selector: ANOVA
• Feature percentage: 90
• Classifier: k-NN, SVM, RF, XGBoost and Ensemble model
Performance metrics of five classifiers for various segmentation lengths are shown
in Table 5.2. It could be observed that model accuracies are approximately similar
for all segmentation lengths and all are high, staying above 95%. However, for the 10-
second case, all models have an accuracy of 98% or higher and thus variance between
model performances is lower compared to other cases. For comparison, for the 2-
second case model accuracy varies from 98.56% to 95.12%. Also, it should be noted
that most of the models (k-NN, RF and Ensemble) acquire their highest accuracy
when 10-second segments are used, whereas SVM and XGBoost with 20 and 2-second
segments, respectively.
Table 5.2: Results for various segmentation lengths and fixed channel numbers (19),
percentage of features selected (90%), feature selection methods and five classifiers.
The metrics are shown with mean and standard deviation for 10-fold cross-validation
runs.
Seg. len. [s]
Model
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 score
2
k-NN
SVM
RF
XGBoost
Ensemble
96.69±0.70
95.12±1.19
97.45±0.58
98.69±0.52
98.52±0.53
98.91±0.92
94.85±1.42
97.96±0.87
98.80±0.78
98.56±0.99
93.58±2.85
93.52±2.23
96.39±1.45
97.48±1.12
97.88±0.68
96.13±0.69
94.13±1.31
96.70±1.19
98.36±0.70
98.39±0.66
4
k-NN
SVM
RF
XGBoost
Ensemble
97.83±0.95
97.06±1.17
97.88±1.10
98.55±0.75
98.75±0.81
98.99±1.54
96.71±1.26
98.29±1.52
97.97±1.85
98.43±1.52
95.57±2.41
96.14±1.54
96.70±2.12
97.84±1.29
98.41±1.27
97.63±0.99
96.63±1.21
97.06±1.18
97.71±0.74
98.58±0.93
10
k-NN
SVM
RF
XGBoost
Ensemble
98.44±0.93
97.84±1.85
98.08±1.10
98.32±1.71
99.04±1.04
98.90±1.35
98.29±1.85
98.34±2.19
98.03±2.20
98.59±1.88
96.58±2.80
96.30±2.58
97.71±2.80
96.60±3.04
98.86±1.40
98.11±1.89
97.55±1.84
98.00±0.93
97.83±1.63
98.72±0.99
20
k-NN
SVM
RF
XGBoost
Ensemble
96.39±3.38
98.43±2.25
96.38±3.55
97.06±2.29
97.74±2.49
98.91±2.19
99.44±1.67
97.47±3.31
95.86±5.05
97.50±4.03
92.02±5.41
95.23±4.97
93.10±6.29
94.65±4.78
97.87±2.62
96.42±3.10
97.52±1.99
96.42±2.88
94.12±5.77
98.14±1.70
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Results
5.1.3
Feature selection method
For comparison of different feature selection methods, the following set of parameters
were used:
• Channels: 19
• Segmentation length: 10
• Feature selector: ANOVA, GA, mRMR
• Feature percentage: 90
• Classifier: k-NN, SVM, RF, XGBoost and Ensemble model
Table 5.3:
Results for k-NN performance with fixed channel numbers (19), seg-
mentation lengths (10s), percentage of features selected (90%), and varying feature
selection methods.
The metrics are shown with mean and standard deviation for
10-fold cross-validation runs.
Feature selector
% of features
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 score
ANOVA
25
50
75
90
93.76±3.07
96.16±1.85
98.56±1.50
98.20±1.34
96.11±2.88
98.22±2.37
99.18±1.74
99.15±1.30
87.48±5.45
92.93±5.52
97.14±2.56
97.16±3.12
92.58±3.14
95.13±2.69
97.68±1.18
98.42±1.21
GA
25
50
75
90
97.00±1.72
97.48±1.36
96.52±2.66
98.56±1.40
99.10±1.38
99.13±1.34
98.85±1.41
99.71±0.86
92.90±4.97
95.74±3.86
92.89±4.29
97.17±1.24
96.78±1.58
97.08±1.79
95.87±3.90
98.40±1.24
mRMR
25
50
75
90
93.77±2.32
96.16±2.72
97.84±1.58
98.32±1.54
96.55±4.01
97.41±2.27
99.16±1.79
98.90±2.49
89.49±5.71
92.90±4.45
96.02±1.89
97.17±2.52
91.88±3.18
94.89±2.01
97.20±2.58
98.00±1.30
-
all
98.44±1.43
99.44±1.43
97.17±2.84
97.68±1.73
Table 5.3 shows k-NN performance metrics for three feature selectors for various
percentages of features selected. ANOVA achieves the highest accuracy with 75% of
features used, and adding more features drops the performance slightly. In contrast,
mRMR and GA feature selectors suggest that the best performance is achieved with
90% of features. It should be noted that GA can achieve higher accuracy of 97% with
only 25% of features compared to other feature selectors that acquire an accuracy of
around 93.8%.
A comparison plot of all three feature selectors for various models is shown in
Fig. 5.1. GA performs better with 25% of features for all classifiers. However, it gets
outperformed by ANOVA and mRMR when more features are selected. ANOVA and
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Machine learning method
41
25
50
75
90
all
90
92
94
96
98
ANOVA
GA
mRMR
Percentage of features used (%)
Accuracy (%)
(a) k-NN
25
50
75
90
all
90
92
94
96
98
ANOVA
GA
mRMR
Percentage of features used (%)
Accuracy (%)
(b) SVM
25
50
75
90
all
90
92
94
96
98
ANOVA
GA
mRMR
Percentage of features used (%)
Accuracy (%)
(c) RF
25
50
75
90
all
90
92
94
96
98
ANOVA
GA
mRMR
Percentage of features used (%)
Accuracy (%)
(d) XGBoost
25
50
75
90
all
90
92
94
96
98
ANOVA
GA
mRMR
Percentage of features used (%)
Accuracy (%)
(e) Ensemble
Figure 5.1: The average accuracy of (a) k-NN, (b) SVM, (c) RF, (d) XGBoost and (e)
Ensemble model for various percentages of features chosen (25, 50, 75, 90, all features) and
feature selector methods (ANOVA, GA, mRMR).
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Results
mRMR have around the same performance. Both methods are model agnostic, mean-
ing they can be used with any type of predictive model and doesn’t require model
to choose features. Also, both methods utilize F-values as measure the significance
of differences between groups. Therefore, it is reasonable that they have the same
performance. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that GA demonstrates superior perfor-
mance in comparison to other feature selection techniques when applied to ensemble
model.
5.2
Deep learning method
CNN with architecture as presented previously in Fig. 4.9 was trained on Dataset 1.
The training procedure and results will be presented below.
5.2.1
Training
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Train loss
Validation loss
Epoch
Loss
(a)
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Train accuracy
Validation accuracy
Epoch
Accuracy
(b)
Figure 5.2: Training (blue) and validation (red) loss (a) and accuracy (b) over 200
epochs
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Generalization
43
The network was built and trained using Keras library1. The model was trained
for 200 epochs with a batch size of 4. The learning rate was set to 0.0005 with a
cosine decay to reduce the learning rate as the training progressed. As an optimizer, a
computationally eﬀicient and less memory-demanding Adam algorithm was used [73].
Model accuracy and loss over epochs for training and validation data are depicted
in Fig. 5.2. Both curves converge in the same manner suggesting that there is no
overfitting and the model is learning from epoch to epoch.
The class distribution between train, test, and validation sets is given in Table
4.1. The dataset contains more control patients rather than depressed, thus having a
slight class imbalance. To deal with class imbalance, class weights of 0.87 for control
and 1.18 for MDD were provided to the model to treat the underrepresented class as
more important. The weights were calculated by dividing half of the total samples
by each class count.
Depressed
Healthy
Healthy  
Depressed  
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
12
821
595
6
Predicted value
Real value
Figure 5.3: Confusion matrix for test data.
The model’s performance on test data is given in Fig 5.3.
According to the
confusion matrix model has an accuracy of 98.74% with around the same performance
for both classes.
5.3
Generalization
The trained models are expected to be generalizable to perform well on unseen data.
Both ML and DL models have good accuracy on unseen test data achieving an ac-
curacy above 98%. But, in this work, models trained on Dataset 1 will be tested
on Dataset 2 to see if they can generalize on other datasets.
It is a complicated
task as there are differences between datasets regarding EEG devices, channels, sam-
pling frequency, background noise, montage, and preprocessing steps applied during
data gathering. For example, Dataset 2 has a sampling frequency of 256 Hz, uses
1https://keras.io/
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Results
10-20 standard, 19 channels collected with different background noise, and also geo-
graphically located in Malaysia compared to Dataset 1 which has a 500 Hz sampling
frequency, uses 31 channel EEG device and was collected in Pakistan with 10-10
standard. These differences make it hard to develop a model that can perform well
on various datasets. However, models developed under this thesis will be tested to
determine whether they learn some of the common features and perform better than
a random guess.
25
50
75
90
all
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
KNN - D1
SVM - D1
RF - D1
XGBoost - D1
Ensemble - D1
KNN - D2
SVM - D2
RF - D2
XGBoost - D2
Ensemble - D2
Percentage of features used (%)
Accuracy (%)
(a) Test for generalization for 3 channels case
25
50
75
90
all
50
60
70
80
90
100
KNN - D1
SVM - D1
RF - D1
XGBoost - D1
Ensemble - D1
KNN - D2
SVM - D2
RF - D2
XGBoost - D2
Ensemble - D2
Percentage of features used (%)
Accuracy (%)
(b) Test for generalization for 19 channels case
Figure 5.4: ML model generalization performance on Dataset 1 (blue) and Dataset
2 (red) for various percentages of features extracted from 3 (a) and 19 (b) channels
with 10-second segmentation length and ANOVA feature selection technique.
Fig. 5.4a shows the performance of ML models on Dataset 1 and Dataset 2 for
various percentages of features used for 3 channels case.
Referring to the figure,
XGBoost and k-NN have the highest difference in performance for the two datasets,
with a difference of approximately 10 to 30%. On the other hand, SVM has the best
ability to generalize with a variation of only around 3% between datasets for cases
except when all features are used. The figure also shows model performances for 19
channel cases. It could be observed that models can generalize even better when
more channels are used. Also, the ensemble model has better performance compared
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Deployment
45
to others on Dataset 2 when 19 channels are used.
The same plots for features
extracted from 6 channels and 5 principal components are provided in Appendix A.3.
Interestingly, when all of the features are used, the ability to generalize for all
models drops, as low as 26% for k-NN. To find an explanation for this trend, a closer
analysis was done on those features that are not included in 90 percent of features
extracted from 3 channels. When all features are used there are 54 features in total
and when 90% of features are selected the model is trained on 48 features.
This
indicates that 6 features added significantly drops model performance on Dataset 2.
The mean and variance of those 6 features for Dataset 1 and 2 are shown in Fig.
5.5. As illustrated for those 6 features, there is an opposite trend between MDD and
Control patients.
Delta-Fp1
Delta-Fp2
Energy-Fp1
Energy-Fp2
Theta-Fp1
Theta-Fp2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Dataset 1 - MDD
Dataset 1 - Control
Dataset 2 - MDD
Dataset 2 - Control
Figure 5.5: 6 features negatively affecting the generalization ability of the models.
The generalization ability of the CNN model was also tested on Dataset 2. Dataset
2 has only 19 channels, whereas CNN presented before was trained for 31 channels.
Thus, the model was retrained with 19 channels for testing on Dataset 2. The archi-
tecture and all hyperparameters were kept the same. The final model achieved an
accuracy of 93.7% on test data from Dataset 1, but it failed to generalize on a second
dataset with an accuracy of only 43.7%. The training progression plots and confusion
matrix for the retrained model are given in Appendix A.4.
5.4
Deployment
The user interface of a web service developed using Fast API is illustrated in Fig.
5.6. The k-NN, SVM, RF, XGboost and ensemble models trained on features from
19 channels with 10-second segment lengths and without feature selection were saved
locally as pickle files. Also, the weight of the CNN model trained to do inference on
31-channel EEG data was stored locally. It is assumed that the user loads filtered and
artefact-free EEG data. After data is loaded it is divided into segments and inference
is done on each segment with 5 ML models and a CNN model. For example, if the
user loads a 1-minute EEG recording, the inference is done on each of six 10-second
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Results
segments. Then, results for each segment are combined using Dempster-Shafer theory
to give the final class for the subject.
Figure 5.6: UI of the deployed model.
The inference with web service is made by sending an HTTP request to the server.
An HTTP request is a communication protocol used by a client and a server. There
are various HTTP request methods, and in this case, the POST method is used
because the user sends the EEG data to the server.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
This chapter intends to analyse and interpret the obtained results by connecting
results to research questions and related work. Furthermore, future research direction
will be provided.
One of the main objectives of the thesis was to study the effect of channel number,
segmentation length, and feature selection techniques. From experiments with vari-
ous channel numbers (refer to Table 5.1), it is evident that an increase in the number
of channels results in higher accuracy, with the highest accuracy of 99.56% achieved
for 31 channel case with the ensemble model. This is also consistent with the result
from related work, where the highest accuracies (98.95 and 98.44%) are achieved with
19 channels used [44, 46]. However, having more channels results in a longer compu-
tational time to extract features from each of those channels. Therefore, the number
of channels should be selected for the specific application depending on requirements
for inference time and accuracy. In addition, features were extracted from 5 principal
components to see if this could result in high accuracy and, as a result, decrease
computational time. Still, it achieves approximately the same performance as with 6
channel case.
Another hyperparameter that can impact the model is the segmentation length.
In related work, various lengths are used varying between 2, 3, 6, 30, and 75 seconds
[37, 42, 39, 38, 44, 43]. Experiments performed with segmentation lengths of 2, 6, 10,
and 20 seconds suggest that there is not much of a difference in model performance,
with all of them having high accuracies with slight variation. However, the 10-second
case has better stability across different classifiers.
This study has also compared ANOVA, GA, and mRMR feature selection methods.
Overall, the application of the feature selector does not result in a significant increase
in the model accuracy, as reflected in Fig. 5.1. But, for SVM, RF, and XGBoost,
reducing the feature set by half with ANOVA or mRMR gives comparable results to
the case when all features are used and the reduction of the feature set further below
results in a sharper negative impact on accuracy. Even though GA performs worse
when the feature set is 50% or higher, it performs better when only 25% of features
are used. Thus, this experiment suggests that GA should be the choice if a significant
reduction in the feature set is required. Otherwise, mRMR and ANOVA are better
choices with fewer computational demands. In addition, although feature selection
does not result in a significant increase in performance, it improves the ability to
generalise, as observed by Fig. 5.4. Overall, feature selection should be opted for to
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Discussion
decrease computational time and improve the model’s generalisability.
In terms of generalisation, all trained classifiers can generalise well on unseen
data from the same dataset with a similar data acquisition procedure.
To access
generalisation further, the models trained with Dataset 1 were tested on Dataset 2.
All ML models are able to perform better than random guess staying above 60%
accuracy for 90% or less percent of features selected, indicating that models are
picking the features that are similar between datasets and classify based on them.
ML models can generalise much better when 19 or 31 channels are used compared to
when fewer channels are used. Also, results suggest that when building generalisable
models, it is essential to perform feature selection otherwise performance could drop
below random guess. It is also important to compare the feature distributions (mean,
variance, etc.) between datasets per class to ensure the consistency and reliability
of results.
Overall, using more channels and as a result, more features that are
consistent between datasets, using feature selection techniques results in a stable and
highly generalisable model.
Even though ML models can generalise well, CNN has poor performance. This
could be because CNN has learned features that are specific to Dataset 1 but not
present in Dataset 2 or that CNN requires more extensive, more diverse training data
to generalise well. Further analysis could be done to find an explanation for this and
further examination of the interpretability of the models is necessary.
When comparing ML and DL classification methods, we must focus on perfor-
mance, simplicity, speed, generalisation ability, and explainability. ML models, par-
ticularly ensemble model attains slightly higher accuracy than DL method, 99.62%
versus 98.74%. DL methods have the advantage of scaling and improving as the data
quality and quantity increase. Another advantage of DL methods is that they are
simpler than ML methods because they do not require feature extraction and selec-
tion, as DL learns characteristics directly from data. Even in some works, the CNN
model takes the raw EEG data without any preprocessing or data cleaning [50]. This
makes DL model development and inference time faster than ML methods. Tests
were performed on the inference time of ML and DL methods. The inference time
of ML models on 19 channel data, including extracting features for each channel, is
27.45 seconds, whereas the inference time for the CNN model is 1.14 s. Thus, there is
a vast difference in inference time between methods though optimising the speed of
ML models was not part of this thesis and further inference time decrease is possible.
Generalisation was discussed previously, concluding that ML methods are more sta-
ble on varying dataset. Another point is explainability, which has critical importance
in the medical field. Classical ML methods definitely have an advantage of explain-
ability compared to DL models. But, with various techniques such as Grad-CAM,
SHAM, or LIME behaviour of models can be explained [74, 75, 76]. In general, when
opting for ML or DL model, depending on the application, all these points should be
considered.
In this work, both ML and DL methods were constructed by following best MLOps
practices making the experiment reproducible and available. All hyperparameters and
experiments are logged, codes and data are appropriately versioned, and models were
==PAGE:59==
6.1 Future research directions
49
deployed as an available web service. Thus, proving the concept that depression clas-
sification with EEG data can be productionalized into clinics. Also, following MLOps
practices will facilitate the research in the field by making codes, data, and models
available and reproducible and also will make diagnostic tools accessible independent
of demographic or economic status.
In general, it was noticed that it is hard to
replicate the results stated in papers because not all model or preprocessing (filtering,
ICA) hyperparameters are properly specified. Therefore, making reproducibility a
practice in the field is important.
For deployment and use of AI models in high-stakes applications such as auto-
matic diagnosis of depression it is crucial to ensure that models adhere to principles
of trustworthy AI. Trustworthy AI refers to models that are free of bias, robust,
transparent, explainable, and aligned with ethical principles [77]. In this thesis, we
have developed an AI that is trustworthy by ensuring robustness, bias, transparency,
and reproducibility. The whole experimental setup was extensively documented to
allow the reproducibility of our results. Robustness tests were performed to ensure
that models can handle edge cases and variations in input data. To ensure that the
model is free from bias all external data such as gender, age, etc. were excluded to
make predictions only on EEG data features. Also, appropriate performance metrics
were used to evaluate model performance and avoid bias towards a prevalent class.
Additionally, we have provided transparency by making the models accessible and
by achieving high accuracy with intuitive ML models such as k-NN that are simple
to understand and explain. Furthermore, exploratory analysis of the data was per-
formed and explanations for cases when models were failing were provided. Through
these efforts, we have developed reproducible, transparent, reliable, and trustworthy
AI models that are suitable for deployment for automatic diagnosis applications.
6.1
Future research directions
After reviewing the available literature and facing some complications while working
on this thesis, the following future research directions can be suggested.
6.1.1
Data availability
The amount of available datasets for depression classification is limited.
Most of
the data in the literature are private because of the concerns regarding privacy and
sensitivity of medical data. However, to develop more accurate models and progress
in the field, there is a need for more public datasets with a more extensive age
range, geographical locations, noise levels, etc. Large, diverse data will make models
more robust and open new opportunities to evaluate existing models. In addition,
developing new data augmentation methods such as GANs could be suggested to
enlarge the existing datasets and tackle data sparsity.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Discussion
6.1.2
Preprocessing
Widely used preprocessing methods such as ICA or visual inspection are manual
and time-consuming. Even though there are new methods, for example, AW-ICA or
FASTER, these methods do not remove all artefacts or result in the loss of important
brain activity [78, 79]. Therefore, there is a demand for an automatic artefact removal
method that can reliably remove as many artefacts as possible (muscle, eye movement,
blinks, heartbeat, etc.). For example, focus could be given to deep learning based
methods.
6.1.3
Classifiers
Deep attention neural networks could be explored for a depression diagnosis. Also,
one of the challenges of using DL is its poor interpretability. To overcome that, new
interpretation methods could be suggested.
6.1.4
Generalization
This work obtained promising results for the generalisation ability of ML models,
suggesting that non-linear features and some models (SVM, RF, ensemble) could
have superior generalisation ability. This could be further explored to determine if
specific features, channels, or models lead to better generalisation ability than others.
CNN had poor generalisation in this work. Further research could be done to assess
how to improve that.
6.1.5
MLOps practices
As was experienced throughout this thesis, most papers overlook reproducibility, ac-
cessibility, and proper logging of all parameters.
Thus, more attention should be
given in research to following best MLOps practices in order to make results more
trustworthy and accessible for further improvements. Also, none of the works inte-
grates the developed models into the clinical environment. More research on that,
with lessons learned and obstacles met, will facilitate the integration of automatic
diagnosis of depression into hospitals.
6.1.6
Other
The combination of EEG data with other data types, such as fMRI or eye-tracking,
is not extensively explored. The increase in accuracy by combining EEG with other
modalities could be further analysed.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The main aims of this research were to propose an accurate way of diagnosing depres-
sion, study the effect of various hyperparameters systematically, compare machine
learning and deep learning based methods and also to make the developments acces-
sible and reproducible. To achieve these goals, we have developed a machine learning
based methodology consisting of data preprocessing, feature extraction, selection and
classification and deep learning based methodology consisting of preprocessing and
classification. We found that an ensemble model that combines the predictions of
k-NN, SVM, RF and XGBoost with the Dempster-Shafer rule resulted in the highest
accuracy of 99.62% for 31 channels and 10-second segmentation lengths. The model
extracts the combination of linear and non-linear features. CNN model has also pro-
vided a high accuracy of 98.74% for 1-second EEG signals from 31 channels. The
models were tested on another dataset to validate the ability to generalise. The re-
sults suggest that ML models can generalise well without training on Dataset 2 when
a larger number of features are used and combined with feature selection methods.
These are certainly encouraging results considering the complexity of the task due
to the difference in dataset gathering procedure. CNN model fails to generalise on
another dataset which could be because of the limited dataset size. In general, the
results have important implications for the use of EEG in the diagnosis of depression.
The study on the effect of hyperparameters indicates that channel numbers, fea-
ture selection method, and the number of features selected significantly impact model
performance. In contrast, segmentation length does not seem to be as important. As
features are extracted from larger numbers of channels, the model performance im-
proves, but there is also a trade-off between feature extraction time and accuracy.
The selection of 90% of the features gives the best results in most cases with ANOVA
and mRMR techniques, but GA tends to yield better results with a smaller subset
of features (25%) and also works well in combination with the ensemble model. Ad-
ditionally, MLOps practices were followed during the research by using tools and
frameworks for logging all preprocessing and training hyperparameters, tracking ex-
periments, versioning code and data, and deployment. These practices will facilitate
the incorporation of ML algorithms into the healthcare industry and can enable ac-
curate and effective healthcare delivery.
By comparing ML and DL methods, it can be outlined that DL methods are
faster and simpler as it has inherent feature extraction and selection capabilities.
However, it was not able to generalise on the second dataset. Conversely, the ML
==PAGE:62==
52
7 Conclusion
model performs slightly better than the DL model, but its inference time is longer.
Future research should aim to verify our findings with larger and more diverse data
to validate these results, as our study was limited to a small population.
Overall, the thesis has proposed accurate methods for depression diagnosis by care-
fully analysing the effect of various development choices and incorporating MLOps
practices. The proposed techniques have the potential to enable neurologists to di-
agnose depression accurately using EEG signals and improve the identification and
treatment of the disorder.
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Information about study participants
==PAGE:64==
54
A An Appendix
Table A.1: Depression scores for subjects in Dataset 1 before and after the treat-
ment.
Subject ID
Gender
Pre Depression Score
Post Depression Score
Comments
S1
Male
24
10
EC excluded
S2
Male
8
8
S3
Female
6
14
S4
Male
12
12
S5
Female
22
12
S6
Female
4
-
S7
Female
10
8
S8
Male
14
12
EO excluded
S9
Male
8
0
EC&EO excluded
S10
Male
6
12
S11
Female
12
16
S12
Male
1
1
S13
Male
2
1
S14
Male
8
1
S15
Male
8
1
S16
Female
16
6
S17
Female
14
6
S18
Female
12
6
EC&EO excluded
S19
Female
6
2
S20
Female
4
2
S21
Male
16
6
S22
Female
16
2
S23
Male
4
-
S24
Male
2
6
EO excluded
S25
Female
6
2
S26
Male
22
24
EC&EO excluded
S27
Male
14
8
S29
Female
6
10
S30
Male
0
8
S31
Male
26
10
S32
Male
4
2
S33
Female
28
2
S35
Male
12
6
EC&EO excluded
S36
Male
18
10
S37
Male
20
12
EC&EO excluded
S38
Male
8
2
S39
Male
4
0
EC&EO excluded
S40
Male
20
28
EC&EO excluded
S41
Male
14
14
EC excluded
S42
Male
0
0
EC&EO excluded
S43
Female
10
10
S44
Male
14
24
EC&EO excluded
S45
Female
18
20
EC&EO excluded
S46
Female
4
2
EC&EO excluded
S47
Male
4
-
EC&EO excluded
S49
Female
0
-
A.2
Example EEG recordings of excluded subjects
==PAGE:65==
A.2 Example EEG recordings of excluded subjects
55
Figure A.1: Raw EEG plot of an excluded subject 18 (EC)
Figure A.2: Raw EEG plot of an excluded subject 37 (EC)
==PAGE:66==
56
A An Appendix
Figure A.3: Raw EEG plot of an excluded subject 39 (EC)
Figure A.4: Raw EEG plot of an excluded subject 45 (EC)
==PAGE:67==
A.3 Generalization plots for other cases
57
A.3
Generalization plots for other cases
25
50
75
90
all
50
60
70
80
90
100
KNN - D1
SVM - D1
RF - D1
XGBoost - D1
Ensemble - D1
KNN - D2
SVM - D2
RF - D2
XGBoost - D2
Ensemble - D2
Percentage of features used (%)
Accuracy (%)
Figure A.5: ML model generalization performance on Dataset 1 (blue) and Dataset
2 (red) for various percentages of features extracted from 6 channels with 10-second
segmentation length and ANOVA feature selection technique.
25
50
75
90
all
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
KNN - D1
SVM - D1
RF - D1
XGBoost - D1
Ensemble - D1
KNN - D2
SVM - D2
RF - D2
XGBoost - D2
Ensemble - D2
Percentage of features used (%)
Accuracy (%)
Figure A.6: ML model generalization performance on Dataset 1 (blue) and Dataset
2 (red) for various percentages of features extracted from 5 channels with 10-second
segmentation length and ANOVA feature selection technique..
A.4
Plots for CNN model for 19 channel data
classification
==PAGE:68==
58
A An Appendix
(a)
(b)
Figure A.7: Training (blue) and validation (red) loss (a) and accuracy (b) over 200
epochs for CNN model trained on 19 channels EEG data
Figure A.8: Confusion matrix of for CNN model trained on 19 channel EEG data
for test data.
==PAGE:69==
A.5 Link to a source code
59
A.5
Link to a source code
A complete source code used for this work is available at github.com/bekarys0504/MSc-
Thesis
A.6
Feature importance analysis
The most commonly selected features seem to be Hjort mobility, sample entropy, delta,
gamma, beta band powers, and power spectral entropy. These features commonly
occur in all three feature selection methods. It should also be noted that genetic
algorithm prefers simple statistical features such as mean, variance and skewness. In
terms of EEG channels, ANOVA and mRMR gives preference to frontal and central
lobes, whereas for GA, channels at the temporal lobe are the most prevalent.
Table A.2: Top 10 features selected by each feature selection method and the number
of times they were selected when 25% of features are selected from 31 channel EEG
data.
ANOVA
mRMR
GA
Hjorth Mob. (24)
Hjorth Mob. (19)
Beta band power (10)
Sample entropy (22)
DFA (16)
HFD (8)
DFA (18)
Sample entropy (15)
Variance (6)
KFD (16)
KFD (13)
Skewness (6)
PSE (16)
Hjorth Comp. (13)
Mean (5)
Hjorth Comp. (12)
Delta band power (11)
Hjorth Mob. (5)
Gamma band power (8)
PSE (11)
Delta band power (5)
Delta band power (7)
Gamma band power (9)
Gamma band power (5)
Beta band power (6)
Beta band power (7)
Sample entropy (5)
Hurst exponent (4)
Hurst exponent (5)
PSE (5)
Table A.3:
Top 10 channels selected by each feature selection method and the
number of times they were selected when 25% of features are selected from 31 channel
EEG data.
ANOVA
mRMR
GA
FT8 (8)
CPz (11)
T4 (8)
FT7 (8)
Cz (9)
TP7 (7)
FCz (8)
Pz (8)
O1 (7)
C3 (8)
FCz (8)
T5 (5)
CP3 (8)
FT8 (8)
F4 (5)
FC3 (7)
C3 (8)
CPz (4)
FC4 (7)
FT7 (7)
Pz (4)
Cz (7)
CP3 (7)
CP3 (4)
CPz (7)
P3 (6)
FT8 (3)
P3 (7)
F7 (6)
T6 (3)
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Depression. https : / / www . who . int / news - room / fact - sheets / detail /
depression. Accessed: 2022-10-11.
[2]
World Mental Health Day: Depression to be the biggest cause of ill health by
2030, says WHO. https://www.indiatoday.in/education-today/gk-&-
current-affairs/story/world-mental-health-day-depression-suicide-
prevention-who-1607866-2019-10-10. Accessed: 2022-10-11.
[3]
International Classification of Diseases,Tenth Revision (ICD-10). https://www.
cdc.gov/nchs/icd/icd10.htm. Accessed: 2022-10-11.
[4]
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders. 2013. isbn: 978-0-89042-554-1.
[5]
Søren Dinesen Østergaard, SOW Jensen, and P Bech. “The heterogeneity of the
depressive syndrome: when numbers get serious.” In: Acta Psychiatrica Scandi-
navica (2011).
[6]
Wei Liu et al. “A Depression Prediction Algorithm Based on Spatiotemporal
Feature of EEG Signal.” In: Brain Sciences 12.5 (2022), page 630.
[7]
Antora Dev et al. “Exploration of EEG-based depression biomarkers identifica-
tion techniques and their applications: A systematic review.” In: IEEE Access
(2022).
[8]
Rebecca Kerestes et al. “Functional brain imaging studies of youth depression:
a systematic review.” In: NeuroImage: Clinical 4 (2014), pages 209–231.
[9]
Jonas Persson et al. “Inhibitory and excitatory neurotransmitter systems in
depressed and healthy: A positron emission tomography and magnetic reso-
nance spectroscopy study.” In: Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging 315 (2021),
page 111327.
[10]
Shalini Mahato and Sanchita Paul. “Electroencephalogram (EEG) signal anal-
ysis for diagnosis of major depressive disorder (MDD): a review.” In: Nanoelec-
tronics, Circuits and Communication Systems (2019), pages 323–335.
[11]
Sebastian Olbrich and Martijn Arns. “EEG biomarkers in major depressive
disorder: discriminative power and prediction of treatment response.” In: Inter-
national Review of Psychiatry 25.5 (2013), pages 604–618.
==PAGE:72==
62
Bibliography
[12]
Oliver Faust et al. “Depression diagnosis support system based on EEG sig-
nal entropies.” In: Journal of mechanics in medicine and biology 14.03 (2014),
page 1450035.
[13]
G Muralidhar Bairy, UC Niranjan, and Subha D Puthankattil. “Automated
classification of depression EEG signals using wavelet entropies and energies.”
In: Journal of Mechanics in Medicine and Biology 16.03 (2016), page 1650035.
[14]
U Rajendra Acharya et al. “Automated EEG-based screening of depression
using deep convolutional neural network.” In: Computer methods and programs
in biomedicine 161 (2018), pages 103–113.
[15]
Brain Anatomy and How the Brain Works. https://www.hopkinsmedicine.
org/health/conditions-and-diseases/anatomy-of-the-brain. Accessed:
2022-12-28.
[16]
What is a neuron? https://qbi.uq.edu.au/brain/brain-anatomy/what-
neuron. Accessed: 2022-12-28.
[17]
Overview of neuron structure and function. https://www.khanacademy.org/
science/biology/human-biology/neuron-nervous-system/a/overview-
of-neuron-structure-and-function. Accessed: 2023-01-02.
[18]
Anatomy of the Brain. https://mayfieldclinic.com/pe-anatbrain.htm.
Accessed: 2022-12-28.
[19]
MC Moulson and CA Nelson. “Neurological development.” In: (2008).
[20]
Basic electrophysiology. https://www.learningeeg.com/basic-eeg-electro
physiology. Accessed: 2023-01-02.
[21]
Saeid Sanei and Jonathon A Chambers. EEG signal processing. John Wiley &
Sons, 2013.
[22]
George H Klem. “The ten-twenty electrode system of the international feder-
ation. the internanional federation of clinical nenrophysiology.” In: Electroen-
cephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. Suppl. 52 (1999), pages 3–6.
[23]
Tat’y Mwata-Velu et al. “Improving motor imagery eeg classification based on
channel selection using a deep learning architecture.” In: Mathematics 10.13
(2022), page 2302.
[24]
TMSi. Mental workload. url: https://www.tmsi.com/applications/mental-
workload/ (visited on January 21, 2023).
[25]
Marc R Nuwer. “10-10 electrode system for EEG recording.” In: Clinical neu-
rophysiology: oﬀicial journal of the International Federation of Clinical Neuro-
physiology 129.5 (2018), pages 1103–1103.
[26]
Robert Oostenveld and Peter Praamstra. “The five percent electrode system
for high-resolution EEG and ERP measurements.” In: Clinical neurophysiology
112.4 (2001), pages 713–719.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
63
[27]
Montages
technicalities. https://www.learningeeg.com/montages- and-
technical-components. Accessed: 2023-01-02.
[28]
Jayant N Acharya and Vinita J Acharya. “Overview of EEG montages and
principles of localization.” In: Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology 36.5 (2019),
pages 325–329.
[29]
Dilara Yüksel et al. “Longitudinal brain volume changes in major depressive
disorder.” In: Journal of Neural Transmission 125.10 (2018), pages 1433–1447.
[30]
Yi Liu, Jingping Zhao, and Wenbin Guo. “Emotional roles of mono-aminergic
neurotransmitters in major depressive disorder and anxiety disorders.” In: Fron-
tiers in psychology 9 (2018), page 2201.
[31]
Paul J Fitzgerald and Brendon O Watson. “Gamma oscillations as a biomarker
for major depression: an emerging topic.” In: Translational psychiatry 8.1 (2018),
pages 1–7.
[32]
Mingfan Liu et al. “Deficient manipulation of working memory in remitted
depressed individuals: Behavioral and electrophysiological evidence.” In: Clinical
Neurophysiology 128.7 (2017), pages 1206–1213.
[33]
Vera A Grin-Yatsenko et al. “Independent component approach to the analysis
of EEG recordings at early stages of depressive disorders.” In: Clinical Neuro-
physiology 121.3 (2010), pages 281–289.
[34]
Maie Bachmann et al. “Methods for classifying depression in single channel
EEG using linear and nonlinear signal analysis.” In: Computer methods and
programs in biomedicine 155 (2018), pages 11–17.
[35]
Maie Bachmann, Jaanus Lass, and Hiie Hinrikus. “Single channel EEG analysis
for detection of depression.” In: Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 31
(2017), pages 391–397.
[36]
Behshad Hosseinifard, Mohammad Hassan Moradi, and Reza Rostami. “Classi-
fying depression patients and normal subjects using machine learning techniques
and nonlinear features from EEG signal.” In: Computer methods and programs
in biomedicine 109.3 (2013), pages 339–345.
[37]
Shalini Mahato et al. “Detection of depression and scaling of severity using six
channel EEG data.” In: Journal of medical systems 44.7 (2020), pages 1–12.
[38]
Jing Zhu et al. “Multimodal mild depression recognition based on EEG-EM
synchronization acquisition network.” In: IEEE Access 7 (2019), pages 28196–
28210.
[39]
Yousef Mohammadi, Mojtaba Hajian, and Mohammad Hassan Moradi. “Dis-
crimination of depression levels using machine learning methods on EEG sig-
nals.” In: 2019 27th Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE). IEEE.
2019, pages 1765–1769.
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
[40]
Amir Nassibi, Christos Papavassiliou, and S Farokh Atashzar. “Depression di-
agnosis using machine intelligence based on spatiospectrotemporal analysis of
multi-channel EEG.” In: Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing (2022),
pages 1–16.
[41]
Jian Shen et al. “A novel depression detection method based on pervasive EEG
and EEG splitting criterion.” In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Bioin-
formatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). IEEE. 2017, pages 1879–1886.
[42]
Ayan Seal et al. “Benchmarks for machine learning in depression discrimination
using electroencephalography signals.” In: Applied Intelligence (2022), pages 1–
18.
[43]
Shahriar Saleque et al. “Detection of major depressive disorder using signal
processing and machine learning approaches.” In: 2020 15th IEEE Conference
on Industrial Electronics and Applications (ICIEA). IEEE. 2020, pages 1032–
1037.
[44]
Yujie Li et al. “A novel EEG-based major depressive disorder detection frame-
work with two-stage feature selection.” In: BMC Medical Informatics and Deci-
sion Making 22.1 (2022), pages 1–13.
[45]
Shalini Mahato and Sanchita Paul. “Classification of depression patients and
normal subjects based on electroencephalogram (EEG) signal using alpha power
and theta asymmetry.” In: Journal of medical systems 44.1 (2020), pages 1–8.
[46]
Maryam Saeedi, Abdolkarim Saeedi, and Arash Maghsoudi. “Major depressive
disorder assessment via enhanced k-nearest neighbor method and EEG signals.”
In: Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine 43.3 (2020), pages 1007–1018.
[47]
P Sandheep et al. “Performance analysis of deep learning CNN in classification
of depression EEG signals.” In: TENCON 2019-2019 IEEE Region 10 Confer-
ence (TENCON). IEEE. 2019, pages 1339–1344.
[48]
Wajid Mumtaz and Abdul Qayyum. “A deep learning framework for automatic
diagnosis of unipolar depression.” In: International journal of medical informat-
ics 132 (2019), page 103983.
[49]
Geetanjali Sharma, Abhishek Parashar, and Amit M Joshi. “DepHNN: a novel
hybrid neural network for electroencephalogram (EEG)-based screening of de-
pression.” In: Biomedical signal processing and control 66 (2021), page 102393.
[50]
Hyunjin Kwon et al. “Deep learning based pre-screening method for depres-
sion with imagery frontal eeg channels.” In: 2019 International conference on
information and communication technology convergence (ICTC). IEEE. 2019,
pages 378–380.
[51]
Zhuozheng Wang et al. “A Novel Diagnosis Method of Depression Based on EEG
and Convolutional Neural Network.” In: International Conference on Frontier
Computing. Springer. 2022, pages 91–102.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
65
[52]
K Hoechstetter, P Berg, and M Scherg. “BESA research tutorial 4: distributed
source imaging.” In: BESA Research Tutorial (2010), pages 1–29.
[53]
Wajid Mumtaz et al. “A wavelet-based technique to predict treatment outcome
for major depressive disorder.” In: PloS one 12.2 (2017), e0171409.
[54]
Carl C Bell. “DSM-IV: diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders.”
In: Jama 272.10 (1994), pages 828–829.
[55]
John Polich and José R Criado. “Neuropsychology and neuropharmacology
of P3a and P3b.” In: International Journal of Psychophysiology 60.2 (2006),
pages 172–185.
[56]
Carlos Amo et al. “Analysis of gamma-band activity from human EEG using
empirical mode decomposition.” In: Sensors 17.5 (2017), page 989.
[57]
Introduction to Filters: FIR versus IIR. https://community.sw.siemens.
com/s/article/introduction- to- filters- fir- versus- iir. Accessed:
2022-11-4.
[58]
ML | Independent Component Analysis. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ml-
independent-component-analysis/. Accessed: 2022-12-12.
[59]
Alexandre Gramfort et al. “MEG and EEG Data Analysis with MNE-Python.”
In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 7.267 (2013), pages 1–13. doi: 10.3389/fnins.
2013.00267.
[60]
Aapo Hyvärinen and Erkki Oja. “Independent component analysis: algorithms
and applications.” In: Neural networks 13.4-5 (2000), pages 411–430.
[61]
Claude Elwood Shannon. “A mathematical theory of communication.” In: The
Bell system technical journal 27.3 (1948), pages 379–423.
[62]
Harold Edwin Hurst. “Long-term storage capacity of reservoirs.” In: Transac-
tions of the American society of civil engineers 116.1 (1951), pages 770–799.
[63]
Bo Hjorth. “EEG analysis based on time domain properties.” In: Electroen-
cephalography and clinical neurophysiology 29.3 (1970), pages 306–310.
[64]
Tomoyuki Higuchi. “Approach to an irregular time series on the basis of the
fractal theory.” In: Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 31.2 (1988), pages 277–
283.
[65]
Michael J Katz. “Fractals and the analysis of waveforms.” In: Computers in
biology and medicine 18.3 (1988), pages 145–156.
[66]
Chris Ding and Hanchuan Peng. “Minimum redundancy feature selection from
microarray gene expression data.” In: Journal of bioinformatics and computa-
tional biology 3.02 (2005), pages 185–205.
[67]
Zhenyu Zhao, Radhika Anand, and Mallory Wang. “Maximum relevance and
minimum redundancy feature selection methods for a marketing machine learn-
ing platform.” In: 2019 IEEE international conference on data science and
advanced analytics (DSAA). IEEE. 2019, pages 442–452.
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
[68]
Deep Learning vs. Machine Learning: Beginner’s Guide. https://www.courser
a.org/articles/ai-vs-deep-learning-vs-machine-learning-beginners-
guide. Accessed: 2022-12-22.
[69]
What is K-fold Cross Validation? https://towardsdatascience.com/what-
is-k-fold-cross-validation-5a7bb241d82f. Accessed: 2022-12-22.
[70]
What is Support Vector Machine (SVM) ?-with Python. https://medium.
com/@cdabakoglu/what-is-support-vector-machine-svm-fd0e9e39514f.
Accessed: 2022-12-12.
[71]
Glenn Shafer. A mathematical theory of evidence. Volume 42. Princeton univer-
sity press, 1976.
[72]
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. “Understanding the diﬀiculty of training
deep feedforward neural networks.” In: Proceedings of the thirteenth interna-
tional conference on artificial intelligence and statistics. JMLR Workshop and
Conference Proceedings. 2010, pages 249–256.
[73]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-
tion.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[74]
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju et al. “Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep net-
works via gradient-based localization.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision. 2017, pages 618–626.
[75]
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. “” Why should i
trust you?” Explaining the predictions of any classifier.” In: Proceedings of the
22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data
mining. 2016, pages 1135–1144.
[76]
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. “A unified approach to interpreting model
predictions.” In: Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[77]
Ismini Psychoula. Trustworthy AI: Why We Need It and How to Achieve It.
2021. url: https://www.onespan.com/blog/trustworthy-ai-why-we-need-
it-and-how-achieve-it (visited on January 16, 2023).
[78]
Hugh Nolan, Robert Whelan, and Richard B Reilly. “FASTER: fully automated
statistical thresholding for EEG artifact rejection.” In: Journal of neuroscience
methods 192.1 (2010), pages 152–162.
[79]
Nadia Mammone, Fabio La Foresta, and Francesco Carlo Morabito. “Automatic
artifact rejection from multichannel scalp EEG by wavelet ICA.” In: IEEE Sen-
sors Journal 12.3 (2011), pages 533–542.
