==PAGE:1==
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
Data-driven optimering af UI & UX
In collaboration with BrainCapture
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
Data-driven optimering af UI & UX
In collaboration with BrainCapture
February, 2023
By
Iman Chelhi
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
Iman Chelhi - s165228
Signature
Date
ii
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
1/2/2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The medical technology company BrainCapture aims at delivering EEG solutions to LMICs
to counterattack the treatment gap seen for people with undiagnosed epilepsy. They seek
to do this through their solution which is centered around a mobile application. However,
this application has never been assessed by an user experience expert, and through user
tests it was seen that the application has usability weaknesses and challenges.
This thesis focuses on discovering who the users of an EEG solution are and their cor-
responding user needs through expert interviews and EEG observations. Hereafter, the
BrainCapture solution will be assessed through a variety of user experience tools and
methodologies to adjudge whether the development of an optimized version of the solu-
tion is justifiable.
The analysis will show that this is justifiable, and therefore the design implementation of an
optimized version of the BrainCapture solution in terms of user interface and experience
at an MVP state will begin. The optimized version will then be refined iteratively through
the build-measure-learn cycle. This cycle will continue for five sprints, where usability
testing with relevant users will continuously improve the prototype.
Lastly, the findings and limitations of the thesis will be discussed and it will be determined
that the optimized version of the BrainCapture application is better in terms of usability
and based on user’s opinions.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This thesis was written by Iman Chelhi, however the project was possible to conduct with
the help of the following people:
Per Bækgaard, Associate Professor, PhD, MSc EE, Head of Study, Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence, Head supervisor
Per Bækgaard has not only delivered quality supervision and guidance, but has also been
a great support even before the beginning of the thesis until the very end.
Louise Klok, Usability Expert, BrainCapture supervisor
Louise Klok has delivered relevant guidance and feedback from the company’s point of
view, and has been especially helpful for the SWOT analysis.
The BrainCapture team
The team at BrainCapture have made the collaboration of this project smooth and have
been enjoyable to work with.
Neurophysiology assistants, medical laboratory technologists, and specialized doc-
tor
With their participation in the expert interviews, these roles have created the foundation
of the project, and therefore their input is gratefully appreciated.
The nurses at their respective hospitals
The nurses who participated in the usability testing have been delightful, helpful, and
lovely to interact with. Their input have been the key to the success of this project.
Sneaster Asrat, User experience designer
Sneaster Asrat was tremendously helpful in giving professional constructive feedback on
the initial version of the optimized application.
Saynab Farah Dahir, Medical student at the university of Copenhagen
Saynab Farah Dahir’s assistance in giving purposeful feedback on the initial version of
the optimized application was highly appreciated.
Sara Asani, Pedagogue
Sara Asani has continuously proofread the thesis despite her different background, and
given relevant feedback from an outside perspective.
Mohamed Chelhi & Asmae Cherti, My parents
My parents have as always been an amazing support system throughout the project.
iv
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:6==
Glossary
LMIC: Low and middle income countries
HIC: High income countries
AED: Anti epileptic drugs
EEG: Electroencephalogram (recording of brain activity)
ECG: Electrocardiogram (recording of heart rhythm)
EMG: Electromyography (recording of motor neuron activity)
EMU: Epilepsy monitoring unit
MVP: Minimum viable product
Sundhedsplatformen: Internal medical system
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Problem Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem Statement & Research Questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Methodologies
5
2.1
Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Design Implementation & Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Research
10
3.1
Users
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
User Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Sub-conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Analysis
23
4.1
User Experience Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
SWOT Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.3
Sub-conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5
Design Implementation & Testing
52
5.1
MoSCoW Prioritization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.2
User Story Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.3
Sprints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.4
Sub-conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
6
Discussion
110
6.1
Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
6.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
6.3
Design Implementation & Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
6.4
The final result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
7
Conclusion
115
Bibliography
116
vi
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:8==
A Appendix
118
A.1 Expert interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
A.2 Standard EEG and Standard Control EEG Scan Observations
. . . . . . . 145
A.3 Focus Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
A.4 User tests on the BrainCapture application (V1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
A.5 Usability tests on the data-driven optimized application . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
A.6 DGR Questionnaire (Filadelfia Epilepsihospital) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
A.7 User story maps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220
A.8 Typical diagnosis flow for an epilepsy suspected patient . . . . . . . . . . . 223
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
1
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This thesis is collaborative project between a MSc. Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
student, Iman Chelhi, and BrainCapture Aps. The thesis has four main parts.
The first part focuses on discovering the user needs for EEG examinations. This is done
by accumulating different types of qualitative data such as expert interviews and obser-
vations.
The second part focuses on adjudging the user interface and user experience of the ex-
isting BrainCapture prototype through different methods, and the risks within the overall
solution are then analyzed to assess whether it is justified to build an optimized version
of the prototype.
The third part aims at building the optimized version of the prototype at a MVP level based
on the accumulated data and findings from the previous parts. Once the optimized version
has been through design implementation, it will go through multiple sprints where users
will test the prototype through usability tests, and then be improved iteratively based on
the results.
This will result in a prototype where user interface and user experience has been optimized
through a data-driven approach which is centered around the user.
Lastly, the final part ties in the thesis by discussing different aspects in terms of improve-
ments and limitations of the overall project.
1.1
Problem Background
Epilepsy is a neurological brain disease characterized by unprovoked seizures which can
negatively affect cognition [1]. The World Health Organization states that at least 50 mil-
lion people worldwide suffer from epilepsy, and of these 50 million, approximately 80%
are located outside HICs [2].
Epilepsy requires treatment and for this to be possible, a diagnoses is needed. How-
ever, this is a challenge in many LMICs, where lack of trained doctors and staff, relevant
equipment, available AED, and diagnostic facilities make it difficult to get diagnosed.
This is where BrainCapture wants to enter the market with their solution to help people
with epilepsy who go undiagnosed in LMICs.
1.2
State of the art
1.2.1
The typical clinical solution
The typical solution utilized in many hospitals, for conducting a standard 30 minute routine
EEG, includes EEG electrodes, either individual or in the form of a cap, conductive salt
2
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:10==
water based gel, an exfoliating NuPrep gel, and a syringe with a needle. Other electrodes
including ECG, EMG, eye eletrodes are also commonly used to create a multi-modal
examination.
The EEG electrodes, where the amount varies between 19-27 electrodes, are placed
on the patient’s head using the gels following a standardized 10-20 system. Within this
system, each electrode is placed at distances of 10 and 20%. Of the electrodes, two
of them differ as one is used as a reference (typically referred to as the REF electrode),
while the other is used as a ground (typically referred to as the GND electrode), and these
electrodes are placed before the rest.
For the rest of the electrodes, they are represented through letters and numbers. The
letters depict the position of the electrode above the brain lobe, and the numbers reference
a position for the electrode on either the left (odd numbers) or right (even numbers) side
of the brain.
The ECG electrodes, where around six electrodes, are typically placed on the rib cage,
and the eye electrode is placed on the eyelid. EMG electrodes are not a part of stan-
dard procedures, however they can be utilized if the patient is known to have myoclonic
movement. Then the EMG electrodes are placed on the corresponding muscles.
Once all the electrodes have been placed, they are connected to an amplifier and the
standard 30 minute routine EEG can be conducted. The data is then transferred as a file
to a computer. Hereafter, the file is uploaded to the cloud and other relevant roles can
then access the file to continue the diagnosis.
1.2.2
The BrainCapture solution
BrainCapture’s solution is a more compromised version of the typical clinical solution. The
BrainCapture solution offers a package including 27 EEG electrodes in caps of different
sizes, an amplifier, ECG device with two electrodes, and a mobile application.
While the EEG electrodes (cap) are placed the same as with the typical clinical solution,
the ECG is placed on the patient’s wrists. Furthermore, no eye or EMG electrodes are
included.
The included electrodes are then connected to the amplifier which is connected to the
application through Bluetooth. With the application, it is possible to conduct a standard
30 minute routine EEG.
The data is then converted into a file which is uploaded to the cloud, where, like the typical
clinical solution, relevant roles can access the file.
1.2.3
Other solutions
There are different solutions available for recording EEG. A competitor analysis conducted
in [1] gave an overview of three other major medical companies who deliver traditional
medical grade or wireless solutions focusing on number of channels, price, and mobility.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
3
==PAGE:11==
Table 1.1: Existing product systems [1]
Company
Name
System Type
Number
of
Channels
Mobility
Price in EUR
Cadwell
Traditional
medical grade
EEG systems
19 to 25
No
14.000
Brain Products
Wireless
19 to 25
Yes
15.000
Zeto
Wireless
19 to 25
Yes
13.000
BrainCapture
Wireless
25
Yes
Fixed
one
time
payment
of
400
per
system
plus
subscription of
50/month
per
system
In table 1.1, it is seen that the BrainCapture solution has an advantage when it comes to
the pricing of their solution.
1.3
Problem Statement & Research Questions
BrainCapture is currently working on their application in regards to implementation and
testing. However, the user interface and user experience have not been evaluated by
experts within user experience.
This leaves questions in regards to whether the current application is the most optimal for
BrainCapture and their intended users.
Therefore, this thesis focuses on the following problem statement:
How might we adjudge the user interface & user experience of the BrainCapture
application to create an optimal version in terms of user interface & user experience
using data-driven approaches?
To answer this problem statement, the following research questions have been stated:
1. Who are the users an EEG solution and what are their needs?
2. What is the as-is state of the current user interface & user experience of the Brain-
Capture application?
3. How would an optimized version of the BrainCapture application look in terms of
user interface & user experience?
4
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:12==
2
Methodologies
Throughout the thesis, different methodologies and tools have been used to work system-
atically towards a final end result. The used methods for each chapter will be described
in theory and in practice for this thesis.
2.1
Research
2.1.1
Qualitative data collection: Expert interviews & observations
Qualitative data is characterized as descriptive data based on subjective opinions and
viewpoints, utilized to describe subjects, notions, inter alia. Within qualitative data collec-
tion, creating an understanding of the data subject’s experiences is the focal point. This
type of data typically does not include numerical values [3, 4].
Different tools can be used to accumulate qualitative data, and in this thesis, interviews
done on experts within EEG and epilepsy have been conducted (A.1). Here, the experts
of different roles have been questioned to gather an overview of user needs. Further-
more, standard EEG scans conducted at Sjællands Universitetshospital, Roskilde were
observed for the same purpose.
2.1.2
Affinity mapping
Affinity mapping, also sometimes referred to as affinity diagramming, is a tool used for
organizing or grouping data by recognizing common patterns, tendencies, or relationships
across through characteristics and themes [3]. This technique is beneficial for discovering
common issues or challenges and is therefore a valuable tool to use at the start of a project
during the research phase.
In this thesis, the affinity mapping tool was used to categorize main user needs through
the accumulated qualitative data.
2.2
Analysis
2.2.1
User experience review
User experience reviews are evaluations of a service or product conducted by an expert
within user experience focusing especially on usability challenges. Here, the expert thinks
of what could be a potential issue for the user. The expert can utilize different heuristics
as guidelines, but the existing knowledge of the expert is what distinguishes this tool from
other kinds of reviews [5].
For the thesis, the BrainCapture prototype was assessed through an user experience
review focusing on usability challenges. In order to capture a full overview of the prototype,
strengths were also included.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
5
==PAGE:13==
2.2.2
Peter Morville’s User Experience Honeycomb
The User Experience Honeycomb is a framework expanded from the users, content and
context diagram. The Honeycomb is focused on diving in to different aspects of user
experience. The aspects are categorized through seven sections which are centered
around whether the user finds a service or product usable, useful, desirable, findable,
accessible, and credible [6].
The usable section focuses on ease of use and familiarity, and the useful section is cen-
tered around user needs. The desirable section is about the visual user interface design,
the findable section targets easy navigation and access to information, and the acces-
sible section looks at how to accommodate users with disabilities. The credible section
examines the credibility of the subject, and lastly, the valuable section is an accumulation
of all the findings focusing on whether the subject brings value to the user.
While it is not mandatory for a product or service to equally satisfy all the sections, the
framework is useful when assessing good user experience.
In this thesis, the User Experience Honeycomb was used to assess the user interface
and experience of the BrainCapture prototype. This was done using a variety of tools to
adjudge the different sections within the Honeycomb. The tools for the usable, desirable,
accessible, and credible sections will be described below.
2.2.3
Jakob Nielsen’s 10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface Design
The 10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface Design are high level heuristics where each
heuristic focuses on different aspects within usability. Because of its simplicity, this method
can be used by different roles without a prior background in user experience resulting in
a rise of popularity for this method. The UX book describes the heuristics as a method
that novices can grab onto and use without a great deal of training [3].
As the name implies, there are 10 heuristics namely, Visibility of system status, Match
between system and the real world, User control and freedom, Consistency and stan-
dards, Error prevention, Recognition rather than recall, Flexibility and efficiency of use,
Aesthetic and minimalist design, Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors,
and lastly, Help and documentation.
This method however has limitations within its simplicity as usability related challenges
can go undiscovered and can therefore not stand alone [3]. To accommodate this lim-
itation, an user experience inspection focusing on the heuristics will be utilized in this
thesis to adjudge the usable section in terms of usability strengths and weaknesses of
the BrainCapture prototype.
2.2.4
Schneiderman’s 8 Golden Design Rules
The 8 Golden Design Rules by Ben Schneiderman have been developed as a guideline for
designers to use for identifying challenges within user interface design which also affect
the user experience [7]. Like the aforementioned 10 Usability Heuristics, the 8 Golden
6
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:14==
Design Rules are a high level set of rules which are easy to comprehend for inexperienced
roles.
Schneiderman’s 8 Golden Design Rules are Strive for consistency, Enable frequent users
to use shortcuts, Offer informative feedback, Design dialog to yield closure, Offer simple
error handling, Permit easy reversal of actions, Support internal locus of control, and lastly,
Reduce short-term memory load.
In this thesis, the 8 Golden Design Rules have been used to assess whether the Brain-
Capture prototype fulfills the desirable section of the Honeycomb.
2.2.5
7 Principles of Universal Design
The 7 Principles of Universal Design is a set of principles commonly used by designers to
cover the broad term of accessibility which focuses on accommodating users with diverse
disabilities [8].
The 7 Principles of Universal Design are Equitable use, Flexibility in use, Simple and
intuitive use, Perceptible information, Tolerance for error, Low physical effort, and lastly,
Size and Space for Approach and Use.
The principles can be used for both designing a product or service from scratch, or to
assess an existing one, and in this thesis, the 7 Principles of Universal Design have been
applied on the BrainCapture prototype to adjudge whether it fulfills the accessible section
of the Honeycomb.
2.2.6
The Elements of Value Pyramid
The Elements of Value Pyramid is a hierarchical framework consisting of 30 elements
which are sectioned in four levels, namely Functional, Emotional, Life changing, and So-
cial impact. The framework was developed in order to make it easier to evaluate value of
a product or service from a user’s perspective.
Some elements are defined as having an inwardly focus as they are targeting user needs,
while other elements are described as having an outwardly focus as they look at holistic
aspects for the user [9].
Again, it is not mandatory for a product or service to satisfy all 30 elements, and at times
it is not a necessity, but targeting some elements across the four levels can be beneficial
when wanting to create value for the user and therefore manifesting credibility.
The Elements of Value Pyramid method has in this thesis been used for assessing whether
the BrainCapture prototype satisfies the credible section of the Honeycomb.
2.3
Design Implementation & Testing
2.3.1
MoSCoW Prioritization
The MoSCoW Prioritization method was developed as a tool to help prioritize tasks or
functionalities by filtering them as must have, should have, could have, and will not have.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
7
==PAGE:15==
The must have cover functionalities which are necessary and therefore can not be ex-
cluded, and while the should have are immensely valuable, they can be excluded. Could
have focus on functionalities which are desirable but optional as they bring less value,
and lastly, will not have defines functionalities which are shallow and bring minimal value
[10].
Through this filtering, a team can determine which functionalities or tasks to focus on and
include in their product or service.
In this thesis, the MoSCoW Prioritization is utilized to filter which functionalities that are
to be included in the final end product of the project.
2.3.2
Lean thinking: Build-Measure-Learn cycle
Lean thinking focuses on creating user value by using minimum resources through con-
tinuous testing [11].
Within Lean thinking is the Build-Measure-Learn cycle which is made of three phases
that move iteratively. Within the Build phase, a product or service is developed in its
lowest form meaning at a minimum viable product (MVP) state. Hereafter, the MVP is
validated through relevant testing methods in the Measure phase. In the Learn phase, the
accumulated data from the previous phase is evaluated to discover findings and insights
for possible improvements. As the cycle is iterative, it can continue until a satisfactory
end state has been reached [11].
The development of the optimized application follows the Build-Measure-Learn cycle,
where each version of the prototype is built whereafter they are measured through usabil-
ity testing, and lastly, the improvements are discovered based on the test results through
the Learn phase.
2.3.3
High fidelity (Hi-Fi) Prototyping
A high fidelity prototype is a detailed depiction of the user interface and interaction of a
service or product. It allows for users to fully comprehend the whole solution and can
gather more in depth results [3].
As mentioned, Lean thinking focuses on using minimum resources which also points to-
wards developing low fidelity prototypes. However, during this thesis, it was decided to
produce a high fidelity prototype that would include the design and functionality which
could be ready for code implementation.
The choice of developing a high fidelity prototype in this thesis, is due to BrainCapture’s
continuous development of their own application, which is at a high level in terms of the
user interface and user experience. The level therefore acts as a reference point. While
code implementation of the application is outside of the thesis scope, it is favorable for
the prototype to be high fidelity in order to meet the reference point. Furthermore, a high
fidelity prototype is needed to cover the complexity of the system.
8
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:16==
2.3.4
Usability testing
When conducting usability testing, an array of qualitative and quantitative testing methods
can be utilized. These testing methods are useful to accumulate data with the purpose of
optimizing user interface and user experience.
Qualitative testing methods, including think-aloud, interviews, critical incident, inter alia,
focus on identifying user related challenges by accumulating subjective user data. Oppo-
sitely, quantitative testing methods, including task completion time, error rate, question-
naires, inter alia, focus on gathering numerical data to evaluate the quality of the design
and functionality of the solution [12].
For this thesis, the think aloud qualitative testing method has been used to validate the
optimized application for each testing round. For quantitative testing methods, error rates,
and ratings on questionnaires methods have been used to track interaction and opinions
of the test users.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
9
==PAGE:17==
3
Research
In the 3 Research chapter, the first research question will be answered firstly by pre-
senting both the direct and indirect users who are impacted by the system. This will be
done by showing the typical diagnosis flow for a patient with suspected epilepsy in Den-
mark. Secondly, the user needs will be discovered through an analysis of qualitative data
consisting of expert interviews with three neurophysiology assistants, a specialized neu-
rology and neurophysiology doctor, and a medical laboratory technologist. Furthermore,
observations from two standard EEG scans and one standard control EEG scan con-
ducted at Sjællands Universitetshospital, Roskilde with three patients, aged 77, 37, and
17 years old respectively, will give a practical perspective. The main user needs will then
be categorized through two affinity maps and be presented.
3.1
Users
In Denmark, EEG systems, including the typical EEG setup, has one direct user and at
least four indirect users. When looking at the diagnosis flow (figure 3.1) for a patient with
suspected epilepsy, the typical impacted users are:
• Patient: The patient has experienced an episode resulting in a visit with their per-
sonal doctor. The patient might not be aware an episode has occurred as they may
have blacked out during. In these cases, it is usually a witness (i.e. family members,
friends, etc.) whom may assist the patient in describing what happened. It can also
be the case that the patient goes directly to the hospital if the episode is critical.
• Personal doctor: The personal doctor of the patient is usually a general practitioner
who knows about the medical history of the patient. The doctor is typically not spe-
cialized in epilepsy. While it is not mandatory, the personal doctor will usually write
a referral for an EEG scan.
• Neurophysiology assistant: The neurophysiology assistant is the one who con-
ducts the EEG scan on the patient and is therefore the main direct user of the sys-
tem. They typically work at the neurological department of a hospital or a specialized
epilepsy hospital. Once the scan has been conducted and evaluated by the assis-
tant, the results will be sent to a neurophysiologist.
• Neurophysiologist: The neurophysiologist receives the results and continues to
further analyze the patterns of the brainwaves to conclude whether epileptiform ac-
tivity has been detected. If abnormal activity has been detected, the updated results
with the conclusion will be sent to a neurologist. If abnormal activity has not been
detected, the patient will be called back for another type of EEG scan. This will
continue until a confident conclusion has been finalized.
10
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.1: Typical diagnosis flow for an epilepsy suspected patient (A.8)
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
11
==PAGE:19==
• Neurologist: The neurologist receives the updated results and conclusion, evalu-
ates it, and delivers the final diagnosis to the patient.
When looking at the diagnosis flow (see figure 3.1), it is clear that the neurophysiology
assistant’s ability to deliver a quality scan is key to better the overall experience for the
patient. If a scan with low noise levels and well annotated artifacts is conducted, it will
decrease the chance of the patient getting called back for another EEG scan. Even more
so if epileptiform activity is detected but this is not in the control of the neurophysiology
assistants.
The flow shows the typical flow for a patient with suspected epilepsy living in Denmark. For
a patient living in a LMIC, the flow looks different. For LMICs, the diagnostic challenges
include lack in trained doctors and staff, relevant equipment, available AED, and diagnos-
tic facilities [1]. In order to counterattack these challenges, the existing resources in these
LMICs will have to cover the gap of the missing neurophysiology assistants amongst oth-
ers. This inevitably means, that the current EEG system will have to be modified so that
nurses with no specialized training in EEG or epilepsy will be able to conduct quality EEG
scans. Thus, different user needs for a nurse can be present.
3.2
User Needs
3.2.1
Expert interviews
In order to capture the user needs of the nurse for an MVP version of the system, five
expert interviews (A.1), including one neurophysiology assistant from Filadelfia epilepsi-
hospital and two from Sjællands Universitetshospital, Roskilde, a specialized neurology
and neurophysiology doctor from Rigshospitalet, and a medical laboratory technologist
also from Sjællands Universitetshospital, Roskilde, were conducted. While the interview
questions were adapted based on their roles, the general themes of the questions cov-
ered the general process of an EEG scan, the patient, and the EEG recording including
artifacts and biggest challenges.
The output of the interviews were categorized using the affinity mapping method, and the
main points can be read below.
EEG scan
Routine questions
Before the scan itself begins, the neurophysiology assistant will ask the patient what is
known as routine questions. While the questions are typically similar, the formulation of
the questions differ not only between hospitals but also between neurophysiology assis-
tants. At Filadelfia epilepsihospital, ”we have a routine questionnaire which we call the
DGR questionnaire (A.6) [...] which are just some questions we ask the patient.” (A.1.1)
They continue, ”I always ask about CPR number first [...] I need to know if they have
heart conditions, if they have had a blood clot or cerebral hemorrhage, if they have lung
12
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:20==
conditions, and for women, if they are possibly pregnant. [...] Lastly, I ask how often they
have experienced the episodes or seizures, and how many times they have had them in
total.” (A.1.1) At Filadelfia epilepsihospital, it is also protocol that ”the patient also signs
the paper with all these questions.” (A.1.1)
At Sjællands Universitetshospital, Roskilde , one neurophysiology assistant starts the ex-
amination with telling the patient ”you have had some episodes, or you have had a seizure
or you have something with your memory. (A.1.2) Another neurophysiology assistant asks
”about medical history, seizures and progress. I ask about things, when did it happen?
How often do you have the seizures? What did you feel? If they did not feel anything, if
someone has joined, what did they see? When was the last seizure?” (A.1.3) Also, the
medical laboratory technologist adds, ”we also ask when did you have your last seizure,
did you eat breakfast which is in regards to for example the hyperventilation.” (A.1.5)
The specialized neurology and neurophysiology doctor at Rigshospitalet emphasizes that
a ”clinical examination is also very important, a good medical history, also the family if
they have a child or from the patient themselves, a description of their episodes, how long
their episodes are, are there provoking factors, when did it start, can they remember the
episode, or were their conscious affected during the episode.” (A.1.4)
The habitual state of the patient is also important to know, as the neurophysiology assis-
tant asks the patient, ”if they feel like they usually do, so whether they are having a normal
day [...] because an EEG curve can look differently depending on how they feel.” (A.1.1)
The medical laboratory technologist agrees, as they ”always start by making a little note,
we all do this, where we indicate whether the patient is awake, asleep, are they confused,
are they oriented in time and place. Most importantly, are they in their habitual state.”
(A.1.5)
The examination usually consists of hyperventilation and photic stimulation, but based
on the answers the patient gives on the routine questions, some restrictions do apply.
One neurophysiology assistant says, ”as a baseline, we always do [the exercises] but I
think that it says in our instructions that people over 50 do not need to. But you usually
choose yourself, it is not restricted by saying if you are over 50 then you can not. But
when I receive a patient who has COPD or other types of lung diseases, then I do not
do it. (A.1.2) At the same hospital, another neurophysiology assistant clearly states ”no,
over 50 we do not hyperventilate. There are a lot of epilepsies, that are provoked, usually
epilepsies prone to children, and the older you are, the bigger the chance is for a blood
clot. For photic, we usually do not do photic stimulation on under one year. With both
hyper and photic, we do not provoke pregnant people, not because it would do something
but it could provoke a seizure if you have a specific type of epilepsy provoked by the lamp.
We are not interested in that with pregnant people.” (A.1.3)
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
13
==PAGE:21==
Equipment
As mentioned in the 3.1 Users section, it is the neurophysiology assistants who put the
equipment on the patient. The neurophysiology assistant at Filadelfia epilepsihospital has
”some loose electrodes, we have 27, which are some gold plated plates which we put on.”
(A.1.1) In order to put the loose electrodes on the scalp, they use ”some gel, which is rem-
iniscent of some face scrub because it has some small grains of sand things, which grinds
the scalp first. Then we have a salt water wax which we put on the individual electrode
and press it down on the scalp, so it can lead the signal better [...] it takes around 15
minutes to put on all the individual electrodes.” (A.1.1) Sometimes, the neurophysiology
assistant will choose another option, ”if not the loose electrodes, I have two options, then
we have a cap they can wear which is a little faster. [...] In our cap, there are only 19
electrodes, but if we know that it might be a temporal lobe epilepsy then we might put what
we call low-row electrodes on, which are three extra electrodes on each side, which we
normally put on with loose electrodes.” (A.1.1) When putting on the cap ”we also use the
scrubbing thing on the scalp, but then we put a more fluid gel with some salt in a syringe
which is then injected.” (A.1.1) Other than the EEG electrodes, ”there always has to be
ECG on, so that we also have the heart rhythm, and sometimes they also have to get
some attached to some muscles on the body.” (A.1.1)
The neurophysiology assistants at Sjællands Universitetshospital, Roskilde work similarly
with the equipment as one of them explains, ”we use 19 electrodes plus ground and
reference, and then six low-row. We go after the 10-20 system [...] it takes 15 minutes”
(A.1.3) About the extra low-row electrodes, another neurophysiology assistant explains
that ”it is our standard that we also include what we call low-row, but there can be some
situations, where a patient can not take it [...] We have some examinations where we
have decided not to put them on.” (A.1.2) In regards to the flexibility of options, the same
case as above is seen as, ”we can either choose a cap or loose electrodes, we decide
ourselves.” (A.1.2) Lastly, they also have extra electrodes, as they ”put ECG on and we
put an eye electrode on, and in some cases we can also put EMG electrodes on”. (A.1.2)
Exercises
The provocation exercises conducted during the scan are the same at the three hospitals.
Firstly, the neurophysiology assistant tells the patient, ”during the examination I will ask
you multiple times to open your eyes, close your eyes and blink with your eyes.” (A.1.2)
This is ”to see the difference in the EEG when they have open eyes and closed eyes, and
how it looks when they blink. It creates some weird waves so you have to see, it looks
like that, so that you do not confuse them with something else later. So they are laying
down and relaxing for approximately two minutes just with their eyes closed just to get an
overview of how their brain looks, how their activity looks.” (A.1.1) Secondly, ”there will
be one point where you will hyperventilate and this you will do for three minutes.” (A.1.2)
The neurophysiology assistant describes, ”during the hyperventilation, they have to do
a minimum of 20 breaths per minute, but there can be a difference in how well people
14
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:22==
are at doing it.” (A.1.2) The third exercise is photic stimulation, where ”I have a photo
lamp which blinks and it blinks with a very powerful light and here I will repeatably say
open your eyes and close your eyes.” (A.1.2) They continue, ”when I do photo, the way
it happens is that there are some different intervals, some of these photos they run for
10 seconds or 14 seconds or a whole minute. So for that I want for them to open their
eyes for approximately three to four seconds before the light starts to blink so that the
eyes have time to adjust and then we have four to five seconds where the light blinks
powerfully in the eyes before they can close them again.” (A.1.2)
During the exercises, one neurophysiology assistant underlines, that the patient ”can not
be tired, because if they drowse during the whole recording then it will be too slow. It will
become slower, it is between 8 and 12 Hz for an adult for example, who is laying down
with closed eyes and is awake. But if they drowse then it goes under the 8 Hz. If it is like
that the whole time then it is abnormal and we say that it is too slow for the age and level of
consciousness.” (A.1.3) The specialized neurology and neurophysiology doctor supports
this by saying, ”when they get drowsy or fall asleep the background [activity] will change.
Normally the background will become slower until they fall asleep and it becomes very
very slow, and it will show some special rhythms in the EEG.” (A.1.4)
When asked why these specific exercises were the standard for provoking epileptiform
activity, a neurophysiology assistant explains, ”light stimulation because there are a lot
who are sensitive to light and hyperventilation because there are a lot of kids who are
sensitive to that. It is simply to provoke [...] we really want to see something in the EEG.”
(A.1.1) The specialized neurology and neurophysiology doctor adds, ”in a routine EEG
we usually stimulate the patient, we stimulate by blinking with some light, hyperventilation
and expect that the patient will fall asleep because most epilepsy types will accentuate
the pathological findings where the low-frequent changes are and also the epileptiform
changes during these stimulation periods.” (A.1.4)
Once the provocation exercises have been completed, the patient ”is allowed for the rest
of the time, so approximately 14 to 15 minutes, to lay down with closed eyes and relax. It
is a part of the 30 minutes.” (A.1.1) When asked when the patient is allowed to sleep, a
neurophysiology assistant states, ”they are allowed to, they just can not sleep the whole
time, they can sleep at the end.” (A.1.3) But if the patient falls asleep in the beginning, ”we
just let them sleep. There just has to be a point where we know that they are completely
awake because that is what we judge based on to see if it corresponds to their age.”
(A.1.3)
Flexible System
The EEG scan in itself follows a standard procedure but it can change according to the
patient. This is what neurophysiology assistants claim as one states, ”it can happen that
we have a child who does not want to lay still, is running around and playing, where you
just have to accept, okay they have on the electrodes, that is fine. It is also not always
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
15
==PAGE:23==
the case that they will want to be photo stimulated or get them to hyperventilate. So there
are many times where we kind of deviate from the standard” (A.1.1) They continue, ”you
never know who is coming through the door so you always have to be quick and say, now
we are doing it differently” (A.1.1).
It is standard protocol to put different kinds of electrodes on the patient in order to have a
multi-modal based examination, but ”we have some examinations where we choose not
to put it on” (A.1.2). These cases especially include children where ”we are happy that
we even get the cap on [...] and we probably do not get the extra ones on the cheeks on
either.” (A.1.3)
As mentioned above, another protocol is to ask the patient different routine questions
before the scan, but ”sometimes their conscious can be so affected, that it is no use to ask
them some questions they can not answer.” (A.1.2) Therefore, the system ”is extremely
flexible because it is based on what the patient can contribute with.” (A.1.2) It is also
possible ”if we have time to expand the examination if 10 more minutes or half an hour
more is needed” (A.1.1). The neurophysiology assistants emphasize that ”we always tell
the patient that it is their choice so if they do not want to continue they can say no and we
stop” (A.1.1) as the exercises ”are voluntary, both hyperventilation and photic stimulation,
it is not something they have to do.” (A.1.3)
Despite not following the exact protocol one neurophysiology assistant states, ”I can still
see something in the EEG even if it does not follow the standard procedure.” (A.1.1)
Overall, another neurophysiology assistant expresses ”in reality, we take what we can
get.” (A.1.2)
Quality Control
Artifacts
Artifacts can be divided in two groups based on the source, namely physiologic and non-
physiologic [1]. The physiologic artifacts are typically caused by the patient which are
therefore characterized as internal factors and include muscle and eye movements inter
alia [1]. On the contrary, nonphysiologic artifacts are mostly caused by external factors
which include the environment, equipment, etc [1].
Physiologic artifacts are generally affecting all recordings, a neurophysiology assistant
explains, ”in the ideal examination, the patient is laying down and is relaxing totally with
closed eyes without clenching their muscles or anything else. But most often you acciden-
tally smile, move, blink, or clench” (A.1.1). Another neurophysiology assistant agrees and
says that the most typical artifact they see ”is when the patient clenches causing muscle
activity. And if you blink too much, then it will cause blinking movements” (A.1.3) They
add, ”there can be a lot of movement artifacts for kids. So it is necessary for the parents to
be included and entertain as best as possible. Because if they cry for all 30 minutes, then
we can not really use it for anything. There is simply too much noise, if they are wiggling
and crying” (A.1.3). When asked which artifacts they most typically see, the specialized
16
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:24==
neurology and neurophysiology doctor jokes, ”I could hold a lecture about that [...] pulse
artifacts, ECG artifacts, blinking artifacts, eye movement artifacts, muscle artifacts, big
movement artifacts, pacifier artifacts with toddlers.” (A.1.4) They further underline why
artifacts have a big effect on the EEG saying, ”because the muscle movements create
big swings. The EEG shows a little swing in the size of a micro volt.” (A.1.4) Therefore,
one neurophysiology assistant explains, ”the EEG is prettier when they have their eyes
closed, so during the whole recording, you will want them to have their eyes closed as far
as possible.” (A.1.1)
Nonphysiologic artifacts also plague recordings one neurophysiology assistant complains
stating that ”electrical noise is a problem.” (A.1.3) Another neurophysiology assistant con-
curs when expressing that the most typical artifact they see ”is noise, that is noise coming
from the outside, which affects the signals causing them to look more... they do not look
that clean, they look more murky, grainy.” (A.1.2) The medical laboratory technologist
points out that ”basically the impedance just need to be consistent and not vary too much,
so that you do not have one which is on five and one which is on 15 because it can also
give some noise artifacts” (A.1.5).
Artifacts can cause misinterpretation, but the medical laboratory technologist explains
”in order to not misinterpret it as some seizure activity, then it can be important to write
events.” (A.1.5)
During the examination, while also directing the patient, the neurophysiology assistant
will annotate different events in the EEG to help resolve some of the misinterpretation.
The medical laboratory technologist describes ”there are some typical events which are
auto defined, those we use a lot. Then we have this OBS where we can write ourselves
so free text [...] Then we put them in throughout when needed, it is also possible to put
them in after when we have done the recording [...] we sit and monitor all the time [...] we
will go in and add something if something happens during.” (A.1.5) They add, ”of course,
we always annotate when they have their eyes open and when they are closed.” (A.1.5)
About annotation, one neurophysiology assistant also says, ”we write in the curve, for
example, ”clenches jaw” and then I ask the patient to open their mouth slightly. I also
write this in the curve, so ”encourage to relax better” and ”putting sandbag on eyes”. This
we write in the curve. Then the neurologist can see, that we have tried to see if we can
make it better.” (A.1.3)
Review of EEG
After the examination has been conducted, the patient is cleaned up and sent home,
”then I go in and look at the examination right after or at least on the same day.” (A.1.1)
To review the EEG, ”we have this SCORE program where we are asked some questions
[...] for example what is the background activity? What is the frequency? What is the
amplitude? Where is something located? Is there something? Do you see sleep? Then
you also have the opportunity to add comments if there for example is something you
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
17
==PAGE:25==
can not answer using these things” says one of the neurophysiology assistants (A.1.2).
The medical laboratory technologist also mentions ”the impedance measurements. It will
always be saved and if you measure the impedance during the recording, it will also save
it so that you can go in and see exactly what the impedance was at the given time, and that
is just for quality assurance and to document that all the electrodes were stuck.” (A.1.5)
When looking at the EEG for evaluation, a neurophysiology assistant explains ”what I am
looking for are some specific patterns which pop up on the EEG. They have a very special
shape where I can then read, okay this is something epileptic. Then I can see which
electrode it popped up on and then I can say it was frontal or occipital. So it is some very
special patterns I look for.” (A.1.1) The specialized neurology and neurophysiology doctor
somewhat describes the evaluation of the EEG as a quest for answers since ”almost
everyone is a little different. With some patients you can see that it is a muscle artifact,
and this is something which has graphical change in the EEG, and you have to find out, this
is not epileptic but then what is it? Is it a tic? Are there some stereotypical movements? Is
there some dystonia? What do they have?” (A.1.4) This is where the doctor emphasizes
the importance of a multi-modal examination, as they state, ”it is always a multi-modal
recording, we have ECG, EEG, and EMG, so that we have a multi-model registration and
then connect the things and try to diagnose.” (A.1.4)
A neurophysiology assistant adds that lastly when the patient ”has been here and you
have figured out which diagnosis they have then they sometimes come in for a control
EEG, which is just half an hour where they come in where you just see how it looks”
(A.1.1).
Synchronized Video
Both a neurophysiology assistant and the specialized neurology and neurophysiology
doctor strongly agree that video recording of the patient during the examination is im-
portant. The neurophysiology assistant explains that the patient ”is video recorded, this is
always with all EEG’s [...] if a seizure were to happen then the doctor can also see what is
going on, when the doctor looks it through later.” (A.1.3) They continue, ”it is always good
to also have video on, because in the old days then we only did something called Oxford
monitoring where they went home with the electrodes on and then we could not see if they
scratched themselves and this actually caused something rhythmic on the EEG which we
then had to judge, is that focal temporallobe seizure or is it because the patient scratched
themselves? So that is also very important.” (A.1.3)
The specialized neurology and neurophysiology doctor also makes it clear that video
recording is ”very important, because a small movement or some epileptiform movements
sometimes with seizures there are so many muscle artifacts that you would not be able
to see anything on the EEG. Therefore, video, more seizures, how stereotypical they are,
are they the same or are they all different, this gives a lot. Is it just, for example, that a
child is clenching their entire body or is it epileptiform? You need the video to see the
18
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:26==
difference.” (A.1.4)
Challenges
Patient behaviour
A neurophysiology assistant tells that the biggest challenge for them during an exami-
nation, ”is always the unknown factor in regards to what kind of patient you get. So the
biggest challenge is if you get a patient which in someway deviates from the standard and
you have to accommodate to the patient, think outside the box. If there is someone who
does not want to, has to be persuaded, or a child then I would say those are the biggest
challenges.” (A.1.1)
The two other neurophysiology assistants agree in the child being a big challenge as one
of them describes their challenges as ”children who feel uneasy or children who have
had a bad experience at the hospital before, because then they are probably primed to
believing that when I come in with white pants and a blue shirt, then this is going to be bad.
I think that is probably the biggest challenge.” (A.1.2) The last neurophysiology assistant
echoes in saying, ”it is probably when children do not want to. It is because the adults
they come in and they know why they need to do this and they want to but the children
do not always know.” (A.1.3)
Seizure handling
While the term seizure is known as a phenomenon which affects people with epilepsy
because of abnormal brain activity [1], neurophysiology assistants tend to use the word
episode in front of patients instead, ”since it is not always something epileptic [patients]
come with. Calling it a seizure will feel very overwhelming for some, to be told that they
have had a seizure cause often you are not conscious when having a seizure so many do
not acknowledge that they have epilepsy.” (A.1.1) When asked how often patients have
a seizure during the scan, the neurophysiology assistant answers ”it happens that people
have seizures. For the standard scan, we preferably do not want them to have a seizure.”
(A.1.1) They continue, ”I can easily figure out if they have epilepsy or not without them
having a seizure.” (A.1.1) Another neurophysiology assistant agrees by saying, ”we are
not interested in people having a seizure here. We are just interested in seeing where
this activity is located and if it fits with the seizures they have had.” (A.1.2) A third neuro-
physiology assistant specifies, ”absences are okay, you just keep going, but if I see in the
EEG that a seizure is building up, then we stop [the exercise] before we get the cramps if
we can. It rarely happens that we provoke a generalised tonic-clonic seizure.” (A.1.3)
Despite the intention of not wanting to provoke a seizure during the examination, it does
occur at times, and it created a challenge for one neurophysiology assistant as they ex-
plain, ”something I thought was really difficult to begin with was if the patient got a seizure,
it happens even though we do not want it to. Or if we see something in the EEG, we have
to test them. We see something in the EEG which looks epileptic and then I do some
things or ask the patient some questions to test their consciousness, whether they can
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
19
==PAGE:27==
hear me, whether they can see me, different things.” (A.1.1)
The specialized neurology and neurophysiology doctor describes a different challenge
also in regards to seizures, as ”sometimes with normal EEG, the patient also has seizures
at night. Most seizures happen at night, but the patient comes during work hours so we
can not see anything.” (A.1.4)
Other illnesses
Figuring out if the episode the patient has had is epilepsy is the main goal for all the roles,
but sometimes the catalyst is something else. ”There is also something called PNES. It is
not epileptic but it is seizures which are psychologically triggered”, one neurophysiology
assistant states (A.1.2). Another neurophysiology assistant explains ”it can be pressure
because of school or other things so that you start to faint and it can also be anxiety. Then
[the patients] also come to us for a clarification [...] Then it is another road they have to
go with the treatment.” (A.1.3)
Lastly, the specialized neurology and neurophysiology doctor states, that ”an episode can
also have a cardiological trigger.” (A.1.4)
3.2.2
Standard EEG scan observations
Through a second affinity map, three main categories have been seen when looking at the
EEG observations (A.2); Patient information, equipment, and exercises. A fourth section
would be review of scan but this was not a part of the observations due to time limitations.
Patient information
During the patient information section of the examination, the main goal for the neurophys-
iology assistants is to get a preliminary overview of the patient. In all three observations
(A.2), one of the first things the assistants would ask the patient for was their CPR num-
ber. Thenceforth, the assistant would ask questions with the aim of assessing the habitual
state of the patient by asking them if they know why they are having the examination and
how they feel. Next, the patient is asked whether they have eaten and at what time, how
they have slept and for how long. In regards to their seizure history, the assistants ask
about their most recent seizure and their seizure frequency. Lastly, the patient is asked
about their medical history and medication.
Equipment
Following the patient information is the equipment. The neurophysiology assistants have
typically prepared all the equipment beforehand if time allows it. Some of the assistants
choose to show the equipment to the patients while others do not but all of them explain
each piece of the equipment before equipping the patient. Regardless whether the as-
sistant has chosen to go with a cap or loose electrodes, they all measure the patient’s
head firstly. Of the equipment, the EEG electrodes are in all the observations attached
firstly using two kinds of gel, saltwater gel and NuPrep gel. While putting on the elec-
trodes, the connection for each electrode is checked using a device which is connected
20
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:28==
to the electrodes and gives a visual overview of the impedance and connection of the
electrodes. The device uses small lights for each electrode which are all switched on
where light means no connection/high impedance whereas no light means a good con-
nection/low impedance (A.2.1). Secondly, the ECG electrodes are attached and lastly,
the eye electrode while the connections are also controlled. The neurophysiology assis-
tants utilize the time while putting on all the equipment to also explain the examination to
the patient.
Exercises
Once the patient is equipped, the neurophysiology assistant asks the patient to close their
eyes. They then start the video and then the recording. The assistants annotate level of
consciousness and mark down the used equipment. Then they introduce, initiate, and
guide the patient through different exercises; Eyes, hyperventilation, and photic stimula-
tion.
Before, during and after the exercises, the neurophysiology assistant annotates com-
mands (i.e. eyes open, eyes closed, and blink) using both predefined and free text anno-
tations, annotates exercises and they also annotate deviations which cause artifacts. One
neurophysiology assistant states, “in general, it is better to annotate if in doubt rather than
not doing it” (A.2.1). In the first observation of the 77 year old women (A.2.1), 15 annota-
tions were made during the exercises and 23 annotations were made in total throughout
the examination (note that because of age restrictions, the hyperventilation exercise was
skipped which means that more annotations would have been made if the exercise had
been conducted as well). In the second observation of the 37 year old women (A.2.2)
43 annotations were made during the exercises and 55 annotations were made in total
throughout the examination, and in the third observation of the 17 year old male (A.2.3),
50 annotations were made during the exercises and 76 annotations were made in total
throughout the examination.
Once the exercises are completed, the neurophysiology assistant asks the patient to keep
their eyes closed and relax for the remainder of the examination. The assistant will fo-
cus harder on possible changes in the EEG due to potential spikes as a result of the
provocation exercises.
3.3
Sub-conclusion
Six main themes of user needs have been categorized. EEG scan, where routine ques-
tions, equipment, and exercises were the essential parts of the examination. This was
also supported by the EEG observations where the same themes were seen. It was
also clearly emphasized that the system had to be flexible in order to accommodate the
patient. The use of the system’s flexibility was especially present in the third EEG obser-
vation where the patient fell asleep in the beginning of the scan and then later when the
neurophysiology assistant was not satisfied with how the patient was performing during
the photic stimulation exercise, and therefore stopped it and tried hyperventilation.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
21
==PAGE:29==
Quality control in terms of annotating artifacts and reviewing the EEG are a focal point for
the neurophysiology assistant as a preliminary analysis is key to bettering the final results.
The amount of annotations made during the EEG observations shows how important it is
for the user to be able to easily and efficiently annotate in the system. The synchronised
video also proved to be a valuable tool to asses the examination.
In terms of challenges, patient behaviour and seizure handling, which inevitably is also
connected to the patient, were chosen since the patient was described as the unknown
factor. Lastly, it was discovered that at times seizures were caused by other sources than
epilepsy, and then the neurophysiology assistant would have to take a stand.
These main themes for user needs will all influence the development of an MVP version
of the system with a nurse as the main direct user.
22
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:30==
4
Analysis
Before an optimized version of the application can be justified, it is necessary to asses
the state of the user interface and user experience of the BrainCapture solution. The 4
Analysis chapter, answers the second research question and will be done in two parts.
In part one, the strengths and weaknesses of the user interface and experience of the
BrainCapture solution will be assessed through an expert user experience review moti-
vated by Peter Morville’s User Experience Honeycomb framework. The framework has
seven sections; Usable, useful, desirable, findable, accessible, credible, and valuable,
where different tools will be used to analyze if and how the solution satisfies the individual
sections.
In the second part, a SWOT analysis focusing on the strengths, weaknesses, opportuni-
ties, and threats of both internal and external factors concerning the overall system will
be examined.
4.1
User Experience Review
BrainCapture is currently working on their application (V1), and the development of the
application is based on a prototype which was delivered by an external company. The
scope of the prototype is bigger, and therefore includes more features and screens than
the developed BrainCapture application in its current state. But with continuing develop-
ment, BranCapture aims to reach the same scope as the prototype in terms of the user
interface and user experience. Thus, the prototype will be the main subject of the analy-
sis. However, results from conducted user tests and a focus group will also be included
throughout the analysis, and these were not conducted with the prototype, but with the
aforementioned BrainCapture application (V1).
Since receiving the prototype from the external company, an user experience expert has
never reviewed it. Therefore, an user experience review is conducted on the prototype
focusing on the User Experience Honeycomb framework.
In the Honeycomb, the following tools and materials will be used to assess each section:
• Usable: User experience inspection focusing on Jakob Nielsen’s 10 Usability Heuris-
tics for User Interface Design as well as a focus group (A.3), and user tests (A.4).
• Useful: Expert interviews (A.1), EEG observations (A.2), and user tests (A.4).
• Desirable: Schneiderman’s 8 Golden Design Rules.
• Findable: User tests on the BrainCapture application (A.4).
• Accessible: 7 Principles of Universal Design.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
23
==PAGE:31==
• Credible: The Elements of Value Pyramid.
• Valuable: An assessment of the accumulated findings of the other sections.
4.1.1
Usable
An user experience inspection, focusing on Jakob Nielsen’s 10 Usability Heuristics for
User Interface Design, will be done on the BrainCapture prototype with the aim of adjudg-
ing usability strengths in terms of what works well for the user, and weaknesses in terms
of what could possibly cause issues for the user. Furthermore, the results of a focus group
conducted on the application, with 11 participants including neurophysiology assistants,
laboratory technologists, and medical students (A.3) and an user test with nurses (A.4)
will also be used to adjudge whether the prototype fulfills the usable section of the User
Experience Honeycomb.
Strengths
Visibility of system status
Exercises
Figure 4.1: Connection status
During the ”Guided exercises” flow, the user has the ability to check ”Connection status”
of the EEG cap, the amplifier, and the ECG by clicking a button with an EEG cap icon on
it (see figure 4.1). This will open a sheet component including a visual presentation of the
EEG electrodes where the electrodes are green if the connection is good, yellow if it is
average, and white if it is disconnected. For the amplifier and ECG, their connection status
is also shown by a light with the same color coordination. This gives an easy overview of
the system’s connection status.
General
24
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:32==
A progress bar is present in both the ”Pre-interview”, ”Prepare Equipment”, ”Guided ex-
ercises”, and ”Evaluation” flows (see figure 4.1 above the connection status button). This
bar gives an easy overview of the progress which is useful in practice during the exami-
nation for the user to help guide the patient throughout.
Match between system and the real world
Prepare Equipment
Figure 4.2: Overview of EEG electrodes
In the ”Prepare Equipment” flow on the ”Connect electrodes” screen, the user is presented
with a visual overview of the EEG electrodes (see figure 4.2) which are mirrored by how
the user sees the EEG electrodes in the real world which helps guide the user in dealing
with them.
Exercises
During the ”Guided exercises”, the user is presented with different icons representing the
exercise they have to ask the patient to do (see figure 4.3). This gives the user a visual
guidance on top of the help text presented on the screens.
User control and freedom
General
Throughout the application, a skip functionality is present for the user (see figure 4.3 at
the bottom of the screen). This respects the control and freedom of the user to freely
move forward in the application.
Consistency and standards
Exercises
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.3: Exercise icons
During the ”Guided exercises” flow, the exercises are consistent in design and functionality
(see figure 4.3), creating a higher learnability for the user, making it easier to navigate
through the exercises.
Figure 4.4: Orange screen shown after exercise completion
Once an exercise is completed, the user is presented with an orange screen (see figure
4.4). Since this screen is consistently presented after the completion of every single ex-
ercise, it affects the user subconsciously thus leading them to associate that the orange
screen means that the exercise is completed.
Aesthetic and minimalist design
26
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:34==
Pre-interview
Figure 4.5: Pre-interview Answers screen
The ”Pre-interview Answers” screen is seen after all the questions in the ”Pre-interview”
flow have been answered (see figure 4.5). This screen presents the inputted answers
from the user in a simple and clean way as well as easily giving the option of editing if
needed.
Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors
Alert messages
Figure 4.6: Different alert messages seen throughout the flow
Throughout the application different messages can be triggered. During the ”Pre-interview”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
27
==PAGE:35==
flow, the user has to ask the question ”Are you pregnant?” to the patient. If the patient an-
swers ”Yes”, a warning message is presented to the user letting them know, ”Your choice
is a contradiction to hyperventilation and photic stimulation. Consult with your clinic’s
guidelines” (see figure 4.6). This warning helps the user in conducting an examination
which has the patient security in mind.
The same instance is seen for the questions, ”Have you had any brain surgery?” and ”Do
you have any lung diseases, asthma or KOL?”
Another one of these error messages which help the user recover from an error is ”Elec-
trode connection lost” (see figure 4.6).
Help and documentation
Prepare Equipment & Side menu
In the ”Prepare Equipment” flow, a help functionality in the shape of a hyperlink button is
present throughout giving the user an easy access to help if needed (see figure 4.2 above
the inactive Next button).
Figure 4.7: Help located in the side menu
Furthermore, the help functionality is seen in the side menu (see figure 4.7) meaning the
user has access to help at any time throughout the application.
Weaknesses
Visibility of system status
Prepare Equipment
During the ”Prepare Equipment” flow, the user is asked to connect to the amplifier by
clicking a dropdown menu and choosing the correct amplifier (see figure 4.8). Then, the
28
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.8: Connecting the amplifier
user will have to wait until the light changes from red to green. During this wait, there is
no indication of connecting for the user and if the connection takes a while, the user will
only experience what seems to be a frozen screen.
Exercises
Figure 4.9: Displayed recording time
On the first screen of the ”Guided exercises” flow, it is stated that the recording time has
started, but there is nowhere for the user to see the recording time during the scan (see
figure 4.9). While this is not a high necessity, it may seem like there is something going
on behind the scenes that the user is not aware of.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
29
==PAGE:37==
User control and freedom
Exercises
When the user is going through the ”Guided exercises” flow, they have no back navigation
(see figure 4.3) which takes away the control from the user as they can not freely move
back in the flow.
Consistency and Standards
Home
Figure 4.10: Card component with different functionalities
The ”Start Epilepsy Scan” card on the ”Home” screen is clickable, and once the user has
clicked it, they are taken to the next screen where another card, ”Preparation”, is present
(see figure 4.10). But this card is not clickable and to start the scan, the user has to click
the ”Get started” in the bottom of the screen. This creates an inconsistency in the use of
card components.
Pre-interview
The alert messages seen in the ”Pre-interview” do not follow the semantic color scheme
(see figure 4.6), thus the messages do not look like typical alert messages which the user
might be used to.
Prepare Equipment
On the screen where the user is asked to ”Put on EEG cap”, there is a sudden relocation
of the ”Next” button from the previous screen (see figure 4.11) which might confuse the
user and lead them to click the ”Previous” button instead.
Exercises
30
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.11: Relocation of Next button
Figure 4.12: Change in buttons
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
31
==PAGE:39==
Once the exercises are finished, the user sees a screen where they can either start the
evaluation, or finish the recording. The issue here, is with the ”Finish recording” button
which was previously a skip button which could cause misclicks (see figure 4.12).
General
Figure 4.13: Different versions for a skip functionality
A skip functionality is present on the ”Pre-interview”, ”Prepare Equipment”, ”Guided ex-
ercises”, and ”Evaluation” flows, where some are in the shape of a button while most are
present as hyperlinks (see figure 4.13). In total, there are three different looks for the
skip functionality. While the three different looks for the skip functionality have different
purposes, namely skip exercise, skip question, or just skip, it can be overwhelming for the
user to have multiple different presentations. For example, they could be interpreted dif-
ferently, e.g. as one presentation having more impact than another and therefore create
doubt.
Similarly, it seems like a close functionality is also presented differently throughout the
prototype (see figure 4.14). On a screen in the ”Prepare Equipment” flow, an ”X” icon is
present, and on the ”Home” screen, a ”Cancel” button is seen at the top right corner. While
an ”X” icon and a ”Cancel” button have different purposes in practice, in this prototype they
seem to serve the same purpose of closing down an action.
Error Prevention
Pre-interview
From question 12 to 13 there is a change in the type of question (see figure 4.15). This
is only indicated by a change in the small text which goes from ”ASK THE PATIENT” to
”CLINICAL QUESTION”. In a real life setting, this might not be clear enough for the user,
and they might mistakenly ask the wrong type of question, more so if they are inexperi-
32
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.14: Different versions for a close functionality seen in the top right corners
Figure 4.15: Change in type of questions
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
33
==PAGE:41==
enced.
Exercises
Figure 4.16: Reporting events
During the ”Guided exercises” flow, the user has the ability to ”Report event” by clicking
a button with an exclamation icon on it. This will open a sheet component with different
predefined events and a ”Free note” option. The user then clicks on the orange ”Report”
button on the right side of the event they want to report (see figure 4.16). A challenge
here, is that the user has no way of removing the reported event which might cause false
positive reported events.
Flexibility and Efficiency of use
Pre-interview
In the ”Pre-interview” flow, the user is asked to put in the date of birth of the patient (see
figure 4.17). This is done through four input fields and one checkbox. The year, month,
and day are all individually selected through three individual scrollable modal date pickers
and then clicking ”Ok” each time. Then, the actual age has to be inputted by the user in a
text input field, and click the checkbox if the age is an estimation. This accumulates to 11
interactions between the user and the application, only to input the date of birth and age
of the patient. This is inefficient and time consuming.
Aesthetic and Minimalist Design
Recordings & Sidemenu
In the top left corner of each screen there is a menu, where the user can click to see the
”Recording History” (see figure 4.18). In this screen there is an icon which indicates that
the recording file has been uploaded to the cloud. In addition, there is also a ”Status:
34
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.17: Inputting of date of birth
Figure 4.18: Recordings screen
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
35
==PAGE:43==
Uploaded” text. It seems redundant and space consuming to have both of these which
ultimately have the same purpose for the user.
As mentioned, the menu is placed in the top left corner of each screen, however the
content of the menu is not critical to have on each screen (see figure 4.18). The main
content which could be necessary for a user at all times would be the ”Help”, but for each
exercise there is a hyperlinked ”Help” button which serves this purpose.
Also, the cloud icon and the upload text are orange (see figure 4.18). The orange color is
used a lot throughout the application, also for call-to-action buttons, and is very present on
this screen. Not only the icon and the upload text use the orange, also the buttons ”Finish
Pre-interview” and ”View Evaluation” use it which gives off an overwhelming feeling, and
takes away the impact a color can have for a user to navigate on the screen.
Pre-interview
There is a total of 13 questions in the ”Pre-interview” flow, and each question is on an in-
dividual screen with between two to five interactions each needed from the user including
clicking the ”Next question” button (see figure 4.17). This could make the application feel
long and cumbersome.
Furthermore, there are two ”Skip” buttons on the same screen, one at the top right corner
called ”Skip” and one below the question called ”Skip question” (see figure 4.17). While
these two buttons might have different functionalities and purposes, it might create con-
fusion for a user to see two different skip options on the same screen.
Exercises
Figure 4.19: ”Go to exercise” screen
On the ”Go to exercise” screens in the ”Guided exercises” flow, the screen is busy with a
lot of small text which might not be noticeable for some users (see figure 4.19).
36
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:44==
Furthermore, the time of the exercise is stated twice (see figure 4.19), and once the exer-
cise is finished an excessive amount of text is seen on the screen. Both these examples,
show unnecessities which challenge a minimalist design.
Evaluation
Figure 4.20: ”You’re done!” screen
On the last screen in the ”Evaluation” flow, the user sees a ”You’re done!” screen (see fig-
ure 4.20). The screen is crowded with a title, some text, a card with text and a button, and
two more buttons, which might overwhelm the user. Furthermore, both the background
and the call-to-action button are the same orange which breaks the impact of the color
usage.
User tests and focus group results
On 6/9 2022, a focus group interview consisting of five neurophysiology assistants, four
medical laboratory technologists, and two medical students, who work with EEG and
epilepsy, took place at Sjællands Universitetshospital, Roskilde (A.3). The participants
were given a presentation of BrainCapture, and their equipment including the application
(V1). After the presentation, the participants were allowed to roughly interact with the
application, and were asked to rate their opinion on application guidance, usability and
learnability on a scale from ”Strongly disagree” to ”Strongly agree”. (Note that two partic-
ipants had to leave before the voting session resulting in 9 participants who voted at the
end).
On 14/9, 21/9, and 22/9 2022, user tests including five nurses, who had no prior training
with EEG or epilepsy, were facilitated by the usability expert at BrainCapture (A.4). The
tests were conducted on the BrainCapture system including equipment and application
(V1). The nurses were asked to conduct three scans on individuals who acted as patients
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
37
==PAGE:45==
(15 individuals in total). The nurses were firstly given a rough introduction to epilepsy,
seizures, and artifacts, then to the system. Lastly, a demo of how to complete a scan
was conducted by the usability expert and presented to the nurses. (Note that A.4 only
shows the results of three out of five of the participants since the last two participants were
documented by another facilitator).
Results from both these studies will be used to adjudge usability strengths and weak-
nesses from the user’s point of view.
Strengths
During the focus group, the participants had positive thoughts to share about the system.
This is reflected in their voting (A.3) where all participants voted either ”Agree” or ”Strongly
agree” when asked if they feel guided well when using the application, and whether the
application was easy to use, thus agreeing that the application had easy usability from
their perspective. For the statement, ”It requires a lot of training to learn how to use the
app”, all participants voted ”Strongly disagree”, while voting ”Strongly agree” when asked
if most people could quickly learn how to use the application, which shows that they found
the application to have simple learnability.
Similar tendencies are seen in the user tests (A.4). In the first scan of the first test user
(A.4.1), the user intuitively uses the application to check the electrode connection. As
mentioned, the match between system and the real world heuristic guides the user. Fur-
thermore, the user reads the text included in the exercises aloud to help themselves learn
how to perform the exercise and also to the patient for them to create an understanding as
well. The second user (A.4.2) also had the same experience in easily checking the elec-
trode connection when asked to do so and using the exercise text when interacting with
the patient. The user also easily noted artifacts, and found the application both intuitive
and informative.
On the second scan, it was seen that the second user (A.4.2) had managed to correct
errors made during the first scan, i.e. correctly turning on the amplifier and remembering
to connect it to the cap.
The third scan showed usability for all the users. The first user (A.4.1) managed to cor-
rectly start the process, connected the cap and amplifier, and applying ECG after failing
to do so correctly on the first two scans. They went through the exercises smoothly and
easily navigated through the application. The second user (A.4.2) also managed to start
in the correct flow and apply ECG in the correct order. The third user (A.4.3) easily con-
nected the ground and reference electrodes after seemingly finding this confusing on the
first two scans.
Conclusively, the first user (A.4.1) finds that the application is quick to learn, simple, and
pleasant. The second user (A.4.2) found it easy to annotate artifacts, and that the appli-
cation guided them well overall. The third user (A.4.3) also found the application simple
and friendly for the patient, and stated that once the application was figured out it was
38
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:46==
uncomplicated to navigate throughout the examination.
Weaknesses
The participants of the focus group (A.3) agreed that the application was missing back
navigation. They expressed a wish of wanting to be able to freely navigate through the
flow of the application if needed. This is also a clear violation of the user control and
freedom heuristic as previously mentioned.
For the user tests (A.4), challenges with the flow of the application seemed to be the
biggest issue for the first user (A.4.1). Firstly, the user forgot to connect the EEG cap to
the amplifier, and then they reversed the order of applying the ECG resulting them to try
again. Another challenge was the report event icon not being clear for the user as well
as the text seen on the ”Relaxation” screens of the application which was found to be
confusing.
The application flow was also a grand challenge for the second user (A.4.2) as they in-
tuitively wanted to measure the cap size before starting the application, forgot to connect
the cap to the amplifier, accidentally skipped the screen where they are asked to put gel
in all electrodes, and lastly, putting on the ECG device in the incorrect order.
This theme was also seen with the third user (A.4.3) as they also started measuring the
cap size before turning on the application, and accidentally skipped the ECG entirely
without noticing causing the first examination to be run uni-modal. More challenges were
present for the third user during their first scan. Firstly, a usability issue is apparent as
the user did not find it intuitive to tap the card to start the examination causing them to
click and look in the menu in confusion until they were eventually helped by the facilitator.
The design of the application was also a dominant challenge as the user almost skipped a
”Relaxation” step in the flow, as the white card was more noticeable on the screen for the
user. Furthermore in the ”Relaxation” flow, the user is asked to have the patient relax for
10 minutes but notes that it says that the duration for the next exercise is approximately
three minutes leading them to mistakenly ask the patient to relax for three minutes instead.
Lastly, when reaching the photic stimulation exercise, which the users were asked to skip,
the user is unsure how to skip the exercise and intuitively clicks an inactive ”Next” button.
These instances further underline that the application violates the aesthetic and minimalist
design heuristic as mentioned previously.
The challenges with the application flow transcend to the second scan for all the users,
and also to the third scan for the third user. Thus, a challenge with usability is apparent
in the flow of the application.
Conclusively, the first user (A.4.1) finds that the connection between the cap and the
amplifier is missing explanation, and also commented that the timing of when to report
an artifact to be difficult to know. The second user (A.4.2) found the lack of freedom in
going back to also be a weakness in the application. Moreover, the application flow was
challenging as well for the second user mentioning that the timer for each exercise would
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
39
==PAGE:47==
start before they felt ready to start the exercise (note, that while the prototype allows the
user to start the timer by themselves, this is not the case for the application (V1)). This
could also be examples of violating the user control and freedom heuristic as the timer
would start before the user would want it to causing them to feel out of control. The third
user (A.4.3) echoes this, mentioning that they felt stressed when the timer started by
itself. They also mention that it is easier and more comfortable for them to put on all the
equipment first despite what is presented in the flow of the application. Lastly, the user
points out that colors of the application are misleading as they put focus on the wrong
things hinting at the ”Relaxation” screens.
To sum up, it was seen through the user experience inspection and the results of the
focus group and the user tests that while the prototype is generally usable, it has its short-
comings. The prototype violated the visibility of system status, user control and freedom,
consistency and standards, error prevention, flexibility and efficiency of use, and aesthetic
and minimalist usability heuristics causing usability weaknesses. Some of these weak-
nesses were also present in the results of the focus group and the user tests. Here, the
lack of back navigation and overall flow of the application (V1) were the biggest issues.
This results in the usable section of the User Experience Honeycomb not being satisfied.
4.1.2
Useful
In the 3.2 User Needs section, user needs were established through the expert interviews
(A.1) alongside the standard EEG scan observations (A.2). While other user needs are
generally satisfied, it is noticeable, through the 4.1.1 Usable subsection, that two of
the user needs, namely flexible system and quality control, are especially challenged.
Therefore, these two needs will be utilized to adjudge whether the application fulfills the
useful section of the User Experience Honeycomb. The results from the user tests (A.4)
will also be included to highlight the findings.
Flexible System
An important user need discovered was for the system to be flexible in order for the user
to best accommodate the patient. In the application, it is possible to restart an exercise
if the user is unsatisfied with the performance or for other reasons. It is also an option to
completely skip an exercise or any other step in the application. This freedom delivers on
the need for a flexible system.
Where the application lacks in terms of flexibility is the missing back navigation which con-
fines the user in only being able to follow the application linearly. This was also apparent
in the focus group (A.3) and user tests (A.4) where multiple users were asking for back
navigation. The linearity continues in the navigational structure of the application so that
the flow is already decided for the user, thus the flexibility of choosing the order of exer-
cises is taken away from the user. This for example does not accommodate, the instance
seen in the EEG observations (A.2.3) where the neurophysiology assistant chose to start
with the photic stimulation exercise before the hyperventilation exercise.
40
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:48==
Quality Control
The user can report an event throughout the examination. The need for this was ex-
pressed when talking about annotating artifacts in assuring quality control. While the
need is somewhat satisfied, the execution of the functionality lacks as the sheet compo-
nent requires at least three clicks per artifact (one click on the ”Report event” button, one
click on the ”Report” button, and one click on the ”X” to close the sheet component). When
more than 50 annotations are made on average during an examination (A.2), it will result
in over 150 clicks. Furthermore, results show that some users would not annotate patient
movements (A.4), which could be a result of it being hidden in a sheet component.
In the expert interviews (A.1), it was mentioned that the neurophysiology assistants will
ask the patient to keep their eyes closed in order to have a less noisy scan. This was
also apparent in the EEG observations (A.2), where the assistant continuously asked the
patient to keep their eyes closed unless asked otherwise. The need for this was also
mentioned by the participants of the focus group (A.3). In the prototype, it is stated on
the ”Relaxation” screens, that it is suggested for the user to let the patient relax with their
eyes closed which seemingly could fulfill this need, but when looking at the results from
the user tests (A.4), it is clear that users forget to tell their patient to have their eyes closed.
Some users even contribute in inevitably worsening the quality by asking the patient to
open their eyes or talking to the patient without making an annotation.
Thus, the user needs, flexible system and quality control, are arguably not fulfilled which
means that the useful section of the User Experience Honeycomb is not satisfied.
4.1.3
Desirable
Desirability is about the design aesthetics and the visual appeal of the application. To
assess whether the prototype fulfills the desirable section of the User Experience Honey-
comb, Schneiderman’s 8 Golden Design Rules were applied.
Strive for consistency
In the 4.1.1 Usable subsection, the consistency and standards usability heuristic was
discussed. Here, it was mentioned how the ”Guided exercises” flow practiced good con-
sistency in the design and functionality of the flow, as well as the consistency of how
the exercises are displayed (see figure 4.3), and the orange completion screen after an
exercise is done (see figure 4.4).
Oppositely, bad consistency is present firstly in the ”Home” screen in the card component
which were at times clickable and at times not (see figure 4.10). During the ”Pre-interview”
flow, the alerts presented to the user had an incorrect usage of semantic colors (see figure
4.6) creating inconsistency in what a user might be used to seeing in other applications.
The inconsistency continues, in the ”Prepare equipment” flow where a ”Next” button had
reallocated from its previous location (see figure 4.11). Furthermore, during the ”Guided
exercises” flow a ”Skip” button was replaced by a ”Finish recording” button (see figure
4.12). Generally, buttons and hyperlinks were used for seemingly the same functionality
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
41
==PAGE:49==
interchangeably (see figure 4.13) which was also the case for the ”X” and ”Cancel” buttons
(see figure 4.14).
Figure 4.21: Different use of colors representing the status connections
Furthermore, the green and yellow colors used for representing the connection of the
GND and REF electrodes as well as the amplifier and the ECG is different than the green
and yellow colors used for representing the connection of the rest of the EEG electrodes
(see figure 4.21).
Therefore, the prototype as a whole does have challenges within consistency, thus it does
not satisfy the strive for consistency design rule.
Enable frequent users to use shortcuts
It is important for an application not only to be easy to learn for a new user, but also
accommodate shortcuts for frequent users to seamlessly navigate the application [7].
The structure of the ”Pre-interview” flow including 13 questions with each question hav-
ing its own screen (see figure 4.22) does increase the ease of learn since the flow is
thoroughly specified, but this flow does not accommodate frequent users. In a scenario
where a user might have five examinations in one day, the amount of screens make the
navigation of the prototype seem long and tedious for the frequent user.
This violates the rule meaning that the enable frequent users to use shortcuts design rule
is not satisfied.
Offer informative feedback
The prototype offers informative feedback for its users throughout. An example of this is
seen in the progress bar in the ”Pre-interview”, ”Prepare Equipment”, ”Guided exercises”,
and ”Evaluation” flows (see figure 4.1 above the connection status button) giving an infor-
42
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.22: ”Pre-interview” flow with individual screens for each question
mative overview of the progress to the user. Furthermore, the alert messages presented
throughout the prototype (see figure 4.6) sufficiently offers understandable feedback to the
user. Lastly, the orange screens in the prototype (see figure 4.4) present the upcoming
exercise or step in the flow which creates a good overview for the user.
A lacking factor, is seen during the ”Prepare Equipment” flow where the user has to con-
nect the amplifier (see figure 4.8). As mentioned in the 4.1.1 Usable subsection, the
lack of informative feedback of the connection to the amplifier causes no visibility in the
system status.
Despite the case of the amplifier connection, the prototype generally satisfies the offer
informative feedback design rule.
Design dialogue to yield closure
Using dialogue to create closure in terms of user actions is important for the sense of
completion for the user [7]. The orange screens throughout the prototype (see figure
4.4) include an encouraging text after the completion of each exercise. Also, the last
orange screen which has the text ”You’re done!” (see figure 4.20) written provides an
accomplishing feeling for the user.
Thus, the design dialogue to yield closure design rule is satisfied.
Offer simple error handling
As mentioned in the 4.1.1 Usable subsection, error handling is included in the prototype
mainly through alert messages and help options (see figure 4.6 and 4.7). Therefore, the
prototype satisfies the offer simple error handling design rule.
Permit easy reversal of actions
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
43
==PAGE:51==
Committing a regrettable action is a commonly seen scenario for a user in a system.
Therefore, permitting the user to easily reverse their actions is crucial [7]. The lack of
back navigation, which was also mentioned in 4.1.1 Usable subsection, greatly violates
this design rule. An example of this was seen in the user tests (A.4), where one user
accidentally skips a step in the flow but has no way of redeeming the error.
Furthermore, the annotation of an artifact offers no option to be removed in case the user
makes an error (see figure 4.16).
Thus, the permit easy reversal of actions design rule is not satisfied.
Support internal locus of control
Permitting the user to be the main trigger for an action causing an application to act in an
expected way is the essence of the support internal locus of control design rule, as an
user would like to feel in control of an application [7].
Overall, the prototype complies to the design rule by respecting the user’s need for control.
However, in the users tests (A.4) it was seen for the application flow, that the exercise timer
started when the user clicked on the ”Go to exercises” button meaning that despite the
user being the actual trigger of the action they did not seem to percieve in that way. As
mentioned in the 4.1.1 Usable section, the users found the instance stressful.
Therefore, the support internal locus design rule is arguably not satisfied.
Reduce short-term memory load
This design rule refers to the limitations of an user’s attention which makes it essential for
the design of the information hierarchy on the user interface to be simple [7].
As mentioned in the 4.1.1 Usable section, one user during the user tests (A.4.3), intu-
itively mistook the given information by asking the patient to relax for three minutes instead
of the intended 10 minutes during the ”Relaxation” flow. Users also mentioned that the
white card, showing the content of the upcoming exercise, would take away their atten-
tion from anything else on the orange screen in the application. This is an example of bad
information hierarchy which means that the reduce short-term memory load design rule
is not satisfied.
All in all, it was seen that while the prototype did satisfy the offer informative feedback,
design dialogue to yield closure, and offer simple error handling design rules, the appli-
cation violated the strive for consistency, enable frequent users to use shortcuts, permit
easy reversal of actions, support internal locus of control, and reduce short-term memory
load design rules to different degrees.
Thus, five out of Shneiderman’s 8 Golden Rules were violated meaning that the desirable
section of the User Experience Honeycomb is not satisfied.
44
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:52==
4.1.4
Findable
The information and navigation of an application should be easily manageable for the user
to find it findable [6].
The prototype has multiple places for the user to find help as mentioned in the 4.1.1
Usable subsection. The results of the user tests (A.4) show that, the users seemed
satisfied with the navigation flow as it was said to be easy, but as mentioned in the 4.1.2
Useful subsection, the enforced linear navigation causes bigger challenges for the user
in practice.
Thus, the findable section of the User Experience Honeycomb is relatively unsatisfied.
4.1.5
Accessible
For an application to be accessible, it must consider users with different disabilities [6]. To
adjudge whether the prototype fulfills the accessible section, the 7 principles of universal
design will be applied.
Equitable use
Having a design with equitable use means, that people with diverse abilities find the design
useful [8]. While many different types of disabilities exist, low vision is one of the most
common [13].
Here, contrast ratio compliance is important to make sure that people with low vision can
utilize the application without difficulties. A contrast checker from WebAIM [14], which
respects the contrast ratio guidelines from Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG)
[15], was applied on the prototype. The results are presented in table 4.1.
The results in table 4.1 show that out of 21 areas of concern, two areas were compli-
ant while 19 areas were not. Based on these results, the prototype does not satisfy the
equitable use principle.
Flexibility in use
This principle requires that the design widely covers individual preferences of the user [8].
The prototype manages to do so in some sense by having icons on their ”Guided exer-
cises” screens in addition to the exercise texts (see figure 4.3). This then accommodates
users who are dyslexic, and therefore seek guidance in visually displayed information.
Therefore, the prototype relatively satisfies the flexibility in use principle.
Simple and intuitive use
In the user tests (A.4), the application was said to be simple and intuitive. Despite this,
usability did have challenges as mentioned in 4.1.1 Usable subsection. The overall
downfall was the flow where some users would find it confusing and at times not intuitive
(A.4). Thus, the simple and intuitive use principle is arguably not satisfied.
Perceptible information
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
45
==PAGE:53==
Screen
Area of concern
Color codes (HEX) for foreground and background
Required contrast ratio
Measured contrast ratio
Pass or fail
Home
Bold large text in black
#010001 (black) on #FFFFFF (white)
3:1
20.96:1
Pass
Home
”Start Epilepsy scan” card component
#FFFFFF (white) on #E4E4E4 (shadow grey)
4.5:1
1.27:1
Fail
Home
Sidemenu
#E28E47 (orange) on #E4E4E4 (shadow grey)
4.5:1
2.01:1
Fail
Home
”Get started” text
#FFFFFF (white) on #E28E47 (orange)
4.5:1
2.65:1
Fail
Prepare Equipment
Battery status
#F5FEF3C (light lime) on #FFFFFF (white)
4.5:1
1.03:1
Fail
Prepare Equipment
Battery status text
#6BAF4C (green) on #F5FEF3C (light lime)
4.5:1
2.56:1
Fail
Prepare Equipment
”Status not connected” amplifier
#D84432 (red) on #FFFFFF (white)
4.5:1
4.38:1
Fail
Prepare Equipment
”Status connected” amplifier
#A1F769 (lime) on #FFFFFF (white)
4.5:1
1.31:1
Fail
Prepare Equipment
Inactive button
#DCDCDC (light grey) on #FFFFFF (white)
3:1
1.37:1
Fail
Prepare Equipment
Inactive button text
#8E8D8E (dark grey) on #DCDCDC (light grey)
4.5:1
2.41:1
Fail
Prepare Equipment
Connected GRD/REF
#A2F608 (light green) on #FFFFFF (white)
3:1
1.31:1
Fail
Prepare Equipment
Average connected GRD/REF
#F9E799 (light yellow) on #FFFFFF (white)
3:1
1.24:1
Fail
Prepare Equipment
Not connected GRD/REF
#DFDFDF (light grey) on #FFFFFF (white)
3:1
1.33:1
Fail
Prepare Equipment
Connected EEG
#76AA63 (green) on #FFFFFF (white)
3:1
2.72:1
Fail
Prepare Equipment
Average connected EEG
#EBB95D (yellow) on #FFFFFF (white)
3:1
1.8:1
Fail
Prepare Equipment
Not connected EEG
#9E9D9E (grey) on #FFFFFF (white)
3:1
2.7:1
Fail
Guided Exercises
Filled progress bar
#FFFFFF (white) on #E28E47 (orange)
4.5:1
2.56:1
Fail
Guided Exercises
Empty progress bar
#D38442 (dark orange) on #E28E47 (orange)
4.5:1
1.14:1
Fail
Guided Exercises
Electrode connection status button
#EBB95D (light orange) on #D38442 (dark orange)
4.5:1
1.42:1
Fail
Guided Exercises
Electrode connection status button icon
#FFFFFF (white) on #EBB95D (light orange)
4.5:1
1.8:1
Fail
Guided Exercises
Exercise icons
#010000 (black) on #FFFFFF (white)
4.5:1
20.69:1
Pass
Table 4.1: Contrast ratios of the prototype for equitable use
46
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:54==
An application should display needed information to accommodate users who have sen-
sory challenges [8].
The prototype’s usage of icons does aid the user’s ability to perceive information which
complies with the principle, but the text heavy sections on some screens (i.e. ”Relaxation”
screens (see figure 4.4)) were proved to cause confusion for the user (A.4.3). Thus, the
perceptible information principle is not satisfied.
Tolerance for error
As the name of the principle states, the design of an application should show tolerance
for possible errors focusing on users with disabilities [8].
In the prototype, alert messages are displayed during different scenarios as mentioned
previously. For example, during the ”Pre-interview” flow, where the user will see alert mes-
sages if they input contradictory patient answers guiding them to consult clinical guide-
lines (see figure 4.6). Thus, the user is prevented from committing an error in terms of
the patient.
Despite these warnings satisfying a part of the principle, the lack of back navigation in
the prototype could result in a point-of-no-return scenario for the user. The weight of this
scenario inevitably results in the tolerance for error principle not being satisfied.
Low physical effort
This principle focuses on having a design which is comfortable to use and does not trigger
excessive fatigue [8]. In the EEG observations (A.2), it was seen that the neurophysiol-
ogy assistant continuously made annotations throughout the examination. This was also
described in the 4.1.2 Useful subsection, where the amount of clicks were tripled as a
result of how the artifact annotation functionality is structured (see figure 4.16). For peo-
ple who suffer from arthritis or are in other ways motor challenged, fatigue occurs when
overworked. This leads to the prototype not satisfying the low physical effort principle.
Size and space for approach and use
Throughout the prototype, the components are presented in a way which seems to fulfill
this principle as the components are well sized and spaced (see figure 4.3). The hyperlink
buttons seen throughout could arguably be bigger but overall it seems that the prototype
satisfies the size and space for approach and use principle.
Conclusively, the prototype violated the equitable use, simple and intuitive use, percep-
tible information, tolerance for error, and low physical effort principles meaning that five
out of the 7 Principles of Universal Design were not fulfilled. Therefore, the accessible
section of the User Experience Honeycomb is not satisfied.
4.1.6
Credible
The Elements of Value Pyramid will be applied to the prototype to determine whether it
fulfills the credible section of the User Experience Honeycomb.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
47
==PAGE:55==
Functional
Starting from the bottom at the functional level, the prototype accomplishes at least three
of the 14 elements. Firstly, it simplifies the examination which is proved by the fact that
nurses with no prior training in EEG or epilepsy would be able to conduct a standard EEG
scan as seen in the results of the user tests (A.4). Furthermore, the system reduces cost
by being cheaper than other products on the current market [1]. Lastly, it manages to
avoid hassles by solving the challenges of the lacking relevant equipment and trained
staff in LMICs as mentioned in the 3.1 Users section.
Emotional
On the emotional level, the wellness element is satisfied since the prototype revolves
around improving health by aiding a patient in their journey of getting a diagnosis to then
receive relevant treatment.
The design/aesthetics element is not accomplished by the prototype based on the findings
in the 4.1.1 Usable subsection, because of the aforementioned shortcomings.
Life changing
The system provides hope by firstly making the examination accessible for patients in
LMICs which secondly, creates an opportunity of decreasing the amount of people with
epilepsy who go undiagnosed thus changing their lives for the better.
Social impact
In terms of social impact, the prototype, as mentioned, helps undiagnosed people, thus
the prototype ultimately reaches the highest level on the Elements of Value Pyramid by
accomplishing the self transcendence element.
Overall, the prototype accomplishes a variety of elements on different levels. While the
design/aesthetics element on the emotional level is arguably lacking, the credible section
of the User Experience Honeycomb is satisfied.
4.1.7
Valuable
Finding a system valuable can be a subjective opinion of every individual user. For a
more objective assessment, whether the prototype fulfills the valuable section of the User
Experience Honeycomb will be adjudged by an accumulation of the findings presented in
the analysis.
Throughout the analysis, the different sections of the User Experience Honeycomb have
been assessed. Starting with the usable section, the prototype had challenges within six
of the 10 usability heuristics resulting in the usable section not being satisfied. The use-
ful section focused on two user needs, flexible system and quality control, which were
respected to some degree but different findings in the expert interviews (A.1), EEG ob-
servations (A.2), and the user tests (A.4) showed challenges leading the useful section
to not be satisfied. Based on Schneidermann’s 8 Golden Design Rules, it was found that
48
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:56==
the prototype did not satisfy the desirable section of the User Experience Honeycomb.
Through the 7 Principles of Universal Design, the prototype was examined on different
perspectives concerning accessibility. This examination, showed that the prototype vio-
lated a majority of the principles concluding that the accessible section was not satisfied.
The only satisfied section of the User Experience Honeycomb is the credible section.
Here, the prototype successfully accomplished different elements across the levels of the
Elements of Value Pyramid.
All in all, a majority of sections of the User Experience Honeycomb are not fulfilled mean-
ing that the valuable section is not satisfied.
4.2
SWOT Analysis
The prototype was adjudged in the 4.1 User Experience section where both usability
strengths and weaknesses from different aspects were discovered. Now, a SWOT analy-
sis will be used to evaluate the possible strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats
of the whole system, including the application (V1) and equipment, from both internal and
external factors. The main points discussed are:
Strengths
Weaknesses
Application based system
Quality control
BrainCapture advantages
System limitations
Opportunities
Threats
User outcomes
Dependant variables
Expansion possibilities
Holistic aspects
4.2.1
Strengths & Weaknesses
The BrainCapture system is centered around the application and is therefore an applica-
tion based system which has its benefits. Firstly, an application is more compact com-
pared to a typical EEG system which includes heavy machinery. The compact aspect
also makes it easier to transport the system to conduct examinations outside of a hospi-
tal setting. Also, a benefit of using an application rather than a specified machine lies in
the familiarity many have with an application. System users might feel more comfortable
dealing with an application based system since they are used to dealing with applications
in their everyday life.
With the application centric system, BrainCapture has managed to enable nurses with no
background or prior education in EEG or epilepsy to conduct a quality EEG scan proving
that applying an application based system on this domain is possible with a high usability
and learnability compared to the typical EEG system. This is done by giving the user a
crash course including introduction and simulation training as well as the user guidance
in the application given throughout the examination.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
49
==PAGE:57==
Lastly, an advantage for BrainCapture is in terms of regulations, they currently have ac-
quired medical approval for their system. This strengthens the system compared to a
competing system, as customers and users can be assured that the system is safely
applicable on patients.
On the flip side, the system also comes with its weaknesses. The quality control, which
was proved to be a user need in the 3.2 User needs section, might be worse than the
quality produced by a typical EEG system because of missing features and functionalities.
In typical EEG systems, the neurophysiology assistant can see the EEG waves live while
also monitoring the patient through a synchronized video which is saved as a part of the
examination and be used for reviewing later on in the process. The lack of these features
result in a higher need for artifact annotations from the user, but still it is doubtful that the
quality of the examination will be on the same level. Another limitation of the system is in
the types of EEG scans possible to conduct. While it is possible to do a standard EEG as
well as a sleep EEG, the system might not be appropriate for video or EMU EEG scans
as these have more requirements for the system.
Other weaknesses are seen in regards to system limitations. Firstly, the application has
local storage limitations meaning that the user will be able to save a limited amount of
examinations locally but once the storage limit is reached, the user will have to upload the
examination to the cloud and delete the local files. Secondly, the accessibility compliancy
was not fulfilled, as discussed in 4.1.5 Accessible subsection, resulting in some direct
users with possible disabilities not being able to utilize the system.
4.2.2
Opportunities & Threats
One of the main opportunities brought by the BrainCapture system is the outcomes it will
bring users. The network created between direct and indirect users across borders allows
neurologists in HICs to connect with nurses in LMICs, thus reaching people with limited
resources. This is also due to the affordability of the system.
The system also opens up for expansion possibilities. For example, the mobility of the
system will make it possible for the user to conduct scans in the homes of the patients.
Overall, the system is adaptable for different use cases including it being used for other
research purposes and illnesses beyond epilepsy.
Contrarily, dependant variables and holistic aspects could threaten the system.
In terms of dependant variables, it is meant for the system to be connected to WiFi, but
the circumstances of LMICs could challenge this element. In a scenario where a nurse
has travelled to a village where no WiFi is accessible, the nurse does have the option of
conducting offline scans, but the aforementioned local storage limitations come into play,
because if the nurse has to conduct an excessive amount of scans, the limitations will be
a threat. It is also meant for the nurses to receive a crash course as mentioned before, but
if a scenario arises where the clinical facility does not have the resources to provide such
courses, it is not certain that the nurse will be able to conduct the examination satisfactorily.
50
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:58==
Furthermore, the aforementioned missing features could result in customers choosing a
more inclusive system from a competitor on the market.
Threats are also seen from holistic aspects. The political and economic state of the LMIC
might also threaten the system. If political or economic challenges arise in the countries
of the customers, they might be forced to renege despite prior established relationships
with the company. Furthermore, the company currently has a relationship with Kenya as
a beachhead market, but are still seeking market validation from other countries meaning
that the future of the system is still unclear.
The fact that the company has its market in LMICs mean that import and export between
Europe and Africa is needed. Here, complications could occur which could threaten the
livelihood of the system. The import and export challenges could mirror in regards to the
externally purchased equipment. At the moment, the company purchases their cap and
the hardware for their amplifier at external European suppliers, and while the company
seems confident in its external suppliers, situations where complications could challenge
the relationship could arise prompting another threat.
Other holistic aspects include legislation or other types of regulations which could threaten
the BrainCapture system. As mentioned, the system is currently not accessibility compli-
ant, as seen in the 4.1.5 Accessible subsection, which not only causes an inconve-
nience for users with disabilities but in some countries such as Denmark, America, and
South Africa, accessibility regulations are in place [16, 17, 18]. Thus, the system’s inability
to comply with accessibility regulations could result in legal threats to the system if similar
regulations are made in the intended markets.
4.3
Sub-conclusion
In the 4.1 User Experience Review section, it was seen that the prototype, which the
BrainCapture application is based on, has both strengths and weaknesses in terms of
usability, accessibility, and more. Overall, the weaknesses outweighed the strengths.
Furthermore, it was discussed in the 4.2 SWOT Analysis section that the system has
strengths by beneficially being an application based system and having advantages over
competitors by being medically approved, but weaknesses of the system included lack in
features affecting quality control and system limitations. The system also produced op-
portunities creating user outcomes and expansion possibilities, however multiple threats
could occur as a result of dependant variables and holistic aspects.
Conclusively, the state of the user interface and the user experience is lacking, thus the
development of a data-driven optimized version of the BrainCapture solution is justified.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
51
==PAGE:59==
5
Design Implementation & Testing
The 5 Design Implementation & Testing chapter focuses on answering the third re-
search question by looking at how an optimized version of the BrainCapture solution would
look in terms of user interface and user experience design. This will be done through three
sections.
The first section of the chapter focuses on a MoSCoW Prioritization where must have,
should have, could have, and will not have will be used to filter which of the functionali-
ties discovered in the previous chapter would be included in an optimized version of the
solution.
Note that the optimized version of the solution is at an MVP level, thus it will not be able
to cover all the weaknesses of the BrainCapture prototype which were stated in the 4
Analysis chapter.
Once the functionalities have been filtered, an user story map centered around the user,
their goals, activities, and tasks as well as system tasks is constructed in the second
section of the chapter.
In the third section of the chapter, the design implementation begins based on the two
first sections. The implementation and testing will happen across five sprints which follow
the build-measure-learn cycle. The testing will be conducted on relevant users including
nurses, medical laboratory technologists, and social and health care assistants who have
the same tasks as a nurse. For each sprint, improvements will be made to the application
based on the test results.
Finally, an optimized version of user interface and user experience design developed
through a data-driven approach is the end result.
5.1
MoSCoW Prioritization
Direct and indirect users and their needs were examined through expert interviews and
EEG observations in the 3 Research chapter, followed by an extensive analysis where
elements such as usability, desirability, accessibility, and more, were discussed in an ex-
pert user experience review, and different risk related factors were presented through a
SWOT analysis in the 4 Analysis chapter.
This has led to the discovery of different functionalities. Table 5.1 shows an overview of
all the functionalities.
These functionalities will be filtered through a MoSCoW Prioritization compromised of
must have, should have, could have, and will not have functionalities.
52
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:60==
Number
Functionality
Discovered
in
chapter,
section
1
Inputting patient informa-
tion including routine ques-
tions
3, 3.2
2
Patient restrictions for ex-
ercises
3, 3.2
3
Patient signature
3, 3.2
4
Prepare equipment includ-
ing cap, amplifier, ECG, sy-
ringe, gel, and measuring
tape
3, 3.2
5
Conducting
exercises
(eyes,
hyperventilation,
and
photic
stimulation)
with guidance
3, 3.2
6
Synchronized video
3, 3.2
7
Annotation contributing to
quality control
3, 3.2
8
Change
between
mon-
tages
3, 3.2
9
Seizure handling/guidance
3, 3.2
10
Review of the scan cov-
ering a preliminary evalua-
tion
3, 3.2
11
Uploading examination to
the cloud
4, 4.1
12
Deletion of files automati-
cally after upload to cloud
4, 4.1
13
Possibility of conducting a
control EEG
3, 3.2
14
Flexible system respecting
free navigation
3, 3.2
Table 5.1: Overview of functionalities
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
53
==PAGE:61==
The final optimized MVP version of the application will only include the must have and
should have functionalities. The functionalities for could have and will not have could be
included in a later developed version of the application which is then not a part of the MVP,
and therefore beyond the scope of this thesis.
5.1.1
Must have
It was discovered through the expert interviews (A.1), and more specifically in the EEG
observations (A.2), that the patient will have to wear the equipment before the exam-
ination can be conducted. The equipment is therefore a must in order for the user to
conduct the examination. Furthermore, it was discovered that the system would have to
be flexible and respect free navigation in order to best accommodate the user and patient.
Instances have shown that system flexibility is exploited repeatedly in practice making it
a highly necessary functionality. It was clear from the 3.2 User Needs section that an
annotation functionality was a key need in order to contribute to the quality of an EEG
scan. In the 4.2 SWOT analysis section, it was also expressed that the lack of other
features, i.e. video and live EEG, increased the need for an easily accessible annota-
tion functionality making it a must have for the application. Lastly, in the same section, it
was also discussed that local storage limitations could cause a threat which makes the
possibility to upload the examination to the cloud a high need. Lastly, it was explained in
the 3.2 User Needs section, that the neurophysiology assistants followed patient related
restrictions influenced by their clinical guidelines. For a nurse who is untrained in EEG
and epilepsy, the restrictions are a high necessity for patient security.
Therefore, functionality numbers 2, 4, 7, and 11 are to be included in the MVP application.
5.1.2
Should have
It is possible to conduct a standard EEG scan without knowing exactly who the patient
is. This is seen in scenarios where neurophysiology assistants have to conduct emer-
gency EEG scans where they do not necessarily know anything about the patient until
after the examination. Nevertheless, the functionality of inputting patient information in-
cluding routine questions brings immense value and is a part of the standard procedure
as discovered in 3.2 User Needs section. The same scenario can be applied when dis-
cussing the priority of the provocation exercises. Here, it is also important to make the
exercises as easy as possible to follow for an inexperienced nurse. Another part of the
standard procedure is the review of the scan. Here, the preliminary evaluation of the scan
contributes to the overall analysis and diagnosis meaning that the functionality brings high
value.
Thus, the functionality numbers 1, 5, and 10 will also be included in the MVP application.
5.1.3
Could have
In the 3.2 User Needs section, the need for synchronized video was deemed highly
important from the perspectives of the neurophysiology assistants, medical laboratory
technologist, and the specialized neurology and neurophysiology doctor who use it as
a tool for diagnostic purposes and quality control. The prioritization of this functionality
54
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:62==
is affected by the limited resources of LMICs. An external camera is not a part of the
BrainCapture solution. Utilizing the camera on the phone, which is a part of the solution,
will result in practical issues such as the nurse having to simultaneously film the patient
while manipulating the application, as well as the size of the examination file including a
video. Despite bringing value, this feature is therefore prioritized as a could have feature.
In regards to the file size, the possibility of automatically deleting files locally after being
uploaded to the cloud could counterattack the aforementioned threat. Despite this, the
possibility will need more user research before being enforced as the feature has currently
not been tested in practice. The need for further user research makes this a could have
feature as well.
This results in the functionality numbers 6 and 12 not being included in the MVP applica-
tion.
5.1.4
Will not have
One neurophysiology assistant (A.1.1) mentioned that they would ask for the patient’s
signature while other neurophysiology assistants at another hospital did not mention this.
Therefore, the inclusion of a patient signature feature is not crucial. In the 3.2 User Needs
section, it was mentioned that there is a change in montages during the examination
which is done manually by the neurophysiology assistant. While this seems to be a stan-
dard procedure, the level of knowledge and training required for this specific action might
be too complex for a nurse without any background in EEG and epilepsy. Thus, the ap-
plication will not have this feature.
Furthermore, challenges in the shape of patient behavior were discovered in the 3.2 User
Needs section. Here, it was mentioned that knowing how to react if a patient has a
seizure during the examination could be difficult. To accommodate this challenge, includ-
ing seizure handling or other guidance in the application could be an option. However,
different hospitals have different ways of handling a seizure attack, thus standardized
guidelines could prove to be difficult to define. In a scenario where a seizure does hap-
pen and the nurse follows the guidance of the application, which might be conflicting to
the hospital’s, it could have a critical outcome for the patient. Thus, this feature will be ex-
cluded. Lastly, the possibility of conducting a control EEG was mentioned in the 3.2 User
Needs section. This feature is outside of the scope, and will therefore not be included in
the application.
Thus, the functionality numbers 3, 8, 9, and 13 will not be included in the MVP application.
Table 5.1 can now be updated after the prioritization of the functionalities as seen in table
5.2.
5.2
User Story Map
Now, that the needed functionalities have been filtered, a user story map focusing on
the user’s goals, activities, and tasks can be created. The must have and should have
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
55
==PAGE:63==
Number
Functionality
Discovered
in
chapter, section
Prioritization
1
Inputting patient in-
formation including
routine questions
3, 3.2
Should Have
2
Patient restrictions
for exercises
3, 3.2
Must Have
3
Patient signature
3, 3.2
Will not Have
4
Prepare equipment
including
cap,
amplifier,
ECG,
syringe,
gel,
and
measuring tape
3, 3.2
Must Have
5
Conducting
ex-
ercises
(eyes,
hyperventilation,
and photic stimula-
tion) with guidance
3, 3.2
Should Have
6
Synchronized
video
3, 3.2
Could Have
7
Annotation
con-
tributing to quality
control
3, 3.2
Should Have
8
Change
between
montages
3, 3.2
Will not Have
9
Seizure
han-
dling/guidance
3, 3.2
Will not Have
10
Review of the scan
covering a prelimi-
nary evaluation
3, 3.2
Should Have
11
Uploading
ex-
amination
to
the
cloud
4, 4.1
Must Have
12
Deletion of files au-
tomatically after up-
load to cloud
4, 4.1
Could Have
13
Possibility of con-
ducting
a
control
EEG
3, 3.2
Will not Have
14
Flexible system re-
specting free navi-
gation
3, 3.2
Must Have
Table 5.2: Overview of prioritized functionalities
56
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:64==
functionalities will be a part of slice one which is the MVP, the could have functionalities
will be a part of slice two, and the will not have functionalities (except for the seizure
handling/guidance function which is excluded for being too risky) will be in slice three.
Slice two and three are outside of the MVP scope, and will therefore not be described
further.
Firstly, the user, who is a nurse in a LMIC, has three goals which is compromised of
different activities with respective user and system tasks. The goals are to 1) conduct, 2)
evaluate, and 3) complete a quality standard EEG scan.
The first goal, of conducting a quality standard EEG scan, has 10 activities which follow
the standard flow of an EEG examination. First, to prepare for the scan the tasks are
to prepare relevant equipment (phone with application, cap with EEG electrodes, gel,
syringe with needle, amplifier, and ECG device), and then to turn on the app. Then,
the user gets relevant patient information by asking the patient about their identification
number, biological sex, birthday, current state, episode activity, and medical history. If the
patient falls into either age or medically related restrictions, the system should show a
warning to notify the user. Once the patient information is received, the user should save
the information, and the system should save the progress. Hereafter, the user will connect
the EEG electrodes by putting the cap on the patient, turning on the amplifier, connecting
the app to the amplifier via Bluetooth, which the system reflects, then connecting the
cap to the amplifier via the wire, gelling up the EEG electrodes on the cap, and lastly,
checking the impedance status of the electrodes. Subsequently, the user connects the
ECG electrodes by putting on the ECG on the patient, connecting the ECG to the amplifier
via the wire, and once again checking the impedance status.
Thus, the user can start the scan by starting the recording which triggers the system to
start the recording time. Next, the user can do the exercises, eyes, hyperventilation, and
photic stimulation, by asking the patient to perform the exercises where the user will add
annotations throughout. The user can then finish the exercises and the system will save
the progress.
Throughout the exercises, the system will notify the user if seizure like behaviour is de-
tected, and the user has the option of skipping exercises if necessary. Also, it will notify
the user if the patient is falling asleep, and if electrodes loose their connection.
Afterwards, the user should let the patient rest for the remaining examination time where
the user has the same possibilities as with the exercises, and the system responds in the
same way as well. Lastly for the goal of conducting a quality standard EEG scan, the user
can finish the scan by taking the equipment off the patient when the time is up, and then
turning off the amplifier.
The second goal, of evaluating a quality standard EEG scan, has one activity which is to
review the scan. The user can do this by noting how the scan went, edit annotations if
necessary, and note final comments. The system will then save the progress.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
57
==PAGE:65==
Lastly, the third goal, of completing a quality standard EEG scan, also has one activity
which is to upload the reviewed EEG scan. Here, the user will have to save the file and
upload it to the cloud which the system then does.
A visual representation of the user story map can be seen in (A.7.1).
5.3
Sprints
With the construction of the user story map, the design implementation, with the aim of
testing on relevant users, can begin.
The design implementation and testing will cover five sprints, which follow the build-
measure-learn cycle iteratively.
The first sprint focuses on the initial version of the prototype (V0) focusing on color choice
and illustrations for the user interface design, and the included prioritized functionalities
in regards to the user experience design. The prototype will be reviewed by an external
user experience designer, and a medical student at the University of Copenhagen, and
will thereafter be updated accordingly.
For the second sprint, an updated version of the prototype (V1) will be tested on four
nurses who participated in the user tests of BrainCapture’s application (A.4). The proto-
type is then updated and the cycle continuous.
For the third and fourth sprints, different versions of the prototype (V2 for the third sprint
and V3 for the fourth) will be tested, and for each respective sprint, four nurses with no
prior knowledge of EEG or epilepsy will be the test users (A.5.2, A.5.3). Based on the test
results, improvements will be implemented.
In the final sprint, the same cycle is continued but after the testing with four nurses is
completed (A.5.4), final comments on the results of the last test round will be discussed,
but no improvements will be implemented on the prototype (V4).
In total, this will accumulate to two feedback sessions (one with the user experience de-
signer, and a second with the medical student), and four rounds of testing with 16 test
users (four in each sprint) (A.5). Thus, the final end result will be an MVP prototype which
has been optimized through a data-driven process.
Note that throughout the sprints, the focus will be on the impact of the improvements and
whether they have solved the challenges, as well as new challenges if any occur. Other
areas which are consistently successful for the users will not be described further.
Test setup
During the testing rounds (sprint 2-5), two types of data were collected, namely quantita-
tive and qualitative data.
For the quantitative data collection, four test cases were measured with different user ex-
perience goals, measures, measurement instruments, metric, baseline levels, and target
58
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:66==
User
class
UX Goal
UX Mea-
sure
Measure-
ment
instru-
ment
UX
Met-
ric
Baseline
level
Target
level
Nurse
with
no
prior
ex-
perience
in
work-
ing
with
epilepsy
or EEG
Low error
rates
Error
related
perfor-
mance
Task 1, 2,
3
Error rate
4 errors
=< 4 er-
rors
-”-
User
at-
traction to
product
User
opinion
on attrac-
tiveness
(UI)
Question-
naire
Average
score
on
scale
from 1-5
3.5/5
=> 3.5/5
-”-
Quality of
user
ex-
perience
User
opinion
of overall
experi-
ence
Question-
naire
Average
score
on
scale
from 1-5
4.3/5
=> 4.3/5
-”-
App guid-
ance
User con-
fidence to
conduct
scan
Question-
naire
Average
score
on
scale
from 1-5
4.5/5
=> 4.5/5
Table 5.3: Test cases
levels (motivated by Table 16-1 in [3]). These can be seen in table 5.3.
For all the test cases, the user class, as stated, is a nurse with no prior experience in
working with epilepsy or EEG. The age and gender of the nurse is not considered as it
does not have a direct impact on the test results. In some cases, where nurses are not
available for testing, social and health care assistants or medical laboratory technologists
can also be utilized, if they have the same tasks and function at a hospital as a nurse.
The target level is to be equal or better than the baseline level. For each sprint, the results
of the previous sprint will be the baseline level meaning that the level changes every sprint.
The first test case, seen in the first row in table 5.3 has the goal ”Low error rates”, and to
accomplish this, the error performance of the user conducting three tasks will be measured
by counting the error rate. The three tasks are:
1. Pre scan
• Input patient information
• Connect and put on equipment
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
59
==PAGE:67==
2. During scan
• Annotate eyes open, eyes closed and blink continuously
• Annotate using “other”
• Remove annotation
3. Post scan
• Edit an annotation
• Review scan
• Upload scan to cloud
The baseline level for this test case is based on the average number of errors made by
the users in the user test on the BrainCapture application (A.4), where the same tasks
were conducted in the application.
The second test case’s goal is ”User attraction to product” where the user’s opinion on
attractiveness will be measured using a questionnaire scale which ranges from 1-5 where
1 is the worst and 5 is the best. The baseline level is established by general recommen-
dations and guidelines stating that for a score to be above average, it should be around
70% [19].
The third test case has the goal ”Quality of user experience” which will be measuring the
user’s opinion of overall experience.
The last test case focuses on ”App guidance”, and measures the user’s confidence to
conduct a scan if they were to do it again tomorrow.
Both of these are measured on the same 1-5 questionnaire scale, and the baseline level
is based on the ratings of the users from the user tests on the BrainCapture application
(A.4).
For the qualitative data collection, the users were presented with equipment (EEG cap,
amplifier, ECG device, syringe, gel, and measuring tape) and a patient (mannequin head)
as seen in figure 5.1.
The users were then asked to start the application and simulate a scan on the patient.
For each round, a think aloud test was conducted where the users were asked to vocalize
their thoughts and possible challenges.
5.3.1
First sprint
User Interface Design
Simplicity is the main theme behind the design of the user interface. The main elements
of the user interface is the use of color and illustrations & icons.
Color
60
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.1: Usability test setup
The color blue symbolizes loyalty and trust [20], and some of the biggest medical compa-
nies in the world, including Novarts [21], Pfizer [22], Roche [23], Regeneron [24], Abbvie
[25], and Novo Nordisk [26], unanimously use different shades of blue as their main color
throughout their branding, services, and more. BrainCapture advertise themselves as a
company working with medical technology [27], and it therefore makes them eligible to
also use blue in their services.
Figure 5.2: The selected ”French Blue” style color
The choice of blue was made using the aforementioned contrast checker from WebAIM
[14], where different shades and nuances of blue were assessed in terms of accessibility
against an off white background. This background was chosen to keep a simplistic and
consistent design, and to assure that the background did not take away attention from
any potential important information or components. A ”French Blue” style color, which
respects the contrast ratio guidelines, was finally chosen (see figure 5.2).
Furthermore, accessible pink and grey colors were chosen alongside the blue to represent
the cap sizes which are similar to the colors of the caps (see figure 5.3). The pink cap is
a small, the blue is a medium while the grey is a large.
Lastly, alert messages will be presented throughout the application. The alert messages
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
61
==PAGE:69==
Figure 5.3: Color coordinated cap sizes
Figure 5.4: Semantic color scheme for alert messages
62
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:70==
follow the semantic color scheme in the way that they are orange when the alert has
information the user needs to be attentive of, green when the information is positive, and
red when the alert has information which the user has to quickly act upon. Furthermore,
an icon is present in the alert corresponding to the message (see figure 5.4).
The colors scheme is familiar to most users, and they therefore trigger a reaction before
the user has read the included text.
Furthermore, the semantic colors are also used throughout the application for red delete
buttons, green check marks, and green exercise completions.
Illustrations & icons
Users in the user tests on the BrainCapture application (A.4) responded well to the icons
as many used them as guidance during the examination. Additionally, the users men-
tioned that the inclusion of animations would help with patient interaction and possible
language barriers.
Figure 5.5: A selection of equipment animations
Therefore, it was decided to create and include more explicit animated illustrations in the
new application. These animated illustrations would be present during both the ”Equip-
ment flow”, to show users how the equipment should be connected (see figure 5.5), and
the ”Exercise flow”, which would mirror how the patient should conduct the exercise (i.e.
breathing tempo for hyperventilation, and blinking frequency for photic stimulation) (see
figure 5.6).
Furthermore, icons will have a big impact on the annotation component. Here, every
single annotation will have its own respective icon which will create visual association for
the user (see figure 5.7).
User Experience Design
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
63
==PAGE:71==
Figure 5.6: A selection of exercise animations
Figure 5.7: Annotation component
64
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:72==
The user experience design of the new application will focus on usability by being easy
to use for first time users, as well as accommodating frequent users by being efficient
in use. The user experience design of each flow, covering the prioritized functionalities
mentioned in table 5.2, will be described below.
Home
Figure 5.8: Home screen
The Home screen of the application includes two buttons; One that says ”Start scan”,
which starts a new scan taking the user to the ”Patient flow”, and another which says
”Review scan”, directing the user to the ”Review EEG flow” where they can evaluate an
existing scan (see figure 5.8). Both buttons have big illustrations which help the user to
visually distinguish between the two.
Patient information flow
The ”Patient Information flow” is divided in four main steps with input fields and dropdown
menus including a small title above each representing a question (see figure 5.9). The
questions, which are motivated by the findings in the 3 Research chapter, will be placed
inside the fields in the shape of help text. Within each step, there is a page count to
keep the user informed of their progress in the flow. For all the steps, the user always
has the option of skipping by clicking a ”Skip” button on the top right corner, and going
back in the flow by clicking a back chevron button on the top left corner. Also, a ”Next”
button is present throughout the flow which is always active to further respect the need
of a flexible system. This is in case the user wants to only answer some of the questions
due to different practical circumstances.
Dividing the ”Patient Information flow” in these four main steps will offer a more compact
and efficient way of inputting the information that does not overwhelm the user.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
65
==PAGE:73==
Figure 5.9: Patient Information flow
The steps are Patient, Current state, Episodes, and Medical history.
The Patient step asks the questions:
• What is the patient’s personal identification?
• What is the patient’s date of birth?
• What is the sex of the patient?
Once the user has answered the questions in the Patient step, they can click a ”Next”
button at the bottom of the screen taking them to the Current state step, which asks the
questions:
• Is the patient in their habitual state?
• Is the patient well rested?
• Is the patient sleep deprived?
• Is the patient pregnant?
• Has the patient ate and drunk?
• When was the last meal the patient had?
Again, the user clicks a ”Next” button at the bottom of the page after finishing, taking them
to the Episodes step, which asks the questions:
• When did the patient last have an episode?
• What is the episode frequency of the patient?
66
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:74==
Another click on a ”Next” button takes the user to the Medical history step, which asks the
questions:
• Does the patient have diagnosed heart diseases or arrhythmia?
• Does the patient have diagnosed high blood pressure?
• Has the patient had cerebral hemorrhage within the last 2 years?
• Has the patient had a blood clot in brain or heart within the last 2 years?
• Has the patient had a heart surgery within the last 2 years?
• Does the patient have diagnosed lung diseases, asthma or COPD?
• Is the patient on any medication?
After the user has completed the last step, the ”Next” button has been changed to a ”Go
to equipment” button, which takes them to the next flow.
Figure 5.10: Patient restriction alerts
During the inputting of patient information in the ”Patient Information flow”, different alert
messages can be triggered depending on the inputted data (see figure 5.10). If the pa-
tient is above 50 years old, the alert message ”It is not suitable for the patient to do the
hyperventilation exercise” will be shown, and likewise the message ”It is not suitable for
the patient to do the photic stimulation exercise” is shown if the patient is below one year.
A pregnant patient will trigger the message ”It is not suitable for the patient to do the
provocation exercises”, and a patient with diagnosed lung diseases, asthma or COPD will
lead to the message ”It is not suitable for the patient to do the hyperventilation exercise.”
The alert messages will be presented in an accessible red making the user aware of a
patient related restriction without dictating how to act upon this restriction.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
67
==PAGE:75==
Equipment flow
The ”Equipment flow” guides the user on how to deal with the equipment and equip the
patient. This is done through a series of screens with animated illustrations and corre-
sponding text. The user navigates through the flow using a ”Next” button at the bottom of
the screen.
Figure 5.11: List of equipment
The first screen presented to the user shows them a list of all the equipment they will need
to conduct the scan, to ensure they have all the needed equipment (see figure 5.11). The
list includes one EEG cap, one amplifier, one ECG device (wires and sticker electrodes),
conductive salt-water gel, one syringe, and a measuring tape. When ready, the user can
click a ”Connect equipment” button.
The user is asked to measure the head of the patient using the measuring tape (see figure
5.12). On this screen the user also sees the aforementioned three color coordinated
standard cap sizes which are available as a part of the BrainCapture solution. This will
help the user in knowing which cap size to choose based on the measurement.
Next, the patient is asked to put the EEG cap on the patient’s head whereafter the user is
asked to turn on the amplifier by sliding the knob on the side (see figure 5.13).
Then, they are asked to connect it to the application via Bluetooth. This is done by choos-
ing the correct amplifier in the dropdown menu and waiting until the connection is complete
which is represented by a green check mark (see figure 5.14). This is the only screen
where the ”Next” button starts in an inactive state, and once the connection is completed,
the button changes to an active state.
The user is then asked to connect the cap to the amplifier via the wire (see figure 5.15).
Hereafter, the user is asked to take the syringe and fill it with gel (see figure 5.15).
68
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:76==
Figure 5.12: Measuring the patient’s head and cap sizes
Figure 5.13: Putting on the cap and turning on the amplifier
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
69
==PAGE:77==
Figure 5.14: Connecting the application and amplifier through Bluetooth
Figure 5.15: Connecting the cap and amplifier, and filling up the syringe with gel
70
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:78==
Figure 5.16: Filling the EEG electrodes
The user then sees a screen which shows them a visual overview of the EEG electrode
placement mirroring the placement on the cap (see figure 5.16). Firstly, the GND electrode
will be filled, then the REF electrode, and lastly the rest of the electrodes are filled with
the gel.
The last part is to connect the ECG electrodes to their wires, then to the amplifier, and
finally to the wrists of the patient (see figure 5.17).
After all the equipment is put on, the user can click a ”Go to exercises” button which takes
them to the next flow.
Exercises flow
The first screen the user sees in the ”Exercise flow”, is a list of all the exercises (see
figure 5.18). To guide the user, the exercises are listed to follow the order of the standard
procedure starting with the eyes, then hyperventilation, photic stimulation, and lastly a
resting exercise. But the user is allowed to choose whichever order they see fit meaning
that they can choose to start with the photic stimulation exercise followed by the eyes
exercise if desired. Within each list item, an illustration of the exercise is present, along
with the estimated duration, to give the user a visual representation of the exercise. At
the bottom of the screen, an inactive ”Save” button is present. In order for the button to
become active, at least one exercise has to be completed.
When the user clicks the desired exercise, they are taken to a screen which has exercise
information text explaining how the user should conduct the exercise (see figure 5.19).
The user can use this text to explain the exercise to the patient, to help themselves, or
however they wish. On the bottom of the screen, a ”Tip” stating ”Tip: Ask the patient to
keep their eyes closed and open their jaw slightly unless asked to do otherwise for best
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
71
==PAGE:79==
Figure 5.17: Connecting ECG
Figure 5.18: List of exercises
72
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:80==
Figure 5.19: Information text for each of the exercises
possible EEG results” is present to increase the quality of examination.
Figure 5.20: Exercise flow
Once the user is ready, they can click a ”Tap to start” button at the top of the screen which
starts a timer counting down until the the end of each exercise part has been completed
(see figure 5.20). The duration stated on the timer for the different steps in the exercise
is based on the findings in the expert interviews (A.1) and EEG observations (A.2).
Furthermore, the aforementioned annotation component is present on all the exercise
screens allowing the user to input annotations throughout the scan (see figure 5.7). The
component consists of six buttons with corresponding icons and titles.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
73
==PAGE:81==
The top row of buttons are for annotating each time the patient opens, closes, or blinks
their eyes when the user asks for it. This is inspired by the EEG observations (A.2) where
the neurophysiology assistant would annotate every time they asked the patient to open,
close, or blink their eyes. The buttons can also be used for deviations in terms of eye
movement.
The bottom row of buttons are only for annotating deviations. Here, talking and seizure
have been selected as predefined annotation options.
Talking was added because in the EEG observation with the 17 year old male (A.2.3), the
neurophysiology assistant annotated the patient talking using a free text field. Therefore,
talking was added as a predefined option for it to be more easy and efficient to annotate.
While it was mentioned in the 3.2 User Needs section that seizures did not to happen
often, the option should still be easily accessible for the user in case it does occur.
Figure 5.21: Adding an ”Other” annotation
Lastly, an ”Other” option is present for when the user wants to annotate something that
differs from the predefined options (see figure 5.21). When the user clicks the ”Other”
button, it will open a sheet component which consists of a large free text field where the
user can freely write the annotation, and save by clicking the check mark at the bottom.
Every time the user adds an annotation, a counter, which is located at the top of the
annotation component, counts the added annotations giving the user an overview of their
annotations. While the main functionality of the counter is to count the added annotations,
the purpose of it is to make sure the user knows the clicked annotation has been added
as a form of user feedback. In practice, it could occur that users click an annotation but
are unaware of it because of distractions or mere human errors.
The composition of the six annotation buttons make it possible to annotate with only one
74
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:82==
Figure 5.22: Removing an annotation
click. However, the easily accessible buttons might increase the error rate by creating
false positive annotations. Therefore, the counter also has a delete functionality where
the interactivity is presented through a chevron icon (see figure 5.22). If the user clicks
the counter, a sheet component opens, which has a list of all the added annotations. To
the right of each annotation, a delete button is present where the user can click to delete
the annotation.
Throughout each step of the exercise, a ”Skip” button is always present at the top right
corner which takes the user one step forward to the next part of the same exercise. Back
navigation is also present through a back chevron located at the top left corner of the
screen which takes the user one step back to the previous part of the exercise.
Furthermore, there is an inactive ”Next” button which turns active once the exercise part
is finished. Similarly, on the final exercise step, a ”Finish” button is present which the user
can click after the final completion (see figure 5.23).
When an exercise is complete, it takes the user back to the screen with the list of exercises,
where the completed exercise has changed color from blue to green (see figure 5.24).
While it is not mandatory to complete all the exercises, the color change helps give the
user an overview of their progress in the examination.
Once the user has completed at least one exercise, they can click the ”Save” button at
the bottom of the screen which then shows a big green check mark expressing that the
scan has been saved by the system, and then takes them back to the Home screen (see
figure 5.24).
During the ”Exercise flow”, four alert messages can be triggered at different times (see
figure 5.24).
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
75
==PAGE:83==
Figure 5.23: Inactive button which turns active after completion of parts in exercise
Figure 5.24: Completion of first exercise and saving the scan
76
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:84==
Figure 5.25: Alert messages
When an electrode has lost connection, the user gets the alert message ”Electrode x has
lost connection!” where x is the name of the specific electrode. The alert message is
orange, and has an exclamation mark in a triangle as an icon, since it needs the user to
pay attention and fix the electrode. Once the electrode is fixed, the alert changes to green,
the text now says ”Electrode x has regained connection”, and the icon also changes to a
check mark in a square.
If the system registers that the patient is about to fall asleep, an alert message is triggered
with the message ”The patient is falling asleep. Wake them up gently.” As mentioned in
the 3 Research chapter, drowsiness creates noisy brainwaves, and the patient therefore
needs to be awake during the exercises (except for the resting exercise). Thus, the user
is alerted with an orange color and the same icon with the exclamation mark in a triangle.
Lastly, the only red alert is triggered when the system detects seizure like behavior, and it
states ”Seizure behavior is detected! Tend to the patient!” This alert is red since it requires
a quick reaction. The text is meant to make the user aware of the behavior to hopefully
stop the seizure before it happens, but the text does not tell the user how to deal with
the seizure as this could be too risky as mentioned in the 5.1 MoSCoW Prioritization
section. The alert also has the exclamation mark in a triangle as its icon.
Review and upload EEG scan
After the completion of a scan, the user can click the ”Review scan” button on the Home
screen (see figure 5.8). This takes the user to a screen with a list of patient scans divided
in two sections; One section at the top called ”To review”, and one at the bottom called
”Reviewed” (see figure 5.26).
”To review” includes all the scans the user has conducted which need to be reviewed.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
77
==PAGE:85==
Figure 5.26: List of patient scans
Each list item consists of the number of annotations, the patient identification number, the
duration of the scan, and the date the scan was conducted.
”Reviewed” on the other hand includes all the scans which the user has conducted, eval-
uated, and uploaded to the cloud.
When the user clicks on a patient scan in the list, they are taken to a screen with a list
of evaluation questions (see figure 5.27) where the construction is similar to the list of
questions in the ”Patient information flow” with input fields. The evaluation questions are:
• What was the state of the patient during recording?
• What was the quality of the eyes exercise?
• What was the quality of the hyperventilation exercise?
• What was the quality of the photic stimulation exercise?
• Did any episodes occur during the scan?
• Other notes?
At the top of the screen, an edit functionality is seen presented with the overall number
of annotations and a pencil icon (see figure 5.28). The user can click the pencil icon and
see a list of the added annotations through the scan. The user can then click on a specific
annotation to add a comment if needed. The user can then use the back chevron on the
top left corner of the screen to get back to the previous screen with the two sections.
Once the scan has been evaluated by the user through them answering all the questions,
they can click the ”Upload to cloud” button at the bottom of the screen which has turned
from an inactive to an active state. This will trigger a green check mark which confirms
78
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:86==
Figure 5.27: Evaluation questions
Figure 5.28: Edit annotations by adding a comment
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
79
==PAGE:87==
Figure 5.29: Upload scan to cloud
80
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:88==
that the scan has been uploaded to the cloud (see figure 5.29). They are then taken back
to the list of patient scans.
Figure 5.30: Reviewed scan has been moved to ”Reviewed” section
Now, the user sees that the evaluated scan has been moved to the ”Reviewed” section,
and a green cloud icon has been added to the patient scan (see figure 5.30).
The user can then click the ”Home” button at the top right corner of the screen which takes
them back to the Home screen, where they can restart the cycle.
To interact with the V0 prototype, please refer to this link.
Feedback
The initial version of the prototype (V0), was presented to both an external user experience
designer and a medical student at the University of Copenhagen. Relevant constructive
feedback was given upon this application presentation.
User experience designer
The user experience designer firstly had comments about the color usage mentioning that
the prototype only using one color violated the color hierarchy. Thus, the prioritization of
components or important information based on color usage would be redundant. The
designer also preached to have a more modern design by advocated against the overly
rounded edges.
Lastly, the designer was not adherent at the usage of drop down menus for the questions
in the ”Patient information flow” which had yes or no answers. Furthermore, the designer
disliked that the questions were present in the shape of help text, since the question would
disappear once the user had answered it. They stated, that this could create confusion
when looking at the overview of the answered questions for each page.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
81
==PAGE:89==
Medical student
While the medical student was overall impressed with the prototype and the usability of it,
they had feedback on the illustrations used in the ”Equipment flow” and ”Exercise flow”.
Here, the student stated that the illustrations looked too unprofessional compared to cur-
rent medical systems they were familiar with. They therefore suggested to update the
illustrations so that they looked more like people and less like cartoon figures.
Improvements
Based on the feedback from the user experience designer and the medical student, dif-
ferent improvements were made to the application.
Figure 5.31: Updated color palette
First, the chosen blue became a call-to-action color which was reserved for buttons be-
cause of its vibrant style. Then, a darker shade of blue was chosen to be a primary color
to be used for interactive components which were not buttons i.e. the annotation compo-
nent. Lastly, an even darker shade of blue was chosen as a secondary color which was
for texts, animations, and other non-interactive elements. Thus, a blue monochromatic
design with a color hierarchy was created where each color has its own impact on the
overall user interface design (see figure 5.31).
Furthermore, the round edges were decreased so that the application had a sharper look
creating a more modern design (see figure 5.32).
For the yes or no questions in the ”Patient information flow”, the drop down menus were
replaced by checkboxes (see figure 5.33). For each question, which has been changed
from being help text to normal text, a checkbox was present to the right of the question.
The user could then click the checkbox if the patient answered yes, or not click anything
if the patient answered no. For all the questions which had a yes as an answer, a green
82
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:90==
Figure 5.32: Less rounded edges on components
Figure 5.33: Updated ”Patient information flow” with check boxes
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
83
==PAGE:91==
check mark would be appear, and for the questions with a no answer the check box would
be empty.
Figure 5.34: Updated illustrations for the animations
Finally, the animations were redrawn so that they looked more like humans as requested
(see figure 5.34).
To interact with the V1 prototype, please refer to this link.
5.3.2
Second sprint
Test users
The four test users for the second sprint (A.5.1), were recruited after they participated in
the aforementioned user test on the BrainCapture application conducted by the usability
expert (A.4). Therefore, the users will be refereed to as biased users because of their
previous expore to the system.
The first biased test user has 31 years of experience as a nurse in intensive care. The
second biased test user has 37 years of experience as a nurse. The third biased test user
has 11 years of experience as a nurse, and lastly, the fourth biased test user has 17 years
of experience as a nurse.
Test results
Quantitative
On average, the four biased users made five errors. The first biased user had six errors,
the second biased user had seven errors, the third biased user had four errors, and the
last biased user had three errors. Thus, the target level in table 5.3 for the first test case
about ”Low error rates” which was at four errors, has not been reached.
84
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:92==
For the second test case, about ”User attraction to product”, the first and the fourth biased
user rated 4.5/5, the second biased user rated 4/5, and the third biased user rated 3.5/5,
averaging at a rating of 4.125/5 which means that the target level has been reached as it
is above the 3.5/5.
Finally, for the third test about the ”Quality of user experience”, the first, second, and fourth
biased user rated 5/5, while the third biased user rated 4/5, averaging at a rating of 4.75/5.
Again, the target level was reached by being above 4.3/5.
The biased users were not asked the fourth test case because of the previous exposure
to the system which might affect their confidence level after having tried to conduct a scan
multiple times.
Qualitative
Patient information flow
App flow
All the biased users navigated well through the Patient information flow. The first biased
user mentioned that ”it was super easy with the drop down options”, and the second biased
user stated that the flow ”was very logical and easy to run through.” The third biased user
said, ”it was really simple to navigate through” while the fourth added that it was ”user
friendly.”
Despite this, all biased users had challenges with the check boxes as they wanted to
check no when the patient answered no. This was not an option creating trouble with
the users. The first biased user stated ”for the check boxes, it would be more intuitive to
check yes when the patient says yes and no if they say no”. The second user explains
that this is due to ”us as nurses as we are very dutiful, so we want to make sure we have
been through everything and have not missed anything.” The fourth user agrees, and
adds ”it is pretty common in the health care sector to want to know that we have asked
the question even if the answer is no.”
Patient restrictions
The biased users responded positively when shown the patient related restrictions, men-
tioning that they would all skip the corresponding exercise(s). The second biased user
mentioned, that ”this is a good help for me as a nurse because why should the system
not help me. This is also something we are used to from the systems we work with, so
these reminders feel natural.”
When asked how they imagine the first screen in the Exercise flow would then look, the
first biased user says, that ”it would be very nice if the application then removes the ex-
ercise from the list of exercises” but the second biased user disagrees and emphasizes
the feeling of safety and security as they explain, ”I would prefer if [the exercise] was still
there but marked differently as you could be cheated by the system controlling everything
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
85
==PAGE:93==
for you. Also, I would like to explain to the patient why the procedure has changed for
them specifically to create some safety and security for the patient by knowing that I am
in control of the situation and it is not because I forgot to do something.” The third biased
user agrees as they imagine a case, where ”if the patient above 50 years old is running
marathons then I would still like to bypass the restriction and conduct the exercise. Even
though we have general guidelines at a hospital, how we use those guidelines really dif-
fers from department to department so most departments have their own instructions and
guidelines.”
Equipment flow
App flow
Overall, the biased users navigated adequately through the Equipment flow, and most
mentioned that it was easy to follow. However, three out of four biased users put on
equipment at different times then what was shown in the application.
The first biased user put on the cap right after measuring the patient’s head, connected
the ECG to the amplifier first before connecting the ECG srickers to the wire, and then
put the ECG on the patient’s wrists all before they were asked to do so by the application.
The user commented on their errors saying ”that is probably because I remembered what
to do from last time [the previous user test], so that was a little cheating” showing that the
errors were due to a clear bias.
The second biased user measured the patient’s head before clicking the ”Connect equip-
ment” button, turned on the amplifier then connected the cap to the amplifier, filled up
the gel in the syringe, and lastly connected the ECG to the amplifier again all before it
was shown in the application. The biased user stated, ”if I was doing this in real life, I
would probably not follow the guide exactly and just put on the equipment in the order it
felt intuitive. [...] I think it is difficult to have a completely perfect flow that all nurses follow
as we all do it a little differently.”
The fourth biased user put ECG on the patient’s wrists before they were asked in the
application but when noticing this, they stated ”okay I did it in the wrong order, but I think
it is not the biggest issue as long as I remember to do it.” This statement might also be
an example of bias as the dutifulness seen in nurses is replaced by the security of prior
knowledge from the user tests on the BrainCapture application (A.4), where the users
were shown that the order of the equipment was flexible to some degree.
Cap documentation
As mentioned, one step of putting on the equipment requires the user to measure the
patient’s head in order to choose the correct cap size for the patient. For this step, the
three color coordinated caps and their sizes are displayed. The second and third biased
users expressed a need for the possibility of choosing the selected cap by clicking on it.
The second biased user mentions documentation purposes as a reason saying, ”some-
86
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:94==
times, you have to go back if something happened in the results”. For the third biased
user, the justification lies in an increase in efficiency for dealing with reoccurring patients,
where they state ”if the patient comes back, I would not have to measure again, kind of
like when you go to the hairdresser where they already know how you want your hair cut.”
Animations
The animations which guided the users on how to equip the patients were popular amongst
all the biased users, as ”the animations were purposeful and made a lot of sense as it
made it easy to see what was going on” as stated by the first biased user.
The third biased user said ”the animations are really nice especially nowadays when we
search a lot on YouTube on how to do things - I think a lot of nurses especially learn by
doing and are visual learners.” One instance even showed that the animations acted as an
error prevention for the third biased user where they were asked to connect the amplifier
and app via Bluetooth, but the user wanted to connect the amplifier and the cap instead.
The user then quickly stopped themselves when looking at the animation and said, ”oh
okay I have to connect the device and the phone through Bluetooth”, and continued to do
so.
Also, the color choices made it ”less confusing on this version of the application because
there is not as much color [compared to the BrainCapture application], as here nothing
specific is taking away the overall focus, so I notice everything” as mentioned by the first
biased user.
Exercise flow
App flow
The fourth biased user talked about the flow mentioning, ”it is easily understandable gen-
erally and there is no place where I can start something before I should.” The rest of the
biased users shared consensus as they all navigated well through the flow.
However, some biased users showed confusion at the beginning of the first exercise when
seeing the screen displaying the ”Tap to start” button and the exercise information text.
About the ”Tap to start” button, the second biased user was confused whether they had
already started the exercise, and they explained ”I did not notice the ”Tap to start” button
at the top since the buttons have been at the bottom of the screen all the way throughout.”
They continued, ”it is not intuitive for me that I have to read some information text in the
middle of the screen but then look at the top of the screen to start, so I have to go back
and forth.” This challenge was also seen with the first biased user as they asked for
clarification on whether the intended information text was only for information before the
actual exercise started meaning that they might not have noticed the ”Tap to start” button
either.
In spite of all this, a majority of the biased users all used the exercise information text
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
87
==PAGE:95==
to explain what was going to happen to the patient showing that they used the text as a
tool throughout the examination proving its importance. Furthermore, the first biased user
stated, ”compared to the [BrainCapture application], it is nice that the colors of the text
are the same, so it creatives an equal focus, so I feel like I have to read everything, so
that is nice in this version.”
Annotations
In general, the biased users had different experiences with the annotation functionality.
Firstly, the first and third biased users found how to annotate challenging. For the an-
notation, the first biased user would like to write a comment after clicking an annotation
button. They explained, ”if I told the patient to keep their eyes open and they for some
reason did not, I would click the eyes open icon and write ”during this session, the patient
started blinking” so that it would be marked in the EEG to get the best result”. The third
biased user would like to annotate by clicking the ”annotation counter” which has the edit
functionality, and mentioned that despite seeing the annotation buttons with icons ”there is
an arrow, so I intuitively click it.” They therefore recommend that the ”annotation counter”
is moved below the buttons with icons ”so that I do not have as much focus on it. I am
just used to reading from the top to the bottom so I noticed that edit box before the other
buttons.”
Secondly, the dual purpose of annotating both exercises and deviations clearly caused
confusion. When finishing the ”blink continuously” part of the eyes exercise, both the first
and third biased users would ask the patient to talk. This pointed towards them under-
standing all the annotation buttons as being related to exercises, since ”the patient was
asked to do these things [eyes open, eyes closed, and blink continuously]. If the three
on top are exercises, then the next three at the bottom are also exercises, is how I un-
derstand it” the first biased user explained. The third biased user confirmed the claim by
saying, ”I feel like I have these tasks, open, close, and blink, and then I continue to talking
since that is the next. But it confuses me a bit cause the first three are tasks the patient
has to do while the next are artifacts, so not something the patient has to do.” The fourth
biased user finishes by stating, ”the only counter intuitive thing is having to annotate when
it is something I asked the patient to do and that it is placed the same place where you
have to annotate artifacts.”
This confusion was arguably due to bias, among other, as the first biased user explained,
”I remembered from [the user test on the BrainCapture application], that we only had to
annotate disturbances or artifacts, so that is why I am a little confused...” This is also
what the third and fourth biased users radiated where the latter states, ”last time [in the
BrainCapture application], I only had to annotate when the user did something they were
not asked to do.”
Nonetheless, successes were also present. Two of the biased users successfully under-
stood the annotation counter when adding an annotation, and three successfully removed
88
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:96==
an annotation. Lastly, three of four biased users correctly added an ”Other” annotation,
but two of them wanted to exit the sheet by clicking the ”X” without clicking the save check
mark at the bottom right corner of the sheet.
App feedback
Once an exercise has been completed, it changes to green in the first screen with the list
of exercises. Upon seeing this, the biased users felt positive where the second biased
user commented, ”I think the green is nice and means I can go to next” also stating that
they could use the change in color to ”update the patient about the progress.”
During the Exercise flow, the biased users were exposed to the three different alert mes-
sages where all of them responded efficiently by dealing with the alert first and some even
wanting to annotate after. For the orange ”Electrode T8 has lost connection!” alert, the
first biased user notes, ”it would be really nice if it would show me where the T8 electrode
is”, and the fourth biased user shares this wish by mentioning ”I would have liked to see
where the electrode is located so I could fix it and make sure everything is where it is
supposed to be.”
When the biased users had completed all the exercises, they saved the scan and saw
the confirmation. To this, the fourth biased user said ”it is always lovely with a big, green
check mark, so I know everything runs correctly.”
Review EEG flow
App flow
All the biased users successfully started the review of the scan by clicking the ”Review
scan” button on the Home screen.
Once the review was initiated, the biased users met the input fields with mixed feelings.
The first biased user stated, ”it is fine to write by myself but in terms of consistency of
results it would probably be better with some predefined options. If we as nurses would
have to write something ourselves, we would have to think about which kinds of words to
use when writing, some would not know what to write. That would make it easier for the
nurse when reviewing. But there should also be an option with the predefined options to
write something more if none of the predefined fit.” The second biased user agreed by
saying, ”it is very nice to not have to write by yourself for nurses as we are used to that
in the systems we work in that you click through options so that you do not have to write
and spell. So, I would like to have some predefined options and then still have the option
to add something if there was anything out of the ordinary. It is just 20 times easier than
having to formulate it by myself.”
The third and fourth biased users also raised different concerns in regards to the input
fields, where the former states ”this is something that you would have to be trained a bit
in so you know what to answer [...] It would be easier if there were some predefined
answers and maybe a note field at the bottom instead of writing everything down. That
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
89
==PAGE:97==
is more efficient.” The latter also mentions ”I live with two people who are dyslexic so
we have a lot of focus on what is difficult for dyslexic in the community. So, if there were
predefined options then they would not feel insecure about spelling or writing.”
Finally, all the biased users successfully navigated to edit an annotation, and upload the
scan when finished. The first biased user noted, ”now we have looked at it, and sent it
so everything should be good. And I can see it is in the cloud which is nice.” The second
biased user shares the excitement as they mentioned, ”it is nice that the scan is now in the
”Reviewed”, so I know that it has been sorted and I can clearly tell the difference between
the sorted and unsorted scans. It gives a good overview.” The fourth biased user happily
finishes, ”I love the big green check mark! It is so lovely.”
Overall application
Altogether, the biased users were positive on the improvements in this optimized version
of the application. The first biased user mentioned that the application ”is definitely more
user friendly than [the BrainCapture application] [...] I think I am more a fan of this one
compared to the one with colors [the BrainCapture application].” This, the fourth biased
user agreed with by saying, ”the app is very intuitive, and easy to use, and I have no
doubt where I should click in the app. Even though it is my first time using this version of
the app, I still find it very easy to use. [...] The app is a lot more user friendly than [the
BrainCapture application].”
The colors of the application also seem to have added on this opinion as the second
biased user stated, ”I liked the neutral blue colors better compared to the orange in [the
BrainCapture application] as there was not any noise in this one and other colors that
would disturb you when not necessary. So the app is nice and calm. Overall, nothing
disturbed me so in that sense the app did what it should.” Again, the third biased user
agreed by saying ”the colors of the app are better than [the BrainCapture application], as
I do not feel as alert from the orange color. [...] I think it is fine and comfortable for the
eyes to look at. [The BrainCapture application] was an alerting orange whereas this one
gives a more calm hospital vibe with the colors.”
In regards to the feedback presented to the user throughout, the third biased user men-
tioned, ”I really liked the feedback the app gave throughout [...] it is really nice to see that I
have done things correctly.” The fourth biased user echoes the statement by saying, ”the
app is good at making you aware if you are missing something or should be attentive on
something, and it guides me all the way.”
Improvements
Based on the test results, improvements have been made to both the application and the
user story map.
For the prototype, the check boxes in the Patient information flow which caused most
errors for the biased users have been replaced by ”Yes” and ”No” radio buttons which
90
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:98==
Figure 5.35: Updated radio buttons for ”Patient information flow”
allows the user to register the patient’s answers both when it is yes and no (see figure
5.35).
Figure 5.36: Added cap selection functionality
In the Equipment flow, the possibility to choose a cap size for documentation has been
implemented (see figure 5.36).
Multiple changes have been made in the Exercise flow.
First and most notably, the screen with the exercise information text has been replaced
by a modal component (see figure 5.37). Furthermore, the color, shape, and text of the
“Tap to start” button has been changed (see figure 5.37). Now, the button, which has the
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
91
==PAGE:99==
Figure 5.37: Updated improvements for the ”Exercise flow”
color and shape of a call-to-action button, has the text ”Start the timer”. These changes
have been made with the intention of counterattacking the misunderstandings the biased
users had in regards to most of them falsely believing that they had started the exercise.
Second, the placement of the timer has been moved from the top to the bottom of the
screen. Once the time is up, it changes to being a “Next” button (see figure 5.37).
Third, the annotation component was a high source of confusion. As mentioned, the
errors are to some extent a result of bias, but upon further research, it was discovered
that the similarity gestalt principle was violated. The principle is defined as, “elements
that share similar characteristics are perceived as more related than elements that do
not share those characteristics.” [28] The effect of this principle is seen as, the biased
users thought that all the annotation buttons had the same functionality. To respect this
principle and deal with the challenges of the users, the first row of annotation buttons which
were for exercises, and the second row which were for deviations have been changed so
that all the buttons are for annotating deviations (see figure 5.37). Here, eye and body
movement were added as predefined options as they were named as some of the most
common artifacts in the 3.2 User Needs section.
Moreover, the placement of the edit functionality was moved from the top of the annotation
component to the bottom to remove primary focus, and the check mark for saving an
”Other” annotation was removed so that it now saves automatically when clicking the ”X”
(see figure 5.37).
Fourth, some of the biased users wished to have a visualization of electrodes when getting
the ”Electrode T8 has lost connection!” alert message to more efficiently spot the electrode
so this was added as well (see figure 5.38).
92
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:100==
Figure 5.38: Added overview of EEG electrodes for alert message
Figure 5.39: Updated patient restrictions
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
93
==PAGE:101==
The fifth change was in regards to the patient restrictions, where the biased users wanted
the corresponding exercise to be marked differently rather than removed so that they
were reminded of the patient restrictions again. This was implemented by the exercises
being marked differently in the exercise list by getting a grey color. The user still has the
opportunity to bypass the restriction if they judge that the patient is capable to conduct
the exercise (see figure 5.39).
Figure 5.40: Added predefined options for ”Review EEG flow”
Lastly, the users had important arguments for replacing the input fields in the Review EEG
flow, and especially the fourth biased user shared their concern about dyslexia. Thus,
the input fields have been replaced by drop downs where the user can choose between
predefined options (see figure 5.40). The change also makes the application increases
accessibility to accommodate more users.
To interact with the V2 prototype, please refer to this link.
On the user story map, automatic annotation of all exercises have been added as system
tasks (A.7.2), so that this responsibility is removed from the user.
For the next sprint, the focus will be on the impact of the improvements and whether they
have solved the challenges, as well as new challenges if any occur. Other areas which
are consistently successful for the users will not be described further.
5.3.3
Third sprint
Test users
Four new test users were recruited for the testing round of the third sprint. The first test
user is a nurse with 12 years of experience where 10 of those years were at the Respira-
tory Medical Department at Hvidovre hospital, and the last two years were at the Ambu-
latory Surgery Department at the same hospital.
94
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:102==
The second test user works as a medical laboratory technologist at Roskilde universitet-
shospital, Region Sjælland. The user has five years of experience both in the laboratory
and with patients, and they therefore conduct very similar tasks to a nurse.
The third user is a social and health care assistant with two years of experience at the Neu-
rological department, and before that at the Acute Rehabilitation department at Roskilde
universitetshospital, Region Sjælland. Apart from giving injections to patients, the social
and health care assistant has the same tasks at the hospital as a nurse.
Lastly, the fourth user is a nurse and clinical instructor with 10 years of experience at the
Ambulatory Surgery Department at Hvidovre hospital.
Test results
Quantitative
For the third sprint, the four users made three errors on average where the first and second
users both had two errors each, and the third and fourth users had four errors each. With
the new baseline level from the last sprint at five errors, the target level of the first test
case about ”Low error rates” is successful.
For the second test case, about ”User attraction to product”, the first and third users rated
5/5, while the second and fourth users rated 4.5/5 averaging at 4.75/5. Again, with the
new baseline level from the last sprint at 4.125/5, the target level of the second test case
is successful.
For the third test about the ”Quality of user experience”, the first and second users rated
5/5, the third user rated 4/5, and the fourth user rated 4.5/5 averaging at a rating of 4.625/5.
The third test case is therefore not successful with the new baseline level from the last
sprint at 4.75/5.
When asked how confident the user would be to conduct a scan tomorrow, the average
rating was 4.5/5. All users rated 5/5 except for the second who rated 3/5. Here, no
new baseline level is set since the users of the last sprint were not asked this question.
Therefore, the original target level set at 4.5/5 in table 5.3 has been reached.
Qualitative
Patient information flow
App flow
The users described the flow as easy to use and straight forward, and the first user ex-
plained ”it is easy to use since it just has a question, something to click and something to
fill out, so it was very straight forward.”
The improvements therefore seemed to work well as none of the users had any difficulties
while navigating through the Patient information flow.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
95
==PAGE:103==
Lastly, the third user praised the design of the flow and said ”it is very manageable, nice,
and it does not have too much text which could create confusion. It is also nice that it
shows that there are four pages of questions because to me the predictability creates a
good overview.”
Patient restrictions
The patient restrictions and the greyed out corresponding exercises were presented to
the users. While all the users responded positively, three out of four users mentioned the
need for extra confirmation after clicking a greyed out exercise.
The first user stated, ”I would still like to be able to click it in case I, as a nurse, determine
that it is safe for the patient. When that is said, I would imagine that an extra pop up would
be there to confirm just in case.” Here, the third user agreed by saying, ”in some cases
where I see that it is still possible, there should be an extra confirmation before I would
start the exercise so it is sure that it is not a mistake.” Lastly, the fourth user reasoned
patient safety by stating, ”if I still want to do the exercise, I would want another confirmation
just to be sure before doing it because that is how it is in our systems at work. That would
be a good idea in terms of patient safety.”
Equipment flow
Cap documentation
Two out of four users successfully clicked to select the chosen cap in the application. One
of the users who did not do it was the fourth, as ”intuitively, I would think it is enough to just
take the cap but when I think about it, it makes sense for the next person who is reading
the scan to know which cap has been used. I think the reason why I did not find it intuitive
is because I was busy with the equipment.”
App flow
Generally, all the users navigated well through the Equipment flow. The first user stated,
”it was also very straight forward and a very pedagogical guidance with both text and
animations of what and how to do it. [...] The animations were nice since it showed me
where to plug in the wires, etc. so it was a lot faster for me than reading and I did not
have to think hard. It kept showing me the way to go.” The second user agreed as they
found that ”it made really good sense. I had zero prerequisites and I could do it, so I think
it made really good sense.”
However, the third and fourth user had minor challenges throughout the flow. The third
user wanted to put the cap on the patient’s head before clicking the ”Connect equipment”
button, and to connect the cap to the amplifier before they were asked in the application.
The user commented, ”generally, I thought it was easy but there were times when I wanted
to do things in a different order or times when I was too fast.”
The fourth user wanted to connect the cap to the amplifier before it was asked in the
96
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:104==
application, and noted, ”I am very focused on the practical aspect of the equipment and
want to finish connecting the cap before connecting the app with Bluetooth. [...] it would
have made more sense to me to finish the steps about the cap before connecting the
app.”
Exercises flow
Information text
The exercise information text still seemed to be a challenge to some of the users. Upon
seeing the information text, the first user seemed to think, they were already doing the
exercise as they explained ”the first screen had a lot of text compared to the rest of the
app and I just needed some time to think how I should act in the screen. I already thought
I was doing the exercise, and I did not notice that it was information text.” The fourth user
also did not seem to understand the information text as they stated, ”I am not sure if I
should say this information to the patient or just check if they do it or something else.”
Despite this, the exercise information text did seem to make sense to both the second
and third users, as they both used the text to explain to the patient how the exercise was
going to be conducted.
In the information text, it is written that the user has to remember to annotate. To this the
first and third user both agreed that they would have liked ”if it said in the exercise text
what I have to annotate since it is only deviations I have to annotate” as stated by the first
user. The third user continued, ”it would have been nice if it said somewhere in the app
that I should only annotate when the patient does something they should not do. I think
that would help me.”
All in all, while clear challenges will need to be accommodated, the updated changes have
made improvements for the user’s understanding and navigation of the Exercise flow.
Annotations
Overall, all the users successfully understood the annotation component, and annotated
when the patient deviated from the exercises meaning that the changes had improved the
experience. The second user did comment, ”I would have a piece of paper next to me
where I would write it down. I do not see where I could do it in the app.”
But when told that it is a possibility in the application, and where they imagine it would
be possible to annotate, the user pointed to the annotation component. From there they
then successfully annotated deviations using the annotation buttons. Going forward, the
user had adapted to the annotation component, finishing with ”the annotation part made
really good sense.”
However, a challenge was apparent when the users were asked to annotate a cough.
While half of the users successfully clicked the ”Other” annotation button to annotate the
cough, the other half wanted to click the ”Body movement” annotation button. The first
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
97
==PAGE:105==
user explained, ”coughing creates body movement” which the second user also stated.
When asked to keep looking, the attention of the first user directed towards the ”Other”
annotation button, and the user noted, ”actually this makes more sense. I would probably
have chosen this one in the end since coughing was not an option, so I would out of
curiosity click ”Other” to see what other options there were.”
Another challenge half of the users were met with was when they were asked to edit an
annotation. Here, the first and second users successfully navigated to edit an annotation,
and the latter commented, that to them it was ”self explanatory that I have to click here to
edit an annotation since you have the total amount of annotations.” For the third and fourth
users, it was not as self explanatory. The third user tried to click the ”Other” annotation
button while explaining ”there is not really anything else that points towards an edit option.”
The fourth user, firstly tried to click the ”Skip” button and then tried to click the same
annotation again hoping to remove an annotation. The user commented, ”my intuition
was to kind of go one back or skip something I just did. Or maybe I could click on the
same annotation and it would reverse it.”
Alert messages
The added visualization of electrodes to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert was praised
by all the users. The first user noted, ”it was nice that it shows me which electrode it is
and where, since I am not familiar with it.” The fourth user also added, ”the illustration
made it easy to understand what to do” meaning that the improvement added value for
the users.
Review EEG flow
App flow
The first user stated that the flow was ”very intuitive and straight forward.” The user con-
tinued, ”I think it makes sense to have to click through the options. We have gotten used
to Sundhedsplatformen where we also have to click through a lot of things so I am used
to this kind of interaction. Also, I think it is also really nice that there is an option to further
write something if needed” where the second user added, ”it was the same as when we
do journals so it was easy.” This shows that the added dropdown menus with predefined
options clearly had a positive impact on the user’s navigation experience.
Still, the third and fourth users felt, that it was not clear that they could choose multiple
options on the first review question. The third user commented, ”it was not clear that I
could choose more, but I started suspecting it when the drop down did not go away after
clicking on one option. It could be more clear that it is possible to choose more options.”
The fourth user added, ”usually it would say if I can choose multiple options.”
A majority of the users easily navigated to edit an annotation, where the fourth user stated,
”it was intuitive because the pen means to edit.”
The third user, however, had misunderstood, and stated, ”I think the main issue is that it
98
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:106==
is in English, because if it was in Danish I would have understood it quicker.”
Furthermore, the second user expressed that they would like for it to be possible to delete
an annotation as well, by explaining ”I would like to also be able to delete an annotation
just in case I had clicked something in a rush and then forgotten to delete it. So it would
be nice before uploading the scan, to have the ability of going through the annotations
and make sure everything makes sense.”
Once the users had finished the review, they all successfully uploaded the scan to the
cloud. The first user then commented, ”it is nice for me to see how many are left to
do and how many have been done but it would have been nice if there was a bigger
difference between to do and done so it is even easier to spot.” This, the fourth user
agreed with as they had not noticed that the scan had been moved to ”Reviewed”. The
user explained, ”I did not notice a difference, but when I read it I do see that there are two
different categories. For me it would have been easier to distinguish if they had different
colors.”
Overall application
Users had positive comments about the overall application. The first and second user
mentioned that the application made sense for them, the latter stating ”it makes sense. I
think anyone, even some who are not in the field, would be able to do it with the proper
training. Everything is shown in the app, so I think even my little sister could do it.”
The application also brought a feeling of safety and security where the first user explained
that ”the app made me feel safe and I did not feel like I could make a fatal error.” The
second user also mentioned that ”the app guided me all the way through and gave me all
prerequisites.” The third user continued, ”it is very simple and there is guidance all the
way throughout and to me that is the most important because it creates safety for me”
while the fourth user added ”the app guided me well and I felt very safe.”
Finally, the design of the application was especially praised as the first user mentioned ”the
design is user friendly, and the colors are calm and neutral.” The second user explained,
”the graphical design and explanations are good.” The third user agreed, by saying that
they ”really liked the animations in the app since many of us understand better visually.”
Finally, the fourth user mentioned, that ”the app is very aesthetic and calming to look at.”
Improvements
The test results presented the need for improvements. Again, these improvements have
been implemented to the prototype and the user story map.
During the Equipment flow, some users put on parts of the equipment in a different order
than what was shown in the prototype. To accommodate this need, the order of putting
the equipment on is changed so that “Connect the amplifier and the cap by connecting
the wire” comes before “Connect the amplifier and app via Bluetooth by choosing the
amplifier” (see figure 5.41). With this new order, the user can ”complete” the steps of
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
99
==PAGE:107==
Figure 5.41: Updated ”Equipment flow”
the cap before continuing to deal with the amplifier and app. This was also added as a
corresponding user task in the user story map (A.7.3.)
For the Exercise flow, again multiple improvements have been made.
Figure 5.42: Change in exercise information text and the annotation component
First, the exercise information text has been reformulated to make it more clear that it
is information text, also the duration of each exercise has been included in the text (see
figure 5.42). Furthermore, it has been specified what the user has to annotate.
Second, the “edit annotations” icon on the annotation component has been changed from
a chevron icon to a pencil icon which is inspired by the ease of use that users felt when
100
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:108==
seeing the same pencil icon during the Review EEG flow (see figure 5.42). Moreover, it
adds consistency to have the same icon for editing functionality.
Figure 5.43: Added confirmation pop up for patient restrictions
The third improvement is in regards to the patient restrictions where users wanted to see
a final confirmation if they wanted to bypass the restrictions and still conduct the exercise.
Therefore, a pop up has been added, which states, ”The patient is not eligible to do this
exercise. Are you sure you want to continue?” Here, the user can then click the ”Cancel”
button if they regret or the ”Continue” button if they still want to conduct the exercise (see
figure 5.43).
Figure 5.44: Updated improvements in the ”Review EEG flow”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
101
==PAGE:109==
The first improvement in the Review EEG flow is that the help text ”Select...” has been
replaced by ”Select multiple...” in the first evaluation question to make it clear that the user
can choose more options. Secondly, upon request, the possibility to delete an annotation
has been implemented. Lastly, the reviewed scans which have been uploaded to the
cloud presented in the ”Reviewed” section at the bottom of the screen which had the dark
blue secondary color was replaced by the positive green color. This was done to make
the difference between the two sections, ”To review” and ”Reviewed”, more distinguished
(see figure 5.44).
To interact with the V3 prototype, please refer to this link.
Again, the focus for the next sprint will be on the impact of the improvements and whether
they have solved the challenges, as well as new challenges if any occur. Other areas
which are consistently successful for the users will not be described further.
5.3.4
Fourth sprint
Test users
Again, four new test users were recruited for the testing round of the fourth sprint. The
first test user is a clinical nurse specialist at the Nephrology Department at Roskilde uni-
versitetshospital with eight years of experience in total.
The second user is a nurse with 14 years of experience at the Cardiology Department at
the same hospital.
The third user is an assisting head nurse with seven years of experience at the Respiratory
Medical Department at Hvidovre hospital.
Finally, the fourth user is a nurse with 10 years of experience as a home care nurse, and
one year of experience at the Respiratory Medical Department at Hvidovre hospital.
Test results
Quantitative
For the fourth sprint, the four users made a little over two (2.25) errors on average where
the first and fourth users both had three errors each, the second user had two errors, and
third user had one error. Based on the new baseline level of three errors from the last
sprint, the target level of the test case about ”Low error rates” is successful.
For the second test case, about ”User attraction to product”, the first and fourth users
rated 4/5, while the second and third users rated 5/5 averaging at 4.5/5. With the new
baseline level of the last sprint being 4.75/5, the target level has not been reached.
For the third test about the ”Quality of user experience”, all users rated 4.5/5 except for
the first who rated 4/5 averaging at 4.375/5. Therefore, with a new baseline level from the
previous sprint at 4.625/5, the target level of the test case has not been reached.
When asked how confident the user would be to conduct a scan tomorrow, the average
102
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:110==
rating was 4.875/5. All users rated 5/5 except for the first user who rated 4.5/5. Therefore,
with the new baseline level at 4.5/5 from the last sprint, the target level of the test case
has been reached.
Qualitative
Patient information flow
About the pop up confirmation triggered by the user clicking on a greyed out exercise, due
to the patient restrictions, the third user commented, ”it makes sense to get a warning. It
makes sense that I should still be allowed to do the exercise if I believe that the patient is
healthy enough. But it is smart that it shows an extra confirmation since it is easy to mis-
takenly click the exercise if you are in a hurry.” The fourth user added that for them it also
”makes sense to get an extra confirmation if it is decided to do the exercise otherwise.”
Equipment flow
All four users navigated easily through the Equipment flow and followed the order shown
in the application showing the positive impact of the implemented improvements. The third
user mentioned that for them the flow ”was very intuitive”, and the second user stated, ”it
was very easy because it both says in text what to do and it also has animations which
guided very well so it was very straight forward.”
However, new challenges arose for the first and second users. When reaching the ”Con-
nect the ECG to the wires” screen, the first user confusedly stated, ”I am unsure what to
do now.” The same screen also confused the second user as upon reaching this screen,
the user took the wires but was unsure what to do next, and said, ”I am unsure what I
should connect them to.” The user continued, ”I believe we call it something else than
wires when we work with ECG.”
Exercises flow
Information text
All the users found the amount of text for the exercise information text to be too excessive.
Upon seeing the text, the first user was unsure whether the exercise had started. The user
noted, ”I thought I was already doing the exercise and had to ask the patient to do it [...]
I actually do not think I personally need this text if it is only meant as an introduction for
the exercise. I think it is more important that it is straight forward without so much text.”
Despite successfully understanding the exercise information text as an introduction to
the exercise, and using it to guide the patient, the second user echoed the statement by
saying, ”the first exercise screen might have a little too much text but otherwise it was
easy.”
Like the first, the third user also thought they had already started the exercise as they
started directing the patient. The user then commented, ”oh wait, it says start the timer. I
should have read the whole thing. Maybe there is a little too much text.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
103
==PAGE:111==
It seems, that the reformulation of the exercise information text has created more chal-
lenges than improvements, as the amount of text now feels too overwhelming for the
users.
Finally, the fourth user, who successfully understood the text as an introduction to the
exercise, mentioned ”it confused me a bit in the beginning when it told me what I had to
do but it did not tell me where to annotate, it only told me to annotate.”
Annotations
The majority of the users successfully understood the annotation component and anno-
tated deviations.
When the second user was asked to annotate, the user went to click where it is meant
to edit an annotation, and explained, ”I would click here because it has the word anno-
tations and on the previous page it said to annotate, also it has a pencil so I thought I
was supposed to write something.” When it is revealed where it should be annotated, the
user said, ”okay, that makes sense. Then it is even easier than having to write. Often, we
have to do a lot of documentation so it is very nice that it is easy to just click on instead of
writing.” When asked to edit an annotation the user commented ”now it is the pencil and
that makes sense.” The rest of the users all successfully edited an annotation as well,
the fourth user commenting that they ”look for the pencil to edit.”
Thus, the change of icon, from chevron to pencil, has proved its impact by creating great
value for the user’s understanding.
Review EEG flow
All users navigated well through the Review EEG flow, where the third and fourth users
successfully understood that it was possible to choose multiple options for the first ques-
tion. For the first and second users, however, this was not clear. The latter stated ”it was
not clear since on all the other ones it was only possible to click once.”
Despite this, the first user excitedly mentioned, ”I think it is really nice that it is not just a
clicking system but it also includes some health care considerations from the nurse, I like
that as it gives a good picture of the process and situation [...] it requires us nurses to
think and use our knowledge and dive deeper.” The second user agreed stating, ”I think
it is very nice to be able to evaluate it like this. It makes really good sense to reflect on
the scan, evaluate it and upload it”.
To test the added deletion functionality in the annotations, the users were asked to delete
the second annotation which they all easily accomplished. About this functionality, the
first user stated, ”I think it is nice that there is the option to edit and delete annotations
later.” Thus, the added improvement has successfully accomplished its purpose.
Once the users had uploaded the scan, they all reacted positively, where the fourth user
expressed ”it makes me happy cause then I know that I have done it right. It is just missing
104
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:112==
a *pling* sound.” The second user commented ”it is smart that it is divided in which scans
I have to do and which I have done. [...] It is nice that it is setup in this way because it
could easily disappear during the work day.” About the use of color to distinguish the two
sections, the third user mentioned ”that is lovely, it is done. I see it as a to do list and at
the end of the day it helps me remember what to do. I like to work in this way - I am a list
kind of person. Also, the different colors are lovely as well.”
Overall application
The users all mentioned that they found the application to be straight forward and good
at guiding them through all the steps. The first user stated, ”I do not think it was hard, it is
actually quite straight forward once you also have some context [...] The app guided me
very well step-wise.” The second user expressed, that ”if I had to do it again, I think I would
be able to. There are not too many questions including possible options for each question,
also the images to guide. [...] The app takes it one step at a time, so for someone who
knows nothing about it, it is super nice. It does not seem too hard to do.”
Furthermore, the third and fourth user praised the design of the application, where the
third mentioned, ”the colors of the app are nice and neutral” and the fourth stated, ”the
design is easy on the eyes.”
Improvements
The users of the testing round in the fourth sprint performed well throughout the whole
application leaving a need for only minor improvements.
Figure 5.45: Change in wording for the information text for the ECG
First, in the Equipment flow, the “Connect the ECG to the wires” is changed to “Connect
the pads to the ECG” because of confusion arising for multiple users at this step (see
figure 5.45).
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
105
==PAGE:113==
Figure 5.46: Added ”Tip” pop up and annotation image to the information text
Second, the exercise information text in the Exercise flow created the most disturbance for
users because of the overwhelming amount of text. In order to decrease the amount, the
”Tip: Ask the patient to keep their eyes closed and open their jaw slightly unless asked to
do otherwise for best possible EEG results” is removed from the modal component (see
figure 5.46). The text is replaced by an image of the annotation component to accom-
modate the need for it to be stated in the information text where to annotate, which was
expressed by some of the users.
Lastly, the ”Tip” is now presented to the user through a pop up including a ”Continue”
button. The pop up is triggered by the user clicking on an exercise, and is only shown
the first time they do so (see figure 5.46). Once, the user has read the ”Tip” and click on
the ”Continue” button, the user is presented with the aforementioned exercise information
text.
To interact with the V4 prototype, please refer to this link.
Once again, for the final sprint, the focus will be on the impact of the improvements and
whether they have solved the challenges, as well as new challenges if any occur. Other
areas which are consistently successful for the users will not be described further.
5.3.5
Final sprint
Test users
For the final test round, four new test users were recruited all working at the Respiratory
Medical Department at Hvidovre hospital.
The first test user is a newly educated nurse with five months of experience.
The second test user is a social and health care assistant with seven years of experience.
106
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:114==
Once again, the social and health care assistant has the same tasks as a nurse except
for giving injections to patients.
The third user is a nurse with two and a half years of experience, and the fourth user is a
clinical nurse specialist with five years of experience.
Test results
Quantitative
For the final sprint, the four users had one and half errors on average. The first user had
two errors, the second user had four errors, and the third and fourth users had zero errors
each. With a new baseline level from the previous sprint of a little over two errors, the
target level of the test case about ”Low error rates” is successful.
For the second test case, about ”User attraction to product”, all users rated 5/5 except for
the first who rated 4/5 which averages to 4.75/5, and with the new baseline level of the
previous sprint being 4.5/5, the target level is reached.
For the third test about the ”Quality of user experience”, once again all users rated 5/5
except for the first who rated 4/5 averaging at 4.75/5. Thus, with a new baseline level
from the previous sprint at 4.375/5, the target level is reached.
Lastly, for the fourth test case all users rated 5/5 which is an average of 5 meaning that
the target level of the test case is successful.
Qualitative
Patient information flow
All the users navigated easily through the Patient information flow, and the third user
commented, ”It was very easy. It is the standard patient information that I would ask
nearly no matter what I have to do with the patient.”
The first user raised a concern for patient security by questioning, ”would the app tell me
if I wrote a wrong digit in the personal identification? I would hope that it would to increase
the patient security and to decrease unintentional incidents.”
Equipment flow
Three out of four test users easily navigated through the Equipment flow by following the
instructions in the application, and the fourth user stated that the flow was ”very intuitive
as it tells you everything you need to do.”
The second user, however, wanted to put on the cap before measuring the patient’s head,
and did not turn on the amplifier. On this, they commented, ”I am maybe a bit too fast and
should probably read what it says.”
Overall, the change in wording for connecting the ECG seems to have made a general
improvement.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
107
==PAGE:115==
While navigating through the flow, the third user asked ”how much gel should I use?”.
The first user also questioned this and reasoned, ”it would be nice if it told me how many
milliliter of gel I need to fill in the syringe. We are very conscious of giving the right dose.”
Exercises flow
The users started the first exercise, and half of the users successfully told the patient to
keep their eyes closed and open their jaw slightly upon seeing the ”Tip” pop up.
Then all the users saw and used the exercise information text to introduce the patient to
the exercise. The third user commented, ”I also liked that it showed me where to annotate
in the exercise information, and I think that once I have done the scan many times, it will
be imprinted. So it is a nice hidden nudge towards increasing the security of the nurse
annotating correctly.” Thus, the addition of the image was a clear improvement for the
users.
Overall application
The users reacted well to the application as a whole and responded positively throughout.
Especially the design of the user interface was complemented, the third user stating ”the
design of the app is streamlined with the same design all throughout so it does not confuse
you with something new [...] The app has the same colors and images throughout so it is
very easy to look at the app visually. It was a very calm looking app so I did not have to
spend a lot of energy on focusing my eyes.”
The fourth user also mentioned, ”the design is lovely and everything is nice and big. It
is pretty, there are green check marks so it is superb. [...] The design is straight forward
without too much randomness.”
Also the usability of the application was praised. The second user found that the applica-
tion ”is very smart, understandable, useful, easy to use, and guides me well.”
The third user continued jokingly, ”the app was very user friendly. I am not very tech savvy
so if I can do it then everyone can. [...] I am one of those who throws my phone at the
wall when something is too confusing so giant koodous.”
The fourth user finished by stating, ”it was super intuitive. It makes super good sense and
we are used to working with information like this, so it is very intuitive for a nurse.”
Final comments
During the tests, the second user failed to follow the order of equipment as instructed by
the application.
Furthermore, it was apparent that the users were missing details about the amount of gel
to use. In their practice, this is very important to know, as stated by the users, but when
filling up the cap with gel, the amount of gel is flexible to some extent as the main goal is
to use the gel until the electrodes are connected and they turn green. That said, for an in-
108
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:116==
crease of the overall user experience, it would be an option to include an average amount
of gel to use, despite it not having a direct impact on the end result of the examination.
Also, it was seen that only half of the users followed the ”Tip” pop up. Since quality control
plays an important role in conducting a quality scan, an improvement is needed through
further development. However, when looking through all the previous sprints, none of
the users had specifically asked their patient to close their eyes or open their jaw slightly.
Thus, the ”Tip” pop up effectively made more users instruct their patient correctly to better
the overall quality.
Moreover, the added image of the annotation component to the exercise information
modal proved to be fruitful as seen through the user’s response.
5.4
Sub-conclusion
Through the MoSCoW Prioritization, the functionalities were filtered to asses which of
them were to be included in the optimized application at an MVP level. Here, inputting
patient information including routine questions, patient restrictions for exercises, prepar-
ing equipment including cap, amplifier, ECG, syringe, gel, and measuring tape, conduct-
ing exercises (eyes, hyperventilation, and photic stimulation) with guidance, annotation
contributing to quality control, reviewing of the scan covering a preliminary evaluation,
uploading examination to the cloud, and flexible system respecting free navigation were
all functionalities to be included.
During the design implementation, the user interface and user experience design of the
initial version of the prototype were established. Especially the exercise information text
proved to be challenging as multiple users would misunderstand. However, through four
rounds of testing, the application was improved iteratively based on the user’s test re-
sults, and for the final sprint, it was seen that all test cases for the quantitative tests were
successful, and for the qualitative tests, only minor improvements were discovered.
Thus, the final version of the application (V4) is an eligible offer of how an optimized
version of the BrainCapture application could look in terms of improved user interface
and user experience design.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
109
==PAGE:117==
6
Discussion
Throughout the thesis, the direct and indirect users and their needs have been discovered,
the BrainCapture system including their prototype and application, has been adjudged
and risks have been assessed. Finally, an optimized MVP prototype has been developed
iteratively through a data-driven process.
The 6 Discussion chapter will discuss different aspects of the thesis chapters including
the importance of failing fast, initial design decisions, test users biases, and more. Con-
clusively, it will discuss whether the optimized prototype is better than BrainCapture’s.
6.1
Research
The users and their user needs were described through expert interviews and EEG obser-
vations which created a fundamental basis for both the content of the 4 Analysis chapter
and the 5 Design Implementation & Testing chapter.
It is however important to consider that the data was collected in Denmark at Danish hos-
pitals with Danish neurophysiology assistants, medical laboratory technologists, doctors,
and patients. The intended market is LMICs and especially Kenya has been a target.
For these countries, other needs and challenges might be present as a result of different
resources, training, or other environmental and cultural factors. Thus, the collected data
is not fully representative of the intended user’s needs but it lays down the foundational
groundwork.
The same can be said for the recruited test users who were all also Danish.
6.2
Analysis
The BrainCapture prototype was held against metrics through a variety of methods to
adjudge whether the prototype satisfied the individual sections of the User Experience
Honeycomb. Each tool was sensibly chosen for a thorough assessment, but the con-
clusion of whether each section was satisfied is to some degree depending on a biased
threshold.
That being said, the threshold set to conclude the results was focused on a comprehensive
assessment based on both relevant knowledge and experience within the field and is
therefore still valid and valuable.
Furthermore, a challenge which showed itself mostly at the end of the thesis was working
with the BrainCapture prototype versus the application. The prototype was the static end
goal for the application, so at the beginning of the thesis, it was decided to focus on the
prototype. At the same time, the company conducted user tests on the application, and
the results were valuable as they gave an overview of usability challenges. Therefore, it
was desired to include the results to use as a tool to highlight points and findings.
110
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:118==
However, the company moves relatively fast on implementing new features to their ap-
plication. Joggling between the two proved to be a challenge as inconsistency between
them were at times difficult to describe. A solution could have been to conduct usability
tests on the BrainCapture prototype and use those results in the analysis. Thus, the rapid
implementation of the application would be an independent factor which could run par-
allel with the thesis. Once the thesis had reached its end, the company would have the
opportunity to sit with both user test results on their desired end state and an optimized
data-driven MVP prototype whereafter they could decide on how to go forth.
An exmample of an inconsistent feature between the prototype and application was the
exercise timer. In the user tests on the BrainCapture application, users found it stressful
that the exercise timer started before they felt ready. A feature for the user to start the
timer was clearly missing from the application. However, when looking at the BrainCap-
ture prototype, this feature is available. Thus, at some point during the implementation of
the application, this feature was overlooked and when the application was finally tested,
it created inconveniences for the users which inevitably worsened the overall user expe-
rience.
It is an interesting phenomenon seen in companies, be it small or large, that the link be-
tween the user experience and development team at times goes missing, creating silos
between the two. It is clear that preliminary usability tests on the prototype could have
been beneficial, and testing on the prototype before starting development on the applica-
tion could have counterattacked the challenge.
Since multiple users met this challenge in the user tests, it is highly likely that the chal-
lenge would have been discovered in preliminary tests, also since it is a violation of basic
usability guidelines as discussed. Thus, the importance of failing fast through early testing
is eminent.
Another aspect in regards to testing is difference in test setup. As mentioned, the Brain-
Capture application was tested by the usability expert, where the focus was also highly
on the cap management. Furthermore, the users were given an introduction to epilepsy
and EEG. Also, the users had to deal with human patients.
This was not the case for the usability testing for the optimized application. Here, the
tests was centered only around the user’s interaction with the user interface and were
conducted through simulations. Therefore, the test users did not have to worry about the
cap being placed correctly, the filling of the cap, or similar concerns.
Thus, the users for the BrainCapture user tests were challenged to a greater extent as
they had more to undergo. It is therefore conceivable, that the additional challenges
had a possible negative impact on the overall experience of the BrainCapture application
which the test users in the usability testing of the optimized application may not have
experienced.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
111
==PAGE:119==
6.3
Design Implementation & Testing
Deciding on the initial design of the user interface of the optimized application was an
arduous task which required many considerations and choices before finally reaching a
satisfactory state. Despite all the deliberation and contemplation, some aspects were still
overlooked. Most notably the color hierarchy.
The usage of colors and its potential impact on users was discussed during the analysis
as the colors of the BrainCapture application were examined. Despite this knowledge,
when it came to designing the optimized version it was not considered, showing that
in practice, human mistakes happen. Also, it furthermore underlines that sparring and
reviewing early stages of solutions with individuals of the same profession can be just as
important as getting feedback from users.
In regards to feedback from the users, the test user’s error rates were measured during
the quantitative testing, and it was clear that for each testing round the average error
rate decreased which is shown in figure 6.1. Thus, it is seen that working in an iterative
build-measure-learn cycle proved to have a positive effect on the error rates.
Figure 6.1: Average user errors for each test round
When looking more into the data, it was interesting to see that the social and health care
assistants typically had more errors than both the nurses and medical laboratory technol-
ogists.
In total, two social and health care assistants participated in the usability testing of the
optimized application, namely the third user in testing round two for sprint three, and the
112
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:120==
second user in testing round four for the final sprint. Both of them had four errors each
which were either the highest or amongst the highest amounts for each respective testing
round.
The amount of users included in the usability testing with this role is not enough to be
fully representative, but one main finding was that while the different roles (nurse, medical
laboratory technologists, and social and health care assistants) might conduct very similar
tasks at the hospital, they seem to have different behavioral patterns. During the testing
rounds, nurses and medical laboratory technologists were notably more calm, read the
information text, and followed the application dutifully, however they were at times careful
and wanted approval before navigating further. For the social and health care assistants,
the case was reversed. They seemed eager and hands-on resulting in them at times
making hasty errors. The different training from their respective educational backgrounds
reflects in how they approach their work creating an influential bias.
Thus, it is important to be aware of these biases when recruiting test users as the be-
havioural patterns of the users inevitably will affect the test results.
6.4
The final result
Throughout the thesis, it was discovered that the BrainCapture solution, be it the appli-
cation or the prototype, has both strengths and weaknesses. The user’s overall opinions
in the user tests were relatively positive but usability challenges were clear. Through the
user experience review in the 4 Analysis chapter, it was also concluded that the solution
was challenged.
The optimized application is an MVP which focused on solving some of the main weak-
nesses, especially on two of the main challenges in regards to user needs and accessi-
bility.
One key user need recurrently mentioned was the need for having a flexible system. As
mentioned, the linear flow, particularly for the exercises, of the BrainCapture application
constraints the user’s ability to flexibly move in the flow. Here, the optimized application’s
list of exercises both guides and respects the user’s choices.
For accessibility, especially the colors of the BrainCapture prototype, violated contrast
ratio guidelines which could cause different inconviences and legal risks as mentioned in
the 4.2 SWOT section. In the optimized application, the colors all satisfy the contrast ratio
guidelines. Furthermore, the annotation component of the optimized application provides
lower physical effort than the BrainCapture solution because of its construction which
makes it possible to annotate with a lower amount of clicks.
Thus, if BrainCapture were to adopt the optimized prototype, they would be able to ac-
commodate more users with possible disabilities, and would be free from worrying about
change in national legislation.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
113
==PAGE:121==
Lastly, the optimized application is based on a data-driven approach focusing on quantita-
tive and qualitative data collection. Having a product or service which has been iteratively
optimizied, results in an user-centric output which was created for the user by the user.
6.4.1
Future work
While the final result presented has reached a satisfactory level, further refinement through
additional sprints would bring more value.
While the application has been through five sprints with feedback sessions and testing
rounds, feedback on the current state from expert roles could be highly relevant to asses
whether the application covered all the requirements they would see fit.
As mentioned, the inteded market is LMICs, thus conducting additional usability tests on
the African nurses could lead to new insights and epiphanies which could be used to
optimize the application all the more.
Furthermore, the optimized application is as mentioned at an MVP state, and therefore
only covers the main analyzed challenges and weaknesses discovered in the BrainCap-
ture application. In future iterations, it would be beneficial to look into other uncovered
risks. Thereafter, it would also be profitable to look at how to expand the MVP to include
additional features. Here, the could have and will not have functionalities mentioned in the
5.1 MoSCoW Prioritization section would be intuitive targets for further implementation
ideas, as well as the tasks in slice two and three in the user story map (A.7.3).
114
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:122==
7
Conclusion
In this thesis, the direct and indirect users of a typical epilepsy diagnosis flow were pre-
sented including the patient, personal doctor, neurophysiology assistant, neurophysiolo-
gist, and neurologist. However, it was stated that these roles were not available in LMICs
meaning that other roles such as nurses would have to fill the role of the neurophysiology
assistant. Thus, other user needs would be present. These needs were then discov-
ered through expert interviews and EEG observations. The user needs covered themes
such as EEG scan including patient information, equipment and exercises, flexible sys-
tem, quality control including artifacts, review of EEG, and synchronized video, challenges
including patient behavior and seizure handling, and lastly other illnesses.
These user needs, alongside previous results from user tests, a focus group, and other
methodologies were used to assess different aspects of the BrainCapture solution with a
focus on user interface and user experience. Here, it was concluded that the solution had
over weighing weaknesses, and risks which ultimately meant that the development of an
optimized version at an MVP state could be initiated focusing on data driven approaches.
Finally, the new version was tested went through five sprints of iterations including four
rounds of testing with relevant test users. Each iteration followed the build-measure-learn
cycle, and improvements were discovered and implemented throughout. At the end of
the final sprint, a final version of the optimized MVP was reached. The results of the
usability tests showed that the optimized version is better in terms of usability, and the
user’s opinions on the user interface and overall user experience.
Thus, the user interface and user experience of the BrainCapture application was ad-
judged, and an optimal version in terms of user interface and user experience using data-
driven approaches was delivered.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
115
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
[1]
Iman Celhi. “Diagnosing Epilepsy and Challenges Within”. In: (2022).
[2]
World Health Organization (WHO). Epilepsy. Feb. 2022. URL: https://www.who.
int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/epilepsy.
[3]
Rex Hartson. The UX Book- Process and Guidelines for Ensuring a Quality User
Experience. Elsevier, 2012.
[4]
Qualitative vs. Quantitative Research. Differences, Examples Methods. URL: https:
//www.scribbr.com/methodology/qualitative-quantitative-research/.
[5]
Aurora Harley. UX Expert Reviews. Feb. 2018. URL: https://www.nngroup.com/
articles/ux-expert-reviews/.
[6]
Dane Wesolko. Peter Morville’s User Experience Honeycomb. June 2016. URL:
https : / / danewesolko . medium . com / peter - morvilles - user - experience - honeycomb -
904c383b6886.
[7]
Euphemia Wong. Shneiderman’s Eight Golden Rules Will Help You Design Bet-
ter Interfaces. 2021. URL: https://www.interaction- design.org/literature/article/
shneiderman-s-eight-golden-rules-will-help-you-design-better-interfaces.
[8]
The 7 Principles. URL: https://universaldesign.ie/what-is-universal-design/the-7-
principles/.
[9]
John Senior Eric Almquist and Nicolas Bloch. The Elements of Value. Sept. 2016.
URL: https://hbr.org/2016/09/the-elements-of-value.
[10]
ProductPlan. MoSCoW Prioritization. URL: https://www.productplan.com/glossary/
moscow-prioritization/.
[11]
Eric Ries. The Lean Startup - How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innova-
tion to Create Radically Successful Businesses. Crown Business, 2011.
[12]
Iman Celhi. “Qualitative and Quantitative Testing Methods”. In: (2021).
[13]
Jessica Navarro. The 10 most common accessibility issues. July 2021. URL: https:
//www.siteimprove.com/blog/top-10-most-common-accessibility-issues-to-avoid/.
[14]
Web accessibility in minds WebAIM. Contrast Checker. URL: https://webaim.org/
resources/contrastchecker/.
[15]
Shawn Lawton Henry. WCAG 2. July 2005. URL: https : / / www . w3 . org / WAI /
standards-guidelines/wcag/.
[16]
The Agency for Digital Government. Web Accessibility in Denmark. URL: https :
//en.digst.dk/digital-services/web-accessibility-in-denmark/.
[17]
ADA Site Compliance. Is Website Accessibility a Legal Requirement? Jan. 2022.
URL: https://adasitecompliance.com/website-accessibility-legal-requirement/.
[18]
Patrick Loftus. Web Accessibility Laws in South Africa. Aug. 2017. URL: https://
www.3playmedia.com/blog/south-african-accessibility-laws/.
[19]
System Usability Scale (SUS). URL: https://www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/
methods/system-usability-scale.html.
116
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:124==
[20]
Bruna. Meaning of the Color Blue: Symbolism, Common Uses, More. URL: https:
//www.colorsexplained.com/color-blue-meaning-of-the-color-blue/.
[21]
Novartis. URL: https://www.novartis.com/dk-da/.
[22]
Pfizer. URL: https://www.pfizer.dk/.
[23]
roche. URL: https://www.roche.dk/.
[24]
Regeneron. URL: https://www.regeneron.com/.
[25]
Abbvie. URL: https://www.abbvie.com/.
[26]
Novo nordisk. URL: https://www.novonordisk.dk/.
[27]
BrainCapture. URL: https://braincapture.dk/.
[28]
Steven Bradley. Design Principles: Visual Perception And The Principles Of Gestalt.
URL: https : / / www . smashingmagazine . com / 2014 / 03 / design - principles - visual -
perception-and-the-principles-of-gestalt/.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
117
==PAGE:125==
A
Appendix
A.1
Expert interviews
A.1.1
Neurophysiology assistant at Filadelfia epilepsihospital.
Jeg er neurofysiologiassistent på Filadelfia, og det har jeg været i 3 år.
Hvad er de forskellige typer af EEG scanninger, og hvad er de mest typiske i laver?
Vi har vores standard undersøgelser som varer en halv time, og det er dem vi laver flest
af. Så har vi vores søvn undersøgelser, de varer en time. De er nærmest magen til
standardundersøgelserne, men de kommer ind og sover i stedet for. Så har vi video
undersøgelser, det er en undersøgelse, der tager fra en time op til 4 timer. Det er en
undersøgelse med henblik på at fremprovokere anfald, så det er længerevarende under-
søgelser. Så har vi vores EMU, som er en enhed, hvor patienterne kommer ind, og så er
de der alt fra et døgn til 4 døgn, hvor de har udstyret på hele tiden, hvor vi følger dem med
EEG og kameraer i op til fire dage. Så har vi det vi kalder rapid undersøgelser, hvor det
er en speciel epilepsi gruppe, børn, som kommer herind, så får de noget udstyr på, og så
kommer de hjem og sover med det her udstyr, og får det først af næste morgen igen, så
det er sådan også et døgns tid. Til sidst tror jeg, så har vi vores hjemme EEG-funktion,
som kører lige nu, hvor at vi tager ud, vi tager over på børneambulatoriet og sætter EEG
på, altså udstyret, og så sover de med det et døgn eller 2 døgn. På sigt er det noget vi
skal bruge ude i landet, hvor man kører ud, men lige nu er det stadig på prøve basis, så
det fungerer ovre på børneambulatoriet. Det er de undersøgelser, som vi kører her med
EEG.
Hvordan bedømmer i hvilke patienter, der skal have hvilke undersøgelser?
Det plejer at være sådan, at hvis vi får en ny patient, så kommer de ind og skal have en
snak med en læge, og samtidig så får de et standard EEG til at starte med. Det er sådan
helt grundlæggende, vi skal have en lægesamtale, og vi skal have et EEG, så starter vi
et eller andet sted. Så starter vi med en standard undersøgelse, når der kommer en ny
patient, så tager vi den derfra. Finder vi nået allerede der, så kan vi måske konkludere
noget. Finder vi ikke noget, så går vi videre til det næste som kan være søvn EEG’et, så vi
også får noget søvn, så vi både har en vågen kurve og søvn kurve, fordi nogle epilepsier
ses kun under søvn. Så tager vi den simpelthen derfra. Hvis vi ikke finder noget, så kan
vi så gå videre til et video EEG, som var det, som varer op til fire timer, og finder vi ikke
noget der, så kan vi sende dem i EMU’en, som er der, hvor de er i 4 dage. Man starter
altid med standardproceduren. Så det er, hvis der kommer en ny patient, så er det den
vej, vi vil gå. Det kan også godt være man ikke skal helt til EMU’en og kun har brug for en
eller to standard EEG’er eller en standard og en søvn. Når de så har været her og man
har fundet ud af hvilken diagnose de har, så kommer de så ind nogle gange til et kontrol
118
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:126==
EEG, så der er det også bare en halv time, hvor de kommer ind, hvor man lige skal se,
hvordan ser det ud, så giver det mening med bare en halv time. Så det er sådan den vej,
ellers kommer de tilbage som kontrol.
Hvordan er hele ”diagnose” flowet?
For eksempel, så er de faldet om derhjemme med kramper, og så er de blevet indlagt
måske på et hospital, og så kan man via forældre, der måske har set et eller andet eller
andre, der har set, hvad det er, der er sket, så mistænker de, ”okay, det kunne være
epilepsi”. Så starter hele den der trummerummen med, så får man lavet en henvisning
fra sygehuset eller sin egen læge til her, og så starter vi sådan ligesom med standardun-
dersøgelsen på 30 minutter, og ser om der er noget der, og er der ikke noget, så tager vi
også et søvn EEG. Sådan bliver vi simpelthen ved og ved indtil vi finder noget. Jeg starter
som assistent med at lave undersøgelsen og kigge undersøgelsen igennem. Så sender
jeg undersøgelsen videre til vores neurofysiolog, som også kigger på undersøgelsen, om
der skulle være noget, som jeg har overset. Det er også dem, der ligesom giver diag-
noserne, og så sender de så svaret videre til den henvisende læge, som ligesom har med
patienten at gøre. Så er det dem, der ligesom fortæller patienten diagnosen og så videre.
Så det starter og slutter hos den samme læge?
Ja, det kan være lidt forskelligt. Det kan være, man går til sin egen læge, som så hen-
viser til en neurolog. Så er det neurologen, der ligesom tager fat, ”okay, vi skal have lavet
EEG”, og så får hun i sidste ende svar. Neurologen, som vi kalder klinikeren, laver ikke
EEG, det er kun os neurofysiologiassistenter. Så har vi neurofysiologerne, som kigger
på undersøgelsen. De kan også finde ud af alt med EEG’et, men de laver ikke under-
søgelserne, det er kun os. De er jo dybt specialiseret, så de er jo virkelig dygtige til at
se på EEG’er. Så de kommer ind til mig, og så er det neurofysiologen, der så kigger
det igennem, som så sender det til klinikeren/neurologen, som er den person, der giver
svaret til patienten. Typisk er det neurologen, som de er kommet ind til, som giver dem
svaret. Der er nogle, der vælger, at deres egen læge også skal have svaret, men de vil
ikke altid kunne uddybe, fordi det er neurolog specialiseret. Oftest så er egen læge kun
som det allerførste step til ligesom at få en henvisning videre i systemet til neurologen,
som så har fat i det hele. Neurologer sidder alle mulige andre steder, der sidder nogen
på børneambulatoriet, og nogen ovre på voksen og så videre.
Hvordan udføres en standard EEG-undersøgelse?
Først så tager jeg imod patienten, og viser dem ind på rummet, der hvor undersøgelsen
skal foregå. Så har jeg et ark med en masse spørgsmål, som jeg starter med at stille
patienten. Jeg spørger altid om CPR først. Så spørger jeg typisk indtil, hvad det er de har
oplevet, de episoder de har haft, hvad det er de oplever. Det kan jo være meget forskelligt,
der kan være nogle, der har haft de helt store kramper i arme og ben. Så er der andre
ting som, det kan være de for eksempel bare lige zoner ud i tre sekunder, og bliver lidt
fraværende. Så det er meget godt lige at høre patientens historie, ikke livshistorie, men
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
119
==PAGE:127==
bare lige, hvad det er de oplever. Så spørger jeg, om de har det som, de plejer at have
det, altså om det er en normal dag. Oftest, så har de det godt, det er mere, hvis de er
syge eller har det skidt, så må de jo egentlig ikke være her, altså hvis de har feber og
sådan noget. Så det er også en indikator til, ”okay, så skal du nok ikke have fået taget
undersøgelsen.” Men det kan også bare være rart for mig at høre, ”har de hovedpine?
Er de mega trætte eller er der et eller andet følelsesmæssigt? Er der et eller andet, der
bare ikke er, som det plejer?” Fordi en EEG-kurve kan godt se forskellig ud alt efter,
hvordan de har det. Så hvis de har taget et eller andet medicin eller noget som, vi skal
være opmærksomme på, som kan påvirke EEG’et, så er det godt at vide, at de har det
som, de plejer. Så spørger jeg om en helt masse rutine spørgsmål, så jeg skal hører, om
de har hjerteproblemer, om de nogensinde har haft blodprop eller en hjerneblødning, om
de har lungeproblemer, og hvis det er kvinder, om de kan være gravide. Fordi hvis de er
gravide, så er der også noget med nogle ting, de må gøre og ikke må gøre. De må ikke
ligge helt ned og sådan nogle ting. Til sidst spørger jeg om, hvor tit de har oplevet de her
episoder eller anfald, og hvor mange gange, de har haft det i alt. Jeg plejer altid at sige
episoder, fordi at det er ikke altid noget epileptisk, de kommer med. Det der med at sige
anfald, nogle ville føle det meget overvældende at få at vide, at de har haft et anfald, fordi
oftest så er du ikke ved bevidsthed, når du har et anfald, så mange anerkende ikke, at de
har epilepsi. Hvis de skal ind og tjekkes, så plejer man bare at sige episode. Medmindre
man ved, at de har epilepsi, og de skal til en kontrol, og der stadigvæk er et eller andet,
så kan man godt sige ”hvor mange anfald har du?”
Så plejer jeg at fortælle dem, hvad der skal ske, at de kommer til at skulle sidde på en
stol, og så kobler jeg 27 elektroder fast på hovedet. Der skal altid et EKG på, så vi også
har hjerterytmen, og nogle gange skal de også have nogle klistret på nogle muskler på
kroppen. Så skal de over i sengen og ligge, og så fortæller jeg, at de skal ligge der i 30
minutter, og så er der to ting jeg skal prøve undervejs, noget foto og noget hyperven-
tilation. Når man har fået dem på og ligger i sengen, så skal jeg prøve de her to ting.
Lysstimulation, fordi der er rigtig mange, der er lysfølsomme og hyperventilation, der er
rigtig mange børn, der er overfølsomme over for det. Det er simpelthen for at provokere,
men ikke nødvendigvis provokere et anfald. Det vil vi til den undersøgelse egentlig helst
ikke se, men vi vil rigtig gerne se noget i EEG’et. Man kan sagtens have en masse
kørende i EEG’et og ikke have anfald. Så jeg kan sagtens finde ud af, om de har epilepsi
eller ej uden, at de får et anfald. Så det er for at provokere hjernen lidt. Hvis man kan se
i EEG’et, ”okay, nu bliver det lidt farligt”, hvis man kan sige det, så ville jeg stoppe, fordi
jeg er ikke interesseret i, at patienten ligger og får et kæmpe anfald eller noget. Så er det
egentlig det, så der plejer jeg at forklare forløbet på den halve time.
Sker det, at patienter får et anfald under undersøgelsen?
Ja, det sker, at vi har patienter i anfald. Nu kan epilepsi jo blive udløst at rigtig mange
ting, men hyper og foto er standard. Der er ikke rigtig så meget, man kan gøre. De ligger i
sengen, og har sådan en sengehest oppe, så de kan ikke falde ud. Vi har EEG’et kørende
120
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:128==
og kamera på, så vi kan jo se det og optage det. Vi plejer at hive i sådan en snor, så der
kommer hjælp bare for, at så er der en, der kan sidde bag skærmen, og så er der en, der
kan være henne ved patienten. De ligger jo blødt. Hvis det er, så kan det være, at man
skal hjælpe dem med at få dem over på siden. Men ellers er det jo bare at være der og
sørge for, at de ikke slår sig eller noget som helst. Hvis det er et anfald, der bliver ved,
så har vi selvfølgelig nogle procedurer med noget medicin, der skal gives for at stoppe
anfaldet og så videre. Men det er ikke så tit, vi kommer ud i det. Men det sker, at folk har
anfald. I hvert fald, til vores standard, vil vi helst ikke have, at de får anfald. Det vil vi så
til nogle af de andre undersøgelser, men ikke til denne her.
Så de har fået elektroderne på, og de ligger i sengen, og jeg starter med at bede dem
om at åbne øjnene, lukke øjnene, og blinke med øjnene. Det har noget med EEG’et at
gøre og nogle ting, jeg gerne vil se. EEG’et er flottere, når de har lukkede øjne, så under
hele optagelsen, vil man så vidt muligt gerne have, at de har lukkede øjne. Jeg starter
med at bede dem om at åbne øjnene og lukke øjnene bare for at se forskellen på EEG’et,
når de har åbne øjne og lukkede øjne, og hvordan det ser ud, når de blinker. Det giver
nogle mærkelige bølger, som man lige skal se, ”okay, det er sådan de ser ud”, sådan
så man ikke forveksler det med noget andet senere. Så får de lov til at ligge og slappe
af først i to minutter cirka bare med lukkede øjne bare lige for at danne et overblik over,
hvordan ser deres hjerne ud, hvordan ser deres aktivitet ud. Det er nemlig forskelligt altid
fra menneske til menneske. Så det er derfor, vi lige laver den først. Så laver jeg denne her
foto stimulation, og så laver jeg hyperventilation bagefter i fem minutter. Og så får de lov
til resten af tiden, så cirka 14-15 minutter tilbage, hvor de får lov til at ligge med lukkede
øjne og slappe af. Det er en del af de 30 minutter. Så det er det, man går igennem på den
halve time. Så stopper jeg optagelsen, og tager det hele af igen. De får et håndklæde og
kan få lov til at gå ud og vaske håret, og så går jeg så ind og kigger på undersøgelsen
lige efter eller samme dag i hvert fald.
Det er vores helt standard for en normalt fungerende voksen person, der kommer ind
og kan kooperere til det hele. Det kan også sagtens være, at vi har et barn inde, som
ikke overhovedet kan ligge stille, som løber rundt og leger, og hvor man bare accepterer,
”okay, de har elektroderne på, det er fint.” Det er heller ikke sikkert, at man ville kunne
foto stimulere eller få dem til at hyperventilere. Så der er også mange gange, hvor vi
ligesom afviger helt fra standarden, men det jeg lige har fortalt, det er i hvert fald, det vi
går ud fra. Det er det, vi stræber efter, men så er der gange, hvor at det ikke kan ske.
Hyperventilationen for eksempel, hvis det er en mand eller kvinde over 65, så laver vi
heller ikke det. Der er i hvert fald nogle forholdsregler, man tager der. Så er der nogle,
der slet ikke vil have lavet ”ej, jeg har ikke lyst til det der foto stimulation, fordi jeg får
simpelthen migræne”, så lader man være. Det er ikke, fordi folk skal komme og få det
dårligt. Det kan også godt være, at vi kan finde på, at hvis vi har et barn inde eller en
anden person, der siger, ”jeg får aldrig en episode, når det er noget med lys, men hver
gang jeg går det her, så kommer det”, så kan jeg også godt finde på at sige, ”når men så
prøver vi det”, hvis det er det personen siger, at det altid er der for at provokere hjernen.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
121
==PAGE:129==
Så vi kan også godt afvige lidt fra det her, men det er sådan det, vi plejer at gøre. Det
kan også godt være, at du får en der er handicappet, og ikke kan snakke eller kan være
med til undersøgelsen andet end måske bare at sidde i en kørestol. Så er det jo det, man
gør, og så er det bare en halv time, hvor de sidder, og kan ikke lave noget, men man
kan stadigvæk få en optagelse af deres hjerne. Vi kører altid 30 minutter som minimum,
medmindre det er et skrigende barn, som ikke vil være med til undersøgelsen eller noget,
så vi kører altid 30 minutter.
Hvad er minimumskravet for at en undersøgelse/optagelse kan bruges?
Jeg skal have et CPR-nummer, og så skal jeg kunne sætte mine elektroder på. Det er
egentlig det. Vi laver også akut-EEG’er nogle gange, det har jeg ikke nævnt. Det er, hvis
der er nogle ude i afdelingerne, som har en patient indlagt, som lige pludselig får et anfald,
og de så ikke kommer ud af anfaldet, men de bliver ved med at enten krampe eller gå
i en tåge, og de mistænker, ”okay, jeg tror denne her patient har anfald”. Så ringer de
herover, og siger, ”vi skal have et akut EEG”, fordi hvis de er i anfald, så skal det kunne
brydes eller så skal de indlægges, og det kan være farligt, og sådan nogle ting. Det var
en jeg glemte, at vi laver akut EEG’er. Der kommer de tit ind, og så er det bare CPR,
på med elektroderne, og så starter vi optagelsen, og det er egentlig det. Så er det lige
meget, at man lige glemmer at få sat et EKG på for hjerterytmen, eller noget på musklerne
eller spørger om standard. Det vil jeg sige, det er de vigtigste. Det er CPR, og jeg skal
kunne sætte alle elektroderne på, alle sammen. Er der én, jeg kan godt slå den fra, men
jeg vil helst gerne have alle dem sammen på. Hvis ikke det er løse elektroder, jeg har
to valgmuligheder, så vi har også sådan hue, en cap de ligesom kan få på, den er lidt
hurtigere. Men jeg skal kunne få noget på hovedet, og selvfølgelig vide, hvem patienten
er. Så har jeg jo en optagelse, så kører det bare. Så er det jo lige meget egentlig om de
lukker øjnene eller åbner øjnene, eller hvad de gør, om de løber rundt. Jeg kan godt se
noget på EEG’et alligevel, selvom det ikke følger standarden/proceduren.
Hvad sker der efter undersøgelsen er overstået?
Hvis de er tilknyttet Filadelfia, så er de tilknyttet en neurolog her, en kliniker, enten på
børneambulatoriet, eller voksen, eller handicap. Der plejer de at blive tilknyttet en neu-
rolog, de skal over at snakke med. Så oftest, når de er her første gang, så plejer der
både at lægge en undersøgelse og en lægesamtale første gang, eller tæt på hinanden i
hvert fald, hvor de kommer ind til lægesamtalen, og så dagen efter kommer de ind til…
Medmindre de er henvist fra Roskilde eller et eller andet sygehus, hvor at de har haft
en samtale med neurolog, og så bare skal have lavet undersøgelsen her. Men hvis de
ligesom følges her på Filadelfia, så snakker de med neurologen her også. Efter, så skal
vi jo kigge på undersøgelsen, og neurofysiologen skal kigge på undersøgelsen, som så
sender den videre til neurologen. Så plejer neurologen at ringe til patienten med svar på
undersøgelsen indenfor 14 dage, hvor man snakker om, hvad skal der ske, skal der flere
undersøgelser til eller har de fundet ud af en diagnose, osv. Det er i hvert fald sådan vi
plejer at gøre her, at neurologen ringer til patienten.
122
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:130==
Kalder i de forskellige skridt af EEG scanningen for noget specielt?
Nej, altså jeg tror bare, at undersøgelsen har hver deres navn. Altså standardunder-
søgelse, så ved alle mine kollegaer, at så er det denne her procedure, man skal igen-
nem. Så terminologier, det har vi egentlig ikke. Vi har et rutineskema, som vi kalder DGR
skema, og jeg kan ikke huske, hvad det står for, men det er bare nogle spørgsmål, vi
stiller patienten. Patienten skriver faktisk også under på det her papir med alle de her
spørgsmål bare lige for at være sikker på, at de ligesom godkender, det vi har snakket
om, at det er de rigtige oplysninger, og at de giver samtykke til, at jeg gerne må lave un-
dersøgelsen. Det er noget, der er meget vigtigt, vi får. Selvfølgelig kan det godt glippe,
at man ikke lige får en underskrift, det går hurtigt nogle gange. Men vi vil helst gerne
have en underskrift fra patienten om, at vi gerne må lave denne her undersøgelse, fordi
at hvis vi får et anfald provokeret af denne her foto stimulation, så skal vi ligesom have
et samtykke på, at det vidste de godt kunne ske. Men det er ikke på alle sygehuse, vi
gør det her. Vi gør det her, men der er mange andre sygehuse, der slet ikke har samme
opsætning. Jo, standardundersøgelsen med det der med fotostimulationen og hyper er
generelt det samme, men lige det der step med spørgsmål og underskrift er det ikke alle
steder, de lige gør det.
Hvis du kunne ændre set up’et, hvad ville du så ændre?
Jeg synes faktisk, at det er en god undersøgelse, altså jeg synes, den er kogt så meget
ned, som den overhovedet kan blive. Jeg synes faktisk, at det er en god protokol. Man
kan sige, hvis patienten har været her flere gange, og det er et kontrol EEG, så det der
med foto stimulation og hyperventilation kan være sådan lidt hip som hap. Hvis ikke du
er fotosensitiv eller overfølsom for at trække vejret hurtigt, så ville jeg måske godt kunne
have taget den ud, men som en helt førstegangs standardundersøgelse, så synes jeg
faktisk, den er rigtig god. Jeg tror faktisk ikke, der er noget jeg sådan tænker kunne blive
ændret for at gøre det bedre.
Hvad var sværest at lære?
Det var helt klart EEG’et. Altså hele processen med at lære at sætte elektroder på, den
er jo svær til at starte med indtil man lige lære den, så den har jo også været rigtig dum
at skulle igennem, men man lærer det jo med alle de elektroder. Og det er jo ikke noget
man kan springe over, det tager bare noget tid at lære. Noget jeg også synes var rigtig
svært til at starte med, det var, at hvis patienten får et anfald, det sker jo, også selvom
vi ikke har lyst til det. Eller hvis vi ser noget i EEG’et, så skal vi teste dem. Vi ser et
eller andet i EEG’et som ser epileptisk ud, og så gør jeg nogle ting eller stiller patienten
nogle spørgsmål for at teste deres bevidsthed, om de kan høre mig, om de kan se mig,
forskellige ting. Men det er jo noget man lærer undervejs, at hvordan man skal reagere
på noget, når man ser noget i EEG’et, så det har ikke rigtig noget med selve proceduren
at gøre i undersøgelsen.
Hvad med cappen?
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
123
==PAGE:131==
Ja, det er en to årig erhvervsuddannelse, så man er ansat, jeg var ansat her, og så lærer
du det her, det hele. Så er der også skoleperioder, men ellers så er du her og har to
vejledere, som du følger med til at starte med hele vejen. Man lærer det helt fra starten
af med alt på stedet, det er meget praktisk. Jeg vil sige, deres [BrainCapture] caps er
også lidt sværere i forhold til vores, synes jeg selv, fordi nu er det også mig der, når
BrainCapture kommer, tager de der på, og jeg synes faktisk, det er sværere. Jeg har
snakket lidt med dem om, man ikke lige kunne gøre et eller andet, fordi normalt tager det
10 minutter for os, på med en cap, bum bum bum bum, så er vi kørende. Så det kan
godt bare drille nogle gange, og det kan også drille i forhold til, hvad det er for noget hår
man har, om man har været i bad, ikke har været i bad, om man sidder stille, altså ens
hovedbund er bare meget forskellig, så det kan godt være, at det bare nogle gange kan
drille.
Du kan se de løse elektroder lige deromme, de der ledninger, der hænger på væggen, det
er sådan nogle løse elektroder, vi har 27 af, som er sådan nogle guldbelagte plader, som vi
sætter på. Så har vi den grønne kasse, du kan se der, det er sådan noget gele, det minder
lidt om sådan noget face scrub faktisk, fordi den har sådan nogle små sandkorn noget,
som ligesom sliber på huden først. Så har vi sådan en saltvands voks et eller andet noget,
som vi ligesom tager på denne her enkelt elektrode og presser ned på hovedbunden, så
skulle den lede signalet bedre. Det er de to ting, vi bruger til vores løse elektroder. Så det
er sådan, vi gør, når det er enkelte elektroder. Det tager cirka et kvarter at sætte de der
enkelte elektroder på. Det er det, når man gør det hver dag, så sidder det jo bare lige i
hænderne. Hvis vi har en cap på, så tager vi cappen på, så bruger vi også det der skrubbe
noget i hovedbunden, men så har vi så en lidt mere flydende gele også noget med noget
salt i, som kan komme i den der sprøjte, som bliver sprøjtet ind. Så det er faktisk det, vi
har. Vi har også sådan nogle elektroder, vi har EKG’et, vi sætter, som bare er en ledning
med et lille klistermærke på, som måler på EKG’et, og så kan vi jo så også sætte en
ledning med det der klistermærke på musklerne for eksempel, fordi der er jo nogen, der
har sådan nogle sammentrækninger for eksempel, og så kan vi måle på musklerne også,
at ”okay, det passer lige med den epileptiske aktivitet, der kom på den kanal samtidigt
med, at musklen den gjorde sådan her”. Så kan man sammenholde det. Til vores video
undersøgelse, jeg har for eksempel haft et i dag, der plejer vi altid at tage det på. Vi kan
så kun tage tre områder, tre muskelområder på, og det er for eksempel på skulder, bicep,
og måske nogle på benene, på begge sider selvfølgelig. Nogle gange, så hvis de så skal
være inde i fire timer, så plejer vi lige at spænde det hele lidt sammen og putte det ned
i en taske, så de kan gå lidt mere rundt. Taper lige ledningerne lidt fast og sådan noget,
så det ikke er over det hele.
Hvordan har folk det, når de har det hele på?
Det er meget forskelligt, der er jo ikke noget, der gør ondt. Vi sørger for, at der ikke er
noget, der strammer. Hvis der er noget, der generer, så sørger jeg altid for at spørge
patienten, så jeg kan rette lidt eller rykke lidt. Men der er jo nogen, der er meget bange
124
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:132==
for det, og som bare synes, at det er ubehageligt. Det er også meget at have det på, man
kan godt føle sig sådan lidt indelukket. Det er meget forskelligt, nogle synes det er så
forfærdeligt, og andre synes ikke, det er særlig slemt. Men vi fortæller altid patienten, at
det er jo deres valg, så hvis de ikke vil være med til mere, så kan de jo sige nej, og så
stopper vi. Det er ikke noget, de bliver tvunget ind til. Der er også nogle ting ved forældre
og børn og sådan noget. Vi må ikke tage fat i dem, så vi er også nogle gange nødt til
at sige fra, selvom der er forældre, der siger, ”det skal bare gøres”. Vi må ikke gå ind
og lave et overgreb, så der er nogle gange, hvor det bare ikke lykkedes, fordi det er så
ubehageligt for patienten. Så det er meget forskelligt.
Sætter i elektroderne anderledes, hvis i allerede ved, hvor den epileptiske aktivitet sidder
i hjernen?
Nej, vi tager stadigvæk hele hjernen. Der er nogle gange med små børn eller handi-
cappede, så har vi den der cap. I vores cap er der kun 19 elektroder, men hvis vi så ved,
at det måske er en temporallapsepilepsi, så kan vi godt finde på at sætte, vi kalder det
low-row elektroder på, det er tre ekstra elektroder på hver side, som vi normalt sætter på
med løse elektroder. Vores cap har den ikke, så sætter vi lige ekstra på for at kunne måle
hernede, men ellers så har vi bare en standard, og tager det hele på. Jo flere jo bedre.
Det har i lang tid været standard at kun tage 19 elektroder på, også løse, hvor det her de
sidste par år er blevet impliceret med flere ekstra elektroder, så vi kommer op på de 27.
Hvad skal du være obs på, når du læser EEG’et?
Når jeg kigger i et EEG, så har jeg en streg på min skærm for hver elektrode, der er, lad
os sige, jeg har 27 streger, og så er der jo de her bølger, hjerneaktivitet, som bare kører
stille og roligt. Det jeg så kigger efter, det er nogle bestemte mønstre, som popper op på
det her EEG. De har sådan en helt speciel figur, som jeg så kan aflæse, ”okay, det der,
det er noget epileptisk”. Så kan jeg jo se hvad elektrode den poppede op på, og så kan
jeg se ”okay, det var frontalt det her eller det var occipitalt”. Så det er sådan nogle helt
specielle mønstre, jeg kigger efter.
Hvad gør i hvis i ikke når de 30 minutter?
Her er vi ret heldige, at vi får oftest forholdsvis god tid, så nogle gange udvider vi. Nogle
gange kan jeg godt finde på, hvis jeg har god tid, hvis det er et barn, jeg skal undersøge,
og forældrene er derinde, at sige, ”okay, nu går jeg lige i 10 minutter, så får i lov til at lige
mærke på cappen, mærke på ting og sager, ledninger, hvad der skulle være”, og prøve
at få barnet lidt mere beroliget. Nogle gange har jeg også brugt forældrene, det er meget
meget sjældent, men det her med cap og så videre, hvor jeg simpelthen har fået mor til at
tage cappen på, fået mor til at tage geleen i hullerne, og til at skrubbe ved at guide hende
gennem en højttaler, hvor at drengen ikke kunne se mig. Så nogle gange må man være
kreativ. Jeg tror, det tog nogle timer, men det lykkedes, og det var fedt. Det er slet ikke alle
steder, man har tid til det, men jeg synes faktisk her, har vi tid til at udvide undersøgelsen,
hvis der er brug for 10 minutter mere eller en halv time mere, ellers så går man ud, og
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
125
==PAGE:133==
snakker med chefen og hører, om man kan rykke lidt rundt. Så det kan man godt.
Hvad er de mest typiske artefakter, du ser?
Øjenbevægelser eller muskelbevægelser. I den ideelle undersøgelse, der ligger patienten
og slapper helt af med lukkede øjne, og slet ikke spænder i muskler eller noget som helst.
Men oftest så kommer man til at smile, bevæge sig, blink, eller spænde, det er det, vi ser
allermest. Så øjenbevægelser, eller sådan generelt muskelbevægelser i ansigtet.
Hvad er de største udfordringer ved at udføre undersøgelsen?
De største udfordringer, det er helt klart… Vi har jo styr på EEG’et , og vi har styr på,
hvordan det fungerer, så det er altid den ukendte faktor i forhold til, hvad det er for en
patient, du får. Så den største udfordring er, hvis du får en patient, som på en eller anden
måde afviger fra standarden, og man skal ligesom imødekomme patienten, tænke ud af
boksen. Hvis det er nogen, der ikke vil, skal overtales, eller et barn, så det vil jeg sige, det
er de største udfordringer. Man ved aldrig, hvad man får ind ad døren og hvem, så man
skal altid være med på ligesom at hurtigt kunne, ”okay, nu gør vi det på en anden måde”,
”nu skal jeg lige sidde at lege med barnet lidt for, at han eller hun er tryk ved det”, eller lige
pludselig er der nogen, der kommer til at hive hele udstyret af. Så sådan nogle ting. Fordi
det andet, vi ved, hvordan det fungerer. Det er også det, der gør arbejdet spændende, at
det er så forskelligt det hele.
126
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:134==
A.1.2
Neurophysiology assistant at Sjællands Universitetshospital,
Roskilde - Region Sjælland
Jeg er neurofysiologiassistent. Jeg var elev for fem år siden, og har været færdiguddannet
i tre år.
Hvad er de forskellige typer af EEG scanninger, og hvad er de mest typiske i laver
herude?
Der er standard, og så har vi akutte EEG’er. Der er også forskel på om, det er en nyfødt,
eller om det er en voksen. Så er der også andre undersøgelser, hvor man bruger EEG
for eksempel langtidsmonitorering, EMU, hvor man gerne vil have de her anfald og kunne
analysere på dem. PSG bruger de også EEG til, MSLT og sådan nogle ting. Jeg laver
både akut og almindeligt standard EEG, vi har også søvn EEG selvfølgelig. Man starter
altid med et standard EEG for at have et udgangspunkt, og hvis det så er, at man ikke
finder noget, eller at man finder noget, som man gerne vil analysere videre på, så kan
man blive henvist til et søvn EEG, hvor det er, at patienterne skal komme herind og være
søvn depriveret, så vi har en god forudsætning for, at de falder i søvn. Nogle gange, så
er man nødt til at lave et søvn EEG først og så et standard EEG bagefter.
Hvordan er hele ”diagnose” flowet?
Epilepsi er jo en klinisk diagnose, så i princippet kan de godt få diagnosen uden at få
et EEG. EEG er med til enten at bekræfte diagnosen eller til at undersøge, hvilken type
epilepsi, eller hvor epilepsien sidder henne i hjernen. Anfald kan jo være mange ting,
for et spædbarn kan det jo være nogle bevægelser, som man ikke synes er normale.
Nogle af vores henvisninger er også patienter, der begynder at få dårligere og dårligere
hukommelse eller får blackouts. Det man ikke normalvis ville tro var et epileptisk anfald.
Det er nogle udfald, som man ikke helt kan sætte en finger på, hvad kan være, så bruger
man det også som udelukkelsesmetode. Vi bruger det jo også i forhold til folk, der ikke
vågner op efter et hjertestop for eksempel.
Hvad nu hvis man skal igennem et EEG scan, hvordan foregår det så?
Du bliver henvist hertil, og så får man en tid. Så får man nogle informationer om, hvad
man skal forberede sig på, og så kommer man ind til os. Jeg tænker, vi gør det nok lidt
forskelligt, men jeg taler altid med patienterne først for lige at bekræfte patientens historie
med, hvad der står i henvisningen, for det er tit, at der går informationer tabt, som egentlig
kan være interessante for os, men som ikke nødvendigvis er interessante for lægen, der
har henvist. Så forklarer jeg patienten, hvad det er de skal, og så putter jeg enten en cap
på, eller sætter elektroder på. Så har vi vores standard EEG, hvor vi skal optage i 30
minutter. Der er nogle forskellige provokationer undervejs, vi skal gøre også, og nogle
forskellige tests af elektroder og sådan nogle ting.
Hvis man starter med, at der er patienten eller netværket omkring patienten, det kan
være pårørende, det kan være arbejdsplads, børn, whatever. Så er der en læge, som
tilser patienten, og tænker, at det her, det er en nødvendighed, eller det her, det er for
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
127
==PAGE:135==
at udelukke, eller det kunne være interessant. Så kommer de jo igennem hele det her
henvisnings show, og så kommer de ind til os, så laver vi undersøgelsen. Vi beskriver,
vores læge godkender, så bliver det sendt tilbage til henviseren, og så er det så henvis-
eren, der skal reagere ud fra det. Om der skal behandling til, eller der skal yderligere
undersøgelser. Vores læger her går altid ind og kigger på undersøgelserne. Det er dem,
der har ansvaret for, at vi udfører undersøgelserne korrekt, og under de rigtige forhold,
og at det vi skriver også er rigtigt. Det er dem, der til sidst står med ansvaret for det, det
lægefagelige ansvar.
Sundhedsplatformen er den vi bruger både til at læse op på vores patienter, altså i henvis-
ningen, men det er også der, hvor vores læge ligger selve svaret på undersøgelsen ind.
Patienterne kommer også selv til at kunne se det. Det er jo til alle vores undersøgelser,
at det er ikke altid, det er til at forstå for dem. Det kan godt give flere spørgsmål, end det
kan give svar.
Hvordan udføres en standard EEG undersøgelse?
Jeg plejer at indlede med, “du har haft nogle episoder” eller “du har haft et krampeanfald”
eller “du har noget med hukommelsen”. Det kommer selvfølgelig også an på, hvad det er
for en patient. Er det et barn, så henvender jeg mig til forældrene, er det et lidt større barn,
altså fem, seks, syv år opefter, så kan jeg også godt spørge dem, “hvordan oplevede du
det?”, fordi når man spørger på den måde, så kan man nogle gange få nogle informationer,
som man ikke normalvis får, hvis man bare spørger, “tissede du i bukserne?”, “lavede du
andet?”, “har du tungebid”. Alle sådan nogle ting, som også er relevante for et epileptisk
anfald. Jeg har ihvertfald god erfaring med at spørge ind til, hvad folk selv har oplevet,
altså hvordan kunne de mærke det, kunne de mærke noget før, kunne de mærke noget
efter. Det er også vigtigt, om de kunne huske noget af det, eller hvad dem omkring dem
har set, fordi nogle gange så, hvis man ikke bliver spurgt om det, så svarer man ikke
nødvendigvis på det. Jeg synes nogle gange, jeg kan fange nogle ting, som der ikke står
beskrevet ellers, som er interessante. Jeg tror, vi gør det forskelligt. Udgangspunktet
er jo, at vi skal have en undersøgelse på 30 minutter. Det derimellem tror jeg også er
sådan lidt, hvad man har været vant til før, og hvad man selv synes, der er interessant
for undersøgelsen, baggrundsviden og sådan nogle ting. Nogle ved jeg spørger om det,
men der er også nogle, som ikke spørger om det, og det er ikke forkert. Det hjælper mig
i processen til også at forstå hvordan og hvorledes, og til at tingene giver mening, så alle
brikkerne passer sammen. Vi kan jo også have ældre her, som kommer ind, og som har
alzheimers, eller en form for demens, eller noget sygdom, som gør, at de ikke rigtig kan
overskue, hvis man snakker for meget eller spørger for meget. Så det er enormt fleksibelt,
fordi det handler jo om, hvad kan patienten bidrage med.
Hvis du nu var en patient, så ville jeg sige til dig, “vi skal lave denne her undersøgelse,
og det skal vi, fordi at du har haft et anfald eller et eller andet. Det foregår sådan, at du
skal op og ligge i sengen her, og der skal du ligge i 30 minutter, mens jeg optager. Du
får en hat på, og du får en elektrode på og under undersøgelsen, så vil jeg flere gange
128
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:136==
bede dig om at åbne øjnene, og lukke øjnene, og blinke med øjnene. Der kommer også
et tidspunkt, hvor du skal hyperventilere, og det skal du gøre i tre minutter af gangen, og
jeg fortæller dig, når der er gået et minut af gangen, så du ligesom har en følelse med.
Bagefter det, så har jeg en fotolampe, der blinker, og den blinker i noget meget kraftigt
lys, og her vil jeg rigtig mange gange sige åben øjnene og luk øjnene.”
Vi kan vælge enten en cap eller løse elektroder, det bestemmer vi sådan set selv. Det er
også enormt fleksibelt, fordi vi kan have en sød lille pige, der har meget tykt hår, eller som
har fletninger i hele håret. Vi kan også have en ældre mand, der ikke rigtig har noget hår
tilbage på hovedet. Det har helt klart en indflydelse på, hvor godt vores elektroder sidder
fast. Vi kan også have et barn inde, som synes, det er rigtig ubehageligt, og ikke helt
forstår, hvad det er, der skal ske, og at det faktisk ikke, hverken gør ondt eller er farligt.
Der kan det nogle gange være en fordel, at man har en cap, som man kan sætte hurtigt
på, og som bliver siddende, fordi børn skal ligge i en halv time. Jeg får tit spørgsmålet,
“skal han ligge helt stille?”, optimalt ja, men i virkeligheden, så tager vi, hvad vi kan få.
Hvis de får de her elektroder på, som bliver sat på med sådan noget pasta enkeltvis, og
de ligger og kegler rundt, jamen så skal man op og rette på de her elektroder. Så især til
børn er det en fordel at have de her caps. Det er 27 elektroder, og det er vores standard,
at vi skal have det, der hedder low row med på også, men der kan være situationer, hvor
det er en patient, der ikke kan rumme det, det kan både være et barn, det kan også
være en voksen. Der har vi nogle undersøgelser, hvor vi vælger ikke at sætte det på. Vi
sætter EKG på, og vi sætter en øjen elektrode på, og i nogle tilfælde kan vi også sætte
EMG elektrode på, altså elektroder på musklerne. Det kan for eksempel være, hvis det
er en patient, som ved et anfald har nogle bestemte bevægelser eller nogle bestemte
trækninger i en muskel eller et eller andet, så er det interessant for os at vide, om det
også viser sig i EEG’et under undersøgelsen, om det har noget sammen. Når det er
nødvendigt selvfølgelig.
I hyperventilation, der skal de have minimum 20 vejrtrækninger pr. minut, så der kan
være forskel på, hvor gode folk er til det. Man skal sådan hjælpe dem lidt på vej, og
de kan også trække vejret for hurtigt og sådan nogle ting. Når man hyperventilerer, kan
man også blive svimmel. Som udgangspunkt laver vi altid dem, men jeg tror, at der står
i vores instruks, at folk over 50 ikke behøver det. Men det vælger man sådan set selv,
det er ikke noget med, er du over 50, så må du ikke. Men får jeg en patient ind, der har
KOL eller anden form for lungesygdom, så gør jeg det ikke. Vi kan heller ikke forvente,
at helt små børn kan finde ud af det. Der har vi nogle hjælpemidler, vi har sådan en
mølle, de kan få lov til at puste, fordi det synes de er sjovt. Men egentlig, så er vores
undersøgelse og fremgangsmåde ret fleksibel. Vi har selvfølgelig nogle ting, vi gerne vil
have, men der vil altid være situationer, hvor det ikke kan lade sig gøre. Foto stimulation
kan også godt være ubehagelig for nogle, og det kan også godt gøre sådan, at vi er nødt
til at stoppe undervejs, hvis de får det ubehageligt, eller hvis vi kan se på selve kurven,
at det provokerer noget epileptisk aktivitet frem, fordi vi er sådan set ikke interesseret i,
at folk skal få et anfald her. Vi er bare interesseret i at se, hvor sidder denne her aktivitet
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
129
==PAGE:137==
henne, og kan det passe sammen med de anfald, de har haft. Nogle gange kan vi godt
personificerer, der er jo også noget, der hedder PNES. Det er ikke epilepsi, men det er
anfald, som er psykisk udløst. Der kan være mange underliggende ting, der kan være
skyld i det, men det er en funktionel lidelse. Så vi kan godt ofte have nogle inde, der
kommer og siger, “det her det kan jeg slet ikke, fordi så et eller andet”, men så kan vi godt
gøre det alligevel, fordi det er måske en patient, hvor det er en forestilling, de har om,
men jeg har faktisk ikke lige været udsat for det på den måde, men jo vi kan godt gøre
det personligt i forhold til, hvis der er et eller andet, de mener, der trigger dem, men det
er ikke, fordi jeg har oplevet det.
Hvad er de mest typiske artefakter, du ser?
Det er støj, altså udefrakommende støj, som går ind og påvirker de her signaler, så de
ser sådan mere… de ser ikke så rene ud, de ser sådan mere nusset, grumset ud. Og så
kan det være EKG, hvis det er, den slår meget kraftigt, så kan den gå op og påvirke nogle
af elektroderne, men det kan vi heldigvis godt se, fordi det kommer på samme tid, og så
kan man sige, “okay, kan jeg flytte elektroden, hjælper det noget eller er det bare noget,
vi accepterer, fordi at det ikke påvirker undersøgelsens resultat ellers?”
Der vil også være ofte muskel støj ved små børn, fordi de bevæger sig.
Blink kan fremprovokerer noget epileptisk aktivitet, som man ellers ikke normalt ville se.
Det er jo ligesom, hvis du ser på fjernsynet, og der kommer sådan en besked, hvor der
står “her kommer der kraftigt lys eller blinkende lys”, og folk med fotosensitiv epilepsi, det
er ligesom en advarsel.
Hvordan noterer i det her støj?
Der har vi, det her SCORE program, hvor det er, vi bliver stillet nogle spørgsmål undervejs,
og så svarer vi på dem. I gamle dage kiggede man kurven igennem, og så beskrev man,
hvad man så i sætninger, som man selv lavede.
Ikke imens, men bagefter sidder vi og kigger undersøgelsen igennem, fordi man kan
sagtens komme til at misse noget eller se noget, som er noget, eller se noget, som ikke
er noget. Så kigger vi den igennem og så samtidigt med, at vi kigger dem igennem, har
det her SCORE program åbnet, hvor det er, vi bliver stillet nogle spørgsmål for eksempel,
hvad er baggrunds aktiviteten? Hvad er frekvensen? Hvad er amplituden? Hvor sidder
der noget? Sidder der noget? Ser du søvn? Eller det skal man selv gå ind aktivt og
vælge, og så bliver man så stillet de her spørgsmål. Så har man også mulighed for at
tilføje kommentarer, hvis der for eksempel er noget, som man ikke kan svare på via de
her ting, man bliver spurgt om, noget man har brug for sådan at skrive sig ud af.
I starten, så har vi jo nogle forskellige montager, vi kører i. Det kommer an på, hvordan
det signal man får fra den enkelte elektrode kommer til at syne på computeren. Så i hver
af de her tre montager, der ber vi patienterne om at åbne øjnene, lukke øjnene og blinke
med øjnene. Det er både for at tjekke elektroderne, men også for at se i forhold til bag-
130
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:138==
grundsaktivitet. Når jeg laver foto, så er det sådan, at der er nogle forskellige intervaller,
nogle af de her foto, de kører på 10 sekunder, eller 14 sekunder, eller et helt minut. Så
der vil jeg gerne have, at de åbner øjnene cirka tre-fire sekunder inden lyset begynder at
blinke, sådan at øjnene kan nå at vende sig til det, og så har vi fire-fem sekunder, mens
lyset blinker kraftigt i øjnene inden de må lukke dem igen.
Hvad er minimumskravet for at en undersøgelse/optagelse kan bruges?
Når vi laver akut EEG’er, så er det jo et kvarter indtil nu. Der arbejdes på, at det skal
forlænges, så det er ligesom andre steder, også internationalt. Så det er minimum et
kvarter for, at man ligesom kan sige noget om, der er noget eller ikke er noget, fordi det
man også skal forstå med epilepsi, det er, at det er jo ikke nødvendigvis, at denne her
aktivitet, den er her hele tiden. Det er jo også derfor, at vi nogle gange skal have et søvn
EEG, fordi vi skal prøve at provokere det lidt frem, eller hyperventilere for at provokere
noget frem, eller foto. Når vi bruger et akut EEG kun på 15 minutter, så er det oftest for
at se, om der er noget on going aktivitet altså noget aktivitet, der løber hele tiden eller
ihvertfald i perioder af mere end 10 sekunder, som kunne indikerer, at de skulle være i
noget, der hedder status. Så det er sådan set bare et meget meget kort her og nu billede
for at se om den bevidsthedspåvirkning patienten som regel har ved et akut EEG, om det
er noget epileptisk, der er skyld i det. Så kan man jo snakke med patienten undervejs,
når jeg sætter elektroder på, for det kan godt tage tid, fordi nogle gange, hvis det er en
patient, der har ligget i en seng i mange dage uden at få vasket hår, jamen så er det også
svært at få elektroderne til at få en god impedans, altså en god kontakt til huden. Og ellers
så har man læst på patienten inden man kommer, fordi nogle gange kan de også være
så bevidsthedspåvirkede, at det alligevel ikke nytter noget at stille nogle spørgsmål, som
de ikke kan svare på.
Hvad er de største udfordringer ved at udføre undersøgelsen?
Støj, men det oplever jeg ikke så meget af længere. Og ellers så vil jeg sige, at det er nok
børn, der er utrygge eller børn, der har haft en dårlig oplevelse på hospitalet før, fordi så
er de forudindtaget, når jeg kommer i hvide bukser og blå trøje, at det her det bliver noget
øv. Det synes jeg nok måske er den største udfordring.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
131
==PAGE:139==
A.1.3
Neurophysiology assistant at Sjællands Universitetshospital,
Roskilde - Region Sjælland
Jeg har været neurofysiologiassistent i 27 år. Jeg laver blandt andet EEG, ultralyd og hals
gang.
Hvad er de forskellige typer af EEG scanninger, og hvad er de mest typiske i laver
herude?
Vi laver almindeligt standard EEG på en halv time, og så laver vi langtids EEG, et eller flere
døgn, over i EMU’en. Det er sådan de EEG’er, vi laver. Så er der et, der er lidt længere,
hvor vi laver med henblik på søvn nede i ambulatoriet, så der har vi en halv time ekstra.
Standard EEG, det er vågen med provokationer med foto stimulation og hyperventilation.
Så kommer der nogen, de har som regel været her før til standard EEG, og så kommer
de og skal sove. Børnene har ofte fået noget Medetomidin at sove på. Og så de lange
over i EMU’en (Epilepsy Monitoring Unit). Patienten kommer altid ind til en standard først,
fordi at vi skal have et vågent EEG for at bedømme om baggrunds aktiviteten passer til
alderen, og der må de ikke være trætte, fordi hvis de døser under hele optagelsen, så
bliver den for langsom. Den bliver langsommere, den er mellem 8 og 13 Hz som voksen
for eksempel, der ligger med lukkede øjne og er vågen. Men de døser, så kommer de
ned under de her 8 Hz. Hvis den er det hele vejen igennem, så bliver den jo abnorm,
og vi siger, at den er for langsom til alderen og bevidsthedsniveau. Så altid en vågen
med provokationerne, foto og hyperventilation, og det tager vi så ikke med i søvn, der
provokerer vi ikke, der skal vi bare have et langt søvn kurve. De kommer jo altid til den
første, og nogle gange så kan vi se, de er abnorme, men hvis de er normale, og de fortsat
har anfald, så kan de supplere det med et søvn EEG. Det kommer også an på, hvilken
type epilepsi det er, for eksempel Rolandisk epilepsi, som er en børneepilepsi, der viser
det sig oftest under søvn. Så først standard for at se, hvordan det ser ud vågen.
Har i også akut scanninger?
Det er det samme. Det er ude på sikkerafdelingener, hvis de ikke kan komme her og over
på intensiv. Vi kører til Holbæk, Slagelse, Køge, og Nykøbing Falster, og laver akutte der
på dårlige patienter. Lige nu er det et kvarters optagelse, og så bare cap uden low row,
det kan være nogle gange, sætter vi low row på, hvis det er temporallapsepilepsi. Så
kører vi et kvarter uden provokationer lige for at se, om de er i en status tilstand, status
epilepticus, eller om der er en eller anden anden påvirkning af hjernen, hvordan det ser
ud. Vi kan komme til at køre længere tid på de akutte, fordi hvis de er i en status tilstand,
så skal der tit gives noget anfaldsbrydende, og så giver vi noget Stesolid eller noget. Så
ser vi, om det går væk, så kører vi ti minutter efter det, for at se om det kommer tilbage.
Hvordan er hele ”diagnose” flowet for en patient?
Det ved jeg ikke lige helt, altså vi har jo kun med det at gøre, til vi afleverer vores EEG
til lægen her i huset, som er neurofysiolog. Så går det videre til henvisende læge, som
så behandler. Lægen kigger lige igennem, vi bedømmer det først, og så kigger de det
132
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:140==
efter, og ser om vores bedømmelse passer, sætter deres underskrift, og så ryger svaret
til henvisende læge, som så eventuelt sætter en behandling i gang. Så er det væk fra
vores afdeling, medmindre de så kommer igen, hvis de stadig har anfald. Der er også
nogle, der kommer til kontrol en gang imellem for at se, hvordan det ser ud, eller hvis der
er nogle, der skal trappes ud af medicin, så ser vi dem også nogle gange igen.
Hvordan udføres en standard EEG-undersøgelse?
Jeg spørger dem ind til navn og CPR. Så fortæller jeg så varighed på undersøgelsen
er cirka en time, det tager noget tid at få cap’en på og få cap’en af. Jeg spørger ind til
sygehistorien til anfald og forløb. Der spørger jeg mange ting, hvornår det startede? Hvor
tit har du anfaldene? Hvad mærker du selv? Hvis de ikke mærker noget, så spørger jeg,
hvis der er nogle med, hvad ser i? Hvornår var der sidste anfald? Spørger mange ting.
Kan man komme ud for, at man ikke selv ved, at man har haft et anfald?
Ja, der er nogle, der ikke er klar over det, men så måske er vågnet op bagefter, og har
haft det dårligt, men der er også nogen, hvor de bare lige er blank. Der er mange typer.
Når, jeg spørger ind til det først, og så fortæller jeg om varighed. Jeg fortæller om alt,
der skal påsættes. Cap, ekstra elektroder, vi sætter low row på, to EKG’er, og en lille
øjensensor. Ikke ved børnene, der skal vi være glade for, at vi får cap’en på bare ved
de små op til fem - seks år, så får vi heller ikke altid de ekstra på ved kinderne. Nogle
sætter vi også ekstra muskel elektroder på, og det kan være for eksempel hos nogen, der
har nogle små ryk, så putter vi da lige en muskel elektrode på, en på hver muskel og så
en reference på en knogle. Fordi så kan vi jo lige se, “der er et ryk, hvad sker der lige
nøjagtigt samtidigt i EEG’et”. Så alt der skal påsættes, selve undersøgelsen i 30 minutter
med hyperventilation og foto, og de optages på video, det er altid alle EEG’er. Så fortæller
vi jo også, det er ikke noget, vi gemmer, det er, hvis der så skulle være anfald, så kan
lægen også altid se, hvad der sker, når lægen bagefter kigger det igennem. Vi har EEG
på en skærm, og så har vi et lille video billede, nogle kan lide at smide det over på en
anden skærm, men jeg kan godt lide at have det der [på samme skærm som EEG], fordi
så kan man bedre holde øje, synes jeg. Så at de optages på video, at de gerne må sove,
siger jeg også. Det må de godt, de må bare ikke sove hele tiden, de må sove til sidst.
Hvad gør du, hvis patienten falder i søvn undervejs?
Så lader jeg dem sove, og så vækker jeg dem henad mod slutningen, så der er tid til at lave
de der hyperventilation og foto stimulation plus også nogle øjenåbning og øjenlukning. Tre
gange øjenåbning plus blink, fordi så ved vi, hvordan blink ser ud, og øjenåbning er, fordi
vi måler baggrundsaktivitet lige efter øjenlukning.
Og det skal i gøre før hyperventilation og foto stimulation?
Det er faktisk lige meget, hvis de falder i søvn fra starten af, så lader vi dem sove. Det
skal bare være et sted, hvor vi ved, at de er helt vågne, fordi det er den, vi bedømmer
efter om nu svarer til alderen. Jeg tror, det er noget standard, alle laver.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
133
==PAGE:141==
Hvem de får svar af, siger jeg også, og hvor lang tid det tager. Så når vi er færdige, så
plejer jeg at sige, “i får svar af den henvisende læge, og der kan godt gå op til en 10 dage”.
Så er de så færdige. Jeg mener, at den henvisende læge skal være speciallæger for at
henvise hertil, jeg tror ikke, egen læge kan. Jeg mener, at patienten bliver sendt til en
neurolog, og så kommer til os. Fordi vi har nemlig hospitaler, vi får patienter fra.
Hvad hvis patienten ved, at de bliver triggered af en anden handling?
Så kan vi gøre det, hvis det er muligt inde på rummet, fordi de skal helst være i sengen.
Vi kan godt, det kommer an på, hvilken type epilepsi det er. Men hvis det er sådan, at
de får krampeanfald stående, det er vi jo heller ikke interesseret i. Men vi prøver at se,
om vi kan fremprovokere det, hvis de har en god ide til hvordan, og det er muligt inde på
rummet indenfor rimelighedens grænser.
Hvad er de mest typiske artefakter, du ser?
Det er, at patienten bider sammen, så kommer der muskelaktivitet. Og hvis man blinker
for meget, så kommer der blinke bevægelser. Så har vi en sådan en lille, vi kalder det
en sandpose, en lille tung pose, jeg tror, der er sand i eller ris i, og den er lidt tung, og
så lægger vi den over øjnene på dem. Det kan vi så ikke ved børnene, så der kører vi
tit med åbne øjne, og så får forældrene så lov til at sidde og læse eller et mirakelmiddel,
mobilen, med noget tegnefilm eller noget sang på, og så får vi mest ro. Der kan være
mange bevæge artefakter ved børn. Så der er det om, at forældrene er på banen og
underholder så godt som muligt. Fordi hvis de græder, de 30 minutter igennem, så kan
vi ikke rigtig bruge det til noget. Så er der simpelthen for meget støj, hvis de vrider sig og
græder.
Hvordan noterer i artefakter?
Vi skriver for eksempel i kurven “bidder sammen”, og så beder jeg patienten om at åbne
munden lidt. Det skriver jeg så også i kurven, at “opfordres til bedre afslapning” og “lægger
sandpose på øjnene”. Det skriver vi i kurven. Så kan neurologen se, at vi har prøvet på
at se, om vi kan få det bedre. Men der er nogle, der bare spænder, så det er ikke altid, vi
kan slippe af med det, men vi prøver på at se, om vi kan få bedre afslapning.
Elektrisk støj er et problem. Vi tager altid el sengen ud af væggen, det er ikke nok at slå
på kontakten, den skal ud. Opladere i telefonen skal prøves i rummet, hvor den kan være
for eksempel over i EMU’en, hvor de er der hele døgnet, der skal de oplade henne ved
døren ikke bag ved sengen, fordi så går det direkte i. De må heller ikke gå hen til døren,
hvor den ligger i opladeren og så stå med den i hånden, fordi så er den også gal. Så det
kan være alt muligt, de sætter i af lamper, seng, loftskift. Så vi plejer, når vi er ude på
intensiv og sådan noget, så tager vi det ud, vi kan, og det der kan kører på batteri. Der er
selvfølgelig noget, vi ikke kan tage ud, så må vi sætte et noise filter på for resten.
Hvad er minimumskravet for at en undersøgelse/optagelse kan bruges?
Det kommer jo an på for eksempel, hvis det er absencer, så er hyperventilationen meget
134
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:142==
vigtig, fordi det fremprovokerer absencer. Så det kan være vi kører 30 minutter uden
noget, og så sætter vi dem til at hyperventilere, og så kommer absencerne. Der er nogen,
for eksempel juvenil myoklonisk epilepsi, der bliver provokeret af lampen. Så nogle ville
man godt kunne køre nogle epilepsier, men andre der er der brug for det, synes jeg. Det
er jo altid godt at have video på også, fordi i gamle dage, der lavede vi noget, der hedder
Oxford monitoring, hvor de gik hjem med elektroderne på, og så kunne vi jo ikke se, hvis
de kløede sig, og det lavede faktisk noget rytmisk på EEG’et, som vi så skulle bedømme,
“er det fokalt temporallaps anfald eller er det fordi patienten klør sig?” Så det er også ret
vigtigt. Det man spørger ind, man spørger om synes jeg jo, de er også vigtige, men det
kommer an på, hvilken type epilepsi.
Men ved i på forhånd, hvilken type epilepsi, der er tale om?
Det ved vi ikke, nej. Vi får et oplæg, hvor vi kan læse ind til, hvordan anfaldene har
været. Men når vi så taler med patienten, så kan der godt være noget anderledes. Det
er sådan, vi bliver peget lidt henad mod, hvilken epilepsi det er, men så kom der nogle
overraskelser senere. Man regner med, at det er en temporallapsepilepsi, og så er det
en generaliseret epilepsi, det har jeg været ude for. Der er også en del læger, der kalder
al fjernhed for absencer. Der er absencer, som er den generaliserede epilepsi, og man
kan også blive fjern på temporallapsepilepsi, som er en fokal epilepsi. Så er det bedre at
skrive, “patienten er fjern” istedet for “patienten har absence”, fordi så har de sagt faktisk,
det er en generaliseret epilepsi, hvis man kan sine epilepsier. Hvis vi skriver det, så er det,
fordi vi har set det i EEG’et, men jeg tænker på den henvisende læge, inden de kommer
til os, inden der er lavet et EEG. Men hvis vi ser noget i EEG’et, så ved vi helt sikkert, om
det er en generaliseret eller en fokal, og får det rigtige navn på. Det kan godt ske, at når
de kommer ind til neurologen, inden de kommer til os, og siger de er fjern, så er det, de
nogle gange sender en henvisning, de kommer til os med absencer, men det ved de jo
ikke helt, om det er en temporallaps eller om det er en absence.
Hvis du kunne ændre set up’et, hvad ville du så ændre?
Faktisk ikke noget, fordi hvis patienten falder i søvn hen ad mod slutningen, så kører
jeg oftest lidt længere tid. Så jeg også har i hvert fald en kort søvn kurve, der så giver
mulighed for, at måske man lige ser noget, så de ikke behøves at komme igen. Der er jo
nogen, der kommer langvejs fra. Så der kører jeg, hvis de falder i søvn, ofte lidt længere
tid, men det kommer jo så lidt an på tiden. Ellers så tror jeg, nej, jeg synes, det kører godt
det der.
Bruger i mest caps eller løse elektroder?
Det er forskelligt. Jeg kan bedst lide caps, der er nogen, der bedst kan lide plader, men
jeg er helt sikkert mest til cap’en. Jeg synes, det er hurtigere at få impedanser, mens
der så er andre, der synes, det er nemmere at få impedanser med cup elektroderne. Vi
bruger 19 elektroder plus ground og reference, og så seks low row. Vi kører efter 10-20
systemet, og så er der 10-10 systemet, og der er mange flere elektroder i, så det kører vi
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
135
==PAGE:143==
ikke med. Det tager et kvarter med 10-20.
Hvordan sætter i cap’en på?
Jeg bruger sådan nogle dutter, skum gummi dutter jeg sætter uden på FP1 og FP2,
klistret udad, og så klistrer jeg dem fast i panden, fordi så bliver den, hvor den skal,
specielt ved børnene. Så bliver den lukket under hagen, og så gel i og kradse lidt for at
få impedanserne ned. Det er en god ide nogle gange at lave midterskilning for, at der
er god forbindelse oppe i toppen. Så gel i alle sammen, og så kører vi lige sprøjten lidt
rundt, og som regel tager vi træ enden af en vatpind og så lige kører bagefter for at gå
impedanserne ned.
Hvad var sværest at lære?
Det var at sætte plader, enkelt elektroder på. Det er det sværeste, og det tager lang tid,
fordi de skal sidde nøjagtige. Så derfor bruger vi jo så også, vi har cap’en, vi kan sætte
på også. Men alle nye, der kommer, de er igennem flere måneder, hvor de står med
målebånd, og så laver krydser og prikker, så der må de sidde, inden de lærer det, fordi
det skal sidde i fingrene.
Hvad er best case scenarie for en patient?
Det er, når børnene ikke græder. Og vi måske kommer til en klarhed for patienten, synes
jeg. Så enten de kan komme i behandling, eller vi får et anfald og finder ud af, at det ikke
er epilepsi.
Hvad kunne det i så fald være?
Det kan måske godt være noget med hjertet, men der er mere sådan over det psykiske.
Det er noget, der hedder PNES. Det kan være pres på grund af skole og andre ting, at
så begynder man måske at besvime, og angst kan det også være. Så kommer de også
lige til os også for at få en afklaring. Det er så ikke altid, at vi fanger sådan en undervejs,
men når vi gør, så kan de også komme videre med det. Så er det en anden vej de skal
gå med behandling.
Hvad er worst case scenarie for en patient?
Det er jo, hvis de bliver voldelige, og ikke vil det her.
Hvad gør man så?
Som sagt børnene, det er ikke altid, vi kan få de der ekstra elektroder på, så er vi glade
for bare at få hatten på og få noget gel i. Nogle gange så står vi sådan her for at ramme,
fordi vi kaster så lidt rundt, men det der med at holde gør vi ikke. Hvis det er sådan, at
der skal holdes, så er det op til forældrene, at de gør det. Vi siger så også altid, at i må
sige stop, hvis det bliver for meget, og så stopper vi undersøgelsen, det er deres valg. Vi
holder ikke eller noget.
Bruger i altid de samme øvelser, foto stimulation og hyperventilation?
136
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:144==
Nej, over 50 år så hyperventilerer vi ikke. Fordi mange af epilepsierne, der bliver provok-
eret, det er børne epilepsier, og jo ældre man er, er der jo også større chance for noget
med blodpropper. Foto, der plejer vi ikke, at foto stimulere under 1 år. Ved både hyper og
foto, vi provokerer ikke gravide, ikke fordi det skulle gøre noget, men det kan jo provokere
et krampeanfald, hvis man har en bestemt type epilepsi, der bliver provokeret af lampen.
Det er vi ikke interesseret i ved en gravid. Jeg synes, der var en ting til… ja, svær astma.
Vi spørger sådan lidt ind til det. Og det er jo frivilligt, hyperventilationen og foto, det er ikke
noget, de skal. De skal jo faktisk have at vide, at det er frivilligt. Det kan fremprovokere et
anfald, men de fleste er jo interesseret i at få anfaldet ved os, og få det filmet, så de kan
se, hvad det er. Men så er der så nogen, der kommer til kontrol, der ikke er interesseret
i det, fordi det kan betyde kørselsforbud igen, hvis de ikke har haft det i flere år, og har
undgået lys lidt, så kan det være, at de ikke har lyst til det. Så det er frivilligt.
Så når i fremprovokerer, så gør i det ikke for at få et anfald?
Nej. Absencer gør ikke noget, der må de bare kører igennem og puste videre bagefter,
men hvis vi ser i EEG, der begynder at bygge op til et anfald, så stopper vi før, vi får
kramperne, hvis vi kan. Det er sjældent, det sker, at vi får fremprovokeret et generaliseret
tonisk-klonisk krampeanfald. Men nogle gange får vi jo myoklonier, nogle små ryk, og
hvis det så bliver ved med at kører i EEG’et, og det ikke går væk, at det bare bliver mere
og mere, så stopper vi lampen.
Hvordan stopper i et fremprovokeret anfald?
Det er inden det bliver til GTK, at vi bliver nødt til at stoppe. Vi kan se, det her, det tør vi
ikke mere, og patienten begynder måske også at få det dårligt og mærke optrækkende
og måske de små ryk. Så har vi også set, det vi ville.
Hvad sker der, hvis i ikke kan stoppe det, og det ender ud i et anfald?
Så har vi en alarmknap dernede, og så kommer kollegerne fra de andre rum, og ind og
hjælper med, at patienten ikke slår sig, og får patienten om på siden, når det er færdigt.
Vi kan altid ringe til vores læge, vi har nummeret på, jeg tror også, det er en bagvagt
dernede, hvis der skal gives noget medicin for at bryde det.
Hvad er de største udfordringer ved at udføre undersøgelsen?
Det er nok, når børn ikke vil. Det er det, fordi de voksne de kommer jo ind, og de ved jo,
hvorfor de skal have lavet det, og det vil de gerne, og det ved børnene jo ikke altid. Så
får man hat på, og så skal der dælme også noget gel i, men det plejer at gå, når vi så
sætter os bagved computeren, og det hele kører. Men det varierer meget, nogle er meget
ulykkelige. Det at få sådan en hat på hovedet… nej, det kan de jo ikke forstå hvorfor. Det
er sådan det eneste, tror jeg, den er mest. De fleste, der forstå det, vil jo gerne have lavet
det for at finde ud af, hvad der er galt.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
137
==PAGE:145==
A.1.4
Specialized neurology and neurophysiology doctor at
Rigshospitalet.
Jeg er overlæge her på Rigshospitalet. Jeg er speciallæge i neurologi siden 1999, og jeg
er speciallæge i neurofysiologi siden 2010 så sammenlagt 23 år. Jeg har været leder af
epilepsi monitorering i gennem mange år, og laver rigtig mange dagtids monitoreringer,
rutine EEG’er, og akut EEG’er.
Hvad er de forskellige typer af EEG scanninger, og hvad er de mest typiske i laver
herude?
Vi kigger for det meste af tiden på normale EEG’er, også kendetegnet som en baggrund,
hvor man skal måle frekvenser og amplitude. Med denne baggrundsaktivitet i hjernen
er en normal person svarende til deres udvikling, deres alder, og deres vågenhedsgrad,
bevidsthedsgrad. Når de bliver døse eller falder i søvn, vil denne baggrund ændre sig.
Normalt ville denne baggrund blive langsommere til de falder i søvn, og det bliver meget
meget langsomt, og det vil vise nogle speciale rytmer i EEG’et. Så det er det normale
EEG.
I et rutine EEG plejer vi at stimulere patienten, vi stimulerer ved blinke med noget lys,
hyperventilation, og forventer at patienten vil falde i søvn, fordi de fleste mange epilepsi
typer vil accentuere de patologiske fund, hvor der er de lavfrekvente forandringer, og
også de epileptiforme forandringer under disse stimulationsperioder. Desuden, afhængig
af epilepsi type, kan vi også finde epileptiforme forandringer. Det kan være fokal, det
betyder kun på en hemisphere, eller det kan være bilateral synkront, som betyder, at det
kommer samtidigt i begge to hemisphere. Det kan være interiktale, det betyder kortvarigt
uden for et anfald, og det kan være iktale, som betyder, at det er under et epileptisk anfald.
Så i forventer, at patienten falder i søvn under scanningen?
Hvis de ikke falder i søvn, mange gange sker det, at de ikke falder i søvn, så vil vi indkalde
dem til et supplerende EEG, som er lidt længere, for at se om de falder i søvn. Hvis der
fortsat er mistanke, og vi ikke har set, hvad vi ønskede at se i den vågne registrering i
de første 30 minutter, så indkalder vi dem til et længere. Alle hvor der er mistanke om
epileptiske anfald, bevidsthedspåvirkning, udviklingsproblemer eller udfordringer, kom-
mer igennem standard EEG.
Hvordan er hele ”diagnose” flowet for en patient?
Det er også afhængigt af deres alder, og hvad deres EEG vil vise. Men klinisk under-
søgelse er også meget vigtigt, en god anamnese, også familien, hvis det er et barn, eller
fra patienten selv, beskrivelse af deres episoder, hvor længe deres episoder er, er der
provokerende faktorer, hvornår startede det, kan de huske episoden, eller er de bevids-
thedspåvirket under episoden. Alle disse spørgsmål først, og så bagefter kører vi EEG.
Hvis der er tegn på, at det kan være fokal, som betyder, at det kommer fra en hemisphere,
så sender vi dem oftest, patienten, til en scanning, en billeddiagnostik undersøgelse for
at se, hvordan udløser epilepsien.
138
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:146==
Er det den samme, som læser EEG’et og giver diagnosen?
Det kan jeg forestille mig, at det er i små hospitaler, men herover bliver det delt meget ud.
Efter jeg beskriver EEG’et, sender jeg det videre til en epileptolog eller en neurolog, som
vil opsamle alle de svar fra MR scanning, eventuel blodprøve og blodtryksmåling, EKG,
og indkalde patienten, og giver diagnose. Hvis man er heldig, så på det ene EEG er nogle
tegn på, hvad der kan hjælpe på den diagnose, fordi det er ikke altid sagen, at patienten
efter en episode kommer ind og oftest vil vi ikke se noget. Det vil ikke udelukke, at de har
epilepsi, men nogle gange kan vi bare sende patienten videre, fordi vi kan ikke se, hvad
der sker, kun hvis vi ser EEG under et anfald. Det bedste EEG er selvfølgelig det EEG,
der har anfald.
Hvilke roller er der ellers med i flowet?
Måske radiologer, der kigger på MR, og eventuelt kardiologer, fordi en episode kan også
være kardiologisk udløst. Det kan være blodtryksfald, det kan være meget, så det er en
differentialdiagnose også, at lave et EGG mellem alle disse forskellige episoder. EKG er
kun 1-kanals EKG.
Jeg visiterer henvisningen, henvisningen den kommer ind hos os, taler med assisten-
ten, som sætter EEG cap på, EKG, nogle gange også en øjenelektrode, nogle gange
muskelelektroder for at se forskellen, der er sket. Og efter de er færdige, sender de det
til os til beskrivelse.
Hvad er de mest typiske artefakter, du ser?
Det kan jeg holde et foredrag om. Der er rigtig mange, elektrode artefakter, EKG, hvis
ikke elektroden har god kontakt med overfladen, det giver problemer. Der er minimum 20
elektroder, hvis referenceelektroden, ground elektroden, ikke sidder godt, så kan det hele
være meget påvirket. Men som sagt EKG, det vil også give nogle artefakter på nogle af
de kanaler. Øjenblink, det giver også rigtig store artefakter. Du kan se, at det giver rigtig
store forstyrrelser også på flere kanaler, minimum på de frontotemporale kanaler, vil du
se, at de er der. Man kan se, at der er disse meget hurtige frekvenser, det er muskel
artefakter, man kan næsten ikke afslappe disse temporale muskler på en vågen patient,
så det kan den altid også vise. Hvis patienten også har nogle store rykninger uden noget
som helst EEG, det er, at patienten måske synker, smasker, eller bevæger hans mund.
Det vil vise nogle kæmpe store artefakter. For eksempel her, er elektrode artefakt, at
elektroden er faldet ned.
Jeg bedømmer det EEG efter, hvad jeg ser, så jeg ville ikke skrive om den. Jeg starter
med at kigge på EEG’ets baggrund, og det er bedst, hvis man kigger efter, om patienten
lukker øjnene i de occipitale elektroder. Jeg måler frekvensen af de occipitale kanaler, og
her kan man se, at på begge sider, højre og venstre, er der mest theta aktivitet på 6-7 Hz.
Den er ret langsom i forhold til, at det skal være minimum 8, 9, 10 på hans alder, vi ville
forvente en lidt hurtigere. Så hans baggrundsaktivitet er lidt langsom, det kan betyde rigtig
mange ting. Det kan betyde, at han døser, eller det kan betyde, at der generelt er nogle
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
139
==PAGE:147==
forstyrrelser i hans hjerne, nogle metaboliske forstyrrelser, noget demens, noget der kan
påvirke hans bevidsthed. Så disse kan ses på normale rutine EEG’er. Man kan se på de
blå kanaler, de blå er højre side og de røde er venstre side, at der er nogle lavfrekvenser,
som er måske 2 Hz i forhold til disse 6 Hz, at der kommer lidt langsom aktivitet i hans
temporale elektroder. Så det kan være lidt komplekst.
Man kan se hvilke frekvenser, der kommer til anterior og posterior, for eksempel så kan
man se, at denne lavfrekvens kommer mest til hans højre temporal. Der er altid en side-
forskel, altid en potentiel forskel, hvor der er en negativ fase på en side, og altid en positiv
fase på den anden side, altså de laver en dipole, de røde er de positive, og de blå er de
negative, hvor det er mest negative.
Her kan man se et eksempel på et epileptiform spikewave. Den er også så stor, at det er
svært at se, så hvis jeg kigger på det, prøver jeg altid at lave det i en lidt mindre størrelse.
Der er en hurtig aktivitet, lavfrekvent, så det er en spike aktivitet, 2-3 per sekund. Her kan
man se, at patienten sover, og efter han har fået denne aktivitet, vågner han op, efter han
har haft et kortvarigt anfald. Så sover han, og så har han haft et myokloni, altså et ryk
i hans arm, og så vågner han. Herover er det så muskel elektroder, han har haft nogle
små ryk i armen, og nu er han vågen. Han har mange interiktale, det betyder, at mange
epileptiforme forandringer, hvor han ikke har opvågning, og han har ikke kliniske anfald,
men man kan se, at han har mange af disse spikewaves, nogle gange kommer de som en
enkelt, og nogle gange kommer de som to. Så sådan ser det ud, når det er epileptiform.
Disse er subkliniske, nogle spikewave aktiviteter, der altid kommer mest højre frontalt,
og det fortsætter altid i den samme elektrode. Vi kan også se de dipole, hvilket er den
negative fase, og positive fase på den anden side.
Her er også en anden, hvor hun er vågen, og så bagefter kommer der nogle meget meget
store amplituder, og så et anfald. I baggrunden bliver der enten en stor amplitude stign-
ing, men nogle gange kommer der amplitude attenuation. Hun har meget store ampli-
tuder, hun hyperventilerer, og hun synker. Hun har bilateral synkront, så det er en arvelig
generaliseret epilepsi type. Disse meget kortvarige anfald, og starter bilateralt synkront.
Tidligere var det bare højre frontalt. Så som du kan se, er næsten alle lidt forskellige.
Hos nogle patienter kan man se, at det er muskel artefakt, og det er noget, som har EEG
grafisk forandring, og man skal finde ud af, “okay, så den er ikke epileptiform, men hvad
er den så? Er det et tic? Er det nogle stereotypiske bevægelser? Er det noget dystoni?
Hvad har hun?” EEG’et viser ikke noget, men hun har nogle motoriske bevægelses foran-
dringer. Det er altid en multimodal optagelse, vi har EKG, EEG, og EMG, så vi kan se en
multimodal registrering, og sætte tingene sammen og prøve at diagnosticere.
Hvor vigtigt er det med videoer for at lave en diagnose, og hvorfor?
Meget vigtigt, fordi en simpel bevægelse eller nogle epileptiforme bevægelser, nogle
gange med anfald er der så mange muskel artefakter, at du ikke kan se noget som helst
på det EEG. Derfor video, flere anfald, hvor stereotypiske de er, er de ens eller er de alle
140
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:148==
sammen forskellige, det giver rigtig meget. Er det bare, at for eksempel et barn spænder
op i hele kroppen eller er det epileptiform? Det skal man se i en video for at se forskellen.
Hvad er threshold for at noterer et artefakt?
Hvis det forstyrrer, hvis det er så voldsomt, at et EEG’et ikke kan bedømmes, så rap-
porterer vi, og skriver til artefakter. Hvis jeg skriver artefakter, hvis jeg skriver noget, så
skriver jeg, hvad det er for nogle artefakter, og hvor meget det forstyrrer den aktivitet,
hvad er betydningen af den artefakt. Optagelsen kan ikke bedømmes, det har reduceret
den diagnostiske værdi eller det påvirker ikke optagelsens diagnostiske værdi. Så det
kan være 50 Hz artefakt fra strøm, det kan være puls artefakt, EKG artefakt, blinke arte-
fakt, øjenbevægelser artefakt, muskels artefakt, store bevægelses artefakt, sut artefakt
hos små børn. Der er rigtig mange, fordi de muskelbevægelser giver rigtig stor svingning.
EEG viser en lille svingning af mikrovolt i størrelsen.
Hvad gør man i en situation, hvor man har en elektrode artefakt, der ligner en spikewave?
Jeg ville kigge på, hvordan impedansen er på den elektrode, hvis den er dårlig. Og så
bagefter ville jeg se, om det kun kommer på en elektrode, så er den ikke reel. En EEG
forandring har altid et field, det viser sig på flere forskellige elektroder.
Hvad er de største udfordringer ved at udføre undersøgelsen?
Nogle gange med normale EEG’er har patienten også anfald om natten. De fleste anfald
kommer om natten, og når patienten kommer i arbejdstiden, så kan vi ikke se noget som
helst.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
141
==PAGE:149==
A.1.5
Medical Laboratory Technologist at Sjællands Universitetshospital,
Roskilde - Region Sjælland
Jeg er bioanalytiker, og har været i afdelingen i 10 år, og i specialet har jeg været i 20 år.
Hvordan udføres en standard EEG-undersøgelse?
Når vi laver selve optagelsen, når der er sat alle de her elektroder på, og orienteret pa-
tienten om undersøgelsen, vi har også det der med, at man lige spørger, hvornår har du
haft dit sidste anfald, har du spist morgenmad, det er i forhold til for eksempel hyperventi-
lationen. Men ellers kommer vi til at sidde bagved skærmen, hvor jeg altid vil starte med
lige at lave sådan lille notits om, det gør vi alle sammen, hvor vi angiver om patienten er
vågen, sovende, er de konfuse, er de orienteret i tid og sted. Vigtigst af alt, er de i deres
habituelle tilstand. Tit når vi kommer i ambulatoriet, så er det patienter, der kommer hjem-
mefra, men vi tager jo også ud og laver akut undersøgelser, og der er det her, det er ret
vigtigt at vide om patienten, er det normalt, at de måske ikke er orienteret i tid og sted,
eller er de lige midt i deres sygdomstilfælde. Så det er ret vigtigt for at kunne vurdere et
EEG, er patienten vågen eller er de sovende.
Så fortæller vi bare lidt om, hvilke elektroder vi har brugt, om de har lukket øjne, åbnet
øjne, om de for eksempel ligger på ryggen eller ligger på siden. Det har noget at gøre
med i forhold til artefakter, altså støj fra kurven, hvis de nu ligger på siden, jamen så
kan vi måske forvente, at der kommer lidt for eksempel bevæge artefakter over fra den
side, de ligger på. Så det starter man lige med at sætte sådan et lille event i starten af
optagelsen, så ved lægen, den der skal sidde og kigge den igennem, lidt om patienten.
Vi har selvfølgelig også henvisningen, vi kan gå fra, men det er faktisk i det øjeblik, når
patienten træder ind af døren. Så skriver vi også altid, hvor den er optaget henne, og
hvem der har gjort det. Når så optagelsen kører, jeg tror, at der er lidt forskel med, hvor
meget men man markerer selvfølgelig altid, hvornår de har øjnene åbne, og hvornår de
har lukket.
Hvordan noterer i artefakter?
Det er jo tit noget, vi beder dem om, for at vurdere reaktiviteten, så der sætter vi et event
ind, og det er jo så auto defineret, altså der er sådan nogle typiske events, der er auto
defineret, dem vi bruger meget. Og så har vi sådan en OBS, hvor vi selv kan skrive, altså
frihånds tekst. Men det er jo så det igen, det der med, at for at det ikke skal mistolkes
som måske noget anfalds aktivitet, så der kan det være vigtigt at skrive events ind. Også
når de bevæger sig, men der har vi selvfølgelig også nogle events til dem, hvis de måske
hoster eller noget. Men det kan jo være forskelligt fra afdeling til afdeling, det er noget,
man selv laver et setup med. Så det kan jo godt være, at på Filadelfia har de valgt nogle
andre events, og en anden rækkefølge, så det er ikke noget, der er prædefineret fra pro-
grammets side af. Vi har så også forskellige paletter, så man kan skifte imellem, så denne
her, den kører vi med i ambulatoriet, og så har vi måske en fra vores søvn optagelser,
og så har vi også en, hvis vi er ude på nogle sengeafsnit, altså nogle akutte afdelinger,
142
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:150==
intensiv og sådan nogle. Så har vi et andet event, men det er, fordi vi går ud og skal også
lave noget smerte stimulering i forhold til igen for at se meget af denne her reaktivitet. Så
dem sætter vi ind løbende efter behov, man kan også sætte dem ind bagefter, når vi har
kørt optagelsen. Det er selvfølgelig svært på sådan en, hvor den kører løbende, men det
kunne måske være meget godt at kunne sige “hov, nu bevæger patienten sig”, og man
lige sætter et event, og siger “okay, her der er noget uro og bevægelse”, fordi så bliver
det ihvertfald ikke mistolket. Så det er jo også det, vi sidder hele tiden og overvåger, så
selvom vi har video på patienten, så vil vi stadigvæk gå ind og sætte ind, hvis der sker
nogle ting undervejs.
Så er der jo også det her, der er impedans målingerne. Den vil altid være gemt, og hvis
man måler impedansen i løbet af optagelsen, så bliver den også gemt, så man kan gå
ind og præcist se, hvad impedansen var på det givne tidspunkt, og det er bare for at
kvalitetssikrer og dokumentere at alle elektroderne sidder fast.
Vi har sådan et threshold, og her kan man se, at der står, at den er på 10 kOhm, så hvis
de er under 10 kOhm, så vil de være grønne, og hvis de er over 10 kOhm, så bliver de
røde. Så det er bare sådan et hurtigt visuelt overblik, men vi kigger selvfølgelig også lige
på tallene og ser, og hvis der så er en, der er 10.1 kOhm, det er sådan lige på grænsen.
I bund og grund skal impedanserne bare være ensartede, altså helst ikke varierer for
meget, så man ikke har en, der er på fem og en, der er på 15, fordi det kan nemlig også
give noget støj artefakt, så det er faktisk derfor. Hvis man kunne få alle impedanserne til
at være lige omkring 15, så ville det faktisk også være okay, det siger lidt omkring, hvor
godt elektroderne har fat, men det vigtigste er faktisk, at der ikke er for stort spring imellem
dem. Det kan give, hvis vi har for eksempel FZ, der lå på 15 eller 20, jamen så kunne det
godt være, den har jo stadigvæk lidt fat, men der vil være meget støj, der ville komme på
den. Fordi den har så meget forskel i impedansen i forhold til de andre elektroder.
Det hedder sådan helt efter forskrifterne, så tjekker man det altid i starten af kurven, og
man bør også tjekke dem i slutningen af kurven ligesom for at dokumentere, jamen sidder
elektroderne stadigvæk fast. Fordi hvis nu, der er en elektrode, der bliver lidt høj, så kan
den godt blive lidt ustabil på kurven. Hvis den så bliver ustabil, så vil der kunne komme
noget støj på, men der vil også kunne komme nogle forskellige frekvenser, hvor man
ikke rigtig ved, “er det på grund af, at hjernen genererer det, eller er det på grund af, at
elektroden den er ved måske at slippe lidt, og måske impedansen er for høj?” Det er jo lidt
af et problem, man skal helst gerne dokumenterer, hvis du måler impedansen til slut, og
kan se, “jamen, alle impedanser de er grønne, ergo må det være noget, der kommer fra
hjernen, hvis der er en elektrode, der ser lidt pudsig ud”. Men er der så lige den elektrode,
som der måske kommer en uregelmæssig aktivitet på, og lige den elektrode, den har en
høj impedans, jamen så må vi sige, at det er elektroden, der er defekt. Men det har man
ikke en ærlig chance for at vurdere, hvis du kun måler i starten af optagelsen. Jeg tror
bare ikke, der er så mange, der måler til slut i optagelsen, men ifølge ihvertfald mange
forskrifter, der er det ihvertfald anbefalet, at man måler impedanser til slut i optagelsen.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
143
==PAGE:151==
Man kan godt måle undervejs, det kan være sådan noget, hvis patienten lige har løftet sig,
og løftet hovedet en gang og så lægger sig ned igen. Så vil man gerne lige tjekke, “sidder
de alle sammen nu stadigvæk fast”. Jeg tror, at det er nok individuelt, man kan godt køre
en hel optagelse uden, hvis patienten bare ligger helt stille, så er der ingen grund til måske
at måle impedansen før til slut i kurven. Men selvom de ligger helt stille, så er der så bare
nogle, som godt kan løsne sig lidt alligevel. Men der ville man måske måle, hvis man
kan se i EEG’et, at så ville man måske lige lave en kontrol, er det elektroden, eller er det
patienten?
144
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:152==
A.2
Standard EEG and Standard Control EEG Scan
Observations
The observations were done at Sjællands Universitetshospital, Roskilde - Region Sjæl-
land.
A.2.1
Standard EEG Scan, woman, 77 years old, 29/9/22
• Patient is asked for their CPR number.
• Patient is asked if they know why they are here, and how they feel their symptoms.
• Explains to the patient why they are here and the examination.
• Patient is asked about their medical history, if they have heart problems.
• Shows the equipment to the patient.
• Patient is asked to lay down on the bed.
• Neurophysiology Assistant uses their hands to measure the patient’s scalp in terms
of the 10-20 system.
• Neurophysiology Assistant has chosen to go with loose electrodes rather than a cap
to get some training using it.
• Hair is very noisy (artifact).
• Neurophysiology Assistant firstly puts couple of the electrodes, then REF and GND.
• Neurophysiology Assistant has a device connected to the electrodes which gives
a visual overview of the impedance and connection of the electrodes. The device
uses small lights for each electrode which are all switched on - light means no con-
nection/high impedance whereas no light means a good connection/low impedance.
• Neurophysiology Assistant focuses on having the cords turning the same way, so
they go backwards.
• Patient is asked to move their head for better access to put the electrodes.
• “It’s important to lay down the hair completely or else the electrodes can’t connect”.
• Neurophysiology Assistant scratches the scalp harshly to get a better connection.
• Neurophysiology Assistant has a lot and very good patient communication through-
out.
• Neurophysiology Assistant puts extra six electrodes - also known as low row.
• Neurophysiology Assistant firstly puts electrodes on the left side of the patient’s head
and then moves on to the right side.
• Neurophysiology Assistant has put the threshold at 5 kOhm, and has the ability to
change this if they wish to.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
145
==PAGE:153==
• “The better the preliminary analysis, the better the result for analysis for diagnosis”.
• Neurophysiology Assistant uses NuPrep first and then the gel.
• “It’s important to have distance between the electrodes so that you don’t create gel
bridges”.
• Neurophysiology Assistant disinfects and puts on ECG (2-system) on the patients,
firstly the stickers and then the cords are clicked on.
• Neurophysiology Assistant puts an eye electrode on the eyelid to detect eye move-
ment.
• Neurophysiology Assistant gets the lamp ready for photo stimulation.
• Neurophysiology Assistant gives a blanket to the patient.
• Neurophysiology Assistant pulls the plug from the electrical bed.
• Neurophysiology Assistant adds a noise filter on the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes.
• Neurophysiology Assistant starts the recording and the video.
• Neurophysiology Assistant annotates that the patient is awake and alert in a free
text annotation field in the beginning of the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to open their eyes for 10 secs, annotates
this using a predefined annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to close their eyes for 10 secs, annotates
this using a predefined annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to blink for 3-4 secs, annotates this using a
predefined annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant changes the montage after 2 mins, and annotates this
in a free text annotation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to open their eyes for 10 secs, annotates
this using a predefined annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to close their eyes for 10 secs, annotates
this using a predefined annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• The Neurophysiology Assistant has a timer on the whole examination and also on
the time for each montage Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to blink, and
annotates this.
• Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to close their eyes, and annotates this.
146
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:154==
• Patient yawns, and Neurophysiology Assistant annotates “yawn” in a free text an-
notation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant changes the montage after 2 mins, and annotates this
in a free text annotation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to open their eyes, annotates this using a
predefined annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to close their eyes, annotates this using a
predefined annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to blink, annotates this using a predefined
annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Hyperventilation exercise is skipped since the patient is over 50 years old.
• Neurophysiology Assistant changes the montage after 2 mins, and annotates this
in a free text annotation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Photostimulation exercise is initiated with different frequencies of light flashing at
different speeds.
• Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to open, close and blink their eyes multiple
times, annotates this using a predefined annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant notes that the patient is flexing their face too hard and
asks the patient to relax their face.
• Neurophysiology Assistant notes two abnormalities in the ECG, and annotates this
in a free text annotation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is told to just relax for the last 16 mins of the examination.
• Neurophysiology Assistant notes that the eye movement is high/noisy, so an eye
pillow is put on the patient’s eyes to calm them down, and annotates this in a free
text annotation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant notes a low frequency, and annotates this in a free text
annotation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant annotates possible reasons for abnormalities in a free
text annotation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to relax their eye movement.
• “It’s good to change between montages to get a better overview of the brain and not
miss anything”.
• Neurophysiology Assistant notes movement, and annotates this in a free text anno-
tation field, and adds it to the curve.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
147
==PAGE:155==
• Neurophysiology Assistant looks at the patient reference and evaluates while the
patient is relaxing.
• Neurophysiology Assistant reviews EEG while the patient is relaxing and annotates
findings.
• Neurophysiology Assistant also looks at other patient’s data while patient is relaxing.
• Neurophysiology Assistant sometimes does not annotate sinking or deep breaths
which have a visible effect on the EEG - when asked why, they answered, “they look
so much like physiologic artifacts that we are used to so there’s no need to annotate
these. If there’s doubt, the doctor can look at the video”.
• When time is up, Neurophysiology Assistant tells the patient that the examination
is done, and stops the recording - there’s no indication that time is up besides the
timer at the bottom of the screen.
• Neurophysiology Assistant helps the patient taking off the electrodes, ECG, and eye
electrode, and wipe off the majority of the gel.
• Patient states that they nearly fell asleep.
• Neurophysiology Assistant does not annotate if “it looks normal”.
• “In general, it’s better to annotate if in doubt rather than not doing it”.
• “It’s important to respect the time and silence for relaxation as most things happen
when the patient is almost asleep”.
148
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:156==
A.2.2
Standard Control EEG Scan, woman, 37 years old, 26/10/22
• Neurophysiology Assistant prepares the equipment (fills the gel, cap, low-row elec-
trodes, ECG, etc.).
• Neurophysiology Assistant checks the patient data in Sundhedsplatformen.
• Once the patient arrives, the Neurophysiology Assistant asks for their CPR number.
• Patient is asked why they are here.
• Patient is asked if they have had breakfast and at what time.
• Patient is asked if they have slept and for how long.
• Explains the examination to the patient.
• Explains that the patient has to lay down and close their eyes.
• Measures the patient’s head and puts on the cap.
• Fills the cap with gel using the syringe.
• Neurophysiology Assistant also puts on NuPrep using a q-tip.
• Neurophysiology Assistant checks the electrode connection through a device which
shows the connection using lights (for each electrode a light is one and once it has
connection, it turns off).
• Patient is asked to lie down.
• Neurophysiology Assistant puts on the low-row electrodes, ECG, and eye electrode.
• Prepares lamp for photic stimulation, and turns off the lights.
• Neurophysiology Assistant checks the connection on the ECG (firstly the stickers
and then the cords are clicked on) and sees that they are too noisy so they need to
be changed.
• Neurophysiology Assistant starts the recording and the video.
• Neurophysiology Assistant annotates that the patient is conscious and which elec-
trodes have been used including which cap.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to relax and this is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds
it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to blink and this is annotated using a predefined annotation, and
adds it to the curve.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
149
==PAGE:157==
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant changes the montage after 2 minutes, and annotates
this in a free text annotation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to blink and this is annotated using a predefined annotation, and
adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to relax and this is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds
it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to blink and this is annotated using a predefined annotation, and
adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant introduces the hyperventilation exercise by giving an ex-
ample of how to breathe.
• Hyperventilation exercise is started and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is encouraged and guided during the hyperventilation exercise.
• Neurophysiology Assistant stops the hyperventilaiton exercise and a ”post hyper-
ventilation” phase is initiated in the curve which is annotated using a predefined
annotation.
• Movement is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Another movement is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds it to the
curve.
150
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:158==
• ”Post hyperventilation” phase is completed which is annotated using a predefined
annotation.
• Neurophysiology Assistant introduces the photic stimulation exercise.
• Patient opens their eyes without being asked and this is annotated using a free text
annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Photic stimulation exercise is started and this is annotated using a predefined an-
notation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
151
==PAGE:159==
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
152
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:160==
• Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to keep their eyes open.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and relax for the remaining time.
• Patient scratches their head and this is annotated using a free text annotation, and
adds it to the curve.
• Again, patient scratches their head and this is annotated using a free text annotation,
and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant stops the recording and removes the equipment from the
patient.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
153
==PAGE:161==
A.2.3
Standard EEG Scan, male, 17 years old, 26/10/22
• Neurophysiology Assistant prepares the equipment (fills the gel, cap, low-row elec-
trodes, ECG, etc.).
• Neurophysiology Assistant checks the patient data in Sundhedsplatformen.
• Once the patient arrives, the Neurophysiology Assistant asks for their CPR number.
• Patient is asked why they are here.
• Patient is asked what they felt during their seizure.
• Patient is asked about their last seizure and if they are taking any medication.
• Patient’s mom is asked whether there is any history with epilepsy in the family.
• Patient is asked about the time of day for when the seizure happened and the fre-
quency.
• Explains the examination to the patient.
• Neurophysiology Assistant uses their hands to measure the patient’s scalp accord-
ing to the 10-20 system.
• Neurophysiology Assistant has a device connected to the electrodes which gives
a visual overview of the impedance and connection of the electrodes. The device
uses small lights for each electrode which are all switched on - light means no con-
nection/high impedance whereas no light means a good connection/low impedance.
• Neurophysiology Assistant puts on ECG and eye electrode.
• Prepares lamp for photic stimulation, and turns off the lights.
• The light is turned off and the video recording is turned on.
• The patient is asked to close their eyes.
• Recording is started.
• Neurophysiology Assistant annotates that the patient is conscious.
• The patient starts talking and this is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds
it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to blink and this is annotated using a predefined annotation, and
adds it to the curve.
154
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:162==
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to blink and this is annotated using a predefined annotation, and
adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant annotates that the patient is drowsy using a free text
annotation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to blink and this is annotated using a predefined annotation, and
adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant annotates something about the ECG using a free text
annotation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Movement is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• When noticing that the patient makes small movements, the neurophysiology As-
sistant waits a while until they continue.
• Smacking is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Mouth movement is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Eyebrow movement is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds it to the
curve.
• Patient falls asleep and the neurophysiology Assistant lets them sleep for a while.
• Sleep is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Movement is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Another movement is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds it to the
curve.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
155
==PAGE:163==
• Neurophysiology Assistant wakes up the patient and annotates it using a free text
annotation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Photic stimulation exercise is introduced and started which is annotated using a
predefined annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to relax.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant annotates that the patient finds it hard to keep their eyes
open using a free text annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant stops the photic stimulation exercise and this is anno-
tated using a predefined annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Hyperventilation exercise is started instead, and this is annotated using a predefined
annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to relax and this is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds
it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to breathe faster.
• Neurophysiology Assistant annotates something about the ECG using a free text
annotation field, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is encouraged during the hyperventilation exercise.
• Neurophysiology Assistant stops the hyperventilaiton exercise and a ”post hyper-
ventilation” phase is initiated in the curve which is annotated using a predefined
annotation.
• Patient opens their eyes without being asked and this is annotated using a free text
annotation, and adds it to the curve.
156
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:164==
• Patient is asked to relax.
• Neurophysiology assistant asks patient about their seizures and annotates talking
using a free text annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• ”Post hyperventilation” phase is completed which is annotated using a predefined
annotation.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Photic stimulation exercise is started and this is annotated using a predefined an-
notation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• The patient blinks and this is annotated using a predefined annotation, and adds it
to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology assistant annotates an OBS and this is annotated using a prede-
fined annotation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
157
==PAGE:165==
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to relax and this is annotated using a free text annotation, and adds
it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
158
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:166==
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Patient is asked to open their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant asks patient to keep their eyes open.
• Patient is asked to close their eyes and this is annotated using a predefined anno-
tation, and adds it to the curve.
• Neurophysiology Assistant stops the recording and removes the equipment from the
patient and helps them clean.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
159
==PAGE:167==
A.3
Focus Group
A.3.1
Focusgroup with neurophysiology assistants, medical laboratory
technologists, and medical students, Sjællands
Universitetshospital, Region Sjælland, 6/9/22
Five neurophysiology assistants
Four medical laboratory technologists
Two medical students
Total: 11 participants
Voting results:
Comments:
• Is it shown in the app if an electrode is not working?
• Can you go back and forth in the app flow if needed?
• Maybe make it possible to prolong the time
• Possibility to add video?
• Tell the user to tell the patient to keep their eyes closed during the scan
160
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:168==
A.4
User tests on the BrainCapture application (V1)
A.4.1
User test 14/9
• App UX score (1-5): 4
• User readiness to scan score (1-5): 4.5
Scan 1: 10:11-10:55
• Nr. of errors: 4
• Nr. of questions: 3
• Gel time: 10:13-10:35
• Body language: The user is not “scared” of the equipment but is a little fragile with
the patient.
Notes:
• User wants to start measuring the head for the cap rather than starting the app
• Good patient communication
• Quick to learn by copying the demo
• User forgets to connect the cap and amplifier
• User is a little confused when asked to fill the whole cap (when seeing the corre-
sponding screen) – almost skips the screen
• User finds it difficult to get a feel of how hard they have the press the needle
• User has minor complications with gelling the cap
• User finds that the gel is a good indication of where they are on the cap
• User is good at using the app to check the electrode connection (connection with
cap)
• User strives to get all the electrodes green rather than settling on yellow
• User does not use the NuPrep gel until asked to do so
• User puts ECG stickers on first before connecting the cords thus must remove them
and try again
• User feels that the first eye blink exercise done by the patient was not good enough,
so they restart the exercise to get a better result
• User changes stance when asked
• User starts cleaning while the patient relaxes losing the patient focus and missing
movements
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
161
==PAGE:169==
• User is unsure about the event icon (the icon is unclear)
• User reads all the text aloud both to themselves and the patient
• User finds the “relax” text confusing and misleading
• User helps the patient clean up
• User remembers to turn everything off and press “Finish”
• Q: How does the calcium in the water affect the cap when being cleaned over time?
Scan 2: 11:05-11:49
• Nr. of errors: 4
• Nr. of questions: 3
• Gel time: 11:13-11:31
• Body language: The user is a little more confident when gelling and pressing harder
on the cap, and user seems more skilled but still not totally comfortable.
Notes:
• User again wants to start with putting on the cap rather than turning on the app
• After measuring the head size, the user finds that the measurement is between two
sizes. User chooses a blue cap (medium) rather than a grey cap (large) in hopes of
it fitting a little tighter
• User is unsure and asks if the chin support should be on the chin
• User forgets to connect the amplifier and the cap
• User seems more confident when gelling the cap
• User tries other ways to fill the needle with gel
• User does not use NuPrep gel until asked again
• User has improved on putting the ECG
• User is more comfortable during scanning
• User uses themselves as an example for how the patient should do the exercises
during the scan
• User still finds the report event icon a little confusing but manages to report an event
• User does not report events unless asked missing some patient movements
• User forgets to tell the user to close their eyes and relax
• User is worried about breaking the cap when washing it
• Q: What is defined as a movement? What is the threshold?
162
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:170==
Scan 3: 12:18-12:56
• Nr. of errors: 1
• Nr. of questions: 1
• Gel time: 12:21-12:39
• Body language: The user is even more confident when gelling the cap, and navi-
gates well through the app.
Notes:
• User correctly starts the process and connects cap and amplifier
• User is more confident in “controlling/managing” the patient
• User uses the NuPrep gel by themselves
• User starts to be more strategic when gelling
• User forgets the NuPrep gel again but uses it more once reminded
• User has no issue with the ECG
• User does not report small movements during the small exercises
• User is more attentive on movement when the patient is relaxing
• User runs through all the exercises and navigates through the app quite smoothly
• User checks connection between electrodes smoothly
• Q: When should I write in the free note field when reporting an event?
User feedback
• You quickly learn the app
• Everything is explained besides that you have to connect the cap and the amplifier
• It was difficult to deal with the electrodes
• The whole process was not too difficult
• You have to find your own way to guide and talk to the patient
• You have to be sharp in guiding and communicating with the patient
• I think I would be able to learn and do this
• I would like two to three more training runs before doing it on an actual patient to
get the training more into my hands and feel more confident
• User runs through all the exercises and navigates through the app quite smoothly
• The lecture on epilepsy was fine but I would need more clarity on what a seizure is
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
163
==PAGE:171==
• It is fine generally and there is no need to know much more
• It’s good to have the general context
• The demo would be fine with a doll or just a video for me but maybe not for everyone
• You can have different interpretations of hyperventilation
• Photo stimulation is not general knowledge for nurses
• I got a well enough understanding of artifacts
• It was a little difficult to know when I should report an artifact
• I would have liked more introduction to how the different seizures could look
• It got better by each turn
• I would feel comfortable in doing an EEG scan after this type of training
• It is fine that you aren’t shown the EEG live in the app
• The app was simple and gave a pleasant experience throughout
• The cleaning of the cap could be a challenge
• The possible challenges that could occur should be presented in the demo
• It would be nice to have some kind of simulation training as the final one
A.4.2
User test 21/9
• App UX score (1-5): 5
• User readiness to scan score (1-5): 5
Scan 1: 10:18-11:02
• Nr. of errors: 3
• Nr. of questions: 0
• Gel time: 10:21-10:41
• Body language: The user is a little cautious with the cap.
Notes:
• User starts with measuring the cap size rather than starting the app
• The two users learn from each other when filling the gel
• User does not connect the cap to the amplifier
• User finds the feeling of filling the gel weird
• User does not use the NuPrep gel until told to do so
• User accidentally skips the “gel all” screen
164
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:172==
• User has good communication with the user
• User first puts the ECG stickers on the patient but corrects themselves after finding
it hard to continue sticking them on
• User shows the app to the patient as a guide through the exercises
• User looks at presentation (PowerPoint prepared by Louise) when in doubt of exer-
cise time
• User notes artifacts and checks electrode connection status well
• User checks the electrode connection while the patient is relaxing
• User remembers to tell the patient to close their eyes during relaxation
• User finds the app easy, intuitive, and informative
Scan 2: 11:08-11:46
• Nr. of errors: 1
• Nr. of questions: 0
• Gel time: 11:12-11:29
• Body language: The user is a little more confident with the cap and very smooth in
the app.
Notes:
• User turns on the amplifier and remembers to connect it to the cap
• User again forgets to put the ECG stickers on after connecting the cords (in their
work life they first attach the stickers and then the cord)
• User tries jaw clenching exercise again when not satisfied
• User finds the app easy to use and guides well
• User is good at checking the status of the cap and reporting events
• User want to finish the scan before the time is up (15 mins in this setting)
Scan 3: 12:10-12:46
• Nr. of errors: 0
• Nr. of questions: 0
• Gel time: 12:13-12:28
• Body language: The user starts very confidently and throughout the flow but could
be rougher when filling gel.
Notes:
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
165
==PAGE:173==
• User starts confidently in the correct flow
• User starts to turn electrodes around to get better access to fill the gel
• User finds it a little hard to judge how much gel is put in the cap
• User finds the feeling of scratching the skin weird
• User correctly puts on both ECG stickers (cord first then stickers on patient)
• User is very good at looking at the patient during smaller exercises
• User keeps their eyes on the user even while clicking on the timer to start the exer-
cises
• User checks cap connection status easily
• User finds it easier to control the gel on thinner, short hair
• User is confused with the word “seizure” in English (terminology issue)
User feedback
• The timer started before the user is done instructing the patient
• Does it say in the app what the next exercise is?
• User questions the timer counting both up and down
• I would feel comfortable in doing the scanning with this amount of training
• I would need some kind of “illness training”
• I think the app guided me well
• A routine quickly established throughout for me - I learned tricks throughout
• I think getting the gel out of the needle was the most challenging
• User is experienced in working with needles and ECG
• It is good to learn how to be in the silence (when asked about the amount of time
spent on relaxation during training)
• A shorter time for training is fitting as I mostly want training on the cap and hand grip
• Three scans are a good amount
• It was nice to have some high-level context about epilepsy but even better that the
focus was on the equipment
• Live demo was good
• Video could work instead of live demo but do include possible challenges
• Hyperventilation is common knowledge for nurses but not photo simulation
166
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:174==
• It is easy to input the artifacts in the app and it’s clever that it annotates in the actual
EEG
• Possibly run through the app during the demo
• What to do with non-cooperative patients?
• There could be more freedom in the app in regards to skipping, going back, etc.
• 3 main challenges of the app: Colors (low contrast), back navigation, consistency
in arrows
A.4.3
User test 22/9
• App UX score (1-5): 4
• User readiness to scan score (1-5): 4
Scan 1: 13:02-13:52
• Nr. of errors: 5
• Nr. of questions: 6
• Gel time: 13:10-13:37
• Body language: The user is rushing a but to get started, seems a little confused,
and very focused on not hurting the patient. The user is in need of support to be
guided through the app.
Notes:
• User starts by measuring the cap size and putting on the cap without turning on the
app
• User does not know to tap on the card to start the scan and presses the burger
menu
• User finds it difficult to connect the cap to the amplifier
• User starts prepping both gels
• User finds the text inside the electrode circles very small
• User has difficulties in refilling the gel
• User finds that the grey cap size was too big (58 cm)
• User refills the gel at least four times during gelling of the cap
• User has somewhat good eye contact with the patient during the short exercises
• User accidentally skips the ECG screen and does not put the ECG on the patient
• User almost skips the relax time screen and states that it’s because the white card
is too noticeable/eye catching
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
167
==PAGE:175==
• User forgets to tell the patient to close their eyes
• User tells the patient to open their eyes after relaxation
• User notes the “minimum 3 minutes” relax text and wants to give the patient only 3
mins to relax
• User is asked to skip photo stimulation but presses the inactive next button instead
of the skip button
• Q: Can the cap be taken off before the file generation is completed?
Scan 2: 14:10-14:52
• Nr. of errors: 2
• Nr. of questions: 1
• Gel time: 14:16-14:36
• Body language: User is very gentle and fragile with the patient. Seems a little more
comfortable with the app and does not seek as much guidance.
Notes:
• User has difficulties putting on the cap correctly (asks for help)
• User puts on the ECG equipment on the patient before asked in the app
• User is confused about the amplifier already being connected to the app
• User is good at alternating between the two gels
• User does not take out the needle to check connection despite being asked
• User reads the text on the relaxation screen thoroughly
• User checks the connection status easily
• While the patient is relaxing the user is prepping the gels and cleaning up
• User mostly looks at the app (timer) during relaxation time
• The user talks a lot to the patient during hyperventilation prompting the patient to do
the same while trying to continue the hyperventilation
• User is again confused by the “minimum 3 minutes” text on the relaxation screen
and suggest turning the text around (state actual time first and then the minimum
required time)
• User does other tasks while the patient is relaxing thus not noticing patient move-
ment (artifacts)
Scan 3: 15:03-15:46
• Nr. of errors: 3
168
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:176==
• Nr. of questions: 0
• Gel time: 15:08-15:28
• Body language: The user is a little more confident but still very careful with handling
the patient
Notes:
• User starts putting on the cap before starting the app as well as the ECG
• User easily connects GND and REF
• User uses the electrode screen to guide themselves when filling the gel
• User does not look at the patient during small exercises
• User looks a lot on the phone and misses small patient movements
• User tells the patient to open their eyes after relaxation to do the hyperventilation
User feedback
• It is nice to have it in my hands
• It is good to try it a third time
• It corresponds well to an everyday situation in a hospital
• The solution makes sense in terms of efficiency and it is something nurses would
like
• You have to figure out the app, but it feels like “we’re just going to do it”
• The app is simple and patient friendly
• I personally would not go out tomorrow and do EEGs
• I would like to try it out, become more secure, and resolve challenges
• The training sessions should not be longer than five hours
• A week would be nice to learn and try it out
• I would be able to redo it tomorrow but dealing with electrodes is difficult
• You had to get used to how the app writes things (text in the app)
• The colors in the app are pleasant but you should switch the colors around, so
attention is focused on the correct things – also the colors had a very low contrast
so it was difficult to read
• It is hard to see what it says on the electrode circles
• It would be cool to include animations/illustrations to help with language barriers,
patient interaction, and so that nurses don’t seem to be hiding behind a screen
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
169
==PAGE:177==
• I forgot to look at the patient because I was so focused on the timer
• In the real world you would have the patient look at a picture instead of looking at a
random point on the wall
• Nurses are trained in hyperventilation and would know how 20 breaths/minute would
look so it would be nice if this information is written in the app so that we know how
fast the patient should do the exercise
• In terms of the shortened training version of the EEG scan it was fine, but it would
be nice if the last try was the full 30 minutes
• It was cumbersome to refill the gels and would be nice if they were prefilled
• I felt that the relaxation timer that started by itself stressed my out since I was not
finished with instructing my patient
• It was nice that the screens in the app had consistency
• I put all the equipment on in the beginning since it’s easier, and then I just skip the
screens where it asks me to do so
• I read the text on the relaxation screen thoroughly to make sure I did not miss any-
thing
• It would be nice if the app was in Danish and that you could choose the language
170
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:178==
A.5
Usability tests on the data-driven optimized application
A.5.1
Round 1 (Biased users)
App version: V1
Test user 1
Experience as a Nurse: 31 years in intensive care
Number of errors: 6
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 4.5
UX guidance score (1-5): 5
• The user wants to check no in the check boxes on the Patient information screen.
• The user navigates well through the Patient information screen.
• The user puts on the cap right after measuring the patient’s head before it is shown
in the flow.
• The user connects the ECG to the amplifier first before connecting the stickers on
the wire.
• The user puts the ECG on the patient’s wrists before it is shown in the flow.
• When the user sees the “Tap to start” screen, they are confused whether they have
already started the exercise. The user asks for clarification on whether the intended
information text is only for information before the actual exercise starts.
• The user is unsure what the word “annotate” means.
• For the annotation, the user would like to write a comment after clicking the anno-
tation. They explain, ”if I told the patient to keep their eyes open and they for some
reason did not, I would click the eyes open icon and write ”during this session, the
patient started blinking” so that it would be marked in the EEG to get the best result”.
• The user finished the first ”eyes open” part of the eyes exercise and does not notice
that the ”Next” button has changed from its disabled state. Thus, the user does not
click it and is confused.
• The user finishes the ”blink continuously” part of the eyes exercise and then asks the
patient to talk. When asked why they explain, ”the patient was asked to do these
things [eyes open, eyes closed, and blink continuously]... If the three on top are
exercises, then the next three at the bottom are also exercises, is how I understand
it. Also, because in the information text, it says ”the patient has to open, close, and
blink their eyes”, and it says the same in the first three annotations...” They further
explain, ”I remembered from the last test [the user test on the current BrainCapture
application], that we only had to annotate disturbances or artifacts, so that is why I
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
171
==PAGE:179==
am a little confused... It should be a little more clear that the first three are part of the
exercises while the others are not, because talking could very well be an exercise,
so it should be more clear”.
• In regards to editing an annotation, the user states, ”these annotations look like the
exercises, so it is unclear to me where I actually have to edit anything.”
• On the ”Tap for information” screen, the user comments ”compared to the other
application, it is nice that the colors of the text are the same, so it creatives an equal
focus, so I feel like I have to read everything, so that is nice in this version.”
• Once the eyes exercise is done, the user feels positive when seeing that it has
changed to green in the ”exercise overview” screen.
• The user gets to the ”Tap to start” screen of the hyperventilation exercise, where the
information text is stated. The user notes, ”here, it is a little contradicting as it says
that the patient should open and close their eyes but then at the bottom it says that
they should always keep their eyes closed. You have to be really sharp in how you
formulate the text.”
• The user responds well to the orange ”Electrode T8 has lost connection!” alert, as
they quickly start looking for it on the cap to fix it. The user notes, ”it would be really
nice if it would show me where the T8 electrode is like it did in the [BrainCapture]
application.”
• The user responds well to the orange ”The patient is falling asleep. Wake them up
gently” alert. They click on the ”other” annotation to write that the patient has fallen
asleep and then continues to wake up the patient.
• The user responds to the red ”Seizure behavior is detected! Stop the exercise!”
alert by tending to the patient, and then annotate clicking the ”seizure” annotation
once they are sure the patient is taken care of. They note, ”As a nurse, I would
always tend to the patient first and make sure that they are okay, and judge based
on the seizure whether I should completely stop the exercise or continue recording.
Also, any nurse would look at the clock once the seizure has started to see when it
started to later note it down somewhere, so we know exactly how long the seizure
has lasted.”
• The user successfully saves the scan once the exercises have finished using the
”Save” button.
• The user successfully starts the review of the scan.
• About the input fields in the Review scan screen, the user notes ”It is fine to write by
myself but in terms of consistency of results it would probably be better with some
predefined options. If we as nurses would have to write something ourselves, we
would have to think about which kinds of words to use when writing, some would not
172
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:180==
know what to write. That would make it easier for the nurse when reviewing. But
there should also be an option with the predefined options to write something more
if none of the predefined fit.”
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation. They further note, ”it would
have been nice if the annotations were grouped by the exercises with a little title or
something similar to have a better overview.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to the cloud using the ”Upload to cloud”
button and notes ”now we have looked at it, and sent it so everything should be
good. And I can see it is in the cloud which is nice.”
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”if I saw some-
thing like this, I would skip the exercise. It would be very nice if the application
then removes the exercise from the list of exercises but regardless I would skip the
exercise.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”For the check boxes, it would be more intuitive to
check yes when the patient says yes and no if they say no. Other than that, it
was super easy with the drop down options”.
– Connect Equipment screen: ”The animations were purposeful and made a lot
of sense as it made it easy to see what was going on... Also the flow is easy to
follow and on some level, it is less confusing on this version of the application
because there is not as much color [compared to the BrainCapture application],
as here nothing specific is taking away the overall focus, so I notice everything.”
When asked about the error of putting on the ECG in a different order than the
shown in the flow, the user answered, ”that is probably because I remembered
what to do from last time [the previous user test], so that was a little cheating”.
– Exercise screens: ”I think that the formulation of the information text is what
caused the confusion later on when annotating. I was too focused on the first
three annotations [eyes open, closed, and blink continuously], as they were the
ones mentioned in the information text in the screen before, so it fit together
for me.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”The app was easy to use. I think I am more a fan of this one compared to the
one with colors [the BrainCapture application]. It is recognisable and familiar
because it is consistent. It shows clearly what is going to happen and has small
amounts of text. I think that is really good. It is definitely more user friendly than
the other one [the BrainCapture application].”
– ”The less good thing about the app would probably be that the information
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
173
==PAGE:181==
screen can be misunderstood. And then it would be nice if there were prede-
fined options when reviewing instead of writing by ourselves so it is easier and
the right words were used.”
174
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:182==
Test user 2
Experience as a Nurse: 37 years
Number of errors: 7
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 4
UX guidance score (1-5): 5
• The user wants to check no in the check boxes on the Patient information screen.
• The user navigates well through the Patient information screen.
• The user measures the patient’s head before clicking the ”Connect equipment” but-
ton on the Connect Equipment screen.
• After measuring the patient’s head, the user wants to click on the corresponding cap
size in the application.
• The user turns on amplifier before it is shown in the flow.
• The user connects the cap to the amplifier before it is shown in the flow.
• The user fills up the gel in the syringe before it is shown in the flow.
• The user connects the ECG to the amplifier before it is shown in the flow.
• When the user sees the “Tap to start” screen, they are confused whether they have
already started the exercise. When asked why the user notes, ”I did not notice the
”Tap to start” button at the top since the buttons have been at the bottom of the
screen all the way throughout”.
• Once the eyes exercise has started, the user asks the patient to close their eyes
before the timer is done meaning they are still in the ”open eyes” part of the exercise.
The user explains, ”I did not pay attention to the timer at the top either because I
did not remember having a timer [in the BrainCapture app] or because I was not
prepared for there to be a timer. The timer does not look like a timer to me.”
• The user successfully understands the annotation counter when adding an annota-
tion.
• The user successfully removes an annotation.
• When the user finishes the exercise the see the Exercise screen where the eyes
exercise is now green and checked. They note, ”I think the green is nice and means
I can go to next.”
• The user uses the information text to explain to the patient what is going to happen.
• The user successfully adds an ”other” annotation, but when wanting to save they
want to click the ”x” at the top of the sheet rather than the save tick at the bottom
right corner of the sheet.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
175
==PAGE:183==
• The user responds well to the orange ”Electrode T8 has lost connection!” alert, as
they quickly start looking for it on the cap to fix it by putting more gel in it.
• The user responds well to the orange ”The patient is falling asleep. Wake them up
gently” alert.
• The user responds to the red ”Seizure behavior is detected! Stop the exercise!”
alert by tending to the patient, and then annotate clicking the ”seizure” annotation
once they are sure the patient is taken care of.
• The user successfully saves the scan once the exercises have finished using the
”Save” button.
• The user intuitively clicks the ”Review scan” button on the Home screen, and suc-
cessfully starts the review of the scan.
• About the input fields in the Review scan screen, the user notes ”I would imagine
that it would be possible to click through some options instead of writing.” When
asked why they continue, ”It is very nice to not have to write by yourself for nurses
as we are used to that in the systems we work in that you click through options so
that you do not have to write and spell. So, I would like to have some predefined
options and then still have the option to add something if there was anything out of
the ordinary. It is just 20 times easier than having to formulate it by myself.”
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation.
• The user successfully uploads the scan to the cloud using the ”Upload to cloud”
button and notes ”it is nice that the scan is now in the ”Reviewed”, so I know that it
has been sorted and I can clearly tell the difference between the sorted and unsorted
scans. It gives a good overview.”
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”this is a good
help for me as a nurse because why should the system not help me. This is also
something we are used to from the systems we work with, so these reminders feels
natural.” When asked how they imagine the Exercise screen would then look later
in the flow, they say ”it would be nice if the corresponding exercise is taken out or
marked differently in case I forget it in a hurry and do whatever I always do. Actually,
I would prefer if it was still there but marked differently as you could be cheated by
the system controlling everything for you. Also, I would like to explain to the patient
why the procedure has changed for them specifically to create some safety and
security for the patient by knowing that I am in control of the situation and it is not
because I forgotten to do something.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”This screen was very logical and easy to run
through. But I really wanted to also check no in the check boxes because
176
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:184==
then it is properly done for us as nurses as we are very dutiful, so we want to
make sure we have been through everything and have not missed anything”.
– Connect Equipment screen: ”The flow was very easy to follow and I liked the
animations. On the first page where it asked me to measure the patient’s head,
I would have liked to click on the cap I had chosen for documentation purposes.
Sometimes, you have to go back if something happened in the results, so it
is good to have done that”. When asked about the error of putting on the
equipment differently from the flow, the answered ”if I was doing this in real
life, I would probably not follow the guide exactly and just put on the equipment
in the order it felt intuitive. Also, we as nurses would prepare the equipment
in advance so it is ready for when the patient comes. So, I think it is difficult
to have a completely perfect flow that all nurses follow as we all do it a little
differently.”
– Exercise screens: ”In the annotation box, I see the first row as the exercises
and the second row as extra remarks for artifacts. Another thing, was the ”Tap
to start” button that I did not notice, because all the other buttons have been
at the bottom of the screen. Also, it is not intuitive for me that I have to read
some information text in the middle of the screen but then look at the top of the
screen to start, so I have to go back and forth. Lastly, the ”keep eyes closed”
text should be in the beginning when starting the scan because it is essential
and does not have to be repeated.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”I really liked the animations so something happened throughout the app. Also,
the colors changing from blue to green when an exercise is done was really nice
to see and update the patient about the progress. I liked the neutral blue colors
better compared to the orange in the other one [the BrainCapture application]
as there was not any noise in this one and other colors that would disturb you
when not necessary. So the app is nice and calm. Overall, nothing disturbed
me so in that sense the app did what it should.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
177
==PAGE:185==
Test user 3
Experience as a Nurse: 11 years
Number of errors: 4
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 3.5
UX guidance score (1-5): 4
• The user wants to check no in the check boxes on the Patient information screen.
• The user navigates well through the Patient information screen.
• After measuring the patient’s head, the user wants to click on the corresponding cap
size in the application. They note ”it would be nice to have this information saved so
that if the patient comes back, I would not have to measure again, kind of like when
you go to the hairdresser where they already know how you want your hair cut.”
• When the user is asked to connect the amplifier and app via Bluetooth, the user
wants to connect the amplifier and the cap by connecting the wire instead. The user
then quickly stops themselves when looking at the animation. The user states, ”Oh
okay I have to connect the device and the phone through Bluetooth”, and continues
to do so.
• The user navigates well through the Connect equipment screen.
• When the user sees the Exercise screen, they start explaining what will happen to
the patient.
• The user is unsure what the word “annotate” means.
• The user does not annotate the first exercise. When asked why, they explain ”I
remember from last time [the previous user test] that we only had to annotate if it
was considered an artifact.”
• The user would like to annotate by clicking the ”annotation counter”. When asked
why, they state ”there is an arrow, so I intuitively click it even though I can see that
there are options to click below.”
• For the next part of the exercise, the user has already adapted to the user interface.
• After finishing the eyes related exercises, the user asks the patient to start talking.
When asked why, the say ”I feel like I have these tasks, open, close, and blink, and
then I continue to talking since that is the next. But it confuses me a bit cause the first
three are tasks the patient has to do while the next are artifacts, so not something
the patient has to do. But I would easily understand after a 5 minute introduction to
the app.”
• The user successfully understands the annotation counter when adding an annota-
tion.
178
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:186==
• The user successfully removes an annotation.
• When the user finishes the exercise they see the Exercise screen where the eyes
exercise is now green and checked. They note, ”this looks good, and I know what
to do.”
• The user uses the information text to explain to the patient what is going to happen.
• The user successfully adds an ”other” annotation, but when wanting to save they
want to click the ”x” at the top of the sheet rather than the save tick at the bottom
right corner of the sheet.
• The user responds well to the orange ”Electrode T8 has lost connection!” alert, as
they quickly start looking for it on the cap to fix it by putting more gel in it. The user
wants to make an annotation about the lost connection.
• The user responds well to the orange ”The patient is falling asleep. Wake them up
gently” alert. The user wants to annotate that the patient is falling asleep.
• About the information text on the Resting exercise screen, the user says ”it is good
that it is written that the patient can fall asleep cause I thought the patient was not
allowed to at any point.”
• The user responds to the red ”Seizure behavior is detected! Stop the exercise!”
alert by tending to the patient, and then annotate clicking the ”seizure” annotation
once they are sure the patient is taken care of.
• The user successfully saves the scan once the exercises have finished using the
”Save” button.
• The user successfully starts the review of the scan by clicking the ”Review scan”
button on the Home screen.
• About the input fields in the Review scan screen, the user notes ”this is something
that you would have to be trained a bit in so you know what to answer on for ex-
ample ”What was the quality of the eyes exercise? It would be easier if there were
some predefined answers and maybe a note field at the bottom instead of writing
everything down. That is more efficient. But I think it is good for the person who has
to read it later that there are some notes.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to the cloud using the ”Upload to cloud”
button. The user sees that the scan has now been moved to the reviewed section,
and notes ”this is nice, cause then I have my to do tasks here [in the To review
section].”
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation and edits the first annotation.
The user notes, ”Is it also possible for me to delete an annotation? Maybe that would
be nice to be able to do.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
179
==PAGE:187==
• The user easily navigates to the home screen using the Home button at the top right
corner.
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”If I was shown
this alert then I would not conduct the exercise on the patient.” When asked how
they imagine the Exercise screen would then look later in the flow, they say ”I would
hope that there would be a reminder pop up reminding me that I should not do this
exercise in case I forgot. But if the patient above 50 years old is running marathons
then I would still like to bypass the restriction and conduct the exercise. Even though
we have general guidelines at a hospital, how we use those guidelines really differs
from department to department so most departments have their own instructions
and guidelines.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”It was really simple to navigate through but I was
thinking of having a yes/no option instead of the check boxes because it was
not seem intuitive. Another thing is maybe making the font size of the text
bigger, not for me but for some of my older colleagues it might be an issue.
Otherwise, I think it is fine and comfortable for the eyes to look at. The previous
app [BrainCapture app] was an alerting orange which whereas this one gives
a more calm hospital vibe with the colors.”
– Connect Equipment screen: ”Here, I would have liked to possibility to select
the cap I had chosen, but it is an improvement that the cap sizes are now in-
cluded in the app. The animations are really nice especially nowadays when
we search a lot on YouTube on how to do things - I think a lot of nurses espe-
cially learn by doing and are visual learners. The ”Connect the amplifier and
the cap by connecting the wire” was really helpful as that is easy forget for me
personally, and then I connect it too late and maybe that messes up the sys-
tem, so it is nice that it tells me when to do it. It is really nice to see that I have
done things correctly. A nice to have is maybe including a video or slider of
images with information on how to put on the cap that you can check for extra
guidance when in doubt.”
– Exercise screens: ”I initially thought that I had to write the annotation where I
actually have to edit, so maybe the ”edit annotation” box could be moved below
the six annotation buttons so that I do not have as much focus on it. I am just
used to read from the top to the bottom so I noticed that edit box before the
other buttons. I wonder about the six buttons if it is necessary to have the
first row of buttons since they are something the patient has to do so it would
be easier if the app could remember it automatically instead of me having to
click the buttons. And then I would only have to click the buttons if the patient
does something they have not been asked to do. Lastly, I think it would make
180
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:188==
more sense to start the exercise in the exercise screen [instead of the Info text
screen], but I still want to keep the information text so I can prepare the patient
on the exercise.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”The colors of the app are better than the previous one [BrainCapture app], as
I do not feel as alert from the orange color. Also, I really liked the feedback the
app gave throughout and also that the equipment screen have been updated
[compared to the BrainCapture app]. The main thing I would change is having
predefined options when reviewing since there are many different ways to write
and formulate something, so that would be really smart and I think it would give
a better end result.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
181
==PAGE:189==
Test user 4
Experience as a Nurse: 17 years
Number of errors: 3
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 4.5
UX guidance score (1-5): 5
• The user wants to check no in the check boxes on the Patient information screen.
The user notes ”since the patient has answered no then I would think that I would
be to check no with some red icon. Also, so I know that I have asked the question
and gotten an answer.”
• Otherwise, the user navigates well through the Patient information screen.
• The user puts ECG on patient wrists before asked in the flow. When noticing this,
they state ”okay I did it in the wrong order, but I think it is not the biggest issue as
long as I remember to do it.”
• Otherwise, the user follows the flow of the Connect equipment screen very well.
• The user reaches the Exercises screen and uses it to explain what is going to happen
to the patient.
• The user is unsure what the word “annotate” means.
• The user starts the eyes exercise correctly and sees the first part of the exercise.
The user is confused and asks, ”is this where I have to annotate [while pointing
at the annotation box]? But the first row does not really make sense because the
patient has to open and close their eyes. Last time [in the BrainCapture app], I only
had to annotate when the user did something they were not asked to do, so it does
not make sense that I would have to annotate something that does not deviate from
the exercise.”
• The user successfully removes an annotation.
• About the exercise screen, ”It is easily understandable generally and there is no
place where I can start something before I should. The only counter intuitive thing
is having to annotate when it is something I asked the patient to do and that it is
placed the same place where you have to annotate artifacts.”
• The user successfully adds an ”other” annotation and clicks the save tick at the
bottom right corner of the sheet.
• The user responds to the orange ”Electrode T8 has lost connection!” alert by saying,
”since it is only one electrode it is not fatal for the overall scan but I would have liked
to see where the electrode is located so I could fix it and make sure everything is
where it is supposed to be.”
182
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:190==
• The user responds well to the orange ”The patient is falling asleep. Wake them
up gently” alert by checking on the patient and telling the patient to wake up but
continue to relax.
• The user responds to the red ”Seizure behavior is detected! Stop the exercise!”
alert. The user tries to click on the timer to stop the exercise. The user then wants
to annotate clicking the ”seizure” annotation once they are sure the patient is taken
care of.
• The user successfully saves the scan once the exercises have finished using the
”Save” button. The user notes, ”It is always lovely with a big, green check mark, so
I know everything runs correctly.”
• The user successfully initiates the review by clicking the ”Review scan” button on
the Home screen.
• About the input fields in the Review scan screen, the user notes ” It would be faster
to have some standard predefined options but still with the option of adding more.”
When asked why they continue, ”you would probably get a better description of the
scan than if people had to write themselves. There could be issues about writing or
spelling, I live with two people who are dyslexic so we have a lot of focus on what
is difficult for dyslexic in the community. So, if there were predefined options then
they would not feel insecure about spelling or writing.”
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation. The user notes, ”I like that it
says that it has been edited because then I know I did it. Also, for example, if I want
to edit three different ones then I get distracted by a colleague or something, then I
can see what I have done and what I have not.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to the cloud using the ”Upload to cloud”
button and notes ”I love the big green check mark! It is so lovely.”
• About the green ”uploaded to cloud” icons, the user states, ”I see that my reviewed
scan has been successfully uploaded to the cloud since it has a green cloud, but
it would be nice if it was more clear for example if the box was completely green.
Now I know I would have to review two more but maybe they could be yellow or
something to make it more clear.”
• The user successfully clicks the home button to get to the home screen.
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”it makes sense
that the app already warns me about it here, but it would also make sense for the
app to give me an alert later on during the exercises, or the exercise is greyed out
or something so I remember that the patient should not do this exercise”.
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”It is fine and user friendly. In regards to writing the
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
183
==PAGE:191==
birthday, I would find it intuitive to roll the dates on a wheel. Another thing, I
would have liked to have a symbol to mark that I have asked and the answer
was no in the check boxes cause then I know for sure that I have asked the
question and I can move on. It is pretty common in the health care sector to
want to know that we have asked the question even if the answer is no.”
– Connect Equipment screen: ”It was very easy to use, and the screen that
shows where you should measure on the patient’s head is nice to have as
well and it maybe the exact measurements of how the cap should be placed
could be added as well but that is extra details I remember from last time [the
previous user test]. I also really like that there are symbols and icons I know
when connecting the app and the amplifier. I think for the animations and il-
lustrations, they are all really nice, but they could look more like the equipment
so that the box is white and the wire for the cap is bigger and so on but that
is a smaller change. Maybe also write on the front and back on the illustration
showing the position of the electrodes.”
– Exercise screens: ”I would have liked the exercise animations to be shown
before the exercise has started because then I could use it to show the patient
how to do it before actually starting. Also, about the annotations, I intuitively
only want to annotate the things that deviate from the exercises since I have
already started the exercise with the patient so the app should already know
that. So I do not feel the need to annotate something that the patient was asked
to do.”
– Review screens: ”It was very easy and the list makes sense but I would have
liked to change an annotation if I had accidentally annotated something during
the scan.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”The app is very intuitive and easy to use, and I have no doubt where I should
click in the app. Even though it is my first time using this version of the app, I
still find it very easy to use.”
– ”The app is good at making you aware if you are missing something or should
be attentive on something, and it guides me all the way.”
– ”The app is a lot more user friendly than the other one [BrainCapture app].”
184
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:192==
A.5.2
Round 2
App version: V2
Test user 5
Experience as a nurse: 12 years (10 years at the Respiratory Medical Department, and
2 years at the Ambulatory Surgery Department at Hvidovre hospital)
Number of errors: 2
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 5
UX guidance score (1-5): 5
User readiness to scan score (1-5): 5
• The user navigates well through the Patient information screen.
• The user successfully clicks to select the chosen cap.
• The user successfully navigates through the Connect equipment screen.
• The user clicks to start the first exercises and sees the exercise information text.
The user seems to think they are already doing the exercise and does not notice
the ”Start the timer” button.
• The user successfully understands the annotation component and annotates when
the patients deviates from the exercises.
• About the Exercise screen where the first exercise has changed to green after com-
pletion, the user notes, ”this makes sense cause now I know how far I am in the
process.”
• When asked to annotate a cough the user talks about the ”Body movement” annota-
tion. When asked why, the note, ”coughing creates body movement.” When asked
to keep looking their attention is directed towards the ”Other” annotation, and the
user notes, ”actually this makes more sense. I would probably have chosen this one
in the end since coughing was not an option, so I would out of curiosity click ”Other”
to see what other options there were.”
• The user successfully edits an annotation.
• The user reacts well to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert by looking for the elec-
trode on the cap. The user notes, ”it was nice that it shows me which electrode it is
and where, since I am not familiar with it.”
• The user reacts well to the ”Patient has fallen asleep” alert by telling the patient to
wake up. The user further notes, ”it is good that it shows it as an alert cause it grabs
my attention since the screen goes dark and the alert is orange.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
185
==PAGE:193==
• The user reacts well to the ”Seizure like behavior has been detected” alert by making
sure the patient does not hurt themselves. The user further notes, ”I noticed here
that the alert was red instead of orange, so it intuitively made me want to act quicker
as it seems more serious.”
• The user successfully saves the scan and notes, ”that was good cause now I know
for sure that it was saved” when seeing the green check mark screen.
• The user navigates well through the Review scan screen. The user notes in general,
”I think it makes sense to have to click through the options. We have gotten used
to Sundhedsplatformen [internal health care system] where we also have to click
through a lot of things so I am used to this kind of interaction. Also, I think it is also
really nice that there is an option to further write something if needed.”
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation, and adds something to the
first annotation.
• The user successfully uploads the scan to cloud and sees that the scan has now
moved to ”Reviewed”. The user says, ”it is nice for me to see how many are left to
do and how many have been done but it would have been nice if there was a bigger
difference between to do and done so it is even easier to spot.”
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”that is a very nice
help cause then I know it is risky for the patient. I think the greyed out exercise is
nice for a further reminder but I would still like to be able to click it in case I, as a
nurse, determine that it is safe for the patient. When that is said, I would imagine
that an extra pop up would be there to confirm just in case.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”It is easy to use since it just has a question, some-
thing to click and something to fill out, so it was very straight forward.”
– Connect Equipment screen: ”It was also very straight forward and a very ped-
agogical guidance with both text and animations of what and how to do it. The
animations were nice since it showed me where to plug in the wires, etc. so
it was a lot faster for me than reading and I did not have to think hard. It kept
showing me the way to go.”
– Exercise screens: ”The first screen had a lot of text compared to the rest of
the app and I just needed some time to think how I should act in the screen. I
already thought I was doing the exercise, and I did not notice that it was infor-
mation text. But I see the ”Start the timer” button clearly now and understood it
for the rest of the exercises. Also, it would have been nice if it said in the exer-
cise text what I have to annotate since it is only deviations I have to annotate.”
About being able to retry the exercise, the user notes, ”despite the icon being
clear, it was not clear to me that I had the opportunity to redo an exercise in
186
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:194==
terms of the overall scan.”
– Review screens: ”Everything here was also very intuitive and straight forward.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”Everything in the app makes sense to me.”
– ”The design is user friendly, and the colors are calm and neutral.”
– ”The app made me feel safe and I did not feel like I could make a fatal error.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
187
==PAGE:195==
Test user 6
Experience as a Medical Laboratory Technologist: 5 years both in the laboratory and with
patients at Roskilde universitetshospital, Region Sjælland.
Number of errors: 2
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 4.5
UX guidance score (1-5): 5
User readiness to scan score (1-5): 3
• The user navigates easily through the Patient information screen.
• The user successfully clicks to select the chosen cap.
• The user successfully navigates through the Connect equipment screen.
• The user uses the exercise information text to explain to the patient how the exercise
is going to be conducted.
• When asked how they would annotate an eye movement, the user says, ”I would
have a piece of paper next to me where I would write it down. I do not see where I
could do it in the app.” When told that it is a possibility in the app, and where they
imagine it would be possible to annotate in the app, the user points to the annota-
tion component and clicks the ”eye movement” icon. Going forward, the user has
quickly adapted to the annotation tool and successfully annotates body movement
and talking.
• The user successfully edits an annotation, and notes ”it is self explanatory that I have
to click here to edit an annotation since you have the total amount of annotations.”
• About the Exercise screen where the first exercise has changed to green after com-
pletion, the user notes, ”I can see what I have been through and what is to do. Or
if the patient was only supposed to do the Eyes exercise, I could just click save
already.”
• When asked to annotate a cough the user talks about the ”Body movement” anno-
tation. When asked why, the note, ”coughing is a type of body movement.” When
asked to keep looking their attention is directed towards the ”Other” annotation, and
the user notes, ”my main strategy would be to choose one of the existing annotation
categories and if none of them fit, I would click ”Other”.”
• The user successfully clicks the ”Try again” button to redo the exercise.
• The user reacts well to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert by saying, ”I would look
for the electrode and make sure it was stuck properly. It is really nice that the app
tells me where the electrode is.”
188
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:196==
• The user reacts well to the ”Patient has fallen asleep” alert by telling the patient to
wake up. The user also wants to click the ”Sleeping” annotation.
• The user reacts well to the ”Seizure like behavior has been detected” alert by tending
to the patient. The user also wants to click the ”Seizure” annotation. The user notes,
”I would react on the patient first and then go back to the app.”
• The user successfully saves the scan.
• The user navigates well through the Review scan screen. The user notes, ”if there
had been something to add about the scan I would have written that in the input field
but if the scan had been smooth and perfect I would not have added anything.”
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation, and adds something to the
first annotation. The user notes, ”then I would write here that this annotation was a
mistake so ignore this. But I would like to also be able to delete an annotation just in
case I had clicked something in a rush and then forgotten to delete it. So it would be
nice before uploading the scan, to have the ability of going through the annotations
and make sure everything makes sense. Also, it is nice that the edited annotation
is marked because then I know I have done something on that annotation.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to cloud and sees that the scan has now
moved to ”Reviewed”.
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”for me this tells
me that I should not do that specific exercise according to the clinical standard. But I
think I would prefer for all these kinds of restrictions to be accumulated somewhere
else on the front page instead so that the important information was listed some-
where in the beginning. I would then imagine that the exercise would not be an
option later on. Maybe on the one with people over 50 or 60 years old, it is fine to
still have the possibility to do it, but with the photic stimulation where it is not allowed
below one, it should not be an option. ”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”Overall, I think it is fine but I could imagine that
for people older than me the text could be a little too small. Other than that, it
makes sense to input the information data like this.”
– Connect Equipment screen: ”It made really good sense. I had zero prerequi-
sites and I could do it, so I think it made really good sense.”
– Exercise screens: ”I could imagine it being a little difficult to keep focus on the
patient while also having to focus on the app. But the annotation part made
really good sense.”
– Review screens: ”It was the same as when we do journals so it was easy.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
189
==PAGE:197==
– ”It makes sense. I think anyone, even some who are not in the field, would be
able to do it with the proper training. Everything is shown in the app, so I think
even my little sister could do it.”
– ”The app is very user friendly.”
– ”The design of the app is nice. I would just make some of the things a little
bigger, but other than that the graphical design and explanations are good.”
– ”The app guided me all the way through and gave me all prerequisites.”
190
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:198==
Test user 7
Experience as a Social and Health Care Assistant: 2 years at the Neurological depart-
ment, and before that at the Acute Rehabilitation department at Roskilde universitetshos-
pital, Region Sjælland.
Number of errors: 4
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 5
UX guidance score (1-5): 4
User readiness to scan score (1-5): 5
• The user navigates easily through the Patient information screen.
• The user does not click the ”Connect equipment” button, but wants to put the cap
on the patient’s head.
• The user does not click to select the chosen cap size after measuring.
• The user would like to connect the cap to the amplifier before asked in the app.
• The user successfully went through the rest of the Connect equipment flow.
• The user starts the first exercise and sees the exercise information text. The user
uses the information to explain what is going to happen to the patient. The user
notes, ”I use this text as a help to explain the exercise to the patient now before the
actual exercise starts since I am not sure what is coming next.”
• The user successfully understands the annotation component and annotates when
the patients deviates from the exercises. The user notes, ”I like that it counts the
number of annotations for you so that you do not have to do it yourself, also for the
quality of the scan.”
• The user is unsure about the meaning of the word ”Seizure”.
• When asked to edit an annotation, the user tries to click the ”Other” annotation and
states, ”there is not really anything else that points towards an edit option.” When
the user’s attention is pointed towards the place to edit an annotation, they say, ”that
also makes good sense because then I can navigate into whatever the patient did.
I think, I did not click it because I did not know what was behind it, so ”Other” was
my next best option.”
• The user successfully clicks the ”Try again” button to redo the exercise.
• The user navigates to the Hyperventilation Exercise and sees the exercise informa-
tion text, and says, ”I have already gotten used to seeing this screen and understood
that it is an information screen so now I am not worried about starting this exercise.”
• The user successfully clicks the ”Other” annotation when asked to annotate a cough.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
191
==PAGE:199==
• The user reacts well to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert by saying, ”I would check
that the electrode is stuck properly.” The user further comments, ”This gives me a
nice overview of what is not working.”
• The user reacts well to the ”Patient has fallen asleep” alert by telling the patient to
wake up. The user also wants to click the ”Sleeping” annotation.
• The user reacts well to the ”Seizure like behavior has been detected” by moving
towards the patient. The user says, ”I am in no doubt that it is an alarm since it is
red and has a triangle icon.” The user states that they would also like to annotate
the seizure in the app, and says ”if you have a long recording of the scan then it is
nice to have an annotation of when to give a quick overview of the seizures. We do
the same with our Holter monitors where the patients have to click a button when
they feel a heart symptom in order for us to know where to put extra focus in the
recording.”
• The user successfully saves the scan, and notes, ”the green check mark tells me
that everything went well and that the scan has been saved.”
• The user navigates well through the Review scan screen. On the first question, it
was not clear for the user that they could choose multiple options, the user notes,
”it was not clear that I could choose more, but I started suspecting it when the drop
down did not go away after clicking on one option. It could be more clear that it is
possible to choose more options.”
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation, and adds something to the
first annotation. But the user is unsure about the list view, and comments, ”the
long list makes me believe that I have to choose which annotations the patient did
throughout the scan. But actually when I look at the number of annotations I see that
it probably is something I have to edit in.” When asked why they originally understood
it this way, they answer, ”I think the main issue is that it is in English, because if it
was in Danish I would have understood it quicker.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to cloud and sees that the scan has now
moved to ”Reviewed”.
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”that is nice be-
cause then you know that you should not do that exercise. And then it should not
be possible to click the exercise later. Or in some cases where I see that it is still
possible, there should be an extra confirmation before I would start the exercise so
it is sure that it is not a mistake. But I actually think the exercises should be red
instead of grey so there is no doubt.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”It is very manageable, nice, and it does not have
too much text which could create confusion. It is also nice that it shows that
192
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:200==
there are four pages of questions because to me the predictability creates a
good overview.”
– Connect Equipment screen: ”Generally, I thought it was easy but there were
times when I wanted to do things in a different order or times when I was too
fast. Also, on the page where I had to connect through Bluetooth, the phone
image did not make sense to me.”
– Exercise screens: ”Generally, it was easy to annotate. But it was not clear to
me where I could edit an annotation.”
– Review screens: ”Also here, everything made sense. I would maybe add that
it is possible to choose more options in the first question.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”It is very simple and there is guidance all the way throughout and to me that
is the most important because it creates safety for me.”
– ”It would have been nice if it said somewhere in the app that I should only
annotate when the patient does something they should not do. I think that
would help me.”
– ”Maybe the first time I would have to do a scan I could be nervous to do it but
once you see how easy the app is, there would be no problems.”
– ”I really liked the animations in the app since many of us understand better
visually.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
193
==PAGE:201==
Test user 8
Experience as a Nurse and Clinical Instructor: 10 years at the Ambulatory Surgery De-
partment at Hvidovre hospital
Number of errors: 4
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 4.5
UX guidance score (1-5): 4.5
User readiness to scan score (1-5): 5
• The user navigates easily through the Patient information screen.
• The user does not click to select the chosen cap. The user comments, ”intuitively,
I would think it is enough to just take the cap but when I think about it, it makes
sense for the next person who is reading the scan to know which cap has been
used. I think the reason why I did not find it intuitive is because I was busy with the
equipment.”
• The user would like to connect the cap to the amplifier before asked in the app. The
user comments, ”I am very focused on the practical aspect of the equipment and
want to finish connecting the cap before connecting the app with Bluetooth.”
• The user successfully went through the rest of the Connect equipment flow.
• The user starts the first exercise and sees the exercise information text but does not
seem to understand it. The user notes, ”I am not sure if I should say this information
to the patient or just check if they do it or something else.”
• The user successfully understands the annotation component and annotates when
the patients deviates from the exercises. The user notes, ”it is a help that it counts
the amount of annotations to help keep track and create an overview.”
• When asked to edit an annotation, the user wants to click ”skip” or click the same
annotation again to hopefully remove an annotation. The user comments, ”my intu-
ition was to kind of go one back or skip something I just did. Or maybe I could click
on the same annotation and it would reverse it.”
• About the Exercise screen where the first exercise has changed to green after com-
pletion, the user notes, ”this is lovely cause then I know it has been checked and
done, I really like that.”
• The user successfully clicks the ”Other” annotation when asked to annotate a cough.
• The user successfully clicks the ”Try again” button to redo the exercise.
• The user reacts well to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert by saying, ”I would look
for the electrode on the cap to check it.” The user further comments, ”The illustration
made it easy to understand what to do.”
194
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:202==
• The user reacts well to the ”Patient has fallen asleep” alert by tapping the patient’s
shoulder and asking them to wake up. The user also wants to click the ”Sleeping”
annotation.
• The user reacts well to the ”Seizure like behavior has been detected” by saying ”I
would tend to the patient and do what I knew would be good to do. It is a nice
warning to get.” Once the user has made sure the patient is stabilized, they would
annotate the seizure by clicking the ”Seizure” annotation.
• The user successfully saves the scan, and notes, ”I love check marks cause then
I know I have done it correctly. I feel like it is so important for example if you are
standing somewhere with no one to ask for help, it is very calming to know that the
app will tell me when I have done something correctly. It makes me feel safe enough
to go forward in the app.
• The user navigates well through the Review scan screen. On the first question, it
was not clear for the patient that they could choose multiple options, the user notes,
”usually it would say if I can choose multiple options.”
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation, and adds something to the
first annotation. The user comments, ”it was intuitive because the pen means to
edit.” About the annotation being marked as ”Edited”, the user says, ”we [nurses]
are used to something being marked as edited in our systems, and then we know
that we have to pay more attention to that thing.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to cloud.
• The user does not notice that the scan has been moved to ”Reviewed”. The user
notes, ”I did not notice a difference, but when I read it I do see that there are two
different categories. For me it would have been easier to distinguish if they had
different colors.”
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”that is a very
nice way to get a warning at the exact moment you input the patient’s personal
identification. I imagine that the exercise is then red or looks inactive. And even if I
still want to do the exercise, I would want another confirmation just to be sure before
doing it because that is how it is in our systems at work. That would be a good idea
in terms of patient safety.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”It was very intuitive and the help text was nice.
Generally, it was straight forward.”
– Connect Equipment screen: ”The animations were very nice, and I had no
doubt what I had to do. The areas where I was most unsure were when I
had to connect the practical things, so the equipment, with the app. Also, it
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
195
==PAGE:203==
would have made more sense to me to finish the steps about the cap before
connecting the app.”
– Exercise screens: ”I had to understand what to do when I saw the exercise
information text. But as soon as I understood, it was pretty intuitive going on-
ward, because the second time I saw the text, it was not hard to understand.
Also, the way to edit an annotation is not intuitive to me. Other than that, the
rest was easy.”
– Review screens: ”Other than making it more clear that it is possible to choose
more on the first question, it was very straight forward to do the evaluation of
the scan.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”The app is very aesthetic and calming to look at.”
– ”The app guided me well and I felt very safe.”
196
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:204==
A.5.3
Round 3
App version: V3
Test user 9
Experience as a Nurse: 10 years as a home care nurse, and 1 year at the Respiratory
Medical Department at Hvidovre hospital
Number of errors: 3
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 4
UX guidance score (1-5): 4
User readiness to scan score (1-5): 4.5
• The user navigates easily through the Patient information screen.
• The user navigates easily through the Connect equipment screen.
• The user successfully clicks on the selected cap.
• When reaching the ”Connect the amplifier and app via Bluetooth by choosing the
amplifier” screen, the user does not notice that there is a drop down menu to interact
with. The user comments, ”I am very focused on the bottom half of the screen.”
• When reaching the ”Connect the ECG to the wires” the user is unsure how to con-
tinue, and states ”I am unsure what to do now...”
• The user starts the first exercise, sees the exercise information and is unsure if
the exercise has started or not. The user notes, ”I thought I was already doing the
exercise and had to ask the patient to do it, since it is written as bullet points. I
actually do not think I personally need this text if it is only meant as an introduction
for the exercise. I think it is more important that it is straight forward without so much
text.”
• The user successfully understands the annotation component and annotates when
the patients deviates from the exercises.
• When asked to annotate a cough, the user looks at the annotation component, and
spots the ”Other”, and says ”I would click ”Other” to annotate the cough.”
• The user successfully retries an exercise by clicking the retry button.
• The user reacts well to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert by moving towards the
patient, and saying, ”something is wrong with the electrode, so I should check on
it.” Furthermore, they comment, ”it was easy to notice as we, as nurses, are used
to deviations like these when something is wrong.”
• The user reacts well to the ”Patient has fallen asleep” alert by clicking the ”Sleeping”
annotation and then waking up the patient.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
197
==PAGE:205==
• The user reacts well to the ”Seizure like behavior has been detected” alert by saying,
”it is red so I would go check on the patient to see if they are okay ans make sure I
have contact to him.”
• The user successfully saves the scan and notes, ”that is nice, then I know I have
done it all” when seeing the green check mark screen.
• The user navigates well through the Review scan screen. On the first question, it
was not clear for the user that they could choose multiple options. The user notes in
general, ”I think it is really nice that it is not just a clicking system but it also includes
some health care considerations from the nurse, I like that as it gives a good picture
of the process and situation.”
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation, adds something to the first
annotation, and deletes the second annotation. The user comments, ”I think it is
nice that there is the option to edit and delete annotations later.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to cloud and sees that the scan has now
moved to ”Reviewed”.
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”if I got this mes-
sage, I would completely skip the exercise. As nurses, we follow the rules and
guidelines a lot so unless I knew that it was only a recommendation from the app
then I would not do the exercise, and if that is the case then it should be more clear
that it is only a recommendation or guideline.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”It made good sense to have a preliminary as-
sessment of the patient. We do that already by giving a preliminary health care
assessment of the patients we have to give ourselves an understanding of who
the patient is.”
– Connect Equipment screen: ”The screen where I fill all the gel so the electrodes
go green is really smart. All in all, it was perfect and very straight forward. There
was not really anything to mistake. The only thing to add would maybe some
colors on the ECG screen, so it matches the colors of the equipment to make
it idiot-proof, that is what we do at the hospital.”
– Exercise screens: ”I really like that the exercises have images on them because
it is more visual and easy to see exactly what is going on. Also, I did not really
need the exercise information text and I think it is too much text. Even though
it is a good presentation of what is going to happen, the screen after it already
tells me what to do. I would appreciate it as a nurse for it to be as easy and
intuitive as possible.”
– Review screens: ”I really liked this part because it requires us nurses to think
198
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:206==
and use our knowledge and dive deeper.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”I do not think it was hard, it is actually quite straight forward once you also
have some context.”
– ”The app guided me very well step-wise.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
199
==PAGE:207==
Test user 10
Experience as a Nurse: 7 years at the Respiratory Medical Department at Hvidovre hos-
pital as an assisting head nurse
Number of errors: 2
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 5
UX guidance score (1-5): 4.5
User readiness to scan score (1-5): 5
• The user navigates easily through the Patient information screen.
• The user navigates easily through the Connect equipment screen.
• The user successfully clicks on the selected cap.
• When seeing the The user asks, ”Fill GND first” screen the user asks, ”which part
is the back and which is the front of the head? It would be nice if it said this in the
app.”
• When reaching the ”Connect the ECG to the wires” the user takes the wires but is
unsure what to do next, and says, ”I am unsure what I should connect them to.” The
user continues, ”I believe we call it something else than wires when we work with
ECG.”
• The user successfully understands the exercise information text as an introduction to
the exercise, uses it to explain what is going to happen to the patient, and continues
to start the exercise.
• The user does not ask the patient to keep their eyes closed or jaw slightly open.
When asked why, the user explains, ”I did not notice it or read that far down. I think
this screen has a lot of text, so I just overlooked it without noticing.”
• When asked to annotate, the user goes to click where it is meant to edit an anno-
tation. The user says, ”I would click here because it has the word annotations and
on the previous page it said to annotate, also it has a pencil so I thought I was sup-
posed to write something.” When it is revealed where it should be annotated, the
user says, ”okay, that makes sense. Then it is even easier than having to write.
Often, we have to do a lot of documentation so it is very nice that it is easy to just
click on instead of writing.”
• The user successfully edits an annotation, and comments, ”now it is the pencil and
that makes sense.”
• About the Exercise screen where the first exercise has changed to green after com-
pletion, the user notes ”it works really nicely cause then I know how far I am and
what is up next, so it makes sense.”
200
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:208==
• The user successfully clicks the ”Other” annotation when asked to annotate a cough.
• The user reacts well to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert by saying, ”I could see
the image of which electrode number it was, so would look at the cap and see where
it fell off.” The user further comments, ”the orange color made me feel like it was a
warning and then it was good again when it turned green, so that worked nicely.”
• The user reacts well to the ”Patient has fallen asleep” alert by clicking the ”Sleeping”
annotation, and then wake up the patient.
• The user reacts well to the ”Seizure like behavior has been detected” by saying ”I
would probably take care of the patient and kind of forget about the app.”
• The user successfully saves the scan, and notes, ”that is nice cause then I know
that I have finished it all and nothing is left.”
• The user navigates well through the Review scan screen. On the first question, it
was not clear for the user that they could choose multiple options, the user notes,
”it was not clear since on all the other ones it was only possible to click once.”
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation, adds something to the first
annotation, and deletes the second annotation. The user comments, ”it is nice be-
cause I get an overview of all the annotations and when they happened. It is nice
that the edited annotation is marked because that is familiar from our own systems.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to cloud and sees that the scan has now
moved to ”Reviewed”. The user comments, ”it is smart that it is divided in which
scans I have to do and which I have done. That is also something we know from
Sundhedsplatformen where it tells us what we are missing and then we check it off
during the day. It is nice that it is setup in this way because it could easily disappear
during the work day.”
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”it is nice that it
pops up but it might be nice if it said why, maybe because of age or something, just
to make it clear that it is not a mistake because I did something wrong. It is very
nice that there is an extra confirmation pop up.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”It was nice, and we do the same when we do tests
on patients where we asks them these questions so that makes sense.”
– Connect Equipment screen: ”It was very easy because it both says in text what
to do and it also have animations which guided very well so it was very straight
forward.”
– Exercise screens: ”The first exercise screen might have a little too much text
but otherwise it was easy. The warnings worked really well with the colors.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
201
==PAGE:209==
– Review screens: ”We deal with the observations we have made or tasks we
have done, so I think it is very nice to be able to evaluate it like this. It makes
really good sense to reflect on the scan, evaluate it and upload it.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”If I had to do it again, I think I would be able to. There are not too many ques-
tions including possible options for each question, also the images to guide.”
– ”The app takes it one step at a time, so for someone who knows nothing about
it, it is super nice. It does not seem too hard to do.”
202
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:210==
Test user 11
Experience as a Nurse: 14 years at the Cardiology Department at Roskilde universitet-
shospital, Region Sjælland
Number of errors: 1
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 5
UX guidance score (1-5): 4.5
User readiness to scan score (1-5): 5
• The user navigates easily through the Patient information screen.
• The user navigates easily through the Connect equipment screen.
• The user successfully clicks on the selected cap.
• The user starts the first exercise and sees the exercise information text. The user
starts directing the patient indicating they believe they have already started the ex-
ercise. The user then comments, ”oh wait, it says start the timer. I should have read
the whole thing. Maybe there is a little too much text. But once you have done it
once, it makes total sense.”
• The user successfully understands the annotation component and annotates when
the patients deviates from the exercises. The user notes, ”it makes sense that the
counter is there cause then it shows me that it has registered my annotation.”
• The user successfully edits an annotation, and notes, ”it makes sense.”
• About the Exercise screen where the first exercise has changed to green after com-
pletion, the user notes,”it makes good sense as it shows me that I have finished the
first and have three left, so it is a good middle station.”
• The user successfully clicks the ”Other” annotation when asked to annotate a cough.
• The user reacts well to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert by checking the elec-
trode on the cap, and comments, ”I am used to these kinds of warnings from the
in-patient-ward where we have monitoring and it tells us something has fallen off or
something.”
• The user reacts well to the ”Patient has fallen asleep” alert by waking up the patient.
• The user successfully retries an exercise by clicking the retry button.
• The user reacts well to the ”Seizure like behavior has been detected” alert by taking
care of the patient and making sure they are okay. The user then clicks to annotate
the seizure in the app.
• The user successfully saves the scan and notes, ”the check mark tells me that ev-
erything is correct and saved.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
203
==PAGE:211==
• The user navigates well through the Review scan screen.
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation, adds something to the first
annotation, and deletes the second annotation. The user comments, ”the edited
annotation reminds me of Sundhedsplaformen where it has a note if something has
been edited, so it makes sense.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to cloud and sees that the scan has now
moved to ”Reviewed”. The user comments, ”that is lovely, it is done. I see it as a to
do list and at the end of the day it helps me remember what to do. I like to work in
this way - I am a list kind of person. Also, the different colors are lovely as well.”
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”it makes sense
to get a warning. It makes sense that I should still be allowed to do the exercise
if I believe that the patient is healthy enough. But it is smart that it shows an extra
confirmation since it is easy to mistakenly click the exercise if you are in a hurry.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”It makes sense, and is kind of what we are used
to with the drop downs, so for me it makes sense.”
– Connect Equipment screen: ”It was very intuitive, and I think I could have put
the equipment on even without the guide in the app.”
– Exercise screens: ”It was also intuitive and made good sense how to annotate.
Gradually, we have become used to working with different apps so we are
getting used to that world.”
– Review screens: ”Also made perfect sense with the color coordination and
reviewing. We are pretty used to doing that as well after having our patients
and then looking through our notes or something.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”The colors of the app are nice and neutral, and the warning colors work nicely.”
– ”Generally, it was good except for that one screen where there was a lot of text
but it was only overwhelming the first time I saw it.”
204
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:212==
Test user 12
Experience as a Clinical Nurse Specialist: 8 years with 1.5 years at the Nephrology De-
partment at Roskilde universitetshospital, Region Sjælland
Number of errors: 3
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 4
UX guidance score (1-5): 4.5
User readiness to scan score (1-5): 5
• The user navigates easily through the Patient information screen. The user com-
ments, ”I would always ask the patient how much that have drunk or ate just in case
they say yes but still have not eaten enough.”
• The user navigates easily through the Connect equipment screen. The user com-
ments when reaching the ECG, ”it would be nice if the colors of the equipment
matched in the app.”
• The user successfully clicks on the selected cap.
• The user starts the first exercise and sees the exercise information text, and states
”okay, now I have started and I got some information of the exercise.”
• The user asks the patient to remain quiet, not to move, and follow the instructions.
• The user successfully understands the annotation component and annotates when
the patients deviates from the exercises.
• The user successfully edits an annotation, and notes, ”I look for the pencil to edit.”
• About the Exercise screen where the first exercise has changed to green after com-
pletion, the user notes ”I like that it presents what I have yet to go through, so I can
tell the patient that now we have done the first out of four. So it is nice so we do not
just continue unknowingly.”
• The user successfully clicks the ”Other” annotation when asked to annotate a cough.
• The user reacts well to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert by checking the elec-
trode on the cap, and comments, ”my first thought would be to check the cap and
see if it needed more gel or see if it is loose or something.”
• The user reacts well to the ”Patient has fallen asleep” alert by waking up the patient.
• The user reacts well to the ”Seizure like behavior has been detected” alert by and
comments, ”I would look at the patient and observe if I saw some physical seizure
like movements, and then I would write some comments to give a clinical image of
the situation by clicking ”Other”.”
• The user successfully saves the scan.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
205
==PAGE:213==
• The user navigates well through the Review scan screen. The user comments, ”it
was good to do but it requires some enlightenment about what the word ”good”
means since it can be subjective and individual.”
• When asked to edit an annotation, the user clicks in the input field and states, ”I
would like some free text field like ”Other” to write something.” When told where it is
meant to edit, the user comments, ”it would make more sense to me if it was at the
bottom of the screen.”
• The user successfully deletes the second annotation.
• The user successfully uploads the scan to cloud, and comments, ”it makes me happy
cause then I know that I have done it right. It is just missing a *pling* sound.”
• The user sees that the scan has now moved to ”Reviewed”, and states, ”since I am
new in this, I would probably look at the older scans done by others and check what
they wrote for inspiration.”
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”I would note it
and then when I reach the exercise, I would think about it. I would maybe prefer if
the warning was more visual because we act a lot more on visual things rather than
text. It makes sense to get an extra confirmation if it is decided to do the exercise
otherwise.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”I like that it has a very simple and professional
design, and it has enough information.”
– Connect Equipment screen: ”It was generally nice. Maybe add some colors to
the equipment but otherwise it was easy.”
– Exercise screens: ”It confused me a bit in the beginning when it told me what
I had to do but it did not tell me where to annotate, it only tell me to annotate.”
– Review screens: ”I would have liked that the editing of an annotation was at
the bottom but otherwise it was easy.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”The design is easy on the eyes.”
206
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:214==
A.5.4
Round 4
App version: V4
Test user 13
Experience as a Nurse: 5 months at the Respiratory Medical Department at Hvidovre
hospital.
Number of errors: 2
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 4
UX guidance score (1-5): 4
User readiness to scan score (1-5): 5
• The user navigates easily through the Patient information screen. The user com-
ments, ”would the app tell me if I wrote a wrong digit in the personal identification?
I would hope that it would to increase the patient security and to decrease uninten-
tional incidents.”
• The user navigates well through the Connect equipment screen. The user com-
ments, ”it would be nice if it told me how many milliliter of gel I need to fill in the
syringe. We are very conscious of giving the right dose.”
• The user successfully clicks on the selected cap.
• The user stops at the ”Connect the pads to the ECG” screen and starts looking
questionably at the cap. The user then finds the ECG equipment after some help and
connects it. They comment, ”I think I forgot about the ECG part of the equipment.
We do work with ECG in our department but I have not started working with it yet.
Maybe some colors could help to associate between the equipment and the app.”
• The user starts the first exercise and sees the exercise information text, and uses it
to explain to the patient how the exercise will be conducted.
• The user successfully understands the annotation component and annotates when
the patients deviates from the exercises.
• The user successfully edits an annotation, and notes. The user comments, ”I like
that I can also use the edit bar to see which annotation I have done in relation to
patient safety. Also, if you are new to the app, then you are sure that it registered
what you have clicked.”
• About the Exercise screen where the first exercise has changed to green after com-
pletion, the user notes ”it shows me that the exercise is done.”
• The user successfully clicks the ”Other” annotation when asked to annotate a cough.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
207
==PAGE:215==
• The user notes that the annotation counter has counted three annotations and com-
ments, ”so is the three including the previous exercise? I just see the eyes exercise
and the hyperventilation exercise as two separate, so I would like that the number
of annotations are separated and then at the end I could see the total amount of
annotations for a better overview.”
• The user reacts well to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert by checking the elec-
trode on the cap. The user comments, ”I like the image it shows so I can see exactly
which electrode it is.”
• The user reacts well to the ”Patient has fallen asleep” alert by waking up the patient
and then annotating by clicking the ”Sleeping” annotation.
• The user reacts well to the ”Seizure like behavior has been detected” alert by clicking
to annotate using the ”Seizure” annotation after making sure the patient was well.
• The user successfully saves the scan.
• The user navigates well through the Review scan screen. The user comments,
”when I see the first screen, logically I would think that the more annotations the
worse the scan went because it had more deviations and errors.”
• On the first question, it was not clear for the user that they could choose multiple
options.
• About the input field at the bottom, the user comments, ”as a nurse I like to add
comments so I like that it is possible to add more.”
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation. The user comments, ”I like it
but I think, in a special case, if I had one specific annotation that I forgot to delete but
remembered later that I wanted to delete, then it would be a bit difficult to remember
it from this long list.”
• About the possibility to add something to the annotation, the user comments, ”I
would have liked to do this during the exercise rather than during the review since I
could easily forget it by the time I reach the review.”
• About the annotation being marked as ”Edited”, the user says, ”that is nice, cause
then I know which ones I have edited in case there are multiple. Also, the neurolo-
gists reading it later can see that it has been edited.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to cloud and sees that the scan has now
moved to ”Reviewed”.
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”It is super nice that
it automatically gives me these warnings. The more the app can do automatically,
the more it increases the patient security. We have something similar in the medicine
room where we must scan the medicine before giving it to the patient to be sure that
we did not take the wrong one. If the medicine is wrong it will not scan it.” The user
208
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:216==
continues, ”I like that the exercise is then a different color but I would have liked a
different color, like yellow, or something more alerting but not too alerting.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”It was very quick and straight forward.”
– Connect Equipment screen: ”For a new nurse who has never seen the app, I
think a course of the equipment would be nice to get more training, but other-
wise it was good.”
– Exercise screens: ”It was setup nicely with the exercises being step-wise.”
– Review screens: ”I would have liked for it to be possible to add something to
the annotations during the scan but otherwise it was easy.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”I am missing some colors in the design.”
– ”The app guided me well.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
209
==PAGE:217==
Test user 14
Experience as a Social and Health Care Assistant: 7 years working at the Respiratory
Medical Department at Hvidovre hospital.
Number of errors: 4
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 5
UX guidance score (1-5): 5
User readiness to scan score (1-5): 5
• The user navigates easily through the Patient information screen.
• During the Connect equipment flow, the user wants to put on the cap before mea-
suring, does not click on the selected cap, and does not turn on the amplifier. The
user comments, ”I am maybe a bit too fast and should probably read what it says.”
• The user successfully clicks the on the annotations when the patients deviates from
the exercises but does not seem to be satisfied. The user comments, ”do I write
somewhere how the patients deviates? I am so used to documenting everything I
do so if I see the patient doing something, it would not be sufficient to just write ”eye
movement”, I would have to write what they do with their eyes. Because when I give
the doctor the documentation, then they would specifically ask what the patient did.
So the specificity is missing for me.”
• The user successfully edits an annotation, and notes. The user comments, ”the
pencil made me intuitively think it was here.”
• About the Exercise screen where the first exercise has changed to green after com-
pletion, the user notes ”it shows me that the eyes exercise has been completed.”
• The user successfully clicks the ”Other” annotation when asked to annotate a cough.
• The user reacts well to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert by saying ”I would cor-
rect the electrode until it gave me the correct image. So I have to figure out why
the connection is lost, and that could either be the electrode or not enough gel or
something else. It is the same as when we do ECG and the connection is lost and
we have to correct them until we get the connection back.”
• The user reacts well to the ”Patient has fallen asleep” alert by waking up the patient
and then annotating by clicking the ”Sleeping” annotation.
• The user reacts well to the ”Seizure like behavior has been detected” alert by clicking
to annotate using the ”Seizure” annotation after making sure the patient was well.
• The user successfully saves the scan.
• The user navigates well through the Review scan screen. The user comments, ”if I
were to choose the ”Not sure” option, I would definitely write in the text field below
210
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:218==
why that was the case. Actually, for all options, I would write something because
”Yes”, ”No”, and ”Not sure” are undefinable.”
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation, adds a text to the first and
deletes the second annotation. The user comments, ”I like that I can write my notes
here.”
• About the annotation being marked as ”Edited”, the user says, ”that makes sense,
because we get disturbed quite a lot so it is nice to know if what I was doing had
been done, and that helps to show me that. So it is a good reminder.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to cloud and sees that the scan has now
moved to ”Reviewed”.
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”I think, it makes
sense that the exercise has changed color while still being available. Whether to do
the exercise should be a professional decision made by us but it is nice that the app
makes me attentive.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”It was easy and very manageable. It was straight forward.”
– ”I think it is a genius invention.”
– ”With the lack of neurologists, it makes sense that somebody else can do all
the preliminary work first, upload it to the cloud and then it can be evaluated
elsewhere to give a possible diagnoses.”
– ”It is very smart, understandable, useful, easy to use, and guides me well.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
211
==PAGE:219==
Test user 15
Experience as a Nurse: 2.5 years at the Respiratory Medical Department at Hvidovre
hospital.
Number of errors: 0
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 5
UX guidance score (1-5): 5
User readiness to scan score (1-5): 5
• The user navigates easily through the Patient information screen.
• The user navigates easily through the Connect equipment screen.
• The user successfully clicks on the selected cap.
• When the user is asked to fill the cap with gel, the user asks, ”how much gel should
I use?”
• When the user sees the Tip, the user successfully tells the patient to keep their eyes
closed and open their jaw slightly.
• The user starts the first exercise and sees the exercise information text, and uses it
to introduce the patient to the exercise.
• The user successfully understands the annotation component and annotates when
the patients deviates from the exercises.
• The user successfully clicks the ”Try again” button to redo the exercise.
• The user successfully edits an annotation, and notes. The user comments, ”very
straight forward.”
• About the Exercise screen where the first exercise has changed to green after com-
pletion, the user notes ”it gives me a good overview of the progress and I can use
it to explain the process to the patient. Also, if I sit with a nervous patient and they
are worried because they have a weird thing on their head, then it is very nice that
I can prepare the patient on the exercises throughout the scan. Also, it is very nice
to see the duration of each exercise, so that I can tell them that it is going to take
approximately 30 minutes.”
• The user successfully clicks the ”Other” annotation when asked to annotate a cough.
• The user reacts well to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert by saying ”I would have
to fix it until the image turns green.”
• The user clicks to redo the exercise since the electrode lost connection.
• The user reacts well to the ”Patient has fallen asleep” alert by waking up the patient
and then annotating by clicking the ”Sleeping” annotation.
212
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:220==
• The user clicks to redo the exercise since the patient fell asleep.
• The user reacts well to the ”Seizure like behavior has been detected” alert by saying,
”I would talk to the patient and make sure they are okay. That comes before the
scan.”
• The user sees that all the exercises are green and comments, ”perfect. Then I know
that I did everything well.”
• The user successfully saves the scan.
• The user navigates well through the Review scan screen. The user comments, ”I
like the overview the screen gives me of the patients that I have to review. It gives
me a very quick overview of my patient. Also, the review questions are easy to
answer with the answer options.”
• The user successfully understands that it is possible to choose multiple options in
the first review question.
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation, adds a text to the first and
deletes the second annotation.
• About the annotation being marked as ”Edited”, the user says, ”in Sundhedsplat-
formen it automatically marks something as edited as well and you can not remove
that something has been edited. But it is very different from department to depart-
ment how we work with it.” The user continues, ”I think it is very nice that I can edit
something after the patient has left because the notes can take some time to write
and would take too long to write during the scan while I also have to focus on the
patient, annotate, and everything else. And it is nice to be able to elaborate more in
sentences.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to cloud and sees that the scan has now
moved to ”Reviewed”.
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”that is smart be-
cause Sundhedsplatformen also has a lot of safety confirmations since there are a
lot of guidelines and instructions, and it is nearly impossible to remember it all. And
when I think about the fact that it is a nurse who has no knowledge within this pro-
fession, then it is super nice that there is a guideline. So that makes sense. While I
do think that the exercise should then be another color, it also makes sense that I as
a nurse can overrule if I evaluate that the patient can do the exercise. With Sund-
hedsplatformen we call it ”break the glass” which means we can always overrule.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”It was very easy. It is the standard patient infor-
mation that I would ask nearly no matter what I have to do with the patient.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
213
==PAGE:221==
– Connect Equipment screen: ”It was idiot-proof. I really like that the caps had
the corresponding colors, and that it increases the safety in terms of documen-
tation.”
– Exercise screens: ”The continuity of the exercises was really nice as it made
it easy to do them. I also liked that it showed me where to annotate in the
exercise information, and I think that once I have done the scan many times, it
will be imprinted. So it is a nice hidden nudge towards increasing the security
of the nurse annotating correctly.”
– Review screens: ”It was also easy.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”The app was very user friendly. I am not very tech savvy so if I can do it then
everyone can.”
– ”The design of the app is streamlined with the same design all throughout so it
does not confuse you with something new.”
– ”The app has the same colors and images throughout so it is very easy to look
at the app visually. It was a very calm looking app so I did not have to spend a
lot of energy on focusing my eyes.”
– ”The app guided me well since it told me exactly what I had to do, so it was
very easy.”
– ”I am one of those who throws my phone at the wall when something is too
confusing so giant koodous.”
214
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:222==
Test user 16
Experience as a Clinical Nurse Specialist: 5 years at the Respiratory Medical Department
at Hvidovre hospital.
Number of errors: 0
UI aesthetics score (1-5): 5
UX guidance score (1-5): 5
User readiness to scan score (1-5): 5
• The user navigates easily through the Patient information screen.
• The user navigates easily through the Connect equipment screen.
• The user successfully clicks on the selected cap.
• When the user sees the Tip, the user successfully tells the patient to keep their eyes
closed and open their jaw slightly.
• The user starts the first exercise and sees the exercise information text, and uses it
to introduce the patient to the exercise.
• The user successfully understands the annotation component and annotates when
the patients deviates from the exercises. The user comments, ”it makes very good
sense, also that it counts how many annotations so I have an idea of how much
noise there is during the scan and just to keep track of the progress.”
• The user successfully clicks the ”Try again” button to redo the exercise.
• The user successfully edits an annotation, and notes. The user comments, ”it makes
very good sense with the edit pencil.”
• About the Exercise screen where the first exercise has changed to green after com-
pletion, the user notes ”it very nice that it has a check mark, it is green, and I can
keep going.”
• The user successfully clicks the ”Other” annotation when asked to annotate a cough.
• The user reacts well to the ”Electrode lost connection” alert by saying ”oh there is an
electrode that has lost connection, I will check it.” The user further comments, ”that
made absolute logical sense cause it turns green when the connection is back, so it
is beautiful. It also makes sense in terms of other things we use as nurses for exam-
ple with ECG where it gives a similar warning if the electrode has lost connection,
so it is very familiar for us nurses.”
• The user reacts well to the ”Patient has fallen asleep” alert by waking up the patient.
• The user reacts well to the ”Seizure like behavior has been detected” alert by making
sure the patient is okay and then clicking to annotate it in the app.
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
215
==PAGE:223==
• The user sees that all the exercises are green and comments, ”I have a full house,
beautiful.”
• The user successfully saves the scan.
• The user navigates well through the Review scan screen.
• The user successfully understands that it is possible to choose multiple options in
the first review question.
• The user successfully navigates to edit an annotation, adds a text to the first and
deletes the second annotation. The user comments, ”that is very straight forward
and logical. We are very used to document everything as nurses so this is definitely
needed. We have something called an evaluation form where you can click through
it but more than often my colleagues and I add comments as well. So it is very
logical for us to have to explain what something means.”
• About the annotation being marked as ”Edited”, the user says, ”it makes sense that
it is marked in terms of the overview.”
• The user successfully uploads the scan to cloud and sees that the scan has now
moved to ”Reviewed”.
• The user is shown the different restriction alerts, and comments, ”it is smart and
makes very good sense that it gives a warning when the question is filled out. Also, it
is a nice reminder that the exercise has a different color and gives an extra warning.”
• When asked about their overall opinion on the:
– Patient Information screen: ”It was super intuitive. It makes super good sense
and we are used to working with information like this, so it is very intuitive for a
nurse.”
– Connect Equipment screen: ”Also very intuitive as it tells you everything you
need to do.”
– Exercise screens: ”It is nice in my brain that it changes to green and has a
check mark when something is done. It was very intuitive and easy to spot
where and what to annotate.”
– Review screens: ”It made super good sense.”
• Overall opinion on the whole application:
– ”It is super smart. The app tells me exactly what to do.”
– ”The design is lovely and everything is nice and big. It is pretty, there are green
check marks so it is superb.”
– ”The design is straight forward without too much randomness.”
216
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:224==
– ”The app guided me well, especially with the extra warnings and the screen
when filling the gel was nice.”
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
217
==PAGE:225==
A.6
DGR Questionnaire (Filadelfia Epilepsihospital)
218
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:226==
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
219
==PAGE:227==
A.7
User story maps
A.7.1
User story map V1
220
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:228==
A.7.2
User story map V2
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
221
==PAGE:229==
A.7.3
User story map V3
222
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
==PAGE:230==
A.8
Typical diagnosis flow for an epilepsy suspected patient
Data-driven optimization of UI & UX
223
==PAGE:231==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
