==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Resilience of weather dependent energy 
systems under extreme generation and demand 
scenarios
Jens Christian Rørbæk Kruse
DTU Wind-M-0584
January 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0584 
January 2023
Project period: 
August 2022 - January 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Matti Juhani Koivisto
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Rasmus Bo Bramstoft Pedersen
DTU Management
János Hethey
Ea Energy Analyses
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy 
Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Jens Christian Rørbæk Kruse
Title:
Resilience of weather dependent energy systems 
under extreme generation and demand scenarios
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared in the period from August 2022 to January 2023 at the
department of Wind and Energy Systems at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Sustainable Energy.
I declare that this thesis was composed by myself, that the work contained herein is my
own except where explicitly stated otherwise in the text, and that this work has not been
submitted for any other degree or processional qualification except as specified.
Jens Christian Rørbæk Kruse - s174358
Signature
Date
ii
29-01-2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Energy systems with a high penetration of variable renewable energy (VRE) may be
particularly vulnerable to imbalances between production and demand. In this study, I
investigate the inter-annual weather variability in such an energy system. The weather
variability impacts the generation of energy from wind, solar and hydro power as well as
the demand for energy. I develop an energy demand model to identify the dependency
on weather variables, while I rely on existing weather dependent generation data. I use
the energy planning tool Balmorel to optimize a European energy system in 2050 based
on an average weather year. The system is afterwards exposed to a range of 35 historical
weather years (1982-2016) to assess the dispatch of energy.
A key parameter for evaluating the system is the use of dispatchable fuels to supplement
the production from VRE. Natural gas provides the most flexibility to ensure balance
across weather years, and the consumption more than doubles from the lowest consuming
year to the highest consuming year. This has consequences for the electricity price and
carbon emissions that show similar volatility. However, the electricity mix was consistently
above 80% VRE in all the tested weather years. A key challenge is also to ensure that
the installed capacity is adequate in all weather conditions. However, the result of this
investigation is not clear.
There are several historical weather years where low production from VRE conicide with
high demand due to cold weather. It is therefore an important finding in this study that
the joint probability of multiple undesirable weather conditions must be considered when
planning energy systems.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This thesis could not have been completed if not for the guidance and support of a number
of people. I would first and foremost like to thank my supervisors Matti Juhani Koivisto
from DTU Wind and Energy Systems and Rasmus Bo Bramstoft Pedersen from DTU
Management. Their guidance has been readily available throughout the project and always
full of encouraging suggestions.
Furthermore, I am grateful that Ea Energy Analyses wanted to collaborate with me on
this project. I thank Lars Møllenbach Bregnbæk and János Hethey for their input that
helped shape the project. I also thank Katja Jensen and Victor Duus Svensson for patient
help with the technical aspects of energy modelling.
Finally, I thank Johanne Hove Vogt, Jacob Michael Hofestadt and Phil Swisher for re-
viewing the final report.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
2
3
Scope
4
3.1
Spatial scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Temporal scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.3
Climatic scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Energy demand modelling
6
4.1
Demand categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.2
Electricity demand model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.3
Heat demand model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
Demand correction factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Energy system modelling
13
5.1
Balmorel model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.2
Energy demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.3
Energy generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.4
Procedure for simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6
Model validation
19
6.1
Electricity demand model validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.2
Energy system model validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7
Results
26
7.1
Optimized system capacities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.2
Dispatch 2050: average weather year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7.3
Dispatch 2050: weather years 1982-2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8
Discussion
37
8.1
Main findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
8.2
Inter-annual variability in studies of energy systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
8.3
Limitations of methods used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
9
Conclusion
40
Bibliography
41
A Custom holidays for the energy demand model
43
B Balmorel years
44
C Examples of generation profiles
45
D Electricity demand model MAPE
46
v
==PAGE:7==
E Correlation in electricity demand model residuals
48
F Important energy system input
49
G Energy system capacities
50
H Inter-annual flexibility from natural gas and nuclear
53
I
Backstop capacity and generation
54
J
Demand correction factors
55
J.1
Low temperature heat demand correction factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
J.2
Classic electricity demand correction factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
K Full load hours
60
K.1 Solar PV full load hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
K.2 Existing onshore wind full load hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
K.3 Future onshore wind full load hours
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
K.4 Existing offshore wind full load hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
K.5 Future offshore wind full load hours
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
K.6 Hydro run-of-river full load hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
K.7 Hydro reservoir full load hours
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Renewable energy is predicted to play a core role in order the meet the European Union’s
goal of becoming climate neutral by 2050 [1]. However, the nature of wind, solar and hydro
power is variable, and the variability exists on multiple time scales. The variations seen
within a given weather year has been the subject of many studies, while the variability
between different weather years is a newer field attracting attention. Demand for energy
is associated with variability as well, and it leaves a joint probability of high demand and
low generation happening simultaneously. Consequently, one may question the long-term
robustness of an energy system based on a high share of renewables.
I therefore seek to answer to the following problem statement:
How will a weather dependent energy system optimized for an average weather year behave
when exposed to the inter-annual variability of other weather years?
To answer this question, I investigate the behaviour of a future European energy system
subjected to 35 historical weather years. I develop new demand models based on weather
hindcasting. Similar hindcasts of weather driven generation from wind, solar and hydro
power already exist, and I will use those data sets in this study. For the simulation of
the energy system, I have collaborated with Ea Energy Analyses and use their model and
existing data set.
Simulating an energy system for several decades across a whole continent results in multi-
dimensional data sets. I will therefore consider the results from an geographically aggregate
system perspective. A key result is the use of dispatchable generation since this will reveal
how dependent the energy system is on supporting fuels. Other metrics include electricity
price and carbon emissions. Finally, I investigate if the invested capacity is adequate under
all weather conditions.
I present some of the existing literature on the topic in chapter 2 and explain the motivation
for this particular study.
In chapter 3, I outline the scope of the project in terms of
geography, temporal and climatic extent. In chapter 4, I describe the methodology for
modelling electricity and heat demands. In chapter 5, I present the energy system model,
its data sources and assumptions along with the procedure for simulating different weather
years. In chapter 6, I validate the demand model and energy system model to ensure
they resemble reality adequately. I present the results of the optimized energy system in
chapter 7, and analyse its dynamics in different weather years. I discuss the strengths
and weaknesses of using multiple weather years in section 8 as well as the methodological
limitations.
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Literature review
In order to meet climate targets in forthcoming years, energy systems based on a high share
of variable renewable energy (VRE) have been investigated as a solution. In an energy
system where supply and demand have to be in balance at all times, the intermittency
of VRE has been a focal point of criticism [2].
The german term dunkelflaute (dark
doldrum) captures those concerns, as it describes a weather phenomenon characterised
by calm winds and overcast skies [3]. It can have various degrees of severity depending
on the temporal and spatial extent. Studies have therefore focused on simulating VRE
variability in high time resolution, and multiple measures have been proposed to alleviate
the consequences. Single locations can experience more pronounced variability in wind,
but the severity decreases when the geographical scope is extended. Transmission lines
can provide such geographical smoothing [4]. Studies also find that sector coupling is a
key enabler for high penetration of VRE [5]. This means a tighter connection between
sectors to utilize synergies. This can be electrification of transport, where charging can
offer temporal flexibility. Other examples of flexibility include green hydrogen production
and electrification of heating. Along with storage and flexible power plants, models have
shown that these measures can enable high penetration of VRE. This is famously promoted
by the 100% Renewable Energy Strategy Group [6].
Studies of energy systems are often based on models that simulate a single weather year
[7]. Energy systems will therefore be optimised to handle intra-annual variations, i.e. the
variability seen within that single year. However, those intra-annual variations will be
different depending on which year is chosen. When seen on a larger time scale, these
differences add up to inter-annual variability. Thus, the system may still fail to handle
lower-frequency events taking place less than once per year.
Price and Zeyringer (2022) demonstrate with highRES-Europe a model of the European
energy system in high spatial and temporal resolution [8]. They use several decades of
weather data to model the inter-annual variability of VRE generation. They find that
investments in flexible generation are particularly sensitive to weather year, while trans-
mission grid expansions are less sensitive.
While dunkelflaute entails generation side issues, weather induced imbalances in energy
systems can occur as a consequence of variability in both generation and demand. For
instance, one can imagine that a particularly cold pan-European winter could lead to
higher demands and exacerbate the consequences of dunkelflaute.
Raynaud et al.
(2018) define the term energy droughts considering balances between
weather dependent demand and supply [9]. Such a drought is defined as a period where
less than 20% of demand is supplied by VRE. They find that a diversification of the
energy mix can decrease both the duration and frequency of energy droughts. The focus
of that study is on quantifying the probability of such energy droughts from a statistical
stand point. The energy system model is simplified and does for instance not include
interconnection between regions.
Ruhnau and Qvist (2022) studied storage requirements for a 100% renewable energy system
in Germany including both demand and generation side inter-annual variability [4]. They
find that different weather years can lead to substantial differences in investments in energy
storage. They emphasise the importance of considering multiple weather years to avoid
underestimating storage needs.
2
==PAGE:10==
The contribution to literature I provide in this study is a pan-European simulation of
35 weather years in a highly integrated energy system. A comprehensive scope such as
this should shine light on low-frequency weather events but also allow the benefits of
interconnections, sector coupling and other sources of flexibility. It is based on a time
coherent data set of weather dependent supply and demand. I optimize the energy system
using an average weather year and test the operational robustness in multiple weather
years.
The study can therefore be seen as a sensitivity analysis to studies of energy
systems that use single weather years.
To study the weather dependency of demand, I will also introduce new models. Weather
dependent demand models exist (see e.g.
[10] and [11]), but are often based on the
aggregate electricity demand. I will introduce a demand model with a focus on end-use
separating demand into different categories with different weather dependency.
3
==PAGE:11==
3
Scope
In the following, I establish the scope of the study in line with the problem statement.
3.1
Spatial scope
I include the following countries in this study: Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, Czech
Republic, Germany, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Great Britain, Italy, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Latvia, Netherlands, Norway, Poland and Sweden.
The spatial scope is seen in fig. 3.1. Most countries have a single region, but Denmark,
Norway, Sweden and Germany are divided into multiple regions.
Figure 3.1: Countries and regions included in the study.
3.2
Temporal scope
I distinguish between two temporal scopes, which should be considered strightly indepen-
dent of each other.
Weather years refer to historical years in which the weather behaved in a certain way. I
will consider 35 different weather years from 1982-2016. The wind resource is for instance
defined with hourly generation profiles and annual full load hours for different weather
years, but without any assumptions about the installed capacity.
Scenario years refer to years with particular realizations of the energy system.
That
system has a certain composition of technologies and demand requirements. For instance,
the system in scenario year 2020 may be based primarily on fossil fuels and with limited
4
==PAGE:12==
demand from electric vehicles, whereas scenario year 2050 may be primarily based on VRE
and with high demand from electric vehicles. I limit the scenario years to 2030, 2040 and
2050 without considering years in between.
When simulating the energy system, I will for instance expose the optimized energy system
in scenario year 2050 to the weather year 1996. The system will thus behave differently
than it actually did in 1996, because the capacities and demand requirements originate
from a particular expectation of how 2050 will unfold.
3.3
Climatic scope
Weather systems are complex and may interact with society in many different ways. I
consider the weather as either resources to the energy generation or drivers of energy
demand. I will therefore not study the impacts of rare, highly stochastic events on security
of supply. These could be damage on transmission lines from storms or lack of cooling
water for thermal power plants as a result of high temperatures.
I have selected the following weather variables: Wind speed as an input to wind turbines,
solar irradiance as input to solar photovoltaics (PV), water inflow to hydro power plants
and amount of daylight as well as ambient temperature as inputs to energy demand.
The weather variables are in all cases based on reanalysis data of the past weather. It
should be noted that such data is not an exact reproduction of the past weather, be rather
computed approximations utilizing both ground measurements, satellite observations and
climate models [12]. I consider only weather variations as seen in the historical weather
years. While the weather is unlikely to repeat itself in the future, I exclude future climate
variability from the analysis, as it requires a comprehensive approach outside the scope of
this study.
5
==PAGE:13==
4
Energy demand modelling
The aim of the energy demand modelling is to simulate demand profiles for classic elec-
tricity and low temperature heat in all weather years. I will assume that all other demand
types (electricity for electric vehicles, power-to-X and high temperature industrial heat)
are weather independent. Furthermore, I generate an annual demand correction factor to
adjust the demand level according to the weather year. I model the demands on a regional
basis, which means individual demand models are fitted for each region. All demands are
modelled having UTC time stamps as index. I used python for modelling, and the code
is available on Github [13].
4.1
Demand categories
I define the two outputs of demand model in the following way:
Classic electricity: Electricity demand in households, the commercial sector and industries
excluding consumption related to electric vehicles, low temperature heating, power-to-X
and high temperature industrial usage.
Heat demand: Demand for low temperature heat (space heating and hot water) in house-
holds, the commercial sector and industries
It is important to clearly distinguish between these two end uses. The classic electricity
profile should for instance not reflect the consumption pattern from electrical heating, but
only contain the end use demand for classic electricity. Likewise, the heat demand profile
should reflect the end demand for heat and not the particular load pattern of an electric
boiler. There are multiple reasons why demands are best defined in terms of end use. First
of all, the load pattern from electric heating will depend on the amount of electrification
of heating in a given system and a given scenario year. The energy system model may
eventually choose to provide heat based on electricity, but this is an endogenous decision
that should not be presupposed in the input electricity profile. Second, the energy system
model assumes that classic electricity is relatively inflexible in time, whereas heating is
more flexible.
That is the justification for having two separate models for simulating
electricity demand and heat demand respectively.
Figure 4.1: Conceptual illustration of the demand modelling.
6
==PAGE:14==
4.2
Electricity demand model
Electricity consumption for different European bidding zones is collected in the ENTSOE
Transparency platform.
I use the time series Actual Total Load (regulated by article
[6.1.A]) [14] which is defined as net generation minus net export minus stored electricity.
For convenience, I retrieve the data set from Open Power System Data [15]. I divide the
data into a set used for model training (years 2015-2018) and model testing (year 2019)
used for an out-of-sample test of model accuracy. This requires the assumption that the
demand pattern stays the same throughout the period used for modelling.
The method I use is known as load hindcasting. It is a process of synthesizing historical
loads with a consistent load profile [16]. In other words, the simulated demand profile
will reflect the dynamics of electrical devices used in the training period, but under the
influence of historical weather. I use a linear least squares regression model with both
static and dynamic regressors. The modelling approach is inspired by [16] and [17].
The aim of the model training is to fit a model that resembles the measured electricity
consumption yt in the training data. The subscript t denotes time and the resolution is
hourly. The model forms a linear combination of exogenous regressors Xt, autoregressive
regressors yt−i, a constant offset c and outputs a response variable ˆyt.
ˆyt = aXt +
I
X
i=1
(biyt−i) + c
(4.1)
The residual term ϵt is a measure of the deviation between the model response ˆyt and the
measured data yt.
ϵt = yt −ˆyt
(4.2)
The model fitting constitutes an optimization problem with the aim of minimizing the
sum of squared residuals. This is done by finding appropriate values for a and b.
min
a,b
T
X
t=1
ϵ2
t
(4.3)
An ordinary least square problem can be solved to guaranteed optimality. However, since
I impose certain constraints on the model, I solve the optimization problem numerically
using lsq_linear from the python package SciPy with solver lsmr [18]. I define an adequate
fit by the tolerance 10−10 or a maximum number of iterations of 104.
I investigate the validity and accuracy of the fitted model in section 6.1.1. With a well-
behaving model and optimized coeﬀicients a∗and b∗, it is possible to simulate the demand
for any historical time period given the corresponding input regressors. Note, I use the
measured yt−i for the model fitting.
For the hindcast simulation, I use ˆyt−i since the
measured demand is unknown. Furthermore, I assume ϵt = 0 in the simulation which will
give a central estimate of the demand. The simulation is initialized 48 hours before the
start of the simulation period to stabilize the autoregressive effects.
7
==PAGE:15==
4.2.1
Selection of regressors
Electricity demand can be driven by many different variables, but I will generally distin-
guish between weather related regressors and non-weather related regressors.
I use day of the week, holidays and hour of the day as regressors to explain non-weather
related patterns in the power demand. All are discrete variables with certain levels. They
are modelled as dummy variables, thus each level is given its own binary variable (e.g. 24
variables for ”hour of the day”).
To capture the weather related behaviour in the demand, I use daylength and ambient
temperature.
Figure 4.2: Example of weekly demand structure in Denmark in January in the training
period. Standard deviation is marked in light blue.
Day of the week: The average daily demand changes over the week as seen in fig. 4.2.
Industry activity is likely the reason for higher demand in weekdays and lower demand in
weekends. I model this behaviour using three dummy variables for weekdays, saturdays
and sundays.
Hour of the day: There is a diurnal cycle visible in fig. 4.2, which is because of the daily
patterns of people, including sleep during the night, work during the day and cooking in
the evening. I use 24 different dummy variables to capture the hourly behaviour.
Holidays: National holidays are clearly visible in the demand data, as they tend to make
people deviate from the normal consumption patterns. I retrieve holidays from the python
library holidays [19]. I add certain additional holidays where I find it necessary (most
importantly around Christmas and New Year) to achieve a better fit (see appendix A).
Each holiday is given its own dummy variable, thus the model can only fit the coeﬀicient
relating to a specific holiday based on instances of that same holiday. Holidays can be seen
as another day type (similar to to the variable denoting day of the week). Thus, when
a holiday variable is active, I set the dummy variable denoting the day of the week to 0.
This ensures a consistent day type dummy system, where only one day type can be active
at a time.
Daylength: I use the daylength to capture the seasonal patterns in demand. I model it
as the average amount of time with daylight per day in a given region. A more accurate
representation of daylight on a given day would be irradiance, but it is a more volatile
variable, and I find that it has a lower explanatory power in terms of electricity demand.
Daylength is therefore not strictly related to weather, but based on a mathematical model
8
==PAGE:16==
of Earth’s tilt angle relative to the sun.
The specific model is available from the the
python package SunTimes [20]. I constrain the regression model to enforce a negative a
coeﬀicient for this regressor based on the assumption that people consume less electricity
in the summer than in the winter.
Temperature: I include the ambient temperature to explain the demand due to electrical
heating and to some degree seasonal behaviour. Temperature is location specific, and to
cover all regions consistently, I introduce a grid with a distance between points of 100 km
(see fig. 4.3). I request temperature measurements at these locations from interpolated
ERA5 reanalysis data [12]. The relationship between electricity demand and tempera-
ture is non-linear as heating is typically switched off above a certain temperature. To
account for this in a linear model, I model temperature as a piece-wise function. I use
15 ◦C as break point based on [21]. The temperature regressor T is split in two and the
term in eq. (4.1) related to temperature has the following structure above and below the
temperature threshold:
 P
k ak,1Tk,t
Tk,t ≤15 ◦C
P
k ak,1Tk,t + ak,2(Tk,t −15)
Tk,t > 15 ◦C

(4.4)
where ak,1 and ak,2 are the two fitting coeﬀicients at each temperature location k. The
model is constrained to enforce ak,1 ≤0 ∀k. This is based on the assumption that a lower
temperature below the threshold leads to higher demand. Since the temperature profiles
are likely to be similar, this constraint will also minimize the risk of multicollinearity. I
make no assumptions about the demand trends above the threshold.
Lagged demands: I include autoregressive regressors to capture the inertia in the change
of demand.
This is mainly to dampen the effect of fluctuating temperatures, as the
thermal mass of the building will smoothen the heat demand. I include lagged time steps
t −1 and t −2, as the measured data showed two significant lags in a plot of the partial
autocorrelation function.
Interactions: Some regressors may also have a combined impact that is different from the
simple sum of the individual impacts. E.g. the demand has a different hourly distribution
depending on the day of the week. I model such interactions by creating new regressors
containing the product of the following interacting regressors:
• Day of the week × Hour of the day
• Holiday × Hour of the day
• Daylength × Hour of the day
4.2.2
Clustering of temperature profiles
Demand in a particular location responds to the local ambient temperature. As a counter
example, the demand in southern Finland would probably not correlate well with the
temperature measured in northern Finland. This speaks in favour of including several of
the gridded temperature profiles, as it allows the regression model to assign weights based
on the explanatory power of each profile. However, including too many similar profiles will
also risk multicollinearity issues. In other words, the regression is unable to give weights
to the temperature regressors, if the profiles are almost identical.
I reduce the number of profiles using K-means clustering from the python library scikit-
learn [22]. This will reduce the number of similar temperature profiles, while preserving
profiles that are distinctly different.
9
==PAGE:17==
I adjust the number of clusters such that regions have 0.4 clusters per degree latitude they
span. A minimum of at least 1 cluster per region is enforced. This results for instance
in 4 clusters in Finland, 4 clusters in France, 3 clusters in Germany and 1 cluster in
Denmark West. The temperature at each cluster is a population weighted average of all
temperature profiles belonging to that cluster. I obtain the JRC 2018 1 km population
grid from Eurostat [23] and resample to 25 km resolution.
(a) Temperature sample loca-
tions with 100 km spacing
(b) Example of clusters in
Finland
Figure 4.3: Model geography
4.2.3
Temperature dependency of different types of electricity demand
Since the power demand model is fitted on aggregate meter readings, it is not possible to
know which parts of the electricity consumption is related to which end use. Especially
electric heating will have a characteristic impact on the modelled profile. As explained in
section 4.1, I aim at modelling a clean classic electricity profile.
With the fitted model, it is possible to simulate a weather year given the temperature of
the historical year. But it is also possible to input a synthetic temperature profile where
a temperature threshold is imposed. I therefore simulate all weather years where input
temperatures are clamped to 15 ◦C whenever they go below this threshold. I choose 15 ◦C
as it is consistent with the break point of the piece-wise temperature regressors. The two
profiles, the actual and the synthetic, are illustrated in fig. 4.4. They represent two ex-
tremes; one profile that contains all the low temperature effects on electricity consumption
and one that contains none of the effects.
I assume that most of additional demand below the threshold can be attributed to electric
heating. But the ambient temperature may also influence other behavioural patterns than
heat consumption. It could be the case that people tend to stay more inside, watch more
television, use the kitchen more etc. in cold weather. Thus, classic electricity may still
have some amount of temperature dependency, but it is not trivial to determine how much.
However, annual statistics [24] exist that estimate the demand for classic electricity and
electricity used for heating. For instance, a hypothetical region may use 95% of electricity
10
==PAGE:18==
to serve classic demands and 5% for heating according to the reference. The synthetic
simulation mentioned above might instead suggest a 90%/10%-split.
The final classic
electricity profiles are obtained as a mix of the two profiles in fig. 4.4 to approximate the
split reference.
Figure 4.4: Example of temperature dependency in demand in Finland in 2019. Resampled
to daily mean for illustration.
4.3
Heat demand model
Heat can be delivered by a multitude of different sources, not just electricity. The heat
demand profile should therefore reflect the end use as objectively as possible without
assuming specific dynamics of the technology providing it. An often used metric for heat
demand in energy modelling is heating degree days (see e.g. [25]). I model the number of
heating degree days (HDD) at each cluster location k in a region based on the Eurostat
definition [21]:
HDDk,t =
 18 −Tk,t
Tk,t ≤15 ◦C
0
Tk,t > 15 ◦C

∀k
(4.5)
where Tk,t is the daily mean ambient temperature and t represents daily time steps. The
time series is later upsampled to hourly resolution.
I model the heat demand profile HDk,t assuming that 75 % of heating is temperature
dependent (space heating) and 25 % is temperature independent (hot water).
This is
based roughly on [26], although different splitting factors exist.
HDk,t = 0.75
HDDk,t
P
t HDDk,t
+ 0.25
1
P
t t
∀k
(4.6)
The sum of HDk,t over a year is 1. An example of is seen in fig. 4.5. The final heat demand
in a region is a population weighted average of heat demands across all clusters.
11
==PAGE:19==
Figure 4.5: Example of heat demand profile for Finland in 2019.
4.4
Demand correction factors
Apart from the electricity and heat profiles, I generate a correction factor that explains
how the annual demand in a given weather year deviates from an average year. This
enables an simple calculation of demands in a given scenario year as the product of the
scenario demand and the weather dependent correction factor. The demand correction
factors are given in appendix J.
In the case of district and individual heating, I scale 75 % of the heat demand by a factor. I
define this as the deviation of the annual number of heating degree days from the long term
mean of all weather years. I assume the remaining 25 % of heat demand is temperature
independent and is therefore not scaled by any factor.
For classic electricity, I define the correction factor as the deviation of the annual con-
sumption from the long term mean.
Figure 4.6: Example of demand correction factors in South West Norway.
12
==PAGE:20==
5
Energy system modelling
In this chapter, I introduce the energy system model along with the main assumptions and
data inputs. Furthermore, I describe the procedure used for investments and simulating
different weather years.
5.1
Balmorel model
Balmorel is an optimization model for energy planning based on an open source code
modelled in GAMS [27]. The specific version I describe below and apply has been further
developed by Ea Energy Analyses [28]. The input data set for Balmorel (unless otherwise
stated) is the December 2022 version of the in-house data set used by Ea Energy Analyses.
I denote this data set existing Balmorel data.
Balmorel solves an optimization problem to find the least-cost energy system under a
given set of constraints. The objective is to minimize the total cost of the system: gener-
ation costs of electricity and heat, fuel and externality costs, generation and transmission
investment costs and unit commitment costs.
It is subject to various constraints that limit the solution space; electricity and heat
demands, transmission line capacity, storage constraints, unit commitment constraints
and policy constraints.
Balmorel is modelled as a perfect, liberalised market with an hourly time resolution re-
sembling the European day-ahead market.
Similar to this market, Balmorel does not
guarantee that the exact energy dispatch is feasible in the physical grid.
Balmorel operates with three levels of geography; (1) countries, (2) regions within countries
where the electricity demands are defined and (3) areas within regions where heat demands
and energy generation are defined. Electricity can flow unconstrained within a region.
Exchange of electricity between regions is constrained by the net transfer capacity of the
transmission lines. District heating is modelled for Scandinavia, the Baltic and Germany.
Individual heating is modelled for all countries.
A Balmorel year consists of 52 weeks and 168 hours per week. The year has to start on a
Monday with time step 00:00-01:00. Thus, the input demand and generation profiles must
be sliced to fit this format. The start and end UTC time stamps for each weather year is
given in appendix B.
For energy production and demand, Balmorel distinguishes between annual levels (annual
energy demand and full load hours) and higher resolution profiles (normalized hourly or
weekly profiles). These two parameters can be defined independently, but linear scaling
of the profile takes place to align it to the annual metric.
While Balmorel has full foresight within a year, it is not able to anticipate future years.
Consequently, I will not study the compounded effect of successive weather years.
Existing capacity is included until end of lifetime (exogenous decommissioning) or until it
is economically optimal to shut it down (endogenous decommissioning).
Policy restrictions constrain the solution space in addition to the physical constraints. For
instance, there are limitations to investments in certain technologies. These constraints
represent in many cases political or assumed limitations, but can also indicate physical
13
==PAGE:21==
limitations (e.g. maximum resource potential for offshore wind in a given area). Similarly,
there are limits on the expansion rate of transmission lines. There are also policies for
penalising negative externalities.
This includes most notably an emission cost of 128
EUR20/tCO2eq.
in 2030 increasing to 190 EUR20/tCO2eq.
in 2050.
The weighted
average cost of capital (WACC) for investments is 5%.
Additional inputs for the energy system model are given in appendix F.
5.2
Energy demand
Balmorel distinguishes between two overall types of demand: heat and electricity. They
can further be divided into the categories shown in table 5.3. The optimization process
can find synergies between sectors (e.g. electrification of heating and storage of heat) to
satisfy demands in a least-cost manner.
I assume that only classic electricity and low temperature heat are weather dependent.
Consequently, I assume the remaining demands are weather independent and are as given
in the existing Balmorel data set.
5.2.1
Annual demand levels
Annual electricity demand projections are part of the existing Balmorel data set. It is
primarily based on a combination of the European Commission’s MIX scenario from the
European Green Deal, ENTSOE TYNDP 2022 Global Ambition scenario and REPowerEU
[29]. Likewise, district heating demands are part of the existing data set. These existing
annual levels are given in table 5.1 and table 5.2, and I will assume they represent an
average weather year. Thus, to represent the levels in a given scenario and weather year,
I scale the relevant levels by the correction factors explained in section 4.4.
The overarching political ambition to reduce greenhouse gas emissions fosters an electri-
fication of transport, heating and industry towards 2050. Whereas the classic electricity
demand stays almost constant, new demands are introduced as a replacement for fossil
fuels in the mentioned sectors. Most notable is power-to-X which constitutes almost 1/3
of the total electricity demand in 2050.
2030
2040
2050
Classic electricity
2680
2681
2685
Electric vehicles
158
298
432
Industry heat
64
222
386
Power-to-X
388
998
1914
Other
26
55
74
Total
3316
4255
5491
Table 5.1: Electricity demand [TWh] in the average weather year [24].
2030
2040
2050
Individual heating
1277
1291
1302
District heating
348
345
343
Total
1625
1636
1645
Table 5.2: Heat demand [TWh] in the average weather year [24]. Note that it represents
end use demand and electricity can be used to supply this.
14
==PAGE:22==
5.2.2
Profiles
The time varying profiles of classic electricity and low temperature heat are modelled as
outlined in chapter 4. The same profiles and correction factors are given to all relevant
areas within a region.
5.2.3
Flexibility
Balmorel allows flexibility in meeting energy demands (demand response) at certain costs
as outlined in table 5.3.
Demand type
Flexibility
Flexibility cost
Classic electricity
10% of average demand can
be moved up to 2 hours in
time.
15-30 EUR/MWh
Electric vehicles
65 % of demand can be
moved
up
to
4
hours
while obeying driving con-
straints.
15 EUR/MWh
Individual heating
Average
demand
can
be
moved up to 2 hours
10 EUR/MWh
District heating
Demand
can
be
fulfilled
both using electricity and
conventional fuels.
Alternative fuel and emis-
sion costs
Industry heat
Alternative
fuels
can
be
used as a backup to elec-
tricity.
Alternative fuel and emis-
sion costs
Power-to-X
Demand is constant and
storage can be added to
allow flexible use of elec-
trolyzers.
Cost of electrolyzers and
storage.
Table 5.3: Flexibility assumptions for electricity demands in scenario year 2050 [30].
Note that individual heating has no fuel switching flexibility. Furthermore, it is an exoge-
nous investment (sunk cost not subject to optimization) and a combination of heat pumps
and electric boilers. I base the variation of the heat pump coeﬀicient of performance on
a reference year in the existing data set. The actual coeﬀicient in a given weather year
would be different.
5.3
Energy generation
Examples of wind, solar pv and hydro power profiles are given in appendix C. Full load
hours for all weather years and areas are given in appendix K.
5.3.1
Wind and solar power
Solar PV and wind generation data is obtained from the DTU CorRES model [31]. The
model is based on the ERA5 weather reanalysis data set [12]. For the wind data sets,
the ERA5 wind speeds are further calibrated using the Global Wind Atlas for improved
accuracy [32]. The data set is available as hourly normalised generation profiles and the
generation assumes a specific deployment of plants in a given location.
15
==PAGE:23==
The data is available aggregated to the geographical zones used in ENTSOE’s Pan-
European Climate Database (PECD). In general, I have mapped the national zones to
the Balmorel areas. In cases where Balmorel has multiple generation areas per country, I
have applied lower level PECD zones.
For wind power, different generation profiles are available using different turbine technolo-
gies and placement assumptions (known as resource grades). Wake losses are considered in
the wind farm assumptions. I restrict the set of wind turbine technologies to the following:
1. Existing turbines: Generation is based on the 2019 mix of onshore and offshore
turbine technologies respectively and corresponding power curves.
2. New investments:
(a) Onshore: Specific power 277 W/m2, hub height 100 m, resource grade B
(b) Offshore: Specific power 370 W/m2, hub height 155 m, standard resource grade
For solar PV, the CorRES model uses ERA5-Land meteorological reanalysis data and
converts the irradiance to power using the python package pvlib [31].
Of all possible
locations, solar units are assumed to be placed in the 50 % best locations with south-
facing panels and tilt angles resembling existing installations. Thus, these represent ideal
conditions that are more likely at utility scale solar farms rather than small-scale rooftop
installations.
Cost assumptions of wind turbines and solar power are given in appendix F.
5.3.2
Hydro power
The amount of hydro power available for dispatch is determined by the hydrological con-
ditions for a given location and weather year.
The actual dispatch of hydro power is
determined endogenously by the energy system model, but water inflow profiles must be
given exogenously.
Hydro inflow profiles are available in the PECD and published by ENTSOE as part of
the 2022 European Resource Adequacy Assessment (ERAA) [10]. They model a transfer
function fitting weather reanalysis data to the natural water inflow in a training period
(2010-2017). Based on this function and historical weather data, they hindcast the water
inflow for the period 1982-2016. Different scenario years are available (2024-2030) where
different capacities are assumed. I use 2024 as a conservative choice, since hydro power
requires very specific conditions and may not be easily expandable. I calculate the full load
hours based on the annual sum of water inflows and the capacity stated in the ERAA data
set. And I use the same capacity to normalize the inflow profiles as input to Balmorel.
I consider the following grouped hydro resources:
1. Run of river and pondage are hydro plants with little to no storage capacity (max
24 hours) and have weekly inflows given.
2. Reservoir and open loop pump storage are hydro plants with natural water inflow,
storage capacity and the possibility of pumping water from the lower reservoir to
the upper one. I resample the given daily inflows to hourly resolution using linear
interpolation.
Closed loop hydro plants are part of Balmorel and modelled as storage. They do not have
natural water inflows, and I will therefore not consider the weather impact due to their
weak link to weather variables.
16
==PAGE:24==
In the ERAA data, all hydro power in Norway, Finland and Sweden is modelled as hydro
reservoirs.
Using the data as such will lead to an overestimation of flexibility by this
energy source, since some capacity is run of river. Thus, for these countries, I use the
inflow profiles from reservoir plants as an approximation of run-of-river. I upsample the
weekly data to hourly resolution using linear interpolation. Reservoir plants allow a greater
inflow per time than what can be produced by the installed capacity (because of the storage
capacity). To use these profiles as run of river, I have therefore clipped the capacity factor
to a maximum of 1. Finally, I have calibrated Norway and Sweden by scaling inflow and
full load hours with a factor of 0.9 to better approximate historical production.
I assume no endogenous investments in hydro power are possible. Only already planned
expansions in the existing data set are included.
5.4
Procedure for simulation
Figure 5.1: Overview of the simulation procedure for the energy system.
The procedure for simulating the energy system is outlined below and shown in fig. 5.1.
5.4.1
Investment model (BB2)
I construct an average year for making investment decisions (in Balmorel known as a
BB2 run). Full load hours in each area are based on the long term average of weather
years considered. The demand correction factor is similarly the long term mean and is
by definition 1. I base demand and generation profiles on weather year 2012, as this year
approximated the long term annual average of weather variables.
To make the optimization problem computationally tractable, I reduce the number of time
steps to 26 weeks and 12 hours per week. Time aggregation is applied to group and average
hours with similar characteristics. The resulting 312 time steps should ideally reflect the
variation of the full year.
Investments are made for scenario years 2030, 2040 and 2050 consecutively. Thus, invest-
ments made in 2030 will be available as existing infrastructure in 2040 and 2050.
5.4.2
Operation model (BB1)
I only consider scenario year 2050 for operation and dispatch.
All weather years are
simulated individually as possible scenario variations of 2050. Investments and existing
capacities from BB2 are available, but no additional investments are possible in BB1.
For each weather year, operations are planned for the whole year based on an annual
foresight. I consider all 52, each with 12 representative hours, and time aggregation is
therefore applied. This is done to plan the use of storage optimally over the year (including
hydro, power-to-X and batteries). The result is an assignment of storage start and end
level for each week that is passed on to the dispatch model.
17
==PAGE:25==
5.4.3
Dispatch model (BB3)
For dispatching energy, I consider all 52 weeks and 168 hours per week with no time
aggregation. Weeks are run sequentially, thus the foresight of the model is limited to one
week. This model ensures that demand is satisfied within each hour while complying with
all other constraints.
If the model is unable to meet the demand with the given capacities and constraints, it can
utilise a backstop technology. It is a virtual technology that is modelled based on a gas
turbine. It has no investment cost, but instead a variable O&M cost of 10.32 EUR20/MWh
in addition to a fuel cost of 16.05 EUR20/GJ. The high cost ensures it is only dispatched
as a last resort. Backstop generation serves as an evaluation measure of how much energy
cannot be dispatch by the current system for a given weather year. Backstop capacity is
similarly a measure of the additional needed capacity.
18
==PAGE:26==
6
Model validation
In this chapter, I validate the electricity demand model and the energy system model to
ensure they can deliver suﬀiciently accurate results.
6.1
Electricity demand model validation
Before applying the demand model, they should be validated and tested for accuracy.
Note that a unique model for each region exists, which would be too comprehensive to
show in this report. Examples are given in this section, and other variations are available
in appendix D.
6.1.1
Regression model diagnostics
A well-behaving linear regression model should fulfill basic requirements to produce valid
results as described in [33]. First of all, the input data should be accurately measured.
Some outliers are present in the original demand data from ENTSOE. They appear as
sharp spikes indicating excessive demand ramping. I will assume they are errors in the
data that should be ignored or removed. This can both impact the accuracy of the model
fitting and the result of the out-of-sample validation. The spikes are rare enough that they
should have low impact on the fitting as it aims at minimizing the total sum of squared
residuals. However, if they represent actual demand ramps, it should be noted that the
model is not suited for reproducing such rare stochastic events. This would require a
dedicated security of supply analysis.
Secondly, the model assumes a linear relationship between the response variable and the
regressors. As seen in fig. 6.1, the effect of temperature on demand is non-linear, but it
can be approximated relatively well with piece-wise temperature regressors and a break
point at 15 ◦C. The model has some problems reproducing demands seen at high ambient
temperatures, as seen in the figure above 25 ◦C. This is especially visible in France and
Italy. This is because of the autoregressive part of the model which gives inertia in the
response to changes in the regressors. Hours with very high temperatures do not last long
enough to yield a strong response from the model. This is a consequence of the model
being optimized for low temperatures.
Disabling the autoregressive part of the model
would negatively impact the precision in the colder months.
As an alternative to the regression model, I performed some tests with a simple machine-
learning tool, Random Forest, in the initial stages of the modelling process. The strength
of such a model is that it is not bounded by the linearity assumption. However, the results
were similar to the regression model. Eventually, I chose not to proceed with the Random
Forest model, as the functioning of such a model is not as easily explainable as a standard
regression model.
The third assumption is that the regressors are independent. If a regressor can be formed
as a linear combination of one or more of the other regressors, the model will be unable to
assign accurate coeﬀicients. If for example two temperature profiles are very similar, the
model is unable to tell if the demand changes because of one or the other temperature pro-
file. Initial model runs included temperature profiles from all gridded sample points with
no restrictions on model coeﬀicients. It resulted in temperature coeﬀicients with very high
positive and and negative values. These values appeared arbitrary, likely as a result of the
reasons mentioned above. To remedy this, I reduced the number of temperature regressors
19
==PAGE:27==
by clustering and I enforced constraints on the temperature and daylength coeﬀicients, as
previously explained. This has reduced multicollinearity issues to a minimum.
Figure 6.1: Example of scatterplot of electricity demand and temperature for France.
The fourth basic requirement of a linear model is that the residuals are independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d).
If the residuals are not independent of each other, they
may show some pattern, which means that there are still trends left in the reference yt
not accounted for in the fitted response ˆyt. It can be a result of one or more missing
regressors. The residuals in fig. 6.2 show some amount of autocorrelation in lag 24 which
implies there is still some diurnal structure not accounted for by the regressors. However,
the dummy system representing the hour of the day should be suﬀicient to capture this
structure and the autocorrelation at this lag is not easily redeemable. Apart from this, no
significant autocorrelation is visible.
Figure 6.2: Example of partial autocorrelation in residuals for the model fitted to France.
20
==PAGE:28==
I have calculated the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient between training residuals in different
regions (see appendix E for a full overview). While it is not always the case, the residuals in
some neighbouring regions appear to correlate. For instance, Poland and Czech Republic
have a coeﬀicient of 0.66, NO1 and NO2 have a coeﬀicient of 0.65 and France and Belgium
have a coeﬀicient of 0.61.
This suggests that there could be some trends left in the
residuals that affect locations in close proximity simultaneously. It is likely that it could
be improved further by including more relevant regressors. They could be weather related
(e.g. precipitation), but they could also be related to specific cultural behaviour (e.g. time
pattern of using the kitchen). However, in order to avoid overfitting the model, I have
followed the approach of including only regressors that have a clear, explainable effect on
the demand.
Figure 6.3: Example of QQ-plot assuming Gaussian residuals (left) and fitted-vs-residual
plot (right). Based on training residuals for the model fitted to France.
The requirement of an identical residual distribution implies that all residuals are samples
from the same probability distribution. It is often assumed that it is a normal distribution
with mean 0 and constant variance, i.e. ϵ ∼N(0, σ2), although the type of distribution is
not essential. The constant variance implies that the residuals are homoscedastic, i.e. the
variance is independent of the response and thus the regressors. The QQ-plot in fig. 6.3
shows that the distribution of the residuals deviate from a theoretical normal distribution.
However, the histogram in fig. 6.4 shows that a t-distribution can give a better fit. The
mean approximates zero and the same distribution appears to fit both the residuals of the
training period and the test period. Having an accurate model of the residual distribution
is mainly important if one wishes to determine uncertainty intervals. The homoscedasticity
assumption is not severely violated, although the residuals tend to be a little higher for
medium size loads.
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 6.4: Example of training- and test residual distribution for the model fitted to
France. Training residuals are from the model fitting (2015-2018). Test residuals refer to
the residuals of the test period (2019) using 1-step ahead prediction.
6.1.2
Demand model accuracy
To validate the model accuracy, I use mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) as an
overall measure inspired by [16]:
MAPE = 1
T
T
X
t=1
 ˆyt −yt
yt
 × 100%
(6.1)
where ˆyt is the model response and yt is a reference response.
I calculate MAPE to perform (1) an out-of-sample validation using measured demand
in 2019 as the reference response and (2) a hindcast validation using electricity demands
modelled by ECMWF [11] as the reference response. Note that I perform MAPE validation
using the simulated electricity profile with the full temperature dependency.
An example of the out-of-sample performance of the model is given in fig. 6.5.
The
prediction intervals are based on 1000 Monte Carlo simulations of the test year, where
each time step is given an error term sampled from the t-distribution of the residuals of
the fitted model. From this range of simulations, I use the 2.5 and 97.5 percentile for
each time step to form the interval visible in the figure. Note that the intervals are for
validation and illustration purposes only. The actual demand profile used for the energy
system modelling in chapter 5 uses a central demand estimate and is therefore treated as
deterministic.
22
==PAGE:30==
Figure 6.5: Example of out-of-sample validation for France
A table of MAPE for all regions is available in appendix D.
The out-of-sample MAPE is between 3-6% for most regions, but with some notable outliers.
Luxembourg (MAPE: 15%) is a much smaller region than some of the others and individual
stochastic behaviour will dominate more than in larger regions. In Great Britain (MAPE:
12%), the measured data showed many of the aforementioned spikes in demand. In south-
mid Norway, NO5 (MAPE: 7.91%), there is an offsets between the training and test data.
This can be a violation of the assumption that the demand pattern stays the same between
2015-2019 (e.g. because of electric vehicle adoption). It could also be because of region
boundaries being redefined. Switzerland (MAPE: 6.21 %) shows a lot of volatility that the
model cannot fully capture. Weekly and diurnal patterns are not as regular as in other
regions.
The MAPE of the hindcast is also between 3-6% for most regions, with some notable
outliers in Luxembourg (MAPE: 32.5%), Poland (MAPE: 11.4%) and Austria (MAPE:
10.5%). The issues in the regions are generally related to the demand level being offset,
while the trends over time are similar.
6.1.3
Validation of temperature dependency of classic electricity
I remove parts of the temperature dependency in the electricity demand to synthesise
a classic profile as described in section 4.2.3.
The initial simulation dictates that all
temperature dependency in demand below 15 ◦C is due to electric heating. On an annual
basis, it amounts to the electricity shares seen in fig. 6.6 used for classic consumption and
electrical heating. For comparison, a reference split based on [24] is also given. The initial
model split captures accurately that e.g. France and Finland have more electric heating
than e.g. Denmark. There is some deviation in Norway, parts of Sweden and Switzerland.
They tend to have more temperature dependent behaviour in their classic electricity than
assumed by the model, which is the reason for the deviation. The model attempts to
correct for this in the final classic electricity profiles as described in section 4.2.3. Note
that the reference is most likely also based on an estimate of the split, since accurate
measurements would require separate meters within each building.
23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 6.6: Initial model split between classic electricity and electricity used for heating.
Reference based on [24].
6.2
Energy system model validation
Before obtaining results from a future energy system, it is important to first assure that the
current energy system can be reproduced with reasonable accuracy. I therefore simulate
the dispatch from the existing capacities in scenario year 2016 and using weather year
2016. This should be comparable to the operation of the actual energy system in 2016
(available from the ENTSOE Transparency Platform [14]). I make the comparison based
on annual average electricity prices and annual dispatch of electricity from wind, solar PV
and hydro generation.
An initial test showed that some existing generation capacities were missing in the existing
data set. I have updated the most important wind, solar and hydro capacities based on
data available in the ENTSOE Transparency platform.
The result of the validation is shown in fig. 6.7. There is some noticeable discrepancy. The
onshore wind generation in Germany deviates from the measured, which could be result
of congestion issues. Germany only has one bidding zone but is modelled with 4 regions
in Balmorel. It could also be an inaccuracy in mapping PECD areas to Balmorel areas.
Regarding offshore wind in Great Britain, the ENTSOE data might be inaccurate. The
UK Department for Business, Energy
Industrial Strategy reports a production of 16.4
TWh in 2016 [34], which is closer to the Balmorel generation.
The solar generation in Germany and Italy is overestimated in Balmorel. The CorRES
data is based on south facing panels, which is mostly true for industrial scale plants, rather
than households. It is furthermore possible that some generation from household panels
is measured below meter.
Countries with large hydro reservoirs (e.g. Norway) are challenging to validate, as the
production in one year may be the result of inflow from previous years. In the case of
Switzerland, the International Energy Agency reports a production of 36.7 TWh in 2016
[35], indicating a possible inaccuracy in the ENTSOE data.
Electricity prices seem to be within the expected range and follow the right trends across
bidding zones. However, an annual average can be the result of many different distributions
of hourly prices, which are not visible in the plot. The electricity price in parts of Norway
is overestimated, while in other parts underestimated.
This could be a sign that the
transmission line capacities in Balmorel are not entirely correct or the distribution of
hydro capacities is not correct.
24
==PAGE:32==
(a) Electricity generation.
(b) Electricity prices. France, Italy and Austria are not available.
Figure 6.7: Comparison of Balmorel results in scenario year 2016 and ENTSOE statistics
from the same year.
25
==PAGE:33==
7
Results
In this chapter, I first present the optimized future energy system. This is followed by
the dispatch results of the 2050 system for the average weather year and weather years
1982-2016. As the focus is on the robustness of the aggregate system, the results are given
as a total for all countries (unless otherwise stated).
7.1
Optimized system capacities
This exogenous growth in demand and political ambition to reduce greenhouse gas emis-
sions drives the model to make new power capacity investments as seen in table 7.1.
2030
2040
2050
Bio and waste
18
26
27
Electric storage
35
73
174
Natural gas plants
127
127
127
Offshore wind
124
280
433
Onshore wind
266
385
496
Solar PV
571
784
1195
Total
1140
1675
2452
Table 7.1: New power capacity investments [GW] accummulated over scenario years.
Investments in solar PV and wind turbines make up 86% of the new power capacity in-
vestments in 2050. The installed capacities in individual countries relative to the assumed
capacity potential can be seen in appendix G. Onshore wind and solar PV capacities are
particularly limited. The installed amounts of onshore wind is equal to the maximum in
almost all countries indicating that the model sees further benefits in expanding these
capacities, if the constraint could be relaxed. The same is seen for offshore wind in France
and Italy as well as solar PV in several central-southern European countries.
To integrate the large share of VRE, the model has invested in 174 GW/1.04 TWh of
electric grid storage by 2050. Furthermore, it proves optimal to invest in 127 GW natural
gas capacity in addition to the existing 140 GW.
Heating is increasingly electrified towards 2050. District heating areas invest in 29 GW
large scale heat pumps and 1.7 TWh heat storage. Individual heating areas have 321
GW heat pumps and 141 GW electric boilers installed in 2050 along with 424 GWh heat
storage. The large district heating storage indicates that there is flexibility potential which
could bring benefits to the whole system.
The invested electrolyzer capacity is 582 GW along with 148 TWh hydrogen storage
in 2050. The transmission grid all over Europe is expanded to allow more exchange of
electricity between regions. It appears that there is further expansion potential, as the
model reached a limit of 3 GW expansion by 2050 between most regions.
Additional capacity results are given in appendix G.
26
==PAGE:34==
7.2
Dispatch 2050: average weather year
The energy model is able to serve the demand in the average weather year with an ag-
gregate electricity generation mix of 7% hydro, 26% solar PV and 55% wind. Due to the
intermittent nature of VRE, this naturally requires flexibility in the system to remain in
balance. An example case of this is seen in fig. 7.1 considering generation and consumption
in a single country (Denmark) as well as the aggregate group of countries.
A major source of flexibility is provided by the electrolyzer capacity along with the hy-
drogen storage. The electrolyzer capacity has 3292 full load hours in the average year,
meaning there is a considerable overcapacity to provide flexibility.
(a) Denmark
(b) Aggregation of all countries
Figure 7.1: Hourly generation and consumption of electricity. Example for the average
weather year in scenario year 2050.
27
==PAGE:35==
In fig. 7.1a, the production of power-to-X is seen to be especially active during the high
wind periods in Denmark. Solar gives spikes each day, and to integrate this, the model
curtails wind. Offshore wind has the highest variable O&M cost, so it is most cost eﬀicient
to curtail this. Denmark is interlinked with neighboring countries, and there is a strong
import and export at the same time, suggesting that Denmark acts as a bridge connecting
demand and production in neighbouring countries.
In this time frame, Denmark can
balance the demand side flexibility, VRE production and import/export such that the use
of dispatchable generation is almost none.
When considering the aggregate system for the same time period in fig. 7.1b, the variations
are smoother.
Wind generation follows similar trends, but with smoother variations.
There is still curtailment of wind in the middle of the day to integrate solar. Interestingly,
dispatchable plants are operating at the same time as wind is curtailed. This indicates
congestion in the system. However, the gas plants are operating quite flexibly (820 full load
hours) along with hydro power and electricity storage. Instead of dispatching constantly
as a baseload capacity, they mostly fill the gaps left by the VRE as seen in the figure.
Batteries and hydro power tend to operate in the hours between sun set and sun rise. It
is worth noting that the hourly structure of the consumption profile no longer resembles
today’s profile with a peak in the evening. The classic demand is rather small compared to
the additional, flexible demands. In the aggregate system in this time window, electrolyzers
tend to follow the diurnal cycle of the sun.
In summary, the energy system is able to utilize a multitude of flexibility options ranging
from electricity exchange, storage, dispatchable generation and demand response. When
dispatching energy with hourly resolution, there is a need for 8 GW/520 GWh of backstop
generation. This is a result of slightly suboptimal planning in the operation model. This
amount should be seen in relation to the need for backstop generation in other weather
years.
7.3
Dispatch 2050: weather years 1982-2016
The following results are from the dispatch of the energy system in scenario year 2050
described in section 7.1 but with variations from weather years 1982-2016.
7.3.1
Aggregate overview
The use of dispatchable generation is an overall indicator of which weather years the VRE
resources are least adequate. A detailed composition is seen in fig. 7.2, which reveals that
the inter-annual flexibility of these fuels is primarily provided by natural gas.
Figure 7.2: Composition of dispatchable generation in different weather years
28
==PAGE:36==
Gas consumption ranges from 154 TWh in weather year 2005 to 378 TWh in weather year
2010. Nuclear also provides some flexibility ranging from 261 TWh in weather year 1983
to 334 TWh in 2010. A full overview is seen in appendix H.
The need for dispatchable generation seems to be particularly driven by a combination of
heat demand, wind and hydro generation.
Figure 7.3: Scatter plots showing dependency between weather related inputs and dis-
patchable generation. Indices use the average weather year as basis. Supply is defined as
generation without curtailment.
29
==PAGE:37==
Scatter plots are given in fig. 7.3 relating the weather induced supply and demand of energy
to the consumption of dispatchable fuels. The values are indexed using the average weather
year as basis. The cold weather years of 1996 and 2010 are some of the most demanding
in terms of dispatchable generation. In those years, the cold weather is combined with
below average hydro and wind production, which exacerbates the challenge and leads to the
highest needs for dispatchable generation. Weather year 2010 has the highest consumption
(30% above the average), despite 1996 being both colder and dryer. This is because 2010
has the lowest wind production of all the weather years considered. Wind is the single
largest source of electricity in the system and provides more than 50% in all weather years.
The system is therefore particularly sensitive to inter-annual variations in wind. Contrary
to 2010, the most favourable wind year (1998) reduces the use of dispatchable fuels by
almost 15 % compared to the average year. The inter-annual variation of solar has low
impact on the need for dispatchable generation as seen in fig. 7.3. In contrast, hydro
has a more clear correlation, despite hydro constituting a smaller share of the energy
mix than solar. It could be due to the fact that hydro reservoir plants can be seen as
semi-dispatchable, and therefore better able to replace the role of e.g. natural gas.
The generation in absolute terms across weather years is seen in fig. 7.4. Despite the
challenges posed by different weather years, dispatchable generation remains less than
20% of the total electricity mix. The other >80% can be supplied by VRE.
An overview of multiple parameters in all weather years is given in fig. 7.5.
There is
a strong connection between the use of dispatchable generation, electricity prices and
emissions. As mentioned, natural gas provides most of the inter-annual flexibility, and
it is associated with fuel costs and carbon emissions. The boxplots in fig. 7.5 show the
regional spread of the annual average price. The boxes denote the 25th, 50th and 75th
percentiles, the whiskers show the minimum-maximum range without outliers and dots
represent outliers. The 50th percentile (mean) ranges from 53 EUR20/MWh in weather
year 1998 to 90 EUR20/MWh in weather year 2010. The same two weather years emit
99 MtCO2eq. and 206 MtCO2eq., respectively. Note that dispatchable generation is seen
to have higher percentage deviations than solar, wind and hydro.
This is a result of
dispatchable generation constituting a smaller share of the total electricity mix.
The magnitude of the needed backstop capacity does not seem to have a trivial connection
to the aggregate representations of the weather years. A more detailed analysis is available
in section 7.3.4.
Figure 7.4: Electricity generation mix across all weather years. Curtailed VRE energy is
deducted.
30
==PAGE:38==
Figure 7.5: Overview of weather year variations of scenario year 2050. Supply is defined
as generation without curtailment to show the available VRE resource. Indices use the
average weather year as basis. The box plot of electricity prices shows the regional spread
of annual average prices.
31
==PAGE:39==
The dynamics of electric heating is shown in fig. 7.6.
Individual heating is electrified
entirely (as an exogenous decision), while district heating generates 34% of its heat from
electricity in the average year. In the coldest years, the use of electricity in district heating
decreases. The reason for this is that district heating has fuel switching flexibility. It
increases the use of thermal plants primarily based on biomass and fossil fuels to supply
the heat in very cold years where electricity is expensive and scarce. Individual heating
has only the option to store a limited amount of heat and can only switch between heat
pumps and electric boilers. Therefore, individual heating has quite limited inter-annual
flexibility, whereas district heating has more.
Figure 7.6: Inter-annual dynamics of electrification of heating.
7.3.2
Geographical overview
In fig. 7.7 and fig. 7.8, the geographical spread of electricity prices is shown as boxplots
per region and price maps for certain years. There is a pronounced north-south division
noticeable. Similar to the behaviour of the 2016 system in section 6.2, the lowest elec-
tricity prices are found in northern Europe. However, it is also here the most volatility
is seen. The cold weather and low wind/hydro of 2010 leads to average prices of 80-90
EUR20/MWh, whereas the high wind and the medium hydro conditions in weather year
1998 yield average prices of 32-42 EUR20/MWh in the same regions.
Southern Europe (especially Italy) have high average electricity prices. They are exac-
erbated by unfavourable weather conditions, but they are consistently higher than or as
high as in the north. Both solar and wind capacities in these countries are limited by the
assumed potential constraints (see appendix G). If the model was allowed to expand VRE
and/or transmission, the prices could be lower.
Figure 7.7: Inter-annual variability of annual average electricity prices per bidding zone.
32
==PAGE:40==
(a) 1998: High wind, mid-high hydro,
mid-low solar, mid temperature
(b) 2000: Mid wind, high hydro,
mid solar, high temperature
(c) 2003: Low wind, low hydro,
high solar, mid-high temperature
(d) 2010: Low wind, low hydro,
mid solar, low temperature
Figure 7.8: Geographical variations in annual average electricity prices.
33
==PAGE:41==
7.3.3
Intra-annual variations of selected weather years
The variations within weather year 2010 and 1998 are shown in fig. 7.9 to exemplify two
extremes in terms of need for dispatchable fuels. In weather year 2010, the heat demand
is at an elevated level for several months, whereas the same level is only reached a few
weeks in weather year 1998. In 2010, the cold weather coincides with volatile wind, and
dispatchable fuels must backup the wind to deliver the energy needed for heating. The
wind production in 2010 is low over the summer, and while solar power is complementary,
it is not suﬀicient to satisfy the demand for power-to-X. Consequently, dispatchable fuels
are used significantly more for two-three consecutive months over the summer compared
to 1998.
(a) Variations within weather year 1998
(b) Variations within weather year 2010
Figure 7.9: Comparison of two weather years in scenario year 2050. Rolling 4-day average
for illustration.
34
==PAGE:42==
Figure 7.10: Distribution of electricity prices in 2050 for weather years 1998 and 2010.
Observations represent hourly averages across bidding zones. Dashed lines indicates annual
averages. A few outliers around 340 EUR20/MWh for 2010 are not visible in this figure.
The annual average prices considered in fig. 7.5 and fig. 7.8 do not show the hourly
distribution that can have more volatility. Histograms based on hourly prices for the two
example weather years are seen in fig. 7.10. Both example weather years have two peaks;
one close to 0 EUR20/MWh and one around 120 EUR20/MWh. The first peak represents
presumable hours where VRE sets the price and the second one where dispatchable fuels
set the price. It is therefore clear that significant volatility is seen within a year. Increasing
the number of hours where VRE is a price setter can lower the prices significantly.
7.3.4
Capacity adequacy
The variation in demand for gas is one issue that electricity producers may need to handle.
This requires the infrastructure and market incentives to provide highly variable amounts
each year. What seems to be a more critical issue is to have the needed capacity installed
for the most extreme weather years. In Balmorel, this is denoted as backstop capacity and
is modelled as a virtual, limitless gas turbine. This is a potentially important measure,
as it can reveal how the investments made in the average year may be insuﬀicient in a
particular weather year. The backstop capacity was illustrated in fig. 7.5 and is also given
as a table along with the corresponding fuel usage in appendix I.
The backstop capacity indicates that up to approximately 147 GW of additional power
capacity and 17 TWh of electricity is needed in the most extreme weather year. Compared
to the installed 267 GW gas plants, this could indicate severe inadequacy. However, there
seems to be no trivial connection between the backstop capacity and the annual weather
variables in fig. 7.5.
I have investigated the most severe cases (weather years 1984, 1991 and 2001) in greater
time resolution. Some similarities appear which are exemplified with a high time resolution
example of 2001 seen in fig. 7.11. A low wind period appears for several consecutive days
in week 34. Meanwhile, the demand for power-to-X follows the diurnal pattern of solar PV
production, but the flexibility is insuﬀicient to respond to the low wind situation. Other
power plants must therefore dispatch instead of wind. Thermal power plants are modelled
with a certain downtime for maintenance, and in many cases, the availability is lowest
in the same summer weeks as discussed here. In summary, these conditions necessitate
backstop generation.
35
==PAGE:43==
The hourly power-to-X demand is modelled as constant, but in each week, the operation
of the electrolyzer production is planned such that it reaches certain storage levels. This
is done in the operation model based a time aggregate overview of the year. If the time
aggregated week for instance indicates high wind, the electrolyzer will indirectly be sched-
uled to run at high load in this week to reach the target storage levels. This limits the
electrolyzer flexibility to respond to a low wind situation if that should appear instead.
Figure 7.11: Example of backstop usage in weather year 2001.
Interestingly, the operation model actually plans to use backstop when planning the full
year. This indicates that there is no way to restructure the operation schedule to avoid
insuﬀicient generation. However, whereas the operation model expects a need for addi-
tional 6 GW capacity in 1984, the dispatch model actually finds a need for 147 GW. This
indicates instead that the operation model has inaccurate information when planning the
year.
On the one hand, it is unlikely that the real operators of electrolyzers have perfect foresight
to plan production of power-to-X over a whole year to reach annual targets. Thus, there
could be situations where demand for power-to-X dictates that it has to be produced
despite unfavourable weather conditions. On the other hand, the demand may be price
elastic enough to react to the market signals. If the system is unable to provide enough
electricity, the price will rise considerably, which in turn may lower the demand for power-
to-X.
In summary, I cannot conclude how severe the capacity inadequacy is. It can be a result of
model limitations as described above, it can be a result of intricate local weather conditions
or it can be a combination of both.
36
==PAGE:44==
8
Discussion
In this chapter, I put the main results into a wider perspective and discuss the applica-
bility of using different weather years in studies of energy systems. I will also relate the
limitations of the methods to suggestions for further studies.
8.1
Main findings
Natural gas is suggested by the model as a key driver to mitigate inter-annual variability in
weather dependent energy systems. It is seen that the use of natural gas is two and a half
times higher in the lowest weather year compared to the highest. The European countries
have committed themselves to reaching carbon neutrality in 2050 [1], so it is debateable
whether natural gas is a feasible fuel. The model dispatches this fuel for purely economical
reasons, but in principle biogas could offer the same flexibility (given that this resource
is plentiful). This would decrease the emissions seen in fig. 7.5, but likely increase the
cost and exacerbate the cost difference between years. While the increase of natural gas
is significant by itself, it stays below 7% in the electricity mix. The generation of power
is consistently above 80% VRE across all weather years.
Weather years 1996 and 2010 are two of the years that required the most dispatchable
generation. This is due to a combination of cold weather and low production from wind
and hydro. This stresses the importance of using time coherent data sets to shine light on
the joint probability of weather events.
While extreme weather years can lead to emissions as high as 206 MtCO2eq., it is still
lower than in the 2016 system which was 970 MtCO2eq. (and did not include transport,
industry heat and expansion of individual heating).
8.2
Inter-annual variability in studies of energy systems
As I have investigated inter-annual weather variations in this study, it naturally raises the
question: In which cases can multiple weather years give additional insights compared to
using a single year? I see at least three use cases.
The first way to use the data set is to assess the stability and operation of an already
planned energy system. This is what I have focused on in this study. Even if the system is
not optimized to handle extreme weather years, society will still expect a fully functional
energy system to be operating during those time periods. A study such as this can therefore
reveal which measures the system utilizes to remain in balance and what the economic
and environmental consequences are. Is the amount of gas usage feasible? Is the cost
difference between weather years tolerable? It can also reveal if the planned system has
enough capacity or flexibility. This is a question I have not been able to give a clear answer
to, but still one that is highly relevant and should be investigated further.
The second use case for multiple weather years is for particular planning problems related
to security of supply. Examples of this could be investments in gas plants, storage facilities
or biomass value chains. Such a study can for instance help in the design of capacity
mechanisms [36] in the energy markets, such that the right incentives exist to invest in
infrastructure that ensures a certain standard of security of supply.
37
==PAGE:45==
The third way of using different weather years is as a sensitivity study to general investment
planning. Should investments be planned based on relatively rare weather conditions?
This is probably an unlikely case, as it is expensive to invest in large capacities that sit
idle most of the time. However, it is also unlikely that society will implement the exact
capacities recommended by an energy planning tool. Having multiple weather years can
help in quantifying the uncertainty range of those investments. It can for instance be
used to explore the trade-off between building more VRE generation and building backup
capacity. This data set could therefore be an extra tool to guide decision makers when
planning the energy system. I used 35 weather years in this study, but it may be enough
to only use some of the most extreme for future studies.
A simplified example of such a sensitivity study is seen in table 8.1. Using weather year
2010, the model invests in higher VRE capacities overall since the VRE capacity factor is
lower and because more energy is needed for heating.
Average year
Weather year 2010
Bio and waste
27
30
Electric storage
174
166
Natural gas plants
127
125
Offshore wind
433
493
Onshore wind
496
497
Solar PV
1195
1309
Total
2452
2619
Table 8.1: Comparison of new power capacity investments [GW] in scenario year 2050.
Investments are made based on the average year and weather year 2010 (low wind, low
hydro, mid solar, low temp).
8.3
Limitations of methods used
The methodology I suggest in this study is limited to historical weather years. This is
not to postulate that the weather in 2050 will be exactly like what was seen historically.
But simulating a multitude of weather years can suggest variations of what 2050 could
look like. However, this approach neglects the fact that the climate is changing. There
is consistent agreement in literature that ambient temperature increases, which in turn
reduces heat demand and increases the demand for cooling.
But there is much more
disagreement about the impacts of climate change on wind speed and solar irradiance
[37]. While it is outside the scope of this study, it is still highly relevant to improve energy
models that can simulate the future weather more accurately.
Another potential expansion to the model is related to security of supply such that in-
frastructure failures are part of the simulation. It could be weather-induced breakdowns
of transmission lines or power plants. It could also be accidents more stochastic in nature
that just happen to coincide with unfavourable weather conditions.
Each weather year in this study is simulated independently of the others. It means that
I cannot conclude how consecutive extreme weather years may affect the energy system.
Furthermore, it is also a simplification that entails some limitations for the long-term
storage.
They are characterized by charge cycles that can span multiple seasons and
therefore overlap years. It will impact both heat storage, hydrogen storage and more, but
I will illustrate the potential issues by considering two different ways of modelling hydro
reservoirs.
38
==PAGE:46==
One method (which is what I use for the results) is based on allocating water volumes.
In the operation (BB1) model, the time aggregated full year is considered and start/end
storage levels are decided for all weeks. The dispatch (BB3) model is later free to dispatch
optimally within the weeks, as long as it starts and ends at the correct levels. Consequently,
the allocated hydro power is forced to be dispatched within each week, even if some less
valueable resource (e.g.
wind) turns out to be available in greater amounts than first
assumed in the operation planning.
The other method (which I initially used) estimates the water value for each week of a
given year in the operation (BB1) model. Thus, when the water is later dispatched (BB3
model), it bids into the market with that value. The advantage is that the dispatch model
is not forced to dispatch the water. Consequently, it may not use a full years inflow of
water and will leave the reservoir levels at another level in the end of the year than it
was in the beginning of the year. This is a more realistic representation of how hydro
systems actually work, since an entire years inflow is not necessarily supposed to be used
within that year. However, as I run the model with each weather year independently, the
storage levels are not connected across weather years. Leaving some water in one year will
therefore not benefit the energy system in the next year, and for that reason, I find that
the method based on allocating water volumes gives the most consistent representation of
weather years. However, forcing hydro power to be used may also lead to curtailment of
more VRE at times where it would be most eﬀicient to save the hydro resource for later
use.
In fig. 8.1, it is visible how the water volume model tends to make a sharper divide
between high and low electricity prices. Inexpensive hydro power is allocated and results
in a number of hours with low electricity prices. In turn, this leads to a need for more
expensive fuels in hours where the hydro power would be better used. The difference
between the water value and water volume model depends on how well the time aggregated
operation model represents the full year.
Figure 8.1: Example of how the choice of hydro power model impacts price duration
curves. Average electricity prices in Norway in scenario year 2050 and weather year 2003.
39
==PAGE:47==
9
Conclusion
In this study, I have investigated the impacts of inter-annual variability on a weather
dependent energy system optimized for an average weather year. This includes long-term
effects and more rare events than what can be seen within a typical weather year.
I
used a comprehensive set of 35 weather years (1982-2016) to simulate both demand and
generation side weather variability.
Demand response of power-to-X, interconnections and storage provided flexibility within
a given year, but the flexibility across multiple years was provided primarily by gas plants.
This resulted in variations in natural gas consumption ranging from 154 TWh to 378 TWh
in different weather years. Similarly, the average electricity price and CO2 emissions varied
from 53 EUR20/MWh and 99 MtCO2eq. to 90 EUR20/MWh and 206 MtCO2eq. The
most price volatility was seen in northern Europe, while prices in southern Europe were
consistently in the higher end of the range.
While these variations can pose significant challenges by themselves, a key challenge for
the energy system operators is to have suﬀicient capacity for the most extreme periods. I
investigated this as well, but the results were less clear. In some weather years, the energy
system needed up to 147 GW of additional capacity, but it did not show a clear connection
to the weather of that year. It is likely a result of suboptimal dispatch planning in the
model, but it requires further investigation to conclude with certainty.
Some of the most challenging weather years were 1996 and 2010 due to the combined effects
of low wind and hydro production and high heat demands. The inter-annual variability
of solar power was more moderate and did not have a significant impact on the energy
system.
Despite the challenges posed by different weather years, the energy system managed to
maintain an electricity mix based on more than 80% wind, solar and hydro power in all
weather years. The critical task is therefore to be prepared for the remaining gaps left by
VRE and ensure suﬀicient dispatchable capacity and fuel supply chains.
Even though rare weather events may not be the basis for investments, studies such as
this can prove helpful as a sensitivity analysis to investment problems based on a single
weather year. It can also reveal challenges in meeting long term decarbonisation targets.
Several of the years that required the most dispatchable generation had a combination of
low VRE generation and high demand. This stresses the importance of using long-term
time coherent data sets to shine light on the joint probability of multiple undesirable
weather events.
40
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1]
European Commission. Delivering the European Green Deal. n.d. url: https : / /
commission.europa.eu/strategy- and- policy/priorities- 2019- 2024/european- green-
deal/delivering-european-green-deal%5C_en.
[2]
Breyer C et al. On the history and future of 100% renewable energy systems research.
2022. url: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3193402.
[3]
Li B et al. Quantifying the Predictability of a Dunkelflaute Event by Utilizing a
Mesoscale Model. 2020. url: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1618/6/062042.
[4]
Ruhnau O and Qvist S. Storage requirements in a 100% renewable electricity system:
extreme events and inter-annual variability. 2022. url: https://https://doi.org/10.
1088/1748-9326/ac4dc8.
[5]
Gea-Bermúdeza J et al. The role of sector coupling in the green transition: A least-
cost energy system development in Northern-central Europe towards 2050. 2021. url:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.116685.
[6]
Global100REStrategyGroup. Joint declaration of the global 100% renewable energy
strategy group. 2022. url: https://global100restrategygroup.org/.
[7]
Coker PJ et al. Interannual weather variability and the challenges for Great Britain’s
electricity market design. 2020. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2019.12.082.
[8]
Price J and Zeyringer M. highRES-Europe: The high spatial and temporal Resolution
Electricity System model for Europe. 2022. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.
2022.101003.
[9]
Raynaud D et al. Energy droughts from variable renewable energy sources in Euro-
pean climates. 2017. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.02.130.
[10]
ENTSOE. European Resource Adequacy Assessment 2022 edition. 2022. url: https:
//www.entsoe.eu/outlooks/eraa/2022/.
[11]
ECMWF. Climate and energy indicators for Europe from 1979 to present derived
from reanalysis. 2022. url: https://doi.org/10.24381/cds.4bd77450.
[12]
Hersbach H et al. The ERA5 global reanalysis. 2020. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1002/qj.3803.
[13]
Kruse JCR. Energy demand model. 2023. url: https://github.com/JensChrKruse/JC-
Energy-demand-model.git.
[14]
ENTSO-E Transparency Platform. Total load per bidding zone per market time unit.
n.d. url: https://transparency.entsoe.eu/.
[15]
Wiese F et al. Open Power System Data – Frictionless data for electricity system
modelling. 2020. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.11.097.
[16]
Black JC and Henson WLW. Hierarchical Load Hindcasting Using Reanalysis Weather.
2014. url: https://doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2013.2278475.
[17]
Koivisto MJ et al. Statistical modeling of aggregated electricity consumption and-
distributed wind generation in distribution systems using AMR data. 2015. url:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2015.08.008.
[18]
SciPy Steering Council. SciPy. 2022. url: https://scipy.org/.
[19]
Maurizio Montel et al. python-holidays. 2022. url: https://python-holidays.readthedocs.
io/.
[20]
Mathis P. suntimes 1.1.2. 2022. url: https://pypi.org/project/suntimes/.
[21]
Eurostat. Heating and cooling degree days - statistics. 2020. url: https://ec.europa.
eu/eurostat/statistics- explained/index.php?title=Heating_and_cooling_degree_
days_-_statistics.
41
==PAGE:49==
[22]
Pedregosa F et al. scikit-learn. 2022. url: https://scikit-learn.org/.
[23]
Eurostat. GEOSTAT. 2021. url: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/gisco/geodata/
reference-data/population-distribution-demography/geostat.
[24]
Ea Energy Analyses. Existing Balmorel data set. 2022.
[25]
Brown T et al. PyPSA-Eur-Sec: A Sector-Coupled Open Optimisation Model of the
European Energy System. 2021. url: https://pypsa-eur-sec.readthedocs.io/.
[26]
Eurostat. Energy consumption in households. n.d. url: https : / / ec . europa . eu /
eurostat/statistics- explained/index.php?title=Energy%5C_consumption%5C_in%
5C_households#Energy%5C_consumption%5C_in%5C_households%5C_by%5C_
type%5C_of%5C_end-use.
[27]
Wiese F et al. Balmorel open source energy system model. 2018. url: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.esr.2018.01.003.
[28]
Ea Energy Analyses. Balmorel User Guide. n.d. url: https://www.ea-energianalyse.
dk/en/publications/3063/.
[29]
Ea Energy Analyses. Electricity price projections. 2022.
[30]
Ea Energy Analyses. Demand buckets and related flexibility. 2022.
[31]
Koivisto MJ and Leon JPM. Pan-European wind and solar generation time series
(PECD 2021 update). 2022. url: https://doi.org/10.11583/DTU.c.5939581.v3.
[32]
Murcia JP et al. Validation of European-scale simulated wind speed and wind gen-
eration time series. 2022. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.117794.
[33]
Poole MA and O’Farrell PN. The assumptions of the linear regression model. 1970.
[34]
Energy Industrial Strategy UK Gov. Department for Business. Wind powered elec-
tricity in the UK. 2020. url: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment%5C_data/file/875384/Wind%5C_powered%
5C_electricity%5C_in%5C_the%5C_UK.pdf.
[35]
IEA. Countries and regions. 2023. url: https://www.iea.org/countries.
[36]
European Commission. Capacity mechanisms. n.d. url: https://energy.ec.europa.
eu/topics/markets-and-consumers/capacity-mechanisms_en.
[37]
Bloomfield HC et al. Quantifying the sensitivity of european power systems to energy
scenarios and climate change projections. 2021. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
renene.2020.09.125.
[38]
Swisher P et al. Competitiveness of a low specific power, low cut-out wind speed wind
turbine in North and Central Europe towards 2050. 2022. url: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.apenergy.2021.118043.
[39]
Energistyrelsen. Technology Data. 2022. url: https : / / ens . dk / en / our - services /
projections-and-models/technology-data.
42
==PAGE:50==
A
Custom holidays for the energy
demand model
As part of the energy demand modelling, custom holidays in addition to those provided
by the holiday library [19] are added to improve the fit. In the few cases where individual
country holidays are added, they are mainly included to fix consistency issues.
Month
Day
Country
Holiday
1
1
All
New Years Day
5
1
All
Int Workers day
6
5
DK
Grundlovsdag
10
31
DE
Reformationstag
12
21
All
Christmas Vacation
12
22
All
Christmas Vacation
12
23
All
Christmas Vacation
12
24
All
Christmas Eve
12
25
All
First Christmas Day
12
26
All
Second Christmas Day
12
27
All
Christmas Vacation
12
28
All
Christmas Vacation
12
29
All
Christmas Vacation
12
30
All
Christmas Vacation
12
31
All
New Years Eve
5
5
NL
Liberation Day
1
6
SE
Three Kings’ Day
Table A.1: Custom holidays used for the energy demand model.
43
==PAGE:51==
B
Balmorel years
Time series data used in Balmorel has to follow a certain pattern. Thus, a calendar year
has to be sliced to fit a Balmorel year consisting of 8736 hours and starting on a Monday.
Due to these constraints, some Balmorel years are seen to overlap multiple calendar years.
Start time
End time
1982
1982-01-04 00:00:00
1983-01-02 23:00:00
1983
1983-01-03 00:00:00
1984-01-01 23:00:00
1984
1984-01-02 00:00:00
1984-12-30 23:00:00
1985
1985-01-07 00:00:00
1986-01-05 23:00:00
1986
1986-01-06 00:00:00
1987-01-04 23:00:00
1987
1987-01-05 00:00:00
1988-01-03 23:00:00
1988
1988-01-04 00:00:00
1989-01-01 23:00:00
1989
1989-01-02 00:00:00
1989-12-31 23:00:00
1990
1990-01-01 00:00:00
1990-12-30 23:00:00
1991
1991-01-07 00:00:00
1992-01-05 23:00:00
1992
1992-01-06 00:00:00
1993-01-03 23:00:00
1993
1993-01-04 00:00:00
1994-01-02 23:00:00
1994
1994-01-03 00:00:00
1995-01-01 23:00:00
1995
1995-01-02 00:00:00
1995-12-31 23:00:00
1996
1996-01-01 00:00:00
1996-12-29 23:00:00
1997
1997-01-06 00:00:00
1998-01-04 23:00:00
1998
1998-01-05 00:00:00
1999-01-03 23:00:00
1999
1999-01-04 00:00:00
2000-01-02 23:00:00
2000
2000-01-03 00:00:00
2000-12-31 23:00:00
2001
2001-01-01 00:00:00
2001-12-30 23:00:00
2002
2002-01-07 00:00:00
2003-01-05 23:00:00
2003
2003-01-06 00:00:00
2004-01-04 23:00:00
2004
2004-01-05 00:00:00
2005-01-02 23:00:00
2005
2005-01-03 00:00:00
2006-01-01 23:00:00
2006
2006-01-02 00:00:00
2006-12-31 23:00:00
2007
2007-01-01 00:00:00
2007-12-30 23:00:00
2008
2008-01-07 00:00:00
2009-01-04 23:00:00
2009
2009-01-05 00:00:00
2010-01-03 23:00:00
2010
2010-01-04 00:00:00
2011-01-02 23:00:00
2011
2011-01-03 00:00:00
2012-01-01 23:00:00
2012
2012-01-02 00:00:00
2012-12-30 23:00:00
2013
2013-01-07 00:00:00
2014-01-05 23:00:00
2014
2014-01-06 00:00:00
2015-01-04 23:00:00
2015
2015-01-05 00:00:00
2016-01-03 23:00:00
2016
2015-12-28 00:00:00
2016-12-25 23:00:00
Table B.1: Start and end UTC time stamps of each Balmorel year
44
==PAGE:52==
C
Examples of generation profiles
In the examples in this section, variations of intra-annual variability is seen from different
weather years.
Figure C.1: Example of future onshore wind generation profiles in DK2. Year 2003: 3879
full load hours. Year 2015: 4448 full load hours. Weekly rolling mean for illustration.
Figure C.2: Example of solar PV generation profiles in DE NE. Year 2001: 939 full load
hours. Year 2003: 1146 full load hours. Weekly rolling mean for illustration.
Figure C.3: Example of hydro reservoir profiles in NO2. Year 1996: 2487 full load hours.
Year 2011: 4887 full load hours.
45
==PAGE:53==
D
Electricity demand model MAPE
Out-of-sample
Hindcast
AT
3.79
10.53
BE
3.89
3.38
CH
6.21
4.21
CZ
3.64
4.98
DE NE
3.72
6.93
DE NW
3.72
DE ME
3.72
DE CS
3.72
DK1
5.54
3.71
DK2
3.70
EE
3.53
3.50
FI
3.61
2.47
FR
4.11
3.38
GB
12.59
6.36
IT
5.18
8.24
LT
7.20
4.97
LU
15.00
32.51
LV
3.23
2.33
NL
6.32
2.82
NO1
5.00
3.90
NO2
3.68
NO3
6.11
NO4
3.28
NO5
7.91
PL
3.16
11.37
SE1
7.57
3.52
SE2
6.75
SE3
4.11
SE4
5.34
Table D.1: Mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) of electricity demand models [%].
46
==PAGE:54==
Figure D.1: Example of out-of-sample validation for Luxembourg model.
Figure D.2: Example of out-of-sample validation for Great Britain model.
Figure D.3: Example of out-of-sample validation for NO5 model.
47
==PAGE:55==
E
Correlation in electricity demand model residuals
AT
BE
CH
CZ
DE
DK1
DK2
EE
FI
FR
GB
IT
LT
LU
LV
NL
NO1
NO2
NO3
NO4
NO5
PL
SE1
SE2
SE3
SE4
AT
0.28
-0.04
0.38
0.41
0.21
0.26
0.22
0.13
0.2
0
0.35
0.24
0.07
0.22
0.26
0.22
0.13
0.12
0.09
0.07
0.39
0.04
0.08
0.28
0.24
BE
0.28
-0.01
0.29
0.52
0.31
0.34
0.06
0.04
0.61
0.14
0.37
0
0.16
0.01
0.54
0.26
0.16
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.21
0.07
0.1
0.28
0.26
CH
-0.04
-0.01
-0.01
-0.05
0.01
0
-0.03
-0.06
0.06
0.12
-0.04
-0.06
0.01
-0.03
0.02
0
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
-0.05
0
-0.02
-0.04
-0.04
CZ
0.38
0.29
-0.01
0.52
0.21
0.32
0.37
0.13
0.25
-0.05
0.41
0.39
0.02
0.42
0.31
0.27
0.14
0.11
0.08
0.08
0.67
0.06
0.1
0.42
0.34
DE
0.41
0.52
-0.05
0.52
0.33
0.41
0.24
0.18
0.38
0.03
0.48
0.2
0.1
0.23
0.51
0.31
0.19
0.16
0.11
0.12
0.46
0.06
0.11
0.41
0.37
DK1
0.21
0.31
0.01
0.21
0.33
0.4
0.12
0.05
0.21
0.1
0.23
0.07
0.06
0.1
0.37
0.25
0.16
0.13
0.1
0.11
0.19
0.06
0.07
0.28
0.26
DK2
0.26
0.34
0
0.32
0.41
0.4
0.21
0.13
0.22
0.07
0.26
0.15
0.05
0.21
0.41
0.32
0.17
0.16
0.1
0.12
0.31
0.05
0.09
0.39
0.35
EE
0.22
0.06
-0.03
0.37
0.24
0.12
0.21
0.45
0.08
-0.05
0.17
0.56
-0.01
0.67
0.14
0.22
0.1
0.09
0.08
0.05
0.45
0.05
0.08
0.37
0.26
FI
0.13
0.04
-0.06
0.13
0.18
0.05
0.13
0.45
0.03
-0.07
0.04
0.35
0.01
0.39
0.03
0.11
0.05
0.04
0.05
0.02
0.19
0.04
0.05
0.24
0.17
FR
0.2
0.61
0.06
0.25
0.38
0.21
0.22
0.08
0.03
0.13
0.35
0.04
0.15
0.03
0.44
0.24
0.14
0.13
0.09
0.09
0.12
0.06
0.07
0.21
0.18
GB
0
0.14
0.12
-0.05
0.03
0.1
0.07
-0.05
-0.07
0.13
0.05
-0.1
0.05
-0.04
0.15
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
-0.05
0.03
0.01
-0.02
0.01
IT
0.35
0.37
-0.04
0.41
0.48
0.23
0.26
0.17
0.04
0.35
0.05
0.2
0.06
0.17
0.47
0.24
0.15
0.13
0.11
0.11
0.49
0.05
0.08
0.28
0.28
LT
0.24
0
-0.06
0.39
0.2
0.07
0.15
0.56
0.35
0.04
-0.1
0.2
-0.01
0.63
0.08
0.15
0.07
0.07
0.06
0.03
0.51
0.03
0.05
0.3
0.23
LU
0.07
0.16
0.01
0.02
0.1
0.06
0.05
-0.01
0.01
0.15
0.05
0.06
-0.01
-0.02
0.1
0.06
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.05
LV
0.22
0.01
-0.03
0.42
0.23
0.1
0.21
0.67
0.39
0.03
-0.04
0.17
0.63
-0.02
0.1
0.19
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.05
0.53
0.04
0.07
0.37
0.26
NL
0.26
0.54
0.02
0.31
0.51
0.37
0.41
0.14
0.03
0.44
0.15
0.47
0.08
0.1
0.1
0.34
0.22
0.21
0.15
0.15
0.28
0.07
0.1
0.34
0.32
NO1
0.22
0.26
0
0.27
0.31
0.25
0.32
0.22
0.11
0.24
0.05
0.24
0.15
0.06
0.19
0.34
0.31
0.65
0.36
0.18
0.29
0.06
0.12
0.39
0.31
NO2
0.13
0.16
0.01
0.14
0.19
0.16
0.17
0.1
0.05
0.14
0.06
0.15
0.07
0.04
0.09
0.22
0.31
0.32
0.54
0.65
0.15
0.03
0.08
0.21
0.18
NO3
0.12
0.12
0.02
0.11
0.16
0.13
0.16
0.09
0.04
0.13
0.06
0.13
0.07
0.04
0.09
0.21
0.65
0.32
0.42
0.23
0.15
0.03
0.07
0.17
0.15
NO4
0.09
0.11
0.01
0.08
0.11
0.1
0.1
0.08
0.05
0.09
0.06
0.11
0.06
0.04
0.08
0.15
0.36
0.54
0.42
0.45
0.11
0.03
0.04
0.13
0.11
NO5
0.07
0.12
0.01
0.08
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.05
0.02
0.09
0.06
0.11
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.15
0.18
0.65
0.23
0.45
0.09
0.02
0.05
0.13
0.12
PL
0.39
0.21
-0.05
0.67
0.46
0.19
0.31
0.45
0.19
0.12
-0.05
0.49
0.51
0.01
0.53
0.28
0.29
0.15
0.15
0.11
0.09
0.05
0.11
0.44
0.37
SE1
0.04
0.07
0
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.06
0.03
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.04
0.07
0.06
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.05
0.11
0.02
0.02
SE2
0.08
0.1
-0.02
0.1
0.11
0.07
0.09
0.08
0.05
0.07
0.01
0.08
0.05
0.02
0.07
0.1
0.12
0.08
0.07
0.04
0.05
0.11
0.11
0.18
0.05
SE3
0.28
0.28
-0.04
0.42
0.41
0.28
0.39
0.37
0.24
0.21
-0.02
0.28
0.3
0.03
0.37
0.34
0.39
0.21
0.17
0.13
0.13
0.44
0.02
0.18
0.43
SE4
0.24
0.26
-0.04
0.34
0.37
0.26
0.35
0.26
0.17
0.18
0.01
0.28
0.23
0.05
0.26
0.32
0.31
0.18
0.15
0.11
0.12
0.37
0.02
0.05
0.43
48
==PAGE:56==
F
Important energy system input
2030
2040
2050
CAPEX
mEUR20/MW
1.374
1.232
1.133
Fixed O&M
tEUR20/MW
15.085
13.579
12.490
Variable O&M
EUR20/MWh
1.616
1.539
1.341
Table F.1: Onshore wind cost inputs [38].
2030
2040
2050
CAPEX
mEUR20/MW
1.800
1.680
1.640
Fixed O&M
tEUR20/MW
39.000
34.000
33.000
Variable O&M
EUR20/MWh
3.890
3.420
3.250
Table F.2: Offshore wind cost inputs [39].
2030
2040
2050
CAPEX
mEUR20/MW
0.397
0.348
0.321
Fixed O&M
tEUR20/MW
6.292
5.686
5.321
Variable O&M
EUR20/MWh
0
0
0
Table F.3: Solar PV cost input [24].
2030
2040
2050
Biogas
7.44
7.44
7.44
Coal
2.42
2.25
2.08
Natural gas
11.11
10.26
9.42
Wood
7.15
7.27
7.48
Table F.4: Fuel prices [EUR20/GJ] [24].
49
==PAGE:57==
G
Energy system capacities
2030
2040
2050
Bio and waste
43
48
45
Electric storage
61
134
282
Pumped hydro storage
31
33
36
Natural gas
282
270
267
Other fossil fuels
36
15
13
Hydro
127
126
127
Nuclear
87
80
57
Offshore wind
150
305
457
Onshore wind
333
416
514
Solar PV
656
857
1240
Total
1803
2284
3036
Table G.1: Installed power generation capacity [GW].
2030
2040
2050
Electrolyzer capacity
GW
127
294
582
Hydrogen storage
TWh
34
80
148
District heating heat pumps
GW
13
22
29
District heating storage
TWh
1.4
1.6
1.7
Individual heating heat pumps
GW
315
318
321
Individual heating electric boiler
GW
138
139
141
Individual heating storage
GWh
224
323
424
Table G.2: Other installed energy infrastructure.
In fig. G.1, the installed generation capacities in 2050 for solar pv, onshore wind and
offshore wind are given in absolute terms (GW) in blue coloured text for each country.
The position of the blue dots indicate how the capacities relative to the assumed minimum
and maximum capacity constraints on a normalized scale from 0% to 100%. The maximum
and minimum constraints are written in absolute terms (GW) above and below the dashed
lines. Note that in some cases (such as onshore wind in Germany), the installed capacity
exceeds the maximum. This is due to the installation taking place in a year before the
constraint becomes binding.
50
==PAGE:58==
Figure G.1: Installed generation capacities in individual countries [GW] in 2050 relative
to the assumed capacity potential.
51
==PAGE:59==
Figure G.2: Installed transmission capacity [GW] in 2050.
52
==PAGE:60==
H
Inter-annual flexibility from natural
gas and nuclear
Natural gas
Nuclear
Generation
Full load hours
Generation
Full load hours
Avg year
219
820
299
5236
1982
329
1229
290
5066
1983
246
918
261
4565
1984
292
1093
297
5197
1985
352
1316
301
5260
1986
217
810
276
4834
1987
376
1405
304
5324
1988
214
802
266
4655
1989
234
875
293
5120
1990
261
977
267
4676
1991
296
1106
299
5220
1992
219
817
270
4729
1993
243
908
282
4939
1994
251
937
265
4629
1995
278
1040
264
4624
1996
335
1254
324
5663
1997
344
1287
299
5228
1998
161
601
266
4646
1999
210
787
281
4921
2000
226
847
278
4859
2001
277
1037
292
5103
2002
295
1103
287
5026
2003
302
1131
304
5314
2004
244
911
283
4950
2005
163
611
301
5263
2006
314
1175
279
4884
2007
240
897
264
4618
2008
241
901
286
4996
2009
218
814
309
5399
2010
378
1414
334
5838
2011
180
671
277
4844
2012
210
785
300
5243
2013
270
1010
298
5207
2014
291
1089
295
5151
2015
154
577
277
4849
2016
282
1054
320
5601
Table H.1: Inter-annual flexibility from natural gas and nuclear plants given as generation
[TWh] and full load hours [h].
53
==PAGE:61==
I
Backstop capacity and generation
Backstop generation
Backstop capacity
Avg year
0.5
8.2
1982
2.3
22.6
1983
1.2
11.1
1984
17.3
147.2
1985
0.4
10.0
1986
0.8
6.7
1987
0.6
10.9
1988
0.9
21.6
1989
0.0
1.1
1990
1.2
27.7
1991
7.8
102.1
1992
0.6
6.4
1993
2.7
21.4
1994
1.7
23.1
1995
3.6
33.5
1996
1.1
20.1
1997
1.6
34.8
1998
0.1
1.3
1999
0.1
6.0
2000
0.9
16.5
2001
11.4
134.3
2002
8.9
89.6
2003
0.0
0.0
2004
0.3
4.7
2005
0.1
1.6
2006
11.4
91.6
2007
0.0
0.0
2008
0.3
3.2
2009
0.0
0.5
2010
1.9
35.1
2011
0.0
2.6
2012
0.0
0.0
2013
1.8
22.3
2014
2.3
21.1
2015
0.0
0.0
2016
0.0
0.2
Table I.1: Overview of backstop generation [TWh] and capacity [GW] in all weather years
54
==PAGE:62==
J
Demand correction factors
On the following pages, the demand correction factors for classic electricity and low tem-
perature heat is given for each region.
55
==PAGE:63==
J.1
Low temperature heat demand correction factors
AT
BE
CH
CZ
DE_CS
DE_ME
DE_NE
DE_NW
DK_W
DK_E
EE
FI
FR
GB
IT
LT
LU
1982
1.022
1.028
1.023
1.008
1.019
1.019
1.019
1.019
1.040
1.043
1.030
1.034
1.012
1.022
1.050
1.027
1.025
1983
1.012
1.043
1.024
0.993
1.024
1.024
1.024
1.024
1.010
1.000
0.981
1.012
1.058
1.020
1.059
0.964
1.046
1984
1.088
1.084
1.093
1.065
1.095
1.095
1.095
1.095
1.041
1.032
1.012
0.999
1.095
1.040
1.108
1.027
1.094
1985
1.100
1.150
1.084
1.110
1.129
1.129
1.129
1.129
1.139
1.147
1.133
1.150
1.139
1.114
1.087
1.145
1.129
1986
1.071
1.122
1.061
1.057
1.102
1.102
1.102
1.102
1.115
1.114
1.061
1.067
1.108
1.133
1.071
1.071
1.107
1987
1.085
1.129
1.064
1.105
1.132
1.132
1.132
1.132
1.151
1.171
1.158
1.155
1.112
1.101
1.082
1.167
1.114
1988
1.026
0.985
1.002
1.001
0.987
0.987
0.987
0.987
0.989
1.002
1.026
1.030
0.993
1.038
1.026
1.030
0.993
1989
1.012
0.960
1.004
0.968
0.966
0.966
0.966
0.966
0.944
0.945
0.921
0.930
0.970
0.966
1.020
0.924
0.974
1990
1.018
0.971
1.001
0.981
0.966
0.966
0.966
0.966
0.927
0.921
0.943
0.968
0.968
0.969
1.002
0.929
0.982
1991
1.093
1.074
1.054
1.075
1.070
1.070
1.070
1.070
1.024
1.032
0.979
0.996
1.093
1.064
1.122
0.993
1.062
1992
1.006
1.007
1.020
0.997
0.997
0.997
0.997
0.997
0.959
0.969
0.973
0.988
1.031
1.027
1.020
0.986
1.000
1993
1.042
1.031
1.026
1.038
1.039
1.039
1.039
1.039
1.064
1.060
1.047
1.025
1.049
1.060
1.042
1.041
1.035
1994
0.942
0.963
0.940
0.964
0.964
0.964
0.964
0.964
1.004
1.004
1.055
1.042
0.949
0.994
0.957
1.028
0.960
1995
1.034
0.993
1.019
1.032
1.028
1.028
1.028
1.028
1.030
1.030
0.984
0.995
0.999
0.989
1.025
1.006
1.004
1996
1.107
1.143
1.068
1.139
1.157
1.157
1.157
1.157
1.145
1.145
1.085
1.049
1.099
1.088
1.038
1.113
1.122
1997
1.014
1.002
0.984
1.039
1.017
1.017
1.017
1.017
1.019
1.033
1.021
1.007
0.968
0.964
0.974
1.028
1.004
1998
1.018
0.990
1.013
1.004
0.995
0.995
0.995
0.995
1.018
1.018
1.025
1.034
1.012
0.970
1.010
1.016
1.009
1999
1.001
0.960
1.004
0.971
0.962
0.962
0.962
0.962
0.967
0.972
0.977
0.994
0.969
0.954
1.005
0.968
0.972
2000
0.954
0.937
0.965
0.927
0.925
0.925
0.925
0.925
0.940
0.937
0.934
0.936
0.948
0.982
0.948
0.925
0.935
2001
1.014
0.997
1.000
1.030
1.004
1.004
1.004
1.004
1.030
1.021
1.009
1.017
0.995
1.011
0.974
1.007
0.992
2002
0.947
0.933
0.966
0.965
0.957
0.957
0.957
0.957
0.966
0.977
0.989
1.004
0.931
0.949
0.944
0.972
0.937
2003
0.997
0.987
0.985
1.002
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.998
1.008
1.019
1.017
0.983
0.964
1.013
1.018
0.978
2004
1.018
1.002
1.015
1.013
1.010
1.010
1.010
1.010
0.998
1.011
1.007
0.996
1.015
0.967
1.007
1.020
1.016
2005
1.033
0.978
1.031
1.028
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.986
0.986
0.999
0.965
1.010
0.966
1.066
1.015
0.985
2006
0.998
0.962
0.977
1.004
0.970
0.970
0.970
0.970
0.940
0.948
0.968
0.965
0.965
0.938
0.991
0.991
0.963
2007
0.940
0.917
0.959
0.943
0.920
0.920
0.920
0.920
0.930
0.922
0.953
0.956
0.938
0.942
0.939
0.961
0.930
2008
0.953
0.984
0.988
0.948
0.964
0.964
0.964
0.964
0.927
0.924
0.920
0.936
0.994
1.000
0.964
0.924
0.986
2009
0.966
0.982
0.977
0.975
0.979
0.979
0.979
0.979
0.977
0.988
1.003
1.001
0.982
0.986
0.984
0.998
0.974
2010
1.049
1.104
1.056
1.085
1.107
1.107
1.107
1.107
1.138
1.138
1.104
1.091
1.095
1.094
1.035
1.082
1.080
2011
0.950
0.899
0.930
0.959
0.929
0.929
0.929
0.929
0.958
0.957
0.959
0.948
0.882
0.926
0.949
0.967
0.913
2012
0.971
1.000
0.983
0.992
0.990
0.990
0.990
0.990
1.023
1.008
1.050
1.028
0.994
1.030
0.991
1.023
0.990
2013
0.995
1.060
1.028
1.018
1.034
1.034
1.034
1.034
1.013
1.004
0.966
0.949
1.044
1.039
0.974
0.977
1.051
2014
0.892
0.880
0.930
0.891
0.885
0.885
0.885
0.885
0.886
0.887
0.971
0.946
0.877
0.904
0.865
0.961
0.889
2015
0.928
0.960
0.950
0.928
0.942
0.942
0.942
0.942
0.952
0.936
0.910
0.910
0.934
0.968
0.929
0.920
0.958
2016
0.946
0.979
0.970
0.958
0.966
0.966
0.966
0.966
0.951
0.940
0.977
0.970
0.987
0.972
0.923
0.974
0.984
56
==PAGE:64==
LV
NL
NO_SE
NO_SW
NO_M
NO_N
NO_MW
PL
SE_N1
SE_N2
SE_M
SE_S
1982
1.028
1.021
1.051
1.013
1.027
1.029
1.013
1.011
1.009
1.026
1.035
1.045
1983
0.970
1.030
0.994
1.003
1.016
1.036
1.010
0.973
1.019
1.006
0.992
1.001
1984
1.016
1.092
1.005
1.016
1.028
1.009
1.025
1.055
1.004
1.007
0.999
1.012
1985
1.136
1.158
1.158
1.113
1.091
1.090
1.085
1.131
1.138
1.146
1.164
1.145
1986
1.058
1.129
1.084
1.085
1.077
1.048
1.079
1.079
1.050
1.066
1.086
1.098
1987
1.158
1.140
1.159
1.096
1.074
1.067
1.074
1.141
1.093
1.116
1.161
1.164
1988
1.023
0.979
1.021
1.007
1.006
1.046
1.004
1.012
1.025
1.009
1.017
1.004
1989
0.929
0.959
0.942
0.961
0.976
0.974
0.994
0.939
0.943
0.942
0.932
0.941
1990
0.931
0.955
0.926
0.958
0.956
0.963
0.979
0.943
0.957
0.950
0.921
0.925
1991
0.982
1.076
1.007
1.002
1.005
0.999
1.012
1.055
1.006
0.992
1.002
1.022
1992
0.984
0.990
0.973
0.987
0.998
1.003
1.004
1.011
0.976
0.974
0.967
0.976
1993
1.040
1.042
1.037
1.037
1.050
1.017
1.048
1.040
1.014
1.015
1.035
1.048
1994
1.042
0.983
1.039
1.012
1.049
1.029
1.030
0.984
1.029
1.043
1.026
1.003
1995
0.998
1.008
1.019
1.001
1.023
1.028
1.030
1.031
1.012
1.017
1.031
1.026
1996
1.097
1.173
1.086
1.071
1.062
1.030
1.066
1.143
1.023
1.055
1.084
1.116
1997
1.028
1.020
0.974
0.983
0.984
1.006
0.997
1.044
0.983
0.970
0.999
1.022
1998
1.025
0.985
0.999
1.012
1.010
1.042
1.010
1.012
1.047
1.021
1.030
1.035
1999
0.969
0.946
0.982
0.979
0.986
1.017
0.980
0.959
1.008
0.996
0.975
0.975
2000
0.924
0.932
0.908
0.954
0.969
0.979
0.969
0.907
0.946
0.951
0.927
0.929
2001
1.007
0.988
1.035
1.026
1.024
1.019
1.036
1.023
1.011
1.022
1.020
1.016
2002
0.982
0.946
1.000
0.975
0.963
1.000
0.956
0.965
0.994
0.985
0.990
0.979
2003
1.020
0.995
0.993
0.980
0.962
0.985
0.977
1.018
0.984
0.990
1.006
1.009
2004
1.017
0.992
0.990
0.982
0.976
0.977
0.970
1.003
1.003
0.992
1.006
1.019
2005
1.012
0.962
0.940
0.969
0.965
0.965
0.959
1.015
0.962
0.966
0.979
0.996
2006
0.977
0.948
0.943
0.938
0.931
0.957
0.939
1.000
0.957
0.943
0.952
0.955
2007
0.955
0.901
0.960
0.968
0.984
0.965
0.982
0.948
0.969
0.968
0.956
0.939
2008
0.920
0.974
0.956
0.970
0.971
0.984
0.971
0.933
0.979
0.969
0.941
0.936
2009
0.998
0.980
1.007
0.990
0.981
0.986
0.976
0.989
0.998
1.008
1.002
0.988
2010
1.089
1.124
1.124
1.101
1.120
1.058
1.093
1.097
1.077
1.107
1.139
1.121
2011
0.965
0.920
0.965
0.959
0.946
0.934
0.943
0.964
0.946
0.944
0.950
0.954
2012
1.033
1.007
1.022
1.021
1.038
1.025
1.023
1.010
1.026
1.019
1.021
1.024
2013
0.982
1.061
1.010
1.036
0.997
0.947
1.022
1.004
0.968
0.978
0.988
0.999
2014
0.969
0.861
0.901
0.921
0.908
0.946
0.907
0.917
0.948
0.936
0.929
0.904
2015
0.923
0.959
0.928
0.977
0.943
0.941
0.970
0.920
0.930
0.943
0.932
0.938
2016
0.976
0.969
0.954
0.985
0.974
0.950
0.973
0.952
0.976
0.977
0.957
0.956
57
==PAGE:65==
J.2
Classic electricity demand correction factors
AT
BE
CH
CZ
DE_CS
DE_ME
DE_NE
DE_NW
DK_W
DK_E
EE
FI
FR
GB
IT
LT
LU
1982
1.0000
0.9992
1.0017
0.9995
1.0027
1.0027
1.0027
1.0027
1.0014
1.0021
1.0005
0.9984
0.9983
0.9989
0.9986
0.9990
0.9990
1983
1.0001
0.9993
1.0031
0.9996
1.0024
1.0024
1.0024
1.0024
0.9999
0.9992
0.9962
0.9989
1.0029
0.9998
0.9985
0.9981
1.0002
1984
1.0031
1.0025
1.0096
1.0022
1.0060
1.0060
1.0060
1.0060
1.0021
1.0028
1.0024
1.0019
1.0047
1.0029
0.9919
1.0001
1.0001
1985
1.0042
0.9996
1.0092
0.9996
1.0038
1.0038
1.0038
1.0038
1.0040
1.0107
1.0159
0.9991
1.0083
0.9988
1.0033
1.0063
0.9977
1986
1.0023
0.9990
1.0060
0.9996
1.0026
1.0026
1.0026
1.0026
1.0016
1.0062
1.0053
0.9989
1.0058
0.9986
0.9962
1.0022
0.9980
1987
1.0011
0.9990
1.0048
0.9990
1.0027
1.0027
1.0027
1.0027
1.0011
1.0086
1.0142
0.9974
1.0045
0.9980
0.9984
1.0037
0.9970
1988
1.0010
1.0010
0.9998
1.0016
1.0042
1.0042
1.0042
1.0042
1.0008
1.0018
1.0050
1.0029
0.9991
1.0011
0.9989
1.0036
0.9994
1989
0.9973
0.9995
0.9988
0.9997
1.0016
1.0016
1.0016
1.0016
0.9963
0.9937
0.9883
0.9991
0.9965
1.0002
0.9884
0.9936
0.9993
1990
0.9988
0.9997
0.9978
0.9996
1.0005
1.0005
1.0005
1.0005
0.9949
0.9918
0.9906
0.9987
0.9968
0.9996
0.9932
0.9907
0.9993
1991
1.0027
0.9995
1.0061
0.9996
0.9990
0.9990
0.9990
0.9990
0.9996
1.0006
0.9954
0.9988
1.0056
0.9997
1.0014
0.9973
0.9998
1992
1.0028
1.0021
1.0031
1.0018
1.0014
1.0014
1.0014
1.0014
1.0011
1.0008
0.9975
1.0017
1.0030
1.0013
0.9980
1.0028
1.0025
1993
0.9993
0.9988
1.0003
0.9990
0.9992
0.9992
0.9992
0.9992
0.9989
1.0017
1.0023
0.9981
1.0003
0.9980
0.9988
0.9980
0.9981
1994
0.9975
0.9990
0.9927
0.9996
0.9976
0.9976
0.9976
0.9976
1.0004
0.9991
1.0047
0.9994
0.9960
0.9992
1.0027
1.0004
1.0005
1995
0.9990
0.9998
0.9997
0.9994
0.9987
0.9987
0.9987
0.9987
1.0023
1.0023
0.9986
0.9992
0.9968
1.0007
0.9918
1.0005
1.0004
1996
1.0055
1.0025
1.0067
1.0024
1.0032
1.0032
1.0032
1.0032
1.0077
1.0130
1.0123
1.0018
1.0037
1.0024
0.9948
1.0071
1.0012
1997
0.9989
0.9992
0.9961
0.9992
0.9981
0.9981
0.9981
0.9981
1.0023
1.0028
1.0023
1.0005
0.9962
1.0000
0.9968
1.0020
0.9995
1998
0.9987
0.9988
1.0000
0.9984
0.9978
0.9978
0.9978
0.9978
0.9958
0.9971
0.9997
0.9979
0.9993
0.9981
1.0051
0.9974
0.9983
1999
0.9976
0.9991
0.9986
0.9991
0.9986
0.9986
0.9986
0.9986
0.9985
0.9975
0.9973
0.9996
0.9973
0.9991
0.9995
1.0003
0.9997
2000
0.9993
1.0015
0.9968
1.0018
0.9995
0.9995
0.9995
0.9995
0.9967
0.9942
0.9920
1.0014
0.9974
1.0018
0.9994
0.9949
1.0006
2001
0.9999
1.0000
0.9985
0.9993
0.9982
0.9982
0.9982
0.9982
1.0001
0.9999
1.0015
0.9996
0.9988
0.9992
1.0013
1.0002
0.9996
2002
0.9983
0.9991
0.9936
1.0001
0.9979
0.9979
0.9979
0.9979
1.0006
0.9986
1.0019
1.0010
0.9925
0.9995
0.9949
1.0037
0.9995
2003
1.0030
0.9998
1.0025
0.9999
0.9979
0.9979
0.9979
0.9979
1.0011
1.0009
1.0009
1.0001
1.0033
1.0005
1.0166
1.0009
1.0032
2004
1.0011
1.0020
1.0022
1.0016
1.0019
1.0019
1.0019
1.0019
1.0012
1.0012
1.0011
1.0016
1.0027
1.0018
1.0019
0.9995
1.0019
2005
0.9995
0.9992
1.0025
0.9989
0.9983
0.9983
0.9983
0.9983
0.9988
0.9985
0.9998
0.9995
1.0022
0.9996
0.9978
0.9989
1.0006
2006
0.9993
1.0000
0.9976
0.9994
0.9983
0.9983
0.9983
0.9983
1.0007
0.9976
0.9979
1.0005
0.9993
1.0010
1.0010
1.0014
1.0017
2007
0.9980
0.9994
0.9936
0.9996
0.9972
0.9972
0.9972
0.9972
0.9953
0.9921
0.9948
0.9995
0.9956
0.9987
1.0031
0.9982
0.9989
2008
1.0015
1.0023
0.9999
1.0023
1.0010
1.0010
1.0010
1.0010
0.9999
0.9964
0.9898
1.0018
1.0005
1.0022
1.0042
0.9966
1.0020
2009
0.9980
0.9992
0.9971
0.9982
0.9980
0.9980
0.9980
0.9980
0.9979
0.9978
0.9980
0.9991
0.9998
0.9988
1.0055
0.9976
0.9996
2010
1.0001
0.9995
1.0047
0.9987
1.0005
1.0005
1.0005
1.0005
1.0061
1.0107
1.0132
1.0003
1.0062
0.9988
1.0003
1.0069
0.9993
2011
0.9974
0.9987
0.9919
0.9990
0.9975
0.9975
0.9975
0.9975
0.9977
0.9963
0.9953
1.0006
0.9930
0.9991
1.0056
0.9990
0.9992
2012
1.0026
1.0028
1.0011
1.0028
1.0012
1.0012
1.0012
1.0012
1.0022
1.0024
1.0078
1.0015
1.0039
1.0025
1.0148
1.0038
1.0023
2013
1.0010
0.9998
1.0027
1.0001
0.9987
0.9987
0.9987
0.9987
1.0005
1.0001
0.9979
1.0005
1.0027
1.0001
1.0012
1.0007
0.9998
2014
0.9934
0.9986
0.9882
0.9993
0.9962
0.9962
0.9962
0.9962
0.9954
0.9902
0.9949
1.0007
0.9893
0.9997
0.9887
0.9992
0.9990
2015
0.9981
0.9989
0.9948
0.9986
0.9971
0.9971
0.9971
0.9971
0.9950
0.9919
0.9849
0.9980
0.9974
0.9982
1.0078
0.9935
1.0004
2016
0.9996
1.0018
0.9983
1.0017
1.0006
1.0006
1.0006
1.0006
1.0020
0.9996
0.9999
1.0021
1.0001
1.0022
0.9996
1.0017
1.0023
58
==PAGE:66==
LV
NL
NO_SE
NO_SW
NO_M
NO_N
NO_MW
PL
SE_N1
SE_N2
SE_M
SE_S
1982
0.9995
1.0000
1.0167
1.0038
1.0027
1.0044
1.0021
1.0004
0.9999
1.0035
0.9999
0.9998
1983
0.9987
1.0004
0.9969
1.0012
0.9998
1.0045
1.0006
0.9990
1.0016
0.9994
0.9989
0.9995
1984
1.0021
0.9972
1.0033
1.0044
1.0042
1.0030
1.0055
1.0016
1.0026
1.0031
1.0023
1.0024
1985
1.0061
0.9951
1.0576
1.0192
1.0096
1.0184
1.0131
1.0031
1.0161
1.0268
1.0053
1.0022
1986
1.0016
0.9952
1.0283
1.0160
1.0076
1.0096
1.0140
1.0015
1.0051
1.0108
1.0020
1.0003
1987
1.0034
0.9933
1.0537
1.0152
1.0065
1.0119
1.0112
1.0030
1.0091
1.0182
1.0038
1.0004
1988
1.0043
0.9965
1.0099
1.0030
1.0032
1.0116
1.0023
1.0018
1.0061
1.0044
1.0025
1.0021
1989
0.9954
1.0008
0.9750
0.9916
0.9946
0.9927
0.9972
0.9962
0.9926
0.9892
0.9968
0.9983
1990
0.9925
0.9988
0.9703
0.9894
0.9924
0.9908
0.9947
0.9956
0.9929
0.9890
0.9969
0.9985
1991
0.9967
0.9984
1.0025
1.0001
0.9995
0.9974
1.0016
0.9995
0.9999
0.9979
0.9995
0.9999
1992
1.0006
1.0032
0.9936
0.9984
1.0012
1.0010
1.0010
1.0040
0.9987
0.9971
1.0007
1.0016
1993
0.9978
0.9946
1.0076
1.0036
1.0029
1.0024
1.0059
0.9994
1.0000
1.0011
1.0000
0.9993
1994
1.0002
1.0010
1.0125
1.0036
1.0061
1.0056
1.0056
0.9986
1.0031
1.0078
0.9999
0.9996
1995
1.0000
1.0036
1.0055
1.0023
1.0011
1.0037
1.0054
1.0009
1.0009
1.0020
1.0002
1.0001
1996
1.0066
0.9994
1.0354
1.0155
1.0095
1.0083
1.0138
1.0054
1.0052
1.0123
1.0059
1.0048
1997
1.0015
1.0008
0.9937
0.9996
1.0015
1.0023
1.0018
1.0006
0.9986
0.9961
0.9991
0.9997
1998
0.9972
0.9954
0.9930
0.9977
0.9986
1.0073
0.9986
0.9989
1.0049
1.0006
0.9992
0.9982
1999
0.9991
1.0009
0.9903
0.9942
0.9967
1.0028
0.9946
0.9979
1.0000
0.9988
0.9982
0.9986
2000
0.9959
1.0001
0.9623
0.9891
0.9957
0.9968
0.9938
0.9981
0.9942
0.9906
0.9991
1.0003
2001
1.0012
1.0010
1.0109
1.0035
1.0013
1.0028
1.0048
0.9994
1.0004
1.0033
1.0003
1.0000
2002
1.0031
1.0003
1.0038
0.9974
0.9991
0.9994
0.9938
0.9991
1.0011
0.9988
0.9994
1.0000
2003
1.0001
1.0052
0.9979
0.9962
0.9961
0.9970
0.9953
1.0018
0.9979
0.9974
0.9993
0.9993
2004
1.0005
1.0017
0.9949
0.9970
0.9990
0.9981
0.9959
1.0010
1.0020
0.9992
1.0019
1.0019
2005
0.9995
1.0015
0.9753
0.9916
0.9938
0.9920
0.9905
0.9999
0.9947
0.9925
0.9984
0.9990
2006
1.0007
1.0073
0.9820
0.9910
0.9941
0.9908
0.9899
1.0013
0.9956
0.9906
0.9979
0.9990
2007
0.9990
0.9990
0.9825
0.9919
0.9978
0.9922
0.9958
0.9976
0.9955
0.9940
0.9976
0.9983
2008
0.9965
1.0028
0.9823
0.9971
0.9992
0.9979
0.9975
0.9994
0.9987
0.9944
1.0001
1.0015
2009
0.9973
0.9999
0.9999
0.9963
0.9970
0.9963
0.9937
0.9994
0.9989
1.0003
0.9987
0.9985
2010
1.0064
0.9999
1.0488
1.0180
1.0143
1.0117
1.0161
1.0021
1.0091
1.0204
1.0041
1.0014
2011
0.9989
0.9988
0.9845
0.9893
0.9918
0.9858
0.9876
0.9977
0.9924
0.9888
0.9975
0.9982
2012
1.0038
1.0025
1.0069
1.0042
1.0051
1.0054
1.0052
1.0033
1.0047
1.0046
1.0027
1.0023
2013
1.0011
1.0009
1.0040
1.0059
0.9994
0.9903
1.0027
0.9993
0.9959
0.9960
0.9996
0.9996
2014
0.9985
1.0007
0.9610
0.9844
0.9906
0.9894
0.9818
0.9960
0.9935
0.9868
0.9958
0.9970
2015
0.9926
0.9977
0.9689
0.9913
0.9908
0.9854
0.9912
0.9968
0.9896
0.9868
0.9961
0.9971
2016
1.0015
1.0063
0.9882
0.9973
0.9973
0.9909
0.9957
1.0003
0.9986
0.9974
1.0007
1.0012
59
==PAGE:67==
K
Full load hours
On the following pages, the full load hours for wind, solar PV and hydro power are given
for each region.
60
==PAGE:68==
K.1
Solar PV full load hours
AT
BE
CH
CZ
DE_CS
DE_ME
DE_NE
DE_NW
DK_W
DK_E
EE
FI
FR
GB
IT
LT
LU
1982
1.022
1.028
1.023
1.008
1.019
1.019
1.019
1.019
1.040
1.043
1.030
1.034
1.012
1.022
1.050
1.027
1.025
1983
1.012
1.043
1.024
0.993
1.024
1.024
1.024
1.024
1.010
1.000
0.981
1.012
1.058
1.020
1.059
0.964
1.046
1984
1.088
1.084
1.093
1.065
1.095
1.095
1.095
1.095
1.041
1.032
1.012
0.999
1.095
1.040
1.108
1.027
1.094
1985
1.100
1.150
1.084
1.110
1.129
1.129
1.129
1.129
1.139
1.147
1.133
1.150
1.139
1.114
1.087
1.145
1.129
1986
1.071
1.122
1.061
1.057
1.102
1.102
1.102
1.102
1.115
1.114
1.061
1.067
1.108
1.133
1.071
1.071
1.107
1987
1.085
1.129
1.064
1.105
1.132
1.132
1.132
1.132
1.151
1.171
1.158
1.155
1.112
1.101
1.082
1.167
1.114
1988
1.026
0.985
1.002
1.001
0.987
0.987
0.987
0.987
0.989
1.002
1.026
1.030
0.993
1.038
1.026
1.030
0.993
1989
1.012
0.960
1.004
0.968
0.966
0.966
0.966
0.966
0.944
0.945
0.921
0.930
0.970
0.966
1.020
0.924
0.974
1990
1.018
0.971
1.001
0.981
0.966
0.966
0.966
0.966
0.927
0.921
0.943
0.968
0.968
0.969
1.002
0.929
0.982
1991
1.093
1.074
1.054
1.075
1.070
1.070
1.070
1.070
1.024
1.032
0.979
0.996
1.093
1.064
1.122
0.993
1.062
1992
1.006
1.007
1.020
0.997
0.997
0.997
0.997
0.997
0.959
0.969
0.973
0.988
1.031
1.027
1.020
0.986
1.000
1993
1.042
1.031
1.026
1.038
1.039
1.039
1.039
1.039
1.064
1.060
1.047
1.025
1.049
1.060
1.042
1.041
1.035
1994
0.942
0.963
0.940
0.964
0.964
0.964
0.964
0.964
1.004
1.004
1.055
1.042
0.949
0.994
0.957
1.028
0.960
1995
1.034
0.993
1.019
1.032
1.028
1.028
1.028
1.028
1.030
1.030
0.984
0.995
0.999
0.989
1.025
1.006
1.004
1996
1.107
1.143
1.068
1.139
1.157
1.157
1.157
1.157
1.145
1.145
1.085
1.049
1.099
1.088
1.038
1.113
1.122
1997
1.014
1.002
0.984
1.039
1.017
1.017
1.017
1.017
1.019
1.033
1.021
1.007
0.968
0.964
0.974
1.028
1.004
1998
1.018
0.990
1.013
1.004
0.995
0.995
0.995
0.995
1.018
1.018
1.025
1.034
1.012
0.970
1.010
1.016
1.009
1999
1.001
0.960
1.004
0.971
0.962
0.962
0.962
0.962
0.967
0.972
0.977
0.994
0.969
0.954
1.005
0.968
0.972
2000
0.954
0.937
0.965
0.927
0.925
0.925
0.925
0.925
0.940
0.937
0.934
0.936
0.948
0.982
0.948
0.925
0.935
2001
1.014
0.997
1.000
1.030
1.004
1.004
1.004
1.004
1.030
1.021
1.009
1.017
0.995
1.011
0.974
1.007
0.992
2002
0.947
0.933
0.966
0.965
0.957
0.957
0.957
0.957
0.966
0.977
0.989
1.004
0.931
0.949
0.944
0.972
0.937
2003
0.997
0.987
0.985
1.002
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.998
1.008
1.019
1.017
0.983
0.964
1.013
1.018
0.978
2004
1.018
1.002
1.015
1.013
1.010
1.010
1.010
1.010
0.998
1.011
1.007
0.996
1.015
0.967
1.007
1.020
1.016
2005
1.033
0.978
1.031
1.028
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.986
0.986
0.999
0.965
1.010
0.966
1.066
1.015
0.985
2006
0.998
0.962
0.977
1.004
0.970
0.970
0.970
0.970
0.940
0.948
0.968
0.965
0.965
0.938
0.991
0.991
0.963
2007
0.940
0.917
0.959
0.943
0.920
0.920
0.920
0.920
0.930
0.922
0.953
0.956
0.938
0.942
0.939
0.961
0.930
2008
0.953
0.984
0.988
0.948
0.964
0.964
0.964
0.964
0.927
0.924
0.920
0.936
0.994
1.000
0.964
0.924
0.986
2009
0.966
0.982
0.977
0.975
0.979
0.979
0.979
0.979
0.977
0.988
1.003
1.001
0.982
0.986
0.984
0.998
0.974
2010
1.049
1.104
1.056
1.085
1.107
1.107
1.107
1.107
1.138
1.138
1.104
1.091
1.095
1.094
1.035
1.082
1.080
2011
0.950
0.899
0.930
0.959
0.929
0.929
0.929
0.929
0.958
0.957
0.959
0.948
0.882
0.926
0.949
0.967
0.913
2012
0.971
1.000
0.983
0.992
0.990
0.990
0.990
0.990
1.023
1.008
1.050
1.028
0.994
1.030
0.991
1.023
0.990
2013
0.995
1.060
1.028
1.018
1.034
1.034
1.034
1.034
1.013
1.004
0.966
0.949
1.044
1.039
0.974
0.977
1.051
2014
0.892
0.880
0.930
0.891
0.885
0.885
0.885
0.885
0.886
0.887
0.971
0.946
0.877
0.904
0.865
0.961
0.889
2015
0.928
0.960
0.950
0.928
0.942
0.942
0.942
0.942
0.952
0.936
0.910
0.910
0.934
0.968
0.929
0.920
0.958
2016
0.946
0.979
0.970
0.958
0.966
0.966
0.966
0.966
0.951
0.940
0.977
0.970
0.987
0.972
0.923
0.974
0.984
61
==PAGE:69==
LV
FI
NO_N
NO_M
NO_MW
NO_SE
NO_SW
SE_N1
SE_N2
SE_M
SE_S
NL
1982
981
906
766
914
889
1058
1059
908
953
999
1014
982
1983
921
845
684
747
772
971
976
804
873
948
961
960
1984
927
862
742
870
905
961
983
836
893
938
924
904
1985
941
890
817
890
865
1020
1019
883
947
979
970
927
1986
952
871
780
909
861
1059
1041
851
952
1000
993
970
1987
1000
857
797
871
881
997
994
836
900
963
957
929
1988
959
874
831
936
873
992
991
864
938
964
976
886
1989
943
887
767
872
819
1036
1069
896
960
990
1014
989
1990
954
919
810
869
825
1033
1027
885
934
971
1020
993
1991
937
841
787
854
894
1051
1071
846
926
971
953
995
1992
961
856
801
905
864
1013
1020
877
919
974
1026
962
1993
987
893
800
889
933
1064
1081
889
962
1011
988
941
1994
994
954
834
938
891
1091
1030
1006
1061
1065
1024
947
1995
985
898
765
868
906
1068
1115
902
975
1016
1037
1027
1996
1049
943
828
935
929
1054
1035
944
1002
1011
991
977
1997
1017
969
859
898
901
1096
1109
984
1026
1081
1053
974
1998
949
870
805
838
800
919
926
814
887
877
907
871
1999
987
901
762
895
862
992
947
858
944
963
974
983
2000
976
909
770
855
828
944
935
870
927
964
962
913
2001
964
900
774
889
886
995
1036
862
936
977
969
944
2002
1068
982
831
948
901
1046
1036
954
1021
1048
1026
949
2003
1000
917
829
953
904
1077
1066
933
1010
1043
1066
1109
2004
974
898
809
906
839
1028
1041
878
968
1012
1019
976
2005
1054
937
776
882
844
1030
1065
906
970
1017
1093
1013
2006
1058
948
827
963
909
1021
1035
939
966
1005
1030
991
2007
1002
901
777
853
807
1027
1035
901
970
984
974
950
2008
941
834
814
951
909
1032
1078
876
952
980
1024
973
2009
963
923
814
892
856
1010
1024
934
938
984
1047
974
2010
972
870
787
886
913
1022
1072
893
945
977
981
963
2011
1037
893
767
856
754
1009
965
847
964
1018
1003
992
2012
977
839
763
831
833
991
1020
840
886
957
1005
964
2013
1025
936
833
940
896
1049
1059
904
1020
1046
1043
952
2014
990
885
832
932
867
931
958
914
924
931
970
976
2015
995
854
737
854
821
1021
1071
845
921
981
1001
1002
2016
960
830
765
917
870
1006
1001
858
912
961
1018
1006
62
==PAGE:70==
K.2
Existing onshore wind full load hours
DK_E
DK_W
GB
IT
CZ
AT
CH
FR
BE
LU
PL
PL
DE_CS
DE_ME
DE_NE
DE_NW
1982
2094
1997
2373
1832
2185
2038
2600
2238
1879
2412
2171
2171
2221
1727
1617
1809
1983
2536
2415
2462
1957
2642
2461
2737
2396
2087
2709
2759
2759
2541
2119
2025
2149
1984
2293
2165
2108
2103
2348
2319
2734
2272
1857
2346
2394
2394
2249
1814
1820
1946
1985
2119
1916
2139
1870
2445
2275
2737
2180
1877
2453
2329
2329
2353
1927
1746
1842
1986
2406
2219
2717
1830
2445
2218
2651
2375
2118
2610
2553
2553
2425
1974
1861
2015
1987
2122
1978
1952
1973
2263
2391
2637
2142
1706
2323
2351
2351
2223
1685
1645
1763
1988
2474
2235
2320
1991
2541
2379
2755
2394
2064
2655
2562
2562
2529
2064
1934
2148
1989
2319
2285
2337
1640
2246
2119
2468
2074
1714
2140
2477
2477
2106
1796
1750
1916
1990
2555
2426
2749
1817
2469
2189
2673
2303
2092
2532
2701
2701
2416
2083
2034
2222
1991
2244
2181
2218
1966
2216
2172
2458
2181
1753
2265
2342
2342
2168
1734
1722
1905
1992
2418
2214
2475
1896
2505
2342
2712
2235
1930
2440
2540
2540
2369
1970
1913
2046
1993
2454
2257
2335
1863
2531
2279
2674
2286
1944
2558
2565
2565
2409
1976
1876
1991
1994
2586
2368
2605
1879
2512
2134
2724
2332
2047
2546
2614
2614
2480
2053
2002
2119
1995
2403
2218
2305
2097
2521
2353
2756
2301
1889
2509
2507
2507
2432
1975
1876
1985
1996
2002
1926
2202
2089
2136
2288
2485
2160
1674
2257
2012
2012
2096
1566
1493
1712
1997
2204
2090
2107
1958
2223
2219
2506
2111
1740
2281
2357
2357
2165
1756
1716
1826
1998
2599
2341
2468
2041
2707
2377
2936
2403
2117
2673
2673
2673
2552
2130
1980
2132
1999
2198
2077
2424
2004
2429
2323
2890
2441
2064
2677
2337
2337
2486
1915
1730
1951
2000
2343
2308
2297
1935
2330
2392
2657
2313
2090
2558
2338
2338
2353
1893
1805
2073
2001
2031
1929
2061
2207
2240
2398
2913
2333
1883
2543
2241
2241
2357
1772
1659
1760
2002
2271
2068
2186
1911
2353
2226
2535
2448
1935
2532
2412
2412
2333
1847
1745
1900
2003
2063
1859
2070
1928
2079
2112
2363
2050
1577
2199
2209
2209
2091
1573
1544
1645
2004
2357
2145
2250
1999
2402
2262
2619
2205
1829
2419
2411
2411
2303
1842
1728
1898
2005
2222
2116
2353
1914
2254
2198
2429
2093
1676
2241
2186
2186
2147
1721
1640
1825
2006
2074
1929
2213
1842
2178
2047
2474
2213
1887
2436
2096
2096
2287
1734
1589
1836
2007
2528
2372
2304
1970
2602
2269
2771
2351
1958
2627
2600
2600
2508
2078
1961
2098
2008
2494
2224
2469
1938
2381
2278
2622
2233
1905
2412
2482
2482
2299
1878
1856
2055
2009
2223
2003
2252
1996
2204
2174
2623
2148
1779
2331
2135
2135
2214
1717
1635
1810
2010
2101
1903
1813
2133
2167
2281
2542
2073
1563
2167
2252
2252
2038
1642
1599
1659
2011
2530
2289
2328
1786
2166
2067
2276
2033
1775
2199
2425
2425
2177
1847
1866
2028
2012
2408
2242
2124
2094
2280
2326
2779
2252
1782
2318
2306
2306
2229
1789
1736
1900
2013
2188
2048
2349
1983
2141
2252
2507
2194
1748
2225
2136
2136
2110
1677
1607
1813
2014
2360
2192
2245
1918
2001
2165
2366
2148
1779
2131
2174
2174
1988
1587
1606
1860
2015
2652
2501
2532
1803
2299
2224
2454
2289
1980
2405
2515
2515
2229
1884
1897
2094
2016
2112
2018
2098
2070
2012
2094
2290
2062
1686
2120
2122
2122
2009
1583
1543
1726
63
==PAGE:71==
LT
EE
LV
FI
NO_N
NO_M
NO_MW
NO_SE
NO_SW
SE_N1
SE_N2
SE_M
SE_S
NL
1982
2775
2389
1685
3044
3147
2342
2826
2826
2930
2508
2726
2627
2434
2224
1983
3251
2617
2025
2815
3082
2558
2949
2949
3120
2444
2851
3046
2974
2502
1984
2872
1954
1507
2461
3117
2029
2846
2846
3206
2049
2312
2326
2553
2162
1985
2785
2016
1470
2566
2899
1948
2499
2499
2595
2172
2405
2323
2389
2198
1986
3085
2306
1750
2865
3042
1991
2711
2711
2967
2283
2707
2748
2763
2521
1987
2923
2224
1631
2668
2992
2051
2670
2670
2863
2235
2509
2387
2459
2034
1988
3022
2431
1809
2742
2917
2033
2718
2718
3040
2246
2473
2524
2611
2505
1989
2968
2414
1733
2955
3133
2556
2921
2921
3020
2448
2898
2845
2642
2168
1990
3197
2365
1915
2893
3408
2455
3045
3045
3191
2502
2899
3001
2857
2574
1991
2854
2194
1649
2717
3131
2089
2809
2809
3071
2254
2545
2634
2543
2180
1992
2984
2398
1786
3105
3195
2335
2778
2778
2789
2632
2800
2782
2615
2354
1993
3188
2369
1866
2737
3136
2114
2833
2833
3106
2357
2591
2763
2788
2267
1994
2997
2231
1737
2643
2960
2076
2797
2797
3167
2183
2494
2616
2862
2407
1995
3008
2470
1811
2966
3100
2462
2880
2880
3009
2425
2867
2852
2710
2272
1996
2629
2083
1430
2606
2943
1804
2624
2624
2954
2239
2373
2277
2274
2046
1997
2890
2233
1700
2798
3104
2392
2881
2881
3055
2437
2825
2528
2402
2089
1998
2978
2203
1669
2806
2925
2085
2751
2751
3077
2124
2441
2619
2798
2482
1999
2720
2095
1542
2608
3024
2088
2662
2662
2800
2136
2445
2617
2459
2367
2000
2914
2298
1648
2882
3033
2217
2869
2869
3192
2423
2812
2560
2559
2474
2001
2575
2080
1431
2661
2941
1941
2469
2469
2501
2214
2448
2405
2244
2146
2002
2977
2014
1612
2367
2779
1905
2539
2539
2799
1880
2124
2419
2617
2199
2003
2748
2136
1566
2787
2918
2118
2535
2535
2554
2267
2488
2434
2322
1858
2004
2789
2019
1586
2559
2998
2130
2666
2666
2799
2112
2454
2538
2597
2188
2005
2618
2110
1517
2857
3130
2193
2793
2793
2963
2401
2629
2546
2425
2053
2006
2622
2068
1476
2638
3063
2061
2679
2679
2830
2201
2511
2377
2259
2214
2007
2992
2283
1714
2777
3080
2395
2855
2855
3009
2234
2573
2730
2716
2365
2008
3098
2465
1858
2665
2868
2130
2615
2615
2767
2100
2472
2655
2736
2365
2009
2615
1869
1466
2449
3055
2072
2742
2742
2975
2047
2295
2307
2411
2125
2010
2673
1944
1431
2421
2792
1737
2480
2480
2763
2069
2308
2247
2410
1832
2011
3115
2395
1877
2833
3203
2409
2961
2961
3164
2459
2797
2854
2789
2255
2012
2904
2269
1665
2710
3076
2292
2839
2839
3042
2224
2460
2625
2628
2113
2013
2641
2050
1511
2734
2894
2081
2615
2615
2782
2322
2632
2535
2432
2128
2014
2774
2020
1538
2603
3000
2003
2823
2823
3250
2167
2371
2494
2677
2145
2015
3069
2384
1823
3076
3209
2498
2992
2992
3175
2512
2927
3057
3077
2420
2016
2713
2086
1563
2460
2689
1873
2498
2498
2786
2060
2342
2598
2472
1995
64
==PAGE:72==
K.3
Future onshore wind full load hours
DK_E
DK_W
GB
IT
CZ
AT
CH
FR
BE
LU
PL
DE_CS
DE_ME
DE_NE
DE_NW
1982
3651
3687
4367
1964
2740
2472
2084
3248
3518
2879
2957
2874
3236
3305
3489
1983
4163
4218
4445
2039
3257
2973
2252
3443
3855
3256
3680
3310
3877
3964
4093
1984
3813
3944
4011
2254
2995
2762
2221
3354
3373
2771
3300
2894
3427
3659
3781
1985
3595
3605
4321
1989
3091
2804
2166
3161
3510
2966
3226
3060
3614
3461
3614
1986
4118
4085
4855
1969
3021
2654
2161
3335
3750
3100
3524
3127
3684
3802
3883
1987
3601
3670
3963
2066
2946
2880
2081
3141
3214
2783
3397
2888
3271
3411
3482
1988
4045
4031
4463
2039
3225
2994
2289
3421
3699
3109
3580
3273
3875
3863
4101
1989
3927
4078
4292
1680
2837
2559
1930
3086
3171
2512
3435
2725
3396
3624
3716
1990
4180
4216
4754
1871
3053
2630
2183
3271
3750
3007
3643
3123
3824
4037
4134
1991
3871
4044
4166
2006
2833
2667
1942
3214
3240
2672
3265
2780
3273
3554
3741
1992
4098
4071
4593
1959
3181
2891
2214
3249
3586
2908
3477
3093
3665
3899
4018
1993
4039
4037
4325
2039
3207
2935
2142
3281
3508
3027
3534
3085
3618
3700
3806
1994
4223
4194
4750
1972
3085
2724
2237
3306
3591
2990
3472
3158
3667
3832
3895
1995
4016
3995
4348
2105
3203
2977
2295
3345
3436
2956
3397
3129
3595
3687
3790
1996
3484
3635
4215
2159
2777
2665
1890
3210
3179
2732
2927
2713
3078
3100
3352
1997
3750
3795
4012
2085
2804
2715
1985
3109
3257
2714
3263
2817
3291
3519
3575
1998
4284
4256
4678
2119
3353
2987
2443
3479
3811
3138
3712
3295
3928
3943
4106
1999
3698
3811
4472
2128
3038
2794
2382
3511
3744
3177
3263
3201
3594
3468
3733
2000
3875
4081
4297
2005
2922
2798
2043
3371
3786
3002
3224
3062
3550
3606
3898
2001
3457
3651
4133
2262
2850
2815
2385
3436
3550
3061
3105
3066
3391
3360
3486
2002
3879
3908
4229
2009
3011
2799
2044
3493
3484
3034
3351
3001
3416
3464
3616
2003
3600
3553
4125
2096
2656
2573
1816
3069
3097
2670
3078
2714
3023
3307
3343
2004
3977
3934
4276
2099
2983
2775
2084
3195
3344
2876
3305
2967
3502
3607
3704
2005
3816
3885
4441
1938
2898
2795
1878
3162
3234
2665
3045
2796
3308
3454
3603
2006
3630
3693
4240
1910
2814
2579
1940
3215
3548
2936
2966
2993
3337
3371
3622
2007
4131
4158
4342
2043
3217
2955
2374
3372
3573
3133
3503
3254
3819
3898
3999
2008
4071
3932
4590
2052
3010
2727
2098
3225
3494
2888
3378
2974
3487
3737
3893
2009
3821
3770
4309
2130
2808
2670
1988
3162
3339
2799
2920
2879
3352
3419
3602
2010
3597
3647
3690
2179
2769
2730
2007
3119
2986
2591
3150
2635
3166
3333
3328
2011
4229
4142
4427
1861
2720
2563
1715
2973
3361
2604
3214
2827
3422
3842
3923
2012
4093
4130
4169
2148
2862
2715
2235
3322
3371
2798
3135
2898
3439
3605
3768
2013
3715
3775
4381
2052
2722
2601
1883
3258
3279
2670
2980
2721
3208
3340
3529
2014
4004
3992
4196
1940
2581
2466
1710
3176
3254
2517
3018
2559
2992
3325
3548
2015
4448
4439
4618
1938
2861
2619
1816
3289
3621
2862
3359
2875
3468
3847
3930
2016
3697
3765
4094
2146
2560
2511
1708
3048
3209
2539
2962
2606
3040
3256
3439
65
==PAGE:73==
LT
EE
LV
FI
NO_N
NO_M
NO_MW
NO_SE
NO_SW
SE_N1
SE_N2
SE_M
SE_S
NL
1982
3381
3441
3311
3631
4667
4440
4655
3286
4226
3378
3577
3401
3321
3637
1983
3951
3600
3727
3416
4675
4418
4280
3571
4426
3329
3732
3832
3914
4100
1984
3510
2939
3141
2965
4644
4322
4260
3027
4427
2899
3160
3027
3395
3542
1985
3364
2928
2995
3123
4320
4019
3620
2787
3786
2983
3167
3105
3323
3622
1986
3754
3265
3379
3416
4552
4396
4584
3528
4460
3144
3616
3543
3720
4013
1987
3606
3306
3329
3257
4427
4193
3811
2972
4030
3062
3304
3154
3367
3365
1988
3713
3435
3467
3288
4352
4142
4081
3134
4270
2972
3286
3298
3475
4016
1989
3685
3391
3416
3524
4668
4503
4594
3596
4439
3352
3764
3582
3514
3578
1990
3821
3240
3468
3454
4943
4576
4569
3777
4574
3459
3821
3725
3753
4039
1991
3462
3121
3183
3251
4503
4177
4163
3160
4324
3017
3387
3406
3480
3579
1992
3640
3348
3395
3667
4696
4224
4487
3387
4181
3414
3587
3565
3577
3899
1993
3858
3385
3528
3287
4528
4234
4078
3212
4346
3082
3371
3521
3712
3666
1994
3606
3207
3354
3186
4425
4294
4321
3243
4469
2978
3311
3347
3702
3739
1995
3728
3496
3522
3566
4590
4493
4086
3558
4374
3286
3735
3647
3643
3654
1996
3259
3053
3009
3162
4308
3896
3942
2822
4073
2979
3145
2973
3114
3363
1997
3601
3149
3353
3309
4489
4390
4102
3264
4222
3271
3676
3209
3255
3483
1998
3701
3120
3344
3305
4334
4171
4127
3128
4445
2835
3203
3372
3717
4021
1999
3317
2963
3031
3125
4449
4229
4086
3205
4077
2902
3267
3337
3309
3789
2000
3532
3167
3196
3429
4504
4472
4468
3489
4488
3267
3653
3258
3397
3944
2001
3185
2887
2924
3258
4357
3991
3719
2969
3739
3014
3250
3117
3092
3546
2002
3551
2937
3198
2882
4033
3886
3892
2768
4130
2539
2895
3188
3590
3516
2003
3414
3051
3136
3324
4205
4030
3919
2994
3806
2976
3271
3165
3224
3252
2004
3363
2883
3073
3065
4575
4339
4134
3201
4153
2888
3306
3290
3476
3531
2005
3194
3099
3086
3384
4550
4344
4508
3536
4298
3102
3451
3269
3286
3453
2006
3244
2986
3018
3158
4477
4171
4165
3184
4111
3020
3358
3101
3137
3687
2007
3651
3228
3349
3336
4560
4428
4379
3381
4415
3026
3416
3480
3609
3834
2008
3820
3524
3604
3190
4293
4142
4027
3160
4023
2821
3281
3372
3581
3819
2009
3107
2663
2877
2907
4556
4337
4267
3072
4189
2868
3104
2983
3258
3580
2010
3258
2816
2942
2926
4212
3868
3623
2884
4070
2806
3083
2963
3314
3085
2011
3669
3411
3483
3374
4696
4491
4514
3447
4495
3255
3681
3658
3771
3736
2012
3530
3264
3282
3302
4528
4279
4227
3219
4382
3019
3294
3423
3593
3532
2013
3155
2867
2911
3257
4492
4082
4209
3200
4177
3155
3452
3222
3311
3504
2014
3274
2837
2990
3026
4434
4416
4451
3246
4488
2878
3220
3233
3556
3428
2015
3637
3344
3363
3664
4699
4612
4723
3807
4731
3370
3849
3874
4044
3899
2016
3341
2972
3091
2981
4131
4000
4048
3114
4143
2790
3151
3328
3380
3411
66
==PAGE:74==
K.4
Existing offshore wind full load hours
BE
DE_KF
DE_NE
DE_NW
DK_E
DK_W
FI
NL
SE_S
GB
1982
3552
3138
3259
3572
2678
3497
3408
3578
2563
3711
1983
3897
3707
3878
4130
3231
4063
3540
4038
3103
3872
1984
3376
3456
3598
3901
2979
3818
2663
3671
2755
3468
1985
3611
3265
3395
3733
2753
3480
2829
3664
2584
3613
1986
4038
3677
3862
4039
3098
3900
3428
4042
2973
4196
1987
3231
3214
3444
3528
2735
3446
3039
3424
2596
3313
1988
3840
3547
3702
4243
3183
3977
3396
4167
2911
3827
1989
3306
3409
3602
3924
2969
3926
3584
3742
2771
3630
1990
3893
3698
3885
4151
3275
4074
3397
4069
3054
4084
1991
3344
3281
3457
3828
2838
3812
3184
3660
2682
3522
1992
3732
3624
3804
4116
3156
3814
3572
3963
2865
3903
1993
3556
3670
3807
3853
3133
3818
3208
3736
2977
3677
1994
3703
3832
3936
3952
3276
4000
3102
3819
3157
4021
1995
3655
3516
3645
3905
3064
3851
3469
3813
2943
3817
1996
3405
3063
3187
3690
2523
3504
2825
3609
2450
3659
1997
3233
3257
3407
3616
2824
3591
3279
3519
2636
3398
1998
3886
3873
4003
4299
3341
4143
3305
4179
3107
4047
1999
3820
3219
3346
3964
2803
3687
3097
3908
2615
3882
2000
3846
3348
3495
4154
2983
3970
3475
4038
2727
3742
2001
3661
3011
3222
3636
2632
3470
3171
3611
2404
3526
2002
3504
3537
3683
3760
2924
3673
2729
3631
2797
3633
2003
3087
3161
3331
3389
2658
3314
3169
3265
2548
3454
2004
3405
3546
3706
3769
3049
3742
3074
3648
2823
3641
2005
3393
3283
3456
3946
2867
3790
3284
3763
2618
3777
2006
3580
3150
3293
3772
2705
3533
3103
3717
2453
3651
2007
3715
3737
3903
4127
3284
3939
3296
3962
2985
3729
2008
3762
3768
3890
4175
3245
3764
3144
4069
2999
3985
2009
3381
3401
3522
3804
2857
3635
2857
3686
2681
3585
2010
3104
3222
3443
3464
2735
3459
2688
3267
2609
3115
2011
3614
3756
3895
4088
3250
3992
3277
3907
3019
3778
2012
3441
3551
3729
3975
3083
3935
3266
3751
2881
3555
2013
3552
3322
3486
3781
2822
3600
3174
3701
2620
3694
2014
3403
3608
3662
4014
2997
3911
3054
3795
2943
3653
2015
3809
3894
4001
4079
3300
4174
3597
3960
3279
3942
2016
3372
3236
3364
3586
2714
3595
2957
3481
2595
3459
67
==PAGE:75==
K.5
Future offshore wind full load hours
BE
DE_NE
DE_NW
DK_E
DK_W
EE
FI
FR
IT
LT
LV
NL
1982
4215
3750
4195
3650
4452
4236
4245
4086
2577
4033
4133
4301
1983
4653
4320
4758
4180
4982
4783
4540
4143
2688
4738
4753
4678
1984
4051
4066
4657
3903
4869
3657
3474
4095
2803
4186
3987
4461
1985
4371
3876
4317
3686
4421
3976
3747
3997
2547
4132
4079
4343
1986
4708
4418
4601
4193
4879
4304
4224
4274
2684
4594
4506
4769
1987
3910
3907
4110
3659
4400
4183
3969
4026
2735
4243
4262
4093
1988
4541
4167
4831
4075
4870
4349
4204
4243
2794
4363
4389
4846
1989
4040
4071
4676
3971
5010
4423
4386
3881
2379
4386
4358
4485
1990
4623
4378
4769
4215
4943
4403
4283
4008
2481
4408
4412
4785
1991
3978
3947
4557
3842
4842
4134
3995
4157
2603
4198
4212
4402
1992
4461
4325
4778
4154
4795
4357
4312
4080
2572
4368
4363
4714
1993
4253
4263
4562
4089
4763
4405
4129
4087
2697
4435
4416
4459
1994
4370
4391
4590
4268
4861
4122
3977
4200
2701
4167
4154
4573
1995
4380
4083
4493
4013
4758
4605
4431
4089
2824
4311
4447
4578
1996
4123
3642
4343
3507
4534
3893
3867
4159
2929
3728
3792
4405
1997
3943
3887
4296
3771
4530
4303
4137
3835
2660
4192
4242
4221
1998
4619
4464
4924
4336
5022
4140
4001
4363
2760
4374
4312
4947
1999
4465
3832
4562
3746
4493
4090
3922
4287
2826
4027
4075
4557
2000
4480
3993
4717
3933
4849
4104
4122
4123
2703
4200
4144
4661
2001
4314
3660
4224
3520
4388
3941
3931
4210
2888
3822
3861
4305
2002
4205
4194
4399
3977
4679
3917
3623
4231
2612
4423
4288
4366
2003
3854
3823
4015
3617
4160
4027
3988
3849
2686
3979
3970
4052
2004
3985
4214
4407
4033
4632
3927
3789
4023
2713
4244
4209
4326
2005
4170
3987
4682
3854
4820
3960
3829
4098
2600
3970
4006
4685
2006
4241
3816
4344
3686
4533
3992
3890
4004
2502
3899
3963
4427
2007
4411
4375
4721
4214
4921
4168
4003
4074
2654
4329
4281
4646
2008
4523
4406
4647
4210
4531
4409
4050
4173
2542
4450
4483
4798
2009
4103
4031
4460
3901
4528
3915
3603
4045
2760
3998
4042
4437
2010
3800
3871
4183
3641
4605
3779
3500
4066
2971
3898
3895
4019
2011
4357
4447
4777
4294
4919
4428
4116
3955
2462
4541
4569
4670
2012
4175
4224
4718
4119
4981
4343
4054
4080
2783
4255
4297
4516
2013
4291
3993
4402
3807
4604
3820
3810
4355
2785
3901
3872
4515
2014
4068
4166
4649
4095
4772
4069
3826
4065
2674
4175
4162
4520
2015
4587
4557
4802
4444
5078
4371
4221
4202
2483
4508
4463
4776
2016
4111
3836
4271
3746
4649
4010
3798
3963
2854
3950
4034
4309
68
==PAGE:76==
NO_N
NO_M
NO_MW
NO_SE
NO_SW
PL
SE_N1
SE_N2
SE_M
SE_S
GB
1982
4321
5010
5038
4461
4685
3970
4289
4242
4073
4012
4784
1983
4288
5031
5018
4683
4945
4662
3911
4364
4728
4722
4793
1984
4105
4355
4450
4778
5019
4182
3380
3658
4097
4206
4461
1985
4157
4109
4133
4160
4415
4157
3557
3643
4123
4238
4439
1986
4186
4804
4832
4553
4828
4619
4121
4587
4591
4696
4997
1987
4051
4226
4262
4293
4493
4201
3656
3974
4210
4309
4353
1988
3956
4341
4366
4582
4838
4258
3907
4177
4300
4271
4811
1989
4213
4974
4964
4644
4911
4406
4161
4467
4391
4410
4830
1990
4416
4902
4941
4712
4960
4528
4040
4285
4453
4521
4999
1991
4280
4304
4329
4620
4871
4242
3853
3963
4246
4350
4565
1992
4286
4850
4815
4385
4683
4388
4322
4351
4375
4399
4962
1993
4269
4282
4309
4671
4905
4480
3694
4020
4475
4587
4687
1994
3957
4399
4448
4704
4956
4356
3724
3869
4236
4413
5031
1995
4240
4505
4467
4618
4860
4306
4048
4368
4407
4394
4750
1996
4042
4090
4148
4448
4704
3703
3672
3796
3764
3816
4651
1997
4129
4622
4614
4494
4694
4113
3911
4144
4054
4101
4430
1998
4103
4398
4438
4783
5051
4523
3843
4025
4435
4578
5003
1999
4069
4538
4519
4286
4523
3925
3699
3888
4021
3955
4804
2000
4090
4734
4772
4552
4775
4249
4094
4208
4216
4284
4545
2001
4022
4169
4162
3903
4163
3803
3623
3987
3815
3791
4365
2002
3812
3905
3950
4366
4637
4497
3240
3598
4426
4567
4587
2003
4010
4542
4518
3995
4201
4042
3931
4110
4002
4142
4557
2004
3974
4451
4407
4307
4566
4407
3543
3933
4327
4485
4701
2005
4264
4979
4973
4613
4910
4016
4060
4194
4064
4102
4955
2006
4248
4496
4474
4334
4578
3881
3689
3910
3908
3948
4632
2007
4196
4892
4860
4648
4915
4495
3764
4080
4411
4537
4714
2008
3928
4313
4364
4216
4473
4445
3570
3868
4406
4507
4853
2009
4128
4481
4506
4368
4582
4017
3521
3634
4050
4133
4612
2010
3808
3613
3646
4359
4648
3981
3382
3502
3947
4070
4101
2011
4426
4814
4851
4725
4971
4595
4039
4210
4613
4657
4855
2012
4101
4565
4567
4632
4876
4255
3539
3893
4329
4389
4599
2013
3884
4424
4417
4365
4655
4002
4055
4077
3973
4104
4650
2014
3955
4339
4473
4694
4928
4230
3705
3886
4231
4316
4648
2015
4227
4692
4708
4760
4994
4678
4124
4433
4691
4818
5008
2016
3768
4296
4300
4302
4585
3943
3439
3803
4060
4047
4505
69
==PAGE:77==
K.6
Hydro run-of-river full load hours
GB
IT
CZ
AT
CH
FR
BE
LU
PL
DE_CS
DE_ME
DE_NE
DE_NW
1982
2015
3422
2779
5347
4504
4465
3470
3471
2599
3982
3982
3982
3982
1983
2274
3704
1894
4776
4508
4044
3426
3434
2276
3560
3560
3560
3560
1984
2176
3884
1859
4599
4283
3898
3852
3877
2012
3482
3482
3482
3482
1985
1836
3890
3054
4756
4363
3267
2872
2957
2076
3676
3676
3676
3676
1986
2000
4088
2715
4898
4462
3578
3345
3571
2042
3715
3715
3715
3715
1987
1929
3958
3324
5590
4472
3540
3526
3822
2416
4247
4247
4247
4247
1988
2185
3533
3142
5224
4562
4331
3522
3172
3035
4181
4181
4181
4181
1989
2314
3271
1919
5001
3883
2492
2858
2833
1980
3572
3572
3572
3572
1990
2846
3050
1956
4652
4093
2785
2743
2880
2012
3322
3322
3322
3322
1991
2070
3432
1819
4445
3832
2717
2629
2409
1643
3363
3363
3363
3363
1992
2206
3490
2540
5070
4192
3351
3171
2953
2344
3742
3742
3742
3742
1993
2172
3461
1970
5049
4249
3256
2933
2710
2401
3913
3913
3913
3913
1994
2629
3827
2100
4684
4508
4203
3371
3235
3400
3787
3787
3787
3787
1995
2470
3424
3058
5090
4325
4162
3243
3021
3040
3938
3938
3938
3938
1996
1751
3062
3436
5283
3720
3853
2533
2436
1896
3767
3767
3767
3767
1997
1918
3620
3854
5040
3958
3186
2670
3130
1924
3793
3793
3793
3793
1998
2217
3476
2704
4986
4139
3475
3548
3522
2439
3782
3782
3782
3782
1999
2460
3629
2957
5313
4554
4256
3333
3233
3092
4260
4260
4260
4260
2000
2227
3513
3082
5354
4712
4145
3493
3890
3130
4242
4242
4242
4242
2001
2401
3855
2219
4909
4735
4691
3734
3685
1974
3732
3732
3732
3732
2002
1935
3552
5218
5570
4686
3493
3415
3189
2643
4342
4342
4342
4342
2003
2185
3498
2662
4634
4133
3326
2595
2267
1461
3566
3566
3566
3566
2004
1997
3468
3079
5143
4298
3427
2867
2900
3338
3985
3985
3985
3985
2005
2216
3093
3104
4809
4063
2914
2603
2436
2638
3680
3680
3680
3680
2006
2093
3158
4310
5364
4208
2998
3065
3315
3917
4042
4042
4042
4042
2007
2148
2738
2942
5174
4390
3242
3133
3027
4394
3983
3983
3983
3983
2008
2095
3695
2249
4739
4408
3727
3081
3326
3876
3850
3850
3850
3850
2009
2146
3520
2991
5556
4265
2938
2816
2803
2697
4263
4263
4263
4263
2010
1847
3512
3223
4883
4229
3327
3205
3075
3906
3878
3878
3878
3878
2011
2412
3257
2681
4350
3797
2724
2596
2061
3082
3487
3487
3487
3487
2012
1838
3209
2616
5416
4503
3352
3001
3051
2338
4261
4261
4261
4261
2013
2225
4475
3211
5269
4496
3908
3110
3733
3224
4131
4131
4131
4131
2014
2715
5050
2634
4936
4389
3540
2867
3199
2647
3936
3936
3936
3936
2015
2938
3982
2608
4542
4225
2962
2871
3129
2206
3622
3622
3622
3622
2016
3004
3646
2744
4969
4230
3375
2991
3274
2572
3933
3933
3933
3933
70
==PAGE:78==
LT
LV
FI
NO_N
NO_M
NO_MW
NO_SE
NO_SW
SE_N1
SE_N2
SE_M
SE_S
NL
1982
4093
814
4029
3279
3774
3774
3080
3080
2667
3310
4001
4835
3416
1983
4323
723
4317
3807
4673
4673
3783
3783
3446
3933
3825
5259
3373
1984
3468
620
4030
3156
3869
3869
3300
3300
3039
3748
4444
5257
3793
1985
3977
639
3980
3158
3809
3809
3261
3261
3188
3994
4952
5483
2793
1986
4087
901
3993
2821
3618
3618
3079
3079
2420
3232
4499
4817
3293
1987
3362
750
4275
2783
4040
4040
3331
3331
2900
4229
5046
5459
3471
1988
4064
555
3758
3173
4114
4114
3689
3689
3027
3477
4700
6154
3467
1989
4177
755
4070
4304
4908
4908
4005
4005
3501
4101
4020
4214
2779
1990
4457
1135
3154
3750
4862
4862
4207
4207
3274
4357
4508
4968
3217
1991
3548
725
4177
3437
3940
3940
3120
3120
2841
3764
3906
5134
1733
1992
4000
591
4810
3480
4248
4248
3440
3440
3090
3917
3877
4996
3122
1993
4522
767
3974
3368
3863
3863
3132
3132
3178
4098
4408
5206
2943
1994
5013
851
3656
2925
3884
3884
3573
3573
2401
3077
3810
5521
3319
1995
4523
858
3972
3683
4077
4077
3245
3245
2681
3181
4021
4532
3192
1996
3438
346
3968
3064
3265
3265
2487
2487
2618
2988
3523
3487
2020
1997
3879
776
3556
3597
4369
4369
3206
3206
2919
3364
3889
4000
1760
1998
4703
1232
4972
3230
4389
4389
3630
3630
3285
4613
5110
6120
3494
1999
4106
759
4027
3358
4155
4155
3824
3824
2923
3517
4496
5809
3281
2000
4060
724
4750
3527
4363
4363
4583
4583
3325
4537
5470
5218
3439
2001
3491
735
3855
3617
4175
4175
3523
3523
3408
4575
4917
5070
3677
2002
4138
759
3116
3504
3899
3899
2937
2937
2847
2940
4030
4743
3362
2003
3614
617
3154
3420
3945
3945
3123
3123
2606
3240
3861
4037
1711
2004
4492
766
4756
3501
4195
4195
3346
3346
3159
3631
3992
6066
3363
2005
4621
913
4457
4175
4685
4685
3797
3797
3368
4160
4552
4644
1716
2006
3833
781
3581
3503
4176
4176
3495
3495
2765
3627
4662
4986
3188
2007
4213
938
4659
4059
4851
4851
3888
3888
3540
3632
4093
6587
3448
2008
4218
1085
5261
3078
3984
3984
3661
3661
2686
3100
4877
5517
3390
2009
4086
1005
3672
3509
4288
4288
3636
3636
3031
4020
4923
4506
3302
2010
4455
1060
3852
2715
3394
3394
3076
3076
2479
3237
4957
5146
3155
2011
3965
936
4103
3945
5140
5140
4507
4507
3794
4374
5044
5905
1710
2012
3597
1153
5252
3133
4372
4372
3937
3937
3088
4170
5552
5320
3122
2013
4419
915
3899
3280
3960
3960
3284
3284
2810
3514
4009
4088
3422
2014
4036
609
4253
2983
3792
3792
3870
3870
2469
3241
5513
5438
3362
2015
3728
581
4997
4012
4696
4696
4468
4468
3554
4388
5230
5235
2792
2016
4703
769
4396
3217
4225
4225
3398
3398
3152
3822
4617
5369
3001
71
==PAGE:79==
K.7
Hydro reservoir full load hours
IT
CZ
AT
CH
FR
PL
DE_CS
DE_ME
DE_NE
DE_NW
1982
1761
1008
1225
1910
2534
996
411
411
411
411
1983
1727
699
1109
1938
2593
831
417
417
417
417
1984
1750
702
1180
1866
2302
715
386
386
386
386
1985
1840
1103
1277
1866
2296
1076
356
356
356
356
1986
1960
1001
1109
1782
2277
799
351
351
351
351
1987
1966
1197
1225
1823
2056
804
318
318
318
318
1988
1731
1121
1451
1798
2697
1013
311
311
311
311
1989
1700
716
1138
1823
1610
1028
512
512
512
512
1990
1519
719
954
1782
1859
730
432
432
432
432
1991
1521
661
1248
1494
1809
623
449
449
449
449
1992
1645
925
1180
1590
2227
929
445
445
445
445
1993
1772
707
1212
1592
2283
869
321
321
321
321
1994
1779
774
1331
1592
2849
1018
259
259
259
259
1995
1663
1134
1225
1334
2568
1229
286
286
286
286
1996
1438
1236
1036
1334
2363
918
459
459
459
459
1997
1711
1399
1178
1400
2058
1057
380
380
380
380
1998
1561
968
1199
1761
2202
1309
363
363
363
363
1999
1711
1082
1378
1783
2436
1054
240
240
240
240
2000
1625
1140
1384
1682
2665
1256
286
286
286
286
2001
1751
795
1298
1683
2909
920
421
421
421
421
2002
1728
1880
1354
1636
2059
1029
302
302
302
302
2003
1680
977
1174
1636
2203
543
316
316
316
316
2004
1544
1128
1277
1645
2565
2027
310
310
310
310
2005
1374
1129
1223
1691
2110
1536
355
355
355
355
2006
1471
1593
1218
1560
1886
1906
352
352
352
352
2007
1317
1077
1161
1560
2062
2766
270
270
270
270
2008
1728
825
1256
1560
2537
2753
191
191
191
191
2009
1767
1084
1319
1539
2108
1252
357
357
357
357
2010
1778
1070
1238
1539
2235
1521
238
238
238
238
2011
1632
746
1138
1539
1653
854
203
203
203
203
2012
1437
859
1451
1608
1983
903
346
346
346
346
2013
2071
1189
1332
1608
2619
963
304
304
304
304
2014
2360
698
1328
1626
2219
860
272
272
272
272
2015
1896
607
1221
1627
1917
705
204
204
204
204
2016
1768
722
1183
1593
2121
909
226
226
226
226
72
==PAGE:80==
FI
NO_N
NO_M
NO_MW
NO_SE
NO_SW
SE_N1
SE_N2
SE_M
SE_S
1982
4398
3858
4349
4349
3510
3510
2981
3983
4327
5252
1983
4627
4081
5454
5454
4583
4583
3762
4952
4194
5422
1984
4299
3934
4671
4671
3814
3814
3559
4675
4707
5411
1985
4175
3411
4366
4366
3701
3701
3403
4940
5440
5922
1986
4169
3245
4127
4127
3466
3466
2858
4127
5033
5147
1987
4404
3036
4648
4648
3656
3656
3410
5260
5674
5810
1988
3931
3363
4801
4801
4245
4245
3327
4424
5151
6513
1989
4463
4967
5665
5665
4280
4280
4142
5009
4209
4369
1990
3243
4120
5618
5618
4771
4771
3757
4994
4563
5238
1991
4213
3845
4231
4231
3129
3129
3451
4217
4100
5646
1992
5106
4207
5241
5241
3870
3870
3649
4858
4160
5202
1993
4379
4037
4543
4543
3528
3528
3918
5137
4651
5696
1994
3830
3070
4219
4219
3942
3942
2608
3683
4085
5843
1995
4306
4564
5128
5128
4037
4037
3584
4346
4503
4543
1996
4149
3524
3459
3459
2487
2487
2903
3249
3523
3643
1997
3906
4505
5620
5620
3533
3533
3767
4474
4249
4276
1998
5284
3603
4839
4839
3865
3865
3895
5600
5509
6676
1999
4140
3640
4678
4678
4308
4308
3586
4269
4718
6146
2000
5067
4338
5492
5492
5137
5137
4067
5468
5945
5354
2001
4096
3716
4406
4406
3971
3971
3729
5383
5253
5172
2002
3356
3827
4493
4493
3504
3504
3074
3653
4319
4945
2003
3273
3780
4292
4292
3436
3436
2808
3874
3901
4267
2004
4991
3756
4668
4668
3700
3700
3672
4207
4141
6555
2005
4726
5033
5728
5728
4123
4123
3952
5068
4565
4779
2006
3768
3627
4413
4413
3729
3729
2916
4086
5126
5316
2007
4755
4344
5563
5563
4418
4418
3922
4392
4093
6724
2008
5531
3233
4656
4656
4388
4388
3007
3909
5209
5621
2009
3902
3700
4749
4749
3755
3755
3142
4603
5225
4682
2010
4001
3145
3789
3789
3390
3390
2917
4172
5083
5452
2011
4131
4540
6001
6001
4887
4887
4203
5243
5241
6284
2012
5567
3480
5224
5224
4288
4288
3532
4906
5666
5511
2013
4186
3817
4664
4664
3970
3970
3302
4202
4090
4213
2014
4361
3532
4268
4268
4519
4519
2950
3917
5802
5822
2015
5381
4248
5118
5118
4772
4772
4250
5236
5485
5418
2016
4673
3336
4648
4648
3760
3760
3465
4517
4757
5371
73
