==PAGE:1==
Intermittent Computing for Low
Power Wide Area Networks
Adam Ømoseg˚ard Bischoff
Kongens Lyngby 2023
IMM-M.Sc.-2023
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3351
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk IMM-M.Sc.-2023
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis explores the field of IoT through intermittent computing using low
power wide area networks for cases where several intermittently powered de-
vices are located in remote areas without direct access to the power grid or
the internet. These devices perform an action, such as taking a photograph,
and transmit the result to a central server. Energy that powers the device is
harvested from the environment and is stored in a small energy buffer like a su-
percapacitor. The limited energy storage restricts the duration that the device
can be powered at a time before recharging is needed. These short durations
of power mean that the device cannot transmit all data at once, and therefore
have to split the data transmission across multiple power cycles.
Two problems are explored in this thesis. The first is the issue of accurately pre-
dicting how much data that can safely be transmitted during a period of power
based on an early reading of the energy available on the device. The other prob-
lem explored is how this can be combined with a reliable, duplex communication
where data is retransmitted if not correctly received by the server. A solution
to the energy estimation is implemented where no measurement of the energy
available in the buffer is made, allowing it to be turned off at any point during
execution assuming a small minimum capacitor size. This is achieved by split-
ting the data further into small packets that are sent in quick succession while
checkpointing progress simultaneously. This is further combined with a solution
to the issue of efficient and reliable duplex communication. By requesting an ac-
knowledgment from the server at the beginning of the device’s period of power,
the server can request the retransmission of lost packets, allowing the intermit-
tently powered device to provide the missing data. The device continuously
transmits small packets until energy is depleted, utilizing the acknowledgment
itself as the checkpoint for the next cycle to come.
==PAGE:4==
ii
A total of four versions have been implemented. Having all four versions enables
us to identify the increased energy consumption that comes with avoiding energy
estimates and having duplex communication. Through energy measurements of
the implemented versions and estimations of each version’s energy profile, it is
found that the energy cost of splitting the data is greatly affected by the sizes
of the split packets. With sufficiently high split packet sizes, the extra energy
cost can be justified by the ability to better utilize the full energy stored in the
energy buffer in a real-world case. Furthermore, the additional cost related to
reliable duplex communication is found to be relatively small when the packet
loss ratio is low.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter science of the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment for the re-
quirements of an MSc in Computer Science and Engineering with a specializa-
tion in Embedded and Distributed Systems. The thesis was carried out from 29
August 2022 to 29 January 2023 under the supervision of Assistant Professor
Luca Pezzarossa, Postdoc Charalampos Orfanidis, and Professor Jan Madsen.
Kongens Lyngby, 29-January-2023
Adam Ømoseg˚ard Bischoff
s174295
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my supervisors for their support and guidance throughout
the project. In particular, I would like to express my gratitude toward Luca
Pezzarossa and Charalampos Orfanidis for their inspiring commitment and mo-
tivation as well as their time and energy spent during the past months.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgments
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
Intermittent computing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
LoRa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
ESP32 and ESP-IDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Analog Discovery 2 and WaveForms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Design
15
3.1
Solution overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Alternative solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Split granularity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Packet payload structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Double buffering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Message creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6
The server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.7
LoRa vs. LoRaWAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Implementation
29
4.1
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Code overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
LoRa
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.3
Flash storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3.1
Double buffer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Acknowledgment timings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Server implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5.1
Simplex versions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5.2
Duplex versions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.6
Managing gaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Evaluation
39
5.1
Test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Models of energy consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2.1
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Estimation of full message transmission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3.1
Simplex-budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3.2
Simplex-split . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.3.3
Duplex-budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.3.4
Duplex-split . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.4
Comparing estimates with measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.5
Minimum/maximum capacitor sizes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.6
Version comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.7
Estimating throughput . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6
Conclusion
69
6.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Bibliography
73
A Full energy estimations of each version
77
A.1 Simplex-budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.2 Simplex-split
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.3 Duplex-budget
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.4 Duplex-split . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In this thesis we explore how to improve the efficiency of intermittent computing
used in the context of long-range communication for low-power IoT devices. This
is achieved through the development of a system that explores novel approaches
to the problem of closely estimating an energy budget and achieving energy-
efficient, reliable duplex communication. To show how the solution performs
relative to the traditional approaches, different versions have been implemented
to enable comparisons.
This chapter provides an overview of the topic and
problems explored in this thesis, providing context for the project as well as
presenting an outline of the thesis.
In recent years, the number of IoT (Internet of Things) devices has seen rapid
growth, and with the estimated number of devices already in the billions, it
is a topic of rapid innovation [1]. Coupled with recent years’ development in
technologies for energy-harvesting and ultra-low-power computers, the field of
intermittent computing has found its foundation [2]. Intermittent computing
is a paradigm where devices operate using only energy gathered from their en-
vironment, such as solar power, without batteries. Instead of batteries, they
store energy in some other energy buffer, usually a supercapacitor, and instead
of being powered and running at all times, they are powered only intermit-
tently. A supercapacitor is a type of capacitor that has a higher capacitance
compared to regular capacitors. When enough energy is stored in the buffer,
the device wakes up to perform its operation after which it either goes back
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
to a deep-sleep state or turns off completely. Storing the energy in a capacitor
instead of a lithium-ion battery has several advantages. One advantage is that
the materials needed are much more environment-friendly to obtain. Another
advantage is that capacitors allow for virtually unlimited charge cycles while
lithium-ion batteries are much more susceptible to wear causing them to lose
capacity for each charge cycle [3, 4]. Most use cases for intermittent computers
demand frequent charge cycles causing the battery to lose enough capacity to
no longer be of use likely within a few years. The system can also be powered by
a non-rechargeable alkaline or lithium-ion battery, but these typically have an
expected lifespan of only 1-3 years [5]. Combined with much less wear for each
charge cycle, improving its life expectancy significantly, capacitors are a great
direction for making IoT devices in general sustainable. There are, however,
also drawbacks to this approach. One drawback is a lower energy density which
significantly lowers the energy that the device can store at a time. This is com-
pensated for by the ability of capacitors to go from a charged to a discharged
state much more rapidly compared to e.g. lithium-ion batteries. This allows
for a much smaller energy buffer, which only has to provide energy for a single
wake-up cycle. Furthermore, by allowing smaller energy buffers, the price of the
device can be lowered.
In general, IoT devices are small machines interacting and communicating with
other machines, objects, environments, and infrastructure [6]. How exactly this
is done depends on the application at hand, but in general, it involves doing some
computation and communicating the result to someplace else, e.g. measuring a
temperature and transmitting it to another device. Examples are home security
systems, weather stations, doorbells, light bulbs, etc.
One key challenge in designing an intermittently powered system is choosing the
appropriate method of communication. These systems are tightly constrained
by their energy capacity and generation, making a low-power communication
system attractive. The use of intermittent computing systems allows for very lit-
tle maintenance, suggesting that the device can be located far away from people
and existing infrastructure. This suggests a need for long-range communication
since a listening device is unlikely to be nearby. Thus, an ideal system would
be one of low power consumption and long range.
Several communication protocols have been employed for intermittent comput-
ing, including short range technologies such as WiFi, Bluetooth Low Energy
(BLE), and Zigbee. Nevertheless, the choice of protocol for this project is lim-
ited to being low-power wide area networks (LPWANs), which implies the need
for it to function at long ranges and excludes the above-mentioned protocols.
LPWAN protocols include cellular, Sigfox, DASH7, NB-IoT, and LoRa [7]. Both
cellular and NB-IoT use licensed bands for communication, requiring authoriza-
tion within the deployment area, complicating deployment.
Moreover, these
==PAGE:13==
3
technologies are limited by the area covered by cellular network, which reduces
where a network can be deployed to primarily urban areas [7]. Additionally,
cellular technology contributes to an increased deployment cost [8]. Depending
on the setup, DASH7 networks reach a range of 1-2 kilometers whereas LoRa
achieves ranges up to 5 or 15 km depending on whether it is located in urban
or rural locations [7, 9]. Sigfox has a significantly longer range of up to 10 or
even 50 kilometers in rural areas but is limited to packet payload lengths of at
most 12 bytes [10].
The nature of intermittent computers means that the device only has energy
for a short duration, which needs to be considered when designing a program.
In the time that the system is awake it needs to do some operation useful to
the application, but also to save its progress if the data is too large to transmit
in a single packet, which allows it to continue the transmission the next time it
wakes up. If the system is powered off before its progress is saved, the operation
performed will not be of use. A common technique is to simply store a checkpoint
in non-volatile memory such as flash. To ensure that this checkpoint is reached
before power is lost, the program will need to stop execution when a specific
amount of energy is estimated to be left.
If this estimation is too late the
checkpoint will fail, and if the estimation is too early the remaining energy upon
completion is wasted and could have been used for a larger transmission. For
systems communicating over long ranges, the transmission of packets requires
long transmission times resulting in large amounts of energy. In situations where
large packets are sent followed by checkpointing, the system must create an
estimate of the maximum size packet that allows enough energy to be left for
the following checkpoint. Because the estimate must be done far in advance, it is
difficult to accurately predict, and must therefore be conservative. This implies
that this checkpointing approach works poorly in conjunction with applications
with long packet transmission times. A straightforward approach to addressing
the prediction of an uncertain energy budget would be to simply equip the
device with a larger energy buffer. However, this increases the cost per device
justifying the desire for a system to operate as efficiently as possible within its
constraints.
The most energy-efficient way for an intermittently powered computer to trans-
mit data is to simply wake up, transmit, checkpoint, and turn off again while a
server continuously listens for incoming packets. This is referred to as simplex
communication. However, there is no guarantee for each individual packet to
arrive, e.g. due to noise on the chosen frequency or to the receiving server being
busy. Imagine an application where a device wishes to transmit some data that
is too large to transmit in a single packet. The device will need to split it into
smaller packets, that are transmitted individually during each wake-up cycle. If
the data is only useful if complete, it will be unusable if at least one packet got
lost, and the risk of this occurring only increases with data sizes. To ensure all
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
packets are received for some given data, the server will need to acknowledge
the received packets. This is in turn referred to as duplex communication. For
an acknowledgment to be received by the transmitting device, it must open the
radio and listen for a response, consuming precious energy. If the system must
also ensure enough energy to create a checkpoint upon reception of the acknowl-
edgment, this addition makes it even harder to estimate the maximum packet
size before transmission. Additionally, in situations where the server is simply
too busy to handle the packet, the device has wasted energy transmitting it.
This thesis explores approaches to the two above-mentioned problems: early,
precise estimates of your energy budget and energy efficient duplex communi-
cation for intermittently-powered devices. To address the issue of energy bud-
geting, we have designed and implemented a system that simply does not make
any assumptions about the remaining energy in the capacitor at any time during
execution, allowing it to be powered off at any time. Instead of transmitting
one large packet, multiple smaller packets are being transmitted in succession
and checkpointing alongside it. In another version, this approach is combined
with duplex communication in which the packet acknowledgment is located be-
fore the data transmissions. By doing so, the device needs no checkpointing
as the server describes what data is missing while ensuring all data is received
correctly. Two versions requiring the energy have also been implemented for
simplex and duplex communication respectively, creating a total of four ver-
sions. Having all four versions enables us to create useful comparisons between
them in terms of measuring their relative energy consumption given the same
message to transmit and their throughput. This provides a basis for considering
whether the added benefits of the approaches outweigh the added complexity
and energy required for their implementations. The structure of the thesis is as
follows:
• Chapter 2 provides the necessary background to the technologies used for
the project as well as discusses work related to the topic of this thesis.
Background is provided on intermittent computing, LoRa, the ESP32 mi-
crocontroller, the framework ESP-IDF, and the Analog Discovery 2 com-
bined with the accompanying WaveForms software used for energy mea-
surements.
• Chapter 3 specifies and describes the system created for the project.
• Chapter 4 provides both an overview and specific examples of how the
system is implemented.
• Chapter 5 evaluates the system created in terms of energy consumption
and data throughput.
• Chapter 6 concludes the thesis.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter provides background knowledge for concepts and technologies used
during the project.
2.1
Intermittent computing
The term intermittent computing refers to a computing paradigm in which a
program is only executing periodically, separated by periods where the device
is using little energy in a sleep-state or even powered off completely [11]. These
devices are usually connected to a power source that is unreliable such as solar
energy or slow such as electromagnetic energy emitted by radio and TV broad-
casting. But instead of relying on enough power to be present for waking up
directly from the source, the energy is stored in some energy buffer, usually a
supercapacitor.
While intermittent computing has been studied for years under different names,
it seems that the term was first coined by Lucia et al. in 2017 [2]. Similar
terms include Transiently Powered Computers [12], RFID-scale sensing devices
[13] and batteryless sensing platforms [14].
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
Figure 2.1: An example of a LoRa module. This is the RF96 transceiver.
2.2
LoRa
LoRa (shorthand for Long-Range) is a system for low-power, low-bitrate, long-
range wireless communication [15] and is used for this project.
It has been
promoted as an infrastructure for the Internet of Things. LoRa networks are
typically in a star-of-stars topology in which several end devices communicate
with gateways using LoRa, and these gateways then communicate the data
further to a central server via the internet [15]. The end devices are often low-
power sensors where a connection to existing communication infrastructure, such
as the internet, is difficult.
LoRa defines the physical layer of communication. The chips are all produced by
SemTech who own the patent. The LoRa Alliance, however, has developed and
maintains LoRaWAN as a Media Access Control (MAC) layer protocol that uses
LoRa as its physical layer [16]. It provides additional features such as message
encryption, authentication, and device addressing.
EU law limits the use of frequencies to unlicensed bands like 868 MHz and a
maximum duty cycle of 1%. I.e. in a continuous one-hour period, the device can
at most be transmitting for 36 seconds in total.
LoRa uses chirp spread spectrum (CSS) modulation for transmission. This tech-
nique encodes data as a linear frequency modulation, where data is encoded in
symbols. A chirp refers to one frequency modulation, and each chirp represents
one symbol. The speed of the modulation is determined by the bandwidth. The
number of times this frequency is adjusted is referred to as the chip rate.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 LoRa
7
LoRa excels in its ability to communicate over very long distances at a relatively
low power draw. An example is the SF96 LoRa module, which draws between
66 and 396 mW while transmitting [17]. An example of this module is seen on
Figure 2.1. For urban areas it allows for transmission of up to 5 kilometers and
even up to 15 kilometers for rural areas [9]. The range is determined by several
settings that can be configured to the given application e.g., by increasing power
consumption in return for more reliable transmissions. These settings are:
• Frequency
Adjusting the center frequency does not affect reliability or energy con-
sumption.
However, it is useful as it allows for multiple simultaneous
transmissions, given that they communicate on different frequencies with-
out interfering with each other.
• Bandwidth
A high bandwidth decreases the time needed for a packet to be transmit-
ted, which in turn results in lower energy consumption. However, lower
bandwidth provides higher sensitivity, allowing for more reliable trans-
missions. The choice of bandwidth is thus a trade-off between reliable
transmissions vs. transmission speed and, in turn, energy consumption.
• Explicit/implicit header mode
One has the choice of either an implicit or an explicit header. The header
tells the receiver how large the data in the packet is. If all packets are
of the same size there is no need for this and the implicit header can be
chosen.
• Spreading factor
To put it simply, the spreading factor is the ratio between the chip rate and
the symbol rate, i.e. how many chips are needed per symbol. With fewer
chips less time needs to be spent transmitting for each symbol, increasing
the throughput. However, this makes it harder to distinguish it from noise,
making it less reliable. The number of chips per symbol is 2SF where SF is
the spreading factor. Thus, increasing the spreading factor by one doubles
the number of chips needed, doubling the transmission time. Spreading
factors must be between 12 and 7, or 6 if using implicit header mode.
• Coding rate
The coding rate is likewise a trade-off between energy and reliability. It
determines the amount of redundancy added to the transmission, which
makes it more resilient to interference. This can be set such that for every
4 bits of data sent, 5-8 bits are transmitted.
• CRC
At the end of the transmission there is the possibility of adding a cyclic
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
redundancy check (CRC). It is used to check the integrity of the data re-
ceived but again comes at the price of increased overhead in transmission.
Figure 2.2 shows how a LoRa packet is structured. The packet begins with a
preamble that allows the receiver’s radio to synchronize with the transmitter’s
radio. It is followed by the header, which describes the size of the payload. Next
is the payload of the packet, which can be up to 255 bytes long. Finally, the
payload CRC (cyclic redundancy check) is used to verify the integrity of the
payload upon reception. Another variation includes an implicit header mode, in
which the payload must be of a fixed size and the header can thus be omitted.
The payload CRC can also be omitted.
However, this increases the risk of
receiving corrupted data.
Preamble
Header
Payload
Payload
CRC
Figure 2.2: Structure of a LoRa packet [18]. The preamble synchronizes the
receiver with the incoming packet.
The header is optional and
describes the length of the payload. The payload is the actual
data transmitted between the devices and is up to 255 bytes in
length. The packet is ended with an optional CRC used to detect
errors in the received payload.
2.3
ESP32 and ESP-IDF
ESP32 is a series of low-cost, low-power microcontrollers manufactured by Espres-
sif Systems and are used for this project. They have integrated WiFi as well as
Bluetooth for communication, but also has a total of 34 programmable GPIO
(general-purpose input/output) pins that, among other things, can be connected
to different communication modules. A picture of an ESP32 device can be seen
in Figure 2.3.
The Espressif IoT Development Framework, or simply ESP-IDF, is a software
development framework for the ESP32 microcontroller [19]. It offers a complete
environment for creating a complete application and is based on the FreeRTOS
operating system. The framework was developed and is maintained by Espressif
Systems, which is also the company manufacturing the ESP32 microcontrollers.
FreeRTOS is a real-time operating system (RTOS) targeted at embedded sys-
tems. It allows for easy access to API functions that, for instance, create tasks
==PAGE:19==
2.3 ESP32 and ESP-IDF
9
Figure 2.3: An ESP32 microcontroller.
with xTaskCreate or delay a task with vTaskDelay [20]. These tasks each rep-
resent a program running on the device, and multiple tasks are allowed to run
simultaneously. Each core of the CPU can run its own task simultaneously, but
if more tasks exist than there are cores, the operating system will need to share
the processing time among the tasks. How this is done is referred to as the
operating system’s scheduling policy. Other non real time operating systems
have kernels that employ a policy in which a fair share of the processing time
is allocated between tasks. I.e. n tasks shared among a single core will each use
approximately
1
n of its processing time. This is assuming no task is sleeping
(delayed for a certain time) or blocked (waiting for I/O or a resource to be
available). The scheduler in FreeRTOS, however, works differently from that.
Since it is a real-time operating system, it makes use of a scheduling policy that
can guarantee a maximum execution time for handling urgent events. This is
achieved by assigning a priority to each task in the system. Instead of sharing
the execution time equally between the tasks, the task with the highest priority
that is ready to be executed is always chosen and run until it either finishes, is
put in a sleep/blocked state, or replaces by a new task with a higher priority.
If two tasks of equal priority are ready to run, execution time is shared fairly
between them.
The kernel of FreeRTOS measures time using a tick variable that is incremented
at some predefined frequency, e.g. 100Hz. At the specified frequency, the RTOS
tick interrupt increments this variable. When a task is set to sleep, the duration
is specified in a specified number of ticks.
Thus, when the tick variable is
incremented, the kernel looks for any tasks that are ready to be put in the
ready state. If a task is resumed that has a higher priority than that of the task
currently running, the resumed task will take over execution. When the system
is started, FreeRTOS itself creates an idle task with the lowest possible priority.
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
This task is always in the ready state, ensuring that there is always at least one
task to execute. The idle task is responsible for freeing memory allocated by the
operating system to deleted tasks [21]. Apart from that it has no practical use.
Real-time operating systems are practical for embedded devices where urgent
tasks can be executed within a guaranteed time frame, given the task running
it is of highest priority.
The system developed in this project has been entirely developed using ESP-
IDF and written in C. The framework was installed as an extension to Visual
Studio Code [22]. This extension allows for development as well as easy access
to building, flashing, monitoring, and more. Once installed, it enables you to
build the project with the click of a button. By connecting the ESP32 board
to the computer via USB, the device shows up as a port. By selecting the port
corresponding to the device-, another button allows for the build of the project
to be flashed to the device after which a third button allows you to monitor it.
Different settings of the framework can be modified by opening the command
palette in Visual Studio Code (Ctrl + Shift + P) and selecting menuconfig. This
opens ESP-IDF’s SDK Configuration Editor with several settings to modify. An
example is selecting a partition file when creating a partition in flash for the
device to manipulate throughout execution or disabling write caching when
writing to flash through the SPIFFS library.
SPIFFS is a file system bundled with ESP-IDF for flash devices intended for
embedded devices and is used throughout this project. Among others, it handles
wear leveling and file system consistency checks. Basic file handling interacting
with the flash memory of the ESP32 needs a library like SPIFFS to function.
By calling the function esp vfs spiffs register(const esp vfs spiffs conf t
*conf) with a pointer to a pointer to a configuration structure, you can register
and mount SPIFFS to a virtual file system (VFS). This configuration structure
lets you specify a file path prefix that will be associated with the file system, the
label of the partition to use, the maximum number of files that you can have
open at a time, and whether to format the file system if it fails to mount. Once
initialized, basic file operations like fopen, fwrite, fread etc. can be used for
any files having the specified prefix. SPIFFS can afterward be unregistered and
unmounted with esp vfs spiffs unregister(const char *partition label)
using the same partition label used to initialize it. If desired, it is possible to
have multiple partitions mounted at the same time.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Analog Discovery 2 and WaveForms
11
Figure 2.4: The Analog Discovery 2.
2.4
Analog Discovery 2 and WaveForms
The Analog Discovery 2 (AD2) is an instrument produced by Digilent that al-
lows for measuring, visualizing, generating, recording, and controlling mixed
signal circuits [23]. This project will make use of its two oscilloscopes for mea-
surements. To create a measurement, the AD2 is plugged into a computer that
is running the accompanying WaveForms software [24].
It is through Wave-
Forms that all interactions with the AD2 are performed. The tool used for this
project is the Logger. It logs the voltage of the two oscilloscopes at up to 10 Hz.
Each measurement can then be exported to a csv file for further analysis.
2.5
Related work
In [25] Winkel et al. present an architecture for wireless communication that
is intermittently powered, and without needing to modify the official protocol
specification. This is demonstrated with a battery-free Bluetooth Low Energy
(BLE) smartwatch. This paper is relevant as it combines intermittently powered
devices with bidirectional (duplex) communication.
However, it does so for
BLE, which comes with a different set of problems compared to LoRa used in
this project. LoRa consumes significantly more power when transmitting and
has a slower bitrate [26, 17, 27], but can transmit with much larger intervals to
maintain a connection at much longer ranges [28, 9].
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
In [29], Winkel et al. present a battery-less Nintendo Game Boy emulator pow-
ered entirely by solar panels and the energy created from button presses. When
power is lost and restored, the state of the game is continued through a check-
pointing system. When checkpointing, the volatile memory in SRAM is moved
to non-volatile FRAM. The paper contributes as a practical demonstration of
the capability of intermittent computing in interactive-based systems. To re-
duce the load of checkpointing, a just-in-time differential checkpointing scheme
is used to only checkpoint updated values. While the data to checkpoint funda-
mentally differs from that explored in this project, they are similar in that they
assume power can be lost at any point in execution.
The topic of differential checkpointing is explored in detail by Ahmed et al. in
[30].
They propose the DICE, which is a software-only system operating in
volatile memory to determine differentials. The system can work in conjunction
with any program. Differential checkpointing reduces the correlated energy cost.
The study shows an order of magnitude improvement in execution time for an
example case.
To reduce the number of checkpoints needed, Bhatti et al. present a code in-
strumentation strategy that improves the efficiency of checkpointing in intermit-
tently powered systems [31]. The solution examines the control-flow graph of
the given program to suggest checkpoint positions during execution. In addition
to needing fewer checkpoints, the system also allows fewer readings of the energy
buffer, again reducing energy consumption. The study measures this strategy
to be 19% from optimal checkpoint placements. An approach suggested in this
thesis consists of continuously checkpointing progress while transmitting data
in parallel, which would benefit from simply creating a single checkpoint for the
last transmission. However, this is infeasible with the restriction placed on that
solution to not allow energy buffer readings.
In another recent paper [32], Desai et al. investigate how intermittent computing
and LoRa can be used to create an image sensor capable of capturing and
transmitting low-resolution images with the platform dubbed Camaroptera. To
reduce the transmission of uninteresting photos, the platform is equipped with
a Machine Learning-based processing platform to only transmit photos that
it deems of interest according to the application. This paper is related in its
approach to transmitting large amounts of data over several cycles by splitting it
up into smaller packets. Where the paper differs, however, is in both reliability
of the transmissions and assumptions about hardware. The paper explains the
communication to be simplex. This implies that the transmitting device has
no way of knowing whether a packet was received or not, thus removing the
possibility for the server to request retransmissions of lost packets. The platform
transmits images in JPEG format, and while there are ways to encode them
to mitigate damages of missing or corrupted bytes [33], it will result in some
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Related work
13
information loss, nonetheless. The proposed system splits certain operations,
say transmitting a full LoRa packet, into tasks that can be guaranteed completed
without power loss, which is achieved by waiting until the capacitor is charged
to a predefined voltage. This differs from the approach suggested in this thesis
where these budget predictions are omitted and the device can be powered off
at any time while executing.
To the best of our knowledge, this paper presents the first system in which in-
termittently powered devices transmit data using LoRa without the assumption
that maximum payload sizes can be estimated. Neither are we aware of other
intermittently powered systems in which the transmitter can omit checkpointing
by requesting knowledge of what data is missing from the server upon wake-up.
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Design
This chapter describes the specifications of the system developed, how it is
designed, and the architecture of the system. An overview of the solution is
first presented in detail.
This is followed by a brief overview of alternative
approaches to the problem that, while novel, proved either infeasible in practice
or inferior to the selected solution. This is followed by elaborations on specific
design challenges and the scope of the project.
3.1
Solution overview
This thesis serves as an exploration into the field of long-range communication
of intermittently powered devices. This is done through the development of a
system, which comes in four different versions. All four versions are capable of
transmitting data of up to 64 KiB over a series of smaller packets. Sending long
series of data in a single packet over long distances and using a reasonably sized
capacitor is simply not feasible at current times. To describe the entire data,
before it is split, we use the term message. To describe the splits that are sent
individually in packets, we use the term chunk.
The general idea for the behavior of all four versions of the system is the fol-
lowing:
==PAGE:26==
16
Design
1. Wake up.
2. Obtain data to send.
3. Transmit the data to a central server.
4. Checkpoint the data sent.
5. Turn off.
This cycle is referred to as a wake-up cycle. The cause for the device waking up
can be several. It can be due to a certain voltage reached on the capacitor, a
predefined time that has passed since it was last awake, or some other external
trigger. How the data is obtained also differs between cycles. The device first
reads its flash storage to look for a message.
If one is present and not yet
transmitted, its data is used.
If not, some data is generated specific to the
use case, e.g., taking a photo with an attached camera.
Some or all of the
data obtained is then transmitted wirelessly using LoRa and checkpointed. By
checkpointing, we ensure that the same data is not retransmitted in the next
wake-up cycle. In general, with a single exception in one of the four versions,
all data is transmitted in order. Afterward, the device turns off.
The first two versions of the solution presented addresses the issue of needing
to budget the amount of data that the device can afford to transmit during a
wake-up cycle. The first version presented is one doing exactly that: After the
device wakes up, the device immediately measures the voltage of its capacitor
to determine how much energy is available. This is then used to estimate how
many bytes can at most be safely sent in a chunk without losing power before
completion. The device looks into its flash memory for a message to send. If
no message is found, or the stored message has been fully transmitted, a new
message is created and stored in its place. What data this message contains
is specific to the application in use. On completion, a new energy budget is
calculated. This message contains information about its ID, the total size of the
message, how much of the data has been sent already, and the data itself, as
can be seen in Figure 3.1. There are no restrictions as to how the message’s ID
is defined, though it should be unique to the receiver to differentiate between
multiple connections. One approach is to generate a random ID and assume it
to be unique, or one could simply assign an ID, or range of IDs, for each device,
which all messages will use. Using the energy budget previously calculated, the
according amount of data is sent, consecutive to the data sent in the previous
wake-up cycle. The device then creates a checkpoint by updating the flash with
how much data that has been sent and powers off.
The distinctions between each of the four versions are in two key areas. The
first distinction is in whether the program should budget how many bytes the
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Solution overview
17
Message ID
Byte index
Message size
Data
2 bytes
2 bytes
2 bytes
 ≤ 65535 bytes
Figure 3.1: The structure of a message stored in flash. The message ID is
what identifies the message from others when received by the
server. The byte index tells how many bytes that have already
been transmitted in the message, indicating what data to trans-
fer next. Message size simply contains the length of the data to
transmit, and is followed by said data.
device can afford to transmit without losing power given the current voltage
of the capacitor, as in the above-mentioned example. This assumes knowledge
of the capacitance of the equipped capacitor, the ability to measure its voltage
reliably, and an accurate estimation of the energy consumed by the program. If
the relationship between the size of the chunk and the energy used to transmit it
by the specific device running the program is known, we can assume a maximum-
size chunk that can be transmitted without interruption. The opposing variation
to this requires no knowledge of the energy left in the capacitor, and in turn,
does not rely on calculating estimates of the maximum allowed payload size that
can be safely sent. It works by splitting the message into smaller chunks and
continuously transmitting them one at a time until the device simply depletes its
energy and is powered off. This removes the need to determine the maximum
safe chunk size from the specific capacitor equipped in the device, and can
simply be run in any hardware configuration.
I.e. not only are assumptions
about the installed capacitor omitted, but the energy profile of the program as
a whole is not needed, as no energy estimations are calculated. This splitting
approach allows the system to be turned off at any time without warning if
desired. These two versions are, in part, named after their approach to this.
I.e. a solution is named budget if it relies on creating a packet size budget from
an energy reading or split if it instead split the data into smaller packets which
are transmitted until energy is depleted.
With the budget version, the device simply checkpoints how much of the mes-
sage it has transmitted into non-volatile flash memory on completion since the
energy required from this checkpoint is calculated into the packet size budget.
A simple sequence diagram is shown in Figure 3.2. This version is opposed to
the splitting version, which does not know the energy budget.
Instead, it
splits the message up into small chunks which it can send multiple of during the
same wake-up cycle. Without the energy budget, it does not know when the
energy is depleted, and must therefore checkpoint between packet transmissions.
A sequence diagram of this is shown in Figure 3.3. To avoid corruption of the
checkpoint caused by sudden power-offs while writing, it is done using a double
==PAGE:28==
18
Design
Transmitter
Server
data
checkpoint
Figure 3.2: Sequence diagram of the simplex-budget version.
loop
Transmitter
Server
data
checkpoint
[device has power
and message is
incomplete]
Figure 3.3: Sequence diagram of the simplex-split version. The loop contin-
ues until the device either depletes of power or the entire message
has been transmitted.
buffer. During the beginning of a device’s wake-up cycle, the double-buffered
checkpoint is read, and transmission of the message continues from the stored
position in the message. This process allows for a packet to be transmitted,
but not checkpointed before being powered off, which causes the packet to be
retransmitted in the following wake-up cycle. While retransmission of packets is
wasteful in energy, it is preferred over skipping a packet entirely (e.g., by check-
pointing before the transmission). Though the transmission itself is not reliable,
this ensures that each packet is sent at least once. If transmission reliability is
of concern, one could look at the other distinction of the four versions, which is
to use duplex communication as opposed to the simplex communication dis-
cussed above. This approach assumes that the capacitor holds at least enough
energy for at least one chunk to be sent and checkpointed.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Solution overview
19
By sacrificing some energy in a wake-up cycle, it is possible to have reliable
communication by not only transmitting some data but also receiving an ac-
knowledgment of it from the server. A version of the system that implements
this is referred to as duplex. If data is simply transmitted without acknowledg-
ment, it is instead referred to as simplex. The two versions earlier mentioned
are thus called simplex-budget and simplex-split respectively. The remain-
ing two versions are thus the duplex variant to those, i.e., duplex-budget
and duplex-split making a total of four versions combined.
For the duplex-budget version, when the device has transmitted its data,
instead of going to sleep, the device begins to listen for a response from the
server. This is shown in Figure 3.4. If the data was received by the server, it
responds with a packet containing the ID of the message, whether the packet
was received correctly, which index of the message the received data starts at,
and the total size of the received packet. If and only if this acknowledgment
contains the anticipated values, the packet is deemed successfully sent by the
transmitter, and the device will create a new checkpoint in flash memory, causing
the device to transmit the next chunk of data in its next wake-up cycle. If no
acknowledgment is received, the acknowledgment does not match the expected
byte index, packet length, or simply if requested by the server, the device will
retransmit the exact same chunk in its next wake-up cycle, which is achieved by
simply not modifying the existing checkpoint. A third and final scenario is that
the server requests the device to restart the transmission entirely. This is used
for rare situations where the server does not recognize the message it receives,
and the packet is not data for the beginning of a message (byte index not zero).
The most likely case for this would be a server-side power loss, causing the
memory, and in effect, the content of the partly received message, to be lost.
When this response is received, the byte index stored in flash is simply changed
to zero.
A fourth and final version of the solution, which combines reliable duplex com-
munication with split has also been developed and is shown in Figure 3.5. This
version has no assumptions about its energy budget for sending a packet while
also enabling data to be sent reliably. This created a challenge as the tradi-
tional approach to acknowledgments is to send it immediately upon receiving
some data, i.e. in the end of the wake-up cycle. Instead, the acknowledgment
has been moved to the beginning of the wake-up cycle by first transmitting a
short request packet, simply containing the ID of the message, upon wake-up.
This packet acts as an announcement to the server that the device has woken
up and is ready to receive its acknowledgment. The server then responds with
an acknowledgment describing exactly which bytes are yet to be received. Using
this response, the missing data is transmitted in split packets until either the
stored energy is depleted or the message is completely sent. Moving the ac-
knowledgment to the beginning of the wake-up cycle is essential as this version
==PAGE:30==
20
Design
Transmitter
Server
data
checkpoint
ACK
Figure 3.4: Sequence diagram of the duplex-budget version.
has no way of estimating when to stop transmitting packets and instead listen
for an acknowledgment.
A drawback of this approach is that an additional packet needs to be sent during
each wake-up cycle, contributing to the energy overhead of sending actual data.
Another solution could be to receive an acknowledgment after every packet or
once every few transmissions. However, once the second acknowledgment has
been transmitted, the drawback of the additional request packet is mitigated.
Thus, any scenario with more than two acknowledgments would require more
packets than our selected solution of having acknowledgments first. Addition-
ally, this would put a larger requirement on the minimum capacitor size of
the device. It is also worth noting that because the acknowledgment tells ex-
actly which bytes are missing, unlike the other versions, there is no need to
checkpoint what has already been transmitted to flash. This creates another
advantage compared to the simplex implementation, namely that data is only
retransmitted if incorrectly received by the server. The simplex implementation
cannot guarantee that a checkpoint is created after every packet transmission
if the power is depleted before this is done, and therefore the last packet sent
in a wake-up cycle might be retransmitted in the following cycle. In the du-
plex version, if this last packet is received correctly it will be included in the
acknowledgment in the following wake-up cycle. When the server responds to a
request it can anticipate a data packet to be received shortly, which reduces the
risk of it being too busy to handle it in time. Since the request packet contains
little data it is not as energy expensive to transmit compared to a data packet.
This means that the energy wasted by the server being busy might be reduced
compared to duplex-budget since that version has to transmit a data packet
before knowing the server to be busy.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Solution overview
21
request
loop
Transmitter
Server
ACK
data
[device has power
and message is
incomplete]
Figure 3.5: Sequence diagram of the duplex-split version. The loop contin-
ues until the device either depletes of power or the entire message
has been transmitted.
That makes a total of four versions which each transmit via budget/splitting
with simplex/duplex communication. Creating four versions is not only useful
as they may tailor to specific application scenarios but are also useful in com-
parisons against each other. For applications where the integrity of the received
data is desired, but not crucial, understanding the impact of adding duplex com-
munication is of great value. An example later discussed in this thesis is that of
transmitting a photo. Certain optimizations for images rely on the integrity of
the file to function, and therefore might not be suitable for simplex communica-
tion, and more primitive, but larger file formats must be used instead. Thus, it
is of great value to know whether a large file that can be transmitted at a lower
energy expense (simplex) has a greater message throughput than a smaller file
that takes more time to transmit (duplex). The benefit of the split solutions
is that the energy in the capacitor can be better utilized compared to budget,
where the estimation is made far in advance and is therefore accompanied by
a larger margin for error. Because of this error margin, the wake-up cycle will
often end with energy left in the capacitor that could have been used for trans-
mitting a larger chunk. The split solution works well for applications where
energy estimations are difficult or limited, and utilizing the entire energy buffer
becomes important.
3.1.1
Alternative solutions
In the course of this project, several other approaches have also been considered.
Though they are not implemented or used for the final product, they provide
==PAGE:32==
22
Design
different ideas for solving the problems. One approach that we wanted to explore
was to halt a transmission before a packet was transmitted completely when the
capacitor reached a certain voltage. Thus, instead of creating an estimate before
starting the transmission, the device would always attempt to send a packet
of maximum size.
This would reduce the need for making an early packet-
size estimate, and increase its accuracy by moving it closer to the end of the
wake-up cycle. If the transmitter can determine how much of the payload was
transmitted, the checkpoint is simply made from that point. The receiving server
would receive the data correctly up to the point in time that the transmission
stopped, followed by data created from noise. The server would not be able
to determine exactly where the actual data stopped, however, the next packet
received would override the noise data. It is worth noting that this solution
would not work in conjunction with LoRa’s payload CRC. An implementation
of this solution was prevented by not being able to determine how much of a
packet had been transmitted before the transmission was complete with the
hardware used for this project.
Several approaches to duplex-split have been considered.
One of the ap-
proaches we considered still allowed for an estimation to be made from reading
the voltage of the capacitor, but while moving this estimation to be as small
as possible to reduce its uncertainty. The version did not include the acknowl-
edgment at the beginning of the wake-up cycle. Instead, it would repeatedly
transmit chunks, each containing a point of time in the future where the de-
vice would expect an acknowledgment. When a certain voltage threshold in the
capacitor was reached, the device would stop the transmission and go into a
low-power state. When the announced time for acknowledgment was reached,
the device would wake up and listen for it. Since there is no guarantee for each
packet to be received, the acknowledgment time would be included in every
packet. Another approach was to simply expect the acknowledgment a fixed
time after the final packet was transmitted. However, this would not work in
cases where the final packet was not received, as the timing would be off. This
idea reduces the number of packets needed compared to transmitting an ac-
knowledgment for every packet. However, it did not completely exclude the
need for energy estimations, why it was not used in the final system.
3.2
Split granularity
The two split versions transmit potentially multiple chunks for each wake-up
cycle. Unless it is the last packet of the message, these chunks are always trans-
mitted at a fixed length. This length is referred to as the granularity and can
be modified to fit different setups best. A clear advantage of a large granularity
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Packet payload structure
23
Message ID
Byte index
Message size
Data
2 bytes
2 bytes
2 bytes
 ≤ 249 bytes
Figure 3.6: Packet payload structure for simplex-budget, simplex-split
and duplex-budget.
Message ID
Byte index
Message size
Data
Type
2 bytes
2 bytes
2 bytes
 ≤ 248 bytes
1 byte
Figure 3.7: Packet payload structure for duplex-split.
is that it involves less overhead to transmit the same data, resulting in faster
transmission of the same amount of data, and decreasing its energy consump-
tion. However, if power is lost during transmission (or before checkpointing in
the case of simplex-split), potentially more data needs to be retransmitted.
With smaller granularity on average less data needs to be retransmitted after a
power loss. Therefore the optimal granularity is very dependent on the capacitor
size.
3.3
Packet payload structure
LoRa allows for a payload of a maximum of 255 bytes. However, some extra
header information is needed for the system presented in this project to work
as intended. Figure 3.6 shows the structure of a data packet payload sent by
both simplex versions as well as duplex-budget. The first two bytes are used
as ID to identify the message in the server. This allows for multiple devices to
transmit to the same server simultaneously. The following two bytes encode at
which index in the total message, the transmitted data is positioned. The next
two bytes encode the total size of the message. The remaining bytes are then
used for the actual data. Figure 3.7 shows the structure of the payload sent
from the duplex-split version, and is very similar. However, since this version
both transmits packets for announcements and packets for data, an additional
byte is added to the header, which tells the server that the packet is for data
transmission. The structure of said request packet is shown in Figure 3.8. It
simply contains the ID of the message it is transmitting and that this packet is
of the type request.
The structure of an acknowledgment received in duplex-budget is shown in
Figure 3.9. It contains the message’s ID, the server’s response to the previous
==PAGE:34==
24
Design
Message ID
Type
2 bytes
1 byte
Figure 3.8: Packet payload structure of announcement in duplex-split.
Message ID
ACK
type
Byte index
Packet
length
2 bytes
2 bytes
1 byte
1 byte
Figure 3.9: Payload structure of acknowledgment in duplex-budget.
packet (acknowledged, retransmit or start over), the byte index of the received
packet, and the length of said packet payload. The structure of an acknowledg-
ment in duplex-split is a little more complicated and is shown in Figure 3.10.
This acknowledgment must describe exactly which bytes need to be transmitted
in the whole message since the transmitting device does not checkpoint. As with
all other payloads, the first two bytes describe the ID of the related message.
The next two bytes encode the index of the last byte received in the entire mes-
sage. If all packets up to this point have been received correctly, the payload
stops here. If, however, a packet is lost during transmission and this is followed
by a packet that is received, there will be a gap in the received data. A gap is
simply an interval of not-received data in the message1. Each gap is described
by its start and end index. To provide a maximum size for this packet, at most
10 gaps can be described per acknowledgment.
3.4
Double buffering
In simplex-split, the device can lose power while writing a checkpoint to flash.
Since this could potentially corrupt the file it is writing to, a double buffer has
been implemented. The principle of a double buffer is that two separate files
1Note that this implies that there is a gap between the last received byte index and the
message size. However, since this gap will always be present unless the message is completed,
this gap is instead implied by the last received byte index alone.
Message ID
Last received
byte index
Gap1
start
Gap1
end
Gapn
start
...
Gapn
end
2 bytes
2 bytes
2 bytes
2 bytes
2 bytes
2 bytes
Figure 3.10: Payload structure of acknowledgment in duplex-split.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Double buffering
25
are used to store the same information. Thus, if one file becomes corrupt, the
other one can be used instead. In this case, the data to be stored is a 16-bit
integer indicating the index of the next byte to transmit in the message. When
checkpointing, the index is first written to file 1. When the operation is complete
and the data is flushed to the actual flash memory, the same data is written to
file 2. When this data has been flushed to the flash memory, a new checkpoint
can be made. By ensuring that the write operation is performed completely
before writing to the next file, we can guarantee that at least one of the files is
valid at all times.
One challenge with this approach is knowing whether the value stored in the file
is correct. If a file was only partially written before power loss, it is possible for
only some of the bytes to have been overwritten, resulting in a false value. The
solution to this is to store a checksum of the data at the end of the file and to
only consider it valid if it matches upon reading. Thus, a partial write would
result in the checksum no longer matching the data, and the other file is not
determined intact.
Despite the checksum matching the content of the file, it is not certain that
the content of the file is correct.
When a file is opened to be updated, the
flash’s file table moves the location of the file to a new address. However, before
the content of this can be updated, the system might power off. It is possible
that this new position pointed to by the file table was used at a previous point
in time. Since at the time these values were written correctly, the checksum
would make it appear valid. If this old value was written to while transmitting
the same message, it would return to that index and lose progress, and need to
retransmit several packets. Alternatively, if the value was from another message
transmission entirely, it could even jump forward, skipping a lot of data. The
solution to this is to include a counter in every checkpoint created. Each time a
new checkpoint is created, this counter is incremented by one. When restoring
a checkpoint, both files are read and the soonest, valid of the two is returned.
Each of the two files used for the double buffer takes up a total of 6 bytes.
The structure of it can be seen in Figure 3.11. Thus, when reading the double
buffer, both file 1 and file 2 are read. If only one of these is intact its content is
simply returned. If both files are intact, we decide which file is the newest by
comparing their counter and returning the byte index of that.
Another approach to fixing the file table pointing to an old checkpoint would be
to include the ID of the message in the checkpoint itself. However, this would
not prevent situations where the old file is from an earlier checkpoint of the
same message and it would thus reset back to that point, retransmitting a lot
of data. It also assumes that the IDs of messages are unique, and would thus
not be robust for situations where messages with the same ID are transmitted
close to each other.
==PAGE:36==
26
Design
Byte index
Count
Checksum
2 bytes
2 bytes
2 bytes
Figure 3.11: Structure of a double buffer file.
3.5
Message creation
What data is contained in a message is naturally dependent on the application
the system is applied to. This data needs only to be generated when the device
has woken up, and the previous message has been fully transmitted to the server.
During development, this message generation either consists of generating a
sequence of random bytes of any length or reading an image file read off of
the flash. However, in an actual application, this would likely be replaced by
e.g., using a camera to take a photo. If this operation can not be done using the
energy stored in the capacitor, it must be able to work intermittently-powered
like this developed system. Importantly, this message creation is also responsible
for creating a sensible ID for the message. Whether this ID is generated at
random, as a hash of the data, or even a constant ID of the device itself etc. is
of no significance to the system presented in this thesis. However, one should
avoid cases where multiple devices, communicating with the same server, are
transmitting messages using the same ID.
3.6
The server
The focus of this thesis is primarily on the intermittently-powered device. How-
ever, an implementation of the server side is necessary as well. It is needed to
validate that the system works as intended, and for the duplex versions, it also
needs to send the expected acknowledgments. The design of the servers used in
this project will be presented briefly.
It is assumed that most applications of the system will involve multiple devices
communicating with the same server simultaneously. Therefore, the servers used
in this project allow for multiple messages to be stored at once while not yet
received fully. This is made possible by distinguishing all packets received by
the ID of the message for which they are containing data. The server must also
be able to determine when a message has been fully sent by the transmitting
device. This is easy to determine for the duplex versions, as it is simply when
all data has been received. For the two simplex versions, however, there is no
==PAGE:37==
3.7 LoRa vs. LoRaWAN
27
guarantee of all packets being received. Therefore, determining the message to
be complete by this condition is not sufficient for these. However, because the
message is transmitted from start to finish, if a packet is received containing
data for the final byte of the message, the message must have been sent (albeit
not necessarily received) completely. In the simplex server implementations for
this project, a message is deemed received completely if either the last byte is
received, or a new packet with byte index 0 is received. The latter indicates that
the previous message was sent completely, and a new one has been created. It
should be noted that this approach is vulnerable to cases where both the first
and final packets of the message are lost. One approach to address this, though
not implemented for this project, would be to use a timeout system, in which
a message is always considered complete if no new packet regarding it has been
received within a certain time frame. This time frame could be determined from
the expected maximum sleep period of the transmitting device. For a given
hardware configuration, one could determine an upper bound on this period
from its energy-harvest rate and capacitor size and simply determine a message
to be complete if no packets regarding it has has been received within that time
frame. If no two devices can transmit messages with the same ID, and each
device ensures the time between using the same ID is never exceeding the upper
bound of sleep periods, this issue can be avoided.
3.7
LoRa vs. LoRaWAN
While LoRa defines the physical layer, LoRaWAN is a MAC layer protocol built
on top of it. Among other benefits, LoRaWAN provides message encryption,
authentication, and device addressing. While these features are desired in a
real application, they are not related to the scope of this project and would
only complicate the implementation process. Creating an application that uses
LoRa directly is simply easier to implement and get working for this purpose. To
enable this functionality, LoRaWAN adds extra data to each packet. Therefore
all packets sent within this project will have less overhead compared to using
LoRaWAN. However, the method used in this thesis is equivalent, and can thus
also be used if LoRaWAN was used. Furthermore, this added overhead can be
considered during project evaluation in chapter 5 by simply considering each
packet to contain the extra overhead.
==PAGE:38==
28
Design
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Implementation
This section describes details regarding the implementation of the four versions
of the solution. Not all aspects of the implementation are described in detail.
Rather a general overview of the implementation is given combined with details
of where interesting solutions were found. All development is carried out in C
using the Espressif IoT Development Framework (ESP-IDF) [19].
4.1
Hardware
The platform for both the transmitting unit and the server is run on an ESP32
microcontroller connected to a LoRa transceiver as shown in Figure 4.1. The
choice of transceiver was limited by the choice of using LoRa. However, the
choice of microcontroller was less restricted.
We chose the ESP32 as it is a
good compromise of user-friendliness to develop on and a power consumption
that was feasible to run from a supercapacitor.
The development board is
the Adafruit HUZZAH32 - ESP32 Feather board with a 240 MHz dual-core
microcontroller fitted with 32 KB cache, 16 MB flash storage, and 250 KB
SRAM. The microcontroller is connected to an RF96 LoRa transceiver.
As this implementation serves as an exploration and not a final product, the
choice in hardware is not necessarily corresponding to what would be used for
==PAGE:40==
30
Implementation
Adafruit HUZZAH32 - ESP32 Feather
240 MHz dual-
core
microcontroller
250 KB SRAM
16 MB flash
LoRa RF96
transceiver
Figure 4.1: Diagram of the hardware used to run the platform.
an actual use case. However, the characteristics in terms of how they operate
are close enough for the comparisons between the versions to be valid.
All LoRa packets are transmitted using CRC, and we, therefore, assume the
data of received packets to be correct.
4.2
Code overview
While the four program versions are different in some very specific ways, the
same logic can often be shared across two or more versions. Because of this, a
lot of functionality is placed in shared files, which are:
• main
The main function of the program. It has the job of initializing LoRa and
selecting its frequency, spreading factor, and bandwidth.
• budget-utils
Contains functions that benefit both the simplex-budget and duplex-budget
versions.
• split-utils
Similarly contains functions benefiting the simplex-split and duplex-split
versions.
• utils
Contains useful functions for all program versions.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Flash storage
31
• flash
Contains all functions needed to interact with the flash memory on the
ESP32.
• capacitor alarm
Is used to simulate the capacitor mounted on an actual prototype of the
platform. For the budget versions, it simulates an estimate of a payload’s
size considering the energy stored in the capacitor from a voltage reading.
It also contains a function that restarts the ESP (wiping its volatile mem-
ory) after some time, which is useful when simulating the split versions.
• constants
Defines various constants used between the versions, such as the size of a
data packet’s header or an acknowledgment.
• structs
Defines a series of structures used throughout the program, such as a
header that contains an ID, the byte index of the data it is carrying, and
the total size of the message it is transmitting.
4.2.1
LoRa
Interaction with the LoRa transmitter is done through the esp32-lora-library
component [34]. This component provides an interface for all basic functionality
such as adjusting the frequency, spreading factor, etc., and of course, sending
and receiving data. The component handles reading and writing to registers
in the transceiver.
To use the library, you first call the lora init() func-
tion. Afterward, you can set the desired settings using lora set frequency(long
frequency), lora set spreading factor(int sf) etc. If you have an array of
bytes you wish to transmit, you simply do it by calling lora send packet(uint8 t
*buf, int size). To receive data, the module must first be put into receive
mode by calling lora receive(). lora received() can afterward be called to
check if a packet has been received. Once a packet has arrived, the lora receive
packet(uint8 t *buf, int size) function can be called to put said packet into
the provided buffer.
4.3
Flash storage
When a message is created it is stored in the ESP32’s non-volatile flash memory,
which allows the transmission to be continued in the following wake-up cycles.
==PAGE:42==
32
Implementation
Interactions with the flash memory are done through the SPIFFS file system.
Before data can be read from or stored to flash, SPIFFS must first register and
mount a flash partition to a virtual file system. The first time data is read from
or stored to flash the related partition is registered and mounted, ensuring this
is only done only once per wake-up cycle to improve efficiency.
When data for a message is read from flash, not all data is used for the trans-
mission and can therefore be ignored. In the two budget versions, the device
knows how many bytes it can afford to transmit for its given wake-up cycle.
Therefore, only that exact amount of bytes are read from the flash memory. For
the two split versions, exactly how much data needs to be read is not known.
Simplex-split, however, will simply continue the transmission from the last
checkpointed byte, meaning no data before that is read from flash. On average
this results in approximately half the bytes read from flash compared to reading
everything. In the case for duplex-split all data is read during every wake-up
cycle.
Since there is no checkpointing system on the device itself, it cannot
tell which byte to transmit next. Furthermore, if a checkpointing was actually
introduced for this purpose the server could request data before the checkpoint,
which would then not have been read.
4.3.1
Double buffer
As described in section 3.4, each file in the double buffer contains a counter,
which is used to determine their relative age. To read the double buffer, both files
are read, and the value of the soonest file, determined by its count is returned.
But determining this proves to be an interesting problem. The first approach
could be to simply use the file with the greatest count, or any of the two if
they are equal. However, this would no longer work when the count overflowed.
The count is stored in a 16-bit variable, and thus has a maximum value of
216 −1 = 65535. When this happens, the newest file would not necessarily have
the largest count. To address this issue, the newest file is instead determined
as the one whose count has the lowest positive distance from the other, with
positive distance meaning the value you would need to add to one value to
get to the other (also considering overflow). Figure 4.2 shows examples where
two different are read from flash. In Figure 4.2a the distance from Count1 to
Count2 is simply 50000 −10000 = 40000. The distance from Count2 to Count1
is the distance from Count2 to its maximum value plus the distance from 0 to
Count1: (65535 −50000) + 10000 = 25535. Since the positive distance from
Count2 to Count1 is the smallest, the file containing Count1 is considered the
most recent. Likewise in Figure 4.2b the distance from Count1 to Count2 is
smallest, implying the file containing Count2 is most recent.
Note that this
implementation assumes the old files to be no more than half of the maximum
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Acknowledgment timings
33
0
65535
10000
Count1
50000
Count2
(a) In this example, it appears that
Count1
has
recently
overflowed
and is the latest of the two.
0
65535
30000
Count1
50000
Count2
(b) In this example, no recent over-
flows appear to have happened,
and Count2 appears to be the lat-
est of the two.
Figure 4.2: Examples of two counts placed on a number line used to determine
the latest checkpoint in a double buffer.
count value old. However, due to wear leveling on the flash and a generally
small storage capacity, this assumption seems reasonable and appears safe under
testing.
When a file in the double buffer has been written to, it is flushed and synced
using fflush and fsync on the file pointer and file descriptor respectively before
closing the file and opening the next.
This is to ensure that the file being
closed is complete and correct in the actual flash memory (and not only a
buffer waiting to write its content) before writing to the next. However, during
testing, it was noticed that at times both files would be corrupt at the same
time, indicating that these functions were not flushing a write buffer properly,
despite the flash write buffer being disabled on the device. The issue seems to
involve the standard C file operation functions and would require resources not
fit for the scope of this thesis. To circumvent the problem, a single task delay
of 50 milliseconds is introduced between closing file 1 and opening file 2, and
between closing file 2 and opening file 1 for a new checkpoint. This delay limits
the frequency at which the system can checkpoint and highlights an area that
would benefit from more work.
4.4
Acknowledgment timings
When duplex-split has sent a data packet or when duplex-split has trans-
mitted its request packet, an acknowledgment packet is expected in return. To
reduce time spent waiting for the packet, and in turn reduce energy consump-
tion, the device would ideally go to sleep right after sending its packet and wake
up just in time to receive the response.
It would then listen for a response
for a period defined by an upper bound of response time. In duplex-split,
by measuring the time between the request packet being transmitted and the
==PAGE:44==
34
Implementation
acknowledgment is received, this upper bound can be found. This is naturally
specific to the hardware used by both the transmitting device and the server
during testing, as well as how many devices are communicating with the server
as this can cause it to be busy and have a delayed response time. It is also
important to consider the size of the acknowledgment packet, as large packets
have a greater time on air, increasing the duration the device needs to listen for.
With the ESP32 used for this project, the response was often received faster
than the boot time itself. Therefore there is no sleep between transmitting the
packet and starting to listen for the response. Additionally, a one-tick delay was
introduced to the server before transmitting the acknowledgment, as it would
oftentimes not be possible to start listening for the packet in time to receive it.
4.5
Server implementation
While the implementation of the server greatly depends on the application sce-
nario at hand, this section describes how it was made for this project to serve
as an example of how it can be done in this environment.
4.5.1
Simplex versions
The server implementation for simplex-budget and simplex-split are exactly
alike. When powered, they immediately begin listening for LoRa packets. When
a packet is received, it first checks that the packet is at least the size of the header
shown in Figure 3.6, which is 6 bytes. If smaller, the packet is discarded and
the server simply returns to listening for new packets. If not, it further checks
whether, with the given byte index and data length, the size of the total message
would be exceeded. If this check passes, the server looks up the message received
so far in a hash table with the message ID as the key, and if no message is found,
indicating this is the first packet received for the message, it is created. The
data of the packet is then put into the message appropriately. If the received
packet contains data for the last part of the message, it is determined to be
finished and for demonstration purposes printed to the terminal.
As mentioned, the messages are stored in a hash table, which there is no default
implementation of in C. For this, the implementation named uthash has been
used for this project [35].
It simply consists of a single header file which is
placed in the project, providing the functionality needed. The content of the
table can be any structure, containing a field of type UT hash handle and an
ID of some sort, in this case, an integer with the message ID. The macro in
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Server implementation
35
uthash HASH FIND INT(messages, id, message), where messages is the structure
containing the table, id is a pointer to the field of the structure used as key and
message is a pointer to where the message stored with the given id will be if
found. A macro named HASH ADD INT(messages, id, message) with similar
parameters can be used to add entries to the table.
4.5.2
Duplex versions
The server implementation for the duplex-budget version is at first similar to
that of the simplex. However, the data of the received packet must not cause
gaps in the data already received. I.e. a packet must either be the beginning of
a new packet, data already received, or an exact continuation of data already
received. By following this protocol, new data is only sent if the previous packet
has been confirmed. And since transmission always begins with a byte index of
0, following the protocol cannot cause any gaps. Therefore, if a gap appears,
something else must have gone wrong, e.g. the server rebooting and wiping its
memory. If a gap is found, the server’s response to the packet will instruct the
transmitting device to restart the message entirely. As mentioned previously,
there are three types of acknowledgments: ACK, RETRANSMIT and START OVER,
used for acknowledging that a packet was received correctly, instructing the
transmitter to retransmit the previous packet or to restart the message trans-
mission respectively. For this server implementation, the RETRANSMIT type is
never used, though it is understood by the transmitter. For some applications
of the system, it might be useful to have, which is why it exists. An example
could be a case where the server receives a packet but is too busy to respond in
time. Instead of ignoring the packet, the server can respond with a RETRANSMIT
packet.
This shortens the duration that the transmitter has to wait for the
response, thus shortening its energy consumption. One thing to note is that the
server would sometimes respond with an acknowledgment before the transmitter
was ready to receive it. Therefore, a small delay had to be added to the server.
However, since these timings are dependent on the hardware in use, they might
not be needed for other implementations. In many ways, the implementation of
duplex-split is similar to that of duplex-budget. A key distinction is that
the server must first look at the content of the packet before knowing whether it
is a request or a data packet. The other key distinction is that for every packet
received, it has to update the list of gaps in the data.
==PAGE:46==
36
Implementation
4.6
Managing gaps
As discussed in section 3.3, duplex-split manages the index of the last received
byte as well as a list of gaps. This list is stored by the server and managed for
every packet received. When a packet is received, it iterates over all the known
gaps. For each packet, one of six cases must be true.1 These cases are visualized
in Figure 4.3:
Case 1 The packet covers a gap entirely.
Case 2 The packet covers a gap’s beginning but not its end.
Case 3 The packet does not cover a gap’s beginning but covers its end.
Case 4 The packet covers data in a gap but neither its beginning nor its end.
Case 5 The packet covers data later than the last received byte.
Case 6 The packet is a continuation of the last received byte.
(a) Case 1
(b) Case 2
(c) Case 3
(d) Case 4
(e) Case 5
(f) Case 6
Figure 4.3: Visualization of how a packet can cover gaps in the received data.
Green blocks represent data already received, and gray blocks rep-
resent data not yet received. The line below them represents the
data covered by the received packet.
In Case 1, the covered gap is simply deleted from the list. In Case 2 the gap’s
beginning index is simply modified, and likewise for Case 3 and its end index.
For Case 4 the gap’s end index is modified and a new gap is created. For Case
1It is not possible for multiple cases to apply for the same packet received. The gap sizes
are always a multiple of the granularity, assuming the granularity is constant.
==PAGE:47==
4.6 Managing gaps
37
5 a new gap is simply created. Case 6 simply modifies the last received index
without modifying any gap.
There is a maximum of 10 gaps included in every acknowledgment sent by the
server. Though the server is able to store an unlimited number of gaps, only
the first 10 are transmitted. This limit is enforced to allow assumptions about
the maximum packet length that the intermittently powered device receives.
==PAGE:48==
38
Implementation
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Evaluation
This chapter evaluates the four solutions in terms of energy usage and through-
put. An energy profile is created for each of the four versions. These energy
estimates are used to determine the minimum and maximum energy needed for
the system to work for a given application. They furthermore provide insight
into how changing different parameters of the versions affects energy consump-
tion across an entire message transmission. All this allows us to compare the
relative energy cost of implementing the different solutions discussed in this
thesis.
5.1
Test setup
The selection of LoRa settings to use is based on a combination of law reg-
ulations, the application in use, and a consideration of the reliability of the
communication compared to the energy required for transmission.
How the
range and reliability of LoRa transmissions are affected by these settings are
outside the scope of this thesis, and where possible have been adjusted to the
value that results in the lowest energy consumption. All tests in this project are
performed with the following LoRa settings:
==PAGE:50==
40
Evaluation
Analog Discovery 2
ESP32
Power source
+V
+I
-I
-V
1Ω
LoRa
module
Figure 5.1: Schematic of setup for measuring the power consumption of the
ESP32.
• Spreading factor: 7
• Bandwidth: 125 kHz
• Coding rate: 4/5
• Frequency: 868 MHz
• CRC enabled
• Explicit header mode
To measure the energy consumption of the device, we use the Analog Discovery
2 (AD2) developed by Digilent [23]. It is equipped with two oscilloscopes that
can be used to measure voltage. To measure energy consumption, we must first
measure its power by measuring voltage and current. Figure 5.1 displays the
setup used to achieve this with the AD2. Measuring voltage is done by simply
measuring between the positive and negative sides of the ESP32. Since the AD2
can only measure voltage, we can derive it by measuring the voltage across a
resistor and using Ohm’s law. It states that V = RI where V is voltage, R is
resistance and I is current. By using a 1Ωresistor, voltage is equal to current.
Multiplying the voltage and current then gives us the power in watts.
The
power measurements of the oscilloscopes are logged once every 100ms using the
associated WaveForms software [24]. The energy consumption over a certain
period can then be found by finding the integral of the power over the time
frame, which gives us a result in joule.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Models of energy consumption
41
5.2
Models of energy consumption
To enable the prediction of energy consumption under a wide range of circum-
stances, an energy model has been created for each of the four versions. This
allows the ability to predict the relative energy cost accompanied by implement-
ing each of the four versions and can be done for any use case desired. These
energy models predict the energy consumption of transmitting a full message
for each version under various circumstances such as the message size, capacitor
size, etc. To do this each of the four programs has been split up into segments
that contribute the most to energy consumption. These segments are:
Segment 1 (Boot, sleep, LoRa init)
Booting the ESP, Initializing LoRa, and going to sleep.
Segment 2 (SPIFFS init)
Initializing the flash library SPIFFS.
Segment 3 (Creating message)
Creating a message of various sizes.
Segment 4 (Store message)
Saving a message to flash of various sizes.
Segment 5 (Read message)
Reading a message frem flash of various sizes.
Segment 6 (Transmit packet)
Transmitting packets with LoRa of various sizes.
Segment 7 (Listen for packets)
Listening for packets with LoRa if various durations.
Segment 8 (Receive packet)
Receiving packets with LoRa of various sizes.
Segment 9 (Store checkpoint)
Storing a checkpoint to flash. I.e. storing the next byte index to transmit
from.
Segment 10 (Transmit while DB checkpointing)
Storing a double buffered (DB) checkpoint while transmitting packets in
parallel.
Segment 11 (Read DB checkpoint)
Reading a double buffered checkpoint.
==PAGE:52==
42
Evaluation
Note that since the logic is shared between the four versions, one does not have to
repeat each test for every version. The goal is that by combining the segments
that are used in each version its total energy consumption can be gathered.
However, this is not just a simple addition, as the size of the capacitor can
limit the effectiveness of the program in a wake-up cycle. I.e. a larger capacitor
would mean less energy spent on overhead operations such as initializing LoRa,
reading from flash, etc. and more time spent transmitting the actual data.
5.2.1
Approach
When testing the energy consumption of these segments, a dedicated function
is created which performs the segment and any other operation necessary to
perform it. E.g. to test the segment of transmitting a packet using LoRa, some
data is required which might be read from flash. However, by also testing the
energy consumption of reading from flash, one can deduce the energy profile of
the packet transmission itself simply as the difference between the two. When
the device is connected to power, it wakes up to execute the function once and
put the device into deep sleep mode for a short period. When the device wakes,
the function is executed once again and goes back to deep sleep. This repeats
a set number of times after which the device sleeps indefinitely and power is
cut. To keep track of how many tests have been performed, a counter variable
is kept in the ESP’s RTC memory. This RTC memory is not wiped while the
device is sleeping, which the rest of the program’s memory is.
Running the test involves first flashing the ESP32 with a program running the
desired function to test. The WaveForms software is set to begin logging the
measured voltage and current. The power source is then plugged into a power
brick, and the setup now resembles that of Figure 5.2.
By monitoring the
power in WaveForms, we can determine when the test is finished, and logging
is stopped. WaveForms now appears as shown in Figure 5.3. The data is then
exported to a CSV file containing the voltage and current measured as well
as the power (by multiplying the voltage and current). Because each test is
separated by a period of deep sleep, one can distinguish each test as the peaks
separated by power measurements below some threshold. A single test’s energy
consumption can then be calculated as the integral over this peak, and as we
know the measurements are made at a frequency of 10 Hz, this is done by simply
multiplying the sum of powers in the peak by
1
10.
Many segments vary on the size of what we are testing, e.g. transmitting data
with LoRa depends on how much data is sent. Thus, when testing, the energy
consumption is measured with multiple different sizes. The resulting CSV file of
similar tests with different sizes are placed in the same folder. A Python script
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Models of energy consumption
43
Figure 5.2: Actual setup for measuring the power consumption of the ESP32.
This follows the schematic shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.3: Screenshot of WaveForms after running a series of measurements.
Yellow indicates voltage, green (though difficult to see) indicates
current and purple indicates power. Note that the values on the
y-axis only apply to the power.
==PAGE:54==
44
Evaluation
Segment
Energy (Joule)
Segment 1 (Boot, sleep, LoRa init)
0.02553
Segment 2 (SPIFFS init)
0.05062
Segment 3 (Creating message)
2.036 · 10−7m + 0.002815
Segment 4 (Store message)
5.564 · 10−6m + 0.004533
Segment 5 (Read message)
6.154 · 10−7m + 0.001564
Segment 6 (Transmit packet)
1.126 · 10−3c + 0.02248
Segment 7 (Listen for packets)
2.364 · 10−4p + 0.006622
Segment 8 (Receive packet)
0
Segment 9 (Store checkpoint)
0.006944
Segment 10 (Transmit while DB checkpointing)
0.0310 c
g + 0.001160c
+0.0003740g + 0.0901
Segment 11 (Read DB checkpoint)
0.01326
Table 5.1: Overview of the energy profile of each segment. m refers to a mes-
sage’s size in bytes, c refers to a chunk size in bytes, p refers to the
listening duration in milliseconds and g refers to the granularity
size in bytes.
is used to automatically read each CSV file in a folder, detect the peaks in
power and calculate their energy consumption. It then determines the average
and standard deviation and combines all tests into a single output file. After
subtracting energy overhead from segments other than the one being tested,
the energy profile can be determined. Following is a discussion on each of the
energy profiles found for the segments. These energy profiles can all be seen in
Table 5.1.
Segment 1 (Boot, sleep, LoRa init) is to test simply booting the ESP, initializing
LoRa, and going to deep sleep. Across 150 measurements, the average energy
cost was found to be X ≈25.53 mJ with s ≈4.286 mJ. Another test was
performed where LoRa was not initialized upon boot, which resulted in an
average energy cost of X ≈22.85 mJ with s ≈3.782 mJ. By subtracting these,
we find that initializing LoRa on average only uses about 2.684 mJ of energy.
Segment 2 (SPIFFS init) is determining the energy cost of initializing SPIFFS.
Since it only needs to be done once every wake-up cycle, but each of these cycles
can involve multiple reads/writes to flash, it cannot be determined from testing
the flash segments alone. Similar to the approach in determining energy for the
initialization of LoRa, This initialization cost is found by measuring the test’s
energy consumption and subtracting the overhead of booting the ESP, etc. The
average cost of initializing SPIFFS is found to be X ≈50.62 mJ.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Models of energy consumption
45
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
0
0.01
0.02
Message size (Bytes)
Energy (Joules)
Message creation
Trendline
Figure 5.4: 3rd segment. The energy required to create a message of a given
size. Overhead from booting the ESP and sleeping has been sub-
tracted. Each point is an average of 50 measurements. The trend-
line follows the equation: 2.036 · 10−7x + 0.002815. R2 = 0.9839.
Segment 3 (Creating message) is the segment for creating random data for a
message. This is useful when determining the energy required to store it to flash
in the fourth segment, as the data saved is first generated randomly. A chart of
the required energy for each test can be seen on Figure 5.4.
Segment 4 (Store message) is storing a message of a given size to flash memory.
The resulting chart of the tests is shown in Figure 5.5. There is a big difference
in standard deviation between the tests. For instance, the measurements at
16384 B come with a standard deviation of 0.113 while the measurements at
10240 B only have a standard deviation of 0.00743. It is worth noticing that for
messages of 10240 B and lower, there is little variation in energy consumption
between measurements. However, with larger messages the variation as well as
the average increases dramatically. One possible explanation for this is that for
small messages when the data is written to flash it is still present in the cache
from when it was generated, but not when the message gets sufficiently large.
The ESP32 used for testing has a cache of 32 kB. This appears reasonable as
this cache is shared across the entire system and also contains the executed code
etc. Despite this jump in required energy, the energy profile is still considered
linear.
However, it is important to consider the uncertainty associated with
using it and to use a greater margin for error.
While testing Segment 4 (Store message), the time required for the data to be
==PAGE:56==
46
Evaluation
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
0
0.2
0.4
Message size (Bytes)
Energy (Joules)
Storing message in flash
Trendline
Figure 5.5: 4th segment. The energy required to store a message of a given
size in flash. Overhead from booting, sleeping, creating the data,
and initializing SPIFFS has been subtracted. Each point is an
average of 15 measurements. The trendline follows the equation:
5.564 · 10−6m + 0.004533. R2 = 0.971. m is the total message size
in bytes.
stored in flash varied wildly from one time to another. Despite the ESP being
powered off completely between tests, the order in which they were performed
seemed to influence the result. Furthermore, at certain points in time, the flash
memory would stop working entirely on the board, resulting in it not being able
to open any files for either reading or writing. However, by erasing the entire
flash on the board and reflashing the program, this problem could be fixed.
There is no clear indication as to when this problem would arise, but it seems
more likely to happen when a large amount of large files has just been written.
The issue appears to be from the library’s implementation and is out of the
scope of this project. Furthermore, the writing times themselves appear to be
affected greatly by when the flash was last erased. This could cause the energy
consumption to double compared to when the flash had recently been erased.
Because of this, the flash was erased completely between all measurements of
segment 4.
A chart showing the measurements of Segment 5 (Read message) is shown in
Figure 5.6. As with Segment 4 (Store message), the energy required for initial-
izing SPIFFS has not been included. And as multiple interactions with flash
may happen during the same wake-up cycle, the library needs only be initialized
once and is therefore added separately when estimating the energy pattern of
an application case.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Models of energy consumption
47
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
0
0.02
0.04
Message size (Bytes)
Energy (Joules)
Reading message from flash
Trendline
Figure 5.6: 5th segment.
The energy required to read a message from the
flash of a given size. Overhead from booting, sleeping, and ini-
tializing SPIFFS has been subtracted.
Each point is an aver-
age of 50 measurements.
The trendline follows the equation:
6.154 · 10−7m + 0.001564. R2 = 0.9434. m is the total message
size in bytes.
Measurements of Segment 6 (Transmit packet) are shown in the chart on Fig-
ure 5.7. It shows the energy required to transmit a packet of various sizes using
LoRa. It follows a very clear linear relationship between the bytes transmit-
ted and the energy consumed. It is important to note that this step consumes
significantly more energy than the other segments tested considering the much
smaller sizes compared to, for instance, Segment 4 (Store message).
The energy profile of Segment 7 (Listen for packets) is shown in Figure 5.8. Here
is shown the energy consumption of listening for LoRa packets compared to the
duration that the device is listening. This relationship is observed to be very
linear and with very little variation between measurements. It is also noticed
that the operation is very energy consuming, emphasizing the importance of
minimizing this duration when listening for acknowledgments.
While 5.8 describes the energy cost of simply listening with the radio, Figure 5.9
shows Segment 8 (Receive packet). For these measurements, a packet is received
of different sizes while the overhead of requesting a packet and listening for it
has been subtracted.
I.e. if the device had to wait 1000ms for a packet to
be received, this overhead is subtracted using the energy profile of Segment 7
(Listen for packets). What this chart indicates is that the energy consumed from
receiving is not correlated to the size of the packet received. However, because
==PAGE:58==
48
Evaluation
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Payload size (Bytes)
Energy (Joules)
Transmitting packet with LoRa
Trendline
Figure 5.7: 6th segment. The energy required to transmit a packet with LoRa
of a given payload size. Overhead from booting, sleeping, and gen-
erating the transmitted data has been subtracted. Each point is an
average of 50 measurements. The trendline follows the equation:
1.126 · 10−3c + 0.02248. R2 = 0.9997. c is the packet’s payload
size.
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
0
0.5
1
Listen duration (Milliseconds)
Energy (Joules)
Listening for packet with LoRa
Trendline
Figure 5.8: 7th segment. The energy required to listen for a LoRa packet for
different time durations. Overhead from booting and sleeping has
been subtracted. Each point is an average of 30 measurements.
The trendline follows the equation: 2.364·10−4p+0.006622. R2 =
0.9998. p is the duration that the device is listening in milliseconds.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Models of energy consumption
49
larger packets take more time to transmit, more time spent listening for the
packet is needed, increasing energy consumption. Thus, instead of profiling the
energy required to receive the packet, we will profile the time spent receiving a
packet and use the energy profile of Segment 7 (Listen for packets). Instead of
measuring the transmission times, we use a calculator provided by the producer
of the LoRa chips, Semtech [36]. Using the calculator given the parameters used
for these measurements, the transmission times (time on air), ptoa, closely follow
the equation
ptoa(n) = 1.4635ms · n + 25.769ms
(5.1)
with n being the packet’s payload length. Assuming that the time to transmit
a packet is equal to the time it takes to receive it, the duration calculated from
this equation is added to the LoRa listening duration. Furthermore, it is useful
when determining the minimum listening duration required to receive a packet
of a given length. The measurements on Figure 5.9 do not correlate with payload
size. It seems this segment does not even consume a constant amount of energy,
as the average of all measurements is around 1 mJ. However, this is likely just
from random variation and is therefore omitted. I.e. the segment of receiving a
packet will not contribute to the overall energy profile.
The energy consumption of Segment 9 (Store checkpoint) was found by mea-
suring the energy needed to modify the byte index of a single message in flash
and subtracting the overhead from booting, sleeping, and initializing SPIFFS.
Its cost was found to be only X ≈6.944 mJ. Note that this checkpoint is stored
in the message file itself, which is why it is not necessary to measure reading a
checkpoint as a segment by itself.
The energy consumption of Segment 10 (Transmit while DB checkpointing)
depends on two variables: how much data is transmitted, c and the granularity
with which this is done, g. However, the relationship between the granularity
and energy consumption is not linear with a fixed c.
However, the energy
consumption does scale with the number of packets required to transmit c bytes.
To estimate the energy profile, a multi-linear regression is thus performed on
both c and g, but also c
g, as the latter is a calculation of the number of packets
needed.
The energy consumption of Segment 11 (Read DB checkpoint) was found to
be a constant of 13.26 mJ over an average of 50 measurements with overhead
subtracted.
==PAGE:60==
50
Evaluation
0
50
100
150
200
250
−0.01
0
0.01
Payload size (Bytes)
Energy (Joules)
Receiving packet with LoRa
Figure 5.9: 8th segment. The energy required to receive a LoRa packet from
different packet payload sizes. Overhead from booting, sleeping,
and time spent with the radio open has been subtracted. Each
point is an average of 30 measurements. No trendline has been
added since the measurements do not seem to follow one. The
average energy consumption measured is found to be only 1 mJ.
However, this is likely due to random variation in measurements.
It is instead assumed that this segment does not consume energy
in itself.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Estimation of full message transmission
51
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2
4
Number of packets to transmit ( c
g)
Energy (Joules)
c = 250
c = 500
c = 1000
Figure 5.10: 10th segment. By multi-linear regression, the measurements were
found to closely follow the equation:
0.0310 c
g + 0.001160c +
0.0003740g + 0.0901. R2 = 0.9994. Where g is the granular-
ity of each packet payload in bytes and c is the total number of
bytes transmitted in sequence.
5.3
Estimation of full message transmission
This section presents the developed models of energy consumption for each of
the four versions. This is done by combining the energy profiles of each segment
appropriately.
Creating an equation that simply returns the total energy consumption for one
of the four versions is difficult. Each version is only limited by a specific number
of variables, e.g. for simplex-budget the message size and how much energy
the capacitor can store. But how these variables impact the total consumption
is not straightforward. One example is that the very first wake-up cycle in a
message transmission will transmit less data compared to the others since it
has spent some of the energy creating and storing the data for the message.
Conversely, the last wake-up cycle will usually transmit less data than what its
capacitor allows, since it only needs to send what is remaining. This means that
we cannot simply assume the same amount of data to be transmitted in each
wake-up cycle. Furthermore, only whole bytes can be transmitted at a time,
i.e. if the budget estimates 99.9 B to be transmitted, it must be rounded down
to 99. LoRa also restricts packets to have a payload maximum payload length
of 255 B. Since the versions include a header of 6-7 bytes for each data packet,
this max is limited to either 248 B or 249 B for these versions. Finally, if the
==PAGE:62==
52
Evaluation
total energy is found by just multiplying the energy consumed by one wake-up
cycle with the number of cycles needed, this would be off if the number of cycles
is not found to be an integer, e.g. if the number of cycles is found by dividing
the total message size by how much data is sent each cycle. It would be off since
you would then assume the constant overhead of every wake-up cycle to scale
with the amount of data it sends, which is not the case.
With large message sizes, however, these deviations are likely not as significant.
To get an idea of the impact, the difference it makes will be evaluated for the
duplex-split estimation.
Because the combined estimations are found as a combination of real-world
measurements, the equations they result in are difficult to interpret and not
very useful to read. For completeness, all the combined equations are found in
Appendix A, but will not be written in this chapter. However, the approach for
their derivation is described here.
5.3.1
Simplex-budget
We will split this version up into segments to estimate the energy required. The
first wake-up cycle will include Segment 1 (Boot, sleep, LoRa init), Segment
2 (SPIFFS init), Segment 5 (Read message)1, Segment 3 (Creating message),
Segment 4 (Store message), Segment 6 (Transmit packet), and Segment 9 (Store
checkpoint). Then for each following wake-up cycle Segment 1 (Boot, sleep,
LoRa init), Segment 2 (SPIFFS init), Segment 5 (Read message), Segment 6
(Transmit packet) and Segment 9 (Store checkpoint) will execute.
Simple estimate
First, we will create a combined energy model which results in an equation that
can be calculated by inputting the message and capacitor size.
The energy cost of a single cycle depends on how large the chunk to transmit
is. Let Ecycle(c) describe this relationship, where c is the chunk size. Note that
the message size is of no concern, as only the bytes to transmit are read from
flash. It is calculated by simply adding the relevant segments mentioned above.
1In order for the system to realize it must create a new message, it must first read the
existing message in flash to find it missing or complete. Only the header and no actual data
is read from flash in this case.
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Estimation of full message transmission
53
The 6-byte header is included in all transmissions.
Ecycle = 0.1309 + 0.001127c
In the very first cycle, some additional energy is spent on creating and storing
the message. Let the energy used in the first wake-up cycle, including that used
for creating the message, be Efirst(m, c), with m being the size of the message.
In the cycle where the message is created, no message data is read from flash,
and this is omitted.
EcreateCycle = 0.001126c + 5.7675 · 10−6m + 0.1382
Now we would like to describe the relationship between capacitor size and the
energy budget. Let ccycle describe the chunk size that can be transmitted in any
cycle except for the first. Let k be the capacitor size in joules. By assuming all
the energy of the capacitor to be utilized, we set Ecycle(c) = k and solve for c.
Ecycle = k =⇒ccycle = 887.38k −116.13
We would also like to determine the chunk size in the first cycle. Because of the
overhead from message creation, this is expected to be smaller. Let this chunk
size be cfirst.
EcreateCycle = k =⇒cfirst = 887.87k −0.005121m −122.72
We have now determined how many bytes can be transmitted in each wake-up
cycle, and we would now like to determine how many cycles are needed for the
full message to be transmitted. Let the number of wake-up cycles needed be
ncycles.
ncycles = m −cfirst
ccycle
+ 1
The fraction is added by one since the message size in the numerator is sub-
tracted by the first wake-up cycle’s chunk size.
Knowing the number of cycles, and assuming the capacitor is completely utilized
in each wake-up cycle, the total energy consumption, Esimplex−budget is then:
Esimplex−budget = ncycles · k
When the capacitor size is sufficiently large, the device would simply transmit
the full 249 B every wake-up cycle. However, this is not accounted for in this
model. For this estimate to be valid, we must ensure that all chunk sizes are
estimated between 0 and 249 B. This is verified by calculating ccycle and cfirst.
We will now go through a rather manual approach in which tighter restrictions
are enforced throughout the calculations. This includes that chunk sizes and
the number of cycles must be integer values.
==PAGE:64==
54
Evaluation
Strict estimate
This estimation is based on a setup with a message of 10,000 B and a capaci-
tor that stored 0.4 J. The energy profile of the first wake-up cycle follows the
function:
EcreateCycle(m, cfirst) = 5.768 · 10−6m + 0.001126cfirst + 0.1382
with m being the size of the message and cfirst being how many bytes of data
are included in the payload of the first cycle. Since we assume the capacitor
to provide 0.4 J of energy, and we assume all energy to be utilized, we can set
the equation equal to this. We also know the size of m to be 10,000 B. We can
then solve for cfirst to determine how much data can be transmitted in the first
wake-up cycle:
EcreateCycle(10000, cfirst) = 0.4 =⇒⌊cfirst⌋= 181
Of course, one cannot transmit partial bytes, so we must round down cfirst to
be 181. This also means the capacitor is not utilized completely, which will be
accounted for.
The energy profile of the following wake-up cycles is similarly found to follow
the function:
Ecycle(ccycle) = 0.1309 + 0.001127ccycle
with ccycle being the bytes of data transmitted in the following cycles. Note that
the size of the message does not impact this energy profile. Since the system
can estimate how many bytes to transmit before the message is read, only the
relevant bytes are actually read from flash. We find the maximum number of
bytes to transmit in these cycles:
Ecycle(ccycle) = 0.4 =⇒⌊ccycle⌋= 238.82
Which is again rounded down to 238 B.
We now know how many bytes are transmitted in the first wake-up cycle and the
remaining except for the last, since the last wake-up cycle only needs to transmit
the remaining bytes, it might not be the full 238 that its budget allows. First,
we will calculate how many wake-up cycles are needed after the first to reach
the final cycle. Let this number be n −2 as it denotes the number of wake-up
cycles excluding the first and last that are needed to fully transmit the message.
n −2 =
m −cfirst
ccycle

=
10000 −181
238

= 41
I.e. when the system has been executing the first wake-up cycle and 41 following
that, only one cycle is needed to transmit the remaining data. How much data
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Estimation of full message transmission
55
remains, clast, can be found as the remainder of the amount of data already sent
and the data remaining:
clast = m
(mod cfirst + (n −2)ccycle) = 10000
(mod 181 + 41 · 238) = 61
I.e. 61 B of data is transmitted in the final wake-up cycle. We can now combine
this to estimate the total energy consumption of transmitting a message of
10,000 B using simplex-budget and a capacitor providing 0.4 J.
EcreateCycle(m, cfirst) + (n −2)Ecycle(ccycle) + Ecycle(clast)
= EcreateCycle(10000, 181) + 41 · Ecycle(238) + Ecycle(61)
= 16.00J
This estimates the transmission of a complete message of 10,000 B would require
16.96 J of energy.
Comparison of simple vs. strict estimate
Using the equation which is not restricted to integer values for the number of
cycles and packet sizes, the estimated energy consumption to transmit a 10,000
B message with a 0.4 J capacitor is 15.85 J. Compared to the 16.00 J determined
by the strict approach, this is a relatively small difference. Considering the extra
work and the inability to create a simple formula, the simple estimate seems the
favored approach to the strict.
5.3.2
Simplex-split
The first wake-up cycle for simplex-split will execute the following segments:
Segment 1 (Boot, sleep, LoRa init), Segment 2 (SPIFFS init), Segment 11 (Read
DB checkpoint), Segment 3 (Creating message), Segment 4 (Store message) and
Segment 10 (Transmit while DB checkpointing) until energy depletes. Every fol-
lowing wake-up cycle will execute: Segment 1 (Boot, sleep, LoRa init), Segment
2 (SPIFFS init), Segment 11 (Read DB checkpoint) Segment 5 (Read message)
and Segment 10 (Transmit while DB checkpointing) until energy depletes.
The approach to finding the total energy consumption is similar to that of
simplex-budget.
One distinction, however, is the energy required to read
the message in flash. The device has no knowledge of its energy budget, and
therefore cannot determine the number of bytes it is going to transmit in each
wake-up cycle.
However, from the checkpoint, it knows from which byte to
transmit next, and all data before that byte are thus not going to be read.
==PAGE:66==
56
Evaluation
Because only data from that point and further are read at each cycle, it is
assumed that half of the message is on average read across an entire message
transmission.
5.3.3
Duplex-budget
The first wake-up cycle will execute: Segment 1 (Boot, sleep, LoRa init), Seg-
ment 2 (SPIFFS init), Segment 5 (Read message), Segment 3 (Creating mes-
sage), Segment 4 (Store message), Segment 6 (Transmit packet), Segment 7
(Listen for packets), Segment 8 (Receive packet) and Segment 9 (Store check-
point). Every following wake-up cycle will execute: Segment 1 (Boot, sleep,
LoRa init), Segment 2 (SPIFFS init), Segment 5 (Read message), Segment 6
(Transmit packet), Segment 7 (Listen for packets), Segment 8 (Receive packet),
and Segment 9 (Store checkpoint).
Ecycle is determined by simply adding the relevant segments together, and sim-
ilarly for EcreateCycle. How much energy is spent per cycle is correlated to the
message size (for message creation only), how many bytes are to be transmit-
ted as well as the duration for which the device will have its radio open when
listening for the acknowledgment. However, this duration is uncertain. When
the system creates its data length budget, it must do so from the worst possible
scenario, i.e. listening for precisely the maximum duration before receiving the
packet. Therefore there is a distinction between the listening period for Ecycle
and ccycle as they operate from the expected and worst-case period respectively.
If the acknowledgment is received early in the listening window, energy is clearly
saved. However, this energy could have been spent transmitting a larger packet
which would in turn increase overall energy efficiency.
The number of cycles needed is naturally determined by how much data needs to
be transmitted compared to how much data is transmitted each cycle, similar to
simplex-budget. However, packets that are lost in transmission will need to be
retransmitted, costing additional energy. Given a packet loss ratio, r : 0 ≤r < 1,
the transmission-factor a can be calculated as
a =
∞
X
i=0
ri
(5.2)
assuming that the retransmission is equally likely to be lost as the original
transmission.
When i = 0, this calculates the number of packets that need
to be transmitted in the first attempt, which is naturally all packets, why this
equals to a factor of 1. When i = 1 we assume a factor of r packets need to
be retransmitted, why this equals r. For each increment of i we consider a new
attempt at retransmission, which is in theory infinitely many.
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Estimation of full message transmission
57
By multiplying the number of cycles needed assuming no packet loss by this
transmission factor, we get the expected number of wake-up cycles needed.
ncycles =
m −cfirst
ccycle
+ 1

· a
The total energy consumption of duplex-budget can now be combined. How-
ever, because the budget is determined from the maximum listening duration
instead of the actual duration, the energy spent for each wake-up cycle cannot
simply be assumed to be the full size of the capacitor k. Instead, the energy
spent in a cycle should be determined from the expected listening period, while
the budget is created from the maximum listening period.
Eduplex−budget = (ncycles −1) · Ecycle + EcreateCycle
(5.3)
When we perform the measurements, the only device communicating with the
server is the device we are measuring on. Therefore, the response times are
usually very consistent and close to the best case. By using Equation 5.1 we
estimate the response packet to be on air for ≈35 milliseconds. Because of the
implementation of listening for acknowledgments, we furthermore expect around
10 milliseconds of overhead, and an additional 10 millisecond wait has been
introduced to the server to avoid the server responding before the transmitting
device was ready to receive. This adds up to a wait time of 55 milliseconds,
which is close to the observed 60 milliseconds during testing.
5.3.4
Duplex-split
The first wake-up cycle will execute: Segment 1 (Boot, sleep, LoRa init), Seg-
ment 2 (SPIFFS init), Segment 5 (Read message), Segment 6 (Transmit packet),
Segment 7 (Listen for packets), Segment 8 (Receive packet), Segment 3 (Creat-
ing message), Segment 4 (Store message) and then Segment 6 (Transmit packet)
until energy depletes. The following wake-up cycles will execute: Segment 1
(Boot, sleep, LoRa init), Segment 2 (SPIFFS init), Segment 5 (Read message),
Segment 6 (Transmit packet), Segment 7 (Listen for packets), Segment 8 (Re-
ceive packet), and then Segment 6 (Transmit packet) until energy depletes.
We similarly find Ecycle and EcreateCycle. For duplex-budget we would need
to assume the maximum allowed listen duration for the acknowledgment when
determining how many bytes could be transmitted in a cycle. However, this
split version will simply use the remaining energy to transmit as much data as
possible. Therefore, determining how much data to transmit is limited by the
==PAGE:68==
58
Evaluation
actual, average listening duration opposed to the maximum. Otherwise ccycle
and cfirst are determined similarly.
To account for packet loss, we calculate the transmission factor a similarly to
duplex-budget. When a > 1, the device will need to wake up for an additional
number of cycles to retransmit. This number of cycles to wake up also scales with
a. Therefore, the number of cycles, ncycles is calculated in the same approach
as before.
ncycles =
m −cfirst
ccycle
+ 1

· a
The device keeps transmitting until it depletes the capacitor of energy. Thus,
the total energy consumption is the number of wake-up cycles multiplied by the
capacitor size:
Eduplex−split = ncycles · k
(5.4)
5.4
Comparing estimates with measurement
This section compares estimated energy consumption to actual measurements.
For each test, data containing the image on Figure 5.11a is transmitted. Ta-
ble 5.2 displays the measured energy of the full message transmission and com-
pares it to the estimation created. Each version thus transmits the full message
of 27254 B (≈27 KB) with a simulated capacitor size providing up to 0.35 J
for each cycle. The granularity of both split versions is 32 B. For duplex-
budget the packet loss rate is estimated as 0% as this was the observed value
while testing. However, in duplex-split a packet loss rate of ≈21% was ob-
served, and this was used for the estimation calculation. This packet loss rate is
significantly higher, as the server is not always ready to receive the next packet
before the previous packet has been handled. It is observed that the packet loss
rate declines with higher granularities and is naturally dependent on the hard-
ware used for the server. The maximum listen duration for duplex-budget is
250 milliseconds, while both duplex versions have an average, actual listening
duration of 60 milliseconds.
As expected, the budget versions perform better compared to split. However,
at this capacitor size, duplex-split surprisingly consumes less energy than
simplex-split. A key difference between the two versions is that once a packet
has been transmitted and received by the server in duplex-split, it does not
need to be retransmitted. However, for simplex-split if a packet is transmitted
but not yet checkpointed it will need to be transmitted again. No matter how
==PAGE:69==
5.4 Comparing estimates with measurement
59
(a) The original uncompressed image
used for transmission in energy
measurements.
The image is ap-
proximately 27 KB and stored in
an uncompressed bitmap (BMP)
format.
(b) A version of the same image in
Figure 5.11a,
but in the com-
pressed JPG format. This image is
of significantly better quality and
even takes up less space with ap-
proximately 19 KB. However, as
this image is in a compressed for-
mat, it might not be able to be dis-
played if data is lost during trans-
mission, why it is better suited for
the duplex versions.
Figure 5.11: The image used for transmission in energy measurements [37].
For best comparison, the image in Figure 5.11a is used across
measurements of all four versions. This version is stored in an
uncompressed format which allows for any packet to be lost with-
out corrupting the image enough to prevent it from being viewed.
However, an advantage of the duplex versions is that all pack-
ets are eventually received allowing for compressed images to be
safely sent. The compressed version is seen in Figure 5.11b.
==PAGE:70==
60
Evaluation
Version
Measured energy
Estimated energy
Difference
simplex-budget
47.21 J
45.77 J
3%
simplex-split
127.86 J
145.36 J
14%
duplex-budget
52.75 J
55.08 J
4%
duplex-split
116.61 J
119.70 J
3%
Table 5.2: Measured and estimated energy consumption of transmitting the
same data for each version. The image transmitted is seen in Fig-
ure 5.11a.
Figure 5.12: Estimations of total energy, E, required to transmit the same
message for both split versions compared to the given capacitor
size k in joules. Both estimations are made based on transmitting
the image in Figure 5.11a with a granularity of 32 B. Duplex-
split assumes a listening duration of 60 milliseconds and a packet
loss rate of 21%.
many packets have been transmitted so far in a given wake-up cycle, the amount
of data that must be retransmitted because of this is the same. Because this
overhead scales with the number of wake-up cycles needed for a full transmis-
sion, it is more significant for low capacitor sizes. Furthermore, since the flash
partitions are mounted and unmounted for every checkpoint, the energy cost
associated with it increases as well. For the given packet loss ratio, when the
capacitor size increases sufficiently, simplex-split consumes less energy than
duplex-split as seen in Figure 5.12.
==PAGE:71==
5.5 Minimum/maximum capacitor sizes
61
5.5
Minimum/maximum capacitor sizes
Using the energy estimations, we can determine the minimum size capacitor
required for the system to function. To function, the capacitor must be large
enough to create a message and store it in flash and able to transmit at least
one byte of data for each of the following wake-up cycles.
As an example, we will calculate the minimum capacitor required for simplex-
budget. The segments needed to create the message are Segment 1 (Boot,
sleep, LoRa init), Segment 2 (SPIFFS init), Segment 3 (Creating message) and
Segment 4 (Store message). By adding the energy of each of these segments you
get the energy required to create the message, which in this case is:
5.768 · 10−6m + 0.0850
where m is the message size.
Using the energy estimation for each cycle calculated earlier, Ecycle, we can
determine the energy needed to transmit a single byte in the following wake-up
cycles. This is found to be 0.1150 J. For a given message size, the largest of
these determines the minimum energy needed for each wake-up cycle, which is
used to determine the capacitor size needed. Figure 5.13 shows these two energy
requirements relative to the message size.
For the two simplex versions, a similar maximum needed capacitor can be
calculated.
Because only one packet is sent for each wake-up cycle, this is
simply the capacitor size required to send a full packet in all cycles. Since the
first wake-up cycle where the message is created will always use more energy
outside of transmitting actual data, if a full packet is transmitted here, it will
also be able to do so in the following cycles. By adding the energy required for
the first wake-up cycle in simplex-budget to transmit a full packet of 249 B,
we get the energy this cycle would require, i.e. the maximum amount of energy
needed for the capacitor to hold, which is:
5.768 · 10−6m + 0.4017.
Table 5.3 shows the minimum and maximum estimations of each version based
on the same parameters as in section 5.4. That is a message of 27254 B, 32
B granularity, and a 250 milliseconds maximum listen duration. Since there is
no limit on the number of packets that can be transmitted during one wake-up
cycle for both split versions, the maximum capacitor size is calculated as the
energy required to transmit the full message in the first cycle. For duplex-
split there can of course be dropped packets, but as these are retransmitted
during a different wake-up cycle, they are not relevant to this.
==PAGE:72==
62
Evaluation
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
0.2
0.4
Message size (Bytes)
Energy in capacitor (Joules)
Energy to create message
Energy to transmit one byte
Figure 5.13: Minimum energy needed from the capacitor for simplex-budget
to function at different message sizes. For the system to function
it must both have enough energy to create the message and to
transmit at least one byte of data in the following wake-up cycles.
The two estimations intersect at a message size of 5195 B.
5.6
Version comparisons
Developing the four versions of the system allows us to more accurately compare
the energy cost associated with them.
It is no surprise that the split versions consume more energy compared to
budget. However, they can better utilize larger capacitors as they can transmit
several packets each wake-up cycle. Figure 5.14 shows a comparison between the
total energy, E, required to transmit the image on Figure 5.11a compared to the
capacitor size k. With 32 B granularity at all capacitor sizes, the budget version
consumes significantly more energy. However, split can utilize larger capacitors
significantly better where budget quickly flattens when the maximum size of
the LoRa payload is reached. When the granularity is set to a full 249 B payload,
the split version even outperforms budget.
Figure 5.15 shows the estimated energy required to transmit the same message
for all four versions given the same settings as in section 5.4. There is a sig-
nificant increase in energy consumption between budget and split. However,
the difference between the budget versions is quite small as the capacitors get
larger, which is because the packet loss rate is assumed to be 0% for duplex-
==PAGE:73==
5.6 Version comparisons
63
(a) The split is done with a granularity
of 32 B.
(b) The split is done with a granularity
of 249 B.
Figure 5.14: Energy required to fully transmit a message of 27254 B at differ-
ent capacitor sizes.
Figure 5.15: Estimated energy in joules required to send a 27254 B message
compared to the capacitor size for all four versions. All settings,
except for capacitor sizes, are similar to that of section 5.4.
==PAGE:74==
64
Evaluation
Version
Minimum energy
in capacitor
Maximum energy
in capacitor needed
simplex-budget
0.2423 J
0.5590 J
simplex-split
0.2780 J
58.42 J
duplex-budget
0.2423 J
0.6246 J
duplex-split
0.3057 J
56.91 J
Table 5.3: Minimum/maximum energy needed in the capacitor for each solu-
tion version to work based on the same parameters as in section 5.4.
Figure 5.16: Estimated energy in joules required to send a 27254 B message
compared to the packet loss rate. The capacitor is assumed to
provide 0.5 J. The remaining settings are similar to those in sec-
tion 5.4. Since simplex-budget does not retransmit, the packet
loss rate does not affect its energy consumption.
budget. Figure 5.16 shows how the energy cost increases with the packet loss
rate. As expected, a higher packet loss rate makes the duplex version signifi-
cantly more energy expensive.
On Figure 5.15 it is seen that simplex-split outperforms duplex-split for
higher capacitor sizes.
However, this is considering a 21% packet loss ratio.
Figure 5.17 compares the energy required for these two versions considering dif-
ferent packet loss ratios. The intersection occurs at r = 10.35%. The estimates
are based on a capacitor providing 1 J of energy for each wake-up cycle. For
this example, duplex-split outperforms simplex-split at any capacitor level
given a sufficiently low packet loss rate. This highlights the before-mentioned
issues with the implementation of simplex-split.
Until now, all estimates for duplex-split have been based on a packet loss
==PAGE:75==
5.6 Version comparisons
65
Figure 5.17: Estimated energy in joules required to send a 27254 B message
compared to the packet loss rate. The capacitor is assumed to
provide 1 J. The remaining settings are similar to those in sec-
tion 5.4.
rate of 21%, but a 0% packet loss rate has been estimated for duplex-budget.
This was due to what was observed when testing. To provide a fair comparison
between the two duplex versions, Figure 5.18 shows how they relate given the
same packet loss rate. As expected, the split version is estimated to always use
more energy. However, these estimations assume a perfectly accurate estimation
of how many bytes to transmit for a given energy reading, which is not possible
for a real-world application. For this, a more conservative estimate will need to
be made, thereby utilizing less of the available energy. As this is not the case
for the split versions, it will always fully consume the available energy during
any wake-up cycle that does not finish the message, leading to better energy
efficiency.
As the message size increases, the total energy required likewise increases for
all four versions of the solution. Figure 5.19 compares the required energy to
the size of the message to transmit. The largest difference in energy seems to
be between budget and split, while the choice between simplex or duplex
is not as influential.
==PAGE:76==
66
Evaluation
Figure 5.18: Estimated energy in joules required to send a 27254 B message
compared to the packet loss rate. The capacitor is assumed to
provide 1 J. The remaining settings are similar to those in sec-
tion 5.4.
Figure 5.19: Estimated energy in joules required to send messages of different
sizes. The capacitor is assumed to provide 1 J. The remaining
settings are similar to those in section 5.4.
==PAGE:77==
5.7 Estimating throughput
67
5.7
Estimating throughput
We will use the energy estimates to determine throughput as a unit of bytes
transmitted per hour. The size of the capacitor decides how many bytes can be
transmitted per wake-up cycle. The power generation determines how often a
wake-up cycle can occur.
With the energy model created for each version, we can simply estimate the
throughput as a function of the existing variables related to their energy estimate
as well as the energy harvest rate. By dividing the message size by the total
energy spent, we get the bytes per joule required for complete transmission.
The final parameter to include in this calculation is the power generation rate,
which can be expressed in watts (joule per second). By multiplying the bytes per
joule with watts, we thus get a throughput measured in bytes/second. In cases
where the power source is inconsistent, say solar power throughout 24 hours,
the throughput will be correspondingly inconsistent, i.e. high throughput with
high power generation and conversely. If throughput is to be measured across
an entire day, the power inputted must be the average power generation during
that day.
bytes
joule · joule
second = bytes
second
Let Etotal be the total energy consumption of transmitting m bytes and h be
the harvest rate in watts. The throughput T is then
T =
m
Etotal
· h
(5.5)
This approach applies to all four versions.
==PAGE:78==
68
Evaluation
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This chapter concludes the thesis with a summary of the project and a highlight
of the primary contributions to the field of intermittent computing using low
power wide area networks. This is finished by a brief discussion on where work
on the project could be continued given more time.
6.1
Summary
This thesis has succeeded in creating novel approaches to two problems related to
intermittent computing used for low power wide area networks: Namely the issue
of accurately determining how much data can be safely transmitted from a given
energy buffer and performing energy-efficient, reliable duplex communication.
To avoid the need to budget the data that can be safely transmitted, an approach
has been developed which splits data into smaller packets that are sent in rapid
succession and allows the device to be powered off at any time during these
transmissions. This approach is combined with reliable duplex communication
by beginning each wake-up cycle of the intermittently powered device with an
acknowledgment from the server, from which the device determines the data
that needs to be (re)transmitted.
==PAGE:80==
70
Conclusion
Four versions of this system have been implemented, each either budgeting or
splitting the data to transmit using either simplex or duplex communication.
Having all four versions implemented allows for a fair comparison of the energy
consumption required by these approaches under similar conditions. When test-
ing, the energy cost associated with the splitting approach at low packet size
granularities is found to be relatively high compared to making an energy bud-
get. However, this distance is lessened as the granularity increases. The energy
cost associated with duplex communication is found to be very low when the
proportion of lost packets is small.
For each version, a model of its energy consumption has been created, which
accounts for a given message size, granularity, etc. These models are useful to
provide an easy estimate of each version’s energy consumption given a specific
use case scenario, allowing a better-informed reason for deciding an approach
for real applications. Additionally, a similar approach can be used to estimate
the minimum/maximum capacitor size needed for a given application. Finally,
it is shown how these estimates can be used to determine the throughput of
each version from a given power generation rate.
6.2
Future work
While this thesis serves as an exploration, some aspects could be improved by
further work.
One aspect is how simplex-split checkpoints with a double
buffer. Since the approach used for the implementation in this project would
not properly flush the write buffer to flash when instructed to do so, the flash
partition needs to be mounted and unmounted between writes, and a 50 mil-
lisecond delay was added between writing to the first and second file.
This
introduces a significant amount of energy overhead for each write compared to
the energy consumed by the flash write itself. As well as costing more energy
per write, it prevents checkpointing from happening more frequently which, in
turn, results in less data being checkpointed, thereby needing retransmission.
This issue was investigated during the project. However, as it was caused by a
core component of the framework it would be too time consuming to investigate
in depth and fix considering the scope of this project.
Another aspect that would be interesting to explore would be LoRa communi-
cation where the intermittently powered device acts as the receiver as opposed
to the transmitter. This would be interesting for the transmission of large files
such as firmware updates. The protocol for this would need to work in cases
where the device would not necessarily be able to receive full-length packets.
As the server is not able to measure the remaining energy of the capacitor, a
==PAGE:81==
6.2 Future work
71
special solution must be implemented to ensure that the intermittently powered
device has enough energy available to receive data from the server and to store
it in non-volatile memory. When the full message is received, the device can
then process it. The data received for each wake-up cycle should be maximized
to optimize energy efficiency. Inspired by the approaches explored in this thesis,
a method could be for the device to transmit a request when it wakes up con-
taining the number of bytes that it can at most safely receive and store given
how much energy it currently holds. Another approach could be for the server
to transmit data in small packets that can be individually stored by the device.
==PAGE:82==
72
Conclusion
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1] Rafeeq Ahmad, Mohd Asim Asim, Safwan Zubair Khan, and Bharat Singh.
Green iot—issues and challenges. In Proceedings of 2nd international con-
ference on advanced computing and software engineering (ICACSE), 2019.
[2] Brandon Lucia, Vignesh Balaji, Alexei Colin, Kiwan Maeng, and Emily
Ruppel. Intermittent computing: Challenges and opportunities. 2nd Sum-
mit on Advances in Programming Languages (SNAPL 2017), 2017.
[3] Battery
University.
Bu-209:
How
does
a
supercapacitor
work?
-
battery
university.
https://batteryuniversity.com/article/
bu-209-how-does-a-supercapacitor-work, 2021.
Accessed:
January
2023.
[4] Alan Millner. Modeling lithium ion battery degradation in electric vehicles.
In 2010 IEEE Conference on Innovative Technologies for an Efficient and
Reliable Electricity Supply, pages 349–356. IEEE, 2010.
[5] Milesight. Lorawan sensor battery — long lifespan sensor battery — mile-
sight. https://www.milesight-iot.com/blog/lorawan-sensor-battery/,
2022. Accessed: January 2023.
[6] Kaivan Karimi and Gary Atkinson. What the internet of things (iot) needs
to become a reality. White Paper, FreeScale and ARM, pages 1–16, 2013.
[7] Wael Ayoub, Abed Ellatif Samhat, Fabienne Nouvel, Mohamad Mroue,
and Jean-Christophe Pr´evotet.
Internet of mobile things: Overview of
lorawan, dash7, and nb-iot in lpwans standards and supported mobility.
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 21(2):1561–1581, 2018.
==PAGE:84==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8] Mads Lauridsen, Benny Vejlgaard, Istvan Z Kovacs, Huan Nguyen, and
Preben Mogensen. Interference measurements in the european 868 mhz ism
band with focus on lora and sigfox. In 2017 IEEE Wireless Communications
and Networking Conference (WCNC), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2017.
[9] Lora
and
lorawan:
Technical
overview
—
developer
por-
tal.
https://lora-developers.semtech.com/documentation/
tech-papers-and-guides/lora-and-lorawan/.
Accessed:
December
2022.
[10] Lukas Krupka, Lukas Vojtech, and Marek Neruda.
The issue of lpwan
technology coexistence in iot environment. In 2016 17th international con-
ference on mechatronics-Mechatronika (ME), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2016.
[11] Sumanth Umesh and Sparsh Mittal. A survey of techniques for intermittent
computing. Journal of Systems Architecture, 112:101859, 2021.
[12] Hrishikesh Jayakumar, Arnab Raha, and Vijay Raghunathan.
Quickre-
call: A low overhead hw/sw approach for enabling computations across
power cycles in transiently powered computers. In 2014 27th International
Conference on VLSI Design and 2014 13th International Conference on
Embedded Systems, pages 330–335. IEEE, 2014.
[13] Josiah Hester, Kevin Storer, Jacob Sorber, and Lanny Sitanayah. Towards
a language and runtime for intermittently powered devices. In Workshop
on Hilariously Low-Power Computing, 2016.
[14] Josiah Hester, Nicole Tobias, Amir Rahmati, Lanny Sitanayah, Daniel Hol-
comb, Kevin Fu, Wayne P Burleson, and Jacob Sorber. Persistent clocks
for batteryless sensing devices. ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing
Systems (TECS), 15(4):1–28, 2016.
[15] Alo¨ys Augustin, Jiazi Yi, Thomas Clausen, and William Mark Townsley. A
study of lora: Long range & low power networks for the internet of things.
Sensors, 16(9):1466, 2016.
[16] Jaco M Marais, Reza Malekian, and Adnan M Abu-Mahfouz. Lora and
lorawan testbeds: A review. 2017 Ieee Africon, pages 1496–1501, 2017.
[17] Hope RF.
Rf96/97/98 - 137 mhz to 1020 mhz low power long range
transceiver. https://datasheetspdf.com/pdf-file/748002/HOPERF/RF96/
1, 2012. Accessed: December 2022.
[18] Congduc Pham and Muhammad Ehsan. Dense deployment of lora net-
works: Expectations and limits of channel activity detection and capture
effect for radio channel access. Sensors, 21(3):825, 2021.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
[19] Esp-idf programming guide - esp32 - — esp-idf programming guide lat-
est documentation. https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/
latest/esp32/. Accessed: December 2022.
[20] Real Time Engineers Ltd.
Rtos - free professionally developed and ro-
bust real time operating system for small embedded systems development.
https://www.freertos.org/RTOS.html, 2022. Accessed: January 2023.
[21] Real Time Engineers Ltd. Rtos idle task and the freertos idle task hook
function.
https://www.freertos.org/RTOS-idle-task.html, 2022.
Ac-
cessed: January 2023.
[22] Espressif
Systems.
Espressif
idf
-
visual
studio
marketplace.
https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=espressif.
esp-idf-extension, 2022. Accessed: January 2023.
[23] Analog discovery 2 - digilent reference. https://digilent.com/reference/
test-and-measurement/analog-discovery-2/start. Accessed: December
2022.
[24] Digilent.
Waveforms.
https://digilent.com/shop/software/
digilent-waveforms/, 2022.
Accessed: December 2022. Version: 3.18.1
64-bit Qt5.12.9 Windows 10 (10.0) Qt5.12.9.
[25] Jasper
De
Winkel,
Haozhe
Tang,
and
Przemys law
Pawe lczak.
Intermittently-powered bluetooth that works.
In Proceedings of the
20th Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications
and Services, pages 287–301, 2022.
[26] Matti Siekkinen, Markus Hiienkari, Jukka K Nurminen, and Johanna
Nieminen. How low energy is bluetooth low energy? comparative mea-
surements with zigbee/802.15. 4. In 2012 IEEE wireless communications
and networking conference workshops (WCNCW), pages 232–237. IEEE,
2012.
[27] Ferran Adelantado, Xavier Vilajosana, Pere Tuset-Peiro, Borja Martinez,
Joan Melia-Segui, and Thomas Watteyne.
Understanding the limits of
lorawan. IEEE Communications magazine, 55(9):34–40, 2017.
[28] 3
common
myths
about
bluetooth
technology
—
blue-
tooth®
technology
website.
https://www.bluetooth.com/blog/
3-common-mythsabout-bluetooth/. Accessed: December 2022.
[29] Jasper De Winkel,
Vito Kortbeek,
Josiah Hester,
and Przemys law
Pawe lczak. Battery-free game boy. Proceedings of the ACM on Interac-
tive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, 4(3):1–34, 2020.
==PAGE:86==
76
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[30] Saad Ahmed, Naveed Anwar Bhatti, Muhammad Hamad Alizai, Ju-
naid Haroon Siddiqui, and Luca Mottola. Efficient intermittent comput-
ing with differential checkpointing. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIG-
PLAN/SIGBED International Conference on Languages, Compilers, and
Tools for Embedded Systems, pages 70–81, 2019.
[31] Naveed Anwar Bhatti and Luca Mottola. Harvos: Efficient code instrumen-
tation for transiently-powered embedded sensing. In 2017 16th ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks
(IPSN), pages 209–220. IEEE, 2017.
[32] Harsh Desai, Matteo Nardello, Davide Brunelli, and Brandon Lucia. Ca-
maroptera:
A long-range image sensor with local inference for remote
sensing applications. ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems
(TECS), 2022.
[33] Tien-Hsu Lee, Hsiu-Hua Hsu, and Pao-Chi Chang. Restart marker regula-
tion technique for progressive jpeg image coding in mobile communications.
IEEE communications letters, 4(12):411–413, 2000.
[34] Bruno Basseto.
esp32-lora-library.
https://github.com/Inteform/
esp32-lora-library, 2022.
[35] Troy D. Hanson and Arthur O’Dwyer.
uthash.
https://github.com/
troydhanson/uthash, 2022.
[36] Semtech.
Lora modem calculator tool.
https://www.semtech.com/,
2013.
Accessed:
December
2022.
Version:
1.1.
Direct
down-
load link: https://semtech.my.salesforce.com/sfc/p/E0000000JelG/a/
2R000000HUhK/6T9Vdb3 ldnElA8drIbPYjs1wBbhlWUXej8ZMXtZXOM.
[37] Ralphs Fotos. Squirrel rodent mammal - free photo on pixabay. https:
//pixabay.com/photos/squirrel-rodent-mammal-wildlife-7678830/,
2022. Accessed: January 2023.
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
Full energy estimations of
each version
A.1
Simplex-budget
Esimplex−budget(m, k) ≈
 1.005120775m −887.8662217k + 107.6595756
887.3813739k −101.0799525
+ 1

k
Where m is the message size in bytes and k is the capacitor size in joules.
A.2
Simplex-split
Esimplex−split(m, g, k) ≈
1000 ·  g2 −1.165973775 · 1010mg −7.348398700 · 1010g −3.103182048 · 1011m
k
(−1016k + 1.810888740 · 1015 + 6.153857713 · 109m + 3.740385851 · 1012g) g
Where m is the message size in bytes, g is the granularity with which data is
transmitted in bytes and k is the capacitor size in joules.
==PAGE:88==
78
Full energy estimations of each version
A.3
Duplex-budget
Eduplex−budget(m, p, q, k, r) ≈
  1.005120775m −887.8662217k + 113.5387900 + 0.2098784342p
887.3813739k −106.9559564 −0.2097638233p
+ 1

·
 ∞
X
i=0
ri
!
−1
!
·  2.0 · 10−11 + k −0.0002363851997p + 0.000236385199776298q
+ 6.4 · 10−11 + k −0.0002363851998p + 1.86 · 10−16m + 0.000236385199776298q
Where m is the message size in bytes, p is the worst-case listening duration for
acknowledgment, q is the average listening duration for acknowledgment, k is
the capacitor size in joules and r is the fraction of packets that are lost and
needs to be retransmitted.
A.4
Duplex-split
Eduplex−split(m, p, g, k, r) ≈
 1.132063311 · 1013mg + 7.348398700 · 1013g + 3.036620147 · 1014m
· (P∞
i=0 ri)k
(1016k −1.102065279 · 1015 −6.153857713 · 109m −2.363851998 · 1012p) g
Where m is the message size in bytes, p is the average listening duration for
acknowledgment, g is the granularity with which data is transmitted in bytes,
k is the capacitor size in joules and r is the fraction of packets that are lost and
needs to be retransmitted.
