==PAGE:1==
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep
learning
Tianyi Ma
Communication Technologies and System Design
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Digital cameras can only capture a limited range of real­world scenes’ luminance, produc­
ing images with saturated pixels and less color richness. However, with the improvement
of image and video quality requirements, we are not satisfied with such images. In this the­
sis, we proposed a learning­based approach to reconstruct a high dynamic range(HDR)
image from a single low dynamic range(LDR) image input. HDR uses a larger bit depth to
record the brightness of the image to express a larger exposure dynamic range, which can
provide a more realistic visual quality to the images captured by digital cameras. In our
model, we build an auto­encoder architecture based on the U­net in convolution neural
network(CNN), which can predict the lost detail in the saturated area through extracted
features, we use VGG­16 as the backbone in the encoder of the U­net. Moreover, we
implement the unsaturated mask and denoising filter to optimize the loss during training
which can eliminate color distortion, pixel loss and blocking artifact caused by reconstruc­
tion. We tested the evaluation parameters and visual results of all the models we tried.
The best performing model is based on the VGG­16 U­net model to add an unsaturated
mask to the output of U­net and add bilateral filtering before calculating the loss, very suc­
cessful in predicting details missing from saturated regions. What’s more, we also make
some attempts on the new backbone of U­net and different color models in LDR input,
they have less contribution currently, but can continue to be explored in future work.
ii
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I am very glad that you can read this text. This thesis is the last step in my master’s career.
Here I am very sincerely grateful to those who helped me in my master’s career. Thank
you for your help to make me stronger.
First of all, I would like to extend my deep appreciation to my thesis supervisor Søren
Forchhammer, who provided me with invaluable guidance. In the past year, your lectures
made me interested in video technology and gained valuable practical experience in video
compression and image processing.
I would also like to thank all of my friends for their support, encouragement, and friend­
ship. We live far away in a foreign country, your continuous company is the root of my
continued optimism and hard work. Especially Lianhao and Jiahao, we shared lots of
splendid moments, thank you for your superb cooking skill to keep me healthy.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my family for their unwavering love and support.
My parents funded my studies at DTU, and they have raised me up and be a better man
with their love. Also, I have lived far away from my girlfriend for two years, she has always
supported my studies and loved me unswervingly. I love my families.
This thesis would not have been possible without their support and I am deeply thankful
to each and every one of them.
Sincerely,
Tianyi Ma
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Related works
3
2.1
Color model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Tone mapping and Inverse tone mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Deep learning in HDR image
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Low­pass filter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Deep learning model in HDR reconstruction
13
3.1
Deep learning and CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Foundation of U­net
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4
Overview of HDR reconstruction model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.5
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.6
Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4
Implementation
31
4.1
Parameter of evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3
Different tone mapping operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.4
Implement of HDR image reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.5
Improvement of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.6
Other attempts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5
Result and Discussion
47
5.1
Results in Model I, II, III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.2
Ablation study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.3
Future works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
6
Conclusion
57
Bibliography
59
A Appendix
63
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
HDR (High Dynamic Range) and LDR (Low Dynamic Range) are terms used in digital
imaging and photography to describe the range of luminance values that a camera, dis­
play, or image file is able to capture or display.
LDR images have a limited range of luminance values and can appear flat or washed out
in high­contrast scenes. On the other hand, HDR images have a much wider range of
luminance values, allowing for more natural­looking, lifelike images which can balance
the contrast and saturation even in extreme lighting conditions.
HDR images are typically created by merging multiple LDR images taken at different ex­
posures[1], or by capturing images with specialized cameras[2] that can capture a greater
dynamic range of light which will have great cost of capturing. In this thesis, we propose a
novel and low­cost method for reconstructing HDR images from single LDR input images.
Expansion of LDR images for HDR applications is commonly referred to as inverse tone­
mapping (iTM)[3]. Most existing inverse tone­mapping operators(iTMO) are not very suc­
cessful in the reconstruction of saturated pixels[4]. That is because if we apply the same
iTMO on well­exposed and saturated pixels, results in ambiguity during recovery will lead
to checkerboard and halo artifacts[5].
Recently, to solve the problem in iTMO, some people apply Convolutional Neural Net­
works(CNN) model to reconstruct HDR images by LDR images. In the related work, there
are two main methods to achieve that[6]. The first one is synthesizing several up­/down­
exposed LDR images and fusing them to produce an HDR image, like Yuki et al[7] have
done. The second one is reconstructing HDR image directly based on LDR images which
have 8 bits depth per pixel to generate better visual quality in the saturated area and more
natural­looking models [8][9][10].
Through the CNN model, the correlation between pixels can be extracted through convo­
lution network. According to these features and the pixel information around the saturated
area, some missing details in the saturated area can be reconstructed. For example, the
research of Eilertsen et al[4], by linearizing the non­saturated area and applying it on
the saturated area to predict the detail of saturated area. In that paper, mainly focuses
on the reconstruction of saturated part detail which corresponds to luminance. It is also
necessary to reconstruct the right color in HDR image to avoid distortion.
There are lots of other researches on HDR reconstruction by deep learning, Feedback
HDR reconstruction network(FHDR) has been proposed by Khan et al[10], it builds a
global feedback block which consists of smaller local feedback blocks of convolutional
layers. ExpandNet[9] also uses CNN to reconstruct the missing information due to quan­
tization, clipping, tone mapping or gamma correction in HDR images.
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
1
==PAGE:8==
The main object of the thesis is how to reconstruct the corresponding HDR image from a
single LDR image input, including predicting the missing information in the saturated area,
improving the consistency of the reconstructed image, and the accuracy of the HDR image
color.
In the project, it will adopt a well­designed network that can push reconstruct HDR im­
ages to the natural image manifold. Based on the idea of reconstructing the HDR image
by single LDR image input, it is suitable for the CNN model to have the same size in­
put and output, for example, the Fully Convolutional Network(FCN) and U­Net, which
have both convolution and deconvolution networks can output the same size predicted
image[11]. U­Net is widely used in HDR reconstruction because it has the ability to han­
dle high­resolution images and preserve detailed features, which is crucial for HDR image
processing.
In general, we will first extract the features in the LDR image through the neural network,
reconstruct the HDR image during the deconvolution process, and use the corresponding
HDR image as the ground truth combines the reconstructed image to calculate the loss
and feed it back to the training network. By this loop reconstruct HDR using a deep
learning network. On this basis, to further improve the model’s performance in terms of
correction of color, consistency, and denoising, we will perform a series of attempts and
improvements on the model. These attempts can be roughly divided into three steps:
• The first step is to divide the saturation area from the unsaturated area and change
the weight of the loss equation so that the model is more focused on improving and
reconstructing the details of the saturated area.
• The second step is to use low­pass filtering on the reconstructed HDR image to
remove high­frequency noise, avoid local scale over­fitting caused by noise, and
achieve a better overall visual quality of the reconstruction image.
• The last step is some attempts which theoretically possible but in practice don’t have
better performance than the second step. We try to implement different color do­
mains and different network backbones during training to have better chrominance
restoration and more accuracy of saturated area division.
The structure of this thesis is as follows, Chapter 2 will introduce relevant background
knowledge. Chapter 3 will mainly introduce the U­net model and the model foundation of
this thesis. Chapter 4 will introduce the implementation of the model and the improvement
of model performance. Chapter 5 will analyze the results of different models and propose
suggestion of future work, and Chapter 6 will do summarizes of the whole thesis.
2
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:9==
2
Related works
In the process of HDR image reconstruction, it will include several challenges and prob­
lems. It can be divided into three main parts, which are Color model, Tone mapping and
inverse tone mapping, Deep learning models, and the low­pass filters. In this section is
the introduction of the problems faced during HDR image reconstruction, we will further
discuss the problems and solve them in the next of the thesis.
2.1
Color model
During the image process, the information contained in the image should be digitized be­
fore processing, and according to different processing purposes, we need to choose dif­
ferent color models. In the grayscale image, the information in the image can be mapped
to the brightness as a single channel, when the object is color images, multi­channel map­
ping is often required. In this section, we will mainly discuss three kinds of color models
that focus on the different characteristics of color image. The visualization of the three
models and the channels in the three models can be expressed as follow image2.1.
Figure 2.1: Visualization of the three color models, and the components in the three mod­
els
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
3
==PAGE:10==
2.1.1
RGB color model
The RGB color model is one of the most common color models. It is based on the sen­
sitivity of human cone cells to these three colors. The RGB color model uses the three
primary colors red, green, and blue to create various different color variations in an image
and is used to display anything on a screen.
RGB is known as an additive color model, meaning images are created by mixing red,
green, and blue light. Additive colors start with black and the primary colors are added on
top of each other in varying intensities to create all the colors you can see on screen[12].
Since in the RGB color model combining the luminance and chrominance components in
this color space make it more sensitive to noise[13].
2.1.2
YUV color model
When we treat an image as a combination of color and brightness, it would be a YUV
color model. The YUV color model includes a series of color models based on luminance
and chrominance components, for example, YUV, YCbCr, YPbPr, etc. The Y component
represents the luma, and the U and V components after that represent the chroma.
The separation of luma from chroma makes this color model interesting for the HDR image
process since it can define the saturated part and unsaturated part by the value of luma
and can directly obtain the pixel distribution of luminance value in the image.
YUV and RGB color spaces can be converted, and one of the convert based on the BT601
standard for calculating the YUV value from the RGB value can be expressed as
Y = 0.257 · R + 0.504 · G + 0.098 · B + 16
U = −0.148 · R −0.291 · G + 0.439 · B + 128
V = 0.439 · R −0.368 · G −0.071 · B + 128
(2.1)
which Y, U, V are the three channels’ value in YUV color model. R, G, B are the value of
three channel in RGB color model.
2.1.3
HSV color model
HSV means Hue, Saturation and Value, it is a three dimensional representation of hexa­
cone color space, where the central vertical axis represents the intensity. Hue is defined
as an angle in the range from 0 to 2π, different hue values represent the different color
domains. Saturation indicates how close the color is to spectral colors, the value of satu­
ration distributes from 0 to 1, higher saturation value represent the purity of color and has
darker color[14]. Value indicates the brightness of the color. For the light source color,
the lightness value is related to the brightness of the illuminant; for the object color, this
value is related to the transmittance or reflectance of the object. Usually, values range
from 0 (black) to 1 (white).
In the last few years, some papers process HDR images in the HSV domain, Zhang[15]
proposes a new tone mapping network in the HSV color model since the HSV domain will
4
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:11==
bring better color and luminance mapping. It is also a possible color model can be used
during HDR image reconstruction. The convert equation of HSV and RGB is
V = max(R, G, B)
(2.2)
S =
{V −min(R,G,B)
V
, V ̸= 0
0, V = 0
(2.3)
H =







60∗(G−B)
V −min(R,G,B), V = R
120+60∗(B−R)
V −min(R,G,B), V = G
240+60∗(R−G)
V −min(R,G,B), V = B
(2.4)
which the H, S, V is the value of three channels in HSV color model, if H value is smaller
than 0, it should be added by 360.
2.2
Tone mapping and Inverse tone mapping
Figure 2.2: The HDR image is composed of three LDR images with different exposure
levels. The HDR image is processed to visualize, and the overexposed and underexposed
area in the LDR image will have more detail in the HDR image
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
5
==PAGE:12==
In the real world, the light intensity has a wide range from dark to very bright[16]. While the
traditional image can only record 8 bits of depth for each pixel in each channel, that means
it can only separate different brightness of light into 256 none linear levels, which will be
much less than the range of light in the real world. This kind of traditional image is the
LDR image. While in the process of synthesizing HDR images, it is necessary to combine
multiple LDR images and extract the saturated features of different exposures[17]. The
result is that HDR images are more realistic and linear in luminance records, Generally, an
HDR image is composed of several LDR images with different exposure times. Through
different pixel values in several images, the information of reality viewing can be recorded
as much as possible, and the range of image luminance and chrominance values can be
expanded. This process has been shown in figure 2.2.
However, most of the screens can only display the LDR image or video due to the spread
and unification of LDR standardization. The range of color that the LDR screen can display
is very limited, and the content of the HDR image cannot be fully displayed. If you need
to display an HDR image with a wider dynamic range on the LDR screen, it needs to
compress the high dynamic range to the low dynamic range in advance[18]. This step is
tone mapping.
2.2.1
Tone mapping
In the process of image tone mapping, since the dynamic range of LDR is much smaller
than that of HDR, it is necessary to reduce the dynamic range. However, since the dy­
namic range is mainly combined with the luminance domain[15], and the high­luminance
pixels in the HDR image are closer to reality than the LDR, they often appear at low
frequencies in the entire image. If the luminance value is directly scaled with equal mag­
nitude during mapping, It will cause the viewing of overall image to be dark due to ex­
cessive consideration of a small number of high­brightness areas, which will be distorted
compared to the original image[19]. Just like the image2.3 shows, the center image is the
LDR result after equal scaling of the luminance value of the HDR image, the left image is
the original LDR image, most of the pixels of the first one is going to be too dark than the
original LDR image.
In order to convert the dynamic range from HDR to LDR of the image more accurately,
many tone mapping operators(TMO) are used, two of them are introduced here.
The first one is Logarithmic(LTM)[20], in the LTM it will use a logarithmic function to com­
press the luminance component of the HDR image to LDR image, it needs to split the
luminance which is Y component from RGB by equation 2.5 and then calculate the loga­
rithmic operator by equation 2.6, where the max(Ihdr) is the max luminance value in HDR
image. Based on the feature of the logarithm, in this step of calculation, the proportion of
the zoomed low­luminance area will be enlarged, and the scaling of the high­luminance
area will be larger. Then this operator will be used for gamma correction and compress
each channel of RBG image by equation 2.7 where s is the gamma gain. The tone map­
ping result can be found in figure 2.3, the right one is the mapping output from HDR image,
6
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:13==
it is obvious that the saturated part is more clear with more detail than LDR image and
also it has great view quality than the HDR image with equal scaling.
Lhdr = 0.299 ∗Rhdr + 0.587 ∗Ghdr + 0.114 ∗Bhdr
(2.5)
Lopt =
log10(1 + Lhdr)
log10(1 + max(Ihdr))
(2.6)


I′
ldr.R
I′
ldr.G
I′
ldr.B

= Lopt ∗(


Ildr.R
Ildr.G
Ildr.B

/Lhdr)s
(2.7)
Another commonly used tone mapping function is exponential(ETM)[18], in exponential
function 2.8 will apply exponent as mapping operator compared to LTM, in the function Lav
is the average luminance of HDR image and after calculating the exponential operator, it
also needs gamma correction by the eq 2.7 as shown previously in LTM.
Ildr = 1 −exp(−Lhdr
Lav
)
(2.8)
Figure 2.3: Left is LDR image, center is HDR image with equal scale mapping, right is
HDR image with LTM tone mapping
2.2.2
Inverse tone mapping
In contrast, dual tone mapping, inverse tone mapping, expands a low dynamic range
image into a high dynamic range image. HDR contains a wider range of physical values
that can be perceived by the human visual system. The majority of today’s media is stored
in a low dynamic range. Inverse Tone Mapping Operators (iTMOs) could thus potentially
revive all of this content for use in high dynamic range display and image­based lighting[3].
In tone mapping, a simple tone mapping operator can be expressed as follow eq 2.9 where
Lhdr is the luminance of the input HDR image and Lout is the output of luminance value,
Lav is the average luminance of image.
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
7
==PAGE:14==
Lout = 1 −exp(−Lhdr
Lav
)
(2.9)
After we invert the equation and solve it, the luminance of input HDR images Lhdr can be
expressed as eq 2.10[16] where the β is a small value to avoid singularity when the value
in logarithm is zero.
Lhdr = −Lav ∗log(1 −Lout + β)
(2.10)
Here is a simple example of an inverse tone mapping operator. In order to expand the
versatility of this operator, we can add some parameters to it to expand the range of the
result and let it controllable. Therefore the new elements in the operator can control the
ratio of curve and the max value of curve.
Lhdr = −γ ∗Lav ∗log(α ∗(1 −Lout + β))
(2.11)
2.3
Deep learning in HDR image
As we discussed before, in order to obtain a better viewing experience for images or
videos, which is needed to improve their reconstruction of reality, we need to convert low
dynamic range images into high dynamic range. In the process of using LDR images to
realize HDR image generation and HDR image reconstruction, many research methods
are combined with deep learning algorithms. Deep learning can extract features in a
specific area of the image, and can be trained through a large number of similar data so
that the prediction results can restore the real viewing result as much as possible.
There are two main ideas in the process of reconstruction, one is by learning from LDR
and HDR pairs at a single exposure level to reconstruct HDR image, which we call a
single­image reconstruction method. The other is to predict a low­exposure LDR image
and an over­exposure LDR image from a medium­exposure LDR image. LDR image, and
then reconstruct the HDR image according to the basic HDR generation method, which
we call the pipeline reconstruction method.
2.3.1
Single­image reconstruction method
In the single­image reconstruction method, the goal is the reconstruct an HDR image by
the well­exposure LDR image, to reconstruct the missing information of saturated part in
which the luminance is too high to record the detail in that area. In recent years, several
approaches have been proposed on this topic. Eilertsen et al.[4] use a deep learning net­
work to predict the saturated part values and reconstructed that by learning the difference
between pairs of LDR and HDR inputs. Yang et al.[21] train a two layers network to do the
image correction. The first layer can learn the loss detail from training HDR images and
reconstruct the HDR image from LDR image, the second layer of network will focus on
feedback these loss detail to LDR domain. Marcel et al.[5] proposed a method to predict
8
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:15==
the saturated part detail by only learning from the feature in the unsaturated part, by cut­
ting off the contribution of saturated part which can avoid the distortion of reconstruction
output.
Compared with the traditional method of generating HDR images, the reconstruction of
HDR images through deep learning can significantly reduce the resources required to
generate HDR images. Only one LDR image can be used to predict and reconstruct HDR
images, and compared with the multiple exposures required before, also reduces the time
required to generate HDR images.
2.3.2
Pipeline reconstruction method
In the pipeline reconstruction, the process can be divided into several steps which include
LDR image prediction and HDR image reconstruction. This method can be regarded as a
community combining HDR traditional algorithm and deep learning algorithm in HDR area.
Compared with the single image reconstruction method, it is more inclined to solve the
process of predicting LDR images under different exposure states from one LDR image.
In this step, it will use a deep learning network to predict LDR images, and combine LDR
images with different exposures into HDR images as the reconstruction result.
There are also lots of proposed methods in this area, Endo et al.[7] define an auto­encoder
to predict several LDR images with different exposures from one LDR image input. Lee et
al.[8] proposed a generative adversarial network(GAN) combined with a pixel­wise l1 loss
to achieve the reconstruction of HDR image. Liu et al.[6] proposed a method that uses
three split CNNs to solve three different challenges in the reconstruction process which
are dynamic range clipping, non­linear mapping and quantization.
2.4
Low­pass filter
Figure 2.4: Classification of filters and most used low­pass filters
Filtering is a fundamental task in signal and image processing, whose goal is to selectively
extract certain information considered important in the image based on the application
environment. Filtering can remove noise from the image, extract visually salient features.
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
9
==PAGE:16==
Frequency analysis is a technique that partitions an image into different parts ranging from
low to high frequency. Low frequencies correspond to regions in the image with small in­
tensity variations like the flat area or main area, while high frequencies correspond to re­
gions with large intensity variations like the edges. In the framework of frequency analysis,
a filter is an operation that enhances a certain band or frequency in an image while block­
ing (or reducing) other frequency bands. Low­pass filters eliminate high­frequency parts
of the image but retain low­frequency parts. High­pass filters eliminate low­frequency
parts of the image. The distribution and function of filters have been shown in figure 2.4.
And it also lists some low pass filter in the right side of figure[22]. The ideally low­pass
filter can be expressed as the equation 2.12, where D(u, v) is the distance between the
current point and center point which can be calculated by 2.13, D0 is the pass­band size.
It will filter out all of the high frequency information so that the viewing will be blurring
because of the Ringing effect.
H(u, v) =
{
1, D(u, v) < D0
0, D(u, v) >= D0
(2.12)
D(u, v) =
√
(u −U
2 )2 + (v −V
2 )2
(2.13)
2.4.1
Gaussian low­pass filter
Figure 2.5: The principle and effect of Gaussian filter
In the Gaussian low­pass filter, the basic principle is that it convolves the image with a
Gaussian kernel, which is a two­dimensional function that is defined by a mean and a
standard deviation[23]. The kernel is a matrix and it is applied to each pixel of the image.
The kernel is a Gaussian function that has the normal distribution curve and gives more
weight to the pixels around the center of the kernel and less weight to the pixels that are
10
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:17==
further away, in the top of figure 2.5 is a 3x3 size Gaussian kernel and how to process the
image by Gaussian filter. The mathematics equation of Gaussian kernel is
G(x, y) =
1
2πσ2 exp(−x2 + y2
2σ2
)
(2.14)
The standard deviation σ of the Gaussian function controls the size of the kernel and the
amount of smoothing that is applied to the image. A larger standard deviation will result
in a larger kernel and more smoothing, while a smaller standard deviation will result in a
smaller kernel and less smoothing.
When the kernel is applied to the image, it is multiplied by the value of each pixel and then
all the values are added up. The sum is then assigned to the center pixel of the kernel,
which is then moved to the next pixel in the image and the process is repeated. This
convolution operation is performed for each pixel in the image. In the down of figure 2.5
shows the denoising result and the transition is flat, so there is no Ringing effect. However,
Gaussian filter will filter all pixels of the image equally which will not only smooth the noise
but also blur the edge of content which will be negative for the saturated part extracting.
2.4.2
Bilateral filter
Bilateral filter is a technique that is used to smooth an image while preserving edges[24].
It works by convolving the image with a kernel defined by a spatial weighting function and
a range weighting function. The spatial weighting function is used to weight the contri­
bution of each pixel based on its distance from the center pixel of the kernel, while the
range weighting function is used to weight the contribution of each pixel based on the dif­
ference in intensity between the center pixel and the neighboring pixels. The kernel takes
into account not only the spatial proximity of neighboring pixels, but also the similarity
in intensity values. This method effectively removes noise while preserving edges and
other fine details in the image which can be used as a more targeted filter during HDR
reconstruction.
The spatial weighting σd function is typically a Gaussian function, similar to the Gaus­
sian low­pass filter. The range weighting σr function is also a Gaussian function, but it is
defined based on the difference in intensity between the center pixel and the neighbor­
ing pixels. It assigns more weight to the pixels that have similar intensity values to the
center pixel, and less weight to the pixels that have very different intensity values. The
mathematics presentation of the weight is
W(i, j, k, l) = exp(−(i −k)2 + (j −l)2
2σ2
d
−∥f(i, j) −f(k, l)∥2
2σ2r
)
(2.15)
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
11
==PAGE:18==
12
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:19==
3
Deep learning model in HDR
reconstruction
In this chapter, I will introduce the basic knowledge of deep learning and the overview of
the deep learning model in HDR reconstruction. Also I will focus on the key points in the
model to do some explanation including the structure of U­net, the elements in the loss
function, the filter and mask before calculating the loss. All of these will setup the outline
of the model.
3.1
Deep learning and CNN
With the improvement of computer performance, the cost of using a lot of computing
power to solve problems has been greatly reduced. So in many fields are trying to solve
traditional problems by machine learning technology. Using machine learning to identify
image content or perform semantic understanding is called deep learning.
Deep learning is derived from the conventional neural network. Convolutional neural net­
work(CNN) is one of the most popular deep learning networks[25], the main advantage
of CNN is that it can automatically identify the relevant features in the high­dimensional
space. CNN is inspired by the neural structure of the animal brain, it contains a large
number of cells inside, and the cells are constructed into a layer structure[26]. Each cell
extracts the features of a small part of the output by the previous layer, and the resulting
output to the next layer. By this structure, the input image or text will be fully utilized, and
only a few parameters will be involved in the process.
And it is worth noting that each cell will only process a small block of the entire data, which
means that during feature extraction the entire input feature will be cut and extracted
independently. That small block is called receptive field of each cell can ’see’ and the size
of the block is hyper­parameter in the model. Because in the process of deep learning,
there are a large number of cells in each layer, resulting in the need for a lot of parameters
to achieve full connection, which will greatly increase the complexity of the model and lead
to over­fitting of the model[27]. What’s more, it will also lost spatial information during
unwrapping. Through the receptive field, the problem that it is difficult to achieve full
connection between the two layers can be solved.
The advantages of using CNNs instead of other traditional neural network can be ex­
plained as, first of all, the CNN is the weight sharing feature which will reduce the number
of parameter in the training network and simplify the difficulty of implementing the net­
work. What’s more, learning the feature from extraction layers and classification layer
causes the model output to be both highly organized and highly reliant on the extracted
features[25].
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1 shows the difference between the fully connected network and CNN. The layer
in CNN will hold by three dimensions which are height, width and depth. The width and
height are well understood, because the convolution itself is a two­dimensional template,
but the depth in the CNN refers to the third dimension of the activation data volume, not
the depth of the entire network, the depth of the network is the number of layers in the
network. Like the lower figure, the depth of data will be greater with the process of model.
And the output of the model will be a 1 ∗1 ∗N size of block.
Figure 3.1: The upper figure is a two­layer fully connected neural network, and the lower
figure is a two­layer CNN, whose cells are arranged in the three directions of depth, width
and height
Many facts have proved that deep learning has a positive impact on breakthroughs in
many fields, such as image recognition[28] and speech recognition[29]. The characteris­
tics of deep learning determine that it is good at discovering intricate structures of multi­
dimensional information[30], which is conducive to processing complex inputs such as
text, voice or images.
Under the current development trend, the computing power of the future will be cheaper,
and there will be more data which can be used for learning, and people will rely more on
14
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:21==
automation or artificial intelligence tools. Deep learning will have wider applications, and
there will be more models and methods have been created, which is a promising direction.
3.2
Foundation of U­net
U­net is one of the popular used segmentation model in the last few years, it has been
proposed by Ronneberger et al.[31] to solve the problem of training a model from end to
end, the input and output of U­net will be the same size image.
In the network, it will be composed of an encoder and a decoder, and there will be several
skip connections between the encoder and the decoder. As shown in figure 3.2, the left
part is the encoder, and the right part is the decoder, and the gray link in the center is skip
connection. Because its overview structure is like ‘U’, we call it U­net.
In the encoder, its architecture is similar to the backbone of a common CNN, which re­
duces the size of the input data hierarchically and extracts local features of the image.
When the input data has converged to the minimum resolution, it will be transferred into
the decoder. In the decoder, by replacing the pooling process with up­sampling, the data
size can be enlarged until it returns to the size of the original input data. In the specific
layer of the decoder, the data will reach the decoder through two paths, the output from
upper layer of the decoder and the skip connection from the encoder, these two inputs
are linearly added to get the output of this layer. When the result of up­sampling is the
original size of the image, that will be the output of encoder.
Figure 3.2: U­net architecture[31]
In the following, I will explain some contents involved in the U­net step by step, including
skip connection which is also the characteristics of the U­net model, the backbone of the
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
15
==PAGE:22==
U­net also used by most of the CNNs model, and the component layers in the backbone.
3.2.1
Skip connection
A skip connection is a type of connection in a neural network that allows the activation
of a layer to be directly passed to a deeper layer, bypassing one or more intermediate
layers[32]. This helps to improve the flow of information through the network and can
help to reduce the vanishing gradient problem, which occurs when the gradients of the
error become very small as they are backpropagated through many layers.
U­net is a typical encoding­decoding structure. The encoder part uses the pooling layer
for step­by­step down­sampling, and the decoder part uses deconvolution for step­by­
step up­sampling. The high­frequency information in the original input image (the detail
of the image) and low­frequency information (the outline of the image) will be gradually
reconstructed, so that the low­resolution feature map will eventually be mapped to a pixel­
level segmentation result map.
Because during the convolution and pooling in down­sampling process, the information
of original image will lose. In order to reduce the information lost in the down­sampling in
the encoding stage.The U­net uses the skip connection between encoder and decoder to
concatenate the feature maps at the corresponding positions in the two processes. So,
when the decoder is upper­sampling, more high­resolution detail information contained in
the high­level feature map can be preserved, and then the detail information in the original
image can be reconstructed more accurately.
The U­net with a skip connection structure can enable the network to concatenate the
feature map of the corresponding position of the encoder during the up­sampling process
of each layer. And in the case of a large network depth, the gradient disappearance can
be avoided by skip connection.
3.2.2
Backbone
In general, a backbone is a known network trained in many other tasks before and demon­
strates its effectiveness[33]. Backbone refers to the feature­extracting network which can
present the input into specific features. These feature extraction networks usually have
great performance on simpler tasks, and therefore, we can utilize them as a feature­
extracting part and combine them in the more complicated models.
In the encoder, the main task will be extracting the feature from input LDR image, so the
backbone part can use some pre­trained models in encoder, two models that we will use
in our training are VGG16 and ResNet50. VGG16 and ResNet50 are two popular CNN
architectures used in image classification tasks.
16
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Left: the architecture of VGG, Right: the block diagram of ResNet
VGG16, developed by the Visual Geometry Group at the University of Oxford[34], is a
simple and powerful CNN architecture that achieves outstanding performance on the Im­
ageNet dataset. It is made up of 16 layers, including 13 convolutional layers and 3 fully
connected layers. The convolutional layers are organized in a series of blocks, each con­
sisting of 2 or 3 convolutional layers followed by a max pooling layer, which has been
shown in the left part of figure 3.3. This architecture is known for its use of small convo­
lutional filters and deep network architecture.
ResNet50, developed by Microsoft Research[35], is a deeper CNN architecture that ad­
dresses the problem of vanishing gradients in very deep networks. It is made up of 50
layers and is characterized by its use of residual connections, which allow information to
bypass multiple layers and flow directly to later layers which has been shown in figure
3.3.The residual layer output(xl) will be delivered to the preceding layer, after calculat­
ing by batch normalization(F), the output will be X. The process can be mathematically
represented as:
X = F(xl −1) + xl −1
(3.1)
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
17
==PAGE:24==
This allows the network to learn much deeper representations and improves its perfor­
mance on image classification tasks. And ResNet50 has achieved state­of­the­art perfor­
mance on several benchmarks and is widely used in computer vision applications.
Both VGG16 and ResNet50 are widely used in computer vision tasks, such as image
classification, object detection and semantic segmentation. VGG16 is considered as a
simple and powerful architecture, while ResNet50 is a more complex architecture that
addresses the problem of vanishing gradients in deep networks, which makes it perform
better on more complex datasets.
3.2.3
Layers
During the deep learning, The whole model architecture is composed of various sub­
modules that implement feature extraction and filter functions. In the architecture of CNNs,
there will be several kinds of layers to combine the whole model by orderly arrangement.
Each layer will have its certain functions and position. The following content will introduce
some common layers in CNNs and also in the HDR reconstruction model.
• Convolutional Layer
In CNN architecture, convolutional layer is the most important component and it
takes up most of the computation in the network. Based on the channels and size
of input image, there will be different size of convolutional filter to generate the output
feature map.
The reason that the convolutional layer plays an important role in the deep learning
model is that it can realize several functions, first is the role of convolution, the main
function. In order to better understand the meaning of convolution, here will be an
example in figure 3.4. In the CNN model, the input volume is generally multi­channel
vector data. Here we simplify it and perform convolution on a 5x5 single­channel
input volume. The size of the convolution kernel is 3x3, and the step size is 1. The
specific process is as shown in the figure. In the object, move horizontally or ver­
tically with a fixed convolution kernel size, multiply the value at the corresponding
position and add the sum to obtain the output value after convolution. Continue cal­
culating until the convolution kernel has moved the entire input block. In the exam­
ple, the size of output block will be 3x3 after convolution, as the result of convolution
layer. Intuitively, the network will let the convolutional layer learn to activate when it
sees certain types of visual features, which may be borders in certain direction, or
spots of certain color on the background, and then extract these features.
Secondly, each convolution operation can be regarded as an output of a neuron cell
in the conventional neural network . The neuron cell only observes a small part of
the input data and shares parameters with all neurons cell around the nearby space.
What’s more, since convolution has the feature of ”weight sharing”, the same small­
sized convolution kernel will traverse the entire large­sized input block, which can
reduce the number of parameters, reduce computational overhead, and prevent
18
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:25==
over­fitting due to too many parameters.
Figure 3.4: The distribution step of convolution, the input size is 5x5, the convolution
kernel size is 3x3, and the output size is 3x3
• Pooling Layer
In the CNN model, a pooling layer is periodically inserted between convolutional
layers. Its function is to gradually reduce the spatial size of the data block, so that
the number of parameters in the network can be reduced, the computational re­
source consumption can be reduced, and overfitting can be effectively controlled.
The pooling layer operates independently on each depth slice of the input data block,
changing its spatial size.
The most common form is that the pooling layer uses a 2x2 size filter to downsample
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
19
==PAGE:26==
each depth slice with a stride of 2, throwing away 75% of activation data. Figure 3.5
shows two most used of pooling operators, Max and Average pooling. Each Max
operation is to take the maximum value from 4 numbers (that is, in a certain 2x2
area in the depth slice), and the depth remains unchanged. Average operator will
get the output of downsampling by calculating the mean of the four numbers.
Figure 3.5: Two types of Pooling operator
• Fully Connected Layer
The fully connected layer is that each node is connected to all nodes in the previous
layer, which is used to integrate the features extracted earlier. Commonly, it will be
located at the end of the CNN model. Due to its fully connected characteristics, the
parameters of the general fully connected layer are also the most. For example, in
VGG16[34], the first fully connected layer FC­1 has 4096 nodes, and the upper layer
POOL­2 has 7x7x512 = 25088 nodes, then the transmission requires 4096x25088
weights, which consumes a lot of memory.
3.2.4
Activation function
In the architecture of neuron network, the output from the upper layer cell will be transfered
to the input of current layer neuron cell, and then pass the output value to the next layer.
In the multi­layer neuron network, there is a functional relationship between the output
of the upper layer cell and the input of the lower layer cell, this function is the activation
function.
Without an activation function, the input of the lower layer neural network will always be a
linear combination of the upper layer neural network, which means that its approximation
ability is limited after convolution, so we need an activation function that can obtain nonlin­
ear results to improve the coverage ability of the neural network. The activation function
must also have the ability to differentiate which is a significant feature during back prop­
agation. The following several activation functions are most used in deep learning.
• Sigmoid: The mathematical function of Sigmoid can be represented as eq 3.2. Sig­
moid can transform the continuous value of the input into an output between 0 and
20
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:27==
1. In particular, if it is a very large negative number, the output is 0; if it is a very
large positive number, the output is 1. But the problem with this activation function
is that when the gradient is passed backwards in the deep neural network, it causes
the gradient to explode and the gradient to disappear.
f(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(3.2)
• Tanh: Tanh is samiliar with Sigmoid, the characteristic of Tanh is the output will be
zero centered and the mathematical representation is
tanh(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
(3.3)
• ReLU ReLU: is the most commonly used activation function. The ReLU function
is actually a function of taking the maximum value. But this is not derivable in the
whole interval, only in the positive interval. The mathematical representation is
f(x)ReLU = max(0, x)
(3.4)
• Leaky­ReLU Instead of kill all of the data under 0, Leaky­ReLU give a leak parameter
k to scale the inputs under 0. It will solve the dead ReLU problem which means some
neuron cell can not be activated during training and the parameters of them will not
be updated. The leak parameter k should be very small, such as 0.1 or 0.01. The
mathematical representation of Leaky­ReLU is
f(x)Leaky−ReLU =
{
x, if x > 0
kx, elseif x ≤0
}
(3.5)
In order to present the characteristics of these four activation functions more specifically,
their function curves are shown in the figure 3.6. It can be seen that the output value area
of each activation function, and the parameter k of Leaky­ReLU is 0.1.
The content mentioned above are the main components of the CNN. The most common in
the CNNs architecture is the hierarchical structure of the convolutional layer and the acti­
vation function cross­distribution, and then downsampling to compress the data size until
the compression block reaches the expected size. And finally achieve the aggregation
of results through the fully connected layer, and output information such as classification
results. Equation 3.6 is a simple multi­layer convolutional neural network implemented by
two convolutions layers.
INPUT →[CONV →RELU →POOL] ∗2 →FC →RELU →FC
(3.6)
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.6: Curve of four activation functions
3.3
Loss function
A loss function is a mathematical function that calculates the difference, or ”loss,” between
the predicted output and the actual output of a neural network. The goal of training a neural
network is to minimize the loss function, which is achieved by adjusting the weights and
biases of the network. In our model is how similar the reconstructed HDR image is to the
actual HDR image.
There are many different types of loss functions that can be used, depending on the
specific task and type of data. Some common loss functions include:
• Mean Squared Error (MSE): This is a popular loss function for regression problems,
where the goal is to predict a continuous value. It calculates the average squared
difference between the predicted and actual values. The loss function of MSE can
be expressed as
Loss =
∑(ypred −yactual)2
n
(3.7)
where ypred is the reconstructed pixel value and yactual is the ground truth pixel value.
• Binary Cross­Entropy (BCE): This is a common loss function for binary classification
problems, where the goal is to predict one of two possible classes (e.g. ”yes” or ”no”).
It calculates the log loss between the predicted probability of the positive class and
the actual class label. The mathematical representation of BCE is
22
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:29==
Loss = −(yactual ∗log(ypred) + (1 −yactual ∗log(1 −ypred)))
(3.8)
• Categorical Cross­Entropy (CCE): This is a common loss function for multi­class
classification problems, where the goal is to predict one of multiple possible classes.
It calculates the log loss between the predicted probability of each class and the
actual class label. The mathematical representation of CCE is
Loss = −
∑
(yactual ∗log(ypred))
(3.9)
3.4
Overview of HDR reconstruction model
Figure 3.7: The architecture of basic model to reconstruct HDR image
In general, the primary problem in the thesis addressed is that of reconstructing an HDR
image from a single LDR image. An U­net architecture is utilized to achieve an output
of HDR image of the same size as the LDR input, and to prevent information loss from
the original image, skip connections are employed within the U­net network to incorporate
information from certain encoder blocks into the decoder to preserve the integrity of the
original image information. In the encoder, features are extracted through convolution and
pooling, and in the decoder, the image size is restored to its original dimension through
deconvolution and up­sampling. Compared to the original U­net network, modifications
have been made to accommodate input images size of 256x256.
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
23
==PAGE:30==
Specifically, the input image will be displayed in RGB color model. As the previous related
content introduction, the three layers of input data respectively represent the intensity of
the colors of red, green and blue in the image. In order to unify during training, the size
of the input image is set to 256x256x3. It is important to note that the input image is an
LDR image, the size of a single pixel value of each layer is 8 bits, and the value range is
an integer from 0 to 255.
In the encoder, the core is to reduce the size of each layer and increases depth of the
matrix. When the input image is processed with a convolution kernel size of 3x3 and a
padding size of 2, the size of each layer remains the same and the depth increases. It
needs to pass the maximum pooling to extract strong features to reduce the size of the
layer and simplify the model. When the size is reduced to 10x10xN, the obtained feature
matrix is passed to the decoder. It needs to be noticed that part of the feature matrices in
decoder are directly delivered by skip connection from encoder. It needs to concatenate
the feature metrics with the same size of length and width together, and then halve the
depth by 1x1 convolution. In the decoder, deconvolution is used to increase the length
and width of the matrix and reduce the depth of the matrix. When reaching the last layer,
three layers HDR image will be the output through three 1x1 convolution kernels.
In order to make the model less complex and easy to control, we first choose VGG16 which
has fewer layers as the backbone of the encoder than Resnet50. The skip­connection
layer is the 3rd, 8th, 15th, 22nd, and 29th layers of the pre­trained VGG16 model in Py­
torch.
The color model of the reconstructed HDR image is still RGB, but the data type of a
single pixel is float 32, the depth is much larger than the input LDR image, so the HDR
image has a higher degree of color reproduction in the real world and is closer to the real
picture. HDR images are recorded as decimals from 0 to 1. In order to make LDR images
and HDR images in the same representation scaling, the input LDR RGB value can be
divided by 255, so that the scaling of LDR and HDR images are both 0 to 1. The RGB
value distribution of LDR image and HDR image is shown in the graph 3.9.
Since most of the RGB values of the HDR image are concentrated in the area close to 0,
the pixel count is going too high to recognize the distribution, so we take log to the value
of y­axis and it is more clear to see the detailed distribution from 0 to 1 instead of being
overwhelmed by a large number of data close to 0. In the last graph, the HDR image is
converted by LTM tone mapping. According to the pixel value distribution graph of LDR
and HDR after tone mapping, it can be seen that they have the same peak around 0.1,
0.3, 0.5, and the number of pixels with R value 0.3­0.4 is greater than G value and B
value.
When the reconstructed HDR image is generated by the decoder, it needs to be com­
pared with the original HDR image, and the HDR loss is calculated by MSE loss, and the
accuracy of the model training can be intuitively evaluated by the value of the HDR loss.
In addition, it is necessary to combine the figure integrity of the reconstructed image to
24
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:31==
evaluate the consistency between the restoration of the saturated area and other areas.
These different aspects of evaluation can be combined into HDR loss, and the results of
model training can be fed back together. The adjustment of HDR loss will be carried out
in the next module. After obtaining the final reconstructed HDR result, since our normal
screen equipment cannot play HDR content, in order to display the reconstructed HDR
image, the original HDR and reconstructed HDR will be processed through TMO, and
then display as a LDR image to have the direct view feeling, the reconstructed content in
the saturated area can be compared then.
Figure 3.8: Flow chart of training process
After combining all the above modules, it is the training process of the model. The flow
chart is shown in figure 3.8. The input LDR will go through with the model block and
reconstruct the HDR output. By calculating the HDR loss by HDR output and HDR ground
truth, the score of this time iteration will get and use the loss value as feedback to keep
training the model in the next iteration. In the process of deep learning, multiple iterations
will be processed and then the final training result will be obtained.
After all of the epochs have been trained, the best­performing model which has the lowest
loss during training will be the result. And based on the trained model, it can provide the
final result on the test dataset to give a more convincing comparison between different
models and the evaluation of model will base on that. In the implementation chapter will
also discuss the step of testing which can test the final performance of the model and get
the overview evaluation of the model.
So the above is the basic architecture of the model. This model will be used as the basis
for the implementation in the next chapter. The result of the current model is not the final
result. During the training process, there are several problems which have been noticed:
the overview color deviation of the image, the inconsistency between the predicted area
and other areas, and some blocking artifacts in the reconstructed image. There will be
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
25
==PAGE:32==
some methods to avoid these problems, and subsequent methods and discussions will
be introduced in the next chapter.
Figure 3.9: The upper graph is the pixel value distribution of the LDR image, the middle
two graphs is the pixel value distribution of HDR image, the third graph takes log for the
value of the y­axis, and the lower graph is the distribution of the HDR image after LTM
tone mapping
26
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:33==
3.5
Challenges
In the process of reconstructing HDR images, the two main tasks are to predict the sat­
urated areas in the LDR image due to overexposure, such as the sun, the moon or light
sources, and then reconstruct these saturated areas. Another is identifying the noise
in the original image and remove that noise, and achieve smooth filtering in the output
results so that the edge between saturated part and other parts of image can achieve
smooth transition.
3.5.1
Saturated part reconstruction
The first challenge of reconstructing the HDR image is predicting values of saturated pix­
els in the given LDR image. In order to generate the final HDR image by the predicted
saturated part and the other unsaturated part of input image, the two parts should be
combined linearly. The final reconstructed HDR image can be presented as:
HDRrecon = GiTMO((1 −α) ∗f(LDRinput) + α ∗ym)
(3.10)
where f(x) is the function to transform the input LDR image into linear domain, GiTMO(x)
is the function which can convert the input from LDR domain into HDR domain that should
be relative with the TMO on HDR input. α is the area division between model output and
LDR input, which is the main task to solve the combination of final output image. A good α
can make the combination smooth and natural, improve the performance of model, which
will be mainly discussed in solutions.
3.5.2
Denoising
Image denoising is the process of removing noise from an image. Noise is any unwanted
information or artifacts that are present in the image, such as Gaussian noise, salt­and­
pepper noise, etc. It can be caused by a variety of factors such as sensor noise, com­
pression, or image processing.
The goal of image denoising is to restore the original image as much as possible, by
removing noise and preserving the details of the image. This is important because noise
can greatly damage the quality of an image, making it difficult to interpret or use for further
analysis.
Recently, deep learning based denoising methods such as Autoencoder and U­net have
been widely used in image denoising, they have shown good performance in removing
noise while preserving image details. Cheng et al.[36] proposed a new neuron network
named NB­net using U­net and subspace attention (SSA) module to design an end­to­end
image denosing network.
During the HDR reconstruction, since noise may be added into the resulting HDR image
during image processing, thereby affecting the calculation of HDR loss. So, the input
ground truth and the generated HDR image should be denoised synchronously before
calculating loss, thereby reducing HDR loss fluctuations due to noise.
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
27
==PAGE:34==
3.6
Solutions
To solve the above problems, some methods are proposed here and will be implemented
in the model in next chapter.
3.6.1
Unsaturated mask
In order to achieve more accurate results in predicting saturated regions, it is necessary to
make the model accurately identify the loss between the predicted image and the actual
image in the saturated regions during the learning process, and use this as a basis for
adjusting the model. Therefore, in order to achieve differentiation of the saturated regions,
pixel­level screening will be performed through a mask before the calculation of loss and
fusion of the final HDR results, thus only presenting the saturated pixels.
Different color models will have different filter objects, but the principle is similar. We set
a threshold x, when the pixel value is greater than this threshold, it will be classified as
a saturated region. In the RGB model, the filter method is MAX(R, G, B) > x, and in
the YUV model, the filter object is Y > x, in the HSV model the filter will be V > x. As
can be seen from the filter­out results of the YUV model in figure 3.10, the bright yellow
represents the saturated region.
Figure 3.10: Filter out saturated areas of the image with an unsaturated mask, where dark
purple areas are unsaturated areas and light yellow areas are saturated areas
In the example, the threshold x is set to 0.9. Before processing by the filter, the pixel
value of the image should be reduced by 255 times to a range of 0­1. After that, each
pixel should be subtracted from the threshold. If the result is a positive number that will
be a saturated pixel. To reconstruct the range of pixel value to 0­1, it needs to divide the
result by (1­x). The mathematical expression is as follows
αth = max(0, (Yw,h/255) −x)
1 −x
(3.11)
28
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:35==
where Yw,h is the value of each pixels in the LDR image. Therefore, the above equa­
tion3.10 can be expressed as follow
HDRfinal = GiTMO((1 −αth) ∗f(LDRw,h) + αth ∗HDRoutput)
(3.12)
3.6.2
Low­pass filter
In order to prevent the noise from affecting the accuracy of the model prediction, we use
low­pass filters to filter the decoder results and ground truth before calculating the loss
during training.
In the section 2.4 we introduce two kinds of low­pass filters, Gaussian filter and Bilateral
filter, they will be implement in the model to remove the noise and smooth the edges
between the predicted area and unsaturated area. In the eq 2.14 and 2.15 show the
principle of two different filters, the gaussian filter is easier to implement, it only need to
set the value of the standard deviation σ to controls the weight distribution of different
pixels in the kernel. And also need to set the kernel size.
Figure 3.11: Bilateral filter results with different σr value and kernel size
In the Bilateral filter is more complicated than Gaussian. Besides of kernel size, both σr
and σd which is as same as σ in gaussian filter should be adjusted. So, before implement
the bilateral filter, we should know how this parameter influence the visual quality of filter­
out images.
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
29
==PAGE:36==
In figure 3.11, the x­axis represents the σr value, and the y­axis corresponds to the kernel
size n. It can be seen that as the σr value increases, the weight of the edges decreases,
and the edges in the filtered image will become more blurred. If you want a better de­
noising effect for entire areas, it is appropriate to increase the kernel size of convolution
also.
30
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:37==
4
Implementation
In this chapter, it will mainly focus on the implementation of the model and method, the
measurement of the reconstructed result of the model, the analysis of the reconstructed
results of the model and improve the performance of the model by adjusting variables and
optimizing the model architecture.
4.1
Parameter of evaluation
4.1.1
PSNR
Peak signal­to­noise ratio(PSNR) is a parameter for measuring the quality of reconstruc­
tion image or signal compared to the original. The principle of PSNR is ratio between the
maximum possible power of a signal and the power of corrupting noise that affects the
fidelity of its representation. In video and image processing uses PSNR to measure the
reconstructed image, which is defined as
PSNR = 10 log10
MAX2
MSE2
(4.1)
Where MAX is the maximum possibe pixel value in the image, in the 8­bit LDR image it
can be 255 and in the HDR image scaling between 0­1 it will be 1.0. MSE is the mean
square error between the original and reconstructed images which can be expressed as
eq 4.2. It will represent the square difference between original value and reconstructed
value.
MSE = 1
n ∗
∑
(Ovalue −Rvalue)2
(4.2)
4.1.2
SSIM
The structural Similarity Index (SSIM) is an algorithm used to evaluate the quality of im­
ages. It consists of three parts: structural similarity, luminance similarity, and contrast
similarity. Structural similarity measures the similarity of texture structures in the image,
luminance similarity measures the changes in brightness in the image, and contrast simi­
larity measures the changes in contrast in the image. The higher the final score, the better
the image quality.
SSIMx,y = (2 ∗µx ∗µy + c1)(σxy + c2)
(µ2x + µ2y + c1)(σ2x + σ2y + c2)
(4.3)
Where µx, µy are the local means of the pixels in the images x and y respectively. σx, σy
are the local variances of the pixels in the images x and y respectively. (σxy is the local
covariance of the pixels in the images x and y. c1, c2 are small constants that are used to
stabilize the division with weak denominator.
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
31
==PAGE:38==
4.2
Dataset
In the process of deep learning, a significant amount of relevant datasets are required,
in the HDR reconstruction model that will be corresponding HDR and LDR images. The
dataset employed in this study is from the research of Nima[37], originally intended for
the synthesis of HDR images from multiple LDR images input. In this model, a center
single LDR image was selected as the input, with the HDR image serving as the ground
truth for training the reconstruction of the HDR image. Additionally, based on the input
image size of the model, preprocessing was applied to the dataset. The size of the image
was cropped to 256x256, and it should include regions of saturation pixel. The original
image size is 1500x1000, it was divided into 6x4 sections of 256 size, and to fully utilize
the dataset, a small number of overlapping sections were included.
During deep learning, people usually divide the entire dataset into three parts: the training
set, the validation set, and the test set. During the process of training the model, only the
training set data is used, and the model is optimized through the validation set to calculate
the loss. The test set will be used to verify the final training results of the model. In the
HDR reconstruction model, the data distribution of the three datasets is 72% : 18% : 10% ,
where the data used for the test set is fixed, and the training set and validation set together
account for 90% of the data. Before each training starts, it will be randomly divided into
72% and 18% as the training set and validation set. The entire distribution is shown in
figure below.
Figure 4.1: Division of dataset, blue block is training dataset, yellow block is validation
dataset, red block is testing dataset
Since the model generates an HDR image with a depth of 12 bits, the LDR device and the
paper cannot fully present the color range of the HDR image, so it needs to be converted
to an LDR image for presentation by tone mapping after obtaining the HDR reconstructed
image.
32
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:39==
4.3
Different tone mapping operators
In Chapter 2, it introduces the basic knowledge about tone mapping and commonly used
tone mapping operators. This part will introduce two kinds of TMO which will be used to
visualize the HDR output, HDR ground truth and compare them to the LDR input.
4.3.1
LTM
Based on the logarithmic operator equation 2.6, we use a µ­law in LTM which is suitable
to the learning model. The equation of the LTM is defined as eq 4.4.
Thdr = log(1 + µHhdr)
log(1 + µ)
(4.4)
where the µ is a setting parameter which defines the amount of compression. Hhdr is the
HDR image before tone mapping which is always in the range of 0­1. µ has been set to
2000 in the future part of thesis.
4.3.2
Gamma Tone Mapping(GTM)
Gamma correction is a nonlinear process used in image and video processing to correct
the relationship between the brightness levels of the image and the values used to store
and display those brightness levels. It is used to adjust the brightness and contrast of
an image by adjusting the power of the input signal. So, gamma correction can also be
used as a simple way to achieve tone mapping which also needs to adjust the scaling and
distribution of luminance of images. The function of GTM is defined as eq 4.5.
Thdr = Hγ
hdr
(4.5)
The gamma value γ used in the correction determines the relationship between the input
and output brightness levels, and can be adjusted to achieve the desired image quality.
In the model, it has been set as (1/3).
4.4
Implement of HDR image reconstruction
In chapter 3, we proposed the basic model for reconstructing HDR images, that is, using
the U­net model as the main structure, and using the VGG16 model with a relatively simple
architecture as the backbone in the encoder to extract the features of the input LDR image
and reduce the matrix size. The image size is restored in the decoder, and the image
content of the corresponding saturated area is reconstructed during this process.
In the process of training the deep learning model, some hyperparameter settings will be
involved. In the basic model, there are the following:
• Batch_size = 8
• Num_epochs = 200
• Learning_rate = 0.001
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
33
==PAGE:40==
where the Batch_size is how many LDR images will be used in each iteration during
training, the Num_epochs is how many times the whole input dataset will be used in
each training, bigger epoch number means more times of training and will cost more
computing resource. When the Num_epochs is too high, it will cause the model over­
fitting. Learning_rate is a hyperparameter in machine learning that controls the step size
at which the algorithm updates the weights of the model during training. A lower learning
rate means that the model makes smaller updates to the weights in each iteration, which
can lead to a more precise model but may take longer to train.
Besides, the optimizer of the model will be Adaptive Moment Estimation(Adam). Adam
optimizer is a gradient­based optimization algorithm that improves upon basic gradient
descent[38]. The Adam optimizer adjusts the learning rate of each parameter adaptively
by keeping track of the gradients and historical gradients of each parameter. This allows
for automatic adjustment of the learning rate during training, eliminating the difficulty of
manually adjusting the learning rate. There is also one hyperparameter which can be
modified in the optimizer, Weightdecay. It can prevent over­fitting by adding a regulariza­
tion term after the lost function, the mathematical equation is
L = L0 + λ
2n
∑
w
w2
(4.6)
where the L0 is the original lost function and other part will be L2 regularization term. It
can be explained as the sum of the squares of all parameters w, divided by the sample
size n of the training set, and then multiplied by λ, the 2 in the denominator is for the
convenience of subsequent derivation. λ is hyperparameter of weight decay.
When it take the derivative of w, it will become equation4.7. After further simplification,
the calculation of w is eq 4.8. Since the η, λ, n are positive, so its effect is to reduce w,
which is the origin of weight decay.
∂L
∂w = ∂L0
∂w + λ
nw
(4.7)
w →w −∂L
∂w = (1 −ηλ
n )w −η∂L0
∂w
(4.8)
During the training process, the loss is calculated by taking the MSE value between the
reconstructed image and the real HDR image. Based on the previously introduced MSE
loss calculation method3.7 and the calculation method of PSNR, it can be observed that
MSE and PSNR are negatively correlated. The larger the MSE, the smaller the PSNR,
so reducing the MSE loss can improve the image’s PSNR and thus increase the similarity
between the reconstructed image and the original image. Both the LDR image and the
HDR image adopt the RGB color model, so the loss is also calculated for the RGB values
and their sum is obtained. In figure 4.2 is the loss curve during 200 epochs, the loss has
34
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:41==
reduced from 0.09 to 0.002. It can be seen that there is a good convergence effect in the
training process.
Figure 4.2: Loss curve during training
The flow chart of training process has been shown in figure3.8, while the flow chart of
testing process will be difference between training which can be found in figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Flow chart of testing process
The set of weight values with the lowest loss will be recorded as the output result of the
model. The trained model can then be tested using the test dataset. Figure 4.4 shows
the reconstruction results of 5 sets of LDR and HDR images. The first column is the LDR
input image with a size of 256*256, the second column is the tone mapping result of the
reconstructed image by LTM, the third column is the tone mapping result of ground truth
by LTM, and the fourth column is the reconstructed image after GTM tone mapping, the
fifth column is the result of ground truth tone mapped with GTM.
Compared to the input LDR image, we can see that the saturated region in the recon­
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
35
==PAGE:42==
structed HDR image is no longer blank due to excessive brightness and is now filled with
color, which is marked with green blocks in the image and has a good consistency with
the input. However, compared to the ground truth image with the same TMO, the color in
the reconstructed image will be distorted, and the overall color has the tendency of being
gray. There are differences in some details between the original image, like the jagged
shapes, which are marked with red squares in the image. These existing issues will re­
duce the PSNR and SSIM values of the image and need to be optimized in subsequent
steps.
Additionally, it can be seen from the comparison of two TMOs that different TMO process­
ing will have different effects. The overall luminance of the image processed by LTM is
higher, and the details in the dark area are displayed better. The image processed by
GTM has higher saturation and more vivid colors, and has higher requirements for the
accuracy of chrominance.
Figure 4.4: The view quality between LDR input, HDR reconstruction and HDR ground
truth under two kinds of TMO
36
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.5 displays the distribution of PSNR and SSIM for testing dataset. In the upper
figure, it is the PSNR and SSIM of LDR input and HDR ground truth. It will need to do
inverse tone mapping first to LDR image and then calculate the PSNR and SSIM under
high dynamic range domain. The iTMO function can be found in eq 4.9 which is the
inverse implementation of GTM, the parameter n set as 3. The average PSNR is 14.66dB,
average SSIM is 0.6530. In the lower figure is the PSNR and SSIM for the current model,
the average PSNR is 18.70, the average SSIM is 0.6371. Through the distribution of
PSNR and SSIM, you can get a more comprehensive sense of the model’s performance
on the testing dataset.
Oldr = On
hdr
(4.9)
Overall, the reconstructed HDR image has improved PSNR compared to the original LDR
image with directly inverse tone mapping, but based on SSIM values and visual quality, the
model’s reconstruction performance is limited. In the following sections, some methods
will be proposed to improve this.
Figure 4.5: The PSNR and SSIM distribution on Test dataset, upper is LDR and Ground
Truth, lower is the output of current model
4.5
Improvement of model
If the basic model in last section is called Model I, the model with changes and improve­
ment should be called Model II, Model III...
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
37
==PAGE:44==
4.5.1
Model II(With unsaturated mask)
In order to solve the problem of color deviation in the reconstructed HDR image and re­
duce jagged distortion in the unsaturated areas, it could use the unsaturated mask which
has been mentioned in Chapter 3 for regional division and focus on reducing loss in the
saturated areas during the training process. The final result can be generated by com­
bining the LDR image that has been mapped by iTMO with the reconstructed saturated
region of the HDR output. The way of generating the HDR image can be expressed as
HDRfinal = (1 −αth) ∗LDR1/γ
w,h + αth ∗HDRoutput
(4.10)
where HDRfinal is the final result of unsaturated mask, αth is the threshold val of satu­
rated area and unsaturated area, LDRw,h is the input of the U­net encoder and HDRoutput
is the output of U­net decoder.
For the iTMO, the inverse GTM(iGTM) is used, that is, the conversion from LDR to HDR
is achieved by reversing of gamma correction. According to the previous introduction of
GTM, the inverse of the exponent should be taken to achieve iGTM, which is the same
as in the equation. So, a γ value needs to be set as a parameter. In addition, since the
color model of the input image is RGB, a threshold for the RGB pixel values must also be
set to determine the saturation region. Here is the new added parameter and value:
• γ = 3
• αth = 0.95
Figure 4.6: The flow chart of Model II, upper is the flow chart during training, lower is the
flow chart during testing
38
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:45==
After adding the unsaturated mask the structure of training and testing process will have a
little difference, the HDR output of model should pass the mask section and then calculate
the loss or generate the HDR reconstruction result. The new flow chart of Model II can be
found in figure 4.6.
To evaluate the performance of Model II, let the results of Model II train on the same test
dataset as Model I. Figure 4.7 displays the reconstruction results of 5 images, the color in
the saturated area are closer to the ground truth than ModelI’s result. And there will not
have any distortion in unsaturated area due to the contribution of inverse tone mapped
LDR image.
Figure 4.7: The view quality of reconstructed HDR image in Model II
Figure 4.8 shows the distribution of PSNR and SSIM in the entire test dataset, with the
average PSNR value being 18.95dB, and the average SSIM value being 0.6462. Com­
pared to the performance of Model I and the ground truth, unsaturated mask in Model II
improve both evaluation parameters and view quality performance. However, there are
some blocking artifacts on saturated area which have been marked by red block in figure
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
39
==PAGE:46==
4.7 which should be eliminated.
Figure 4.8: The PSNR and SSIM distribution of Model II
Based on the visual performance of Model I, it doesn’t have blocking artifacts. So, it
is worth to combine the loss of whole image and the loss on saturated part to make a
balance. To divide the weight into two parts of weight, it needs to invite a new parameter
wsat, the new function for HDR loss should be expressed as eq 4.11. Lhdr means the new
HDR loss, L(x,y) is the MSE in each pixel, αth is the threshold parameter.
Lhdr =
∑
x,y
(1 −wsat) ∗(1 −αth) ∗L(x,y) +
∑
x,y
wsat ∗αth ∗L(x,y)
(4.11)
Based on the new HDR loss function, the model has been trained again with the new
parameters wsat.
• wsat = 0.8
The new output has been shown in figure 4.9. The upper part of the image is the visual
quality of HDR reconstruction image, under the same iTMO, the overall visual result is
fine and the blocking artifacts have been improved since there are fewer block edges in
the red block areas. But there will be some noises similar to pepper noise appear in the
reconstructed area, and similar to the results of Model I, the overall color will be partially
distorted, but compared to Model I, the performance is now better since the little value of
wsat.
In the lower part of the figure is the PSNR and SSIM distributions of test dataset, the
average value of PSNR is 20.13dB and average SSIM is 0.6406. The PSNR result is
better than the Model II without considering the loss on unsaturated part of images. While
SSIM doesn’t have a great difference which is also consistent with the visual quality, the
noise in the reconstructed image still exists.
In general, after adding the unsaturated mask in Model II, the model will mainly focus
on the main problem of saturated part reconstruction when calculating the loss and re­
constructing the image. The PSNR and SSIM will be better than the result in Model I.
40
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:47==
In addition, adding some unsaturated part loss enters into the HDR loss and its overall
performance on PSNR will be improved, but there will still be noise in the output.
Figure 4.9: The visual quality and evaluation parameters result of Model II
4.5.2
Model III(With denoising filter)
In order to further improve the performance of the prediction results, we need to further
eliminate the impact of noise on the reconstructed image. The method is combining the
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
41
==PAGE:48==
solution in Chapter 3 about using low­pass filters to eliminate noise. Therefore, in the next
step, the model output needs to go through the low­pass filter before the loss calculation.
This model with the low­pass filter is called Model III. In Model III, we tried two low­pass
filters, Gaussian filter and Bilateral filter. According to the principle of the two filters, 2 or
3 parameters need to be introduced respectively. Gaussian filter requires the Gaussian
kernel size n and σ value to be set, while bilateral filter requires an additional σr value to
be set. Please refer to equation 2.14 and 2.15 for more details. The new added parameter
values are as follows
• n = 7
• σ = 2
• σr = 0.02
Figure 4.10 is the PSNR and SSIM distribution of the test dataset which can compare
between two kinds of filter, the average PSNR(22.12dB) and SSIM(0.6922) value of Bilat­
eral filter is better than the average PSNR(21.06dB) and SSIM(0.6565) value of Gaussian
filter. And both of these two result are better than the results of Model II.
Figure 4.10: Upper graph is the PSNR and SSIM distribution of Gaussian Filter, lower
graph is Bilateral Filter
42
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:49==
In figure4.11 shows the result of Model III, all of the HDR images will be tone mapped
by LTM operator. In the center­left is the result with Gaussian filter and the center­right
side is the result with Bilateral filter. In the reconstructed HDR image, the overall quality
is better than Model II and most of the saturation part can be well reconstructed. There is
some small­scale distortion in the red boxes, but the overall image quality is good.
Figure 4.11: The visual quality of reconstructed HDR image in Model III
4.6
Other attempts
To try more possibilities, we have carried out other attempts based on Model III. According
to the introduction of different color models in Chapter 2, the HSV and YUV models may
have better performance in saturate recognition, which can take advantage of their fea­
tures to improve the determination of saturated regions and improve the accuracy of the
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
43
==PAGE:50==
required reconstruction area. Similar to the determination in RGB color space, a threshold
value αth is also needed, but different from RGB’s determination of the maximum value of
three channels, YUV can compare with Y values, and HSV compares with V values. The
color model conversion in the model will import the built­in functions in the CV2 package
directly to implement.
After using the same hyper­parameters to train the model, the result can be found in figure
4.12, which shows the three groups of images which are reconstructed by RGB, YUV and
HSV color domain. From the visual effect, the best of them is the reconstruction image in
the RGB domain which is the result in Model III. In the YUV color domain, the distortion
area has been pointed out by yellow boxes and there is some wrong color reconstruction
areas. In the HSV color domain, the overall image is smoother than YUV, it has smaller
size of distortion in red boxes, but the color deviation is very obvious, the color is gray and
dark than ground truth.
Figure 4.12: The reconstruction result of RGB, YUV, HSV color model
The average PSNR of YUV color model is 18.46dB, average SSIM is 0.6407. In the HSV
44
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:51==
color model, the average PSNR value is 19.76dB, average SSIM value is 0.6745. Based
on the performance of the test set, the RGB color model has the best reconstruction effect,
in the rest two, HSV color model is better than YUV.
In addition, based on the introduction of backbone in Chapter 3, Resnet has better perfor­
mance in complex networks, so we chose to try using Resnet50 instead of VGG16 as the
backbone of the encoder. The pre­trained Resnet50 model in Pytorch was used here. The
structure of layers in Resnet50 is different from VGG16, with an array structure which will
include many layers in one array instead of a linear connection. Therefore, when estab­
lishing the skip connection, the start point of the skip connection will be conv1, layer2(0),
layer3(0), layer4(0) in the Resnet50 and point to the decoder. Compared to VGG’s 5 skip
connections in the backbone, it was reduced to 4.
Figure 4.13: The Resnet50 backbone reconstruction result of RGB, YUV, HSV color model
The new backbone has been tried on the Model III and also tried with three color models,
the result of reconstruction images is shown in figure 4.13. There is no model that can
exceed the performance of Model III, but the HSV model reconstructs the edge details of
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
45
==PAGE:52==
the saturated area better, and the YUV model reconstructs the color better. The average
PSNR and SSIM values can be found in table 4.1. In the table, it can be recognized that the
VGG16 backbone combined with the RGB color model has the best reconstructed result
compared with the ground truth. Besides the RGB color domain, other color domains will
have better performance on the Resnet50 backbone, HSV color domain will be better than
YUV color domain in HDR image reconstruction also.
Backbone
VGG16
Resnet50
Color model
RGB
YUV
HSV
RGB
YUV
HSV
Average PSNR(dB)
22.12
18.46
19.76
18.87
19.13
20.46
Average SSIM
0.6922
0.6407
0.6745
0.6373
0.6323
0.6796
Table 4.1: The average PSNR and SSIM value in six attemped models
46
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:53==
5
Result and Discussion
In Chapter 5, in order to find the factors that will influence the HDR image reconstruction,
the data results in the Chapter 4 will be analyzed and compared and summarized. In ad­
dition, since the construction of the model is accumulated from generation to generation,
the ablation test will be used to further analyze the influence of single variable factors on
the reconstruction results.
After implementing all of the attempts in Chapter 4, there are some positive changes based
on the Model I including the unsaturation mask(Model II) and denoising filter(Model III),
also there are some attempts didn’t improve the final performance during reconstruction
including YUV, HSV color model and ResNet50 backbone in the encoder. The models
with positive results will be analyzed first and then discuss the ablation study on other
attempts.
5.1
Results in Model I, II, III
In order to provide a comparative baseline for the test results of all the models, we used
the iTMO mentioned above to directly obtain the HDR image through the inverse tone
mapping of LDR, the equation of iTMO can be found in eq 4.9. And also we introduce the
Santos’s learning­based model of HDR image reconstruction[5] to compare the perfor­
mance of our models’ result. In table 5.1 shows the average PSNR and SSIM value in all
of the 5 methods by reconstructing the test set HDR image, these results are computed
by the pre­trained model in the chaper 4, the distribution of the PSNR and SSIM value
can be found in figure 4.5, 4.9, 4.10. All of the models are trained on the same training
dataset and tested on the same test set of Kalantari [37].
Model
iTMO
Santos
Model1
Model2
Model3
Average PSNR(dB)
14.66
16.92
18.70
20.13
22.12
Average SSIM
0.6530
0.6518
0.6371
0.6406
0.6922
Table 5.1: The average PSNR and SSIM value in three models compared to iTMO and
Santos’s result
By the pre­trained model of Santos’ proposal, we directly implement it on the test set of our
model and the average result shows a positive effect on HDR reconstruction compared
to the iTMO method, the PSNR is higher than iTMO while the SSIM only has a small
difference of three decimal places. So, both the iTMO and Santos methods will be set as
the comparison baseline of out models.
Compared with the baseline of iTMO and Santos model, the models I to III of this thesis
have several advantages. Firstly, the convolution layer extracts features of LDR images,
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
47
==PAGE:54==
and the lost details by exposure in saturated areas are predicted through the features of
unsaturated areas. By the result of model I. The reconstruction result is better than the
result of iTMO. According to the calculation method of PSNR, the mean square error on
the test dataset will be reduced to 1/2.57, and the overall PSNR distribution of the test
result is significantly better than that of iTMO. Using the U­net neural network helps to
reconstruct images whose pixel values are more closer to the original HDR image, but
the reconstructed image will have color distortion and some pixels’ detail in unsaturated
area will be lost.
In model II, by using the unsaturated mask, the HDR loss will concentrate the weight
on the unsaturated area of the image, and use part of unsaturated area in the LDR input
during reconstruction to reduce the impact of the distortion of the great visual quality area.
Compared with the model I, the color correction of the image and the details of the bright
part performs better. When assigning weights, it is better to give the unsaturated area a
smaller weight instead of 0, thereby reducing the blocking artifact in reconstruction, but
there will still be sharp edges to the size of the up­sampling kernel size in the reconstructed
saturated area, if the weight of unsaturated area is 0, its boundaries are more obvious. In
the test of model II, its mean square error is reduced to 1/3.58 compared with iTMO.
In order to further improve the reality of the reconstructed HDR image, in Model III, the
output of the U­net is denoised and filtered before calculating the loss, which reduces the
over­fitting caused by the blocking artifact and noises in the individual area. The filtering
range here should be greater than the kernel size at the last up­sampling, which is greater
than 3, and 7 is used in our training. After testing two different low­pass filters, the Bilateral
filter has a better filtering effect than the Gaussian filter, since its blocking effect is more
completely removed. The test result shows the PSNR value is 22.12dB, which is the mean
square error is 1/5.66 of iTMO, and the SSIM value is 0.6922.
One thing to note is that the calculation of PSNR and SSIM in this chapter is in the HDR
domain. According to the previous description of the HDR domain, the value range of
the HDR image is 0­1, compared with the same scaling LDR image, the pixel values are
mainly concentrated in a small range nearby 0 in HDR domain. So, the calculation result
of PSNR and SSIM may be inconsistent with that in the LDR domain. However, all the
results presented in this thesis can be compared with each other to reflect the changes in
model performance.
In figure 5.1 shows the PSNR and SSIM result of iTMO and three models’ reconstructed
HDR image comparing to ground truth. The box shows the quartiles of the result while the
whiskers extend to show the rest of the distribution. It can be seen, with the iteration of
the model, the results of PSNR gradually become better, including the average value and
overall distribution. However, the SSIM value didn’t show a great upward trend, expecially
in the model I, the average SSIM value was even lower than iTMO’s. Based on the visual
quality of reconstructed results of model I, the reason of low SSIM might because of the
area loss in reconstructed image which can be found in the red boxes of figure 4.4. As
48
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:55==
the unsaturated mask has been implemented, the SSIM value will increase.
Figure 5.1: Left is the distribution box plot of PSNR value during the model upgrade, right
is the box plot of SSIM during the model upgrade
In addition, during the training of models, they will spend different epochs to achieve con­
vergence on HDR loss, in Model I, II, III the convergence period is about 20, 35, 80, which
can be found in figure 5.2. After this amount of epochs the rest time of the training will not
give the model a noticeable change to HDR loss. So, it can be said that with the iteration
of the model, the required training cost is increasing. Also, since the reconstructed result
of models is going better with the iteration and the period of convergence is going longer,
it is also consistent with the fact that in deep learning, when the loss curve of the model
declines smoothly instead of being sharp, it often means that the effect of the model will
be better.
Figure 5.2: The HDR loss curve of three models during training
In figure 5.3 shows the visual quality of reconstructed HDR images. The HDR images
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
49
==PAGE:56==
have been used LTM to map into LDR domain for showing. To better present the re­
construction effect of our model, we compare it between the model by Santos et al.[5].
Santos’s model is good at extending the dynamic range of luminance in the image which
will make the image have richer grayscale performance than LDR image. However, in our
model we are more focused on the reconstruction of saturated area, it is obvious that the
result of model III is more similar to the ground truth than Santos’s model in the saturated
area. The color reproduction is more accurate and the edges in the image is smooth.
Comparing the three models in our thesis, the visual quality is going better especially on
the reality of the reconstructed image, not only the lost detail has been reconstructed in
the saturated area, but also has a great combination of the whole image. As the same
iTMO processing, it shows a good similarity to the original HDR image.
Figure 5.3: We compare our final results of three model between Santos’s model in paper
[5]
In general, the model III has the best performance and it has been improved by adding
the unsaturated mask during HDR loss calculation and HDR image synthesis, and adding
50
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:57==
a denoising filter to model output before HDR loss. Also, the CNN model–U­net we used
in the thesis also provides a great improvement on the HDR image reconstruction. Com­
pared to the original LDR input, the result in our model has a much better rendering of
details in saturated area, the color and edge of saturated can be correctly predicted. The
overall visual quality of the reconstruction result is closer to the ground truth and reality.
Besides the model I to III, there are also some attempts which we tried in chapter 4,
they are mainly focused on the different backbones and different color models for HDR
reconstruction. The result of them has been shown in table 4.1. Since all of the five
models besides the RGB color model with VGG16 backbone have been trained on the
basis of model III, using the results of them compared to model III, all of them did not show
positive effects directly on improving the performance of reconstruction.
So, to further verify if these attempts can be used in HDR image reconstruction, we apply
an ablation study on that. Instead of implementing all of the attempts on the well­trained
model III, in ablation study will set the comparison group on the simpler model, which can
provide a more intuitive comparison of different variables’ effects. A simple model means
only keeping the necessary part, avoiding the uncertain influence of some other variables
on the results.
5.2
Ablation study
In the ablation study, it mainly focuses on testing the feasibility of various attempts in
4.6. For the effectiveness of the test, we removed the modules in the model that is not
related to the test. Compared with the previous attempts, only the necessary modules in
the model will be kept in the ablation study. There are two test models which have been
implemented in this section:
• Ablation test 1: To compare the two different backbones in encoder, VGG16 and
ResNet50 which have been introduced in section 3.2, the ResNet50 has been im­
plemented in the Ablation test 1 instead of VGG16 and the other parts of model is
as same as model 1, so the result of Ablation test 1 can compare with the model 1
directly.
• Ablation test 2: Different color models will influence the division of saturated part and
also will change the input data of LDR image. By the testing result in the section
4.6, the HSV color model has a great potential to reconstruct smoother HDR image.
So, in the ablation test 2, we will transfer the LDR input from RGB into HSV color
domain before training. The saturated area will be divided by V component in HSV
domain instead of the max value of RGB three channels. The other parts of ablation
test 2 is same with model 2, so the result can compare with each other.
The result of Ablation test 1, 2 and model I, II has been shown in figure 5.4. The first
comparison pair of box plots are Model I and Ablation test 1, The PSNR value shows
that the noise of the reconstructed image in the model using ResNet50 as the backbone
of the encoder is more than that using VGG16. This result is also consistent with the
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
51
==PAGE:58==
previous results implementing ResNet50 on model 3. It can be said that when using U­
net to reconstruct HDR images, VGG16 is more suitable for such tasks. However, both
of these two backbones have better PSNR results than the iTMO’s result 14.66dB.
The result of model II and ablation test 2 are closer than the first comparison, the average
PSNR and SSIM of model II are better than the ablation test 2 while both of them are
greater than the performance of model I. So, it can double prove the unsaturated mask is
very helpful to improve the prediction results in saturated area, and can be applied to a
variety of color models, but in the RGB and HSV models, the results of RGB are better.
However, it is interesting to see that the overall distribution of test dataset in the four
models, the minimum PSNR and SSIM values of ablation test 2 are the biggest, so it
might point to a better lower limit of reconstruction in HSV color model which might need
to verify by bigger dataset or other CNN models.
Figure 5.4: The PSNR and SSIM distribution box plot of Model 1, Ablation test 1, Model
2 and Ablation test 2
As the feature of ResNet50[33], it should have a better performance in making the model
converge faster. Compared to the VGG16 using 20 epochs, the ablation test 1 only takes
less 15 epochs to achieve convergence which can save computing resources. And the
total time of running 200 epochs on ResNet50 backbone is 2.7 hours, in VGG16 is 3.9
hours. So, it only takes about 0.2 hour to achieve convergence in ResNet50 backbone
compared to 0.39 hour in VGG16. So that might be a trade­off between lower­cost, faster
model training and accuracy of model results.
To further implement the new models on the basis of model III, it will be possible to keep
52
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:59==
some attempts on the new backbones to have a better balance between the cost of training
the model and the performance of predicted HDR result. Also, the HSV color model has
a better minimum value of evaluation parameters in the overall test set, which is also a
possible way to generate more consistent HDR images.
In addition, we can also evaluate the results of ablation studies through visual experience
in figure 5.5. The figures in the first two columns are the same as the result of model I
and model II in the above figure 4.4, 4.9. Compared with the results of the two ablation
studies, it can be seen that the result of ablation study 1 using the new backbone has better
image smoothness, while the ablation study 2 using HSV has a better reconstruction on
saturated areas, but there is still the color gamut distortion which just like we introduced
in section 4.6.
Figure 5.5: The visual quality of Model I&II and Ablation study 1&2
So in general, the feasibility of implementing HSV and Resnet in our model is discussed
in the ablation learning. The introduction of these two variables is not very helpful for
the model to predict better results. The possible help is that Resnet reduces required
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
53
==PAGE:60==
computing resources and time during model training, HSV may require further color gamut
conversion to eliminate its color gamut distortion in reconstructing HDR images.
5.3
Future works
By the results of model I to model III, it is obvious that we have made some achievements,
but the PSNR value is not great enough to say the reconstructed result is perfect. Also,
the attempts which we tried before in sections 4.6 and 5.2 are still a puzzle waiting to
be solved, since they have been proved in others’ working[33][39][15] but have limited
improvement in our model. And there are also some other attempts have not been tried
due to the limited time. Based on that problems and regrets in this thesis, we proposed
several items of future work:
• Although most of the saturated area has been correctly predicted in our model, it
still has some distortion in the center of large range saturated area, for example the
red box in figure 4.11, it has artifacts during reconstruction. To keep improving the
performance of the model, these kinds of artifact in the large saturated areas should
be eliminated. The possible solution can be a better feature extraction network and
a greater range of convolution kernel to provide more correlation features for missing
details in saturated area.
• Based on the distribution of the reconstructed HDR image shown in figure 5.1, our
reconstructed result is not temporally stable. The reconstruction results of some
LDR images with large areas of saturation or extremely bright colors are not good.
Since we can adjust the hyper­parameters to achieve different training results of
the model, and when the training set is adjusted, or the special certificate of the
predicted object is changed like more focus on the extremely bright colors, we can
also adjust the hyper­parameters to make the model perform better. In order to
make the model more robust, new dataset can be used for training in the future.
Also the different sizes of input images can be applied in the model.
• Since the HSV color model has great performance on the deep tone mapping of
HDR image[15], it makes sense to keep on trying to convert the input image into
HSV domain and then reconstructing. Also, it is possible to test more backbone
models during training since the VGG16 is an older and simpler model compared to
Googlenet, ResNet and others. In this thesis, we only use the simple way to attempt
the possibility of HSV and Resnet50, it might be wiser to implement these attempts
with a new loss function to make further discussion.
• In Chapter 2, we introduced some other proposals in HDR image reconstruction, like
the pipeline method to reconstruct the LDR image with different exposure first and
then synthesize HDR image. It also makes sense to try CNN model on other recon­
struction methods like pipeline and comparing the differences with current model.
• To further enhance the feasibility of HDR image reconstruction, the gamma correc­
tion of the certain camera could be implemented on the input LDR images to avoid
54
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:61==
the non­linearity of cameras and screen devices, and also implement on the output
of the final HDR output after inverse tone mapping to keep more accurate luminance.
Since different devices will have different features during LDR image presentation,
dynamic gamma correction can unify the results and facilitate the comparison of
visual results.
In conclusion, in this thesis, we only tried some possibilities of HDR image reconstruc­
tion, there are still some other interesting directions to keep trying. Also, in the topic of
reconstructing HDR image by a single LDR image, the CNN model, unsaturated mask
and denoising filter we have tried bring us a great result, but it might be further improved
by other fancy attempts. If we have more time, we could do more training times and the
number of data sets used to further improve performance, and everyone is welcome to
further improve this model.
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
55
==PAGE:62==
56
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:63==
6
Conclusion
In this thesis, we proposed a deep learning model for HDR image reconstruction by single
LDR image. The basic architecture of the model is based on the U­net in CNN, the U­
net model realize the feature extraction of images and preserves the stronger correlation
of input and output images with skip connections. In this step, it can provide the output
HDR image with some predicted detail in saturated area which is model I, the average
PSNR based on the test data set in chapter 4 is 18.70dB and average SSIM is 0.6371,
the distribution has been shown in figure 4.5. To solve the color distortion and loss of
pixels in unsaturated areas of the image in model I, we apply the unsaturated mask and
set a higher weight on the saturated area loss, lower weight on other areas, to make the
model focus on predicting the saturated pixels but doesn’t completely out of the color of
the overall images, which is model II. When we set the HDR loss weight of saturated area
is 0.8, the average PSNR of model II is 20.13dB, average SSIM is 0.6406 which has been
shown in figure 4.9. However, the reconstructed images are still troubled by blocking
artifact, so we further apply denoising filter on the output of model to avoid over­fitting by
small scaling of noise. We tried two different low pass filters, Gaussian filter and Bilateral
filter, the average PSNR of gaussian filter is 21.06dB which in bilateral filter is 22.12dB,
the average SSIM of gaussian filter is 0.6565 which in bilateral filter is 0.6922, all of the
result has been presented in figure 4.10. So, the bilateral filter has better performance
on the reconstructed HDR images. Also, the bilateral filter shows great effect and the
visual quality of reconstructed image is smoother without sharp edges compared with
gaussian filter in figure 4.11, which is model III. Compared the reconstructed HDR image
and ground truth in test set, both the PSNR value and SSIM value of model III is much
better than the HDR image presented by iTMO, the MSE of model III is 1/5.66 of iTMO.
Also, The visual experience of the reconstructed image will be closer to the real HDR
image. What’s more, by trying the different color models including RGB, YUV and HSV,
and new backbone Resnet50 on the three model separately, it shows that RGB color
model and VGG16 backbone perform best in this model, while the HSV color model and
other new backbones in CNN are also an open choice for the further researching.
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
57
==PAGE:64==
58
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
Ning Sun, Hassan Mansour, and Rabab Ward. “HDR image construction from multi­
exposed stereo LDR images”. In: 2010 IEEE International Conference on Image
Processing. IEEE. 2010, pp. 2973–2976.
[2]
Miguel Granados et al. “Optimal HDR reconstruction with linear digital cameras”.
In: 2010 IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recog­
nition. IEEE. 2010, pp. 215–222.
[3]
Francesco Banterle et al. “Inverse tone mapping”. In: Proceedings of the 4th inter­
national conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques in Australasia
and Southeast Asia. 2006, pp. 349–356.
[4]
Gabriel Eilertsen et al. “HDR image reconstruction from a single exposure using
deep CNNs”. In: ACM transactions on graphics (TOG) 36.6 (2017), pp. 1–15.
[5]
Marcel Santana Santos, Tsang Ing Ren, and Nima Khademi Kalantari. “Single im­
age HDR reconstruction using a CNN with masked features and perceptual loss”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.07335 (2020).
[6]
Yu­Lun Liu et al. “Single­image HDR reconstruction by learning to reverse the cam­
era pipeline”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. 2020, pp. 1651–1660.
[7]
Yuki Endo, Yoshihiro Kanamori, and Jun Mitani. “Deep reverse tone mapping.” In:
ACM Trans. Graph. 36.6 (2017), pp. 177–1.
[8]
Siyeong Lee, Gwon Hwan An, and Suk­Ju Kang. “Deep recursive hdri: Inverse tone
mapping using generative adversarial networks”. In: proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). 2018, pp. 596–611.
[9]
Demetris Marnerides et al. “Expandnet: A deep convolutional neural network for
high dynamic range expansion from low dynamic range content”. In: Computer
Graphics Forum. Vol. 37. 2. Wiley Online Library. 2018, pp. 37–49.
[10]
Zeeshan Khan, Mukul Khanna, and Shanmuganathan Raman. “Fhdr: Hdr image re­
construction from a single ldr image using feedback network”. In: 2019 IEEE Global
Conference on Signal and Information Processing (GlobalSIP). IEEE. 2019, pp. 1–
5.
[11]
Ozan Oktay et al. “Attention u­net: Learning where to look for the pancreas”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03999 (2018).
[12]
Noor A Ibraheem et al. “Understanding color models: a review”. In: ARPN Journal
of science and technology 2.3 (2012), pp. 265–275.
[13]
Zaher Hamid Al­Tairi et al. “Skin segmentation using YUV and RGB color spaces”.
In: Journal of information processing systems 10.2 (2014), pp. 283–299.
[14]
S. Sural, Gang Qian, and S. Pramanik. “Segmentation and histogram generation us­
ing the HSV color space for image retrieval”. In: Proceedings. International Confer­
ence on Image Processing. Vol. 2. 2002, pp. II–II. DOI: 10.1109/ICIP.2002.1040019.
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
59
==PAGE:66==
[15]
Ning Zhang et al. “Deep tone mapping network in HSV color space”. In: 2019 IEEE
Visual Communications and Image Processing (VCIP). IEEE. 2019, pp. 1–4.
[16]
Francesco Banterle et al. “A framework for inverse tone mapping”. In: The Visual
Computer 23.7 (2007), pp. 467–478.
[17]
Andrey Vavilin, Kaushik Deb, and Kang­Hyun Jo. “Fast HDR image generation tech­
nique based on exposure blending”. In: International Conference on Industrial, En­
gineering and Other Applications of Applied Intelligent Systems. Springer. 2010,
pp. 379–388.
[18]
Yasir Salih, Aamir S Malik, Naufal Saad, et al. “Tone mapping of HDR images: A
review”. In: 2012 4th International Conference on Intelligent and Advanced Systems
(ICIAS2012). Vol. 1. IEEE. 2012, pp. 368–373.
[19]
Rafał Mantiuk, Scott Daly, and Louis Kerofsky. “Display adaptive tone mapping”. In:
ACM SIGGRAPH 2008 papers. 2008, pp. 1–10.
[20]
Erik Reinhard et al. High dynamic range imaging: acquisition, display, and image­
based lighting. Morgan Kaufmann, 2010.
[21]
Chao Yang et al. “High­resolution image inpainting using multi­scale neural patch
synthesis”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition. 2017, pp. 6721–6729.
[22]
Ming Zhang and Bahadir K. Gunturk. “Multiresolution Bilateral Filtering for Image
Denoising”. In: IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 17.12 (2008), pp. 2324–
2333. DOI: 10.1109/TIP.2008.2006658.
[23]
Kazufumi Ito and Kaiqi Xiong. “Gaussian filters for nonlinear filtering problems”. In:
IEEE transactions on automatic control 45.5 (2000), pp. 910–927.
[24]
Frédo Durand and Julie Dorsey. “Fast bilateral filtering for the display of high­dynamic­
range images”. In: Proceedings of the 29th annual conference on Computer graph­
ics and interactive techniques. 2002, pp. 257–266.
[25]
Laith Alzubaidi et al. “Review of deep learning: Concepts, CNN architectures, chal­
lenges, applications, future directions”. In: Journal of big Data 8.1 (2021), pp. 1–
74.
[26]
Jiuxiang Gu et al. “Recent advances in convolutional neural networks”. In: Pattern
recognition 77 (2018), pp. 354–377.
[27]
Jie Wang and Zihao Li. “Research on face recognition based on CNN”. In: IOP
Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science. Vol. 170. 3. IOP Publishing.
2018, p. 032110.
[28]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks”. In: Communications of the ACM 60.6
(2017), pp. 84–90.
[29]
Geoffrey Hinton et al. “Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recog­
nition: The shared views of four research groups”. In: IEEE Signal processing mag­
azine 29.6 (2012), pp. 82–97.
[30]
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Deep learning”. In: nature 521.7553
(2015), pp. 436–444.
60
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:67==
[31]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U­net: Convolutional net­
works for biomedical image segmentation”. In: International Conference on Medi­
cal image computing and computer­assisted intervention. Springer. 2015, pp. 234–
241.
[32]
Michal Drozdzal et al. “The importance of skip connections in biomedical image seg­
mentation”. In: Deep learning and data labeling for medical applications. Springer,
2016, pp. 179–187.
[33]
Omar Elharrouss et al. “Backbones­review: Feature extraction networks for deep
learning and deep reinforcement learning approaches”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08016
(2022).
[34]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very deep convolutional networks for
large­scale image recognition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 (2014).
[35]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016, pp. 770–
778.
[36]
Shen Cheng et al. “Nbnet: Noise basis learning for image denoising with subspace
projection”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. 2021, pp. 4896–4906.
[37]
Nima Khademi Kalantari and Ravi Ramamoorthi. “Deep High Dynamic Range Imag­
ing of Dynamic Scenes”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proceedings of SIG­
GRAPH 2017) 36.4 (2017).
[38]
Zijun Zhang. “Improved adam optimizer for deep neural networks”. In: 2018 IEEE/ACM
26th international symposium on quality of service (IWQoS). Ieee. 2018, pp. 1–2.
[39]
Viktar Atliha and Dmitrij Šešok. “Comparison of VGG and ResNet used as Encoders
for Image Captioning”. In: 2020 IEEE Open Conference of Electrical, Electronic and
Information Sciences (eStream). IEEE. 2020, pp. 1–4.
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
61
==PAGE:68==
62
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:69==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: The content in sub­file
In the sub­file, I submit the codes and results involved in my thesis, the code needs to run
in the python language environment. The content in the sub­file has been shown in figure
A.1. If you want to try to train the model, please refer to the following steps
• Configure the required environment in the requirement.txt file.
• Select the database that has LDR and HDR pair, and use splitimage.py to split
the image into 256*256 size. Assign the dataset to the Data folder and attach the
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
63
==PAGE:70==
address file annotations.txt.
• Run the python file train.py.
• The output of the model will be saved in the folder output, you can run predict.py to
test the result of the model you have trained. The test result will be shown in folder
test/result.
I also upload the pre­trained model III in the thesis. It has been named as Ouput_model3.
If you want to test the performance of it, you can only run the step 1 and 4 above.
All of the codes are also been uploaded on the GitHub, the link to the GitHub page is
https://github.com/godwantma/HDR_reconstruction.
64
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
==PAGE:71==
HDR image reconstruction using CNN deep learning
65
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 340
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
