==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
Master thesis
Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Author:
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen (s174066)
Supervisors:
Professor mso, Esben Thormann
Postdoc, Johannes Eiler
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This project ”Ion Mobility In Aqueous Polymer Systems” is a 32.5 ECTS point master project con-
ducted by Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen (s174066) from September 2022 to February 2023. This project
was conducted under the supervision of postdoc Johannes Eiler and professor Esben Thormann. The
project includes a literature study of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, the conductivity of aque-
ous solutions, interactions between polymers and electrolytes, and the relationship between ions and
the macro- and microscopic environment. Furthermore, the project contains an experimental investiga-
tion and analysis of the ion mobility in both pure aqueous solutions and aqueous solutions containing
poly(ethylene glycol).
I would like to thank my supervisors for allowing me to be part of this project and research group.
Thank you for the educative and constructive discussions, and most of all thank you for your great
patience and for providing an enjoyable work environment. It has truly been a pleasure working on this
project.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this project, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used to investigate how the presence
of macromolecules affects the mobility of ions in aqueous solutions. EIS was chosen as the primary
analytical technique because it enables the adjustment of cell and probe geometry, and can be used to
study the electrical properties of both liquids and gels. This project sought to achieve a baseline under-
standing of the relationship between the mobility of ions and the concentration and molecular weight
of polymers. Initially, the cell was calibrated, and an optimal electrode distance and salt concentration
were determined. The calibration was performed using a conductivity probe to determine the conductiv-
ity of pure NaCl solutions. The cell constant, d/A, was determined from the solutions’ conductivity and
the impedance measurements. The conductivity measurements revealed a linear relationship between
the salt concentrations and the conductivity. Furthermore, the relationship between conductivity and
temperature was also determined. The measurements revealed that the conductivity is approximately
20 times more dependent on the salt concentration than the temperature of the solution. From the
initial experiments, an electrode distance of 10 mm, a temperature of 30 °C, and salt concentrations of
5 and 40 mM were selected for the ongoing investigations of the polymeric solutions.
The mobility of NaCl and NaSCN was studied in the presence of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) in different
concentrations. PEG with molecular weights of 6000, 12 000, 20 000, and 40 000 g/mol were studied.
The study revealed that the mobility of NaCl decreases with increasing PEG concentration. No obvious
change in the mobility curves appears near the estimated overlap concentration, c*. This indicates
that the mobility of ions is somewhat indifferent to the macroscopic changes occurring in for example
the solution viscosity. The microscopic environment which the ions experience seems to govern their
mobility. The mobility of NaCl and NaSCN was studied in polymer solutions containing PEG 20 000.
NaCl and NaSCN were chosen due to their kosmotropic and chaotropic nature which could potentially
influence how the ion mobility is affected by the presence of macromolecules. The ionic strengths of
the solutions were 5 and 40 mM. The measurements revealed no obvious change in mobility near c*,
and the mobility of NaCl and NaSCN seemed to be affected by PEG in a similar matter. No specific
ion effects were observed between the ions and the uncharged PEG. The mobility of NaSCN is lower
than NaCl, however, this was expected from the literature. The origin of the decrease in mobility was
not fully understood from the study and a discussion of possible processes and parameters affecting the
ion mobility was conducted. There is no convincing evidence that mobility is limited through collisions
with polymer coils at the highest applied frequency as otherwise hypothesised in the literature. It is
therefore possible that the mobility is limited by another mechanism possibly including attractive forces
between the ions and PEG chains.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Background
1
1.1
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Ideal Circuit Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Visual Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3
Circuit Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.4
Electrode-Electrolyte Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
Molecules in Motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.1
Conductivity of Electrolyte Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.2
Polymeric Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.3
Interactions Between Polymers and Electrolytes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.3.1
Presentation of Chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.3.2
The Hofmeister Effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.3.3
Microviscosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.3.4
Interactions Between Uncharged Polymers and Ions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.4
The Aim of this Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2
Materials and Methods
19
2.1
Conductivity Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Impedance Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Determination of Cell Geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
Determination of Ion Mobility in Aqueous PEG Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5
Analysis of Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Results and Discussion
23
3.1
Calibration of Cell and Determination of Cell Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Conductivity Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Impedance Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.3
Determination of Cell Geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.4
Determination of the Cell Constant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.5
Ion Mobility and Effective Double Layer Capacitance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.6
Comparison of Aqueous NaCl and NaSCN Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.7
Determination of Expected Ion Mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Determination of Ion Mobility in Aqueous PEG Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.1
Presence of Ions in the PEG Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.2
Screening of Suitable PEG Concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.3
Effect of Molecular Weight
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2.4
Ion Specific Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3
Revisiting Ionic Conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.1
Estimation of Internal Length Scales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.2
Estimation of Model Fit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:5==
4
Conclusion
48
5
Outlook
50
References
55
6
Appendix
59
6.1
Initial Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.1.1
Nyquist Plot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.1.2
Bode Impedance Plot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.1.3
Bode Phase Plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.1.4
Nyquist and Bode Plots of NaCl Solutions at 10 mm Electrode Distance . . . . .
63
6.1.5
Q0 and n
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.1.6
Nyquist and Bode Plots of NaSCN Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.1.7
Determination of Relationship Between Resistance and Electrode Distance
. . .
66
6.2
Determination of Ion Mobility in Aqueous PEG Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.2.1
Screening for Suitable PEG Concentrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.2.2
Concentration Range of PEG6K, PEG12K, PEG20K, and PEG40K in 40 mM NaCl 68
6.2.3
Concentration range of PEG 20K in 40 mM NaSCN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.2.4
Concentration range of PEG 20K in 5 mM Nacl or NaSCN
. . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2.5
Linear and Exponential Fit of Mobility Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.3
PEG100K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
==PAGE:6==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
1
Background
In this project, the aim is to understand how macromolecules affect the mobility of ions in aqueous
solutions. It is well known that properties such as macroviscosity depend greatly on the concentration
and molecular weight of the macromolecules. On a much smaller length scale, which the ions experience,
the macroscopic properties may not govern the processes. The microviscosity that the ions experience
may behave differently due to their limited size.[1] The study aims to achieve a baseline understanding
of ion mobility in the presence of an uncharged polymer. This baseline understanding allows for the
further study of ion mobility in more complex systems including for example polyelectrolytes. The
mobility is studied with EIS which allows for the study of opposition to current flow at different time
scales. Furthermore, EIS, as a technique, has many strengths and advantages compared to a regular
conductivity probe. In EIS the probe and cell geometry can be adjusted. Furthermore, the technique
allows for the study of both liquids and gels.
1.1
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) is a fast and non-invasive analytical technique that can
be used to evaluate the response of a system upon the application of an electric potential at different
frequencies. EIS offers high resolution compared to other electrochemical analytical techniques such as
cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry.[2] EIS measures the impedance that a circuit experiences
during the passage of an alternating electric current [3], and it can be used to explore among others
mass-transfer, charge-transfer, and diffusion processes.[4]
Impedance evaluates the opposition to current flow upon the application of an oscillating potential.[3]
For measurements conducted with a potentiostat, a potential difference is applied and a current is
measured. The reverse process is also possible where a current is imposed. Based on the potential
difference, E, and measured current, I, the impedance, Z, can be calculated following Equation 1.
E = I · Z
(1)
The measured current can be in phase or out of phase with the applied potential difference. If the
system is purely resistive then the measured current will be in phase. However, if the system is purely
capacitive then the measured current will be 90° out of phase with the applied potential difference. The
purely resistive or capacitive systems are two possible extremes, and most real systems are a combination
of the two by which the phase will be somewhere between -90-0°. The input and output sinus waves
for a purely resistive and capacitive system can be seen in Figures 1a and 1b, respectively. Impedance
measurements allow the extraction of resistances, inductances, capacitances, and the phase from the
system.
Page 1 of 81
==PAGE:7==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: Input/output of a) a resistor and b) a capacitor. Reproduced from [3]
When the oscillating sinusoidal waves are out of phase it can be concluded that the system shows
conductive and/or inductive behaviour. This is known as the reactance of a system. Resistance opposes
the flow of current, but reactance opposes the change in current. The presence of a capacitor and/or
inductor does not lead to energy loss but the storage of energy. Through the storage of energy, the
responding signal is displaced. The impedance can be calculated from the applied oscillating potential
difference and the measured oscillating current response.[3] The impedance can be expressed as seen in
Equation 2.
Z = E(t)
I(t) =
|E| · sin(ω · t)
|I| · sin(ω · t + φ)
(2)
Here, φ is the phase, and from Equation 2 it becomes clear that the impedance is highly dependent on
the frequency, ω.
1.1.1
Ideal Circuit Components
Resistor
A resistor is a component that limits or regulates the flow of electric current. The impedance of a resistor
does not contain a reactive part. Therefore, a phase of 0° applies to the system, and the impedance of
the circuit is frequency independent. The impedance is therefore equal to the resistance, see Equation
3.[3]
ZR = R
(3)
Capacitor
A capacitor is a device that stores energy in the form of electric charges and ideally has no resistance.
A capacitor is typically made from two metal plates (or other geometry) separated by a medium.
Capacitance is a measure of how much charge can be stored on the electrodes. The capacitance depends
on the geometry of the electrodes (namely the surface area), the distance between the electrodes, and
the permittivity of the medium. The capacitance has the unit [C] = F (Farad). Materials used as the
Page 2 of 81
==PAGE:8==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
dielectric in a capacitor have different abilities to oppose the flow of electric charge.[3] The capacitance,
C, can be calculated using Equation 4.
C = εr · ε0 · A
d
(4)
Here εr is the relative permittivity of the selected material, ε0 = 8.854 · 10−12F/m is the permittivity
of free space, A is the surface area, and d is the distance between the electrodes. The impedance of
a capacitor is purely reactive. When applying a current to a capacitor, it charges up until no more
current flows. When the current is reversed the capacitor discharges and a delayed sinusoidal response
is measured. For a capacitor, the phase is -90°. The impedance for a capacitor is inversely proportional
to the frequency, see Equation 5.[3]
ZC =
1
j · ω · C
(5)
Combination of Resistors and Capacitors
Resistors and capacitors can be combined in RC circuits. In series, impedance is additive, and for an
RC combination the impedance is equal to the sum of the impedance for a resistor and capacitor, see
Equation 6.[3]
Z[RC] = ZR + ZC = R +
1
j · ω · C
(6)
In parallel, the reciprocals of impedance are additive, and for an RC combination the reciprocal
impedance is equal to the sum of the reciprocal impedance for a resistor and a capacitor, see Equation
7.[3]
1
Z(RC)
=
1
ZR
+ 1
ZC
= 1
R + j · ω · C
(7)
1.1.2
Visual Representation
Nyquist Plot
In the Nyquist plot, the real and imaginary parts are plotted against each other. The real part, Z’, is
plotted on the x-axis and the imaginary part, -Z”, is plotted on the y-axis. Z’ and Z” are also referred
to as Zreal and Zimag, respectively. In the Nyquist plot, it is possible to see characteristic shapes from
various circuit elements and combinations but the frequencies cannot be known from the plot alone.
The Nyquist plots of a resistor, capacitor, and the in series and parallel combinations are shown in
Figures 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d, respectively.
Page 3 of 81
==PAGE:9==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2: Visual representation of a) R, b) C, c) RC in series, and d) RC in parallel in Nyquist plot. Reproduced from
[3]
The Nyquist plot of a resistor, capacitor and the parallel and in-series combinations are ideal and very
simple. The real systems are often far from ideal.
Bode Plots
The Bode impedance plot shows the magnitude of the impedance against the frequency. The Bode
phase plot shows the phase angle against the frequency. Bode impedance and phase plots are shown in
Figures 3a and 3b, respectively.
Page 4 of 81
==PAGE:10==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
Figure 3: Visual representation of RC in parallel in Bode a) impedance and b) phase plot. Modified from [5]
The Bode plots supply key information about the capacitance, resistance, and frequency dependency.
The Bode phase plot provides information about the capacitative or resistive nature of the system. A
phase angle between -90° and 0° would entail that the capacitative nature is not ideal and that the
electric charge is not completely stored which leads to some extent of current flow. The phase can also
change at different time scales by which the system will change from being predominantly resistive to
reactive or vice versa.[2]
1.1.3
Circuit Models
Real systems can have both a capacitive and resistive nature and the ideal circuit models will not always
suffice.[2]
Constant Phase Element
The constant phase element (CPE or Q) is a model that to a greater extent describes real electrochemical
systems. The CPE is an imperfect capacitor, and sometimes it is used to describe the non-ideal capacitive
behaviour of the formed electric double layer.[2, 5] The mathematical expression for the impedance of
a CPE is closely related to that of a capacitor, see Equation 8.
ZCP E =
1
Q0 · (j · ω)n
(8)
The CPE has a constant phase angle. The observed phase angle is φ = −90◦· n. Here n is a constant
between 0 and 1. Q0 is a factor associated with the CPE and has the unit [Q0] = S · sn = Ω−1 · sn. The
CPE corresponds to a capacitor at n = 1 where Q0 is the capacitance.[3, 6] At n = 0 the impedance
of the system is independent of the angular frequency and corresponds to a resistor.[6, 7] The Nyquist
plot of a CPE in parallel and in series with a resistor is shown in Figures 4a and 4b, respectively.
Page 5 of 81
==PAGE:11==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Complex plane visualisation of a CPE (solid lines) compared to an ideal capacitor (dashed lines) a) in parallel
and b) in series [8]
In Figure 4a the Randles circuit with the CPE yields a compressed semi-circle.
This is sometimes
referred to as a ”depressed” semi-circle. In Figure 4b the CPE in series yields a phase angle below -90°
forming a straight line with an incline below 90°. The CPE can be explained as a leaking capacitor
where some degree of energy dissipation occurs due to the partly resistive nature of the CPE.[5]
The origin of the CPE is still up for debate. It has been proposed that the non-ideal behaviour is
caused by among others roughness on the electrodes, and adsorption of ions. How the CPE behaviour
is best interpreted and modelled is not completely clear.[9–11] For n < 1 the unit of Q0 has no physical
meaning, and comparison to other measurements becomes difficult. One possible approach is to ignore
the non-ideal double layer capacitance, but this will cause systematic deviations and errors. Another
approach is to fix the dimension. When the CPE exponent changes, the dimension of the CPE also
changes. By fixing n at an average value the capacitance parameters’ dimensions are constant which
allows for comparison with other experimental data. Alternatively, it is possible to estimate an effective
double layer capacitance from Q0 and n.[9–11] The effective double layer capacitance can be determined
from the solution resistance, Rsol, n, and Q0 using Equation 9.[10]
¯Cdl = Q
1
n
0 ·
 1
Rsol
1−1
n
(9)
This estimation of the effective double layer capacitance utilises the solution resistance. However, it
should be noted, that if the origin of the CPE is purely interfacial then the solution resistance should
not have any influence on the CPE.[10] This model should not be used for large resistances and/or small
values of n (n > 0.8 −0.85).[9, 10] It has been experimentally found that the capacitance parameter
and the CPE exponent are coupled. From this follows that an increase in Q0 is followed by a decrease
in n. The effect of this is that ¯Cdl remains fairly constant.[10]
Page 6 of 81
==PAGE:12==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
1.1.4
Electrode-Electrolyte Systems
Electrodes can be categorised as polarisable or non-polarisable. They differ from each other in the
way they respond to a current that is passed through the electrode/electrolyte interface. A polarisable
electrode is inert under the present conditions and no electrochemical reactions take place. A non-
polaraisable electrode, however, participates in electrochemical reactions leading to the conversion of
electric current to ionic current.[3] When a potential is applied, the electrodes will charge up. Thereafter,
ions will start to migrate toward the electrode of the opposite charge.[12] This movement depends among
others on the mobility of the ions. When ions move from the bulk towards the electrodes an electric
double layer is formed. Separation of the charges causes the electric double layer to behave as a capacitor.
The electric double layer is therefore often modelled as a capacitor or a CPE.[9] Depending on the type
of electrode and the applied potential, charge transfer reactions can occur alongside the formation of
the electric double layer. The electrochemical reactions and their rates depend on the chemistry of
the electrodes and the ions. If charge transfer reactions occur the electrode surface may change due
to e.g., consumption during corrosion.[13] The processes occurring during the application of an electric
potential are illustrated in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Processes occurring during the application of an electric potential
Polarisable Electrode
A perfect polarisable electrode acts as a capacitor as there is charge separation between the elec-
trode/electrolyte interface.[3] Several equivalent circuit models have been proposed to explain the per-
fect polarisable electrode. The system consists of an electrode, the interface between the electrode and
electrolyte solution, and the bulk electrolyte solution. This system can be modelled as the system shown
in Figure 6.
Page 7 of 81
==PAGE:13==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Figure 6: Equivalent circuit model for electrode/electrolyte system. Re, Rct, and Rsol are the resistance of the electrode,
charge transfer, and electrolyte solution, respectively. Cdl and Csol are the capacitance of the electric double layer and
electrolyte solution, respectively.
The application of a potential difference causes the electrodes to charge up, and the electric double
layer will form. The capacitance that arises from the separation of charges at the interface is termed
Cdl. Simultaneously, at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte solution, electrochemical
reactions can occur if the charge transfer resistance, Rct, is suitable. Rct is the internal resistance that
limits the transfer of electrons between the electrode/electrolyte interface. A high charge transfer resis-
tance entails a kinetically slow charge transfer process.[2] The electrolyte solution has a resistance, Rsol,
and also acts as a capacitor between the electrodes as the electrodes (and the charges) are separated.
Furthermore, energy can be stored in the solution upon the orientation of solution molecules etc.[14,
15] The capacitance is termed Csol.
The impedance of the circuit in Figure 6 is shown in Equation 10.
Z = ZRe +
1
1
ZRct +
1
ZCdl
+
1
1
ZRsol +
1
ZCsol
⇒Z = Re +
1
1
Rct + jωCdl
+
1
1
Rsol + jωCsol
(10)
This model seems quite complex, but several of the terms can be omitted. The electrode used has
a certain resistance, Re, but this resistance is often not accounted for in the equivalent circuits for
polarisable electrodes.[2, 16] This is because the resistance of common electrodes is very low and therefore
can be neglected. For a polarisable electrode electrochemical reactions do not occur, and the charge
transfer resistance therefore equals ∞. With a Rct = ∞the term
1
Rct →0. The equivalent circuit is
therefore vastly simplified into the following shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Equivalent circuit for polarisable electrode including the solution capacitance
Page 8 of 81
==PAGE:14==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
The expression for impedance corresponding to this simplification is shown in Equation 11.
Z =
1
jωCdl
+
1
1
Rsol + jωCsol
(11)
The solution capacitance is often very small and usually only has an impact at very high frequencies.
However, in some systems, a semicircle begins to appear in the Nyquist plot. It could therefore be
appropriate to include the solution capacitance. This will be further elaborated in Section 3.1. As
shown in Figure 2d a semicircle appears for resistances and capacitors in parallel. In those cases, it is
therefore suitable to include the solution capacitance in the model.
More often, in simple circuits of a polarisable electrode, the capacitance of the double layer is often
used to model the capacitative behaviour of the system alone.[2, 16] Many polarisable electrodes are
therefore modelled without the solution capacitance. The equivalent circuit and impedance of such a
model are shown in Figure 8 and Equation 12, respectively.[3]
Figure 8: Equivalent circuit model for polarisable electrode/electrolyte system. Adapted from [2]
Z[CdlRsol] = Rsol +
1
j · ω · Cdl
(12)
If ω −→∞then Z[CdlRsol] −→Rsol. If ω −→0 then Z[CdlRsol] −→∞. In the circuit, the double layer
capacitor can be exchanged with a constant phase element to improve the model by compensating for
the imperfect nature of real systems.[2] In this case the impedance is as shown in Equation 13.
Z[CdlRsol] = Rsol +
1
Q0 · (j · ω)n
(13)
Non-Polarisable Electrode
In a perfect polarisable electrode no current flows from the electrodes into the solution. In systems
with non-polarisable electrodes electrochemical reactions occur, and current can flow from the electrode
into the solution through the transformation of electronic current to ionic current. The equivalent cir-
cuits used for non-polarisable electrodes are more complicated than for the polarisable electrode. This,
however, provides the ability to gain information about among others reaction kinetics, and diffusion.
Non-polarisable electrodes can be modelled with a solution resistance, double layer capacitance, and
charge transfer resistance. The latter describes the kinetics of the electrochemical reaction occurring.[2,
16] The electrodes used in this study are made of Pt, which does not take part in electrochemical reac-
tions under these conditions. For this purpose, the simplified equivalent circuit model of the polarisable
electrodes will be sufficient to describe the system.
Page 9 of 81
==PAGE:15==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
1.2
Molecules in Motion
1.2.1
Conductivity of Electrolyte Solutions
EIS compared to regular conductivity measurements makes it possible to study the system at different
time scales due to the alteration in frequency. At high frequencies migration of ions could be seen as a
wriggle, whereas at low frequencies the ions have time to move a noticeable distance. When applying a
potential difference to the electrolyte solution the ions will start to orient themselves or migrate towards
the electrodes of opposite charge.[12, 17]
From the EIS measurements, the solution resistance and double layer capacitance can be extracted
using fitting software. The solution resistance can now be used to determine the conductivity and other
parameters of the system. Conductance is a measure of the system’s ability to conduct electricity. It is
the reciprocal of the solution resistance, R, and is measured in Ω−1 = S (Siemens), see Equation 14.[14,
17]
G = 1
R
(14)
The conductivity is calculated from the reciprocal resistance, and the relationship is found in Equation
15.
σ = d
A · 1
R
(15)
Here, σ is the conductivity of the solution measured in [S·m-1], d the distance between the electrodes
[m], A the effective area [m2], and R the resistance [Ω].[17] The ratio d/A is often referred to as the
cell constant and it can be determined by calibration with liquids of known conductivity.[18] The cell
constant is rarely based directly on the geometry of the cell and electrodes as this would provide in-
accurate results. This is among others due to the edge effect on the electric field created between the
two electrodes. An effective area, Aeff, can be determined upon calibration. The effective area is not
necessarily similar to the area of the electrodes.
The conductivity of electrolyte solutions depends on the type of dissolved salt, its concentration, and
the dissociation degree.[19] When ions move around in the solution they experience friction which slows
down the ions. The friction is proportional to the speed and depends among others on the size of the
ion and its degree of hydration. The mobility of an ion is the ability of the charged particle to move
through the solution when a potential is applied.[12, 17] The mobility can be expressed as in Equation
16.
u =
z · e
6 · π · η · a
(16)
The mobility, u, depends on the charge, ze, the viscosity, η, and the hydrodynamic radius, a. Ions with
a large charge density will reach a higher hydration level than ions with a low charge density. During
the hydration of the ions, the effective ion size will increase as the associated water molecules must be
accounted for. The mobility of ions decreases with increasing hydration. Small ions give rise to stronger
electric fields than large ions and will therefore be more extensively hydrated.[17] Equation 16 requires
Page 10 of 81
==PAGE:16==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
the solution viscosity to determine the ion mobility. Another approach to determine the mobility is
based on the resistance determined during electrochemical measurements, see Equation 17.
I = z · u · c · ν · F · A · ∆ϕ
d
(17)
The current, I, depends on the charge, z, mobility, u, number of ions per formula unit, ν, concentration,
c, area, A, distance, d, and potential difference, ∆ϕ. F is the Faraday constant. It is necessary to use a
calibrated setup where the cell constant is known. Using Ohm’s law, I = ∆ϕ
R , Equation 17 simplifies to
Equation 18.
∆ϕ
R = z · u · c · ν · F · A · ∆ϕ
d
⇐⇒u = 1
R ·
d
z · c · ν · F · A
(18)
The mobility of ions in aqueous solutions are well studied and can be used as a frame of reference in
the study of how the mobility changes when adding macromolecules. The ion mobility of typical ions
such as Na+, K+,Cl-, and Br- are around 5 −10 · 10−8 m2· s-1·V-1.[12, 17] Electrolyte solutions are
often described with either their ion mobility or molar conductivity. At infinite dilution, the ions have
the highest mobility, thus the highest molar conductivity. This conductivity is denoted as the limiting
molar conductivity. The limiting molar conductivity of an ion pair is calculated using Equation 19.
Λo
m = ν+ · λo
+ + ν−· λo
−
(19)
Here, λo
+ and λo
−are the limiting molar conductivity of the cation and anion, respectively. ν+ and ν−
are the number of cations and anions per formula unit, respectively. The mobility of an ion can be used
to determine the molar conductivity, see Equation 20. This relation applies to both the limiting molar
conductivity and the molar conductivity at concentrations different from infinite dilution.[17]
λ± = z · u± · F
(20)
The molar conductivity can be determined from the limiting molar conductivity and salt concentration.
The correlation between the two is described by Kohlrausch’s law, see Equation 21.
Λm = Λo
m −K · c1/2
(21)
Λo
m is the limiting molar conductivity, K the Kohlrausch constant, c the concentration, and Λm the
molar conductivity of the solution.
Kohlrausch’s law predicts a decrease in the molar conductivity
(thus the ion mobility) when the salt concentration increases. As the concentration increases the molar
conductivity decreases due to among others an increase in ionic interactions. The molar conductivity
at a given concentration can be calculated from the obtained conductivity, see Equation 22.[17]
Λm = σ
c
(22)
Typical values of molar conductivity are around 10 mS/mol.[17]
Page 11 of 81
==PAGE:17==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
1.2.2
Polymeric Solutions
Dissolving Polymers
Polymer solutions differ from solutions with low-molecular-weight compounds due to the great difference
in the dimensions of solvent and polymer chains. Dissolving macromolecules occurs in two stages. First,
the polymer matrix takes up the solvent and swells into a solvated gel. Subsequently, the gel breaks up
and the polymer chains are dispersed into the solution. This process can be very slow depending on
among others the molecular weight, choice of solvent, and temperature. The free energy relationship is
essential to whether molecules can dissolve. The free energy relationship is given in Equation 23.[20]
∆G = ∆H −T · ∆S
(23)
∆G must be negative for molecules to spontaneously dissolve. For polymers the entropy, ∆S, is positive.
When the polymer is dissolved the number of conformations that the chains can have increases, and this
increased conformational mobility leads to an increase in entropy. Since ∆S is positive the enthalpy of
mixing determines the sign of ∆G, and for a molecule to dissolve the enthalpy should be small.[20]
The shape and size of dissolved polymers change depending on the solvent used and the weight and
structure of the polymer. The volume that a polymer chain in solution takes up, the hydrodynamic
volume, depends on many different factors. Those factors include solvent-polymer interactions, electric
and steric effects, rigidity in the chain, etc. The polymer chains in low concentration typically take
up the shape of a spherical coil. If the polymer has a good affinity for the solvent in use, the solvent
will associate itself more with the polymer chain causing the polymer to swell and increase its hydro-
dynamic volume. For a solvent with a poorer affinity for the polymer, the solvent-polymer interactions
decrease, and the intramolecular polymer interactions become more important. This leads to a con-
traction in hydrodynamic volume, thus the formation of smaller spheres, and if the solvent is poor even
precipitation.[20, 21] The solvent effect on coil size is illustrated in Figure 9.
Figure 9: Effect of solvent conditions on coil size. Reproduced from [21]
Page 12 of 81
==PAGE:18==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Concentration Regimes
There are several concentration regimes of polymer solutions in which the properties differ. For very
dilute polymer solutions the formed polymer coils are completely separated, and the solution consists
of bulk water and polymer spheres.
At a specific concentration, c*, the hydrodynamic volume of
the individual coils begins to touch. This concentration is known as the overlap concentration. At
concentrations above the overlap concentration, the coils are no longer individual spheres but start to
overlap and eventually entangle.[22] The concentration regions are illustrated in Figure 10.
Figure 10: Concentration regions. Reproduced from [22]
At the overlap concentration, the concentration of the solution equals the concentration inside the
volume of the coil. At concentrations below c* the polymer concentration is either c* or zero.
At
concentrations above c* the coils begin to overlap. The increase in polymer concentration will cause
the coils to shrink until a certain point. Eventually, the increase in polymer concentration will lead to
chain entanglement due to topological constraints.[23, 24] The overlap concentration can be estimated
from Equation 24.
c∗=
3 · M
4 · π · R3g · NA
(24)
The overlap concentration can be estimated from the molecular mass, M, and the radius of gyration,
Rg. NA is Avogadro’s number.[25] The radius of gyration can be estimated from Equation 25.
Rg = b · N ν
(25)
Here, b is the estimated monomer length, N is the degree of polymerisation, and ν is an exponent
associated with the solvent conditions.[26] The radius of gyration can be experimentally determined by
e.g. light scattering experiments. Power law parameters for Rg in PEG/PEO-water systems have been
proposed based on empirical values, and for such a system the Rg can be estimated from the molecular
weight (g/mol), see Equation 26.[27]
Rg(PEG/PEO−water) = 0.0215 · M 0.583
(26)
Equation 26 yields the radius of gyration in nm. From experimental values of Rg, c* can be deter-
mined.[27] Another approach to determine c* is through systematic measurements of viscosity with
increasing polymer concentration. These systematic measurements will show viscosity curves with sud-
Page 13 of 81
==PAGE:19==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
den changes in slope at a certain concentration. This concentration is the overlap concentration and
marks the transition from dilute to semi-dilute region.[28] In this project four different molecular weights
of PEG are studied (6 000, 12 000, 20 000, and 40 000 g/mol). A density of 1.2 g/cm3 is assumed for
all molecular weights of PEG.[29] From Equation 26 and 24 the overlap concentrations were estimated,
see Table 1.
Table 1: Estimation of DP, Rg, and c*
Mw [g/mol]
DP
Rg [nm]
c* [wt.%]
6 000
136
3.43
5.84
12 000
272
5.14
3.49
20 000
454
6.92
2.39
40 000
909
10.4
1.42
The estimated overlap concentration decreases with increasing molecular weight, and it is expected that
if a change in slope occurs it will also follow this decreasing trend.
Macroviscosity
The viscosity of polymer solutions differs based on the size of formed polymer coils and the concen-
tration of polymer.[20, 22] The presence of small coils reduces drag, thus lowering the viscosity of the
solution.[20] The viscosity of polymer solutions depend greatly on the length scale in which the viscosity
is measured. At length scales far greater than the radius of gyration and coil size, the macroviscosity
determines the flow.[27, 30] The macroviscosity can be measured using a capillary viscometer. Here the
motion of the entire solution containing the macromolecules is measured.[30] The length of the chains
(the molecular weight of the polymer) and concentration of the polymer influence the macroviscosity.
Longer chain lengths and higher concentrations increase the likelihood of chain entanglement and other
factors contributing to an increase in viscosity.[31] Where the solution viscosity depends greatly on the
polymer’s concentration and molecular weight, the same behaviour may not apply to conductivity. This
is discussed further in Section 1.3.3.
1.3
Interactions Between Polymers and Electrolytes
1.3.1
Presentation of Chemicals
Poly(ethylene glycol)
The polymer used in this study is poly(ethylene glycol), PEG. At high molecular weights (typically >
20 000 g/mol) PEG is also referred to as poly(ethylene oxide), PEO.[32] PEG is a non-ionic, hydrophilic
polymer that is water soluble over a wide range of concentrations and molecular weights.[33] PEG
consists of a hydrophobic and hydrophilic region.[34] The structure of PEG is shown in Figure 11.
Page 14 of 81
==PAGE:20==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Figure 11: Chemical structure of poly(ethylene glycol).[32]
PEG is a highly used polymer in various applications including medical devices and formulations. Be-
ing a hydrophilic polymer, PEG is soluble in water, and other polar solvents such as acetonitrile, and
dichloromethane but insoluble in e.g. ethers. Upon dissolution in water, PEG molecules adopt the
conformation of a random coil.[35] The hydrophilic oxygen is a possible hydrogen bonding site and is
responsible for the great water solubility of PEG.[34] The high water solubility of PEG is attributed to
the distance between the ether oxygens which is compatible with hydrogen in water molecules.[33] The
hydrophilic oxygen is responsible for enthalpically favourable interactions with water. The enthalpic
contribution to solubilisation is a combination of intra- and intermolecular interactions between water
and PEG. These interactions include van der Waals interactions and hydrogen bonding. PEG dissolves
in water when the formation of hydrogen bonds between water and the polar oxygen on PEG domi-
nates.[36] The entropic effect arises from an increase in the number of possible conformations of the
polymer chains. This will increase the entropy, thus making solubilisation favourable.[20]
NaCl and NaSCN
The salts used in this project are NaCl and NaSCN. The cation, Na+, is kept constant but the anions
are changed.
Cl- and SCN- are both anions with a charge of -1.
The two ions’ size, shape, and
polarisability differ, and it is expected that the interactions with the polymer and water will also differ.
The interactions between the anions and macromolecules are described further in Section 1.3.2. The
mobility of Na+, Cl-, and SCN- in water have previously been studied.[12, 17] Values for the ion mobility
in infinitely diluted aqueous solutions and limiting molar conductivity are summarised in Table 2.
Table 2: Ion mobility of Na+, Cl-, and SCN- in water at 25°C.
* u of SCN- is calculated from [37] and Equation 20.
Ion
u 10-8 m2· s-1·V-1
Λo
m[ mS·m2
mol ]
Na+
5.19 [12, 17]
5.01 [12, 17]
Cl-
7.91 [12, 17]
7.64 [17, 37]
SCN-
6.88* [37]
6.64 [37]
For pure aqueous solutions at 25 °C the mobility of SCN- is smaller than that of Cl-. With that follows
that the resistance of solutions containing SCN- ions is bigger than Cl-. It is therefore expected that the
systems containing PEG and SCN- will be less conductive. However, due to the nature of Cl- and SCN-
the conductivity does not necessarily change in the same way with increasing PEG concentration. The
differences between Cl- and SCN- can be explained by the Hofmeister effect. This is discussed further
in Section 1.3.2.
Page 15 of 81
==PAGE:21==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
1.3.2
The Hofmeister Effect
The Hofmeister effect is the ability of ions to stabilise or destabilise a protein (or polymeric structure).
The Hofmeister effect becomes more apparent at high ion concentrations (>10 mM). The understanding
of the Hofmeister effect is incomplete due to its great complexity caused by interactions between ions,
water, and macromolecules. It has been seen that anions provide a greater contribution to the Hofmeister
effect than cations due to the greater polarizability values of anions.[38] The Hofmeister series for anions
is ordered as [39]:
CO2−
3
> SO2−
4
> S2O2−
3
> H2PO−
4 > F −> Cl−> Br−> NO−
3 > I−> ClO−
4 > SCN −
In general, ions left of Cl- are called kosmotropes, and they induce protein/polymer aggregation thus
decreasing the solubility of macromolecules. Ions to the right are called chaotropes and have the op-
posite effect.[40] Furthermore, ions can be classified as ”salting in” or ”salting out” ions. Kosmotropes
are strongly hydrated and are thus called water structure makers. They will interact less with the
macromolecules, thus stabilizing the native fold. The lack of interaction leads to the salting out be-
haviour where the ions primarily stay away from the coil structure. Chaotropes are poorly hydrated
and therefore called water structure breakers. The chaotropic ions will facilitate the unfolding of the
macromolecules by the salting in effect. The salting in effect will increase the solubility of the macro-
molecules but, due to the unfolding, denaturation and destabilisation can occur.[39] The salting in and
out effect is illustrated in Figure 12.
Figure 12: Kosmotropic and chaotropic ions in solution. Reproduced from [40]
In this study, the two salts NaCl and NaSCN are studied. The cation, Na+, is unchanged throughout
the study. In general, Cl- is less chaotropic than SCN-. It is therefore expected that the Cl- anions
will seek the bulk water rather than interact with the polymeric structures. SCN- is highly polarisable
and is the strongest chaotrope according to the Hofmeister series. SCN- has a lower affinity for water
(hence the association with macromolecules). It is expected that SCN- will interact with the polymer
chains, increase the solubility and affect the coil size and structure.[38] The different water affinities are
likely to influence the microscopic environment that the Cl- and SCN- ions experience. The microscopic
processes are discussed further in Section 1.3.3.
Page 16 of 81
==PAGE:22==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
1.3.3
Microviscosity
Where macroscopic viscosity depends greatly on chain entanglement and length, diffusion (and micro-
viscosity) is only really sensitive to the nearest environment. On small length scales it is possible to
determine the microviscosity. The diffusion of small molecules (probes) has been studied extensively
using e.g. fluorescence.[30] The mobility of ions in polymer solutions can be viewed similarly to probe
mobility in polymer solutions. Ions can be viewed as the smallest possible probe. It has been deter-
mined that for small probes the viscosity felt by the probes is smaller than the macroscopic viscosity
measured. This means that probes of a certain size (including ions) are less restricted by the presence
of macromolecules than what would be expected.[1]
The relationship between viscosity and conductivity in polymer-salt solutions has previously been stud-
ied. It is expected that when chain length increases the solution viscosity will increase and diffusion
coefficients will decrease.[31] Walden’s rule describes the correlation between the conductivity and vis-
cosity of the solution. The relationship is seen in Equation 27.[1, 31]
σ · η = constant
(27)
Previous studies of solutions containing PEG and electrolytes by Stojilkovic et al. (2003) [1] have shown
a violation of Walden’s rule. It was found that the concentration of the polymer (not the molecular
weight) affects the conductivity, whereas the viscosity is not only affected by concentration but to a
great extent the molecular weight of the polymer. The differences in molecular weight dependency cause
σ · η to change with increasing polymer concentration.[1, 31] From these studies it is therefore expected
that the molecular weight of the added polymer could have minimal effect on the conductivity but that
the concentration will have a large effect. However, the polymers tested in these studies are small and
have molecular weights of 300-10 000 g/mol. The concentration range is 0-33 wt.%, and with very
few measuring points around any c*. It is therefore interesting to study the mobility in solutions with
higher molecular weight PEG and at a concentration range that makes it possible to study the trend in
mobility before and after c*.
1.3.4
Interactions Between Uncharged Polymers and Ions
Uncharged polymers dissolve by forming hydrogen bonds with water.
Uncharged polymers do not
contain functional groups that can participate in favourable ionic bonds/interactions with electrolytes.
The effect of salt on the water structure in bulk and around the uncharged polymer has been studied.
The water surrounding an ion is polarised by the electric field arising from the ion. The hydrophilic
polymer chains are hydrated by water. When an ion approaches a monomeric unit, water between
the two is displaced.
The displacement of water from the hydration shell of the polymer leads to
an attractive force.
This attractive force is greater for large ions.
This is because large ions lead
to the removal of more structured water around the polymer.[41] Ions with low charge density such
as SCN- have been shown to bind to solutes through non-localised attractive dispersion forces. The
ions work by adding charge to the surface thus creating greater water solubility of the solute. Ions
with high charge density such as Cl- cause the salting out effect through a combination of electrostatic
repulsion and enhancement of the hydrophobic effect.[42] It has been suggested that SCN- binds to PEG
Page 17 of 81
==PAGE:23==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
by interactions with low curvature interfaces. Here, the SCN- ions displace water at sites containing
hydrogen-bonding defects.[43] Furthermore, PEG is capable of coordinating cations, such as Na+, to the
oxygen atoms in the backbone. This coordination of ions to the polymer will lead to a decrease in the
concentration of mobile ions, thus effectively causing a drop in the conductivity of the solution.[44] The
differences in water affinities for the two anions could potentially affect the ability to migrate when a
potential difference is applied. Cl- ions are expected to prefer the bulk water solution, whereas the SCN-
potentially can be found near the polymeric structure. If this is the case then it is expected that the
mobility of SCN- will be affected more by the presence of polymer. Alternatively, it has been proposed
that the mobility of ions is effectively decreased due to ”collision” with polymer molecules.[1] Overall,
it is not clear whether Cl- and SCN- will be affected similarly by the presence of PEG, and how the
mobility will change.
1.4
The Aim of this Project
The project aims to achieve a baseline understanding of the mobility of ions in aqueous polymer systems.
The aim is to calibrate the cell setup and determine cell constants for different electrode distances so
that the cell can be used to study the impedance of more complex systems. Furthermore, is the aim
to study the mobility of NaCl and NaSCN ions in the presence of PEG. By systematic changes in
polymer concentration and molecular weight, it will be studied how the mobility changes, and if any
drastic change in mobility is observed near the estimated c*. It is unknown whether Cl- and SCN-
will be affected by the presence of PEG in a similar fashion or if the differences in association with
macromolecules will affect the mobility. Furthermore, the effect of ion concentration on mobility will
be studied.
Page 18 of 81
==PAGE:24==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Conductivity Measurements
All conductivity measurements of polymer-free aqueous solutions were performed using a conductivity
probe. The conductivity was measured using an 856 Conductivity Module connected to an 805 Dosimat
(all from Metrohm, Switzerland). The conductivity module was operated from a computer using tiamo
2.5 software. All solutions both for conductivity and impedance measurements were prepared using
ultrapure water with a resistance of 18.2 MΩ·cm (Sartorius Arium Pro) (hereafter denoted MilliQ
water). Saline solutions were prepared with NaCl (VWR, Belgium). Conductivity measurements with
a fixed salt concentration were conducted to evaluate the effect of temperature on the conductivity, see
Table 3. The temperature of the solution was controlled with a water bath and a combined magnetic
stirrer and a hot plate (RCT.standard, IKA, Germany). Furthermore, conductivity measurements with
a fixed temperature were conducted to evaluate the effect of salt concentration on the conductivity, see
Table 4. Conductivity measurements were performed in triplicate and the data was reported as the
mean ± sd.
Table 3: Conductivity measurements at 40 mM NaCl ionic strength and temperatures from 25-40 °C
cNaCl [mM]
Temperature [°C]
40
25
30
35
40
Table 4: Conductivity measurements at 30 °C at different NaCl concentrations
Temperature [°C]
cNaCl [mM]
30
0.1
1
10
20
40
70
100
2.2
Impedance Measurements
The impedance was measured using an Autolab potentiostat (PGSTAT128N) with a frequency anal-
yser module (FRA32M) and a multiplexer module (MUX.SCNR8), all obtained from Metrohm Nordic
(Denmark). The impedance was measured using Pt electrodes. The Pt wires (Sigma-Aldrich) have
a diameter of 250 µm. The measurements were conducted in an incubator (KS 4000 i control, IKA,
Germany) with a fixed temperature of 30 °C. The impedance was measured with an amplitude of 5
mV, a bias of 0 V, and a frequency range of 105 to 0.1 Hz with 10 points per decade. Impedance
measurements were performed in triplicate. The impedance data were reported as the mean value of
the three measurements. The experimental setup is illustrated in Figure 13.
Page 19 of 81
==PAGE:25==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 13: a) Experimental setup of the incubator with cell (left) and potentiostat (right). b) Cell with wires (grooves
allow for different electrode distances). c) Assembled cell with wires
2.3
Determination of Cell Geometry
To determine the most ideal cell geometry, the impedance of several saline solutions was measured
as described in Section 2.2. The impedance was measured with varying electrode distances and NaCl
concentrations, see Table 5. NaCl solutions were prepared as described in Section 2.1. A fixed volume of
15 mL saline solution was added to the cell. Impedance measurements of NaSCN (Sigma Aldrich, India)
solutions were conducted at a fixed electrode distance, see Table 6. The impedance measurements for all
NaCl concentrations and distances can be found in Appendix 6.1.1 - 6.1.4. The impedance measurements
of NaSCN solutions are found in Appendix 6.1.6.
Page 20 of 81
==PAGE:26==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Table 5: Impedance measurements at 30 °C at different NaCl concentrations and electrode distances
cNaCl[mM]
Distance [mm]
0.1
1
10
20
40
70
100
1
5
10
13
19.5
Table 6: Impedance measurements at 30 °C at different NaSCN concentrations and an electrode distance of 10 mm
Distance [mm]
cNaSCN [mM]
10
0.1
1
10
20
40
70
100
2.4
Determination of Ion Mobility in Aqueous PEG Solutions
PEG with different molecular weights was dissolved in saline solutions using varying PEG and NaCl
concentrations. The molecular weights of PEG used are 6 000 (Sigma-Aldrich, Ukraine), 12 000 (Ther-
moFisher, Germany), 20 000 (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany), and 40 000 g/mol (Serva, Germany). Initial
screening was conducted as listed in Table 7 with both varying salt and polymer concentrations. To
determine any possible impurities conductivity measurements of the ultrapure water and PEG20K 30.3
wt.% dissolved in ultrapure water were conducted. For the experiments with a fixed salt concentra-
tion, the PEG concentrations were varied over a concentration range of 0-10 wt.%, see Tables 8 and 9.
Impedance measurements for all aqueous PEG solutions can be found in Appendix 6.2.1 - 6.2.4.
Table 7: Impedance measurements for the screening. Conducted at 30 °C, at 10 mm electrode distance with PEG 20 000
NaCl
NaSCN
cPEG20K[wt.%]
csalt[mM]
0.0
0.03
30.3
0.0
0.03
30.3
0.1
1
5
10
40
100
Table 8: Impedance measurements for the determination of the relationship between molecular weight and concentration
of PEG and the mobility. Conducted at 30 °C, at 10 mm electrode distance with an ionic strength of 40 mM NaCl
cPEG[wt.%]
PEG6K
PEG12K
PEG20K
PEG40K
0.0
...
10
Page 21 of 81
==PAGE:27==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Table 9: Impedance measurements for the determination of specific ion effects. Conducted at 30 °C, at 10 mm electrode
distance with PEG 20 000
NaCl
NaSCN
csalt [mM]
cPEG20K [wt.%]
5
40
5
40
0.0
...
10
2.5
Analysis of Data
The obtained impedance data were analysed using software (EIS Spectrum Analyser). The data were
fitted to equivalent circuit models presented in Section 1.1.4. The initial NaCl solutions were fitted over
the entire frequency range of 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz. However, for the later experiments containing NaSCN
or NaCl and/or polymer, the model was fitted to a narrower frequency range of 100 kHz to 10 Hz. This
change was necessary since impedance measurements no longer fitted the linear model at frequencies
from 10 Hz to 0.1 Hz. The fitting parameters were reported as the mean ± sd.
Page 22 of 81
==PAGE:28==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Calibration of Cell and Determination of Cell Geometry
3.1.1
Conductivity Measurements
Conductivity measurements were conducted of all NaCl concentrations to determine the cell constant.
The conductivity measurements at 30 °C showed a linear relationship (R2 = 0.99949) between the
conductivity and the NaCl concentration, see Figure 14a. Furthermore, conductivity measurements
were conducted in 40 mM NaCl solutions at temperatures of 25-40 °C. The conductivity is shown in
Figure 14b along with its linear regression. Here, the R2 = 0.96102 and the correlation between the
temperature and conductivity is still very linear. It should be noted that the linear fit is based on
only four temperatures and for a more precise fit the conductivity should be measured at several other
temperatures. The errors in Figure 14b appear big but this is due to the scale of the y-axis. From the
conductivity measurements, it is concluded that the conductivity to a greater extent (approximately a
factor of 20) depends on the ion concentration than the temperature. Furthermore, it is concluded that
for the forthcoming experiments, the temperature is not crucial, and if the temperature varies slightly
the conductivity estimation is still appropriate.
(a)
(b)
Figure 14: Conductivity measurements of saline solutions with a) ramping NaCl concentration at 30 °C and b) ramping
temperature at 40 mM NaCl concentration
3.1.2
Impedance Measurements
The Bode impedance and phase plots for 40 mM NaCl are shown in Figure 15a and 15b, respectively.
Figure 15a reveals that the impedance changes at high frequencies when the electrode distance changes.
At high frequencies, the solution resistance can be extracted, and it is possible to see that the solution
resistance increases with increasing electrode distance. This is expected since the solution resistance
is directly proportional to the electrode distance. Figure 15b illustrates the phase angle. At low fre-
quencies, the system behaves like a capacitor. -ϕ is approximately 80°, which means that the capacitive
behaviour is close to ideal. At high frequencies, the system behaves like a resistor which can be seen in
that the phase approaches 0°.
Page 23 of 81
==PAGE:29==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
Figure 15: Bode a) impedance and b) phase plot of 40 mM NaCl solution
From the impedance measurements, the solution resistance and other parameters can be extracted using
fitting software. The equivalent circuit used to fit the systems is as seen in Section 1.1.4 Figure 8 for
a polarisable electrode. Here a resistor and a constant phase element are in series. The system is thus
described by the solution resistance and the double layer capacitance of the interface (here described by
the imperfect CPE). For the lowest salt concentration (0.1 mM and partially 1 mM) it became evident
that this simple equivalent circuit was not sufficient to describe the system. At low concentrations, the
contour of a semi-circle begins to appear, and the system can no longer be modelled with this simple
circuit, see Figure 16. In Figure 16 the Nyquist plot for the 19.5 mm electrode distance is shown.
Figure 16: Nyquist plot of different NaCl concentrations with a 19.5 mm electrode distance. Data points shown with ◦
and fit with dashed line
Page 24 of 81
==PAGE:30==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
The Nyquist plots reveal that the lowest salt concentrations require the addition of solution capacitance
to the model. To avoid this complication salt concentrations above 1 mM should be used. The choice
of salt concentration is discussed further in Section 3.2.1.
3.1.3
Determination of Cell Geometry
The fitting parameters for all concentrations and distances were estimated using fitting software. The
conductivity is expected to increase nearly linearly with ionic strength. The conductance, 1/R, (directly
proportional to the conductivity) is plotted in Figure 17 for all electrode distances.
Figure 17: Relationship between 1/R and the NaCl concentration for all electrode distances
The impedance measurements reveal that the relation between 1/R and the NaCl concentration is
described well by a linear function. The linearity was evaluated using linear fitting and calculation of
R2 values. 1/R shows good linearity at all electrode distances as R2 > 0.99 in all instances. Figure
18 illustrates the relationship between the resistance (on a log scale) and the electrode distance. It
is clear that the resistance both increases with increasing electrode distance and with decreasing salt
concentration.
Linear regressions of the relationship between resistance and electrode distance are
shown in Appendix 6.1.7. It is expected that the resistance increases linearly with increasing electrode
distance. This is supported by the R2 values which are > 0.94 for all salt concentrations.
Page 25 of 81
==PAGE:31==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Figure 18:
Relationship between the resistance (on a log scale) and the electrode distance for NaCl concentrations
ranging from 0.1-100 mM
All geometries provide a linear relationship between the conductance (hence the conductivity) and
the concentration, and the high R2 values allow for use of all cell geometries. However, the smaller
distances such as 1 and 5 mm entail physical difficulties with placing the Pt electrodes. Furthermore,
the electrodes are only fixated in the ends, and therefore bending of the wires can occur in the middle of
the cell. At low distances, these small changes in distances provide a high uncertainty. Based on these
observations a bigger electrode distance of 10 mm is chosen for the following experiments.
3.1.4
Determination of the Cell Constant
From the conductivity measurements the cell constants, d/A, were determined for all electrode distances
using Equation 15.
The cell constants are averaged out over all concentrations for each electrode
distance. The cell constants are listed in Table 10. It is clear that the cell constant increases with
increasing distance. The cell constants can be used to convert the solution resistance (determined by EIS)
to conductivity. Furthermore, the effective electrode area can be determined from the cell constant. The
effective area increases with increasing electrode distance. It is worth noting that Equation 15 applies
for simple parallel-plate electrode arrangements [18], but can also be used for other geometries.[3, 17]
It should be noted that this model assumes infinitely large electrodes in which we can ignore the edge
effect at the electrodes’ sides. In reality, the electric field may not run in straight lines between the
electrodes but take a more complex shape. The cell constant can be interpreted as a geometric factor
that allows for the conversion of resistance to conductivity, mobility, etc. For comparison the surface
area of a single electrode equals Aelectrode = 2 · π · 0.025cm
2
· 3.0cm = 0.23562cm2.
Page 26 of 81
==PAGE:32==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Table 10: Cell constant and effective area
d [mm]
d/A [1/cm]
Aeff [cm2]
1
0.21975 ± 0.01282
0.45634 ± 0.025605
5
0.37647 ± 0.02469
1.3334 ± 0.093771
10
0.49533 ± 0.02141
2.0222 ± 0.089493
13
0.55457 ± 0.02189
2.3472 ± 0.09061
19.5
0.67545 ± 0.03446
2.8936 ± 0.15191
3.1.5
Ion Mobility and Effective Double Layer Capacitance
After calculating the conductivity with the determined cell constant, the ion mobility can be determined
using Equation 18. The mobility of NaCl is visualised in Figures 19a and 19b. The mobility of NaCl
decreases with increasing ionic strength. This is in agreement with Kohlrausch’s law. As expected the
mobility data seems quite unaffected by the electrode distance.
(a)
(b)
Figure 19: Mobility of NaCl as function of a) concentration and b) distance
The other fitting parameters include Q0 and n. Q0 is the parameter associated with the constant phase
element and the double layer capacitance of the electrode-solution interface. n describes how imperfect
the double layer capacitance is. n varies with concentration and distance. Therefore, it is not possible
to compare the obtained Q0 values since they have different dimensions. To compare the parameters an
effective double layer capacitance is calculated using Equation 9. The ¯Cdl is divided by the electrode
area to make comparison with literature values easier. The effective double layer capacitance for the
pure salt solutions is approximately 9 µF/cm2. The ¯Cdl seem relatively unaffected by both the NaCl
concentration and electrode distance. The plots of Q0 and n are shown in Appendix 6.1.5.
Page 27 of 81
==PAGE:33==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
Figure 20: ¯Cdl as function of a) concentration and b) distance
The electric double layer capacitance reported in the literature range from 5-20 µF/cm2 for Pt elec-
trodes.[9, 10] The obtained values are therefore in good agreement with other experimental values.
3.1.6
Comparison of Aqueous NaCl and NaSCN Solutions
At an electrode distance of 10 mm impedance measurements of NaSCN solutions were carried out.
The effective double layer capacitance and mobility of NaSCN solutions are compared to that of NaCl
solutions with the same electrode distance, see Figures 21 and 21b. The experimental values are shown
along with theoretically expected values.
(a)
(b)
Figure 21: a) ¯Cdl and b) u at 10 mm electrode distance of NaCl and NaSCN solutions
The mobility is estimated using Kohlraush’s law, see Section 3.1.7. The mobility of NaCl is bigger
than the mobility of NaSCN. This was expected based on the limiting molar conductivity and mobility
from the literature. It should be noted that the estimated mobility for NaSCN is determined from
Page 28 of 81
==PAGE:34==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
the impedance measurements and not separate conductivity measurements (which is the case for NaCl).
This explains why the estimated and experimental values for the mobility of NaSCN are coinciding. The
effective double layer capacitance decreases from approximately 9 to 6.5 µF/cm2 for NaSCN compared
to NaCl. This could potentially be due to the different sizes of the hydrated ions. This hypothesis can
be tested by an estimation of the theoretical double layer capacitance. The double layer capacitance
can be estimated using Equation 28.[9]
1
CEDL
=
1
CSL
+
1
CDL
(28)
The capacitance of the double layer can be divided into the capacitance of the Stern layer and the
capacitance of the diffuse layer. The capacitance can be determined using Equations 29 and 30.
CSL = εr,SL · ε0 · A
lSL
(29)
CDL = εr,DL · ε0 · A
lD
(30)
Here, A is the electrode area, ε0 is the permittivity of vacuum, εr,SL and εr,DL are the relative per-
mittivity of the Stern and diffuse layer, respectively. lSL and lDL are the thicknesses of the Stern and
diffuse layers, respectively. The thickness of the diffuse layer can be determined from the concentration,
see Equation 31.
lD =
r
εr,DL · ε0 · R · T
2 · F 2 · I
(31)
Here, R is the universal gas constant, T is the temperature, and F is the Faraday constant. I is the
ionic strength and depends on the concentration and type of ions, see Equation 32.
I = 1
2 · Σiz2
i · ci
(32)
z is the valency which for all three ions equals 1. I is for this simple system equal to the concentration.
The thickness of the Stern layer is in the range of 3-10 ˚A according to the literature.[9] The thickness is
estimated from the diameter of the hydrated ion and the diameter of a water molecule. The length of the
Stern layer is estimated to be 6.21 ˚A for NaCl and 6.46 ˚A for NaSCN.[9, 45, 46] The relative permittivity
for the diffuse layer can be approximated to that of the bulk solution, εr,DL = 76.546 [47] and the relative
permittivity for the Stern layer can be approximated to be around εr,SL = 6 [9]. The estimation is quite
rough but it does provide a double layer capacitance for both ion pairs in the same order of magnitude
as the experimental values. The double layer capacitance is estimated to be lower for NaSCN than
NaCl. This is in agreement with the experimental results. However, the large decrease could potentially
also be due to contamination of the electrodes and insufficient cleaning. This is discussed further in
Section 3.3.2. It should be noted that the experimental double layer capacitance and modelled double
layer capacitance differ a lot from each other at very low salt concentrations. The equation used to
determine the effective double layer capacitance from the data should not be used for large resistances
Page 29 of 81
==PAGE:35==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
and/or small values of n (n > 0.8−0.85).[9, 10] It is possible that the high solution resistance at low salt
concentrations makes the model unsuited and that the experimental effective double layer capacitance
is less precise. This could potentially explain why the experimental and estimated values are so far from
each other at the lower salt concentrations. Furthermore, it should be noted that the model predicts
a small increase in the double layer capacitance with increasing ionic strength. Figure 20a showed no
significant increase in the effective double layer capacitance at different NaCl concentrations. However,
the ¯Cdl varies over a wide range, and it is possible that any small increase in ¯Cdl over the concentration
is not noticeable from the data.
3.1.7
Determination of Expected Ion Mobility
The conductivity measurements can be used to estimate the molar conductivity at any given concen-
tration using Kohlrausch’s law. The molar conductivity of NaCl was determined from the conductivity
measurements using a conductivity probe whereas the molar conductivity of NaSCN was determined
from the impedance measurements and the cell constant. K was determined by linear regression. Here,
the molar conductivity of aqueous solutions with 1, 5, 10, 20, 40, 70, and 100 mM NaCl and NaSCN
were plotted against the c1/2, see Figure 22. The intercept was fixed at the literature value for limit-
ing molar conductivity at 25°C. From Table 11 it was found that the limiting molar conductivity was
12.65 and 11.65 mS·m2
mol
for NaCl and NaSCN, respectively. The slope was determined from the fit. The
literature only provides the limiting molar conductivity (and mobility at infinite dilution) at 25 °C, not
30 °C which has been used in this project. This is not believed to produce significant errors since it
has already been established that the temperature is not the most important factor for the conductivity
(and mobility), see Section 3.1.1.
Figure 22: Determination of K
The fitted parameters are shown in Equations 33 and 34.
Page 30 of 81
==PAGE:36==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
NaCl : Λm = 12.65 −6.3269 · c1/2
NaCl
(33)
NaSCN : Λm = 11.65 −5.9128 · c1/2
NaSCN
(34)
The obtained regressions can now be used to estimate the molar conductivity at ionic strengths of 5
and 40 mM. The expected mobility of NaCl and NaSCN in polymer-free aqueous solutions of 5 and 40
mM salt concentrations can be determined from Equation 20 and this estimated molar conductivity.
This estimated mobility can serve as a way to evaluate the quality of the impedance measurements
by comparing the mobility estimated from Kohlrausch’s law and those obtained from the impedance
measurements. The estimations are listed in Table 11.
Table 11: Estimated molar conductivity and mobility of NaCl and NaSCN
Salt
NaCl
NaSCN
csalt [mM]
Λm[ mS·m2
mol ]
u ·10-8 m2· s-1·V-1
Λm[ mS·m2
mol ]
u ·10-8 m2· s-1·V-1
5
12.193
12.637
11.242
11.652
40
11.375
11.789
10.497
10.879
3.2
Determination of Ion Mobility in Aqueous PEG Solutions
Initially, the cell was calibrated with solutions of known conductivity. Based on the calibration, the cell
constants at all electrode distances could be determined. The cell constants allow for the conversion of
obtained impedance to conductivity and mobility. An electrode distance of 10 mm has been proposed
as a suitable cell geometry. The EIS method was established, and predictions of the ion mobility at 5
and 40 mM salt concentrations allow for the verification of EIS as a method to determine ion mobility.
A baseline understanding of the mobility of NaCl and NaSCN in water has been achieved.
In the
following sections, an understanding of the ion mobility in aqueous PEG solutions is sought. A suitable
salt concentration along with an appropriate PEG concentration is determined. The mobility and its
dependence on both PEG concentration and molecular weight are studied. Additionally, the mobility
of NaCl and NaSCN is studied at different salt concentrations in the presence of PEG.
3.2.1
Presence of Ions in the PEG Formulation
Initially, the conductivity of pure MilliQ water and PEG20K 30.3 wt.% dissolved in MilliQ water was
measured.
The conductivity is shown in Figure 23.
The conductivity measurements confirm that
MilliQ water itself is not very conductive, but when PEG is added at a high wt.% the conductivity
of the solution increases rapidly. PEG is an uncharged polymer, and due to the lack of charges, the
polymer itself is not expected to increase the conductivity of the solution. The conductivity of PEG
could be attributed to an ion content present due to impurities from manufacturing. The conductivity
of 30.3 wt.% PEG solution is a factor three higher than the conductivity of the 0.1 mM NaCl solution.
It is therefore expected that the presence of PEG will participate in the conductivity of PEG solutions
with low ion strength. Based on these observations ions strengths above 1 mM are chosen for further
experiments. Any possible contribution to conductivity from impurities can therefore be ignored.
Page 31 of 81
==PAGE:37==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Figure 23: Conductivity measurements of pure MilliQ water, MilliQ and PEG20K 30.3 wt.%, 0.1, and 1.0 mM NaCl
PEG is often produced by anionic polymerisation with alkoxides or other nucleophilic compounds as
initiator systems. The counterion is often K+. In anionic polymerisation, it is common to find residues of
counterions in the formulation. One initiator is consumed per chain, thus a maximum of one counterion
per chain is expected if the residue comes from the polymerisation.[33] It is assumed that the counter ion
used is K+. The concentration of K+ ions can be estimated from the measured conductivity. However,
the mobility of K+ in a 30.3 wt.% PEG20K solution is unknown and it will require further experiments to
determine the mobility. A rough estimate can be made based on the decrease in mobility seen in Figure
28b. The mobility of NaCl decreases from approximately 12·10−8m2 · s−1 · V−1 to 4.6·10−8m2 · s−1 · V−1
when going form 0 to 30.3 wt.% PEG20K. Thus the mobility at 30.3 wt.% is 0.38 times the initial
mobility.
It is assumed that the decrease in mobility of K+ ions in 30.3 wt.% PEG is of similar
size. The initial mobility of K+ is assumed to be the mobility at infinite dilution at 25 °C of 7.62
·10−8m2 · s−1 · V−1 [12]. The mobility of K+ in 30.3 wt.% PEG20K is determined using Equation 35.
uK+(30.3wt.%) = 0.382 · 7.62 · 10−8m2 · s−1 · V−1 = 2.91 · 10−8m2 · s−1 · V−1
(35)
With this estimated mobility of K+, the concentration can be estimated using a rewritten version of
Equation 18, see Equation 36.
u = σ ·
1
z · c · ν · F ⇔c = σ ·
1
z · u · ν · F
(36)
ν is the number of ions per formula unit and z is the charge. For K+ both equals one. The concentration
is determined in Equation 37.
cK+ = σ ·
1
u · F = 1.70 · 10−3mol/L
(37)
Page 32 of 81
==PAGE:38==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
The number of K+ ions in 0.1 L can thus be determined by multiplication with Avogadro’s number to
yield approximately 1.02·1020 K+ ions in the 0.1 L solution. For comparison, the estimated number
of PEG molecules in 0.1 L 30.3 wt.% PEG20K solution is 9.20·1020. The number of ions and polymer
chains are within the same order of magnitude with this estimation.
It is therefore likely that the
conductivity that arises from the pure PEG solution is due to residues of counterions, e.g. K+, from
the polymerisation reaction.
3.2.2
Screening of Suitable PEG Concentration
Initially, it was desired to verify that the conductivity has a linear relationship with the salt concentration
even at high polymer concentrations. The impedance was studied of solutions containing a low and
high polymer concentration. Figure 24 illustrates the conductivity determined by EIS of the pure salt
solutions and the solutions containing salt and PEG20K in 0.03 wt.% or 30.3 wt.%. The 0.03 wt.%
PEG20K solutions exhibit similar behaviour as the pure salt solutions. This was as expected since the
content of macromolecules is very low, thus not inhibiting the mobility of the ions. In the solutions
with a 30.3 wt.% PEG20K content, the presence of macromolecules influences the ion mobility. At
high salt solutions, the conductivity for low/no PEG content is approximately 2-3 times that of high
wt.% PEG solutions. The decrease in conductivity is attributed to the presence of macromolecules that
potentially hinder or reduce ion mobility. At low salt concentrations, this does not occur. For 0.1 mM
salt concentration, the conductivity is significantly increased by the high wt.% presence of PEG20K.
This is explained by the possible presence of ions in PEG from manufacturing. It is concluded that at
salt concentrations from 10 mM and above any possible ion impurity from PEG is negligible. At an ion
strength of 5 mM, the biggest possible uncertainty at 30 wt.% is approximately 10%. This uncertainty is
acceptable, and would therefore be suitable to conduct further measurements at concentrations between
5-100 mM. Salt concentrations of 5 and 40 mM are chosen for further measurements. Furthermore,
Figure 24 shows that there is a linear relationship between the concentration and conductivity even for
high PEG concentrations. The linearity was quantified with R2 values which were all above 0.99. It can
be concluded that a high PEG content does not influence the principle of linearity in aqueous solutions.
Page 33 of 81
==PAGE:39==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Figure 24: Conductivity against salt concentration for NaCl and NaSCN. PEG20K concentration varies from 0-30.3
wt.%. The salt concentrations measured are 0.1, 1, 5, 10, 40, and 100 mM.
As discussed in Section 3.1 the model of solutions with 0.1 mM salt concentration contains the solu-
tion capacitance. The obtained solution capacitance from the fits is shown in Figure 25. The 0.1 mM
solutions with low PEG concentrations show similar solution capacitance as pure MilliQ water. The
solution capacitance for these is approximately 2 · 10−11 F. It was expected that the solutions with
a very low PEG content show similar behaviour as the pure salt solutions. The solution capacitance
is a measure of how well the solution stores energy (similar to the double layer capacitance). When
the potential is applied, the water molecules (and other molecules that are in the solution) will orient
themselves accordingly. It is therefore possible that the presence of ions and low concentration of PEG
does not influence the ability to orient according to the field. Figure 25 reveals that a high PEG content
decreases the solution capacitance. For the solutions with 30.3 wt.% PEG20K the solution capacitance
drops to around 1.1 −1.2 · 10−11 F. The high PEG content almost reduces the solution capacitance
by half. It should be noted that the 30.3 wt.% solutions contain 30% less water and the decrease in
solution capacitance could be explained partly by this decrease. Another possible reason for this is that
the macromolecules are not rotating with the field and/or preventing the hydration water from rotating
with the field. PEG is hydrated by water and the energy gain from binding with PEG may be bigger
than that of binding to another water molecule.
From Equation 4 it is possible to estimate the solution capacitance of pure water. The dielectric constant
of pure water is 76.546 at 30 °C.[47] By inserting the known dielectric constant and determined cell
constant, an expected solution capacitance can be obtained, see Equation 38.
C = 8.854 · 10−12 F
m · 76.546 ·
1
49.533 1
m
= 1.3683 · 10−11F
(38)
Page 34 of 81
==PAGE:40==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Figure 25: Solution capacitance of pure MilliQ water and solutions containing 0.1 mM salt and/or PEG20K
The estimated solution capacitance of 1.3683 · 10−11 F is in the same order of magnitude as the fitted
values. This indicates that the experimental setup and theoretical model used provide a decent deter-
mination of the solution capacitance. A possible approach to improving the determination of solution
capacitance could be to increase the frequencies used.
3.2.3
Effect of Molecular Weight
Ion Mobility
Impedance measurements of aqueous PEG solutions were conducted. The solutions contained PEG in
concentrations between 0-10 wt.%. The obtained data is fitted to the model from Equation 13. The
mobility at 30.3 wt.% PEG20K is included in the fit but not shown in Figure 26. From the determined
solution resistance, the mobility of the NaCl ion pair is determined using Equation 18. The ion mobility
of NaCl is illustrated in Figure 26.
Overall the ion mobility is decreasing with increasing PEG concentration. The concentration regime
covers a wide range of measuring points before and after the estimated overlap concentration. There
does not seem to be any obvious break in the curve near the expected c* for any of the four molecular
weights. This suggests that the ionic movement and mobility in polymeric solutions are not drastically
affected by the cross-over regime. Additionally, there does not seem to be any correlation between the
decreased rate of mobility and molecular weight. The mobility curves are either on top of each other or
somewhat randomly distributed according to molecular weight. The individual mobility graphs along
with the linear illustration can be seen in Appendix 6.2.5. The lack of molecular weight dependence
is in agreement with previous studies which have found that both the conductivity and microviscosity
Page 35 of 81
==PAGE:41==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Figure 26: Ion mobility of NaCl in PEG solutions
are fairly unaffected by the increase in molecular weight of the polymers.[1, 48] The study suggests
that ion mobility is not correlated to macroscopic changes in the solution viscosity. It is important to
consider the environment that the ions experience upon the application of a potential difference. Ions
have a size of a few ˚A, whereas the size of a polymer coil is in the range of several nm.[12, 48] At
length scales much larger than the size of an ion the macroviscosity dominates the flow and movement
of a solution. However, at small-length scales, this is no longer the case. The environment that ions
experience is in a microscopic length scale, where the microviscosity dominates.[27] The microviscosity
has previously been studied using different measuring techniques. Microviscosity has been studied with
molecular probes based on diffusion studies. The molecular probes are molecules of different sizes which
have some sort of chemical tag. A chemical tag could be a fluorescently labelled moiety in the molecular
probe.[48] The microviscosity has been predicted from changes in diffusion coefficients occurring with
increasing polymer concentration.
Furthermore, it has been shown that the microviscosity depends
greatly on the size of the molecular probe. That is smaller probes are less influenced by the macroscopic
changes. Holyst et al. (2009) [48] studied the microviscosity in PEG solutions using both capillary
electrophoresis (CE) and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS). The CE measurements allowed
the study of the hydrodynamic drag, thus providing a determination of the electrophoretic mobility. The
FCS measurements were used to study the diffusion of fluorescently tagged proteins. The study revealed
the crossover length scale between the microviscosity (also called the nanoviscosity) and macroviscosity.
It was found that the crossover length scale is given by the Rg. That is probes smaller than the Rg will
experience microviscosity.[48] Ions can be considered a very small probe. The size of an ion is in the
range of a few ˚A, which is well below the estimated Rg of the polymers used in this study. Based on
this discovery it is therefore not odd that the ion mobility is seemingly unaffected by the macroscopic
changes in the solution.
Page 36 of 81
==PAGE:42==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Figure 26 shows the mobility against the concentration (on a log scale). Originally, a linear regression
was conducted. This showed a linear relationship (R2 > 0.96) between the mobility and PEG concen-
tration. The regressions and linear illustrations are shown in Appendix 6.2.5. The mobility curves are
mathematically described well with a linear decrease (at least in this concentration regime). However,
physically and chemically it is not obvious why the mobility should follow a linear curve. If this is the
case then the mobility will reach 0 at a given PEG concentration (here around 45-50 wt.% PEG). This
could of course be tested by measuring the impedance of a 50 wt.% solution (if solubility is possible).
From a physical and chemical point of view, it is more logical that the mobility is described through
an exponential decay. The fitting parameters to exponential functions are shown in Figure 26. The
R2 values are approximately the same for the linear and exponential regression. The R2 can therefore
not be used as a guide to what model best describes the data. The exponential decay is chosen as the
mathematical model. The mobility of NaCl in a polymer-free solution can be read from the equations
and yields an average of 12.17·10−8 · m2 · s−1 · V−1. From Table 11 it was expected that the mobility
for the ion pair at 40 mM NaCl is around 11.79 · 10−8 m2 · s-1 · V-1. The ion mobility experimentally
determined is in the same order of magnitude, and it seems that EIS is a decent tool to determine ion
mobility in polymer solutions. The estimation of ion mobility is discussed further in Section 3.2.4.
At very low polymer concentrations the mobility seems to equilibrate around an initial value before the
decrease in mobility commences. This plateau is seen in Figure 26. Around a concentration of 0.2 wt.%
PEG the mobility is somewhat unaffected by the presence of PEG. The concentration, at which there
are equally as many monomer units as Na+ or Cl- ions, is determined to be 0.17 wt% PEG. This is
coincident with the approximate concentration of PEG where the decrease in mobility begins to occur.
This could potentially link the plateau with the salt concentration. This is discussed further in Section
3.2.4.
Effective Double Layer Capacitance
Figure 27 shows the effective double layer capacitance for the four different molecular weights. The ¯Cdl
seems relatively unaffected by the concentration of PEG. The effective double layer capacitance does not
show a specific trend with increasing molecular weight. For PEG 6 000 and 20 000, there seems to be
a slight decrease in ¯Cdl, whereas for PEG 12 000 and 40 000, there seems to be a slight increase in ¯Cdl.
Overall, these variations are not systematic, and the differences likely occur due to experimental error
and uncertainties in the model fit. The ¯Cdl for all four molecular weights is approximately 6.5 µF/cm2.
The effective double layer capacitance has decreased compared to the initial polymer-free experiments.
Here, the ¯Cdl was approximately 9 µF/cm2 for all electrode distances and salt concentrations, see Figure
20. The double layer capacitance is a property related to the electrode surface and the nearest ions in
the solution. It is possible that PEG molecules can adhere to the electrode surface, and that this could
affect the double layer capacitance.[49] If PEG molecules adhere to the electrodes the effective electrode
area which can produce the double layer capacitance decreases. It is not known to what extent the
polymer adheres to the Pt electrodes.
Page 37 of 81
==PAGE:43==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Figure 27: Effective double layer capacitance
The heaviest polymer used has a molecular weight of 40 000 g/mol. Ideally, polymers with a much
higher molecular weight were to be studied. However, polymers of molecular weight of 100 000 and 106
g/mol did not dissolve in water. PEG100K was tried dissolved in water at 0.5, 1, 5, and 10 wt.%. The
5 and 10 wt.% solutions were cloudy. The diluted 0.5 and 1 wt.% solutions appeared dissolved at first
glance but contained powder-like precipitation. The solutions were kept in the fridge for several days
without a change, see Appendix 6.3 Figure 66.
3.2.4
Ion Specific Effects
Ion Mobility
The ion mobility of PEG 20 000 solutions was determined at two ionic strengths (5 and 40 mM) with
NaCl and NaSCN. As discussed in Section 3.2.3 the mobility can be explained very well with both
a linear and exponential function. Figures 28a and 28b show the ion mobility at 5 and 40 mM salt
concentrations. Here, the mobility is fitted to an exponential function and the equations are shown in
Figures 28a and 28b. The intercept at the y-axis reveals that the mobility of NaCl is bigger than that of
NaSCN. Furthermore, the mobility decreases when the ionic strength increases. Both observations are
in agreement with the expected behaviour. The mobility curves do not indicate any of the expected ion
specific effects, and NaCl and NaSCN seem to be affected by the presence of PEG in a similar fashion.
Page 38 of 81
==PAGE:44==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
Figure 28: Ion mobility of a) 5 mM and b) 40 mM PEG 20 000 solutions containing NaCl or NaSCN
This change in mobility can be explained by Kohlrausch’s law which predicts the correlation between
the concentration of strong electrolytes and molar conductivity, see Equation 21. The ion mobility of
NaCl and NaSCN can be extracted from the intercept on the y-axis. The mobility of NaCl and NaSCN
determined experimentally is in very good agreement with the estimated values from Kohlrausch’s law,
see Table 12. The results indicate that the EIS is a fine experimental technique that can precisely
determine among others resistance and ion mobility.
Table 12: Comparison of experimentally obtained mobility and prediction from Kohlrausch’s law. u ·10-8 [m2· s-1·V-1]
NaCl
NaSCN
csalt [mM]
Kohlrausch’s law
EIS measurement
Kohlrausch’s law
EIS measurement
5
12.637
13.182
11.652
11.726
40
11.789
12.036
10.879
10.970
The plateau in mobility at low concentrations is seen in Figures 28a and 28b. The plateau continues
until 0.2-0.3 wt.% regardless of the salt concentration. The concentrations at which there are equally
as many Na+ or Cl- ions as ether groups are 0.022 wt.% and 0.17 wt.% for 5 and 40 mM, respectively.
There does not seem to be strong evidence of the correlation between the plateau region and the salt
concentration. It seems that the mobility is quite stable / slightly decreasing up to 1 wt.%. It is possible
that the presence of PEG in very low concentrations does not affect the mobility of ions noticeably,
and that any small decrease in mobility perhaps is hidden behind the uncertainties of the impedance
measurements and model fit.
Effective Double Layer Capacitance
The effective double layer capacitance for the solutions is shown in Figures 29a and 29b. The effec-
tive double layer capacitance for all four instances is approximately 6.5 µF/cm2.
The double layer
capacitance is slightly larger for the 40 mM solutions than for the 5 mM solutions. The ¯Cdl for the 5
mM solutions is approximately 6.3 µF/cm2, and for the 40 mM solutions, this number is 6.8 µF/cm2.
The effective double layer capacitance seems to be slightly lower for NaSCN than for NaCl solutions.
Page 39 of 81
==PAGE:45==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
The double layer capacitance was expected to decrease slightly with decreasing ionic strength.[9] The
estimated double layer capacitance of the corresponding polymer-free solutions is indicated in Figures
29a and 29b. The model and experimental capacitance at 40 mM are in better agreement compared to
the 5 mM. However, overall the experimentally obtained effective double layer capacitance is in good
agreement with the estimated value, and it seems that the rough model is a decent tool to predict the
double layer capacitance.
(a)
(b)
Figure 29: Effective double layer capacitance of a) 5 mM and b) 40 mM PEG 20 000 solutions containing NaCl or
NaSCN. The estimated ¯Cdl of the corresponding polymer-free solutions is indicated by the dotted lines
The effective double layer capacitance shown in Figure 27 and 29 is of similar size. Figure 27 revealed
that ¯Cdl is quite unaffected by molecular weight. Figure 29 indicates a slight change in ¯Cdl with ion
type and concentration. Overall, further experiments could be conducted to determine the significance
of specific ion effects and ion concentration on the double layer capacitance.
3.3
Revisiting Ionic Conductivity
3.3.1
Estimation of Internal Length Scales
During the impedance measurements, the ions experience a force over a given time. This time varies
from 10-5 to 10 seconds. The solution resistance is determined from the fit and is the dominating term
in impedance at high frequencies. It would be interesting to know how far an ion travels in the time
the potential difference is applied. A rough estimation of the distance that an ion travels is determined
by its drift speed, see Equation 39.[17]
s = u · E
(39)
Here, s is the drift speed, u is the mobility, and E is the magnitude of the electric field. The magnitude of
the electric field is unknown. For planer electrodes, the magnitude of the electric field can be determined
from the potential difference and the distance between the electrodes, see Equation 40.[17]
E =
∆φ
delectrode
(40)
Page 40 of 81
==PAGE:46==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
It is assumed that the electric field of the parallel wires can be determined in a similar fashion. The
distance that an ion travels is then determined from Equation 41.
dion = u ·
∆φ
delectrode
· 1
f
(41)
The potential difference applied is not a part of the raw data extracted from the impedance measure-
ments. An average voltage of sinusoidal waveforms can be estimated from the amplitude of 5 mV, see
Equation 42.[50] Here, ∆φ = Vavg.
Vavg = 0.637 · 5mV = 3.185mV
(42)
Based on these assumptions it can now be estimated how far the ions move over time. For simplicity,
this is only determined for 40 mM NaCl, which has a mobility of approximately 12 ·10-8 m2 · s−1 · V−1
in polymer-free solutions according to the obtained data. The estimated distance NaCl travels at the
applied frequencies is shown in Figure 30.
Figure 30: Estimated distance NaCl travels at the applied frequencies
From this estimation, it is concluded that at high frequencies the ions travel in a length scale between
10-12 to 10-13 m. This length scale is 100-1000 times smaller than the size of the ions themselves.[12]
The solution resistance determined is therefore more precisely a measure of the ions’ ability to wriggle
around themselves than move an actual distance.
It is now interesting to estimate the length between each polymer coil. This allows us to predict when
ions travel a length scale large enough to move past the coils. The distance between each polymer coil,
Page 41 of 81
==PAGE:47==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
dbulk, is estimated from the model shown in Figure 31. The number of polymer coils, Ncoils, can be
determined from the wt.%. This number of polymer coils is then distributed evenly in a cube with
ncoils= 3√Ncoils in each dimension. The distance to the nearest neighbour can then be determined from
Equation 43.
Lcell = ncoils · 2 · Rg + dbulk · (ncoils + 1)
(43)
Here, Lcell is the length of one cell side.
Figure 31: Model of estimation of the distance between polymer coils
In this model, it is assumed that all polymer coils are surrounded by bulk water and are not adhering to
the cell walls. Furthermore, it should be noted that the cell has rounded corners that are not accounted
for in the model. The estimated distance between the polymer coils is shown in Figure 32.
Figure 32: Distance between polymer coils
Page 42 of 81
==PAGE:48==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
This model only makes sense up until c*, which can be seen for the negative distances at concentrations
above c*. The distance is in the range of 0-40 nm. According to Figure 30 NaCl travels a distance
in the nm length scale at around 10 Hz.
It should be noted that at a 10 wt.% concentration, the
major component is water. It is therefore likely that the ions primarily are in an aqueous environment.
This observation arises several questions: why does the solution resistance, thus mobility, change with
increasing polymer concentration if the ions are barely moving? The estimations revealed that the ions
are not moving and that the solution resistance is not a measure of the ions’ ability to travel a long
distance in the solution. It, therefore, seems unlikely that the decrease in conductivity (and mobility)
is caused by collisions with polymer coils at a frequency of 105 Hz which is the mechanism proposed in
the literature. The decrease in mobility must therefore arise from another mechanism.
The ions’ affinity for polymer association may not be similar. A simplified model of the binding is
illustrated in Figure 33. The salting in effect of SCN- is illustrated by the association of the ion to
the polymer. The salting out effect of Cl- is illustrated by the predominant presence of bulk Cl-. The
illustration is simplified and the ratio between polymer-associated and non-associated ions is not known.
Figure 33: Association of ions
The complexation of Na+ to the ether oxygen on PEG will bind the ion and limit the mobility.[44] It is
therefore a more likely theory that the presence of PEG binds the Na+ ions to the polymer chains and
through this mechanism limits the mobility. The concentration, in which there are equally as many Na+
ions as ether oxygen, has been determined. But there is no strong indication that mobility is drastically
influenced at this concentration. It should be noted that the PEG oxygen and Na+ might not bind
in a 1:1 relationship [44] and that not all participate in binding. It is therefore a possibility that the
addition of polymer chains leads to an increase in bound Na+ ions but that not all ether oxygen and
Na+ ions participate in binding. The mobility of SCN- is also expected to decrease due to the formation
of attractive interactions.[43] Cl- ions are not expected to interact as strongly with the polymer chains,
Page 43 of 81
==PAGE:49==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
and it is therefore expected that these ions are less affected by the presence of PEG. It should be noted
that the mobility estimated must be an average of the mobility of all ions in the solution. Some ions
will find themselves in a bulk water environment, others near PEG or even bound to PEG. The mobility
measured is thus a combination of the free bulk ions and the more immobile polymer-associated ions.
The mobility may be limited by both the complexation or attractive dispersion forces for Na+ and
SCN- ions, respectively. Furthermore, the mobility could be sterically limited by ions that are simply
near PEG. This applies to all three types of ions. The interactions with PEG are expected to be more
pronounced for SCN- than Cl-. It is therefore contrary to the expectation that the mobility of NaCl and
NaSCN is similarly affected by PEG. The regressions over the mobility curves revealed that the equations
of mobility of NaCl and NaSCN are approximately similar. This indicates that the mobility of NaCl
and NaSCN is limited equally by adding PEG. This discovery leads to new questions. Is the mobility
of ions (measured at 105 Hz) independent of any chemical attractions between ions and surroundings?
At this frequency, the ions move a distance in the order of 10-13 m. The length of a chemical bond is in
the range of 10-10 m. Is the distance moved so small that any electrostatic interactions are not strongly
affected by the movement? Or is the applied potential so strong that any attraction between the ions
is broken and the ions are torn away from the polymer? If this is the case then it might not be possible
to see any difference between Cl- and SCN-.
3.3.2
Estimation of Model Fit
Another coinciding observation can be seen in the Nyquist and phase plots of the polymer solutions.
The equivalent circuit model predicts a straight line over the entire frequency range in the Nyquist plot.
However, this does not apply to polymer solutions. In the Nyquist plots, it is possible to see that the
data deflects from the straight line at lower frequencies. This deflection is illustrated in Figure 34.
Figure 34: Nyquist plot of PEG 20 000 solutions at 5 mM NaCl concentration
Page 44 of 81
==PAGE:50==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
The data deflects in the direction of an increased Zreal value compared to the expected value. The big
Zreal values indicate that the resistance of the system increases more than the model predicts. One
of the downsides of the Nyquist plot is that the impedance values cannot be directly linked to their
corresponding frequencies. It is therefore not possible to know exactly at what frequencies the model
begins to fail from the Nyquist plot. To understand this, the relationship between the residuals of the
model and the applied frequency is plotted. The residuals plotted are the error in Zreal, see Equation
44.
Error = Zrealdata −Zrealmodel
Zrealmodel
(44)
The estimation of error is not conducted for all polymer weights and concentrations but a few are
selected, see Figure 35.
Figure 35: Error plot of Zreal for PEG 6K, 20K and PEG 40K 40 mM NaCl
Figure 35 reveals that the error is small in the frequency range of 105 to 100 Hz. The model begins
to err at frequencies between 100 to 10 Hz, and this error drastically increases at low frequencies. Fre-
quencies between 100-10 Hz correspond to a movement of NaCl in the nm length scale. The distance
between coils is estimated to be around 0-40 nm at concentrations below c*. It is, therefore, possible
that the increase in the system’s resistance is caused by collisions with the polymer coils, and that these
collisions begin to occur at a frequency between 100 and 10 Hz. The energy loss caused by collisions is
not reversible such as any collision/association with the electrodes would be.
This deviation from the pure NaCl solutions can also be observed in the Bode phase plots. The Bode
phase plots show a large deviation compared to that of polymer-free solutions. In polymer-free so-
lutions, the phase increases to a phase of -80° (for 40 mM solutions) as the maximum value.
For
polymer-containing solutions, this is not always the case. At low frequencies, the phase begins to de-
Page 45 of 81
==PAGE:51==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
crease, and the approach of a maximum phase value does not follow the same pattern. This difference is
seen in Figures 36a and 36b. It is very clear to see that the presence of polymer affects the measurements.
(a)
(b)
Figure 36: Bode phase plot a) 40 mM NaCl solutions and b) 40 mM NaCl and PEG12K solutions
The Bode phase and impedance plots along with Nyquist plots for all aqueous polymer solutions are
shown in Appendix 6.2. This behaviour is seen both in measurements with NaCl and NaSCN and at all
molecular weights of PEG. The aqueous PEG solutions and polymer-free NaSCN solutions were only
fitted to the frequency range of 105 to 10 Hz. Whereas the polymer-free NaCl solutions were fitted
to the entire frequency range of 105 to 0.1 Hz. The differences in frequency range were among others
decided from the look of the Bode phase plot, where it is very obvious at which frequency the model
ceases to fit. The error of polymer-free NaCl is smaller than the polymer solutions and polymer-free
NaSCN solutions, see Figures 37a and 37b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 37: Error in Zreal of a) NaCl and b) NaSCN solutions at 10 mm electrode distance
Page 46 of 81
==PAGE:52==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
It is not obvious why the polymer-free NaSCN solutions should have so big errors and show similar
behaviour as the polymer solutions. Furthermore, the 5 mM polymer-free solutions have a bigger error
(especially for NaCl). These measurements were conducted late in the project, and the electrodes may
be contaminated with polymer residue. The polymer-free NaSCN measurements were also conducted
following impedance measurements of polymer solutions. The cell and electrodes were cleaned with
MilliQ water between each type of aqueous system. It was expected that water would be sufficient to
remove the residue of ions and a hydrophilic polymer. And based on this assumption the behaviour
should not be present in polymer-free solutions. This, however, does not seem to be the case. It is
unknown whether the deflection from the model occurs due to a build-up of polymer residue on the
electrodes or if the increase in the systems’ resistance is caused by the ions’ collision with polymer coils
or something completely different.
Page 47 of 81
==PAGE:53==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
4
Conclusion
The project aimed to study ion mobility in aqueous polymer systems. The project sought to understand
how the presence of macromolecules affects the mobility of ions in aqueous solutions. This project pro-
vided a basic understanding of ion mobility in solutions containing an uncharged polymer, PEG. The
mobility of two salts, NaCl and NaSCN, was studied. The mobility was studied using EIS, an analytical
technique that allows for the adjustment of cell and probe geometry and the analysis of electrical prop-
erties of both solutions and gels, independently of the solution viscosity. Initially, the cell was calibrated
using solutions of known conductivity. Here, the conductivity of NaCl solutions with concentrations
from 0.1-100 mM was determined with a conductivity probe. The impedance of these solutions was
measured at electrode distances between 1-19.5 mm. From these measurements, the cell constant, d/A,
and the effective area, Aeff, were determined at all electrode distances. This calibration allowed for the
conversion of the obtained solution resistance to conductivity and ion mobility.
Based on the calibration and determination of the cell constant, the ion mobility in aqueous polymer
systems could then be studied. It is well known that macroviscosity greatly depends on the polymer
concentration and molecular weight. However, this project sought to study how the ions and their
movement is limited by the presence of polymer. This limitation might not be similar to the macro-
scopic processes as the ions are very small and experience this so-called microviscosity. The polymer
used in this project was PEG. The effect of polymer concentration was studied using four different
molecular weights of PEG, namely PEG 6000, 12 000, 20 000, and 40 000 g/mol.
The impedance
measurements revealed that the mobility of NaCl decreased with the increased polymer concentration
without any significant change around c*. The decrease could mathematically be explained by both
a linear and exponential decrease. It was decided to use the exponential function to model the de-
crease. Furthermore, the decrease in mobility was seemingly unaffected by the molecular weight of the
polymers. This indicated that mobility was fairly unaffected by the macroscopic changes and that the
microscopic rather than the macroscopic environment was an important factor. The effect of specific
ionic effects was studied using two different salts, NaCl and NaSCN. Here, PEG 20 000 was used for
measurements of solutions with ionic strengths of 5 mM and 40 mM. The mobility decreased for both
salts, and there was no obvious change in behaviour when comparing the two salts. The SCN- has a
salting in effect and prefers to associate itself with macromolecules. This behaviour could potentially
have affected the ion mobility. However, no such behaviour was seen at the two salt concentrations
since the equations of the mobility curves were almost identical for NaCl and NaSCN. The comparison
of the two ionic strengths revealed that ion mobility decreases with increasing ionic strength. This was
expected following Kohlraush’s law, and the law allowed for the prediction of ion mobility for NaCl and
NaSCN at different salt concentrations. The mobility obtained from the data was in good agreement
with the estimation obtained from Kohlraush’s law.
The model used to fit the data turned out to be insufficient at low frequencies for the aqueous polymer
solutions. This was seen in the Nyquist plot of the raw data. The model predicted that the impedance of
said systems appears as a straight line. However, the impedance curve deflects and bends off compared
to the model. This process was sought to be understood using estimation of the length scales of which
Page 48 of 81
==PAGE:54==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
the ions operate at different time spans. The estimations predicted that the distance between polymer
coils is in the nm range, whereas the length an ion travels is in the pm (10-12 m) range. It, therefore,
seems odd that mobility is affected by the presence of PEG. The distance travelled is so little that
collisions with the polymer coils can be ruled out as the major contributor to the decrease in mobility.
It is speculated whether the decrease in mobility is caused by the association of ions to PEG. But
this is not fully understood. The estimations revealed that at frequencies between 100 and 10 Hz, the
ions travel a distance in the nm range. The residuals of the models revealed that the model begins
to fail around the same frequencies. A possible explanation is that the ions begin to collide with the
polymer coils at this frequency and the collisions bring more resistance (that is loss of energy) into the
system. This is not accounted for in the model, and it does not occur to the same extent at the higher
frequencies. The reason behind why the model fails and what processes occur at the microscopic length
scales are not fully understood. Further studies could be conducted to try to understand what causes
the model to fail and what causes the ion mobility to decrease in the presence of an uncharged polymer.
Page 49 of 81
==PAGE:55==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
5
Outlook
This study was conducted with an uncharged polymer. It would be interesting to study how charged
polymers behave in a setup like this. In this regard, it would be feasible to study both cationic and
anionic polyelectrolytes. In polyelectrolyte solutions the charges are either fixed on the polyelectrolyte
or carried by the counterions in solution. It would be interesting to study how the counterions con-
tribute to the conductivity, and how this contribution changes when different counterions are used. Ions
with different water affinities will be tightly or loosely bound to the polyelectrolyte, thus providing
different contributions to the conductivity. The counterions’ ability to ion-pair with the charges on the
polyelectrolyte could potentially have great a influence on the ability to oppose current flow.
The solution capacitance was included in the model for 0.1 mM salt concentrations. But this parameter
was not included in the model for the impedance of solutions with higher ionic strength. The solution
capacitance can be studied by measuring the impedance at even higher frequencies. This will entail
that the mathematical term including the solution capacitance becomes of sufficient size to actually be
significant for the impedance of the system.
This study was conducted with a constant amplitude of 5 mV. By applying a different amplitude the
force applied to the ions changes. The change in amplitude will change the distance the ions move. It is
possible that the resistance of the system is altered when ions potentially can collide with the coils over
a wider or narrower frequency range. A few small measurements were conducted to give an idea of the
relationship between the amplitude and parameters previously analysed. The amplitude applied was
in the range of 0.5-300 mV and the impedance measurements were performed once for each amplitude.
The Nyquist plot is shown in Figure 38.
Page 50 of 81
==PAGE:56==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Figure 38: Nyquist plot of amplitude sweep of aqueous 0.8 wt.% PEG20K solutions with a NaCl concentration of 40
mM
The amplitude sweep indicates that the impedance deflects towards higher Zreal values at low frequencies.
The deflection towards higher Zreal indicates that the systems’ resistance increases more than the model
predicts. The deflection from the model is quantified by the error in Zreal values, see Figure 39.
Page 51 of 81
==PAGE:57==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Figure 39: Error in model of aqueous 0.8 wt.% PEG20K solutions with a NaCl concentration of 40 mM
The error plot does not show convincingly that the error in Zreal values based on the model should
increase with increasing amplitude. There does not seem to be any correlation between the amplitude
and when large errors begin to occur. This indicates that the deflection is not caused by collisions with
the polymer coils. The estimated distance NaCl travels at the different amplitudes is shown in Figure
40. The distance is estimated based on the mobility and amplitude.
Figure 40: Distance NaCl travels at different amplitudes
Page 52 of 81
==PAGE:58==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
The distance NaCl travels is clearly influenced by the amplitude and the time, at which the ions travel a
length scale corresponding to the average distance between polymer coils, decreases. It could therefore
be hypothesised that the deflection in the Nyquist plot could have been observed earlier at higher am-
plitudes. However, there is not a strong indication of this phenomenon. Therefore, the explanation for
the deflection should potentially be found somewhere else. Is the deflection a product of the adhesion
of the polymer to the electrodes? The adhesion of the polymer could potentially lower the ability to
form the electric double layer. Furthermore, the ions will collide with the polymer on the electrodes
rather than the polymers in solution. This could potentially lead to energy dispersion and not build up
of capacitance.
The error plot shows large deviations for 0.5 mV in particular.
It should be noted that there was
noise/interference from 100-0.1 Hz for the 0.5 mV measurement. The Bode impedance and phase plots
are shown in Figures 41a and 41b. In the Bode phase plot, this interference is also easily spotted.
(a)
(b)
Figure 41: Bode a) impedance and b) phase plot of amplitude sweep of aqueous 0.8 wt.% PEG20K solutions with a
NaCl concentration of 40 mM
The Bode impedance plot shows that the solution resistance is quite unaffected by the amplitude. From
this it follows that the mobility is also unaffected by the change in amplitude. It appears as if the phase
is slightly decreased for all measurements compared to previous measurements on polymer systems, see
Appendix 6.2.2. Here, the maximum phase is around -70° whereas the previous PEG solutions had a
phase up to -80°. However, there does not seem to be any correlation between the phase and amplitude
since all nine measurements have approximately the same phase. The decrease in phase could be caused
by some experimental error or defects on the Pt wires. The relationship between mobility and effective
double layer capacitance is shown in Figures 42a and 42b, respectively.
Page 53 of 81
==PAGE:59==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
Figure 42: a) mobility of NaCl and b) effective double layer capacitance of amplitude sweep of aqueous 0.8 wt.% PEG20K
solutions with a NaCl concentration of 40 mM
The impedance measurements indicate a slight increase in mobility, thus a decrease in resistance,
with increasing amplitude.
This change is small and in general, the mobility varies from 11.6 -
11.8·10−8m2 · s−1 · V−1.
With so few measurements and no replications, it is difficult to say with
certainty that the change is caused by the increase in amplitude and is not a matter of measuring and
fitting uncertainties. Further measurements could be conducted to verify if there is an increase in mobil-
ity or not. The effective double layer capacitance increases with increasing amplitude. It is not known
why this increase occurs. With high amplitudes, it is possible that the system is changed and that this
change could cause an increase in ¯Cdl. In EIS measurements the amplitude must be so small that the
response of the sample is linear (or assumed to be linear). Typical amplitudes are up to 20 mV.[3] It is
not known whether the response is linear or not for all the applied amplitudes. If further studies that
include a change in amplitude, should be conducted, it is important to check that the response is linear.
Overall, it seems that there are many aspects of ion mobility that are not completely understood. EIS
is a tool that allows us to study the opposition to current flow at different time scales. This project
has used EIS as a tool to evaluate ion mobility in PEG solutions. However, many questions remain.
It is not fully understood what the best interpretation of ion mobility is and how it is affected by the
macromolecules. It would therefore be interesting to study the mobility of ions in more complex systems
that permit ion pairing. Furthermore, it would be feasible to investigate how EIS can be used to study
the properties of such systems. It could for example be interesting to alter the frequency range or the
amplitude.
Page 54 of 81
==PAGE:60==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
References
1.
Stojilkovic, K. S., Berezhkovskii, A. M., Zitserman, V. Y. & Bezrukov, S. M. Conductivity and
microviscosity of electrolyte solutions containing polyethylene glycols. The Journal of chemical
physics 119, 6973–6978 (2003).
2.
Laschuk, N. O., Easton, E. B. & Zenkina, O. V. Reducing the resistance for the use of electro-
chemical impedance spectroscopy analysis in materials chemistry. RSC advances 11, 27925–27936
(2021).
3.
Careem, M. A., Noor, I. S. M. & Arof, A. K. Chapter 2 - Impedance Spectroscopy in Polymer
Electrolyte Characterization in Polymer Electrolytes 23–64 (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2020). isbn:
9783527805457. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9783527805457.
ch2.
4.
Magar, H. S., Hassan, R. Y. & Mulchandani, A. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS):
Principles, Construction, and Biosensing Applications. Sensors 21, 6578 (2021).
5.
Lasia, A. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy and its Applications 1–367. isbn: 978-1-4614-
8932-0 (Springer New York, 2014).
6.
Vendrell, X., Ram´ırez-Gonz´alez, J., Ye, Z.-G. & West, A. R. Revealing the role of the constant
phase element in relaxor ferroelectrics. Communications Physics 5, 1–10 (2022).
7.
Holm, S., Holm, T. & Martinsen, Ø. G. Simple circuit equivalents for the constant phase element.
PloS one 16, e0248786 (2021).
8.
Brett, C. M. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy in the Characterisation and Application of
Modified Electrodes for Electrochemical Sensors and Biosensors. Molecules 27, 1497 (2022).
9.
Khademi, M. & Barz, D. P. Structure of the electrical double layer revisited: Electrode capacitance
in aqueous solutions. Langmuir 36, 4250–4260 (2020).
10.
Lasia, A. The origin of the constant phase element. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 13,
580–589 (2022).
11.
Orazem, M. E. et al. Dielectric properties of materials showing constant-phase-element (CPE)
impedance response. Journal of The Electrochemical Society 160, C215–C225 (2013).
12.
Salis, A. & Ninham, B. W. Models and mechanisms of Hofmeister effects in electrolyte solutions,
and colloid and protein systems revisited. Chemical Society Reviews 43, 7358–7377 (2014).
13.
Warriner, K. & Namvar, A. 4.54 - Biosensors for Foodborne Pathogen Detection in Comprehen-
sive Biotechnology (Second Edition) (ed Moo-Young, M.) Second Edition, 659–674 (Academic
Press, Burlington, 2011). isbn: 978-0-08-088504-9. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780080885049003226.
14.
Su, L., Liao, X. & Huang, Z. A theoretical study on resistance of electrolytic solution: Measurement
of electrolytic conductivity. Results in Physics 13, 102274 (2019).
Page 55 of 81
==PAGE:61==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
15.
Mulopo, J. & Abdulsalam, J. Chapter 9 - Energy storage properties of graphene nanofillers in
Graphene-Based Nanotechnologies for Energy and Environmental Applications (eds Jawaid, M.,
Ahmad, A. & Lokhat, D.) 155–179 (Elsevier, 2019). isbn: 978-0-12-815811-1. https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128158111000090.
16.
Randviir, E. P. & Banks, C. E. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: an overview of bioana-
lytical applications. Analytical methods 5, 1098–1115 (2013).
17.
Atkins, P. & de Paula, J. Atkins’ physical chemistry Tenth Edition, 798–803. isbn: 978-0-19-969740-
3 (Oxford University Press, 2014).
18.
Doppelhammer, N., Pellens, N., Kirschhock, C. E., Jakoby, B. & Reichel, E. K. Using moving
electrode impedance spectroscopy to monitor particle sedimentation. IEEE Sensors Journal 21,
9636–9641 (2020).
19.
Bataller, R., Gandıa, J. M., Garcıa-Breijo, E., Alca˜niz, M. & Soto, J. A study of the importance of
the cell geometry in non-Faradaic systems. A new definition of the cell constant for conductivity
measurement. Electrochimica Acta 153, 263–272 (2015).
20.
Stevens, M. P. Polymer Chemistry: An Introduction Third Edition, 37–42. isbn: 978-0-19-512444-6
(Oxford university press New York, 1999).
21.
Koltzenburg, S., Maskos, M. & Nuyken, O. Polymer chemistry 17–38. isbn: 978-3-662-49277-2
(Springer, 2017).
22.
Fried, J. R. Polymer science and technology Third Edition, 452–456. isbn: 978-0-13-703955-5 (Pear-
son Education, 2014).
23.
Gupta, P., Elkins, C., Long, T. E. & Wilkes, G. L. Electrospinning of linear homopolymers of
poly (methyl methacrylate): exploring relationships between fiber formation, viscosity, molecular
weight and concentration in a good solvent. Polymer 46, 4799–4810 (2005).
24.
Rodrigues, T., Galindo-Rosales, F. J. & Campo-Dea˜no, L. Critical overlap concentration and in-
trinsic viscosity data of xanthan gum aqueous solutions in dimethyl sulfoxide. Data in Brief 33,
106431 (2020).
25.
Ziebacz, N., Wieczorek, S. A., Kalwarczyk, T., Fia lkowski, M. & Ho lyst, R. Crossover regime for
the diffusion of nanoparticles in polyethylene glycol solutions: influence of the depletion layer. Soft
Matter 7, 7181–7186 (2011).
26.
Cruje, C. & Chithrani, D. Polyethylene glycol density and length affects nanoparticle uptake by
cancer cells. Journal of Nanomedicine Research 1, 27–32 (2014).
27.
Agasty, A., Wisniewska, A., Kalwarczyk, T., Koynov, K. & Holyst, R. Macroscopic Viscosity of
Polymer Solutions from the Nanoscale Analysis. ACS applied polymer materials 3, 2813–2822
(2021).
28.
Rayner, M., ¨Ostbring, K. & Purhagen, J. Chapter 5 Application of Natural Polymers in Food in
Natural Polymers: Industry Techniques and Applications (ed Olatunji, O.) First Edition, 115–161
(Springer International Publishing, 2015). isbn: 9783319264141.
29.
Sigma-Aldrich. Polyethylene glycol 20000 Last accessed 06-02-2023. https://www.sigmaaldrich.
com/DK/en/product/mm/818897.
Page 56 of 81
==PAGE:62==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
30.
Gulnov, D. V., Nemtseva, E. V. & Kratasyuk, V. A. Contrasting relationship between macro-and
microviscosity of the gelatin-and starch-based suspensions and gels. Polymer Bulletin 73, 3421–
3435 (2016).
31.
Zitserman, V. Y., Stojilkovich, K., Berezhkovskii, A. & Bezrukov, S. Electrical conductivity of
aqueous solutions of polyethylene glycol. Russian Journal of Physical Chemistry 79. Translated
from Zhurnal Fizicheskoi Khimii, Vol. 79, No. 7, 2005, pp. 1236–1243, 1083–1089 (2005).
32.
Zarrintaj, P., Saeb, M. R., Jafari, S. H. & Mozafari, M. Chapter 18 - Application of compatibi-
lized polymer blends in biomedical fields in Compatibilization of Polymer Blends (eds A.R., A. &
Thomas, S.) 511–537 (Elsevier, 2020). isbn: 978-0-12-816006-0. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780128160060000189.
33.
Herzberger, J. et al. Polymerization of ethylene oxide, propylene oxide, and other alkylene ox-
ides: synthesis, novel polymer architectures, and bioconjugation. Chemical reviews 116, 2170–
2243 (2016).
34.
Ensing, B. et al. On the origin of the extremely different solubilities of polyethers in water. Nature
communications 10, 1–8 (2019).
35.
Huang, L. & Nishinari, K. Interaction between poly (ethylene glycol) and water as studied by
differential scanning calorimetry. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics 39, 496–
506 (2001).
36.
Hocine, S. & Li, M.-H. Thermoresponsive self-assembled polymer colloids in water. Soft Matter 9,
5839–5861 (2013).
37.
Hunger, J., Neueder, R., Buchner, R. & Apelblat, A. A conductance study of guanidinium chloride,
thiocyanate, sulfate, and carbonate in dilute aqueous solutions: ion-association and carbonate
hydrolysis effects. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 117, 615–622 (2013).
38.
Yang, Z. Hofmeister effects: an explanation for the impact of ionic liquids on biocatalysis. Journal
of biotechnology 144, 12–22 (2009).
39.
Kang, B., Tang, H., Zhao, Z. & Song, S. Hofmeister series: Insights of ion specificity from am-
phiphilic assembly and interface property. ACS omega 5, 6229–6239 (2020).
40.
Wang, X., Qiao, C., Song, K., Jiang, S. & Yao, J. Hofmeister effect on the viscosity properties of
gelatin in dilute solutions. Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 206, 111944 (2021).
41.
Florin, E., Kjellander, R. & Eriksson, J. C. Salt effects on the cloud point of the poly (ethylene ox-
ide)+ water system. Journal of the Chemical Society, Faraday Transactions 1: Physical Chemistry
in Condensed Phases 80, 2889–2910 (1984).
42.
Hyde, A. M. et al. General principles and strategies for salting-out informed by the Hofmeister
series. Organic Process Research & Development 21, 1355–1370 (2017).
43.
Rogers, B. A. et al. Weakly hydrated anions bind to polymers but not monomers in aqueous
solutions. Nature Chemistry 14, 40–45 (2022).
44.
Balijepalli, A., Robertson, J. W., Reiner, J. E., Kasianowicz, J. J. & Pastor, R. W. Theory of
polymer–nanopore interactions refined using molecular dynamics simulations. Journal of the Amer-
ican Chemical Society 135, 7064–7072 (2013).
Page 57 of 81
==PAGE:63==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
45.
Kadhim, M. & Gamaj, M. I. Estimation of the diffusion coefficient and hydrodynamic radius
(Stokes radius) for inorganic ions in solution depending on molar conductivity as electro-analytical
technique-a review. J. Chem. Rev 2, 182–188 (2020).
46.
Kim, H., Park, S. & Cho, M. Rotational dynamics of thiocyanate ions in highly concentrated
aqueous solutions. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 14, 6233–6240 (2012).
47.
Malmberg, C. & Maryott, A. Dielectric constant of water from 0 to 100 C. Journal of research of
the National Bureau of Standards 56, 1–8 (1956).
48.
Holyst, R. et al. Scaling form of viscosity at all length-scales in poly (ethylene glycol) solutions
studied by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy and capillary electrophoresis. Physical Chemistry
Chemical Physics 11, 9025–9032 (2009).
49.
Fritz, P. A. et al. Electrode surface potential-driven protein adsorption and desorption through
modulation of electrostatic, van der Waals, and Hydration Interactions. Langmuir 37, 6549–6555
(2021).
50.
Bauer, W. & Westfall, G. D. Chapter 23 - Electric Potential in University Physics with Modern
Physics Second Edition, 709–737 (McGRaw-Hill, 2014). isbn: 978-1-259-08075-3.
Page 58 of 81
==PAGE:64==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6
Appendix
6.1
Initial Experiments
6.1.1
Nyquist Plot
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 43: Nyquist plot of NaCl concentrations with electrode distances of a) 1 mm, b) 5 mm, c) 10 mm, d) 13 mm,
and e) 19.5 mm
Page 59 of 81
==PAGE:65==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure 44: Nyquist plot of NaCl solutions with concentrations of a) 0.1 mM, b) 1 mM, c) 10 mM, d) 20 mM, e) 40 mM,
f) 70 mM, and g) 100 mM
Page 60 of 81
==PAGE:66==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6.1.2
Bode Impedance Plot
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure 45: Bode impedance plot of electrode distances NaCl concentrations of a) 0.1 mM, b) 1 mM, c) 10 mM, d) 20
mM, e) 40 mM, f) 70 mM, and g) 100 mM
Page 61 of 81
==PAGE:67==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6.1.3
Bode Phase Plot
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure 46: Bode phase plot of electrode distances at NaCl concentrations of a) 0.1 mM, b) 1 mM, c) 10 mM, d) 20 mM,
e) 40 mM, f) 70 mM, and g) 100 mM
Page 62 of 81
==PAGE:68==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6.1.4
Nyquist and Bode Plots of NaCl Solutions at 10 mm Electrode Distance
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 47: a) Nyquist and Bode b) impedance and c) phase plots of NaCl solutions
Page 63 of 81
==PAGE:69==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6.1.5
Q0 and n
(a)
(b)
Figure 48: a) Q0 and b) n as function of concentration
(a)
(b)
Figure 49: a) Q0 and b) n as function of distance
Page 64 of 81
==PAGE:70==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6.1.6
Nyquist and Bode Plots of NaSCN Solutions
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 50: a) Nyquist and Bode b) impedance and c) phase plots of NaSCN solution
Page 65 of 81
==PAGE:71==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6.1.7
Determination of Relationship Between Resistance and Electrode Distance
Figure 51: R against electrode distances for NaCl concentrations ranging from 0.1-100 mM
Page 66 of 81
==PAGE:72==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6.2
Determination of Ion Mobility in Aqueous PEG Solutions
6.2.1
Screening for Suitable PEG Concentrations
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 52: a) Nyquist and Bode b) impedance and c) phase plots of 0-30.3 wt.% PEG20000 40 mM NaSCN or NaCl
Page 67 of 81
==PAGE:73==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6.2.2
Concentration Range of PEG6K, PEG12K, PEG20K, and PEG40K in 40 mM NaCl
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 53: a) Nyquist and Bode b) impedance and c) phase plots of PEG6000 and 40 mM NaCl
Page 68 of 81
==PAGE:74==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 54: a) Nyquist and Bode b) impedance and c) phase plots of PEG12000 and 40 mM NaCl
Page 69 of 81
==PAGE:75==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 55: a) Nyquist and Bode b) impedance and c) phase plots of PEG20000 and 40 mM NaCl
Page 70 of 81
==PAGE:76==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 56: a) Nyquist and Bode b) impedance and c) phase plots of PEG40000 and 40 mM NaCl
Page 71 of 81
==PAGE:77==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6.2.3
Concentration range of PEG 20K in 40 mM NaSCN
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 57: a) Nyquist and Bode b) impedance and c) phase plots of PEG20000 and 40 mM NaSCN
Page 72 of 81
==PAGE:78==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6.2.4
Concentration range of PEG 20K in 5 mM Nacl or NaSCN
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 58: a) Nyquist and Bode b) impedance and c) phase plots of PEG20000 and 5mM NaCl
Page 73 of 81
==PAGE:79==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 59: a) Nyquist and Bode b) impedance and c) phase plots of PEG20000 and 5mM NaSCN
Page 74 of 81
==PAGE:80==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6.2.5
Linear and Exponential Fit of Mobility Data
Linear Fit
(a)
(b)
Figure 60: Linear fit of ion mobility of NaCl in PEG solutions. a) Linear illustration b) logX illustration
Page 75 of 81
==PAGE:81==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Exponential Fit
(a)
(b)
Figure 61: Exponential fit of ion mobility of NaCl in PEG solutions. a) Linear illustration b) logX illustration
Page 76 of 81
==PAGE:82==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Individual Mobility Curves
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 62: Ion mobility of NaCl in PEG solutions. a) PEG 6 000, b) PEG 12 000, c) PEG 20 000, d) PEG 40 000
Page 77 of 81
==PAGE:83==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 63: Ion mobility of NaCl in PEG solutions on logX scale. a) PEG 6 000, b) PEG 12 000, c) PEG 20 000, d) PEG
40 000
Page 78 of 81
==PAGE:84==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
Ion Specific Effects
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 64: Ion mobility of 5 mM NaCl and NaSCN in PEG solutions. a) exponential function logX scale, b) exponential
function linear scale, c) linear function logX scale, d) linear function linear scale
Page 79 of 81
==PAGE:85==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 65: Ion mobility of 40 mM NaCl and NaSCN in PEG solutions. a) exponential function logX scale, b) exponential
function linear scale, c) linear function logX scale, d) linear function linear scale
Page 80 of 81
==PAGE:86==
Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen, s174066
Master Thesis: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Polymer Systems
February 2023
6.3
PEG100K
Figure 66: PEG 100 000 solutions of 0.5, 1.0, 5.0, and 10 wt%
Page 81 of 81
