==PAGE:1==
Dynamic Route Planning for Mobile Robots
MSc Eng in Autonomous Systems - Master’s thesis
Author
Christoff Sperly Toftegaard - s144787
Supervisor
Nils Axel Andersen - Associate Professor
In collaboration with Robotize ApS
Christian Witting - Company Contact
19th February 2023
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Introduction
1
3
Theory
4
3.1
Dijkstra’s algorithm and A* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
D* Lite
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Methods
13
4.1
General outline of the implementation: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Implementing a costmap:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Altering the calculation of the heuristic and movecost: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4
Implementing scanning for edge-cost changes at a distance:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.5
Ignoring occupied nodes when updating: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.6
Sorting the priority queue: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.7
Alternative implementations of the program: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.8
Testing methods: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Results
25
5.1
Test 1: Obstacle appears.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Test 2: Obstacle disappears. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Test 3: Simple office map test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Discussion
32
7
Future Work
33
7.1
ROS implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.2
Non-binary costmap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8
Conclusion
34
9
References
36
10 Appendices
37
10.1 D* Lite
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
10.2 D* Lite (optimized version) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
10.3 standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.h . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
10.4 standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.cpp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
10.5 lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.h . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
10.6 lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:3==
Final Project
1
Abstract
Robots have been playing an increasingly important role in our modern world for the past few
decades and they are likely to take on more roles in the near future. With the advancement of
technology and as robots become more autonomous we are already seeing robots taking their first
steps in our world, no longer bolted to a factory floor. What is important is that it is ’our’ world
these robots need to navigate, a complex and dynamic environment. However, methods of path
planning such as the A* algorithm, which is often implemented on robots today, are not efficient
in a dynamic environment as A* has no ability to deal with the unexpected other than creating
a brand new plan. This project aims to instead implement the D* Lite [4] path planning algo-
rithm which has the capability to re-plan and deal with the unexpected. The project utilized a
demonstration implementation of the D* Lite algorithm in C++ and developed on that to imple-
ment a path planner which utilized D* Lite to navigate in simulated environments which could
mirror simplified real-world settings. Analysis of the project results shows that D* Lite is far bet-
ter when obstacles disappear, than when obstacles appear and block existing paths. Results also
show that re-planning with the D* Lite implementation have to search a smaller number of lo-
cations than what an A* implementation’s new plan needs to search when obstacles appear/dis-
appears. While results also show that the A* implementation requires less time to create a new
plan than the D* Lite implementation’s re-planning requires when a new obstacles is encountered,
this is due how the D* Lite implementation have been implemented, and could presumably be
corrected. I thus conclude that D* Lite re-planning increases the efficiency of path planning in a
dynamic environment.
2
Introduction
Ours is a world always in motion. Every day billions of people go work, untold tons of goods
are ferried between continents, and everywhere something is happening. The world is dynamic,
not static and our entire existence is built around autonomous mobile agents who act, interact,
and are being acted upon. From mowing a lawn to painting a house, physical tasks requires an
agent with autonomy and mobility to carry them out. While we have acted as autonomous mo-
bile agents for most of history, in recent decades technology have paved the way for autonomous
mobile robots. In recent years the Massachusetts, USA based company Boston Dynamics have
gained public attention with their mobile robots such as the four-legged, dog-like robot ’Spot’
which can be seen crossing various difficult terrain in online videos which garner several million
views. However, while a robot might be mobile and capable of limited autonomy how can it navi-
gate in our dynamic world?
Motion planning, or path planning, is the problem a robot needs to solve in order to move from
where it is to where it needs to be. Also known as ’the piano mover’s problem’ which gives a
more tangible example, it’s the same problem a piano mover face, how to get a piano from where
it is to where it needs to be using the shortest path in an environment bounded by walls/obsta-
cles. Path planning is often divided in two parts, global path planning which handles the overall
task of getting a mobile robot to where it needs to be, and local path planning which controls the
robots movements and trajectory along the planned path. The focus and scope of this paper is
that of global path planning. Solutions to the global path planning problem are found through
the use of "search algorithms" which are an ordered set of instructions that involves performing
Page 1
==PAGE:4==
Final Project
mathematical calculations to find a path to the ’goal’.
The A* algorithm is one example of a path planning algorithm which is often used for global
planning. It’s a search algorithm which dates back to Shakey the Robot, the first mobile robot
able to reason about its own actions [8]. The A* algorithm was invented by researchers who worked
on its path planning and is a method of finding the shortest path to a goal location. However,
while the A* algorithm is simple to implement, that same simplicity comes with issues that makes
the A* algorithm inefficient in dynamic environments. To elaborate, the A* algorithm is fully ca-
pable of creating a plan to a desired location, but it does not track the progress of that plan or
account for any potential changes which may occur. So, for example, the plan created by the A*
algorithm might be described in a simplified manner as receiving directions from a friend, being
told to head down the street, take a left, then a right, and enter the red house, and then your
friend leaves and we follow the directions. However, down the street we cannot take a left because
the road is fully blocked by a truck. An obstacle have been encountered which makes it impos-
sible to follow the plan and your friend is not there to account for this unexpected truck to give
alternative instructions. Thus, if a robot using A* encounters an obstacle the A* cannot ’plan
around’ that obstacle. Instead the robot must discard the current plan along with all the data
which have been calculated, and create an entirely new plan.
Now, this is obviously not very efficient in a dynamic environment and a potential problem for
companies who produce autonomous mobile robots. The A* search algorithm performs a num-
ber of mathematical calculations to find a path to the goal, a number which increase the larger
the area it needs to search is. So discarding the plan means that the instructions needs to be
run again, and new calculations performed, regardless of whether the previous plan might still
be fully valid beyond the obstacle, it’s still discarded. And as the number of calculations needed
grows with the size of the environment, a robot might potentially ’stop’ for a period of time, do-
ing nothing while it calculates a new path. And if a robot stops several times on its journey this
inactive time can quickly add up and become very inefficient for a company. Now, one obvious
solution might be to conclude that if the A* algorithm doesn’t handle obstacles very efficiently
to just ensure that there are no obstacles. It’s quite common for industrial robot arms to be en-
closed in a cage for safety reasons, simplifying the robots environment instead of trying to solve
the issues that arise in our environment. While doing something similar with a mobile robot, de-
signing its environment to be restricted and less dynamic, might solve the problem it’s probably
expensive and the robot will only retain its performance in that type of environment.
But the A* search algorithm is not the only search algorithm in existence, there are many other
path planning algorithms which performs in different ways. Since A* is an effective search al-
gorithm in cases other than when a new obstacle appears, and with the focus and scope being
global planning, a search algorithm that possess the qualities of A*, but the ability to deal with
the unexpected would be interesting to explore. Therefore this this paper concerns the implemen-
tation of the D* Lite search algorithm.
The D* Lite algorithm created by Sven Koenig and Maxim Likhachev is a more complex search
algorithm than A*, and if nothing unexpected is encountered as a robot move along the path it
produce the exact same path as the A* algorithm. But where D* Lite differs from A* is that the
D* Lite algorithm includes capabilities which make it far more efficient when functioning in dy-
Page 2
==PAGE:5==
Final Project
namic environments. And key to being able to function in a dynamic environment is the capabil-
ity to ’re-plan’ when the environment changes in unexpected ways. Thus if we consider the A*
example from earlier were a friend gave us directions but we encountered a truck which rendered
the plan invalid, a very simplified similar example of D* Lite would be that our friend not only
gave us directions, but also a phone so we could call and after describing the nature of the ob-
stacle we could get new directions. Thus the concept behind D* Lite presents a better method of
path planning than A*. The objectives in this paper are:
• Implement a global planner using the D* Lite search algorithm with the capability to per-
form path planning on simulated real-world scenarios (eight connectivity grid-map).
• Perform tests and collect data to examine the properties of a D* Lite global planner, and
the effectiveness and efficiency of re-planning.
And the paper seeks to answer the research question:
• Will re-planning with a D* Lite implementation as a global planner display increased effi-
ciency compared to what could be achieved with the creation of an entirely new plan?
This paper first lays out the theory behind the A* algorithm, the simpler Dijkstra’s algorithm,
and D* Lite, it then goes on to explain the methodology behind the implementation of the D*
Lite algorithm. The results of testing performed with the implementation is then presented, fol-
lowed by a discussion of the interpretations of the results and the implications. Finally this paper
rounds off with recommendations of potential future avenues of research based on the work per-
formed here, before ending with a conclusion on the project and the answer to the research ques-
tion.
Page 3
==PAGE:6==
Final Project
3
Theory
This section will cover some basic terminology for path planning and explain a bit about the
Dijkstra’s and A* path planning algorithms, but will not delve too deeply into an already well-
documented subject. It will merely cover the basics in preparation for the theory behind D* Lite.
For a path planning algorithm to function it requires data to work with. Such as the example of
’the piano mover’s problem’ in the introduction, a piano mover needs to know where to bring the
piano and they need to avoid obstacles while moving. For a path planner information regarding
the current location of the robot, the location of the goal, and information on the surrounding
space is utilized to find a path to the goal, if such a path exists. In order for the algorithm to
work this information is interpreted as a mathematical structure, a graph.
(a) Graph with 6 nodes and 7 edges
(b) Grid structure graph showing
movement from node E
Figure 1: Two different graph structures, both made up of nodes and edges
Figure 1a displays one type of graph. It is made up of ’vertices’ or ’nodes’, in the case of 1a nodes
A to F. In path planning these nodes corresponds to locations, whether that be the location of
the robot, an open space it can move to, or part of a wall. These nodes are connected by ’edges’,
the lines between the nodes which describe a relation between nodes. For example, if a robots lo-
cation is node A and wanted to move to node F we can see the edge between them is 3, thus the
robot would move a distance of 3 to get to node F. Now, while figure 1a displays a valid example
of a graph, it is not an effective representation for a robot. Nodes E and F both connect to node
C, but the distance from F to C is 10 times the distance from E to C. This type of graph might
be useful for representing scenarios like the travel distances between cities, but for robot naviga-
tion the graph should represent a ’map’ of the space around it. For example, a person might take
a step forwards or backwards, moving to a new ’node’, but the step distance or ’edge cost’ is of
equal length. So, instead the space/graph in which path planning is carried out is structured as a
grid, like a chessboard as can be seen in figure 1b. Assuming the robot’s current location is node
E it can move to one of eight locations, eight because we utilize ’eight connectivity’ which allows
moving diagonally instead of just up, down, left, right. Furthermore, the edges or distances be-
tween nodes would follow logical rules like, for example, straight movements (E to B or E to G)
have an edge ’cost’ of 1 and diagonal movements having an edge cost of 1.4 due to the slightly
longer distance when moving diagonally. This is more representative of a real-world environment
Page 4
==PAGE:7==
Final Project
3.1
Dijkstra’s algorithm and A*
and thus a path can be generated as a sequence nodes, for example the sequence E to B to A
could be same as telling a robot to move forward 1 meter and then go left 1 meter.
3.1
Dijkstra’s algorithm and A*
The method by which the sequence of nodes is calculated to produce the shortest possible path is
path planning algorithms. From a starting node a path planner expands outwards to other nodes
until it fulfills a condition where it will have created a path between the robots current location
and where it needs to go. Well-known examples of search algorithms are the Dijkstra’s algorithm
and the A* algorithm. Lets show a simple example of how they work on this grid graph:
(a) Dijkstra’s.
(b) A*.
Figure 2: Dijkstra’s and A* [9]
Figure 2a shows an example similar to figure 1b with a few changes. Every node is connected by
eight connectivity to its neighbor nodes and we have a ’Start’ node in the bottom left of the grid
and the location we want to reach is the top right ’Goal’ node. There are no obstacles, so ev-
ery node is a valid location to move to, a very simple path planning problem. Now, we’ve already
established that the edges between nodes have a ’cost’, a representation of the distance between
nodes, and as we get into Dijkstra’s algorithm we have to introduce two more core concepts of
path planning. Namely the fact that nodes also have values attached to them, and that nodes are
organized in a ’priority queue’. So, at the very beginning of Dijkstra’s the ’Start’ node would be
in the priority queue, it would have a value of 0 because it’s where we’re already at, and all other
nodes has a value of infinity to represent that we haven’t looked at them yet and don’t know how
far away they are. Then, with ’Start’ as the only node node in the queue we ’expand’ it and we
are now looking at the other nodes around ’Start’, which we call ’Node A’, ’Node B’, and
Page 5
==PAGE:8==
Final Project
3.1
Dijkstra’s algorithm and A*
’Node C’, which are added to the queue. So, ’Node A’ and ’Node C’ are both at a distance
of 1 from ’Start’ and ’Node B’, using euclidean distance (aka. Pythagorean distance), is ap-
proximately at a distance of 1.4142 from ’Start’. With ’Start’ expanded it’s removed from the
queue and we are left with only the three nodes which have been discovered in the queue, and
since we want to find the ’shortest path’ the queue is organized by the size of the values, making
it a ’priority queue’ which can be seen in the table of figure 2a. Then the first node in the queue
is chosen for expansion, so the algorithm would then expand ’Node A’ and then ’Node C’ as
they are both closer than ’Node B’. From there the distance traveled would also become a fac-
tor, for example, from ’Node A’ to ’Node D’ the distance from ’Start’ would be 2, so ’Node
B’ would be closer and worth exploring before going that way. This is the essence of Dijkstra’s
algorithm, from a single node we expand outwards, making note of the value of every node dis-
covered, and then looking to the priority queue for the next node to expand. The problem with
Dijkstra’s is that while it would find the shortest path from ’Start’ to ’Goal’ it would do so
by looking in ALL directions equally. So, for example, if we a robot started in the middle of a
square map and wanted to find a path to the upper left, Dijkstra’s algorithm would explore in
expanding circles around the robot instead of directing it’s search in the direction of the goal.
The A* algorithm fixes this issue, so regard figure 2b. Here we have the exact same setup, but
with one important difference, the red arrows. These represent the distance between ’Node A’,
’Node B’, and ’Node C’ from ’Goal’. We call this a ’heuristic’ and its a method with which we
can increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the search. Now instead of just being able to see
that ’Node A’ is at a travel distance of 1 from ’Start’ we can instead calculate a measurement:
1 + 2.2361 = 3.2361
And if we compare that with the measurement of ’Node B’:
1.4142 + 1.4142 = 2.8284
Suddenly we have a measurement of distance that takes into account not only the distance from
’Start’ but also the distance from ’Goal’ which affect the order of the priority queue as can be
seen in the table in 2b. Thus we can ’focus’ our search, ignoring nodes which does not move us
closer to the ’Goal’, thereby making the search much more efficient.
The A* algorithm and D* Lite algorithm are both search algorithms which are used with mobile
robots for the purpose of path planning, and their basic properties were mentioned in the intro-
duction, but to a more detailed overview of A* can be seen in the list below:
• A* is a Best-First search algorithm, meaning that it always expands the node with the small-
est value in the priority queue to produce the shortest path.
• A* searches from the start node to the goal node.
• A* is also an informed search algorithm, due to using a heuristic which provides information
about the distance of each node to the goal.
• The important variable of A* is the f variable. The f variable provides a measure of the
distance traveled AND the proximity to the goal.
Page 6
==PAGE:9==
Final Project
3.2
D* Lite
• The A* algorithm computes a plan from the start node to the goal node, but once this is
accomplished the algorithm is finished and no longer running.
So while the A* algorithm is an effective and efficient global path planning algorithm, as men-
tioned it’s this last point is where the issues with A* arise. If something goes wrong while the
robot is traveling along its planned path, perhaps a box has been put in a hallway then an A*
planner has way to correct for this unexpected obstacle. Therefore the problem with the A* algo-
rithm is that it has no ability to re-plan if an unexpected obstacle is encountered. Not only has
the algorithm finished its operation, but all the calculations of the nodes in the graph is all gone
as the A* algorithm does not retain this data, nor is designed utilize it even if it were retained.
The only recourse is to re-initiate the A* algorithm with a new start location and the obstacle
now present in the graph and run through the entire process again.
3.2
D* Lite
This concept of ’starting over’ whenever an obstacle blocks the path and the plan becomes in-
valid, while it simplifies path planning, is not very efficient. Discarding all data and starting from
nothing every time a plan run into unexpected obstacles represent a potentially great loss of effi-
ciency as a robot in a dynamic environment is likely to encounter multiple obstacles while travel-
ing. This is where the D* Lite algorithm comes in. The D* Lite algorithm can be characterized
by:
• D* Lite is a incremental heuristic search algorithm, meaning that it can use information
from previous searches.
• D* Lite searches from the goal node to the start node. This also means that the measure-
ments D* Lite use are the reversed of those A* use. The heuristic is the measure of distance
from the start node, and the measure of distance traveled is from the goal node.
• The D* Lite algorithm has much of the same variables as the A* algorithm, but one impor-
tant difference is the rhs-variable. rhs stands for ’right-hand-side’ and the variable is de-
scribed in Koenig and Likhachev paper on D* Lite as a "one-step lookahead values based on
the g-values and thus potentially better informed than the g-values", with the ’g-values’
being the measure of distance from the goal node (since D* Lite searches from the goal
node to the start node). This means that the rhs-variable acts as a way to compare an
older ’map’ to a newer. If a new obstacle is suddenly present in the ’map’, or if a path has
opened up which was previously blocked, this ’change’ will be visible in how a nodes g-
value does not match its rhs-value and thus a new map can be created to account for this
change and new shortest path can be found which circumvent a new obstacle or take advan-
tage of a shortcut.
• Unlike the A* algorithm, the D* Lite algorithm does not end when a path have been com-
puted. It continues running, moving from the start node to the ’cheapest’ neighboring node,
and then continues from node to node until it reach the goal. Only then does the D* Lite
algorithm end.
Thus it can be observed how the D* Lite algorithm is similar but very different to the A* algo-
rithm. Instead of having to create an entirely new plan whenever an unexpected obstacle is en-
countered, the D* Lite algorithm is able to ’repair’ the graph with which is it navigating from
Page 7
==PAGE:10==
Final Project
3.2
D* Lite
start to goal and from this ’repaired’ graph its able to get a new path to avoid an obstacle which
was not present in the initial planning. Not only that, it is able to take advantage of any short-
cuts it discovers while the robot is moving, something the A* algorithm would NOT be able to do
unless the current plan was discarded and a new one made.
Now, as to this ’repair’ the D* Lite algorithm is capable of, that can be explained with this sim-
plified example. For simplicity’s sake we do not make use of a heuristic and use a simplified diag-
onal edge cost of just 1.4 instead of 1.4142.
(a) Shortly after start.
(b) A path to start have been found.
Figure 3: D* Lite example for new planning [2]
In figure 3a we see an example of the local area around the goal a little bit after the start of the
D* Lite algorithm. As mentioned D* Lite searches from the goal to the start, and without a heuris-
tic it’ll spread out similarly to Dijkstra’s algorithm. The operation of D* Lite is relatively simple
at this stage which we might refer to as new planning as the D* Lite algorithm needs to con-
struct a search graph when first initiated, similarly to the other search algorithms. In figure 3a we
have the case where the goal nodes have been ’popped’ (aka. removed from the priority queue)
and its neighbors have been expanded. When D* Lite expands to neighboring nodes the rhs-
values of those nodes are calculated, showing why the rhs-value is described as a "one-step looka-
head" since they are calculated before a node receive a g-value. A node only gets a g-value when
it becomes the ’active’ node, and it only becomes the active node if it’s first on the priority queue
as the ’cheapest’ node. We can observe this in figure 3a where the node above the goal node have
become the active node, gaining a g-value whereas the node right of the goal node is still only has
its rhs-value. The algorithm progress like that, making the first node on the priority queue the
active node and expanding to its neighboring nodes until, as we can see in figure 3b (which shows
the full map), the start node becomes the active node. From there a path from start to goal can
be found by following a chain of the ’cheapest’ nodes (arrows highlighted by red circles) until the
goal node is reached. The Dijkstra’s algorithm or the A* algorithm has been fully capable of a
mostly similar operation up until this point, but here they would have ended. So, what if a robot
is moving along this path and suddenly encounter an obstacle at the red exclamation mark (in
figure 3b) which was not present during the new planning?
Page 8
==PAGE:11==
Final Project
3.2
D* Lite
And this is where the D* Lite algorithms ability to repair the search graph comes into play. D*
Lite is still running, which it does until it has reached the goal, but suddenly a change to the
graph have been detected due to the ’edge cost’ (aka. the distance between one node and an-
other) not matching up with the distance in the graph that have been created. What happens
now is that D* Lite updates certain vertexes/nodes, namely the node where the new obstacle is
AND the nodes which are its neighbors. This can be seen in figure 4a which shows the local area
around the obstacle, with the arrows pointing out of the obstacle node (which is the green center
node in the image or the node with coordinates [2,2] displayed).
(a) Updating all neighbors and itself.
(b) Neighbors affected.
Figure 4: D* Lite example for updating nodes [2]
This update of the vertexes/nodes has the effect of:
1. Updating a node’s rhs-value to reflect what its distance from the goal node actually is now.
2. Removing a node from the priority queue if it’s already present.
3. If the g-value of a node does not match its rhs-value the node is re-inserted into the queue
with its new values (if it was removed in the by the 2nd operation we see above), or the
node is added queue (if it was not present in the queue before).
The effect of this update operation can be seen in figure 4b, showing the situation after all neigh-
boring nodes to the obstacle node have been updated. We can observe that most nodes have
NOT been affected by this update. This is due to the simple fact that they have not needed to be
updated as the obstacle have not increased their distance from the goal node. Only nodes whose
distance from the goal has increased (as we see with the two nodes on the right [2,3] and [1,3])
have had their rhs-values updated and have been put back into the priority queue (they have be-
come green to show this, as per the legend in figure 3a).
Now the D* Lite algorithm is at the stage of what we might refer to as re-planning. In short,
until the start node is on top of the priority queue (as the node with the smallest key) AND the
Page 9
==PAGE:12==
Final Project
3.2
D* Lite
start node’s rhs-value and g-value are the same, which is the flag used to indicate that we are
finished planning/re-planning, the following operations seen in (Code 1) are carried out:
k_old = Top Key in priority queue
u = Top Node in priority queue
if k_old < calculate.Key(u)
insert u in priority queue
else if g(u) > rhs(u)
g(u) = rhs(u)
update ALL neighbors of u
else
g(u) = infinity
update ALL neighbors of u AND u
(Code 1)
Now, this might bring up questions about "What is a key?" and "What is the function/reasoning
behind these operations?". As could be seen in figure 2b where A* sort its priority queue based
on "distance traveled + distance to goal" the D* Lite algorithm also sorts its priority queue, but
it does so based on keys which are calculated as such:
k(s) = (k1(s); k2(s)) = (min(g(s), rhs(s)) + h(sstart, s) + km; min(g(s), rhs(s)))
(Equation 1)
Simply explained the k(s) we see in (Equation 1) is the ’key’ of a node. This ’key’ is made up of
two values, k1(s) and k2(s). The first value of a key, k1(s), is calculated as the addition of the g-
or rhs-value (whichever is smallest) of a node, its distance from start (h(sstart, s)), and the km
variable. The second value of a key, k2(s), is simply the g- or rhs-value (whichever is smallest)
of a node. The priority queue of D* Lite is meant to be sorted by lexicographic ordering (aka.
alphabetical order). So, like on a bookshelf that volume 1.1 should come before volume 2.3, so the
priority queue of D* Lite should be ordered. The key with the smaller k1(s) value should come
before keys with larger k1(s) values. In the case of two keys having equal k1(s) values, the key
with the smaller k2(s) value comes first. As for the reasoning behind the operations in (Code 1),
that can be explained as:
• If... the key belonging to the node which is on top of the priority queue does not match a
new calculation of the key belonging to said node, that is not correct as the keys in the pri-
ority queue should always be based on data of the current environment. To fix this mistake
the node (which has just been popped from the queue) is re-inserted into the priority queue
with a new key which match the current reality.
• Else if... the g-value of the node which is on top of the priority queue is larger than its
rhs-value, the g-value is set to the same as the rhs-value and all the neighbors of the node
are updated.
– This is the primary operation behind new planning as all the g-values are infinity
before they are expanded.
• Else... none of the other operations are valid so the g-value of the node is set to be infinity
and all the neighbors of the node are updated along with the node itself.
Page 10
==PAGE:13==
Final Project
3.2
D* Lite
– This is an important operation in re-planning. Resetting a node whose distance from
goal has grown to allow the Else if operation to later fix its rhs-value.
That covers nearly all of D* Lite but for two things. First is the km variable in (Equation 1), and
secondly is the importance of the heuristic and the edge cost matching. On the first remaining
subject, km, when D* Lite is finished computing, having expanded and calculated the variables
of the necessary nodes in the graph, a path have been found between goal and start. The algo-
rithm then begins its moving phase, going from the current ’start node’, which we’ll call sstart,
to the neighboring node which has (A): the minimum distance from the goal, and (B): is closest.
This node then becomes sstart. If nothing has changed in the graph this method of movement is
repeated till the goal is reached. But if a new obstacle is encountered then re-planning begins,
however, the heuristic with which all the keys in the priority queue had been calculated was cal-
culated with the heuristic h(sstart, s), and as was just mentioned sstart is updated whenever we
move to a new node. Ordinarily this would mean that we’d have to re-calculate all the nodes in
the priority queue, but this is where km comes in. To avoid this the D* Lite algorithm use the
variable km or ’key modifier’. It is initially 0, but during re-planning key modifier is re-calculated
as:
km = km + h(sstart, slast)
(Equation 2)
With slast equal to the sstart from before the moving phase was begun. Thus it’s a variable which
save the ’last location where a new plan/re-planning was performed’. The effect of km can be
demonstrated as an example seen figure 5a.
(a) The km variable in effect.
(b) The balance between h() and g().
Figure 5: D* Lite and its variables
The blue arrow represent the original heuristic cost between Start and node 23 during the calcu-
lation of the new/first plan. Then after moving the blue arrow no longer represent this cost, it’s
instead the red arrow (the heuristic between the new sstart and node 23), but this is obviously
smaller and thus the key of node 23 in the priority queue would need to be re-calculated as it is
still a product of the old heuristic cost. But this issue is solved with the km variable which is rep-
resented as the green arrow (the heuristic between the old sstart, now slast, and the new sstart).
After moving km (green arrow) + the new heuristic cost (red arrow) together should equal the
Page 11
==PAGE:14==
Final Project
3.2
D* Lite
same heuristic cost as the keys in the priority queue was originally calculated with. The km vari-
able acts as an offset for the change in heuristic cost, and as can be seen in (Equation 2) any new
re-planning after would maintain the priority queue as km always act as an offset for the change.
Finally, regarding the importance of the heuristic and the edge cost matching, it’s important that
the heuristic does not ’overestimate’ the cost of reaching the Start and it’s equally important
that the edge cost between nodes does not ’underestimate’ the cost of reaching a new node. In
figure 5b we see a rough representation of the ’balance’ between these two values, so to speak.
The reason this ’balance’ is important is because of how keys are calculated in (Equation 1) and
then organized in the priority queue based on k1(s) and k2(s). If there is balance then k1(s) of
the Start is equal to the k1(s) of the Goal since while Start’s heuristic cost might be zero, g-
value is non-zero, similarly with Goal just with the g-value being zero and the heuristic being
non-zero (equal to the g-value of Start if there’s balance). Thus in conflicts between keys it’ll be
k2(s) that decides which node is expanded first, or in other words, in a conflict it’ll always be the
node closest to Goal which is expanded first.
But if the heuristic ’overestimate’ the cost of reaching the Start or the edge cost between nodes
’underestimate’ the distance from Goal, then nodes closer to Start or Start itself will be ex-
panded earlier than they should be. This can cause the D* Lite algorithm to finished computing
before a valid path to Goal have been found.
Page 12
==PAGE:15==
Final Project
4
Methods
The research question this paper sought to answer were: ’Will re-planning with a D* Lite imple-
mentation as a global planner display increased efficiency compared to what could be achieved with
the creation of an entirely new plan?’. To answer that question a project was undertaken to im-
plement the D* Lite algorithm in a C++ program, not as a simple demonstration program of the
algorithm as the D* Lite algorithm is already documented, but as a program which could simu-
late the D* Lite global path planner for a robot. Further, if the timeline of the project allowed
there were also aspiration to continue development to a C++ program which could act as the
global path planner plugin for ROS (aka. Robot Operating System which is a set of software li-
braries and tools that helps build robot applications [6]). However, the focus of this project was
the creation of a D* Lite global path planner in C++ first. The reason for not developing the
program in ROS were to simplify it, thereby simplifying the debugging and testing of the program
while still providing a method for answering the research question.
Instead of creating an entirely new program from the bottom up and go through all the trial and
error that would entail, it was decided to instead attempt to use an existing program as either in-
spiration or a template and then focus efforts towards implementing changes to the program that
would enable it to function as a D* Lite global planner that could simulate the path planning of a
robot. Research into the programs available uncovered two programs which were selected. Those
programs were:
• A C++ program with ROS compatibility using the Relaxed A* algorithm [7]
• An experimental C++ program using the D* Lite (optimized) algorithm [3]
Both had attributes beneficial to the project, but both also had issues which needed to be ad-
dressed.
The C++ program with ROS compatibility using the Relaxed A* algorithm provided a func-
tional example of a ROS compatible C++ program that would act as a structural template of
sorts. It contained beneficial functions and a logical and intuitive program structure. However,
besides obviously running the wrong algorithm (Relaxed A* instead of D* Lite) the program was
also not executable outside ROS. It contained code necessary for a ROS compatible program, but
which could not be compiled in Visual Studio Code which were code editor used for this project.
The experimental C++ program using the D* Lite (optimized) algorithm provided a template
for a D* Lite program in C++. However, as an experimental program it lacked a great many
features which the project required, but the greatest problem was that it relied on a hard-coded
graph as shown in this example:
graph.connect(0, 3, 1);
The nodes were ’manually’ connected as with the example above which shows node 0 and node 3
being connected together in the graph with a distance of 1 between them.
As such neither of the programs were, obviously, a ready-made D* Lite global path planner which
could be used as a robot’s global path planner. And so the two programs were merged and the
remaining missing features were developed and implemented.
Page 13
==PAGE:16==
Final Project
4.1
General outline of the implementation:
4.1
General outline of the implementation:
The C++ code of the finished implementations of the global path planner using D* Lite can be
found in the appendix, but this subsection provides a general outline of the finished implementa-
tion.
First, as the research question were focused on the standard form of the D* Lite algorithm and
not the optimized form it were necessary to implement changes to the the code of experimental
C++ program using the D* Lite (optimized) algorithm. The differences between the two algo-
rithms D* Lite were found in the functions main, ComputeShortestPath, and UpdateVer-
tex. The two different algorithms can be found in the appendix in 10.1 and 10.2.
Figure 6: Simplified flowchart of D* Lite global path planner
A flowchart showing the general processes of the D* Lite global planner implementation/program
which were created in the project can be seen in figure 6. While different implementations of the
D* Lite global path planner have been made (explained in subsection 4.7) they all follow this ba-
sic sequence of processes, starting with loading the map of the environment, creating the grid
graph, and getting start and goal positions (not shown in figure 6). If those positions are valid
(start and goal being different positions and not being obstacle etc.) the D* Lite algorithm is uti-
lized to find a path between start and goal. This path is then traveled (one node at a time) un-
til the goal is reached unless changes in the edge costs are detected (explained in subsection 4.4)
which triggers D* Lite re-planning. It is this re-planning which this paper seeks to examine as the
research question indicates.
4.2
Implementing a costmap:
In the Theory section it was mentioned how a graph was used by path planners to navigate. A
’costmap’ is an additional method used in ROS and by robots to navigate. It is a map in the
form of a grid, with each node in the grid a location, like a chessboard. However, a costmap is
Page 14
==PAGE:17==
Final Project
4.2
Implementing a costmap:
separate from the graph and the ’nodes’ in the costmap each have a value, or a ’cost’, which usu-
ally represents how close to an obstacle a given node is. A costmap is used to navigate around
obstacles by utilizing the values in the costmap in addition to the movement costs between nodes.
A costmap may be binary, each node having a value which mark it as either free space or an ob-
stacle, and this value can be combined with the movement cost to adjust the path planning (for
example, if a movement cost of 1 is combined with a costmap value of infinity it suddenly be-
comes very expensive to move through that node). Another type of costmap, like the type used
in ROS, have values from 0 to 255, and the closer to an obstacle a node is the higher the cost
of that node in the costmap. This have an effect somewhat similar to magnets repelling each
other, as the higher cost of nodes closer to an obstacle ’repel’ path planning without fully pre-
venting it either. Thus robots with this type of costmap will usually stay in the ’cheaper’ areas
when possible, ex. driving in the middle of a hallway instead of along the wall, but they are still
able to navigate through narrow openings as while the cost may be high it is the shortest path.
With no ROS functions to provide this 0 to 255 type costmap, another method was needed that
emulated a costmap. Such an implementation was developed and coded and will be explained
here. The ’map’ of the environment was made as a .txt file with x rows and y columns made up
of numbers. To simplify the testing of the program it was decided to use binary maps made up
of 0’s or 1’s. A ’0’ represented a ’free space’ (a space without an obstacle where the robot could
freely move in) and a ’1’ represented an ’occupied space’ (an obstacle of some sort). The .txt file
was loaded into the D* Lite global planner implementation/program during initialization using a
’stream class’ which is a method for performing input/output operations (in this case, an input
operation) and this was used to ’read’ the .txt file. The file’s rows and columns would then be it-
erated through and the value at each ’coordinate’ would be assigned to a costmap using the same
coordinates. Here the ’1’ value would also be altered to an ’infinity’ value in the costmap, repre-
senting a node impossible to move through.
The result was a costmap consisting of only free spaces or obstacles. This provided a great en-
vironment for testing as the costmap had no influence on the workings of the D* Lite algorithm
besides indicating the location of obstacles. With no costmap values influencing the cost of free
space nodes the path produced by the program should always be the absolutely shortest path,
and if not it would be due to a problem in the program or the algorithm and not a costmap value.
This would ease the process of error finding as the costmap could be disregarded as a factor.
Using this method for implementing a costmap also eased the process of testing due to the ability
to rapidly generate and test multiple different maps either by manually altering an existing .txt
file to insert or remove obstacles, but also by creating maps from images. Figure 7a, 7b, and 7c
shows the process by which different maps were created for testing in this project.
Page 15
==PAGE:18==
Final Project
4.3
Altering the calculation of the heuristic and movecost:
(a) .png map
(b) .png map converted to .txt
(c) .txt map visualized in
MATLAB
Figure 7: Creating maps from pictures
In figure 7a a simple example of a 10 by 10 pixel .png image can be seen, something that can
quickly be created in most types of image and photo editing software. Using a programming and
numeric computing platform such as MATLAB this picture can then be read and converted to a
.txt file as can be seen in figure 7b. For testing this process could then also be reversed by copy-
ing the costmap into an array of the same size as the map, then altering the values of this ar-
ray when moving from node to node, and then outputting the data with a ’stream class’ to get
a visual representation of the path the planner takes. This can be seen in figure 7c where the
costmap and the path have been visualized in MATLAB as such:
• Obstacles/walls in figure 7c are yellow. This is how MATLAB have visualized the value 300
in the array used to create the visual representation.
• Free spaces in figure 7c are blue. This is how MATLAB have visualized the value 0 in the
array used to create the visual representation.
• The path traveled in figure 7c is green. This is how MATLAB have visualized the value 200
in the array used to create the visual representation.
4.3
Altering the calculation of the heuristic and movecost:
A small but impactful alteration of the D* Lite global path planner this project implemented was
adjusting the calculations behind the heuristic and diagonal movement cost. As explained the the
Theory section it’s important that the heuristic not ’overestimate’ the cost of reaching the Start
or the edge cost between nodes not ’underestimating’ the distance from Goal. It was therefore de-
cided to implement the euclidean distance between the coordinates of nodes as the heuristic using
a function from the <math.h> C++ library. The diagonal ’movecost’ from one node to another
was altered to also use the euclidean distance, not between specific coordinates, but just a hard-
coded calculation of the euclidean distance from a nodes current location to any diagonal neigh-
bor nodes (euclidean distance from [0;0] to [1;1] used used as the basis for diagonal ’movecost’).
Page 16
==PAGE:19==
Final Project
4.4
Implementing scanning for edge-cost changes at a distance:
This solution was not perfect for implementation on a real robot. As shown in figure 5a in the
Theory section the km variable is utilized to maintain the same heuristic cost when re-planning
to avoid re-ordering the priority queue. However, tests similar to figure 5a showed that using eu-
clidean distance as heuristic did not always result in km functioning as intended. For example, if
D* Lite computes a plan with Start in [0;0], then the heuristic to a node at [4;3] would be:
p
(0 −4)2 + (0 −3)2 = 5
The full plan is made and we begin to move as the process in figure 6 shows. Now, say the Goal
is at [4;4], so we move to [1;1], but encounter an obstacle and need to re-plan there. Start is now
in [1;1], the heuristic is different, but km should adjust the difference. But it is not the exact
same number we get:
p
(0 −1)2 + (0 −1)2 +
p
(1 −4)2 + (1 −3)2 = 5.01976
However, this issue is circumvented and does not affect the data in Results as the Start is reset to
the original location, as is explained in the subsection on testing methods in 4.8. Thus it does not
affect the ability to answer the research question.
4.4
Implementing scanning for edge-cost changes at a distance:
Another feature which the experimental C++ program using the D* Lite (optimized) algorithm
lacked were the ability to carry out the ’scan graph for changed edge costs’ operation (from D*
Lite as seen in Appendix 10.1) at a distance. In the D* Lite algorithm, once the graph have been
computed and a path have been found from Start to Goal the algorithm then enters its move-
ment phase as figure 6 also shows. But in this phase the algorithm also needs to carry out a ’scan
graph for changed edge costs’ operation in-between movements to register if something has changed
in the environment it have calculated. If something has changed this requires a re-planning to en-
sure that the Goal can still be reached by the shortest path possible.
The experimental D* Lite program was implemented in such a way that:
1. It would only scan for changes to edge costs in the neighborhood of sstart, the node which
were the current Start node. So it would only scan up to eight nodes in the entire graph,
the ones left, right, above... etc. of the current Start node.
2. It operated on the basis of ’gradual discovery’ so to speak. It maintained a C++ container,
a ’map’, which were initially empty but the edges between sstart and its neighbors would
then be added. This action constituted a ’change’ in the edge costs for the experimental D*
Lite program and thus re-planning was initiated. From there whenever a new edge was en-
countered it would be added to the ’map’ and re-planning initiated till the Goal was reached.
This limited method did not align with how a global path planner was envisioned for this project.
It limited the ’vision’ of the planner to just its neighboring nodes meaning that obstacles would
be ignored up until they were right in front of the current location, and a real robot might very
well collide with the obstacle. The ’gradual discovery’ method was also not a desired feature. It
completely invalidated the benefits of having advanced knowledge of the environment in the form
of the costmap, and triggered re-planning with every new move as new edges would be discovered,
which resulted in very frequent re-planning.
Page 17
==PAGE:20==
Final Project
4.4
Implementing scanning for edge-cost changes at a distance:
Instead a method was developed and implemented for the D* Lite global planner implementa-
tions/programs of this project which would allow for the scanning of changes to the edge costs
at a distance AND retain the benefits of the costmap. First, in order to scan for changes to the
edge costs it was important to consider how to register this change? The decision was made to
follow the literal wording of the operation ’scan graph for changed edge costs’ so a function was
implemented after the initialization function which creates the costmap in the program. This new
function (represented in figure 6 as ’Create Graph’) would iterate through the size of the map and
for each value a node in the graph would connected together with its neighbors with the appropri-
ate edge cost. So, for example, for a 10x10 map like figure 7b the function would iterate through
nodes 0 to 99, connecting nodes together in a graph based on eight connectivity. This had the
result of a ready-made graph which matched the costmap being available before the D* Lite algo-
rithm had even started, vastly simplifying operations as opposed to creating the graph during D*
Lite.
With the graph created the method of registering ’changed edge costs’ could then be realized
by comparing the graph created by the function which was just mentioned to the current envi-
ronment, but that alone would not solve the problem without a method of increasing the range
with which changes could be registered. To solve this it was decided to iterate through the nodes
around the current Start node in a predefined square ’radius’ to somewhat emulate how a laser
scanner would function in a real robot. A pseudo code example of how the implemented method
for scanning for edge-cost changes at a distance functions can be written as such:
ScanRange = N
row = getRow(startnode)
column = getColumn(startnode)
for i = (−ScanRange) to ScanRange do
for j = (−ScanRange) to ScanRange do
x = row + i
y = column + j
if Location (x,y) is not outside the map then
scanNode = getNode(x, y)
for sp = each neighbor of scanNode do
if graph.getEdgeCost(scanNode, sp) != getMoveCost(scanNode, sp) then
...Perform D* Lite update operations...
end if
end for
end if
end for
end for
(Code 2.)
The ’N’ which define ’ScanRange’ (aka. laserScan_range) is a hard-coded value set before exe-
cution of the program, but it can also be implemented as a variable the user can input after pro-
gram execution. What’s important is that it define the ’radius’ wherein changes to the edge costs
are examined, as can be seen as an example in figure 8 below that shows the area with a Scan-
Range = 2. We can think of this example as a 5x5 map in graph-form where the current Start
Page 18
==PAGE:21==
Final Project
4.5
Ignoring occupied nodes when updating:
node is 12. The ’row’ and ’column’ of 12 would be [2;2] as can be seen in figure 8, and the search-
method would then iterate through locations [2-2;2-2]=[0;0] to [2+2;2+2]=[4;4], so starting with
0, 1, 2... and ending with ...22, 23, 24. Before continuing there would be a check to see whether
the location was valid to avoid issues like [0-2;0-2]=[-2;-2] if the Start node was 0 for example. If
the check is passed the edges in the graph are compared with the current cost of movement, so for
node 0 its edges are to 1, 5, and 6 as can be seen in figure 8.
Figure 8: Example of the area examined with a ScanRange = 2
This method is scalable and works equally well on a 5x5 map as it does on a 5000x5000 map.
However, there’s also a reason for this limited search and not just searching the entire map. The
D* Lite algorithm performs a search for changed edge costs after every movement so it’s a very
frequent operation. That combined with the the increase in computation time the larger the search
area/ScanRange is has the potential of slowing the overall program down, so ScanRange is kept
only as large as necessary.
4.5
Ignoring occupied nodes when updating:
When D* Lite is making a new plan, or re-planning it is executing the ’ComputeShortestPath’
function. In this function the algorithm is adding nodes to the priority queue, updating the vari-
ables of nodes etc. all in an attempt to create a graph which includes the start and goal nodes so
a path of non-infinite length between start and goal can be found.
The important values for the nodes in the graph, as explained in the theory chapter are the rhs
and g variables which are calculated based on the edge cost between nodes. However, in the case
of an occupied node the edge costs should be infinity as you can’t move into or out of an obstacle.
It’s not a ’valid’ location and updating them during the planning or re-planning does not change
their values, it just waste time.
Page 19
==PAGE:22==
Final Project
4.6
Sorting the priority queue:
Therefore a function was created and implemented as an addition to when D* Lite updates neigh-
bors (see (Code 1) in the Theory section) which checks the status of a node and skips updating
that neighboring node if it’s occupied as it’s non-traversable (the implemented function, called
’occupied’, can be seen in appendix 10.4 in the ’ComputeShortestPath’ function).
4.6
Sorting the priority queue:
The ’priority queue’ which is used by D* Lite is implemented as a binary heap as the D* Lite pa-
per by Koenig and Likhachev does in the ’Experimental Results’ section [4]. The D* Lite algo-
rithm requires a priority queue wherein the "Top Key" in the priority queue has the smallest cost
and as such the heap which is implemented must be a ’Min Heap’ wherein the ’root’ or node on
top of the heap must have the minimal key among all the keys in the heap. An example of a ’Min
Heap’ can be seen in figure 9.
Figure 9: Example of a binary heap in its tree-structure and as an array [5].
In this simple example node ’1’ is on top of the heap and thus in the front of the array and would
be the node chosen for expansion. For D* Lite it’s slightly more complicated as the keys are com-
pared according to lexicographic ordering as mentioned in the Theory chapter but the basics re-
main the same, merely that the nodes in the heap is sorted based on the two values each node
contains.
Per default the C++ functions used to create heaps create a ’Max Heap’ and thus a comparison
function must be added to these operations to get the ’Min Heap’ as desired. This is implemented
using the C++ binary function object ’greater’ as a ’KeyCompare’ which is added to the heap
functions. This ensures the D* Lite global planner implementations has the capabilities to sort
their priority queue as a ’Min Heap’, though actually maintaining the ’Min Heap’ depends on how
nodes are added/removed from the queue as subsection 4.7 explains.
4.7
Alternative implementations of the program:
While the research question of this paper focus on the efficiency of D* Lite re-planning, there are
also other factors to consider. The benefits of a D* Lite global planner in comparison to an A*
global planner is re-planning, the ability to re-use some of what has already been calculated to
make a new plan more efficiently than creating a whole new plan from scratch. Time is therefore
an important factor in real-world applications, so when it was discovered that different methods
Page 20
==PAGE:23==
Final Project
4.7
Alternative implementations of the program:
of inserting and removing keys from the heap could have a great impact on the time required to
complete the planning stage it was decided to explore this phenomenon to examine how it might
impact the research question.
At the most basic level two things happens to the heap within the program. An element can be
added to it, or an element can be removed from it. Elements can be added to a vector with a
push_back() function, but they remain in the order they were pushed back into. For example if
like in figure 9 we had the nodes 3, 9, 5, 6, 8, 1 and pushed them back in that sequence we’d get
a similar vector [3, 9, 5, 6, 8, 1] which is obviously not a min heap, so this vector needs to
be organized as a min heap.
One method to accomplish this is to use the make_heap() function from the C++ <algorithm>
library with the ’KeyCompare’ comparison function after pushing all the nodes into the vector
to get a min heap. As the name, ’make_heap()’, suggests this function would organize the vec-
tor into a heap structure. Another method if we want to add an node to an existing heap is the
push_heap() function which organize the last element in the vector into it’s proper place in the
heap. So, for example, if have the heap from figure 9 and we add new node, a node ’2’, we get
[1, 3, 6, 5, 9, 8, 2] which is no longer a min heap. If we want to keep the vector in a min
heap structure we can then use push_heap() which will make ’2’ move up into its proper position
in the min heap.
As for removing nodes from the heap, this can be accomplished in two ways. When we want to
remove the first element in the heap, to expand that node, we can use the pop_heap() function.
Basically this just move the first node into the back and rearrange the vector so the first and last
elements satisfy the properties of the heap. After that the operation pop_back() can be used to
remove the last elements, thus for example the heap from figure 9 would go from [1, 3, 6, 5, 9, 8]
to [3, 6, 5, 9, 8, 1] to [3, 6, 5, 9, 8] which is still a valid min heap. The second method,
if we want to remove a specific node, is to search for it with a find_if() function and use the
erase() function to remove it from the vector.
Now, 4 different implementations of the program have been created. The first 3 versions, stan-
dard, standardB, and standardC, are true to the D* Lite algorithm but not all of them are
true to the structure of a min heap and it all comes down to the make_heap() function.
As make_heap() constructs a heap from the first to last element it goes through the entire vector
to ensure the correct structure which, of course, will take more time the more elements in the pri-
ority queue. This problem of time also apply to find_if() when removing nodes, both of these
operations acting as a bottleneck due to their time complexity. This fact were discovered and
thus 3 different program were created to test the effects of different implementations:
• The standard program employs the push_heap() function after a new node have been
pushed back into the priority queue. Because only a single node is pushed back at a time
this method of insertion works to keep the heap structure as the new node will move up
into its proper position in the min heap. However, this program also removes specific nodes
if they are updated and already in the priority queue with the erase() function. This break
the min heap structure as make_heap() is not used afterwards to restructure the heap.
• The standardB program employs the make_heap() function after a new node have been
pushed back into the priority queue. The make_heap() function restructure the heap into
Page 21
==PAGE:24==
Final Project
4.8
Testing methods:
the desired form. This program also use erase() without make_heap(), but the heap is re-
structures when a new node is added.
• The standardC program is similar to the standard program but does use make_heap()
after removing a node with erase() thus keeping the heap structure at all times.
Finally there is the 4th program, the lazyremove program. This program was an attempt to
increase the speed with which the D* Lite global planner could compute a plan or re-plan. The
program does not hold strictly to the D* Lite algorithm as it does not include the statement which
remove a node from the priority queue during update of the vertex, if that node is already in the
queue (as can be seen in figure 18 in line 8 in the appendix). Instead every time a new node is
chosen for expansion this program checks the size of the priority queue and if it is larger than a
set value it removes the last element in the priority queue. The idea behind this method is that
it has the effect of reducing the size of the priority queue to only the most promising nodes, the
ones in the front of the queue who’d be the next to be expanded. Reducing the size of the prior-
ity queue also reduce the number of nodes which have to be iterated through in the other heap
function, thus speeding the overall program up.
4.8
Testing methods:
A large part of the project has involved testing the D* Lite global planner implementations/pro-
grams, both to discover potential errors which needed to be corrected, but also to get the results
of the programs efficiency as path planners to answer the research question. To that effect specific
map types have been used, certain comparisons have been made, and different measurements have
been performed.
In terms of the specific map types there are two types which have been the standard on which the
results are based. These two map types can be seen in the figure below:
(a) Obstacle appears/disappears.
(b) Simple office map.
Figure 10: Testing maps visualized in MATLAB.
Figure 10a shows a ’obstacle appears/obstacle disappears’ type of testing map. The plan-
ner’s initial start node (sstart) is in the upper left corner [0;0] and it has the goal of making its
way down to the node in the lower right corner [rows-1; columns-1]. An obstacle will then ei-
ther appears at [1;1] (the yellow square) after the new/initial planning of D* Lite, requiring a re-
planning around the obstacle, or it’s already present at [1;1] and disappears after the initial plan-
ning thus also initiating a re-planning to take advantage of the shorter path. This type of map
Page 22
==PAGE:25==
Final Project
4.8
Testing methods:
functions as a useful test of D* Lite’s re-planning ability since the entire point of D* Lite is to be
more efficient by re-planning rather than making a whole new plan, thus the re-planning should
be far more efficient and the simplified setting of the map would make the results far more clear.
It’s important to mention that in tests carried out with this map the current position (sstart) is
’reset’ one time. So the sstart which normally would advance to the next position, in this case
from [0;0] to [0;1] or [1;1], after the initial plan is instead reset back to [0;0]. This is done partly
to ensure that sstart is not an obstacle, but the main reason is to ensure a correct comparison
between D* Lite re-planning and other attempts at planning. We want to compare D* Lite re-
planning from the SAME start to the SAME goal with other planners to make accurate compar-
isons.
Figure 10b shows a map meant to represent a simplified office floor, with rooms and hallways.
This map is used not for direct measurements but to test and show the planners ability to get
around obstacles in a simplified, simulated real-world setting. The test performed with this map
sets the start position in the upper left room, and the goal position in the upper right room. The
shortest path is the ’hallway’ in the middle of the image, but this hallway will then be blocked
by obstacles introduced in the middle of the hallway, requiring the program to update the graph
and create a new shortest path through another hallway or room. A successful re-planning should
then backtrack out of the hallway and go through the hallway below. This test is meant to test
an example which could be found in a real-world setting.
In terms of comparisons while, of course, the different versions of the program would be com-
pared, in general there are two comparisons of interest:
• D* Lite New Planning vs. D* Lite Re-Planning.
• D* Lite Re-Planning vs. A* New Planning.
The first comparisons, D* Lite New Planning vs. D* Lite Re-Planning, is perhaps one of the
most important comparisons which can be made. Widely different methods of implementation
of a D* Lite planner will likely lead to widely different results, but whatever the method of imple-
mentation the expectation is that re-planning should ALWAYS be more efficient than creating a
new plan. For example, if an ’obstacle appears’ test were to be performed on standardB, the re-
planning around the obstacle at [1;1] should yield better results than with standardB where the
obstacle at [1;1] was already present and no re-planning was required.
The second comparison, D* Lite Re-Planning vs. A* New Planning, was made to get an idea
about the effectiveness of the D* Lite implementations in comparison to an A* implementation
available online [1].
In terms of measurements it was decided that there were three different types of measurements
who could provide relevant data when it came to comparing results:
• Time required to compute the search graph.
• UpdateVertex calls.
• New nodes added to the queue.
Page 23
==PAGE:26==
Final Project
4.8
Testing methods:
When it comes to planning and navigation time is, of course, important to consider. The main
real-world interest in D* Lite over A* is to avoid any potential ’pauses’ in robot operations as it
stops to make a new plan after the previous plan was rendered invalid. To simplify the measure-
ment, and enable easier comparison with other planners like A* it was decided not to measure the
time taken by the programs from start to finish, but instead measure only the time taken to com-
pute a plan. Thus the time spent from the very start of the ComputeShortestPath function
to end of the function is measured. In order to measure time in the programs the steady_clock
class from the <chrono> C++ library is used. These time measurements were performed on a
Lenovo laptop with the following specifications:
• Processor: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-10750H CPU @ 2.60GHz 2.59 GHz.
• Installed RAM: 16,0 GB.
Another form of measurement, this one more directly related to D* Lite, is the amount of Up-
dateVertex calls. The UpdateVertex function is the primary function which the ComputeShort-
estPath function calls to add nodes, update values etc. Thus the amount of times this function is
called per. instance of ComputeShortestPath is a method to measure the efficiency of different D*
Lite implementations.
Finally, measuring time, while interesting, is not guaranteed to give the most stable of measure-
ment and comparison between different implementations of planners. A lot can affect a time mea-
surement, thus an alternative measurement independent of time, and to some degree implemen-
tation, is very useful when comparing results. The amount of nodes a global path planner adds
to its priority queue is a good measure of the efficiency of the path planner. For A* every node
added to the priority queue should be counted as these are potential nodes set for expansion.
For D* Lite it’s a bit different as the D* Lite algorithm can remove and add the same node dur-
ing one execution of the UpdateVertex function to update the values of that node in the queue.
Thus for D* Lite a node is only counted as being a ’new’ node added to the priority queue if it
had been added to the priority queue, but NOT removed first, in the same call of UpdateVertex.
The lazyremove implementation, however, does not include the code which removes a node in
UpdateVertex if it’s already present in the queue. Instead it removes nodes from the back of the
priority queue if the queue is of a certain size or larger. This meant that the method of counting
nodes added to the queue in the other D* Lite implementations were not valid here. In the end
the decision was made to not include a measure of ’new nodes added to the queue’ in the lazyre-
move implementation and thus leave it out of these measurements. Instead using the UpdateVer-
tex measurement to compare it against the other D* Lite implementations.
Page 24
==PAGE:27==
Final Project
5
Results
This section contains the results of tests carried out with the four D* Lite implementations stan-
dard, standardB, standardC, and lazyremove. Some tests in this section are also compared
with data from the A* planner found at [1].
5.1
Test 1: Obstacle appears.
An ’obstacle appears’ type of test, which is described in subsection 4.8 Testing methods, was
carried out. The details of the test are as follows:
• Start node: [0;0]...(Top left)
• Goal: [width-1; height-1]...(Bottom right)
• Obstacle appears at: [1;1]
Figure 11 below displays the resulting different time measurement between the D* Lite implemen-
tations re-planning around the obstacle and the D* Lite implementations making a new plan with
the obstacle already present. The details of the graph are:
• x-axis/map sizes: 10x10, 20x20, 40x40, 80x80, 160x160, 320x320, 640x640, 1280x1280.
• y-axis/measuring: Time spent to compute the ComputeShortestPath() function for D*
Lite re-planning and the time spent for D* Lite new planning (or the time spent in the A*
algorithm till the goal node had been found for A*)
Figure 11: Time taken for D* Lite re-planning and D* Lite new planning.
Page 25
==PAGE:28==
Final Project
5.1
Test 1: Obstacle appears.
It can be observed that for all implementations the re-planning time measurements are faster
than creating an entirely new plan. With standardB and standardC it can be observed that
this difference between their re-planning vs. making a new plan visibly grows the larger the map
size.
Figure 12 below utilize the same test details as figure 11 but displays the resulting different time
measurement between the D* Lite implementations re-planning around the obstacle and an A*
implementations making a new plan with the obstacle already present.
Figure 12: Time taken for D* Lite re-planning and A* new plan.
It can be observed that all D* Lite program implementations are slower than the A* program
with the exception of the lazyremove implementation. At map size 1280x1280 standard, A*,
and lazyremove can re-plan or create a new plan in less than a second (time measured using
methods mentioned in 4.8 Testing methods). standardB and standardC takes several sec-
onds.
Figure 13 below displays the result of the measurement of new nodes added to the queue. The
details of the graph are:
• x-axis/map sizes: 320x320, 640x640, 1280x1280.
• y-axis/measuring: For D* Lite: Nodes added to the priority queue in the UpdateVertex
function which had not previously been removed in the same function. For A*: All nodes
added to the priority queue.
• Note: This graph have been simplified to include only map sizes of 320x320, 640x640, and
1280x1280 to ease the readability of the graph. The relationships that can be observed be-
tween the D* Lite implementations and A* at 320x320 and 640x640 in figure 13 (D* Lite
adding fewer nodes) holds true for smaller map sizes as well.
Page 26
==PAGE:29==
Final Project
5.1
Test 1: Obstacle appears.
Figure 13: New nodes added D* Lite re-planning and A* new plan.
In addition to the bar plot, lines have been added which show the halfway point (50%) of the
amount of nodes A* adds to the queue. The halfway point of A* in a 320x320 map is the red
line. The halfway point of A* in a 640x640 map is the blue line. The halfway point of A* in a
1280x1280 map is the green line.
All D* Lite program implementations (with the exception of lazyremove which is not included
as explained 4.8 Testing methods) adds fewer nodes to the priority queue than A* at every
map size (less than 50% as can be observed by the lines). The amount of nodes added to the
queue for the D* Lite programs is identical at every map-size except at 1280x1280 where the
standard program diverge, adding more nodes to the queue than the other D* Lite implementa-
tions. Table 1 also shows the difference in nodes added to the queue by the D* Lite implementa-
tions when creating a new plan vs. re-planning and it can be observed that fewer nodes are added
when re-planning.
Table 1 - Obstacle appears nodes added (new plan/re-plan)
.
standard
standardB
standardC
Map size 320x320
(2213/635)
(2213/635)
(2213/635)
Map size 640x640
(4455/1275)
(4453/1275)
(4453/1275)
Map size 1280x1280
(8942/2710)
(8935/2557)
(8935/2557)
Figure 14 below displays the result of measurement of UpdateVertex calls. The details of the
graph are:
• x-axis/map sizes: 10x10, 20x20, 40x40, 80x80, 160x160, 320x320, 640x640, 1280x1280.
• y-axis/measuring: The number of times the UpdateVertex function is accesses during
ComputeShortestPath of the new plan or re-planning.
Page 27
==PAGE:30==
Final Project
5.2
Test 2: Obstacle disappears.
• Note: This graph have been simplified to include only the new planning and re-planning of
standardC and lazyremove. The results of standardB is wholly identical to standardC
at every map size. standard is wholly identical to standardC at every map size except
at 1280x1280 where it calls UpdateVertex 30740 times during the new planning and 21702
times during the re-planning.
Figure 14: UpdateVertex calls during ComputeShortestPath.
It can be observed that new planning calls the UpdateVertex function more than re-planning.
It can also be observed that standardC calls UpdateVertex less that lazyremove up until the
map size 640x640 where the amount of times lazyremove calls UpdateVertex drops compared to
standardC and even it’s performance at 320x320.
5.2
Test 2: Obstacle disappears.
An ’obstacle disappears’ type of test, which is described in 4.8 Testing methods, were carried
out. The details of the test are as follows:
• Start node: [0;0]...(Top left)
• Goal: [width-1; height-1]...(Bottom right)
• Obstacle disappears at: [1;1]
Table 2 below displays the resulting different time measurement between the D* Lite implemen-
tations re-planning a new shortest path with the obstacle no longer present and the D* Lite im-
plementations making a new plan with no obstacle present. Unlike figure 11 the data in table 2 is
limited to the 3 largest map sizes to not show redundant data as table 2 is adequate to show the
relationship between new planning and re-planning when an obstacle disappears.
Page 28
==PAGE:31==
Final Project
5.2
Test 2: Obstacle disappears.
Table 2 - Obstacle disappears ComputeShortestPath Time (sec) (new plan/re-plan)
Map size
320x320
640x640
1280x1280
standard
(0.0194704/9.04e-05)
(0.0473791/0.0001082)
(0.130676/0.0001645)
standardB
(0.148195/0.0005395)
(0.572681/0.0009425)
(2.22263/0.0017582)
standardC
(0.058138/0.0003235)
(0.195912/0.0007813)
(0.731406/0.0014822)
Like with figure 11 it can be observed that all re-planning time measurements are faster than
creating an entirely new plan, but even more so for this scenario where an obstacle disappears.
Figure 15 below displays the result of the time measurement test for D* Lite re-planning vs. A*
new planning. The details of the graph are:
• x-axis/map sizes: 10x10, 20x20, 40x40, 80x80, 160x160, 320x320, 640x640, 1280x1280.
• y-axis/measuring: Time spent to compute the ComputeShortestPath() function for D*
Lite re-planning and the time spent in the A* algorithm till the goal node had been found
for A*.
Figure 15: Time taken for D* Lite re-planning and A* new plan.
In this test the D* Lite implementations all take less time that the A* implementation, with all
graphs from the D* Lite implementations visually overlapping in the bottom of the graph. The
order of time taken to re-plan between the D* Lite programs remain as in figure 12 with the lazyre-
move being the fastest followed by standard, standardC, and finally standardB.
Page 29
==PAGE:32==
Final Project
5.3
Test 3: Simple office map test.
Table 3 below shows the new plan/re-plan difference in new nodes added to the priority queue
when an obstacle is not present/disappears. A comparison with A* is redundant as all D* Lite
implementations (again, with the exception of lazyremove which is not measured) outperform
A*, adding only ’1’ node to the priority queue during re-planning, no matter the map size.
Table 3 - Obstacle disappears nodes added (new plan/re-plan)
.
standard
standardB
standardC
Map size 320x320
(1584/1)
(1584/1)
(1584/1)
Map size 640x640
(3184/1)
(3184/1)
(3184/1)
Map size 1280x1280
(6384/1)
(6384/1)
(6384/1)
Table 4 below shows the new plan/re-plan difference in the amount of UpdateVertex calls when
an obstacle is not present/disappears. The results for all D* Lite implementations are identical in
this case, the UpdateVertex is called 11 times during re-planning for all map sizes, and the Up-
dateVertex calls for new plans scale equally for all the implementations.
Table 4 - Obstacle disappears UpdateVertex calls (new plan/re-plan)
.
standard, standardB, standardC, lazyremove
10x10
(70/11)
20x20
(150/11)
40x40
(310/11)
80x80
(630/11)
160x160
(1270/11)
320x320
(2550/11)
640x640
(5110/11)
1280x1280
(10230/11)
Important note: In 5.1 Test 1: Obstacle appears and 5.2 Test 2: Obstacle disappears
the length of the paths produced by the different implementations were all of equal length de-
pending on the test. So, while the different implementations resulted in different measurements
they all produced the shortest path when creating a new plan or re-planning, paths which were
similar to A* for that situation.
5.3
Test 3: Simple office map test.
An ’simple office map’ type of test, which is described in 4.8 Testing methods, were carried
out. The details of the test are as follows:
• Start node: [4;20]...In the top left ’room’.
• Goal: [3:380]...In the top right ’room’.
• Obstacles appears at: [209;200], [210;200], [211;200], [212;200], [213;200], [214;200], [215;200],
[216;200], [217;200], [218;200], [219;200], [220;200], [221;200], [222;200], [223;200], [224;200],
[225;200], [226;200], [227;200], [228;200]...Blocking middle hallway.
Page 30
==PAGE:33==
Final Project
5.3
Test 3: Simple office map test.
Figure 16 below displays the data in an array as an image. This array mirrors the costmap ini-
tially, but is altered to display additional information. Dark blue represent free space, with the
lighter blue representing obstacles. Additional data have been added such as green which repre-
sent the start node at each movement, thus the line represents the path traveled. Yellow represent
new obstacles which were added blocking the hallway after the first planning, as can be observed
with the yellow line near the middle of the image. All this can be seen in figure 17.
Figure 16: Simple office map test with standardC
Figure 17: Figure 16 explained
Figure 16 display the result of the standardC implementation navigating through the simple
office map, encountering the blocked hallway, and navigating around it, reaching the goal through
another hallway.
Not all D* Lite implementations could complete this test. The results of this test on standard,
Page 31
==PAGE:34==
Final Project
standardB, standardC, and lazyremove can be seen in Table 5 below:
Table 5 - Office map test (completion vs. failure)
.
standard
standardB
standardC
lazyremove
Start to Goal NO NEW obstacles
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Start to Goal with NEW obstacles
No
Yes
Yes
No
Thus as table 5 shows, only the standardB and standardC D* Lite global planner implemen-
tations/programs created in the project were able to fully complete Test 3 by finding the shortest
path from start to goal and then re-planning when encountering the blocked hallway and creating
a new shortest path to reach the goal.
6
Discussion
The research question this paper sought to answer were: ’Will re-planning with a D* Lite imple-
mentation as a global planner display increased efficiency compared to what could be achieved with
the creation of an entirely new plan?’. The results indicate that the D* Lite implementations cre-
ated for this project shows an increased efficiency by re-planning over creating a new plan. Of
those four implementations/programs the standardB implementation and the standardC im-
plementation are the most reliable, as indicated by their ability to complete Test 3. Furthermore,
the time measurements indicate that the re-planning of all of the four implementation outperform
the A* program in scenarios where an obstacle disappears, but standardB and standardC is
outperformed by the A* program in the time required to compute the shortest path in scenar-
ios where an obstacle appears, though they are still more efficient than A* in the number of new
nodes added to the priority queue. This indicates that D* Lite enjoys an even greater increase in
efficiency when obstacles disappear, beyond the already greater efficiency that re-planning pro-
vides, but also that time was, as expected, a ’biased’ unit of measurement, very much a function
how the four implementations were implemented, but not displaying the underlying increase in ef-
ficiency.
One hard fact which can be observed is that the standard and lazyremove implementations
are not fully functional in real-world scenarios (Test 3). If we combine this information with the
data from Test 1 and Test 2 a correlation between an ordered priority queue and reliability be-
comes clear. The standardB and standardC implementations both employ the make_heap()
function which ensures an ordered priority queue, whereas standard and lazyremove removes
nods from the priority queue without method to ensure a correct ordering afterwards. However, a
correlation between employing the make_heap() function and a slower computation of the short-
est path is also clear from the results in the scenarios were an obstacle appears.
These results therefore do not challenge, but rather serve to further confirm the work of Koenig
and Likhachev, the creators of the D* Lite algorithm, who employed binary heaps for their re-
sults. The implications of this is that for a path planning algorithm as complex as D* Lite (com-
pared to A*) it is of paramount importance to ensure correct ordering of the priority queue, and
there is likely not to be any ’shortcuts’ to increase the performance of an implementation of D*
Lite by not ordering the priority queue. But the results do also confirm D* Lite’s ability as a
path planner when executed correctly, and furthermore the results confirm the algorithms ability
Page 32
==PAGE:35==
Final Project
to re-plan in a simulated real-work environment, thus building on existing evidence of D* Lite’s
capabilities with new data.
In terms of the limitations of this study, the generalizability of the results is limited by a lack of
diversity in the test scenarios. While testing on different map sizes were carried out, these tests
only reflect two scenarios with a third testing scenario which simply shows that two of four imple-
mentations are functional in a simulated real-world environment. Thus the results cannot confirm
the effectiveness of the D* Lite implementations in other scenarios. The methodological choices of
this study were constrained by time limitations and thus more extensive tests or development of a
more effective implementations did not fall within the the possibilities of this study. However, the
results are nonetheless valid and showcase the potential of the D* Lite algorithm as a global plan-
ner for real-world applications.
Future studies should take into account the importance of organizing the priority queue when im-
plementing a D* Lite path planner and the fact that D* Lite not only pop nodes from the front
of the priority queue, but can also remove nodes at places inside the queue. Thus an efficient way
of ordering the queue when removing nodes will have a significant impact on the efficiency of the
overall implementation.
7
Future Work
The initial scope of the project included the development of a global planner plugin for the Robot
Operating System (ROS). This plugin would implement the D* Lite algorithm as the search algo-
rithm used by a real-world robot. However, this scope proved to be beyond the time constraints
and thus the scope of the project was reduced. However, future projects building on the work
performed in this project and attempting to fulfill the original scope could focus their efforts on
the following areas.
7.1
ROS implementation
In order to implement a new global planner in ROS the path planner must adhere to the
nav_core::BaseGlobalPlanner C++ interface defined in the nav_core package. The code struc-
ture of the implementations of this project already has some compatibility with ROS as the struc-
ture of a ROS compatible program were used during development as explained in the methods
sections. However, besides lacking some ROS specific functions one potentially large challenge to
developing a ROS compatible implementation is the lack of a clear main() function in ROS. For
the programs of this project, the implementation of the D* Lite algorithms main() function was
simplified as it could simply be the C++ main() function. However, for ROS this would most
likely not be the case and might require more complex solutions to implement the movement from
one location to another, search for changes to the edge costs and other functionalities the main()
function of D* Lite implements.
7.2
Non-binary costmap
Unlike the implementation of this project, a global planner plugin for ROS would utilize a costmap
with values from 0 to 255 as a method of keeping a safe distance from walls and obstacles. This
could probably be fairly simply implemented as a binary costmap is already being utilized in the
Page 33
==PAGE:36==
Final Project
implementations of this project. It is, however, difficult to speculate about what effects a non-
binary costmap would have. One possibility is that it could lead to very frequent re-planning
as the values of a costmap in ROS fluctuates quite often, thus a node which might have had a
costmap value of 54 might change to 57 without any new obstacle having been introduced. As
the implementations of this project utilize the costmap when determining the edge cost between
nodes, and D* Lite re-plan when detecting a change in edge costs, some method to avoid fre-
quent, unnecessary re-planning would probably be required in order to keep the global planner
efficient.
8
Conclusion
This project aimed at examining the increase in efficiency the D* Lite algorithm could provide for
a global path planner with its capability to re-plan, over creating a new plan when encountering
unexpected elements. This was realized by implementing a global path planning program utilizing
the D* Lite search algorithm to provide a more efficient method of path planning than algorithms
like A* could provide.
Based on analysis of the results it can be concluded that re-planning does represent a great in-
crease in efficiency, adding far fewer nodes to the priority queue that would be required for a new
planning. These results show the reliable D* Lite implementations (standardB and standardC)
are more than twice as efficient in the test scenario where an obstacle appears and enormously
more efficient in the test scenario where an obstacle disappears. Thus in can be concluded that
while a ’faster’ global path planning program have not been implemented this was not the goal
of the project and but rather to show an increase in efficiency which have been achieved with re-
planning.
As the objective of this research was not to expand on the D* Lite algorithm but to rather to uti-
lize it only made sense to also utilize an experimental D* Lite program rather than creating an
implementation from scratch of something which already existed. Having this program as a foun-
dation had the added benefit of speeding up the timeline of the project which was only beneficial
as expectations were that many complications would likely be encountered on the journey to de-
velop a global planner using D* Lite, which turned out to be true.
With the project aimed towards the implementation of a D* Lite global planner for simulated
real-world scenarios a methodology of frequent testing during the implementation were employed.
With the implementation of a costmap which, in the absence of sensor data, utilized text files as
maps it became possible carry out frequent tests on different scenarios very swiftly by manually
altering the text files or creating simple programs which could create maps. But it was also de-
cided, supported by advice from the project’s supervisor, to simplify as much as possible during
the development of the D* Lite global planner implementation, and later focus on implement-
ing more advanced features. This methodology only made sense as while more advanced features
might bring with them new issues, a D* Lite global planner implementation which functioned in a
simplified scenario would be more than sufficient to answer the research question, and any issues
with more advanced features would not be due to any errors in core functionality of the global
planner implementation.
Page 34
==PAGE:37==
Final Project
The results clearly show the efficiency of the a D* Lite global planner have with re-planning over
A*, but the also shows a not insignificant amount of nodes added to the priority queue when just
a single obstacle appears. These results ran counter to initial expectations regarding D* Lite re-
planning, expectations that the algorithm need only update nodes local to the area of the new
obstacle. While this is still very efficient when compared to A*, it does raise questions about
whether a method exists or could be developed which did not expand the ’corridor’ between start
and goal, and could simply expand the local area around the obstacle and otherwise get the plan-
ner back in it’s original path without further expansion. While such a methods could probably
never be as efficient as the scenario where an obstacle disappears, it would still have great poten-
tial.
Based on these conclusions I believe this paper makes a strong argument for the potential gains a
D* Lite global planner implementation can provide in real-world applications, especially in large,
dynamic environments. Future studies could examine the implications and potential gains of im-
plementing a D* Lite global planner with alternate data structures such as perhaps a Fibonacci
heap instead of a Binary heap. There might also be potential gains in examinations into alter-
nate methods of interacting with the priority queue, such as perhaps utilizing a hashtable to know
where each value is located in the heap to reduce time complexity.
Page 35
==PAGE:38==
Final Project
9
References
References
[1]
Damian Barczyński. A ∗Program. url: https://github.com/daancode/a-star.
[2]
Jan Faigl. Grid and Graph based Path Planning Methods. 2017. url: https://cw.fel.cvut.
cz/old/_media/courses/b4m36uir/lectures/b4m36uir-lec04-handout.pdf.
[3]
Shohei Fujii. D ∗LiteimplementationinC + +(experimental). url: https://gist.github.
com/ompugao/32a61c32b8b6749dfab1a6c512d6b6c2.
[4]
Sven Koenig and Maxim Likhachev. “D ∗Lite”. In: (2002), 1 to 8. url: http://idm-lab.
org/bib/abstracts/papers/aaai02b.pdf.
[5]
Min Heap Image. url: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/binary-heap/.
[6]
ROS. url: https://www.ros.org.
[7]
Al-Imam University/King AbdulAziz Center for Science and Technology (KACST)/Prince
Sultan University. coins-lab relaxedastar. 2014. url: https://web.archive.org/web/
20180611021016/https://github.com/coins-lab/relaxed_astar.
[8]
Shakey the robot. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shakey_the_robot.
[9]
Unduli. Grid Image. 2015. url: https://www.gamedev.net/forums/topic/664693-
getting-number-of-nodes-of-a-grid/.
Page 36
==PAGE:39==
Final Project
10
Appendices
10.1
D* Lite
Figure 18: D* Lite
Page 37
==PAGE:40==
Final Project
10.2
D* Lite (optimized version)
10.2
D* Lite (optimized version)
Figure 19: D* Lite (optimized version)
Page 38
==PAGE:41==
Final Project
10.3
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.h
10.3
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.h
standardC for a 320x320 map.
1
#include <stdio.h>
2
#include <stdlib.h>
3
#include <string.h>
4
#include <sys/types.h>
5
#include <string>
6
#include <vector>
7
#include <limits> // numeric_limits
8
#include <cassert> //assert
9
#include <set>
10
#include <map>
11
#include <math.h>
12
#include <tuple>
13
using namespace std;
14
using namespace std::chrono;
15
using std::string;
16
17
#ifndef DSTAR_ROS_CPP
18
#define DSTAR_ROS_CPP
19
20
float infinity = std::numeric_limits< float >::infinity();
21
22
/*Define map size. Map size = SIZE x SIZE*/
23
const int SIZE = 320;
24
/**/
25
using Cost = float;
26
Cost key_modifier;
27
using Edge = pair<unsigned int, unsigned int>;
28
using HeapKey = pair<Cost, Cost>;
29
using KeyCompare = std::greater<std::pair<HeapKey, unsigned int>>;
30
vector<pair<HeapKey, unsigned int>> U;
31
int in_U[SIZE*SIZE];
32
33
int width;
34
int height;
35
36
int id_start;
37
int id_goal;
38
int id_last;
39
40
Cost heuristic(int id1, int id2) {
41
int x1=id1/width;
42
int y1=id1%width;
Page 39
==PAGE:42==
Final Project
10.3
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.h
43
int x2=id2/width;
44
int y2=id2%width;
45
return hypot((x1-x2),(y1-y2));
46
}
47
48
class Cell {
49
public:
50
Cell(const int id)
51
: id(id)
52
, neighbors()
53
, g(infinity)
54
, rhs(infinity) {};
55
const unsigned int id;
56
vector<Cell*> neighbors;
57
Cost g;
58
Cost rhs;
59
const HeapKey calculateKey() const {
60
return { min(g, rhs) + heuristic(id_start, id) + key_modifier, min(g, rhs) };
61
}
62
};
63
64
class Graph {
65
public:
66
Graph(const unsigned int size) : size(size) {
67
assert(size > 2);
68
for (unsigned int i = 0; i < size; i++) {
69
Cellss.push_back(new Cell(i));
70
}
71
}
72
~Graph() {
73
for (unsigned int i = 0; i < size; i++) {
74
delete Cellss[i];
75
}
76
}
77
void connect(const unsigned int id1,
78
const unsigned int id2, const Cost cost) {
79
assert(id1 < size && id2 < size);
80
Cellss[id1]->neighbors.push_back(Cellss[id2]);
81
edges.insert({ makeEdgeKey(id1, id2), cost });
82
}
83
const bool edgeExists(const unsigned int id1,
84
const unsigned int id2) const {
85
assert(id1 < size && id2 < size);
86
return edges.find(makeEdgeKey(id1, id2)) != edges.end();
87
}
Page 40
==PAGE:43==
Final Project
10.3
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.h
88
const Cost getEdgeCost(const unsigned int id1,
89
const unsigned int id2) const {
90
assert(id1 < size && id2 < size);
91
assert(edgeExists(id1, id2));
92
return edges.at(makeEdgeKey(id1, id2));
93
}
94
void setEdgeCost(const unsigned int id1,
95
const unsigned int id2, const Cost cost) {
96
assert(id1 < size && id2 < size);
97
assert(edgeExists(id1, id2));
98
edges.at(makeEdgeKey(id1, id2)) = cost;
99
}
100
Cell* getCell(const unsigned int id) {
101
assert(id < size);
102
return Cellss[id];
103
}
104
void setCellG(const unsigned int id, const float g) {
105
assert(id < size);
106
Cellss[id]->g = g;
107
}
108
void setCellrhs(const unsigned int id, const float rhs) {
109
assert(id < size);
110
Cellss[id]->rhs = rhs;
111
}
112
static const Edge makeEdgeKey(const unsigned int id1,
113
const unsigned int id2) {
114
return {id1,id2};
115
}
116
const unsigned int size;
117
118
private:
119
vector<Cell*> Cellss;
120
map<Edge, Cost> edges;
121
};
122
123
namespace Dstar_planner {
124
125
class DstarPlannerROS {
126
public:
127
128
DstarPlannerROS ();
129
void initialize();
130
131
float getMoveCost(int CellID1, int CellID2);
132
float getMoveCost(int i1, int j1, int i2, int j2);
Page 41
==PAGE:44==
Final Project
10.3
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.h
133
void findFreeNeighborCell (int CellID);
134
void createNeighborCellLinks();
135
136
void insertHeap(unsigned int id, HeapKey k);
137
void updateVertex(unsigned int id);
138
139
bool makePlan(int startCell, int goalCell);
140
vector<int> DstarPlanner(int startCell, int goalCell);
141
vector<int> ComputeShortestPath(int startCell, int goalCell);
142
vector<int> constructPath();
143
144
bool isStartAndGoalCellsValid(int startCell,int goalCell);
145
bool isFree(int CellID); //returns true if the cell is Free
146
bool isFree(int i, int j);
147
bool occupied(int CellID);
148
149
int getCellIndex(int i,int j) { //get the index of the cell to be used in Path
150
return (i*width)+j;
151
}
152
int getCellRowID(int index) {//get the row ID from cell index
153
return index/width;
154
}
155
int getCellColID(int index) {//get colunm ID from cell index
156
return index%width;
157
}
158
159
bool initialized_ = false;
160
bool initializedDstarLite_ = false;
161
};
162
163
};
164
#endif
Page 42
==PAGE:45==
Final Project
10.4
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.cpp
10.4
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.cpp
standardC for a 320x320 map where an obstacle appear at [1;1]. Comments in the code show the
few modifications needed to alter the program to standard or standardB.
1
#include <stdio.h>
2
#include <stdlib.h>
3
#include <string.h>
4
#include <sys/types.h>
5
#include <fstream>
6
#include <iostream>
7
#include <iomanip>
8
#include <string>
9
#include <algorithm> // std::reverse
10
#include <sstream>
11
#include <numeric>
12
#include <chrono>
13
#include "Dstar_Lite.h"
14
15
const int mapSize = SIZE*SIZE;
16
bool* OGM;
17
const int laserScan_range = 4;
18
Cost costmap[SIZE][SIZE];
19
20
unsigned int insert_extra_check = 0;
21
double updateVertex_count = 0;
22
unsigned int computeShortestPath_counter;
23
bool testx = false;
24
25
Graph graph(mapSize);
26
27
static const float INFINIT_COST = INT_MAX;
28
constexpr Cost inf = numeric_limits<Cost>::infinity();
29
constexpr Cost large = inf;
30
31
ostream& operator<<(ostream& os, pair<Cost, Cost> const& p) {
32
return os << "<" << p.first << ", " << p.second << ">";
33
}
34
35
namespace Dstar_planner
36
{
37
38
DstarPlannerROS::DstarPlannerROS() {}
39
40
void DstarPlannerROS::initialize() {
41
Page 43
==PAGE:46==
Final Project
10.4
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.cpp
42
if (!initialized_) {
43
string inFileName = "320x320testmap.txt";
44
ifstream inFile;
45
inFile.open(inFileName.c_str());
46
if (inFile.is_open())
47
{
48
for (int i = 0; i < SIZE; i++) {
49
for (int j = 0; j < SIZE; j++) {
50
inFile >> costmap[i][j];
51
if (costmap[i][j] == 1) {
52
costmap[i][j] = inf;
53
}
54
}
55
}
56
inFile.close();
57
}
58
else {
59
cerr << "Can't find input file " << inFileName << endl;
60
}
61
62
width = SIZE;
63
height = SIZE;
64
computeShortestPath_counter = 0;
65
66
OGM = new bool [mapSize];
67
for (unsigned int iy = 0; iy < SIZE; iy++) {
68
for (unsigned int ix = 0; ix < SIZE; ix++) {
69
Cost cost = costmap[iy][ix];
70
if (cost == 0) {
71
OGM[iy*width+ix]=true;
72
} else {
73
OGM[iy*width+ix]=false;
74
}
75
}
76
}
77
78
initialized_ = true;
79
80
} else {
81
cerr << "This planner has already been initialized... doing nothing" << endl;
82
}
83
}
84
85
float
DstarPlannerROS::getMoveCost(int i1, int j1, int i2, int j2) {
86
float moveCost=INFINIT_COST;
Page 44
==PAGE:47==
Final Project
10.4
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.cpp
87
88
if((j2==j1+1 && i2==i1+1)||(i2==i1-1 && j2==j1+1)
89
||(i2==i1-1 && j2==j1-1)||(j2==j1-1 && i2==i1+1)) {
90
moveCost = hypot((1),(1));
91
}
92
else {
93
if ((j2==j1 && i2==i1-1)||(i2==i1 && j2==j1-1)
94
||(i2==i1+1 && j2==j1) ||(i1==i2 && j2==j1+1)) {
95
moveCost = 1;
96
}
97
}
98
if (costmap[i1][j1] == inf) {
99
return inf;
100
}
101
return moveCost + costmap[i2][j2];
102
}
103
104
float
DstarPlannerROS::getMoveCost(int CellID1, int CellID2) {
105
int i1=0,i2=0,j1=0,j2=0;
106
i1=getCellRowID(CellID1);
107
j1=getCellColID(CellID1);
108
i2=getCellRowID(CellID2);
109
j2=getCellColID(CellID2);
110
return getMoveCost(i1, j1, i2, j2);
111
}
112
113
void DstarPlannerROS::findFreeNeighborCell (int CellID) {
114
Cell* u = graph.getCell(CellID);
115
int rowID=getCellRowID(CellID);
116
int colID=getCellColID(CellID);
117
int neighborCell;
118
u->neighbors.clear();
119
120
for (int i=-1;i<=1;i++) {
121
for (int j=-1; j<=1;j++){
122
if ((rowID+i>=0)&&(rowID+i<height)&&(colID+j>=0)
123
&&(colID+j<width)&& (!(i==0 && j==0))){
124
neighborCell = getCellIndex(rowID+i,colID+j);
125
Cost this_edge = getMoveCost(CellID, neighborCell);
126
graph.connect(CellID, neighborCell, this_edge);
127
}
128
}
129
}
130
}
131
Page 45
==PAGE:48==
Final Project
10.4
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.cpp
132
void DstarPlannerROS::createNeighborCellLinks() {
133
for (int i = 0; i < mapSize; i++) {
134
findFreeNeighborCell(i);
135
}
136
}
137
138
void DstarPlannerROS::insertHeap(unsigned int id, HeapKey k) {
139
U.push_back({ k, id });
140
/*Use for standard & standardC implementation*/
141
push_heap(U.begin(), U.end(), KeyCompare());
142
/**/
143
144
/*Use for standardB implementation*/
145
//make_heap(U.begin(), U.end(), KeyCompare());
146
/**/
147
in_U[id]++;
148
}
149
150
void DstarPlannerROS::updateVertex(unsigned int id) {
151
Cell* u = graph.getCell(id);
152
updateVertex_count++;
153
bool check_remove = false;
154
bool check_insert = false;
155
156
if (u->id != id_goal) {
157
Cost mincost = infinity;
158
for (auto s : u->neighbors) {
159
mincost = min(mincost, graph.getEdgeCost(u->id, s->id) + s->g);
160
}
161
u->rhs = mincost;
162
}
163
if (in_U[id]) {
164
check_remove = true;
165
auto it = find_if(U.begin(), U.end(), [=](auto p) { return p.second == id; });
166
U.erase(it);
167
/*Use for standardC implementation*/
168
make_heap(U.begin(), U.end(), KeyCompare());
169
/**/
170
in_U[id]--;
171
}
172
if (u->g != u->rhs) {
173
check_insert = true;
174
insertHeap(id, u->calculateKey());
175
}
176
if (!check_remove && check_insert) {
Page 46
==PAGE:49==
Final Project
10.4
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.cpp
177
insert_extra_check++;
178
}
179
}
180
181
bool DstarPlannerROS::makePlan(int startCell, int goalCell) {
182
183
if (!initialized_) {
184
cerr << "The planner has not been initialized";
185
cerr << ", please call initialize() to use the planner" << endl;;
186
return false;
187
}
188
189
if (isStartAndGoalCellsValid(startCell, goalCell)) {
190
vector<int> bestPath;
191
bestPath.clear();
192
bestPath = DstarPlanner(startCell, goalCell);
193
/*
194
cout << "Path: ";
195
for (int i = 0; i < bestPath.size(); i++) {
196
cout << bestPath[i] << " - ";
197
}
198
cout << endl;
199
*/
200
Cell* l = graph.getCell(bestPath[0]);
201
cout << "Length of path: " << l->g << endl;
202
203
if (bestPath.size()>0) {
204
return true;
205
} else {
206
cerr << "The planner failed to find a path";
207
cerr << ", choose other goal position" << endl;
208
return false;
209
}
210
} else {
211
cerr << "Not valid start or goal" << endl;
212
return false;
213
}
214
}
215
216
vector<int> DstarPlannerROS::DstarPlanner(int startCell, int goalCell){
217
218
vector<int> bestPath;
219
if (!initializedDstarLite_) {
220
id_last = id_start;
221
key_modifier = 0;
Page 47
==PAGE:50==
Final Project
10.4
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.cpp
222
for (int i=0; i<mapSize; i++) {
223
Cell* n = graph.getCell(i);
224
n->g = infinity;
225
n->rhs = infinity;
226
}
227
Cell* c = graph.getCell(goalCell);
228
c->rhs = 0;
229
insertHeap(id_goal, c->calculateKey());
230
initializedDstarLite_ = true;
231
}
232
bestPath=ComputeShortestPath(startCell, goalCell);
233
return bestPath;
234
}
235
236
vector<int> DstarPlannerROS::ComputeShortestPath(int startCell, int goalCell) {
237
steady_clock::time_point clock_begin = steady_clock::now();
238
vector<int> bestPath;
239
vector<int> emptyPath;
240
Cell* n = graph.getCell(id_start);
241
computeShortestPath_counter++;
242
243
while (U.front().first < n->calculateKey() || n->rhs != n->g) {
244
245
auto uid = U.front().second;
246
Cell* u = graph.getCell(uid);
247
auto kold = U.front().first;
248
pop_heap(U.begin(), U.end(), KeyCompare());
249
U.pop_back();
250
in_U[u->id]--;
251
252
if (kold < u->calculateKey()) {
253
insertHeap(u->id, u->calculateKey());
254
} else if (u->g > u->rhs) {
255
u->g = u->rhs;
256
for (auto s : u->neighbors) {
257
if (!occupied(s->id)) {
258
updateVertex(s->id);
259
}
260
}
261
} else {
262
u->g = infinity;
263
for (auto s : u->neighbors) {
264
if (!occupied(s->id)) {
265
updateVertex(s->id);
266
}
Page 48
==PAGE:51==
Final Project
10.4
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.cpp
267
}
268
updateVertex(u->id);
269
}
270
}
271
272
steady_clock::time_point clock_end = steady_clock::now();
273
steady_clock::duration time_span = clock_end - clock_begin;
274
double nseconds = double(time_span.count()) *
275
steady_clock::period::num / steady_clock::period::den;
276
cout << "Plan: " << computeShortestPath_counter <<
277
" took " << nseconds << " seconds - ";
278
cout << "updateVertex count: " << updateVertex_count <<
279
". New nodes added to the queue: " << insert_extra_check << endl;
280
updateVertex_count = 0;
281
insert_extra_check = 0;
282
283
bestPath=constructPath();
284
return bestPath;
285
}
286
287
vector<int> DstarPlannerROS::constructPath() {
288
vector<int> bestPath;
289
vector<int> emptyPath;
290
vector<int> path;
291
Cell* c = graph.getCell(id_goal);
292
Cell* n = graph.getCell(id_start);
293
unsigned int currentCell=n->id;
294
295
while(currentCell!=c->id) {
296
path.insert(path.begin()+path.size(), currentCell);
297
Cell* cur = graph.getCell(currentCell);
298
299
if (cur->rhs == inf) {
300
cerr << "NO ROUTE!!!" << endl;
301
return emptyPath;
302
}
303
304
unsigned int argmin = currentCell;
305
Cost mincost = inf;
306
for (auto sp : cur->neighbors) {
307
Cost cost = graph.getEdgeCost(currentCell, sp->id) + sp->g;
308
if (mincost > cost) {
309
mincost = cost;
310
argmin = sp->id;
311
}
Page 49
==PAGE:52==
Final Project
10.4
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.cpp
312
}
313
currentCell = argmin;
314
}
315
path.insert(path.begin()+path.size(), currentCell);
316
317
for(int i=0; i<path.size(); i++) {
318
bestPath.insert(bestPath.begin()+bestPath.size(), path[path.size()-(i+1)]);
319
}
320
reverse(bestPath.begin(), bestPath.end());
321
return bestPath;
322
}
323
324
bool DstarPlannerROS::isStartAndGoalCellsValid(int startCell,int goalCell) {
325
Cell* start = graph.getCell(startCell);
326
Cell* goal = graph.getCell(goalCell);
327
bool isvalid=true;
328
bool isFreeStartCell=isFree(startCell);
329
bool isFreeGoalCell=isFree(goalCell);
330
if (startCell==goalCell) {
331
cout << "The Start and the Goal cells are the same..." << endl;
332
isvalid = false;
333
}
334
else {
335
if (!isFreeStartCell && !isFreeGoalCell) {
336
cout << "The start and the goal cells are obstacle positions..." << endl;
337
isvalid = false;
338
}
339
else {
340
if (!isFreeStartCell) {
341
cout << "The start is an obstacle..." << endl;
342
isvalid = false;
343
}
344
else {
345
if(!isFreeGoalCell) {
346
cout << "The goal cell is an obstacle..." << endl;
347
isvalid = false;
348
}
349
else {
350
if (goal->neighbors.size()==0)
351
{
352
cout << "The goal cell is encountred by obstacles... "<< endl;
353
isvalid = false;
354
}
355
else {
356
if(start->neighbors.size()==0) {
Page 50
==PAGE:53==
Final Project
10.4
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.cpp
357
cout << "The start cell is encountred by obstacles... "<< endl;
358
isvalid = false;
359
}
360
}
361
}
362
}
363
}
364
}
365
return isvalid;
366
}
367
368
bool
DstarPlannerROS::occupied(int CellID) {
369
int i1=0,j1=0;
370
i1=getCellRowID(CellID);
371
j1=getCellColID(CellID);
372
if (costmap[i1][j1] == inf) {
373
return true;
374
}
375
return false;
376
}
377
bool
DstarPlannerROS::isFree(int i, int j) {
378
int CellID = getCellIndex(i, j);
379
return OGM[CellID];
380
}
381
bool
DstarPlannerROS::isFree(int CellID) {
382
return OGM[CellID];
383
}
384
385
} //namespace end
386
;
387
388
using Dstar_planner::DstarPlannerROS;
389
390
int main() {
391
392
DstarPlannerROS mgr;
393
mgr.initialize();
394
mgr.createNeighborCellLinks();
395
/*Define start location/node*/
396
id_start = 0;
397
/**/
398
399
/*Define goal location/node*/
400
id_goal = mapSize-1;
401
/**/
Page 51
==PAGE:54==
Final Project
10.4
standard, standardB, standardC - Dstar_Lite.cpp
402
mgr.makePlan(id_start, id_goal);
403
404
while (id_start != id_goal) {
405
406
Cell* start = graph.getCell(id_start);
407
if (start->rhs == inf) {
408
cerr << "NO ROUTE!!!" << endl;
409
return -1;
410
}
411
412
unsigned int argmin = id_start;
413
Cost mincost = inf;
414
for (auto sp : start->neighbors) {
415
Cost cost = graph.getEdgeCost(id_start, sp->id) + sp->g;
416
//cout << "Cost from " << id_start <<
417
//" to " << sp->id << ": " << cost << endl;
418
if (mincost > cost) {
419
mincost = cost;
420
argmin = sp->id;
421
}
422
}
423
//cout << ">>> Move from " << id_start <<
424
//" to " << argmin << " <<<" << endl;
425
id_start = argmin;
426
if (testx == false) {
427
id_start = 0;
428
testx = true;
429
}
430
431
/*Define obstacles that appear/disappears*/
432
costmap[1][1] = inf;
433
//costmap[1][1] = 0;
434
/**/
435
436
Cell* u = graph.getCell(id_start);
437
int rowID=mgr.getCellRowID(id_start);
438
int colID=mgr.getCellColID(id_start);
439
int scanCell;
440
bool cost_changed = false;
441
int updateVertex_main_counter = 0;
442
443
for (int i = (-laserScan_range); i <= laserScan_range; i++) {
444
for (int j = (-laserScan_range); j <= laserScan_range; j++) {
445
if ((rowID+i>=0)&&(rowID+i<height)&&(colID+j>=0)&&(colID+j<width)){
446
scanCell = mgr.getCellIndex(rowID+i,colID+j);
Page 52
==PAGE:55==
Final Project
10.5
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.h
447
Cell* cur_new = graph.getCell(scanCell);
448
for (auto sp : cur_new->neighbors) {
449
if ( (graph.getEdgeCost(cur_new->id, sp->id)
450
!= mgr.getMoveCost(cur_new->id, sp->id)) ) {
451
if (!cost_changed) {
452
key_modifier += heuristic(id_last, id_start);
453
id_last = id_start;
454
}
455
cost_changed = true;
456
graph.setEdgeCost(cur_new->id, sp->id,
457
mgr.getMoveCost(cur_new->id, sp->id));
458
mgr.updateVertex(cur_new->id);
459
}
460
}
461
}
462
}
463
}
464
465
if (cost_changed) {
466
cout << endl;
467
cout << "updateVertex count (changes detected): " <<
468
updateVertex_count << endl;
469
cout << "New nodes added to the queue (changes detected): " <<
470
insert_extra_check << endl;
471
updateVertex_count = 0;
472
insert_extra_check = 0;
473
cout << endl;
474
475
mgr.makePlan(id_start, id_goal);
476
}
477
}
478
479
cout << endl;
480
cout << "- - - END - - -" << endl;
481
cout << "mapSize: " << mapSize << ", SIZE: " << SIZE << endl;
482
cout << "A plan have been made: " <<
483
computeShortestPath_counter << " times." << endl;
484
}
10.5
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.h
lazyremove for a 320x320 map.
1
#include <stdio.h>
2
#include <stdlib.h>
Page 53
==PAGE:56==
Final Project
10.5
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.h
3
#include <string.h>
4
#include <sys/types.h>
5
#include <string>
6
#include <vector>
7
#include <limits> // numeric_limits
8
#include <cassert> //assert
9
#include <set>
10
#include <map>
11
#include <math.h>
12
#include <tuple>
13
using namespace std;
14
using namespace std::chrono;
15
using std::string;
16
17
#ifndef DSTAR_ROS_CPP
18
#define DSTAR_ROS_CPP
19
20
float infinity = std::numeric_limits< float >::infinity();
21
22
const int SIZE = 320;
23
using Cost = float;
24
Cost key_modifier;
25
using Edge = pair<unsigned int, unsigned int>;
26
using HeapKey = pair<Cost, Cost>;
27
using KeyCompare = std::greater<std::pair<HeapKey, unsigned int>>;
28
vector<pair<HeapKey, unsigned int>> U;
29
int in_U[SIZE*SIZE];
30
31
int width;
32
int height;
33
34
int id_start;
35
int id_goal;
36
int id_last;
37
38
Cost heuristic(int id1, int id2) {
39
int x1=id1/width;
40
int y1=id1%width;
41
int x2=id2/width;
42
int y2=id2%width;
43
return hypot((x1-x2),(y1-y2));
44
}
45
46
class Cell {
47
public:
Page 54
==PAGE:57==
Final Project
10.5
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.h
48
Cell(const int id)
49
: id(id)
50
, neighbors()
51
, g(infinity)
52
, rhs(infinity) {};
53
const unsigned int id;
54
vector<Cell*> neighbors;
55
Cost g;
56
Cost rhs;
57
const HeapKey calculateKey() const {
58
return { min(g, rhs) + heuristic(id_start, id) + key_modifier, min(g, rhs) };
59
}
60
};
61
62
class Graph {
63
public:
64
Graph(const unsigned int size) : size(size) {
65
assert(size > 2);
66
for (unsigned int i = 0; i < size; i++) {
67
Cellss.push_back(new Cell(i));
68
}
69
}
70
~Graph() {
71
for (unsigned int i = 0; i < size; i++) {
72
delete Cellss[i];
73
}
74
}
75
void connect(const unsigned int id1, const unsigned int id2, const Cost cost) {
76
assert(id1 < size && id2 < size);
77
Cellss[id1]->neighbors.push_back(Cellss[id2]);
78
edges.insert({ makeEdgeKey(id1, id2), cost });
79
}
80
const bool edgeExists(const unsigned int id1, const unsigned int id2) const {
81
assert(id1 < size && id2 < size);
82
return edges.find(makeEdgeKey(id1, id2)) != edges.end();
83
}
84
const Cost getEdgeCost(const unsigned int id1, const unsigned int id2) const {
85
assert(id1 < size && id2 < size);
86
assert(edgeExists(id1, id2));
87
return edges.at(makeEdgeKey(id1, id2));
88
}
89
void setEdgeCost(const unsigned int id1, const unsigned int id2, const Cost cost) {
90
assert(id1 < size && id2 < size);
91
assert(edgeExists(id1, id2));
92
edges.at(makeEdgeKey(id1, id2)) = cost;
Page 55
==PAGE:58==
Final Project
10.5
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.h
93
}
94
Cell* getCell(const unsigned int id) {
95
assert(id < size);
96
return Cellss[id];
97
}
98
void setCellG(const unsigned int id, const float g) {
99
assert(id < size);
100
Cellss[id]->g = g;
101
}
102
void setCellrhs(const unsigned int id, const float rhs) {
103
assert(id < size);
104
Cellss[id]->rhs = rhs;
105
}
106
static const Edge makeEdgeKey(const unsigned int id1, const unsigned int id2) {
107
return {id1,id2};
108
}
109
const unsigned int size;
110
111
private:
112
vector<Cell*> Cellss;
113
map<Edge, Cost> edges;
114
};
115
116
namespace Dstar_planner {
117
118
class DstarPlannerROS {
119
public:
120
121
DstarPlannerROS ();
122
void initialize();
123
124
float getMoveCost(int CellID1, int CellID2);
125
float getMoveCost(int i1, int j1, int i2, int j2);
126
void findFreeNeighborCell (int CellID);
127
void createNeighborCellLinks();
128
129
void insertHeap(unsigned int id, HeapKey k);
130
void updateVertex(unsigned int id);
131
132
bool makePlan(int startCell, int goalCell);
133
vector<int> DstarPlanner(int startCell, int goalCell);
134
vector<int> ComputeShortestPath(int startCell, int goalCell);
135
vector<int> constructPath();
136
137
bool isStartAndGoalCellsValid(int startCell,int goalCell);
Page 56
==PAGE:59==
Final Project
10.6
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
138
bool isFree(int CellID); //returns true if the cell is Free
139
bool isFree(int i, int j);
140
bool occupied(int CellID);
141
142
int getCellIndex(int i,int j) { //get the index of the cell to be used in Path
143
return (i*width)+j;
144
}
145
int getCellRowID(int index) {//get the row ID from cell index
146
return index/width;
147
}
148
int getCellColID(int index) {//get colunm ID from cell index
149
return index%width;
150
}
151
152
bool initialized_ = false;
153
bool initializedDstarLite_ = false;
154
};
155
156
};
157
#endif
10.6
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
lazyremove for a 320x320 map.
1
#include <stdio.h>
2
#include <stdlib.h>
3
#include <string.h>
4
#include <sys/types.h>
5
#include <fstream>
6
#include <iostream>
7
#include <iomanip>
8
#include <string>
9
#include <algorithm> // std::reverse
10
#include <sstream>
11
#include <numeric>
12
#include <chrono>
13
#include "Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.h"
14
15
const int mapSize = SIZE*SIZE;
16
bool* OGM;
17
const int laserScan_range = 4;
18
Cost costmap[SIZE][SIZE];
19
20
double updateVertex_count = 0;
Page 57
==PAGE:60==
Final Project
10.6
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
21
unsigned int computeShortestPath_counter;
22
bool testx = false;
23
24
Graph graph(mapSize);
25
26
static const float INFINIT_COST = INT_MAX;
27
constexpr Cost inf = numeric_limits<Cost>::infinity();
28
constexpr Cost large = inf;
29
30
ostream& operator<<(ostream& os, pair<Cost, Cost> const& p) {
31
return os << "<" << p.first << ", " << p.second << ">";
32
}
33
34
namespace Dstar_planner
35
{
36
37
DstarPlannerROS::DstarPlannerROS() {}
38
39
void DstarPlannerROS::initialize() {
40
41
if (!initialized_) {
42
string inFileName = "320x320testmap.txt";
43
ifstream inFile;
44
inFile.open(inFileName.c_str());
45
if (inFile.is_open())
46
{
47
for (int i = 0; i < SIZE; i++) {
48
for (int j = 0; j < SIZE; j++) {
49
inFile >> costmap[i][j];
50
if (costmap[i][j] == 1) {
51
costmap[i][j] = inf;
52
}
53
}
54
}
55
inFile.close();
56
}
57
else {
58
cerr << "Can't find input file " << inFileName << endl;
59
}
60
61
width = SIZE;
62
height = SIZE;
63
computeShortestPath_counter = 0;
64
65
OGM = new bool [mapSize];
Page 58
==PAGE:61==
Final Project
10.6
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
66
for (unsigned int iy = 0; iy < SIZE; iy++) {
67
for (unsigned int ix = 0; ix < SIZE; ix++) {
68
Cost cost = costmap[iy][ix];
69
if (cost == 0) {
70
OGM[iy*width+ix]=true;
71
} else {
72
OGM[iy*width+ix]=false;
73
}
74
}
75
}
76
77
initialized_ = true;
78
79
} else {
80
cerr << "This planner has already been initialized... doing nothing" << endl;
81
}
82
}
83
84
float
DstarPlannerROS::getMoveCost(int i1, int j1, int i2, int j2) {
85
float moveCost=INFINIT_COST;
86
87
if((j2==j1+1 && i2==i1+1)||(i2==i1-1 && j2==j1+1)||
88
(i2==i1-1 && j2==j1-1)||(j2==j1-1 && i2==i1+1)) {
89
moveCost = hypot((1),(1));
90
}
91
else {
92
if ((j2==j1 && i2==i1-1)||(i2==i1 && j2==j1-1)||
93
(i2==i1+1 && j2==j1) ||(i1==i2 && j2==j1+1)) {
94
moveCost = 1;
95
}
96
}
97
if (costmap[i1][j1] == inf) {
98
return inf;
99
}
100
return moveCost + costmap[i2][j2];
101
}
102
103
float
DstarPlannerROS::getMoveCost(int CellID1, int CellID2) {
104
int i1=0,i2=0,j1=0,j2=0;
105
i1=getCellRowID(CellID1);
106
j1=getCellColID(CellID1);
107
i2=getCellRowID(CellID2);
108
j2=getCellColID(CellID2);
109
return getMoveCost(i1, j1, i2, j2);
110
}
Page 59
==PAGE:62==
Final Project
10.6
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
111
112
void DstarPlannerROS::findFreeNeighborCell (int CellID) {
113
Cell* u = graph.getCell(CellID);
114
int rowID=getCellRowID(CellID);
115
int colID=getCellColID(CellID);
116
int neighborCell;
117
u->neighbors.clear();
118
119
for (int i=-1;i<=1;i++) {
120
for (int j=-1; j<=1;j++){
121
if ((rowID+i>=0)&&(rowID+i<height)&&(colID+j>=0)&&
122
(colID+j<width)&& (!(i==0 && j==0))){
123
neighborCell = getCellIndex(rowID+i,colID+j);
124
Cost this_edge = getMoveCost(CellID, neighborCell);
125
graph.connect(CellID, neighborCell, this_edge);
126
Edge edge = Graph::makeEdgeKey(CellID, neighborCell);
127
}
128
}
129
}
130
}
131
132
void DstarPlannerROS::createNeighborCellLinks() {
133
for (int i = 0; i < mapSize; i++) {
134
findFreeNeighborCell(i);
135
}
136
}
137
138
void DstarPlannerROS::insertHeap(unsigned int id, HeapKey k) {
139
140
U.push_back({ k, id });
141
//make_heap(U.begin(), U.end(), KeyCompare());
142
push_heap(U.begin(), U.end(), KeyCompare());
143
}
144
145
void DstarPlannerROS::updateVertex(unsigned int id) {
146
147
Cell* u = graph.getCell(id);
148
updateVertex_count++;
149
150
if (u->id != id_goal) {
151
Cost mincost = infinity;
152
for (auto s : u->neighbors) {
153
mincost = min(mincost, graph.getEdgeCost(u->id, s->id) + s->g);
154
}
155
u->rhs = mincost;
Page 60
==PAGE:63==
Final Project
10.6
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
156
}
157
if (u->g != u->rhs) {
158
insertHeap(id, u->calculateKey());
159
}
160
}
161
162
bool DstarPlannerROS::makePlan(int startCell, int goalCell) {
163
164
if (!initialized_) {
165
cerr << "The planner has not been initialized,";
166
cerr << "please call initialize() to use the planner" << endl;;
167
return false;
168
}
169
170
if (isStartAndGoalCellsValid(startCell, goalCell)) {
171
172
vector<int> bestPath;
173
bestPath.clear();
174
bestPath = DstarPlanner(startCell, goalCell);
175
/*
176
cout << "Path: ";
177
for (int i = 0; i < bestPath.size(); i++) {
178
cout << bestPath[i] << " - ";
179
}
180
cout << endl;
181
*/
182
Cell* l = graph.getCell(bestPath[0]);
183
cout << "Length of path: " << l->g << endl;
184
185
if (bestPath.size()>0) {
186
return true;
187
} else {
188
cerr << "The planner failed to find a path, choose other goal position" << endl
189
return false;
190
}
191
} else {
192
cerr << "Not valid start or goal" << endl;
193
return false;
194
}
195
}
196
197
vector<int> DstarPlannerROS::DstarPlanner(int startCell, int goalCell){
198
199
vector<int> bestPath;
200
if (!initializedDstarLite_) {
Page 61
==PAGE:64==
Final Project
10.6
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
201
id_last = id_start;
202
key_modifier = 0;
203
for (int i=0; i<mapSize; i++) {
204
Cell* n = graph.getCell(i);
205
n->g = infinity;
206
n->rhs = infinity;
207
}
208
Cell* c = graph.getCell(goalCell);
209
c->rhs = 0;
210
insertHeap(id_goal, c->calculateKey());
211
initializedDstarLite_ = true;
212
}
213
bestPath=ComputeShortestPath(startCell, goalCell);
214
return bestPath;
215
}
216
217
vector<int> DstarPlannerROS::ComputeShortestPath(int startCell, int goalCell) {
218
steady_clock::time_point clock_begin = steady_clock::now();
219
vector<int> bestPath;
220
vector<int> emptyPath;
221
Cell* n = graph.getCell(id_start);
222
computeShortestPath_counter++;
223
224
while (U.front().first < n->calculateKey() || n->rhs != n->g) {
225
226
auto uid = U.front().second;
227
Cell* u = graph.getCell(uid);
228
auto kold = U.front().first;
229
230
// lazy remove
231
while(U.size() > 4) {
232
//pop_heap(U.begin(), U.end(), KeyCompare());
233
U.pop_back();
234
U.erase(U.end());
235
}
236
237
pop_heap(U.begin(), U.end(), KeyCompare());
238
U.pop_back();
239
240
if (kold < u->calculateKey()) {
241
insertHeap(u->id, u->calculateKey());
242
} else if (u->g > u->rhs) {
243
u->g = u->rhs;
244
for (auto s : u->neighbors) {
245
if (!occupied(s->id)) {
Page 62
==PAGE:65==
Final Project
10.6
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
246
updateVertex(s->id);
247
}
248
}
249
} else {
250
u->g = infinity;
251
for (auto s : u->neighbors) {
252
if (!occupied(s->id)) {
253
updateVertex(s->id);
254
}
255
}
256
updateVertex(u->id);
257
}
258
}
259
260
steady_clock::time_point clock_end = steady_clock::now();
261
steady_clock::duration time_span = clock_end - clock_begin;
262
double nseconds = double(time_span.count()) *
263
steady_clock::period::num / steady_clock::period::den;
264
cout << "Plan: " << computeShortestPath_counter <<
265
" took " << nseconds << " seconds - ";
266
cout << "updateVertex count: " << updateVertex_count << endl;
267
updateVertex_count = 0;
268
269
bestPath=constructPath();
270
return bestPath;
271
}
272
273
vector<int> DstarPlannerROS::constructPath() {
274
vector<int> bestPath;
275
vector<int> emptyPath;
276
vector<int> path;
277
Cell* c = graph.getCell(id_goal);
278
Cell* n = graph.getCell(id_start);
279
unsigned int currentCell=n->id;
280
281
while(currentCell!=c->id) {
282
283
path.insert(path.begin()+path.size(), currentCell);
284
Cell* cur = graph.getCell(currentCell);
285
286
if (cur->rhs == inf) {
287
cerr << "NO ROUTE!!!" << endl;
288
return emptyPath;
289
}
290
Page 63
==PAGE:66==
Final Project
10.6
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
291
unsigned int argmin = currentCell;
292
Cost mincost = inf;
293
for (auto sp : cur->neighbors) {
294
Cost cost = graph.getEdgeCost(currentCell, sp->id) + sp->g;
295
if (mincost > cost) {
296
mincost = cost;
297
argmin = sp->id;
298
}
299
}
300
currentCell = argmin;
301
}
302
path.insert(path.begin()+path.size(), currentCell);
303
304
for(int i=0; i<path.size(); i++) {
305
bestPath.insert(bestPath.begin()+bestPath.size(), path[path.size()-(i+1)]);
306
}
307
reverse(bestPath.begin(), bestPath.end());
308
return bestPath;
309
}
310
311
bool DstarPlannerROS::isStartAndGoalCellsValid(int startCell,int goalCell) {
312
Cell* start = graph.getCell(startCell);
313
Cell* goal = graph.getCell(goalCell);
314
bool isvalid=true;
315
bool isFreeStartCell=isFree(startCell);
316
bool isFreeGoalCell=isFree(goalCell);
317
if (startCell==goalCell) {
318
cout << "The Start and the Goal cells are the same..." << endl;
319
isvalid = false;
320
}
321
else {
322
if (!isFreeStartCell && !isFreeGoalCell) {
323
cout << "The start and the goal cells are obstacle positions..." << endl;
324
isvalid = false;
325
}
326
else {
327
if (!isFreeStartCell) {
328
cout << "The start is an obstacle..." << endl;
329
isvalid = false;
330
}
331
else {
332
if(!isFreeGoalCell)
333
{
334
cout << "The goal cell is an obstacle..." << endl;
335
isvalid = false;
Page 64
==PAGE:67==
Final Project
10.6
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
336
}
337
else {
338
if (goal->neighbors.size()==0)
339
{
340
cout << "The goal cell is encountred by obstacles... "<< endl;
341
isvalid = false;
342
}
343
else {
344
if(start->neighbors.size()==0) {
345
cout << "The start cell is encountred by obstacles... "<< endl;
346
isvalid = false;
347
}
348
}
349
}
350
}
351
}
352
}
353
return isvalid;
354
}
355
356
bool
DstarPlannerROS::occupied(int CellID) {
357
int i1=0,j1=0;
358
i1=getCellRowID(CellID);
359
j1=getCellColID(CellID);
360
if (costmap[i1][j1] == inf) {
361
return true;
362
}
363
return false;
364
}
365
bool
DstarPlannerROS::isFree(int i, int j) {
366
int CellID = getCellIndex(i, j);
367
return OGM[CellID];
368
}
369
bool
DstarPlannerROS::isFree(int CellID) {
370
return OGM[CellID];
371
}
372
373
} //namespace end
374
;
375
376
using Dstar_planner::DstarPlannerROS;
377
378
int main() {
379
380
DstarPlannerROS mgr;
Page 65
==PAGE:68==
Final Project
10.6
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
381
mgr.initialize();
382
mgr.createNeighborCellLinks();
383
id_start = 0;
384
id_goal = mapSize-1;
385
mgr.makePlan(id_start, id_goal);
386
387
while (id_start != id_goal) {
388
389
Cell* start = graph.getCell(id_start);
390
if (start->rhs == inf) {
391
cerr << "NO ROUTE!!!" << endl;
392
return -1;
393
}
394
395
unsigned int argmin = id_start;
396
Cost mincost = inf;
397
for (auto sp : start->neighbors) {
398
Cost cost = graph.getEdgeCost(id_start, sp->id) + sp->g;
399
//cout << "Cost from " << id_start <<
400
//" to " << sp->id << ": " << cost << endl;
401
if (mincost > cost) {
402
mincost = cost;
403
argmin = sp->id;
404
}
405
}
406
//cout << ">>> Move from " << id_start <<
407
//" to " << argmin << " <<<" << endl;
408
id_start = argmin;
409
410
if (testx == false) {
411
id_start = 0;
412
testx = true;
413
}
414
415
416
/*blockages*/
417
costmap[1][1] = inf;
418
//costmap[1][1] = 0;
419
/*blockages*/
420
421
Cell* u = graph.getCell(id_start);
422
int rowID=mgr.getCellRowID(id_start);
423
int colID=mgr.getCellColID(id_start);
424
int scanCell;
425
bool cost_changed = false;
Page 66
==PAGE:69==
Final Project
10.6
lazyremove - Dstar_Lite_lazyremove.cpp
426
427
for (int i = (-laserScan_range); i <= laserScan_range; i++) {
428
for (int j = (-laserScan_range); j <= laserScan_range; j++) {
429
if ((rowID+i>=0)&&(rowID+i<height)&&(colID+j>=0)&&(colID+j<width)){
430
scanCell = mgr.getCellIndex(rowID+i,colID+j);
431
Cell* cur_new = graph.getCell(scanCell);
432
for (auto sp : cur_new->neighbors) {
433
Edge edge = Graph::makeEdgeKey(cur_new->id, sp->id);
434
if ( (graph.getEdgeCost(cur_new->id, sp->id)
435
!= mgr.getMoveCost(cur_new->id, sp->id)) ) {
436
if (!cost_changed) {
437
key_modifier += heuristic(id_last, id_start);
438
id_last = id_start;
439
}
440
cost_changed = true;
441
graph.setEdgeCost(cur_new->id, sp->id,
442
mgr.getMoveCost(cur_new->id, sp->id));
443
mgr.updateVertex(cur_new->id);
444
}
445
}
446
}
447
}
448
}
449
450
if (cost_changed) {
451
cout << endl;
452
cout << "updateVertex count (changes detected): " << updateVertex_count << endl;
453
updateVertex_count = 0;
454
cout << endl;
455
456
mgr.makePlan(id_start, id_goal);
457
}
458
}
459
460
cout << endl;
461
cout << "- - - END - - -" << endl;
462
cout << "mapSize: " << mapSize << ", SIZE: " << SIZE << endl;
463
cout << "A plan have been made: " << computeShortestPath_counter << " times." << endl
464
}
Page 67
