==PAGE:1==
Regulation of alpha-1-acid glycoprotein,
leptin and pro-inflammatory biomarkers in
adipose tissue of the obese Ossabaw pig
Master thesis
Department of Health Technology
DTU Health Tech
Technical University of Denmark
Nanna Hartvig Jensen (s174589)
February 19th, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Regulation of alpha-1-acid glycoprotein, leptin and pro-inflammatory biomark-
ers in adipose tissue of the obese Ossabaw pig
Master thesis
30 ECTS
Start date:
September 19th, 2022
End date:
February 19th, 2023
By
Nanna Hartvig Jensen
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
Student number: s174589
Supervisors:
Peter M. H. Heegaard (PMHH@dtu.dk)
Catarina Ventura (catv@dtu.dk)
Copyright
Cover photo: Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by: DTU, Department of Health Technology, Kemitorvet, Building 202, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
I
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The work presented in this Master of science (M.Sc.) thesis corresponds to 30 ECTS points and is the
result of a literature study and experimental work carried out by Nanna Hartvig Jensen in fall 2022 for
the Ossabaw group at the Department of Health Technology at the Technical University of Denmark. The
work is a part of the Ossabaw group’s research aimed towards the understanding of innate immunology
in obesity.
II
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First off all, I would like to thank professor Peter M. H. Heegaard and PhD Catarina Ventura for their guidance
throughout the project. I would, furthermore, like to thank lab technician Henriette Vorsholt for the training
needed in order to carry out the experiments for this project.
Additional thanks to previous students, whose projects paved the way for the development of this thesis.
Many thanks to friends and family for their huge support, encouragement and feedback during the span of
this process.
III
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The heightened growth of worldwide obesity has created the need for understanding, treatment, and pre-
vention of obesity and its functions. Obesity increases the risk of developing major NCDs such as diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, and respiratory diseases. During obesity, the body will be in a chronic low-grade
inflammation state bringing the metabolic energy homeostasis out of balance with an increased expres-
sion of pro-inflammatory immune cells. Specifically, the changed response with peptide hormones leptin
and insulin gives rise to resistance in the body. Leptin is a hormone controlling the feeling of satiety in
the brain and is also a controller of energy homeostasis. Thus, leptin resistance will lead to increased food
intake. Combined with insulin resistance, which regulates energy balance and glucose homeostasis, the
risk of developing MetS is significantly heightened. During the obese inflammation state, an upregulation
of AGP has been seen from the AT. Previous research has hypothesized that AGP binds competitively to the
LEPR, thus taking part in the development of leptin resistance. The aim of this project is to investigate
AGP and its interactions with the leptin system. This is done through a complex porcine Ossabaw model,
which has shown similar immune responses to the human obesity response. In other research, the LEPR
gene has been proposed to introduce two positively selected sites in Ossabaw pigs. This could introduce
gene truncation and significantly affect obesity and inflammation development. Because of this, another
part of this project focuses on investigating LEPR gene expression.
IV
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations list
AGP/ORM α-1-acid glycoprotein
AgRP agouti-related protein
AMPK Adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase
AP-1 activator protein 1
APC antigen presenting cells
APP acute-phase protein
AT adipose tissue
ATM Adipose tissue macrophages
b-AGP biotinylated AGP
BAT brown adipose tissue
BMI Body Mass Index
cDNA complementary DNA
CNS central nervous system
CRP C-reactive protein
DAMP damaged-associated molecular patterns
ddNTPs dideoxynucleotide triphosphates
dNTPs deoxynucleotide triphosphates
dsDNA double stranded DNA
ELISA enzyme-linked immunoassay
FA fatty acids
HFHF high-fat high-fructose
HRM High Resolution Melting
ICAM Intercellular Adhesion Molecule
==PAGE:7==
IFN-γ Interferon γ
JAK2 Janus kinase 2
LEPR Leptin Receptor
LPS lipopolysaccharides
MAPK mitogen-activated protein kinase
MCP-1 Monocyte Chemotactic Protein 1
MetS Metabolic Syndrome
NBT/BCIP 4-Nitro-blue-tetrazolium/5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-phosphate
NCD Noncommunicable Disease
NE neutrophil elastase
NF-κB nuclear factor-κB
NOS2 Nitric Oxide Synthase 2
NPY neuropeptide Y
NTC no template control
Ob-R obesity receptor
OD optical density
PAI-1 Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor type 1
PAMP pathogen-associated molecular patterns
PBS phosphate-buffered saline
PI3k phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase
POMC proopiomelanocortin
PRR protein-recognition receptors
PSGs positively selected genes
PVDF polyvinylidene difluoride
==PAGE:8==
qPCR high throughput real time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
RIN RNA Integrity Number
RT reverse transcriptase
SAT subcutaneous adipose tissue
SDS-PAGE Sodium dodecyl-sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
SOCS3 Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3
STAT3 signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
TGF-β1 Transforming Growth Factor beta 1
TLR4 toll-like receptor 4
Tm melting temperature
TNFα tumor necrosis factor α
UCP1 uncoupling protein 1
VAT visceral adipose tissue
WAT white adipose tissue
WHO World Health Organization
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives and Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Obesity and inflammation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Adipose tissue immunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Immune markers in inflammation signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Leptin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Insulin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
The leptin receptor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Ossabaw pig models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Materials and methods
17
3.1
Ossabaw models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
AGP extraction on a column . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Protein extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
SDS-PAGE and NativePAGE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.1
Western Blot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4.2
Silver staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.6
RNA purification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.7
Purity and integrity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.8
cDNA synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.9
RT-qPCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.9.1
Primer design and the Ossabaw LEPR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.9.2
PCR product purification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.9.3
Sanger sequencing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:10==
4
Results
33
4.1
LEPR, leptin, and AGP in an isolated system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Leptin and LEPR in Ossabaw tissue samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
qPCR and sequencing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.1
Sequencing results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Discussion
50
6
Conclusion
53
6.1
Future aspects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A
Protein extraction protocol
61
B
SDS-PAGE, Western blot and silver stain protocol
62
C
NativePAGE and silver stain protocol
68
D
ELISA protocol
71
E
cDNA synthesis
74
F
qPCR Rotorgene protocol
75
G PAGP ELISA results
77
H ELISA 2 results
78
I
ELISA 3 results
79
J
ELISA 4 results
80
K ELISA 6 results
81
L
Failed ELISA results
82
M Quantitation graph primer 417 UCPH pig experiment
83
N HRM graph primer 417 UCPH pig experiment
84
==PAGE:11==
O Quantitation graph primer 665 UCPH pig experiment
85
P HRM graph primer 665 UCPH pig experiment
86
Q RIN analysis of Leipzig tissue samples
87
R Quantitation graph primer 417 Leipzig pig experiment
88
S
HRM graph primer 417 Leipzig pig experiment
89
T Quantitation graph primer 665 Leipzig pig experiment
90
U HRM graph primer 665 Leipzig pig experiment
91
V
Sequencing bioanalyzer results
92
W BLAST analysis results
96
==PAGE:12==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Obesity is a major and growing global public health problem. Obesity results from excessive fat accumu-
lation that may impair one’s health. Developing obesity may influence morbidity, disability, and quality of
life. In 2016, 13% of the world’s adult population and 14% of children and adolescents were considered
obese. Obesity is defined as a Body Mass Index (BMI) ≥30. BMI is used to identify overweight and obesity
and is defined as a person’s weight in kg divided by the square of height in meters (kg/h2) [1]. A child with
a high BMI percentile may have a risk of being overweight or obese at 35 years of age [2]. In 2011, obesity
was recognized by the World Health Organization (WHO) as a Noncommunicable Disease (NCD). NCDs, also
known as chronic diseases, are responsible for 74% of all deaths globally [3]. Obesity increases the risk of
developing other major NCDs, including cardiovascular diseases, cancer, chronic respiratory diseases, and
diabetes [3]. Globally there has been a higher intake of high-fat and high-calorie foods, while there has
been a decrease in physical activity due to work, transportation, and increased urbanization. This could
be correlated to the increase seen in obesity [1]. Beginning in the late 1970s the prevalence of obesity
began to rise rapidly [4]. Worldwide obesity has nearly tripled since 1975 and according to obesity models,
by 2030, it is projected to reach levels of 89% and 87% in men and women, respectively [2]. This would
result in an increase in coronary heart disease by 97%, cancers by 61%, and diabetes by 21% [5]. As part of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, heads of state and government must reduce NCD-related
mortality by one-third, by 2030, through prevention and treatment [1].
Despite the raised insight into obesity in recent years, a deeper understanding of obesity pathogenesis
is still lacking. The first step in preventing and treating obesity is to understand the mechanisms by which
adipocytes may contribute to obesity-associated inflammation given their immune-like potential and sense
of inflammatory mediators to modify functional capacity. To accomplish this large animal models are used
to study the mechanism of the disease for basic biological and clinical understanding. The pig, in particu-
lar, is one of the best models for obesity, due to their similarities in anatomy, metabolism, immunology, and
physiological response to humans. Rodents are more commonly used for obesity research, which poses a
problem concerning the human response in regards to animal-to-human translational research. In general
the aim of biomedical research is to gain knowledge or treatment of diseases. Here we are using pigs
to investigate the human obesity immune response. There are two perspectives potentially explaining
translational failures between animals and humans. The first is that the animal-to-human predictability
1
==PAGE:13==
has yet to be fundamentally determined. This study is based on the fact that Ossabaw pigs are predicable
for human response, which hasn’t been finally proven to be the case. An opposite perspective looks at the
advancements that has been made in the medicinal industry over the last decades with the use of animal
models. Based on this the animal model should be the best option for prediction of human response [6].
Thus, even though the Ossabaw pig hasn’t definitively been proven as a human model, this project deems
it a good alternative to unethical human experiments.
1.2
Objectives and Outline
The purpose of this project was to investigate the change in the innate immune response when the body
is in an obese state. Specifically, this projects investigates were the Leptin Receptor (LEPR) and its inter-
action with α-1-acid glycoprotein (AGP or ORM) in an obese setting in a large animal model. This was
achieved by looking at the binding between both LEPR and leptin, LEPR and AGP, and finally looking at the
binding of the proteins in an environment where the LEPR had an equal opportunity to bind AGP and leptin.
Based on previous studies and literature we know that AGP is upregulated in an obese state [7]. When
taking the observed leptin resistance into acount we wanted to know if AGP could bind to the LEPR and
if it had a cooperative binding with leptin, which could explain the development of leptin resistance in
obese individuals. Therefore, the initial experiments that were carried out tested the binding relationship
between LEPR and AGP, to see if we could prove any binding at all. Later experiments were run with LEPR
and leptin to have a positive control. Lastly, the relationship was observed in an environment where LEPR,
leptin, and AGP were all present, to determine which protein would have a stronger binding to the LEPR
or if they both bound with similar affinity.
Later a protein extraction from subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT), visceral adipose tissue (VAT), and liver
samples from Ossabaw pigs was tested, for the presence of the LEPR and AGP, in order to determine whether
these proteins were present in the samples, and whether there were any differences in their expression
between a lean state versus an obese state.
Additionally mRNA was extracted from liver, VAT, and SAT from Ossabaw pigs, and was synthesized into
cDNA. Primers made to transcribe specific sequence in the Ossabaw sequence were run together with the
cDNA in a high throughput real time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). The sequences chosen
were based on the studies done by Zhang et al., who proposed an alternative Ossabaw sequence of the
2
==PAGE:14==
LEPR genome [8]. Based on these experiments, we wanted to test this hypothesis and see if there were
any differences between lean and obese pigs.
3
==PAGE:15==
2
Background
2.1
Obesity and inflammation
Obesity can be defined as an excess of body fat that leads to increased morbidity and mortality. It can
be empirically determined based on measures such as BMI, waist circumference, waist-to-height ratio.
The massive rise in obesity has led to a debate about it being classified as a disease, contrary to it being
considered a medical condition. One of the problems when determining obesity as a disease is the lack of
definition of the term obesity itself. The lack of a universally accepted metric for measuring obesity limits
the ability in classifying it as a disease [9]. Heshka et al. 2001 [10] established a broad definition of what
can be considered a disease. This definition is collected from multiple general and medical dictionaries.
The definition is split into four points:
• Disease is a condition of the body, its parts, organs, or systems or an alteration thereof.
• It results from infection, parasites, nutritional, dietary, environmental, genetic, or other causes.
• It has a characteristic, identifiable, marked group of signs or symptoms.
• It deviates from normal structure or function.
In both 2007 and 2012, the American Medical Association rejected obesity as a disease because it didn’t
fulfill the requirements for the definition of a disease [9]. However, in 2011 the World Health Assembly
recognized it as an NCD. They also presented a strategy to the stakeholders for reducing 1/3 of prema-
ture mortality from NCDs [1]. The goal behind obesity being a defined disease is the increased focus on
understanding and preventing it.
2.1.1
Adipose tissue immunity
A characteristic of obesity is a mass accumulation of fat resulting in an increased volume and number of
adipose tissue (AT) in the body. Adipocytes form the essential part of the AT, however, houses a range of
other different cells including adipocytes, preadipocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and immune cells.
Together they play an essential role in metabolic regulation, and energy homeostasis [11]. Adipose tissue
also serves as an insulator for keeping the body temperature [12]. Fundamental functions carried out by the
AT include nutrient handling, energy storage and utilization, and secretion of adipokines which can modify
the body’s homeostasis. Adipose tissue is a fat storing endocrine organ and increased adipocyte volume
4
==PAGE:16==
and number positively correlate with leptin production, insulin sensitivity, and metabolic rate. However,
at a certain point in the obesity development, the increased accumulation will lead to insulin resistance
[13]. Metabolic Syndrome (MetS) is a group of dysregulations in the body including insulin resistance,
atherogenic dyslipidemia, central obesity, and hypertension. If left untreated MetS poses a high risk of
developing diabetes and cardiovascular diseases [14].
Adipocytes can be divided into four central groups: white adipocytes, brown adipocytes, beige adipocytes,
and pink adipocytes. The association with obesity depends not only on calorie intake and energy expen-
diture but also on balance between white adipose tissue (WAT) and brown adipose tissue (BAT) [11, 15].
WAT plays a central role in energy storage. During obesity, the WAT will become bigger as it accumulates
excess lipids. In humans, the AT possesses the ability to develop through life. The adipose tissue will
change its size in regard to the number of lipids stored. When a certain size of the adipocytes is reached,
new adipocytes will develop through adipogenesis [15]. In contrast, when a food or nutrient shortage
occurs, the WAT can shrink by hydrolyzing stored triglycerides into fatty acids (FA) and glycerol through
lipolysis. This provides the sufficient energy needed for the body’s cells and organs to function [11].
BAT plays a role in energy expenditure through thermogenesis. BAT consists of numerous mitochondria,
making it a highly metabolically active tissue with the ability to regulate and maintain body temperature.
BAT responds to environmental stimuli, and its specialized function is mediated by uncoupling protein 1
(UCP1), which is located in the inner membrane of the mitochondria. Studies have shown correlations
between BAT activation and decreased BMI [16, 17]. Beige adipose tissue resembles BAT by morphology
and function but is more closely related to WAT. Synthesis of beige tissue had been correlated to white
tissue "browning". Browning of WAT can be seen through several environmental factors such as dietary fac-
tors, cold exposure, hormonal factors, etc. [18]. The expansion and activation of BAT can protect against
diet-induced obesity. Therefore, increased BAT mass/activity or increased WAT browning could be a way
to prevent obesity. Moreover, BAT has been recognized as an endocrine organ due to its ability to produce
hormones such as leptin, estrogen, resistin, and the cytokine tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) [12].
WAT is further subdivided into SAT and VAT, based on the anatomical placement of the tissue. The fat below
the skin is called SAT. The fat lining the internal organs is called VAT. Accumulation can vary according to
gender, ethnicity, and age. High amounts of VAT and SAT can lead to several health risks, including insulin
resistance, leptin resistance, metabolic syndrome, hepatic steatosis, and hypertension [19, 12, 20]. Expan-
sion of SAT has been shown to decrease insulin sensitivity and thus increase the risk of developing type
5
==PAGE:17==
2 diabetes. VAT accumulation has been shown to increase metabolic risk and overall mortality. Excessive
VAT has been linked to heightened insulin resistance as well as to an increased inflammatory state [12].
2.1.2
Immune markers in inflammation signals
The increased prevalence of obesity worldwide is a concern as it increases the risk of developing human
widespread diseases, notably, several types of cancers, cardiovascular diseases, and diabetes [3]. Obesity
affects the endocrine and metabolic function leading to obesity-associated complications. The inflamma-
tion signal that is seen alters the immune marker profile in the body. The chronic inflammatory response
has no easily definable targets, making it very difficult to regulate once it worsens. The altered function
leads to an increased release of fatty acids, hormones, and pro-inflammatory molecules [21, 13]. The onset
of inflammation provides the body’s first defense system against pathogens. A well-regulated response is a
self-limiting and local response. If the response is not properly regulated, it can cause damage or disease
to the body [21]. The inflammation seen in obesity is a chronic response that disturbs the levels of immune
markers expressed.
However, if the local inflammation is insufficient to combat infection and tissue injuries, a wide-range sys-
temic response will be activated, collectively referred to as the acute phase reaction. The inflammation re-
sponse is triggered by stimuli as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMP) and damaged-associated
molecular patterns (DAMP) [22]. PAMPs include microbial structures shared by pathogens, including gram-
positive and -negative bacteria, fungi, and viruses. These microbial structures are recognized by white
blood cells and blood proteins. DAMPs are released in the body after cell death or cell injury and are de-
rived from intracellular organelles. Recognition of PAMPs or DAMPs by protein-recognition receptors (PRR)
on host cells will trigger a common set of signaling modules including nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), activator
protein 1 (AP-1), and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). These signaling modules drive the produc-
tion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as IL-1, IL-6, and TNFα, which are involved in
neuropathic pain and hyperalgesia, as well as in regulation of osteoclast formation, bone resorption, mod-
ification of vascular endothelial permeability, and recruitment of immune cells to inflamed tissue [23, 24].
In AT exogenous signals, such as fatty acids or bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS), induce an inflammatory
response due to the widespread humane toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and th NF-κB pathway [15]. Neu-
trophils are the first responders to inflammation, and recruiting macrophages and interacting with antigen
presenting cells (APC) promotes a more chronic inflammatory state. Neutrophils secrete several proteases
including neutrophil elastase (NE), which promotes inflammatory responses in several disease models [25].
6
==PAGE:18==
Figure 1: The balance between the suppressive and immune responses in lean and obese AT [19].
A study done by Weisberg et al. [13] showed that the accumulation of macrophages in AT of both obese
mice and in humans could be directly proportionally linked to measures of adiposity. Adipose tissue
macrophages (ATM) can be classified as M1 and M2. M1 is a promotor of inflammation and insulin re-
sistance [27]. Compared to lean individuals, obesity induces increased numbers of pro-inflammatory pro-
teins from the AT such as IL-6, TNFα, Nitric Oxide Synthase 2 (NOS2), Transforming Growth Factor beta 1
(TGF-β1), C-reactive protein (CRP), soluble Intercellular Adhesion Molecule (ICAM), Monocyte Chemotactic
Protein 1 (MCP-1), Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1), and different tissue factors [13]. The
pro-inflammatory molecules have a direct impact on cellular effects, e.g. TNF-α decreases insulin sensi-
tivity and increases lipolysis in adipocytes. IL-6 stimulates lipolysis and hepatic triglyceride secretion [13].
Researchers found that, in murine models, T cells produced more Interferon γ (IFN-γ) under obese condi-
tions than the control group [26]. Moreover, specifically elevated levels of CD4+ Th1 and CD8+ T cells were
seen. Thus, knowing that M1 is induced by IFN-γ, this results in a heightened pro-inflammatory response
(figure 1). On the other hand, M2 inhibits the M1 function by inhibiting NOS2 production. Additionally,
regulatory T cells are associated with a lower degree of inflammation and better insulin sensitivity [27].
7
==PAGE:19==
2.2
Leptin
The discovery of leptin was made in 1994 by researchers running an obesity mouse study [28]. They
noted that a group of mutated mice lacking the obese (Ob) gene expressed hyperphagia, decreased energy
expenditure, and early-onset obesity [28]. This was later explained due to leptin deriving from the mRNA
transcript of the Ob gene, which means that a mouse missing the Ob gene will also be missing leptin
expression. In the absence of leptin, both rodents and humans suffer from obesity with a less regulated
appetite and a blunted metabolic rate [29]. Leptin is the satiety hormone, meaning that it provides you
with the sensation of being full. Leptin plays an important role in neuroendocrine function and metabolism
homeostasis by serving as an energy regulator (figure 2). It also affects other energy-requiring functions
in the body such as reproduction, hemopoiesis, and angiogenesis [30]. The leptin protein is coded by
the Ob gene (now known as the LEP gene) and is conserved through many mammalian species. The LEP
gene is primarily expressed in the adipocytes and here leptin is regulated in response to changes in body
weight or energy [31, 32]. Thus, serum leptin concentration is linked to the overall fat content in the body.
Leptin expression was found to be nearly double the amount in SAT than in VAT for both lean and obese
individuals [33].
Figure 2: Schematic illustration of leptin energy homeostasis and endocrine function in the different organs
of the body [32].
Leptin initiates its signaling in the body through binding to the LEPR and it is typically seen in LEPR-
expressing neurons, where the signaling regulates dietary intake. The binding of leptin to the LEPR allows
8
==PAGE:20==
it to pass the blood-brain barrier and gain access to the central nervous system (CNS). Otherwise, free
leptin will permeate the blood-brain barrier, which is facilitated by tanycytes. When leptin is bound to
receptors in the hypothalamus, the receptor dimerizes and initiates the JAK-STAT signaling pathway (fig-
ure 6) [33]. Blocking of leptin signaling is linked to the pathogenesis of obesity and metabolic diseases [20].
At peripheral level, leptin is part of the gastrointestinal nutrient absorption and is also involved in lipid
and glucose homeostasis in AT, liver, and skeletal muscles. In this regard, leptin resistance has a clear
correlation to the development of obesity and worsening of obese response in the body. Extensive studies
have been done on leptin resistance, but the exact reason for the development still needs to be eluci-
dated. One theory is the connection between TNF-α and inflammatory factors like LPS, which has been
seen to increase circulating leptin concentrations in humans and murine models. This suggests that these
molecules may be involved in hyperleptinemia and leptin resistance development. Leptin resistance has
also been partially attributed to the interaction between C-reactive protein and leptin [34].
2.3
Insulin
Insulin is a peptide hormone secreted as proinsulin by β cells of the pancreatic islets of Langerhans. Glu-
cose is the main stimulus for insulin secretion, though other factors may modify the response. Insulin,
together with glucagon are the main regulators regulate blood glucose concentrations. Glucose triggers
insulin secretion from the pancreatic β cells by increasing intracellular ATP and closing the K+-ATP chan-
nels [35]. Insulin action in the brain is also associated with energy balance and glucose homeostasis.
Adipocytes are some of the most insulin-responsive cell types. Insulin promotes adipocyte triglyceride
storage as well as, the increase of cellular uptake of fatty acids from the circulation [36]. The chronic
low-grade inflammation resulting from obesity is a crucial cause for the development of systemic insulin
resistance, as it decreases insulin sensitivity. At the same time, it increases immune activity in the adipose
tissue. Critical immune regulators such as CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes have increased IFN-γ production.
IFN-γ may activate STAT1 which induces insulin resistance by blocking Akt phosphorylation (figure 3) and
expression of the insulin receptor [37].
Fluctuations in insulin sensitivity have been observed in correlation to lifestyle variations, such as AT
production of numerous cytokines that are associated with insulin resistance. This includes TNFα, inter-
leukins, and PAI-1 which are cytokines with pro-inflammatory abilities. As previously stated the transduc-
9
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3: Leptin and insulin signaling pathways. Leptin signaling induces expression of POMC and reduces
expression of AgRP through activation of STAT3. Insulin induces expression of AgRP and reduces expression
of POMC through activation of FoxO1 [37].
tion of the leptin signal is mediated through the JAK-STAT pathway. Parts of this pathway also involves
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3k), and Adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) (fig-
ure 3). The AMPK pathway is an important energy sensor and takes part in regulating the whole-body en-
ergy homeostasis. AMPK is activated in response to glucose deprivation, caloric restriction, and increased
physical activity. AMPK activation leads to increased formation of ATP, while at the same time reducing
ATP-consuming processes. Humans with type 2 diabetes has been seen to have down-regulated AMPK,
and diabetic animal models have shown an impaired link between glucose and AMPK activity in pancre-
atic islet cells [38]. Thus, the AMPK pathway in involved in preventing insulin resistance, by inhibiting
pathways that antagonize insulin signaling. To maintain a normal glucose homeostasis action of insulin
and leptin on the POMC neurons is required. The expression here normalizes blood glucose, and lessens
hepatic insulin resistance, hyperglucagonemia, and dyslipidemia. Leptin from the AT inhibits pancreatic
insulin expression. Insulin, in turn, stimulates leptin expression from WAT [29].
10
==PAGE:22==
2.4
Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein
AGP is a part of the lipocalin protein family and a known positive acute-phase protein (APP) observed in
many species. In pigs, it has been described as a negative APP in response to bacterial infection and aseptic
inflammation [39]. Even though the molecular mechanisms of AGP are still to be elucidated, AGP is com-
monly defined as a transport protein that works in the plasma. AGP is mainly found in plasma originating
from liver, but other tissues have also been shown to contain AGP including the AT, the nervous system, and
endothelial cells. Immune cells have been shown to express an increased amount of AGP during inflamma-
tion. A variety of functions have been attributed to AGP. This includes modulating immunity, drug-carrying
abilities, maintenance of the capillary barrier, and mediating sphingolipid metabolism [40, 41, 39].
AGP is found circulating as a single chain with a mass of approximately 43 kDa. AGP has several isoforms
resulting from variations in carbohydrate structure and sialic acid content. In humans, AGP is encoded by
the genes ORM1 and ORM2 [39]. Sequences of ORM1 and ORM2 differ by 22 amino acids, but otherwise
have identical structures. The binding pocket of ORM2 is narrower than that of AGP1. AGP1 has three
common variants: F1, F2, and FS. Other mammals have shown a different amount of AGP encoding genes
[41]. Compared to humans who contain both ORM1 and ORM2, pigs only contain one gene, ORM1 [39].
Due to its low isoelectric point, AGP is highly glycosylated. This ensures that AGP escapes the glomerular
filtration in the kidneys. It has not been elucidated whether glycosylation affects the binding affinity of
AGP toward ligands [41]. AGP has been seen to be induced selectively in the AT of obese mice in order to
suppress the obesity derived inflammation that disturbs the energy homeostasis [42]. The AGP signal was
shown to be elevated through metabolic signals such as insulin, TNFα, and free fatty acids, which was found
in higher levels in the body of obese mice. In pigs, AGP is found to behave as a negative APP during stimuli
of infectious and inflammatory responses, both in serum concentrations and hepatic expression. However,
as an obesity response serum AGP concentrations were upregulated in Ossabaw pigs, which resembles the
response seen in mice and humans. This may indicate that the acute phase response of pig AGP may be
stimulus-dependent, since we see a different response in obesity compared with bacterial infection and
aseptic inflammation. However, in obesity serum AGP has not been investigated further [39, 40, 42, 43].
The increased level of AGP is correlated with BMI, body fat, serum leptin, fasting plasma glucose levels,
and adiponectin [40].
11
==PAGE:23==
2.5
The leptin receptor
The leptin receptor (LEPR), also known as the obesity receptor (Ob-R), is a member of the class I cytokine
family and is expressed in six isoforms. Short version isoforms include Ob-Ra, Ob-Rc, Ob-Rd, and Ob-Re.
These short Ob-R’s contain box 1 motif and may therefore bind JAK (figure 4).
Figure 4: The six isoforms of the LEPR. All of them have similar structures on the extracellular domain
whereas they differ in the intracellular structure. The short isoforms contain box 1. The long isoform
contains box 1, 2, and 3 [44].
Ob-Re is able to regulate leptin concentration and serve as a carrier protein delivering leptin to the LEPRs
located in the membrane of the cells in the hypothalamus. Among all the Ob-R isoforms, Ob-Rb is able to
fully transduce activation signal into the cell ( figure 5) [44].
Ob-Ra is the most common LEPR isoform and is found in various cells including the kidney, liver, spleen,
and macrophages. After ligand-binding, the receptor will be internalized and either degraded or recycled.
This process concerns mostly Ob-Ra and Ob-Rb isoforms. Ob-Rb is degraded more often than Ob-Ra, which
is recycled to the cell membrane much faster. Reduced signalling through Ob-Rb is often observed in obese
patients. The decreased receptor expression on the cell membrane could be an explanation to the observed
leptin resistance [44].
12
==PAGE:24==
Figure 5: The long form of the LEPR: Ob-Rb. Contains box 1, 2 and 3, which interacts with the tyrosine
kinase (JAK), signal transductor and activator of transcription (STAT), protein-cytokine signal transduction
inhibitors (SOCS), phosphate residues (P). It also shows the location of the cytokine receptor domain (CR)
and the type III fibronectin domain (FIII) [44].
Extracellular engagement between leptin and the the leptin receptor on the arcuate nucleus in the hy-
pothalamus causes a conformational change, which in turn activates the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) through
proximity-mediated phosphorylation. In turn, this will phosphorylate the receptor resulting in a docking
site for transduction and activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). Binding
of STAT3 to the receptor allows the JAK protein to phosphorylate its C-terminus on conserved tyrosine
residues. Active STAT3 translocates to the nucleus and upregulates transcription of proopiomelanocortin
(POMC) and decreases transcription of agouti-related protein (AgRP) and neuropeptide Y (NPY) in the neu-
rons located in the hypothalamus. AgRP and NPY are peptides that mediate the anorectic response of
leptin, and increases food intake (figure 6) while POMC is associated with fasting. Moreover, STAT3 in-
duces the expression of Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3), which acts as a negative regulator of
the LEPR [45, 46]. The continuous expression of supressors such as SOCS will create a negative-feedback
loop to switch off the JAK-STAT pathway, resulting in the feeling of hunger and reduced energy expenditure.
It is proposed that leptin and the LEPR interact through their conserved sites. Owing to three conserved
epitopes on leptin, the exact structure of leptin-LEPR has been debated, however, it is believed to have
either a 2:4 (leptin:LEPR) or a 2:2 binding stoichiometry [47, 31].
13
==PAGE:25==
Figure 6: The JAK-STAT pathways affect on the human body in lean vs obese state. Leptin binding promotes
transcription of SOCS3 and POMC, and reduces transcription of AgRP and NPY. In obese individuals leptin
resistance will lead to a reduced activity of the JAK-STAT pathway, and thus less dietary control and energy
expenditure [45].
2.6
Ossabaw pig models
Animal models are crucial for understanding biological processes in our bodies and for development of
medicine and disease treatments. In this case, it is difficult and unethical to carry out a lot of obesity stud-
ies on humans. We therefore need a good substitute that can describe the complex mechanisms associated
with obesity development in humans. Pigs are a great model for human health and disease, because their
anatomy and physiology is very similar. The similar anatomy introduces the possibility of using pigs for
xenotransplantation, which increase the number of available organs for transplants. Most obesity studies
conducted so far have used rodents, however, pigs have a genome that is three times closer to the hu-
man genome compared to mice [48]. Furthermore, in regards to immunology studies the porcine immune
system has been seen to resemble the humans for more than 80%, whereas mice only share about 10% [49].
Rødgaard et al. [21] proposed a relevant pig model for obesity in their study conducted in 2013. The study
investigated the expression of ORM1 in liver, VAT, and SAT as well as serum concentration of AGP in three
different pig models: the domestic pig, Göttingen minipigs and Ossabaw minipigs [21]. Here they saw that
serum AGP concentration was significantly elevated in Ossabaw pigs compared to their lean counterparts.
They didn’t show any upregulated AGP in any of the other tested tissues [21]. Studies in humans have
14
==PAGE:26==
shown that they also see an upregulation of serum AGP, but not significantly in AT in the obese state. This
indicates that Ossabaw minipigs would be the best model for human obesity of the different pig models
tested.
Due to their relatively small size Ossabaw pigs, Göttingen pigs, and Yucatan pigs are the most used mod-
els in porcine studies. They can also reach adulthood in a reasonably cost-effective manner. On top of
this, an obese state can be reached in Ossabaw pigs through a high-calorie, high-fat high-fructose (HFHF),
high-cholesterol diet given for approximately six months to reach this state. Genetic engineering of pigs
is a technique that has been refined, which makes it possible to further tailor large animal models. Thus,
due to their anatomical and physiological similarities to humans as well as, their high fertility, and the
possibility of dietary and surgical interventions, the Ossabaw pigs have been chosen as the best model for
human response [50].
In a study done by Zhang et al. [8] they compared the Ossabaw genome to 13 other pig breeds. These
studies showed that 214 genes were positively selected, two of which was in the LEPR gene. Here 214
positively selected genes (PSGs) are discovered in the Ossabaw genome compared to 14 other pig breeds.
Among the PSGs, the LEPR gene was seen to contain two positively selected sites. The first site led to a
substitution of glutamic acid (E) to alkaline (K). The second site was hypothesized to lead to 3 different
types of translation according to the GT-AG splice rule. At the 5’ of DNA the nucleotides are GT and at the 3’
they are AG. The splice rules states that these nucleotides will be part of the splicing sites [51]. Depending
on where the splice site is the gene sequence and function can be altered drastically. The first option will
generate a deletion of one amino acid after W664. The second option will generate a frameshift, making
the gene into a pseudogene. The third option will introduce an insertion of amino acids, however, one of
these insertions will introduce a stopcodon. This would cause a truncated protein as the stop codon would
terminate protein synthesis (figure 7).
15
==PAGE:27==
Figure 7: A: Shows the 2 PSGs in the LEPR gene. And illustrates the possible splice sites around amino acid
665 [8]. B: The 3 different splice options in the LEPR gene around amino acid 665. The first option has a
deletion of K. The second option has a frameshift. The third option truncates the protein.
16
==PAGE:28==
3
Materials and methods
Figure 8: Overview of the laboratory work done throughout this project. A) The workflow with the Ossabaw
pig samples. B) The workflow with the pure store-bought protein samples. Created with BioRender.com.
3.1
Ossabaw models
The Ossabaw samples used in this project are derived from two different studies: A diet-induced study
at the University of Copenhagen (UCPH) and Leipzig. The UCPH experiment was performed using male
castrated Ossabaw pigs. The pigs at age 6-8 months were randomly split into two groups. The control
group was fed a standard diet (n=6). This group is referred to as the lean group. The fed group was fed
high-fructose, high-fat, and 0.5% cholesterol diet (n=9). This group is referred to as the obese group. Over
a period of two weeks, the new feed was implemented within the obese group with feeding twice a day
(table 1). The pigs were split into groups accordingly:
OBESE:(n=9) 8,10,13,14,15,19,20,25,27,28,29,30 (bold numbers = actual surviving pigs)
LEAN: (n=6) 1,2,3,9,11,18
17
==PAGE:29==
Weeks
Group
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Termination
Lean
Standard diet
End of week 14
Obese
T-Phase
100% HFHF Diet
End of week 14
Table 1: An overview of the UCHP study which spanned over 14 weeks. The pigs were divided into two
groups, lean which was fed a standard diet, and obese which was fed a HFHF diet after 2 weeks of transition
from the standard diet.
The other Ossabaw samples we received were from Leipzig in Germany. 5 pigs at about 9 months old
were placed on a 22 week HFHF diet (KT324). Before being put on the diet they were put on 2 weeks
transition feed from standard to HFHF diet. After the 22 weeks of being on the HFHF diet the pigs were
transported to Leipzig, where a similar diet was continued before euthanization. At the same time, an
additional experiment was run on the pigs, which included exposing the pigs to a stent in the femoral
artery (table 2).
Weeks
Diet KT324
1
2
3
4-25
% Standard diet
75
50
25
0
% HFHF
25
50
75
100
Table 2: An overview of the Leipzig study which spanned over 25 weeks. The pigs were transitioned from
a standard diet to a HFHF diet over 3 weeks. After 25 weeks the pigs were relocated but the obese diet
was continued.
3.2
AGP extraction on a column
In order to run any experiments that included porcine specifc AGP we needed to extract it from a porcine
sample. A serum sample (50 mL assorted) was mixed with sodium acetate (pH 5.5, 50 mL), and salted
out over 2 days in the fridge (4°C). The precipitated mixture was centrifuged (4000 rpm, 30 min), the
supernatant collected, and the remaining pellet resuspended. This was repeated three times and the
supernatant was pooled. The pool was the dialysed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Dialysis is a process
that facilitates the removal of small compounds, utilizing passive diffusion. The dialysis tubing is made of
a semi-permeable film containing small pores allowing only small sized molecules through. The process
is done to purify a sample from unwanted compounds, or to exchange the buffer the original sample is
suspended in [52]. The resulting salted-out pig serum was run through an anti-AGP monoclonal antibody
(Mab) 1.62 affinity matrix (0.5 mL/min), where it was cycled through for 2 days. The column was then
washed with PBS for 1 hour. The collected AGP was eluated using glycine (pH 2.8, 0.1 M). Fractions were
collected and tested in a sandwich ELISA for AGP concentrations. The column is able to catch the AGP
18
==PAGE:30==
through immunoprecipitation, which is a technique that uses a specific antibody that is immobilized into a
solid on agarose resin [52]. Running a sample through this column with 1.62 (anti-AGP) makes AGP bind to
the beads. Thus, the AGP will be seperated from the rest of the sample, and by washing the column with
glycine all of the AGP bound in the column is washed out, yielding purified AGP. 1.62 was purified from cell
culture supernatants, grown in flasks, by affinity chromatography on protein A-agarose. The antibodies
were isotyped using anti-mouse Ig subclass-specific kit (Mouse MonoAb-ID Kit (HRP), Zymed Laboratories
Inc., Invitrogen) [39].
3.3
Protein extraction
Protein was extracted from SAT, VAT and liver tissue from Ossabaw pigs. By extracting protein from a
tissue sample, we are able to get a picture of the protein residing in that tissue at the moment of necropsy.
130 mg of tissue was taken from each sample from each pig and collected in M-tubes along with 900 µL
RIPA buffer mix (20 mL RIPA buffer mixed with 2 protease tablets). GentleMACS prog. RNA_02_01 (80 sec
homogenization) was run on the samples. The solution for each sample was centrifuged (15000 rpm, 15
min, 4 °C) in individual Eppendorf tubes, where the fat layer and the supernatant were separated. The
centrifugation step and separation step was repeated 5 times until the fat layer was gone. The samples
were then dialysed overnight in PBS (4 °C). For a detailed protocol see appendix A.
3.4
SDS-PAGE and NativePAGE
First 3 different solutions of pure protein were run. These included the previously extracted AGP from pig
serum, bought recombinant porcine leptin (from Cell Sciences), and human LEPR/CD295 Protein, Fc Tag
(from acro biosystems). The first porcine leptin used in most experiments was a powder reconstituted in
250 µL PBS yielding a concentration of 0.4 mg/mL. The second porcine leptin was received later in the
experiment process and was mainly used in NativePAGE undiluted. It was received as a powdered protein
and was reconstituted in 1 mL 0.02% Sodium Carbonate. The human LEPR consists of 817 amino acids
(Phe 22- Asp 839) and an Fc-tag at the C-terminus consisting of 230 amino acids (Pro 100- Lys 330). This
means that we can expect to see the LEPR around mass 105 kDa.
To obtain information about the protein interactions in Ossabaw pigs, the extracted protein was used
for running both SDS-PAGE and NativePAGE. Sodium dodecyl-sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) is a technique that can obtain a high resolution of different proteins in a mixture based on
size. During the preparation of samples for SDS-PAGE, the proteins are denatured, which means that this
19
==PAGE:31==
technique is good for determining which proteins are in a sample, but not for functional or structural prop-
erties. The SDS has a high negative charge that overwhelms any charge the protein may have, imparting
all proteins with a relatively equal negative charge based on molecular mass. This is followed by elec-
trophoresis through an acrylamide gel matrix that, due to its pores, separates the proteins by size [53].
SDS-PAGE was run in SDS running buffer (50 mL MES in 950 mL H2O Milli-Q). All samples were pretreated
with reducing sample buffer (sample buffer 1:4 reducing agent 1:10) and placed in a 100 °C heating block
for 5 minutes. The gel (NuPAGE™10% Bis-Tris protein gel) was run on a power supply at 200V for ap-
proximately. 60 min. Then, the gel was removed from the cassette and either silver stained or western
blotted (for a detailed protocol see appendix B). NativePAGE or blue-native PAGE was developed as a way
to separate native proteins for investigations of structure-function relationships [53]. It can therefore be
used to investigate protein-protein interactions in our experiments. This project has focused on the in-
teractions between the LEPR, leptin, and AGP. The NativePAGE differentiates itself from SDS-PAGE by not
running denatured protein charged by SDS meaning that we get a "native" picture of the proteins in the
samples. NativePAGE, thus, also differs from SDS-PAGE by using different running buffers and a different
sample buffer not containing SDS. The samples were prepared 1:4 with the sample buffer. The samples
were loaded into wells on NativePAGE™Novex® 4-16% Bis-Tris. The running buffer consists of an anode
running buffer (50 mL NativePAGET M Running Buffer (20X) in 950 mL H2O Milli-Q) that was added to the
anode (outer) chamber and a light blue cathode buffer (10 mL NativePAGE™Running Buffer (20X), 1 mL
NativePAGE™Cathode Additive, and 189 mL H2O Milli-Q) that was added to the cathode (inner) chamber.
The gel was then run for 120 minutes, 150 V (rt). When the run was finished the gel was removed from the
cassette and either silver stained or western blotted (for a detailed protocol see appendix C).
3.4.1
Western Blot
Western blot or immunoblot is a technique used to identify specific proteins from a protein mixture. In this
case, it was used to distinguish AGP, LEPR, and leptin from the Ossabaw protein extractions. After protein
separation through gel electrophoresis, the protein was transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF)
membrane using a current run of 150 mA for 1 h in transfer buffer (1.5 g Trizma® Base, 7.21 g Glycine, 200
mL Absolute Ethanol, add to 1000 mL H2O Milli-Q) after which the membrane was blocked in blocking
buffer (3 mL Tween20 (1:5 dilution), 27 mL TBS-T buffer) for 10 min and washed in TBS-T buffer (14.61 g
NaCl, 6.06 g Trizma® Base, 5 mL Tween20 (1:5 dilution), add to 1000 mL H2O Milli-Q). Next the membrane
was coated with the primary antibody (4 °C on a shaker overnight). The next day the membrane was
washed and coated with the secondary antibody (1 h rt on a shaker). Finally, the membrane was washed
20
==PAGE:32==
and developed with 4-Nitro-blue-tetrazolium/5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-phosphate (NBT/BCIP) tablets
for 1-10 min until desired staining is obtained (for a detailed protocol see appendix B). As the unbound
protein was washed away, only antibody-boud proteins remain on the membrane, appearing visually as
bands according to their molecular mass [54].
3.4.2
Silver staining
Silver staining is a method used for its sensitivity and its cost-effectiveness. The technique works by binding
silver ions to the proteins that have been size separated through SDS-PAGE or NativePAGE. These silver
ions can be reduced under the right conditions to yield a visible image, thus staining the proteins in the
gel. Thus, silver staining, contrary to western blotting, will stain all proteins present in the gel. [55]. After
electrophoresis, the gel is fixated overnight in 25 µL 37% formaldehyde, in 50 mL 30% ethanol and 12%
acetic acid. This step ensures that the protein present in the gel is fixated to the gel and will not be washed
off the gel. Then the gel is washed in 30% ethanol (3x10 min) and pretreated with 0.2 g/L Na2S2O3,5H2O
(1 min). The gel is then washed in H2O Milli-Q (3x20 sec) and 37,5 µL 37% formaldehyde in 50 mL 2.0 g/L
AgNO3 was added (20 min). The result of this step is the binding of the silver ions to the proteins on the
gel. Next, it was washed again and developed with 25 µL formaldehyde in 50 mL development buffer (60.0
g/L Na2CO3 + 4 mg Na2S2O3,5H2O). The addition of the development buffer creates a basic environment,
reducing the silver ions to silver. The key aspect in silver staining is that silver ions that are bound to
proteins are more easily reduced than free silver ions. Finally, the development buffer is discarded and the
stop buffer (50% ethanol, 12% acetic acid) is added. The gel is left in 30% ethanol for storing (see appendix
B and C for detailed protocol).
3.5
ELISA
To further understand the binding of AGP on LEPR, the relationship between LEPR, AGP and leptin was
tested using enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA). ELISA is a quantitative method for determining antibody-
antigen binding through a colour-changing reaction obtained by using an enzyme-linked conjugate. This
technique is very sensitive and can measure interactions with very low concentrations of protein present
in a sample. Moreover, it is an assay that makes use of antibodies with specificity for a particular a antigen.
Hence, a very minimal interference will be seen from other compounds when running an ELISA [56]. There
are multiple subtypes of ELISA; In this project, we used sandwich and competitive ELISA.
21
==PAGE:33==
In a sandwich ELISA, the wells are coated with a capture protein overnight (4 °C) and blocked with blocking
buffer (5% skimmed milk/PBS/Tween (0.05%)) for 30 min at 37 °C. The samples are added and incubated
(37 °C) on the plate for 1 h and washed in washing buffer (Tween20 (0.05%) in PBS). The washing step
removes any unbound sample proteins. Then, the antibodies binding the sample protein are added and
again incubated for 1h (37 °C). Thus, we are able to bind first the sample protein to the capture protein,
and secondly the sample antibody to the sample protein. Finally, a secondary enzyme-tagged (horseradish
peroxidase,HRP) antibody is added to the wells and incubated (37 °C) for 1 h. In order to reveal the en-
zyme activity, an enzyme substrate (100 µL TMB PLUS2) is added to the wells, and when a visible level
of colouration (blue) is achieved a stop solution (100 µL H2SO4, 0.5 M) is added to each well turning the
colour yellow. HRP activity is quantified at 450 nm [56].
In a competitive ELISA, the procedure is very similar to sandwich ELISA. However, two samples are added
in the same step. This means that in the incubating phase the two proteins have the option of binding to
the catching protein. The two substrates in added, thus, have to compete for protein binding. However,
only one of these proteins would be able to bind a tagged antibody. And the presence or lack of colour
would mean one or the other had bound to the catching protein. This method can be used to measure the
binding relationship between proteins in an environment with multiple binding options (see appendix D
for detailed protocol) [56].
To be able to distinguish between all the ELISAs made in this project they have all been assigned numbers
and the different setups will be explained.
ELISA 1
This ELISA was done to determine the concentration yielded from the AGP column extraction. The starting
material and run-through of the column were diluted 2-fold on the first 2 columns of the ELISA plate with
a starting dilution of 1:100. Then fractions 17-24 were run individually (start dilution 1:50) to determine
if each fraction had a high enough AGP concentration to be pooled with the other samples. Then two KVL
columns were run also in a 2-fold dilution. This was to get a standard curve to determine the concentration
of the other ELISA wells. These dilutions were made in the opposite direction from the other dilutions to
ensure that possible spill-over would be noticed. Row H of the ELISA plate was a negative control and
only contained buffer. The ELISA plate was coated with the samples, starting material, run-through and
KVL overnight. Biotinylated 1.62 (anti-AGP) was incubated on all wells to bind the AGP coated in the wells.
Afterwards, HRP-Streptavidin was incubated in all wells. Streptavidin binds to biotin, and HRP is able to
develop colour when in reaction with TMB substrate. The absorption of the concentration of reacted HRP
and thus colour development is measured (figure 9).
22
==PAGE:34==
Figure 9: Illustration of the ELISA 1 setup to determine AGP concentration from column fractions. KVL:
porcine serum with known concentration. Created with BioRender.com.
ELISA 2
This ELISA was done to determine the amount of LEPR binding leptin has in an isolated environment.
Figure 10: Illustration of the ELISA 2 setup to determine LEPR binding abilities of leptin. Created with
BioRender.com.
Only half of the ELISA wells were used in this setup. A 2-fold dilution of LEPR was done down all columns
(1-6) while leaving the H row empty (start dilution of 1:40). A 2-fold dilution of leptin was done through all
23
==PAGE:35==
rows (A-H) while leaving the 6 column empty (start dilution of 1:50). Thus a negative control was ensured
for both LEPR and leptin. The plates were coated overnight. All wells were then incubated with anti-leptin
(1:1000) and later HRP-anti-rabbit (1:1000). Anti-rabbit was used due to anti-leptin being yielded from
rabbit antibody. This means that the anti-rabbit is able to bind the anti-leptin. HRP is able to develop
colour when in reaction with TMB substrate. The absorption of the concentration of reacted HRP and thus
colour development is measured (figure 10).
ELISA 3
This ELISA was done to determine the amount of LEPR binding AGP has in 2 different 1.62 (anti-AGP) di-
Figure 11: Illustration of the ELISA 3 setup to determine 1.62 dilutions for optimal LEPR binding of AGP.
Created with BioRender.com.
lutions. The ELISA plate was coated with a 2-fold LEPR dilution (start dilution 1:40) down all the columns.
LEPR was not added to row H, making this row the negative control. Two 2-fold dilutions were made with
AGP and incubated. Then 2 different dilutions of 1.62 were added (1:500 and 1:2000), each to half of the
wells in the ELISA. With the exception of column 6 and column 12 which were kept as negative controls.
Lastly, HRP-anti-mouse was incubated to bind the mouse yielded antibody, 1.62. HRP is able to develop
colour when in reaction with TMB substrate. The absorption of the concentration of reacted HRP and thus
colour development is measured (figure 11).
24
==PAGE:36==
ELISA 4
This ELISA was done to determine the amount of LEPR binding by biotinylated AGP. A 2-fold dilution of
Figure 12: Illustration of the ELISA 4 setup to determine LEPR binding of AGP, utilizig the biotin-streptavidin
binding for the secondary antibody. Created with BioRender.com.
LEPR was done down all columns (1-6) while leaving the H row empty (start dilution of 1:40). A 2-fold
dilution of bio-AGP was done through all rows (A-H) while leaving the 6 column empty (start dilution of
1:200). Thus a negative control was ensured for both LEPR and bio-AGP. The ELISA is then incubated
with HRP-Streptavidin. Streptavidin binds to biotin, and HRP is able to develop colour when in reaction
with TMB substrate. The absorption of the concentration of reacted HRP and thus colour development is
measured (figure 12).
ELISA 5
This ELISA was done to illustrate the binding affinity of leptin to LEPR in an environment with and without
AGP. If AGP blocked leptin binding the signal in the first column should be less than the second column
where leptin is incubated without AGP. The last column is empty in order to get a negative control. The
entire plate was coated with LEPR in a 2-fold dilution (starting dilution 1:40) while leaving the H row
empty to get a negative control. Both AGP, leptin, and anti-leptin was added to the first column in a 2-fold
dilution row (start dilution of AGP 1:70 and leptin 1:25). In the next column only leptin and anti-leptin were
added in the same 2-fold dilution row. In the third column only anti-leptin was added in the same 2-fold
dilution row. The last column was added in order to detect unspecific anti-leptin binding. The entire plate
was incubated with HRP-anti-rabbit which binds to the rabbit yielded antibody anti-leptin. HRP is able to
develop colour when in reaction with TMB substrate. The absorption of the concentration of reacted HRP
and thus colour development is measured (figure 13).
25
==PAGE:37==
Figure 13: Illustration of the ELISA 5 setup to determine LEPR binding of leptin. First lane in combination
with AGP and anti-leptin. Third, row is anti-leptin alone to test for unspecific LEPR binding. Created with
BioRender.com.
ELISA 6
This ELISA was done to illustrate the binding of biotinylated AGP to the LEPR in an environment with
different levels of leptin present. The plate is coated with LEPR in a 2-fold dilution (starting dilution 1:40)
down the columns leaving row H empty as a negative control. The wells are then incubated with leptin
in a 2-fold dilution through all the rows, leaving column 6 empty as a negative control. At the same
time, the ELISA is incubated with an equal concentration of AGP in every well. This makes both leptin
and AGP binding possible to the LEPR. With decreasing leptin concentration, we want to see if the AGP
binding concentration is raised. The plate is finally incubated with HRP-Streptavidin which will bind to
the biotinylated AGP. When TMB is added to the wells it reacts with the HRP protein present and develops
colour. The absorption is measured (figure 14).
26
==PAGE:38==
Figure 14: Illustration of the ELISA 6 setup to determine optimal LEPR binding of AGP in an environment
with different levels of leptin present. Created with BioRender.com.
3.6
RNA purification
In order to analyze gene expression from the Ossabaw model, RNA was extracted from SAT, VAT, and liver
tissue samples. This was done using the QIAGEN RNeasy Micro kit. 100 mg of each tissue sample was
transferred to an M-tube along with 1 mL QIAzol Lysis Reagent. The RNeasy kit simlifies RNA isolation.
First, samples are lysed and homogenized, afterwards ethnaol is added to the lysate to provide the best
binding conditions. The residual DNA that could remain is removed with the DNase treatment. This yields
pure RNA in eluted water [57]. The tissue was homogenized using GentleMACS Octo Dissociator machine
(GentleMACS_RNA_02, 80 sec homogenization). The homogenate was transferred to an Eppendorf which
was centrifuged (10 min, 4 °C, 15000 rpm) to clear the fat layer from the samples. 200 µL chloroform was
added to each sample before being vortexed and centrifuged for 30 min (4 °C). The samples will separate
into 3 phases: an upper phase containing RNA, an interphase containing DNA and a lower phase containing
excess proteins and lipids from the samples. 300 µL was extracted from the upper layer and transferred to
a new collection tube along with 450 µL absolute ethanol. The samples were transferred into an RNeasy
Mini spin column placed in a 2 mL collection tube. The RNeasy column works as a filter, catching the RNA
from the samples. The tubes were centrifuged (13000 rpm, rt, 15 sec) and the run-through is discarded.
This is repeated until all of the sample/ethanol mix has been run through. 350 µL RWT buffer is then
pipetted into the RNeasy column and the samples are centrifuged (13000 rpm, rt, 15 sec), the flowthrough
is discarded. 80 µL DNAse mix (10 µL DNAse stock to 70 µL RDD buffer) is added onto the column of
each sample which is then left for 10 min rt. Again, 350 µL RWT buffer is added onto the columns and
they are centrifuged (13000 rpm, rt, 15 sec), then the samples are centrifuged and the flow flowthrough is
27
==PAGE:39==
discarded. 500 µL RPE buffer is added onto the columns and the samples are centrifuged until dry (about
2 min). This ensures that ethanol is removed from the column and not carried over to the RNA eluation.
The RNA in the columns is eluated with 30 µL RNase-free water.
3.7
Purity and integrity analysis
For both protein extraction and RNA purification the quality was checked with the NanoDrop® One/OneC
microvolume UV-Vis Spectrophotometer. A NanoDrop is able to measure the purity of a sample in regards to
protein contamination by measuring spectrophotometrical optical density (OD). A 1 µL sample was placed
on the reading plate and the NanoDrop measures absorbance at wavelengths of 230 nm, 260 nm, and 280
nm. Here 280 will measure the protein contamination and 230 will measure the organic compunds e.g.
buffers. An OD260/280 of 1.8-2.0 indicates good quality RNA [58]. 260/230 is commonly higher than the
260/280 value in pure samples. The ratio is commonly around the 2.0-2.2 value. The samples were run on
the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer to measure the RIN number, which was done by using the Agilent RNA 6000
Nano kit. RNA Integrity Number (RIN) is a method for measuring the integrity of RNA. Using microfluidics-
based electrophoresis RNA is separated into specific bands based on the RNA size. Ribosomal subunits 28S
and 18S are distinct bands visible in RNA. Degraded RNA will show a decrease in 18S to 28S ribosomal
band ratio. Thus, a high ratio of 28S/18S ribosomal subunits indicates non-degraded RNA samples. In
order to standardize the interpretation of the ratio, the RIN score is introduced. The RIN score measures
the degradation profile and gives a number from 1-10, where 10 is the most intact RNA sample. A RIN
score above 7 indicates that the RNA samples are good to continue working within the project, while bad
scores mean that the samples should be discarded [59]. Based on this our ideal samples should all have a
RIN value above 7, however samples above 6 are determined to be the cut-off.
3.8
cDNA synthesis
In order to analyze gene expression from the Ossabaw model, complementary DNA (cDNA) needs to be
synthesized using the Ossabaw RNA samples as template with the use of reverse transcriptase (RT). This was
done using the QIAGEN cDNA synthesis kit was used. Best results are achieved using >100 ng, however only
liver samples were above this limit. Therefore, the volume of RNA solution was reduced to fit the individual
samples. 2 µL gDNA Wipeout Buffer was added to 0.2 mL tubes along with the previous calculated RNA
volumes. RNase-free water was added to achieve a volume of 14 µL. The tubes were incubated for 2 min at
42 °C to eliminate genomic DNA. 6 µL reverse transcriptase (RT) master mix (per reaction: 0.75 µL Reverse
28
==PAGE:40==
transcriptase, 1 µL RT Primer Mix, 4 µL RT Buffer, 0.25 µL RNase-free water) was added to each tube with
treated RNA and the tubes were incubated for 15 min (42 °C) followed by 3 min (95 °C). The temperature
steps were performed in a thermocycler. -RT controls were made for each type of tissue. In these samples
the 0.75 µL Reverse transcriptase was replaced with TE-buffer. See appendix E for a detailed protocol.
3.9
RT-qPCR
Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) is a method for investigating differences in gene
expression with RNA. The detection method is based on the emission of fluorescence. One example of
this method uses fluorescent dye, SYBR®Green, which emits a fluorescent signal upon intercalating with
double stranded DNA (dsDNA). This means that the more dsDNA that is generated in the qPCR reaction
the more fluorescence will be detected. [60]. In order to run qPCR the following is needed: a template
sequence, a forward and reverse primer and nucleoside triphosphates containing deoxyribose (dNTP). Mul-
tiple fluorescence measurements are made and an average value is given per cycle. The output of a qPCR
is an amplification and a melting curve. The amplification curve is split into 3 parts. First is the initiation
phase, which is low product levels and thus low fluorescence levels. This can be considered the background
fluorescence. Second is the amplification phase which occurs as the reaction progresses and DNA is expo-
nentially amplified. The threshold is determined as the point where the amplification reaches significantly
higher levels than the baseline. When a sample crosses the threshold a value is noted down as the Ct or Cq.
These values quantify the absolute amount of a target sequence. Finally comes the plataeu phase which is
reached when there are no more nucleotides left to make more DNA or if the primers or DNA polymerase
are broken down or inactivated due to the high temperatures. The melting curve measures the dissociation
of at high temperatures. Different sequences will have different melting temperatures depending on the
amount of cytosine and guanine, as these have stronger binding than adenine and thymine [60].
The qPCR was run on the Rotorgene Q real-time qPCR machine. The tubes were prepared beforehand with
1 µL cDNA, 24 µL mastermix (5.5 µL TE-buffer, 12.5 µL 2 x SYBR Green Jumpstart mix, 3 µL MgCl2 (25 nM),
3 µL FW + RW primer mix (10 µM) in TE-buffer). A no template control (NTC) was made for each primer
assay used. In these, cDNA was switched out with 1 µL TE-Buffer. Additionally, -RT samples were made for
the 3 types of tissue from the Leipzig pigs (see appendix F for detailed protocol). The run profile was set
to 10 min at 95 °C, followed by 45 cycles with denaturing for 3 sec at 95 °C and annealing and elongation
for 30 sec at 60 °C. Followed by High Resolution Melting (HRM) from 70 °C to 90 °C. Two qPCR runs were
done, one with cDNA from the Ossabaw pigs from the UCPH experiment (n=15) and one with cDNA from
the Ossabaw pigs from the Leipzig pigs (n=11 + 3 -RT controls). Each set of cDNA was repeated for each
29
==PAGE:41==
Figure 15: A: The qPCR method using SYBR®Green. First, the DNA is denatured, then annealed, and finally
extended. The detection happens when the dye is intercalated into the sequence. B: The Amplification
curve consists of 3 parts the initiation phase, the exponential phase, and the plateau phase. C. The melting
curve that measures melting temperatures for the specific qPCR product [60].
primer assay plus 2 NTCs for each assay. This means that 64 samples were run for the UCHP pigs and 53
samples were run for the Leipzig pigs.
3.9.1
Primer design and the Ossabaw LEPR
The primer assays used for the qPCR were designed to amplify 2 specific positions of the Ossabaw LEPR
gene. The Ossabaw genome was previously sequenced by Zhang et al. Primers were designed to investigate
2 positions of interest in the sequence positions 417 and 665, which were determined based on a study
done et al. [8]. To investigate the sequence of the LEPR gene and to test the claim from the Zhang et
al. study the two primer pairs were designed to amplify around amino acid 417 (primer 417) and amino
acid 665 (primer 665). The protocol used was written by Louise Brogaard and was also used by a previous
30
==PAGE:42==
master’s student of Peter M. H. Heegaard to design primers. To design the primers the websites ensembl
and Primer3Web (v.4.1.0) were used. In ensembl, the LEPR (pig) gene sequence along with its exons and
introns was found. These 2 primer assays were designed to span from the 5’ of one exon to another. Using
Primer3Web and inputting the forward primer. The primers were set to have a PCR product between 80-
200 nucleotides. melting temperature (Tm) should be as close to 60 °C as possible with ± 1.00 °C and
around 18-22 base pairs. Appendix from previous master thesis by Philip Bjerre [61] used.
Figure 16: The sequences of the primer assays made.
3.9.2
PCR product purification
AMPure beads are used to purify PCR product by removing unwanted DNA [62]. 25 µL sample was moved to
Eppendorf tubes. 30 µL AMPure XP beads were added to each qPCR sample (1.2 µL beads to 1 µL sample)
and the sample mix was incubated at rt for 5 min. The tubes were then moved to a magnet and incubated
for 5 more minutes at rt. This step binds DNA fragments 100 bp or larger to the magnetic beads. The
supernatant was then removed and 500 µL 80% ethanol was added the tubes were incubated for 30 sec
then turned around 180 °and incubated for another 30 sec. Then the tubes were turned back around and
the ethanol was aspirated. The wash step was repeated one more time. The supernatant was aspirated
and the tube was incubated on the magnet for 5 min to dry. The DNA was eluted using 25 µL TE-buffer
which added to the tubes. The beads were resuspended until a homogenous solution was reached. The
tubes were then incubated for 2 min at rt and placed back onto the magnet where they were incubated for
2 more min at rt. The supernatant was aspirated from the tubes and collected in new tubes. This was the
final purified PCR product (figure 17).
31
==PAGE:43==
Figure 17: The manual workflow for purification of PCR samples [63].
3.9.3
Sanger sequencing
Sanger sequencing is a first-generation sequencing technique. This technique is used for the verification of
PCR results and is used to provide the genetic data needed for phylogenetic analyses. It works by adding
a DNA polymerase which extends the annealed amplified sample DNA. It adds either a mixture of the 4
deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs) or chain-terminating dideoxynucleotide triphosphates (ddNTPs).
The incorporation of ddNTPs will end the elongation reaction resulting in destinguisable DNA fragments
[64]. The DNA fragments are separated based on their size in a capillary gel electrophoresis. A laser excited
the fluorophore incorporated onto the fragments to generate a peak. This peak is recorded on a graph used
to determine the sequence (figure 18) [65].
Figure 18: A Sanger sequencing scheme. A: The DNA is fragmented, denatured, amplified and bound to
a primer. B: The elongation reaction occurs in a reaction mixture and fluorescently labeled ddNTPs are
added resulting in termination. C: capillary gel electrophoresis is done to separate the DNA fragments by
size and a laser is used for fluorescent detection [65]
A Sanger Sequencing was done on purified qPCR samples. The sequencing was not done by ourselves but
was sent out of the lab to be sequenced.
32
==PAGE:44==
4
Results
4.1
LEPR, leptin, and AGP in an isolated system
To ensure we were working in an isolated environment human LEPR, porcine leptin, anti-LEPR, and anti-
leptin were bought as pure protein. AGP was isolated from Ossabaw serum and 1.62. As AGP was isolated
using a 1.62 coupled agarose column a silver stain was made of the different pulldown steps. As AGP has
a molecular mass of 43 kDa it should be visible in this region (figure 19).
Figure 19: A. Starting material (lipid tissue extract in PBS). B. AGP. C. Agarose bead-coupled 1.62. D. Agarose
bead-coupled 1.62 + AGP. E. Agarose bead-coupled 1.62 + AGP + lipid tissue extract beads after pulldown
and wash. F. Agarose bead-coupled 1.62 + AGP + lipid tissue supernatant after pulldown. G. Agarose bead-
coupled 1.62 + lipid tissue extract beads after pulldown. H. Agarose bead-coupled 1.62 + lipid tissue extract
supernatant after pulldown. I. Agarose bead-coupled 1.62 + AGP, supernatant. J. Weight Marker. The arrow
indicates the AGP band.
From the silver stain, it can be seen that AGP has been captured in the pulldown. This is due to the AGP
band around 43 kDa, which is visible in both G and H lanes. To investigate exactly how much AGP was
extracted a competitive ELISA was done with un-pooled samples from purified AGP samples 17-24. See
appendix G for ELISA results. From this, the concentration was determined to 298 µg/mL.
It was the intention to buy porcine LEPR in order to have a model closest to the Ossabaw pig, however, no
vendor had it available for purchase. After corresponding with a vendor of human LEPR, who told us that
it was able to bind to porcine leptin, we decided that using human LEPR would not cause any significant
changes in the experiments. First, in the experiments, we wanted to show the binding of AGP and leptin
33
==PAGE:45==
to the LEPR. This was done by running ELISAs. The first ELISA that was run was ELISA 1 (figure 9) to show
the leptin binding of the LEPR. This is to show a positive control of leptin on the LEPR. Because of the
exact structure and binding of leptin to LEPR, we needed to see that leptin-LEPR binding does not block
the binding of anti-leptin (table 3).
Table 3: Normalized ELISA results based on ELISA 2 setup.
Here the ELISA plate is coated with LEPR (1:40) in a two-fold dilution from rows A-G with the H row being
negative. Columns 1-5 are afterward incubated with leptin (1:50) in a two-fold dilution with column 6
being empty. This means that row H is a negative control for LEPR and column 6 is a negative control for
leptin. When comparing the absorption values down column 1 a clear dilution can be seen with lowering
values from A-H. When comparing row G to row H, there are no significant differences. This could indicate
that leptin binding cannot be detected at too low concentrations, or that we see some sort of unspecific
binding. When comparing this to column 6 where there is no leptin present, it still looks like the binding
concentration decreases as the LEPR concentration decreases. This could indicate that anti-LEPR or anti-
rabbit has unspecific binding to the LEPR.
Next, we look at the AGP binding to the LEPR (ELISA 2 (figure 10)). Here the ELISA plate is split up from
columns 1-6 with a 1.62 (anti-AGP) concentration of 1:500 and columns 7-12 with 1.62 concentration of
1:2000. LEPR (1:40) is diluted two-fold down throughout the wells and row H is empty. See appendix H
for the ELISA result.
This ELISA looks very similar to the leptin ELISA, which could indicate AGP binding to the LEPR. They
are similar as this ELISA also shows a decrease in concentration when AGP concentration is decreased,
as well as when the LEPR concentration is decreased (ELISA 3 (figure 11)). However, when comparing
A1 to A7 we see a clear difference in the absorption value for the tests. As these two columns have the
same concentration of AGP and LEPR, the 1.62 concentration in the wells is the only thing that makes a
difference. This could indicate unspecific binding of 1.62 or anti-mouse to the LEPR. To investigate the
unspecific binding of the secondary antibodies we decided to do a dot blot coated with LEPR and then
34
==PAGE:46==
incubated with the first series AGP, 1.62, and anti-mouse, a second series with leptin, anti-leptin, and
anti-rabbit, and finally a series with only anti-LEPR and anti-rabbit (figure 20).
Figure 20: A: Three series of dot blots testing for unspecific binding. Top left is LEPR incubated with AGP,
then 1.62, and anti-mouse. Top right is LEPR incubated with 1.62 and anti-mouse. Middle left is LEPR
incubated with leptin, anti-leptin, and anti-rabbit. Middle right is LEPR incubated with anti-leptin and
anti-rabbit. Bottom left is LEPR incubated with anti-LEPR and anti-rabbit. Bottom right is LEPR incubated
with anti-rabbit. B: A dilution series of AGP and leptin with undiluted LEPR and 1:2 diluted LEPR. Top is
AGP dilutions. Bottom is leptin dilutions.
From figure 20A we see a visible dot on all blots except the one that is only incubated with anti-rabbit.
This means the positive stain we see from AGP can be unspecific binding from either 1.62 or anti-mouse.
Additionally, the positive stain we see for leptin can be unspecific binding from anti-leptin or anti-rabbit.
In the bottom of figure 20A, we do not see any unspecific binding. This indicates that anti-rabbit is not
the problem, which means we know anti-leptin will bind unspecifically. When looking at figure 20B it is
35
==PAGE:47==
seen that the visibility of the dots is not correlated with AGP or leptin concentration. The most visible AGP
dot is for the 1:90 dilution whereas the most visible dot for leptin is for the 1:80 dilution. From this, it can
be concluded that both AGP and leptin have unspecific binding when using their secondary antibodies. To
visualize the binding of AGP and leptin to the LEPR, as well as investigate unspecific binding of anti-LEPR,
a western blot was run with AGP and leptin. 3 different western blots were made: one coated with LEPR
and incubated with anti-LEPR as well as anti-rabbit, one without LEPR, and the last one without both LEPR
and anti-LEPR (figure 21)
Figure 21: Western blots of AGP and leptin binding to LEPR. Left system is coated with LEPR and later
incubated with anti-LEPR and Ap-anti-rabbit. Middle system is coated with TBS-T buffer and later incubated
with anti-LEPR and Ap-anti-rabbit. Right system is coated with TBS-T buffer and later incubated with more
TBS-T buffer and finally Ap-anti-rabbit.
We see binding of leptin on the left and middle blots, while the right one remains relatively unstained.
The left blot is the control of this system to see if LEPR is able to bind to leptin in the first place. Here
a faint leptin stain is visible, however, AGP does not appear. In the middle blot, we again see the leptin
stain. Again we can see that Ap-anti-rabbit does not bind unspecifically to leptin. This indicates that anti-
LEPR can bind unspecifically to leptin as well. Because of this another option for testing AGP binding on
the LEPR is to use biotinylated AGP (b-AGP) and HRP-streptavidin instead (table 6). As streptavidin only
binds biotin, we hope to see less unspecific binding. To obtain b-AGP the AGP was dialyzed overnight 4°C
against 0.1 M NaHCO3 pH 8.2. The dialyzed AGP was transferred to 1.5 mL eppendorf tubes and 10 µL
36
==PAGE:48==
biotin N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (10 mg/mL in NMP, DMSO or another organic solvent, freshly prepared)
was added. The tubes were incubated on a rocking table for 2 h. The b-AGP was then dialyzed against PBS
overnight at 4 °C.
Table 4: Normalized ELISA results based on ELISA 4 setup.
In the results of ELISA number 4, a much better dilution row can be seen from decreasing AGP concentra-
tion from columns 1 to 6. A dilution can also be seen for LEPR, however, it does look like there could be a
bit of unspecific binding in H1. This ELISA indicates that AGP is able to bind to the LEPR.
A similar ELISA setup was run, but with leptin and anti-leptin, to measure leptin binding to the LEPR (ELISA
4 (figure 12)). In this, a two-fold dilution of leptin was done from columns 1-5 with 6 being a negative
control. A 2 fold dilution was made of LEPR in rows A-G with H being a negative LEPR control (see ELISA
in appendix J). In this ELISA again LEPR binding can be observed. This is due to the clear dilution seen
from rows A-G indicating that the OD relates a concentration of bound leptin decreses as the LEPR con-
centration decreses in the wells. Additionally, it is seen that the OD lessens as leptin concentrations lessen
from columns 1-6. It is, however, still very clear that anti-leptin causes unspecific binding. This is due to
the dilution seen in column 6 where no leptin is present, indicating that the positive binding signal comes
from anti-leptin.
To illustrate the severity of anti-leptin unspecific binding another ELISA was run (ELISA 5 (figure 13)). In
this ELISA only 3 columns were run. One was coated with LEPR, incubated with an AGP and leptin mix,
anti-leptin, and HRP-anti-rabbit. The second one was coated with LEPR, incubated only with leptin, anti-
leptin, and HRP-anti-rabbit. The last one was coated with LEPR, incubated with PBS, anti-leptin, and
HRP-anti-rabbit.
The ELISA showed most binding in the column containing both leptin and AGP. Here a clear dilution could
be seen in correlation to the LEPR concentration. Leptin alone also showed binding of LEPR. However, anti-
37
==PAGE:49==
Table 5: ELISA results based on ELISA 5 setup.
leptin alone showed a lot of binding of LEPR as well. The OD numbers are very similar to the lane with
leptin alone. This could indicate that most of the binding we are detecting could be from unspecific anti-
leptin binding to LEPR. Because of this an ELISA was run with all 3 proteins in a system with biotinylated
AGP and HRP-streptavidin (figure 14).
Table 6: ELISA results based on ELISA 6 setup.
Binding of AGP can be detected just as it was in (ELISA 4 about Bio-AGP). Again, a clear dilution can be
seen down the columns in correlation to LEPR concentration. This, however, does not say anything about
leptin binding. And it does not tell us if AGP and leptin bind to the LEPR cooperatively or competitively
(see ELISA in appendix K).
To investigate the binding of AGP and leptin to LEPR the complexes were run in a NativePAGE: One that
was silver stained and one that was blotted. On the silver stain LEPR, AGP, and leptin were run individually
for mass comparison and together. Based on the mass of the complexes it is visible if either AGP or leptin
or both bind to LEPR. If the band visible moves 17 kDa towards the top leptin will have bound, and if it
moves 43 kDa towards the top AGP has bound. If both have bound to LEPR two bands should be visible
(figure 22).
38
==PAGE:50==
Figure 22: NativePAGE and silver staining of LEPR, AGP and leptin individually and in complexes.
The leptin band is not very visible on the gel, due to a failure of pipetting in the well before running the
NativePAGE. There is, however, a faint band at the bottom of the gel located at approximately the same
spot as leptin would be in. This band is not visible in the other leptin lanes indicating that it has bound
to the LEPR. This is also indicated by the movement of the LEPR when bound to leptin in the LEPR+leptin
and LEPR+leptin+AGP lanes. Using the same logic it can be seen that AGP is not bound to LEPR as we still
see the AGP stain around 43 kDa on the gel in all 3 lanes containing AGP. Additionally, we do not see any
movement of LEPR, which would be the case if it had bound AGP. This contradicts the earlier ELISA results
that indicated AGP binding.
39
==PAGE:51==
4.2
Leptin and LEPR in Ossabaw tissue samples
We chose to move from the pure proteins to Ossabaw tissue samples. This was done to investigate the
protein present in the samples and their interaction with leptin and LEPR. First, we wanted to see if we
could detect any LEPR and leptin in the samples, as well as determine the optimal dilution of the samples
in the SDS-PAGE system. Because of this, an SDS-PAGE was run with LEPR, leptin, and SAT 27. This PAGE
was silver stained to show the proteins present (figure 23).
Figure 23: SDS-PAGE silver stained LEPR, leptin, and SAT 27 in dilutions 1:2 and 1:5.
Firstly, we see that an inoptimal weight marker has been used. It appears very weakly on the gel compared
to the other lanes. Because of this, a new weight marker was bought and used for the rest of the SDS-
PAGEs. Secondly, we see that LEPR is present in a very high concentration which indicates that the dilution
of it needs to be adjusted. It also seems to have spilled over in the leptin well as a faint band is visible
where it shouldn’t be. Aside from this, we see a band at the bottom of the leptin lane indicating 17 kDa
leptin is present. Next, we see a band present at the same mass as LEPR on the SAT 27 lanes. This might
show presence of LEPR, but it also might be another protein with the same mass. At the bottom of the
SAT 27 1:5 diluted lane, we see a faint staining of what could indicate leptin. As SAT 27 1:2 dilution seems
to be too concentrated, it is determined that the tissue samples will be a 1:5 dilution in the experiments
forward. The same setup was silver stained with anti-leptin and AP-anti-rabbit as well as anti-LEPR and
Ap-anti-rabbit in order to look for specific staining in the tissue samples (figure 24). Looking at the left
40
==PAGE:52==
Figure 24: SDS-PAGE and western blot of SAT 27 Ossabaw samples from UCHP pigs along with pure leptin
and LEPR. Left blot is incubated with anti-leptin. Right blot is incubated with anti-LEPR.
blot, we see that anti-leptin reacts with leptin around 30 kDa and below 20 kDa. The stain below 20 kDa
is most likely leptin which is expected around 17 kDa. We see that anti-leptin does not react with SAT 27.
Looking at the right blot, we see that anti-LEPR reacts with the LEPR around 120 kDa. We also see that
it reacts with SAT 27 around 55 kDa and around 70 kDa. From this we see that the secondary antibody
for leptin does not react unspecifically with the LEPR, and that the secondary antibody for LEPR does not
react unspecefically with leptin. This stands in contrast to what has previously been seen. Next, all SAT
samples (n=14) were run in an SDS-PAGE and coated with anti-LEPR and incubated with Ap-anti-rabbit.
The samples were then blotted (figure 25).
When looking at this figure it can be seen that all SAT samples show anti-LEPR binding. This binding does
not appear to be LEPR binding as the stains are visible around 55 kDa. This could indicate that either
the anti-LEPR binds unspecifically as we have seen it capable of previously. Otherwise, it could indicate
that the LEPR present in the SAT samples is another smaller version than the pure human LEPR used for
positive control. Based on the fact that some samples show two bands, multiple LEPR’s could be present
in the samples. Interestingly, it seems like SAT 15-30 (except SAT 18) show more clear dual bonds, while
SAT 1-14 plus SAT 18 only show one. The same setup was run but with the corresponding VAT samples
(n=15) (figure 26).
41
==PAGE:53==
Figure 25: SDS-PAGE and western blot of SAT Ossabaw samples from UCHP pigs. The numbers correspond
to each pig in the study.
Figure 26: SDS-PAGE and western blot of VAT Ossabaw samples from UCHP pigs. The numbers correspond
to each pig in the study. There is an additional sample, VAT 3, compared to the SAT samples.
From this, it can again be seen that a much lower band is stained compared to the LEPR positive con-
trol lane. Again a double band can be seen at VAT 15-30 (except VAT 18). Again this could indicate the
presence of a shorter chain LEPR around 55 kDa or unspecific binding of anti-LEPR to another protein. By
comparing the stained protein on the tissue samples with the silver stain of SAT 27 in figure 23 we can
see that some protein is present at the same mass. This could indicate that some LEPR corresponding to
the positive control would be present in the samples. However, since this band does not stain at 120 kDa
in the western blot, it is indicated that the band could stem from another protein at the same size that is
42
==PAGE:54==
not LEPR. Furthermore, we also see that SAT 13-30 are less stained. These samples derive from the obese
group of pigs from the UCPH experiment. By comparing this to both the SAT results which also showed
that, and the results seen in an earlier master thesis ([61]) we see that these results are in conformity. This
indicates that the LEPR is down-regulated in both obese SAT and VAT.
Because we wanted to investigate protein binding further in the tissue samples, we determined the strongest
staining SAT and VAT samples. These were determined to be SAT and VAT 25, and SAT and VAT 18. Ad-
ditionally, these two represent a sample with double band staining and with one band staining. This was
done to save some of the expensive proteins such as pure leptin, anti-leptin, LEPR, and anti-LEPR.
First, we wanted to test for LEPR in the SAT and VAT. To do this we coated the blot with leptin to get it to
bind to the LEPR in the samples. Then the blot was incubated with anti-leptin and Ap-anti-rabbit (figure
27).
Figure 27: SDS-PAGE and western blot of VAT 25, VAT 18, SAT 25, and VAT 18. Testing for leptin binding.
From this blot, we see that leptin binds to the positive control LEPR lane. It does bind very weakly in this
system, this is based on an over-dilution of the leptin used. We see that VAT 25 and VAT 18 bind leptin
in the same position as anti-LEPR in figure 26. This adds to the hypothesis that this is LEPR present as a
shorter chained version of the LEPR compared to the pure LEPR. It also seems like there is a difference in
LEPR concentrations comparing VAT to SAT samples, based on the visibly stronger stain of the VAT samples.
To visualize the binding of leptin and AGP to the LEPR in VAT 18 were run on SDS-PAGE together with pure
LEPR (figure 28).
43
==PAGE:55==
Figure 28: 4 different SDS-PAGE and western blots of VAT 18.
From the blots, it can be seen that leptin and AGP supposedly bind to the LEPR in the VAT 18 tissue sample.
However, based on unspecific binding to the LEPR no definitive difference can be seen between the blots
and the negative controls. We tried to investigate the binding of proteins in the samples in a porcine LEPR-
specific ELISA. This ELISA ended up inconclusive and no results can be gathered for it. For ELISA results
see appendix L. Finally, the binding of proteins in SAT 18, SAT 25, VAT 18, and VAT 25 was investigated in
a NativePAGE run (figure 29).
In figure 29A the blot is coated with anti-leptin meaning that leptin-binding is shown. It can be seen that
leptin binds to the LEPR of VAT and SAT as no leptin is left at the bottom of the blot. Additionally, it looks
like there are multiple bands which could either be from multiple mass LEPRs present in the samples or
from unspecific binding of both unbound LEPR as well as leptin-bound LEPR. In figure 29B the blot is
coated with anti-LEPR meaning that LEPR is shown instead of leptin. By looking at the unbound SAT and
VAT lanes a long band can be seen, this band becomes much weaker in the leptin-bound tissue lanes. This
is a result of running multiple proteins in a lane diluted 7.5 µL SAT or VAT to 7.5 µL leptin to 5 µL sample
44
==PAGE:56==
Figure 29: A: NativePAGE and western blot showing leptin binding of VAT and SAT tissue samples. Coated
with anti-leptin and Ap-anti-rabbit. LEPR is present as a positive control. B: NativePAGE and western blot
showing leptin binding of VAT and SAT tissue samples. Coated with anti-LEPR and Ap-anti-rabbit. LEPR is
present as a positive control.
buffer. Interestingly no LEPR can be detected in any of the lanes except the two positive control lanes.
This could be because LEPR in NativePAGE is aggregated making it unable to run through the gel at all. It
could also be because LEPR binds to many different compounds forming the smear seen down through the
gel. It could also be because of the binding of anti-LEPR is blocked by another bound compound, which
leads to no LEPR staining.
45
==PAGE:57==
4.3
qPCR and sequencing
The idea of running a qPCR is to see the difference in melting temperature between the the sequence. The
melting temperature was calculated from the Wallace equation (table 7) [66]:
Tm = 64.9 + 41
yG + zC −16.4
wA + xT + yG + zC
(1)
Where w, x, y, and z is the number of the bases A, T, G, and C respectively. The first round of samples run on
the Rotorgene machine was 15 cDNA samples from the UCPH experiment. The cDNA was made previously
by a laboratory assistant. The RNA samples had already been tested for purity and integrity and accepted
for qPCR runs. The samples were run for both primer assays 417 and 665 as technical duplicates resulting
in 60 qPCR samples. Then two NTC samples were run for both primer 417 and primer 665 resulting in 64
qPCR samples. Using equation 1 the melting temperature of the substitution in the Ossabaw gene was
calculated to 75.09 °C. Using equation 1 the melting temperature of the change in the Ossabaw gene was
calculated to either 75.10 °C, 75.36 °C, or 75.37 °C based on which of the 3 gene changes proposed. Based
on the minimal change in temperature from the theoretical Tm, no difference can be seen in the melting
curve. The results of this run can be seen as two quantitative and HRM graphs (figure 8). For graphs see
appendix M-P
Table 7: A table summarizing the Tm’s for the different PSG Ossabaw genome options.
Looking at the primer 417 Tm values in table 8 we see that there is almost no difference between the
sample values and the two NTCs. All of the values are exponential Ct values which means that the higher
value the less amplification of the sample. Generally, NTCs generating a signal of 5 or more cycles than
the test signals are considered acceptable [67]. As the primer 417 NTCs are less than 5 cycles from the
sample values this run cannot be accepted and no further data analysis can be made. Looking at the HRM
graph similar peaks can be seen around 75.5 °C. This could indicate that all of the primers have turned
into primer dimers. The Wallace equation was used to calculate the Tm of primer dimers (figure 9). Here
we see that it does not fit exactly with the measured value.
When looking at the primer 665 Tm values most of the sample values are blank. This is because a lot of the
46
==PAGE:58==
Table 8: A table summarizing the mean Ct value for each UCPH sample (both primer 417 and primer 665)
run in the qPCR. 2 NTCs have been run for each primer assay.
Table 9: A table summarizing the Tm’s for the different primer assays.
duplicate samples were bellow the threshold. Because of this, the samples do not provide reliable data.
One of the 665 NTCs is negative, as it does not exceed the threshold either. The other NTC is 28.86 which
does not fulfill the criteria of less than 5 cycles from the sample values. This means that the other half of
the run is bad as well and no further data analysis can be made. When looking at the HRM graph we see
that a lot of primer dimers are in the samples around 75.1 °C. However, a lot of the samples peak around
78.5 °C indicating that some PCR product has been amplified.
RNA was extracted from SAT, VAT, and liver samples of the 4 pigs (71: Poul, 73: Rasmus, 74: Rune, 75: Rene)
from the Leipzig experiment. The RNA was tested on the Bioanalyzer and all RIN values were accepted
except for Rene SAT. See appendix Q for RIN analysis. cDNA was synthesized from all RNA samples except
one (Rene (75) SAT). Next round of qPCR was run for 11 cDNA samples from the Leipzig experiment. These
samples were again run for both primer 417 and 665 along with duplicates. Additionally, 3 -RT samples
were run: one for SAT, one for VAT, and one for liver samples. Again, 2 NTCs were run for each primer assays
totalling to 53 samples (figure 10).
Looking at the primer 417 values in table 10 we see that the NTC values are 2-3 cycles away from the
47
==PAGE:59==
Table 10: A table summarizing the mean Ct value for each Leipzig sample (both primer 417 and primer
665) run in the qPCR. 2 NTCs have been run for each primer assay.
highest sample value. The -RT is only 1.325 cycles away. Based on the fact that an acceptable run needs to
be 5 cycles higher than the sample values, this means that the run provides insufficient data and no further
data analysis can be done. Additionally, when looking at the melting graph we see a peak around 75.5 °C.
This could be the amplification of another sequence, but there is also a high chance that is could be the
cause of primer dimers forming. Further up on the graph, we see peaks indicating that some product has
formed around 79.5 °C. When looking at the primer 665 values in the table we see that multiple of the
sample values are higher than both of the NTCs. This means that none of the NTCs are 5 cycles higher and
again the data cannot be used for further analysis. When looking at the melting graph we see that only
one sample formed primer dimer around 75.5 °C. The rest of the samples peak around 79.0 °C. For graphs
see appendix R-U.
Based on the fact that the calculated melting temperatures are not representative of the temperatures
measured in the HRM analysis, we determined that the calculations are not reliable. In addition, the fact
that such a small sequence change would cause such a small change in temperature that it would be
difficult to tell the difference is taken into consideration. It is also based on the fact that the equation 1
used is based on standard conditions of 50 nM primer and pH 7.0. Because of this, we decided to send the
qPCR product of the first UCPH run to Sanger Sequencing. The PCR product was purified using AMPure
beads.
48
==PAGE:60==
4.3.1
Sequencing results
Based on the fact that none of the qPCR runs went well, we decided to run the products, of the UCPH
run, on a Bioanalyzer to see if we could see anything being amplified. See appendix V for results. Here
we saw that, most of the samples had peaks in the lower area of the graph, indicating that there was
some sort of contamination in the samples. However, we could also see a high peak in the area where
we would expect amplified DNA in most of the samples. Based on this we decided to send the qPCR
samples to sequencing in order to elucidate what had been upregulated in the samples. The sequencing
results showed only very short sequences that was not the target sequences. Two came back with longer
sequences, but still not matching our target sequences. Because of this we decided to run these two
sequences in NCBI nucleotide BLAST. Here we found the top matches to be Staphylococcus aureus strains
with an E value <e-5 and a query coverage of >90% [68]. This indicates that a contamination has happened
somewhere in the process. By running contamination screens of the different components used in the qPCR
on the Bioanalyzer we discovered that there might have been a problem with the primers. The primers
might have been contaminated accidentally, they can have been prone to primer dimers, or they might
have had binding multiple places in the DNA template. Based on previous a master thesis who also ran
qPCR on the LEPR gene and succeeded we had a suspicion that the primers might have been the errors.
However, when comparing with the results from that masters study we see that obese SAT and VAT tissue
has a significantly lower LEPR expression. This might also play a role as less LEPR would be extracted
from the obese tissue samples. When comparing the lean samples to the obese samples, in this study, we
do not see a significant difference suggesting that the problem might have been located elsewhere.
49
==PAGE:61==
5
Discussion
One of the major problems when going through the results is the amount of unspecific binding seen from
anti-leptin and anti-LEPR. Also, 1.62 indicates unspecific binding to the LEPR. This is only proven false in
western blots seen in figure 24, directly contradicting the result seen in figure 28. This contradiction means
that we cannot positively say that unspecific binding has a relevance in the positive results seen in the
PAGE results. But considering it a problem, this causes a lot of false positive results, meaning that further
experiments would need to be done in order to avoid this. To run experiments about leptin binding to the
LEPR an obvious option is to biotinylate leptin and run ELISAs measuring the actual binding of leptin to
LEPR. This means that ELISA 2 and ELISA 5 could be rerun with proper results. To explain the unspecific
binding seen between anti-leptin and LEPR in various SDS-PAGEs we need to look more closely to the pure
LEPR structure. The human LEPR carries an Fc-tag. An Fc-tag is a constant region of an immunoglobulin
heavy-chain. Fc-tagged proteins will bind to the Fc region of IgG antibodies [69]. This includes anti-leptin
which is a polyclonal rabbit IgG isotype antibody. 1.62 is a monoclonal IgG isotype antibody derived from
mice. This could explain the unspecific binding seen in multiple SDS-PAGE results (figures 20,21,27, and
28) as well as ELISA 2 and 5. To solve this problem one solution could be that we would need to find a
porcine LEPR without the Fc-tag. Another option could be to wash the ELISA wells with Fc-containing an-
tibodies that do not react with the ELISA, and, thus, essentially blocking Fc-tags, meaning that anti-leptin
and 1.62 cannot bind.
In the ELISA results, we were only able to look at the relative absorption values. These can change from
run to run depending on the time the HRP-derived colour gets to develop in the wells. To get a specific
concentration of bound protein we would need to run a sample with known concentrations. From this
sample, a trendline could be made and used to calculate the rest of the unknown sample concentrations.
These concentrations would be comparable between ELISA runs and would make for more quantitative
results. A way to do this could be to run a standard dilution row using LEPR:anti-LEPR, leptin:anti-leptin,
or AGP:1.62. We can assume that the secondary antibodies would bind most of the related protein coated
in the wells. If we assume that this column has the same development time as the other wells of the ELISA,
we can make a trendline from the known concentrations and absorptions. From this trend, we would be
able to calculate the exact amount of bound AGP or leptin in the ELISA run. We would not risk any unspe-
cific binding as we could determine that anti-rabbit did not bind.
Based on the fact that AGP binding was seen in the ELISA runs but not seen in the NativePAGE run it is
50
==PAGE:62==
difficult to conclude whether AGP actually binds the LEPR or not. In a NativePAGE there could be many
reasons as to why AGP did not bind LEPR but leptin did. An explanation could be that AGP binds in another
spot of the LEPR, which could be blocked by something else. If the leptin binding site is not blocked this
gives leptin an option to bind even though AGP cannot. Another option is that AGP just does not bind
to the LEPR and the ELISA results are fake positive. This, however, should not be the case since we took
unspecific binding into account when we decided to use the biotinylated AGP setup. Based on the fact that
some ELISAs showed hightened leptin binding when AGP was present, this could indicate that AGP and
leptin has a cooperative binding relationship.
The primer sequence binding was investigated in NCBI nucleotide BLAST as well as primer-BLAST on the
Sus Scrofa genome. See appendix W for BLAST results. This was done in order to examine the theoretical
binding of the primers and to see if they had a chance to amplify other parts of the template other than the
target sequence. By running 417 FW and RW primers we can see that they only bind to the LEPR. This is
also seen when running the 665 FW and RW primers. By running the primer-BLAST on the 417 we can see
binding on multiple transcript variants, but all with a product length of 119 matching the target sequence.
This indicates that the amplified DNA should only be the target sequence. By running the primer-BLAST on
the 417 we can see binding on multiple transcript variants, but all with a product length of 115. The length
might increase when running this in the Ossabaw genome. When comparing this to the target sequence
of the Sus Scrofa LEPR gene this fits to the predicted length. Based on these investigations the primers
should not bind multiple places on the template DNA. Thus the bad results from both the qPCR runs and
the sequencing must be a contamination from something else. We did not have more time to investigate
the source of the contamination, but based on the results we have some theories. Based on the fact that
the Staphylococcus aureus DNA was only seen in two of the samples we can conclude that it did not happen
before the qPCR run. Otherwise we would likely have seen results of S. aureus in more samples. This means
that the contamination could have happened either during the purification process, as this was done in
another lab and not with our own lab equipment. Another option could be an error from the company who
did the sequencings side. If they mixed up the samples or did not treat them properly this might have
ruined the results we got from them. In regards to the bad qPCR run this could most likely stem from the
primers. Considering the results gotten from another masters project we know that it is possible to amplify
sequences in the LEPR gene [61]. Here the only difference to our qPCR run, was that other primer assays
were used. Even though the primers should bind specifically to the LEPR we don’t know the level of primer
dimers they can make or how good the binding is to the LEPR at the running conditions. A solution to run-
ning a better qPCR could be changing the primers by moving the position of them a little bit in order to get
51
==PAGE:63==
better binding primers and a longer amplified DNA sequence from the qPCR. By increasing the annealing
temperature we might be able to amplify only the target sequence and not various minor fragments.
In the SDS-PAGEs and western blots made of the extracted protein SAT and VAT samples (figure 25 and 25)
we could see that something stained as a result of anti-LEPR binding around 60 kDa. Compared to the pure
human LEPR, the bands seen for the SAT and VAT samples are much smaller. It is not necessarily a problem
since the LEPR present in the tissue samples could be another version than the human LEPR bought. This
was initially thought to be a smaller version of the LEPR. However, based on the fact that the smallest
LEPR is 806 amino acids this cannot be the case as a LEPR that consists of 806 amino acids would have a
mass around 80 kDa. Another option could be that the anti-LEPR unspecifically binds to something else in
the samples. This is possible since we already determined that anti-LEPR binds unspecifically (figure 21).
However, the lower bands are seen with anti-LEPR and anti-leptin staining, which could indicate that this
could potentially be the LEPR. We know that the SAT and VAT samples used in this can be considered as
a picture of the proteins present in the pigs’ fat tissue at the time of termination. With this in mind, we
compared the weight of the bands stained in the SDS-PAGEs (around 60 kDa) to the mass of the different
possible LEPR in Ossabaw pigs. Zhang et al. proposed 2 PSGs in the LEPR gene one at amino acid 417
and one at amino acid 665. If we consider that specifically one of the three possible options around amino
acid 665 is true we could get another explanation for the band we see around 60 kDa. If the option of
introducing a STOP-codon was present in high enough amounts in the Ossabaw tissue then the truncated
LEPR gene would be around 665 amino acids long. This would yield a LEPR with a weight between 60
kDa and 70 kDa as we see in the blots. If this was the case this would indicate that the Zhang et al. study
hypothesis could be correct and further studies need to be done to determine this finally.
52
==PAGE:64==
6
Conclusion
The aim of the project was to investigate the obesity immune response and the binding relationship be-
tween leptin and the LEPR in an environment where serum AGP concentration is upregulated. Here, we
found from looking at NativePAGE runs that it did not look like AGP bound to the LEPR at all. Thus, we
cannot prove any AGP binding from this project. However, we saw that leptin was able to bind the LEPR
in the NativePAGE runs proving that leptin does bind in spite of the unspecific binding seen in the ELISA
runs. ELISA runs suggested that AGP did indeed bind, and furthermore enhanced the leptin binding to
LEPR when present, which could suggest a cooperative binding of leptin and AGP. Additionally, we found
evidence showing that the LEPR is down-regulated in obese fatty tissue. This was done by observing the
anti-LEPR reaction of 15 different SAT and VAT tissues on an SDS-PAGE. The decreased LEPR in obese tissue
could thus be a major factor in the leptin ressistence mechanism seen in correlation to obese immunity.
Another aim of this project was to investigate the gene expression of the Ossabaw LEPR gene. Here, we
designed 2 primer assays, one to amplify a sequence around amino acid 417 and one to amplify a sequence
around amino acid 665. We did not detect any of the target DNA being amplified in the qPCR runs or the
Sanger sequencing that was run performed on the products. Based on this, we were unable to obtain any
results that either confirmed or denied the claim of the Zhang et al. previous study. We did, however, see
indications of a truncated LEPR around 60-70 kDa in the Ossabaw SAT and VAT samples. This could be one
of the three possible 665 gene variations we see, and gives rise to further investigations.
6.1
Future aspects
If more time had been available, more experiments would have been performed. Firstly, more ELISA runs
need to be carried out using biotinylated leptin in order to investigate its binding of it to the LEPR without
the possibility of unspecific binding. Secondly, the NativePAGE and ELISAs could be rerun in order to
ensure, that the contradicting negative and positive results are correct and not due to human error. Thirdly,
the primer assays should be revised for running the qPCR in order to get the target sequence amplified.
Afterward, this sequence should be sent to sequencing for proper results. At the same time, one should
consider that the use of probe-based qPCR could measure the amount of amplified target before it is
sequenced. In probe-based qPCR oligonucleotides with modified 5’ (added fluorophore) and 3’ (added
quencher). In annealing conditions, the probe is hybridized in a template-specific manner. When the
polymerase breaks the probe the fluorophore and quencher are separated allowing for fluorescence [70].
Another way to go with this project could be to further investigate the AGP pathway and what other parts
53
==PAGE:65==
of the immune response it affects. Finally, the role of AGP in the insulin system could also be investigated
in this obese model.
54
==PAGE:66==
References
[1] WHO.
Obesity and Overweight - https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-
overweight. Accessed: 30/09-2022, 6 2022.
[2] Ayse Basak, Engin Atilla, and Engin Editors.
Obesity and Lipotoxicity.
Advances in Experimental
Medicine and Biology, 960, 2017.
[3] WHO.
Noncommunicable
diseases
-
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/noncommunicable-diseases. Accessed: 03/10-2022, 9 2022.
[4] B Conway and A Rene. Obesity as a disease: no lightweight matter. Technical report, 2004.
[5] Atilla Engin. The definition and prevalence of obesity and metabolic syndrome. In Advances in Exper-
imental Medicine and Biology, volume 960, pages 1–17. Springer New York LLC, 2017.
[6] Cathalijn H.C. Leenaars, Carien Kouwenaar, Frans R. Stafleu, André Bleich, Merel Ritskes-Hoitinga,
Rob B.M. De Vries, and Franck L.B. Meijboom. Animal to human translation: a systematic scoping
review of reported concordance rates. Journal of Translational Medicine, 17(1):223, 7 2019.
[7] Tina Rødgaard, Kerstin Skovgaard, Jan Stagsted, and Peter M.H. Heegaard. Expression of innate im-
mune response genes in liver and three types of adipose tissue in cloned pigs. Cellular Reprogramming,
14(5):407–417, 10 2012.
[8] Yaolei Zhang, Guangyi Fan, Xin Liu, Kerstin Skovgaard, Michael Sturek, and Peter M.H. Heegaard. The
genome of the naturally evolved obesity-prone Ossabaw miniature pig. iScience, 24(9), 9 2021.
[9] Howard Rosen. Is Obesity A Disease or A ehavior Abnormality Did the AMA et It Right.
[10] S Heshka and D B Allison. DEBATE Is obesity a disease?
[11] Calvin C Chan, Michelle S M A Damen, Pablo C Alarcon, Joan Sanchez-Gurmaches, and Senad Di-
vanovic. Inflammation and Immunity: From an Adipocyte’s Perspective. JOURNAL OF INTERFERON &
CYTOKINE RESEARCH, 39, 2019.
[12] Balraj Mittal. Subcutaneous adipose tissue & visceral adipose tissue. The Indian Journal of Medical
Research, 149(5):571, 5 2019.
[13] Stuart P. Weisberg, Daniel McCann, Manisha Desai, Michael Rosenbaum, Rudolph L. Leibel, and Jr.
Anthony W. Ferrante. Obesity is associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue. Journal
of Clinical Investigation, 112(12):1796, 12 2003.
55
==PAGE:67==
[14] Gracia Fahed, Laurence Aoun, Morgan Bou Zerdan, Sabine Allam, Maroun Bou Zerdan, Youssef Boufer-
raa, and Hazem I. Assi. Metabolic Syndrome: Updates on Pathophysiology and Management in 2021.
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 23(2), 1 2022.
[15] Jean Philippe Bastard and Bruno Fève. Physiology and physiopathology of adipose tissue. Springer-
Verlag France, 4 2012.
[16] Veronique Ouellet, Annick Routhier-Labadie, William Bellemare, Lajmi Lakhal-Chaieb, Eric Turcotte,
André C. Carpentier, and Denis Richard. Outdoor Temperature, Age, Sex, Body Mass Index, and Diabetic
Status Determine the Prevalence, Mass, and Glucose-Uptake Activity of 18F-FDG-Detected BAT in
Humans. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 96(1):192–199, 1 2011.
[17] Stefania Carobbio, Barry Rosen, and Antonio Vidal-Puig. Adipogenesis: New insights into brown adi-
pose tissue differentiation. Journal of Molecular Endocrinology, 51(3), 9 2013.
[18] A Kaisanlahti and T Glumoff. Browning of white fat: agents and implications for beige adipose tissue
to type 2 diabetes.
[19] Sung Sik Choe, Jin Young Huh, In Jae Hwang, Jong In Kim, and Jae Bum Kim. Adipose tissue remodeling:
Its role in energy metabolism and metabolic disorders. Frontiers in Endocrinology, 7(APR):30, 4 2016.
[20] Jiarui Liu, Xiaoning Yang, Siwang Yu, and Ruimao Zheng. Neural Regulation of Metabolism. Springer,
1090:145–157, 2018.
[21] Tina Rødgaard, Jan Stagsted, Berit Christoffersen, Susanna Cirera, Sophia G. Moesgaard, Michael
Sturek, Mouhamad Alloosh, and Peter M.H. Heegaard. Orosomucoid expression profiles in liver, adi-
pose tissues and serum of lean and obese domestic pigs, Göttingen minipigs and Ossabaw minipigs.
Veterinary Immunology and Immunopathology, 151(3-4):325–330, 2 2013.
[22] Fabrizio Ceciliani and Cristina Lecchi. The Immune Functions of α 1 Acid Glycoprotein . Current Protein
& Peptide Science, 20(6):505–524, 4 2019.
[23] Ji-Hyun Jang, Hee Woong Shin, Jung Min Lee, Hyeon-Woo Lee, Eun-Cheol Kim, and Sang Hyuk Park.
An Overview of Pathogen Recognition Receptors for Innate Immunity in Dental Pulp. 2015.
[24] Claudia Sommer and Michaela Kress. Recent findings on how proinflammatory cytokines cause pain:
peripheral mechanisms in inflammatory and neuropathic hyperalgesia. Neuroscience Letters, 361(1-
3):184–187, 5 2004.
56
==PAGE:68==
[25] Saswata Talukdar, Da Young Oh, Gautam Bandyopadhyay, Dongmei Li, Jianfeng Xu, Joanne McNelis,
Min Lu, Pingping Li, Qingyun Yan, Yimin Zhu, Jachelle Ofrecio, Michael Lin, Martin B. Brenner, and Jer-
rold M. Olefsky. Neutrophils mediate insulin resistance in high fat diet fed mice via secreted elastase.
Nature medicine, 18(9):1407, 9 2012.
[26] Viviane Zorzanelli Rocha, Eduardo J. Folco, Galina Sukhova, Koichi Shimizu, Israel Gotsman, Ashley H.
Vernon, and Peter Libby. Interferon-gamma, a Th1 Cytokine, Regulates Fat Inflammation A Role for
Adaptive Immunity in Obesity. Circulation research, 103(5):467, 8 2008.
[27] Anna M. Kucharska, Beata Pyrżak, and Urszula Demkow. Regulatory t cells in obesity. Advances in
Experimental Medicine and Biology, 866:35–40, 2015.
[28] Yiying Zhang, Ricardo Proenca, Margherita Maffei, Marisa Barone, Lori Leopold, and Jeffrey M. Fried-
man. Positional cloning of the mouse obese gene and its human homologue. Nature 1994 372:6505,
372(6505):425–432, 12 1994.
[29] Gilberto Paz-Filho, Claudio Mastronardi, Ma-Li Wong, and Julio Licinio. Leptin therapy, insulin sen-
sitivity, and glucose homeostasis. Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism, 16(Suppl 3):S549,
2012.
[30] Giuseppe Matarese, Stergios Moschos, and Christos S. Mantzoros. Leptin in Immunology. The Journal
of Immunology, 174(6):3137–3142, 3 2005.
[31] J. W. Prokop, R. J. Duff, H. C. Ball, D. L. Copeland, and R. L. Londraville. Leptin and leptin receptor:
Analysis of a structure to function relationship in interaction and evolution from humans to fish.
Peptides, 38(2):326–336, 12 2012.
[32] C R Barb, G J Hausman, and K L Houseknecht. Biology of leptin in the pig. Technical report, 2001.
[33] Monica Misch and Prasanth Puthanveetil. The Head-to-Toe Hormone: Leptin as an Extensive Modu-
lator of Physiologic Systems, 5 2022.
[34] Neira Sáinz, Jaione Barrenetxe, María J. Moreno-Aliaga, and José Alfredo Martínez. Leptin resistance
and diet-induced obesity: Central and peripheral actions of leptin, 1 2015.
[35] Gisela Wilcox. Insulin and Insulin Resistance. Clin Biochem Rev, 26, 2005.
[36] Barbara B. Kahn and Jeffrey S. Flier. On diabetes: insulin resistance. The Journal of Clinical Investigation,
2000.
57
==PAGE:69==
[37] Luis Varela and Tamas L. Horvath. Leptin and insulin pathways in POMC and AgRP neurons that
modulate energy balance and glucose homeostasis, 12 2012.
[38] Tomasz Szkudelski and Katarzyna Szkudelska.
The relevance of AMP-activated protein kinase in
insulin-secreting β cells: a potential target for improving β cell function? Journal of Physiology and
Biochemistry, 75(4):423, 11 2019.
[39] Peter M.H. Heegaard, Ingrid Miller, Nanna Skall Sorensen, Karen Elisabeth Soerensen, and Kerstin
Skovgaard.
Pig α1-Acid Glycoprotein: Characterization and First Description in Any Species as a
Negative Acute Phase Protein. PLoS ONE, 8(7), 7 2013.
[40] Yang Sun, Yili Yang, Zhen Qin, Jinya Cai, Xiuming Guo, Yun Tang, Jingjing Wan, Ding Feng Su, and Xia
Liu. The acute-phase protein orosomucoid regulates food intake and energy homeostasis via leptin
receptor signaling pathway. Diabetes, 65(6):1630–1641, 6 2016.
[41] Mario Ruiz. Into the Labyrinth of the Lipocalin α1-Acid Glycoprotein, 6 2021.
[42] Yun Sok Lee, Jin Woo Choi, Injae Hwang, Joo Won Lee, Jae Ho Lee, A. Young Kim, Jin Young Huh,
Young Jun Koh, Gou Young Koh, Hee Jung Son, Hiroaki Masuzaki, Kikuko Hotta, Assim A. Alfadda,
and Jae Bum Kim.
Adipocytokine orosomucoid integrates inflammatory and metabolic signals to
preserve energy homeostasis by resolving immoderate inflammation. Journal of Biological Chemistry,
285(29):22174–22185, 7 2010.
[43] Assim A. Alfadda, Sumbul Fatma, M. Azhar Chishti, Mohammed Y. Al-Naami, Ruba Elawad, Carmen
Deanna O. Mendoza, Hyunsun Jo, and Yun Sok Lee. Orosomucoid serum concentrations and fat depot-
specific mRNA and protein expression in humans. Molecules and Cells, 33(1):35–41, 1 2012.
[44] Elzbieta Gorska, K. Popko, A. Stelmaszczyk-Emmel, O. Ciepiela, A. Kucharska, and M. Wasik. Leptin
receptors. European Journal of Medical Research, 15(Suppl 2):50, 11 2010.
[45] Esteban N. Gurzov, William J. Stanley, Evan G. Pappas, Helen E. Thomas, and Daniel J. Gough. The
JAK/STAT pathway in obesity and diabetes. The FEBS Journal, 283(16):3002–3015, 8 2016.
[46] G J Morton and M W Schwartz. The NPY=AgRP neuron and energy homeostasis. International Journal
of Obesity, 25(5):56–62, 2001.
[47] Liliya V. Mancour, Hikmat N. Daghestani, Somnath Dutta, Gerwin H. Westfield, Justin Schilling,
Austin N. Oleskie, Jeffrey F. Herbstman, Steven Z. Chou, and Georgios Skiniotis. Ligand-Induced Ar-
chitecture of the Leptin Receptor Signaling Complex. Molecular Cell, 48(4):655–661, 11 2012.
58
==PAGE:70==
[48] Eric M Walters and Randall S Prather. Advancing Swine Models for Human Health and Diseases.
Science of Medicine, 2013.
[49] Reinhard Pabst. The pig as a model for immunology research. Cell and Tissue Research, 380(2):287, 5
2020.
[50] Maximilian Kleinert, Christoffer Clemmensen, and Susanna M Hofmann. Animal models of obesity
and diabetes mellitus. Publication Date. 2018.
[51] Elodie Foulquier and Céline Protat.
Splicing sites - https://www.imgt.org/IMGTeducation/Aide-
memoire/_UK/splicing/. Accessed: 06/02-2023. 2020.
[52] ThermoFisher Scientific. Protein preparation handbook. 2018.
[53] Andrew B. Nowakowski, William J. Wobig, and David H. Petering. Native SDS-PAGE: High resolution
electrophoretic separation of proteins with retention of native properties including bound metal ions.
Metallomics, 6(5):1068–1078, 2014.
[54] Tahrin Mahmood and Ping Chang Yang. Western Blot: Technique, Theory, and Trouble Shooting. North
American Journal of Medical Sciences, 4(9):429, 9 2012.
[55] Mireille Chevallet, Sylvie Luche, and Thierry Rabilloud. Silver staining of proteins in polyacrylamide
gels. Nature Protocols, 1(4):1852, 11 2006.
[56] Suleyman Aydin. A short history, principles, and types of ELISA, and our laboratory experience with
peptide/protein analyses using ELISA. Peptides, 72:4–15, 10 2015.
[57] QIAGEN. QIAzol Lysis Reagent - https://www.qiagen.com/de-us/products/discovery-and-translational-
research/lab-essentials/buffers-reagents/qiazol-lysis-reagent. Accessed: 04/02-2023.
[58] Sean Taylor, Michael Wakem, Greg Dijkman, Marwan Alsarraj, and Marie Nguyen. A practical approach
to RT-qPCRâPublishing data that conform to the MIQE guidelines. Methods, 50(4):S1–S5, 4 2010.
[59] Odilo Mueller, Samar Lightfoot, and Andreas Schroeder. RNA Integrity Number (RIN)-Standardization
of RNA Quality Control Application. Technical report.
[60] Grace Adams. A beginner’s guide to RT-PCR, qPCR and RT-qPCR. 2020.
[61] Philip Martin Bjerre. Adipose Tissue Lipolysis- and Inflammation Phenotype in Lean and Obese Ossabaw
Mini Pigs. PhD thesis, DTU, 2022.
[62] Agencourt Ampure. Instructions For Use. 2016.
59
==PAGE:71==
[63] Beckman Coulter Life Sciences. AMPure XP Workflow - https://www.beckman.com/reagents/genomic/cleanup-
and-size-selection/pcr. Accessed: 13/02-2023.
[64] Beate M. Crossley, Jianfa Bai, Amy Glaser, Roger Maes, Elizabeth Porter, Mary Lea Killian, Travis
Clement, and Kathy Toohey-Kurth.
Guidelines for Sanger sequencing and molecular assay moni-
toring. Journal of Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation : Official Publication of the American Association of
Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians, Inc, 32(6):767, 11 2020.
[65] Julie Nguyen. Sanger sequencing - https://apollo-institute.org/sanger-sequencing/. Accessed: 14/02-
2023.
[66] John SantaLucia. A unified view of polymer, dumbbell, and oligonucleotide DNA nearest-neighbor
thermodynamics.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
95(4):1460–1465, 2 1998.
[67] PCR Biosystems. qPCR Technical Guide.
[68] What is the E Value in BLAST - http://folk.uio.no/einarro/Presentations/blast_statistics.html. Accessed:
16/02-23. 2005.
[69] Kenneth Murphy and Casey Weaver. Janeway’s Immunobiology. Garland Science, 9th edition, 2017.
[70] Takara.
Probe-based
qPCR
Kits
-
https://www.takarabio.com/learning-centers/real-time-
pcr/overview/probe-based-qpcr-kits. Accessed: 15/02-23.
60
==PAGE:72==
Protein extraction protocol 
• 900µl RIPA buffer incl. Protease tabl./sample. (1 tabl./10ml RIPA buffer) 
• 130mg tissue is cut into small pieces and placed in an M-tube. 
• GentleMACS prog. RNA_02_01, some of the samples, serval times. 
• The M-tube is then incubated in a box with ice, and the box is then placed in the  
    coldroom overnight. 
• The lipidsolution is transfered to an eppendorf tube and centrifuged 20.000 g 15 min. at 
4°C.  
• The layer of fat will now be located on the top, and the supernatant can be transfered to a  
new tube (by sticking the tip through the fat), then centrifuged again and so on until there is 
no more fat left 
• All the samples are then dialyzed against PBS overnight at 4°C.  
• Samples were diluted 1/20 for measure in Nanodrop (A280) 
• PAGP ELISA: starting dilution 1/10 and then 2-fold 
 
A
Protein extraction protocol
61
==PAGE:73==
Course 24101 “Assay Technology” 
 
IMM Exercise 1 
DTU Vet January 2017 
 
1 
 
 
Characterization of protein A/protein G-purified monoclonal antibody 
by SDS-PAGE and Immunoblotting. 
 
SDS-PAGE  
Run 2 SDS-PAGE (one for silver staining, one for blotting); apply the samples as follows on both gels 
(1 = sample lane no. 1 etc.): 
1:  
Starting Material 
2: 
Run-Through 
3,4,5: 
Wash fractions 1-3 in separate lanes 
6,7,8,9: 
Eluate fractions 1,2,3 and 4 in separate lanes 
10: 
Molecular weight marker on both gels.   
 
As a “rule of thumb” a protein concentration corresponding to an OD280 of 0.1 will produce nice bands 
with silver staining. For dilution (if needed) use PBS. 
 
Example: how to dilute your samples from the Nanodrop measurements: 
You have a A280 10mm measurement on: 1.185  
ex.  1.185/0.1=11.85 (this is the dilution factor). 
If you make 100µl then do like this: 100µl/11.85=8.44µl. 
So you have to take 8.5µl sample and 91.5µl PBS. 
 
Sample preparation: 
Before electrophoresis all samples are pretreated with reducing sample buffer: 
(total sample volume: 60 µl) 39 µl sample + 15 µl sample buffer + 6 µl reducing agent. 
Boil for 5 minutes or place in 100° heating block for 5 minutes. 
 
 
 
Preparation and running of NuPAGE-SDS gel 
Running buffer: prepare 1L MES  
Dilute MES 20X in H2O Milli-Q, i.e. 
1L running buffer: 50 ml MES + H2O ad 1L. 
 
1) Open the gel bag. 
2) Rinse the gel cassette with H2O Milli-Q. 
3) Remove the comb by carefully pulling it upwards. 
4) Rinse the wells carefully with H2O Milli-Q water. 
Use a disposable pipette.  
5) Remove the adhesive tape, which is placed at the 
bottom on the outside, from the cassette. 
6) Place the gel cassette in the electrophoresis 
container, so that the inside of the gel cassette faces the middle of the container. In case only one gel is 
run, place a ’dummy’ in the other gel place. 
7) Fix the gel cassettes with the lock in the container. 
8) Fill the inner chamber with running buffer, so that the buffer covers the wells in the gels. If there is a 
leakage in the container, open and close the lock and re-fill the inner chamber with buffer. Leakage 
between the inner and outer chambers is not acceptable. 
9) Fill the outer chamber with buffer. 
Wells 
’Inside’
Wells 
’Outside’
”Lip” 
B
SDS-PAGE, Western blot and silver stain
protocol
62
==PAGE:74==
Course 24101 “Assay Technology” 
 
IMM Exercise 1 
DTU Vet January 2017 
 
2 
 
 
10) Apply the molecular weight marker (10µl/well) and the samples (20µl/well) in the wells, using long 
pipette tips 
11) Put on the lid. 
12) Connect the gel apparatus to the power supply, ensuring anode is at the bottom of the gel. 
13) Turn on the power and run the gels at 200V for approximately 40-60 min. making sure that samples do 
not run longer than to 0.5 cm from the bottom of the gel (or until it reaches the “lip”) 
 
When the run is finished, turn off the power supply, open the gel apparatus and remove the gel cassette 
from the container. 
 
Detach the two cassette plates using the gel knife. Put in the knife between the two plates and break the 
plates gently apart. Use the sharp edge of the knife to cut off the lip. 
Silver stain one gel and use the other for immunoblotting. 
 
 
 
 
Silverstain: 
Safety note:  
Summary of safety note for formaldehyde >25 % (uploaded on Campusnet): 
Always use gloves. Pregnant women should avoid contact with 37% formaldehyde. Collect all solutions in a 
specifically marked container in the fume hood, except solutions with silver nitrate, which need to be 
collected separately.  
 
Procedure: 
1. Fixation * (add 25µl 37% formaldehyde/ 50ml) 
5C overnight. 
2. Wash 30% ethanol 
 
 
3 x 10 min. 
3. Pretreat 
 
 
1 min. 
4. Wash Milli-Q H2O 
 
 
3 x 20 sec. 
5. Adsorption * (add 37.5µl 37% formaldehyde/ 50ml) 
20 min. (collect waste separately) 
6. Wash Milli-Q H2O 
 
 
3 x 20 sec. 
7. Develop * (Add 25µl 37% formaldehyde/ 50ml) 
until bands are visible, approx. 3-10 min. 
8. Stop 
 
 
until there are no more bubbles 
9. Wash 30% ethanol 
 
 
20 min. 
 
* Add formaldehyde immediately before use. 
 
 
 
63
==PAGE:75==
Course 24101 “Assay Technology” 
 
IMM Exercise 1 
DTU Vet January 2017 
 
3 
 
 
Immunoblot: 
While the SDS-PAGE gel is running, prepare the following: 
Pre-wet 2 fiber pads and 2 x 4 pieces of filter paper in transfer buffer for each gel to be blotted (use the lid 
of a plastic box) 
Cut out a piece of the nitrocellulose membrane, 7 x 8 cm, and place in a large petri dish. 
Instead of nitrocellulose a PVDF membrane (“Immobilon”) may be used. Due to the hydrophobicity of PVDF 
this type of membrane should be “wetted” before use by placing it in 70% ethanol before transferring it to 
transfer buffer (bullet point 6 below) 
 
 
Assembly (see figure below as well) 
 
• 
Place one sponge on the BLACK side of the blotting cassette 
• 
Remove air bubbles from a stack of 4 filter papers using a rolling pin 
• 
Place the 4 filter papers on the sponge 
• 
Place the SDS-PAGE gel on the filter paper 
• 
Add a few drops of transfer buffer on the gel 
• 
Wet the nitrocellulose membrane with transfer buffer in the petri dish and then place it carefully 
on the gel (NB: Immobilon (PVDF) should be pre-wetted in 70% ethanol before this step (see above) 
• 
Remove air bubbles from the remaining 4 filter papers using a rolling pin 
• 
Place the 4 filter papers on the membrane 
• 
Carefully use the rolling pin on the filter papers 
• 
Place the remaining sponge on top 
• 
Close the blotting cassette and place it in the blotting chamber (white side facing the red half of the 
chamber, black side facing the black half of the chamber) 
• 
Put in an ice block 
• 
Add transfer buffer up to the edge 
• 
Put on the lid 
 
 
 
 
Black side of the 
cassette 
Katode ÷ 
White side of the 
cassette 
Anode + 
 
Sponge 
Filter paper 
Nitrocellulose or 
Immobilon 
membrane 
 SDS-PAGE gel 
Filter paper 
Sponge 
64
==PAGE:76==
Course 24101 “Assay Technology” 
 
IMM Exercise 1 
DTU Vet January 2017 
 
4 
 
 
Blotting (Transfer) 
 
• 
Run at 150 mA for 1 h. Check the mA after 10 min and reset to 150 mA if it is too high. 
• 
After blotting, the nitrocellulose membrane is placed in a large petri dish. 
 
 
Blocking, antibody incubation, development 
 
• 
Block the membrane for 10 minutes in blocking buffer on shaker. 
• 
Wash 3 x 5 min with TBS-T. 
• 
Incubate with primary antibody (Polyclonal Goat anti-mouse Ig/Alkaline Phosphatase 
conjugate, D0486), diluted 1/1000 in TBS-T, at 4°C over night on shaker. 
• 
Wash 3 x 10 min with TBS-T. 
• 
Develop with NBT/BCIP-tablets (2 tablet/20 ml MilliQ water) for 1-10 min. - Incubate blot 
until desired staining level is attained (clear bands, low unspecific staining, and low 
background). 
• 
Stop staining by washing the membrane briefly 5 times in tap water. 
• 
Dry the membrane in between pieces of filter paper. 
• 
Scan blot. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65
==PAGE:77==
Course 24101 “Assay Technology” 
 
IMM Exercise 1 
DTU Vet January 2017 
 
5 
 
 
 
Buffers etc. used for exercise 1 
 
 
 
SDS-PAGE: 
 
Sample buffer: LDS sample buffer (4x), NP0008 Invitrogen 
 
Reducing agent: Sample Reducing Agent (10x), NP0009 Invitrogen 
 
Running buffer: MES running buffer (20x), NP0002 Invitrogen 
 
PBS: In House 
 
Gels: 12 % Bis-Tris gel 1.0mmx10 well, NP0341BOX Invitrogen 
 
Marker: Magic Mark XP (western protein standard), LC5602 Invitrogen 
 
 
 
Silver staining: 
 
Fixation: 
 
30% ethanol, 12% acetic acid 
Add 37% formaldehyde before use (25 µl / 50ml) 
 
 
Store in cabinet for chemicals (ventilation). 
 
Wash: 
 
30% ethanol 
 
 
Store in cabinet for chemicals 
 
Pretreat: 
 
0.2 g/L Na2S2O3,5H2O  (a few ‘grains’) 
 
 
Store in cabinet for chemicals 
 
Adsorption: 
 
2.0 g/L AgNO3   (store in the dark) 
 
Add 37% formaldehyde before use (37.5 µl / 50ml) 
 
 
Store in cabinet for chemicals 
 
Develop: 
 
60.0 g/L Na2CO3 + 4 mg/L Na2S2O3,5H2O 
 
 
Dissolves slowly 
Add 37% formaldehyde before use (25 µl / 50ml) 
 
 
Store at 4 °C 
 
Stop: 
 
50% ethanol, 12% acetic acid 
 
 
Store in cabinet for poisons (ventilation) 
 
 
 
 
66
==PAGE:78==
Course 24101 “Assay Technology” 
 
IMM Exercise 1 
DTU Vet January 2017 
 
6 
 
Immunoblotting: 
 
Transfer Buffer:  
Tris 
(12.5 mM) 
 
1.5 g    
Glycine 
(96 mM) 
 
7.21 g  
Ethanol  
(20%) 
 
200 mL 
H2O 
 
 
add 1000 mL 
Adjust pH to 8.4 
 
Blocking buffer (TBS-T + 2% Tween 20): 
Tween 20 (1:5 dilution) 
 
3 ml  
TBS-T 
 
 
27 ml 
 
Wash and dilution buffer (TBS-T): 
NaCl 
(250 mM) 
 
14.61 g 
Tris 
(50 mM) 
 
6.06 g 
Tween20  
(0.1%) 
 
5 mL of a 1:5 dilution 
H2O 
 
 
add 1000 mL 
 
Staining: NBT/BCIP staining: Roche tablets, cat. no.: 11 697 471 001 
67
==PAGE:79==
NativePAGE 4-16% gel & Silver Staining 
NativePAGE buffers 
Anode Buffer: 
- 
50 mL NativePAGE™ Running Buffer (20X) 
- 
950 mL Milli-Q water 
Cathode Buffer (Light Blue): 
- 
10 mL NativePAGE™ Running Buffer (20X) (under no circumstances use NuPAGE® MES or 
MOPS SDS Running buffers, or Tris-Glycine SDS buffers with NativePAGE™ Gels.) 
- 
1 mL NativePAGE™ Cathode Buffer Additive (20X) 
- 
189 mL Milli-Q water 
Sample dilutions 
Dilute samples to around 100 µg/mL. Mix the samples (1:4) with NativePAGE™ Sample Buffer (4X). 
One sample in well:  
 
 
 
15 µL sample to 5 µL Sample Buffer 
Two samples in well:  
 
 
 
7,5 µL sample A + 7,5 µL sample B to 5 µL Sample Buffer 
Three samples in well: 
 
 
 
5 µL sample A + 5 µL sample B + 5 µL sample C to 5 µL Sample Buffer 
 
 
Procedure: 
1. Prepare sample dilutions. 
2. Prepare Cathode- and Anode Buffer. 
3. Open gel bag (4-16% NativePAGE Bis-Tris gel) and drain away the packaging buffer. 
4. Rinse the gel cassette with Milli-Q water. 
5. Peel the tape off the bottom of the cassette. 
6. Carefully remove the comb from the top of the gel.  
C
NativePAGE and silver stain protocol
68
==PAGE:80==
7. Rinse the sample wells with cathode buffer. Invert the gel and shake out the buffer. Repeat 
2 times. In the end fill the wells with cathode buffer. Be sure there are no bubbles left in the 
wells.  
8. Insert the cassette into the tank. Make sure the lower side of the cassette is facing the inner 
chamber.  
9. Fill the Cathode chamber a little bit to prevent the gel from drying out.  
10. Add the samples to the wells of the gel.  
11. Fill the Cathode chamber (inner chamber) with the Cathode Buffer. Fill the Anode chamber 
(outer chamber) with Anode Buffer.  
12. Run the electrophoresis at room temperature 150V for 105-120 min. 
13. When the gel is finished running remove the gel from the cassette by inserting a cassette 
knife into the gat between the cassettes two layers. The gel needs to be transferred directly 
into an adequately sized container. Make sure the gel is not folded onto itself. 
Silver staining buffers 
Fix1: 
 
40% ethanol, 12% acetic acid 
 
 
Stored in cabinate for poisons (ventilation). 
Fix2: 
 
30% ethanol, 10% acetic acid 
 
 
Stored in cabinate for poisons (ventilation). 
Wash:   
30% ethanol. 
 
 
Stored in cabinet for chemicals.  
Pretreat: 
0.2 g/L Na2S2O3,5H2O (a few grains). 
 
 
Stored in cabinet for chemicals.  
Adsorption: 
2.0 g/L AgNO3 (store in the dark) 
 
 
Add 37% formaldehyde before use (37,5 µL/ 50 mL) 
Develop:  
60.0 g/L Na2CO3 + 4 mg/L Na2S2O3,5H2O 
 
 
Add 37% formaldehyde before use (37,5 µL/ 50 mL) 
 
 
Stored in fridge (4˚C) 
Stop:   
50% ethanol, 12% acetic acid 
 
 
Stored in cabinate for poisons (ventilation). 
 
14. Cover the gel with Fix1 (40% ethanol, 10% acetic acid, Milli-Q) and let the gel sit on a shaker 
for 1h. (Discard in ethanol, acetic acid waste). 
15. Discard the Fix1 in the container and add Fix2 (30% ethanol, 12% acetic acid, Milli-Q) in 37% 
formaldehyde (37,5 µL/ 50 mL). Leave the gel on a shaker overnight. (Discard in ethanol, 
acetic acid waste). 
16. Wash the gel in 30% ethanol for 10 min. Discard the ethanol. Repeat 2 more times.  
17. Add Pretreat for 1 min. Discard (in ethanol waste). 
18. Wash with Milli-Q water for 20 sec. Discard. Repeat 2 more times.  
19. Add Adsorption and leave the gel for 20 min. (Discard in AgNO3 waste!). 
20. Add Develop (stored at 4˚C) with formaldehyde (25 µL/ 50 mL) and leave until bands are 
visible. Make sure to have the “Stop” ready as the gel develops quickly.  
21. Add “Stop” and leave it until no more bubbles. (Discard in ethanol, acetic acid waste). 
69
==PAGE:81==
22. Add 30% ethanol to prevent the gel from drying out. 
 
70
==PAGE:82==
O:\Sektion-for-Immunologi-og-Vaccinologi\Users\Vorsholt, Henriette Tackmann\PETER HEEGAARD\ELISA-
forskrifter 
 
 
 
Test of PAGP – competitive ELISA (version 130120, not ready) 
 
Materials: 
ELISA plates: Maxisorp cat. no.: NUNC 4-42404 
 
Coating buffer, 1 L: 
Na2CO3 
 
 
1.75 g 
NaHCO3 
 
 
2.86 g 
Dissolve in 500 mL MilliQ water 
Adjust pH to 9.6 
Add Phenol Red 
 
Add MilliQ water to 1 L 
 
 
Washing buffer: 
PBS 
 
5 L 
Tween 20 (0.05%) 
12.5ml of a 20% solution Tween 20. 
 
Blocking buffer: 
5% skimmed milk/PBS/TWEEN (0,05%) 
 
 
Dilution buffer for samples and biotinylated PAGP: 
1% skimmed milk/PBS/TWEEN (0,05%) 
 
 
Dilution buffer for Streptavidin HRP P397 (PBS-T-BSA): 
BSA (1%) 
 
10g 
Tween 20 (0.05%) 
2.5ml of a 20% solution Tween 20. 
Add PBS to 1 L 
 
Color substrate: 
TMB PLUS2 ready to use, KEM EN TEC 
 
Stop: 
H2SO4 0.5M, VWR 
 
 
 
 
Procedure: 
 
Coating: 
Dilute the Purified 1.62 monoclonal antibody (homemade) 2µg/ml in carbonate buffer and add 
100µl/well. Add sealing tape and incubate overnight 4°C. 
 
D
ELISA protocol
71
==PAGE:83==
O:\Sektion-for-Immunologi-og-Vaccinologi\Users\Vorsholt, Henriette Tackmann\PETER HEEGAARD\ELISA-
forskrifter 
 
 
 
Wash: 
Wash the plate 4x in washing buffer. 
 
Blocking: 
Ad 200µl/well blocking and dilution buffer and incubate the plate, with a lid, on shaker for 30 min at 
37°C. 
 
Wash: 
Wash the plate 4x in washing buffer. 
 
Dilution and application of standard, samples and biotinylated antibody: 
 
Standard: The standard row should also be in double determinations. KVL (serum) 2.55mg/ml.  
Dilute the standard 1/250. Do a 2-fold dilution on the plate vertically, from A to G, and leave only buffer 
in the H-wells. After titration there will be 50µl in each well. See the scheme below. 
 
Samples: Prepare always for double determinations. Generally dilute your sample 1/1000.  Ad 50µl 
diluted sample/well.  
 
Biotinylated PAGP antigen: Dilute the purified and biotinylated antigen PAGP 1/500 (Batch080119)  
Add 50µl/well on the whole plate. 
Now there, in total will be 100µl in each well.  
Incubate the plate, with a lid, for 1 hour on shaker at 37°C. 
 
Wash: 
Wash the plate 4x with washing buffer. 
 
HRP conjugated streptavidin: DAKO P397, dilute 1/8000 (in PBS-T-BSA). Add 100µl/well on the whole 
plate. 
Incubate, with a lid, on shaker at 37°C for 1 hour. 
 
Wash: 
Wash the plate 4x with washing buffer. 
 
Develop: 
Add 100µl TMB to all the wells. The time for develop is depending on the color intensity. Keep an eye on 
the standard, and stop the plate with 100µl 0.5M H2SO4 to each well. 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
 
A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Std.  
100µl/well 
Std. 
100µl/well 
Transfer 50µl to the next 
row                (            µg/ml) 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
 MIX → Transfer 50µl to 
the next row   (         µg/ml) 
C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
MIX → Transfer50µl to the 
next row          (        µg/ml) 
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
MIX → Transfer 50µl to the 
next row          (        µg/ml) 
72
==PAGE:84==
O:\Sektion-for-Immunologi-og-Vaccinologi\Users\Vorsholt, Henriette Tackmann\PETER HEEGAARD\ELISA-
forskrifter 
 
 
 
E 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
MIX → Transfer 50µl to the 
next row          (        µg/ml) 
F 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
MIX → Transfer 50µl to the 
next row        (           µg/ml) 
G 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
MIX → 50µl OUT 
                          (        µg/ml) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
Buffer  
50µl/well 
 
 
73
==PAGE:85==
cDNA synthesis, QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen) 
 
1. Take gDNA Wipeout Buffer, RT Buffer, and RT Primer Mix out of the freezer and let it thaw at room 
temp. Leave Reverse Transcriptase in the freezer – it doesn’t freeze solid. 
2. Best result is achieved by using 500 ng RNA per synthesis – preferable not below 100 ng per synthesis. 
Calculate necessary volume of RNA solution containing desired amount of RNA. 
3. Prepare one 0.2 ml tube per reaction and mark it with cDNA number (Cxxx). Remember tubes for –RT 
controls. 
4. Add 2 µl gDNA Wipeout Buffer to each tube. 
5. Add the above calculated amount of RNA to each tube. 
6. Add RNase-free water to each tube to achieve a total volume of 14 µl. 
7. Incubate for 2 min at 42 °C to eliminate genomic DNA. 
8. Prepare a reverse transcriptase master mix for all samples (NOT –RT controls) – make an extra 15 % to 
account for loss: 
MM for cDNA synthesis 
1 reaction 
_____ reactions (incl. 15 % extra) 
Reverse Transcriptase 
0.75 µl 
_____ µl 
RT Primer Mix 
1 µl 
_____ µl 
RT Buffer 
4 µl 
_____ µl 
RNase-free water 
0.25 µl 
_____ µl 
 
In case of preparing a large number of –RT controls a master mix can also be prepare for these: 
MM for –RT controls 
1 reaction 
_____ reactions (incl. 15 % extra) 
RT Primer Mix 
1 µl 
_____ µl 
RT Buffer 
4 µl 
_____ µl 
RNase-free water 
1 µl 
_____ µl 
 
9. Add 6 µl master mix to each tube containing gDNA Wipeout Buffer treated RNA. 
10. Incubate for 15 min at 42 °C followed by 3 min at 95 °C. 
11. Prepare 0.2 ml tubes for 1:10 dilutions of cDNA; mark them with dilution number (Fxxx) corresponding 
to the cDNA number (Cxxx).  
12. Dilute the cDNA 1:10 in low-EDTA TE buffer (2 µl cDNA, 18 µl buffer). 
13. Store both undiluted and diluted cDNA at -20 °C. 
 
E
cDNA synthesis
74
==PAGE:86==
CATV 15032022 
 
Side 1 af 2 
Protocol 5: mRNA real time qPCR (Jumpstart) 
 
Materials:  
RotorGene Q (real time qPCR machine) 
Sybr Green Jumpstart Taq Readymix without MgCl2 (Sigma) 
Vortexer 
RNAse Free water 
 
Components: 
1. HotStart Taq DNA Polymerase, dNTPs, and SYBR Green I dye included in mastermix 
2. Primermix (10uM) – in RNase free water 
3. Magnesium chloride solution, 25 mM 
4. template cDNA  (diluted 1/10 in TE buffer or RNase free water) 
 
 
1. Thaw diluted cDNA, mastermix and primermix at room temperature. 
 
In clean room (K206A ) 
2. Mix the individual component according to the table below  
 
1 reaction 
         
____ reactions + (20 %) 
 
3. Pipette 24 µl mastermix into each reaction tube placed in the 72 well loading block according 
to the sample setup layout (handed out).  
 
In RNA lab (K206B) 
4. Pipette 1 µl diluted cDNA into each tube according to the sample setup layout 
 
5. Add 1 µl RNase free water to NTC. 
 
qPCR reaction setup at the RotorGene Q  
6. Insert the reaction tubes into the correct rotor and ensure that each tube sits correctly into 
place. In order to achieve maximum temperature uniformity, each position in the rotor must 
contain a tube. 
  
7. Remember the rotor locking ring and insert the rotor into the Rotor-Gene 6000 chamber by 
clicking it into place.  
RNase free water 
5,5 µl 
 
2 x SYBR Green Jumpstart mix 
12,5 µl 
 
MgCl2 (25nM) 
3 µl 
 
FW and RW primer mix (10µM) in 
RNase free water 
3 µl 
 
Total volume (µl)  
24 µl 
_________________________   
Kommenterede [CV1]: Should use the same machine for 
different runs, as between machines it can happen that we have a 3Ct 
variation. 
F
qPCR Rotorgene protocol
75
==PAGE:87==
CATV 15032022 
 
Side 2 af 2 
 
8. Once the rotor and locking ring have been set in place, close the lid and begin setting up the 
run profile in the Rotor-Gene software 
 
9. Select the desired run template 
 
10. Check RUN/Temperature Profile should be: 
10 min at 94 °C, followed by 40 cycles with 
  
1. denaturing for 15 s at 95 °C and  
2. annealing and elongation 1 min at 60 °C. Goto 1 
 
Melting curves (from 50 °C to 99 °C, increasing 1 °C/ 5 s). 
 
Data analysis 
11. Press rotor-gene 6000 ikon. 
 
12. Quatitative analyse  
Auto find treshold 
Export data/Cq to Excel  
 
 
Kommenterede [CV2]: Empty run; 72 well rotor, lock it; V of 
25 uL; Edit profile and Insert: Hold, Cycling (acquire in Green) and 
Melting (delete the last step); Gain optimization: select Green and 
add it and ok and then press the first box; Optimal acquiring: say yes 
(every time we have a new run do this) 
Kommenterede [CV3]: Select Dynamic range, slope correction, 
outlier removal (10%) 
Kommenterede [CV4]: Melting curve threshold above the 1st 
peak 
Amplification curve check it manually where to put the threshold. 
Then the Cq values will show up. 
76
==PAGE:88==
G
PAGP ELISA results
77
==PAGE:89==
H
ELISA 2 results
78
==PAGE:90==
I
ELISA 3 results
79
==PAGE:91==
J
ELISA 4 results
80
==PAGE:92==
K
ELISA 6 results
81
==PAGE:93==
L
Failed ELISA results
82
==PAGE:94==
M
Quantitation graph primer 417 UCPH pig experiment
83
==PAGE:95==
N
HRM graph primer 417 UCPH pig experiment
84
==PAGE:96==
O
Quantitation graph primer 665 UCPH pig experiment
85
==PAGE:97==
P
HRM graph primer 665 UCPH pig experiment
86
==PAGE:98==
Q
RIN analysis of Leipzig tissue samples
Instrument Name:
G2938CDE34903050
Firmware:
Serial#:
Assay Information:
C.01.069
DE34903050
Instrument Information:
Assay Origin Path:
C:\Program Files\Agilent\2100 bioanalyzer\2100
expert\assays\RNA\Eukaryote Total RNA Nano Series II.xsy
Assay Class:
Version:
Assay Comments:
Eukaryote Total RNA Nano
2.6
Total RNA Analysis ng sensitivity (Eukaryote)
 
© Copyright 2003 - 2009 Agilent Technologies, Inc.
Chip Information:
Chip Comments:
Type:
G2938C
Chip Lot #:
Reagent Kit Lot #:
Rune SAT
RIN: 7.10
Rune VAT
RIN: 7.70
Rune Liver
RIN: 8.70
Rasmus SAT
RIN: 6.50
Rasmus VAT
RIN: 8.30
Rasmus Liver
RIN: 7.10
Poul SAT
RIN: 7.10
Poul VAT
RIN: 7.80
Poul Liver
RIN: 7.50
Rene SAT
RIN: 2.20
Rene VAT
RIN: 7.40
Rene Liver
RIN:8
2100 Expert (B.02.08.SI648)
© Copyright 2003 - 2009 Agilent Technologies, Inc.
Printed:
11/30/2022 1:48:51 PM
2100 expert_Eukaryote Total RNA Nano_DE34903050_2022-11-30_13-19-54.xad
Page
of
1
18
Created:
Modified:
11/30/2022 1:19:53 PM
11/30/2022 1:45:00 PM
Data Path:
Eukaryote Total RNA Nano
C:\...Eukaryote Total RNA Nano_DE34903050_2022-11-30_13-19-54.xad
Assay Class:
Electrophoresis File Run Summary
87
==PAGE:99==
R
Quantitation graph primer 417 Leipzig pig experiment
88
==PAGE:100==
S
HRM graph primer 417 Leipzig pig experiment
89
==PAGE:101==
T
Quantitation graph primer 665 Leipzig pig experiment
90
==PAGE:102==
U
HRM graph primer 665 Leipzig pig experiment
91
==PAGE:103==
V
Sequencing bioanalyzer results
92
==PAGE:104==
Assay Origin Path:
93
==PAGE:105==
Assay Origin Path:
94
==PAGE:106==
Assay Origin Path:
95
==PAGE:107==
FW 417 
 
RW 417 
 
Primer-BLAST 417 
 
W
BLAST analysis results
96
==PAGE:108==
 
FW 665 
 
97
==PAGE:109==
RW 665 
 
Primer-BLAST 665 
 
 
98
==PAGE:110==
Technical University of Denmark
Tlf. 5050 1341
DTU Health Tech
Kemitorvet
Building 202
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
