==PAGE:1==
MSc of Biomedical Engineering
Master thesis in Biomedical Engineering
Biomechanical model development of the
distal radius
Biomechanical evaluation of a Novel bone fixation
technology
Author: Amber Ravn Labuz
Student number s164563
19th of February 2023
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Ass. Prof. Marie Sand Traberg
Co-supervisors: Ass. Prof. Christian Berggreen & MD Thomas Colding-Rasmussen & MD
PhD. Christian Wong
DTU Biomedical engineering
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Akustikvej
Building 349
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This master’s thesis has been prepared over 5 months and 3 weeks at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU) in collaboration with Rigshospitalet, the Department
of Health Technology DTU, and the Department of Civil Engineering DTU, and
is the final assessment for the Master of Science degree in Biomedical Engineering.
This thesis was accomplished over the period from 8th of August 2022 to the 29th of
January 2023, corresponding to 30 ECTS.
Amber Ravn Labuz - s164563
19th February 2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis explores the potential of AdhFix as a new technology for distal radius
fractures. AdhFix is a unique novel customisable in situ orthopaedic technology that
has shown promises in tests on small bones in rats, in both wet and dry conditions.
The study focuses on the potential of AdhFix as a DRF fixation device, given that
DRF is one of the most common fractures treated in emergency rooms. A DFR can
be a complex multi fragmented fracture. However, in this study, the focus was on
the biomechanical properties of AdhFix on a mimicked Colles fracture.
To test the effectiveness of AdhFix, a simplified biomechanical model of a Colles frac-
ture was created with the fracture moved to the mid-shaft, which was then validated
in a 4-point bending experiment. The fracture was induced onto a digitalised radius
using CAD software, and subsequently, screws and a layer of AdhFix were added to
fixate the bone. Consequently, loads were applied to the model, allowing AdhFix
to undergo pure bending to determine the mechanical properties of the fixation. To
validate the model and test the strength and wearability of the fixation, sawbones
underwent an osteotomy to create a Colles fracture on the mid-shaft and were fixated
using AdhFix. Wherefrom, the specimens were tested under a 4-point bending to
their ultimate failure, and the strain was evaluated using DIC.
The results showed that AdhFix proved to be a brittle material; it achieved a max-
imum displacement of 5 mm, which is larger than that of DRF metal plates. The
ultimate load was 25 N (experiment) and 35 N (model), much less than any DRF
metal plate and less than what the bone can withstand. The ultimate strain was
0.35% and 0.25% for the experiment and model, respectively, indicating that with
the use of AdhFix, primary healing may be promoted. The ultimate strength of the
experiment was found to be 3.5% of the FEM model (20.8 MPa and 0.7 MPa, respec-
tively). These findings indicate that AdhFix may not be a reliable and effective DRF
fixation material. Moreover, the simplified FEM model needs refinement to simulate
the bone and AdhFix’s biomechanical behaviour properly, as evidence in the value
differences between the model and experiment. To conclude, the study, the simpli-
fied model of a Colles fracture and 4-point bending test with AdhFix, showed that
the material has potential as an orthopaedic hardware; however, its use for a DRF
would have to be used as a hybrid fixation, were AdhFix can be used as a supplement
allowing for the fixation of smaller fragments in a multi-fragmented fracture.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I am extremely grateful for the opportunity to have worked on this project, and I
would like to express my deep gratitude to DTU Health Tech, BoneFix, and Risghos-
pitalet for making this project possible.
I express my sincere appreciation to all of my supervisors for their invaluable advice
and guidance throughout with the testing, analyzing, and writing process. I would
like to extend my heartfelt thanks to Marie Sand Traberg and Thomas Colding-
Rasmussen for their insightful suggestions and extensive knowledge, which helped
steer the direction of my thesis. Additionally, I would like to thank Madhi for his
extensive assistance with the machinery used in this thesis and for his willingness to
help resolve any issues that arose during testing.
I would also like to direct a huge appreciation towards Christian Bergreen and the
lab technician in DTU 119, who have been of enormous help throughout the project
in every possible regard, including mechanical testing, design, and their hospitality
and willingness to support me.
Lastly, I would like to send a sincere thank you to my family and friends whose
unconditional support and motivation have been invaluable during this project.
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
DRF
Distal Radius Fracture
DRL
Distal Radius Line
FEM
Finite element model
FEA
Finite element analysis
COMSOL
COMSOL Multiphysics
LEHI
Linear, elastic, homogeneous, and isotropic
DRUJ
Distal radio-ulnar joint
TEC
Trifunctional triazintrione
PET
Poly(ethyleneterephthalate)
HEV
High-energy visible
TATO
Trifunctional triazine–trione
DIC
Digital Image Correlation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Approval
i
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Abbreviations
iv
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Clinical Issue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Anatomy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Distal Radius Fractures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Orthopaedic Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Fracture Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Finite Elements Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Mechanical Testing and Analysis Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Experimental Methods
17
3.1
Scan of the Bone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Bone Mount Design and Fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Osteotomy and Fixation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
In Vitro 4-point Bending . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Finite Element Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Results
32
4.1
4-point Bending . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
FEM Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Discussion
41
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
5.1
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Use of AdhFix on Distal Radius Fractures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Study Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
Conclusion
50
Bibliography
51
Appendices
56
Appendix: Blue Print
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Appendix: Instron and ARAMIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
Appendix: 2D model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Appendix: Bone holders for fracture fixation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
Appendix: MATLAB code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Appendix: Ultimate Failure Results Specimen 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Clinical Issue
A distal radius fracture (DRF) is often caused by a patient falling on an outstretched
hand with their wrist in dorsiflexion and is one of the most frequent fractures treated
in emergency departments, approximately 20% of all fractures treated [1]. DRFs are
most commonly seen in the paediatric population, young adults and patients over 65.
The fracture can differ considerably between the age groups. In younger patients,
a DRF is often a result of high-energy trauma, involving various combinations of
bending, compression, impact, and shearing. In high-energy trauma, the fracture is
seen in the metaphyseal comminution (the neck of the radius between the epiphysis
(distal end) and the diaphysis (shaft)). It can, in some cases, cause extensive damage
to the joint surface, fragmentation of the metaphysis, and injury to the ulna and tri-
angular fibrocartilage. In older patients, the DRF is usually a result of a lower energy
injury, such as ground level falls, leading to more standard extra-articular, dorsally
angulated, or displaced fractures [2].
There are several types of DRFs, the most common being ’Colles fracture’, where the
distal fragment of the radius fractures and displaces dorsally. The fracture is treated
either with immobilization and stabilization in plaster or by surgery, often with the
use of volar plates. For the elderly with osteoporosis, the fracture can be complicated
to treat as the fracture is often in several pieces and the quality of the bone makes
osteosynthesis with conventional metallic implants diﬀicult.
Currently, there are two main ways to treat DRF, depending on the severity of the
fracture. One treatment option is non-surgical where the bone is forced back into
place and a cast is placed around the patient’s arm and wrist, ensuring that the
fracture is held in place and the bone can heal, which is only possible if the bone
has not splintered, and the fracture is simple. The other treatment option is surgery.
The most common fixation technology is the use of volar plates, a metal plate that
is screwed onto the bone giving the bone support to grow back in place [2].
Even though volar plates have a low complication rate, it has been reported that they
have been removed primarily due to pain (30%). Other reasons for removal include
malunion (24%), nonunion (6%), infection (12%), tenosynovitis (27%) and tendon
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Objectives
2
rupture (3%). Other complications include nerve dysfunction (5.7%), tendon injury
(3.5%), and hardware-related issues (1.6%) [3,4].
Another factor to consider is that the standard volar plates, which are used to treat
DRF, comes in a limited number of variations and may not be tailored to the specific
needs of each patient. This can lead to issues with the plate not fitting properly or
not being able to provide the necessary support for the fracture. To address this
issue, a new fixation technology called AdhFix has been developed. AdhFix is a bone
glue that uses technology inspired by dental use. It is designed to provide a more
personalized solution for patients, allowing in situ fixation and thus a better fit and
more effective treatment of the fracture [5].
1.2
Objectives
AdhFix is a new type of osteosynthesis material that can be adapted to specific
fracture configurations and thus achieve better stability in complex fractures. The
material has been tested on 4-point bending and torsion setups for small tubular
bones and has mechanical properties comparable to a corresponding metal splint [5].
This study aims to create a biomechanical model using COMSOL that mimics the
behaviour of a DRF treated with AdhFix. To validate the model, it is compared to
an in vitro static 4-point bending test of an anatomically fashioned synthetic bone
fixated with AdhFix. With the use of the model and experiment the study aims to
do a feasibility study of AdhFix as a DRF material. Where the following questions
will be answered:
1.2.1
Research Questions:
1. How can a a simplified mathematical model of a radius be created to conduct
a feasibility study of the use of AhdFix as a distal radius fracture fixation
material?
2. How can an ultimate failure study under a 4-point bending setup be designed
to validate the mathematical model of AdhFix?
3. How can a fatigue 4-point bending setup be designed to determine how the
AdhFix fixation will react throughout a rehabilitation period?
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Background
In this chapter, an overview of the anatomy and material properties of the radius is
presented, including different types of distal radius fractures, along with a thorough
explanation of the bone healing process.
Fracture fixation technologies and their
applications are also introduced. Lastly, the chapter explains finite element modelling
and different mechanical testing methods.
2.1
Anatomy
This section provides a brief introduction to the anatomy of the radius, including its
structural composition and material properties. Bone tissues and the bone healing
processes are also explained to gain a better understanding of fractures and the healing
process.
2.1.1
Radius
The radius is a long bone located on the lateral side of the forearm, on the side closest
to the thumb, running parallel to the ulna, the other forearm bone [6]. The radius
is crucial in facilitating movement at the proximal and distal radio-ulnar joints, as
it pivots around the ulna. The radius can be divided into three distinct sections:
the proximal end, the shaft, and the distal end, as depicted in Figure 2.1 [7]. In this
study, sawbones (Synbone AG, Switzerland) are utilised and the measurements of the
different regions are stated in Table 2.1. Overall, the forearm is a complex and highly
specialised region of the body that is essential for movement, dexterity, function, and
stability of the hand and wrist. It further interacts with multiple joints and muscles
allowing for wrist, elbow, finger and thumb movement.
The proximal region of the radius comprises the radius’s head, a circular-shaped struc-
ture at the top of the bone featuring a concave articulating surface. The head of the
radius is thicker on its medial side and plays a key role in the proximal radioulnar
joint, which pivots between the radial head, and the radial notch of the ulna [6]. Below
the head of the radius lies the neck, a narrow section of bone linking the radial head
to the radial tuberosity. The radial tuberosity serves as the attachment point for the
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Anatomy
4
Region
Measurement
Total length
247.423 mm
Distal (bottom)
82.474 mm
shaft (middle)
82.474 mm
Proximal (top)
82.474 mm
Table 2.1. Bone measurements
Figure 2.1. Right Ulna and Radius [6].
biceps brachii muscle. Furthermore, the proximal region of the radius also articulates
in the elbow joint, connecting the head of the radius to the capitulum of the humerus.
The long and cylindrical part of the bone is the shaft, also known as the diaphysis.
It gradually increases in diameter as it extends towards the distal end. The shaft
has a triangular shape with three borders and three surfaces. The anterior surface
is situated between the anterior and interosseous borders. The posterior surface is
between the interosseous and posterior borders, and the lateral surface is between the
anterior and posterior borders with a faintly rounded appearance. At the midpoint
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Distal Radius Fractures
5
of the lateral surface, there is a small rough area that serves as the attachment site
for the pronator teres muscle [7].
The distal region represents the end of the radial shaft, which expands into a rectan-
gular form and is responsible for 80% of the axial load [8]. On the lateral side, the
distal region projects distally to form the styloid process. On the medial surface, the
ulnar notch is present, which articulates with the head of the ulna and contributes
to the formation of the distal radioulnar joint. On the distal surface, two facets allow
the wrist joint to connect with the scaphoid and lunate carpal bones [7].
2.1.2
Biomechanical and Material Properties of Radius
As mentioned, the distal radius is an essential component for the body’s upper ex-
tremity’s stability and movement in the wrist, forearm, and elbow. Furthermore, it
is characterised as a long bone, thus weight bearing, load-damping and stiff. The
mechanical properties of bone are typically described as linear, elastic, homogeneous,
and isotropic (LEHI) for modelling purposes; however, in reality, bones are nonho-
mogeneous and orthotropic. The Young’s modulus of cortical bone is around 16 GPa
with a Poisson’s ratio of 0.3 and a density of 2,000 kg/m3. These values were used
in the finite element model for the stress analysis (Table 2.2). In addition, bones
exhibit linear elastic behaviour under minor strains, described by Hooke’s law, and
have both elastic and viscoelastic properties.
The distal radius is commonly sub-
jected to compression, but a transverse loading was applied for the AdhFix analysis
in this study. Lastly, due to the small amount of strain that bones can tolerate, strain
gauges can be used to measure the surface strains under various loading conditions [9].
Properties
Value
Unite
Young’s modulus
16000
MPa
Poisson’s ratio
0.3
Density
2000
kg/m3
Table 2.2. Biomechanical properties of a healthy human radius [9–11].
2.2
Distal Radius Fractures
A Distal Radius Fracture (DRF) is a frequent fracture of the radius bone located at
the end of the forearm. DRF is a prevalent injury and constitutes 20% of all fractures
treated in emergency departments, with a higher incidence in the paediatric popula-
tion (25%) and the elderly populations (18%) [12]. The classification of DRF (varies
based on the nature of the fracture pattern. One of the most widely used systems
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Distal Radius Fractures
6
to classify DRF and determine an optimal course of treatment is the Frykman Clas-
sification System. This system categorises DRF into four main types, each with a
subtype including an ulnar styloid fractures:
Type I: Extra-articular fractures, including Colles and Smith fractures.
Type III: Intra-articular fractures involving the radiocarpal joint, including both
Barton and reverse Barton fractures and Chauffeur fractures.
Type V: Intra-articular fractures involving the distal radio-ulnar joint (DRUJ).
Type VII: Intra-articular fractures involving both the radio-carpal and the DRUJ
[13].
Figure 2.2.
Illustration of Colles,
Smith and Barton fractures [14].
The three most common distal radius fractures
are Colles Fracture, Smith Fracture, and Bar-
ton’s Fracture (Figure 2.2). Colles fracture is a
type I fracture caused by direct trauma to the
palm and is characterised by a fork-like shape
with the distal end of the radius displaced to-
wards the back of the hand. Smith fracture, also
a type I fracture, is less frequent and occurs from
an impact on the back of the wrist, such as falling
onto a bent wrist. This results in a palmar tilt
of the distal fragment [15]. Lastly, Barton’s frac-
ture, a type III fracture, is rare and can be further
divided into dorsal or volar fractures. A dorsal
Barton’s fracture is an inter-articular DRF that
involves the dislocation of the radiocarpal joint
along with the fracture fragment. In contrast, a
volar Barton’s Fracture is a DRF involving dor-
sal carpal subluxation Both occur from a fall on
an extended wrist [16].
Different to the DRF, forearm shaft fractures can be classified into three groups: sim-
ple, wedge, or multi-fragmentary. Simple fractures are sub-categorized as oblique or
transverse, while wedge fractures are classified as with or without dislocation. Multi-
fragmentary fractures depend on the location, fragmentation and bones involved [17].
In this study, to simplify the model and experimental set-up, Colles fracture was
relocated to the midshaft, mimicking a Colles fracture line as a radius shaft wedge
fracture without dislocation.
2.2.1
Bone Tissue
Depending on the organisation of collagen fibres within the bone matrix, bone tissue
is divided into two groups, woven or lamellar bone [6]. Four types of bone cells form
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Distal Radius Fractures
7
and maintain bone tissue: osteoprogenitor cells, osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteo-
clasts.
Osteoprogenitors: Stem cells located in the periosteum, endosteum, and epiphyseal
growth plate of growing bones. The undifferentiated cells differentiate into osteoblasts
and play a role in bone repair [18].
Osteoblasts: Bone-building cells that form bone tissue, and they synthesize and
secrete the organic matrix of bone [18].
Osteocytes: Mature bone cells that function in the maintenance of bone matrix [18].
Osteoclasts:
Responsible for the resorption of bone matrix, cells that can degrade
bone. They additionally release calcium and phosphate from the bone [18].
Woven bone is an immature bone found in fetuses, infants and during fracture heal-
ing. It has a less organised structure and lower tensile strength than mature bone.
Bone remodelling transforms woven bone into the mature lamellar bone through the
actions of osteoclasts breaking down the existing bone and osteoblasts laying down
the new matrix. This ossification continues till the skeletal maturity is reached [6] [18].
Lamellar bones are the mature bone found in the adult skeleton. They are composed
of highly organised sheets of cylindrical units called osteons. Each osteon comprises
concentric layers of bone matrix and surrounds a central canal known as the Haver-
sian canal. This canal contains the blood vessels and nerves essential for the support
and function of the bone. Lamellar bones are divided into compact and cancellous
bones. Compact bone, also known as cortical bone, is the hard outer layer of a bone
and is responsible for providing strength and protection. Its central Haversian canal
runs parallel to the long axis of the bone, with interstitial lamella filling the spaces
between the osteons. Circumferential lamellae cover the entire shaft of long bones.
Cancellous bone, or spongy bone, is porous and located at the ends of long bones,
reducing the density and weight of a bone while providing strength. They comprise
lamellae bone tissues, but the blood vessels typically do not penetrate the trabecu-
lae. Together, these two types of bones form a solid and supportive structure for the
body [18].
2.2.2
Fracture Healing
Following a fracture, proper alignment, stabilisation, and protection of the bone are
crucial for successful healing. The healing time may vary depending on the fracture
type, but it typically takes up to one year for a full recovery. For a DFR, it takes
approximately three months before the union is achieved, and the patient can return
to most activities [19]. There are two processes of fracture healing: primary (direct)
and secondary (indirect). Primary healing involves direct repair of the fracture by
osteoblasts and osteoclasts without callus formation. It is achieved through reduc-
tion, immobilisation, and rehabilitation using screws and plates to provide absolute
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Distal Radius Fractures
8
stability. The absolute stability permits a low-strain environment similar to the phys-
iological strain environment of an unfractured bone (< 2% strain). Secondary healing
involves the formation of a callus and remodelling, stimulated by micromotion and is
typically seen with external fixation, intramedullary nails, or locking constructs. The
secondary healing process involves four steps: hematoma formation, callus formation,
ossification, and bone remodelling (Figure 2.3). In secondary healing, the strain en-
vironment is between 5% and 10% [6,20].
Hematoma formation: A fracture causes internal bleeding, and consequently, a
blood clot (hematoma) forms, promoting fibrin network formation and serving as a
scaffold, closing off the fracture site and aiding the influx of inflammatory cells, as
well as the ingrowth of fibroblasts and new vessels (Figure 2.3.1) [18].
Callus formation: Next, the hematoma and formation of new vessels initiate the
precalculus. The fibroblasts proliferate invade the precalculus and secrete fibrocar-
tilaginous, soft callus paths connecting broken bone fragments. This occurs in 2-3
weeks(Figure 2.3.2) [18].
Bony Callus Formation: The fibrocartilage cartilage converts to bony callus as
osteoblasts develop into osteoblasts creating spongy bone trabeculae.
Osteoblasts
initiate on the outer surface, proceeding inwards until a new bony sheath covers the
fibrocartilaginous callus, which converts to the spongy bone, a bony callus, and later
to mature bone (Figure 2.3.3) [18].
Bone remodelling: Osteoclasts remove dead bone, and the spongy bone is replaced
with compact bone. The mineralised bone is reorganised, and excess material is re-
moved. Compact bone reconstructs the shaft however with a thickened area around
the fracture site 2.3.4) [18].
Figure 2.3. Four steps of secondary bone healing [6].
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Orthopaedic Hardware
9
2.2.3
Union, Malunion, and Nonunion
Various factors contribute to proper bone healing and achieving union. When a bone
has achieved union, it is strong enough to allow for normal activity, and the fracture
is solid enough to withstand normal stresses. However, impaired bone healing can
occur due to many factors, such as the nature and extent of the injury, risk factors,
including smoking, obesity, or medical issues, e.g., diabetes. Impaired bone healing
is split into three types, delayed union, malunion and nonunion. Delayed union is
when a fracture fails to unite within a regular period. Malunion is when a fractured
bone heals in an abnormal position, deformity, angulation, or rotation. Nonunion is
when the bone fails to produce union, and the healing process is interrupted [18].
Malunion is a common complication of DRF and occurs in up to 24% of the cases
[4]. The malunion is usually characterized by dorsal angulation of the bone or poor
radiographic alignment before healing, resulting in pain and impaired function and
may require an osteotomy [21, 22]. Nonunion of DRF is less common (6%) but can
still result in similar issues [4, 23]. To prevent these complications, it is essential to
evaluate the fracture before and during healing, determine the cause of malunion, and
decide on the best treatment.
2.3
Orthopaedic Hardware
Orthopaedic hardware is used to place the broken bone back and prevent it from mov-
ing out of place. Treatment for DRF may be either non-surgical or surgical, based
on the fracture type, displacement, and other factors.
Non-surgical: A splint or cast is used to immobilize the bone until healing is com-
plete. If the bone is displaced, close reduction is performed to realign the bone before
applying the splint or cast (Figure 2.4(a)). The healing process is monitored through
X-rays, and surgery may be recommended if necessary. After six weeks, the cast is
removed and physical therapy begins. During rehabilitation, a removable splint may
be used for support [17].
Surgical: If the fracture cannot be realigned through close reduction or poor align-
ment has occurred, surgery is performed to correctly align the bone using orthopaedic
hardware. An incision is made over the fracture, and the bone is realigned [17]. Com-
mon hardware used after open reduction includes a volar locking plate, but other
devices may also be used depending on the fixation:
1. External Fixation utilises percutaneously inserted pins, rods (percutaneous
pinning), or wires (Kirschner‐wires), which are attached to an external frame
or cast, providing support and stability.
This method aligns and maintains
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Orthopaedic Hardware
10
the position of the broken bone during the healing process and is implemented
through small incisions in the skin (Figure 2.4(b) and Figure 2.4(c)) [24,25].
2. Intramedullary Nail Fixation involves the insertion of a percutaneous metal
rod into the medullary cavity of the bone. This type of fixation is typically used
for complex fractures that involve the joint [24,26,27].
3. Plate and Screw Fixation stabilises broken bones by attaching a metal plate
to the bone using screws. The plate is surgically placed on the dorsal or volar
side of the radius and secured to the bone with titanium screws serving to
realign and keep the bone in position during healing. The volar plate is the
most commonly used due to its lower complication rate (Figure 2.4(d)) [28,29].
4. Bone Grafts or Substitutes play a crucial role in facilitating bone tissue
healing and imparting stability to the affected area. These grafts or substitutes
supplement the eﬀicacy of other orthopaedic hardware and can be classified as
allografts and biological or synthetic substitutes, [24,24,30].
5. Hybrid Fixation employs a combination of different hardware and techniques
to achieve the best outcome for the patient.
((a)) Cast fixation.
((b)) K-wire with cast.
((c)) External fixation
with pins and frame.
((d)) Platting.
Figure 2.4. Different orthopaedic hardware used to treat DRF [17].
2.3.1
AdhFix
AdhFix is a novel technology for fixating fractures, which has been demonstrated
to have exceptional potential as a scientifically sound and technologically advanced
alternative to current metal plates.
The technology provides a new solution for
fractures requiring open reduction and internal fixation, allowing for customisable
patches. Screws are first introduced around the fracture, wherefrom AdhFix is ap-
plied. AdhFix combines the versatility and biocompatibility of trifunctional triaz-
intrione (TEC) technology. The fixation is done by securing the broken bone with
screws providing a robust mechanical attachment, wherefrom the TEC composite
and poly(ethyleneterephthalate) (PET) fibre mesh are applied in alternating layers
(Figure 2.5) [5].
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Fracture Model
11
Figure 2.5.
Overview of the layer-by-
layer build-up of AdhFix over a fracture.
AdhFix is attached to the bone by drilling
screws into the bone on each side of the
fracture, then applying the first layer of
composite around the screw heads, and
repeat [5].
Properties
Value
Unite
Young’s modulus
2800
MPa
Poisson’s ratio
0.3
Density
1.772 · 10−6
kg/m3
Figure 2.6. Biomechanical properties of
a AdhFix.
A novel generation of TEC composites tailored explicitly for the AdhFix methodology
has been developed, which have superior mechanical properties and thermodynamics
in both dry and wet conditions. The process has been tested on a wide range of
fracture types. Further, the biocompatibility and impact on bone healing have been
evaluated in the short- and long-term through in vivo rat fracture models. The tri-
functional triazine–trione (TATO)-TEC composite system combines the strength and
rigidity of dental composites with the biocompatibility and versatility of TATO alkene
and thiol monomers. The rapid curing of the composite is facilitated through TEC
chemistry, and it can be shaped in situ using a handheld high-energy visible (HEV)
light lamp. The composite is applied in alternating layers with PET fibre mesh, re-
sulting in a fibre-reinforced fixation patch that adheres strongly to bone fractures
without causing soft-tissue adhesions. In addition, the high monomer conversion en-
sures the stability of the composite under physiological conditions and reduces the
likelihood of monomer leaching [5]. Given the frequent occurrence of DRFs, it is of
interest to investigate if AdhFix can be utilized as a treatment options. This study
tested a refined version of AdhFix on a DRF. The AdhFix used contained two distinct
components, thoroughly mixed, applied and cured utilising HEV light; see section 3.3
for the description.
Some of the material properties of AdhFix were provided by
BoneFix (The BoneFix Consortium) and are stated in Table 2.6.
2.4
Fracture Model
In the field of orthopaedics, biomechanical fracture models are used to design, investi-
gate and validate medical devices. They are also applied to gain a deeper understand-
ing of the underlying pathophysiology of the fractures. The currently accepted gold
standard biomechanical fracture model for a Colles DRF is a dorsal wedge osteotomy,
==PAGE:20==
2.5 Finite Elements Modelling
12
20 mm proximal to the articular surface, following a triangular shape, where the os-
teotomy wedge is 10 mm (Figure 2.7). However, a novel DRF model was introduced
in a study by Baumbach et al. (2012) [31], which more accurately mimicked the in
vivo DRF sites and the nature of a DRF compared to the currently accepted gold
standard model. The new model demonstrated significant variations of biomechanical
behaviours, which were observed to follow in vivo responses under increasing loads
closely. Furthermore, it was determined that the Distal Radius Line (DRL) location
was independent of the the complexity of the fracture, the energy of the fall, and the
patient’s age. The DRL location was precisely defined as being 7.9 ± 2.7 mm dorsal
and 11.7 ± 3.9 mm palmar, proximal to the dorsal/palmar apex of the lunate fossa,
running diagonally from the palmar proximal to dorsal distal. This new model was
defined as 8 mm / 12 mm proximal to the dorsal/volar apex of the articular surface
with a 10 mm osteotomy wedge (Figure 2.8) [31]. This novel model is applied in this
study.
Figure 2.7. Gold-standard osteotomy lo-
cation [31].
Figure 2.8. Novel osteotomy location by
Baumbach et al. [31].
2.5
Finite Elements Modelling
Finite Element Method (FEM) is often used in biomechanics to study the complex
mechanics of real-world problems. It is a numerical technique used to solve boundary-
value problems described by differential equations. FEM involves four main steps:
defining the real-world problem, creating a simplified physical model, developing a
mathematical model, and discretising (meshing) the model. After the model has been
made, FEM divides the problem’s domain into small elements connected at nodes (dis-
cretising). The equilibrium of the system is then only satisfied over a finite number
of these discrete elements rather than the entire body. The displacement at each
node of the mesh can be calculated by solving the nodal forces and moments and
==PAGE:21==
2.6 Mechanical Testing and Analysis Methods
13
the stiffness matrix of the element by following Hook’s Law, {f} = [k]{u}, where the
nodal force and moments(f), the stiffness matrix of the element ([k]), and the nodal
displacement (u) are used. The stiffness matrices are then assembled to form a global
stiffness matrix, which describes how the entire structure will behave under loads.
Thus, allowing the elements to be solved using mathematical equations whereafter
the solutions of all elements are combined. After the nodal displacements have been
solved, it is possible to compute the strains and stresses [32].
COMSOL Multiphysics is a cross-platform that utilises FEM. In this study, a frac-
tured radius fixated with AdhFix was defined in the COMSOL software as a linear
elastic, homogeneous and isotropic material. The boundary conditions were set to
simulate those from the mechanical test, and the material properties were defined for
each material used.
2.6
Mechanical Testing and Analysis Methods
This section introduces the mechanical tests that are typically used for biomechanical
testing. Wherefrom digital image correlation, force-displacement and stress-strain are
clarified.
2.6.1
Mechanical Tests
Mechanical testing is an integral aspect of material evaluation; it allows for an un-
derstanding of how a material will behave in real-world applications wherefrom the
design can be optimised. The mechanical properties can be determined by subjecting
the specimen to various loading conditions through axial (tension or compression),
bending, and torsional loads Axial testing is utilised to determine how a specimen
behaves under compressive or tensile forces.
The specimen is pressed together or
pulled apart until failure, and torsion testing evaluates how the sample responds to a
twisting motion. Lastly, bending tests is when the specimen is subjected to a bending
force along a span until failure [33].
Further, the load can be applied in different ways, such as static or fatigue. Static
testing applies a constant load to evaluate the breaking point and elongation, while
fatigue testing involves cyclic loads to assess the specimen’s wear resistance. In this
study, a 4-point bending test was performed to investigate the mechanical proper-
ties of AdhFix while fixating a DRF, both in static and fatigue loading, under pure
bending. A 4-point bending test moreover allowed for a simple experimental setup
while still mimicking the loads that a DRF encounters from a fall. Additionally, the
4-point bending method undergoes constant moment, applying pure bending, and can
be simulated in a finite element analysis (FEA).
==PAGE:22==
2.6 Mechanical Testing and Analysis Methods
14
A 4-point bending experiment is a widely used method for evaluating the mechanical
properties of bones. This method entails placing the specimen on two supporting
points with two loading points applied equidistant from the centre, inducing ultimate
fracture at the centre (Figure 2.9). The loading points apply a force at a constant
strain rate, and the deflection of the material is measured to determine its stiffness
and strength. The bone specimen experiences bending as the pins move down, re-
sulting in compression on the top surface and tension on the lower surface, forming a
complex stress formation. Meanwhile, the neutral zone in the middle section experi-
ences neither compression nor tension. Customised moulds were employed to ensure
consistent placement of the bone on the supporting points and to apply the load at
a specific location and area. In the 4-point bending experiment, the force and deflec-
tion of the material were measured to obtain its stiffness and strength and to generate
force-displacement and stress-strain curves [33].
Figure 2.9. Free hand diagram of a 4-point bending set up.
2.6.2
Digital Image Correlation
The Digital Image Correlation (DIC) method is a non-invasive optical technique that
quantifies the spatial and temporal development of object deformation and displace-
ment through the analysis of digital images. The ARAMIS system, which utilises the
GOM correlate algorithm, was used in this study to perform a DIC analysis. To set
up the DIC experiment, cameras were positioned using triangulation to record the
3D positions of points within the images (Figure 2.10). The intrinsic parameters of
the cameras were determined during calibration, while the extrinsic parameters had
to be specified. A stochastic pattern was created on the specimen by coating it with
white paint and applying a black speckle pattern. The specimen was then placed in
front of the stereo camera setup to capture grey value information of the pattern for
analysis [34–36].
The system continuously captures images of the deformation of the object at a specific
frequency, with the reference image being the object in its undeformed state. The
==PAGE:23==
2.6 Mechanical Testing and Analysis Methods
15
Figure 2.10. Stereo camera setup and triangulation [37].
software then uses stereo triangulation to convert the 2D images into 3D information,
and by comparing the images from different stages, the displacement and deformation
of the object can be calculated. The process is facilitated by the calibration param-
eters and the reference stage defined in the ARAMIS system. The reference stage
is automatically set to the first image acquired, and all values are initialised to zero.
The software can determine the displacement and deformation of the object with the
corresponding features identified [34,35,37].
2.6.3
Biomechanical Terms
A load-displacement curve provides an understanding of the mechanical behaviour of
a structure involving its stiffness or rigidity as well as several biomechanical proper-
ties. Some of the properties that can be extracted from the curve are the ultimate
force/bending strength (Fu) on the structure, and ultimate displacement (du) (Figure
2.11). Specifically, for bones, the ultimate force reflects the general integrity of the
bone, and the ultimate displacement is related to the brittleness of the bone. The
combination of these properties describes the biomechanics of the bone and provides
valuable information about its fracture behaviour, including fracture strength and
modulus of toughness. All of which is important to understand when designing or-
thopaedic hardware that helps support a broken bone. The curve is plotted with
displacement on the x-axis and force on the y-axis. It typically shows a linear elastic
behaviour, followed by a plastic deformation after a yield point. The slope of the elas-
tic region represents the stiffness of the material. The curve provides information on
the mechanical behaviour of the object, including its strength, stiffness, and ductility
(Figure 2.12) [38].
A stress-strain curve describes a relationship between stress and strain of the mate-
rial. The stress is defined as the force (applied to the material) per unit area, while
==PAGE:24==
2.6 Mechanical Testing and Analysis Methods
16
Figure 2.11.
Force-displacement
curve of a bone [38].
Figure 2.12.
Force-displacement
curve of different martial types [38].
the strain is the fractional change in length caused by the stress. The curve can be
plotted using either engineering stress-strain, which uses the original cross-sectional
area to calculate stress, or true stress-strain, which uses the current cross-sectional
area. In the case of bone, the stress-strain curve describes the relationship between
applied load and resulting deformation, providing information on the bone’s mechan-
ical behaviour of the bone. Parameters extracted from a stress-strain curve include
the material’s yield strength, ultimate strength, and toughness of the material. The
curve has three regions: linear elastic, plastic deformation, and fracture, where the
shape of the curve depends on the bone’s microstructure, mineralisation, and other
factors of the bone. The elastic modulus (Young’s modulus) of the bone measures
its stiffness, while energy absorption measures the energy necessary to cause material
failure. The ultimate strength and ultimate strain are the maximum stress and strain
that the bone can tolerate(Figure 2.13) [38].
Figure 2.13. Stress-strain curve of a bone [38].
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Experimental Methods
This chapter explains the required preparation, protocols and data processing of the
experimental 4-point bending and FEM. Firstly, the preparation is described, includ-
ing the scanning process, mount design, osteotomy and AdhFix fixation. Secondly,
the 4-point bending setup and the static and fatigue protocol are explained. Lastly,
the FEM design and the simulation are described.
3.1
Scan of the Bone
A digital 3D model of the bone was required to create a geometrically and anatomi-
cally correct 3D FEM and to create moulds to stabilise the bone during the mechanical
tests. For acquiring the digital 3D model, the sawbones (Synbone AG, Switzerland)
were scanned using an ATOS Triple Scanner (Carl Zeiss GOM Metrology GmbH,
Germany). An ATOS Triple Scanner is an industrial optical 3D digitised scanner
that can capture up to 2 × 16 million coordinate points during a scan [39].
For the scanner to be able to generate the image, small black markers were placed
randomly onto the bone. These markers were necessary for the scanner to localise
the bone within the room and to create a mesh. After placing the markers, the bone
was stabilised in a holder, and the scan was initiated. The scanner used Blue Light
Technology and cameras, projecting different light patterns to generate a 3D blueprint
of an object. Blue Light Technology is a non-contact metrology that leverages blue
light to produce highly accurate measurements utilising a narrow wavelength. Line
shadows were projected onto the 3D surface, and the camera was leveraged to view
the variances in the 2D lines on the 3D objects, wherefrom algorithms were used to
generate point clouds. The coordinate points generated were combined to create a
precise 3D model [40].
The bone was flipped, and the other end of the bone was scanned. Next, the 3D
model was further polished by removing the surroundings, and the acquired digital
bone meshed. Finally, the holes from the scan (tricky corners and angles) were fixed
by manually patching up the desired area by creating bridges and meshing the sites.
The 3D model was then converted to an STL File and imported into Autodesk Fusion
360 (Autodesk Inc, California, United States).
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Bone Mount Design and Fabrication
18
3.2
Bone Mount Design and Fabrication
As the Radial has a round surface, moulds were designed to stabilise and hold the
bone in place doing the osteotomy and the mechanical tests. All the moulds were
created using the scanned radius in Autodesk Fusion 360. Here, the scanned bone
was meshed, allowing for interaction and the ability to design around the bone. The
ends of the bone were stabilised by creating two rectangles (40x65x45 mm). Two
supplementary cylinders were designed and placed on the shaft 70 mm apart (35 mm
to each side of the midpoint) to stop the metal loading pins from interacting with the
bone during the mechanical test, guaranteeing the bone would not fracture or splinter
at the loading points. The two cylinders had a height of 31 mm and a diameter of 28
mm, hereafter referred to as epoxy load protectors (Figure 3.1)
After the moulds had been designed and correctly placed, the interfering area of
the moulds with the bone was removed using the interfaced tool (keeping the bone),
allowing for a perfect fit around the bone. Subsequently, these moulds were hollowed,
split into two parts, and a clicking mechanism was added, allowing them to be placed
and clicked on to the correct location.
Finally, these moulds were imported into
Ultimaker Cura (Ultimaker, Netherlands) and printed using an Ultimaker 3 Extended
(Ultimaker, Netherlands).
Figure 3.1.
The 3D designed moulds
around the radius in Autodesk Fusion
360.
Figure 3.2.
The 3D printed moulds
clicked onto a radius.
Following a study by Pfander (2022) [41], clear epoxy, DiaCast 86 epoxy, was used
to create the mounts. Firstly, the 3D printed moulds were sprayed with release spray
TRS (RG Faserverbundwerkstoffe GmbH, Germany) to allow for the removal of the
moulds after epoxy hardening. Secondly, the moulds were placed onto the bone and
clamped together (Figure 3.2), and the openings and sides (clicking mechanism) were
covered with non-drying modelling clay (Chavant Clay, United States) to reduce
epoxy leakage. The epoxy components were then mixed and poured into the moulds.
The epoxy was left to harden for five days with a maximum temperature of 80◦C,as
overheating would result in loss of mechanical strength.
After five days, the 3D
printed moulds were removed, leaving the bone with epoxy bone mounts [41]. The
final mounts can be seen in Figure 3.3. The mechanical properties of epoxy are stated
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Osteotomy and Fixation
19
in Table 3.1. Young’s modulus of epoxy was calculated based on the Shore-D stiffness,
which had the value of 80D after seven days of drying, the equation used to convert
Shore-D stiffness to Young’s modulus is:
E = e((Shore−DDurometer+50)∗0.0235−0.6403)
(3.1)
Properties
Value
Unite
Young’s modulus
11.19
MPa
Poisson’s ratio
0.34
Density
1100
kg/m3
Table 3.1. Biomechanical properties of epoxy [42], [43]
.
3.3
Osteotomy and Fixation
Before the DRF could be fixated with AdhFix, an osteotomy had to be performed on
the sawbones. This was done using a waterjet cutter following the DRF line estab-
lished by Baumbach et al. (2012) (Figure 2.8). The fracture location was changed to
mid-shaft to simplify the mechanical test, the osteotomy was created as a right-angle
triangle with a 10 mm wedge, and the top of the triangle was at the middle of the
shaft (124 mm) on the shaft distal anterior surface (Figure 3.3). Firstly, the DRF
line was drawn onto the bone, wherefrom a MACH 3 1313B (Flow, United States)
waterjet cutter was used to cut the sawbones into two parts. A waterjet cutter was
used to ensure accurate fast and reproducible fractures, and the three radius were cut.
A waterjet generates a stream of water with pressure rated up to 94,000 psi; and the
pressure is then converted into velocity through a small jewel orifice, creating a small
stream, which can very accurately cut soft materials [44].
Figure 3.3. Sketch of the osteotomy lo-
cation, shape and size.
Figure 3.4.
The sawbones with os-
teotomy and AdhFix fixation.
After the osteotomy had been performed, the fracture was fixated with AdhFix; see
Figure 3.4 for the outcome. To conduct the fixation, the bone was placed onto a
manufactured holder (see Appendix 5.4) to keep it stable and linear, ensuring AdhFix
was applied to the correct location. The fixation with AdhFix was completed in the
following steps:
==PAGE:28==
3.3 Osteotomy and Fixation
20
1. Six holes were drilled in the bone using a 2.5 mm drill, three on each side of
the fracture. The first hole was drilled 7.5 mm (centre of the hole) from the
fracture site, wherefrom there was 4.5 mm between the hole centres. The steel
screws were then screwed into the bone
2. From the AdhFix package, the two syringes with components A and B were
taken out. Syringe B was connected to syringe A through a connector, and the
plunger of Syringe A was used to mix the content of the syringes
3. The content of the two syringes was continuously transferred back and forth
between the two syringes until a homogenous mixture was obtained. Metal foil
was placed around the syringe to stop the light from activating the combination.
4. The first layer of the AdhFix mixture was then applied to the fracture site, on
the anterior side of the bone around the screws, and over the fracture. The
mixture was cured with a handheld high-energy visible (HEV) light lamp for 3
x 5 seconds in all locations.
5. Two additional layers of the AdhFix mixture were applied and cured with the
HEV light.
The applied AdhFix was then measured (the length, width, and thickness).
The
measurement is noted in Table 3.2.
Measurement
Specimen 1
Specimen 2
Specimen 3
Length
50.52 mm
50 mm
49.09 mm
Width
9.83 mm
9.48 mm
9.98 mm
Thickness
3.72 mm
3.10 mm
3.2 mm
Table 3.2. Measurement of AdhFix on the three specimens.
The screws applied in this study were steel flat countersunk heads with hexalobu-
lar sockets with a zinc-plated blue surface, BN11308 (Bossard Holding AG, Switzer-
land) [45]. The screws were cut to be 8 mm long. The material properties of the steel
screws are shown in Table 3.3.
Properties
Value
Unite
Young’s modulus
211
MPa
Poisson’s ratio
0.3
Density
7.85 · 10−6
kg/m3
Table 3.3.
Biomechanical properties of the steel screws [46], [47].
==PAGE:29==
3.4 In Vitro 4-point Bending
21
3.4
In Vitro 4-point Bending
An in vitro 4-point bending experiment was set up for the static and fatigue tests of
AdhFix to determine how it worked as a fixation for a Colles fracture and to validate
the FEM of the fixation. The specimens were placed onto the 4-point bending set-up
by placing the middle of the epoxy end mounts onto the support rollers, and the
loading pins were placed above the centre of the epoxy load protectors. The loading
span distance (distance between loading pins) was 92 mm, the distance between
the support rollers and loading pins was 64 ±1 mm, and the span length (distance
between support pins) was 220 mm, the set-up is shown in Figure 3.5. It should be
noted that an in vivo forearm joint would not allow for as much movement in the
diagonal direction as is allowed through this setup. In vivo, the elbow joint has two
degrees of freedom , the wrist joint also has two degrees of freedom [48]. However, to
validate the FEM and study AdhFix, a simplified experimental 4-point bending was
created for an experiment with no shear stress, and thus, the rollers were used.
Figure 3.5. The experimental four-point bending set-up.
After a literature review, it was chosen to follow the experimental method conducted
in Liu et al. (2021): Study of Mechanical Comparison of a Novel Hybrid and Commer-
cial Dorsal Double Plating for Distal Radius Fracture: In Vitro Fatigue Four-Point
Bending and Biomechanical Testing [49]. Here, the biomechanical properties of two
types of DRF double dorsal plating were tested through static and fatigue tests. It
was decided to follow the mechanical test protocol from Liu et al. (2021) as AdhFix
is being tested as a new/replacement for DRF plating, and the study was conducted
==PAGE:30==
3.4 In Vitro 4-point Bending
22
on sawbones. It should be noted that the method and maximum forces vary from
study to study, in the study by Baumbach et al. (2012), where the fracture model
was designed, it was found that it took 1522 ±105 N in compression for a 3.93 ±0.53
mm bone displacement. However, most studies correspond that the maximum dis-
placement is 3 mm before failure.
Two experimental protocols (static and fatigue) are explained below. The experimen-
tal set-up was first tested on wooden rods with a 15 mm diameter and 250 mm length
and two ulnae, to validate the setup.
3.4.1
Instron 8874 Setup
The 4-point bending test was performed using an Instron 8874 (Instron, United States)
tabletop biaxial servohydraulic testing system with a 5 kN loading cell. A 400 mm
loading jack was connected to the impactor, and the support was mounted onto the
base table. To turn on the Instron machine, the pump was turned on first. Then, the
Instron Dynamic software and a hand remote was used to control the machine.
Subsequently, the loading precision of Instron for small loads was checked using a
spring scale (Ohaus, United States), and the loading jack position was validated.
The Instron machine was then calibrated by setting the start load to zero. Once
the machine was on, the specimen was placed onto the supporting pins, and the
loading pins were moved down using the remote until there was contact with the
epoxy moulds.
3.4.2
ARAMIS System (DIC) Setup
The DIC system used to detect displacements and strains on the AdhFix surface in
this study was an M6 ARAMIS adjustable camera system. An ARAMIS system is a
non-contact and material-independent measuring system based on DIC. The ARAMIS
system was set up with an adjustable base to hold the two cameras with 12.5 lenses;
it was placed 320 cm away from the specimens with two lights. The ARAMIS system
was connected to a computer with the ARAMIS software; see all the components for
the set-up in Table 3.4. The system was then calibrated using a calibration plate; the
system was calibrated by following the ARAMIS calibration program; see calibration
results in Table 3.5. Further, the ARAMIS and Instron were connected to allow for
electronic synchronisation by connecting the analogue output from the Instron to the
ARAMIS analogue input. The connection was set with a conversion factor of 6.299
mm/v on the Instron output and 6 mm on the ARAMIS software; the offset was
evaluated and specified for each sample.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 In Vitro 4-point Bending
23
To prepare the test subject, the bone was speckled with uniform size of black dots,
as the specimens were already white, this was achieved using black spray paint. The
specimen was placed on the 4-point bending support rollers in front of the ARAMIS
system, and data collection could begin. To create a surface mesh, the meshing size
(facet size: 20, and pixel size: 10) was evaluated for the specimen, and the surface
mesh was created. A reference photo was taken, and the system was set to run a
protocol that would take a photo every 5Hz for 1000 pictures; if the specimen failed
before the 1000th photo, capturing was manually stopped.
ARAMIS set-up
Camera lens
12.5 mm
Camera support
Adjustable base
800
Working distance
320 cm
Camera angle
25◦
Camera distance
110 mm
Camera lens
110 mm
Table 3.4. ARAMIS set-up.
ARAMIS Calibration results
Calibration panel
CP20/250/D12400
Temperature
20◦C
Calibration deviation
0.031 pixels
Scale deviation
0.002 mm
Camera angle
26.8◦
Height variance
62mm
Measuring volume
250/215/215 mm
Table 3.5. ARAMIS calibration results.
3.4.3
Static Testing Methods
The AdhFix specimen (AdhFix fixating a mimicked Colles fracture on the midshaft)
was first tested in a static 4-point bending test. The static test was conducted to
determine the failure of AdhFix on a Colles fracture, maximum force, and displace-
ment, to validate the FEM and to conclude if the fixation could tolerate the 3 mm
displacement seen in other orthopedic DRF devices. See Appendix 5.4 for the overall
set up.
Two AdhFix specimens were used for the static test, specimens 1 and 2. The Instron
and the ARAMIS were turned on, and the Instron machine was run with no sample
a few times to ensure the pump pressure. A wave matrix was created on the Instron
software, using the values from Table 3.6. The wave matrix informs the machine
on what movement to conduct. A two-step waveform was created, and the loading
jack was programmed to hold still for 2 s, ensuring the test did not start before the
ARAMIS system. Next, the loading jack should move downwards in the y-direction
following a position control with a rate of 0.05 mm/s until failure, after which the
loading jack should retrieve, and the test stopped. The load was calibrated, where
after the specimen was placed onto the 4-point bending setup, and the loading jack
was moved down until contact with the epoxy load protectors, as seen in Figure
3.5. The two systems (Instron and the ARAMIS) were simultaneously started, the
load was recorded from the Instron software, and the displacement and strain were
==PAGE:32==
3.4 In Vitro 4-point Bending
24
determined in the ARAMIS data processing; the loading jack position was recorded in
both systems through the analogue connection. See section 3.4.5.1 for data processing.
Moreover, the failure pattern of AdhFix was visually examined to evaluate the failure
mechanism.
Mechanical Fatigue Testing Values
Position control
0.05 mm/s
ARAMIS data
5 Hz
Specimen
2
Table 3.6. Values used to program the Instron machine for the static test.
3.4.4
Fatigue Testing Methods
To evaluate the wear of AdhFix over the healing process of a DFR, a fatigue test
was designed and performed following the results obtained from the static test. The
test was performed on the Instron machine to determine how the fixation technol-
ogy would react within the upper end of an estimated physiological use, seen over a
usual 6-month healing process after a DRF. The estimated physiological load was set
to 20,000 load cycles at 1 Hz with a maximum applied load of 19.1 N (80% of the
average max load of the two static tests) and a minimum of 1.91 N (ratio:0.1) [49].
The fatigue test was considered finished when the 20,000 cycles were reached or if a
failure occurred.
A wave matrix was created using the values in Table 3.7. Firstly, the loading jack
was ramped down to 10.5 N in 30 s (the midpoint of the sinus curves). A fatigue
test was designed as a sinus wave with an amplitude of 17 N, where the load first
increased to 19.1 N and decreased to 1.9 N, the sinus wave was repeated for 20,000
cycles. A position limit was set to the breaking point from the static test, ensuring
that the loading jack would not forcefully press down and destroy the specimen.
The Instron system was programmed to collect the data for every cycle till the 10th
cycle, where after only every 10th cycle was recorded till the 100th, then every 100th
cycle, etc. The last ten cycles were saved to see the results before the failure.
The Instron system was turned on, and the protocol was first tested on brittle and
soft materials and redesigned. Due to the load cell being larger than desired (5 kN),
the machine struggled with the small loads. Thus, the amplitude was changed to
13.6 N to ensure the maximum load did not exceed 19 N. Consequently, specimen
3 was placed onto the 4-point bending setup. The loading pins were moved down
until contact with the epoxy load protectors, and the test was initiated. The failure
pattern of AdhFix was visually examined to evaluate the failure mechanism.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 In Vitro 4-point Bending
25
Mechanical Fatigue Testing Values
Frequency
1 Hz
Control
Load
Wave
Sinus
Wave phase
180◦
Minimum Force
1.91 N
Maximum Axial Force
19.1 N
Amplitude
17 N
Cycles
20000
Sample Number
1
Table 3.7. Values used in the Instron machine for the fatigue test on AdhFix.
3.4.5
4-Point Bending Data Processing and Analysis
The data was collected from the Instron and ARAMIS systems, it was then combined
using the position data as a common column. In Figure 3.6, a flowchart of the data
collection, processing and analyses can be seen.
Figure 3.6. Flowchart illustrating the 4-point bending data processing and analysis.
3.4.5.1
Static Test Data Analysis
The data was first processed in the ARAMIS system; before starting the static test, a
single image was taken of the specimen on the ARAMIS system, creating the reference
image. The mesh pattern generated on the reference image was checked to ensure
that it had picked up the area of AdhFix and was acceptable, after which a surface
component was created. Consequently, the test was initiated; once the testing was
complete, the ARAMIS system automatically calculated the values for the surface
component created in the reference image for the same area in all the obtained im-
ages. Once the ARAMIS had loaded all images, the areas of the images were checked,
and the images that had not picked up the area were removed.
Secondly, the images were loaded into GOM correlate for further analysis. GOM
correlate is a software for analysing DIC results. GOM correlate was used to obtain
the displacement of AdhFix; this was performed by creating a point component in the
middle of the AdhFix surface. The point was inspected, and the displacement (change
==PAGE:34==
3.4 In Vitro 4-point Bending
26
in Y)throughout the experiment was obtained. Next, a strain gauge was created on
the AdhFix surface (length: 30 mm), wherefrom the strain (change in X-direction)
was computed, see Figure 3.7. All the data were then exported to be combined with
the Instron force data.
Figure 3.7. Creating the point and strain evaluation in GOM.
Lastly, the Instron and GOM results were combined; this was possible by using the
common column from the loading jack position (analogue signal). After the data had
been combined, it was imported into MATLAB. This data consisted of the raw exper-
imental data, the load, jack position point displacement, and strain. In MATLAB,
the load and position were zeroed (subtracting the start values).
The data was then analysed, and the load-displacement curve was plotted; using this
plot, the ultimate load and ultimate displacement. The normal engineering stress
was then calculated using: σ0 =
F
A0 , where F is the applied load and A0 is the cross-
sectional area of the undeformed specimen. The cross-sectional area was calculated
for AdhFix, A = w ·t, where w is the width and t the thickness. While the true stress
was calculated knowing σ = F
A, where A is the cross-sectional area of the deformed
specimen [50].
The stress-strain curve was plotted using the calculated stress and the strain from the
GOM correlation. In the experiment, the strain is calculated using the GOM software
were the strain is: ϵ = △L
L0 , where L is the length of the AdhFix. The Stress-Strain
curve was used to determined, the ultimate stress, strain, and Young’s modulus was
determined using the slope and compared to the known value. The bending stiffness
was calculated using the following equations [37,51]:
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Finite Element Modelling
27
Moment of inertia:
I = bh3
12
(3.2)
Where b is the width and h the thickness of AdhFix.
Bending stiffness:
σ = E ∗I
(3.3)
Where E is Young’s modulus. The MATLAB script can be seen in Appendix 5.4.
3.4.5.2
Fatigue Data Analysis
The raw Instron tracking data from the fatigue test was directly imported into MAT-
LAB. The last ten cycles were added to the dataset. The raw data consisted of a
time stamp, cycle number, position, and load. The load was plotted over time to
visualise the cycles, the maximum and minimum load were evaluated. All findings
were collected in a table (Table 4.3), and the final cycle number was noted.
3.5
Finite Element Modelling
COMSOL Multiphysics is a cross-platform that uses FEM. The fractured human ra-
dius and AdhFix fixation were defined in the following study in COMSOL. With the
use of FEM, it was possible to analyse how AdhFix on a Colles fracture would react
under different loads. Assumptions were made, and a simplified model of AdhFix on
the bone was created, not considering the muscles, tendons, different bone tissue ma-
terial properties (cancellous and compact bone) and blood vessels. The assumptions
were, that all the components (bone, epoxy, AdhFix, and screws) were linear elastic
homogeneous isotropic (LEHI) materials, and the boundary conditions and material
properties were defined in COMSOL. A homogeneous material has identical physical
properties at all points within the sample. An isotropic material has identical phys-
ical properties in all directions. The mathematical model applied was linear elastic,
and thus COMSOL used the following constitutive law of a three-dimensional LEHI
solid to evaluate how the model deformed:
¯¯σ =
E
(1 + υ)
!
¯¯ε +
υ
(1 −2υ)tr¯¯ε¯¯I
"
(3.4)
==PAGE:36==
3.5 Finite Element Modelling
28
Where ¯¯σ and ¯¯ϵ are stress and strain tensor, respectively. E is Young’s modulus, υ is
Poisson’s ratio, tr¯¯ϵ is the trace of the strain tensor and ¯¯I represents the identity tensor.
The model was created as a solid mechanical model, a branch of continuum mechanics
which studies the behaviour of a solid material and the reaction of the material, e.g.
an applied force and the corresponding motion and deformation. Solid mechanics uses
tensors to define the stresses, strains, and their aﬀiliation. Thus, following Newton’s
second law of motion, Cauchy’s equation of motion for static equilibrium was assumed
and utilised. Cauchy’s equation of motion is:
∇¯¯σ + ρ⃗g = ⃗0
(3.5)
Where ∇is the nabla operator (gradient operator), and ¯¯σ the Cauchy stress tensor.
E is Young’s modulus, υ is Poisson’s ratio, ρ is the density and ⃗g represents the forces
acting on the material e.g gravity.
3.5.1
Geometry Design
The geometry of the model was constructed in Autodesk Fusion 360. Firstly, the
moulds (explained in section 3.2) were reshaped to the geometry of the epoxy-filled
mounts and epoxy-filled load protectors (proximal square: 43.5x50x30 mm, distal
square: 40x50x31 mm, epoxy load protector Ø23.6 mm, height: 27 mm). The epoxy
mounts were placed 31 mm from the ends of the bone, and the epoxy load protectors
were placed 49.3 mm from the midpoint of the shaft(centre of the circle); the two
epoxy load protectors were 70 mm apart. Next, AdhFix was digitally created as a
rectangle with the same measurements as AdhFix from specimen 2 (Table 3.2). The
digital AdhFix was placed onto the middle of the anterior side of the radius; the
shared area of the AdhFix and bone was removed from the rectangle to ensure a
smooth surface and no geometry interaction.
It should be noted that theAdhFix geometry thickness was 6 mm and not the in-
tended 3 mm. The fracture line was then recreated; this was performed by following
the standard of Baumbach et al. (2012) (Figure 2.8), the midpoint of the radius was
marked, and a right-angle triangle (as for the osteotomy) was created. Lastly, the
triangle was extruded from the radius, creating the fracture.
Subsequently, the six screws were added; in accordance to the instruction in section
3.3. The measurements of the screws were: screw head: 5 mm, body diameter: 3
mm, and length: 8 mm [45]. Then, the interacting area of the screws with the ra-
dius and AdhFix was removed, leaving an imprint in the bone and AdhFix, mimicking
the holes drilled into the bone and the interaction of the screws with the AdhFix layer.
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Finite Element Modelling
29
Finally, each geometry component was saved individually and exported to STL files.
See Figure 3.8 for the geometry of the model, and for a more detailed illustration see
the blueprint in Appendix 5.4.
Figure 3.8. The geometry of the 3D model designed in Fusion 360, with all the components
connected: radius, epoxy, screws, and AdhFix.
3.5.2
COMSOL Model of a Human Radius with AdhFix
The model was conducted as a solid mechanical model in COMSOL in a stationary
study. All the components of the geometry were imported, and tweaks were made to
the epoxy and AdhFix in COMSOL to allow for meshing. Rollers were subsequently
added to allow for the simulation of the experiment, complete freedom in the z axis (x
in experiment). Here the support rollers were added as two rectangles (40x30x40mm)
and two diagonal cylinders (Ø:20 and length:40). The material properties (Young’s
modulus, Poisson’s ratio and density) were defined for each material. The material
properties for the radius, epoxy, AdhFix and screws can be seen in Table 2.2, 3.1, 2.6
and 3.3, respectively. The determined Young’s modulus of AdhFix from the experi-
ment (engineering value) was used. The geometry of the model was cleaned up and
simplified, and the materials were set to be LEHI.
To simulate the 4-point bending test, the bottom of the support rectangles was set
as fixed constraints, and the cylinders were defined as rollers in solid mechanics. The
force was applied as a boundary load to the posterior side of the two epoxy load
protectors. The load side was chosen to mimic a physiological fall, in addition to
being able to evaluate the compressive and tensile stresses of AdhFix. The loads were
applied, and the model was then meshed, computed, and analysed.
3.5.2.1
2D Model
Initially, a 2D simplified COMSOL model of the radius was created. The model was
created in a solid mechanical study in COMSOL, and the geometry of the bone was
constructed as a rectangle following the bone measurements from Table 2.1. The
fracture was then added by creating three points mimicking the three ends on the
fracture seen in Figure 2.8. The first point was located at the middle bottom of the
bone minus 5mm, the second point was set to be directly above on top of the bone
==PAGE:38==
3.5 Finite Element Modelling
30
and the last point 10mm to the top right. Next the points were connected and the
area was removed from the model. The screws were added as 6 rectangles (length
8 mm and thickness 3 mm), 6 mm from the fracture and apart, they were placed 6
mm into the bone. AdhFix was then added by creating a rectangle, length: 50 mm
and thickness 3 mm, this was located on the bottom, under the fracture, connected
to the bone and on top of the remaining part of the screws. Lastly, the rollers were
constructed likewise as in the 3D model (see Appendix 5.4 for a graphic illustration).
The material properties of the materials were defined. In solid mechanics, the rollers
bottoms were set as fixed and the roller support as rollers
Two simulations were conducted on the 2D model to test the difference between using
epoxy and not. Firstly, a point bending test was simulated by creating two points, 35
mm from the centre of the bone on each side. These points mimic the location at which
the pin loading would occur in the 4-point bending test. The point load was set to
the two points wherefrom the force required to reach the maximum displacement was
determine. Finally, the model was meshed and analysed. The second simulation was
conducted as the 3D model; two squares were introduced to the geometry and placed
around the bone. These squares were placed with 35 mm between them, following the
two DiaCast 86 epoxy moults created for the mechanical test, the material properties
of epoxy were defined. The loads were then applied in boundary conditions to the top
of the squares to determine the force required to reach the maximum displacement.
The model was meshed and analysed.
3.5.3
Model Data Processing and Analysis
The model was first analysed in COMSOL, wherefrom the stresses were determined
and evaluated. Through Parametric Sweep studies, the load, displacement, stress,
and strain data were determined, extracted, and imported into MATLAB. See Figure
3.9 for the process.
Figure 3.9. Flowchart illustrating the COMSOL data processing and analysis.
Firstly, a Parametric Sweep study was conducted to simulate the 4-point bending
static experiment. The load varied from 0 N to 25 N to simulate the experimental
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Finite Element Modelling
31
conditions. Subsequently, a second Parametric Sweep study was performed to deter-
mine the force required for the model to reach the maximum deflection found in the
4-point bending experiment. The load range for this study was 0 N to 37 N. Finally,
a point evaluation was performed to collect data for specific points at the AdhFix
surfaces, one at the top (compression) and one at the bottom (tension). The points
were created as cut points in 3D. At this point, the force, displacement, stress and
strain were combined and saved in a table. Next, the stress and strain were computed,
utilising the Cauchy green strain tensor in the z direction for strain and the Cauchy
stress tensor for stress. The right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor quantifies for
the deformation of a material, it is a symmetric 3x3 matrix that characterizes the
deformation of a material element between two points in a continuum body [51]. The
deformation tensor is calculated through the following equation:.
C = F T F
(3.6)
Where F is the deformation gradient tensor and F T its transpose tensor.
The
Cauchy’s stress tensor describes the state of stress within a continuum body. It char-
acterises the distribution of stresses acting on an infinitesimal element of the material.
It is a symmetric second-order tensor represented in a 3x3 matrix. These components
reflect the stresses acting in three directions, including the normal stresses along the
three orthogonal axes and the shear stresses on planes perpendicular to these axes [51].
Cauchy’s stress tensor is calcuated via :
¯¯t = ¯¯n · ¯¯σ
(3.7)
Where ¯¯t is the stress vector, ¯¯σ is the Cauchy stress tensor, and ¯¯n is the unit normal
vector.
Subsequently, the forced displacement and stress-strain curves were verified in COM-
SOL, and the data were extracted and used to create plots in MATLAB.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
4-point Bending
A static 4-point bending was conducted on the specimens to validate the FEM by
measuring the relevant bending properties of AdhFix, which are bending stiffness,
bending structural stiffness, and bending strength.
4.1.1
Static Ultimate Failure Result
The ultimate static failure 4-point bending test was utilised in the study to determine
the material properties, ultimate strength, strain, load and fracture point of the
mimicked DRF fixated with AdhFix, to assess how the FEM models results compared
to a physical experiment.
4.1.1.1
Force-Displacement
Figure 4.1. Force-Displacement curve of the 4-point bending static experiment.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 4-point Bending
33
The force-displacement curves for the two specimens exhibited similar behaviour, with
a variance of 2 N for the ultimate load and 0.5 mm ultimate displacement. As shown
in Figure 4.1, specimen 2 reached a maximum displacement of 5.4 mm and an ultimate
load of 22.6 N. Conversely, specimen 1 achieved a maximum displacement of 5 mm
and an ultimate load of 25 N. For further details, please refer to Appendix 5.4 for
specimen 1 results. The average ultimate displacement of the two specimens was 5.2
mm, and the average ultimate maximum loads were 23.6 N. Throughout the study,
the results from specimen 2 will be used. When analysing the force-displacement
curve it is revealed that AdhFix is a brittle material
4.1.1.2
Stress-Strain
The stress experienced by the material during the experiment, was consequently cal-
culated using the recorded load and cross-sectional area, also known as normal stress.
This was plotted against the recorded strain data from the ARMIS data process-
ing. Subsequently, the true stress and true strain were determined. The stress-strain
curves demonstrates the relationship between the stress introduced to the material
and the resulting strain. When examining these curves, the ultimate stress, ultimate
strain, and Young’s modulus were calculated and noted (refer to Table 4.1). The
ultimate strain was assumed to be constant with the initial length, while the true
stress was calculated using the evolving cross-sectional area. The cross-sectional ar-
eas were similar when deformation was small, resulting in comparable yield values.
The stress-strain curve for specimen 2, as depicted in Figure 4.2, highlights the brittle
nature of AdhFix, as there was no observed plastic deformation. Although a brief
deviation from the linear elastic region was observed in the experimental data, this
may be a plastic region or due to recording errors.
Ultimate Stress
0.74 MPa
Normal
Ultimate Strain
0.3 %
Elastic Modulus
2.7 MPa
Ultimate Stress
0.9 MPa
True/Cauchy
Ultimate Strain
0.26 %
Elastic Modulus
3.5 MPa
Table 4.1.
The engineering, true and experimental ultimate stress, strains and elastic
modulus of AdhFix
Nevertheless, it can be concluded that AdhFix exhibits an elastic behaviour up until
fracture. The material properties for AdhFix were calculated with Young’s modulus
found to be 3.3 MPa, which was much lower than the value provided by BoneFix Con-
sortium (2800 MPa). As a result, this value was adopted for the model. Further, as
expected, the true ultimate stress (0.057 MPa) was seen to be larger than the experi-
mental ultimate stress (0.046 MPa) and the ultimate strains seem to be very similar,
0.35% for the experimental and 0.26% for the true strain. The differences in the slope
==PAGE:42==
4.1 4-point Bending
34
Figure 4.2. Stress strain curve comparing the true and engineering stress-strain curve
in the linear region results in varying elastic modulus, with the true stress-strain curve
exhibiting the stiffest behaviour and experimental results exhibiting the least stiffness.
The ultimate strengths, bending stiffness, were calculated of specimen 2 and can be
seen in Table 4.2.
Ultimate failure results
Properties
Specimen 1
Specimen 2
Ultimate displacement
5.4 mm
5 mm
Ultimate load
22.6 N
25.2 N
Ultimate Strength
0.7 MPa
0.6 MPa
Ultimate strain
0.3 %
0.14 %
Young’s modulus
3.3 MPa
3.1 MPa
Moment of inertia
29.5 kg/mm3
42.1 kg/mm3
Bending stiffness
77.49 N/mm
132.2 N/mm
Table 4.2. Summary of the 4-point bending results, specimen 1 and 2.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 FEM Results
35
4.1.2
Fatigue Testing of AdhFix Results
As the fatigue test utilised the results obtained from the static 4-point bending test,
the 80% of the maximum load observed, did not clinically correspond to the loads that
the bone would endure during the healing process. During the cyclic test on AdhFix
using specimen 3, it was observed that the loading cell used (5 kN) was too large for
the desired load ratio. As a result, the cycles did not vary between the desired maxi-
mum of -19 N and the minimum of -1.9 N, but rather between -8 N and -13 N with
a variation of ±1 N. This observation suggests that a much smaller load-cell, ideally
a 100 N load-cell, is required to perform a fatigue test on a DRF fixated with AdhFix.
Despite the limitation, AdhFix withstood 299 cycles with a maximum load of -8 N
and a minimum load of -13 N. However, AdhFix did not endure the 20000-cycle limit.
The detailed results of the fatigue test are presented in Table 4.3.
% of Max
Load
Load (N)
Actual
load
obtained
Sample
Number
Cycle
Result
80%
Min: -19.1 N
Max: -1.19 N
Min: -13.6 N
Max: -8 N
3
299/20000
Failure
Table 4.3. Fatigue 4-point bending test results. Temperature: 21◦.
4.1.3
Fracture Location/Failure Pattern of AdhFix
The fracture of AdhFix was observed to fail (break) by the fracture line at the distal
side of the fixation, in all specimens, both in the static and fatigue tests. In addition,
the fracture occurred at the weakest point of the fixation, which was anticipated and
consistent with the failure of other fixation devices. Specifically, the fracture was
observed at the distal side of the fracture site, where the slope of the fracture was
situated, the surface area available for adhesion was minimal and furthers from any
screw fixation. The findings are visually represented in 4.3, Figure 4.4 and Figure
4.5, for specimen 1,2 and 3, respectively.
4.2
FEM Results
For the FEM evaluation, two scenarios were evaluated:
Scenario 1: How AdhFix reacts when 25N total force is applied (the ultimate force
found from the static experiment).
Scenario 2: The total load required to create the maximum displacement of 5mm
==PAGE:44==
4.2 FEM Results
36
Figure 4.3.
Fracture location of
specimen 1 (static test).
Figure 4.4.
Fracture location of
specimen 2 (static test).
Figure 4.5.
Fracture location of
specimen 3 (fatigue test).
(the ultimate displacement found from the static experiment).
4.2.1
2D Model
The scenarios were computed and evaluated for two 2D FEMs.
One model was
designed for direct loading to the bone (without epoxy), while the second was designed
with epoxy as a load protector (with epoxy). The two models were created to illustrate
the difference between using epoxy and direct force applied to the bone, as the epoxy
absorbed some of the applied load. In a point evaluation (in the middle of AdhFix),
the displacement in scenario 1 was found to be 1.2 mm and 2.2 mm with and without
epoxy, respectively. For scenario 2, the total load required to create the maximum
displacement of 5mm was found to be 154 N and 94 N for with and without epoxy,
respectively. Which shows as expected that more load is required to obtain the same
displacement.
4.2.1.1
Von Mises stress
Von Mises stress, is a scalar value used to describe stress distribution in a material
under multiaxial loading conditions. It helps predict material failure and reliability
of structures under various loading conditions [52].
The results of the von Mises stress analysis for scenario 2 in the two 2D models, with
and without the use of epoxy, are presented in Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7. The mod-
els show that the maximum stress concentrations occur at the center of the model,
where the bone is fractured, and adhered to the AdhFix surface. Likewise, seen as the
location of the failure pattern in the experiments. Secondly, the stress distribution is
consistent with the experimental setup, also showing stress located at the roller site,
the contact point between the bone and supports. As the model is on rollers and not
fixed, there is no stress where the joins would anatomically have held the bone. In
==PAGE:45==
4.2 FEM Results
37
real life there would have been a high amount of stress present at the end of the bone,
as the bone would experience a pulling force at the joint sites.
The highest stress was found between the fracture, and was computed to be 151 MPa
for the model with epoxy and 156 MPa without. This agrees with the hypothesis
that the stress concentration at the centre would lead to a fracture. These ultimate
stress values indicate that the stress at the fracture point does not vary too much
under scenario 2 from the two models, a comparison of the maximum and minimum
von Mises stress levels for scenario 2 is presented in Table 4.4.
Figure 4.6. Von Mises stress of the 2D FEM
model with epoxy holders for scenario 2.
Figure 4.7. Von Mises stress of the 2D FEM
model without epoxy holders for scenario 2.
Simulation
Maximum
von
mises
stress
minimum mises stress
Bone with epoxy moults
151 MPa
0.000035 MPa
Bone without epoxy
156 MPa
0.004 MPa
Table 4.4. Maximum and minimum von mises stress from the two simulation under 1522N,
and the coordinates.
4.2.2
3D Model
The 2D model was found to be too simplistic. Thus, a more sophisticated 3D model
was created to fully capture the behaviour of AdhFix under the different scenarios.
Such that a model could be created where the fixation location could be moved to the
correct location and analysed as the properties of AdhFix should react similarly. The
von Mises stress of the 3D model is compared to the results from the 2D model, a
sweep parameter study was conducted to determine the force-displacement and stress-
strain curves. The results from the force-displacement and stress-strain evaluations
will be used to compare the model to the experiment.
In the 3D model, the scenarios are referred to as Scenario 3D.1 and Scenario 3D.2.
==PAGE:46==
4.2 FEM Results
38
4.2.2.1
Von Mises Stress
The von Mises stress computation on the 3D model for scenario 2 revealed that there
was, likewise seen in the 2D model, a larger stress formation at the middle of the
model, however, it was larger than in the 2D model (Figure 4.8). When concentrating
on the stress distribution on AdhFix, it was observed the largest stress was on the
AdhFix surface between the fracture line (Figure 4.9). This again indicates that the
failure of the material, as seen in both the 2D model and the experiment, will occur
in the middle of the AdhFix fixation. These results suggest that the weakest point
of AdhFix is the part that is not adhered to the bone. The maximum and minimum
von Mises stresses for the whole model and AdhFix is stated in Table 4.5
Figure 4.8.
Von Mises stress distribution
over the whole model.
Figure 4.9.
Von Mises stress distribution
on AdhFix.
Simulation
Maximum
von
Mises
stress
minimum Mises stress
Whole
576 MPa
1.3E-9 MPa
AdhFix
76 MPa
0.0067 MPa
Table 4.5. Maximum and minimum von Mises stress from the two simulation under 3D.2.
4.2.2.2
Force-Displacement
The findings from the force-displacement analysis of the 3D model show that, in
the case of scenario 3D.2, a load of 36.7 N is required to achieve the displacement
of 5 mm, which exceeds the experimental value, having a relative difference of 31%
(10 N). An overview of the load and displacement values for both scenarios can be
found in 4.6. In addition, the force-displacement curve for scenario 3D.2 was plotted
and is illustrated in Figure 4.10, with the corresponding values from scenario 3D.1
marked. When comparing the displacement measurement of scenario 3D.1 with the
experimental values, it was noted that when 25 N was applied to the model, it
==PAGE:47==
4.2 FEM Results
39
resulted in a displacement of 3.1 mm, representing a 46% difference compared to the
experimental measurements.
Figure 4.10. Force-Displacement curve of the model on rollers. The first red indication
line at 3.1 mm displacement is when 25 N applied, and the second at 4.8 mm displacement
when 36.7 N is applied.
Model
Scenario
Maximum
displacement [mm]
Required
load [N]
1
3.1
25
3D
2
5.1
36.2
Table 4.6. Summary of the force and displacements from the different scenarios and 3D
FEM models.
4.2.2.3
Stress-Strain
The stress-strain curves for scenario 3D.2 were generated to compare the stress and
strain in the numerical model with the results from the 4-point bending experiment.
To obtain the necessary data, the Cauchy stress tensor and Cauchy green strain were
extracted through a point evaluation at the top and bottom surface of the middle of
AdhFix in the ZZ direction using the COMSOL software. The resulting stress-strain
curve is shown in Figure 4.11, which depicts the tensile and compressive stress that
AdhFix underwent throughout bending.
It was observed that the model and the experiment induced the same strain, but
the stress was 20 times higher in the model. Nevertheless, the stress-strain curve
exhibited similar behaviour in both scenarios. Additionally, the strain tolerated by
==PAGE:48==
4.2 FEM Results
40
AdhFix toll failure was comparable in both the model and the experiment (table 4.7
for the ultimate values). These results suggest that while the model is not represen-
tative of the experimental conditions in terms of absolute stress values, it captures
the underlying mechanical behaviour of AdhFix.
Figure 4.11.
The model Stress-strain distribution curve of AdhFix, red illustrates com-
pression and blue tension. The model using the experimental Young’s modulus.
Lastly, the ultimate stress, strain, force, and displacement were determined for the
model data, and the moment of inertia and bending stiffness was calculated (Table
4.7).
Model results
Ultimate compressive Stress
-10.5 MPa
Ultimate compressive Stain
-0.14 %
Ultimate tensile Stress
20.8 MPa
Ultimate tensile Stain
0.26 %
Ultimate force
36.7 N
Ultimate displacement
5.1 mm
Moment of inertia
171 kg · mm2
Bending stiffness
461.7 N/mm
Table 4.7. Summary of the biomechanical analyses of the FEM model.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
5.1
Data Analysis
This study employed a finite element model to analyse the feasibility of using Ad-
hFix as a fixation device on a DRF. The accuracy of the model was validated by
conducting a 4-point bending test; it must be noted that the model and specimens
were simplified to mitigate the fracture, the complexity of the bone, and loading con-
ditions. This resulted in several assumptions and simplifications in both the physical
specimens and the FEM model; the fracture location was moved to the shaft, and
the material properties of the bone were simplified. Not all the assumptions accu-
rately reflect the anatomy of a DRF, the exact properties of AdhFix, or the loading
conditions a DRF would be exposed to in a real-world scenario. In this chapter, the
experimental findings will be compared to commonly used DRF metal plates and the
model results will be compared to the experimental results. Lastly, the limitations of
the study will be discussed and the clinical relevance and future work will be proposed.
5.1.1
Experimental data analysis
Through the 4-point bending test, the ultimate failure of AdhFix used as a fixation
on the mimicked Colles fracture was conducted. As a result, it was possible to deter-
mine the adhesion and fixation limitations of the material as well as the ultimate load,
displacement, and strength. In the study, Sawbones composed of homogeneous solid
foam material were used to allow for reproducibility. However, cadaver bones could
have yielded different and more anatomically correct results, as this study did not
consider factors such as bone type and density. Moreover, epoxy mounts were added
to ensure stability during the 4-point setup, as the organic shape of the bone has
a cylindrical and uneven shape, making it diﬀicult to stabilise the bone on the sup-
port. Additionally, epoxy mounts were used to uniformly distribute the applied load,
thereby avoiding unintended microfractures at the loading sites, this, however, also
damped the load applied onto the bone as simulated in the 2D models. In addition,
the load was applied as transverse loading, the fracture was moved to the midshaft,
and the specimens were placed on rollers. This allowed the bone ends to be used as
stabilisers and for pure bending across the fracture. However, in the body, the radius
==PAGE:50==
5.1 Data Analysis
42
is primarily exposed to axial compressive loading, where the proximal and distal ends
are fixated through joints and ligaments, which does not allow for movement across
the shaft. Thus, the loading condition is not a realistic representation of the load that
AdhFix on a DRF would have to withstand. If axial compressive loading was applied,
it may change the results of the usability of AdhFix for the fracture, as brittle ma-
terials are more robust in compression than in tension. However, the fracture would
have to be moved to the correct location, and complex moults for a compression test
would have to be designed.
From the 4-point bending study, it was evaluated that the maximum force the fixa-
tion could withstand under pure bending was 25 N for specimen 1, and 22.6 N for
specimen 2, where after the AdhFix fractured into two parts. The maximum displace-
ments seen (fracture point) through the 4-point bending were 5 mm and 5.5 mm, for
specimen 1 and 2, respectively. These values indicates that the AdhFix is too brittle
to be used for the fixation of a DRF, as a healthy radius should withstand around
80% of the force transmitted from the wrist [8]. However, AdhFix has potential if the
fracture is additionally protected with a cast till union forms at the fracture site. The
bending stiffness of the fixation was found to be 132.2 N/mm and 77.49 N/mm for
specimen 1 and 2, respectively. This indicates that specimen 1 was more resistance
to bending deformation than specimen 2. In the stress-strain curve, it was seen that
the ultimate strain in compression was 0.3 % from specimen 1 and 0.14% for speci-
men 2. This demonstrates how the difference in adhesion yields different results, as
the fixation was not identical for both specimens. Moreover, the engineering Young’s
modulus was calculated to be 3.3 and 3.1 MPa(specimen 1 and 2, respectively), which
was almost 850 times lower than the value provided by BoneFix (2800 MPa). Sug-
gesting that when AdhFix is utilised on a DFR it is more prone to deformation and
breakage under stress. However, as the origin of the original value was unknown, the
accuracy of the newly obtained value could not be confirmed.
When comparing the obtained results of the experimental values of AdhFix (specimen
2) and DRF metal plates, it was seen that AdhFix has a significantly lower bending
stifness than the metal plates (Table 5.1). In the study by Baumbach et al. 2012 [31],
it was found that the ultimate load of angle-locking volar plates was 1522 N, with
a displacement of 3.93 mm on the novel DRF model. This bending strength is 60
times greater than the values obtained for AdhFix. When comparing AdhFix to non-
locking volar T-plates, it was again seen that the ultimate load was much lower for
AdhFix, the ultimate load for nonlocking volar T-plate was 1115 N (≈45% higher).
In terms of stiffness, AdhFix was found to be 77.5 N/mm, while the volar locking
plate systems and nonlocking volar T-plate had a stiffness of 277 N/mm and 175.96
N/mm, respectively [53]. This again indicates that AdhFix as a fixation device for
DRF does not have the correct mechanical values. The metal plates are, moreover,
connected to the bone with the use of screws and depending on the type of plate
used, the screw location and amount differs, which affects the ultmate load [54]. A
Volar Locking Plate utilises six screws, two on the shaft/neck and four on the distal
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Data Analysis
43
end. With AdhFix being customisable, the screws could be placed at a location that
would allow for the best adhesion. Knowing that the screws increase the strength of
the fixation, as the fracture was moved to the middle of the shaft in this study, six
screws were used linearly; however, on a distal radius, this would ideally be like that
of a volar plate.
Distal radius orthopaedic hardware mechanical properties
Device
Ultimate
load [N]
Ultimate
displacement [mm]
Bending
stiffness N/mm
AdhFix
25
5.5
77.5
Angle-locking volar plates
1522
3.93
277
Nonlocking volar T-plate
1115
N/A
175.67
Table 5.1. Comparison of the mechanical properties of angle-locking volar plates, T-plates
and AdhFix [31,53].
Despite the lower bending strength and stiffness, AdhFix exhibited a 2 mm greater
displacement than volar plates. This suggests that AdhFix can withstand a greater
deformation before it fractures. However, metal plates can withstand larger loads
before failure (≈1100 N more). On the other hand, if the metal plate experiences
deformation, it results in a bend in the material, which may be hard to notice and
requires realignment. In comparison, in case of damage of AdhFix, due to its brittle-
ness, the fixation will break and require complete redoing of the fixation.
Secondly, a fatigue evaluation was designed to assess the durability of AdhFix through-
out a six-month rehabilitation period. However, the limitations of the laboratory
equipment prevented feasible results. This was due to the insuﬀicient sensitivity of
the load cell utilised (5 kN), which could not attain or measure the low loads re-
quired(1.9 N to 19.1 N). Despite these limitations, the Instron machine was able to
record resilience when a load ratio of 8 N to 13 N was applied in fatigue. The results
obtained showed that the specimen withstood 299 cycles. It is important to note
that the results, due to equipment limitations, should be interpreted with caution
and these findings do not accurately reflect the wear resistance of AdhFix, and a
fatigue test should be conducted using a smaller load cell.
5.1.2
Comparison between the FEM model and Experimental
data
Acknowledging several significant differences between the model and the experiment
is important before comparing them. While the model was developed carefully, time-
constraints limited the ability to replicate the experiment and bone fully.
Thus,
further refinement is necessary to achieve a more comprehensive and accurate com-
parison. Specifically the differences in the thickness of AdhFix (twice as thick in the
==PAGE:52==
5.1 Data Analysis
44
model), and the contact surface between the bone, screws, and AdhFix (free contact
in the model). These differences may have contributed to the observed variation in
ultimate strength and load between the two systems. Future work may involve fur-
ther refining of the model to capture the dynamics of the experimental system more
accurately.
Nevertheless, the 3D model was updated with the newly calculated Young’s modulus
(2.7 MPa) from the experiment, suggesting that AddFix is more susceptible to de-
formation when subjected to applied loads. The model revealed that a higher force
(36.7 N) was required to reach the maximum displacement, as seen in the experiment.
When applying the maximum load from the experiment (25 N), a displacement of 3.1
mm was seen in the model. Showing that the model can withstand a higher amount
of loading before failure than the experiment, this difference should be kept in mind
as the model indicates that the material is stronger than in vivo. Moreover, due to
the material being set as LEHI, there was an observed continuous deformation rather
than a fracture.
It should be noted that the stress calculation in the two cases differed. In the ex-
periment, the normal engineering stress (0.7 MPA) and true stress (0.9 MPa) were
calculated. Since the cross-sectional area of AdhFix varies due to its rounded edges
and surface resulting from the application, it is important to consider how its thick-
ness changes throughout its area.
While, the model employed the Cauchy stress
tensor to compute the normal stress. The true stress is a scalar value representing
the stress in a specific direction, and the Cauchy stress tensor represents the stress in
the material considering all directions. Thus, this may also contribute to the stress
difference.
When comparing the stress and strain values, it was discovered that the models ex-
hibited a higher stress tolerance before fracture than the experimental results. When
looking at the ultimate strength, it was seen that the relative difference of the exper-
imental data’s ultimate strength was 3.37% of the models strength. Moreover, the
Stress-Strain curve follows that of the true stress-strain curve, with a similar differ-
ence in stress (4.3 % of the model).
This discrepancy can be allocated to the geometrical simplifications in the model, the
assumption of material properties and boundary conditions. However, both meth-
ods showed a similar strain behaviour. Noting the failure location was the same for
the experiment and model, as indicated by the von Moses stress and the material
failure patterns. When comparing the strain, the specimen 2 from the experiment
withstood 0.35% strain in compression which was twice as much as the model and in
specimen 2 (0.14%), which showed the exact same compressive strain. Due to equip-
ment limitations, it was not possible to attain proper tensile strain data from the
experiment. In terms of strain, specimen 2 in the experiment withstood 0.3% strain
on the compressive side, which was around twice as much as the model and specimen
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Use of AdhFix on Distal Radius Fractures
45
1 (0.14%), which exhibited the exact same strain. Unfortunately, due to equipment
limitations, the experiment could not obtain accurate tensile strain data. However,
the results suggest that the model may respond similarly, but the strain reaction is
heavily dependent on the material adhesion.
Lastly, bending stiffness was also larger in the model than in the experiment. The
stiffness was calculated to be 461 N/mm for the model and 77.5 N/mm for the exper-
iment. This again shows that AdhFix is stiffer in the model than in real life, and as
it takes more force to reach the 5 mm.
Overall, the discrepancy between the model and experiment will likely be due to the
combination of the abovementioned factors (LEHI, geometry and loading condition).
The model’s limitations are further explained in 5.3.1. it should be acknowledged that
this model is moreover designed to validate the properties of AdhFix by simulating
the experimental setup rather than replicating an anatomically correct fracture or
the conditions that would be seen in the body.
.
5.2
Use of AdhFix on Distal Radius Fractures
Based on the biomechanical properties observed in this study, it is evident that Ad-
hFix does not possess the strength compared to commercial implants. In addition,
due to its brittleness, it may not be ideal for treating a Colles fracture. However, it
could be advantageous for managing multi-fragmentary fractures and has potential
in hybrid fixations.
In cases where a metal plate is used to stabilise the fracture, it typically involves the
realignment and connection of two main bone fragments, namely, the distal radius
and the neck. AdhFix has the potential to complement this technique by allowing
for the fixation of smaller fragments, resulting in a more reliable and proper bone
growth. On the other hand, AdhFix could serve as a means in open reduction, after
which the bone should be protected with a cast. However, it is essential to note that
if AdhFix was to be utilised as an orthopaedic device for DRF’s, the rehabilitation
process would need to be modified, as the fracture may not be able to withstand
significant loads until union has formed.
AdhFix could also be used on non-load
bearing fractures, and on bones that are not frequently under loading conditions.
5.2.1
Fracture Healing and Strain
The strain experienced on the bone during recovery is a crucial factor in the bone heal-
ing process. If the strain is too low, it may not be enough to stimulate the osteoblasts
and osteoclasts, leading to a slow or ineffective healing process. On the other hand,
==PAGE:54==
5.3 Study Limitations
46
if the strain is too high, it may cause the bone to fracture again, leading to a delay
or failure in the healing process. Therefore, finding the right balance between the
amount of strain experienced on the bone and the stability provided by the fixation
device is crucial [20].
All the ultimate strains from the experiment and model were below 2%, indicating
that the use of AdhFix stimulates primary bone healing by providing absolute stability
[20]. This should, however, be confirmed in a fatigue study where the fixation is tested
at a load over time; ideally, the load applied to a DRF during the rehabilitation period,
wherefrom the strain seen over the rehabilitation can be estimated.
5.2.2
Clinical Relevance
AdhFix presents several clinical advantages compared to metal plating. While emer-
gency departments typically stock a variety of DRF plates and screws to address
different fracture patterns and standards, AdhFix offers in situ customisation that
allows surgeons to create the fixation on the spot during the operation. Moreover,
compared to metal plates and screws with rough edges, AdhFix has a smooth surface
that reduces the risk of scar tissue growth on the material. In addition, AdhFix shows
properties that avoid tendon adhesion, a common complication of metal plates that
can cause pain at the fixation site. Importantly, AdhFix aims to become biodegrad-
able, which addresses patients’ concerns about the presence of non-organic materials
in their bodies. Furthermore, being biodegradable makes AdhFix particularly suit-
able for paediatric cases where the child’s bone is still growing. AdhFix will also be
coated with antibiotics, minimising the risk of infection and biofilm growth. Another
significant benefit to AdhFix is that as humans live longer, bone density is reduced,
often due to osteoporosis. Due to the reduced bone density, it is challenging to fix-
ate the bone using standard plates, the screws are not secure, and the bone often
fractures multi-fragmentally. AdhFix would allow for smaller and more customisable
fixation and thus be used for complex fractures.
However, likewise to plates, the refracture of the bone is a limitation. Metal plates
are stiffer and can withstand a more significant load, making them less likely to break
and splinter. Due to the low ultimate strength of AdhFix, it will fracture and may
splinter under low impact,this is a significant limitation.
5.3
Study Limitations
This study had several limitations, primarily due to its simplification of the model
and experiment. The model and experiment were designed using sawbones, which
does not accurately reflect the complexity of the human forearm, which interacts with
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Study Limitations
47
other bones, muscles, and ligaments in the region. These interactions are crucial for
the biomechanics of the arm and in protecting the bone from fractures. However, as
the study was simplified, they were not considered.
Additionally, the study did not account for the involvement of the ulna and carpal
bones, which are often also affected during DRFs.
Secondly, the location of the
fracture in the model was not anatomically correct, as the Colles fracture was moved
to the middle of the bone for simplification purposes. Lastly, the loading conditions
applied to the specimen did not accurately reflect the axial compressive forces that
would occur in real life, where the distal radius is primarily exposed to compressive
forces in daily use, and the fracture is often a result of a high-impact compressive
force from a fall stopped by the hand while in flexion.
5.3.1
Model Limitation
As the simplified 3D model created contained assumptions and limitations that af-
fected its accuracy. A simplified 3D model was created and compared the experi-
mental results, however, the model contained assumptions and had limitations that
affected the accuracy. One of the assumptions was that the whole model was a LEHI
material, including the bone.
However, skeletal bone is composed of cortical and
cancellous bone, making the bone a non-homogeneous and anisotropic material.and
the Young’s modulus depend on the direction of the force. This result in the model
being stiffer and the stress values derived higher than what was seen experimentally.
However, as the synthetic bone used, was a homogeneous material, the comparison is
valid. Moreover, the model does not consider the relevant physiological forces nor the
muscles, ligaments, joints, and the other forearm and wrist bones. The force applied
to the model only allows for determining how AdhFix performs as a DRF fixation
material and does not reflect the full physiological system.
In addition, some of the material values for epoxy and screws used in the model are
not specific and may need to be more accurate, as epoxy’s Young’s modulus was cal-
culated using the D-shore stiffness, and the specific steel type of the screws could not
be found. The load applied to the model was also applied to the whole surface area
of the epoxy load protectors. In contrast, in the experiment, the load was applied to
a smaller area on the epoxy’s surface.
The Finite element analyses showed that the von Mises stresses were located at the
fracture site where the bones met and not on the AdhFix. To solve this issue, the
contact between the bone was set to have friction, and the space between the fracture
was set to be 1 mm apart, whereas in the experiment, there was contact between the
bone halves. This means that the stresses obtained from the model do not directly
correlate to that seen in the experiment. Equally important, as mentioned, the thick-
==PAGE:56==
5.4 Future Work
48
ness of the AdhFix in the computational model is 6 mm, which deviates from the
experimentally measured thickness.
5.3.2
Experimental Limitation
The 4-point bending experiment was performed to validate the FEM model and as-
sess the load-bearing capacity and material behaviour of AdhFix as a fixation of a
Colles fracture. . The limitations of the experimental setup, likewise to the compu-
tational model, encompassed the fracture,bending location and the freedom of move-
ment provided by the rollers, which deviated from the anatomical behaviour and
conditions.Using roller supports did notsimulate the fixation conditions in a human
forearm where the proximal elbow radius joint allows for flexion and extension, and
at the distal end, the radius wrist joint allows for flexion–extension and abduction–
adduction [48].
None of which allows for movement across the shaft, which was
allowed in the experiment.
Secondly, achieving the same fracture and fixation on all sawbones was diﬀicult due
to the organic shape of the bone. As a result, they had different surface areas where
the AdhFix adhered and the specimens were not identical. Moreover, the osteotomy
for specimen 3, was performed manually using a handsaw. Furthermore, the fracture
location was a limitation when testing the feasibility of AdhFix as a DRF fixation, as
the distal end of the bone has a flatter and broader surface area, and fixation at the
distal end would, therefore, have allowed for better adhesion to the bone.
Furthermore, the manual starting of the Instron and ARAMIS machines resulted in
altered starting values between the two system.In addition vibrations from the Instron
pump and large loading cell caused a high degree of noise interference in the recorded
data. The ARAMIS, moreover, could not always capture the mesh on every photo,
and thus a few data points were not obtained. Due to the insensitivity of the Instron
machine and large load cell , it was only demonstrated that a fatigue study is feasible.
However, a smaller load cell is necessary to conduct the test. This was not possible
due to time constraints.
5.4
Future Work
This study aimed to investigate the potential use of AdhFix as an orthopaedic hard-
ware for treating DRF’s. While the initial steps have been taken to test its suitability,
future work is required to determine its eﬀicacy as a hybrid fixation method. To
achieve this, additional studies must be conducted, including cadaver tests, to fully
evaluate the suitability of the material. However, the main next steps are: to refine
the model and conduct a fatigue test.
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Future Work
49
To refine the current model, the AdhFix thickness should be reduced to a maximum
of 3 mm to replicate the experimental conditions accurately and define the material as
brittle, more information about the material may be required to do so. The adhesive
fixation between the bone and AdhFix should also be defined. This may require tests
to determine the connection strength. All of these refinements should be compared
to the 4-point bending results to confirms the model. Next the fracture should be
moved to the correct location (Figure ) and a fatigue study should be conducted. The
loading conditions should also be moved to the top of the distal radius to recreate the
loading conditions that the bone would experience in real life, consequently removing
the rollers and epoxy from the shaft. Using the module the mechanical properties
should be further tested by examining the impact of using AdhFix in different shapes
and locations with varying numbers and of screws.AdhFix should further be tested
as a hybrid fixation and thus in combination with different plates, the bone should
also be modified to represent an anatomically correct bone.
In terms of experimental testing, , moving the fracture to the correct location and
conducting an axial compressive test to determine the biomechanical values are rec-
ommended. Most importantly, a fatigue test should be conducted under compression
to assess the ability of the material to withstand the forces it would be exposed to
during rehabilitation, over a minimum of 1 million cycles. This is crucial to determine
if AdhFix can be used either as a fixation or a hybrid fixation method and what loads
the bone can safely withstand during rehabilitation. Strain over the rehabilitation
time should also be evaluated, to determine if AdhFix promotes primary healing,
which can be achieved using DIC.
Overall, this study has the potential to provide valuable insights into the use of Ad-
hFix as an orthopaedic hardware for DRF treatment. At the same time, further work
is required to determine its eﬀicacy fully.
==PAGE:58==
Conclusion
This report concludes that AdhFix is unsuitable as a fixation device for Colles frac-
tures as an alternative to plates and screws, based on its low ultimate strength, load,
and stiffness. The mechanical properties of AdhFix were seen to be inferior to the
commonly used DRF devices. Even though, AdhFix displayed a more significant max-
imum displacement than the metal plate fixations, the fixation failed when subjected
to a small load of 25 N, and since the distal radius undergoes continuous compressive
forces throughout the day, AdhFix would not withstand such impacts. Despite this,
AdhFix still holds potential in orthopaedics, such as when used as a supplement to
plate and screws in complex DRFs and in combination with a cast to protect the
fixation until union has formed.
Overall, the initial steps in creating a 3D biomechanical model of a distal radius
fracture, has been taken. A simplified FEM model was developed to simulate the
behaviour of AdhFix in fixing a DRF. A 4-point bending experiment was conducted
to validate the model. The model yielded different ultimate strength and load results
than the experiment. The experimental ultimate strength showed to be 3.4% of the
models. While the ultimate load of the experiment was 68% of the models, and thus
the model withstood ≈12 N more than the physical AdhFix. The displacement and
strain were consistent between the two methods, the difference between the model
and experimental values may be attributed to the simplifications of the model and
the thickness of AdhFix. Even though, the model does need refinement, it allows for
future studies where the fracture location can be moved to the distal end of the bone,
enabling the future evaluation of the properties of AdhFix if applied to the correct
location.
Moreover, it was found that a fatigue test is feasible on AdhFix, however, a low
load cell would be necessary due to the low ultimate load. Future studies should
investigate the wearability of AdhFix in a fatigue test to determine how it behaves
over time and what the rehabilitative conditions should be if utilised. Finally, the
model and ultimate failure test results demonstrated that the maximum strain that
AdhFix could endure before fracture was 0.35%, and the model’s ultimate strain was
0.25% indicating that primary healing is promoted. However, this finding requires
validation through axial fatigue compression and should be tested in the model under
fatigue.
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
S. Meena, P. Sharma, A. K. Sambharia, and A. Dawar, “Fractures of distal
radius: An overview,” Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care, vol. 3,
p. 325, 2014.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4311337/.
[2]
Mayo Clinic, ”Distal radius fractures in older versus younger patients”,
https://www.mayoclinic.org/medical-professionals/orthopedic-
surgery/news/distal-radius-fractures-in-older-versus-younger-patients.
[3]
T. H. Alter, K. Sandrowski, G. Gallant, M. Kwok, and A. M. Ilyas, “Complica-
tions of volar plating of distal radius fractures: A systematic review,” Journal
of Wrist Surgery, vol. 8, p. 255, 6 2019.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6546498/.
[4]
V. Palola, V. Ponkilainen, T. Huttunen, A. Launonen, and V. M. Mattila, “In-
cidence for volar locking plate removal following distal radius fracture surgery,”
Archives of Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery, vol. 141, pp. 1297–1302, 8 2021.
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00402-020-03565-6.
[5]
D. J. Hutchinson, V. Granskog, J. von Kieseritzky, H. Alfort, P. Stenlund,
Y. Zhang, M. Arner, J. Håkansson, and M. Malkoch, “Highly customizable bone
fracture fixation through the marriage of composites and screws,” Advanced Func-
tional Materials, vol. 31, 10 2021.
[6]
P. Tate and R. R. Seeley, “Seeley’s principles of anatomy physiology,” 2009.
[7]
Edwin Ocran,”Radius and ulna: Anatomy and function”,Kenhub, 2022
https://www.kenhub.com/en/library/anatomy/the-radius-and-the-ulna”,.
[8]
S. Qazi, D. Graham, S. Regal, P. Tang, and J. E. Hammarstedt, “Distal ra-
dioulnar joint instability and associated injuries: A literature review,” Journal
of Hand and Microsurgery, vol. 13, p. 123, 7 2021.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8440053/.
[9]
J. D. Humphrey and S. L. O’rourke, “An introduction to biomechanics.”
[10] H. E. Meema and S. Meema, “Compact bone mineral density of the normal
human radius,” 2009.
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
52
[11] M. R. Bosisio, M. Talmant, W. Skalli, P. Laugier, and D. Mitton, “Apparent
young’s modulus of human radius using inverse finite-element method,” Journal
of Biomechanics, vol. 40, pp. 2022–2028, 1 2007.
[12] K. W. Nellans, E. Kowalski, and K. C. Chung, “The epidemiology of distal radius
fractures,” Hand Clinics, vol. 28, p. 113, 5 2012.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3345129/.
[13] Y. V. Kleinlugtenbelt, S. R. Groen, S. J. Ham, P. Kloen, R. Haverlag, M. P.
Simons, V. A. Scholtes, M. Bhandari, J. C. Goslings, and R. W. Poolman, “Clas-
sification systems for distal radius fractures,” Acta Orthopaedica, vol. 88, p. 681,
11 2017.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5694815/.
[14] T. Hunter, L. Peltier, and P. Lund, “Radiologic history exhibit: Musculoskeletal
eponyms: Who are those guys?,” Radiographics : a review publication of the
Radiological Society of North America, Inc, vol. 20, pp. 819–36, 05 2000.
[15] Johns Hopkins Medicine, ”Distal Radius Fracture (Wrist Fracture)”,
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/distal-radius-
fracture-wrist-fractur.
[16] R. M. Walls, “Rosen’s emergency medicine: Concepts and clinical practice, ninth
edition.”
[17] J. R. Fricker and M. K. Jupiter, “Treatment of extraarticular fracture of the
radius with volar displacement or tilt.”
https://surgeryreference.aofoundation.org/orthopedic-trauma/adult-
trauma/distal-forearm/extraarticular-fracture-of-the-radius-with-volar-
displacement-or-tilt.
[18] T. L. Norris, “Porth’s essentials of pathophysiology, 5th eddition,” wolrhers
kluwer, pp. 724 – 753, 2019.
[19] Ortho Info - The American Academy of orthopeadic surgeons ”Distal Radius
Fractures (Broken Wrist)”
https://orthoinfo.aaos.org/en/diseases–conditions/distal-radius-fractures-
broken-wrist.
[20] D. S. Elliott, K. J. Newman, D. P. Forward, D. M. Hahn, B. Ollivere, K. Kojima,
R. Handley, N. D. Rossiter, J. J. Wixted, R. M. Smith, and C. G. Moran, “A
unified theory of bone healing and nonunion,” Bone and Joint Journal, vol. 98B,
pp. 884–891, 7 2016.
[21] A. Elmi, A. Tabrizi, A. Rouhani, and F. Mirzatolouei, “Treatment of neglected
malunion of the distal radius: a cases series study,” Medical Journal of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, vol. 28, p. 7, 2014. /
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4153520/.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
53
[22] D. K. M. B. Brandon D. MD; Bynum, “Malunion of the distal radius,” Journal
of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 2007.
[23] K. J. Prommersberger and D. L. Fernandez, “Nonunion of distal radius fractures,”
Clinical orthopaedics and related research, vol. 419, pp. 51–56, 2004.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15021131/.
[24] C. P. Hoare, D. R. Dickson, D. J. Armstrong, D. Nuttall, and A. C. Watts,
“Internal fixation for treating distal radius fractures in adults,” The Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, vol. 2017, 9 2017.
[25] Y. Liu and Y. ming Bai, “Eﬀicacy of non‐bridging external fixation in treating
distal radius fractures,” Orthopaedic Surgery, vol. 12, p. 776, 6 2020.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7307264/.
[26] M. Çalbiyik and D. Ipek, “Use of different methods of intramedullary nailing
for fixation of distal radius fractures: A retrospective analysis of clinical and
radiological outcomes,” Medical Science Monitor : International Medical Journal
of Experimental and Clinical Research, vol. 24, p. 377, 1 2018.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5785913/.
[27] A. Karantana, H. H. Handoll, and A. Sabouni, “Percutaneous pinning for treat-
ing distal radial fractures in adults,” The Cochrane Database of Systematic Re-
views, vol. 2020, 2 2020.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7007181/.
[28] D. Disseldorp, P. Hannemann, M. Poeze, and P. Brink, “Dorsal or volar plate
fixation of the distal radius: Does the complication rate help us to choose?,”
Journal of Wrist Surgery, vol. 5, p. 202, 2 2016.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4959891/.
[29] J. Wilson, J. J. Viner, K. S. Johal, and M. J. Woodruff, “Volar locking plate
fixations for displaced distal radius fractures: An evaluation of complications
and radiographic outcomes,” Hand (New York, N.Y.), vol. 13, pp. 466–472, 7
2018.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28691543/.
[30] K. Ozer and K. C. Chung, “The use bone grafts and substitutes in the treatment
of distal radius fractures,” Hand Clinics, vol. 28, p. 217, 5 2012.
[31] S. F. Baumbach, E. Dall’Ara, P. Weninger, A. Antoni, H. Traxler, M. Dörr, and
P. K. Zysset, “Assessment of a novel biomechanical fracture model for distal
radius fractures.,” BMC musculoskeletal disorders, vol. 13, 2012.
[32] M. S. Traberg, “Tissue and movement biomechanics, Lecture slides: Tissue and
movement biomechanics:
Introduction to finite element method,” tech. rep.,
2020.
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
54
[33] Y. Khan, “Characterizing the properties of tissue constructs for regenerative engi-
neering,” in Encyclopedia of Biomedical Engineering (R. Narayan, ed.), pp. 537–
545, Oxford: Elsevier, 2019.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128012383998970.
[34] GOM, ”ARAMIS: User Information-Hardware”, 2008,
www.gom.com.
[35] GOM, ”ARAMIS: User Manual-Software v6.3 and higher”,
www.gom.com, 2013.
[36] GOM, ”ARAMIS High-Speed DIC Systems”,
https://www.gom.com/en/topics/aramis-high-speed-dic-systems.
[37] GOM, ”ARAMIS: Digital Image Correlation and Strain Computation Basics”,
2016
www.gom.com.
[38] C. H. Turner, “Bone strength: Current concepts,” 2006.
[39] ATOS,GOM Brochure ATOS TripleScan, ”Computers and information technol-
ogy company” ,Precise Industrial 3D Metrology.
[40] a ZEISS company White Light vs Blue Light Scanning | Capture 3D”,
https://www.capture3d.com/knowledge-center/blog/white-light-vs-blue-light-
scanning.
[41] I. B. Pfander, Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical
model. Technical University of Denmark, 2022.
[42] Diatom A/S, ”Data sheet: DiaCast 86 epoxyindstøbning - TDS”,2020.
[43] S.
Saseendran,
M.
Wysocki,
and
J.
Varna,
“Cure-state
de-
pendent
viscoelastic
poisson’s
ratio
of
ly5052
epoxy
resin,”
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/20550340.2017.1348002,
vol.
3,
pp.
92–100,
7
2017. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/20550340.2017.1348002.
[44] Flow ”How Waterjet Technology Works - Flow Waterjet”
https://www.flowwaterjet.com/Learn/How-Waterjet-Works.aspxbasics.
[45] Bossard, ”BN 11308 - EJOT® PT® | Bossard Global”
https://www.bossard.com/eshop/global-en/fastening-technology/direct-
assembly-screws/direct-assembly-screws-for-plastics/ejot-
pt/p/11308/?clear=true.
[46] Bossard, ”Technical information - Fastening technology: Materials screws and
nut”,
https://media.bossard.com/es-en/-/media/bossard-
group/website/documents/technical-resources/en/f-017-en.pdf.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
55
[47] Ovako, ”Material data sheet: steel grade 34CrNiMo6”
https://steelnavigator.ovako.com/steel-grades/34crnimo6/.
[48] R. A. Prokopenko, A. A. Frolov, E. V. Biryukova, and A. Roby-Brami, “Assess-
ment of the accuracy of a human arm model with seven degrees of freedom,”
Journal of Biomechanics, vol. 34, pp. 177–185, 2 2001.
[49] H. C. Liu, Y. H. Zeng, and C. L. Lin, “Mechanical comparison of a novel hybrid
and commercial dorsal double plating for distal radius fracture: In vitro fatigue
four-point bending and biomechanical testing,” Materials (Basel, Switzerland),
vol. 14, 10 2021.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34683780/.
[50] F. Irgens, “Continuum mechanics,” 2008.
[51] M. S. Traberg, “Tissue and movement biomechanics, Lecture slides: Tissue and
movement biomechanics: Stress and strain Student compendium,” tech. rep.,
2020.
[52] E. Pavlatos, “Finite element analysis of radius and ulna,” 2013.
[53] S. M. Levin, C. O. Nelson, J. D. Botts, G. A. Teplitz, Y. Kwon, and F. Serra-
Hsu, “Biomechanical evaluation of volar locking plates for distal radius fractures,”
Hand (New York, N.Y.), vol. 3, p. 55, 3 2008.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2528971/.
[54] D. P. Moss, K. R. Means, B. G. Parks, and C. L. Forthman, “A biomechanical
comparison of volar locked plating of intra-articular distal radius fractures: Use
of 4 versus 7 screws for distal fixation,” 2011.
==PAGE:64==
Appendices
==PAGE:65==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F
Dept.
Technical reference
Created by
Approved by
Document type
Document status
Title
DWG No.
Rev.
Date of issue
Sheet
23/01/2023
Comsol 3D geomerty of AdhFix x Radius
23/01/2023
1/1
Model 1: Colle's fracture on midshaft
RAIDUS_with_ AdhFix_Comsol_geomorty
Amber Labuz
DTU heath technology
50mm
27mm
75.2mm
Ø23.6mm
Ø23.6mm
31mm
40mm
30mm
43.5mm
252.83mm
12.07mm
50.11mm
3.07mm
6.92mm
10.04mm
50mm
AdhFix
Proximal radius
Distal radius
AdhFix
Epoxy mount
for support pins
Epoxy mount
for loading pins
Epoxy mount
for loading pins
Epoxy mount
for support pins
AdhFix
27mm
9.99mm
Steel screws
Appendix: Blue Print
==PAGE:66==
Appendix Appendix: Instron and ARAMIS
58
Appendix: Instron and ARAMIS
Figure 1. The 4-point bendind set up on the Instron with the ARAMIS system.
==PAGE:67==
Appendix Appendix: 2D model
59
Figure 2. Setup of Instron and ARAMIS system.
Appendix: 2D model
Figure 3. The geometric design of the 2D model.
==PAGE:68==
Appendix Appendix: Bone holders for fracture fixation
60
Appendix: Bone holders for fracture fixation
Figure 4. To ensure the bone’s did not move during the fixation, clay bases were created
to hold the bone in place while the surgeons completed the fixation.
==PAGE:69==
Appendix Appendix: MATLAB code
61
Appendix: MATLAB code
Experimental data processing:
1 [language=matlab]
2
3 clear all;
4 close all;
5 clc;
6
7 %Experimental data processing
8 data = xlsread('Test2data_withtopandbot.xlsx') ;
9 dis =data(:,1);
10 Displacment = abs(dis);
11 %F = abs(data(:,3));
12 F = abs(data(:,3));
13 epsilon_top = abs(data(:,11));
14 epsilon_bot = abs(data(:,10));
15
16 % real:
17 CSA = 3.1*9.5
18
19 b = 9.5; % width of the rectangle
20 h = 3.1; % Thickness/hight of the rectangle
21
22
23 %zero for both signals and Force-displacement plot.
24 figure;
25 Pos = Displacment -min(Displacment);
26 Force = F-mean(F(1:5));
27 plot(Pos,Force);
28 title('Force-Displacment of specimen 2');
29 xlabel('Position');
30 ylabel('Force');
31
32 %max force and displacement
33 [max_F, index] = max(Pos);
34 Displacment_max = Pos(index);
35 plot(Displacment , Pos,Displacment_max , max_F,'rx','LineWidth',2.5);
36 hold on
37 plot([Displacment_max ,Displacment_max],[0,max_F],':r','LineWidth',2)
38 grid on
39
40
41 %From DIC
42 figure;
43 Expepsilon = epsilon_top(30:end);
44 ExpForce = Force(30:end);
45
46 DICStrain = (Expepsilon-min(Expepsilon));
47 DICStress = (ExpForce/CSA);
48
49 %Ultimate stress and strain
50 [ dicUltStress , IdxMax ] = max ( DICStress ) ;
==PAGE:70==
Appendix Appendix: MATLAB code
62
51 dicUltStrain = DICStrain ( IdxMax ) ;
52 IdxStartexp = find(DICStrain >0.003,1,'first');
53 IdxEndexp = find(DICStrain <0.19,1,'last');
54
55
56
57 %DICStress = (Expepsilon*28000);
58 %plot(DICStrain,DICStress);
59
60 plot(DICStress,DICStrain);
61 title('Stress-strain curve DIC');
62 xlabel('Strain');
63 ylabel('Stress');
64
65
66
67 FitExp = polyfit(DICStrain(IdxStartexp:IdxEndexp),DICStress(IdxStartexp:
IdxEndexp),1);
68 ExpMod = FitExp(1);
69
70 %Now, the True Ultimate stress and strain and the True Elastic Modulus are
71 %calculated.
72 TStrain = log(1+DICStrain);
73 TStress = DICStress.*(1+DICStrain);
74 [TUltStress, IdxMax] = max(TStress);
75 TUltStrain = TStrain(IdxMax);
76 FitTru = polyfit(TStrain(IdxStartexp:IdxEndexp),TStress(IdxStartexp:
IdxEndexp),1);
77 TruMod = FitTru(1);
78
79 %Finally, a graph is created with both Engineering and True stress-strain
80 %curves. As can be seen in the image, the dashed line corresponds to the
81 %True values, while the solid line corresponds to the Engineering ones.
82 figure('DefaultAxesFontSize',17)
83 hold on;
84
85
86 plot(TStrain,TStress,'--',DICStrain,DICStress,'--','LineWidth',2);
87
88
89 plot(TStrain(IdxStartexp:IdxMax),polyval(FitTru,TStrain(IdxStartexp:IdxMax))
,'LineWidth',1);
90 plot(DICStrain(IdxStartexp:IdxMax),polyval(FitExp,DICStrain(IdxStartexp:
IdxMax)),'LineWidth',1);
91
92
93 title('Stress-strain curve: specimen 2');
94 xlabel('Strain (%)');
95 ylabel('Stress (MPa)');
96 legend('True Stress-Strain','DIC Stress-strain');
97 hold off;
98
99
100 %MOI
101 I = b * h^3 / 12; % calculate the second moment of area
==PAGE:71==
Appendix Appendix: MATLAB code
63
102 disp(I); % display the result
103
104 %Beninding stiffness
105 B_stiff=(ExpMod*I);
106 %work to failure
107 FDarea = trapz(Pos(1:IdxMax), Force(1:IdxMax));
108 SSarea = trapz(DICStrain(1:IdxMax), DICStress(1:IdxMax));
The model data processing:
1
2 %Compressve stress and strain from the model
3 datas1 = xlsread('exp_YM_new_top.xlsx')
4
5 %roller
6 F = abs(datas1(1:49,1));
7 Displacment = abs(datas1(1:49,2));
8
9 Stress = (datas1(1:49,3))/ 1e6; % convert to MPa
10 strain = ((datas1(1:49,4)));
11
12
13 %COMSOL
14 CSA = 6*9.5;
15 b = 9.5;
16 h = 6;
17
18 %MOI
19 I = b * h^3 / 12; % calculate the second moment of area
20 disp(I); % display the result
21
22 %beninding stifness
23 ExpMod=2.7;
24
25 B_stiff=(ExpMod*I);
26
27 figure;
28 plot(strain,Stress);
29 title('Stress-strain curve Compressive');
30 xlabel('Strain');
31 ylabel('Stress');
32
33 %the 25N was seen at point 35
34 Force25 = F(1:35, :);
35 Diss25 = Displacment(1:35, :);
36
37 figure;
38 figure('DefaultAxesFontSize',17)
39 [max_F, index] = max(F);
40 Displacment_max = Displacment(index);
41 [max_Force25 , index] = max(Force25);
42 Displacment_max25 = Diss25(index);
43 plot(Displacment , F,Displacment_max , max_F,'rx','LineWidth',2.5);
==PAGE:72==
Appendix Appendix: MATLAB code
64
44 plot(Displacment , F,Displacment_max25 , max_Force25 ,'rx','LineWidth',2.5);
45 hold on
46 plot([Displacment_max ,Displacment_max],[0,max_F],':r','LineWidth',2)
47 plot([Displacment_max25 ,Displacment_max25],[0,max_Force25],':r','LineWidth'
,2)
48 grid on
49 xlabel('Displacement (mm)','FontSize', 18);
50 ylabel('Force (N)','FontSize', 18);
51 %title('Force-Displacement Curve Fixed Model','FontSize', 18);
52 title('Force-Displacement Curve Roller Model','FontSize', 18);
53
54 %Stress-strain
55 first_strain_value = strain(1, :);
56 %figure;
57 figure('DefaultAxesFontSize',17)
58 Strain_p = (strain./first_strain_value*100-100);
59 plot(Strain_p,Stress,'C','LineWidth',2.5);
60 title('Compressive Stress-strain curve Model');
61 grid on
62 %title('Stress-strain curve Roller Model');
63 xlabel('Strain [%]');
64 ylabel('Stress [MPa]');
65
66
67 %ultamite compressive
68 % raw
69 [Ul2tStress1 , IdxMax ] = max ( Stress ) ;
70 UltS2train = Strain_p ( IdxMax ) ;
71
72
73 %work to failure
74 FDarea = trapz(Displacment(1:49), F(1:49));
75 SSarea = trapz(Strain_p(1:49), Stress(1:49));
76
77 %strain at experimental ultimate strength
78 stress_value = 0.75;
79 strain_value = interp1(Stress,Strain_p,stress_value ,'linear');
80
81
82 %Tensile stress and strain from the model
83 datas2 = xlsread('exp_YM_new_bot.xlsx') ;
84
85 Stress2 = abs(datas2(1:49,3))/ 1e6; % convert to MPa
86 strain2 = abs((datas2(1:49,4)));
87
88
89 %figure;
90 plot(strain2,Stress2);
91 title('Stress-strain curve tensile');
92 xlabel('Strain');
93 ylabel('Stress');
94
95
96 %Stress-strain
97 first_strain_value2 = strain2(1, :);
==PAGE:73==
Appendix Appendix: MATLAB code
65
98 figure;
99 figure('DefaultAxesFontSize',17)
100 Strain_p2 = (strain2./first_strain_value2*100-100);
101 plot(Strain_p2,Stress2,'C','LineWidth',2.5);
102 title('Tensile Stress-strain curve Model');
103 grid on
104 %title('Stress-strain curve Roller Model');
105 xlabel('Strain [%]');
106 ylabel('Stress [MPa]');
107
108 %ultamite tensile raw
109 [Ul2tStress2 , IdxMax ] = max ( Stress2 ) ;
110 UltS2train2 = Strain_p2 ( IdxMax ) ;
111
112
113 %strain at experimental ultimate strength
114 stress_value2 = -0.75;
115 strain_value2 = interp1(Stress2,Strain_p2,stress_value2 ,'linear');
116 %work to failure
117 SSarea2 = trapz(Strain_p2(1:49), Stress2(1:49));
118
119 %raw stress curves together
120 figure('DefaultAxesFontSize',20)
121 plot(Strain_p2,Stress2,'-',Strain_p,Stress,'-','LineWidth',2);
122 title('Stress-strain curves model');
123 grid on;
124 ax = gca;
125 ax.XAxisLocation = 'origin';
126 ax.YAxisLocation = 'origin';
127 hold on;
128
129 % Fill area under curve 1
130 [X1, Y1] = stairs(Strain_p, Stress);
131 X1 = [X1; X1(end)];
132 Y1 = [Y1; 0];
133 fill(X1, Y1, 'red', 'FaceAlpha', 0.2);
134
135 % Fill area under curve 2
136 [X2, Y2] = stairs(Strain_p2, Stress2);
137 X2 = [X2; X2(end)];
138 Y2 = [Y2; 0];
139 fill(X2, Y2, 'blue', 'FaceAlpha', 0.2);
140
141 xlabel('Strain (%)');
142 ylabel('Stress (MPa)');
143 legend('Tensile','compressive');
144
145
146 hold off;
==PAGE:74==
Appendix Appendix: Ultimate Failure Results Specimen 1
66
Appendix: Ultimate Failure Results Specimen 1
Figure 5. Force-displacement specimen 1
Figure 6. Stress strain curve comparing the true and experiment stress-strain curve, spec-
imen 1
==PAGE:75==
==PAGE:76==
