==PAGE:1==
Automation, deep-learning image analysis,
and data processing for multispectral micro-
scopy
Master Thesis
DTU Fotonik
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multis-
pectral microscopy
Master Thesis
Febuary, 2023
By
Aksel Chiristan Møller
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Bygn-
ing 343, Ørsteds Pl.,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months in collaboration with the Depart-
ment of Photonics at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge of the subjects of Photonics,
computer vision, and automation engineering.
Aksel Chiristan Møller - s173935
Signature
Date
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
ii
22/02/23
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The Multi-Spectral Upconversion Imaging (MSUI) system is a promising tool for
the clinical diagnosis and treatment of various diseases due to its ability to detect
unique chemical signatures in organic tissues, its high signal-to-noise ratio, low
cost, and room-temperature operation. This project investigates the possibility
of improving the scanning speed of the MSUI system by incorporating a galvano
scanner and implementing a ResNet deep-learning neural network for the auto-
matic segmentation of cancer regions in the samples based on their chemical
composition.
The MSUI system’s compatibility with a standard silicon chip makes it an attract-
ive alternative for medical and clinical settings where cost-effectiveness is critical.
Moreover, the MSUI system provides higher resolution and specificity for identify-
ing chemical compounds compared to traditional scanners and microscopes that
use visible light or fluorescence-based Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
(FTIR).
The integration of a galvano scanner has the potential to increase the scanning
speed of the MSUI system and enable faster and more accurate scans of tissue
samples. However, implementing this technology into the MSUI setup requires
overcoming technical challenges.
The ResNet model trained on a tiff file, similar to the previous CDA method, could
not detect cancer accurately. Therefore, further research is needed to develop
more precise and efficient methods for cancer detection using image analysis.
Overall, the MSUI system’s unique capabilities, coupled with advancements in
scanning speed and image analysis, hold significant promise for the future of
medical imaging, enabling rapid, high-resolution imaging of tissue samples and
facilitating accurate diagnosis and treatment of various diseases.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Aksel Chiristan Møller, MSc Automation Engineering, DTU
Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg, Associate Professor, Department of Electrical and
Photonics Engineering at Technical University of Denmark
Thanks to Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg for guiding me through the project as the
primary supervisor and helping to explain some of the more complicated laser
physics.
Siavash Arjormand Bigdeli, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Math-
ematics and Computer Science at Technical University of Denmark
Thanks to Siavash Arjormand Bigdeli for guidance with the computer vision part
of the project, a giving me ideas for how to approach the problem.
Rasmus Lyngbye Pedersen, Postdoc, Department of Electrical and Photonics
Engineering at Technical University of Denmark
Thanks to Rasmus Lyngbye Pedersen for helping me understand the scanning
process, the following image processing, and setting up some new hardware for
a part of the project.
Katrine Elisabeth Karmisholt, , Chief Consultant, Dept. of Dermatology at Bis-
pebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital
Thanks to Katrine Elisabeth Karmisholt for providing the microscope images of the
H&E Stained biopsies and marking where cancer areas are on these images.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Biopsies and Mohs Surgery
3
2.1
Tissue type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Mohs Surgery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Tissue staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Laser physics and linear and nonlinear optics
6
3.1
Upconversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Theoretical Resolution Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Multi Spectral Upconversion Imaging System
11
4.1
MSUI system setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Automation of tests and scan area acquisition
14
5.1
Selecting Scan Areas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
Galvano Scanner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6
Computer vision analysis of samples
21
6.1
What method has previously been used to detect cancer? . . . . .
21
6.2
Canonical Discriminant Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.3
Data available to train the ResNet Neural Network . . . . . . . . .
23
6.4
Constructing the ResNet Neural Network (NOT COMPLETE) . . .
23
6.5
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7
Discussion
27
7.1
Using a galvano scanner to control the beam path
. . . . . . . . .
27
7.2
Analysing the acquired images with ResNet . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
8
Conclusion
29
Bibliography
30
A Mohs surgery
31
B Laser Optics
32
C Selecting scan area UI
33
D Galvano Scanner tests
39
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
v
==PAGE:7==
E
Data for computer vision
45
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Spectroscopy has emerged as an essential tool in many fields, enabling in-depth
analysis of materials ranging from celestial bodies to human cells and smaller
particles. Different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum are probed using vari-
ous systems, providing diverse information. However, not all regions of the elec-
tromagnetic spectrum can be easily accessed, necessitating the development of
novel systems and techniques. The Multi-Spectral Upconversion Imaging (MSUI)
system is one such system that is being developed, which is capable of acquiring
high signal-to-noise ratio mid-infrared (MIR) images using a standard silicon chip
at room temperature.
One significant advantage of the MSUI system is its ability to detect distinct chem-
ical signatures by measuring the absorption by the sample when it is scanned with
different wavelengths. This allows for analysing organic tissues and non-organic
material in great detail. It could, for instance, be used to quickly detect cancer
in biopsies, or for gaining information about changes in the molecular structure
of plastic after being exposed to different kinds of stress, as this changes the ab-
sorption by the martial. The system can differentiate between various molecules
and structures by utilising the mid-infrared (MIR) spectral range, providing unique
information about the sample under investigation. This capability is particularly
relevant in medical applications, where detecting specific chemical compounds
can aid in diagnosing and treating various diseases.
Compared to traditional scanners and microscopes that use visible light or fluor-
escence based Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), the MSUI system
has several advantages. Firstly, the MIR range provides higher resolution and
specificity for identifying chemical compounds, enabling more accurate analysis
of tissue samples. Secondly, the MSUI system can image large areas with a
high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at room temperature. In contrast, traditional FTIR
methods require cryogenic cooling, limiting their clinical applicability. When using
viable light for analysing tissue samples, the samples also have to be stained in
one way or another, adding a significant amount of time to the process. Finally,
the MSUI system’s compatibility with a standard silicon chip makes it relatively
inexpensive and an attractive alternative for medical and clinical settings where
cost-effectiveness is critical.
Overall, the MSUI system’s ability to detect unique chemical signatures in organic
tissues, coupled with its high SNR, low cost, and room-temperature operation,
makes it a promising tool for the clinical diagnosis and treatment of various dis-
eases. In this project, the possibility of improving the scanning speed of the MSUI
system by incorporating a galvano scanner has been investigated. By integrating
this technology, faster and more accurate scans of tissue samples increase the
system’s throughput, which is particularly relevant if the system were to be used
in the medical field, where analysis of tissue samples, for instance, cancerous
regions, often takes up a significant amount of time.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
1
==PAGE:9==
Additionally, a ResNet deep-learning neural network has been implemented to
analyse the data gathered from the MSUI system. This approach enables the
automatic segmentation of cancer regions in the samples based on their chemical
composition.
Together, these advancements hold significant promise for the future of medical
imaging, enabling rapid, high-resolution imaging of tissue samples and facilitating
accurate diagnosis and treatment of various diseases.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
2
==PAGE:10==
2
Biopsies and Mohs Surgery
This chapter will briefly explain the type of tissue used during the project and briefly
introduce Mohs surgery and the process of staining tissue, the current standard
for finding cancer cells in biopsies.
2.1
Tissue type
As this project is focused on finding cancer, it is essential to keep in mind what
kind of tissue and type of cancer one is working with. For this project, the work is
focused on finding cancer in the skin and layers just below the skin.
Skin is the human body’s largest organ, with an adult having about 2m2 of skin and
a weight of around 3.6 kg. The skin helps the body by protecting the more sens-
itive parts from the elements and potential infectious sources[6]. Therefore, the
skin has a relatively high risk of developing cancerous infections. Skin cancer is
commonly divided into three types basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma,
and melanoma [13]. It also has several structures built into it, which could inter-
fere with various cancer detection methods. These structures are, among others,
hair follicles and sweat glands.
The human skin comprises several layers divided into the Epidermis, the Dermis,
and the Hypodermis. Which will be given a brief explanation below.
2.1.1
Epidermis
The Epidermis is the outermost layer of the skin and ranges in thickness between
0.5mm on the eyelid and 1.5mm on the palms and soles. This layer of the skin
primarily consists of keratinocytes and melanocytes, and Keratinocytes make up
around 80% of the total cell population in the Epidermis.
The keratinocytes are responsible for a process called keratinisation, which is a
two-phase process. The first phase is the synthesises of keratin, and the second
is the breakdown of keratin. This makes the keratinocytes capable of creating
keratin filaments. This filament is used in cells to stiffen them and allow them to
withstand environmental damage better. There are several types of tissue keratins
and hair-type keratins[6].
As most skin cancer types originate and spread from the Epidermis, it is vital that
the detection method used can reliably differentiate between the different kinds of
keratinocytes and cancerous cells. One problem is that the cells making up the
hair follicles and the outermost layer of the Epidermis also have a high cell count
pr area. They are making it difficult to differentiate between the normal densely
packed cells and rapidly dividing cells. Cancer cells often divide too quickly for
the site to expand, so cancerous regions have a higher concentration of cells than
usual.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
3
==PAGE:11==
2.1.2
Dermis
Just beneath the Epidermis is the Dermis. This layer consists of fibrous and elastic
tissue, providing structural and nutritional support to the Epidermis. The top of the
dermis, called the papillary, consists primarily of loosely arranged collagen fibres.
Beneath this layer, the reticular dermis exists. This layer is made from thicker
bundles of collagen fibres[6].
The dermis also contains multiple minor blood vessels, involuntary muscles, and
nerves. All of these cell types could make it even more challenging to detect can-
cer cells. However, this project will primarily focus on finding cancer in the Epi-
dermis and the most outer layer of the dermis. These challenges are not relevant
to the work during the project.
2.1.3
Hypodermis
The final layer of the skin is the Hypodermis. This layer contains several fat cells
and is a reserve energy supply for the body. The Hypodermis also allows the skin
to slide across the underlying structures[6]. However, this layer of the skin has
even less relevance to this project as the lower layer of the dermis and will not be
discussed further.
2.2
Mohs Surgery
Because the focus of the project lies on skin cancer in the face (as mentioned in
chapter 1). It is desired to remove as little of the healthy tissue as possible while
removing all of the cancerous cells to prevent the redevelopment of cancer in that
area. Therefore a particular procedure called Mohs Surgery has been developed.
Mohs surgery has several advantages over an excision, with the two primaries
being that Mohs surgery has a much lower risk of missing part of the tumour and
a much lower risk for a tumour to reoccur. For Basal Cell Carcinoma tumours, the
risk of a recurring tumour after five years is 1% to 1.4% compared to 10.1% to
17.4% for Excision[10]. In addition to the lower risk of a recurring tumour, Mohs
surgery is much more precise, allowing for its use in delicate areas such as the
face.
Mohs surgery is usually performed under local anaesthesia, with the patient fully
awake. The area with the tumour is marked, and the surgeon then cuts out as
much of the tumour as possible in a dome shape. The outermost layer of the
dome is then sliced from the sample and investigated for any suspicious areas
where the tumour crosses the boundary of the tissue extracted. The new regions
with tumours are mapped out, and Mohs surgery is performed again. This process
repeats until there are no signs of the tumour penetrating the tissue extracted by
the surgeon[10]. An illustration of the procedure can be seen in fig. A.1, where
steps two and three are repeated as many times as needed.
2.3
Tissue staining
For Mohs surgery to be performed with the accuracy it has, a pathologist needs
to determine where cancerous cells are located precisely. For this, the cutout
sections are sliced into very thin slices and stained to highlight high concentrations
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
4
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: The figure shows an image of a biopsy stained with the H&E method
as seen through a microscope.
of cells. The most common staining method is H&E-staining (Hematoxylin and
Eosin staining). This method was first used in the 1830s [14] for biological samples
and was in the late 1800s adopted by the medical field. This method is still the
primary staining method for detecting cancer due to its relatively easy application
and precise result.
After a biopsy has been sliced into thin slices, the tissue is stained with Hem-
atoxylin, which binds to the cell nucleus and stains them blue. After that, the slice
is washed to remove excess and is stained with Eosin which binds to cytoplasm
and collagen, giving these areas a red or pink colour. With the two stains, a patho-
logist can easily distinguish between regions with a high cell nucleus concentration
and regions with a very low cell nucleus concentration. A higher cell nucleus indic-
ates more cells in a smaller area[12]. This method has some shortcomings, as it
does not allow for identifying specific protein groups, for example. For this, other
staining methods are available, such as IHC (Immunohistochemistry) and other
special stains. Using IHC, a pathologist can use specific antibodies to bind to an-
tigens or specific cell types. Thereby locating specific cells instead of just groups
of cells. However, these methods are irrelevant to this project, as IHC often are
too specific to find cancer in a sample from Mohs surgery unless the operation is
performed to remove particular cells, and will not be described further. An image
of a biopsy stained with the H&E method can be seen in fig. 2.1.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
5
==PAGE:13==
3
Laser physics and linear and
nonlinear optics
This chapter will introduce and explain the general theory behind upconversion,
the requirements for using it, theoretical resolution limits, and the limitations of
such a system.
3.1
Upconversion
Typically upconversion in laser physics refers to the process in which photons of
lower energy (typically in the near-infrared or visible spectrum) are absorbed by
a material and then re-emitted as photons of higher energy (typically in the mid-
or far-infrared region of the spectrum). This process can be achieved through
various mechanisms, such as two-photon absorption or energy transfer between
ions or molecules.
However, the multi-spectral upconversion imaging system (MSUI) up-converts the
photons by combining the IR laser with another (the pump) laser to use a typical
silicon detector in contrast to the more standard Fourier-transform infrared spec-
troscopy system (FTIR), which uses a much more expensive and complex sensor
to gather data from the infrared lasers. The main disadvantages of the FTIR sys-
tem are the need for cryogenic cooling, the slow operating speed, and the low
sensitivity. The silicone detector solves these flaws. It can operate under aver-
age room temperatures, is mass-produced (driving down the cost), and has a high
sensitivity in the near-infrared and visible spectrum[4].
In its simplest form, the upconversion works by adding the pump laser frequency to
the MIR signal, thereby increasing the frequency to convert the MIR signal to a NIR
(near infrared) signal. This works because a laser’s frequency and wavelength are
inversely related; an increase in frequency decreases the wavelength[11]. The
relationship between wavelength and frequency is illustrated in fig. 3.1, or as an
equation, it is given by:
f = c
λ
(3.1)
Where f is the frequency, c is the speed of light, and λ is the wavelength. This is
a simplified version, assuming that the propagation speed of the laser is close to
the speed of light in a vacuum.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
6
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: A overview of wavelengths and the corresponding frequencies of those
wavelengths. The illustration covers the relevant electromagnetic spectrum for the
use case in this project. The illustration is from the Britannica [3]
3.1.1
Momentum and energy
As stated previously, the upconversion of a laser with another laser combines the
two lasers. This happens in a beam combiner, allowing them to pass through a
nonlinear medium together. This medium allows the lasers to interact with each
other according to the medium susceptibility, which can convert the signal to a
higher frequency with a suitable nonlinear medium. As mentioned in the previous
section, an upconversion increases the frequency of the laser, decreasing the
wavelength and increasing the energy of each photon. This is needed to use a
standard silicon chip as the detector, as it requires more energy to cross the band
gap of a silicon diode than a diode used for a non-up-converted laser. Energy (E)
and momentum (p) must be conserved through the upconversion process in the
direction of propagation. The following equations describe this.
E1 = E2 + E3
(3.2)
and
p1 = p2 + p3
(3.3)
The energy can also be described by the equation:
E = h · f
(3.4)
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
7
==PAGE:15==
and the momentum by:
p = h · k
(3.5)
Where h is Planck’s constant, v is the frequency, and k = 2π·n
λ
is the wavenumber
with n as the refraction index. By combining eq. (3.4) and eq. (3.1) into eq. (3.2),
one can see that the energy conservation can be rewritten to:
1
λ1
= 1
λ2
+ 1
λ3
(3.6)
Likewise eq. (3.3) can be rewritten with k = 2π·n
λ
to:
n(λ1)
λ1
= n(λ2)
λ2
+ n(λ3)
λ3
(3.7)
n(λ) is the refraction index and depends on the temperature of the material and
the wavelength of the laser (or light) entering the material, which means that it is
essential to keep the material at a constant operating temperature for predictable
behaviour[11].
Form eq. (3.6) and eq. (3.7), one can see the wavelength of the lasers entering the
material is fixed then there is a specific combination of refraction indices. However,
with different refraction indices in a material to match each wavelength, dispersion
will occur where different wavelengths refract at different angles. A birefringent
material is needed to mitigate this in a system that uses different wavelengths
(such as the MSUI system). In a birefringent material, the refraction index also
depends on the polarisation angle and the propagation of the laser through the
material. These characteristics of a birefringent material allow for the mitigation
of dispersion caused by different wavelengths[11].
3.1.2
Linear To Nonlinear Optics
Linear optics describes the propagation of a laser, or light, through a homogen-
eous transparent material. Meaning the harmonic waves will propagate through
the material while upholding the principles of superposition and propagating without
distortion due to either material or interference from other electromagnetic waves.
It is possible to easily model an electrical field applied to a transparent material
by using the velocity of the wave and wavelength. This holds for as long as the
intensity of the electromagnetic wave is relatively small. However, as the intensity
of the electromagnetic wave increases, nonlinear effects overtake the linear ef-
fects as the most dominant aspect, and the principles of superposition no longer
hold. The material and the wave propagating through it will begin to interact, al-
tering the wave and creating harmonics. Potentially let the material emit waves of
frequencies other than the one desired.
The generated harmonics induced is a nonlinear polarisation P (t):
P (t) = ϵ0χ(1)E(t) + ϵ0χ(2)E2(t) + ϵ0χ(3)E3(t)...
(3.8)
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
8
==PAGE:16==
The first order of eq. (3.8) is the linear properties of the material, while the follow-
ing orders describe the nonlinear properties of the polarisation of the electrified
through the material. ϵ0 is the permittivity of free space and E(t) is the electrical
field applied.
3.1.3
Phase matching
For an efficient upconversion, the lasers need to be phase matched. The phase
mismatch can be defined as:
δk = k3 −(k1 + k2)
(3.9)
where k is the wavenumber. Phase matching can be obtained through birefringent
phase matching in a birefringent material. From the direction of the polarisation,
the refraction index will split into the ordinary index (no) and the extraordinaire
index (ne). Suppose the electric field is perpendicular to the optical axis. In that
case, the refractive index is equal to the ordinary index. If the field is parallel to
the optical axis, the refraction index equals the extraordinaire index.
3.2
Theoretical Resolution Limits
An MSUI system has both a spectral resolution and a spatial resolution, which
poses theoretical limits to how high a resolution the output can have. The spectral
resolution is the system’s ability to differentiate between different wavelengths,
with the limiting factor being either the light source or the detector. Whichever has
the narrowest output or response.
The spatial resolution is the smallest possible distance between two features,
where the system can differentiate the two. This depends on how well the sys-
tem can focus down the laser when the detector collects the signal.
As the beam of the laser can be described as having a Gaussian distribution, the
irradiance of the beam can be described as in eq. (3.10), provided that the power
of the laser beam is constant.
I(ρ, z) = I0( w0
w(z))2 · e
( −2ρ2
w2(z) )
(3.10)
With I0 being the maximal irradiance, w0 is the spot radius at the beam waist,
w(z) is the radius of the beam distance z from the beam waist, and ρ is the radial
distance from the optical axis[11]. From this, it can be seen that the irradiance
of the beam decreases as the distance z increases. This is because the beam
is only focused at the beam’s waist, and the beam crosssection expands as it
passes this point. The beam also has a larger crosssection before it reaches the
beam’s waist. Therefore, focusing the beam as much as possible when it hits the
detector is vital, but this solution does not come without drawbacks.
When light passes through an optical aperture, the light is likely to diffract and
cause small extra patterns to appear. This pattern is likely a bright spot in the
centre with several rings around it for a standard lens. This is called an airy disc.
See fig. B.1 for an example of an airy disk. To differentiate two airy disks (from two
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
9
==PAGE:17==
different laser beams), the disk must be at least separated by a distance equal to
their radius. The minimum distance separating the airy disk can be found by:
xmin = f · 1.22λ
D
(3.11)
Where xmin is the minimal distance the two points must be separated by, D is the
diameter of the aperture, λ is the beam’s wavelength, and f is the focal length
of the aperture. Therefore, the resolution depends on the lens’s focal length, the
beam’s wavelength, and the aperture’s inverse diameter. The interference from
the rings caused by the diffraction can be mitigated in practice, as it will only occur
if the entire lens is used. When the Gaussian beam is approximated to be 0 at the
edges of the lens, the rings will disappear at the cost of a smaller usable diameter
of the aperture. Hence using a numerical aperture eq. (3.11) can be expressed
as
NA = D
f
(3.12)
xmin = 1.22λ
NA
(3.13)
NA, the numerical aperture, can not take every possible value in practice, as any
lens has physical limitations. The lens used in the MSUI system has a NA = 1,
which gives a minimum distance of:
xmin = 1.22λ
(3.14)
The minimal distance between two points in the MSUI system only depends on
the source’s wavelength, between 5.5µm and 10.5µm. Giving the following xmin =
6.71µm and xmin = 12.81µm respectively.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 10
==PAGE:18==
4
Multi Spectral Upconversion
Imaging System
The chapter contains the system schematics of the Multi-Spectral Upconversion
Imaging (MSUI) system used during the project, a description of image acquisition,
and a summary of the noise sources affecting the system’s performance.
4.1
MSUI system setup
The current MSUI system consists of two lasers, several mirrors to direct the
lasers, a detector, two filters, a beam combiner, and a nonlinear medium. A basic
setup schematic can be seen in fig. 4.1.
The Quantum-cascade laser (QCL), Lasertuner LT-3000 3 tuner, provides the light
source for the system. This QCL is a tunable narrowband laser that produces
beams within 5.5µm to 10.5µm wavelengths. The QCL comprises three independ-
ent lasers that have their beams guided through the same output of the QCL.
Changing which of the lasers are active and the different modes of the individual
lasers allow for a broader range of laser wavelengths to be produced than if a
single laser was used.
The mirrors guiding the laser beams are gold-plated and guide the beam through
the system. The gold plating provides a highly reflective surface so that losses,
as the beam is directed, are kept to a minimum.
The beam then passes through a 12.5mm focal length, focusing the beam down
on the stage and the sample. This lens has a NA of 1, and if all of its surfaces
were eliminated, it would result in a pixel size of around 10µm by 10µm per pixel
depending on the wavelength as previously discussed with eq. (3.14). However,
in practice, not the entirety of the lens is used to avoid the pattern from diffraction
if it hits the outer rim of the lens. However, it is still a good approximation to use
NA = 1.
The stage holds the sample as the system scans it and can move along the two
axes, x and y, perpendicular to the laser beam. The beam is fixed with the current
system, and the stage moves to make a raster scan of the selected scan area. The
stage in the implementation is an ASI motorised Microscope LX-4000, which has
very accurate and fine control. It can move the stage in steps of as little as 200nm
and is moved in a snack-like pattern. The step seized during a scan is determined
by the user when making a scan. It depends on the desired resolution of the final
scan, with maximal resolution depending on the focal spotseize.
After the stage, the beam passes through another lens with a 12.5mm focal length
to rectify the beam and guide it with another mirror into a lens which focuses it into
the beam combiner and nonlinear crystal. The laser from the pump is also focused
by a lens so that it can probably be combined with the signal before entering the
non-linear crystal. The pump laser is a 1-watt laser with a wavelength of 1064nm.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy
11
==PAGE:19==
Figure 4.1:
A simplified diagram of the current MSUI system.
The golden
squares are mirrors deflecting the beams, the blue ovals represent the lenses,
the hexagons are filters, and the rectangles are different specific hardware such
as the QCL, the stage, the beam collector, the pump, and the non-linear crystal.
The detector is the photo collector PDA100A(-EC), which collects the light and
sends the signal to the computer for processing.
The beam combiner combines the signal beam and the beam from the pump laser
by letting the signal beam pass through a polarised mirror while reflecting the
beam from the pump, with this ”adding” the beams together. The combiner is
implemented by using a dichroic beam combiner coated with a CaF2 substrate,
which reflects wavelengths of 1064nm while letting wavelengths of 5 −10µm pass
through.
The non-linear AgCaS2 crystal can sustain the non-degenerating parametric fre-
quency conversion. The crystal is transparent to wavelengths in the range 0.5µm−
13.2µm, allowing both the beam from the QCL and the pump to pass through. The
crystal is placed in a rotational stage, allowing for adjustments of the crystal posi-
tion to phase match each wavelength the MSUI system can scan with.
Following the crystal, the combined beam passes through two filters. The first is a
long-pass filter, allowing wavelengths above 850nm to pass through. At the same
time, the second filter is a short-pass filter with a cutoff wavelength of 1000nm.
These filters filter out any light from the visible spectrum and filter any excess
from the pump.
Lastly, the remaining beam enters a PDA100A(-EC) photo-detector. The detector
can operate in the region of 340 −1100nm. The signal from the collector is sent
to a computer and processed along with the position of the stage to convert the
beam signal into a grayscale image.
4.1.1
Converting laser signal to an image
After the detector converts the laser beam to a digital value between 0 and 255, the
value is assigned to a pixel based on the stage position. As previously mentioned,
the stage moves in a snack-like pattern to complete the raster scan. This is done
by moving the stage in one direction until the end of the sample, moving down by a
predetermined step size and moving the stage in the opposite direction to the first
line until the other side of the sample is reached. The movement of the stage is
repeated until the entire sample is scanned. While the stage is moving, the laser
pulses multiple times for each pixel in the final image, with the final pixel value
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 12
==PAGE:20==
being an average of the values measured. This is primarily done to mitigate noise
in the measurements done by the detector. After a scan with one wavelength is
done, another wavelength scan can be made. For this project, each sample was
scanned with 16 different wavelengths, an example of how a biopsy looks in the
images generated by the scans can be seen in the collage in fig. E.1.
4.1.2
Noise pollution
There are several different potential noise sources which can influence the quality
of the scans. Image artefacts can occur due to the stability of the QCL, specific-
ally when the QCL switches wavelength. The laser source within it can slightly
alter the beam’s angle. A small angular difference between two wavelengths hit-
ting the sample would result in the beam hitting slightly different points. As the
XY-coordinate of the stage is currently giving the coordinates of the sample, the
angular difference could result in a slight pixel shift. This means the values as-
signed to a pixel would be slightly off.
The power of the beams could also contain some noise. This could be for several
reasons, one being that water has high absorbance in the MIR band. And as the
beam from the QCL travels quite a distance (∼1m) before passing through the
sample. This means that a change in humidity could influence the beam’s intens-
ity at the detector. Another is that the power delivered to the QCL or the pump
could contain minor fluctuations, which would influence the QCL beam and the up-
conversion resulting in a variance of pixel values for areas with similar structures.
Furthermore, it is possible that ambient lighting changes could also influence the
result. Therefore the setup is covered by a tinted plexiglass box, which helps
eliminate any near-infrared light. The room with the setup is also only lighted by
artificial light, eliminating any fluctuations in ambient light from the outdoors.
Another source of noise is temperature change. As the laser beams are made
with crystals, they will heat up when the QCL is used. This will slightly change the
refraction index of the crystal and, thereby, the beam’s wavelength. The same
applies to the non-linear crystal. Changing the refraction index of this crystal will
impact the efficiency of the upconversion, leading to a loss in the intensity of the
combined beam and the value assigned to the pixels in the image.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 13
==PAGE:21==
5
Automation of tests and scan
area acquisition
This chapter will .....
5.1
Selecting Scan Areas
The following sections will briefly describe how a camera and mirror were added
to the current scanning setup to improve the accuracy of selecting scanning areas
and how two programs were constructed in Lab-VIEW to make it easier for any
user to select the desired areas.
5.1.1
Changes to the selection approach
When a scan is made, a couple of areas must be selected. Firstly an area of
the stage which blocks the laser from the QCL from passing through. A scan of
this area provides the background data and allows for accounting for any back-
ground noise. Secondly, a scan of an area where the QCL laser can pass straight
through the system without any absorption from the sample. This provides the
maximal value the detector can detect in the current settings and, along with the
background scan, provides the range for maximal and minimal absorption of the
laser signal. Then a scan of the sample, or part of the sample, can be made. How-
ever, in previous versions of the setup, there has not been any accurate way of
designating the various areas. The regions have been estimated to the operator’s
best ability and experience. This is quite a hurdle to overcome if a new user with
minimal experience were to make a scan. A camera has been added to the setup
to levitate this problem, and two minor programs have been made. The camera
has been positioned to see the samples on the stage through a mirror. A simpli-
fied top-down semantic can be seen in fig. 5.1. The camera can not be placed to
look directly down on the stage, so it had to be set so that it could look through
at the stage through the mirror. The camera position is also translated along the
stage y-axis, which must be accounted for in the program for selecting the scan
areas.
5.1.2
The software developed to facilitate easier use of the
scan setup (NOT COMPLETE)
To make it significantly more accessible for the user to operate the MSUI system
and explicitly select the areas the user wishes to scan, two programs were de-
veloped to integrate them with the existing software for controlling the MSUI. The
first program allows the user to mark where the different areas are located on
the stage by looking at the image from the camera. The user faces a UI that al-
lows drawing a region the user wants to scan, see section 5.1.2. The coordinates
gained from the drawn box are then translated into coordinates for the scan pro-
gram to move the stage within. This is done by redefining the (0,0) of the image to
the centre of the image, then dividing the new bounding box pixels by the number
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 14
==PAGE:22==
Figure 5.1: Top down simplified schematic of the stage, the added camera is
marked in grey, and a mirror allow it to see the stage below it. The lens and
the mirror above it are where the laser from the QCL will be directed through the
sample during a scan. The arrows in the figure’s corner indicate the direction of
positive movement for the stage.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 15
==PAGE:23==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2: The areas to be scanned selected is the green rectangles in images
a and b. The white dots in the image are the image’s centre and where the laser
would hit if the stage were set to (0,0). The area to be scanned was selected on a
pop-up image after the ”Draw RIO” were pushed, and the area was selected with
a simple mouse click and drag. The calculated coordinates were then saved to
the data cluster and later to an XML file.
of pixels in the x and y direction of the stage to get the coordinates in real-world
values. Then the position of the stage, when the scan area was marked, is ad-
ded to account for the translation between the image centre and where the beam
would hit the stage.
The scan coordinates calculated from the drawn box can be saved as a Back-
ground area, an area where the QCL laser is blocked from passing through, a
Clean area, an area where the QCL laser can pass cleanly through, and a scan
ROI (region of interest) indicating where the subject the user wishes to scan is loc-
ated. This can be done by clicking the ”Save Background area”, ”Save clean area”,
and ”Save ROI”, respectively. The data is stored in the ”All Area to be Scanned”
data cluster under the appropriate names. Lastly, the data in the cluster can be
saved to an XML file by pressing the ”Save to XML” after a user-determined file
location and name have been selected. An example of scan coordinates saved
in the XML file can be seen in appendix C.
The second program is much simpler. It simply loads the XML file and reconstructs
the data cluster, with the appropriate data inputted into the relevant arrays, so the
data can be passed on to the scanner.
5.2
Galvano Scanner
This section describes an overview of the work done with a galvano scanner and
how it can be used to control the laser beam through a lens. The results of testing
the galvano scanner system GVS111 from Thorlabs with a lens with a focal lens
of 75mm and a test with a lens with a 30mm focal length are discussed.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 16
==PAGE:24==
5.2.1
How would the galvano scanner improve the current
scanning method?
As mentioned, the current MSUI system scans the samples by moving the stage
in a snake-like raster pattern. However, this severely limits the speed at which a
scan can be performed. Especially as the MSUI needs to perform the same move-
ment pattern for each wavelength, the user wishes to scan the sample. However,
the signal-to-noise ratio of the current system is quite good, allowing for the imple-
mentation of a much faster scanning process as the SNR is inversely proportional
to the intensity of the signal. One way to improve the scanning speed would be
to use an oscillating mirror to move the laser beam across the sample while the
stage only moves in one direction during the scan. This could be done with the
Galvano scanner system GVS111. This galvano scanner has a gold-plated mirror
which can be moved with maximal full bandwidth travel (±10V ) frequency of 25
Hz with a square wave and 35 Hz with a sine wave. If only half the possible travel
bandwidth is used, this goes up to 65Hz and 130Hz, respectively[9].
Test setup
To test the usability of the galvano scanner, a simplified test setup was constructed,
with the simplified schematic can be seen in fig. 5.3. The test setup simulates a
potential scan with a weak near-infrared laser relapsing the QCL. It is directed
towards the galvano scanner without sending the laser along a longer path with
various mirrors, as in the MSUI system. The beam travels through a rectifying
lens to ensure the beam photons move parallel. The beam then hits a galvano
scanner with a gold-plated mirror, which directs the beam towards a lens which can
be moved towards the galvano scanner or away from it. After passing through the
lens, the beam propagates toward the camera, translating the beam’s intensity to
a grayscale image for processing. The entire setup is placed on pillars, held with
rods running through the various holders, and locked with small torque screws.
The laser output is also held with an adjustable holder, which can translate the
laser ±1mm from side to side and up and down. This holder directly directed the
laser onto the galvano scanner mirror. It can also change the angle at which the
laser is pointing.
Test software
An automatic test program was developed using Lab-VIEW to test the control of
the galvano scanner. The program allows the user to control the laser intensity
and camera settings for data collection. It can also receive a positional signal
through a voltage value and save the voltage applied to the galvano scanner and
the laser’s position in a text file for further processing in Matlab.
The program provides a user-friendly interface for setting the laser intensity by
controlling the current applied to the laser (0-0.2 A) and displaying the laser current
and temperature as a graph over time. The camera can be initialised, and the pixel
clock, exposure time, framerate, and gain can be adjusted to capture the laser’s
movement. A simple blob detection method is implemented to detect the laser
beam position, using pixel value range and minimum/maximum radius settings
that can be fine-tuned to match the camera settings and laser intensity.
To define the maximal angle of the galvano scanner from its initial 0 degrees, the
user can set the scan range voltage. The program then divides the voltage range
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 5.3: A simplified schematic of the test setup for testing a galvano scanner
to control the path of a laser beam. The beam is a weak near-infrared laser that
travels through a rectifying lens and then is directed by the galvano scanner with
a gold-plated mirror towards a lens which can be moved towards the galvano
scanner or away from it. After passing through the lens, the beam propagates
toward the U3-3150CP camera. The camera translates the beam’s intensity to a
grayscale image for processing. It is held in place with rods running through the
various holders and locked with small torque screws. The laser output is also held
with an adjustable holder, which can translate the laser ±1mm from side to side
and up and down and adjust the angle at which the laser is pointing.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 18
==PAGE:26==
(0V to the max voltage set) into equal voltage steps based on the desired number
of measurements the user sets. After pressing the ”Get data” button, the program
collects data by saving the voltage applied to the galvano scanner and the position
of the laser beam on the sensor. The data is saved to a data array and new data
is added when the galvano scanner reaches the desired position. Once the data
is collected, the user can save it in a text file by providing a location and a name
for the file.
After collecting the data, it can be imported from the text file into a Matlab script,
which calculates polynomial fits and plots the data and the fits in a figure. The data
represents the distance a laser beam is moved when a voltage is applied to a gal-
vano scanner for different lenses placed at a fixed distance from a mirror. The
code reads the data from text files, creates arrays for the independent variable
(voltage) and dependent variable (distance moved), calculates the polynomial fits,
and then plots the fits along with the original data for each camera position rel-
ative to the lens. The resulting figure shows each camera position’s data points
and polynomial fits, with the legend indicating which colour corresponds to which
camera position. See section 5.2.2.
5.2.2
Results
The preliminary results of testing the galvano scanner and its ability to control the
path of the laser can be seen in section 5.2.2. The lens used for this test has
a focal length with fig. 5.4a depicting the results from the lens at 40mm from the
galvano scanner mirror, fig. 5.4b showing the movement of the laser beam with the
lens at 75mm from the galvano scanner (the focal length), and fig. 5.4c depicting
the movement of the laser beam with the lens at 110mm from the galvano scanner.
For each test, the camera was placed at 65mm, 70mm, 75mm, 80mm, and 85mm
from the lens for each of the positions of the lens. More plots of different lens
distances, and larger plots of these results from the galvano scanner test, can be
seen in appendix D.
From these plots in section 5.2.2, it is clear that as long as the lens is placed in the
focal length from the galvano scanner, the beam will be perfectly perpendicular to
the target surface no matter at what distance the target is placed from the lens.
This can be seen by the fact that all the fitted lines in fig. 5.4b are parallel. From
this plot, it can also be seen that by increasing the voltage applied linearly, the
laser beam travels equally linearly across the target. Meaning the laser beam can
be linearly controlled. For a scan, it would be very likely that a saw tooth or a
triangular pattern of the voltage applied to the galvano scanner would be an ideal
way of controlling the beam during a scan.
However, when the lens is not placed at the focal length from the galvano scanner,
the lines fitted are no longer parallel. This indicates that the laser beam no longer
hits the target surface perpendicular, as the distance the laser beam moves across
the camera sensor changes when the camera is moved closer or further away
from the lens. This poses a problem for data collection and highlights that if the
galvano scanner is to be used to control the laser beam in the MSUI system, the
lens must be placed at the focal length distance from the galvano scanner. The
lens used to attain the data in section 5.2.2 had a focal length of 75mm, and there
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 19
==PAGE:27==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.4: This figure shows three plots of the data gathered (the dots) and the
fitted 2. decree polynomials. The lines are fitted, and the data is colour coordin-
ated, e.g. the blue line is fitted to the blue data points. The three plots show how
the laser moves across the camera lens from 0,0 until the end of the sensor. The
blue lines are from data collected with the camera at 65mm from the lens, the light
blue from the camera at 70mm from the lens, the green marks the camera being
in the focal length of the lens (75mm), the yellow is from the camera being 80mm
from the lens, and the red is from the camera being 85mm from the lens. Plot (a)
has the moveable lens placed at 40mm from the galvano scanner, plot (b) has
the lens at its focal length from the galvano scanner, and plot (c) has the lens at
110mm from the galvano scanner.
is not enough space in the MSUI system for a lens of this focal length. It would
also significantly reduce the resolution of the scans, as the focal length dictates
the resolution. The Galvano scanner did, however, prove to be a straightforward
way of directing the laser beam; provided that the lens focuses the beam down
onto the sample, it would significantly improve the speed at which a scan could
be completed.
In the MSUI, a 12mm focal length lens is used, but due to the physical dimensions
of the galvano scanner, it is simply impossible to place it close enough to the lens.
This problem can be circumvented by adding a relay lens system. This would
provide enough space for the galvano scanner while still allowing control of the
laser beam path in a very linear way with the galvano scanner.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 20
==PAGE:28==
6
Computer vision analysis of
samples
This chapter will briefly introduce DensNet and ResNet, explain Canonical Dis-
criminant Analysis previously used to analyse a sample, and explain how it is
used during cancer detection.
6.1
What method has previously been used to
detect cancer?
Two primary neural networks (NN) are commonly used to detect various objects
and perform image segmentation: DensNet and ResNet neural networks. How-
ever, many others are NN can also perform these tasks, but DenseNet and Res-
Net compete for being state of the art, especially when classifying biological im-
ages with cancer. For instance, Niharika Gouda and J Amudha have succeeded
in classifying images with skin cancer with a 92% accuracy [5].
DenseNet is a convolutional neural network architecture proposed by Gao Huang,
Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten, and Kilian Q. Weinberger in 2017 that
addresses the vanishing gradient problem and enhances feature propagation in
deep neural networks[8]. The DenseNet architecture is based on dense connec-
tions, where each layer receives all preceding layers as input, and its output is
used as input by all subsequent layers. This connectivity pattern leads to shorter
paths for gradient flow, allowing the network to propagate gradients better and
alleviate the vanishing gradient problem.
The DenseNet architecture comprises several densely connected blocks, each
consisting of multiple layers, including convolutional layers, batch normalisation
layers, and Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation functions. The output of each
block is fed into the next block, forming a deep network with feature reuse across
the blocks.
On the other hand, ResNet (short for ”Residual Network”) is a deep convolutional
neural network architecture proposed by Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing
Ren, and Jian Sun in 2016 that introduced the concept of residual connections[7].
Residual connections allow for the successful training of very deep neural net-
works by addressing the problem of vanishing gradients.
The ResNet architecture consists of several residual blocks containing multiple
convolutional layers and residual connections. The residual connections add the
output of a previous layer to the output of the current layer, effectively creating a
shortcut connection that bypasses one or more layers. This allows the gradient
to flow more easily through the network, which is especially important in deep
architectures.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 21
==PAGE:29==
Defences Between DensNet and ResNet Neural Networks
The differences between the two can be summarised in the following four points:
• Connectivity pattern: The main difference between DenseNet and ResNet
is their connectivity pattern. DenseNet uses dense connections, connect-
ing each layer to all preceding and subsequent layers. In contrast, ResNet
uses residual connections, where the previous layer’s output is added to the
output of the next layer.
• Feature reuse: DenseNet encourages feature reuse across the network
by concatenating the outputs of all preceding layers as input to each sub-
sequent layer, while ResNet encourages feature reuse by using residual
connections that allow the reuse of features from earlier layers.
• Model complexity: DenseNet typically has more parameters than ResNet,
as each layer receives input from all preceding layers. This makes DenseNet
more computationally expensive, allowing for more feature reuse and better
performance on specific tasks.
• Performance: DenseNet and ResNet have achieved state-of-the-art per-
formance on various computer vision tasks, but their relative performance
depends on the task and dataset. DenseNet has been shown to perform
well on tasks requiring fine-grained feature discrimination, while ResNet has
performed well on tasks requiring general feature extraction.
Due to ResNet’s lower complexity than DensNet, with all the layers being connec-
ted and the more significant amount of parameters, thereby allowing ResNet to
be trained faster, especially on the relatively small data set available. The most
important part of this project is finding areas with potential cancer. The fine-grain
feature extraction that DensNet provides is not necessarily needed to segment
areas with possible cancer. Therefore ResNet was selected as the architecture
for the NN segmentation.
6.2
Canonical Discriminant Analysis
Another potential method of discriminating between cancer and non-cancer re-
gions could be Canonical Discriminant Analysis (CDA).
CDA is used in computer vision and machine learning for dimensionality reduction
and feature extraction. It is a variant of Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) that is
used for multi-class classification problems.
CDA aims to find a low-dimensional representation of high-dimensional data that
preserves as much discriminatory information as possible.
CDA aims to find
a linear projection that maximises the ratio of the between-class scatter to the
within-class scatter, similar to LDA. The resulting low-dimensional representation
is called the discriminant space, and the projections onto this space are called
discriminant features.
One limitation of CDA is that it assumes that the data is normally distributed and
that the covariance matrices of the classes are equal. When these assumptions
are violated, the performance of CDA may degrade. In addition, CDA can be
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 22
==PAGE:30==
sensitive to outliers and noise in the data. Therefore, it is essential to carefully
prepossess the data before applying CDA.
Previously Aske Schultz Carstensen and Tjalfe Egholm Rude have tried to analyse
the data from the MSUI using Canonical Discriminant Analysis (CDA)[2]. However,
due to a lack of data, they could only use one sample to find the features that dis-
criminate the non-cancerous religions from the cancerous regions. Furthermore,
their test sample was the neighbouring slice of the biopsy to the one they used
to determine the features, leading them to have an accuracy of 81.4% and a pre-
cision of 86.8%. They also found that their implementation marked several false
positive regions when testing.
They did find that they could reduce the number of wavelength bands to 12 and
still have an accuracy of 99.4% and a precision of 53.3%, which could indicate
that it is possible to use fewer wavelengths in each scan and still be able to find
cancerous regions. If this is true, then image acquisition could be drastically cut
down.
6.3
Data available to train the ResNet Neural
Network
For this project, the data available is 20 tiff files containing images captured with
different IR wavelengths. Each tiff file contained 16 pages, with each page rep-
resenting a different IR wavelength. These images were used to train the ResNet
model to detect cancer areas in the tissue samples.
The training data consisted of a set of labelled images and corresponding masks.
The masks were used to identify the cancer areas in the images. Each mask was
a black-and-white image with three distinct regions: unknown, cancer, and no
cancer areas. The unknown region was used to mask areas with no label, while
cancer and no cancer areas were used to identify the presence or absence of
cancer in the tissue sample.
The images and masks were prepossessed before being used for training. The
images were resized to a fixed dimension and normalised to improve the model’s
accuracy. The masks were also resized to the exact dimensions as the images
and converted to binary format.
6.4
Constructing the ResNet Neural Network (NOT
COMPLETE)
6.4.1
Training on only on tiff file
Firstly a ResNet NN was constructed and trained on the same data as the work
previously done with CDA. This was mostly done to see if there were some merit
in pursuing this path further.
This code defines a ResNet-based model for image segmentation using Tensor-
Flow. The ResNet architecture used in the model is implemented with residual
blocks, and the model is built using the Keras API of TensorFlow. The segmenta-
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 23
==PAGE:31==
tion model aims to predict a binary mask of an input image indicating the presence
or absence of a specific feature (in this case, cancer).
The code starts by importing the necessary libraries, such as TensorFlow, NumPy,
Matplotlib, etc. The ResNet block function is defined as input an input tensor, num-
ber of filters, kernel size, strides, and an activation function. This function applies
two convolutional layers to the input tensor, followed by batch normalisation and
activation. The output tensor is then added to the input tensor to form the residual
connection, and the activation function is applied again to obtain the final output.
The build_model function is defined to build the segmentation model. This func-
tion takes as input the input shape of the images and the number of classes to be
predicted (in this case, binary classification). It defines the input layer, followed
by a convolutional layer with 64 filters, batch normalisation, and ReLU activation.
Then, five residual blocks are applied using the resnet_block function, each con-
sisting of two convolutional layers, batch normalisation, and activation. After the
last residual block, a final convolutional layer with 64 filters is applied, followed by
batch normalisation and ReLU activation.
The dense layer at the end of the ResNet model is replaced with a convolutional
transpose layer to convert the output to a mask. The model output is then passed
through a softmax activation function to obtain the predicted probability distribution
over the three classes (unknown, cancer and no cancer). The model is finally built
using the Model class of the Keras API.
The load_mask function is defined to load the binary mask of the image indicating
the presence or absence of cancer. This function takes as input the mask file’s
path and the mask’s desired size. The function loads the PNG file as a grayscale
image, resizes it to the desired size, and converts it to a binary mask.
The load_tif_as_images function is defined to load the input images for the model.
This function takes as input the path of the TIFF file containing the input images
and the desired size of the images. The function loads the images from the TIFF
file, resizes them to the desired size, and normalises their values to the range [0,
1].
The main code block defines the paths of the input and mask files, loads the in-
put and mask images using the load_tif_as_images and load_mask functions, re-
spectively, and splits the data into training and validation sets using the train_test_split
function from scikit-learn. The ResNet model is then built using the build_model
function and compiled with binary cross-entropy loss and Adam optimiser. Finally,
the model is trained using the fit method, and the results are plotted using Mat-
plotlib.
6.5
Results
This section will describe the results from training the ResNet models described
previously.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 6.1: The left image shows the training loss, while the right image shows
the training accuracy.
6.5.1
Training on only one tiff file
After training the ResNet model on the same dataset as in previous work, the best
outcome is displayed in fig. 6.2. The image on the left illustrates the ground truth
for cancer areas, while the one on the right depicts the prediction made by the
trained model on a test file. It is clear from the images that the prediction does
not match the ground truth. The model perceives areas with high absorption as
cancer regions, although they may be hair follicles or other skin features. The
accuracy achieved during training was 0.84, while the loss was 0.48.
However, the model has certain limitations in precisely identifying cancer areas.
The model’s interpretation of areas with high absorption as cancer regions may
lead to false positive predictions. Therefore, further analysis and modifications to
the model may be required to enhance its performance.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 6.2: The left image shows the ground truth for where the cancer is in the
test image, while the right image shows the predicted areas with cancer.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 26
==PAGE:34==
7
Discussion
7.1
Using a galvano scanner to control the beam
path
From the preliminary test of using a Galvano scanner to control a laser beam
through a lens. The results show that when the lens is placed at the focal length
from the galvano scanner, the laser beam is perfectly perpendicular to the target
surface, regardless of the target’s distance from the lens. This indicates that the
laser beam can be linearly controlled by linearly increasing the voltage applied to
the galvano scanner. However, when the lens is not at the focal length, the laser
beam no longer hits the target surface perpendicularly, which poses a problem for
data collection, as the laser beam would spread out from the perpendicular vector.
The solution to this problem is to use a relay lens system to provide enough space
for the galvano scanner while still allowing control of the laser beam path in a very
linear way with the galvano scanner.
The test used a lens with a focal length of 75mm, but the MSUI system uses a
12mm focal length lens, which is too small to place the galvano scanner close
enough to the lens. The Galvano scanner provides a straightforward way of dir-
ecting the laser beam and would significantly improve the speed at which a scan
could be completed if a relay lens system is used. However, using a lens with a
longer focal length would reduce the resolution of the scans and, therefore, not
desirable.
Overall, the test results suggest that using a Galvano scanner to control a laser
beam through a lens is feasible. Still, careful attention must be paid to the lens
placement and the galvano scanner. A relay lens system can overcome the prob-
lem of limited space in the MSUI system while preserving the resolution of the
scans, as the resolution only depends on the focal length of the final lens.
7.2
Analysing the acquired images with ResNet
The ResNet Neural Network model was used for cancer detection and trained on
the same data as the previous work with CDA. ResNet is a popular neural network
architecture widely used in various image classification and segmentation tasks.
The ResNet architecture used in the model is implemented with residual blocks,
and the model is built using the Keras API of TensorFlow. The model aims to
predict a binary mask of an input image indicating the presence or absence of
cancer. The model’s architecture consists of several convolutional layers, batch
normalisation, activation functions, and a convolutional transpose layer to convert
the output to a mask. The model’s performance can be further improved by tuning
its hyperparameters, such as learning rate, batch size, number of epochs, etc.
Comparing the results of the trained ResNet neural network to the results of the
CDA implementation, it is pretty clear that the CDA provides a significantly better
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 27
==PAGE:35==
result when only using a single image. However, it should be possible for the Res-
Net method to outperform the CDA implementation by fine-tuning the architecture
and adding more data to the training set.
In conclusion, the presented sections discuss important aspects of cancer detec-
tion using image analysis, such as CDA, available data, and the ResNet Neural
Network model. However, cancer detection is a challenging task that requires
careful consideration of several factors, such as data quality, prepossessing tech-
niques, model selection, and hyperparameter tuning. Therefore, further research
is required to develop more accurate and efficient methods for cancer detection
using image analysis.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 28
==PAGE:36==
8
Conclusion
In conclusion, this project successfully improved the selection of scan areas for
the MSUI by adding a camera system and developing a user-friendly program
for faster and more efficient selection. The possibility of using a galvano scan-
ner to increase scanning speed was also explored, and the results showed that
it is possible to control beam position with a linear voltage signal. However, im-
plementing the galvano scanner into the MSUI setup requires overcoming some
technical challenges.
Regarding cancer detection, the ResNet model trained on a tiff file, similar to
the previous CDA method, was not able to detect cancer accurately. The model
marked areas with high absorption across different wavelengths but was not spe-
cifically designed for cancer detection. As cancer detection is a complex task, it
requires consideration of various factors such as data quality, preprocessing tech-
niques, model selection, and hyperparameter tuning. Hence, further research is
needed to develop more precise and efficient methods for cancer detection using
image analysis.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 29
==PAGE:37==
Bibliography
[1]
Airy disk. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Airy_disk.
[2]
Aske Schultz Carstensen and Tjalfe Egholm Rude. ‘Multispectral infrared
imaging and data analysis of biological tissue’. Technical University of Den-
mark, 2021.
[3]
‘Encyclopedia Britannica’. In: Britannica, The Editors of Encyclopaedia, 2022.
Chap. Electromagnetic Spectrum. URL: https://www.britannica.com/science/
electromagnetic-spectrum.
[4]
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Fourier-transform_infrared_spectroscopy.
[5]
Niharika Gouda and J Amudha. ‘Skin Cancer Classification using ResNet’.
In: 2020 IEEE 5th International Conference on Computing Communication
and Automation (ICCCA). 2020, pp. 536–541. DOI: 10.1109/ICCCA49541.
2020.9250855.
[6]
Michael R. Hamblin, Pinar Avci and Tarl W. Prow. ‘Nanoscience in Derma-
tology’. In: Elsevier Inc., 2016. Chap. 1. ISBN: 0128029269, 0128029455,
9780128029268 AND 9780128029459.
[7]
Kaiming He et al. ‘Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition’. In: 2016
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
2016, pp. 770–778. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
[8]
Gao Huang et al. ‘Densely Connected Convolutional Networks’. In: 2017
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
2017, pp. 2261–2269. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.243.
[9]
Large Beam Diameter Scanning Galvo Systems, User Guide. Thorlabs, 2022.
[10]
Desiree Ratner and Jennifer L. MacGregor. ‘Skin Cancer Management: a
Practical Approach’. In: Springer New York, 2010. Chap. 11: Mohs Surgery.
ISBN: 0387884947, 0387884955, 1282829408, 9780387884943, 9780387884950
and 9781282829404.
[11]
B. E. A. Saleh and M. C. Teich. Fundamentals of photonics. Second. Wiley-
InterScience, 2007. ISBN: 978-0-471-35832-9.
[12]
Cindy Sampias and Geoffrey Rolls. H&E Staining Overview: A Guide to Best
Practices. 2023. URL: https://www.leicabiosystems.com/knowledge-pathway/
he-staining-overview-a-guide-to-best-practices/.
[13]
Skin cancer. 2023. URL: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/skin-
cancer/symptoms-causes/syc-20377605.
[14]
Michael Titford. ‘The long history of hematoxylin’. In: INFORMA HEALTH-
CARE, 2005. Chap. The long history of hematoxylin, pp. 73–78. ISBN: 14737760
and 10520295.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 30
==PAGE:38==
A
Mohs surgery
Figure A.1: An illustration of the surgical steps of Mohs surgery. The illustration
is from the textbook Skin Cancer Management: a Practical Approach[10]
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 31
==PAGE:39==
B
Laser Optics
Figure B.1: A computer-generated example of an airy disk. The figure is from the
Wikipedia page ’Airy disk’, which also contains a general overview of the subject[1]
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 32
==PAGE:40==
C
Selecting scan area UI
This appendix contains screenshots of the user interface (UI) for selecting the
various scan areas, and an example of how the data is stored in the XML file
Figure C.1: This figure shows the UI for initialising the camera, the error codes
given by the program, and the emergency stop.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 33
==PAGE:41==
Figure C.2: This figure shows the tab for adjusting the camera settings Pixel clock,
Frame rate, Exposure time, and what camera is used (if multiple are connected).
Here the user can also see what the picture captured by the camera looks like to
make appropriate adjustments.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 34
==PAGE:42==
Figure C.3: This figure shows the tab for controlling the movements of the stage.
It shows the actual x and y coordinates of the current stage position (as reported
by the stage controller). Here the user can input the desired stage position to
move the areas the user wishes to scan into position for selecting as a region of
interest (ROI)
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 35
==PAGE:43==
Figure C.4: This figure shows the UI (user interface) for saving the selected area
as a scan area. It can be saved as a Background area, an area where the QCL
laser is blocked from passing through, a Clean area, an area where the QCL laser
can pass cleanly through, and a scan ROI (region of interest) indicating where the
subject the user wishes to scan is located. This can be done by clicking the ”Save
Background area”, ”Save clean area”, and ”Save ROI”, respectively. The data is
stored in the ”All Area to be Scanned” data cluster under the appropriate names.
The ”Draw ROI” button opens a pop-up window, which the user can draw on to
select the area for one of the three types of scans. Lastly, the data in the cluster
can be saved to an XML file by pressing the ”Save to XML” after a user-determined
file location and name has been selected.
An example of how different scan area are stored in the XML file
1
<?xml version="1.0" standalone="true"?>
2
-<LVData xmlns="http://www.ni.com/LVData">
3
<Version >22.3f0</Version >
4
-<Cluster >
5
<Name>Cluster </Name>
6
<NumElts >3</NumElts >
7
-<Array>
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 36
==PAGE:44==
8
<Name>Background </Name>
9
<Dimsize >1</Dimsize >
10
<Dimsize >4</Dimsize >
11
-<DBL>
12
<Name>Numeric </Name>
13
<Val >13.49102745762712</Val>
14
</DBL>
15
-<DBL>
16
<Name>Numeric </Name>
17
<Val >-0.36742739130435</Val>
18
</DBL>
19
-<DBL>
20
<Name>Numeric </Name>
21
<Val >16.62662067796610</Val>
22
</DBL>
23
-<DBL>
24
<Name>Numeric </Name>
25
<Val >-0.28047086956522</Val>
26
</DBL>
27
</Array>
28
-<Array>
29
<Name>Refrence </Name>
30
<Dimsize >1</Dimsize >
31
<Dimsize >4</Dimsize >
32
-<DBL>
33
<Name>Numeric </Name>
34
<Val >15.01645118644068</Val>
35
</DBL>
36
-<DBL>
37
<Name>Numeric </Name>
38
<Val >-12.28047086956521</Val>
39
</DBL>
40
-<DBL>
41
<Name>Numeric </Name>
42
<Val >18.83001050847458</Val>
43
</DBL>
44
-<DBL>
45
<Name>Numeric </Name>
46
<Val >-8.54134043478261</Val>
47
</DBL>
48
</Array>
49
-<Array>
50
<Name>Messurments </Name>
51
<Dimsize >2</Dimsize >
52
<Dimsize >4</Dimsize >
53
-<DBL>
54
<Name>Numeric </Name>
55
<Val >-7.01744711864407</Val>
56
</DBL>
57
-<DBL>
58
<Name>Numeric </Name>
59
<Val >-21.67177521739131</Val>
60
</DBL>
61
-<DBL>
62
<Name>Numeric </Name>
63
<Val >-2.94965050847458</Val>
64
</DBL>
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 37
==PAGE:45==
65
-<DBL>
66
<Name>Numeric </Name>
67
<Val >-17.84568826086957</Val>
68
</DBL>
69
-<DBL>
70
<Name>Numeric </Name>
71
<Val >12.38933254237288</Val>
72
</DBL>
73
-<DBL>
74
<Name>Numeric </Name>
75
<Val >-17.49786217391305</Val>
76
</DBL>
77
-<DBL>
78
<Name>Numeric </Name>
79
<Val >15.69441728813559</Val>
80
</DBL>
81
-<DBL>
82
<Name>Numeric </Name>
83
<Val >-14.19351434782609</Val>
84
</DBL>
85
</Array>
86
</Cluster >
87
</LVData>
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 38
==PAGE:46==
D
Galvano Scanner tests
This figure shows the data collected from applying a voltage to the galvano scan-
ner system (a GVS011) and calculating the distance the centre of the laser beam
has travelled from 0. The camera used to detect the laser beam position was
placed at different distances from the lens. In contrast, the lens was kept at a
predetermined distance from the galvanometer directing the laser beam for each
data collection. Three lenses were used, one with a focal length of 75mm, one
with a focal length of 30mm, and one with a focal length of 20mm. While the cam-
era used to determine the beam’s position was a U3-3140CP Rev. 2.2 from IDS.
To simplify the data visualisation, C, followed by a number, indicates the distance
from the centre of the lens to the camera centre, e.g. C75 indicates the camera
is 75mm from the centre of the lens. Similarly, L followed by a number indicates
the distance from the centre of the lens to the galvano scanner, e.g. L75 indicates
the lens is placed 75mm from the galvano scanner.
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 39
==PAGE:47==
Figure D.1:
The lens (with focal length = 75mm) was placed at 57.5 mm
from the galvano scanner to the centre of the lens.
The camera was
placed at 65 mm (C65), 70mm (C70), 75mm (C75), 80mm (C80), and
85mm (C80).
The points mark the data collected, while the lines are
the fitted 2.
degree polynomial to the respective data.
The polynomi-
als
found
were:
(C65)
0.002328626421681x + 0.000079513949269,
(C70)
0.002366691504975x
+
0.000210652799958,
(C75)
0.002401892467681x
+
0.000143266283676,
(C80)
0.002429306519749x + 0.000136989733841,
(C85)
0.002464055943726x + 0.000059653728328
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 40
==PAGE:48==
Figure D.2:
The lens (with focal length = 75mm) was placed at 57.5 mm
from the galvano scanner to the centre of the lens.
The camera was
placed at 65 mm (C65), 70mm (C70), 75mm (C75), 80mm (C80), and
85mm (C80).
The points mark the data collected, while the lines are
the fitted 2.
degree polynomial to the respective data.
The polynomi-
als
found
were:
(C65)
0.002206796952088x + 0.000323570701992,
(C70)
0.002284240720926x
+
0.000237145596391,
(C75)
0.002363091178470x
+
0.000175963437984,
(C80)
0.002438288359328x + 0.000241753646934,
(C85)
0.002512376294810x + 0.000155379922190
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 41
==PAGE:49==
Figure D.3:
The lens (with focal length = 75mm) was placed at 75 mm
from the galvano scanner to the centre of the lens.
The camera was
placed at 65 mm (C65), 70mm (C70), 75mm (C75), 80mm (C80), and
85mm (C80).
The points mark the data collected, while the lines are
the fitted 2.
degree polynomial to the respective data.
The polynomi-
als
found
were:
(C65)
0.002427083784691x + 0.000019030006446,
(C70)
0.002421752014777x
+
0.000152272166682,
(C75)
0.002415929309936x
+
0.000160469398630,
(C80)
0.002410777417742x + 0.000089738978168,
(C85)
0.002406523307932x + 0.000099031068701
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 42
==PAGE:50==
Figure D.4:
The lens (with focal length = 75mm) was placed at 92.5 mm
from the galvano scanner to the centre of the lens.
The camera was
placed at 65 mm (C65), 70mm (C70), 75mm (C75), 80mm (C80), and
85mm (C80).
The points mark the data collected, while the lines are
the fitted 2.
degree polynomial to the respective data.
The polynomi-
als
found
were:
(C65)
0.002531679016647x −0.000008095577671,
(C70)
0.002482213623631x
+
0.000043719729252,
(C75)
0.002445798275124x
+
0.000067353292601,
(C80)
0.002405033732615x + 0.000221554965200,
(C85)
0.002357171512774x + 0.000235712710386
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 43
==PAGE:51==
Figure D.5:
The lens (with focal length = 75mm) was placed at 110 mm
from the galvano scanner to the centre of the lens (the lens focal length).
The camera was placed at 65 mm (C65),
70mm (C70),
75mm (C75),
80mm (C80), and 85mm (C80).
The points mark the data collected, while
the lines are the fitted 2.
degree polynomial to the respective data.
The
polynomials
found
were:
(C65)
0.002624423089055x −0.000022458150541,
(C70) 0.002541267570899x + 0.000052442440644, (C75) 0.002448988925498x +
0.000061179799443,
(C80)
0.002376754010019x + 0.000036172290135,
(C85)
0.002298277506111x + 0.000053316608426
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 44
==PAGE:52==
E
Data for computer vision
This appendix contains an example of the scans used to train the computer vision
algorithms. The images are stored in a tif file when used in the algorithms. The
image in the top left is always the first of the series, and the bottom right is the last.
The images are therefore stored according to the wavelength used for obtaining
them. The numbers on the images are the wavelength used for capturing the
sample image.
Figure E.1: Sample 1a
Automation, deep-learning image analysis, and data processing for multispectral microscopy 45
==PAGE:53==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygning 343, Ørsteds Pl.
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
