==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Investigation of Bacillus’ potential in
starter cultures for plant based dairy
alternatives
Authored by
Marie Fobian Jensen
s164448
Master of Science (MSc.) in Engineering,
Food Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Supervisor: Claus Heiner Bang-Bertelsen, Senior Researcher
Co-Supervisor: Egon Bech Hansen, Professor
Deadline: March 1st, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim and Hypotheses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Production of dairy yogurt
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Production of plant-based yogurt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Nordic crops for plant-based dairy alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Bacillus sp. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Materials and Methods
10
2.1
Chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Preparation of samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Selection of strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Genomic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Metabolomic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Chemical assays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.7
Formulation of plant-based milk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.8
Fermentation set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.9
Post-fermentation analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.10 Statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Results
22
3.1
Isolation from nature samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Genomic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Metabolomic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Chemical assays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Pre-screening in plant-based milk
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.6
Main fermentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Discussion
41
4.1
Choice of fermentation medium and parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Selection of strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Fermentation of plant-based milk alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
Potential safety risks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Conclusion
49
6
Further research
50
References
51
==PAGE:3==
List of Amino Acids
I
Abbreviations
II
Appendices
III
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Senior Researcher Claus Heiner Bang-Bertelsen and
Professor Egon Bech Hansen for giving me the opportunity to conduct my Master’s thesis in the
laboratories for Microbial Biotechnology and Biorefining and for Gut, Microbes and Health. I
would also like to thank them for their guidance and critical questions throughout the project
that helped me think outside of the box and dig even deeper into the subject.
Thank you to Postdoc Hang Xiao for helping me with the isolation of microorganisms and for
always putting your own agenda a side to help me, whether that being with answering a question
or walk with me to the strain collection.
For always enlightening me with new perspectives of a given case and helping me in the lab
with respectively HPLC, GC-MS and LC-MS analysis, thank you to PhD students Anders Peter
Wätjen and Guillermo-Eduardo Sedó Molina.
Thank you to Tine Suhr for the introduction to the laboratory and for making sure that everything
was as they should be at all times.
To Assistant Professor Elena Hakme from the research group for Analytical Food Chemistry,
and to Senior Researcher Jette Jakobsen from the research group for Bioactives – Analysis and
Application, thank you for your time and help with both a metabolomic analysis and investigation
of Vitamin K production. A great thank you to Associate Professor and Head of research group
Mohammad Amin Mohammadifar for your kind supervision in the world of rheology and for
letting me loose in the laboratories for Food Production Engineering.
Thank you to Heidi Olander Petersen, Peter Reimer Stubbe and Inge Holmberg for your help in
the laboratories for both Food Production Engineering and Bioactives - Analysis and Application.
A great thank you to everyone in the research group for Microbial Biotechnology and Biorefining
for, once again, making the long (and at times very cold) days enjoyable. Thank you for the great
conversations during lunch break about all the differences we find across our many cultures, the
social gatherings, private and professional discussions, and the warmth and kindness that filled
my every-day life for the last six months.
A huge thank you to my family for supporting me throughout the writing of this thesis. Your
hugs and warm meals were at times much needed, and at all times very much appreciated. A
special thank you to my beloved Mikkel Swartz for taking care of both me, the household, your
studies and two jobs during this period. I could not have done it without you.
Page iii of 58
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this project, 41 Bacillus sp. isolated from different origins in Denmark were investigated for
their potential in starter cultures for plant-based dairy alternatives. Based on initial screenings
for acetoin production, protein and phytic acid degradation, 28 strains were selected for further
screening in pea, oat and potato milk. The number of strains was narrowed down to five strains,
for which the ability to degrade un-favourable volatiles, form favourable volatiles, change the
rheological aspects of the plant-bases as well as the degradation of protein and production of
Vitamin K was investigated. From the five selected strains, two strains (Bacillus subtilis NFICC
1534 and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens spp. plantarum NFICC 1610) were used in fermentation
of pea, two strains (Bacillus amyloliquefaciens spp. plantarum NFICC 1785 and Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens spp. plantarum NFICC 1940) were used in fermentation of oat and one strain
(Bacillus subtilis NFICC 2087) was used in the fermentation of potato. The fermentation was
conducted at 37 °C for 48 hours with agitation (200 rpm). It was found that the fermentation of
oat milk resulted in an almost complete removal of unfavourable volatiles, while the greatest
formation of favourable volatiles was seen during fermentation of pea milk. In regards to
protein degradation, the highest proteolytic activity was observed during fermentation of pea and
potato milk, where the concentration of free amino acids increased more than 250- and 20-fold,
respectively. The free amino acids accounted for approximately 20 % of the total estimated
protein content after fermentation of pea milk, while they accounted for approximately 16 %
of the total estimated protein content after fermentation of potato milk. This high proteolytic
activity is hypothesised to be the cause of no evident texture formation in any of the fermented
samples. All five strains did however produce Vitamin K during fermentation of the plant-bases,
and the concentration of menaquinone-7 ranged from 1.6 to 4.3 µg/g sample. Overall, Bacillus
sp. are evaluated as having great potential in starter cultures for plant-based dairy alternatives.
However, several modifications should be considered in the experimental set-up for them to be
used as starter cultures for plant-based yogurt production.
Page iv of 58
==PAGE:6==
Marie Fobian Jensen
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
Global food trends have been demanding both wider and better options for Plant-Based (PB)
dairy alternatives, as many consumers have transitioned from an animal-based diet to an either
flexitarian, vegetarian or vegan diet. This transition is based on several factors, which include
both environmental impact, health and concerns for allergens. Especially in Asian countries,
the use of PB dairy alternatives is big, as most of the population is lactose intolerant. Many
consumers are however not satisfied with the existing products, with the primary reasons being
poor flavour and bad mouthfeel[62]. It has been found that PB dairy alternatives have several
health promoting factors, where especially the dietary fibers and antioxidants play an important
role, as they have been shown to reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases as well as cancer[36].
However, Jakobsen et al. (2022) have found that the PB milks on the Danish market have
lower concentrations of both minerals and vitamins than dairy milk[27]. It is difficult to make
PB products that fully mimic the appearance, flavour, nutritional value and texture of dairy
based products without using any additives or enrichment, as it is described in the following
sections[12]. The challenge lies primarily within the complex plant matrix that consists of both
cell wall residues and several different indigestible sugars as well as in-soluble proteins that
might be difficult for humans to digest. Besides the fact that these compounds are absent in dairy
milk, the milk has been standardised throughout the years, making it easier to work with[2].
With this, there is a need for improving the nutritional value, flavour and texture of PB dairy
alternatives.
1.1
Aim and Hypotheses
The aim of this project is to investigate the potential of using Bacillus species as a starter culture
for PB dairy alternatives, in this case yogurt. In relation to this, the aim is to investigate the
capability of different Bacillus sp. to produce dairy related flavour components and their effect
on the rheology post fermentation.
The project is carried out by selecting Bacillus sp. from the strain collection at the National
Food Institute at DTU (National Food Institute Culture Collection (NFICC)) and performing
initial screenings for phytic acid degradation, protease activity and acetoin production. The aim
is afterwards to identify potential end-points for the fermentation in plant milk based on Nordic
crops.
It is hypothesised that the selected Bacillus sp. are able to degrade phytic acid, both in standard
media and in the Nordic PB milk. It is also hypothesised that the selected Bacillus sp. can
produce valuable flavour components during fermentation by bioconversion of e.g. aldehydes.
Learning objectives
• To identify the best performing Bacillus strains in relation to degradation of phytic acid
with selected QPS strains from NFICC
• Identify and assess the current state of Nordic plant-bases in terms of safety and nutritional
value
Page 1 of 58
==PAGE:7==
Marie Fobian Jensen
1
INTRODUCTION
• Apply specific assays to determine the concentrations of anti-nutritional compounds
• Track fermentation processes of plant-bases inoculated with selected Bacillus strain(s).
• To use analytical instruments and methods such as HPLC instrument
• To report results structured and clearly
• To discuss results and the used methods critically
1.2
Production of dairy yogurt
Yogurt is one of the most popular dairy products in the world, and is consumed for both health
and nutritional benefits. The production of yogurt can vary depending on the type of yogurt that
is aimed for. In general, there are three different types of yogurts; drinkable, spoonable and firm,
Greek-style yogurt, where the spoonable yogurt can be prepared either as set or stirred yogurt.
In this project, it is investigated whether a PB alternative to the stirred spoonable yogurt can
be made. The spoonable yogurt is mostly popular due to its texture and mouthfeel, which is
characterised as a smooth, viscous gel[73].
The stirred, spoonable yogurt is produced from cow’s milk, which is initially pasteurised through
boiling at approximately 90 °C. After pasteurisation, the milk is cooled to approximately 42 °C
and inoculated with a starter culture consisting of different lactic acid bacteria, typically Lactococ-
cus sp. and Streptococcus thermophilus, where the strains should be a mix of both EPS-forming
and non-EPS-forming strains in order to obtain the correct texture and mouthfeel[25]. The
inoculated milk is typically incubated at 42 °C for 5-8 hours until a pH of 4.6 is reached. The
yogurt is a curd at this stage of production, which is broken and poured into the containers that
they are to be sold in and cooled down to below 10 °C[30, 73]. With this process, the smooth,
viscous gel is formed from the agglomeration of the casein micelles in the cow’s milk, which
happens both as the milk is heated and as the pH decreases[26].
Flavour components and nutritional value
The flavour compounds that are most often reported as resulting in desirable flavour in dairy
based yogurts are the components lactic acid, acetaldehyde, diacetyl, acetoin and 2,3-butanediol.
However, these flavour components should be present in appropriate concentrations, since a
too high concentration can result in off-flavour while too low concentrations can result in a
weak-flavoured/dull yogurt[12, 55]. The most important contributor to the flavour and aroma is
acetaldehyde, which is characterised by a nutty or "green apple" flavour. Of the other flavour
components, diacetyl contributes most to flavour in the sense of its low threshold of down to
0.001 mg/kg, though diacetyl can result in harshness if the concentration is too high. Acetoin can
reduce this harshness and contributes with a milder, creamy flavour, and has a threshold of down
to 0.014 mg/kg. The much similar flavour contributor 2,3-butanediol has higher thresholds of
20-50 mg/kg for comparison. Most of these flavours are produced from carbohydrate metabolism
by the bacteria present in the starter cultures[12]. Besides flavour components produced from
carbohydrate degradation, flavour components originated from protein degradation might also
be of great importance in the sensory profile of traditional dairy yogurt. These types of flavour
Page 2 of 58
==PAGE:8==
Marie Fobian Jensen
1
INTRODUCTION
compound include ammonia, amines, aldehydes and alcohols, as well as some sulphur-containing
compounds that are known from cheese[19].
A plain, low-fat yogurt has a rather low calorie content of just 50 kcal/100 g, while the protein
and available carbohydrate content is 4.1 and 4.8 g/100 g. The low fat content of 1.6 g/100 g
combined with the previously mentioned low calorie content are factors that contributes to the
popularity of the food[48].
1.3
Production of plant-based yogurt
With the fermentation of bovine milk being a great industry that have been well established for
centuries[73], the fermentation of PB milk is yet to be fully commercial. However, many studies
have been and are continuously being done in order to develop a fully PB yogurt, which is both
accepted by the consumers and without any additives. Most PB yogurts are based on soy or oats,
while different nuts have been utilised as well[47].
Montemurro et al. (2021) described that the overall production of PB yogurt follow the same
principle as the dairy-based production, however with some modifications. The first step is the
formulation of a PB milk. Here, water is typically the main ingredient of 70-80 %, while the
remaining can be either cereal or legume flours, fruit purees or protein isolates[6]. The milk
is typically pretreated prior to inoculation, which can be to obtain either pasteurisation, starch
gelling, up-concentration, filtration or homogenisation. Several of the mentioned pretreatments
can be utilised prior fermentation, but it depends on the PB that is used and how the further
processing is planned. After pretreatment, the prepared PB milk is innoculated. Common starter
cultures known from the dairy industry, Lactobacillus delbrueckii ssp. bulgaricus and Strepto-
coccus thermophilus, are often used, while other specifically selected lactic acid bacteria and
probiotics can be used as well. Only few studies have investigated the use of Bacillus sp. as starter
cultures in PB dairy alternatives[10, 11], while several studies have investigated the probiotic
effect from B. subtilis in addition to the traditional starter cultures[59].
The fermentation time and temperature is often the same as for dairy-based yogurts, where the
crucial parameter to reach is the reduction of pH to below 4.5, which ensures both agglomeration
of the proteins as well as a longer shelf-life. However, the reduction in pH is often not sufficient in
order to reach the desired texture, and gelling and structuring agents like gums and hydrocolloids
are often added post fermentation, which contributes to a relatively long list of ingredients on the
finished PB products in comparison to dairy-based yogurt[47]. A study by Shin et al. (2022) was
based on the optimisation of pea protein and citrus fiber contents in order to make a clean-label
soy-based yogurt[63]. However, research is still needed, if a PB yogurt is to be made solely
based on a plant milk and starter cultures.
Besides the problems in regards to the gelling and proper structure formation during fermentation,
problems with un-favourable volatiles arise with the use of plants as well. Un-favourable volatiles,
or off-flavours, resemble beany or earthy smells, as well as giving associations to grass and
sometimes dirt. These smells often originate from the formation of volatile aldehydes and
furans, where the most known and studied volatiles are hexanal, pentanal and octanal[21]. The
Page 3 of 58
==PAGE:9==
Marie Fobian Jensen
1
INTRODUCTION
un-favourable volatiles are often formed due to lipid oxidation, where the lipids are broken into
small, medium and long-chained aldehydes. Other compounds also contributes to un-favourable,
bitter and astringent flavour of the PB products, for which many anti-nutrient compounds like
tannins, glucosinolates and saponins often are responsible[65].
1.4
Nordic crops for plant-based dairy alternatives
Instead of using soy as the base for PB yogurt, the aim of this project is to use the Nordic
crops pea, potato and oat. In 2020, the production of peas for human consumption reached
7,360.5 tonnes in Denmark while the total production of potatoes (the sum of potatoes for flour
production and human consumption) reached 2,493,000 tonnes. The production of oat reached a
total of 466,700 tonnes in 2020 all over Denmark[39]. In Table 1, the nutritional value of the raw
crops can be seen[48].
Table 1: The nutritional composition of fresh green pea, potato and oat in g/100 g. The data is from the food-data database of
the National Food Institute of Denmark, DTU[48], and the chosen data have the IDs 55 (Peas, green, raw), 946 (Potato, old
(February to June), raw) and 480 (Oats, rolled, not enriched).
Nutrient (g/100g)
Green pea
Potato
Oat
Fat
0.7
0.3
6.7
- hereof saturated fatty acids
0.128
0.058
6.29
Carbohydrates
7
16.8
58
- hereof sugars
4.7
-
1.03
- hereof starch
1.8
-
Protein
5.9
2.2
13.3
Dietary fibers
5.9
1.4
10.3
Water
79.6
78.3
9.5
Salt
0.01
-
0.01
The plant material used in this project was either protein isolates or commercial formulated
PB milk. The protein isolates of pea (UP11124) and potato (Protafy 130) were obtained from
respectively Pure Garden (Skanderborg, Denmark) and KMC (Brande, Denmark) and were both
soluble in water. The extraction of the potato protein requires treatment with both heat and acid
to make the proteins water soluble. For oat, a commercial oat milk, Økologisk Barista Havredrik
from Thiese (Roslev, Denmark), was obtained. In Table 2, the nutritional value of the protein
isolates and the commercial oat milk can be seen.
Green peas - Pisum sativum
Green peas are commonly grown and eaten in the Nordic countries. Peas are the seeds of the
flowering plant Pisum sativum, which usually grows to a height of 30-100 cm with several
seed-pods distributed on the plant. The seeds are sown in the early spring or even in the winter,
since they can sprout at 1 °C. The seeds are ready to be harvested in August from where they
are either sold for human consumption or as protein supplement for animal feed [18]. In Table
1, the nutritional composition of raw green peas can be seen. Here, the protein content is 5.9
g/100 g, and research have found that approximately half of these proteins are globulins, while
approximately 17 % are albumins and the rest are insoluble proteins[37]. The carbohydrate
Page 4 of 58
==PAGE:10==
Marie Fobian Jensen
1
INTRODUCTION
Table 2: Nutritional composition of pea protein powder (UP11124) from Pure Garden, Skanderborg, Denmark and potato protein
powder (Protafy 130) from KMC, Brande, Denmark. The nutritional value is calculated by the manufacturer based on raw
material data, and natural variation can therefore occur.
Nutritional value (g/100g)
Pea powder
Potato powder
Thiese barista havredrik
(g/100 mL)
Fat
0.5
2.3
1.4
- hereof saturated fatty acids
0.1
1.6
0.1
Carbohydrates
10.7
1.6
7.9
- hereof sugars
0.5
0
2.9
- hereof starch
-
1.6
-
Protein
77
81
0.4
Dietary fibers
2.7
6
-
Salt
2.78
0.13
0.12
content is 7 g/100g, which is the amount of available carbohydrate in the plant. According to
Urbano et al. (2005), the main carbohydrate in raw peas is starch with approximately 42 %
of dry-matter but with concentrations of stachyose and raffinose of 2.24 % and 0.56 % in dry
weight, respectively[71].
Oat - Avena sativa
Oat is a crop with the Latin name Avena sativa, and it is commonly grown in Northern European
countries, where the growth conditions are highly favourable. Oats are sown in the spring and
harvested in August[35]. The part of the crop that is eaten by humans is the de-hulled oat groats
that have been rolled or cut into flakes. Typically, the rolled oat flakes have been heat treated
prior to human consumption to give its characteristic, rather sweet oat flavor. Oats are considered
good for the human health due to their high content of β-glucans and soluble fibers[44], and are
as well rich in protein, as seen in Table 1. The proteins mostly consist of α- and β-globulins,
prolamins and albumins[64], and the carbohydrates in the oats, besides fibers, consists mainly of
starch[41].
Potato - Solanum tuberosum
World wide, there are many different varieties of potatoes but in Denmark, 23 variants are among
the ones commonly produced for human consumption[15]. In Denmark, potatoes are typically
laid in the first half of April, and they are harvested before October 1st, to avoid temperatures
below 8 °C[34]. Fresh potatoes consists mainly of water and carbohydrates, where up to 19 %
of the potato is starch, the nutritional composition can be seen in Table 1. Most of the potato is
already being used to produce potato starch for human consumption, and some of the protein
for food applications and feed additives. However, there is still much of the protein that are
left unused, leading to an un-reached potential for the potato proteins, which mainly consist of
patatin, protease inhibitors and high molecular weight proteins[9].
Anti-nutritional factors
Most plants and PB products contain Anti-Nutritional Factor (ANF). These ANFs vary across the
different plants as well as how they function in the plant and how they influence the nutritional
Page 5 of 58
==PAGE:11==
Marie Fobian Jensen
1
INTRODUCTION
uptake in humans. Some of the commonly found ANFs in peas, potatoes and oats are phytic
acid, saponins, cyanide, tannins, trypsin inhibitors, triglycoalkaloids and oxalates [9, 53]. Other
ANFs include indigestible sugars as stachyose and raffinose, which are commonly found in
legumes[41].
Phytic acid, also known as phytates and myo-inositol hexakisdihydrogen phosphate, is found in
most plants, as it is the central storage of phosphate and myo-inositol in oil seeds, legumes, plant
seeds and nuts.[56]. Phytic acid has great chelating properties, and is able to chelate multivalent
positive cations, which includes the minerals that are essential for human health like magnesium,
zink and calcium ions. Besides minerals, amino group derivatives in proteins can also be chelated.
Increased amounts of phytic acid in the food matrix can therefore lead to mineral deficiency and
in general reduced nutrient solubility, bioavailability and absorption[57]. The concentration of
phytic acid found in legumes as peas varies but is commonly in the range of 386-714 mg/100g,
while grains like oat usually contain 50-74 mg/g and nightshades like potato contain 0.82-4.48
mg/100g[53].
1.5
Bacillus sp.
Belonging to the family of Bacillaceae, Bacillus sp. are endospore forming, Gram-positive,
facultative anaerobic, rod shaped bacteria. Their optimum of growth is in the range of 37-42 ◦C,
while some species can grow in a very large range of approximately 10-50 ◦C. Several species in
the genus Bacillus are considered as food-borne pathogens and food spoilers, such as Bacillus
cereus and Bacillus mycoides, but other species are great at producing extracellular enzymes and
proteins that are valuable for the food industry, which include both Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus
coagulans and Bacillus megaterium[29]. The pathogenic species are though closer related to each
other than they are to the non-pathogenic species, which was investigated in-silico by Khurana
et al. (2020). With their wide range of growth temperature, the bacteria can survive in otherwise
extreme conditions, and they are therefor often also found in soil, where the environment and
conditions are interchangeable. Along with this, most of the species in the genus can form biofilm,
which in nature is used for communication and nutrient exchange, while it can be used as texture
formation in the food industry. Here, the texturising properties also relies on the production
of Exopolysaccharides (EPS), which have been found crucial for the mouthfeel, sensory and
rheoloy of PB yogurt-like alternatives[47, 60].
Of the many different species, B. subtilis has been studied the most. The species is used in
many industrial applications, where especially the production of the enzyme α-amylase and
different proteases like subtilisin is well-known[52]. As part of the B. subtilis group, Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens share many of the same features. Historically, the species was considered a
B. subtilis but is now considered as its own species. B. amyloliquefaciens have been found to
produce many texturing enzymes that e.g. can be used for milk clotting in cheese production,
and some strains have also been found to produce trans-glutaminase, which can be used across
different food processing sectors[72, 81].
Page 6 of 58
==PAGE:12==
Marie Fobian Jensen
1
INTRODUCTION
Flavour enhancement
Bacillus sp. have been found to be able to produce dairy-like flavour and aroma compounds as
acetoin and 2,3-butanediol[66]. The formation of the two compounds is closely related, which
can be seen in Figure 1. In general, acetoin is formed during the fermentation of glucose (or
other carbon sources) in the Embden-Meyerhof pathway. Here, two molecules of pyruvate
can be converted to the unstable α-acetolactate by the enzyme α-acetolactate synthase. AL is
converted into acetoin by α-acetolactate decarboxylase but can also be converted into diacetyl
by a non-enzymatic oxidative decarboxylation. Though, diacetyl is often a minor by-product
and can be irreversibly transformed into acetoin, which is its reductive state. Likewise, acetoin
can be transformed into diacetyl, which is its reductive state but here the reaction is reversible.
Both of these reactions are catalysed by the enzyme 2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase, which has
several names, including acetoin reductase and diacetyl reductase [76]. Many organisms can also
utilise citrate as a precursor for acetoin and 2,3-butanediol, however, this needs to be converted
to pyruvate first[29].
Figure 1: Production of acetoin, diacetyl and 2,3-butanediol from pyruvate in Bacillus sp. The figure is made with ChemSketch,
Advanced Chemistry Development Inc., Canada with inspiration from Xiao and Xu (2007) [76].
Besides the production of dairy-like flavours, Fischer et al. (2022) found that several organisms
are able to degrade the "beany" and "grassy" off-flavours found in legumes and other plants.
Here, they found that the enzymes alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase are the
main contributors to this bioconversion, and that alcohol dehydrogenase e.g. converts hexanal
into hexanol[21, 66].
QPS status
The bacteria that are chosen in this project are all on the list of Qualified presumption of
safety (QPS). The QPS list was established by EFSA in the early 2000’s due to extensive risk
assessments on microorganisms that already had a long history of use in both food and feed.
There was a need for a faster process in approving microorganisms for use in new products,
which was then done based on historical use and whether any risk concerns existed. The QPS
status is granted to an organism with either full QPS grant or with certain limitations and factors
that had to be taken into account for the user. If an organism is granted QPS status, no further
Page 7 of 58
==PAGE:13==
Marie Fobian Jensen
1
INTRODUCTION
safety assessments are needed other than satisfying any qualifications that might be specified,
while those organisms that fail to obtain QPS status is considered as hazardous[5].
The organisms that have been granted QPS status include Gram-positive non-sporulating bacteria,
several yeasts and, most importantly for this project, Bacillus sp. The qualifications for the
Bacillus sp. to be granted QPS status is that there is an absence of toxigenic activity[5], and no
harbouring of antimicrobial resistance genes[32].
Historical use of Bacillus sp. in food
Evident for their QPS status, Bacillus sp. have been used in many Asian and African cuisines
for centuries, and an extract of the types of foods the species have been used in can be seen
in Table 3. The variety of foods include both liquids like the Korean rice wine Makegolli and
solids like the Indonesian Tempeh[72]. In all the foods listed in Table 3, Bacillus sp. is one of the
dominant groups of microorganisms that is responsible for production of flavour compounds,
vitamins, probiotics or texture [14, 20, 38, 43]. One of the reasons for the great production of
flavour components is Bacillus’ capability of producing extracellular enzymes that break down
polysaccharides, oligosaccharides, proteins, lipids and nucleic acids. Besides the extracellular
enzymes, Bacillus also have intracellular enzymes that prepare the carbohydrates to enter the
glycolysis , resulting in many flavour compounds and precursors for flavour compounds known
from for example soy sauce[14, 29].
Table 3: Historical use of Bacillus sp. in food products. The bacterium has mainly been used in Asian and African cuisine, as it
can be seen in the third column.
Strain used
Type of food
Location
Function of Bacillus sp.
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
Baiju[72]
China
Flavour production
Makegolli[72]
Korea
Probiotic and antimicrobial
production
Beer[72]
India
bio-conversion of lignocellulose
to digestible sugars
Tempeh[72]
Indonesia
Peptide synthesis as well as
vitamin production
Fish sauce[72]
Malaysia
bio-conversion of amines
Pickled mango[72]
USA
Degrade polysaccharides to
monosaccharides
Flavoured yogurt[72]
USA
Production of antimicrobials
Bacillus subtilis
Doenjang[43]
Korea
Antimicrobial and vitamin
production
Natto[43]
Japan
Vitamin production, bio-conversion
of macromolecules
Cheonggukjang[43]
Korea
bio-conversion of proteins and
polysaccharides into peptides
and monosaccharides
Soy sauce like
flavours[75]
China
Production of flavour:
acetoin, ligustrazine, tetramethylpyrazine
Dawadawa[14]
Africa
bio-conversion of macromolecules
Ugba[14]
Africa
bio-conversion of macromolecules
Aisa[14]
Africa
bio-conversion of macromolecules
Okpehe[14]
Africa
bio-conversion of macromolecules
Page 8 of 58
==PAGE:14==
Marie Fobian Jensen
1
INTRODUCTION
Ogiri[14]
Africa
bio-conversion of macromolecules
Owoh[14]
Africa
bio-conversion of macromolecules
Bacillus sp.
Gochujang[43]
Korea
bio-conversion of macromolecules
Bacillus subtilis/
Bacillus licheniformis
Maotai liquor[38]
China
Production of flavour components:
organic acids, 3-furfural,
2, 3-butanediol, ethyl palmitate,
ethyl oleate and ethyl linoleate
As it can be seen in Table 3, Bacillus sp. have been found to produce different vitamins when used
for food fermentation. Many studies have found that B. subtilis can produce both a wide range of
Vitamin Bs, where especially the production of riboflavin have been found efficient[3]. Besides
riboflavin, B. subtilis have also been found to produce Vitamin K, also known as phylloquinones
and menaquinones, which was found in fermentation with both B. amyloliquefaciens and Bacillus
licheniformis[33, 43, 74]. Especially Vitamin K is of importance for human health, as it is
essential for the synthesis of the calcium-binding protein osteocalcin. This protein is thought to
have many functions in the human metabolism, reproduction and cognition, while it is essential
in the inhibition of bone mineralisation[28, 82].
Page 9 of 58
==PAGE:15==
Marie Fobian Jensen
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Chemicals
All chemicals were acquired from Sigma-Aldrich Merck, Germany unless otherwise stated.
2.2
Preparation of samples
For the fermentation trials, overnight cultures were prepared as follows. From a frozen stock
solution, approximately 1 µL of bacterium was inoculated into 0.5-1 mL Luria-Bertani (LB)
broth, Miller (Fisher BioReagents, USA), and the cultures were incubated at 37◦C at 140 rpm for
approximately 16 hours. After incubation, the cultures were centrifuged with 21,000xg at 10◦C
for 5 minutes in a top-bench centrifuge (Hermle Labortechnik GmbH, Wehingen, Germany), and
the supernatant was discarded. To the remaining pellets, sterile water was added in equal volume
as the discarded supernatant. This washing step was done to avoid nutrients from the broth to be
transferred to the medium used for fermentation.
2.3
Selection of strains
In order to select the strains that were to be used, both isolation from samples from the Danish
nature and strains from the strain collection at the National Food Institute DTU (NFICC) were
used. All strains can be seen in Appendix A.
Isolation from nature samples
A total of 60 samples were collected from the Danish nature. Of the samples, 40 were flower and
20 were soil samples. The flowers were sampled in a saline solution from different locations in
Denmark and made to glycerol stocks with a 50% glycerol solution. The stock samples were
stored at -80 ◦C until isolation. The soil was sampled from different locations in Denmark in 2
mL Eppendorf tubes and kept at 4 ◦C for approximately 7 days until isolation.
Preparation of soil samples
The soil samples were treated in two different ways. First, the samples were liquefied with sterile
water in a ratio of approximately 1:3 (v/v). The liquefied samples were thoroughly vortexed and
left at 140 rpm in room temperature for 1 hour. After sedimentation of the soil, the supernatant
of the samples were split into duplicates. One of the duplicates of each sample was heat treated
at 70 ◦C for 10 minutes in an effort to kill most bacteria and favour the spore-forming Bacillus
sp. After heat treatment, both duplicates were made into glycerol stocks by adding 50% glycerol
solution in each sample in the ratio 1:1 (v/v), and the samples were kept at -80 ◦C until further
usage.
Preparation of flower samples
The frozen samples were thawed at room temperature for 1 hour and vortexed until the liquid was
fully mixed. Hereafter, the samples were centrifuged at 21,000xg for 5 minutes in a top-bench
centrifuge (Hermle Labortechnik GmbH, Wehingen, Germany). The supernatant was discarded,
as well as the flower residues, and the pellet was dispersed in 2 mL Yeast extract, Peptone,
Dextrose (YPD) broth. The flower samples were then split into duplicates. As with the soil
Page 10 of 58
==PAGE:16==
Marie Fobian Jensen
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
samples, one of the duplicates of each sample was heat treated under the same conditions, and
made to glycerol stocks as previously described.
Identification of strains
The frozen stock solutions of prepared soil and flower samples were thawed at room temperature
upon isolation of strains. From the heat treated samples, 100 µL were inoculated on YPD agar
(Sigma-Aldrich, Y1500, USA)) with added 5% D-glucose (Sigma-Aldrich, G7021, Mexico) to
ensure growth, and incubated at 37 ◦C for approximately 24 hours. The non-heat treated samples
were inoculated on Plate Count Agar (PCA) (Sigma-Aldrich, 80957, Switzerland), and incubated
at 30 ◦C for approximately 24 hours. All samples were re-streaked until there were pure single
colonies.
The single colonies were identified using MALDI-TOF, which is a Matrix-Assisted Laser
Desorption/Ionization Time-Of-Flight Biotyper (Bruker Daltonic GmbH, Bremen, Germany).
The identification followed a protocol by Sedó Molina et al. (2022). Briefly, the pure, fresh
colonies grown on agar plates were transferred directly to the 96-sample target plate with a 1 µL
pode needle and distributed evenly on the spot. To each spot with biological material, 1 µL 75%
(v/v) ethanol was added and left to dry before addition of 1 µL 70% (v/v) formic acid. Lastly, 1
µL of a matrix solution was added to each spot and left to dry completely before identification
with the MALDI-TOF. The matrix solution was prepared in 1 mL by mixing 475 µL HPLC
grade water, 500 µL 100% acetonitrile and 25 µL trifluoroacetic acid with approximately 50
µL α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid. The solution should be over-saturated with α-cyano-4-
hydroxycinnamic acid, meaning that yellow crystals should be visible as sedimentation.
If the identification with pure colony material resulted in an insufficient score value, a protein ex-
traction procedure was made with overnight cultures of the given samples. The washed overnight
cultures were centrifuged at 21,000xg for 2 minutes and 30 seconds, and the supernatant was
discarded. A standard ethanol-based protein extraction protocol was followed. After extraction,
the sample was centrifuged at 21,000xg for 3 minutes and the supernatant was discarded. To the
(air-) dried pellet, 50 µL 70% formic acid and 50 µL acetonitrile was added and the sample was
homogenised. To sediment the solid materials, the sample was centrifuged at 21,000xg for 3
minutes, and 1 µL of each sample was added to a spot on the target plate followed by 1 µL of
the matrix solution.
The target plate with either directly transferred biological material or extracted proteins was
inserted in the MALDI-TOF Biotyper and the instrument was run according to the protocol. The
quality of the identification was evaluated based on the score. If the score was above 2.0, the
identification was to species level, while a score between 1.70 and 1.99 meant identification to
genus level. Organisms with identification scores above 1.70 were added to NFICC, made to
glycerol stocks and kept at -80 ◦C.
Page 11 of 58
==PAGE:17==
Marie Fobian Jensen
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Strains from NFICC
From NFICC, 32 Bacillus strains had QPS status[32]. Adding the Bacillus sp. found during
isolation from nature samples, 41 Bacillus sp. with QPS status were in NFICC. All 41 strains,
their internal identification number and origin of isolation can be seen in Table 4.
Table 4: Qualified presumption of safety Bacillus sp. from the Strain Collection of the National Food Institute at the Technical
University of Denmark (NFICC). The strains are isolated from various sources and locations in Denmark, and the identification
of the strain is done with Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time-Of-Flight Biotyper (MALDI-TOF).
NFICC
Number
Organism
Isolation Origin
528
Bacillus subtilis
Sour dough, Lyngby
530
Bacillus pumilus
Rørvig klitplantage (dybesø)
869*
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
Pasteurized BSG from Fredericia
1127*
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
Pasteurized BSG
1130*
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
Pasteurized BSG
1525*
Bacillus subtilis
Sildegarum m koji
1527*
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp plantarum
Sildegarum m koji
1531*
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp plantarum
Sildegarum u koji
1534*
Bacillus subtilis
"Dårlig" miso
1549*
Bacillus licheniformis
apple pulp
1599
Bacillus subtilis
Apple
1610
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp plantarum
Mushroom
1612
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp plantarum
Carrot
1617
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp plantarum
Red Raddish+Leek+Mushroom
1687
Bacillus subtilis/Bacillus mojavensis
Garlic
1689
Bacillus pumilus/Bacillus altitudinis
Red Raddish
1690
Bacillus subtilis
Red Cabbage-Gochujang
1692
Bacillus subtilis
Red bell pepper
1700
Bacillus megaterium
Ginger-Cumin Seed
1702
Bacillus pumilus
Ginger-Cumin Seed
1704
Bacillus megaterium
Sweet Potato
1780
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp plantarum
Oat
1782
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp plantarum
Salad
1785
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp plantarum
Feld Salad
1869
Bacillus subtilis
Kimchi
1938
Bacillus vallismortis
Kimchi
1939
Bacillus subtilis ssp subtilis
Kimchi
1940
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp plantarum
Kimchi
1941
Bacillus megaterium
Kimchi
2013
Bacillus coagulans
Flower
2014
Bacillus coagulans
Flower
2015
Bacillus coagulans
Flower
Page 12 of 58
==PAGE:18==
Marie Fobian Jensen
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
2082
Bacillus subtilis
Sandy soil
2083
Bacillus megaterium
Field soil
2084
Bacillus megaterium
Common soil
2085
Bacillus subtilis
Sandy soil
2086
Bacillus megaterium
Gravel soil
2087
Bacillus subtilis
Sandy soil
2089
Bacillus subtilis
Clay/sandy soil
2090
Bacillus megaterium
Common soil
2091
Bacillus megaterium
Clay soil
* DNA sequences of these strains were previously acquired.
Underlined NFICC numbers indicate strains that were isolated during this project.
Quality control of strains
The quality of all Bacillus strains from NFICC was determined using the previously described
MALDI-TOF method. This was done in order to ensure that the correct strains were used
throughout the project.
2.4
Genomic analysis
From previous DNA sequencing, whole genomes were available on eight Bacillus sp. from
NFICC, which are highlighted with a star (*) in Table 4. Initially, the genomes were trimmed
and assembled prior to genomic analysis and annotation of genes. To process and analyse the
sequences, the online open source platform and server Galaxy[1] was used. Firstly, the raw
reads were trimmed with Trimmomatic, where the forward and reverse sequences were treated as
paired-ends. An initial cut of ILLUMINA specific sequences was performed automatically by
the software and the adaptor sequence used was the TrueSeq2 for paired-ended Illumina GAII.
The quality of the trimmed reads was determined with FASTQC, where the crucial parameters
were the total number of sequences, the lenght of the sequence and the per-base sequence quality.
Here, the higher the number of sequences and an interval of approximately 2-150 in sequence
length was favoured as well as having stable bases with high quality from start to end of the
sequence. For reference, see Figure 2.
The trimmed read sequences with the highest quality were chosen for assembly, which was done
using the Shovill tool in Galaxy. Here, the forward and reverse sequence of the highest possible
quality were uploaded as paired-end reads, and the settings were kept as default. To check the
quality of the assembled genome, the tool Quast was used to analyse the contigs. The important
parameters were the N50, length and number of contigs, which all represents higher quality the
higher the values.
The genomes that were assembled with poor quality using the Shovill tool, were assembled
again by mapping the trimmed reads against reference genomes with the tool Bowtie2. The
settings used were as follows: The library setting was paired-end and the reference genomes were
downloaded from NCBI and uploaded in FASTA format in Galaxy[49, 68]. All other settings
were kept as default and the mapping was run. To assemble the mapped genome, the SPAdes
Page 13 of 58
==PAGE:19==
Marie Fobian Jensen
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 2: Per base quality of the trimmed forward sequence of the fourth DNA sequence of Bacillus subtilis 1534. The trimming
and quality evaluation was done with the online software Galaxy[1]. The higher the score, the better the quality of the bases.
tool was used with the paired-end settings Interlaced and all other settings kept as default. The
quality of the assembly was controlled by using Quast as previously mentioned.
Annotation of genes
The assembled genomes were uploaded to the RAST server[4], which automatically performs
a functional annotation. With the annotated genomes, different metabolism pathways and sub-
systems were investigated. The subsystems included systems for different vitamins such as
menaquinone and riboflavin.
Besides the annotation, specific genes were BLASTed against the assembled genomes. This
was also done through the RAST server. The genes of interest in this project are the genes
encoding for enzymes in the pathways related to flavour component and vitamin production,
as well as genes encoding degradation enzymes for anti-nutritional factors. The genes were
found in UniProt [8], and were transglutaminase (tgl, P40746), subtilisin E (aprE, P04189),
6-phospho-beta-glucosidase (bglA, P42973) (saponin degradation), phytase (phyC, O31097),
oxalate decarboxylase (oxdC, O34714) and 2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase (bdhA, O34788). The
match of the genes to the genome was assessed by evaluating the bit score and the E-value.
2.5
Metabolomic analysis
For a metabolomic analysis, nine QPS Bacillus strains from NFICC were grown as overnight
cultures in YPD broth with 1 % added D-glucose at 37◦C with agitation (140 rpm). From the
overnight cultures, 0.1 OD600 was inoculated into 15 mL YPD both with 1% added glucose in
Page 14 of 58
==PAGE:20==
Marie Fobian Jensen
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
50 mL tubes. The samples were incubated at 37 ◦C under agitation (140 rpm) for 72 hours. After
incubation, the samples were centrifuged at 4000 rpm at 4◦C for 10 minutes, and the supernatant
was transferred to clean tubes prior to analysis.
The metabolomic analysis was carried out by Assistant Professor Elena Hakme from the research
group for Analytical Food Chemistry at the National Food Institute. For the analysis, different
online annotation sources and mass lists were used to identify the components, however, no
standards were used, therefore the analysis was solely qualitative.
2.6
Chemical assays
In order to select the most suitable strains for the investigation of starter culture potential, initial
screenings with chemical assays were performed. The 41 Bacillus sp. seen in Table 4 were
screened for their ability to produce acetoin, degrade phytic acid and their protease activity.
Acetion production
The screening for acetoin production was done by making a Voges-Proskauer (VP) test [23, 67],
both qualitatively and quantitatively. First, the VP test was done qualitatively according to Garcia
(2010)[23]. Initially, a Methyl-Red-Voges-Proskauer (MR-VP) broth was prepared with 7 g
peptone, 5 g glucose and 5 g dipotassium phosphate per 1 L distilled water. The pH was adjusted
to 6 ± 0.2. Overnight cultures of each strain were made in the MR-VP broth at 35 ◦C under
agitation (200 rpm). For each strain, 0.1 OD600 was inoculated in 2 mL MR-VP broth and
incubated at 35 ◦C for 48 hours under agitation (200 rpm). To ensure aeration, the test was done
in 15 mL falkon tubes.
After incubation, 1 mL of each sample was transferred to a clean tube, and 600 µL 5% α-naphtol
was added followed by 200 µL 40% potassium hydroxide. The samples were left at room
temperature for 15-30 minutes after which they were examined for any colour formation. The
formation of a pink/red colour on the top part of the liquid indicated a positive test, and thereby
formation of acetoin, while no colour formation indicated a negative test, and no production of
acetoin. If the samples were to be left for longer incubation that 30 minutes, false positives could
arise from the reaction between α-naphtol and potassium hydroxide, resulting in a cobber/red
colour[23].
The quantitative VP test was done by following the same procedure, though in smaller volumes.
To measure the concentration of acetoin produced, a standard curve was made with acetoin
(Sigma-Aldrich, W200832, China) in MR-VP broth, with concentrations ranging from 0.001 to 1
g/L. The measurement was done in a 96-well titer plate, and the asorbance was measured at 510,
525 and 535 nm.
From both the fermented and blank samples, 83.8 µL was transferred to a 96-well plate to where
5% α-naphtol was added followed by 40 % potassium hydroxide. The ratio between samples
and reagents was 1:0.6:0.2 and the absorbance was measured every 2 minutes for 20 minutes
from the point of adding the last chemical at wavelenghts 510, 525 and 535 nm. Before each
Page 15 of 58
==PAGE:21==
Marie Fobian Jensen
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
measurement, the plate was shaken mechanically for 5 seconds. All measurements was done at
25 ◦C with an Infinite M200 Pro plate reader (Tecan, Switzerland).
Phytic acid degradation
To investigate the phytic acid degradation, a plate growth assay was conducted with a technique
extracted from Raghavendra and Halami 2009 [54], though with slight modification. MRS-MOPS
broth and agar plates were used and consisted of 21.92 g/L MOPS, 4 g/L meat extract, 2 g/L
yeast extract, 0.65 g/L phytic acid sodium salt and 10 g/L glucose. For the plates, 12 g/L agar
was added as well.
Each strain was grown as overnight culture in the MRS-MOPS broth at 37 ◦C at 140 rpm. The
quantity was 0.5 mL in 2 mL Eppendorf tubes to ensure sufficient head-space. From the overnight
cultures, point inoculations were made. With one MRS-MOPS plate for each strain, 5 inoculation
points of 2 µL each were placed on the agar plate and left to dry for a few minutes. With the
inoculation points dried, the plates were incubated at 37◦C for 24 hours.
After incubation, the colonies were washed off the agar surface with distilled water, and the
plates were flooded with 2% (w/v) aqueous cobalt chloride solution and incubated at room
temperature for 5 minutes. Hereafter, the cobalt chloride solution was replaced with a freshly
prepared solution consisting of equal volumes of 6.25% (w/v) aqueous ammonium molybate
solution and 0.42% (w/v) aqueous ammonium metavanadate solution. The plates were incubated
at room temperature for 5 minutes again, and the ammonium molybate/ammonium metavanadate
solution was removed.
The plates were examined for clearing zones, where bigger clearing zones around the inoculation
point indicated higher degree of phytic acid degradation[54].
Protease activity
The protease activity of all the strains were tested in a skim milk plate assay. The skim milk
plates were prepared by using 20 g/L of Plate Count Skim Milk Agar (Sigma-Aldrich, 80957,
Switzerland) and additional 24 g/L of Skim milk powder (VWR chemicals, USA). All strains
were grown as overnight cultures as described in Section 2.2, however without washing the
strains after incubation. Each strain was spot-inoculated onto the skim milk plates in 4 spots of 2
µL, were left to dry for a few minutes and incubated at 37◦C for 24 hours. After incubation, the
plates were examined for clearing zones around the inoculation spots.
2.7
Formulation of plant-based milk
For the formulation of PB milks, the raw materials described in Section 1.4 were used, and
the nutritional value of these can be seen in Table 2. For this project it was desired to obtain a
nutritional value of the PB milks as close to cow milk as possible. From the food database hosted
by the National Food Institute DTU, Frida, the nutritional value of conventional skimmed milk
(0.1 % fat) was obtained, and the data for this, and the formulated PB milks, can be seen in Table
5[22].
Page 16 of 58
==PAGE:22==
Marie Fobian Jensen
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Table 5: Nutritional value of self-formulated pea and potato milk with respectively 5 % and 4 % protein isolate (w/v). As a base
for an oat milk, the organic Thise barista havredrik was used in this project, and it was obtained from Thise, Roslev, Denmark.
For comparison of nutritional value, data of a conventional skim milk was obtained from the food database hosted by the National
Food Institute, DTU [22], and can be seen in the last column.
Nutritional value (g/100 mL)
Pea milk
(5% (w/v))
Potato milk
(4% (w/v))
Thise
barista
havredrik
Skim milk
(0.1% fat)
Fat
0.025
0.092
1.4
0.1
-hereof saturated FA
0.005
0.064
0.1
-
Carbohydrates
1.035
0.564
7.9
5.5
- hereof sugars
0.025
0
2.9
4.62
- hereof starch
-
0.064
-
-
- Added glucose
0.25
0.25
-
-
- Added fructose
0.25
0.25
-
-
Protein
3.85
3.24
0.4
3.5
Dietary fibers
0.135
0.24
-
-
Salt
0.139
0.0052
0.12
0.09
To formulate the pea and potato milk, 50 g of the pea protein powder and 40 g of potato protein
powder was dissolved in 1 L demineralised water respectively. The dissolved protein powders
were stirred at room temperature for one hour with a magnetic stirrer, and afterwards pasteurised
in a water bath set to 80 ◦C for one hour. Two blank samples of each milk were collected, and one
was frozen at -18 ◦C until further analysis, while one was stored at 4 ◦C until use for viscosity
analysis. The remaining plant milk was stored at 4 ◦C until the next day. Additionally to the
pea- and potato-based milks, the conventionally produced organic Thise barista havredrik was
obtained from Thise, Roslev, Denmark. It consists of 9% organic oat, 1% organic rapeseed oil,
organic cane sugar and salt. The nutritional values of all three milks can be seen in Table 5. As it
can be seen in the table, the sugar content of the self-formulated PB milks is much lower than in
the skimmed milk, why it was supposed to be up-regulated with 5%. However, a mistake was
made when calculating the concentration, and the sugar concentration was only adjusted with 5
g/L by adding equal amounts of glucose and fructose to the milks.
2.8
Fermentation set-up
The fermentation of pea, oat and potato milk was done in two trials, with the first being an initial
screening with the strains in single replicates, and the last being a fermentation with the strains
in biological triplicates. The strains used for fermentation were selected based on the chemical
assays that were described previously, meaning that the total number of strains narrowed down
from the initial 41 Bacillus strains to 28 good performing strains after chemical analysis. These
28 strains were used in the first fermentation screening, while the best performing strains from
this screening were used in the second, main fermentation. The best performing strains used in
the main fermentation can be seen in Table 6.
The 28 strains that were used for the initial screening fermentation can be seen in Table 9.
Page 17 of 58
==PAGE:23==
Marie Fobian Jensen
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Table 6: The selected strains in pea, potato and oat milk based on initial screenings with both chemical assays and a fermentation
screening. The x indicates for which milk the given strain was selected. An abbreviation of the strain name can be seen in the
first column, which will be used for future notation.
Abbreviation
Selected strains
Pea
Potato
Oat
BS 1534
Bacillus subtilis 1534
x
BA 1610
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens subsp. plantarum 1610
x
BS 2087
Bacillus subtilis 2087
x
BA 1785
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens subsp. plantarum 1785
x
BA 1940
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens subsp. plantarum 1940
x
Initial screening fermentation
To choose the most suitable strains for fermentation in the PB milks, an initial screening for
texture, flavour and odour formation was made. The formulated PB milks were inoculated with
1% (v/v) of overnight cultures of the 28 strains, and incubated at 37◦C for 48 hours in 100 mL
Erlenmeyer flasks (Pyrex, USA). During the first 24 hours, the samples were under agitation
at 200 rpm, which was adjusted to 20 rpm for the last 24 hours in order to enhance texture
formation. After incubation, each sample was investigated for whether there were any bad odour
formation or not. Here, five different researchers, individually and independent from each other,
evaluated each fermented sample and noted whether the smell was "bad", "neutral" or "good".
This evaluation was done as a rough selection and screening of the fermented samples, and was
done neither objectively nor non-biased, since none of the researches were trained in sensory
evaluation. Any change in texture and colour was evaluated visually, while the pH was measured
with an Excellent Line pH-meter (Windaus-Labortechnik GmbH & Co. KG, Germany). Sub-
samples were taken out for HPLC analysis to investigate the formation of the flavour compounds
acetoin, 2,3-butanediol, diaceyl and organic acids, and whether any ethanol was produced.
Main fermentation
The extrinsic conditions for the second, main fermentation were the same as for the initial
screening fermentation. All three PB milks were used, and the initial pH of them were 6.7 for
oat, 7.1 for pea and 6.7 for potato. The five strains seen in Table 6 were inoculated as 1 % (v/v)
in 50 mL PB milk in 300 mL Erlenmeyer flasks. After fermentation, samples were taken for
GC-MS, FAA, HPLC, SDS-PAGE and rheology analysis. All sub-samples, except the ones for
rheology, were stored at -18 ◦C until analysis, while the sub-samples for rheology were analysed
immediately post sampling.
2.9
Post-fermentation analysis
The fermented samples were analysed with different techniques. To analyse soluble compounds,
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) was used, while volatile compounds were
analysed with Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS). Free Amino Acids (FAA)
were analysed with Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS). A viscosity analysis
was conducted with a TA Instruments Discovery HR-2 hybrid rheometer, while an Elementar
DUMAS instrument was used to estimate the total protein content. The protein degradation was
investigated with Sodium Dodecyl-Sulfate Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE).
Page 18 of 58
==PAGE:24==
Marie Fobian Jensen
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Analysis of sugars, organic acids and soluble flavour compounds
Sub-samples of 2.5 mL were taken post fermentation for the analysis of sugars, organic acids,
ethanol and the flavour compounds acetoin, diacetyl and 2,3-butanediol. The sub-sample was
centrifuged with 21,000xg at 10◦C for 5 minutes in a top-bench centrifuge (Hermle Labortechnik
GmbH, Wehingen, Germany), and the supernatant was filtered through a 0.2 µm PES syringe
filter (Th Geyer, Germany) into 2 mL HPLC glass vials. The samples were kept at 4-8◦C until
analysis.
For the analysis, an UltiMate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Hvidovre, Denmark) system was used. The
system was equipped with an Aminex HPx-87H column (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., USA) and
connected to a RefractoMax 520 refractive index detector (ERC, USA). As mobile phase, 5 mM
sulfuric acid with flow rate 0.5 mL/min was used, and the column oven temperature was main-
tained at 60 ◦C. To quantify the different components, standard solutions were prepared and used
as reference, and all samples and standards were analysed in the Chromeleon Chromatography
Data System (ThermoFisher, Boston, USA).
Analysis of volatile compounds
To analyse the degradation and formation of both off- and favourable volatiles, a dynamic head-
space collection with GC-MS analysis was used. The fermented and un-fermented sub-samples
were stored at -18 ◦C prior to analysis, and were thawed at room temperature at the day of
analysis. 5 g of each sample were weighted off in 100 mL purge bottles with attached purge head
and Tenax tube (SKC, USA). To each sample, 2 mL of an anti-foaming agent (SynperonicTM,
Croda, United Kingdom) was added. An internal standard (4-methyl-1-pentanol) was added to
all samples in quantities of 25 mg, which corresponds to 30 µg/g in water.
All samples were placed in a water bath at 45 ◦C for 30 minutes with a Nitrogen flow of 340
mL/min to release the volatile compounds. Following the water bath, the Tenax tubes were
detached from the purge head and held at a constant nitrogen flow of 50 mL/min for 20 minutes.
The trapped volatile compounds in the Tenax tubes were released into the gas chromatograph
(HP 6890 Series, Hewlett Packard, Palo Alto, CA, USA) equipped with a DB-1701 column with
dimensions 30 m x 0.25 mm x 1.0 µm (J&W Scientific, CA, USA). The initial temperature was
45 ◦C, which was held for 5 minutes, followed by a linear increase to 55 ◦C with 1.5 ◦C/min.
After reaching 55 ◦C, the temperature was increased to 90 ◦C with 2 ◦C/min, and lastly to 230
◦C with 8 ◦C/min.
The chromatograph was attached to a mass spectrophotometer (HP 5973 inert mass-selective
detector, Agilent Technologies Inc., CA, USA; Electron ionization mode, 70 eV, mass to charge
ratio scan between 30 and 250), which all compounds were analysed with. Calibration curves
were made for 35 different volatile compounds and analysed in the software MassHunter (Agilent
Technologies Inc., CA, USA). All samples were analysed in biological triplicates.
Page 19 of 58
==PAGE:25==
Marie Fobian Jensen
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Total protein estimation
The initial and final total protein content was estimated using the DUMAS principle with the
Elementar DUMAS equipment. For each of the liquid samples, 2 mL were weighted off in
crucibles in mg to one decimal. An internal method for beer was used, and the protein factor for
milk of 6.38 was used as the conversion factor. Prior to the run of fermented and un-fermented
samples, five samples with aspartic acid (Sigma-Adrich, A7219, Japan) was run as standards and
two wheat flour reference standards were run as well.
Free amino acids analysis
For the analysis of FAA, LC-MS was used. The fermented and un-fermented samples were, in
biological triplicates, frozen at -18 ◦C prior to analysis, and were thawed at room temperature at
the day of analysis. All samples were shaken until homogenise and diluted 1:1 with the mobile
phase (100 mM ammoniumformite in water). After dilution, the samples were centrifuged, and
the supernatant was collected with a syringe and filtered through a PES 0.2 µm syringe filter (Th
Geyer, Germany) into 2 mL HPLC glass vials. The samples were analysed subsequently.
The amino acids were separated using a BioZenTM 2.6 µm Glycan LC column with dimensions
100 x 2.1 mm (Phenomenex, CA, USA), and quantified with mass spectrometry. For the separa-
tion, two different mobile phases were used at different gradients. Mobile phase (A), 10 mM
ammonium formate diluted in acetonitrile, where initially at 100 %, while the second mobile
phase (B), 10 mM ammonium formate diluted in water, was 0 %. The gradient of the mobile
phases can be seen in Table 7. The flow rate of the mobile phases was 0.5 mL/min.
Table 7: Flow gradient of the two mobile phases A (10 mM ammonium formate diluted in acetonitrile) and B (10 mM ammonium
formate diluted in water) during the separation of amino acids in a BioZenTM Glycan column (Phenomenex, CA, USA). The
time ranges are given in minutes and the flow gradients in percentage of the total mobile phase volume.
Time (min)
0
2
7
8-12
12-16
Mobile phase A (%)
100
95
80
20
100
Mobile phase B (%)
0
5
20
80
0
The analysis and final quantification of FAA was done using the software MassHunter (Agilent
Technologies Inc., CA, USA). In total, 17 amino acids were quantified: Alanine, Arginine,
Asparagine, Cysteine, Glutamine, Glycine, Histidine, Isoleucine, Leucine, Lysine, Methion-
ine, Phenylalanine, Proline, Serine, Threonine, Tyrosine, Valine. Due to the lack of standards,
Tryptophan, Glutamate and Aspartate were not analysed for.
Protein degradation
To evaluate the composition of the water soluble proteins before and after fermentation, two SDS-
PAGE gels were run. For the first gel, the frozen samples were thawed at room temperature, and
a sub-sample of 0.5 mL was taken out and centrifuged. For the second gel, the remaining of the
thawed sample was adjusted to pH 6.6, after which a sub-sample of 0.5 mL was centrifuged. From
the supernatant, 20 µL was mixed with 19 µL 2x Laemmili buffer and 1 µL β-mercaptoethanol.
The solution was heat-treated for 10 minutes at 90 ◦C and was subsequently loaded into a
Mini-Protean TGX precast gel, 4-20 % (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., USA). The buffer used for
Page 20 of 58
==PAGE:26==
Marie Fobian Jensen
2
MATERIALS AND METHODS
the electrophoresis was a freshly prepared 100 mM TGS buffer. The gel was run at constant
ampere (40 A) for 33 minutes and subsequently washed with demineralised water and stained
with Bio-Safe Coomassie G-250 Stain (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., USA) for 10 minutes. The
gel was rinsed with demineralised water, and analysed with a FUSION FX7 Western Blot and
Chemi Imaging (Vilber, France).
Viscosity analysis
The viscosity and flow behaviour analysis was made by using the TA Instruments Discovery
HR-2 hybrid rheometer, United Kingdom. With this, the viscosity of the liquid samples were
measured using the "cup and bob" method, where a cup with a single gap (serial number 111202)
and a concentric cylinder DIN SST smart-swap bob with the dimensions 28 mm in diameter and
42.09 mm in length were used. The viscosity was measured at 10 ◦C with 20 seconds soak time
and a logarithmic sweep step from shear rates 0.1 to 300 1/s. For comparison of the fermented
and un-fermented samples, a commercial diary based drinkable yogurt (Actimel Immune system
(strawberry flavour), Danone, Denmark) was analysed. All samples, were analysed in biological
triplicates. The data was analysed using the TRIOS software, TA Instruments, United Kingdom.
Vitamin production
The estimation of Vitamin K production was done by the research group for Bioactives - Analysis
and Application. Briefly, 0.5 g of samples was weighted off and the weight was noted down to
the fourth decimal. The samples were kept at -18 ◦C until further analysis. Due to a temporary
low capacity of the equipment, it was not possible to analyse more than five samples, therefor
one sample of each strain from the main fermentation was analysed. The method used was as
described by Jensen et al. (2022)[28].
2.10
Statistical analysis
For the results obtained in the chemical assays, genomic analysis, metabolomic analysis, as well
as in the analysis for Vitamin K production, isolation of strains and during the pre-screening
fermentation, the samples were analysed in one replicate, why no statistical analysis was done.
For the remaining results, the samples were analysed in biological triplicates, and a one-way
ANOVA test was performed to examine the significance of the variance among the results with a
significance level of 0.05. A pair-wise comparison of the variances was conducted with a t-test.
The tests were performed in Microsoft Excel.
Page 21 of 58
==PAGE:27==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
3
Results
3.1
Isolation from nature samples
A full list of the identified microorganisms from soil and flower samples can be seen in Appendix
A. A total of nine QPS Bacillus sp. were isolated from soil, with the MALDI-TOF score value
being above 2.0 for all of them. Besides the nine QPS Bacillus sp. one sample had a mix of
Bacillus altitudinis and Bacillus pumilus, which was not possible to get into pure colonies. Of the
two bacteria, only Bacillus pumilus is QPS, why this sample cannot be used further in the project.
The nine QPS Bacilli are all of the species B. subtilis (n=4) and B. megatarium (n=5). As it is
seen in Appendix A, the rest of the identified microorganisms are mostly pathogenic Bacillus sp.
or Pseudomonas sp., which are both expected given that their natural habitat is, among others,
soil.
From the flower samples, no Bacillus sp. were identified. As it can be seen in Table A.2 in
Appendix A, the flower samples mostly yielded a mixture of Lactococcus lactis and Escherichia
coli. The scores for the flower samples ranged in general high and above 2.2 meaning that the
organisms were identified to strain level.
3.2
Genomic analysis
By using both Galaxy and RAST, it was possible to assemble and annotate the genomes for
the strains Bacillus subtilis 1525 and 1534, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens 869 and 1127, Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1527 and Bacillus licheniformis 1549. The raw reads of the
other strains that had been whole genome sequenced were of too poor quality to be assembled,
whether that being with de novo assembly or mapping against a reference genome.
Table 8: Results showing the E-value and bit score of each gene that was BLASTed. The genes are shown in the top row with
their respective primary accessions and typical abbreviation. For each BLAST, and E-value < 0 and Bit scores > 50 indicates
significant sequence similarity. With these results, it is very likely that all the genes, or homologous genes are present in all the
genomes that were analysed.
6-phospho-beta
-glucosidase,
BglA
(P42973)a
Transglutaminase,
tgl
(P40746)
Phytase,
phyC
(O31097)cc
Oxalate
decarboxylase,
oxdC
(O34714)dd
2,3-butanediol
dehydrogenase,
bdhA
(O34788)e
Subtilisin E,
aprE
(P04189)f
E-value
Bit score
E-value
Bit score
E-value
Bit score
E-value
Bit score
E-value
Bit score
E-value
Bit score
B. amyloliquefaciens
869
0
897
e-137
383
e-154
430
0
636
0
605
0
639
B. amyloliquefaciens
1127
0
897
e-137
383
0
748
0
712
e-145
405
0
639
B. subtilis
1525
0
984
0
506
0
566
0
769
0
693
0
763
B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum
1527
0
896
e-137
383
0
749
0
606
0
605
0
639
B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum
1531
0
583
e-137
383
e-163
452
0
711
e-151
421
0
601
B. subtilis
1534
0
896
e-137
383
0
749
0
712
0
602
0
639
B. licheniformis
1549
0
541
e-111
317
e-177
494
0
655
e-34
127
e-165
464
The length of the gene sequence, and organism of origin is as follows: a, 479 AA originated from Bacillus subtilis tax ID 224308. b, 245 AA
originated from Bacillus subtilis tax ID 224308. c, 383 AA originated from Bacillus subtilis tax ID 1423. d, 385 AA originated from Bacillus
subtilis tax ID 224308. e, 346 AA originated from Bacillus subtilis tax ID 224308. f, 381 AA originated from Bacillus subtilis tax ID 224308.
Page 22 of 58
==PAGE:28==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
With the functional annotation in RAST, it was found that all of the annotated genomes had
subsystems for both Vitamin K, and three Vitamin Bs (Thiamine, riboflavin and pyridoxin). The
annotations were not investigated to completion due to limited time and other priorities for the
project, so many more subsystems and mechanisms are to be investigated further.
Some specific genes were BLASTed against the genomes, which can be seen in Table 8, where
the E-value and bit-score for the most significant result of each BLAST can be seen as well.
Many of the E-values resulted in 0, which indicated that homologous or related genes might be
present in the genome. This was the case for all genomes with regards to both 6-phospho-beta-
glucosidase and oxalate dehydrogenase. However, the bit scores for these genes were above 500
for all the genomes, which indicated a significant similarity between the gene and the genomes.
It is therefore very likely that all the genes seen in Table 8 are present in the assembled genomes
but this should be investigated further to be verified.
3.3
Metabolomic analysis
From the metabolomic analysis done by Assistant Professor Elena Hakme, a long list of metabo-
lites was compiled and can be seen in Appendix B.
As mentioned previously, no standards were made for any of the annotated compounds, why the
results are approximate annotations. From the list of annotated compounds, the toxin ALA-Toxin
was annotated in the samples for both B. amyloliquefaciens 1127 and 869, and for B. subtilis
1525. Other toxins annotated included (D-Asp3,Dha7)MC-FR and (D-Leu1)MC-RR, which
were annotated for both B. amyloliquefaciens 1127 and 1130, and B. subtilis 1525.
Besides these toxin-like compounds, some compounds with both plant-growth promoting and
antifungal or herbicide functions were also found. These compounds included 9-Nitrooleate, Atro-
viridetide, Curvularide A, Fuzanin I, N-(2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-2-oxoethyl)-3-methylbutanamide
and Prumycin, and were annotated to a broad range of the analysed organisms.
3.4
Chemical assays
The results for all three chemical assays can be seen in Table 9.
Table 9: Results from three chemical screening assays; Voges-Proskauer (VP) test for acetoin production, plate assay for phytic
acid degradation and protease activity on skim-milk plates. For each strain and assay, + indicates that the strain was positive
towards the given assay in qualitative means, while 0 indicates that the strain was negative. The columns with Degree of ...
indicates the size of the clearing zone in cm for the given assay. In the VP-test and protease assay, 35 strains were positive,
while 28 strains were positive for phytic acid degradation. When a strain was negative in a given assay, N.A. is written in the
corresponding column with Degree of ....
Strain name and number
Acetoin
(+/0)
Phytic acid
(+/0)
Degree of
phytic acid
degradation
(cm)
Protease
activity
(+/0)
Degree of
protease
activity
(cm)
B. subtilis 528
+
+
1.5
+
5
B. pumilus 530
+
0
N.A.
+
5
B. amyloliquefaciens 869
+
+
4
+
3.5
Page 23 of 58
==PAGE:29==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
Table 9 – continued from previous page
Strain name and number
Acetoin
(+/0)
Phytic acid
(+/0)
Degree of
phytic acid
degradation
(cm)
Protease
activity
(+/0)
Degree of
protease
activity
(cm)
B. amyloliquefaciens 1127
+
+
3
+
3.5
B. amyloliquefaciens 1130
+
+
3.5
+
4
B. subtilis 1525
+
+
1
+
3
B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1527
+
+
4
+
5
B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1531
+
+
4.5
+
4
B. subtilis 1534
+
+
3
+
4
B. licheniformis 1549
+
0
N.A.
0
N.A.
B. subtilis 1599
+
+
2
+
2
B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1610
+
+
3
+
3.5
B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1612
+
+
4.5
+
3.5
B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1617
+
+
4.5
+
4.5
B. subtilis/
B. mojavensis 1687
+
0
N.A.
+
5
B. pumilus/
B. altitudinis 1689
+
0
N.A.
+
1.5
B. subtilis 1690
+
+
1
+
4.5
B. subtilis 1692
+
+
1.5
+
4
B. megaterium 1700
+
+
3
+
4
B. pumilus 1702
+
+
3.5
+
3.5
B. megaterium 1704
+
+
4
+
3.5
B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1780
+
+
3
+
4
B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1782
+
+
3
+
4
B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1785
+
+
3
+
4.5
B. subtilis 1869
+
+
2
+
5
B. vallismortis 1938
+
+
4.5
+
3.5
B. subtilis ssp subtilis 1939
+
+
4.5
+
5
B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1940
+
+
4
+
5
Page 24 of 58
==PAGE:30==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
Table 9 – continued from previous page
Strain name and number
Acetoin
(+/0)
Phytic acid
(+/0)
Degree of
phytic acid
degradation
(cm)
Protease
activity
(+/0)
Degree of
protease
activity
(cm)
B. megaterium 1941
0
0
N.A.
+
1.5
B. coagulans 2013
+
0
N.A.
0
N.A.
B. coagulans 2014
+
0
N.A.
0
N.A.
B. coagulans 2015
+
0
N.A.
0
N.A.
B. subtilis 2082
+
+
2
+
5
B. megaterium 2083
0
0
N.A.
0
N.A.
B. megaterium 2084
0
0
N.A.
0
N.A.
B. subtilis 2085
+
+
1
+
5
B. megaterium 2086
0
0
N.A.
+
1
B. subtilis 2087
+
+
3.5
+
5
B. subtilis 2089
+
+
1.5
+
4
B. megaterium 2090
0
0
N.A.
+
1
B. megaterium 2091
0
0
N.A.
+
1.5
Acetoin detection
From the qualitative experiment with the Voges-Proskauer (VP) test, six samples did not change
in colour, indicating that these six strains were acetoin negative. The strains of concern were
1941, 2083, 2084, 2086, 2090 and 2091. All these six strains were of the species B. megaterium
but interestingly not all the B. megaterium in the collection were negative, as strain 1700 and
1704 both showed positive results towards the VP-test. An example of a positive VP-test is seen
in Figure 3, and the remaining results can be seen in Table 9.
Figure 3: From left to right is seen a blank control sample and a positive sample from a qualitative Voges-Proskauer test (VP-test),
with the pink colour formation indicating a positive test.
Regarding the quantitative estimation of the acetoin produced by each strain during a VP-test,
the method needs to be further optimised in order to get useful results. The standard curve that
was made, needed more concentration points in order to fit into a linear regression at lower
Page 25 of 58
==PAGE:31==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
concentrations, why only three concentrations (0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 g/L) were used to make a trend-
line. This resulted in a regression function of y = 1.4265x+1.1066 (R2 = 0.9995), with y being
the absorbance and x being the concentration for samples analysed at 510 nm. With most of the
samples measuring absorbance in the range 0.1-0.8, the calculated concentration was negative
for all samples.
As seen in Figure 4, the intensity varied across the different samples, which were measured in
duplicates. The wells that contained the strains that were negative for acetoin production in the
qualitative test (1941, 2083, 2084, 2086, 2090 and 2091) were A5-A8, A11, A12, B1, B2, B5,
B6, G3 and G4, while the blank samples were in G11 and G12. Investigating Figure 4 closely,
a weaker colouration in those wells appeared, except for sample 2083, which appear with an
intense pink colour in A11 and A12.
Figure 4: 96-well plate with results from a quantification of acetoin produced in a Voges-Proskauer test. Wells that should be
colour-less according to the results obtained with a qualitative test: A5-A8, B1, B2, B5, B6, G3, G4, G11 and G12, with the last
two being the blank sample without inoculation with bacteria.
In the two wells with the blank sample, G11 and G12, a pink colour appeared, indicating that
a reaction between α-naphtol and potassium hydroxide had occurred. This could lead to false
positive results across the samples. Given that the plate had not been incubated with the reactants
longer than 30 minutes when the picture was taken and the examination of the results were made,
it might indicate that the ratio of the added reactants and the broth need optimisation. This would
also apply for the creation of the standard curve.
Phytic acid degradation
From the plate assay for phytic acid degradation, 28 strains were shown as positive for phytic
acid degradation, while 13 strains were negative. The degree of phytic acid degradation was
evaluated qualitatively, as the concentration of inoculated bacteria is unknown. However the
clearing zone around the inoculation points on each plate was measured. For all the positive
strains, the clearing zone ranged from approximately 1 to 4.5 cm in diameter, where 4.5 cm in
diameter represented the whole plate being clear. In Figure 5, the different degrees of phytic acid
degradation can be seen with the blank sample in the lower right corner.
Notably, neither of the three B. coagulans showed ability to degrade phytic acid, while six of the
eight B. megaterium neither were able to degrade phytic acid.
Page 26 of 58
==PAGE:32==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
Figure 5: Plates with clearing zones representing degradation of phytic acid. In the top row, from left to right, the degradation of
phytic acid is seen in degrees of 1, 2 and 3.5 cm clearing zones around the inoculation point, while the bottom row from left to
right shows phytic acid degradation in degrees of 4 and 4.5 cm while the last plate shows a blank plate without any inoculation
for comparison.
In general, the strains that were considered poor at degrading phytic acid, with clearing zone
diameters of below three where all B. subtilis, while B. amyloliquefaciens strains in general had
large clearing zones with half of them having clearing zones above or equal to 4 cm in diameter.
Protease activity
After incubating the strains on skim-milk plates for approximately 17 hours at 37 ◦C, the clearing
zones were examined. In total, 35 of 41 strains showed clearing zones on the plates, indicating
protease activity. The strains without protease activity were either of the species B. licheniformis,
B. coagulans or B. megaterium, however only two of the total eight B. megaterium where negative
and the rest positive. The clearing zones were measured with a ruler, and all results can be seen
in Table 9.
3.5
Pre-screening in plant-based milk
The smell-test and HPLC results can be seen in Appendix C.1 and C.2, respectively. It was
found that the strains performed differently in the different PB milks, since both the consumption
of sugars, production of organic acids, flavour components and ethanol were different across
the substrates. The obtained HPLC results found that 15 strains did not produce detectable
amounts of ethanol during the fermentation in pea milk, while this was true for 17 strains during
fermentation in potato milk and all 28 strains during fermentation in oat milk.
The amount of strains selected based on ethanol production was still too high in relation to the
further analysis, and additional limitations were set up for the selection of strains. Based on the
evaluation of the smell of the different samples, the strains that resulted in "bad" smell after
fermentation were de-selected. This resulted in four strains from the pea fermentation, one strain
from the potato fermentation and five strains from the oat fermentation, which can be seen in
Appendix C.1.
Page 27 of 58
==PAGE:33==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
Lastly, the detected concentration of the flavour components were evaluated, and the strains with
highest concentrations of 2,3-butanediol after fermentation were chosen. The concentration of
both 2,3-butanediol and acetoin in the samples with the selected strains can be seen in Table 10.
Table 10: The concentration of 2,3-butanediol and acetoin produced in the fermented samples with the selected strains during
the pre-screening fermentation. The concentration was determined with High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) in
singular replicates, and external standards were used for each component. The concentration is given in g/L.
Strain name and NFICC number
2,3-butanediol
(g/L)
Acetoin
(g/L)
Substrate used
Bacillus subtilis 1534
1.36
-
Pea
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens subsp. plantarum 1610
1.17
-
Pea
Bacillus subtilis 2087
0.59
-
Potato
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens subsp. plantarum 1785
4.06
5.07
Oat
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens subsp. plantarum 1940
6.17
6.45
Oat
As opposed to the fermentation of pea and potato milk, acetoin was detected in all samples from
the oat fermentation with the lowest concentration being 1.98 g/L and the highest concentration
being 7.69 g/L. The concentration of acetoin in the samples with the selected strains was 5.07
and 6.45 g/L for BA 1785 and BA 1940, respectively.
From the visual evaluation of the pre-screening, it was found that two strains, B. subtilis 1869
and 2087 made the pea milk red-ish/light pink after fermentation. This was investigated further
by growing the strains as overnight cultures in LB broth spiked with either iron(II) sulfate
hepta-hydrate (Sigma-Aldrich, 215422, India) or iron(III) chloride (Sigma-Aldrich, 157740,
Germany) and with and without glycerol, since this was found in literature to be important for
the colour formation[45, 46]. However, there was no formation of colour after either 24 or 48
hours at 37 °C under agitation 200 rpm.
Other interesting results were obtained from the visual inspection, as nine of 28 Bacillus sp.
thickened the potato milk during fermentation. However, all these samples were evaluated as
"bad" in the smell evaluation, why they were not investigated further.
3.6
Main fermentation
After a 48 hour fermentation at 37 ◦C with agitation of 200 rpm during the first 24 hours, the pH
of the samples had changed as seen in Table 11. The pH increased during fermentation of both
pea and potato milks, while in decreased during fermentation of oat milk.
Table 11: The pH before and after 48 hours of fermentation at 37 ◦C with agitation (200 rpm) during the initial 24 hours. The pH
was measured with an Excellent Line pH-Meter (Windaus-Labortechnik GmbH & Co. KG, Germany) in biological triplicates.
Sample
pH before
pH after
Substrate used
Bacillus subtilis 1534
7.1
8.2±0.2
Pea
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1610
7.1
8.4±0.1
Pea
Bacillus subtilis 2087
6.7
7.7±0.2
Potato
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1785
6.7
5.8±0.1
Oat
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1940
6.7
5.8±0.1
Oat
Page 28 of 58
==PAGE:34==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
As seen in Figure A.2a in Appendix D.2, many debris, possibly cell-debris, were observed in the
pea samples after fermentation, while the colour of the liquid was light brown. The fermented
samples of oat milk kept the light white-ish colour from the oat milk and, as seen in Figure
A.2b, no visible debris were present. The fermented potato samples can be seen in Figure A.2c,
and they also kept their colour, which was slight purple. No visible debris were present in the
fermented potato sample.
Sugars, organic acids and soluble flavour compounds
Oat fermentation
From the HPLC results, it was observed that all five organisms consumed the available glucose,
except in the oat milk with BA 1785 and BA 1940, where the glucose concentration post
fermentation was 0.77 ± 0.36 g/L and 2.40 ± 0.6 g/L, respectively. The reduction of glucose
was however not significant (p>0.05) during fermentation with BA 1940. In comparison, the
un-fermented sample had a concentration of 3.02 ± 0.40 g/L of glucose. However, both strains
were able to reduce the concentration of the more complex sugars, here denoted stachyose,
raffinose and maltose, where BA 1940 reduced the concentration the most for both stachyose and
raffinose, as seen in Figure 6A. This might explain the concentration of glucose post fermentation,
as the complex sugars are broken down to monosaccharides. The concentrations of the complex
sugars are high in comparison with the remaining compounds analysed with HPLC therefore,
the results are presented in two separate graphs in Figure 6.
Figure 6: The concentration in g/L of water-soluble compounds found before and after fermentation in oat milk. Graph A shows
the concentration of stachyose, raffinose and maltose, however both stachyose and raffinose are labelled with a star, since these
compounds most likely are maltodextrines, which have similar retention times. Graph B shows the remaining water-soluble
compounds analysed for with High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). The orange bars represent the oat samples, the
green bars represent the samples fermented with Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1785 (BA 1785), and the purple bars
represent the samples fermented with Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1940 (BA 1940). All samples were analysed as
biological triplicates.
As expected, the carbohydrates were partly or completely broken down, and metabolites like
acetate, diacetyl, acetoin, 2,3-butanediol and ethanol were produced. Notably, no diacetyl, acetoin
Page 29 of 58
==PAGE:35==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
or 2,3-butanediol was detected in the un-fermented oat sample, which could be questioned due
to the use of a commercial oat milk.
Figure 7: The concentration in g/L of water-soluble compounds found before and after fermentation in pea and potato milk.
Graph A shows the results for the fermented and un-fermented pea samples. The orange bars represent the pea samples, the
green bars represent the samples fermented with B. subtilis 1534 (BS 1534), and the purple bars represent the samples fermented
with B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1610 (BA 1610). Graph B shows the results from the fermented and un-fermented
potato samples. Stachyose and raffinose are labelled with a star since the natural occurrence of these carbohydrates is low. These
carbohydrates are therefore more likely to be maltodextrines, as these have similar retention times. The orange bars represent
the un-fermented potato sample, and the green bars represent the samples fermented with Bacillus subtilis 2087 (BS 2087).
The results were obtained with High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC), and the analysis was done on biological
triplicates.
Pea fermentation
In the pea milk, the concentration of both stachyose and raffinose was much lower than the
monosaccharides in the un-fermented sample, with stachyose concentrations being 0.65 ± 0.06
g/L and raffinose below quantification limits as seen in Figure 7A. Similarly, both strains were
able to degrade stachyose to concentrations of 0.04 ± 0.04 g/L and 0.09 ± 0.04 g/L for BS
1534 and BA 1610 respectively. The more simple carbohydrates were completely or partly
consumed during fermentation, however with an increase in the concentration of sucrose. The
carbohydrates were most likely used in the production of metabolites, as an increase of both
citrate, acetate, acetoin, 2,3-butanediol and a very small amount of ethanol was seen. The
production of acetoin was, however, not significant (p>0.05), as very small concentrations were
seen in the un-fermented sample. Interestingly, lactate was detected in the un-fermented sample in
concentrations of 0.09±0.02 g/L, which was almost completely consumed during fermentation.
Potato fermentation
In the potato samples, the simple sugars, glucose and fructose, were completely degraded
during fermentation, and metabolites were produced. Especially acetate was produced during
fermentation and reached 0.57±0.25 g/L. Both 2,3-butanediol and acetoin were also produced,
however with the concentrations of acetoin not being significant (p>0.05) due to too high
Page 30 of 58
==PAGE:36==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
variation. Di- and oligosaccharides were produced during fermentation, were the concentration
of stachyose increased to 0.68±0.05 g/L. However, the stachyose denoted for the potato samples
is probably maltodextrines, which originates from the hydrolysis of starch that is the main
carbohydrate source in potatoes. Citrate was found in larger concentrations of 0.30±0.00 g/L in
the un-fermented sample, which was reduced with 90% during fermentation with BS 2087. In
Figure 7B, an increase in the concentration of ethanol can be seen, it was however not significant
(p>0.05), which was the case for the production of lactate as well.
Change in volatile compounds
From the analysis of volatile compounds with GC-MS, the results for acetoin and diacetyl
showed very high concentrations in both the fermented and un-fermented samples, which can be
seen in Table 12. The concentration of diacetyl was quantified to be 83.27±19.59 mg/g in the
un-fermented oat sample with a change after fermentation to 83.95±8.60 mg/g and 81.73±1.99
mg/g for respectively BA 1785 and BA 1940. The concentration of diacetyl in the two other
plant bases was also high, with standard deviations reaching 31.91 for the pea sample fermented
with BA 1610.
Table 12: The concentration of acetoin and diacetyl before and after fermentation for 48 hours at 37◦with agitation (200 rpm)
during the initial 24 hours. The quantification was based on Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) with external
standards in biological triplicates. The concentration is given in mg/g sample in wet weight, and the analysis was done on
biological triplicates.
Sample
Acetoin (mg/g)
Diacetyl (mg/g)
Oat blank
-
83.27 ± 19.59
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1785
1.87 ± 1.17
83.95 ± 8.60
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1940
0.59 ± 0.58
81.73 ± 1.99
Pea blank
7.16 ± 8.86
60.52 ± 12.83
Bacillus subtilis 1534
3.52 ± 3.72
18.56 ± 26.24
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1610
2.23 ± 2.06
42.73 ± 31.91
Potato blank
16.04 ± 11.10
21.89 ± 16.68
Bacillus subtilis 2087
17.79 ± 10.51
35.58 ± 25.19
The detected concentrations for acetoin were in general not as high as that of diacetyl, but for
the potato samples, the concentration was 16.04±11.10 mg/g in the un-fermented sample and
17.79±10.51 mg/g in the sample fermented with BS 2087. This was rather high compared to
what was found in the pea and oat samples, but the standard deviations were equally high in all
samples. With the high standard deviation for both diacetyl and acetoin, these are left out for the
remaining of the results analysis, as the prepared standards might need revision.
In Figure 8, a heat map showing the change in volatile compound concentration after fermentation
can be seen. Here, the black and grey colours show a decrease in concentration after fermentation,
while the orange colours show an increase in concentration after fermentation. The white, empty
fields show that the given volatile was absent in both the fermented and un-fermented sample.
All results, including standard deviations can be seen in Appendix D.1. Due to time limitations,
no statistical analyses were conducted on the GS-MS results.
Page 31 of 58
==PAGE:37==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
Change in un-favourable volatiles
During the fermentation of oat milk, the two strains BA 1785 and BA 1940 were able to reduce
the concentration of most of the un-favourable volatiles that are seen in the left side of Figure
8. The pattern for reduction of volatiles was similar for the two strains, which was expected as
they are the same species. Three of the un-favourable volatiles, 2,4-decadienal, 1-octen-3-ol and
trans-2-hexenal, were not present in the un-fermented sample, and were neither produced by any
of the two strains.
Many of the un-favourable volatiles were also reduced during the fermentation of pea milk,
however, there was an increase in concentration of both 4-methyl-furan, 1-penten-3-ol and
1-octen-3-ol. The pattern for change in volatile concentration was though the same for the two
Bacillus strains used in the pea fermentation, but the increase in the concentration of 4-methyl-1-
pentanol was the greatest for fermentation with BS 1534. The two strains BS 1534 and BA 1610
showed good abilities in reducing the concentration of hexanal, which was reduced the most
during pea fermentation compared to the other PB milks.
The potato milk was the one with the least un-favourable volatiles before fermentation, and all
that were present were reduced during fermentation with BS 2087, except 4-methyl-1-pentanol,
which was increased with approximately 0.7 mg/g. In total, four of the six un-favourable volatiles
that were present before fermentation were completely removed by BS 2087. In comparison,
only three and four of the initial nine volatiles were removed during the fermentation of pea, and
five and six out of initial seven volatiles were removed during the oat fermentation.
Change in favourable volatiles
Apart from the typical dairy-like volatiles, acetoin and diacetyl, other favourable volatiles were
also detected and quantified in the fermented and un-fermented samples, and these can be seen
in the middle section in Figure 8.
During the fermentation of oat milk, two favourable volatiles were detected. A reduction of
the compound 2-heptanone was seen for both strains, while 2-pentanone increased during
fermentation with both BA 1785 and BA 1940.
More favourable volatiles were detected for the fermented pea samples. Here, the two strains
produced both 1-pentanol and 2-pentanone as well as the previously mentioned 2-heptanone. In
the samples fermented with BS 1534, an increase in the concentration of both 1-nonanol and
2,3-butanediol was also seen, leaving ethyl-acetate as the only favourable volatile that was not
found in either of the fermented pea samples.
During the fermentation of potato milk, there was an increase in most of the favourable volatiles,
where only 1-nonanol and 2,3-butanediol were absent both before and after fermentation.
Other volatile compounds
In the furthest right side of Figure 8, a mixed group of volatiles is seen, which can be grouped as
both favourable and un-favourable. All of these volatiles were reduced during fermentation in
oat milk with BA 1940. Though, during fermentation with BA 1785, 2-butanone was increased.
Page 32 of 58
==PAGE:38==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
Figure 8: Heat map showing the change in concentration of volatile compounds after fermentation. Black and grey-scale colours indicate a reduction in concentration after fermentation, while the
orange colours indicate an increase in concentration after fermentation. The concentrations are in mg/g. The five strains can be seen in the lables on the y-axis, where BA 1940, BA 1785, BA
1610, BS 1534 and BS 2087 are B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1940, B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1785, B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1610, B. subtilis 1534 and B. subtilis
2087, respectively. The volatiles grouped in the left side of the graph are considered as un-favourable volatiles, while the ones grouped in the middle of the graph are considered as favourable
volatiles, and the volatiles grouped in the right side of the graph can be either favourable or un-favourable, which depends very much on the concentration of which they are present. The results
were obtained with Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS), and the analysis was done on biological triplicates.
Page 33 of 58
==PAGE:39==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
In the fermentation of pea milk, the overall pattern for change in volatiles was similar for BS 1534
and BA 1610, as they reduced all volatiles except 2-nonanone and 1-hexanol. Here, 1-hexanol
was increased with approximately 0.9 mg/g during fermentation with BS 1534.
In the potato samples, there was an increase in the concentration of both 2-nonanone, 1-hexanol
and 2-butanone, while the remaining volatiles in this group were reduced during fermentation.
Here, 2-butanone increased with more than 1 mg/g.
Total protein estimation
The total protein estimation with DUMAS showed that the total protein concentration did not
change significantly (p>0.05) after fermentation, as seen in Figure A.3 in Appendix D.4. The
concentration of protein in the samples were 4.2±0.01 %, 0.43±0.02 % and 3.52±0.36 % for
pea, oat and potato milk, respectively.
Free amino acids analysis
From the FAA analysis, the results showed a clear difference before and after fermentation
for especially the fermented pea, where the biggest difference was seen (Figure 9). Here, the
difference in concentration of FAA before and after fermentation was greatest with the use of
BA 1610, except for four amino acids, TYR, THR, SER and ARG, where the difference was
greatest after fermentation with BS 1534. Though, here the change in the concentration of ARG
was not significant (p<0.05). The total concentration of FAA in the pea milk before fermentation
was 35.09±7.22 µg/mL, which increased to 8847.37±911.22 µg/mL and 9810.50±899.96
µg/mL after fermentation with BS 1534 and BA 1610, respectively. This increase is a 252- and
280-fold increase in the total FAA after fermentation with the two strains, and indicates a rather
high proteolytic activity.
The difference in total FAA was not as big before and after fermentation in the potato milk.
Here, there was a total concentration of FAA in the milk of 255.94±5.50 µg/mL while the total
concentration was 5914.87±249.97 µg/mL after fermentation with BS 2087. This was a 23-fold
increase, which still indicates a high proteolytic activity, however lower than in the pea milk.
The difference in concentration of FAA was much smaller for the fermented oat samples with a
3.37- and 3.71-fold increase after fermentation with BA 1785 and BA 1940, respectively. For
some of the amino acids, PRO, GLY and THR, the difference was not significant (p>0.05) after
fermentation with either strains. The change in concentration of ASP was not significant after
fermentation with BA 1940 either, while the change in concentration of CYS was insignificant
after fermentation with BA 1785. The change FAA was though significant for the remaining
amino acids. After fermentation with BA 1785, four amino acids, SER, ARG, GLU and ASP,
decreased in concentration, which can be seen in Figure 9(A). Here, the biggest decrease was seen
for ASP, where the concentration before fermentation was 23.60±0.15 µg/mL and decreased to
4.18±4.30 µg/mL after fermentation with BA 1785, which was a 82% decrease..
Focusing on the essential amino acids, the concentration before and after fermentation can be
seen for each PB milk in Figure 9 as well. The essential amino acids are marked with a star (*).
Page 34 of 58
==PAGE:40==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
Figure 9: The concentration of free amino acids before and after fermentation in oat, pea and potato milk. The concentration
is given in mg/mL, and the results were obtained with Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) on biological
triplicates. The stars indicates essential amino acids in all graphs. In Figure A, the results from the oat samples can be seen. Here,
the orange bars represent the un-fermented oat sample, the green bars represent the samples fermented with B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp. plantarum 1785 (BA 1785), and the purple bars represent the samples fermented with B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum
1940 (BA 1940). In Figure B, the results from the pea samples can be seen. Here, the orange bars represent the un-fermented
pea samples, the green bars represent the samples fermented with B. subtilis 1534 (BS 1534), and the purple bars represent the
samples fermented with B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1610 (BA 1610). In Figure C, the results from the potato samples
can be seen. Here, the orange bars represent the un-fermented potato sample, and the green bars represent the samples fermented
with B. subtilis 2087 (BS 2087).
Here, it can be seen that the composition of essential amino acids was similar after fermentation
in the potato and pea samples. However, the concentration of essential amino acids was generally
higher in the fermented pea samples, with the concentration of LYS being almost twice as that in
the fermented potato sample. The concentrations of the essential amino acids in the un-fermented
pea sample were too low to be visible in Figure 9.
Page 35 of 58
==PAGE:41==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
The composition of essential amino acids in the oat before and after fermentation was rather
different from that of the two other plant based milks. The concentration of each amino acid
was low, which was also expected given the low total protein concentration before fermentation.
However, the biggest difference in release of essential amino acids was found among PHE, VAL
and HIS, while the difference in concentration of LYS was less evident.
Protein degradation
To investigate the degradation pattern of proteins, a SDS-PAGE was made. The gel was based on
the supernatant of both the fermented and un-fermented samples, meaning that the visible bands
indicated soluble proteins and peptides. For the gel, where the samples had been adjusted to pH,
no bands appeared, why the gel seen in Figure 10 is from the sample where pH was not adjusted.
For these samples, there might be a difference in the solubility of the proteins, and the results for
the different samples might not be comparable.
Figure 10: A digital picture of a SDS-PAGE gel run for the supernatant of the first biological replicate of the fermented pea
samples with Bacillus subtilis 1534 and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1610, the fermented oat samples with Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1785 and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1940, the fermented potato sample with
Bacillus subtilis 2087 as well as the samples of each substrate, denoted Pea, Oat and Potato on the gel. The pH was not adjusted
before preparation of the samples, why the solubility of the proteins might be different across the samples. The first and the
seventh band were run as protein standards.
Starting with the pea samples, the pea milk can be seen as number three from the right in Figure
10. Here, clear bands appeared at approx. 87, 60, 45, 37 and 30 kDa, while several rather unclear
bands were present around 12-16 kDa. The lane for the pea was rather broad, indicating that the
volume added to the well might have been too large for the concentration of protein. Comparing
the bands obtained from the pea with the bands obtained after fermentation with BS 1534 and
BA 1610, the large clear bands were gone, and many smaller bands were present instead. The
bands for the fermented samples were rather unclear compared to the ones for the un-fermented
pea, indicating either a much lower concentration of protein or a high proteolytic activity.
Page 36 of 58
==PAGE:42==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
Looking at the second lane from the right on Figure 10, an almost empty lane was seen for
the un-fermented oat sample. Here, there might either have been too low protein concentration
for any bands to appear, the sample only having insoluble proteins, or the proteins were all
small peptides that had too low molecular weight to be seen in the gel. Comparing this with
the fermented samples of oat (BA 1785 and 1940), the first or second scenario are most likely,
given the clear bands seen for both fermented samples at approximately 55 and 37 kDa. For both
fermented samples, several low molecular weight proteins and peptides were present, resulting
in clear bands in the gel from approximately 25 kDa and down. Whether these proteins were
resulting from the breakdown of insoluble proteins or whether they were proteins that had been
secreted by the bacteria is unknown, and further research should be made in order to investigate
this.
The un-fermented potato sample can be seen in the last column in Figure 10. Here, only one clear
band was seen at approximately 40 kDa. Three additional unclear bands were seen at respectively
125 kDa and in the far bottom of the gel at approximately 15 kDa and below 10 kDa. Comparing
the bands obtained after the fermentation with BS 2087, a clear band at approximately 40 kDa
was still seen after fermentation. This protein could be the 40-45 kDa heavy protein patatin[9],
which is one of the main proteins in potatoes, as mentioned in Section 1.4. Additionally, less clear
bands were seen at both higher molecular weights and in the range 20-37 kDa. The low-molecular
weight proteins seen after fermentation could result from the hydrolysis of the high-molecular
proteins that were seen in the un-fermented sample, but could also result from proteins that were
secreted from the bacteria. This should be investigated further.
Viscosity analysis
For all viscosity measurement data, the power law model was fitted to the shear range 6.30 1/s to
251.2 1/s for the graphs with stress against shear rate. The power law model is as follows:
τ = m· ˙γn
Where τ is the stress in Pa, m is the viscosity coefficient in Pa·s, ˙γ is the shear rate in 1/s and
n is the rate index. The calculated values for m and n, and the R-square values, can be seen in
Table 13. A graphical presentation of the change in flow behaviour can be seen in Appendix D.6,
while a graphical presentation of the change in viscosity, for which the power law model is fitted,
can be seen in Figure 11. Due to time limitations, no statistical analyses were conducted on the
viscosity results.
Two of the samples, the oat milk fermented with BA 1940 and the potato milk fermented with
BS 2087, showed Newtonian flow behaviour, which is the same flow behaviour as water, and is
indicated by the rate index of 1 in Table 13. However, the other samples showed flow behaviour
close to Newtonian but since n<1, the flow behaviour is characterised as shear thinning. The shear
thinning flow behaviour is more evident in the Actimel drinkable yogurt, where n = 0.57±0.02.
Comparing the fermented and un-fermented samples, the biggest difference in texture was seen
during the potato fermentation. As seen in Table 13, the un-fermented potato sample showed
Page 37 of 58
==PAGE:43==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
Figure 11: Results from viscosity measurements on fermented and un-fermented samples of (A) oat, (B) pea, and (C) potato. The
stress is plotted against the shear rate in the shear rate range of 6.3-300 1/s. As a reference, a commercial drinkable yogurt, Actimel
(Danisco, Denmark) was analysed as well, and the results are plotted together with the fermented and un-fermented samples in
all three graphs. The analysis was done with a TA Instruments Discovery HR-2 hybrid rheometer at 10 ◦C, and the samples
were analysed as biological triplicates. The abbreviations for the strains are as follows: BA 1785; B. amyloliquefaciens ssp.
plantarum 1785, BA 1940; B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1940, BS 1534; B. subtilis 1534, BA 1610; B. amyloliquefaciens
ssp. plantarum 1610, and BS 2087; B. subtilis 2087.
a shear thinning behaviour with a rate index of 0.74 ± 0.05. The fermentation with BS 2087
resulted in an almost constant viscosity of 4 cP. In comparison, water has a viscosity of 1 cP, why
it can be said that the fermented potato sample had a viscosity 4 times thicker than that of water.
Contrary, both the pea and oat milks showed Newtonian-like flow behaviour prior fermentation,
and after fermentation with the four different strains, slight shear thinning behaviour was seen.
However, the change in flow behaviour was very small in both the pea and oat samples, as seen
in Table 13.
The apparent viscosity at shear rate 0.1 1/s can be seen in Table 13 in the column to the right.
Here, it can be seen that the biggest difference in viscosity before and after fermentation was
seen for the potato sample, where the apparent viscosity was 8.30±2.31 cP before fermentation
Page 38 of 58
==PAGE:44==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
Table 13: Viscosity coefficient (m), rate index (n) and R-squared values from the fitting of the power law model on biological
triplicate viscosity measurement data. The model was fitted in the shear rate range of 6.30-251.2 1/s, and the viscosity at shear
rate 0.1 1/s can be found in the right column for all samples. The results were obtained with a TA Instruments Discovery HR-2
hybrid rheometer, United Kingdom.
Substrate
Sample
m [mPa.s]
n
R2
m ˙γ = 0.11/s
Actimel
Reference
217.20 ± 39.13
0.57 ± 0.02
1.00 ± 0.00
59.09 ± 13.23
Oat
Blank
2.36 ± 0.00
1.06 ± 0.0
1.00 ± 0.00
0.21 ± 0.00
Oat
1785
4.16 ± 0.81
0.96 ± 0.05
1.00 ± 0.00
0.47 ± 0.14
Oat
1940
2.74 ± 0.66
1.00 ± 0.06
1.00 ± 0.00
0.29 ± 0.12
Pea
Blank
4.51 ± 1.10
1.01 ± 0.04
1.00 ± 0.00
0.46 ± 0.15
Pea
1534*
451.75 ± 558.75
0.74 ± 0.28
0.99 ± 0.01
424.38 ± 572.38
Pea
1610
4.90 ± 1.72
0.95 ± 0.08
0.99 ± 0.01
0.60 ± 0.30
Potato
Blank
45.10 ± 7.97
0.75 ± 0.05
1.0 ± 0.00
8.27 ± 2.31
Potato
2087
3.89 ± 0.10
1.02 ± 0.00
1.00 ± 0.00
0.37 ± 0.01
*One measurement gave poor results, why the average and standard deviation is calculated on only 2 values and thus not statistically true.
and was reduced to 0.37±0.010 cP after fermentation with BS 2087. The change was not that
evident for the pea and oat, where the difference was less than 0.5 cP. This change is beyond
what is sensible for humans, why the change is negligible.
Vitamin K production
After fermentation, the first biological triplate of each strain was analysed for the production of
Vitamin K. As only one replicate was analysed, the results are not statistically true. The quantified
Vitamin K production is presented in Table 14, where the concentrations of phylloquinones (PK)
and menaquinones (MK) 4-10 can be seen.
Table 14: The quantified production of Vitamin K during fermentation of pea, oat and potato milk. The concentration is given in
ng/g, and the abbreviations are as follows: MK is menaquinone, and the subsequent number is the type of menaquinone, while
PK is phylloquinone. The results are obtained from the research group of Bioactives - Analysis and Application with the method
described by Jensen et al. (2022)[28].
ng/g
Vitamin K - phylloquinones and menaquinones
Strain name and number
MK-4
MK-5
PK
MK-6
MK-7
MK-8
MK-9
MK-10
B. subtilis 1534
<5
7
29
29
1900
24
5
16
B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum
1610
<5
5
19
40
2200
25
5
14
B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum
1785
8
24
14
81
2800
23
<2
9
B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum
1940
11
35
14
142
4300
31
<2
8
B. subtilis 2087
<5
5
3,0
27
1600
14
<2
<5
<x represents that the sample was below the Limit of Quantification, with x being the limit.
During fermentation, all strains produced MK5-8 and PK, while MK-10 was produced by all
other strains than BS 2087. MK-4 was only produced during the fermentation of oat milk,
where it was produced by both BA 1785 and BA 1940. MK-9 was only produced during the
fermentation of pea milk with the strains BS 1534 and BA 1610, while MK-7 was produced in
Page 39 of 58
==PAGE:45==
Marie Fobian Jensen
3
RESULTS
the largest concentrations of up to 4300 ng/g (wet weight), which is much higher concentrations
than for the remaining compounds.
The production of Vitamin K was lowest during the potato fermentation with BS 2087, which
had the lowest concentration of all the analysed compounds compared to the other four strains.
However, the total concentration of menaquinones produced by the different strains reached 1.98,
2.29, 2.95, 4.53 and 1.65 µg/g for respectively BS 1534, BA 1610, BA 1785, BA 1940 and BS
2087.
Page 40 of 58
==PAGE:46==
Marie Fobian Jensen
4
DISCUSSION
4
Discussion
4.1
Choice of fermentation medium and parameters
Prior to the screening process, no growth experiments were conducted, meaning that there is a
lack of knowledge about the growth rate for Bacillus sp. under different conditions, such as tem-
perature and available carbohydrates. Tangyu et al. (2021) found growth rates of approximately
0.4 log CFU/h during fermentation with B. amyloliquefaciens NCC 156 in chickpea milk, but
whether that is comparable to the growth of the strains used in this project is unknown[66].
Both during isolation of the organisms and when growing overnight cultures, problems arose
with EPS formation both on plates and in LB broth. From previous studies, it was found by
Dervaux et al. (2014) that the formation of biofilm is depended on, among other things, the
nutrients available[16]. Choosing different media than YPD agar plates and LB broth could
therefor have resulted in less to no EPS formation, and thereby made it possible to measure a
proper OD. Though, this was omitted, and a set inoculation volume of 1 % (v/v) was chosen for
the fermentation trials. This was more than the double of what was added in a study by Baskar
et al. (2022), where only 0.4 % (v/v) of the starter cultures (L. bulgaricus and S. thermophilus)
were added in the production of a yogurt based of oat, coconut and peanut milk[6].
The set inoculation volume with no OD measurement, or other CFU count, does however still
rises questions on what the concentration of bacteria was at the beginning of the fermentation,
whether the concentration of the different strains was the same, and if the strains reached
stationary phase at the same time. This information is, however, important to estimate when
production of secondary metabolites will happen, which is often in the late growth phase, as
described by Sanchez and Demain (2011).
Instead of the growth experiments, the fermentation time and temperature was based on previously
established results performed in the laboratories of Microbial Biotechnology and Biorefinery,
where Bacillus sp. were found to have the highest production of acetoin after fermentation for
48 hours at 37 ◦C, which became the baseline for this thesis. However, no growth curves were
established in the previous work either, as the concentration of produced acetoin and related C4
components was the main objective.
4.2
Selection of strains
With the uncertainties of bacterial concentration in mind, the number of strains were reduced
from initially 41 to 28 during screening with chemical assays. The assay responsible for the
reduction in number of strains was the investigation of phytic acid degradation, in which 28 of
the 41 strains were positive. It was expected that most of the strains could degrade phytic acid,
based on both the genomic analysis, where phytase was found in all investigated strains, and
from studies done by Zhang et al. (2020) and Beaumont (2002), where they found reduction
of phytic acid in traditional African dawadawa and production of phytases by Bacillus sp,
respectively[7, 80]. To what extend the different strains were able to degrade phytic acid was not
determined in this project due to limitations in quantification equipment.
Page 41 of 58
==PAGE:47==
Marie Fobian Jensen
4
DISCUSSION
However, research have found that phytic acid can be reduced by soaking of the crop for several
hours before further processing, since phytic acid and phytases are water soluble. However, this
method would increase the processing time of the finished product, leading to a higher price and
essentially also a higher carbon footprint, given the increased amount of water and time used
during processing[56]. Though, Samtiya et al. (2021) found that the concentration of phytic acid
and other ANFs in general were reduced after fermentation of PB foods [57], which corresponds
to the findings in the assay of phytic acid degradation.
The principle for selection of strains was the same for both the phytic acid assay and the protease
activity assay. Here, the strains with visible clearing zones were selected, as they showed positive
results regarding degradation of respectively phytic acid and casein. The principle followed the
agar diffusion assay done by Ouoba et al. (2003), where they also found most of the screened
Bacillus sp. positive for casein degradation[50]. These results correlates with what was found in
the skim-milk plate assay in this project, where 35 of the total 41 Bacillus sp. were positive for
casein degradation.
Interestingly, B. licheniformis 1549 did not show any protease activity during the skim milk plate
assay, which contradicts the results obtained in the genomic analysis. Here, it was found that
the protease subtilisin was present with very high probability in all the investigated genomes.
A reason for this could be that B. licheniformis 1549 is not able to degrade casein, but able to
degrade other proteins. This would correlate with results obtained by Ouoba et al. (2003), where
a difference in degradation was seen between agar plates spiked with casein and agar plates
spiked with African locust bean protein isolate[50]. This was however not investigated further.
In general, there are many uncertainties from the genomic analysis, since only the gene se-
quences were BLASTed, while the promoter regions, inducers and other important factors for the
transcription and expression of the genes were not investigated. The same is applicable for the
annotation of genes with the RAST server, where the annotation is based on libraries of genes and
genetic code, while the metabolic pathways and specific regions should be investigated further.
Several more genes and pathways could be investigated, including the alcohol dehydrogenase
and aldehyde dehydrogenase, which were found by Fischer et al. (2022) to be the important
enzymes in the conversion of un-favourable volatiles to favourable ones[21]. Investigating these
genes solely through bioinformatics does however not verify if the genes are expressed and
active during fermentation.
As Bacillus sp. have shown good abilities in producing acetoin in studies done by Tangyu
et al. (2021), it was expected that most strains would be positive in the VP-test, to which the
results correlated. However, the quantitative assay needed much optimisation in order to properly
quantify the concentration of acetoin, while this might not even be possible, as the VP-test relies
on the chemical conversion of acetoin to diacetyl with the presence of a strong alkali[67]. In the
case of this project, both compounds are favourable for a PB yogurt production and it is therefore
not necessary to be able to distinguish between them in an initial screening like the VP-test.
Page 42 of 58
==PAGE:48==
Marie Fobian Jensen
4
DISCUSSION
Pre-screening in plant-based milk
Considerations can be made regarding the selection of strains from the pre-screening. Here, a
panel of 5 people from the research group of Microbial Biotechnology and Biorefinery, myself
included, evaluated the smell of the fermented samples from each PB milk. The evaluation was
subjectively and consisted of "Good", "Bad", "Ok" and "Neutral". Doing this evaluation, it was
known that the results could not be used as a scientific reasoning for the selection of strains,
however it was used as a rough selection to exclude the samples that we all agreed was not
of good smell. More people would be needed to have a proper evaluation of the smell of the
samples, but it would still not be an official panel or consumer test, which would have been
the best solution in regards to consumer acceptance. Even though the selection based on odour
formation was questionable, it still allowed for the selection of strains that subsequently showed
interesting results in regards to volatile reduction and formation, as well as protein degradation.
Regarding the plant-bases used in this project, uncertainties arise regarding the comparabil-
ity of performance across the different PB milks. With different sugar concentrations in the
self-formulated PB milks compared to the commercial oat milk, different metabolisms of the
Bacillus sp. might have been active during fermentation. This leads to different metabolites
being produced, and potentially different growth patterns of the same strains in the different PB
milks. In the pre-screening of the milks, there was a great difference in pH across the different
substrates, where all the strains were acidifying the oat milk, but increasing pH to above 7.7
in the potato milk. In the pea milk, there was more variation in pH across the different strains.
The increase in pH can be explained by the degradation of proteins and simultaneous release of
amino acids, which was found by Ouoba et al. (2003) to be the main reason for increase of pH
during fermentation of African locust bean protein with the use of different Bacillus sp.[50].
As mentioned, two B. subtilis strains (1869 and 2087) coloured the pea milk red/pink-ish during
fermentation in the pre-screening. Investigations on the production of pigment was made in LB
broth with the addition of two different iron sources as well as glycerol, but it was not possible
to obtain the red pigment in either of the synthetic media. This is interesting as Yan et al. (2003)
found that a B. licheniformis produced a similar red pigment, as well as antimicrobial compounds,
when growing in a biofilm in the presence of both glycerol and ferric ions. They also found
that the formation of the red pigment was not due to sporulation, which contradicts what was
found by Mitchell et al. (1986). Here, they found that the endospores of B. megaterium contained
carotenoid-like red pigments, which they suggested to function as stabilisers in the endospore
cell membrane[45]. The latter was also found by Moeller et al. (2005), where they proposed that
the red pigment found in some Bacillus spores protects the spores from environmental damage
such as UV radiation[46]. The reason for the formation of the red pigment is still unknown and
could be and interesting to further investigate.
4.3
Fermentation of plant-based milk alternatives
Change in volatiles during fermentation
As mentioned in the results, the concentration of diacetyl was extremely high based on the GC-
MS results. In the oat samples, both fermented and un-fermented, the concentration was more
Page 43 of 58
==PAGE:49==
Marie Fobian Jensen
4
DISCUSSION
than 8% in wet weight, which seems very unlikely. This would be 18 times more than the protein
concentration in the same samples, and is simply not realistic. The concentration of acetoin was
found to be approximately 1.6% (wet weight) in the fermented and un-fermented potato samples,
with standard deviation of approximately 1 % as well. In comparison found Tangyu et al. (2021)
concentrations of 30 mM of acetoin, which corresponds to approximately 0.2%, produced by
a B. amyloliquefaciens in chickpea milk[66]. The results for at least diacetyl and acetoin are
therefore very unlikely, and the method should be revised. Contrary, Luo et al. (2014) were able
to produce up to 7% (w/v) acetoin with an acetoin-tolerant mutant of B. amyloliquefaciens[40],
meaning that high concentrations can be obtained with the right strain under the right conditions,
why the strains could be investigated further for such abilities.
The concentrations and standard deviations are in general lower for the other compounds that
where analysed for, as seen in Appendix D.1, indicating that the main problem is the quantification
and analysis of diacetyl and acetoin. New standards could be prepared for these compounds in
order to evaluate whether these were accurate or not.
Considering the ability of the strains to degrade the un-favourable volatiles, it seems that the
two strains BA 1785 and BA 1940 performed best, since all un-favourable volatiles, except
4-methyl-pentanol, and octanal, were completely degraded during fermentation. These two
strains did not perform as good in producing favourable compounds, as only 2-pentanone was
present post fermentation, and the concentration of 2-heptanone was reduced by both strains.
In terms of these favourable volatiles, the best performance was by the two strains in the pea
fermentation. Similar degradation and production of volatiles was found by Tangyu et al. (2021),
where both hexanal and pentanal were removed during fermentation of chickpea milk with
B. amyloliquefaciens. They also found increased concentrations of 2-nonanone and 1-hexanol,
which aligned with the results obtained in the pea milk[66].
Some studies have shown that there are differences in the metabolites produced by B. subtilis
when incubated at different temperatures. Wu et al. (2022) found that the flavour and aroma
compounds were more like raw soybeans, when B. subtilis was inoculated in LB medium at 37
◦C for 42 hours, while the flavour and aroma production was more like soy sauce when incubated
at 53 ◦C under otherwise same conditions[75]. With this, it could be investigated whether the
volatile conversion and formation would be different if the fermentation was done at e.g. 42 ◦C
in stead of 37 ◦C as it was done in this project.
Protein analysis
The pattern for protein degradation found during analysis with SDS-PAGE was similar to that
obtained by Ouoba et al. (2003) with the use of B. subtilis in fermentation of African locust
beans. Here, they isolated the protein from the beans, suspended it in water and fermented at
37 ◦C for 72 hours. The interspecies differences that were seen during the pea fermentation,
were also found in the study by Ouoba et al. (2003), where they observed different protein
degradation patterns for B. subtilis and B. pumilus[50]. Questions do however arise regarding
Page 44 of 58
==PAGE:50==
Marie Fobian Jensen
4
DISCUSSION
potential observations of bacteria-secreted proteins in the gel, which was not investigated further
in this study.
With the approximately 200-, 20- and 3-fold observed increase in FAA during fermentation of
respectively pea, potato and oat milks, there was clear correlation with the previous obtained
results[50, 66]. An increase was seen for both essential and non-essential amino acids, with
the largest increase being for lysine in both the fermented pea and potato samples, followed by
leucine and phenylalanine.
Tangyu et al. (2021) found similar results during the fermentation of chickpea milk with B.
amyloliquefaciens NCC 156, where they analysed the total amino acids before, during and after
fermentation. Here they saw a 42.8% increase in total L-lysine as well as an increase in total
concentrations of phenylalanine, proline, valine and leucine, while arginine and some other
non-essential amino acids were reduced. Increased concentration of extracellular, free lysine was
observed, which reached a final concentration of 1.4 mM (0.205 mg/mL) and accounted for most
of the total measured lysine after fermentation. They also found that B. amyloliquefaciens NCC
156 produced lysine from aspartate, for which the enzyme diaminopimelate decarboxylase (lysA)
was essential[66]. Whether this gene, together with the remaining pathway, is present in the
Bacillus sp. used in this project is not known but should be investigated further, if the production
of lysine should be optimised or of main focus.
The results obtained by Tangyu et al. (2021) are not completely comparable with the results
obtained during this project, as only free amino acids were analysed. Though, there might have
been production of lysine from aspartate during the oat fermentation, as there was a decrease of
19.45 µg/mL (0.15 mM) aspartate, while the concentration of free lysine increased with 15.19
µg/mL (0.1 mM). Contrary, aspartate was increased during fermentation of pea and potato, why
the bioconversion of aspartate to lysine is unlikely in these substrates, when only the free amino
acids are taken into account.
It is difficult to evaluate whether the fermented plant-bases had a better composition of essential
amino acids than the un-fermented plant-bases had, since the availability of the amino acids and
human digestibility of the proteins before and after fermentation is unknown. However, there was
an increase in free amino acids, and especially in free essential amino acids, which are important
for several human physiological processes, as it have been investigated by Green and Lamming
(2019)[24].
Sugar utilisation and overall performance
From the standards used for analysis, both stachyose and raffinose were detected in concentrations
of respectively 4.5 % and 3.5 % (wet basis) in the un-fermented samples of oat milk. In
comparison, Macarthur and Dappolonia (1979) found that high-protein oat flour contained 0.07
and 0.26 % (dry basis) stachyose and raffinose, respectively, while high-protein oat bran contained
0.24 and 0.30 % (dry basis) stachyose and raffinose, respectively[41]. These concentrations were
much lower than what was determined with HPLC in this project, why there is no validation
for such high concentrations of stachyose and raffinose in either fermented or un-fermented oat
Page 45 of 58
==PAGE:51==
Marie Fobian Jensen
4
DISCUSSION
samples. However, the concentrations are not completely comparable, as there is no conversion
between wet and dry basis. The concentrations in wet basis should though be lower than the ones
in dry basis, as the compounds are up-concentrated in dry basis.
A study by Peterbauer et al. (2001) found that in peas, the concentration of stachyose and
raffinose was ranging from 2.7 to 4.4 % and 0.57 to 0.67 % in dry weight, respectively[51]. The
concentration of 0.05% of stachyose in wet basis that was found in the un-fermented pea samples
correlates therefore with previous studies.
Instead of the high concentrations obtained for stachyose and raffinose in the fermented and
un-fermented oat samples, it is more likely that the peaks resembles different lengths of mal-
todextrins, the break-down products of starch, as they have the approximate same retention time
in a HPLC column similar to the one used for analysis. This would correlate with the results
obtained in a later study by Macarthur and Dappolonia (1979), where they investigated the
starches in oat and wheat and found that oat flour consists of approximately 67 % starch on a dry
basis[42].
The same is probably the case for the fermented potato sample, where the immediate results
indicated a production of stachyose. Commonly, stachyose is not found in potatoes, and a study
by Dhaduk et al. (2022) found the main carbohydrate in potatoes to be starch with concentrations
of 60-80 % of the dry weight for a fresh potato[17].
Regarding the formation of the volatile flavour compounds acetoin, diacetyl and 2,3-butanediol,
varying results were obtained, however an increase was seen across all fermentations. This is in
accordance to what was found by Tangyu et al. (2021), where an increase in concentration of
EMP-pathway products was seen after 48 hours of fermentation with B. amyloliquefaciens NCC
156 in chickpea milk. The concentration of the acetoin and 2,3-butanediol reached 2.6 g/L and
1.7 g/L, respectively[66], which is approximately half of what was found in the fermented oat
samples with the HPLC, while it exceeded the concentrations found in both the fermented pea
and potato samples.
Acetate increased to approximately 0.5 g/L during fermentation of both pea and potato, and to
approximately the half of that during the fermentation of oat. This is much lower than the 2.4
g/L found by Tangyu et al. (2021), which could be due to the lack of carbohydrates or citrate in
the un-fermented plant-bases[66].
Viscosity analysis
In the viscosity analysis of the fermented pea samples, large standard deviations were obtained,
which was especially notable for the sample with BS 1534. Here, the variation can be due to
bigger particles in the fermented samples, which can be seen in Figure A.2a in Appendix D.2.
For future research, a particle separation should be made for to determine how and if there has
been any aggregations of particles that would influence the viscosity analysis.
As described, all samples were liquid before and after fermentation, and the biggest change
in texture and flow behaviour was seen after fermentation of the potato samples, where the
Page 46 of 58
==PAGE:52==
Marie Fobian Jensen
4
DISCUSSION
flow approximated Newtonian flow behaviour and the apparent viscosity at shear rate 0.1 1/s
decreased from 8.3±2.31 to 0.37±0.01 cP. This viscosity is very low for yogurts, which can
be seen in a study by Baskar et al. (2022). They found that with an optimised mixture of oat,
coconut and peanut milk they could obtain a PB yogurt with a viscosity of 53.76 P (or 5376
cP) after fermentation for 18 hours at 41 ◦C with the two classical starter cultures L. bulgaricus
and S. thermophilus[6]. Here, the pH also decreased to 5.5, which was comparable to that of the
fermented oat samples. Similar results were found by Shin et al. (2022) however with viscosities
half of that found by Baskar et al. (2022). From several studies it was found that an apparent
viscosity of approximately 3200 cP is desired for spoonable yogurts, which is far from what was
obtained in this project[6, 63].
In the studies from both Baskar et al. (2022) and Shin et al. (2022), stabilisers and gelling agents
were utilised, which could be a major reason for the obtained viscosities. The composition of
the substrates used for fermentation also differed from what was used in this project, as the
concentration of carbohydrate, fat and protein was 27%, 9.45% and 17% in the study done by
Baskar et al. (2022). The substrate used by Shin et al. (2022) was a commercial soymilk with
additional 2% (w/w) sucrose but the total carbohydrate content was not given. Three major
differences from these studies and our project are the use of starter cultures, the use of stabilisers
and gelling agents, and the initial concentration of carbohydrates, which are all important factors
for the gelling during fermentation[6, 63]. Though, the long fermentation time used in this
project, with the addition of agitation, might also be huge contributors to the lack of gelling, but
this was not investigated further.
The addition of stabilisers or gelling agents could increase the viscosity of the fermented potato
samples, as well as the other fermented samples, as the presence of potato starch might have
been the reason for the relatively high viscosity before fermentation of the potato milk. However,
starch was also present in the other substrates before fermentation, why it might not be of
that high impact. A reason, however, for the liquefying after fermentation could be the high
proteolytic activity found in all fermented samples, since the proteins loose their tertiary structure
when they are broken down to either peptides or free amino acids. This loss of tertiary structure
results in poor water holding capacity and thereby no gel formation, which was demonstrated by
Yang et al. (2021) who discovered that hydrophobic interactions as well as sulphide bonds were
the main contributors to the gel structure in pea protein and mung bean protein-based yogurt
gels[79].
Contrary to investigating whether the plant-bases can be used as PB yogurt alternatives, there
might be a possibility that the obtained viscosity is similar to that of dairy milk. This was however
not tested in the viscosity analysis.
Vitamin K and potential health benefits
The production of phylloquinones and menaquinones during fermentation of all three plant-bases
reached levels 1.65-4.53 µg/g (wet weight), which was approximately half of what was found
by Yanagisawa and Sumi (2005) in the Japanese dish Natto. Here, they found more than 880
Page 47 of 58
==PAGE:53==
Marie Fobian Jensen
4
DISCUSSION
µg/100 g, corresponding to 8.8 µg/g[78]. However, EFSA recommends an Adequate Intake (AI)
of 70 µg/day for adults above the age 18, which is only based on phylloquinones due to a lack of
evidence on intake, absorption, function and content of menaquinones in the human body[69].
With more knowledge, menaquinones might be included in the AI of 70 µg/day, which would
be covered by an intake of less than 100 g of the fermented pea oat and potato milks from this
project.
4.4
Potential safety risks
Although all the Bacillus sp. used in this project have QPS status, there might be concerns with
using them as starter cultures for PB dairy alternatives in a commercial food production. As the
bacteria are sporeformers, it can be challenging for the food producer to keep the production
clean, since the spores are resistant to heat and disinfectants, which was described by Cho and
Chung (2020). Besides being a sporeformer, Bacillus is also a fantastic producer of biofilm,
which can have many beneficial applications when used purposely. Turhan et al. (2019) described
the advantages of antibiotic production, probiotic applications as well as root growth promoting
functions from the biofilm of especially B. subtilis[70]. However, biofilm formation gives rise
to further problems in regards to cleaning of both equipment and production environment. A
food producer should therefore be prepared to invest fully in implementing Bacillus sp. in
their production. Several studies, including one by Engels et al. (2022), report problems with
cross-contamination with Bacillus in regards to both the pathogenic strains as well as the food
approved strains[19].
In the granted QPS status for Bacillus sp., it is stated that there should be no antibiotic resistance
genes or toxigenic activity. However, in the metabolomic analysis, several toxins were annotated.
With no standards run for these toxins it is not known with certainty whether they were produced
by the strains, and as it was mentioned in Section 3.3, the toxins were not detected for all the
analysed Bacillus sp.. The production of toxins might therefore not be active in the strains used
in the main fermentation later in the project, but it should still be investigated further, if the
strains are to be used in commercial productions.
Page 48 of 58
==PAGE:54==
Marie Fobian Jensen
5
CONCLUSION
5
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to investigate whether Bacillus sp. can be used as starter cultures
for plant-based dairy alternatives. This was done by investigating their ability to reduce un-
favourable volatiles, increase the favourable ones, and examine their influence on the texture
after fermentation, along with investigating their ability to degrade proteins to make the nutrients
easier accessible for human consumption and absorption. Additionally, the production of Vitamin
K analysed for the investigation of possible health promoting factors post fermentation.
From the results obtained, it was found that B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1785 and 1940
performed very well in relation to reduction of un-favourable volatiles from the organic Barista
Havredrik from Thiese (Roslev, Denmark), while their ability to increase or produce favourable
compounds was less impressive. However, the two strains B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum
1610 and B. subtilis 1534 showed very good abilities to increase the concentration of favourable
volatiles in pea milk, and showed also good ability to decrease the concentration of most of the
analysed un-favourable volatiles. In potato milk, B. subtilis 2087 showed overall good results in
both decreasing un-favourable volatiles, while also increasing the concentration of most analysed
favourable volatiles.
Regarding the effect on the texture, the results came out differently than initially expected, as all
fermented samples were liquid with no gel formation. The biggest difference before and after
fermentation was seen in the fermentation of potato milk, where the viscosity was 16 times lower
after fermentation with B. subtilis 2087. It is hypothesised that the reason for the liquefying of
the plant-based milk during fermentation is the high proteolytic activity of the Bacillus sp..
This high proteolytic activity resulted in the release of free amino acids of a total of 8812.28±918.44
µg/mL and 9775.41±907.08 µg/mL after fermentation of pea milk, 5658.93±255.47 µg/mL
after fermentation of potato milk, and 314.36±127.90 µg/mL and 360.08±81.37 µg/mL after
the fermentation of oat milk. The free amino acid with the highest concentration post fer-
mentation was lysine, which reached 3084.28±73.9 µg/mL in the pea milk fermented with B.
amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1610.
With investigation of potential toxigenic activity and the presence of genes encoding antibiotic
resistance, all five Bacillus sp. could have potential as starter cultures for plant-based dairy
alternatives, as they all produced Vitamin K and increased the availability of essential amino
acids, leading to potential health and nutritional benefits of the fermented plant-bases. However,
with the lack of texture formation, the strains might be more suitable for fermentation of PB milk
with the purpose of creating a functional PB drink.
Page 49 of 58
==PAGE:55==
Marie Fobian Jensen
6
FURTHER RESEARCH
6
Further research
The full potential of Bacillus sp. as starter cultures in plant-based dairy alternatives was not
uncovered in this project, and several aspects could be investigated further in order to do so.
Proper growth experiments should probably be established prior to further research, which can
be done with both plate count assays and potentially OD measurements for those of the strains
that did not produce EPS in the overnight cultures. When this has been established, it could be
interesting to investigate the change in volatiles at different times during fermentation, and how
the inoculation concentration affects the overall performance of the strains. This also relates to
the formulation of the plant-based milks, to which especially the carbohydrate content could be
standardised.
To resemble industrial production of yogurt, it would be important to investigate the protein
degradation, acidification, change in volatile and consumption of carbohydrates during a shorter
fermentation time, as an industrial yogurt production typically ranges between 8 and 12 hours[55].
In this relation, it could be exciting to combine different strains, both within the Bacillus genus
as well as from other families such as Streptococcaceae.
With many Bacillus sp. producing antimicrobial compounds, it could be examined under what
conditions these are produced. This would have a great impact on the combination of strains,
and could make Bacillus sp. function as a bioprotectant if good results could be obtained against
pathogens and spoilers.
Besides having potential as starter cultures within dairy alternatives, many of the strains from
NFICC have potential in the umami and savoury kitchen, as the odour that was evaluated in
the pre-screening resembled the odour from Millard reaction derivatives. This aligns with the
historical use of Bacillus sp. but is yet to be explored in the European cuisine.
Investigating the production of red pigment from the strains B. subtilis 1869 and 2087 in pea
milk would be interesting, as the pigment potentially could be used as a natural food colourant in
clean-label food productions.
Page 50 of 58
==PAGE:56==
Marie Fobian Jensen
REFERENCES
References
[1] E. Afgan, D. Baker, B. Batut, M. V. D. Beek, D. Bouvier, M. Ech, J. Chilton, D. Clements,
N. Coraor, B. A. Grüning, A. Guerler, J. Hillman-Jackson, S. Hiltemann, V. Jalili, H. Rasche,
N. Soranzo, J. Goecks, J. Taylor, A. Nekrutenko, and D. Blankenberg. The galaxy platform
for accessible, reproducible and collaborative biomedical analyses: 2018 update. Nucleic
Acids Research, 46:W537–W544, 7 2018. ISSN 0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/NAR/GKY379.
URL https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/46/W1/W537/5001157.
[2] B. Alberts, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. Raff, K. Roberts, and P. Walter. The Plant Cell Wall. In
Molecular biology of the cell. Garland Science, 2002. URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/NBK26928/.
[3] L. A. Averianova, L. A. Balabanova, O. M. Son, A. B. Podvolotskaya, and L. A. Tekutyeva.
Production of vitamin b2 (riboflavin) by microorganisms: An overview. Frontiers in
Bioengineering and Biotechnology, 8:1172, 11 2020. ISSN 22964185. doi: 10.3389/
FBIOE.2020.570828/BIBTEX.
[4] R. K. Aziz, D. Bartels, A. Best, M. DeJongh, T. Disz, R. A. Edwards, K. Formsma,
S. Gerdes, E. M. Glass, M. Kubal, F. Meyer, G. J. Olsen, R. Olson, A. L. Osterman, R. A.
Overbeek, L. K. McNeil, D. Paarmann, T. Paczian, B. Parrello, G. D. Pusch, C. Reich,
R. Stevens, O. Vassieva, V. Vonstein, A. Wilke, and O. Zagnitko. The rast server: Rapid
annotations using subsystems technology. Bmc Genomics, 9(1):75, 2008. ISSN 14712164.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-75.
[5] S. Barlow, A. Chesson, J. D. Collins, E. Dybing, A. Flynn, C. Fruijtier-Pölloth, A. Hardy,
A. Knaap, H. Kuiper, P. Le Neindre, J. Schans, J. Schlatter, V. Silano, S. Skerfving, and
P. Vannier. Introduction of a qualified presumption of safety (qps) approach for assessment
of selected microorganisms referred to efsa - opinion of the scientific committee. Efsa
Journal, 5(12):587, 2007. ISSN 23149396, 18314732. doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2007.587.
[6] N. Baskar, S. Varadharajan, M. Rameshbabu, S. Ayyasamy, and S. Velusamy. Development
of plant-based yogurt. Foods and Raw Materials, 10(2):274–282, 2022. ISSN 23109599,
23084057. doi: 10.21603/2308-4057-2022-2-537.
[7] M. Beaumont. Flavouring composition prepared by fermentation with Bacillus spp. In-
ternational Journal of Food Microbiology, 75(3):189–196, 2002. ISSN 01681605. doi:
10.1016/S0168-1605(01)00706-1.
[8] E. Boutet, D. Lieberherr, M. Tognolli, M. Schneider, and A. Bairoch. UniProtKB/Swiss-
Prot, pages 89–112. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, 2007. ISBN 978-1-59745-535-0. doi:
10.1007/978-1-59745-535-0_4.
[9] B. Burlingame, B. Mouillé, and R. Charrondière. Nutrients, bioactive non-nutrients and
anti-nutrients in potatoes. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 22(6):494–502, sep
2009. ISSN 08891575. doi: 10.1016/J.JFCA.2009.09.001.
Page 51 of 58
==PAGE:57==
Marie Fobian Jensen
REFERENCES
[10] Q. Cai, Y. Song, S. Wang, W. Wang, X. Sun, J. Yu, and Y. Wei.
Functional yogurt
fermented by two-probiotics regulates blood lipid and weight in a high-fat diet mouse
model. Journal of Food Biochemistry, 46(9):e14248, 2022. ISSN 17454514, 01458884.
doi: 10.1111/jfbc.14248.
[11] J. Cao, Z. Yu, Q. Zhang, L. Yu, J. Zhao, H. Zhang, W. Chen, and Q. Zhai.
Effects
of bacillus coagulans gbi-30, 6086 as an adjunct starter culture on the production of
yogurt. Food Research International, 160:111398, 2022. ISSN 18737145, 09639969. doi:
10.1016/j.foodres.2022.111398.
[12] C. Chen, S. Zhao, G. Hao, H. Yu, H. Tian, and G. Zhao. Role of lactic acid bacteria
on the yogurt flavour: A review. International Journal of Food Properties, 20:S316–
S330, dec 2017. ISSN 15322386. doi: 10.1080/10942912.2017.1295988. URL https:
//www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10942912.2017.1295988.
[13] W. I. Cho and M. S. Chung. Bacillus spores: a review of their properties and inactivation
processing technologies. Food Science and Biotechnology, 29(11):1447, nov 2020. ISSN
20926456. doi: 10.1007/S10068-020-00809-4. URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC7538368/.
[14] Y. Dabire, M. KSomda, J. Ugwuanyi, L. IEzeogu, and A. STraore. Diversity of bacillus
species and their antimicrobial compounds involved in alkaline-fermentation of indigenous
food condiments used in africa. International Journal of Advanced Research, 6(12):331–
355, 2018. ISSN 23205407. doi: 10.21474/IJAR01/8147.
[15] Danspo. Dyrkning af korn, 2020. URL https://lf.dk/viden-om/landbrugsproduktion/planter/
korn.
[16] J. Dervaux, J. C. Magniez, and A. Libchaber. On growth and form of Bacillus subtilis
biofilms. Interface Focus, 4(6), dec 2014. ISSN 20428901. doi: 10.1098/RSFS.2013.0051.
URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4213440/.
[17] P. Dhaduk, N. Karmakar, P. Faldu, A. Narwade, K. Desai, K. Patel, M. K. Debnath, and
J. Tarafdar. Comparative study between nutritional compositions of processed white and
yellow flesh sweet potato. Journal of Culinary Science and Technology, pages 1–22, 2022.
ISSN 15428044, 15428052. doi: 10.1080/15428052.2022.2074330.
[18] DLF. Dyrkningsvejledning, markært (pisum sativum), 2018. URL https://www.dlf.dk/
landbrug/proteinafgroeder/dyrkningsvejledninger.
[19] W. Engels, J. Siu, S. van Schalkwijk, W. Wesselink, S. Jacobs, and H. Bachmann. Metabolic
Conversions by Lactic Acid Bacteria during Plant Protein Fermentations. Foods, 11(7):
1005, apr 2022.
ISSN 23048158.
doi: 10.3390/FOODS11071005/S1.
URL https://
www.mdpi.com/2304-8158/11/7/1005/htmhttps://www.mdpi.com/2304-8158/11/7/1005.
[20] G. Fan, Y. Du, Z. Fu, M. Chen, Z. Wang, P. Liu, and X. Li. Characterisation of physic-
ochemical properties, flavour components and microbial community in chinese guojing
Page 52 of 58
==PAGE:58==
Marie Fobian Jensen
REFERENCES
roasted sesame-like flavour daqu. Journal of the Institute of Brewing, 126(1):105–115,
2020. ISSN 20500416, 00469750. doi: 10.1002/jib.583.
[21] E. Fischer, N. Cayot, and R. Cachon. Potential of microorganisms to decrease the "beany"
off-flavor: A review. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 70(15):4493–4508, 2022.
ISSN 15205118, 00218561. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c07505.
[22] D. T. U. Fødevareinstituttet. Fødevaredata, 2022. URL https://frida.fooddata.dk/food/
1596?lang=en.
[23] L. S. Garcia. Clinical Microbiology Procedures Handbook. John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
ISBN 1683674057, 9781683674054.
[24] C. L. Green and D. W. Lamming. Regulation of metabolic health by essential dietary amino
acids. Mechanisms of Ageing and Development, 177(Sp. Iss. SI):186–200, 2019. ISSN
00476374, 18726216. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2018.07.004.
[25] C. Hansen. YOFLEX®, 2020. URL https://www.chr-hansen.com/en/food-cultures-and-
enzymes/fresh-dairy/cards/collection-cards/yoflex.
[26] A. Haque, R. K. Richardson, and E. R. Morris. Effect of fermentation temperature on the
rheology of set and stirred yogurt. Food Hydrocolloids, 15(4-6):593–602, 2001. ISSN
0268005x, 18737137. doi: 10.1016/S0268-005X(01)00090-X.
[27] J. Jakobsen, M. Danielsen, M. Langwagen, P. L. Svarc, A. Poulsen, and E. Trolle.
Næringsstofindhold i plantedrikke.
Technical report, National Food Institute
DTU, 2022.
URL https://www.food.dtu.dk/-/media/institutter/foedevareinstituttet/
publikationer/pub-2023/rapport-om-plantedrikke-final{_}221205.pdf?la=da{&}hash=
E6D9EC2886F7D4705D453A1BFB85C823CA55520F.
[28] M. B. Jensen, K. E. Rød, P. L. Švarc, E. Oveland, and J. Jakobsen. Vitamin K (phylloquinone
and menaquinones) in foods – Cost-effective quantification by LC-ESI-MS/MS. Food Chem-
istry, 385:132672, aug 2022. ISSN 0308-8146. doi: 10.1016/J.FOODCHEM.2022.132672.
[29] I. Jenson. Bacillus | detection by classical cultural techniques. Encyclopedia of Food
Microbiology, pages 149–158, 2004. doi: 10.1006/rwfm.1999.5010.
[30] P. Jeyasekaran and M. Deepa.
Formulation of stirred probiotic fruit yogurt to boost
immunity. Journal of Experimental Biology and Agricultural Sciences, 9(1):S169–S175,
2021. ISSN 23208694. doi: 10.18006/2021.9(SPL-1-GCSGD_2020).S169.S175.
[31] H. Khurana, M. Sharma, H. Verma, B. S. Lopes, R. Lal, and R. K. Negi. Genomic
insights into the phylogeny of bacillus strains and elucidation of their secondary metabolic
potential. Genomics, 112(5):3191–3200, 2020. ISSN 10898646, 08887543. doi: 10.1016/
j.ygeno.2020.06.005.
[32] K. Koutsoumanis, A. Allende, A. Alvarez-Ordonez, D. Bolton, S. Bover-Cid, M. Chemaly,
R. Davies, A. De Cesare, F. Hilbert, R. Lindqvist, M. Nauta, L. Peixe, G. Ru, M. Simmons,
Page 53 of 58
==PAGE:59==
Marie Fobian Jensen
REFERENCES
P. Skandamis, E. Suffredini, P. S. Cocconcelli, P. S. Fernández Escámez, M. P. Maradona,
A. Querol, L. Sijtsma, J. E. Suarez, I. Sundh, J. Vlak, F. Barizzone, M. Hempen, S. Correia,
and L. Herman. Updated list of QPS-recommended biological agents for safety risk assess-
ments carried out by EFSA. EFSA Journal, 20, jul 2022. doi: 10.5281/ZENODO.6902983.
URL https://zenodo.org/record/6902983.
[33] N. Lal, M. Seifan, D. Novin, and A. Berenjian. Development of a Menaquinone-7 enriched
product through the solid-state fermentation of Bacillus licheniformis. Biocatalysis and
Agricultural Biotechnology, 19:101172, may 2019.
ISSN 1878-8181.
doi: 10.1016/
J.BCAB.2019.101172.
[34] Landbrug&Fødevarer.
Dyrkning af korn, 2018.
URL https://lf.dk/viden-om/
landbrugsproduktion/planter/korn.
[35] Landbrug&Fødevarer.
Dyrkning af korn, 2022.
URL https://lf.dk/viden-om/
landbrugsproduktion/planter/korn.
[36] A. D. Lassen, L. M. Christensen, and E. Trolle. Development of a Danish Adapted Healthy
Plant-Based Diet Based on the EAT-Lancet Reference Diet. Nutrients 2020, Vol. 12, Page
738, 12(3):738, mar 2020. ISSN 2072-6643. doi: 10.3390/NU12030738. URL https:
//www.mdpi.com/2072-6643/12/3/738/htmhttps://www.mdpi.com/2072-6643/12/3/738.
[37] P. Leterme, T. Monmart, and E. Baudart. Amino-acid-composition of pea (pisum-sativum)
proteins and protein profile of pea flour. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 53
(1):107–110, 1990. ISSN 10970010, 00225142. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.2740530112.
[38] H. Li, Y. Qu, W. Tian, X. Wang, B. Shi, Y. Tang, H. Zhou, Y. Bai, L. Cao, Q. Dong, X. Liu,
S. Tian, L. Qu, X. Li, and L. Yue. Study on primary influencing factors of flavor components
produced by bacillus sp. isolated from black part of maotai daqu. Iop Conference Series:
Earth and Environmental Science, 512(1):012065, 2020. ISSN 17551315, 17551307. doi:
10.1088/1755-1315/512/1/012065.
[39] M. Lundø. Vegetabilsk produktion - Danmarks Statistik, 2022. URL https://www.dst.dk/
da/Statistik/emner/erhvervsliv/landbrug-gartneri-og-skovbrug/vegetabilsk-produktion.
[40] Q. Luo, J. Wu, and M. Wu. Enhanced acetoin production by bacillus amyloliquefaciens
through improved acetoin tolerance. Process Biochemistry, 49(8):1223–1230, 2014. ISSN
18733298, 13595113. doi: 10.1016/j.procbio.2014.05.005.
[41] L. Macarthur and B. Dappolonia. Comparison of oat and wheat carbohydrates .1. sugars.
Cereal Chemistry, 56(5):455–457, 1979. ISSN 19433638, 00090352.
[42] L. Macarthur and B. Dappolonia. Comparison of oat and wheat carbohydrates .2. starch.
Cereal Chemistry, 56(5):458–461, 1979. ISSN 19433638, 00090352.
[43] V. Mani and L. Ming. Chapter 19 - Tempeh and Other Fermented Soybean Products Rich
in Isoflavones, pages 453–474. Academic Press, Boston, 2017. ISBN 978-0-12-802309-9.
Page 54 of 58
==PAGE:60==
Marie Fobian Jensen
REFERENCES
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-802309-9.00019-4. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780128023099000194.
[44] R. J. McGorrin. Key Aroma Compounds in Oats and Oat Cereals. Journal of Agricultural
and Food Chemistry, 67(50):13778–13789, dec 2019. ISSN 15205118. doi: 10.1021/
ACS.JAFC.9B00994/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/JF-2019-00994E_0006.JPEG. URL https:
//pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/acs.jafc.9b00994.
[45] C. Mitchell, S. Iyer, J. F. Skomurski, and J. C. Vary. Red pigment in Bacillus mega-
terium spores. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 52(1):64, 1986. ISSN 00992240.
doi: 10.1128/AEM.52.1.64-67.1986. URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC203393/.
[46] R. Moeller, G. Horneck, R. Facius, and E. Stackebrandt. Role of pigmentation in protecting
bacillus sp. endospores against environmental uv radiation. Fems Microbiology Ecology, 51
(2):231–236, 2005. ISSN 01686496, 15746941. doi: 10.1016/j.femsec.2004.08.008.
[47] M. Montemurro, E. Pontonio, R. Coda, and C. G. Rizzello. Plant-based alternatives to
yogurt: State-of-the-art and perspectives of new biotechnological challenges. Foods, 10(2),
2021. ISSN 2304-8158. doi: 10.3390/foods10020316. URL https://www.mdpi.com/2304-
8158/10/2/316.
[48] D. National Food Institute. Grønne ærter, rå, 2022. URL https://frida.fooddata.dk/food/
55?lang=en.
[49] H. Oh, S. Jeon, Y. Kim, M. Ryu, D. Jeong, and U. T.B. Bacillus licheniformis strain
SCDB 14 chromosome, complete genome - Nucleotide - NCBI, 2016.
URL https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_CP014842.1?report=fasta.
[50] L. I. I. Ouoba, K. B. Rechinger, V. Barkholt, B. Diawara, A. S. Traore, and M. Jakobsen.
Degradation of proteins during the fermentation of African locust bean (Parkia biglobosa)
by strains of Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus pumilus for production of Soumbala. Journal of
Applied Microbiology, 94:396–402, 2003. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2672.2003.01845.x. URL
https://ami-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1046/j.1365-2672.2003.01845.x.
[51] T. Peterbauer, L. B. Lahuta, A. Blöchl, J. Mucha, D. A. Jones, C. L. Hedley, R. J. Gòrecki,
and A. Richter. Analysis of the raffinose family oligosaccharide pathway in pea seeds with
contrasting carbohydrate composition. Plant Physiology, 127(4):1764–1772, 2001. ISSN
00320889, 15322548. doi: 10.1104/pp.010534.
[52] P. J. Piggot. Bacillus subtilis. Encyclopedia of Microbiology, pages 45–56, 2009. doi:
10.1016/B978-012373944-5.00036-5.
[53] A. Popova and D. Mihaylova.
Antinutrients in Plant-based Foods: A Review.
The
Open Biotechnology Journal, 13(1):68–76, jul 2019. ISSN 1874-0707. doi: 10.2174/
1874070701913010068.
Page 55 of 58
==PAGE:61==
Marie Fobian Jensen
REFERENCES
[54] P. Raghavendra and P. M. Halami.
Screening, selection and characterization of
phytic acid degrading lactic acid bacteria from chicken intestine. International Jour-
nal of Food Microbiology, 133:129–134, 7 2009.
ISSN 0168-1605.
doi: 10.1016/
J.IJFOODMICRO.2009.05.006.
[55] H. Ramaswamy and S. Basak. Rheology of stirred yogurts. Journal of Texture Studies, 22
(2):231–241, 1991. ISSN 17454603, 00224901. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-4603.1991.tb00016.x.
[56] M. Samtiya, R. E. Aluko, and T. Dhewa. Plant food anti-nutritional factors and their
reduction strategies: an overview. Food Production, Processing and Nutrition, 2020. doi:
10.1186/s43014-020-0020-5.
[57] M. Samtiya, R. E. Aluko, A. K. Puniya, and T. Dhewa.
Enhancing micronutrients
bioavailability through fermentation of plant-based foods: A concise review. Fermen-
tation, 7(2), 2021. ISSN 2311-5637. doi: 10.3390/fermentation7020063. URL https:
//www.mdpi.com/2311-5637/7/2/63.
[58] S. Sanchez and A. Demain.
1.12 - secondary metabolites.
In M. Moo-Young, edi-
tor, Comprehensive Biotechnology (Second Edition), pages 155–167. Academic Press,
Burlington, second edition edition, 2011.
ISBN 978-0-08-088504-9.
doi: 10.1016/
B978-0-08-088504-9.00018-0. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780080885049000180.
[59] W. L. d. Santos, E. F. T. d. Silva, M. E. B. d. Silva, E. G. d. Silva, A. G. J. a. Bomfim, and
K. A. Moreira. Effect of in vitro gastrointestinal digestion on the antioxidant potential of
yogurt added with probiotic culture containing bacillus subtilis. Diversitas Journal, 5(3):
1750–1763, 2020. ISSN 25255215. doi: 10.17648/diversitas-journal-v5i3-1070.
[60] C. L. Schoch, S. Ciufo, M. Domrachev, C. L. Hotton, S. Kannan, R. Khovanskaya,
D. Leipe, R. McVeigh, K. O’Neill, B. Robbertse, S. Sharma, V. Soussov, J. P. Sulli-
van, L. Sun, S. Turner, and I. Karsch-Mizrachi. NCBI Taxonomy: a comprehensive up-
date on curation, resources and tools. Database : the journal of biological databases
and curation, 2020.
ISSN 1758-0463.
doi: 10.1093/DATABASE/BAAA062.
URL
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32761142/.
[61] G. E. Sedó Molina, R. Shetty, H. Xiao, A. P. Wätjen, M. Tovar, and C. H. Bang-Berthelsen.
Development of a novel lactic acid bacteria starter culture approach: From insect micro-
biome to plant-based fermentations. Lwt, 167:113797, 2022. ISSN 10961127, 00236438.
doi: 10.1016/j.lwt.2022.113797.
[62] S. Sethi, S. K. Tyagi, and R. K. Anurag. Plant-based milk alternatives an emerging segment
of functional beverages: a review. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 53(9):3408–
3423, 2016. ISSN 09758402. doi: 10.1007/s13197-016-2328-3.
[63] J. S. Shin, B. H. Kim, H. S. Kim, and M. Y. Baik. Optimization of pea protein and citrus
fiber contents for plant based stirred soymilk yogurt using response surface methodology.
Page 56 of 58
==PAGE:62==
Marie Fobian Jensen
REFERENCES
Food Science and Biotechnology, 31(13):1691–1701, 2022. ISSN 20926456, 12267708.
doi: 10.1007/s10068-022-01180-2.
[64] B. A. Sunilkumar, S. Leonova, R. Öste, and O. Olsson. Identification and characterization
of high protein oat lines from a mutagenized oat population. Journal of Cereal Science, 75:
100–107, 2017. ISSN 10959963, 07335210. doi: 10.1016/j.jcs.2017.03.003.
[65] M. Tangyu, J. Muller, C. J. Bolten, and C. Wittmann. Fermentation of plant-based milk
alternatives for improved flavour and nutritional value. Applied Microbiology and Biotech-
nology, 103(23-24):9263–9275, dec 2019. ISSN 14320614. doi: 10.1007/S00253-019-
10175-9/FIGURES/6. URL https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00253-019-10175-9.
[66] M. Tangyu, M. Fritz, R. Aragao-Börner, L. Ye, B. Bogicevic, C. J. Bolten, and C. Wittmann.
Genome-based selection and application of food-grade microbes for chickpea milk fermen-
tation towards increased l-lysine content, elimination of indigestible sugars, and improved
flavour. Microb Cell Fact, 20:109, 2021. doi: 10.1186/s12934-021-01595-2.
[67] A. Tankeshwar. Voges proskauer (vp) test: Principle, procedure, results – microbe online, 10
2022. URL https://microbeonline.com/voges-proskauer-test-principle-procedure-results/.
Accessed October 14th, 2022.
[68] T. Tompkins, G. Barreau, and O. Mathieu.
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens IT-45, com-
plete sequence - Nucleotide - NCBI, 2011. URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/
NC_020272.1?report=fasta.
[69] D. Turck, J. L. Bresson, B. Burlingame, T. Dean, S. Fairweather-Tait, M. Heinonen,
K. I. Hirsch-Ernst, I. Mangelsdorf, H. J. McArdle, A. Naska, G. Nowicka, K. Pen-
tieva, Y. Sanz, A. Siani, A. Sjödin, M. Stern, D. Tomé, H. Van Loveren, M. Vinceti,
P. Willatts, C. Lamberg-Allardt, H. Przyrembel, I. Tetens, C. Dumas, L. Fabi-
ani, S. Ioannidou, and M. Neuhäuser-Berthold.
Dietary reference values for
vitamin K.
EFSA Journal, 15(5):e04780, may 2017.
ISSN 1831-4732.
doi:
10.2903/J.EFSA.2017.4780.
URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.2903/
j.efsa.2017.4780https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.2903/j.efsa.2017.4780https:
//efsa.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.2903/j.efsa.2017.4780.
[70] E. U. Turhan, Z. Erginkaya, M. Korukluoglu, and G. Konuray. Beneficial biofilm ap-
plications in food and agricultural industry. In Health and Safety Aspects of Food Pro-
cessing Technologies, page 445. Springer Cham, 2019.
ISBN 9783030249038.
doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-24903-8.
[71] G. Urbano, M. López-Jurado, S. Frejnagel, E. Gómez-Villalva, J. M. Porres, J. Frías,
C. Vidal-Valverde, and P. Aranda. Nutritional assessment of raw and germinated pea
(Pisum sativum L.) protein and carbohydrate by in vitro and in vivo techniques. Nutrition,
21(2):230–239, 2005. ISSN 08999007. doi: 10.1016/J.NUT.2004.04.025.
Page 57 of 58
==PAGE:63==
Marie Fobian Jensen
REFERENCES
[72] K. Woldemariamyohannes, Z. Wan, Q. Yu, H. Li, X. Wei, Y. Liu, J. Wang, and B. Sun.
Prebiotic, probiotic, antimicrobial, and functional food applications of bacillus amylolique-
faciens. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 68(50):14709–14727, 2020. ISSN
15205118, 00218561. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.0c06396.
[73] S. S. Wong, R. Wicklund, J. Bridges, J. Whaley, and Y. B. Koh. Starch swelling behavior
and texture development in stirred yogurt. Food Hydrocolloids, 98:105274, 2020. ISSN
18737137, 0268005x. doi: 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2019.105274.
[74] W. J. Wu and B. Y. Ahn. Isolation and identification of bacillus amyloliquefaciens by01
with high productivity of menaquinone for cheonggukjang production. Journal of the
Korean Society for Applied Biological Chemistry, 54(5):783–789, 2011. ISSN 2234344x,
17382203. doi: 10.3839/jksabc.2011.118.
[75] Y. Wu, Y. Tao, J. Jin, S. Tong, S. Li, and L. Zhang. Multi-omics analyses of the mechanism
for the formation of soy sauce-like and soybean flavor in bacillus subtilis bj3-2. Bmc
Microbiology, 22(1):142, 2022. ISSN 14712180. doi: 10.1186/s12866-022-02555-5.
[76] Z. Xiao and P. Xu. Acetoin metabolism in bacteria. Critical Reviews in Microbiology, 33
(2):127–140, 2007. ISSN 15497828, 1040841x. doi: 10.1080/10408410701364604.
[77] L. Yan, K. G. Boyd, D. R. Adams, and J. G. Burgess. Biofilm-specific cross-species
induction of antimicrobial compounds in bacilli. Applied and Environmental Microbiology,
69(7):3719–3727, 2003.
ISSN 10985336, 00992240.
doi: 10.1128/AEM.69.7.3719-
3727.2003.
[78] Y. Yanagisawa and H. Sumi. Natto Bacillus contains a large amount of water-soluble
vitamin K (menaquinone-7). Journal of Food Biochemistry, 29(3):267–277, 2005. ISSN
01458884. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-4514.2005.00016.x.
[79] M. Yang, N. Li, L. Tong, B. Fan, L. Wang, F. Wang, and L. Liu. Comparison of physicochem-
ical properties and volatile flavor compounds of pea protein and mung bean protein-based yo-
gurt. Lwt, 152:112390, 2021. ISSN 10961127, 00236438. doi: 10.1016/j.lwt.2021.112390.
[80] Z. Zhang, M. Wen, and Y. Chang. Degradation of glucosinolates in rapeseed meal by
Lactobacillus delbrueckii and Bacillus subtilis. Grain & Oil Science and Technology, 3(2):
70–76, 2020. ISSN 25902598. doi: 10.1016/j.gaost.2020.02.003.
[81] X. Zhao, M. Cai, Z. J. Yang, T. Q. Luo, A. Sarwar, S. Megrous, T. Aziz, and Z. N. Yang.
Purification and characterization of a novel milk-clotting enzyme produced by bacillus
amyloliquefaciens gsba-1. European Food Research and Technology, 245(11):2447–2457,
2019. ISSN 14382385, 14382377. doi: 10.1007/s00217-019-03361-6.
[82] M. L. Zoch, T. L. Clemens, and R. C. Riddle. New Insights into the Biology of Osteocalcin.
Bone, 82:42, jan 2016. ISSN 87563282. doi: 10.1016/J.BONE.2015.05.046. URL https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4670816/.
Page 58 of 58
==PAGE:64==
Marie Fobian Jensen
List of Amino Acids
Amino Acids
ALA Alanine.
ARG Arginine.
ASN Asparagine.
ASP Aspartate.
CYS Cysteine.
GLN Glutamine.
GLU Glutamate.
GLY Glycine.
HIS Histidine.
ILE Isoleucine.
LEU Leucine.
LYS Lysine.
MET Methionine.
PHE Phenylalanine.
PRO Proline.
SER Serine.
THR Threonine.
TRP Tryptophan.
TYR Tyrosine.
VAL Valine.
Page I of XXII
==PAGE:65==
Marie Fobian Jensen
Abbreviations
Abbreviations
AHD alcohol dehydrogenase.
ALDC α-acetolactate decarboxylase.
ALDH aldehyde dehydrogenase.
ALS α-acetolactate synthase.
ANF Anti-Nutritional Factor.
BA Bacillus amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum.
BDH 2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase.
BS Bacillus subtilis.
EPS Exopolysaccharides.
FAA Free Amino Acids.
GC-MS Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry.
HPLC High-Performance Liquid Chromatography.
LB Luria-Bertani.
LC-MS Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry.
MALDI-TOF Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time-Of-Flight Biotyper.
NFICC National Food Institute Culture Collection.
PB Plant-Based.
PCA Plate Count Agar.
QPS Qualified presumption of safety.
SDS-PAGE Sodium Dodecyl-Sulfate Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis.
YPD Yeast extract, Peptone, Dextrose.
Page II of XXII
==PAGE:66==
Marie Fobian Jensen
A
ISOLATION FROM NATURE SAMPLES
Appendix
A
Isolation from nature samples
Table A.1: Soil and flower samples from different locations in Denmark. All samples have different GPS locations, making them unique
(data not shown). The number in parentheses is an internal numbering, which was used for further isolation, as seen in Table A.2. The
soil samples were sampled in 2 mL Eppendorf tubes and stored at 8 ◦C until isolation (1 week), while the flowers were sampled in 2 mL
Eppendorf tubes with saline water and stored at -80 ◦C until isolation (4 weeks).
Soil samples
Flower samples
Soil type
Location
Flower species
Location
Common soil (1)
Hareskoven
Bellis perennis (1)
Dalgas have
Permanent moist soil (2)
Hareskoven
Bellis perennis (2)
Utterslev mose
Sandy soil (3)
Hareskoven
Bellis perennis (3)
Utterslev mose
Common soil (4)
Hareskoven
Bellis perennis (4)
Emdrup sø
Fertilised soil (5)
Værløse
Bellis perennis (5)
Skodsborg, Strandvejen
Sandy soil (6)
Værløse
Bellis perennis (6)
Mikkelborg, Strandvejen
Clay/sandy soil (7)
Nørreskov, Værløse
Bellis perennis (7)
DTU, Lyngby Campus
Common soil (8)
Nørreskov, Værløse
Bellis perennis (8)
Borrebakken, Lyngby
Clay soil (9)
Nørreskov, Værløse
Bellis perennis (9)
Gyrithe Lemche vej, Lyngby
Common soil (10)
Nørreskov, Værløse
Bellis perennis (10)
Lundtoftevej, Lyngby
Gravel (11)
Nørreskov, Værløse
Trifolium repens (1)
Dalgas have
Common soil (12)
Nørreskov, Værløse
Trifolium repens (2)
Utterslev mose
Sandy soil (13)
Nørreskov, Værløse
Trifolium repens (3)
Utterslev mose
Field (14)
Nørreskov, Værløse
Trifolium repens (4)
Skovshoved havn
Seashore (15)
Nørreskov, Værløse
Trifolium repens (5)
Taarbæk, Strandvejen
Common soil (16)
Nørreskov, Værløse
Trifolium repens (6)
Skodsborg, strandvejen
Gravel (17)
DTU, Lyngby Campus
Trifolium repens (7)
Rungsted, Strandvejen
Sandy soil (18)
DTU, Lyngby Campus
Trifolium repens (8)
Mikkelborg, Strandvejen
Sandy soil (19)
DTU, Lyngby Campus
Trifolium repens (9)
DTU, Lyngby Campus
Gravel (20)
DTU, Lyngby Campus
Trifolium repens (10)
DTU, Lyngby Campus
Sambucus nigra (1)
Utterslev mose
Sambucus nigra (2)
Utterslev mose
Sambucus nigra (3)
Emdrup sø
Sambucus nigra (4)
Taarbæk, Strandvejen
Sambucus nigra (5)
Mikkelborg, Strandvejen
Sambucus nigra (6)
Nivå, Strandvejen
Sambucus nigra (7)
Nivå havn
Sambucus nigra (8)
Humlebæk, Strandvejen
Sambucus nigra (9)
DTU, Lyngby Campus
Sambucus nigra (10)
Kulsviervej, Lyngby
Rosa (1)
Skovshoved havn
Rosa (2)
Skovshoved, Strandvejen
Rosa (3)
Taarbæk, Strandvejen
Rosa (4)
Skodsborg, Strandvejen
Rosa (5)
Vedbæk havn
Rosa (6)
Vedbæk strand
Rosa (7)
Rungsted, Strandvejen
Rosa (8)
Rungsted, Strandvejen
Rosa (9)
Nivå, Strandvejen
Rosa (10)
Humlebæk, Strandvejen
Page III of XXII
==PAGE:67==
Marie Fobian Jensen
A
ISOLATION FROM NATURE SAMPLES
Table A.2: Soil and flower samples from different locations in Denmark. The data in the table shows the results from the Matrix-Assisted
Laser Desorption/Ionization Time-Of-Flight Biotyper (MALDI-TOF) (Bruker, The United States of America), where the green cells
indicate scores of above 2.0 and thereby a valid identification on species level, and the yellow cells indicate scores between 1.70 and 1.99
meaning that the identification is only certain on genus level. For the soil samples, a H as prefix in the sample number indicates that the
sample has been heated at 70 ◦C for 10 minutes prior to isolation. The letter prefixes for the flower samples indicate the following: K;
White clover (Trifolium repens), B; Bellis (Bellis perennis), H; Elder (Sambucus nigra) and R; Beach Rose Rosa rugosa. For both the
soil and flower samples, the number of sample relates to the number in the list in Table A.1, while the NFICC number in the first column
was given to the strain after isolation.
Soil samples
NFICC
number
Organism
(best match)
Score
value
Organism
(second best match)
Score
value
Sample
number
2066
Bacillus mycoides
1.94
Bacillus mycoides
1.85
1.1
2067
Bacillus mycoides
2.29
Bacillus mycoides
2.20
3.2
2068
Bacillus mycoides
2.23
Bacillus mycoides
2.12
4.1
2069
Pseudarthrobacter oxydans
2.36
Pseudarthrobacter scleromae
2.14
6
2070
Bacillus mycoides
2.26
Bacillus mycoides
2.08
7
2071
Pseudomonas abietaniphila
2.04
Pseudomonas corrugata
1.80
9
2072
Bacillus mycoides
2.22
Bacillus mycoides
2.18
11.1
2073
Bacillus altitudinis
2.01
Bacillus altitudinis
1.88
11.2
2074
Bacillus altitudinis
2.07
Bacillus pumilus
2.04
11.3
2075
Pseudomonas putida
2.02
Pseudomonas putida
1.97
12
2080
Pseudomonas gessardii
1.98
Pseudomonas synxantha
1.92
15.2.2
2076
Pseudomonas putida
1.98
Pseudomonas putida
1.97
16
2077
Bacillus cereus
2.29
Bacillus cereus
2.17
19.1
2081
Pantoea agglomerans
2.28
Pantoea agglomerans
2.28
19.3.1
2078
Bacillus thuringiensis
2.15
Bacillus cereus
1.99
20.1
2079
Bacillus cereus
2.22
Bacillus cereus
1.97
20.2
2087
Bacillus subtilis
2.02
Bacillus subtilis
1.86
H3
2088
Bacillus ginsengihumi
1.96
Bacillus ginsengihumi
1.89
H6
2089
Bacillus subtilis
2.27
Bacillus subtilis
2.10
H7
2090
Bacillus megaterium
2.08
Bacillus megaterium
1.9
H8.1
2091
Bacillus megaterium
2.29
Bacillus megaterium
2.29
H9.2
2082
Bacillus subtilis
2.10
Bacillus subtilis
2.10
H13
2083
Bacillus megaterium
2.39
Bacillus megaterium
2.35
H14.1
2084
Bacillus megaterium
2.27
Bacillus megaterium
2.13
H16
2085
Bacillus subtilis
2.08
Bacillus subtilis
2.02
H18.1
2086
Bacillus megaterium
2.08
Bacillus megaterium
2.06
H20
Flower samples
2113
Escherichia coli
1.95
Enterobacter hormaechei
1.75
Løv
2114
Escherichia coli
2.27
Escherichia coli
2.01
K6
2115
Escherichia coli
2.24
Escherichia coli
1.93
K7
2116
Escherichia coli
2.25
Escherichia coli
2.14
K8
2117
Escherichia coli
2.23
Escherichia coli
2.02
K3
2118
Lactococcus lactis
2.31
Lactococcus lactis
2.30
K4
2119
Lactococcus lactis
2.31
Lactococcus lactis
2.27
K5
2120
Lactococcus lactis
2.37
Lactococcus lactis
2.34
B6
2121
Escherichia coli
2.23
Escherichia coli
2.11
K1
2122
Escherichia coli
2.13
Escherichia coli
2.11
K2
2123
Enterococcus hirae
2.38
Enterococcus hirae
2.29
B3
Page IV of XXII
==PAGE:68==
Marie Fobian Jensen
A
ISOLATION FROM NATURE SAMPLES
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
NFICC
number
Organism
(best match)
Score
value
Organism
(second best match)
Score
value
Sample
number
Flower samples
2124
Enterococcus faecium
2.28
Enterococcus faecium
2.23
H7
2125
Klebsiella aerogenes
2.24
Klebsiella aerogenes
2.17
R9
2126
Lactococcus lactis
2.43
Lactococcus lactis
2.31
H1
2127
Enterobacter cloacae
1.81
Enterobacter asburiae
1.70
H6
Page V of XXII
==PAGE:69==
Marie Fobian Jensen
B
METABOLOMIC ANALYSIS
B
Metabolomic analysis
Table A.3: The detected compounds from the metabolomic analysis, which was performed qualitatively by Assistant Professor Elena Hakme from the research group for Analytical Food Chemistry.
The numbers in the first row refer to the strain number and are as follows:
1127: Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, 869: Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, 530: Bacillus pumilus, 2086: Bacillus megaterium, 528: Bacillus subtilis, 1525: Bacillus subtilis, 1130: Bacillus amyloliquefaciens,
2014: Bacillus coagulans, 2015: Bacillus coagulans.
X indicates that the compound was detected in the sample with the given strain.
Detected compounds
1127
869
530
2086
528
1525
1130
2014
2015
(-)-jasmonic acid
X
(R)-3-((R)-3-Hydroxybutanoyloxy)butanoate
X
(R,R,R,R)-3-hydroxybutyrate tetramer
X
(S)-N-tetradecanoyl-HSL
X
X
(Z)-N-15-carboxypentadec-9-enoyl-L-alanine methyl ester
X
X
X
(Z)-N-16-hydroxyhexadec-9-enoyl-L-alanine methyl ester
X
X
X
(D-Asp3,Dha7)MC-FR
X
X
(D-Leu1)MC-RR
X
10-Methyldodec-3-en-4-olide
X
12-Aminododecanoic acid
X
12β-hydroxy-13α-ethoxyverruculogen TR-2
X
3-hydroxy-N-(1-hydroxy-3-methylpentan-2-yl)-5-oxohexanamide
X
X
X
X
X
X
3R-(3R-(3R-Hydroxybutyryloxy)-butyryloxy)buteric acid
X
4-((1-acetoxy-3-methylpentan-2-yl)amino)-3-methyl-4-oxobutanoic acid
X
X
5-(Hydroxymethyl)-2-(isopropylamino)-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-1,6-naphthalenediol
X
9-Nitrooleate
X
AAL Toxin Tb1
X
AAL-Toxin
X
X
X
Acetyl-L-carnitine
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Adenine
X
X
Alpha-Linolenic acid
X
Atroviridetide
X
X
Blastmycetin C
X
X
X
X
Butyryl-L-carnitine
X
Campyridone B
X
Page VI of XXII
==PAGE:70==
Marie Fobian Jensen
B
METABOLOMIC ANALYSIS
Table A.3 – continued from previous page
Detected compounds
1127
869
530
2086
528
1525
1130
2014
2015
Carbofuran, 3OH-
X
Cinnabaramide A
X
X
X
X
Cinnabaramide B
X
Corynebactin
X
Curvularide A
X
X
X
Curvularide C
X
X
X
X
Cyclo-(isoleucyl-prolyl-leucyl-alanyl)
X
Deoxymulundocandin
X
DL-Norvaline, 2TMS
X
Dudawalamide B
X
ENK
X
Epohelmin B
X
Ergometrinine
X
Ethyl (2E,4S,5S)-5-methyl-4-([(2-methyl-2-propanyl)oxy]carbonylamino)-2-heptenoate
X
X
Ethyl N-((2-isopropyl-5-methylcyclohexyl)carbonyl)glycinate
X
X
X
X
X
Ethylhexyl triazone
X
Fuzanin I
X
X
Guanine
X
X
X
Guanosine
X
X
X
Hexanoylcarnitine
X
Indole-3-ethanol
X
Kasarin
X
Laingolide A
X
L-Octanoylcarnitine
X
X
X
Loihichelin E
X
X
Luteoride A
X
MC-KynR
X
MC-RY(OMe)
X
X
methyl tumonoate A
X
Metoprolol
X
X
X
Page VII of XXII
==PAGE:71==
Marie Fobian Jensen
B
METABOLOMIC ANALYSIS
Table A.3 – continued from previous page
Detected compounds
1127
869
530
2086
528
1525
1130
2014
2015
Muscotoxin A
X
Mycestericin F
X
N-((E)-2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)ethenyl)-3-methylbutanamide
X
X
X
X
N-(2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-2-oxoethyl)-3-methylbutanamide
X
X
X
Natalenamide B
X
N-decanoyl-L-homoserine lactone
X
Ochramide C
X
X
X
O-nonanoylcarnitine
X
X
Phenelfamycin C
X
X
X
X
Picaridin
X
Pinodiketopiperazine A
X
X
X
Pompanopeptin B
X
Prumycin
X
Pyridinoline
X
X
Pyrronamycin A
X
Salinamide E
X
Scalusamide C
X
Sphingofungin B
X
X
X
X
X
Staphyloamide B
X
X
Streptenol E
X
Tenacibactin A
X
X
X
Tenacibactin B
X
X
tert-butyl 2-((2-(acetamidomethyl)-3,3,3-trifluoro-propanoyl)amino)-3-methyl-butanoate
X
trans-2-Dodecenoylcarnitine
X
X
Triethyl citrate
X
Versipelostatin F
X
Page VIII of XXII
==PAGE:72==
Marie Fobian Jensen
C
PRE-SCREENING IN PLANT MILK
C
Pre-screening in plant milk
C.1
Qualitative evaluation of pre-screening
Table A.4: The results from the initial screening of 28 strains in pea, oat and potato milk. The colour of each sample was evaluated visually, and the odour was evaluated as either "good", "bad", "ok"
or "neutral" by 5 scientists from the laboratory of Microbial Biotechnology and Biorefinery. The indication of "good" in the table is based on neither of the scientists evaluating the sample as "bad",
why the sample could have been evaluated as either "good", "ok" or "neutral" by the scientists. The texture formation in the potato samples was evaluated visually, and all samples from the pea and oat
fermentation were evaluated as "liquid". The coloured boxes indicate that the strain was selected in the given plant milk, where the green boxes represent the strains selected in the pea milk, the
yellow boxes represent the strains selected in the oat milk and the brown box represent the strain that was selected in the potato milk.
Strain name and NFICC
Colour in pea
Smell-test, pea
Colour in oat
Smell-test, oat
Texture in potato
Colour in potato
Smell test, potato
Bacillus subtilis 528
slight pink
bad
White
good
thick liquid
grey
bad
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens 869
green
good
White
bad
liquid
brown-red
bad
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens 1127
grey/green
bad
White
bad
liquid
brown-red
bad
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens 1130
green
good
White
bad
liquid
brown-red
bad
Bacillus subtilis 1525
grey/white
bad
White
bad
thick liquid
brown-grey
bad
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1527
green
good
Yellow-ish
bad
liquid
brown-grey
bad
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1531
green
good
Yellow-ish
bad
liquid
brown-red
bad
Bacillus subtilis 1534
grey
good
White/yellow
bad
liquid
brown-red
bad
Bacillus subtilis 1599
grey
bad
White
bad
thick liquid
brown-grey
bad
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1610
grey/white
good
White/yellow
bad
liquid
brown-red
bad
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1612
green/grey
good
White/yellow
bad
liquid
brown-red
bad
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1617
grey
bad
White
bad
liquid
brown-red
bad
Bacillus subtilis 1690
green/grey
bad
White/grey
bad
gel
brown-red
bad
Bacillus subtilis 1692
white
bad
White
bad
thick liquid
brown-grey
bad
Bacillus megaterium 1700
green/grey
bad
White
good
liquid
brown-red
bad
Bacillus pumilus 1702
green
bad
White
bad
liquid
brown-red
bad
Bacillus megaterium 1704
green
good
White
bad
thick liquid
brown
bad
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1780
green
good
White
bad
liquid
brown
bad
Page IX of XXII
==PAGE:73==
Marie Fobian Jensen
C
PRE-SCREENING IN PLANT MILK
Table A.4 – continued from previous page
Strain name and NFICC
Colour in pea
Smell-test, pea
Colour in oat
Smell-test, oat
Texture in potato
Colour in potato
Smell test, potato
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1782
green
bad
White
bad
liquid
brown
bad
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1785
green
bad
White/yellow
good
liquid
brown
bad
Bacillus subtilis 1869
red-ish
bad
White/yellow
bad
liquid
brown-grey
bad
Bacillus vallismortis 1938
white/grey
bad
White/yellow
bad
thick liquid
brown-grey
bad
Bacillus subtilis ssp subtilis 1939
grey/green
bad
White
bad
thick liquid
brown-grey
bad
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
ssp plantarum 1940
green
bad
White/yellow
good
liquid
brown
bad
Bacillus subtilis 2082
grey/white
bad
White
bad
liquid
brown-red
bad
Bacillus subtilis 2085
white
bad
White
bad
thick liquid
brown-grey
bad
Bacillus subtilis 2087
red-ish
bad
White
good
liquid
brown
good
Bacillus subtilis 2089
green/grey
bad
White
bad
liquid
brown-grey
bad
C.2
Quantitative evaluation of pre-screening
Table A.5: The HPLC results from the initial screening fermentation in pea, potato and oat milk with the selected 28 best performing strains from the chemical assays. The concentrations are in g/L
and calculated based on external standards. The strain corresponding to a given strain number can be found in Table 9. The three rows for each strain number corresponds to pea, potato and oat,
respectively, and the pH after fermentation can be seen in the second column for each strain in each plant milk.
Strain
number
pH
Stachyose
Raffinose
Citric acid
Sucrose
Glucose
Galactose
Fructose
Lactic acid
Acetic acid
Acetoin
2,3-butanediol 2
Ethanol
528
5.61
0.06
0.08
-
-
-
-
-
0.35
-
-
0.60
-
8.41
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.04
-
-
0.56
0.05
5.93
33.72
21.38
-
-
2.28
-
0.09
0.11
0.32
7.01
2.62
-
869
8.34
-
-
-
-
0.06
-
-
0.22
-
-
0.62
0.02
8.46
-
-
-
-
0.02
-
-
-
-
-
0.47
-
6.00
-
25.34
-
-
1.25
-
0.08
-
0.23
5.79
3.25
-
1127
6.67
-
-
-
-
0.05
-
-
1.70
-
-
0.65
-
8.38
-
-
0.02
-
-
-
-
0.04
-
-
0.48
-
5.99
31.37
25.12
-
-
1.64
-
0.09
-
0.27
5.97
3.50
-
1130
8.08
-
-
-
-
0.06
-
-
0.24
-
-
0.57
0.01
Page X of XXII
==PAGE:74==
Marie Fobian Jensen
C
PRE-SCREENING IN PLANT MILK
Table A.5 – continued from previous page
Strain
number
pH
Stachyose
Raffinose
Citric acid
Sucrose
Glucose
Galactose
Fructose
Lactic acid
Acetic acid
Acetoin
2,3-butanediol
Ethanol
8.43
-
-
0.02
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.52
-
5.88
31.45
25.40
-
-
1.42
-
0.09
-
0.22
5.58
3.32
-
1525
7.93
-
-
-
-
0.05
-
-
2.64
-
-
1.24
0.50
8.22
0.01
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.06
-
-
1.07
0.05
4.9
1.09
19.81
-
-
0.77
-
-
0.26
0.65
4.25
5.99
-
1527
8.42
-
0.04
-
-
0.05
-
-
0.03
-
-
0.55
0.02
8.26
-
-
0.03
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.39
-
5.46
32.47
26.95
-
-
1.99
-
0.08
-
0.02
6.09
2.11
-
1531
8.33
-
-
-
-
0.05
-
-
-
-
-
0.45
0.01
8.17
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.47
-
5.63
30.68
25.80
-
-
2.06
-
0.08
-
0.07
5.79
2.34
-
1534
6.75
-
0.04
-
-
0.05
-
-
0.21
-
-
1.36
-
8.34
-
-
0.02
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.57
-
5.82
32.64
25.28
-
-
1.65
-
0.08
-
0.29
4.97
4.45
-
1599
8.31
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.22
-
-
1.35
0.10
8.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.04
-
-
0.56
0.23
5.91
33.40
22.89
-
-
1.82
-
0.10
0.04
0.22
6.69
2.29
-
1610
6.11
0.16
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.40
-
-
1.17
-
8.44
-
-
0.03
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.56
0.04
6.03
52.51
37.95
-
-
2.03
-
0.14
-
0.06
7.19
4.41
-
1612
8.21
-
0.04
-
-
0.07
-
-
0.22
-
-
0.63
0.01
8.26
-
-
0.03
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.45
-
5.95
32.62
25.69
-
-
1.16
-
0.09
-
0.26
5.29
3.29
-
1617
6.44
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.67
-
-
1.38
-
8.27
-
-
0.02
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.40
-
5.96
32.29
25.50
-
-
1.37
-
0.09
-
0.23
5.49
3.05
-
1690
7.7
-
-
-
-
0.05
-
-
0.22
-
-
0.91
-
7.85
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.04
-
-
1.13
-
5.38
11.79
9.79
-
-
2.47
-
0.07
0.14
0.09
5.35
7.66
-
1692
5.09
-
0.11
-
-
-
-
-
0.46
-
-
0.24
-
Page XI of XXII
==PAGE:75==
Marie Fobian Jensen
C
PRE-SCREENING IN PLANT MILK
Table A.5 – continued from previous page
Strain
number
pH
Stachyose
Raffinose
Citric acid
Sucrose
Glucose
Galactose
Fructose
Lactic acid
Acetic acid
Acetoin
2,3-butanediol
Ethanol
8.22
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.11
-
-
0.69
0.15
5.34
21.38
18.04
-
-
0.82
-
-
0.50
0.18
3.41
6.14
-
1700
7.35
-
-
-
-
0.05
-
-
0.13
-
-
0.98
0.01
8.42
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.48
-
5.64
30.07
23.89
-
-
2.40
-
0.09
-
0.08
6.00
3.21
-
1702
7.92
-
0.04
-
-
0.05
-
-
0.21
-
-
1.08
-
8.43
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.04
-
-
0.55
0.01
5.72
30.40
23.64
-
-
2.14
-
-
-
0.30
5.50
4.61
-
1704
8.22
-
0.04
-
-
0.08
-
-
0.19
-
-
0.70
-
8.48
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.55
0.01
5.88
30.81
24.14
-
-
1.88
-
0.09
-
0.27
4.92
4.99
-
1780
8.13
-
0.04
-
-
0.07
-
-
0.17
-
-
0.77
-
8.43
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.53
-
5.93
31.83
25.21
-
-
1.45
-
0.09
-
0.33
4.93
3.40
-
1782
8.5
-
0.04
-
-
0.11
-
-
-
-
-
1.05
0.01
8.35
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.44
-
5.91
31.97
25.11
-
-
1.50
-
0.09
-
0.29
4.91
3.34
-
1785
7.09
-
0.04
-
-
0.05
-
-
0.32
-
-
0.90
-
8.42
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.48
0.02
5.8
31.80
25.16
-
-
1.80
-
0.09
-
0.29
5.07
4.06
-
1869
6.78
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.64
0.20
-
0.52
-
7.76
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.04
-
-
0.74
-
5.81
33.44
26.19
-
-
1.76
-
0.14
0.10
0.34
5.08
2.34
-
1938
5.97
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.55
-
-
0.83
-
8.31
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.44
0.15
5.41
32.34
29.04
-
-
4.12
-
0.14
-
-
5.57
1.30
-
1939
8.26
-
-
-
-
0.05
-
-
0.22
-
-
1.78
0.15
8.33
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.07
-
-
0.41
0.09
5.53
31.09
27.89
-
-
4.10
-
0.11
-
0.04
5.27
1.55
-
1940
7.58
-
-
-
-
0.05
-
-
0.04
-
-
0.35
-
Page XII of XXII
==PAGE:76==
Marie Fobian Jensen
C
PRE-SCREENING IN PLANT MILK
Table A.5 – continued from previous page
Strain
number
pH
Stachyose
Raffinose
Citric acid
Sucrose
Glucose
Galactose
Fructose
Lactic acid
Acetic acid
Acetoin
2,3-butanediol
Ethanol
8.37
-
0.02
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.55
0.01
5.83
26.48
20.12
-
-
3.52
-
0.09
-
0.12
6.45
6.17
-
2082
8.19
-
-
-
-
0.05
-
-
0.33
-
-
1.72
0.21
8.26
-
-
-
-
0.02
-
-
-
-
-
0.63
-
5.53
30.32
24.75
-
-
3.75
-
0.11
-
0.17
5.71
3.69
-
2085
6.92
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1.14
-
-
0.20
-
8.02
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.07
-
-
0.43
-
5.3
35.78
26.17
-
-
2.23
-
-
0.23
0.12
1.98
4.29
-
2087
8.3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.12
-
-
1.28
0.19
8.34
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.59
-
5.83
-
22.29
0.17
-
3.37
-
0.14
-
0.10
7.39
2.00
-
2089
8.3
-
-
-
-
0.06
-
-
1.06
-
-
1.52
0.03
8.01
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.47
-
5.63
31.89
23.23
-
-
4.12
-
0.10
0.07
0.09
7.69
5.26
-
Blank
7.76
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1.08
-
-
1.46
1.19
8.47
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.62
-
4.84
40.95
26.85
0.42
0.28
-
0.06
-
0.44
0.18
0.08
1.80
-
Page XIII of XXII
==PAGE:77==
Marie Fobian Jensen
D
MAIN FERMENTATION
D
Main fermentation
D.1
GC-MS results
Table A.6: The concentration of volatile compounds in the fermented and un-fermented samples analysed with Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS). The concentration is in mg/g on
wet basis, and was calculated based on external standards. The analysis was made with biological triplicates. The abbreviations for the strains are: BA 1785; B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1785,
BA 1940; B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1940, BS 1534; B. subtilis 1534, BA 1610; B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1610 and BS 2087; B. subtilis 2087. ND: Not Detected.
Concentration
(mg/g)
Oat blank
BA 1785
(Oat)
BA 1940
(Oat)
Pea blank
BS 1534
(Pea)
BA 1610
(Pea)
Potato blank
BS 2087
(Potato)
2-ethyl furan
0.01 ± 0.02
ND
ND
0.02 ± 0.02
ND
ND
ND
ND
2,4-decadienal
ND
ND
ND
0.08 ± 0.05
ND
ND
ND
ND
pentanal
0.25 ± 0.35
ND
ND
0.53 ± 0.34
ND
ND
0.02 ± 0.03
ND
hexanal
2.3 ± 2.28
ND
ND
4.57 ± 2.05
0.1 ± 0.15
ND
0.95 ± 0.69
ND
2-pentylfuran
0.77 ± 1.09
ND
ND
1.81 ± 0.98
0.28 ± 0.2
0.41 ± 0.31
0.24 ± 0.17
ND
4-methyl-1-pentanol
0.65 ± 0.16
0.51 ± 0.05
0.62 ± 0.14
0.75 ± 0.14
1 ± 0.05
0.77 ± 0.14
0.35 ± 0.5
1.04 ± 0.25
1-penten-3-ol
0.08 ± 0.11
ND
ND
0.15 ± 0.11
0.26 ± 0.14
0.23 ± 0.17
0.04 ± 0.03
ND
1-octen-3-ol
ND
ND
ND
ND
0.04 ± 0.06
ND
ND
ND
octanal
0.11 ± 0.03
ND
0.04 ± 0.05
0.16 ± 0.04
0.02 ± 0.03
ND
0.05 ± 0.04
0.03 ± 0.02
trans-2-hexenal
ND
ND
ND
0.03 ± 0.04
0.02 ± 0.03
0.02 ± 0.04
ND
ND
Ethyl acetate
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
0.01 ± 0.02
0.03 ± 0.05
2-pentanone
0.01 ± 0.02
0.19 ± 0.08
0.07 ± 0.05
0.08 ± 0
0.78 ± 0.31
0.79 ± 0.37
ND
0.52 ± 0.13
1-pentanol
ND
ND
ND
0.08 ± 0.12
0.68 ± 0.5
0.39 ± 0.32
0.1 ± 0.14
0.11 ± 0.08
2-heptanone
0.2 ± 0.29
ND
ND
0.51 ± 0.27
0.57 ± 0.8
1.24 ± 0.68
0.04 ± 0.03
0.55 ± 0.12
diacetyl
83.27 ± 19.59
83.95 ± 8.6
81.73 ± 1.99
60.52 ± 12.83
18.56 ± 26.24
42.73 ± 31.91
21.89 ± 16.68
35.58 ± 25.19
acetoin
ND
1.87 ± 1.17
0.59 ± 0.58
7.16 ± 8.86
3.52 ± 3.72
2.23 ± 2.06
16.04 ± 11.1
17.79 ± 10.51
1-nonanol
ND
ND
ND
ND
0.1 ± 0.08
ND
ND
ND
2,3 butanediol
ND
ND
ND
ND
0.01 ± 0.01
ND
ND
ND
benzaldehyde
0.07 ± 0.09
ND
ND
0.31 ± 0.29
0.01 ± 0.02
0.02 ± 0.02
0.41 ± 0.29
ND
nonanal
0.06 ± 0.08
ND
0.04 ± 0.06
0.17 ± 0.04
0.01 ± 0.02
ND
0.03 ± 0.04
ND
2-nonanone
0.02 ± 0.03
ND
ND
0.07 ± 0.03
0.14 ± 0.08
0.17 ± 0.13
0.01 ± 0
0.05 ± 0.02
heptanal
0.11 ± 0.05
ND
0.03 ± 0.04
0.26 ± 0.09
0.02 ± 0.02
ND
0.24 ± 0.14
0.04 ± 0
1-hexanol
0.62 ± 0.44
ND
0.29 ± 0.41
0.37 ± 0.52
1.23 ± 0.06
0.69 ± 0.5
0.43 ± 0.61
1.27 ± 0.32
2-butanone
4.17 ± 1.03
4.21 ± 0.45
4.09 ± 0.1
2.97 ± 0.67
1.59 ± 0.8
2.73 ± 0.81
1 ± 0.8
2.1 ± 0.71
hexanenitril
0.02 ± 0.03
ND
ND
0.06 ± 0.01
0.05 ± 0.01
0.05 ± 0.03
0.01 ± 0.02
ND
Page XIV of XXII
==PAGE:78==
Marie Fobian Jensen
D
MAIN FERMENTATION
D.2
Visual presentation of samples
Figure A.1: All samples placed in the shake-incubator right before fermentation. From left to right is the oat, potato and pea samples.
(a) Pea milk fermented with B. subtilis 1534
(left) and B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum
1610 (right).
(b) Oat milk fermented with B. amyloliquefa-
ciens ssp. plantarum 1785 (left) and B. amy-
loliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1940 (right).
(c) Potato milk fermented with B. subtilis
2087.
Figure A.2: Pea, oat and potato samples post fermentation with different Bacillus sp. The fermentation was at 37 ◦C for 48 hours under agitation (200 rpm) for the first 24 hours. Inoculation was 1 %.
Page XV of XXII
==PAGE:79==
Marie Fobian Jensen
D
MAIN FERMENTATION
D.3
Free amino acids
Table A.7: The concentration of free amino acids in µg/mL in the fermented and un-fermented samples of potato, pea and oat. The results were obtained with Liquid Chromatography Mass
Spectrometry (LC-MS). The abbreviations for the strains are as follows: BS 2087; B. subtilis 2087, BS 1534; B. subtilis 1534, BA 1610; B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1610, BA 1785; B.
amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1785 and BA 1940; B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1940. The samples were analysed in biological triplicates.
Amino acid
(µg/mL)
Potato milk
BS 2087
Pea milk
BS 1534
BA 1610
Oat milk
BA 1785
BA 1940
PHE*
15.38 ± 0.25
564.94 ± 12.45
2.27 ± 0.13
839.43 ± 9.47
871.14 ± 12.32
2 ± 0.09
113.17 ± 13.81
109.74 ± 4.07
LEU*
52.98 ± 0.63
733.19 ± 18.86
3.51 ± 0.2
938.16 ± 86.88
995.16 ± 23.69
1.79 ± 0.05
19.33 ± 8.12
17.44 ± 1.77
ILE*
11.45 ± 0.21
415.7 ± 20.82
0.97 ± 0.09
646.74 ± 85.06
693.94 ± 35.57
1.8 ± 0.03
8.71 ± 3.39
10.26 ± 0.69
MET*
8.00 ± 0.11
216.47 ± 10.14
0.1 ± 0.01
129.53 ± 12.05
149.57 ± 3.2
0.55 ± 0.01
3.71 ± 2.04
5.4 ± 0.59
TYR
11.18 ± 0.23
568.34 ± 17.58
1.78 ± 0.09
735.01 ± 11.17
703.61 ± 15.76
2.74 ± 0.12
36.67 ± 14.18
42.8 ± 6.68
PRO
5.61 ± 0.03
46.25 ± 3.66
0.66 ± 0.05
128.57 ± 7.49
168.02 ± 41.65
4.46 ± 0.15
4.2 ± 1.67**
4.44 ± 1.48**
VAL*
20.72 ± 0.29
507.4 ± 28.15
1.24 ± 0.12
750.1 ± 90.91
807.8 ± 39.04
3.77 ± 0.15
103.17 ± 29.95
98.83 ± 13.54
ALA
18.93 ± 0.2
241.17 ± 8.95
4.46 ± 0.17
323.53 ± 33.24
346.7 ± 36.15
16.43 ± 0.16
16.4 ± 3.42
29.06 ± 0.15
THR*
19.06 ± 1.06
249.88 ± 19.74
1.42 ± 0.42
272.28 ± 48.45
243.41 ± 33.69
9.11 ± 2.05
9.36 ± 5.49**
12.31 ± 5.23**
GLY
3.39 ± 0.06
237.43 ± 10.46
0.57 ± 0.12
224.37 ± 12.12
247.64 ± 42.81
5.89 ± 1.79
4.51 ± 1.68**
4.26 ± 2.62**
SER
11.08 ± 0.82
118.96 ± 22.93
0.6 ± 0.18
128.86 ± 62.39
76.24 ± 15.86
4.14 ± 0.69
2.27 ± 0.3
4.52 ± 0.78
HIS*
3.03 ± 0.17
105.13 ± 6.77
0.55 ± 0.11
353.52 ± 182.98**
356.27 ± 136.82**
6.72 ± 1.05
66.84 ± 18.7
61.22 ± 12.37
ARG
19.21 ± 0.11
31.09 ± 0.45
5.05 ± 0.08
41.02 ± 20.11**
27.52 ± 5.07
12.1 ± 0.18
7.27 ± 1.77
13.28 ± 1.38
LYS*
31.78 ± 0.25
1425.98 ± 47.01
1.51 ± 0.25
2485.82 ± 141.78
3084.28 ± 73.9
3.82 ± 0.91
19.01 ± 6.45
26.95 ± 6.04
GLU
7.08 ± 0.1
311.65 ± 17.52
3.87 ± 0.55
652.27 ± 54.17
788.43 ± 246.51
32.83 ± 0.26
25.35 ± 2.02
33.62 ± 3.3
CYS
0.64 ± 0.37
17.19 ± 0.34
0.59 ± 0.24
32.95 ± 5.92
44.17 ± 8.49
0.88 ± 0.09
2.86 ± 1.36**
3.04 ± 0.36
ASP
16.41 ± 0.61
122.28 ± 4.13
5.94 ± 4.4
165.28 ± 47.04
206.6 ± 129.4**
23.63 ± 1.46
4.18 ± 4.31
15.57 ± 11.08**
Total
255.94 ± 5.5
5914.87 ± 249.97
35.09 ± 7.22
8847.37 ± 911.22
9810.5 ± 899.96
132.65 ± 9.24
447.01 ± 118.66
492.73 ± 72.13
* Essential amino acids
** Not significant
Page XVI of XXII
==PAGE:80==
Marie Fobian Jensen
D
MAIN FERMENTATION
D.4
Total protein estimation
Figure A.3: Total protein concentration estimated with Elementar DUMAS instrument (Elementar Analysensysteme GmbH, Germany).
The concentration is in % wet weight, where a protein factor of 6.38 (Milk) was used. The measurements were based on biological
triplicates, and external standards of aspartic acid and wheat flour were used as references. The green bars represent the pea samples,
while the brown bars represent the potato samples, and the yellow bars represent the oat samples. The abbreviations for the strains are
as follows: BS 1534; B. subtilis 1534, BA 1610; B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1610, BS 2087; B. subtilis 2087, BA 1785; B.
amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1785 and BA 1940; B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1940.
Page XVII of XXII
==PAGE:81==
Marie Fobian Jensen
D
MAIN FERMENTATION
D.5
HPLC chromatograms
Figure A.4: Chromatogram of the un-fermented pea sample obtained after analysis with High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
(HPLC).
Figure A.5: Chromatogram of the pea sample fermented with B. subtilis 1534 obtained after analysis with High-Performance Liquid
Chromatography (HPLC).
Page XVIII of XXII
==PAGE:82==
Marie Fobian Jensen
D
MAIN FERMENTATION
Figure A.6: Chromatogram of the pea sample fermented with B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1610 obtained after analysis with
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC).
Figure A.7: Chromatogram of the un-fermented oat sample obtained after analysis with High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
(HPLC).
Page XIX of XXII
==PAGE:83==
Marie Fobian Jensen
D
MAIN FERMENTATION
Figure A.8: Chromatogram of the oat sample fermented with B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1785 obtained after analysis with
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC).
Figure A.9: Chromatogram of the oat sample fermented with B. amyloliquefaciens ssp. plantarum 1940 obtained after analysis with
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC).
Page XX of XXII
==PAGE:84==
Marie Fobian Jensen
D
MAIN FERMENTATION
Figure A.10: Chromatogram of the un-fermented potato sample obtained after analysis with High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
(HPLC).
Figure A.11: Chromatogram of the potato sample fermented with B. subtilis 2087 obtained after analysis with High-Performance Liquid
Chromatography (HPLC).
Page XXI of XXII
==PAGE:85==
Marie Fobian Jensen
D
MAIN FERMENTATION
D.6
Viscosity analysis
Figure A.12: On all three graphs, the viscosity (Pa.s) is plotted against the shear rate (1/s), and the data was obtained using a TA
Instruments Discovery HR-2 hybrid rheometer, United Kingdom. (A) shows the flow behaviour for the fermented and un-fermented oat
samples, (B) shows the flow behaviour for the fermented and un-fermented pea samples, (C) shows the flow behaviour for the fermented
and un-fermented potato samples. In all three graphs, the flow behaviour for a commercial drinkable yogurt is shown with the legend
"Actimel".
Page XXII of XXII
