==PAGE:1==
Shankar Rimal
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as
foundation concept for walls
Master Thesis
February, 2023
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
Master Thesis
February, 2023
Author: Shankar Rimal
Supervisor: Varvara Zania, Associate Professor, DTU
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis is output of the work of a one semester course which accounts for
32.5 ECTS and is submitted to the Section for Geotechnics and Geology, Department
of Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in partial fulfillment of
the requirements for the degree of M.Sc. in Civil Engineering. The study was conducted
between September 2022 to February 2023 with the supervision of Associate Professor
Varvara Zania from the Department of Civil Engineering.
The study investigates the stabilisation of rammed earth to use as a foundation for walls,
and includes an analysis of design and performance of the wall foundation for the esti­
mated strength and stiffness properties.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge within the field of geotechnical engi­
neering.
Kgs. Lyngby, February, 2023.
Shankar Rimal
M.Sc. student
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Sustainable development is becoming more important in the construction industry. The
use of rammed earth stabilised with lime in the construction of wall foundations may form
an integral part of the plan for Denmark to reduce CO2 emissions by 70% in 2030. The
strength and stiffness parameters of lime stabilised rammed earth depend on the amount
of use of stabilisers, particle size distribution, optimum water content, soil chemical com­
position, specimen dimension and compaction efforts.
The following report presents an extensive laboratory investigation of rammed earth from
Vinge city, Denmark. Lime­stabilised rammed earth is used in the construction of the
foundation for free­standing walls, when loading from the self­weight of the wall and wind
effects. The proportion of lime used for stabilisation is 5% of the mass of dry soil, and the
measured optimum water content of lime­treated soil of 16%. During the 28­day curing
period strength parameters are used for the design of wall and foundation.
In the present study, unconfined compressive strength (qu), Young’s modulus (E),repeated
loading and unloading modulus (Eur) values of lime­treated soil with curing periods of one
day, seven days, twenty eight days and ninety one days were measured and calculated.
The water content of estimated optimum moisture content is used to mix the soil lime
mixture using standard proctor compaction energy. The test specimens were sealed with
plastic immediately after extraction from the mould. Some samples were sealed with plas­
tic within the mould without extraction to prevent moisture loss and carbonation of the lime
with carbon­dioxide in the air. The specimens were cured at a temperature of 230C and
64.5% of relative humidity and extracted just before testing. The static compaction of the
constant peak stress variable method with compaction energy of 0.71MPa is used in the
compaction of the test specimens.
The strength and stiffness of lime stabilised rammed earth starts increasing immediately
after the compaction and continues to increase throughout the curing period. The lime
stabilised rammed earth shows brittle failure and relatively low strain at failure. The un­
loading and reloading modulus (Eur) is increased 2 ­ 6 times than the elastic modulus;
still, there is a significant dispersion in its values. The elastic modulus is measured using
the tangent line of the stress strain curve of the unconfined compression test with 35%
to 75% of the axial failure stress and corresponding axial strain. The lime treated soil
sample fails in shear with vertical cracks at the beginning of failure. The specimens used
to measure repeated loading and unloading with saturation suffered settlement failure in­
stead of shear failure, which shows that lime­stabilised soil showed a poor resistance to
water immersion.
The PLAXIS 2D models indicate that building a wall on the ground surface and with a one­
meter foundation below the ground only partially utilises the material strength. Tension
cracks occurred at the brick interface when the wall is built on the ground surface using
bricks. It is recommended to use soil lime mortar as a binding material for bricks.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This study was accomplished under the supervision of Associate Professor Varvara Za­
nia, Department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark (DTU). Thank you,
Varvara, for your continuous support, guidelines, encouragement and for sharing your
vast knowledge throughout the study.
I would like to extend a special thanks to the technical employee Ditte Jul Valentin for her
assistance in the laboratory experiment, including equipment, setup and advice.
Many thanks to Postdoc Ida Maria Gieysztor Bertelsen, without her it would not be possible
to obtain this project. Her motivation and advise was a catalyst to work tirelessly on this
project. In addition, I would like to thank, laboratory coordinator Ebba Cederberg Schnell
help in the laboratory and Assistant professor Tobias Orlander for introducing me to a
pathway to this interesting project.
Last but not least, my greatest thanks goes to my wife, Manisha, my lovely kids, Swara
and Moksha, and to my parents, family and friends for their direct and indirect caring, love,
and continuous support throughout my studies.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Scope and objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature review
4
2.1
Clay mineralogy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Rammed earth stabilisation overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Stabilisation of rammed earth with lime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Mechanism of soil lime stabilisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Soil lime mix design procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6
Review on specimen preparation for UCS testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.7
Some previous works on lime stabilised rammed earth . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.8
Lime stabilised rammed earth as a foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3
Methodology
21
3.1
The soil sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Performed tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3
Standard proctor test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.4
Specimen preparation, moulding and curing for UCS and repeated loading
and unloading testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.5
Data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.6
Plaxis 2D modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.7
Analysis of lime stabilised rammed earth wall and foundation . . . . . . . . 40
4
Test results
44
4.1
Moisture content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.2
Particle density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.3
Loss on ignition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.4
Atterberg limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.5
Particle size distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.6
Standard proctor test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.7
Optimum moisture content determination of mixture of soil and lime
. . . . 47
4.8
PH measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.9
Unconfined compression test and repeated loading and unloading test . . . 48
5
FEM analysis in PLAXIS 2D
68
5.1
Construction of wall on the ground surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
5.2
Construction of wall with a one meter foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
6
Interpretation and discussion
78
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
v
==PAGE:7==
7
Conclusion
84
7.1
Future works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Bibliography
86
A Grain size distribution
90
B Natural moisture content
91
C Loss on ignition
92
D Particle density
93
E
Atterberg limits
94
F
Standard proctor test on rammed earth
95
G Standard proctor test on lime treated rammed earth
96
H Repeated loading unloading test on a one day curing period specimen
97
H.1 Repeated loading and unloading test on a one day curing period specimen
with saturation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
H.2 Repeated loading and unloading test on a one day curing period specimen
without saturation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
I
Repeated loading unloading test on a seven day curing period specimen
100
I.1
Repeated loading and unloading test on a seven day curing period speci­
men with saturation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
I.2
Repeated loading and unloading test on a seven day curing period speci­
men without saturation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
J
Repeated loading and unloading test on a twenty eight day curing period
specimen
102
J.1
Repeated loading and unloading test on a twenty eight day curing period
specimen with saturation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
J.2
Repeated loading and unloading test on a twenty eight day curing period
specimen without saturation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
K Repeated loading unloading test on a ninety one day curing period specimen105
K.1 Repeated loading and unloading test on a eighty three day curing period
specimen with saturation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
K.2 Repeated loading and unloading test on a ninety one day curing period
specimen without saturation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
L
PLAXIS 2D modelling with monolithic construction
107
L.1
Construction of monolithic wall on ground surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
M PLAXIS 2D modelling using a brick construction
109
M.1 Construction of brick wall on ground surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
vi
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
γ0 Unit weight
τ Shear stress
ϕ Friction angle
ϕ′ Effective friction angle
ρs Particle density
ρL Density of liquid
ρ0 Bulk density
σ Effective stress
ν Dynamic viscosity
ρw Density of water
ρd Dry density
ε Strain
εv Vertical strain
Gs Specific gravity
e0 Initial void ratio
ψ Dilatancy angle
G Shear modulus
E0 Tangent modulus
Eur Unloading reloading modulus
e0 Initial void ratio
qu Unconfined compressive strength
εf Vertical strain at failure
Sr Degree of saturation
E Youngs modulus
cu Undrained shear strength
Ip Plasticy index
MJ Mega joule
w Water content
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
vii
==PAGE:9==
µm Micrometer
A Cross sectional area of specimen
P Applied load
d Diameter of specimen
h Height of specimen
c Cohesion
c′ Effective cohesion
kN Kilo Newton
psi Pound per square inch
C Celsius
kPa Kilo pascal
MPa Mega pascal
UCS Unconfined Compression strength
OLC Optimum lime content
RE Rammed earth
LSRE Lime stabilised rammed earth
LOI Loss on ignition
URE Unstabilised rammed earth
PH Potential of Hydrogen
LL Liquid limit
PL Plastic limit
PI Plasticity Index
FEA Finite element analysis
CBR California bearing ratio
MDU maximum dry unit weight
OMC Optimum moisture content
CL Clay with low plasticity
CM Clay with medium plasticity
CH Clay with high plasticity
CM Clay with medium plasticity
ML Silt with low plasticity
CM Clay with medium plasticity
OH High plasticity organic soil
MH Silt with high plasticity
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
viii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and motivation
Denmark sets a goal to reduce carbon emissions by 70% in 2030 and climate neutrality
by 2050, along with more than 130 countries[1]. The building sector alone represents
approximately 40% of global energy. To fulfil the carbon neutrality goal, the building sector
can reduce energy consumption by minimising industrial processes and sourcing locally
available materials such as rammed earth for construction. The attraction of the use of
rammed earth is increasing as a sustainable solution because of the reduction in energy
consumption, CO2 emission, and generated waste. Rammed earth is locally available
and harmless to humans. Construction and demolition sectors covered 33% of solid waste
generation in the European Union. Rammed earth construction will help minimise waste
as unbaked earth can be used indefinitely, which means it will never become a waste
material harmful to the environment[2].
Rammed earth construction has a long history. Over 2000 years ago, sections of the
Great Wall of China and the Alhambra palace in Spain, built in the 10th century, were
constructed with rammed earth. Cointerux wrote that during the late eighteenth and nine­
teenth centuries, buildings throughout Europe, Australia, and the USA were constructed
using rammed earth. ”Haus Rath,” the six story building in Germany, was constructed
using rammed earth in 1828. However, after World War II, engineers preferred to use
concrete and steel for building construction because of the rapid reconstruction require­
ments, even now though 50% of the current world population lives in earth buildings[2].
Using rammed earth stabilised with lime as walls and foundations will help to reach the
danish and global carbon neutral target. It is common to use portland cement as a sta­
biliser for rammed earth to increase its strength and durability, but this reduces sustain­
ability and increases cost and environmental impact. Cement stabilised rammed earth
is more popular in the construction of buildings and walls. However, the option of us­
ing lime is much greener than cement because limestone is the basic raw material in
cement production. Cement production alone accounts for approximately 9 to 10% of
global CO2 emissions[3]. Lime stabilisation improves strength, stiffness, it has excellent
hygro­thermal properties, high plasticity, good acoustic and thermal performance, and
water adsorption of the raw soil[2].
1.2
Problem
Engineers need help with using rammed earth as a construction material. Rammed earth
codes and standards are written with geometric relations without thoroughly analysing the
mechanical behaviour of the material. Proportion of stabilisers, particle size distribution,
soil chemical compositions, specimen dimension, compaction efforts, and optimum water
content will affect the strength and stiffness of the rammed earth. Although curing the
sample is essential to use hydraulic binders efficiently, some studies were completed
without curing and dried in the air after their manufacture.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
1
==PAGE:11==
Many studies show that stabilised rammed earth is being used to construct buildings and
walls. This project will investigate to use lime stabilised rammed earth as a foundation for
walls. Lime content in the rammed earth will improve the water resistance.
Gallipoli et al. reported that several countries (e.g.Germany, Spain, USA, Australia, New
Zealand, and Zimbabwe) have published national standards for rammed earth construc­
tion. The codes are based on experience rather than engineering science. Those stan­
dards state the requirements of curing for weeks before gaining full strength, but the phys­
ical nature of the curing process is not clearly mentioned. Evaporation of pore water in­
creases capillary tension, which results in stronger intergranular bonding of raw earth as
in concrete curing. The effects of capillary tension are not properly quantified in those
national standards, this negatively affects safety, construction cost and environmental
impacts [2]. It is hard to compare the strength and stiffness parameters with other lime
stabilised soil investigations as those parameters depend mainly on the soil’s chemical
and geotechnical properties. Proportion use of stabilizers, particle size distribution, chem­
ical compositions of the soil, soil mineralogy, compaction efforts, optimum water content,
and curing time/temperature will affect the strength and stiffness of the rammed earth[4].
1.3
Scope and objectives
The main objective of this thesis is to investigate whether lime stabilised rammed earth
from Vinge city, Denmark can be used as a foundation for walls. Lime stabilised soil
strength evolution depends on the soil’s chemical and geotechnical properties. Therefore,
the scope of this thesis is limited to the Vinge soil. However, this thesis can be used as
a reference with similar geotechnical and chemical properties to that of Vinge rammed
earth.
A series of unconfined compression tests and repeated loading and unloading tests will
be conducted for the samples with curing periods of one, seven, twenty eight and ninety
one days in order to map the strength and stiffness evolution on lime­stabilised rammed
earth. As the design method uses a curing period of 28 days or three months for lime
stabilised rammed earth, strength and stiffness will be closely analysed and suggested in
the design of the wall’s foundation based on results obtained from 28 days curing.
Perform unconfined compression strength and repeated loading and unloading tests on
evaluating strength and stiffness of lime stabilised rammed earth with 5% lime and opti­
mum water content. The optimum moisture content will be identified using the standard
proctor test. The objective is to identify the suitability of a lime stabilised rammed earth
foundation for walls.
­ Soil classification test to determine the geotechnical properties of rammed earth from
Vinge, Denmark.
­ Preparation of samples, using 5% lime and measured optimum water content and testing
their strength and stiffness using the unconfined compression test and repeated loading
and unloading test.
­ The repeated loading and unloading tests will be conducted for the specimens with
saturation using back pressure and without saturation.
­ Modelling lime stabilised rammed earth wall together with foundation using stiffness pa­
rameter obtained from virgin loading, unloading and reloading curve, and model in PLAXIS
2D Geotechnical FEA software.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
2
==PAGE:12==
­ Design and evaluate the bearing capacity of soil and stress distribution inside the wall
using the assumed and calculated properties.
1.4
Thesis structure
The following section provides the overview of the thesis. The schematic diagram of the
thesis structure is presented in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: Overview of thesis structure
Title
contents
1. Introduction
Background, motivation, problem and objective of the thesis.
2. Literature
review
A brief discussion on lime stabilised rammed earth, effects of clay mineralogy
on stabilisation, mechanism of stabilisation, review of previous works on a
determination of UCS and stabilised rammed earth as a foundation.
3. Methodology
The classification tests, OMC test on rammed earth and soil lime mixture,
UCS test and repeated loading and unloading tests on lime stabilised
rammed earth. Design of wall and foundation using the PLAXIS 2D.
4. Test results
The experimental test results will be presented and discussed with the
properties of the test specimen at production and testing.
5. Modelling
Modelling of the rammed earth wall in PLAXIS 2D.
6. Interpretation
and discussion
The test results will be analysed and discussed.
7. Conclusion
A summary of the thesis and a conclusion of the findings will
be presented with recommendations for further studies.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
3
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature review
The following chapter describes the mineralogy of clay with a brief introduction to common
clay minerals, as soil lime reaction is highly dependent on clay minerals. Afterwards, this
chapter will discuss an overview of stabilised rammed earth, which includes the effects of
clay minerals on lime stabilisation, and clay lime reaction with its short term and long term
effects. After that, the mix design procedure of soil lime mix is presented, followed by
a specimen preparation review for unconfined compressive strength. Lastly, a literature
review on previous work on lime stabilised rammed earth is discussed.
2.1
Clay mineralogy
The range of soil includes soft rock, less compressible clays and sands, and very soft or­
ganic deposits. Soil is made up of solid particles, liquid, and gas. The primary determinant
of soil particle size, shape, and characteristics of mineralogy. As a size term, it refers to all
soil components that are smaller than a specific size, which in engineering classifications
is typically 0.002 mm (2µm). When viewed as a mineral, clay is distinguished by: 1) it’s
small particle size, 2) it’s net negative electrical charge, 3) it’s plasticity when mixed with
water, and 4) it’s high weathering resistance. Because the conditions are ideal for forming
hydrous and fine grained minerals, clay minerals result from a chemical alteration at the
earth’s surface. Clays are one of the most chemically active parts of soils and sediments
because of their extremely small particle size and high surface to volume ratio[5].
The most common rock forming minerals are silicates, and they influence the properties of
clay soils[6]. The silicon tetrahedron and the aluminium or magnesium octahedron are two
simple structural units that are combined to form the common layer silicates’ structures.
The silica tetrahedra are connected in a sheet structure in the majority of clay mineral
structures. Each tetrahedron shares three of its four oxygens to create a hexagonal net.
A combination of tetrahedrons forms a silica sheet. Likewise magnesium or aluminium
are arranged in octahedral coordination with oxygen atoms or hydroxyl atoms to form an
octahedral sheet structure.
Figure 2.1: (a) silica tetrahedron (b) silica tertrahedra in hexagonal network and (c) silica
sheet[5]
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
4
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: (a) Octahedral unit (b) octahedral units sheet structure and (c) octahedral
sheet[5]
There are several different clay minerals. The mineral groups kaolinite, montmorillonite
or smectite, and illite make up the majority of clay deposits. They have different geo­
logical origins and chemical structures and thus also very different properties. Among
other things, smectite can originate from transformed volcanic ash while kaolinite origi­
nates from the chemical breakdown of feldspar, which is one of the main components of
granite[7].
2.1.1
Kaolinite minerals
Kaolinite has a small number of exchangeable cations, and the interlayer bonds are rela­
tively strong. Kaolinite minerals have a basal spacing of 7.2Å and a 1:1 (silica: alumina)
unit structure. Kaolinite minerals are destroyed by heating to 500◦C, unlike the other
clay minerals[5]. Since there is a strong hydrogen bond between each unit, isomorphic
substitution rarely occurs in the kaolinite group because no other ions interact with the
interlayers. This indicates that kaolinite has a low cation exchange capacity. The mineral
has a small surface area compared to other clay minerals, about 20 m2/g[7].
Figure 2.3: Schematic structure of Kaolinite mineral[7]
2.1.2
Smectite minerals
Smectite has a basal spacing of 12–15 Å[5]. The expansive 2:1 (silica: alumina) clay
minerals are made up of two Si layers and one Al layer, and there are weak bonds between
the flakes. Due to the weak bonds, the clay mineral is very prone to incorporating other
cations between its layers and therefore has a very high ion exchange capacity. The
surface area can also be up to 50 times larger than kaolinite, which is 1000 m2/g [7].
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
5
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.4: Schematic structure of smectite mineral
2.1.3
Illite minerals
Illite has a basal spacing of about 10 Å and a 2:1 (silica: alumina) unit structure. In the
presence of polar liquids, the interlayer, which contains potassium ions, appears to be
highly stable and is not sensitive to changes in the pore water or salinity. In addition, illite
interacts in less isomorphous substitutions because its surface charge is less negative
than smectite’s and because its cation exchange capacity is smaller than smectite’s but
higher than kaolinite[5].
Figure 2.5: Schematic structure of Illite mineral
2.2
Rammed earth stabilisation overview
The construction engineer’s main concern on properties of soils are volume stability,
strength, permeability and durability. Soil stabilisation is the process of alteration of soil
properties to satisfy the specific engineering requirements[8]. The term earth and soil
refers to the subsoil, where top soil with organic content is discarded. Soil is a complex
and variable material but because it is of low cost, sometimes cost free and is readily
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
6
==PAGE:16==
available, it is frequently used as a construction material[9]. Compaction, or mechanical
stabilisation, helps to densify soil by applying mechanical energy. Air is expelled from
soil voids without much water content change while densifying. This technique is partic­
ularly effective for cohesionless soil, where particle arrangement and interlocking can be
achieved through compaction energy. However, this technique may not be effective for
soils subjected to significant moisture fluctuations. The compaction’s effectiveness will
also be lowered with the increase in fine content, fraction smaller than about 75 µm of the
soil. The reason is that cohesion and interparticle bonding interfere with the particle ar­
rangement during mechanical stabilisation. Alteration of physiochemical properties of fine
grained soil using chemical stabilisers is a more effective method of durable stabilisation
than compaction for fine grained soils[10].
Soil stabilisers are generally classified as traditional stabilisers, byproduct stabilisers and
non traditional stabilisers. Traditional stabilisers includes lime, cement and fly ash, byprod­
uct stabilisers are lime kiln dust, cement kiln dust, and non traditional stabilisers includes
asphalt, sulfonated oils, enzymes, and ionic stabilisers[10].
2.3
Stabilisation of rammed earth with lime
Lime stabilisation is one of the widely used methods of soil improvement techniques in
the world. Lime stabilisation helps clay particles stick together and form larger particles.
Optimum lime content (OLC) is the percentage of lime required to complete the mod­
ification and stabilisation of soil. Modification of soil refers to the reduction in plasticity,
improved workability, and stabilisation refers to an increase in strength, durability and stiff­
ness. Lime stabilisation refers to the uses of burned limestone products, either calcium
oxide (CaO) or calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2), as a stabilising agent for the stabilisation of
soil and is best suited for fine grained soils having a considerable amount of clay. Clay
mineral having the highest silica content reacts more strongly with lime even though all
clay minerals are reacted by lime[11]. In soil modification, quick lime and hydrated lime
have the same effect on plasticity. However, quick lime is a more effective stabiliser of
soil than hydrated lime because quick lime has an additional drying effect. This drying
effect causes the soil to remove free water, and heat produced by the reaction assists in
drying the soil, improving the effectiveness of higher strength development and shrinkage
characteristics[12]. Calcium hydroxide (Slaked lime) is mainly used for soil stabilisation,
although calcium oxide (Quick lime) may be more effective in some cases[8].
Lime stabilisation is held in two stages. The first stage involves ion exchange on the
clay surface (production of calcium clays), and the second stage involves removing sil­
ica and some alumina from the clay minerals. When clay rich soils are treated with lime,
liquid limit, plasticity index and maximum dry density decreases and increase in work­
ability, immersed and dry strength, resistance to freeze thaw cycles, optimum moisture
content, permeability, erosion resistance, bearing capacity, shrinkage limit, stiffness and
strength[9][11]. Generally, 1 to 3 percent of lime is needed to modify clay soil, i.e., to
reduce the plasticity of soil, and 2 to 8 percent of lime is required for actual stabilisation,
i.e., cementation. [9]. When lime is added to the soil, Ca++ ions move to the clay parti­
cle’s surface, where they develop an electrical force of attraction with the clay particle’s
negative charges. As a result, flocs develop, and the soil’s strength increases[13].
However, the amount of lime added must satisfy the affinity of the soil for lime, that is,
ions are adsorbed by clay minerals and are not unavailable for pozzolanic reactions until
this affinity is satisfied. The reason is that lime is fixed in the soil and is not available for
other reactions. The percentage of lime that causes the soil’s plastic limit to attain a stable
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
7
==PAGE:17==
value, i.e., without experiencing any appreciable variations, is known as the lime fixation
percentage.
With the addition of small amount of lime, plasticity will increases, and strength remains
relatively constant, whereas an addition of a large amount of lime, the plastic limit re­
mains constant and strength increases. Thus, the plastic limit can give the indication of
the amount of lime fixation in clayey soils[11]. An increase in lime content beyond the cer­
tain limits causes a decrease in strength because lime alone does not have appreciable
amount of cohesion and friction[14]. When the optimum level of lime content is reached,
too many Ca++ ions are available, creating an attractive force between the particles that
causes the clay particles to deflocculate and split. This deflocculation on clay particles
causes cracks to form at lower loads and earlier strain rates, which causes a lowering of
the soil’s unconfined compressive strength[13]. The reduction in strength is more promi­
nent in silica rich soils because of the excess formation of silica gel, which is a highly
porous material[15].
2.3.1
Effect of clay minerals on lime stabilisation
The mineralogical composition of clay soils is extremely diverse. They could include dif­
ferent ratios of different clay minerals, such as kaolinite, illite, mixed layer clays, and
montmorillonite, as well as non clay minerals, such as quartz, organic matter, and col­
loidal matter. As the conditions are favorable for the formation of hydrous and fine grained
minerals at the earth’s surface, clay minerals are the result of a chemical alteration that
occurred there. The most chemically active component of soils and sediments is clay,
which is characterised by its extremely small particle size and high surface to volume
ratio.
A clay deposit’s physical characteristics may be significantly influenced by very small
amounts of specific clay minerals. The degree of crystallinity is also significant because
clay minerals with poorly ordered crystallinity exhibit different properties from those with
well ordered crystallinity. The various levels of activity on the surface of the clay particle
can help to partially explain the different properties of the various clay mineral families.
For example, non expansive clay minerals like kaolinite have a relatively low cation ex­
change capacity, while expansive clay minerals like montmorillonite exhibit a high cation
exchange capacity.
It would seem that lime attacks the edges of the particles when applied to kaolinite. In
addition, a gel like substance that coated the flocs appears to act as a bond between
individual particles. But the addition of lime to montmorillonite gives rise to small hazy
patches of reaction products at the edges of the particles.
Clay materials become stronger after being treated with lime. Compared to kaolinitic
clays, montmorillonitic clays exhibit an earlier increase in strength because they respond
to lime stabilisation much more quickly. However, the additional strength produced by
montmorillonitic clay is not as high as that of kaolinitic clay after further ageing. The
addition of lime to fine quartz results in the most significant strength gains[14].
The cation that was initially adsorbed on clay surfaces and the type of clay determine how
the engineering properties of clayey soils change when lime is added. In kaolinitic soils,
the nature of exchangeable cations does not make much difference, but in montmoril­
lonite soils, it makes a huge difference. Montmorillonite containing expanding clays react
quickly with lime, losing plasticity immediately and, after compaction, slowly gaining poz­
zolanic strength. Illite, chlorite, vermiculite, or kaolinite rich clays use lime less effectively.
The addition of lime causes the most significant increase in the unconfined compres­
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
8
==PAGE:18==
sive strength of montmorillonite soil. However, lime treatment only slightly increase the
strength of illitic chloritic soil while significantly enhancing the strength of kaolinitic soil.
Natural pozzolans, or components of crystal lattices, like the clay minerals montmoril­
lonite and kaolinite, react with lime to create cementing materials. However, illitic and
chloritic minerals do not make good natural pozzolanas and only produce a small amount
of strength. Therefore, it is necessary to add a pozzolanic material, such as fly ash, to
obtain appreciable increases in strength in lime stabilization[11].
2.4
Mechanism of soil lime stabilisation
Lime is an effective stabiliser for soils. Two stages of stabilisation occur in the lime soil
system. X­ray diffraction and differential thermal analysis (DTA) were used to identify the
reaction taking place between the lime and clay [16]. The initial phase involves immediate
reactions that take a few hours or days, and at this stage, cation exchange, flocculation­
agglomeration, and carbonation occur. These improvements can be seen in improved
workability, immediate strength improvement, and reduced swell susceptibility. The sec­
ond stage, also known as long term treatment, involves pozzolanic reactions responsible
for improvements in strength and durability. Pozzolanic reactions depend upon the clay
mineralogy[17].
2.4.1
Short term treatment
When lime and water are added to the clayey soil, lime dissociates into Ca++ and OH−,
and divalent calcium cations Ca++ replaces the cations of single valence like Li+, Na+, H+
et­cetera, and ions in a high concentration will replace those in a lower concentration. This
process is called the cation exchange process. This cation exchange process depends on
the PH of the soil water and the clay mineralogy, as the PH increases the cation exchange
capacity will increases[17]. In most cases the ion exchange process is complete in one
hour. This is why it is only necessary to know the amount of lime consumed in one hour for
any soils[16]. Clay rich in minerals like montmorillonite has the highest cation exchange
process, while kaolinite rich clay has the lowest cation exchange process. This attachment
of Ca++ ions with the clay minerals results in a net decrease of repulsive forces and
also reduces the size of the diffused water layer. Due to the reduction in the size of the
water layer, soil particles come closer, and flocculation occurs. The flocculation increases
internal friction among the agglomerates, resulting in greater aggregate shear strength
and workability due to the texture change from plastic clay to a friable sand like material.
The cation exchange and flocculation decreases in plasticity of the soil lime mixture, so
the short term treatment is also called soil modification[17].
2.4.2
Long term treatment
Long term strength is more complicated and heavily influenced by mineralogical prop­
erties and soil conditions. When stabilized with lime, many clay soils are pozzolanically
reactive and respond by gaining noticeably more strength because a cemented matrix
forms between the soil particles. The gradual development of pozzolanic strength is what
causes soil stabilisation.
A pozzolan is defined as a finely divided siliceous or aluminous material that will form a
cemented product when combined with water and calcium hydroxide. Calcium silicate
hydrates and calcium aluminate hydrates are the products of cementing. These are es­
sentially the same hydrates that develop during Portland cement’s hydration. Clay is a
pozzolan as it is a source of silica and alumina for the pozzolanic reaction[17]. In a highly
alkaline environment (pH 12.4), lime promotes the dissolution of the clay, particularly at
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
9
==PAGE:19==
the edges of the clay plates, permitting the formation of calcium silicates and calcium alu­
minates. Clay­silica and clay­alumina become soluble and form the cementitious products
which are similar in composition of those of cement paste[12].
At 25°C, the pH of lime saturated water is 12.45. This means that the pH of a soil lime
water system is high enough to solubilise silica and alumina for a pozzolanic reaction. The
pozzolanic reaction will continue as long as there is enough residual calcium in the system
to combine with the clay­silica and clay­alumina and as long as the pH is high enough to
maintain solubility. The silicate and alumina content in the clay minerals becomes soluble
and free from soil[17]. It starts to react with calcium ions produced from lime hydration to
form cementitious hydrates, i.e., calcium silicate hydrates (C­S­H) and calcium aluminate
hydrates (C­A­H)[4]. The following equations illustrate the chemical reactions involved in
pozzolanic cementation.
Burnt lime + Water →Hydrated lime + Heat
i.e. CaO+H2O →CaOH2+ Heat
Ca++ + OH−+Soluble Clay Silica →Calcium Silicate Hydrate (CSH)
i.e. Ca (OH)2+SiO2 →CaO­SiO2­H2O
Ca++ + OH−+Soluble Clay Alumina →Calcium Aluminate Hydrate (CAH)
i.e. Ca (OH)2+Al2O3 →CaO­Al2O3­H2O
The soil strength improvement rate decreases with time. The strength of soil lime mixtures
continues to increase with time, up to ten years[17].
2.5
Soil lime mix design procedure
The primary objectives of the mixture design are to establish an appropriate lime content
for the construction and evaluation of the properties of the mixture. As the properties
of the soil are the same for stabilisation, the only variable is lime content. The water
content in the soil lime mixture is near optimum moisture content or simulated with field
conditions. The lime soil reactions are presented in the section on the mechanism of
soil lime stabilisation[18]. So, the lime content should be enough for the purpose of the
construction, such as modification or stabilisation.
These procedures are used for stabilising pavement subgrades and base course with lime;
however, this study is used to stabilise rammed earth with lime to design a foundation for
walls.
There are numerous methods for designing mixtures, such as the California procedure,
Eades and Grim procedure, Illinois procedure, Oklahoma procedure, South Dakota pro­
cedure, Thompson procedure, Texas procedure and Virginia procedure [19] [17] . Those
criteria can be validated only based on actual field performance. These procedures are
developed for the pavement system, such as sub base course, base course, and sub
grade modification to expedite construction. As already mentioned, mixture design pro­
cedures consider specimen preparation, curing conditions and testing procedures and
mixture design criteria[19].
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
10
==PAGE:20==
The California procedure is based on the unconfined compression test, where samples of
4 inches in diameter and 4 inches in height are produced in various lime percentages and
tested for unconfined compression tests. The lime content which gives maximum strength
is referred to as optimum lime content. The mixing of soil lime and water is completed
in two stages, where one half of the estimated compaction moisture is mixed with lime
and soil for no longer than one minute and sealed for 16 to 24 hours at 210C, and the
second half of the water is added to obtain a uniform consistency. Compaction is done
using kneading followed by a static load.
The Oklahoma procedure is used for soil modification instead of soil stabilisation. The
PH procedure is adopted to determine the optimum lime content and, alternatively, the
plasticity index (PI) reduction test procedure. In the PI reduction procedure, a plot of PI
versus percentage lime is prepared, and the percentage of lime that reduces the PI by
two points per 1% increase in lime is considered the optimum lime content in the soil lime
mixture. The PI should be reduced maximum value of 10.
The Illinois procedure is used for two types of stabilisation objectives. The first one is for
the base and subbase material in the pavement system and the second is for subgrade
modification and increasing workability.
The South Dakota procedure used CBR test data to evaluate the strength of the soil lime
mixture together with an unconfined compression test. Initial lime content is used based
on the PH procedure.
The Virginia mix design procedure is based on the cured compressive strength of soil
lime mixtures stabilised with various amounts of lime. In addition, PI test results were
also analysed. Finally, the field design lime percentage for the construction, 0.5 to 1%
lime, is added to account for construction losses, uneven distribution, etcetera[19].
The Eades and Grim procedure (pH technique) created by Eades and Grim [16] is founded
on the idea of adding enough lime to a soil to fulfil its cation exchange capacity, all initial
or short term reactions, while still having enough lime and a high enough pH to maintain
the strength producing lime soil pozzolanic reactions. As long as lime and pozzolans are
present, the reactions basically continue as long as the pH is high. The step by step
procedure to determine optimum lime content is summarised below:
1. Pour 20 grams of air dried samples, passing through 425 microns into 150ml or
larger plastic bottles with screw tops.
2. Set five bottles with the lime percentage (weighted to the nearest 0.01gm) of 2,3,4,5,
and 6 and add them into the soil. Shake to mix dry soil and lime.
3. Add 100ml of CO2 free distilled water to the bottles.
4. Shake the bottle for a minimum of 30 seconds.
5. Shake the bottle for 30 seconds every 10 minutes.
6. After one hour transfer part of the slurry to a plastic beaker and measure the PH.
7. The lowest percentage of lime that gives a PH of 12.4 is the percentage required
to stabilise the soil. If the PH does not go beyond 12.3 and has a reading of 12.3
for 2 samples, the lowest percentage of lime that gives PH 12.3 is the required lime
content. If only one gives PH 12.3, additional bottles should be prepared with a
larger percentage of lime content[16].
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
11
==PAGE:21==
The PH test is an excellent starting point for determining the optimum lime content selec­
tion. It has been demonstrated that the pH test can produce optimal lime concentrations
that closely match those chosen by strength testing for soils in Illinois and other parts of
the country. However, when optimum lime content is defined as the lime concentration
that produces the maximum strength, the pH test is ineffective in forecasting the optimum
lime content for ultisols and oxisols of the tropics and subtropics[17].
The Texas procedure determines the lime content based on the grain size and PI value.
The percentage passing through the 425mµ sieve and PI value is plotted as in Figure 2.6,
and determines the optimum lime content. For this procedure to determine lime content,
materials passing with less than 10% and PI value less than three are excluded. For the
purpose of stabilisation, unconfined compression test parameters are used.
Figure 2.6: Plot of percentage fine versus PI to evaluate optimum lime content (Texas
procedure) [17]
The Thompson procedure suggested a mix design procedure on the essential compo­
nents of mixture design which are: 1. Preparation method of soil lime mixture 2. Pro­
cedure for compaction and curing of specimens 3. Testing procedures to evaluate the
properties of the soil lime mixture and 4. Criteria to identify the design lime content
Preparation of the soil lime mixture
The amount of lime in the soil is expressed as a percentage of its dry weight. To make soil
lime mixtures, combine the correct amount of soil and lime in a dry mixture, then add the
required amount of water. Before preparing the specimens, the mixture needs to mellow
for about an hour. In most cases, mixtures are prepared with moisture contents that are
close to optimum moisture content.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
12
==PAGE:22==
Density control
The compacted specimen’s density needs to be carefully controlled. This is because
density significantly impacts the strength of a cured soil lime mixture, and slight density
of variations will make it challenging to accurately assess the impact of additional factors
like lime percentages and curing conditions. Therefore, it is essential always to specify
the compactive effort.
Curing conditions
Controlling time, temperature, and moisture is necessary while curing. Specimens can
be tested immediately after compaction in stabilisation applications where immediate
strength is crucial. The typical curing period is 28 days at 210C. Forty eight hours of
accelerated curing at 490C are required. In addition, specimens should be cured in a
closed container to prevent moisture loss and lime carbonation. Plastic bags, sealed
metal cans, and other containers work well. Comparing the outcomes of various testing
methodologies is challenging due to differences in curing conditions[17].
Danish Standard Association [20] specify the mixture design procedure for the preparation
of the specimens for the test.
It is preferred to produce mixtures using a mechanical mixer. The mixing process shall
be discussed in the report along with specimen dimensions and compaction procedure in
the production of the specimens.
The samples should be cured at a temperature 20± 20C, with relative humidity not less
than 90%. Specimens have to be sealed in a container or in a special cabinet or paraffin
to avoid evaporation. To evaluate the performance of the stabilised mixture, one of the
tests needs to be examined from the California bearing ratio (CBR), compressive strength
test or the combination of the tensile strength test and modulus of elasticity[20].
The influence of varying lime percentages on selected engineering parameters of the soil
lime mixture is typically considered when determining the design lime amounts. The lime
content differs for the objectives of the lime treatment and utilisation of mixture design[19].
2.6
Review on specimen preparation for UCS testing
Proportion use of stabilisers, particle size distribution, soil chemical compositions, spec­
imen dimension, compaction efforts, and moisture content will affect the strength and
stiffness of the unstabilised rammed earth. Curing the sample is essential to use hy­
draulic binders properly[21]. Burroughs [22] mentioned that the aspect ratio (specimen
height divided by diameter) also influences the strength of test specimen. Production of
the specimen for UCS test, and curing methods differ from one to another authors.
2.6.1
Mixing of soil, lime and water
Soil preparation for the sample is used passing the soil through a 10mm sieve when
prepararing of UCS specimen[23][16][24]. Mixing of soil were done in different ways, for
example 1. natural soil mixing with lime and water added reaching optimum water content
corresponding to modified proctor test[23], 2. Air dried soil and lime mixed by hand or me­
chanical mixture for five minutes and water was added corresponding to optimum moisture
content, and leaving for 30 seconds for dry then mixed for another 4 minutes[11][25][16] 3.
Oven dried soil mixed with lime for five minutes and water added slowly reaching optimum
moisture content using modified proctor test[24].
Particle size distribution of soil samples were 10% fines, 64.3% sand, and 25.7% gravel,
and lime content of 0 to 18% in the increment of 3% with 12% optimum lime content [23],
approximately 100 soil samples were tested and because of soils follow the same pattern
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
13
==PAGE:23==
based on clay minerals only 4 samples were reported of varying size of clay (2µ) 22.8­
67%, clay (5µ) 31­84.5%, silt (74­5µ) 7.6­41.8%, and passing No. 40 sieve (425 µ) 82.7­
95.7% [16], 58% clay, 42% silt, and UCS conducted on lime content 4% and 12% using
optimum moisture content 4% [25], 30% fines, 60% sand, 10% gravel, and lime content
2 to 6% with 4% optimum lime content[24], seven soil types with different clay minerals
varying size of clay 29­67%, silt 18.3­60%, and sand 0.2­45.2%[11] for soil modification.
2.6.2
Specimens dimension and compaction procedure
Different shape and size of samples were prepared for UCS testing to determine strength
and stiffness, cube of 10cm having 5 layers compacted on each 2 layers [23], compacted
using Harvard miniature compaction apparatus of standard proctor energy level [25],2 by 4
inch mold compacted to modified proctor test[16], cylindrical specimen of 2 inch diameter
and 2 inch height compacted near standard proctor density using five blows of a hammer
in the mold and another five blows in the inverting mold[11], and cylindrical specimen
of 100mm diameter and 200mm height with compaction effort near modified proctor test
energy[24].
2.6.3
Curing
Curing of the specimen were carried out in different ways, specimen were removed from
mold and stored in wire racks in 25◦C, and 40% relative humidity for 2 to 100 days[23],
21◦C, and 94% relative humidity[24] allowing water content to decrease with time and
cured for 28 days, Immediately after, the manufacture specimens were wrapped in damp
paper towels and sealed in polyethylene bags and cured at room temperature and 40◦
C from 1 hour to 3 years[16], samples were sealed in plastic containers and then sealed
in aluminium foil, and cured in 21◦C having relative humidity 95%, and cured for 0 days
to 123 months [25], specimens were wrapped in waxed paper and sealed with cellulose
tape, and cured in 21◦C having relative humidity 95% and cured for 28 days [11] to prevent
moisture loss and carbonation of the lime with carbon dioxide in the air.
2.7
Some previous works on lime stabilised rammed earth
Eades and Grim [16] evaluated a quick test to determine lime requirements for lime sta­
bilisation. Hydrated lime, Ca (OH)2 was used to stabilise the soil. Approximately one
hundred soils were tested for this investigation, and all the soils followed the same pat­
tern and therefore only four soils were reported.
Table 2.1: Properties of soils used in the investigation[16]
Property
Glacial Till
A­4(6)
Glacial Till
A­6(9)
Porter Creek Clay
A­7­6 (20)
Pierre Shale
A­7­6 (20)
Textural composition:
Passing No. 10 sieve
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Passing No. 40 sieve
82.7
93.5
91.7
95.7
Silt (74­5micron)
33.3
48.1
27.9
7.6
Clay(5micron)
39.6
31.0
55.0
84.5
Clay (2 micron)
22.8
25.2
37.4
67.0
Physical properties:
Liquid limit
20.0
28.6
78.8
161.2
Plastic limit
14.5
16.5
31.5
34.5
Plasticity index
5.5
12.1
47.3
126.7
Predominant clay mineral
Illite­
chlorite
Illite­
chlorite
Illite­
montmorillonite
montmorillonite
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
14
==PAGE:24==
Table 2.2: Compressive strength vs PH from Glacial till A­4 (6) cured at 140 F [16]
Time
(days)
2%
Lime
4%
Lime
6%
Lime
8%
Lime
psi
pH
psi
pH
psi
pH
psi
pH
1
78
12.30
60
12.40
­
12.40
­
12.40
2
110
12.25
88
12.40
73
12.40
68
12.40
3
133
12.00
118
12.40
101
12.40
82
12.40
4
131
12.80
133
12.30
123
12.40
109
12.40
15
233
11.20
560
11.50
536
11.80
459
12.05
30
240
10.90
800
11.10
764
11.35
748
11.50
Table 2.3: Compressive strength vs PH from Glacial till A6 (9) [16]
Time
(hr)
1% Lime
3% Lime
5% Lime
7% Lime
9% Lime
psi
pH
psi
pH
psi
pH
psi
pH
psi
pH
(a) Room Temperature
1
41
11. 85
42
12. 30
45
12. 40
45
12. 40
43
12. 40
6
39
11.85
42
12. 30
43
12.35
43
12. 35
47
12. 40
12
38
11.70
41
12.25
41
12.30
41
12.35
46
12. 35
24
43
11. 70
45
12. 25
46
12. 30
45
12.30
40
12. 35
(b) Moist Cured at 140 F
12
43
11. 45
72
12.15
82
12. 30
82
12. 30
83
12. 35
24
45
11. 30
79
12.05
93
12. 20
91
12.25
105
12. 30
48
44
11. 20
188
11.90
210
12.10
194
12.20
195
12. 25
72
54
11, 05
211
11. 70
301
11.80
258
11.85
255
12. 10
96
­
­
­
­
306
11.70
332
11.70
282
11. 85
120
­
­
­
­
312
11.60
408
11.60
350
11. 70
192
­
­
­
­
343
11.45
415
11.45
417
11. 50
264
­
­
­
­
384
11.35
454
11.35
489
11. 35
It is seen that there is no change in strength for the first 24 hours if the soil A­6 (9) is cured
at room temperature. The reason for this, is that lime is used to kill the plasticity of the
soil, and it is too early to receive benefits from the formation of calcium silicates, however,
the sample curing at 140F gives double strength.
Avila, Puertas, and Gallego [23] used natural soil obtained from a quarry in Padul (Granada,
Spain). The soil was stabilised with natural hydraulic lime NHL 3.5 (European standard
459­1:2015) having 30% free lime (CA(OH)2), 0.67 kg/dm3, and a real density of 2.51
kg/cm3.
UCS was conducted for the lime content from 0% to 18%, increasing by 3%. The RE
mixtures with 0,3,6,9,12,15 and 18% lime are noted as U, L3, L6, L9, L12, L15, and L18
respectively. Lime content of 12% was considered optimum because it maximises both
UCS and E, and more L12 samples were prepared for analysis of the strength develop­
ment process.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
15
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.7: UCS (left) and elastic modulus (right) of RE specimens at 28 days[23]
Figure 2.8: Evolution of UCS (left) and elastic modulus (right) for L12 specimens[23]
The value of UCS increased by over 80% and the elastic modulus increased by approxi­
mately 75% during the first 20–30 days, and then remained practically invariant for longer
curing periods.
Kavak and Baykal [25] evaluated UCS from 0 to 12% lime at 2% increment using 0 to
28 day cured specimens of kaolinite clay. The soil was classified as ML according to
USCS classification. Clay content was 58% and silt content was 42%, with no coarse
particles. The liquid limit, plastic limit, and plasticity index of the soil were 38%, 30%, and
8%, respectively.
The optimum lime content was chosen as 4% based on Atterberg limits, UCS, and PH
test results. The PH value of soil increases to 12.4, with the optimum lime content in the
soil[16].
Figure 2.9: UCS test of kaolinite at different lime contents[25]
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
16
==PAGE:26==
The UCS showed that maximum soil strength was obtained with the lowest lime content
of 4%. The UCS of natural kaolinite is 125 KPa and with the addition of 4% lime and 28
days of curing, the UCS value increased to 1015 kPa. The optimum lime content was
taken as 4%, based on economic factors of the stabilisation work.
The authors also evaluated the long term behaviour of the lime stabilised kaolinite clay
for the optimum lime content of 4% and the maximum value of lime used at 12% cured at
different periods from 0 to 123 months.The UCS value of the specimen with 4% lime for
the period of 123 months reached 2640 kPa, which is 21 times higher than the original
strength. The UCS value with lime content of 12% was increased from a reference value
of 125kPa to 1000kPa in 28 days and reached to 2507 kPa at 123 months of curing time.
The performance of lime stabilised kaolinite with 4% lime content is similar to that of 12%
lime content in the short and long term tests. In the long term, strength is found to be
around 3 times higher compared to a 28 day strength for both 4% and 12% lime content.
Figure 2.10: UCS tests conducted in 123 months for K4 at various curing periods[25]
Figure 2.11: UCS tests conducted in 123 months for K12 at various curing periods[25]
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
17
==PAGE:27==
The modulus of elasticity changes sharply for lime stablised kaolinite, and the soil shows
brittle behaviour with lime.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.12: UCS tests, stress strain curve for (a) k4 and (b) K12 samples [25]
Tonoz, Ulusay, and Gokceoglu [26]evaluated the effects of lime stabilisation on engineer­
ing properties of expansive Ankara clay (Turkey). Five different lime content samples from
2% to 10% with an increment of 2% lime by weight were prepared. Ankara clay mainly
consists of smectite minerals. The clay is mainly the weathering product of volcanic rocks
with a reddish brown colour. The soil sample composed of clay (77%), quartz (11%), cal­
cite (8%), and feldspar (4%) minerals. The soil consists of 8.5% gravel, 16.5% sand, 20%
silt, and 25% clay, with a liquid limit of 75%, a plastic limit of 43%, and a plasticity index of
32%. The optimum lime content was determined by testing the PH of lime treated sample
having value of 12.4 Eades and Grim [16]. In this research a close PH value of 12.2 was
achieved while using 6% of lime mixture.
In this study, only 2% and 4% of lime content were investigated due to difficulties in prepar­
ing remoulded specimens of lime content 6% and more. In the Ankara clay, for curing
periods shorter than 28 days, the UCS of untreated samples was higher than that of lime
treated samples. This is the reason that the pozzolanic reactions are slower than the
flocculation in the Ankara clay.
In the case of 4% lime content and a curing period of 28 days, the UCS and Youngs
modulus increased by 84% and about 60%, respectively. The UCS values of untreated
Ankara clay, 2%, and 4% lime stabilized clay were 80MPa, around 100MPa, and around
150MPa. The optimum lime content for Ankara clay was taken as 4% with a curing time
of 28 days.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
18
==PAGE:28==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.13: Variation of UCS (a) and the stress strain behavior of clay (b) [26]
2.8
Lime stabilised rammed earth as a foundation
Lime stabilised rammed earth is widely used in road construction for the subgrade, sub­
base and base layers to stabilise the soil. Stabilised rammed earth helps in the reduction
of swelling potential and increases in strength so that it reduces the thickness of the up­
per layers of the roads meaning that there are minimal cut and fill volumes. Reduction in
liquid limit value and proctor density and an increase in CBR values, unconfined compres­
sive strength, modulus of elasticity, shear strength, and tensile strength helps the stability
against swelling and shrinkage and the resistance to freezing increases[27].
Besides highways, lime soil stabilisation is used in airports, parking lots, building founda­
tions and embankment stabilisation[28].
The Lime column method is used for the deep stabilisation of soils. In cooperation with
Linden­Alimark AB, the Swedish Geotechnical Institute developed this method. The Lime
column method is principally used for the stabilisation of soil in trench excavations, pipeline
foundations and road embankments. This method seems feasible technically and eco­
nomically. These days, 350,000 meters are manufactured each year in Scandinavia. The
Lime column method is an established method for settlement reduction and improved
foundation stability[29]. With the novel lime column technology, light structures and road
embankments are supported by columns that are made in situ by combining lime and
soft clay. In place of sheet pile walls, lime columns can be utilised as lateral support in
excavations. The lime column acts as a vertical reinforcement in the ground, which helps
reduce settlement and increases bearing capacity. The lime column also acts as a verti­
cal drainage, on which the consolidation rate increases of the unstabilised soil within the
stabilised block of soil as well as below the block. The shear strength and bearing capac­
ity of the lime column lies between 20 to 100kN depending upon the soil type, amount of
lime added, and soil type[30].
The lime column method is used in Norway, Sweden and Finland for the reduction of total
and differential settlement of the light structures, to control the settlement and increase the
settlement rate of the heavy structures, to improve the stability of slopes, trenches, deep
cuts and embankments, and to reduce the vibration from blasting, pile driving, traffic et­
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
19
==PAGE:29==
cetera. The bearing capacity of lime column may decrease with time when carbon dioxide
content is high and PH of the groundwater is low [31].
2.8.1
Durability of stabilised rammed earth foundation
The earth material quickly degrades under harsh weather, which is the fundamental dis­
advantage of earthen structures. Preventing water attacks is the main crucial part of the
stabilisation with the lime. The material is compressed, and the voids ratio goes down
when a soil volume is subjected to stress. As soil density rises, its porosity decreases
and less water can permeate. When the compacting stresses are increased, water ab­
sorption diminishes. As the compacting forces and lime concentration are increased, the
capillary absorption diminishes. The weight loss in wetting and drying, and freezing and
thawing decreases when the compacting stress and lime content are increased[32].
The addition of lime increase the hydraulic conductivity of a soil. By the effect of freezing
and thawing cycles, hydraulic conductivity could increase by 10 to 100 fold. This increase
is because of the horizontal and vertical cracks formed during freezing and thawing. The
strength of lime stabilised rammed earth decreased by 10–15% at the end of the freeze­
thaw cycles while testing high and low plasticity earth in Konya, Turkey[33].
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
20
==PAGE:30==
3
Methodology
This chapter presents the soil samples used for experimental laboratory work and de­
scribes the procedure for conducted laboratory tests, including soil classification tests,
standard proctor tests for rammed earth and soil lime mixture, unconfined compression
strength test, and repeated loading and unloading tests. Lastly, the procedure for data
processing on stabilised soil specimens and lime stabilised rammed earth wall design
procedure is discussed together with FEA geotechnical software PLAXIS 2D.
3.1
The soil sample
The soil investigated for this study was excavated from Vinge, Denmark. Collected soil
was stored in a closed big plastic bags outside the concrete laboratory of building 130 at
DTU before testing in the laboratory. The soil is characterised as red brown, low plasticity,
highly calcareous (white dots).
(a) Vinge soil storage bag
(b) Collected soil from storage bag for
laboratory testing
Figure 3.1: Sample storage and the collected sample
3.2
Performed tests
This study aims to evaluate the strength and stiffness characteristics of lime stabilised
rammed earth. First, various classification tests were performed to classify the soil by its
particle size distribution, particle density, loss of ignition, and Atterberg limits. Then, a
standard proctor test was conducted to determine the optimum moisture content in the
soil, optimum moisture content of lime stabilised rammed earth, and a PH measurement
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
21
==PAGE:31==
at different lime content was performed. Lastly, an unconfined compression test and re­
peated loading and unloading test was be performed on prepared samples at different
curing periods.
3.2.1
Moisture content measurement
Moisture content of the soil was determined after taken the soil from stored bag. The
sample is placed in a 105◦C oven for 24 hours.
After the sample has been dried, the water content can be calculated using Equation 3.1.
Water content [%] = mwet −mdry
mdry
× 100
(3.1)
where,
• mwet is mass of sample used for drying in the oven.
• mdry is mass of sample after drying in the oven.
3.2.2
Loss on ignition (LOI)
The amount of organic content present in the soil is calculated using loss on ignition test.
The furnace used for the LOI test and sample cooling on the desiccator is shown in Fig­
ure 3.2. An oven dried sample was used in the loss on ignition test. Crucibles are used
to put samples in the furnace of temperature 5500C for two hours. After that, crucibles
are taken out from the furnace and left in a desiccator for cooling. Loss on ignition was
calculated using the Equation 3.2.
wLOI = mc −md
mc −ma
· 100
(3.2)
where,
• wLOI is loss on ignition of the dry mass of a solid sample (%)
• ma is mass of the empty crucible (g)
• mc is mass of the crucible containing the dried sample (g)
• mc is mass of the crucible containing the ignited sample (g)
(a) Furnace used for LOI test at 5500C
(b) Soil sample in crucible in desiccator
for cooling
Figure 3.2: LOI test oven and sample in crusible after test
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
22
==PAGE:32==
3.2.3
Particle density
The particle density is the ratio of the dry mass of the particles to their volume, and is
determined according to the standard DS/EN ISO 17892­3:2015[34].
Soil sample passing through 4mm sieve was oven dried and about 30g of sample were
used in each pycnometer. First, the pycnometers were dried and weighted together with
stopper. Then, dry soil samples were transferred to pycnometers and weighted. After
that, deionised water was poured to the pycnometers so that it covered the soil with at
least 75% full as in Figure 3.3 . The pycnometer with stopper was placed in the vacuum
chamber to make air bubble out from the soil. Afterwards, the pycnimeters are filled with
deionised water, closed with stopper and weighed. The particle density is determined
performing three tests on each soil sample and average value is reported as particle
density.
Figure 3.3: Pycnometers with soil sample prepared for the vacuum chamber.
The particle density is determined using the Equation 3.3.
ρs =
m4
(m1 −m0) −(m3 −m2) · ρL
(3.3)
where,
• ρs is Particle density [g/cm3]
• m0 is Mass of the dry pycnometer [g]
• m1 is Mass of the pycnometer filled with the control fluid [g]
• m2 is Mass of the pycnometer with the dry soil sample [g]
• m3 is Mass of the pycnometer with the soil sample and filled with control fluid [g]
• m4 is Dry mass of the soil sample [g]
• ρL is Density of control fluid [g/cm3]
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
23
==PAGE:33==
3.2.4
Atterberg limits
Atterberg limits are determined according to the standard DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892­12:2004
[35]. Atterberg limits comprises the plastic limit and liquid limit.
The soil taken from the stored big bag (without drying) was sieved and passing through
425µm are used to determine the Atterberg limits.
Plastic limit
The plastic limit (PL) is the water content at which a soil becomes too dry to behave
plastically.
Water was added to make plastic enough to form a ball. The ball was rolled between the
palms of the hands and subdivided into four parts. Each parts was rolled to 3mm in di­
ameter. This process was repeated until the thread crumbles in longitudinal or transverse
way when it was rolled to 3mm diameter as shown in Figure 3.4. The test was conducted
three more times, and the water content of the crumble was determined.
Figure 3.4: Soil threads to determine the plastic limit
The procedure’s specifications are vague in the standard, so the operator significantly
impacts the outcome. In particular, how quickly you roll the soil into a thread depends
on the amount of pressure you apply; how much friction between your hand and the soil
varies from person to person as does how quickly the threads are rolled. The consistency
limits for two soils were compared using data obtained from four laboratories based on a
study case and the results in the lab. Two soils with low plasticity soil (Soil 1: LL = 35.3%,
PL = 21.5%, IP = 13.8%) and a high plasticity soil (Soil 2: LL = 125.3%, PL = 45.8%,
IP = 79.5%), the results are presented in the table. Due to the nature of high plasticity
soils, which are more sensitive to changes in water content, it is challenging to control
the water content during experimentation, it is evident that the soil with higher plasticity
content has more errors. The accuracy in measuring Atterberg limits differs from one lab
to another[36].
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
24
==PAGE:34==
Table 3.1: Summary of the Statistical Analysis of Results of Laboratories[36]
Liquid limit
The liquid limit (LL) is the water content at which a soil passes from a liquid state to a
plastic state. Fall cone method is used to determine liquid limit in this study, even though
the Casangrande method can also be used to determine liquid limit. In fall cone test
method a cone apparatus shall permit the cone to be held firmly initially and released to
fall freely in the vertical direction into the soil.
Figure 3.5: Fall cone equipment
From the sample bucket, soil is sieved using a 0.425 mm sieve and used for analysis.
Water is added to the soil and remoulded using a spatula until a homogenised paste is
produced. The remoulded paste is transferred to a cup with a minimum 50 mm diameter
and 25 mm minimum depth, and the top is levelled. The soil sample is lightly touched on
top by a metal cone of 60 g/60◦, which is then dropped freely into the soil. It measures the
depth of penetration. A portion of the paste that is remoulded from the cone penetrated
zone has its water content measured as well. The remaining remoulded paste is combined
with the remaining paste from the cup. The water content can be changed by adding
water to the paste and remixing it. Consequently, a deeper penetration depth is achieved.
The test is repeated to provide at least four test points at various water contents. The
acceptable cone penetration range is 7mm to 15 mm, with a 0.4 mm maximum difference
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
25
==PAGE:35==
between any two consecutive readings. If not, the test needs to be repeated. The best
straight line fit is then drawn from the data points of the water content (%) as a function
of the cone penetration (mm) in a logarithmic plot. The liquid limit is the water content
corresponding to a penetration of 10 mm.
The fall­cone method has a few potential errors, even though it is more reliable than the
Casagrande method. Air bubbles could become trapped when the soil is transferred to the
cup. The determining liquid limit may deviate significantly without proper homogenisation
of the soil paste.
3.2.5
Particle grain size distribution
The particle size distribution of Vinge soil is starts with wet sieving and is determined ac­
cording to the standard DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892­4:2016 [37]. Afterwards particle retained
on 63µm and 2mm sieves are oven dried and sieved. Particles passing through 63µm are
oven dried in 50 ◦C and a performed hydrometer analysis is performed on them, because
if drying temperature increased to 100◦C, the clay size fractions will decrease and silt and
sand particle will increase. The rise in drying temperature improves the maximum dry
unit weight (MDU) and optimum moisture content (OMC) of soil. As drying temperature
increased, pH, organic matter, iron oxides, and carbonates decreases, which is the cause
of the aggregation of the finer particles. This affects the particle size distribution as well
as decrease in plastic limit and liquid limit[38].
Sample preparation
The material was dissolved in demineralized water to prepare it for sieve and sedimen­
tation analysis, a dispersing agent was used to separate clay and fine sand from sand
particles. The solution was stirred for an hour and then sieved through a 2 mm and a
63 m sieve while spraying with distilled water to ensure all of the small particles were re­
moved. Finally, the pan containing the specimen’s pieces and the sieves were oven dried
at 50◦C.
Sieve analysis
Particles retained on 2mm and 63µ from wet sieving were used for a sieve analysis. Indi­
vidual sieves were weighted and sieve size varied from 0.63 µm to 19mm. A mechanical
sieve shaker was used for the sieve analysis and shook for 10 minutes. The shaking ma­
chine was set at 50% of its total shaking capacity. After that, each sieves were weighted
to determine the particle retained on individual sieves.
Sedimentation analysis
Sedimentation analysis was performed using the soil passing through a 63µ sieve while
wet sieving. Soil sample with water was dried in 50◦C. Dispersing agent tetrasodium py­
rophosphate of 5gm with two and half liters of water was prepared one day before and left
in mixing device to become thoroughly soluble thoroughly with water for both sedimenta­
tion cylinder and reference fluid.
Calibration of hydrometer was completed before starting starting the actual test. The
effective depth Hr is calculated for each of the major calibration marks using the Equa­
tion 3.4.
Hr = H + 0.5
(
h −Vh
900L
)
(3.4)
where,
• H is the length from neck of the bulb to the graduation Rh in mm
• h is the length of bulb in mm
• Vh is the volume of the bulb, in ml
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
26
==PAGE:36==
• L is the distance between the 100 ml and 1000ml scale markings on the sedimen­
tation cylinder, in mm
During the hydrometer readings temperature of the water is recorded once in the first 8
min and then after every hydrometer readings, because viscosity of water depends on the
temperature.
Equivalent particle diameter is determined using Stokes law from Equation 3.5.
di = 0, 005531
√
η × Hr
(ρs −ρw) × t
(3.5)
where,
• di is the equivalent particle diameter in mm
• ν is the dynamic viscosity of water in MPa.s
• ρs is the particle density, in Mg/m3
• ρw is the density of sedimentation fluid at temperature of the test, in Mg/m3
• t is the time elapsed from the start of the sedimentation, in minutes
Fractions smaller than the corresponding particle diameter is calculated using the Equa­
tion 3.6.
K = 100 × ρs
m (ρs −1)Rd
(3.6)
where,
• k is the fraction smaller than equivalent particle diameter in %
• ρs is the particle density of the soil, in Mg/m3
• m is the dry mass of specimen, in gm
• Rd is the modified hydrometer reading
Pario meter
In addition to hydrometer analysis, the measurement of particle size distribution on fine
content (< 63mµ) is measured according to PARIO user manual [39]. The PARIO meter
consists of a pressure and temperature sensor at the top of the shaft, and the shaft is
submerged in the suspension to record the temperature and pressure every 10 seconds.
The PARIO meter is shown in Figure 3.6. Preparation of sample of PARIO meter is done
in the same way as in hydrometer analysis.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
27
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.6: Particle size distribution using PARIO meter
PARIO works automatically to measure the particle size distribution of fine grained soil,
which identifies mainly the sand (2000­20mµ), and silt (50­2mµ), and clay content (<2mµ)
and is calculated by subtracting the total amount of soil with sand and silt content.
3.3
Standard proctor test
The standard proctor test determines the relationship between the water content and the
dry density. Therefore, it helps to estimate the density of the mixture for the compaction
under specific test conditions. The standard proctor provides the dry density and water
content relationship with a specific energy of about 0.6MJ/m3.
The standard proctor test was conducted according to the standard DS/EN 1328­2:2004[40].
An automatic compacting machine is used for the test which is shown in Figure 3.7a.
Proctor moulds of 100mm diameter and 120mm height were used with a removable ex­
tension and detachable steel base plates. The compactor consists of a rammer weighing
2.5kg with a base diameter of 50mm. The rammer is allowed to fall freely from a height
of 305mm on the upper surface of the mixture in the mould. The compacted layer was
made up of three layers.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
28
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b) [41]
Figure 3.7: Automatic proctor machine (a) and sequence of blows for hand rammer in
mould (b)
About 15kg of soil sample passing through a 16mm sieve is oven dried at 50 degrees
C for 24 hours, and five separate batches with about 2.5kg were prepared with different
water contents.
While completing the standard proctor test for a soil lime mixture, 5% of lime was added
to the soil, each batch was thoroughly mixed in the mixture as shown in Figure 3.8a with
different amounts of water. Mixing was done using wet mixing. The soil lime mixture was
prepared one batch at a time. The water content was increased from 12% to 20% with an
increment of 2%. First, the water was poured into the mixture and rammed earth, and half
the amount mass of the lime was added and mixed three minutes. Afterwards, the side
of the mixing bowl was manually scrubbed to remove the clay stuck on the sides. Then
the remaining mass of the lime was added and mixed for another three minutes, and the
mixture was stored in an airtight container.
After the standard proctor test, the top surface of the compacted mixture was levelled off
using a straightedge steel plate to determine the mass of the soil with the mould.
The compacted dry density of each compacted specimen was calculated using the Equa­
tion 3.7.
ρ = (m2 −m1) /V
(3.7)
where,
• ρ is the bulk density, in Mg/m3
• m1 is the mass of mould and base plate, in g
• m2 is the mass of mould, base pate and compacted mixture, in g
• V is the volume of the mould, in ml
Calculation of the dry density of each compacted specimen using the Equation 3.8.
ρd = (100 × ρ)/(100 + w)
(3.8)
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
29
==PAGE:39==
where,
• ρd is the dry density, in Mg/m3
• ρ is the bulk density, in Mg/m3
• w is the water content during mixing, in [%]
The optimum water content is calculated from the best fit plot of dry densities as ordinates
and corresponding water content in abscissa.
3.4
Specimen preparation, moulding and curing for UCS and
repeated loading and unloading testing
Sample preparation methods of lime stabilised rammed earth vary from country to coun­
try and even differ from one institution to another.This can be seen from the specimen
preparation on section 2.5 and section 2.6. The main concern with mixing is obtaining a
uniform soil binder mixture. The effect of the mixing time dramatically influences stabilised
soils physical and mechanical properties. Mixing time of fewer than 10 minutes results
in the unconfined compressive strength significantly decreased in the case of low binder
addition. Longer mixing time is required if the binder is used in dry form compared to
the binder used in slurry form. According to British and Japanese standards, the recom­
mended mixing time is set to 10 minutes, while the recommended mixing time in Sweden
is 5 minutes and the produced mixture should be visually homogenised.
The curing procedure, the curing time and temperature, has a high influence on the
strength and stiffness properties of stabilised soil. The unconfined strength of lime sta­
bilised rammed earth increases almost linearly with the logarithm of the curing time. In
the interval of 1­3 months of curing, the lime treated soil obtains 50% to 70% of the fi­
nal shear strength, while it takes one year of curing to gain 90% of the stabilised shear
strength. The curing temperature influences the strength gain time of the mixture, and a
higher strength can be obtained under a higher curing temperature during the short term
curing of stabilised soil[42].
The static compaction technique is employed in the production of compressed earth blocks.
In this method, the soil is compacted using a gradual application of the static force. The
soil is confined in a metal mould, and compaction is achieved with the gradual movement
of the piston. In the static compaction process, the constant peak stress variable stroke
compaction and variable peak stress constant stroke compaction can be used. The static
compaction process is more efficient than that standard proctor method, and this is be­
cause of higher energy loss during the impact of falling weight in the standard proctor test
[43].
Production of mixture for one specimen for the lime stabilised rammed earth uses the
materials as in Table 3.2. The specimen is compacted in three layers using approximately
360gm of the mixture in each layer.
Table 3.2: Mix proportion of soil, lime and water
Name
mass
% of dry soil
Rammed earth [g]
1200
­
Lime [g]
60
5
water [g]
192
16
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
30
==PAGE:40==
The soil preparation for the lime treatment is dried in 500C in the oven for 24 hours. Dry
soil is then pulverised in the big kitchen mixture in the DTU concrete lab and sieved using
an 8mm sieve. Soil passing through sieving is used for sample preparation.
Specimens C91­3001, C91­3001.2, C28­2811, S28­2811, S91­0102 and S91­0102.2 were
prepared using a wet mix of soil and lime. The mixture was prepared for four specimens
at a time. First, water weighing optimum moisture content (16% of dry soil mass) was
poured into the mixture shown in Figure 3.8a, and rammed earth was added and mixed
for four minutes. Afterwards, half of the total lime mass was added and mixed for 3 min­
utes. Then the remaining lime was added and mixed for another 3 minutes. After that,
the soil lime mixture was manually scrubbed off, where clay was stuck on the sides of the
mixing bowl. Following those steps, lumps on the soil were broken and mixed the mixture
about one minute. Finally, the soil was mellowed in an airtight bucket for approximately
one hour, and UCS specimens were prepared using Instron compacting machine shown
in Figure 3.10a.
(a) Big kitchen mixture
(b) small kitchen mixture
Figure 3.8: Kitchen mixtures used for mixing rammed earth, lime and water
Specimens besides those mentioned above were prepared in a small kitchen mixture, as
shown in Figure 3.8b, in the GeoLab at DTU. Soil mixture for one specimen was prepared
at a time and stored in an airtight bucket until a maximum of four mixtures were prepared.
First, a dry mix of soil and lime is prepared in the mixing bowl until seemed homogeneous
and starts mixing using the kitchen mixture. Next, water was added while mixing for
3 minutes. After that, the mixture was manually scrubbed, where clay was stuck on the
mixing bowl’s sides, the lumps were broken. Following those steps, the mixture was mixed
for another 3 minutes. Then, the mixture was again manually scrubbed, and lumps were
broken. Afterwards, when all four mixings were completed, specimens were prepared
using Instron compacting machine. Some samples were left confined in moulds, and
some were extracted from mould and stored in a climate room sealed with plastic wrap.
The compaction load used for compaction is 2.73kN with compaction energy of 0.71MPa
using static compaction of type constant peak stress variable method.Mixed soil is com­
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
31
==PAGE:41==
pacted in 3 layers with 5 stamps. The force displacement curve in the compaction process
is shown in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Force displacement curve for constant peak stress variable stroke length
This sample preparation technique is used for samples other than the samples tested
in 28 days. Specimens for UCS testing were extracted from the mould using the same
Instron machine and sealed with wrapping plastic to to prevent moisture loss and carbon­
ation of the lime with carbon dioxide in the air. The samples used for repeated loading
and unloading testing were left in the mould after compaction and sealed using wrapping
plastic. The prepared samples were placed in the climate room on 230C, with relative
humidity of 64.5%.
(a) Automatic compaction machine
(b) manual compaction assembly
Figure 3.10: Automatic and manual compaction assembly
Specimens S28­2811, S28­1212, C28­2811W, C28­1212, C28­0212 were produced using
manual compaction with a specific energy of standard proctor test. The compactor is
shown in the Figure 3.10b. The number of blows is calculated using the Equation 3.9
[40].
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
32
==PAGE:42==
Specific energy = m × g × h × Nb × NL
Volume of mould
(3.9)
where,
• m is mass of rammer in Kg
• g is acceleration due to gravity m/s2
• h is free fall height in meter
• Nb is number of blow
• NL is Number of compacting layer
A brass rod of 0.75 kg was dropped 38 times per layer, and the soil mixture is compacted
into three layers.
3.4.1
Unconfined compression test (UCS)
Unconfined compression test is conducted to determine the strength and stiffness charac­
teristics of a lime stabilised soil specimen. UCS provides a reliable indication of cohesive
and cementing strength. This test can be performed relatively faster[11].
The unconfined compression tests were conducted in the DTU GeoLab according to the
standard DS/EN ISO 17892­7:2018 [44]. The test setup and schematic diagram of the
triaxial testing machine is shown in the Figure 3.11a. In the schematic diagram in Fig­
ure 3.11b, 1. load frame 2. load measuring device 3. top platen 4. bottom platen 5. soil
specimen and 6. displacement measuring device.
(a) Triaxial load frame setup
(b) Schematic diagram of the uncon­
fined compression test
Figure 3.11: Triaxial setup and schematic diagram of UCS and repeated loading and
unloading test [44]
The unconfined compression test specimens were not confined with a membrane, and the
test cell was not filled with water. Porous stones of 70mm diameter were placed on the
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
33
==PAGE:43==
top and bottom platens. The pedestal that supports the bottom platen was raised steadily
throughout the test. Vertical load and displacement variations were recorded using a data
logging system. During the test, a constant displacement of 0.1 mm/min was adopted,
and the test was stopped when the peak stress decreased by 20%. The vertical strain and
vertical stress were determined using the Equation 3.10, and Equation 3.11 respectively.
εv = ∆H
Hi
(3.10)
where,
• εv is axial strain
• δH is axial displacement in mm
• Hi is initial height of the specimen in mm
σv =
P
Ai/ (1 −εv)
(3.11)
where,
• σv is applied vertical stress in N/mm2
• P is applied force in N
• Ai is initial cross sectional area of specimen in mm2
The mass of the specimen, height, and diameter was measured before testing. After the
specimens failed while testing, the water content was measured for the whole specimen.
A stress strain diagram was plotted to determine the unconfined compressive strength,
and elastic modulus of the specimen.
3.4.2
Repeated loading and unloading test
Specimens for the repeated loading and unloading test were produced, and tests were
conducted with the same device on which unconfined compression tests were conducted.
The unconfined compression strength of the specimen was taken as a reference to deter­
mine the loading and unloading strength in the repeated loading and unloading test. The
repeated loading and unloading stresses for the test is presented in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Repeated loading and unloading test schedule
Curing period
[days]
UCS value
[kPa]
Loading
strength
[kPa]
Unloading
strength
[kPa]
1.00
350.00
120.00
40.00
7.00
416.00
140.00
40.00
28.00
576.00
300.00
100.00
91.00
1203.00
460.00
140.00
Repeated unloading reloading tests were conducted in two ways, one is with saturation
in the stage loading and unloading, and the other way is without saturation. The meaning
of saturation throughout the testing process in this thesis is the instant addition of water
in the stage loading, which is not considered as fully saturated soil. Specimens loaded
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
34
==PAGE:44==
without saturation were tested the same way as the unconfined compression test, and
the samples with saturation were confined with a membrane. Saturated porous stones
of 70mm diameter were used on the top and bottom platen. First, the first cycle of virgin
loading and unloading was completed and was stopped the triaxial machine left the test
running. Afterwards, the required volume of water wreq from Table 3.4 to make full satu­
ration is divided by the number of cycles and water was supplied using the back pressure
increment. The required water content to make full saturation was calculated based on
the measured dimension of the specimen before testing and assuming the initial water
content is not varied. The de­aired water supply was measured with a volume change
unit. The second testing stage starts with loading, unloading and saturation in the same
way as the previous stage. Saturation, loading, and unloading were applied for five cycles
with the same virgin loading and unloading rate. The test is strain controlled, and a rate of
change of strain 0.1mm/min is used. After completion of the test, the specimen is taken
out and measured the water content.
Table 3.4: Extra water content wreq for sample to make full saturation
Specimen ID
wreq [ml]
C1­1511W
48.44
C1­2911W
60.98
C7­1711W
47.68
C28­2811W
81.46
C36­0401W
51.58
C83­0102W
45.64
3.5
Data processing
The mass of ingredients for preparation of one Lime Stabilised Rammed Earth (LSRE)
specimen is used as Table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Ingradients proportion and mass used for production of unit specimen
Ingradients of LSRE
Percentage [%]
mass [g]
Rammed earth
­
1200
Lime
5
60
Water
16
192
Water content on LSRE
15.24
­
The same proportion of ingredients were used for mixing and production of four speci­
mens. The initial density of specimen at the time of production and testing were calcu­
lated based on the measured mass,m, height, h and diameter, d of the specimen using
Equation 3.12.
ρ0 =
m
π
4 d2h
(3.12)
The initial degree of saturation was estimated using Equation 3.13
Sr0 =
ρ0Gsw0
ρwGs (1 + w0) −ρ0
= w0Gs
e0
(3.13)
where,
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
35
==PAGE:45==
• ρ0 is initial bulk density in kg/m3
• ρw is density of water in kg/m3
• Gs is specific gravity of particles of soil
• w0 is initial water content in the soil
• e0 is initial void ratio
Initial void ratio, e0 is calculated by Equation 3.14,
e0 = Gs (1 + w0)
ρ0
ρw −1
(3.14)
The initial water content for samples was not measured directly, at the time of preparation
it was assumed as the optimum water content which was used for mixing lime stabilised
rammed earth and for the testing phase water content was measured after testing of the
specimen. The value of ρw was assumed to be 1000 kg/m3.
3.6
Plaxis 2D modelling
The two dimensional finite element programme PLAXIS 2D is specifically designed for
performing deformation, stability, and flow analysis for diverse geotechnical applications.
A plane strain or an axisymmetric model can both be used to simulate real world con­
ditions. A finite element mesh and geometry model can be easily generated using the
program’s easy graphical user interface using a typical vertical cross section of the situa­
tion at hand.
The Mohr­Coulomb material model is utilised to model the ground and the interface ma­
terial. The Concrete model is used to model the lime stabilised soil as the wall material.
3.6.1
Mohr­Coulomb model
Generally, the well known Mohr­Coulomb linear elastic perfectly plastic model is used
as a first approximation of soil behaviour. It is advised to use this model for a preliminary
analysis of the problem considered. For the soil layer, an average stiffness that is constant
is predicted. This constant stiffness makes computations generally quick and enables the
estimation of initial deformations[45]. Five input parameters make up the Mohr­Coulomb
model: E and ν for soil elasticity, ϕ and c for soil plasticity, and ψ for a dilatancy angle[46].
Hooke’s law of isotropic elasticity serves as the foundation for the Mohr­Coulomb model’s
linear elastic component. The Mohr­Coulomb failure criterion, expressed in a non asso­
ciated plasticity framework, is based on the foundation for the completely plastic compo­
nent, as shown in the Figure 3.12.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
36
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.12: Basic idea of an elastic perfectly plastic model [46]
Shear modulus (G) and Oedometer modulus (Eoed) can be used as stiffness parameters
instead of Young’s modulus (E). Poisson’s ratio (ν) should enter in mechanical proper­
ties of soil. The relationship between E, G, ν, and Eoed is shown in Equation 3.15 and
Equation 3.16.
G =
E
2(1 + ν)
(3.15)
Eoed =
(1 −ν)E
(1 −2ν)(1 + ν)
(3.16)
In both the elastic and Mohr­Coulomb models, PLAXIS uses Young’s modulus as the basic
stiffness modulus. A stiffness modulus has the same unit of stress. The initial slope of the
stress strain curve (tangent modulus) is typically written as E0, and the secant modulus
at 50% strength is marked as E50 in the triaxial testing of soil samples. It is reasonable
to use E0 for materials with a wide linear elastic range. However, E50 is typically used for
loading soils. Therefore, an unloading reloading modulus (Eur) is required rather than an
E50 when unloading issues, such as those associated with tunnelling and excavations.
In the Mohr­Coulomb model, if one of the three stiffness value enter, two of the stiffness
parameters will be changed, however the value of Poisson’s ratio remains the same.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
37
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.13: Definition of E0, E50 and Eur [46]
Mohr­Coulomb yield criterion is an extension of Coulomb’s friction law, generalizing states
of stresses. Coulomb friction law obeys the friction law in any plane within a material
element. The Mohr­Coulomb yield condition is expressed in terms of six yield functions
when formulated in terms of principal stresses as in Equation 3.17.
fi = 1
2
(
σ′
2 −σ′
3
)
+ 1
2
(
σ′
2 + σ′
3
)
sin φ −c cos φ ≤0
(3.17)
When fi is equal to zero, the soil will reach a plastic state. If the value is less than zero,
the soil will be elastic. A fixed hexagonal cone in the principal stress space is represented
by the condition fi = 0 for all yield functions taken together (where fi stands for each yield
function), as shown in Figure 3.14.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
38
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.14: The Mohr­Coulomb yield surface in principal stress space (c = 0) [46]
3.6.2
The concrete model
The concrete material model is a non linear elastic material model, which was adopted
here for the inspection of a reliable redistribution of stress strain in the continuum and to
make a correct design. The concrete model is able to simulate the model regarding time
dependent strength and stiffness, however in this model time dependency parameters are
neglected.
The Concrete model uses a combination of Mohr­Coulomb and Rankine surfaces to de­
scribe the material behavior under stress. It considers both deviatoric and tensile loading,
and includes isotropic compression softening. The yield function is represented by the
capital letter ”F” and follows a sign convention with tension being positive and σ1 being
the major principle stress and σ3 being the minor principle stress.
The yield functions for the Concrete model are expressed in terms of the principal stresses
in comparison to the uniaxial compressive and tensile yield stresses (fcy and ft) using the
Equation 3.18 and Equation 3.19.
Fc = σ1 −σ3
2
+ σ1 + σ3 −2σrot
2
fcy
2σrot + fcy
(3.18)
Ft = σ1 −ft
(3.19)
”σrot ” is the point where the Mohr­Coulomb failure envelope intersects the isotropic axis.
It can be calculated for a given maximum inclination of the Mohr­Coulomb envelope as
Equation 3.20.
σrot = fc
2
(
1
sin (φmax) −1
)
(3.20)
The yield surfaces and failure envelope for the Concrete model is shown in Figure 3.15
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
39
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.15: Yield surfaces and failure envelope for Concrete model[46]
In the concrete model, the stress strain curve is divided into four parts, as shown in Fig­
ure 3.16. The first part until failure is considered in the concrete model, so the other three
parts are not considered during simulation on the finite element model.
Figure 3.16: Normalised stress­strain curve in compression [46]
3.7
Analysis of lime stabilised rammed earth wall and
foundation
The PLAXIS 2D, numerical analysis program is used as a tool to perform calculations.
The linear elastic perfectly plastic Mohr­Coulomb model, and the advanced elastoplastic
model, the concrete model are utilised to investigate the assumption in this study. The
model is created based on the dimensions of the wall provided by the authority.
Ground soil is assumed to be typical fill sand, with a groundwater label of 3m below the
ground surface. The ground soil is medium dense sand. A lime stabilised rammed earth
wall is constructed on the soil with the properties in the Table 3.6.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
40
==PAGE:50==
Two phases are investigated,and applied on the stage construction on the model. Each
phases are described below:
­ In the Initial phase, a model is created and ground soil (fill sand) properties is assigned.
­ Wall construction (Phase 1), the construction of a lime stabilised foundation and wall.
­ Wind loading (Phase 2), wind loading throughout the perpendicular direction of a longi­
tudinal section.
Two construction methods are used to design the wall. One is the monolithic wall, and
another is the wall constructed using 0.5m× 0.5m× 0.5m bricks made up of the material
parameters of lime stabilised rammed earth. For both design methods, another two ap­
proaches were used for the construction of the wall. One is, the wall constructed on the
ground surface, and the other is the construction of the wall with a one meter foundation
below the ground.
The dimension of the lime stabilised rammed earth wall is 1m×6m (b×h) for 1m of founded
wall, and 1m×5m (b×h) for the wall constructed on the ground surface. One meter of the
wall is founded into the ground at five meters high from the ground surface as shown in
Figure 3.17. The soil surface is assumed to be horizontal in this study. A wind load of
1kN/m2 was applied in the horizontal direction perpendicular to the longitudinal section of
the wall. The complete finite element model represented the real case scenario at phase
2 is shown in Figure 3.17.
Figure 3.17: Wall dimension and loading on wall
The soil on the ground is assumed to be the standard fill medium dense sand with the
properties shown in the Table 3.6.
The interface material is assumed to be the same as ground material, having 70% of
the strength of the ground material. The friction angle is assumed to be 210, and other
parameters are the same as in the Table 3.6.
The wall was composed of stabilised rammed earth, the physical and mechanical prop­
erties of the rammed earth as are tabulated in Table 3.7.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
41
==PAGE:51==
Table 3.6: Properties of fill sand taken from [47], modified by author
Characteristics
Value
Youngs modulus [MPa]
50.00
Cohesion [kPa]
1.00
Friction angle [0]
30.00
Unsaturated unit weight [kN/m3]
18.00
Poission ratio [­]
0.30
Table 3.7: Physical properties of rammed earth
Characteristics
Value
Specific gravity
2.67
Liquid limit [%]
23.00
Plastic limit [%]
16.00
Plasticity index [%]
7.00
Maximum dry density [kg/m3]
2049.00
Optimum moisture content [%]
11.00
Unified soil classification
CL­ML
Soil descriprion
Brown silty clay
Clay content [%]
10.00
Silt content [%]
35.00
Sand content [%]
49.00
Gravel content [%]
6.00
PH value
8.09
Stabilisation of rammed earth was completed using burnt lime (CaO) with a proportion of
5% of lime, and the water content was equal to an optimum moisture content of 16%. The
properties of stabilised rammed earth are listed in the Table 3.8.
Table 3.8: Physical properties of soil lime mixture
Characteristics
Value
Maximum dry density [kg/m3]
1838.00
Optimum moisture content [%]
16.00
The lime stabilised rammed earth is a design based on 28 days curing period. The aver­
age first unloading and reloading stiffness modulus (E1) was used as the input parameter
of the lime stabilised rammed earth. The tensile strength of compacted lime mixed soil lies
between 15% ­ 20% of the corresponding unconfined strength at 28 days curing period[48]
and the lower value of 15% was used as the design tensile strength of lime stabilised soil.
The compressive fracture energy was assumed as 1 kN/m, tested for cement stabilised
soil and shows in relation to UCS value [49]. At higher stress levels, Poisson’s ratio is
within the range of 0.2 to 0.3. A typical value of between 0.15 and 0.2 is usually used
for Poisson’s ratio of lime stabilized soil [19]. The Concrete material model is utilised to
model the lime stabilised rammed earth. The input parameters to established PLAXIS 2D
Concrete material model are presented in the Table 3.9.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
42
==PAGE:52==
Table 3.9: Properties of lime stabilised rammed earth used in Concrete model
Parameter
Symbol
Unit
Value
Youngs modulus
E28
[MPa]
350
Poisson ratio
ν
[­]
0.20
Uniaxial compressive strength
fc,28
[kPa]
576.00
Normalised initially mobilised strength
fc01
[­]
0.05
Normalised residual strength
fcun
[­]
0.05
Maximum friction angle
φmax
[0]
40.00
Dilatancy angle
ψ
[0]
0
Unsaturated unit weight
γunsat
[kN/m3]
19.5
Saturated unit weight
γsat
[kN/m3]
21.00
Compressive fracture energy
Gc,28
[kN/m]
1.00
Uniaxial tensile strength
ft,28
[kPa]
43.00
Ratio of residual vs peak tensile strength
ftun
[­]
0.001
Tensile fracture energy of cured concrete
Gt,28
[kN/m]
0.25
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
43
==PAGE:53==
4
Test results
This chapter will discuss the index properties of soil, which includes grain size distribu­
tion, Atterberg limits, loss on ignition, water content in the soil samples, particle density.
Afterwards, the modified proctor test result, PH determination with different lime contents,
and cation exchange capacity test will presented. This is followed by the results from
an unconfined compression test with various curing periods along with evaluation of the
experimental results.
4.1
Moisture content
Moisture content in the stored soil was measured considering natural water content. As
the soil was collected more than six months before the time of testing, the moisture content
may not referred the natural water content.
The measured water content of the soil sample was 8.35%, which is lesser in amount if
compared to plastic limit of the soil sample which was measured 16%.
4.2
Particle density
The particle density of Vinge soil sample was measured 2.67. The maximum deviation of
the particle density among the three experiment was found to be 0.014, which means the
densities of the soil samples are similar.
4.3
Loss on ignition
The result of loss of ignition shows average of 2.3%. The percentage deviation of the
LOI among the two experiments were found to be 0.018, which means the presence of
organic content on the soil samples are similar.
4.4
Atterberg limits
The liquid limit (LL), plastic limit (PL) and plasticity index (PI) for the Vinge soil is shown in
Table 4.1. The soil was classified by the Casagrande chart as shown in Figure 4.1. The
soil was classified as clayey silt (CL­ML). The soil was positioned above the A­line and
below the U­line defining the soil as a natural soil. The soil sample used for Atterberg
limits analysis passes through 425 µm, meaning that the soil sample contains clay, silt
and fine sand size.
Table 4.1: Atterberg limits of Vinge soil
Liquid limit [%]
Plastic limit [%]
Plasticity index [%]
22.00
16.00
6.00
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
44
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.1: Casagrande plasticity chart
4.5
Particle size distribution
The grain size distribution of rammed earth is shown in Figure 4.2. Nearly 45% of soil
passed through 0.063mµ, i.e.fine content, on which percentage of clay was about less
than 10% according to hydrometer analysis. On the other side, PARIO meter shows the
clay content was approximately 20%. As more than 50% of soil passes on No. 200 (75µ)
sieve, according to USCS soil classification using the casagrande plasticity chart as in
Figure 4.1, soil was classified as CL­ML (silty clays and clayey silt with low plasticity).
Figure 4.2: Grain size distribution for Vinge rammed earth from sieve, pario and hydrom­
eter analysis
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
45
==PAGE:55==
The effective particle size (D10) of soil was 0.0027, which means that 10% of the particles
were finer and 90% were coarser than D10 by dry mass. The uniformity coefficient which
measures the slope of the line joining D60 and D10 points. Coefficient of uniformity is the
ratio of the 60% particle size to the 10% particle size.
4.6
Standard proctor test
The plot of the moisture density curve of the Vinge soil is shown in the Figure 4.3 and
maximum dry density and optimum moisture content is shown in Table 4.2. The optimum
moisture content is 11% and the maximum dry density is 2049 kg/m3. An automatic com­
pression apparatus was used while carrying out the compaction test. Compared to the
manual compaction, densities achieved by machines are often less. The reason for this,
is that the blow patterns differ from the recommended one as in Figure 3.7b, and in some
way, the base not only rotates but also horizontal movement when a mould is being used
so that the rammer may cover its whole area. Because of this, the support for the mould
is less rigid than a concrete base.
Table 4.2: Maximum dry density and optimum moisture content
Optimum moisture content [%]
Maximum dry density [kg/m3]
11.00
2049.00
Figure 4.3: Standard proctor test results
The presence of stones will result in a higher overall density if the matrix material is com­
pacted to a specific density because the stones have a higher density than the matrix ma­
terial they displace. Due to the presence of the stones, the overall moisture content of the
entire material will be different from that of the matrix. The moisture that the stones may
absorb will expunge during the typical oven drying process. Before adjusting the moisture
content for compaction, cohesive soils must be broken up into small pieces. These soils
should be chopped with a suitable knife at their natural moisture content rather than being
dried first. As the compaction test results depend on the size of the pieces, the chopped
pieces should be uniform. The range should provide at least two values on either side of
the optimum moisture content, where maximum dry density occurs[41].
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
46
==PAGE:56==
The measured moisture content seems more than that of provided water content, which
may be the reason for the presence of stones and the use of cohesive soil without chop­
ping. Moisture content was used from 6% in the interval of 2% in increasing order, mois­
ture content can be seen to be more than used in all the water content. Optimum moisture
content may be found other than that of used moisture content, if the interval of moisture
can reduce near the optimum value.
4.7
Optimum moisture content determination of mixture of
soil and lime
A standard proctor test was conducted on the soil lime mixture. Lime was added 5% of
the dry soil weight. The plot of the moisture density curve for the soil lime mixture is shown
in the Figure 4.4. The optimum moisture content is 16%, and the maximum dry density
is 1838 kg/m3. It can be seen from the Table 4.2, and Table 4.3 that optimum moisture
content of soil lime mixture is increased from 11% to 16% and maximum dry density de­
creased from 2049 kg/3 to 1838 kg/m3.
Table 4.3: Maximum dry density and optimum moisture content on soil lime mixture
Optimum moisture content [%]
Maximum dry density [kg/m3]
16.00
1838.00
Figure 4.4: Standard proctor test results on rammed earth and soil lime mixture
A similar test (standard proctor test) was conducted by Hasan and Fattah [50] with appli­
cation of 5% of lime, and it can be seen that the optimum water content increased from
20% to 23% and the maximum dry density decreased from 1.63 g/cm3 to 1.585 g/cm3.
The test was conducted on kaolin clay mixed with hydrated high calcium lime, Ca(OH)2.
Kavak and Akyarli [27] found that the maximum dry unit weight of brown clay with the ap­
plication of 5% of lime, increased the optimum water content from 20.5% to 26%, and, the
maximum dry density decreased from 15.51 kN/m3 to 14.6 kN/m3, whereas the optimum
moisture content of green clay increased from the maximum dry unit weight of green clay
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
47
==PAGE:57==
increased from 20% to 23%, and maximum dry density decreased from 15.30 kN/m3 to
14.88 kN/m3.
4.8
PH measurement
The first step to determine the optimum lime content to stabilised and gain long term
optimum strength is a PH measurement of soil lime mixture in different lime contents using
Eades and Grim principle. The PH should be measured at 250C, and the PH of lime will
stabilise its PH at about 12.45[10]. In addition, the electrode and PH meter should be
standardised with a 12.00 PH buffer since the PH of lime at 250C is 12.4 [16].
The PH of rammed earth with various lime content was measured using Sension+ PH3
Basic laboratory pH and ORP Meter at room temperature, which was able to measure
PH from ­2 to 16, and operation temperature is 0 to 400C. PH measurement was con­
ducted following the procedure of Eades and Grim [16], however PH of the samples were
measured in room temperature. The measured PH values are shown in the Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: PH of soil measured in one hour with various lime content
4.9
Unconfined compression test and repeated loading and
unloading test
4.9.1
Specimen failure mechanism
All the specimens failed in shear, the shear surface was clearly visible on the sample
diagonally. In addition, almost all the specimens show vertical cracks before failure. The
specimen S7­1511 was loaded beyond the failure stress, which showed a clear diagonal
failure surface. In theory, the angle of internal friction ϕ=00 and the angle of failure plane
should be 450 for undrained conditions. Figure 4.6b seems less steep than the theoretical
angle of failure, which shows the assumption of the angle of failure is not strictly valid. A
typical failure surface and the vertical cracking, before failure, are shown in Figure 4.6a.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
48
==PAGE:58==
(a) Vertical crack on specimen S28­1212
(b) Diagonal failure surface on speci­
men S7­1511
Figure 4.6: Typical failure development on LSRE on axial loading
The initial phase involves immediate reactions that can take a few hours or days, and at
this stage, cation exchange, flocculation agglomeration, and carbonation occur. These
improvement can be seen in increase workability, immediate strength improvement, and
reduced swell susceptibility.
4.9.2
Immediate effect of lime on soil
The immediate, after specimen production results of unconfined compression tests are
shown in Figure 4.7. Both of the specimens were produced on their optimum moisture
content. According to the results, the unconfined compressive strength for unstabilised
rammed earth was 275kPa, while lime stabilised rammed earth was 334kPa, which is
around 22% increased in strength compared to unstabilised rammed earth. At the initial
phase of the soil lime reaction, cation exchange, flocculation agglomeration, and carbona­
tion occur. These improvements can be seen in increased workability, immediate strength
improvement, and reduced swell susceptibility[17].
The lime stabilised rammed earth showed brittle failure and relatively low strain at failure,
εf, at around less than 1%, while unstabilised rammed earth showed ductile failure and
relatively high strain at failure, εf, at more than 2.5%. The elastic modulus (E), is defined
as the slope of the tangent line of the elastic part, which is measured between approxi­
mately 35% and 75% of the maximum stress and corresponding strain[23] as shown in
Table 4.4. Elastic modulus also increased significantly when the rammed earth was sta­
bilised with lime. In addition to this, lime to rammed earth bulk density decreased from
2160.82 kg/m3 to 1991.74 kg/m3, void ratio increased from 0.42 to 0.54, due to cation
exchange and flocculation process, resulting in increases in grain size [4] also the degree
of saturation decreases from 0.96 to 0.75 with the same compaction effort. At room tem­
perature and at the same time interval after the production of specimens before testing,
the moisture content is determined after testing the specimen using the whole specimen,
which showed a loss on the unstabilised rammed earth specimen is 0.09%. At the same
time, the lime stabilised rammed earth specimen lost 2.00% of moisture, showing that
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
49
==PAGE:59==
lime and water react significantly to further moisture loss.
The properties of test specimens at the time of production are given in the Table 4.4,
and UCS testing were conducted using machine 2. The moisture loss on the specimen
immediately after produced lime stabilised rammed earth shows more than a one day
specimen because the specimen tested immediately after production was left in the open
air without warping in a plastic. The reaction between lime and soil in the presence of
water generates heat as a catalyst for more moisture loss.
Table 4.4: Initial properties of a 0 day test specimens before testing
Specimen
ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
w[%]
Moisture
loss [%]
Ss0­0812
70.01
130.87
1088.6
2160.82
0.96
0.42
10.91
0.09
SL0­0812
69.99
140.97
1080.24
1991.74
0.75
0.54
13.23
2.01
Figure 4.7: Stress­strain (σ­ε) curve for immediate after production of specimens under
unconfined compression test
The measured unconfined compressive strength, which is qu, strain at failure, εf, and
Elastic modulus, E, for lime stabilised rammed earth (LSRE), and unstabilised rammed
earth (URE) are presented in the Table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Results from the unconfined compression tests of 0 day test specimen
Sample ID
qu[kPa]
εf[%]
E [MPa]
comment
Ss0­0812
275.00
2.56
31.29
URE
SL0­0812
334.00
0.80
55.63
LSRE
4.9.3
Unconfined compression test on a 1 day curing time
The properties of test specimens at the time of production are given in the Table 4.6.
Unconfined compression test specimens were produced as explained in section 3.4.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
50
==PAGE:60==
Table 4.6: Initial properties of one day curing test of specimens at production time
Specimen
ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
Specimen
sealed
method
UCS test
machine
number.
S1­2911
69.97
142.41
1073.34
1960.12
0.71
0.57
Plastic
2.00
S1­0912
70.05
139.33
1072.24
1994.86
0.75
0.54
Mould
2.00
The specimens were unwrapped from the sealed plastic and the physical properties were
measured before testing. The actual mass m’ of the specimen is measured with mould
before extraction. The moisture content is measured after testing the specimen. The
properties of the test specimens just before testing are given in the Table 4.7
Table 4.7: Initial properties of a one day curing test specimens at testing
Specimen
ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m’[g]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
w[%]
Moisture
loss [%]
S1­2911
69.99
142.3
­
1075.36
1964.21
0.72
0.57
13.47
1.77
S1­0912
70.03
139.27
1071.84
1071.15
1996.80
0.75
0.54
13.96
1.28
The stress strain curves for one day UCS tests and elastic modulus are shown in Fig­
ure 4.8. The deviation of the UCS value is about 6%, while the deviation in elastic mod­
ulus value is about 4%. Table 4.6 shows that the bulk density of specimen S1­0912 was
greater than specimen S1­2911, while the initial void ratio was less. Table 4.7 shows
that moisture loss was low in the S1­0912 specimen, which was sealed within the mould
immediately after production. The result on strength and stiffness value shows the uncon­
fined compressive strength of the specimen sealed with plastic is higher compared to the
specimen sealed within the mould. In contrast, stiffness is higher in the specimen sealed
within the mould.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: (a) Stress­strain (σ­ε) curve with photo of specimens after testing and (b)
Elastic modulus for one day curing on specimen under unconfined compression test
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
51
==PAGE:61==
The measured unconfined compressive strength, qu, strain at failure, εf, and Elastic mod­
ulus, E, for 1 day curing time lime stabilised rammed earth is presented in the Table 4.8.
Table 4.8: Results from the unconfined compression tests of a one day curing specimens
Sample ID
qu[kPa]
εf[%]
E [Mpa]
S1­0912
360.00
0.81
59.46
S1­2911
341.00
0.78
61.56
4.9.4
Repeated unloading reloading test on a one day curing time
The properties of a one day curing time repeated loading and unloading test specimens
at the time of production are given in the Table 4.9. Test specimens were produced as
explained in section 3.4.
Table 4.9: Initial properties of a one day curing test specimens at production time
Specimen
ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
Specimen
sealed
method
UCS test
machine
No.
C1­1511W
70.04
139.74
1069.84
1987.08
0.74
0.55
Mould
2.00
C1­2911W
69.97
140.73
1047.64
1936.03
0.69
0.59
Plastic
2.00
C1­0612
70.05
138.58
1071.16
2005.62
0.76
0.53
Plastic
2.00
C1­0912
70.05
139.98
1077.16
1996.68
0.75
0.54
Mould
2.00
C1­1312
70.05
139.43
1071.95
1994.86
0.75
0.54
Mould
1.00
The specimens named with ’W’ at the end were used in addition to water during stage
reloading and unloading, for example, specimen C1­1511W. Water was added to the sam­
ple as shown in Table 4.10, and the second stage was started and repeated the the loading
and unloading. However, in some stages, water was not added because of problems in
water injection using back pressure. The use of saturation throughout the testing pro­
cess, in this thesis, is the instant addition of water in the stage loading. At the time of
measurement of the water content after testing the specimen, it is not seen all the water
in the specimen because the water spilt out while taking the sample out from the triaxial
machine.
Table 4.10: Addition of water to the specimen using back pressure, the volume of water
was measured by volume change unit measured in ml in the triaxial machine
Sample ID
stage 1
stage 2
stage 3
stage 4
C1­1511W
­
10.39
14.45
11.84
C1­2911W
­
10.81
10.28
­
The properties of a one day curing test specimens before testing are given in the Ta­
ble 4.11. As previously mentioned, the moisture content was measured after testing the
samples. The value of moisture loss is the difference between the initial water content
of the specimen, which is 15.24% and the water content tested after repeated loading
and unloading test. The negative value of moisture loss means that moisture content
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
52
==PAGE:62==
increased in the specimen because of stage saturation in the repeated unloading and
reloading test.
Table 4.11: Initial properties of a one day curing test specimens before testing
Specimen ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m’ [g]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
w[%]
Moisture
loss [%]
C1­1511W
69.92
139.72
1069.13
1067.36
1989.57
0.74
0.55
16.92
­1.68
C1­2911W
70.01
140.1
­
1046.16
1939.77
0.69
0.59
16.80
­1.56
C1­0612
69.96
138.57
­
1070.8
2010.25
0.77
0.53
13.83
1.41
C1­0912
69.94
139.94
1076.88
1075.23
1999.95
0.76
0.54
13.79
1.45
C1­1312
69.95
139.41
1071.69
1070.99
1999.06
0.75
0.54
13.81
1.43
The stress­strain curves for the sample C1­1312 on a one day repeated loading and un­
loading tests with the failure specimen are shown in Figure 4.9, to demonstrate the loading
and unloading curve only within the repeated loading curves is shown here. The unload­
ing reloading modulus are calculated by measuring the slope of the loading and unloading
stress as shown in the Figure 4.9, the slope of the straight line showing first unloading
stress and first reloading stress is the unloading reloading modulus Eur. The specimen
was then loaded until failure, the graph showing the failure stress strain diagram and the
rest of the test graphs are attached in the Appendix H.
Figure 4.9: Repeated loading and unloading hysteresis loops and failure specimen of a
one day test specimen C1­1312 without saturation
The estimated unloading reloading modulus, Eur, for a one day curing time test specimens
on lime stabilised rammed earth is presented in the Figure 4.10 and Table 4.12.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
53
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.10: Unloading reloading modulus of a one day curing time specimen with and
without saturation
Figure 4.10 clearly shows that the unloading reloading modulus values have a higher de­
viation with the different tests within the same curing period. The specimens C1­2911W
and C1­1511W were saturated in unloading reloading stages with the volume of water as
shown in Table 4.17. However, the samples tested unloading reloading without satura­
tion have slight deviation, and the trends of the unloading reloading modulus increase as
stages on those tests.
Table 4.12: Unloading reloading modulus,Eur [MPa] for a 1 day curing time specimens
Sample ID
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
E6
E7
C1­2911W
209.70
200.95
136.24
­
­
­
­
C1­1511W
135.47
94.40
119.77
86.40
52.30
­
­
C1­0612
246.92
259.89
246.90
176.64
268.39
277.06
251.12
C1­1312
254.16
338.90
267.18
267.18
254.14
286.73
­
4.9.5
Unconfined compression test for a 7 day curing time
The properties of a seven day curing test specimens at the time of production are given
in the Table 4.13.
Table 4.13: Initial properties of a 7 day curing test specimens at production time
Specimen
ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
Specimen
sealed
method
UCS test
machine
No.
S7­1511
69.97
140.7
1068.77
1975.50
0.73
0.56
Plastic
2.00
S7­0512
69.98
142.93
1048.85
1907.89
0.66
0.61
Plastic
2.00
The properties of test specimens just before testing are given in the Table 4.14
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
54
==PAGE:64==
Table 4.14: Initial properties of a 7 day curing test specimens at testing
Specimen ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
w[%]
Moisture
loss [%]
S7­1511
69.97
141.31
1063.18
1956.68
0.71
0.57
13.26
1.98
S7­0512
69.99
142.96
1048.2
1905.76
0.66
0.61
13.22
2.02
The stress strain curves on a seven day curing UCS test, and elastic modulus are shown in
Figure 4.11. The UCS values and elastic modulus showed a slight deviation for specimen
S7­1511 which was higher higher than specimen S7­0512. Table 4.6 shows that bulk
density of the specimen S7­1511 is higher than that of specimen S7­0512, while initial
void ratio is less. Table 4.14 shows that moisture loss was similar, for which both of the
specimens were sealed in plastic extracting them immediately after production.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: (a) Stress­strain (σ­ε) curve and (b) Elastic modulus of specimens under
unconfined compression test
The measured unconfined compressive strength, qu, strain at failure, εf, and Elastic mod­
ulus, E, for seven days curing period test specimens are presented in the Table 4.15.
Table 4.15: Results from the unconfined compression tests on a 7 day curing period
Sample ID
qu[kPa]
εf[%]
E [Mpa]
S7­1511
424.00
0.61
90.66
S7­0512
408.00
0.80
82.43
4.9.6
Repeated loading and unloading test on a seven day curing time
specimens
The properties of a seven day curing time repeated loading and unloading test specimens
at the time of production are given in the Table 4.16.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
55
==PAGE:65==
Table 4.16: Initial properties of a 7 day curing time test specimens at production
Specimen
ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
Specimen
sealed
method
UCS test
machine
No.
C7­1711W
70.04
139.5
1069.58
1990.02
0.75
0.55
Mould
2.00
C7­0512
69.97
137.52
1062.54
2009.40
0.77
0.53
Plastic
2.00
C7­1212
70.05
139.23
1071.16
1996.25
0.75
0.54
Mould
2.00
The amount of water added in the loading and unloading stage is shown in Table 4.17.
Table 4.17: Addition of water in the specimen using back pressure, the volume of water
was measured by volume change unit measured in ml in the triaxial machine
Sample ID
stage 1
stage 2
stage 3
stage 4
stage 5
stage 6
stage 7
C7­1711W
15.51
15.62
2.28
­
10.21
10.67
­
The properties of test specimens before testing are given in the Table 4.18. As previously
mentioned, the moisture content was measured after testing the specimens.
Table 4.18: Initial properties of a seven day test specimens before testing
Specimen
ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m’ [g]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
w[%]
Moisture
loss [%]
C7­1711W
69.89
139.47
1068.41
1065.91
1992.14
0.75
0.54
18.92
­3.68
C7­0512
70.06
138.04
­
1061.48
1994.70
0.75
0.54
12.98
2.26
C7­1212
69.96
139.44
1072.6
1071.64
1999.27
0.75
0.54
13.60
1.64
The stress­strain curves for the sample C7­1711W on seven days repeated loading and
unloading test, with the failure specimen and spilled water in traxial machine are shown
in Figure 4.12. The graph showing the failure stress strain diagram and the rest of the
test graphs are attached in the Appendix I. The failure stress was reduced to 214kPa
from unsaturated mean repeated loading and unloading stress 416kPa, this showed the
strength degradation due to saturation was about 49% from the test without saturation.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
56
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.12: Repeated loading and unloading hysteresis loops and failure specimen of a
seven day test specimen C7­1711W with saturation
The estimated unloading reloading modulus, Eur, for seven day curing time test speci­
mens on lime stabilised rammed earth is presented in the Figure 4.13 and Table 4.19. The
specimen C7­1711W, was the specimen tested at reloading and unloading with saturation,
and the specimen C7­0512, was tested without saturation.
Figure 4.13: Unloading reloading modulus of a seven day curing time specimen with and
without saturation
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
57
==PAGE:67==
Table 4.19: Unloading reloading modulus,Eur [MPa] for a 7 day curing time specimens
Sample ID
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
E6
C7­1711W
170.25
200.83
157.14
151.89
282.84
172.34
C7­0512
503.70
404.67
645.79
348.73
­
­
4.9.7
Unconfined compression test for 28 days curing time
The properties of 28 days curing period test specimens at the time of production are given
in the Table 4.20. The specimen S28­2811 was mixed in the big mixture in the concrete
lab, while the sample S28­1212 and S35­0311 were mixed in a small kitchen mixture in
Geo­lab, which resulted in higher moisture loss in specimen S28­2811 during preparation
of mixing. The specimen S35­0301 was tested at 35 days of curing time. The specimen
S35­0301 was compacted using the Instron compacting machine, while the other two
were compacted using hand compaction with standard proctor energy. Table 4.20 shows
that the moisture loss during the curing period on the specimen sealed within the mould
is negligible compared to the specimen extracted during the production and sealed in the
plastic.
Table 4.20: Initial properties of twenty eight days test specimens at production time
Specimen ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
Specimen
sealed
method
UCS test
machine
No.
S28­2811
69.98
144
1030.22
1860.07
0.62
0.65
Plastic
2.00
S28­1212
70.05
132.74
1067.9
2087.48
0.86
0.47
Mould
2.00
S35­0301
69.97
140.72
1046.11
1933.34
0.69
0.59
Plastic
1.00
The properties of test specimens just before testing are given in the Table 4.21. The height
of the specimen S28­1212 was not measured because of uneven surface.
Table 4.21: Initial properties of 28 days curing test specimens before testing
Specimen ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m’ [g]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
w[%]
Moisture
loss [%]
S28­2811
70.05
144.44
­
991.9
1781.86
0.56
0.73
8.51
6.73
S28­1212
69.96
­
1061.9
1060.57
­
­
­
13.52
1.72
S35­0301
69.86
141.06
­
1005.81
1860.22
0.62
0.65
9.33
5.90
The stress strain curves for twenty eight days UCS tests and elastic modulus are shown
in Figure 4.14. The UCS value for 28 days curing time specimen were similar, and 35
days UCS shows that the compressive strength increases with the curing period.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
58
==PAGE:68==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.14: (a) Stress­strain (σ­ε) curve and (b) Elastic modulus for a twenty eight day
curing on specimen under unconfined compression test
The measured unconfined compressive strength, qu, strain at failure, εf, and Elastic mod­
ulus, E, for twenty eight days curing period test specimens are presented in the Table 4.22.
The elastic modulus of specimen S28­1212 was much less compared to specimen S28­
2811 because of the slope surface on the specimen, which was an error in the production.
The failure strain is also affected due to the uneven height of the specimen, but the UCS
value was similar.
Table 4.22: Results from the unconfined compression tests on 28 days curing period
Sample ID
qu [kPa]
εf [%]
E [Mpa]
S28­2811
577.00
0.61
211.71
S28­1212
574.00
1.31
91.66
S35­0301
591.00
1.00
99.70
Table 4.22 shows that the elastic modulus value of the specimen S28­2811 is much higher
than two other tests, However, Table 4.20 showed that the bulk density of the sample S28­
1212 was much higher than that of S28­2811. The difference is because S28­2811 speci­
men was sealed in plastic while the specimen S28­1212 was confined in the mould. From
the literature review and elastic modulus of other tests, the elastic modulus of specimen
S28­2811 was discarded in the interpretation of the results.
4.9.8
Repeated loading and unloading test on a twenty eight day curing
time
The properties of a twenty eight day curing time repeated loading and unloading test
specimens at the time of production are given in the Table 4.23. The specimen C35­0301
was tested at 35 days, and C36­0401W was tested at 36 days curing time.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
59
==PAGE:69==
Table 4.23: Initial properties of 28 days curing time test specimens at production time
Specimen
ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
Specimen
sealed
method
UCS test
machine
No.
C28­2811W
69.97
139.63
956.16
1780.89
0.56
0.73
Plastic
2.00
C28­0212
70.05
135.4
1059.9
2031.14
0.79
0.51
Mould
1.00
C28­1212
70.05
134.93
1064.2
2046.49
0.81
0.50
Mould
1.00
C35­0301
69.99
139.82
1073.85
1996.24
0.75
0.54
Plastic
1.00
C36­0401W
70.05
139.31
1072.1
1996.86
0.75
0.54
Mould
1.00
The amount of water added in the loading and unloading stage is shown in Table 4.31.
Table 4.24: Addition of water to the specimen using back pressure, the volume of water
was measured by volume change unit measured in ml in the triaxial machine
Sample ID
stage 1
stage 2
stage 3
stage 4
stage 5
C28­2811W
10.09
10.21
9.1
10.09
2.71
C36­0401W
10.00
10.01
19.73
8.45
­
The properties of test specimens before testing are given in the Table 4.25. The spec­
imens C28­2811W, C28­0212, and C28­1212 were compacted using hand compaction
with standard proctor energy, while two others were compacted using Instron compacting
machine.
Table 4.25: Initial properties of 28 days curing time test specimens at repeated loading
and unloading testing
Specimen ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
w[%]
Moisture
loss [%]
C28­2811W
69.96
139.4
993.8
1854.58
0.62
0.66
8.26
6.98
C28­0212
69.97
135.6
1056.19
2025.67
0.78
0.52
12.16
3.08
C28­1212
69.83
134.34
1060.25
2060.77
0.83
0.49
13.70
1.54
C35­0301
69.96
140.55
1032.52
1911.08
0.67
0.61
9.33
5.91
C36­0401W
69.99
139.61
1061.92
1977.03
0.73
0.56
15.82
­0.59
The stress strain curves for the sample C28­1212 on twenty eight days repeated loading
and unloading tests with failure specimen is shown in Figure 4.15. The specimen was
then loaded until failure, the graph showing the failure stress strain diagram and the rest
of the test graphs are attached in the Appendix J.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
60
==PAGE:70==
Figure 4.15: Repeated loading and unloading hysteresis loops and failure specimen of
the twenty eight day test specimen C28­1212 without saturation
The stress strain curves for the sample C36­0401W on thirty six days curing period re­
peated loading and unloading tests with failure specimen shown in Figure 4.16. The
failure strength was reduced to 247kPa from the unsaturated mean repeated loading and
unloading strength of 670kPa, this showed the strength degradation due to saturation was
about 63% from the test without saturation.
Figure 4.16: Repeated loading and unloading test on a thirty six day curing time on spec­
imen C36­0401W with saturation
The estimated unloading reloading modulus, Eur, for twenty eight days curing time test
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
61
==PAGE:71==
specimens on lime stabilised rammed earth, is presented in the Figure 4.17 and Ta­
ble 4.26. The specimens C28­2811W and C28­0212 were tested using test machine 2,
while other specimens were tested using machine 1. In the real time observation, machine
2 showed more scatter in the data logging. The results of unloading reloading modulus
were highly different from one another. The specimens tested with saturation have low
unloading reloading modulus, but specimen C28­1212 shows a much higher value than
C28­0212 and C36­0401. The specimen C36­0401 was tested at 36 days curing period.
Figure 4.17: Unloading reloading modulus of twenty eight day curing time specimen with
and without saturation
The specimens tested with the addition of water failed with a settlement at the bottom
rather than diagonal failure, which can be seen clearly from Figure 4.18 of failure speci­
mens. The unloading reloading stress for specimen C28­2811W test is 65­180kPa, while
specimen C36­0401W is between 80­260kPa.The sample C28­2811W was failed in 267kPa,
and the the specimen C36­0401W was failed in 246kPa after four unloading reloading cy­
cles.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
62
==PAGE:72==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.18: Failure specimens (a) C28­2811W and (b) C36­0401W with addition of water
in repeated unloading reloading test
Table 4.26: Unloading reloading modulus,Eur [MPa] on 28 days curing time specimens
Specimen ID
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
C28­2811W
121.50
159.48
127.25
174.69
155.31
C28­0212
187.97
393.72
235.77
157.14
C28­1212
713.13
721.45
729.85
696.21
796.89
C35­0301
367.09
371.42
461.40
466.65
471.85
C36­0401W
147.54
147.40
135.98
98.73
4.9.9
Unconfined compression test for a 91 day curing time
The properties of unconfined compression test specimens at the time of production are
given in the Table 4.27. The specimen S91­0102 was mixed in the big mixture in the
concrete lab, while the sample S85­0102 was mixed in a small kitchen mixture in Geo­
lab, which resulted in higher moisture loss in specimen S91­0102 during preparation of
mixing. The specimen S85­0102 was tested at 85 days of curing time.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
63
==PAGE:73==
Table 4.27: Initial properties of a ninety one day test specimens at production time
Specimen
ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
Specimen
sealed
method
UCS test
machine No.
S91­0102
69.97
140.2
1083.76
2010.35
0.77
0.53
Plastic
1.00
S85­0102
69.98
142.2
1066.1
1949.22
0.70
0.58
Plastic
1.00
The properties of test specimens just before testing are given in the Table 4.28.
Table 4.28: Initial properties of a 91 day test specimens at testing
Specimen
ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
w[%]
Moisture
loss [%]
S91­0102
69.97
136.4
971.22
1851.78
0.62
0.66
1.81
13.43
S85­0102
69.95
142.8
973.27
1773.54
0.55
0.73
3.40
11.84
The stress strain curves for a ninety one day UCS tests and elastic modulus are shown
in Figure 4.19.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.19: (a) Stress strain (σ­ε) curve and (b) Elastic modulus for a ninety one day
curing on specimen under unconfined compression test
The measured unconfined compressive strength, qu, strain at failure, εf, and Elastic mod­
ulus, E, for a ninety one days curing test specimens are presented in the Table 4.29. The
UCS of specimen S85­0102 was much less compared to the specimen S91­0102, How­
ever specimen S91­0102 was tested for 91 days curing time and specimen S85­0102 was
tested for a curing time of 85 days.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
64
==PAGE:74==
Table 4.29: Results from the unconfined compression tests on a 91 day curing period
Sample ID
qu [kPa]
εf [%]
E [Mpa]
S91­0102
1203.00
1.02
177.80
S85­0102
832.00
0.78
173.78
4.9.10
Repeated loading and unloading test on a ninety one day curing
specimens
The properties of a ninety one day curing time repeated loading and unloading test spec­
imens at the time of production are given in the Table 4.30. The specimen C83­0102W
was mixed using a small kitchen mixture in the Geo­lab and was tested at 83 days, and
C91­0102 was mixed using a big kitchen mixture in the Concrete­lab and was tested at
91 days curing time.
Table 4.30: Initial properties of 91 days curing time test specimens at production time
Specimen
ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
Specimen
sealed
method
UCS test
machine
No.
C91­0102
70.05
143.59
1043.35
1885.38
0.64
0.63
Mould
1.00
C83­0102W
70.05
139
1074.6
2005.98
0.76
0.53
Mould
1.00
The specimen named C83­0102W was tested with addition of water during stage reload­
ing and unloading. Water was added after the second stage of unloading the specimen.
However, in the second stage, the volume change does not show water injection, and
the specimen had an unknown volume of water and the volume was measured in other
stages. Nevertheless, the water could be seen above the top porous stone.
Table 4.31: Addition of water to the specimen using back pressure, the volume of water
was measured by volume change unit measured in ml in the triaxial machine
Sample ID
stage 1
stage 2
stage 3
stage 4
C83­0102W
­
missing
11.32
8.62
The properties of 91 days curing test specimens before testing are given in the Table 4.32.
Table 4.32: Initial properties of a 91 day curing time test specimens at repeated loading
and unloading testing
Specimen ID
d [mm]
h [mm]
m [g]
ρ0 [kg/m3]
Sr0 [­]
e0 [­]
w[%]
Moisture
loss [%]
C91­0102
69.82
144.61
1001.1
1808.13
0.58
0.70
10.23
5.01
C83­0102W
69.92
139.4
1040.66
1944.26
0.70
0.58
14.47
0.77
The stress strain curves for the sample C91­0102 at ninety one days repeated loading
and unloading tests with failure specimen are shown in Figure 4.20. The specimen was
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
65
==PAGE:75==
then loaded until failure, the graph showing the failure stress strain diagram and the rest
of the test graphs are attached in the Appendix K.
Figure 4.20: Repeated loading and unloading hysteresis loops and failure specimen of
ninety one days test specimen C91­0102 without saturation
The estimated unloading reloading modulus, Eur, for a ninety one day curing time test
specimens on lime stabilised rammed earth is presented in the Figure 4.21 and Table 4.33.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
66
==PAGE:76==
Figure 4.21: Unloading reloading modulus of ninety one days curing time specimen with
and without saturation
The specimens tested with saturation has settlement failure rather than diagonal shear
failure. The unloading reloading stress for specimen C83­0102W test is 130­300kPa. The
sample failed in 352kPa after five loading unloading cycles.
Table 4.33: Unloading reloading modulus,Eur [MPa] for a 91 day curing time specimens
Sample ID
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
C83­0102W
361.14
177.12
268.79
290.04
306.87
C91­0102
605.67
622.76
613.27
663.75
672.13
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
67
==PAGE:77==
5
FEM analysis in PLAXIS 2D
This chapter will discuss the wall foundation design from the point of two different assump­
tions. One is the construction of a wall of height 5m on the ground surface, and another
is the foundation constructed 1m below the ground surface. The wall and foundation are
assumed as monolithic construction in the first part, and in the second part, bricks of size
0.5m×0.5m×0.5m are considered for the wall and foundation construction. The property
of the mortar used is the same material as the ground material with friction value of 0.7×
friction angle of ground material as an interface material. The finite element model of lime
stabilised rammed earth wall together with the foundation would be stabilised in PLAXIS
2D. The groundwater table is assumed below the depth of the foundation. A 15­noded
plain strain model is used to analyse the finite element model. The input parameters on
PLAXIS 2D model are presented in section 3.7. The design parameters are based on 28
days curing period.
5.1
Construction of wall on the ground surface
The mohr­coulomb model with drainage type drained is utilised to model the fill sand for
ground material and interface material, while the wall is modelled using drainage type
drained using the concrete material model.
The wall is constructed in three phases, as presented below:
1. Initial phase, a ground insitu model will be built up
2. Phase 1, construction of wall
3. Phase 2, action of wind loading with 1kN/m2 on the longitudinal section of the wall
5.1.1
Construction of the monolithic wall on the ground surface
The finite element deformed fine mesh is shown in Figure 5.1. The maximum displace­
ment value is 35.02mm.
The maximum horizontal displacement Ux in the direction of the wind is 31.81 mm, which
is at the top of the wall, and the maximum vertical displacement Uy is 14.66mm acted on
the leeward side of the wall.
The major principle stress developend in the wall is 191.6kPa, while the unconfined com­
pressive strength of the wall material is 576kPa, which shows only 33.26% of the com­
pressive strength of the wall material is mobilised. At the same time, the maximum value
of minor principle stress is 35.84kPa is experienced by the wall, while the designed tensile
strength is 43kPa. The tensile stress of 83.35% is mobilised on the wall.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
68
==PAGE:78==
Figure 5.1: Deformed mesh on PLAXIS 2D
The maximum value of cartesian shear stress, 30.71 kPa, is developed at the ground
below the leeward side of the wall. Simultaneously, the maximum tensile shear strength
developed in the ground below the windward side of the wall and is 28.44 kPa in the
foundation material. For the wall material, the calculated shear strength of the wall is
288kPa. The foundation experiences maximum shear strength of about 26.48 kPa at
the ground surface, which is about 9.20% of the lime stabilised rammed earth’s shear
strength. The minimum shear stress of 21.48 kPa is developed at the bottom of the wall
on the leeward side from the centre of the wall, which is 7.46% of the shear strength of
wall material.
The generated figures of principle stresses, total horizontal displacement, vertical dis­
placement, and cartesian shear stresses are attached in the Appendix L.
The foundation soil has failure points and the failure points on the ground surface are
extended on the wall’s leeward side, the shear failure can be seen in the foundation soil
as shown in Figure 5.2.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
69
==PAGE:79==
Figure 5.2: Plastic points at phase 2
5.1.2
Construction of brick wall on the ground surface
The interface material parameters in the construction of the wall using lime stabilised
rammed earth bricks on the ground surface used tensile strength of 4kPa, and cohesion
of 2kPa. The interface material of the cohesion of 1kPa, and tensile strength of 1kPa was
unable to withstand the design loads. This indicates that the interface material should use
cohesive material.
The deformed fine mesh of brick wall construction is shown in Figure 5.3. The maximum
displacement of 47.41 mm is at the top of the surface of the wall.
Figure 5.3: Deformed mesh on PLAXIS 2D, at phase 2
The maximum horizontal displacement Ux in the direction of the wind is 45.62 mm, which
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
70
==PAGE:80==
is at the top of the wall, and the maximum vertical displacement Uy is 12.90 mm acted on
the leeward side of the wall.
The maximum value of cartesian shear stress, 35.30 kPa, is developed at the ground
below the leeward side of the wall. Simultaneously, the maximum tensile shear strength
developed in the ground below the windward side of the wall is 28.94 kPa on the founda­
tion material. For the wall material, the calculated shear strength of the wall is 288 kPa.
The foundation experiences maximum shear strength of about 28.32 kPa at the ground
surface, which is about 9.83% of the lime stabilised rammed earth’s shear strength. The
maximum negative shear stress of 27.52 kPa was developed at the bottom of the wall on
the leeward side from the centre of the wall, which is 9.55% of the shear strength of wall
material.
The generated figured of principle stresses, total horizontal displacement, vertical dis­
placement, and cartesian shear stresses are attached in the Appendix M.
The foundation soil has failure points, and the failure points on the ground surface are
extended on the wall’s leeward side, and the shear failure surface can be seen in the
foundation soil as shown in Figure 5.4. The tension cutoff points are presented on the
interface material, which means minimum pressure becomes negative, which is not de­
sirable because the soil imposes very little tensile strength[51]. Plastic failure points ex­
tended throughout the interface from the top of the tension cutoff points.
Figure 5.4: Plastic points on PLAXIS 2D, at phase 2
5.2
Construction of wall with a one meter foundation
The ground soil and interface materials are modelled using the Mohr­Coulomb soil model,
while lime stabilised rammed earth material is modelled using the Concrete material model.
The model was constructed in the following three phases.
1. Initial phase, a ground insitu model will be built up
2. Phase 1, construction of wall
3. Phase 2, wind loading with 1kN/m2 on the longitudinal section of the wall
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
71
==PAGE:81==
5.2.1
Construction of monolithic wall with a one meter foundation
The deformed fine mesh is shown in Figure 5.5. The maximum displacement value is
11.96mm. The displacement is increase with the height of the wall and maximum at the
top surface.
Figure 5.5: Deformed mesh at Phase 2
Figure 5.6 shows the total displacement in the horizontal directionUx . Figure 5.6 shows
that the maximum displacement occurred on the top part of the wall, which is about
9.54mm. The displacement decreases with the height of the wall.
Figure 5.6: Total displacement Ux at phase 2
Total displacement Uy is shown in Figure 5.7. The maximum displacement in the vertical
direction is about 7.22mm on the leeward side of the wall.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
72
==PAGE:82==
Figure 5.7: Total displacement Uy at phase 2
The principal effective stresses are shown in Figure 5.8. The major principle stress devel­
oped on wall is 185.5kPa, while the unconfined compressive strength of the wall material
is 576kPa, which means only 32.2% of the compressive strength of the wall material is
mobilised. At the same time, and the minor principle stress of 24.19kPa is experienced
by the wall, while the designed tensile stress is 43kPa. The tensile stress of 56.26% is
mobilised on the wall. Figure 5.8 show stress is increases with the depth of the wall.
Figure 5.8: Effective principal stresses at phase 2
Figure 5.9 shows the cartesian shear stresses. The maximum value of shear stress 24.70
kPa is developed at the ground below of the leeward wall, at the same time, the maximum
tensile shear stress developed in the ground below the windward side in the wall is 25.46
kPa. The foundation experiences maximum shear strength of about 8.80kPa just below
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
73
==PAGE:83==
the ground surface. The minimum shear stress of 14.20kPa is developed on the centre
of the wall, below 0.77m of the ground surface. Shear stresses increase with a decrease
in the height of the wall, which is 4.94% of the shear stress of wall material. Therefore, it
shows all the shear stress of the wall material is not fully mobilised.
Figure 5.9: Caetesian shear stress σxy at phase 2
Plastic points are shown in Figure 5.10. The foundation soil has plastic failure points, and
the failure points on the ground surface is extended on both to the windward and leeward
side of the wall.
Figure 5.10: Plastic points at phase 2
5.2.2
Construction of brick wall with a one meter foundation
The deformed fine mesh is shown in Figure 5.11. The maximum displacement value is
22.38mm at the top of the wall.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
74
==PAGE:84==
Figure 5.11: Deformed mesh at Phase 2
Total displacement Ux is shown in Figure 5.12. The maximum displacement in the wind
direction is about 20.86mm, and acted at the top portion of the wall. The horizontal dis­
placement decreases with the height of the wall.
Figure 5.12: Total displacement Ux at phase 2
Total displacement Uy is shown in Figure 5.13. The maximum displacement in the vertical
direction is about 8.11mm on the leeward side of the wall.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
75
==PAGE:85==
Figure 5.13: Total displacement Uy at phase 2
The principal effective stresses are shown in Figure 5.14. The maximum principle stress
experienced by the wall is 230.0kPa, while the unconfined compressive strength of the
wall material is 576kPa, which shows that only 40% of the compressive strength of the
wall material is mobilised. At the same time, the minor principle stress of 26.01kPa is
experienced by the wall, while the designed tensile strength is 43kPa. The tensile stress
of 60.49% is mobilised on the wall. The principle stresses increase with the height of the
wall decreases.
Figure 5.14: Effective principal stresses at phase 2
Cartesian shear stresses is shown in Figure 5.15. The maximum value of shear stress
22.87 kPa is developed at the ground below of the leeward wall, at the same time, the
maximum tensile shear strength developed in the ground below the windward side in the
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
76
==PAGE:86==
wall is 26.90 kPa. The calculated shear strength of the wall is 288kPa. The foundation
experiences maximum shear strength of about 8.76 kPa just below the ground surface,
which is about 3.04% of the lime stabilised rammed earth’s tensile strength. The minimum
shear stress of 17.86kPa is developed on the centre of the wall, below 0.70m of the ground
surface, which is 6.20% of the shear strength of wall material. Shear stresses increase
with the height of the wall.
Figure 5.15: Caetesian shear stress σxy at phase 2
Plastic points are shown in Figure 5.16. The foundation soil and interface material have
failure points. The failure points are extended to the vertical interface, few horizontal
interface and in the foundation soil, failure points are extended on both the windward and
leeward sides of the wall.
Figure 5.16: Plastic points at phase 2
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
77
==PAGE:87==
6
Interpretation and discussion
This chapter will discuss the results from the unconfined compression tests and repeated
loading and unloading tests on lime stabilised rammed earth. In addition, the UCS and
stiffness value evolution with curing period, unloading reloading modulus and findings on
the design of the foundation will be presented.
A number of studies have been published to determine the unconfined compressive strength
of lime stabilised rammed earth considering the parameters such as Young’s modulus,
mixing procedure, specimen shape and dimensions, curing temperature, relative humid­
ity, curing time, curing methods, and soil type.
The unconfined compressive strength of lime stabilised rammed earth is almost the same
within one day. This is because the lime is used to kill the plasticity of the soil, and one day
is too early for the formation of calcium silicates. The strength gained with curing time is
related to the formation of the calcium silicates. The calcium silicate formation varies with
the soil’s mineralogical components[16]. The UCS value of lime stabilised rammed earth
specimen immediately after production is measured 334.00 kPa, while the same value for
one day curing period is measured at an average value of 350.00 kPa. The failure strain
decreases to around 1% for lime stabilised specimens, compared to 2.56% for natural
rammed earth samples. Similar results were found by Kavak and Baykal [25].
Figure 6.1 shows the relation between unconfined compression strength and curing pe­
riod. The UCS value increases instantly from the addition of lime and increases linearly
until 91 day curing period. The moisture loss in the specimens indicates that more mois­
ture loss occurred in the samples sealed in the plastic immediately after production, than
in the specimens confined within the mould. After that period of time, the strength will in­
crease further, though this is not measured in this project. The strength increase linearly
from the day of curing time.
Figure 6.1: Unconfined compressive strength in relation to curing period
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
78
==PAGE:88==
The trend of increasing UCS with time is clearly seen in Figure 6.1. The relationship
between the UCS value of lime stabilised rammed earth and the curing period can be
estimated by the equation qu=7.69t + 346.81, (where t is curing time is in days) with the
coefficient of determination R2= 0.92, which is valid for curing period of up to 91 days.
It is also seen, that referring the Appendix H to Appendix K, the failure strength of re­
peated loading and unloading specimens, without saturation is higher than that of uncon­
fined compression testing specimens. However, repeated loading and unloading failure
strength is much lower than the UCS value for 91 days curing period.
Figure 6.2 shows the relation between elastic modulus (E) and curing period. Elastic
modulus is calculated using the slopes of the stress strain curve between 35% and 75%
of the failure stress. The soil shows brittle behaviour with lime[23]. Notable increases in
stiffness occur within the first seven days, where cementitious reactions are more active.
The relationship between the stiffness value of lime stabilised rammed earth and the cur­
ing period can be estimated by the equation E=125.51×t + 63.66, (where t is curing time
in days) with the coefficient of determination R2= 0.96. The stiffness value for a 28 day
curing period specimen S28­2811 is excluded for this relationship.
Figure 6.2: Elastic modulus in relation to curing period
It is difficult to compare the unconfined compressive strength and elastic modulus of lime
stabilised soil because the strength and stiffness development depends mainly on soil
mineralogy, chemical characteristics, and geotechnical properties of soil. For this study,
the test results are compared to Kavak and Baykal [25] because of the similarity in the
sample preparation and curing methods.
Kavak and Baykal [25] used Kaolinite clay. The UCS value of natural kaolinite was 125
kPa, while at 28 days, lime stabilised strength reached to 1015kPa. The Vinge soil has a
natural UCS value of 275 kPa, and in 28 days UCS value reached to 576 kPa. However,
the stiffness of Vinge soil increases dramatically within seven days, which is an average
of 86 MPa, while the same for kaolinite is 45 MPa. The 28 days stiffness for kaolinite was
58 MPa, same for Vinge soil is 91 MPa, these results show that the increase in strength
and stiffness of lime stabilised soil is not proportional. In the long term treatment, poz­
zolanic reactions are responsible for improvements in strength and durability. Pozzolanic
reactions depend upon the clay mineralogy[17]. The relation between UCS and elastic
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
79
==PAGE:89==
modulus is shown in Figure 6.3. The relationship between the stiffness value of lime sta­
bilised rammed earth and the UCS value can be compared by the equation E=171.3× qu,
with the coefficient of determination R2= 0.98.
Figure 6.3: Elastic modulus in relation to unconfined compressive strength
The long term strength gain of lime stabilised soil is very high. The design strength of
lime stabilised soil in many design methods uses unconfined strength and stiffness of 28
days or three months of cured samples. However, the strength gain can continue for ten
years, and the water content and drying effect might be crucial in the long term[25].
Figure 6.4: Unconfined compressive strength in relation with bulk density
The variation in the specimen’s density is influenced by the specimen mixing, preparation
method, and compaction energy resulted in the pre­consolidation pressure, which is as­
sociated with an increase in strength. Thus, it is reasonable to expect that the higher the
density of the specimen the higher the compressive strength. The UCS is plotted with bulk
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
80
==PAGE:90==
density in Figure 6.4. The results do not reveal any clear relationship with the expectation
of higher compressive strength with higher density. The moisture loss also depends on
the sample mixing, preparation procedure and sealed method during curing time. It can
be observed that the specimen produced in the big mixture in the concrete lab shows a
higher moisture loss than that of the specimen produced using the small mixture in Geo­
lab. The specimens cured within the mould have higher moisture loss than those sealed
in the plastic. However, there is no clear relationship between unconfined compressive
strength and moisture loss during curing time, shown in Figure 6.4 and Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: Unconfined compressive strength in relation to moisture loss during curing
The Figure 6.6 shows the average repeated unloading and reloading modulus of one,
seven, twenty eight, and ninety one day curing period specimens without addition of wa­
ter. Figure 6.6 demonstrates the elastic modulus value from the unloading and reloading
curve, on which 28 days of unloading and reloading modulus is used to design the wall.
There is a huge deviation in the measured values. The unloading reloading modulus for
the design of the wall foundation is used 350MPa, evaluating the modulus on one day,
seven days, and 28 days test specimens and below the average loading unloading modu­
lus of the test specimen. In addition, it can be seen that the unloading reloading modulus
increases with the increase of the curing period.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
81
==PAGE:91==
Figure 6.6: Unloading reloading modulus in relation with curing time without addition of
water
The Figure 6.7 presents unloading reloading modulus, Eur with stage saturation, which
shows the seven days specimen is stiffer compared to other samples. Furthermore, the
specimens tested in repeated loading and unloading with stage saturation failed in a set­
tlement instead of shear failure.
Figure 6.7: Unloading reloading modulus in relation with curing time with saturation
The actual Young’s modulus on unloading reloading (Eur) depends on stress level, which
is used for modelling the elastic unloading reloading behaviour. The relation between
the Young’s modulus E50 and Eur for soil is given by Equation 6.1 [52]. This relation is
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
82
==PAGE:92==
also true for the lime stabilised rammed earth, even though the results are dispersed and
inconsistent.
Eur
E50
= 2 to 6
(6.1)
Table 6.1 presents the difference between repeated loading and unloading failure strength
with and without saturation. The results indicate that there was a significant degradation
of repeated loading and unloading failure strength with saturation, compared to when the
soil was not saturated. This degradation was observed to dramatically decreased from 36
days to 83 days of curing. However, the percentage of reduction in failure strength was
found to be consistent from the curing period of 1 day to 36 days, suggesting that the rate
of degradation of failure strength is relatively constant during this time.
Table 6.1: Comparison of failure strength of stage saturation and without saturation on
repeated loading and unloading test
The laboratory data are used to design the foundation together with a wall. There are
two approaches to the design, one is the construction of the wall at the ground surface
with monolithic construction and construction of bricks with lime stabilised rammed earth
bricks, and the other is founded one meter below the ground surface for both monolithic
and brick construction.
The maximum horizontal displacement on the top of the wall is 47.41mm when the wall
is constructed using bricks on the ground surface. The maximum displacement value is
reduced to 9.55mm when the monolithic wall is founded 1m into the ground. At the same
time, when the wall is constructed with a 1m deep foundation using bricks, the maximum
horizontal displacement will be 20.86mm. The horizontal displacement decreases with
the height of the wall.
Construction of a wall on the ground surface experiences the maximum shear stresses
compared to a wall constructed with a 1m deep foundation. The maximum value of carte­
sian shear stress, 30.79 kPa, is developed at the ground below the leeward wall. Simulta­
neously, the maximum tensile shear strength developed in the ground below the windward
side of the wall is 28.44 kPa on the foundation material. Shear stresses increase with the
depth of the wall.
For the wall material, the calculated shear strength of the wall is 288kPa. The foundation
experiences maximum shear strength of about 26.48 kPa at the ground surface, which is
about 9.20% of the lime stabilised rammed earth’s shear strength. The minimum shear
stress of 21.48 kPa is developed at the bottom of the wall on the leeward side from the
centre of the wall, which is 7.46% of the shear strength of wall material.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
83
==PAGE:93==
7
Conclusion
This chapter is dedicated to the conclusions of this investigation, followed by some rec­
ommendations on future works. The rammed earth used for this project was from Vinge
city, Denmark. The lime content used for this investigation was 5% of the mass of dry
soil, and burnt lime was used for the rammed earth soil stabilisation. The optimum mois­
ture content was measured using an automatic standard proctor test on lime treated soil,
which was 16% of the dry mass of the rammed earth.
This project was an outcome of extensive laboratory investigation and evaluation of the
strength and stiffness development of lime stabilised rammed earth in relation to the curing
period. In addition, the repeated loading and unloading modulus was also investigated
with the curing time.
The unconfined compressive strength and elastic modulus of curing period of 1 day, 7
days, 28 days and 91 days were measured using a triaxial compression testing machine.
In addition, repeated loading and unloading tests with and without saturation were con­
ducted to determine the unloading reloading modulus of the lime stabilised rammed earth
to investigate the evolution of strength parameters with curing time. However, the wall
foundation design based on 28 days of strength parameters.
The results indicate that the unconfined compressive strength and stiffness increase with
the curing period. However, the criteria for soil stabilisation is that the strength increased
by 345kPa or greater at room temperature compared to untreated rammed earth. The
stabilised soil, which increased the strength to less than 345 kPa, is called lime modified
soil[18]. The unconfined compression strength of unstabilised rammed earth is measured
275kPa, and the measured UCS value of stabilised rammed earth is 576 kPa.
The stiffness on the specimen with a curing period of seven days increases sharply and
increases linearly until 91 day. However, the unconfined compression strength increases
linearly until the curing period’s ninety one days.
The calculated unloading reloading modulus (Eur) values have higher deviation on a
twenty eight day curing period, even though the deviation on Eur is comparable for one
day curing period. In the repeated loading and unloading test the specimens with satura­
tion, one day, twenty eight days, and eighty three days samples are failed in settlement,
while seven days curing time specimen showed stiff behaviour. The Eur value on five
cycle is much higher than that of the first stage Eur value on the seven days curing time
specimen.
The models from the PLAXIS 2D results indicate that the strength of the material is par­
tially utilized during construction, leading to the development of tension cracks and plastic
failure points in the interface. Additionally, the results suggest that using a cohesive mor­
tar as a binder for bricks may be a better solution, and that the unconfined compressive
strength of the material decreases when it becomes saturated with water.
In conclusion, the foundation material strength parameters are not fully mobilised by the
loading on the wall. Saturation on the foundation causes settlement failure instead of
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
84
==PAGE:94==
shear failure, which shows that the lime stabilised soil showed poor resistance to water
immersion. However, the degradation in failure strength decreases with the curing period.
Therefore, even though the saturated repeated loading and unloading failure strength
is able to sustain the maximum principle stress experienced in the wall, the saturated
repeated loading and unloading failure strength is unable to conclude that the loading on
the wall can withstand while the foundation is in saturation because of the instant addition
of water for repeated loading and unloading test.
7.1
Future works
The unconfined compression test was conducted on the lime stabilised soil without satu­
ration, as the lime stabilised rammed earth is used as a foundation, which may get fully
saturated. The specimens can be tested using an immersion test using the standard for
immersion testing to determine the stress strain characteristics, failure mode, durability
and swelling behaviour of lime stabilised rammed earth.
The freezing and thawing effect of the lime stabilised rammed earth can be checked using
the freezing and thawing test.
Test on XRD can be employed to figure out the specific minerals in the soil. The strength
gained with curing time is related to the formation of the calcium silicates and the calcium
silicate formation varies with the soil’s mineralogical components.[16]
It is advisable to conduct a tensile strength test on lime treated soil on Vinge rammed
earth, as it is an essential parameter in the design of the structures.
The lime mortar is used to join stabilised earth bricks, and it is advisable to determine the
proportion of soil and lime, water content and evaluation of the compressive strength of
lime mortar[53].
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
85
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
Global climate action strategy. URL: https://um.dk/en/foreign-policy/new-climate-
action-strategy.
[2]
D. Gallipoli et al. A geotechnical perspective of raw earth building. June 2017. DOI:
10.1007/s11440-016-0521-1.
[3]
K. A. J. Ouedraogo et al. “Is stabilization of earth bricks using low cement or lime
contents relevant?” In: Construction and Building Materials 236 (Mar. 2020). ISSN:
09500618. DOI: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2019.117578.
[4]
S. O. Manzoor and A. Yousuf. “Stabilisationof Soils with Lime: A Review”. In: Journal
of materials and environmental science 11.9 (2020), pp. 1538–1551. ISSN: 2028­
2508. URL: http://www.jmaterenvironsci.com.
[5]
J. K. Mitchell and K. Soga. Fundamentals of Soil Behavior. Elsevier Inc., 2005.
[6]
K. Frye. “Rock­forming minerals”. In: Mineralogy. Springer US, 1983, pp. 447–449.
[7]
T. R. Simonsen. “Danmarks lumske ler”. In: AKTUEL NATURVIDENSKAB 6 (2017).
URL: www.onlinedoctranslator.com.
[8]
O. G. Ingles and J. B. Metcalf. Soil stabilization principles and practice. Butter­
worths, 1972.
[9]
F. G. Bell. “Lime stabilisation of clay soils”. In: (1989).
[10]
D. N. Little and S. Nair. Recommended Practice for Stabilization of Subgrade Soils
and Base Materials. Tech. rep. NCHRP Project 20­07, 2009.
[11]
G. H. Hilt and D. T. Davidson. Lime Fixation in Clayey Soils. Tech. rep.
[12]
P. Sherwood. Soil stabilization with cement and lime. Second. HMSO, 1995.
[13]
O. Q. Jan and B. A. Mir. “Strength and Micro Structural Behavior of Lime Stabilized
Dredged Soil”. In: Sustainable Civil Infrastructures. Springer Science and Business
Media B.V., 2019, pp. 132–153. ISBN: 9783030019167. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-
01917-4{\_}11.
[14]
F.G. Bell. “Lime stabilization of clay minerals and soils”. In: (1996).
[15]
S. K. Dash and M. Hussain. “Lime Stabilization of Soils: Reappraisal”. In: Journal
of Materials in Civil Engineering 24.6 (June 2012), pp. 707–714. ISSN: 0899­1561.
DOI: 10.1061/(asce)mt.1943-5533.0000431.
[16]
J. L. Eades and R. E. Grim. “A Quick Test to Determine Lime Requirements For
Lime Stabilization”. In: (1966), pp. 61–72.
[17]
D. N. Little. Handbook for stabilization of pavement subgrades and base courses
with lime. First. Lime Association of Texas, 1995.
[18]
M. R. Thompson. Suggested method for mixture design procedure for lime­treated
soils. Tech. rep. 1970. URL: www.astm.org.
[19]
Transportation research board. Reactions, properties, design and construction. Tech.
rep. 1986.
[20]
Danish Standard Association. “Earthworks­Part 4: Soil treatment with lime and/or
hydraulic binders”. In: DS/EN 16907­4:2018, 2018. URL: www.ds.dk.
[21]
F. Avila, E. Puertas, and R. Gallego. Characterization of the mechanical and phys­
ical properties of unstabilized rammed earth: A review. Feb. 2021. DOI: 10.1016/j.
conbuildmat.2020.121435.
[22]
S. Burroughs. “Recommendations for the selection, stabilization, and compaction
of soil for rammed earth wall construction”. In: 5 (), p. 101. URL: http://meridian.
allenpress.com/jgb/article-pdf/5/1/101/1770053/jgb_5_1_101.pdf.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
86
==PAGE:96==
[23]
F. Avila, E. Puertas, and R. Gallego. “Experimental evaluation of the optimum lime
content and strength development of lime­stabilized rammed earth”. In: International
Journal of Computational Methods and Experimental Measurements 9.3 (2021),
pp. 239–248. ISSN: 20460554. DOI: 10.2495/CMEM-V9-N3-239-248.
[24]
D. Ciancio, C. T. S. Beckett, and J. A. H. Carraro. “Optimum lime content identifi­
cation for lime­stabilised rammed earth”. In: Construction and Building Materials 53
(Feb. 2014), pp. 59–65. ISSN: 09500618. DOI: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2013.11.077.
[25]
A. Kavak and G. Baykal. “Long­term behavior of lime­stabilized kaolinite clay”. In:
Environmental Earth Sciences 66.7 (Aug. 2011), pp. 1943–1955. ISSN: 18666280.
DOI: 10.1007/s12665-011-1419-8.
[26]
M. C. Tonoz, R. Ulusay, and C. Gokceoglu. “Effects of Lime Stabilization on Engi­
neering Properties of Expansive Ankara Clay”. In: Apr. 2004, pp. 466–474.
[27]
A. Kavak and A. Akyarli. “A field application for lime stabilization”. In: Environmental
Geology 51.6 (Jan. 2007), pp. 987–997. ISSN: 09430105. DOI: 10.1007/s00254-
006-0368-0.
[28]
National Lime Association. Lime­treated soil construction manual Lime Stabilization
& lime modification. Tech. rep. National Lime Association, Jan. 2004.
[29]
Swedish council for building research. “The lime column method”. In: Swedish coun­
cil for building research (1988).
[30]
B. B. Broms and P. Boman. “Stabilisation of soil with lime columns”. In: Ground
Engineering (1979).
[31]
B. B. Broms. “Stabilization of Soil with Lime Columns”. In: Foundation Engineer­
ing Handbook. Ed. by Fang HY. Second. Springer, Boston, MA., 1991. Chap. 24,
pp. 833–855. ISBN: 978­1­4757­5271­7. DOI: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/
10.1007/978-1-4757-5271-7{\_}24.
[32]
A. Guettala et al. Durability of lime stabilized earth blocks. Tech. rep. 2002, pp. 61–
66.
[33]
M. Yldz and A. S. Soganc. “Effect of freezing and thawing on strength and per­
meability of lime­stabilized clays”. In: Scientia Iranica 19.4 (2012), pp. 1013–1017.
ISSN: 10263098. DOI: 10.1016/j.scient.2012.06.003.
[34]
Danish Standards Association. “Geotechnical investigation and testing­Laboratory
testing of soil­Part 3: Determination of particle density”. In: DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892­
3:2015. 2016.
[35]
Danish Standards Association. “Geotechnical investigation and testing­Laboratory
testing of soil­Part 12: Determination of Atterberg limits”. In: DS/CEN ISO/TS 17892­
12, 2004.
[36]
H. O. Abbas. “Assessment of accuracy in determining Atterberg limits for four Iraqi
local soil laboratories”. In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineer­
ing 433.1 (Nov. 2018). ISSN: 1757899X. DOI: 10.1088/1757-899X/433/1/012030.
[37]
Danish Standards Association. “Geotechnical investigation and testing­Laboratory
testing of soil­Part 4: Determination of particle size distribution”. In: 2016.
[38]
S. Nayak and H. K. Preetham. “Effect of drying temperature and rewetting on the
engineering properties of marine clay”. In: Transportation Infrastructure Geotech­
nology 7.4 (Dec. 2020), pp. 517–534. ISSN: 21967210. DOI: 10.1007/s40515-020-
00105-y.
[39]
METER Group AG. PARIO user manual. 2017.
[40]
Danish Standards Association. “Test methods for laboratory reference density and
water content­Proctor compaction”. In: DS/EN 13286­2, 2010. ISBN: 132862:2010.
[41]
K. H. Head. “Compaction tests”. In: Manual of Soil Laboratory Testing. second. Whit­
tles Publishing, 1992, pp. 310–364.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
87
==PAGE:97==
[42]
W. Al­Jabban et al. Common laboratory procedures to prepare and cure stabilised
soil specimens: A short review. Dec. 2019. DOI: 10.1680/jgere.19.00035.
[43]
B. V. V. Reddy. Compressed Earth Block & Rammed Earth Structures. Tech. rep.
2021. URL: https://link.springer.com/bookseries/13593.
[44]
Danish Standards Association. “Geotechnical investigation and testing ­ Laboratory
testing of soil ­ Part 7: Unconfined compression test”. In: DS/EN ISO 17892­7:2018,
2018. ISBN: 178927:2017. URL: www.ds.dk.
[45]
Bentley. PLAXIS 2D­Reference Manual. Vol. V20.02. 2020.
[46]
Bentley. PLAXIS materials models, Connectedition V20.02. Ed. by Bentley. Bentley,
2020.
[47]
M. Gunaratne. The foundation engineering handbook. Taylor & Francis, 2006.
[48]
H. Araki, J. Koseki, and T. Sato. “Tensile strength of compacted rammed earth ma­
terials”. In: Soils and Foundations 56.2 (Apr. 2016), pp. 189–204. ISSN: 00380806.
DOI: 10.1016/j.sandf.2016.02.003.
[49]
A. Corbin and C. Augarde. “Fracture Energy of Stabilised Rammed Earth”. In: Pro­
cedia Materials Science 3 (2014), pp. 1675–1680. ISSN: 22118128. DOI: 10.1016/
j.mspro.2014.06.270.
[50]
M. Hasan and M. Y. Fattah. “Engineering properties of clayey soil stabilized with
lime”. In: (2016). URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/295605758.
[51]
B.M. Das and Sivakugan N. Principles of foundation engineering. 9th ed. Cengage,
2019.
[52]
F.o. Rafal and T. Andrzej. The hardening soil model ­ A practical guidebook. Tech.
rep. 2018. URL: http://www.zsoil.com,.
[53]
M. Apostolopoulou et al. “Compressive strength of natural hydraulic lime mortars us­
ing soft computing techniques”. In: Procedia Structural Integrity 17 (2019), pp. 914–
923. ISSN: 24523216. DOI: 10.1016/j.prostr.2019.08.122.
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
88
==PAGE:98==
Appendix
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
89
==PAGE:99==
A
Grain size distribution
Table A.1: Sieve analysis
Table A.2: Hydrometer analysis
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
90
==PAGE:100==
B
Natural moisture content
Table B.1: Natural moisture content
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
91
==PAGE:101==
C
Loss on ignition
Table C.1: Loss on ignition test
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
92
==PAGE:102==
D
Particle density
Table D.1: Particle density
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
93
==PAGE:103==
E
Atterberg limits
Table E.1: Plastic limit (PL)
Table E.2: Liquid limit (LL)
Figure E.1: LL Water content vs. cone penetration on a semi­log scale
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
94
==PAGE:104==
F
Standard proctor test on rammed earth
Table F.1: Standard proctor test data on rammed earth
Table F.2: Water content determination on standard proctor test of rammed earth
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
95
==PAGE:105==
G
Standard proctor test on lime treated
rammed earth
Table G.1: Standard proctor test data on lime treated rammed earth
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
96
==PAGE:106==
H
Repeated loading unloading test on a
one day curing period specimen
H.1
Repeated loading and unloading test on a one day curing
period specimen with saturation
Figure H.1: Repeated loading and unloading test of one day curing time on specimen
C1­1511W
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
97
==PAGE:107==
Figure H.2: Repeated loading and unloading test of a one day curing time on specimen
C1­2911W
H.2
Repeated loading and unloading test on a one day curing
period specimen without saturation
Figure H.3: Repeated loading and unloading test of a one day curing time on specimen
C1­0612
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
98
==PAGE:108==
Figure H.4: Repeated loading and unloading test of a one day curing time on specimen
C1­1312
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
99
==PAGE:109==
I
Repeated loading unloading test on a
seven day curing period specimen
I.1
Repeated loading and unloading test on a seven day
curing period specimen with saturation
Figure I.1: Repeated loading and unloading test of a seven day curing time on specimen
C7­1711W
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
100
==PAGE:110==
I.2
Repeated loading and unloading test on a seven day
curing period specimen without saturation
Figure I.2: Repeated loading and unloading test of a seven day curing time on specimen
C7­1212
Figure I.3: Repeated loading and unloading test of a seven day curing time on specimen
C7­0512
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
101
==PAGE:111==
J
Repeated loading and unloading test on
a twenty eight day curing period
specimen
J.1
Repeated loading and unloading test on a twenty eight
day curing period specimen with saturation
Figure J.1: Repeated loading and unloading test of a twenty eight day curing time on
specimen C28­2811W
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
102
==PAGE:112==
J.2
Repeated loading and unloading test on a twenty eight
day curing period specimen without saturation
Figure J.2: Repeated loading and unloading test of a twenty eight day curing time on
specimen C28­0212
Figure J.3: Repeated loading and unloading test of a twenty eight day curing time on
specimen C28­1212
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
103
==PAGE:113==
Figure J.4: Repeated loading and unloading test of a thirty five day curing time on speci­
men C35­0301
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
104
==PAGE:114==
K
Repeated loading unloading test on a
ninety one day curing period specimen
K.1
Repeated loading and unloading test on a eighty three
day curing period specimen with saturation
Figure K.1: Repeated loading and unloading test of a eighty three day curing time on
specimen C83­0102W
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
105
==PAGE:115==
K.2
Repeated loading and unloading test on a ninety one day
curing period specimen without saturation
Figure K.2: Repeated loading and unloading test of a ninety one day curing time on spec­
imen C91­0102
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
106
==PAGE:116==
L
PLAXIS 2D modelling with monolithic
construction
L.1
Construction of monolithic wall on ground surface
Figure L.1: Effective principal stresses at phase 2
Figure L.2: Cartesian shear stresses σxy at phase 2
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
107
==PAGE:117==
Figure L.3: Total horizontal displacement Ux at phase 2
Figure L.4: Total vertical displacement Uy at phase 2
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
108
==PAGE:118==
M
PLAXIS 2D modelling using a brick
construction
M.1
Construction of brick wall on ground surface
Figure M.1: Effective principal stresses at phase 2
Figure M.2: Cartesian shear stresses σxy at phase 2
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
109
==PAGE:119==
Figure M.3: Total horizontal displacement Ux at phase 2
Figure M.4: Total vertical displacement Uy at phase 2
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
110
==PAGE:120==
Evaluation of lime stabilised rammed earth as foundation concept for walls
111
==PAGE:121==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Section for Geotechnics and Geology
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
