==PAGE:1==
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
Predicting Awards from Textual and Network Features
Master Thesis
Lasse Pelle Skytte Hansen
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
Predicting Awards from Textual and Network Features
Master Thesis
March, 2022
By
Lasse Pelle Skytte Hansen
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Building 324, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark ­ www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree
Master of Science in Human­Centered Artificial Intelligence, MSc Eng.
This thesis is credited 35 ETCS and was conducted during the period from the 12th
September 2022 to the 10th March 2023. It was supervised by Sune Lehmann Jørgensen
& Laura Alessandretti.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, machine
learning, and computer science.
Lasse Pelle Skytte Hansen ­ s154446
Signature
Date
ii
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis explores how the acknowledgment of individuals can be quantitatively mea­
sured by exploiting the Reddit award system. The thesis primarily focuses on data from
the subreddit Wallstreetbets, where we analyzed the social dynamics of the community
using network science and natural language processing. We developed a deep learning
model that classifies awarded posts, using network features and the transformer model
ELECTRA. Finally, we explained some of the underlying social mechanisms within the
community, revealing a ”rich get richer” effect for the award system, where the probability
of receiving an award increases prior to the amount previously awarded posts. We also
investigate the impact of the network size on individuals’ identity within the community,
revealing that larger networks have different social dynamics, making it more challenging
for individuals to establish identity. Overall, this research provides insights into how repu­
tation is formed and maintained within online communities and the factors that contribute
to it.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
A huge thanks to my supervisor Laura Alessandretti for the guidance throughout the whole
process!
A special thanks to my fellow students at G. A. Hagemanns Kollegium for the motivational
talks and input.
iv
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Reddit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Reputation & Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Reviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Data
9
3.1
Gathering the Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
The Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Methods
19
4.1
Data Science Tools & Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Network Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Natural Language Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.5
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Results ­ Factors of Awarded Posts
27
5.1
Defining Acknowledgment on Reddit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
The Effect of Reputation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.3
Network Features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.4
Textual Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.5
Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.6
Other Subreddits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6
Results ­ Explaining & Predicting Awarded Posts
47
6.1
Predicting Awarded Posts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Individuals Identity in Communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.3
Awards Increases Awards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7
Discussion
59
7.1
Awards as a Metric of Reputation & Acknowledgment
. . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7.2
Network Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7.3
Text
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7.4
Predicting Reputation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
7.5
Rich Get Richer Effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7.6
Identity Importance for Reputation in Communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7.7
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
8
Conclusion
65
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
v
==PAGE:8==
Bibliography
67
A Appendix
71
A.1 Text Examples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.2 ELECTRA ­ PCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A.3 Features by Date . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
A.4 Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
A.5 Appendix ­ Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
B Code
86
B.1 Model: Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
B.2 Model: Neural Network + ELECTRA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
vi
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Since the origins of social network analysis, there has been an interest in identifying the
most influential individuals of a social network. Researchers have proposed several mea­
sures to quantify the relevance of individuals, such as the ”centrality” of a node in the
network. However, it is still unclear if these traditional measures and methods within
social science can effectively explain the importance of an individual. The online social
platform Reddit uses a system where users can give others recognition for their contri­
butions, through a system of ”awards” it provides a unique opportunity to quantitatively
measure the acknowledgment of an individual. We will in this thesis investigate how the
reputation and acknowledgment of individuals are explained through traditional network
science, by exploiting the award system. We will gather data from Reddit and construct
social networks from the users’ interaction via posts and comments. The final aim is to
develop a deep learning model that predicts if a post is awarded using network science
features and the textual content created by the individual. Moreover, we will also explore
some of the underlying patterns within social networks.
Understanding online social networks are essential because they have the power to influ­
ence real­world outcomes, from consumer behavior to political activism. By connecting
people across the globe, these networks facilitate the rapid spread of information and
ideas, which can shape public opinion, impact business decisions, and even drive social
change. However, they also have the potential to perpetuate harmful stereotypes and mis­
information, making it crucial to investigate and understand the underlying mechanism of
how content and reputation propagate.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Reddit
Reddit is an online social network of a variety of communities where people can share and
discuss interests. These communities are called subreddits. Reddit was founded in June
2005 and is the 9th most visited website in 2022 with approximately 52 million users world­
wide. The platform has been involved in various social and political movements, making
it a significant force in shaping online discourse and public opinion. Additionally, Reddit
is a huge part of internet culture and a valuable resource for people seeking information
and conversation on a diverse range of topics [1], [2].
1.2.1
The Structure of Reddit
Reddit consists of a variety of different subreddits where people can discuss and share
different interests. On these subreddits, people can make posts and make comments on
posts. Examples of posts can be seen in Appendix A.1. It is also possible to comment on
comments, which creates a tree­like structure, see Figure 1.1 [3].
Figure 1.1: The figure shows the post/comment structure of Reddit
1.2.2
Upvotes & Awards
Reddit uses a system of upvotes/downvotes, which works similarly to other social plat­
forms e.g. ”likes”. Posts/comments get a total score, where upvotes count as +1 and
downvotes as −1. This system can be used for users to express their overall sentiment
toward the content. Additionally, Reddit uses a system called ”karma”, which is the aver­
age of upvotes/downvotes across all of the user’s content.
Reddit also uses an award system, where users can award each other with virtual trophies
for their contributions, each with its own icon and name. Awards are often used to show
appreciation for posts or comments. Awards cost Reddit Coins depending on the type of
award. Users can purchase Reddit Coins for real money, which can then be used to give
awards or to access premium features on the site. Awards serve as a way to highlight
exceptional content and to recognize the effort and expertise of users [3].
2
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:11==
1.3
Reputation & Acknowledgment
Cambridge Dictionary uses the following definition for reputation [4].
”The opinion that people, in general, have about someone or something, or how much
respect or admiration someone or something receives, based on past behavior or
character”
The definition of reputation emphasizes the importance of public opinion and perception
in defining how individuals are perceived by others. An individual’s past behavior is fun­
damental in determining their reputation, which can be positive or negative depending on
how others perceive them.
In the context of this project, the focus is on understanding and explaining the positive rep­
utation that is captured by Reddit awards. These awards serve as a means of acknowl­
edgment of individuals who have made positive contributions to the Reddit community.
The principles of acknowledgment and recognition are crucial in building and maintain­
ing positive reputations, as they help to establish credibility and trustworthiness among
others.
Reputation is an essential aspect of social interactions, particularly in the digital age where
individuals are increasingly reliant on online platforms to connect and engage with oth­
ers. By exploring the nature of positive reputation and how it is conveyed through Reddit
awards, this project aims to contribute to a deeper understanding of how acknowledg­
ment and recognition principles contribute to the construction and valuation of reputation
in online communities.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
3
==PAGE:12==
1.4
Scope
We will address the following hypotheses in this thesis.
I. On Reddit individuals with a high reputation are more likely to receive awards.
II. It is possible to predict if a Reddit post is awarded by using the content of the post
and the position of the author in the social network.
III. The likelihood of receiving an award increases prior to the number of awards previ­
ously received by the author.
IV. It is harder for individuals on Reddit to be recognized and establish an identity in
larger networks.
In order to do this, we will gather data from different subreddits. The investigation will fo­
cus on understanding how users’ reputations and acknowledgment from others are built
through their interactions with others on the platform. The first step is to analyze how
reputation is captured through Reddit’s system of ”awards”. The thesis focuses primarily
on the subreddit Wallstreetbets. This study will investigate how these signals of approval
and recognition can be used to determine an individual’s level of reputation. To better
understand the social dynamics we will construct social networks from the interactions
between users via posts and comments, and measure different properties of the network,
as well as the overall social behavior. Additionally, a textual analysis will be conducted
on individuals’ content to uncover underlying patterns, using textual feature extractions
and a deep learning transformer model. Underlying patterns will be investigated on how
these textual and network features can be used to explain the reputation and acknowl­
edgment of individuals. The ultimate goal of the thesis is to develop a machine­learning
model that classifies if a post is awarded using both network features and the textual con­
tent written by individuals. By combining these two types of features, the model has the
potential to provide insights into the complex nature of reputation on online social plat­
forms. Additionally, we will investigate some of the underlying social mechanisms that
affect Reddit’s award system. This includes the social dynamics of the award system
and how the likelihood of receiving an award increases prior to the number of previous
awards. Furthermore, we will investigate how the identity of individuals changes for larger
networks by examining the reciprocity of the edges and the number of direct mentions of
individuals.
Structure
The thesis is divided into the following 8 chapters:
• Introduction
• Literature Review
• Data
• Methods
• Results ­ Factors of Awarded Posts
• Results ­ Explaining & Predicting Awarded Posts
• Discussion
• Conclusion
The thesis contains an appendix with additional figures and tables that were not included
in the main text. Additionally, a GitHub repository can be found here which contains the
source code behind the thesis.
4
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
In order to gain insight and a broader understanding of the field within this thesis, we
conducted a literature review. This chapter investigates relevant research within network
science, online communities, and machine learning. This section presents the key find­
ings.
Relevant literature has been found using Google Scholar and DTU findit. Some of the fol­
lowing keywords have been used: ”Networks”, ”Graph Theory”, ”Reputation”, ”acknowl­
edgment”, ”Community” etc.
2.1
Reviews
2.1.1
Network Science
The ph.d.­project ”Elites in Denmmark” by Anton G. Larsen & Christoph Ellersgaard [5],
[6] identified the Danish power elite through a social network analysis. By using network
science it is possible to find individuals with high centrality. The project revealed that
these individuals tend to group, forming a dense cluster of people with power in Danish
society (CEOs, politicians, etc.). They also found that these individuals were highly in­
terconnected and held multiple positions of power and influence in various organizations,
making them difficult to challenge. They also observed that the Danish power elite was
highly homogeneous, with a limited diversity of educational backgrounds and a strong
presence of men. The results of the study have significant implications for understanding
the distribution of power and influence in Danish society and for evaluating the democratic
representation of its citizens.
The paper ”Identifying Social Roles in Reddit Using Network Structure” [7] shows how
network science can be used to identify social roles and individual behavior. The study
reveals that Reddit roughly consists of ”answer­persons” and ”non­answer persons”. They
also show that individuals change their behavior based on the subreddit they participate in.
These results highlight the importance of network analysis in understanding the dynamics
of online communities and how individuals interact with each other.
2.1.2
Reputation & Indentity of Individuals
The paper ”Identity effects in Social Media” by Sean J. Taylor et.al. [8] describes a study
that examines the effects of identity cues (eg. user names, profile pictures, etc.) on how
people interact with content on social media. The study conducted an experiment where
the content was randomly assigned with either an ”identified” condition or an ”anonymous”
condition. The experiment showed that people reacted quicker to content with identity
cues than to anonymous content. The study also showed that people react according to
the reputation of the content producer. Thus showing that the reputation of an individual
influences how people behave and interact. The results also provide evidence to show
the rich­get­rich dynamics and that inequality in social content evaluation is mediated by
identity cues. Overall, the study highlights the importance of identity cues in shaping the
way people perceive and interact with each other on social media.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
5
==PAGE:14==
The research described in ”Learning User Reputation on Reddit” by Alexandre Parmentier
& Robin Cohen [9] investigates the user’s reputation on Reddit based on the interaction
between users. By using extracted features from the interaction they build 3 machine
learning models for predicting the score, sentiment, and profanity use. The data is solely
based on the discussion from a parent post, where the features are extracted. The study
found that certain features, such as the length of a comment, the presence of certain
words, and the time of day a comment was posted, were predictive of a user’s reputation
score. The sentiment and profanity use models also performed well, with the sentiment
model outperforming the profanity use model. The results of the study demonstrate the
potential for machine learning in understanding user reputation and behavior in online
communities and have applications for improving moderation and user engagement in
these communities. Additionally, the findings provide insights into how to design systems
that can automatically predict the reputation of users and their likelihood of engaging in
negative behavior.
Furthermore, awards are used to acknowledge content that contributes to the community
on Reddit and shows the potential of being a motivating factor for content creation. The
paper ”How Do Peer Awards Motivate Creative Content? Experimental Evidence from
Reddit” by Gordon Burtch et.al [10] reveals that awards motivate users to create more
content. They conducted an experiment where they awarded random posts over two
months on Reddit. They found that peer awards induced recipients to develop longer and
more frequent posts. This study indicates that awards are a big part of how users perceive
each other.
2.1.3
Communities
Online communities exist everywhere on the internet and Reddit is definitely not an ex­
ception. The paper ”Loyalty in Online Communities” by William L. Hamilton et.al. [11]
investigates the components within online communities. The research is based on ex­
ploring a large set of Reddit communities. Loyalty is an essential part of a community.
Every user has an opportunity to engage with a variety of different communities, espe­
cially on a platform like Reddit due to the number of different subreddits. To retain a sense
of community the user must return to the community and engage with other users regu­
larly. Loyal communities have a denser user­to­user interaction and are reciprocal where
interaction goes both directions. This suggests that loyal communities have a more cohe­
sive network and are less fragmented in smaller subgroups. The paper also reveals that
loyal users tend to engage with more esoteric or less popular content. In this way, the
community may develop new ideas and content collectively. This can be seen in different
examples e.g. the subreddit wallstreetbets that was the staging ground for a populist up­
rising against the financial establishment, by collectively increasing the stock price of the
struggling company, Gamestop and nearly bankrupting institutional investors who had
shorted its stock in the process [12]. To accomplish this the subreddit required a loyal
community that collectively followed the same movement.
6
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Summary
Examining various research studies that have been conducted on communities provides a
good basis for further investigation. The ”Elites in Denmark” project found that a cluster of
highly interconnected individuals with power and influence in Danish society exist and that
they are homogeneous. This shows that network science can be used to identify central
individuals and understand the behavior of communities. Furthermore, the study ”Identi­
fying Social Roles in Reddit” shows that individuals tend to change their behavior based
on the subreddit they participate in. This shows that reputation stays within the commu­
nity, this can also be seen in the study ”Identity Effects in Social Media” which shows the
importance of identity cues in how people perceive and interact with each other on social
media. If a user is known and has a reputation within a community they tend to get more
reactions and keep the same level of reputation. For an online community to form and
for individuals to obtain reputation users must continuously engage with each other, as
described in the study ”Loyalty in Online Communities”, which shows that loyal commu­
nities are more cohesive and tend to engage with more esoteric content. Furthermore,
the paper ”Learning User Reputation on Reddit” demonstrated the potential of machine
learning in understanding user reputation and behavior in online communities. The study
also showed that other features such as textual features can be used to describe behavior
within communities.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Data
3.1
Gathering the Data
Reddit data is publicly available and can be gathered through different APIs (Application
programming interface). Reddit provides its own API: the python Reddit API wrapper
(PRAW), but with some limitations. PRAW allows requests of up to 100 items at once, with
a 2 seconds delay. Another very commonly used API is the third­party Pushshift.io API
Wrapper (PSAW), which also has some limitations.
The data has been gathered using a combination of both APIs (PSAW, PRAW). For each
subreddit two datasets have been created, one containing posts and the other containing
comments. For each dataset different features have been extracted. The flowing table
shows the features in the dataset containing comments. The ID of the post can be used
to link the two datasets.
Description
Author
The name of the author
ID
The id of the comment
Body
The text of the comment
Post_id
The id of the post to which the comment is related to
Parent_id
The id of either the post or comment which the author has commented on
Score
The number of upvotes for the comment.
N_awards
The number of awards given to the comment
Date
The created date of the comment
Table 3.1: Comments data
The following table shows the features in the dataset containing posts.
Description
Author
The name of the author
ID
The id of the post
Title
The title of the post
Text
The text of the post
N_Comments
The number of comments connected to the post
Score
The number of upvotes for the post
N_awards
The number of awards given to the post
Date
The created date of the post
Table 3.2: Posts data
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
9
==PAGE:18==
3.2
The Data
This section provides an overview of each dataset used in the thesis, as well as a brief
descriptive analysis. The datasets are collected using the method explained in section 3.1.
The dataset wallsteetbets (3.2.8) is collected by my advisor Laura Alessandretti, where we
additionally collected the number of awards for each post. Initially, we tried to collect and
analyze data from smaller active subreddits, but throughout the project, we discovered the
importance of awards as a metric in the analysis. Due to the scarcity of awards in other
subreddits, the analysis presented in the thesis is primarily from wallstreetbets. However,
all the data is still presented in this section.
Each subreddit has its own color which can be seen in figure 3.1.
The colors occur
throughout the thesis when the different subreddits are compared, but due to the large
focus on Wallstreetbets, it is not consistently colored for Wallstreetbets.
Figure 3.1: The colors indicate how each subreddit is colored.
Each dataset has been cleaned such that data with errors or empty values have been
removed. We also removed bots and automatic moderators for each subreddit.
10
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:19==
3.2.1
Jazznoir
The subreddit jazznoir is related to the sub­genre of jazz which has a melancholic feel.
The dataset contains 4725 data points with 2109 comments and 2616 posts. The data is
collected from 2015­01­01 to 2022­01­01. The dataset contains 1497, unique users. 8
posts are awarded which is 0.3% of all posts.
Figure 3.2: The figure shows the number of posts & comments per day with an average
of 2.69 posts & comments per day.
Figure 3.3: The figure shows the distribution of comments
per post
The average number of
comments for each post is
0.83, with a median of 0.
The standard deviation is
1.17.
The post with the
most number of comments
is 20.
Figure 3.4: The most active users on the subreddit and the most common words used.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
11
==PAGE:20==
3.2.2
DTU
The subreddit DTU is related to the Technical University of Denmark. The dataset contains
2788 data points with 2302 comments and 486 posts. The data is collected from 2015­05­
15 to 2022­01­01. The dataset contains 689, unique users. 3 posts are awarded which is
0.6% of all posts.
Figure 3.5: The figure shows the number of posts & comments per day with an average
of 3.88 posts & comments per day.
Figure 3.6: The figure shows the distribution of comments
per post
The average number of
comments for each post is
4.24, with a median of 3.
The standard deviation is
4.42.
The post with the
most number of comments
is 48.
Figure 3.7: The most active users on the subreddit and the most common words used.
12
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:21==
3.2.3
FourSentenceStories
The subreddit FourSentenceStories is a forum where users make fictive stories that are
four sentences long. The dataset contains 200 data points with 79 comments and 121
posts. The data is collected from 2021­05­04 to 2022­01­01. The dataset contains 34,
unique users. 5 posts are awarded which is 4.1% of all posts.
Figure 3.8: The figure shows the number of posts & comments per day with an average
of 1.92 posts & comments per day.
Figure 3.9: The figure shows the distribution of comments
per post
The average number of
comments for each post is
0.63, with a median of 0.
The standard deviation is
1.27.
The post with the
most number of comments
is 8.
Figure 3.10: The most active users on the subreddit and the most common words used.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
13
==PAGE:22==
3.2.4
indoorbouldering
The subreddit indoorbouldering is a forum where users discuss the sport bouldering. The
dataset contains 10532 data points with 8912 comments and 1620 posts. The data is
collected from 2017­08­23 to 2022­01­01. The dataset contains 2529, unique users. 82
posts are awarded which is 5.1% of all posts.
Figure 3.11: The figure shows the number of posts & comments per day with an average
of 2.17 posts & comments per day.
Figure 3.12: The figure shows the distribution of comments
per post
The average number of
comments for each post is
5.46, with a median of 3.
The standard deviation is
7.63.
The post with the
most number of comments
is 90.
Figure 3.13: The most active users on the subreddit and the most common words used.
14
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:23==
3.2.5
kiwi_bird
The subreddit kiwi_bird is a forum where users share pictures with the bird species kiwi.
The dataset contains 862 data points with 508 comments and 354 posts. The data is
collected from 2015­02­22 to 2022­01­01. The dataset contains 302, unique users. 12
posts are awarded which is 3.4% of all posts.
Figure 3.14: The figure shows the number of posts & comments per day with an average
of 2.17 posts & comments per day.
Figure 3.15: The figure shows the distribution of comments
per post
The average number of
comments for each post is
1.47, with a median of 1.
The standard deviation is
2.04.
The post with the
most number of comments
is 12.
Figure 3.16: The most active users on the subreddit and the most common words used.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
15
==PAGE:24==
3.2.6
GraphTheory
The subreddit GraphTheory is a forum where users discuss graph theory and network
science. The dataset contains 497 data points with 303 comments and 194 posts. The
data is collected from 2015­02­17 to 2022­01­01. The dataset contains 247, unique users.
None of the posts are awarded.
Figure 3.17: The figure shows the number of posts & comments per day with an average
of 2.17 posts & comments per day.
Figure 3.18: The figure shows the distribution of comments
per post
The average number of
comments for each post is
2.26, with a median of 1.
The standard deviation is
2.94.
The post with the
most number of comments
is 14.
Figure 3.19: The most active users on the subreddit and the most common words used.
16
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:25==
3.2.7
Trump666
The subreddit Trump666 is a forum where users believe that former president Donald
Trump is the Antichrist. The dataset contains 6746 data points with 5616 comments and
1130 posts. The data is collected from 2015­02­22 to 2022­01­01. The dataset contains
755, unique users. 26 posts are awarded which is 2.3% of all posts.
Figure 3.20: The figure shows the number of posts & comments per day with an average
of 2.17 posts & comments per day.
Figure 3.21: The figure shows the distribution of comments
per post
The average number of
comments for each post is
5.05, with a median of 1.
The standard deviation is
8.96.
The post with the
most number of comments
is 78.
Figure 3.22: The most active users on the subreddit and the most common words used.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
17
==PAGE:26==
3.2.8
Wallstreetbets
The subreddit wallstreetbets is a forum for amateur investors who share investment ideas,
strategies, and news. The dataset contains 33049869 data points with 31909222 comments
and 1140647 posts. The data is collected from 2016­01­01 to 2021­02­04. The dataset
contains 1323990, unique users. 28555 posts are awarded which is 2.5% of all posts.
Figure 3.23: The figure shows the number of posts & comments per day with an average
of 17750 posts & comments per day. Note that y­axis is log scaled
Figure 3.24: The figure shows the distribution of comments
per post
The average number of
comments for each post is
6.85, with a median of 0.
The standard deviation is
17.67.96. The post with the
most number of comments
is 128.
Figure 3.25: The most active users on the subreddit and the most common words used*
(The most common words are computed from a sample of 8000 posts & comments, due
to large amount of data)
18
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
This chapter contains the methodology used throughout the project. This includes Net­
work science, Natural Language Processing, Basic Statistics, Machine Learning and Trans­
former Models.
4.1
Data Science Tools & Practices
4.1.1
Tools
Python has been used as the main programming language for this project. A variety of
libraries has been used throughout the project. networkx is used for the network analysis
and for the final predictive deep learning model Pytorch has been used. Furthermore,
standard libraries such as pandas, numpy etc have been used. The full list of used libraries
can be seen in the requirements.txt file on the git repository.
4.1.2
Machine Learning Operations (MLOps)
Machine Learning Operations (MLOps) are considered the best practices for developing
machine learning models and conducting data analysis. A well­organized project is key
to ensuring efficient workflow and reputability [13]. Keeping track of changes in data and
code version control using git ensures the reproducibility and transparency of the project.
To standardize and organize the file structure the cookie-cutter structure has been ap­
plied. Applying the best practices of MLOps makes it easier to adjust for small changes
once a promising pipeline has been established, and allows for a more agile work process.
For optimizing the hyperparameters while training machine learning models, weights and
biases (wandb) have been used, where you can monitor the model’s performance through
a grid search. wandb is a python library that enables sweeping hyperparameters and
monitoring the performance of models through an online dashboard. Furthermore, cloud
computation has been used to compute large computational tasks efficiently, such as
training machine learning models.
4.2
Network Science
The following section presents some of the central concepts within network science.
Network science (or graph theory) is a field that studies complex networks. A network
maps a complex system’s distinct elements, these elements are referred to as nodes.
The connections between nodes are called edges. The number of edges for a node u
is called the degree deg(u). Networks can either be directed or undirected. For directed
networks, the edge between two connected nodes is from one node to another i →j.
For the undirected networks, the direction of the edge is irrelevant, thereby the direc­
tion of the edge is going both ways i ↔j. Edges between nodes in networks can be
assigned weights based on the frequency of interaction between the nodes, these are
called weighted networks [14].
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
19
==PAGE:28==
4.2.1
Adjacency Matrix
The adjacency matrix is a matrix used to represent a network. Each element in the matrix
indicates whether a pair of nodes are connected (or adjacent). Each row or column in the
matrix represents a node, e.g. if A1,2 = 1 then node 1 and 2 are adjacent. For simple
non­weighted networks, the adjacency matrix is a (0, 1)­matrix. For undirected networks
the matrix is symmetrical. The following plot shows the adjacency matrix and graph of an
undirected network with 6 nodes [14].
A =


0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0


4.2.2
Creating Networks from Reddit Data
By using the datasets (described in Section 3.2) of posts and comments from Reddit,
a network can be created. Every unique author is represented as a node in the graph.
An edge is created between the two nodes if they interact by commenting on a post or
comment. The graph’s edges are weighted by the number of connections between the
nodes. Each post/comment has a unique post_id/ID and each comment has a Parent_id
that tells which post_id/ID the comment is connected to. Furthermore, a directed graph
can also be computed.
4.2.3
Clustering Coefficient
The clustering coefficient can be used to measure which nodes tend to cluster together
[15]. For unweighted, undirected graphs the local cluster coefficient is computed as:
Cu =
2T(u)
deg(u)(deg(u) −1),
(4.1)
Where T(u) is the number of triangles through the node u and deg(u) is the degree of u.
The average cluster coefficient for a graph can be computed by C = 1
n
∑n
i=1 Ci.
To detect if the network has a ”high” clustering coefficient the average clustering can be
compared to sampled clustering coefficients using a network with the same number of
degrees and nodes. By using the double­edge swap algorithm [16] that randomly swaps
edges in a graph while keeping the degrees of the nodes fixed, the average cluster coeffi­
cient C can be compared to the average cluster coefficient of a double­edge swap version
of the same graph Cswap. Since Cswap is random, the distribution of Cswap can be com­
puted by sampling multiple swapped graphs. A right­tailed test can then be performed by
using the cumulative distribution function FC(c) =
∫c
−∞fc(t)dt where fx is the probability
density function of Cswap. The P­value is computed by:
pvalue = 1 −FC(C)
(4.2)
20
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:29==
4.2.4
Reciprocal Edges
Reciprocal edges are edges that go in both directions in directed networks. The proportion
of reciprocal edges Rp can be an indication of how tight the connections between the
nodes in the network are. RN denotes the number of reciprocal edges and E is the
number of edges
Rp = RN
E
(4.3)
4.2.5
Centrality
The centrality of a node can be measured in different ways. Centrality measures are a
way of assigning a metric to nodes based on their position in the network [14].
Degree Centrality
The degree centrality CDu for a node u is simply the fraction of nodes it is connected to.
CDu = deg(u)
N −1
(4.4)
Where N is the total number of nodes and deg(u) is the degree [14].
Betweenness centrality
The betweenness centrality CBu of a node u is based on the shortest path and is a mea­
surement of how well one node connects other nodes [17].
CBu =
∑
s̸=v̸=t
σst(u)
σst
(4.5)
where s is the total number of shortest paths from node s to node t and σst(v) is the
number of shortest paths that pass through v (where u is not an endpoint).
Closeness centrality
The closeness centrality CCu is a measure of centrality based on how close the node u
is to all nodes in the network [18].
CCu =
N −1
∑
x d(x, u)
(4.6)
where d(x, u) is the shortest path between the origin node u the node x.
Eigenvector centrality
The eigenvector centrality ECu is a measure of the centrality of a node u based on its
neighbors [19].
xv = 1
λ
∑
t∈M(v)
xt = 1
λ
∑
t∈V
av,txt
(4.7)
The set of neighbors of node u is denoted as M(u), and the adjacency matrix of the graph
is denoted as A. The equation can be rewritten as Ax = λx, where x is the eigenvector of
A with eigenvalue λ. The eigenvector centrality can be found by finding the eigenvalues
of the adjacency matrix.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
21
==PAGE:30==
4.3
Natural Language Processing
Natural language processing (NLP) is the field concerned with the interaction between
human language and computer science. NLP extracts information from language and
text data. [20]
4.3.1
Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment analysis is a field in NLP that extracts sentimental opinions from a text. The
method transforms text into structured and quantitative measurements of sentiment. There
are various different methods to compute sentiment analysis.
One of the most common sentiment analyses is VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary for
sEntiment Reasoning) [21] provided by the open­source toolkit NLTK. VADER uses a sen­
timent lexicon that contains a comprehensive list of sentiment features. Each word or
phrase is rated either negative, positive, or neutral. VADER also uses grammatical rules,
so natural words (such as ”very”) amplify the positive or negative component of the sen­
tence. The output of the VADER algorithm is a score of the neutral, positive, and negative
sentiment, as well as a compound which is the overall score of the entire text. The com­
pound is normalized so that the values are ranging from (−1 : 1).
4.4
Statistics
Fundamental concepts of statistics are not included in this section.
4.4.1
Pearson correlation coefficient
The Pearson correlation ρ is a measure of linear correlation between two sets of variables.
The coefficient is computed by the ratio between the covariance cov and the standard
deviation σ between the two sets of data. The covariance is normalized, such that the
correlation coefficient is between −1 and 1
ρX,Y = cov(X, Y )
σXσY
(4.8)
4.4.2
Performance Metrics
For binary classification tasks, different metrics can be used to compare and evaluate the
performance of a predictive model.
Recall
The recall is defined as the proportion of actual positives that are correctly classified.
recall =
TP
TP + FN
(4.9)
Where TP denotes the number of true positives and FN denotes the number of false
positive predictions.
Precision
Precision is defined as the proportion of positive identifications that are actually correct.
precision =
TP
TP + TN
(4.10)
Where TP denotes the number of true positives and FP denotes the number of false
positive predictions.
22
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:31==
F1­score
The F1­score is the harmonic mean of the recall and precision defined by the following
equation.
F1 = 2 precision ∗recall
precision + recall
(4.11)
4.5
Machine Learning
The following section describes the key methods of Machine Learning, used in the thesis.
Fundamental concepts within machine learning and deep learning are not included but
can be found here [22],[23].
4.5.1
Transformer Models
Transformer models is a deep learning model that was first introduced in 2017 in ”Attention
is all you need” by Vaswani et al. [24]. A Transformer model is built to handle sequential
data, similar to Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). But it does not handle data in a specific
order and is therefore a popular choice for NLP tasks since it detects the contextual input of
each word. To do this a transformer model uses a self­attention mechanism, that devotes
more attention to smaller specific parts of the data. Transformer models do this by looking
at the contextual relationship of the inputs. The architecture has shown huge potential and
is used in many models such as Bert, ELECTRA, and GPT3.
Figure 4.1: The architecture of transformer models from ‘Attention Is All You Need’ by
Vaswani et al.[24]
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
23
==PAGE:32==
The architecture of transformers consists of an encoder and a decoder. The encoder
generates encodings that contain information about which parts of the inputs are relevant
to each other, while the decoder decodes the encodings with the common incorporated
contextual information.
Figure 4.1 shows the encoder on the left and the decoder on the right. These modules
can be stacked multiple times. The input and output are passed through an embedding
layer which maps them to an N­dimensional vector representation, where each word is
represented as the index in the vector. Furthermore, the relative position of each word
in the sentence is also represented in a vector. A transformer model uses a so­called
attention­mechanism to understand the input embedding.
The attention mechanism can be described by the following equation. Where Q (query)
is denoted as the vector representation of one word in the sequence. K (key) is denoted
as all words in the sequence and lastly, V (value) is denoted as the value.
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
(QKT
√dk
)
V
(4.12)
The dot product of the query Q and the key K is divided by √dk, where dk is denoted
as the dimension of K. A softmax function is applied to distribute the values from 0 to 1.
This can be simplified by the following equation.
a = softmax
(QKT
√dk
)
(4.13)
Where a denotes the attention­weights, which describes how each word Q is influenced
by the other words K. This is a simplification that makes the attention­mechanism easier
to conceptually understand.
ELECTRA
The model was proposed in the paper ”ELECTRA: Pre­training Text Encoders as Dis­
criminators Rather Than Generators” [25]. The model consists of 2 separate transformer
models; the generator and the discriminator. The generator replaces tokens in the se­
quence and the discriminator tries to identify the masked tokens. The overall structure
can be seen in the following figure.
Figure 4.2: From the paper ELECTRA: Pre­training Text Encoders as Discriminators
Rather Than Generators [25].
ELECTRA can be used for next­sentence prediction, but can also be used for classification
tasks, where the model gives an output of a dense layer of size 256, this is also referred to
24
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:33==
as classification sequence tokens or CLS­tokens. These embeddings contain information,
which can be used for a variety of classification tasks. However, the individual CLS token
does not contain information that can conceptually be understood.
When using the ELECTRA model in this thesis project we used a pre­trained model with
initial weights since training an ELECTRA model would require a large amount of comput­
ing. Therefore the initial weights are transferred and the last layer of ELECTRA is trained
to optimize the specific classification task, this is also known as last­layer­training.
The Deep Learning Models
We tested and developed two different deep learning models to predict whether a post
would be awarded or not. Model (b) uses network features and extracted textual features
with a hidden layer consisting of 7 linear layers, totaling 5514240 parameters, with a ReLu
activation function between each layer. The model definition is available in Appendix B.1.
Model (a) uses the ELECTRA transformer 4.5.1 to handle the textual input, tokenizing the
raw text before feeding it into the transformer, which had 13483008 parameters. A dropout
layer is used to prevent overfitting of the textual input before concatenating the output
of the ELECTRA with the network features. A hidden layer with 6 layers and 5516544
parameters is then used for the concatenated layer. The code snippet for this model is
provided in Appendix B.2. Both models can be seen in the following Figure 4.3.
(a) Neural Network + ELECTRA
(b) Neural Network
Figure 4.3: Figures (a) and (b) shows the overall structure of the deep learning models
used to classify if a post is awarded or not.
4.5.2
Random Forrest
Tree­based models partition the feature space into subsets and fit a simple model to each
subset by recursively splitting the feature space [23]. Consider the response variable Y
and the continuous input variable X. A decision tree splits the feature X by, for example,
X > c, where c is a constant that divides the feature space into a subset so that most
variance is explained in Y . Decision trees can vary in depth, which partitions the feature
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
25
==PAGE:34==
space into different subsets. By doing this, tree­based models can learn irregular patterns
that linear models cannot learn (e.g. logistic regression). Decision trees are conceptually
very simple, and one of the key advantages of decision tree models is their interpretability.
They are also very versatile and can be used for categorical, discrete, and continuous
input variables for regression and classification tasks.
Random forest [26] is an ensemble of decision trees that uses bootstrap aggregation also
called bagging. Given a training set of the input data X = x1, x2..., xn and the response
Y = y1, y2..., yn bagging is repeated B times by sampling the data with replacement. A
decision tree is then fitted to each sampled data in the bag B.
After training, the prediction can be computed by taking the average across all the decision­
trees output fb(x′) or the majority vote for classification tasks.
ˆf = 1
B
B
∑
b=1
fb
(
x′)
(4.14)
Single decision trees often tend to overfit and have low bias and very high variance, but
by using an ensemble of decision trees and averaging multiple trees’ output with bagging
it is possible to reduce the overall variance.
4.5.3
Permutation feature importance
Permutation importance is a method used to inspect the behavior of a model and the
importance of individual features. The method randomly shuffles all values of a single
feature, the model is then fitted to the corrupted data. By doing this any potential relation­
ship between the target and the feature is removed. An accuracy metric of the original
model and the corrupted model is then compared. The following equation shows the per­
mutation importance ij, where j denotes the feature. s is the score (eg. F1 score) of the
original model, K denotes the number of reputations, and sk,j denotes the score of the
corrupted model.
ij = s −1
K
K
∑
k=1
sk,j
(4.15)
Permutation feature importance can be used to evaluate the predictive power of a feature
in a specific model and does not necessarily explain the intrinsic predictive value of a
feature by itself, but its importance in a particular model. However, it can give an indication
of the overall behavior of a feature.
4.5.4
Principal Component Analysis
Principal component analysis, or PCA, is a technique to reduce the number of dimen­
sions of an observation, such that most information is retained and represented in a lower
dimensional space. PCA was first introduced in 1901 by Karl Pearson [27].
PCA is a technique that discovers the principal components of a dataset. These compo­
nents are a set of orthogonal linear transformations of the original variables that convert
the data into a new coordinate system, where they capture the highest variance in the
dataset. The initial principal component describes the most significant variance, followed
by the second component, and so on. The singular value decomposition (SVD) is used
to compute the principal components. [22]
26
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5
Results ­ Factors of Awarded Posts
This chapter presents the result of the explorative analysis. In Section 5.1 we reveal why
we are using Reddit’s award system as a metric for acknowledgment and why we are
focusing on the subreddit Wallstreetbets. In Section 5.4 & 5.3, we present the network
and textual features for Wallstreetbets, as well as an analysis of these features.
5.1
Defining Acknowledgment on Reddit
Reputation is explained in section 1.3 as the general opinion of someone. Reddit uses a
system of either scores or awards where users can acknowledge an individual’s content
and show their appreciation (Section 1.2). The following section shows the key results
from the study on how reputation is defined for a user on Reddit. The result show why
we are using awards as a metric of acknowledgment and additionally why we are using
wallstreetbets as the main source of data.
5.1.1
Awards versus Scores
By examining users with a known positive reputation we are able to compare the score
and the awards given to those individuals. The users 1RONYMAN, ControlTheNarrative,
and DeepFuckingValue have been studied [28].
On the subreddit Wallstreetbets the user 1RONYMAN exploited a popular stock trading
platform, where the user created a risk­free trade using a method called ”boxspread” on
the trading platform Robinhood in 2019. This gained the user a huge amount of reputation
[28] [29].
Another user known as ControlTheNarrative found a bug on the trading platform Robin­
hood, where the user could leverage the stocks of a ratio of 25 : 1. This was later referred
to as the ”free money cheat code” in the community of Wallstreetbets. The user shared
the story on the subreddit and gained a lot of reputation [28] [30].
The user DeepFuckingValue is a highly known user within Wallstreetbets and is consid­
ered one of the founders of the GameStop short squeeze [31]. He first posted about the
stock in September 2019 and is known in the community as a person with a very high
reputation [28] [32].
In order to investigate if these users have more awards and larger scores than the pop­
ulation mean.
We computed the Cumulative Density Function (CDF) for the sum of
scores and awards for users with the same activity (umber of posts) as DeepFucking­
Value, 1R0NYMAN, and ControlTheNarrative. The CDFs can then be compared to the
individual’s sum of awards and scores.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) DeepFuckingValue
(b) 1RONYMAN
(c) ControlTheNarrative
Figure 5.1: Awards and Score comparison for highly reputed users. The blue lines indicate the
CDF for awards and scores for users with the same activity level. The user’s sum of awards and
scores is denoted with a black line.
28
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:37==
As seen in the examples (5.1a 5.1b 5.1c) the user has more awards relative to other users
with the same activity level, while the score of the user is relatively low compared to other
users.
To determine if the awards or scores are significantly higher than the population means,
a one­sample t­test is performed by: p =
∑n
i=1[xi>X]
n
. The following table shows the p­
values.
p­value, Awards
p­value, Score
1R0NYMAN
0.0396
0.1881
DeepFuckingValue
0.0
0.4286
ControlTheNarative
0.0366
0.9070
Table 5.1
For all users, the p­value for the sum of awards is below the significance level of 0.05,
meaning that the users have a significantly higher sum of awards than the population
means. Furthermore, the p­value for the sum of scores is above the significance level.
This indicates that the number of awards is a better indicator of an individual’s reputation
on Reddit, assuming the users have a high reputation. This is further elaborated and
discussed in Section 7.1.
5.1.2
Awards
The following section shows the result of awards as the chosen metric for acknowledg­
ment. The following figure shows the number of awards for each subreddit used in this
project.
Figure 5.2: Sum of awards on subreddits with the y­axis log scaled. It can be seen that
the subreddit wallstreetbets contains a larger amount of awarded posts than the other
subreddits.
The figure shows that wallstreetbets has a large number of awarded posts, compared to
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
29
==PAGE:38==
the other posts. Wallstreetbet contains a total of 304817 awards, while the second most
awarded subreddit indoorboulding only contains 88 awards. Due to the lack of awarded
posts in other subreddits, wallstreetbets is used to investigate reputation. The following
figure shows the distribution of the sum of awards for each user on wallstreetbets.
Figure 5.3: The distribution of the sum of awards for each user on wallstreetbets with the
y­axis log scaled.
It can be seen that the majority of posts do not receive awards, hence making awards a
rare commodity. This exclusivity makes receiving an award a notable achievement and
can be seen as a symbol of recognition for the hard work and dedication put into creating
the post. Only 4% of the authors from wallstreetbets received an award.
Due to the scarcity of awards on other subreddits, wallstreetbets is further investigated.
For the final predictive model awarded posts are used as the dependent variable. Due to
the scarcity and wide distribution of awards seen in Figure 5.3 the aim of the predictive
model is to classify if a post/author receives an award. A new nominal variable called
awarded is introduced to indicate whether a post has received an award or not.
30
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:39==
5.2
The Effect of Reputation
The following section contains results of how reputed users may have an impact. More
specifically how the user DeepFuckingValue affected the GameStop (GME) stock. Keith
Gill known by the username DeepFuckingValue is seen as one of the driving factors in
the GameStop short squeeze of January 2021 [31].
The figure shows the number of times the stock is mentioned each day in posts on wall­
streetbets. By doing this we can measure the ”trend” of the stock inside the subreddit. The
Gamestop stock price is also plotted. Furthermore, each post from DeepFuckingValue is
annotated by a dotted line, and a bar illustrates the number of awards given to the post.
Figure 5.4: Illustration of the effect of a person with a high reputation. The red and blue
lines show the stock price and the number of times GME is mentioned respectively. The
dotted vertical lines show each time DeepFuckingValue made a post about GME. Ad­
ditionally, the number of awards for each post is shown by the orange bars, which are
annotated by the number of awards.
On the evening of 2021­01­11, DeepFuckingValue made a post (Appendix A.1.1) showing
the stocks he bought in GameStop, and 3 days later 2021­01­14 the stock had increased
100.15%. DeepFuckingValue made a similar post the 2021­01­25 and 2 days later the
stock increased by 352%.
This can be further investigated by comparing the return on investment (ROI) of the
GameStop stock after DeepFuckingValue made a post to other randomly sampled dates.
The ROI is calculated by:
ROI = (profit−cost)
cost
(5.1)
First, the same number of dates as the number of posts by DeepFuckingValue is randomly
sampled from the same period as DeepFuckingValue posted about GameStop. Then the
ROI three days after these random dates is computed. The mean of the ROIs is then
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
31
==PAGE:40==
computed. This is repeated N = 2000 times and then compared to the mean of ROIs for
the original dates from the posts by DeepFuckingValue.
Figure 5.5:
The figure shows the distribution from 2000 samples of mean ROIs of
GameStop from random dates after 3 days. The red line shows the mean of ROIs for
the original dates after 3 days.
The distribution of mean ROIs from random dates follows a normal distribution. It appears
that the mean of ROIs for the dates of posts from DeepFuckingValue after 3 days is not
higher than the population means. Additionally, we computed the p­value of the mean as
being significantly higher than the population means by performing a one­sample t­test:
pvalue =
∑n
i=1[xi > X]
n
= 0.616
(5.2)
This shows that means is not significantly higher than the population means, which in­
dicates that DeepFuckingValue did not affect the stock price of GameStop. Nonethe­
less, it cannot be inferred that DeepFuckingValue had no impact. Other factors may have
come into play, such as external events or news that may have influenced the stock price.
Therefore, while the data suggest that DeepFuckingValue’s posts did not have a signif­
icant impact on GameStop’s stock price, it is important to consider that the user started
a movement in the community and gained a large following, which in turn may have in­
fluenced the behavior of other investors in the market. DeepFuckingValue’s posts may
have contributed to increased trading activity in GameStop’s stock. It is also worth noting
that the impact of DeepFuckingValue’s posts is difficult to quantify, as the stock market is
a complex system with many variables at play.
32
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:41==
5.3
Network Features
The following section presents the result of the network analysis of wallstreetbets. This
includes results from how the networks were created using discrete­time dynamic graphs,
as well as an analysis of the features extracted from the networks. The distinctions be­
tween the features for awarded and not awarded posts are analyzed to identify the factors
contributing to receiving an award.
5.3.1
Discrete­Time Dynamic Networks
We created discrete­time dynamic networks for wallstreetbets. These networks are a
static snapshot of 10 weeks in the period before a post was created, this creates a network
for each individual post. By doing this we are able to analyze the network before a post
is created and the behavior of the individual who made the post in that 10­week period.
The data is balanced such that it contains an equal amount of awarded and not awarded
posts, this is done by downsampling the majority class not awarded posts.
The following plot shows the number of nodes for each discrete­time dynamic network,
created for each individual post.
Figure 5.6: The number of nodes for each network by date. The y­axis is log­scaled
The following figure illustrates the number of awards given to the authors of the posts from
where a network is created.
Figure 5.7: The number of awards given to each post. The y­axis is log­scaled
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.8: An example of a discrete­time dynamic graph (2020­12­25 to 2021­03­25) of
the first graph created. The edges are colored by the reciprocity and the size of the node
is defined by the number of degrees. Only nodes from the biggest coherent part of the
network are included.
By visualizing networks it is often possible to get a better understanding of the social dy­
namics of a community. However, due to the size of this network, it is hard to comprehend
all the information. We visualized this primarily because it is it’s aesthetically pleasing, but
also to see how complex the network is.
34
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:43==
5.3.2
Network Features
The following section contains an analysis of the networks from the discrete­time dynamic
networks from wallstreetbets. For each network, we extracted and computed a variety
of features that are used to explain and understand the network. This includes overall
network features and features from the authors of the posts, by which the discrete­time
dynamic networks were created. It is important to note that the interactions from the post
from which each network where created is not included, since the network is created in
the time period before the post where made. By doing this the features are not biased
toward the posts, but instead, explain the social dynamic of the author within the network.
Feature
Description
edges
The number of edges in the network
nodes
The number of nodes in the network
degree
The degree of the author of the post
degree centrality
The degree centrality of the author of the post (Section 4.2.5)
closeness centrality
The closeness centrality of the node (Section 4.2.5
in­degree
The in­degree of the author of the post in the directed network
out­degree
The out­degree of the author of the post in the directed network
fraction of reciprocal
The fraction of reciprocal edges of the whole network (Section 4.3)
reciprocal edges of the author
The sum of reciprocal edges of the author of the post (Section 4.3)
reciprocaledges
The total sum of reciprocal edges (Section 4.3)
activity
The number of posts & comments by the author of the post in the time interval
mentions
The number of times the author of the post has been mentioned in other posts & comments.
Table 5.2: The network features extracted from the discrete­dynamics graphs for each
post
The following sections contain an analysis of some of the key features. Distributions of
all features can be seen in Appendix A.4.
Closeness centrality & degree centrality
We computed the closeness centrality and the degree centrality of the author of the post.
The following figure shows the distribution of each post/author.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.9: The closeness centrality (a) and the degree centrality (b) colored by awarded
or not awarded.
A visual interpretation of the Figure 5.9 (a) suggests that the closeness centrality for both
authors that received and did not receive an award follows a similar normal distribution.
This indicates closeness centrality does not explain much of the variance for awards.
However, few awarded authors have a high closeness centrality around 0.5. Addition­
ally, it is hard to distinguish awarded users by observing the degree centrality. But some
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
35
==PAGE:44==
awarded users have a high degree centrality. It is important to note that the y­axis is log
scaled on both figures, so the smaller values appear proportionally larger.
Number of Nodes & Edges
We computed the total number of edges and nodes for each network, which can be seen
in the following figure.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.10: Distribution on the number of nodes (a) and the number of edges (b) colored
by awarded or not awarded.
It is hard to distinguish the distribution of the number of nodes and edges for networks
created for awarded and not awarded posts. However, it appears that it is more likely to
receive an award if you make a post when the network has a size of around 150000 nodes.
Another explanation could be that more awards were given at a certain point in time. This
can be seen in appendix A.8, which shows the number of awards given by date.
In and out Degree
We computed the in­degree, the number of edges directed toward the author of the post,
which is how many times other users engage with the author. Additionally, we also com­
puted the out­degree in the 10­week period, which is the number of edges going away
from the author of the post. The out and in­degree can be seen in the following figure.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.11: Distribution of the in­degree (a) and the out­degree (b) colored by awarded
or not awarded. Note that the y­axis is log scaled for both figures
The figure shows that awarded users appear to have a larger in­degree, meaning that
users are more likely to comment on the author’s content. Additionally, awarded users
also appear to have a higher out­degree, meaning that they are more likely to comment
36
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:45==
on other users’ content. This suggests that awarded users are not only popular within the
network, but also active and engaged members of the community. Additionally, few not
awarded authors have a large out­degree, this could potentially be ”bots” or similar.
Reciprocal Edges
Reciprocal edges are edges where interaction occurs in both directions between the
nodes, such that both users have engaged with each other. Figure 5.12 shows the recip­
rocal edges for the author of the post and also the fraction of the total number of reciprocal
edges in the network, which we computed by
Nnodes
Nreciprocaledges. The fraction of reciprocal
edges can be used as a measure of how engaged and connected the community generally
is (see Section 4.3).
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.12: The number of reciprocal edges for the author of the post (a) and the fraction
of the total number of reciprocal edges in the network. (b) The distributions are colored
by awarded or not awarded. Note that the y­axis of figure (b) is log­scaled
The distribution of reciprocal edges for the author of the post indicates that awarded users
appear to be more active and engaged in the community. The figure of the fraction of
reciprocal edges suggests that posts are more likely to get awarded when the fraction of
reciprocal edges is around 0.40 however, this could also be because more awards were
given at a certain point in time. This can be seen in Appendix A.15 where the fraction of
reciprocal edges are plotted by date.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
37
==PAGE:46==
Mentions
Reddit uses a system where users can mention or ”tag” other users in their content by
writing ”/u/” followed by the specific username. We computed the number of times other
users mentioned the author of the post in the network.
Figure 5.13: The distribution of mentions of the user, colored by awarded or not awarded
posts. Note that the y­axis is log­scaled.
The figure shows that an individual is more likely to receive an award if the person is previ­
ously mentioned by other users. This indicates users are more likely to be acknowledged
if they already are known within the community.
38
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:47==
5.4
Textual Features
The following section shows the key result from the textual analysis of the posts from
wallstreetbets. This includes textual feature extraction such as the VADER sentiment
algorithm. Additionally, the embeddings from ELECTRA are also presented.
5.4.1
Sentiment
Using the VADER algorithm explained in Section 4.3.1 it is possible to extract the sen­
timent compound from posts. We conducted a sentiment analysis of awarded and not
awarded content for posts on wallstreetbets. The following figure shows the sentiment
compound from the VADER algorithm.
Figure 5.14: The figure shows the sentiment compound from the VADER algorithm for
Awarded or not awarded posts. Note that the y­axis is log­scaled.
The figure shows that the awarded posts appeared to be more negative and positive,
while the not awarded posts were more neutral in tone. This could indicate that awarded
content is more subjective, which tends to evoke stronger emotional responses, whether
positive or negative, while more objective content tends to be more neutral in tone. An
example of a positive awarded post can be seen in Appendix A.1.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
39
==PAGE:48==
5.4.2
Text Length
The following section shows the result of the text length analysis. We counted the char­
acter length of posts on wallstreetbets. The following figure shows the text length for
awarded and not awarded posts.
Figure 5.15: The text length distribution of awarded and not awarded posts. Note that
the y­axis is log scaled and therefore the longer text lengths appear proportional bigger,
in reality, the majority of the post has a short text length.
The figure shows that awarded posts appear to be longer. The average text length of
an awarded post is 794.61 characters and 137.6 for posts without awards. One possible
explanation for this relationship could be that larger content contains more detailed and
nuanced information. In relation to wallstreetbets, awarded content could contain more
detailed information about e.g. a stock, which could be valuable to other users and is
therefore acknowledged with awards. Examples of texts can be seen in Appendix A.1.
40
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:49==
5.4.3
ELECTRA Embeddings
The transformer model ELECTRA explained in Section 4.5.1 can be used to extract in­
formation from the text. ELECTRA transforms the raw text into classification sequence
tokens (CLS tokens), which retain information used for classification tasks. Using ELEC­
TRA we extract the CLS tokens from different posts. ELECTRA returns 256 CLS tokens
for a single text input.
Using the 256 outputs of ELECTRA we reduced the number of dimensions by using PCA
4.5.4. This allows us to visualize the CLS­tokens. The following figure shows the two first
principal components of the CLS tokens from posts randomly sampled from wallstreet­
bets. The dots are colored by awarded and not awarded posts.
Figure 5.16: Awarded and not awarded posts from wallsteetbets
Figure 5.17: Principal components of CLS tokens colored by awarded and not awarded
posts from Wallstreetbets.
It can be seen in Figure 5.17 that some of the ELECTRA CLS­tokens from awarded posts
tend to cluster together. This shows that the ELECTRA model is able to extract valuable
information from the raw text. However, it’s important to note that using the ELECTRA
model does have its limitations. One of the key challenges is that the model is a black
box, which means that we cannot interpret the behavior of the model.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
41
==PAGE:50==
Furthermore, we examined the relationship between other features and the CLS­tokens.
The following figure shows an example of the sentiment compound and the closeness
centrality.
(a) VADER sentiment compound
(b) Closeness Centrality
Figure 5.18: Principal components of CLS tokens colored by the sentiment compound of
Figure (a) and the closeness centrality on Figure (b)
It can be seen in Figure 5.18 (a) that ELECTRA captures similar information from the text,
as the VADER sentiment analysis does. A cluster of posts with a positive sentiment can
be seen on the left and neutral posts can be seen on the right.
The posts have been colored by the closeness centrality in Figure 5.18 (b), where it appear
to be no clusters. This indicates that there is no correlation between how users express
themself in text and how they react in the network. This can also be seen in similar figures
with the other features in Appendix A.2.
42
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:51==
5.5
Correlations
In order to gain an overview of the in­between correlation of the dependent variable
awarded, but also the correlation in­between the features a correlation matrix has been
computed using the Pearson correlation (Section 4.4.1).
Figure 5.19: The figure shows the Pearson correlation matrix 4.4.1 for each feature. The
correlation is colored and the value is shown. Correlations with a p­value below the sig­
nificance level of 0.05 has been denoted with a ”∗”.
Closeness centrality and text length are the strongest correlated features for the depen­
dent variable awarded with a Pearson correlation of 0.3 and 0.2. However, this is still a
relatively weak correlation. Additionally, the matrix shows a strong correlation between
some of the independent variables, such as the fraction of reciprocal edges and the num­
ber of reciprocal edges or the number of nodes and edges. This is to be expected, given
the inherent relationships among these features. It is important to note that the Pearson
correlation is a measure of a linear relationship, and can therefore not capture a non­linear
relationship.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
43
==PAGE:52==
5.6
Other Subreddits
The following section presents an examination of the smaller subreddits that were ex­
cluded from the predictive model. Our original intention was to analyze a broad range of
smaller subreddits and use them for explaining and predicting reputation. However, this
proved to be unfeasible due to the limited number of awards given in smaller subreddits.
This section provides a brief overview of the subreddits.
5.6.1
Network Analysis
For each subreddit (Section 3.2) a network has been created using the method explained
in Section 4.2.2. The networks are colored by the respective subreddit color 3.1 and
plotted using the Fruchterman­Reingold force­directed algorithm (spring layout) that treats
edges as springs holding nodes close while treating nodes as repelling objects. By doing
this high degree nodes tend to cluster together.
(a) DTU
(b) Jazznoir
(c) Indoorbouldering
(d) Trump666
(e) FourSentenceStories
(f) Kiwi_bird
(g) GraphTheory
Figure 5.20: The figure shows the biggest coherent component from each subreddit.
44
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:53==
The following table shows an overview of the networks of different subreddits.
subreddit
period
A
N
E
W
Wµ
D
Dµ
C
A
t
R
R%
PC
FourSentenceStories
2021­05­04 ­ 2021­12­28
200
34
28
2.679
1.0
1.647
1.0
0.275
5.824
19
15
0.429
0.023
Trump666
2020­03­16 ­ 2022­01­01
6746
755
1628
2.653
1.0
4.313
2.0
0.203
7.910
53
1048
0.493
0.000
GraphTheory
2015­02­17 ­ 2021­12­26
497
247
163
1.718
1.0
1.320
1.0
0.016
2.012
59
124
0.564
0.286
jazznoir
2015­01­01 ­ 2022­01­01
4725
1497
1139
1.474
1.0
1.522
1.0
0.010
2.986
122
640
0.453
0.016
indoorbouldering
2017­08­23 ­ 2022­01­01
10532
2529
4866
1.665
1.0
3.848
2.0
0.062
3.967
112
3487
0.532
0.000
DTU
2015­05­15 ­ 2022­01­01
2788
689
1196
1.805
1.0
3.472
2.0
0.064
4.046
136
1014
0.600
0.000
kiwi_bird
2015­02­21 ­ 2021­12­27
862
302
301
1.595
1.0
1.993
1.0
0.048
2.778
65
128
0.358
0.085
Table 5.3: A (Activity) is the total sum of posts and comments on the subreddit. A is the
average activity across all authors. N is the number of nodes/authors. E is the number of
edges. W is the average weight of the edges. ∆t is the average time period of the users.
R is the number of reciprocal edges and RP is the proportion of reciprocal edges (Equation
4.3). D is the average degree. PC is the p­value of the average cluster coefficient being
different from the double­edged swapped graphs (Equation 4.2).
5.6.2
Textual Analysis
This section shows the result of the textual analysis of the different subreddits and that
each subreddit uses a distinct way of communicating.
Using the VADER 4.3.1 sentiment analysis we computed the sentiment compound of
content from different subreddits. Furthermore, completely neutral sentiment scores of
0 have been removed for better interpretation and readability. The following figure shows
the distribution of each subreddit.
Figure 5.21: The figure shows the sentiment compound from the VADER algorithm for
each subreddit. It shows the distribution, with the y­axis being the density for each sub­
reddit
It can be seen that each subreddit varies in sentiment. The subreddits FourSentenceS­
tories and Trump666 appear to use a more negative tone compared to other subreddits.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
45
==PAGE:54==
It can also be seen in Figure 5.21 that many of the subreddits appear to follow a bimodal
distribution.
Additionally, we computed the ELECTRA CLS­tokens for posts from the different subred­
dits. Each subreddit is sampled an equal amount of times. The dimensionality of the
CLS­tokens is reduced by using PCA. The following figure shows the result of this.
Figure 5.22: The principal components of the ELECTRA CLS­tokens colored by the dif­
ferent subreddits
The figure shows that some of the principal components from the different subreddits tend
to cluster together. This indicates that subreddits use distinct ways of communicating.
This can also be seen in Figure 5.21, which shows a variation in the tone used in posts.
46
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
Results ­ Explaining & Predicting
Awarded Posts
This chapter contains a predictive analysis of how an individual obtains an award. In
Section 6.1 we present the predictive model used to classify if a post gets awarded, using
the network and textual features. In Section 6.2 we explored the importance of identity
and how the social dynamics change for a larger network. Additionally, in Section 6.3 we
show how the probability of receiving an award increases if the user is already awarded.
6.1
Predicting Awarded Posts
The aim of the predictive model is to classify if a post gets an award. The dependent
variable of the model is therefore the nominal variable awarded. The following section
shows the results of the different models used to classify if a post is awarded or not. Due
to the lack of awards given in other subreddits, only data from wallstreetbets is included
in the predictive model.
6.1.1
The Data
The dataset used for the model is based on discrete­time dynamic graphs taken in the
interval from before a post was created. This creates a static snapshot of the graph. The
time interval of the snapshot is 10 weeks. For each post/network, different features have
been extracted.
Feature
Description
N edges
The number of edges in the graph
N nodes
The number of nodes in the graph
text
The title and text of the post concatenated
text length
The length of the text
sentiment compound
The VADER sentiment compound of the text (Section 4.3.1)
degree
The degree of the author
degree centrality
The degree centrality of the author (Section 4.2.5)
closeness centrality
The closeness centrality of the node(Section 4.2.5
in­degree
The in­degree of the author in the directed graph
out­degree
The out­degree of the author in the directed graph
Fraction of Reciprocal Edges
The fraction of reciprocal edges of the whole network (Section 4.3)
N Reciprocal Edges (author)
The sum of reciprocal edges of the author (Section 4.3)
N Reciprocal Edges
The total sum of reciprocal edges (Section 4.3)
activity
The number of posts & comments in the time interval by the author
mentions
The number of times the author has been mentioned in other posts & comments.
Table 6.1: Independent variables.
The original data is imbalanced with more posts being not awarded. This is corrected by
downsampling the majority class not awarded posts, such that the models do not overfit
the majority class.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.1: The data has been balanced by downsampling the majority class. The final
data contains 56278 points.
The data is furthermore normalized and divided into training, test, and evaluation dataset
with a size of 80%, 10%, and 10% respectively.
To investigate if it is possible to classify awarded posts, we conducted a preliminary anal­
ysis of the features. The following figure shows the principal components of the features
used to classify awarded posts, where each dot is colored by awarded content.
Figure 6.2: The first to principal components from the PCA using the features. This shows
some clusters of awarded posts, which indicates that a classification task is possible.
48
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:57==
6.1.2
Random Forrest
Due to the simplicity and interpretability random forest is a good baseline. Random forest
obtained an F1 score of 74.82% of the test set. Since a Random Forrest model does not
handle sequential data the raw text has been excluded. Instead features from the text
have been extracted and the sentiment compound & the text length have been included
in the model (see Table 6.1).
Figure 6.3: Confusion Matrix
Precision
Recall
F1­score
Support
not awarded
0.7594
0.7306
0.7447
2829
awarded
0.7378
0.7660
0.7516
2799
accuracy
0.7482
5628
macro avg
0.7486
0.7483
0.7482
5628
weighted avg
0.7486
0.7482
0.7482
5628
Table 6.2
6.1.3
Neural network
The model uses a neural network which is further explained in Section 4.5.1. The model
uses the same features as the Random Forrest model, where features have been ex­
tracted from the text. The model has been trained using the cluster computer HPC on
DTU. The model has been optimized using a hyperparameter sweep which can be seen
in appendix A.5.2. The model obtained an F1 score of 74.13%.
Figure 6.4: Confusion Matrix
Precision
Recall
F1­score
Support
not awarded
0.7574
0.7144
0.7343
2829
awarded
0.7270
0.7688
0.7474
2799
accuracy
0.7415
5628
macro avg
0.7423
0.7416
0.7413
5628
weighted avg
0.7423
0.7415
0.7413
5628
Table 6.3
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
49
==PAGE:58==
6.1.4
Neural Network + ELECTRA
The model is a combination of the transformer model ELECTRA and a neural network.
The model is further described in Section 4.5.1. The model has been trained using the
cluster computer HPC on DTU. The model has been optimized using a hyperparameter
sweep which can be seen in appendix A.5.2. The model obtained an F1 score of 78.13%.
Figure 6.5: Confusion Matrix
Precision
Recall
F1­score
Support
not awarded
0.8130
0.7217
0.7217
2829
awarded
0.7583
0.8403
0.7647
2799
accuracy
0.7821
5628
macro avg
0.7857
0.7810
0.7810
5628
weighted avg
0.7852
0.7822
0.7813
5628
Table 6.4
6.1.5
Overview
The following table shows an overview of the models used to classify awarded. Every
model has been trained on the same training data and tested using the same test data. It
shows the weighted average F1­score, Recall, and Precision.
Model
Features
F1­score (%)
Recall (%)
Precesion (%)
Random Forrest
Network Features + Extracted text features
74.82
74.82
74.83
Logistic Regression
Network Features + Extracted text features
70.47
70.52
70.69
K Nearest Neighbor
Network Features + Extracted text features
70.50
70.50
70.52
Nerual Network
Network Features + Extracted text features
74.13
74.15
74.23
Nerual Network + Electra model
Network Features + raw text
78.13
78.22
78.52
Table 6.5: Performance metrics (Section 4.4.2)
The neural network with the ELECTRA transformer model performed best with an F1­
score of 78.13%. This model was the only one to use the raw text as input instead of
extracted text features. This suggests that the extracted text features sentiment com­
pound and the text length is not enough to capture all information retained in the text.
By using the ELECTRA model we were able to capture more information and underlying
patterns from the text that would normally not be captured by a traditional feature­based
approach.
50
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:59==
6.1.6
Feature Importance
To inspect the performance of the model we computed the permutation feature importance
for the Random Forrest model. Due to computational limitations, it was not possible to
compute the permutation importance of the Deep Learning ELECTRA Model, since it re­
quires training numerous times. As explained in Section 4.5.3 the permutation importance
is computed for each feature where the model is trained K times for each feature. The fol­
lowing figure shows the permutation feature importance using the F1­score as the metric
s for the Random Forrest model.
Figure 6.6: The Figure shows the decrease in F1 score of each feature, using the permu­
tation feature importance for the random forest model
It is important to note that the permutation feature importance does not necessarily explain
the intrinsic predictive value of a feature, but instead the predictive power of the features
in the specific model the Random Forrest model. This means that permutation feature
importance could be different for the Deep Learning ELECTRA model. However, it can
be seen that when the text length is corrupted the F1 score decreases, this could indicate
that users who write longer text are more likely to get an award, this suggests that they
create informative text that contributes to the community. Additionally, network features
such as the number of reciprocal edges, the fraction of reciprocal edges, and the in­
degree and the number of edges and nodes also decrease the F1 Score when corrupted.
This suggests that the network features also contribute to the explanation of individuals’
reputations. This is further discussed in Section 7.2 & 7.3.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
51
==PAGE:60==
6.2
Individuals Identity in Communities
The following section shows the result of the study we conducted on the importance of
identity in communities. As stated in Section 2.1 and in the paper ”Identity Effects in
Social Media” an individual’s identity is a crucial part of a user’s reputation within a com­
munity. For a user to have a true and accurate reputation, they must be well­known and
recognizable within the community.
The subreddit wallstreetbets gained widespread popularity at the end of 2020, resulting in
a large influx of new members joining the community. This section shows the result of the
investigation conducted on how community size affects the identity of an individual. Using
the discrete­time dynamic graphs (Section 5.3.1) we analyzed the relationship between
various features and the size of the wallstreetbets networks. The summary of these results
is furthermore discussed in Section 7.6
6.2.1
Recirpocal Edges
The total number of reciprocal edges explained in section 4.3, can be seen as a metric
of how well the individual nodes are connected and how dense the community is. The
following figures illustrate the relation between the total number of reciprocal edges and
the network size.
Figure 6.7: The total number of reciprocal edges and nodes by date. The red line shows
the number of nodes for each network. The blue line shows the total number of reciprocal
edges of the same network.
52
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.8: The total number of reciprocal edges and nodes. The lines show a linear
regression for N nodes < 200000 & > 200000
We performed a linear regression for the networks with N nodes < 200000 & > 200000 It
can be seen that the slope for Nnodes < 200000 is 5.43 meaning that when a node is added
to the network the number of reciprocal edges is increased by 5.43. For Nnodes > 200000
the slope is 0.79 meaning that when a node is added the number of reciprocal edges is
increased by 0.79. This suggests that when the community gets too big it losses its ability
to form strong connections between nodes.
6.2.2
Mentions
Reddit uses a system where users can mention individuals in the text by writing ”/u/”
followed by a username. We computed the total number of mentions, which can be used
as a measure of how well users know each other within the community. The sum of
mentions is compared to the network size, N Nodes.
Figure 6.9: The total number of mentions and nodes by date. The red line shows the
number of nodes for each network. The blue line shows the number of mentions of a user
in the same period
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.10: The total number of mentions and nodes. The lines show a linear regression
for N nodes < 200000 & > 200000
We performed a linear regression for the networks with N nodes < 200000 & > 200000.
It can be seen that the slope for Nnodes < 200000 is 3.29e−2 meaning that when a node
is added to the network the number of mentions is increased by 3.29e−2. For Nnodes >
200000 the slope is 3.39e−3 meaning that when a node is added the number of reciprocal
edges is increased by 3.39−3. This illustrates that when the community reaches a certain
size it becomes more difficult for individuals to establish strong connections and increase
their mention count.
54
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:63==
6.2.3
Permutation Importance
To further investigate how the community changes based on the network size, two random
forest models 4.5.2 have been computed using data from different time periods. Addition­
ally, the permutation importance has been computed for both models. 4.4.2. The data
has been divided such that each set contains the same amount of awarded posts, addi­
tionally, each dataset has been balanced. The first set is from the start of the period when
the network was smaller and the second is from the end of the period. The random forest
model has been used due to computational simplicity.
Figure 6.11: The red line indicates the point in time the data is divided. It can be seen
that the majority of the awarded post is at the end of the period, hence splitting the data
towards the end such that the two sets are the same size.
Each dataset contains 24876 datapoints with a 20% test set each. The data is divided from
2016­03­28 to 2021­01­03 & 2021­01­03 to 2021­02­04, they obtained a F1 score of 0.75
& 0.74 respectively.
Figure 6.12: Permation Importance for the early and late period of wallstreetbets. write
more here
It can be seen that features (6.1) such as the fraction of reciprocal edges, number of
nodes, number of edges, and the number of reciprocal edges contribute to higher accu­
racy in the model for the early period. While these features do not contribute so much to
the model for the late period. Additionally, the text length decreases the accuracy for both
models when it is corrupted. The results of the permutation importances suggest that
network features have a larger predictive power in smaller communities since primarily
only the text length appears to have an effect on the later model.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
55
==PAGE:64==
6.3
Awards Increases Awards
This section seeks to investigate how the probability of receiving an award increases if
the user is already awarded. As previously mentioned, awards are a rare commodity,
with only 4% of the authors from wallstreetbets receiving an award. These awards are
expected to be given to users that have produced high­quality, informative, entertaining,
or otherwise valuable content for the community. However, there are indications that
individuals receive more awards if they are previously awarded. This could suggest a
”rich get richer” effect [33], which refers to the phenomenon where those who are already
successful are more likely to continue to be successful. This concept is often used in the
context of economics, but can also be applied to social systems such as awards on Reddit
communities. We computed the percentage of awards given to the top n% awarded users
of the awarded users. The following figure shows the cumulative rate of the total awards
given to the top awarded users.
Figure 6.13: The cumulative distribution of the number of awards given to the awarded
users.
It can be seen that the majority of awards are given to a small proportion of the awarded
users. The top 1% awarded users have received 40% of the total awards. This suggests
that the award system follows the ”rich get richer” phenomenon. Users who are already
well­known or have established a reputation are more likely to receive awards, which
enhances their visibility and popularity, leading to even more awards. This creates a
feedback loop where the rich get richer and the poor get poorer.
56
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:65==
To further investigate the ”rich get richer” effect we computed the probability of receiving
an award prior to the individual receiving K awards. The conditional probability for re­
ceiving an award is computed for P(A|K = 0), P(A|K = 1)...P(A|K = n). This is done
by considering the sequence of awards received by a user e.g. Not awarded, Awarded,
Not awarded, Awarded and then computing the cumulative number of awards in the se­
quence e.g. 0, 1, 1, 2. The probability prior to the amount previously awarded post is then
computed for each K (awarded post) by counting the number of occurrences of K in the
sequence. The mean of conditional probability for each K is then computed for multiple
individuals. Furthermore, this can be compared with a null model where the sequence of
awards is randomized. This is done by randomly sampling the value awarded from users
with the same activity level (number of posts) and from the same date. For each model, a
linear regression line is fitted to data and the 95% confidence interval for that regression
The following figure shows the conditional probability for each K for the true model and
the null model.
Figure 6.14: The conditional probability prior to being previously awarded K times. The
red line shows the true model and the blue line shows the null model where the sequence
of awards is randomized. The error bars indicate the 95% confidence intervals of the
regression lines.
It can be seen that for the true model the probability P(A|K) increases for larger K,
while for the null model, the probability appears flat. This suggests that the award system
follows the ”rich­get­rich” phenomenon where it is more likely for already awarded users
to receive additional awards.
6.3.1
Effect of the network size
To investigate how this concept is affected by the community size, we computed the %
of awards given to the top n% awarded individuals for different periods of the data. As
previously stated wallstreetbets had a large increase in members at the end of 2020. We
divided the data into 4 equal parts and computed the cumulative distribution of the number
of awards given to the awarded users in each time period.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.15: The Figure shows the data divided into 4 equal parts by date, where each
part is colored
Figure 6.16: The cumulative distribution of the number of awards given to the awarded
users for each different time period. Each color denotes the time period shown in Figure
6.15
Figure 6.16 shows that the effect increases in the later periods when the community gets
bigger. The following table shows the % of the total awards for each period, received by
the top 1 % awarded individuals in that period.
Period
% awards received by the top 1%
2016­03­27 ­ 2017­06­13
4%
2017­06­13 ­ 2018­08­31
11%
2018­08­31 ­ 2019­11­18
35%
2019­11­18 ­ 2021­02­04
47%
Table 6.6: % of the total awards for each period received by the top 1 % awarded individ­
uals in that period.
The increase in this phenomenon could be due to many different factors. The self­reinforcing
feedback loop, where individuals who receive more awards become more visible and in­
fluential, could potentially be bigger in larger communities. Another factor could be that
as the community grows larger, the competition for reputation can become more intense,
making it more difficult for new or less well­known individuals to gain a reputation. This is
further discussed in Section 7.5.
58
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
This chapter contains a discussion of the results. The results presented in chapters 5 &
6 reveal that the hypotheses stated in Section 1.4 can be supported. Hypothesis (I) is
discussed in Section 7.1 and hypothesis (II) is discussed in Sections 7.2, 7.3 and 7.4.
Additionally, hypothesis (III) is discussed in 7.5. Finally, Section 7.6 discusses hypothesis
(IV).
7.1
Awards as a Metric of Reputation & Acknowledgment
In Section 5.1 we investigated the use of awards as a metric of acknowledgment and
recognition of individuals on wallstreetbets. The following section discusses the key re­
sults.
Users with a know high reputation, appear to have more awards compared to the popu­
lation means, which can be seen in Table 5.1. This suggests that these highly reputable
users have been recognized through awards for their contributions to the community. It
can be assumed that these users are in fact highly reputed, by the existence of papers
and articles about them, since it is not common for every Reddit user to have articles
written about them [28] [32] [29] [30].
Figure 5.3 shows that the majority of posts on Reddit do not receive an award. The
scarcity of awards helps to maintain the value and prestige of the award system, as it
demonstrates that only the best content is being recognized. This can motivate users to
continue creating high­quality content, leading to a self­reinforcing cycle of improvement
and recognition. This sacristy is also an issue since the community needs a big enough
size for users to receive awards, this can be seen in Figure 5.2 which shows that the
subreddit wallstreetbets has a substantially large amount of awards relative to other sub­
reddits. Initially, we tried to investigate and focus on smaller subreddits since it is expected
to have a better community as described in Section 7.6 & 6.2, but due to the scarcity of
awards, it was hard to investigate and find a measurement for acknowledgment in these
datasets.
One of the key limitations of the analysis is the collection of the data. The dataset of
awards was collected using the python library PRAW, which collects the data from Reddit’s
own API. This means that the number of awards for each post is computed at the time
of the scrapping. Ideally, this should be a fixed factor where the number of awards is
collected at a specified period after the post where created. This is unfortunately not
possible since Reddit does not save the history of awards for each post. The library PSAW
is also not preferable since it collects data from posts at an unknown point in time and
then saves it in PSAW’s own database.
In Section 1.2 the ”karma” system on Reddit is described as an average of scores across
all content of a user. While it could potentially be used as a metric, it is not considered,
since it can be earned across a wide range of subreddits, making it difficult to evaluate
within a single community.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
59
==PAGE:68==
7.2
Network Science
We analyzed the network of wallstreetbets using discrete­time dynamic graphs. When
using discrete­time dynamic graphs we analyzed the 10 weeks before the creation of a
post. Social dynamics often change and are very volatile, so by analyzing the network
before the point in time of the post we are predicting, we can get a more accurate repre­
sentation of the social dynamics captured by the network features. If we used the entire
period of the data, the network and the network features would capture dynamics that
would not be relevant to the individual we are trying to predict. Additionally, using the en­
tire period would result in over­representing the users who had a consistently high level of
activity throughout the entire duration, leading to an inaccurate portrayal of the network’s
true dynamics. Another advantage of discrete­time dynamic graphs is their computational
simplicity. It was proven to be easier to divide the data into smaller chunks of data, instead
of computing the features for a network created by the entire period.
Centrality measures such as the degree or closeness centrality are often used to quantify
the relevance of individuals in a social network. However, a visual interpretation of the
distribution of the centrality measures for awarded and not awarded posts (Figure 5.9)
does not suggest that these measures are a significant good representation of individu­
als’ importance. This can also be seen in Figure 6.6 which shows the permutation feature
importance of the Random Forrest, it can be seen that the corruption of the closeness nor
betweenness centrality affects the performance of the random model. This is of course
assuming that awards are a true measure of acknowledgment. Due to computational limi­
tations, other centrality measures such as the betweenness and eigenvector centrality are
not computed, these measures could potentially show a more promising understanding
of the reputation of an individual.
Other features did however show a promising potential of explaining how individuals re­
ceive an award. The visual interpretation of the distributions of the in­degree for awarded
and non­awarded posts (Figure A.29) and the permutation importance from the random
forest model (Figure 6.6) suggests that it is more likely to be awarded if you have a high
in­degree. A similar trend can be seen in the distribution of the number of mentions of
the individual (Figure 5.13), which also indicates that highly mentioned individuals have a
higher likelihood of being awarded. The results of this indicate that awarded individuals
have an established identity within the community.
7.3
Text
In Section 5.4 we showed the results from the analysis of the textual content from the
post. This included the sentiment and the text length, which were extracted from the text.
We also investigated the embeddings from the ELECTRA model.
The sentiment analysis was conducted using the VADER algorithm. The results in Figure
5.14 showed that awarded posts appeared more negative and positive, compared to not
awarded posts. This indicates that awarded post is more polarizing and that the content
might be more subjective, which tends to evoke stronger emotional responses. It is also
important to consider that the VADER algorithm may not accurately capture the nuances
and complexities of human language, particularly when it comes to sarcasm, irony, and
other forms of figurative language.
We also extracted the text length from the posts. The result seen in Figure 5.15 shows
that awarded posts appear to be longer. This indicates that awarded post contains more
detailed information that is valuable to the community. This could be detailed information
about stocks or investment ideas. It is possible that this pattern only is true for wall­
60
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:69==
streetbets, as other subreddits cover different topics, where the same level of detail is not
appreciated.
The textual content can potentially retain a large amount of information and methods such
as text length and sentiment analysis may not extract sufficient information, therefore we
used the ELECTRA transformer model. Using the outputs from ELECTRA, we visualized
the 256 CLS­tokens, by reducing the dimensions using PCA (see Section 5.4.3). The
result in Figure 5.18 shows the Principal components colored by awarded post, where it
can be seen that ELECTRA explains some of the variations of the awarded post. This
applies that the textual features retain predictive power. Additionally, the overview of the
models 6.5 shows that ELECTRA contributes to higher accuracy when comparing the two
deep learning models with the extracted features and with the ELECTRA.
The limitation of using ELECTRA is the lack of explainability of textual features. Since
ELECTRA contains more than 10e6 parameters it is hard to explain the behavior of the
model.
7.4
Predicting Reputation
As previously mentioned the initial idea was to investigate many smaller subreddits, which
should be included in the final model, such that reputation is more generally explained
instead of primarily within wallstreetbets. However, due to the lack of awards in other
subreddits only data from wallstreetbets were included in the development of the final
model. The following sections address the challenges related to the final predictive model.
7.4.1
Data Bias
As seen in Section 3.2.8 wallstreetbets gained a large influx of users toward the end of
2021. This results in more people being able to award other users, which could affect the
likelihood of being awarded based on the period the individual made a post. The dataset
used for the models is balanced such that it contains the same amount of awarded and not
awarded posts. However, the percentage of awarded posts by date which can be seen
in Appendix A.30 shows that the dataset is imbalanced by the date. The figure shows
a higher percentage of awarded posts in the later periods of the data. Network features
such as the number of nodes and edges might be biased toward the end since there are
more nodes in this period. The figure in Appendix A.24 showing the number of nodes for
the awarded and not awarded posts does not however show any clear correlations. It is
also important to note that the models capture the changes in social dynamics that occur
when the network size increases and are able to predict these changes with an F1 score
of 78.13%.
7.4.2
The Deep Learning Models
The ELECTRA transformer model uses attention­mechanism, described in 4.5.1, which
captures the contextual relationship of the input and devotes more ”attention” to smaller
specific parts of the input. The transformer model has been used to obtain information
retained in the text in the form of CLS­tokens, these tokens have been combined with
the network features to recognize the underlying relationship between network features
and CLS­tokens (see Section 4.5.1). However, the model does not capture any relations
between network features and raw text input. Ideally, an attention mechanism should be
applied to a combination of network features and text as the input. By doing this it could
potentially find the contextual relationships between a network’s features and specific
words.
The attention mechanism described by Equation 4.12 in Section 4.5.1, does however not
handle continuous variables (network features) as input but uses a vector representing,
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
61
==PAGE:70==
where each word/input is represented as the index in the vector. A proposal for this could
be to use Graph Neural Networks (GNN) as input instead of the network features. This
is further discussed in Section 7.7. This would require training and developing a model
from scratch, which would require a substantial amount of data and computational power,
which was not possible within the constraints of this project.
7.4.3
Training the Deep Learning Models
Both deep learning models have been trained successfully, which can be seen in Ap­
pendix A.5.1 & A.5.1. The figures show that the training and validation loss lowers and
converges.
The training and validation accuracy also increases and converges after
enough epochs. To obtain the optimal hyperparameters wandb have been used to ”sweep”
all the hyperparameters through a Bayes search that finds the optimum faster than a ran­
dom grid search. More details on this method can be found in Section 4.1.2. The results
from the search can be seen in Appendix A.5.2, which shows that both models performed
better with smaller batch sizes and more epochs.
Through the development of the models, many different versions have been tested. A
code snippet for the final models can be seen in Appendix B.1 & B.2.
7.4.4
Excluded Features
Some network features have not been included in the data used for predicting reputation,
this is due to the computational complexity. The betweenness centrality algorithm has a
relatively high running time for big networks compared to other centrality measures since
it needs to compute the total number of shortest paths (Section 4.2.5). The eigenvector
centrality is also computationally complex since it computes the eigenvector for the adja­
cency matrix A, which has the same dimension as the number of nodes (Section 4.2.5).
However, it is to be expected that the centrality measures are highly correlated with each
other.
7.5
Rich Get Richer Effect
Section 6.3 shows how the probability of receiving an award increases prior to the more
awards you have, which can be seen in Figure 6.14. Figure 6.13 also shows that the top
1 % of the most awarded individuals received 40 % of all the awards. This could indicate
a ”rich get richer” effect [33], where successful users are more likely to continue to be suc­
cessful. The concept of the ”rich get richer” is often used within economics. However, the
same concept can be applied to other systems. In social sciences, capital is often divided
into 4 distinct forms: economic, symbolic, cultural, and social [34]. Where symbolic capital
is referred to as honor, prestige, or recognition. Reddits’ award system provides a unique
opportunity to measure the symbolic capital of an individual quantitatively. We used this
to study the ”rich get richer” effect of awards, which suggests that symbolic capital in the
form of awards behaves similarly to economic capital.
This phenomenon is also seen within network science. This is known as a scale­free net­
work where the distribution of degrees follows a power law meaning that a few nodes have
a very high number of connections, while most nodes have only a few connections [14]. A
similarity can be seen between the concept of scale­free networks and the distribution of
awards. The degree can be seen as a measure of social capital, while the award system
can be seen as a measure of symbolic capital.
This concept was further investigated for different network sizes of wallstreetbets. The
inequality of the distribution of awards increases when the Wallstreetbets network size
increases (Figure 6.16). This indicates that there are different mechanisms driving the
62
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:71==
award systems for larger networks. The results suggest that when the network is small
every user that creates valuable content gets acknowledged through awards. For bigger
networks, it’s primarily individuals with an established reputation that gets acknowledged
for their work. For larger networks, reputed individuals who receive more awards become
more visible and influential leading to a self­reinforcing feedback loop, where they keep
receiving more awards. When the network is too extensive it also becomes harder for less
well­known individuals to establish an identity within the community and gain a reputation.
This can also be seen in Section 6.2 where the social dynamics of larger networks change
and it becomes difficult for individuals to establish strong connections. This can be seen
in Figure 6.10 and Figure 6.8 which show the decrease in mentions and reciprocal edges
for larger networks.
However, it is important to note that the phenomenon is not necessarily caused by a ”rich
get richer” effect, but it could be that a few users simply produce high­quality content and
are therefore recognized more by the community through awards.
When we conducted the experiments we purposely did not control for the activity level
of each individual, since it mimics real­world economics. Individuals can ”work hard” and
accumulate more wealth or success in the ”real world”, which would cause inequality in the
distribution of wealth. However, the distribution should not be that unequally distributed,
despite some people being highly active. We adapted this idea to the experiment, such
that it mimics the dynamics of economics.
7.6
Identity Importance for Reputation in Communities
In Section 6.2 we investigated how the individuals’ identity is affected by the size of the
network. This was done by examining the total number of mentions and the total number
of reciprocal edges in the network.
The two slopes for the regression computed between the total number of nodes and re­
ciprocal edges, which can be seen in Figure 6.8, indicate that it is harder to form stronger
connections in bigger networks. It may be that in smaller networks, individuals are more
likely to form connections with others who have similar interests or goals, while in larger
networks, connections may be driven more by convenience or proximity.
The regression computed for the total number of nodes and mentions, which can be seen
in Figure 6.10 also indicates that there are different mechanisms driving the social dy­
namics of bigger networks. It suggests that in large networks, it becomes increasingly
challenging for new nodes to establish a strong presence and build their reputation. This
could potentially be because smaller communities are stronger and the identity of individ­
uals is lost when a network reaches a certain size. It becomes harder for individuals to
establish an identity within the community since there are too many people.
Furthermore, we also computed the permutation importance of a Random Forrest model
(Figure 6.12) which indicates similar findings. Where features such as the fraction of
reciprocal edges, number of nodes, number of edges, and the number of reciprocal edges
contribute to higher accuracy in the model for the early period with smaller networks.
7.7
Further Work
This section contains discussions and ideas about potential further work, that was out of
the constraints of this thesis. This includes the improvement of the data, model, and the
use of Graph Neural Networks (GNN).
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
63
==PAGE:72==
7.7.1
Data
Due to the constraints of the thesis, only data from wallstreetbets have been used for
developing the model. Initially smaller subreddits were analyzed, but due to the lack of
awarded posts which is used as the dependent variable, these subreddits have not been
included in the model. Ideally, data from many subreddits should be used in the devel­
opment, such that the model explains individuals’ reputations more generally, instead of
primarily on wallsteetbets.
Furthermore, it could be interesting to include textual analysis of the interaction between
users, and more specifically the interaction between users and the individual that is being
predicted. This will capture some of the social dynamics between the nodes, that are not
captured through the network analysis. It could be expected that users interact differently
towards a user with a high reputation. An example of this can be seen in Appendix A.1.1
where a user comments on the individual DeepFuckingValue. It can be seen that the
user expresses themself in a manner that would not be expected for a user without a
reputation.
7.7.2
Model Improvements
It could be interesting to control for the date discussed in Section 7.4.1 since the result
suggests a bias towards the date a post is created. Additionally, the result in Section
6.3 shows the likelihood of receiving an award increases prior to the number of previous
awards by the user. This feature could be included in the model since it shows promising
predictive power.
7.7.3
Graph Neural Networks
A future possibility for further improvement could be to explore the possibilities within
Graph Neural Networks.
Graph Neural Networks (GNN) are Neural Networks that are capable of dealing and work­
ing with graph­structured information or data. A GNN model takes networks/graphs as
input and can learn information retained in the network, this can be used for a variety of
machine­learning tasks. GNN models take the adjacency matrix as input.
A variation of GNN that could be ideal for this project is Temporal Graph Networks (TGNs)
explained in the paper ”Temporal Graph Networks for Deep Learning on Dynamic Graphs”
by Emanuele Rossi et al [35]. TGNs handle dynamic graphs represented as sequences
of timed events. Which could have huge potential for predicting awarded posts.
Another approach is Graph Attention Networks (GATs) [36] described in the paper ”Graph
Attention Networks” by Petar Veličković et al. GATs use an attention­mechanism similar
to transformer models, where the model finds contextual relationships between nodes.
This works very similarly to the attention­mechanism in a transformer model since the
GAT takes the adjacency matrix as input which is a (0, 1)matrix, this is similar to the word
embedding in the transformer model which is also a (0, 1) vector representation of each
word in the sequence.
When using a GNN model you do not have to extract features for the networks, instead,
the GNN model finds information retained in the network. When using a deep learning
model instead of feature extracting you lose the ability to interpret the learned features
and their relationship to the dependent variable.
64
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this thesis, we explored how reputation & acknowledgment through awards can be
explained by using network science and natural language processing on the subreddit
Wallstreetbets. The results support the hypotheses stated in Section 1.4.
Hypothesis I
Using Reddit’s award system we were able to measure an individual’s acknowledgment
and recognition. This was investigated by examining individuals with a known high rep­
utation on the subreddit Wallstreetbets. These users had a significantly high amount of
awards compared to users with the same activity level. The study revealed that Reddit’s
award system is a unique opportunity to quantify how an individual is perceived.
Hypothesis II
In order to investigate how individuals obtain an award for their posts, we used discrete
time dynamic networks. For each post, we computed a network of a 10­week period be­
fore a post was created. This enables us to extract different network features in the time
before the post. To extract information retained in the text we used the ELECTRA trans­
former. Using the network features and the ELECTRA transformer model we developed a
deep learning model that can classify if a post gets an award or not. The model performed
well with an F1­score of 78.13%. The model is a combination of various network features
and textual content, which indicates the complex nature of acknowledgment within com­
munities.
Hypothesis III
We explored the social dynamics of acknowledgment through awards. We studied the
distribution of awards across the awarded users, which shows that a small group of peo­
ple receive the majority of all the awards. The top 1 % of the most awarded individuals
received 40 % of all the awards on Wallstreetbets. In addition, we showed that the prob­
ability of receiving an award increases prior to the more awards you have. This indicates
a ”rich get richer” dynamic.
Hypothesis IV
We investigated the impact of network size on individuals’ identity and reputation within the
wallstreetbets community. By analyzing the reciprocity and number of mentions, we found
that larger networks have different social dynamics. The results indicated that there are
relatively fewer reciprocal edges and number of mentions in larger networks, suggesting
that it is more challenging for individuals to establish an identity within larger communi­
ties. Our analysis also revealed similar findings in the permutation feature importance
computed for models of both larger and smaller networks.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Elizabeth Dubois and Grant Blank. “The echo chamber is overstated: the moder­
ating effect of political interest and diverse media”. In: Information, Communication
& Society 21.5 (2018), pp. 729–745. DOI: 10.1080/1369118X.2018.1428656. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2018.1428656. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
1369118X.2018.1428656.
[2]
Yonghwan Kim, Ji Eun Lee, and Eun­Ju Park. “Motivations for using the social net­
working site Reddit”. In: Telematics and Informatics 34.7 (2017), pp. 1294–1304.
[3]
Alexey Medvedev, Renaud Lambiotte, and Jean­Charles Delvenne. “The Anatomy
of Reddit: An Overview of Academic Research”. In: May 2019, pp. 183–204. ISBN:
978­981­13­6240­8. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-14683-2_9.
[4]
Rationality. The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy. Cambridge University Press,
1999.
[5]
Christoph Ellersgaard. PhD Thesis ­ Elites in Denmark: Power Elites and Ruling
Classes in a Welfare State. June 2016. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.2176.9840.
[6]
Anton Grau Larsen. “Elites in Denmark: Identifying the elite”. English. PhD thesis.
2015. ISBN: 9788776119096.
[7]
Cody L. Buntain and Jennifer Golbeck. “Identifying social roles in reddit using net­
work structure”. In: Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide
Web (2014).
[8]
Sean Taylor et al. “Identity effects in social media”. In: Nature Human Behaviour
(Nov. 2022), pp. 1–11. DOI: 10.1038/s41562-022-01459-8.
[9]
Alexandre Parmentier and Robin Cohen. “Learning User Reputation on Reddit”.
In: 2019 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI). 2019,
pp. 242–247.
[10]
Gordon Burtch et al. “How Do Peer Awards Motivate Creative Content? Experimen­
tal Evidence from Reddit”. In: Management Science 68.5 (2022), pp. 3488–3506.
DOI: 10.1287/mnsc.2021.4040. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.4040.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.4040.
[11]
William L. Hamilton et al. Loyalty in Online Communities. 2017. DOI: 10.48550/
ARXIV.1703.03386. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03386.
[12]
Abhinav Anand and Jalaj Pathak. “The role of Reddit in the GameStop short squeeze”.
In: Economics Letters 211 (2022), p. 110249. ISSN: 0165­1765. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.econlet.2021.110249. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0165176521004808.
[13]
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen. Machine Learning Operations. https://github.com/SkafteNicki/
dtu_mlops. 2022.
[14]
Albert­László Barabási and Márton Pósfai. Network science. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2016. ISBN: 9781107076266 1107076269. URL: http://barabasi.
com/networksciencebook/.
[15]
Jari Saramäki et al. “Generalizations of the clustering coefficient to weighted com­
plex networks”. In: Phys. Rev. E 75 (2 Feb. 2007), p. 027105. DOI: 10 . 1103 /
PhysRevE.75.027105. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.75.027105.
[16]
Ron Milo et al. “Network motifs: simple building blocks of complex networks”. In:
Science 298.5594 (2002), pp. 824–827.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
67
==PAGE:76==
[17]
Linton C. Freeman. “A Set of Measures of Centrality Based on Betweenness”. In:
Sociometry 40.1 (1977), pp. 35–41. ISSN: 00380431. URL: http://www.jstor.org/
stable/3033543 (visited on 12/12/2022).
[18]
Linton C. Freeman. “Centrality in social networks conceptual clarification”. In: Social
Networks 1.3 (1978), pp. 215–239. ISSN: 0378­8733. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
0378-8733(78)90021-7. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
0378873378900217.
[19]
Phillip Bonacich. “Power and Centrality: A Family of Measures”. In: American Jour­
nal of Sociology 92.5 (1987), pp. 1170–1182. DOI: 10.1086/228631. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1086/228631. URL: https://doi.org/10.1086/228631.
[20]
Prakash M Nadkarni, Lucila Ohno­Machado, and Wendy W Chapman. “Natural lan­
guage processing: an introduction”. In: Journal of the American Medical Informat­
ics Association 18.5 (Sept. 2011), pp. 544–551. ISSN: 1067­5027. DOI: 10.1136/
amiajnl-2011-000464. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article-pdf/18/5/544/
5962687/18-5-544.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000464.
[21]
C. Hutto and Eric Gilbert. “VADER: A Parsimonious Rule­Based Model for Sen­
timent Analysis of Social Media Text”. In: Proceedings of the International AAAI
Conference on Web and Social Media 8.1 (May 2014), pp. 216–225. DOI: 10.1609/
icwsm.v8i1.14550. URL: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICWSM/article/view/14550.
[22]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Sci­
ence and Statistics). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer­Verlag, 2006. ISBN: 0387310738.
[23]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Elements of Statistical
Learning. Springer Series in Statistics. New York, NY, USA: Springer New York Inc.,
2001.
[24]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. 2017. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1706.
03762. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[25]
Kevin Clark et al. ELECTRA: Pre­training Text Encoders as Discriminators Rather
Than Generators. 2020. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2003.10555. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2003.10555.
[26]
Tin Kam Ho. “Random decision forests”. In: Proceedings of 3rd international con­
ference on document analysis and recognition. Vol. 1. IEEE. 1995, pp. 278–282.
[27]
Karl Pearson F.R.S. “LIII. On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in
space”. In: The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal
of Science 2.11 (1901), pp. 559–572. DOI: 10.1080/14786440109462720.
[28]
Spectator ­ who are the reddit traders. https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/who-are-
the-reddit-traders/. Accessed: 14­02­2023.
[29]
Marketwatch ­ 1R0NYMAN. https://www.marketwatch.com/story/trader-says-he-
has- no- money- at- risk- then- promptly- loses- almost- 2000- 2019- 01- 22. Accessed:
14­02­2023.
[30]
CNBC ­ ControlTheNarrative. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/06/18/young-trader-
dies-by-suicide-after-thinking-he-racked-up-big-losses-on-robinhood.html. Accessed:
14­02­2023.
[31]
Abhinav Anand and Jalaj Pathak. “The role of Reddit in the GameStop short squeeze”.
In: Economics Letters 211 (2022), p. 110249. ISSN: 0165­1765. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.econlet.2021.110249. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0165176521004808.
[32]
The Guardian ­ DeepFuckingValue. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2022/
nov/04/how-i-lost-1m-during-the-pandemic. Accessed: 14­02­2023.
68
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:77==
[33]
J. Reiman and P. Leighton. The Rich Get Richer and the Poor Get Prison: Ideology,
Class, and Criminal Justice: Eleventh Edition. Nov. 2016, pp. 1–258. DOI: 10.4324/
9781315639079.
[34]
P. Bourdieu and R. Nice. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste.
Harvard University Press, 1984. ISBN: 9780674212770.
[35]
Emanuele Rossi et al. Temporal Graph Networks for Deep Learning on Dynamic
Graphs. 2020. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2006.10637. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.
10637.
[36]
Petar Veličković et al. Graph Attention Networks. 2017. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1710.
10903. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10903.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
69
==PAGE:78==
70
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER A
Appendix
A.1
Text Examples
The following example is from an awarded post from wallstreetbets with a VADER senti­
ment score text of 0.9543 and a text length of 632.
This is probably going to be a huge week Let’s show them how much we
really like the stock, let’s destroy that 1000, let’s zoom past 5000 and then
let’s get out of this universe, going to the moon was plans of the past, we’re
far too good for that, let’s explore in deep space. Love the sight of fear in
the mornings, watching the news every day seeing they’re trying to make us
crumble, do they not know diamond is too strong to shatter (I ain’t no scientist
so if I’m wrong forgive me) Good luck this week people, keep them ￿￿￿￿
and remember, together apes strong ￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿Also not financial
advice, I just really like the stock.
A.1.1
DeepFuckingValue
Figure A.1: A post from DeepFuckingValue
Figure A.2: A comment on the post from DeepFuckingValue seen in Figure A.1.1
The post and comments can be seen here.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
71
==PAGE:80==
A.2
ELECTRA ­ PCA
(a) Degree Centrality
(b) Closeness Centrality
(c) Activity
Figure A.3: Principal components of CLS tokens
72
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:81==
(a) N Nodes
(b) N Edges
Figure A.4: Principal components of CLS tokens
(a) Author Mentions
(b) Fraction of reciprocal edges
Figure A.5: Principal components of CLS tokens
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
73
==PAGE:82==
(a) In degree
(b) Out degree
(c) N Reciprocal Edges for the author
(d) Nreciprocaledges
Figure A.6: Principal components of CLS tokens
74
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:83==
(a) Sentiment compound
(b) Text Length
Figure A.7: Principal components of CLS tokens
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
75
==PAGE:84==
A.3
Features by Date
Figure A.8: The number of awards given to each author of a post by date
Figure A.9: The activity for each author of a post by date
Figure A.10: The closeness centrality for each author of a post by date
76
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:85==
Figure A.11: The degree centrality for each author of a post by date
Figure A.12: The degree for each author of a post by date
Figure A.13: The in­degree for each author of a post by date
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.14: The out­degree for each author of a post by date
Figure A.15: The fraction of reciprocal edges
Figure A.16: The number of reciprocal edges for the author of a post
78
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:87==
Figure A.17: The number of reciprocal edges in each network
Figure A.18: The number of edges in each network
Figure A.19: The number of nodes in each network
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure A.20: The mentions of each author of a post by date
Figure A.21: The sentiment compound for each post by date
Figure A.22: The text length for each post by date
80
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:89==
A.4
Features
(a)
(b)
Figure A.23: The closeness centrality (a) and the degree centrality (b) colored by awarded
or not awarded.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.24: The number of nodes (a) and the number of edges (b) colored by awarded
or not awarded.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.25: The number of nodes (a) and the number of edges (b) colored by awarded
or not awarded.
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
81
==PAGE:90==
(a)
(b)
Figure A.26: The number of reciprocal edges for the author of the post (a) and the fraction
of the total number of reciprocal edges in the network. (b) The distributions are colored
by awarded or not awarded.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.27: The activity for the author of the post (a) and the degree for the author of the
post (b). The distributions are colored by awarded or not awarded.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.28: The number of mentions of the author of the post (a) and the number of
reciprocal edges in the network (b). The distributions are colored by awarded or not
awarded.
82
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:91==
(a)
(b)
Figure A.29: The sentiment compound of the post (a) and the text length of the post (b).
The distributions are colored by awarded or not awarded.
A.5
Appendix ­ Models
The following figure shows the percentage of awarded posts by date of the balanced data
used for the model.
Figure A.30
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
83
==PAGE:92==
A.5.1
Training
Neural Network
Figure A.31: Training History
Neural Network + ELECTRA
Figure A.32: Training History
A.5.2
Hyperparameter Sweeping
Neural Network
Figure A.33
84
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:93==
Neural Network + ELECTRA
Figure A.34
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
85
==PAGE:94==
CHAPTER B
Code
B.1
Model: Neural Network
1
class Classifier(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self,num_labels=2):
3
super(Classifier ,self).__init__()
4
self.num_labels = num_labels
5
6
# network + text features
7
self.network_input = nn.Linear(in_features=14,out_features=256)
8
self.dense_net2 = nn.Linear(in_features=256,out_features=512)
9
self.dense_net3 = nn.Linear(in_features=512,out_features=1024)
10
self.dense_net4 = nn.Linear(in_features=1024,out_features=2048)
11
self.dense_net5 = nn.Linear(in_features=2048,out_features=1024)
12
self.dense_net6 = nn.Linear(in_features=1024,out_features=512)
13
self.dense_net7 = nn.Linear(in_features=512,out_features=256)
14
15
# output layer
16
self.out_proj = nn.Linear(256, self.num_labels)
17
18
def forward(self,network_features=None):
19
x_net = F.relu(self.network_input(network_features))
20
x_net = F.relu(self.dense_net2(x_net))
21
x_net = F.relu(self.dense_net3(x_net))
22
x_net = F.relu(self.dense_net4(x_net))
23
x_net = F.relu(self.dense_net5(x_net))
24
x_net = F.relu(self.dense_net6(x_net))
25
x_net = F.relu(self.dense_net7(x_net))
26
27
logits = self.out_proj(x_net)
28
return logits
B.2
Model: Neural Network + ELECTRA
1
class ElectraClassifier(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self,num_labels=2):
3
super(ElectraClassifier , self).__init__()
4
self.num_labels = num_labels
5
6
# text features
7
self.electra = ElectraModel.from_pretrained('google/electra -small-
discriminator ')
8
self.dense_txt = nn.Linear(self.electra.config.hidden_size , self.
electra.config.hidden_size)
9
self.dropout_txt = nn.Dropout(self.electra.config.hidden_dropout_prob)
10
11
# combined features
12
self.dense_cat1 = nn.Linear(in_features=(256+12),out_features=512)
13
self.dense_cat2 = nn.Linear(in_features=512,out_features=1024)
14
self.dense_cat3 = nn.Linear(in_features=1024,out_features=2048)
86
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
==PAGE:95==
15
self.dense_cat6 = nn.Linear(in_features=2048,out_features=1024)
16
self.dense_cat7 = nn.Linear(in_features=1024,out_features=512)
17
self.dense_cat8 = nn.Linear(in_features=512,out_features=256)
18
19
# output layer
20
self.out_proj = nn.Linear(256, self.num_labels) # 2 labels
21
22
def classifier(self,sequence_output ,network_features):
23
# text features
24
x_txt = sequence_output[:, 0, :] #[CLS] token
25
x_txt = F.relu(self.dense_txt(x_txt))
26
x_txt = self.dropout_txt(x_txt)
27
28
# combined features
29
x = torch.cat((x_txt,network_features),dim=1)
30
x = F.relu(self.dense_cat1(x))
31
x = F.relu(self.dense_cat2(x))
32
x = F.relu(self.dense_cat3(x))
33
x = F.relu(self.dense_cat6(x))
34
x = F.relu(self.dense_cat7(x))
35
x = F.relu(self.dense_cat8(x))
36
37
# output layer
38
logits = self.out_proj(x)
39
return logits
40
41
def forward(self, input_ids=None,attention_mask=None,network_features=None
):
42
discriminator_hidden_states = self.electra(input_ids=input_ids ,
attention_mask=attention_mask)
43
sequence_output = discriminator_hidden_states[0]
44
logits = self.classifier(sequence_output ,network_features)
45
46
return logits
Explaining Successful Reddit Posts
87
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
