==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
MASTER THESIS
Environmental safety of novel materials for
the green transition - the case of perovskites
Author: Fides Hensel
Student-no.: s202610
A thesis submitted in fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of Master of Science Environmental Engineering
in the
Section of Circularity & Environmental Impact
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Supervisor:
Prof. Anders Baun,
Snr. Researcher Lars M. Skjolding,
PhD in progress Veronica Di Battista
March 4, 2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
iii
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
Abstract
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Master of Science Environmental Engineering
Environmental safety of novel materials for the green transition - the case of
perovskites
by Fides Hensel
The development of new, more capable materials is considered to be a key part of the
green transition. Due to their unique properties, perovskites have the potential to play
a key role in several industries, e.g. for use in catalysts in the automotive industry. This
study aims to investigate the behavior and ecotoxicity of perovskites as metal-based ad-
vanced materials (AdMs) in aquatic environments. The behavior of selected perovskites
in aquatic ecotoxicological media was studied, focusing on nickel dissolution and aggre-
gation/sedimentation processes. Short-term freshwater toxicity tests were conducted on
six different perovskite materials for the relevant aquatic key species R. subcapitata and
D. magna. The influence of natural organic matter (NOM) on dissolution, size distribu-
tion, sedimentation characteristics, and nanoecotoxicity was also investigated. The re-
sults showed that most perovskite dispersions were very polydisperse and unstable in
dispersion, exhibiting agglomeration and sedimentation processes over the 24-hour mea-
suring period. The addition of SR-NOM resulted in smaller agglomerates and a slower
sedimentation rate, which increased dispersion stability, while higher water hardness and
ionic strength had a stronger stabilization effect. The dissolution of both nickel and cobalt
was observed from all perovskite materials, but the release of metal ions was compara-
tively low compared to other metal-containing nanomaterials observed in other studies.
The toxicity of the perovskites towards relevant aquatic key species was also evaluated,
and the dominating source of toxicity from perovskites to R. subcapitata was found to be
caused by nickel ions. The release of nickel ions was not considered the dominating mode
of action towards D. magna. This study provides relevant information on the behavior
and ecotoxicity of perovskites in aquatic environments, which can contribute to the safe
and sustainable research and development of AdMs according to the European concept of
"Safe and Sustainable by Design".
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
v
Preface
Declaration of Authorship
I, Fides Hensel, declare that this thesis titled, “ Environmental safety of novel materials for
the green transition - the case of perovskites” and the work presented in it are my own. I
confirm that:
• This work was done wholly or mainly during the assigned period for my master´s
thesis in Environmental Engineering at Technical University of Denmark, Depart-
ment of DTU Sustain
• Where any part of this thesis has previously been submitted for a degree or any other
qualification at this University or any other institution, this has been clearly stated.
• Where I have consulted the published work of others, this is always clearly at-
tributed.
• Where I have quoted from the work of others, the source is always given. With the
exception of such quotations, this thesis is entirely my own work.
• I have acknowledged all main sources of help.
• Where the thesis is based on work done by myself jointly with others, I have made
clear exactly what was done by others and what I have contributed myself.
Signed:
Date:
==PAGE:6==
vi
Acknowledgements
This master thesis was written by Fides Hensel for the period October 4, 2022 to March
04, 2023 at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Department of DTU Sustain. The
thesis is equivalent to 35 ECTS and represents the final thesis of my MSc in Environmental
Engineering. Engineering.
First and foremost, I want to thank my supervisor Anders Baun, who took me in during
a personally difficult time and brought me back on track through empathy and trust. I
would like to thank him for the always motivating meetings, the exciting and very sym-
pathetic discussions and an ever present flexibility for questions in between.
The same goes for my supervisor Lars M. Skjolding. He was always patient with me,
helped me out with good explanations and with many professional tips and tricks. This
helped me a lot both in the lab and on paper.
I would also like to thank Veronica Di Battista, who gave me inspiration for the devel-
opment of my topic through her work and was always warm, open and motivated for
professional and at the same time humorous discussions.
I would like to express my gratitude to my partner and boyfriend, Paul Daniel, for his
unwavering support, love, and belief in me throughout this period, accepting me just the
way I am.
. . .
==PAGE:7==
vii
Contents
Abstract
iii
Preface
v
1
Background and aim
1
2
Introduction
3
2.1
Advanced Materials and Nanoparticles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Perovskites as study case of advanced materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Potential use cases of perovskites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Behavior of Nanoparticles in the aquatic environment . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Agglomeration and Sedimentation Processes in Relation to Particle
Size and Surface Area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.2
DLVO theory and zeta potential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.3
Natural organic matter and its role in ecotoxicity and characteriza-
tion studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.4
Dissolution Behavior of Nanoparticles: Influence of Particle Size,
Agglomeration, and Ionic Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
The ecotoxicology of nanomaterials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
The ecotoxicological impact heavy metals and nickel on aquatic ecosystems
14
3
Materials and Methods
17
3.1
Advanced materials - perovskites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Preparation of stock and test suspensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Perovskite characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.1
Size distribution, agglomeration and sedimentation behavior
. . . .
19
3.3.2
Dissolution behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.3
Influence of SR-NOM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Short-term ecotoxicity tests with perovskites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4.1
Culturing conditions for R.subcapitata and D. magna . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4.2
Reference toxicity tests with Potassium Dichromate . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4.3
Algal growth inhibition test of 72h . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4.4
Daphnia m. acute immobilization test of 48h . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.5
Acute toxicity tests with addition of SR-NOM
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Data treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Results
25
4.1
Size distribution and the influence of SR-NOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Particle number and the influence of SR-NOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Dissolution behavior of perovskites and the influence of SR-NOM . . . . . .
29
4.4
Short term toxicity of perovskites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.1
Growth inhibition tests with R. subcapitata
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.2
Immobilisation test with D. magna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Short-term toxicity tests with addition of SR-NOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:8==
viii
4.5.1
Growth inhibition test with R. subcapitata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5.2
Immobilisation test with D. magna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Discussion
37
5.1
Behavior of perovskites in ecotoxicological media
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.1
Size distribution, agglomeration and sedimentation . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.2
Dissolution of perovskites in ecotoxicological media . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Short-term toxicity of perovskites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Influence of SR-NOM on the behavior of perovskites in ecotoxicological me-
dia and on aquatic ecotoxicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Conclusion
47
Bibliography
49
A Potassium Dichromate as reference compound and validity criteria for algal growth
inhibition- and crustacea immobilization tests
55
B
Appendix B - Agglomeration/sedimentation and Dissolution test results
57
C Appendix C - Toxicity test results
65
==PAGE:9==
ix
List of Figures
2.1
Molecular model of ABO3-type perovskite (Zang et al. (2019) [16] . . . . . .
4
2.2
Nanoparticle pathways and nano-bio interactions with the aquatic environ-
ment. Figure adapted from Fig. 2.2 in [23] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1
Experimental study structure; green arrow refer to tests with R. subcapitata
and ISO8692, 2012 medium [62]; blue arrows refer to tests with D. magna
and Elendt M7 medium (TG OECD 202, 2004) [63] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
LEVITATT setup; developed at DTU Sustain (2020) [65] . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1
Size distribution by Intensity for t0.5 in 10 mg/L dispersions in (A) ISO
medium (B) M7 medium (C) ISO medium + SR-NOM (D) M7 medium +
SR-NOM determined by DLS. Undoped perovskite materials were analyzed.
26
4.2
Size distribution by Intensity for a measurement period of 24 hours (t0 - t24
in 10 mg/L dispersions in (A) ISO medium (B) M7 medium (C) ISO medium
+ SR-NOM (D) M7 medium + SR-NOM determined by DLS. Undoped per-
ovskite materials were analyzed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Zeta potentials for 10mg/L dispersions of perovskite materials at t0 (full
colour) and t24 (unfilled). Displayed are averaged values from duplicate
measurements for the undoped perovskite materials.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
By ICP-MS measured mass concentrations [µg/L] of dissolved nickel ions
over 24 hours for the undoped perovskite materials. Each figure displays
one material and compares nickel ion release between ISO medium, M7
medium, ISO medium + SR-NOM, M7 medium + SR-NOM. The dispersion
concentration was 10 mg/L for all tested perovskite materials. . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Concentration-response curves of growth inhibition tests on R. subcapitata
for all tested perovskite materials. 95% Confidence Intervals displayed in
grey. Concentration series of 3.125 - 50 mg/L with a dilution factor of two. .
33
4.6
Concentration-response curves of immobilization tests on D. magna for all
tested perovskite materials with toxic effects. 95% Confidence Intervals dis-
played in grey. Concentration series of 3.125 - 100 mg/L with a dilution
factor of two. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
B.1
Relative percentage of the dissolved nickel and cobalt ions at 24 hours in
ISO9682 medium, Elendt M7 medium and with additon of SR-NOM for
undoped perovskite materials. Dispersion concentration was 10 mg/L for
all tested perovskite materials.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
xi
List of Tables
3.1
Physico-chemical information on studied perovskites (Information received
from BASF and [3]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Ionic strength (IS), water hardness, and calcium concentration for the two
testing media. More details on the media description and characteristics can
be found ISO8692, 2012 [62], OECD guideline TG 202, 2004 [63]
. . . . . . .
18
3.3
Stability characteristics zeta potential. Supplemented from Riddick (1968) .
19
4.1
10% and 50% effect concentrations (EC) and corresponding 95% confidence
intervals for 72h R. subcapitata growth inhibition test with 6 different per-
ovskite test suspensions tested for the influence of SR-NOM . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
10% and 50% effect concentrations (EC) and corresponding 95% confidence
intervals for 48h D. magna immobilization test with 6 different perovskite
test suspensions tested for the influence of SR-NOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
A.1 Validity criteria for R. subcapitata and D. magna. for Potassium Dichromate .
56
A.2 Validity criteria fresh water algal growth inhibition test with unicellular
green algae p. subcapitata [62] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
B.1
Particle number, size and PDI zeta potential measured by DLS for LaNi
suspended in ISO algal and Elendt M7 medium (10 mg/L) over a measuring
period of 24 hours with and without addition of 10 mg/L SR-NOM . . . . .
58
B.2
Particle number, size, PDI and zeta potential measured by DLS for LaCoNi(16)
suspended in ISO algal and Elendt M7 medium (10 mg/L) over a measuring
period of 24 hours with and without addition of 10 mg/L SR-NOM . . . . .
59
B.3
Particle number, size, PDI and zeta potential measured by DLS for LaCoNi
suspended in ISO algal and Elendt M7 medium (10 mg/L) over a measuring
period of 24 hours with and without addition of 10 mg/L SR-NOM . . . . .
60
B.4
Particle number, size, PDI and zeta potential measured by DLS for LaCoNi(5)
suspended in ISO algal and Elendt M7 medium (10 mg/L) over a measuring
period of 24 hours with and without addition of 10 mg/L SR-NOM . . . . .
61
B.5
Relative percentage of dissolved metal ions nickel and cobalt comparing the
influence of 10 mg/L SR-NOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.6
Relative percentage of the dissolved nickel and cobalt ions in ISO medium
over a period of 72 hours comparing the influence of 10 mg/L SR-NOM . .
62
C.1
Based on dissolution experiment recalculated 10% and 50% effect concen-
trations and corresponding 95% confidence intervals for 72h R.subcapitata
growth inhibition test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
C.2
Based on dissolution experiment recalculated 10% and 50% effect concen-
trations and corresponding 95% confidence intervals for 48h D. magna im-
mobilization test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
C.3
EC50 values on elemental nano-Ni0 and dissolved nickel from nanomateri-
als found in relevant literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1
Chapter 1
Background and aim
The concept "Safe- and sustainable-by-design" (SSbD) was developed to assess the safety
and sustainability of chemicals in advance of their market introductions and was pub-
lished in the context of the European Green Deal policy initiative by the European Com-
mission in 2019 [1]. The concept is intended to contribute a significant step towards a
sustainable, circular- and pollution-free economy to reach a climate friendly and carbon
neutral future. It promotes safe and responsible handling of chemicals, materials and
products throughout research and development as an upstream regulation tool. Further-
more, its aim is to optimize longevity as well as reuse and recycling to reduce detrimental
effects to the environment and human health [1]. In an effort to reach a carbon neutral fu-
ture, new technologies are constantly being developed, while efforts are also underway to
optimize existing, essential technologies. One way of doing so often involves utilizing the
latest advances in material sciences in order to lessen the detrimental impacts of polluting
technologies.
Advanced materials (AdMs), are considered cutting-edge materials with properties tai-
lored to specific applications. The development of AdMs often involves creating complex
structures with various coatings, sizes, shapes, and surface properties that are not consis-
tent across the entire material [2, 1, 3]. Their general property of a high surface to volume
ratio leads to an increased reactivity and specific behavior in liquid media compared to
other soluble chemical compounds, as they behave comparatively more like a solid phase
[4]. AdMs present a unique challenge in the regulatory context, as they have the potential
to aid in reaching climate goals through advanced technologies, but also raise concerns
due to their novel nature and lack of regulation.
Perovskite-based three-way catalytic converters are a novel class of AdMs that may have
the potential to serve as an alternative to traditional materials used in automotive cataly-
sis [3]. The widespread use of catalytic converters will lead to an increase in the presence
of these materials in the environment. This creates a pressing need to understand their
behavior and assess their potentially hazardous impacts on the environment in advance
to their large scale application. The perovskites contain noble and heavy metals such as
cobalt, nickel, and lanthanum. Due to the toxicological profile of nickel and cobalt the
understanding of physico-chemical dynamics of these metals structures in aquatic envi-
ronments is crucial. At present, there is limited research on the conduct of agglomeration,
sedimentation, dissolution, and toxicity of perovskites.
The commonly used test systems for risk assessment of environmental and human health
impacts were designed for dissolved chemicals, which raises the question of their suitabil-
ity for evaluating the impacts of advanced materials. These test systems have limitations
and may not accurately reflect the effects of AdMs on the environment and human health.
Hence, there is a need to develop new test systems or modify existing ones to accurately
assess the risks posed by AdMs. Although some progress has been made in evaluating
the test systems since this issue was raised, the concern still persists and should be further
explored in the thesis [2].
==PAGE:14==
2
Chapter 1. Background and aim
To address this knowledge gap, the aim of this study is twofold:
1. Acquire data to describe the behavior of perovskites as metal-based AdMs in aquatic
environments.
2. Gather data on perovskites ecotoxicity for relevant aquatic key species.
This will be accomplished by means of:
• Studying selected perovskites in aquatic ecotoxicological media considering their
behavior of 1) nickel dissolution 2) aggregation/ sedimentation
• Applying short-term freshwater toxicity tests on six different perovskite materials
for relevant aquatic key species.
• Studying the influence of natural organic matter (NOM) on dissolution-, size distribution-
and sedimentation characteristics as well as on the freshwater nanoecotoxicity.
==PAGE:15==
3
Chapter 2
Introduction
2.1
Advanced Materials and Nanoparticles
According to the European Chemicals Agency’s (ECHA) Registration, Evaluation, Au-
thorization and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) regulation, a nanomaterial is defined
as "a natural, incidental, or manufactured material containing particles, in an unbound
state or as an aggregate or as an agglomerate and where, for 50% or more of the particles
in the number size distribution, one or more external dimensions is in the size range 1
nm–100 nm." [5] They occur naturally formed as products of soot from fires, volcanic ash,
or other combustion processes [6]. But they can also be industrially produced as engi-
neered nanoparticles (ENPs). Naturally occurring nanomaterials are physico-chemically
heterogeneous, whereas ENPs are mainly homogeneous in size, shape and structure [6].
Advanced Materials (AdMs) are innovative materials, specifically engineered to have novel
or improved properties that enable better performance compared to conventional materi-
als and processes. They represent a not strictly defined, diverse group of materials includ-
ing a variety of compositions, structures, and combinations [7]. In the past decade, AdMs
have more and more become the description of nano-enabled materials such as engineered
nanoparticles (ENPs) [8], as the industry of nanotechnology is experiencing rapid devel-
opment.
This study particularly focuses on perovskites as AdMs, which have various applications
as noted in 2.2.1, but particularly investigates their use as three-way catalytic converters
for the automotive industry. However, it is important to note that the definition of a nano-
material is not solely based on size, but also on the properties and behavior of the material
at the nano scale. According to the REACH definition of nanomaterials, perovskite mate-
rials that are 96 - 206.5 nm in size (see details in 3.1 would technically fall outside this size
range, but they may still exhibit unique physico-chemical properties (rational design and
functionalities, precise control on their composition and internal structure) to be included
in the group of AdMs [3].
The importance of engineered nano structures has steadily increased in recent years, with
a wide variety of applications in the pharmaceutical, cosmetic, agricultural, food, and
automotive industries as well as in nanoelectronics and nanophotonics. The number of
consumer products based on nanotechnology on the global market increased from 1814
in 2015 to 10212 in 2022 [9], whereas 5267 nanomaterial products are currently registered
in Denmark [10]. With an estimated market share of $1.76 billion in 2020, the global nan-
otechnology market is expected to reach $33.63 billion by 2030 [11]. With specific reference
to the global relevance of catalytic converters like perovskites, annual sales have increased
from over 9 million in 2006 to approximately 140 million units in 2019. A further increase
to up to 2 billion units in 2030 is expected [12].
==PAGE:16==
4
Chapter 2. Introduction
2.2
Perovskites as study case of advanced materials
Perovskites are considered AdMs due to their unique and tunable properties by adjusting
the composition of the material, making them suitable for various technological applica-
tions. Hence, they are considered promising materials for the various needs in the green
energy transition [13]
Perovskites represent one of the most abundant crystal structures on the planet, originally
discovered as a mineral in 1839 in Russia [14]. Perovskites make up 93% of the lower
mantle- and 38% of the total mass of the planet. There are several different kinds of per-
ovskites, but each type shares a specific crystal structure and chemical composition, with
the formula ABX3, where A is typically a metal cation, B is a metal or metalloid cation, and
X is an anion (see FIGURE 2.1) [15, 16]. Specifically, the A-site in most inorganic ABO3 per-
ovskites is occupied by alkaline earth metals and lanthanides, which have relatively large
ionic sizes (>1 Å). These elements are crucial for maintaining the structure of the B-site
octahedra, which are corner-shared [15]. At the B site a variety of transition metals with
mostly good thermodynamic stability such as Fe, Co and Ni are used.
FIGURE 2.1: Molecular model of ABO3-type perovskite (Zang et al. (2019)
[16]
Perovskite materials have unique physical properties such as a high ability to store electri-
cal energy (high dielectric constant), a high absorption coefficient, a long range of coupled
motion of positively and negatively charged particles to keep down the internal electric
fields (long range ambipolar charge transport), which is very important in the material
studies of conductors and ferroelectric properties which means that these materials can
be electrically polarized without an external electric field and that the polarization can be
switched [17]. Based on these unique properties, perovskites have gained a lot of attention
as material in photovoltaic, optoelectronic and as catalysts for applications in chemical-
and automotive industry.
2.2.1
Potential use cases of perovskites
Due to diminishing fossil fuel reserves and the environmental damage caused by their
combustion, sustainable energy requires decarbonisation in the near future. It is therefore
important to identify new clean, sustainable, and renewable energy sources and vectors
to replace fossil fuels. In the context of the European Green Deal ambitions are high to
==PAGE:17==
2.2. Perovskites as study case of advanced materials
5
cut greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50% by 2050 to tackle climate change, which in-
cludes massive transitions of energy-, agriculture, transport-, waste and water sectors. As
regulations for a carbon-neutral future are becoming more urgent than ever before, most
industries are driven by innovative pressure and therefore using new materials like per-
ovskites to improve current technologies.
In the photovoltaic industry, solar cell technology experienced groundbreaking develop-
ments, especially within the last decade. The efficiency of perovskite-based solar cells
(PSCs) has increased from 14.2% in 2013 to over 25.6% in 2021 [18, 19]. Unlike silicon-
based solar cell technologies, perovskites can simply be layered onto a surface and gener-
ate an electric charge, making manufacturing easier and much cheaper than silicon-based
solar cells. This emerging thin film generation of solar cells counts as the third generation
of solar cells.
The chemical- and automotive industries are driven to implement drastic technological
changes for a carbon-neutral future. The European Parliament has introduced cleaner
emission standards in the EU action plan first in 2009 to reduce emissions from industries
and vehicles. Currently, conventional car engines have a high potential for improving
combustion efficiency. Residues of unburned fuel are emitted which consequently require
a higher total fuel consumption and lead to greater amounts of particulate matter and
greenhouse gas emissions. AdMs can provide a solution to this problem through their
tunable, superior properties [6]. Especially effective for catalytic applications with tra-
ditional catalyst technologies are perovskites with rare earth metals like Pd at the A-site
[20], but as much larger quantities of precious metals would be used to achieve significant
emission improvements, research into non-noble catalysts and improvements in catalysis
is fundamentally important. Furthermore, the threat from pollution with toxic lead-based
perovskites must be counteracted through the innovation of novel material compositions.
Compared to noble-metal catalysts, non-noble perovskites provide high thermal stability,
high activity in low temperatures, unusual valence states of their transition metal ions, and
easily tunable redox properties. In addition, it is possible to dope the A or B site cation
with another ion, which can further increase the performance of the catalyst. Considering
these extraordinary potentials, perovskites are one of the most prospective catalytic mate-
rials [16].
Perovskites promise another major advancement in energy and transportation for the
long-awaited breakthrough in hydrogen technology,. H2 has a high energy density (119.7
MJ-kg-1) and is nontoxic and renewable. In addition, the water vapor produced dur-
ing combustion is a much shorter-lived greenhouse gas than exhaust gases from standard
combustion processes. The previous sticking point of H2 storage, transport, and cost ef-
ficiency, can now possibly be solved by so-called hydrogen-carrier molecules. Next to
compounds such as methanol and methane, currently, the research focus here is on am-
monia. As a clean and invulnerable energy carrier, H2 offers a potential solution to the
previous complications and could enable the on-demand production of hydrogen in situ.
Accordingly, green hydrogen could be produced by the decomposition reaction of ammo-
nia without COx emissions. Lanthanum perovskites are promising catalyst precursors for
H2 production from NH3 [21, 13, 22]. Furthermore, high ammonia decomposition activ-
ity has attracted much attention to Ni and Co. The nickel and cobalt perovskite catalysts
provided excellent H2 production from ammonia decomposition and showed admirable
performance and stability [13]. This fairly new generation of perovskites for the photo-
voltaic, automotive, and chemical industry, which are free from lead and noble metals are
currently tested for their applicability in these various technology approaches.
According to current research, the catalytic performance of ABX3 is mainly dependent on
the B cation, whereas the A cation (here lanthanum) plays the fundamental role of crystal
structure stabilization. Substitution of an element with similar atomic radius as the A and
==PAGE:18==
6
Chapter 2. Introduction
B elements (here cobalt and nickel with 1.67 Å and 1.62 Å, respectively) can effectively
improve the activity of the perovskite catalysts. However, parameters such as low tem-
perature, bimodal pore structure and oxygen content also have significant effects on the
catalytic performance of perovskite catalysts and must be optimally balanced with each
other [16].
In addition to the promising properties of AdMs, the widespread use of engineered nanos-
tructures raises concerns about toxicological effects on humans and biota. Aquatic ecosys-
tems are considered an important sink for anthropogenic pollutants and nanomaterials,
as they are transported through various pathways such as leaching, municipal wastew-
ater treatment plants, and water treatment to the aquatic environment. Accordingly, the
studies of nanomaterials and their effects on aquatic biota is of utmost importance for tox-
icological risk assessment [6].
The perovskites investigated in this study specifically, are characterized by the fact that
they are all La-based, meaning that their A-site ion is lanthanum. This specific metal for
the perovskite catalysts was chosen to convert or reduce hydrocarbons (such as aldehy-
des and ketones) and other gaseous organic substances to potentially mitigate/eliminate
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) emissions in the combustion process [16]. The ma-
terials differ in their specific composition and their proportions of cobalt and nickel for
their respective B and X sites. In addition, two of the studied perovskites are doped with
noble metals palladium or platinum respectively. The metals of potential concern in the
perovskite materials to the environment are cobalt and nickel. Their exact designations
are explained in section 3.1
2.3
Behavior of Nanoparticles in the aquatic environment
Aquatic ecosystems are polluted with nanoparticulate contaminants mainly through dis-
charge of domestic wastewater and from catchment area runoffs, landfill leachates or
waste incineration residuals [23, 24]. Since aquatic environments are at the receiving end
of contamination resulting in up-concentration of nanomaterials, it is of distinct impor-
tance to understand the routes of exposure in the aquatic environment with their impact
on bioavailability and toxicity. After release into the environment, a series of dynamic
transformation processes of the advanced materials can take place in interaction with the
environmental matrix and aquatic organisms [25, 24]. The properties of the materials and
the behavior and distribution of ENMs in the environment change accordingly. This has
implications for bioavailability and toxicity and is strongly dependent on the specific en-
vironmental conditions [24]. Many studies have shown the properties of nanomaterials
such as size [26, 27], shape [28], coatings [27], chemical composition and structure [29] as
predefined characteristics by production as well as their concentration can influence their
behavior in and effect on the environment [24, 25].
After their introduction to the aquatic environment, nanoparticles can undergo a series of
photochemical, physical and/or biological transformation processes [24]. More detailed,
these can be categorized as: photochemical processes (degradation, oxidation / reduction,
speciation / complexation, dissolution or precipitation), physical processes (agglomera-
tion, aggregation, sedimentation) and biological processes (degradation, interaction with
bio-macromolecules like natural organic matter - NOM). Furthermore, interaction with
other substances or surfaces can occur in form of adsorption or desorption [24]. Their
interactions with an environmental matrix add additional influences by parameters such
as pH [30], temperature, ionic strength [30] dissolved organic carbon [3] as well as their
contact duration and age which mainly determines their environmentally driven mod-
ification/transformation processes [24] and dispersion stability [3]. All these processes
==PAGE:19==
2.3. Behavior of Nanoparticles in the aquatic environment
7
can potentially influence their behavior and toxicity towards aquatic organisms (see FIG-
URE 2.2) [23, 31]. However in this report, the focus was put on selected transformation
processes that take place after introduction of the AdMs into the aquatic environment.
Thereby agglomeration/aggregation, sedimentation, size distribution and dissolution in
different environmental conditions (media composition, ionic strength, natural organic
matter) were specifically studied.
FIGURE 2.2: Nanoparticle pathways and nano-bio interactions with the
aquatic environment. Figure adapted from Fig. 2.2 in [23]
Orange circles display the trophic levels observed. Thereby, phytoplank-
ton was represented by R. subcapitata, zooplankton was represented by D.
magna. Beige boxes represent transformation processes that were observed
in the present study with perovskite AdMs; dotted lines represent toxic ef-
fects on key species
2.3.1
Agglomeration and Sedimentation Processes in Relation to Particle Size
and Surface Area
Agglomeration is a reversible process in which particles stay attached to each other by Van
der Waals forces and form clusters [24]. Thereby, the total surface area corresponds to the
sum of the individual particle surface areas and the particles continue to exist as separate
units in a clump. As the Van der Waals forces can be overcome by electrostatic forces,
agglomeration can be reversed by deagglomeration. Contrary, the process of aggregation
is defined as irreversible, where individual particles are merged into a bulk material by
strong electrostatic interactions such as covalent or ionic bonds. The specific surface area
of an aggregate is smaller than that of the sum of individual particles involved in the
merged material.
Agglomeration and aggregation processes lead to bigger particle sizes, gravitational forces
consequently enhance the settling process. The settling velocity depends on both the prop-
erties of the dispersion medium (fluid) and those of the dispersed particles. By Stokes law,
==PAGE:20==
8
Chapter 2. Introduction
the settling velocity can be described as a function of fluid viscosity and - density as well as
particle radius and -density [24]. As a result, larger agglomerates/aggregates will have a
higher settling velocity than smaller or single particles. It can be deduced that an increase
in particle concentration rises the collision probability and thus the aggregation and con-
sequently the sedimentation rate. In the presence of natural organic matter (in the form of
dissolved organic matter), aggregates tend to become more dynamic as their disaggrega-
tion is enhanced [32].
The processes of agglomeration/aggregation (referred to hereafter as agglomeration) and
sedimentation are transformational processes that are primarily considered for estimating
the fate and behavior of AdMs in the environment [33, 24, 4].
2.3.2
DLVO theory and zeta potential
The DLVO theory, established in the 1940s by Derjaguin, Landau, Verwey and Overbeek
(DLVO), is an important concept in the theory of colloidal dispersion stability. According
to this, there is an interaction of Van der Waals forces and electrostatic forces in colloidal
dispersion. Based on the assumption that in any stabilized dispersion these two forces are
directly opposite acting forces, the electric double layer repulsion counteracts agglomera-
tion while van der Waals forces enhances it. The total energy of interaction between parti-
cle interfaces is the result of both electrostatic and Van der Waals forces. If all particles of
a colloidal dispersion would have the same electrical charge, they would have repulsive
effects on one another when they come close. The existing colloidal dispersion is then de-
fined as stable [24]. While the van der Waals forces are independent of the ionic strength
of the suspension, variations in the range of double layer forces occur with the change of
ionic strength of the aquatic medium. An electric double layer exists around each particle
and consists of two different sub-layers which are called stern layer and diffuse layer. While
the stern layer consists a homogeneous ion layer with opposite charge of the particle itself,
the diffuse layer is heterogeneously composed of ions of different charge. The resulting
Coulomb potential of the diffuse ion layer is called zeta potential (z-potential), which rep-
resents a key figure for the potential stability of a colloidal system and an indirect indicator
for the agglomeration status. While a low zeta potential corresponds to a higher agglomer-
ation rate (Van der Waals forces overcome the low electrostatic forces of the double layer),
a high zeta potential indicates a lower agglomeration rate and consequently a higher dis-
persion stability. The stability behavior of colloidal dispersion is categorized on a scale
from excellent stability (≥±61) to maximum agglomeration and precipitation (0 −±5) [34].
The application of this theory reaches its limits with complex matrices such as environ-
mental matrices. Furthermore, novel materials such as AdMs/ENPs with novel shapes
and surface chemistry are limited to be evaluated with this theory [24]. There are also
other electrostatic interactions that can affect the binding and behavior of the particles
such as ion-dipole interaction in hydration or steric hindrance. However, in this study, the
described theory was applied based on current state of the art to measure the stability of
perovskite dispersions.
2.3.3
Natural organic matter and its role in ecotoxicity and characterization
studies
AdMs do not remain unaltered in the environment, but rather experience various trans-
formations in aqueous solution [35, 32] One significant transformation is their interaction
with NOM. For example, nanomaterials can interact with NOM by adsorption onto their
surface, forming an ecological corona (also called environmental corona or eco-corona)
[36, 24]. The process of adsorption can work through various mechanisms such as hy-
drophobic interaction, electrostatic interactions, van der Waals forces, ligand exchange,
==PAGE:21==
2.3. Behavior of Nanoparticles in the aquatic environment
9
chelation, cation bridging and hydrogen bonding [32]. In most systems, the formation
of an eco-corona is caused by multiple driving forces operating simultaneously and are
strongly influenced by the prevailing environmental conditions as well as intrinsic prop-
erties of the NOM and the present nanomaterials [37].
The formation of an eco-corona can significantly affect the behavior, risk, and fate of nano-
materials in the environment [37, 35], which makes it crucial to understand the mecha-
nisms of eco-corona formation as well as the possible impact pathways with nanomaterials
for the environmental risk assessment of AdMs to the aquatic environment. The specific
composition of NOM can be highly heterogeneous in its main structure as well as in its
functional groups. Generally, it consists of different macromolecules like lignin, cellulose,
tannic-, fulvic- and humic acid, which can widely differ in their composition and propor-
tion.
The current state of research indicates that the presence of an eco-corona can impact the
toxicity of nanoparticles in various ways [37]. This includes changes to the dissolution
[24], the way they adhere to surfaces, and the damage they cause to bio-membranes, as
well as their internalization (cellular uptake and transport) and the generation of reactive
oxygen species [37, 38]. The formation of eco-corona changes the surface properties of
AdMs (such as surface charge, hydrophobicity and functionalization), which influences
the dispersion/ agglomeration/sedimentation behavior by increasing the steric repulsion
and/or inducing bridging interactions [38] which subsequently can influence the dissolu-
tion behavior. Both mechanisms mainly depend on the ionic strength of the solution.
The complex molecular composition of NOM together with the diverse types of AdMs,
and varying environmental conditions, result in a dual effect on the toxicity and accumu-
lation of nanomaterials [37]. Thereby, NOM can serve as a protective barrier for aquatic
organisms, reducing the toxicity of nanomaterials by adsorbing them onto its surface or
by blocking their interactions with biological membranes. On the other hand, NOM can
also facilitate the transport and uptake of nanomaterials by organisms, as well as influence
their agglomeration and sedimentation behavior.[37].
Despite the diversity in composition and size of NOM, only the fraction with a size smaller
than 0.45 µm, predominantly smaller than 20 nm, significantly contributes to the for-
mation of an eco-corona around nanomaterials.
Additionally, it should be noted that
NOM molecules that have a size that is approximately equal to or slightly larger than
the NMs may come into contact with the particles, leading to the formation of hetero-
agglomerates [37]. Additionally, unbound NOM may also interfere with the formation of
an eco-corona. Unbound NOM can influence the bioaccessibility of ions that have dis-
solved from nanoparticles through processes such as chelation or dissolution that is facili-
tated by ligands [37, 24].
In case of metallic AdMs like the studied perovskites, NOM might be able to change the
morphology and chemical properties of AdMs. Humic acid with its reducing properties
was observed to change nano-Ag particles from their original spherical shape to triangu-
lar, hexagonal and rod-like shape depending on time of illumination [39]. Interaction of
biomolecules with eco-corona could be based on charge transfer, ion chelation or chem-
ical bonding since metals tend to have a high surface energy as well as high reactivity,
whereas the charge transfer often takes place between the metals and oxygen or nitrogen
rich groups [37]. Furthermore, hydrogen bonds with polar groups are possible in case of
hydroxyl-groups on the nano-surface from metal-oxides and non-metal-oxide nanomate-
rials [37].
While humic substances tend to contribute to lower agglomeration, the presence of mul-
tivalent cations can cause bridging flocculation (like Ni 2+/3+ or Co 2+/3+ in the case of
the observed perovskites in this study) [32, 37]. Furthermore, the presence of dissolved
==PAGE:22==
10
Chapter 2. Introduction
organic matter might enhance the reversibility of agglomerated structures might become
more dynamic [32]. An increased dissolution was found for nano-Ag and nano-CuO par-
ticle suspensions in freshwater in the presence of Suwannee River humic acid (SRHA),
which was associated with an increased suspensions of the metal oxides. Other studies,
however, suggested that NOM could also act as a chelating agent that increases dissolu-
tion by binding to the released metal ions [37].
Contrary findings of increased dissolution were observed in a study of Ellis et al. (2016),
investigated the impact of surface coating and environmental conditions on the fate and
transport of silver nanoparticles in the aquatic environment.
Specifically, the authors
studied the influence of Suwannee River fulvic acid (SRFA) on the dissolution of silver
nanoparticles [40]. They found that the presence of SRFA increased the dissolution of
silver nanoparticles in the aquatic environment. The proposed mechanisms to explain
this phenomenon are: (1) complexation of NOM with nanoparticles which enhances their
solubility (2) NOM as reducing agent, promoting the dissolution of metal ions (3) SRFA
induced disruption of surface coating which leads to higher dissolution. Supported evi-
dence for these finding is also given by Wang et al (2017) [41] which additionally proposed:
(4) NOM affect on the pH, promoting the dissolution of metal ions through acid-base re-
actions (5) microbial activity: Microorganisms in the aquatic environment can metabolize
NOM, producing organic acids and other metabolites that can promote the dissolution of
metal ions. No strong influence of NOM on the dissolution was observed in the study of
Battista et al. (2023), who observed the perovskites LaCoNi, LaCoNiPd and LaCoNiPd in
three different media of ionic strengths [3].
Extensive research has been conducted on the impact of NOM to environmental behavior,
fate, potential exposure, and ecotoxicity of AdMs. Contradictory toxic effects of AdMs
were found by several studies. While the majority of studies performed between 1990-
2021 observed a reduction of ecotoxicity in the presence of NOM, where the studied types
of NOM could work like a shield. Opposite observations have also been made in which
NOM can serve as a complicating agent to increase toxicity, suggesting that these effects
depend on strict environmental conditions such as pH, ionic strength, temperature, hard-
ness, dissolved oxygen and nutrient elements [35, 37, 24].
In a study by Cupi et al. (2015), the influence of SR-NOM on the toxicity of Ag, ZnO and
TiO2 nanoparticles on D. magna was observed. The presence of SR-NOM resulted in the
stabilization of ZnO nanoparticle suspensions and did not decrease their toxicity, while no
stabilisation effect was observed for Ag nanoparticle suspensions resulting in a decreased
toxicity in all tests. For the TiO2 nanoparticles no toxic effects was observed [42]. Compa-
rable effects in regards to ZnO nanoparticles (increasing dispersion stability, no decrease
of toxicity) and TiO2 (no toxicity) were found in a study by Neale et al. (2015) towards
Raphidocelis subcapitata (R. subcapitata) [43]. Arvidsson et al (2020) aimed to provide statis-
tical approaches that demonstrated empirical correlations between the XC50 values, NOM
concentration, and pH. While no statistically strong correlation was determined, a rule of
thumb was established for the ratio of XC50 values with and without NOM over a range
of environmentally relevant NOM concentrations (0.1–10 mg/L). It was observed that the
XC50 values obtained in experiments with NOM present tended to be a factor of 1 to 10
higher than those obtained in experiments without NOM[35].
Numerous studies have investigated the effect of NOM on the behavior, fate, potential
exposure, and ecotoxicity of AdMs. Mechanisms have been discussed in detail in various
papers and reviews [24, 44, 35, 37]. Despite this, it remains challenging to predict the im-
pact of SR-NOM on the behavior and toxicity of nanoparticles in the environment as the
complexity of various influencing factors, including nanoparticles, organic matter, testing
organisms, and the ambient environment, makes it difficult to make accurate predictions
[37, 35].Consequently, there is a requirement for case-specific research. That aligns with
==PAGE:23==
2.3. Behavior of Nanoparticles in the aquatic environment
11
the objective of this study as the aim is to address this research gap by collecting data on
the behavior of perovskite in ecotoxicological media, their aquatic ecotoxicity as well as
the influence of SR-NOM on both.
2.3.4
Dissolution Behavior of Nanoparticles: Influence of Particle Size, Ag-
glomeration, and Ionic Strength
When a substance dissolves it becomes a part of a solution. Thereby, the molecules of
the solute are separated by the solvent molecules. For a substance to dissolve, the bonds
between the solute molecules and the solvent molecules must be stronger than the bonds
between the solute particles themselves. If these stronger bonds don’t form, the solvent
particles will attract each other, causing the substance to separate from the solution and
remain insoluble [45]. It is crucial to differentiate between solubility (the capacity of a sub-
stance to dissolve in a solvent), dissolution (the process by which a substance dissolves
over time), and dissolution rate (the amount of substance that dissolves over a period of
time).
As AdMs are composed of multiple molecules and can take the form of crystalline solids or
elemental metals, unlike individual molecules described in the definition above, AdMs do
not dissolve in water, but instead remain in a particulate form and disperse in the medium
[24]. However, what can be become truly dissolved in the case of advanced materials are
ions or molecules which are released from AdMs´ surface and diffusing into the media
[24]. Dissolved ions or molecules interact with other media constituents such as hydrogen
carbonate, sulfate, chloride or organic matter to form complexes or precipitates. The rate
by which these processes take place depend on the specific environment and media com-
position such as pH, temperature, ionic strength, ligands and others interacting materi-
als. Furthermore, dissolution processes are - as other transformation processes mentioned
above - dependent on material properties like size, surface area, chemical composition,
coatings, shape and more [24].
Generally, dissolution and precipitation are determined by an equilibrium between a solid
and the ion concentration in the solution, which is expressed by the solubility product Ksp
[24]. While most Ksp values can be found in literature, this is not true for most novel ma-
terials like AdMs. In these cases, initial estimates can only be made based on the bulk
materials, the solubility of the materials´ individual components and prediction models,
while the actual solubility and dissolution rates must be determined in case-by-case stud-
ies. Increasing ionic strength leads to higher surface protonation displacing ions from the
surface of nanomaterials and leading to higher dissolution rates [3]. The majority of the
predictive models for dissolution currently available concur that the dissolution rate in-
creases as the particle diameter decreases, however, the connection is not straightforward
and challenging to prove [24, 4].
Dissolution should also be set in context with agglomeration, as the specific surface area
is significantly decreased by this transformation and might consequently influence a ma-
terials dissolution behavior. However, there has been conflicting evidence published on
this theory, indicating a shape- [28] and agglomeration induced concentration dependent
dissolution [46]. Furthermore, there is evidence that supports that dissolution is rather
controlled by the initial size of nanoparticles, than by subsequent agglomeration pro-
cesses [26]. However, other studies reported that the dissolution of silver nanoparticles
was slower at higher ionic strength, where higher agglomeration was observed, compared
to media with lower ionic strength [29]. No dependency of dissolution on ionic strength
was found in a recent study by Battista et al. (2023) with perovskite nanoparticles [3]. In
her study, she observed the very same perovskite LaCoNi as the materials in this present
==PAGE:24==
12
Chapter 2. Introduction
report. While in her case-study, for LaCoNi, no significant differences were observed be-
tween the three tested ionic strength media, higher dissolution was observed for ZnO in
high and medium ionic strength media EPA soft and L-15/ex, compared to significantly
lower dissolution for the mid ionic strength medium Elendt M7.
In the context of perovskites, the release of cations from the crystal structure is expected
to occur due to the high solubility of the predominant structural support element, lan-
thanum, located at the A-site. Since the perovskites under investigation contain two to
four metals in both the A and B-sites, it can be hypothesized that dissolution activities are
likely to be observed for all of them [15]. Thereby, the metals ions of potential concern
in the perovskite materials of this study are cobalt and nickel. Given that the process of
dissolution serves as a critical transformation mechanism influencing the environmental
behavior, fate, and potential toxicity of Advanced Metal Materials (AdMMs) in aquatic
environments, this study aims to assess dissolution as a key characteristic of perovskite
material.
2.4
The ecotoxicology of nanomaterials
The discipline of nanoecotoxicology is a separate research field and has been defined “as
the scientific study of the impending danger to living organisms and eco-systems result-
ing from the harmful consequences of exposure to nanoparticles; the mechanisms of their
action; and the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of nanoparticle intoxication” [6, pg2]
Particles at nano size range have substantially different properties than their respective
bulk materials of the same composition [24, 47]. This effect is due to their significantly in-
creased surface area, their small size and their ability to penetrate cell membranes, which
can result in toxicity even at low concentrations [4]. This effect is referred to as nanoparti-
cle effect, which in turn can lead to altered bioavailability and toxicity [47].
Skjolding et al. (2016) [4] expound that in addition to nanoparticle effects, mechanisms
of toxicity for nanoparticles also encompass physical and ionic effects. Thereby physical
effects refer to the direct physical interactions of the nanoparticles with the organism, such
as blocking or damaging organs or tissues. Ionic effects occur when nanoparticles release
ions into the environment, which can be toxic to organisms.
Freshwater algae and aquatic arthropod toxicity tests are utilized to evaluate the potential
ecological risk of nanomaterial-induced environmental contamination. These test species
occupy the primary trophic level, and adverse effects at this level may have far-reaching
impacts across multiple trophic levels and the ecosystem as a whole. This is due to the
foundational nature of these species in the food chain, wherein their removal may lead to
a collapse of the local and/or regional ecosystem.
In the specific case of this study, perovskites might be able adhere to the cell surface of
green algae R. subcapitata and interfere with nutrient uptake and light penetration. This
consequently leads to reduced growth and photosynthetic activity [4] . Furthermore, the
materials can enter the algae cell through endocytosis, disrupting cellular functions and
potentially causing oxidative stress. Additionally, perovskites may accumulate in the ex-
tracellular matrix, affecting algal motility and colonization [4].
In comparison for Daphnia magna, the studied materials can be ingested through filter feed-
ing and accumulate in the gut, potentially causing physical damage and oxidative stress
[4]. Furthermore, interactions with Daphnia magna’s gut microbiome, altering microbial
diversity and metabolism, which can in turn affect the organism’s physiology and im-
mune function are possible in the exposure with perovskite materials. Accumulation also
in other tissues, potentially causing cellular damage and oxidative stress might be causing
toxic effects.
==PAGE:25==
2.4. The ecotoxicology of nanomaterials
13
Which specific parameters are responsible for the potentially altered toxicity of nanoparti-
cles is strongly dependent on the speciation of the material itself and the specific environ-
mental conditions it is exposed to and is still an open research question. In addition to size
[26, 27], many other parameters such as shape [28], dissolution [24], structure, agglomer-
ation [29], surface speciation and coating [27], medium [3, 46, 29] and functionalities are
responsible for their behavior in the environment and consequently for their toxicity to-
wards distinct organisms [48, 6].
Regarding the size, nanoparticles have a significantly increased surface to volume ratio,
presenting relatively more chemical molecules on their surface, which makes them po-
tentially more toxic compared to bulk materials of the same kind [49]. In addition, their
size allows them to pass through membranes and blood brain barrier, entering cells which
opens up new dimensions of toxic mode of action based on biomolecular interaction as
they can directly affect organs, immune- and inflammatory systems [6, 50]. This property
is exploited in for example medicinal contexts of drug delivery, but represents at the same
time a new research discipline with many new risk potentials for all trophic levels [51, 6,
50]. The observed toxicity of nanosized Copper oxides (CuO) was found to be significantly
impacted by size, as demonstrated by a 16-fold higher toxicity towards R. subcapitata al-
gae (EC50-72h = 0.71/ mg Cu/L) compared to the respective bulk material (CuO EC50-72h
=11.55 mg Cu/L) [49]. Even a 50 times higher toxicity of nano-CuO was observed towards
crustaceans [52]. For TiO2, an increased toxicity of factor 6 was also determined towards
the same algae species for the nanoparticle (bulk TiO2 EC50-72h = 35.0 mg Ti/L, nano
EC50-72h = 5.83 mg Ti/L) [49]. In contrast, there is no evidence in the current literature
of particle size dependence of nanoparticulate nickel and its toxicity to aquatic organisms
[53].
In regards to transformation status of nanomaterials and it´s influence on aquatic tox-
icity, very different findings are reported in the current literature. Transformation pro-
cesses do not only include the the change and interaction of a single type of nanomaterial
with its surrounding, but may also occur as a complex interaction between different types
nanoparticles. This complex inter-nanomaterial transformation and the consequent influ-
ence of toxic effects was shown in the study of Fang et al (2020). It discusses the combined
toxic effects of multi-walled carbon nanotubes and nano copper oxide on the freshwater
algae Tetradesmus obliquus. The results show that the combination of these nanomaterials
has a greater toxic effect on the algae than either substance alone, while the specific mech-
anism of toxicity is not clarified.
In regards to exposure time and age of the nanoparticulate dispersion, Sørensen et al.
(2014) demonstrated a time dependency on short term aquatic toxicity with silver nanopar-
ticle dispersions. A dependence of the exposure time (and therefore the toxicity test dura-
tion) as well as a dependence of the toxicity on the age of the dispersion was found [31].
Furthermore, Sørensen et al. (2015), did show the dynamic relationship of toxicity with
the combined effects of both the dissolved and particulate forms of nanosilver potentially
contributing to toxicity through different modes of action.
In case of metal containing AdMs, the toxicity observed in the test medium can often be
explained by the release of metal ions. For the perovskite materials the release of nickel
ions is hypothesized to be a major toxic mechanism for the aquatic environment. The
dissolution behavior of metals ions from nanomaterials can be influenced by many dif-
ferent parameters such as particle Size, agglomeration, and ionic strength. In most cases,
the dissolved metal ions are more toxic than the corresponding AdMs. However, some
exceptions have been found to indicate a nanoparticle effect [4].
The impact of nanoparticles on the aquatic environment can also be of physical nature.
Decreased growth rates and reproduction can occur due to shading or adsorption to or-
ganisms, as seen in a study by Sørensen et al (2016). In this study, tests with platinum
==PAGE:26==
14
Chapter 2. Introduction
nanoparticles on R. subcapitata showed that the precious metal nanoparticles were classi-
fied as toxic, with EC 50 values of 15 [13 - 16]95% mgPt/L after 48 hours in ISO medium.
However, it could not be ruled out that not only toxic effects of the metal itself, but also
shading effects were playing a role in the overall, potentially multi-causal effects on algae
[2]. In this section various modes of action that nanoparticles have on key species in the
aquatic environment have been outlined. The focus of the present report, however, is on
the toxic effects that result from nickel ion release.
2.5
The ecotoxicological impact heavy metals and nickel on aquatic
ecosystems
Human activities such as mining, smelting, and industrial processes are significantly in-
creasing the concentration of heavy metals in the environment. They can also be intro-
duced through the use of fertilizers and pesticides, as well as through the burning of fossil
fuels. Consequently, they are introduced by point sources (from industrial practices) and
diffuse sources (by natural weathering, atmospheric deposition, surface runoff) and can be
transported over long distances through the air and water [54]. Furthermore, Heavy met-
als, including lead, mercury, cadmium, and zinc, can have a range of hazardous effects on
the aquatic environment. They can be acutely toxic to aquatic organisms, including fish
and invertebrates, at high concentrations [55]. This can result in death or other adverse
effects, such as reduced growth or reproduction. In regards to chronic toxicity, long-term
exposure to lower concentrations of heavy metals can also have negative effects on aquatic
organisms, including reduced growth, reproduction, and immune function. Furthermore,
they can bioaccumulate in the tissues of aquatic organisms, which can increase the toxicity
over time. This can lead to up-concentration (biomagnification) of heavy metals in organ-
isms at the top of the food chain, and be harmful to human health. Consequently, heavy
metal pollution can have negative effects on entire aquatic ecosystems, such as reducing
biodiversity, altering food webs, and disrupting ecosystem processes. Furthermore, they
pose a risk to human health as they are persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic [41]
Nickel is considered a priority pollutant by the US Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) due to its potential to cause adverse effects on human health and the environment
[54, 56]. Nickel is considered a carcinogen and causes toxic effects in humans such as
chronic asthma, cough, nausea and dermatitis [56]. According to the WHO (World Health
Organization), the permitted limit of nickel in potable water is 0.02 ppm (0.02 mg/L) [57,
50]. Typical Ni concentrations in water range from 0.002 mM to 0.010 mM, but in some
cases, water in impacted systems can contain up to 3 mM Ni [54].
Heavy metals, including nickel, can be toxic to aquatic life in high concentrations. Nickel
is considered to be moderately toxic to aquatic organisms, and its toxicity can vary de-
pending on the specific species and the form of nickel present in the water. Long-term
exposure to low concentrations of nickel can also have harmful effects on aquatic life. In
addition, nickel can bioaccumulate in the tissues of aquatic organisms, which can lead to
increased toxicity over time [41].
According to current literature, nickel and nickel oxide nanomaterials are toxic to fresh-
water species, with toxicity levels varying depending on the species and type of nanoma-
terial used. Nanoparticulate elemental Nickel (nano-Ni0) has an IC50 of 0.35 mgNi/L on
R. subcapitata (96h) [58] and 10.3 mgNi/L on Daphnia magna (D. magna) in freshwater in
standardized toxicity tests[59, 53]. In the study by Griffitt et al. (2008), it was additionally
observed that the toxicity of nano-Ni (5-20 nm) did not differ significantly from dissolved
==PAGE:27==
2.5. The ecotoxicological impact heavy metals and nickel on aquatic ecosystems
15
Ni toxicity to Daphnia pulex adults. In a study from Morgaleva et al. (2015) [60] a LC50 of
nano-Ni (5 nm) to D. magna was found to be greater than 100 mg/L (where the life stage
and exposure time of these toxicity tests were not specified). The study of Oleszczuk et al.
(2015) [59] also tested the influence of surfactants with elemental Ni nanoparticles on the
toxicity and observed a decreasing influence with concentration.
The highest sensitivity to nano-sized elemental nickel in the consideration of the mean
values of acute toxicity throughout different freshwater ecotoxicity studies were found for
algae and crustacea [53].
Observing another chemical composition of nano-scale nickel, nickel oxide showed toxic
effects on freshwater algae and crustacea in different studies. In a study by Nogueira et
al. (2015), a 72-h EC50 of 8.25 and 15.2 mg/L for 100-nm and 10-20-nm nano-NiO were
determined for R. subcapitata. An even higher toxicity towards the same species was ob-
served by Sousa et al. (2018), who found a 72-h nano-NiO effect concentration of EC50 =
1.6 mg/L. They also compared the toxicity of nanoNi-O and dissolved Ni and detected an
even higher toxicity for the last mentioned compound of EC50 = 0.042 mg/L. The study
also found that nano-NiO increased ROS formation, impaired photosystems, arrested cell
division, and increased cell volume. In a study by Gong et al. (2016), a short-term 48-h test
of nano-NiO with D. magna, showed an EC50 of 36 mg/L. The study also showed consid-
erable accumulation of NPs in gut and on external surfaces of the animals. Much lower
effect concentrations with D. magna were found by Nogueira et al. (2015) with 48-h EC50s
values of 9.74 and 9.76 mg/L for 100-nm and 10-20-nm nano-NiO, respectively.
In order to get more comparability with the ecotoxicological effects of multi-component
metal nanomaterials like perovskites, studies with more complex nanomaterial structures
and compartments of nickel and cobalt were consulted. Bozich et al. (2017) conducted a
study with nano-NiCoLiMn-oxide sheets on D. magna. No significant showed no effect on
daphnia survival was found at the highest test concentration of 25 mg/L. In another fresh-
water study, toxic effects of lithium cobalt oxide (LixCo1-xO2, LCO) and lithium nickel
manganese cobalt oxide (LixNiyMnzCo1-y-zO2, NMC) the benthic model species Chirono-
mus riparius were examined. At concentrations of 10 and 100 mg-L-1 30-60% decrease in
larval growth and a delay of 7-25 days in adult hatching was observed [61].
The actual mechanism of nickel toxicity on aquatic organisms is still not fully under-
stood, but multiple potential mode of action have been proposed [54]. These possible
mechanisms can be summarized by disruption of Ca2+ homeostasis, disruption of Mg2+
homeostasis, disruption of Fe2+/3+ homeostasis reactive oxygen species–induced oxida-
tive damage (ROS), and an allergic-type response of respiratory epithelia. Furthermore,
complex interactions between the different pathways are possible [54]. As a consequence
on the organism, this contributes to interruption of growth and reproduction [54].
==PAGE:28==
==PAGE:29==
17
Chapter 3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Advanced materials - perovskites
Six different perovskites (three way combustion catalyst) were provided by BASF (Lud-
wigshafen, Germany) in powder form. All studied perovskite materials are lanthanum
based with different compositions of nickel and cobalt. The precise provided AdMs are
called LaNi(22), LaCoNi(16), LaCoNi, LaCoNi(5), whereas two additional perovskites (La-
CoNiPd, LaCoNiPt) are doped with noble metals Platinum (Pt) and Palladium (Pd). De-
tails about their chemical compositions, sizes and specific surface area can be taken from
TABLE 3.1 .
TABLE 3.1: Physico-chemical information on studied perovskites (Informa-
tion received from BASF and [3]
Name
Nominal composition
(ABO3)
La/wt.-%
Co/wt.-%
Ni/wt.-%
Pd/wt.-%
Pt/wt.-%
SEM min
Feret diam
[nm]
BET
[m2/g]
LaNi(22)
LaNiO3
59
/
22
/
/
128.94
3.98
LaCoNi(16)
LaCo0.25Ni0.75O3
58
6
16
/
/
122.64
3.73
LaCoNi
LaCo0.5Ni0.5O3
60
12
8
/
/
96.1
3.8
LaCoNi(5)
LaCo0.75Ni0.25O3
57
17.6
5.1
/
/
120.71
2.75
LaCoNiPd
LaCo0.475Ni0.475Pd0.05O3
60
12
7.9
0.59
/
206.5
2.3
LaCoNiPt
LaCo0.475Ni0.475Pt0.05O3
60
12
7.5
/
1.1
106.6
4.6
"/" indicates that the element is not included
3.2
Preparation of stock and test suspensions
LaNi(22), LaCoNi(16) LaCoNi, LaCoNi(5) as well as the doped forms LaCoNiPt and La-
CoNiPd, (synthesized by BASF, Germany) perovskite nanomaterial of different composi-
tion were characterized and tested for their ecotoxicity. Stock suspensions were prepared
by using a analytical scale to determine a mass of ≈0.02g of nanomaterial to be dispersed
in 100 or 200ml ISO8692 medium [62] as well as in Elendt M7 medium [63] to obtain a nom-
inal concentration of 200 or 100 mg/L respectively. Particle dispersion was performed by
10 minutes sonication with Branson Digital Sonifier Model S-250D at 66% amplitude. The
perovskite dispersion were not stabilized prior to characterization or ecotoxicological test-
ing.
All experiments of this study have been performed in two different standard media for
aquatic testing: ISO8692, Elendt M7 media. ISO8692 medium was freshly prepared on de-
mand according to ISO standards and left to stabilize to pH 8.1 ± 0.2. Elendt M7 medium
was prepared every week and left to stabilize to pH 8.6 ± 0.2 and O2 concentrations of
9.0 ± 0.6 mg/L. Table 3.2 shows the Ionic strengths (IS), hardness and Ca2+ concentra-
tion for each media. The full media composition can be found in TG OECD 202, 2004
==PAGE:30==
18
Chapter 3. Materials and Methods
FIGURE 3.1: Experimental study structure; green arrow refer to tests with R.
subcapitata and ISO8692, 2012 medium [62]; blue arrows refer to tests with
D. magna and Elendt M7 medium (TG OECD 202, 2004) [63]
[63] Immediately following the preparation of the stock suspensions, the size distribution
and zeta potential of each suspension were measured using the Malvern Nano Zeta Sizer
(Malvern Instruments). Suwannee River natural organic matter (SR-NOM) (1R101N) with
15% fulvic and 85% humic acid was purchased from International Humic Substances So-
ciety (MN, USA). A stock solution at a concentration of 100 mg/L in ISO8692 medium and
Elendt M7 medium was prepared. After stirring over night, the pH was adjusted to 8 with
0.1M NaOH and 0.1M HCl and left to stabilize for some hours to be readjusted once more.
After a stable pH of 8, the SR-NOM stock solution was filtered through a 0.2 µm nylon
Econofilter (Agilent Technologies). Toxicity tests on algae and crustacea were conducted
with and without addition of 10 mg/L SR-NOM (corresponding to 5.25 mg C L−1). Five to
six different test concentrations for algae growth inhibition and D. magna immobilization
tests were prepared from the stock suspensions in their respective media. The concentra-
tions of test suspensions for all different perovskite materials ranged from 100 mg/L to
3.125mg/L in a geometric series with a separation factor of two.
TABLE 3.2: Ionic strength (IS), water hardness, and calcium concentration
for the two testing media. More details on the media description and char-
acteristics can be found ISO8692, 2012 [62], OECD guideline TG 202, 2004
[63]
ISO
M7
Ionic strength [mM]
2.17
9.06
Water hardness [mM]
0.2
2.5
Calcium concentration [mM]
0.08
2
==PAGE:31==
3.3. Perovskite characterization
19
3.3
Perovskite characterization
3.3.1
Size distribution, agglomeration and sedimentation behavior
Dynamic light scattering (DLS) performed by a Malvern Nano Zeta Sizer (Malvern In-
struments) was used to measure the size distribution and zeta potential of perovskites in
suspension of two different ionic strength media suspensions (ISO 8692, Elendt M7). Only
the undoped materials were analysed for their agglomeration/sedimentation behaviour.
The hydrodynamic diameter [d.nm], poly-dispersivity index (PDI), and zeta potential val-
ues [mV] of the nanomaterials in the were tested with a nominal concentration of 10 mg
substance/L. At 25°C and a scattering angle of 173°, 1 mL samples with the respective con-
centrations were measured in standard disposable cuvettes (measuring volume of 3.5 mL).
Polystyrene was chosen as the reference material. The size distribution of the perovskite
dispersions was measured for 24 hours with a measuring interval of 30 minutes. The zeta
potential was measured at t0 and at t24. Measured zeta potentials were evaluated based on
stability-characterization-scale published by Riddick (1968) [34] (see FIGURE 3.3).
TABLE 3.3: Stability characteristics zeta potential. Supplemented from Rid-
dick (1968)
Stability Characteristics
Avg. Zeta Potential [mV]
Maximum agglomeration and precipitation
0 to +3
Range of strong agglomeration and precipitation
+5 to -5
Threshold of agglomeration
- 5 to -10
Threshold of delicate dispersion
-16 to -30
Moderate stability
-31 to -40
Fairly good stability
-41 to -60
Very good to extremely good stability
<-61
3.3.2
Dissolution behavior
The recommended centrifugal ultrafiltration method as per OECD Guidance Document
(GD318)[64] was utilized for conducting dissolution experiments. Therefore Amicon Ul-
tra - 4 centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore Ltd., Ireland) have been used. The membrane
pore diameter had a molecular cut-off (MWCO) of 3KDa. The same membrane filter size
was used for all experiments. All dissolution experiments have been performed with the
undoped Perovskite materials LaNi, LaCoNi(16), LaCoNi and LaCoNi(5). In the first dis-
solution experiment a time frame of 24 hours was analyzed in a time series of 0, 0.5h, 1h,
2h, 4h and 24h. During the second phase of the dissociation study, the measurement inter-
vals were extended to 72 hours in ISO medium to provide an opportunity to correlate the
characterization data with the toxicity testing results. Therefore time series of 0.5h, 24h,
48h and 72h was analyzed. Furthermore, a recovery analysis was performed at each mea-
surement point to ensure accuracy and precision of the data obtained. All experiments
have been carried out with a nominal test concentration of 10mg/L perovskite in medium
with and without the addition of 10 mg/L SR-NOM. was tested
The tests were performed in triplicates for each time point and test setup (+- SR-NOM, 2
different media). The test suspensions with a final volume of 4ml were prepared from the
stock solutions (see 3.2) and transferred into the Amicon tubes. Subsequently, the Amicon
tubes have been placed in the LEVITATT (LED Vertical Illumination Table for Algal Toxic-
ity Tests) setup [65] to provide stable conditions as for the toxicity testings. At each of the
time points, the suspensions were loaded in a swinging bucket rotor centrifuge (Beckmann
Technologies) and spun at 4600 rpm for 30 minutes. Subsequently, 3ml of the supernatant
==PAGE:32==
20
Chapter 3. Materials and Methods
was removed from the Amicon tubes and transferred into autosampling vials for ICP-MS
analysis. All samples were acidified in concentrated HNO3 (65%) to a final concentration
of 2% prior to analysis. All samples were analyzed by ICP-MS (7850, Agilent Technolo-
gies) with Yttrium internal standard added directly in the samples. The instrument was
equipped with Platinum tipped skimmer and sample cones, a double pass Scott spray
chamber operated at 2 °C and a Micromist nebulizer. All elements where analyzed in He
collision mode with a Helium flow of 5 ml/min.
3.3.3
Influence of SR-NOM
The influence of SR-NOM addition was analyzed for the agglomeration/sedimentation
as well as for the dissolution behavior of perovskites. Therefore, a parallel experiment
with the addition of 10 mg/L SR-NOM was prepared for each of the materials tested. All
test suspensions were prepared from stock solutions. In this study, the reference material
of the International Humic Substances Society (IHSS) of Suwannee River Natural organic
matter (SR-NOM) was used, containing fulvic (15%) and humic (85%) acid.
3.4
Short-term ecotoxicity tests with perovskites
3.4.1
Culturing conditions for R.subcapitata and D. magna
The unicellular freshwater green alga R. subcapitata used in this study is a laboratory cul-
ture. It was obtained from the Norwegian Institute for Water Research, Oslo, Norway
(NIVA), and cultured in ISO 8692 medium [62]. Stock cultures were maintained in stan-
dardized medium. Algae cultures were kept in LEVITATT setup [65] providing constant
conditions for parameters such as pH, temperature, carbon dioxide content and light in-
tensity (see FIGURE 3.2). In this setup, the algae culture is cultivated in 20-mL scintillation
glass vials with a pierced screw lid to guarantee diffusion of CO2 from the atmosphere
and a stable pH. Moreover, the vials are placed on a orbital shaker (300 rpm) which is
illuminated from the bottom by LED light with an intensity of 5 - 150 µE m-2 s-1 and a
wavelength of 400 - 700nm providing a uniform fluorescent illumination of “cool-white”
or “daylight”. The temperature is kept constantly at 20 ± 2 °C [31, 65]
FIGURE 3.2: LEVITATT setup; developed at DTU Sustain (2020) [65]
The culture of D. magna originated in 1978 from Denmark (Birkedammen) and has since
been grown in the laboratory of the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Department
of Environmental Engineering according to OECD recommendations [63]. The cultures
were maintained in 1L glass beakers under controlled conditions of medium, light, dis-
solved oxygen and feeding with a 16/8 hour light/dark cycle. Separated by age groups,
==PAGE:33==
3.4. Short-term ecotoxicity tests with perovskites
21
crustacea were grown with 700-800 mL of Modified Elendt M7 medium at 20 ± 2° C. The
Elendt M7 medium [63] had a pH of 8.2 ± 0.3 and oxygen concentrations of 9.0 ± 0.6 mg/ L.
Medium renewal was performed twice a week by replacing 300-400 mL of the old medium
with fresh Modified M7 medium. A daily feeding (with exceptions on weekends) with 1-2
mg C L-1 per day of alga R. subcapitata was performed.
3.4.2
Reference toxicity tests with Potassium Dichromate
The substance Potassium Dichromate (K2Cr2O7) was analyzed as a reference compound
prior with the same test setup to ensure that the sensitivity of the cultivated R. subcapitata
and D. magna strain remains the same and to validate the toxicity testing methodology (see
Appendix A). K2Cr2O7 is recommended by the European Chemicals Agency as a reference
substance for the acute toxicity test for D. magna [66]. For details on the reference testing
see A.
3.4.3
Algal growth inhibition test of 72h
The test was performed according to standards of OECD 201 [67] with ecotoxicological
test medium prepared according to standards of ISO, 2012 [62] using R. subcapitata as
test species. The aim was to determine the toxic effect of Perovskite nanoparticles on
fresh water green algae in aqueous environment. Therefore, the inhibition of algae growth
rate depending on the compound concentration was examined. As this test is best suit-
able for water soluble chemicals, appropriate modifications of the test regulations to the
specific conditions of the perovskite nanomaterials were made. The algal culture was
grown according to the methodology recommended by the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD 1984, 2006).
The pH of the medium was tested prior starting the inoculation and was always within
the valid range of 8.1 ± 0.2. After the test period of 72 hours, the pH was measured again
for at least one test replicate per concentration and the controls to verify the valid range
of 8.14 + 1.5. Five different concentrations of the nanomaterial and one control (without
the test material) arranged in a geometric series with concentration ratio of 2 were se-
lected for testing. Each concentration was performed in triplicates, whereas the controls
were performed in replicates of five to ten. An appropriate cell density in the inoculum
of 104 cells was determined by determining the cell density of the preculture on a Multi-
sizer Coulter Counter® (Beckmann Coulter Life Sciences). The incubation was performed
in LEVITATT setup conditions to guarantee optimal and constant growth conditions [65].
The fluorescence of all samples was measured at t0, t48h and t72h with a fluorescence
spectrophotometer (HITACHI F-7000) with a wavelength of 430nm and emission wave-
length of 671nm. The incoming light penetrates the extracted chlorophyll and emerging
fluorescence can be measured. The fluorescence measurement is correlated with the cell
density and can be used as parameter for biomass.
The samples were prepared for fluorescence measurement by taking 0.4ml aliquots out
from each of the test vessels without replacing the volume. The aliquots were treated with
1.6 ml Acetone (saturated with MgCO3) and stored in the dark prior to analysis. For back-
ground corrections a blind was prepared at t0. Based on the described measurements, the
growth rates µ of the algal cultures at the different concentrations and the growth inhibi-
tion [%] were determined. The growth rate is presented as the logarithm of the absorbance
per unit time (see section 3.5).
==PAGE:34==
22
Chapter 3. Materials and Methods
3.4.4
Daphnia m. acute immobilization test of 48h
The OECD 202 [63] standard was followed to carry out D. magna short term (acute) immo-
bilization tests in response to six different perovskite materials. The test organisms were
from a healthy D. magna strain that has been successfully cultured at the DTU Sustain In-
stitute since 1979.
To obtain animals ≤24 hours of age, hand filtering, sorting and counting was performed
from the total population and transferred to a 100 ml glass beaker containing 25 ml medium.
The test was performed with standard Elendt M7 medium at a valid pH within the range
of 8.2 -8.5. Five juveniles were placed into each beaker in a test series of three to five
different concentrations and a control series. Each test concentration was present in five
replicates and was performed with nominal concentrations of 3.125 - 100 mg substance/L.
During cultivation and testing, a constant room temperature of 20±2 °C was provided.
Beakers were covered and incubated in the dark for the entire 48-hour test period. The
number of immobilized organisms was determined after 24 and 48 hours of exposure, re-
spectively. Animals were considered immobile if they were unable to swim freely and did
not respond to gentle movement of the suspension or physical stimulation with a pipette.
3.4.5
Acute toxicity tests with addition of SR-NOM
The influence of SR-NOM addition on short-term freshwater toxicity was observed for
all perovskite materials. Therefore, parallel experimental setups with 10 mg/L SR-NOM
for all tests with R. subcapitata and D. magna were performed. All test suspensions were
prepared from stock solutions and the same SR-NOM standard was used as described
above.
3.5
Data treatment
The relative percentage of the dissolved ions nickel and cobalt (Di) was calculated based
on their respective wt% for each perovskite component and the nominal test concentration:
Di =
Ci
cn ∗mm
mt
(3.1)
Ci averaged and blank corrected mass concentration measured by ICP-MS
cn applied nominal test concentration
mm
mt
fraction of respective metal component mass of total perovskite mass
Dissolution rates were calculated according to OECD guideline TG318 [64] according
to the equation:
Dissolutionrate = dm
dt = −kdiss ∗m
(3.2)
Thereby simplified assumptions have been made due to the experimental setup, which
means that no surface area normalization was performed.
Key parameters for the toxicity tests were calculated by the following equations:
µ = (lnNn −lnN0)
td
(3.3)
==PAGE:35==
3.5. Data treatment
23
N0 initial biomass
Nn final biomass
td test period in days
The inhibition rate I was calculated by:
I = 1 −µi
µ0
(3.4)
µo mean growth rate for the control
µi mean growth rate for a given concentration
Subsequently, the effect concentrations of the nanomaterials that inhibit the growth rate of
the algae by 10% (EC10) and 50%(EC50) relative to the control growth rate within the test
period, were determined.
The software R [68] was used to generate concentration-response curves and effect concen-
trations with corresponding 95% confidence intervals by employing the log-logistic model
for nonlinear regression analysis of the relationship between responses and concentration.
Nominal concentrations were used for the model input. The comparison of inhibition of
growth rate data is based on EC50 values and the variability indicated by the correspond-
ing 95% confidence intervals.
To examine the potential correlation between the EC50 values obtained and [NOM], the
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (r) was calculated.
r = 1 −6 ∑d2
n3 −n
(3.5)
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
25
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Size distribution and the influence of SR-NOM
The undoped perovskites have been measured in 10mg/L dispersion in both media over
a time period of 24h. Thereby the hydrodynamic diameter was measured every half an
hour and the zeta potential at the beginning (t0.5h) as well as after 24h (t24).
In the FIGURE 4.1 the size distribution of the different perovskite dispersions in ISO and
M7 medium after 0.5 h is displayed with and without the presence of SR-NOM. At this ini-
tial stage, it can be presumed that the observed particle size distribution is representative,
and any transformation processes that may have occurred would have had a minimal
effect on the samples. In ISO medium at t0.5h, LaCoNi(5) exhibited a size peak of 362.2
d.nm, which was considerably smaller than the most prominent peak of LaCoNi(16) at
1102 d.nm. LaCoNi and LaNi showed overlapping size peaks, with sizes of 527.2 d.nm
and 742.2 d.nm, respectively.
Comparing these findings to the size distribution in M7 medium noticeably differences
for two of the perovskites (LaCoNi(5), LaCoNi(16)) were observed. At t0.5, a significantly
higher size peak for LaCoNi(5) was observed, with a size of 1666 d.nm. Additionally,
a second peak with a size of 221 d.nm was evident. In contrast, LaCoNi(16) showed a
much smaller size peak of 685.4 d.nm in the M7 medium, while the other two perovskite
dispersions did not exhibit a significantly different size distribution after 0.5 hours in the
M7 medium. From the presented data no correlation between the Feret diameter measured
in SEM and the hydrodynamic diameter in medium, neither for ISO nor for M7 medium,
can be established (see FIGURE 4.1 and TABLE 3.1).
In FIGURE 4.2, a summary of the hydrodynamic diameters against measuring time for
examined perovskites can be seen for each medium and with and without presence of
SR-NOM. Comparing the average hydrodynamic diameter over 24 hours measurement
between the two media ISO and M7 for each of the perovskites, distinct differences can
be observed for 50% of the dispersions (LaCoNi(16), LaCoNi(5)) (see TABLES B.1, B.2, B.3,
B.4).
During the 24-hour observation period, the sizes of the particles cannot be directly deter-
mined due to transformation processes in dispersion. Instead, the sizes of the agglomer-
ates are being referred to (which is elaborated further in the discussion section 5). In the
following description, an observation of the hydrodynamic diameters is made in general
trends over the measured time period of 24 hours. The majority of the studied dispersions
have a high polydispersity index (PDI > 0.7) in ISO and M7 medium. The samples there-
fore contain large particles and aggregates which can subsequently lead to sedimentation
[69].
In ISO medium two general trends can be observed. While the average hydrodynamic
diameters over 24 hours of LaNi, LaCoNi(16) and LaCoNi are between 3500 and 4000
d.nm, LaCoNi(5) is clearly smaller with an average particle size of 600 d.nm. Also the
==PAGE:38==
26
Chapter 4. Results
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
FIGURE 4.1: Size distribution by Intensity for t0.5 in 10 mg/L dispersions
in (A) ISO medium (B) M7 medium (C) ISO medium + SR-NOM (D) M7
medium + SR-NOM determined by DLS. Undoped perovskite materials
were analyzed.
fluctuation of LaCoNi(5) over 24 hours with a value of 102 d.nm is clearly smaller than
for the other perovskite materials. For LaNi and LaCoNi a clear trend of initial increase
of hydrodynamic diameter can be observed. This is accompanied by an increase in their
polydispersity index (all details can be taken from TABLES B.1, B.2, B.3, B.4).
While for LaCoNi(5) only a very limited amount of the entire measurements have a PDI
value >0.7, all others have significantly higher PDI values. Within the confines of a 24-hour
measurement period conducted in ISO medium, a hierarchical ranking of LaCoNi(16) >
LaCoNi > LaNi > LaCoNi(5) with PDI values exceeding 0.7 can be discerned. Conse-
quently, all perovskite materials contain large particles and aggregates which can subse-
quently lead to sedimentation and the ranking provides an indication of the magnitude
of these processes (together with other data that was measured). Thereby also PDI values
of <0.4 and >0.7 are observed for all investigated materials with no temporal dependence,
but a fluctuation throughout the entire measurement duration. This observation suggests
an unstable state of dispersion. It is essential to emphasize that the qualitative evaluation
of the observed PDI fluctuations must be interpreted with caution, as such assessments
are limited by the DLS technology itself, the application on DLS with AdMs as well as the
single experimental replication. Therefore, to establish the unstable state of dispersion, it
is necessary to perform repetitive measurements on DLS as well as support the dataset
with the application of other analysis techniques like Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to confirm the results.
As shown in FIGURE 4.3a, all undoped perovskite materials in dispersion with ISO medium
are unstable at the beginning of the measurements (t0). With zeta potentials of -0.11mV, -
0.22mV and 0.02 mV for LaNi, LaCoNi(16) and LaCoNi respectively, the samples are in a
range of strong agglomeration and precipitation and not in stable dispersion status [34].
==PAGE:39==
4.1. Size distribution and the influence of SR-NOM
27
With a zeta potential of -16.95 mV, LaCoNi(5) has less strong tendency for agglomeration
with being in threshold are of "delicate dispersion" [34]. After 24 hours, all dispersions,
but LaNi, show a slight increase in stability by more negative zeta potentials. Neverthe-
less, non of them has a moderately stable dispersion status after 24 hours.
In the Elendt M7 medium, a general trend of increasing hydrodynamic diameters over
time can be seen for LaNi, LaCoNi and LaCoNi(16) (see FIGURE 4.2b). Within 4 hours,
the determined diameters of LaNi and LaCoNi do not clearly differ from those in the ISO
dispersion, whereas LaCoNi(16) shows a markedly smaller average hydrodynamic diam-
eter in the M7 medium, compared to ISO medium (see B.2). Over a 24-hour measurement
period, LaCoNi(5) exhibits the smallest hydrodynamic diameter among all the materials
tested, (as similarly observed for the ISO medium). It´s average hydrodynamic diameter
is thereby approximately three times higher than measured in ISO medium. Furthermore,
the fluctuation of LaCoNi(5)’s hydrodynamic diameter is significantly lower than that of
the other materials
Regarding the polydispersity index similar trends like in ISO medium can be drawn for
the dispersions in M7 medium so that the overall ranking remains the same.
As shown in FIGURE 4.3b, all examined perovskite dispersions have zeta potentials in the
range of 0 to -10 for the initial measurement t0. The samples are consequently in status of
strong agglomeration and precipitation [34]. No changes in zeta potential were observed
after 24 hours for LaNi and LaCoNi(5), but LaCoNi(16), which is in stability after 24 hours
according to the zeta potential measurement.
With the presence of SR-NOM, a clear tendency in the particle distribution can be seen for
ISO and M7 dispersions at t0.5. As shown in FIGURES 4.1c, 4.1d the group of perovskites
show higher size similarities as their peaks exhibit a higher degree of proximity and sub-
stantial overlapping combined with slightly higher peak intensities. Furthermore, a slight
decreasing size trend can be observed in both media. To validate these findings, replicates
must be conducted. Major differences can also be observed in the hydrodynamic diame-
ters with the presence of 10 mg/L SR-NOM over the measuring period of 24 hours in both
ecotoxicological media (FIGURE 4.2c, 4.2d). In the presence of SR-NOM in ISO medium,
the mean hydrodynamic diameter of LaNi is not markedly different from the dispersion
without SR-NOM, while the magnitude of its fluctuations decreases markedly (see TABLE
B.1). The hydrodynamic diameters of all other dispersions are clearly reduced and show a
less fluctuation over 24 hours.
In M7 medium with presence of SR-NOM a major reduction in hydrodynamic diameters,
fluctuation over 24 hours can be observed. Additionally, the hydrodynamic diameters of
the different perovskite dispersions groups in the M7 medium appear more similar to each
other over the measuring time period. The average reduction in hydrodynamic diameters
can be accounted with factors between 2 (LaCoNi(5)) to 5.7 (LaCoNi(16)). LaCoNi(16) has
the smallest average hydrodynamic diameter of 493 d.nm, while all other dispersions are
in the range of 750 d.nm.
The proportions of PDI values above 0.7 show major reductions in the presence of SR-
NOM for the majority of the studied dispersions. With the presence of SR-NOM the hi-
erarchical ranking of PDI values exceeding 0.7 changes to LaNi > LaCoNi(16) > LaCoNi
LaCoNi(5) shows a slight increase, but the data acquisition in M7 medium without SR-
NOM only ran over 12.5 hours instead of 24 hours and must therefore be repeated. No
data are available for zeta potential with presence of SR-NOM.
==PAGE:40==
28
Chapter 4. Results
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
FIGURE 4.2: Size distribution by Intensity for a measurement period of 24 hours (t0 - t24 in 10 mg/L dispersions in (A) ISO medium (B)
M7 medium (C) ISO medium + SR-NOM (D) M7 medium + SR-NOM determined by DLS. Undoped perovskite materials were analyzed.
==PAGE:41==
4.2. Particle number and the influence of SR-NOM
29
(A) ISO8692 medium
(B) Elendt M7 medium
FIGURE 4.3: Zeta potentials for 10mg/L dispersions of perovskite materials
at t0 (full colour) and t24 (unfilled). Displayed are averaged values from
duplicate measurements for the undoped perovskite materials.
4.2
Particle number and the influence of SR-NOM
During the 24-hour DLS measurement period, the derived count rates of the different per-
ovskite materials have been collected. Based on the results presented in the previous chap-
ter 4.1, this derived count rate cannot be referred to as particle number, but is more reflect-
ing the number of aggregates as the process of aggregation was suggested by the study
data in all perovskite dispersions.
A general trend of a decrease of particle/aggregate count rate can be observed for all per-
ovskites over the measuring period of 24 hours. In case of LaNi, the highest decrease
was observed with a factor of 10 or 1000 in ISO and M7 media respectively. The derived
count rate of LaCoNi also showed a substantial decrease, with factors around 5 to 100
for ISO and M7 medium respectively. The trend of LaCoNi(16) in ISO medium was even
more pronounced, with a decrease in particle quantity by a factor of 100. The changes in
particle/agglomerate count rate for LaCoNi(5) were much smaller compared to the other
materials.
Similar trends were observed in the presence of SR-NOM. LaNi in both media showed
a reduction by a factor of 10. LaCoNi in ISO medium exhibited a decrease in particle
number by 10, while no significant decrease was detected in LaCoNi in M7 medium. La-
CoNi(16) in ISO medium showed a decrease by a factor of 10, while LaCoNi(5) in ISO and
M7 medium displayed a fluctuation in particle number, showing a decrease followed by
an increase within 24 hours. This trend, along with the previously recorded increase in
particle size, supports the occurrence of agglomeration and indicates sedimentation pro-
cesses.
4.3
Dissolution behavior of perovskites and the influence of SR-
NOM
The comparison of perovskites dissolution status in various ecotoxicological media and
with and without the addition of SR-NOM after 24 hours can be deduced from FIGURE
B.1. The dissolution study results indicate an overall increase of the absolute ion concen-
trations in both ISO and M7 media over time. The presence of SR-NOM reduces the effect.
The sole exception is the LaCoNi(5) sample, which does not exhibit nickel ion dissociation
in ISO medium within 24 hours, but shows evidence of cobalt ion dissociation. It should
==PAGE:42==
30
Chapter 4. Results
be noted that no differentiation is made between Ni2+and Ni3+, Co2+ and Co3+ ions re-
spectively.
The results of the 24-hour ISO medium dissolution experiment (TABLE B.5 ) indicate that
LaNi has the highest dissolved nickel ion content among the tested compounds, with a
leachate of 24% (equivalent to a mass concentration of 491 µg/L) (see FIGURE 4.4a). Mean-
while, LaCoNi and LaCoNi(16) display lower dissolved nickel proportions of 12.75% and
6.42% (corresponding to 102 µg/L and 103 µg/L, respectively).
In M7 medium a generally lower trend in nickel dissociation compared to ISO medium
can be observed. However, LaCoNi(5) exhibits an exception with small amounts of nickel
dissociation observed even in the absence of NOM. The order of perovskites with regards
to nickel dissociation remains unchanged as seen in ISO medium, with LaNi displaying
the highest proportion of 9.3% (equivalent to a mass concentration of 204 µg/L) after 24
hours, followed by LaCoNi (6.7%, 54 µg/L) and LaCoNi(16) (6.2%, 99 µg/L).
In the presence of 10mg/L SR-NOM, the results of the dissolution study indicate a reduc-
tion in nickel ion release, with a 1.8-fold reduction (for LaCoNi(16)), a 1.6 fold reduction
for LaCoNi and a 1.4-fold reduction (for LaNi) observed over 24 hours. This reduction
is reflected in a decrease in absolute nickel mass concentration in the ISO medium of 58
µg/L, 64 µg/L and 353 µg/L respectively. LaCoNi(5) displays a deviation from the trend,
with a slight increase in nickel dissociation observed in the presence of 10mg/L SR-NOM
(resulting in a concentration of 0.88 µg/L after 24 hours).The reduction of nickel dissoci-
ation with the presence of SR-NOM is greater in M7 medium than in ISO medium with a
up to 4.7-fold decrease for LaNi.
In general, the dissolution behavior of cobalt follows a pattern similar to that of nickel, ex-
hibiting a decreasing rate with time. The addition of SR-NOM to the ISO and M7 medium
results in a decrease in metal ion dissociation for most of the perovskites studied. La-
CoNi(5) represents an exception in ISO medium, like in the described results for nickel.
The presence of natural organic matter causes a slight increase in cobalt dissolution over
the measuring period (see TABLE B.5).
As shown in TABLE B.6 results of the 72-hour dissolution study indicate that similar nickel
and cobalt values are obtained for the overlapping hours of 0.5 and 24 hours from the 24
hours experiment in ISO medium. Additionally, a progressive absolute nickel and cobalt
ion concentration can be observed over the time period of 72 hours. The ranking of rela-
tive percentage of released metal ions over 72 hours remains unchanged, in the order of
LaNi > LaCoNi > LaCoNi(16) > LaCoNi(5). The presence of SR-NOM in the ISO medium
continues to markedly reduce nickel and cobalt dissolution over the course of 48 and 72
hours like observed in the 24 hours time frame.
However, the recovery analysis reveals considerable disparities in the recovery between
the different perovskite dispersions in ISO medium, which require consideration in the
evaluation of the data. While LaNi, LaCoNi(16) and LaCoNi show a recovery between
81% and 82% after 0.5 hours, there is a clear decrease with time down to 36% (LaCoNi(16)).
In general, it is observed that LaCoNi(5) exhibit the lowest recovery throughout the mea-
surement period with only 4% of its total nickel being recoverable after 72 hours.
==PAGE:43==
4.3. Dissolution behavior of perovskites and the influence of SR-NOM
31
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
FIGURE 4.4: By ICP-MS measured mass concentrations [µg/L] of dissolved nickel ions over 24 hours for the undoped perovskite mate-
rials. Each figure displays one material and compares nickel ion release between ISO medium, M7 medium, ISO medium + SR-NOM,
M7 medium + SR-NOM. The dispersion concentration was 10 mg/L for all tested perovskite materials.
==PAGE:44==
32
Chapter 4. Results
4.4
Short term toxicity of perovskites
4.4.1
Growth inhibition tests with R. subcapitata
All tests were conducted in accordance with OECD standards TG201 standards [67]. With
regards to the OECD validation criteria, the control growth rates after 72 hours were
within the acceptable range for almost all algae tests (see details in TABLE A.2). The
only exception was LaCoNiPd, which had a growth rate of 0.85 −1, lower than the rec-
ommended OECD standard of 0.9 d−1. In terms of the coefficient of variation, LaCoNi(16)
and LaCoNi(5) had a variation coefficient of 4% and 5%, respectively, which were within
the valid range of 5%, while the other tests had a coefficient of variation ranging from 7%
to 14%. The pH did not vary by more than ± 1.5 units during the 72-hour test period in
comparison to the pH at the beginning of the test of 8.1 ± 0.2.
The concentration-response curves obtained through regression modeling in R ( [68]) are
presented in FIGURE 4.5. The corresponding EC10 and EC50 values with their respective
95% confidence intervals are displayed in TABLE 4.1. Based on these EC50 values from
the 72-hour testing, the toxicity of the perovskites towards R. subcapitata can be ranked
as follows: LaNi, LaCoNi(16), LaCoNiPt, LaCoNi(5), LaCoNiPd, LaCoNi. This order can
also be observed by a rightward shift on the x-axis of the concentration-response curves
according to the mentioned ranking.
The highest toxicity, as evaluated by the effect concentrations, was observed for LaNi with
an EC50 value of 3.47 mg/L, followed by LaCoNi(16) with 15.09mg/L. The 95% confi-
dence intervals of these two materials are not overlapping, indicating a significantly differ-
ent concentration-response relationship. The remaining perovskite materials, LaCoNiPt,
LaCoNi(5), and LaCoNiPd, are not significantly different in terms of their EC50 values,
which were 27.2 mg/L, 40.8 mg/L, and 44.07 mg/L, respectively.
==PAGE:45==
4.4. Short term toxicity of perovskites
33
(A) LaNi
(B) LaCoNi(16)
(C) LaCoNi
(D) LaCoNiPd
(E) LaCoNiPt
(F) LaCoNi(5)
FIGURE 4.5: Concentration-response curves of growth inhibition tests on R. subcapitata for all tested perovskite materials. 95% Confi-
dence Intervals displayed in grey. Concentration series of 3.125 - 50 mg/L with a dilution factor of two.
==PAGE:46==
34
Chapter 4. Results
4.4.2
Immobilisation test with D. magna
With respect to applied OECD standards TG OECD 202, 2004 [63], all validation criteria
have been fulfilled for the immobilization tests with the perovskite materials on D. magna.
For LaNi and LaCoNiPd, a full concentration-response setup with six test concentrations
ranging from 3.125 to 100 mg/L was performed. For the remaining perovskites, a screen-
ing approach with only the two highest concentrations of 50 and 100 mg/L was per-
formed. Three out of six perovskites (LaNi, LaCoNi, LaCoNiPd) showed a response in
the form of immobilization to perovskite exposure. The effect concentrations (EC50) of
all other perovskites were determined to be greater than 100 mg/L. The concentration-
response curves were obtained using regression models in R software. The EC10 and
EC50 values with their respective 95% confidence intervals are reported in TABLE 4.2.
Based on the 48-hour EC50 value, LaNi showed the most toxic effect on D. magna with an
EC50 value of 85 mg/L. Since LaNi´s confidence interval of [76.3; 93.6] is overlapping with
the confidence intervals of LaCoNiPd (EC50 = 87.71 mg/L; confidence interval = [63.71;
111.71]), the toxic effects of the two perovskites were not significantly different. Based
on these EC50 values from the 48- hour testing, the toxicity of the perovskites towards
D. magna can be ranked as follows: LaCoNi, LaCoNiPd, LaNi and the remaining three
materials LaCoNi(16), LaCoNi(5) and LaCoNiPt as one group on the lowest toxicity rank.
(A) LaNi
(B) LaCoNi(16)
(C) LaCoNiPd
FIGURE 4.6: Concentration-response curves of immobilization tests on D.
magna for all tested perovskite materials with toxic effects. 95% Confidence
Intervals displayed in grey. Concentration series of 3.125 - 100 mg/L with a
dilution factor of two.
==PAGE:47==
4.5. Short-term toxicity tests with addition of SR-NOM
35
TABLE 4.1: 10% and 50% effect concentrations (EC) and corresponding 95%
confidence intervals for 72h R. subcapitata growth inhibition test with 6 dif-
ferent perovskite test suspensions tested for the influence of SR-NOM
ISO 8692 medium
ISO 8692 medium + SR-NOM
EC10
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
EC50
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
EC10
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
EC50
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
LaNi
0.28
[ - ; 0.9]
3.47
[1.15; 5.79]
13.0
[6.66; 19.3]
60.3
[44.0; 76.8]
LaCoNi(16)
2.07
[ - ; 5]
15.1
[5.82; 24.4]
27.4
[11.5; 43.4]
137
[69.8; 204]*
LaCoNi
28.3
[18.1; 38.4]
103
[37.0; 170]*
15.4
[9.17; 21.7]
33.9
[27.7; 40.0]
LaCoNi_Pd
33.8
[0.02; 67.7]
44.1
[29.6; 58.5]
10.7
[6.29; 15.1]
35.7
[28.5; 42.9]
LaCoNi_Pt
14.0
[9.44; 16.5]
27.2
[23.2; 31.2]
6.73
[1.13; 12.3]
9.28
[4.56; 14.0]
LaCoNi(5)
27.2
[21.8; 32.5]
40.1
[36.4; 43.8]
14.5
[ - ; 30.7]
687
[ - ; 2069]*
* extrapolated value; cf.i. = 95% confidence interval; The test concentration series
was set to 3.125 - 50 mg substance/L and 6.25 - 100 mg substance/L + 10mg/L SR-
NOM forR. subcapitata. All EC 50 values were determined for 72h.
4.5
Short-term toxicity tests with addition of SR-NOM
4.5.1
Growth inhibition test with R. subcapitata
With the addition of 10mg/L SR-NOM, the EC50 values are significantly different for
LaNi, LaCoNi(16) and LaCoNi compared to their toxicity without the presence of natu-
ral organic matter (see not overlapping 95% confidence intervals in TABLE 4.1). While the
EC50 values increased by factors of 17 for LaCoNi(5) (EC50+SRNOM = 687 mg/L), 15 for
LaNi (EC50+SRNOM = 60.3 mg/L) and 9 for LaCoNi(16) (EC50+SRNOM = 137 mg/L), it de-
creases significantly for LaCoNi and the platinum doped materials LaCoNiPt by a factor of
3 in both cases. Also for LaCoNiPd a decrease in EC50 and therefore an increase in toxicity
is observed, but not in a significant manner. A growth inhibition of 50% compared to the
control group could not be observed for LaCoNi(16) with the highest test concentration of
100 mg/L + SR-NOM. In the toxicity ranking between observed perovskites the presence
of SR-NOM moves the LaCoNi(16) from the second most toxic substance without natural
organic matter to the second least toxic with presence of SR-NOM. Based on these EC50
values from the 72- hour testing, the toxicity of the perovskites towards R. subcapitata
with the presence of SR-NOM can be ranked from lowest to highest toxicity as: LaCoNi(5)
< LaCoNi(16)< LaNi < LaCoNiPd < LaCoNi< LaCoNiPt.
4.5.2
Immobilisation test with D. magna
The test concentration series with D. magna was set to 6.25 - 150 mg substance/L, as lower
toxic effects were expected. The nickel content in %wt is shown in parenthesis behind
each compound respectively and are displayed in a ranked order from lowest to highest.
The addition of 10 mg/L SR-NOM led to a reduction of the EC50 values in all observed
perovskite dispersions in which toxic affects have been detected without SR-NOM (LaNi,
LaCoNi,LaCoNiPd). While LaNi and LaCoNiPd had EC50 values below 100 mg/L with-
out SR-NOM, they show an increase of factors 12 (1023 mg/L [- ; 4627]) and and 3.5 (310
mg/L [- ; 1842]) with the addition of SR-NOM with respectively.
No toxic effects have been observed for LaCoNi(16), LaCoNiPt or LaCoNi(5) neither with-
out nor with SR-NOM within the test concentration series. Consequently, no statement
can be made weather natural organic matter influences the EC50 in these dispersions.
==PAGE:48==
36
Chapter 4. Results
TABLE 4.2: 10% and 50% effect concentrations (EC) and corresponding 95%
confidence intervals for 48h D. magna immobilization test with 6 different
perovskite test suspensions tested for the influence of SR-NOM
Elendt M7 medium
Elendt M7 medium + SR-NOM
EC10 (48h)
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
EC50
[mg/L]
95% Confidence
Interval
EC10
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
EC50
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
LaNi(22)
52.2
[41.4; 63.0]
85.0
[76.3; 93.6]
93.6
[33.7; 154]
1023
[ - ; 4627]*
LaCoNi(16)
>100
**
>100
**
140
[ - ; 353]*
310
[ - ; 1842]*
LaCoNi(8)
130.2
[82.5; 178]*
465
[ - ; 1019]*
>100
**
>100
**
LaCoNi_Pd
43.3
[16.2; 70.4]
87.7
[63.7; 112]
>100
**
>100
**
LaCoNi_Pt
>100
**
>100
**
>100
**
>100
**
LaCoNi(5)
>100
**
>100
**
>100
**
>100
**
* extrapolated value; ** when no toxic effects were observed within the test
concentration series, EC50 considered >100 mg/L *** performed as screen-
ing test with the two highest concentrations and controls; cf.i. = 95% confi-
dence interval; 10 mg/L SR-NOM was added. All EC50 values were deter-
mined for 48h.
==PAGE:49==
37
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
Behavior of perovskites in ecotoxicological media
5.1.1
Size distribution, agglomeration and sedimentation
The observed trend of increasing hydrodynamic diameter, decreasing derived particle
number, and near-zero zeta potentials in all samples suggests an unstable dispersion sta-
tus, which indicates the presence of agglomeration and sedimentation processes occurring
already at the beginning and over the 24-hour of the measurement period. These findings
align with those of other studies, such as Griffitt et al. (2008), who also reported agglom-
eration of metallic nanoparticles, including nickel and cobalt, in both ISO and M7 media
[58]. Therefore, the derived particle number provided by DLS is not the number of indi-
vidual particles, but rather the number of agglomerates during the measurement duration
due to the unstable dispersion status observed throughout the experiment (see TABLES
B.1, B.2, B.3, B.4). These findings also support the conclusions of Battista et al. (2022) that
LaCoNi is an unstable dispersion in M7 medium [3].
There is no clear difference in stability between ISO and M7 medium for most of the dis-
persions, except for LaCoNi(5), which shows zeta potential at the threshold of dispersion
stability in ISO medium. Although the zeta potential of LaCoNi(16) indicates dispersion
stability after 24 hours, it cannot be considered as a stable dispersion throughout the mea-
suring period due to evident agglomeration and sedimentation processes occurring.
From findings by other studies, it could be expected to see higher agglomeration in dis-
persions with M7 medium, due to the higher water hardness [37], since Ca2+ can induce
bridging interaction and promote agglomeration of AdMs [70]. As M7 medium has a Ca2+
molar concentration of 2 mM compared to 0.08 mM in ISO medium, higher aggregation
processes can be expected. This phenomenon can not be observed in the majority of per-
ovskite dispersions, but for LaCoNi(5).
The difference in ionic strength (M7 = 9.06 mM, ISO medium = 2.29 mM) was found to
have a minor impact on the agglomeration behavior of perovskites. Although previous
studies have demonstrated that higher ion concentrations can weaken the electrical dou-
ble layers surrounding particles, resulting in reduced surface charge and decreased elec-
trostatic repulsion between particles, leading to increased agglomeration [48], this phe-
nomenon could not be observed in the present study.
Transformations like agglomeration and sedimentation have main impacts on the actual
exposure to aquatic species, as they change their interaction characteristics with aquatic
species. In case of large particle agglomeration and subsequent sedimentation thus their
transport and bioavailability would be restricted [38]. The contact time and exposure is
more likely for benthic organisms as well as bottom feeding fish, rather than to pelagic
species, what needs to be considered in the environmental risk assessment of these AdMs.
Consequently, more studies on aquatic pelagic and benthic species should be conducted
to ensure a comprehensive survey of the risks of perovskites to the aquatic environment.
==PAGE:50==
38
Chapter 5. Discussion
To better simulate realistic environmental conditions and understand the behavior of per-
ovskites in aquatic solutions, dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements were con-
ducted in the presence of SR-NOM. With the presence of SR-NOM, a noticeable reduction
in particle size at t0.5 and a greater degree of size similarity among the various perovskite
dispersions can be observed. As already described by Hartmann et al. (2014) [24] a re-
duction in size will lead to smaller agglomerates, which in turn will decrease the settling
velocity and ultimately slow down the sedimentation rate. Hence, the addition of SR-
NOM to the perovskite dispersions, results in an increased dispersion stability at t0.5.
However, the application of DLS has certain limitations when it comes to such complex
particle systems, like with perovskites as multi-component, unstable, and agglomerating
particle dispersions. One of the main reasons for these limitations is that DLS relies on the
assumption of a single scattering population, meaning that all particles in the sample con-
tribute to the scattered light in the same way [25]. This assumption is violated in complex
systems where there are multiple populations of particles with different sizes, shapes, and
refractive indices. In such cases, the results may not accurately reflect the true size distri-
bution of the particles. Furthermore, the dynamic nature of the DLS technique, meaning
that it measures the Brownian motion of particles in solution, is limiting in the applica-
tion with perovskite dispersions. In complex systems where particles can agglomerate or
settle, the assumption of Brownian motion can be affected, leading to errors in the size
measurement. The agglomeration and settling can cause changes in the refractive index
and shape of the particles, further complicating the interpretation of the DLS data. As also
reported by the expert advice of Malvern technologies for the measured samples, PDI val-
ues higher than 0.7 have a very broad size distribution and are probably not suitable for
the DLS technique [69]. Similar finding with high PDI values (> 0.7) for metal nanomate-
rials was found in Cupi et al. (2015) [42], working with Ag, ZnO and TiO2 nanoparticles.
As the majority of the measured perovskite dispersion samples have PDI values higher
than 0.7 making quantitative determinations of size distribution invalid. Consequently,
validating application of other methods to support above mentioned findings are recom-
mended. In addition, it is essential to substantiate and validate the data obtained so far
on dissolution and dispersion stability through further research. As perovskites are em-
ployed as catalysts in engine combustion processes, their introduction through industrial
effluents and surface runoff is highly probable. Consequently, upon their entry into the
aquatic environment, they are already in aquatic dispersion. Together with the high prob-
ability that the perovskite materials will remain long term in the given ecosystem, it is
vital to investigate the effects of dispersion aging on dispersion stability and dissolution.
Furthermore, employing complementary testing methodologies recommended by the Or-
ganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), such as Transmission
Electron Microscopy (TEM), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Ultraviolet-visible
(UV-vis) detection is recommended.
Despite the mentioned limitations, the qualitatively observed trend of agglomeration and
sedimentation can be supported by findings of other studies and is therefore considered as
important transformation process of perovskites in dispersion of ecotoxicological media of
different ionic strengths.
5.1.2
Dissolution of perovskites in ecotoxicological media
As hypothesized earlier in this report (see section 2.3.4), the results of the dissolution study
indicate that there is an overall increase in ion concentrations in both ISO and M7 media
over time for all perovskite dispersions. While LaNi is displaying the highest dissolved
==PAGE:51==
5.1. Behavior of perovskites in ecotoxicological media
39
nickel proportion among the tested perovskites, LaCoNi(5) shows the lowest. Some of
the studied materials demonstrated greater dissolution in the ISO medium as compared
to the M7 medium, while other have quite similar dissolution behaviors like LaCoNi(16)
or higher dissolution in M7 medium like for LaCoNi(5). Consequently, no correlation
between the release of metal ions and the ionic strength of the medium was observed. Pre-
vious research has indicated that augmented ionic strength can promote higher surface
protonation, thereby leading to a heightened dissolution rate [3]. Nonetheless, Battista et
al. (2023) reported no significant association between ion dissociation and ionic strength
with perovskite materials such as LaCoNi, LaCoNiPt, and LaCoNiPd, which reinforces
the current findings. Furthermore, prior research has demonstrated that ion leaching in
perovskites with an ABO3 structure is primarily driven by the pH of the dispersion me-
dia, rather than its ionic strength [15, 3].
Like in the study on ZnO nanoparticles by Bian et al (2011) [71], a deviation from the
generally available model predictions assumed size dependent dissolution rate [26] is ob-
served in the present perovskite study. While the size ranking from SEM measurements
(see TABLE 3.1) is LaCoNi < LaCoNi(5) < LaCoNi(16) < LaNi, the relative percentage of
dissolved ions is lowest in LaCoNi(5) in both media and at all time point of measurement.
Also no correlation between hydrodynamic diameters and dissolution of metal ions can
be drawn. The deviation from the size dependence in dissolution observed by Bian et al
for ZnO was attributed to inaccurate applicability of thermodynamic due to small particle
sizes that did not consider the effect of surface tension and agglomeration for nanopar-
ticles of size ranges below 15 nm. However, this explanation may not be applicable to
perovskites, as they are relatively larger in size compared to other nanoparticles (96 - 129
nm). Much more, the complex structure and multicomponent composition of perovskites,
which consist of different metals in a lattice structure, may be responsible for the altered
dissolution rate compared to simpler structured nanomaterials.
As proposed by research studies [28, 26], the phenomenon of dissolution is likely cor-
related with both agglomeration and sedimentation, as these alteration mechanisms can
exert discernable impacts on particle dimensions, surface characteristics, and ultimate dis-
solution behavior. Given that agglomeration is evident in both media, and it is possible
to discern a pattern characterized by a higher initial release of metal ions that diminishes
over time the current study allows conclusions to be drawn about the impact of agglom-
eration on dissolution as specific surface area is significantly decreased. These findings
could consequently be taken as a confirmation of the agglomeration induced concentra-
tion dependent dissolution proposed by Baek et al. (2011) [46].
The data revealed that perovskite materials have a relatively low release of metal ions,
compared to other materials. From originally loaded 0.04mg LaCoNi (which corresponds
to a mass of 3.2 *10−3mg Ni), only 0.62% leached after 24 hours in M7 medium. With
25.63%, LaNi had the highest leachable mass across all tested scenarios of materials and
media in ISO medium, corresponding to a leachable nickel ion mass of 8.2*10−4mg nickel
after 24 hours. Similar to the present study, findings of Battista et al. (2023), have reported
comparably low release of metal ions in perovskite materials like LaCoNi with only 2%
leachable mass after 24 hours in M7 medium compared to other metal-containing nano-
materials like ZnO or BaSO4 with up to 55% and 25% respectively.
In the context of metal ion release into the aquatic environment, it is crucial to acknowl-
edge that the relatively slow dissolution observed during the 24 and 72-hour measure-
ment period, in conjunction with the incidents of agglomeration and sedimentation, could
potentially result in higher metal ion exposure for benthic organisms than to the pelagic
organisms studied in this report [72]. With observed sedimentation of the perovskite mate-
rials, the perovskite material will accumulate on the sediments with long-term dissolution
of metal ions. However, in case of bioaccumulation the dissolution process will process
==PAGE:52==
40
Chapter 5. Discussion
will continue in pelagic organisms as well.
The results of perovskite dissolution behavior in ecotoxicological media should be vali-
dated by other methods like the continuous flow system used in Battista et al. (2023) and
recommended by OECD test-guideline TG318 as certain limitations of the present method-
ology might influence the results. According to the OECD guideline TG318, low molecu-
lar weight cut-off (MWCO) filter membranes as they were used in the present study, may
result in ion accumulation at the filter’s inlet, leading to a potentially inaccurate measure-
ment of the dissolution rate. The adsorption of perovskite material and/or metal ions to
the filter membrane can occur. Additionally, the presence of SR-NOM can obstruct the
filter membrane. During the laboratory experiments, a coloured sample residue above
the filter after centrifugation was observed in the case of SR-NOM added samples, which
might confirm the influence of filter adsorption on dissolution. Furthermore, the recov-
ery experiment for the 72 hour experiment in ISO medium further supports possible con-
straints in the findings of the study.
To enhance comprehension of the dissolution study outcomes, it is suggested to apply
specification models, such as PHREEQC or Visual MINTEQ. These models can provide
preliminary estimations of effectively available nickel and cobalt ions in the release stud-
ies and assist in the identification of additional potential ionic compounds that may con-
tribute to toxicity.
Despite possible limitations due to filter membranes and/or recovery rates, the data pro-
vides very relevant findings on ionic strengths-, size- and agglomeration dependent dis-
solution of perovskites in ecotoxocological media.
5.2
Short-term toxicity of perovskites
Standard toxicity tests are a simplified method, and do not account for various factors such
as transformation processes (like dissolution, agglomeration, sedimentation etc.), particle
size, physical effects (like shading, adsorption) and many more factors. Ecotoxicity testing
of aqueous suspensions containing nanomaterials is complicated by the dynamic nature of
these systems, which undergo various transformation processes. Unstable exposure con-
ditions further add to the uncertainty in ecotoxicity testing [31]. However, in this study,
extensive and informative data were generated, providing insights into the aquatic toxic-
ity of lanthanum-based perovskites.
For the freshwater algae, all studied perovskite materials, did show effects on the growth
rate of R. subcapitata. All perovskites, but LaCoNi, can be determined as toxic (EC50 ≤
10mg/L) or harmful (EC50 = 10 −100mg/L) for the aquatic environment [73] (see TABLE
4.1). As the EC50 value for LaCoNi is an extrapolated value with a quite broad confidence
interval from, it can be determined as harmful in the conservative approach of toxicity
evaluation. For the studied freshwater algae species, the toxic effects are likely to depen-
dent at least partly on the nickel content of the perovskites. This conclusion can be drawn
from several observations explained in the following.
Firstly, the toxicity ranking of the perovskites correlates with their weight percent of nickel,
in which LaNi with the highest wt% nickel (22%) had the lowest EC50 value and differed
significantly from all other results. Additionally, LaCoNi(16), with a nickel content of 16%,
elicited the second highest toxic reaction in R. subcapitata. Since the nickel contents of the
other remaining perovskite materials are fairly similar (5-8%), their EC50 values do not
differ significantly, and a moderate correlation was indicated by a Spearman correlation
coefficient of r = 0.49, a correlation between nickel content and toxic effect can be sug-
gested.
To further strengthen this claim the results obtained from the dissolution study were
==PAGE:53==
5.2. Short-term toxicity of perovskites
41
linked to the values of toxicity. As previously stated, the release of nickel ions is considered
a crucial mechanism underlying toxicity to aquatic organisms. To enable correlation of ob-
tained toxicity and dissolution data, the results from the ultracentrifugation, were used to
recalculate the concentration-response curves for all perovskite materials using dissolved
nickel concentration rather than the total nominal concentration. This was done under the
assumption of a linear relationship between concentration and dissolution. Additionally,
based on the recovery study, adjustments are made to the concentration of released nickel
ions (adapted to 100% recovery) (see TABLE C.1).
According to the recalculation, the EC50 values for free nickel ions are ranging from EC50
0.38 mgdissolvedNi/L [0.1; 0.66] for LaNi, to 2.95 mgdissolvedNi/L [0.64; 5.26].Sousa et al. (2018)
[74] and Nogueira et al. (2015) [75] conducted relevant studies investigating the toxicity of
released nickel ions to R. subcapitata, yielding EC50 values of 0.042 ± 0.005 mgNi2+/L (from
NaCl2), 8.24 [-; 22.13] mgdissolvedNi/L (100nm particles), and 15.2 [14.5; 15.8] mgdissolvedNi/L
(10-20 nm particles). The EC50 values for the perovskite-based dissolved nickel concen-
trations, fall within the range of the comparative value of nickel ions released from 100
nm nano NiO [75] (see TABLE C.3. Furthermore, the deviation from the reported value
in Sousa et al.’s study can be attributed to the presence of only the bivalent cation species
Na2+. The low EC50 value observed in Sousa et al.’s study suggests a greater toxic effect
of the bivalent cation Na2+ compared to the interaction of both bivalent cations Na2+ and
Na3+ together, in contrast to the values obtained in Nogueira et al.’s study and the present
perovskite study. Consequently, the reported results of the perovskite study suggest that
the dominating source of toxicity from perovskites to r. subcapitata is caused by nickel
ions.
Like already proposed by Skjolding et al. (2016) the exposure to metal ions resulted in
decreased growth and can effect the photosynthetic activity of the freshwater algae, re-
sulting in decreased growth rates [4]. Thereby, the observed toxic effect of the nickel ion
were dose-dependent, with higher concentrations resulting in greater toxicity, which can
also be supported by the findings of the aforementioned study. As another effect of metal
ions on R. subcapitata, Brix et al. (2017) [54] found that exposure to the metals caused dam-
age to the cell membrane, as evidenced by increased permeability and leakage of cellular
contents. This damage was also dose-dependent, with higher concentrations of released
metal ions causing greater membrane damage. Overall, both studies support the evidence
of the presented data on the toxic effects of metal ions (in this case nickel) on R. subcapitata
and highlight the importance of monitoring metal contamination in aquatic environments.
Additional nanoparticle- and nanomaterial-specific effects, where a mixed response of dif-
ferent modes of actions is responsible for the overall toxic effect of R. subcapitata on green
freshwater algae, still needs to be considered and require more research, but are not fur-
ther evaluated in this study, as the release of nickel ions was detected as the dominating
mode of action in the present dataset.
For D. magna, LaNi and LaCoNiPd are considered to be harmful, while all other perovskite
materials are considered to be non-toxic [73]. In the immobilization test of LaCoNi, only
one single animal was effected, and so the EC10,50 values for LaCoNi are extrapolated.
In order to exclude potential harmful effects in a conservative hazard assessment of the
perovskite materials, it is recommended to conduct chronic toxicity tests as part of the
ecotoxicological test series to rule out any potential harmful effects. These tests will pro-
vide valuable information on the sensitivity of the species by revealing the impact on the
same biological endpoints of the freshwater species. Additionally, preparing replicates is
suggested to assess the reproducibility of the results.
The EC50 values of D. magna do not have obvious rank correlations with the nickel con-
tent of the different perovskites. Consequently, the toxic mode of action towards D. magna
==PAGE:54==
42
Chapter 5. Discussion
is not expected to be mainly be driven by nickel ion release. However, an evaluation of
the dissolution’s effects on the D. magna species will still be conducted, to gain an impres-
sion on how much the endpoint sensitivities to released ions differ between the observed
aquatic species. In the present study, no data were obtained for the release of nickel ions
within 48 hours, but for the time frame of 24 hours. To be able to use a similar approach to
relate dissolution data with ecotoxicity, additional assumptions needed to be made. Bat-
tista et al. (2023) [3], investigated the dissolution behavior of LaCoNi in M7 medium and
discovered that the dissolution rate becomes stable after about 6 hours. Using this assump-
tion, the data of 24 hours measurement from the present study was utilized to estimate the
dissolution of nickel ions in M7 medium after 48 hours. This information was then used
as a basis to recalculate the EC50 values under the assumption of a linear relationship
between dissolution and concentration (see TABLE C.2). According to the recalculation,
the EC50 values for free nickel ions are ranging from EC50 4.73 mgdissolvedNi/L [2.02; 7.43]
for LaNi to 5490 mgdissolvedNi/L [-; 32127] for LaCoNi. Comparing these data to relevant
results from literature in which EC50 values were estimated for free nickel ions, it can be
suggested that for LaNi about 50% of the toxic effects are related to the released nickel ions,
whereas for LaCoNi the ions seem to be a irrelevant mode of action in the concentration
range observed in this study. The investigations carried out by Nogueira et al. (2015) and
Griffitt et al. (2008), which evaluated the EC50 values for nickel ion release from nanoma-
terials towards D. magna or other Daphnia species, should be referenced herein (details can
be taken from TABLE C.3). Together with the observation that only three of the six per-
ovskite materials tested had a discernible toxic impact on the studied crustacean species,
it can be generally inferred that nickel ions exhibit a subordinate mode of action of toxicity
towards D. magna.
Similar to the findings of the present study, Griffitt et al. (2008) observed that D. magna
exhibited lower sensitivity to nickel-nanoparticles as well as nickel ions compared to R.
subcapitata. In their study, they propose an explanation of the ecotoxicological effect that is
specifically linked to the filter feeding behavior of Daphnia, which increases their exposure
to numerous nanoparticles. Using the particle count results from the DLS analysis, it can
be inferred that D. magna may experience an exposure of approximately 2.2*106 particles
for the EC50 value of LaNi and 7.3 *106 for LaCoNi during a 48-hour period, assuming an
approximate filter rate of 0.4 ml/h (see TABLES B.1, B.3) for particle count information).
While these values are purely theoretical and based on rough estimates, they provide an
approximation of the magnitude of particle infiltration load and contribute to a better
understanding of the potential nanoparticle-dominated toxic effects of perovskites on D.
magna, which was pointed out above.
Low ecotoxicological effects on D. magna to multi-component metal nanoparticles were
also confirmed by the study of Bozich et al. (2017) [76] with Lithium Nickel Manganese
Cobalt Oxide and Lithium Cobalt oxide, who found no effects on D. magna, but only stud-
ied concentrations up to 25 mg/L. Morgaleva et al. (2015) [60] also found low ecotoxico-
logical effects on D. magna, working with 5nm nickel nanoparticles. However, information
on life stage and exposure time of these conducted tests are missing.
However, this argumentation alone may not provide a complete understanding of the
toxic effects of perovskites to D. magna. Additional studies are needed to characterize the
mode of actions and implications of sublethal effects, as well as the potential for cumula-
tive or long-term impacts over multiple exposure periods as they might have long-term
effects on populations and ecosystems.
DLS analysis conducted in Elendt M7 medium confirmed the occurrence of agglomeration
and sedimentation processes in all perovskite materials. Furthermore, sedimentation was
observed in the laboratory during the experiments (see FIGURE C.1c). Additionally, exter-
nal adsorption on D. magna was observed during the short-term toxicity tests , as well as
==PAGE:55==
5.3. Influence of SR-NOM on the behavior of perovskites in ecotoxicological media and
on aquatic ecotoxicity
43
ingestion and accumulation in the digestive tract (see FIGURES C.1b, C.1a). Together with
the finding that for D. magna nickel ion release is not a dominant ecotoxicological mode
of action for perovskites, these transformation processes might play a significant role in
the effects on D. magna.As Skjolding et al (2016) [77] elaborated in detail, nanoparticulate
accumulations in the gut of D. magna, can potentially cause physical damage and oxida-
tive stress. Furthermore, the perovskites can potentially interact with Daphnia magna’s
gut microbiome, altering microbial diversity and metabolism, which can in turn affect the
organism’s physiology and immune function. They might also accumulate in other tis-
sues, potentially causing cellular damage and oxidative stress [77]. Consequently, it is
imperative to undertake investigations on the bioaccumulation to evaluate their probable
nanoparticle effects and body burden. Along with the acquisition of chronic toxicity and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) data, this would represent a significant advancement to un-
derstand the toxic mode of actions to D. magna.
In summary, the study data showed that R. subcapitata exhibited a higher sensitivity to the
tested perovskite materials compared to D. magna as well as the dominating toxic mode
of action for the two species is different. The sensitivity of the two species to nickel ions,
as measured by the endpoint, differed by a minimum factor of 12 in the case of LaNi, but
was considerably higher in most instances (with a difference of approximately 2000 times
observed in the case of LaCoNi). Other studies like Nogueira et al. (2015), Hund-Rientke
et al. (2022), and Meyer et al. (2020) have also confirmed different sensitivities between
the two species in short-term nanomaterial exposure. Also different indication of toxicity/
mode of action can be supported in the interaction of perovskites with different freshwater
species as it was proven by other studies with nanomaterials [78, 53].
Apart from the varying modes of action, the differences in biological endpoints between
the species examined may also account for the observed variations in sensitivity. Thus,
conducting additional tests for chronic toxicity is recommended to gain a more compre-
hensive understanding of the toxic effects for the same biological endpoints of the different
species. This is considered important as altering the populations of species in the lower
trophic levels can exert a considerable influence on the overall ecosystem. R. subcapitata
and D. magna play a critical role in maintaining the balance of the food chain and support
the survival of other freshwater species, therefore maintaining biodiversity and health of
the ecosystem and avoid far reaching consequences for other species including humans.
5.3
Influence of SR-NOM on the behavior of perovskites in eco-
toxicological media and on aquatic ecotoxicity
With the presence of SR-NOM, the formation of eco-corona becomes a relevant transfor-
mation process within the perovskite dispersions. The creation of an eco-corona alters
the surface characteristics of AdMs, including surface charge, hydrophobicity, and func-
tionalization. These modifications affect the behavior of dispersion, agglomeration, and
sedimentation by enhancing steric repulsion and/or creating bridging interactions [20].
Consequently, these changes can impact the dissolution behavior, with both mechanisms
being primarily influenced by the ionic strength of the solution.
As mainly the fraction of NOM with a size smaller than 0.45 µm and predominantly
smaller than 20 nm significantly contributes to the formation of eco-corona around nano-
materials [37], the previous filtration of the stock solution of SR-NOM through a 20 µm
nylon filter provided an increased likelihood of eco-corona formation. By removing larger-
sized NOM particles through filtration, the concentration of smaller-sized NOM particles
in the stock solution is increased, which can result in a higher likelihood of eco-corona
==PAGE:56==
44
Chapter 5. Discussion
formation around the nanomaterials.
The data collected permits limited inferences regarding the improvement in dispersion
stability with the presence of SR-NOM, as the zeta potential of the dispersions in the pres-
ence of SR-NOM was not measured. However, by considering the size distribution and
the impact of SR-NOM on dissolution behavior, it is possible to make some conjectures.
In presence of SR-NOM, containing humic acid, lower aggregation can be observed for the
majority of perovskites in ISO medium and Elendt M7 medium. This statement is founded
on the observation of reduced average particle/aggregate sizes over a 24-hour measure-
ment period, as well as a relatively smaller decrease in particle counts. These observations
can be supported by findings of other studies like Philippe et al. (2014) and Wang et al.
(2022)[32, 37]. Furthermore, with the influence of SR-NOM, derived particle counts are
observed to slightly increase towards the end of the measurement period. Therefore, a re-
versibility of agglomeration and a more dynamic status of agglomerates can be observed.
This phenomenon can also be supported by the findings of Philippe et al. (2014) [32].
With the observed decrease in agglomeration and sedimentation, a more stable dispersion
status is present with the addition of SR-NOM. A stabilizing effect of NOM can also be
supported by findings of other studies with metal-containing nanomaterials like Cupi et
al. (2015) [42] in which the addition of SR-NOM stabilized ZnO ENP suspensions. The
supporting results from Battista et al.’s (2023) study are of even greater significance, as
they indicate a substantial enhancement in the dispersion stabilization of LaCoNi in solu-
tion through the presence of SR-NOM [3] . In order to further substantiate the stabilizing
effects of SR-NOM, zeta potential measurements should be conducted on the observed
dispersions in the presence of SR-NOM in future studies.
When examining the impact of SR-NOM on the two studied media, ISO and M7, it is ev-
ident that M7 exhibits a markedly stronger stabilization effect. There are several possible
explanations for this observation, including the following: (1) The lower ionic strength
of ISO medium implies that there are fewer ions in the solution to provide electrostatic
stabilization of the perovskite particles, resulting in decreased repulsion between particles
and increased agglomeration (2) The presence of SR-NOM can promote agglomeration by
reducing the availability of free ions for stabilization and by providing additional binding
sites for particles to aggregate.
For all perovskites except LaCoNi(5), a decreased release of nickel and cobalt ions was
found with the presence of SR-NOM after 24 and after 72 hours in dispersion. Like ob-
served in Li et al. (2013) with nano-ZnO [79], adsorption of NOM might form a surface
coating which acts like a shield and consequently prevents metal ions to dissolve. This
transformation changing the surface properties of the material and consequently the in-
teraction with other particles and the surrounding media [24] , could serve as a possible
explanation for the reduced dissolution of the metal ions in the present study with per-
ovskites. As described in Hartmann et al. (2014) [24], such interaction between NOM and
nanoparticles can act as a kind of steric coating around the particles and lead to stabiliz-
ing effects. With reduced agglomeration and sedimentation rate of perovskites under the
influence of NOM, observed in the present study, a stabilizing affect of SR-NOM can be
confirmed.
A slight increase of dissolution of LaCoNi(5) in presence of SR-NOM was observed in ISO
medium and can be supported by findings of other studies with metal containing nano-
materials like Ellis et al. (2016) [40], who observed an increase of dissolution of silver
nanoparticles with the presence of Suwanee river fulvic acid (SRFA). The possible expla-
nations given in this study can also be applied to the enhanced dissolution of perovskites.
Here, the complexation of the metal ions released from LaCoNi(5) with SR-NOM, as well
==PAGE:57==
5.3. Influence of SR-NOM on the behavior of perovskites in ecotoxicological media and
on aquatic ecotoxicity
45
as the role of SR-NOM as a reducing agent, are conceivable as factors promoting the disso-
lution of metal oxides and enhancing the solubility of metal ions. Also the from Wang et al
(2021) proposed role of NOM as chelating agent, binding released metal ions of nickel and
cobalt from the perovskites [41] can be a possible explanation for the reduced dissolution
in case of LaCoNi(5).
In conclusion, the precise mechanism by which dissolution was increased in the case of
LaCoNi(5) cannot be fully understood on the basis of the available data. Observable ex-
planations, such as reduced aggregation, might apply. However, this correlation does not
necessarily indicate a standalone explanation or establish a causal relationship. The po-
tential contribution of multivalent cations Ni 2+/3+ and Co 2+/3+ to bridging flocculation,
as suggested in previous studies [32, 37], is supported by the observed trend that agglom-
eration has been reduced, but is still taking place.
Putting these information of perovskite behavior in ecotoxicological medium in con-
text with the findings of the SR-NOM influenced toxicity results, some meaningful corre-
lations can be proposed. The impact of SR-NOM on toxicity showed that in 50% of the
cases involving R. subcapitata, a reduction in toxicity was observed. As discussed in pre-
vious paragraphs, the addition of SR-NOM was found to lower agglomeration and, in
most cases, decrease metal ion release. Since metal ions were identified as the primary
mode of action for the toxicity of R. subcapitata, the effects described in this study could
potentially account for the observed decrease in toxicity. Studies conducted earlier have
indicated that toxic metal ions can bind to humic substances, making them inaccessible
to organisms [80].The possible shielding or coating provided by SR-NOM might prevent
the dissolution of metal ions, which could provide an explanation why the introduction
of SR-NOM resulted in a reduction of toxic effects on algae for LaNi, LaCoNi(16) and La-
CoNi(5).
In contrast, higher toxicity levels were observed for three perovskite materials in presence
of SR-NOM. As previously discussed, the influence of SR-NOM on the materials behavior
in an aquatic medium cannot be fully understood or predicted [35]. Further investigations
are required to fully comprehend the mechanisms underlying this observation. Further-
more, with respect to LaCoNiPd and LaCoNiPt, no data on the dispersion stability and/or
dissolution was provided, making it even more difficult to draw any conclusions about the
increased toxicity observed with the presence of SR-NOM.
For D. magna a decrease in toxicity was observed for all tested perovskite materials with
the presence of SR-NOM. While nickel ion release was not found to be the primary cause of
toxicity for D. magna, it is possible that other factors, such as nanoparticle effects, adsorp-
tion on the body, or accumulation in the gut or organs, may be responsible as elaborated
in detail in the discussion above. With the presence of SR-NOM in M7 medium, agglomer-
ation was reduced, and stabilization increased for all material dispersions. Taken together
with the observed decrease in toxicity, it is possible to hypothesize that higher particle size
and/or agglomeration could be correlated with increased Daphnia toxicity.
The empirical rule of thumb established by Arvidsson et al (2020) that with an added
concentration of NOM between 1-10 mg/L, an increase of EC50 values with a factor of
1-10, could not be supported in all cases of the perovskite toxicity of the present study
[35]. Even though many of the potential mechanisms have been presented and discussed
above, it remains largely impossible to predict the impact of SR-NOM and the formation of
eco-corona on the toxicity of perovskites as the complexity of various influencing factors
[37, 35]. The findings in which both reductions and enhancement of the toxicity of metal
nanomaterials have been documented, are representative of the current state of knowl-
edge. In the case of perovskites, a relatively frequent increase in toxicity in the presence of
SR-NOM has been observed in 50% of the compounds studied, towards the more sensitive
==PAGE:58==
46
Chapter 5. Discussion
species R. subcapitata. These finding suggest that the toxicity strongly depends on complex
environmental conditions.
In order to better assess the influence of the formation of eco-corona on aggregation and
toxicity behavior, it is recommended in subsequent studies on the perovskite materials
to: 1. separate free organic matter from the eco-corona by centrifugation 2. measure
zeta potential also in the dispersions with SR-NOM 3. conduct chronic toxicity tests with
SR-NOM as the interaction of SR-NOM with dissolved compounds is known to be time-
dependent and influences toxic effects [42] In regards to safety assessments and regula-
tions, EC50 values generated in aquatic toxicity tests without the presence of NOM should
be used, and communicated, as it will result in a more conservative, but not overly con-
servative, safety assessments [35].
==PAGE:59==
47
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The aim of this case study was to provide data on the behavior of perovskites in aquatic
environments and their ecotoxicity to key freshwater species. The majority of the studied
perovskite dispersions were very polydisperse, unstable in dispersion, and exhibit ag-
glomeration and sedimentation processes over the 24-hour measuring period. LaCoNi(5)
showed the lowest trend of agglomeration and the least behavioral impact from media
characteristics or SR-NOM on agglomeration and sedimentation processes. The addition
of SR-NOM resulted in smaller agglomerates and a slower sedimentation rate, which con-
sequently increased dispersion stability.
The dissolution of both nickel and cobalt was observed for all perovskite materials, and
the release of metal ions from perovskite materials was relatively low with a maximum of
25 % leachable mass over 24 hours. Thereby, a ranking (highest to lowest) of LaNi > La-
CoNi > LaCoNi(16) > LaCoNi(5) could be defined for the leaching of nickel ions for both
media, confirming that increasing ionic strength did not lead to more dissolution in the
observed perovskite dispersions. For the majority of perovskite materials in dispersion
the addition of SR-NOM reduced the release of Nickel and Cobalt ions.
The toxicity of the perovskites towards R. subcapitata could be ranked as LaNi > LaCoNi(16)
> [LaCoNi, LaCoNi(5), LaCoNiPd, LaCoNiPt], where the dominating toxic mode of action
was identified as the release of nickel ions. However a markedly lower sensitivity was
observed towards D. magna , where the toxicity could be ranked as LaCoNi > LaCoNiPd
> LaNi > [LaCoNi(16), LaCoNi(5), LaCoNiPt]. The release of nickel ions was identified to
play a subordinate role in the toxic mode of action towards D. magna.
In conclusion, among the perovskite materials investigated for potential use as a three-way
catalyst, LaCoNi(5) can be considered the least harmful material for the aquatic environ-
ment. This conclusion is drawn based on a comprehensive evaluation of its behavior in
aquatic environment. LaCoNi(5) shows the highest tendency of dispersion stability, the
lowest trend of agglomeration and the lowest freshwater ecotoxicity towards R. subcapi-
tata and D. magna.
Even as the least harmful of the investigated perovskites, LaCoNi(5) still displays a clear
pattern of aquatic ecotoxicity. With the application of perovskites as catalysts in the auto-
motive industry being one potential major use case, this would entail the release of large
quantities of these materials into the environment, which is already polluted with high
levels of heavy metals. Therefore, serious thought should be given to the question if the
benefits of the applications of the investigated AdMs can even come close to matching the
potential hazardous effects on ecosystem health. This study provides data and a baseline
for such discussions in the context of SSbD prior to a large-scale introduction of the ma-
terials. Furthermore, an approach for the safe and responsible handling during research
and development was introduced. Although the leaching of nickel and the toxicity of
the investigated AdMs is lower than for other metal-based nanomaterials, the currently
available data does not allow for definite conclusions about their safety and sustainability.
Instead, this work should be followed up by further studies, as elaborated in detail above.
==PAGE:60==
==PAGE:61==
49
Bibliography
[1]
A. Mech, S. Gottardo, V. Amenta, A. Amodio, S. Belz, S. Bøwadt, J. Drbohlavová,
L. Farcal, P. Jantunen, A. Małyska, K. Rasmussen, J. Riego Sintes, and H. Rauscher.
Safe- and sustainable-by-design: The case of Smart Nanomaterials. A perspective
based on a European workshop. In: Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology. Vol. 128.
Academic Press Inc., Feb. 2022, p. 105093.
[2]
S. N. Sørensen. Aquatic toxicity testing for hazard identification of engineered nanopar-
ticles. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark DTU Environment, 2016.
[3]
V. Di Battista, K. Werle, L. M. Skjolding, A. Baun, and W. Wohlleben. Behaviour of
Advanced Materials in environmental aquatic media - Dissolution kinetic and dis-
persion stability of metal-containing perovskites for the automotive catalysis sector.
In: unpublished (2023).
[4]
L. M. Skjolding, S. N. Sørensen, N. B. Hartmann, R. Hjorth, S. F. Hansen, and A.
Baun. Aquatische Ökotoxizität von Nanopartikeln - Versuche zur Aufklärung von
Nanopartikeleffekten. In: Angewandte Chemie 55 (Dec. 2016), pp. 15224–15239.
[5]
European Commission. Nanomaterials in REACH and CLP - Environment - European
Commission. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/environment/chemicals/nanotech/
reach-clp/index_en.htm.
[6]
K. Vineet, P. Guleria, S. Ranajan, N. Dasgupta, and E. Lichtfouse. Nanotoxicology and
Nanoecotoxicology Vol. 1. Vol. 59. Springer, 2021.
[7]
European Union. DAMADEI Design and Advanced Materials As a Driver of European
Innovation. Tech. rep. 2013. URL: www.damadei.eu.
[8]
A. Kennedy, J. Brame, T. Rycroft, M. Wood, V. Zemba, C. Weiss, M. Hull, C. Hill, C.
Geraci, and I. Linkov. A Definition and Categorization System for Advanced Mate-
rials: The Foundation for Risk-Informed Environmental Health and Safety Testing
HHS Public Access. In: Risk Anal 39.8 (2019), pp. 1783–1795.
[9]
Home | Nanotechnology Products Database | NPD. URL: https://product.statnano.
com/.
[10]
Nanodatabase. 2013. URL: https://nanodb.dk/.
[11]
Allied Market Research. Nanotechnology Market Size, Share and Analysis | Forecast -
2030. URL: https://www.alliedmarketresearch.com/nanotechnology-market.
[12]
K. M. Islam, J. Hildenbrand, and M. M. Hossain. Life cycle impacts of three-way
ceramic honeycomb catalytic converter in terms of disability adjusted life year. In:
Journal of Cleaner Production 182 (May 2018), pp. 600–615.
[13]
M. Pinzón, A. Sánchez-Sánchez, A. Romero, A. R. de la Osa, and P. Sánchez. Self-
combustion Ni and Co-based perovskites as catalyst precursors for ammonia de-
composition. Effect of Ce and Mg doping. In: Fuel 323 (Sept. 2022), p. 124384.
[14]
K. Brooks. Perovskite. In: Geology Today 36.1 (2020), pp. 33–38.
==PAGE:62==
50
Bibliography
[15]
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, M. Wang, J. Wang, H. Li, S. Xi, C. Wei, P. Xi, G. E. Sterbinsky, J. W.
Freeland, A. C. Fisher, J. W. Ager, Z. Feng, and Z. J. Xu. Lattice site–dependent metal
leaching in perovskites toward a honeycomb-like water oxidation catalyst. In: Sci-
ence Advances 7.50 (Dec. 2021).
[16]
M. Zang, C. Zhao, Y. Wang, and S. Chen. A review of recent advances in catalytic
combustion of VOCs on perovskite-type catalysts. In: Journal of Saudi Chemical Society
23.6 (Sept. 2019), pp. 645–654.
[17]
M. Mohan. Perovskite photovoltaics. In: Perovskite Photovoltaics: Basic to Advanced
Concepts and Implementation (Jan. 2018), pp. 447–480.
[18]
J. I. Kwak, L. Kim, T. Y. Lee, G. Panthi, S. W. Jeong, S. Han, H. Chae, and Y. J. An.
Comparative toxicity of potential leachates from perovskite and silicon solar cells in
aquatic ecosystems. In: Aquatic Toxicology 237 (Aug. 2021), p. 105900.
[19]
Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart | Photovoltaic Research | NREL. URL: https://www.
nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.
[20]
H. Tanaka, M. Uenishi, M. Taniguchi, I. Tan, K. Narita, M. Kimura, K. Kaneko, Y.
Nishihata, and J. Mizuki. The intelligent catalyst having the self-regenerative func-
tion of Pd, Rh and Pt for automotive emissions control. In: Catalysis Today 117.1-3
(Sept. 2006), pp. 321–328.
[21]
M. Pinzón, A. Sánchez-Sánchez, P. Sánchez, A. R. de la Osa, and A. Romero. Ammo-
nia as a carrier for hydrogen production by using lanthanum based perovskites. In:
Energy Conversion and Management 246 (Oct. 2021), p. 114681.
[22]
S. Podila, H. Driss, A. M. Ali, A. A. Al-Zahrani, and M. A. Daous. Influence of Ce
substitution in LaMO3 (M = Co/Ni) perovskites for COx-free hydrogen produc-
tion from ammonia decomposition. In: Arabian Journal of Chemistry 15.1 (Jan. 2022),
p. 103547.
[23]
J. K. Biswas, M. Rai, A. P. Ingle, M. Mondal, and S. Biswas. Nano-bio Interactions
and Ecotoxicity in Aquatic Environment: Plenty of Room at the Bottom but Tyranny
at the Top! In: Nanomaterials: Ecotoxicity, and Public Perception. 2018. Chap. 2.
[24]
N. I. B. Hartmann, L. M. Skjolding, S. F. Hansen, A. Baun, J. Kjølholt, and F. Gottschalk.
Environmental fate and behaviour of nanomaterials : new knowledge on important
transformation processes. In: Environmental Protection Agency. Environmental Project
No. 1594 (2014).
[25]
F. Abdolahpur Monikh, Z. Guo, P. Zhang, M. G. Vijver, I. Lynch, E. Valsami-Jones,
and W. J. Peijnenburg. An analytical workflow for dynamic characterization and
quantification of metal-bearing nanomaterials in biological matrices. In: Nature Pro-
tocols 17.9 (Sept. 2022), pp. 1926–1952. ISSN: 17502799.
[26]
R. D. Kent and P. J. Vikesland. Controlled Evaluation of Silver Nanoparticle Disso-
lution Using Atomic Force Microscopy. In: Environmental Science and Technology 46
(2012), pp. 6977–6984.
[27]
E. Demir. A review on nanotoxicity and nanogenotoxicity of different shapes of
nanomaterials. In: Journal of Applied Toxicology 41.1 (Jan. 2021), pp. 118–147.
[28]
S. K. Misra, A. Dybowska, D. Berhanu, S. N. Luoma, and E. Valsami-Jones. The com-
plexity of nanoparticle dissolution and its importance in nanotoxicological studies.
In: Science of The Total Environment 438 (2012), pp. 225–232.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
51
[29]
A. P. Gondikas, A. Morris, B. C. Reinsch, S. M. Marinakos, G. V. Lowry, and H. Hsu-
Kim. Cysteine-induced modifications of zero-valent silver nanomaterials: Implica-
tions for particle surface chemistry, aggregation, dissolution, and silver speciation.
In: Environmental Science and Technology 46.13 (July 2012), pp. 7037–7045.
[30]
D. Cupi, N. B. Hartmann, and A. Baun. Influence of pH and media composition on
suspension stability of silver, zinc oxide, and titanium dioxide nanoparticles and im-
mobilization of Daphnia magna under guideline testing conditions. In: Ecotoxicology
and Environmental Safety 127 (May 2016), pp. 144–152.
[31]
S. N. Sorensen and A. Baun. Controlling silver nanoparticle exposure in algal toxicity
testing-A matter of timing. In: Nanotoxicology 9.2 (Mar. 2015), pp. 201–209.
[32]
A. Philippe and G. E. Schaumann. Interactions of dissolved organic matter with natural
and engineered inorganic colloids: A review. Aug. 2014.
[33]
J. T. Quik, J. A. Vonk, S. F. Hansen, A. Baun, and D. Van De Meent. How to assess
exposure of aquatic organisms to manufactured nanoparticles? In: Environment In-
ternational 37.6 (Aug. 2011), pp. 1068–1077.
[34]
T. M. Riddick. Control of Colloid Stability Through Zeta Potential: With a Closing Chapter
on Its Relationship to Cardiovascular Disease. 1968.
[35]
R. Arvidsson, S. F. Hansen, and A. Baun. Influence of natural organic matter on the
aquatic ecotoxicity of engineered nanoparticles: Recommendations for environmen-
tal risk assessment. In: NanoImpact 20 (Oct. 2020). ISSN: 24520748.
[36]
F. Nasser, J. Constantinou, and I. Lynch. Nanomaterials in the Environment Acquire
an “Eco-Corona” Impacting their Toxicity to Daphnia Magna—a Call for Updating
Toxicity Testing Policies. In: PROTEOMICS 20.9 (May 2020), p. 1800412.
[37]
X. Wang, D. Liang, Y. Wang, W. J. G. M. Peijnenburg, F. A. Monikh, X. Zhao, Z. Dong,
and W. Fan. A critical review on the biological impact of natural organic matter
on nanomaterials in the aquatic environment Open Access †. In: Carbon Research 1
(2022).
[38]
Y. Wang, C. Lei, and D. Lin. Environmental Behaviors and Biological Effects of En-
gineered Nanomaterials: Important Roles of Interfacial Interactions and Dissolved
Organic Matter. In: Chinese Journal of Chemistry 39.2 (Feb. 2021), pp. 232–242.
[39]
W.-C. Hou, B. Stuart, R. Howes, and R. G. Zepp. Sunlight-Driven Reduction of Silver
Ions by Natural Organic Matter: Formation and Transformation of Silver Nanopar-
ticles. In: (2013).
[40]
L.-J. A. Ellis, E. Valsami-Jones, J. R. Lead, and M. Baalousha. Impact of surface coat-
ing and environmental conditions on the fate and transport of silver nanoparticles
in the aquatic environment. In: Science of Total Environment 568 (2016), pp. 95–106.
[41]
L. Wang and X. Tan. Ecotoxicology of heavy metals in aquatic environments: mech-
anisms, bioavailability, and ecological risk assessment. In: Ecotoxicology and Environ-
mental Safety 140 (2017), pp. 83–94.
[42]
D. Cupi, N. B. Hartmann, and A. Baun. The influence of natural organic matter and
aging on suspension stability in guideline toxicity testing of silver, zinc oxide, and
titanium dioxide nanoparticles with Daphnia magna. In: Environmental Toxicology
and Chemistry 34.3 (Mar. 2015), pp. 497–506.
[43]
P. A. Neale, Å. K. Jämting, E. O’Malley, J. Herrmann, and B. I. Escher. Behaviour of
titanium dioxide and zinc oxide nanoparticles in the presence of wastewater-derived
organic matter and implications for algal toxicity. In: Environmental Science: Nano 2.1
(Feb. 2015), pp. 86–93.
==PAGE:64==
52
Bibliography
[44]
Z. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Zhao, and B. Xing. Environmental processes and toxicity of
metallic nanoparticles in aquatic systems as affected by natural organic matter. In:
Environmental Science: Nano 3 (2016), pp. 240–255.
[45]
D. W. Connell. Basic concepts of environmental chemistry. CRC/Taylor & Francis, 2005,
p. 462.
[46]
Y.-W. Baek and Y.-J. An. Microbial toxicity of metal oxide nanoparticles (CuO, NiO,
ZnO, and Sb 2 O 3 ) to Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, and Streptococcus aureus.
In: Science of The Total Environment 409 (2011), pp. 1603–1608.
[47]
A. Kahru and H. C. Dubourguier. From ecotoxicology to nanoecotoxicology. Mar. 2010.
[48]
R. D. Handy, F. Von Der Kammer, J. R. Lead, M. Hassellöv, R. Owen, and M. Crane.
The ecotoxicology and chemistry of manufactured nanoparticles. In: Ecotoxicology
17.4 (May 2008), pp. 287–314.
[49]
V. Aruoja, H. C. Dubourguier, K. Kasemets, and A. Kahru. Toxicity of nanoparticles
of CuO, ZnO and TiO2 to microalgae Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata. In: Science of
The Total Environment 407.4 (Feb. 2009), pp. 1461–1468. ISSN: 0048-9697.
[50]
V. Kumar, P. Guleria, S. Ranjan, N. Dasgupta, and E. Lichtfouse. Nanotoxicology and
Nanoecotoxicology Vol.2. Vol. 67. 2021.
[51]
SCENIHR. Opinion on Nanotechnologies. 2006. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/health/
scientific_committees/opinions_layman/en/nanotechnologies/index.htm#
il1.
[52]
M. Heinlaan, A. Ivask, I. Blinova, H.-C. Dubourguier, and A. Kahru. Toxicity of
nanosized and bulk ZnO, CuO and TiO2 to bacteria Vibrio fischeri and crustaceans
Daphnia magna and Thamnocephalus platyurus. In: Chemosphere 71.7 (2008), pp. 1308–
1316.
[53]
J. S. Meyer, T. Lyons-Darden, E. R. Garman, E. T. Middleton, and C. E. Schlekat.
Toxicity of Nanoparticulate Nickel to Aquatic Organisms: Review and Recommendations
for Improvement of Toxicity Tests. Oct. 2020.
[54]
K. V. Brix, C. E. Schlekat, and E. R. Garman. The mechanisms of nickel toxicity in aquatic
environments: An adverse outcome pathway analysis. May 2017.
[55]
Z. Xin, Z. Wenchao, Y. Zhenguang, H. Yiguo, L. Zhengtao, Y. Xianliang, W. Xiaonan,
L. Tingting, and Z. Liming. Species sensitivity analysis of heavy metals to freshwater
organisms. In: Ecotoxicology 24.7-8 (Oct. 2015), pp. 1621–1631.
[56]
Overview of REACH information requirements and available methods - ECHA. URL: https:
//euon.echa.europa.eu/de/reach-test-methods-for-nanomaterials.
[57]
World Health Organization (WHO). Nickel in drinking-water Background document for
development of WHO Guidelines for drinking water quality. Tech. rep. 2021.
[58]
R. J. Griffitt, J. Luo, J. Gao, J. C. Bonzongo, and D. S. Barber. Effects of particle com-
position and species on toxicity of metallic nanomaterials in aquatic organisms. In:
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 27.9 (Sept. 2008), pp. 1972–1978.
[59]
P. Oleszczuk, J. Izabela, and E. Skwarek. Surfactants decrease the toxicity of ZnO,
TiO 2 and Ni nanoparticles to Daphnia magna. In: Ecotoxicology 24 (2015), pp. 1923–
1932.
[60]
T. Morgaleva, Y. Morgalev, I. Gosteva, and S. Morgalev. Research of nickel nanopar-
ticles toxicity with use of Aquatic Organisms. In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Sci-
ence and Engineering 98.1 (Nov. 2015).
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
53
[61]
N. J. Niemuth, B. J. Curtis, M. N. Hang, M. J. Gallagher, D. H. Fairbrother, R. J.
Hamers, and R. D. Klaper. Next-Generation Complex Metal Oxide Nanomaterials
Negatively Impact Growth and Development in the Benthic Invertebrate Chirono-
mus riparius upon Settling. In: Environmental Science and TechnologyTechnology 53
(2019), pp. 3860–3870.
[62]
ISO. ISO 8692 Water quality - Fresh water algal growth inhibition test with unicellular
green algae. Tech. rep. 2012.
[63]
OECD. OECD/OCDE 202 - OECD Guideline for testing of chemicals. Tech. rep. 2004.
[64]
OECD. GD318: Guidance document for the testing of dissolution and dispersion stability
of nanomaterials and the use of the data for further enviornmental testing and assessment
strategies Series on Testing and Assessment No. 318. Tech. rep. 2020.
[65]
L. M. Skjolding, S. Kruse, S. N. Sørensen, R. Hjorth, and A. Baun. A Small-Scale
Setup for Algal Toxicity Testing of Nanomaterials and Other Difficult Substances.
In: JoVE (2020).
[66]
European Chemical Bureau. European Union Risk Assessment Report: chromium triox-
ide, sodium chromate, sodium dichromate, ammonium dichromate and potassium dichro-
mate. 2005. URL: https://echa.europa.eu/registration-dossier/-/registered-
dossier/15102/6/2/4.
[67]
OECD. OECD/OCDE 201 - OECD Guideline for testing of chemicals. Tech. rep. 2006.
[68]
C. Ritz, F. Baty, J. C. Streibig, and D. Gerhard. Dose-response analysis using R. In:
PLoS ONE 10.12 (2015), pp. 1–13.
[69]
Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) - Definition & Terms | Malvern Panalytical. URL: https:
//www.malvernpanalytical.com/en/learn/knowledge- center/whitepapers/
wp111214dlstermsdefined.
[70]
L. Miao, C. Wang, J. Hou, P. Wang, Y. Ao, Y. Li, B. Lv, Y. Yang, G. You, and Y. Xu. Ef-
fect of alginate on the aggregation kinetics of copper oxide nanoparticles (CuO NPs):
bridging interaction and hetero-aggregation induced by Ca2+. In: Environmental Sci-
ence and Pollution Research 23.12 (June 2016), pp. 11611–11619.
[71]
S.-W. Bian, I. A. Mudunkotuwa, T. Rupasinghe, and V. H. Grassian. Aggregation
and Dissolution of 4 nm ZnO Nanoparticles in Aqueous Environments: Influence
of pH, Ionic Strength, Size, and Adsorption of Humic Acid. In: Langmuir 27 (2011),
pp. 6059–6068.
[72]
A. Baun, N. Hartmann, K. Grieger, and K. O. Kusk. Ecotoxicity of engineered nanopar-
ticles to aquatic invertebrates: a brief review and recommendations for future toxic-
ity testing. In: Ecotoxicology 17 (2008), pp. 387–395.
[73]
A. Baun, N. Nyholm, and K. O. Kusk. Environmental Risk Assessment of Chemicals.
Tech. rep. Technicla University Demnark Department of Environmental Engineer-
ing, 2017.
[74]
C. A. Sousa, H. M. Soares, and E. V. Soares. Toxic effects of nickel oxide (NiO)
nanoparticles on the freshwater alga Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata. In: Aquatic
Toxicology 204 (Nov. 2018), pp. 80–90.
[75]
V. Nogueira, I. Lopes, T. A. Rocha-Santos, M. G. Rasteiro, N. Abrantes, F. Gonçalves,
A. M. Soares, A. C. Duarte, and R. Pereira. Assessing the ecotoxicity of metal nano-
oxides with potential for wastewater treatment. In: Environmental Science and Pollu-
tion Research 22.17 (May 2015), pp. 13212–13224.
==PAGE:66==
54
Bibliography
[76]
J. Bozich, M. Hang, R. Hamers, and R. Klaper. Core chemistry influences the toxic-
ity of multicomponent metal oxide nanomaterials, lithium nickel manganese cobalt
oxide, and lithium cobalt oxide to Daphnia magna. In: Environmental Toxicology and
Chemistry 36.9 (Sept. 2017), pp. 2493–2502.
[77]
L. M. Skjolding, K. Kern, R. Hjorth, N. Hartmann, S. Overgaard, G. Ma, J. G. Veinot,
and A. Baun. Uptake and depuration of gold nanoparticles in Daphnia magna. In:
Ecotoxicology 23.7 (2014), pp. 1172–1183.
[78]
K. Hund-Rinke, A. Baun, D. Cupi, T. F. Fernandes, R. Handy, J. H. Kinross, J. M.
Navas, W. Peijnenburg, K. Schlich, B. J. Shaw, and J. J. Scott-Fordsmand. Regulatory
ecotoxicity testing of nanomaterials-proposed modifications of OECD test guide-
lines based on laboratory experience with silver and titanium dioxide nanoparticles
Regulatory ecotoxicity testing of nanomaterials-proposed modifications of OECD
tes. In: Nanotoxicology 10.10 (2016), pp. 1442–1447.
[79]
M. Li, D. Lin, and L. Zhu. Effects of water chemistry on the dissolution of ZnO
nanoparticles and their toxicity to Escherichia coli. In: Environmental Pollution 173
(Feb. 2013), pp. 97–102.
[80]
N. Janes and R. C. Playle. Modeling silver binding to gills of rainbow trout (On-
corhynchus mykiss). In: Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 14.11 (Nov. 1995),
pp. 1847–1858.
==PAGE:67==
55
Appendix A
Potassium Dichromate as reference
compound and validity criteria for
algal growth inhibition- and crustacea
immobilization tests
Short-term toxicity tests were performed using Potassium Dichromate (K2Cr2O7). Thereby,
algal growth inhibition tests were performed with R. subcapitata and acute immobilization
tests were performed with D. magna, as these are the tests species in the subsequent study
with perovskite nanomaterials. All tests were performed according to standards of Organ-
isation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) according to the test guide-
lines TG OECD 201, (2006) for fresh water algae and TG OECD 202,(2004) for Daphnia.
For R. subcapitata almost all validation criteria were fulfilled (see TABLE A.1). The average
growth rate of the controls was 1.16 d−1, which meets the requirement of a growth rate
greater than 0.92 d−1. The coefficient of variation was with 11% above the demanded 7%,
but was evaluated as acceptable for this testing. Additionally, the obtained EC50 value of
1.39 mg/L, accompanied by a 95% confidence interval of [1.22; 1.56], fell within the EC50
range of the current laboratory at DTU Sustain when testing the same strain of freshwater
algae on a regular base. For the test with D. magna, all validation criteria were fulfilled (see
TABLE A.1). Less than 10% of the organisms did show signs of immobilization, disease or
stress in the controls and dissolved oxygen concentration was in the valid range. Further-
more the yielded EC50 values of 0.41 mg/L with 95% confidence intervals of [0.37; 0.45]
fell within the EC50 range of the current laboratory at DTU Sustain when testing the same
strain of freshwater algae on a regular base.
(A) 72h dose-response curve for growth inhibition test
on p. subcapitata with K2Cr2O7
(B) 48h dose-response curve for immobilisation test
on d. magna with K2Cr2O7
==PAGE:68==
56
Appendix A. Potassium Dichromate as reference compound and validity criteria for
algal growth inhibition- and crustacea immobilization tests
TABLE A.1: Validity criteria for R. subcapitata and D. magna. for Potassium
Dichromate
Reference
substance
Test Organism
pH
t0
pH
t48/t72
Mean growth
rate [d-1]
(0-48h)
Mean growth
rate [d-1]
(0-72h)
% dead
animals
(0-24h)
% dead
animals
(0-48h)
SD ±
(48h/72h)
Mean CV
(48h/72h)
Controls
K2Cr2O7
R. subcapitata
7.91
7.66
1.51
1.16
0.13
0.11
D. magna
8.2
7.83
0
0
0
0
TABLE A.2: Validity criteria fresh water algal growth inhibition test with
unicellular green algae p. subcapitata [62]
AdM
Mean growth rate [d-1]
(0 - 48 hours)
Mean growth rate [d-1]
(0 - 72 hours)
SD ±
(72h)
Mean CV
(72h)
Controls
LaNi
1.23
1.21
0.08
0.07
LaNi+NOM
0.93
0.82
0.06
0.08
LaCoNi(16)
1.24
1.12
0.05
0.04
LaCoNi(16)+NOM
1.24
0.89
0.11
0.12
LaCoNi
ND
1.04
0.05
0.05
LaCoNi +NOM
0.88
0.74
0.09
0.12
LaCoNi(5)
1.24
1.07
0.09
0.08
LaCoNi(5) + NOM
0.95
0.92
0.15
0.17
LaCoNi_Pd
ND
0.85
0.12
0.14
LaCoNi_Pd+NOM
0.91
1.03
0.18
0.17
LaCoNi_Pt
ND
0.99
0.12
0.12
LaCoNi_Pt + NOM
0.72
1.03
0.3
0.29
==PAGE:69==
57
Appendix B
Appendix B -
Agglomeration/sedimentation and
Dissolution test results
==PAGE:70==
58 Appendix B. Appendix B - Agglomeration/sedimentation and Dissolution test results
TABLE B.1: Particle number, size and PDI zeta potential measured by DLS
for LaNi suspended in ISO algal and Elendt M7 medium (10 mg/L) over a
measuring period of 24 hours with and without addition of 10 mg/L SR-
NOM
LaNi
Suspension with
10mg/L nominal
concentration
Measuring
time
[h]
Derived
particle
number
[kcps]
z-avg
[d.nm]
Mean
Fluc.
PDI
Mean
Fluc.
z-potential [mV]
M7 medium
0
11485
1094
3556
2602
0.4
0.9
0.18
-7.02 ± 0.16
0.5
10940
1276
0.3
N.D
1
7131
1406
0.2
2
1296
1210
0.6
4
1477
1788
0.6
6
3591
2786
0.8
24
N.D
N.D
N.D
-0.24 ± 1.00
M7 medium
+ SR-NOM
0
5583
1034
763
125.3
0.7
0.6
0.07
N.D
0.5
5386
884.1
0.6
1
719.4
848.5
0.6
2
5084
842.6
0.6
4
312.0
654.8
0.6
6
286.0
760.3
0.7
24
520.9
827
0.6
ISO8692 medium
0
7048
846.5
3790
4124
0.4
0.7
0.27
-0.12± 0.11
0.5
6755
969.6
0.4
N.D
1
7556
1119
0.4
2
1044
826.3
0.2
4
2134
1595
0.4
6
1053
3028
1.0
24
279.6
2630
0.1
-0.03 ± 0.03
ISO8692 medium
+ SR-NOM
0
6194
1309
3728
1390
0.7
0.9
0.12
N.D
0.5
5775
1414
0.6
1
3870
1525
0.6
2
1083
1763
0.8
4
962.1
3002
1.0
6
642.9
3061
1.0
24
256.5
4773
1.0
Fluc. = Fluctuation
==PAGE:71==
Appendix B. Appendix B - Agglomeration/sedimentation and Dissolution test results 59
TABLE B.2: Particle number, size, PDI and zeta potential measured by DLS
for LaCoNi(16) suspended in ISO algal and Elendt M7 medium (10 mg/L)
over a measuring period of 24 hours with and without addition of 10 mg/L
SR-NOM
LaCoNi(16)
Suspension with
10mg/L nominal
concentration
Measuring
time
[h]
Derived
particle
number
[kcps]
z-avg
[d.nm]
Mean
Fluc.
PDI
Mean
Fluc.
z-potential [mV]
M7 medium
0
12496
2120
2817
1741
1.0
0.9
0.13
-5.89 ± 0.22
0.5
3459
907.6
0.5
N.D
1
1461
1438
1.0
2
2112
1387
0.9
4
1685
2013
1.0
6
481.8
1427
0.8
24
189.9
3232
1.0
-62.6 ± 5.52
M7 medium
+ SR-NOM
0
10.00
1054
693
76.63
0.8
0.6
0.05
N.D
0.5
4177
752.5
0.5
1
4244
745.7
0.6
2
1062
568.3
0.5
4
716.2
649.1
0.6
6
448.8
753.3
0.6
24
877.6
771.6
0.6
ISO8692 medium
0
6504
8529
4157
2122
1.0
0.9
0.18
-0.03 ± 0.03
0.5
582.2
1116
0.2
N.D
1
3713
7287
1.0
2
983.7
2921
1.0
4
119.7
3655
1.0
6
70.80
3667
1.0
24
274.9
5591
1.0
-5.91 ± 0.59
ISO8692 medium
+ SR-NOM
0
6552
764.8
493
58.85
0.6
0.4
0.04
N.D
0.5
5679
630.6
0.4
1
1967
475.1
0.4
2
1648
498.9
0.4
4
1634
479.1
0.4
6
1400
480.7
0.4
24
1729
491.6
0.4
Fluc. = Fluctuation
==PAGE:72==
60 Appendix B. Appendix B - Agglomeration/sedimentation and Dissolution test results
TABLE B.3: Particle number, size, PDI and zeta potential measured by DLS
for LaCoNi suspended in ISO algal and Elendt M7 medium (10 mg/L) over
a measuring period of 24 hours with and without addition of 10 mg/L SR-
NOM
LaCoNi
Suspension with
10mg/L nominal
concentration
Measuring
time
[h]
Derived
particle
number
[kcps]
z-avg
[d.nm]
Mean
Fluc.
PDI
Mean
Fluc.
z-potential [mV]
M7 medium
0
8284
821.8
3523
5620
0.6
0.9
0.21
-3.13 ± 0.71
0.5
7652
958.6
0.5
N.D
1
1351
731.6
0.1
2
7462
1540
0.9
4
775
2100
1.0
6
3543
2295
0.9
24
708.3
2630
1.0
-1.09 ± 0.28
M7 medium
+ SR-NOM
0
9528
796.3
745.7
75.92
0.4
0.3
0.08
N.D
0.5
7022
707.3
0.3
1
2526
469.2
0.4
2
10133
767.2
0.2
4
5871
719.9
0.4
6
6639
734.8
0.3
24
7721
850
0.4
ISO8692 medium
0
4970
731.6
3422
2047
0.3
0.9
0.22
0.03 ± 0.01
0.5
2599
623
0.3
N.D
1
2119
786.4
0.4
2
1942
1562
0.6
4
5005
1981
0.8
6
782
1854
1.0
24
2764
7047
0.8
-3.77 ± 0.86
ISO8692 medium
+ SR-NOM
0
6791
1346
785.9
279.7
0.9
0.6
0.15
N.D
0.5
5976
1225
0.7
1
1404
1130
0.8
2
889.6
933.7
0.7
4
847.2
937.1
0.6
6
639.5
1106
0.8
24
1077
1148
0.8
Fluc. = Fluctuation
==PAGE:73==
Appendix B. Appendix B - Agglomeration/sedimentation and Dissolution test results 61
TABLE B.4: Particle number, size, PDI and zeta potential measured by DLS
for LaCoNi(5) suspended in ISO algal and Elendt M7 medium (10 mg/L)
over a measuring period of 24 hours with and without addition of 10 mg/L
SR-NOM
LaCoNi(5)
Suspension with
10mg/L nominal
concentration
Measuring
time
[h]
Derived
particle
number
[kcps]
z-avg
[d.nm]
Mean
Fluc.
PDI
Mean
Fluc.
z-potential [mV]
M7 medium
0
13490
1437
1570
613.6
0.4
0.3
0.18
-9.15 ± 3.05
0.5
10993
1311
0.3
N.D
1
12895
2409
0.3
2
6073
1166
0.6
4
5454
1042
0.2
6
3795
1274
0.4
24
N.D
N.D.
N.D
-10.5 ± 2.48
M7 medium
+ SR-NOM
0
4273
1246
761
105.4
0.9
0.6
0.06
N.D
0.5
4263
996.7
0.7
1
2065
775.6
0.6
2
1243
722.6
0.6
4
766.4
785.9
0.6
6
594.1
667.2
0.6
24
1190
841.5
0.6
ISO8692 medium
0
3559
489.2
592
102.9
0.4
0.5
0.08
-17.0 ± 1.34
0.5
4448
609.8
0.5
N.D
1
3471
636.6
0.5
2
3544
535.9
0.5
4
2052
505.8
0.5
6
1594
477.1
0.4
24
1660
630.3
0.5
-19 ± 0.35
ISO8692 medium
+ SR-NOM
0
3606
1117
526
94.34
0.9
0.5
0.06
N.D
0.5
3238
528
0.4
1
2650
524.2
0.4
2
1378
471.3
0.4
4
924.3
485.6
0.5
6
707.6
454.9
0.4
24
1591
503.9
0.4
Fluc. = Fluctuation
==PAGE:74==
62 Appendix B. Appendix B - Agglomeration/sedimentation and Dissolution test results
TABLE B.5: Relative percentage of dissolved metal ions nickel and cobalt
comparing the influence of 10 mg/L SR-NOM
Relative percentage of dissolved nickel and cobalt ions over 24 hours [%]
Nickel
Cobalt
Nickel
Cobalt
time [h]
algae medium
SR-NOM
algae medium
SR-NOM
M7 medium
SR-NOM
M7 medium
SR-NOM
LaNi
10 mg/L
0.5
4.11
1.03
0.73
0.29
1
6.56
1.40
1.42
0.44
2
11.3
2.25
3.53
0.47
4
16.1
4.18
6.45
0.83
6
19.3
5.20
7.02
0.69
24
22.3
16.0
9.26
1.90
LaCoNi(16)
10 mg/L
0.5
1.26
0.54
0.50
0.28
0.80
0.29
0.40
0.17
1
1.02
0.68
0.69
0.36
1.18
0.44
0.58
0.21
2
1.77
1.15
1.09
0.70
1.98
0.54
0.93
0.27
4
3.07
1.42
2.02
0.96
3.40
0.81
1.75
0.38
6
3.48
1.82
2.26
1.20
4.47
0.82
2.44
0.46
24
6.42
3.62
4.45
2.80
6.21
1.82
3.76
1.15
LaCoNi
10 mg/L
0.5
1.99
1.19
1.20
0.74
1.11
0.36
0.48
0.15
1
3.09
1.68
1.69
1.03
1.98
0.46
0.86
0.20
2
4.44
2.47
2.40
1.46
2.52
0.51
1.23
0.24
4
6.10
3.28
3.33
2.29
5.08
0.74
2.48
0.37
6
7.19
4.14
3.91
2.88
4.52
0.96
2.67
0.43
24
12.8
8.03
7.75
6.25
6.74
2.24
4.42
1.32
LaCoNi(5)
10 mg/L
0.5
b.d.
0.02
0.11
0.12
0.06
b.d.
0.11
0.06
1
b.d.
0.09
0.08
0.14
0.18
0.10
0.15
0.08
2
b.d.
0.12
0.10
0.16
0.10
0.36
0.20
0.11
4
b.d.
0.27
0.13
0.20
0.35
0.36
0.30
0.14
6
0.07
0.34
0.12
0.26
0.39
0.25
0.40
0.18
24
b.d.
0.88
0.14
0.44
0.93
0.74
0.85
0.36
b.d. = below detection limit by substraction from blank correction
TABLE B.6: Relative percentage of the dissolved nickel and cobalt ions in
ISO medium over a period of 72 hours comparing the influence of 10 mg/L
SR-NOM
Relative percentage of the dissolved nickel and cobalt ions over 72 hours [%]
Nickel
Cobalt
ISO medium
recovery
[%]
ISO +
SR-NOM
recovery
[%]
ISO medium
recovery
[%]
ISO +
SR-NOM
recovery
[%]
time [h]
LaNi
10 mg/L
0.5
2.56
80.7
0.66
83.5
24
21.1
66.3
10.6
54.0
48
27.6
68.9
17.5
70.0
72
31.2
61.7
21.8
57.2
LaCoNi(16)
10 mg/L
0.5
1.06
81.1
0.77
84.3
0.72
85.6
0.52
89.1
24
10.4
29.0
5.05
43.1
7.12
25.6
3.87
44.8
48
8.36
36.2
7.05
43.1
5.65
31.4
5.73
42.8
72
13.3
35.8
7.89
29.2
9.90
30.9
6.77
26.3
LaCoNi
10 mg/L
0.5
1.37
82.1
1.02
76.1
0.91
82.1
0.64
76.1
24
11.5
72.5
5.43
72.5
7.58
71.2
4.57
72.0
48
15.6
73.9
8.44
79.8
10.8
71.2
7.58
80.0
72
18.1
54.2
10.7
51.4
12.7
47.2
9.75
47.4
LaCoNi(5)
10 mg/L
0.5
b.d.
31.9
0.06
33.0
0.23
32.1
0.23
32.9
24
1.30
19.6
0.50
19.6
1.03
22.8
0.59
20.9
48
0.76
13.2
0.60
17.1
1.23
14.1
0.87
17.9
72
0.84
4.24
1.07
13.3
1.29
3.34
1.07
14.0
b.d. = below detection limit by substraction from blank correction
==PAGE:75==
Appendix B. Appendix B - Agglomeration/sedimentation and Dissolution test results 63
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
FIGURE B.1: Relative percentage of the dissolved nickel and cobalt ions at 24 hours in ISO9682 medium, Elendt M7 medium and with
additon of SR-NOM for undoped perovskite materials. Dispersion concentration was 10 mg/L for all tested perovskite materials.
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
65
Appendix C
Appendix C - Toxicity test results
TABLE C.1: Based on dissolution experiment recalculated 10% and 50%
effect concentrations and corresponding 95% confidence intervals for 72h
R.subcapitata growth inhibition test
mgNi/L
mg dissolved Ni/L
EC10 (48h)
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
EC50
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
EC10
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
EC50
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
LaNi(22)
0.06
[-; 0.2]
0.76
[0.25; 1.27]
0.03
[-; 0.11]
0.38
[0.1; 0.66]
LaCoNi(16)
0.33
[-; 0.8]
2.41
[0.93; 3.9]
0.12
[-; 0.3]
0.89
[0.32; 1.46]
LaCoNi
2.26
[1.45; 3.07]
8.27
[2.9; 13.6]
0.74
[0.43; 1.05]
2.95
[0.64; 5.26]
LaCoNi_Pd
2.24
[0; 5.35]
3.26
[2.34; 4.62 ]
N.D
N.D
N.D
N.D
LaCoNi_Pt
1.05
[0.71; 1.24]
2.04
[1.74; 2.34]
N.D
N.D
N.D
N.D
LaCoNi(5)
1.36
[1.09; 1.63]
2.00
[1.82; 2.19]
0.28
[0.22; 0.35]
0.42
[0.38; 0.46]
N.D. = no data as dissolution experiment was carried out with undoped
perovskite materials; cf.i. = 95% confidence interval
TABLE C.2: Based on dissolution experiment recalculated 10% and 50% ef-
fect concentrations and corresponding 95% confidence intervals for 48h D.
magna immobilization test
mgNi/L
mg dissolved Ni /L
EC10
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
EC50
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
EC10
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
EC50
[mg/L]
95% cf.i.
LaNi(22)
52.2
[41.4; 63.0]
85.0
[76.3; 93.7]
0.62
[0.25; 2.00]
4.73
[2.02; 7.43]
LaCoNi(16)
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
LaCoNi
130
[82.5; 178]*
465
[ - ; 1019]*
13.2
[-; 43.3]
5490
[-; 32127]
LaCoNi_Pd
43.3
[16.2; 70.4]
87.7
[63.7; 111.7]
N.D
N.D
N.D
N.D
LaCoNi_Pt
/
/
/
/
N.D
N.D
N.D
N.D
LaCoNi(5)
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
N.D. = no data as dissolution experiment was carried out with undoped
perovskite materials; cf.i. = 95% confidence interval; / = as no toxic effects
could be observed for the whole perovskite materials, no EC50 values could
be recalculated
==PAGE:78==
66
Appendix C. Appendix C - Toxicity test results
TABLE C.3: EC50 values on elemental nano-Ni0 and dissolved nickel from
nanomaterials found in relevant literature
D. magna*/D.pulex°/Ceriodaphnia dubia#
R. subcapitata
Form
of Nickel
EC50
[mgNi/L]
95% cf.i.
Interval
Life stage of organism;
size of material
Ref.
Form
of Nickel
EC50
[mgNi/L]
95% cf.i.
/StdDv
Size of
material
Ref.
nano-Ni0
3.89°
[1.97; 7.43]
adults, 5-20nm
[58]
nano-Ni0
0.35’
/
5-20nm
[58]
10.3*
/
<100 nm
[59]
dissolved Ni
19.64 #
[2.68; 143.84]
neonates, Ni2+ from NiCl2
[58]
dissolved Ni
0.042
± 0.5 x 10-2
Ni2+ from NiCl2
[74]
1.48°
[1.01; 2.19]
adults, Ni2+ from NiCl2
[58]
8.24
[-; 22.13]
NiO, 100nm
[75]
9.74*
[7.73; 11.1]
neonates, NiO, 100nm
[75]
15.2
[14.5; 15.8 ]
NiO, 10-20nm
[75]
9.76*
[8.53; 10.7]
neonates, NiO, 10-20nm
[75]
*,°,# are indicating different species of the same genus (Daphnia); ’ = EC50
value is referring to 96h growth rate inhibition test with R. subcapitata; / =
no data available; StdDv. = Standard deviation; If not indicated differently,
all tests values with crustacea are displayed at 48h, while all tests with algae
are displayed at 72h.
(A) Documentation of carapace-accumulation of per-
ovskite material D.magna (LaCoNi, 24h)
(B) Documentation of gut-accumulation of perovskite
material in D.magna (LaCoNi, 24h)
(C) Documentation of perovskite sedimentation in
M7 medium after 24 hours (LaCoNi)
