==PAGE:1==
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
Master Thesis
DTU BioEngineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
Master Thesis
March, 2023
By
Søren Valentin Nielsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Henrik Dams Allé,
Building 221, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5 months at the Department of Biotechnology and
Biomedicine, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, and micro­
biology.
Søren Valentin Nielsen ­ s164473
Signature
Date
ii
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The soil microbiome is one of the largest reservoirs of bacteria and other microorgan­
ism. Theses are capable of producing a large variety of highly specialized compounds,
called secondary metabolites. Historically these secondary metabolites have predomi­
nantly been thought of as weapons used to keep competitors at bay. However research
has shown that concentration of these compounds are rarely found in sufficient concen­
tration to have antimicrobial effects. Research have shown that these compounds might
instead play a role in inter­species interactions and responses.
This thesis has focused on pyoluteorin, a Pseudomonas protegens produced secondary
metabolite, and its effects on Stenotrophomonas indicatrix. First the effects of pyolute­
orin was investigated for its ability to induce a chemical counter response in S.protegens
resulting in lysis of the producing P. protegens colony. Pyoluteorin was found to play a
role in inducing this phenotype, but it is not solely responsible as the effect was not com­
pletely reproducible. Most likely other unknown factor also have a role to play. Secondly
the inhibitory effects of pyoluteorin was investigated, and the the antimicrobial activity was
determined. The results showed that pyoluteorin functions as an bacteriostatic antibiotic.
Thirdly the transcriptional effects of subinhibitory concentrations of pyoluteorin was in­
vestigated. The results showed significant upregulation of multiple genes with relation to
oxidative stress and DNA repair, even at a concentration at 1/8th of the minimal inhibitory
concentration. Additionally changes in the transcriptome was found that indicate that py­
oluteorin might have a mode of action involving inhibition of protein synthesis. Finally
from the transcriptional changes, a gene cluster with potential involvement in the lysis
phenotype was identified.
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Dansk Resumé
Jordmikrobiomet er et af de største reservoirer af bakterier of andre mikroorganismer .
Disse er i stand til at producere en lang række af forskellige højt specialiserede stoffer,
kaldet sekundere metabolitter. Historisk set er disse blevet anset som et våben, brugt til
at holde konkurrenter stangen. Forskning har dog vist, at koncentrationen af disse stoffer
sjældent når et niveau, hvor de har deres inhibitoriske effekt. I stedet har forskningen vist,
at disse stoffer højst sandsynligt spiller en rolle i inter­species interaktioner og respons.
Denne afhandling har fokuseret på pyoluteorin; en Pseudomonas protegens produceret
sekundær metabolit, samt dens effekt på Stenotrophomonas indicatrix. Først blev ef­
fekten af Pyoluteorin undersøgt for dens evne til at inducere et kemisk modangreb fra
Stenotrophomonas Indicatrix, som resulterer i at den producerende organisme bliver ly­
seret. Det blev vist at pyoluteorin spiller en rolle i at inducerer denne fænotype, men at
den er ikke ene ansvarlig, da effekten ikke var fuldt reproducerbar. Sandsynligvis spiller
andre ukendte faktorer også en rolle her.
Dernæst blev den inhibitoriske effekt af pyoluteorin undersøgt og den antimikrobielle ak­
tivitet blev bestemt. Resultaterne viste at pyoluteorin fungerer som et bakteriostatisk an­
tibiotika. Desuden blev den transskriptionelle effekt af subinhibitoriske koncentrationer
af pyoluteorin undersøgt. Her viste resultaterne signifikant opregulering af flere gener in­
volveret i oxidativ­stress og DNA reparation. Selv ved en 1/8 af den minimum inhibitoriske
koncentration. Desuden, blev der fundet ændringer i transskribtomet, som indikere at py­
oluteorin fungerer ved at blokerer protein syntese. Til sidst blev der fundet en gruppe af
gener som potentielt er involveret i lytiske fænotype.
iv
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest appreciation to Professor Lars Jelsbak for giving me
the opportunity to write my thesis with him at the DTU Department for Biotechnology and
Biomedicin, and for the supervision and support throughout the project.
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Ph.D Morten Lindqvist Hansen.
Thank you for your support in the laboratory and for helping guide me in the right direction
when things did not work out the way we thought they would.
Likewise i would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Ph.D Morten Dencker
Schostag, especially in regards to his help with the bioinformatic analysis for this thesis.
Without his support the thesis would not have been the same.
I would also like to thank the rest of the Microbiome interactions and engineering group.
The last couple of months working on this thesis would not have been as enjoyable and
enlightening without you.
Finally i would like to thank my family, my friends and especially my girlfriend Anja Jensen­
Dahm for the tremendous support you have shown me throughout my education and the
writing of this thesis.
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Dansk Resumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Genus of Pseudomonas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Stenotrophomonas ­ A Relatively Small Genus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Pseudomonas­produced Secondary Metabolites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Hormesis and the Role of Subinhibitory Antibiotic Concentrations . . . . . .
8
1.5
Ecological Effect of Bacteria and their SMs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.6
Deseq2 as an Analytic Tool for RNA Sequencing Data . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.7
Aim of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2
Materials and Methods
14
2.1
Stenotrophomonas indicatrix D763 Soft­agar Overlay Assay . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2
Stenotrophomonas indicatrix D763 Soft­agar Overlay Assay with Pyolute­
orin Chemical Complementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3
MIC Determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4
Time­kill Kinetics to Study the Antibiotic Activity of Pyoluteorin
. . . . . . . 15
2.5
S. indicatrixD763 Supernatant Ability to Inhibit Prowth of P. protegens DTU
9.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.6
Chloroform Inhibition Assay with GFP Producing Strains . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.7
RNA Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.8
DNase Treatment of Extracted RNA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.9
Analysis of RNA Extract Using Agilent Bioanalyser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.10 RNA­seq
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3
Results
19
3.1
Soft­agar Overlay Assay Reveal Pyoluteorin Mediated Interactions Between
P. protegens and S. indicatrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
MIC Determination for Pyoluteorin, Ciprofloxacin and Tetracycline
. . . . . 22
3.3
Growth Inhibiting Effects of Pyoluteorin at SIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.4
Time Kill Kinetics Reveals Bacteriocidal Effects of Pyoluteorin . . . . . . . . 25
3.5
Testing S. indicatrix Supernatant Ability to Reduce Growth in Liquid Media . 27
3.6
Chloroform Inhibition Does Prevent Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.7
S. indicatrix RNA Extraction and Verification of Quantity and Quality . . . . 28
3.8
RNA­Seq of Strains Grown with 1g/ml Pyoluteorin Reveals Deferentially
Expressed Genes and Gene Clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4
Discussion
36
4.1
Pyoluteorin is Bacteriostatic and Might Function by Inhibiting Protein Syn­
thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2
M23 Family Metallopeptidase is Most Likely Involved in Cell Division . . . . 37
4.3
Upregulation of Prophage Genes caused by DNA repair Response . . . . . 38
4.4
Regulation of Intracellular Iron as a Way to Prevent ROS
. . . . . . . . . . 38
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
vii
==PAGE:10==
4.5
The Potential T1SS Cluster Does Not Fit the Structure of a Typical RTX­
operon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Conclusion
40
Bibliography
41
A Appendix
49
viii
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
If we are to keep up increased demand for food for our growing populations it is estimated
that agricultural production will have to increase by 70% by 2050 (Šunjka and Mechora
2022). When we also take into account the great challenges that agricultural production
currently faces, such as reduction in access to fresh water and especially crops lost due
to pest and diseases, it becomes clear that we need to achieve adequate protection of
our plants. Plant protection has historically been achieved through the use of chemical
pesticides. These compounds have been and are still very effective. They allow us to
increase yields, simplify cultivation, and protect our crops. However, the long term and
intensive use chemical pesticides do come with severe drawbacks. They cause damage
to our ecosystems through lowering biodiversity, they can adversely effect human health,
and they endanger future plants production by increasing the emergence of pesticide re­
sistant strains (Šunjka and Mechora 2022).
It is clear that we have to find alternative solutions to chemical pesticides if we want to
be able to sustain a growing agricultural need. One possibility for this is the employment
soil of microorganism and microbial communities for biocontrol. This is no easy task. Soil
is presumed to have the most diverse population of bacteria (Raaijmakers and Mazzola
2012), that have evolved to thrive under many different conditions, using many different
strategies. One of these strategies is the use of antibiotic as a way of combating predators
and competitors in the environment. This way of looking at antibiotics may however be
more fitting in a pharmaceutical setting, as metabolites with antibiotics properties might
have completely different roles in their natural environment (Raaijmakers and Mazzola
2012). In fact, there is limited evidence that the antibiotics metabolites produced in the
soil ever reaches sufficiently high concentrations to have effect we see in a clinical setting.
Instead, studies have demonstrated that these antibiotics, when present in subinhibitory
concentrations (SIC), exert a range of other effects such as inducing changes in transcrip­
tion, motility, virulence, and biofilm formation (Romero et al. 2011).
When it comes to bacteria with plant protective capabilities, the genus Pseudomonas has
received special attention. Especially the group; Pseudomonas fluorescens have been
investigated due to their presence in most soil (Mendes et al. 2011) and their ability to
produce a wide range of secondary metabolites (SMs) with relevance to biocontrol and
promotion of plant growth (Gross and J. E. Loper 2009. Though much is known about the
metabolome of Pseudomonas spp. there is still much that we do not know when it comes
to the intricacies of these SMs regarding interactions with other microorganism
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
1
==PAGE:12==
1.1
The Genus of Pseudomonas
Pseudomonas is genus of Gram­negative γ­proteobacteria, and is one of the diverse
bacterial genre (Parte 2013). They are well know for their metabolic versatility, and are
present in wide range natural niches. As these bacteria have been studied extensively,
they are currently an excellent model organism. Across the genus of Pseudomonas a
wide range of properties can be found, correlating with organisms role in its favored envi­
ronment. For instance, as a human opportunistic pathogen, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, is
well characterized. It is considered one of most frequent causes of nocosomial infections
and is associated with significant rates of morbidity and mortality (Spagnolo, Sartini, and
Cristina 2021). As P. aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen, it is commonly isolated
from the airways of cystic fibrosis patients, and due to a prolonged antibiotic treatment
regiment, they show a wide range of antibiotic resistances (Folkesson et al. 2012). Other
species of Pseudomonas, such as P.tolaasi and P.syringae, are know to be pathogenic to­
wards mushrooms or plants respectively. P.tolaasi produces tolaasin, which is the agent
responsible for brown rot in agaricus bisporus (Scherlach et al. 2013). P.syringae is capa­
ble of causing diseases in a range of plants, by function of a large set of virulence systems
(Hwang et al. 2005).
Species of Pseudomonas have also been found to be beneficial to us. P. putida is con­
sidered a versatile biocatalyst, capable of degrading both natural and industrial products
turning them in to commercially relevant chemicals (Wackett 2003).
Pseudomonas flourescens is a group that has long been known for its plant growth pro­
moting properties and its role in biocontrol (Raaijmakers, Vlami, and Souza 2002; Haas
and Défago 2005). It has long been recognized for its diversity and genetic heterogeneity
and the complex includes more than 50 taxonimically distinct species (Garrido­Sanz et al.
2016). It was shown by Hesse et al. 2018 that species of P. flourescens have some the
largest genomes in the Pseudomonas genus. The core genome of Pseudomonas is on
the other hand relatively small. The core genome comprises genes essential for prolif­
eration. The pangenome of the P. flourescens complex have been shown to be much
larger than that of the remaining groups (Hesse et al. 2018). This Pangenome that con­
tains species specific genes, is one of the reason for the genetic diversity and immense
potential of the different subgroups of P. fluorescens. One of the subgroups with great
potential is Pseudomonas Protegens. They have shown a strong correlation with natural
disease suppression caused by phytopathogens. Much of their protective ability as been
linked to their large secondary metabolome (Whipps 2001; Voisard et al. n.d.).
1.2
Stenotrophomonas ­ A Relatively Small Genus
Bacteria from the genus of Stenotrophomonas was first isolated back in 1943 from hu­
man pleural fluid (Ghosh, Chatterjee, and Mandal 2020) (fluid from between the linings
of the lung). The genus itself was only created in 1993 in order to classify the species
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. Originally S. maltophilia had been classified first as Pseu­
2
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:13==
domonas maltophilia and subsequently as Xanthomonas maltophilia (Weber et al. 2018).
As of 2020 the genus is comprised of 18 well characterized species (Ghosh, Chatterjee,
and Mandal 2020), and can be found in a wide range of diverse habitats. This includes
soils, water, and in association with plants, humans, and animals. Stenotrophomonas
are Gram­negative rod shaped bacteria and are γ­proteobacteria belonging to the order
of Xanthamonadales. The name was originally given to the species to accentuate the
limited range of nutrient the bacteria could utilize. This has however been disproved, as
stenotrophomonas has subsequently been show to have versatile metabolic capabilities
and the ability to grow on a wide range of substrates, (Ryan et al. 2009), corresponding
with its presence in many different environments.
As a human pathogen S. maltophilia is considered opportunistic, and of special concern
to immunocompromised patients. It survives on any moist surface, such as suction tub­
ing and nebulizers, and is able to form biofilms on these surfaces. This coupled with
a resistance profile to a broad array of antimicrobial agents, such as most beta­lactams
(Nicodemo and Paez 2007), the World health organization classified S. maltophilia as one
of the leading multidrug resistant organism in hospital settings (Chang et al. 2015). While
Stenotrophomonas are know to be human pathogens, no species are currently know to
be phytopathogenic (Ryan et al. 2009). In fact many members are known to have impor­
tant roles in the nitrogen and sulfur cycles (Park et al. 2005). Several species, including
S. maltophilia have been shown to have beneficial interactions with plants. This includes
production of plant growth regulators like indole acetic acid (IAA) or by inhibiting plant
pathogens such as Pythium ultimum. It has been reported that treatments with bacteria
of this species increased various growth parameters, such as root length and chlorophyll
content (Ghosh, Chatterjee, and Mandal 2020).
When it comes to the species of Stenotrophomonas indicatrix, it was first named in 2018
after it was isolated from surfaces with food contact (Weber et al. 2018). Strains of S.
indicatrix has been shown to be involved in plant growth promotion. This is the case
with the strain S. indicatrix Bovis 40, which was shown to modulate plant growth trough
production of IAA. Additionally it was also shown that the strain had genes involved in
nitrogen fixation (Adeleke, Ayangbenro, and Babalola 2021). Another strain, S. indicatrix
CPHE1, was indicated to be involved in bioremediation by degrading phenanthrene (Lara­
Moreno et al. 2023). The strain stenotrophomonas indicatrix D763 used in this study, was
isolated from soil samples, and its genetic sequence was published in 2021 (Lozano­
Andrade, Strube, and Kovács 2021).
1.3
Pseudomonas­produced Secondary Metabolites
Secondary metabolites are low molecular mass products that are mainly produced by bac­
teria, fungi, and plants. The name ”secondary metabolite” stems from the fact that they
are not essential for the growth or reproduction of the organism, in contrast to primary
metabolites (Mosunova, Navarro­Muñoz, and Collemare 2021). Instead, SMs are gen­
erally considered to play a role in the survival of the organism by functioning as cellular
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
3
==PAGE:14==
communicators, aiding in the defence of the producer, in competition with other organism,
or increasing the availability of hard to get nutrients (Moore, Robson, and Trinci 2020;
Sanchez and Demain 2011). The Pseudomonas species has been of particular interest
when it comes to research into SMs, as it has been shown to produce of a wide range
of bioactive compounds (Raaijmakers and Mazzola 2012), some of which can be seen in
figure 1.1. The first group of Pseudomonas SMs are the iron­chelating molecules called
siderophores, such as pyoverdin and pyochelin. Pyoverdin, the pigment responsible for
pseudomonads fluoresence, has a strong affinity for Fe3+, while pyochelin has a weaker
affinty for Fe3+ but a higher affinity for Cu2+ and Zn2+ (Haas and Défago 2005). These
molecules helps the producing strain to scavenge the trace amounts of metals present the
the soil. In addition in low iron media pyoverdin has been show to inhibit the growth other
microorganisms with less potent siderophores, giving pyoverdin the function of an antibi­
otic. This interaction shows that the line between primary and secondary metabolites, can
be blurry, as siderophores are generally considered a part of the primary metabolism, as
iron is essential for the growth of the organism, but they can on occasion also function as
antibiotics which are generally considered SMs (Haas and Défago 2005).
]
Figure 1.1: Structure of Pseudomonas produced SMs with antibiotic properties.
All
molecules are diffusible except hydrogencyanide which is a volatile. The figure is from
Haas and Défago 2005.
In addition to siderophores, P. fluorescens has been shown to produce a wide range of
small diffusible antibiotic compounds, such as 2,4diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG), pyrroni­
trin, pyoluteorin and phenazine (Raaijmakers and Mazzola 2012; Haas and Défago 2005).
The mode of action for some of these molecules are partly understood. Phenazine for ex­
4
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:15==
ample, is thought to inhibit growth by interfering with electron transport, and in presence
of ferripyochelin catalyse production of hydroxyl radicals, resulting in damage to macro­
molecules such as lipids (Haas and Défago 2005).
Cyclic lipopeptides (CLP), are another group of SMs commonly produced by pseudomon­
ads, and include molecules such as viscosin and orfamide (Haas and Défago 2005; Raai­
jmakers and Mazzola 2012; Gross, Stockwell, et al. 2007). This group of SMs is involved
in controlling the mobility of producers. By secreting CLPs, the surface tension of the sur­
rounding area is reduced, often leading to an increase in swarming and thus an increase in
motility across a surface (Geudens and Martins 2018). CLPs have also been found to be
an important factor for regulating biofilm formation. The formation of this extracellular ma­
trix, can help protect the bacteria against adverse environmental conditions, making the
producer less susceptible to for example antibiotic treatment (Raaijmakers and Mazzola
2012). The outcome of the biofilm regulation is dependant on the type of CLP produced.
Visconsin and orfamide B is thought to inhibit the biofilm formation of the producing strain,
other strains appear to aide the production (Geudens and Martins 2018). All of the above
mentioned SMs have been diffusible molecules, but pseudomads also produce volatiles,
such as hydrogen cyanide. This compound inhibits electron transport, disrupting the cells
energy supply, and is therefore considered toxic to most organisms (Blumer and Haas
2000).
1.3.1
Pyoluteorin
Pyoluteorin is an SM produced by Pseudomonas protegens and some soil­dwelling strains
of P. aeruginosa. The SM was first shown to have antimicrobial effect against oomycetes
but has later also been shown to be effective against bacteria (Liang et al. 1996 Q. Yan,
Philmus, et al. 2017). It consist of a bichlorinated pyrrole­moeity linked to a resorcinol­ring
(Nowak­Thompson et al. 1999).
The pyoluteorin biosynthetic gene cluster (BCG) consist of a total of 17 genes. pltHIJ­
KNOP encodes a putative ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter, consisting of an inner
membrane ABC transporter, made up by PltIJK, a membrane fusion protein, PltH and an
outer membrane efflux protein, PltN (Huang, A. Yan, et al. 2006). pltM pltR and pltZ are
involved in transscribtional regulation of the BCG, while pltLABCDEFG are responsible
for biosynthesis of pyoluteorin Huang, Zhu, et al. 2004; Q. Yan, Philmus, et al. 2017.
As shown in figure 1.2 pyoluteorin synthesis initiates with L­proline, which is activated to
L­prolyl­AMP by the aminoadenylation domain of PltF at the cost of ATP. The L­prolyl­AMP
is then attached to the carrier protein PltL. While the molecule is bound here, the prolyl
moiety is desaturated by PltE into the intermediary product Pyrolyl­S­PltL (Gross and J. E.
Loper 2009). Next the intermediate is dichlorinated, first at position 5 and subsequently at
position 4. It was shown by Dorrestein et al. 2005 that the dichlorination is carried out by
a single FADH2 dependent halogenase, PltA, resulting in dichloropyrrol­s­pltL (Dorrestein
et al. 2005)
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.2: An overview of the biosynthetic gene cluster for pyoluteorin (top), with the
genes shown as arrows and the proposed biosynthesis pathway of the compound (bot­
tom). Asterisks denotes a predicted inactive domain. The figure is from Gross and J. E.
Loper 2009
The next step in the synthesis of pyoluteorin involves a type 1 polyketide synthase (PKS),
consisting of PltB and PltC (Bender, Rangaswamy, and J. Loper 1999; Gross and J. E.
Loper 2009). Here the dichloropyrrol­intermediate is loaded on the ketosynthase (KS)
domain of the first module of PltB and a molecule of manolyl­CoA is loaded onto the
acyltransferase (AT). The ketosynthase (KS) is responsible for a condensation of the two
loaded molecules resulting in the first extension of the carbon chain. The now elongated
chain is subsequently moved to module 2 of PtlB where a similar condensation occurs.
The third module contains an active ketoreductase (KR), which results in a reduction of
a keto group into a hydroxy group (See figure 1.2) in addition to the KS mediated chain
elongation, similar to that of module 1 and 2 (Bender, Rangaswamy, and J. Loper 1999;
Gross and J. E. Loper 2009). Finally, the thioesterase, PtlG catalyses the release the
circularization of the elongated polyketide, resulting in pyoluteorin (Gross and J. E. Loper
2009).
As part of the work done by Gross and Loper in elucidating the synthesis of pyoluteorin,
analysis of the gene sequences of P. protegens PF­5 showed that PtlBs’ module 2 of
the PKS contains an inactive KR domain, and PltCs’ module 3 contains in inactive dehy­
dratase (DH) domain. This domain, if active, could have resulted in a dehydration of a
hydroxyl group, and as a result a desaturation of the chain via the addition of a carbon­
carbon double bond. This is however not the case and it alludes to the possibility that the
current biosynthesis of pyoluteorin has evolved from previously synthesised polyketides
with another molecular structure, or that we still don’t know all about this synthesis, and
that the two supposedly inactive domains are in fact a part of this synthesis or another.
The biosynthesis of pyoluteorin is under tight control by two regulators, PltR and PltZ.
6
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:17==
PltR is a typical LysR type transcriptional regulator, and is responsible for activation of the
pltABCDEFG operon (Li et al. 2012). Activation of the pltABCDEFG operon is facilitated by
direct binding of PltR to the pltLp promotor region facilitating stabilisation of the interaction
between the RNA­polymerase and the promotor region (Li et al. 2012). In contrast, PltZ
is a TetR family repressor controlling the expression of both pltABCDEFG BCG and the
pltHIJKNOP export operon (Li et al. 2012; Q. Yan, M. Liu, et al. 2021). Pyoluteorin serves
as an autoinducer for its own synthesis by binding to PltZ and relieving the repression
(Q. Yan, M. Liu, et al. 2021). Work performed by Huang, Zhu, et al. 2004, showed that
PltZ on its own was insufficient in explaining the repression of pyoluteorin, as production
was only partially suppressed by increased PltZ. An additional layer of the pyoluteorin
regulation was elucidated by Q. Yan, Philmus, et al. 2017, where they identified the role of
the halogenase PltM. They found out that PltM is responsible for mono and di­chlorination
of phloroglucinol (PG), an intermediate from biosynthesis of DAPG, and that is in fact the
chlorinated forms of PG that induce PltR mediated activation the pyoluteorin BCG. Q.
Yan, Philmus, et al. 2017 Also found evidence that PG­Cl and PG­Cl2 function in cell
to cell communication as chemical messengers, inducing expression of pyoluteorin in
neighboring cells.
1.3.2
DAPG
DAPG is another Pseudomonas produced SM involved in biological control of plant dis­
ease (Gross and J. E. Loper 2009). The compound itself is phenolic in structure and
has been shown to be toxic against bacteria and a wide range of plant­pathogenic fungi
(Keel 1992; Cronin et al. 2006). It does show phytotoxicity at high concentration (Keel
1992), but has also been found have beneficial effects for plant. One of these benefits is
that DAPG has been shown to be a key determinant for the biocontrol found in disease­
suppresive soils (Whipps 2001). Production of DAPG is mainly found in P. corrugata and
P.protegens, two sup­groups of P. fluorescens, though not all species in these subgroups
have the BCG required for synthesis (Almario et al. 2017).
DAPG is a polyketide under tight control by a highly conserved BCG consisting of 8 genes
(phlHGFACBDE) involved in its production, regulation, and secretion (Gross and J. E.
Loper 2009). The Biosynthesis of DAPG is initiated by PhlD (See figure 1.3), a type 3
PKS synthase, in which 3 molecules of manonyl­CoA is condensed to form an activated
3,5­diketoheptanedioate, which is in turn cyclized in a Claisen­condensation, to form PG
(Achkar et al. 2005). The next step involves a protein complex consisting of PhlACB re­
sponsible for acetylation of PG turning it first into monoacetylphloroglucinol (MAPG) and
then DAPG (Gross and J. E. Loper 2009). The level of DAPG can be regulated by PhlG,
a hydrolase, responsible for degrading DAPG back into MAPG. This process is eluci­
dated by Bottiglieri and Keel 2006. PhlF. PhlF have been shown by Abbas, Morrissey,
et al. 2002, to bind to two conserved regions of the promoter site for phlA blocking access
of the RNA­polymerase to the ­10 box. Like pyoluteorin, DAPG function as its own au­
toinducer by disassociating PhlF and relieving its repression (Schnider­Keel et al. 2000).
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
7
==PAGE:18==
PhlH is another regulatory protein. It has been shown to bind upstream of phlG and pre­
venting its expression. Repression by PhlH can be relieved by binding of DAPG to the
protein, thus allowing transcription of phlG, resulting in a decrease in DAPG concentration
(Q. Yan, Philmus, et al. 2017). These three regulatory proteins (PhlH, G and F) shows
how the biosynthesis and cellular concentrations of DAPG is able to be finely controlled.
Finally, the phlE encodes a permease able to facilitate efflux of DAPG, and decrease the
producing cells own susceptibility to DAPG toxicity (Abbas, McGuire, et al. 2004).
Figure 1.3: schematic representation of the phl gene cluster and biosynthetic pathwat for
DAPG. The figure is from Gross and J. E. Loper 2009
1.4
Hormesis and the Role of Subinhibitory Antibiotic
Concentrations
As we can see from the above section, SMs with antibiotic properties play many different
roles other than combating microorganism. This is how antibiotics have been viewed his­
torically; for their use as therapeutics. Since their advent as a viable therapeutic during
the 1940s (Quinn 2013), most of the research into antibiotics has also been in discern­
ing aspects related to their clinical use, such as pharmacology, dosage and side effects
(Davies, Spiegelman, and Yim 2006). In the late 2000s however, as tools to asses tran­
scriptional changes became more available, so did research assessing the responses to
antibiotics on a whole­cell level. Much of this research was focused on classifying modes
of action, but did reveal that many of the expression profiles induced by different antibiotics
were very diverse and contained changes in expression for genes not related to the tar­
get function (Davies, Spiegelman, and Yim 2006). This can be seen as an indication that
antibiotics have pleiotropic effects, affecting multiple different pathways and processes.
Interestingly, a lot of these molecules have been shown to induce one response at a
high concentration while inducing another at low concentration (Romero et al. 2011). This
phenomenon has been termed hormesis, and is used to describe a bi­phasic relationship,
illustrated in figure 1.4, that both show stimulation and inhibition in a dose dependant man­
ner (Davies, Spiegelman, and Yim 2006). In contrast to the large amount of information
about the effects of antibiotics at or above the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) rel­
atively little is known about the effect at sub­inhibitory concentrations (SIC). Only a small
number of natural products with antibiotic properties have been extensively tested, and
the role they play in their natural habitat is still poorly understood (Romero et al. 2011). It
is therefore entirely possible that these molecules do not act as antibiotics in nature, but
instead have other functions. Today, it is believed that many of these metabolites may
8
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:19==
act as signalling molecules, with functions such as those mentioned earlier, and facilitate
inter­ and intraspecies communication (Romero et al. 2011).
Figure 1.4: Pictorial overview of the concept of hormesis. The figure show the changes
in transcription level as the concentration increases from subinhibitory to inhibitory. The
figure is from Davies, Spiegelman, and Yim 2006
An interesting facet when it comes to interspecies communication is a term that has
been named ”bacterial competition sensing” (Cornforth and Foster 2013). This hypothe­
sis states that bacteria have evolved the ability to sense the presence of toxic SMs and
response to them, potentially altering their own production of SMs. A great example of
this phenomenon was identified by Lozano et al. 2020. In their work they discovered a
two component response system in Chromobacterium violaceum that is induced by the
presence of hygromycin A produced by Streptomyces. As a result C. violaceum is able
to upregulate its own production of violacein, a compound know to have broad activity
against gram­positive bacteria (Durán et al. 2011). A similar response was observed by
Y. Liu, Kyle, and Straight 2018. Here Chloramphenicol produced by Streptomyces ven­
zuelae was able to induce sliding motility in bacillus subtilis. The exact mechanism to
which the response is induced, has not yet been elucidated, but it is generally believed
that sliding dependant on multiple factors such as production and secretion of surfactin
and exopolysaccharide (Y. Liu, Kyle, and Straight 2018).
A study performed by Buijs et al. 2021 found that when two marine strains, Vibrio coral­
liilyticus and Photobacterium galateae, were grown in co­culture, production of specific
SMs increased for both of the strains. Specifically production of andrimid from V. corlali­
ilyticus increased 4.3 fold and holomycin from P. galateae increased 2.7 fold. Another
interesting finding from the study of Buijs et al. 2021 was the ability of V corallilyticus
to detoxify holomycin by methylation. As a result holomycin, which is normally a potent
antibiotic (MIC: 4.3µg/ml against V corallilyticus), lost its ability to inhibit growth (MIC>
68.8µg/ml). This study is a great example when it comes to illustrating both how bacteria
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
9
==PAGE:20==
are able to increase their offensive and defensive capabilities in the presence of a competi­
tor. Another study performed by Tyc et al. 2014 investigated the effects co­cultivations of a
combination of 146 different soil bacteria against two human pathogens (Escherichia coli
and Staphylococcus aureus). They found that while only 6% of co­cultivations showed
an induction of antibiotic production, 42% of these combinations showed antimicrobial ef­
fects against one of the pathogens, whereas mono­cultures did not. From this it is clear
to see that there is still much we do not know about the mechanism and effects of bacte­
rial interactions. These studies do however, show the importance of using co­cultivations
when investigating microbial interactions when trying to deduce the functions of bacterial
produced SMs in their natural habitats.
1.5
Ecological Effect of Bacteria and their SMs
The roots of plants grown in certain soils around the world are know to be naturally resis­
tant to infections, even though pathogens are shown to be present. Disease suppressive
soils, as they are called, is a complex phenomenon that is influenced by many different
microbial and physiological factors in order to provide their signature protection. A few of
these factor are especially important when it comes to microbial interaction. This stems
from the fact that pasteurization can remove the suppressive properties of the soil (Haas
and Défago 2005). Other antimicrobial treatments, such as gamma radiation, have the
same effect. Additionally disease suppression is in some cases transferable. By inoculat­
ing a disease conductive soil with a suppressive soil, protection can be established (Haas
and Défago 2005). This indicates that that the disease suppression is of microbial nature
and that microorganisms act as antagonist for the pathogens. One of the mechanisms
for antagonism is trough production and secretion of SMs. both pyoluteorin and DAPG
has been shown to play important roles in biocontrol and protection in multiple plants. A
study performed by Balthazar et al. 2022, showed that both deletion of pyoluteorin and
DAPG lead to a significant decrease in disease reduction, of bortrytis cinera (grey mold)
on Cannabis sativa. Complementation the respective antibiotics trough a plasmid vector,
increased diseases protection back to a level comparable to the wild type P. protegen­Pf5.
Interestingly the study also found that in vitro inhibition of the grey mold was increased
in the DAPG deletion strain, compared to the wildtype. The authors spectulate that this
was due to an overproduction of pyoluteorin as a result of the DAPG deletion. Pyoluteorin
mediated protection has been show to also be dependant on the plant. P. flourescence
CHA0 was shown by Maurhofer et al. 1994 to be able to control damping­off or root rot
caused by Pythium ultimum on cucumber and cress. Deletion of pyoluteorin did result
in an reduced capacity for diseases protecetion in cress, but did not show any reduced
protection for cucumber. This indicates that dependant on the plant the biocontrol effects
of pyoluteorin can be modulated.
1.6
Deseq2 as an Analytic Tool for RNA Sequencing Data
High trough­put sequencing and screening have become invaluable when it comes to
elucidation the effects of interspecies interactions. One way of doing this is by using
10
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:21==
RNA­sequencing (RNA­Seq) to identify change to a target organisms transcriptional pro­
file induced by the presence of SMs. The general workflow of RNAseq can be broken up
into the following steps: First extracted RNA is fragmented in to small complementary DNA
(cDNA) sequences, and is then sequenced in a high trough­put platform such as illumina.
Second the the sequences are mapped to a reference genome. Third the expression
level for each gene is estimated. Fourth the mapped expression data is normalized, and
deferentially expressed genes (DEGs) are identified. Fifth, and finally, these DEGs are
evaluated for their relevance and biological significance (Costa­Silva, Domingues, and
Lopes 2017).
For the fourth step especially, reliable statistical methods are needed to normalize the
counts data and to identify and quantify these differences. One of the statistical chal­
lenges is the fact that the counts data generated from RNA­seq does not fit a normal
distribution. One of the tools that have been developed for this purpose is DESeq2. It
uses a parametric approach, and uses a negative binomial distribution to map the counts
data (Love, Huber, and Anders 2014).
One of the main advantages to this approach is that it allows for data predictions using
the adapted model and its parameters (Costa­Silva, Domingues, and Lopes 2017). In the
case of DESeq2 it allows for detection and correction of dispersion estimates that are to
low, by using the dispersion of the average expression over all the samples (Love, Huber,
and Anders 2014). In order to be able to evaluate logarithmic fold changes in a gene’s
expression between a treatment and its control, with statistical significance, the negative­
binomially distributed data needs to be normalized. DESeq2 does this by scaling the
concentrations of cDNA fragments in a sample with a normalization factor (love).
As mentioned above, DESeq2 able to make predictions and corrections to dispersion
estimates. This is an estimate of the variability between replicates. Without this step, the
accuracy of the differential expression testing, would be compromised. The way DESeq2
performs this step is by first making a dispersion estimate for each gene, using the counts
data. Then it uses those estimate to fit a model. Finally, working from the assumption
that genes with similar expression have similar dispertion, it shrinks the first estimates
towards the model. The amount that each estimate is shrunk depends on how close the
real values is to the predicted values (the model) and by how many degrees of freedom
the experiment has. A visual representation of this process can be seen in figure 1.5
which was made by Love, Huber, and Anders 2014 using data from a study by Bottomly
et al. 2011.
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 1.5: Plot of dispersion estimates over average expression . Black dots (MLE:
maximum­likely­hood estimate) are the gene­wise dispersion estimates calculated in the
first iteration. The red curve is the model fitted to these data points and is used as a prior
mean for the second iteration of estimation. Blue arrows (MAP: Maximum a posteriori)
show size of shrinkage and final location of the gene­wise estimation after noise reduction.
Black dots circled in blue are considered outlier and are not shrunk. Figure is from (Love,
Huber, and Anders 2014).
DESeq2 also addresses another issue common with RNA­seq data, which is strong vari­
ance in log fold change (LFC) estimates for genes with low read counts. DESeq2 uses
a method similar to one described above. This time however shrinkage is done towards
zero (meaning no change in gene expression), but again it is done in a way, so that shrink­
age is higher for genes with a low number of counts or with few degrees of freedom (Love,
Huber, and Anders 2014).
In a study performed by Wu et al. 2020 DESeq2 was used to identify transcriptional
changes in P protegens H78 when the stringent response was abolished. They found
that stringent response mediated activation of pyoluteorin The mutant tested was found
to have transcription of the pltAHCDEFG and ptlIJKNOP operon decreased by 11.7­78.2
fold compared to the wild­type.
12
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:23==
1.7
Aim of the project
The purpose of this project was to investigate the effects of P.protegens produced pyolute­
orin on S. indicatrix.. the hypothesis was that the presence of pyoluteorin in subinhibitory
concentrations induced a transcriptional change causing S indicatrix to produce and se­
crete enzymes allowing for lysis and clearance of P. protegens.
The aims of this study were as follows:
1.7.1
Investigate the Mechanism of the Inhibitory Effects of Pyoluteorin
To achieve this we studies the interactions when growing S indicatrix in the presence of
an inhibited colony of P. protegens in real time. Additionally The mechanism of action for
pyoluteorin was investigated in a time kill kinetics assay.
1.7.2
Investigate the Pyoluteorin Induced Transcriptional changes in S.
indicatrix
To achieve this S.indicatrix was grown in the presence of subinhibitory concentrations of
pyoluteorin to determine differentially expressed genes. The analysis was done using
DESeq2.
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
13
==PAGE:24==
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Stenotrophomonas indicatrix D763 Soft­agar Overlay
Assay
This experiment was performed in triplicates Single colonies of P. protegen DTU 9.1 and
P. protegen DTU 9.1 ∆pltA was inoculated in 5ml LB and grown for 16­20 hours at 30◦C
at 200 RPM. 1ml of the overnight culture were transfered to 1.5ml eppendorf tubes and
centrifuged at 10,000RMP for 1 minute. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was
resuspended in 1ml physological saline (0.9% NaCl). This process was repeated. The
OD of the washed cells was measured, and set to 1. 10µl of P. protegen DTU 9.1 and P.
protegen DTU 9.1 ∆pltA was spotted on separate halves of a 10% TSA plate (2% agar).
These colonies were allowed to grow at room temperature ( 20◦C) for 48 hours. After
24hours single colonies of S. indicatrix D763 was inoculated in 5ml of LB and grown at
30◦C for 16­20 hours. 1ml of the overnight culture was transferred to a 1.5ml eppendorph
tube at centrifuged at 10,000 RPM for 1min. The supernatant was discarded, and the
pellet re­suspended in 1ml physiological saline (0.9%NaCl). This process was repeated
once and the OD was measured and set to 2. 10%TSA soft­agar (0.3% agar) was boiled
and 6ml was added to 15ml falcon tubes. The soft­agar was kept liquid in a waterbath at
42◦C. When the P. protegens strain had grown for 48 hours it was inhibited by chloroform
fumes. This was done by adding 400µl chloroform to 4x4cm square of paper towel in the
lid of a glass petri dish. The Lb plate with the P. protegens strain was then inverted on top of
the chloroform containing square. The colonies were treated for 30minutes, before being
removed and excess fumes were allowed to escape for an additional 30 minutes. 500µl of
S. indicatrix D763 was added to the 6ml of 10% TSA soft­agar, immediately vortexed and
poured on top of the chloroform inhibited P. protegens colonies. These colonies were then
grown for up to 48 hours at room temperature. Pictures were taken during this growth.
For the time­lapse photos 3 replicates were photographed every hour for 48 hours using
a Reshape­biotech imager V2.2, with the top light at the highest brightness and a black
fully opaque background.
2.2
Stenotrophomonas indicatrix D763 Soft­agar Overlay
Assay with Pyoluteorin Chemical Complementation
This experiment was performed with two samples with pyoluteorin and one as a control
without pyoluteorin This assay was set up in the same way as the assay described in
section 2.1, with the following changes. The experiment was performed with two additional
strains; P. protegens DTU 9.1 ∆phlACB and P. protegens DTU 9.1 ∆phlACB, pltA. 10µl
of each culture, were prepared in the same way as previously described and spotted in
separate wells of a 6­well microtitre plate. Each well containing 10ml 10% TSA. For the
14
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:25==
soft­agar overlay, 250µl of S. indicatrix D763 was prepared as described in section 2.1
and was used to inoculate 3ml of TSA soft­agar. Before pouring the inculated TSA soft­
agar onto two of the triplicates of the P. protegens spots (excluding P.protegens DTU 9.1),
Pyoluteorin was added for a final concentration of 4µg/ml.
2.3
MIC Determination
MIC determinations for pyoluteorin was performed in octuplicates. MIC determination for
tetracycline and ciprofloxacin was performed in triplicates To column 1­9 and column 11
of a 96­well microtitre plate 100µl of 10%TSB was added, while column 12 had 200µl
10%TSB added. Column 10 had 200µl of antibiotic solution added (64µg/ml for pyolu­
teorin and ciprofloxacin, and 512µg/ml for tetracycline). 100µl of the antibiotic solution
was transferred to column 9, and mixed with the pipette before a 100µl from column 9
was transferred to column 8 and mixed. This process was repeated until column 1. Af­
ter the antibiotic solution had been added and mixed in column 1, 100µl was removed.
Single colonies of S.indicatrix D763 was inoculated in 5ml LB and incubated at 30◦C for
16­20 hours with shaking at 200 RPM. 1ml of the overnight culture were transfered to
1.5ml eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 10,000RMP for 1 minute. The supernatant was
discarded and the pellet was resuspended in 1ml physological saline (0.9% NaCl). This
process was repeated. The OD of the washed cells was measured, and set to 0.02. 100µl
of the washed and diluted S indicatrix D763 was added to each well in column 1­11. In
the end this resulted in a concentration gradient of the antibiotics ranging from 32µg/ml­
0.0625µg/ml (for pyoluteorin and ciprofloxacin) and 256µg/ml­0.5µg/ml (for tetracycline)
with the highest concentration in column 10 and the lowest in column 1. A breath­easy©
filter was applied to the 96­well microtitre plate. mixing was achieved by double orbital mix­
ing in a microtitre­platereader for 10 seconds. the plate was grown at 22 ◦C. OD[600nm]
was measured at the beginning of the incubation period and subsequently after every
10minutes for 24 hours, with double orbital shaking before each measurement.
2.4
Time­kill Kinetics to Study the Antibiotic Activity of
Pyoluteorin
This experiment was performed in triplicates Triplicates of 5ml LB inoculated with a single
colony of Stenotrophomonas indicatrix D763 was grown at 30◦C with shaking at 200 RMP
for 16­20 hours. 1ml of each overnight culture was centrifuged at 10,000 RMP for one
minute, and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was resuspended in 1ml physio­
logical saline solution (0.9% Nacl). This process was repeated once. OD of the washed
cells were measured and set to 0.004 in 10% TSB. A stock of ciprofloxacin and Tetra­
cycline, in addition to pyoluteorin was made at 8 times the MIC values determined in in
section 2.3. 200µl of the pyoluteorin solution was added to wells 1a­3a of a 96­well mi­
crotiter plate. 200µl of the ciprofloxacin solution was added to wells 4a­6a and 200 µl of
the tetracycline solution was added to wells 7a­9a. 100µl of 10% TSB was added to well
10a as well as row b and c 1­10. 200 µl 10%TSB was added to well 12a, 12b and 12c.
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
15
==PAGE:26==
Serial dilutions of the 3 antibiotics were made by transferring 100µl from row a to row b
and from row b to row c, mixing with the pipette in between transfers. 100µl of the diluted
antibiotic solution was discarded from row c, resulting in a final volume of 100µl in each
well. 100µl of replicate 1 (OD 0.004) bacterial solution was added to wells 1a­c, 4a­c, 7a­c
and 10a. Replicate 2 was added to 2a­c, 5a­c, 8a­c and 10b and replicate 3 was added
to wells 3a­c, 6a­c, 9a­c and 10c. The wells were mixed using the pipette, resulting in a
final OD of 0.002, and final antibiotic concentration of 4, 2 and 1 times MIC in rows a, b,
and c respectively. The microtitre plate was incubated at room temperature ( 20◦C with
shaking, for 24 hours. 10µl from each well was taken, at the beginning of the experiment
(T0) and diluted to 10­2, 10­3 and 10­4. 20µl of each dilution was plated in drop form on
LB­agar plates and incubated at 30◦C for 24hours before the colonies were counted. For
the sterile control in column 12, 10µl from a replicate was taken and spotted directly on
an LB­agar plate before incubation. This process was repeated after 4, 8 and 24 hours.
2.5
S. indicatrixD763 Supernatant Ability to Inhibit Prowth of
P. protegens DTU 9.1
this experiment was performed in quadruplicates. Single colony of S. indicatrix D763 was
inoculated in 5ml LB and allowed to grow for 16­20 hours at 30◦C with shaking at 200
RPM. 20µl of the liquid culture was transferred into a conical flask containing 20ml 10%
TSB with and without 1µg/ml pyoluteorin. These cultures were incubated for 16 hours at
30◦C with shaking at 200RPM. 10ml of the overnight culture was centrifuged at 5000RPM
for 5minutes and the supernatant was filtered though a 0.02micron cellulose filter into a
15ml falcon tube.
To column 1­9 and column 11 of a 96­well microtitre plate 100µl of 10%TSB was added,
while column 12 had 200µl 10%TSB added. Column 10 had 200µl of supernatant added.
100µl of the supernatant was transferred to column 9, and mixed with the pipette before a
100µl from column 9 was transferred to column 8 and mixed. This process was repeated
until column 1. After the supernatant had been added and mixed in column 1, 100µl
was removed. Single colonies of P. Protegens DTU 9.1 was inoculated in 5ml LB and
incubated at 30◦C for 16­20 hours with shaking at 200 RPM. 1ml of the overnight culture
were transfered to 1.5ml eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 10,000RMP for 1 minute.
The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was resuspended in 1ml physological saline
(0.9% NaCl). This process was repeated. The OD of the washed cells was measured,
and set to 0.02. 100µl of the washed and diluted P. Protegens DTU 9.1 was added to each
well in colum 1­11. In the end this resulted in a concentration gradient supernatant with
the highest concentration in column 10 and the lowest in column 1. A breath­easy© filter
was applied to the 96­well microtitre plate. mixing was achieved by double orbital mixing
in a microtitre­platereader for 10 seconds. the plate was grown at 22 ◦C. OD[600nm]
was measured at the beginning of the incubation period and subsequently after every
10minutes for 24 hours, with double orbital shaking before each measurement.
16
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:27==
2.6
Chloroform Inhibition Assay with GFP Producing Strains
This experiment was performed in triplicates This experiment was performed as described
in section 2.1, with the following changes. P. progetens DTU 9.1 gfp was used. fluores­
cence was measured using Zeiss axiozoom V.16 with Zenblue software. Fluorescence,
and bright­field photoes were taken before chloroform treatment, after treatment, after
addition of S.indicatrix inoculated soft­agar and after 24 and 48 hours of incubation with
soft­agar. For fluorescence photography the EGFP channel was used with a exposure
time of 500ms. for bright­field photography the bright­field channel with 10ms exposure
times was used. for both sets of photographs a black fully opaque background and 8
times zoom was used.
2.7
RNA Extraction
For this RNA extraction RNeasy® Protect Bacteria mini kit was used. This experiment was
performed in pentuplicates Single colony of S. indicatrix D763 was inoculated in 5ml LB
and allowed to grow for 16­20 hours at 30◦C with shaking at 200 RPM. 20µl of the liquid
culture was transferred into a conical flask containing 20ml 10% TSB with and without
1µg/ml pyoluteorin. These cultures were incubated for 16 hours at 30◦C with shaking at
200RPM. After incubation 1ml cell culture was transferred to a 2ml safe lock tube and
mixed with 1ml RNAprotect Bacteria Reagent. Mixing was achieved by vortexing for 5s.
The samples were incubated for 5min at room temperature. The samples were then
centrifuged at 11,000g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was discarded and the inverted
tubes were gently dabbed on a paper towel to dry. 200µl TE buffer containing 5µg/ml
hen­eggwhite lysosyme was added to each sample and mixed by vortexing for 10s. The
samples were incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature and vortexed 10s at least
every 2 minutes. 700µl RLT buffer containing 1% (V/V) β­mercaptoethanol was added to
each sample and mixed by vortexing. 500µl 100% ethanol was added to each sample
and mixed by gently pipetting up and down. 700µl of the sample lysates were added to
an RNeasy® mini spin column, with a collection tube and centrifuged for 15 seconds at
8,000g. This was repeated with the remaining lysate. After all the lysate had been passed
through the column 700µl Buffer RW1 was added to the column and centrifuged at 8,000g
for 15 seconds. The RNeasy® mini spin column was transferred to a new collection tube.
500µl of buffer RPE was added to the RNeasy® mini spin column and centrifuged for 15
seconds at 8,000g. The flow­through was discarded and this process was repeated this
time centrifuging for 2 minutes. The RNeasy® mini spin column was transferred to an
RNase free eppendorf tube and centrifuged for 1 minute. The RNeasy® mini spin column
was then transferred to a collection tube and 50µl RNase free water was added to the top
of the filter. The water was allowed to sit for 30 seconds before the tubes were centrifuged
for 1 minute. Aliqouts of the extracted RNA was made at a volume of 20µl, 20µl, and 10µl
respectively. The RNA extracts was stored at ­80 ◦C
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
17
==PAGE:28==
2.8
DNase Treatment of Extracted RNA
Removal of residual DNA was performed using the TURBO DNA­freeTM kit. 10xTURBO
DNaseTM buffer was added to the extracted RNA 10% of the total volume, and mixed
gently. 3µl TURBO DNaseTM was added to the sample. The sample was then incubated
at 37◦for 30 minutes. DNase inactivation reagent was reactivated by vortexing before
use. DNase inactivation reagent was added to the samples at a volume corresponding
to 20% of the total volume. The samples was then mixed by flicking. The samples were
incubated at room temperature ( 20◦) for 5 minutes. The mixture was resuspended every
minute by flicking. The samples were then centrifuged at 10,000g for 1.5 minutes, and
the supernatant was carefully transferred to another tube without disturbing the pellet.
Success of the treatment was validated using gel electrophoresis on a 0.8% agarose gel
stained with ethidium bromide.
2.9
Analysis of RNA Extract Using Agilent Bioanalyser
This experiment was performed using Agilent RNA 6000 Nano Assay Protocol and kit.
To prepare the gel for this experiment the following steps were performed. All reagent
were allowed to equilibrate to room temperature for 30 minutes before use. 550µl of
Agilent RNA 6000 Nano gel matrix was placed into the top a spin filter. The spin filter was
centrifuged for 10 minutes at 1500g. The filtered gel was made into aliquots of 65µl in
RNase free tubes. 1µl RNA 6000 Nano dye was added to a gel aliquot. The tube was
vortexed. The tube was vortexed for 10 minutes at 13,000g. 9µl of the dyed gel was
added to well marked ”G” on a New RNA Nano chip in a Agilent chip priming station. The
priming station syringe was used to pressurise the chip for 30 seconds, before pressure
was released over 5 seconds. 9µl of dyed gel was placed in the 2 wells directly above
the well marked ”G”. 5µl of RNA 6000 nano marker was added to the well marked with
a ladder and the remaining 12 sample wells. 1µl RNA ladder was added to the well
marked with a ladder. 1µl each sample was added to each of the 12 sample wells. As this
experiment only tested 10 samples, 1µl RNase free water was added to the 2 remaining
sample wells. The filled chip was placed in an adapter for vortexmixer and the chip was
vortexed horizontally for 60 seconds at 2400 RMP. The Chip was then loaded into the
Agilent 2100 bioanalyser, where the samples were read using the 2100 expert software.
2.10
RNA­seq
After verification of samples using the agilent bioanalyser the RNA samples loaded into
Eppendorf tubes packed on dry­ice and sent to Novogene, Cambridge, UK for library
preparation and RNA sequencing. The RNA­sequencing data received from Novogene,
was filtered using FastP, aligned with kallisto and analysed using DEseq2 in R. A script
for the data analysis is available here:
https://github.com/MSchostag/Kallisto_transcriptomics
18
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:29==
3
Results
3.1
Soft­agar Overlay Assay Reveal Pyoluteorin Mediated
Interactions Between P. protegens and S. indicatrix
Figure 3.1: Results for the Stenotrophomonas indicatrix D763 10% soft agar overlay as­
say after 48 hours. Top: P.protegens DTU 9.1. Bottom: P.protegens DTU 9.1 ∆pltA.
showing replicate 1 of 3
Strains of P. protegens was grown on 10% TSA plates for two days, in order for them to
produce and secrete their SMs into the media. Inhibition of the P. protegens strains was
performed to simplify the interactions with S. indicatrix.
We can see from figure 3.1 that when S. indicatrix is added on­top of an already estab­
lished (though inactivated) colony of P. protegens DTU 9.1 and subjected to its secreted
metabolites, an interesting phenomenon occurs. There seems to be a clearing of the
pseudomonal colony. From the top part of figure 3.1 we can see this clearing, as the
colony almost becomes completely transparent. This could be caused by S. indicatrix
being able to lyse and/or digest P. protegens. We can also see small spots on the inside
of the colony. These small spots could potentially be cellular remnants that remain after
S. indicatrix lyses the P. protegens colony. When looking at the bottom part of figure 3.1
we can see that this colony of P. protegens DTU 9.1 ∆pltA is seemingly unaffected by
S. indicatrix and still appears quite opaque. As the bottom strain is unable to produce
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
19
==PAGE:30==
pyoluteorin, while the top strain is, it seems that pyoluteorin is involved in the activation of
the lysis phenotype. It is important that when this experiment was replicated, variations
in the resulting phenotype was common. At times the inhibited zone (explained in section
3.1.2) did not shrink significantly during the experiment, and as a result S. indicatrix was
not able to grow in near proximity of the P. protegens spot. At other times inhibition was
overcome as growth near the pseudomonal spot was observed, yet no apparent digestion
was observed. This indicates that the interactions involved are very intricate, and that we
still do not know all the factors involved.
3.1.1
Timelapse Imaging Provides Insight in the Mechanism of the
Pyoluteorin Mediated Interaction
Figure 3.2: Selection of time lapse photos from S. indicatrix overlay assay in %10 TSA.
Top row from left to right: 0 hours, 6 hours, 12 hours. Bottom row from left to right: 18
hour, 24 hours, 30hours. Top half of plate: P. protegens DTU 9.1. Bottom half plate: P.
protegens DTU 9.1 ∆pltA. Showing replicate 1 of 3
To elucidate the effects pyoluteorin plays in the interactions between S. indicatrix and
P. protegens photos were taken every hour using a Reshape­biotech imager V2.2. A
selection of these photos can be seen in figure 3.2. For the time­lapse see supplementary
files: D763 Timelapse.
At around 6 hours, a zone around P. protegens DTU 9.1 can be seen starting to appear.
As time progresses this zone decreases in size until around 30 hours where the zone is
almost completely gone. From the control using the non­pyoluteorin producing strain P.
protegens DTU 9.1 ∆pltA, this zone is not present and growth of S. indicatrix is more uni­
20
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:31==
form over the entirety of the plate. A possible explanation for this could be that pyoluteorin
functions as a growth inhibitor for S.indicatrix causing an area around the P. protegens
colony where they are unable to grow. Over time, pyoluteorin is then degraded by S.
indicatrix or is bound in still inhibited cells, causing the functional concentration to drop,
which allows for invasion of the previously inhibited zone. If pyoluteorin functions as a
bacteriostatic antibiotic, it could help explain the inhibition seen in figure 3.2.
3.1.2
Complementing P. protegens DTU 9.1 ∆pltA with Pyoluteorin in an
Attempt to Restore Lysis Phenotype
Figure 3.3: Addition of 4µg/ml pyoluteorin to the top­agar to various strains of P.protegens
DTU 9.1 Assay was performed in 10% TSA and in duplicates in regards to addition of
pyoluteorin only one control strain was produced for each mutant tested.
Results obtained from the S. indicatrix overlay assay. It seems that pyoluteorin is respon­
sible for inducing the lysis phenotype observed. To further strengthen this hypothesis we
performed an assay where pyoluteorin­ strains of P. protegens were complemented with
the addition of chemically synthesized pyoluteorin. From Figure 3.3 it can be seen that
when pyoluteorin is added to the top agar of P. protegens DTU 9.1 ∆pltA a zone of in­
hibition is observed around the spot and growth of S. indicatrix only appears at the very
edge of the well. it was expected that this set up would resemble the wild­type, but this is
clearly not the case. For the wild­type P.protegens spot no inhibition zone of S.indicatrix
was observed. However no digestion was observed either. From this it seems that py­
oluteorin is not the only product responsible and that another protein or SM produced
by P. protegens DTU 9.1 ∆pltA is modulating the inhibitory effect of pyoluteorin. As we
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
21
==PAGE:32==
know that the biosynthesis of DAPG and pyoluteorin is closely related and that we two
molecules are often seen both together and on their own as mediates for biocontrol, Two
additional strains was tested in this set up. these two strain (DTU 9.1 ∆phlACB and DTU
9.1 ∆phlACB, pltA , are incapable of producing DAPG and both DAPG and pyoluteorin re­
spectively. From figure 3.3 it can be seen that when S. indicatrix is grown in the presence
of DTU ∆phlACB,pltA it is visually similar to the the wild type. Addition of pyoluteorin to
the setup with the double mutant does indicate a weak inhibition zone around the inhib­
ited spot. This could be an indication that, if pyoluteorin inhibitory effects are modulated it
does seem to be by DAPG. This experiment was only performed in duplicates, so it would
need to be repeated in at least triplicates. Additionally as we can see from the setup with
the P.protegens wildtype the lytic phenotype is not present in this experiment.
3.2
MIC Determination for Pyoluteorin, Ciprofloxacin and
Tetracycline
As one of the goals of this thesis is to investigate the effects pyoluteorin plays in inducing
changes in the transcription of S. indicatrix at SIC, we need to determine the level at
which it becomes inhibitory. In addition to determining the MIC for pyoluteorin, the MIC
for ciprofloxacin, a known bacteriocidal antibiotic, and tetracycline a known bacteriostatic
antibiotic, was also determined. The reason for testing ciprofloxacin and tetracycline will
be explained later in the thesis. The results are shown in figure3.4. The MIC for all three
antibiotics was determined be be 8µg/ml in 10% TSB.
Figure 3.4: S. indicatrix MIC values for pyoluteorin, ciprofloxacin and tetracycline. Deter­
mined in 10% TSB. The line through the data points shows median value.
22
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:33==
3.3
Growth Inhibiting Effects of Pyoluteorin at SIC
Figure 3.5: Growth curves of S. indicatrix D763 in the presence of increasing concentra­
tions of pyoluteorin. performed 10% TSB in octuplicates
As we want to test SIC of pyoluteorin and its induction of changes on the transcriptome
of S. indicatrix D763, it is important to quantify the growth inhibition effect at SIC. A risk
here is that to high concentrations of pyoluteorin induces a high number of stress related
genes, and thus makes it more difficult to find the genes involved in microbial interactions.
To achieve this, the growth of S. indicatrix was measured in varying concentrations of
pyoluteorin (See figure 3.5). As it can be seen from the figure, no growth was observed at
concentration at or greater than MIC (8­32µg/ml). The variations for these are quite high,
but it can also bee seen that variance decreases, for the entire dataset as OD increases.
Therefore the high variances might be explained by limitations of the platereader at low
ODs. However when looking at the variances for the experiment with 4µg/ml pyoluteorin,
a decrease in variance is observed as OD increases, but it does not decrease to the
same degree as others at a similar OD. Another possible explanation, or a part of it, could
therefore be that the variance is caused by stress induced by pyoluteorin. For the lowest
concentrations tested (0.0625­1µg/ml) no obvious change in the growth could be seen.
A seemingly growth inhibiting effect was however observed for strains grown with 2 and
4µg/ml pyoluteorin. For the strain grown with 2µg/ml pyoluteorin a possible decrease in
growth­rate might be present, but it does manage to reach the same OD as the strains
whos growth was not inhibited. For the strain grown with 4µg/ml pyoluteorin a similiar
but more pronouced effect was observed. In order to better be able to quantify potential
inhibitory effects, the growth rates for the different conditions were calculated. They can
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
23
==PAGE:34==
be seen in figure 3.6. From this figure it can be seen that the growth­rate of strains grown
in both 2µg/ml and 4µg/ml were significantly decreased compared to the growth control
(0µg/ml). Additionally from this analysis it can be seen the growth rate of the S indicatrix
d763 was reduced in the presence of 1µg/ml pyoluteorin. This was not apparent from
figure 3.5.
Figure 3.6: Growth rates of S. indicatrix D763 in the presence of varying concentration
of pyolution. Concentrations can be seen on the x­axis. The increase in OD pr hour is
represented as the size of each bar (As a logatrithmic value). Statistical significance is
represented by stars (*). * P­value ≤0.05, ** P­value ≤0.01, *** P­value ≤0.001, **** P­
value ≤0.0001. Analysis was perfomed by one way anova, and subsequent comparisons
between each group and the growth control (0µg/ml)
24
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:35==
3.4
Time Kill Kinetics Reveals Bacteriocidal Effects of
Pyoluteorin
Figure 3.7: CFU/ml for S. indicatrix D763 in 10% TSB with increasing concentration of
pyoluteorin (squares), ciprofloxacin (triangles) and tetracyline (diamonds) over 24 hours.
performed in octuplicates in 10% TSA
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
25
==PAGE:36==
In order to try to explain some of the dynamics observed in the overlay assay described
in section 2.1, the mechanism of which pyoluteorin inhibits growth was tested. This was
done in a time­kill­kinetic assay. Here 3 different concentrations of pyoluteorin (1xMIC,
2xMIC and 4xMIC) was tested. As this assay was performed in 10% TSB and not mueller­
hinton broth, which is the standard, a know bacteriocidal agent; Ciprofloxacin and a known
bacteriostatic agent; tetracycline was also included verify the viability of the assay.
For ciprofloxacin the following reductions in CFU/ml were observed. For 1xMIC the CFU/ml
was reduced from 5.6x 106 at T0 to 1.3 x106 at T24. For 2xMIC the CFU/ml was reduced
from 5.6x106 at T0 to 1.1x105 at T24. Finally for 4xMIC the CFU/ml was reduced from
6.9x106 at T0 to 0 at T24. All of these reductions were found to be significant (P­values:
0.0103, 0.0094 and 0.0169 respectively). This Corresponds to a 76%, 98% and 100%
reduction in the overall CFU/ml. From this data we can see that ciprofloxacin does fulfill
the requirement of a 99.9% reduction in CFU/ml at a concentration ≤4xMIC. From this
we can conclude that Ciprofloxacin does function as a bacteriocial antibiotic in 10%TSB.
However if we look at figure 3.7 we can see what appears to be a increase in CFU/ml
between T8 and T24 for both 1x MIC and 2x MIC, though not as pronounced for the
latter. The increase for both were found to not be significant (p­value 0.194 and 0.259
respectively), and is thus most likely due to noise in the data.
For tetracyline only one of the tested MICs showed a significant reduction in CFU/ml. This
was for 4xMIC, where a reduction from 5x10 6CFU/ml to 1.5x10 6CFU/ml (P­value:0.026)
was observed. This corresponds to a 70% reduction. This means that tetracyline func­
tions as a bacteriostatic antibiotic in 10% TSA. From this combined with the results for
ciprofloxacin, it can be seen that antibiotics with known inhibitory mechanism in Mueller­
hinton broth can be replicated in this media.
The CFU/ml for pyoluteorin decreased from 6.6x106 at T0 to 1.4 x106 at T24 with a pyolu­
teorin concentration corresponding to 1xMIC. This does show a significant reduction (p­
value: 0.0022) in the amount of CFU/ml corresponding to a 79% decrease. A similar pro­
file was seen for pyoluteorin at 2xMIC and 4xMIC, which showed a 71%(P­value:0.0125)
and 65% (p­value: 0.0506) reduction respectively. This does not meet the critieria of
a 99.9% reduction in CFU/ml within 4 times the MIC of the compound, required for py­
oluteorin to be classified as a bacteriocidal antibiotic. From this data set it seems that
Pyoluteorin functions as a bacteriostatic antibiotic in 10%TSB.
26
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:37==
3.5
Testing S. indicatrix Supernatant Ability to Reduce
Growth in Liquid Media
Figure 3.8: Growth rates of P. protegens DTU 9.1 in the presence of varying concentration
of Supernatant from S. indicatrix D763. Proportion of P. protegens to supernatant can be
seen on the x­axis. The increase in OD pr hour is represented as the size of each bar (As
a logatrithmic value). Statistical significance is represented by stars (*). * P­value ≤0.05,
** P­value ≤0.01, *** P­value ≤0.001, **** P­value ≤0.0001. Analysis was performed
by one way anova, and subsequent comparisons between each group and the growth
control.
The lytic ability of S. indicatrix was observed on solid media, but the RNA extraction and
subsequent RNA­seq was performed in liquid media. Therefore it would be interesting to
see if the supernatant, which was expected to contain SMs or proteins capable of inducing
lysis was tested against a liquid culture of P. protegens, to see if it could affect the growth
rate. From figure 3.8 it can be seen that this does not seem to be the case from this
experiment as no significant changes in growth rates were observed.
3.6
Chloroform Inhibition Does Prevent Growth
As we are using chloroform to inhibit P. protegens before the addition of the top­agar
containing S. indicatrix. We wanted to verify that the treatment with chlorofom fumes did
infact prevent further growth of P. protegens. For this we used a strain of P. protegens
tagged with GFP, which was allow to grow on it own, in the same way as the normal soft
agar overlay assay. This time fluorescence of the colony was measured before chloroform
treatment, after treatment, just after top­agar with S.indicatrix was added, and after 24
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
27
==PAGE:38==
and 48 hours. Treatment with chloroform did cause a marked decrease in fluorescence.
There are two possible explanations for this, either the chloroform fumes denatures GFP,
causing it to loose its fluorescence, or chloroform functions as a fluorescence quencher.
No growth of the colonies was observed over 48 hours as no fluorescence was observed
in this time period. Additionally, chloroform­treated colonies were also resuspended in
physological saline, before an undiluted sample was replated on LB. Here no growth was
observed either. From this it is most likely that treatment with chloroform is able to inhibit
growth of P. protegens but the images taken during this process were unfortunately not
usable, and the experiment will therefore have to be repeated in order to prove this.
3.7
S. indicatrix RNA Extraction and Verification of Quantity
and Quality
The results from Dnase treatments cen be seen from figure 3.9. Here we see two band at
around 1500bp and 1000bp in size. This correspond with 23s and 16s RNA respectively.
The band at the top of the gel in lane 4, is genomic DNA showing that DNase treatment for
Py3 was not successful. therefore DNase treatment was repeated for this sample (data
not shown). For the second round of treatment for Py3 no band was present indication
genomic DNA and two clear bands for 23s and 16s were visible (data not shown. From
table 3.1 The concentration of RNA for the samples can be found. RNA extraction was
successful for all sample, although Py4 and WT4 have relatively low concentrations. The
RNA integrity number RIN needed to be above 6 in order to be of sufficiently high quality
for RNA sequencing. It can be seen from table 3.1 that all samples are of sufficiently high
quality.
Figure 3.9: Gel electrophoresis on 0.8% agarose gel. Lane 1, 12: generuler express
ladder (5000bp, 3000bp, 2000bp, 1500bp, 1000bp, 750bp, 500bp, 300bp, 100bp), lane
2: Py1, lane 3: Py2, lane 4 :Py3, lane 5:Py4, lane 6: Py5, lane 7: WT1, lane 8: WT2, lane
9: WT3, lane 10: WT4, lane 11: WT5
28
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:39==
Table 3.1: The measured RNA concentrations after DNase treatment and the RNA in­
tegrity number (RIN) for the samples without addition of pyoluteorin (WT) and the samples
with added pyoluteorin (Py).
Sample
RNA Conc [ng/µl] (qubit)
RNA conc [ng/µl] (agilent bioanalyser)
RIN
WT1
18.8
25.5
6.9
WT2
19.3
27.8
7
WT3
18.5
42.6
6.9
WT4
8,3
25.7
7
WT5
58.4
49,9
6.4
Py1
38.8
50.9
7.7
Py2
43.4
53.5
7.8
Py3
43.8
35.1
7.6
Py4
12.7
26.3
7.6
Py5
21.2
43.2
7.6
3.8
RNA­Seq of Strains Grown with 1g/ml Pyoluteorin
Reveals Deferentially Expressed Genes and Gene
Clusters
As the data­set we are working with is very large and complex (a total of 108,495,558
hits across the 10 samples, mapped against 4108 genes) we first want to investigate if
there are any strong patterns in the data set. We have achieved this by use of a principal
component analysis (PCA) plot (See figure 3.10). It can be seen that there is a clear
visible grouping of the expression profile of the strains grown with 1µg/ml pyoluteorin and
those grown without. This is a good indication that we will be able to find DEGs in this
data­set.
Figure 3.10: PCA plot showing grouping of S. indicatrix D763 grown without pyolution(teal,
pyo0), and S. indicatrix D763 grown with 1µg/ml (orange, pyo1) PC: Principal component.
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
29
==PAGE:40==
Next we used DESeq2 to generate a list of all significantly up­ and down­regulated genes,
using fairly strict criteria for determining significance (2Log2fold change in expression
either up or down with an adjusted p­value of 0.01). This was done in order to get a view
of only the genes that have the greatest change in their gene expression. The results
can be seen in figure 3.11. It is important to note here, that the contrast is made by
comparing the RNA­expression of our pyoluteorin treated strains of S. indicatrix against
the RNA­expression profile of our control strains. As such, if a gene is found to have a
higher expression it means that there were more hits found for our pyoluteorin treated
strain compared to our untreated control. Vice­versa, a down regulation means that there
were fewer hits found in treated strains compared to the untreated control.
Figure 3.11: Volcano plot showing log2fold change and P­value for genes of S.indicatrix.
upregluated genes are marked as blue while downregulated genes are shown in red.
A total of 43 genes were found to be significantly upregulated, while 13 were found to be
significantly downregulated. A list of all of these genes, can be found in Appendix A.1.
Additionally a full list is uploaded as a supplementary file named:
pyo_vs_Wt_filtered_2log2fold_With_annotations. Of the upregulated genes a total of
9 were either 30s or 50s ribosomal proteins. 3 genes were involved in arsenic regula­
tion. These arsenic regulating genes were found to be the second, forth and ninth most
upregulated genes. 3 genes were involved in iron regulation. These were two genes an­
30
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:41==
notated to encode bacterioferritin (KX724_06945 and KX724_19150) and sufB involved
in synthesising Fe­S clusters. Two genes on this list, are seemingly involved with prevent­
ing and repairing DNA damage. KX724_12090, is annotated to encode for a superoxide
dismutate, while KX724_06505 is annotated to encode for deoxyribonuclease V. these
two genes are 5 and 8 most upregulated genes with a log2fold increase of 4.08 and 3.54
respectively.
Of the 13 down regulated genes 3 of them were also involved in iron­regulation. These
were KX724_03705 which was annotated to be a TonB dependant hemoglobin/transfer­
in/lactoferin family receptor. KX724_19155 annotated to be bacterioferritin­associated
ferredoxin, and HemP involved in uptake of hemin.
A gene that was found to be significantly upregulated was KX724_12090. It is annotated
to encode for a superoxide dismutase, which responsible for turning oxygen radicals back
into O2 and Hydrogenperoxide. Of all the upregulated genes found with this strict set of
criteria, only 3 of them, KX724_04345, KX724_04350 and KX724_04355 (rpsM,rpsK and
rpsD were found to be next to each other on the genome.
In addition to the 43 DEGs, a total of 19 tRNA sequences were also found to be to be
significantly upregulated (no tRNA sequences were found to be downregualted). Of these
15 were non­polar (4xAla, 4xGly, 3xLeu, 2xPhe, 1xPro) 3 were neutral (2xSer, 1xThr) and
one was polar (Gln).
The Lack of significant regulated clusters of genes could be an indication that the criteria
used for determining significance were to strict. Therefore a new round of analysis was
performed. Genes were now found to be significantly regulated if a 0.5Log2fold change
in expression either up or down with an adjusted p­value of 0.05. A total of 652 genes
were now found to be significantly deferentially regulated (352 genes were upregulated
and 323 were downregulated. A full list of the genes is uploaded as a supplementary
file named. pyo_vs_Wt_filtered_0.5log2fold_With_annotations This time there was a
focus on differential expressed clusters of genes, as an assumption was made that the lytic
response observed is most likely due to expression of BCG clusters. Some of the clusters
found during this second round of analysis will we explained in the following sections. A
list of all the significantly regulated genes can be found in the supplementary files. As two
genes with relation to DNA repair was found during the first round of analysis, this new
list was checked for other genes with known relation to DNA­repair. Here recA was found
to be significantly upregulated with a 2log2fold change 1.54 and an adjusted p­value of
6.41 x10­13.
3.8.1
Upregulation of M23 Family Metallopeptidase
From the second round of analysis one of the clusters contained transcripts for a M23­
family­metallopeptidase. (gene­KX724_03555) This gene has a log2fold change of 2.053,
and was thus also in the stricter dataset. We can now see that it is placed closely with
a large set of genes involved in cell division (table 3.2), many of which have a log2fold
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
31
==PAGE:42==
change of above 1. To investigate orientation of the genes and the possibility that they
are transcribed together, NCBI’s genome workbench was used.
Figure 3.12: Overview of the cluster containing the M23 metallopeptidase (shown at far
right in a black box)
Figure 3.13: Overview the intergenic regions before and after the M23 family metallopep­
tidase (shown with black outline).
From figure 3.12 we can see the gene responsible for the M23 metallopeptidase does read
in the same direction as the rest of the genes in this group, but that the Gene KX_03550
(which is only annotated as a domain containing a protein) reads in opposite direction.
From figure 3.13 It can be seen that the intergenic region between lpcX and KX724_03555
is quite large making unlikely that transcription is initiated by the same promoter. The
same is the case for the intergenic region after KX724_03555 and the next gene (secA),
not significantly regulated). From table 3.2 it can be seen that the M23 metallopeptidase
is located near a group of genes with known roles in septum formation and cell division.
To investigate if the M23 metallopeptidase was also involved in cell division, the region
was compared to other more well known strains. In E. coli K­12 the genetic region was
found to be very similar with the same genes appearing in the same order as in S.indicatrix
D763. However for E.coli No gene corresponding to the M23 metallopeptidase was found.
In S. maltophilia NCTC10258 a similiar region, containg multiple fts­genes also beginning
with an mraZ transcriptional repressor, was found. In this case nplD was annotated in the
same position as KX724_03555. Protein blast revealed that nplD from S.maltphilia and
S.indicatrix had 95% identity. When comparing this to nplD from E. coli a 39% similarity
was found (P­value: 4x10­21)
32
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:43==
Table 3.2: Table showing the genes Located Near M23 metallopetidase and their statisti­
cal significance
Gene name
log2­
FoldChange
Adj. P­value
sig
Annotated
function
KX724_03475
1,909922
1.33E­12
up_sig
division/cell wall
cluster transcriptional
repressor MraZ
KX724_03480
0,803249
1.62E­05
up_sig
16S rRNA
(cytosine(1402)­N(4))
­methyltransferase RsmH
KX724_03485
0,37843
0.207482
not_rel
cell division protein FtsL
KX724_03490
0,519552
0.003893
up_sig
penicillin­binding protein 2
KX724_03495
0,55056
0.009463
up_sig
UDP­N­acetylmuramoyl­L­
alanyl­D­glutamate
2%2C6­diaminopimelate ligase
KX724_03500
1.635351
1.65E­09
up_sig
UDP­N­acetylmuramoyl­tripeptide­
­D­alanyl­D­alanine ligase
KX724_03505
0.782192
0.005682
up_sig
phospho­N­acetylmuramoyl
­pentapeptide­transferase
KX724_03510
0.825401
0.000149
up_sig
putative lipid II flippase FtsW
KX724_03515
1.079013
1.07E­05
up_sig
undecaprenyldiphospho­
muramoylpentapeptide
beta­N­acetylglucosaminyltransferase
KX724_03520
0.66256
0.004724
up_sig
DP­N­acetylmuramate–L­alanine ligase
KX724_03525
0.987565
0.000359
up_sig
D­alanine ligase
KX724_03530
0.807174
0.004799
up_sig
cell division protein FtsQ (PBP)
KX724_03535
1.068302
0.000165
up_sig
cell division protein FtsA
KX724_03540
1.96244
1.12E­22
up_sig
cell division protein FtsZ
KX724_03545
0.453719
0.13538
not_rel
LpxC,UDP­3­O­acyl­N­acetylglucosamine
deacetylase
KX724_03550
0.930139
0.008124
up_sig
DUF721 domain­containing protein
KX724_03555
2.053144
0.000384
up_sig
M23 family metallopeptidase
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
33
==PAGE:44==
3.8.2
Small Cluster of Genes with Potential for Extracellular Secretion
Table 3.3: Table showing a small cluster of 4 genes, with annotations alluding to their role
in extracellular secretion and their statistical significance
Gene name
log2­
FoldChange
Adj. P­value
sig
Annotated
function
KX724_17570
1.725133
2.90E­08
up_sig
efflux transporter outer membrane subunit
KX724_17575
1.813692
4.72E­06
up_sig
HlyD family secretion protein
KX724_17580
1.689765
1.24E­08
up_sig
MFS transporter
KX724_17585
1.796485
1.97E­12
up_sig
LysR family transcriptional regulator
Another group of genes that was not found to be significantly upregulated during the first
analysis, can be seen from table 3.3. These four genes, can be seen to have a Log2fold
change for 1.69 to 1.81, and have therefore just barely been left out of the original 43
up regulated genes. All of the four new genes have significantly low P­value to qualify
as significant for both rounds of testing. From the annotations provided, it can be seen
that these genes seem to be involved in secretion. More specifically, as there is HlyD
family secretion proteins annotated, these genes seem to encode for a type 1 secretions
systems (T1SS). Production of the secreted protein is not readily apparent in the areas
surrounding the cluster, as no genes here show any significant changes in expression or
have annotations that give immediate associations with proteins secreted from a T1SS.
protein blasting the sequences reavealed that the MFS transporter was also annotated as
ermB/qacA family drug resistance transporter. in S indictrix with 98% protein similarity.
As KX724_17585 is annotated to be a LysR familiy transcriptional regulator and a quite
large intergenic region is present between this gene and KX724_17580 it is possible
that a promoter binding site is present here. therefore The intergenic region between
KX724_17580 and KX724_17585 was tested for predicited promoter binding sites using
SAPPHIRE. one possible σ70 promoter binding site was found (p­value:0.002298) with a
transcription start site 85bp upstream of the start­codon for KX724_17580. the sequence
for the predicted promoter regions was: tttttcgcaggcaacggcctttctagact.
Figure 3.14: Overview of the cluster containing the 4 genes with involved in potential
secretion of a HlyD family protein.
34
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:45==
3.8.3
Cluster of Phage Genes Might be an Indication of Stress
Table 3.4: Table showing the genes encoding for phage related protein.
Gene name
log2­
FoldChange
Adj. P­value
sig
Annotated
function
KX724_01275
1.15615
9.07E­05
up_sig
head­tail connector protein
KX724_01280
1.465806
0.000826
up_sig
head­tail adaptor protein
KX724_01285
1.236982
0.000138
up_sig
domain­containing protein;
KX724_01290
1.443967
2.72E­09
up_sig
phage tail protein
KX724_01295
1.095542
0.003925
up_sig
phage tail assembly chaperone
KX724_01300
1.380617
0.001491
up_sig
DUF1799 domain­containing protein
KX724_01305
1.06045
3.07E­06
up_sig
phage tail tape measure protein
The 7 genes, shown in table 3.4 above, were also found to be significantly up regulated in
the second round of analysis. The log3fold change for these genes were found to be be­
tween 1 and 1.5. Compared to some of the previously described genes, the upregulation
found here is quite a bit lower. It is, however, interesting to see the annotated function of
these genes, as they are all involved in production of phage head and tail proteins. This
could be an indication that the cells were stressed by the addition of 1µg/ml pyoluteorin.
When this cluster is investigated in NCBI’s genome workbench it was found that the gene
KX724_01270 (just upstream of the first gene in the phage cluster) was transcribed in the
opposite direction and there was enough space between the genes for a potential pro­
moter to be present. It is therefore likely that KX724_01275 is the first transcribed gene in
this cluster. When investigating the other end of the cluster it was found that the end of the
coding sequence for KX724_01305 was overlapping with the start codon of another gene.
This gene (KX724_01310) was annotated to encode for a product­phage tail protein, and
is thus most likely part of the transcription of this potential operon, but its regulation was
not found to be significantly upregulated (adjusted P­value: 0.09).
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
35
==PAGE:46==
4
Discussion
The interaction between P. protegens and S. indicatrix has in this project been revealed
to be even more complex than expected. Even though multiple steps have been taken
to simplify the interaction, we are still not able to fully explain and replicate the lysis seen
in section 3.1. It does seem that pyoluteorin is responsible, at least in part, for inducing
the lytic phenotype of S. indicatrix. However, as mentioned in section 3.1 this was not
consistent. In some instances the inhibitory zone around P. protegens was much larger
and S. indicatrix was not able to overcome it and in other instances it was overcome but
no digestion was observed. From this it seems that other factors do also play a role in
activation. Many additional factors are know to play a role in activation and production
of SM, such as pH, temperature, and media composition (Baral, Akhgari, and Metsä­
Ketelä 2018). These factors were not tested in this project, but would be interesting to
investigate. 10% TSA and TSB was used in this study and while it is a complex media, the
low concentrations of the nutrients was used to mimic the low nutrient availability of the
soil. Perhaps testing the effects of minimal media or medias with different compositions
could reveal some of the intricacies of the interaction. pH was another factor that was not
tested in this study. It would therefore be prudent to see if changes in pH of the media
could explain the instability in the onset of lysis.
4.1
Pyoluteorin is Bacteriostatic and Might Function by
Inhibiting Protein Synthesis
The timelapse photos of S. indicatrixs growth showed that pyoluteorin had an inhibitory
effect around the producing P. protegens colony. It was also observed that this inhibi­
tion, at least in some cases, was transient and that over time S. indicatrix was able to
overcome this inhibition, causing the inhibitory zone to shrink from the outside in. As py­
oluteorin is produced and secreted by P. protegens a concentration gradient is assumed
to be present, with the highest concentration nearest to the colony. This effect could be
caused if pyoluteorin acted as a bacteriostatic antibiotic halting the growth of S. indicatrix.
This led us to test the activity of pyoluteorin in a modified time­kill assay. In this assay,
we could conclude that two antibiotics with known activity acted as expected and that
pyoluteorin was able to inhibit growth but not decrease CFU/ml to an extent that would
cause it to be classified as a bacteriocidal compound. Therefore, pyoluteorin functions
as a bacteriostatic antibiotic under the conditions tested in this thesis. When it comes to
mode of action for pyoluteorin the DEGs genes that was identified in this study might pro­
vide some insight here. A total of 9 genes with relation to either 30s or 50s subunit of the
ribosome was identified to have an upregulation ≥2. This could perhaps be explained by
pyoluteorin binding to ribosome and blocking protein synthesis. As a response to this the
bacteria upregulate genes involved in protein synthesis such as 30s and 50s ribosomal
36
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:47==
proteins to try and overcome this inhibition. Studies done in other organisms, such as E.
coli have shown a relation between antibiotics that inhibit protein synthesis and upregula­
tion of ribosomal proteins including both 30s and 50s (O’Rourke et al. 2020; Sabina et al.
2003). This could allude to pyoluteorin binding to the ribosome. A study performed by
Molina­Santiago et al. 2015 on the transcriptional effects of different antibiotic, done in P.
putida, showed that while treatment with tetracycline, kanamycin, gentamicin, and specti­
nomycin did cause an upregulation of 30s genes, a downregulation of aminoacyl­tRNA
was also observed. The same was the case for Choramphenicol, which caused an up­
and downregulation in 50s genes, but also a decrease in aminoacyl­tRNA. The treatment
with pyoluteorin did cause an increase in aminoacyl­tRNA (19 transcripts was found to be
upregulated ≥2). From this it seems the DEG profile found in this study does not fit with
the DEG profile for antibiotics inhibiting protein synthesis by binding to the ribosome. If
instead pyoluteorin inhibited tRNA themselves, and thus inhibitited protein synthesis this
could potentially explain the DEG profile observed in this study. In fact, treatment with
4­azaleucine, a competitive inhibitor for leucine, binding to leucyl­tRNA­synthase, was
shown by Sabina et al. 2003 to increase transcribtion of both amino acid synthesis and
ribosomal protein. In addition, an increase in prophage genes was also observed when
treating with 4­azaleucine. In this study a group of prophage genes was also observed to
be upregulated.
4.2
M23 Family Metallopeptidase is Most Likely Involved in
Cell Division
A M23 metallopeptidase was found to be significantly upregulated with a log2 fold change
≥2. This group of peptidases are involved in hydrolysis of bacterial peptidoglycan. This
group of enzymes are involved in maturation of peptidoglycan, turnover, a recycling dur­
ing cell division (Razew et al. 2022). Some enzymes in this group have also been found
to have antibacterial properties against mainly Gram­positives (Carmo de Freire Bastos,
Coutinho, and Coelho 2010) but they have also been shown to function against Gram­
negatives (Abramov et al. 2022). The area upstream of the M23 metallopeptidase was
annotated to be mraZ followed by multiple genes belonging to the fts family. These genes
are well described as being responsible for septum formation and separation of mother
and daughter cell during cell division (White et al. 2022; Margolin 2005). The proximity
of the M23 metallopeptidase to the MraZ regulated cell division cluster, makes it prob­
able that it is involved in some part of the cell division and not secreted as a peptidase
inhibiting other organisms. When investigating similar genetic sequences in other organ­
isms it was found that E. coli K12 harbored a similar sequence of genes, but not the M23
metallopeptidase. S maltophila, however, was shown to harbor a sequence for a protein
with 96% similarity to the KX724_03555. In S. maltophilia this gene was not annotated as
a generic M23 metallopeptidase but as NlpD. NlpD has been characterized as a protein
required for activation of peptidases responsible for peptidoglycan remoddelling (Tsang,
Yakhnina, and Bernhardt 2017). This further supports the hypothesis that KX724_03555
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
37
==PAGE:48==
is involved in cell division. As to why it has been annotated as a M23 metallo peptidates, it
could be explain by the LysM binding motif. Both NplD and many metallopeptidases have
been shown to have this LysM binding motif, which provides specificity for peptidoglycans
(Razew et al. 2022; Tsang, Yakhnina, and Bernhardt 2017).
4.3
Upregulation of Prophage Genes caused by DNA repair
Response
As mentioned previously, treatment with certain antibiotics such as 4­azaleucine has been
shown to increase expression of prophage genes in Gram­negative bacteria (Sabina et al.
2003). This could be a possible explanation of the group of 7 upregulated prophage genes
found in this study. Another possibility is that these prophage genes are upregulated due
to DNA damage (Sutcliffe et al. 2021). RecA, which was shown to be significantly up­
regulated in the pyoluteorin exposed strains, has been shown induced by RecA, a known
component of bacterial DNA repair response (Chen et al. 2019)). Two additional genes
with relation to DNA damage, KX724_12090 and KX724_06505, were also found to be
upregulated. The superoxide dismutase KX724_12090 is responsible for turning oxygen
radical back into O2 and is known to be a type of defence against oxidative stress (Bafana
et al. 2011). KX724_06505 encodes for DNase V and endonuclease also know to be in­
volved with DNA repair (Cao 2012). Upregulation of these genes do give an indication
that even at 1µg/ml pyoluteorin S. indicatrix is experiencing some cellular stress. This is
in correspondence with the decrease in growth rate shown in figure 3.6.
4.4
Regulation of Intracellular Iron as a Way to Prevent ROS
As described in section 3.8 multiple genes encoding for bacterioferritin were upregulated.
These proteins are responsible for oxidizing and storing soluble Fe+2 as Fe+3 (Rivera
2017). While Fe+2 is required for bacterial growth it can also react with O2 and H2O2 and
form reactive oxygen species. Additionally, KX724_0370, annotated as encoding HemP,
was shown to be downregulated. HemP has been shown to be a transcriptional activator
for uptake of hemin, a source of iron (Sato et al. 2017). This suggest that treatment with
pyoluteorin causes the cells to try to decrease the amount of free intracellular iron. As
described in the previous section an upregulation of superoxide dismuate was seen, and
together with changes observed to iron regulation, could be a way for the cells to regulate
the formation of ROS and thus damage to cellular components such as DNA.
4.5
The Potential T1SS Cluster Does Not Fit the Structure of
a Typical RTX­operon
One of the clusters of genes found in this study showed annotations with relation to ex­
tracellular secretion via a T1SS. T1SS systems are comprised of 3 proteins to facilitate
transport over the Gram negative double membrane; an ABC transport, facilitating trans­
port over the inner membrane, an outer membrane protein that generally forms a pore
in the outer membrane, and a membrane fusion protein that spans the gap between the
38
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:49==
membranes (Kanonenberg, Schwarz, and Schmitt 2013). This most common type of
substrates secreted by T1SS are the so called RTX (repeats in toxin), named after their
signature repeating amino acid sequence. This category includes the two best described
T1SS systems; the has operon, and the hemolysin operon (hly). Common for this type of
T1SS is the structural organisation of operons, where the membrane fusion protein, the
ABC transporter, and the toxin is encoded on the same operon (Spitz et al. 2019). The
outer membrane protein is typically encoded else were. The cluster found in this study
does have some of the structural characteristics associated with this type of T1SS, such
as HlyD family secretion protein. This gene could potentially encode for membrane fusion
protein in a similar way to HlyD (Pimenta et al. 2005). Transport over the inner membrane
could be facilitated by the MFS protein. However, as the name suggest this not annotated
to be an ABC transporter but rather a major facilitator superfamiliy transporter. These gen­
erally facilitate transport of small molecules, either down their concentration gradient or
against their gradient using the energy from transport of another molecule (Drew et al.
2021). Additionally, the cluster identified in this study does not contain a gene encoding
for anything resembling a possible substrate to be secreted. On the other hand it does
contain a gene that is annotated to encode for an outer membrane transporter, which
as mentioned earlier, is commonly located outside the RTX T1SS operon. Therefore,
it does seem unlikely that this operon encodes for a T1SS. When the MFS transporter
(KX_17850) was protein blasted, some of the results that came back annotated the gene
as a ErmB/QacA family drug resistance transporter. The structure of ErmB facilitated
transport has been shown to be very similar to that of the T1SS, with it functioning as an
antiporter, connected to an adaptor component, with the adaptor component also being
connected to an outer membrane channel (Yousefian et al. 2021). In order to test if these
genes are involved in protein secretion or drug efflux, it would be prudent to construct gene
knock outs to test if it affected S. indicatrix to lyse P. protegens or if it perhaps caused an
increase in antibiotic susceptibility.
Finally, the gene KX724_17585 could very well encode for a regulatory protein as the
intergenic region between this gene and the MFS transporter does contain a predicted
σ70 promoter binding region.
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
39
==PAGE:50==
5
Conclusion
This study set out to investigate the interaction between P. protegens and S. indicatrix,
both found in the rhizosphere soil microbiome. By using pyuluteorin, a P. protegens pro­
duced secondary metabolite, as a mediator for the interaction, we tried to simplify an
otherwise extremely complex system. This study used both classical microbial methods
and RNA­sequencing analysis to elucidate this.
The results produced in this study do partially support the hypothesis that pyoluteorin
induces a counter­punch in S. indicatrix resulting in lysis of P. protegens. It was however
also shown that additional unknown factors play a role in inducing the lysis phenotype.
The antibiotic effects of pyoluteorin was investigated in this study. From the results found,
it was concluded that pyoluteorin functions as an bacteriostatic antibiotic. The results
from analysing the pyoluteorin induced changes to S. indicatrixs transcriptome alluded to
a possible mode of action for pyoluteorin as an inhibitor of protein synthesis.
From the RNA­sequencing performed in this study we were not able to identify upregu­
lation of genes that could fully explain the lysis observed. Upregulation of a gene cluster
with involvement in extracellular secretion was however found. Whether this cluster is
involved in lysis of P. protegens, or has other functions, has yet to be determined.
The data produced in this study also revealed that even at an 8th of the MIC, pyoluteorin
was still able to induce stress responses in S. indicatrix. This was seen as an upregulation
of DNA repair genes, upregulation of a cluster of prophage genes and changes for genes
involved in controlling intracellular iron concentration. The stress induced by pyoluteorin
was also able to be measured as a small yet significant decrease in the growth rate of S.
indicatrix.
Overall the pyoluteorin mediated interactions between S. indicatrix and P. protegens were
found to be more complex than anticipated and more research is needed on the physical
and chemical requirements for initiation of the S. indicatrix lysis phenotype. The gene
cluster KX724_17570­17585 does also need to be investigated further to elucidate its
potential role in lysis of P. protegens.
40
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
Šunjka, Dragana and Špela Mechora (Nov. 2022). “An Alternative Source of Biopesticides
and Improvement in Their Formulation—Recent Advances”. In: Plants 11.22, p. 3172.
DOI: 10.3390/plants11223172. URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/plants11223172.
Raaijmakers, Jos M. and Mark Mazzola (Sept. 2012). “Diversity and Natural Functions of
Antibiotics Produced by Beneficial and Plant Pathogenic Bacteria”. In: Annual Review
of Phytopathology 50.1, pp. 403–424. DOI: 10.1146/annurev- phyto- 081211- 172908.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-phyto-081211-172908.
Romero, Diego et al. (July 2011). “Antibiotics as Signal Molecules”. In: Chemical Re­
views 111.9, pp. 5492–5505. DOI: 10.1021/cr2000509. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/
cr2000509.
Mendes, Rodrigo et al. (May 2011). “Deciphering the Rhizosphere Microbiome for Disease­
Suppressive Bacteria”. In: Science 332.6033, pp. 1097–1100. DOI: 10.1126/science.
1203980. URL: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1203980.
Gross, Harald and Joyce E. Loper (2009). “Genomics of secondary metabolite produc­
tion by Pseudomonas spp.” In: Natural Product Reports 26.11, p. 1408. DOI: 10.1039/
b817075b. URL: https://doi.org/10.1039/b817075b.
Parte, Aidan C. (Nov. 2013). “LPSN—list of prokaryotic names with standing in nomen­
clature”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 42.D1, pp. D613–D616. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt1111.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkt1111.
Spagnolo, Anna Maria, Marina Sartini, and Maria Luisa Cristina (Feb. 2021). “Pseudomonas
aeruginosa in the healthcare facility setting”. In: Reviews in Medical Microbiology 32.3,
pp. 169–175. DOI: 10.1097/mrm.0000000000000271. URL: https://doi.org/10.1097/
mrm.0000000000000271.
Folkesson, Anders et al. (Nov. 2012). “Adaptation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to the cys­
tic fibrosis airway: an evolutionary perspective”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology 10.12,
pp. 841–851. DOI: 10.1038/nrmicro2907. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro2907.
Scherlach, Kirstin et al. (Nov. 2013). “Biosynthesis and Mass Spectrometric Imaging of
Tolaasin, the Virulence Factor of Brown Blotch Mushroom Disease”. In: ChemBioChem
14.18, pp. 2439–2443. DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201300553. URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/
cbic.201300553.
Hwang, Michael S. H. et al. (Sept. 2005). “Phylogenetic Characterization of Virulence and
Resistance Phenotypes of iPseudomonas syringae/i”. In: Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 71.9, pp. 5182–5191. DOI: 10.1128/aem.71.9.5182- 5191.2005. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.71.9.5182-5191.2005.
Wackett, Lawrence P. (Feb. 2003). “Pseudomonas putida—a versatile biocatalyst”. In:
Nature Biotechnology 21.2, pp. 136–138. DOI: 10.1038/nbt0203-136. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1038/nbt0203-136.
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
41
==PAGE:52==
Raaijmakers, Jos M., Maria Vlami, and Jorge T. de Souza (2002). In: Antonie van Leeuwen­
hoek 81.1/4, pp. 537–547. DOI: 10.1023/a:1020501420831. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1023/a:1020501420831.
Haas, Dieter and Geneviève Défago (Mar. 2005). “Biological control of soil­borne pathogens
by fluorescent pseudomonads”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology 3.4, pp. 307–319.
DOI: 10.1038/nrmicro1129. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro1129.
Garrido­Sanz, Daniel et al. (Feb. 2016). “Genomic and Genetic Diversity within the Pseu­
domonas fluorescens Complex”. In: PLOS ONE 11.2. Ed. by Boris Alexander Vinatzer,
e0150183. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150183. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0150183.
Hesse, Cedar et al. (June 2018). “Genome­based evolutionary history of iPseudomonas/i
spp”. In: Environmental Microbiology 20.6, pp. 2142–2159. DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.
14130. URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.14130.
Whipps, J. M. (Mar. 2001). “Microbial interactions and biocontrol in the rhizosphere”. In:
Journal of Experimental Botany 52.suppl 1, pp. 487–511. DOI: 10.1093/jexbot/52.
suppl_1.487. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/jexbot/52.suppl_1.487.
Voisard, Christophe et al. (n.d.). “Biocontrol of Root Diseases byPseudomonas fluorescens
CHA0: Current Concepts and Experimental Approaches”. In: Molecular Ecology of Rhi­
zosphere Microorganisms. Wiley­VCH Verlag GmbH, pp. 67–89. DOI: 10.1002/9783527615810.
ch6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527615810.ch6.
Ghosh, Ranjan, Sohini Chatterjee, and Narayan C. Mandal (2020). “Stenotrophomonas”.
In: Beneficial Microbes in Agro­Ecology. Elsevier, pp. 427–442. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-
12-823414-3.00020-4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-823414-3.00020-4.
Weber, Mareike et al. (June 2018). “Stenotrophomonas lactitubi sp. nov. and Stenotrophomonas
indicatrix sp. nov., isolated from surfaces with food contact”. In: International Journal of
Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 68.6, pp. 1830–1838. DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.
002732. URL: https://doi.org/10.1099/ijsem.0.002732.
Ryan, Robert P. et al. (July 2009). “The versatility and adaptation of bacteria from the
genus Stenotrophomonas”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology 7.7, pp. 514–525. DOI:
10.1038/nrmicro2163. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro2163.
Nicodemo, A. C. and J. I. Garcia Paez (Mar. 2007). “Antimicrobial therapy for Stenotrophomonas
maltophilia infections”. In: European Journal of Clinical Microbiology &amp Infectious
Diseases 26.4, pp. 229–237. DOI: 10.1007/s10096-007-0279-3. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10096-007-0279-3.
Chang, Ya­Ting et al. (Sept. 2015). “Update on infections caused by Stenotrophomonas
maltophilia with particular attention to resistance mechanisms and therapeutic options”.
In: Frontiers in Microbiology 6. DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00893. URL: https://doi.org/
10.3389/fmicb.2015.00893.
Park, Myoungsu et al. (Apr. 2005). “Isolation and characterization of diazotrophic growth
promoting bacteria from rhizosphere of agricultural crops of Korea”. In: Microbiological
42
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:53==
Research 160.2, pp. 127–133. DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2004.10.003. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.micres.2004.10.003.
Adeleke, Bartholomew Saanu, Ayansina Segun Ayangbenro, and Olubukola Oluranti Ba­
balola (June 2021). “Genomic assessment of Stenotrophomonas indicatrix for improved
sunflower plant”. In: Current Genetics 67.6, pp. 891–907. DOI: 10.1007/s00294-021-
01199-8. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00294-021-01199-8.
Lara­Moreno, Alba et al. (Jan. 2023). “Genome sequence of Stenotrophomonas indicatrix
CPHE1, a powerful phenanthrene­degrading bacterium”. In: 3 Biotech 13.2. DOI: 10.
1007/s13205-023-03469-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205-023-03469-3.
Lozano­Andrade, Carlos N., Mikael Lenz Strube, and Ákos T. Kovács (Nov. 2021). “Com­
plete Genome Sequences of Four Soil­Derived Isolates for Studying Synthetic Bacte­
rial Community Assembly”. In: Microbiology Resource Announcements 10.46. Ed. by
Leighton Pritchard. DOI: 10.1128/mra.00848-21. URL: https://doi.org/10.1128/mra.
00848-21.
Mosunova, Olga, Jorge C Navarro­Muñoz, and Jérôme Collemare (2021). “The Biosyn­
thesis of Fungal Secondary Metabolites: From Fundamentals to Biotechnological Ap­
plications”. In: Encyclopedia of Mycology. Elsevier, pp. 458–476. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-
12-809633-8.21072-8. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-809633-8.21072-8.
Moore, David, Geoffrey D. Robson, and Anthony P. J. Trinci (May 2020). 21st Century
Guidebook to Fungi. Cambridge University Press. DOI: 10.1017/9781108776387. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108776387.
Sanchez, S. and A.L. Demain (2011). “Secondary Metabolites”. In: Comprehensive Biotech­
nology. Elsevier, pp. 155–167. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-08-088504-9.00018-0. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-08-088504-9.00018-0.
Gross, Harald, Virginia O. Stockwell, et al. (Jan. 2007). “The Genomisotopic Approach:
A Systematic Method to Isolate Products of Orphan Biosynthetic Gene Clusters”. In:
Chemistry &amp Biology 14.1, pp. 53–63. DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2006.11.007. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2006.11.007.
Geudens, Niels and José C. Martins (Aug. 2018). “Cyclic Lipodepsipeptides From Pseu­
domonas spp. – Biological Swiss­Army Knives”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 9. DOI:
10.3389/fmicb.2018.01867. URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.01867.
Blumer, Caroline and Dieter Haas (Feb. 2000). “Mechanism, regulation, and ecological
role of bacterial cyanide biosynthesis”. In: Archives of Microbiology 173.3, pp. 170–
177. DOI: 10.1007/s002039900127. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s002039900127.
Liang, X.Y. et al. (Mar. 1996). “Control of damping­off of safflower by bacterial seed treat­
ment”. In: Canadian Journal of Plant Pathology 18.1, pp. 43–49. DOI: 10.1080/07060669609500653.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/07060669609500653.
Yan, Qing, Benjamin Philmus, et al. (Mar. 2017). “Novel mechanism of metabolic co­
regulation coordinates the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in Pseudomonas pro­
tegens”. In: eLife 6. DOI: 10.7554/elife.22835. URL: https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.22835.
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
43
==PAGE:54==
Nowak­Thompson, Brian et al. (Apr. 1999). “Characterization of the Pyoluteorin Biosyn­
thetic Gene Cluster of iPseudomonas fluorescens/i Pf­5”. In: Journal of Bacteriology
181.7, pp. 2166–2174. DOI: 10.1128/jb.181.7.2166-2174.1999. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1128/jb.181.7.2166-2174.1999.
Huang, Xianqing, An Yan, et al. (July 2006). “Identification and characterization of a pu­
tative ABC transporter PltHIJKN required for pyoluteorin production in Pseudomonas
sp. M18”. In: Gene 376.1, pp. 68–78. DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2006.02.009. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2006.02.009.
Huang, Xianqing, Donghua Zhu, et al. (Mar. 2004). “Identification and characterization
ofipltZ/i, a gene involved in the repression of pyoluteorin biosynthesis iniPseudomonas/isp.
M18”. In: FEMS Microbiology Letters 232.2, pp. 197–202. DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1097(04)
00074-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-1097(04)00074-6.
Dorrestein, Pieter C. et al. (Sept. 2005). “Dichlorination of a pyrrolyl­S­carrier protein by
FADH sub2/sub ­dependent halogenase PltA during pyoluteorin biosynthesis”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102.39, pp. 13843–13848. DOI: 10.
1073/pnas.0506964102. URL: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506964102.
Bender, CL, V Rangaswamy, and J Loper (Sept. 1999). “PscpOLYKETIDE/scp PscpRODUCTION
BY/scp PscpLANT/scp­AscpSSOCIATED/scp PscpSEUDOMONADS/scp”. In: Annual
Review of Phytopathology 37.1, pp. 175–196. DOI: 10.1146/annurev.phyto.37.1.175.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.phyto.37.1.175.
Li, Sainan et al. (June 2012). “Transcriptional Activation of Pyoluteorin Operon Mediated
by the LysR­Type Regulator PltR Bound at a 22 bp lys Box in Pseudomonas aeruginosa
M18”. In: PLoS ONE 7.6. Ed. by Paul Jaak Janssen, e39538. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0039538. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0039538.
Yan, Qing, Mary Liu, et al. (July 2021). “Two Pathway­Specific Transcriptional Regulators,
PltR and PltZ, Coordinate Autoinduction of Pyoluteorin in Pseudomonas protegens Pf­
5”. In: Microorganisms 9.7, p. 1489. DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9071489. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms9071489.
Keel, Christoph (1992). “Suppression of Root Diseases byiPseudomonas fluorescens/iCHA0:
Importance of the Bacterial Secondary Metabolite 2, 4­Diacetylphloroglucinol”. In: Molec­
ular Plant­Microbe Interactions 5.1, p. 4. DOI: 10.1094/mpmi-5-004. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1094/mpmi-5-004.
Cronin, Don et al. (Jan. 2006). “Ecological interaction of a biocontrol Pseudomonas flu­
orescens strain producing 2, 4­diacetylphloroglucinol with the soft rot potato pathogen
Erwinia carotovora subsp. atroseptica”. In: FEMS Microbiology Ecology 23.2, pp. 95–
106. DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.1997.tb00394.x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-
6941.1997.tb00394.x.
Almario, Juliana et al. (June 2017). “Distribution of 2, 4­Diacetylphloroglucinol Biosyn­
thetic Genes among the Pseudomonas spp. Reveals Unexpected Polyphyletism”. In:
Frontiers in Microbiology 8. DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01218. URL: https://doi.org/10.
3389/fmicb.2017.01218.
44
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:55==
Achkar, Jihane et al. (Mar. 2005). “Biosynthesis of Phloroglucinol”. In: Journal of the Amer­
ican Chemical Society 127.15, pp. 5332–5333. DOI: 10.1021/ja042340g. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/ja042340g.
Bottiglieri, Me
lanie and Christoph Keel (Jan. 2006). “Characterization of PhlG, a Hydrolase That
Specifically Degrades the Antifungal Compound 2, 4­Diacetylphloroglucinol in the Bio­
control Agent iPseudomonas fluorescens/i CHA0”. In: Applied and Environmental Mi­
crobiology 72.1, pp. 418–427. DOI: 10.1128/aem.72.1.418- 427.2006. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1128/aem.72.1.418-427.2006.
Abbas, Abdelhamid, John P. Morrissey, et al. (June 2002). “Characterization of Interac­
tions between the Transcriptional Repressor PhlF and Its Binding Site at the iphlA/i
Promoter in iPseudomonas fluorescens/i F113”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 184.11,
pp. 3008–3016. DOI: 10.1128/jb.184.11.3008-3016.2002. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1128/jb.184.11.3008-3016.2002.
Schnider­Keel, Ursula et al. (Mar. 2000). “Autoinduction of 2, 4­Diacetylphloroglucinol
Biosynthesis in the Biocontrol Agent iPseudomonas fluorescens/i CHA0 and Repres­
sion by the Bacterial Metabolites Salicylate and Pyoluteorin”. In: Journal of Bacteri­
ology 182.5, pp. 1215–1225. DOI: 10.1128/jb.182.5.1215- 1225.2000. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1128/jb.182.5.1215-1225.2000.
Abbas, Abdelhamid, John E. McGuire, et al. (July 2004). “The putative permease PhlE
of Pseudomonas fluorescens F113 has a role in 2, 4­diacetylphloroglucinol resistance
and in general stress tolerance”. In: Microbiology 150.7, pp. 2443–2450. DOI: 10.1099/
mic.0.27033-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.27033-0.
Quinn, Roswell (Mar. 2013). “Rethinking Antibiotic Research and Development: World
War II and the Penicillin Collaborative”. In: American Journal of Public Health 103.3,
pp. 426–434. DOI: 10.2105/ajph.2012.300693. URL: https://doi.org/10.2105/ajph.2012.
300693.
Davies, Julian, George B Spiegelman, and Grace Yim (Oct. 2006). “The world of subin­
hibitory antibiotic concentrations”. In: Current Opinion in Microbiology 9.5, pp. 445–453.
DOI: 10.1016/j.mib.2006.08.006. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2006.08.006.
Cornforth, Daniel M. and Kevin R. Foster (Mar. 2013). “Competition sensing: the social
side of bacterial stress responses”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology 11.4, pp. 285–293.
DOI: 10.1038/nrmicro2977. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro2977.
Lozano, Gabriel L. et al. (June 2020). “A Chemical Counterpunch: Chromobacterium vi­
olaceum ATCC 31532 Produces Violacein in Response to Translation­Inhibiting Antibi­
otics”. In: mBio 11.3. Ed. by Michele S. Swanson. DOI: 10.1128/mbio.00948-20. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.00948-20.
Durán, Marcela et al. (May 2011). “Potential applications of violacein: a microbial pigment”.
In: Medicinal Chemistry Research 21.7, pp. 1524–1532. DOI: 10.1007/s00044-011-9654-
9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00044-011-9654-9.
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
45
==PAGE:56==
Liu, Yongjin, Steven Kyle, and Paul D. Straight (Feb. 2018). “Antibiotic Stimulation of a
Bacillus subtilis Migratory Response”. In: mSphere 3.1. Ed. by Craig D. Ellermeier. DOI:
10.1128/msphere.00586-17. URL: https://doi.org/10.1128/msphere.00586-17.
Buijs, Yannick et al. (Mar. 2021). “Enhancement of antibiotic production by co­cultivation of
two antibiotic producing marine iVibrionaceae/i strains”. In: FEMS Microbiology Ecology
97.4. DOI: 10.1093/femsec/fiab041. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/femsec/fiab041.
Tyc, Olaf et al. (Oct. 2014). “Impact of interspecific interactions on antimicrobial activity
among soil bacteria”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 5. DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00567.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2014.00567.
Balthazar, Carole et al. (Aug. 2022). “Pyoluteorin and 2, 4­diacetylphloroglucinol are ma­
jor contributors to Pseudomonas protegens Pf­5 biocontrol against Botrytis cinerea in
cannabis”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 13. DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.945498. URL:
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.945498.
Maurhofer, M. et al. (Sept. 1994). “Pyoluteorin production byPseudomonas fluorescens
strain CHA0 is involved in the suppression ofPythium damping­off of cress but not of
cucumber”. In: European Journal of Plant Pathology 100.3­4, pp. 221–232. DOI: 10.
1007/bf01876237. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/bf01876237.
Costa­Silva, Juliana, Douglas Domingues, and Fabricio Martins Lopes (Dec. 2017). “RNA­
Seq differential expression analysis: An extended review and a software tool”. In: PLOS
ONE 12.12. Ed. by Zhi Wei, e0190152. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0190152. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0190152.
Love, Michael I, Wolfgang Huber, and Simon Anders (Dec. 2014). “Moderated estimation
of fold change and dispersion for RNA­seq data with DESeq2”. In: Genome Biology
15.12. DOI: 10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-014-
0550-8.
Bottomly, Daniel et al. (Mar. 2011). “Evaluating Gene Expression in C57BL/6J and DBA/2J
Mouse Striatum Using RNA­Seq and Microarrays”. In: PLoS ONE 6.3. Ed. by Xiaoxi
Zhuang, e17820. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017820. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0017820.
Wu, Lingyu et al. (Feb. 2020). “The (p)ppGpp­mediated stringent response regulatory sys­
tem globally inhibits primary metabolism and activates secondary metabolism in Pseu­
domonas protegens H78”. In: Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 104.7, pp. 3061–
3079. DOI: 10.1007/s00253-020-10421-5. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-020-
10421-5.
Baral, Bikash, Amir Akhgari, and Mikko Metsä­Ketelä (Sept. 2018). “Activation of microbial
secondary metabolic pathways: Avenues and challenges”. In: Synthetic and Systems
Biotechnology 3.3, pp. 163–178. DOI: 10.1016/j.synbio.2018.09.001. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.09.001.
O’Rourke, Aubrie et al. (Feb. 2020). “Mechanism­of­Action Classification of Antibiotics by
Global Transcriptome Profiling”. In: Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 64.3. DOI:
10.1128/aac.01207-19. URL: https://doi.org/10.1128/aac.01207-19.
46
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:57==
Sabina, Jeffrey et al. (Oct. 2003). “Interfering with Different Steps of Protein Synthesis­
Explored by Transcriptional Profiling of iEscherichia coli/i K­12”. In: Journal of Bacte­
riology 185.20, pp. 6158–6170. DOI: 10.1128/jb.185.20.6158-6170.2003. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1128/jb.185.20.6158-6170.2003.
Molina­Santiago, Carlos et al. (Feb. 2015). “Differential transcriptional response to an­
tibiotics byiP/iiseudomonas putida/i DOT­T1E”. In: Environmental Microbiology 17.9,
pp. 3251–3262. DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.12775. URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-
2920.12775.
Razew, Alicja et al. (Oct. 2022). “One fold, many functions—M23 family of peptidoglycan
hydrolases”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 13. DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1036964. URL:
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.1036964.
Carmo de Freire Bastos, Maria do, Bruna Gonçalves Coutinho, and Marcus Lı́vio Varella
Coelho (Apr. 2010). “Lysostaphin: A Staphylococcal Bacteriolysin with Potential Clinical
Applications”. In: Pharmaceuticals 3.4, pp. 1139–1161. DOI: 10.3390/ph3041139. URL:
https://doi.org/10.3390/ph3041139.
Abramov, Vyacheslav M. et al. (Oct. 2022). “Limosilactobacillus fermentum Strain 3872:
Antibacterial and Immunoregulatory Properties and Synergy with Prebiotics against So­
cially Significant Antibiotic­Resistant Infections of Animals and Humans”. In: Antibiotics
11.10, p. 1437. DOI: 10 . 3390 / antibiotics11101437. URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 /
antibiotics11101437.
White, Maria L. et al. (Feb. 2022). “MraZ is a transcriptional inhibitor of cell division in
iBacillus subtilis/i”. In: DOI: 10.1101/2022.02.09.479790. URL: https://doi.org/10.1101/
2022.02.09.479790.
Margolin, William (Oct. 2005). “FtsZ and the division of prokaryotic cells and organelles”.
In: Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 6.11, pp. 862–871. DOI: 10.1038/nrm1745.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm1745.
Tsang, Mary­Jane, Anastasiya A. Yakhnina, and Thomas G. Bernhardt (July 2017). “NlpD
links cell wall remodeling and outer membrane invagination during cytokinesis in Es­
cherichia coli”. In: PLOS Genetics 13.7. Ed. by Lotte Søgaard­Andersen, e1006888.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006888. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1006888.
Sutcliffe, Steven G. et al. (Mar. 2021). “Common Oral Medications Lead to Prophage
Induction in Bacterial Isolates from the Human Gut”. In: Viruses 13.3, p. 455. DOI: 10.
3390/v13030455. URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/v13030455.
Chen, Qian et al. (Jan. 2019). “Fibrillar structures induced by a plant reovirus target mi­
tochondria to activate typical apoptotic response and promote viral infection in insect
vectors”. In: PLOS Pathogens 15.1. Ed. by John Carr, e1007510. DOI: 10.1371/journal.
ppat.1007510. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1007510.
Bafana, Amit et al. (Feb. 2011). “The basic and applied aspects of superoxide dismutase”.
In: Journal of Molecular Catalysis B: Enzymatic 68.2, pp. 129–138. DOI: 10.1016/j.
molcatb.2010.11.007. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcatb.2010.11.007.
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
47
==PAGE:58==
Cao, Weiguo (Dec. 2012). “Endonuclease V: an unusual enzyme for repair of DNA deam­
ination”. In: Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 70.17, pp. 3145–3156. DOI: 10.1007/
s00018-012-1222-z. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-012-1222-z.
Rivera, Mario (Feb. 2017). “Bacterioferritin: Structure, Dynamics, and Protein–Protein In­
teractions at Play in Iron Storage and Mobilization”. In: Accounts of Chemical Research
50.2, pp. 331–340. DOI: 10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00514. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.accounts.6b00514.
Sato, Takuya et al. (Aug. 2017). “The Small Protein HemP Is a Transcriptional Activator for
the Hemin Uptake Operon in Burkholderia multivorans ATCC 17616”. In: Applied and
Environmental Microbiology 83.16. Ed. by Maia Kivisaar. DOI: 10.1128/aem.00479-17.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.00479-17.
Kanonenberg, Kerstin, Christian K.W. Schwarz, and Lutz Schmitt (July 2013). “Type I se­
cretion systems – a story of appendices”. In: Research in Microbiology 164.6, pp. 596–
604. DOI: 10.1016/j.resmic.2013.03.011. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resmic.2013.03.
011.
Spitz, Olivia et al. (Apr. 2019). “Type I Secretion Systems—One Mechanism for All?”
In: Microbiology Spectrum 7.2. Ed. by Maria Sandkvist, Eric Cascales, and Peter J.
Christie. DOI: 10.1128/microbiolspec.psib-0003-2018. URL: https://doi.org/10.1128/
microbiolspec.psib-0003-2018.
Pimenta, A. L. et al. (Nov. 2005). “Mutations in HlyD, Part of the Type 1 Translocator for
Hemolysin Secretion, Affect the Folding of the Secreted Toxin”. In: Journal of Bacteri­
ology 187.21, pp. 7471–7480. DOI: 10.1128/jb.187.21.7471-7480.2005. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1128/jb.187.21.7471-7480.2005.
Drew, David et al. (Apr. 2021). “Structures and General Transport Mechanisms by the
Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS)”. In: Chemical Reviews 121.9, pp. 5289–5335. DOI:
10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c00983. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c00983.
Yousefian, Narek et al. (Jan. 2021). “Structural characterization of the EmrAB­TolC efflux
complex from E. coli”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) ­ Biomembranes 1863.1,
p. 183488. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2020.183488. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bbamem.2020.183488.
48
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:59==
A
Appendix
Table A.1: Table of all DEGs found in the first round of DESeq2 analysis performed with
the strict set of criteria for significance.
Gene name
log2­
FoldChange
Adj. P­value
sig
Annotated
function
KX724_15855
5.173486
9.86E­51
up_sig
O­succinylhomoserine
(thiol)­lyase
KX724_05660
4.61492
6.52E­42
up_sig
metalloregulator ArsR/SmtB
family transcription factor
KX724_15860
4.606866
3.92E­52
up_sig
homoserine
O­succinyltransferase
KX724_13510
4.392851
5.28E­56
up_sig
metalloregulator ArsR/SmtB
family transcription factor
KX724_12090
4.076909
1.05E­52
up_sig
superoxide dismutase
KX724_06500
3.813588
2.54E­33
up_sig
DUF3574 domain­
containing protein
KX724_16465
3.695475
1.83E­31
up_sig
DUF3574 domain­
containing protein
KX724_06505
3.5368
2.10E­35
up_sig
deoxyribonuclease V
KX724_05655
3.527136
4.95E­38
up_sig
arsenate reductase ArsC
KX724_09635
3.506506
3.68E­86
up_sig
helix­turn­helix
domain­containing protein
KX724_06945
3.256437
3.95E­22
up_sig
bacterioferritin
KX724_11350
3.215905
9.21E­14
up_sig
hypothetical protein
KX724_12190
2.955285
8.16E­21
up_sig
QacE family quaternary
ammonium compound
efflux SMR transporter
KX724_08480
2.905286
1.02E­09
up_sig
hypothetical protein
KX724_06065
2.759376
6.87E­05
up_sig
hypothetical protein
KX724_14715
2.536228
3.05E­08
up_sig
trpB,tryptophan
synthase subunit beta
KX724_13395
2.475233
4.05E­28
up_sig
30S ribosomal protein S6
KX724_12095
2.471792
2.55E­07
up_sig
flavin reductase family protein
KX724_04345
2.461271
3.17E­11
up_sig
rpsM, 30S ribosomal protein S13
KX724_13195
2.45009
1.19E­18
up_sig
hutH,histidine ammonia­lyase
KX724_06055
2.423292
3.54E­11
up_sig
rplU, 50S ribosomal protein L21
KX724_04350
2.407419
7.76E­08
up_sig
rpsK,30S ribosomal protein S11
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
49
==PAGE:60==
Table A.1: Table of all DEGs found in the first round of DESeq2 analysis performed with
the strict set of criteria for significance.
Gene name
log2­
FoldChange
Adj. P­value
sig
Annotated
function
KX724_08120
2.387925
7.74E­06
up_sig
alpha/beta hydrolase
KX724_08485
2.373358
5.19E­06
up_sig
SDR family NAD(P)­
dependent oxidoreductase
KX724_03575
2.367852
4,31E­07
up_sig
metF,methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase
KX724_06490
2.348509
3.40E­05
up_sig
GGDEF domain­containing protein
KX724_19150
2.348198
2.56E­20
up_sig
bacterioferritin
KX724_12100
2.348025
0.000343
up_sig
tetratricopeptide repeat protein
KX724_04235
2.304292
7.40E­11
up_sig
30S ribosomal protein S10
KX724_15850
2.270635
2.22E­10
up_sig
homoserine dehydrogenase
KX724_13385
2.269302
2.40E­11
up_sig
rplI, 50S ribosomal protein L9
KX724_12000
2.242394
5.99E­11
up_sig
DUF3348 domain­containing protein
KX724_01250
2.206834
4.54E­09
up_sig
enoyl­CoA hydratase
KX724_19775
2.1957
4.31E­22
up_sig
TonB­dependent receptor
KX724_05415
2.18518
4.64E­10
up_sig
sufB, SUF system Fe­S
cluster assembly regulator
KX724_04310
2.170515
5.99E­10
up_sig
rps,H30S ribosomal protein S8
KX724_13200
2.117672
2.32E­20
up_sig
hutG,N­formylglutamate
deformylase
KX724_13390
2.103634
4.79E­11
up_sig
rpsR,30S ribosomal protein S18
KX724_04355
2.09918
0.000827
up_sig
rpsD,30S ribosomal protein S4
KX724_09820
2.096829
6.16E­09
up_sig
efflux RND transporter
periplasmic adaptor subunit
KX724_03555
2.053144
0.000384
up_sig
M23 family metallopeptidase
KX724_09835
2.04042
0.000382
up_sig
MliC family protein
KX724_09640
2.010091
2.06E­10
up_sig
hisG,ATP
phosphoribosyltransferase
KX724_02615
­2.08774
1.29E­05
down_sig
lana protein
KX724_03705
­2.11976
8.68E­09
down_sig
TonB­dependent
hemoglobin/transferrin/lactoferrin
family receptor
KX724_10830
­2.22607
0.001237
down_sig
diacylglycerol kinase
KX724_19465
­2.27272
6.41E­13
down_sig
PepSY domain­containing protein
KX724_19155
­2.35065
3.18E­24
down_sig
bacterioferritin­associated ferredoxin
50
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
==PAGE:61==
Table A.1: Table of all DEGs found in the first round of DESeq2 analysis performed with
the strict set of criteria for significance.
Gene name
log2­
FoldChange
Adj. P­value
sig
Annotated
function
KX724_09665
­2.37143
1.59E­11
down_sig
hisA,1­(5­phosphoribosyl)­5­
[(5­phosphoribosylamino)methylideneamino]
imidazole­4­carboxamide isomerase
KX724_00990
­2.40896
2.83E­19
down_sig
DUF1328 domain­containing protein
KX724_19735
­2.51352
4.49E­09
down_sig
hypothetical protein
KX724_09670
­3.12219
2.89E­16
down_sig
imidazole glycerol phosphate
synthase subunit HisF
KX724_10965
­3.34217
0.000852
down_sig
msuE, FMN reductase
KX724_03700
­3,35518
9,16E­19
down_sig
hemin uptake protein HemP
KX724_10975
­3.78248
0.000207
down_sig
methionine synthase
KX724_10970
­4.10385
2.22E­05
down_sig
DUF1852 domain­containing protein
The Effects of Pseudomonas­produced
Secondary Metabolites on Soil Microbiomes
51
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Henrik Dams Allé, Building 221
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
