==PAGE:1==
Nitrite
accumulation
in
wastewater
treatВӯ
ment plants induced by salt and temperature
shocks
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic
Science and Technology (Eawag), Dubendorf, under remote supervision from DepartВӯ
ment of Environmental and Resource Engineering, at the Technical University of DenВӯ
mark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Xingzhou Lyu Вӯ s210341
Signature
Date
ii
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Nitrogen removal is an important objective for wastewater treatment plants, but the proВӯ
cess is not always successful. Incomplete nitrification often occurs in the winter, causing
nitrite accumulation and resulting in damage to the aquatic ecosystem, while increasing
N2O emissions, a potent greenhouse gas. Previous studies and WWTP operators sugВӯ
gested that this may be related to cold rainfall events. This thesis tested two possible
shocks from cold rainfalls: temperature and salt shocks. The study was conducted as
a laboratoryВӯscale experiment to test how temperature or salt shocks would affect the
wastewater plant and whether it would cause the problems described above. The experiВӯ
ments were divided into shortВӯterm experiments (3h) and longВӯterm experiments (6 weeks)
in EawagвҖҷs experimental facility, both of them tested temperature, salt and temperature
and salinity shocks respectively. The shortВӯterm experiment only tested the activity, flocВӯ
culation and settleability of sludge, while the longВӯterm experiment also monitored N2O
emissions of reactors. NH+
4 removal rates and NOвҲ’
2 removal rates were measured to
determine the shocksвҖҷ effect on the activity of AOB and NOB, respectively. The turbidity
of the supernatant was measured to detect the shocksвҖҷ effect on flocculation. SVI valВӯ
ues reflect the settlebaility of sludge changed because of shocks. N2O emissions were
monitored during the aerobic period in longВӯterm experiments. In addition, DNA and FISH
samples were collected and fixed for storage. They were originally planned to observe
changes in the microbial community, which could not be completed due to the time limВӯ
itation of the thesis. All shocks in the shortВӯterm and longВӯterm experiments caused a
decrease in the activity of nitrifying bacteria. In shortВӯterm experiments, the negative efВӯ
fect of salt shock on NOB was strong than that of AOB. In addition, salt shock also caused
the deflocculation of sludge. All shocks had a stronger negative impact on NOB than AOB
under longВӯterm shocks. Salt shock also caused slight deflocculation in longВӯterm experВӯ
iments. Though no NOвҲ’
2 accumulation was observed, longВӯterm experiments show that
N2O emissions increase during shock period. The results of this paper demonstrated that
temperature and salinity shocks from cold rainfalls may be responsible for incomplete niВӯ
trification in winter, however, other factors are needed to take into consideration to explain
the incomplete denitrification typically observed during the cold season.
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I am deeply grateful to my supervisors, Adriano Joss, Borja Valverde PГ©rez and Wenzel
Gruber, for their unwavering support and guidance throughout my masterвҖҷs thesis. Their
expertise and patience have been invaluable to me and have played a crucial role in the
success of this thesis. I really appreciate their help in my life, lab work, every meeting and
report review.
I would also like to thank В Eberhard Morgenroth for providing me with the opportunity to
conduct my study and letting me meet so many very nice people in Eawag.
I am grateful to DTU and Eawag for all of the resources and support they provided. I
would like to extend a special thanks to Aline Hobi, Marco Kipf, Robert Niederdorfer,
Sylvia Richter and Pravin Ganesanandamoorthy, who went above and beyond to help me
with my study in Eawag.
I am deeply thankful to my friends, parents and my girl Zhang Ran for their love and
support during this process. Without their encouragement and motivation, I would not
have been able to complete this journey.
Finally, I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to all of the participants in my study.
Their willingness to share their experiences and insights has been invaluable to my reВӯ
search and has helped to make this thesis a success. Thank you for your time and conВӯ
tribution.
Xingzhou Lyu
Chengdu, China
07.04.2023
iv
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Research question and hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Materials and methods
6
2.1
ShortВӯterm experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
LongВӯterm experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Analytical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Results and discussion
15
3.1
ShortВӯterm experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
LongВӯterm experiment result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Conclusion
28
5
Recommendations
29
A Appendix
33
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
1
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The discharge of untreated wastewater poses a major challenge to the environment and
causes pollution of the aquatic environment and human drinking water sources [7]. ConВӯ
sequently, wastewater treatment has become a crucial challenge to human society. WastewВӯ
ater treatment plants (WWTPs) are the most common methods of treating wastewater.
WWTPs effectively protect the water environment by removing pollutants and nutrients
from wastewater.
One of the major objectives is to remove nitrogen. Wastewater contains nitrogen in the
forms of organic nitrogen, ammonia (NH3) or ammonium (NH+
4 ), nitrate (NOвҲ’
3 ), and nitrite
(NOвҲ’
2 ). Traditionally, WWTPs use nitrification and denitrification to remove nitrogen from
wastewater (Figure1.1) [16]. Microorganisms mineralize organic nitrogen in wastewater to
ammonia. NH4+ is then oxidized to NOвҲ’
2 by AmmoniaВӯoxidizing bacteria (AOB) through
nitritation. NOвҲ’
2 is further oxidized to NOвҲ’
3 by nitriteВӯoxidizing bacteria (NOB). NOвҲ’
3 is
ultimately denitrified to nitrogen (N2) by heterotrophic denitrifying bacteria (HDB).
Figure 1.1: Overview of nitrogen removal process in WWTPs. To show how nitrogen is
removed from wastewater by nitrification and denitrification to N2. Denitrification is not
studied in this thesis, so there are no detailed steps for denitrification.
High NOвҲ’
3 concentration in water can lead to eutrophication, which may damage aquatic
ecosystems. However, NH+
4 and NOвҲ’
2 are two toxic nitrogenous pollutants in the aquatic
ecosystem, which can directly threaten the health of aquatic organisms.
Hence, for
WWTPs with the objective of nitrogen removal, nitrogen pollutants should at least comВӯ
plete the nitrification process in the WWTPs to convert to NOвҲ’
3 . The denitrification process
may be achieved only partially since nitrate is not directly toxic (i.e. is environmentally relВӯ
evant only as nutrient)Нҫ this allows for WWTP design with smaller hydraulic retention time
design. WWTPs can therefore be divided by nitrogen removal types into nitrification only
(possible partial denitrification) and full nitrogen removal (complete nitrification and deniВӯ
trification).
This thesis focuses on nitrification only WWTPs. For these WWTPs previous studies have
indicated that nitrification efficiencies have seasonal variation and incomplete nitrification
can occur in the winter, leading to NOвҲ’
3 accumulation in effluent [4]. The accumulation
of nitrite is in WWTPs indicative of poor nitrogen removal, and the effluent could damage
aquatic ecosystems. Therefore, it is crucial to identify the underlying causes of incomplete
nitrification and find solutions.
NOвҲ’
2 is an intermediate in the nitrification process(Figure1.1), its unusual accumulation
may be caused by impaired NOB activity. Several studies found that the cumulative abunВӯ
dances of NOB had a significant negative correlation to NOвҲ’
2 concentrations and sludge
2
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:7==
microbial communities in fullВӯscale WWTPs had seasonal variation (NOB disappearance
or species exchange in winter)[24][4][2].
Some operators have made an empirical connection between cold rain and changes in
activated sludge. This thesis identified and researched two potential influences of cold
rainfalls: salt (NaCl) and temperature shock. The results of the previous investigations
indicate that in thawing roadВӯsalt events, WWTPs detected salt concentrations of up to
3 g NaCl/L[22]. Naturally, the thawed icy wastewater would bring temperature shock to
wastewater.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the salt shock brings monovalent cations (Na+)
into wastewater to displace divalent cations from the floc structure, leading to a defloccuВӯ
lation of activated sludge [8]. Salt could also have a concentrationВӯdependent effect on
sludge biomass activity, with concentrations above 1 g NaCl/L resulting in inhibition [22].
Low temperature favoured the growth of filamentous bacteria in the full scale activated
sludge system WWTPs. As a result, it contributed to the increase of sludge volume index
(SVI) [13]. The SVI increase indicates a decrease in sludge settleability. The observed
trend in the variation of sludge activity is that sludge activity decreases as temperature
decreases (within 10Вӯ20в—ҰC) [6].
Thus, the often jointly occurring temperature and salt shocks may act together and have
a negative effect on sludge activity, resulting in sludge deflocculation and settleability deВӯ
crease leading to sludge loss. They could cause incomplete nitrification.
In addition to the damage caused to the water environment, there is another challenge
caused by incomplete nitrification: Nitrous oxide (N2O) emission. N2O is a potent greenВӯ
house gas that depletes the ozone layer.
Over the past forty years, humanВӯcaused
N2O emissions have increased by 30%, accounting for around 43% of all N2O emisВӯ
sions[5]. Mitigating N2O emissions and reducing N2O concentration in the atmosphere
are therefore essential issues that must be addressed in order to promote the sustainВӯ
able development of all nations (UNSDG 13). The results of mitigation efforts are alВӯ
ready visible. Effective mitigation actions have reduced N2O emissions in EU, including
technological improvements by some industries[5]. Statistically, the N2O emissions from
WWTPs amounted to as much as 108В Mt CO2Вӯeq in 2010 and accounted for 3.4% of the
annual global budget of estimated N2O emissions (IPCC, 2014). The greenhouse gas
from WWTP are mainly composed of CH4 and N2O emissions, N2O emission could acВӯ
count for 66Вӯ80% and has a great potential for reduction[21][9]. Therefore, reducing N2O
emissions is a key step toward carbon neutrality for WWTPs and even for human society.
It is thus urgent to clarify the production process of N2O in WWTP and reduce it.
AOB and HDB can produce N2O in WWTPвҖҷs biological process units (Figure 1.2) [17].
AOB can generate N2O via nitrifier denitrification under high NOвҲ’
2 and hydroxylamine oxВӯ
idation under high NH3 and low NOвҲ’
2 concentrations in combination with high N oxidation
rate[27][1]. During denitrification, HDB produces N2O as an intermediate and then reВӯ
duces it to generate N2, but N2O reductase activity can be deficient in some cases lead
to N2O accumulation[18][23].
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
3
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.2: Pathway of N2O production. N2O reduces from NOвҲ’
2 via AOB and HDB denВӯ
itrification. HDB can further reduce and consume N2O to form N2.Hydroxylamin process
was not be studied in this thesis. Chemical oxidation of hydroxylamine to N2O mostly ocВӯ
curs in side stream treatment for rejected water from sludge treatment. In general, abiotic
reactions are of minor importance in biological nitrogen removal systems[19][20].
Although many factors affect N2O emissions, a previous study has found the most imporВӯ
tant factor. N2O emissions from WWTPs exhibit a stronger correlation with effluent NO2Вӯ
(relative to influent nitrogen load) and nitrogen removal efficiency[3]. This corresponded to
the above mechanism of N2O production. The N2O emissions also exhibit seasonal fluctuВӯ
ations, with peak N2O emissions occurring in winter, similar to NO2Вӯaccumulation[3]. The
incomplete nitrification processes in winter therefore not only harm the water environment
but also challenge the carbon neutrality of WWTPs. The temperature and salinity shocks
referred to previously have also been shown to affect N2O emissions in past studies, with
high salinity or low temperature leading to high N2O emissions[23][26]. Therefore, to conВӯ
trol N2O emissions from WWTPs, it is also crucial to reduce the winter NOвҲ’
2 accumulation
caused by incomplete nitrification.
On the basis of previous research and in conjunction with the nitrification process and
N2O production pathway depicted in Figure 1.1 and 1.2, the cold rainfall events could
have varying degrees of negative effect on activity and flocculation of AOB and NOB,
resulting in incomplete nitrification, the accumulation of NOвҲ’
2 and high N2O emission.
1.2
Research question and hypothesis
In order to understand the reason causing seasonal failure of complete nitrification, in
this thesis laboratory reactors were operated to test the sludge changes that occur in a
WWTP after cold rainfall events, while observing the NOвҲ’
2 concentration and N2O emission
increase.
1.2.1
Research question
RQ1. Are AOB and NOB activity affected differently by salt or temperature shocks?
RQ2. Do typical salt or temperature shocks negatively affect flocculation and settleability
of sludge?
RQ3: Does a simulated cold rainfall favor NOB loss, NOвҲ’
2 accumulation and high N2O
emission?
1.2.2
Hypothesis
Figure 1.3 illustrates the hypothesis of the cold rain mechanism. The cold rainfalls cause
temperature or salt shocks that may have a negative effect on sludge flocculation and
activity. Salt or temperature shocks may deflocculate the activated sludge, and they ulВӯ
timately may cause sludge loss in the effluent, which changes the sludge composition
(NOB disappearance or species exchange). In case the loss is larger for NOB than on
AOB, this could explain the accumulation of NOвҲ’
2 and high emission of N2O. Alternatively,
such an effect may result if the shocks decrease the NOB activity stronger than AOB.
4
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1.3: The hypothesis of the cold rain process impact. The blue arrow represents
the proven mechanism and the yellow arrow represents the hypothesis of this thesis.
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
5
==PAGE:10==
2
Materials and methods
This thesis designed and implemented two separate experiments, each focused on the
simulation of cold rainfall events of differing duration, one of shortВӯterm and the other of
longВӯterm events. ShortВӯterm experiments simulated the impact of a shortВӯterm shock on
activated sludge from a single cold rainfall. LongВӯterm experiments simulated the impacts
of longВӯterm shocks on activated sludge from cold rainfalls over a period of several weeks.
On the one hand, shortВӯterm experiments obtain multiple results to find regular results of
shocks and avoid randomness, longВӯterm experiments may confirm the regular results
from shortВӯterm experiments. On the other hand, since longВӯterm shocks may change the
properties of activated sludge, longВӯterm shock impacts may be different from shortВӯterm
ones. Salt shocks were designed to be 3g/l and temperature shocks were designed to be
around 5 в—ҰC, both of which were found to occur in real WWTPs in previous studies[22][6].
2.1
ShortВӯterm experiment
ShortВӯterm experiments were carried out to test sludge activity and flocculation changes
caused by salt or temperature shock.
2.1.1
Inoculation sludge for shortВӯterm experiments
The shortВӯterm laboratory experiments conducted at the experimental facility of Eawag
using four 12Вӯliter reactors. For this experiment, activated sludge (AS) was taken from
Eawag pilot scale WWTPвҖҷs bioreactor and was then diluted 1:2 with wastewater (WW)
from the effluent of its secondary clarifier. The Eawag pilot WWTP consists of primary
treatment (5mm grid, combined sand and oil trap, primary clarifier), and two 8 m3 stirred
bioreactors followed by a secondary clarifier. It is operated as complete nitrification with
preВӯdenitrification (50% N removal), a sludge age of 20 days and 16.5+/Вӯ1.5 в—ҰC. The
Eawag pilot WWTP is fed with sewage taken from the local sewer of the municipality of
Dubendorf.
2.1.2
ShortВӯterm experimental design
The experimental setup is shown in Figure 2.1 and 2.2. Each shortВӯterm experiment
simulated the following four types of shocks in separate reactors: no shock (reference),
salt shock, temperature shock, and combined shock. To create the temperature shock
cooled WW was added. Dissolved salt was dosed to reactors to create the salt shock.
NH+
4 and NOвҲ’
2 solutions were dosed to reactors to create the activity test condition as
section 2.3.1 described.
6
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Overview of shortВӯterm experiment procedure: The red text indicates the variВӯ
ables that create the shocks, the bold text indicates the main measured parameters.
Figure 2.2: Overview of shortВӯterm experiment reactor conditions. The data of ambient
temperature reactor in 5th series is missing. The right table shows the individual reactor
conditions for each series of experiments, using the first series as an example.
Following this, 15Вӯminute with coarse bubble aeration served for effective mixing. At the
end of this exposure period, sludge samples were taken and allowed to settle for 30 minВӯ
utes in order to take supernatant and measure turbidity. The fineВӯbubble aeration of reacВӯ
tors was started after the mixing to maintain the oxygen concentration during the aeration
phase between 2.5 and 3 mg/l, with coarse aeration ran for 10s every 90s in order to
ensure homogeneous reaction in the reactor. Sludge samples were taken every 45 min
to measure the NH+
4 , NOвҲ’
3 , NOвҲ’
2 concentration. After the end of aeration period, sludge
samples were taken to measure TSS, VSS and repeat the previous steps to measure the
turbidity.
2.2
LongВӯterm experiment
2.2.1
Inoculation sludge for longВӯterm experiments
LongВӯterm experiments were performed in three labВӯscale reactors with a 12 L working
volume. The seed sludge was collected from the Neugut WWTP bioreactor in Dubendorf.
Because at the start of the longВӯterm experiments, EawagвҖҷs pilot WWTP featured highly
filamentous sludge with unrepresentatively bad sludge settling characteristics. The feed
to the reactors was collected from primary clarifier effluent of EawagвҖҷs pilot WWTP. The
average total nitrogen concentrations of influent are 40Вӯ80 mg N/l.
2.2.2
LongВӯterm experimental design
Three reactors as displayed in Figure 2.3 were operated as sequencing batch reactors
(SBRs) (Figure 2.4).
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
7
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.3: Overview of longВӯterm SBR. The cooling system was used to control temperВӯ
ature, reactors were fully covered to collect emitted N2O during aerobic period. The PLC
controls the reactor operation via the sensors, valves and pumps which are marked in
green.The red box shows the variation in 1st and 2nd period influent settings
Figure 2.4: Overview of longВӯterm SBR operation with pieВӯchart showing typical step duВӯ
rations. Anoxic, aeration, and settling duration are precise times, all others are rough, the
actual entire duration is about 250min per cycle
The three reactors were filled to a liquid level of 12 litres followed by an anoxic period.
During this period, the oxygen concentration was kept close to 0 mg O2/l, and only coarse
bubble aeration were used intermittently to ensure a homogeneous reaction in the reacВӯ
tors. The frequency of the coarse bubble aeration was determined based on the sludge
settleability. Specifically, the aeration interval is the time for sludge to settle to 90% in
the static experiment. The interval was decreased from the initial 300 seconds to 90 secВӯ
onds as the sludge settleability increased during the experiment, with each coarse bubble
aeration running for 10 seconds.
After the anoxic period, the aerobic period began. The same frequency of coarse bubble
aeration was used to guarantee a homogeneous reaction. In addition, the PLC system
controlled the fine bubble aeration to maintain the oxygen concentration of reactors at
8
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:13==
2.3Вӯ2.5 mg O2/l. A manual sludge discharge was conducted during this period, with a
volume of 5.6 liters per week.
The aerobic period is followed by 30 min of settling, then reactors discharged supernatant
to 8 litres of liquid level. Thus a cycle was completed.
The solids retention time (SRT) calculation was based on Equation 2.1 and 2.2, with the
homogeneous mixing of reactor sludge being assumed during the sludge discharge proВӯ
cess. The SRT for each reactor was 15 days, with the aerobic SRT for each reactor being
9 days. Although the sludge for the shortВӯterm and longВӯterm experiments was collected
from two different WWTPs, both WWTPs were fed with the same wastewater. ThereВӯ
fore, the longВӯterm experiment aerobic SRT was designed to be close to the shortВӯterm
experiment (10 days) in order to better compare the results of the experiments.
ОёX = V X
вҲҶX =
V X
QW X
(2.1)
ОёXA = ОёX Г— TA
TE
(2.2)
With:
вҖў ОёX = Total activated sludge solids retention time, day
вҖў V = Volume of the reactor, litre
вҖў ОёXA = Aerobic activated sludge solids retention time, day
вҖў X = TSS of sludge, g/l
вҖў QW = Volume of discharge sludge, 0.8 l/day
вҖў TA = Duration of aerobic period, 2.5h
вҖў TE = Duration of an entire cycle, 4.17h
Each cycle continued for 4.17 hours, the hydraulic retention time (HRT) was 12.5 hours
(Equation 2.3).
HRT = V
Q
(2.3)
With:
вҖў HRT = Hydraulic retention time, h
вҖў V = Volume of the reactor, litre
вҖў Q = flow of influent, l/h
The weekly sampling schedule was shown in the Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Weekly sample plan of SBRs.
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Parameter
TSS, VSS, SV30,
activity test
DNA, FISH
TSS, VSS, SV30,
activity test
The operation period of three SBRs was divided into two periods as shown in Table 2.2
and Figure 2.3.
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
9
==PAGE:14==
Table 2.2: Operation plan of the three SBR reactors (R1: reactor 1, temperature shock,
R2: reactor 2, salt shock, R3: reactor 3, temperature and salt shock).
Period
Procedure
Weeks
Reactor
Added NaCl
(g/l)
Temperature
(в—ҰC)
1st
Inoculation and
adaptation
1Вӯ3
R1, R2, R3
0
14
2nd
Shock test
4Вӯ6
R1
0
10
R2
3
14
R3
3
10
The first period was the process of sludge inoculation and adaptation. The second period
included salt/temperature shock test. During the first period, three reactors were operated
in parallel at around 14 в—ҰC, fed with wastewater from EawagвҖҷs primary clarifier effluent
without any salt or temperature shocks.
In the second period, three reactors were set for a series of temperature (reactor 1, coolВӯ
ing), salt (reactor 2, added salt) or temperature and salt shock (reactor 3, cooling+added
salt), respectively. For the temperature shock setting, wastewater from Eawag pilot scale
primary clarifier effluent was cooled in the fridge for one day to reach around 6 в—ҰC. R1
(temperature shock) and R3 (temperature and salt shock) used cooled wastewater for inВӯ
fluent. Additionally, the temperature of R1 and R3 was controlled at around 10 в—ҰC during
a period of 13 hours (Figure 2.5) after starting the shock event. So the temperature shock
is around вҲҶ4в—ҰC. To create the salt shock, additional dosing pumps were installed to three
reactors. R2 (temperature and salt shock) and R3 (salt shock) were dosed with salt soluВӯ
tion to maintain the added salt concentration in reactors at 3g NaCl/l. Since salt solution
was 1.5 litre for the first shock cycle and 0.5 litre for each subsequent shock cycle, the
total feed water per cycle including salt solution is 4 litre, R1 (temperature shock) was
dosed same volume of distilled water to prevent the effects of the dilution on results.
Figure 2.5: Temperature change of SBRs during shock events. Six cycles correspond to
roughly 24 hours. From the fourth cycle (13h) onwards, temperatures of R1 and R3 were
close to 10 в—ҰC
10
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:15==
The shock tests during 2nd period were planned as shown in Table 2.3. In the entire
experimental period, six longВӯterm shock events were executed. Each reactor condition
under six shocks is shown in Table 2.4. The daily average conductivity of influent from
monitoring data of EawagвҖҷs pilot WWTP was shown in Table 2.5. During the 22.02 and
23.02 shock events, the sludge conductivity was manually measured as section 2.3.5
described (Figure 2.6). It was found that compared the reference reactors (R1) to salt
shock ones (R2 and R3), the added 3 g/l salt bring around 5 mS/cm conductivity increase.
The background conductivity variation was no more than 0.5 mS/cm (10% less of added
salt), variation in background salinity in longВӯterm experiments could therefore be ignored
compared to the added salt.
Table 2.3: Shock test plan of SBRs.The last shock was conducted for two days, to test
the longer shock effect. Other events lasted for one day.
Shock event
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
1stВӯ5th
Shock test
Shock test
6th
Shock test
Shock test
Shock test
Table 2.4: Conditions of three longВӯterm SBRs during shock period
Reactor
date
R1 Cooling
R2 Salt
R3 Cooling+Salt
Temperature(в—ҰC)/ Added Salt(g/l)
08.02
10.4/0
14.3/3
10.5/3
10.02
10.3/0
14.4/3
10.3/3
15.02
11.0/0
14.6/3
10.6/3
17.02
10.7/0
14.9/3
10.5/3
22.02
10.5/0
10.4/3
14.9/3
23.02
11.1/0
11.0/3
15.0/3
Table 2.5:
Background conductivity of longВӯterm experimental influent during shock
events.
Date
Conductivity(mS/cm)
Date
Conductivity(mS/cm)
07/02
1.46
14/02
1.48
08/02
1.42
15/02
1.38
09/02
1.47
16/02
1.38
10/02
1.43
17/02
1.07
11/02
1.37
21/02
1.39
12/02
1.40
22/02
1.34
13/02
1.49
23/02
1.36
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
11
==PAGE:16==
Table 2.6: Conductivity of longВӯterm SBRs in 22.02, 23.02.
Date
Conductivity (mS/cm)
R1
Cooling
R2
Salt
R3
Cooling+salt
22.02
1.3
6.6
6.3
23.02
1.4
7.1
6.7
2.3
Analytical methods
2.3.1
Activity test
The purpose of the activity test is to measure AOB and NOB activity, expressed by amВӯ
monia removal and nitrate production respectively.
Preparation for the activity test was dosing both NH+
4 and NOвҲ’
2 solutions to the reactors
to achieve concentrations of approximately 20Вӯ40 mgВӯN/l and 3Вӯ6 mgВӯN/l, respectively,
i.e. sufficient to prevent substrate limitation during the activity test. Therefore, the two
reactions followed the zeroВӯorder kinetics equation.
For the activity test, grab samples were filtered via membrane filter GF/PET with a pore
size of 0.45 Ојm Nanocolor (Germany). Ion chromatography (IC) was then used to meaВӯ
sure the inorganic nitrogenous chemicals (NH4+, NO2Вӯ, and NO3Вӯ). The Hach DR2800
spectrophotometer and photometric cuvette testing from Hach (Germany) were also used
to help determine the IC measurement range. The following cuvette tests were used in
the research: ammonium nitrogen (LCK303), nitrite (LCK342) and nitrate (LCK340). The
sludge activity calculation followed the SLOPE function in Excel.
The Arrhenius equation (Equation 2.4) was used to calculate the theoretical activity of
AOB and NOB at actual temperature according to Metcalf & Eddy et al., 2014[25] .
kT = kRОёTвҲ’TR
(2.4)
With:
вҖў kT = theoretical reaction rate at T в—ҰC
вҖў kR = Reaction rate at reference temperature
вҖў Оё = Temperature correction factor
вҖў T = Reaction real temperature, в—ҰC
вҖў TR = Reference temperature, в—ҰC
2.3.2
Sludge concentration and turbidity
According to EawagвҖҷs standard operating procedure (SOP), the total suspended solids
(TSS) and volatile suspended solids (VSS) of the sludge were measured three times at
each sampling event. The TSS and VSS calculation was done according to Equations
2.5 and 2.6.
TSS = B вҲ’A
V
(2.5)
V SS = B вҲ’C
V
(2.6)
With:
12
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:17==
вҖў TSS = total suspended solids, g/l
вҖў VSS = volatile suspended solids, g/l
вҖў A = weight of the dry filter, g
вҖў B = weight of the filter and sludge after 105 в—ҰC evaporation, g
вҖў C = weight of the filter and sludge after 550 в—ҰC burn, g
вҖў V = volume of the sludge sample, l
Sludge flocculation changes were reflected by turbidity. Turbidity was measured by TL2300
Tungsten Lamp Turbidimeter, EPA, measuring range of 0Вӯ4000 NTU.
2.3.3
Settleability measurement and sludge monitoring
The SVI was calculated by Equation 2.7. SV30 measured by wide mouth graduated 1
litre cylinder according to Mark van Loosdrecht et al., 2016 [12].
SV I = SV 30 Г— 10
TSS
(2.7)
With:
вҖў SVI = sludge volume index, mL/g TSS
вҖў SV30 = settled sludge volume percentage after settling 30 minutes, %
2.3.4
N2O monitoring
N2O emissions were assessed using an adapted version of the fluxВӯchamber method as
described in Gruber et al. 2021 [3] A sample of the offВӯgas was diverted at the outlet
through a tube with a length of 15 meters to the central monitoring station, where the offВӯ
gas was measured in a nonВӯdispersive infrared analyser (XВӯstream, Emerson, St. Louis
MO, USA). Prior to the measurement, the offВӯgas was dehumidified by cooling to 4 в—ҰC
(JCP SL, JCT, Wiener Neustadt, AUT or TCВӯStandard PKE 521, BГјhler, Ratingen, GER).
The N2O emission monitoring was only operated during the aerobic phase.
N2O emission factors (EFs) were calculated with equation 2. EFs always refer to N2O
produced by unit nitrogen removal.
EFN2O = CN2O,m,h Г— Qair,m,h
NH+
4 removal,h
(2.8)
With:
вҖў EFN2O = emission factor for N2O, g N2O/g NH+
4 removal]
вҖў CN2O,m,h = concentration of N2O from monitoring
вҖў Qair,m,h = air flow of aeration per hour, g/h
вҖў NH+
4 removal,h = ammonia removal per hour, g/h
2.3.5
Most routine chemical analyses
Temperature, NH+
4 , NOвҲ’
3 , dissolved oxygen (DO), and pH were monitored during the enВӯ
tire short and longВӯterm experiments. A digital ISEmax CAS40D ion selective sensor from
Endress+Hauser (Germany) was used to monitor temperature, NH+
4 , and NOвҲ’
3 concenВӯ
tration. Oxymax COS61D oxygen sensor from Endress+Hauser (Germany) was used to
monitor DO. pHВӯElectrode CPS11D sensor from Endress+Hauser (Germany) was used
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
13
==PAGE:18==
to monitor pH. Conductivity was manually measured by WTW TetraCon 925 sensor from
Xylem Analytics (German).
2.3.6
DNA and FISH sample collection
DNA and FISH analysis could not be completed due to the time limitation of the thesis,
only sample collection was completed.
DNA samples were taken from SBRs sludge and effluent. Samples were directly stored
at Вӯ20 в—ҰC.
Fish samples were also taken from SBRs sludge and effluent. Samples were fixed by
adding 100 ОјL of 37% (v/v) stabilized formaldehyde (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) to 1 mL of
sludge and incubated on ice for 1 h. The samples were subsequently washed three times
by centrifugation for 3 min at 4 в—ҰC and 10 000g and reВӯsuspended in 1 mL of phosphateВӯ
buffered saline solution (PBS pH 7.2). Fixed samples were added to a 1:1 (v/v) mixture
of ethanol/PBS and stored at Вӯ20 в—ҰC.
14
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:19==
3
Results and discussion
3.1
ShortВӯterm experiment
3.1.1
The shortВӯterm effects of temperature or salt shocks on sludge
activity
Throughout the five series of shortВӯterm experiments in this study, the trends in inorganic
nitrogen substrate changes consistently exhibited zeroВӯorder kinetic (Figure 3.1). This inВӯ
dicates that the activity of ammoniaВӯoxidizing bacteria (AOB) and nitriteВӯoxidizing bacteria
(NOB) can be expressed by the rate of ammonia removal and nitrate production measured
as the linear regression of the according concentrations during the activity test.
Figure 3.1: Inorganic nitrogen concentration change during the activity test. Data comes
from reactor 1 in 1st series of experiments, other data are shown in Appendix 1.
The observed NH+
4 and NOвҲ’
3 rates of the shortВӯterm salt and temperature shocks are
shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Ammonia removal rate (AOB activity) (a) and nitrate production rate (NOB
activity) (b) for different shocks tested. The plot utilizes square boxes to denote the mean
values while the median values are represented by a line. Boxes mean 25 and 75 perВӯ
centile, whiskers mean range within 1.5IQR, and dots mean outliers
In Figure 3.2(a), the differences in AOB activity caused by the three types of shocks are
compared. The data shows that both salt and temperature shocks have a negative impact
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
15
==PAGE:20==
on AOB activity. A comparative analysis between the two shock groups reveals that a
salt shock of a concentration of 3g NaCl/l had a lower degree of negative effect on AOB
compared to a temperature shock of О”6 в—ҰC. Moreover, there was no significant decrease
in AOB activity caused by the combined shock when compared to the temperature shock
alone.
Figure 3.2(b) shows the variations observed in NOB activity caused by the three types
of shocks. Similar to AOB activity, the addition of salt and temperature shocks had a
negative effect on NOB activity. By comparing the salt and temperature shock groups,
it was found that a salt shock at a concentration of 3g NaCl/l had almost an equivalent
negative effect on NOB compared to a temperature shock of О”6 в—ҰC. Furthermore, the
combined shock had a stronger negative impact on NOB activity compared to either salt
or temperature shock.
In addition to the above findings, an Arrhenius correction of the theoretical changes in
nitrification rates was computed as section 2.3.1 described. The normalized comparison
is shown in Figure 3.3 based on mean values of the activity test and Arrhenius correction
calculated result. The results indicate that the 3g/l salt shock, results in an AOB activity
decrease to 83% and to 75% for NOB. For a О”6 в—ҰC shock, the activity test result of AOB
decreased to 47% and that of NOB to 63%, while the Arrhenius calculated result showed
a decrease to 39% and 63%. Finally, the combined shock caused a decrease in AOB and
NOB activity of 40% and 38%, respectively.
Figure 3.3: Normalized comparison (temperature correction factor Оё for AOB = 1.172,
NOB = 1.081 respectively[25][10]). Оё of AOB is a shortВӯterm factor different from that
used in the longВӯterm experimental results (section 3.2.1). Оё of NOB is a longВӯterm factor,
and it is also used in the longВӯterm experimental results(section 3.2.1)
.
In addition, analysis of the NOвҲ’
2 change rates under shocks showed that all experimental
reactors showed a trend in NOвҲ’
2 removal and no accumulation was observed (Figure
3.4). The NOвҲ’
2 removal rates were consistent with the previous decrease in AOB and
NOB activity. The salt shock group had the lowest NOвҲ’
2 removal, which corresponds
16
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:21==
to the previous analysis that NOB was negatively affected to a higher degree than AOB
under salt shock. The temperature shock group showed the highest relative removal rate,
as in the previous analysis the temperature shock caused a more significant decrease in
AOB activity than NOB. The combined shock group showed similar removal rates to the
reference group, due to the very similar decrease in activity for AOB and NOB under
combined shock.
Figure 3.4: NOвҲ’
2 removal rates for different shocks tested.
The following is the discussion of the shortВӯterm effects of temperature or salt shocks on
sludge activity:
The observed sludge activity decrease due to temperature shocks is very similar to the
activity decrease expected according to the Arrhenius theoretical values. The AOB acВӯ
tivity experimental value is only 8% higher than the Arrhenius theoretical value, which
is a very small difference compared to the total decrease of approximately 60%. The
experimental value for NOB activity is equal to the theoretical value. However, the temВӯ
perature correction factor Оё of NOB used in the calculations was a longВӯterm value from
the literature due to the absence of a shortВӯterm literature value. Therefore, the Arrhenius
theoretical value of NOB shown in the Figure 3.3 is actually the theoretical results under
longВӯterm shocks. Based on a previous study, microorganisms can develop adaptations
in response to longВӯterm temperature shocks, shortВӯterm temperature shocks caused a
stronger negative impact compared to longВӯterm shocks on microorganism activity [15].
Considering such a theory, the experimental value of NOB should also be slightly higher
than the theoretical value, if the shortВӯterm Оё value is found from the previous literature
for the Arrhenius calculation.
In summary, AOB and NOB activity results under shortВӯterm temperature shock are close
to Arrhenius theoretical values and are relatively reliable.
In the case of salt shock, there is no similar theoretical equation, and there are few previВӯ
ous studies at this concentration (3 g/l NaCl). One study showed that autotrophic biomass
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
17
==PAGE:22==
respiration was inhibited by up to 30% between 1 and 3 g/l NaCl longВӯterm shock [22].
Another study showed that AOB activity decreased by 60% and NOB activity decreased
by 70% at 5 g/l NaCl shortВӯterm shock [14]. In this experiment, the activity decrease in
AOB was 83% and in NOB was 75%, which is within the range of the results obtained in
previous studies.
Finally, no NOвҲ’
2 accumulation was observed during the shortВӯterm experiment, probably
due to the fact that the activated sludge NOB base activity used in this experiment was
higher than AOB (mean value of NOB activity is 1.9 mg N/g VSS/h compared to 1.6 mg
N/g VSS/h of AOB). After salt shock, NOB activity decreased to a greater extent than
AOB and resulted in a decrease in the mean value of NOвҲ’
2 removal from 0.3 to 0.2 mg
N/g VSS/h, suggesting that it is possible to observe NOвҲ’
2 accumulation if the initial NOB
activity is close to that of AOB.
3.1.2
The shortВӯterm effects of temperature or salt shocks on supernatant
turbidity
Effects on the sludge flocculation of shortВӯterm salt or temperature shocks are shown
in Figures 3.5 (a) and (b). It can be observed that for all tested shocks, comparable
turbidity was measured before and after the aeration step. Salt shock and combined
shock increased the sludge turbidity. Temperature shock (О”6 в—ҰC) had no significant effect
on turbidity, the turbidity of sludge under temperature shock closed to reference, indicated
that no deflocculation happened to the sludge.
Figure 3.5: (a) Supernatant turbidity under shocks before aeration (after 15 minutes expoВӯ
sure period under shock), (b) Supernatant turbidity under shocks after 2.25 hours aeration.
The following is the discussion of the shortВӯterm effects of temperature or salt shocks on
the effluent turbidity:
Since an increase of turbidity was found in both the salt shock and combined shock
groups, while no significant change of turbidity was observed in the temperature shock
group compared to the reference, it was concluded that the increase of turbidity in the
combined shock group was due only to the effect of the salt.
Based on a comparison of turbidity before and after the aeration, it has been determined
that the decrease in turbidity caused by salt shock is completed within a period of 15
minutes or less. The mechanism for the increase in turbidity is assumed to be caused by
monovalent cations (Na+) displacing divalent cations that contribute in stabilizing the floc
18
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:23==
structure, thus causing deflocculation [8]. On the other hand, temperature shocks have
been observed to cause filamentous bacteria to swell and subsequently decrease sludge
settleability in previous studies [13]. However, this process cannot be completed within
the experimental period of less than 3 hours, and therefore there is no significant change
in turbidity during shortВӯterm temperature shock.
3.2
LongВӯterm experiment result
3.2.1
The longВӯterm effects of temperature or salt shocks on sludge
activity
The six times shock tests were conducted as section 2.2.2 described. Figure 3.6 (a) and
(b) show the activity of AOB and NOB during the entire experimental period. The ammonia
removal rate and nitrate production rate were used as indicators to reflect these changes.
Figure 3.6: (a) Ammonia removal rate (AOB activity) and (b) nitrate production rate (NOB
activity) during the entire experiment. Empty signs for no impact period, solid signs for
shock period
For all three SBRs, AOB activity gradually increased and then stabilized during the first
three weeks, indicating the gradual adaptation of the sludge. After the onset of the shocks,
a decrease in activity was evident in the three reactors. AOB activity did recover during
the interval between shocks. Hence, activity data in 30.01, 02.02, 06.02, 13.02, 21.02
were taken to calculate the baseline in the noВӯshock period.
For the NOB activity of all three SBRs, it increased before the shocks were started, with
followВӯup data of 13.02 indicating a further increase. However, due to the thesis timeline,
the shock test had to be started without waiting for complete stabilization of the NOB
activity. Upon the onset of the shocks, there was a significant decrease in NOB activity
in all three reactors. NOB activity did increase during the interval between the second
and third shocks (08.02 and 13.02), but decreased after the forth shock (17.02) when
compared to the activity before the shock. Activity data in 06.02, 13.02, 21.02 were taken
to calculate baseline in no shock period.
Figure 3.7 (a) and (b) show the comparison of AOB and NOB activity between the nonВӯ
shock period and the shock period. Arrhenius correction of the theoretical changes in
nitrification rates was computed according to the method as section 2.3.1 described. As
evident from Figure 15, NOB was always more negatively affected by the three shocks
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
19
==PAGE:24==
than AOB in the longВӯterm experiment. During О”4 в—ҰC shocks, the activity of AOB deВӯ
creased to 82% and that of NOB to 70%. The Arrhenius correction nicely fits with exВӯ
pected values of 82% and 73%, respectively. Under 3g/l salt shock, the activity of AOB
decreased to 81% and that of NOB to 66%. The maximum activity reduction was obВӯ
served under the combined shock, with the activity of AOB decreasing to 58% and that of
NOB to 53%.
Figure 3.7: (a) Ammonia removal rate (AOB activity) comparison between noВӯshock and
shock period, (b)nitrate production rate (NOB activity) (b) comparison between noВӯshock
and shock period. Signs ( empty for nonВӯshock period, solid for shock period) denote
mean value, whiskers denote 95 percentile.
Figure 3.8: Normalized comparison of the measured activities during the long term shock
events. The temperature correction factor (Оё) for AOB = 1.051 and NOB = 1.081, respecВӯ
tively[25][10]. Оё of AOB is a longВӯterm factor different from that used in the shortВӯterm
experimental results. Оё of NOB is a longВӯterm factor, and it is also used in the shortВӯterm
experimental results
20
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:25==
In addition, monitoring of the NOвҲ’
2 change rates during the entire longВӯterm experiment are
shown in Figure 3.9. Prior to 02.02.23, the reactor accumulated NOвҲ’
2 , whereas after this
date, almost no NOвҲ’
2 accumulation happened. Between 17.02.23Вӯ21.02.23, NOвҲ’
2 accuВӯ
mulated in R1, because a reactor pressure accident occurred in three reactors, resulting
in unknown volume sludge discharge from three reactors.
Figure 3.9: NOвҲ’
2 change rate during longВӯterm experiment
The following is the discussion of the longВӯterm effects of temperature or salt shocks on
sludge activity:
The sludge activity decrease due to longВӯterm temperature shocks is also very similar
to the activity decrease of Arrhenius theoretical values. The AOB activity experimental
value is equal to the Arrhenius theoretical value. The experimental value for NOB activity
is 3% lower than the theoretical value, which is a small difference compared to the total
decrease of approximately 30
In summary, AOB and NOB activity results under longВӯterm temperature shock are close
to Arrhenius theoretical values and are relatively reliable.
In the case of salt shock, there is no similar theoretical equation, and there are few previВӯ
ous studies at this concentration (3 g/l NaCl). One study showed that autotrophic biomass
respiration was inhibited by up to 30% between 1 and 3 g/l NaCl longВӯterm shock [22].
Another study showed that AOB activity decreased by 75% and NOB activity decreased
by 83% at 5 g/l NaCl longВӯterm shock [14]. In this experiment, the activity decrease in
AOB was 81% and in NOB was 66%. Therefore, the AOB activity decrease is within the
range of the results obtained in previous studies. NOB activity decrease is beyond the
range of the results obtained in previous studies, but the difference is not very big.
Finally, no significant NOвҲ’
2 accumulation observation during the longВӯterm experiment beВӯ
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
21
==PAGE:26==
cause of shocks. NOвҲ’
2 accumulation only happened at the beginning of the longВӯterm exВӯ
periment, when AOB activity is higher than NOB. The fact that the observed NOвҲ’
2 change
rates are small compared to the NH+
4 removal rates and NOвҲ’
3 production rates, NOвҲ’
3 proВӯ
duction rates were higher than NH+
4 removal rates in baseline data points (see scales on
Figure 3.6, 3.7 and 3.9). Even though all three shocks had a stronger negative impact on
NOB activity than AOB, there was still no significant NOвҲ’
2 accumulationпҝҝbecause of the
activity of AOB and NOB in the sludge itself.
3.2.2
The longВӯterm effects of temperature or salt shocks on N2O
emission
The N2O monitoring results are shown in Figure 3.10. The comparisons of N2O emissions
under no shock and shocks in three reactors are shown in Figure ??.
Figure 3.10: (a) N2O monitoring during longВӯterm experiments. The vertical axis means
N2O gas concentration in discharged gas of SBRs. The data points are average values
of the whole daily monitoring data. N2O was only monitored during aerobic period. (b)
N2O emission comparison of three reactors between nonВӯshock period and shock period.
The temperature shock did not result in an increase in N2O emissions, whereas both the
salt and combined shocks led to an increase in N2O emissions (Figure ??). The tВӯtests
were conducted to determine whether the observed increase was statistically significant
(Table 3.1). In order to compare the experimental results with the results in the previВӯ
ous literature, the N2O EFs were calculated according to the method as section 2.3.4
described. The shock group calculated the mean and standard deviation of EFs based
on the available data. Due to the limitation of the data sample numbers, the noВӯshock EFs
standard deviation was calculated using the propagation of uncertainty equation.
Table 3.1: tВӯtest results of N2O emission and N2O EFs for the three reactors. TwoВӯsample
tВӯtest for dependent samples was done to analysis. The degrees of freedom are 11, sigВӯ
nificance level Оұ is 5%, if tВӯcalculated>tВӯcritical, then difference is significant.
Reactor
tВӯcalculated
tВӯcritical
EFs (no Shock)
EFs (shock test)
R1ВӯCooling
0.638
2.131
2.2Вұ0.9%
2.4Вұ0.7%
R2ВӯSalt
2.315
2.1Вұ0.5%
6.0Вұ2.6%
R2ВӯCooling+salt
2.916
2.5Вұ0.7%
5.9Вұ1.6%
As data shown in Table 3.1, salt shock and combined shock did cause a significant and
22
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:27==
comparable increase in N2O emission, while cooling alone had no significant effect. FigВӯ
ure 3.11 shows an example of N2O emissions increase because of combined shocks.
Figure 3.11: N2O concentration measured in the offgas during two consecutive SBRВӯ
cycles. No pH and oxygen concentration changes between cycles. The shock test started
at the second cycles, temperature decreased 2 в—ҰC, the added salt is 3g/l.
The following is the discussion of the longВӯterm effects of temperature or salt shocks on
N2O emission:
Based on the results presented above, it is apparent that N2O emissions have been inВӯ
creased by salt and combined shocks. Notably, the increase in emissions was only obВӯ
served during the shock period and did not have any longВӯterm effects. Conversely, temВӯ
perature shocks were found to have no significant impact on N2O emissions. According to
the N2O production pathway, the actual emissions of N2O are influenced by both the proВӯ
duction and consumption processes (Figure 1.2). The activity test (section 3.2.1) showed
a decrease in the activity of each microorganism by temperature shocks. Therefore, temВӯ
perature shocks slowed all rates similarly without putting extra stress, while salt brings
additional stress leading to quantitative changes in the importance of different biochemВӯ
ical pathways. The EFs results suggest only the salt shocks trigger the increase in N2O
emissions (Table 3.1).
Based on a previous study, the concentration of NOвҲ’
2 could be an important factor afВӯ
fecting the production process[3]. However, section 3.1 indicates that there was no disВӯ
cernible trend of NO2Вӯ accumulation during the shock period. Therefore, it is assumed that
the increase in N2O emissions resulting from the salt shocks is caused by a reduction in
the consumption process. This finding is consistent with a previous study, which demonВӯ
strated that salt shocks inhibited N2O reductase activity, leading to N2O high emission
[23].
Additionally, during the activity test, a shortВӯterm NOвҲ’
2 accumulation of 3Вӯ6 mg N/l was
observed following the dosing of NOвҲ’
2 solution, leading to an increase in N2O emissions
during this period (Figure 3.12). This may be caused by NOвҲ’
2 induced nitrifier denitrificaВӯ
tion resulting in additional N2O formation.
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
23
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.12: N2O monitoring during two consecutive shock cycles at constant operational
conditions(i.e., no shocks).
Regarding the temperature shock, the lack of an increase in N2O emissions following the
temperature shock may be attributed to the temperature shock design. The longВӯterm exВӯ
periment caused only a 2 в—ҰC temperature decrease in the first cycle and a slow increase
to 4 в—ҰC after 3Вӯ4 cycles. It is assumed that microorganisms or microbial populations were
adapted to cope with temperature changes in the range of at least a few degrees centiВӯ
grade. The conclusion of a previous study showed that only a large shortВӯterm temperaВӯ
ture shock (8 в—ҰC temperature difference) leads to an increase in N2O[26]. Therefore, the
temperature shocks in the longВӯterm experiments may not be harsh enough to cause N2O
emissions increase. While salt shocks of the longВӯterm experiments put stress on some
pathways that directly or indirectly influenced nitrogen metabolism.
Finally, the EFs of three SBRs were compared with the Swiss average EFs (0.9Вӯ3.6%)
[3]. This result suggests that the reactor has a normal performance and that the available
N2O data are reliable.
3.2.3
The longВӯterm effects of temperature or salt shocks on sludge
settleability
Figure 3.13 (a) shows the monitoring of the supernatant effluent turbidity, throughout the
entire experiment period. However, manual sludge discharge was stopped, as an unВӯ
known volume of sludge discharge happened to the last two data points due to an unВӯ
expected pressure problem that happened in 18.02Вӯ20.02, leading to high turbidity. To
evaluate the negative effect on sludge settleability of shocks, a comparison was done usВӯ
ing the mean and standard deviation obtained from the other data points. Three shocks
had a slight negative impact on turbidity.
24
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.13: (a) NTU monitoring during the entire experiment period, (b) comparison of
NTU between noВӯshock period and shock period
During the experiment, the SVI was also monitored, a parameter describing sludge setВӯ
tleability (3.14). The first data point has been taken just after inoculation, the aforemenВӯ
tioned accident happened to last data point. The comparison results with other data points
showed no significant changes due to shocks. The results indicated that there was no sigВӯ
nificant negative effect of three shocks on SVI of sludge.
Figure 3.14: (a) SVI monitoring during the entire experiment period, (b) comparison of
SVI between noВӯshock period and shock period
Turbidity describes the amount of fine particles that typically do not settle in the secondary
clarifier. SVI describes the settling characteristics of the bulk part of the sludge (i.e. in
most cases coarser flocs than those observed as turbidity). Hence, based on the turbidity
and SVI results, it is possible that the 3 g NaCl/L salt shocks negatively affected floc
stability, but only of part of the flocs and thus may impact on turbidity while leaving SVI
pretty much unchanged.
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
25
==PAGE:30==
As the impact appeared to be slight, the twoВӯsample tВӯtest for dependent samples was
done to analysis. The zero hypothesis H0 and the alternative hypothesis H1 were formuВӯ
lated as follows: H0: вҖқturbidity/SVI of sludge under shocks have the same expected value
as the turbidity/SVI of sludge with no shockвҖқ. H1: вҖқturbidity/SVI of sludge under shocks
do not have the same expected value as the turbidity/SVI of sludge with no shockвҖң. For
degrees of freedom = 10/7 and Оұ =5%, tВӯcritical of 2.228/2.365 were obtained. By applying
the equations of the twoВӯsample tВӯtest to the turbidity/SVI data, a list of tВӯcalculated was
obtained. The difference between tВӯcalculated and tВӯcritical are shown in Table 7. The reВӯ
sult indicates that there was no significant influence by three shocks on the turbidity/SVI.
Table 3.2 tВӯtest results of the effect of cooling and salt shocks on turbidity and SVI.
Table 3.2: tВӯtest results of the effect of cooling and salt shocks on turbidity and SVI for the
three reactors. TwoВӯsample tВӯtest for dependent samples was done to analysis. The deВӯ
grees of freedom are 11, significance level Оұ is 5%, if tВӯcalculated>tВӯcritical, then difference
is significant.
Turbidity
SVI
Reactor
tВӯcalculated
tВӯcritical
tВӯcalculated
tВӯcritical
R1ВӯCooling
1.321
2.228
0.899
2.365
R2ВӯSalt
1.503
0.697
R3ВӯCooling+salt
1.483
1.117
The VSS was also monitored during the longВӯterm experiment, and the trend that was
observed is that from the time of inoculation, the VSS decreased from 2.6 g/l to around 2.2
g/l through several sludge discharges, with a rapid drop of about 0.5 g/l after the first shock,
but then a steady increase, even after several subsequent shocks(3.15). Therefore, it can
be inferred that other unknown causes of sludge loss should have occurred after the first
shock. Besides, there is no significant sludge loss because of shocks.
Figure 3.15: VSS concentration measured in the reactors during the longВӯterm experiВӯ
ments.
The following is the discussion of the longВӯterm effects of temperature or salt shocks on
sludge settleability:
26
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:31==
In terms of statistical methodology (tВӯtest), the analysis of the above results shows that
the sludge settleability was not significantly affected by the longВӯterm impact, either in
terms of temperature or salt shocks. However, according to Figure ?? (b) and ?? (b),
salt shocks had some negative effect on sludge flocculation and settleability (even if not
quantified above the critical significance level according to tВӯtest) while temperature not.
Although there are various mechanisms to explain the decrease in sludge settleability
under salt and temperature shocks, it has also been shown that sludge is resistant to
them and still retains its proper form and composition under shock [11]. + wait microscopy
analysis from Pravin
As a result, it is possible that no decrease in settleability leading to increased sludge loss
from effluent under the current temperature and salt shock, as evidenced by the continued
increase in VSS.
However, salt and temperature shocks may still result in varying degrees of loss of AOB
and NOB under the existing sludge loss from effluent. AOB activity remained at the same
level after the four times shocks as before the shocks. NOB, on the other hand, was lower
compared to the preВӯshock level. Although this may be due to fluctuations in the results
themselves, it is important to note that NOB was still slowly increasing after the first two
times shocks. The decrease after the fourth shock event is likely to be a loss of NOB. It is
not possible to know from the available experimental results whether there was a specific
loss of NOB due to the shocks, as the DNA samples were only stored and not analysed
due to the timeline of the thesis. It may be possible to find out whether there was indeed
a loss of NOB if DNA analysis was carried out, even though there was no decrease in
settleability of longВӯterm salt or temperature shocks.
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
27
==PAGE:32==
4
Conclusion
вҖў AOB and NOB activity affected differently by salt or temperature shocks
The activity of sludge can be negatively affected by shortВӯterm and longВӯterm experiВӯ
ments. In shortВӯterm experiments, NOB activity was only stronger negatively affected
by salt shock than AOB activity. In longВӯterm experiments, salt, temperature, and comВӯ
bined shocks had a stronger negative impact on NOB activity compared to AOB activity.
A comparison of the longВӯ and shortВӯterm shocks demonstrated that AOB was more easВӯ
ily adaptable to temperature shock in longВӯterm than NOB. The results obtained from the
shortВӯterm and longВӯterm experiments on temperature shock are consistent with the ArВӯ
rhenius equation, while the results of salt shock are consistent with previous results for
similar salt concentration ranges. Therefore, temperature and salt shocks caused by mulВӯ
tiple cold rainfalls in winter can negatively affect NOB activity stronger than AOB activity,
resulting in incomplete nitrification.
вҖў Salt shocks negatively affect the flocculation and settleability of sludge
Both shortВӯterm and longВӯterm shocks had the same effect on sludge flocculation. In
the shortВӯterm and longВӯterm experiments, the sludge turbidity increased only under salt
shocks, representing the deflocculation of sludge. As for the sludge settleability, the SVI
was only monitored during longВӯterm experiments, both salt and temperature shocks had
no significant effect on SVI. According to the meaning of turbidity and SVI as section 3.2.3
described, the results mean that salt shocks can cause sludge deflocculation to some
extent, however, it did not cause large sludge floc deflocculation and affected the sludge
settleability. Temperature shock has no effect on sludge flocculation and settleability under
the current experimental condition. Therefore, the salt shocks that come from cold rainfalls
may cause sludge deflocculation and slight sludge loss.
вҖў A simulated cold rainfall favor high N2O emission and may cause NOB loss.
LongВӯterm experimental monitoring results show that only salt shocks can cause an inВӯ
crease in N2O emissions, which may be due to the inhibited reduction process of N2O to
N2. However, longВӯterm exposure to salt shocks did not affect emissions during normal
operation, meaning that the increase only occurs during the shock event. Temperature
shocks did not cause an increase in N2O emissions in this experimental design case. In
addition, the N2O EFs of the reactors were within the average range of the Swiss wastewВӯ
ater plant. According to the activity test results, there may be some loss of NOB under
longВӯterm shocks, and no definite conclusion can be obtained as DNA and FISH analysis
were not completed in this thesis.
28
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:33==
5
Recommendations
This thesis tested whether cold rainВӯinduced salt and temperature shocks result in incomВӯ
plete nitrification, NOвҲ’
2 accumulation, N2O emission increase and sludge loss.
However, deficiencies in the experimental design and simulation process prevented the
simulation from validating all the hypotheses. The previous detection of NOвҲ’
2 accumuВӯ
lation occurred in March, while the first snowfall in the Zurich region typically happens
in December/January. Thus, a longВӯterm experimental period of FebruaryВӯMarch would
have been more appropriate. Unfortunately, a technical failure led to the reactor being
reВӯinoculated in midВӯJanuary, shortening the experimental cycle considerably. As a result,
the sludge in the reactor did not undergo a complete adaptation process, as reflected in
the fact that NOB activity was greater than AOB and still growing before the shock, which
was not stable. Therefore, a suitable design of the experimental time point is necessary
for this experimentпҝҝ
This experiment was the first attempt at N2O detection in EawagвҖҷs laboratory reactor and
could help to better understand the effects of temperature and salt shocks on the nitrogen
cycle. However, caution must be exercised due to the experimentвҖҷs unstable operation.
The paper was restarted and had one incident due to the N2O detection device.
The method based on activity tests, N2O detection, and flocculation and settleability tests
can only simulate the reproduction of incomplete nitrification, N2O emission increase and
sludge loss due to cold rain. Further characterization of the mechanism and discovery of
the specific cause requires FISH and DNA analysis methods to characterize changes in
microbial diversity. The experiment originally planned to perform FISH and DNA analysis
of sludge and effluent samples but could not be completed due to the time requirement
of the thesis. Future experiments are necessary to analyze the changes in the sludge
microbial community.
N2O emissions increase because of the temperature and salt shocks from cold rainfalls
even without NOвҲ’
2 accumulation. Despite not being observed during the laboratory simuВӯ
lation, it can be predicted that NOвҲ’
2 accumulation is likely to occur during salt and temperВӯ
ature shocks based on the change of AOB and NOB activity under shocks from experiВӯ
mental results, so incomplete nitrification is likely to occur during cold rainfalls. Besides,
experimental results also showed that salt shocks from cold rainfall may lead to sludge
loss. Therefore, operators should take the action to avoid shock effects from cold rainfalls
in practice. Some possible solutions are to contact city authorities to substitute salt with
sand or grit to minimize salt use. Or by separating rainwater and sewage, road runoff
could be discharged separately to surface waters rather than being conveyed to the muВӯ
nicipal sewer. It can also be seen that the composition of the microbial community in the
bioreactors of WWTPs will affect its performance in the face of cold rainfalls. Hence, one
possible solution could be to cultivate desired sludge to cope with the negative effects of
the shock by bacteria inoculation, controlling SRT et.
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
29
==PAGE:34==
Bibliography
[1]
Jonathan D. Caranto and Kyle M. Lancaster. вҖңNitric oxide is an obligate bacterial
nitrification intermediate produced by hydroxylamine oxidoreductaseвҖқ. In: ProceedВӯ
ings of the National Academy of Sciences 114.31 (2017), pp. 8217вҖ“8222. DOI:
10.1073/pnas.1704504114. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.
1704504114. URL: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1704504114.
[2]
James Griffin and George Wells. вҖңRegional synchrony in fullВӯscale activated sludge
bioreactors due to deterministic microbial community assemblyвҖқ. In: The ISME JourВӯ
nal 11 (Dec. 2016). DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2016.121.
[3]
Wenzel Gruber et al. вҖңEstimation of countrywide N2O emissions from wastewater
treatment in Switzerland using longВӯterm monitoring dataвҖқ. In: Water Research X
13 (2021), p. 100122. ISSN: 2589Вӯ9147. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wroa.2021.
100122. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2589914721000359.
[4]
Wenzel Gruber et al. вҖңLinking seasonal N2O emissions and nitrification failures to
microbial dynamics in a SBR wastewater treatment plantвҖқ. In: Water Research X 11
(2021), p. 100098. ISSN: 2589Вӯ9147. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wroa.2021.
100098. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2589914721000116.
[5]
Tian H et al. вҖңA comprehensive quantification of global nitrous oxide sources and
sinksвҖқ. In: NATURE 586 (2020), pp. 248вҖ“256. ISSN: 0028Вӯ0836 (online). DOI: 10.
1038/s41586-020-2780-0(online). URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-
2780-0.
[6]
Jong Hyuk Hwang and Jan A. Oleszkiewicz. вҖңEffect of ColdВӯTemperature Shock
on NitrificationвҖқ. In: Water Environment Research 79.9 (2007), pp. 964вҖ“968. ISSN:
10614303, 15547531. URL: http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 25053672 (visited on
04/03/2023).
[7]
S. C. Jhansi and Santosh Kumar Mishra. вҖңWastewater Treatment and Reuse: SusВӯ
tainability OptionsвҖқ. In: Consilience: journal of sustainable development 10 (2013),
pp. 1вҖ“15.
[8]
F. Kara, G.C. Gurakan, and F.D. Sanin. вҖңMonovalent cations and their influence on
activated sludge floc chemistry, structure, and physical characteristicsвҖқ. In: BiotechВӯ
nology and Bioengineering 100.2 (2008), pp. 231вҖ“239. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1002/bit.21755. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/bit.21755.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/bit.21755.
[9]
Lanqing Li et al. вҖңCarbon neutrality of wastewater treatment Вӯ A systematic conВӯ
cept beyond the plant boundaryвҖқ. In: Environmental Science and Ecotechnology
11 (2022), p. 100180. ISSN: 2666Вӯ4984. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ese.2022.
100180. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666498422000369.
[10]
Y.C. Liu et al. вҖңTemperature Variations Shape Niche Occupation of Nitrotoga Вӯlike
Bacteria in Activated SludgeвҖқ. In: ACS EST Water XXXX (Sept. 2020). DOI: 10.
1021/acsestwater.0c00060.
[11]
Ewa LiwarskaВӯBizukojc, Olga Andrzejczak, and MONIKA SOLECKA. вҖңStudy on acВӯ
tivated sludge flocs morphology and composition in a fullВӯscale wastewater treatВӯ
ment plant in PolandвҖқ. In: Environment Protection Engineering 45 (Jan. 2019). DOI:
10.37190/epe190205.
[12]
Mark van Loosdrecht et al. Experimental Methods in Wastewater Treatment. Apr.
2016. ISBN: 9781780404745 (Hardback) 9781780404752 (eBook).
30
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:35==
[13]
R.I. Manassra. Study of Temperature Effects on Activated Sludge Floc Stability. ExВӯ
amensarbete (Institutionen fГ¶r byggВӯ och miljГ¶teknik, Chalmers tekniska hГ¶gskola).
Chalmers tekniska hГ¶gskola, 2006. URL: https : / / books . google . fr / books ? id =
vRLojwEACAAJ.
[14]
M.S. Moussa et al. вҖңLong term effects of salt on activity, population structure and
floc characteristics in enriched bacterial cultures of nitrifiersвҖқ. In: Water Research
40.7 (2006), pp. 1377вҖ“1388. ISSN: 0043Вӯ1354. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.watres.2006.01.029. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0043135406000509.
[15]
Mateusz MuszyЕ„skiВӯHuhajЕӮo et al. вҖңThe shortВӯ and longВӯterm effects of coldВӯtemperature
shock on partial nitritation Вӯ improved assessment methodologyвҖқ. In: Journal of EnВӯ
vironmental Chemical Engineering 10.1 (2022), p. 106995. ISSN: 2213Вӯ3437. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2021.106995. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2213343721019722.
[16]
Ajay Patel, Jesse Zhu, and George Nakhla. вҖңSimultaneous carbon, nitrogen and
phosphorous removal from municipal wastewater in a circulating fluidized bed bioreВӯ
actorвҖқ. In: Chemosphere 65.7 (2006), pp. 1103вҖ“1112. ISSN: 0045Вӯ6535. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2006.04.047. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S004565350600511X.
[17]
Frank Schreiber et al. вҖңNitric oxide and nitrous oxide turnover in natural and engiВӯ
neered microbial communities: Biological pathways, chemical reactions, and novel
technologiesвҖқ. In: Frontiers in microbiology 3 (Oct. 2012), p. 372. DOI: 10.3389/
fmicb.2012.00372.
[18]
R.V. Schulthess and W. Gujer. вҖңRelease of nitrous oxide (N2O) from denitrifying
activated sludge: Verification and application of a mathematical modelвҖқ. In: Water
Research 30.3 (1996), pp. 521вҖ“530. ISSN: 0043Вӯ1354. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0043-1354(95)00204-9. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/0043135495002049.
[19]
Aina SolerВӯJofra, Julio PГ©rez, and Mark CM van Loosdrecht. вҖңHydroxylamine and
the nitrogen cycle: A reviewвҖқ. In: Water Research 190 (2021), p. 116723.
[20]
Qingxian Su et al. вҖңAbiotic nitrous oxide (N2O) production is strongly pH depenВӯ
dent, but contributes little to overall N2O emissions in biological nitrogen removal
systemsвҖқ. In: Environmental science & technology 53.7 (2019), pp. 3508вҖ“3516.
[21]
Chris Sweetapple, Guangtao Fu, and David Butler. вҖңIdentifying sensitive sources
and key control handles for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from wastewВӯ
ater treatmentвҖқ. In: Water Research 62 (Oct. 2014). DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2014.06.
002.
[22]
Joseph Tauber et al. вҖңInfluence of road salt thawing peaks on the inflow composiВӯ
tion and activated sludge properties in municipal wastewater treatmentвҖқ. In: Water
Science Technology (Feb. 2021). DOI: 10.2166/wst.2021.045.
[23]
Satoshi Tsuneda et al. вҖңEffect of salinity on nitrous oxide emission in the biologiВӯ
cal nitrogen removal process for industrial wastewaterвҖқ. In: Journal of hazardous
materials 119 (Apr. 2005), pp. 93вҖ“8. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2004.10.025.
[24]
Laura Christina Valk et al. вҖңExploring the microbial influence on seasonal nitrous oxВӯ
ide concentration in a fullВӯscale wastewater treatment plant using metagenome asВӯ
sembled genomesвҖқ. In: Water Research 219 (2022), p. 118563. ISSN: 0043Вӯ1354.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2022.118563. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0043135422005164.
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
31
==PAGE:36==
[25]
Metcalf Eddy Tchobanoglous G. Stensel H. D. Tsuchihashi R. Burton F. L. AbuВӯ
Orf M. Bowden G. Pfrang W. Wastewater engineering : treatment and resource
recovery (Fifth). 2014.
[26]
Xiaojun Wang et al. вҖңEffects of Temperature Shock on N 2 O emissions from DenitriВӯ
fying Activated Sludge and Associated Active BacteriaвҖқ. In: Bioresource Technology
249 (Oct. 2017). DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2017.10.070.
[27]
Nicole WrageВӯMГ¶nnig et al. вҖңThe role of nitrifier denitrification in the production of
nitrous oxide revisitedвҖқ. In: Soil Biology and Biochemistry 123 (Apr. 2018). DOI:
10.1016/j.soilbio.2018.03.020.
32
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:37==
A
Appendix
A.0.1
1
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
33
==PAGE:38==
34
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:39==
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
35
==PAGE:40==
36
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:41==
A.0.2
2
Figure A.1: Photo of shortВӯterm reactors
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
37
==PAGE:42==
Figure A.2: Photo of longВӯterm reactors
38
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
==PAGE:43==
Nitrite accumulation in wastewater treatment plants induced by salt and temperature shocks
39
==PAGE:44==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://sustain.dtu.dk/en
