==PAGE:1==
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision
and machine learning
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Computer Science and Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
Master Thesis
1st April, 2023
Author:
Michael Thiesen Westergaard (s175180)
Supervisors:
Birger Andersen, Bhupjit Singh, Per Lynggaard
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Computer Science and Engineering, Anker Engelunds Vej 101, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis presents the development of a system for automating traﬀic alarms using
machine learning and computer vision. The system is implemented as a mobile
application developed using Flutter, which uses computer vision to detect road signs
while driving. The detected road signs are then classified into speed limit categories
using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model that was trained on a large dataset
of road signs to ensure accurate classifications. The proposed system offers an innovative
solution to enhance traﬀic safety by providing alerts to drivers, when they are exceeding
the speed limit, which can help prevent accidents and ensure compliance with speed
limits. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed system, with high
accuracy rates achieved in classifying road signs. This study showcases the potential of
machine learning and computer vision for automating traﬀic alarms and improving road
safety.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to all those who have
supported and helped me throughout my thesis journey.
Firstly, I would like to extend my sincere thanks to my supervisors at DTU, Birger
Andersen, Bhupjit Singh and Per Lynggaard, for their support, guidance, and
encouragement throughout the entirety of my project. Their profound insights and
extensive expertise have been a valuable source of inspiration and have significantly
contributed to the success of my thesis. I am grateful for the time and effort they have
invested in my thesis.
I would also like to thank my friends and family for their encouragement and support
throughout my academic journey. I would like to express my heartfelt appreciation to
them for taking the time to read my thesis and provide me with valuable insights and
feedback, which have undoubtedly enhanced the quality of my work. Their belief in me
has been a source of strength and motivation, and I am fortunate to have them in my life.
Finally, I would like to thank OOONO A/S for providing me with the inspiration for this
project. Their idea and support acted as a catalyst in shaping my research, and I am
grateful to the company for providing me with the necessary inspiration. I would also
like to acknowledge my colleagues at OOONO A/S for their invaluable sparring and
guidance throughout the course of my project.
Once again, I would like to express my heartfelt appreciation to everyone who has helped
me on this journey. Thank you all for your support, encouragement, and guidance.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of abbreviations
ADAS: Advanced Driver Assistance Systems
AI: Artificial Intelligence
ANN: Artificial Neural Network
CNN: Convolutional Neural Network
DCNN: Deep Convolutional Neural Network
ER: Entity Relationship
FFI: Foreign Function Interface
IL: Incremental Learning
ILSVRC: ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
ML: Machine Learning
MVP: Model-View-Presenter
MVC: Model-View-Controller
MVVM: Model-View-ViewModel
RGB: Red, Green and Blue
ROI: Regions Of Interest
SL: Supervised Learning
TTS: Text-To-Speech
TSR: Traﬀic Sign Recognition
UL: Unsupervised Learning
UI: User Interface
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
List of abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
State of the art
4
2.1
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Computer vision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Road sign detection systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Incremental learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Flutter framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Methodology
22
3.1
Project planning and management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Data preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Model selection, training and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Analysis
30
4.1
Selected models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Optimizer optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Input image shape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Final model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Computer vision analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.6
Requirements analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Design and implementation
42
5.1
Design of mobile application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
App Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
OpenCV implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4
Integration of the machine learning model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.5
Challenges and Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Testing and evaluation
56
6.1
Software test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
v
==PAGE:7==
6.2
User test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Overall evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7
Future work
64
8
Conclusion
65
Bibliography
66
A Time plan
69
B Class diagram
70
C OpenCV Flowchart
72
D Final model training history
74
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
vi
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In this chapter the background and motivation of this project will be presented. Based
on this a problem statement will be formed, followed by the research questions of the
project. Finally, a section for the limitation of this project will be explained to make sure
that the scope of the project is well known.
1.1
Background and motivation
This project aims to develop a system for detecting road signs with speed limits and
monitoring the speed of drivers to ensure compliance with these limits. The problem of
speed limit violations is of utmost importance as it has far-reaching implications for road
safety and traﬀic flow.
One of the primary reasons why this problem is relevant is due to the dangers caused by
excessive speed. Excessive speed is a leading cause of traﬀic accidents and can result in
serious injury or death. According to the International Transport Forum (ITF), 30% of
fatal crashes in Denmark in 2020 were caused by speeding [1]. This highlights the need
for a system that can monitor speed and ensure that drivers are adhering to the speed
limits.
Another important factor is the impact that speed limit violations can have on traﬀic
flow. When drivers exceed the speed limit, they can slow down other vehicles and cause
a domino effect. This can lead to traﬀic congestion and increased travel times, which can
be a source of frustration for other drivers and negatively impact their daily routines.
Obeying the speed limit is not just a matter of safety, but also a legal obligation. All
drivers are required by law to follow the posted speed limits, and those who violate these
limits can face serious consequences. The most common penalties for breaking speed
limits include fines and points on a driver’s license. In some cases, drivers who repeatedly
violate speed limits may even have their license suspended or revoked, which can make it
diﬀicult for them to get to work, run errands, or attend to other daily responsibilities.
Furthermore, major speed limit violations are often considered a form of reckless or
negligent driving, which can result in criminal charges or confiscation of the vehicle in
some cases.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that in certain circumstances, speed limits can be
temporarily changed due to conditions on the road. For example, roadwork or
construction sites may require lower speed limits to ensure the safety of workers and
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
1
==PAGE:9==
other road users. Similarly, inclement weather or other environmental factors can also
lead to temporary changes in speed limits.
In these cases, it is essential for drivers to be aware of the temporary changes in speed
limits and to adjust their driving accordingly. The system for detecting speed limit signs
and monitoring driver speeds should be able to accommodate these temporary changes
and ensure that drivers are aware of the new limits. This will help to promote road
safety and ensure compliance with the law, even during periods of change or uncertainty.
Currently, several vehicles possess the capability to identify the speed limits. This
functionality is primarily facilitated through the vehicle’s navigation system, which
obtains the relevant speed limit information based on the vehicle’s location. However,
this approach falls short in identifying temporary changes to the speed limits.
Alternatively, modern vehicles features advanced camera or radar systems capable of
identifying road signs. Nonetheless, the adoption of such systems requires the purchase
of a new vehicle, thereby imposing an financial burden on drivers seeking to ensure their
vehicles are equipped with up-to-date information on speed limits.
These factors underscores the importance of ensuring that drivers are aware of the speed
limits and are adhering to them. Not only does this promote road safety and reduce the
risk of accidents, but it also helps to ensure that drivers are in compliance with the law
and avoid any potential legal consequences. By developing a system that can monitor
speed and enforce compliance with speed limits, we can help drivers stay safe, avoid legal
consequences, and improve the overall driving experience for everyone on the road.
1.2
Problem statement
Despite the efforts to ensure road safety, there remains a significant issue of drivers
breaking speed limits and causing traﬀic violations, putting themselves and other road
users at risk. One of the reasons for this is due to drivers not noticing the speed limit
signs, either because they are not paying attention or due to poor visibility, possibly
caused by bad weather or lighting conditions.
The current method of enforcing speed limits through manual law enforcement is
resource-intensive and often not effective in real-time monitoring. This project aims to
address this issue by developing a machine learning and computer vision system for
detecting road signs with speed limits. The system should be integrated into vehicles
without any major modifications, providing a more eﬀicient and effective method of
monitoring and enforcing speed limits on roads. To make it more accessible for everyone,
the system should run through a mobile application. This means that the system should
not be resource heavy, as smartphone does not have resources like high performing GPUs.
The proposed system should use state-of-the-art technologies to perform real-time object
detection and recognition of speed limit road signs. The goal is to improve road safety
by providing drivers with an indication of the speed limit, reducing the instances of
traﬀic violations, and enhancing the overall driving experience for everyone.
1.3
Research questions
• How can we make the detection of road signs with speed limits more accessible
without major modifications/upgrades to the vehicle?
• How can an average smartphone with minimum 6 GB ram be used to detect road
signs?
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
2
==PAGE:10==
• What methods can be implemented to achieve a detection accuracy of at least 90%
for road sign with speed limits?
• How does the detection perform, when used in real-world scenarios compared to the
test environment?
• How can the model be continuously improved when new data has been collected?
• How can the solution be adapted for use in countries other than Denmark?
• To what extent can the proposed solution improve the current state-of-the-art?
1.4
Limitations
To ensure the success of the project, certain limitations have been set. The scope of this
study is the classification of road signs associated with speed limits; other road signs will
not be considered. Nonetheless, the study will provide an explanation of how additional
road signs could be incorporated into the project. Moreover, the investigation will be
restricted to Danish road signs, although some countries may share comparable sign
layouts. However, the performance of the model on road signs beyond Denmark will be
evaluated, but it will not serve as the deciding factor for the study.
In this project a mobile application will be developed along with a machine learning
model. The mobile application is designed to function independently without any
backend servers to store collected data or facilitate communication with other
smartphones to notify users of speed limits. Although incorporating such functionality
could have potentially enhanced the project, it was deemed beyond the scope of this
study and has been identified as an area for future improvements.
In addition, the mobile application has not been subjected to analysis for security risks
and concerns. While the application is not connected to a backend, thereby minimizing
the risk of internet traﬀic manipulation, there could be potential security risks if the
user’s smartphone contains malware. These risks include the possibility of an intruder
monitoring the camera feed or user’s location while the application is in use. Other risks
would be setting up fake road signs with fake speed limits to trick the system. However,
investigating these potential security risks would require a considerable investment of
time and resources and was therefore not included in the project scope.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
3
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
State of the art
In order to comprehend the technologies employed in this thesis, a thorough review of
the current state-of-the-art in relevant fields and technologies is essential. This chapter
aims to provide an overview of machine learning, including its historical development
and advancements, and an examination of some of the models that have performed well
in this domain. Additionally, an investigation into the latest developments in computer
vision will be discussed. Next, the detection of road signs in modern automobile models
will be reviewed. Lastly, this chapter will look into the subject of incremental learning
for machine learning models, followed by a section dedicated to the Flutter framework
for mobile application development.
2.1
Machine learning
Machine learning is a subfield of artificial intelligence (AI) that deals with the
development of algorithms and models that can perform tasks without explicit
instructions[2]. It is based on the idea that machines can learn from data, identify
patterns, and make decisions based on that information.
The early history of machine learning can be traced back to the 1940s and 1950s when
researchers first started exploring the concept of learning from data. Logician Walter
Pitts and neuroscientist Warren McCulloch published a paper in 1943 about the
mathematical modeling of the first neural network, marking the advent of machine
learning[3]. With this, we saw one of the earliest examples of machine learning projects
including Frank Rosenblatt’s ”Perceptron”, which was an artificial neural network
(ANN) built to categorize and label the input[4].
Throughout the following decades, machine learning saw significant progress, with the
development of new algorithms, models, and techniques. Researchers developed decision
trees in the 1960s and 1970s, which became one of the earliest examples of supervised
learning [5]. In the 1980s and 1990s, researchers introduced multilayered neural
networks, which were inspired by the structure of the human brain and became a
popular tool for solving complex problems[4].
In the 21st century, machine learning has experienced tremendous growth, with
advancements in hardware and the availability of large datasets making it possible to
train much larger and more complex models. Some of the most notable breakthroughs in
recent years include deep learning, which is a type of artificial neural network with
multiple hidden layers, and reinforcement learning, which is a type of machine learning
that focuses on teaching machines to make decisions by learning from consequences[4].
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
4
==PAGE:12==
Today, machine learning is used in a wide range of applications, from computer vision
and natural language processing to recommendation systems and autonomous vehicles.
The state-of-the-art technology in machine learning is constantly evolving, and
researchers are continually pushing the boundaries of what is possible in this field. Some
of the most promising areas of research at the moment include transfer learning, which
allows models trained on one task to be adapted to new tasks, and generative models,
which can generate new data from existing data.
According to a paper on machine learning[2], the machine learning field can be divided
into two groups: Supervised learning (SL) and unsupervised learning (UL).
SL is a type of machine learning technique where the algorithm is trained using labeled
data. In supervised learning, the algorithm is provided with a set of input data along
with their corresponding outputs. The algorithm then uses this labeled data to learn a
mapping between the input and output variables. Once the algorithm is trained on this
labeled data, it can be used to make predictions on new, unseen data. SL is widely used
in a variety of applications such as image recognition, speech recognition, and natural
language processing. It is a powerful technique that allows machines to learn from data
and make accurate predictions.
UL is where the algorithm is trained on unlabeled data. Unlike supervised learning,
there are no correct outputs provided to the algorithm during the training process.
Instead, the algorithm is tasked with finding patterns and relationships within the data
on its own. Unsupervised learning is useful when there is no specific goal or task in
mind, and the goal is to explore the data and identify any interesting patterns or
structures that may exist. Some common examples of unsupervised learning include
clustering, dimensionality reduction, and anomaly detection.
In conclusion, machine learning has come a long way since its inception, and the field is
now at the forefront of the technological innovation. With the rapid pace of development
and the increasing demand for intelligent systems, machine learning is sure to continue
to play a key role in shaping the future of technology.
2.1.1
CNN
Deep learning is a subfield of machine learning that has become increasingly popular in
recent years. A review of deep learning was giving in [6], which will be referenced
throughout this section.
Deep learning refers to the use of neural networks with multiple layers, which enables
them to learn complex representations of data. One of the most popular types of deep
neural networks is the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), which is particularly
effective in image and video analysis tasks. They use a series of convolutional and
pooling layers to extract increasingly abstract features from the input image. The
convolutional layers apply a set of filters to the input image to detect features such as
edges and corners. The pooling layers then reduce the dimensionality of the output of
the convolutional layers, resulting in a smaller set of features that are more robust to
small variations in the input image. In addition to convolutional and pooling layers,
CNNs also typically include activation layers and fully connected layers. The activation
layers apply a non-linear function to the output of the convolutional or pooling layers,
which allows the network to learn more complex representations of the input image. The
fully connected layers take the output of the previous layer and apply a set of weights to
produce a prediction. This is typically used in the final layers of the network to make a
classification or regression prediction.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
5
==PAGE:13==
The success of CNNs in image and video analysis tasks is due in large part to their ability
to learn complex features from raw data. Unlike traditional computer vision techniques,
which rely on hand-engineered features, CNNs can learn features automatically from
large amounts of data. This has enabled CNNs to achieve state-of-the-art results in tasks
such as image classification, object detection, and image segmentation.
To get a depper understanding of how they work, an explanation of the different layers is
necessary.
Convolutional layer
The convolutional layer adds multiple kernels or filters to the input image, which is a
matrix of pixels. These filters have a fixed size and are smaller than the input image.
This process is known as convolution, and it produces a feature map that highlights the
presence of specific features in the input image.
The output of a convolutional layer is a set of feature maps, each of which corresponds
to a specific filter. These feature maps represent different aspects of the input image,
such as edges, corners, and textures. The number of filters in a convolutional layer is a
hyperparameter that determines the complexity and capacity of the network. Increasing
the number of filters can result in a richer set of features being extracted, but it also
increases the computational cost and risk of overfitting.
Pooling layer
The pooling layer is an essential component that is typically used after a convolutional
layer. The purpose of the pooling layer is to reduce the size of the feature map from the
convolutional layer. This is useful to reduce the complexity of the network.
Figure 2.1: Average and max pooling example
The layer works by dividing the feature map into smaller regions. The two most
commonly used pooling techniques are max pooling and average pooling. Max pooling
selects the maximum value within each region, while average pooling computes the
average value within each. Max pooling is generally preferred over average pooling in
CNNs because it can better preserve the most salient features of the input image. An
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
6
==PAGE:14==
example of the two different pooling methods applied on an image can be seen in Figure
2.1.
One drawback of using the pooling layer is that it can result in the loss of important
features from the input image. This is particularly true when the size of the filter is too
large, and the stride is relatively high.
Activation layer
The activation layer follows the convolutional layers in a typical CNN architecture. Its
purpose is to introduce non-linearity in a network. This will allow it to learn more
complex patterns and relationships between the input and the output data. Without an
activation layer, the network would be limited to learning only linear relationships
between the input and output, which is not desirable, as it won’t be able to learn the
complex patterns of the data.
The activation layer applies an activation function to the feature map, which results in a
feature map with non-linear activations. Some of the popular activation functions are
sigmoid and ReLU. The choice of activation function can have a significant impact on the
performance of the network, and different functions may be more suitable for different
types of data. The ReLU function for example applies a thresholding operation to the
input data, setting all negative values to zero and leaving positive values unchanged.
In addition to introducing non-linearity into the network, the activation layer also serves
as a form of regularization, helping to prevent overfitting. Overfitting occurs when the
network learns the patterns of the training data too well, and performs poorly on new
data. By introducing non-linearity into the network, the activation layer helps to prevent
overfitting by making it more diﬀicult for the network to memorize the training data.
Fully connected layer
The purpose of the fully connected layer, also known as the dense layer, is to connect all
neurons from the previous layer to the neurons in the current layer. This connectivity
pattern allows the network to learn complex representations of the input data, enabling
it to make accurate predictions.
Therefore, the fully connected layer is commonly placed at the end of the network. The
placement allows the fully connected layer to act as a bottleneck in the network, which
will reduce the amount of dimensions of the input data before passing it to the output
layer. This reduction can help preventing overfitting and improve the performance of the
network. An example of a fully connected layer passing data to the output layer, with
two different outputs, can bee seen in Figure 2.2.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: Fully connected layer example
2.1.2
Models
In order to gain a comprehensive understanding of some of the neural network models,
an explanation of the top-performing models in the field of image classification is
necessary. The selection of the models that have been employed in this investigation has
been guided by their eﬀicacy in image classification and therefore can be used in this
study. In Section 4, these models will be used in rigorous analysis and evaluation to
decide which model would be best for this project.
AlexNet
AlexNet is a deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) that won the ImageNet Large
Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) in 2012, with an error rate of 15.3%
compared to 26.2% of the second-best entry [7]. The network is composed of 60 million
parameters, 650,000 neurons, with a total of five convolutional layers, followed by
max-pooling layers and three fully-connected layers, which utilizes the 1000-way softmax
function at the final layer. AlexNet uses the ReLu activation function, which proved to
be more eﬀicient that Tanh, as shown in Figure 2.3.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
8
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: ReLu (solid line) reaches a 25% training error rate six times faster than with
Tanh (dashed line) [7]
The convolutional layers are designed to capture various features within the input image.
The initial layer uses an 11x11 kernel with a stride of 4, aiming to extract low-level
features, including edges and corners, while the remaining convolutional layers use
smaller kernels to capture more complex features. The fully connected layers are
intended to classify the input image into one of the 1000 predefined classes in the
ImageNet dataset. These layers consist of 4096 neurons each, and the implementation of
dropout regularization helps to address the issue of overfitting, thus improving the
network’s generalization capability. The overall architecture can be seen in Table 2.1.
Layer Name
Shape
Parameters
Input
224x224x3 (RGB Image)
Convolutional Layer 1
11x11x3x96
34,848
Max Pooling Layer 1
3x3
Local Response Normalization 1
Convolutional Layer 2
5x5x48x256
307,200
Max Pooling Layer 2
3x3
Local Response Normalization 2
Convolutional Layer 3
3x3x256x384
885,120
Convolutional Layer 4
3x3x192x384
1,327,104
Convolutional Layer 5
3x3x192x256
884,992
Max Pooling Layer 3
3x3
Fully Connected Layer 1
4096
37,752,832
Fully Connected Layer 2
4096
16,781,312
Fully Connected Layer 3
1000
4,097,000
Softmax Layer
1000
Table 2.1: The layers and their corresponding shapes and parameter counts for AlexNet.
AlexNet’s success paved the way for the development of more complex deep learning
architectures, such as VGGNet and ResNet, which have achieved even better
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
9
==PAGE:17==
performance on the ImageNet dataset.
VGGNet
The Visual Geometry Group Network (VGGNet) is also a successful DCNN that won
the ImageNet challenge in 2014, with an error rate of 6.8% [8]. The network was
developed by the Visual Geometry Group at the University of Oxford and is known for
its simple architecture, which is comprised of 16 or 19 layers of small, 3x3 convolutional
filters, which are stacked on top of each other to extract increasingly complex features
from the input image.
Figure 2.4: Architecture of VGGNet [9]
The VGGNet architecture is illustrated in Figure 2.4, which clearly shows that the
network shares similarities with AlexNet, but with more layers. The variants of
VGGNet, VGG16 and VGG19, have 138 and 144 million parameters, respectively, and
consist of 13 or 16 convolutional layers followed by 3 fully connected layers. Despite its
simplicity, VGGNet achieved state-of-the-art results on the ImageNet dataset, and its
architecture has served as a baseline for many subsequent deep learning models.
An overview of the layers of VGG16 and VGG19 can be seen in Table 2.2 and 2.3.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
10
==PAGE:18==
Layer Name
Shape
Parameters
Input
224x224x3 (RGB Image)
Convolutional Layer 1
224x224x64
1,792
Convolutional Layer 2
224x224x64
36,928
Max Pooling Layer 1
112x112x64
Convolutional Layer 3
112x112x128
73,856
Convolutional Layer 4
112x112x128
147,584
Max Pooling Layer 2
56x56x128
Convolutional Layer 5
56x56x256
295,168
Convolutional Layer 6
56x56x256
590,080
Convolutional Layer 7
56x56x256
590,080
Max Pooling Layer 3
28x28x256
Convolutional Layer 8
28x28x512
1,180,160
Convolutional Layer 9
28x28x512
2,359,808
Convolutional Layer 10
28x28x512
2,359,808
Max Pooling Layer 4
14x14x512
Convolutional Layer 11
14x14x512
2,359,808
Convolutional Layer 12
14x14x512
2,359,808
Convolutional Layer 13
14x14x512
2,359,808
Max Pooling Layer 5
7x7x512
Flatten Layer
25,088
Fully Connected Layer 1
4,096
102,764,544
Fully Connected Layer 2
4,096
16,781,312
Softmax Layer
1000
4,097,000
Table 2.2: The layers and their corresponding shapes and parameter counts for VGG16.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
11
==PAGE:19==
Layer Name
Shape
Parameters
Input
224x224x3 (RGB Image)
Convolutional Layer 1
224x224x64
1,792
Convolutional Layer 2
224x224x64
36,928
Max Pooling Layer 1
112x112x64
Convolutional Layer 3
112x112x128
73,856
Convolutional Layer 4
112x112x128
147,584
Max Pooling Layer 2
56x56x128
Convolutional Layer 5
56x56x256
295,168
Convolutional Layer 6
56x56x256
590,080
Convolutional Layer 7
56x56x256
590,080
Convolutional Layer 8
56x56x256
590,080
Max Pooling Layer 3
28x28x256
Convolutional Layer 9
28x28x512
1,180,160
Convolutional Layer 10
28x28x512
2,359,808
Convolutional Layer 11
28x28x512
2,359,808
Convolutional Layer 12
28x28x512
2,359,808
Max Pooling Layer 4
14x14x512
Convolutional Layer 13
14x14x512
2,359,808
Convolutional Layer 14
14x14x512
2,359,808
Convolutional Layer 15
14x14x512
2,359,808
Convolutional Layer 16
14x14x512
2,359,808
Max Pooling Layer 5
7x7x512
Flatten Layer
25,088
Fully Connected Layer 1
4,096
102,764,544
Fully Connected Layer 2
4,096
16,781,312
Softmax Layer
1000
4,097,000
Table 2.3: The layers and their corresponding shapes and parameter counts for VGG19.
EﬀicientNet
A recent advancement in the realm of DCNNs is the EﬀicientNet, introduced in 2019
[10]. The core principle underlying this network architecture is to optimize the balance
between the model’s size, computational complexity, and accuracy. The EﬀicientNet
method introduces a new scaling technique that uniformly scales the depth, width, and
resolution of the network. The network itself consists of a sequence of repeated blocks,
with each block consisting of convolutional layers, batch normalization, and activation
functions. The number of blocks and their hyperparameters are determined by the
scaling coeﬀicient, ϕ, which determines the overall size of the network. This scaling
technique enables the EﬀicientNet to achieve state-of-the-art performance on various
benchmark image classification tasks while using significantly fewer computational
resources compared to other state-of-the-art DCNNs.
depth: d = αϕ
width: w = βϕ
resolution: r = γϕ
The EﬀicientNet have fixed the values of the constants α, β, and γ. As such, an increase
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
12
==PAGE:20==
in the scaling coeﬀicient ϕ leads to an increase of the network’s size. Figure 2.5 shows a
comparison between the baseline model B0 and the scaled model B7. Here it is clear,
that the scaled model outperforms the other networks in terms of accuracy while still
maintaining a similar or smaller parameter size. This highlights the effectiveness of
scaling up neural networks for better performance.
Figure 2.5: Scaled EﬀicientNet model compared to other CNN models [10]
2.2
Computer vision
Computer vision is a field of study that focuses on enabling machines to interpret and
understand the visual world in the same way that humans do. It involves the
development of algorithms, models, and techniques that enable computers to process and
analyze digital images and videos. The ultimate goal of computer vision is to enable
machines to gain a high-level understanding of the content of visual data, such as
recognizing objects and people, estimating their poses and shapes, and understanding
the relationships between them.
The origins of computer vision can be traced back to the early days of computer science,
with the first work in the field appearing in the late 1950s and early 1960s [11]. During
this time, researchers focused on developing basic image processing techniques, such as
edge detection and feature extraction. Over the years, computer vision has progressed
significantly, with major advancements occurring in the 2000s. During this time,
researchers made significant progress in the development of object recognition and
tracking algorithms.
The current state of the art in computer vision technology is driven by deep learning
algorithms [11]. These algorithms have proven to be highly effective in solving a wide
range of computer vision tasks, including image classification, object detection, and
segmentation.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
13
==PAGE:21==
The development of open-source tools has facilitated the work of researchers and
developers in computer vision. Among these tools, OpenCV (Open Source Computer
Vision Library) stands out as one of the most widely used and recognized libraries [12].
It is written in C++, with interfaces in Python, Java, and MATLAB, and supports
various operating systems, including Windows, Linux, Android, and MacOS. This library
provides a comprehensive set of tools and algorithms for image and video processing,
which can be utilized in the creation of computer vision applications. These tools include
color filtering, image segmentation, and edge detection, among others.
Notably, OpenCV has gained significant importance among researchers in the field of
computer vision due to its capacity to eﬀiciently implement algorithms and prototype
applications. Its versatility is demonstrated by its use in the development of algorithms
for a variety of applications, including facial recognition, human action recognition,
autonomous driving, and medical imaging. Additionally, OpenCV has proven useful in
industrial applications, such as surveillance, robotics, and automotive safety systems.
Alternatives to OpenCV is the machine learning computer vision model frameworks,
such as Google ML kit [13] and TensorFlow [14]. These tools uses machine learning to
detect objects and other computer vision tasks.
In conclusion, computer vision is a rapidly evolving field that has made tremendous
progress in recent years. The current state of the art in computer vision technology is
driven by deep learning algorithms, which have proven to be highly effective in solving a
wide range of computer vision tasks. In addition, the availability of open-source tools
has facilitated the research and development of new computer vision applications, as well
as the refinement of existing ones.
2.3
Road sign detection systems
Road sign detection is an important research area in the field of computer vision and
machine learning, with significant applications in advanced driver assistance systems
(ADAS), autonomous driving, and road safety. The goal of road sign detection is to
automatically identify and classify the traﬀic signs present in an image or video stream,
which is a challenging task due to the variability in sign appearance, lighting conditions,
and occlusions. The current state-of-the-art approaches for road sign detection can be
broadly classified into two categories: traditional computer vision-based methods and
deep learning-based methods.
In a recent academic investigation, a comprehensive review of five road sign detection
methods was conducted, focusing on color, shape, machine learning, and LIDAR-based
techniques [15]. The study extended beyond speed limit signs and evaluated a diverse
range of road signs across various global regions.
The research outcomes revealed that color- and shape-based methods were
comparatively fast and straightforward. However, their primary function was limited to
the extraction of regions of interest (ROIs) from images. In contrast, machine
learning-based approaches delivered state-of-the-art results. Nonetheless, LIDAR-based
methods showed substantial potential in enabling road sign detection in harsh weather
conditions. Nevertheless, the restricted accessibility of LIDAR systems limits their
applicability in the research and development of road sign detection systems. If LIDAR
technology were to become more accessible, it could potentially replace machine
learning-based methods or improve the machine learning models by using the LIDAR
data as input for the models. Until that occurs, traditional cameras with machine
learning remains the favored approach.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
14
==PAGE:22==
Based on the results from the research in [15], a comparison and summary of traditional
computer vision methods and machine learning methods is stated below, with the
strengths and weaknesses for each of them.
2.3.1
Traditional computer vision-based methods
Strengths
• Fast and simple to use, which has been used for decades and has a well-established
theoretical foundation, making them easy to understand and interpret.
• Fast and eﬀicient in terms of computation and memory usage.
• No need for large amounts of training data.
• Effective in detecting objects with distinctive features and characteristics, such as
edges or corners.
Weaknesses
• Not able to learn or adapt to new road signs without manual intervention.
• Only eﬀicient in ROIs extraction.
• Can be sensitive to changes in weather and lighting conditions.
2.3.2
Machine learning-based methods
Strengths
• Can learn relevant features from the data, making them more effective in detecting
objects with subtle or variable features.
• They can improve their performance over time as more data becomes available for
training.
• Can learn and adapt to new situations, making them highly robust and accurate.
Weaknesses
• Often requires a large amount of data for training.
• May not perform well in situations that are significantly different from the training
data, such as changes in lighting conditions, weather conditions, or camera perspec-
tives.
• Can be computationally intensive and require significant amounts of memory and
processing power.
2.3.3
Detection in cars
Over the past few years, the automotive industry has witnessed remarkable
advancements in the field of ADAS. These systems are designed to enhance the safety of
drivers and passengers by assisting them in monitoring and controlling their vehicles.
ADAS technologies work in conjunction with each other and ultimately aim to achieve a
fully autonomous driving experience. One of the key systems that have gained significant
attention and adoption in the automotive industry is the traﬀic sign recognition system
(TSR).
TSR is a vital component of ADAS technology that detects and reads traﬀic signs,
including speed limits, stop signs, and other road signs, to provide drivers with real-time
information about road conditions. While some vehicles fetch speed limits using GPS
location data, several manufacturers have incorporated front-facing cameras in their
vehicles to capture and interpret road signs. Leading automobile manufacturers such as
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
15
==PAGE:23==
BMW, Mercedes, Mazda, and Volvo have all incorporated TSR systems in their vehicles
to improve driver safety and increase the eﬀiciency of their driving experience [16].
Figure 2.6: Mazda CX-30 Traﬀic Sign Recognition System (TSR) [17]
As depicted in figure 2.6, the TSR system on a Mazda CX-30 utilizes a Forward Sensing
Camera (FSC) to detect road signs and increase the speed limit displayed on the driver’s
dashboard, once the car has passed the detected sign. The system alerts the driver
through an indication on the dashboard and a warning sound if the vehicle speed exceeds
the detected speed limit sign [17].
However, despite the benefits of Mazda’s TSR systems, there are limitations that must be
considered. Firstly, the system’s effectiveness is dependent on the location and country
in which it is used. TSR systems may not be supported in all regions, which restricts
their widespread adoption. Furthermore, these systems may not operate normally in
certain conditions, such as harsh weather or when traﬀic signs are obscured by mud or
snow. In addition, the positioning of the traﬀic sign and the lighting conditions may
affect the system’s ability to recognize and interpret the sign correctly [17].
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
16
==PAGE:24==
2.3.4
Summary
In recent years, road sign detection has become a critical area of research in the field of
computer vision, as it has the potential to significantly enhance driver safety and
improve traﬀic flow. Traditional computer vision-based methods rely on handcrafted
features and rule-based algorithms to detect road signs, while machine learning-based
methods use statistical techniques to learn from data and make predictions.
The choice of approach for road sign detection depends on the specific requirements and
constraints of a particular application. Traditional methods are fast and eﬀicient in ROI
extraction, making them well-suited for applications that require real-time processing,
such as detecting road signs from a moving vehicle. On the other hand, machine
learning-based methods have been shown to outperform traditional methods in many
road sign detection tasks, especially when dealing with complex scenarios such as
occlusion and illumination variations.
One of the main strengths of traditional computer vision-based methods is their ability
to extract ROIs quickly and eﬀiciently. This is a crucial strength in a project where road
signs should be detected by a moving car, sometimes driving at high speeds. Color- and
shape-based methods are widely used for ROI extraction and can achieve high accuracy
in detecting road signs in real-world scenarios.
However, machine learning-based methods have shown significant progress in recent
years, and are becoming the dominant approach in the field of road sign detection. The
use of deep learning models, such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), has shown
great success in achieving high accuracy and robustness in road sign detection. These
models can learn complex features from large datasets and can adapt to different lighting
conditions and occlusion scenarios.
Furthermore, machine learning-based methods have the advantage of being able to
integrate multiple sources of information, such as color, shape, and context, to improve
the accuracy of road sign detection. For example, a deep learning model can be trained
to identify road signs based on their color and shape, as well as their relative position to
other objects in the scene. This can improve the accuracy of road sign detection,
especially in scenarios where road signs are partially obscured by other objects.
In conclusion, both traditional computer vision-based methods and machine
learning-based methods have their strengths and weaknesses in road sign detection. The
choice of approach depends on the specific requirements and constraints of a particular
application. However, the increasing success of machine learning-based methods in
achieving high accuracy and robustness in road sign detection has made them the
dominant approach in this field. The combination of color- and shape-based methods for
ROI extraction and a machine learning model for classification would be a suitable
approach for a project requiring real-time processing and high accuracy in road sign
detection, which are the requirements of this project.
2.4
Incremental learning
Incremental learning (IL), a machine learning paradigm that enables models to
continuously learn from new data without retraining from scratch, is an increasingly
popular approach in scenarios where new data is frequently collected. For example, in
the context of this project, where the application will capture an image of road signs
every time they are detected, IL can be leveraged to improve the model’s performance
over time. It is essentially how the human brain works. We do not have to discard our
prior knowledge to be able to learn something new, we simply integrates it with
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
17
==PAGE:25==
previously acquired knowledge. To gain insight into the current state of the art in IL, the
study presented in [18] can serve as a valuable reference. The paper describes three
different approaches to incremental learning: Regularization, rehearsal, and bias
correction methods.
Regularization-based methods includes two types of methods: weight regularization and
data regularization. Weight regularization focuses on preventing weight drifting away
from the previous tasks, by stating the importance of each parameter in the network.
Data regularization prevents activation drift and is based on knowledge distillation,
which keeps the representations of previous data from drifting too much while learning
new tasks.
Rehearsal-based methods keeps a small number of samples from the previous training
and use them to train the model along with the new data. This is done to make sure
that the model does not forget the previously used data.
Lastly, bias correction methods aims to address the bias that can be introduced by
training the model with new data in incremental learning. This is done because the
model can be more biased to the newest data presented to it, when it has not seen data
from the previous training. These methods prevents this by introducing a new stage in
the training or a dedicated layer to correct the bias of the model[18].
The primary benefit of incremental learning is that it can significantly reduce the time
and resources required to update a model. Instead of retraining the model on the entire
dataset, IL enables the model to process and integrate new data by updating its
parameters. This approach not only saves computational resources but can also help
mitigate the problem of catastrophic forgetting, where a model forgets previously learned
patterns when trained on new data.
Another advantage of incremental learning is the ability to address issues with the
dataset size, whether if there are insuﬀicient data or too much data for the system to
handle. In case of a dataset with limited size initially, a model can be trained on the
available data and subsequently updated using incremental learning as new data
becomes available. In contrast to that, when faced with too much data that is too
computationally demanding, it can be necessary to divide the dataset into smaller
batches to train the model. By doing so, the system requirements necessary for training
the entire dataset can be omitted.
2.5
Flutter framework
Mobile app development has become increasingly important with the rapid growth of
smartphone usage. However, choosing the right platform for app development can be a
daunting task for developers. One of the popular platforms used for mobile app
development is Flutter, which is an open-source mobile application development
framework created by Google. Flutter employs Dart, an object-oriented programming
language also developed by Google, as its programming language. Notably, Dart is
equipped with both just-in-time (JIT) and ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation, thereby
allowing for JIT compilation during development for quick feedback and fast
development cycles, and AOT compilation for even faster execution by pre-compiling the
code to machine code [19].
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
18
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.7: Cross-platform mobile frameworks used by software developers worldwide from
2019 to 2021 [20]
The ever-growing significance of the Flutter framework is substantiated by the statistical
data depicted in figure 2.7. A survey involving 31,743 participants revealed that Flutter
had reached the top spot as the most favored cross-platform mobile framework adopted
by software developers across the globe, garnering 42% of the total votes [20]. It is
noteworthy that React Native had consistently held the leading position in the preceding
years. Nonetheless, in 2021, Flutter managed to surpass React Native, with the former
amassing 42% of the votes, while the latter secured 38%. This outcome is indicative of
the increasing prominence of Flutter in the mobile app development industry.
Flutter has emerged as a popular choice for mobile app development due to its
cross-platform compatibility, ease of use, and fast development speed. It allows
developers to create mobile applications that work on both Android and iOS devices
with a single codebase, reducing the time and effort required to develop for multiple
platforms. Moreover, Flutter’s flexibility extends beyond mobile devices, enabling
developers to utilize the same codebase to create apps for Windows, macOS, Linux, and
websites. Thus, in the event that developers wish to expand their applications beyond
mobile devices, Flutter offers a seamless solution for targeting multiple platforms.
Another significant aspect that has made Flutter an increasingly preferred choice for
mobile app development is its expanding community. The Flutter community has
experienced significant growth in recent years due to the framework’s capacity to
support cross-platform development and streamline app development processes. This has
made it easier and faster to create high-quality applications, contributing to the
increasing popularity of Flutter among developers. This thriving community of
developers has contributed to the creation of an extensive collection of open-source
packages, which amounts to over 30000 packages as of the latest reports [21].
The availability of these packages has significantly reduced the time and effort required
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
19
==PAGE:27==
to develop complex features and functionalities, thereby enabling developers to focus on
other critical aspects of the app development process. These packages range from simple
UI components to complex features like payment gateways and location services and are
easily accessible via the ”pub.dev” website [21]. By leveraging these packages, developers
can speed up the app development process and enhance the app’s functionality without
the need for extensive coding. Furthermore, the vast array of packages allows developers
to customize and tailor the app to meet specific requirements, without having to reinvent
the wheel.
Figure 2.8: Integrating with other code - Platform channels [22]
In the event that a particular package does not exist and a certain feature that is not
supported by the Dart or Flutter framework is required, resorting to the development of
native Android or iOS code is always an option. Since Flutter is constructed upon the
underlying native platform, the Flutter framework can invoke the Flutter engine Android
and iOS shell, as depicted in figure 2.8, by using the MethodChannel embedded within
the Flutter framework [22]. This mechanism enables the execution of custom Android or
iOS code, which is essential for the incorporation of native code. For this project it will
be useful for incorporating native OpenCV code, as it is not supported by Dart.
In regards to the build and execution times of the Flutter framework, it slightly lags
behind native platforms, but marginally so. This is attributed to the presence of an
bridge between Flutter and the platform-specific interfaces. Nevertheless, the variance is
relatively inconsequential. An investigation, where the same Flutter and native Android
application was benchmarked, it was indicated that the latter generally achieved slightly
superior outcomes, with build and execution times only differing by some milliseconds
[23]. Nevertheless, there were instances in which the Flutter application outperformed
the native app.
In conclusion, while it may be possible to use an alternative cross-platform frameworks
or develop the application natively, given the significant divergence between the benefits
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
20
==PAGE:28==
and drawbacks of using Flutter, it would be infeasible to pursue another framework
other than Flutter.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
21
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Methodology
This chapter will provide an overview of how this project has been managed and the
techniques used in the work. Then a comprehensive overview of the stages used in the
development of the machine learning model will be described. This will include a
detailed description of the data sources and collection methodologies employed for
gathering data for training and validation purposes. Following this, the chapter looks
into the data augmentation and preprocessing, describing the techniques used to enhance
the quality and quantity of data.
The chapter concludes by outlining the methods used to train and evaluate the model,
providing a thorough assessment of its eﬀiciency. The insights from this chapter will serve
as the foundation for the analysis of the machine learning model in Chapter 4. Overall,
this chapter provides an overview of how the project was managed and a detailed
account of the key steps involved in the development of a machine learning model.
3.1
Project planning and management
In this study, an Agile development approach was used from the start. This is common
practice in software development projects as it gives flexibility in the project. The Agile
methodology was preferred over other approaches, such as the Waterfall model, due to
its ability to adapt to changing project requirements, challenges, and unforeseen things
that could not be predicted from the start. The project was divided into smaller sprints
with a duration of 2-4 weeks. At the end of each sprint, the application or model had
progressed from the previous iteration, while the following sprints were dedicated to
introducing new features or enhancements to improve the functionality of the project.
To provide an overview of all the project tasks and deadlines, a time plan was created at
the project’s start. The plan included task start dates and deadlines and is presented in
Appendix A. While the plan proved useful in identifying essential project tasks and
allocating suﬀicient time to complete them, it was not strictly followed to due to various
unforeseen challenges and changing requirements. If the plan was strictly followed, then
the project would have been more like the Waterfall model.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
22
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.1: Trello scrum board example
Additionally, the project management tool Trello was used to keep track of the tasks
that needed to be completed during each sprint. Prior to the start of each sprint, the
tasks was created and added to a scrum board, which consisted of columns for To-do, in
progress, testing, and done. This way it was possible to keep track of what was missing
and what was done. Figure 3.1 provides an example of the Trello board used in the
project.
3.2
Data collection
In a machine learning project, the data collection process is a vital phase. It involves the
gathering of relevant data, which should be used to train the model, but also used to
validate that the model is working as intended. The quality and quantity of the data will
be an deciding factor of the effectiveness and accuracy of the model.
There are multiple methods of data collection available and the most suitable depends
on the scope of the project. Generally, the data collection process can be started by
searching for relevant datasets used in similar projects. However, for more niche projects
this might not be possible, so therefore you have to collect the data by yourself.
In the case of this project, the primary data requirement was road signs with speed
limits, preferably Danish road signs or road signs with a similar layout. To obtain such
datasets, a website like Kaggle.com [24] can be used. Kaggle is a publicly accessible
platform that provides a broad spectrum of over 200,000 datasets across multiple
domains.
Here a lot of datasets with road signs were found. Some of these was the German Traﬀic
Sign Recognition Benchmark (GTSRB) [25] and a dataset with road signs across 4
different classes [26]. The GTSRB is a large dataset with more than 40 classes and over
50,000 images. All the used datasets were under the ”CC0: Public Domain” license,
meaning they can be copied, modified, distributed for all purposes without asking for
permission from the publisher [27].
The following datasets was used:
• https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/meowmeowmeowmeowmeow/gtsrb-german-traffic-
sign
• https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/andrewmvd/road-sign-detection
• https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/flo2607/traffic-signs-classification
• https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/ahemateja19bec1025/traffic-sign-dataset-
classification
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
23
==PAGE:31==
• https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/dmitryyemelyanov/chinese-traffic-signs
• https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/shanmukh05/traffic-sign-cropped
In addition to using data from the datasets from Kaggle.com, new data was also being
collected. Especially when the mobile application was built, it was possible to collect
data about the detected road signs. When a road sign was detected, the image would be
saved, which then could be exported and used to train the model afterwards. However,
with this approach there was a need to go through all data, to make sure that the
specific sign was placed under the correct classification and that no unwanted data was
being used.
3.3
Data augmentation
Even though, a lot of data was found during the data collection process, it was observed
that some data classes did not have as much data as other classes. Notably, the data
class for the 130 KM/hour road sign had a relatively low sample size, when compared to
the other classes. In order to overcome this challenge, data augmentation was used to
enhance the size and diversity of the dataset, thereby enabling effective model training
and classification of these signs.
Data augmentation refers to the process of increasing a set of data by generating
modified copies of the existing data. This technique typically involves image processing,
where certain modifications are applied to the original image to create variants with
slightly changed features. There are a lot of different ways and tools to do the data
augmentation. However, it is important to only generate data that would be suitable for
the project. For instance, generating new images where the features of the road signs are
removed would not be deemed appropriate for this application.
For this project the Python library, called ”imgaug”, was used [28]. With this library a
Python script was created, which can be seen in Figure 3.2. The script works by
importing a directory of images with the original images and setting the sample size.
The code will then use the list of image processing tools on every image in the directory
and save a new image of the modified image in a new directory.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
24
==PAGE:32==
1
import os
2
import imgaug.augmenters as iaa
3
import cv2
4
import numpy as np
5
6
original_dir = '40'
7
augmented_dir = '40'
8
samples = 300
9
10
if not os.path.exists(augmented_dir):
11
os.makedirs(augmented_dir)
12
13
augmentation_pipeline = iaa.Sequential([
14
iaa.Affine(rotate=(-30, 30)),
15
iaa.GaussianBlur(sigma=(0, 1.0)),
16
iaa.AdditiveGaussianNoise(scale=(0, 0.05*255)),
17
iaa.LinearContrast((0.5, 1.5)),
18
iaa.AverageBlur(k=(2, 5)),
19
iaa.Sharpen(alpha=(0, 1.0), lightness=(0.75, 1.5)),
20
iaa.Sometimes(0.2, iaa.Grayscale(alpha=(0.0, 1.0))),
21
iaa.PerspectiveTransform(scale=(0.01, 0.1)),
22
iaa.Sometimes(0.2, iaa.SaltAndPepper(0.03)),
23
iaa.Sometimes(0.1, iaa.Snowflakes(flake_size=(0.1, 0.2), speed=(0.01, 0.05
))),
24
iaa.MultiplyAndAddToBrightness(mul=(0.5, 1.5), add=(-30, 30)),
25
iaa.MotionBlur(k=(3, 7), angle=(0, 180)),
26
iaa.CropAndPad(percent=(-0.1, 0))
27
])
28
29
for file_name in os.listdir(original_dir):
30
img = cv2.imread(os.path.join(original_dir , file_name))
31
img = cv2.cvtColor(img, cv2.COLOR_BGR2RGB)
32
augmented_images = augmentation_pipeline.augment_images([img] * samples)
33
34
for i, augmented_image in enumerate(augmented_images):
35
new_file_name = f"{os.path.splitext(file_name)[0]}_augmented_{i}.jpg"
36
augmented_image = cv2.cvtColor(augmented_image , cv2.COLOR_RGB2BGR)
37
cv2.imwrite(os.path.join(augmented_dir , new_file_name),
augmented_image)
Figure 3.2: Data augmentation Python script
In this script there is used a list of 14 different operations on the images. Each
operations has been picked to serve a purposes in the setting of road signs in a real life
scenario. The first operation listed is the aﬀine transformation. This will be used to
rotate the road sign, which is a useful technique to simulate the effect of vehicles or the
camera moving in different directions and angles, which can help improve the model’s
ability to generalize to different driving conditions.
Next, a few different blur and noise variations has been used. This can be used to
simulate weather conditions such as fog or rain, which can help the model learn to
recognize signs under different levels of visibility and noise. Additionally, images
captured by moving vehicles are often subject to be blurry.
Linear contrast adjustments can help increase or decrease the contrast in the image,
which can help the model learn to recognize signs with varying levels of contrast.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
25
==PAGE:33==
By grayscaling the image, the model can learn to recognize signs in black-and-white
images or in low-light conditions where color information is lost.
The perspective transform is used to simulate the distortion that occurs when a sign is
viewed from an angle from a car, which helps the model learn to recognize signs under
real-world driving conditions.
Salt-and-pepper noise and snowflakes are employed to mimic the effect of dirt or snow on
the sign. This strategy enables the model to learn to recognize signs under varying levels
of occlusion or noise.
Brightness adjustments can simulate the effect of changes in lighting conditions, which
can help the model learn to recognize signs under different levels of illumination.
Crop and pad can help the model learn to recognize signs that are partially occluded or
located in different parts of the image.
In conclusion, the combination of data collection and data augmentation resulted in an
extensive dataset of more than 54,000 images with road signs with varying speed limits
across multiple categories. The distribution of images across these categories is visually
presented in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Distribution of images in all classes
3.4
Data preprocessing
The subsequent stage in the methodology involves data preprocessing, which aims to
ensure that the gathered data is in a format that can be comprehended by the machine
learning algorithm. This process consists of various steps, including data cleaning, data
labeling, data normalization, data splitting, and data balancing. A visual representation
of how data preprocessing was done in this project is provided in Figure 3.4.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
26
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.4: Flowchart of the data preprocessing process
Upon the completion of the data collection and data augmentation procedures, the next
stage involves data cleaning, which involves a careful cleaning of the data to eliminate
inconsistencies and errors, including duplicate data instances. Afterwards, the data is
divided into directories that represent their respective class or label. It is crucial to
ensure that the classes remain distinct, as any mixing of the classes could lead to issues
in the subsequent stages of the analysis.
After data cleaning and labeling, normalization techniques are applied to standardize the
scale of the features within the data. This is particularly important since the size of the
signs could overshadow the significance of other features, potentially compromising the
eﬀicacy of the model. Following normalization, the data is divided into training and
validation sets. The training set is employed to train the machine learning model, while
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
27
==PAGE:35==
the validation set is utilized to validate the model on data that it has not seen before.
Prior to model training, it is imperative to ensure that the data is balanced, meaning the
number of samples is nearly the same across all classes. In cases where the data is
imbalanced, then there might be need for more data collection or by using corrective
measures such as oversampling or undersampling to ensure each class has enough
samples to train the model effectively.
3.5
Model selection, training and evaluation
After the data has been collected and preprocessed, the next step is to select an
appropriate model for training. In the analysis chapter of this study, multiple candidate
models will be selected, each exhibiting eﬀicient performance in image classification.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are commonly recognized as the leading
approach for this task, and as such, various CNN models will be selected, trained, and
evaluated. In order to ensure fair comparison, each model will be trained on the same
training set and validated on the same validation set.
During the training of a model, it is essential to employ strategies to enhance its
performance. In this regard, two callback mechanisms have been used: ”EarlyStopping”
and ”ReduceLROnPlateau”.
”EarlyStopping” makes it possible to train the model as long as the valiation loss is
decreasing. This ensures that the model continues to learn and improve its performance
until it reaches a point where it cannot improve anymore. If the validation loss stops
decreasing, the training will be stopped and the model weights from the epoch with the
best validation loss will be used.
On the other hand, the ”ReduceLROnPlateau” mechanism helps to optimize the
learning rate by reducing it with a factor of 0.2, when the validation loss stops
decreasing. This can help the model converge faster and improve the model accuracy.
Figure 3.5 provides an overview of these callbacks, along with their respective parameter
values, to improve the performance of the machine learning model during the training
phase. By using these callbacks it also means that the models will not be trained on the
same amount of epochs, which can be observed in the graphs in Section 4.
1
early_stop = EarlyStopping(
2
monitor='val_loss',
3
patience=5, verbose=1,
4
restore_best_weights=True
5
)
6
7
lr_reduce = ReduceLROnPlateau(
8
monitor='val_loss',
9
factor=0.2,
10
patience=2,
11
verbose=1
12
)
Figure 3.5: Keras callbacks of EarlyStopping and ReduceLROnPlateau
Before being able to evaluate the performance of the models, the hyperparameters of the
models should be optimized. This can be done by trial and error, but it is far more
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
28
==PAGE:36==
effective to use automation for this. To find the optimal hyperparameters, such as
learning rate, optimizer algorithm, etc., the KerasTuner was utilized [29]. This makes it
possible to setup variables in the models, which KerasTuner will go through and change.
Every parameter will be evaluated and the best combination of hyperparameters will be
shown at the end of all the evaluations. The KerasTuner simply automates the job of
finding the correct combination of hyperparameters. An example of this can be seen in
Figure 3.6. In this example the validation accuracy is set an the objective, meaning it
will choose the hyperparameters that gives the best accuracy.
1
optimizer_choice = hp.Choice('optimizer', values=["Adam", "SGD", "RMSprop"])
2
learning_rate_choice = hp.Choice(
3
'learning_rate', values=[1e-1, 1e-2, 1e-3, 1e-4, 1e-5, 1e-6]
4
)
5
...
6
7
tuner = keras_tuner.RandomSearch(
8
MyModel(),
9
objective="val_accuracy",
10
max_trials=12,
11
overwrite=True,
12
)
13
14
tuner.search(X_train , y_train , epochs=100, validation_data=(X_val, y_val))
Figure 3.6: KerasTuner example of tuning optimizer and learning rate
To determine the best performing model, a comprehensive set of evaluation metrics will
be employed. The chosen evaluation methods and a short explanation for their selection
are described below:
• Classification accuracy
– Measures the overall proportion of correctly classified samples in the test set.
However, it can be misleading if the class distribution is imbalanced, as it can
achieve high accuracy by predicting the majority class.
• Precision, Recall and F1 score
– Measures the model’s ability to correctly identify positive and negative classes
and are useful when the class distribution is imbalanced.
• Confusion matrix
– The confusion matrix evaluates a model’s classification performance by com-
paring predicted and actual results for each class. It enables the calculation of
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score. The matrix also shows the trade-off
between true positive rate (TPR) and false positive rate (FPR) for different
thresholds, helping to optimize the model’s sensitivity and specificity.
• Cross validation
– Technique that partitions the data into k-folds, trains the model on k-1 folds,
and evaluates performance on the remaining fold. This provides a robust eval-
uation of the performance and reduces the risk of overfitting.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
29
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Analysis
In this chapter, an evaluation of the selected machine learning models will take place,
based on the methods outlined in the methodology chapter. To find the optimal model,
various hyperparameters will be tested, including the learning rate, optimizer function,
various batch sizes, and input image sizes. Based on these results, the final model can
will be found. Through an iterative process of experimentation, the optimal combination
of hyperparameters will be determined to train the final model, which will be thoroughly
evaluated and analyzed to ensure its suitability for integration into a mobile application.
4.1
Selected models
This study will evaluate multiple CNN models to determine the most effective model for
the task. Specifically, the AlexNet, VGGNet, and EﬀicientNet architectures were chosen
due to their strong performance in image classification tasks, as previously discussed in
Section 2.1.2.
AlexNet was selected based on its historical significance and its success in the ILSVRC.
VGGNet was chosen for its simplicity and its deeper architecture when compared to
AlexNet. Meanwhile, EﬀicientNet was selected for its scaling method, which balances
network parameters, depth, and width to achieve state-of-the-art performance with
greater eﬀiciency.
In addition to evaluating these state-of-the-art models, a custom model will also be
developed and assessed to determine if it can outperform the existing architectures. This
will provide insights into whether it is more effective to use pre-existing models or to
create a custom one from scratch. Overall, the evaluation of multiple models will enable
the project to identify the optimal architecture for road sign with speed limit
classification.
4.1.1
Custom model
The development of machine learning models is a constantly evolving process that
requires an agile approach. The architecture of a machine learning model is a crucial
component that can greatly impact the performance of the model. The parameters and
number of layers in a model are constantly updated in order to improve the model’s
performance.
For the intial model, a few convolutional layers were utilized, each of which was followed
by a max pooling layer. In order to prepare the output for the fully connected layer, a
flatten layer was incorporated into the architecture. These preliminary layers provided a
solid foundation for the model to build upon.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
30
==PAGE:38==
As the model evolved, modifications were made to the architecture to optimize its
performance. These changes were implemented based on the results of model testing and
analysis. Ultimately, the final iteration of the model architecture can be seen in Table
4.1.
Layer Name
Shape
Parameters
Conv2D
(None, 73, 73, 32)
896
BatchNormalization
(None, 73, 73, 32)
128
Activation
(None, 73, 73, 32)
0
MaxPooling2D
(None, 36, 36, 32)
0
Conv2D
(None, 34, 34, 64)
18,496
BatchNormalization
(None, 34, 34, 64)
256
Activation
(None, 34, 34, 64)
0
MaxPooling2D
(None, 17, 17, 64)
0
Conv2D
(None, 15, 15, 128)
73,856
BatchNormalization
(None, 15, 15, 128)
512
Activation
(None, 15, 15, 128)
0
MaxPooling2D
(None, 7, 7, 128)
0
Flatten
(None, 6272)
0
Dense
(None, 128)
802,944
BatchNormalization
(None, 128)
512
Activation
(None, 128)
0
Dropout
(None, 128)
0
Dense
(None, 64)
8,256
BatchNormalization
(None, 64)
256
Activation
(None, 64)
0
Dropout
(None, 64)
0
Dense
(None, 12)
0
Table 4.1: The layers and their corresponding shapes and parameter counts for the custom
model
In the final model, batch normalization was introduced to help normalize the activations
from the layers. This helped increase the learning process and the convergence. Dropout
layers was also added to randomly drop out units from the previous layer during the
training. This helped to prevent the model from overfitting.
The final model consists of 906,892 parameters based on an input shape of 75x75. This is
much lower than the other models described in Section 2.1.2. The model architecture
was designed to balance the need for expressive power to learn features with the need to
avoid overfitting. The relatively small number of parameters in the final model is
advantageous, as it helps to reduce the risk of overfitting and makes the model more
eﬀicient to train and use in practice.
To get an understanding of the model architecture and the connections between the
different layers, a visual representation of the model can be seen in Figure 4.1.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.1: Visual representation of the architecture
4.2
Optimizer optimization
To find the optimal optimizer, the models will be tested with three widely used
optimization algorithms: Adam, SGD, and RMSprop. The selection of a optimizer
cannot guarantee the best performance of the model, so therefore tuning of
hyperparameters such as learning rate and batch size is needed.
The learning rate is a critical hyperparameter to tune, as it impacts the speed and
stability of the model. If the learning rate is too high, then the training may not
converge or diverge. If the rate is too low, then training is more reliable, but will take
more time. Typically, it is recommended to start with a higher learning rate, enabling
significant updates during the initial stage when the weights are far from the optimal
solution. Subsequently, the learning rate can be gradually reduced to enable finer weight
updates as the model approaches convergence. The optimal value of the learning rate for
each model will be determined by testing various values.
The batch size refers to the number of training samples processed in a single iteration of
the algorithm. A small batch size, such as 8, may lead to noisy gradients and slower
convergence, while a larger batch size, such as 128, can lead to smoother gradients and
faster convergence. However, a larger batch size also requires more memory and
computational resources, which may not be feasible for some systems. In these tests,
batch sizes of 8, 16, 32, 64, and 128 will be evaluated.
Model
Optimizer
Start Learning rate
End Learning rate
Batch size
Custom Model
Adam
5.0000e-05
3.2000e-09
64
AlexNet
Adam
1.0000e-06
1.6000e-09
32
VGG16
Adam
1.0000e-06
8.0000e-09
64
EﬀicientNet
Adam
7.0000e-04
1.1200e-06
64
Table 4.2: Optimizer optimization results
In Table 4.2 the optimal hyperparameters for the models are listed, which initially was
found by KerasTuner and then fine-tuned get the best results.
As seen in Figure 4.2, the training and validation accuracy of all models reaches above
95%. It can be seen, that the validation accuracy is higher and loss lower than the
testing accuracy and loss. The reason behind this is due to the fact, that the models uses
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
32
==PAGE:40==
dropout rates, which only is used for the training data [30]. However, this is one of the
features that can be used to combat overfitting.
Figure 4.2: Results for optimizer optimization
The test of the different optimizer algorithms showed, that Adam was the only one with
promising results. SGD and RMSprop failed to converge in most cases or did not reach a
good enough validation accuracy. For some parameters they converged, but then was
stuck in a local minima, without getting over 70% validation accuracy. By using Adam
for all the models, these issues were solved.
Furthermore, it can be observed, that the loss of the EﬀicientNet model is increasing
while accuracy is also increasing. This might be because the model is starting to
memorize the data, which leads to overfitting. It was not possible to correct this by
changing the hyperparameters. This might be because the data in this project is too
simple for a complex model, such as the EﬀicientNetB0.
Model
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Custom Model
0.8745623
0.8634534534
0.868972375
AlexNet
0.72346759
0.711583459
0.717476316
VGG16
0.532347349
0.494534586
0.51274478
EﬀicientNetB0
0.143242623
0.134232624
0.13859134
Table 4.3: Precision, recall and F1 scores for the models
Table 4.3 presents the F1 scores of several models for a particular classification task. The
custom model achieved an F1 score of 86%, which is quite high and indicates that the
model is performing well. AlexNet also performed well, with an F1 score that was not
too far behind the custom model.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
33
==PAGE:41==
However, the other two models achieved much lower F1 scores, indicating that they are
not performing as well for the task. This could be due to a variety of reasons, such as a
poor choice of hyperparameters, insuﬀicient training data, or an architecture that is not
well suited for the project.
4.3
Input image shape
The last hyperparameter evaluated is the input image shape. The size of the input image
will directly affect the complexity of the model, as more information is available. With
bigger input shapes, the model will require more memory and computational resources.
The maximum image size is set to 100, as it is limited to the system’s resources.
Therefore, the following resolutions will be tested: 100x100, 75x75, 50x50. Lower
resolutions wasn’t tested, because it was not possible to get good features out of the
images at lower resolutions.
Model
Input shape
Loss
Accuracy
F1 Score
Custom Model
50x50
0.1834
0.9574
0.868972375
Custom Model
75x75
0.1726
0.9567
0.86983023
Custom Model
100x100
0.1826
0.9583
0.87382095
AlexNet
50x50
0.4358
0.9759
0.717476316
AlexNet
75x75
0.4210
0.9731
0.729834533
AlexNet
100x100
0.4482
0.9683
0.73839572
VGG16
50x50
0.0527
0.9836
0.51274478
VGG16
75x75
0.0498
0.9717
0.53193842
VGG16
100x100
0.0495
0.9781
0.55912831
EﬀicientNetB7
50x50
1.0127
0.9937
0.13859134
EﬀicientNetB7
75x75
0.9856
0.9823
0.14928521
EﬀicientNetB7
100x100
0.7891
0.9931
0.18174928
Table 4.4: Training Results for Image input size
Table 4.4 shows the results from the tests conducted on the input image sizes. The
analysis of the results indicate that the performances achieved by 50x50 and 75x75 input
image sizes are comparable. The use of 100x100 input image size has shown to result in
slight performance enhancements, particularly with more complex networks. However,
this also leads to an increase in training time, almost doubling the duration required.
The increased time based on the bigger images is not feasible for this project as limited
resources are available. Therefore, an image size of 75x75 will be used.
4.4
Final model
Based on the result from the previous subsections and the evaluations from the tests, the
best performing model can be found. It was noted, that the less complex models
performed the best on this dataset and therefore the decision was between the custom
model and the AlexNet model. The custom model was however superior to the AlexNet
model, as seen in Table 4.3 and Table 4.4.
The final hyperparameters for the custom model can be seen in Table 4.5. To validate
that these hyperparameters still were the best performing ones, the model was trained
from scratch again on a training dataset of 38,080 images and validated against 16,320
images, which is a 70/30 split of the original dataset.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
34
==PAGE:42==
Optimizer
Start Learning rate
End Learning rate
Batch size
Image shape
Adam
5.0000e-05
3.2000e-09
64
75x75
Table 4.5: Final hyperparameters for the custom model
The model was trained with these values for 63 epochs, due to early stopping, and
achieved a record 97.38% validation accuracy. The metrics of the last epoch can be seen
in Table 4.6 and an graph of the training can be seen in Figure 4.3.
Training
Loss
Training
Accuracy
Validation
Loss
Validation
Accuracy
F1 Score
0.4349
0.8650
0.1049
0.9738
0.97
Table 4.6: Metrics of epoch 63 for the custom model
In Table 4.6 it can be seen again, that validation accuracy is higher than the training
accuracy. This is because of the use of dropout layers, which was mentioned in Section
4.2. Comparing this table with Table 4.4, we can clearly see the improved metrics from
the previous training and the final training test.
To ensure that the model is not overfitting, a 10-fold cross-validation evaluation was
conducted on the model. The results of this evaluation, including the validation loss and
accuracy, were found to be similar to the values reported in Table 4.6. These outcomes
provides evidence of the model’s ability to generalize well and suggest that its
performance is consistent, even when splitting the data up in 10-folds.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.3: Graph for model accuracy and loss
Figure 4.3 shows the accuracy and loss trends of the model during its training phase.
The graph provides valuable insights into the performance of the model and does not
show any major signs of overfitting. See Appendix D for the full training history.
The initial loss values for the training and validation sets are 2.4994 and 1.9051,
respectively. The loss trends for both sets shows similar patterns during the initial
epochs of training, indicating that the model is learning effectively from both sets of
data. However, after epoch 10, a divergence in the loss trends is observed, with the
validation loss decreasing at a faster rate than the training loss.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
36
==PAGE:44==
Notably, towards the end of the training phase, the gap between the training and
validation loss trends narrows, indicating that the model has learned to generalize
better, which is a desirable outcome. Overall, the graph demonstrates that the machine
learning model has been trained effectively and has the potential for high performance
on unseen data.
Figure 4.4: Confusion matrix for final model
When analyzing the confusion matrix shown in Figure 4.4, it is apparent that the
majority of the predicted values are correctly classified. However, it is notable that the
model is better at classifying certain classes compared to other. For instance, the model
demonstrates high accuracy in predicting the 110 km/h and 40 km/h classes, showing a
nearly perfect score for these. In contrast, it does not perform as good for the 80 km/h
class. This is most-likely because some classes share more similarities with each other.
For instance, there are more similarities for 60 and 80 signs, that there is for 20 and 110
signs.
To address this issue, a potential solution is to increase the amount of training data
available for the classes that has this problem. By collecting more examples for these
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
37
==PAGE:45==
classes, the model can better learn to distinguish the features that differentiates them
from other classes.
Figure 4.5: Testing the model with test data
In order to obtain a visual representation of the model’s performance and its ability to
make accurate predictions on images, a matrix displaying a set of test images, their
labels, and the predicted values can be observed in Figure 4.5. It is noteworthy that the
model demonstrates remarkable proficiency in image classification, as evidenced by the
accurate prediction of both low-quality and high-quality images.
Achieving high accuracy is a primary objective when developing a machine learning
model. However, in order to establish the reliability of the model, it is also essential to
investigate the underlying learned features. One approach to this is examining the
feature maps generated by the model. These feature maps are the output of the
convolutional layers, and they provide insights into the extracted features from the input
data.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
38
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.6: First convolutional layer
Figure 4.7: Second convolutional layer
Figure 4.8: Third convolutional layer
Figure 4.6 illustrates the initial input data received by the model. Figure 4.7 provides
evidence that the model has identified the contours of the road sign as important
features. Furthermore, the image reveals that the text embedded within the sign is also
being highlighted. Finally, Figure 4.8 shows more complicated feature maps that reveal
the presence of the numbers ”6” and ”0” in some of the layers. This provides support for
the notion that the model is learning, rather than guessing. These results demonstrate
the ability of the model to learn relevant features from the input data and to make
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
39
==PAGE:47==
informed predictions based on the learned features.
4.5
Computer vision analysis
With a final model selected, the machine learning part is complete. To be able to use the
machine learning model, the application should use computer vision to detect the road
signs and then use the model to classify the detected sign. The computer vision library
chosen for this task must meet certain requirements, including lightweight processing to
enable fast sign extraction without excessive computational power usage. Moreover, it
should be compatible with both Android and iOS platforms.
One of the widely used computer vision libraries is OpenCV, which comes to mind as the
potential candidate for this task. This choice is based on prior experience working with
the library in C++, as well as its popularity and prevalence in the computer vision field.
OpenCV both works with Java and C++, which is the two programming languages that
are compatible with Android and iOS.
When exploring options for computer vision libraries, OpenCV stands out as one of the
most widely used libraries, with a lot of guides and documentation. However, when
trying to find other libraries, libraries such as Google ML kit [13] and TensorFlow [14]
comes to light.
Google ML kit and TensorFlow are alternative libraries available for developers seeking
computer vision capabilities. Google ML kit is designed for mobile applications and
offers a range of tools for image and text recognition, while TensorFlow is a more general
machine learning framework that can be used for various applications beyond computer
vision. Both libraries rely on machine learning models to perform computer vision tasks,
which can lead to increased resource requirements when multiple machine learning
models are used simultaneously.
Additionally, the machine learning model described in Section 4.4, could had been used
without computer vision and just plain machine learning. However, the idea of putting
computer vision in between the mobile application and the machine learning model, is to
extract the only relevant part of the images, which is the road sign. Hence, it wouldn’t
be feasible to use another machine learning model just to extract the road signs from the
image. Therefore, OpenCV is the chosen computer vision library for this project.
4.6
Requirements analysis
To ensure that the mobile application possesses the necessary capabilities, a
comprehensive list of requirements has been established, which must be effectively
incorporated into the application. The list of requirements has been decided based on
the MoSCoW model.
4.6.1
MoSCoW prioritization
The MoSCoW prioritization model is a technique that prioritizes requirements into four
categories: Must have, Should have, Could have, and Won’t have. This categorization
enables us to focus on the essential requirements that must be implemented first to
create a functional product, followed by requirements that will enhance user experience
and provide additional features.
Must have
• The application must be able to access the phone’s camera and take images or record
a video while driving the car, without further interaction from the user.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
40
==PAGE:48==
• The application must be capable of recognizing road signs with speed limits using
the image or video stream from the camera with the use of computer vision.
• The application must be able to use the machine learning model to classify the
recognized road sign.
• The application must not distract the driver or require interaction from the driver
while driving to avoid accidents.
Should have
• The application should be compatible with different types of mobile devices and
operating systems to ensure that as many drivers as possible can use it.
• The application should keep track of the speed of the car.
• The application should notify the driver when the speed of the car is above the speed
limit from the detected road sign.
Could have
• The application should be designed to be easily upgradable and adaptable to future
road sign updates and changes.
Won’t have
• The application should collect and use the data obtained and send it to a server for
further improvement of the machine learning model.
• The application should incorporate an API for speed limits based on the location,
which would work with the speed limit given by the classified road signs.
• The application should communicate with other users of the app and send them
updates about the speed limits, when a road sign has been classified.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
41
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Design and implementation
The ubiquitous presence of smartphones in modern society has resulted in a fundamental
transformation of the way in which we interact, communicate, and engage with each
other and our surroundings. The increase in smartphone usage has contributed to a
significant upswing in the mobile app industry. In line with this, this project seeks to
create a mobile application that facilitates road sign detection, thereby rendering it
easily accessible to users without requiring significant modifications to their vehicles.
This chapter outlines the development of the mobile application, detailing the ideation
process and any problems encountered during its development. The design and
implementation phases of the app’s development are explained, alongside a description of
the integration of the machine learning model into the mobile application.
5.1
Design of mobile application
The design and implementation of a mobile application are crucial aspects of the devel-
opment process. This section discusses the design and architecture of the application, as
well as the implementation in details.
5.1.1
UI design
Due to the limited scope of functionalities intended for the application and the
imperative to maintain simplicity, little attention has been devoted to the user interface
(UI) of the application beyond its fundamental purpose as an interface between the user
and the underlying machine learning model. The primary inspiration for the UI design is
drawn from existing traﬀic alarm applications in the market, which share similar design
features. In particular, the OOONO application[31] has served as a good source of
inspiration for this project. The reason behind this, is because it would be an ideal
solution to incorporate features from this project into an application like OOONO.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
42
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.1: Screenshot of home screen of the OOONO Android app
As seen in Figure 5.1, the OOONO application interface adopts a minimalist approach,
featuring a map, the user’s current location, device connectivity status, and additional
screens for administrative features. Given the utilization of the mobile camera and the
absence of external device connectivity requirements, additional screens are deemed
unnecessary for this project. However, this project’s application requires a way to
initiate the camera and its corresponding feed, visualization of the detected road sign,
and presenting the current speed limit and the user’s speed.
Therefore, these UI elements has been added to the map screen, without cluttering the
UI. Figure 5.2 provides a visualization of the interface, which features camera preview,
the detected road sign above, current speed with the speed limit next to it, and an
expandable button that serves the dual purpose of initiating/stopping the camera and
adjusting the camera zoom level.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
43
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.2: Screenshot of the app design with needed UI elements
5.1.2
Architecture
The decision of the software architecture pattern of a project can be crucial to ensure the
success of a project. Choosing the appropriate architecture pattern that aligns with the
project’s requirements and future development is important due to the fact that
migrating to a different architecture pattern after the implementation has begun can be
a time-consuming and be a costly process.
For mobile development, the Model-View-Presenter (MVP), Model-View-Controller
(MVC), and Model-View-ViewModel (MVVM) patterns are all commonly used [32]. The
primary objective of the patterns is to ensure maintainability and scalability of the
project. The main difference between these patterns lies in the way they separates the
codebase and handles the communication between components.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
44
==PAGE:52==
In the MVC pattern, the Model component is responsible for managing the data that the
user interacts with. The Model is decoupled from the View and Controller components,
but can be accessed by them. The View component represents the user interface (UI)
and displays the data obtained from the Model. The View cannot communicate with the
Controller, but retrieves data from the Model. The Controller component, which
contains the business logic of the application, is the main component of the pattern. It
handles user input and updates the View or Model as required.
The MVP pattern is an evolution of the MVC pattern. In MVP, the Model component
still manages the data, but can only be accessed by the Presenter. The View component
remains the UI and communicates with the Presenter to report user actions and and
have its UI updated by the Presenter. The Presenter acts as the link between the Model
and View components, and also contains the business logic.
Despite the advantages of MVC and MVP, one major drawback is the need for manual
synchronization between the View and Model components. This can lead to errors or
inconsistent data if not properly managed. To overcome this issue, the
Model-View-ViewModel (MVVM) pattern can be used.
The MVVM architectural pattern bears resemblance to both MVC and MVP. However,
it replaces the Controller/Presenter with a ViewModel, which is a link between the View
and Model. The significant benefit of using MVVM is that the ViewModel holds the
state of the data, and any changes automatically updates the View. Thus, the
ViewModel doesn’t need to communicate directly with the View to ensure that UI
elements are displayed correctly when there are changes in the Model. This means that
the ViewModel and View are tightly bound to each other.
One of the major benefits of using MVVM is that it provides a clear separation of the
different components of the application. This makes it easier to maintain and test the
code, as each component can be developed and tested independently of the others.
Another advantage of MVVM is that it promotes reusability of code. Since the
ViewModel is designed to be independent of the View, it can be reused across different
parts of the application, or even in different applications altogether. This can lead to
significant savings in development time and resources.
However, one potential drawback of MVVM is that it can result in a tightly coupled
architecture. Since the ViewModel and View are closely linked, changes to one
component can have a ripple effect on the other. This can make it diﬀicult to make
changes to the application without affecting other parts of the code.
Despite this limitation, the MVVM pattern remains a popular choice for developers due
to its effectiveness in achieving a clean separation of concerns and promoting
modularization of code. When implemented correctly, it can lead to a more
maintainable, reusable, and eﬀicient application architecture.
5.1.3
System overview
Based on the architecture decisions outlined in Section 5.1.2 and the MoSCoW
priorization in Section 4.6.1, it was possible to design the system. This, as most software
projects, has been an iterative process, where the system has been modified when new
information and solutions was discovered. At the beginning of the design process an
Entity Relationship (ER) diagram was created to guide the design process.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
45
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.3: ER Diagram of application
As seen in Figure 5.3, the application consists various components including a
MapsScreen, CameraService, LocationService, WarningService, ClassificationService and
RoadSignClassications. The MapsScreen serves as the primary interface between the
user and the underlying services offered by the application. This screen features the UI
as well as the ability to communicate with other services within the application. The
CameraService is responsible for initiating the phone’s camera and capturing images,
which should be cropped to solely display road signs. This process can be facilitated by
locating red circles within the image. When a road sign has been detected, it must be
sent to classification. Due to the existence of multiple road sign labels, it is possible for
the machine learning model to identify the sign as multiple labels. Therefore, it is
important to maintain all the classified labels and their corresponding confidence values.
The LocationService should be used to obtain the user’s location and speed. This data
should be used to build and update the map on the MapsScreen, and the speed should
be used to trigger a warning if the user exceeds the speed limit. This is where the
WarningService is utilized. If the user’s current speed exceeds the detected speed limit,
then the WarningService should play an audible alert to notify the user. The
ClassificationService should be used to classify the captured images from the
CameraService and return the RoadSignClassications to the MapsScreen. All services
are interconnected and should be managed by a ViewModel with models to keep track of
the application states.
5.2
App Implementation
The development of a software project often involves the translation from a conceptual
design, such as the ER diagram, to an object-oriented model, such as a class diagram.
The class diagram serves as a blueprint for the design of the software, showing the
classes, their attributes, operations, and relationships. In this regard, the ER diagram
from Figure 5.3 was converted into a class diagram, which was continuously updated
during the development process.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
46
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.4: Main components of Class Diagram - See appendix B for full size with all
attributes
The final version of the class diagram can be seen in Figure 5.4. Note that this diagram
does not show all attributes and methods, but only the most important ones. See
Appendix B for the full overview of attributes and methods. Figure 5.4 does not include
the relations with the Flutter and Dart components either, which also are provided in
Appendix B.
As seen in the diagram, the application has been separated into the following packages:
View, models, util, and services. The relationships between the classes are fundamental
to understand the behavior of the application. For instance, the view model for the
MapsScreen class is responsible for managing the user interaction and subsequently
communicating with the services in the application. This highlights the importance of a
well-designed class diagram in elucidating the software design and facilitating its
development.
In this section, we will delve deeper into the implementation of the important
functionality within the application, providing a detailed overview of its design and
execution.
5.2.1
CameraService
The CameraService’s responsibility is to capture images from the device’s camera, which
can be used to detect the road signs. To get access to the mobile’s camera, the camera
package is used and the camera can be administrated through the CameraController
[33]. Other than capturing images, then this class also makes it possible to change the
zoom level of the camera. This is done because of the different setup possibilities of the
device in the vehicle.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
47
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.5: CameraService Component
The class has three public methods, initialize(), toggleCamera(), and
onZoomChanged(). The initialize() method initializes the camera by discovering the
available cameras on the device and selecting the back camera. It then configures the
camera controller with specific settings, such as the image resolution, disables audio, and
sets the image format. It also sets the flash mode to off, determines the maximum and
minimum zoom levels, and updates the CameraState to hold the controller instance and
the zoom levels.
The toggleCamera() method allows the user to start and stop the camera preview and
capture images periodically. It sets a timer that takes an image every second and passes
it to the onImageTaken callback function The callback function will be explained in
Section 5.2.4.
The onZoomChanged() method updates the zoom level by calling the setZoomLevel()
method of the camera controller and updating the state with the new zoom level set by
the user.
5.2.2
LocationService
The LocationService component provides functionality for monitoring the user’s location
and current speed. This functionality is provided by the same plugin that creates the
map, which is called MapBox [34]. The service is instantiated by the MapsScreen and
the service will communicate with the WarningService, when the user exceeds the speed
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
48
==PAGE:56==
limit.
Figure 5.6: LocationService Component
The described service provides several methods, namely, getCurrentSpeedText(),
onNewSpeedLimit(), checkCurrentSpeed(), onMapCreated(), and
onLocationUpdated(). The getCurrentSpeedText() method returns the current speed of
the user’s device in the form of a string, which is presented to the user on the
MapsScreen. If the speed limit is not set, the method returns the current speed.
Otherwise, it returns both the current speed and the speed limit.
The onNewSpeedLimit() method receives a new speed limit and updates it in the state.
The method first attempts to extract the speed limit from the classification object
parameter passed in. If the parsing process is successful, the method updates the speed
limit and calls the checkCurrentSpeed() method. The purpose of the
checkCurrentSpeed() method is to verify whether the current speed of the user’s vehicle
exceeds the speed limit set in the state object. If the current speed is higher than the set
limit, the warningService’s playWarning() method is invoked.
The onLocationUpdated() method updates the current speed, position, and location in
the state when a new UserLocation object is received from MapBox. The MapBox
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
49
==PAGE:57==
platform provides all the necessary information. However, the speed value is given in
meters per second, so that is converted to kilometers per hour. Additionally, this method
adjusts the camera position of the map to center on the user’s location, which also will
be updated on the MapsScreen.
5.2.3
WarningService
The WarningService component is designed to provide an audio warning to drivers who
exceed the speed limit while driving. The component is implemented using the Dart
programming language and utilizes the open-source flutter_tts package to generate and
play the audio warning. The component provides a set of attributes and operations that
are shown in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: WarningService Component
The service uses the open-source package, called flutter_tts, which utilizes the
Text-To-Speech (TTS) services on the native platform [35]. This package needs to be
initialized, which the initialize() method is responsible for. This initializes the
flutter_tts package and setting up event listeners that will change the state of the
service based on the current state of the TTS engine. The
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
50
==PAGE:58==
playWarning(currentSpeed, speedLimit) method is the main method that will be used
to play the audio warning to the driver.
The playWarning method generates a warning message based on the current speed of
the vehicle and the speed limit, and it plays the message using the flutter_tts package,
using the function: flutterTts.speak(String). The warning message is generated in
either Danish or English, depending on the language settings of the user’s phone.
5.2.4
MapsScreen
The main purpose of the MapsScreen component is to show the UI and handle the user’s
interactions. It is also responsible for instantiating and invoking all the initialization
methods of the services. By inheriting from the ChangeNotifier class in Flutter, the
MapsScreenViewModel class is endowed with the ability to update the user interface via
the notifyListeners() method invocation. It is worth noting that such updates are
limited to only those segments of the UI that are integrated with a
ChangeNotifierProvider and configured to listen for changes from the specified
ViewModel. This characteristic is advantageous, as it minimizes unnecessary resource
consumption associated with the comprehensive re-rendering of the entire UI. This
attribute is particularly crucial for this application, where frequent re-rendering of
crucial UI components, such as the camera, map, and current speed, is necessary.
Figure 5.8: MapsScreen Component
Other than the mentioned functionality, the ViewModel also contains the functionality
for the onImageTaken callback method, which was mentioned in Section 5.2.1. When
an image has been captured and saved to the cache of the application, this method is
invoked to initiate the extraction of any possible road signs from the image using
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
51
==PAGE:59==
OpenCV. The explanation of how the OpenCV code works are detailed in Section 5.3. If
a road sign is extracted from the image, it is subsequently forwarded to a machine
learning model for classification, as explained in Section 5.4. If the confidence level of the
classified road sign is found to be above 80%, then the code recognizes it as a correctly
classified road sign with speed limits. Subsequently, the classified label is communicated
to the LocationService to enable the saving of the current speed limit and the playback
of a warning if the user is driving too fast.
All the classifications obtained in this process are saved in the application state and
displayed at the top of the screen for debugging purposes. Additionally, the extracted
image from the OpenCV code is displayed above the live camera feed to indicate that
the application has successfully recognized a road sign.
5.3
OpenCV implementation
Following the capture of an image from the mobile phone’s camera, it is transmitted to
the OpenCV code to facilitate the recognition and cropping of any road signs, so that
only the road sign can be forwarded to the machine learning model for classification.
However, OpenCV is not supported directly by Flutter and Dart, so therefore it is
required to execute the OpenCV code natively. While there exist a few Flutter plugins
that enable the use of some of OpenCV’s features in Flutter, these plugins do not
provide the complete functionality of OpenCV. Therefore, it was deemed necessary to
write the OpenCV code natively.
To mitigate the requirement of writing native code for both Android and iOS, it is
possible to integrate native C++ code into Flutter using the Dart FFI plugin. The
integration process was described in an article authored by a member of the Flutter
Community [36]. Dart Foreign Function Interface (FFI) makes it possible to call native
C and C++ functions for both native platforms to the same C/C++ code, without the
use of the Flutter MethodChannel, which was mentioned in Section 2.5. This way there
won’t be a need to write code for Android and iOS as the FFI can call the same C/C++
function on both platforms.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
52
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.9: Flowchart of the OpenCV code - Appendix C
The OpenCV code performs a series of image processing steps to detect road signs, as
illustrated in Figure 5.9. When invoked, the processImage method in the
OpenCV Interface is called within the onImageTaken callback method. The C++
implementation first checks if the input image is not empty. If the image is empty, the
function returns without saving any detected road sign, and the onImageTaken callback
method detects this as a failure to find a road sign in the captured image. If the image is
not empty, the RGB color space of the image is converted to the HSV color space. This
conversion facilitates the separation of the red colors, which is important for identifying
road signs.
Next, a thresholding operation is performed to isolate the red color in a specified range,
effectively removing all non-red objects from the image. Morphological operations are
then applied to the thresholded image to reduce noise and fill any holes present. The
resulting image is saved as a mask, which is used to identify contours in the image.
Contours are a useful concept in image processing, because they are used to represent
the boundaries of objects in an image. Therefore, this can be used to find red circles in
the masked image. Once the contours are found, the code iterates through each contour
to identify the best red ellipse that matches the shape of the road sign. The fitEllipse
method is used to fit an ellipse to each contour, and the aspect ratio, width, and height
of the ellipse are compared to specific criteria to determine if it is a good match for a
road sign.
By finding the best ellipse that matches the shape of a road sign, the code can crop the
original image to the bounding box of the ellipse, which contains the road sign, and write
the result to an output file. If no ellipse or contours could be found, then there won’t be
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
53
==PAGE:61==
written anything to the output file, and then the execution of the method will stop.
Due to the lack of direct communication between Flutter and OpenCV, passing images
as a parameter to the OpenCV method or returning the cropped image is not feasible.
Rather, the input and output images are accessed using the imread and imwrite
methods from OpenCV, with file locations passed as parameters. While it is possible to
pass strings to the C++ code, passing image data directly is not possible due to the
distinct methods by which the two systems handle images. Therefore, it was necessary to
restrict the overwriting of the input image’s file location until the image processing in
OpenCV was completed. Once the processing of the image was finished, the code would
unblock and allow for the next image to be processed.
5.4
Integration of the machine learning model
The integration of the machine learning model into the Flutter mobile application was
fairly simple due to the usage of the TensorFlow Lite API and the Flutter tflite plugin
[37]. The Flutter tflite plugin is a plugin for the Flutter mobile application development
framework that provides a convenient and easy-to-use interface for integrating machine
learning models into Flutter applications. This plugin works by providing a wrapper
around the TensorFlow Lite API, allowing developers to easily load and use machine
learning models in their Flutter applications.
To use the Flutter tflite plugin, the model was exported to a .tflite model file, which then
could be loaded into the Flutter application. In addition, a text document containing all
the labels used in the model must also be provided. Once these files have been loaded
into the application, the Flutter tflite plugin provides a simple interface to use the model
to make predictions and perform other machine learning tasks.
To interact with the model, a ClassificationService was created. This service contains an
initialization method to load the model and the labels. Besides that, is there a
classifyImage() method. This method gets an input image, which will be resized to
match the data in the model. Then the image will be fed into the model by using the
Tflite.runModelOnImage method. This method will return a list of results which may
range from 0 to 11 elements. The data of the result includes the confidence level of the
classification, the label, and the index of the label in the provided text file. The first
element of the list will always be the one with the highest confidence level.
Once the classifyImage() method has received the results and the list is not empty,
then the list of classifications will be sent back to onImageTaken method.
5.5
Challenges and Solutions
During the development of the application there has been a few challenges, which needed
to be resolved in order to fulfill the requirements of the project. These challenges needed
solutions in order for the application to work optimally, and therefore a description of
the challenge and the solution to it is provided in this section.
The initial obstacle encountered during the development was related to the camera
functionality, specifically the continuous capturing of images and continuous feed
transmission to OpenCV, resulting in a UI blockage due to multiple image processing
tasks being executed concurrently. UI blockage can lead to an unresponsive and slow
application, resulting in a bad user experience. To address this challenge, the a constraint
of one image per second and a check for ongoing image processing tasks was introduced.
These measures significantly improved the application’s performance, enabling the
option to even reduce image capture intervals while maintaining the processing check.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
54
==PAGE:62==
An additional challenge related to the camera involved the initial plugin used to capture
images, which produced a file format incompatible with the ClassificationService,
meaning the image could not be classified. Various solutions were attempted, but none
resolved the issue, and several resulted in further complications with image data
corruption upon conversion to a compatible format for use with the Tflite plugin.
Therefore, a new camera plugin was adopted as a resolution for this predicament and
that still remains in use in the project.
An obstacle related to the OpenCV code was the inherent limitation in the initial
approach for road sign recognition. Specifically, the code developed for identifying circles
in the images, which would have been satisfactory if road signs were indeed perfectly
circular in shape. However, road signs viewed from a skewed perspective from a vehicle
are not likely geometrical perfect, leading to their failure in being detected as road signs
by the OpenCV code. Attempts to solve this issue were made by adjusting camera
position and zoom level, but these solutions did not solve the problem.
As a resolution to this problem, the decision was made to discontinue the usage of the
OpenCV method, namely HoughCircles, which was responsible for identifying circles in
the image. While this method successfully detected circular shapes, it was unable to
recognize the wider road sign shapes encountered in real-world scenarios. Therefore, the
contour and ellipse searching approach, outlined in Section 5.3, was adopted instead of
HoughCircles. This resulted in a significant improvement in the detection of road signs
and even enabled the identification of signs partially obscured by obstacles, such as trees
or moving vehicles.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
55
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 6
Testing and evaluation
Upon the completion of the machine learning model and the mobile application featuring
the computer vision, the functionality of the integrated system must be thoroughly
tested and evaluated to ensure driver safety and awareness. Hence, it is important to
conduct a comprehensive analysis of the application’s performance under diverse
conditions. This chapter starts off by describing the testing procedures used during the
software development. Additionally, it will present an extensive test of various factors
that may affect the performance, including camera placement, zoom level, time of day,
weather conditions, and country-specific differences. Lastly, an overall assessment of the
performance based on these factors will be conducted to determine its feasibility in
real-world settings. The objective is to provide valuable insights into the application’s
performance, thereby contributing to understand the optimal conditions for the
application, but also to get the limitations and things that can be improved in the future.
6.1
Software test
Software testing is useful in software development process, as it helps ensure that the
software works as intended. Particular, when working agile to ensure that the old
functionality continues to work when new functionalities is introduced. A way to
automate the process of software testing, is by creating unit tests of the code.
Unit testing involves testing individual units or pieces of code in isolation to ensure they
work as expected. This was done in this project for the important components, such as
the classification service.
1
test('Classify 20 km/h sign', () async {
2
final result = await classificationService.classifyImage(
3
'assets/test/images/20.png'
4
);
5
expect(result, isNotNull);
6
expect(result!.length, equals(1));
7
expect(result.first.labelIndex , equals(0));
8
expect(result.first.label, equals('20'));
9
});
Figure 6.1: Example of unit test of the classifyImage method
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
56
==PAGE:64==
An example of a unit test can be seen in figure 6.1. This tests if the classification service
is able to classify an input image of a 20 km/h road sign. Similar tests is made for all
classes in the model. These unit tests can then be run every time something new has
been made, to make sure that the application is still able to classify the road signs
correctly. If the method does not work and the signs are not classified correctly, then an
error will occur and then the modifications can be reviewed to find what is causing the
issues.
6.2
User test
While unit testing is an essential part of ensuring the quality and reliability of software,
it alone is not suﬀicient to guarantee that an application will perform as intended in the
real world. Therefore, it is important to supplement unit testing with other types of
testing, such as user testing, to validate that the application functions as expected in
various scenarios. This section will explore various camera setups and their effectiveness
in different weather conditions and times of the day. Additionally, the application will be
tested in countries outside Denmark.
6.2.1
Camera placement
Picking the correct placement of the camera is a critical factor in effectively detecting
road signs. The Danish Regulation on Road Markings (2017), Chapter 2, § 7 [38],
specifies that traﬀic signs are placed on the right side of the road in the direction of the
traﬀic. However, traﬀic signs may be placed in the center of the road, on the left side, or
suspended above the roadway where the conditions of the road requires it. This mean
that it might be a good idea to direct the camera towards the right side of the road.
However, to ensure comprehensive testing, various setups should be assessed. Therefore,
the camera should be tested when angled to the left, in the middle of the car, and angled
to the right. The phone will be mounted to the center of the vehicle and angled according
to the mentioned test scenarios. An illustration of the tests is shown in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Testing camera placement to the left, center and right - Assets from [39]
The three tests will be conducted on the same road, with the same amount of road signs.
The success criteria is that the application detects the road sign before passing the road
sign. This means, that any wrongly classifications will still be counted as a success,
because the main objective of this test is to evaluate the optimal placement of the
camera to detect the road signs.
Left side of the road
Suspended above the road
Right side of the road
2
2
10
Table 6.1: Amount of road signs on the test road
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
57
==PAGE:65==
Test No.
Camera Placement
Angle
Detected Signs
Total Signs
1
Right facing
30° to the right
10
10
2
Center mounted
0°
7
10
3
Left facing
30° to the left
3
10
Table 6.2: Results of Camera Placement Tests
Table 6.1 shows the number of road signs on the tested road. It is worth noting that
while there were a total of 10 signs, some locations had multiple signs for each
placement. In such cases, if the application detected multiple signs for that specific
location, it only counted once.
The results presented in Table 6.2 indicate that the right facing camera placement was
the most effective option, as it was able to detect all possible road signs on the tested
road. This placement was able to detect signs on the right side of the road as well as
those suspended above the road.
The center mounted camera with no angle was able to detect all suspended road signs,
two signs to the left, and three signs to the right of the road. However, it failed to detect
all signs, which might be cased by a skewed perspective of the road signs, making
OpenCV not be able to detect the red circle.
The left facing camera placement successfully detected all road signs on the left side of
the road and was able to detect one suspended road sign. Overall, the right facing camera
placement was the most effective option for detecting road signs on the tested road.
6.2.2
Zoom level
The placement of the camera is a more critical factor than the zoom level. However,
adjusting the zoom level can make it possible for the application to detect road signs at
a greater distance. Without zooming, the camera will detect the road sign when it is
fairly close to the car. On the other hand, setting the zoom level too high, it will limit
the visible area, and that can contribute to missing the road signs. Therefore, it is
important to find the right balance between the zoom level and being able to detect the
most road signs.
The following tests was performed on the same road, with the same amount of road
signs. The right facing and center mounted camera placement will be used in the zoom
level testing.
Test No.
Camera Placement
Zoom level
Detected Signs
Total Signs
1
Right facing
1x
10
10
2
Right facing
2x
10
10
3
Right facing
3x
9
10
4
Right facing
6x
3
10
5
Center mounted
1x
7
10
6
Center mounted
2x
6
10
7
Center mounted
3x
4
10
8
Center mounted
6x
2
10
Table 6.3: Results of Zoom Level Tests
The results from the test shows that a 1-2x zoom level is the best option. When zooming
in further, the application is able to detect the road signs earlier, but it will also miss
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
58
==PAGE:66==
some of the road signs, particularly on slightly or partially curved roads. This could also
be due to something with the angle. When changing the angle for the right facing
slightly, the result became better. For the center mounted camera, the signs suspended
above the roadway was also missed after the 3x zoom, due to the less visible area
available when zoomed.
The conclusion to this test is that the road signs can be detected from a greater distance
with an increased zoom level, but it might miss road signs when zoomed too much in.
Therefore, a safe bet to pick a zoom level between 1-2x. However, when setting up the
phone, it’s important to note that finding the optimal settings may require testing and
fine-tuning of the camera angle, zoom level, and mount placement. For future tests, a
zoom level of 2x with the right facing camera angle will be used.
6.2.3
Time of day
While the previous tests took place in daylight, it is crucial to evaluate the application’s
performance in different lightning conditions. To accomplish this, the same road was
driven in the early morning, midday, and late evening/night. The rest of the test are
going to test the detection and recognition of the signs, so therefore the application must
detect and recognize the sign correctly in order to get a point.
Test No.
Time of Day
Detected Signs
Recognized Signs
Total Signs
1
6:10 AM (Morning)
10
8
10
2
11:45 AM (Midday)
10
10
10
3
23:24 PM (Night)
9
6
10
Table 6.4: Results of time of day test
As shown in Table 6.4, the optimal conditions is during the midday with the most light.
However, the morning and night tests did not perform badly. The application was good
at detecting the road signs. This is because of the way the road signs reflect and light up,
when a car drives by it. As for the recognition part, then there is room for improvement.
This might be due to the fact, that the road sign was more bright than normal and that
way some of the features were lost. To further improve this, the machine learning model
should be trained with more images based on these lighting conditions.
6.2.4
Weather conditions
A series of tests were carried out in a range of weather conditions, including rain, snow,
fog, and situations where the camera was exposed to glare from the sun. The
unpredictable and uncontrollable nature of weather conditions made it diﬀicult to
conduct the tests on the same road. Therefore, a statistical comparison of the findings
was not deemed appropriate, and the focus was shifted to analyzing the challenges faced
during the testing process instead.
While driving in rain, the application functioned normally. However, the presence of
droplets on the windshield affected the performance of the detection. Additionally, if the
camera’s visible area was blocked by the windshield wiper when passing a sign, the
application failed to detect it. This issue may not be encountered in vehicles equipped
with TSR systems, as the camera is typically positioned outside of the car. However, this
solution presents the challenge of maintaining a clean camera lens.
During the test in foggy weather, the system operated flawlessly. However, the only issue
encountered was the camera’s limited range of vision. As a result, the zoom option
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
59
==PAGE:67==
should be avoided during foggy weather to prevent the camera from attempting to
capture distant objects that are obscured by the fog.
Figure 6.3: Snow on road sign
The snow test showed similar issues to those that was encountered during the rain test.
Furthermore, an additional complication was observed, namely snow accumulation on
road signs, which hindered their detection by the camera. A real-life example of this is
shown in Figure 6.3. In situations of severe snow accumulation on the signs, the
application’s ability to detect the signs is limited, and this is also challenging for humans
to interpret the signs correctly.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
60
==PAGE:68==
Figure 6.4: Camera directed at the sun causing glare and reflections
Lastly, the test involving exposing the camera to glare from the sun demonstrated
significant diﬀiculties. The application’s performance was severely affected, and only one
road sign was detected, with incorrect classification. The sun’s glare and reflections in
the windshield made the camera unable to identify red circles in the image. A visual
example of these challenges is shown in Figure 6.4. To address this problem, a potential
solution could be to automatically adjust the camera’s exposure settings or a polarizing
filter to suppress the glare from the sun.
6.2.5
Country
To evaluate the performance of the application outside Denmark, a test was conducted
using data from different countries across Europe and beyond. In Europe, the vast
majority of countries use red circles for their road signs with speed limits, but with some
variations in font, size, and color shades. Notably, Finland, Iceland, and Sweden have
yellow/orange backgrounds on their signs instead of the traditional white used in other
European countries.
Outside of Europe, the signs vary significantly, making it challenging for the application
to recognize and classify them accurately. To test the system’s performance across
different countries and sign variants, videos from YouTube were sourced and used to test
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
61
==PAGE:69==
the application. The chosen countries for the test included Sweden, United Kingdom,
China, and USA.
Country
Detectable
Recognizable
Example
Sweden (Stockholm) [40]
Yes
Yes
UK (England - Dorset) [41]
Yes
Yes
China (Shenzhen) [42]
Yes
Yes
USA (Tennessee) [43]
No
No
Table 6.5: Results of country test from videos
As shown in Figure 6.5, the application successfully detected and recognized signs in
three out of four tested countries. Despite Sweden’s orange background, the application
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
62
==PAGE:70==
was still able to accurately detect and classify the 30 km/h sign. Similarly, the signs in
China and the United Kingdom were successfully detected and recognized as they share
similarities with Danish signs.
However, the application failed to detect and recognize road signs in USA. This is
because the OpenCV code used to detect road signs is designed to look for circular
shaped objects that are red in color. In the case of USA, the road signs have a
rectangular shape with a black border, which the current code is not optimized to detect.
To overcome this limitation, the code should be modified to include a separate detection
algorithm for rectangular shaped signs with black borders when the user is driving in the
United States.
6.3
Overall evaluation
With these tests, it can be concluded, that the optimal conditions for the application is a
right facing camera, with 1-2x zoom level, in clear weather, and with normal lightning.
Furthermore, it was observed that although the application was developed for use in
Denmark, it can be used in other countries around the world.
Several challenges were encountered due to conditions that limits the camera’s visibility,
such as snow and darkness. To mitigate this, the application should be updated with
measures to handle these scenarios. Additionally, there are countries that are not
supported by the application. To address this, country-specific detection code is required.
Along with that, a new model trained with the different road sign type is required.
Overall, the results of the tests shows that the application is capable of detecting and
recognizing road signs with speed limits, even in not ideal conditions.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
63
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 7
Future work
As mentioned throughout the report, there are room for improvement in this project.
Firstly, the machine learning model can continuously be improved, when new data gets
collected or becomes available. This could be achieved through the implementation of
incremental learning techniques, which would allow the model to update without having
to be retrained from scratch. Along with this, there should be a solution to update the
machine learning model on the phone, without having to send out a new app update
every time the model has been improved.
The expansion of the model with additional road sign classes would also be good. In this
study, 12 classes of road signs with speed limits were used, leaving many other types of
road signs unaccounted for. Currently, all circular road signs with a red border could
easily be introduced, just by adding data of these signs. Additionally, road signs from
other countries could also be introduced. As mentioned in the test, the road signs in the
United States did not work. To make these work, a new model for the US marked could
be developed using only the data from the US.
In case of the introduction of road signs with other shapes, the application and computer
vision implementation must also be updated. This could include triangles, octagons etc.,
which would require the OpenCV code to be able to identify shapes other than ellipses.
An improvement to the application would be the addition of a link between the users,
enabling successful detection of a road sign to be shared with others in the app. This
would require the development of a backend server to manage the collected data, a
database of the speed limit and their location, and endpoints to notify the other users.
Detected road signs could be placed on the map within the application to inform other
users.
Furthermore, evaluating the application’s performance by testing it against built-in TSR
systems in cars would be crucial. This was not possible in this study, because it was not
possible to get access to a car with this functionality.
Additionally, resource usage of the application should also be assessed. Continuous
camera usage is known to drain smartphone battery. Therefore, tests of the resource
usage and perhaps ways to optimize the usage would be appropriate.
Overall, these potential improvements could enhance the accuracy and usability of the
application, and facilitate its adoption by a wider user base in more countries.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
64
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The primary objective of this study was to develop a system capable of detecting speed
limit road signs without requiring the installation of specialized hardware such as Traﬀic
Sign Recognition (TSR) systems in the car. To achieve this goal, a Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) model was developed, which achieved an accuracy of over 95% on the
validation dataset. In addition, a cross-platform mobile application was created to utilize
the developed model and computer vision techniques to detect road signs, allowing
drivers to use the application simply by mounting their phone and running the app
during their drive.
The application was tested in various scenarios to determine the optimal conditions and
identify any potential limitations. The results revealed that the system, which was
designed for Danish roads, also functioned effectively in other countries with similar road
signs. Moreover, the system could be used without the need of upgrading or modifying
the user’s car, making it a more cost-effective solution compared to buying a new car
with a TSR system.
As the application is being used, new training data for the model will be collected
continually. With this, the system could utilize incremental learning to enhance the
model’s performance, ensuring that it becomes even more accurate and reliable in
detecting road signs over time.
This project also demonstrated that even basic CNN models can perform effectively and
surpass models that have achieved high accuracy on other datasets where some of them
are considered state-of-the-art. However, it is important to remember that each model is
developed to a specific need. This means that not all state-of-the-art models are tailored
to specific needs and circumstances of a specific problem, such as classifying road signs.
In conclusion, the developed model and mobile application provides a practical and
eﬀicient solution for detecting road signs with speed limits, eliminating the need for
specialized car hardware. The use of a CNN model and computer vision techniques has
enabled the technology to be accessible to a broader user base through smartphones.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
65
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
ITF/OECD. Denmark Road Safety - International Transport Forum. Dec. 2021. url:
https://www.itf-oecd.org/sites/default/files/denmark-road-safety.pdf.
[2]
Ravil Mukhamediev. “Machine learning methods: An overview”. In: CMNT 19 (Jan.
2015), pp. 14–29. url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320550516_
Machine_learning_methods_An_overview.
[3]
Walter Pitts and S. McCulloch Warren. “A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in
nervous activity”. eng. In: Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 52.1 (1990), pp. 99–115.
issn: 15229602, 00928240. doi: 10.1007/BF02459570.
[4]
Alexander L. Fradkov. “Early History of Machine Learning”. In: IFAC-PapersOnLine
53.2 (2020). 21st IFAC World Congress, pp. 1385–1390. issn: 2405-8963. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2020.12.1888. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2405896320325027.
[5]
Explorium. Decision trees: Complete guide to decision tree analysis. Dec. 2019. url:
https://www.explorium.ai/blog/the-complete-guide-to-decision-trees/.
[6]
Laith Alzubaidi et al. “Review of deep learning: Concepts, CNN architectures, chal-
lenges, applications, future directions”. In: Journal of big Data 8 (2021), pp. 1–74.
[7]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “ImageNet Classification
with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems. Ed. by F. Pereira et al. Vol. 25. Curran Associates, Inc., 2012. url:
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2012/file/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-
Paper.pdf.
[8]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large-Scale Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv: 1409.1556 [cs.CV]. url: https://
arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556v6.
[9]
Davi Frossard. Papers with code - VGG explained. url: https://paperswithcode.
com/method/vgg.
[10]
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. EﬀicientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for Convo-
lutional Neural Networks. 2020. arXiv: 1905.11946 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1905.11946v5.
[11]
SuperAnnotate. Introduction to computer vision: History and applications. url:
https://www.superannotate.com/blog/introduction-to-computer-vision.
[12]
OpenCV team. About - OpenCV. Nov. 2020. url: https://opencv.org/about/.
[13]
Google. ML Kit nbsp;|nbsp; google developers. url: https://developers.google.
com/ml-kit.
[14]
Tensorflow. Tensorflow. url: https://www.tensorflow.org/.
[15]
Chunsheng Liu et al. “Machine Vision Based Traﬀic Sign Detection Methods: Re-
view, Analyses and Perspectives”. In: IEEE Access PP (June 2019), pp. 1–1. doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2924947.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
66
==PAGE:74==
[16]
Lease Fetcher. What is traﬀic sign recognition and how does it work? Aug. 2021.
url: https://www.leasefetcher.co.uk/guides/car-technology/traffic-
sign-recognition.
[17]
Mazda USA. Traﬀic sign recognition system (TSR). 2020. url: https : / / www .
mazdausa.com/static/manuals/2020/cx-30/contents/05282903.html.
[18]
Marc Masana et al. “Class-incremental learning: survey and performance evaluation
on image classification”. und. In: (2022).
[19]
Dart.dev. Dart overview. url: https://dart.dev/overview.
[20]
Lionel Sujay Vailshery. Cross-platform mobile frameworks used by global develop-
ers 2021. Feb. 2022. url: https://www.statista.com/statistics/869224/
worldwide-software-developer-working-hours/.
[21]
Pub.dev. Pub.dev - Top packages. url: https://pub.dev/packages?q.
[22]
Flutter. Flutter architectural overview. url: https://docs.flutter.dev/resources/
architectural-overview#integrating-with-other-code.
[23]
Aaditya Brahmbhatt. Comparing real-world apps developed with Flutter amp; Native
Android. Dec. 2022. url: https://auberginesolutions.com/blog/comparing-
the-performance-of-an-app-built-with-native-android-and-flutter/.
[24]
Kaggle.com. Find open datasets and Machine Learning Projects. url: https://
www.kaggle.com/datasets.
[25]
Mykola. GTSRB - German Traﬀic Sign Recognition Benchmark. Nov. 2018. url:
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/meowmeowmeowmeowmeow/gtsrb-german-
traffic-sign.
[26]
Larxel. Road sign detection. May 2020. url: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
andrewmvd/road-sign-detection.
[27]
creativecommons.org. Creative Commons License Deed. url: https://creativecommons.
org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/.
[28]
Aleju. Aleju/IMGAUG: Image Augmentation for machine learning experiments. url:
https://github.com/aleju/imgaug.
[29]
Tom O’Malley et al. KerasTuner. https://github.com/keras-team/keras-tuner.
2019.
[30]
Keras Team. Keras Documentation: Keras FAQ. url: https://keras.io/getting_
started/faq/#why-is-my-training-loss-much-higher-than-my-testing-
loss.
[31]
OOONO AS. Ooono - apps on Google Play. url: https://play.google.com/
store/apps/details?id=com.ooono.app.
[32]
Nayab Akhtar and Sana Ghafoor. “Analysis of Architectural Patterns for Android
Development”. In: June 2021.
[33]
Flutter.dev. “camera | Flutter Package”. In: (2023). url: https : / / pub . dev /
packages/camera.
[34]
Mapbox. “mapbox_gl | Flutter Package”. In: (2023). url: https:/ /pub .dev /
packages/mapbox_gl.
[35]
tundralabs.com. Flutter_tts: Flutter Package. Dec. 2022. url: https://pub.dev/
packages/flutter_tts.
[36]
Igor Kharakhordin. “Integrating C library in a Flutter app using Dart FFI | by Igor
Kharakhordin | Flutter Community | Medium”. In: (2023). url: https://medium.
com/flutter-community/integrating-c-library-in-a-flutter-app-using-
dart-ffi-38a15e16bc14.
[37]
pub.dev. “tflite | Flutter Package”. In: (2023). url: https://pub.dev/packages/
tflite.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
67
==PAGE:75==
[38]
Transportministeriet. Bek nr 1632 AF 20/12/2017, Transportministeriet. url: https:
//www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2017/1632.
[39]
upklyak. Free vector: Car salon interior with view to road. Feb. 2023. url: https:
//www.freepik.com/free- vector/car- salon- interior- with- view- road_
38539711.htm.
[40]
[4K] Driving in Stockholm, Sweden: City center driving. YouTube, Apr. 2022. url:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6nvZfXcV3uA.
[41]
England 4K - Scenic Drive - Jurassic Coast. YouTube, Apr. 2022. url: https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=JjqRxVV5X7Q.
[42]
Driving in Downtown Shenzhen | China’s Silicon Valley | 4K. YouTube, Nov. 2020.
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hprMdlmOh2w.
[43]
Drive 4K - America’s Most Popular Park - USA. YouTube, Sept. 2016. url: https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=jieP4QkVze8&amp;t=285s.
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
68
==PAGE:76==
Appendix A
Time plan
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
69
==PAGE:77==
Appendix B
Class diagram
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
70
==PAGE:78==
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
71
==PAGE:79==
Appendix C
OpenCV Flowchart
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
72
==PAGE:80==
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
73
==PAGE:81==
Appendix D
Final model training history
1
Epoch 1/100
2
595/595 [==============================] - 55s 91ms/step - loss: 2.4994 -
accuracy: 0.1813 - val_loss: 1.9051 -
val_accuracy: 0.3667 - lr: 5.0000e-05
3
Epoch 2/100
4
595/595 [==============================] - 50s 85ms/step - loss: 2.1834 -
accuracy: 0.2513 - val_loss: 1.6430 -
val_accuracy: 0.4592 - lr: 5.0000e-05
5
Epoch 3/100
6
595/595 [==============================] - 48s 81ms/step - loss: 1.9901 -
accuracy: 0.3102 - val_loss: 1.4505 -
val_accuracy: 0.5401 - lr: 5.0000e-05
7
Epoch 4/100
8
595/595 [==============================] - 50s 84ms/step - loss: 1.8436 -
accuracy: 0.3586 - val_loss: 1.3242 -
val_accuracy: 0.5966 - lr: 5.0000e-05
9
Epoch 5/100
10
595/595 [==============================] - 49s 82ms/step - loss: 1.7219 -
accuracy: 0.4000 - val_loss: 1.2188 -
val_accuracy: 0.6587 - lr: 5.0000e-05
11
Epoch 6/100
12
595/595 [==============================] - 57s 95ms/step - loss: 1.6159 -
accuracy: 0.4404 - val_loss: 1.0711 -
val_accuracy: 0.6926 - lr: 5.0000e-05
13
Epoch 7/100
14
595/595 [==============================] - 52s 87ms/step - loss: 1.5186 -
accuracy: 0.4775 - val_loss: 0.9805 -
val_accuracy: 0.7358 - lr: 5.0000e-05
15
Epoch 8/100
16
595/595 [==============================] - 51s 85ms/step - loss: 1.4208 -
accuracy: 0.5106 - val_loss: 0.8663 -
val_accuracy: 0.7744 - lr: 5.0000e-05
17
Epoch 9/100
18
595/595 [==============================] - 51s 86ms/step - loss: 1.3395 -
accuracy: 0.5470 - val_loss: 0.8027 -
val_accuracy: 0.8072 - lr: 5.0000e-05
19
Epoch 10/100
20
595/595 [==============================] - 52s 87ms/step - loss: 1.2637 -
accuracy: 0.5747 - val_loss: 0.7139 -
val_accuracy: 0.8249 - lr: 5.0000e-05
21
Epoch 11/100
22
595/595 [==============================] - 50s 84ms/step - loss: 1.1971 -
accuracy: 0.5985 - val_loss: 0.6520 -
val_accuracy: 0.8455 - lr: 5.0000e-05
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
74
==PAGE:82==
23
Epoch 12/100
24
595/595 [==============================] - 52s 87ms/step - loss: 1.1292 -
accuracy: 0.6232 - val_loss: 0.5785 -
val_accuracy: 0.8642 - lr: 5.0000e-05
25
Epoch 13/100
26
595/595 [==============================] - 51s 86ms/step - loss: 1.0667 -
accuracy: 0.6480 - val_loss: 0.5236 -
val_accuracy: 0.8635 - lr: 5.0000e-05
27
Epoch 14/100
28
595/595 [==============================] - 51s 86ms/step - loss: 1.0135 -
accuracy: 0.6648 - val_loss: 0.4824 -
val_accuracy: 0.8908 - lr: 5.0000e-05
29
Epoch 15/100
30
595/595 [==============================] - 52s 87ms/step - loss: 0.9613 -
accuracy: 0.6843 - val_loss: 0.4465 -
val_accuracy: 0.8946 - lr: 5.0000e-05
31
Epoch 16/100
32
595/595 [==============================] - 64s 108ms/step - loss: 0.9304 -
accuracy: 0.6957 - val_loss: 0.4071 -
val_accuracy: 0.9102 - lr: 5.0000e-05
33
Epoch 17/100
34
595/595 [==============================] - 56s 95ms/step - loss: 0.8719 -
accuracy: 0.7162 - val_loss: 0.3580 -
val_accuracy: 0.9223 - lr: 5.0000e-05
35
Epoch 18/100
36
595/595 [==============================] - 53s 88ms/step - loss: 0.8345 -
accuracy: 0.7275 - val_loss: 0.3281 -
val_accuracy: 0.9338 - lr: 5.0000e-05
37
Epoch 19/100
38
595/595 [==============================] - 51s 85ms/step - loss: 0.8002 -
accuracy: 0.7435 - val_loss: 0.3304 -
val_accuracy: 0.9195 - lr: 5.0000e-05
39
Epoch 20/100
40
595/595 [==============================] - 57s 96ms/step - loss: 0.7649 -
accuracy: 0.7517 - val_loss: 0.2826 -
val_accuracy: 0.9430 - lr: 5.0000e-05
41
Epoch 21/100
42
595/595 [==============================] - 53s 89ms/step - loss: 0.7298 -
accuracy: 0.7653 - val_loss: 0.2575 -
val_accuracy: 0.9428 - lr: 5.0000e-05
43
Epoch 22/100
44
595/595 [==============================] - 57s 96ms/step - loss: 0.7109 -
accuracy: 0.7690 - val_loss: 0.2425 -
val_accuracy: 0.9466 - lr: 5.0000e-05
45
Epoch 23/100
46
595/595 [==============================] - 59s 99ms/step - loss: 0.6725 -
accuracy: 0.7832 - val_loss: 0.2347 -
val_accuracy: 0.9469 - lr: 5.0000e-05
47
Epoch 24/100
48
595/595 [==============================] - 51s 86ms/step - loss: 0.6551 -
accuracy: 0.7904 - val_loss: 0.2110 -
val_accuracy: 0.9534 - lr: 5.0000e-05
49
Epoch 25/100
50
595/595 [==============================] - 66s 110ms/step - loss: 0.6304 -
accuracy: 0.7987 - val_loss: 0.1961 -
val_accuracy: 0.9537 - lr: 5.0000e-05
51
Epoch 26/100
52
595/595 [==============================] - 53s 89ms/step - loss: 0.6095 -
accuracy: 0.8046 - val_loss: 0.2003 -
val_accuracy: 0.9479 - lr: 5.0000e-05
53
Epoch 27/100
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
75
==PAGE:83==
54
595/595 [==============================] - ETA: 0s - loss: 0.5922 - accuracy:
0.8107
55
Epoch 00027: ReduceLROnPlateau reducing learning rate to 9.999999747378752e-06
.
56
595/595 [==============================] - 57s 96ms/step - loss: 0.5922 -
accuracy: 0.8107 - val_loss: 0.2123 -
val_accuracy: 0.9438 - lr: 5.0000e-05
57
Epoch 28/100
58
595/595 [==============================] - 56s 95ms/step - loss: 0.5491 -
accuracy: 0.8266 - val_loss: 0.1573 -
val_accuracy: 0.9650 - lr: 1.0000e-05
59
Epoch 29/100
60
595/595 [==============================] - 57s 95ms/step - loss: 0.5413 -
accuracy: 0.8305 - val_loss: 0.1559 -
val_accuracy: 0.9646 - lr: 1.0000e-05
61
Epoch 30/100
62
595/595 [==============================] - 52s 87ms/step - loss: 0.5365 -
accuracy: 0.8328 - val_loss: 0.1526 -
val_accuracy: 0.9654 - lr: 1.0000e-05
63
Epoch 31/100
64
595/595 [==============================] - 51s 86ms/step - loss: 0.5281 -
accuracy: 0.8346 - val_loss: 0.1486 -
val_accuracy: 0.9679 - lr: 1.0000e-05
65
Epoch 32/100
66
595/595 [==============================] - 51s 86ms/step - loss: 0.5205 -
accuracy: 0.8377 - val_loss: 0.1457 -
val_accuracy: 0.9677 - lr: 1.0000e-05
67
Epoch 33/100
68
595/595 [==============================] - 62s 105ms/step - loss: 0.5118 -
accuracy: 0.8433 - val_loss: 0.1428 -
val_accuracy: 0.9686 - lr: 1.0000e-05
69
Epoch 34/100
70
595/595 [==============================] - 52s 88ms/step - loss: 0.5113 -
accuracy: 0.8383 - val_loss: 0.1406 -
val_accuracy: 0.9690 - lr: 1.0000e-05
71
Epoch 35/100
72
595/595 [==============================] - 56s 93ms/step - loss: 0.5076 -
accuracy: 0.8400 - val_loss: 0.1404 -
val_accuracy: 0.9683 - lr: 1.0000e-05
73
Epoch 36/100
74
595/595 [==============================] - 51s 86ms/step - loss: 0.5003 -
accuracy: 0.8438 - val_loss: 0.1377 -
val_accuracy: 0.9672 - lr: 1.0000e-05
75
Epoch 37/100
76
595/595 [==============================] - 59s 99ms/step - loss: 0.5009 -
accuracy: 0.8441 - val_loss: 0.1339 -
val_accuracy: 0.9695 - lr: 1.0000e-05
77
Epoch 38/100
78
595/595 [==============================] - 50s 84ms/step - loss: 0.4954 -
accuracy: 0.8443 - val_loss: 0.1313 -
val_accuracy: 0.9695 - lr: 1.0000e-05
79
Epoch 39/100
80
595/595 [==============================] - 57s 96ms/step - loss: 0.4909 -
accuracy: 0.8454 - val_loss: 0.1322 -
val_accuracy: 0.9691 - lr: 1.0000e-05
81
Epoch 40/100
82
595/595 [==============================] - 51s 85ms/step - loss: 0.4814 -
accuracy: 0.8501 - val_loss: 0.1311 -
val_accuracy: 0.9690 - lr: 1.0000e-05
83
Epoch 41/100
84
595/595 [==============================] - 50s 84ms/step - loss: 0.4840 -
accuracy: 0.8477 - val_loss: 0.1253 -
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
76
==PAGE:84==
val_accuracy: 0.9719 - lr: 1.0000e-05
85
Epoch 42/100
86
595/595 [==============================] - 63s 106ms/step - loss: 0.4753 -
accuracy: 0.8512 - val_loss: 0.1287 -
val_accuracy: 0.9705 - lr: 1.0000e-05
87
Epoch 43/100
88
595/595 [==============================] - 51s 86ms/step - loss: 0.4807 -
accuracy: 0.8491 - val_loss: 0.1246 -
val_accuracy: 0.9718 - lr: 1.0000e-05
89
Epoch 44/100
90
595/595 [==============================] - 50s 84ms/step - loss: 0.4766 -
accuracy: 0.8499 - val_loss: 0.1250 -
val_accuracy: 0.9700 - lr: 1.0000e-05
91
Epoch 45/100
92
595/595 [==============================] - 57s 95ms/step - loss: 0.4707 -
accuracy: 0.8525 - val_loss: 0.1237 -
val_accuracy: 0.9705 - lr: 1.0000e-05
93
Epoch 46/100
94
595/595 [==============================] - 54s 92ms/step - loss: 0.4695 -
accuracy: 0.8519 - val_loss: 0.1212 -
val_accuracy: 0.9715 - lr: 1.0000e-05
95
Epoch 47/100
96
595/595 [==============================] - 59s 99ms/step - loss: 0.4613 -
accuracy: 0.8548 - val_loss: 0.1182 -
val_accuracy: 0.9719 - lr: 1.0000e-05
97
Epoch 48/100
98
595/595 [==============================] - 48s 81ms/step - loss: 0.4639 -
accuracy: 0.8537 - val_loss: 0.1201 -
val_accuracy: 0.9710 - lr: 1.0000e-05
99
Epoch 49/100
100
595/595 [==============================] - 55s 93ms/step - loss: 0.4545 -
accuracy: 0.8587 - val_loss: 0.1162 -
val_accuracy: 0.9721 - lr: 1.0000e-05
101
Epoch 50/100
102
103
595/595 [==============================] - 48s 81ms/step - loss: 0.4549 -
accuracy: 0.8584 - val_loss: 0.1152 -
val_accuracy: 0.9724 - lr: 1.0000e-05
104
Epoch 51/100
105
595/595 [==============================] - 69s 117ms/step - loss: 0.4471 -
accuracy: 0.8623 - val_loss: 0.1098 -
val_accuracy: 0.9746 - lr: 1.0000e-05
106
Epoch 52/100
107
595/595 [==============================] - 60s 101ms/step - loss: 0.4429 -
accuracy: 0.8618 - val_loss: 0.1117 -
val_accuracy: 0.9725 - lr: 1.0000e-05
108
Epoch 53/100
109
595/595 [==============================] - ETA: 0s - loss: 0.4455 - accuracy:
0.8624
110
Epoch 00053: ReduceLROnPlateau reducing learning rate to 1.9999999494757505e-
06.
111
595/595 [==============================] - 94s 158ms/step - loss: 0.4455 -
accuracy: 0.8624 - val_loss: 0.1104 -
val_accuracy: 0.9732 - lr: 1.0000e-05
112
Epoch 54/100
113
595/595 [==============================] - 93s 157ms/step - loss: 0.4343 -
accuracy: 0.8641 - val_loss: 0.1059 -
val_accuracy: 0.9747 - lr: 2.0000e-06
114
Epoch 55/100
115
595/595 [==============================] - 70s 118ms/step - loss: 0.4385 -
accuracy: 0.8631 - val_loss: 0.1065 -
val_accuracy: 0.9747 - lr: 2.0000e-06
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
77
==PAGE:85==
116
Epoch 56/100
117
595/595 [==============================] - ETA: 0s - loss: 0.4354 - accuracy:
0.8637
118
Epoch 00056: ReduceLROnPlateau reducing learning rate to 3.999999989900971e-07
.
119
595/595 [==============================] - 137s 231ms/step - loss: 0.4354 -
accuracy: 0.8637 - val_loss: 0.1071 -
val_accuracy: 0.9737 - lr: 2.0000e-06
120
Epoch 57/100
121
595/595 [==============================] - 76s 129ms/step - loss: 0.4296 -
accuracy: 0.8648 - val_loss: 0.1064 -
val_accuracy: 0.9740 - lr: 4.0000e-07
122
Epoch 58/100
123
595/595 [==============================] - ETA: 0s - loss: 0.4334 - accuracy:
0.8653
124
Epoch 00058: ReduceLROnPlateau reducing learning rate to 8.00000009348878e-08.
125
595/595 [==============================] - 56s 94ms/step - loss: 0.4334 -
accuracy: 0.8653 - val_loss: 0.1062 -
val_accuracy: 0.9738 - lr: 4.0000e-07
126
Epoch 59/100
127
595/595 [==============================] - 58s 98ms/step - loss: 0.4347 -
accuracy: 0.8653 - val_loss: 0.1059 -
val_accuracy: 0.9738 - lr: 8.0000e-08
128
Epoch 60/100
129
595/595 [==============================] - 52s 87ms/step - loss: 0.4329 -
accuracy: 0.8664 - val_loss: 0.1056 -
val_accuracy: 0.9737 - lr: 8.0000e-08
130
Epoch 61/100
131
595/595 [==============================] - 65s 110ms/step - loss: 0.4294 -
accuracy: 0.8659 - val_loss: 0.1057 -
val_accuracy: 0.9738 - lr: 8.0000e-08
132
Epoch 62/100
133
595/595 [==============================] - ETA: 0s - loss: 0.4317 - accuracy:
0.8655
134
Epoch 00062: ReduceLROnPlateau reducing learning rate to 1.5999999902760466e-
08.
135
595/595 [==============================] - 91s 153ms/step - loss: 0.4317 -
accuracy: 0.8655 - val_loss: 0.1055 -
val_accuracy: 0.9738 - lr: 8.0000e-08
136
Epoch 63/100
137
595/595 [==============================] - 57s 95ms/step - loss: 0.4349 -
accuracy: 0.8650 - val_loss: 0.1049 -
val_accuracy: 0.9738 - lr: 1.6000e-08
138
Epoch 64/100
139
595/595 [==============================] - 70s 117ms/step - loss: 0.4295 -
accuracy: 0.8675 - val_loss: 0.1053 -
val_accuracy: 0.9740 - lr: 1.6000e-08
140
Epoch 65/100
141
595/595 [==============================] - ETA: 0s - loss: 0.4243 - accuracy:
0.8685
142
Epoch 00065: ReduceLROnPlateau reducing learning rate to 3.1999999094978194e-
09.
143
595/595 [==============================] - 78s 131ms/step - loss: 0.4243 -
accuracy: 0.8685 - val_loss: 0.1054 -
val_accuracy: 0.9739 - lr: 1.6000e-08
144
Epoch 66/100
145
595/595 [==============================] - 72s 121ms/step - loss: 0.4306 -
accuracy: 0.8647 - val_loss: 0.1051 -
val_accuracy: 0.9743 - lr: 3.2000e-09
146
Epoch 67/100
147
595/595 [==============================] - ETA: 0s - loss: 0.4322 - accuracy:
0.8686
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
78
==PAGE:86==
148
Epoch 00067: ReduceLROnPlateau reducing learning rate to 6.399999641359955e-10
.
149
595/595 [==============================] - 80s 134ms/step - loss: 0.4322 -
accuracy: 0.8686 - val_loss: 0.1051 -
val_accuracy: 0.9746 - lr: 3.2000e-09
150
Epoch 68/100
151
595/595 [==============================] - ETA: 0s - loss: 0.4305 - accuracy:
0.8675Restoring model weights from the
end of the best epoch: 63.
152
595/595 [==============================] - 70s 118ms/step - loss: 0.4305 -
accuracy: 0.8675 - val_loss: 0.1055 -
val_accuracy: 0.9740 - lr: 6.4000e-10
153
Epoch 00068: early stopping
Automation of traﬀic alarms using computer vision and machine learning
79
==PAGE:87==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 101
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
