==PAGE:1==
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable
Indoor Farming in Greenland
Jan Martí Torra
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
Master Thesis
March, 2023
By
Jan Martí Torra
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
Cover photo:
Jan Martí Torra, 2022
Back­cover photo:
Paolo Sardella, 2022
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
construct.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Energy and Services,
Depratmnet of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Declaration of competing interests
The author declares that he has no rival interests, nor personal relationships, that could
have arisen to influence the work described.
Jan Martí Torra ­ s210367
Signature
Date
ii
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis explores the design of a modular facility for sustainable indoor farming in
Greenland, to address the challenge of food insecurity due to the harsh climate conditions
in this Arctic Island. The proposed facility is designed for lettuce and is intended to be lo­
cated in Sisimiut. The design of the facility is based on a comprehensive literature review
of technologies, best practices, and existing facilities. Several locations within Sisimiut
were assessed with a Multi­Criteria Decision Analysis technique, considering integrated
utilities as one of the main criteria. The facility is designed as a modular set­up using five
shipping containers that can be handled by a single person, with a potential yearly output
of lettuce of 832 kg. The thesis presents the layout of the facility and its flows. The car­
bon footprint of the produced lettuce in the facility is calculated and compared to lettuce
imported by sea­freight and air cargo. The locally produced lettuce has a higher carbon
footprint than the lettuce imported by sea­freight but a lower footprint than those imported
by air cargo. Future studies could focus on the technical set­up that the facility requires.
This study provides insights into the potential of sustainable indoor farming in Greenland
and can inform future efforts to address food insecurity in the region.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Martin Kotol & Kevin Michael Smith, Associate Professors ­ Supervisors, DTU
I am really thankful to you for proposing this topic and for giving the opportunity to learn
and explore it in Greenland. Thus, thank you for all the meetings, continuous support and
discussions that we have had. It was a pleasure to work with you, and I appreciate the
time and effort dedicated towards a successful completion of my thesis.
Paolo Sardella, Project Manager ­ Co­supervisor, Nordic Harvest
Thank you very much Paolo for always being a continuous source of support through the
thesis and for the time and effort dedicated on me. Thank you, for providing me with highly
valuable insights that have given me a deep understanding on the field. Additionally, I
am really thankful to have had you as my co­supervisor, since you also gave me the
perspective of a recent graduate on how to approach and write the thesis, knowledge that
has been extremely useful through all the stages of the thesis.
To everyone I got to know in Sisimiut
Thanks to all the people I got to know in Sisimiut, since they made my stay really enjoyable,
educational and fun. Additionally, I would like to thank all the people I got the chance to
interview, since these provided me really valuable insights on the particularities of this
community.
A la meva família
Moltes gràcies, Mare, Pare i Rita pel vostre suport a tota hora i tot moment. Gràcies, per
ajudar­me i sempre estar al meu costat al llarg de tota la meva vida acadèmica. Sense
vosaltres això no hagués estat possible.
iv
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
General Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Introduction to Greenland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Indoor Farming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Building Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3
Utilities Perspective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4
Social Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Methodology
21
3.1
Methodology Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Selection of Location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3
Modular Configuration of the Facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.4
Indoor Farming Facility Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.5
Base Module Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.6
Facility Layout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.7
Facility Services Set­up and Integration of Utilities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.8
Carbon Footprint of the facility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4
Results and Discussion
47
4.1
Selecting the Location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.2
Modular Configuration of the Facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.3
Indoor Farming Facility Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.4
Base Module Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.5
Facility Layout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.6
Services Set­Up of the Facility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
4.7
Carbon Footprint of the facility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
4.8
General Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5
Conclusion and Future Work
69
5.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Bibliography
71
A Appendix
77
A.1 REMBRANDT results overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A.2 Plots Characterization and Pair­Wise Comparison: Utilities, Price and Sur­
face . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:9==
List of Abbreviations
• CEA: Controlled Environment Agriculture
• PFAL: Plant Factory with Artificial Lightning
• EC: Electrical Conductivity
• HPS: High Pressure Sodium
• LED: Light Emitting Diode
• PPFD: Photosynthetic Photon Flux Density
• AC: Air Conditioning
• RH: Relative Humidity
• UV: Ultraviolet
• HEPA: High­Efficiency Particulate Absorbing
• VOC: Volatile Organic Compounds
• HC: High Cube
• MCDA: Multi Criteria Decision Analysis
• AHP: Analytic Hierarchy Process
• DFT: Deep Flow Technique
• NFT: Nutrient Film Technique
• GHG: Green House Gases
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
General Introduction
Agriculture has been a critical component of human civilization for thousands of years,
contributing significantly to the development of societies worldwide [1]. However, with the
global population projected to reach 9.7 billion by 2050, an increase of roughly 2 billion
people, there is a growing need to improve food production techniques, particularly in
the field of agriculture [2]. To address this challenge, it is crucial to develop techniques
that not only enhance yield but also reduce greenhouse emissions, which account for
approximately 30% of the world’s total emissions [3]. In this context, Indoor Farming, also
known as Controlled Environment Agriculture (CEA), presents an opportunity to explore
innovative solutions that allow for year­round, controlled production of crops, regardless of
weather conditions and location. Additionally, from an environmentally perspective, Indoor
Farming provides enhanced water consumption and a better yield per unit of land ratio.
On this regard, indoor farming also reduces the length of supply chains, one of the major
responsibles of food loss and waste, which in turn contribute significantly to the overall
environmental impact of food production. Therefore, a shorter supply chain reduces food
waste by minimizing post­harvest handling and storage, and enables production to be
tailored to the needs of local consumers. Moreover, by enhancing local production supply
chains, traditionally produce exporting countries are also less pressured to produce, which
leads to a more sustainable approach to agriculture [4] [5] [6]. Indoor farming’s potential
for year­round, controlled production makes it a particularly appealing solution for places
like Greenland, where extreme weather conditions and short growing seasons have made
traditional agriculture nearly impossible.
Greenland’s harsh climate and limited arable land have made traditional agriculture nearly
impossible, leaving the country heavily reliant on imported food. However, indoor farming
offers a promising solution to these challenges, allowing crops to be grown year­round in
a controlled environment and improving the country’s food security. In this sense, Con­
trolled Environment Agriculture provides a set­up in which plants, fruits and vegetables
can grow indoors thanks to a controlled environment that can be adjusted to emulate the
crop’s ideal growing conditions. Consequently, this innovative farming technique would
increase the country’s self­sufficiency and ultimately contribute to a greater food security.
Moreover, this technique would reduce significantly the food waste related to the long
supply chain produce needs to go through before it arrives to Greenland. Then, post­
harvest handling and storage would be reduced, enabling production to be tailored to the
needs of local consumers. Given the unique challenges of indoor farming in Greenland, a
comprehensive research study is necessary to design an indoor farming facility that can
thrive in this environment.
Therefore, while indoor farming has been studied to improve crop yields and quality, there
is a lack of research on designing indoor farming systems suitable for Greenland’s unique
climate and remoteness. Thus, this thesis aims to research on how to design an indoor
farming facility adapted to these challenging conditions. On this thesis, Sisimiut has been
chosen as the location where the proposed facility should be placed, since it is a location
familiar to the author. Due to the novelty of the research, a thorough literature review
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
1
==PAGE:12==
to identify existing indoor farming facilities and techniques is required, to then, use this
knowledge to apply it on the designed facility in Sisimiut.
This report has been written in Copenhagen (Denmark) and field work has been performed
in Sisimiut (Greenland).
1.2
Introduction to Greenland
Greenland, also known as Kalaallit Nunnat in Kalaallisut, Greenlandic language, is a
mountainous country located on the largest island in the world. The island is approxi­
mately 2,670 km long from north to south and 1,050 km wide from east to west. About
81% of the island is covered by ice. The population of Greenland is 57,000, with 50,000
of those being Inuit. These individuals live in 17 towns and 57 settlements located along
the coastline. Due to the lack of roads, all transportation between these locations must
be done by ship or aircraft, emphasizing the island’s isolated nature [7] [8].
From a geopolitical perspective, Greenland is considered as part of Europe as it falls
under the jurisdiction of the Kingdom of Denmark. However, from a physical standpoint, it
is located in North America. Greenland’s capital, Nuuk, has a population of 18,000 and is
the largest town on the island, followed by Sisimiut, with a population of 5,600. The towns
and settlements in Greenland are scattered across five municipalities, namely Kujalleq,
Sermersooq, Qeqqata, Qeqertalik, and Avannaata, as shown in figure 1.1, [7] [8].
Greenland’s political status has undergone several changes throughout its history. In
1953, it was no longer considered a colony and became a part of the Kingdom of Den­
mark.
In 1978, the Greenland Home Rule Act was introduced, transferring decision­
making power on Greenlandic affairs from the Danish parliament to the Greenlandic one.
In 2009, the Act on Self­Government granted Greenland additional autonomy. Yet Green­
land still does not have decision power on foreign and security affairs. These political
changes have been accompanied by significant economic development and westerniza­
tion [9] [10].
The population of Greenland has experienced a 50% increase from 24.000 inhabitants
in 1953 to 57.000 in 2017. The increase of population has also been followed by a no­
table shift in population distribution from settlements to towns during this period. The
proportion of residents in settlements decreased from 50% in 1950 to 13% in 2017. Mod­
ern houses with running water and bathrooms have replaced traditional stone­and­turf
dwellings, and hospitals, schools, churches, and main shops are now available in all
towns. Yet economic, health, social, and environmental challenges still persist among
the Inuit people, especially in the less developed east and extreme north communities
of the island. These challenges are accentuated by the prevalence of harmful behaviors
such as alcohol abuse, smoking, and poor diet [11].
The dietary habits of the Greenlandic population have experienced a significant shift within
the last 50 years. The limited possibilities for horticulture in Greenland, which are char­
acterized by permafrost and the harsh weather conditions, has lead the Inuit to base their
lifestyle around hunting marine mammals and fishing. Therefore, historically, the Inuit diet
has been primarily composed of protein and fat from marine sources, to which they have
evolved genetically [12]. However, modern Greenlanders are reducing their consumption
of traditional food and increasing their intake of sugar and saturated fat, which is lead­
ing to a high prevalence of obesity within the population. In addition to dietary changes,
there are also issues of food security in Greenland, particularly in the East where 20%
of respondents in a 2014 survey reported experiencing occasional food shortages due to
2
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:13==
financial constraints. However, in West Greenland, only 10% of the population reported
food security issues, and in Nuuk, the number drops to 7% [11] [12].
All in all, indoor farming provides an opportunity to have fresh vegetables grown locally,
which has the potential to solve the significant challenges associated with horticulture in
Greenlandic soil, reducing the country’s dependence on imports. Scaling up this concept
could enable the provision of a wide range of produce throughout Greenland. Addition­
ally, indoor horticulture presents an opportunity to raise awareness of plant cultivation
processes and promote healthier dietary habits among modern Inuit populations. By in­
corporating more produce into their diets, Inuit individuals can potentially transition to a
healthier lifestyle. However, it is essential to acknowledge that produce is not a traditional
component of the Inuit diet. Therefore, dietary strategies implemented in other regions
of the world should be carefully evaluated before being applied in Greenland. It is nec­
essary to consider the historical diet that has sustained the Inuit population in extremely
isolated locations with harsh climatic conditions and limited access to resources for over
a thousand years. [13]
Figure 1.1: Map of Greenland with Municipalities [14]
1.3
Research Objectives
This thesis aims to provide a design of a modular facility for sustainable indoor farming in
Greenland. In order to achieve this objective, I have set several research objectives that
are covered along the thesis.
1. Research on Literature review to identify existing technologies, best practices and
indoor farming facilities to provide a foundation.
2. Establish a suitable location for an Indoor Farming facility in Sisimiut, Greenland.
3. Design an Indoor Farming facility based on hydroponics placed in Sisimiut, Green­
land.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
3
==PAGE:14==
4. Establish the integration of utilities required by the facility.
5. Assess the Carbon Footprint of the facility.
4
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Indoor Farming
A technology intensive sophisticated indoor farming facility is what is also known as a
”Plant Factory with Artificial Lightning” (PFAL). A PFAL is a plant production facility using
a thermally insulated and nearly airtight warehouse structure. In this facility, plants are
cultivated vertically, using electric lamps, that act as an artificial light source, and with an
air conditioning system, all in all, trying to emulate the ideal light, temperature and humidity
conditions to maximise the crop’s yield. In regards of the nutrients supply, in a PFAL this
normally is done through a hydroponic set­up. This is the nutrient supply method that this
thesis focuses on [15].
Therefore, the main components of an indoor farming consist on a thermally insulated and
airtight cultivation room, a rack system equipped with lighting devices above the cultivation
beds, a heat/refrigeration and dehumidification system, fans to circulate the air and a
nutrient solution delivery unit [16] [17].
2.1.1
Hydroponic Systems
The theoretical basis on which hydroponics is based is that all factors required for a plant
to grow, that are naturally supplied by the soil, can also be artificially supplied by com­
bining water and chemicals, as stated in the ”Complete Guide to Soil­less Gardening” by
W.F. Gericke [18]. Therefore, a hydroponic system provides a liquid nutrient rich solution
into which the plant roots. Nevertheless, for industrial purposes, normally a supporting
medium is used to fix the plant in the cultivation panel, as sponges, clay pellets or perlite,
among others. So only the roots of the plant are directly exposed to the liquid solution,
and the shoots of the plant to the air [17]. There exist several irrigation or growing meth­
ods to fertilize the plants, used by hydroponic systems. These are extensively described
in P. Sardella’s thesis [19], an overview of the most used is detailed below.
• Nutrient Film Technique: These systems have a continuous thin flow of nutrient
solution (2­3 mm), ensuring that plant roots are irrigated, but not being completely
soaked, and the the upper part of the roots, have access to the air’s oxygen. This
system requires that the cultivation bed is put on a slope, as well as, a pump that
circulates the nutrient solution, that is on a tank, to the cultivation bed [17] [20].
• Deep Flow Technique: Also known as deep­water culture, is a method that in­
stead of exposing the plant roots to a thin flow of nutrient solution, it soaks them
completely. Therefore, since the roots are completely soaked these cannot get oxy­
gen from the air, consequently, the system requires constant re­circulation of the
nutrient solution to introduce oxygen to the cultivation bed ensuring that the roots
have enough oxygen to grow. In these systems, the supporting medium usually
floats on water. Regarding the nutrient solution circulation system, the solution is
pumped from one side of the cultivation bed, and then gets into the tank containing
the nutrient solution from the other end of the bed. Some of these systems also
include an air pump connected to the cultivation bed, to ensure the oxygen supply
[17].
• Aeroponics: In this system the nutrient solution is atomised and continuously sprayed
to the plant roots, to prevent them of drying out, since the roots are directly exposed
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
5
==PAGE:16==
to the air. Therefore, a pump should be used to continuously pump the atomised
solution to the plant roots [17].
• Ebb and Flow System: This technique is similar to the nutrient flow and the deep
flow techniques. Nevertheless, in this case there is not continuous re­circulation of
the nutrient solution, but the solution is only pumped to the cultivation bed at certain
times of the day. Furthermore, in this system the plants are grown in pots with a
medium that is able to hold water for some hours, preventing the roots from drying
out [17].
• Drip Irrigation System: The system consists on a growth medium on which the
plants are being grown, and the drip lines directly supply water and nutrients to
each individual plant. The system requires an air pump that gets air into the nutrient
container, and a pump that thereafter supplies the nutrient solution to the plants
located in the growing bed [17] [21].
• Wicking System: The wicking system gets the water to the plants through a series
of wick ropes or a fabric sheet at the base. Then, the solution containing the nutrients
is added whenever the water goes below below a certain level. This system per se,
does not require pumps. Nevertheless, in case this system is automated, pumps
are required to provide water to the growing bed whenever water goes below this
established limit [17].
Nutrient Solution
The nutrient solution is one of the basic aspects to grow any kind of crops using a hy­
droponic set­up. Nevertheless, since this thesis focuses on the aspects related with the
design of the facility, this aspect is only briefly approached in this section.
This solution is the medium from which the crop gets all the necessary elements to grow.
Then, since the a hydroponic system uses water to distribute the fertilizer, this must be
soluble in water.
There are more that 20 elements necessary for a plant to grow, and besides C (Carbon),
H (Hydrogen) and O (Oxygen), that are absorbed from the air and water during the pho­
tosynthesis, the remaining 17 nutrients should be supplied through the nutrient solution,
these are: P (Phosphorus), K (Potassium), N (Nitrogen), Ca (Calcium), Mg (Magnesium),
S (Sulphur), Fe (Iron), B (Boron), Mn (Manganese), Cu (Copper), Zinc (Zn), Mo (Molyb­
denum), Cl (Chlorine) and Ni (Nickel) [22].
To determine the amount of mineral salts that are present in the nutrient solution the
electrical conductivity­ also called EC­ of the solution should be tracked, since the nutrients
that are need ed by the plants are composed of mineral salts. Therefore, depending on the
amount of minerals that are present in the solution, the nutrient solution can be adjusted by
adding water, to lower the concentration of nutrients, or by adding more nutrient solution
to increase it. The optimum range of nutrient solution is dependant on the growing stage
[23].
Besides the electrical conductivity, the pH should also be tracked, since this has a signifi­
cant importance on the plant’s health. Thus, the nutrient solution should not be too acidic,
since this could lead to the plant dying. Hence, depending on the pH level a component
can be added to lower or higher the level. [23]
At the same time, the temperature of the nutrient solution should also be tracked, since it
influences the oxygen concentration in the solution, and can have an important affect on
the plant. [17]
6
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:17==
All of these parameters should be monitored on a nutrient solution management system.
Then, this system should be able to supply the nutrient solution in a certain frequency and
volume, based on these mentioned parameters, and the crop type, growth stage, size,
irrigation system and climate conditions. [24]
2.1.2
Environment Conditions
This section describes which are the environment conditions that should be considered
when designing an indoor farming facility.
Light
The photosynthesis is the basic metabolic reaction, from which the plants obtain the basic
nutrients that they need to grow. One of the essential components for this reaction to
happen is light. Besides for photosynthesis, plants also use light as a source of heat and
as a signal source, that induces several physiological responses [25]. Therefore, since
the aim of this thesis is to design an indoor farming facility, one of the cornerstones of the
facility is the artificial lighting system, allowing the crops to still grow indoors.
There are several sources of light that are being used for this purpose, the two most
widely used types are High Pressure Sodium (HPS) and LEDs. Nevertheless, HPS light­
ing is getting replaced by LED in most of the cases, since LED lamps are more energy
efficient and radiate less direct heat to the plants. However, all lamps produce heat, yet
LEDs are more efficient on converting energy to light. Furthermore, the spectrum of the
light emitted by a LED can be adjusted to match the photosynthesis action spectrum of a
leaf. Conversely HPS, emits within the yellow and orange spectrum, but almost not in the
blue. Additionally, HPS light emissions are in average 30% within the Infrared light spec­
trum, which is a spectrum not usable by the plants, only warming these up, in contrast to
LEDs, which almost do not emit within these wavelengths. Nevertheless, regardless of
the source of light, all the power used by lamps at the end is converted to heat, either by
convection or radiation a closed space. [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] .
Light Characteristics
There are four parameters that are normally considered when analysing growing light,
these are described below.
• Light Intensity :It is the amount of instant light that is received by a plant [31],
The Light intensity that is used for photosynthesis is also known as Photosynthetic
Photon Flux Density (PPFD), measured in µmol/ m2∙s. An increased light intensity
normally leads to a better performance of the crop. Nevertheless, if this parame­
ter is increased excessively, the plant might experience light saturation, where the
plant growth is limited by other factors, such as, carbon dioxide, temperature or nu­
trients. Nevertheless, the effect of PPFD on the plant growth has been found to be
dependent on the species and type of the plant [32].
• Light Quality: Light quality is related to the spectre of light that is within the red and
blue light of the visible spectre. Hence, it is within this spectre of light, where plants
experience a significantly increase in its effect on morphology and the photosynthe­
sis [31] [25].
• Photoperiod: The photoperiod is the amount of time that plants are exposed to
light during a whole day. This time frame can also be intermittent, which can lead to
better results. It has a direct connection to the circadian rhythm of plants [33].
• Daily Light Integral: It is the amount of total light that is within photo­synthetically
active radiation spectre that a plant receives in a day. This parameter is directly
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
7
==PAGE:18==
related to the light intensity and photoperiod [34].
Temperature
The temperature is a parameter that should be monitored and controlled at all times in an
indoor farming facility because the physiological processes of the plant are heavily influ­
enced by it. Therefore, to achieve this, the air temperature should be kept at a constant
level at all times, so there is a constant physiological activity of the plant. Normally, the
air temperature inside the facility should be kept in a range between 18ºC to 25ºC for
most of the crops [17]. Reaching this temperature range depends completely on the Air
Conditioning (AC) system of the facility. The sensible heat load on the AC system will
be substantially due to the heat that is generated by the lighting system. Some literature
leads to think that even in extreme cold conditions, when the temperature is below freez­
ing, within a range of 0ºC to ­40ºC, the facility would not need a heating system, since the
LED lamps already provide enough. [17]
Ventilation
• Humidity: The air humidity has a strong influence on the leaf transpiration rate and
on the crops’ water balance, affecting to the nutrient uptake and the leaf tempera­
ture. Hence, finally affecting to the plant’s growth [35] [16]. There are two methods
to measure the air’s humidity, the Relative Humidity (RH, %) and the Vapor Pressure
Deficit (VPD, kPa) [36]. Particularly for lettuce, there are some studies pointing that
plant growth can be increased by rising the relative humidity, and for this the most
optimum RH range is 85±2% at 26ºC [35].
• Carbon Dioxide Concentration
Carbon dioxide is an essential substrate of the photosynthesis reaction, and this is
directly absorbed by the plants. Then, elevated concentrations of carbon dioxide
stimulate photosynthesis, leading to increased carbon (C) uptake, increasing plant
growth. Additionally, elevated carbon dioxide concentration has an impact on wa­
ter use efficiency. Thus, high concentrations slow plant’s transpiration rate. The
palpable impact of carbon dioxide enrichment it is species dependant, and also de­
pendant on the growth stage of the plant. Moreover, as suggested by some studies,
more research in this topic is required, to develop better management practices on
this area [37] [16].
2.1.3
Pests and Diseases Management
Pests and diseases seldom affect to controlled environment facilities. Nevertheless, it is
impossible to fully exclude pest and pathogens from any farming system. In a controlled
system, the most common mechanism through which pathogens access the facility are
the ventilation systems and door ways. Therefore, filters and airlock systems with decon­
tamination protocols might help to reduce this risk. Nevertheless, the risk is never fully
mitigated, since there are microorganisms of small sizes that can even access to the most
pest protected facilities [38].
Hydroponic systems require further considerations on management of pests and dis­
eases. Since, as they are based on a re­circulation flow, sometimes many microorganism
species are found recirculating, specially fungi. Furthermore, hydroponic systems might
also lack on diversity and content of microorganisms to compete with pathogens. There­
fore, a thorough control of the system sanitation is paramount. Moreover, there are sys­
tems such as ultraviolet irradiation, ozone, ultra­filtration and heat treatment to clean the
solution. Finally, nutrients and plant protection products can also be added to the system
to ensure a better management of pests and diseases [38].
8
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:19==
2.1.4
Facility Control and Automation
To achieve a high crop’s yield it is paramount to establish an accurate control of the cul­
tivation environment with sensors, so the plant growth and the cost performance can be
monitored and evaluated at all times. Therefore, several different types of sensors are
needed, so the different processes in the indoor farming facility can be automated. To
automate the processes, the facility uses the data captured by the sensors. Then, this
data is used by the actuators, which regulate the control equipment. The communication
between the sensors and actuators is done by a control system [39]. An example on how
this flow works is shown in the diagram 2.1. The Internet of Things, IoT, can be used
as an autonomous control system. The devices that would define the Internet of Things
for an Indoor Farming would be a network of wireless sensors, as well as, all the other
devices that are in the facility, such as the lighting system, air conditioning systems etc.
[40].
Nonetheless, since this project is implemented in Greenland, it must be taken into consid­
eration the lack of qualified staff on these fields due to its remoteness [8]. Thus, in case
the system experience a failure, qualified staff might take weeks until they arrive to the fa­
cility to repair it. Therefore, the control systems and automated components of the facility
must always have a back­up solution. This solution needs to provide a method to operate
the facility without needing to fully rely on the sensors and automated components, thus,
the facility can still work if these elements are out of order.
Figure 2.1: Control and automation diagram
2.1.5
Suitable Crops
To enhance the economic and technical viability of crop cultivation in vertical farms, the
following key characteristics must be considered:[41]
• Short production cycle: Growing crops in a vertical farm has a high cost asso­
ciated. Therefore, the most profitable crops to grow are those that have a short
production cycle, since those are the ones that have associated the less fixed and
electricity costs per unit produced.
• High harvestable yield: The harvestable yield is the portion of the crop that can be
harvested, therefore that can be sold.
• Short stature: Crops with shorter stature can use space more efficiently.
• Year round demand: Producing the similar crops during the whole year it is more
simple technologically, than growing several crops during a year.
This thesis focuses on the design of a facility to cultivate lettuce. Since, it is one of the
most spread crops in Vertical Farms using hydroponics, therefore, a solution with a high
level maturity, along with a lot of available literature.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
9
==PAGE:20==
2.1.6
Production Processes in Indoor Farming
The farming processes are all those steps that must be followed during the whole chain,
from seeding the plant until this is shipped to be sold. The processes have been gathered
based on the overview presented by Kozai in ”Plant Factory: An Indoor Vertical Farming
System for Efficient Quality Food Production” [16]. Specifically for process number 2,
includes the actual cultivation of the plant from the first seedlings obtained in a dark space
in step number 1,
Figure 2.2: Kozai’s Plant production process [16]
2.1.7
Indoor Farming Facilities in Antarctica ­ EDEN ISS (Neumayer III
Station)
Antarctica in its whole is home to several research stations. Therefore, there exist a lot of
publications on Controlled Environment Agriculture Facilities in these research stations,
describing the solutions and technologies that they use to overcome the extreme weather
conditions in the South Pole. However, there are several differences in the weather in
Antarctica and in the Arctic. Nevertheless, the facilities in the Antarctic serve as good
reference for facilities to be developed in the Arctic, and in Greenland for several reasons.
The weather in the Arctic is milder than the one in Antarctica, so the technologies used in
the facilities in Antarctica are prepared for the weather conditions in the Arctic. Moreover,
Antarctica is a much more isolated region that Greenland, therefore the solution also takes
into account the location’s remoteness of the location. There has been at least 46 plant
production facilities in the Antarctic operated by 13 different countries through the years.
As for 2015, there were only 9 operational facilities. Out of the 46 facilities that are or were
operational with the latest data gathered on 2015, 7 of them used shipping containers [42].
Particularly, EDEN ISS, Evolution and Design of Environmentally­Closed Nutrition Sources”,
established on 2015, is a new indoor farming module established in the Neumayer III Ger­
man Station, developed by the German Aerospace Center (DLR). The main purpose of
this facility is to gain knowledge on the technologies on Controlled Environment Agricul­
ture in harsh environment conditions and with complicated logistics, analogous to the ones
in the Space. To study the future implementation of these technologies in space missions.
Along with this, the facility also aims to provide vegetables for the station’s crew [43].
10
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:21==
Structure Configuration
The EDEN ISS has a modular design based on shipping containers. Simplifying the trans­
port of the facility, and at the same time, taking advantage of the current’s station supply
chain. The design of the EDEN ISS is based on using two 20 ft high cube containers
joined together [43]. The particular structural configuration that the EDEN ISS uses is
detailed below.
• Inner walls: The inner walls have Rockwool insulation of 80mm and wood plates
of 10mm. These are attached to the inner walls of the container. [44]
• Inner side of inner walls and ceiling: Fire retardant high pressure laminate plates
[44].
• Floor: Polyurethane foam insulation of 120mm. A stainless steel basin is also in­
stalled on top of the whole wood floor. Then, in case there is a water spill, this does
not run into the container wall. Additionally, this water is collected and pumped to a
wastewater tank [44].
• Sub­Floor: There is a sub­floor space into which there is a 300 mm high space
dedicated to pumps and pipes for water and cooling. This floor is constructed by
using anodized bars, and on top a metal grid, so there is air movement to this sub­
floor space [44].
Growing System
It uses a modular approach, by using grow units and pallets. To distribute the nutrients
to the plants, aeroponincs are used and LED lamps are used as a light source [43].The
growing units are a set of shelves in which the growing pallets are stacked using a rail
system, so the height can be changed. Each growing unit has a dedicated section for
the air and nutrient solution delivery lines, and on the sides of the grow unit there are
pipes and cabling connecting the different grow units service modules. Below each of the
shelves the LED light lamps are installed, providing light for the crop below. The grow
pallets contain the place where the plants grow, called grow lid, as well as, sensors to
track the different growing parameters. The EDEN ISS uses a 40ft configuration, 12.2m,
and there are 18 grow units [43].
Services set­up
The solutions used in the services set­up of EDEN ISS are described below, as detailed
in [45] and [46].
• Power Control and Distribution System
The power control and distribution system serves as the crucial connection between
the public energy supplying network and the facility, providing all systems and sub­
systems within the facility with the necessary power to carry out their designated
tasks. The main components of this system are stated below:
– Main power box: The main power box is the primary entry point for power from
the public network to enter the facility. It is equipped with essential components
such as fuses, relays, and wattmeters. Additionally, each subsystem within the
facility is equipped with its own fuse, which functions to completely shut down
the components of that particular section of the facility in the event of a fault or
emergency.
– Energy measurement system: The system in charge of measuring the amount
of electricity that is consumed by the facility.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
11
==PAGE:22==
– Cable channels and power cables: The medium in charge of transferring the
power to the different devices in the facility.
• Atmosphere Management System
To minimize interactions between areas, the facility is equipped with two separate
atmosphere management systems. One system is specifically designed to manage
the environment in which the plants are grown, while the other system is responsible
for the rest of the facility, the service modules. The enclosed space in which the
plants are grown creates a closed environment, effectively preventing pathogens
from entering. In contrast, the other areas of the facility utilize a fresh air atmosphere
system. The details of each system are presented below.
– Open Environment ­ Service Areas
This system is used in the service areas. The system is responsible for regulat­
ing the temperature and relative humidity of these sections. This is achieved by
cooling the air by mixing the internal and external air. Below, the elements that
make up the system are described in detail. Figure 2.3 illustrates the design
used by EDEN ISS, which uses a similar setup. [46]
* Air inlet: This is an H­shaped cowl, preventing the snow getting into the
system.
* Flow control valve: The valve regulates the external air intake to the sys­
tem until a maximum temperature is achieved. At this point the valve lets
air from the outside, to cool down these sections. EDEN ISS has a maxi­
mum temperature set point of 27°C during the day and 18°C at night.
* Air filters: Pre­ and HEPA filters are used to prevent pathogens entering
the system.
* Heater: The heater is used to warm the external air to maintain a consis­
tent temperature for the incoming fresh air into the facility. In EDEN ISS
the external air is warmed to 5°C.
* Fan: The fan adds sufficient pressure to the system, overcoming the pos­
sible losses in the system.
* Louver: The louvers distribute the fresh air to these areas of the facility.
* Humidifier: Before entering the facility, the air is humidified by a humidifier
to maintain the desired relative humidity range. In the case of EDEN ISS,
the range is set between 25­30%.
Figure 2.3: P&ID of the Fresh Air Supply System
– Closed Environment ­ Growing Areas
12
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:23==
A closed­loop system is employed to regulate the air conditions in the areas
where vegetables are grown. This system is designed to maintain nominal
air conditions despite the thermal loads generated by equipment and gas ex­
changes in the area. To achieve this, the system filters and dehumidifies the air
in the growing areas. The internal heat provided by the LED might be enough
to keep the facility warm. The system loses carbon dioxide due to filtration and
overall system leakage, therefore this should be replenished to increase the
plant yield. In this facility this is done by providing CO2 from bottles to achieve
a nominal value of 650 ppm, and a maximum of 1500 ppm in 24h. Since the
system is closed, less pathogen substances get into these areas. Neverthe­
less, a filtering system to get rid of the internal generated pathogens is required.
The components of this system are detailed below [46] [45].
* Pre­filter: The air coming from the inside of the facility is submitted to a
pre­filtration process, so large particles and contaminants do not get into
the system.
* UV­lamp: The air is exposed to ultraviolet light to decrease the concentra­
tion of microorganisms that may re­enter the facility.
* Dehumidifier: To maintain the desired relative humidity , the dehumidifier
removes moisture from the air originated from the plants at the growing
sections of the facility. Additionally, the resulting condensate water can be
reused after undergoing a filtration and sterilization process. The cooling
liquid for the dehumidifier is sourced from an external heat exchanger.
* Heater elements: The heater elements act in case there is a failure of the
facility, preventing the temperature from dropping below a certain estab­
lished value.
* Fan: Fans inject pressure to the system, to overcome the possible losses.
* HEPA & VOC filters: Finally, the air undergoes a final purification process
to ensure that it is free from micro­particles and volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) that could harm the plants. This process involves running the air
through a HEPA filter to remove any remaining particles, followed by a
VOC filter to eliminate any trace gases, such as ethylene, which could
accumulate in the air and negatively affect plant growth. Only then is the
purified air allowed to re­enter the growing section.
Figure 2.4: P&ID of the Growing Atmosphere Management System
• Thermal Control System
The thermal control system of EDEN ISS has a passive thermal control, which is
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
13
==PAGE:24==
the insulation placed in the shipping container. And an active thermal control which
consists of liquid cooling loops that transport the heat produced in the facility to an
external heat rejection unit. The heat sources that have to be dissipated at the facility
are two: the LED lights and the devices of the same thermal control system. The
thermal control system uses a water and glycol mixture to transport the heat from
the sources to a liquid to liquid plate heat exchanger. This heat is then transported
to a free­cooler heat rejection unit installed in the rooftop of the facility [45].
• Growing System
It uses a modular approach, by using grow units and pallets. To distribute the nutri­
ents to the plants aeroponincs are used and LED lamps are used as a light source
[43].The growing units are a set of shelves in which the growing pallets are stacked
using a rail system, so the height can be changed. Each growing unit has a dedi­
cated section for the air and nutrient solution delivery lines, and on the sides of the
grow unit there are pipes and cabling connecting the different grow units service
modules. Below each of the shelves the LED light lamps are installed, providing
light for the crop below. The grow pallets contain the place where the plants grow,
called grow lid, as well as, sensors to track the different growing parameters. The
EDEN ISS uses a 40ft configuration, 12.2m, and there are 18 grow units [43].
• Lighting
As mentioned before the EDEN ISS uses LED lamps as a light source. The pho­
toperiod they are using is of 16 light hours and 8 dark hours. It is estimated that half
of the LED power is given off as heat, therefore it is unlikely that the system would
need a supplementary heating system [43].
• Nutrient Delivery
EDEN ISS uses aeroponics as nutrient delivery system, this technique uses the
air as delivery medium, minimising the amount of waste. The nutrient solution re­
circulates into the system, and to keep track of the mineral levels; the pH and the
electrical conductivity of the solution is measured. Finally, to ensure there is not any
pathogen element in the recirculated solution a UV sterilization and Ozone disinfec­
tion solutions are used [43].
Figure 2.5: EDEN ISS System
14
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:25==
2.2
Building Perspective
Building in Greenland faces several challenges, but there are three that stand out from
the others: the extreme climate conditions, the lack of both building materials and work­
force. Since Greenland’s island­operated nature, the transport of goods of all kinds is
exceptionally challenging, directly affecting the overall availability of these. Additionally,
the building season is short and protections against inclement weather cannot be installed
[8].
Consequently, building designs should give special regard on functionality and robust­
ness along with appearance. Hence, the building construction process should also focus
on using prefabricated building materials, so these are previously manufactured indoors
and quickly installed on­site. Additionally, the lack of skilled personnel also makes the
maintenance of the buildings a challenge, therefore the buildings should be designed in
a manner, so their maintenance requirements are kept to a bare minimum, focusing on
using long life span materials [8]. At the same time, a challenge that is not unique to old
buildings in Greenland is mould growth, which in case of a continuous exposure might
lead to develop concerning health problems [47] . Therefore, one of the ways to tackle all
of these challenges from a building perspective, is to keep designs as simple as possible,
so these are easier to be built and managed.
Greenland has their own building regulations different from the ones in Denmark. Nev­
ertheless, Greenlandic building regulations are based on the Danish but adjusted to the
Greenlandic nature [48]. These adjustments normally are based both in what is best
suited considering an Arctic perspective, but also heavily influenced by solutions already
known by the building companies operating there, therefore Danish building traditions [8].
Until recently, Greenlandic government and municipalities were the ones financing the
construction of buildings. Nevertheless, there are a few new initiatives were developers
are constructing new buildings and then renting these to the government or the munici­
palities for a long term. This trend is beneficial for both, since these public entities do not
need to pay up­front for the whole project, since land in Greenland is commonly owned,
so the Government does not make a revenue out of it [8] [49].
2.2.1
Modular Construction
Generally, the elements used in modular construction are prefabricated and easily put
together on­site. Consequently, this construction technique is a perfect approach to tackle
the different challenges that need to be considered when building in Greenland.
There exist two types of modular construction as described below. Nevertheless, a mod­
ular construction project may use some elements of both types of modular construction.
• Volumetric modular construction: Volumetric modular construction consists on
the off­site construction of three dimensional modules, and then connecting these
on­site. This project is only focused on this approach [50].
• Non­volumetric modular construction: Non­volumetric modular construction fo­
cuses only on off­site construction of building elements, such as columns, façades,
roofs... Then, these are connected on­site [50].
Modular construction presents several benefits when compared to more usual construc­
tion approaches. In terms of quality, modules are normally produced in bulk and in a
manufacturing environment, then the characteristics between modules are standardized.
Furthermore, since these are produced in a closed facility the modules’ characteristics are
not affected by weather exposure. Thus, these are less prone to develop any mold related
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
15
==PAGE:26==
issues, since their exposure to moisture through the construction phase is almost non ex­
istent. Moreover, construction projects using modules are less susceptible to be delayed
by weather conditions, so the construction schedule is much more predictable. From a
sustainable perspective, modular construction also uses resources more efficiently, since
less material is needed, and consequently, less waste is generated [50].
Modular projects also benefit from an increased energy and thermal performance since
the precision that is achieved when constructing the modules in a manufacturing facil­
ity with a controlled environment is higher. Additionally, the building would also have a
higher air­tightness level, since less constructive processes are to be completed on its
final location. [50]
On the other hand, the initials costs of starting a modular construction are higher than a tra­
ditional one, since a facility where the modules can be constructed is required. Therefore,
there is an extra cost that is normally not needed on traditional construction. Conversely,
the maintenance and on­site construction costs are lower [51].
2.2.2
Shipping containers as a modular construction solution
Shipping containers are the core of the standardized delivery of goods around the globe.
The balance between producers and consumers around the world is not equal, thus some­
times is cheaper to leave these containers at the destination, specially in importing coun­
tries [52].
Therefore, the surplus of shipping containers at importing countries ports ends up leading
to challenges on terms of allocating these a spot at seaports. Consequently, these issues
have lead to finding new applications and niches for shipping containers, such as using
these as a construction element.
The use of shipping containers as a building system is justified for the set of advantages
that these present in terms of durability, transportation and cost. Container buildings have
an extended use as emergency dwellings, due to their ideal characteristics to withstand
extreme weather conditions and its construction simplicity [53]. Thus, their construction
simplicity and the ISO standardization make them an ideal modular construction solution.
However, constructing with shipping containers has an important drawback that must be
considered, which is the aesthetics of the resulting building. Since, people associate con­
tainers to an industrial product rather to a building. Therefore, mechanisms to adequate
the aesthetics of the building to more conventional solutions are recommended [52].
There exist several types of shipping containers within ISO standardization. The most
common container sizes used for construction are 20’ and 40’. Moreover, the High Cube
version of these lengths is normally preferred, since these are 1’ higher in height than the
normal containers. These, have extra space between the ceiling and the roof that can be
used for duct work, plumbing and electrics, and still provide a 2.40 m of usable height,
which is compliant with most of building regulations worldwide [53].
The tables below contain the dimensions of the shipping containers utilized in the con­
struction process; 2.1 and 2.2.
There are several companies that are already using shipping containers to build indoor
farming facilities, due to the before mentioned properties provided by this solution. Such
as Freight Farms with a solution called ”Greenery S” that uses shipping containers di­
mensions and materials to encapsulate the indoor farming facility. As of 2021 they had a
network of 500 farms all around the world [55]. Or Urban Crop Solutions, a Belgian com­
pany providing a plant factory in a shipping container with the FarmLab and FarmFlex
16
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:27==
Container Type
External Length (m)
External Width (m)
External Height (m)
20’
6.058
2.438
2.591
20’ High Cube
6.058
2.438
2.896
40’
12.192
2.438
2.591
40’ High Cube
12.192
2.438
2.896
Table 2.1: External Shipping Container Dimensions [54]
Container Type
Internal Length (m)
Internal Width (m)
Internal Height (m)
20’
5.898
2.352
2.393
20’ High Cube
5.898
2.352
2.698
40’
12.032
2.352
2.393
40’ High Cube
12.032
2.352
2.698
Table 2.2: Internal Shipping Container Dimensions [54]
solutions, that are fully adaptable to the consumer’s needs [56]. However, these do not
yet present a set­up which is tailored to the Greenlandic environment. Additionally, there
is also the previously described EDEN ISS in the Neumayer III station in Antarctica.
Assembly and refurbishment of shipping containers
The procedure of assembling the modules involves welding profiles with corner pieces,
as detailed in [57]. To carry out this procedure, the corner pieces are first attached to the
profiles using welding techniques. This creates a strong and secure connection between
the profiles, forming the structural skeleton of the module.
The container junctions that are formed using welded profiles on corner pieces have the
potential to cause thermal bridging due to metal­to­metal contact. To address this issue,
it is crucial to apply appropriate insulation and techniques, particularly at these junctions.
Moreover, extra care must be taken when separating the interior and exterior layers com­
posed of corrugated metal as any material that promotes thermal bridging within these
layers can significantly compromise the overall insulation of the container [58].
To meet the requirements of a building, it may be necessary to create openings in the
shipping containers by cutting through the steel wall sheets and profiles. However, this
process can compromise the original strength of the container. To address this issue,
strengthening elements must be installed at the openings, with the area of these elements
being equal to the area of wall that has been removed.[57]
2.3
Utilities Perspective
The island­operated nature of Greenland, meaning cities and towns not being connected
with each other, directly affects to the energy transmission within settlements, directly
impacting on the utilities. Therefore, Greenland requires a different approach to energy
production consisting on producing the energy right where is consumed, a place­based
approach. Consequently, the non­existent transmission network of energy between set­
tlements, requires that each of these must have a back­up system in case of an energy
over­demand.
The Greenlandic energy system presents significant challenges in terms of relying on re­
newable energies such as wind or solar. Nonetheless, hydropower represents a viable
solution due to its ability to supply a stable energy source. Greenland’s topography, with
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
17
==PAGE:28==
its high altitude differences and abundant presence of water in most settlements, offers
ideal conditions for hydropower generation. As a result, hydropower can serve as the
primary source of electricity for settlements year­round, leveraging the availability of wa­
ter. However, this is subject to the variability of water quantity, availability, and weather
conditions, including the potential risk of reservoir freezing [59] [60].
The aforementioned particularities of the energy system in Greenland has lead to the main
source of energy in Greenland to be fossil fuels, until recently. Nevertheless, its consump­
tion has decreased, and approximately now around 55­60% of the energy consumed in
Greenland comes from renewable sources [59] [60].
The company in charge of ensuring the provision of energy and water to the Greenlandic
settlements is Nukissiorfiit, Greenlandic for ”where energies are created”. As of May
2022 the company had five hydroelectric plants in the whole Greenland, one of this being
placed in Sisimiut with a capacity of 15 MW. This hydroelectric plant is able to fulfill all
the demand of electricity and heating of Sisimiut, roughly 55­80 MW a year produced by
this renewable energy source. The eventual overdemand is served by fossil fuel boilers
placed in the city.
Nukissiorfiit is currently conducting windmill tests in Sisimiut, Greenland. The installation
of wind turbines in Greenland presents certain advantages, such as the cost savings asso­
ciated with foundations, which are one of the most expensive elements of the construction
process. In Greenland, if the turbines can be anchored into the bedrock, the associated
costs are lower, since the bedrock acts as a foundation per se. Additionally, due to the
physical properties of cold air being denser than warm air, it is theoretically possible to
generate more energy from wind in Greenland. [61]Nonetheless, this solution still needs
further development and study, since the expenses of transporting these to Greenland
and their installation are high. Moreover, wind turbines still have a low maturity level in
extreme cold conditions, since these needs to be submitted to some special modifications
to stand this harsh climate conditions.
The other solution that is being implemented by Nukissiorfiit to smaller settlements is solar
cells to produce energy, this solution is used now in 12 towns and cities in whole Green­
land. Solar cells are installed in several places in Sisimiut, but from a private initiative, not
directly related to Nukissiorfiit, as the solar cells installed in the Appisseq dormitory and
the ones in Knud Rasmussend High School [61].
The energy mix produced by Nukisiorfiit on 2021, indicates that a total of 72% was pro­
duced using renewable sources of energy; 66% hydropower and a 6% obtained by waste
incineration and the rest was produced by fossil fuels. In Sisimiut, an incinerator has
been installed that utilizes the heat generated from the combustion process to produce
hot water. This hot water is then supplied to the city’s district heating system, enabling
the provision of heat to buildings and residences in the area [59] [62].
Regarding water supply, Nukissiorfiit is also in charge of the extraction, transport, cleaning
and setting up the pipes and taps, and also its maintenance. The water consumption
patterns of the Greenlandic population have changed drastically through the years, since
the water consumption before it was mainly for drinking and cooking, and with different
practices for cleaning and personal hygiene. Hence, the freshwater resources were not
a decisive parameter to chose the location of a settlement, so even a small river or a lake
were considered enough. There were even settlements placed in islands that did not have
real water resources, thus the only source of water they had was ice floes in the sea [63].
All these differences between the natural resources that are used in each of the different
18
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:29==
settlements as freshwater resources, has lead to remarkable difference between water
provision systems depending on the location of the settlement and the availability degree
of freshwater at that particular location. On top of that, another aspect that makes the
water supply specially hard, is that the pipes, that supply water and the ones used for
sewage, must be kept frost­free using electrical heating cables that cover the pipes. All
in all, there are four mainly freshwater provision systems in Greenland: [63]
1. Piped water: The ”regular” supplying system where the water pipes directly provide
water to the different households, by a regular tap.
2. Tank water: There is a tanker truck that provides water to the households indi­
vidual tanks. This is by a private company, that buys the water from Nukissiorfiit
waterworks and provides this to the different household tanks.
3. Tap house: Nukissiorfiit has tap houses to which the households go and fetch water
from.
4. Traditional water supply methods: There are only three small settlements in
northern Greenland, where population still rely on either melting floes of ice or col­
lecting water in lakes when the weather allows it.
The sewage treatment system is almost non­existant in Greenland. The sewage normally
is directly discharged into the sea, using collection systems such as bagged sewage,
trucked sewage and piped sewage. The traditional approach to disposal of sewage in
Greenland, and still in use in some settlements is called ”Natrenovation”. This consists
on placing the bagged sewage at the edge of the fjords, so the tides will get these away
by next morning. A more modern approach to this technique is the building commonly
known as ”Chocolate Factories”, centers curated to sewage disposal. In these facilities,
the bags are opened and deposited in a common basin, and then discharged directly to
the ocean [62].
Finally, the utilities provision systems in Greenland are really different from the ones we
are used to in Europe. Therefore, it is paramount for the design of the facility to thoroughly
analyse which would be the ideal location of this, considering this perspective. Moreover,
in case of some of the main utilities is not present into the desired location, assess if it is
better to switch to another one, or study how this should be implemented so the facility
has all the required utilities.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
19
==PAGE:30==
2.4
Social Perspective
Agriculture in Greenland is extremely limited due to its nature and adverse climatic con­
ditions. Moreover, the isolation of this Arctic community has traditionally made it hard to
import fruits and vegetables to most of the remote corners of this island. Thus, the difficult
access to food from the outside made the Inuit people totally reliant on their local food in
order to survive, conforming a diet which is quite unique when compared with diets from
the rest of the world. This diet was mainly based on fish and marine mammals, including
whale and skin blubber (Mattak), seal and dried fish. [64]
However, the diet of Greenlandic people has experienced a high degree of Westerniza­
tion in the last decades, nevertheless, it is still quite seldom for Inuit people to include
fruits or vegetables to their diet on a daily basis [64]. Based on a study, only 42% of
the Greenlandic people surveyed consumed fruit on a daily basis, and only a 35,2% con­
sumed vegetables daily. Consequently, the social perspective of indoor farming in the
Inuit communities should be thoroughly regarded to assess the acceptation degree of this
solution within the Greenlandic community, and ways to tackle the scepticism on this new
food and the method used to produce it [65].
On the other hand, the Arctic communities are experiencing a sociocultural change at
a very fast pace, when compared with other indigenous communities around the world.
Thus, this fast pace Westernization has also lead to a very fragile socioeconomic frame­
work in the Arctic. [66] Additionally, the average income in Greenland after tax is 17%
lower in Greenland than in Denmark and the price level in Greenland is 6% higher than
in Denmark. Particularly for vegetables, these are a 60% more expensive in Greenland
than in Denmark. [67] Therefore, indoor farming could be a new solution to improve food
security for fresh produce in Greenland, improving their quality and supply regularity.
Subsequently, indoor farming in Greenland provides a duality where this solution on one
hand, improves food security within these communities, since it provides a new way of
obtaining regularly available fresh produce, not reliant on weekly cargo ships. Never­
theless, the consumption of fresh produce in Greenland is still scarce, thus there might
be a certain degree of scepticism through this solution and its produce, so strategies for
dealing with this duality have to be regarded to run a successful business.
However, one of the core elements of the Inuit culture in terms of food and its consump­
tion is the practice of sharing. It is one of the elements of the Inuit culture that has not
substantially changed in these past few decades. The sharing tradition within Arctic com­
munities has cultural similarities to the tradition of sharing garden produce in southern
communities, as pointed in [66]. Thus, this could be a basis to develop this new fresh
produce provision solution within a Greenlandic perspective.
In consequence, the only way to run a sustainable business with indoor farming in Green­
land is adapting the solution to the needs, habits and traditions of the Inuit community,
considering that there is a big difference to those people in Europe are used to. Thus,
the implementation and further development of this solution should be developed hand by
hand with people within the Arctic communities, since the huge difference on the traditions
within these communities.
20
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:31==
3
Methodology
3.1
Methodology Description
The project methodology has been developed to investigate the design of an indoor lettuce
farm in Sisimiut, Greenland through a structured approach, including location identifica­
tion, layout determination, service and utility identification, and carbon footprint assess­
ment. I have selected lettuce as crop to grow in the facility, since it is one of the most
spread crops in Vertical Farms using hydroponics, therefore, a solution with high level
maturity, along with a lot of available literature. The methodology I followed is based on
a thorough literature review to identify existing indoor farming facilities, technologies and
best practices and provide a foundation for the design and justifying the choices. The
methodology structure is represented in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Methodology Structure
3.2
Selection of Location
This section explains how I determined the best location for an indoor farming facility in
Sisimiut. Considering the information gathered on locations in an interview with Qeqqata
Municipality officials, I performed a a Multi Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) to evaluate
potential locations based on different criteria.
3.2.1
Interview with Qeqqata Municipality
The meeting with the Qeqqata Municipality was held physically in one of the Municipal­
ity’s main buildings in Sisimiut. There, I met with Alexander Beck and Tuperna Rix, two
planning civil servants of the Department of Technology and Environment of the Munic­
ipality. They provided information on currently available suitable locations for an indoor
farming facility. They proposed areas B8.1, B8.2, and B8.4 in the industrial area, and
their details and requirements can be found in the Municipal Plan, the overview of these
areas can be seen in the figure 3.2. They recommended to check the availability of the
plots on NunaGIS, the Greenlandic National Geo­Data Platform [68]. The use of shipping
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
21
==PAGE:32==
containers is a permitted construction element, but only six containers can be visible per
building as per the municipal regulation. Finally, to screen which are the available utilities
in each plot they told us to use NunaGIS and to approach Nukissiorfiit.
3.2.2
Locations in Sisimiut
Considering the information provided on the several available plots in the interview with
the Qeqqata Muncipality 3.2.1. The location of the plots are within the business area B8,
between the Ulkebugt Bridge and the Old Heliport, an area made up of existing commer­
cial areas, that are ready for construction. This business area has several gravel roads
and dirt roads connecting it to the main city. Several of the locations within the zone also
have available utilities such as water, sewage and electricity, utilities that are not as com­
mon to have in Greenland as in Europe. A picture of this area can be seen in Figure 3.3.
The areas proposed by the Municipality are B8.1, B8.2 and B8.4, which can be seen in
figure 3.2, from a map retrieved from the NunaGIS platform [68].
Figure 3.2: Location of B8.1, B8.2 and B8.4 areas in Sisimiut, Greenland [68]
Figure 3.3: Location of B8 areas in Sisimiut, Greenland. Photography of P. Sardella
22
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:33==
3.2.3
Multi Criteria Decision Analysis
Multi Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) is a subfield of Operations Research that offers a
structured approach for tackling problems that entail multiple criteria and a limited number
of alternatives [69]. Consequently, it is necessary to consider diverse perspectives. The
advantage of using this methodology is that it equips decision­makers with a tool to rank
various alternatives based on their performance under a predetermined set of importance
criteria.
Therefore, the decision can be made assisted by this ranking, ensuring to the person
making the decision that all the different criteria have been properly considered [70]. The
data that can be used in these methods can be both qualitative and quantitative, providing
a wide spectrum of possibilities [71].
The nature of MCDA is to split up complex decision into small components, so these small
pieces can be dealt one by one, and then, when all of them have been considered, put all
of them together again, to make the decission.
Multiple methods have been proposed during the past years to fulfill this mission. Never­
theless, all the methods follow the same logic structure found below: [72]
1. Possible Alternatives Set: Set of the different alternatives that are going to be
appraised.
2. Criteria: Set of different characteristics considered when performing the alternatives
appraisal.
3. Preference Structure: Weights given to the different criteria in the appraisal. These
reflect the preferences of the person making the decision.
3.2.4
Multi Criteria Method Selection
To choose which is the method best suited for this purpose, I have used the ”Generalised
framework for multi­criteria method selection” [73]. This article presents a framework that
helps the decision maker to choose which are the best suited methods from 56 methods
studied by the researchers. To provide the subset of techniques that are better tailored for
the problem, the framework assesses several aspects of the composition of the problem
as:
• Weights: Whether the problem has weights, and the type of these weights, if they
are quality, quantity or relative weights.
• Scale: The type of scale that the problem uses to grade alternatives and criterion.
• Uncertainty: Whether the data used for the problem has some kind of uncertainty,
and the type of this uncertainty.
• Topic: The purpose of this analysis, whether the decision maker wants a ranking of
alternatives or just a choice of these.
The outcome I got after applying this method for choosing a location to establish an indoor
farming facility within Sisimiut, is the following subset of methodologie:
• Macbeth
• Dematel
• Fuzzy AHP
• AHP
• REMBRANDT
• Fuzzy ANP
• ANP
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
23
==PAGE:34==
From the options in this set, I have selected REMBRANDT based on familiarity. This
decision was made considering that the only methods I am familiar with are AHP and
REMBRANDT, and according to the literature, REMBRANDT is an enhanced version of
the original AHP [74]. Therefore, I will focus on the REMBRANDT method from now on.
3.2.5
Multiplicative Analytic Hierarchy Process ­ REMBRANDT Framework
The method I have chosen to apply for the location selection is called the Multiplica­
tive Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP), also called REMBRANDT, Ratio Estimation in
Magnitudes or deci­Bells to Rate Alternatives which are Non­DominaTed. This method
was developed by a research group in the Netherlands, led by F.A. Lootsma in 1992 [75].
The REMBRANDT technique is a procedure that comes from overcoming the theoretical
issues found in the underlying theory of the regular Analytical Hierarchy Process [74]. The
Analytical Hierarchy Process being a method developed in 1977 by Saaty [76].
Therefore the methodological framework of the multiplicative AHP ­ REMBRANDT is the
following: [72] [74] [77]
1. Structured hierarchical approach
When the the problem has been defined, this is desegregated in a hierarchic struc­
ture diagram. The hierarchic desegregation is done from top to bottom. Starting
by the goal of the decision making (highest level), the criteria (intermediate level)
and the alternatives (lowest level). This step should be also used to disregard those
alternatives that are not relevant, since they do not match the criteria.
2. Pair­wise comparison Matrices
The decision­maker performs a pair wise comparison, considering that ”each ele­
ment in an upper level is used to compare the elements in the level immediately
below with respect to it”[78]. To make the comparisons the decision­maker uses the
REMBRANDT scale, that can be found in table 3.1. This scale translates a verbal
comparative judgement into an integer­valued gradation index, δjk. Then, for every
of these comparisons the decision­maker must fill a square matrix with the grada­
tion index using the previously mentioned scale. The matrix index is equal to the
number of criterion or alternatives that are being compared.
Preference
Gradation Index (δjk)
Same
0
Weak
2
Clear
4
Strong
6
Very Strong
8
Table 3.1: REMBRANDT Scale [78]
3. Geometric scale transformation
The values of the matrices are transformed to a geometric scale using a scale pa­
rameter γ with value ln(2), implying a geometric scale with progression factor 2.[75]
Then, the REMBRANDT scale values are transformed using the following formula
3.1:
rjk = exp(γδjk)
(3.1)
24
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:35==
Where:
• j, k: 1,...,n
• n: Number of criteria alternatives
4. Geometric Mean for Criterion and Alternatives
I calculated the geometric mean for the each of the different criterion. As well as,
for each of the alternatives compared to each of the criteria.
5. Criterion Weights
Once the geometric mean has been calculated for every criteria, these values are
normalised. The normalised values are the weights of each of the criteria.
6. Multiplicative Model
For each of the final scores obtained, using the geometric mean for the alternatives
and the criterion weights the multiplicative model is used. This model follows the
following formula 3.2:
Aj = ACi
ji . ACi+1
ji+1 . ACi+2
ji+2 ...
(3.2)
Where:
• A: Alternative
• C: Criteria
• j: 1 ,..., number of alternatives
• i: 1,..,number of criteria
7. Values Normalisation
Finally, to simplify the comparison of the alternatives, the values obtained for each of
the alternatives on the previous step are normalised to enhance the comparability.
3.2.6
Location Selection using REMBRANDT Technique
A. Structured Hierarchic Approach
The outcome that I am trying to reach using the REMBRANDT technique is finding a
location for a vertical farming facility in Sisimiut, Greenland. Thus, I define the criteria
framework that is used to assess the considered location alternatives.
Criteria
The criteria I used to evaluate the alternatives are selected based on the most significant
factors that affect the decision­making process when choosing a location for an indoor
farming facility. Additionally, considering the remoteness of Greenland and the significant
differences in daily life from Europe, the following criteria are established.
For two of these criteria I have set a threshold, for which the alternatives that do not meet
this are automatically disregarded. This is further detailed in each specific criteria:
1. Surface
The surface of the plot is one of the aspects that I consider when doing the assess­
ment of the different alternatives. Since, it is important to have a plot that allows the
facility to expand when this needs it. So, the facility is not constrained in area due
to the plot’s size.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
25
==PAGE:36==
The data to characterise each of the plots by its surface can be found in the Municipal
Plan, as well as in the different announcements made by the Municipality [79] [80]
[81]. The surface data has been analysed considering intervals, these are described
on the appendix of this thesis.
In the context of assessing plots, I base my evaluation on the principle that a larger
plot surface area implies higher score.
Threshold: Only those plots bigger that 1000 m2 are considered. Since, as the
Municipal plan, [79], states on its page 27. PCS 1; ”The built­up area must not
exceed the 50% of the total land plot area. Then, reviewing some of the solutions
used for Indoor Farming in these conditions, as for example the one presented in
[19], present solutions of at least 500 m2. Therefore, I consider that the facility would
be significantly constrained with only 500 m2 of constructable surface.
2. Available Utilities
When evaluating a plot in Greenland, it is crucial to take into account the utilities that
are currently available. Obtaining common utilities can be a challenging task, as it
is not unusual for plots to lack them upon acquisition. Additionally, bringing utilities
to a plot can be a burdensome task.
Furthermore, it is important to note that in many cases the utilities supplier or the
Municipality does not provide the necessary infrastructure for utilities. As a result,
the new landowner is typically responsible for covering the costs associated with
obtaining and installing these utilities.
The characterization of plots is based on the availability of water, electricity, and
sewage utilities. The required information for characterizing the plots can be ob­
tained from NunaGIS [68], as mentioned during the interview with Nukissiorfit, which
is further elaborated in Section 3.7.2.
The assessment of the plots has been done on the basis that that the more supplies
a plot has the higher the score is.
Threshold: I only consider those plots that have one or more of the above described
utilities (water, electricity and sewage). As I mentioned earlier, having utilities in the
plot is crucial without these, a project would require a costly integration from scratch.
3. Cost
The price per square meter of the plot is another aspect to consider when performing
the assessment, since it has a direct effect in the budget of the project.
The data to characterise the plot by the price per square meter can be found in the
Municipal Plan, as well as in the different announcements made by the Municipality
[79] [80] [81].
The assessment is performed considering that the cheaper the plot the better.
Alternatives
Regarding the alternatives, the Qeqqaata Municipality provided me with an overview of
the different plots within Sisimiut that would be suitable for the purpose of this facility, as
has been previously mentioned.
Specifically, the plots are in the Business Area B.8., and particularly, within sub­areas
B8.1, B8.2 and B8.4. Within these sub­areas there exist 38 plots, as can be checked in
26
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:37==
the Municipal Plan of this area, [79], and the several announcements on the different sub­
areas that the Qeqqata Municipality does [80] [81]. But not all of these are available, as I
was told by the Municipality in the interview that we had, detailed in section 3.2.1. I used
NunaGIS, [68], to check the plots availability within this area. After checking NunaGIS, I
was able to confirm that only 25 plots are available out of the initial 38.
Thereafter, on the basis of 25 available plots within business area B.8., I checked which
of these plots can be immediately disregarded. Thus, considering the criteria thresholds
set for the surface and available utilities criterion, those plots that are smaller or equal to
1000 m2 or those that do not have any utilities available are not further regarded.
After applying these thresholds, I disregarded 14 plots, so finally, only 11 plots are anal­
ysed using the REMBRANDT technique.
B. Hierarchic Diagram
Initially, I constructed a hierarchical diagram to represent the problem being addressed
through the implementation of this technique. The diagram serves as a comprehensive
overview of the problem, encompassing the inquiry being pursued, the various criteria
being considered, and the alternative solutions being evaluated using the method. The
diagram is available in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Hierarchic diagram for the location selection
C. Pair­wise comparison matrices
I used a hierarchic approach to organize the options, and then I evaluated them using
the REMBRANDT scale through pair­wise comparisons. This process involved rating
the alternatives against each criteria and comparing the criteria to determine their relative
importance. As a result, I generated four pair­wise comparison matrices: three to evaluate
the performance of each alternative for each criteria and one to assess the importance of
each criteria in the overall selection process.
D. Calculations
Once the four matrices have been created, I perform the calculations stated in steps: 3,
4, 5, 6 and 7 of the REMBRANDT framework that can be found in section 3.2.5.
3.3
Modular Configuration of the Facility
This section outlines the methodology employed to determine the optimal modular config­
uration for the facility. The process includes two steps: identification of the most efficient
modular unit and selection of a suitable arrangement of modules for the facility.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
27
==PAGE:38==
3.3.1
Optimal Modular Unit
To identify the most appropriate modular unit to use for building the indoor farming facility,
the initial step involves evaluating two viable options for this kind of facility: custom­built
modules and shipping containers.
As pointed in the study in [43], half of the research stations in Antarctica have had at some
point hydroponic facilities for vegetables cultivation constructed using shipping containers
as modular units to build these facilities. The other facilities were build using wood or other
specialized building materials. Additionally, various companies have developed indoor
farming solutions using shipping containers.
In addition, the utilization of shipping containers presents an opportunity to leverage Green­
land’s pre­existing supply chain infrastructure. The established shipping routes, operated
by the Royal Arctic Line, use 20 and 40­foot containers from Denmark to Greenland. This
offers a viable and efficient option for deploying shipping containers in the region [82].
One of the primary drawbacks associated with using shipping containers for construction
is their poor fire safety performance, which require special fireproofing treatments to meet
regulatory requirements [83]. Another limitation of using shipping containers is that their
sizes cannot be altered to suit design requirements, which can restrict design flexibility.
Additionally, in Sisimiut, there is a maximum amount of six visible shipping containers, if
this limit is exceeded a façade must be constructed to mask them, as told in the interview
with public servants from the Qeqqata municipality 3.2.1.
As highlighted in Section 2.2.2, various types of shipping containers are available. How­
ever, High Cube containers are the most commonly used for modular construction, as
they provide an additional foot of height (i.e., 30.48 cm) compared to regular containers.
The most usual lengths for High Cube containers are 20 and 40­foot. On an economic
perspective, the price difference between the two container lengths I assume is negli­
gible, compared to the overall project. Therefore, I did not consider this aspect in the
decision­making process. Instead, I reviewed the availability of appropriate machinery
and maneuvering space for trucks at the location. In Sisimiut, the transportation of 20­
foot containers is highly compatible with many trucks, owing to the urban planning layout
that favors these particular types of vehicles. Conversely, the transportation of 40­foot
containers poses greater difficulties, as it requires finding a suitable truck and negotiating
the city’s infrastructure.
3.3.2
Modular Arrangement
The next step involves considering the ideal modular configuration for the facility. This
section aims to determine whether the technical or service area of the facility should be in­
corporated in each module or solely in one module, which would then serve the remaining
ones. These arrangements are evaluated below.
A) Stand­Alone Configuration
In this configuration each of the modules would contain both a growing and a service
area. The proposed service area is intended to accommodate all the essential technical
equipment required to regulate the environmental conditions and provide utilities.
The standalone configuration offers an improved robustness, since any technical equip­
ment incidents are contained on the single module experiencing the issue, minimizing the
risk of escalation to other modules. Likewise, this configuration results in a more com­
pact facility, improving the ease of movement. Conversely, the stand­alone configuration
has certain disadvantages. One issue, is the amount of space taken up by technical
equipment in each module, which can limit the area available for growing crops. Another
28
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:39==
challenge is the maintenance and control of technical areas and equipment distributed
across multiple modules, which can be more difficult than in centralized configurations.
Additionally, scaling up the facility using this configuration may result in higher costs since
technical equipment needs to be installed in each new module.
B) Grid Configuration
The second configuration involves one module dedicated solely to the service area, as
well as supplying utilities and nutrients, and a separated growing module where the crops
grow. The growing modules are plugged to the service module, which can service a
limited amount of growing modules depending on the capacity and power of the equipment
installed in the service module.
The use of separate containers for growing and servicing the facility would allow for more
efficient utilization of space within the modules. Additionally, due to the reduced number
of service modules, maintenance and monitoring become easier. Another benefit is that
expansion of the facility can be accomplished more easily and with less investment. Espe­
cially, if the service module has capacity for additional growing modules, expansion would
only require construction of a new growing module rather than acquisition of new techni­
cal equipment. The grid configuration has some limitations regarding the robustness of
the system, since a failure in the service module might affect all the growing modules it
services. Moreover, compared to other configurations, the initial investment required for
a grid system could be higher, as it requires setting up two modules instead of just one.
Figure 3.5: Stand alone and grid configuration
3.4
Indoor Farming Facility Areas
The areas overview I obtained is based on the process involved in an indoor farming facil­
ity, described earlier in 2.1.6 and the information provided by P.Sardella, Project Manager
at Nordic Harvest, on the primary processes specifically for a facility of this kind.
3.4.1
Processes and production flows
To establish the processes required in the facility, I presented P. Sardella the overview
in 2.2, to set which are relevant for lettuce. For leafy greens he said that a single trans­
planting process is enough. Additionally, he mentioned that the substrate should also be
placed in the tray before seeding, and that all trays and equipment should be cleaned
after each harvesting. Finally, trimming would normally be done before harvesting, but he
recommended to do quality inspections during the growing process, since leaves are the
facility’s product.
Additionally, I have analysed which are the different production flows within these pro­
cesses, to later use this as a criteria to group them together in areas.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
29
==PAGE:40==
Therefore, I present the processes included in the facility in Figure 3.6, considering the
overview by Kozai in 2.1.6 and the input given by P.Sardella.
Figure 3.6: Processes and production flows
3.4.2
Areas
Once I identified the primary processes and operation flows, I evaluated which ones could
be grouped together within the same area based on shared working flow and similar pur­
poses. The criteria used for grouping the processes together are outlined below:
• Flow: Processes that depend on each other and share a similar working flow were
grouped together.
• Functionality: Processes with similar objectives and functionalities were also con­
solidated.
3.5
Base Module Design
The methodology I followed to design a base growing module consists on studying the
structure of the module, considering the areas discussed in 3.4 and 4.3. Thereafter, I
assess which are the different hydroponic systems that the facility could use, and which
are the different set­up alternatives to grow the plants. On the other hand, I have defined
the configuration of the service module so it uses the same structural configuration as the
growing module, thus I did not present a specific base design for the service module.
3.5.1
Growing Module Configuration
This section describes the configuration that the growing module has in terms of structural
configuration, processes, organization structure and the modular structure and sizing of
the sections.
The design methodology is inspired on the areas and processes outlined in 3.4 and 4.3,
as well as the solutions used by other organizations such as Freight Farms and EDEN
ISS [44] [55]. The design process is the following:
30
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:41==
Modules structural configuration
The modules need to withstand similar weather conditions and adhere to the standard 20’
HC shipping container framework, I would recommended to use the structural configura­
tion principles used in EDEN ISS and detailed in 2.1.7. On Table 3.2, I present the internal
dimensions of the shipping container, considering this configuration.
Width (mm)
Height (mm)
Length (mm)
Volume (m3)
2150
2260
5700
27.7
Table 3.2: Dimensions and volume of the growing module
Processes Breakdown
Considering the processes outlined in Figure 3.6 the ones that are directly related to cul­
tivation, and therefore encompassed within the growing module are the following. The
processes that are not part of the growing module, are thoroughly examined and defined
in the facility layout section of the thesis.
Figure 3.7: Processes breakdown
Processes Modular Organization Structure
The processes organization structure at the module I present is done considering the
flows described at 3.6, as well as the common functionality shared by these. Therefore,
considering these key principles, the module structure is organized by the following sec­
tions.
• Cleaning and Preparing Section: This section is used to carry out those proce­
dures for cleaning used equipment and the seeding preparation.
• Germination Section: This particular section is specifically designed to be utilized
during the germination stage of plant growth. Once the germination process is com­
plete, the plant is then transferred to the following section.
• Growing Section: Once the plant has initiated the germination process, it is then
transferred to the growing section where it will remain until the final harvest stage.
Modular structure and sizing of sections
I based the modular structure of the facility on the previous outlined steps. The organi­
zation structure establishes the layout of the different sections within the facility and their
sizes. In the design of the facility, I aimed for simplicity, robustness and scalability as key
principles. These ideas are paramount on a modular design, and particularly if this is to be
deployed in a location such as Greenland. Additionally, the designs are done considering
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
31
==PAGE:42==
the following requirements, based on the design of the Future Exploration Greenhouse at
EDEN ISS. [44] These are stated below:
• Corridor Disposition: The facility is designed considering a single centred aisle
with a corridor in the center of the facility and each of the growing racks at the side.
Other solutions, as pointed in [44], as a single side corridor leads to having racks
that are too deep and difficult to operate.
• Corridor Width: The optimal width of the corridor as pointed in [44], is of 1 m.
Therefore, there is 0.575 m on each side of the aisle to place growing elements, so
there is still a 1.15 m width to place equipment.
3.5.2
Growing Configuration
Hydroponic system
From the several hydroponic systems that are stated in the literature review, the ones that
are more used for leafy plants production are the nutrient film technique and the Deep Flow
Technique (DFT), as stated in [16]. Therefore, I only consider these two techniques, since
these are the ones broadly used for lettuce, thus with a higher maturity level. Moreover,
considering that this facility is placed in Greenland, the most important factor is that the
system is robust and easy to maintain.
After discussing this matter with P. Sardella, he suggested that utilizing the Nutrient Film
Technique (NFT) system would be ideal for this particular facility, considering simplicity as
a fundamental principle. NFT is a simpler solution compared to other hydroponic systems,
since it involves a lower volume of circulating water, potentially reducing the complexity
of system management. Additionally, P. Sardella highlighted that implementing an NFT
system allows for the use of a more resistant substrate, which offers improved retention
of nutrients and facilitates a gradual release of these to the roots.
As highlighted in [84], which compares different hydroponic solutions, the DFT method is
less dependant on a pumping system compared to NFT. Consequently, if there is a pump
failure in DFT the plants are less likely to wilt in comparison to NFT. However, in DFT
adjusting parameters such as pH, dissolved oxygen, and temperature is more challenging
due to the larger volume of water used. Despite being cheaper to construct, DFT systems
have higher operational costs when compared to NFT.
Hydroponic set­up
The hydroponic system comprises multiple racks, which hold trays containing the culti­
vation bed. Each of the trays contain a LED panel that acts as a lighting source for the
cultivation bed below. An overview of this system can be seen in Figures 3.8 and 3.9.
This particular arrangement has been implemented in facilities utilizing shipping contain­
ers, such as the EDEN ISS project in Antarctica [43]. The different solutions I have chosen
for this hydroponic system are stated below, these are later used to design the different
modules.
• Growing Trays
The growing trays consist of two parts. First, the cultivation bed, where the nutrient
solution flows. The second part of this set­up is a lid for the cultivation bed with
several holes, where a substrate cub is introduced into which the plant is seeded.
Set­ups similar to this are used in some experiments such as [85] [43]. Regarding
the substrate cubes, commonly used materials include Rockwool, Coco Fiber, Per­
lite and Expanded Clay. In this setup, Rockwool has a better absorption capability
compared to others. This makes it a suitable choice for serving as a nutrient reser­
32
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:43==
voir in the event of pump failure, also assists in keeping the plants in place within
the nutrient solution, as highlighted in [86].
• Nutrient Solution Delivery System:
The irrigation set­up of the facility consists in two tanks. A first one connected to a
clean water source, such as the public grid, serving as a reservoir in case of any
disruptions with the water supply. The second tank is used to mix the clean water
with the nutrients, which is then utilized to irrigate the cultivation beds, in a closed­
loop system. As a result, the drainage water from each bed is returned back to the
nutrient solution tank. Maintaining the appropriate EC, pH, and temperature of the
solution is crucial to ensure that the nutrient solution is not exhausted. The second
tank should also contain a drainage system, to get rid of the exhausted solution.
Additionally, the second tank should feature a drainage system to dispose of the
depleted solution and a pollutant and pest management system to eliminate any
pathogens from the solution. Similar setups can be found in other facilities, such as
[87].
Regarding the water consumption for lettuce, considering the research done in P.
Sardella’s thesis, [19], lettuce consumes 2 l/m2 per day. The optimal flow of nutrient
solution for which the plants have the highest dry weight is of 4 l/min, as pointed
in [88]. Moreover, as also pointed in [19], the optimal temperature to supply the
nutrient solution to the plants is of 2 degrees lower than the temperature in the
growing facility.
Based on research conducted in [19], lettuce requires 2 liters of water per square
meter per day. The nutrient solution’s ideal flow rate, resulting in the highest plant
dry weight, is 4 liters per minute, as pointed in [88]. Additionally, [19] indicates that
the optimal temperature for the nutrient solution provided to the plants should be 2
degrees lower than the temperature inside the growing facility.
Figure 3.8: Nutrient Film Technique Vertical Farming [89]
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.9: Diagram NFT in VF Set­up [85]
Lighting System
As previously discussed in the literature review chapter, LED lights are widely regarded
as the optimal lighting system solution due to their high maturity level, energy efficiency,
and adjustable lighting spectrum which can be tailored to meet the absorption spectrum
requirements of the crop. As shown in Figure 3.10, LED lights offer a superior fit to the
light spectrum needs of lettuce compared to other options such as High Pressure Sodium
lights (HPS). Although LED lights typically carry a higher upfront cost compared to other
lighting solutions such as HPS lights, their lower running costs due to increased energy
efficiency make them a more economical and sustainable choice in the long term. [26]
Figure 3.10: HPS vs LED as light source compared to the absorption spectrum of lettuce.
[90]
There are two parameters of the lighting system, that should be duly controlled and ad­
justed to ensure an optimal lettuce grow. These are the photoperiod and the light intensity.
The light parameters chosen are pointed to be optimal in [91], as well as by P. Sardella.
Thus, the light lamps must be able to provide the following light intensity and photoperiod
homogeneously to the plants.
• Light Intensity: 150 µmol/ m2∙s
• Photoperiod: 16 light hours and 8 dark hours, in 1 cycle. An example of how the
photoperiod of one of the modules could be arranged is shown at the graph below.
34
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:45==
3.6
Facility Layout
This section outlines the methodology I used to develop a modular layout for the facility.
Initially, the layout’s boundaries are defined, including the minimum and maximum sizes
of the facility. Once the approach is defined, the layout design is developed, considering
the product flows throughout the facility and the division of clean and unclean areas.
3.6.1
Layout Boundaries
Establishing layout boundaries is critical in determining the optimal size for a facility. In
this case I defined the boundaries that set the facility’s minimum and maximum size limits,
while considering its scalability and marketability of its products.
Assumptions
• Growing trays yield 0.5 kg of clean lettuce.
• Lettuce harvesting cycle is of 3 weeks.
Lower boundary ­ Workforce capacity
To establish the lower boundary, I consider the optimal facility size which can be oper­
ated by a single person. I chose this approach since previous studies suggest that such
facilities are not highly profitable [19]. Consequently, to address economic uncertainty,
it is crucial to keep the number of employees to a minimum, especially during the initial
stages of the facility. Therefore, it is better to keep operational costs low and increase
them later if the facility becomes profitable or new funding becomes available. Since this
is a modular facility, more modules can also be added in a later stage.
The methodology that I employed to calculate the amount of growing space that can be
handled by a single employee is as follows:
1. Growing trays yield
The growing trays dimensions are 600 mm long per 500 mm wide, with a growing
area of 0,3 m2 as mentioned in table 4.4. To estimate the yield for lettuce in a tray of
this dimensions, I contacted P. Sardella, project manager in Nordic Harvest, so he
could assess it. He said that in a tray of this dimensions the yield could be of 500g
of lettuce every three weeks, clean without roots.
2. Processes time estimation
I conducted an estimation on how much time does a person take to complete the
different growing processes on a single tray, to later size the facility accordingly.
I have done the estimation considering the growing space, the time to manage it
and the output of lettuce per tray. Additionally, I have performed these estimations
on collaboration of P.Sardella. Consequently, considering the presented estimates
overview in Table 3.3, the time required to manage one growing tray per harvesting
cycle (3 weeks) are 30 minutes, more detail is presented for seeding and packaging
processes.
• Seeding: This estimation of the process time is done considering a semiauto­
matic seeder.
• Packaging: 2 minutes per packaging operation, which includes weighting,
packing, labelling and storing. For this case, I have assumed a bag of 100
g of lettuce, therefore that would be 5 packaging operations per growing tray,
thus 10 minutes in total.
3. Module growing capacity
As described in Section 4.4.1 each module has a growing capacity of 32 trays.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
35
==PAGE:46==
Processes
Cleaning
tray
Moving to
seeding
Rockwool
filling
Seeding
Moving to
growing
Harvesting
Packaging
Time
(minutes)
5
1
5
6*
1
2
10*
Table 3.3: Process times on a growing tray per harvesting cycle (3 weeks)
4. Resource time allocation
The time allocation of the resource is of 40 hours a week in a 5 days workweek, as
established in the Greenland Working Environment Act. [92]
5. Resource handling capacity
To determine the handling capacity of the resources of the facility, I first calculate
how much time is not directly used for growing purposes, to know how much time
does the employee has left to handle growing trays. In this sense, I estimated with
collaboration of P.Sardella, how much time an employee would allocate to other
tasks not directly related to horticulture, these are presented in Table 3.4.
Maintenance
Cleaning
Changing
and Gowning
Break
Time
(hours)
1
1
1*
1
Table 3.4: Time spent on a day in tasks not horticulture­related
The changing and gowning to get in to the production area of the facility is estimated
to take 15’ per time, if we consider that an employee might leave the facility around
four times a day, it adds up to one hour per day.
Therefore, based on these estimations, I assess that an employee would only allo­
cate 4 hours to tasks that directly pertain to horticulture and the final product.
6. Production plan
Considering the 8 trays per day handling capacity of one employee, I outline the
production plan. The production plan I considered is for a 3 weeks harvesting cycle,
to produce a stable amount of lettuce, in which the employee works on a five­day
workweek.
I followed a holistic approach to establish the production plan, where I assumed that
the processes in Table 3.4, for each tray are all performed in the same day. Hence,
given that each tray takes 30 minutes to process, and considering than an employee
dedicates 4 hours to horticulture related task, I assess that an employee can handle
8 trays in a day.
The production plan I have established considers that the employee works at capac­
ity, handling 8 trays per day for four days and then, a buffer day is allocated weekly
for any unforeseen tasks that may arise and are not taken into account in this plan.
This buffer day is included due to the novelty of the solution, which increases the
36
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:47==
likelihood of unexpected issues directly impacting plant production. The production
scheduled is presented in Table Table 3.5 the buffer days are displayed with B. Con­
sequently, a total of 32 trays are produced each week, equivalent to 16 kg of lettuce.
Over the three­week harvesting cycle, this amounts to a total of 96 trays or 48 kg of
lettuce. The annual production a person can handle is of 832 kg.
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
W1
8
8
8
8
B
W2
8
8
8
8
B
W3
8
8
8
8
B
Table 3.5: Production schedule of growing trays in a 3 week harvesting cycle
7. Workforce capacity boundary
The method I have determined and used to establish the workforce boundary sug­
gests that an individual can mange up to 96 trays each harvesting cycle. Considering
that the capacity of a growing module is of 32 trays, the amount of modules that a
person can handle considering a three week harvesting cycle is of three growing
modules.
Upper Boundary ­ Market Demand (Lettuce Consumption in Sisimiut)
I determined the upper boundary considering which is the size of the facility that would
be able to satisfy the lettuce demand in Sisimiut. Overproduction of lettuce would lead to
a surplus of produce with a reduced market demand. By producing only the amount of
lettuce that can be efficiently sold and distributed within Sisimiut, the facility can minimize
operating costs while maximizing profits. The consumption values used for setting the
upper boundary were obtained from a study conducted by P. Sardella and R. Q. Jørgensen
during their Master’s theses, consequently, the data can be found in table 3.6 [19] [93].
Lettuce consumption in Sisimiut
Consumption rate
2256 kg/year
Table 3.6: Lettuce consumption in Sisimiut [19]
To meet a demand of 2256kg a year, considering the yield per module calculated in 4.4.1
of 278kg, 9 growing modules are needed.
3.6.2
Design of the facility layout
The facility layout is designed with the incorporation of three growing modules, as detailed
in 4.5.1 and considering the defined facility areas and flows from sections 3.4 4.3.
Modules disposition
The aim is to determine which is the optimal modular arrangement to use later as a basis
for the layout design of the facility. The analysis I performed focuses on two different
dispositions, presented in 3.11 each comprising three growing modules and two service
modules. The service modules are added so there is sufficient space in the facility for
non­growing related processes.
• Disposition 1: This configuration offers a fixed layout with limited options for facility
expansion, yet provides a space­efficient design that facilitates optimal heat distri­
bution across modules. However, the arrangement involves integrating shipping
containers oriented both longitudinally and horizontally, which poses challenges
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
37
==PAGE:48==
in achieving design flexibility. Particularly, attaching modules with different orien­
tations presents significant construction obstacles, especially when incorporating
three containers on a single side [57].
• Disposition 2: This configuration offers a flexible layout that enables facility expan­
sion in multiple directions. Specifically, utilizing only horizontally oriented shipping
containers allows for organic and seamless expansion. Additionally, by attaching
the containers at the intended junctions, the facility benefits from a robust construc­
tion approach that streamlines the building process. Furthermore, the configuration
features a space­efficient design that enhances heat distribution across modules.
Considering the advantages and disadvantages, Disposition 1 provides a fixed configura­
tion that establishes a clear and explicit path for future expansion. This leads to a simpler
planning process and greater ease of coordination for scaling up. However, this layout’s
flexibility is limited, which may lead to potential logistical obstacles, particularly if the fa­
cility needs to expand in a different direction. Furthermore, the compact arrangement of
this layout simplifies the heating and distribution of heat throughout the growth modules,
resulting in improved energy efficiency. However, it should be noted that attaching con­
tainers in other junctions aside from the originally designed ones can be challenging from
a construction perspective [57].
Disposition 2, on the other hand, offers a flexible layout that enables the facility to expand
in multiple directions, providing a valuable advantage for future growth. Additionally, at­
taching the containers together at the intended junctions creates a robust and straightfor­
ward construction solution, simplifying the building process. However, this arrangement’s
flexibility makes it more challenging to plan and coordinate future expansions, which may
present logistical difficulties. Conversely, compared to Disposition 1, the design of Dispo­
sition 2 is less compact, resulting in reduced energy efficiency.
Finally, I chose Disposition 2 as the basis for the facility layout design due to its more
adaptable and robust set­up, better aligned with the facility’s needs in Greenland. Al­
though Disposition 1 offers a more compact layout, it presents higher complexity and less
flexibility in terms of future expansion and produce flow design. Therefore, Disposition 2
provides a solid construction solution and the necessary flexibility for future growth and
development.
Figure 3.11: Disposition examples of the facility
38
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:49==
Clean and unclean areas
In the design process I also considered the segregation of clean and unclean areas within
a facility. This is a critical aspect that must be thoroughly considered in food production
facilities. Hence, to prevent the contamination in the lettuce production areas by external
substances or organisms, a special gowning and sterilization procedure must be followed
to enter these ”Clean” areas. Additionally, I also considered a single point of entry and
exit for operators accessing the clean areas, to minimize the risk of of pathogen intrusion.
The remaining areas that do not require gowning and sterilization are termed ”Unclean.”
Production Flows
The production flows, as the ones described in Figure 3.6, are also a key aspect that I con­
sidered during the design process of the facility layout. Due to space and area constraints
imposed by the rigid structure of shipping containers, it is crucial to carefully evaluate the
different production flows within the facility, to ensure optimal efficiency and productivity.
3.6.3
Distribution Channels
During the designing process of the facility I also considered which are the distribution
channels that the facility focuses on. The primary distribution channels for produce are
the local supermarkets, such as Brugseni and Pissifik, located in Sisimiut. Therefore, most
of the lettuce produced in the facility is sold through these supermarkets. However, a shop
within the facility is also incorporated, so the public can also purchase produce directly.
This strategy would bring the public closer to the facility, rising the public’s awareness and
providing them with an opportunity to learn about the entire production process of greens
and get them involved.
3.6.4
Modular Assembly and Refurbishment
Regarding the assembly of the modules together and its refurbishment to meet the build­
ing characteristics of the facility, I would recommend to follow the principles outlined in
the literature review section 2.2.2.
3.7
Facility Services Set­up and Integration of Utilities
This section introduces the services set­up utilized in the facility to ensure its regular
operations, and how the utilities are integrated into the facility.
3.7.1
Facility services set­up
Power Control System
The same solution used in EDEN ISS and described in 2.1.7 is recommended, since the
facility I am designing has similar nature to EDEN ISS.
Atmosphere Management System
The principles used in EDEN ISS and described in 2.1.7 are recommended. Therefore,
the facility has two different atmosphere management systems, one for the growing mod­
ules (clean areas) that consists on a closed­loop system, and a fresh­air ventilation system
for the service modules (unclean areas).
Additionally, I have calculated following the Danish Standard [94], the ventilation require­
ments in the service modules of the facility, as well as the inside temperature for which
the system should start introducing fresh air into the facility.
Furthermore, I determined which is the ideal temperature and the optimal humidity range
in the growing areas of the facility, from the input I received from P.Sardella.
Thermal Control System
The thermal control system uses passive thermal control, which is the insulation placed
in the shipping containers that form the facility. Additionally, the active thermal system in
the facility are the LED lights that provide heat to the environment.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
39
==PAGE:50==
LED Lighting as Thermal System for the facility
Assumptions
• Desired temperature in the facility is of 19ºC.
• There are no internal walls within the modules of the facility.
• The modules thermal transmittance can be assumed to be the same as for a 20ft
isolated shipping container.
According to [17], the LED lighting system installed in this type of facilities should be ca­
pable of generating sufficient heat to maintain the required temperature levels throughout
the facility, thereby eliminating the need for a continuous heating system. However, to
try to demonstrate if this statement is true in a facility made out of shipping containers I
conducted an assessment to establish which is the viability of utilizing LED lamps as a
source of heat for the facility. On this regard, I performed a calculation to determine the
minimum outdoor temperature for which the LED lamps can compensate the heat losses
trough both walls and ventilation in a facility with no internal walls and considering the
three growing and two service modules. The desired service temperature for the growing
module is set at 19°C, as specified in [19], and in this calculation I assume that the desired
temperature of the whole facility is 19°C.
First, I present diagram 3.12 which provides the area trough which there are heat losses
trough walls, roof and ceiling of the facility.
Figure 3.12: Facility dimensions
Thereafter, I present formula 3.3 which I use to calculate the heat lost trough these. I have
assumed that the transmittance of the modules that made out the facility is the same as
for a shipping container with insulation.
Qw = U × A × ∆T
(3.3)
Where:
• Qw: Heat transfer rate through walls, roof and ceiling.
• U: Thermal transmittance. For an insulated 20ft container this value is 0.47 Wh/m2K
[95]
• A: Heat transfer surface. 310.75 m2, considering the walls, ceiling and floor of the
container.
• ΔT: Temperature difference across the heat transfer area.
40
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:51==
Then, formula 3.4 provides the heat lost through ventilation. For this facility, there is only
heat lost to ventilation in the two service modules using a fresh air ventilation system. The
growing modules have not been considered in this case due to their closed ventilation
system.
Qa = ˙m × Cair × ∆T × (1 −η)
(3.4)
Where:
• Qa: Heat transfer rate through ventilation.
•
˙m: Air flow rate (m3/h). Considering the calculation in 4.6.1, this is 50.4 m3/h per
service container (100.8 m3/h).
• Cair: Air’s specific heat capacity. 0.33 Wh/m3K
• ΔT: Temperature difference across the heat transfer area.
• QIN: Desired temperature inside the facility, in this case 19°C.
• η: Heat exchanger efficiency. 70% efficiency assumed.
The LED lamps’ minimum service temperature occurs when the heat generated by the
lamps is equal to the heat losses through walls and ventilation. Thus, considering this the
following equations are presented:
LEDs Heat = Qa + Qw
(3.5)
Qa + Qw = ∆T × (( ˙m × Cair × (1 −η)) + (U × A))
(3.6)
Finally, the heat provided by the LED lamps is equal to the lights consumption, since all the
energy consumed by the LED lamps end up as energy input to the space due to radiation
[27].
Nutrient Delivery System ­ Technical Supply
The nutrient delivery system requires several equipment that must be placed outside of
the growing module. These are:
• Nutrient solution tank: The nutrient solution tanks contains the solution provided
to the plants. To supply the nutrient to the plants there is a pump, so the solution
reaches the plants. This tank also have sensors incorporated such as of pH, EC,
temperature and water level. Then, during maintenance, the employees can adjust
the different components of the solution to keep it within the desired values. Below
the nutrient solution tank there are the stock nutrient reservoir and the acid/base
control solution.
• Fresh and waste water tanks: There are two different tanks, one used for the fresh
water and another used for the waste water, and these are placed in the sub­floor of
the facility. The fresh water tank provides water to the nutrient delivery system tank
and the sinks in the facility.
• Stock nutrient reservoirs: The nutrient reservoir tanks are below the fresh and
waste water tanks, with dosing pumps on top of the nutrient solution task.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
41
==PAGE:52==
3.7.2
Utilities Integration
The availability of utilities in Greenland differs significantly from what is common in Europe,
as previously discussed in 2.3. This a key aspect to consider during the design process of
the facility, since the facility fully relies on utilities being available. Therefore, in case that
a specific utility is not available, it is important to study how this utility can be integrated
in the facility by using another solution. For this facility, the utilities that are necessary
are water, electricity and sewage. On this regard, this section presents an interview I
had with Qeqqata District Manager of Nukissiorfiit, the sole utilities provider for the whole
Greenland. Finally, the availability state of utilities in the selected plot is also described.
Interview with Nukissiorfiit
Figure 3.13: Nukissiorfiit Logo
Nukissiorfiit, greenlandic, is the company that supplies Greenland with main utilities: elec­
tricity, heating and water. Therefore, this is the only company that has information regard­
ing the utilities provision in Sisimiut and its practicalities.
The meeting with Nukissiorfiit was held physically in the offices they have in Sisimiut.
There, I met with Jan Zachariassen, the Qeqqata district manager of Nukissiorfiit. On the
electricity mix of Sisimiut, he said that half of the energy consumed in Sisimiut is produced
by the hydropower plant close to the city. Nonetheless, he pointed out that this electricity
produced by the hydropower plant is enough to cover the supply related to the electricity
lighting in the city. Additionally, when asked about other sources of sustainable electricity,
he said that their main focus is on wind mills. However, these are really expensive to install
in Greenland, but in a long term perspective this could br a solution for the settlements.
Regarding the water supply, he mentioned that only a few buildings in Sisimiut are still
being provided with water by truck, around 70 houses in 2022. Then, he said that in case
we would build the facility in a plot without a water pipe connection, we should consider
installing one.
Utilities availability in the selected plot
As discussed in the previous section in selection of location 3.2, one of the main attributes
when considering which plot to choose is the amount of utilities that are already available
in that area. Therefore, the selected plot, plot B8.1.4, has all the required utilities already
provisioned by Nukissiorfiit and the municipality, these are electricity, water and sewage.
Therefore, no further study on this topic is needed.
3.8
Carbon Footprint of the facility
Indoor farming has emerged as a promising solution that has the potential to enable agri­
culture in any part of the world, including regions with harsh climatic conditions. However,
this approach demands substantial energy inputs and may result in a significant carbon
footprint, which must be carefully evaluated to assess its overall sustainability. There­
fore, quantifying the CO2 emissions linked to the production of greens in such facilities is
crucial for identifying opportunities to enhance the sustainability of the system.
To estimate the carbon footprint of a facility it is necessary to assess greenhouse gas
emissions throughout the entire life cycle. There exist several approaches to calculate
the carbon footprint, but one of the most widely used is The Greenhouse Gas Protocol
42
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:53==
(GHG). To determine greenhouse gas emissions, the protocol employs CO2 equivalent,
which denotes the quantity of CO2 that would generate the same warming effect as a
specific greenhouse gas multiplied by its Global Warming Potential [96].
In this study, I have defined as the functional unit of the calculation as the delivery of
1 kilogram of lettuce yearly. Once the functional unit is established, I identify the sys­
tem boundaries of the carbon footprint scope. The boundaries encompass all processes
relevant to the cultivation and packaging of the lettuce product, without considering the
emissions directly related to producing and shipping the equipment, except for the LED
lights.
Once I have established the functional unit and system boundaries, the subsequent step
is to evaluate the emissions associated with the facility. To conduct this estimation, I
have followed the three scopes outlined in the Greenhouse Gas Protocol. Additionally,
to determine the carbon footprint of the facility, the emission inventories are analyzed for
three distinct stages within the facility’s lifecycle: construction, cultivation, and packaging.
I have performed this assessment using the inventories framework presented in [6].
3.8.1
Carbon Footprint Calculation Assumptions
• The modules are manufacture and equipped in Europe and then imported to Green­
land.
• The transportation of the modules with the equipment that they have inside is the
only transportation emissions considered in the carbon footprint calculations, as I
consider the transportation of the other elements negligible in comparison.
• The facility is close to the final consumers, thus waste and transport are assumed
to be negligible.
• LED lamps are the only equipment that I consider the emissions related to producing
and shipping.
• Growing trays are made of PP plastic and weight 1kg.
• I have assumed the different lifespan values of the elements of the construction
inventory.
3.8.2
Construction Inventories
In the carbon footprint of the construction inventory I have included the emissions associ­
ated with the shipping containers physical structure and its transportation to Sisimiut, the
racks and trays used for growing plants, and the LED lights serving as an artificial light
source. The corresponding references for the emission factors are available in the table
below, in case an assumption has not been clearly stated.
Trays and LED lights Inventories
I have estimated the inventory related to the growing tray assuming that each tray weights
1 kg, and its re­used every 3 weeks. Therefore, every growing tray produces 8.7 kg of
lettuce per year. Additionally, considering a lifespan of 5 years for the growing trays, their
inventory is 0.023 kg of PP plastic.
Similarly, considering that LED lamps have a lifespan of 5 years, and that each LED
lamps produces 8.7 kg of lettuce yearly, 0.023 LED lamps utilized for every 1 kg of lettuce
produced in the facility within the lifespan.
Freight Shipping Inventory (Modules)
To calculate the carbon footprint associated with freight shipping, I have considered only
the emissions produced by the shipping containers modules used to build the facility. I
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
43
==PAGE:54==
made this assumption based on that other materials transported to Sisimiut have minimal
impact on the overall CO2 footprint, as their weight is relatively small in the context of the
entire project.
To provide context for the shipping logistics, the planned freight shipping is solely oper­
ated by Royal Arctic Line, with departure from the port of Aarhus in Denmark[97]. The
distance covered to reach Sisimiut is approximately 5035 km. In this inventory I only take
into account the freight related to five retrofitted shipping containers, repurposed to serve
as modules for an indoor farming facility. It is assumed that each refurbished container
has a weight of 5000 kg, including the basic equipment, resulting in a total of 25,000 kg
of freight to be transported from Denmark to Greenland, based on the weight of EDEN
ISS modules when they were shipped to Antarctica. [98] Additionally, the facility’s yearly
lettuce production is estimated to be 832 kg. Therefore, the t.km associated with 1 kg of
lettuce is calculated to be 151.3 t.km.
Figure 3.14: Mary Arctica Vessel mooring in Sisimiut Port. Photography taken by me
Construction Inventories Overview
In this section I present the inventory of the quantities of different elements utilized in
lettuce production at the facility. This data is presented in Table 3.7. In cases where the
reference indicates ”Not Applicable,” the value has been previously calculated within the
same section.
Meanwhile, table 3.8 illustrates the equivalent carbon dioxide emissions associated to the
materials used in the construction of the facility. The data on carbon dioxide equivalents
has been compiled from multiple literature sources, which are listed in the table.
44
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:55==
Stage
Process/input
Unit
Value
Reference
Lifespan
Infrastructure
Steel structure
kg
0.029
[99]
20 years
Plastic trays
kg
0.022
N.A.
5 years
Aluminum racks
kg
0.035
[6]
10 years
LED lights
no.
0.023
N.A.
5 years
Transportation
Ship freight
t.km
7.57
N.A.
20 years
Table 3.7: Construction Environmental Inventories
Type of Element
kg CO2eq per Unit
Reference
Steel (kg)
1.89
[100]
PP Plastic (kg)
1.586
[101]
Aluminum (kg)
4.80
[102]
LED Lamp (unit)
2.4
[103]
Maritime Shipping (t.km)
0.135
[104]
Table 3.8: CO2eq per Element of Construction Inventories
3.8.3
Cultivation Inventories
On the inventory analysis of the cultivation process I have taken into account various fac­
tors, including the growing media, fertilizers, consumed water and energy consumption
associated with LED lights and atmosphere management systems. In estimating utility
inputs, specifically electricity and water, data from [6] is utilized, which reports an average
electricity consumption of 15 kWh per kilogram of lettuce produced and a water require­
ment of 1.6 liters per kilogram of hydroponically grown lettuce. Furthermore, I analysed
the fertiliser separately, considering the different components that it contains form the
data gathered on [6].
Overview of the cultivation inventories
The cultivation inventory overview showcases the quantities of various materials and utility
sources employed to produce 1 kg of lettuce at the facility. Furthermore, the data sources
used to compile this inventory are also provided. This data is presented in table 3.9.
Stage
Process/input
Unit
Value
Reference
Growing media
Rockwool
kg
0.06
[101]
Fertiliser
N
kg
0.002
[6]
P
kg
0.001
K
kg
0.002
Ca
kg
0.002
Mg
kg
0.0004
S
kg
0.0005
Fe
kg
0.0001
Other inputs
Electricity
kWh
15
[6]
Water
L
1.6
Table 3.9: Environmental cultivation inventory
The carbon dioxide equivalent of various items assessed in the cultivation inventory is
displayed in Table 3.10. The data presented in the table is derived from multiple sources,
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
45
==PAGE:56==
which are indicated in the table. In particular, the electricity data used is sourced from the
annual report of Nukissiorfiit. Lastly, the carbon footprint of water presented in the table
is an average value for a liter of water consumed, and it may not be specific to Sisimiut.
Type of Element
kg CO2eq per unit
Reference
Rockwool (kg)
1.22
[105]
N (kg)
7,8
[106]
P (kg)
0.56
[107]
K (kg)
0.43
[107]
Ca (kg)
1.5
[108]
Mg (kg)
0.3
[109]
S (kg)
2.38
[110]
Fe (kg)
0.18
[109]
Electricity (kw)
0.0117
[111]
Water (L)
0.004
[112]
Table 3.10: CO2eq per Element of Construction Inventories
3.8.4
Packaging Inventories
For the packaging of the lettuce produce at the facility, the inventory analysis considers
the carbon footprint associated with the plastic and cardboard used for packaging. The
quantities considered are derived from the data provided in [6].
Overview of the packaging inventories
The inventory of packaging materials used in lettuce production and their respective car­
bon footprints are shown in Table 3.11, along with the sources where this data has been
retrieved. The carbon dioxide equivalent of the items assessed in the packaging inventory
is displayed along with the sources where these data is retrieved in Table 3.11.
Process/Input
Unit
Value
Reference
Cardboard
kg
0.026
[6]
Plastic
kg
0.006
[6]
Table 3.11: Environmental Packaging Inventories
Type of element
kg CO2eq per unit
Reference
Cardboard (kg)
0.262
[113]
Plastic LDPE (kg)
0.0023
[114]
Table 3.12: CO2eq per Element of Packaging Inventories
46
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:57==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Selecting the Location
In this section I present the final results obtained using the Multiplicative Analytic Hierarchy
Process, also called REMBRANDT, a Multi Criteria Decision Analysis tool, to choose a
location for the Indoor Farming facility. Then, I analyse these results, to finally conclude in
which would be the best suitable location to place the Indoor Farming Facility in Sisimiut.
4.1.1
Multiplicative AHP or REMBRANDT Results and Analysis
After applying the Multiplicative AHP or REMBRANDT methodology, I obtained a ranking
on the final eleven alternatives that I took into consideration, since these are the ones that
fulfil with established thresholds. The extended results obtained with the REMBRANDT
methodology are provided in the appendix of this thesis. The final ranking with the scores
and the weights of the different criteria can be found , in Tables 4.1 and 4.2.
Area
Plot
Score
Ranking
B8.1
4
0.2497
1
B8.1
6
0.2415
2
B8.1
7
0.2415
2
B8.1
8
0.2415
2
B8.1
16
0.0056
3
B8.2
A
0.0048
4
B8.2
AA
0.0048
4
B8.2
B
0.0048
4
B8.2
BB
0.0048
4
B8.2
C
0.0005
5
B8.2
CC
0.0005
5
Table 4.1: Scores and Ranking of the Alternatives
Utilities
Price
Surface
Criteria Weights
0,9735
0,0024
0,0241
Table 4.2: Criteria Weights
Considering this ranking, there are four alternatives that outperform when compared to
the rest, all of them located in the business area B8.1. These alternatives are Plot 4,
6, 7 and 8. Plot 4 has a slightly higher score than the others. The four alternatives are
displayed in Figure 4.1.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.1: Location of the Final Plot Alternatives
4.1.2
Final Assessment
The score difference among the four alternatives is minimal, with a difference of only one­
eight­thousandth. Given this narrow margin, I have decided to conduct a final assessment
of the plots considering the amount of groundwork required for each. Groundwork is a
highly expensive aspect of the overall construction process, making it a critical factor
in the final selection. In order to assess the amount of groundwork required for each
plot, I have estimated the the slope percentage of each plot. Although there are several
other variables to consider when evaluating groundwork requirements, slope percentage
is used as a preliminary criteria for an initial assessment of the different alternatives [115].
The slope percentage is calculated by determining the highest and lowest altitude points
of each plot, as well as the linear distance between these two points. I consider that the
plot with the lowest slope percentage to require the least amount of groundwork and this
is selected as the most suitable option based on this criteria. I have collected all the data
through NunaGIS, and the resulting slope percentages for the final four plots can be found
in Table 4.3.
Area
Plot
Slope
B8.1
4
11,44%
B8.1
6
20,63%
B8.1
7
15,97%
B8.1
8
13,11%
Table 4.3: Slope percentage of the final four location alternatives
4.1.3
Selected location
After evaluating the REMBRANDT ranking and conducting an assessment of the amount
of groundwork required for each plot, the optimal location is determined to be plot number
48
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:59==
4 in the B8.1 business area, which has a surface area of 6365 m2. This decision is based
on two factors: Firstly, it is the top­ranked plot according to the REMBRANDT analysis,
and secondly, it has the smallest slope percentage, making it the most suitable option
based on the groundwork requirements.
4.2
Modular Configuration of the Facility
In this section, I outline the selected options for the modular configuration of the indoor
farming facility. The decision­making process is detailed in the corresponding section of
the methodology chapter.
4.2.1
Modular Unit
Based on the methodology detailed in Section 3.3, I have chosen modular the shipping
container as a modular unit. This option was preferred over custom­built modules due
to its established usage and cost­effectiveness, as well as its suitability for Greenland’s
current supply chain. Moreover, employing retrofitted, pre­owned shipping containers
would offer a more sustainable solution to the project. The chosen shipping container is
the 20­foot High Cube since it is more convenient option for the project’s overall logistics.
4.2.2
Modular Arrangement
After assessing two technical setups, the preferred choice is the Grid Configuration. I
based the decision on two factors: firstly, the set­up offers better arrangements for facility
expansion, maintenance, and servicing. In particular, from a Greenlandic perspective, it is
crucial to have a system that is easy to maintain since there is a shortage of skilled workers
in the area. Additionally, if a problem could not be resolved on site, the service module
could be shipped back to Denmark for repair. Another notable aspect of this configuration
is its potential vulnerability since all the services setup are contained in a single module,
this risk can be mitigated by keeping a spare service module that can be integrated with
the entire facility in the event of a failure in the original module.
4.3
Indoor Farming Facility Areas
I have identified four distinct areas to group the processes. A summary of these areas
and the corresponding processes can be found in the overview presented in 4.5.
4.3.1
Ad­hoc Area
The ad­hoc area aggregates those processes that are not related to the horticulture pro­
cesses themselves, nor to the packaging processes or related to the technology services.
Therefore, this area is formed by the preparation and gowning processes, before access­
ing the growing area, and selling the vegetables. The processes in this area are allocated
in both growing and service module.
4.3.2
Packaging Area
The packaging area aggregates those processes that take place from the point of har­
vesting to the final storage and shipment or sale of plants. The processes in this area are
in the service module.
4.3.3
Growing Area
All processes directly related to horticulture, from equipment cleaning to the final plant
harvest, are found within the growing area. The processes in this area are in the growing
module.
4.3.4
Technology Area
Finally, the technology area is formed by those processes directly related to the technology
and technical service of the different equipment of the facility.The processes in this area
are in the service module.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.2: Production Areas and Processes
4.4
Base Module Design
This section presents the design of a base growing module, obtained following the method­
ology presented in Section 3.5. I have designed the service modules so these use a simi­
lar structural configuration as the growing modules, so I only introduce an overview of the
particularities of the service modules
The service module is an adapted base growing module, with a similar configuration.
Then, I only present the design for a base growing module, that is used as base for the
later design of the whole facility.
4.4.1
Hydroponic Solutions
Hydroponic Technique
I have chosen the Nutrient Film Technique as the basis for designing the facility. This
decision is made due to its simple and low­maintenance arrangement, which is well­suited
considering a Greenlandic perspective.
Growing racks and trays
I have sized the growing racks and trays considering the configuration presented in 4.5,
additionally to the dimensions of trays used in EDEN ISS. The configuration of the growing
racks and trays is displayed in the following figure 4.3.
The growing tray is formed by three items:
• Growing lid: The growing lid serves as a perforated platform for holding plants and
is designed to seamlessly integrate with the bottom component of the growing tray.
It is worth noting that the growing lid is the sole constituent that changes during
the transplanting procedure, resulting in the utilization of distinct growing lids with
different spacing pre­ and post­transplantation. The substrate that is going to be
used is Rockwool.
• Water bed: The water bed is the tray where the nutrient solution flows.
50
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:61==
• LED light: The LED lamp does not form part of the growing tray per se, but this is
attached to the bottom of the water bed. The LED lamp provides light for the plants
placed on the below growing tray. On the top level, the lamps are placed above the
rack.
The growing tray has the dimensions presented in table 4.4. This dimensions are chosen
considering the work done in EDEN ISS and the advice of P. Sardella, Project Manager
at Nordic Harvest.
Length (mm)
Width (mm)
Total growing area (m2)
600
500
0.3
Table 4.4: Dimensions of the growing tray
Figure 4.3: Diagram of the growing tray and rack
Figure 4.4: Growing tray
Regarding the growing racks, the dimensions of these are presented in the Table 4.5. I
have calculated the dimensions of these considering the space allocated to growing at
the module configuration section, the internal dimensions of the module after placing the
structural solutions and the chosen growing tray size. By using this dimensions, the rack
can accommodate 4 growing trays per level within 4 levels, 16 growing trays per rack,
what translates to 32 growing trays per module. Therefore, a module can produce in
every growing cycle 16kg of lettuce, considering a yield of 500g per growing tray, which
translates to a yearly yield of 278kg.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
51
==PAGE:62==
Length (mm)
Width (mm)
Height (mm)
3650
540
2220
Table 4.5: Dimensions of the growing rack
Nutrient delivery system
Most of the components of the nutrient delivery system are placed at the service module
of the facility. Nevertheless, there are some of the parts of the system that are placed in
the growing module, such as the supply and drainage pipes, and high­pressure pumps
that supply the nutrient solution to the plants. The pipes are placed in the sub­floor of the
facility, and these are connected to the solution tanks outside the growing module.
Lighting system
Within the most used lighting systems in the growing sector, I choose the LED lamps since
they provide a solution with better energy efficiency and more adaptable to requirements
of the crops. To fulfill the lighting requirements of this project, pointed in 3.5.2 it is essential
to provide a light intensity of 150 µmol/m2∙s1 for 16 hours of light followed by 8 hours of
darkness. The LED lamps should also fit below the growing tray, so these should have
the same dimensions as in Table 4.4.
4.4.2
Design Configuration
I present the design of the base growing module, that is the same in terms of structure
than the service module. Additionally, the core of the whole facility are the growing mod­
ules. Therefore, I only present the final design of the base growing module. The design I
present outlines the arrangement of processes and sections within the shipping container,
taking into account the structural configuration, ensuring that the final usable area meets
the necessary structural requirements and sizing. The layout of the growing module de­
sign includes the four areas outlined in section 3.5, as well as a corridor that meets the
requirements stated in the same section.
The dedicated spaces within the growing module are used solely to store the materials
and equipment required for the processes outlined in the section. The corridor has a width
of 1 meter and serves as both a working area and a transit space for facility operators. It is
worth noting that the germination section is designed as a closed, dark space to facilitate
the germination process.
I have arranged the sections within the growing module keeping the modular approach in
mind. As shown in figure 4.5, the available free spaces on the right and top right of the
module have been designated for connecting the base growing module to other growing
or service modules. The dimensions of the facility’s areas have been determined based
on the requirements of the EDEN ISS project.[44] Finally, the different sections within the
growing module are detailed, all within the growing area detailed in Figure 4.3, as well as
the tasks performed in each of these.
• Cleaning and preparing: The cleaning and preparation area comprises a sink, a
bin, and a trolley. This section is dedicated to cleaning and preparing the growing
trays for re­use. The used Rockwool is disposed of, and the roots of the lettuce
are cut and discarded. After cleaning the tray, new Rockwool is placed inside in
preparation for the next seeding process.
• Germination: The germination section is where trays are placed after the seedlings
have been transferred. This is the stage where the first sprouts start to appear, and
52
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:63==
the trays can subsequently be moved to the growing area. It is essential that this
section remains completely dark, to facilitate the germination process.
• Equipment: This area serves as the central location for all equipment and materials
necessary for the various horticulture processes, encompassing multiple steps.
The figures presented below, 4.5 and 4.7, showcase the final design. Figure 4.5 illustrates
the various sections within the module, including the entrance and potential modular ex­
pansion areas. Meanwhile, Figure 4.7 provides a detailed overview of the processes
carried out in each section, which are the detailed in the processes breakdown in the
methodology in Figure 3.7.
Figure 4.5: Areas in Growing Module
Figure 4.6: Flows in the growing module, refer to 3.7 for the name of the processes
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
53
==PAGE:64==
4.4.3
Service Module Particularities
The service module presents a similar structural configuration to the growing module, with
a centered aisle with allocated space at both sides of the corridor to place equipment.
The main difference is that the service module has a specially allocated area to enter the
facility, and another one to enter the growing area. Particularly, the internal configuration
and placement of equipment in the service module changes depending on the nature
of the service module, considering if this is solely used to place the service equipment
of the facility, since these modules can be used as Ad­Hoc, Packaging and Technology
areas. Therefore, the structure of a base service module would be similar to Figure 4.7,
but without the growing related equipment and sections separations.
4.5
Facility Layout
This section exhibits the ultimate layout of the facility, obtained through the methodology
proposed in the analogous section of this thesis 3.6. It includes a presentation of the
layout comprising various areas and sections, along with a detailed description of the
new areas and sections. The people flow (including staff and customers) and the tray
and lettuce movement within the facility are depicted in a facility diagram. Moreover, a
diagram of the facility’s clean and unclean areas is presented in figure 4.7.
4.5.1
Sizing boundary
The layout of the facility is designed with consideration to the workload that can be handled
by a single person, taking into account the modular nature of the design. This approach
allows for scalability by adding more modules if necessary to meet the entire lettuce de­
mand in Sisimiut or to grow other plants, vegetables, or fruits in the future. This ensures
that the facility maintains its operational effectiveness while providing the flexibility re­
quired for future growth. Therefore, the upper boundary can be used as an expansion
limit to which the facility would be meeting the lettuce demand in Sisimiut.
4.5.2
Modules and areas in the facility layout
The facility is formed by five modules, three growing modules (G1, G2 and G3) and two
service modules (S1 and S2), as can be seen in Figure 4.7.
The modules have a similar physical configuration, which makes them easier to construct.
Their design similarity also facilitates their replication, construction, and maintenance, and
enhances their interoperability. The modules are configured with a 1­meter corridor in the
center of the container, and equipment areas on both sides of the central aisle.
Particularly, modules S1 and S2 have a similar configuration in terms of sections distribu­
tion, nevertheless the processes allocated to each of the areas are different. The areas
that are common in both modules are the following:
• Cold Porch: The cold porch is used as an air­lock between the outside and the
inside environment of the facility. Thus, providing an extra insulation to the facility.
• Airlock and gowning: This area functions as an intermediate space between the
environment inside and outside of the growing areas. Furthermore, this area serves
as a gowning and de­gowning area, as well as a sterilization chamber for personnel
before entering or leaving the growing area.
The rest of the areas in modules S1 and S2 are described below:
• S1
This module contains the equipment required to ensure the operability of the facility
in terms of energy, climate control and the irrigation system.
54
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.7: Diagram of the Facility
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
55
==PAGE:66==
– Power Control and Distribution System: Contains the different devices used
for the energy supply system of the facility.
– Fresh Air Supply System: This area contains the instruments and equipment
to supply fresh air to S1 and S2 modules.
– Growing Atmosphere Management System: This area contains the equip­
ment required to control the atmosphere at the growing areas of the facility, so
the parameters are within the established parameters.
– Nutrient Delivery System: This section contains the equipment and instru­
ments to ensure the supply of nutrient solution to the growing trays.
– Thermal Control System: It contains the equipment required to cool down the
LED lights used as an artificial light source at the growing racks.
• S2
This module includes areas dedicated to practical tasks that are not directly asso­
ciated with horticultural processes taking place in the growing modules but are still
essential within the facility.
– Waste room: The area is used to place the different waste gathered in the
facility, as well as to place the gowns and clean them.
– Shop: This area is designated for selling the greens produced in the facility to
private customers.
– W.C.: This section contains a basic toilet to be used by the facility’s personnel.
– Office: The facility also contains a space to perform basic office tasks.
– Packaging: This area is used to weight, label, pack and store the lettuce pro­
duced in the facility.
The modules G1, G2, and G3 are similar to the base growing module, which is outlined
in 4.4.2. However, there are minor variations among them in terms of the placement of
the equipment area, resulting from the connections between modules.
4.5.3
Clean and Unclean Areas at the Facility
The facility is divided in two zones, as it has been previously described in the analogous
section of the methodology 3.6. Find the areas considered clean and unclean in figure
4.8.
Overall, the areas that are not directly associated with the horticultural growing phases are
designated as unclean and are situated outside of the growing modules. This results in
the growing modules G1, G2, and G3 being categorized as clean areas, while the service
modules S1 and S2 are classified as unclean areas. As a result, a specialized gowning
process and sterilization are necessary to access the clean area of the facility from the
unclean area.
56
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.8: Clean and unclean areas at the facility
4.5.4
Flows in the Facility
The flows in the facility are also another aspect that has been thoroughly regarded, since
in a facility of this kind and space restricted it must be clear how the different flows are
managed. Thus, I have considered six flows during the designing process of the facility:
the operators, the customers, the plants and trays, the waste and the materials. These
flows are further detailed below.
Growing Area Operators
The facility has a single access point for entry and exit, limiting the access of growing area
operators exclusively to the growing area. This strict access policy aims to prevent the
contamination of the growing areas by pathogenic substances.
Figure 4.9: Operators flow in the facility
Customers
Customers are only allowed to enter the facility through S2, and to access the selling area
of the facility.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.10: Customer flow in the facility
Trays and Plants
Initially, the movement of trays and plants is uniform, with plants being held in trays until
they reach maturity and are ready for harvesting, which marks the decoupling point. Fol­
lowing the harvest, the trays are transported back to the cleaning and preparation area,
where they are processed and prepared for the next growing cycle. In contrast, the plants
are transported to the packaging area for packing and commercialization. Figure 4.11
illustrates the movement of trays and plants in a single module, and this flow is the same
in the other growing modules.
Figure 4.11: Trays and plants flow in one growing module of the facility
Waste Flow
Any waste generated in each growing module is collected in a bin located in the cleaning
and preparation area of this module. Once full, the bin is transferred to the waste room
for disposal in the designated area assigned by the municipality.
Figure 4.12: Waste flow in one growing module in the facility
Material­Equipment Flow
The equipment and materials required for the various processes taking place within a
module are stored in the designated equipment area. These materials are subsequently
58
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:69==
utilized in different sections of the module as needed.
Figure 4.13: Material and Equipment flow of one growing module in the facility
4.5.5
Modular expansion
The facility’s layout is intentionally designed to allow for modularity, providing significant
flexibility for future expansions. The expansion of the facility at this stage is not limited by
the size of the plot, as previously mentioned in section 4.1.3, which provides approximately
6300 m2 of surface area. Therefore, when planning for a future expansion, it is important
to consider practical placement of new modules, the balance between service and growing
modules, and any potential effects on the facility’s workflow.
It is important to note that the Qeqqata Municipality regulations 3.2.1 stipulate that when
utilizing shipping containers as a building solution, no more than six containers of the
entire structure should be visible. In the event that additional containers are required, a
façade must be employed to conceal them. One solution that could provide a façade is
using cladding. A frame is attached to the shipping container, and then the cladding is
attached to the frame. Additionally, this solution provides some space to place insulation
between the corrugated walls of the container and the cladding, and also a more appealing
look to the shipping container.
Figure 4.14: Example of cladding applied on a shipping container [116]
Practical placement of new modules
There are two expansion options for a future scale­up of the facility. These are depicted
in figure 4.15. These are described below:
• Expansion Option 1 (Blue): This option allows for the facility to expand without
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
59
==PAGE:70==
any changes to the layout of the other modules. The new modules would simply be
attached to the areas indicated by the blue arrows.
• Expansion Option 2 (Orange): This option requires rearranging the layout of the
other modules to make space for the new module connection. However, it would
still be feasible to expand the facility in this direction in the future if needed.
Figure 4.15: Possible Expansion Options of the facility
Service and Growing Modules Balance
The goal of expanding the facility is to increase the production of greens. Therefore, the
design should prioritize maximizing the growing space by incorporating as many growing
modules as possible and minimizing the number of service modules. Nevertheless, there
still needs to be a balance so the service areas can still provide the required services to
the rest of the facility.
The amount of modules a service module can service depends mainly on the equipment
that it is installed on it. It should be noted that the capacity of the equipment in the facility
is beyond the scope of this thesis. However, further research should be conducted on
this aspect to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the service capacity of the
facility. As a general rule, the technical service module (S1) is expected to serve up to
five growing modules. However, this assumption is based on a rule of thumb and does
not take into account the capacity of the facility’s equipment.
Expansion effects on the flows
The facility has been designed to accommodate future expansion without significantly
impacting the existing flow. This is because the primary entry (S1­G1) and exit (G3­S2)
points of the growing area will remain unchanged even after expansion. As a result, there
should be minimal disruption to the existing flow.
However, when a new service module is added, it must be connected to the growing
area. Although this new connection should not serve as the primary entrance or exit to
the growing area, since the facility should always try to minimize the number of entry and
exit points to mitigate the risk of pathogens entering the facility.
4.6
Services Set­Up of the Facility
This section outlines the essential characteristics that the service equipment within the
facility must have to ensure a seamless operation. The purpose is to present this infor­
mation for further analysis in upcoming projects.
60
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:71==
4.6.1
Atmosphere Management System
The facility has two distinct atmosphere management systems: one for the unclean areas
S1 and S2, and another for the clean growing areas G1, G2, and G3. The setup for each
section is described below.
Unclean Areas (Fresh Air Supply System)
The ventilation of service modules is determined by the Danish standard [94], which stip­
ulates a minimum ventilation rate of 7 liters per second per person. To comply with this
standard, the ventilation system in this area is designed for two people working simulta­
neously. This means that the air supply system should be able to provide a minimum flow
rate of 504 cubic meters per hour. For areas where fertilizers are stored or used, higher
air change rates are recommended to maintain air quality. Alternatively, a dedicated ven­
tilation system can be installed specifically for this area.
On the other hand, if the temperature reaches the maximum recommended level of 26°C,
[117], the flow control valve should activate to allow fresh air into the facility and cool it
down. The system also includes an electrical heater to maintain a consistent temperature
of the fresh air flow by warming up external air to a suggested temperature of 5°C, as
recommended by literature [44].
Clean Areas (Growing Atmosphere Management System)
The clean areas have a separated enclosed air circulation system. Based on research
by [19], the ideal temperature range for optimum plant growth is between 18­24°C, while
the optimal relative humidity range falls between 70­80%. Specifically for lettuce, from
the input I received from P. Sardella, the ideal temperature is of 19°C. Consequently, the
Growing Atmosphere Management System functions as a closed loop, ensuring that any
deviations from these optimal conditions are rectified by the system.
Additionally, as pointed in [118], plants release half of the CO2 they capture. Conse­
quently, the growing module atmosphere would be at a deficit overall requiring CO2 en­
richment. Thus, to ensure optimal plant growth a CO2 enrichment system should be
placed in the atmosphere management system of the clean areas.
4.6.2
LED lighting system
The facility is equipped with LED lamps capable of providing a photosynthetic photon flux
density (PPFD) of 150 µmol m­2 s­1. A total of 96 LED lamps are utilized in the facility,
operating on a light cycle of 16 hours and a dark cycle of 8 hours, as outlined in section
4.4.1.
Energy Consumption
To calculate the energy consumption, I took the Groplanner O series 150W grow light [119]
as an example, which offers a dimmable set­up with a power rating of 150W. Assuming
that the growing lights are operational for 16 hours each day, and there are 96 lamps in
the facility, the total energy consumption is estimated to be 9.6 kWh per day.
LED lighting as heating for the facility
To calculate which is the temperature to which the LED lamps can compensate the heat
lossess through walls and ventilation, I have considered the methodology described in
Section 3.7.1. Additionally, the LED lamps I have considered are the decribed in the
above section, 96 LED lamps with a 150W power rating each. Finally, the temperature
inside the facility must be kept at 19°C.
LEDs Heat = (96 × 150W) × 16h
24h = 9600Wh
(4.1)
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
61
==PAGE:72==
LEDs Heat = Qa + Qw
(4.2)
∆T = T IN −T OUT = 61.5°C
(4.3)
T OUT = ­42°C
(4.4)
I have determined that the minimum service temperature for the LED growing lights is
­42°C, lower than the design temperature in Sisimiut which is ­30°C, therefore the LED
lamps would be suited for servicing there.
Finally, I analysed which is the primary component in the heat losses of the facility, the
majority of the heat lost, approximately 94%, is attributed to heat escaping through the
walls, ceiling, and floor. To address this issue, it is recommended that further investigation
and improvement be undertaken to enhance the insulation of the whole facility.
4.7
Carbon Footprint of the facility
4.7.1
Construction Carbon Footprint
The carbon footprint analysis of the construction inventories reveals that the transportation
of the containers used as modules for the facility from Denmark to Greenland is the largest
contributor, accounting for approximately 77% of the total construction carbon footprint.
The detailed information on the contribution of the different elements is in table 4.6.
Type of Element
kg CO2eq
Steel Structure
0.023
Plastic Trays
0.0365
Aluminum racks
0.168
LED Lamp
0.055
Ship freight
1.022
Total Construction
1.32
Table 4.6: Total Construction Carbon Footprint
4.7.2
Cultivation Carbon Footprint
After analyzing the carbon footprint of the cultivation inventories, it was found that elec­
tricity consumption during lettuce production is the major contributor to the overall carbon
footprint in this category, accounting for approximately 64% of the whole carbon footprint
of the category. The specific contribution of each element is presented in detail in Table
4.7.
4.7.3
Packaging Carbon Footprint
The analysis of the packaging carbon footprint reveals that plastic usage during the pack­
aging process accounts for almost 72% of the total emissions in this category. Further
details regarding the carbon footprint of individual elements in this inventory can be found
in Table 4.8.
62
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:73==
Type of Element
kg CO2eq
Rockwool
0.0732
N
0.0156
P
0.00056
K
0.00086
Ca
0.003
Mg
0.00012
S
0.00119
Fe
0.00002
Electricity
0.1755
Water
0.0064
Total Cultivation
0.2764
Table 4.7: Total Cultivation Carbon Footprint
Type of Element
kg CO2eq
Cardboard
0.007
Plastic
0.0174
Total Packaging
0.0242
Table 4.8: Total Packaging Carbon Footprint
4.7.4
Overall Carbon of lettuce production
The carbon footprint of producing 1 kg of lettuce in a hydroponic indoor farm built with
shipping containers in Greenland is estimated to be 1.62 kg of CO2 equivalent. The anal­
ysis shows that the largest contributor to the carbon footprint is the construction inventory,
with the maritime shipping of the containers from Denmark to Greenland accounting for
approximately 63% of the total emissions. The carbon footprint detailed for every element
is displayed in table 4.9. The contributions of the different inventories are presented in a
pie chart in figure 4.16.
The carbon footprint of hydroponic lettuce cultivated in Greenland is similar to that re­
ported for hydroponic lettuce grown in different facilities, shown in [6]. However, variations
in the carbon footprint calculation between each facility arise due to differences in their
energy sources. For instance, the facility using hydro­power has a much lower carbon
footprint of 0.89 kg CO2 equivalent per kg of lettuce. The difference in carbon footprint
can be attributed to the transportation of the modules to Greenland and variations in the
facility’s configuration.
Assuming that the carbon footprint of producing lettuce in the UK and Denmark is similar,
estimated at 0.15 kg CO2 equivalent [6], and using the same carbon emissions value
for shipping as shown in 3.8, the total carbon footprint of producing and transporting the
lettuce from Denmark to Sisimiut via ship freight is approximately 0.85 kg CO2 equivalent,
90% less compared to the lettuce grown in the designed facility. On the other hand, if
lettuce is transported by air­cargo, considering 3441 km as the distance from Copenhagen
to Sisimiut, and as literature points [120], 0.5 kg of CO2 equivalent per every tonne of
freight per every kilometer. This same lettuce transported by air carg would account a
carbon footprint of 2.57 kg CO2 equivalent, 60% more than the hydroponically grown
lettuce in the indoor farm.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
63
==PAGE:74==
Inventory
kg CO2eq
Construction
1.32
Cultivation
0.2764
Packaging
0.0242
Total 1kg of Lettuce
1.62
Table 4.9: Total Carbon Footprint of producing 1kg of lettuce in this facility
81 %
17 %
2 %
Construction
Cultivation
Packaging
Figure 4.16: Carbon Footprint by Inventory Categories
4.8
General Discussion
The thesis has been structured to include a comprehensive analysis of the literature re­
view throughout its entirety, investigating the current solutions and practices used globally
in Indoor Farming. A significant amount of time has been allocated to thoroughly study
the state of the art of these solutions, comprehending their operations in detail. Conse­
quently, the calculations and assumptions were continuously refined as more knowledge
on the solutions was acquired.
4.8.1
Location
Selecting the location for the facility is a crucial initial decision in its design process. This
decision is even more relevant in Greenland where the land ownership structure is dif­
ferent that what is conventional in Europe, and a the right to use a plot must be directly
requested to the Government or Municipality that grants it. Furthermore, it is usual that
plots do not have all the required utilities integrated, and integrating these runs on the
own budget of the building entities. Consequently, an extensive examination of the utili­
ties accessible in different location alternatives is necessary. The presence or absence of
these utilities in the chosen plots has a substantial effect on the project’s overall budget,
and therefore, its profitability.
Upon analyzing the plots in terms of area, I observed that this factor has a relatively
small impact in the whole plots evaluation. This can be attributed to the limited area
requirements of shipping containers architecture. However, it is important to note that in
the case of a modular facility, the design must allow for scalability and expansion, and thus
any limitation on available area could have significant implications for future expansions
of the facility.
64
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:75==
On the other hand, the price of land per square meter has minimal influence on the overall
site selection process. This is because plots within a particular region have identical
prices per unit area. Even though there may be significant variations in land prices among
various areas, these differences do not significantly affect the total construction cost of a
facility of this nature in Greenland.
Additionally, I conducted a preliminary assessment of the ground­works that are required
to build in a particular plot considering the plots’ slope, considering that this could give a
meaningful insight on the overall ground­works requirement, considering that these plots
are placed in a significantly uneven area of the city. However, there are more parameters
that should be considered to make a comprehensive assessment on this criteria.
Finally, the chosen plot measures 6365 m2 and is equipped with electricity, sewage, and
water facilities. However, the plot size is larger than necessary, so the current area of the
facility is of 74 m2. One of the aspects that lead to this, is the threshold I established to
disregard those plots smaller than 1000 m2, as one of the considerations was to ensure
that future facility expansion would not be restricted by the plot size considering that the
local building regulations [48], dictate that the building surface area must not exceed half
of the plot’s total area.
4.8.2
Facility Design
The facility has been designed with a modular approach, utilizing shipping containers as
modular units. This approach is ideal for assessing the feasibility of the project, given that
lettuce is the sole crop being cultivated in the facility. However, the design layout is highly
versatile and could be tailored to meet the specific requirements of other crops. It is worth
noting that the Inuit people tend to consume fewer vegetables and plants compared to
other regions of the world. Thus, the acceptance of the locally grown lettuce produced
in the facility is uncertain. It is essential to carry out promotional campaigns to raise
awareness and promote the benefits of consuming locally produced greens.
Using shipping containers as modular units provides an ideal setup for expanding the
facility as their intrinsic modularity makes them an easy ”plug and play” solution. Moreover,
their worldwide availability allows modules to be constructed wherever skilled personnel
and necessary equipment are available.
In this thesis, I have considered manufacturing all required modules in Europe and then
shipping them to Sisimiut for the first stage of the facility. This decision mitigates risks
associated with missing equipment, materials, or skilled personnel. It ensures that the
critical installation of the core of the facility is done accurately and can be thoroughly
tested before shipping to Greenland. In case of any shortcomings during the modular
manufacturing phase, skilled personnel in Europe can rectify them.
However, for future expansions, especially growing modules, manufacturing could be
done in Sisimiut since these do not require highly technical equipment to be installed
on them. Nevertheless, I would recommend on­site production only when personnel and
operators in Sisimiut have gained knowledge of the facility’s structure and equipment.
On the other hand, the use of shipping containers has its drawbacks when it comes to
the flexibility of configuring spaces within the container and the subsequent placement
of equipment. This issue becomes particularly challenging as the facility grows in size,
exacerbated by the grid configuration of the facility. Although this configuration provides
advantages in terms of easier servicing, maintenance, and natural expansion, the inter­
connected layout of service and growing modules can become difficult to arrange, given
the interdependencies between them. As a result, careful planning and management of
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
65
==PAGE:76==
future expansions are crucial to ensure that the system remains manageable as it ex­
pands.
In addition, adopting a base module design for the facility offers numerous advantages,
such as scalability, ease of production, consistent interior configuration, and structural
robustness. These benefits are particularly relevant since growing and service modules
have a similar arrangement. However, this approach also has its limitations, as design
expansions are limited to a single base module, which may restrict the flexibility of the
facility. Thus, if a future expansion involves a substantial change to the overall nature
of the modular facility, such as adding a space for the public to grow their own produce
or switching the distribution system to sell primarily in the facility rather than through su­
permarkets, a new base module design would be necessary to accommodate these new
requirements.
To address this issue, I have analyzed the flows within the facility to ensure that the base
design allows for expansion without directly affecting the facility’s flows. This has been
achieved by maintaining the same primary entrance and exit points even as the facility
expands. Nevertheless, future research should focus on how to manage the facility’s
flows when the regular points of entry and exit are unable to handle the amount of produce
harvested or when the facility needs to adapt to new needs not considered in this work.
Future expansions of the facility are directly dependant on the balance between growing
and service modules. However, this thesis has not had as primary aim to assess which
should be the power and capacities of the different equipment placed in the modules of
the facility. Therefore, a thorough study on this regard should be done, and specifically,
to determine how many growing modules can be serviced by a service module, and to
comprehensively study the equipment that should be placed in these.
Finally, I conducted a preliminary assessment to determine whether the LED lamps in­
stalled in the facility could serve as the primary heating system for the entire facility, as it
is suggested by literature [17]. The results indicate that LED lamps are capable of com­
pensating for heat loss through walls and ventilation until temperatures drop to ­42°C,
which is 12 degrees colder than the design temperature in Sisimiut. However, it is impor­
tant to note that this calculation was based on certain assumptions that may significantly
impact the outcome. Therefore, a comprehensive study using a reliable simulation tool
like IDA­ICE and precise equipment specifications should be conducted to determine the
viability of using LED lamps as the sole heating provider in the facility. However, the
value obtained has a 12 degrees margin from the design temperature, therefore it can
be said with a certain level of assurance that even if the calculation has used a signifi­
cant amount of assumptions, the 150 W LED lamps would be able to be the sole primary
heating system of the facility.
Despite the use of assumptions in the calculations, the value obtained has a 12 degree
margin from the design temperature, which suggests that the 150 W LED lamps could
potentially be the sole primary heating system of the facility. It is also worth noting that
the photoperiod of the lamps in the different containers can be arranged in such a way
that there is always a growing module with the lights on, providing heat to the others while
the lights on those are off. This is facilitated by the fact that the photoperiod configuration
is 16 hours of light and 8 hours of darkness, ensuring that there is always a module with
lights on.
66
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:77==
4.8.3
Utilities
After conducting a detailed analysis of the facility’s location, it has become apparent that
selecting the appropriate site is critical for efficient utility incorporation. Focusing solely on
bringing utilities to a particular location can prove to be a costly operation. This finding is
further reinforced by the assessment I did on the studied plots where 16% of them had all
the required utilities readily available. In contrast, 20% had two utilities available, 40% had
only one utility available and 24% lacked any utility at the time of construction. This values
provided me a different overview from the one I had originally during my stay in Sisimiut,
where I thought that the fact of finding plots with all available utilities would be even more
seldom. Consequently, these values imply that it is feasible to base the utility integration
solely on a comprehensive analysis of the plots. However, it is essential to note that if the
facility were to be located in a more remote location in Greenland, probably there would
not be plots with available utilities, thus a thorough technical study of utility integration into
the land­plot would be necessary.
4.8.4
Carbon Footprint
The carbon footprint analysis I conducted was based on estimating the amount of Carbon
Dioxide equivalent that is emitted on the production of 1 kg of lettuce in the indoor farming
facility placed in Sisimiut. The analysis considered that the modules of the facility are
manufactured and equipped in Europe and then shipped to Sisimiut by freight. This is
are the only emissions related to transport that I have considered in the estimation. Thus,
I have deemed that the other transport emissions are negligible on comparison to the
transport of the modules. In terms of equipment, I focused solely on emissions related to
the production of LED lamps, which are significantly present in the facility compared to
other equipment. It is important to note that these assumptions may have a direct impact
on the estimated carbon footprint value of the facility.
To obtain a more precise and comprehensive assessment of the carbon footprint of the
facility I have considered the lifespan values of the different components that make up
the facility. Therefore, whenever the different components are not usable anymore, these
would be exchanged by new ones. However, if there are other time­based variables that
directly influence the feasibility of the facility and thus the carbon footprint calculation, the
lifespan of the components of the facility would be directly influenced by this factor.
In the assessment of the carbon footprint of the produced lettuce, three emission invento­
ries were considered, namely construction, cultivation, and packaging. Of the three, the
construction inventory had the highest impact, accounting for 81% of the overall emis­
sions. Notably, the primary contributor to emissions in this inventory was the shipping of
modules from Denmark to Greenland, representing 63% of the overall emissions. Con­
sequently, producing the modules locally in Sisimiut would lead to a substantial reduction
of the carbon footprint of the overall facility. However, as mentioned before, this is a chal­
lenging aspect due to the lack of skilled workforce in Greenland, as well as equipment.
In absolute terms, the production of one kilogram of lettuce in this facility results in 1.62 kg
of CO2 equivalent. This figure is 80% higher than that of a hydroponic facility that utilizes
the same energy source. The primary cause of this difference is the transportation of
modules to Greenland. When compared to lettuce grown in Europe and then transported
to Greenland, the emissions from the lettuce produced in this facility are also 80% higher
than those of European lettuce shipped by sea. However, when compared to lettuce
transported by air cargo, the facility­produced lettuce emits 60% less greenhouse gases.
Therefore, considering a carbon footprint perspective, the project is deemed feasible if
the carbon footprint values are compared to the emission values of shipping the lettuce
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
67
==PAGE:78==
by air­cargo, but unfeasbile if compared to the emissions of sea­shipped lettuce. Con­
sequently, this finding points out that there is a niche for which the facility would still be
environmentally feasible, and requires further research on which are the shares of let­
tuce that are transported by air and by ship to Sisimiut, to present a more comprehensive
analysis on this regard.
68
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:79==
5
Conclusion and Future Work
5.1
Conclusion
As the global population continues to grow, the Earth’s finite resources are becoming
increasingly strained. One critical area that requires attention is food production, which
must adapt to meet the growing demand while minimizing its environmental impact. In­
door farming offers a promising solution that enables the cultivation of crops in any loca­
tion in the world with an available energy source. Additionally, this technology accelerates
the harvest cycle and increases productivity. This approach is specifically significant for
producing vegetables in harsh weather conditions, such as the Arctic, where traditionally,
farming is non­existent. Particularly, in this thesis I have investigated the design of a mod­
ular facility for sustainable indoor farming in Sisimiut, Greenland. The facility is designed
based on hydroponics and for growing lettuce.
In the initial phase of the design process, the primary focus was set on determining the
most suitable location for an indoor farming facility in Sisimiut. To gather data on plot
availability and their characteristics, I conducted an interview with public officials from the
Qeqqata Municipality in Sisimiut. Subsequently, I evaluated potential locations based on
three critical criteria: available utilities, cost, and area. The reason for considering these
factors is the modular nature of the solution, which requires a plot that can accommodate
the facility’s size without constraints. However, the availability of utilities in the plot was the
most crucial criteria, as it could result in significant expenses to install infrastructure if not
already in place. I performed an evaluation of eleven plots, using these three criteria per­
forming a REMBRANDT technique, a Multi Criteria Decision Analysis method. Given that
there were four possible options that yielded similar scores, I conducted a comprehensive
evaluation of each of the alternatives, taking into account the extent of groundwork that
would be necessary for each of the plots. Eventually, the plot I have chosen is oversized
for the extension of the current facility, however it has all the required utilities, which is the
most important aspect.
Following the site selection, I conducted an analysis to determine the optimal modular
configuration for the facility. After carefully studying the available options, I selected ship­
ping containers as the most suitable modular unit, and a grid arrangement consisting of
two types of modules. One type of module is designed to provide technical services to
the others, which are focused on growing. In addition, I analyzed the required processes
for lettuce production in an indoor farm and their respective flows within the facility. As a
result, I organized the processes into functional areas that share similar flows to optimize
the placement of each area. The next step I followed is designing a growing module to be
later used as a base for designing the whole layout of the facility. The design considers
the structural configuration, the processes organization within the module, the hydroponic
set­up to be used within the growing module and the expansion possibilities.
The layout of the facility is conceived as three growing and two service modules. The size
is determined considering which would be the optimal size of the facility with a workforce
of just a single person. This assumption is made to address the economic uncertainty
linked to these projects by keeping the personnel in the facility to a minimum. The optimal
size that a single person can handle was obtained considering the information provided
by a Project Manager at Nordic Harvest. The disposition of the modules was carefully
analyzed to determine which layout would provide greater flexibility and expansion oppor­
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
69
==PAGE:80==
tunities for the facility. The layout design also took into account the separation of clean
and unclean areas within the facility, with a focus on ensuring that food production areas
remained isolated from the rest. Additionally, the flows of operators, customers, trays,
plants, waste, and materials were taken into consideration to achieve an optimized over­
all design. The expansion possibilities were studied, highlighting its potential for future
growth and adaptation. Overall, these factors were crucial in achieving an efficient and
sustainable design for the facility. Especially, considering the design rigidness offered by
shipping containers.
The services set­up used in the facility is also described and studied. Particularly, I con­
ducted a primary evaluation of the viability of using the LED lighting system of the facility
as the primary heating source in the facility. The findings turned out to point that the light­
ing system can effectively offset the heat losses so the indoor temperature is at 19°C, to
­42°C, make them a feasible option considering that the design temperature in Sisimiut is
of ­30°C.
Additionally, the report presents the results of the carbon footprint analysis for the lettuce
production facility. The analysis included three inventories, namely construction, cultiva­
tion, and packaging, to calculate the carbon footprint of producing one kilogram of lettuce.
The total carbon footprint of lettuce produced in the facility was found to be 1.62kg of CO2
equivalent per every kilogram of lettuce. Comparing this value to the emissions of lettuce
grown in Europe and transported to Greenland, the lettuce shipped by sea emits 80% less
carbon dioxide equivalent. However, if compared to the value of air­shipped lettuce, the
lettuce grown locally in Sisimiut emits 60% less greenhouse gases. On this regard, further
study on the actual ratio of air and sea shipped lettuce to Sisimiut should be conducted,
to present a more comprehensive study of the environmentally feasibility of the project.
Finally, based on the findings regarding the uncertainty of the environmental impact of the
facility, and the results presented in [19] regarding the economic unfeasibiliy of this project,
it may appear that the viability of the project is questionable. However, the significance
of this initiative lies in its potential social impact, as it offers the remote community in
Greenland the opportunity to cultivate their own vegetables. By providing a dependable
source of produce that is not subject to weather­related disruptions or dependence on air
or sea shipments, this facility can enhance overall food security in Sisimiut. Thus, while
economic and environmental factors may present challenges, the project’s social benefits
make it a valuable undertaking for the community.
5.2
Future Work
• Design of the technical set­up of the facility.
• Study the the shipping containers to use these as shipping containers.
• Study the automation and control of the facility.
• Comprehensive study on the amount of ground­works required on the plots.
• Technical study of the integration of utilities considering no utilities at location.
• Study how the module manufacturing could be done in Sisimiut.
• Comprehensive assessment of the carbon footprint of produce consumed in Green­
land.
• Comprehensive assessment of the viability of using LED lamps as main heating
source.
70
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
Food System Primer. History of Agriculture. 2023.
[2]
Global Issues: Population. 2022.
[3]
Greenhouse gas reduction ­ Climate­Smart Agriculture. 2022.
[4]
Daniel Petrovics and Mendel Giezen. “Planning for sustainable urban food sys­
tems: an analysis of the up­scaling potential of vertical farming”. In: Journal of
Environmental Planning and Management 65 (5 Apr. 2022), pp. 785–808. ISSN:
0964­0568. DOI: 10.1080/09640568.2021.1903404.
[5]
Peter A. Y. Ampim, Eric Obeng, and Ernesto Olvera­Gonzalez. “Indoor Vegetable
Production: An Alternative Approach to Increasing Cultivation”. In: Plants 11 (21
Oct. 2022), p. 2843. ISSN: 2223­7747. DOI: 10.3390/plants11212843.
[6]
Leanne Casey et al. “Comparative environmental footprints of lettuce supplied by
hydroponic controlled­environment agriculture and field­based supply chains”. In:
Journal of Cleaner Production 369 (Oct. 2022), p. 133214. ISSN: 09596526. DOI:
10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.133214.
[7]
Naduk Kleemann. “Greenland in figures. 2022”. In: (May 2022).
[8]
Eva B. Møller and Tove Lading. “Current building strategies in Greenland”. In: E3S
Web of Conferences 172 (June 2020), p. 19004. ISSN: 2267­1242. DOI: 10.1051/
e3sconf/202017219004.
[9]
World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples. Inuit (Greenlanders). 2023.
[10]
Maria Ackrén and Uffe Jakobsen. “Greenland as a self­governing sub­national ter­
ritory in international relations: past, current and future perspectives”. In: Polar
Record 51 (4 July 2015), pp. 404–412. ISSN: 0032­2474. DOI: 10.1017/S003224741400028X.
[11]
Peter Bjerregaard and Christina V. L. Larsen. “Three lifestyle­related issues of
major significance for public health among the Inuit in contemporary Greenland: a
review of adverse childhood conditions, obesity, and smoking in a period of social
transition”. In: Public Health Reviews 39 (1 Dec. 2018), p. 5. ISSN: 2107­6952.
DOI: 10.1186/s40985-018-0085-8.
[12]
“Local Seal or Imported Meat? Sustainability Evaluation of Food Choices in Green­
land, Based on Life Cycle Assessment”. In: Foods 10 (6 May 2021), p. 1194. ISSN:
2304­8158. DOI: 10.3390/foods10061194.
[13]
The land of the ”icefjord people”. 2023.
[14]
Danish Geodata Agency. Faroe Islans and Greenland. The populations. The econ­
omy. 2015.
[15]
Toyoki Kozai and Genhua Niu. Introduction. Elsevier, 2016, pp. 3–5. DOI: 10.1016/
B978-0-12-801775-3.00001-9.
[16]
Toyoki Kozai, Kazuhiro Fujiwara, and Erik S. Runkle. LED Lighting for Urban Agri­
culture. Ed. by Toyoki Kozai, Kazuhiro Fujiwara, and Erik S. Runkle. Springer Sin­
gapore, 2016. ISBN: 978­981­10­1846­6. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-1848-0.
[17]
Toyoki Kozai. Smart Plant Factory. Ed. by Toyoki Kozai. https://www­sciencedirect­
com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/book/9780128017753/plant­factory. Springer Singapore, 2018.
ISBN: 978­981­13­1064­5. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-13-1065-2.
[18]
W.F. Gericke. The Complete Guide to Soilless Gardening. Prentice­Hall, Incorpo­
rated, 1940.
[19]
Paolo Sardella. “Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy sys­
tems for vertical farming in Greenland”. MA thesis. DTU, 2022, p. 66.
[20]
Arjina Shrestha and Bruce Dunn. Hydroponics. Apr. 2017.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
71
==PAGE:82==
[21]
trees.com. Hydroponic Drip Sistem Explained. 2022.
[22]
Libia I. and Fernando C. “Nutrient Solutions for Hydroponic Systems”. In: Hydro­
ponics ­ A Standard Methodology for Plant Biological Researches (Mar. 2012).
DOI: 10.5772/37578.
[23]
G W Michael, F S Tay, and Y L Then. “Development of Automated Monitoring Sys­
tem for Hydroponics Vertical Farming”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series
1844 (1 Mar. 2021), p. 012024. ISSN: 1742­6588. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1844/
1/012024.
[24]
Duraisamy Kalaivanan, Govindan Selvakumar, and Arockiasamy Carolin Rathi­
nakumari. Soilless Cultivation to Secure the Vegetable Demand of Urban and Peri­
Urban Population. IntechOpen, Apr. 2022. DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.102695.
[25]
Haijie Dou and Genhua Niu. Plant responses to light. Elsevier, 2020, pp. 153–166.
DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-816691-8.00009-1.
[26]
Dennis Dannehl et al. “LED versus HPS Lighting: Effects on Water and Energy
Consumption and Yield Quality in Lettuce Greenhouse Production”. In: Sustain­
ability 13 (15 Aug. 2021), p. 8651. ISSN: 2071­1050. DOI: 10.3390/su13158651.
[27]
Grow Package. how much ehat do LED grow lights produce? 2019.
[28]
Feng Tian. “Study and optimization of lighting systems for plant growth in a con­
trolled environment”. https://theses.hal.science/tel­01582072/document. Université
de Toulouse, 2017.
[29]
crecerlighting.com. Benefits of LED Grow Lights over HPS lights. 2020.
[30]
Growace. Do You Need Infrared Light in Your Grow Room? 2023.
[31]
Yesid Ramos Gonzalías and Eduardo Ramírez Lasso. “Development of an artificial
LED lighting system for indoor farming”. In: Informador Técnico (Colombia) 80
(2016), pp. 111–120.
[32]
Dorthe H. Larsen et al. “Response of Basil Growth and Morphology to Light In­
tensity and Spectrum in a Vertical Farm”. In: Frontiers in Plant Science 11 (Dec.
2020). ISSN: 1664­462X. DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2020.597906.
[33]
“Determination of the effective operating hours of the intermittent lighting system
for growing vegetables”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Sci­
ence 935 (1 Dec. 2021), p. 012004. ISSN: 1755­1307. DOI: 10.1088/1755-1315/
935/1/012004.
[34]
Ariana Torres and Roberto Lopez. Measuring Daily Light Integral in a Greenhouse.
Purdue University, 2012.
[35]
S Y Chia and M W Lim. “A critical review on the influence of humidity for plant
growth forecasting”. In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineer­
ing 1257 (1 Oct. 2022), p. 012001. ISSN: 1757­8981. DOI: 10.1088/1757-899X/
1257/1/012001.
[36]
Youssef Rouphael et al. “Improving vegetable quality in controlled environments”.
In: Scientia Horticulturae 234 (Apr. 2018), pp. 275–289. ISSN: 03044238. DOI:
10.1016/j.scienta.2018.02.033.
[37]
Stephen Prior and Brett Runion. “A Review of Elevated Atmospheric CO2 Effects
on Plant Growth and Water Relations: Implications for Horticulture”. In: Hort Sci­
ence 46 (2 2011), pp. 158–162.
[38]
Joe M. Roberts et al. “Vertical farming systems bring new considerations for pest
and disease management”. In: Annals of Applied Biology 176 (3 May 2020), pp. 226–
232. ISSN: 0003­4746. DOI: 10.1111/aab.12587.
[39]
Mohamad Hanif Md Saad, Nurul Maisarah Hamdan, and Mahidur R. Sarker. “State
of the Art of Urban Smart Vertical Farming Automation System: Advanced Topolo­
72
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:83==
gies, Issues and Recommendations”. In: Electronics 10 (12 June 2021), p. 1422.
ISSN: 2079­9292. DOI: 10.3390/electronics10121422.
[40]
Nidhi Meshram et al. “Scaling Vertical Farming from Micro to Macro using Wireless
Network for Smart Agriculture”. In: IEEE, Nov. 2021, pp. 1–5. ISBN: 978­1­6654­
1758­7. DOI: 10.1109/IBSSC53889.2021.9673438.
[41]
Erik Runkle. “Crops Suitable for Vertical Farming”. In: Greenhouse Products News
(Apr. 2019), p. 42.
[42]
Matthew Bamsey et al. “Review of Antarctic Greenhouses and Plant Production
Facilities: A Historical Account of Food Plants on the Ice”. In: (July 2015).
[43]
Matthew Bamsey et al. “Design of a Containerized Greenhouse Module for De­
ployment to the Neumayer III Antarctic Station”. In: 44th International Conference
on Environmental Systems (July 2014).
[44]
Paul Zabel et al. “Future Exploration Greenhouse Design of the EDEN ISS Project”.
In: 47th International Conference on Environmental Systems (July 2016).
[45]
Vincent Vrakking et al. “Service Section Design of the EDEN ISS Project”. In: 47th
International Conference on Environmental Systems (2017).
[46]
Matthew Bamsey et al. “Early Trade­offs and Top­Level Design Drivers for Antarc­
tic Greenhouses and Plant Production Facilities”. In: 46th International Conference
on Environmental Systems (July 2016).
[47]
E J de Place Hansen. “Moisture related challenges in the Greenlandic building
sector – results from a survey”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 2069 (1
Nov. 2021), p. 012072. ISSN: 1742­6588. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2069/1/012072.
[48]
Greenlandic Government. Greenlandic Building Regulations. 2022.
[49]
Inatsisartut. Inatsisartut – Inantsisartulov Nr. 17 af 17. november 2010 om plan­
lægning og arealanvendelse (EN: on planning and land use). 2010. URL: https:
//lovgivning.gl/lov?rid=%7B8DA79884-6A1B-4512-A5BE-E963287A2F51%7D.
[50]
The American Institute of Architects and National Institute of Building Sciences.
Design for Modular Construction: An Introduction for Architects. 2018.
[51]
Dita Hořínková. “Advantages and Disadvantages of Modular Construction, includ­
ing Environmental Impacts”. In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and
Engineering 1203 (3 Nov. 2021), p. 032002. ISSN: 1757­8981. DOI: 10.1088/1757-
899X/1203/3/032002.
[52]
Adrian Robinson and Tony Swindells. “Customized Container Architecture”. In: Off­
iste Magazine (2011).
[53]
Mazran Ismail et al. “Container Architecture in the Hot­Humid Tropics: Potential
and Constraints”. In: International Conference on Environmental Research and
Technology (ICERT 2015) (2015).
[54]
P C H Ling et al. “Technical Information on ISO Shipping Container”. In: IOP Con­
ference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 884 (1 July 2020), p. 012042.
ISSN: 1757­8981. DOI: 10.1088/1757-899X/884/1/012042.
[55]
Freight Farms. Greenery S ­ 2022 Product Booklet. 2022.
[56]
Urban Crop Solutions. Growth Solutions. 2023.
[57]
Luís F. A. Bernardo et al. “USE OF REFURBISHED SHIPPING CONTAINERS
FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF HOUSING BUILDINGS: DETAILS FOR THE STRUC­
TURAL PROJECT”. In: Journal of Civil Engineering and Management 19 (5 Oct.
2013), pp. 628–646. ISSN: 1392­3730. DOI: 10.3846/13923730.2013.795185.
[58]
Design and Build. Heat transfer in shipping containers. 2022.
[59]
Nukissiorfiit. “Årsregnskaber 2021”. In: (May 2022).
[60]
Jukka Teräs and Nelli Mikkola. Green growth in Nordic regions – 50 ways to make
it happen. Nordregio, 2016.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
73
==PAGE:84==
[61]
Danish Environmental Protection Agency. Energy in Greenland. 2002.
[62]
Northern Territories Water and Waste Association. “Greenland Infrastructure”. In:
Journal of the Northern Territories Water and Waste Association (Oct. 2017).
[63]
Kåre Hendriksen and Birgitte Hoffmann. “Greenlandic water and sanitation systems—
identifying system constellation and challenges”. In: Environmental Science and
Pollution Research 25 (33 Nov. 2018), pp. 32964–32974. ISSN: 0944­1344. DOI:
10.1007/s11356-017-9556-6.
[64]
Ninna Karsbæk Senftleber. “The traditional diet and genetic architecture of the
Greenlandic Inuit and their cardiovascular effects”. University of Copenhagen, Mar.
2020.
[65]
Peter Bjerregaard and Charlotte Jeppesen. “Inuit dietary patterns in modern Green­
land”. In: International Journal of Circumpolar Health 69 (1 Feb. 2010), pp. 13–24.
ISSN: 2242­3982. DOI: 10.3402/ijch.v69i1.17387.
[66]
Ellen Avard. “Northern Greenhouses: An Alternative Local Food Provisioning Strat­
egy for Nunavik”. Université Laval, 2015.
[67]
Zdravka Bosanac and Daniel Schütt. “Hvor meget dyrere er det at leve i Grøn­
land end i Danmark? (How much more expensive is it to live in Greenland than in
Denmark?)” In: DST Analyse (Mar. 2017).
[68]
NunaGIS. NunaGIS – GISKortportal. 2022.
[69]
et al. Majumdar A. “Determination of the Technological Value of Cotton Fibre:
A Comparative Study of the Traditional and Multiple­Criteria Decision­Makin Ap­
proaches”. In: AUTEX Research Journal 5 (2005), pp. 71–80.
[70]
Barfod M. “An MCDA approach for the selection of bike projects based on structur­
ing and appraising activities”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 218
(2012), pp. 810–818.
[71]
Hossain S et al Saqiful Alam K Wali F. “Use of multi­criteria decision analysis for
location decision: Developing a risk reaction spectrum”. In: Journal of Developing
Areas 49, 6 (2015), pp. 505–516.
[72]
Barfod M. and Leleur S. Decision Support and Strategic Assessment. DTU Man­
agement Compendium. Version 2021. 2nd Edition. 2021.
[73]
Jarosław Wątróbski et al. “Generalised framework for multi­criteria method selec­
tion”. In: Omega 86 (July 2019), pp. 107–124. ISSN: 03050483. DOI: 10.1016/j.
omega.2018.07.004.
[74]
Barfod M.B. & Leleur S. “Scaling transformation in the REMBRANDT technique:
Examination of the progression factor”. In: International Journal of Information
Technology & Decision Making 12 (2013), pp. 887–903.
[75]
F.A. Lootsma. “The REMBRANDT system for multi­criteria decision analysis via
pairwise comparisons or direct rating”. In: Report 92­05, Faculty of Technical Math­
ematics and Informatics, Delft University of Technology, the Netherlands (1992).
[76]
Saaty T. “A scaling method for priorities in hierarchical structures”. In: Journal of
Mathematical Psychology 1 (1977), pp. 234–281.
[77]
Rosaria de F.S.M. Russo and Roberto Camanho. “Criteria in AHP: A Systematic
Review of Literature”. In: Procedia Computer Science 55 (2015), pp. 1123–1132.
ISSN: 18770509. DOI: 10.1016/j.procs.2015.07.081.
[78]
Thomas L. Saaty. “Decision making with the analytic hierarchy process”. In: Inter­
national Journal of Services Sciences 1 (1 2008), p. 83. ISSN: 1753­1446. DOI:
10.1504/IJSSCI.2008.017590.
[79]
Qeqqata Kommunia Department of Engineering and Environment. Qeqqata Kom­
munia – Tillæg nr. 24 til Kommuneplan 2012­24 for Qeqqata Kommunia Erhverv­
74
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:85==
sområde ved Ulkebugten Sisimiut (EN: Addendum no. 24 to Municipal Plan 2012­
24 for Qeqqata Municipality Business area at Ulkebugten Sisimiut). 2017.
[80]
Qeqqata Kommunia Department of Engineering and Environment. Qeqqata Kom­
munia Qeqqata Kommunia hereby re­advertises vacant building plots for com­
mercial purposes in sub­area 800­B8.4 along Qinngunnguanut at Ulkebugten in
Sisimiut ). 2022.
[81]
Qeqqata Kommunia Department of Engineering and Environment. Qeqqata Kom­
munia Qeqqata Kommunia hereby re­advertises vacant building plots for com­
mercial purposes in sub­area 800­B8.2 along Qinngunnguanut at Ulkebugten in
Sisimiut ). 2019.
[82]
Royal Arctic Lines. Cargo Rates ­ Royal Arctic Line ­ (Aarhus ­ Kalaallit Nunaat).
2023.
[83]
Fire Chiefs’ Association of British Columbia. “Position Paper: Intermodal Shipping
Container Fire Safety”. In: (Sept. 2014).
[84]
Juan Cabrera­Garcia. Hydroponic Systems Overview. 2022.
[85]
Ju Yeon Lee et al. “Characterizing nutrient uptake kinetics for efficient crop pro­
duction during Solanum lycopersicum var. cerasiforme Alef. growth in a closed
indoor hydroponic system”. In: PLOS ONE 12 (5 May 2017), e0177041. ISSN:
1932­6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177041.
[86]
Funiomi Takeda. “Out­of­season greenhouse strawberry production in soilless sub­
strate”. In: Advances in Strawberry Research 18 (1999).
[87]
Muhammad E. H. Chowdhury et al. “Design, Construction and Testing of IoT Based
Automated Indoor Vertical Hydroponics Farming Test­Bed in Qatar”. In: Sensors
20 (19 Oct. 2020), p. 5637. ISSN: 1424­8220. DOI: 10.3390/s20195637.
[88]
Bateer Baiyin et al. “Effect of Nutrient Solution Flow Rate on Hydroponic Plant
Growth and Root Morphology”. In: Plants 10 (9 Sept. 2021), p. 1840. ISSN: 2223­
7747. DOI: 10.3390/plants10091840.
[89]
Toyoki Kozai. Role and characteristics of PFALs. Elsevier, 2022, pp. 25–55. DOI:
10.1016/B978-0-323-85152-7.00014-8.
[90]
Matthew Gentry. “Local heat, local food: Integrating vertical hydroponic farming
with district heating in Sweden”. In: Energy 174 (May 2019), pp. 191–197. ISSN:
03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2019.02.119.
[91]
Jeong Hwa Kang et al. “Light intensity and photoperiod influence the growth and
development of hydroponically grown leaf lettuce in a closed­type plant factory sys­
tem”. In: Horticulture, Environment, and Biotechnology 54 (6 Dec. 2013), pp. 501–
509. ISSN: 2211­3452. DOI: 10.1007/s13580-013-0109-8.
[92]
Greenlandic Ministry of Employment. “Greenland Working Environment Act (Con­
solidated Act no. 2062)”. In: (Nov. 2021).
[93]
Rasmus Qupersimat Jørgensen. “Arctic production of greens: Design of energy
efficient greenhouse in Sisimiut, Greenland”. In: (June 2022).
[94]
Dansk Standard and European Committee for Standardization. Energy perfor­
mance of buildings ­ Part 1: Indoor environmental input parameters for design
and assessment of energy performance of buildings addressing indoor air qual­
ity, thermal environment, lighting and acoustics ­ Module M1­6. English. DS/EN
16798­1:2019. Copenhagen, Denmark, 2019.
[95]
TPSolutions.eu. Technical Data Sheet for Insulated Shipping Containers. 2021.
[96]
Oficina Catalana del Canvi Climàtic. Practical guide for Calculating Greenhouse
Gas (GHG) Emissions. 2019.
[97]
www.ral.dk. Sailing Plans. 2023.
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
75
==PAGE:86==
[98]
Daniel Schubert et al. “Status of the EDEN ISS Greenhouse after on­site instal­
lation in Antarctica”. In: 48th International Conference on Environmental Systems
(July 2018).
[99]
Daina Romeo, Eldbjørg Blikra Vea, and Marianne Thomsen. “Environmental Im­
pacts of Urban Hydroponics in Europe: A Case Study in Lyon”. In: Procedia CIRP
69 (2018), pp. 540–545. ISSN: 22128271. DOI: 10.1016/j.procir.2017.11.048.
[100]
www.worldsteel.org. Climate change and the production of iron and steel. 2020.
[101]
Selma Mujkic and Kaushik Narasimhan Andakudi. “Life Cycle Assessment of Let­
tuce Production Systems A Case Study Performed at Hollbium”. KTH, 2020.
[102]
www.worldsteel.org. Carbon footprint for 1kg of aluminum extruded profile. 2019.
[103]
www.austeplighting.au. LED embodied emissions. 2015.
[104]
European Environment Agency. Specific CO2 emissions per tonne.kn and per
mode of transport in Europe. 2017.
[105]
Joshua L. Sohn et al. “Life­cycle based dynamic assessment of mineral wool in­
sulation in a Danish residential building application”. In: Journal of Cleaner Pro­
duction 142 (Jan. 2017), pp. 3243–3253. ISSN: 09596526. DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.
2016.10.145.
[106]
J. Havukainen et al. “Carbon footprint evaluation of biofertilizers”. In: International
Journal of Sustainable Development and Planning 13 (08 Dec. 2018), pp. 1050–
1060. ISSN: 1743­7601. DOI: 10.2495/SDP-V13-N8-1050-1060.
[107]
VegaAlga. Report on the sustainability: Sustainable agriculture eco­system: busi­
ness and technological solution for eco­conscious vegetable cultivation using on­
site produced algae fertilizer. 2017.
[108]
Fertilizers Europe. Carbon Footprint Reference Values: Energy Efficiency and Green­
house Gas Emissions in European Mineral Fertilizer Production and Use. 2011.
[109]
Winnipeg Materials Management. Emission factors in kg CO2­equivalent per unit.
2012.
[110]
Mengyue Liu et al. “Life Cycle Environmental Impact Assessment of Sulfur­Based
Compound Fertilizers: A Case Study in China”. In: ACS Sustainable Chemistry
Engineering 10 (7 Feb. 2022), pp. 2308–2317. ISSN: 2168­0485. DOI: 10.1021/
acssuschemeng.1c05450.
[111]
Nukissiorfiit. Årsregnskaber 2021 ­ Annual Report 2021. 2021.
[112]
Ibrahim Kronfol. The hidden carbon footprint of water. 2022.
[113]
procarton.com. Comparing the carbon footprint of carbon packaging against alter­
native solutions. 2021.
[114]
Pahola Thathiana Benavides, Uisung Lee, and Omid Zarè­Mehrjerdi. “Life cycle
greenhouse gas emissions and energy use of polylactic acid, bio­derived polyethy­
lene, and fossil­derived polyethylene”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 277 (Dec.
2020), p. 124010. ISSN: 09596526. DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124010.
[115]
N.S. Sokolov. “Geotechnical Practice of Slope Reinforcement”. In: Journal of Civil
Engineering Research Technology (Mar. 2022), pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.47363/JCERT/
2022(4)123.
[116]
Domino Clamps. How to prep a shipping container for cladding? 2021.
[117]
SafeWork. Maintaining thermal comfort in indoor work environments. 2023.
[118]
“Implications of improved representations of plant respiration in a changing cli­
mate”. In: Nature Communications 8 (1 Nov. 2017), p. 1602. ISSN: 2041­1723.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-01774-z.
[119]
Migro. Groplanner O series 150W. 2021.
[120]
Tree­Nation. What are the CO2 emissions of a package or parcel? 2020.
76
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:87==
A
Appendix
A.1
REMBRANDT results overview
Area
Plot
Score
Utilities
Score
Price
Score
Surface
Options
Assessment
Final
Score
B8.1
4
18,1490
9,6647
30,0458
18,3435
0,2497
B8.1
6
18,1490
9,6647
7,5114
17,7397
0,2415
B8.1
7
18,1490
9,6647
7,5114
17,7397
0,2415
B8.1
8
18,1490
9,6647
7,5114
17,7397
0,2415
B8.1
16
0,3649
9,6647
30,0458
0,4091
0,0056
B8.2
A
0,3649
0,1510
0,1174
0,3543
0,0048
B8.2
AA
0,3649
0,1510
0,1174
0,3543
0,0048
B8.2
B
0,3649
0,1510
0,1174
0,3543
0,0048
B8.2
BB
0,3649
0,1510
0,1174
0,3543
0,0048
B8.2
C
0,0378
0,1510
0,1174
0,0389
0,0005
B8.2
CC
0,0378
0,1510
0,1174
0,0389
0,0005
Table A.1: REMBRANDT results overview
A.2
Plots Characterization and Pair­Wise Comparison:
Utilities, Price and Surface
Area
Plot
Water
Electricity
Sewage
All Utilities
B8.1
4
1
1
1
3
B8.1
6
1
1
1
3
B8.1
7
1
1
1
3
B8.1
8
1
1
1
3
B8.1
16
1
1
0
2
B8.2
A
1
1
0
2
B8.2
AA
1
1
0
2
B8.2
B
1
1
0
2
B8.2
BB
1
1
0
2
B8.2
C
0
1
0
1
B8.2
CC
0
1
0
1
Table A.2: Plots characterization by Utilities
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
77
==PAGE:88==
Area
Plot
Price/m2
B8.1
4
57.91
B8.1
6
57.91
B8.1
7
57.91
B8.1
8
57.91
B8.1
16
57.91
B8.2
A
182.12
B8.2
AA
182.12
B8.2
B
182.12
B8.2
BB
182.12
B8.2
C
182.12
B8.2
CC
182.12
Table A.3: Plots characterization by Price
Interval Number
Area Interval
2
1000–2000
4
2000–3000
6
3000–4000
8
>4000
Table A.4: Interval number and area.
Area
Plot
Surface m2
Interval
B8.1
4
6365
4
B8.1
6
3465
3
B8.1
7
3505
3
B8.1
8
3581
3
B8.1
16
7980
4
B8.2
A
1032
1
B8.2
AA
1164
1
B8.2
B
1480
1
B8.2
BB
1219
1
B8.2
C
1631
1
B8.2
CC
1365
1
Table A.5: Plots characterization by Area considering Intervals in A.4
78
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
==PAGE:89==
B8.1
B8.2
4
6
7
8
16
A
AA
B
BB
C
CC
B8.1
4
0
0
0
0
6
6
6
6
6
8
8
6
0
0
0
0
6
6
6
6
6
8
8
7
0
0
0
0
6
6
6
6
6
8
8
8
0
0
0
0
6
6
6
6
6
8
8
16
­6
­6
­6
­6
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
B8.2
A
­6
­6
­6
­6
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
AA
­6
­6
­6
­6
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
B
­6
­6
­6
­6
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
BB
­6
­6
­6
­6
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
C
­8
­8
­8
­8
­4
­4
­4
­4
­4
0
0
CC
­8
­8
­8
­8
­4
­4
­4
­4
­4
0
0
Table A.6: Pair­Wise Comparison for Utilities
B8.1
B8.2
4
6
7
8
16
A
AA
B
BB
C
CC
B8.1
4
0
0
0
0
0
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
0
0
0
0
0
6
6
6
6
6
6
7
0
0
0
0
0
6
6
6
6
6
6
8
0
0
0
0
0
6
6
6
6
6
6
16
0
0
0
0
0
6
6
6
6
6
6
B8.2
A
­6
­6
­6
­6
­6
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA
­6
­6
­6
­6
­6
0
0
0
0
0
0
B
­6
­6
­6
­6
­6
0
0
0
0
0
0
BB
­6
­6
­6
­6
­6
0
0
0
0
0
0
C
­6
­6
­6
­6
­6
0
0
0
0
0
0
CC
­6
­6
­6
­6
­6
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table A.7: Pair­Wise Comparison for Price
B8.1
B8.2
4
6
7
8
16
A
AA
B
BB
C
CC
B8.1
4
0
2
2
2
0
8
8
8
8
8
8
6
­2
0
0
0
­2
6
6
6
6
6
6
7
­2
0
0
0
­2
6
6
6
6
6
6
8
­2
0
0
0
­2
6
6
6
6
6
6
16
0
2
2
2
0
8
8
8
8
8
8
B8.2
A
­8
­6
­6
­6
­8
0
0
0
0
0
0
AA
­8
­6
­6
­6
­8
0
0
0
0
0
0
B
­8
­6
­6
­6
­8
0
0
0
0
0
0
BB
­8
­6
­6
­6
­8
0
0
0
0
0
0
C
­8
­6
­6
­6
­8
0
0
0
0
0
0
CC
­8
­6
­6
­6
­8
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table A.8: Pair­Wise Comparison for Surface
Design of a Modular Facility for Sustainable Indoor Farming in Greenland
79
==PAGE:90==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
