==PAGE:1==
February 26, 2023
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Compute
A Software Architecture for Deploying Predictive
Machine Learning Models
Master Thesis
Mads Finnerup s154102
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This report is a master’s thesis in Computer Science and Engineering at The Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark. The thesis (30 ECTS points) is written from August 2022 to February 2023
at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science (DTU Compute).
I would like to thank my supervisors associate professor Ekkart Kindler and associate professor
Tommy Alstrøm at DTU Compute for providing me with this opportunity to work on this
project and for outstanding support and guidance throughout the project.
I would also like to thank Anders Vestergaard and Shahrzad Pour, all from DTU Compute, for
good conversations, excellent guidance, and feedback at various project stages.
Nærum, February 2023
Mads Finnerup Nielsen
1
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Integrating and deploying a machine learning model efficiently into production are prone to
technical hurdles. The technical hurdles are mainly related to differences in practice of the two
engineering cultures, data science and software engineering.
This thesis focuses on developing an integration of a machine learning model into a service-
oriented system. The thesis touches upon an architecture that can be implemented for a scalable
and customizable solution. In addition, a focus has been made on collecting metadata related
to saving the machine learning model prediction and calculation of measurements related to
the way and segments created by the machine learning model. The thesis uses the Live Road
Assessment (LiRA) project as a facilitator. The data initially gathered for the machine learning
model and the machine learning model itself is inherited from LiRA.
It has been successfully demonstrated how a service-oriented system can adapt and integrate a
machine learning model.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface
1
Abstract
2
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Research Questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Design science
9
2.1
Methods and strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Explicate Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Ethnography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Focus Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Related work
21
4
Design
23
4.1
System requirements analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Major components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.1
Components communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.2
Information exchanged . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.3
Storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.4
Input/output processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
System structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.1
Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.2
Python components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3.3
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3.4
Windowing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3.5
Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.6
Message Broker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.7
API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.8
Prediction Importer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3
==PAGE:5==
4.3.9
Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Envisioned system architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Implementation
42
5.1
Workflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Geo services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2.1
Collection OSM data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
API
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4
Choreography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.5
Executing Python scripts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.6
Docker deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.7
Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.7.1
Unit Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.7.2
Integration Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.7.3
End-To-End Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Evaluation
52
6.1
System evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.1.1
Project management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.1.2
Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.1.3
System requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.1.4
Integration and deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.2
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Future work
57
8
Conclusion
58
9
References
59
4
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Every year, the Danish Road Directorate (DRD) operates huge vehicles loaded with multiple
sensors that go around the streets of Denmark to collect road condition data. The data collec-
tion is an important tool in the assessment of the conditions of the streets and the subsequent
plan for road maintenance.
The vehicles operated by the DRD are specially built for this
purpose and trips are planned ahead. Furthermore, the vehicles need a dedicated chauffeur
[11, 12, 3, 12].
The data is mainly collected by these vehicles, but in some cases, even manual inspections are
made to collect data. This is an expensive operation as the vehicles must travel all over the
country to gather the data. The data is therefore only collected annually, so the data might
not be up to date throughout most of the year. To collect accurate data, weather conditions
are essential. For example, puddles of water on the road reflect the monochromatic light of the
vehicles’ lasers and thereby reducing the accuracy of the collected data.
Live Road Assessment (LiRA) is a project by which aims to solve this problem by using data
collected by sensors installed on modern cars. With an increase in automotive sensors installed
in cars, it is possible to use them to collect various measurements throughout a trip. LiRA
uses machine learning, and the collected trip data can be used to recognize patterns which
leads to an automated and efficient system of accurate road condition predictions. Car trip
data includes driving information such as acceleration and speed, which is used as input in the
machine learning model to predict road conditions[12].
To gather the initial training data for the machine learning algorithm in LiRA, a fleet of GM cars
were driven simultaneously with P79 and ARAN vehicles under the same road conditions[12].
When trained, the data from GM cars can be collected, processed, and stored in a database
and used to predict road conditions using the trained machine learning model. [4]
LiRA is not a standalone project that utilizes machine learning, as machine learning is be-
coming more prevalent in the industry, the collaboration between software engineers and data
scientist engineers has grown. Collaboration between the two cultures is an excellent opportu-
nity for data science engineers, and it allows them to move the projects from a research-based
5
==PAGE:7==
environment to a production environment and to advance in structuring the projects for eas-
ier integration.
Software engineers are allowed to learn about different cultures and apply
knowledge entirely out of the expertise usually associated with a software engineer.
In recent decades, both cultures had enormous development. New technologies and practices
are constantly being developed and emerging. For this reason, companies have been looking for
better ways to create an integrated project that utilizes both cultures’ best practices. However,
it becomes more challenging to integrate the two as technologies evolve. Each culture has its
respected team of contributors, which leads to challenges in organizing and systematizing the
development process. Success is calculated for any project in any correlation based on satisfying
the requirements, staying within the budget, and within the planned time. If either of them is
not met, the project will be deemed not wholly successful. Often this is the case and is mainly
caused by underestimation and the fact that requirements change over the project’s lifetime.
Machine Learning models are created by data scientists who excel at creating models that
represent and predict accurate world data. Deployment of Machine Learning requires skills
found more commonly in software engineering. Sites such as Venture[7] report that 87 percent
of data science projects never make it to production, while Redapt [5] claims 90 percent. Both
places highlight a problem regarding the difference between success and failure and that it lies
in the ability to collaborate as a unified team of data scientists and software engineers.
The primary purpose of a machine learning model is to solve a problem, but a machine Learning
model can only do so if it has been deployed to production and has been actively used by
consumers. Deploying a model is, therefore, just as important as building and developing the
model. There can be a “disconnect between IT and data science. IT tends to stay focused on
making things available and stable. They want uptime at all costs. Data scientists, on the other
hand, are focused on iteration and experimentation. They want to break things.”[5]
1.1
Problem statement
This thesis focuses on the problem that only a small percentage of data scientist projects find
their way from research into production. One of the main issues is the difficulty of integrating
a data scientist project with a software engineering project. There is various reason why this is
difficult. The main issue is the technical hurdles related to the differences in the practice of the
6
==PAGE:8==
two engineering cultures. Currently, no current guidelines or methods for creating a modular
integration of a data scientist project are represented to project managers and development
teams. The two engineering cultures might develop differently, which adds to the complexity
when integrating.
1.2
Research Questions
In this section, the research question will be defined. The research questions will be designated
as clear statements and set as a goal for the project to answer. Therefore, this thesis aims to
design and develop a solution that can be used to integrate and deploy an application developed
in cooperation between data science and software engineers.
The research question can be defined as:
• How can the integration process of software developed by data science into a software
engineering application be improved?
• How can a machine learning model be integrated into a modular service-oriented software
engineering application?
• How can software engineers and data science’s ability to work independently still be
supported when cooperating?
7
==PAGE:9==
1.3
Thesis structure
This thesis consists of 8 chapters.
Chapter 2: Design science elaborates on how the scientific methods were utilized.
The
problem statement has been analyzed and generalized within this Chapter.
Chapter 3: Related work is about work done regarding the area of expertise.
Chapter 4: Design Chapter clarifies a design for the system. The design has been built with
the information described in the design science section
Chapter 5: implementation Chapter will describe areas of difficulties during the implemen-
tation phase and testing.
Chapters 6: Evaluation looks upon the results and evaluates on them
Chapter 7: Future work is about features that could be added in the Future or were deemed
out of scope for this thesis.
Chapter 8: Conclusion wraps the entirety of the thesis and concludes with the research
questions.
8
==PAGE:10==
2
Design science
This chapter describes the scientific methods and strategies utilized within this thesis. Further-
more, this chapter will explicate the problem to be investigated as stated in Section 1.1.
2.1
Methods and strategies
The thesis uses the design science methodology in a Requirements and Development Focused
Design Science Research approach. Design science is defined through a design science canvas
by its five phases: Explicate problem, definition of objectives for a solution, design and devel-
opment, demonstration, and evaluation. The design science is illustrated in Figure 1, and the
five phases are elaborated below [14].
Figure 1: Design science canvas [14]
9
==PAGE:11==
Explicate Problem defines the research problem and establishes the motivation related to
the problem. Defining the problem and motivation can help isolate and specify the problem
of the thesis and capture its complexity. To justify the solution and, thereby, the value is just
as significant as it motivates the researcher as it enables the audience to pursue the solution
and accept its results. In theory, all research strategies or methods can be used, as each has
advantages and disadvantages. Section 2.2 describes the ones used in this thesis.
Define requirements defines the requirements for the solution and consists of two approaches;
quantitative and qualitative. Quantitative refers to information that can be quantified, and a
solution using this approach intends to discover a better solution and replace the old one.
Unlike quantitative, qualitative is descriptive and is typically used to express problems yet
to be addressed through language rather than numerical values. This thesis is designated as
quantitative, aiming to create a new and enhanced solution for integrating a data science project
into a software engineering project. Enhancing an existing solution is an extensive term. To
define the objective more precisely, a system requirement analysis for what the solution, in the
end, should be capable of was created and is described in Section 4.1.
Design and develop artifact includes constructs, models, methods, and instantiations. The
artifacts’ design phase should determine the artifact’s functionality and use. This includes the
development phase, which should be an iterative process and thus be performed multiple times.
Design and development have been divided into two sections for this report. Both utilize the
agile, iterative process and can be viewed in more detail in their respected Chapters 4 and 5.
Demonstration defines the utilization problem solving of specific problems of the artifacts.
Methods to carry this out can be such as a case study. Therefore it requires the user to have
sufficient knowledge to utilize the artifacts.
Evaluation inspects the solutions objects by looking at them individually and inspecting the
results from the utilized artifacts. The evaluation is to discuss how well the explicated problem
and its objectives are solved and can be found in Chapter 6.
The five phases lay the foundation of what a research project should include and are utilized
throughout the thesis in its various sections.
Therefore, design science aims to implement
10
==PAGE:12==
and design a solution that either improves an already existing solution or experiments with
something new.
2.2
Explicate Problem
This section will investigate the underlying causes of the problem stated in Section 1.1. The
investigation consists of the different research strategies and methods used and consists of a
case study, ethnography, and focus groups.
2.2.1
Ethnography
Ethnography is about understanding the involved cultures in depth. Two cultures are presented
in this thesis; software engineering and data science. Therefore, the author of this thesis should
be able to see a problem not just as an outsider but also from a collaborator’s point of view.
The gathered knowledge allows for understanding the explications of a problem related to
integrating the data science project into a software engineering project. Three methods were
used to understand the cultures within this project: Interviews, observations, and a survey
related to the problem. The observations have been through dialogues such as meetings or
writing material such as code and papers.
Interviews
The purpose of the interviews was to understand and narrow down the technical
hurdles related to the integration within this project. Three people were interviewed for this
project; Anders Malherbes Vestergaard, Shahrzad Pour, and Søren Tønnesen. The three people
were interviewed multiple times during this project.
Anders Malherbes Vestergaard is a data scientist at DTU Compute. Anders developed the
Machine Learning model, which will be integrated with the system to be developed in this
thesis. The interview with Anders was conducted on several occasions. Either through a direct
interview related to understanding the differences, including strengths and weaknesses, between
the cultures seen from a data science point of view and through project meetings. The project
meetings are where the decisions of which tasks should be allocated to which team. One of
the tasks was related to SQL and databases. SQL is typically required for a data scientist.
However, a data science team usually would have a dedicated database expert to do the work
related to database construction, management, and changes. Databases are, therefore, not in
the expertise of a data scientist and would be considered when designing the solution for this
11
==PAGE:13==
thesis.
Shahrzad Pour is a Postdoc researcher at DTU Compute. Shahrzad has been involved from
the start of the LiRA project. The interview with Shahrzad was conducted to understand the
reasoning for choosing the current integration approach in LiRA. LiRA is a micro-service and
follows the micro-service architecture design pattern. The design pattern is described more in
detail in Chapter 4. The design pattern was designed to divide the processes of a system into
more minor dedicated services. As the machine learning models processes are so intertwined, it
was previously deemed too complicated and time-consuming to separate them to create minor
dedicated services for each. This matches the observation regarding the structuring to be the
a cause of the difficulty of separating machine learning into its processes.
Søren Tønnesen is a student worker at DTU Compute. Søren has implemented the current
integrated version of the machine learning model into LiRA. The interview with Søren was
conducted to understand the problem when integrating a data science project into a software
engineering application and what, in hindsight, could have been done differently. Søren believed
creating a more straightforward integration process with the Python scripts would be possible
as the current methods required to stream log information from a python runner to an object
in C#. Likewise, if it were possible to start over with the current knowledge, Søren would have
applied the Python scripts modularly, but as Shahrzad described, this was not possible then.
Observations
To get a preview of how a data science project can be integrated into a software
engineering project, a review of the code base subject to integration is essential. Reviewing the
codebase will give an idea of building and constructing a solution that will encapsulate the data
science project. Furthermore, the structure of the code base will give the general idea of if a
clean-up or a refactoring of the project structure is needed. The review of the code base of this
project revealed how closely intertwined the different processes of the machine learning model
are. The intertwining can be due to the lack of a planned structure, as each Python class had
multiple purposes. Another issue related to the structuring is the amount of redundant code
present in the code base and the naming of methods and variables within the code. The famous
quote Good code is self-documenting [15] is typically accurate for well-written code with good
naming of methods and variables that are to be easily read and understood. Several methods
are named similarly in this code base, making it challenging to understand and figure out which
12
==PAGE:14==
method is used and what it does.
These initial observations suggest that the code base needs more structuring and modularity
for large-scale deployment. An architecture such as micro-services relies heavily upon being
modular and would lead to an increased integration time.
Survey
To support the interviewee’s claim that the integration issues are the sole reason why
the number of deployed machine learning models is so low, it was decided to look outside this
project and find other data that could support this claim. An article from January 17, 2022,
by Eric Siegel, Ph.D., and former Columbia University professor, asked 114 data scientists,
based on their experiences, what percentage of machine learning projects reached production
and the reason behind that [16]. Of the 114 data scientists, 58% answered that only 0-20%
of the machine learning models created by themselves or a colleague had reached production.
Figure 2.2.1 illustrates the answers related to the underlying reason for the low machine learn-
ing deployment in production. The Top-3 reasons are; The decision-maker’s unwillingness to
approve the changes created existing (32%), Technical hurdles integrating into existing systems
(35%), and the model’s performance needed to be considered stronger by the decision-makers
(24%), i.e., the 114 data scientists agree that technical hurdles are an issue.
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2: Survey - main impediment to model deployment [16]
2.2.2
Focus Groups
Focus groups are a method to explicate the problem and are used to narrow down the challenges
related to the problem of integrating data science into a larger software engineer project and
ultimately deploying the system to production. The focus groups aim to define problems in a
domain. The problem domain can be represented by dividing it into different domain areas of
software engineering and data science. Some domains are obligatory to both cultures as every
software project contains development, deployment, and project management areas. Since two
cultures work together on one project, there will be limitations due to each culture’s strengths
and weaknesses and should therefore be considered another problem domain area.
See the
Figure 3 for the problem domains.
14
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3: Domain problems - draft not yet finalized
Each problem domain will be elaborated on throughout the following sub-sections.
Limitations of cultures
The two cultures each have their limitations, and it is essential
to understand the limitation of the domain.
The limitations can be separated into sub-
categories: knowledge, restraints, time frame, and budget.
Figure 4 shows the limitations
and sub-categories identified as limiting factors of integrating and thus deploying a predictive
machine learning model.
Figure 4: Limitations of cultures domain
15
==PAGE:17==
Time has been considered a category because time cannot be changed and thus will limit the
number of features that can be developed.
Restraints can be set by the company’s policies or the general approach in the industry within
certain technologies and should therefore be considered. An example is that some of the larger
danish banks will not allow Python writing projects to be deployed into production. The reason
is that Python is more commonly used in data science than software engineering, and the wish
is to keep the system uniform in a programming language.
Cost or the budget allocated to a given project. The cost is divided between two elements;
the development and deployment cost.
The development cost is for the software engineers
developing the project and will vary depending on the project’s size and difficulty. The server
cost is the operation cost when the project is deployed. Free tier options only sometimes cover
what is needed and are a possible running cost.
Knowledge of the cultures involved in the project. It is thus the most significant challenge
when developing a project that needs to live up to a certain level of quality and stability when
deployed.
A software engineer would be inexperienced in creating complex algorithms and
mathematical equations more commonly used in the data science industry. In contrast, data
science software engineers need to be more experienced in elements that are more commonly
used in the software engineering industry. Elements include creating APIs, extracting data
from various sources, and a more extensive project structure. It is vital to understand each
culture’s strengths and weaknesses and allocate the right tasks for the culture’s strengths. This
combination makes it harder to deliver a system that meets the standards for a production-
ready system.
Project Management
Whether or not a project is successful comes down mainly to the
success of its project management. It helps to see the bigger picture of the progress of every
project. Project management is, therefore, about planning and coordinating a team. Since
this thesis is about integrating a data science project into a software engineering project, are
there considerable challenges in aligning the work done by the different cultures, which have
their plans and datelines for milestones. A Project management tool such as Jira or Azure
DevOps can be utilized to track each culture team’s progress. If such tools are utilized, it can
16
==PAGE:18==
be easier for the project manager to keep track of the project’s overall progress. The teams
should implement an agile workflow for an iterative and short cycle called sprints.
Figure 5: Development domain
Figure 5 has been created to showcase the identified challenges. The challenge with having
two different cultures can be the need for a possible project management tool utilized by both
cultures. However, such a tool can create confusion if it is too cluttered with tasks from multiple
different culture teams.
Depending on the size of the project itself, it might be necessary to have two teams; A data
science team and a software engineer team. Having two separate teams leads to another issue;
it can be difficult to manage projects when two teams have two sets of people with different
roles. The structure of a project might be varied from company to company, but these roles
might exist:
• The project owner for each team then aligns with the other project owners on which
task needs to be prioritized to uphold the schedule and have general knowledge regarding
both team’s direction and dependencies between the teams
17
==PAGE:19==
• Scrum master is the team member that facilitates scrum meetings and keeps track of
each task and team member’s progress, and tries to improve the flow.
• Architect the overall project. Depending on the culture from which the architect orig-
inates, data scientist, or software engineer, the architect will have a different role. The
data architect in data science is the one who formulates the organizational data strategy.
In contrast, a software engineer architect will design the overview of a project.
• UX Designer designs the interface or the application’s front end, which is why this role
is typical for the software engineer team and not the data scientist team.
• Software/data science developer is the one who develops the software and is typically
divided into their preferred fields.
A team member might cover more than one of these roles as its standard for the scrum master
and architect to function as a developer.
Spreading the responsibility across multiple independent teams introduces additional project
management challenges. Instead of having the software engineering team focus on creating a
single solution, the project owner(s) now know how to coordinate with the teams involved.
Likewise, the integration of two cultures will always lead to some compromises in crossing
boundaries into the other respected culture and, therefore, out of the culture’s expertise zone.
Development
Every company and team has differences in how software is developed. In
terms of teams, it is because, predominantly, the teams are of two completely different cultures
within the organizations with different agendas. Depending on the size of the team, the overall
structure is similar in process. Both cultures share the agile process where the team follows
a streamlined workflow, either through the use of scrum or kanban. In this type of workflow,
features are divided into tasks.
The tasks go through a grooming phase, where developers
refine the tasks. The reason to groom the tasks is to find the right approach to execute the
given problem related to the task. Both cultures have their tech stack within a company, and
developers are hired based on the skills and experiences that can be provided.
18
==PAGE:20==
The cultures are, therefore, very similar in terms of the work process and resources, but what
differs are in skills and experience. Data scientists focus more on machine learning, algorithms,
statistics, and mathematics. Compared to software engineers are more focused on software
design, computer engineering, and automation. One of the problem areas is the differences in
technologies used by the cultures. The difference in technologies leads to another problem. The
inexperience in jumping across to another culture’s expertise means that it is an expensive and
typically lengthy development phase, as the technical hurdles in the integration process would
be difficult. Other challenges may be from the decision makers who are unwilling to approve
the changes to existing operations or consider the model’s performance not strong enough and
can be attributed to low code quality. Figure 6 displays the domain areas of the development
phase.
Figure 6: Development domain
Deployment
How to deploy a project can be done in multiple ways, all of which are time-
consuming. Due to limitations and focus, data scientists usually prefer to avoid learning how
to utilize tools such as Continues integration pipelines or similar deployment methods. The
missing integration part introduces a new set of issues. The code is only being tested locally
with limited data without integration or deployment. Herefore, it is doubtful that it will work
as expected when deployed.
There are two ways it can be done; Either the data scientist
teams spend a vast amount of hours trying to get it deployed when in their opinion, those
hours can be used to improve the prediction code. Alternatively, it can be passed on to the
19
==PAGE:21==
project’s supervisor - the project owner. It is now the project owner’s job to hand over the
project to another team that will integrate or deploy it. Deploying code that is a so-called
black box, meaning that the team with the task of deploying has limited knowledge of how
the project works, will therefore be time-consuming. Deploying a python project may not be
allowed depending on the company policies. To combat this issue, an adapted has to be created
around it that executes and data manage the python project, which adds complexity to the
project.
Deploying using continuous integration requires using at least two software environments, one
for local use and one for production use. The local is for local paths such as the local database
connection string, local folder paths, etc. The production is for the connection string to the pro-
duction database, which will differ from the local test database and the folder path. Therefore,
a unified structure is needed in the development phase to make the deployment more fluent.
Figure 7 displays the domain areas of the deployment phase.
Figure 7: Deployment domain
20
==PAGE:22==
3
Related work
This Chapter will present the related work already performed within this area. Based on these
works, it will be discussed how this project differs. There are different ways to analyze and
understand how the challenges have been dealt with previously.
As the development of each culture grows, so does the advancement in methods used. Machine
learning models contain several processes it has to undergo before it can produce a prediction
and traditionally machine learning model and their processes have been unified component.
LiRA uses this method in its deployment of machine learning, through its own machine learn-
ing component called AI component[12]. The most popular programming language to create
machine learning is Python due to the many libraries and frameworks created for it. Machine
learning processes tend to be tightly connected to each other and are therefore hard to break
up into smaller services, such that is the standard practice in a micro service system of which
LiRA utilizes. Arnau Morancho [13] did a paper on how it was possible to use modularization to
separate the sub-processes of machine learning in Python and thus be able to run each process
independently. In a micro service, each service can be created with its desired language and
framework, as the services communicate through a message broker. LiRA chooses to keep the
services uniform, meaning that each service is created with the .NET framework and is using
C#. Through C# it is possible to execute Python code.
A master’s thesis by Victor Foged, Niels With Mikkelsen, and Lasse Steen Pedersen about
being able to provide faster and better prices in RFQ auctions. They archived the goal by
enacting machine learning in a production environment. [17]. The implementation of the ma-
chine learning was performed by having a single service that contained all the machine learning
components. Compared to Victor and Niels’ thesis. Compared to Vicot and Niels’ thesis, this
thesis will modularize the machine learning model components into separate services. Much like
Victor and Niels’ thesis, the facilitator project LiRA also has an implementation of a machine
learning model, which is comprised of a single service.
A master’s thesis by Aayush Dhakal [8], the project touches on an architecture for integrat-
ing and deploying a machine learning model. This thesis focuses on creating an architecture
that makes the implementation of a machine-learning model scalable and customizable. In
21
==PAGE:23==
this thesis, to create the scalability, the components were orchestrator by a machine learning
Orchestrator component that starts each machine learning model component as needed. A dis-
advantage of using an orchestrator is that the orchestrator needs to communicate directly with
the services and wait for each service’s response. Compared to Aayush’s thesis, this thesis has
implemented a choreographing minded system. In choreographing, the services are less coupled
and, therefore, more agile and fault tolerant than an orchestrator-based system. Furthermore,
choreographing allows for a faster and more agile development phase.
All projects share the experiences of trying to utilize a machine-learning model and its data out-
put in a specific way. In a research-based thesis, it’s essential to make a contribution that differs
from the mentioned solutions. Making a contribution to science, the thesis was designed, as
mentioned, to be a choreography-based system; the machine learning models components were
modularized and compared to Arnau’s thesis to simplifying the process of executing Python
scripts from C#
22
==PAGE:24==
4
Design
This Chapter describes the design of the system. This Chapter is built up of three parts; the
system requirements, major components, and the structure for the system based on the major
components. The requirements and design are built with the problem domains described in
Chapter 2 in mind.
4.1
System requirements analysis
The solution must live up to a production-level standard, why an analysis of the desired re-
quirements for the system has been created. The solution is expected to manage and process
the data presented by the machine learning prediction. Furthermore, the machine learning
model must also be integrated and work flawlessly with the rest of the system.
The requirement analysis is divided into three categories: Prediction handler, Python scripts,
and Other.
Prediction handler
handles the prediction output file received from the machine learning
model.
Python Scripts
are the machine learning model that executes the components of the machine
learning model.
Other
is for anything related to databases, hosting hardware, etc
The requirements for the system are listed in Table 1.
23
==PAGE:25==
Table 1: System requirements
Component
Requirement-ID
Requirement
Prediction handler
Requirement-01
The output reader must be able to read the
output files from a predefined folder
Requirement-02
The processed files must be deleted after use.
Requirement-03
The prediction read must be able to handle
more than one prediction file in a row
Requirement-04
Metadata must be collected for ways
Requirement-05
Metadata must be collected in segments
Requirement-06
The database must be able to handle multiple
users
Requirement-07
Prediction output must be saved to a database
Python scripts
Requirement-08
Python scripts must be executed in C#
Requirement-09
Python scripts must be separated into its core
components
Requirement-10
Python scripts must be deployed to the Virtual
machine
Requirement-11
Python scripts must be able to read and create
pickle files
Others
Requirement-12
Access rights: Developers have read/write
access while the users outside of the project
will have read-only access
Requirement-13
Hardware: The deployment must be on a DTU
Compute virtual machine
Requirement-14
The database must to be able to handle
multiple users
Requirement-15
Communication must be through a message
broker.
Requirement-16
The system must be a micro-service
architecture.
24
==PAGE:26==
4.2
Major components
The system developed in this thesis will comprise of several components. In the existing LiRA
system, the machine learning is allocated into one component, the AI component.
The AI
component consists of several steps before a prediction is created. The steps are Preprocessing,
creating windows, and the prediction calculation itself.
If one step fails or the component
crashes, the entirety of it needs to start over, which takes time. The component should therefore
be divided into three new components. Each component will be tasked with its respective field.
If one crashes, fails or is taken down due to a bug, the other components can still operate.
A component is needed to activate or tell the machine learning that a new trip has arrived.
LiRA uses a micro-service architecture, and communication between each service is, therefore,
through a message broker.
Moreover, a component must fetch any metadata and save the
prediction values.
The components of the system should consist of the following elements:
• Component(s) that contains the machine learning components
• A component that receives that a new trip has arrived
• A communication link component
• A component that collects metadata related to the machine learning prediction output
and saves it
• A component that stores the prediction and metadata
4.2.1
Components communication
This Section will be about the component that received the new trips and how the different
components communicate.
An initial analysis was performed on the data received from a
new trip, as this will give insight into how the data should be passed around amongst the
components. A single trip contains a vast amount of data, and realizing that sending that
amount of data between the components would need to be revised, a more straightforward
25
==PAGE:27==
method was needed. Each newly received trip has been given an id that can be used as an
initiator. The component receiving the trip id will pull the necessary data related to the trip
from the database and limit the amount of data needed to go through the communication link.
The communication link between the components is in micro-services a message broker and
should therefore be used here as well. Since the system developed in this thesis will act as
a stand-alone solution, it must come from outside the system. The system should, therefore,
adopt and use an application programming interface API and can be used as an initiator for
when a new trip arrives. The API is for two or more systems to communicate with each other
over the internet. Once the API has received the new trip, the trip ID will be passed on to
the message broker and then to one of the services. RabbitMq is a message broker and enables
software applications to connect and scale. The messages are asynchronous, decoupling the
application by separating the data received and sent. RabbitMQ will be discussed in more
detail in the Section 4.3.6.
4.2.2
Information exchanged
The information exchanged between the different components will have two parts. The reason
to use a two-part system is that the data created in each step for the machine learning is too
great to be transferred over the message broker. The message broker will only transmit the trip
id between the micro-services. The second part is to transmit the data between the services.
One of the solutions would be to load all the data created onto a database and then make
each service pull the data from the previous step. From the Chapter 2 where it was discussed,
what are some of a data scientist’s strengths and weaknesses, it was discovered that utilizing,
designing, and creating a database or modifying an existing is typically allocated to a database
expert. Python has another way to save data to the disk - pickle. Pickle files can store objects
by serializing. Pickle files are, therefore, an excellent solution to store the data created by the
different steps. The file can be located by the next step by saving the file path.
4.2.3
Storage
As discussed in the previous Section 4.2.2 on information exchanged between the components,
the data will be saved locally with pickle files between the machine learning components and
why this was chosen. The final prediction output must be saved in a database as it has a use
case later. A look at the prediction output data is needed to determine what type of database
is needed. The output data contains geospatial data in longitude and latitude coordination,
26
==PAGE:28==
which can be used to create a geometry object. See the Section 4.3.9 for more detail on the
geometry objects and database type used.
4.2.4
Input/output processing
As described, the input data will be a trip id, while the python scripts will communicate its
data with pickle files. With the prediction output file being a CSV, it is possible to create an
analysis of what data has been created. Additional data must be collected through an API
call to Open Street Map (OSM) to ensure information such as street name, relations, etc. data
is collected. Besides the data collected from the API, data is needed to be calculated. The
calculation will be of how much each window occupies on a given road, the length of rows, and
converting geospatial data into a database format.
4.3
System structure
This Section will combine the previous Sections’ information and explain how the system’s
structure and architecture will be built. It is possible to meet the requirements by creating
one system, but this would be ill-advised. As described earlier, LiRA uses the micro service
architecture, and a similar architecture style should be used in this thesis.
4.3.1
Architecture
Since it was an initialized idea that this thesis should be able to be incorporated into the existing
LiRA system, it was decided to use the same micro-service architecture. micro-service architec-
ture is an architectural style that structures a system as a collection of services. The architecture
utilizes the ability to make the services highly maintainable, testable, loosely coupled, indepen-
dently deployable, and organized around business capabilities.
Micro-service enables rapid,
frequent, and reliable delivery of larger and more complex IT applications.
There are three primary architectural patterns in a micro-service system; the Monolithic Archi-
tecture pattern is a more traditional architectural style and is a good choice for many applica-
tions but may have limitations and issues regarding larger and more complex applications. In
contrast, the micro-service Architecture pattern is more suited to a larger application. Lastly,
Service-Oriented architecture (SOA).
27
==PAGE:29==
Monolithic Architecture pattern is commonly used in the industry. The pattern is defined
as a single application containing several smaller components. The components can vary based
on the use case. The components can be payment, notification, etc. Because the design pattern
is a single application, can the components not be deployed separately. A classic design pattern
for the monolithic architecture would be three layer structure. The structure consists of three
layers; The API, which is connected to the client application. The business logic contains the
core logic of the application. Lastly, the data layer is where the application communicates with
the data related to the application; in most cases, this would be a database. See Figure 8 for
an overview of the three-layer structure
Figure 8: Overview of a three-layer structure
Monolithic architecture patterns advantage is in its simplicity and straightforwardness when
it comes to developing a system. The simplicity makes it ideal for smaller and less complex
systems. One of the advantages of simplicity is that only one component needs to be tested
and deployed, and it is much easier than having several components. If the system grows over
time, the first drawbacks will show. As the code base is all located in a single component,
will it be more laborious to maintain the system. Likewise, the application will not be easily
expanded as one application means one technology is used, and any expansion would have to
28
==PAGE:30==
use the same technology. The scalability is, therefore, not great either. See Figure 9 for an
overview of a monolithic architecture.
Figure 9: Overview of a monolithic Architecture
Micro-service Architecture pattern is utilizing a service-oriented structure. Meaning that
the system is divided into several micro-services, the opposite of the monolithic architecture.
Each service has been designed for a single context and can be deployed independently. The
service communicates through a message-based system.
One of the design pattern’s main
features is that the micro-services are loosely coupled. Loosely coupled means that the service’s
dependencies on each other are relativity low. Upholding this standard is clearly understanding
what each micro-services business logic should be capable of.
In a monolithic architecture pattern, the system would typically have one centralized database.
In a micro-service architecture pattern, each micro-service would have its own dedicated data
storage. Depending on the type of data storage, the other services would not have access to the
other micro-services databases. The reason for this logic is, if one database is changed, then all
the other micro-services must change as well to accommodate the changes. See Figure 11 for
an overview of the micro-service architecture.
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 10: Overview of a micro-service Architecture
One of the strongest motivations for using the micro-service architecture pattern is its ability to
develop and deploy independently of each other. Suppose the micro-services are developed by
multiple teams. In that case, the services don’t necessarily need to share the same technology or
database technology as each micro-service would utilize what is best suited for the micro-service.
For any reason that may be unknown, a micro-service needed to be replaced, or if the micro-
service went down, it would be easy for the development team to replace or get it up and
running again. The reason is that the application can operate as the micro-service and would
not affect other micro-services.
Service-Oriented architecture is an architecture style that takes inspiration from both
monolithic and micro-service architecture. Like the micro-service architecture, it has divided
its system into micro-services. The services are generally larger, reusable, and share resources.
Instead of each service having a database, it has one large one, shared by all the services.
Determine between the three different architectures comes down to the thesis’s use case. As
thesis goal is to modularize the machine learning component and to integrate the modular
machine learning components of the modular approach of the micro-service architecture ideal.
The architecture pattern is based on the practicality of developing, testing, and deploying indi-
vidually. Each machine learning module can be built into a single service, which can be tested
30
==PAGE:32==
Figure 11: Overview of a SOA Architecture
and deployed independently. The method facilitates a speedy development and release phase.
A benefit of using micro-service architecture is that the release of one service is not limited
by the release of another service, which needs to be finished and ready for release. Compared
to the others, the agility of the architecture is high since multiple teams can work on services
independently and quickly. Each service can be developed this way due to the decoupling of
micro-service components. The inherent micro-service architecture and its multiple minor ser-
vices make it easier to scale the application. Scaling is adding a new service and is not limited
to this architecture. In Section 4.4 has, the structure of the selected architecture been described
in more detail.
4.3.2
Python components
Each Python component consists of several processes before it can compute the prediction
results. The component has been viewed as a black box because the software engineer would
only have the basic knowledge of how it works. The structure of the Python components are
displayed in Figure 12, and each component will be discussed more in-depth later in Section
4.3.3,4.3.4 and 4.3.5 .
The user could transfer the prediction output to the system’s database manually, but this will
add more cost in terms of man-hours needed and the increased risk of user errors by saving the
data.
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 12: Flow Diagram Python
The Machine learning component can be separated into three sub-components: Preprocessing,
windowing, and Prediction. The Prediction components create the prediction output that needs
to be saved to a database. Besides saving, metadata needed to be collected for each prediction
before saving. This should be kept in a separate service to uphold the practice of keeping the
system loosely coupled. The services would consist of the following machine learning services;
Preprocessing, Windowing and Prediction.
Each step requires the processed data from the previous step. Numerous possible solutions can
be used to pass the data to the next step. Each step requires information from the message
broker to be passed from the previous step once completed. A database table can store the data
between the services and review the data output when testing the services. Instead of using a
database, which might not be in the skill set of a data scientist, each step will create a pickle
file and a CSV file with a specific name such that the next step in the ML model can quickly
identify and access the previous step’s work. Pickle files are used in Python and are extremely
fast to read and write, but they aren’t readable to the human eye. Likewise, saving the data in
files is also a less optimal practice, but it was an optimal choice for simplicity. An excel/CSV file
would have to be created beside the pickle file for readability and testability to the developer.
The excel/CSV can also be used as a final output file for the prediction since collecting data
elsewhere might be required before data is ready for use in a deployed environment.
Some advantages to using a file system approach instead of a database can be less loading time
32
==PAGE:34==
related to loading data from a database that might be located on another machine and less
downtime if said database is unavailable. The database is not cluttered with an extra table to
hold temporary values. Some disadvantages can be that the data files are typically larger and
located on the machine where it was created. Therefore only available on that machine. The
data is, therefore, not backed up if something were to happen. It can be less convenient to
rerun one of the three steps if many files are in the same folder without a clear id.
4.3.3
Preprocessing
The preprocessing service will be the first to receive input from the message broker. The service
task will be to execute the first step of the python scripts, which will preprocess the data. Since
transferring a large amount of data over the rabbitMQ queue is ill-advised, the Python script
will utilize a database connection to retrieve the necessary data from the trip. The data needs
to be saved locally to avoid saving the preprocessed data in a database, and a pickle file will
be used as temporary storage. Once the data has been processed, the service will transmit the
trip id to the next service. The structure of the python scripts contains the Map Matching,
windowing, interpolation. Each is necessary to be executed before the next service. In Figure
13, the structure of the preprocessing python script can be seen.
Figure 13: Preprocessing structure Diagram
4.3.4
Windowing
Much the same as the previous service, this service will execute the windowing Python code
and receive the trip id from the message broker. The code takes the processed data pickle file
from the previous Python component and splits it into a segment of 50 or 100 meters. Once
the segment have been established, it will save a pickle file for easy access and send the trip
33
==PAGE:35==
id to the message brokers’ message queue. In figure 14, the structure of the machine learning
python script can be seen.
Figure 14: Windowing structure Diagram
4.3.5
Prediction
As this thesis will be handling an already trained machine learning model. Besides the pre-
diction value of IRI, KPI, and DI, the machine learning model calculates friction and energy
consumption. In Figure 15, the structure of the machine learning python script can be seen.
The service structure will be inherent in the three-layer structure as the other services are using.
The python prediction script differs from the rest as it does not save a pickle file but a CSV
file, which the C# code read and processes.
Figure 15: prediction structure Diagram
34
==PAGE:36==
4.3.6
Message Broker
In a micro-service architecture, the system can send information through a message broker to a
service within it. Since each trip contains considerable information, passing all the data would
be deemed a bad practice in a micro-service architecture. The message broker should only send
the necessary information to the receiving system. Therefore instead of sending an entire trip,
only the trip task ID will be delivered to the micro-service system so it can extract the necessary
information from a database. A message broker will be managed by RabbitMQ. The system will
be designed to follow rabbitmq’s AMQP protocol. The AMQP protocol is programmable, and
a micro-service can directly manage the routing schemes. There is no need for a service that
administrates the messages sent. As the name message broker suggests, the AMQP protocol
uses message exchanges. Attributes such as name and trip can be in each message. A routing
key is provided to route the messages to the correct message queue. A routing key is essential
as if none has been provided, and the message will be delivered to all possible queues that have
been bound. The key, therefore, needs to be specified for both the consumer and the provider.
See Figure 16 for illustration RabbitMQ.
Figure 16: Illustration of RabbitMQ
To utilize the message broker, two main methods are utilized; Choreography and Orchestration.
Choreography is event-driven by the events from the services in the system. A service con-
sumes the event and acts and publishes an event. Compared to the orchestration method, no
centralized coordinator service. The orchestrator in the orchestration methods coordinates the
different services by sending commands. As orchestration relies on the orchestrator to coordi-
nate, the system fails if the coordinator fails. For this reason alone, the decision was to utilize
choreography as the primary development method.
35
==PAGE:37==
4.3.7
API
A REST API is one of the most known forms of web services that are available today. It gives
clients the ability to communicate with the server. An API needs to accept a JSON object, and
depending on the API call, it should also be able to send one. In the case of this system API,
sending any information back to the client will not be necessary, as it only needs to accept an
input of a trip id. Due to the simplicity of the API, it will consist of two layers: the controller
and the Business layer. The controller will contain the API call itself, while the business layer
will contain the logic that the API layer will need to work successfully. In this instance, the
API’s task will be to relay the trip id to the next service and thus start the process of creating
a prediction for the given trip. The id will be transferred to a rabbitMQ queue and be utilized
if the queue responder is available. The API should consist of a call to run the entire pipeline
and one call for each python script.
4.3.8
Prediction Importer
The data importer is tasked with reading the prediction CSV file, collecting any metadata
relevant to the prediction data, calculating distances covered, and saving or updating existing
values in a database. To know what extra data has to be collected, the data importer should
read the CSV file first and once the CSV file has been loaded into a list, it can start to collect
the metadata. Not all rows have the necessary information for pre-check for collecting the
metadata. The reason is that the trip at the time the measurement was taken was on an off/on
ramp to a highway or in a parking lot and therefore did not have information, such as a street
name. When all external data has been collected, measurements can be calculated. There
will be two types of measurement. The first one will be the streets length, as this is not data
that can be collected externally. The second will be how much of the road a given prediction
segment occupies. Lastly, the data will be saved once these steps have been completed.
The service structure can therefore be divided into four Sections. CSV-read, external data
collected, Calculations, and database saving or updating
4.3.9
Database
The database is a geospatial database. A geospatial database is different as it can save the
geographic information as geometry objects. There are different types of geometry objects, but
36
==PAGE:38==
all generally are an abstraction of geospatial objects. The types vary from a single location,
represented by a point and a linestring which is a collection of multiple points. An area is
defined as a polygon. Sometimes a line string can have the same start and end point; if this is
the case, it’s called a linearring. All of which can be in a geometry collection. The geospatial
data can define bounding boxes, calculate the length, and many others. Types displayed in
Figure 17.
Figure 17: Overview of Geometry objects
The cars drive on streets, and the information related to the ways needs to be saved. Geospatial
data is used here, but since a way tends to curve and not be straight, multiple linestrings must
be drawn as a multi-linestring object. The multi-linestring is created by fetching the nodes
related to the way and creating a linestring between each node.
The table design for the geodatabase will be as follows: A table for the trips taken. A table for
map references. A table for ways. A table for the coverage. A table for the coverage values.
The Way table stores the relevant information of the Open Street Map (OSM) ways. the ways
are collected from the OSM database through an API. In theory, LiRA’s overpass server could
change this as it is a copy. Each way has a multi-point geometry associated with it. The Object
has been created by fetching the nodes associated with the way. By collecting the nodes, it is
possible to calculate the distance of the Section more precisely than just calculating the start
and end position of the way. With PostGIS and the OSM data collected, it is possible to use a
geospatial function to provide geographic services. Attributes isHighway, Node end, Node start
37
==PAGE:39==
can be retrieved from tags residing inside the API call associated with the specific OSM object.
The Trips table contains the information related to the trip. Information such as the date and
time of the trip and when it was inserted into the database. The table also has two geometry
objects containing a point of the trip’s start and end point.
In the coverage table, every window for each trip has been saved. Each window has a relation
to a trip and a way. The table stores each window in a linestring geometry object. A date
of when the window was saved and two distances that have been measured. The distances
are of the same type. The Distance is the amount the window occupies the way. The reason
for selecting two distances is that the first will measure the distance to the start point, and
the second will measure the distance to the endpoint. Since the machine learning prediction
produces about 15 different types of values, it made sense to separate coverage and the values
and create a separate database to contain a type and the value of the type. The database table
is called coverage values. See Figure 18 for the Entity-Relation database diagram.
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 18: ERB
4.4
Envisioned system architecture
The envisioned system structure will be designed so that when receiving the new trip infor-
mation, the API initializes it by putting it into a message broker queue. The services can be
created in many ways. As described earlier in Chapter 2, some industry standards have to be
met when doing so. Some companies will not allow services made out of purely Python-written
code to enter production and therefore need a different way to be executed. C# has a specific
way of creating a process, which can be a python script and can be used and read more about
in Section 5.5. The services should therefore be written in C# and then execute the python
39
==PAGE:41==
code using C#. This method will uphold the industry standard and minimize the different
frameworks needed for deployment. Likewise, this will separate the work of the data science
and the software engineers.
In a micro-service architecture, the system can send information through a message broker to a
service within the micro-service. Since each trip contains considerable amounts of information,
passing all the information would be deemed a bad practice. The message broker should only
receive and send the necessary information for the receiving service to work. Therefore instead
of sending an entire trip, only the trip task ID will be delivered to the micro-service system so
the service can extract the necessary information from a database.
In theory, incoming new trips would be a reoccurring phenomenon as more and more trips are
driven. During this thesis, only a handful of trips will be used to test whether it is possible
and whether the data flow will be cross-sectional. However, the system will be designed to
accommodate the possibility of receiving data regularly and be longitude.
The data needs to be saved in a location between the services for the next service to pick it up
or as an end destination. In Chapter 2, it was determined that the data science strengths did
not include databases and database data manipulation. As the ML has been written in python,
using a pickle file to store data between the services would be optimal. As the prediction is
the final data output and will be used in further applications, the data should be stored in a
database. Additional data must be collected before the data can be inserted into a database.
That is why to create temporary data storage between the python scripts and the C# code,
CSV files should be used since C# cannot read pickle files. Once the C# code has read the
CSV file and collected the necessary additional data, the data will be saved to a database.
Figure 19 show the envisioned system structure diagram, external marked components are not
developed in this Thesis.:
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 19: System architecture Diagram
41
==PAGE:43==
5
Implementation
The design implementation described in Chapter 4 will be documented in this Chapter. This
Chapter will also describe the workflow, the deployment method, testing, and how the Python
scripts have been executed.
5.1
Workflow
The two culture each has one independent repository. The repository is spread out over GitLab
and Github. Both tools are git-based version control. The reason for choosing Github is that
DTU computes its own secure GitLab service. For the micro-services, Github was chosen to
show a proof of concept that the location of the team repository can vary. Of course, this puts a
strain on any management overlooking both teams. Two teams, two cultures with their git flow
to follow. The software engineering team follows the standard git feature branch workflow[19].
Following the git feature branch workflow, every new addition to the system will be developed
in a dedicated branch, a feature branch. Once a feature is finished and ready to be merged
into the master branch, a pull request is created. The pull request requires another developer
to approve; see Figure 20 for a workflow example.
Figure 20: Git feature branch workflow
For a team to keep track of the different tasks/features or to plan new tasks/features, a simple
kanboard can be used. Of such tools, many exist. For this thesis, Jira has been used to track and
show the different tasks’ progress. Through Jira, the tasks have been defined and documented,
see Figure 21
42
==PAGE:44==
Figure 21: Jira Kanban board
43
==PAGE:45==
5.2
Geo services
The geo service provides three functionalities; geometry objects, map referencing, and length
calculation based on coordinates. To be able to provide such functionality, the service collects
the data needed from the OSM database and stores it locally, as it needs to create the map
referencing and calculations before it is stored in a separate database created for this thesis.
This section will be divided into two sub-Sections: the first will explain how the system imports
the OSM data, and the second will be about how it was implemented and used.
5.2.1
Collection OSM data
The fetching of data happens in two steps. The first step is the initial road trip data collected
from the LiRA overpass database. The second step is the collection of all the metadata related
to the trip collected from the LiRA overpass database. The metadata is collected from the
OSM API. The Python script collects the data from the overpass database in the preprocessing
service and is used for the machine learning model. This data is saved locally as described
in a pickle file for later use. Once the prediction has been completed, the metadata can be
collected. The API call needed for collecting is a slow process as every prediction calculation
needs additional metadata, which requires its API call. The metadata consists of data from
each prediction and the way that the prediction is located. After the metadata collection, the
prediction data can be saved to a database. This step must be completed as the data objects are
yet to be translated into geometry objects, which PostGIS needs. NetTopologySuite.Geometries
is a C# nuget pack that has the functionality needed to do such a translation and has been
used.
5.3
API
REST API utilizes the methods corresponding to HTTP requests - GET, PUT, DELETE,
POST. These HTTP methods can be used to create and define endpoints. For an API to be
genuinely RESTful, it has to conform to specific criteria: The API must be Stateless, meaning
no information is saved of the client between the requests, and each request is unconnected.
A layered structure that organizes the different types of service, load-balancing, security, etc.
The architecture is a client-server and, as the name suggests, comprises clients, servers, and
resources. The requests are managed through the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). In the
use case of this thesis, the API will be used as an initiator. The API will start the process
44
==PAGE:46==
by delivering the trip id to one of the different services. For testability, every service should
have its dedicated endpoint, not only if one of the services needs to be executed again due to
unforeseen complications. To initiate the entire pipeline, an endpoint would be dedicated.
Swagger has been used to visualize the API endpoints created. It is possible to visualize the
API without having any logic implemented. The visualization gives the development team -
and the consumers, the possibility to interact with the API’s endpoints, and it is automatically
generated based on the API specifications.
5.4
Choreography
The choreography coordinates the services and keeps track of each service’s status and progress.
Systems utilizing the choreography approach are decentralized. The microservices are, there-
fore, aware of their place in the process hierarchy and connect to an event queue. Compared
to the alternative, the orchestrator, the choreography is a more decoupled system in the sense
that there is no chance of the orchestrator either doing too much work or failing. The downside
is that choreography is significantly harder to monitor. Another aspect is that the orchestrator
is less coupled as each service in the choreography system would have to know the next service.
In contrast, the orchestrator would be the only one to know the services and in which order
the pipeline was defined. See Figure 22 for a visualization of the choreography pattern.
Figure 22: Choreography pattern
45
==PAGE:47==
The choreography system was chosen to be less dependent on one element in the pipeline.
The approach is relatively straightforward to implement, as there is no orchestrator to be
implemented. The service subscribes to a message broker queue, and the event is sent directly
to the service, which completes its process. Once the process is completed, it must know its
next destination in the pipeline and send a new event.
5.5
Executing Python scripts
In Chapter 4, it was decided to use C# as the primary programming language. Executing
the Python scripts from another initiator than Python itself has to be considered an external
process. A process is, in the simplest of terms, an application located on the computer. With
a process component, it is possible to gain access to said process and run it through the C#.
The Process component in C# is used to start, stop, control, and monitor apps that have been
started through the component. A simple application can be run directly through the process
component. However, before starting processes such as the Python machine learning model,
information must be given. Together with the process component, can theProcessStartInfo be
used as it is possible to set the arguments for the Python scripts, file name, and file path. See
linestring 1 for an example of one of the executed Python components.
Listing 1: Python process start
var
psi = new ProcessStartInfo ( ) ;
s t r i n g
path = @”/ usr / bin /python3” ;
psi . FileName = path ;
var
s c r i p t = @”/app/ python repo /module deployment/get windows . py” ;
int
f o r c e d b f e t c h = 0;
psi . Arguments = $”\”{ s c r i p t }\” \”−−GM trip\” \”{ t r i p }\” \”−−window length \”
\”{ window lenght }\” \”−−f o r c e d b f e t c h \” \”{ f o r c e d b f e t c h }\”” ;
// Process
configurations
psi . UseShellExecute = false ;
psi . CreateNoWindow = true ;
psi . RedirectStandardOutput = true ;
46
==PAGE:48==
psi . RedirectStandardError = true ;
// Execute
process and get
output
var
e r r o r s = ”” ;
var
r e s u l t s = ”” ;
using
( var
process = Process . Start ( psi ))
{
Console . WriteLine ( ” Process
has
started ” ) ;
e r r o r s = process . StandardError . ReadToEnd ( ) ;
r e s u l t s = process . StandardOutput . ReadToEnd ( ) ;
}
// Display
output
Console . WriteLine ( ”ERRORS” ) ;
Console . WriteLine ( e r r o r s ) ;
Console . WriteLine ( ) ;
Console . WriteLine ( ”RESULTS” ) ;
Console . WriteLine ( r e s u l t s ) ;
5.6
Docker deployment
To deploy the solution, several options exist. The current LiRA road condition system, which
utilizes the exact machine learning prediction as in this thesis, uses Continuous Integration/De-
livery (CI & CD). This approach is the best practice for automating deployment.
Continuous integration is, as the name suggests, the practice of automating the integration
part of your code base. The Pipeline that controls the automation has several steps to abide
by before the code changes are always integrated.
Continuous Delivery is a practice to deliver and release a new software version. Continuous
Delivery is the step after continuous integration and is only followed if the code passes this
step.
47
==PAGE:49==
Since setting up a CI and CD can be lengthy, a more straightforward solution was chosen;
Docker. Docker can be used in CI and CD and is used to deploy the actual code base, but
without the automation commonly found in CI and CD. a Docker deployment consists of two
elements; Docker image, and Docker container.
Docker Image is a template with instructions for creating a docker container. As the name
suggests, the image comprises stacked layers, like in a photo editor. Each Layer changes ele-
ments in the environment. Therefore, the docker image is a file used to execute the code inside
the container. The image file must include the application code, libraries, tools dependencies,
and anything else needed to run the application. See Listing 2 for an example of a docker
image.
Listing 2: Docker file
#Build
Stage
FROM mcr . microsoft . com/ dotnet /sdk : 7 . 0 AS build
WORKDIR / source
COPY .
.
RUN dotnet
r e s t o r e
” ./ DataImporterAPI/DataImporterAPI . csproj ” −−disable −p a r a l l e l
RUN dotnet
publish ” ./ DataImporterAPI/DataImporterAPI . csproj ”
−c
r e l e a s e −o /app −−no−r e s t o r e
# Serve
Stage
FROM mcr . microsoft . com/ dotnet / aspnet : 7 . 0
WORKDIR /app
COPY −−from=build /app
.
EXPOSE 80
ENTRYPOINT [ ” dotnet ” , ”DataImporterAPI . d l l ” ]
Docker container is generally a virtualized run-time environment. The container is used to
create, run and deploy an application.
The container shares the host machine kernel and,
48
==PAGE:50==
depending if the container is limited due to limitation factors sat upon it, will share its resources
too. Based on this, the container is lightweight. The container’s task is to set up the run time
environment. This involves which ports must be exposed, the internal network if containers
need to communicate, if the container needs access to files, if volumes are necessary, etc.
Each service will have its image and its container.
For the services to communicate with
each other, it is, therefore, essential to establish a network through which the services can
communicate. The network can be created through two methods. The first method is to create
and referee the network in the docker container. The other way is to create all the containers
based on the images through a Docker-compose file. A docker-compose is a tool to define and
share multiple container applications. A docker-compose file uses YAML and is dedicated to
defining the different services. With a single command - Docker-compose up/down can either
start it all up or shut everything down. One of the significant advantages of docker-compose is
that it does much of the work automatically. For example, the network for multiple services to
communicate with each other is automatically set up. Instead of using a command for running
a docker container with multiple settings, it can be done by writing it in the docker-compose
yaml file instead of directly in the terminal window.
5.7
Testing
The test has been performed to verify the quality and standards of the developed system.
Different types of tests have been used throughout the thesis. The test used is a unit test, an
integration test, and an End-To-End test.
5.7.1
Unit Testing
Unit tests are for testing the functionality of methods and classes. The unit testing performed
in this thesis tested the calculations related to distance and conversion. The unit test consists
of three stages; Assigning, where the variables needed to execute the test are declared. Act,
where the method or class being tested is utilized, and Assert, where the result is compared to
an expected output. see listing 3 for an example of a unit test performed.
49
==PAGE:51==
Listing 3: Unit testing
[ Test ]
public void CalculateDistance ()
{
// Assign
Coordinate a = new Coordinate (12.5362526 ,
55.6926256);
Coordinate b = new Coordinate (12.5362537 ,
55.6927531);
//Act
var
distance =
c a l c u l a t i o n s . CalculateDistance (a , b ) ;
// Assert
NUnit . Framework . Assert . That ( distance ,
Is . EqualTo ( 1 4 ) . Within ( 1 ) ) ;
}
5.7.2
Integration Testing
The thesis works on integrating Machine learning into a software engineering system.
An
integration test can be performed on the various parts to test the integration. The integration
test was performed on each micro-service with an integrated machine learning component. The
test will therefore be conducted on the service Preprocessing. The test has been completed
outside of the production environment. The reason for isolating the tests from production is
to protect the production environment. The isolation will use new message queues created in
the message broker and a test database to secure the production database from possible data
duplication. Some exception was made as the Preprocessing service requires the collection of
initial data from a database, and to collect all metadata, an API call is needed. As a result,
using external components for the test results in considerable time and resources needed to
perform the tests. The calls to the database or the API must be completed over the network
and awaited. For this reason, the integration test is few. The integration test tests whether the
Python scripts are successfully executed and that the message broker receives and delivers the
correct messages.
5.7.3
End-To-End Testing
The data flows from the beginning to the end of an application. An End-To-End test can be
performed to test the workflow of an applications pipeline. The application created in this thesis
50
==PAGE:52==
has been tested by executing the pipeline with different start inputs and conditions. The two
teams have then verified the result - the software engineering team and the data scientist team,
to have correctly processed the data and saved or updated the correct entities in the database.
One of the downsides of doing an End-to-end test is that it can be very time-consuming, hence
the reason to keep the number of tests down relativity low. The tests have been manually
conducted. The reason is due to the complexity of the test.
The system has been tested based on two hypotheses. The first is that a brand new trip has
arrived, and the second is if the trip has already been processed and saved. Each of the services
in the system has been tested individually and then together as an entire pipeline. All the
tests listed were successfully executed, and the data was processed correctly. If the data was
already in either an existing pickle file or in the database, the data was either not pulled from
the database because the pickle file maintained the data, and neither was replicated in the
database.
51
==PAGE:53==
6
Evaluation
This Chapter evaluates the implementation of the system with respect to the problem state-
ment, research questions, and quality of the machine learning integration. The evaluation of
these areas will be covered in three sections: System evaluation, which will evaluate the differ-
ent domain problem areas described in Chapter 2, the System requirements listed in Chapter
4 and finally the research questions stated in Chapter 1.
6.1
System evaluation
This section will review the problem domain areas discussed in chapter 2.
6.1.1
Project management
The problems encountered within the project were the difficulties in tracking the progress of
the data scientist team. This was due to the data scientist team operating as a separate entity.
In an optimal solution, the progress would have been tracked in a unified tool between the data
scientists and software engineers. Depending on the size of the teams, two different boards,
e.g., Jira boards, would have been utilized. Enforcing project management tools encourage
developers to use an agile workflow. Working in sprints, connected to an agile workflow, is
essential to keep both teams on track with their respective work, as it would constantly have
clear objectives. Adding a new task to the backlog makes it easier to get an overview of the tasks
in the current sprint and the tasks ready for the next sprint. Utilizing a project management
tool will optimize the workflow of each team.
This project’s tracking has been mainly done through conversations and meetings with the
respective partners.
6.1.2
Development
An usual development approach is to develop and integrate a machine learning model in a single
service in an application [17, 20]. As a machine learning model consists of multiple processes, it
would mean if an unexpected event happened, the entire model would need to be re-executed.
Modularizing the machine learning model would give the developers the freedom to run selected
machine learning processes, either for testing purposes or if, for some reason, one of the processes
failed. In a service-oriented application, as the one implemented in this thesis, there is generally
52
==PAGE:54==
two primary ways to coordinate the services; Choreography and Orchestration. Choreography
was chosen as it is a decentralized service composition compared to the integration methods
from Thomas Bech Madsen [21] that utilized Orchestration, which is centralized.
The service composition of the communication is one thing, transferring data between the ser-
vices is another. The file system between the services, used in this thesis, is simple and elegant,
but not optimal. In an optimal solution, the data transferred between services would not be
conducted with files, but through database(s) instead. Files have the perks of being straight-
forward and fast to implement but are slow to read and write from compared to databases.
Databases are on the other hand are more time consuming to setup.
The repositories were separated for apparent reasons: two different programming languages
and two teams working together. The C# repository comprises the various services created
during the thesis. The repository could have been divided into multiple repositories, so each
service had its own. However, as the C# structure is divided into an overall project and the
individual services inside the project are called solutions, it was decided to go against the further
repository separation.
6.1.3
System requirements
Prediction handler
The requirement concerns the choices made regarding the prediction
handler. The prediction handler must be able to read the prediction CSV-files. As all the files
are located in a single folder, a naming scheme was conceived to differentiate the files based
on the stage of the machine learning component it originated from. The naming scheme also
provides easy deletion of files processed, as if kept, would stack up over time. Once processed,
any metadata must be collected before saving the prediction to the database. The amount of
data collected depends on the information in the database.
Python scripts
The requirements are related to how the python scripts have been executed.
The approach implemented in this thesis was chosen because the machine learning model is
typically written in Python. Python is not a programming language often utilized in software
engineering as its use case is more related to algorithms.
Another aspect was to keep the
programming language uniform.
53
==PAGE:55==
Others
The requirements for this component are everything related to outside of the system,
such as the database, hardware, and architecture, and was, therefore, a requirement on its own.
6.1.4
Integration and deployment
The problem encountered when integrating the machine learning model was that the Python
code was not optimized for integration in a service-oriented system.
The machine learning
components needed to be less intertwined to utilize the modular approach in the micro-service
architecture, and the machine learning model had to be refactored during the project period
prior to integration. In general, the modular system has to be considered at the beginning of
the project. Having decided on a clear structure in the early phases means less time spent
on refactoring code when the model is completed. Furthermore, during the structuring phase
of the machine learning model, it is essential to differentiate which tasks should be allocated
to each component of the machine learning model to keep a low coupling between the com-
ponents. As the machine learning model is created in Python and the integration is done in
C#, the Python version and the libraries used are not automatically transferred between the
two programming languages. This requires the Python version and libraries to be installed on
the host machine, otherwise the integration will not work. A requirement file was created to
mitigate the problem with the necessary information on Python/library class versions. Each
time a version is upgraded, or if a new library is added, it must be added to the file. The
file helps when the software engineer has to integrate the Python scripts, as the developer can
execute the file and have every dependency needed to run the scripts.
There are several ways to keep uniformity in the services regarding using C# in the software
engineering application. Arnau’s [13] approach was to utilize a NuGet Package named Iron
Python, which has a custom Python Engine to execute the Python scripts.
The approach
created in this thesis is to assume the Python script is aProcess of ProcessStartInfo. Utilizing
ProcessStartInfo is a more straightforward solution compared to Iron Python. Iron Python, on
the other hand, is a fully integrated Python compiler as it compiles Python code to memory,
and the features and performance are better than running the scripts as a process.
Docker was utilized for deploying the application. Docker consists of two elements; the docker
image file and the docker-compose file. The docker image file requires the necessary installations
to be added, as the image contains all the installations necessary for the docker container.
54
==PAGE:56==
Instead of creating a long and tedious process of adding every library needed to execute the
Python script, the mentioned requirement file was added. Furthermore, if an image needed
access to the database C# solution, the solution also needed to be added here. The docker-
compose defines the services and creates an isolated environment for each service with a network
for them to communicate. The docker image and the docker-compose approach are standardized
and will not differ much from solution to solution.
6.2
Research questions
This section evaluates the research questions. The results of the answers can be used for the
future development of the solution.
How can the integration process of software developed by data science into a software engineering
application be improved?
Using a predefined structure, the data scientist, or the software engineer, does not need to
know what is undergoing on the other team. The time that would otherwise have been put into
project management can now be put into the focus of the team’s main objectives. The process
can therefore be easier and less time-consuming in the end.
How can a machine learning model be integrated into a modular service-oriented software engi-
neering application?
The modular approach allows the ability to work on separate components, both in terms of
development and testing. The modularity comes down to the software architecture selected.
This project demonstrates that separating the machine-learning components into modules with
decentralized coordination between services can be integrated.
How can software engineers and data science’s ability to work independently still be supported
when cooperating?
The ability of each team to work independently comes down to communication and planning.
The project has demonstrated that through communication, planning, and the selected archi-
tecture - in this case, a micro-service architecture - can the development and deployment of
55
==PAGE:57==
each service be executed separately. This allows each culture to work independently.
56
==PAGE:58==
7
Future work
This Chapter will elaborate on the future features that could be added.
A Bachelor thesis in Aggregation and Visualization of Road Condition Data by Nathan Maire
[6], is about aggregate evaluated road conditions while smoothing out any unnecessary noise
and could therefore be a great feature to add to any follow-up work.
As a proof of concept, has the system created been designed on a single process.
As each
prediction takes roughly 5 minutes to produce, it would be an optimal future feature to make
the prediction run async. Running the prediction async would result in being able to process
more of the collected road data to produce a prediction
The thesis system has been created modularly, which means each service can be hand-picked
and integrated into another system as needed. As the system created has used LiRA’s data
source, it would be ideal for integrating this thesis services into LiRA. A paper on ”A Method
for Integrating and Organizing Software Projects Comprised of Independent Subprojects and
Data Sources” by Andreas Soelberg went through how to integrate student software projects
and could be a valid reading [18].
Pickle and CSV files have been used to transfer data between the services. This approach is
great for rapid development and simplicity and as the files often changed during the thesis, so
would the database table have been. The files are now in their completed state, and therefore
in a future feature, the data should be saved in a database between each service and pulled
when needed.
As of now, the database is not indexed. Indexing a database can make saving data slower, as
indexing is another element that needs to be added to each row. Indexing the database is for
when data is being extracted from the database. The more frequently the database is being
used to extract data, the more critical indexing the database will be. A future feature would
be to add indexing to the database.
57
==PAGE:59==
8
Conclusion
The scope of this thesis was to integrate the LiRA machine learning model into a modular
service-oriented software engineering application.
Using the micro-service architecture, this thesis demonstrated that integrating a machine-
learning model is possible through communication, planning, and cooperation. The solution
has been designed based on this architecture, as its modular approach was the optimal choice
for the integration of a modular machine learning model. The implementation and deployment
have been successful, and the system can produce a prediction based on the road condition
data collected from the external LiRA OSM database. The system created has utilized .NET,
Docker, RabbitMQ, and Python for implementation and deployment. Further development
in deployment has been suggested in Chapter 7 and is based, among others, on CI and CD
pipelines. The base for CI has already been realized with unit and integration testing but could
be further expanded with more tests.
Improvements in the machine learning model’s performance were not within the scope of the
project. However, a benefit of the modular system going forward is that it allows the data
science developers to perform performance testing and improve an individual machine learning
component without affecting the other components.
This thesis project has successfully presented a foundation for how a machine learning model
can be applied to a micro-service architecture, which is highly modular. Improvements in the
architecture can be performed, but as is, it can successfully show the purpose of how a modular
machine learning model can process data in a micro-service architecture.
58
==PAGE:60==
9
References
References
[1] Technical University of Denmark. URL http://sdb.dtu.dk/2017/30/583#Master thesis
[2] Yaron
Haviv
Productionizing
Machine
Learning
with
a
Microser-
vices
Architecture,
Professional.
URL:
https://databricks.com/session
na20/productionizing-machine-learning-with-a-microservices-
architecture?fbclid=IwAR3Q63ZjaQBgwIt BEj95Gmhl4D4UnHIWLPzLiYvUcDTlZRaBuNIFMTswS0
[3] LiRA. URL: http://lira-project.dk/publications/
[4] LiRA. URL: https://lira-project.dk/research/s
[5] Redapt.
URL:
https://www.redapt.com/blog/why-90-of-machine-learning-models-never-
make-it-to-production#: :text=During%20a%20panel%20at%20last,actually%20make%20it%20into%20production
[6] Nathan Maire. June 5th 2022. Machine Learning in LiRA : Aggregation and Visualization
of Road Condition Data
[7] VentureBeat. URL: https://venturebeat.com/ai/why-do-87-of-data-science-projects-never-
make-it-into-production/
[8] Aayush Dhakal. LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning
to production
[9] VentureBeat. https://venturebeat.com/ai/why-do-87-of-data-science-projects-never-make-
it-into-production/
[10] Pavel
Klushin.
URL:
https://www.qwak.com/post/what-does-it-take-to-deploy-ml-
models-in-production
59
==PAGE:61==
[11] Fugro. URL: https://www.fugro.com/our-services/asset-integrity/roadware/equipment-
and-software
[12] Asmus Skar, Anders M. Vestergaard, Tommy S. Alstrøm, Ekkart Kindler. Live Road As-
sessment based on modern car sensors (LiRA): Practical guide
[13] Arnau Morancho Tarda, Shahrzad M. Pour. June 2022. Report on Modularization of
Python Components and Integration Approach into LiRA Big Data Pipeline
[14] Paul Johannesson, Erik Perjons. An Introduction to Design Science (pp 75-155)
[15] wikipedia,
Good code is self-documenting URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-
documenting code
[16] Eric Siegel. January 17, 2022. URL: https://www.kdnuggets.com/2022/01/models-rarely-
deployed-industrywide-failure-machine-learning-leadership.html]
[17] Victor Foged. Niels With Mikkelsen. Lasse Steen Pedersen. 24th of june 2022. A Framework
for Enacting Machine Learning Models in Fast Decision-Making Processes in Trading
[18] Andreas Soelberg. February 13, 2022 A Method for Integrating and Organizing Software
Projects Comprised of Independent Sub projects and Data Sources.
[19] atlassian
URL:
https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows/feature-
branch-workflow
[20] Victor Foged. Niels With Mikkelsen. Lasse Steen Pedersen. 2022 A Framework for Enacting
Machine Learning Models in Fast Decision-Making Processes in Trading
[21] Thomas Bech Madsen. 24th of January 2021. LIRA: A Microservice Architecture for Col-
lecting, Processing, Accessing and Visualizing Geospatial Data.
60
