==PAGE:1==
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For
3D Tissue Culture
Master’s Thesis
By: Zahraa Hassoun
Supervisor: Niels B. Larsen
DTU Biomedical Engineering
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
30 ECTS Master’s Thesis
March, 2023
By
Zahraa Imad Hassoun
Supervisor
Niels Bent Larsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Health Technology,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Zahraa Imad Hassoun - s202325
Signature
Date
ii
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I am deeply grateful to my supervisor, Niels B. Larsen, first, for offering me this very in-
teresting opportunity that I learned so much from. Secondly, I thank him sincerely for his
dedicated support and guidance throughout this project from the very beginning. I pro-
foundly appreciate your encouragement and motivation to be independently creative with
my ideas, and at the same time always welcoming and helpful whenever I had questions
or doubts. I will always admire your passion and your very wide and broad knowledge in
various domains. Lastly, thank you for introducing me to the real world of Science and
making me part of it, and for enabling me and trusting me with the resources at DTU that
I needed in completing this project.
I would also like to thank my colleagues and friends in building 423, especially Zoltan A.
Guller, for being such a friendly and welcoming buddy whenever needed. He was always
generously giving and helping and always tried to help even if it was out of his expertise.
I will forever be grateful for my family who always believed in me, supported me, and
encouraged me to outdo myself. Sending my tremendous gratitude to my parents who
have always put my comfort, dreams, and ambitions first, who sacrificed so much and
went through so much more to provide me and bless me with more than anyone could
wish for. I would definitely extend this gratitude to my eldest sister, Fatima, who was there
for me to ensure my comfort throughout those 5 months. I would also love to thank my
family and friends who gave me an enjoyable, cozy, and loving environment outside my
working and studying times, alongside their ongoing support.
Finally, a special thanks to my best friend, Rawan who has been with me throughout this
journey even with us being continents apart, she still succeeded in making me feel that
she was there for me through the whole of it. I thank everyone I have met and encountered
within my work and life in general, in this period of time for helping me grow on a personal
level in aspects I would not be able to describe fairly. I am beyond appreciative of their
kindness and the pieces of advice that they have offered.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Three-dimensional (3D) physiologically relevant in vitro cell culture models that capture
both controllable micro-environment and analytical opportunities, and physiological com-
plexities have been in great need to replace animal models. Animal models suffer from
high variability from one sample to another, differences between human and animal bi-
ology, and limited controllable environment and analytical possibilities. Despite the ad-
vances reached by organ-on-chip models, there still lacks the presence of fully 3D phys-
iologically relevant models. The main shortcoming stems from the lack of oxygen and
nutrient supply to cells cultured at high densities which is not faced in vivo due to the pres-
ence of a microcirculatory system. Highly dense tissues cultured in vivo are restricted by
the oxygen diffusion limit of 150-200 µm. Moreover, the development of micro-sized vas-
cular channels in vitro is still limited to manufacturing vessels of diameters larger than
100 µm and the inability to manufacture synthetic capillary bed scaffolds. In this thesis,
I propose a perfusable, diffusion open, mechanically stable micro-vasculature using a
high-resolution stereolithographic (SLA) 3D printer utilizing poly(ethylene glycol) diacry-
late (PEGDA) based resin solution. The channels were designed to be fenestrated to
allow angiogenesis that would overcome the oxygen diffusion limit by supplying the cells
between the channels through a capillary network. The resultant prints confirmed the
high-resolution capabilities of the SLA in printing defined micro-scaled structures. Differ-
ent designs were printed studying the limitations and possibilities of the SLA 3D printer
prior to the development and optimization of a complete chip design in regards to fenes-
trations and lumens sizes, and overall chip support. Moreover, perfusability testing was
done along with optimizing a stable perfusable chip reaching a long-term perfusability of
at least 2 weeks. Finally, different GelMA concentrations were developed and tested with
aim of blocking the fenestrations but failed in preventing leakage of the perfused liquid.
The printed chips and GelMA settlement were assessed using bright field microscopy and
confocal laser scanning microscopy. Future studies are needed to successfully block the
fenestrations with a removable, sacrificial medium that would allow endothelialization of
the channel lumens and angiogenic sprouting.
iv
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Materials and Methods
12
2.1
3D Printing Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2
Perfusion of the Chips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Results
18
3.1
Designs and 3D Prints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2
Perfusion of Non-fenestrated Channels and Design Updates
. . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Perfusion of Fenestrated Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4
Discussion
39
4.1
Designs and 3D Prints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.2
Designing, Optimization, and Analysis of Synthetic Microfenestrated Vas-
culature Prints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.3
Perfusion of Non-fenestrated Channels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.4
Perfusion of Fenestrated Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5
Conclusion
47
Bibliography
48
A Appendix
53
A.1 Holder Systems for Organ Model Chips
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
v
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
CAD
-
Computer-Aided Design
CO2
-
Carbon Dioxide
CMP
-
Collagen Mimetic Peptide
DLP
-
Digital Light Projection
DMD
-
Digital Mirror Device
ECM
-
Extracellular Matrix
ECs
-
Endothelial Cells
FEP
-
Fluorinated Ethylene Propylene
GelMA
-
Gelatin Methacrylate
LAP
-
Lithium phenyl-2,4,6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate
LED
-
Light-Emitting Diode
MATLAB
-
Matrix Laboratory
Mn
-
Number Average Molecular Weight
MQ
-
Milli-Q
MW
-
Molecular Weight
OoC
-
Organ-on-Chip
PBS
-
Phosphate Buffer Saline
PDMS
-
Polydimethylsiloxane
PEG
-
Poly(ethylene glycol)
PEGDA 700
-
Poly(ethylene glycol) Diacrylate, Mn 700 g.mol-1
PLA
-
Polylactic Acid
PSF
-
Point Spread Function
QY
-
Quinoline Yellow
RGD
-
Arginylglycylaspartic Acid
SD
-
Standard Deviation
SLA
-
Stereolithography
2D
-
Two-Dimensional
3D
-
Three-Dimensional
UV
-
Ultra-Violet
Øinner
-
Inner diameter
Øouter
-
Outer diameter
vi
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
Symbol
Specification
Unit Used
τ
Shear Stress
dyn/cm2
Q
Flow Rate
µL/min
µ
Dynamic Viscosity
mPa·s
R
Inner Radius
µm
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Over the past decades, biomedical research has undergone tremendous growth. That
growth was on multiple levels, be it on the cellular level which seeks a better understanding
of human physiology, drug development aiming for better therapeutics, and in the long run,
tissue engineering that would replace damaged tissues or even organs [1].
Biomedical research in human physiology, pathophysiology, and their possible treatments
traditionally has been focused in two main areas. One focused on simple cell models with
the advantages of controllable micro-environments and plenty of analytical opportunities;
however, it has its drawbacks, mainly the lack of physiological complexity. The second
direction is in vivo animal models that offer physiological complexity, but of large vari-
ability; differences between species biology, anatomy, and physiology; and very limited
controllability over micro-environments and analytical opportunities [2], [3], [4]. Each of
the aforementioned models has one thing that the other does not, and a serving human
organ model would be one that shares both physiological relevance and a controllable
micro-environment with enough analytical possibilities.
Organ and Tissue Modeling
Organ-on-a-chip (OoC) platforms have emerged in the past decade from the pharmaceu-
tical industry to great expectations as preclinical drug screening models [5]. OoC models
aim to bridge the gap between the simple, conventional two-dimensional (2D) cell cul-
ture models and complex human bodies, reproducing functional tissues and organ sub-
structures. OoC closes the gap by containing living engineered organ substructures in
a controlled micro-environment mimicking the human tissues under real-time monitoring
allowing more accurate testing of pharmaceutical agents [6], [7]. However, one of the
greatest challenges aimed to overcome using OoC is the lack of physiological relevance
in those pre-clinical models [6].
Organ and tissue modeling has advanced by deviating from the traditional 2D, mono-
layered cell culturing that lacks the three-dimensional (3D) in vivo environment, to 3D
culture models. 2D cultures fail to replicate biological complexities which in turn lack
physiological relevance. However, even the 3D in vivo environment replication in con-
ventional 3D models is restricted in terms of physiological relevance. It is restricted by
the limit on cell culture densities due to the lack of a key need of oxygen and nutrient
support to the cells at such cell densities [8].
Functional microvasculature constitutes a critical building block for overcoming this lack
of physiological relevance in OoC where highly dense, complex tissues and organs cru-
cially require a viable microcirculation for oxygen and nutrient supply. Hence, with all the
progress reached, we are still limited by the inability to establish functional microvascu-
lar networks with properties that mimic the physiological microcirculation and support [9].
In this thesis, I aim to develop a synthetic chip that overcomes this limitation allowing
cell culture at high densities by a hybrid-artificial microvascular system that mimics the
physiological one.
The Vascular System
The importance of the vascular system lies in supplying the native tissues and organs with
oxygen and nutrients and removing wastes through a complex network of capillaries that
constantly delivers blood to its surroundings [5]. The limiting factor of the survival of cells
cultured at high densities in 3D cultures is oxygen transport which is limited by oxygen
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
1
==PAGE:10==
diffusion of 150-200 µm distance only. Therefore, high-density cells forming thick tissue
(>400 µm) develop a necrotic core in absence of vascular networks supplying oxygen
to the cells. In addition to oxygen transport, fluidic flow is essential to supply cells with
nutrients and remove CO2 and cellular wastes. Moreover, the circulatory system is an
important channel for the influx of circulatory cells and bioactive factors into the tissue
[10], [11].
There currently exists enormous clinical demand for engineered soft tissue that would
treat peripheral artery diseases and myocardial ischemia, and as mentioned previously,
reach regeneration of vital organs such as the liver, kidney, and heart. For such clinical
applications to be achievable, an internal vascular supply will be essential to maintain
the viability of in vitro-engineered tissues and organs of dimensions greater than a few
hundred micrometers [11].
The diameter of blood vessels in humans spans from about 8 µm to more than 1 cm in
large elastic arteries [12]. Large arteries range from 33 mm for the ascending aorta, to
5 mm of femoral artery and 3.5 mm for coronary artery, reaching small arteries ranging
between 300-500 µm. Large arterioles range between 100-300 µm where venules are also
of similar range [13], [14]. The span of small arterioles and venules are of the order of 10s
µm [15]. Finally, reaching the range of capillaries that vary between 5-10 µm [13].
Angiogenesis is the physiological process of forming new blood vessels from pre-existing
vessels by the process of sprouting and splitting. A simplified schematic of sprouting
angiogenesis can be seen in fig. 1.1 taken from a review paper [14].
Figure 1.1: Tip and stalk ECs during angiogenic sprouting from a review by Haase et al.
[14].
An endothelial tip cell guides the development of capillary sprouting through the ECM in
response to angiogenic stimuli. Sprouting angiogenesis in brief is associated with the
following events, first, vessel formation is initiated via cell-cell signaling. The initiation
of sprouting results in cells breaking out of the vessel wall, degradation of the basement
membrane, and changing cell shape into a tip cell. Followed by proliferation and collective
invasion of the surrounding tissue through stalk cells formation that would extend the
growing vessel while remaining connected to the vessel source. Lastly, the individual
sprouts would anastomose with other vessels forming a microvascular network [16], [17],
[18].
Engineering of Vascular System Models and Previous Works
Engineering perfusable vascular networks within engineered tissues remain to be one of
the greatest challenges in the fields of biomaterials and tissue engineering. Recapitulating
2
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:11==
the intricate network in particular has become a major difficulty in the ongoing attempts to
engineer in vitro living tissues [10].
Synthetically fabricated vessels usually in the form of vascular grafts of millimeter range
have been typically manufactured using traditional tissue engineering techniques such as
polymer scaffolds [19], electrospinning [20], cell-sheet engineering [21] as well as using
3D printing [22]. Vessels at such dimensions can be created and handled by hand as
casting a tubular hydrogel in a mold [23] or sewing a polymer mesh into a tube [24]. How-
ever, micro-sized vessels typically require the self-assembly of endothelial and supporting
cells. Therefore, so far efforts in engineering microvasculature have primarily relied on
controlling the extracellular matrix (ECM) added as a medium and cell populations. On
the other hand, meso-scaled vessels, i.e., in the range of 50 µm-1 mm, have challenges of
their own where they are too large to form using self-assembly methodology or by lithog-
raphy such as photo-lithography, but at the same time are too small to be formed via rolled
cell sheets or meshes [10].
Numerous approaches and studies have been conducted to overcome the urgent limi-
tation of the oxygen supply in highly dense tissue cultures. The advances in microflu-
idics have enabled the manufacture of fluidic networks in plastic resins with architectural
structures similar to vascular networks. Some other strategies have used conventional
microfluidics with the use of biomaterials to create fluidic channels and networks [10].
Some researchers have chosen an alternative approach to provide the transport of oxy-
gen and nutrients to tissues by using macroporous architectures. In some of those stud-
ies, such architecture has significantly improved cell survival and function [25]. However,
those structures have no defined inlets or outlets, so there can be no integration of vascu-
lar supply in vitro [26]. Additionally, the lack of fluid flow gives rise to lacking mechanical
cues that contribute to native tissue functioning [10]. Research studies using microfluidic
devices have highlighted the importance of fluid flow-induced shear stress in regulating
endothelial cell (EC) morphology and alignment, cytoskeleton reorganization, and pro-
tein/gene expression [12].
Historically, the complexity of the circulatory system has limited its fabrication in in vitro
tissue engineering. Over the past decade, soft lithographic techniques for microfluidic de-
vices and microscale fabrication technologies in tissue engineering have grown evidently
with the aim of establishing microvascular networks for both in vitro and in vivo applica-
tions [9]. Different groups have adopted this technique in modeling vascular networks
and angiogenic assays such as Bischel et al. who developed a tubeless microfluidic an-
giogenesis assay with 3D endothelial-lined microvessels [23]. In their study, they used
lumen-patterning by filling the channels with pre-polymerized hydrogel, then pumping me-
dia followed by polymerization of the hydrogel to the lumen walls which is a time-intensive
technique.
Transition to 3D Printing
Aims in vascular modeling are now transitioning towards 3D printing since it offers full
3D design freedom, greater complexity, higher fabrication throughput, and rapid device
prototyping. The free-form capabilities of 3D printing are allowing the fabrication of fluidic
networks incorporating the complex architectures of vascular networks [10]. OoCs have
been fabricated using various innovative techniques which vary based on the desired
outcome of the model [27]. In fact, 3D printing techniques have been used in creating
support systems and microfluidic encasement in OoCs [7].
Various 3D printing techniques have been developed for fabricating fluidic networks where
3D printing covers a variety of technologies that additively creates layer-by-layer geome-
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
3
==PAGE:12==
tries in space including inkjet [28], extrusion [29], selective laser sintering or melting [30],
[31], and stereolithography (SLA) [10]. Conventional SLA was the first technology in-
troduced for creating 3D constructs, using a spatially defined light source to selectively
polymerize a photo-cross-linkable resin [7]. The common benefit of these techniques lies
in decoupling the vascular architecture from the biological perspective which allows the
study of vascular architecture in different biological contexts. This is beneficial in thera-
peutic tissue engineering for using the same pattern techniques and constructing tissues
with different types of cells and bioactive factors. Furthermore, it would be of great ad-
vantage in more general in vitro-engineered tissue models [10].
Hydrogels are 3D networks composed of crosslinked hydrophilic polymer chains, which
have been exploited in different approaches such as SLA and extrusion-based bioprint-
ing. It has been an attractive choice that can be manipulated to resemble the physiological
extracellular environment of cells and tissues, allowing their application in fields of regen-
erative medicine and tissue engineering [32].
3D extrusion bioprinting is the most commonly used approach for printing patterned vas-
cular networks. It is a solid free-form biofabrication technique that has the potential for
printing organs and tissues by dispensing continuous cylindrical filaments containing hy-
drogels, ECM proteins, biochemical cues, and cells through a nozzle. However, the mini-
mum resolution in such technology is around 100 µm, and even larger values when printing
more viscous solutions where due to the filament resolution, vessel diameters end up be-
ing typically greater than 500 µm; thus, inhibits the fabrication of capillary-sized vessels
[32], [29]. An application of 3D bioprinting using filaments was adopted in a study by Lee
et al. where they developed two parallel perfusable channels of 1 mm inner diameter,
forming a capillary bed between them [33]. Although 3D bioprinting has the capability
of producing complex vascular networks with multiple cell types, direct printing of small
microvessels and capillaries is still limited due to filament size. This can be overcome by
promoting angiogenic sprouting and microvessel development between two larger ves-
sels as presented by Lee et al. [12], [33].
Another approach in fabricating perfusable vascular networks utilizes conventional 3D
printing that is then embedded in a matrix material such as a carbohydrate templated
glass with diameters as small as 200 µm prepared by thermal extrusion printing that is
then dissolved after encapsulation in an ECM containing cell matrix. Thereafter, ECs are
suspended into the resulted-empty channels forming a vascular network. Such methods
are time-intensive and limited to larger vessels of >100 µm in diameter [12].
Conventional SLA, on the other hand, was invented in the late 1980s; however, it has only
been recently adopted for tissue engineering applications. SLA provides high accuracy,
high printing speed, and high feature resolution of around 50 µm. The printing speed
of light-based printing can be further greatly enhanced by maskless digital micromirror
device (DMD)-based bioprinting [7]. In addition, SLA printers offer biocompatible materials
that can be printed, increasing the number of potential biological applications [34].
Multiple studies have been using SLA for constructing micro-vascular channels; however,
they were all limited to the range of 100s µm-sized channels. Nevertheless, a study done
by Raman et al. was able to develop microchannel-like structures with diameters less than
100 µm in size, printed with projection SLA. However, while being significant, they have
not presented fluidic flow in the network; thus not presenting a functionally perfusable
microfluidic chip [35]. A similar approach was attempted by Grigoryan et al. using SLA,
resulting in perfusable, branched channels resembling different vasculature structures,
but roughly in the range between 500 µm and 1 mm with no demonstration of functional
4
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:13==
supply of dense tissues [36]. On the other hand, Zhang et al. succeeded in manufacturing,
diffusion-open hydrogel scaffolds with perfusable synthetic vasculature channels down to
100x100 µm2 using SLA 3D printer. This allowed the fabrication of reproducible, stable
and long-term perfusable synthetic vasculature scaffolds colonized by 3D cell cultures
that are not directly exposed to shear stress [37], [2].
The wide range of vessel sizes found in vivo has historically demanded separate tech-
niques in creating vessels in each size range in vitro. Yet, it might be possible with newly
emerged methods such as 3D printing, to unite into one fabrication method across a range
of scales using a single technology. Currently, there is no single technique that can get
a hold of such complexity at the various length scales of the vasculature [10]. However,
combining the two modalities of self-assembly of micro-scaled vessels and microfluidic
approaches is one promising strategy towards engineering functional tissues of various
dimensions of vasculature [14].
Guided Angiogenic Approaches in Modeling the Microvasculature
Guided capillary angiogenesis is used to create a network of microvessels across an
ECM-filled microfluidic channel. Using chemical and/or pressure gradients can simulate
the formation and growth of angiogenic sprouts propagating from the main source channel
to an adjacent channel, forming a microvascular network. It takes about one week to
form a network across a 1 mm wide channel [12]. An important factor is fluidic shear
stress where in vivo ECs are constantly in contact with fluid shear stress that contributes
to activating migratory pathways [38].
Various studies have been done in the field of developing vasculature and angiogenesis
sprouting in vitro models. One of those studies which developed an angiogenic model
was conducted by Ngyun et al.. Ngyun et al. demonstrated the use of an endothelium-
lined cylindrical channel, fully surrounded by a matrix and exposed to a gradient of angio-
genic factors derived from a parallel source channel. Both channels were continuously
perfused. The channels were fabricated using a bilayer of Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
mold with collagen type I polymerized around 400 µm needles that were then extracted re-
sulting in hollow channels. They succeeded in allowing ECs to sprout and self-assemble
their own channels, resulting in the development of fairly complicated geometries found
only in vivo [39], [40].
Inspirational work was done by Kim et al. where they form perfusable networks of intact
3D microvessels by developing a microfluidic device that promotes angiogenic sprouting.
Angiogenic sprouting was based on spatially controlled co-culture of ECs with stromal
fibroblasts, pericytes, or cancer cells. Their results show successful angiogenesis induced
by exposing seeded ECs to a gradient of lung fibroblast-secreted factors, resulting in
lumenized vessels traversing a 700 µm wide channel. The ECs were seeded on a channel
filled with an acellular fibrin gel to form ECM constructs for the seeded cells. Robust
formation of tip cells and angiogenic sprouts along the openings of their developed chip
was observed within 24 h of co-culturing where the tip cells guided the sprouting growth
across the fibrin matrix reaching the opposite end of the channel after 4 days as can be
seen in fig. 1.2 [8].
The microfluidic device developed by Kim et al. was also fabricated using PDMS soft-
lithography and replica molding [8]. This technique as mentioned earlier, has lower fabri-
cation throughput, slower prototyping, and limited complexity. Moreover, the device fab-
ricated is of around hundreds µm scale and of no tube-like vascular structure. Although
soft lithography is a very robust and repeatable technique, it still suffers from some limi-
tations. Firstly, it usually involves considerable and time-consuming labor due to multiple
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
5
==PAGE:14==
non-automated steps. It also requires specialized engineering training, and expensive
equipment, which are restrictive to iteratively developing working systems and performing
experiments within in vitro microvascular environments. Moreover, PDMS microfluidics
usually possesses planar architectures due to the fabrication procedure [40], [37].
Figure 1.2: Image to the left shows growing angiogenic sprouts traverse the entire width of
700 µm width by day 4, cells were labeled with CellTracker green and fixed and stained for
nuclei (blue). The image to the right shows the quantification of angiogenic sprout growth
by tip cell distance [8]. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.
PDMS vs. Poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA)
Although soft lithography used in molding PDMS-based chips and hydrogels has been
one of the most common choices of fabrication presented in literature so far, PDMS is not
very well suited for complex 3D architectures. PDMS permits the diffusion of compounds
in the vapor phase and not the liquid phase [37]. In addition, efficient surface coating is
needed to prevent unwanted protein binding [2].
Another material candidate that has been proven to be useful is PEGDA which has been
used in various works including the biocompatible, diffusion-open, and mechanically sta-
ble vascular 100 µm-sized channels achieved by Zhang et al. while successfully culturing
ECs forming tube-like vessels within PEGDA structures [37]. As well as, Wesseler’s work
in demonstrating SLA 3D printing of 160 µm-wide channels culturing liver cells at physi-
ologically relevant densities in the surrounding [2]. A number of other studies also used
PEGDA including Rogers et al., Raman et al. and Grigoryan et al. [41], [35], [36].
PEGDA has been widely used in different biomedical applications for its cytocompatibil-
ity, non-toxicity, and ease of use [42]. PEGDA-based hydrogels are generally inert to
cell attachment; therefore, some modification must be taken into consideration for cell at-
tachment such as displaying cell adhesive arginylglycylaspartic acid (RGD) peptides and
collagen mimetic peptide (CMP) bioactive species as developed by Patrick et al. [43].
Project Goal
Motivated by all the challenges and inspirations discussed, the long-term goal of this thesis
study is to combine high-resolution SLA 3D printing with living ECs forming a reproducible,
hybrid-artificial vascular network with well-defined fenestrated channels that would en-
able the formation of a true capillary bed as illustrated in fig. 1.3. Thus, overcoming the
current limitation of providing convective transport of nutrients and oxygen to the tissue
core in fully 3D tissue cultures at physiologically relevant cell densities. More specifically,
the aim is to explore the possibilities of a home-built SLA 3D printer in developing a cost-
efficient, diffusion-open, perfusable, and mechanically stable hydrogel-based microfenes-
trated vasculature of physiologically relevant size. In future studies, aiming that it would
6
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:15==
enable ECs seeding and colonization of the channel lumen wall whilst promoting angio-
genesis sprouting into the surrounding tissue volume through the openings. Moreover,
to investigate options for subsequent selective perfusion of the channel lumen without
significant leakage into the surrounding volume through the fenestrations. The primary
technique used in this thesis to assess the attempts of making a reversible closing of the
fenestrations is confocal laser scanning microscopy.
Figure 1.3: Illustration of a fenestrated channel.
The following part includes some useful theories of the methodologies and techniques
used in this thesis. Followed by a section that outlines the methodologies used in de-
veloping a synthetic microvasculature. The methodologies section includes attempts to
block fenestrations in the channel walls using a sacrificial material so that those fenes-
trated channels are perfusable without significant leakage. Following that, the results of
the outcome prints will be presented and discussed, analyzing the possibilities and lim-
itations of the 3D printer and of the sacrificial material used. In conclusion, this thesis
will demonstrate the potential of SLA in creating a synthetic microvasculature that would
enable tissue culture in fully 3D at physiologically relevant cell densities.
Theory
Stereolithography
Stereolithography (SLA) is the fabrication method used in this thesis. Conventional SLA
was the first introduced technology for creating 3D constructs using a spatially defined
light source, but only recently adopted in tissue engineering applications. The printing of
3D constructs using SLA is based on spatially controlled photo-polymerization of a liquid
resin by layer-by-layer formation [37]. Most of the previous SLA printers were constructed
in a way that a light source polymerizes a bath filled with liquid resin on a moving stage
that descends to a predefined distance for another layer to polymerize after polymerizing
the previous one, which is called the bottom-up setup shown in fig. 1.4A to the left.
Alternatively, another recent approach has been adopted, and that is the top-down setup
presented in fig. 1.4A to the right. This layout is based on using a light source that is
located below the liquid resin bath. It is capable of selectively polymerizing the photo-
curable resin onto a moving stage that elevates by a predefined distance equivalent to
the thickness of the layer to be consequently polymerized [7], [37]. Before printing, a
computer-aided constructed (CAD) design is sliced into a series of planar patterns as
shown in fig. 1.4B defined by a slicing thickness that corresponds to the polymerized layer
thickness which is usually in the range of 25-100 µm. The smaller the slicing thickness the
better structural fidelity; however, the longer fabrication time due to higher numbers of
slices [37].
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.4: A) Two different SLA setups, bottom-up to the left and top-down to the right.
B) A schematic of a 3D CAD slicing model into 3 layers of a pyramid construct [37].
The patterned light defined by the CAD design is first irradiated on the photo-curable resin
surface to create a solid phase of the material where the first layer of the polymerized
material adheres to the fabrication platform (stage) providing support to the structures
as they are printed. The same previously described process of polymerization of a layer
then descending or elevating the platform to polymerize another layer, is repeated until
the whole 3D structure is complete [37].
Some advantages of the top-down setup over the bottom-up one include object height
not being limited by the vat depth, usually leading to less resin consumption. Moreover,
polymerization and usually radical polymerization in SLA take place away from the liquid-
air interface; thus oxygen inhibition is minimized in the top-up setup where the resin can be
cured faster. On the other hand, one drawback of the top-down setup is when separating
newly formed layers from the vat bottom subjects, the structure is subjected to larger
mechanical forces than the bottom-up setup which can risk damaging fragile and delicate
constructs; thus, a non-adhesive bottom is a requirement for gentle separation [37].
Traditional SLAs while considered of high printing speed, they use a point source to poly-
merize large areas of photo-curable resin by sequential laser scanning which can still
be very time-consuming. Newer technologies such as continuous digital light processing
(DLP) using a digital micromirror device (DMD) to generate dynamic masks have been
introduced. DMD uses a computer-controlled array of micromirrors that polymerizes a
patterned design unit volume of the resin all at once; hence, significantly speeding up the
curing process [7], [37]. In this thesis, a DMD-based projection SLA of a top-down setup
is used.
Polymerization
The resin used in SLA mainly consists of two essential components, a monomer, and
a photo-initiator. Frequently, non-reactive substances are added to dilute the mixture to
8
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:17==
reduce its viscosity and a photo-absorber that controls light penetration depth. The light
activates the photoinitiator which in turn results in reactive species (free radicals) that poly-
merize the monomers forming a solid crosslinked polymer network [37]. A polymerization
reaction example of PEGDA is initiated using a photo-initiator activated by light; thus,
resulting in free radicals which react with the monomer resulting in PEGDA crosslinked
network as can be seen in fig. 1.5.
Figure 1.5: PEGDA crosslinking reaction. Reproduced from the article by Yang et al. [44].
Advantages and Disadvantages of SLA:
Compared to extrusion-based printing, SLA is capable of freeform printing at high spatial
resolution and higher fabrication speed. SLA results in printing compliant hydrogels that
are mechanically stable and suitable for cell encapsulation. Moreover, the embedment
of fluidic channel networks within 3D constructs is enabled by SLA without the need for
sacrificial molding which has been used previously to print simple 3D branched networks.
Nonetheless, there are limited reports on 3D structures embedding fluidic channels and
also cell culture using SLA [37]. Also, it has been reported that the hydrogel viscosity and
stiffness would affect cell viability, attachment, differentiation, and proliferation [7]. SLA
can be hindered due to a shortage of suitable resins for cells; however, cells are usually
seeded post-fabrication; thus, OoC can be first manufactured using SLA [37]. Based on
the advantages mentioned which are compatible with the aims of this thesis, SLA is cho-
sen for this project. Particularly, due to its superior manufacturability of high resolution and
reproducibility bridging the gap between high biological relevance and robust production
processes [37].
Hydrogels and ECM
In the body, nearly all cells reside in a 3D microenvironment consisting of a vasculature
that enables oxygen and nutrient supply and metabolic wastes removal; soluble factors;
and an ECM surrounding, supplying, and supporting the cells and allowing cell-cell com-
munication [37]. ECM constitutes the biological material produced by the cells, present
in between cells and supporting the cells. The ECM provides physical support and a ma-
trix that cells can adhere to, signal each other through, and interact with. But the ECM
is more than just a physical scaffold, it also regulates many aspects of cell behavior in-
cluding proliferation and growth, survival, morphology, migration, and differentiation [45].
Furthermore, the ECM is distinctive corresponding to a particular function based on the
specific cell type it supports where ECM components and spatial and temporal dynamics
of their interactions are critical to tissue function. Therefore, the scaffolds used in tissue
engineering are often used to replicate several functions of the ECM [45].
Hydrogel materials are polymeric crosslinked networks with a high water content that reca-
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
9
==PAGE:18==
pitulate many physical and chemical properties of the ECM. Polymers used for hydrogels
are typically either naturally derived from living sources, or synthetically made. Natural
polymers such as collagen and gelatin which are very common choices are better than
synthetic polymers in mimicking the native ECM found in vivo, possessing many intrinsic
biological cues for directing multiple cellular behaviors. However, they usually suffer from
poor mechanical properties and high batch-to-batch variability. Synthetic polymers on the
other hand, such as poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) can be readily adjusted to accommodate
a range of physical and chemical requirements based on the specific application. Never-
theless, post-modifications are usually needed for adequate biofunctionality due to them
being biologically inert [37].
Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy
Confocal scanning microscopy is a form of optical sectioning microscopy that has trans-
formed optical imaging in biology. Optical sectioning acquires images of thin slices of a
thick specimen by removing the effect of out-of-focus light in each imaging plane. This is
an advancement on the traditional fluorescence microscopy where regardless of where
the microscope is focused vertically, illumination results in fluorescing the entire specimen
thickness. Additionally, the contrast in fluorescence images is adversely affected by scat-
tering which is another concern in traditional fluorescence microscopes. Scattered light
results from fluorescent emission that may be diffracted, reflected, and refracted by the
specimen on the way to the objective lens which appears to have been emitted from the
last point of scattering and not from its actual location of the fluorophore emitting it. Imag-
ing deeper into the specimen increases the likelihood of scattering. A known way that
improves this issue is by using techniques capable of optical sectioning. Optical section-
ing removes unwanted light providing better contrast and permitting 3D reconstructions
by computationally combining the acquired stack of images [46].
The aforementioned issues are improved via confocal microscopy. Confocal means ob-
taining an image from the focal plane only, by removing optically any background emis-
sions obtained from sample thickness. Laser scanning means the images are attained
point-by-point under localized laser excitation instead of full sample illumination as adopted
in conventional widefield microscopy as illustrated in fig. 1.6 [47].
Figure 1.6: Illumination and detection difference between widefield microscopy and confo-
cal scanning microscopy. Excitation light is shown in green and the emitted fluorescence
is shown in red. Out-of-focus emissions are shown in orange in the confocal fluorescence
microscopy schematic. This modified schematic is taken from PhD dissertation by Philipp
Johannes Alt [48].
10
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:19==
More elaborately, scanning means that the image of each section is a built-up of infor-
mation added from regions that are sampled in sequence. The aim of most confocal
microscopes is to illuminate with light that is focused on the smallest spot possible in the
focal plane. Therefore, the lateral resolution is improved by exciting one spot at a time
[46].
Even with focusing on the narrowest spot at the specimen, the whole cone volume of the
exciting laser (see fig. 1.6) will still be illuminated, emitting light from all that illuminated
volume. Meaning, the axial resolution is still affected, by illuminating deeper and shal-
lower than the spot focused on. Therefore, scanning illumination is insufficient to remove
unwanted light, thus it is necessary to add some mechanism to ensure light from out-of-
focus sources does not reach the detector. This can be achieved by placing a pinhole
aperture in front of the detector at a plane that is conjugate to the focal plane, resulting in
having the illuminated spot and the pinhole aperture simultaneously focused at the same
spot [46].
When scanning a spot in the center on the in-focus plane, the emitted light is focused
into the imaging plane where the confocal pinhole aperture is located. Light not emitted
from the location of the scanning spot focuses away from the pinhole; thus does not reach
the detector, ensuring better lateral resolution. Emitted light from deeper points than the
in-focus plane is focused in front of the imaging plane and that of shallower emission is
focused behind it, resulting in only a small portion of the light passing through the pinhole;
hence, improved axial resolution [46].
Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy Drawbacks
One main drawback of scanning is that image acquisition is not as rapid as widefield
techniques that acquire the entire image simultaneously. Scanning each spot individually
takes so much time and introduces long time exposure of the specimen to light which
in turn risks causing photo-damage and photo-toxicity of the biological specimens and
bleaching of the fluorophores. Moreover, improving this issue by placing a shutter that
closes at the end of each line and opens at the beginning of the next in the scanning
process, reduces exposing the molecules to light, but in turn, prolongs the long frame
scan time more than what it already is [46].
Furthermore, the thickness of the specimen imaged is limited where imaging a too-thick
layer of tissue, the illuminating and emitted photons traveling through the tissue are af-
fected by molecular interactions that change their direction. The fluorescence emitted
from a molecule within a large volume can be scattered on its way back to the objective,
in a way it no longer seems to come from the scanned spot. Thus, the resulting image
suffers from two major degradations, it being severely blurred and of a very low signal-to-
background ratio. Additionally, fluorophores could have toxic effects on some organisms
under study, especially when using a very high concentration of fluorophores. The need
to use fluorophores for visualization could be a limiting factor in some applications [46].
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
11
==PAGE:20==
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
3D Printing Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature
Resin Preparation
The materials used for resin preparation are summarized in the table below.
Table 2.1: Materials used for resin preparation.
Abbreviation
Product Name
Vendor Information
Function
PEGDA 700
Poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate,
Mn 700 g.mol-1
Sigma -Aldrich
Pre-polymer
LAP
Lithium phenyl-2,4,6-
trimethylbenzoylphosphinate
CellLink
Photo-initiator
QY
Quinoline yellow
Sigma -Aldrich
Photo-absorber
An aqueous pre-polymer solution was prepared using the materials mentioned in table
2.1 with concentrations of 800 mg/mL for PEGDA 700, 20 mg/mL for LAP, and 36 mg/mL
or 48 mg/mL of QY. I prepared 8 mL stock solutions of each of the previously mentioned
reagents, which were mixed with 8 mL MQ water, vortexed, and filtered using a syringe
and a 0.22 µm pore filter before use for printing. The final concentrations of each reagent
are the following, 200 mg/mL for PEGDA 700, 5 mg/mL for LAP, and 9 mg/mL or 12 mg/mL
for QY.
Designing using CAD Software and Slicing
The different designs used in this thesis were designed using CAD software (Autodesk
Inventor Professional 2023) using a lateral base unit of 10.8 µm to match the DMD pixel
pitch (1920 x 1080 pixels). All the designs were created based on converting all the
original dimensions that I have chosen in the xy-plane as shown in the 2 equations below:
F = ⌊d
10.8⌉
(2.1)
D = F · 10.8,
(2.2)
where F is the multiplication factor based on the pixel pitch size which is rounded to the
nearest odd integer, d is the original chosen dimension and D is the new dimension used
in the design. The 3D CAD designs were exported as stl files that were sliced using
SliceSTL script into sliced images of black (void) and white (structural features) of 20 µm
step size along with a ’Buildlist’ file that indexes the digital masks [2].
3D Printing Using Home-Built Polychromic Stereolithography
The designed chips were printed on pre-treated cover glass slips using a high-resolution,
home-built polychromic stereolithography printer by Professor Niels B. Larsen. The printer
is based on 1-to-1 projection of light that is reflected off a DMD (10.8 µm pixel pitch,
DLP9500 UV, Texas Instruments) coupled to a V-9500 Hi-Speed controller (Vialux) [37].
The printing process takes place using a MATLAB (Mathworks) code that synchronizes
digital mask exposure on the DMD, UV-light exposure using a 365 nm high power LED
(LZ1-00UV00, Ledengin), and the fabrication stage movement through a linear stage
(LNR50S, Thor Labs) [37]. The general working principle of the printer is filling a printing
vat with the prepared resin solution and fixing it in its position. The vat was covered with
12
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:21==
a non-adhesive Fluorinated Ethylene Propylene (FEP) foil [37]. Moreover, gluing the pre-
treated glass slip (22 mm x 22 mm x 0.4 mm) to a stage later lowered to the bottom of the
printing vat, with a 20 µm distance between the vat bottom and glass stage equivalent to
the slicing height of the slice being printed. The sliced black and white images are then
projected with the DMD onto the vat bottom with the 365 nm light that would polymerize
the white features from the sliced images by activating the photo-initiator (LAP) [2].
Each layer gets exposed for 3-5 seconds depending on which concentration of QY is
used where I have used 3 s when using QY=9 mg/mL and 4.5 s when using QY=12 mg/mL,
based on previous work done by the group [37]. Subsequently, the stage moves back up
from the vat bottom and moves to a 20 µm level above the previously exposed layer.
This procedure is repeated until all layers of the design are printed. Once the chips are
completely printed, they are removed from the stage by applying some ethanol under the
cover glass using a needle and a syringe. Once removing the cover slip from the stage,
they are placed in 6-well cell-culture plates (ThermoFisher Scientific) filled with MQ water.
Cover Slips Treatment
PEGDA hydrogels were printed on pretreated cover slips. The treatment took place by
placing non-treated cover glasses in a metal holder placed inside the chamber of Diener
Plasma Surface Technology. Plasma treatment is the process by which gas is ionized
in a vacuum chamber to form plasma, altering the surface of the material [49]. Plasma
treatment was generated for 10 min by vacuum pumping with pressure in the chamber in
the range of 0.4-0.6mbar. After that the cleaned glasses were soaked for another 10 min
in a 2 % v/v 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate (Sigma-Aldrich) solution mixture with
96 % ethanol (pH 5, adjusted by acetic acid). After 10 min the solution is removed and the
cover slips are washed 3 times with pure ethanol (99.9 %). Then heated to 150 ◦C for at
least 10 min to evaporate residual solution, drying the slips.
2.1.1
Assessment of Prints Using Microscopy
I used a bright field microscope (Motic) to visualize and acquire images of all the printed
chips. I also used another bright field microscope (Carl Zeiss, Axioscope 40). For cross-
sectional analysis of printed channels, I had to cut the chips in halves using a disposable
scalpel of stainless steel surgical blade (Swann-Morton) and position them vertically using
a vertical chip holder that I have designed and printed using Polylactic Acid (PLA) filaments
dispensed by extrusion 3D printer (MakerBot Replicator). The vertical chip-holder design
can be seen in the figure below.
(a) Illustration of the vertical chip holder with
cover slip placement.
(b) Top view of the vertical chip holder.
Figure 2.1: a) Side and b) top views of the vertical chip holder. Outer diameter: 33.5 mm,
distance between handles: 22.8 mm and width of the opening: 0.8 mm.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
13
==PAGE:22==
The distance between the handles where the glass slip (22 mm x 22 mm x 0.4 mm) would
be inserted was chosen to be 22.8 mm and of 0.8 mm in width, as can be seen in fig. 2.1b. I
used both microscopes in imaging the channels from the top (for cross-sectional imaging).
2.1.2
Statistical Analysis of the Prints
Inter- and intra-sample analysis was done for the prints where features of interest were
measured and analyzed using ImageJ processing program (Fiji software); meaning the
averaging was done within prints and between different prints.
2.2
Perfusion of the Chips
The evolution in chip design is described in Chapter 3. Reaching a final chip design of
8 in-parallel channels, which were put under perfusibility testing. In order to test their
perfusability, I used food dye and MQ water mixture to perfuse the channels at first but
then switched to a mixture of food dye and PBS (Phosphate Buffer Saline). Blue food dye
(Brilliant Blue) was first used for perfusion, and then I switched to red food dye (Tørsleffs,
Haugen’s Group). I sonicated the dye-PBS mixture using an ultrasonic cleaning bath
(VWR) for 20 min to ensure dye dissolution while heating it up to around 30 ◦C to have
the dye around room temperature when perfusing it through the chips. Moreover, the dye
mixture was filtered through a 0.22 µm pore filter, and the filtrate was thereafter sonicated
for another 20 min to get rid of trapped gases in the liquid.
As a start, I used the sealed fenestration designs (see Chapter 3 for details) as a con-
trol. The sealed channels were used as an estimate of how long the chips would survive
continuous perfusion.
2.2.1
Perfusing non-fenestrated channels
The perfusion set-up is shown in fig. 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Perfusion set-up.
14
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:23==
The perfusing set-up consisted of custom-cut 21G stainless steel blunt needles (Ø (diame-
ter) 0.8 mm and 30 mm length, Adhesive Dispensing) connected to the chip through the in-
let and outlet which was placed in a petri dish (ThermoFisher Scientific). The needles were
mounted to flexible polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) micro-tubing (Øinner 0.30 mm and Øouter
0.50 mm, Adtech Polymer Engineering) which were connected through another needle to
a Sanroprene flexible tubing (GPR-0051-008, Øinner 0.51 mm, Advanced Elastomer Sys-
tems). The flexible tubing was connected to LabV1 Intelligent Flow Rate Peristaltic Pump
(Shenchen) by pump stopper tubing (Pharmed BPT SC0731, Ismatec, Cole-Palmer) [2],
[37].
Different perfusion modes were adopted choosing between a pumping-based or suction-
based mode, as well as testing different flow rates. I first started perfusing the 97.2 µm-
lumen-wide channels by pumping the diluted blue dye mixture into the channels at a
flow rate starting at 100 µL/min decreasing to different flow rates reaching 10 µL/min and
5 µL/min. I then switched to suction instead of pumping and stuck to 56 µL/min flow rate.
Moreover, I perfused 97.2 µm-lumen-wide channels as well as, perfusing 162 µm-lumen-
wide channels for comparison.
2.2.2
Pre-filling the channels’ surroundings with sacrificial material
After testing and estimating the perfusability duration of the non-fenestrated chips, I switched
to perfusing the fenestrated chips. However, in order to make them perfusable, I had to
use a sacrificial material that would temporarily block the fenestrations. I used Gelatin
Methacrylate (GelMA) as the sacrificial material which is intended to be degraded after
the endothelial cells form a vessel in the channel’s lumen in future studies.
2.2.3
Gelation of sacrificial material in the channels’ surroundings
The materials used for GelMA preparation are summarized in the table below.
Table 2.2: Materials used for GelMA preparation.
Abbreviation
Product Name
Vendor Information
Function
GelMA
Gelatin Methacrylate
GelMA prepared by
Rujing Zhang [37]
Used as a sacrificial
filler
LAP
Lithium phenyl-2,4,6-
trimethylbenzoylphosphinate
CellLink
Photo-initiator
PBS
Phosphate-Buffered Saline
Sigma -Aldrich
Buffer Solution
Microbeads
FluoSpheres carboxylate-
modified microspheres, yellow-
green fluorescent
Molecular Probes
Fluorescent microbeads
used for visualization
I first prepared GelMA stock solutions by dissolving 100 mg of GelMA in 1 mL of PBS,
preparing LAP as described in section 2.1. The final GelMA mixture was made by adding
50 µL of GelMA stock solution, 25 µL of LAP stock and 25 µL of PBS. Resulting in final
concentrations of 50 mg/mL GelMA and 5 mg/mL LAP in 100 µL volume.
The materials pre-mixing into GelMA stock solutions and post-mixing were heated to
around 35-40 ◦C and sonicated for around 10 min using Ultrasonic Cleaner (Bransonic).
GelMA stock solutions were also degassed using the same Ultrasonic Cleaner for 5 min
prior to use.
Furthermore, 1 µm-sized (in diameter) fluorescent microbeads of 2 % solid in 1 mL were
used to visualize where the GelMA is settling in the chip. Different concentrations of
GelMA were tested, using 5 %, 7.5 %, 8 % and 10 %. The corresponding initial concentra-
tions and volumes used to prepare a 100 µL stock solutions are summarized in table 2.3.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
15
==PAGE:24==
The volume of the channels’ compartment in the 97.2 µm-lumen-wide fenestrated chan-
nels is 3.738 x 3.402 x 1.5 mm resulting in around 19 mm3 which corresponds to 19 µL
volume, so I added 19 µL of GelMA to fill the channels’ compartment and gel in place
sealing the fenestrations. I removed the excess water from the channels compartment
prior to GelMA addition, by pipetting the water out using a 200 µL pipet (Eppendorf).
Table 2.3: Materials and their corresponding concentrations and volumes utilized for
GelMA preparation of different concentrations.
GelMA
Materials
Initial Concentration
Volume Used
Final Concentration
in 100 µL
GelMA 5 %
GelMA
100 mg/mL
50 µL
50 mg/mL
LAP
20 mg/mL
25 µL
5 mg/mL
Microbeads
0.02 mg/mL
1 µL
2·10−4 mg/mL
PBS
-
24 µL
-
GelMA 7.5 %
GelMA
200 mg/mL
37.5 µL
75 mg/mL
LAP
20 mg/mL
25 µL
5 mg/mL
Microbeads
0.02 mg/mL
10 µL
2·10−3 mg/mL
PBS
-
27.5 µL
-
GelMA 8 %
GelMA
200 mg/mL
40 µL
80 mg/mL
LAP
20 mg/mL
25 µL
5 mg/mL
Microbeads
0.02 mg/mL
10 µL
2·10−3 mg/mL
PBS
-
25 µL
-
GelMA 10 %
GelMA
200 mg/mL
50 µL
100 mg/mL
LAP
20 mg/mL
25 µL
5 mg/mL
Microbeads
0.02 mg/mL
10 µL
2·10−3 mg/mL
PBS
-
15 µL
-
The gelation process took place using a home-built light heater box (8 mW/cm2 at 365 nm),
displayed in fig. 2.3, by cross-linking the methacrylate groups using free radical polymer-
ization by a photoinitiator and UV-light, forming a covalently cross-linked GelMA network
[50]. The GelMA mixture and the chips were heated up on the heater box to around 40 ◦C
prior to adding the GelMA to the chips.
Figure 2.3: Heater box using UV light in GelMA curing process.
16
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:25==
Different techniques were used to ensure that the GelMA covers the channels’ environ-
ment, one by pumping PBS at different flow rates through the channels at the same time
as adding and curing the GelMA. Another, by suction at different flow rates at the same
time as adding and/or curing the GelMA.
2.2.4
GelMA Gelation Assessment Using Confocal Fluorescence
Microscopy
Different chips post GelMA curing were assessed using confocal laser scanning fluores-
cence microscope (Zeiss, Axio, Imager M2, LSM 700) using laser illumination at 488 nm.
Stacked and tiled images were acquired for almost full chip visualization. A chip with no
GelMA was also visualized by stack imaging. The chips were placed on a glass slide
where a few water drops were added on top of the chip with another cover slip placed on
top of it to ensure that the chip does not dry out during imaging and to minimize optical
distortion (scattering) at the water/air or water/glass interface due to changes in the re-
fractive index between mediums [51], [52].
The images acquired were analyzed and visualized using two software, the ImageJ pro-
cessing program (Fiji software) and Icy bioimaging software [53], [54].
2.2.5
Perfusing fenestrated channels with a sacrificial material in the
surrounding
Suction perfusion at different flow rates was applied to the post-GelMA-gelled chips, as
well as pumping at different flow rates, of different chip designs. The same perfusion
setup shown in fig. 2.2 was utilized.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
17
==PAGE:26==
3
Results
At first, I studied the limitations and possibilities of the 3D printer focusing on how small of
a distance between structures is printable, as well as, what structure is a better printable
choice. After getting a better understanding of the printer’s limitations and capabilities in
terms of the printability of spaced features, I switched to testing the printability of hollow,
cylindrical channels with openings in the side walls, reaching a complete printable chip de-
sign. Secondly, I assessed the perfusability and perfusability duration of non-fenestrated
channels. Following that, I examined the possibilities of sealing the fenestrations of the
fenestrated channels and testing their perfusability.
3.1
Designs and 3D Prints
3.1.1
Insights of 3D printer limitations and possibilities
The first design used in aim of studying the printer’s resolution possibilities was a replica
of a channel design used for vasculogenesis in the study by Kim et al. shown in fig. 3.1a
[8]. The same design was replicated with the same dimensions but with different vertical
distances between the structures to assess if such micro-scaled structures with small
distances are printable. The distances used were the following: 70, 50, 30 and 10.8 µm
while keeping the horizontal spaces between the structures as shown in fig. 3.1a.
(a) Channel design from Kim et. al.’s study.
Reproduced with permission from the Royal
Society of Chemistry.
(b) Side view of the design of 250 µm height.
Figure 3.1: a) Top and b) side views of the replicated design from Kim et al.’s study [8].
Based on what is mentioned previously in Chapter 2 regarding the designed dimensions,
the vertical distances were converted using the multiplication factor F (check Chapter 2)
which would result in for example, 97.2 µm instead of 100 µm, the converted parameters
can be seen in fig. 3.5. The designs were placed at 5 different positions with different
vertical distances across the printing area as presented in fig. 3.2, to study the variation
of light exposure across the printing field. The vertical spacing in the middle of 97.2 µm,
upper left of 75.6 µm, upper right of 54 µm, lower left of 32.4 µm and lower right of 10.8 µm.
A resultant print of the replicated design looks like what can be seen in fig. 3.2. It can
be seen that the features were differently printed at different positions across the printing
field where some were not printed very well as can be seen in the upper left corner of
fig. 3.2. Furthermore, I averaged the measured distances between the hexagonal and
trapezoidal structures for 4 prints. The measured distances between the hexagonal and
trapezoidal structures are depicted in fig. 3.3c and fig. 3.3d, respectively.
18
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.2: A print of design from fig. 3.1a of 5 different vertical distances at 5 different
positions. The images were acquired using 2.5x objective of the Carl Zeiss microscope.
The results for all 4 prints along with the standard deviation (SD) of the measurements
are presented in fig. 3.3.
(a) Between hexagonal structures.
(b) Between trapezoidal structures.
(c) Distance between hexagonal structures.
(d) Distance between trapezoidal structures.
Figure 3.3: Inter-averaging of the distance between hexagonal and trapezoidal structures
for all of the 4 prints. The SD is represented by the error bar.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
19
==PAGE:28==
The measurements show that the printed values are higher than the designed dimensions.
The measurements within prints between hexagonal and trapezoidal structures were also
averaged and presented in the fig. 3.4 which were consistent with the previous results of
the printed dimensions being higher than the designed ones.
(a) Between hexagonal structures.
(b) Between trapezoidal structures.
Figure 3.4: Intra-averaging of the distance between hexagonal and trapezoidal structures
for each print of the 4 prints. The SD is represented by the error bar.
Furthermore, the aforementioned design was also replicated into another design with the
previously used dimensions; however, the right-side structures were changed into 108 µm-
sized square structures as shown in the inventor design in fig. 3.5. I adopted the square-
like structures to check if they were better printed than the trapezoidal ones which were
not printed as intended and way smaller than intended as can be seen in fig. 3.2.
The dimensions mentioned in this thesis will be the final calculated dimensions used in
the designs. Both designs were also printed with and without a seal on top to observe and
assess if the whole chip would be printed as intended if sealed without collapsing which
was the case in the sealed prints. In addition, this design was also placed at 5 different
positions with the different vertical distances mentioned previously across the printing
area as presented in fig. 3.6, to study the effect of variation in light exposure across the
printing field observed previously, with a different structure.
20
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.5: The same design replicated, but with 108 µm squares in the right side. Hexag-
onal structure length = 280.8 µm, left side length of trapezoidal structures = 108 µm and
vertical distance between structures of 97.2 µm Dimensions are represented in µm.
A print of the modified design of square-like structures on one side, of the same positioning
as previously done in fig. 3.2 of the 5 different vertical distances between structures at 5
different positions is presented in fig. 3.6.
Figure 3.6: A print of the design from fig. 3.5. The images were acquired using 2.5x
objective of the Carl Zeiss microscope.
The same issue with structures being differently printed across the printing area was still
observed in those prints. Moreover, the square structures seemed to be printed slightly
better than the trapezoidal ones, but the ones with 10.8 and 32.4 µm spacing were merging.
Hence, another design presented in fig. 3.7 was created. The design was created with
the aim of having less surface area of the structures facing each other to reduce the
possibility of them merging as observed previously. The approach was having 108 µm
squares positioned diagonally with different vertical and horizontal distances, ‘V d’ and
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
21
==PAGE:30==
′Hd’ respectively, assessing which distancing is most convenient in regards to merging.
Figure 3.7: 108 µm square structures constructed as diagonals of different V d and Hd.
The 4 diagonals presented in fig. 3.7 are of the following specifications:
• Diagonal 1: Vd = 10.8 µm; Hd = 10.8 µm
• Diagonal 2: Vd = 2x10.8 µm; Hd = 10.8 µm
• Diagonal 3: Vd = 3x10.8 µm; Hd = 10.8 µm
• Diagonal 4: Vd = 2x10.8 µm; Hd = 2x10.8 µm
A print can be seen in the following figure.
Figure 3.8: Design from fig. 3.7 positioned at 5 different places across the printing area.
The images were acquired using 2.5x objective of the Carl Zeiss microscope.
22
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:31==
The same design was also placed at 5 different positions along the printing area. As
observed, the structures in the corners were poorly printed, and most of the ones near the
center seem to be merging, mainly the ones in the middle where all of them are combined.
This shows that the diagonal approach does not solve the merging issue.
3.1.2
3D Printing, and Design Optimization and Analysis of Synthetic
Micrfenestrated Vascularature
After studying the printability and limitations of the printer, by printing different designs and
structures, different aims were conducted in designing fenestrated channels. Two different
designs of a complete channel were considered. One approach was the following design
given in fig. 3.9 which is a whole cylindrical channel with openings on all side walls. The
channel is chosen to be of 162 µm inner diameter and 356.4 µm outer diameter, and the
openings of 75.6 µm in width and the distance separating them. I have printed the channel
vertically and horizontally to assess which prints with better-resolved openings.
Figure 3.9: A horizontal and vertical cylindrical channels design with openings on the side
walls of 75.6 µm size and spacing between. Parameters are in µm.
The other approach was also a cylindrical channel with the same inner and outer diam-
eters as the previously mentioned design; however, the openings were of 54 µm in width
between 342.8 µm-sized hexagonal walls as can be seen in fig. 3.10.
Figure 3.10: A cylindrical channel design of 162 µm inner diameter and 356.4 µm outer
diameter with 54 µm openings between hexagonal walls of 342.8 µm width.
This design was inspired by the study done by Kim et al. where they created the open-
ings in such a manner as seen in fig. 3.1a to avoid leakage into adjacent channels (as
discussed in Chapter 4) [8]. A print of each design is shown in fig. 3.11.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
23
==PAGE:32==
(a) Top-view of the vertical print of the fig. 3.9
design. Using 5x objective.
(b) Side-view of the horizontal print of the
fig. 3.9 design. Using 5x objective.
(c) Side-view of a print of the fig. 3.10 channel design. Using 2.5x objective.
Figure 3.11: A print of fig. 3.9 and fig. 3.10 designs using Carl Zeiss microscope.
Both designs were printed as intended as can be seen in fig. 3.11; however, the verti-
cal channel design was abandoned for reasons regarding the vertical resolution of the
openings that are discussed in Chapter 4. Moreover, since the channel design inspired
by Kim et al. was printed successfully without the walls merging (fig. 3.11c), the fig. 3.10
was adopted with openings on both sides of the channel and upgraded to a full chip of
8 channels with an inlet and an outlet design shown in figure fig. 3.12 [8]. The full chip
design along with a resultant print are presented in fig. 3.12.
Figure 3.12: 8 fenestrated channels chip. Using 2.5x objective, Carl Zeiss microscope.
24
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:33==
More details about the design include the volume distributor shown in fig. 3.13a which is
a closed shell structure between a 1.5 mm square cross-section and a rectangular format
on the wall where the channels end of 1 mm height. The site where the needles are to
be inserted is designed as shown in fig. 3.13b where the diameter of the insertion site
is 0.7 mm, and the last 0.3 mm of the needle channel near the volume distributor to be
of 0.6 mm diameter as a stop for the needle. A better understanding of the fenestrations
design through hexagonal walls can be seen in fig. 3.13c where a 32 µm-sized openings
were adopted for more physiologically relevant size.
(a) Volume distributor design.
(b) Site of needle insertion configuration.
(c) Design dimensions of 32.4 µm-fenestrations and 169.057 µm-hexagonal wall structures.
Figure 3.13: Design details of the complete chip.
Three prints of fig. 3.12 design were analyzed by measuring the size of the fenestrations
compared to the design dimension as represented in fig. 3.14.
Figure 3.14: Averaged fenestration measurements of 3 different prints and within prints.
The error bar represents the SD within measurements.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
25
==PAGE:34==
The measurements revealed the printed fenestrations to be larger than the designed di-
mension.
Moreover, I created the design with 2 different dimensions, one to have an inner channel
diameter of 97.2 µm and the other 162 µm to study which is best in terms of clogging.
The distance between hexagonal structures was set to 32.4 µm for both designs. I ended
up sticking with the channels of 97.2 µm lumen diameter design since they were both
well printed, in order to have a more physiologically relevant dimension. I also changed
the size of the fenestrations to 54 µm for reasons regarding them serving the angiogenic
purpose that is discussed in Chapter 4.
On the other hand, the fenestrations seemed to be of slight variations in the dimensions
between channels as can be observed in the image below where the openings in the
upper channels seem to be wider than the lower ones.
Figure 3.15: A print of 97.2 µm lumen diameter channels and 54 µm-sized fenestrations.
Thus, fenestrations measurement was done for each tube with 54 µm-sized fenestrations
of 3 different prints for comparison presented in fig. 3.16.
Figure 3.16: Measured fenestrations size in all of the 8 channels of 3 different chips.
26
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:35==
The plotting of the fenestrations measured in fig. 3.16 shows the fenestrations to decrease
in size as descending from top channels to lower ones.
A table summarizing the different design dimensions and measurements of their corre-
sponding features in the full chip design prints is presented below.
Table 3.1: Summary of different design dimensions, and printed features measured of full
chip design prints.
Design
Reference
Design Description
Features Measured
Features
Dimensions
Results
fig. 3.12
Full chip of 8
162 µm-sized channels
Fenestrations size
Fenestrations size
= 32.4 µm
Measurements
in fig. 3.14
fig. 3.15
Full chip of 8
97.2 µm-sized channels
Fenestrations size in
all 8 channels
Fenestrations size
= 54 µm
Measurements
in fig. 3.16
After sticking to the 97.2 µm channels and 54 µm fenestrations, I sealed those fenestrations
in the CAD design shown in fig. 3.13c to test the perfusability and durability of the channels
which is considered an estimation and a comparison to the perfusability of the fenestrated
channels.
3.2
Perfusion of Non-fenestrated Channels and Design
Updates
I first used pumping to perfuse the channels with a diluted red food dye. The shell wall
of the structure of the flow distributor volume was too thin and was breaking as soon as
I start the pumping. Therefore, the shell thickness was increased to 0.3 µm instead of
0.1 µm, as well as decreasing the flow rate gradually from 100 µL/min reaching 10 µL/min
and finally to 5 µL/min. The chip was leaking and mostly the volume distributors were
breaking upon pumping perfusion as can be seen in fig. 3.17. Accordingly, more support
was added mainly to the volume distributors and needle insertion sites.
Figure 3.17: The breaks in the inlet and outlet volume distributors after pumping perfusion.
Images acquired using 2x objective of Motic microscope.
Different chips were perfused and more support was added to different parts every time
the chips broke during perfusion, reaching a final design of the chips with added support as
can be seen in fig. 3.18 where the base was designed to be 1 mm thick. Moreover, I also
switched to suction instead of pumping as the perfusion mechanism to avoid breaking.
With the additional support and after switching to suction, the chips survived high flow
rates reaching 300 µL/min without breaking or leaking.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.18: Updated design with additional support to the chip.
Some examples of the perfused chips by pumping at different flow rates showed slightly
different results. Figure 3.19 shows examples of perfused chips using red dye at 30 µL/min
and 5 µL/min flow rates.
(a) A Perfused chip by pumping at 30 µL/min. Image acquired using 1x objective.
(b) A Perfused chip by pumping at 5 µL/min. Image acquired using 2x objective.
Figure 3.19: Images of perfused chips by pumping perfusion at 30 µL/min and 5 µL/min
using the Motic microscope.
I observed the same pattern in some of the perfused chips using suction as the one in
fig. 3.19b where there was no dye present in the upper channels which were suspected
to be either smaller than the lower ones or clogging. Therefore, the channels’ lumen
diameters were measured for 5 different prints at different sites across the length of the
97.2 µm-channels to assess whether the upper ones are smaller. The averaged measure-
ments along with their SD are presented in fig. 3.20.
28
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.20: Measurements of all of the printed 97.2 µm-channels’ inner diameters of 5
different prints. SD is represented by error bars.
The channels appeared to be of comparable sizes with slightly, non-significantly smaller
upper channels. Another observation during perfusion was dye stagnation in some areas
throughout the chip as can be seen in fig. 3.21 which was perfused by suction at 50 µL/min
for around 4 days and then cleaned with water by suction at 300 µL/min.
(a) A perfused chip with red dye mixture for
more than 4 days.
(b) The same chip after cleaning by water
perfusion at 300 µL/min.
(c) Dye precipitate observed in inlet volume
distributor.
(d) Dye precipitate in outlet volume distribu-
tor.
Figure 3.21: An example of dye stagnation upon perfusion for a duration of time using
Motic microscope, objective: 2x
Dye precipitate was observed in some areas throughout the channels, as well as dye
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
29
==PAGE:38==
stagnation in the volume distributors observed in fig. 3.21c and fig. 3.21d for the inlet and
outlet volume distributors, respectively. This was accompanied by the presence of a large
number of bubbles entering the volume distributors and channels and sticking there as
can be observed in fig. 3.22.
Figure 3.22: Bubble formation during perfusing a 162 µm-diameter channels. Using 1x
objective, Motic microscope.
Similarly, dye precipitate was also observed in the tubing, fig. 3.23 where the same type
of precipitate came out as a particle from the tubing when cleaned.
Figure 3.23: Dye precipitate in the tubing taken by a phone camera.
For forthcoming perfusion, the dye was mixed with PBS instead of water using an ul-
trasonic cleaning bath (VWR) for 20 min for better dye dissolution while heating it up to
around 30 ◦C to have the dye around room temperature when perfusing it through the
chips, to avoid bubble formation. Additionally, the dye mixture was filtered using 0.22 µm
filter, removal of undissolved dye which was thereafter sonicated for another 20 min to
get rid of trapped gases. The rationales behind those choices are further discussed in
Chapter 4.
To ensure that the channels are not clogged, the chips were cut in half and placed on
the vertical holder I designed, as can be seen in the cross-sectional imaging setup in
fig. 3.24. The outer diameter of the ring was chosen to be 33.5 mm fitting in a cell culture
dish (Greiner Bio-One) of 35 mm inner diameter. The 33.5 mm was reached by trial and
error by printing the same design with different outer diameters starting by 34.5 mm until
reaching the right size that fits into the well. The reason behind trial and error is that the
MakerBot printer was resulting in slightly bigger dimensions than designed. The same
was done to reach the distance between handles and opening width values.
30
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.24: Cross-sectional imaging setup taken by a phone camera.
The same design of 97.2 µm-channels was printed with two different resins containing two
different QY concentrations, some printed using 9 mg/mL and others with 12 mg/mL to test
which is better in printing a hollow channel. A cross-sectional view of one of each resin
used can be seen in fig. 3.25. As seen in fig. 3.25a, the vertical diameter in the channels
of 9 mg/mL QY is smaller than the horizontal one and also smaller than the vertical one in
the channels of 12 mg/mL QY seen in fig. 3.25b. Also, I reconstructed the sliced images of
the circular channels design that have been adopted in the previous prints to compare it to
the resulting prints, assessing which resin configuration better prints the intended sliced
structure. The constructed shape of the circular design can be seen in fig. 3.26a. This
shows that the lumen channels printed using 12 mg/mL QY-resin match the shape of the
constructed structure, unlike the lumen channels printed using 9 mg/mL QY-resin. Thus,
I stuck to QY of 12 mg/mL concentration in the rest of my prints.
(a) Cross-sectional view of 97.2 µm lumen
channels printed using 9 mg/mL QY-resin. Im-
age acquired using 4x objective.
(b) Cross-sectional view of 97.2 µm lumen
channels printed using 12 mg/mL QY-resin.
Image acquired using 5x objective..
Figure 3.25: Cross-sectional view of 2 prints of the same design but different resin con-
figuration acquired using Motic microscope.
Additionally, I designed two other shaped lumens of hexagonal and octagonal structures
of 97.2 µm-lumen, to see which is of a more circular-like construct compared to the circular
channel design, reconstructing the sliced images of the designs. The result of the different
channels can be observed in fig. 3.26 where it can be seen that the more circular-like con-
struct was the octagonal design. For the cross-sectional lumen diameter measurement,
I measured the diameters vertically and horizontally since the lumens were observed to
have smaller vertical diameters than the horizontal ones. Even though I stuck with the
channels of 97.2 µm design, I printed the same design but with channels of 162 µm lumen
diameter to compare the printed inner diameter of the channels when cut and observed
from the top.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) Circular design.
(b) Hexagonal design.
(c) Octagonal design.
Figure 3.26: Three different 97.2 µm-lumen constructs from sliced images.
The graph in fig. 3.27 represents a rough measurement of the diameters of 4 different
prints since it was too difficult to measure due to some blurriness in the images with no
clear edges. The four different combinations of lumen diameter and QY concentration in
the resin used of the assessed prints are the following:
• 97.2 µm with 9 mg/mL QY
• 97.2 µm with 12 mg/mL QY
• 162 µm with 9 mg/mL QY
• 162 µm with 12 mg/mL QY
Figure 3.27: Vertical and horizontal diameter measurement of different prints.
It is clear that the horizontal measurement is larger than the vertical one in all of the 4 prints;
in addition to the prints with QY of 12 mg/min concentration to have higher dimensions than
the ones with 9 mg/min. A table summarizing the measurements of the lumen diameter
of different dimensions and resin (QY concentration) configurations of the full chip design
is presented in table 3.2.
32
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:41==
Table 3.2: Summary of lumen measurement of different design dimensions and QY con-
centration of the full chip design prints.
Design Reference
Design Description
QY concentration
Results
fig. 3.18
Full chip of 8
97.2 µm-sized channels
9 mg/mL QY
Measurements in
fig. 3.20
fig. 3.18
Full chip of 8
97.2 µm-sized channels
9 mg/mL QY
Measurements in
fig. 3.16
12 mg/mL QY
fig. 3.18
Full chip of 8
162 µm-sized channels
9 mg/mL QY
Measurements in
fig. 3.16
12 mg/mL QY
The maximum perfusing time of the chips before adding the extra support to the volume
distributor in particular lasted for slightly more than 4 days. The support addition was
not done all at once. I first added support to the needle insertion site, followed by some
support near the volume distributor area with different support dimensions while testing
perfusability after every design update, until reaching the fully supported design seen in
fig. 3.18. The final updated chip design was tested for 3 different chips of 97.2 µm lumen
printed using 12 mg/mL QY-resin that perfused successfully for at least 2 weeks. All of
these 3 chips were perfusing fine after 2 weeks; however, two of them were observed to
have weaker perfusion after 2 weeks.
3.3
Perfusion of Fenestrated Channels
After studying and testing the perfusability of the non-fenestrated chips and getting an
estimate of how long they are perfusable, the same updated design but with fenestrations
was conducted for printing further on. The non-fenestrated chips were used as a base
to compare perfusability after using GelMA as a sacrificial fill that is intended to prevent
leakage through the fenestrations. The GelMA was added to the well-like compartment
where the 8-channels are located. I was first using the 5 % GelMA which I added directly
after taking the chip out of the water. The GelMA-chip curing took place by placing the
chip on the curing box and curing it for 3 min based on previous work done by the group
[50]. The results of curing it and placing it back in the water were observed in the following
patterns as presented in fig. 3.28.
(a) Before inserting the chip back in water.
(b) Video screenshot after water insertion.
Figure 3.28: A GelMA cured chip before and after inserting it back in the water. Image
and video acquired using 2x objective, Motic microscope.
From what is observed, the GelMA was not attaching to the walls where there could be
residual water present. Consequently, water pipetted out from the chip was done prior to
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
33
==PAGE:42==
adding GelMA. Still, to assess where the GelMA was reaching, fluorescence images of
fluorescent microbeads embedded in the GelMA mixture were acquired. Firstly, I tested
the GelMA in a bath-well design to visualize the space it occupies as shown in fig. 3.29.
(a) Bath-well of a 8 mm-square of 1 mm depth.
(b) Top view near the bath well’s wall. 200 µm
scale bar.
(c) 3D view.
(d) YZ-plane view.
Figure 3.29: Cured-GelMA in a bath-well design. Images were acquired using 10x objec-
tive of the confocal scanning microscope.
It can be seen from the 3D and YZ-plane views that the GelMA occupied the full height
(1 mm) of the well. However, the stacked images were of only one side of the chip; still,
it can be seen that the GelMA was reaching the well’s wall as shown in fig. 3.29b. Since
not the full length or width of the bath well was imaged, the length represented by Y-axis
in fig. 3.29c and fig. 3.29d only shows around 1.2 mm of the well’s length.
After testing GelMA settlement using the bath well, I went back to curing GelMA on the
fenestrated channels chips, but after pipetting the water out. I attempted to remove the
water by suction using the pump previously used for perfusion which took some time.
Then, I left the GelMA for around a minute in the chip to settle down before curing, fol-
lowed by 3 min curing. Unfortunately, in that case, the chip dried out and cracked, so I
stuck to pipetting the water out using a pipette. Furthermore, I switched to inverting the
curing setup by placing the curing box on top of the 6-well plate containing the chip; thus
curing it from the top instead of the bottom to ensure the UV light is reaching the GelMA.
Nevertheless, all the chips perfused post-GelMA were leaking from the openings; there-
fore, I tried visualizing the areas where GelMA was reaching. The following images were
acquired from a stacked image of a chip post-GelMA curing. I tried finding the base of
the chip to ensure GelMA is reaching the bottom where some microbeads were seen in
fig. 3.30a.
The 3D image in fig. 3.30b shows no microbeads where the lumens of the channels are
34
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:43==
assumed to be located where I tried finding the expected location of the lumen using the
dashed line in the YZ-view shown in fig. 3.30c to acquire the image in fig. 3.30d where
the dashed circle represents the expected lumen site. The image shows no microbeads
in the lumen nor in the fenestrations; thus no GelMA was reaching those sites.
(a) PEGDA base. 400 µm scale bar.
(b) 3D visualization of the stack images.
(c) The expected lumen position in the YZ-
view where fig. 3.30d was acquired.
(d) Expected lumen position in the XY-cross-
sectional view. 400 µm scale bar.
Figure 3.30: Different images of the same stacked-imaged GelMA-cured chip. The stack
image was acquired using objective 10x.
Those chips were still tested for perfusion which ended up resulting in leakage of perfused
liquid through the fenestrations. Another design of fewer fenestrations in each channel
was designed as depicted in fig. 3.31.
Figure 3.31: Design of fewer fenestrations, different in each channel, but of the same
54 µm size.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
35
==PAGE:44==
This design was used to test if the fenestrations are being slightly blocked and whether
fewer fenestrations would result in successful perfusion, and also to track where the per-
fused dye solution is leaking from. The channels were of an increasing number of fenes-
trations, starting with one in the center channel, increasing by 2 openings to the adjacent
channels and so one, reaching 15 openings as shown fig. 3.31. Adding GelMA to those
new-designed chips and perfusing them resulted in the same thing as previously reported
of leakage through the fenestrations as can be seen in fig. 3.32. The same was observed
in those chips where there seemed to be no microbeads observed near the fenestrations,
showing that the GelMA is not successfully blocking the openings.
Figure 3.32: A perfused chip of the new design. Image acquired using 1x objective of
Motic microscope.
Another attempt in sealing the fenestrations was changing the original fenestrated design
of 97.2 µm lumen diameter and 54 µm openings, by removing the top shell on the channels
depicted in fig. 3.13c resulting in the channels observed in fig. 3.33, suspecting that the
top shell shown in fig. 3.13 was restricting the GelMA from reaching below it, near the
fenestrations.
Figure 3.33: Same previous fenestrated channels design but with no top shell.
After curing GelMA on the no-top design, there seemed to be some GelMA (microbeads)
reaching the site of some fenestrations but not all as seen in fig. 3.34. 10 % GelMA was
used in this chip due to observing the 5 % GelMA pop out upon pumping in some of the
36
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:45==
previous chips. However, upon perfusion, the same leaking issue through the fenestra-
tions was still observed.
Figure 3.34: Fluorescence imaging of GelMA cured in fenestrated channels with no top
shell. 10x objective. 400 µm scale bar.
On the other hand, the 10 % GelMA was too viscous and seemed to be harder to settle
down between the fenestrations. To overcome this issue, 7.5 % and 8 % GelMA were
tested by curing drops of each on a 6-well plate where 7.5 % had similar viscosity to that
of the 5 % GelMA and the 8 % more gell-like. Based on this, I selected the 8 % GelMA in
the chips cured afterward.
A final design was created to test if GelMA would block the fenestrations. The design was
changed from hexagonal structures to triangular structures as shown in fig. 3.35, to have
more defined structured openings aiming to facilitate the reaching of GelMA to the fenes-
tration sites. Following the pixel pitch factor (check Chapter 2) keeping the fenestrations
of 54 µm size, the triangular structures are created of a 13x10.8 µm (140.4 µm) hypotenuse
and 7x10.8 µm thickness (median) (more details are explained in Chapter 4). In order to
block the fenestrations, different trials were attempted in relation to the curing process.
Figure 3.35: Triangular wall structures forming the fenestrations.
First, I tried removing the water from the surroundings and heating it prior to adding the 8 %
GelMA. Then I added the heated GelMA at the same time as pumping PBS at 20 µL/min
and while curing it, attempting to push residual water molecules out of the fenestrations,
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
37
==PAGE:46==
to allow the GelMA to reach instead. However, GelMA was observed to come on top
of the chip forming a bubble-like shape. Therefore, I stopped pumping and flipped the
chip removing the GelMA formed on top then added GelMA again and cured it. The
microbeads seemed to be seen closer to the fenestrations and near most openings as
can be seen in fig. 3.36.
Figure 3.36: Image of 8 % GelMA cured in the triangular structure design (fig. 3.35) ac-
quired using 5x objective. 400 µm scale bar.
Once I perfused the chip, it leaked in a similar manner to the other fenestrated chips I
previously tried perusing, but the GelMA did not pop out. I also cured GelMA on another
chip with the same design. This time I added the GelMA at the same time as suctioning
PBS at 50 µL/min instead of pumping. The GelMA seemed to be suctioned out entirely, so
I stopped the suction mode. Fluorescence images of this chip are shown in fig. 3.37 where
there seems to be no presence of GelMA at all showing only a few beads where marked
with white circles. Perfusing this chip showed leakage everywhere upon perfusion, just
like a fenestrated chip with no GelMA added to it.
(a) A few microbeads marked with a white circle.
(b) A marked microbead with a white circle.
Figure 3.37: Marked positions of the only microbeads left. Images acquired using 5x
objective. 400 µm scale bars.
38
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:47==
4
Discussion
4.1
Designs and 3D Prints
All designs were created taking into consideration the pixel pitch factor (10.8 µm) which is
actually the pixel size plus the distance between adjacent pixels so that my prints are not
limited in resolution by pixel mismatch (between pixel position and the features cured). ’F’
was chosen as the closest odd integer to ensure that the pixels would be evenly divided
with a central pixel as demonstrated later on. Furthermore, the slicing/step height or layer
thickness 20 µm was selected based on previous work of the group with aims of improv-
ing structural accuracy while having reasonable fabrication time, as well as adjusting the
absorber’s concentration to match the slicing thickness, producing mechanically stable
structures by enhancing the bonding between neighboring layers [37].
PEGDA is a synthetic polymer commonly used in biomedical studies due to its biocompat-
ibility and non-fouling properties. Higher molecular weight (MW) PEGDA of Mn (Number
Average Molecular Weight) > 2000 g.mol-1 results in more compliant hydrogels of lower
crosslinking densities [37]. High MW values correspond to a loosely cross-linked network
and thus a decreased swelling ratio (more swelling). A decrease in MW is accompanied
by an increase in cross-linking density, resulting in an increased swelling ratio, mean-
ing decreased swelling [55]. Other researchers have used highly crosslinked PEGDA of
lower MW (fx. Mn of around 250g.mol-1 in order to manufacture microfluidic devices that
resist swelling and are impermeable to water and water-soluble nutrients. However, in
this study, I have used PEGDA of Mn of 700 g.mol-1 based on previous work done by
Zhang et al. that showed to be mechanically stable, diffusion open, and compliant hydro-
gel constructs. Furthermore, PEGDA 700 is commercially available at a cheaper price
than other PEGDAs of higher MW [37].
Additionally, LAP was chosen as the photoinitiator in this thesis which has been widely
used in photopolymerizable hydrogels due to it being water-soluble, cytocompatible, and
its strong absorption at 365 nm which results in faster photoinitiation, thus shorter fabrica-
tion time. QY was chosen as the photo-absorber which is a typically used food dye due to
its high water solubility, and low cytotoxicity. Though QY’s high absorption is around 405
and 413 nm, and at 365 nm only one-fifth the value at 405 nm, its water solubility makes it
a better candidate than other photo-absorbers of higher absorbance at 365 nm excitation
such as diaminobenzophenone. Adjustments of the resin in relation to exposure time, by
Zhang et al., were followed in this thesis. The photo-absorber was used to limit light pene-
tration into the pre-polymer resin solution, thereby achieving an optical vertical resolution
of the 3D printer by matching its concentration to the printing process [37]. QY limits the
curing depth of the projected light by avoiding the polymerization of pre-polymer solutions
retained in previously printed layers. The QY concentrations and their corresponding ex-
posure times were chosen based on previous work by the group [2].
The first design shown in fig. 3.1a taken from the study done by Kim et al. was of great
inspiration in terms of having two different volumes separated by fenestrated walls that
promoted angiogenesis [8]. Moreover, since they were of µm-scale, they were suitable to
the aims of my study of having microvessels of physiologically relevant sizes that would
allow the formation of µm-scaled capillary networks [12]. It was a good candidate to start
testing the 3D printer’s possibilities and limitations by printing such small structures and
spacing values between the features.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
39
==PAGE:48==
From what is seen in fig. 3.2, the design of such small structures was indeed printable.
However, the 75.6 µm-spaced structures positioned on the upper left corner, showed the
upper structures to be of smaller, almost not printed structures, and the structures of
32.4 µm seemed to be slightly merging on the right side but slightly spaced on its left side.
This shows that the light is inconsistent in exposure across the printing area. The center
print of 97.2 µm seemed to be of smaller structures that could be perceived as such due to
wider spaces. All the hexagonal structures seemed to be printed without merging except
for the 10.8 µm distancing, showing that I can still print distant structures of spacing as
small as 32.4 µm without them merging.
Quantitative analysis was done regarding the printed distances between structures which
were all higher than designed as can be seen in figures 3.3 and 3.4. They were all higher in
the range of about + 20 µm. This result was caused by printing slightly smaller structures
due to the rounding effect around the edges which can not be printed sharply as seen
in the resultant prints, which results in smaller structures, in turn, having wider spaces
between them. In DLP printing, the XY resolution is defined by the pixel size which is
the smallest feature the projector can reproduce as shown in fig. 4.1a where DLP uses a
projector screen that projects layers of squared voxels. In addition, DLP uses rectangular
voxels (in the Z-direction) which in turn have an effect on curved edges making them
appear as stepped or ladder-shaped in both the Z-axis and XY-plane as can be seen in
fig. 4.1b [56]. It has the same effect in the hexagonal structures that I have printed since
the hexagonal structure along with the pointed edges will in turn be converted into squared
voxels resulting in a stepped shape.
(a) DLP resolution and layers projection through squared voxels.
(b) Voxel effect in DLP.
Figure 4.1: DLP resolution and voxel effect [56].
The same was done with the second design of squares on the left side instead of trape-
40
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:49==
zoidal structures where I placed it in 5 different positions to assess the inconsistency in
exposure as the other prints. A similar observation was marked in the upper left print;
moreover, the upper right one showed also the upper left designs to be almost not printed
as can be seen in fig. 3.6. In addition, the squares seemed to be merging in both 32.4 µm
and 10.8 µm prints which show that the squares merge more than trapezoidal structures,
due to more surface area facing each other that would result in more close surface areas
illuminated, thus merging. Another observation in both prints shows a tapering effect of
the prints in the vertical direction which was an issue faced in the Z-direction.
After realizing the issue with squares structures merging due to more surface area fac-
ing each other, the design in fig. 3.7 was created to study what dimensioning of vertical
and horizontal distances is best in having less surface area facing the other, thus better
printability in regards of not combining into each other. The print of such a design was
consistent with the results of previous printed designs, in terms of having the upper left
features less illuminated and thus poorly printed, more defined central prints thus almost
all merging, and less defined lower prints, especially lower right due to inconsistent light
exposure over the printing area. Inconsistent light exposure was present even with in-
ternally calibrated exposure. Therefore, as could be concluded from the resulting prints,
the hexagonal structures were better printed than trapezoidal and square-like structures
where the trapezoidal ones were poorly printed in regards to the tapering effect and the
square-shaped structures were poorly printed due to the merging effect.
4.2
Designing, Optimization, and Analysis of Synthetic
Microfenestrated Vasculature Prints
After getting a better understanding of the printer’s limitations and possibilities, I switched
to printing full channels as discussed previously. The design shown in fig. 3.9 was printed
vertically and horizontally to assess which is printed with better-resolved openings. The
vertical approach was thought of to get a better-resolved lumen as seen in the resulted
print shown in fig. 3.11a than what is shown later in the lumen assessment of channels
printed horizontally. Due to the effect of accumulative polymerization of residual photo-
initiator particles that are being excited in the empty space while curing the upper wall of
the channel, they are printed smaller than intended. However, this issue is also applicable
in regards to the fenestrations being printed in the vertical channel; therefore, resulting
in smaller fenestrations than intended. Since the fenestrations are way smaller than the
lumen, it is of greater concern to clog compared to the lumen when printed vertically;
hence the approach of printing the channel vertically was abandoned. In addition to the
difficulty of printing the whole chip vertically instead of horizontally which would result
in very high prints; thus resulting in a very long printing time due to having more sliced
images [37]. Furthermore, the fenestrations were printed as designed without the issue
that we would face if printed vertically as can be seen in fig. 3.11b.
Inspired by Kim et al.’s design, as mentioned previously, I created the design seen in
fig. 3.10. The idea behind this design was to have a cylindrical vessel-like structure with
the fused approach of fenestrations using hexagonal wall structures. It was designed
by Kim et al. in such geometry and dimensioning to allow the surface-tension assisted
patterning of an ECM, cells, and culture medium into the designated microchannels com-
partments [8]. I created the opening in the same manner in order to confine each volume
to its compartment. Adopting this configuration, in order to limit the leakage of the per-
fused medium from the lumen into the surroundings and confine the gel I would use to
block the fenestrations to the surrounding of the channels without entering the lumen.
The print of this design showed to be printable without merging the hexagonal walls that
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
41
==PAGE:50==
construct the fenestrations when using 54 µm distance between the walls as can be seen
in fig. 3.11c.
Sticking to this fenestrated channel configuration, a full chip depicted in fig. 3.12 was
printed to inspect its robustness when flowing medium inside the channels. The design
of the volume distributor shown in fig. 3.13a was designed in such a way as to ensure the
perfused liquid would flow downwards towards the openings. In addition, the site where
the needles are to be inserted was designed as can be seen in the image in fig. 3.13b
where the diameter of the insertion site is 0.7 mm; however, 0.6 mm for the last 0.3 mm of
the needle channel near the volume distributor as a stop when inserting the needle since
it is too difficult to visualize where the needle would be reaching.
In this design, I selected 32.4 µm-sized openings to see how small I can print the fenes-
trations without merging. Fortunately, as can be seen in the images of the printed chip in
fig. 3.12, the openings were printed successfully. However, ECs general dimensions are
roughly the following 50-70 µm long, 10-30 µm wide and 0.1-10 µm thick [57], and capillary
sprouting starts with an EC that generates a new capillary branch by hollowing out to form
a tube, so to give the ECs breaking out (check fig. 1.1), sufficient space to sprout, I chose
to continue with the size of 54 µm fenestrations [58].
The printed fenestrations were also wider than designed as observed in the prints of the
design shown in fig. 3.1a which is due to the voxel effect as previously explained. The
measurements of the fenestrations are presented in fig. 3.14. Furthermore, as seen in
fig. 3.15, the fenestrations appeared to be wider in the upper channels showing a de-
scending fenestration size from top to bottom channels. This could be due to inconsistent
illumination across the printing area as previously addressed.
4.3
Perfusion of Non-fenestrated Channels
The stability of the chip needle setup was rather challenging; therefore, many attempts
were needed in order to create a chip-needle holder presented in Appendix A. However,
they did not serve as intended so I selected the well plate instead for having a deeper
volume of water which was more practical for leaving the chip for days and avoiding drying
out.
Solutions of food dyes are frequently used to visualize fluidic channels in transparent
microsystems [59]. As blue dye has poor visualization, I selected red dye which provides
better imaging contrast.
I chose the channels to be of 97.2 µm size to have a more physiologically relevant size
that is approaching that of large arterioles and venules in lumen diameter (described in
Chapter 1) from which capillary beds would sprout from [13], [14]. Moreover, to assess
the SLA printer’s capabilities of how small of a lumen diameter is successfully printable.
Upon perfusion by pumping at a low flow rate of 5 µL/min, there was no dye observed in
the upper channels indicating that there was no perfusion. Thus, a quantitative study of
the lumen diameter at different positions across the channel length of 5 different prints
showed the lumen diameter to be of comparable size as shown in fig. 3.20, removing the
concern of the upper ones being smaller. Furthermore, the dye precipitate seen in fig. 3.21
was suspected to be due to the clogging of the channels. However, upon washing the
channels with water, some of the precipitates were washed away which shows that it is
dye precipitating and not channels clogging. In addition, to observing the same type of
dye precipitate in the volume distributors, also that observed in the tubing. Clogging of
42
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:51==
the lumen was further assessed by cross-sectional images which ensured the channels
were open by viewing the lumen from the top as presented in fig. 3.25.
Another reason for dye stagnation and chip breakage could be related to the formation of
air bubbles, as seen in fig. 3.22. Since the bubbles were stubborn in some areas in the
volume distributors and the channels, it seems like some dye particles were stopped in
place due to not being able to pass across the bubble blockage. Additionally, the bursting
of the bubbles could have resulted in the breakage of the volume distributors could be
due to extra pressure where the bubble is present.
To remove the bubbles and undissolved dye in the dye mixture, I first switched to mix-
ing the dye with PBS instead of MQ water since it provides a constant physicochemical
environment for all dyes without a mismatch in pH or ionic strength [59]. Additionally, I
sonicated the dye PBS mixture using an ultrasonic cleaning bath to ensure dye disso-
lution. At the same time, I heated it up to around 30 ◦C to have the dye around room
temperature when perfusing it through the chips to avoid bubble formation by decreasing
the solubility of the gases in liquid since gas solubility is inversely proportional to tem-
perature [60]. Moreover, the dye mixture was filtered using a 0.22 µm filter, to remove
undissolved dye which was thereafter sonicated for another 20 min to get rid of trapped
gases in the liquid [61].
Two different QY concentrations were tested for their effect on the vertical resolution as
explained previously. The results in fig. 3.25 comply with the explained theory of QY
limiting polymerization of pre-polymer solutions retained in the previously printed layer
where it can be seen that using QY of 12 mg/mL concentration resulted in more defined
structure and better vertical resolution than that of QY of 9 mg/mL. Additionally, when
comparing the cross-sectional view of both prints to the corresponding construct (circular
lumen) from sliced images seen in fig. 3.26a, the print using 12 mg/mL QY is compatible
with the shape seen in the constructed image which makes it a better candidate in terms
of design accuracy.
Furthermore, the measurements were done for the cross-sectional images for 4 different
prints showed that the vertical diameter measured was less than the horizontal in all com-
binations described in Chapter 3 with the horizontal diameters being closer to the actual
design dimensions. Moreover, the vertical diameter using 12 mg/mL QY in the 97.2 µm
lumen design was quite higher than that in the one using 9 mg/mL QY. The acquired
results were expected due to the accumulated polymerization effect when printing verti-
cally opened spaces as previously mentioned. However, images and measurements of
the cross-sectional sectioning are not accurate enough due to the difficulty in cutting the
chips in perfectly straight cuts; thus, having poorly acquired images with blurred edges
in most of the cut prints. But what is of relevance is the change in shape compared to
the sliced images construction as discussed, ensuring that 12 mg/mL QY results in better
optically resolved vertical constructs.
When imaging, some shadowing was observed due to the optics in the Motic one, so I
switch to the Carl Zeiss microscope to image the lumen of the channels. However, upon
imaging, not much difference was observed, so I stuck to the Motic one.
When testing perfusability, the aim was to have the chips perfusing for at least one week
where it takes the endothelium around 2-4 days to form in OoC platforms, and angiogen-
esis typically requires days to weeks to form where guided capillary angiogenesis took
around a week to form a network across a 1 mm wide ECM channel [12]. Based on that,
it is expected to take less than 1 week to form a network between adjacent channels in
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
43
==PAGE:52==
my chips since they are only 226.8 µm apart. The perfusability test was successful and
consistent with our aims by having the chips successfully perfusing for at least 2 week.
Furthermore, I selected 56 µL/min flow rate based on the measurement of volumetric flow
rate in human retinal vessels as a function of vessel diameter done by Riva et al. [62].
It was stated that the volumetric flow rate of arterial vessels of around 97-100 µm had a
volumetric flow rate of around 7 µL/min. Therefore, for 8 parallel channels, I used a flow
rate of 7 µL/min x 8 resulting in 56 µL/min since the total flow divides into the components
along the branching channels [63].
As mentioned previously in Chapter 1, shear stress plays an important role in regulating
endothelial cell morphology and alignment, cytoskeleton reorganization, and protein/gene
expression. Introducing laminar flow is a significant advantage where shear stress plays
an important role in establishing cell morphology and barrier function. Additionally, shear
stress caused by interstitial flow plays an important role in the sprouting and angiogenesis
of EC monolayers into the ECM as shown by the study done by Song et al. [64], [12].
Shear stress in large arterioles of around 100 to 300 µm diameters can reach 58 dyn/cm2
[13]. The shear stress induced by fluid flow onto the channel walls in this study can be
approximated according to the wall-shear rate model for circular tubes using the equation
below:
τ = 4 · Q · µ
π · R3 ,
(4.1)
where Q is the volumetric flow rate, µ is the dynamic viscosity of the medium and R is the
inner radius of the tube [6].
Taking the viscosity of the culture media (for future use) to be around that of water at
room temperature which is almost 1 mPa·s [65], [66]. Thus, the estimated shear stress
is around 12.94 dyn/cm2. Even though the estimated shear stress is noticeably lower
than what is found in vivo, still different in vitro studies have succeeded in culturing ECs
and forming vessels of tight junctions in studies using shear stresses of 10 dyn/cm2 and
higher [6]. A study done by Buchanan et al. was still able to establish a viable and
functional endothelialized channel using shear stresses way lower than 10 dyn/cm2 (0.1
dyn/cm2) [67]. Furthermore, Galie et al. concluded that intraluminal shear stress of above
10dyn/cm2 can trigger ECs to sprout and invade into the underlying matrix [4].
4.4
Perfusion of Fenestrated Channels
My aim in creating fenestrated, perfusable channels was inspired by different studies such
as Kim et al.’s study described previously in confining two different volumes in two different
compartments separated by hexagonally structured microposts, and Ge et al. that also
confines GelMA in one compartment and cell solution in the adjacent one separated by
PEGDA micro-pillar arrays [8], [68]. In particular, my aim was to have a sacrificial gel first
added to the channels surroundings that would block the fenestrations temporarily so that
I seed ECs in the lumen without leaking out, keeping the gel in place until the seeded ECs
form a tight endothelial layered vessel within the channel lumen.
In Ge et al.’s study, the hydrogel was prevented from leakage at a micro-scale due to the
surface tension between the GelMA and PEGDA of Mn of 700 g.mol-1 micro-pillars which
was the main factor influencing the formation of well-defined boundaries. The surface
tension inhibited the leakage of the mixtures through the openings between the pillars
resulting in a filled cavity. They calculated the contact angle between the two to be 69◦and
have shown the liquid gas surface tension to be lower than the threshold value for common
44
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:53==
liquids which indicated that the surface tension successfully restricted the diffusion of the
hydrogel [68].
In addition to the successful confinement of GelMA by PEGDA 700 micro-pillars, GelMA
was chosen as the sacrificial material for multiple reasons. One advantage of using GelMA
is its rapid polymerization ranging from seconds to minutes which is crucial for preventing
the hydrogel from drying out due to evaporation [50]. Two, GelMA can also be used in
large quantities at a reasonable cost [37]. Moreover, PEGDA and GelMA were shown to
be good candidates together for cell culturing and biocompatibility [69], [68].
GelMA was heated to around 45 ◦C and so were the chips, to ensure that the GelMA is
around 30 ◦C or higher when added to the chips so that it does not turn viscous before
filling the spaces between the channels. The reason behind that is that GelMA’s viscosity
increases rapidly upon the temperature reaching room temperature as can be observed
in the graph shown in fig. 4.2 where 5 % w/v of GelMA (percent measure of weight per
100 mL) corresponds to 50 mg [50], [70].
Figure 4.2: The viscosity of 5 % GelMA varying with temperature [50].
As mentioned in the results, in the first cured chips, there appeared to be water present
that did not allow the GelMA to cure near the walls. After that, the curing and settlement of
GelMA were tested using a 1 mm deep bath-well which showed the GelMA to reach and
stay near the wall of the well as seen in fig. 3.29. Due to the water issue faced in the first
cured chip, I chose to pipet the water out as described in Chapter 3 and then curing the
GelMA. The GelMA was reaching the bottom of the well near the channels as observed in
fig. 3.30a, but there were no microbeads (GelMA) reaching the site of fenestrations that
are aimed to be blocked using the GelMA as shown in fig. 3.30d. Moreover, it was uncer-
tain to tell where the lumen is positioned in fluorescence imaging since the PEGDA itself
is found to be auto-fluorescent as can be observed from the acquired images [71]. The
microbeads used are yellow-green fluorescent and are efficiently excited using the 488
nm spectral line of laser which is the spectral line used in the confocal laser microscope
[72].
The design shown in fig. 3.31 was to test if the spacing near the fenestrations was being
blocked and whether fewer fenestrations were present along the channel length would
cause the perfusion to be successful. Still, the liquid dye was leaking through the fen-
estrations and through the GelMA. Another suspected issue was the top support on the
original chips as can be seen in fig. 3.13c which was removed in the channels as seen in
fig. 3.33. This attempt was not successful either where still the perfused liquid was leaking
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
45
==PAGE:54==
through the fenestrations and the fluorescence images showed some microbeads reach-
ing near some openings, but apparently was not enough in blocking the fenestrations.
Furthermore, since the 5 % GelMA was popping out in some of the perfused chips upon
pumping, I switched to 10 % GelMA which is more mechanically stable due to higher cross-
linking density [73]. But it was too viscous which was a concern when pipetted into the
chip to not settle near the fenestrations; therefore, I chose the 8 % GelMA which would be
more mechanically stable than the 5 % GelMA, but less viscous than 10 % one [73].
A final design suggesting triangular wall structures to have more defined structured open-
ings than hexagonal ones was used, as can be seen in fig. 3.35 compared to fig. 3.33.
The design as described in Chapter 3 was chosen to have a hypotenuse of 13x10.8 µm
and 7x10.8 µm to be consistent as previous designs of staying in the same structural di-
mension of 54 µm-sized fenestrations. The width is kept the same (fenestration size),
therefore, to ensure the consistency of the design with the voxel effect discussed pre-
viously, the 13x10.8 µm was chosen to be consistent with a ladder voxel excitation as
demonstrated in fig. 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Voxel ladder reasoning behind choosing 13x10.8 µm triangular base. Grid
representing a projected layer of squared voxels.
Finally, two different GelMA addition and/or curing techniques were further studied. The
first trial of pumping PBS through the channels while curing GelMA was in order to get
rid of any residual water molecules present at the fenestration sites as suspected since
not all of the water could be removed by pipetting. However, that did not work where the
GelMA was still liquid and not cured when added and cured during perfusion, hence the
GelMA got moved upwards due to the leaking PBS through the fenestrations which also
failed in post-GelMA perfusion.
The final attempt was the opposite where I used suction in order to suck the residual water
through the fenestrations into the channel lumen, at the same time suctioning the GelMA
slightly into the fenestrations which I aimed to have cured at that time which was a failed
attempt. The result was the suction of all the GelMA out of the chip since it was still in
the liquid phase, resulting in leakage through the fenestrations upon perfusion. This can
be further tested at lower flow rates that might have this attempt succeed in curing the
GelMA right at the time when it is being sucked through the fenestrations before reaching
the lumen.
46
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:55==
5
Conclusion
This study succeeded in developing synthetic microfenestrated channels of lumen diam-
eters smaller than 100 µm without clogging using SLA. SLA profitably enabled fast and
high throughput, freeform 3D printing of diffusion open, mechanically stable microvascu-
lar chips using cost-effective resin. This approach was able to overcome the limitations
and challenges in previous approaches in the field of developing a high-throughput tech-
nique that can manufacture micro-channels of less than 100 µm. Besides, the microfen-
estrations were successfully printed without merging, of dimensions as small as 32.4 µm.
Additionally, the non-fenestrated channels were successfully perfused for at least 2 weeks
as intended for our aims when culturing cells for at least 1 week in future studies. This
study confirmed the strength of SLA in terms of resolution by the documented results of
printed channels. However, the second goal of this study was not fully achieved where
GelMA was successfully cured into the chips but failed in blocking the fenestrations; thus
not preventing leakage through them. Nonetheless, the fenestrations still hold potential
for future studies in enabling angiogenesis sprouting through such structured openings
based on previous studies. In summary, I have addressed the possibilities and limitations
of different constructs printed using SLA, as well as achieving long-term perfusion of a
stable chip. In addition to the challenges addressed that were faced when imaging the
chips whether it was using bright field microscopy or confocal laser scanning microscopy.
It could be of interest in future studies to investigate if adding GelMA while suctioning at
lower flow rates, would succeed in allowing the GelMA to reach near the fenestrations
and hence blocking them. Moreover, I propose adding the GelMA to the chip and then
removing the chip from the curing box to allow its temperature to cool down to room tem-
perature; thus increasing GelMA’s viscosity and at that time using suction mode from
both ends of the chip, in aims of suctioning the GelMA slightly through the fenestrations
thus blocking them. Another suggestion is to follow the micro-pillar structures and dimen-
sioning inspired by Ge et al.’s study which succeeded in the confinement of GelMA in
one compartment using PEGDA 700 pillars [68]. Additionally, it could be worth testing
different types of gels to test if they are less viscous compared to GelMA. It would be
interesting to study the fibrin matrix with type I collagen that was used in Kim et al.’s study
which succeeded in separating two volumes with similar openings. Finally, if blocking
the fenestrations is successful, the second part of the study can be further addressed
by attempting ECs colonization of the channel walls and promoting angiogenic sprout-
ing through the fenestrations. To summarize, this thesis showed the potential of SLA in
printing microfenestrated channels of dimensions smaller than previously reported stud-
ies and the possibility of developing a long-term perfusable, stable chip, thereby opening
new avenues of developing micro-scaled synthetic vasculatures.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
47
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[1]
Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine. URL: https://www.nibib.nih.gov/
science-education/science-topics/tissue-engineering-and-regenerative-medicine.
[2]
Milan Finn Wesseler. “Development of synthetic vasculature , 4D optical oxygen
mapping and their implementation in human 3D liver tissue models Doctoral thesis”.
In: February (2022).
[3]
J. Malcolm Wilkinson. Need for alternative testing methods and opportunities for
organ-on-a-chip systems. Elsevier Inc., 2020, pp. 1–11. ISBN: 9780128172025.
DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-817202-5.00001-2.
[4]
Xiaolin Wang, Qiyue Sun, and Jianghua Pei. “Microfluidic-based 3D engineered mi-
crovascular networks and their applications in vascularized microtumor models”. In:
Micromachines 9.10 (2018), pp. 1–26. ISSN: 2072666X. DOI: 10.3390/mi9100493.
[5]
Somin Lee et al. “Microfluidic-based vascularized microphysiological systems”. In:
Lab on a Chip 18.18 (2018), pp. 2686–2709. ISSN: 14730189. DOI: 10 . 1039 /
c8lc00285a.
[6]
Felix Kurth et al. Organs-on-a-chip engineering. 2019, pp. 47–130. DOI: 10.1016/
B978-0-12-817202-5.00003-6.
[7]
Amir K. Miri et al. “Effective bioprinting resolution in tissue model fabrication”. In: Lab
on a Chip 19.11 (2019), pp. 2019–2037. ISSN: 14730189. DOI: 10.1039/c8lc01037d.
[8]
Sudong Kim et al. “Engineering of functional, perfusable 3D microvascular networks
on a chip”. In: Lab on a Chip 13.8 (2013), pp. 1489–1500. ISSN: 14730189. DOI:
10.1039/c3lc41320a.
[9]
Jeffrey T. Borenstein et al. “Functional endothelialized microvascular networks with
circular cross-sections in a tissue culture substrate”. In: Biomedical Microdevices
12.1 (2010), pp. 71–79. ISSN: 13872176. DOI: 10.1007/s10544-009-9361-1.
[10]
Ian S. Kinstlinger and Jordan S. Miller. “3D-printed fluidic networks as vasculature
for engineered tissue”. In: Lab on a Chip 16.11 (May 2016), pp. 2025–2043. ISSN:
1473-0189. DOI: 10.1039/C6LC00193A.
[11]
Juliana M. Chan et al. “Engineering of In Vitro 3D Capillary Beds by Self-Directed
Angiogenic Sprouting”. In: PLoS ONE 7.12 (Dec. 2012), p. 50582. ISSN: 19326203.
DOI: 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0050582.
[12]
Max I. Bogorad et al. “Review: In vitro microvessel models”. In: Lab on a Chip 15.22
(2015), pp. 4242–4255. ISSN: 14730189. DOI: 10.1039/c5lc00832h.
[13]
Bernhard Sebastian and Petra S. Dittrich. “Microfluidics to Mimic Blood Flow in
Health and Disease”. In: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-fluid-010816-060246 50
(Jan. 2018), pp. 483–504. ISSN: 00664189. DOI: 10 . 1146 / ANNUREV - FLUID -
010816-060246.
[14]
Kristina Haase and D Roger. “Advances in on-chip vascularization”. In: 12 (2017),
pp. 285–302.
[15]
Hilaria Mollica et al. “Two-Channel Compartmentalized Microfluidic Chip for Real-
Time Monitoring of the Metastatic Cascade”. In: ACS Biomaterials Science and En-
gineering 5.9 (2019), pp. 4834–4843. ISSN: 23739878. DOI: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.
9b00697.
[16]
Raquel Blanco and Holger Gerhardt. “VEGF and Notch in Tip and Stalk Cell Se-
lection”. In: Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine 3.1 (Jan. 2013). ISSN:
21571422. DOI: 10.1101/CSHPERSPECT.A006569.
48
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:57==
[17]
Thomas H. Adair and Jean-Pierre Montani. “Overview of Angiogenesis”. In: Morgan
& Claypool Life Sciences, 2010. Chap. 1.
[18]
Ryan S. Udan, James C. Culver, and Mary E. Dickinson. “Understanding vascu-
lar development”. In: Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Developmental Biology 2.3
(2013), pp. 327–346. ISSN: 17597684. DOI: 10.1002/wdev.91.
[19]
L. E. Niklason et al. “Functional arteries grown in vitro”. In: Science 284.5413 (Apr.
1999), pp. 489–493. DOI: 10.1126/SCIENCE.284.5413.489/ASSET/37D812F8-4519-
483F-AF80-74041B16C15D/ASSETS/GRAPHIC/SE159743605A.JPEG.
[20]
Eugene D. Boland et al. “Electrospinning collagen and elastin: Preliminary vascu-
lar tissue engineering”. In: Frontiers in Bioscience 9 (2004), pp. 1422–1432. ISSN:
27686698. DOI: 10.2741/1313/PDF.
[21]
Nicolas L’Heureux et al. “Human tissue-engineered blood vessels for adult arte-
rial revascularization”. In: Nature Medicine 12.3 (Mar. 2006), pp. 361–365. ISSN:
10788956. DOI: 10.1038/NM1364.
[22]
Cyrille Norotte et al. “Scaffold-free vascular tissue engineering using bioprinting”.
In: Biomaterials 30.30 (Oct. 2009), pp. 5910–5917. ISSN: 01429612. DOI: 10.1016/
J.BIOMATERIALS.2009.06.034.
[23]
Lauren L. Bischel et al. “Tubeless microfluidic angiogenesis assay with 3D endothelial-
lined microvessels”. In: Biomaterials 34.5 (2013), pp. 1471–1477. ISSN: 01429612.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.11.005.
[24]
Laura E. Niklason et al. “Morphologic and mechanical characteristics of engineered
bovine arteries”. In: Journal of Vascular Surgery 33.3 (Mar. 2001), pp. 628–638.
ISSN: 0741-5214. DOI: 10.1067/MVA.2001.111747.
[25]
Christopher M. Walthers et al. “The effect of scaffold macroporosity on angiogenesis
and cell survival in tissue-engineered smooth muscle”. In: Biomaterials 35.19 (June
2014), pp. 5129–5137. ISSN: 0142-9612. DOI: 10.1016/J.BIOMATERIALS.2014.03.
025.
[26]
Yu Chieh Chiu et al. “The role of pore size on vascularization and tissue remodeling
in PEG hydrogels”. In: Biomaterials 32.26 (Sept. 2011), pp. 6045–6051. ISSN: 0142-
9612. DOI: 10.1016/J.BIOMATERIALS.2011.04.066.
[27]
Abdellah Aazmi et al. “Engineered Vasculature for Organ-on-a-Chip Systems”. In:
Engineering 9 (Feb. 2022), pp. 131–147. ISSN: 2095-8099. DOI: 10.1016/J.ENG.
2021.06.020.
[28]
Rachel Elizabeth Saunders and Brian Derby. “Inkjet printing biomaterials for tissue
engineering: bioprinting”. In: 59.8 (Nov. 2014), pp. 430–448. ISSN: 17432804. DOI:
10.1179/1743280414Y.0000000040.
[29]
Ibrahim T. Ozbolat and Monika Hospodiuk. “Current advances and future perspec-
tives in extrusion-based bioprinting”. In: Biomaterials 76 (Jan. 2016), pp. 321–343.
ISSN: 0142-9612. DOI: 10.1016/J.BIOMATERIALS.2015.10.076.
[30]
Alida Mazzoli. “Selective laser sintering in biomedical engineering”. In: Medical and
Biological Engineering and Computing 51.3 (Mar. 2013), pp. 245–256. ISSN: 01400118.
DOI: 10.1007/S11517-012-1001-X.
[31]
Busaina Dhariwala, Elaine Hunt, and Thomas Boland. “Rapid prototyping of tissue-
engineering constructs, using photopolymerizable hydrogels and stereolithography”.
In: Tissue engineering 10.9-10 (Sept. 2004), pp. 1316–1322. ISSN: 1076-3279.
DOI: 10.1089/TEN.2004.10.1316.
[32]
Ana Letícia Rodrigues Costa et al. “Trends in hydrogel-based encapsulation tech-
nologies for advanced cell therapies applied to limb ischemia”. In: Materials Today
Bio 13 (Jan. 2022). ISSN: 25900064. DOI: 10.1016/J.MTBIO.2022.100221.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
49
==PAGE:58==
[33]
Vivian K. Lee et al. “Generation of multi-scale vascular network system within 3D hy-
drogel using 3D bio-printing technology”. In: Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering
7.3 (2014), pp. 460–472. ISSN: 18655033. DOI: 10.1007/S12195-014-0340-0.
[34]
Bastián Carnero et al. “Microfluidic devices manufacturing with a stereolithographic
printer for biological applications”. In: Materials Science and Engineering: C 129
(Oct. 2021), p. 112388. ISSN: 0928-4931. DOI: 10.1016/J.MSEC.2021.112388.
[35]
Ritu Raman et al. “High-Resolution Projection Microstereolithography for Patterning
of Neovasculature”. In: Advanced Healthcare Materials 5.5 (Mar. 2016), pp. 610–
619. ISSN: 2192-2659. DOI: 10.1002/ADHM.201500721.
[36]
Bagrat Grigoryan et al. “Multivascular networks and functional intravascular topolo-
gies within biocompatible hydrogels”. In: Science 364.6439 (May 2019), pp. 458–
464. ISSN: 10959203.
[37]
Rujing Zhang and Niels B. Larsen. “Stereolithographic hydrogel printing of 3D cul-
ture chips with biofunctionalized complex 3D perfusion networks”. In: Lab on a Chip
17.24 (2017), pp. 4273–4282. ISSN: 14730189. DOI: 10.1039/c7lc00926g.
[38]
Laurent Lamalice, Fabrice Le Boeuf, and Jacques Huot. “Endothelial Cell Migration
During Angiogenesis”. In: Circulation Research 100.6 (Mar. 2007), pp. 782–794.
ISSN: 00097330. DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000259593.07661.1E.
[39]
Duc Huy T. Nguyen et al. “Biomimetic model to reconstitute angiogenic sprouting
morphogenesis in vitro”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 110.17 (Apr. 2013), pp. 6712–6717.
[40]
Robert G. Mannino, Yongzhi Qiu, and Wilbur A. Lam. “Endothelial cell culture in
microfluidic devices for investigating microvascular processes”. In: Biomicrofluidics
12.4 (July 2018), p. 42203. ISSN: 19321058. DOI: 10.1063/1.5024901.
[41]
Chad I. Rogers et al. “3D printed microfluidic devices with integrated valves”. In:
Biomicrofluidics 9.1 (Jan. 2015). ISSN: 19321058. DOI: 10.1063/1.4905840.
[42]
Jason P. Mazzoccoli et al. “Mechanical and Cell Viability Properties of Crosslinked
Low and High Molecular Weight Poly(ethylene glycol) Diacrylate Blends”. In: Journal
of biomedical materials research. Part A 93.2 (May 2010), p. 558. ISSN: 15493296.
DOI: 10.1002/JBM.A.32563.
[43]
Patrick J. Stahl et al. “Capillary Network-Like Organization of Endothelial Cells in
PEGDA Scaffolds Encoded with Angiogenic Signals via Triple Helical Hybridiza-
tion”. In: Advanced functional materials 24.21 (June 2014), pp. 3213–3225. ISSN:
1616-301X. DOI: 10.1002/ADFM.201303217.
[44]
Wenguang Yang et al. “Rapid fabrication of hydrogel microstructures using UV-
induced projection printing”. In: Micromachines 6.12 (2015), pp. 1903–1913. ISSN:
2072666X. DOI: 10.3390/mi6121464.
[45]
Frederick J. Schoen and Richard N. Mitchell. Tissues, the Extracellular Matrix, and
Cell-Biomaterial Interactions. Third Edit. Elsevier, 2013, pp. 452–474. DOI: 10.1016/
B978-0-08-087780-8.00039-5.
[46]
José Angel Conchello and Jeff W. Lichtman. “Optical sectioning microscopy”. In:
Nature Methods 2.12 (2005), pp. 920–931. ISSN: 15487091. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth815.
[47]
A. Canette and R. Briandet. “Microscopy: Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy”.
In: Encyclopedia of Food Microbiology: Second Edition (Apr. 2014), pp. 676–683.
DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-384730-0.00214-7.
[48]
Philipp Johannes Alt. “RESOLFT nanoscopy with water-soluble synthetic fluorophores”.
In: ().
[49]
Plasma Treatment | Plasma Treat | Plasma Etch, Inc. URL: https://www.plasmaetch.
com/plasma-treatment-basics.php.
50
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:59==
[50]
Rie Kjær. “Engineering cardiac microenvironments for func ￿onal drug safety screen-
ing”. In: (2020).
[51]
Lihong V. Wang and Hsin-I Wu. Biomedical Optics. 2009. ISBN: 9780471743040.
DOI: 10.1002/9780470177013.
[52]
Joseph R. Lakowicz. Principles of fluorescence spectroscopy. Ed. by Joseph Lakow-
icz. 3rd ed. Springer New York, NY, 2006, pp. 1–954. ISBN: 0387312781. DOI:
10.1007/978-0-387-46312-4/COVER.
[53]
Johannes Schindelin et al. “Fiji: An open-source platform for biological-image anal-
ysis”. In: Nature Methods 9.7 (2012), pp. 676–682. ISSN: 15487091. DOI: 10.1038/
nmeth.2019.
[54]
Fabrice De Chaumont, Stephane Dallongeville, and Jean Christophe Olivo-Marin.
“ICY: A new open-source community image processing software”. In: Proceed-
ings - International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (2011), pp. 234–237. ISSN:
19458452. DOI: 10.1109/ISBI.2011.5872395.
[55]
Gjylije Hoti et al. “Effect of the Cross-Linking Density on the Swelling and Rheo-
logical Behavior of Ester-Bridged β-Cyclodextrin Nanosponges”. In: Materials 14.3
(Feb. 2021), pp. 1–20. ISSN: 19961944. DOI: 10.3390/MA14030478.
[56]
SLA vs. DLP: Guide to Resin 3D Printers. URL: https://formlabs.com/blog/resin-
3d-printer-comparison-sla-vs-dlp/.
[57]
Michel Félétou. “The Endothelium”. In: The Endothelium: Part 1: Multiple Functions
of the Endothelial Cells—Focus on Endothelium-Derived Vasoactive Mediators 24.1
(2011), pp. 10–12.
[58]
Bruce Alberts et al. “Blood Vessels and Endothelial Cells”. In: (2002).
[59]
Martinus H.V. Werts et al. “Quantitative full-colour transmitted light microscopy and
dyes for concentration mapping and measurement of diffusion coefficients in mi-
crofluidic architectures”. In: Lab on a Chip 12.4 (2012), pp. 808–820. ISSN: 14730189.
DOI: 10.1039/c2lc20889j.
[60]
Temperature Effects on the Solubility of Gases - Chemistry LibreTexts. URL: https:
//chem.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Physical_and_Theoretical_Chemistry_Textbook_
Maps/Supplemental_Modules_(Physical_and_Theoretical_Chemistry)/Equilibria/
Solubilty/Temperature_Effects_on_the_Solubility_of_Gases.
[61]
Liyan Liu et al. “The influence of air content in water on ultrasonic cavitation field”.
In: Ultrasonics Sonochemistry 21.2 (2014), pp. 566–571. ISSN: 18732828. DOI:
10.1016/j.ultsonch.2013.10.007.
[62]
C. E. Riva et al. “Blood velocity and volumetric flow rate in human retinal vessels”.
In: Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science 26.8 (1985), pp. 1124–1132.
ISSN: 01460404.
[63]
Flow through Pipes in Series and Parallel: Difference Diameters, Equations and
Solved Problems. URL: https: //www.engineeringenotes.com/fluids/pipes/flow-
through - pipes - in - series - and - parallel - difference - diameters - equations - and - solved -
problems/47568.
[64]
Jonathan W. Song and Lance L. Munn. “Fluid forces control endothelial sprouting”.
In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of Amer-
ica 108.37 (Sept. 2011), pp. 15342–15347. ISSN: 00278424. DOI: 10.1073/PNAS.
1105316108/-/DCSUPPLEMENTAL/SM01.AVI.
[65]
Christine Poon. “Measuring the density and viscosity of culture media for optimized
computational fluid dynamics analysis of in vitro devices”. In: Journal of the Me-
chanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 126.i (2022). ISSN: 18780180. DOI: 10.
1016/j.jmbbm.2021.105024.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
51
==PAGE:60==
[66]
Sergey P. Kiselev, Evgenii V. Vorozhtsov, and Vasily M. Fomin. “Ideal Fluid”. In:
(2017), pp. 187–266. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-66149-0{\_}4.
[67]
Cara F. Buchanan et al. “Flow shear stress regulates endothelial barrier function
and expression of angiogenic factors in a 3D microfluidic tumor vascular model”.
In: Cell Adhesion and Migration 8.5 (2014), pp. 517–524. ISSN: 19336926. DOI:
10.4161/19336918.2014.970001.
[68]
Zhixing Ge et al. “Development of Multi-Dimensional Cell Co-Culture via a Novel Mi-
crofluidic Chip Fabricated by DMD-Based Optical Projection Lithography”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Nanobioscience 18.4 (2019), pp. 679–686. ISSN: 15582639. DOI:
10.1109/TNB.2019.2940258.
[69]
Yihu Wang et al. “Development of a photo-crosslinking, biodegradable GelMA/PEGDA
hydrogel for guided bone regeneration materials”. In: Materials 11.8 (2018), pp. 6–
8. ISSN: 19961944. DOI: 10.3390/ma11081345.
[70]
Calculating Percent Weight/Volume (% w/v) - LabCE.com, Laboratory Continuing
Education. URL: https://www.labce.com/spg913555_calculating_percent_weightvolume_
_wv.aspx.
[71]
Chunqi Sun et al. “Fluorescence Behavior and Mechanisms of Poly(ethylene glycol)
and Their Applications in Fe3+and Cr6+Detections, Data Encryption, and Cell Imag-
ing”. In: ACS Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering 9.14 (Apr. 2021), pp. 5166–
5178. ISSN: 21680485. DOI: 10 . 1021 / ACSSUSCHEMENG . 1C00250 / SUPPL{\ _
}FILE/SC1C00250{\_}SI{\_}001.PDF.
[72]
J. Iain. “FluoSpheres Fluorescent Microspheres”. In: Product Manual (2005), pp. 13–
18.
[73]
Ashlyn T. Young, Olivia C. White, and Michael A. Daniele. “Rheological Properties of
Coordinated Physical Gelation and Chemical Crosslinking in Gelatin Methacryloyl
(GelMA) Hydrogels”. In: Macromolecular bioscience 20.12 (Dec. 2020), e2000183.
ISSN: 16165195. DOI: 10.1002/MABI.202000183.
52
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:61==
A
Appendix
A.1
Holder Systems for Organ Model Chips
I designed different chip holders that would hold the chip in position along with the tubing
used for the inlets and outlets due to the tubes moving, releasing the tension which led
to breaking either the inlet or outlet, or sometimes both. To ensure the tubes would not
move, I created first chip holder design which can be seen below.
As can be seen, there are 4 compartments where the chips would be positioned with the
inlet and outlet facing the openings in the walls. The compartment where the chip will be
placed was designed to be of 22.75 mm width which was also reached by trial and error to
keep the cover slip in place. The length of it was chosen to be 36 mm to have more space
for needle insertion.
Moreover, I measured the outer diameter (OD) of the flexible tubes I was using to perfuse
the chips with which was around 0.7 mm which was used as 0.65 mm as a start for trial and
error until reaching the used dimension of 0.65 mm. The same was done for the bigger
tube opening (OD: around 2.22 mm) on the outer wall of the holder starting by 2.3 mm
reaching 1.9 mm.
The chip compartment was changed to 40 mm since the compartment was too small to
fit the needles in the inlet and outlet and changing the inner walls’ openings to 0.6 mm
instead of 0.65 mm which was big for the tiny tubes, and the inner walls’ openings to
1.95 mm instead of 1.95 mm which was a bit too tight on the beige thicker tubes. However,
it is relevant to note that tiny flexible tubes of different OD were available being around:
0.5 mm, 0.5 mm and 0.7 mm which surprisingly was kept in place when using a 0.6 mm
opening.
(a) Side view of the chip holder design.
(b) Dimensions of the openings in the walls
that hold the tubes in place.
Figure A.1: Design of the first chip holder.
The problem with this design was the chip compartment was too small for needle insertion
so I tried another design that can be seen in fig. A.2 where the same openings’ sizes in
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
53
==PAGE:62==
the walls were used, but with a 100 mm-wide compartment, and one chip compartment
instead of 4. However, this was too big to be placed on the w’s stage, so it was discarded.
Figure A.2: Design of another chip holder.
The final chip holder design was completely changed into what can be seen in fig. A.3.
In this design, I changed the compartment into two horizontal walls spaced by 22.7 mm
instead of 22.75 mm for being a bit wide for the cover slip. Additionally, I designed 2
holders of 0.6 mm-sized openings facing the spacing between the walls and 2 of 1.96 mm
diameter near the opposite walls that hold the chips in place as well as 4 other openings
of the same size on the horizontal opposing walls of the holder as can be seen in fig. A.3.
I designed it in such a way to have more options of placing the tubes closest to where how
they self-rest after releasing the tension. Furthermore, the bigger openings were changed
to 1.96 mm since the previous designs with 1.9 mm openings were a bit too tight on the
beige thick tubes.
Figure A.3: Design of the final chip holder.
The problem with this design was that the well was shallow in general where too little
water can be added and therefore evaporating very fast needing continuous filling. On
54
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
==PAGE:63==
the other hand, the holders being tight enough to keep the tubing in place was squeezing
the liquid out even before perfusion. The holder was not much needed afterwards, for
chip insertion for long periods of time, so I kept for use when needed for imaging during
perfusion. Noting that this can be further developed into a deeper well and slightly wider
opening.
Microfenestrated Synthetic Vasculature For 3D Tissue Culture
55
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
