==PAGE:1==
Low-Threshold Parametric Decay
Instability of Gyrotron Beams into
Trapped Daughter Waves in the TCV
Tokamak During X-2 Heating
By
Asbjørn Clod Pedersen (s173956)
Supervisor
Stefan Kragh Nielsen
Co-supervisors
Mads Givskov Senstius
Riccardo Ragona
Stefano Coda
Technical
University of 
Denmark
March 5th, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I am very grateful to my supervisor, Associate Professor Stefan Kragh Nielsen,
for his guidance and good discussions, both during working hours and off-hours and for his contin-
uous support of the project. An additional special thanks goes to my co-supervisor Stefano Coda,
Senior Scientist and head of the TCV Tokamak group at Swiss Plasma Centre (SPC), for making
the installment of the radiometer at TCV possible and for providing the necessary help and re-
sources for me during a busy period with many experimental campaigns at TCV. My co-supervisor
Mads Givskov Senstius, postdoc at DTU Physics, also deserves my sincere gratitude for valuable
discussions and help with the theoretical aspects of the project. Finally, a big thanks goes my
co-supervisor Riccardo Ragona, postdoc at DTU Physics, for providing valuable advice during the
early stages of the project, and for continuously supporting my work.
The creation of this thesis wouldn’t have been possible without the help and support from several
other people as well. I want to express my gratitude to Umesh Kumar, Postdoc at Swiss Plasma
Centre (SPC), for supporting my experimental work at TCV and helping with the commissioning
of the diagnostic launcher. I would like to thank Thomas Jensen, previous special consultant at
DTU Physics, as well for providing invaluable help with designing the radiometer, choosing the
components and installing the device at TCV. A thanks also goes to the staff of DTU Skylab for
providing access to their workshop and giving advice during the assembly of the radiometer.
Lastly, I want to say thanks to several friends for good discussions and for making the project even
more enjoyable. And for providing financial support for my travel to Switzerland, I would like to
thank Danfusion, Ingeniør Alexandra Haynman og fru Nina Haynmans Fond and EPFL.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
One of the important methods that is used to heat magnetically confined plasmas in tokamaks
is microwave heating, more specifically known as Electron Cyclotron Resonance Heating (ECRH).
During ECRH the electrons in the plasma are heated due to a resonant coupling between the
electrons and the incoming microwave beam. The microwave beams are generated in a devices
called gyrotrons. In order to reach the high temperatures required in fusion plasmas, the power
and intensity in the beams of modern gyrotrons is very large. Similar to the propagation of light
in optical crystals, the response of the plasma to the incoming microwave determines its dispersion
relation in the plasma.
Under most conditions, the response of the plasma in a tokamak to a
gyrotron beam is linear, and the description of the propagation of the excited plasma wave modes
is relatively simple. For non-linear processes to be relevant under most conditions, the power of
the gyrotron would have to be orders of magnitude larger than the power that is currently possible
in gyrotrons. However, in recent years, a new class of non-linear three-wave interactions known as
Parametric Decay Instabilities has been discovered and observed in several tokamaks. This family
of three wave interactions can occur in the edge of the plasma at relatively low gyrotron power if
certain conditions for the plasma density are satisfied that allow for a trapping mechanism of the
daughter waves in the three wave interaction.
The consequences of the occurrence of PDIs during ECRH have not yes been fully understood. One
prediction is that an effect of the parametric decays could be the generation of a population of fast
ions with temperatures significantly above the temperature of the remaining ions in the plasma.
Such populations of fast ions have earlier been observed during ECRH in the device Tokamak
`a configuration variable (TCV). This tokamak belongs to the Swiss Plasma Centre (SPC) and
is located at ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne (EPFL). Due to the large ECRH power
capabilities in the TCV tokamak, this machine is an optimal platform for examining non-linear
parametric three-wave interactions. In this thesis, it is investigated how Parametric decays occurs
during ECRH at TCV.
The two daughter waves that are excited during a non-linear parametric decay instability both
have frequencies at approximately half the frequency of the gyrotron beam. In order to measure
the half frequency daughter waves that are generated during PDIs directly, a heterodyne microwave
radiometer was designed and constructed during the first months of this project. After construction,
the radiometer was brought to Switzerland and installed at TCV. In the following months it was
used for measurements in a frequency band around the expected frequencies of the daughter waves
generated in parametric decays. In order for the radiometer measurements to be applicable, a novel
calibration technique that uses ray tracing was developed.
The analysis of the calibrated radiometer measurements that were acquired during its commissioning
at TCV shows proof of a frequent occurrence of a low-threshold PDI at TCV. During a heating
process called X-2 heating, PDI processes have been observed very consistently. To prove that the
anomalous measured signals indeed originate from three wave interactions, a theoretical framework
for describing the parametric decay is presented in the thesis. The analytical model presented in
this thesis is largely based on a model developed at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
five years ago. With use of the analytical model combined with an analysis of both the radiometer
measurements and measurements with other diagnostic systems at TCV, this thesis shows how a
trapping mechanisms that occur in correlation with so-called blobs and ELMs in the plasma edge
give rise to low threshold PDIs at TCV. The last part of this project is devoted to investigating what
happens, after parametric decays occurs in the tokamak. An analysis show strong indications of the
production of fast ions during parametric decays, which indicate the occurrence of secondary PDIs.
Additionally, a hypothesis is presented that based on the observations of PDI in TCV explains how
1
==PAGE:4==
the daughter waves travel from the the region where they are excited to the radiometer where they
are measured.
2
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Fusion Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Magnetic Confinement Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Motion of Charged Particles in a Uniform Magnetic and Electric Field . . . .
3
1.2.2
The tokamak . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Electron Cyclotron Resonance Heating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Parametric Decay Instability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Fast Ion Observations at TCV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Plasma Dynamics in Tokamaks
10
2.1
Geometry of the Magnetic Field in a Tokamak
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Density Fluctuations in Tokamak Plasmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Magnetohydrodynamic Modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Interchange Turbulence in the Scrape-Off Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Wave Propagation in Tokamak Plasmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.1
Cold Plasma Theory of a Homogeneous Plasma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.2
Kinetic Theory of Electrostatic Waves in a Warm Homogeneous Plasma . . .
20
2.3.3
WKB Theory and Ray Tracing in an Inhomogeneous Plasma . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Parametric Decay Instability
26
3.1
Absolute and Convective Parametric Instabilities in Tokamaks
. . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
PDI in Plasmas with a Non-monotonic Density Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1
PDI with Trapped Daughter Waves in a 1d Non-monotonic Density Profile
.
30
3.2.2
Secondary parametric decays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3
==PAGE:6==
4
Tokamak `a configuration variable
39
4.1
ECRH System and launchers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Relevant Diagnostics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2.1
Thomson Scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.2
Far Infrared Interferometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.3
Langmuir Probes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.4
Magnetic Coils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2.5
Photo Diodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.6
Compact Neutral Particle Analyser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Development of a Heterodyne Radiometer
49
5.1
Design and installation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Data Acquisitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3
Calibration with ECE radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3.1
Calibration for measurements with O-mode polarization . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.3.2
Calibration for measurements with X-mode polarization . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.4
Observation of Below Frequency Gyrotron Emission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Observations of PDIs in TCV
68
6.1
Possible low-threshold PDI Scenarios in TCV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.2
PDI occurring during ELM Bursts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.3
PDI occurring in Blob Filaments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.4
PDI possibly occurring during a disruption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6.5
Power Threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
7
Escape Mechanism of Trapped Daughter UH Waves
91
7.1
Observation of Supra-thermal Ions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
7.2
Escape Mechanism of the Primary Trapped UH Waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7.2.1
Dependence on the Polarization Received by the Launcher . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7.2.2
Dependence on Launcher LOS Angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
7.2.3
Proposed Tunnelling Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
8
Conclusion and Outlook
106
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Ever since the industrialisation in the 19th century, the world population and energy consumption
has been steadily increasing, and since 1970 humanity has been consuming more natural resources
than than planet Earth regenerates [1]. The consequences are now beginning to unveil, and the
future impacts of climate change presented in the 2022 IPCC report [2] are alarming.
The vast majority of the global energy consumption stems from burning of fossil fuels. One of
the consequences of releasing carbon into the atmosphere is that the average global temperature
increases. The year 2022 set the record for the global carbon emissions [3]. If all countries live up to
their current climate policies, the global carbon emissions are predicted to peak around 2025, but
according to current climate models, the global temperature will have increased by around 1.5◦C
compared to pre-industrial levels in 2100 [4].
In order to limit global carbon emissions, many countries are investing heavily in renewable energy
sources. These technologies provide cheap emission free energy, but most have the intrinsic problem
that they are dependent on weather conditions, season and time of day. Because energy storage is
expensive and often resource demanding, most renewables must be assisted by a base load energy
production. An optimization of energy use and a clever implementation of renewables can reduce
the base load demand as suggested in e.g. [5], but removing the base load demand world wide is
very unlikely. The existing technologies for base load production are burning of fossil fuels, biomass,
nuclear power, and in some regions hydro-power and geothermal heat. Even though biomass is in
principle renewable, the recapture of carbon can take many decades, and the production requires
large land areas that could otherwise be used for carbon storage in e.g. forests. Nuclear power is
the only other globally available source without carbon emissions. It is, however, not renewable,
and easily accessible uranium reserves are limited to decades of world wide production with current
technologies [6]. In addition, the production of nuclear waste and risk of meltdown makes nuclear
power expensive and prone to political resistance. A future technology with potential to cover the
base load demand worldwide without carbon emissions is fusion energy.
1.1
Fusion Energy
The only issue with fusion energy is that fusion is hard. Very hard. Scientists have put immense
effort into research and development for more than 70 years, and nuclear fusion processes are well
understood by now. Generally, light elements have a low binding energy pr. nucleon, and when
light elements fuse into heavier elements with a higher binding energy pr. nucleon, the difference in
1
==PAGE:8==
energy is released as kinetic energy. One of the promising nuclear fusion processes for power plants
is the fusion of the nuclei of the two hydrogen isotopes deuterium and tritium into an alpha particle
and a neutron, which follows
D + T →4
2He + n + 17.6MeV.
(1.1)
Because of its smaller mass, the neutron is produced with a higher kinetic energy than the helium
nucleus. Deuterium is abundant on earth. In the oceans, deuterium makes up 0.03% of the hydrogen
by mass. Tritium, on the other hand, is radioactive with a half-live of only 12.3 years, and its
occurrence is therefore very sparse in nature. The strategy in most fusion reactors is to breed it
from lithium in the fusion process
6
3Li + n →T + 4
2He + 4.8MeV.
(1.2)
The lithium reserves can sustain a world wide fusion energy production in 250-600 years[7]. When
lithium reserves are depleted, a solution could be to extract lithium from sea water and build reactors
that uses different, more available fuels. Because of the difficulty of achieving fusion conditions,
there is no risk of a meltdown in fusion reactors, and the fuel present at any time is very limited. This
makes fusion energy a safe energy source. If fusion energy production can be made economically
viable, it meets all the criteria for an optimal base load energy source.
For the fusion processes to occur, the strong force between the reactants must overcome the Coulomb
repulsion between them. This can be achieved if the reactants have a sufficiently high temperature,
i.e. a large average kinetic energy, in a process called thermonuclear fusion. At fusion relevant
temperatures, all materials are in the plasma state. In a plasma, the majority of the ions and
electrons are free. The typical velocities of the free particles in the plasma are
vσ,T =
r
2Tσ
mσ
,
(1.3)
where the subscript σ denotes the species of the particle and mσ, Tσ the mass and temperature of
the given species. A plasma is said to be quasi-neutral, meaning that it has a neutral charge on a
macroscopic scale, but there might be local fluctuations in the charge density. Another important
feature of plasmas is that they exhibit a coherent behavior, where long range electromagnetic
interactions are a determining factor of the dynamics. This results in complex phenomena such as
plasma waves, which will be explored in chapter 2.3, and instabilities, some of which are summarized
in section 2.2.
Thermonuclear fusion processes are not difficult to achieve. The challenge in fusion energy is to
produce more energy than is spent. For a sustained fusion burn, the power delivered to the plasma
from alpha particles and auxiliary heating systems must be greater than the losses from the plasma.
The fraction of fusion power and auxiliary heating power is called the gain factor Q = Pfusion/Paux.
Depending on the type of reactor, a power plant needs at least Q ∼25 to be economically acceptable.
The conditions a plasma needs to reach in a fusion reactor are conveniently expressed with the
Lawson triple product. Depending on the fusion process and desired gain, there is a minimum value
of the product of the plasma density n, plasma temperature T and energy confinement time τE that
must be met. For a D-T reaction in a plasma with a temperature of 100 −200 million degrees, the
minimum triple product is
nTτE ≳3 · 1021keVs/m3.
(1.4)
A triple product this high has yet to be achieved, but reactors are getting very close.
Thermonuclear fusion can be divided into controlled and uncontrolled processes.
Uncontrolled
fusion has already been achieved in thermonuclear weapons such as the hydrogen bomb, where
2
==PAGE:9==
tremendous amounts of energy is released in an uncontrolled and violent manner. Controlled ther-
monuclear fusion has also been achieved, but so far the demonstrated produced fusion energy hasn’t
been sufficient for what is needed in power plants. There are a number of different approaches to
controlled thermonuclear fusion. The two most researched categories are inertial confinement fusion,
where fusion is achieved by compressing small fuel targets, and magnetic confinement fusion, where
the plasma is contained with magnetic fields. The phenomena explored in this thesis is occurring in
a tokamak called Tokamak `a configuration variable (TCV), which is a magnetic confinement fusion
device.
1.2
Magnetic Confinement Fusion
Confining a plasma with a temperature above 100 million degrees is a complicated task. Because a
plasma consists of charged particles, its general shape and equilibrium behaviour can be controlled
by magnetic fields. The idea of magnetic confinement fusion is to generate magnetic fields that
constrain the motion of the plasma particles to a confined and finite space. The idea is simple, but
requires a non-uniform magnetic field, and, as a result, the acquired plasma equilibrium is prone to
instabilities.
1.2.1
Motion of Charged Particles in a Uniform Magnetic and Electric
Field
There are several ways to modelling a plasma with different levels of complexity and assumptions.
The model with least assumptions is the particle approach, where all plasma particles are considered
as individual charged particles belonging to a species σ. The model cannot be used to describe the
complex particle interactions in a plasma because of computation limits, but considering a single
charged particle gives great insight to some fundamental behaviour of a plasma. The equation of
motion of a charged particle in a magnetic field B ad electric field E is given by he Lorenz force
equation
mσ
dvσ
dt = qσ(E + vσ × B),
(1.5)
where mσ, vσ and qσ are the mass, velocity and charge of the particle respectively. In the case that
the fields are uniform and parallel (B0, E0), the solution to the equation of motion in the direction
parallel to B0 (denoted ∥) and perpendicular to B0 (denoted ⊥) is
vσ,∥(t) = qσE0,∥
mσ
t + vσ,∥,0
(1.6)
vσ,⊥(t) = vσ,⊥,0 [sin (ωcσt + φ0) e1 + cos (ωcσt + φ0) e2] ,
(1.7)
where (e1, e2) are orthonormal basis vectors that span the plane perpendicular to B0, φ0 is an
arbitrary phase, and
ωcσ = |qσ|B0
mσ
(1.8)
is the cyclotron frequency of species σ with B0 = B0ˆb where ˆb is a unit vector pointing in the
direction of B0. The essence of eq. (1.6)-(1.7) is that, in the absence of an electric field, charged
particles in a uniform magnetic field follows helical orbits around the magnetic field lines with radius
ρL,σ = mσvσ,⊥
|qσ|B0
,
(1.9)
3
==PAGE:10==
called the Larmor radius. The position on the axis that the particle is orbiting is called the guiding
centre of the particle. The addition of a uniform electric field in the direction of B0 accelerates the
charged particles and, consequently, induces a current in the plasma.
1.2.2
The tokamak
The property that charged particles tend to follow magnetic field lines is the core idea in magnetic
confinement fusion.
The conventional approach to obtain magnetic confinement is to bend the
magnetic field lines into closed loops. Other approaches have gained attention recently [8, 9], but
will not be discussed here. When the field lines are bend, the magnetic field is no longer uniform.
The simplest form is a purely toroidal magnetic field. The integral formulation of Ampere’s law,
I
B · dl = µ0Ienc,
(1.10)
dictates that a toroidal magnetic field is azimuthally symmetric and on the form
B = B0R0
R
ˆζ,
(1.11)
where ˆζ is a unit vector in the azimuthal direction, R is the radial coordinate, and B0, R0 are
constants. The result of a non-uniform magnetic field is that the charged particles in the plasma
are subjected to forces with different contributions α. Each force α gives rise to a drift velocity of
the guiding centre of the charged particles in the perpendicular direction described by
v⊥gc,σ =
X
α
Fσ,α × ˆbgc
qBgc
=
X
α
vα
⊥gc,σ,
(1.12)
where gc refers to the position of the guiding centre. In the guiding centre picture, the lowest
order drifts are found by Taylor expanding the Lorentz force equation (eq. 1.5) to first order, and,
neglecting gravity, they count
vE
⊥gc,σ = E⊥× ˆbgc
Bgc
,
v∇B
⊥gc,σ = −µσ∇B × ˆbgc
qσBgc
,
vC
⊥gc,σ =
mσv2
σ,∥ˆR × ˆbgc
RqσBgc
,
(1.13)
where µσ = m|vσ,⊥|2/(2Bgc) is the magnetic moment. In a toroidal magnetic field, the gradB drift
v∇B
⊥gc,σ and curvature drift vC
⊥gc,σ points in the same vertical direction. Because of their opposite
charge, ions and electrons drift in opposite directions, and this gives rise to a vertical electric field.
The resulting drift vE
⊥gc,σ drives both ions and electrons radially outwards, and confinement is lost.
A solution is to add a poloidal magnetic field such that the total magnetic field B is helical. The
short circuiting of magnetic field lines at different poloidal positions leads to better confinement as
will be discussed in section 2.1.
There are two fundamentally different solutions to producing a helical magnetic field. One is to
arrange the field coils with shapes and an orientation that produce a helical magnetic field. Such a
machine is called a Stellarator. The other solution is to produce a toroidal magnetic field with an
array of evenly spaced toroidal field coils and generate the poloidal magnetic field with a toroidal
plasma current. This is the concept of a tokamak, which is illustrated in figure 1.1. Conventionally
the plasma current is induced by a central solenoid that is ramped in current. According to Faraday’s
law,
∇× E = −∂
∂tB,
(1.14)
4
==PAGE:11==
the ramp in current generates an electromotive force in the plasma. Because of the low resistivity
of a plasma, a relatively low voltage can drive a large current. However, the the ramping nature of
the solenoid sets a limit for the possible duration of plasma pulses in tokamaks. For steady state
operation of tokamaks there is a need for non-inductive current drive. This can be achieved with
microwaves and is a very active field of study. Non-inductive current drive will not be discussed in
this thesis, but it is noted that parametric decay instabilities can possibly alter the current drive
profiles. The device that has been investigated the most due to its simplicity and early promising
results is the tokamak. There are several arguments in favor of the stellarator, such as easier steady
state operation and a higher plasma density limit, but the research lacks behind that of the tokamak.
This thesis deals solely with a tokamak geometry. The toroidal field coils are assisted by a several
Figure 1.1: Sketch of the key components of a tokamak. Original figure from [10].
vertical field coils and saddle coils for plasma shaping. The plasma is kept inside a torus shaped
vacuum vessel. Heating of the plasma can be supplied with four different methods. First, the induced
plasma current heats the plasma because of its electric resistance. This is called Ohmic heating.
The resistivity of a plasma η scales as η ∝T −3/2
e
. Therefore, Ohmic heating is only effective up to
a temperature of ∼1keV. A second solution is to inject fast neutral particles into the plasma. The
neutral particles collide with plasma particles and are ionized in the collision events. Thereby the
large kinetic energy of the neutral particles is transferred to the plasma as thermal energy. Another
method for plasma heating is to inject high power electromagnetic waves that couple resonantly
to either the electrons or ions of the plasma. These two approaches are called Electron Cyclotron
Resonance Heating (ECRH) and Ion Cyclotron Resonance Heating (ICRH) respectively and are
covered in section 1.3. Finally, if a D-T plasma reaches ignition, the fast 4
2He-ions will also heat the
plasma. This will be the main heating source in future power plants.
1.3
Electron Cyclotron Resonance Heating
One of the most common approaches to plasma heating is Electron Cyclotron Resonance Heating
(ECRH), where injected microwaves couple resonantly to the electrons in the plasma. As will be
shown in section 2.3.1, there are two fundamental microwave modes called O-mode and X-mode.
Both the modes couple resonantly to the plasma, when the wave frequency is close to a harmonic
of the electron cyclotron frequency (eq.
1.8).
At a resonance, part of the energy in the wave
is transferred to the motion of the plasma particles. The energy absorption is generally highest
5
==PAGE:12==
at lower wave harmonics. Getting a microwave to reach the electron cyclotron resonance can be
difficult, because both the O-mode and X-mode can reach cutoffs where they are reflected. This
issue is discussed in section 2.3.1. Here, it is simply noted that the cutoffs are typically omitted
by heating at the second or third harmonic of the electron cyclotron resonance. In most tokamaks
that means that the injected microwaves have frequencies on the order of ∼100GHz.
The high power microwaves are generated with maser devices called gyrotrons. The principle in a
gyrotron is that a beam of electrons is sent through a resonant cavity where there is a strong axial
magnetic field generated by a superconducting magnet. The cyclotron motion of the electrons gives
rise to microwave radiation at the electron cyclotron frequency, and the cavity is designed such that
the emitted microwaves form resonant modes, and the radiation leaving the gyrotron has the form
of a Gaussian beam, with an amplitude following [11]
E(r, s) = E0
W0
W(s) exp
 −r2
W(s)2

exp

−i

ks + k(r, s)r2
2R(s)

(1.15)
where s is the spatial coordinate along the direction of propagation, r is the radial distance from
the beam centre, ω is the angular wave frequency, and k is the local wave number. The width W(s)
Gaussian amplitude profile is not constant during propagation. It takes a minimum value W0 called
the beam waist at a focal point s0 and changes away from the focal point as
W(s) = W0
s
1 + 4c2 (s −s0)2
ω2W 4
0
.
(1.16)
The power density in the beam is largest at the focal point. The last term in eq. (1.15) includes
the radius of curvature
R(s) = s
"
1 +
SR
s
2#
,
(1.17)
where SR = kω2
0/2 is the Rayleight length and accounts for diffraction of the beam. Knowing the
electric field profile of the beam is relevant in modelling parametric decay instabilities in chapter 3.
The power from ECRH is delivered to the electrons in the plasma. The important quantity for
fusion gain, however, is the ion temperature because only the ions fuse. Much of the energy from
the electrons is transferred to the ions by electron-ion collisions, but a plasma heated primarily with
ECRH will have a higher electron temperature than ion temperature. An alternative to ECRH that
heats the ions directly with RF waves is called Ion Cyclotron Resonance Heating (ICRH). ICRH
has the advantage that it heats the ions more efficiently, but is more complicated because it has
to be installed within the vacuum vessel to couple the RF waves to the ions in the plasma and
takes space away from the breeding blanket. Another difference between ECRH an ICRH is that
ECRH deposit energy in very localised places in the plasma and can be used to control different
instabilities. As TCV is only equipped with an ECRH system, ICRH will not be discussed anymore
in this thesis.
1.4
Parametric Decay Instability
For most purposes a plasma can be modelled as a linear medium for propagating waves. However,
when the amplitude of propagating waves gets sufficiently large, the linear description of a plasma
is no longer adequate. Plasmas have been shown to have both second-order and third-order nonlin-
earity. Having a second-order nonlinear response to a driving source is not unique to plasmas, but
is common in both optical crystals [12], Acoustics [13], fluids [14] and in mechanical systems [15].
6
==PAGE:13==
The non-linear interaction that has been most studied in plasmas, and which is also the topic of
this thesis, is the parametric three wave interaction, which is a second order nonlinear effect. Both
the classification of ”parametric” and ”second-order” are important to understand the nature of
the interaction. A parametric process is an optical process where an electromagnetic wave interacts
with a medium in a way that the quantum state of the medium is left unchanged by the process.
A consequence is that both energy, momentum and angular momentum of the interacting waves
must be conserved in the process. Though this can sound intuitive, there are numerous examples
of non-parametric processes such as photoionization and Stimulated Raman scattering (SRS), both
of which have been shown in plasmas [16, 17]. The other classification ”second-order” defines the
order of the nonlinearity. The material response to an electromagnetic wave can be expressed as
a perturbation series, and different orders of the series describe different processes. This will be
discussed further in chapter 3. A second order nonlinear process, which is also the lowest possible
order of nonlinearity, is an interaction of three waves at different frequencies where energy and
momentum can be transferred between the waves. If the process is parametric, then the following
conservation rules must hold simultaneously
¯hω0 = ¯hω1 + ¯hω2,
¯hk0 = ¯hk1 + ¯hk2,
(1.18)
where the indices of the frequencies and wave vectors refer to the three different waves. Additionally,
all the implicated waves must satisfy their respective dispersion relations. A generic example of
a parametric second-order three wave interaction in optical crystals is that of Second Harmonic
Generation (SHG). The process describes two photons of equal frequency that combine in a second
order nonlinear medium to form a single photon with twice the frequency. This process is used for
e.g. frequency doubling in lasers [18].
Parametric three wave interactions also take place in plasmas. The specific process that is described
in this thesis is called a Parametric Decay Instability (PDI). In a PDI process, a strong pump wave
(ω0, k0) decays into two daughter waves (ω1, k1), (ω2, k2). The amplitude of the electric field of
the pump wave has to surpass a certain threshold, before the decay can occur. Because of the
nature of the decay, it grants the name ”instability”. Plasmas used in magnetic confinement fusion
are inhomogeneous in nature, and therefore the selection rules are only satisfied in localised decay
regions. This can give rise to either convective PDIs with free daughter waves or absolute PDIs
with trapped daughter waves. The terminology and mechanisms are explained in section 3.1.
The early theoretical models for the PDI were published in the 1960s and 1970s, e.g. [19, 20], and
soon after followed experimental observations [21, 22]. The power threshold for PDI was predicted
to be large in most conditions (< 10MW), but to be lowered in the vicinity of the UHR in X-1
heated plasmas, because here the pump X-wave couples strongly with the plasma, and the electric
field of the wave is amplified. In 1982, PDI was observed in a tokamak plasma for the first time
in the Versator II tokamak during first harmonic ECRH [23]. In the experiment, a pump X-mode
reached the UH resonance and decayed into two daughter waves, one being an Electron Bernstein
Wave (EBW) and the other a Lower Hybrid Wave (LHW). The process will be briefly covered in
section 3.1. During the 1980s, convective PDI was also observed in ionospheric plasmas[24].
Analytical studies of a different, absolute PDI, denoted a Two Plasmon Decay (TPD) that produces
two trapped daughter waves with equal frequency, were also performed already from the mid 1970s
[25, 26]. The trapping mechanism is presented in section 3.2.1. The TPD was predicted to have
implications for laser fusion. The full mechanism wasn’t properly understood at the time, but indeed
several observations were made of TPD emission in laser fusion experiments [27, 28]. The absolute
TPD was only investigated for non-magnetized maser fusion plasmas and was never related to
plasmas in magnetic confinement fusion. It was therefore a surprise, when experiments at TEXTOR
in 2009 showed indications of a new type of absolute PDI during X-2 ECRH [29]. Shortly after began
7
==PAGE:14==
the analytic work to explain the mechanism, and a trapping mechanism for the daughter waves was
proposed the following year [30] by the author of [26]. Since, the model has been improved [31,
32, 33], and numerical fully kinetic Particle-In-Cell (PIC) simulations have shown to reproduce the
mechanism [34] and, furthermore, show good agreement with analytical models [35]. Additionally,
there has been new observations of absolute TPD PDI during X-2 heating in the tokamak ASDEX
Upgrade [36], in the large stellarator Wendelstein 7-X [37] and in the linear device GRANIT [38],
where the plasma is more more easily controlled. This thesis presents new observations of absolute
TPD PDI during X-2 heating in the Tokamak `a configuration variable (TCV) along with both
analytical modelling and PIC modelling.
This thesis focuses only on explaining the occurrence of PDI and not on the consequences of PDI of
which there could be several. First, a fraction of the power in the pump wave is transferred to the
daughter waves during PDI. The study at GRANIT [38] showed a steady absorption of 45% of the
injected power from the pump wave to the PDI daughter waves, but in realistic tokamak scenarios
the fraction of transferred power is approximately an order of magnitude lower. The redirection
of power has implications on where (and if) the power is deposited in the plasma. Additionally,
it can possibly change the current drive profiles during non-inductive Electron Cyclotron Current
Drive (ECCD). Another issue is that large radiation power at unexpected frequencies can damage
sensitive microwave diagnostic components as was demonstrated in ASDEX Upgrade [39]. On the
other hand, if properly understood PDI processes could also enable new heating schemes and current
drive schemes. Moreover, there is a possibility that secondary parametric decays generate ion waves
that can accelerate ions in the plasma. The mechanism for this is quickly presented in section 3.2.2.
This effect is also examined in this thesis, and experimental results from TCV are presented in
section 7.1.
1.5
Fast Ion Observations at TCV
One of the less understood mechanisms in an absolute PDI with trapped daughter waves is what
happens after the primary PDI decay. The current leading theory is that the daughter waves grow
in amplitude until they initiate a cascade of secondary parametric decays. The process is presented
in section 3.2.2. Some of the daughter waves that are thought to be generated are a family of ion
waves. These ion waves are expected to be absorbed and thereby deliver energy locally to ions in the
plasma. whether this process occurs has not been investigated experimentally before. At TCV there
has previously been observations of supra-thermal ions in plasma discharges where only ECRH was
used as a heating source [40]. The supra-thermal ion population was found to have temperatures
up to Ti ∼6 keV, and in extreme cases the supra-thermal ion population was found to comprise
up to 20 % of the ions in the plasma. The original explanation for the generation of the observed
supra-thermal ions at TCV was an Ion-Acoustic turbulence process that showed decent agreement
with several of the observations. One other possible explanation for this fast ion population could
be the generation of ion waves in secondary PDI decays. This possible link between PDI processes
and the generation of a fast ion population was one of the motivations for the experimental work
carried out in this thesis, and indeed there are indications of a correlation, presented in section 7.1.
1.6
Thesis Structure
This thesis is organized as follows. Chapter 2 introduces methods of describing a tokamak plasma
and summarizes some key characteristics of fluctuations and turbulence in different regions of a
tokamak plasma. Chapter 2.3 gives an overview of the physics of propagating electromagnetic and
8
==PAGE:15==
electrostatic waves in a plasma and introduces the WKBJ formalism which is used for a simpler
description of plasma modes. This is followed by 3 where a model for PDI with trapped daughter
waves in a 1-dimensional non-monotonic density profile is presented. This concludes the analytic
section of the thesis. In chapter 4 the Tokamak `a configuration variable (TCV) is presented and in
addition all the relevant diagnostic systems that are used in the experimental work in this project.
Chapter 5 details the development of the radiometer that was installed at TCV during the project
and presents the method of calibration. Additionally, measurements of anomalous signals emitted
directly from the gyrotrons in TCV are characterized. In chapter 6 observations of anomalous signals
with the radiometer are characterized, and it is shown that these signals can be explained with low-
threshold parametric decay instabilities with different trapping mechanism for the daughter waves.
As a part of the analysis, the model presented in section 3 is applied. After having demonstrated
the occurrence of different PDI signals, section 7 gives a discussion of the escape mechanism of
the trapped daughter waves. This includes looking at indication of a fast ion population possibly
caused by secondary parametric decays, making angular scans with the radiometer and comparing
the measured signal strength and, finally, suggesting an escape mechanism for the daughter waves.
Chapter 8 concludes on the project.
9
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2
Plasma Dynamics in Tokamaks
Plasmas exist in many sorts, both laboratory made and in nature. This thesis deals specifically
with magnetized plasmas in a tokamak. Understanding the PDI process requires a knowledge on
both the propagation of waves in a tokamak plasma and on the density fluctuations occurring in a
tokamak. Some fundamental theory on these phenomena as well as a description of the magnetic
field in a tokamak are presented in this chapter.
2.1
Geometry of the Magnetic Field in a Tokamak
The helical magnetic field lines in a tokamak form surfaces around the magnetic axis known as
magnetic flux surfaces. The magnetic flux surfaces are nested, meaning that they fit inside each
other, and they all surround the same circular magnetic axis. This can be shown to always be
the case mathematically as long as the magnetic field is axisymmetric [10]. Because the charged
particles in a tokamak are generally free to stream along the magnetic field lines, several properties
of the plasma will equilibrate along the field lines. This property carries over to the magnetic flux
surfaces. The gradB drift and curvature drift (along with other drifts) still act on the particles, but
poloidal currents along the magnetic flux surfaces quickly cancel the charge separation. Therefore,
both the plasma density, pressure and temperature are constant on magnetic flux surfaces to a good
approximation as is described in section 2.2.1. This crucial property motivates the introduction of
magnetic flux coordinates. These can be defined in both the radial, poloidal and toroidal direction,
and there are a number of different conventions on their definitions. This thesis follows the conven-
tion by [10]. The aim is to map each magnetic flux surface uniquely with a single function. This is
done by choosing a toroidal curvilinear coordinate system (s, θ, ζ), where ζ ∈[0, 2π] is the toroidal
angle, θ ∈[0, 2π] is the poloidal angle around the magnetic axis, and s is a monotonically increasing
positive coordinate that labels each flux surface with s = s0 at the magnetic axis. A natural choice
of basis is a contravariant basis with basis vectors ∇θ × ∇ζ, ∇ζ × ∇s and ∇s × ∇θ. This is a
non-orthogonal basis except for the special case where the flux surfaces have a circular cross section.
Hence, extra care has to be taken when treating integrals. Two functions of great interest are the
toroidal flux Ψt and poloidal flux Ψp
Ψt =
Z
B · dSt =
Z
B · ˆndSt
Ψp =
Z
B · dSp =
Z
B · ˆndSp,
(2.1)
10
==PAGE:17==
where the two surfaces St and Sp are shown in figure 2.1aa. To evaluate the integrals, it’s noted
that the infinitesimal surface areas are given by
dSt = |∇ζ|

q
det[gij]
 dsdθ
dSp = |∇θ|

q
det[gij]
 dsdζ.
(2.2)
Here, gij is the metric tensor, from which the Jacobian can be expressed as
J(s, θ, ζ) =
q
det[gij] = [∇s · (∇θ × ∇ζ)]−1.
(2.3)
The normal vectors of St and Sp are ˆn = ∇ζ/|∇ζ| and ˆn = ∇θ/|∇θ| respectively. Thus, the two
integrals in eq. (2.1) can be expressed as
Ψt =
Z s
s0
d˜s
Z 2π
0
dθ
B · ∇ζ
∇˜s · (∇θ × ∇ζ)
Ψp =
Z s
s0
d˜s
Z 2π
0
dζ
B · ∇θ
∇˜s · (∇θ × ∇ζ).
(2.4)
The evaluation of the integrals requires a clever rewriting of the magnetic field. By definition of the
closed flux surfaces B · ∇s = 0, which means that B can be expanded using only the poloidal and
toroidal basis vectors ∇ζ × ∇s, ∇s × ∇θ. A standard, but mathematically cumbersome, result
that builds on the divergence free nature of B is that with a certain choice of direction for θ = 0
the B-field can be expressed [10, 41]
B = ∇ψt(s) × ∇θ + ∇φ × ∇ψp(s).
(2.5)
The functions ψt(s), ψp(s) are constant on magnetic flux surfaces, and indeed inserting eq. (2.5) in
2.4 yields
Ψt(s) = 2π
Z s
0
d˜s ψt(s) = 2πψt(s)
Ψp(s) = 2π
Z s
0
d˜s ψp(s) = 2πψp(s)
(2.6)
with the choice that ψt(0) = ψp(0) = 0, meaning that the functions introduced in eq. (2.5) are
exactly the toroidal and poloidal flux functions (multiplied by a factor of 2π). On the surface it
looks like we are back to start. But the important insight of eq. (2.5)-(2.6) is that the toroidal and
poloidal flux functions satisfies B · ∇ψt = 0 and B · ∇ψp = 0. In other words, the magnetic flux
surfaces are surfaces of constant Ψt or Ψp. With the notion that important plasma quantities are
approximately conserved on magnetic flux surfaces, the introduction of flux coordinates has reduced
the mapping of plasma properties in the poloidal plane from a 2d problem to a 1d problem is either
of the ψ-profiles are known. With the introduction of the MHD model, which is briefly covered in
section 2.2.1, the equilibria ψ-profiles can relatively easily be reconstructed from magnetic probe
measurements. Accordingly, plasma diagnostics only need to conduct measurements on relatively
few positions to reconstruct an equilibrium profile of e.g. temperature and density. It is worth
to note that no assumptions were made on axisymmetry of the magnetic field, and indeed flux
coordinates are used in both tokamaks and stellarators.
The poloidal and toroidal flux motivated the introduction of the quantity
ι(ψp) = dψp
dψt
(2.7)
called the rotational transform. It expresses how much the magnetic field lines pf a flux surface
rotate poloidally and is often rather expressed in term of the safety factor q(ψp) = 1/ι(ψp). The
safety factor indicates how many toroidal turns the field lines make for each poloidal turn. The
safety factor is important in the description of MHD instabilities covered in section 2.2.1.
11
==PAGE:18==
(a) Illustration of coordinate system and surfaces St,
Sp. Original figure from [42]
(b) Illustration of the plasma core, separatrix and
Scrape-off Layer in the poloidal plane of the tokamak
TCV.
Figure 2.1: Magnetic field topology in a tokamak.
If a flux surface touches the inner walls of the vacuum vessel there is a loss of confinement. Addition-
ally, the walls can only withstand a certain amount of heat, and plasma wall interactions give rise
to a lot of impurities in the plasma. Therefore, the magnetic field is generated in a way that there is
a central region with nested closed flux surfaces that never gets in contact with the vessel walls and
an outer region with open flux surfaces as illustrated in figure 2.1ab. The boundary between the
open and closed flux surfaces is called the separatrix. In most tokamaks the separatrix has either
one or two X-points. The confinement region inside the separatrix is called the core region of the
plasma, and the region between the separatrix and the vessel wall is called the Scrape-Off Layer
(SOL). Due to a variety of phenomena, plasma is continuously transported from the confined core
region to the SOL. Here, the open flux surfaces guide the plasma into a small region of the vessel
wall called the divertor. The divertor can be thought of as the exhaust of the plasma and is designed
to withstand an extremely high heat flux. Developing materials for the divertor and vessel walls is
one of the large engineering challenges for fusion power plants. The dynamics of the plasma is very
different in the core region and in the SOL, where the density decreases quickly with increasing
flux function. In this thesis only the poloidal flux function is used to map the flux surfaces. The
poloidal flux function is normalized as
ρψ =
ψp
ψp|s∈separatrix
(2.8)
such that ρψ ∈[0, 1] within the core region.
2.2
Density Fluctuations in Tokamak Plasmas
As will be heavily investigated throughout this thesis, density fluctuations are key to understanding
Parametric Decay Instabilities in a tokamak. In both the core region and the SOL, the plasma
exhibits oscillations and might be prone to instabilities and turbulent behaviour. In the core region
the dynamics are described using MHD theory. In the SOL the turbulent transport can be described
in terms of an interchange turbulence model. This section summarizes some features of common
12
==PAGE:19==
MHD modes and turbulent transport phenomena that gives rise to density fluctuations in the
plasma.
2.2.1
Magnetohydrodynamic Modes
The best tool to describe low-frequency large-scale phenomena in a plasma is magnetohydrodynam-
ics (MHD). By restricting the behaviour to length scales larger than the ion Larmor radius and
time scales longer than the ion cyclotron period, the plasma can be described as a single electrically
conducting fluid. Thus, the determining quantities are the current that is induced in the fluid J
and the pressure of the fluid p. Despite its simplicity, the MHD model can be used to determine
the equilibrium shape of a plasma and to analyse a variety of instabilities. In the simplest form, the
fluid is assumed to be non-resistive. This is generally a good approximation in a hot fusion plasma.
If steady state is assumed, the so-called ideal MHD equations are
J × B = ∇p,
J = ∇× B,
∇· B = 0.
(2.9)
The solution to these equations gives an equilibrium profile for the plasma where no net force is
acting on any volue element. It’s easily seen that the ideal MHD equations satisfy B · ∇p = 0 and
J · ∇p = 0. The first equation shows that the pressure is constant on a flux surface, and the second
shows that the current density always lies on flux surfaces. Accordingly, p is determined uniquely
with the poloidal flux function (eq. 2.8), and the same is true for n and T to a good approximation
[43]. As a consequence, the plasma equilibrium can be described in terms of only ρψ. The solution
to eq. (2.9) that describes the equilibrium ρψ-profile in a tokamak is called the Grad-Shafranov
equation, and it can be solved numerically. Practically, the equilibrium profile is reconstructed by
a number of measurements with magnetic probes in the edge of the vacuum chamber in a tokamak
as described in section 4.2.4.
The equilibrium profile of the plasma can be either stable, i.e. perturbations give rise to oscillations
that might be damped, or unstable, meaning that perturbations to the equilibrium tend to grow.
These oscillations, whether stable or unstable, are referred to as MHD modes. Whether a MHD
mode is stable or unstable can be determined by evaluating how a perturbation changes the free
energy of the system. The two main families of MHD modes are ideal MHD modes and resistive
MHD modes. Multiple MHD modes are present at once, so the stability of each mode needs to be
considered. Both stable and unstable MHD modes can give rise to density fluctuations large enough
to give rise to PDI. This will be experimentally shown in section 6.
Ideal MHD Modes
The ideal MHD equations (eq. 2.9) gives rise to different families of ideal MHD modes. Some are
driven by the plasma current, some are driven by perturbations in the plasma pressure and some
by a combination of current and pressure. A way to classify different instabilities is to assign a
poloidal and toroidal mode number (m, n) where q = m/n. These can be seen as the dominant
Fourier components of the modes in the toroidal and poloidal direction. All MHD modes lead to
some perturbation of the magnetic field lines. The modes are generally more unstable, if the phase
of the perturbation is constant and are therefore resonant on flux surfaces with q = m/n. Ideal
MHD instabilities are linear and can result in disruptions if not controlled. Therefore, tokamaks
are operated in regimes where most of the ideal MHD modes are stable.
The current driven ideal MHD mode is called the kink mode. The word kink refers to a helical
displacement of the entire poloidal cross section of the plasma. The difference in magnetic pressure
between the LFS and HFS of the plasma is what drives the mode. The only unstable kink modes in
13
==PAGE:20==
the plasma core are the m = 1 kink modes and especially the 1, 1 kink mode can lead to disruption
if the q = 1 surface is positioned inside the plasma. Therefore, tokamak plasmas are operated with
q > 1 everywhere in the plasma. This sets an upper limit for the allowed plasma current in the
plasma as q ∝1/I. If the resonant surface is just outside the plasma, kink modes can also arise.
Both the external 1, 1 mode and 2, 1 mode are unstable, so as a rule of thumb q > 2 at the plasma
edge.
Pressure driven ideal MHD modes called ballooning modes can also be unstable if the pressure in
the tokamak becomes to high. The important parameter for the plasma pressure is named β and is
given
β =
p
pmag
= nkBT
B2/2µ0
.
(2.10)
Avoiding unstable ballooning modes (and unstable tearing modes) sets an upper value of β. The
limit is on form β = βNI0/(aB0), where a is the minor radius, I0, B0 are the magnetic field strength
and plasma current on the magnetic axis, but how high the parameter βN is depends on the tokamak
configuration with some experiments exceeding early theoretical predictions [44, 45].
A third class of MHD modes that can be partially described by ideal MHD analysis and are both
driven by current and pressure are Edge Localized Modes (ELMs). ELMs are MHD instabilities that
occur frequently and periodically in the edge of a plasma when it is operated in the H-mode. The
H-mode is the name of a global tokamak plasma configuration that is characterized by a transport
barrier in the edge of the core region.
Within the transport barrier the gradients of both the
temperature and the density are very steep. The ”H” stands for ”high confinement” in contrary
to the L mode or ”low confinement” mode where a transport barrier isn’t formed. The cost of the
H mode is periodic ELMs, where energy and particles are lost. Because ELMS could damage and
limit the lifetime of the divertor in ITER [46] and future larger fusion reactors, much effort is being
put into ELM control and mitigation and the discovery of other high confinement regimes without
ELMs. As will be showed in section 6, this thesis finds that there is a clear correlation between
ELM activity and the occurrence of PDI.
Resistive tearing modes
Including a small, but finite resistivity in the MHD model leads to a new class of resistive MHD
modes. Though these modes are generally less violent than ideal instabilities, they are harder to
mitigate and can occur at several rational q-surfaces in the core of the plasma. Contrary to Ideal
MHD modes, resistive MHD modes can change the magnetic field topology due to recombination
of magnetic field lines and give rise to so-called magnetic islands, where new magnetic axes with
locally nested magnetic flux surfaces are created in the plasma. The most common resistive MHD
mode that can occur at low energies is called the tearing mode, with the name referring to the
recombination of magnetic field lines. The m, n tearing mode creates a number of magnetic island
with m, n marking their dominant Fourier components in the poloidal and toroidal direction. For
a given m, n tearing mode, the islands occur on the rational q = m/n surface where the mode is
resonant, and the islands rotate in the poloidal direction.
One problem with the tearing modes is that the short circuiting of magnetic field lines lead to
an increased transport, which lowers the confinement. Another concern is regarding the stability
of the tearing modes. Tearing Modes are current driven, and a the most unstable are a subclass
called Neoclassical Tearing Modes (NTMs) which are driven by perturbations in the bootstrap
current. The increased transport across the magnetic islands flattens the pressure profile. This in
turn increases the perturbation in the bootstrap current, and might lead to a growth of the island.
NTMs are metastable.
Small perturbations to the bootstrap current quickly damps, but if the
14
==PAGE:21==
islands get to big, the NTM becomes unstable. This can be triggered by e.g. ELMs. Mitigation and
control of NTMs is a concern in large tokamaks and can be achieved using directed ECRH heating
and ECCD [47].
Generally, the most prominent tearing modes are found at low q-values. Depending on the q-value
at the edge of the machine, typical large modes observed in TCV are the 2, 1 mode, 3, 2 mode and
3, 1 mode. The magnetic islands give rise to perturbations in the plasma density and have earlier
been shown to give rise to PDI in other tokamaks [48, 49] and in Wendelstein 7-X [37]. Section 6.1
discusses the occurrence of PDI related to magnetic islands in TCV.
2.2.2
Interchange Turbulence in the Scrape-Off Layer
The MHD analysis mainly concerns modes in the confined plasma core. Fluctuations occurring in
the SOL are also highly relevant for PDI. There are different models that describe the turbulent
behaviour of the plasma in the SOL. The fundamental phenomenon can be understood with the
interchange turbulence process. One method of describing the interchange turbulence process is in
terms of the diamagnetic current that within the two-fluid picture is given
Jd =
X
σ
b × ∇pσ
B
,
(2.11)
where b = B/|B| and the sum is over the particle species. There is a diamagnetic current in a
plasma whenever there is a nonuniform plasma pressure. It is clear by taking the divergence of the
diamagnetic current,
∇· Jd =
X
σ
(∇× b) · ∇pσ
B
+

∇1
B

· (b × ∇pσ)

≈
X
σ
2
B0R0
∂zpσ,
(2.12)
that pressure gradients drive a change of the diamagnetic current. The last step in eq. (2.12) takes
into account knowledge in the magnetic field in a tokamak. For a full derivation of the equation,
see [50]. From eq. (2.12) it is evident that a small positive perturbation in the pressure gives rise to
a diamagnetic current gives rise to a vertical charge polarization as illustrated in figure 2.2. This in
turn gives rise to a vertical electric field −∇ϕ, which induces a radially outwards directed electric
drift vE
⊥given in eq. (1.13). Whenever there is a vE
⊥drift, a current called the polarization current
Jp is induced
Jp = ρm
B b ×
 ∂
∂t + vE
⊥· ∇

vE
⊥,
(2.13)
where ρm is the mass density of the plasma. If the plasma is assumed stationary, the continuity
equation for to total plasma current J is ∇· J = 0. If only the lowest order drifts are included, the
equation reads
∇· Jp = −∇· J∥−∇· Jd,
(2.14)
where J∥is a current that might flow along the magnetic field lines, reducing the effect of the two
other currents. Taking the divergence of eq. (2.13) yields
∇· Jp = ρm
 ∂
∂t + vE
⊥· ∇

Ω= .
(2.15)
Here Ω= b · ∇× vE
⊥is the vorticity of the electric drift vE
⊥. As ∇· Jp is opposite above and below
the pressure perturbation, the vorticity is opposite as well as illustrated in figure 2.2. The rotating
motion of the plasma particles doesn’t perfectly cancel the vertical electric field, and the vE
⊥drift
15
==PAGE:22==
continue to act. As a result, this mechanism gives rise to mushroom like blob structures in the SOL
region of the plasma that moves material radially outwards from the confined plasma core. the
blob structures are localised in the poloidal plane, but stretches in the parallel direction. As will be
discussed in section 3.2.1, the density perturbation in a blob can give rise to a low threshold PDI
with daughter waves that are trapped.
∇𝑝
∇𝑝
𝑬
𝑱𝑫
𝑱𝒑
–
–
+
+
𝛀>0
𝛀<0
𝑩
𝛻𝑩
𝒗𝑬×𝑩
Figure 2.2: Illustration of Blob formation. The illustration is from [50].
A method for modelling interchange turbulence in the SOL is using reduced fluid models.
An
example is found in [51], where the model ESEL is used to model interchange turbulence in the
SOL region of TCV. The findings in this article will be used in section 6.3 where observations of
PDI occurrence in connection with blobs is analysed.
2.3
Wave Propagation in Tokamak Plasmas
Dealing with the theory of the non-linear PDI requires a fundamental understanding of the linear
wave modes that can exist in a tokamak plasma. This chapter first presents the fundamental wave
equation and some results from the simple model of a cold plasma that can be found in a variety of
text books, e.g. [52, 53]. The cold dispersion relations are useful for describing the Ordinary and
Extraordinary plasma modes and for mapping out different cutoffs and resonances in a magnetized
plasma. Afterwards, the chapter covers how including kinetic effects of a warm plasma gives rise
to wave absorption and lead to a new class of waves called Electron Bernstein Waves that are
central to the PDI. Finally, it is shown how the propagating waves can be approximated as rays
and be described using semi-classical wave theory. This wave description is the starting point of
the analytical PDI model presented in section 3.2.1.
As in any other media, the propagation of waves in a plasma is governed by the two Maxwell’s
equations, here written in terms of the vacuum field E, B and the induced current J as
∇× E(r, t) = −∂B(r, t)
∂t
(2.16)
∇× B(r, t) = µ0

J(r, t) + ϵ0
∂E(r, t)
∂t

.
(2.17)
The response of the plasma to the waves is governed in the induced current J(r, t).
The two
equations can be combined into a single wave equation by taking the curl of both sides in eq. 2.16
and inserting it in eq. 2.17, yielding
∇(∇· E(r, t)) −∇2E(r, t) −1
c2 ∂2
t E(r, t) = −µ0∂tJ(r, t),
(2.18)
16
==PAGE:23==
where the vector identity ∇× (∇× A) = ∇(∇· A) −∇2A has been used. When working with
waves in a medium, it is useful to transform the governing equations to (ω, k) Fourier space. This
is done by employing the Fourier transformation
F[f(r, t)] = f(k, ω) =
Z
r
Z ∞
0
f(r, t)ei(ωt−k·r)dtdr
(2.19)
to all vector fields, and eq. (2.18) can be written as
−k ⊗k · E(k, ω) + k2E(k, ω) −ω2
c2 E(k, ω) = iµ0ωJ(k, ω).
(2.20)
in terms of the Fourier transformed E and J.
Eq.
(2.20) is the governing wave equation that
describes the propagation for all possible modes in a plasma (or any other media). The difficulty
lies in describing the plasma response J(k, ω). The first trick is to split the current density into a
linear and nonlinear part
J = Jl + Jnl.
(2.21)
The linear part Jl can conveniently be described in terms of the electric field E(r, t) using linear
response theory. In other words,
Jα
l (r, t) =
Z
all r′, all t′
X
β
σαβ(r, r′, t, t′)Eβ(r′, t′),
(2.22)
where the linear response tensor σαβ, called the conductivity tensor, gives the linear current re-
sponse Jα
l in direction eα to an applied field Eβ in direction eβ. Evaluating the integral in eq. 2.22
is possible using e.g. the Kubo formula [54], but would significantly complicate the description of
plasma waves. Therefore, the method used in almost all literature is to assume that the plasma is
completely homogeneous when evaluating the wave equation and dispersion relations. The homo-
geneous wave equation have proven to give a good description of waves in inhomogeneous plasmas.
Why this is the case and how to describe wave propagation an inhomogeneous plasma is covered in
section 2.3.3. Under the assumption of a homogeneous plasma, the conductivity tensor reduces to
σαβ(r−r′, t−t′). The resulting integral is a convolution integral. Taking the Fourier transformation
on both sides of (eq. 2.22) and using the Convolution theorem, F[f ∗g] = F[f]F[g], yields
Jl(k, ω) = σ(k, ω) · E(k, ω),
(2.23)
which reduces the nonlinear wave equation (2.20) to
D(k, ω) · E(k, ω) =
 ω2 −c2k2
I + c2k ⊗k + iωσ(k, ω)
ϵ0

· E(k, ω) = −iωJnl(k, ω)
ϵ0
.
(2.24)
The tensor D(k, ω) is called the dispersion matrix.
The RHS of eq.
(2.24) that includes the
non-linear part Jnl will not be discussed until chapter 3, so for now the RHS is set to 0, which
leaves
D(k, ω) · E(k, ω) =
 ω2 −c2k2
I + c2k ⊗k + iωσ(k, ω)
ϵ0

· E(k, ω) = 0.
(2.25)
If there are any non-trivial solutions to the, now homogeneous, wave equation, then it follows that
det[D(k, ω)] = 0. Solving this relation yields a dispersion relation that relates the frequency and
wave vector of a given mode. The remaining difficult task is to identify the tensor elements of
D(k, ω). In section 2.3.1 this is done within the approximation of cold plasma theory, which gives
a simple description of the linear plasma modes. The cold plasma description is reliable for most
plasma parameters and is great for mapping out resonances and cutoffs in a plasma. However, it
falls short of describing the strong interactions of the wave and the plasma at a resonance as well
as any dissipation of energy in the plasma. This requires a kinetic description, which is shortly
covered in section 2.3.2.
17
==PAGE:24==
2.3.1
Cold Plasma Theory of a Homogeneous Plasma
Computing the elements of the conductivity tensor σ requires a description of the current. The
approach in the Cold plasma theory is to assume that both electrons and ions have reached a
thermal equilibrium and therefore use the simple two-fluid description
J1(r, t) =
X
σ
qσnσ(r, t)uσ(r, t),
(2.26)
where the sum is over the species σ. The governing equation of motion for the two-fluid model is
the momentum equation, which generally (without including gravity) reads
nσmσdtuσ = nσqσ (E + uσ × B) −∇· Pσ −νσσ′nσmσ (uσ −uσ′) .
(2.27)
In the cold plasma picture, all effects of temperature are neglected.
Therefore, both the term
including the stress tensor Pσ and the collision frequency νσσ′ are neglected. Furthermore, all the
vector fields E, B, uσ are linearised to first order, and the first order terms are assumed to be on
the form
F(r, t) = F0 + F1(r, t)
F1(r, t) = F1eF1(r, t)ei(k·r−ωt),
(2.28)
where eF1(r, t) is a polarization vector. With an assumption of no background flow uσ0 = 0 and no
external stationary electric field E0 = 0, the Fourier transform of the momentum equation to first
order is
−mσnσiωu1s = nσqσ (E1 + u1s × B0) .
(2.29)
The cold plasma conductivity tensor is evaluated by substituting eq. (2.26) and eq. (2.29) into eq.
(2.23), yielding
σ(k, ω) = iε0ω
c2
X
σ




ω2
pσ
ω2−ω2cσ
i
ωcσω2
pσ
ω(ω2−ω2cσ)
0
−i
ωcσω2
pσ
ω(ω2−ω2cσ)
ω2
pσ
ω2−ω2cσ
0
0
0
ω2
pσ
ω2



,
(2.30)
where ωcσ is the cyclotron frequency (eq. 1.8) and ωpσ is called the plasma frequency and given by
ωpσ =
s
nσq2σ
mσε0
.
(2.31)
Furthermore, the coordinate system is Cartesian and has been aligned such that the background
magnetic field B0 points in the positive z-direction and the wave vector lies in the (x, z)-plane
as shown in figure 2.3. The dispersion relation is constructed by setting the determinant of the
dispersion matrix (eq. 2.25) equal zero
det



S −c2k2
w2 cos2 θ
−iD
c2k2
w2 sin θ cos θ
iD
S −c2k2
w2
0
c2k2
w2 sin θ cos θ
0
P −c2k2
w2 sin2 θ


= 0.
(2.32)
The angle θ is the angle between the wave vector and B0, and the quantities S, D and P are the
three Stix coefficients [52]
S = 1 −
X
s
ω2
ps
ω2 −ω2cs
D =
X
s
sgn(qs)ωcsω2
ps
ω(ω2 −ω2cs)
P = 1 −
X
s
ω2
ps
ω2 .
(2.33)
18
==PAGE:25==
Solving eq. (2.32) gives two linearly independent solutions for the wave vector k. As in birefringent
optical crystals, the two solutions are denoted the Ordinary mode (O-mode) and the Extraordinary
mode (X-mode). The two solutions exist for all propagation directions as shown in [55], but here
only the canonical solutions for k ⊥B0 (θ = π/2) are considered. These are
D = k2
x + k2
y −ω2
c2 P = 0
(O-mode)
(2.34)
D = k2
x + k2
y −ω2
c2
S2 −D2
S
= 0
(X-mode),
(2.35)
and from the wave equation (2.25), it’s evident that the O-mode is polarized linearly along the
z-direction, while the X-mode is elliptically polarized in the (x, y)-plane with
Ex
Ey
= iD
S .
(2.36)
Both modes have cutoffs where the refractive index N = ck/ω goes towards zero, and the wave
becomes evanescent. By inspection of the two dispersion relations it is easy to see that only the
X-mode is affected by the background magnetic field B0 = 0, and the dispersion relation of the
X-mode reduces to that of the O-mode when B0 = 0. Therefore, it is not surprising the the cutoff of
the O-mode is found, when the wave frequency approximately equals the electron plasma frequency
(ω ≈ωpe), and the X-mode has cutoffs at R = 0 and L = 0, where R = S + D and L = S −D, that
both depends on the magnetic field as well as the plasma density. In the cold plasma description,
the X-mode also has a resonance,where N →∞, at S = 0, which occurs when
ω ≈ωUH =
q
ω2pe + ω2ce.
(2.37)
The frequency ωUH is called the Upper Hybrid frequency.
At the resonance, the wave couples
strongly with the plasma. Of course, N →∞is an nonphysical behaviour, and the cold wave
theory fails to describe the the physics close to resonances. This will be covered in section 2.3.2.
The beauty of the Cold theory lies in its simplicity and its mapping of the O-mode and X-mode.
Figure 2.4 shows a so-called CMA diagram, where the different cutoffs and resonances for the O-
and X-mode are plotted. The cutoffs and resonances map out different regions where either both
of the modes, one of the modes of none of the modes exist. The diagram immediately explains
why X-1 heating is not used in many tokamaks. When launching a microwave into a plasma from
vacuum, the wave starts at X = 0, and to reach the EC resonance form the low field side requires
crossing the evanescent region between the R-cutoff and the UH resonance (yellow region in figure
2.4). A fraction of the wave power can tunnel through the region, but, depending on the conditions,
most of the power will be reflected. The second harmonic EC resonance, positioned at Y = 1/2
(black dotted line), can on the other hand easily be reached. The CMA diagram is also useful for
identifying trapping regions. The important feature to notice for now is that in order to reach the
second harmonic EC resonance, the wave must pass the second harmonic UH resonance. As will
be shown in in section 3.2, a low threshold PDI can occur during this passing under certain plasma
conditions.
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.3:
Conventional choice
of coordinate system when work-
ing with plasma waves. B0 points
along the z-axis, and k is re-
stricted to the (x, z)-plane. This
system is also called the Stix ba-
sis. This figure is originally from
[56].
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.5
1
Figure 2.4: CMA diagram showing the cold plasma cutoffs
and resonances along with the fundamental electron cyclotron
resonance ω = ωce and second harmonic electron cyclotron
resonance ω = 2ωce. The plot has X = ω2
pe/ω2 along the first
axis, and Y = ωce/ω along the second axis.
In the purple
region the X-mode cannot propagate, in the yellow region the
O-mode cannot propagate and in the red region neither the
O-mode nor the X-mode can propagate.
2.3.2
Kinetic Theory of Electrostatic Waves in a Warm Homogeneous
Plasma
Kinetic theory is a widely applied model that also accounts for the thermal motion of the plasma
particles. It describes the plasma with a 7d distribution function fσ(r, v, t) for each species with
three spatial dimensions, three velocity dimensions and one temporal dimension. Several text books
covers the kinetic description of waves in a magnetized plasma. Good examples are [52, 53, 57].
This section doesn’t include any complete derivations, but accounts for the governing equations and
the applied assumptions in kinetic plasma wave theory. The governing equation for kinetic theory
is the Boltzmann equation
∂tfσ(r, v, t) + v · ∇rfσ(r, v, t) + qσ
mσ
[E(r, t) + v × B(r, t)] · ∇vfσ(r, v, t) = [∂tfσ(r, v, t)]coll, (2.38)
where the two nabla operators are ∇r = (∂x, ∂y, ∂z) and ∇v =
 ∂vx, ∂vy, ∂vz

in Cartesian coordi-
nates, and the RHS accounts changes to the distribution function due to collisions. In the description
of kinetic plasma waves, the plasma is taken to be collisionless, setting [∂tfσ(r, v, t)]coll = 0. Several
other assumptions also carry over from the cold plasma theory. First, the distribution function is
expanded to first order as
fσ(r, v, t) = fσ,0(r, v) + fσ,1(r, v, t),
(2.39)
where fσ0(r, v) are taken to be stationary Maxwellian distributions for a plasma in thermal equilib-
rium, and fσ1(r, v, t) account for first order terms. Additionally, all fields are expanded according
to eq. (2.28). The resulting linearised collisionless Boltzmann equation (also called the Vlasov
equation) reads
∂tfσ1(r, v, t) + v · ∇rfσ1(r, v, t) + qσ
mσ
[v × B0] · ∇vfσ1(r, v, t)
+ qσ
mσ
[E1(r, t) + v × B1(r, t)] · ∇vfσ0(r, v) = 0.
(2.40)
20
==PAGE:27==
As only the first order term f1 has a time dependence, the plasma current can be found by
J(r, t) =
Z
qσvf1(r, v, t)dv,
(2.41)
and under an assumption of a homogeneous plasma, elements of the conductivity tensor (eq. 2.23)
can be evaluated and the linear kinetic plasma waves can be evaluated using eq.
(2.23) with
Jnl = 0.
This is done in the three listed textbooks, and the resulting dispersion matrices are
very cumbersome. The kinetic version O- and X-mode both include damping at harmonics of the
EC resonance, and they behave physically at cutoffs. Additionally, several new wave modes are
produced. The wave of interest for this thesis is called the Electron Bernstein Wave (EBW), and
it turns out to be electrostatic in nature close to the UH resonance. In this region, the EBW can
be described in terms of a much simpler electrostatic kinetic theory. Being electrostatic means that
the electric field of the wave can be described in terms of the plasma potential E = −∇ϕ instead
of the electric field. Instead of the Maxwell equations, the governing equation for an electrostatic
wave is the Poisson equation
∇2ϕ(r, t) = −ρ(r, t)
ε0
,
(2.42)
where ϕ(r, t) is the electrostatic potential, and ρ(r, t) is the charge density. As in the treatment of
the plasma current, the charge density is divided into a linear term and a non-linear term
ρ(r, t) = ρl(r, t) + ρnl(r, t),
(2.43)
and the linear term can be expressed as a linear response to the applied electric field
ρ1(r, t) = −ε0k2
Z
χ (r, r′, t, t′) ϕ (r′, t′) dr′dt′,
(2.44)
where χ (r, r′, t, t′) is the linear electric susceptibility. For electrostatic waves χ is a scalar quantity,
whereas it is a second order tensor for electromagnetic waves. The assumption of a homogeneous
plasma reduces the electric susceptibility to χ (r −r′, t −t′), and the integral in eq. (2.44) turns
into a convolution integral that can be resolved in Fourier space. Taking the Fourier transform of
the Poison equation (2.42) yields the electrostatic wave equation
D(k, ω)ϕ(k, ω) =

χe(k, ω) + k2
ϕ(k, ω) = ρnl(k, ω)
ϵ0
,
(2.45)
where the dispersion function is D(k, ω) = χe(k, ω) + k2. The EBWs are linear wave modes, so
the RHS of eq. (2.45) is set equal zero. The dispersion function is related to the corresponding
dispersion matrix by [49]
D(k, ω) = k · D(k, ω) · k
ω2
= 0.
(2.46)
Evaluating the electric susceptibility requires working with the Vlasov equations 2.40 and is not
covered here.
Instead, the result is taken directly from the PhD thesis [49].
Here, the system
is significantly simplified by only including the electron response in the electric susceptibility and
thereby limiting the frequency range to ω ∼|ωce| ≫ωci. Another important note is that plasma
collisions are also included in the work of [49]. The resulting complex dispersion function is on the
form D(k, ˜ω) = D′(k, ˜ω) + iD′′(k, ˜ω), where D′, D′′ ∈R and |D′′| ≪|D′|. The real and imaginary
dispersion functions are
D′(k, ˜ω) = ℓ2
T ek4
⊥+ Sk2
⊥+ Pk2
∥−Re
 ˜ω2
c2
 S2 −D2
= 0
(2.47)
D′′ (k, ˜ω) = k2
⊥
ω2
pe
 ˜ω2 + ω2
ce

(˜ω2 −ω2ce)2
νei
˜ω +
ω2
pe˜ω
k∥
 v3
T e
e−˜ω2/(k2
∥v2
T e) −Im
 ˜ω2
c2
 S2 −D2
= 0,
(2.48)
21
==PAGE:28==
with vTe given in eq. (1.3), the characteristic thermal length scale ℓT e defined by
ℓ2
Te = 3
2
v2
Te
4ω2ce −˜ω2
ω2
pe
˜ω2 −ω2ce
,
(2.49)
and electron ion collision frequency νei given by [58]
νei =
21/2niZ2e4 ln Λ
12π3/2ϵ2
0m1/2
e
T 3/2
e
ln Λ = ln
12πnλ3
D
Z

λD =
r
ε0Te
nee2 .
(2.50)
The length λD is called the Debye length and gives a characteristic length scale over which the
electrons and ions in the plasma shield out external electric fields.
All wave frequencies ω are
marked with a tilde to denote that they are allowed to be complex and on the form ˜ω = ω + iγ ∈C
with |γ| ≪|ω|. The introduction of an imaginary part to the dispersion function gives rise to either
a dampening of the waves if Re(γ) < 0 or to an unstable exponential growth if Re(γ) > 0. The
imaginary part of the frequency, γ, can be calculated using the Cauchy-Riemann equation from the
field of complex analysis. For a function f(x, y) = u(x, y) + iv(x, y), for which x, y, u, v ∈R, it
holds that ∂xu = ∂yv and ∂yu = −∂xv. As |γ| ≪|ω|, D(k, ω + iγ) can be Taylor expanded around
γ = 0 to first order, yielding
0 = D(k, ω + iγ) ≈D(k, ω) + γ [∂γD′(k, ω) + i∂γD′′(k, ω)]
= D(k, ω) + γ [−∂ωD′′(k, ω) + i∂ωD′(k, ω)]
≈D(k, ω) + iγ∂ωD′(k, ω)
= D′(k, ω) + i[D′′(k, ω) + γ∂ωD′(k, ω)].
(2.51)
In the second line the Cauchy-Riemann equation is used, and in the third line the the term
∂ωD′′(k, ω) is removed because |D′′| ≪|D′|. As both the real and imaginary part of the equa-
tion must equal zero, it holds that
Γ (k, ω) = −γ = D′′ (k, ω)
∂ωD′(k, ω).
(2.52)
When Re(γ) < 0 and the wave is damped, which is usually the case, the function Γ (k, ωj) is the
linear damping rate of the wave. This quantity is important when considering PDI in chapter 3.
Returning to the real part of the dispersion relation, it is seen to have the two linearly independent
solutions
 k±
⊥
2 =
1
ℓ2
T e
S
2

1 ±
s
1 −
4Pk2
∥l2
T e
S2
+ 4ω2
c2
S2 −D2
S2
l2
T e

.
(2.53)
The solution k+
⊥is the EBW, whereas the solution k−
⊥is simply the warm branch of the X-mode.
The warm X-mode no longer diverges at the UH resonance. Instead, it converts linearly into the
EBW, when S2 = 4ℓ2
T e[Pk2
∥−(ω2/c2)(S2 −D2)], which is called the warm UH resonance (WUHR).
Figure 2.5 shows the dispersion relation of the two waves close to the UH resonance. The position
of the WUHR is density dependent and lies at slightly higher density and magnetic field than the
cold UH resonance. Because the two modes are solution to the same dispersion relation and convert
linearly into each other, they are both referred to as Upper Hybrid waves (UH waves). It should be
stressed that the electrostatic dispersion relation is only valid close to the UH resonance as shown
in [59]. An important feature of the electrostatic UH waves is that they are both longitudinal. This
is easily seen by considering the electrostatic electric field in Fourier space, which is on the form
E(k, ω) = −∇ϕ(k, ω) = iϕ(k, ω)k. The longitudinal nature of the EBW becomes rather intuitive
22
==PAGE:29==
when considering the mechanism of the wave. Close to the UH resonance, the EBW is mainly
propagating in the direction perpendicular to the B-field. The electrons in the plasma are gyrating
along the magnetic field lines, and the EBW is formed by a collective periodic motion of the gyrating
electrons. A very simplified picture is illustrated in figure 2.6. Another special feature of the EBW
is that it is a backwards propagating wave, meaning that k and vg = ∇kω have opposite signs.
This is easily seen by looking at the slope of the EBW in figure 2.5.
0
5
10
15
20
k [mm
1]
2.7
2.8
2.9
3.0
/
pe
Cold UH resonance
Cold X evanescent
Cold k
k
, Te = 10eV
k + , Te = 10eV
k
, Te = 100eV
k + , Te = 100eV
k
, Te = 1000eV
k + , Te = 1000eV
Figure 2.5: UH wave dispersion relation for different temperatures. Note that the value of ω/ωpe at
the position of the UH resonance is dependent on the magnetic field of the plasma. Here B0 = 1.1T.
The evanescent region (orange) is equivalent to the orange region in figure 2.4.
Figure 2.6: Illustration of simplified propagation mechanism for Electron Bernstein waves.
2.3.3
WKB Theory and Ray Tracing in an Inhomogeneous Plasma
Both the cold and kinetic linear waves described so far live in homogeneous plasmas, where the
eigenfunctions of the system are plane waves. No physical plasma is of course homogeneous, but
as shown here the solutions are still relevant within the approximation of a weakly inhomogeneous
plasma if treated properly. Linear plasma waves also exist in inhomogeneous plasmas. The diffi-
culty is that all coefficients in the governing linear differential equations gets a spatial and temporal
dependence. A great method for solving such differential equations in weakly inhomogeneous plas-
mas is the WKB approximation. First, what is meant by a weakly homogeneous plasma is that
the characteristic length scale of the variation of the plasma density Ln and background magnetic
field LB is long compared to the wavelength of the considered waves. Taking Ln ∼LB ≈L, this
condition is typically formulated as
kL ≈k |B|
|∇B| ≈k
n
|∇n| ≫1,
(2.54)
23
==PAGE:30==
and has to be satisfied for the WKB approximation to be applicable. The ansatz of the WKB
approximation is to look for solutions to the electric and magnetic field in the form
E(r, t) = E0(r, t)eEeiψ(r,t)
B(r, t) = B0(r, t)eBeiψ(r,t),
(2.55)
where eE, eB are polarization vectors, E0(r, t), B0(r, t) are slowly varying amplitude functions and
ψ(r, t) is called the eikonal, which can be thought of as the local phase of the waves. From the
eikonal, the local frequency and local wave vector are defined as
ω(r, t) = −∂ψ
∂t
k(r, t) = ∇ψ.
(2.56)
As long as the governing wave equation is linear, this ansatz can be used to derive a solution
along the characteristics of the wave equation, called rays. The idea is to insert the fields from eq.
(2.55) in the two Maxwell equations (2.16)-(2.17) and transform into Fourier space, exactly as when
treating the homogeneous waves. The resulting local wave equation is somewhat similar to the
homogeneous wave equation, but includes many extra terms, because of the extra r, t dependence
on the amplitude functions. Now, the weakly homogeneous plasma condition (eq. 2.54) allows an
expansion of the electric and magnetic field in orders of the small parameter (kL)−1 ≪1. As shown
in e.g. [55], the local wave equation to zeroth order in (kL)−1 reproduces the linear homogeneous
wave equation (2.25) and gives a local dispersion relation ω = ω(k, r, t). That the local dispersion
relation to lowest order reproduces the homogeneous dispersion relation is an intuitive result. But
the strength in this result comes from the definition of local frequency and wave vector in eq. (2.56).
First letting ω(r, t) →ω(r, k, t) from the local dispersion relation, and then taking the gradient of
the first equation of (2.56) and the temporal derivative of the second equation of (2.56), the two
can be combined to give
∂k
∂t + ∇kω(r, k, t) · ∇k = ∂k
∂t + vg · ∇k = dk
dt = −∇rω(r, k, t),
(2.57)
where the first equal sign uses vg = ∇kω(r, k, t). The total derivative after the second equal sign is
justified by the observation, that the equation gives the local change of k for an observer moving
with the group velocity. For this reason, eq. 2.57 is called the ray equation. Rather than evaluating
the entire wave, the wave is described as a ray, having a single position that evolves with the group
velocity. The physical framework describing ray propagation is known as geometrical optics. The
argument that makes the ray equation extremely useful is, that for any linear dispersion relation
D′(k, ω, r, t) = 0, it follows that
∂D′(k, ω, r, t)
∂r
= ∇rD′(k, ω, r, t) + ∂D′(k, ω, r, t)
∂ω
∇rω(r, k, t)
(2.58)
∂D′(k, ω, r, t)
∂k
= ∇kD′(k, ω, r, t) + ∂D′(k, ω, r, t)
∂ω
∇kω(r, k, t).
(2.59)
By isolating ∇rω(r, k, t) and ∇kω(r, k, t) in eqs. (2.58)-(2.59), the ray equation (eq. 2.57) can be
cast in the form
dr
ds =
1
|vg|
dr
dt = −
1
|∇kω(k, r, t)|
∇kD′(k, ω, r, t)
∂ωD′(k, ω, r, t) = −sgn
∂D′(k, ω, r, t)
∂ω
 ∇kD′(k, ω, r, t)
|∇kD′(k, ω, r, t)| (2.60)
dk
ds =
1
|vg|
dk
dt =
1
|∇kω(k, r, t)|
∇rD′(k, ω, r, t)
∂ωD′(k, ω, r, t) = sgn
∂D′(k, ω, r, t)
∂ω
 ∇rD′(k, ω, r, t)
|∇kD′(k, ω, r, t)|.
(2.61)
What these ray equations allow is to trace the propagation of the waves found in section 2.3.1
and 2.3.2 in a weakly inhomogeneous plasma! In larger magnetic confinement fusion devices, the
24
==PAGE:31==
assumptions of a weakly inhomogeneous plasma are found to be satisfied, and because of its low
computational cost ray tracing is the go-to tool for evaluating wave trajectories in magnetic confine-
ment machines. Throughout chapter 6, ray tracing will be employed using the code TORAY [60].
Additionally, the ray tracer Warmray 2 is used for a calibration procedure explained in chapter 5.
So far, only linear waves has been considered. But the WKB approximation is also a great starting
point for solving the nonlinear wave equation (2.24) in an inhomogeneous plasma.
The simple
approach of only including zeroth order terms in the wave equations is not sufficient to describe e.g.
phase variations [49]. To deal with the more complex problem of non-linear waves, a more general
approach is taken. To decrease the complexity of the problem, the number of degrees of freedom
of the problem must be limited. The only waves that are treated nonlinearly in this thesis are the
electrostatic upper hybrid waves of section 2.3.2 that are described by a the scalar wave equation
(2.45). To simplify the wave equation, the plasma is assumed to be stationary in time. In most
cases this is a good approximation, as the time scale of the plasma waves is typically much faster
than the time scale of plasma fluctuations. Additionally, the weak spatial inhomogeneity makes
the dispersion function strongly dependent on r −r′, but only weakly dependent on r −r′. In
(r, t)-space, the wave equation therefore reads
ρnl(r, t)
ϵ0
=
Z
all(r′,t′)
D (r −r′, r + r′, t −t′) ϕ (r′, t′) dr′dt′
(2.62)
with D having strongest dependence of the first and third argument. The WKB ansatz is to assume
that the solution of the electrostatic potential can be written as a superposition of a number of
WKB modes
ϕ (r, t) = Re
"X
n
An (r, t) eiψn(r,t)
#
.
(2.63)
where An (r, t) are slowly varying amplitude functions and ψn (r, t) are WKB eikonals of each mode
n, such that
ρnl(r, t)
ϵ0
= Re
"Z
all(r′,t′)
X
n
D (r −r′, r + r′, t −t′) An (r′, t′) eiψn(r′,t′)dr′dt′
#
.
(2.64)
As in the case of linear waves, the next step is to expand the wave equation. The weak inhomogeneity
of the plasma allows An (r′, t′) to be Taylor expanded around (r, t) and D (r −r′, r + r′, t −t′) to be
Taylor expanded around D (r −r′, r, t −t′). This is done in [61, 49], and it is argued that a second
order expansion is sufficient to model PDI with trapped daughter waves. The general expansion is
not carried out here, but the result in a specific system is shown in section 3.2.1.
25
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3
Parametric Decay Instability
As briefly mentioned in section 1.4, the parametric decay instability (PDI) is a second-order non-
linear three-wave interaction between a pump wave and two daughter waves. Due to its parametric
nature, the decay must satisfy
¯hω0 = ¯hω1 + ¯hω2,
¯hk0 = ¯hk1 + ¯hk2,
(3.1)
where the index 0 is for the pump wave, 1, 2 for the two daughter waves, and ωi, ki are the angular
frequency and wave vector of each wave. In realistic scenarios, both the pump wave and the two
daughter waves must all be linear plasma modes. Thus, an additional constraint is that each of
the waves satisfy the linear dispersion relation (eq. 2.24). The theory of second-order parametric
three wave interactions is fairly well understood in both acoustic systems and in optical crystals. In
optical crystals, the material response to an electromagnetic wave is described in terms of an induced
polarization P, which is related to the external electric field through the electric susceptibility χ.
The typical approach is the expand the response response in a perturbation series on the form
P(t) = Pl(t) + Pnl(t) = ε0

χ(1)E(t) + χ(2)E(t)E∗(t) + χ(3)E(t)E∗(t)E(t) + . . .

,
(3.2)
where χ(n) is a tensor of rank n+1. To model for second-order non-linearity, the perturbation series
is truncated, giving
Pnl(t) = χ(2)E(t)E∗(t).
(3.3)
In many optical crystals there are several symmetries that reduce the amount of tensor elements in
χ(2), and the problem can be fully solved analytically in Fourier space [62]. As has been shown in
chapter 2, the optical properties of a magnetised inhomogeneous plasma are complicated. Instead
of the induced polarization P, the material response is described in terms of the induced current J,
or for electrostatic waves the induced charge density ρ. In addition, several assumptions are made
to obtain manageable dispersion relations.
The consequence is that solutions to the non-linear
wave equation in plasmas are less elegant than in optical crystals and typically only applies to very
specific systems.
The specific PDI covered in this thesis is that of an X-mode pump wave into two trapped upper
hybrid waves in a cavity formed by a non-monotonic density profile. The analysis of the PDI follows
the model that was first presented in the two journal articles [63, 31] and later covered in the PhD
thesis [49] and where the model was also applied to estimate the power threshold of parametric
decays in the tokamak ASDEX Upgrade. Since then the model has been expanded upon, and one
of the latest versions is found in [64]. The starting point of the model is a WKB expansion of
26
==PAGE:33==
the non-linear wave equation in eq. (2.64), and all the linear wave modes are described with the
electrostatic kinetic theory presented in section 2.3.2. Both [49] and [37] show reasonable agreement
between the model and experimental results. Before PDI with trapped daughter waves is covered in
section 3.2, the different possibilities of PDI in a tokamak plasma are quickly summarised in section
3.1.
3.1
Absolute and Convective Parametric Instabilities in Toka-
maks
Parametric decay instabilities can be classified as either absolute instabilities, that grow exponen-
tially, or convective instabilities that have a finite amplification. This classification is important
in order to understand the nature of the decay. To illuminate the different types of PDI, the PDI
mechanism will here be covered in three types of plasmas. The exact same behaviour could also be
identified in corresponding optical systems.
The simplest possible system is that of a homogeneous plasma. For PDI to occur in a homogeneous
plasma, the selection rules (eq. 3.1) must be satisfied everywhere. Therefore, if a PDI was to occur
in a homogeneous system, it would grow exponentially until the pump wave was depleted. This
type of instability is absolute. Evaluating whether a PDI occurs requires a solution of the non-linear
wave equation (2.64). This can be done using first order Taylor expansions of D, An. The steps in
the expansion and solution are not carried out here, but the result quickly summarized. If each of
the three waves are assumed to be on the form of a single WKB mode, and the temporal evolution
of the amplitude of the daughter waves to have the proportionality A1, A2 ∝eγt, the solution can
be cast as [65, 49]
γ = ±
s
ν12ν∗
21 |E0|2 +
Γ1 −Γ2
2
2
−Γ1 + Γ2
2
,
(3.4)
where |E0| is the amplitude of the pump wave, γ1, γ2 are the damping coefficients of each of the
daughter waves, given by eq. (2.52), and ν12, ν∗
21 are nonlinear coupling factors. The coupling
factors are a measure of how well the daughter waves couple to the pump wave and requires a
description of the nonlinear current density to evaluate. The factor γ is called the growth rate
of the PDI. From the proportionality A1, A2 ∝eγt it is evident, that for Re(γ) < 0 the daughter
waves are damped faster than they are generated meaning that the PDI cannot occur, whereas if
one of the roots has Re(γ) > 0 an absolute instability with exponential growth is initiated. Thus,
the requirement for an unstable PDI to occur can be cast as a threshold for the amplitude of the
electric field of the pump wave
Eth
0
 that must be surpassed, i.e.
|E0| >
Eth
0
 =
s
Γ1Γ2
ν12ν∗
21
.
(3.5)
Though the example of a homogeneous plasma is nonphysical, many of the key features and the
idea of a power threshold also applies to more complicated systems.
27
==PAGE:34==
(a) Convective PDI with escaping daughter waves.
(b) Absolute PDI with trapped daughter waves.
Figure 3.1: Illustration of a PDI where a pump (k0, ω0) wave decays into two daughter waves
(k1, ω1),(k2, ω2) inside a finite decay region.
In (a) the daughter waves are excited from their
thermal level inside the decay region and then escapes, resulting in a convective PDI. In (b) the
daughter waves return to the decay region, which gives rise to an absolute PDI.
Next, consider the case of a weakly inhomogeneous plasma with a monotonic change in external
B-field and plasma density. The system shares many features with a homogeneous plasma, but for
a given set of three linear waves that can interact, the phase matching conditions (eq. 3.1) are only
satisfied in a finite spatial region, called the decay region. If a pump wave undergoes PDI within the
decay region, the two daughter waves are amplified from their thermal level to a new higher, but
finite level. The idea is illustrated in figure 3.1a. If the wavenumber mismatch between the three
waves is defined as ∆k ≡|k0 −k1 −k2|, then the characteristic length of the decay region is given
by Ld = |d∆k/ds|−1/2, where ds is an infinitesimal element along the direction of propagation.
Within the decay region, the solution for the growth rate in eq. (3.4) is still valid, but if the finite
amplification is minuscule, the decay is of little interest. Instead, the choice of defining quantity is
the gain, G, given
Gj = ln |Aj,out|2
|Aj,in|2 ,
(3.6)
where Aj,in and Aj,out are the amplitude of the respective daughter wave just before and after
passing the decay region. It should be noted that G1 = G2 = G. A well known result is that the
gain through a finite region with amplification can be written as [20]
G =
2πγ2L2
d
|vg,1svg,2s|,
(3.7)
with vg,1s, vg,2s being the group velocity of the two daughter waves in the direction along the path
s and γ given in eq. (3.4). The typical choice of gain threshold to mark the onset of a parametric
decay is Gth = 2π. Substituting γ from equation (3.4) into eq. (3.7) and setting G > Gth = 2π
yields
|E0| >
Eth
0
 =
s
[(ν12ν∗
21)2|vg,1s/Ld||vg,2s/Ld|(Γ1 + Γ2)2]
1
2 + ν12ν∗
21 (Γ1Γ2 + |vg,1s/Ld||vg,2s/Ld|)
(ν12ν∗
21)2
≈
s
|vg,1s/Ld||vg,2s/Ld|
ν12ν∗
21
.
(3.8)
28
==PAGE:35==
In the last result Γ1, Γ2 are both set to zero. The justification is, that convective losses |vg,js/Ld|
play a much larger role than damping of the waves Γj. The threshold in inhomogeneous plasmas
(eq. 3.8) is very similar to the threshold in homogeneous plasmas (eq. 3.5), but with a much faster
loss mechanism.
Convective PDIs in weakly inhomogeneous plasmas are not just a thought experiment, but a heavily
studied phenomenon. The most studied PDI is the decay of a pump X-mode into an EBW and
an ion wave when the X-mode approaches the fundamental UH resonance. The theory has been
studied thoroughly since the 1960s [66], and the decay has been observed in multiple tokamaks, e.g.
[23, 67, 68]. Due to the energy transfer directly from the pump wave to an ion wave, this decay has
recently been suggested as a possible method of heating ions directly using an EC beam.
As a final example, a weakly inhomogeneous plasma with a finite decay region is considered again,
but in a case relevant to the phenomenon studied in this thesis. This time, the daughter waves are
able to return to the decay region as illustrated in figure 3.1b. The consequences for the decay are
very significant. Even if the gain (eq. 3.7) is orders of magnitude below the typical choice of gain
threshold of 2π, the instability will grow as long as long as the gain of the daughter waves inside the
decay region is larger than the damping and losses experienced by the daughter waves until their
return to the decay region. Thus, PDIs with a weak non-linear coupling between the linear wave
modes can occur under the right conditions. And contrary to convective PDIs with a single passing
of the decay region, this class of PDIs are absolute, meaning that they continue to grow until the
pump wave is depleted or other mechanisms set in. What happens after the primary PDI decay is
not well understood, but a possible explanation is covered in section 3.2.2. There could exist several
mechanisms that would allow the daughter waves to return to the decay region. The phenomenon
studied in the decay of an X-mode into two UH waves that are trapped due to a non-monotonic
density profile.
3.2
PDI in Plasmas with a Non-monotonic Density Profile
The low threshold PDI that is considered in this thesis is a decay of a pump X-wave into two UH
waves. The decay can occur during X-2 ECRH in tokamaks. In an X-2 heating process, a gyrotron
is launching an X-mode from the low field side (LFS) of the tokamak towards the central plasma.
The gyrotron is polarized such that it excites an X-mode when the vacuum beam reaches the edge
of the plasma, and the frequency of the gyrotron beam is tuned to match the the second harmonic
of the EC frequency ωce close the centre of the plasma core. As briefly explained in section 2.3.1
and as is evident form the CMA diagram in figure 2.4, the X-beam passes the second harmonic
UH resonance on its way to the plasma centre. The X-beam is unaffected by the passing of the
second harmonic UH resonance as long as the density profile is monotonically increasing towards
the plasma centre. But if the density profile temporarily increases non-monotonically with a bump
at slightly lower density than the second harmonic UH resonance, there is is a chance that two new
2nd harmonic UH resonances appear around the density bump. UH waves with half the frequency
of the pump X-beam can propagate in the region between these two 2nd harmonic UH resonances,
while the region around the resonances is evanescent for the daughter waves. To illustrate this idea,
figure 3.2 shows the dispersion relation of an UH wave (eq. 2.53) inside a Gaussian density profile.
For simplicity, the system is taken to be 1 dimensional. On each side of the peak density, there
is an evanescent region between the warm UH resonance and the R = 0 cutoff. Between the two
evanescent regions both the X-mode and EBW can propagate in each direction, giving a total of
four allowed modes. At the UH resonance, there is a linear conversion between each of the two
X-modes and the corresponding EBWs. Because the X-mode is a forward propagating wave, while
the EBW is a backwards propagating wave, the four modes form two connected wave pairs. In the
29
==PAGE:36==
rest of this, the phrase ”trapped UH wave” refers to such a wave pair. In one dimension, where
convective losses and diffraction losses are not considered, the energy of each trapped UH wave is
confined inside the cavity between the two resonances.
Figure 3.2: Dispersion relation of UH waves inside a Gaussian density profile. The propagation
is taken to be in the x direction, such that ky = kz = 0, and a background magnetic field of
|B0| = 1.1T is pointing in the z direction. The dispersion relation is given by equation (2.53) with
Te = 300eV.
With this example in mind, it follows that a parametric decay of a pump X-wave into two approx-
imately half frequency daughter UH waves at a position with a density bump around the second
harmonic UH resonance can result in both the daughter waves being trapped. This trapping can
give rise to an absolute PDI if a certain power level is surpassed. How many directions the trapping
mechanism applies to and which loss mechanisms are dominating depends on the dimensionality of
the density bump.
The following section presents a WKB model that describe a PDI where a pump X-mode decays into
two trapped UH waves at exactly half the pump frequency. In the model the plasma is assumed to be
inhomogeneous only in the X-direction. This model is adequate for modelling PDI in relation with
ELMs and magnetic islands, because both of these phenomena have elongated density perturbations
with a large inhomogeneity in the x-direction. In the case of PDI occurrence due to turbulent density
fluctuations in the SOL however, the trapping region is localized in two dimensions. Due to the
time limitation of this project, the model in section 3.2.1 will also be applied to these types of
fluctuations in section 6.3.
3.2.1
PDI with Trapped Daughter Waves in a 1d Non-monotonic Density
Profile
This section presents an analytical model describing the PDI of an X-beam (k0, ω0) into two trapped
UH waves (k1, ω1),(k2, ω2) with a one dimensional trapping region. The system is described using a
Cartesian coordinate system with x pointing in the direction of −∇B and z pointing in the direction
of B as depicted in figure 3.3. This system is convenient for modelling phenomena in the poloidal
30
==PAGE:37==
cross section of a tokamak plasma. It should be noted, however, that in the case of a tokamak, the
magnetic field would also have components in the y and z direction due to the plasma current.
Figure 3.3: Employed coordinate system. The dotted circle is a rough representation of the poloidal
cross section of a tokamak plasma profile.
To reduce the complexity of the model, the pump wave is restricted to propagation in the x direction.
This reduces the parametric selection rules (eq. 3.1) to
k0x = k±
1x + k±
2x
0 = k±
1y + k±
2y
0 = k1z + k2z.
(3.9)
Furthermore, the density profile is taken to be non-monotonic only in the x direction. If a trapping
region occurs due to a density bump close to the second harmonic UH resonance, this gives rise
to a one-dimensional trapping region with possible losses in both the y direction and z direction.
Even with a one-dimensional trapping region, figuring out which daughter waves will be excited
is not a trivial task. The selection rules can be satisfied for an infinite amount of trapped pairs
of UH waves with two slightly different frequencies adding up to the pump frequency. The power
threshold of each of these possible decays is different, and the decay with the lowest threshold,
and thereby largest growth rate, will dominate. The choice in this thesis is to follow the simple
assumption of the PhD thesis [49] that only a single decay occurs in which the two daughter UH
waves have an identical frequency ω1 = ω2 = ω0/2. It is not by any means given that this decay has
the lowest power threshold. Fully kinetic Particle In Cell (PIC) simulations suggests that the two
daughter waves will have slightly different frequencies [35]. Additionally, the new measurements of
PDI occurring in the TCV tokamak that are presented in chapter 6 suggests that typical PDI decays
create daughter waves with slightly different frequencies. The reason for the crude approximation
of ω1 = ω2 = ω0/2 is that it simplifies the calculations significantly.
With all of these assumptions in mind, an example of the type of PDI that is considered is shown
in figure 3.4. The small bump in the otherwise monotonically increasing density profile gives rise to
two additional second harmonic UH resonances that form a 1d trapping region. For a PDI to occur
in the trapping region, equation (3.9) must be satisfied, and this happens in two different localized
decay regions. The figure illustrates this graphically by plotting the dispersion relations for k±
1x and
k±
2x as well as k0x −k±
2x. The phase matching condition is satisfied where the UH wave pair k±
1x
crosses the UH wave pair k0x −k±
2x at the positions marked with green circles in the figure. The
two decay regions have a small spatial span around these two positions. Both of the two parametric
decays are seen to generate an EBW with positive kx and a warm X-mode with negative kx. In
other words, there are two possible parametric decays, both with k0x = k+
1x + k−
2x. As explained in
section 3.2, the two daughter waves produced in each of the two parametric decays go on to form
two trapped UH wave pairs because of the linear conversion between the EBW and warm X-mode
at the WUHR. Because ω1 = ω2 = ω0/2 is assumed for both decays, the daughter waves of both
decays satisfy the same dispersion relations, and hence the two parametric decays are treated as
one decay moving on.
31
==PAGE:38==
0.800
0.825
0.850
0.875
0.900
0.925
0.950
0.975
1.000
x [m]
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
ne [1019 m
3]
k0x [104 m
1]
k +
1x [104 m
1]
k1x [104 m
1]
k +
2x [104 m
1]
k2x [104 m
1]
k0x
k +
2x [104 m
1]
k0x
k2x [104 m
1]
Phase match
2nd harmonic WUHR
2nd harmonic R=0 cutoff
Daughter waves evanescent
Trapping region
Figure 3.4: A constant background magnetic field of |B0| = 1.1T is pointing in the z direction. The
X pump wave is modelled with the cold dispersion relation in eq. (2.35), and the dispersion relation
of the UH waves is given in equation (2.53) with Te = 300eV.
As of now, the solution to the non-linear wave equation (eq. 2.24) into trapped waves haven’t been
touched upon. The remainder of this section is devoted to presenting an analytical solution. The
derivation in this thesis follows closely the derivation in the PhD thesis [49]. However, instead
of using the fluid description of the induced non-linear current that is applied in [49], this thesis
uses the slightly different approximate kinetic description derived in [64]. Additionally, some of
the assumptions in this thesis differ slightly from the ones used in [49].
Several equations will
referenced directly from [49] and [64]. While most of the lengthy algebraic calculations are left out
of this thesis, all of the equations that are directly used in the analytical solution are presented
here. For a full derivation, the reader is encouraged to read [49].
This model is only meant for describing the initial transient period of the PDI. What happens later
is briefly discussed in section 3.2.2 and in chapter 7. In the beginning of the PDI, the power of the
pump wave is much stronger than the power of the daughter waves. Therefore, the pump wave is
assumed to be non-depleted. What this allows is to only consider the non-linear induced charge
density responsible for amplifying each of the two daughter waves and write ρnl ≈ρ1,nl +ρ2,nl. This
approximation simplifies the math significantly.
The starting point of solving the non-linear wave equation is to describe the three waves with
a WKB approximation, which leads to the form og the non-linear wave equation in eq. (2.64).
This is a general equation, where waves propagating in arbitrary directions are decomposed into a
superposition of WKB modes. For waves propagating in the x direction, the eikonals of the WKB
modes are on the form
ψn =
Z x
kn,xdx′ + kn,yy + kn,zz −ωnt.
(3.10)
As the daughter waves from the PDI are assumed to be monochromatic with kx determined by their
dispersion relation, it is natural to describe each daughter wave as a single WKB mode ϕj(r, t) =
Re{Aj(r, t) exp[iψj(r, t)]}, each with an associated non-linear induced charge density ρj,nl, where
32
==PAGE:39==
j ∈1, 2 is indexing the daughter waves. In that case the wave equation (2.64) simplifies significantly.
Taylor expanding Aj (r′, t′) around (r, t) and Dj (r −r′, r + r′, t −t′) around Dj (r −r′, r, t −t′) and
including terms up to second order, the wave equation takes the form [49]
ieiψj


D′′
j
q
∂D′
j/∂kx
aj +
 ∂D′
j/∂ω

q
∂D′
j/∂kx
∂aj
∂t −
X
i=y,z


 ∂D′
j/∂ki

q
∂D′
j/∂kx
∂aj
∂i +
 ∂2D′
j/∂k2
i

2
q
∂D′
j/∂kx
∂2aj
∂i2



= ρj,nl
ϵ0
,
(3.11)
where Aj(r, t) = aj(r, t)/
q
∂Dj(k, x, ω)/∂kx|kx=kx(x) has been introduced. All arguments are left
out for readability, but it should be noted that Dj = Dj(k, x, ω), and all other functions (ψj, aj, ρj,nl)
are defined in real space with arguments (r, t). The wave equation (3.11) is valid for describing each
of the produced daughter waves. However, to describe the entire process of the absolute PDI, it
is important to include loss terms not only for the two produced daughter waves, but for the two
UH wave pairs that live in the trapping region. Each of the UH wave pairs can be treated as a
superposition of two WKB modes with the same slowly varying amplitude function Cj(y, z, t), i.e.
φj(r, t) = Re


Cj(y, z, t)


eiψ+
j (x)
q
∂D′+
j /∂kx
+
eiψ−
j (x)
q
∂D′−
j /∂kx




,
(3.12)
where ± refers to the two solutions of the UH wave equation (2.53). Having in mind that for each
of the two UH wave pairs, only one of the waves is generated in a nonlinear decay, while the other
is a linearly generated wave, the non-linear wave equation governing each UH wave pair φj is
i


D′′+
j
eiψ+
j
q
∂D′+
j /∂kx
+
D′′
j eiψ−
j
q
∂D′−
j /∂kx

Cj + i


 ∂D′+
j /∂ω

eiψ+
j
q
∂D′+
j /∂kx
+
 ∂D′−
j /∂ω

eiψ−
j
q
∂D′−
j /∂kx

∂Cj
∂t
−
X
i=y,z


i


 ∂D′+
j /∂ki

eiψ+
j
q
∂D′+
j /∂kx
+
 ∂D′−
j /∂ki

eiψ−
j
q
∂D′
j/∂kx

∂Cj
∂i
+


 ∂2D′+
j /∂k2
i

eiψ+
j
2
q
∂D′+
j /∂kx
+
 ∂2D′−
j /∂k2
i

eiψ−
j
2
q
∂D′−
j /∂kx

∂2Cj
∂i2


= ρj,nl
ϵ0
(3.13)
The next natural step is to integrate the wave equation over the entire trapping region. Before
integrating, both sides of eq. (3.13) are multiplied by e−θ+
j /
q
∂D′+
j /∂kx
∗
+e−θ−
j /
q
∂D′−
j /∂kx
∗
,
which gives rise to the wave equation
iΓCj + i∂Cj
∂t + ivg,jy
∂Cj
∂y + ivg,jz
∂Cj
∂z −Λy
∂2Cj
∂y2 −Λz
∂2Cj
∂z2 =
Pj,nl
⟨∂Dj/∂ω⟩
(3.14)
The averaged quantities are defined by
⟨f(kjx)⟩= 1
Nj
Z xr
xl
"f(kjx)|kjx=k+
jx
∂D′+
j /∂kx

+
f(kjx)|kjx=k−
jx
∂D′−
j /∂kx

#
dx,
(3.15)
where
Nj =
Z xr
xl
 
1
∂D′+
j /∂kx
 +
1
∂D′−
j /∂kx

!
dx.
(3.16)
33
==PAGE:40==
The quantities Pj,nl are nonlinear coupling factors given by
P1,nl =
1
ϵ0N1
Z xr
xl
ρ1,nl(r, t)e−iψ+
1
p
∂D′
1/∂kx
∗dx
P2,nl =
1
ϵ0N2
Z xr
xl
ρ2,nl(r, t)e−iψ−
2
p
∂D′
2/∂kx
∗dx,
(3.17)
and the three remaining coefficients are given
Γj =

D′′
j


∂D′
j/∂ω

vg,ji = −

∂D′
j/∂ki


∂D′
j/∂ω

Λji =

∂2D′
j/∂k2
i

2

∂D′
j/∂ω

i ∈y, z.
(3.18)
The parameter Γj is the averaged damping coefficient (compare with eq. 2.52), vg,ji are averaged
components of the group velocities of the daughter waves in the y and z direction, and Λji are the
averaged diffraction coefficients of the daughter waves in the y and z direction. For ω1 = ω2 = ω0/2,
the only difference between the dispersion functions is the sign, so Γ1 = Γ2 = Γ and Λ1z = Λ2z = Λz.
By also considering the phase matching conditions (eq. 3.9), it follows that vg,1y = −vg,2y = vgy
and vg,1z = −vg,2z = vgz.
A quantity not accounted for so far is the non-linear induced current density ρnl. A proper de-
scription of the daughter waves requires a kinetic description of ρnl. If only the onset of the PDI is
considered, [64] finds the following approximation to the kinetic description of the induced current
density within the WKB approximation
ρ1,nl(r, t)
ε0
= −

χ(a)
e (r, t, ω1)
∗
E∗
0y(r, t)φ2(r, t)
2B
(3.19)
ρ2,nl(r, t)
ε0
= −

χ(a)
e (r, t, ω2)
∗
E∗
0y(r, t)φ1(r, t)
2B
,
(3.20)
where χ(a)
e
is the kinetic electron susceptibility in real space, approximately given by
χ(a)
e (r, t, ω) ≈−
ω2
peω2
ceω0k+
1xk−
2xk0x
4 (ω2
0 −ω2ce) (ω2 −ω2ce)2

7 + 3 D (ω0, x) ω0
S (ω0, x) ωce
−4ω2
ce
ω2
0

.
(3.21)
S(ω, x) and D(ω, x) are Stix coefficients given in eq.
(2.33).
E0y(r, t) is the amplitude of the
electric field of the pump X beam. The expression for the amplitude of the E-field if a Gaussian
beam in vacuum (eq. 1.15) can be generalized to a medium (here a plasma) with a geometric optics
approximation. This gives [67]
|E0y|(x, y, z) = |E0(x, 0, 0)| e−(y2+z2)2/W 2(s),
(3.22)
with
|E0y(x, 0, 0)|=
s
8P(x)
πϵ0W 2(x) |∂ωj(k, x)/∂k|k=k(x) e∗(x) · ∂{H[D(k(x), ω)]/ω}/∂ω|ω=ωj · e(x),
(3.23)
where e(x) is the polarization vector of the wave, and H refers to the Hermitian part of the dispersion
function. Because the pump beam is far away from the UH resonance and EC resonance, it can be
described with the cold plasma dispersion relation (eq. 2.35), and the dispersion function D(k, ω)
given by eq. (2.46). The cold dispersion funciton is Hermitian. The fraction of the injected gyrotron
power that is absorbed in the plasma before the pump beam passes the decay region is insignificant,
34
==PAGE:41==
so P(x) can simply be taken to be equal to the injected power P(x) = P0. The fact that the pump
X wave is polarized in the y direction follows from eq. (2.36), because the wave is far away from
the primary UH resonance. After inserting eq. (3.20) into the two nonlinear coupling coefficients
(eq. 3.17), the two couples wave equations for the daughter waves can be put on the form
iΓC1 + i∂C1
∂t + ivgy
∂C1
∂y + ivgz
∂C1
∂z −Λy
∂2C1
∂y2 −Λz
∂2C1
∂z2 = γ12(y, z)C∗
2
(3.24)
−iΓC∗
2 −i∂C∗
2
∂t + ivgy
∂C∗
2
∂y + ivgz
∂C∗
2
∂z −Λy
∂2C∗
2
∂y2 −Λz
∂2C∗
2
∂z2
= γ∗
21(y, z)C1
(3.25)
with non-linear coupling coefficients
γ12(y, z) ≈−
ω0
8N1 ⟨∂D′
1/∂ω⟩
" Z xr
xl
E0y(x, y, z)
B(0)
ω2
peω2
cek0k+
1xk−
2x
(ω2
0 −ω2ce) (ω2
1 −ω2ce) (ω2
2 −ω2ce)
×7 + 3ω0D(ω0, x)/[ωceS(ω0, x)] −4ω2
ce/ω2
0
q
∂D′+
1 /∂kx
∗p
∂D′
2 −/∂kx
∗
ei
R x(k0−k+
1x−k−
2x)dx′dx

(3.26)
γ∗
21(y, z) ≈−
ω0
8N2 ⟨∂D′
2/∂ω⟩
"Z xr
xl
E∗
0y(x, y, z)
B(0)
ω2
peω2
cek0k+
1xk−
2x
(ω2
0 −ω2ce) (ω2
1 −ω2ce) (ω2
2 −ω2ce)
×7 + 3ω0D(ω0, x)/[ωceS(ω0, x)] −4ω2
ce/ω2
0
q
∂D′+
1 /∂kx
q
∂D′−
2 /∂kx
e−i
R x(k0−k+
1x−k−
2x)dx′dx


(3.27)
The last thing that has to be considered is the specific solution to the dispersion relation of the two
UH daughter waves. Even after restricting the pump wave propagation to the x direction, leading
to the specific phase matching conditions in eq. (3.9) and assuming ω1 = ω2 = ω0/2, the dispersion
relation for the UH waves (eq. 2.47-2.48) remains ambiguous. This is because k1, k2 ∈C3, so
there are spatial degrees of freedom that still have to be determined. This is done by considering
the constraints on the two daughter waves to each form a trapped UH wave pair. Each of the
two trapped UH wave pairs continuously obtains a phase shift as it propagates forth and back
in the trapping region. In order for the waves to interfere constructively with themselves, their
phase must be unchanged up to a factor of 2π after a full round trip in the cavity. In each mode
conversion, the waves get an additional phase shift of −π/2 , giving rise to a phase shift of −π
after a completed round trip with two mode conversions. For ω1 = ω2 = ω/2, the condition for
constructive interference can be written as
I
k · dr =
Z xr
xl
 k+
1x
 −
k−
1x

dx =
Z xr
xl
 k+
2x
 −
k−
2x

dx = (2m + 1)π,
m ∈Z,
(3.28)
where xl and xr are the left and right turning point of the waves, i.e. the positions of the two 2nd
harmonic warm UH resonances. Equation (3.28) is known as the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization
rule. The parametric decay that has the lowest power threshold is going to be the one that has the
lowest convective losses and diffraction losses in the y direction and z direction for the daughter
waves compared to the nonlinear coupling coefficients (eq. 3.26-3.27). As the daughter waves are
only trapped in the x direction, it is natural to assume that the parametric decay with lowest
possible threshold produces is one that satisfies the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization rule (eq. 3.28)
with the largest possible |k1x| and |k2x|. Increasing k1y and k1z generally increases the integral
R xr
xl
 k+
1x
 −
k−
1x

dx. Therefore a clever algorithm for computing k+
1x and k−
2x is to find the lowest
35
==PAGE:42==
integer value m that solves
Z xr
xl
 |k+
1x|−|k−
1x|
 
(k1y<k1z=0)dx > (2m + 1)π,
(3.29)
and minimize the difference between the RHS anf LHS of the inequality by increasing k1y and/or
k1z. This idea is very similar to the algorithm suggested in [49] section 4.3.1, but with a different
inequality.
After this step, there is only one degree of freedom left in the system.
Should k1y
or k1z be increased to minimize the difference? In any real systems, both k1y and k1z are finite.
Figuring out the relation between k1y and k1z is a rather complicated optimization problem. Here,
the approach is to solve the coupled wave equations for both k1y = 0 and k1z = 0 respectively and
evaluate the resulting power thresholds. The solution that gives the lowest power threshold of the
two will be the one best describing the real system, and the other can be scrapped.
With a numerical implementation, the two coupled non-linear wave equations (3.24-3.25) can now be
solved. But in order to gain a better understanding of the physics in the equations, it is sensible to
make further approximations in order to simplify the system and make an analytical expression for
the power threshold. This is done for a very similar system of equations in [49]. Here, the first step is
to approximate the Gaussian distribution of the pump wave intensity in eq. (3.22) with a quadratic
uniform distribution following e−(y2+z2)/W 2 →Θ(y)Θ (2L −y) Θ (z + L) Θ (L −z), where Θ are
Heaviside step functions, L =
p
π/8W, and W is the width of the Gaussian distribution. From
here the key is to evaluate which loss processes are dominating for the given problem. In most
cases, the convective losses in the y and x directions will dominate over diffraction losses. In other
words, |vy∂C1/∂y| /
Λz∂2C1/∂z2 ∼|vz∂C1/∂z| /
Λy∂2C1/∂y2 ≫1. If all diffraction losses are set
to zero, then following the same analytic method as [49] gives the two possible power thresholds
P th
0

k1y=0 ≈Γ2 + [πvz/(4Lz)]2
γref
12 (0, 0)γref
21 (0, 0)P ref
0
P th
0

k1z=0 ≈Γ2 + [πvy/(4Ly)]2
γref
12 (0, 0)γref
21 (0, 0)P ref
0 ,
(3.30)
of which only the lowest one is considered. The quantity P ref
0
can be picked at random, but should
also be used to calculate the amplitude of the electric field in eq. (3.23), i.e. P(x) = P ref
0 . In that
way, it cancels in the expressions for the power threshold. In the opposite limit, where diffraction
losses dominate over convective losses, |vy∂C1/∂y| /
Λz∂2C1/∂z2 ∼|vz∂C1/∂z| /
Λy∂2C1/∂y2 ≪
1, the convective losses are set to zero. If further, the diffraction losses ar assumed to be dominated
by either diffraction in the y direction of on the z direction, the two resulting power thresholds are
given by
P th
0

Λz=0 = Γ2 +

Λy/
 2L2
y
2
γref
12 (0, 0)γref ∗
21
(0, 0)P ref
0
P th
0

Λy=0 = Γ2 +

Λz/
 2L2
z
2
γref
12 (0, 0)γref ∗
21
(0, 0)P ref
0
.
(3.31)
In all four solutions, the product of the two nonlinear coupling coefficients evaluated at (y, z) = (0, 0)
is given
γ12(0, 0)γ∗
21(0, 0) =
ω2
0
64N 2
1 ⟨∂D′
1/∂ω⟩2

Z xr
xl
E0y(x, 0, 0)
B(0)
ω2
peω2
cek0
k+
1x
 k−
1x

(4ω2
1 −ω2ce) (ω2
1 −ω2ce)2
× 7 + 3ω0D(ω0, x)/[ωceS(ω0, x)] −4ω2
ce/ω2
0
q
∂D′+
1 /∂kx
q
∂D′−
1 /∂kx
ei
R x
xl(k0+|k−
1x|−|k+
1x|)dx′
dx

2
.
(3.32)
The best estimate of the power threshold is found by comparing the lowest of the two thresholds
in equation (3.30) with the largest of the two thresholds in equation (3.31) and picking the larger
36
==PAGE:43==
one of the two.
Because of the sometimes crude approximations that are made to obtain the
four expressions, this approach is only meant to give an approximate threshold. If a more precise
threshold is to be found, the optimization problem of finding the correct k1x and k1y should first
be solved, after which the wave equations in eq. (3.24-3.25) could be solved numerically without
neglecting any loss processes. In the rest of this thesis, only the approximate solution is applied.
3.2.2
Secondary parametric decays
The model presented in section 3.2.1 describes the trapping mechanism in a low threshold PDI of a
pump wave polarized in X-mode into two approximately half frequency daughter waves. As a final
result, the model calculates the power threshold for the onset of such a parametric decay. But the
onset of the parametric decay is only half the story. Having an understanding for what happens
after the initial decay is crucial when it comes to considering the implications of the parametric
decays in the plasma. As is shown in the paper [35], both kinetic Particle-in-Cell (PIC) simulations
and a analytical models (slightly more complicated than the one presented in the previous section)
agree when it comes to describing the initial parametric decay into two trapped UH waves. However,
numerical and analytical models don’t agree in the description of what happens after the primary
decay. And as of now, no experimental observations have managed to make direct observations
of secondary parametric decays, although observations in [36] indicate possible tertiary parametric
decays, and observations in [37] show signs of possible tertiary 4-wave interactions.
What both the analytical model, numerical model and the observations have in common is the idea
that the initial parametric decay is not the only non-linear wave decay happening. Because of the
trapping mechanism that give rise to the first parametric decay, the intensity of the trapped UH
daughter waves quickly get large in the cavity. As the pump can be assumed to be non-depleted for
the typical gyrotron powers used in tokamaks, the amplitude of the trapped UH waves continue to
increase until they either manage to escape the cavity by some means or get strong enough to initiate
a secondary non-linear parametric decay instability. There has been several speculations as to which
waves are interacting in the secondary decay. Both leading analytical models and observations find
indications that the secondary decay comprises the EBW branch of a trapped UH wave as a pump
wave that decays into a down-shifted UH wave and a low frequency Ion Bernstein Wave (IBW).
The new UH wave generated in the secondary decay could in principle either be trapped within
the non-monotonic density profile or escape the trapping region depending on the frequency shift
in the decay. The densities generated in such a secondary parametric decay are illustrated in figure
3.5. According to some models, the secondary parametric decay is only the first in a cascade of
higher order decays that occur until all trapped waves can finally escape the trapping region after a
number of decays. Numerical simulations in e.g. [35] also show signs of several additional parametric
decays, but the frequency spectrum quickly becomes very complicated and the chain of the decays
uncertain.
No direct measurements of waves generated in secondary parametric decays have been identified in
this project. Instead, several observations are made of signals that have frequencies equal to the
expected frequencies of the trapped daughter UH waves generated in the primary parametric decay.
How these waves that are originally trapped can reach the radiometer is discussed in section 7.
Although no direct measurements are made of daughter weaves from secondary decays, 7 presents
indications of a population of fast ions that is correlated with the occurrence of a strong PDI signal.
It is argued that this observation could possibly be explained by an ion acceleration due to the ion
waves generated in secondary and tertiary PDI decays.
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.5: Illustration of possible frequency spectrum after both a primary, secondary and Ter-
tiary parametric decay. The low frequency wave generated in the secondary decay could explain
the observation of a fast ion population presented in this thesis in section 7.1, and [36] presents
measurements from ASDEX Upgrade that could be originating from tertiary parametric decays.
The figure is taken from [34].
38
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Tokamak `a configuration variable
Figure 4.1: Schematic 3d drawing of TCV showing the different coil sets, vacuum vessel and first
wall. Original picture from [69].
Tokamak `a configuration variable (TCV) is a medium sized tokamak located at the Swiss Plasma
Centre (SPC) at ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne (EPFL) with a major radius of 0.89m
and a minor radius of 0.25m. The plasma in TCV typically consists of deuterium, but can also be
made of hydrogen or helium. A unique thing about the tokamak is that it has a very elongated
plasma with an elongation of 0.9 −2.8. Figure 4.1 shows an illustration of the coil systems at TCV.
The toroidal field coils can produce a magnetic field of B0 ≤1.5T, and high energy plasma pulses
can be sustained for several seconds with typical densities in the range n ∈[5·1018m−3, 1·1020m−3],
typical electron temperatures in the range Te ∈[0.5keV, 10keV] and typical ion temperatures in the
range Te ∈[0.1keV, 5keV]. A total of 16 poloidal field coils are installed, positioned both on both
sides of the vacuum vessel, as well as several ohmic coils and 6 internal coils. This allows for a
large variety in plasma shaping and divertor configuration. In order to facilitate many different
plasma configurations, the poloidal cross section of the vacuum vessel is rectangular, and additional
divertor baffles are occasionally installed. Since its first plasma in 1992, a variety of diagnostics has
39
==PAGE:46==
been added to the machine. Some of the diagnostics are integrated in advanced real-time control
systems. One of the recent prominent results from TCV was the demonstration of real-time control
of several plasma configurations through reinforcement learning [70]. The diagnostics used in this
project are described in section 4.2.
An important feature of TCV is that it has a very high heating power compared to its modest
size. In addition to the ohmic heating power, TCV has two auxilary heating systems installed. An
ECHR system can deliver 2.8MW during X-2 heating and 1.3MW during X-3 heating, as further
explained in section 4.1. In Addition, the tokamak is equipped with a new NBI system capable of
delivering up to 1.3MW. The large heating power allows for studies that are relevant for supporting
both ITER and future demonstration power plants. Current studies are both focused on operation
in H-mode and operation in alternative confinement regimes without ELMs. Additionally, there are
studies focusing on plasma exhaust, edge turbulence, ECCD and fast ions among other things. An
overview of the current experimental program is given in [71].
The radiometer measurements included in this thesis are taken during shots from several different
campaigns in addition to three dedicated shots presented in section 7.1. The shot number and
associated campaign of all measurements will be specified as data is presented. A brief description
of the different campaigns relevant for this thesis follows here.
• RT22-01: Core-Edge-SOL integrated H-mode scenario compatible with exhaust
constraints in support of ITER. This is a campaign supported by EUROfusion that
investigates an H-mode scenario highly relevant for ITER with focus on edge control and
ELM suppression. Shots include both EHRH heating (X-2 and X-3) and NBI heating.
• RT22-02:
Physics of understanding alternatives to Type-I ELM regime.
This
is a campaign supported by EUROfusion that investigates possible relevant scenarios in a
future demonstration power plant. Shots include both EHRH heating (X-2 and X-3) and NBI
heating.
• RT22-08: Physics and operational basis for high beta long pulse scenarios. This
is a campaign supported by EUROfusion that investigates high beta operation, relevant for
both ITER and a future demonstration power plant. Shots include both EHRH heating (X-2
and X-3) and NBI heating.
• M2134: Fast ion dynamics and instabilities. This is an internal TCV campaign that
investigates Fast Ion behaviour in TCV with a focus on fast ion tomography. Shots include
both EHRH heating (X-2 and X-3) and NBI heating.
4.1
ECRH System and launchers
TCV is equipped with two gyrotrons from Gycom operating at ∼82.7 GHz, each with a heating
power of up to 700 MW and four gyrotrons from Thales, two of which two are operating at ∼
118 GHz capable of delivering up to 450 MW and two of which are dual frequency gyrotrons
operating at either ∼84 GHz or ∼126 GHz, each with a heating power of up to 1000 MW. During
the experimental campaign in the autumn of 2022 only one Gycom gyrotron and the two dual
frequency gyrotrons were active.
Gyrotrons operating at 82.7 GHz and 84 GHz are polarized in X-mode and used for heating the
second harmonic electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) in a process called X-2 heating, whereas the
gyrotrons operating at 126 GHz are used for X-3 heating, where the third harmonic ECR is instead
40
==PAGE:47==
heated. For heating at the jth harmonic EC resonance, the magnetic field is strength selected such
that the jth harmonic EC resonance is positioned approximately in the centre of the plasma core. In
order for a gyrotron beam to reach the jth harmonic of the EC resonance, it must have a path there
without any cutoffs. As can be seen from the CMA-diagram, the limiting cutoff for X-mode heating
is the R = 0 cutoff. Imagine a wave starting from X = 0 and Y < 0.5 trying to reach the 2nd
harmonic EC resonance (black dotted line). If the EC resonance in the plasma core is positioned
beyond the R = 0 cutoff, the gyrotron beam cannot reach the EC resonance. Therefore, for either
of the heating methods to be possible, there is a constraint on the maximum value of the density in
the plasma. The critical value of the density depends on the magnetic field strength, the frequency
of the gyrotron beam and the projected ECR harmonic and can be found by equating R = 0 for
the desired parameters. If using the cold plasma dispersion relations and neglecting ion effects in
the Stix coefficients (eq. 2.33), the critical density nc for a resonance located on the magnetic axis
is given
nc = j(j −1)ϵ0B2
0
me
,
(4.1)
where j denotes the number of the harmonic. For an on-axis magnetic field in TCV of B0 = 1.5T,
the critical density for X-2 heating with ω = 84GHz is nc = 4.38·1019 m−3, and the critical density
for X-3 heating with ω = 126GHz is nc = 1.31 · 1020 m−3. Hence, the X-3 gyrotrons allow for
operating at higher plasma densities. This makes TCV relevant for ITER related H-mode studies.
(a) Illustration of relevant launchers in the toroidal
cross section.
(b) Illustration of relevant launchers in the poloidal
cross section. Original illustration from [69].
Figure 4.2: Positions of the launchers L1, L4, L5 and L7. L1 is connected to a gyrotron from Gycom
with a nominal frequency of 82.7 GHz. L4 and L5 are connected to dual frequency gyrotrons from
Thales with a nominal frequency of 84 GHz when used for X2 heating. L7 is a diagnostic launcher
connected to the heterodyne radiometer used in this project. The colormap shows an example of a
plasma density profile inside the plasma core with the density increasing form black to yellow/white.
The principle of a gyrotron is briefly covered in section 1.3.
For the gyrotrons to deliver their
power to the plasma, the gyrotron beams are transported from the remote location of the gyrotrons
in HE11 wave guides (sustaining the fundamental HE11 mode) into launchers on either the Low
field side (LFS) and top side of the vacuum vessel. Several steerable mirrors in the launchers are
41
==PAGE:48==
used to focus the beam and to set its angle into the plasma. The angle into the plasma can be
controlled both in the toroidal and poloidal direction. In addition to having a launcher for each of
the gyrotrons, TCV has an additional launcher, L7, that is not used to transfer gyrotron beams
to the plasma, but to receive radiation form the plasma. During the experimental work in this
thesis, a heterodyne radiometer was installed at Launcher L7. The development of the radiometer
is described in section 5. Only PDI signals caused by either of the X-2 gyrotrons are measured in
the experiments carried out in this thesis. The position of the launchers for the X-2 gyrotrons in
use are shown in figure 4.2. It should be noted that all the X-2 gyrotrons are launched from the
LFS of the plasma, whereas the X-3 gyrotrons are launched from the top side. The unconventional
positioning of the X-3 launchers in the top side is chosen because the X-mode absorbance at the 3rd
harmonic EC resonance is significantly lower than the X-mode absorbance at the 2nd harmonic EC
resonance. Because the position of a harmonic of the EC resonance only depends on the frequency
of the gyrotron beam and the magnetic field strength, and the magnetic field strength in a tokamak
approximately falls as 1/R (eq.
1.11), the EC resonance is positioned on a vertical line in the
poloidal cross section as shown in figure 4.2b. Having a vertical launch direction allows the X-
3 beam to be in proximity with the resonance for a longer time, thus increasing the absorption.
The position of the 3rd harmonic resonance moves slightly during a shot, and TCV make use of a
real-time control system to aim the X-3 beams correctly [72].
A PDI process is strongly dependent on the frequency of the decaying gyrotron beam. During a
gyrotron pulse, the main frequency shifts slightly, an effect mainly due to a small change in the
temperature of the gyrotron and cooling water [73] during operation. The main frequency of the
gyrotrons are not tracked during operation at TCV, so the PDI analysis in section 6 rely on an
estimation. The frequency drift of one of the 84 GHz gyrotrons has been tracked during operation at
a power of 0.93 MW in the paper [74]. Figure 4.3 shows a graph from the paper, where the gyrotron
frequency is seen to shift with 180 MHz during a 1 second long pulse. Likewise, the frequency of
the 82.7 GHz gyrotrons has been observed to drift with 80 MHz −100 MHz during a 2 second long
pulse.
Figure 4.3: Frequency drift of a 84 GHz gyrotron during operation at a gyrotron power of 0.93 MW.
The figure is taken from [74].
4.2
Relevant Diagnostics
The TCV tokamak is used as a research facility for numerous studies on different branches of plasma
physics. During its 30 years of operation many diagnostics has been installed and some replaced
42
==PAGE:49==
along the way. Here, the probes and diagnostics that are used in this project are described.
4.2.1
Thomson Scattering
The main diagnostic for determining the density profile in TCV is a Thomson Scattering (TS)
system. The theory is well covered in literature, see e.g [75], and will not be covered here apart
from the fundamental idea. When an electromagnetic wave passes through a plasma, it experience
scattering due to the free moving charges (electrons and ions).
The term Thomson Scattering
covers the elastic scattering an electromagnetic wave by free electrons and is the classical low-
energy description of the phenomenon Compton Scattering. The phenomenon was first described
by J. J. Thomson. In the scattering process, the electric field of the incoming wave accelerates the
electron along the direction of the wave polarization. As a result, the free electron starts to oscillate
with the frequency of the incident wave and thereby emits dipole radiation. The dipole radiation is
polarized along the direction of the oscillation of the electron, and the intensity of the radiation is
dependent on the angle between the observer and the incident wave.
In the TS system at TCV, a single laser is injected vertically into the plasma in the centre of the
vessel at R = 0.9m. The amount if scattering processes occurring along the laser beam depends
directly on the electron density. In other words, the TS intensity gives a measure of the electron
density. In each scattering process, the velocity of the electron relative to an observer in the lab
frame gives rise to a Doppler shift of the scattered radiation. When the electrons in the plasma are
in a thermal equilibrium, their velocities follow a Maxwellian distribution, and so will the scattered
radiation. The width of the radiation spectrum determines the electron temperature.
In order to collect the scattered waves, TCV has 117 spectrometers installed, each collecting radi-
ation from a different vertical position along the laser. The positions are illustrated in figure 4.4a.
Even though measurements are only collected along a single line, each measurement can be mapped
to a flux coordinate as explained in section 2.1. Thus, the TS system gives good measurements
of the electron temperature and density in the entire plasma core and extends slightly beyond the
separatrix in most plasma configurations. The treatment of the collected radiation is relatively
complicated, and requires a substantial amount of data, and therefore the acquisition frequency of
the TS system is only 20 Hz.
4.2.2
Far Infrared Interferometry
The main disadvantage of the TS system is its relatively slow sampling rate. A method that can be
used for measurements of fast density fluctuations is a Far Infrared (FIR) interferometry system. An
interferometry system is not capable of measuring the local plasma density, but gives measurements
on the line integrated measurements along several chords in the plasma.
In addition to giving
information on density fluctuations, the line integrated density measurements of the FIR system
are used for calibration of the TS system.
The FIR system at TCV is of Mach-Zehnder type and uses a FIR laser with a wavelength of 184.3 µm
that is split into 14 probe beams and a reference beam. The probe beams are all sent vertically
through the plasma at 14 different radial positions as shown in figure 4.4b, while the reference beam
is travelling a similar distance in vacuum. When the beams pass through the plasma, they each
experience a phase shift ∆ϕ compared to the reference beam due to the lower refractive index of
the plasma. The phase shift can be expressed
∆ϕ = 2π
λ
Z s1
s0
[Nvac −N(s)] ds = 2π
λ
Z s1
s0
[1 −N(s)] ds.
(4.2)
43
==PAGE:50==
(a) Line of sight of the 117 spec-
trometers of the TS diagnostic
at TCV. Original picture from
SPC Wiki.
(b) Position of the 14 vertical
chords of the FIR interferom-
etry system at TCV.
(c)
Position
of
Langmuir
probes. Original picture from
SPC Wiki.
Figure 4.4: Position of selected diagnostics at TCV mapped onto the poloidal cross section.
Because the frequency of the beams is large compared to the plasma frequency ω ≫ωpe, the beams
are far away from any cutoffs, and the refractive index of the beams can be described with the cold
plasma dispersion relations (eq. 2.34−2.35). Isolating N = ck/ω and and expanding to first order
around ω2
pe/ω2 = 0, the refractive index for both O-mode polarization and X-mode polarization is
approximately
N (O)(s) ≈N (X)(s) ≈1 −ω2
pe(s)
2ω2
= 1 −
e2n(s)
2ω2εome
.
(4.3)
This gives the simple relation
∆ϕ =
π
λNc
Z s1
s0
N(s)ds,
(4.4)
where Nc = ωϵ2
0me/e2 is the cutoff density of the probe beams. Thus, by continuously measuring
the phase difference between the reference beam and each of the probe beams, direct measurements
of the line integrated density can be obtained with a high acquisition rate. The FIR interferometry
system at TCV has an acquisition frequency of 20 kHz.
4.2.3
Langmuir Probes
For precise local measurements of the plasma density and electron temperature in the plasma edge,
the suitable diagnostic is a system of Langmuir probes. Contrary to the TS system and FIR interfer-
44
==PAGE:51==
ometry system, Langmuir probes are intrusive and measurements require the probes to be in direct
contact with the plasma. Therefore, they can only be used in the very edge of the plasma. Still,
the Langmuir probe is one of the simplest plasma diagnostics there is. A Langmuir probe consists
of a small wire-tip, working as an electrode, that is put in contact with the plasma. By varying
a bias voltage between the wire-tip and the vacuum vessel, measurements of the current running
through the probe can be used to calculate both the plasma density and, electron temperature and
plasma potential. When the probe voltage is different from the plasma potential, the free charges
shield the changes in the electric field. Thereby, a small sheath is formed around the probe tip with
a thickness of a few Debye lengths (eq. 2.50), where the plasma is not quasi-neutral. The response
of the sheath gives knowledge on the local plasma parameters. The theory of Langmuir probes is
covered in e.g. [76].
If the applied bias voltage is negative and has a large absolute value, all electrons are repelled from
the probe tip, and the probe is said to be in the ion saturation regime. Here, the current through
the probe, called the Ion Saturation Current Isat, is given by
Isat = −Aenecs,
(4.5)
where A is the exposed area of the probe tip and cs is the ion acoustic velocity
cs =
r
ZTe + γiTi
mi
,
(4.6)
with γi being the adiabatic ion coefficient. Measurements of the ion saturation current gives direct
measurements on the electron density if the electron and ion temperature is known. These fast
density measurements are important for monitoring density fluctuations in the edge region. In this
thesis they are used in section 6.2 to give information on ELM activity and in section 6.3 to give
information on the blobs created by interchange turbulence in the SOL region.
If the bias voltage is increased (being less negative), some electrons also reach the probe tip. In this
region, called the exponential region, the current through the probe is given
I(Vbias) = Ii,sat

1 −exp
e [Vbias −Vf]
kBTe

.
(4.7)
Here, the quantity Vbias is the floating potential.
At this applied bias voltage, the number of
electrons and ions in the sheath equalize, and the measured current is zero. If multiple acquisitions
are made with a sweep in the applied bias voltage, the electron temperature can be evaluated with
a fit of the measured current in the probe.
The Langmuir probe system at TCV consists of 135 Langmuir probes covering almost the entire edge
in a poloidal cross section as shown in figure 4.4c. The system has a fast acquisition frequency 200
KHz. When operating in ion saturation mode, Isat measurements are given by a single acquisition,
whereas measurements of the electron temperature Te in sweeping mode takes 200 acquisitions,
which reduces the effective acquisition frequency to 1kHz.
4.2.4
Magnetic Coils
TCV is equipped with a variety of magnetic field probes inside the vacuum vessel. All magnetic
field probes have a pick-up coil. When there is a change in magnetic flux through the pick-up coil,
an electromotive force is induced, and a small current can be detected in the coil as a result. This is
easily explained by Faraday’s law (eq. 2.16). Thereby, magnetic field probe can be used to measure
fluctuations in the magnetic flux density.
45
==PAGE:52==
The main magnetic diagnostic on TCV is 203 poloidal Mirnov probes. The poloidal Mirnov probes
measure fluctuations in the magnetic flux in the poloidal direction. They are grouped in four poloidal
arrays and six toroidal arrays. The poloidal arrays each consists of 38 poloidal Mirnov proves and
are installed at four different toroidal positions 90◦apart. The toroidal arrays are positioned in the
midplane and 35 cm above and below the midplane on the HFS and LFS respectively. In addition
to the poloidal Mirnov probes, TCV is also equipped with 24 saddle loops that measure fluctuations
in the magnetic flux in the radial direction, and 3 high frequency 3D magnetic sensors capable of
measuring fluctuations in the magnetic flux in all three directions.
The magnetic field probes are used both for reconstruction of the magnetic tokamak equilibrium
and for MHD analysis. These two purposes require different acquisition systems. Currently, 3 out
of four poloidal arrays of Mirnov probes are used for equilibrium reconstruction. These probes are
sampled with a frequency of 10kHz, and integrating the probe measurements gives the magnitude
of the magnetic field. This process is carried out with the framework LIUQE [77]. The equilibrium
profile is both crucial for real time plasma control systems and analysis of diagnostics after a shot.
the rest of the probes has a significantly faster acquisition rate of 500 kHz and are along with the
fast 3d probes with an acquisition rate of 2 MHz used for MHD analysis. Both the equilibrium
profiles and MHD analysis are used in this work. The basic physics and phenomenology of MHD
instabilities is described in section 2.2.1. The perturbations in the plasma current caused by MHD
perturbations also emerge as perturbations in the magnetic field that can be measured at the
plasma edge. The scope of an MHD analysis is to determine the dominant MHD modes and their
amplitudes. Substantial effort has been put into an MHD analysis toolbox at TCV. The toolbox
allows for the search of multiple MHD modes at the same frequencies with a method described in
[78].
4.2.5
Photo Diodes
Photodiodes are diodes that produce a current when they absorb incoming light. They are a common
tool to measure radiation of visible light in a tokamak. TCV is equipped with 14 photodiodes. 6
are installed in lateral ports, and the other 8 have a vertical line of sight. Several of the probes
have a filter that only passes visible light with a wavelength of approximately 656.3 nm because
this wavelength corresponds to the wavelength of light that is emitted when electrons in a hydrogen
atom in an excited state jumps form the n = 3 shell to the n = 2 shell. This specific spectral line is
referred to as the H −α line and is prominent in the visible spectrum when hydrogen ions recombine
with electrons. Thereby, measurements of Hα radiation gives an indication on the activity in the
plasma edge.
It has been shown experimentally that there is a strong correlation between plasma instabilities and
emitted Hα radiation. In this thesis, Hα measurements are used to detect the occurrence of ELMs
in section 6.2. As shown in [79] the occurrence of an ELM is followed by a burst of Hα radiation.
4.2.6
Compact Neutral Particle Analyser
One loss mechanism in a tokamak is that of charge exchange (CX). Hot ions can exchange an
electron with cold neutral atoms, leaving the cold neutrals ionized and the hot ion charge neutral.
For a deuterium ion and neutral the process follows
D +
 D+∗→D+ + D∗,
(4.8)
where D is a deuterium atom, D+ is a deuterium ion and the asterisk denote the particle with a
large kinetic energy. The fast neutral is no longer confined and can escape the plasma. A method
46
==PAGE:53==
of tracking escaping neutrals is by using a Neutral Particle Analyser (NPA). An NPA covers all
the escaping fast particles within its line of sight that are moving directly into the NPA. The first
process in the NPA is a redirection of all ions entering the device. Afterwards, the now completely
neutral particle beam is passed through a stripping medium, where some electrons are removed, and
the beam is partially ionized. This is conventionally done by passing the beam through a gas, but
at TCV the beam is instead passed through a very thin carbon foil. The beam then passes through
an electrostatic condenser. This deflects all the ions in the beam with a deflection angle depending
on the kinetic energy of the ions.
By having multiple collector channels at different deflection
angles, the velocity distribution of the beam can be determined. This distribution corresponds to
the velocity distribution of the confined fast ions in the tokamak.
The NPA installed at TCV is very compact and thus denoted a Compact Neutral Particle Analyser
(CNPA). A full description of the device is given in [80]. It has 16 collector channels for counting
escaping deuterium neutrals and 11 channels for counting escaping helium neutrals. The CNPA
was originally installed with a lateral line of sight perpendicular to the magnetic field lines. This
was the configuration used in the study [40], where populations of supra-thermal ions during ECRH
heating were examined. Since, the CNPA has been moved and now has a line of sight tangential to
the magnetic field lines. This distinction is important for the discussion in section 7.1.
A tricky aspect of the CNPA is transforming the amount of particle counts in each of the collec-
tor channels into information on the velocity distribution of ions in the plasma. The measured
quantity in each collector channel is the charge exchange flux ΓCX (in units of s−1eV−1) with the
proportionality [40]
ΓCX(E)dE ∝
Z s2
s1
exp

−
Z s2
s
α(s′)ds′

S(s, E)ds,
(4.9)
where both integrals are along the line of sight of the CNPA channel with coordinate s, α(s) is the
local absorption of neutral particles (due to reabsorption processes) and S(s, E) is the local CX
source function given
S(s, E) = fi(s, E)σCXvi(s)nn(s).
(4.10)
Here, fi is the local ion energy distribution function, σCX is the cross section of the CX process
and nn is the density of neutrals (that can undergo charge exchange with the ions). The definition
of the source function motivates the introduction of the Charge Exchange Spectrum CXS(E) given
CXS(E) = ΓCX(E)
σCXE .
(4.11)
The important feature of the Charge Exchange Spectrum is that it has the same dependence on
the neutral particle energy E, ion temperature Ti and ion density ni as the ion energy distribution
function fi(E). If a single species of ions is assumed, and the ions are in thermal equilibrium, the
energies of the ions will follow a Maxwellian distribution. The scenario of interest in this thesis is
situations where there is a bulk population of ions in addition to a population of supra-thermal fast
ions. In that case, the energy distribution function can often be described as a superposition of two
Maxwellian distributions with different densities and temperatures following
fi(E) = f b
i (E) + f s
i (E) = nb
i
 mi
2πT b
i
3/2
exp

−E
T b
i

+ ns
i
 mi
2πT s
i
3/2
exp

−E
T s
i

,
(4.12)
where the superscript b indicates the bulk population and the superscript s denotes the supra-
thermal population. Hence, the Charge Exchange Spectrum will have the form
CXS(E) = A

nb
i
 T b
i
−3/2 exp

−E
T b
i

+ nb
i (T s
i )−3/2 exp

−E
T s
i

,
(4.13)
47
==PAGE:54==
where A is a coefficient depending on the density of neutrals, absorption of neutral particles and
CNPA dimensions and angles. By fitting the Charge Exchange Spectrum, the temperatures of both
the bulk ion population T b
i and supra-thermal population T s
i can be determined as well as the
fraction of supra-thermal ions to bulk ions ns
i/nb
i.
Recent measurements with the CNPA at TCV show a relatively poor correlation with expected CX
spectra at low particel energies. This could indicate that the carbon film has been damaged after
more than 15 years of service of the CNPA. The numeric predictions are therefore not to be fully
trusted. Nevertheless, the CNPA still gives clear indications of fast ions and is therefore applied in
this thesis.
48
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5
Development of a Heterodyne
Radiometer
This section describes the development of the heterodyne radiometer that was installed on the
launcher L7 at TCV during the is project. The radiometer was successfully used to measure half
frequency PDI signals.
5.1
Design and installation
The trapped daughter waves from PDI in TCV during X-2 heating are expected to have frequencies
around ω0/2. For the two types of X-2 gyrotrons that are installed at TCV this amounts to expected
frequencies of ∼41.35 GHz and ∼42 GHz. The idea of a radiometer is to analyse radiation coming
from the plasma in the tokamak.
With a heterodyne radiometer it is possible to measure the
radiation intensity in a relatively narrow frequency band that covers both of the frequencies.
A diagram of the heterodyne radiometer and its setup is shown in figure 5.1.
The radiometer
works as follows. First, radiation from the plasma with a certain polarization is guided through the
launcher L7. The launcher has two angular degrees of freedom. The launcher can turn 360◦around
its axis (angle θ in figure 5.1), and the mirrors can be flipped to guide the beam at an angle φ
between 10◦and 50◦, where φ = 0 would correspond to a horizontal beam. After travelling through
the launcher, radiation is picked up by a horn, after which it is let into a square WR15 waveguide.
The radiation is now called a Radio Frequency (RF) signal. After a directional coupler, half of the
RF signal continues to a Fast Pulse Reflectometry (FPR) system [81], and the other half is let into
the heterodyne radiometer. Here, the signal is first let through two 47 GHz low pas filters (LPF) to
remove stray radiation from the main gyrotron lines. The WR15 waveguides can sustain modes with
frequencies in the V-band (50−75 GHz) and has a lower cutoff frequency of 39.875 GHz. Thus, they
work as a High Pass Filter (HPF), and the RF signal has a band of approximately 40.5 −47 GHz.
After the filters, the signal is passed into a Q-band WR-22 Balanced mixer with a frequency band of
33 −50 GHz (Model QMC-MIX28-FB00 from Quantum Microwave). Here, the RF signal is mixed
with a 40.24 GHz signal coming from a gunn oscillator from MACOM. This signal is denoted the
LO signal. Two avoid unnecessary heating the Gunn oscillator was connected to a large heat sink.
In addition, it is contact with a k-type thermocouple. The thermocouple is connected to an Arduino
M0 Pro that continuously tracks the temperature of the Gunn oscillator. From the output of the
mixer comes a down mixed Intermediate Frequency (IF) signal with frequency fIF = fRF ± fLO.
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.1: Diagram of the heterodyne radiometer installed at TCV. The two upper dashed squares
contain a block diagram, and the lower two boxes illustrate the actual appearance of the launcher
L7 and radiometer.
After the mixing, signals between 40 GHz and 40.24 GHz will be included in the IF band. Therefore,
only IF frequencies above 0.25 GHz are included in the analysis. Luckily, no signs of parametric
decays were measured below fIF = 0.25 GHz. From the radiation is picked up in the launcher to
the output of the mixer there is a lot attenuation. Therefore, the IF signal is amplified with two
Low Noise Amplifiers (LNAs). After the amplification step, it is passed through a 13 dBm limiter
and a DC block before arriving at an Analog to Digital Converter (ADC).
The ADC consists of a PXIe 8-bit high speed digitizer from Spectrum Instrumentation (Model
M4x.2233-x4).
It has a sampling frequency of 5 GS/s when measuring on one channel and an
on-board memory of 4 GB. The dynamic input range Vrange can be chosen between ±200 mV and
±2500 mV. The digitizer is connected to a PXIe chassis (Model PXIe-1062Q) with a PXIe-8135
controller form National Instruments. The nominal frequency band of the digitizer is 1.5 GHz. If
only including IF frequencies above fIF = 0.25 GHz, this gives a frequency band of 40.5−41.75 GHz
for the radiometer. To check how the radiometer responds to different frequencies, a laboratory test
with a signal generator was performed. The squared Fourier amplitude of the measured peak of
the signal (normalized to 1) vs IF frequency is shown in figure 5.2. Naturally, the signal is seen to
decrease with increasing ∆f. The fluctuations are likely due to the response of the radiometer itself
(not the ADC). The response of the radiometer will be properly adjusted for with a calibration
shown in section 5.3. For now, what is noticeable is that even at ∆f = 2.25 GHz the squared
amplitude is only down by 90%. Signals this far from the LO frequency should still be measurable.
Therefore, the considered frequency band of the radiometer is expanded to 40.5 −42.5 GHz.
The heterodyne radiometer was designed and constructed within the two first months of the project.
The circuit design was carried out with help from Special Consultant Thomas Jensen and Associate
Professor Stefan Kragh Nielsen (supervisor), both from DTU physics. The following construction
and testing happened in DTU Skylab and in the microwave lab at DTU physics and was carried
50
==PAGE:57==
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
109
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 5.2: Normalized squared Fourier amplitude of signal generator signal measured with the
digitizer ˜U 2 vs ∆f. The nominal band edge of the digitizer is marked with a red dotted line. The
green region marks the bandwidth that is considered in the experiments in chapter 6.
out by the author of this thesis (me). In the beginning of November, the radiometer was installed
at TCV. Figure 5.3 shows pictures of the completed radiometer and its installation at TCV. During
the initial measurements the attenuation in the variable attenuator was slowly reduced until it was
found that all the components were save without any added attenuation to the system.
(a) A look into the radiometer.
(b) The installation of the radiometer at TCV.
Figure 5.3: Pictures of the heterodyne radiometer
As a final remark, it should be noted that this radiometer is relatively similar in design to the
radiometers that were used for PDI observations at TEXTOR [48], ASDEX Upgrade [36] and
Wendelstein 7-X [37]. However, a noticeable difference is that in the three listed experiments the
radiometer was part of a CTS setup.
In CTS experiments, there is an overlap in line of sight
between a launcher with a CTS receiver (and radiometer) and an active gyrotron.
This setup
should be compared with the setup of active gyrotrons in TCV in figure 4.2. Unfortunately, there
are no launchers with an overlapping line of sight with the L7 launcher. The gyrotron that comes
closest to overlapping is the one attached to launcher L1. As a consequence, more amplification is
required in the radiometer at TCV compared to in CTS systems, and the Signal to Noise ratio of
the measured PDI signals is worse.
51
==PAGE:58==
5.2
Data Acquisitions
Before any data can be acquired with the radiometer, launcher L7 has to be prepared. The angles
of the launcher and its mirrors are controlled electronically. Obtaining a set of angles θ, φ for the
line of sight of the launcher that accepts incoming radiation at a given polarization (O or X) is
not a trivial task. As the polarization of radiation is frequency dependent, an algorithm optimizes
the mirror angles for incoming radiation for a specified narrow frequency band. The FPR system
that shared the launcher with the radiometer operates at ∼50GHz. The launcher polarization was
therefore optimized for radiation with frequencies around 50GHz in some acquisitions and optimized
for 41.5GHz whenever the FPR system wasn’t in use. When results are presented in chapter 6, the
optimization frequency will be noted in all measurements.
The radiometer is controlled via aPpython code that uses a framework developed by Spectrum
Instrumentation. The data acquisition code is set up such that after a start-up phase, the ADC
begins measuring when it receives an external trigger signal. During a TCV shot the ADC makes
a number of individual acquisitions. Only the timing of the first acquisition is determined by the
trigger. All subsequent acquisitions are triggered directly from the code, and the timestamp of each
acquisition relative to the external trigger time is saved. How many acquisitions the ADC makes,
the amount of samples in each acquisition and the pause between the acquisitions are controlled
with a user input to the code. The timing of the first trigger can be controlled as well and is
set before an experiment. The timing of the trigger is with respect to a reference clock used by
multiple diagnostics at TCV. In most measurements, the trigger time was set to 0s. When this is
not the case, all times will be given with respect to the t = 0s trigger time. All the data collected
in the acquisitions as well as the relevant input parameters were first stored locally on the ADC
and subsequently transferred to the PXIe controller with an HDF5 file format. After this project
ends, all data will be available on an MDS tree at the TCV server. The data acquisition code and
calibration profile will be uploaded as well.
5.3
Calibration with ECE radiation
In order to make quantitative measurements, the radiometer is first calibrated. The signal that the
radiometer is measuring contains both a background signal of amplified noise b(ω) and radiation
from the plasma. The spectral power density of the radiation signal can be written in terms of a
radiation temperature Tr(ω) (in energy units), such that the spectral power density of the signal
S(ω) of the measured signal can be written as
S(ω) = c(ω)Tr(ω) + b(ω),
(5.1)
where c(ω) is a constant that takes into account both losses and amplification in the radiometer
at a given frequency ω. The only quantity with physical relevance is the radiation temperature
Tr(ω), and to find it both constants b(ω) and c(ω) has to be evaluated. Evaluating the background
signal b(ω) is easy. For a given dynamic range Vrange that simply requires a measurement with
the radiometer when TCV is not operating.
Evaluating c(ω) however is not a simple task.
A
common procedure is to measure the black body radiation from a target at different temperatures
and calculate c(ω) with a linear regression. This is done in e.g. [82]. Due to the short operation
period of this newly developed radiometer at TCV, this procedure wasn’t possible. Instead, the
radiometer has been calibrated using a single measurement of ECE radiation from the tokamak
in a period without X-2 heating. If the power density of the measured signal in this calibration
experiment is denoted S0(ω) and the ECE radiation temperature Tr0(ω), the constant c(ω) can be
52
==PAGE:59==
found as
c(ω) = S0(ω) −b(ω)
Tr0(ω)
.
(5.2)
The challenge now is to evaluate the radiation temperature Tr0(ω) of the measured ECE radiation.
This requires modelling the transport of ECE radiation from where it is generated in the plasma
along its path to where it is picked up in the radiometer. The governing equation to solve is
d
ds
I(ω, s)
N 2ray(ω, s) =
1
N 2ray(ω, s) (j(ω, s) −α(ω, s)I(ω, s))
(5.3)
and is called the equation of radiative transfer. The equation is valid within the approximation of
geometric optics (see section 2.3.3), and the radiation is modelled as many individual rays. I(ω, s)
is the intensity of a radiation ray with frequency ω, N 2
ray(ω, s) is the refractive index of the ray,
j(ω, s) is the emission coefficient of frequency ω, and α(ω, s) the absorption coefficient of frequency
ω, all evaluated at position s. A convenient quantity that is used to describe the absorption of
radiation in the plasma is the optical depth τ, which is given
τ(ω, s, s0) =
Z s
s0
α(ω, s′)ds′,
(5.4)
where the integral is along the radiation path. The optical depth can be used to calculate the
transmittance of radiation T (ω, s) as T (ω, s) = e−τ(ω,s,s0). Using the optical depth, the intensity
of a ray passing through a plasma from s = s0 to s = s1 can now be described using the equation
of radiative transfer (eq. 5.3), which can put on the form
Iout(ω) = Iin(ω)e−τ(ω,s1,s0) +
Z τ(ω,s1)
0
j(ω, s(τ))
N 2ray(ω, s(τ))α(ω, s(τ))e−τ ′(ω,s(τ),s0)dτ ′
(5.5)
Here, Iout denotes the intensity of radiation coming out of the plasma, Iin the intensity of radiation
going into the plasma. The quantity of interest for the calibration of the radiometer is not the
radiation intensity I, but the radiation temperature Tr(ω). The radiation temperature is the tem-
perature of an equivalent blackbody that would emit radiation with the same intensity at a given
frequency ω as the considered medium and is given [83]
j(ω, s)
N 2ray(ω, s)α(ω, s) =
ω2
8π3c2 Tr(ω, s).
(5.6)
One method of calculating the radiation temperature that is used in some complicated codes (e.g.
in the ray tracing code TRAVIS [84]) is to evaluate α(ω, s) and j(ω, s) and solve eq. (5.5) numeri-
cally. That option is not available in this project with the codes at hand, and instead an alternative
approach is used. First, it’s noted that in the long wavelength limit ¯hω/Tr(ω) ≪1 (called the
Rayleigh-Jeans limit) that is relevant for radiation in the microwave spectrum, the radiation tem-
perature simplifies to [11]
I(ω, s)
N 2ray(ω, s) =
ω2
8π3c2 Tr(ω, s).
(5.7)
Substituting the Rayleigh-Jeans approximation (eq. 5.7) into the equation of radiative transfer (eq.
5.3) yields the equation
d
dsTr(ω, s) = 8π3c2
ω2
j(ω, s)
N 2ray(ω, s) −α(ω, s)Tr(ω, s).
(5.8)
53
==PAGE:60==
This is an inhomogeneous linear first order ordinary differential equation. Solving the equation is
straightforward, and after applying the definition of the optical depth (eq. 5.4) the solution is
Tr(ω, s1) = Tr(ω, s0)e−τ(ω,s1,s0) + 8π3c2
ω2
Z s1
s0
j(ω, s′)
N 2ray(ω, s′)e−τ(ω,s′,s0)ds′
(5.9)
The final step is to eliminate the emission coefficient j(ω, s) from the equation. If the plasma is
assumed to be in thermal equilibrium, then the local radiation temperature Tr(ω, s) is approximately
given by the local electron temperature Te(s). The approximation os rather crude, but brings eq.
(5.9) on the simple form
Tr(ω, s1) = Tr(ω, s0)e−τ(ω,s1,s0) +
Z s1
s0
Te(s′)α(ω, s′)e−τ(ω,s′,s0)ds′
(5.10)
The local absorption coefficient α(ω, s), optical depth τ(ω, s, s0), and local electron temperature
Te(s) can all be evaluated with the use of a ray tracer. As linear optical processes generally have
time reversal symmetry, the radiation temperature of a ray reaching launcher L7 through its line
of sight is equal the radiation temperature of an equivalent ray leaving the launcher and following
the same trajectory. The latter is far easier to model as shall be done here.
Because EC emission is strongest close to the fundamental EC resonance, the radiation temperature
has a strong frequency dependence. The frequency band of interest for the calibration is that of
the radiometer between 40.5 −42.5 GHz. At these frequencies, the fundamental EC resonance is
close to the centre of the plasma core, and EC emission is relatively strong. Most auxiliary heated
plasmas in TCV and similar tokamaks are optically thick enough (τ(ω, s1, s0) > 2) that the first
term on the RHS of eq. (5.10) can be ignored. In such a scenarios, the radiation temperature could
be calculated by tracing a single ray through the plasma along the line of sight of the radiometer.
However, in this project the best measurements of EC radiation where taken during the startup
phase of a shot, where the plasma is only ohmically heated and has a relatively low temperature
and density. In this case, the incoming radiation cannot be omitted. Moreover, for some of the EC
radiation measurements the line of sight of the radiometer is not pointing towards the plasma core
at all. A single pass with a ray is therefore not sufficient to calculate the radiation temperature.
Inspired by [85], the chosen strategy is to take into account reflections of the ray on the first wall
of the vacuum chamber. More specifically, the idea is to trace a ray leaving the launcher through
its line of sight and let that ray undergo a number of reflections. In each reflection the wave vector
is reflected but in addition the electric also has to satisfy the boundary conditions at the wall.
As a consequence part of the ray is reflected as an O-mode and part of the ray is reflected as an
X-mode. Thus by including reflections, the initial ray branches out in each reflection. The fraction
of power in the reflected O-mode and X-mode is denoted FO and FX, satisfying FO + FX = 1.
Again, the physical picture should be thought of as the opposite situation. A fraction of the EC
radiation in each of the branches reaches the line of sight of the launcher after undergoing a number
of reflections. With this in mind and by considering eq. (5.10), the radiation temperature of the
total EC radiation reaching the launcher is given by
Tr(ω) =
X
all segments
Tr,segFOX,secRw
Y
i∈all parents
Fmode,iRwe−τi(ω,s1i,s0i)
(5.11)
where the parent ray segments i are all the ray segments between the launcher and the considered
segment. Rw is the reflectance of the first wall of the vessel, and Fmode,i is the fraction of power
reflected in the mode of the considered segment i.
The ray tracer that is used for analysis of the radiometer measurements in the next chapter is
TORAY due to its clever integration with equilibrium reconstructions form TCV. TORAY, however,
54
==PAGE:61==
is not being used for ECE calculations and does not have a framework for calculating wall reflections.
Therefore, the ray tracing for the calibration process is instead carried out with the relativistic ray
tracer Warmray 2 (WR2) that was developed at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) for
supporting Collective Thomson Scattering calculations. Calculation of the radiation temperature
of a single segment is already implemented in WR2 by a numerical implementation of eq. (5.10)
without the first term on the RHS of the equation. In this project, the code was expanded to allow
reflections in the calculation of the radiation temperature, and eq. (5.11) was implemented.
The code WR2 is not in itself capable of handling wall reflections, but in the bachelor thesis [56] (by
me), a framework for WR2 to handle wall reflections in the NORTH tokamak [86] was developed.
A thorough description of how reflections are handled is given in the bachelor thesis. Here, it is
simply noted that when a plasma wave (O-mode or X-mode) undergoes reflection, the reflected
plasma wave will generally be a superposition of both an O-mode and an X-mode with different
intensities, and both of the reflected rays are traced independently. During this project, the code
was made more robust and modified to handle the slightly more complicated geometry of TCV.
This both included making it adaptable with TCV equilibrium profiles generated in LIUQE and
to account for the wall positions in TCV. Instead of including a precise geometry, the vessel is
approximated with a square poloidal cross section with walls at R = 0.614m, R = 1.147m and
z = ±0.76m as shown in figure 5.8. The first wall of the vacuum vessel of TCV consists of graphite
tiles, which are not perfectly reflecting for the considered microwave frequencies. In addition, the
wall is not homogeneous, but covered with a variety of ports and diagnostics. As a crude estimate,
the wall reflectance Rw is set to 0.95.
During measurements with the radiometer, the mirrors in the launcher are set at an angle to allow
radiation to pass that is polarized in either O-mode or X-mode. In some shots during this project,
the radiometer was measuring radiation polarized in O-mode, while it was measuring radiation
polarized as X-mode in other shots. After the radiation leaves the vacuum chamber through the
window in the launcher, the radiation is electromagnetic and is propagating through the waveguide
as one of the allowed modes.
At this point it should be of little influence for the radiometer
calibration whether the radiation was collected in O-mode or in X-mode. Because the calibration
technique is relatively novel, the procedure was decided to be applied for en ECE measurement
both in O-mode and in X-mode. In addition to testing the technique, this allows for a benchmark
of the procedure, because the response functions for the radiometer are expected to be similar for
the two polarizations.
In principle, the calibration should be carried out for all choices of Vrange for the digitizer due to
small changes in the system when changing the dynamic range. Due to small variations in the
temperature of the radiometer, measurements far apart in time are also subject to slightly different
frequency responses.
The calibration process, however, proved to be relatively tedious, and as
described shortly in the end of section 5.3.1, the calibration curve found in this section is instead
slightly modified in each shot to adjust for the small, but important changes in the radiometer
response.
5.3.1
Calibration for measurements with O-mode polarization
Here follows a walkthrough of the calibration of the radiometer in a measurement where the launcher
accepts waves polarized in O-mode, and the Vrange was set to the lowest option of 200 mV. The
goal is to determine the calibration coefficient c(ω) and background signal b(ω) from eq. (5.1) with
a measurement of the EC radiation following eq. (5.2) and the procedure described in the previous
section. The measurement was taken during the shot 77335 that is part of the campaign RT22-08,
and the line of sight of Launcher 7 was set at angles θ = 0◦, ϕ = 30◦with the mirrors optimized
55
==PAGE:62==
for collecting radiation within the bandwidth of the radiometer. The measurement consists of 1400
acquisitions of 221 samples distributed evenly over 1.7 s. Figure 5.4 shows the average absolute bit
value of each of the acquisitions. Already from this figure it is evident that there is a relatively high
background noise level that needs to be accounted for. With a total of 53 dB of attenuation this is
to be expected.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
Acquisition number
6
8
10
12
Bit value
Avg. absolute bit value
Background level
Figure 5.4: Average absolute bit value of each acquisition vs. acquisition number. Data from shot
77335.
For each of the 1400 measurements, a spectrogram is constructed. A spectrogram maps the Power
Spectral Density (PSD) of the signal as a function of time. With a signal in Volts, the unit of the
PSD is V2/Hz. The individual spectrograms are not shown here, but other individual spectrograms
are shown throughout chapter 6. The temporal average of the PSD for each spectrogram is collected
in a new averaged spectrogram that maps the avg. PSD for each acquisition as a function of the
acquisition start time. This spectrogram is shown in figure 5.5 with the frequency limited to the
considered bandwidth 40.5 −42.5 GHz. This type of spectrogram will be used extensively in the
data analysis and is for the remaining thesis referred to as an averaged spectrogram. By looking at
the averaged spectrogram in figure 5.5, it is clear that the signal changes in time. At time t = 0 s
the averaged spectrogram simply shows the background noise signal b(ω) (see eq. 5.2). Then, at
around t = 0.5 s, the radiometer starts receiving a stronger signal. At this time the gyrotrons nor
any other auxiliary heating systems are switched on yet, so the received signal consists of pure EC
radiation. By the time that the gyrotrons are switched on, the signal strength increases, and an
additional thin line is seen at around f = 42.45 GHz. The occurrence thin line is addressed in
section 5.4. The other increase in the signal, as this thesis finds, is likely due to the occurrence of
a low threshold PDI.
Figure 5.6a shows the averaged spectrogram of shot 77335 after the background signal b(ω) has
been removed. From this figure the EC radiation stands out clearly. The EC radiation is strongest
between t ≈0.5 s and t ≈0.57 s. Therefore, the average EC radiation measured in this time
span, denoted S0(ω) (see eq. 5.2), is used for the calibration procedure. Figure 5.6b shows both
the background signal b(ω) and the ECE signal S0(ω) within the radiometer bandwidth.
The
trend of a decrease in the strength of the background signal with frequency is expected and aligns
with the response of the digitizer shown in figure 5.2. However, a very noticeable feature seen in
figure 5.6b is that the difference between the ECE signal S0(ω) and the background noise b(ω) is
very small at the frequencies in the lower part of the spectrum. The reason for this inconvenient
feature is to find in the WR15 V-band waveguides that are used for the first step in radiometer
setup (see figure 5.1). Even though the radiation in the lower end of the spectrum is above the
cutoff frequency of 39.875 GHz in the waveguides, the ECE signal is heavily attenuated at these
frequencies. One solution could be to increase the lower bound of the considered bandwidth of
the radiometer to 41 GHz. Indeed, almost all interesting signals turn out to be above 41 GHz.
56
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.5: Top: averaged spectrogram of the raw voltage signal measured by the radiometer in
shot 77335. Bottom: gyrotron power of the X2 gyrotrons X2-1, X2-5 and X2-5 during the shot.
The two figures share the same time axis.
However, a few important signals are observed between 40.5 GHz and 41 GHz. Therefore, the
solution for calibration is instead to cap the calibration coefficient c(ω) at a minimum value for low
frequencies as shown later in figure 5.11. Another feature seen in figure 5.6b is that the measured
ECE signal S0 seems to have variations as a function of f on three different frequency length scales;
fast oscillations that are also seen in the background signal, oscillations with a period of ∼100MHz
and a slow variation peaking at ∼42 GHz and ∼41.3 GHz. These oscillations are likely due to
different standing waves that can propagate within the radiometer and amplify certain frequencies.
Next comes the modelling of the radiation temperature Tr0 during the ECE measurement. The ray
tracing requires knowledge of the electron temperature profile Te(ρψ) and plasma density profile
n(ρψ) at that time in the plasma. Because the vast majority of EC radiation are coming from
the plasma core region, the TS system delivers the two needed profiles, shown in figure 5.7. To
secure convergence of the ray tracer, the low values Te = 10 eV and ne = 5 · 1017 m−3 are set for
ρψ > 1, i.e. in the SOL region. The strong ECE signal was acquired at an early stage with a low
plasma density. The reason that the radiation temperature of O-mode EC radiation is found to be
largest at low densities is that at higher densities there is a density cutoff in the plasma, and the
fundamental O-mode is evanescent at the position of the fundamental EC resonance in the plasma
core.
With the Te and ne profiles established, the ray tracing can proceed. The reflection coefficient
at the walls is set to Rw = 0.95, and reflections are carried out until the power in the ray goes
below 2% of the initial power content. As a first approach, the reflection angle is calculated from
purely geometrical considerations. The projections of the resulting trajectories of the traced rays for
f = 40.5GHz in both the toroidal and poloidal plane are shown in figure 5.8. This simulation results
in a radiation temperature of Tr = 319 eV. This is a decent first approximation to the radiation
temperature, but the approach has some limitations. First, an obvious limitation of the ray tracer
WR2 is that it represents the Gaussian beam as a single ray. Contrary to a ray, a beam with a
finite width will undergo diffraction. This process is particularly important when including multiple
reflections. Secondly, the modelling of the poloidal cross section as completely square is very crude
approximation. In reality the first wall is covered in tiles and different probes, and as a result, the
beam will scatter in different directions. Especially from the projection in the poloidal plane it can
57
==PAGE:64==
(a) Averaged spectrogram of the raw voltage signal
measured by the radiometer in shot 77335 with the
background signal b(ω) subtracted. The dotted red
lines mark the time interval used for calculating the
ECE signal.
40.5
41.0
41.5
42.0
42.5
f [GHz]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
PSD [V2/Hz]
×10−12
b
S0
(b) Power Spectral Density of background signal
b(ω) and the ECE signal S0(ω) within the radiome-
ter bandwidth. Note, that the ECE signal includes
the background signal b(ω).
Figure 5.6: Identification of ECE signal and background signal.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.5
1
(a) Electron temperature profile.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
5
10
1018
(b) Plasma density profile.
Figure 5.7: Thomson scattering profiles in shot 77335 at time t = 0.5003.
be seen how the ray neither diffracts nor scatters away form its toroidal position. To include these
two effects in the simulations to some extend, this thesis follows the approach of [85] and includes
a degree of randomness to the reflection angle in each reflection. The reflection angle is modelled
with a random sample from a Gaussian distribution with a mean of the geometric reflection angle
and a standard deviation σθ of 10 degrees. An example of such a simulation is shown in figure 5.9.
One noticeable difference in the reflections after the randomness in the reflection angle is added is
that a fraction fraction of the ray is now reflected as X-mode in all reflections.
To model the radiation temperature profile Tr0(ω) (see eq. 5.2), a simulation with σθ = 10◦is
repeated 10 times for all ray frequencies between 40.5 GHz and 42.5 GHz in steps of 100MHz. The
resulting Tr0(ω) profile is shown in figure 5.10 along with the profile resulting from σθ = 0◦. Both
profiles are interpolated with a cubic spline function. A trend in both figures is that the radiation
temperature drops as the radiation frequency goes from 40.5 GHz to 42.5 GHz, and the radiation
temperature is generally estimated to be higher when the standard deviation of 10 degrees is added
to the reflection angles. The randomness in the reflection angles results in a relative large uncertainty
in the radiation temperature. Nevertheless, the best estimate of the radiation temperature is given
by the spline interpolation of the profile with σθ = 10◦(black line).
58
==PAGE:65==
Figure 5.8: Projections of ray trajectories in the toroidal plane (left) and poloidal plane (right) for
a ray with f = 40.5GHz at time t = 0.5003 in shot 77335. The red-white color scale (left bar)
maps the remaining relative power in the ray at its launch position, and the inferno color scale
(right bar) maps the plasma density. O-mode rays are solid lines, and X-mode rays are dashed
lines. The standard deviation in the reflection angle σθ is 0 degrees. The poloidal plane also shows
the R cutoff, cold UH resonance, EC resonance and ρψ contours. The simulation gives a radiation
temperature of Tr = 319 eV.
With an evaluation of both S0(ω), b(ω) and Tr0(ω), the calibration coefficient c is calculated ac-
cording to eq. (5.2). Its value is capped at 5·10−17 [V2/(Hz · eV)] for frequencies below 41.13 GHz,
and it is plotted in figure 5.11. Using b(ω) and c(ω), the averaged spectrogram in figure 5.5 is cali-
brated, such that the PSD is given in terms of the radiation temperature according to eq. (5.1). The
calibrated averaged spectrogram is shown in figure 5.12. Now, the EC radiation around t = 0.5 s
follows the profile Tr0(ω), and the signals occurring after the gyrotrons are switched on is defined
clearly. A full analysis of shot 77335 is given in section 7.2.2. There, it is shown that a probable
cause for some of the signals around half the gyrotron frequency is indeed a low threshold PDI.
The background signal b(ω) and calibration coefficient c(ω) are used to calibrate several shots
presented in this thesis. During the month of data collection, the response of the radiometer was
changing slightly. A slightly shift in radiometer response was also seen during some shots, possibly
because of a change of temperature in the system. An example of this is seen in figure 7.9. What
happens is that the fast modulations in frequency seen in figure 5.11 can shift slightly in frequency
between shots. The period of the fast modulations is luckily found to be unchanged. Therefore a
simple solution to make up for the change in the response function of the radiometer is to compare
the calibration coefficient carefully with the PSD of the raw signal at different frequencies in each
shot. If there appears to be a phase difference between the fast frequency modulations in the raw
signal and in the calibration coefficient, the calibration coefficient is shifted slightly by superposing
it with a harmonic function proportional to the moving average of the calibration
59
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.9: Same as figure 5.8, but with a standard deviation in the reflection angle σθ is 10 degrees.
This particular simulation gives a radiation temperature of Tr = 283 eV.
Figure 5.10: Plot of Tr0(ω) calculated with the ray tracing approach for both σθ = 0◦and σθ = 10◦.
Both profiles are interpolated with a cubic spline function. For the calculation with σθ = 10◦the
simulation is repeated 20 times, and the gray area on the graph marks ±1 standard deviation of
the best estimate
coefficient, denoted ⟨c(ω)⟩. If the ”frequency” of the fast modulations in the calibration coefficient
is denoted σ, the phase difference between the radiometer response and the calibration coefficient
σ0 and the proportionality factor K, the calibration coefficient is modified according to
c(ω) →c(ω) + K⟨c(ω)⟩ω sin(ω · σ + σ0).
(5.12)
60
==PAGE:67==
40.5
41.0
41.5
42.0
42.5
f [GHz]
0
2
4
[V2/(Hz · eV)]
×10−15
c(ω)
c lower limit
Figure 5.11: Calibration coefficient c(ω) found by a ray tracing analysis of shot 77335.
Figure 5.12: Calibrated averaged spectrogram of the measurements in shot 77335. The correspond-
ing uncalibrated averaged spectrogram is shown in figure 5.5. The labels are explained in section
5.4.
The two parameters K and σ0 are changed manually as to correct the response with the correct
phase and make sure that the amplitude of the new calibration coefficient doesn’t change in the
process.
5.3.2
Calibration for measurements with X-mode polarization
To benchmark the calibration procedure, the radiometer is also calibrated with an ECE mea-
surement in X-mode. A proper calibration of measurements in X-mode is more difficult than a
calibration in O-mode, because the radiation is harder to account for. Whereas the O-mode doesn’t
have any cutoffs in a low-density plasma, both the R cutoff and UH resonance are blocking X-mode
radiation from reaching the launcher. Therefore, the inclusion of reflections on the first wall is
absolutely necessary to account for any radiation. Even then, the ray tracing simulations are gov-
erned with a large uncertainty. Because the procedure of carrying out the calibration for X-mode
is similar to the procedure described in section 5.3.1, only a few steps are presented here.
The first caution to take is in the launcher polarization itself. In all measurements in O-mode, the
61
==PAGE:68==
mirror angles were calculated to be valid for radiation with a frequency around 41.5 GHz. In most
measurements with X-mode polarization, the mirror angles were instead calculated to be valid for
radiation with a frequency around 51 GHz. Therefore, radiation in the radiometer bandwidth might
not be fully polarized in X-mode. It will be approximated as X-mode radiation in this calibration
however.
The calibration uses measurements in the shot 77142 with a Vrange of 500 mV and a line of sight
of the launcher with the angles θ = 0◦, ϕ = 30◦with the mirrors optimized for collecting radiation
at 51 GHz. An averaged spectrogram of the measurements with a removed background is shown in
figure 5.13. Comparing this figure with the measurements used for the O-mode calibration, figure
5.6a, it is clearly seen that the radiometer picks up a lot less radiation when polarized in X-mode
(note the different scales on the colorbar). The reason for this can be seen in figure 5.14, where
X-mode radiation with a frequency of 42.5 GHz is traced in the reconstructed equilibrium profile
of shot 77142 at the time t = 0.55 s. The initial ray from the launcher is reflected at the R cutoff
before it reaches the plasma core. For any radiation generated in the plasma core to propagate
along the line of sight of the launcher, it has to undergo a number of reflections at the vessel walls
and R cutoff.
Figure 5.13: Top: averaged spectrogram of the raw voltage signal measured by the radiometer in
shot 77142 with the noise background b(ω) subtracted. The red dashed lines marks the frequency
band used for the calibration. Bottom: gyrotron power of the X2 gyrotrons X2-1, X2-5 and X2-5
during the shot. The two figures share the same time axis.
In this situation the ray tracing approach to the calibration becomes very approximate. In addition,
the ray tracer WR2 sometimes crashes when rays polarized in X-mode launches from very low density
into the R cutoff, so the procedure is rather cumbersome. Therefore, the radiation temperature is
only calculated at the frequency f = 42.5 GHz by averaging the radiation temperature of 20 full
ray tracings with reflections and with σθ set to 10 degrees. The resulting radiation temperature is
Tr0(42.5 GHz) = 21.4 eV ± 7.5 eV. This is an order of magnitude lower than the typical radiation
temperature of O-mode radiation. The large standard deviation of Tr0 compared to its value shows
the uncertainty in the ray tracing approach. Contrary to the calibration of O-mode polarization, the
radiation temperature is simply assumed to have this constant value in the entire bandwidth. With
this approximation, the resulting calibration coefficient c(ω) and calibrated averaged spectrogram
are shown in figure 5.15a and 5.15b respectively. Even though the ECE signal was lower for the
calibration in X-mode, the resulting calibration coefficient is similar to the one found in the O-mode
62
==PAGE:69==
Figure 5.14: Projections of ray trajectories in the toroidal plane (left) and poloidal plane (right)
for a ray with f = 42.5GHz at time t = 0.5503 in shot 77142. The red-white color scale (left bar)
maps the remaining relative power in the ray at its launch position, and the inferno color scale
(right bar) maps the plasma density. O-mode rays are solid lines, and X-mode rays are dashed
lines. The standard deviation in the reflection angle σθ is 10 degrees. The poloidal plane also shows
the R cutoff, cold UH resonance, EC resonance and ρψ contours. The simulation gives a radiation
temperature of Tr = 188 eV.
calibration, and indeed the calibrated averaged spectrogram in figure 5.15b shows a great degree
of details with little noise. However, a comparison of the amplitude of the calibration coefficient
found in section 5.3.1 after a re-scaling to the larger Vrange in shot 77142 shows that the calibration
coefficient calculated with X-mode radiation is approximately 40% to large. For the two calibration
coefficients to be equivalent, the radiation temperature of the X-mode radiation in shot 77142
would have to be Tr0 = 30eV. This value is around one standard deviation from the ray tracing
estimation of the X-mode radiation temperature. This result shows that the ray tracing approach
to the calibration of the radiometer is reasonable.
A choice is made to have most faith in the
calibration in section 5.3.1 and simply re-scale the calibration coefficient for the X-mode radiation
as shown in figure 5.15a. Moving on, the re-scaled calibration coefficient calculated in this section is
only used for the calibration of shot 77142, where the exact PSD values are not of large relevance.
In all other shots, the calibration coefficient found in section 5.3.1 is instead applied.
The measurements in shot 77142 will be analyzed properly in section 6.2. Here it is simply noted
that the calibrated averaged spectrogram show the same characteristics of two distinctively different
types of signals as was also seen in figure 5.12. In the following section it is shown how some of
these signals are directly related to gyrotron emission and are not PDI indications.
63
==PAGE:70==
(a) Calibration coefficient c(ω) calculated us-
ing ECE radiation in shot 77142. At frequen-
cies below 41.1 GHz, the value is clipped at
c(ω) = 7·1017[V2/(Hz · eV)]. The black curve
shows the calibration curve found using the
estimated radiation temperature of 21.4 eV in
the ray tracing analysis. In the red curve, the
calibration coefficient has been re-normalized
to fit the amplitude of the O-mode calibration
coefficient calculated in section 5.3.1.
This
corresponds to an X-mode radiation temper-
ature of Tr0 ∼30 eV.
(b) Calibrated averaged spectrogram of the measurements
in shot 77142. The labels indicate anomalous signals that
are caused by direct below frequency emission of the two
gyrotrons X2-1 and X2-5. An analysis of these signals is
covered in section 5.4.
Figure 5.15: Calibration of shot 77142.
5.4
Observation of Below Frequency Gyrotron Emission
As can be clearly noticed in the calibrated averaged spectrograms 5.12 and 5.15b, there seems to
be two distinctively different signals after the gyrotrons are switched on. One type of signal seems
to be relatively wide in frequency and to have large variations in time. In the next chapter it will
be shown that these signals are linked with the occurrence of low-threshold PDIs. The other type
of signals is very narrow in frequency and are present whenever a gyrotron is turned on with small
temporal variations in the PSD. Moreover, they drift in frequency during the shot. This behaviour
suggests that these signals are directly related to the gyrotron emission. As was explained in section
4.1, the main frequency of the gyrotrons also drift during a shot.
To more clearly see the difference in the signals, figure 5.16 shows a single spectrogram of the
acquisition at t = 1.331 s in shot 77142. The spectrogram will be analyzed in section 6.2. What is
to notice for now is the different characteristics of the visible signals. Figure 5.17 zooms in on two
narrow lines in the spectrogram that are assumed to be direct gyrotron emission. Both lines are
alsmost continuous in time.
Motivated by the observation of these narrow signals, an experiment at TCV was carried out to
test the hypothesis that the signals were coming directly from the gyrotrons and were not a result
of plasma interactions. In the three shots 77014, 77344 and 77350, a very short pulse was made
with the gyrotrons X2-1, X2-4 and X2-5 respectively at a time before the plasma breakdown. In all
of the three shots, the radiometer picked up radiation polarized in X-mode. The resulting averaged
64
==PAGE:71==
Figure 5.16: Calibrated spectrogram of a single acquisition at time t = 1.1331 s in shot 77142. This
specific spectrogram is also used in section 6.2 in the analysis of PDI measurements during ELM
bursts in TCV.
Figure 5.17: Same as figure 5.16, but zoomed in at two narrow frequency bands. The two spectro-
grams share the same time axis, but have different colorbars.
spectrograms are shown in figure 5.18 together with the gyrotron power. In all three shots, the
radiometer picks up a clear signal when the respective gyrotrons are switched on. For the X2-1
gyrotron, both the gyrotron power Pgyro and forward power Pforward is plotted. From the forward
power measurement it appears that the actual power reaching the vessel has a period of ∼8ms
where it gradually grows. The same is not observed for gyrotrons X2-4 and X2-5. This observation
is important in section 6.5, where the power threshold for PDI is investigated. The signal emitted
by the X2-1 gyrotron starts at around 42.5 GHz and drifts slightly in frequency as the forward
power grows. The measurements of direct gyrotron emission from the gyrotrons X2-4 and X2-5
both show a similar behaviour, different from the one seen for gyrotron X2-1. Around 20 ms before
the gyrotron switches on, a strong signal is seen around 41 GHz and when the gyrotron starts
delivering power, a weak signal around 42 GHz appears. The different characteristics of the three
gyrotrons owe to the fact, that gyrotron X2-1 is different from the two similar gyrotrons X2-4 and
X2-5 and is also positioned closer to the radiometer as shown in figure 4.2a.
Looking again at the two calibrated averaged spectrograms 5.12 and 5.15b, all the identified signals
65
==PAGE:72==
(a) Below frequency emission of gyrotron X2-1. The measurement is taken in shot 77014.
(b) Below frequency emission of gyrotron X2-4. The
measurement is taken in shot 77344.
(c) Below frequency emission of gyrotron X2-5. The
measurement is taken in shot 77350.
Figure 5.18: spectrograms showing direct below frequency gyrotron emission lines for each of the
three gyrotrons X2-1, X2-4 and X2-5. The top figure shows the gyrotron power and the bottom
figure an averaged spectrogram.
from direct gyrotron emission can be seen. In the two figures, these signals are each marked with
a label with the accountable gyrotron. Because this is the first time that strong below frequency
gyrotron emission has been observed at TCV, the signals gave rise to confusion in the early weeks
of measurements. Measurements of gyrotron emission in a bandwidth of half gyrotron frequency
are rarely made, and no literature or gyrotron characterizations could be found that described these
signals.
The gyrotron signals are seen both when the launcher accepts radiation in O-mode and in X-mode.
The below frequency emission from the gyrotrons is most likely polarized primarily in X-mode
similarly to the main gyrotron beams. During a shot, the low frequency beam will therefore be
reflected at the R cutoff and generally live in the edge of the machine between the cutoff and
the first wall. The part of the low frequency beam that is polarized in O-mode after reflections
can penetrate deeper into the plasma until it reaches a density cutoff, where it is also reflected.
Nevertheless, a fraction of the power of the low frequency O-mode beams will be reflected, and they
live in a larger volume than the low frequency X-mode beams. Therefore the signal measured by
the radiometer is expected to be stronger in X-mode than it is in O-mode. This is exactly what is
66
==PAGE:73==
observed as can be seen already by comparing figure 5.12 and figure 5.15b. A comparing the PSD of
the signal from gyrotron X2-1 in shot 77335 (O-mode) and in 77142 (X-mode) shows that the PSD
of the signal is ∼6 times stronger when measuring radiation in X-mode. This is strong evidence
that these signals are indeed direct gyrotron emission. In chapter 6 these signals will therefore be
ignored.
67
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 6
Observations of PDIs in TCV
During the experimental campaign in the autumn of 2022, the heterodyne radiometer presented in
the previous chapter picked up anomalous signals with varying strength during all shots with X2
heating. This chapter shows how these anomalous signals align with the expected daughter waves
produced in low-threshold parametric decay instabilities. A discussion on how the daughter waves
reach the radiometer follows in chapter 7.
6.1
Possible low-threshold PDI Scenarios in TCV
The type of PDI that is investigated experimentally in this thesis is that of a pump X-wave decaying
into two trapped daughter UH waves during X2 heating. The trapping mechanism requires a local
maximum in the density profile that is surrounded by two UH resonances as illustrated in figure
3.4 in section 3.2.1. There are several very different scenarios where such a profile can exist at a
particular time during a plasma shot. This section briefly discusses the possible scenarios in TCV.
In the following sections each scenario is investigated experimentally. It turns out that multiple
PDI scenarios can occur at different times in a single shot.
PDI occurring in the Plasma Core in Magnetic Islands
One low-threshold PDI that has been observed during X-2 heating in other machines, e.g. [37], is
a scenario where density perturbations due to magnetic islands act as cavities for the UH daughter
waves. This scenario first of all requires the plasma to have either a stationary magnetic island (as
is the case in [37]) or a strong tearing mode that generates the islands. Secondly, the position of the
second harmonic UH resonance must lie at a flux coordinate ρψ slightly below the rational q-surface
where the islands are generated. Tearing modes and magnetic islands are regularly observed in TCV
(e.g. [87]). However, the density of most of the plasmas with strong MHD activity in November and
December 2022 was so large that the second harmonic UH resonance was positioned either close to
the separatrix or in the SOL region. Therefore, no scenarios with possible trapping regions due to
magnetic islands have been observed at TCV, and the scenario is not discussed any further.
PDI occurring in the SOL during ELM Bursts
As described in section 2.2.1, a tokamak plasma operated in High confinement mode (H-mode) has
periodic ideal MHD instabilities known as Edge Localised Modes (ELMs). During an ELM, a small
68
==PAGE:75==
fraction of the particles in the plasma core are transported radially outwards in long filaments that
follow the direction of the magnetic field, but are very localized in the two other directions. An
image of a plasma in H-mode both before and during an ELM is shown in figure 6.1. When the
ELM filament passes the X-2 gyrotron beam in the SOL, the density perturbation works as a cavity
for the UH daughter waves generated in a PDI. During November and December 2022 there where
several campaigns with operation in H-mode. During H-mode shots, the radiometer measured PDI
signals that are correlated with the ELM crashes. Some of these measurements are presented and
analysed in section 6.2.
Figure 6.1: Images of the plasma in Mast. The global state of the plasma is (a) L-mode, (b) H-mode
before an ELM and (c) H-mode during an ELM. The picture is from [88].
PDI occurring in the SOL in Blob Filaments
When the plasma is operated in L-mode instead of H-mode, there is a constant turbulent radial
transport of particles in the SOL as described in section 2.2.2. Similar to the transport during ELM
events, this turbulent transport occurs in the form of filaments called blobs. The blobs are similar
to ELM filaments, but smaller in both size and amplitude. The first picture in figure 6.1 shows
these visible structures in the plasma edge. As with the ELMs, the blobs can work as cavities for
the UH daughter waves generated in a PDI when an X-2 passes through the SOL.
The transport of blobs in the plasma edge has previously been studied at TCV, both with experi-
ments and numerical interchange turbulence simulations. A snapshot of such a simulation is shown
in figure 6.2. The snapshot shows the cross section of a blob structure between the separatrix and
the first wall. The study [89] found the typical blob size to be 1 cm and the typical drift speed to be
400 m/s. During November and December 2022, the radiometer measured anomalous signals in all
L-mode shots. Some of these measurements are presented and analysed in section 6.3. It is found
that they are likely generated in Parametric decays in blob structures with parameters similar to
those found in [89].
69
==PAGE:76==
Figure 6.2: Snapshot from an interchange turbulence simulation of plasma transport in the SOL of
TCV. A blob structure is seen between the separatrix (ρψ = 1) and the first wall on the LFS of the
vacuum chamber. The simulation is made with the model ESEL and is taken from [89].
PDI occurring in the Plasma core
One of the PDI scenarios that has been observed at TEXTOR [48] is that of a low-threshold PDI
into trapped daughter waves occurring close to the centre of the plasma core. This mechanism
is only possible at very low plasma densities and requires the second harmonic EC resonance to
be positioned on the HFS of the plasma centre. In such a scenario, the plasma centre itself can
be completely surrounded by a second harmonic UH resonance and act as a very strong trapping
region.
In all campaigns in the autumn of 2022, the density in TCV was to high to allow for a second
harmonic UH resonance close to the plasma centre. Moreover, the toroidal magnetic field places the
EC resonance close to the centre of the vessel in most shot. An anomalous signal that was possibly
generated in a low-threshold PDI was observed once in an experiment with negative triangularity
during a violent disruption, as the plasma was lost before the gyrotrons were switched off. This
specific PDI signal could possibly be due to trapping somewhere within in the plasma core. Para-
metric decays of this type has little relevance for tokamak commissioning, but the observation gives
great insights into the trapping mechanism and escape of radiation. The measurements during this
shot are presented in section 6.4.
6.2
PDI occurring during ELM Bursts
This section presents evidence of PDI signals generated in H-mode plasmas during ELM bursts.
The data presented is from the two shots 77142, which is a part of the campaign RT22-01 and
77263, which is a part of the campaign M2134. The radiometer measurements from the shot 77142
have already been applied in section 5.3.2 where they are used for calibration of the radiometer.
In this shot the radiometer was measuring signals in X-mode and its LOS has the angle φ = 50◦,
θ = 0◦. In shot 77263 the radiometer was instead measuring signals in O-mode, but with the same
angle of the LOS. In both shots the plasma starts in L-mode and transitions to H-mode where ELM
bursts occur. PDI signals are measured during ELM bursts in both shots, but the characteristics
of the PDI signals turn out to be slightly different.
70
==PAGE:77==
Figure 6.3: Relevant measurements during shot 77142.
All panes (a)-(e) share the same time
axis. (a) Power of each X2 gyrotron. (b) Averaged spectrogram of the radiometer signal. The
radiometer is measuring signals in X-mode and its LOS has the angle φ = 50◦, θ = 0◦. The green
dashed lines mark the frequency band IX2−1 = [41.15, 41.55] GHz, and the red dashed lines mark
the frequency band IX2−5 = [41.65, 42.05] GHz (c) Average Power Spectral Density in the two
frequency bands IX2−1 and IX2−1. (d) Hα radiation measured with a LFS photo diode. (e) average
ne measured with the FIR radiometer at R = 1.06 m (yellow), ne measured with the TS system at
the separatrix (purple), ne measured with a Langmuir probe (LP) at the first wall at z = −0.04 m
(pink), moving mean of LP measurement (black) and critical density (eq. 6.1) for the X2-1 gyrotron
at the separatrix (blue).
First, the shot 77142 is analyzed. The measurements from several different diagnostics that are
used for the analysis of the shot are shown in figure 6.3 along with an averaged spectrogram of 600
individual radiometer acquisitions. The radiometer measurements can be divided into four different
phases. Until t = 0.6 s the plasma is only heated omically, and the radiometer measurements consists
of thermal EC emission. The ECE signal is low because the radiometer measures in X-mode. At
the t = 0.6 s the X2-1 gyrotron, which has a frequency of around fX2−1 = 82.7 GHz, is switched on,
and a signal is measured around half the gyrotron frequency at f ≈41.35 GHz. At this time the
plasma is still in L-mode, and the measured signal is attributed to PDI occurring in blobs in the
SOL of the plasma. At t = 0.8 s the power in the X2-1 gyrotron is increased, and the X2-5 gyrotron,
which has a frequency of around 83.8 GHz, is switched on. As a consequence, the signal measured
with the radiometer around f ≈0.5fX2−1 changes, and a new signal at f ≈0.5fX2−5 appears. The
mechanism behind this transition and an analysis of this part of the shot is not considered for now,
71
==PAGE:78==
but is covered in section 6.3.
At the time t ≈1.1 s the plasma transitions to H-mode, and the two signals at half gyrotron
frequency change in nature.
This part of the shot is analyzed now.
The fact that the plasma
transitions into H-mode is evident from the figures 6.3d and 6.3e. In the latter figure, the density in
the plasma core (yellow line) and at the separatrix (purple) is seen to increase at this time. This is
because a transport barrier builds up in the plasma. At the same time the photo diode measurements
of Hα radiation show large peaks appearing periodically. These peaks can be explained by the
recombination processes that occur in the plasma edge during ELM bursts as explained in section
4.2.5.
To keep track of the PDI signals related to each of the different gyrotrons, the frequency spectrum,
special emphasis is put on the interval IX2−1 = [41.15, 41.55] GHz which covers half the frequency
of the X2-1 gyrotron and the interval IX2−4,5 = [41.65, 42.05] GHz which covers half the frequency
of the X2-4 and X2-5 gyrotron respectively. Both intervals are marked with dashed lines in figure
6.3b. The average Power Spectral Density (PSD) in each of the frequency bands is plotted in figure
6.3c.
After the plasma transitions to H-mode, tall spikes start to appear in the averaged PSD
measurements. Between these spikes, the average PSD in both frequency bands IX2−1 and IX2−5
is lower than when the plasma was in L-mode. This behaviour agrees with the assumption that
ELM bursts give rise to low threshold PDI, whereas the monotonic density profile between the ELM
bursts with limited radial plasma transport doesn’t produce any trapping regions that allow for PDI
processes. The reason that there are fewer spikes in the average PSD of the radiometer signal than
there are spikes in the Hα signal is that the radiometer only took 600 acquisitions during the shot.
This doesn’t give a high enough time resolution to cover all ELM events.
Figure 6.4: Measurements before and after an ELM burst in shot 77142. All panes (a)-(c) share
the same time axis. (a) four individual spectrograms of the radiometer signal. The third spec-
trogram is identical to the one presented in figure 5.16.
The green dashed lines mark the fre-
quency band IX2−1 = [41.65, 42.05] GHz, and the red dashed lines mark the frequency band
IX2−1 = [41.15, 41.55] GHz.
(b) Average Power Spectral Density in the two frequency bands
IX2−1 and IX2−1. (c) Hα radiation measured with a LFS photo diode.
72
==PAGE:79==
In order to investigate the relation between the PDI signal and ELM events, figure 6.4 shows four
single spectrograms occurring before, during and after and ELM burst. The radiometer signal in
both frequency bands IX2−1 and IX2−5 is clearly seen to be largest in the third acquisition that
occurs at a time with a spike in Hα signal. To see if this correlation is consistent, the mean PSD
in each band in each radiometer acquisition is plotted as a function of the difference between the
time halfway through the acquisition and the time of the closest peak in Hα radiation. The plot
is shown in figure 6.5, and indeed a clear correlation in timing is seen. The PDI signal in both
frequency bands IX2−1 and IX2−5 is seen to peak around 0.15 ms before the peak in Hα radiation.
This is a key result. First of all, it establishes the expected correlation between the ELM bursts
and PDI occurrence. But the result is also important in the discussion of the escape mechanism for
the daughter waves in chapter 7. As will be shown in section 6.3, the expected PDI region in shot
77142 is positioned in the SOL around 3-4cm from the first wall. If the PDI signal is approximated
to be instantaneous, the time delay of ∼0.15 ms suggests a radial speed of the ELM filament of
∼250 m/s. This number doesn’t seem unrealistic, as it is close to the typical blob drift speed of
400 m/s found in [89]. Thus, the difference in timing suggests that the time scale for the daughter
waves to escape the trapping region and reach the radiometer is a lot faster than the time scale for
the radial propagation of an ELM.
Figure 6.5:
Average Power Spectral Density in each of the frequency bands IX2−1
=
[41.15, 41.55] GHz (green) and IX2−5 = [41.65, 42.05] GHz (red) vs time difference between ac-
quisition and the closest peak in the Hα measurement. The data covers radiometer measurements
in the time interval t ∈[1.153s, 1.373s] in shot 77142.
Before analyzing the single spectrograms during the ELM bursts in shot 77142, the PDI signals
occurring during the H-mode in shot 77263 is first considered in order to have a second shot for
comparison.
The radiometer was programmed to take four times more, but four times shorter
acquisitions compared to shot 77142. An overview of the relevant diagnostics for shot 77263 is
shown in figure 6.6. The shot 77263 shares many features with shot 77142. After the gyrotrons are
switched on the plasma is in L-mode, and the observed resulting PDI signal can be explained by a
trapping mechanism within blobs in the SOL. This part of the shot is analyzed in section 6.3 along
with the L-mode stage of shot 77142. At t ∼0.98 s the plasma transitions to H-mode, which is
followed by an increase in core density and periodic peaks in Hα radiation due to ELM bursts.
73
==PAGE:80==
Figure 6.6: Relevant measurements during shot 77263. All panes (a)-(f) share the same time axis.
(b) Averaged spectrogram of radiometer signal. The radiometer is measuring signals in O-mode and
its LOS has the angle φ = 50◦, θ = 0◦. The green dashed lines mark the frequency band IX2−1 =
[41.65, 42.05] GHz, and the red dashed lines mark the frequency band IX2−1 = [41.15, 41.55] GHz
Panes (a),(c)-(e) show similar measurements to the panes (a),(c)-(e) in figure 6.3. (f) electron
temperature measured with the TS system at the plasma centre (blue), at ρ = 0.5 (yellow) and at
the separatrix (purple).
One difference between this shot and shot 77142 is that the average PSD of the radiometer signal
during the H-mode phase is ∼5 times smaller. This difference is not concerning, as the shots are
from two different campaigns with very different plasmas. What is more interesting is the timing
of the measured signals with respect to the ELM bursts. With 2400 acquisitions compared to only
600 acquisitions taken in shot 77142, this shot offers a better temporal resolution. Figure 6.7 shows
spectrograms from five individual acquisitions taken during a single ELM burst. Again, there seems
to be a strong correlation between an increase in the Hα radiation and in the average PSD in both
frequency bands IX2−1 and IX2−5. The mean PSD in each band in each radiometer acquisition is
plotted as a function of the difference between the time halfway through the acquisition and the
time of the closest peak in Hα radiation in figure 6.8. Figure 6.8a covers the radiometer acquisitions
during the entire H-mode period for the frequency band IX2−5, but only the short period with
74
==PAGE:81==
constant power in the X2-1 gyrotron for the frequency band IX2−1. The timing of all acquisitions
in the frequency band IX2−1 is shown in figure 6.8b with a colorbar showing the gyrotron power.
As was also evident in shot 77142, there is seen to be a clear correlation between the timing of the
peaks in Hα radiation and the timing of the peaks in average PSD of the radiometer measurements.
In this shot, the peak in average PSD occurs ∼0.2 ms before the peak in Hα radiation, which is very
close to the offset found in shot 77142. The larger amount of data acquisitions with the radiometer
in shot 77263 allows for a better comparison between the timing of the peak in the average PSD in
the frequency bands IX2−1 and IX2−5. When comparing the red points in figure 6.8a with all the
points in figure 6.8b there doesn’t seem to be a difference. Neither the power in the gyrotron seems
to affect the timing as seen in figure 6.8b.
Figure 6.7: Measurements during an ELM burst in shot 77283. All panes (a)-(c) share the same
time axis. (a) five individual spectrograms of the radiometer signal. The green dashed lines mark
the frequency band IX2−1 = [41.65, 42.05] GHz, and the red dashed lines mark the frequency band
IX2−1 = [41.15, 41.55] GHz. (b) Average Power Spectral Density in the two frequency bands IX2−1
and IX2−1. (c) Hα radiation measured with a LFS photo diode.
A feature that is seen during the H-mode in both shot 77142 and 77263 is that the average PSD in
the frequency band IX2−1 is larger than the average PSD in the frequency band IX2−5 even though
the power in the X2-5 gyrotron is slightly higher than in the X2-1 gyrotron. This is a general
trend that goes again in all the analyzed shots from TCV during this project. The reason can be
contributed to the position of the gyrotrons compared to the radiometer. The position and angle of
the gyrotrons during shot 77142 and 77263 are shown in both the toroidal and poloidal plane in the
figures 6.13 and 6.15 respectively. Simply because the gyrotrons X2-4 and X2-5 are further away
from the radiometer than the X2-1 gyrotron, the daughter waves generated in parametric decays of
the gyrotron beams in the X2-4 and X2-5 gyrotrons have to travel further to reach the radiometer
which naturally results in a weaker signal.
With the different positions of the gyrotrons in mind, it is interesting to look at spectrograms of
single radiometer acquisitions during an ELM burst in the two shots. A plot of a single spectrogram
during an ELM burst in shot 77142 is shown in figure 6.9a. The colorbar in this figure has a log
scale. The same figure with a linear scale was previously shown in figure 5.16. This particular
spectrogram is the third spectrogram that was shown in figure 6.4. The strongest signal in the
75
==PAGE:82==
Figure 6.8:
(a) Average Power Spectral Density in each of the frequency bands IX2−1
=
[41.15, 41.55] GHz (green) and IX2−5 = [41.65, 42.05] GHz (red) vs time difference between ac-
quisition and the closest peak in the Hα measurement in shot 77142.
The data for the fre-
quency band IX2−5 covers radiometer measurements in the entire time interval of the ELMy phase,
t ∈[0.982s, 1.576s], whereas the data for the frequency band IX2−1 only covers the time interval
t ∈[0.982s, 1.110s] where the power in the X2-1 gyrotron is constant. (b) Same as (a), but only
contains data for the frequency band IX2−1 in the time interval t ∈[0.982s, 1.576s]. The colorbar
maps the power in the X2-1 gyrotron in each acquisition.
spectrogram occurs at f = 41.355 GHz with a well defined frequency. This frequency is matches
half the frequency of the X2-1 gyrotron. Another signal is observed at f = 41.85 GHz which matches
half the frequency of the X2-5 gyrotron. This signal is weaker and less well defined. The different
behaviour of the two signals align with the assumption that they are originally generated as trapped
daughter waves in a parametric decay instability within the filament of an ELM burst. The escaping
mechanism of the original trapped daughter waves is not discussed until next chapter, but the fact
that the X2-1 gyrotron is positioned a lot closer to the radiometer than the X2-5 gyrotron explains
why the radiometer would pick up a stronger and more well defined signal from a PDI caused by
the X2-1 gyrotron than one caused by the X2-5 gyrotron. Neither of the two signals are constant
in time, but appears to consist of many small events. This indicates that the density fluctuations
during an ELM burst change rapidly in time and doesn’t consist of a single smooth filament. The
timing of the events in the two signals is interesting. If it is possible to correlate the individual
signals generated during PDI of the beams from the two gyrotrons that have different poloidal and
toroidal positions, it might be possible to extract information on the poloidal movement of the ELM
filaments. The timing of the two signals is not investigated further in this thesis and remain an
open question for further analysis.
A spectrogram of a single acquisition during an ELM burst in shot 77263 is shown in figure 6.9b.
The frequencies seen in the frequency band IX2−1 in this acquisition are fundamentally different
from the ones seen in figure 6.9a. Instead of having a single signal at half gyrotron frequency, there
are two individual signals, each displaced with the same distance from half gyrotron frequency. This
indicates that the daughter UH waves in the parametric decays are not generated with the same
frequency, but slightly offset from each other. Additionally, of the two signals in the frequency band
IX2−1, the signal with lower frequency has a significantly larger PSD. The temporal length of the
individual PDI events is similar in figure 6.9b and in figure 6.9a. Note that the single acquisition
in figure 6.9a is 4 times longer than the acquisition in figure 6.9.
The occurrence of two signals in the frequency band IX2−1 with the lower one being the stronger one
is also observed consistently in measurements of PDI in the SOL during L-mode. The mechanism
76
==PAGE:83==
is investigated in section 6.3. For now, it is noted that by comparing the moving mean of the
Langmuir measurements of density in figure 6.3e and figure 6.6e, the average edge density is seen
to be larger in shot 77263 than in shot 77142 during the H-mode. In section 6.3 it will be shown
that density perturbations occurring in a plasma with a larger background density tend to give
rise to parametric decays with more separated daughter wave frequencies and which have larger
power thresholds compared to similar density perturbations with a lower background density. This
tendency could both explain the fact that signals with separated frequencies are only observed in
shot 77263 and why the average PSD is ∼5 times larger during the ELM bursts in shot 77142.
Figure 6.9: (a) Spectrogram of single acquisition taken in shot 77142 at a time around t = 1.332 s
where a peak is present in the Hα signal. The dashed lines marks the frequency bands IX2−1, IX2−5,
and the dotted line marks approximately half the gyrotron frequency of gyrotron X2-1 (green) and
X2-5 (red). (b) Spectrogram of single acquisition taken in shot 77263 at a time around t = 1.086 s
where a peak is present in the Hα signal. The dashed lines marks the frequency bands IX2−1, IX2−5,
and the dotted line marks approximately half the gyrotron frequency of gyrotron X2-1 (green) and
X2-5 (red).
6.3
PDI occurring in Blob Filaments
The focus is now shifted to the L-mode stage of the two shots 77142 and 77263. In this stage,
the assumption is that the signals measured with the radiometer are half frequency daughter waves
generated in PDI processes in plasma blobs in the SOL. To investigate this hypothesis, the individual
signals are first analyzed and characterized. Afterwards, the TS system and magnetic coils are used
to reconstruct the density and temperature profiles in the plasma at the time of the observed
signals. These profiles are subsequently analyzed with the analytical model that was presented in
section 3.2.1. The model finds that the measured signals align well with the signals that would be
theoretically expected.
Starting with shot 77142, figure 6.3 shows that there is a clear radiometer signal in the frequency
band IX2−1 until t ∼0.805 s. The signal is not constant in time, but consists of some acquisitions
with only EC radiation and some acquisitions with a large average PSD. At t ∼0.805 s the power in
the X2-1 gyrotron increases, and the X2-5 gyrotron is switched on. When this happens, the average
77
==PAGE:84==
the anomalous signal almost vanishes, and an increased amount of EC radiation is measured in both
frequency bands IX2−1 and IX2−5. Figure 6.10 shows two spectrograms of single acquisitions. The
spectrogram in 6.10 is based on an acquisition taken at a time with a strong radiometer signal during
the time where the gyrotrons are being switched on. The spectrogram in 6.10 uses an acquisition
taken ∼95 ms later. Both spectrograms contain anomalous signals in the frequency band IX2−1
that are very similar in nature to the PDI signals observed during the ELM burst in figure 6.9b.
The main difference between the two spectrograms in the frequency band IX2−1 is the amount of
anomalous signals that are observed. It should be noted that the spectrogram in figure 6.10b was
chosen because it does contain a single anomalous signal contrary to none in most acquisitions.
Under the assumption that these anomalous signals are indeed PDI signals, the takeaway is that
fewer PDIs occur in the frequency band IX2−1 after t ∼0.805 s than before that time. In the other
frequency band IX2−5, no anomalous signals are seen before the X2-5 gyrotron is switched on, but
a weak signal is seen in the second spectrogram. This observation also aligns with an assumption
that the anomalous signals are generated in parametric decays.
Figure 6.10: (a) Spectrogram of single acquisition taken in shot 77142 at a time around t = 0.804 s.
The dashed lines marks the frequency bands IX2−1, IX2−5, and the dotted line marks approximately
half the gyrotron frequency of gyrotron X2-1 (green) and X2-5 (red). (b) Spectrogram of single
acquisition taken in shot 77263 at a time around t = 0.898 s. The dashed lines marks the frequency
bands IX2−1, IX2−5, and the dotted line marks approximately half the gyrotron frequency of gyrotron
X2-1 (green) and X2-5 (red).
Before trying to explain the change in behaviour of the signals before and after t = 0.805 s, the
attention is switched to the shot 77263 again, which is shown in figure 6.6. This shot has the same
feature with a period with a large anomalous signal followed by a period with a weak anomalous
signal before the plasma transitions to H-mode. After the X2-1 gyrotron power increases at t ∼0.8 s,
the anomalous signal is strong, until it suddenly decreases rapidly at t ∼0.92 s. Figure 6.11 shows
a cutout of the averaged spectrogram in figure 6.6b that only considers the frequency band IX2−1
around this transition. Only judging from this figure, there seems to be three broad signals. One at
half gyrotron frequency, a weak up-shifted signal and a strong down-shifted signal. When looking at
a spectrogram of a single acquisition during this period in figure 6.12, these three signals are seen to
really be caused by two distinct signals centered around half gyrotron frequency, as was also observed
in figure 6.10. In both shots, the PSD in the lower observed signals is two orders of magnitude larger
than the PSD in the upper signal. If the anomalous signals are indeed measurements of the daughter
waves in parametric decays, the fact that this difference in the PSD of the two signals is observed in
78
==PAGE:85==
multiple shots is an important insight to determining the escape mechanism of the daughter waves.
This will be discussed in chapter 7.
The first strong hint that the anomalous signals shown the figures 6.10 and 6.12 are caused by
parametric decays with daughter waves trapped in the density fluctuations of blobs in the SOL
is found by considering the temporal length of the individual signals. The paper [89] found that
the typical radial size of the blob structures in TCV is ∼1 cm and that the typical radial blob
speed is 400 m/s. Thus, the time it takes for such a blob filament to pass a single radial point is
approximately 0.025 ms. This number is similar to the typical temporal length of the individual
signals observed in the frequency band IX2−1 in both figure 6.10 and 6.12. This observation supports
the hypothesis that the anomalous signals are generated when a blob passes a gyrotron beam in a
small radial region where a parametric decay is possible.
Figure 6.11: Identical to figure 6.6b, but covers a smaller window in time and frequency.
Figure 6.12: Spectrogram of single acquisition taken in shot 77263 at a time around t = 0.892 s.
The dashed lines marks the frequency bands IX2−1, IX2−5, and the dotted line marks approximately
half the gyrotron frequency of gyrotron X2-1 (green) and X2-5 (red).
What turns out to be the key quantity that causes the transition from a period with large PDI
signals to a period with a weak PDI signals is the density in the edge of the plasma. Already from
figure 6.6e and 6.3e it is apparent that the density at both R = 1.06 m (yellow lines) and at the
separatrix (purple lines) increase exactly at the time where the strong PDI signal disappears in
both shots. To see why this is the case requires a consideration of the trapping mechanism of the
low-threshold PDI presented in section 3.2.1. A low-threshold parametric decay instability with
daughter waves that are trapped between second harmonic UH resonances can only occur if there
is a perturbation in the plasma density that creates two new UH resonances, as illustrated in figure
3.4. This naturally requires the unperturbed background density to have a value that is lower than
the density that would be necessary for the second harmonic UH resonance to occur at that specific
79
==PAGE:86==
position. Accordingly, there is an upper critical value that the density can have for the trapping
mechanism to be possible at a specific plasma position. By calculating the second harmonic UH
resonance using eq. (2.37), it is straightforward to show that this critical density is given by
nc = ϵ0me
q2
ω2
0
4 −ω2
ce

(6.1)
where ω0 is the frequency of the considered gyrotron. For a perturbation in the density to give
rise to a trapping region, the unperturbed density must be below the critical density, whereas the
peak value of the perturbed density must be above the critical density. This creates a ”Goldilocks
zone” where density fluctuations of a certain size gives can give rise to a trapping mechanism. The
critical density for a parametric decay of the X2-1 gyrotron beam at the position of the separatrix
and at the vertical position z = 0 is plotted with a blue solid line in both figure 6.6e and 6.3e. In
both shots, the TS measurement of the density at the separatrix is very close to this value when
the transition from a period with a strong PDI signal to a period with a weak PDI signal occurs.
To investigate the change of density in the plasma edge and its effect on the region where PDI is
possible, the four figures 6.13-6.16 maps the density profiles in the two shots at times during the
period with strong PDI signal and at a time just after the PDI signals get weaker and less frequent.
In the two figures 6.13 and 6.15, the contours of the flux coordinate ρψ is shown in both the poloidal
and toroidal plane. Measurements from the TS system combined with an equilibrium reconstruction
from the magnetic probes gives a profile of both the plasma density ne and electron temperature
Te for the confined plasma region ρψ ∈[0, 1] with a small uncertainty. Because the flux surfaces are
open for ρψ > 1, the mapping of density and temperature to a flux surface is governed by a larger
uncertainty in this region. Nevertheless, the upper chords of the TS system is used to expend the
ne and Te profile into the SOL region with ρψ > 1. With an estimate of the plasma density and a
knowledge of the magnetic field, the second harmonic EC resonance, second harmonic UH resonance
and field frequency R cutoff can all be mapped onto the spatial coordinates of the tokamak. To
avoid the figures from getting too crowded, only the second harmonic resonances and cutoffs for
the X2-1 gyrotron are shown in the figures. On top of these profiles, the projection of the gyrotron
beams are plotted. These trajectories are calculated with the Ray tracing code TORAY which is
well integrated with the TCV equilibrium profiles. Finally, the LOS of the radiometer is illustrated
in the cross sections. Contrary to the beam trajectories, this is not simulated. The reason for the
difference in the illustration of the LOS in figure 6.13 and 6.15 is that in shot 77142 the radiometer
picks up radiation in X-mode, whereas it picks up radiation in O-mode in shot 77263.
Because the strongest PDI signals in both shots are measured in the frequency band IX2−1, only
the decay of the gyrotron X2-1 is considered in this analysis. In the region between the first fall and
the second harmonic UH resonance, the plasma density is below the critical density (eq. 6.1), and
a density fluctuation could theoretically give rise to a trapping region. This region is colored yellow
in the figures 6.13 and 6.15. The region is seen to be positioned very close to the vertical position
z = 0. The two figures 6.14 and 6.16 show the density profile, critical density and PDI region
at z = 0 for the two time instances in both shots. With these figures, the PDI process becomes
easier to imagine. At both considered time instances in both shots, the PDI region is positioned
almost fully in the SOL region. Accordingly, the only likely phenomenon that can cause density
fluctuations large enough for a trapping effect to occur are the blob filament structures that are
present in the SOL due to interchange turbulence processes.
80
==PAGE:87==
Figure 6.13: Position of radiometer, gyrotron beams, cutoffs and resonances in both the toroidal
plane at z = 0 m and in the poloidal plane at (a) t = 0.75 s and (b) t = 0.85 s in shot 77142.
Figure 6.14: Density profile, critical density (see eq.
6.1) and PDI region vs R at the vertical
position z = 0 at t(a) t = 0.75 s and (b) t = 0.85 s in shot 77142.
81
==PAGE:88==
Figure 6.15: Position of radiometer, gyrotron beams, cutoffs and resonances in both the toroidal
plane at z = 0 m and in the poloidal plane at (a) t = 0.85 s and (b) t = 0.95 s in shot 77263.
Figure 6.16: Density profile, critical density (see eq.
6.1) and PDI region vs R at the vertical
position z = 0 at (a) t = 0.85 s and (b) t = 0.95 s in shot 77263.
82
==PAGE:89==
The figures 6.14 and 6.16 show that in both shots, the edge density increases between the two
considered time instances, and the PDI region is shifted towards the LFS of the plasma. However,
as a PDI region is present at both time instances, parametric decays with trapped daughter waves
appear to be possible at both time instances. Thus, the fact that the PDI region is shifted due
to the density increase doesn’t express the transition away from strong PDI signals alone. Indeed,
PDI signals are seen after transition, but much less frequent. A possible explanation for the sudden
decrease in PDI signal is that the change in the background density gives rise to an increase in the
power threshold of parametric decays with daughter waves trapped in the blob filaments. To validate
whether this is the case, the analytical model presented in section 3.2.1 is applied. Implementing the
modes requires an estimate of both the temperature profile and perturbed density profile. Because
of the extend of work, the model is only used to analyze the transition in shot 77263. To start
off, figure 6.17 shows the profile of the plasma density and electron temperature at different times
around the transition.
Figure 6.17: (a) Different density profiles vs R in the plasma edge at z = 0 at different times during
the time period with transition from a strong PDI signal to a weak PDI signal in shot 77263. The
density measurements are made with a the TS system and mapped onto ρψ coordinates using an
equilibrium reconstruction. The profiles from times before the transition are plotted with solid lines,
the profile at a time during the transition with a dotted line and the prifiles after the transition
with dashed lines. Additionally, the critical density is plotted with a black line. (b) Similar to (a),
but showing the electron temperature profiles measured with the TS system insteda of the plasma
density profiles. The black solid line is an approximation of the Te profiles given by the Gaussian
distribution in equation 6.2.
The idea is now to use the Te and ne profiles before and after the transition as unperturbed profiles,
and and calculate the power threshold for a PDI to occur, if a perturbation is put on top of the
density profile. As shown in figure 6.17b, the electron temperature doesn’t appear to change much
83
==PAGE:90==
during the transition. It is approximated with the Gaussian distribution (on top of a constant
background)
Te(R) = 410 eV · e−( R−1.032 m
0.042 m )
2
+ 10 eV
(6.2)
Figure 6.18: (a) electron temperature Te vs R. (b) Perturbed plasma density profiles following
eq. (6.5) with an unperturbed profile from before the transition (eq. 6.3) and with different blob
positions Rblob (dash-dotted lines). The corresponding wave numbers of possible half frequency UH
daughter waves are plotted with dotted and dashed lines with the dotted lines being the warm X
branch of the dispersion relation and the dashed lines being the EBW branch, both following eq.
(2.53). Additionally, the critical density (black line) and PDI region (yellow region) are shown. (c)
same as (b), but for the unperturbed density profile in eq. (6.4) approximating the density after
the transition to lower PDI signal. (d) Power threshold for the X2-1 gyrotron beam to undergo a
PDI as a function of blob position Rblob for each of the unperturbed density profiles. The power in
the X2-1 gyrotron beam is plotted with a black dotted line.
84
==PAGE:91==
which is also plotted in the figure. The density profile changes during the transition. Therefore,
two different density profiles are constructed. One approximating the density before the transition,
nprofile 1
e
(R) =

0.63 · e−( R−1.06 m
0.036 m )
2
+ 0.27

· 1019 m−3
(6.3)
and another one approximating the density profile after the transition
nprofile 2
e
(R) =

1.0 · e−( R−1.06 m
0.036 m )
2
+ 0.35

· 1019 m−3.
(6.4)
The density profiles are each perturbed with a blob structure such that
nprofile i
e
(R) →nprofile i
e
(R) + nblob
e
(R, Rblob),
(6.5)
where Rblob is the position of the perturbation. The blob is approximated as a Gaussian distribution
with a width of σ = 0.01 m as was found to be the typical size of the blobs in the paper [89]. The
amplitude of the blob perturbation is set to 1·1018 at the position Rblob = 1.08 m. In order to keep
a constant amplitude of the blob structure as it propagates towards the plasma edge, the amplitude
of the perturbation Ablob is set to be a function of position as well, following
Ablob(Rblob) =

0.1 + nprofile i
e
(1.08 m) −nprofile i
e
(Rblob)

· 1019 m−3.
(6.6)
A number of profiles are now constructed, where the blob structure is set at different radial positions
in both density profiles. The profiles approximating a blob moving through the SOL in the period
with large PDI signal are plotted in figure 6.18b, and the profiles approximating a blob moving
through the SOL after the transition to the period with low PDI signal are plotted in figure 6.18c.
In both figures, the critical density is plotted as well (black line). The approximation to the electron
temperature is plotted in figure 6.18a. Under the assumption of half frequency daughter waves, the
wave number for each of the possible UH daughter waves for each density profile is plotted in
the figures 6.18b and 6.18c as well using the dispersion relation (eq. 2.53). In these plots, the
Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization rule (eq. 3.28) is not applied yet, and ky and kz are both set to
0. The color is set to be the same for each density profile and corresponding wave numbers. The
yellow region in figure 6.18b and 6.18c mark the region, where trapping of the daughter waves is
possible. This region is denoted the PDI region. Already, it is clear that the PDI region in the
period with strong PDI signal is position closer to the core of the plasma and is slightly larger
than the PDI region after the transition to lower PDI signal. Another observation is that due to
the larger absolute density level after the transition, the absolute value of the wave number of the
trapped daughter UH waves in this period is generally larger than the absolute value of the wave
number of the trapped daughter UH waves before the transition. This difference turns out to have
a large impact on the power threshold of the Parametric decays. For each profile, the method to
calculate the power threshold that is described in section 3.2.1 is carried out, and the resulting
power threshold is plotted in figure 6.18d as a function of blob position. What is found is that the
power threshold is generally ∼2 orders of magnitude lower for the profile showing a large PDI signal
than for the profile after the transition to a weak PDI signal. In the latter, the power threshold is
above the gyrotron power at most radial positions so parametric decays cannot occur, whereas the
power in the X2-1 gyrotron surpasses the PDI power threshold in large parts of the PDI region in
the profile with large measured PDI signal. The calculated power threshold in this region is ranging
down to ∼70 kW. This overall result aligns perfectly with the experimental observations and is
a strong indication that the measures anomalous signals measured with the radiometer are in fact
PDI signals.
Now, the analytical model that is applied to calculate the power threshold uses several crude
approximations and has certain limitations. The biggest inaccuracy of the model is that it assumes
85
==PAGE:92==
trapping in only one dimension, whereas the trapping mechanism within a blob filament (or an
ELM filament) is generally two-dimensional. Furthermore, the daughter waves are assumed to have
exactly the same frequency. From the observation presented in this chapter this is shown not to
be the case. Therefore, the absolute values of the power threshold should not be trusted to high
precision. Yet, the general trend of an increase in power for a larger unperturbed density profile and
the order of magnitude of the estimated power thresholds is not expected to change dramatically
by expanding to a more complicated model. Based in the result of this model and comparison with
the experimental observations, it is likely that an anomalous measured signal is indeed originating
from parametric decays of the gyrotron beam with a trapping process in blob structures in the SOL
To round off the analysis, the fact that the two trapped UH daughter waves appear to have slightly
different frequencies in the observations is explained with a qualitative argument. The power thresh-
old of the PDI decay is calculated by considering both the non-linear coupling of the pump wave and
two daughter waves and the loss of the daughter waves in the directions without trapping due two
convection and diffraction. As shown in figure 3.4, the assumption that the daughter waves have
equal frequency give rise to two small regions within the trapping region where the phase matching
criterion (eq. 3.1) is satisfied, and the decay is into one UH wave on the X-mode branch and another
UH wave on the EBW branch. If the frequencies of the two daughter UH waves are slightly displaced
from each other, it is possible to have a scenario where the phase matching criterion (eq. 3.1) is
approximately satisfied in a relatively large region, and both daughter waves belong to the EBW
branch of the UH dispersion relation (eq. 2.53). The larger size of the interaction region and the
lower group velocity of the EBW gives rise to a larger nonlinear interaction strength between the
three waves. To illustrate this, two profiles from the region with large observed PDI signal with dif-
ferent blob positions are plotted in figure 6.19. For these particular profiles, the largest overlap with
phase matching if the daughter UH waves is reached for a frequency difference of f2 −f1 ∼125 MHz
for the blob position in figure 6.19a and a frequency difference of f2 −f1 ∼50 MHz for the blob
position in figure 6.19b. These frequency differences are very similar to the frequency differences
that are observed in the experiments. Furthermore, this example perfectly explains the observation
(in eg. figure 6.11) that the difference in frequency between the two UH daughter waves changes
during the passing of a blob through the PDI region. As the blob passes through the PDI region,
the specific parametric decay with lowest power threshold changes, giving rise to the difference in
the observed frequencies.
The same phenomenon can explain the difference in the measured PDI signals in the frequency
band IX2−1 during the two ELM crashes in presented in figure 6.9. The edge density during the
H-mode in shot 77263 is larger than the edge density during the H-mode in shot 77142 (see figures
6.3e and 6.6e), and the density perturbation in the ELMs in shot 77263 are expected to be larger
than in shot 77142 as well. A reconstruction of the density profiles during the ELM bursts is not
carried out here, but the larger ELMs in shot 77263 are likely to give rise to parametric decays with
more separated daughter waves than the small ELMs in shot 77142, where only a single signal at
half gyrotron frequency is measured.
86
==PAGE:93==
Figure 6.19: (a) Perturbed plasma density profile following eq. (6.5) with an unperturbed profile
from before the transition (eq. 6.3) and with a blob position at Rblob = 1.10m (solid black line).
The corresponding wave numbers of the two trapped UH daughter waves that give rise to the largest
spatial region with the phase matching condition (eq. 3.1) satisfied are plotted with solid and dashed
lines. The wave number of the second daughter wave is reversed and displaced with k0x in order
to illustrate the overlap in the phase matching region. The solid lines are the warm X branch of
the dispersion relation, and the dashed lines are the EBW branch, both following eq. (2.53). The
daughter UH waves are displaced ∼125 MHz from each other. (b) same as (a), but with a blob
position at Rblob = 1.115m. Here, the daughter UH waves are only displaced ∼50 MHz from each
other.
6.4
PDI possibly occurring during a disruption
A third type of a possible PDI decay in TCV was observed in shot 77058 during a disruption, where
the plasma was lost. The shot 77058 is fully analyzed in section 7.1. For now, the attention is kept
at a spectrogram of a single radiometer acquisition taken during the disruption of the plasma which
is shown in figure 6.20. Several features of this of this anomalous signal stand out from the other
anomalous signals presented in this thesis. First of all, the signal has a very well defined frequency
at both half the frequency of the X2-1 gyrotron and at half frequency of the gyrotrons X2-4 and
X2-5. Especially the signal at half frequency of X2-4 and X2-5 is way more defined than other
signals measured at this frequency. Additionally, the signal has a large PSD and last for a long
time with a relatively small change in the PSD compared to other observed frequencies. As this
signal is also measured during the time of a disruption, the suspicion that this signal is generated
in a PDI decay with a different trapping mechanism than the ones presented in the previous two
section arises.
To investigate whether this could be the case, figure 6.21 shows several measurements from active
diagnostics during the disruption. The disruption itself occurred at around t = 0.9035 s. From figure
6.21a it is seen that the three gyrotrons where still switched on at the time of disruption, and from
figure 6.21b it is evident that a current was still flowing in the plasma during the disruption. This
means, that the plasma still has some closed flux surfaces, and accordingly a coherent structure.
Figure 6.21c shows the line integrated density at R = 1 m during the disruption. Interestingly, the
line integrated density at this position is seen to increase during the disruption, after which it
87
==PAGE:94==
Figure 6.20: The two figures share the same time axis. (a) spectrogram of single acquisition in the
shot 77058 at a time during a plasma disruption. b Maximum PSD in the frequency bands IX2−1
and IX2−45 during the acquisition)
Figure 6.21: Measurements from different diagnostics during the disruption in shot 77058. The
figures share a common time axis. (a) Forward power in the three gyrotrons X2-1, X2-4 and X2-5.
The absolute value of the signals appear to be wrong, but the timing of the measurement assumed
to be correct. (b) Total plasma current. (c) Line integrated electron density ne measured with the
FIR interferometry system. The data is shown for the chord positioned at R = 1m.
quickly declines and the plasma is lost.
The increase in density at this position indicates that
the plasma is moving radially outwards during the disruption. For a low threshold PDI with half
frequency daughter waves to be able to occur during the disruption, requires a trapping region for
the daughter UH waves caused by a plasma fluctuation. The assumption for the observed anomalous
signal is that it is caused by a PDI with the daughter wave trapped somewhere inside the plasma
88
==PAGE:95==
core itself.
To see how this could be possible, it is first noted that the shot 77058 was a part
of the campaign RT22-02 and had a negative triangularity. A reconstruction of the equilibrium
profile in the poloidal plane a short moment before the disruption is shown in figure 7.2. Density
measurements from the Thomson scattering system are not available during the disruption, so
instead the analysis relies on line integrated density measurements with the FIR interferometry
system. Figure 6.22 shows the line integrated radial density profile before, during and after the
disruption. The black line shows the density profile at the time of the disruption. Surprisingly,
the line density is seen to generally go up during the disruption. Furthermore, the profile shifts
from being relatively smooth with a maximum around R = 1.0 m to having a local maximum
in the density profile around R = 0.87 m, further towards the centre of the vacuum vessel. The
observation of this large perturbation gives rise to a suspicion that it could work as a trapping
region for daughter waves generated by parametric decays of the X2-4 and X2-5 gyrotron beams
during the disruption. Indeed, the perturbation is positioned on the LFS of the second harmonic
EC resonance, which is a minimum requirement for a trapping region between second harmonic
UH resonances to occur. However the fact that the density is seen to increase indicate that the
perturbation could be positioned beyond the critical density in equation (6.1). Even though this
indeed seems to be the case at first sight, the lack of data from the TS system makes it impossible
to create a proper density reconstruction.
Some key information that is missing is the vertical
density distribution during the disruption. As the FIR interferometry system only measures the
line integrated density, the density perturbation could e.g. consist of several smaller perturbations
that could allow for a trapping mechanism. Another important thing to notice is that approximately
1 ms after the FIR measurement, the plasma is lost. A small timing error could potentially give
rise to an overestimation of the density during the disruption.
Regardless of the trapping process, the observation of the well defined and strong signals at half
gyrotron frequency in itself is a strong indication of a PDI process. It could be interesting to have a
systematic look through all data recorded by the radiometer during plasma disruptions in different
shots and see whether strong
Figure 6.22: Radial profiles of line integrated density at a time before (blue), during (black) and after
(orange) the disruption. The data is collected with all the chords of the FIR interferometry system.
The dotted green and red lines mark the radial position of the second harmonic EC resonance of
the X2-1 gyrotron and X2-4 and X2-5 gyrotrons respectively.
6.5
Power Threshold
A final remark that has not been considered in detail so far is the observed values of the power
threshold for the parametric decays instabilities observed in TCV. Of the approximately 50 shots
with both X2-heating and with the heterodyne radiometer switched on, anomalous signals have
89
==PAGE:96==
been observed in every single shot. Far from all of the shots have been analyzed in detail, but
there is a clear trend of seeing signals due to parametric decays during ELM bursts in H-mode
operation and signals during operation in L-mode that are very dependent on the edge density.
If all the anomalous signals are indeed originating from parametric decays, it follows that all the
shots with X2-heating in TCV give rise to some possible PDI process with a power threshold below
the gyrotron frequency. An interesting and slightly tedious study to do in the future could be to
go through all the radiometer data collected during X2 heating at TCV and classify the possible
trapping mechanism, density profile and PSD of the observed PDI signals along the lowest emitted
gyrotron power, where no anomalous signals are observed. This could give a good estimate of the
power threshold of the different PDI processes along with a possible correlation between gyrotron
power, plasma density and PDI signal strength.
For now, to show an example of this process and to give a crude estimate of the power threshold in L-
mode plasmas, figure 6.23 shows a spectrogram of a single long acquisition during the time that the
X2-1 gyrotron starts emitting power in the shot 77460. In this shot, the radiometer was collecting
radiation in X-mode. spectrogram and the average PSD of the measured PDI signal is plotted along
with the gyrotron power stored in Pgyro as well as the forward power in the gyrotron. Although the
gyrotron is supposed to increase almost instantaneously according to the Pgyro measurement, the
measurement of forward power shows that it takes some time before the requested power is delivered.
If the readings if the forward power are trusted, the power threshold for the PDI process in this
specific L-mode shot is around Pth ∼160 kW, which correlates well with other PDI measurements
of the power threshold as well as the level predicted in the analysis in the L-mode period of the
plasma in shot 77263 in section 6.3.
Figure 6.23: Gyrotron power and PDI signal in shot 77460. The three figures share a common time
axis. (a) Gyrotron power collected stored in Pgyro as well as measured forward power for the X2-1
gyrotron during the first milliseconds of its operation. (b) spectrogram of a single long radiometer
acquisition showing only the frequency band IX2−1. (c) Average PSD in the frequency band IX2−1
during the acquisition. For higher readability in this long acquisition, the average PSD (green solid
line) is shown after taking a moving temporal average of the line. The black dashed line marks the
approximate time that the first PDI signal occurs.
90
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 7
Escape Mechanism of Trapped
Daughter UH Waves
Until now, all the anomalous signals that are measured with the radiometer have been shown
to have the same frequency as trapped UH daughter waves that are generated in low-threshold
parametric decays. Additionally, the features of individual has been explained in terms of a PDI
decay. However, there has not been an assessment of the origin of the waves that are actually being
measured with the radiometer. The assumption is that some of the power in the trapped daughter
waves is somehow escaping the trapping region and reaching the radiometer, where a signal is picked
up.
Based on the observations in the previous chapter, it is beyond doubt that waves with approximately
half gyrotron frequency are produced in low-threshold nonlinear wave interactions. Furthermore,
the observations can be explained with the trapping mechanism described in section 3.2, where
several UH resonances appear due to a non-monotony of the plasma density. Of course, the 1d
model presented in section 3.2.1 and applied in section 6.3 is highly idealized and based on crude
assumptions, and is therefore insufficient for describing the full mechanism. However, the funda-
mental idea of a trapping mechanism giving rise to a reduction in the power threshold of parametric
three wave interactions is valid.
As explained in section 3.2.2, the current leading theory is that the intensity of the daughter waves in
the trapping region quickly gets so large that the trapped UH daughter waves undergo a secondary
parametric decay into an UH wave with a lower frequency and an Ion Bernstein Wave (IBW). In
the analyzed data so far, no downshifted signals originating from secondary parametric decays have
been observed. This, however, doesn’t rule out that secondary decays actually occur in TCV. There
could be several reasons for the lack of measurements.
• The frequency shift of the downshifted UH wave in a secondary decay could be anywhere
between a few hundred MHz and a GHz.
There is a good chance that the bandwidth of
the radiometer is too limited for the downshifted waves from secondary parametric decays
originating from the X2-1 gyrotron to be measured, simply because these signals cannot
propagate through the WR15 waveguides in the radiometer. Even if this is the case, secondary
downshifted UH waves originating from the X2-4 and X2-5 gyrotron should be measurable
within the bandwidth. This leaves two options.
• Maybe some down-shifted signals form secondary decays of the X2-4 and X2-5 gyrotron beams
are measurable, but are mistaken for primary PDI signals originating from the X2-1 gyrotron.
91
==PAGE:98==
This also seems unlikely, as several shots without an active X2-1 gyrotron have been analyzed,
and no extra signals have been observed.
• A second and more likely explanation is therefore that the UH waves originating from sec-
ondary parametric decays are in fact not measurable. A situation where this could very well
be the case is if the UH wave generated in the secondary decay is not trapped.
Because
the EBW has a smaller group velocity than the X-mode, it is likely that secondary decays
with lowest threshold are those of the EBW branch of the trapped UH waves decaying into
a downshifted EBW and an IBW. If the frequency of the downshifted EBW is low enough
that the wave is not trapped, the wave will propagate into the core of the plasma where it is
completely damped at the EC resonance. This in turn could potentially give rise to relatively
large EC radiation within the bandwidth of the radiometer.
The last explanation for the lack of observations of UH waves generated in secondary decays doesn’t
seem unlikely at all. Indeed, an increase in ECE radiation within the radiometer bandwidth is often
seen as a ”side effect” of measurements of strong PDI signals. Another peculiar feature that is
observed in figure 6.6f is that the temperature in the outer plasma core and at the separatrix
remains approximately constant during the period with a strong PDI signal in shot 77142, while
the temperature in the plasma centre increases in this period. Whether this observation could have
a relation to an absorption of EBWs in the plasma centre still seems unlikely due to the sheer size
of the increase in the core temperature, but further statistical analysis of several shots could show
whether a small correlation could be found. The ion waves are also not observed directly, but an
accompanied effect of the generation of strong IBWs would be the generation of a population of fast
ions, as have previously been observed in the TCV tokamak [40]. The following section analyses a
shot from November 2022, where a fast ion population is also observed.
7.1
Observation of Supra-thermal Ions
One of the shots where the largest PDI signals has been observed is shot 77058. The shot is in
L-mode and is part of the campaign RT22-02. Figure 7.1a-7.1e gives an overview of the gyrotron
power, average PDI signal, plasma density and electron temperature at different positions in the
plasma. Additionally, it is important to note, that no NBI heating was used in the shot. Contrary
to the other shots analyzed so far, shot 77263 is not diverted, but has a negative triangularity as
shown in figure 7.2. The figure is from the time t = 0.85 s, where figure 7.1b-c show a very large
PDI signal. The edge of the plasma at ρψ = 1 is seen to touch the first wall in figure 7.2, meaning
that the acts as a limiter. As a result, the Langmuir probe measurements in figure 7.1d show the
the edge density is large and has large modulations in time. This limits the PDI region to the last
∼2 cm before the first wall as shown in figure 7.3 for gyrotron X2-1 and X2-5, but gives a slightly
larger PDI region for the gyrotron X2-5. By comparing figure 7.1c and 7.1d there is seen to be a
clear correlation between the edge density and average PSD of the PDI signal, as well as with the
electron temperature in the centre of the plasma, shown in figure 7.1e with a blue line. This is
similar to what was observed in the period with large PDI signal in shot 77263. No matter what
exact mechanism gives rise to he density perturbations that allow strong PDI signals to occur, these
perturbations tend to give rise to long PDI signals in the frequency band IX2−45, where PDI signal
with the largest PSD is also observed. To have a better look at the individual PDI signals, figure
7.4 shows three spectrograms made for acquisitions taken at three different times in the plasma.
The first thing to notice is that when comparing with all other spectrograms of single radiometer
acquisitions presented in this thesis, the PDI signals observed in the frequency band IX2−45 in these
three spectrograms are the longest observed so far. Secondly, the three spectrograms in figure 7.4
92
==PAGE:99==
all show a large EC radiation. With a careful inspection of the spectrograms, it can be seen that
the EC radiation is clearly correlated with the occurrence of the PDI signals, and is especially large
Figure 7.1: Several relevant measurements during shot 77058. All panes (a)-(f) share the same time
axis. (a) Power of each X2 gyrotron during the shot. (b) Averaged spectrogram of the radiometer
signal. The radiometer is measuring signals in X-mode and its LOS has the angle φ = 47◦, θ = 0◦.
The green dashed lines mark the frequency band IX2−1 = [41.15, 41.55] GHz, and the red dashed
lines mark the frequency band IX2−45 = [41.65, 42.05] GHz (c) Average Power Spectral Density
in the two frequency bands IX2−1 and IX2−1.(d) average ne measured with the FIR radiometer at
R = 1.06 m (yellow), ne measured with the TS system at the separatrix (purple), ne measured with
a Langmuir probe (LP) at the first wall at z = −0.04 m (pink), moving mean of LP measurement
(black) and critical density (eq. 6.1) for the X2-1 gyrotron at the separatrix (blue). (e) electron
temperature measured with the TS system at the plasma centre (blue), at ρ = 0.5 (yellow) and
at the separatrix (purple). (f) Fraction of supra-thermal ions and bulk ions during the shot. The
calculation is based on the bi-Maxwellian fits shown in the Charge Exchange spectrum in figure 7.6.
93
==PAGE:100==
Figure 7.2: Position of radiometer, gyrotron beams, cutoffs and resonances in both the toroidal
plane at z = 0 m and in the poloidal plane at t = 0.85 s in shot 77058.
Figure 7.3: Density profile, critical density (see eq. 6.1) and PDI region vs R at the vertical position
z = 0 at t = 0.85 s in shot 77058.
during the long PDI signals in pane a and c. If the EC radiation is indeed correlated with the
occurrence of the long PDI signals, a good explanation could be that it is generated by by absorption
of escaping EBWs from secondary parametric decays that deposit their energy in the plasma centre.
This is not the only possible explanation.
Another possible explanation could be that the EC
radiation is generated locally during primary decay processes or that the PDI processes somehow
allows more radiation from the centre of the plasma to reach the radiometer.
If the increased EC radiation is indeed caused by escaping EBWs from secondary PDI decays, it
follows that the same secondary decays produce IBWs. Is this is the case, and if the produced IBWs
are large, these waves should manifest in a population of fast ions when they deposit their energy in
the plasma. To analyse the distribution of bulk ions and fast ions in the shot, the CNPA diagnostic
at TCV is used. This diagnostic is described in detail in section 4.2.6. In the presentation of earlier
measurements of a supra-thermal ion population in TCV, the PhD thesis [40] has been cited several
times throughout this thesis. The CNPA analysis performed now is closely inspired by the approach
in this PhD thesis. Before the analysis of the shot 77058 it is necessary with a short intermezzo.
94
==PAGE:101==
Figure 7.4: Spectrograms of single radiometer acquisitions in shot 77058 at the three times (a)
t ∼0.695 s, (b) t ∼0.357 s and (c) t ∼0.861 s. The dotted and dashed lines marks half the
frequency of the gyrotrons and the frequency bands IX2−1 and IX2−45 respectively.
A figure of a CNPA analysis with a Change Exchange Spectrum (CXS) is taken directly from the
PhD [40] and presented in figure 7.5. The CXS on the y-axis is given by equation (4.11), and a
bi-Maxwellian fit of the spectrum following the equation (4.13) gives an estimate of the bulk ion
temperature T b
i , the temperature T s
i of the supra-thermal ion population and the fraction between
the particle density of the supra-thermal ion population and the bulk population ns
i/nb
i. What
is important to notice from the figure is how well the bi-Maxwellian fits describe the data, which
really looks like two straight lines in the figure. The results of the fit is shown in the legend of
the figure for each spectrum and should be read as T b
i [keV], T s
i [eV], ns
i/nb
i. Since that and similar
observation was made, almost 15 years have passed, and in the meantime there are two major
changes to the CNPA system. The first change is simply tear and wear. There is a suspicion that
the thin carbon foil in the CNPA that is meant to strip some electrons from the continuous beam
of neutral particles is damaged in some of the collector channels. This is because straight lines in
the CX spectrum are generally not observed anymore, and some collector channels appear to see a
stronger signal than others. This is especially observed for the collector channels for low deuterium
energies (< 4 keV). Secondly, the line of sight of the CNPA has been turned by 90 degrees since the
experiments in [40] were carried out. Back then, the LOS of the CNPA was pointing in a direction
perpendicular to the magnetic field lines. That has since been changed to a direction tangential to
the magnetic field lines, as this allows for better diagnostic of the fast ions generated by the NBI
system. However, ions accelerated by ion waves generally obtain their supra-thermal velocity in
the direction perpendicular to the magnetic field lines. Partly because of these two changes, the
obtained CX spectrum in shot 77058 which is shown in figure 7.6 looks different and somewhat less
convincing than the CX spectrum shown in figure 7.5. Despite its slightly different appearance,
the spectrum in figure 7.6 clearly shows an increase in ion counts during the shot, especially after
t = 0.8 s. By fitting the data points after a the bi-Maxwellian distribution in equation (4.11), the
fraction of supra-thermal ions to bulk ions is calculated in the different time intervals. The temporal
95
==PAGE:102==
Figure 7.5: Charge Exchange Spectrum (CXS) of the deuterium collector channels of the CNPA
measurements for different time intervals during shot 30477. The CXS is given by function (4.11).
All the points indicate measurements with individual collector channels, and the solid lines are fits
of the CX spectrum after the bi-Maxwellian equation (4.13). A black dashed line plots the one
count limit of the CX spectrum and is a measure of the noise floor. The figure is not created by
me, but is borrowed from the PhD thesis [40].
Figure 7.6: Charge Exchange Spectrum (CXS) of the deuterium collector channels of the CNPA
measurements for different time intervals during shot 77058. The CXS is given by equation 4.11.
All the points indicate measurements with individual collector channels, and the solid lines are fits
of the CX spectrum after the bi-Maxwellian function 4.13. The points marked with crosses are all
excluded from the fit. A black dashed line plots the one count limit of the CX spectrum and is a
measure of the noise floor. All measurements except the first one at t ∈[0.10s, 0.25s] are well above
the noise floor.
96
==PAGE:103==
evolution in the populations is shown in figure 7.1f. Although the fits are far from perfect, they
clearly establish that a population of fast ions is building up in the end of the shot during the period
where the strongest PDI signal is observed. The population of supra-thermal ions is found comprise
∼0.6% of the total ion population. This number is an order of magnitude below the populations
observed in [40]. However, due to the issues with damage of the CNPA and the rotation of its
LOS, it is likely that the actual population of supra-thermal ions along the direction perpendicular
to the magnetic field lines is substantially higher. The combined observation of an increase of EC
radiation during periods with large PDI signals along with the measurement of a supra-thermal ion
population both support the hypothesis that the trapped UH waves undergo secondary parametric
decays into EBWs and IBWs.
After the initial indications of a correlation between the observations of a supra-thermal ion pop-
ulation and the observation of strong PDI signals, a dedicated three shot study was planned and
performed in the last week of the experimental campaign of the project to investigate the correla-
tion further. Unfortunately, the planning of the shots didn’t take properly into care the state of the
CNPA diagnostic, and the shots were performed at power levels too low to give rise to PDI signals
strong enough to be measured clearly with the CNPA diagnostic. The results from the shots will
be reported internally at SPC and are not presented in this thesis.
7.2
Escape Mechanism of the Primary Trapped UH Waves
The observed correlation between strong PDI signals and strong EC radiation as well as the build
up of a supra-thermal ion population indicate that the occurrence of a secondary decay. Secondary
(and higher order) parametric decays of the trapped daughter waves are likely to provide the main
mechanism for the loss of power from the trapping region. Yet, the occurrence of secondary and
potential higher order decays doesn’t explain how the radiometer picks up radiation
To investigate the escape mechanism of the daughter waves, the following subsections presents scans
of the correlation between the PDI signal strength and the polarization of the radiometer along with
the angle of its line of sight. Based on the result of these scans along with several observations from
the previous chapter, section 7.2.3 presents a hypothesis for how radiation is escaping the trapping
region.
7.2.1
Dependence on the Polarization Received by the Launcher
The two shots 77054 and 77077 both belong to the campaign RT22-08 and were programmed to have
almost identical density profiles as well as auxiliary heating power. The radiometer was measuring
PDI signals in both shots with the same angle of the LOS of the radiometer, but the launcher
was programmed to receive radiation in X-mode in shot 77054 and radiation in O-mode in shot
77077. Therefore a comparison of the radiometer measurements in these shots give knowledge on
the dependence of whether the PDI signals reach the radiometer in X-mode or in O-mode. The
density profiles in both shots along with heating power and radiometer signal is shown in figure 7.7.
After the X2-5 gyrotron switches on, a PDI signal is measured in both shots. Figure 7.7e shows the
average PSD of the signal picked up by the radiometer in the frequency band IX2−5 in both shots.
At first sight, the signal appear to be larger for the radiometer measuring in X-mode. A closer look
reveal that the change in average PSD in the frequency band is primarily do to background EC
radiation. If the EC background is subtracted, the strength of the PDI signal itself, shown in figure
7.7f, appears to be very similar in the two shots.
97
==PAGE:104==
Figure 7.7: Scan of PDI signal during measurement in X-mode and O-mode in the two similar shots
77054 and 77077. All panes share a common time axis. (a) FIR Interferometry measurements of the
average plasma density at R = 1.06 m (solid lines) and TS measurements of the plasma density at
the position of the separatrix (dashed lines) for both shots. (b) Heating power of the X2-5 gyrotron
and NBI system during the two shots. (c) Averaged spectrogram of the radiometer signal in shot
77054 with the launcher picking up radiation in X-mode. The red dashed lines mark the frequency
band IX2−5 = [41.65, 42.0] GHz. (d) Averaged spectrogram of the radiometer signal in shot 77077
with the launcher picking up radiation in O-mode. The red dashed lines mark the frequency band
IX2−5 = [41.65, 42.0] GHz. (e) Average PSD in the frequency band IX2−5 for each shot. (f) same
as (e), but with the EC radiation measured at t = 0.8 s subtracted.
98
==PAGE:105==
7.2.2
Dependence on Launcher LOS Angle
The dependence on the PDI signal strength and of the angle of the LOS of the launcher is now
investigated for launcher polarization in both O-moe and in X-mode.
Poloidal Angle scan for polarization in O-mode
The three shots 77337, 77335 and 77077 all belong to the experimental campaign RT22-08. The
heating power and density profile in these three shots was almost identical, which makes them
optimal for a comparison of launcher angle. In all three shots, the radiometer was collecting radiation
in O-mode, and the poloidal angle of the LOS of the launcher in the three shots was φ = 16◦, φ = 30◦
and φ = 47◦respectively. These three angles are illustrated in the poloidal cross section in figure
7.8.
Figure 7.8: poloidal angle of LOS for the radiometer in the three shots 77337, 77335 and 77077.
Each of the line of sights are mapped onto a reconstruction of the equilibrium profile in the poloidal
plan at the time t = 0.95 s.
The PDI measurements in each of the shots is shown in figure 7.9 along with the daesity profiles
and delivered auxiliary power. The three shots are seen to be very similar until t = 1.1 s. When
comparing the averages spectrograms of the three shots in the figures 7.9c-e, the PDI signals show
similar behaviour, but the level of EC radiation is significantly larger for the two shots 77337 and
77335 where the LOS of the launcher is not pointing straight at the plasma. After subtracting the
EC radiation, the averaged PSD of the PDI signals measured in the three shots are compared in
the frequency band IX2−45 (figure 7.9f) and in the frequency band IX2−1 (figure 7.9g). Generally,
the difference in PSD of the observed signals is seen to be relatively small. When only the X2-5
gyrotron is switched on until t = 1.0 s, the measured PDI signal in the frequency band IX2−45 is
largest in shot 77077 where the LOS of the launcher is pointing directly towards the plasma. After
the other two gyrotrons are switched on as well, the picture chances, and now the signal in the shot
77077 is she smallest whereas the signal appears to be similar for the two sharper angles of the LOS
99
==PAGE:106==
in the shots 77337 and 77335. Again, it should be noted that the differences seen in the PSD of the
different signals are generally minor between the different launcher angles in the shots.
Figure 7.9: Scan of PDI signal during measurement in O-mode with different poloidal angles of the
LOS of the launcher in the three similar shots 77337, 77335 and 77077. All panes share a common
time axis. (a) FIR Interferometry measurements of the average plasma density at R = 1.06 m (solid
lines) and TS measurements of the plasma density at the position of the separatrix (dashed lines)
for all three shots. (b) Heating power of each X2 gyrotron and NBI system during the two shots. (c)
Averaged spectrogram of the radiometer signal in shot 77337 with the LOS of the launcher having
a poloidal angle of 16◦. The green dashed lines mark the frequency band IX2−1 = [41.15, 41.5] GHz,
and the red dashed lines mark the frequency band IX2−45 = [41.65, 42.0] GHz. These lines are also
plotted in (d) and (e). (d) Averaged spectrogram of the radiometer signal in shot 77337 with the
LOS of the launcher having a poloidal angle of 30◦. (e) Averaged spectrogram of the radiometer
signal in shot 77077 with the LOS of the launcher having a poloidal angle of 47◦. (f) Average PSD
in the frequency band IX2−45 for each shot with the EC radiation at t = 0.8 s subtracted. (g) same
as (f), but for measurements in the frequency band IX2−1.
100
==PAGE:107==
Poloidal and Toroidal Angle scan for polarization in X-mode
Figure 7.10: Scan of PDI signal during measurement in X-mode with different poloidal and toroidal
angles of the LOS of the launcher in the three similar shots 77223, 77222 and 77224. All panes
share a common time axis. (a) FIR Interferometry measurements of the average plasma density
at R = 1.06 m (solid lines) and TS measurements of the plasma density at the position of the
separatrix (dashed lines) for all three shots. (b) Heating power of the X2-1 gyrotron and two X3
gyrotrons during the three shots. (c) Averaged spectrogram of the radiometer signal in shot 77223
with the LOS of the launcher having a poloidal angle of φ = 24.5◦and a toroidal angle of θ = 0◦.
The green dashed lines mark the frequency band IX2−1 = [41.15, 41.5] GHz. These lines are also
plotted in (d) and (e). (d) Averaged spectrogram of the radiometer signal in shot 77222 with the
LOS of the launcher having a poloidal angle of φ = 46◦and a toroidal angle of θ = 0◦. (e) Averaged
spectrogram of the radiometer signal in shot 77224 with the LOS of the launcher having a poloidal
angle of φ = 49◦and a toroidal angle of θ = −78◦. (f) Average PSD in the frequency band IX2−1
for each shot.
A scan of the dependence on the launcher angle is also carried out for the three similar shots 77223,
77222 and 77224 belonging to the campaign RT22-07 where the Launcher was receiving radiation
polarized in X-mode. Between shot 77223 and 77222 the poloidal angle is changed from φ = 24.5◦
to φ = 46◦, but the toroidal launcher angle θ is kept at 0◦. In shot 77224, the ”toroidal” angle of
the launcher (see figure 5.1) is rotated by 78◦such that the LOS of the launcher in the last shot
points to the right side seen from above (in the direction of launcher X2-1). Figure 7.10 shows the
101
==PAGE:108==
density profile and delivered power in each of the three shots as well as an averaged spectrogram of
the radiometer signal in each shot. The average PSD in the frequency band IX2−1 in the three shots
is compared in figure 7.10f. In this scan, the PSD of the PDI signal is seen to be very similar for
the two shots with θ = 0, although with a slightly larger PSD then the launcher has a smaller angle
and looks more to the top of the plasma. However, the PSD decreases significantly until t = 0.9 s
for the launcher pointing to the side.
7.2.3
Proposed Tunnelling Mechanism
The observations in the scans can be crudely summarized as follows
• There is little difference in the strength of the PDI signals when the launcher accepts polar-
ization in either O-mode or X-mode.
• When measuring radiation in O-mode, the PDI signal in the band IX2−45 is slightly stronger
when the LOS points directly towards the plasma, whereas the PDI signal is slightly stronger
in the band IX2−1 when the LOS points at the upper part of the plasma instead.
• When measuring radiation in X-mode, the PDI signal in the band IX2−1 is slightly stronger
when the LOS points points at the upper part of the plasma, and the signal strength decreases
significantly when the launcher is turned to the side instead of looking directly towards the R
cutoff with θ = 0.
The fact that the signal doesn’t change significantly when the launcher is programmed to receive
radiation in either O-mode or X-mode, and the fact that the poloidal launcher angle doesn’t seem
to have a large effect in neither O-mode nor X-mode suggests that the measured PDI signal is not
very localized in the machine. Furthermore, the fact that a PDI signal can be measured in O-mode
at all even though the trapped daughter UH waves belong to the warm X-mode suggests that the
signal has reflected off a wall and undergone a partial mode conversion before it is received by the
radiometer.
Figure 7.11: Illustration of proposed tunnelling mechanism. A small fraction of the power of the
trapped UH waves is continuously tunnelling radially inward through the evanescent region between
the two UH resonances.
Throughout chapter 6, two additional key insights where made. First of all, the peak in PDI signal
during ELM bursts is found to occur ∼0.15 ms before the ELMs reach the LFS of the vessel, and
there is a peak in the Hα signal. This indicates that the escape of radiation from the trapping region
occurs on a time scale that is significantly faster than the time scale for the radial motion of blobs
102
==PAGE:109==
and ELM filaments. Thus, part of the PDI signal escapes the trapping region while new trapped
daughter waves are still generated in parametric decays. A second and very crucial trend that was
observed in all PDI signals was that whenever the two trapped daughter waves had a difference
in frequency, the wave with lower frequency was measured with a PSD that is up to 2 orders of
magnitude higher than the PSD of the signal with the larger frequency.
This last observation
suggests that the trapped daughter waves are continuously tunnelling out of the trapping region
in the direction towards the plasma core as illustrated in figure 7.11. To see why, the attention
is drawn back to the figure 6.19. For UH waves with smaller frequency, the UH resonance shifts
towards a lower density. According to the UH wave dispersion relation (eq. 2.53), the distance
in k-number between the X-mode branch and EBW branch also becomes similarly larger. What
effectively happens is that the daughter wave with lower frequency (dark-red in figure 6.19) has a
slightly larger trapping region and a smaller evanescent region between the density perturbation and
the plasma bulk. Furthermore, the wave with lower frequency has a comparably lower imaginary
value of the wave number in the evanescent region. As a consequence, the tunnelling effect of the
low frequency through the evanescent region should be larger than the tunnelling of the wave with
larger frequency.
Due to the trapping region, an estimation of the tunnelling of the daughter waves through the
evanescent region is not a trivial task.
After discussions with my co-supervisor postdoc Mads
Givskov Senstius, an idea was made to evaluate the tunnelling using a fully kinetic 1-d Particle-In-
Cell (PIC) code with the same density profile and parameters as the scenario portrayed in figure
6.19a. Towards the very end of the project, postdoc Mads Givskov Senstius managed to implement
the profile in the framework EPOCH and make a simulation of the parametric decay occurring due
to trapping in the blob structure. The theory of PIC simulations is not covered here, but the reader
is referred to the PhD thesis [34] and the articles [59], [35] where similar simulations are carried
out. In a nutshell, the plasma particles are grouped into a number of so-called super particles that
each represent a large amount of particles. This approach can reduces the complexity of complex
problems in plasma physics, such as describing a parametric decay into trapped daughter waves. By
using an algorithm where the position of each super-particle is first updated based on acceleration
from electromagnetic forces followed by a step where the electromagnetic fields are updated based on
the new particle positions, the evolution of the electromagnetic field and various plasma parameters
can be simulated. After the PIC simulation has been running for a time long enough to capture the
onset of the parametric decay and subsequent evolution of the daughter waves, the resulting electric
field can be analyzed. This is done in figure 7.12 where two different 2d Fast Fourier transforms
of the electric field are plotted. The structure that appears after the 2d FFT are nothing but the
dispersion relations of the UH waves with the color bar denoting which modes (kx, ω) that are
excited. The dispersion relations are similar to the theoretical UH dispersion relation plotted in
figure 2.5. The two central lines with low absolute wave number are the X-mode branches, and
the outer lines the EBW branches of the dispersion relation. Now, figure 7.12a covers the trapping
region inside the blob structure during the initial evolution of the parametric decay.
Both the
branch at positive k and the branch at negative k contain an UH wave pair with frequencies of
∼41.3GHz and ∼41.4GHz GHz respectively. There are the two trapped UH waves. The 2d FFT
shown in figure 7.12b covers a region within the plasma core at a later time in the simulation. Here,
only the wave with the lower frequency of ∼41.3GHz is clearly present. This indicates that the
for a PDI with two trapped UH daughter waves with different frequencies, the tunnelling through
the evanescent region into the plasma core can indeed occur, and it is seen to be stronger for the
the daughter wave with lower frequency. It should be emphasized that these results are extremely
preliminary, and motivate for a proper future investigation of the tunnelling mechanism.
After the UH wave has tunnelled through the evanescent region, it still has some way to go before
reaching the radiometer. To evaluate whether this is possible, the equilibrium profile for the shot
103
==PAGE:110==
(a) 2d FFT of the longitudinal electric field in
the
region
spatial
and
temporal
region
R
∈
[1.098m, 1.102m], t ∈[0ns, 118ns]. This region cov-
ers the onset of the parametric decay within the blob
structure.
(b) 2d FFT of the longitudinal electric field in the
region spatial region R ∈[1.070m, 1.075m] during a
time period of 30 ns after the simulation has been
running for a while. This region covers the onset of
the parametric decay within the blob structure.
Figure 7.12: PIC simulation of tunneling daughter waves in shot 77263. The specific density profile
that is used in teh simulation is shown in figure 6.19a.
77263 at time t = 0.85 s is analyzed with the ray tracing code WR2. An X-mode with a frequency
of 41.3 GHz is launched from a position on the inside of the evanescent region towards the wall on
the HFS where it reflects. This scenario is plotted in the poloidal plane in figure 7.13. Surprisingly,
the plasma is found to be very optically thin for the initial passing of the X-mode with an optical
depth on the order of τ = 0.02 to τ = 0.1 depending on the chosen launch angle. At the wall on the
HFS, the majority of the power in the ray is reflected as an X-mode that is subsequintly trapped
at the UH resonance, but a fraction between 5% and 20% is reflected as an O-mode, again heavily
depending in the incident angle of the ray on the wall. The O-mode is partially damped on its way
out through the plasma core with an optical depth on the order of 0.5. Thus, a rough estimate is
that between 5% and 10% of the power in the UH wave escaping from the trapping region ends up
reaching the SOL region of the plasma. In this region, the wave will live as both an O-mode and an
X-mode due to numerous reflections. This aligns with the observations found the the scan of PSD
in the PDI signal for the launcher measuring radiation in different modes.
All in all, this quick and somewhat ad hoc analysis with the PIC simulation and ray tracing sim-
ulation shows that an escape mechanism including tunnelling of the daughter waves through the
evanescent region towards the HFS of the plasma could indeed be plausible. A Further and more
thorough analysis is needed to determine whether this is really what’s happening.
104
==PAGE:111==
Figure 7.13: Projection of the ray trajectory in the poloidal plane for a ray tracing analysis of the
escape mechanism in shot 77263 at the time t = 0.85 s. The wave has a frequency of 41.3 GHz, and
its corresponding EC resonance, UH resonance and R cutoff is mapped onto the poloidal profile as
well. The ray is launched as an X-mode traveling through the bulk plasma. The fraction of the ray
that reflects as an X-mode is stopped at the UH resonance, where it converts into an EBW, but
the fraction of the ray that reflects as an O-mode escapes the plasma.
105
==PAGE:112==
Chapter 8
Conclusion and Outlook
During this project, it has been shown beyond doubt that parametric decay instabilities occur
frequently in the TCV tokamak. To do so, a heterodyne radiometer has been designed, constructed
and installed at TCV. For calibration of the radiometer, a novel technique that is based on a
thorough ray tracing analysis and measurements of electron cyclotron radiation has been developed.
The technique has been used to produce reliable spectra of the radiometer measurements.
The radiometer was designed to measure in a frequency band covering half the frequency of all
X-2 gyrotrons at TCV. within this frequency band it has measured daughter waves excited in
parametric decays in the plasma edge of TCV in both L-mode plasmas and H-mode plasmas. In
L-mode plasmas a low threshold PDI is shown to occur due to trapping of daughter waves in the
density perturbations of blob filaments in the Scrape-off Layer. For plasmas operated in H-mode,
the density fluctuations during the periodically occurring ELMs are also shown to give rise to low
threshold parametric decays with trapped daughter waves.
In order to prove that the anomalous signals measured at half gyrotron frequency are indeed directly
caused by PDI processes, an analytical model has been presented. The model is used to predict
how the density fluctuations occurring during the passing of blobs in the plasma edge give rise to a
trapping mechanism that decreases the power treshold to levels below the gyrotron power.
An important aspect of PDI occurrence that is currently poorly understood is what happens after
a PDI onsets. Several models predict the possibility of secondary parametric decays. Some of the
waves excited in these secondary decays are ion waves. It has been theorized that these ion waves
could generate a population of supra-thermal ions with temperatures far above the temperature
of the bulk of the plasma. This thesis finds indications of a correlation between the occurrence of
strong PDI signals and an occurrence of a supra-thermal ion population.
The final part of this project is devoted to explaining how the daughter waves from parametric
decay instabilities that are travelling from the PDI region of the plasma to the radiometer. It is
shown how this could be explained with a tunnelling process.
106
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[1]
Past Earth Overshoot Days. 2022. url: https://www.overshootday.org/newsroom/past-
earth-overshoot-days/.
[2]
IPCC. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 3056 pp., 2022. doi:
10.1017/9781009325844.
[3]
Pierre Friedlingstein et al. “Global Carbon Budget 2022”. In: (2022), pp. 4811–4900.
[4]
International Energy Agency. “International Energy Agency (IEA) World Energy Outlook
2022”. In: Https://Www.Iea.Org/Reports/World-Energy-Outlook-2022/Executive-Summary (2022).
[5]
Irena. “From baseload to peak : Renewables provide a reliable solution”. In: (2015), p. 16.
url: http://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA_Baseload_to_
Peak_2015.pdf.
[6]
Sophie Gabriel et al. “A critical assessment of global uranium resources, including uranium in
phosphate rocks, and the possible impact of uranium shortages on nuclear power fleets”. In:
Annals of Nuclear Energy 58 (2013), pp. 213–220. issn: 03064549. doi: 10.1016/j.anucene.
2013.03.010. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2013.03.010.
[7]
D. Fasel and M. Q. Tran. “Availability of lithium in the context of future D-T fusion reactors”.
In: Fusion Engineering and Design 75-79.SUPPL. (2005), pp. 1163–1168. issn: 09203796. doi:
10.1016/j.fusengdes.2005.06.345.
[8]
G. Votroubek et al. “Formation of a stable field reversed configuration through merging”. In:
Journal of Fusion Energy 27.1-2 (2008), pp. 123–127. issn: 01640313. doi: 10.1007/s10894-
007-9103-4.
[9]
M. W. Binderbauer et al. “A high performance field-reversed configuration”. In: Physics of
Plasmas 22.5 (2015). issn: 10897674. doi: 10.1063/1.4920950.
[10]
Lise-Marie Imbert-Gerard, Elizabeth J. Paul, and Adelle M. Wright. “An Introduction to
Stellarators: From magnetic fields to symmetries and optimization”. In: (2019). url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1908.05360.
[11]
Hans-J¨urgen Hartfuß Geist and Thomas. Fusion Plasma Diagnostics with mm-Waves. Wiley-
VCH, 2010. isbn: 9783527409679.
[12]
Ian N. Ross. “Optical parametric amplification techniques”. In: Springer Series in Optical
Sciences 134.6 (2009), pp. 35–59. issn: 03424111. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-34755-4{\_}3.
[13]
H. O. Berktay. “A study of the travelling-wave parametric amplification mechanism in non-
linear acoustics”. In: Journal of Sound and Vibration 5.1 (1967), pp. 155–163. issn: 10958568.
doi: 10.1016/0022-460X(67)90184-8.
107
==PAGE:114==
[14]
D. A. Foga¸ca et al. “Nonlinear waves in second order conformal hydrodynamics”. In: Nuclear
Physics A 934 (2015), pp. 18–40. issn: 03759474. doi: 10.1016/j.nuclphysa.2014.11.009.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysa.2014.11.009.
[15]
Zengkun Qi and Yuntao Han. “Catastrophe control of a nonlinear oscillator under paramet-
ric excitations”. In: Proceedings of the 2012 24th Chinese Control and Decision Conference,
CCDC 2012 5 (2012), pp. 1387–1390. doi: 10.1109/CCDC.2012.6244222.
[16]
S. White et al. “Production of photoionized plasmas in the laboratory with x-ray line radia-
tion”. In: Physical Review E 97.6 (2018), pp. 1–10. issn: 24700053. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.
97.063203.
[17]
D. W. Phillion et al. “Stimulated Raman scattering in large plasmas”. In: Physics of Fluids
25.8 (1982), pp. 1434–1443. issn: 10706631. doi: 10.1063/1.863920.
[18]
M. Zhou et al. “52% optical-to-optical conversion efficiency in a compact 1.5 W 532 nm
second harmonic generation laser with intracavity periodically-poled MgO:LiNbO3”. In: Laser
Physics 20.7 (2010), pp. 1568–1571. issn: 1054-660X. doi: 10.1134/s1054660x10130232.
[19]
E. Atlee Jackson. “Parametric effects of radiation on a plasma”. In: Physical Review 153.1
(1967), pp. 235–244. issn: 0031899X. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.153.235.
[20]
Marshall N. Rosenbluth. “Parametric instabilities in inhomogeneous media”. In: Physical Re-
view Letters 29.9 (1972), pp. 565–567. issn: 00319007. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.29.565.
[21]
R. A. Stern. “Radiation-induced decay instability of Bernstein modes”. In: Physical Review
Letters 22.15 (1969).
[22]
B. E. Keen and W. H.W. Fletcher. “Plasma heating effects in the presence of a parametric
decay instability”. In: Journal of Physics A: General Physics 6.3 (1973). issn: 03054470. doi:
10.1088/0305-4470/6/3/003.
[23]
F. S. McDermott et al. “Observation of the parametric decay instability during electron cy-
clotron resonance heating on the Versator II tokamak”. In: Physics of Fluids 25.9 (1982),
pp. 1488–1490. issn: 10706631. doi: 10.1063/1.863932.
[24]
Bo Thid´e, Helmut Kopka, and Peter Stubbe. “Observations of stimulated scattering of a
strong high-frequency radio wave in the ionosphere”. In: Physical Review Letters 49.21 (1982),
pp. 1561–1564. issn: 00319007. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.49.1561.
[25]
R. White et Al. “Absolute parametric instabilities in inhomogeneous plasmas”. In: Nuclear
Fusion 14.1 (1974). issn: 00319007. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.51.574.
[26]
V. I. Gusakov E. Z.; Fedorov. “Decay Instabilities in an Inhomogeneous Plasma with Trapped
Waves”. In: Soviet Journal of Plasma Physics 5.4 (1979).
[27]
H. A. Baldis and C. J. Walsh. “Experimental observations of nonlinear saturation of the two-
plasmon decay instability”. In: Physical Review Letters 47.23 (1981), pp. 1658–1661. issn:
00319007. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.47.1658.
[28]
Laser Division and Bhabha Atomic. “Observation of two- plasmon decay instability saturation
domain in laser-plasma experiments”. In: Optics Communications 73.1 (1989), pp. 51–56.
[29]
E. Westerhof et al. “Strong scattering of high power millimeter waves in tokamak plasmas
with tearing modes”. In: Physical Review Letters 103.12 (2009), pp. 4–7. issn: 10797114. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.103.125001.
[30]
E. Z. Gusakov and A. Yu Popov. “Low threshold parametric decay backscattering instability
in tokamak electron cyclotron resonance heating experiments”. In: Physical Review Letters
105.11 (2010), pp. 1–4. issn: 00319007. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.115003.
108
==PAGE:115==
[31]
E. Z. Gusakov and A. Yu Popov. “Theory of anomalous backscattering in second harmonic
X-mode ECRH experiments”. In: Physics of Plasmas 23.8 (2016). issn: 10897674. doi: 10.
1063/1.4959849. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4959849.
[32]
Evgeniy Gusakov, Aleksei Popov, and Ekatherine Sysoeva. “Anomalous backscattering and
absorption in second harmonic ECRH experiments due to low-threshold two UH plasmon
decay instability in blobs”. In: EPJ Web of Conferences 157 (2017). issn: 2100014X. doi:
10.1051/epjconf/201715703019.
[33]
E. Z. Gusakov and A. Yu Popov. “Possible transition from modest to strong anomalous
absorption in X2-mode electron cyclotron resonance heating experiments in toroidal devices”.
In: Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 62.2 (2020). issn: 13616587. doi: 10.1088/1361-
6587/ab5ba8.
[34]
M. G. Senstius, S. K. Nielsen, and R. G.L. Vann. “Numerical investigations of parametric
decay into trapped waves in magnetized plasmas with a non-monotonic density background”.
In: Physics of Plasmas 27.6 (2020). issn: 10897674. doi: 10.1063/5.0004672.
[35]
M. G. Senstius et al. “Absolute parametric decay instabilities of X2 microwave beams in
reduced models and fully kinetic codes”. In: Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 64.11
(2022). issn: 13616587. doi: 10.1088/1361-6587/ac8f6e.
[36]
S. K. Hansen et al. “Parametric decay instabilities near the second-harmonic upper hybrid
resonance in fusion plasmas”. In: Nuclear Fusion 60.10 (2020). issn: 17414326. doi: 10.1088/
1741-4326/aba802.
[37]
A. Tancetti et al. “Nonlinear decay of high-power microwaves into trapped modes in inho-
mogeneous plasma”. In: Nuclear Fusion 62.7 (2022). issn: 17414326. doi: 10.1088/1741-
4326/ac5d61.
[38]
A. B. Altukhov et al. “Observation of the strong anomalous absorption of the X-mode pump
in a plasma filament due to the two-plasmon decay”. In: Epl 126.1 (2019). issn: 12864854.
doi: 10.1209/0295-5075/126/15002.
[39]
S. K. Hansen et al. “Microwave diagnostics damage by parametric decay instabilities during
electron cyclotron resonance heating in ASDEX Upgrade”. In: Plasma Physics and Controlled
Fusion 63.9 (2021). issn: 13616587. doi: 10.1088/1361-6587/ac0fd0.
[40]
Christian Schlatter. “Turbulent Ion Heating in TCV Tokamak Plasmas”. In: 4479 (2009).
[41]
Per Helander. “Theory of plasma confinement in non-axisymmetric magnetic fields”. In: Re-
ports on Progress in Physics 77.8 (2014). issn: 00344885. doi: 10.1088/0034-4885/77/8/
087001.
[42]
Mirko Salewski. “A First Course in Fusion Plasma Physics”. In: (2022).
[43]
Francis F. Chen. Introduction to Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion. 2015, E1–E1. isbn:
9783319223087. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-22309-4{\_}11.
[44]
A. Sykes et al. “High-β performance of the START spherical tokamak”. In: Plasma Physics
and Controlled Fusion 39.12B (1997). issn: 07413335. doi: 10.1088/0741-3335/39/12B/019.
[45]
C. C. Petty et al. “High-beta, steady-state hybrid scenario on DIII-D”. In: Nuclear Fusion
56.1 (2016). issn: 17414326. doi: 10.1088/0029-5515/56/1/016016.
[46]
A Loarte et al. “Preidcted {ELM} energy loss and power loading in {ITER-FEAT}”. In: Proc.
18th Int. Conf. on Fusion Energy (Sorrento, 2000) (2000), ITERP/11.
[47]
C. C. Petty et al. “Complete suppression of the m = 2/n = 1 neoclassical tearing mode using
electron cyclotron current drive in DIII-D”. In: Nuclear Fusion 44.2 (2004), pp. 243–251. issn:
00295515. doi: 10.1088/0029-5515/44/2/004.
109
==PAGE:116==
[48]
S. K. Nielsen et al. “Experimental characterization of anomalous strong scattering of mm-
waves in TEXTOR plasmas with rotating islands”. In: Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion
55.11 (2013). issn: 13616587. doi: 10.1088/0741-3335/55/11/115003.
[49]
S. K. Hansen et al. “Parametric decay instabilities during electron cyclotron resonance heating
at ASDEX upgrade”. In: 46th EPS Conference on Plasma Physics, EPS 2019 (2019).
[50]
Asbjørn Clod Pedersen and Rune Højlund. Reduced fluid simulations of perpendicular blob
propagation in the NORTH tokamak. Tech. rep. Technical University of Denmark, 2022.
[51]
O. E. Garcia et al. “Interchange turbulence in the TCV scrape-off layer”. In: Plasma Physics
and Controlled Fusion 48.1 (2006). issn: 07413335. doi: 10.1088/0741-3335/48/1/L01.
[52]
Thomas H. Stix. Waves in plasmas. 1992.
[53]
D G Swanson. Plasma waves. 2nd. 2003.
[54]
K. Flensburg H. Bruus. Many-body quantum theory in condensed matter physics. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2016.
[55]
E. Mazzucato. Electromagnetic Waves for Thermonuclear Fusion Research. World Scientific,
2014, pp. 17–33. isbn: 9789814571807.
[56]
Asbjørn Clod Pedersen. “Heating Mechanism in the NORTH Tokamak”. PhD thesis. Technical
University of Denmark, 2020.
[57]
R. Fitzpatrick. Plasma Physics. The University of Texas at Austin, 2014. isbn: 9780857936134.
[58]
J Robert and Paul H Rutherford. Introduction to Plasma Physics. 1995. isbn: 0750303255.
doi: 10.1201/9780367806958.
[59]
M. G. Senstius, S. K. Nielsen, and R. G.L. Vann. “Trapped upper hybrid waves as eigenmodes
of non-monotonic background density profiles”. In: Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 63.6
(2021). issn: 13616587. doi: 10.1088/1361-6587/abf85a.
[60]
A. H. Kritz et al. “Ray Tracing Study of Electron Cyclotron Heating in Toroidal Geometry.”
In: Commission of the European Communities, (Report) EUR 2 (1982), pp. 707–723. doi:
10.1016/b978-1-4832-8428-6.50081-3.
[61]
Herbert L. Berk and David L. Book. “Plasma wave regeneration in inhomogeneous media”.
In: Physics of Fluids 12.3 (1969), pp. 649–661. issn: 10706631. doi: 10.1063/1.1692529.
[62]
Karsten Rottwitt and Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg. Nonlinear Optics - Principles and Appli-
cations. Vol. 7. 1. CRC Press, 2015. isbn: 9772081415.
[63]
A. Yu Popov and E. Z. Gusakov. “Low-threshold absolute two-plasmon decay instability in
the second harmonic electron cyclotron resonance heating experiments in toroidal devices”.
In: Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 57.2 (2015). issn: 13616587. doi: 10.1088/0741-
3335/57/2/025022.
[64]
Evgeniy Z. Gusakov and Aleksei Yu. Popov. “Low-power-threshold parametric decay insta-
bilities of powerful microwave beams in toroidal fusion devices”. In: Uspekhi Fizicheskih Nauk
190.04 (2020), pp. 396–420. issn: 0042-1294. doi: 10.3367/ufnr.2019.05.038572.
[65]
Mads Givskov and Document Version. “Simulations of Three-Wave Interactions in Microwave
Heated Fusion Plasmas Mads Givskov Senstius”. In: (2020).
[66]
N. Tzoar. “Parametric excitations in plasma in a magnetic field”. In: Physical Review 178.1
(1969), pp. 356–362. issn: 0031899X. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.178.356.
[67]
S. K. Hansen et al. “Parametric decay instability near the upper hybrid resonance in magnet-
ically confined fusion plasmas”. In: Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 59.10 (2017). issn:
13616587. doi: 10.1088/1361-6587/aa7978.
110
==PAGE:117==
[68]
Shinichiro Kojima et al. “Parametric Decay Wave Observation in HFS X-Mode Injection in
QUEST*)”. In: Plasma and Fusion Research 15 (2020), pp. 2402063–1. issn: 18806821. doi:
10.1585/pfr.15.2402063.
[69]
Zhouji Huang. “Experimental study of plasma turbulence in the TCV tokamak”. PhD thesis.
´ECOLE POLYTECHNIQUE F´ED´ERALE DE LAUSANNE, 2017.
[70]
Jonas Degrave et al. “Magnetic control of tokamak plasmas through deep reinforcement learn-
ing”. In: Nature 602.7897 (2022), pp. 414–419. issn: 14764687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-
04301-9.
[71]
H Reimerdes et al. “Overview of the TCV tokamak experimental”. In: Nuclear Fusion 62.042018
(2022).
[72]
S. Alberti et al. “Third-harmonic, top-launch, ECRH experiments on TCV tokamak”. In:
Nuclear Fusion 45.11 (2005), pp. 1224–1231. issn: 00295515. doi: 10.1088/0029-5515/45/
11/002.
[73]
T Hori et al. “Influence of beam current and cooling water temperature on the frequency
characteristics of sub-millimeter wave gyrotron FU-IV”. In: vol. 2. 2005, 521–522 vol. 2. isbn:
0-7803-9348-1. doi: 10.1109/ICIMW.2005.1572644.
[74]
J. P. Hogge et al. “Megawatt power generation of the dual-frequency gyrotron for TCV at 84
and 126 GHz, in long pulses”. In: AIP Conference Proceedings 2254.September (2020). issn:
15517616. doi: 10.1063/5.0014343.
[75]
D. Dimoch. Diagnostics for Fusion Experiments. Pergamon, 1979, pp. 271–301.
[76]
Thomas J. Dolan. Magnetic Fusion Technology. Springer, 2013. isbn: 9781447155553. url:
https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9781447155553.
[77]
J. M. Moret et al. “Tokamak equilibrium reconstruction code LIUQE and its real time im-
plementation”. In: Fusion Engineering and Design 91 (2015), pp. 1–15. issn: 09203796. doi:
10.1016/j.fusengdes.2014.09.019.
[78]
D. Testa. “Manufacturing, installation, commissioning, and first results with the 3D low-
temperature co-fired ceramic high-frequency magnetic sensors on the Tokamak `a Configuration
Variable”. In: Review of Scientific Instruments 91.8 (2020). issn: 10897623. doi: 10.1063/1.
5115004. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5115004.
[79]
Neil Salmon. “High Spatial Resolution Temperature Measurements in the JET Plasma Using
Electron Cyclotron Emission by Department of Plasma Physics”. PhD thesis. University of
London, 1989.
[80]
Alexander N. Karpushov et al. “Neutral particle analyzer diagnostics on the TCV tokamak”.
In: Review of Scientific Instruments 77.3 (2006). issn: 00346748. doi: 10.1063/1.2185151.
[81]
P. Molina Cabrera et al. “V-band nanosecond-scale pulse reflectometer diagnostic in the TCV
tokamak”. In: Review of Scientific Instruments 90.12 (2019). issn: 10897623. doi: 10.1063/
1.5094850. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5094850.
[82]
M. Stejner et al. “Resolving the bulk ion region of millimeter-wave collective Thomson scat-
tering spectra at ASDEX Upgrade”. In: Review of Scientific Instruments 85.9 (2014). issn:
10897623. doi: 10.1063/1.4894199. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4894199.
[83]
George Bekefi. Radiation Processes in Plasmas. 1st. Wiley, 1966.
[84]
N B Marushchenko, Y Turkin, and H Maassberg. “Ray-tracing code TRAVIS for ECR heating
, EC current drive and ECE diagnostic”. In: (2013).
111
==PAGE:118==
[85]
J. Rasmussen et al. “Modeling the electron cyclotron emission below the fundamental reso-
nance in ITER”. In: Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 61.9 (2019). issn: 13616587. doi:
10.1088/1361-6587/ab2f4a.
[86]
S. K. Nielsen et al. “First results from the NORTH tokamak”. In: Fusion Engineering and
Design 166.December 2020 (2021), p. 112288. issn: 09203796. doi: 10.1016/j.fusengdes.
2021.112288. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2021.112288.
[87]
A. Scarabosio, A. Pochelon, and Y. Martin. “Plasma shape stabilization of current rise MHD
instabilities in TCV”. In: Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 49.7 (2007), pp. 1041–1060.
issn: 07413335. doi: 10.1088/0741-3335/49/7/007.
[88]
G. Hommen et al. “Optical boundary reconstruction of Tokamak plasmas for feedback con-
trol of plasma position and shape”. In: Review of Scientific Instruments 81.11 (2010). issn:
00346748. doi: 10.1063/1.3499219.
[89]
O. E. Garcia et al. “Fluctuations and transport in the TCV scrape-off layer”. In: Nuclear
Fusion 47.7 (2007), pp. 667–676. issn: 17414326. doi: 10.1088/0029-5515/47/7/017.
112
