==PAGE:1==
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream
on Distributed System
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Bingkun Wu
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Elek­
trovej, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for six months at the Section for Cybersecurity Engineering,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, and Zendesk ApS in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science
in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Computer Science.
Bingkun Wu ­ s210318
Signature
Date
ii
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Large modern software is often composed of many independent subcomponents. For ex­
ample, a microservice architecture running on a distributed system, the coupling between
microservices is very low but they coordinate with each other. Under this paradigm, in­
formation transfer between services becomes crucial. Entity Stream is one of the most
popular patterns which enable the asynchronous communication among services. It acts
as a source of truth to report the current state of an object. In this architecture, same data
may exist in different locations of the distributed system, such as relational database,
message broker, etc. This thesis implements a standby verification system ”Entity Ver­
ifier” to verify the correctness and consistency of data in Entity Stream, which is very
essential for monitoring the health of services built around Entity Stream. This verification
system can not only indicate whether the program logic is correctly producing messages
to the Entity Stream, but also indicate the running status of the microservice. In addition,
Entity Verifier is completely based on functional programming. It utilizes the SQL binary
log, asynchronous processing and reactive stream to ensure efficient monitoring while
reducing the overall performance burden. We evaluate the built system in real distributed
software to verify the feasibility and performance of its functions, and further illustrate
its application in a high­load microservice environment. Finally, the implemented sys­
tem meets the design goals without adding significant burden to the existing functional
microservices.
Keywords: Distributed System, Message Queue, Microservice, Functional Programming
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Bingkun Wu, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Author
Weizhi Meng, Associate Professor, DTU Compute
Director
James Dietrich, Engineering Manager, Zendesk
Director
iv
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Microservice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Database Replication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Consistency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Functional Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Reactive Stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.7
Motivation and Contributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Background
11
2.1
Entity Stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3
S3Guard
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3
Design
23
3.1
Design Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Overall Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
Binlog Replicator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.4
Metadata Storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.5
Entity Consumer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Implementation
33
4.1
Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.2
Binlog Replicator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.3
Metadata Storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.4
Entity Consumer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.5
Structured Concurrency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5
Evaluation
43
5.1
Functionality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.2
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
53
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Monolith applications suffer from problems of maintenance and scalability for their mod­
ules cannot be executed independently [1]. As a result, microservice architecture is be­
coming more popular when developing large­size software especially on distributed sys­
tems. Microservices in a microservice architecture are loosely coupled with fine­grained
functionalities.
While improving the modularity, the microservice architecture also subverts the commu­
nication pattern between modules in the Monolith application. Due to the loose coupling,
microservices may not know each other’s existence, and they run on different systems or
even at different times. So it is difficult to directly call functions in a distributed system like
in a monolith.
There are different communication patterns in microservices [2], among which event­
driven architecture alleviates many pain points of modern web development, and the mi­
croservice architecture around Message Queue is widely used.
In such patterns, Message queues can be introduced as a source of truth to connect
upstream and downstream services (microservices). In the microservice architecture,
there are many distributed local data stores. For example, a service can have its own
relational database replica, or a data service such as ElasticSearch to preserve data as
a source of truth. Although the same data exists in different forms in different sources of
truth, correct coordination between microservices requires correct and timely delivery of
data updates.
In this thesis, an independent application based on functional programming and Reactive
Stream is developed to verify the data correctness and consistency of a microservice
asynchronous communication pattern ­ Entity Stream. The application derived can be
applied to microservice architecture with multiple heterogeneous distributed sources of
data.
1.1
Microservice
The microservice architecture has grown into the dominant architecture in service oriented
software industry. It is defined as the organization of minimal lightweight services which
are the specific non­subdividable functional modules [3]. This loosely coupled whole pro­
vides cohesive business function. Compared with the traditional Monolith structure, mi­
croservices have better agility, scalability, reliability, ability to recover from errors, and
ease of maintenance.
Consider an example of a blog application which maintains the blog articles. If it is built
upon a monolith architecture, all the business logic are contained inside one bulk of ap­
plication. The diagram illustrated in figure 1.1 shows all the upstream services are con­
nected to the monolith. And also all the dependent databases and downstream services
are integrated directly with the main application. For the user management and blog func­
tions, an account database and an article database are needed relatively. For the search
functionality, a downstream search engine ElasticSearch is also consuming data from the
main application.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Monolith Architecture of A Blog Application
When it comes to the microservice architecture with the same application in figure 1.2,
the functionalities in the bulk monolith are broken into separated microservices. The ad­
vantage in reliability is obvious for different end users can go through separate gateways
and microservices are only connected to the dependencies they need. The whole appli­
cation is more robust for once an error happens to the WebApp, mobile users can still
get access to the service. Furthermore, unlike the monolith, bringing down the Account
Service does not shut down the whole app but only affect users on functions like creating
or updating accounts. Users can still view the posts through Article Service for it normally
runs in another container or environment in the distributed setup.
Figure 1.2: Microservice Architecture of A Blog Application
2
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:11==
All these merits of de­coupling makes the microservice architecture much more wel­
comed.
1.2
Communication
However, the transition to microservice adds complexity to the communications among
functioning modules [4]. The communication between microservices needs to be cau­
tiously designed for multiple distributed microservices need to have a simple and easy­
to­maintain communication pattern while coordinating with each other. It is obvious that
building direct communication between each pair of microservices is heavy and unfavor­
able. A series of communication patterns in distributed system are introduced below.
1.2.1
Synchronous Communication
Synchronous communication is normally based on request/response­based Web APIs
such as HTTP­based REST APIs or XML­based SOAP APIs. The microservices act as
client and server in pairs. The client waits for the response to proceed after sending a
request [5]. Although APIs can be organized through API gateway to avoid direct com­
munications between microservices, synchronous communication requires the program
to be blocked and wait until the response is received. This would be very undesirable in
a data exchange intensive application and leave the CPU idle for a long time.
Figure 1.3: Synchronous Communication on REST API
Figure 1.3 illustrates the diagram of the synchronous communication based on REST API.
1.2.2
Asynchronous Communication
In contrast to synchronous communication, asynchronous communication does not re­
quire any of the services to block while waiting for the response. The request is directed
to an asynchronous media such as a message queue and kept for a certain time for other’s
consumption. Service who are responsible for handling the request listen to the message
queue and generate the response to the message queue again for the requester’s con­
sumption.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.4: Asynchronous Communication on RabbitMQ
Message broker are intermediary service independent to microservices which provides
such message queues. Popular message queues such as RabbitMQ [6], Apache Kafka
[7] and Apache ActiveMQ [8] can all act as independent asynchronous media. Figure
1.4 shows how a asynchronous request/response process works through RabbitMQ. Ex­
change module function is a facet which handles the incoming request/response mes­
sages and forwards them to the corresponding message queue. Both exchange and
message queue operates on the message broker so that all the routing logic are indepen­
dent from the microservices. Unlike the point­to­point synchronous communication where
routing logic stays on endpoints, the usage of message broker meets the criteria of loose
coupling of microservice.
Because of the existence of message broker, microservices who take parts in the asyn­
chronous communication can be unaware of each other. Furthermore, event­driven ar­
chitecture is usually built upon message broker. Event­driven architecture (EDA) is a
software architecture paradigm promoting the production, detection, consumption of, and
reaction to events. The publish/subscribe communication pattern is based on event­driven
architecture. Comparing with the request/response model, publish/subscribe communi­
cation is more concise and does not need to make a request every time a service requests
data. It is centered on topics and driven by events. Whenever a producer generates a
new event into a particular topic, all consumers subscribed to that topic will be notified.
Figure 1.5: Asynchronous Communication with Publish/Subscribe Pattern
4
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.5 illustrates how the producer, consumer and message broker are set up in pub­
lish/subscribe communication pattern. Events are normally used for two purposes:
• Collect behaviour of user, application or service
• Trigger task by specific event
1.3
Database Replication
Database replication is a very important technique to split the load in distributed sys­
tems [9]. Consider a distributed system where multiple microservices need to access
the database, all services accessing a single point database makes the system fragile.
Creating local replication or partial replication of the primary database can significantly
improve the performance and fault­tolerance of distributed systems. This means that the
local services do not need to access remote sites and the database load is distributed to
different replicas. This also means that even if the primary database fails, data can still
be queried from replicas, but it cannot be updated synchronously. Unless all replicas and
the main database fail at the same time, the system will not go down directly.
Different relational database management systems (RDBMS) have different replication
strategies. For instance, MySQL supports three modes of replication: statement­based,
row­based and mixed [10].
Figure 1.6: Database Replication based on Binary Log
In MySQL, replication is realised based on a medium for distributing updates, namely the
binary log. The primary database writes a record of each update to the binary log which
can be seen as a set of files. A replica database connects to the binary log and maintains
a pointer to the relative position in the file so it knows the next one to apply. The replica
keeps updating this way and so after a short period all updates by the primary will be
applied by the replica. Figure 1.6 is to illustrate how the process works.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
5
==PAGE:14==
1.4
Consistency
Data is shared and replicated across nodes in a distributed system. At a given time in a
distributed system, consistency is the property that every node has the same view of data
irrespective of how and when the data is updated [11].
A consistency model is an agreement between a distributed system and the services
running on it. Different consistency models make different guarantees for consistency.
Here we introduce some of them briefly.
• Eventual Consistency This is a particularly weak model. If no new updates are
made to a given data object, all reads to that data object will eventually return the
same value. Inconsistent behaviour can be spotted for the system might converge
at a later time [12].
• Session Guarantees This model is proposed from a user prospective. The goal
is to provide a view of the data to the user which is consistent with the user’s own
behaviours, no matter where and how the read and write happens (may on different
nodes in a distributed system). The guarantees can be further categorized to ”read
your writes”, ”monotonic reads”, ”writes follow reads” and ”monotonic writes” [13].
• FIFO Consistency Writes carried out by one particular process are observed by
other processes in the order of occurrence. However, writes from different pro­
cesses may be observed in different orders by different processes [14].
• Causal Consistency The model preserves the causality character of the system
where causally related operations are executed and observed in the same happens­
before order. Happens­before order ensures that if writing a value to variable x
depends on reading from another variable y (causal dependency), all processes
will observe the new value of x only after fetching the related value of dependency
y.
• Sequential Consistency Sequential consistency produces a total order which is
consistent with the order of operations on each single process. In the same time,
the order between operations from different processes is undefined [15].
Figure 1.7: Sequential Consistency
Consider the two processes in 1.7, under the sequential consistency model, order
between operations A1, B1 and C1 is preserved in the total order when observing
from all the processes. The same for A2 and B2. However, B2 might be observed
to be happening before or after C1 for they are from different processes. In another
word, if B2 happens before C1 in real­world time, the effect of B2 might be observed
after that of C1 for there is no order guarantee between operations on different
processes.
6
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:15==
• Strict Consistency Conceptually, this model provides the strongest consistency
which of most ideal. All the nodes (processes) observe the same value of an object
at the same time, the value is guaranteed to be the most recent updated one [16].
1.5
Functional Programming
It is hard to define functional programming from a comprehensive and intuitive perspec­
tive. It is a style of programming in contrast to imperative programming. Instead of implic­
itly coding functions into problem solving steps, functional programming uses function as
the main program and the computation is realized by application of functions to arguments
[17]. The other important difference is that functional programming is stateless with focus
on expression while imperative programming puts the emphasis on transitions between
states.
Intuitively, functional programming tries to express what is being computed while imper­
ative programming requires the programmer to define how the computation is composed
[18].
0! = 1
(n + 1)! = (n + 1)n!
(1.1)
Consider a scenario that programming the calculation of factorial for integer n like it in 1.1.
For imperative programming, a state (n, s) needs to be construct where s stands for the
state or intermediate result. Then the process of calculation which is the transition from
states to states can be defined in an iteration. The pseudocode can be found in listing
1.1.
1
// initial state
2
_n = n;
3
s = 1;
4
// iteration
5
while (_n > 0) {
6
s = s * _n;
7
_n = _n + 1;
8
}
Listing 1.1: Imperative Programming for Factorial
Things can be much simpler in functional programming. The code is similar to the mathe­
matical equation so programmer does not need to deconstruct calculation logic. In another
word, ”what we want to compute” can be directly translated to codes. In Haskell (a pure
functional programming language), the problem can be expressed as in listing 3.1.
1
fac 0
= 1
2
fac (n + 1) = (n + 1) ∗fac n
Listing 1.2: Functional Programming for Factorial
Notice the preference of recursion is only one of the many differences between functional
programming and other programming paradigms, but it lays the foundation for many other
characteristics. The other important concept in functional programming is pure function
where side effects are eliminated from the logic. Detailed definitions can be found in
[19]. From the programmer’s perspective, pure function is more easy to comprehend and
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
7
==PAGE:16==
reasoning about for its ability of high­level abstraction. Pure function avoids using internal
state, which is more convenient for debugging or testing.
Except for the the benefits during development and test process, applications written with
functional programming is more efficient under certain scenarios. For instance, functional
programming makes concurrency or parallelism much easier and efficient. Because the
characteristic of statelessness, pure function runs independently among each other while
no fractions of data is modified by the same thread twice. These intrinsic features avoids
the additional trouble of handling race condition and dead lock for they do not exist in an
application consists of only pure functions [20].
1.6
Reactive Stream
Reactive Streams is an initiative to provide a standard for asynchronous stream process­
ing with non­blocking back pressure [21]. The term ”reactive” here aims to express the
responsiveness and handling of changes and new data items in the data stream asyn­
chronously. The corresponding programming paradigm for this is known as reactive pro­
gramming. Compared to imperative programming and object­oriented structures, reac­
tive programming does not require maintaining state, coupling between objects, or calling
each other’s methods [22]. Reactive programming isolates the upstream and downstream
of the data stream and only defines ”reactive” processing for new data items, which is par­
ticularly suitable for scenarios with a continuous large amount of data streams.
Several key concepts make reactive streams fast, resource­efficient, easy to handle er­
rors, and scalable when processing large­scale data.
• Back­pressure When the volume of data in the stream exceeds the processing
capacity of downstream consumers, consumers can use reactive streams to notify
data producers upstream to adjust their production speed.
• Non­blocking In a synchronous structure, threads will be blocked when they reach
a specific point during execution. For example, in the process of numerical calcu­
lation, a thread that requests the result of another module will suspend itself until it
receives the result. The problem with this approach is that if the requested thread
unexpectedly throws an error, it may uncontrollably damage the requesting thread.
This is also highly inefficient in stream processing because data is constantly flow­
ing into the computation unit. Asynchronous frameworks used in reactive streams
ensure that data flows in stream between different computation nodes, without the
need for blocking or unbounded buffering, while each node runs on independent
computational resources.
In short, reactive streams help applications that handle streaming data or events (such as
a real­time stock trading application) to use a non­blocking, asynchronous model to main­
tain scalability within a limited number of threads, while also incorporating back­pressure
features that allow data consumers to not worry about keeping up with the production
speed of upstream data.
8
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.8: An Example of Reactive Stream
It is not difficult to find that many concepts in reactive streams are in line with functional
programming, such as statelessness and asynchronous. Using functional programming
tools for Reactive Programming is called functional reactive programming [23].
Figure 1.8 shows an example of a functional reactive stream, which is designed to calcu­
late the squares and only keep results less than 5. Natural numbers are generated as a
data stream by the producer, processed by the computation component 1 for exponen­
tiation, and then filtered by the computation component 2. All of the computation com­
ponents use functional programming operations (map, filter, etc.). When the data stream
is sent from computation component 1 to computation component 2, because they may
be independent computations running on separate resources, crossing an asynchronous
boundary may occur, which is a core issue that reactive streams focus on efficiently solv­
ing.
1.7
Motivation and Contributions
In this Chapter, we have introduced some highly relevant topics to this thesis as a pre­
lude to the application of validating heterogeneous data in the microservice architecture
of distributed system. Heterogeneity here refers to different representations of data that
represent the same object in a distributed system, such as the replicated databases or
communication based on message brokers that we have described. Functional program­
ming and reactive streams are important techniques in the design proposed in this thesis.
The motivation of this thesis is to explore the pros and cons of the microservice communi­
cation architecture based on Entity Stream and to develop a verification system to address
the challenges of using Entity Stream, so that developers can ensure the correctness of
the data while using Entity Stream.
Some of the main contributions include:
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
9
==PAGE:18==
1. Introduce the definition of Entity Stream and summarize its advantages and potential
challenges in practical applications.
2. A systematic Entity Verifier is developed based on Reactive Stream and functional
programming to monitor the correctness of Entity Stream.
3. Verify whether the possible errors in the Entity Stream can be detected by Entity
Verifier. Analysis of its performance and characteristics.
The following content will be divided into several parts. Chapter 2 provides a more detailed
definition of the Entity Stream, building on the introduction in this chapter, and explains the
problem and application scenarios that this thesis aims to address, as well as listing and
introducing previous methods that can be referenced. Chapter 3 describes the design and
rationale behind the application developed to address the corresponding problem, while
Chapter 4 describes the details of the implementation process. Chapter 5 showcases the
actual features and metrics of the implemented system. Finally, Chapter 6 presents the
conclusion based on the implementation and the runtime performance of the program.
10
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:19==
2
Background
The previous chapter introduces the communication pattern of microservice architecture
based on a message broker in a distributed system. This paradigm is called event­driven
architecture. In simple terms, it uses a message broker to manage topics, with some
services acting as producers of the topics and others subscribing to messages from the
topics as consumers.
In addition to being used for event delivery, this asynchronous communication pattern can
also be used for transmitting data objects. This chapter will introduce such a paradigm,
Entity Stream, and will also discuss the potential challenges that a microservice architec­
ture utilizing Entity Stream needs to conquer. These challenges also involve the coordi­
nation of Entity Stream with traditional RDBMS in the architecture.
To address such issues, at the end of this chapter, we will introduce some industry refer­
ence examples, such as the S3Guard system. The design ideas in these examples have
greatly inspired the design ideas for the rest of this thesis.
2.1
Entity Stream
Entity Stream, also known as Entity Topic, is a method of transporting data across ser­
vices using message queues. Unlike the common practice in event­driven architecture
of delivering events or messages (recording user behavior or domain changes), the data
object in Entity Stream records the current state of a data object [24].
2.1.1
An Example
As an example, consider a forum application based on microservice architecture, where
there is an Post service responsible for managing all the posts in the forum. If other
services in the application need to access these posts, in the traditional synchronous
way, the Post service can expose some APIs for other services to query the data objects
of these posts. Instead, Post service can produce these post data objects to a Post topic
for other services’ consumption.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.1: Forum Application Based on Entity Stream
In figure 2.1, the Post service has its own database, the Post database, which contains
several tables that together describe the posts. Note that the database schema here is
not canonical and omits the setting of some IDs, just to represent the entity relationship
of several tables simply. The Post service can select the appropriate columns from the
tables of the database to form the post entity schema and then produce entities into the
Entity Stream. Downstream from the Entity Stream, there is an Analytics service that
performs some statistics on the posts in the forum. The Analytics service subscribes to
the Entity Stream to obtain the latest post objects.
2.1.2
Usage
As the Analytics service is not interested in the content of the posts, it can perform trans­
formations when obtaining the latest state of the post from the Entity Stream, such as
discarding irrelevant fields like content and calculating the number of words and com­
ments in the post. The transformed representation is then stored in the local database.
One can argue that database replication can also transfer data object entities between
services and achieve the same effect of read­write separation. However, the advantage
of using Entity Stream is that it can share data object entities between different services
without fully replicating the database structure. For example, it can select specific columns
from specific tables and perform some transformations to form the representation in the
Entity Stream. This reduces the resource overhead of data transmission and makes the
abstraction of data objects easier to understand.
For consumers downstream of the Entity Stream, they can also transform the acquired
data object entities according to their needs. For example, in our example, the Analytics
service does not care about the specific content of the post, so it can only calculate the
12
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:21==
word count and store it in a local database. This ensures that when the Analytics ser­
vice needs to access the data of a particular post, it does not need to request the Post
database, but can pull the latest post information from the local database.
Figure 2.2: Messages in Post Entity Stream
2.1.3
Message Key
In common message queues like Apache Kafka, each message has a corresponding key,
which makes updating and deleting data objects in Entity Streams more efficient. Unlike
primary keys in relational databases, keys in message queues like Apache Kafka do not
need to be unique, which makes it efficient for Entity Stream consumers to always use a
key to obtain the latest state of a corresponding data object [25].
If one wants to notify the consumer to delete a data object entity, just set the payload
corresponding to its ID to null and send it to the Entity Stream, which is also known as a
tombstone. In theory, users (producers, consumers) of Entity Streams typically only care
about the latest state of data objects. The compaction mechanism of the message queue
automatically removes records from the Entity Stream and only keeps the latest update
of the same key, greatly optimizing the utilization of storage resources.
To provide a more intuitive understanding, let’s continue with the example of forum posts.
In the Entity Stream that transfers post data objects shown in the diagram 2.2 above, the
earliest record is creating a new post with an id of 1. Then, the author changes the title
of the post from ”Fish” to ”Salmon”. After that, a new post with an id of 2 is inserted and
immediately deleted.
At this point, the first record becomes useless after the second one is generated, and
the third record will also be overwritten by the later tombstone. Under the compaction
mechanism, both of these records will be automatically removed, only keeping the latest
record of post:1 and post:2, which greatly optimizes the utilization of storage resources.
2.1.4
Partition
Another feature of using message queues such as Apache Kafka is partitioning. For fault
tolerance and size considerations, a topic is often deployed across multiple distributed
nodes, dividing a topic into multiple segments called partitions [26].
Because messages with the same key are always sent to the same partition, the order of
the Entity Stream is guaranteed. In other words, a consumer will not receive out­of­order
data object entities, and the version it currently sees is the latest one it has ever seen.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.3: Partitions in Message Broker
In a nutshell, an Entity Stream is a stream of successive versions of an entity. The point
is that consumers can replicate the entities into their own materialized views, with new
versions simply overwriting the previous versions. Since entity topics provide an external
perspective of a service’s owned state, you have the flexibility to export only the required
information. You can always augment this information by including additional fields to
the exported data and republishing it later. However, removing fields is more challenging
since you would need to verify with all data consumers to determine if they are using those
fields.
2.2
Challenge
Even though Entity Streams have many advantages in terms of efficiency and flexibility.
Over the years the industry has experienced a number of challenges to maintaining data
quality in Entity Streams.
2.2.1
Writing the Right Codes
First of all, keeping two copies of the same data in sync is a difficult problem in general.
Even when we denormalize (i.e. keep two copies of the same piece of information) data in
a traditional relational database like MySQL, developers often wind up with bugs. In order
to ensure that data we replicate remains consistent with the source data, developers need
to capture all writes to the data and reflect them in the replicated data. This is a challenge
in a relatively large codebase because it involves manually identifying and instrumenting
all code paths that contain writes to the affected data. When developers make changes
to the system – for example by adding a new codepath that writes to the post object –
they don’t have a way to guarantee that changes produced by the new codepath will be
reflected in the Entity Stream.
Secondly, in a distributed system, with a global infrastructure (e.g.
AWS Availability
Zones), Entity Streams need to regularly be populated from scratch. In the case of fo­
rum post Entity Stream, when an author’s account moves between deployment nodes
(e.g. account moves from Europe to America, all information associated with it, such as
all posts it has created, needs to be migrated together), the code needs to populate a
stream of posts based on the contents of the primary post datastore (MySQL).
14
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.4: Two Situations to Synchronize Entity Stream
As a result, the engineers responsible for populating the posts Entity Stream must main­
tain code in the system to handle at least two distinct kinds of situations:
• When users create, update, or delete posts (code to maintain consistency)
• When an account moves between nodes (code to bootstrap the stream)
The figure 2.4 above illustrates two scenarios that need to be handled in order to maintain
a correct Entity Stream. The upper part of the figure shows that developers need to pay
attention to every codepath that modifies the database in order to ensure that the same
changes are synchronized in the Entity Stream (i.e. ensure consistency). The lower part
of the figure shows that in a distributed system, when an account is migrated, the Entity
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
15
==PAGE:24==
Stream needs to be bootstrapped to synchronize the data object to the new deployment
node’s Entity Stream.
When the code that ensures consistency and the code that bootstraps the stream deviate,
it can result in inconsistent data in the Entity Stream. For example, if a new field is added
to the post entity and populated when a user creates an post, but not populated when
bootstrapping posts for an account, only some of the post entities will have the correct
data. Additionally, when a new field is added to the stream, all entities in the stream
should be repopulated because there is no assurance that they will converge to a correct
state just through user updates.
2.2.2
Consistency between Database and Entity Stream
Earlier, we discussed the issues that developers need to pay attention to when implement­
ing a correct Entity Stream. These issues mainly revolve around whether developers can
correctly implement the synchronization logic between other data storage and the Entity
Stream, which is a requirement for developers when writing business logic.
Even if developers pay attention to these details and implement them correctly, there are
some architectural challenges that cannot be compensated for by correct code logic [27].
Although Entity Streams are useful, there is a significant drawback to them: they offer
eventual consistency. As topics are asynchronous, there is no guarantee that the data in
the consumers’ local database will exactly match that in the producer’s primary database
by any time. If the message broker is experiencing a slowdown, there may be a delay of
seconds or even minutes before the data is updated in your database.
In the example of the forum post application that we have been using, the Analytics service
does not have a high real­time requirement for getting updates on post data objects.
This is because the main function of the Analytics service is to collect and analyze overall
data of forum posts, such as calculating the average length and number of comments
of a certain category of post. Therefore, even if the latest version of some posts is not
obtained in real­time by the Entity Stream consumer, the impact can be negligible (unless
eventual consistency is delayed by days or months).
Consider a more complex scenario where both database replication and Entity Streams
coexist in the application architecture like it in figure 2.5. Coordinating consistency be­
tween database and Entity Stream in this case becomes even more difficult to predict.
16
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.5: Consistency Coordination between DB and Entity Stream
In the example of forum posts shown in the figure 2.5, when the database content is
modified through the Post service, such as updating the title of a post, the Post service will
generate a domain event. A domain event is an event that relates to a specific application
domain. For example, for the support domain we can imagine PostCreated, PostUpdated,
etc. Importantly, domain events describe changes made to the domain model. The Post
service contains an event consumer module that listens to domain changes. When it
detects an event such as postUpdated, it means that the Post service needs to publish
the new version of the post to the post Entity Stream. At this point, the Post service
reads the data from the replica of the Posts database and sends it to the Entity Stream
because the Posts database uses database replication to achieve read­write separation.
The benefits and necessity of using database replication for read­write separation have
been introduced in the Introduction.
Assuming that the database replication here can guarantee that the transactional commits
included in the replication are complete, that is, it is not possible to obtain an incomplete
data version that does not satisfy the database constraints from the replica. However, for
mainstream database replication mechanisms, it is impossible to predict the delay from
when the data is written to the master database to when it arrives at the replica database.
Therefore, without additional assistance, Post service may read an old version of a post
from the replica database.
In this architecture, for the system to function properly, developers should assume that
the time it takes for the Post service to generate a domain event after performing a write
operation on the database and subsequently triggering a read operation on the replica
after listening to the event should be longer than the time it takes for the database repli­
cation to complete. Otherwise, Analytics service may consume stale data from the Posts
Entity Stream, and it cannot determine whether this is due to the eventual consistency
of the entity stream itself or because Post service published old data obtained from the
replica database to the entity stream.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
17
==PAGE:26==
If it is the former case, then the Analytics service can still expect to obtain the latest version
of the post data object from the entity stream at some point in the future, which will bring
the entire application back to a consistent state.
If it is the latter case, the impact is fatal. As Post service only performs one read opera­
tion from the replica database in response to one domain event, the new version of the
data will not be published into the entity stream, and the entire application will not con­
verge to a consistent state. If a subsequent update to the same post object is received
in the future and is correctly read from the replica database and broadcasted through
the entity stream, the application will be brought back to a consistent state. However, all
downstream consumers of this post will miss an intermediate version.
2.2.3
Consequence
In summary, there are two challenges to the correct operation of Entity Stream. One is that
developers need to maintain the program correctly so that all modifications to data objects
can be presented in the entity stream. The other is that the consistency coordination of
the same data object in different storage media (database, entity stream) in the system
needs to be guaranteed or monitored.
If these challenges are not handled correctly, the data in the Entity Stream will be incon­
sistent, and the impact will be significant.
For example, in our example, the user obtains the statistics of Post data through the
Analytics Service. If the data in the Entity Stream is inconsistent with the database and
the user finds that the statistical characteristics of the Analytics Service do not match the
user behavior (for example, some comments are not counted), the user will report the
problem. It is already a very bad user experience for users to find problems. However,
the process of locating and solving problems is not easy.
Due to the complexity of the microservice structure, different microservices are often main­
tained by different teams. Although the user reported the data inconsistency to the team
in charge of the Analytics Service, since the Analytics Service is only a consumer of the
data, it may take a long time before the problem is finally submitted to the upstream of the
data—Post Service.
It can be seen that if the correctness of Entity Stream is unclear, the reliability of the entire
service decreases drastically, and once a problem occurs, it will cause an increase in
operating costs.
18
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.6: Additional Operation Cost for Entity Stream Problem
2.3
S3Guard
It is evident that the trade­off between consistency and efficiency is a challenge in design­
ing systems that use asynchronous data transmission. The pursuit of data transmission
efficiency brings the cost of compromising sequential consistency and settling for eventual
consistency. Both academia and industry have been continuously studying ways to strike
a balance between consistency and system efficiency [28]. They have proposed various
tools and designs to improve the correctness of weakly consistent systems or monitor
whether consistency converges [29] [30].
This section discusses S3Guard, a subsidiary system of Apache Hadoop that addresses
the consistency coordination problem between Apache Hadoop and Amazon Simple Stor­
age Service (S3). Its implementation provides significant reference for the design of the
thesis [31].
2.3.1
Problem
The Apache Hadoop software library is a framework that allows for the distributed pro­
cessing of large data sets across clusters of computers using simple programming mod­
els. Despite the fact that Apache Hadoop can use Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3)
as a Hadoop filesystem, it differs from the default distributed file system for Hadoop ap­
plications, Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS), in how it behaves. One of the major
differences lies in the level of consistency provided by the underlying file system. Unlike
HDFS, S3 is an eventually consistent file system, which implies that modifications made
to files on S3 may not be immediately visible for a certain period of time.
Several Hadoop components rely on HDFS consistency for ensuring their correctness.
However, due to the eventually consistent nature of S3, some failures may occur when
using it with Hadoop:
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
19
==PAGE:28==
• Applications that write data to a directory and then try to list that same directory may
encounter errors if the data they wrote is not immediately visible in the listing due to
inconsistencies between S3 and Hadoop.
• In multi­step Hadoop jobs that rely on the output of previous jobs, the absence of
data may occur without notification. This can happen when a job selects files to
consume based on a directory listing, which may not include recently written items.
2.3.2
Solution
S3Guard is a component of the open source Apache Hadoop S3 client, S3A. It addresses
the consistency issues between Hadoop and S3 by recording all metadata modifications to
S3 in a separate, consistent storage system known as a Metadata Store. As the Metadata
Store maintains consistency, S3A can utilize it to retrieve any missing information that may
not be immediately available on S3.
S3Guard addressed the most prevalent scenario of inconsistency issues, namely the ”list­
after­create” or ”read­after­write” problem. When a file is created or moved by a Hadoop
S3A client and then the client lists the directory where the file is located, S3Guard ensures
that the file is included in the listing.
Figure 2.7: S3Guard List­after­create Consistency
Figure 2.7 is a simple example of how S3Guard enables list­after­create consistency in
S3A. In this example, it begins with an S3 bucket that only includes two directories, namely
/a and /a/b, along with one file /a/b/file1. Next, a Metadata Store is auto­created if it does
not already exist. As shown in the upper part of Figure 2.7, the cluster now has a existing
S3 bucket, and a new, empty Metadata Store. And then, a job creates a new file at the
path /a/b/file2. S3A writes the file to S3, and then logs the metadata for the new path to
the Metadata Store, as shown in the lower part of figure 2.7. S3Guard will read both S3
and the Metadata Store, union the results, and return the correct listing to the client when
it receives a read operation. This approach will always raise the correct listing even their
is a delay in S3 that /a/b/file2 may not appear because of eventual consistency.
20
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.8: S3Guard Delete Consistency
Delete tracking in S3A ensures that when a file is deleted, any subsequent request for its
metadata, either directly or through listing the parent directory, will reflect the deletion of
the file.
The implementation process of deleting tracking is similar. In the figure 2.8, when the file
/a/b/file1 is deleted, S3A will log the deletion in the Metadata Store while performing an S3
deletion operation. The Metadata Store will mark a tombstone next to the deleted path.
Once a Hadoop client lists the directory /a/b, S3Guard will query both S3 and the Metadata
Store. In the event that S3 is still listing the deleted file due to eventual consistency, the
Metadata Store will indicate that the file has been deleted. S3A will then filter out the
deleted file from the results, returning the accurate listing.
2.4
Summary
Although ensuring the correct operation of Entity Stream is a complex process that in­
volves coordinating many other components in a distributed system and even invasive
modifications, setting a predictable goal, such as monitoring the correctness of Entity
Stream, can provide developers and operators with confidence in its use [32]. This goal
involves checking if the Entity Stream has converged to consistency throughout the ap­
plication and if it fully reflects all database modifications. With the help of well­designed
tools like Metadata Store, we can achieve this goal of monitoring the data in Entity Stream
for correctness in a non­invasive way.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:31==
3
Design
The previous chapter has explored the background under which the problem is raised,
focusing on the challenges that Entity Stream may encounter in the context of distributed
systems. Under the guidance of some research and mature systems, we proposed Entity
Verifier, which is used to monitor whether Entity Stream contains correct data in a complex
architecture with multiple sources of truth.
In this chapter, design goals are firstly fine­grained to explain what people can expect from
Entity Verifier. Further, An overall design diagram is proposed for explaining how the Entity
Verifier fits in the whole architecture. Entity Verifier consists of three main functioning
modules: Binlog Replicator, Metadata Store and Entity Consumer. The design of each
module is related to how to achieve the established goal in the most efficient and least
resource­intensive way.
3.1
Design Goals
3.1.1
Types of Errors
As mentioned above, the challenges affecting the correctness of Entity Stream mainly
come from the program that is not implemented correctly and the consistency coordination
with other sources of truth. Before a design is proposed of how to use automated verifier
to address these challenges, the types of errors which automatic verification is capable
to identify should be defined.
• Errors of omission An entity that should be present in the stream is not. This
can happen if application code fails to produce an entity message at specific points
in the entity’s lifecycle. For example: when the entity is created or restored from
deletion, or when the account the entity belongs to moves between deployment
nodes(regions/zones).
• Errors of inclusion An entity that should not be present in the stream. This can
happen if application code fails to remove (tombstone) the entity at the correct points
in the entity’s lifecycle. For example: when an entity is deleted by a user or an
automated account deletion process. This type of error is particularly concerning in
the context of account data deletion for legal reason.
• Content errors An entity is present in the stream when it should be, but the data it
contains is incorrect. For instance in an post entity, the title in the database might
be “Title A” but it might be “Title B”.
The aforementioned errors may also be caused by coordination issues between Database
and Entity Stream, such as the service failing to push new version data into the Entity
Stream due to database replication delays.
3.1.2
Goals
The ultimate goal of the Entity Verifier is to ensure that the data in the Entity Stream
remains consistent with the system’s source of truth, where we can assume that the data
in the master database is always correct and the latest version. So, verifying the Entity
Stream means verifying whether the data in the Entity Stream is consistent with the master
database.
Corresponding to these types of errors, Entity Verifier needs to achieve the following goals.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
23
==PAGE:32==
• Detection of omission Entity Verifier should be able to detect that new data object
entity inserted into the master database are also published to the Entity Stream.
This ensures that the insertion of new data object entity into the database is correctly
reflected in the Entity Stream.
• Detection of inclusion Entity Verifier should be able to detect that a data object
entity deleted in the master database is also tombstoned in the Entity Stream. This
ensures that the deletion operation on the data object entity in the database is cor­
rectly reflected in the Entity Stream.
• Validation of content Entity Verifier should be able to compare the content of data
object entity between the master database and Entity Stream, which means the con­
sistency of their versions. This ensures that the update operation on a data object
entity in the database is correctly reflected in the Entity Stream. As the database and
Entity Stream use different representations for the same data object entity, careful
design is required for the comparison steps.
3.2
Overall Design
Figure 3.1: Entity Verifier’s Position in the Architecture
Continuing to consider the example of the forum blog post, as shown in the figure 3.1,
Entity Verifer is an independent system that runs on its own resources and has no side
effects on other parts of the architecture.
Transactions are executed on the Master database, and then, all transactions are written
in binary log files as ”event” on the Master. The binary log is written to as transactions
commit so it is considered sequential consistent between Master DB and binary log.
Entity Stream subscribes to binlog and parses to copy database updates into Metadata
Store. At the same time, Entity Verifier also subscribes to Entity Stream as a consumer.
When a new message is available in Entity Stream, Entity Verifier compares the received
data object entity with Metadata Store to conduct the verification.
24
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:33==
In the example, the Entity Verifier tracks changes to all tables related to the Post Entity in
the Posts Database Master and records them in the Metadata Store. In this way, when a
new Post Object Entity appears in the Posts Entity Stream, the corresponding metadata
used to verify its correctness has already been stored in the Metadata Storage.
3.2.1
Internal Structure
The Entity Verifier consists of three main internal modules: the Binlog Replicator, the
Entity Consumer, and the Metadata Storage. The internal workflow of the Entity Verifier
is shown in the following figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Internal Diagram of Entity Verifier
The task of Binlog Replicator is to subscribe to Binary Log and parse its contents. After­
wards, the Binlog Replicator registers the metadata changes parsed from the Binary Log
into the Metadata Storage. In general, metadata refers to data that describes other data.
It usually summarizes the structural information of a data object to facilitate tracking of the
data. In the context of Entity Verifier, it is necessary to ensure that the metadata used can
reflect any changes that occur in the data object entity.
Entity Consumer’s role is to subscribe to the Entity Stream, it compares each data object
entity included in each message of the Entity Stream with the corresponding metadata in
the Metadata Storage, and then outputs the comparison results to a Correctness Metric
to show engineers and operations whether the data in the Entity Stream is correct.
It is noticeable that Binlog Replicator and Entity Consumer are only associated through
Metadata Storage. This allows for the potential concurrency of Binlog Replicator and
Entity Consumer, with the only requirement being that Metadata has read­after­write con­
sistency. This means that updates to Metadata Storage by Binlog Replicator are always
reflected when Entity Consumer reads it so that Entity Consumer does not read stale data.
In general, the term ”concurrent” refers to multiple actions that are defined as independent
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
25
==PAGE:34==
in their control flow [33]. The opposite of concurrent is ”sequential”, which suggests that
something cannot be concurrent. It should be noted that actions defined as concurrent
can be executed sequentially if the underlying runtime system deems it optimal, whereas
actions defined as sequential will always be executed one after the other [34].
3.2.2
Consistency Requirements
In the design phase, we need to consider a critical question: Is Entity Verifier’s verification
complete? To be more specific, this question can be divided into three sub­questions.
• Can Binlog Replicator ensure that every update in the Binary Log is tracked? What
is the consistency requirement between them?
• Can Entity Consumer ensure that every message in the Entity Stream gets verified?
What is the consistency requirement between them?
For the first question, there are many Binary Log tools that can achieve eventual consis­
tency, which means that every record in the Binary Log can eventually be delivered to the
Binlog Replicator. The eventual consistency of this stage is sufficient for the entire Entity
Verifier process. A person may ask what if the Entity Consumer reads a new message
while the Binlog Replicator has not yet received the corresponding Binary Log record due
to eventual consistency? In fact, this scenario is highly unlikely to occur because the data
in the Entity Stream comes from a database replica, and if the Entity Consumer receives a
new message, it means that the database replica has also been updated via Binary Log,
and this update should have also reached the Binlog Replicator (which is much faster than
database replication). Moreover, if the data object entity version received by the Entity
Consumer is newer than the version in the Metadata Storage, it can be easily detected.
For the second question, mature message brokers such as Apache Kafka generally en­
sure eventual consistency, which means that each message is delivered to the Entity
Consumer at least once. In the at­least­once delivery model [35], the same message
may be received multiple times, and multiple verifications of the same message do not
have any impact.
Figure 3.3: Consistency Requirements across Entity Verifier
The figure 3.3 shows how the consistency models are adopted between different compo­
nents of Entity Verifier.
26
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:35==
3.3
Binlog Replicator
Figure 3.4: The Flowchart of Binlog Replicator
As previously mentioned, Binlog Replicator and Entity Consumer can run independently
in separate processes to achieve concurrency. In fact, the Binlog Replicator is a Reactive
Stream as a whole, where Binary Log records continuously flow in as other programs write
to the database. These records go through a series of stream processing and eventually
produce updated entities that are written to the Metadata Storage.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
27
==PAGE:36==
3.3.1
Binlog Event Publisher
Firstly, we need a BinlogEventPublisher to read and parse records from the Binary Log
file and publish them downstream as a stream. There are many mature solutions for
such a BinlogEventPublisher, which usually record the current read position’s offset to
ensure eventual consistency. Their implementation is also based on the Reactive Stream
standard, so they can be directly integrated as a source of stream.
Each record in Binary Log is parsed into an event, and each event represents a transac­
tional commit to a database table. A data object entity is often composed of information
joined from multiple tables in the database. Therefore, in the stream of events from the
Binary Log, we may be interested in changes related to multiple tables. For example, the
information that makes up a Post object in a forum may include data from columns of five
tables: Post, Topic, Account, User, and Community.
3.3.2
Processor
We refer to the processing units between data streams as processors (the yellow rect­
angles in the diagram 3.4). The first processor is a filter that is used to filter out events
related to tables that we are not interested in, i.e., tables other than those related to Post
object. After passing through this processor, the resulting data stream still consists of
change events in the database.
The next processor aims to parse the change events into messages containing the specific
row of a specific database table with the changed values. Due to the fact that one record in
Binary Log may contain modifications to multiple rows of a database table (a transactional
commit can submit modifications to multiple rows), one change event may correspond to
multiple row change events, with each row change event corresponding to column value
changes in a row of a database table.
The third processor extracts information from the row change events and constructs object
entities corresponding to the database table schema. It is worth noting that the data entity
here is different from the data object entity mentioned earlier, as a data entity here is
incomplete and only corresponds to the part of the data object entity related to one table.
For instance, the Post entity shown in the diagram 3.4 only includes the fields related to
the Post table in the corresponding data object entity, while the Topic entity only includes
the fields related to the Topic table. Both entities are subsets of the Post object entity, as
they only contain a portion of its fields.
The final processor writes these entities into Metadata Storage, effectively recording the
updates to the database from the Binary Log.
3.3.3
Asynchrony
In the entire stream processing, all processors are asynchronous [36]. In this context,
asynchronous means that the execution of each processor does not depend on the re­
sults of other processors, meaning that the entire process is non­blocking (in contrast to
synchronous processing) [37].
Thanks to the back­pressure provided by the Reactive Stream protocol [38], we do not
need to worry about one processor’s processing speed being faster than other processors.
Slower processors will signal upstream for back­pressure [39]. Meanwhile, the Reac­
tive Stream protocol is responsible for transporting the data stream across asynchronous
boundaries, so that each processor can run in an asynchronous context ExecutionCon­
text, which in addition allows scheduling of single or periodical execution of Runnables.
It will describe in the next chapter how tasks within the processors are asynchronously
orchestrated.
28
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:37==
3.4
Metadata Storage
It has been analyzed that Metadata Storage needs to have read­after­write consistency.
A simpler implementation is to use a single­threaded cache system that can only perform
one write operation (or read operation) at a time. This ensures the atomicity and order of
operations, so that read operations can always obtain the latest metadata [40].
In addition, we do not want the resource overhead and response speed of Metadata Stor­
age to affect the flow of the entire system, that is to say, we want it to be low­latency and
high­throughput. An in­memory data structure can make access significantly faster than
a network or hard disk [41].
However, since memory space is precious, we need to carefully design the internal stor­
age structure of Metadata Storage to save resource consumption. We use a hash table
of key­value pairs to store metadata about data entities. In this way, the time complexities
of writing and reading are both O(1).
As mentioned earlier, the data entity generated by Binlog Replicator corresponds to a
specific database table, then we can make the index key of the hash table correspond
to the primary key in the database. The advantage of this is that it naturally satisfies the
requirements of the hash table index cannot be duplicated.
For the values in the hash table, directly storing the entire content of the data entity is
obviously heavy. For the verification of Entity Stream, we only care about whether the
changing data object entities are consistent, not how they change. For example, if the
title of a post changes from ”A” to ”B”, Entity Verifier does not need to know that the
original value is ”A”, nor does it need to know that the new value is ”B”, it only needs to
know the blog post data object entity From one version to another.
The hash value of the data entity is very suitable for our needs. The contents of a data
entity are processed through a cryptographic algorithm, and a unique numerical value –
the hash value ­ is produced that identifies the contents of the data entity. The hash value
can be regarded as the digest of the data entity, which uniquely represents the content of
the data entity, and has the following characteristics [42].
• It accepts an entity of any length and of any data type
• It produces a fixed­length digest (the memory overhead is limited and predictable)
• It is easy and fast to compute the digest for any given entity
• The hash is irreversible – it is not possible to generate an entity from its digest
• A small change in an entity should generate large changes in the message value
• The hash is collision free, meaning it is not feasible that two different entities would
result in the same hash value
1
<table_name:primary_key > => hash_value_of_entity
2
// For example
3
<post:2>
=> efe473564cb63a7bf025dd691ef0ae0ac906c03ab408375
4
<post:1>
=> 1b9ed7aa6346ee2c6e0faf0f75997b9308916160239b184
5
<account:1> => 94c6af4c0b5d493181a0a762b9023b90b295fbad1e28a6f
6
<topic:3>
=> 762b9023b90b295fbad1e28a6f616a4af59209ba7c3f355
Listing 3.1: Metadata Storage Internal Storage Structure
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
29
==PAGE:38==
Listing 3.1 shows how the Metadata Storage is structured internally as a hash table. The
index order in the hash table is not linearly arranged according to the value of the primary
key.
3.5
Entity Consumer
Figure 3.5: The Flowchart of Entity Consumer
Similar to Binlog Replicator, Entity consumer is also an independent process running Re­
active Stream illustrated in flowchart 3.5.
The first processor is the Message Queue Connector. It implements stream­aware and
reactive integration pipelines from traditional message broker. It allows us to treat Entity
30
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:39==
Stream as a data stream and easily integrate it with our subsequent stream processing.
Connector itself is also implemented based on Reactive Stream, which saves us the com­
plicated internal logic of connecting to message broker and reading data in a streaming
manner.
The next processor in stream processing is a deserializer. The message in the entity
stream obtained by the connector is a byte stream without a specific data type. Deseri­
alization is the process of reconstructing a data structure or object from a series of bytes
in order to instantiate the object for consumption. In this step, we need the help of Entity
Schema, which defines the fields contained in the Post entity and the corresponding data
types to tell the program how to implement serialization/deserialization of messages. Note
that Schema generally exists in a library called Schema Registry, which is referenced from
outside, and our processor does not need to create it because it is a necessary part of
the operation of traditional message queues.
After deserialization, the verifier can start ingesting the stream of Post object entities and
the data they contain. As shown in the figure, verifier contains the main verification and
comparison logic. The Post object entity contains data from multiple database tables, and
the metadata corresponding to these data is stored discretely in Metadata Storage. If the
Post object entity contains only one key, then we need to get the keys of other tables from
the database based on this key and the foreign key reference. After that, we can find all
the metadata related to the Post object entity in the Metadata Storage based on these
keys for comparison and verification.
The comparison process of Verifier is very intuitive. It uses the same hash function to
calculate the object entity as a digest and compares it with the hash stored in Metadata
Storage. If it is equal, it will output a correct signal, and if there is a discrepancy, it will
output a warning.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:41==
4
Implementation
Entity Verifier is a standalone program that can run independently. It is primarily developed
using the Scala programming language. Scala is a high­level programming language that
seamlessly integrates object­oriented and functional programming paradigms. The lan­
guage’s static types provide robustness and help prevent errors in complex applications.
Furthermore, Scala’s ability to run on both the JVM and JavaScript runtimes enables de­
velopers to create high­performance systems with access to a vast library ecosystem [43].
In Entity Verifier, we mainly leverage Scala’s native support for asynchronous program­
ming and its functional programming semantics to build parallelizable, non­blocking pro­
grams. Scala has native support for asynchronous programming with its Futures and
Promises constructs, which allow developers to write non­blocking and parallel programs.
It also provides a powerful and flexible concurrency library with constructs such as ac­
tors, which can be used for event­driven programming. Additionally, Scala’s functional
programming constructs make it easy to write code that is inherently asynchronous and
parallel, as it encourages the use of immutable data structures and pure functions. The
combination of these features makes Scala a good choice for building highly scalable and
performant asynchronous systems.
Based on this foundation, our entire program is built with Monix. Monix is a low­level
concurrency library for Scala that provides support for asynchronous programming. It
offers a range of features, including task, future abstractions, and concurrency primitives,
which make it easy to build concurrent, scalable, and fault­tolerant applications [44].
As previously mentioned, both Binlog Replicator and Entity Consumer are implemented
based on Reactive Stream. We choose Akka Stream as the overall framework to im­
plement Binlog Replicator and Entity Consumer. Akka Stream is a reactive stream pro­
cessing toolkit built on top of the Akka toolkit. It provides a high­level and expressive
API for building reactive stream processing systems that process data in a non­blocking,
asynchronous and backpressure­driven manner [45].
We have chosen a commonly used message queuing system, Apache Kafka, for the
implementation of the Entity Stream. Apache Kafka is a distributed streaming platform
that is engineered to handle large volumes of data in real­time. It functions as a publish­
subscribe messaging system that facilitates data transmission among processes, appli­
cations, and systems in a scalable and fault­tolerant manner. Kafka’s architectural de­
sign is centered around topics, which represent streams of records, and partitions, which
are subsets of a topic that can be distributed across multiple brokers. Producers gener­
ate data that is published to topics, while consumers subscribe to topics to receive data.
Kafka’s underlying design principles provide support for high throughput, low­latency, and
real­time processing of massive data sets. It is widely used in data processing pipelines,
real­time analytics, and event­driven architectures.
As for the database, we use the commonly used RDBMS, MySQL, and its corresponding
replication and Binary Log.
Regarding Metadata Storage, we use Redis, an in­memory data structure store. In the
previous chapter, we discussed the requirements that Metadata Storage needs to meet.
In this chapter, we will introduce how these requirements can be met in Redis.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.1: The Technology Stack of Entity Verifier
The figure 4.1 shows the technology stack used in the entire project.
4.1
Database
Figure 4.2: The Entity Relationship (ER) Diagram of Forum Post Application
The Entity Relationship diagram used in the experiment is shown in the figure 4.2. It
describes the data related to posts in a forum application, and we have omitted some
34
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:43==
columns that are not related to the Post object entity. It consists of 5 tables with one­to­
one and one­to­many relationships between them.
4.1.1
Binary Log Format
We utilize row­based binary log for the MySQL database in the implementation setup [46].
There are two types of binary logs available in MySQL, which are the statement­based
binary log and the row­based binary log. The row­based binary log is a format for logging
in which all modifications made to specific rows are recorded, rather than just the SQL
statement responsible for the modifications. This method of logging is particularly valuable
in situations where the SQL statement does not fully explain the modifications that were
made to the data. For instance, row­based logging can capture the exact changes made
at the row level when triggers or stored procedures are used to modify data.
Figure 4.3 illustrates the structure of a typical transaction for a single event of updating
rows. For instance, if there is a transaction that modifies certain data in the table of User,
the Binlog file will contain the subsequent events.
Figure 4.3: MySQL Binary Log Update Rows Event
• The GTID EVENT. The beginning of a transaction
• The Query EVENT with “BEGIN” as SQL
• The TABLE MAP EVENT contains table identifier information like schema and table
name for the User table
• The UPDATE ROWS EVENT contains both before and after the data updated in the
User table
• The XID or QUERY EVENT that contains “COMMIT/ROLLBACK” as a SQL. The
end of a transaction.
The records in the Binary Log are stored in a compact binary format, so human need
some utilities to read them. The command­line tool mysqlbinlog can be used to obtain the
records corresponding to the above example. Listing 4.1 shows part of the events read
by mysqlbinlog in the command line.
1
# at 475120
2
#180704 18:08:43 server id 1
end_log_pos 475185 CRC32 0xfaf6f0a2
Rows_query
3
# update test_table set name='Alice' where id=1
4
# at 475185
5
#180704 18:08:43 server id 1
end_log_pos 475252 CRC32 0x9ac1f8e5
Table_map: `test_db `.`test_table ` mapped to number 1093
6
# at 475252
7
#180704 18:08:43 server id 1
end_log_pos 475291 CRC32 0x2e19d7b9
Write_rows: table id 1093 flags: STMT_END_F
Listing 4.1: Row­based Binary Log – Mysqlbinlog
In fact, during the implementation process, the BinglogEventPublisher encapsulates the
parsing of Binary Log events for developers, which means that we do not need to focus
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
35
==PAGE:44==
on these specific details and can directly obtain the high­level database change events
(”INSERT”, ”UPDATE” and ”DELETE”) that have been reconstructed.
4.2
Binlog Replicator
The following listing 4.2 presents the overall framework of the Binlog Replicator stream
processing written in Scala.
4.2.1
Stream Processing
1
streamToTask { _ =>
2
filterSource(
3
tableSchemas ,
4
binlogEventPublisher ,
5
config,
6
watchEntities ,
7
scheduler
8
) // filter in binlog events related to tables of object entity
9
.viaMat(KillSwitches.single)(Keep.right) // insert a cancel switch
10
.via(eventFlow(config, processor , scheduler)) // events to entities
11
.toMat(Sink.foreach(entityMessage => writeToCache(cache, entityMessage
, scheduler).runToFuture(scheduler)))(Keep.both)
12
.run()(materializer)
13
}
14
.doOnFinish {
15
case None =>
// log with complete
16
case Some(e) => // log with error
17
}
Listing 4.2: Binlog Replicator Stream Processing
The function streamToTask is a higher­order function that takes a function as its argu­
ment and converts the Akka Stream processing into Monix Task data objects. Monix
Task models asynchronous and non­blocking execution of computations. By wrapping
the operations inside Task, we can fine­grain the control over execution semantics, such
as scheduling, execution context, and error handling strategy. From the perspective of
functional programming, using Task enables us to compose and orchestrate computations
more intuitively and defer side effects.
4.2.2
Task and Scheduler
In Binlog Replicator, stream processing is submitted to the scheduler through Task, which
is used to orchestrate and run Tasks. In Monix, the scheduler can be seen as an abstrac­
tion of the threading model, providing an asynchronous runtime. With Monix’s scheduler,
we don’t need to worry about when the Binlog Replicator is running or when it switches
to other processes (such as Entity Consumer). We also don’t need to worry about unpre­
dictable behavior caused by asynchronous operations with side effects [47]. For example,
when writing to Metadata Storage, there may be multiple asynchronous write operations
happening simultaneously. However, these side effects are encapsulated in Tasks, and
the scheduler ensures that they are executed in order [48].
As an example, the listing 4.3 shows the specific operation of writing to the Metadata
Storage. The program first converts the entity to be written into key­value pairs for the
hash table through the toHashKV function, and then writes it to the Metadata Storage
using the cache operations.
1
private def writeToCache(cache: RedisCmd[String , String],
2
entityMessage: EntityMessage ,
36
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:45==
3
scheduler: Scheduler): Task[AnyVal] = {
4
entityMessage match {
5
case _: DeleteMessage =>
6
for {
7
key <- entityMessage.toHashKV.map(_._1)
8
result <- cache.key.del(key) // // Task[Unit]
9
} yield result
10
case _ =>
11
for {
12
hashKV <- entityMessage.toHashKV
13
result <- cache.string.set(hashKV._1, hashKV._2) // Task[Unit]
14
} yield result
15
}
16
}
Listing 4.3: Write to Metadata Storage with Task
In the Binlog Replicator example, the cache.key.del and cache.string.set functions are
both wrapped in a Task data type provided by the Monix library. This allows the program
to perform these actions asynchronously while still maintaining the order of operations.
4.2.3
Cancellation
Converting stream processing to Task also makes it easier for us to cancel its execution at
any time. In listing 4.2, in addition to the stream processors we introduced in the flowchart,
there is also a switch for cancellation.
1
private def streamToTask(f: Scheduler => (UniqueKillSwitch , Future[Done])):
Task[Done] = {
2
Task.create { (scheduler , cb: Callback[Throwable , Done]) =>
3
val (killSwitch , doneFuture) = f(scheduler)
4
5
doneFuture.onComplete(cb(_))(scheduler)
6
7
Cancelable.apply { () =>
8
logger.info("Handling request to cancel BinlogReplicator stream")
9
killSwitch.shutdown()
10
}
11
}
12
}
Listing 4.4: Create Stream task With Cancellation Switch
In the function streamToTask, we create an asynchronous Task. When the stream pro­
cessing gets a Future (which contains the computation result), a callback function will
be automatically injected by the runtime to continue running other tasks. This callback
function is provided by the Monix runtime and follows a certain contract, and we don’t
need to worry about its specific content. Since we insert a switch to cancel the operation
in the stream processing, this switch will also be registered here along with the result of
the stream processing, to asynchronously cancel the stream. In summary, Task.create is
a convenient function provided by Task to create asynchronous operations and register
methods to cancel these operations.
4.3
Metadata Storage
In the previous chapter, we have introduced the composition of Metadata and how they
are stored in the structure in Metadata Storage. Here we will introduce the specific imple­
mentation of the underlying Metadata Storage.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
37
==PAGE:46==
4.3.1
Redis
Metadata Storage is implemented using Redis. Redis is a free and open­source data
structure server that operates in memory and can function as a message broker, cache,
and database. It is intentionally designed for speed, efficiency, and scalability, and is
extensively employed in contemporary software development due to its ease of use and
high performance [49].
Redis adopts a key­value data model, which stores data in a collection of key­value pairs.
This aligns with the hash table­based Metadata Storage we designed. Redis is an in­
memory data store, which means that all data is stored in memory and is therefore fast to
access and manipulate.
In the design chapter, it was mentioned that because the Binlog Replicator needs to write
to Redis while the Entity Consumer needs to read from Redis, we need Redis to achieve
read­after­write consistency to achieve parallelism between the two processes. This con­
dition is naturally satisfied by the design of Redis.
Redis has a unique single­threaded architecture, wherein all the client requests are pro­
cessed by a single thread. The event­driven I/O model is utilized by Redis to manage a
large number of clients while minimizing overhead. In this model, file descriptors are mon­
itored for events, including incoming connections or data to read from sockets. Redis then
triggers the corresponding event handler to handle the event. This strategy allows Redis
to prevent the overhead of context switching and locking that is inherent in multi­threaded
architectures.
4.3.2
Hash Function
As described in the Design chapter, in the storage process, we do not store entities di­
rectly. Instead, entities are computed to hash (digest) values by a hash function. In
addition to the basic properties that a hash function needs to satisfy, we also have some
standards to select the hash function for our implementation process.
In Entity Verifier, the encryption of the entity in Metadata Storage is not of concern, and
the focus is on the performance of the hash function. XxHash64, created by Yann Collet,
is a 64­bit non­cryptographic hash function that is renowned for its rapid hashing speed,
minimal memory usage, and favorable distribution of hash values [50]. This hash function
operates by processing data in blocks of 8 bytes and then merging the results of each
block to create the ultimate hash value. It has a small memory footprint and is optimized
for contemporary CPUs that feature instruction sets such as SSE2 and AVX2, allowing
it to deliver excellent performance on a broad range of hardware platforms. XxHash64
is frequently utilized in applications that necessitate swift hashing, including in­memory
databases, checksums, and data integrity checks.
4.3.3
Resource
Since Entity Verifier hopes to wrap as much logic as possible in pure functions to take
advantage of the better asynchronous performance of functional programming, its con­
nection with database or Metadata Storage (Redis) is different from that of imperative
programming.
Instead of maintaining a stateful connection object, Entity Verifer uses the concept of
Resource to connect to the outside world. A resource is an abstraction that represents
an acquired resource that must be released after it has been used. A resource can be
anything that needs to be explicitly managed and cleaned up, such as a file handle, a
database connection, or a network socket.
38
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:47==
Here is an example how Resource data type is used to safely acquire and release re­
source of Redis connection in a composable and type­safe way.
1
object CacheResource {
2
def apply() = {
3
val redisUri = RedisUri("<uri_of_Redis_server >")
4
RedisConnection.standalone(redisUri).connectUtf // Resource data type
5
}
6
}
7
8
CacheResource()
9
.use { cache =>
10
// operation using the cache
11
}
Listing 4.5: Resource of Redis Connection
In the listing 4.5, we only need to define a Resource data type representing the con­
nection, and then use functional programming semantics to pass it statelessly to other
operations. Resource­based operations can be included in the scheduler as a Task (such
as the previous cache.string.set). More conveniently, resources created with use will be
automatically recycled after usage.
4.4
Entity Consumer
Similar to Binlog Replicator, Entity Consumer is also a stream processing process based
on Akka Stream and Monix Task.
1
streamToTask { _ =>
2
Consumer
3
.committableSource(consumerSettings , Subscriptions.topics("<topic_name
>"))
4
.viaMat(KillSwitches.single)(Keep.right)
5
.toMat(Sink.foreach(msg =>
6
verify(cache, transactor , msg.record.value()).runToFuture(scheduler)
))(Keep.both)
7
.run()(materializer)
8
}
9
.doOnFinish {
10
case None => // log with complete
11
case Some(e) => // log with error
12
}
Listing 4.6: Entity Consumer Stream Processing
It is easy to see that the program implementation in listing 4.6 corresponds to the pro­
cessors designed earlier. At the beginning of the stream processing, communication is
established between the consumer and the message broker to consume object entities
from the entity stream topic in a reactive stream manner.
1
message ForumPost {
2
google.protobuf.Int64Value id = 1
3
google.protobuf.StringValue title = 2
4
google.protobuf.Int64Value topic_id = 3
5
google.protobuf.Int64Value author_id = 4
6
google.protobuf.StringValue content = 5
7
google.protobuf.Int64Value vote_count = 6
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
39
==PAGE:48==
8
google.protobuf.Int64Value vote_sum = 7
9
google.protobuf.Int64Value answer_count = 8
10
google.protobuf.StringValue type = 9
11
google.protobuf.StringValue topic_name = 10
12
google.protobuf.Int64Value account_id = 11
13
google.protobuf.StringValue account_name = 12
14
google.protobuf.StringValue user_name = 13
15
}
Listing 4.7: Protocol Buffers Schema of Post Object Entity
Since messages are forwarded in binary format on the message broker, when the en­
tity consumer consumes the data, it needs to deserialize it into the corresponding data
structure based on the schema.
listing 4.7 is the Post schema defined with Google Protocol Buffers. Protocol Buffers,
also known as protobuf, is a language­agnostic binary serialization format developed by
Google.
4.5
Structured Concurrency
Formally, structured concurrency refers to a type of control flow that requires all concurrent
operations to form a closed hierarchy. This means that any operation that initiates parallel
actions must ensure that those actions are completed before proceeding. Additionally, the
results of a concurrent operation should only be made available after its completion and
only to its parent in the hierarchy. This concept ensures that all concurrent operations are
properly managed and executed in a structured manner [51].
Structured concurrency has several benefits, including:
• Improved code reliability and maintainability
• Better resource utilization
• Simplified error handling
• Improved scalability
We utilized the structured concurrency tool provided by Monix to achieve parallelism be­
tween the Binlog Replicator and Entity Consumer.
1
Task.parZip2(runBinlogReplicator(), runEntityConsumer())
Listing 4.8: Structured Concurrecy of Entity Verifer
Task.parZip2 is a method provided by Monix that allows two tasks to be executed in par­
allel, with the results combined into a single tuple. This is useful for scenarios where two
independent computations need to be performed. When parZip2 is called on two Task
instances, it creates a new task that runs the two tasks in parallel, and waits for both to
complete before combining their results into a tuple.
40
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.4: Error Handling in Structured Concurrency
The figure 4.4 illustrates how structured concurrency safely handles all errors, whereas
unstructured concurrency can lead to messy error management due to the main process
terminating before the child processes.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:51==
5
Evaluation
After presenting the design and its implementation, this chapter demonstrates some eval­
uations of the Entity Verifier.
The evaluation of the Entity Verifier mainly focuses on two aspects. On the one hand, it
examines whether the implemented Entity Verifier has achieved its design goals, and on
the other hand, it evaluates its operating costs to assess its feasibility under large­scale
data loads.
5.1
Functionality
The core problem Entity Verifier has to answer remains, ”Is the data inside Entity Stream
correct?” To answer this question, we need to examine how Entity Verifier has achieved
the three design objectives previously established.
• Detection of omission
• Detection of inclusion
• Validation of content
5.1.1
Detection of Omission
Consider a scenario where a new forum post is added to the database through a particular
code path in the Post service.
The workflow of Entity Verifier is as follows:
1. A new post is written to the Master database from the Post service. New rows are
inserted to the corresponding tables.
2. The Master database updates its Binary Log. The Replica databases read the Bi­
nary Log from the Master database and update themselves.
3. Entity Verifier reads the Binary Log and updates the Metadata Storage.
The newly inserted metadata key­value pairs would look like the following listing.
1
(post:4398063289343,-3594220374563734155)
2
(topic:10001,3914942634346718033)
3
(account:10001,5109956571991420608)
4
(community:10001,-2008398737971810630)
5
(user:10001,-5891095901662175256)
Listing 5.1: New Post in Metadata Storage
There are two possible consequences at this point. If the new Post object entity is correctly
published to the Entity Stream, the Entity Verifier will provide the following information,
indicating the successful verification of the new message in the Entity Stream.
1
(Some(-3594220374563734155),Some(-3594220374563734155))
2
true
3
(Some(5109956571991420608),Some(5109956571991420608))
4
true
5
(Some(-2008398737971810630),Some(-2008398737971810630))
6
true
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
43
==PAGE:52==
7
(Some(-5891095901662175256),Some(-5891095901662175256))
8
true
9
(Some(3914942634346718033),Some(3914942634346718033))
10
true
11
Version 1001 - Verification Passed
Listing 5.2: Successful Verification of New Object Entity
The above message indicates that the Entity Verifier has successfully validated the new
message in the Entity Stream, if it has been published correctly. This is achieved by
comparing the hash value of the Post object entity computed by the Entity Consumer from
the Entity Stream with the value stored in the Metadata Storage. When the Post object
entity is validated by all corresponding entities (post, topic, account, user, and community)
with consistent results, we can trust that the new Post object entity is correct.
Another situation is when an omission error occurs. In this case, the new post is inserted
into the database but for some reason is not sent to the Entity Stream. Therefore, the
Entity Verifier cannot consume the new post object entity. When Entity Verifier is unable
to perform the hash comparison check, how can it detect omissions in the Entity Stream?
The solution is straightforward. We maintain a version number in both Binlog Replicator
and Entity Consumer. When a new metadata is inserted into Metadata Storage from
Binlog Replicator, the version number maintained by Binlog Replicator is incremented
by 1. When Entity Consumer compares the hash with the one in Metadata Storage, it
retrieves the version number maintained by Binlog Replicator and compares it with its own
version number. If the retrieved version number is greater than its own version number
by 1, it means that this is a new object entity, and Entity Consumer will synchronize and
update its own version number. If the retrieved version number is greater than its own by
more than 1, it indicates an omission error in Entity Consumer, where it has not received
one or more object entities before.
Figure 5.1: Detection of Omission Error
The process of Entity Verifier detecting omission errors is shown in figure 5.1.
44
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:53==
5.1.2
Detection of Inclusion
Consider a scenario where a code path in the Post service deletes the relevant data of a
forum post from the database.
The workflow of Entity Verifer is as follows:
1. A post is deleted from the Master database requested by the Post service. Relevant
rows are deleted from the corresponding tables.
2. The Master database updates its Binary Log. The Replica databases read the Bi
nary Log from the Master database and update themselves.
3. Entity Verifier reads the Binary Log and updates the Metadata Storage.
The tombstoned metadata key­value pairs would look like the following listing.
1
(post:439806328934,null)
Listing 5.3: Tombstone in Metadata Storage
There are two possible consequences at this point. If the tombstoned Post object entity
is correctly published to the Entity Stream, the Entity Verifier will provide the following
information, indicating the successful verification of the tombstone in the Entity Stream.
1
(Some(null),Some(null))
2
true
3
Version 1002 - Verification Passed
Listing 5.4: Successful Verfication of Tombstone
The above message indicates that the Entity Verifier has successfully validated the tomb­
stone message in the Entity Stream, if it has been published correctly. This is achieved
by comparing the null value of the Post object entity computed by the Entity Consumer
from the Entity Stream with the null value stored in the Metadata Storage.
Another situation is when an inclusion error occurs. In this case, the post is deleted
from the database but for some reason the tombstone is not sent to the Entity Stream.
Therefore, the Entity Verifier cannot consume the tombstone.
In fact, the error of inclusion here can also be seen as an object entity with a content
of tombstone that has not been sent to the entity stream. This is similar to the error
of omission. If the deletion operation also causes the version number maintained by
the Binlog Replicator to increase by 1, then the Entity Consumer will detect the error
of inclusion due to the inconsistency of version number caused by not consuming the
tombstone.
5.1.3
Validation of Content
Consider a scenario where a forum post is modified and updated to the database through
a particular code path in the Post service.
The workflow of Entity Verifer is as follows:
1. A post or its related field is modified in the Master database from the Post service.
Rows are updated to the corresponding tables.
2. The Master database updates its Binary Log. The Replica databases read the Bi­
nary Log from the Master database and update themselves.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
45
==PAGE:54==
3. Entity Verifier reads the Binary Log and updates the Metadata Storage.
The newly updated metadata key­value pairs would look like the following listing.
1
(post:4398063289343,-6537044783735519540)
2
(topic:10001,3914942634346718033)
3
(account:10001,5109956571991420608)
4
(community:10001,-2008398737971810630)
5
(user:10001,-5891095901662175256)
Listing 5.5: Updated Post in Metadata Storage
In the above example 5.5, we updated the content of a post through the Post service.
Since this field belongs to the ”post” table in the database, only the hash value corre­
sponding to that table was updated comparing with listing 5.2.
There are two possible consequences at this point. If the updated Post object entity
is correctly published to the Entity Stream, the Entity Verifier will provide the following
information, indicating the successful verification of the new message in the Entity Stream.
1
(Some(-6537044783735519540),Some(-3594220374563734983))
2
true
3
(Some(5109956571991420608),Some(5109956571991420608))
4
true
5
(Some(-2008398737971810630),Some(-2008398737971810630))
6
true
7
(Some(-5891095901662175256),Some(-5891095901662175256))
8
true
9
(Some(3914942634346718033),Some(3914942634346718033))
10
true
11
Version 1003 - Verification Passed
Listing 5.6: Successful Verification of Updated Object Entity
If the incorrect content is published to the Entity Stream, the hash value will be inconsistent
and the verification will fail like below.
1
(Some(-6537044783735519540),Some(-6537044783735519540))
2
false
3
(Some(5109956571991420608),Some(5109956571991420608))
4
true
5
(Some(-2008398737971810630),Some(-2008398737971810630))
6
true
7
(Some(-5891095901662175256),Some(-5891095901662175256))
8
true
9
(Some(3914942634346718033),Some(3914942634346718033))
10
true
11
Version 1004 - Verification Failed
Listing 5.7: Successful Verification of Updated Object Entity
46
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.2: Content Validation Based on Hash Digest
The figure 5.2 shows how the Entity Verifier verifies the consistency of content by calcu­
lating two hash digests.
5.2
Performance
As a verification system, Entity Verifier provides insights to users as an observer of the
original system. Therefore, from a design perspective, it should not impose too much
burden on the original system.
The experimental environment configuration (hardware + major library versions) used to
obtain performance­related data is shown in the following table 5.1.
CPU
Apple M1 Pro
RAM Size
32G
Monix Version
3.4.1
Akka Stream Version
2.7.0
Table 5.1: Configuration of The Experiment
5.2.1
Memory Consumption
Ignoring the runtime memory overhead of Entity Verifier itself, its main memory overhead
comes from the in­memory Metadata Storage.
To understand the storage cost of metadata, we first need to know the size of a key­value
pair in Redis’s hash table. The key we are using is a string, while the value is a 64­bit
hash value calculated by the XxHash64 algorithm. The total memory allocations for data
and administrative overheads for one key­value record is 67bytes illustrated in 5.8.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
47
==PAGE:56==
1
redis:6379> MEMORY USAGE post:4398063289343
2
(integer) 67
Listing 5.8: Memory Usage of One Record
In our example, one Post object entity corresponds to data from 5 database tables, which
means that 5 key­value pairs need to be stored in the Metadata Storage. The RAM con­
sumption of storing metadata for one Post object entity would be
5 ∗67 = 335
bytes
(5.1)
In general settings, the number of records in Metadata Storage will not increase infinitely.
This is because messages in Entity Consumer usually have a retention period, and mes­
sages that exceed a certain period of time will be automatically expired. Assuming the
validity period of the records in Metadata Storage is 90 days, and 50,000 new Posts are
generated per day, the maximum memory consumption of Metadata Storage in our ex­
ample would be:
335 ∗50, 000 ∗90 = 1434.2
Megabytes(MB)
(5.2)
For modern servers, this is an acceptable number. If there is a larger memory requirement
(e.g. more complex entities, larger data volume), Redis cluster can be used to distribute
the cache, or data on RAM can be swapped to the hard disk. Furthermore, we can also
reduce the retention period of metadata. If the new object entities can be guaranteed to
reach the Entity Consumer and complete verification in a relatively short period of time,
we do not need to continue storing metadata in memory. It can be seen that Entity Verifier
has a small memory consumption.
5.2.2
Processing Efficiency
The processing speed of Entity Verifier largely determines whether its verification speed
can match the high load of microservices. If the verification speed of Entity Verifier cannot
keep up with the speed at which the main service writes to the database and publishes
the Entity Stream, the lag will become larger and larger, causing problems such as buffer
overflow.
We have designed a small experiment to estimate the processing time of two streaming
processes, the Binlog Replicator and Entity Consumer. For the Binlog Replicator, we will
feed it with 100 Binary Log events to process continuously, and calculate the average
elapsed time from the arrival of an event at the beginning of the streaming process until
it is written to the Metadata Storage.
Since Reactive Streams use an asynchronous execution model, the number of threads
in the ExecutionContext can also affect the processing speed. The graph 5.3 displays
the average time required by the Binlog Replicator to process a Binary Log event with
disposable threads ranging from 1 to 6.
48
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.3: Process Time of Binary Log Event by Different Thread Number
For the Entity Consumer, we performed a similar test by having it consume and process
100 Post object entities continuously. We estimated the average elapsed time from when
the message arrives in the processing stream to when the verification is completed and
the verification result is output. The corresponding graph is as 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Process Time of Consumed Entity by Different Thread Number
As the result shows, it is easy to see that when the number of threads exceeds a cer­
tain amount, the processing speed of stream processing will no longer be significantly
improved, indicating that some threads are idle. When the number of threads is 4, the
processing speed of both processes has reached an ideal state.
If Binlog Replicator takes about 23ms to process an event, it can process approximately
2,600 database updates per minute. And the average time it takes for Entity Consumer
to consume and verify one Entity is 100ms, which means that it can verify up to 600
messages in one minute. Although the verification speed is slower than the processing
speed of Binlog Replicator, it is not a fatal problem because they are parallel. However, it
is still necessary to think of ways to improve the speed of Entity Consumer.
The potential reasons for the lag in Entity Consumer processing speed may include the
following:
• Protobuf deserialization is time­consuming
• The verification processors can be more asynchronous
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
49
==PAGE:58==
In theory, when the system has a large amount of data, we can increase the throughput
and processing capacity by containerizing and deploying replicas of the two streaming
processing processes, thanks to the parallelism of Binlog Replicator and Entity Consumer.
5.2.3
Summary
In this chapter, we have demonstrated that the designed and implemented Entity Verifier
has achieved the functional goals set at the beginning of the project.
In addition, as an independent service in the microservice architecture, the Entity Verifier
implementation achieves its design goal of verifying the correctness of the Entity Stream
without adding significant resource overhead to the original system. Furthermore, the
design does not intrude into the original functional modules (services). In this design, the
operation of Entity Verifier only adds an Entity Stream consumer and does not perform
any write operations on the original database (except for potentially a small amount of
read operations to obtain keys).
Due to the good support of functional programming and Reactive Stream for asynchronous
stream processing, the Entity Verifier designed and implemented in this chapter is well
suited for use in high­load scenarios with large data flow.
50
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:59==
6
Conclusion
Entity Stream is an asynchronous communication architecture in microservice architec­
ture. It makes communication in distributed systems efficient and decoupled, but also
brings some challenges in its usage. As an additional source of truth, maintaining the
correctness of data in the Entity Stream and its consistency with other sources of truth is
not easy.
To have a more intuitive understanding of whether Entity Stream contains correct data, we
constructed a typical scenario of Entity Stream in an event­driven architecture application
with multiple sources of truth. In this scenario, we designed Entity Verifier, a non­invasive
service used to compare the consistency of data between the Master database and the
Entity Stream.
By using the database binary log, we avoid tracking database updates with a large number
of reads/writes to the database, which would add additional burden to the main service.
We implemented a Metadata Storage based on caching by referring to other systems,
which maintains the updates of data objects with low memory overhead and high read­
/write speed.
The Entity Verifier designed in this thesis adopts Reactive Stream and functional program­
ming, which differs from traditional synchronous stateful imperative programming. This
design is more suitable for asynchronous computation and orchestration, making it pos­
sible to fully utilize hardware performance for concurrency and parallelism, and has good
scalability in large­scale data scenarios.
We provided a detailed explanation of the implementation process of the stream process­
ing program and how the implemented functionality meets the goal of verifying the Entity
Stream. Additionally, as a verification system, we also have certain requirements for its
resource consumption and processing speed. In this thesis, we analyzed the system from
these perspectives and concluded that the designed system has the potential to handle
high­load scenarios.
One potential improvement for the system is to increase its level of automation. It may be
possible to simplify the process for users to register database tables and entity schemas,
allowing Entity Verifier to become a more versatile tool capable of verifying different Entity
Streams.
These are important questions to consider in order to further scale and improve the Entity
Verifier system. If metadata storage is deployed as a cluster, the choice of consistency
model to ensure that the original functionality is not compromised is an important consider­
ation. In addition, multiple Binlog Replicator replicas must coordinate to consume Binary
Logs effectively. These issues require further exploration and potential improvements to
the system architecture.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Nicola Dragoni et al. “Microservices: yesterday, today, and tomorrow”. und. In: (2017).
[2]
Işıl Karabey Aksakalli et al. “Deployment and communication patterns in microser­
vice architectures: A systematic literature review”. eng. In: Journal of Systems and
Software 180 (2021), p. 111014. ISSN: 18731228, 01641212. DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.
2021.111014.
[3]
Nuha Alshuqayran, Nour Ali, and Roger Evans. “A systematic mapping study in mi­
croservice architecture”. eng. In: Proceedings ­ 2016 Ieee 9th International Confer­
ence on Service­oriented Computing and Applications, Soca 2016 (2016), pp. 44–
51. ISSN: 21632871. DOI: 10.1109/SOCA.2016.15.
[4]
Davide Taibi and Valentina Lenarduzzi. “On the Definition of Microservice Bad Smells”.
eng. In: Ieee Software 35.3 (2018), pp. 56–62. ISSN: 19374194, 07407459. DOI:
10.1109/MS.2018.2141031.
[5]
Kapil Bakshi. “Microservices­based software architecture and approaches”. eng.
In: Ieee Aerospace Conference Proceedings (2017), p. 7943959. ISSN: 1095323x.
DOI: 10.1109/AERO.2017.7943959.
[6]
Binildas Christudas. “Install, Configure, and Run RabbitMQ Cluster”. eng. In: Prac­
tical Microservices Architectural Patterns (2019), pp. 827–841. DOI: 10.1007/978-
1-4842-4501-9_21.
[7]
Deepak Vohra. “Apache Kafka”. eng. In: Practical Hadoop Ecosystem (2016), pp. 339–
347. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4842-2199-0_9.
[8]
Valeriu Manuel Ionescu. “The analysis of the performance of RabbitMQ and Ac­
tiveMQ”. eng. In: 2015 14th Roedunet International Conference ­ Networking in Ed­
ucation and Research, Roedunet Ner 2015 ­ Proceedings (2015), pp. 132–137.
ISSN: 22475443, 20681038. DOI: 10.1109/RoEduNet.2015.7311982.
[9]
Matthias Wiesmann et al. “Database replication techniques: A three parameter clas­
sification”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee Symposium on Reliable Distributed Sys­
tems (2000), pp. 206–215. ISSN: 10609857, 25758462.
[10]
Baron et.al Schwartz. High performance MySQL. eng. O’Reilly, 2008, xxii, 684 s. ill.
[11]
Alexey Gotsman et al. “’Cause I’m strong enough: Reasoning about consistency
choices in distributed systems”. eng. In: Conference Record of the Annual Acm
Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages 20­22­.1 (2016), pp. 371–
384. ISSN: 07308566, 15232867. DOI: 10.1145/2837614.2837625.
[12]
Peter Bailis and Ali Ghodsi. “Eventual consistency today: Limitations, extensions,
and beyond”. eng. In: Communications of the Acm 56.5 (2013), pp. 55–63. ISSN:
15577317, 00010782. DOI: 10.1145/2447976.2447992.
[13]
D. B. Terry et al. “Session guarantees for weakly consistent replicated data”. eng.
In: Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Parallel and Distributed
Information Systems (cat. No.94th0668­4) (1994), pp. 140–149. DOI: 10.1109/PDIS.
1994.331722.
[14]
Alessandro Margara and Guido Salvaneschi. “On the semantics of distributed reac­
tive programming: The cost of consistency”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Software
Engineering 44.7 (2018), pp. 689–711. ISSN: 23263881, 00985589, 19393520.
DOI: 10.1109/TSE.2018.2833109.
[15]
H. Attiya and J. L. Welch. “Sequential consistency versus linearizability”. eng. In:
Spaa ’91. 3rd Annual Acm Symposium on Parallel Algorithms and Architectures
(1991), pp. 304–15. DOI: 10.1145/113379.113407.
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
53
==PAGE:62==
[16]
E PITOURA and B BHARGAVA. “Maintaining consistency of data in mobile dis­
tributed environments”. eng. In: Distributed Computing Systems, International Con­
ference on (1995), pp. 404–413. ISSN: 25758411, 10636927. DOI: 10.1109/ICDCS.
1995.500045.
[17]
J HUGHES. “WHY FUNCTIONAL PROGRAMMING MATTERS”. eng. In: Computer
Journal 32.2 (1989), pp. 98–107. ISSN: 14602067, 00104620. DOI: 10.1093/comjnl/
32.2.98.
[18]
Zhenjiang Hu, John Hughes, and Meng Wang. “How functional programming mat­
tered”. eng. In: National Science Review 2.3 (2015), pp. 349–370. ISSN: 2053714x,
20955138. DOI: 10.1093/nsr/nwv042.
[19]
Paul Chiusano and Runar Bjarnason. Functional programming in Scala. Simon and
Schuster, 2014.
[20]
Simon Marlow, Ryan Newton, and Simon Peyton Jones. “A monad for deterministic
parallelism”. eng. In: Haskell’11 ­ Proceedings of the 2011 Acm Sigplan Haskell
Symposium (2011), pp. 71–82. DOI: 10.1145/2034675.2034685.
[21]
Shweta Khare et al. “Industry paper: Reactive stream processing for data­centric
Publish/Subscribe”. eng. In: Debs 2015 ­ Proceedings of the 9th Acm International
Conference on Distributed Event­based Systems (2015), pp. 234–245. DOI: 10.
1145/2675743.2771880.
[22]
Engineer Bainomugisha et al. “A survey on reactive programming”. eng. In: Acm
Computing Surveys 45.4 (2013), p. 2501666. ISSN: 15577341, 03600300. DOI:
10.1145/2501654.2501666.
[23]
Zhanyong Wan and Paul Hudak. “Functional reactive programming from first prin­
ciples”. eng. In: Sigplan Notices (acm Special Interest Group on Programming Lan­
guages) 35.5 (2000), pp. 242–251. ISSN: 03621340, 15581160. DOI: 10 . 1145 /
358438.349331.
[24]
Mahmoud Assran et al. “Advances in Asynchronous Parallel and Distributed Opti­
mization”. und. In: (2020), p. 33.
[25]
Guozhang Wang et al. “Building a replicated logging system with apache kafka”.
eng. In: Proceedings of the Vldb Endowment 8.12 (2015), pp. 1654–1655. ISSN:
21508097. DOI: 10.14778/2824032.2824063.
[26]
Theofanis P. Raptis and Andrea Passarella. “On Efficiently Partitioning a Topic in
Apache Kafka”. eng. In: Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on Com­
puter, Information and Telecommunication Systems, Cits 2022 (2022), 8 pp. DOI:
10.1109/CITS55221.2022.9832981.
[27]
Alexander Thomson et al. “Calvin: Fast distributed transactions for partitioned database
systems”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Acm Sigmod International Conference on
Management of Data (2012), pp. 1–12. ISSN: 07308078. DOI: 10.1145/2213836.
2213838.
[28]
Hanan Shukur et al. “A State of Art Survey for Concurrent Computation and Clus­
tering of Parallel Computing for Distributed Systems”. und. In: Journal of Applied
Science and Technology Trends 1.4 (2020), pp. 148–154. ISSN: 27080757. DOI:
10.38094/jastt1466.
[29]
Brad Calder et al. “Windows azure storage: A highly available cloud storage service
with strong consistency”. eng. In: Sosp’11 ­ Proceedings of the 23rd Acm Sympo­
sium on Operating Systems Principles (2011), pp. 143–157. DOI: 10.1145/2043556.
2043571.
[30]
Paolo Viotti and Marko Vukolić. “Consistency in non­transactional distributed stor­
age systems”. eng. In: Acm Computing Surveys 49.1 (2016), p. 19. ISSN: 15577341,
03600300. DOI: 10.1145/2926965.
54
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:63==
[31]
Yanish Pradhananga, Shridevi Karande, and Chandraprakash Karande. “High per­
formance analytics of bigdata with dynamic and optimized hadoop cluster”. eng. In:
Proceedings of 2016 International Conference on Advanced Communication Con­
trol and Computing Technologies, Icaccct 2016 (2016), pp. 715–720. DOI: 10.1109/
ICACCCT.2016.7831733.
[32]
Klaus V. Gleissenthall et al. “Pretend synchrony”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Acm
on Programming Languages 3.POPL (2019), p. 59. ISSN: 24751421. DOI: 10.1145/
3290372.
[33]
David del Rio Astorga et al. “A generic parallel pattern interface for stream and
data processing”. eng. In: Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience
29.24 (2017), e4175. ISSN: 15320634, 15320626. DOI: 10.1002/cpe.4175.
[34]
Abhishek Kulkarni and Andrew Lumsdaine. “A Comparative Study of Asynchronous
Many­Tasking Runtimes: Cilk, Charm++, ParalleX and AM++”. und. In: (2019).
[35]
Guozhang Wang et al. “Consistency and Completeness: Rethinking Distributed
Stream Processing in Apache Kafka”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Acm Sigmod
International Conference on Management of Data (2021), pp. 2602–2613. ISSN:
07308078. DOI: 10.1145/3448016.3457556.
[36]
Vinu E. Venugopal and Martin Theobald. “Benchmarking synchronous and asyn­
chronous stream processing systems”. eng. In: Acm International Conference Pro­
ceeding Series (2020), pp. 322–323. ISSN: 21531641. DOI: 10 . 1145 / 3371158 .
3371206.
[37]
Hai Tao Mei, Ian Gray, and Andy Wellings. “A Java­based real­time reactive stream
framework”. eng. In: Proceedings ­ 2016 Ieee 19th International Symposium on
Real­time Distributed Computing, Isorc 2016 (2016), pp. 204–211. ISSN: 15550885,
23755261. DOI: 10.1109/ISORC.2016.36.
[38]
Sanket Chintapalli et al. “Benchmarking streaming computation engines: Storm,
flink and spark streaming”. eng. In: Proceedings ­ 2016 Ieee 30th International Par­
allel and Distributed Processing Symposium, Ipdps 2016 (2016), pp. 1789–1792.
ISSN: 21647062. DOI: 10.1109/IPDPSW.2016.138.
[39]
Avrilia Floratou et al. “Dhalion: Self­Regulating Stream Processing in Heron”. eng.
In: Proceedings of the Vldb Endowment 10.12 (2017), pp. 1825–1836. ISSN: 21508097.
[40]
Miguel Diogo, Bruno Cabral, and Jorge Bernardino. “Consistency models of NoSQL
databases”. eng. In: Future Internet 11.2 (2019), p. 43. ISSN: 19995903. DOI: 10.
3390/fi11020043.
[41]
Juncheng Yang, Yao Yue, and K. V. Rashmi. “Segcache: A memory­efficient and
scalable in­memory key­value cache for small objects”. eng. In: Proceedings of the
18th Usenix Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation, Nsdi
2021 (2021), pp. 503–518.
[42]
Lianhua Chi and Xingquan Zhu. “Hashing techniques: A survey and taxonomy”.
eng. In: Acm Computing Surveys 50.1 (2017), p. 11. ISSN: 15577341, 03600300.
DOI: 10.1145/3047307.
[43]
John A. Miller et al. “Open source big data analytics frameworks written in scala”.
eng. In: Proceedings ­ 2016 Ieee International Congress on Big Data, Bigdata Congress
2016 (2016), pp. 389–393. ISSN: 23797703. DOI: 10.1109/BigDataCongress.2016.
61.
[44]
Philipp Haller et al. “Reactive async: Expressive deterministic concurrency”. eng.
In: Scala 2016 ­ Proceedings of the 2016 7th Acm Sigplan Symposium on Scala
(2016), pp. 11–20. DOI: 10.1145/2998392.2998396.
[45]
T. Y.J. Naga Malleswari and G. Vadivu. “Adaptive deduplication of virtual machine
images using AKKA stream to accelerate live migration process in cloud environ­
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
55
==PAGE:64==
ment”. eng. In: Journal of Cloud Computing 8.1 (2019), p. 3. ISSN: 2192113x. DOI:
10.1186/s13677-019-0125-z.
[46]
Siti Rokhmah and Ihsan Cahyo Utomo. “Binary Log Analysis on MySQL to Help
Investigation Process Against Database Privillege Attacks”. und. In: International
Journal of Computer and Information System (ijcis) 1.1 (2020), pp. 11–15. ISSN:
27459659. DOI: 10.29040/ijcis.v1i1.7.
[47]
Conor Mcbride and Ross Paterson. “Applicative programming with effects”. eng.
In: Journal of Functional Programming 18.1 (2008), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 14697653,
09567968. DOI: 10.1017/S0956796807006326.
[48]
Philipp Haller and Martin Odersky. “Scala Actors: Unifying thread­based and event­
based programming”. eng. In: Theoretical Computer Science 410.2­3 (2009), pp. 202–
220. ISSN: 18792294, 03043975. DOI: 10.1016/j.tcs.2008.09.019.
[49]
Shanshan Chen et al. “Towards Scalable and Reliable In­Memory Storage Sys­
tem: A Case Study with Redis”. eng. In: 2016 Ieee Trustcom/bigdatase/ispa (2016),
pp. 1660–1667. ISSN: 23249013, 2324898x. DOI: 10.1109/TrustCom.2016.253.
[50]
Yann Collet. “xxHash­Extremely fast non­cryptographic hash algorithm”. In: URL
https://github. com/Cyan4973/xxHash (2016).
[51]
Yi An Chen and Yi Ping You. “Structured Concurrency: A Review”. eng. In: Acm
International Conference Proceeding Series (2022), p. 16. DOI: 10.1145/3547276.
3548519.
56
Toward Correctness for Entity Stream on Distributed System
==PAGE:65==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
