==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis for the Attainment of the Degree
Master of Science
at the TUM School of Management
of the Technische Unversit¨at M¨unchen
Gender, Implicit Bias and Entrepreneurship
Reviewer TUM
Prof. Dr. Reiner Braun
Chair of Entrepreneurial Finance 2
TUM School of Management
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen
Advisor TUM
Dr. Svenja Jarchow
Reviewer DTU
Lars Alkærsig
DTU Entrepreneurship
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Advisor DTU
Farnaz Aref
Study program
M.Sc. Management and Technology
Composed by
Christina Unger
Matriculation Number TUM: 03689685
Student Number DTU: s217016
Date of Submission
1st of April, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In this thesis, implicit gender bias in the context of entrepreneurship was investigated. Based
on prior literature, it was hypothesized that in the area of entrepreneurship, there exists an
implicit male bias, that men, as well as women, have a stronger implicit male bias than fe-
male bias, and that men’s implicit male bias is stronger than women’s implicit male bias. To
test the implicit gender bias, an Implicit Association Test, using male/female pictures and
entrepreneurial/non-entrepreneurial words, was implemented. Two studies were conducted
with 227 students from four entrepreneurial courses at Danmarks Tekniske Universitet. The
results of both studies showed a slight tendency toward implicit male bias (Study 1), respec-
tively slight male bias (Study 2). Study 2 additionally supported three of the established
hypotheses, showing that, in the context of entrepreneurship, there exists a male bias, men
have a stronger implicit male bias than women, and men’s implicit male bias is stronger
than their implicit female bias. Male bias in society (especially men), therefore, seems to
shape common assumptions, respectively, the perception of the entrepreneurship domain be-
ing male-typed. This result was found critical regarding the successful shift of higher female
involvement in entrepreneurship. To counteract the demonstrated implicit male bias in en-
trepreneurship, recommendations were made to explicitly address this bias in business and
entrepreneurial education.
I
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Abstract
I
Contents
II
List of Figures
IV
List of Tables
V
List of Appendices
VI
List of Abbreviations and Symbols
VII
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Foundations
2
2.1
Gender in Entrepreneurship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1
Language in the Context of Entrepreneurship
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Entrepreneurial Stereotypes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Gender-related Differences in Startups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.4
Gender-related Differences in Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.5
Entrepreneurial Self-Efﬁcacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Deﬁnition of Implicit Bias
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Hypotheses Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Method
13
3.1
Structure of the Implicit Association Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Implementation of the Implicit Association Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
Creating the Implicit Associations Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.2
Deploying the Implicit Associations Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Design of the Implicit Association Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Data
19
4.1
Description of Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
II
==PAGE:4==
4.1.1
Implicit Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.2
Explicit Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Sample Selection and Descriptive Representation of the Sample
. . . . . . .
21
4.3
Data Cleaning and Scoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Statistical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Results
27
5.1
Results Study 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Results Study 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Discussion and Conclusion
36
6.1
Discussion and Practical Implications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Limitations and Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Appendix
42
References
57
Declaration of Authorship
67
III
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
1
Hypotheses Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Attribute Category Representation ’Female’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Attribute Category Representation ’Male’
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Difference in d-scores Study 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
IV
==PAGE:6==
List of Tables
1
Words for Attribute Categories ’Entrepreneur’ and ’Non-Entrepreneur’ . . . .
17
2
Order of Compatible First and Incompatible First IAT . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Built-in Error Penalty Procedure as Described by Greenwald et al. (2021)
. .
24
4
Statistical Summary of Blocks A1, A2, B1 and B2 in Study 1 . . . . . . . . .
29
5
D-scores Separated by Gender and Age for Study 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Strength of Bias in Study 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Results t-test in Study 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8
Statistical Summary of Blocks A1, A2, B1 and B2 in Study 2 . . . . . . . . .
32
9
D-scores Separated by Gender and Age for Study 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
10
Strength of Bias in Study 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
11
Bias Separated by Ethnicity (Absolute Values) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
12
Bias Separated by Study Field (Absolute Values)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
13
Results t-test in Study 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
V
==PAGE:7==
List of Appendices
Appendix 1: E-Mail Draft for Study 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Appendix 2: Screenshots Implicit Association Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Appendix 3: Codebook Explicit Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Appendix 4: Descriptive Representation of the Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Appendix 5: Results F-tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Appendix 6: Results Scoring Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
VI
==PAGE:8==
List of Abbreviations and Symbols
AS
Standard deviation for combined blocks using all trials
A1
Block 3
A2
Block 4
B1
Block 6
B2
Block 7
CI
Conﬁdence Interval
CS
Standard deviation for combined blocks including correct trials only
df
Degrees of freedom
DIFF1
Mean latency differences combined task 1
DIFF2
Mean latency differences combined task 2
d-score
Implicit measure to assess the Implicit Association Test
E
Percentage of Errors
ESE
Entrepreneurial Self-Efﬁcacy
F
Percentage of fast responses
f
Test-statistic F-test
H
Hypotheses
H1
Hypothesis 1
H2
Hypothesis 2
H3
Hypothesis 3
H4
Hypothesis 4
IAT1
Step 7 in Data and Scoring Algorithm (table 3)
IAT2
Step 7 in Data and Scoring Algorithm (table 3)
IAT
Implicit Association Test
M
Mean
N
Sample size
p
p-value
r
Correlation coefﬁcient
SD
Standard deviation
VII
==PAGE:9==
SUBEXCL
Exclusion Criteria
t
Test-statistic t-test
Var
Variable
VIII
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Entrepreneurship is widely recognized as a key driver for economic development, job cre-
ation, and innovation (Raposo et al., 2014). It has been described as the cornerstone of the
’modern knowledge-based economy’ (Kowalska, 2012, p. 230). Despite its importance and
great potential, women remain underrepresented in the domain of entrepreneurship (Elam
et al., 2022). Although they make up 51% of Europe’s population (Eurostat Gender Statis-
tics, 2023), only 9.4% of women compared to 16.1% of men are self-employed (Eurostat
Gender gap in self-employment rises with age, 2023), and a mere 15.5% of founders in Eu-
rope are women (Report on Women Entrepreneurs in Europe, 2020). As such, women are
considered the largest untapped entrepreneurial and leadership resource in Europe (Women
Entrepreneurship and Leadership, 2023). But what is the reason for the remaining low repre-
sentation of women in entrepreneurship?
The explanations regarding this gender gap are multifaceted, with prior literature primarily
focusing on explicit beliefs. These beliefs include stereotypical roles of men and women per-
sisting in entrepreneurship (Ranga & Etzkowitz, 2010), gender-typed language that is used
in the context of entrepreneurship (Ahl, 2003; Marlow, 2002), and factors such as access
to funding (Guzman & Kacperczyk, 2019) and entrepreneurial self-efﬁcacy (Shinnar, Hsu,
& Powell, 2014). In addition, differences in male and female-founded startups, like indus-
try and leadership style, have often been investigated (Hechavarria & Ingram, 2016; Eagly &
Wood, 1991). While some researchers suggested that venture capitalists exhibit a bias against
women entrepreneurs and tend to invest more often in male-founded businesses (Buttner &
Rosen, 1989; Marlow & Patton, 2005), this bias has not been explored extensively.
In this context, the present thesis aims to investigate implicit gender bias in the context of en-
trepreneurship. In order to do so, an Implicit Association Test, containing entrepreneurship
and gender-related pictures and words is conducted in two studies. Additionally, hypotheses
are developed and tested with the help of t-tests. In fact, no known study has so far investi-
gated implicit bias within the ﬁeld of gender in entrepreneurship.
To meet this objective, the thesis is structured as follows: section 2 provides the theoretical
foundations regarding gender in entrepreneurship and the deﬁnition of implicit bias. This
section also includes the development of the hypotheses. In section 3, the structure, the
implementation, and design of the Implicit Association Test are described. Subsequently,
1
==PAGE:11==
section 4, explains the data together with the data cleaning and scoring algorithm and the
statistical analysis. Finally, in Section 5, the results are explained, followed by the discussion
and conclusion in Section 6.
2
Theoretical Foundations
To gain a better overview of gender in entrepreneurship and how potential implicit biases can
be measured, the following paragraphs give a literature overview of gender in entrepreneur-
ship (2.1). Subsequently, the deﬁnition of implicit bias is given (2.2), followed by the hy-
potheses development (2.3).
2.1
Gender in Entrepreneurship
Gender-based differences in behavior and roles have existed throughout human history and
continue to shape modern society (Rudman & Glick, 2021). Traditionally, women were as-
signed the role of the family caretaker, while men were considered the family breadwinner
(Jennings & McDougald, 2007; Wood & Eagly, 2010). Over time, these roles have evolved,
with the female and mother role being associated with communal values and interpersonal re-
lationships and the male and father role being linked to autonomy and independence (Wood &
Eagly, 2010). These gender roles not only exist in the family context but also in business and
entrepreneurship. Whereas men often start their businesses to build wealth and raise money
for their families, catering to the breadwinner role, women’s motivations are often driven by
job scarcity or the desire to make a difference (Elam et al., 2022). Gender differentiation
in research on entrepreneurship, however, only started in the late 1990s with the increase of
women business owners (Yadav & Unni, 2016). Until then, there was no perceived need to
differentiate between male and female entrepreneurs in research due to the lack of female
entrepreneurs (Yadav & Unni, 2016). Even though female participation in entrepreneurship
has increased, and recent research indicates that women can signiﬁcantly contribute to the
greater entrepreneurial phenomena and economic growth (Sarfaraz, Faghih, & Majd, 2014),
women remain underrepresented in the area of entrepreneurship. The Global Entrepreneur-
ship Monitor Women’s Report of 2021/2022 revealed that the current female/male early-stage
entrepreneurial activity ratio is only 0.78 across Europe, with highly developed countries such
2
==PAGE:12==
as Norway showing a ratio of only 0.39 (Elam et al., 2022).
Research on gender in entrepreneurship sheds light on potential reasons regarding this re-
maining gender gap. One important factor is the language used in the context of entrepreneur-
ship. The phrases and words used to describe male and female entrepreneurs not only re-
inforce stereotypes (Ahl, 2006) but also inﬂuence external stakeholders, such as investors,
ﬁnancial backers, and society at large (Balachandra, Fischer, & Brush, 2021). These stereo-
types and external stakeholders highly inﬂuence the legitimacy of certain entrepreneurial
activities, leading to gendered patterns in types of startups and entrepreneurial self-efﬁcacy
(Elam et al., 2022).
The following paragraphs provide an overview of research in the ﬁeld of gender in en-
trepreneurship and explore each of the aforementioned factors in more detail, namely lan-
guage in the context of entrepreneurship (2.1.1), entrepreneurial stereotypes (2.1.2), gender-
related differences in startups (2.1.3), gender-related differences in funding 2.1.4 and en-
trepreneurial self-efﬁcacy (2.1.5).
2.1.1
Language in the Context of Entrepreneurship
The language used in the context of entrepreneurship is a major factor contributing to fe-
male discrimination in the ﬁeld (Ahl, 2006). Entrepreneurship is often considered a male-
dominated industry (Sullivan & Meek, 2012), and traits traditionally associated with femi-
ninity are viewed as incompatible with entrepreneurship (Ahl, 2006; Lewis, 2006). This is,
for example, supported by the fact that the term ’women entrepreneurs’ is still used to distin-
guish female entrepreneurs from their male counterparts, as if the latter were the norm (Ahl,
2006). Additionally, entrepreneurs’ descriptions often include adjectives that are stereotyp-
ically associated with men, like bold, aggressive, risk-taking, and calculative (Ahl, 2003;
Marlow, 2002). On the other hand, when female-led ventures are successful, they are dis-
missed as a ’women’s hobby’, suggesting that a woman’s presence in the workforce is not
seen as real work but rather as a way to earn additional money for her family (Wheadon
& Duval-Couetil, 2019). Apart from that, entrepreneurial women are often described with
attributes not matching entrepreneurial spirits. These discussions, for instance, include the
statements of women being risk averse (Masters & Meier, 1988), having less motivation for
entrepreneurship or the growth of their businesses (Buttner & Moore, 1997; Fischer, Reuber,
3
==PAGE:13==
& Dyke, 1993), and having insufﬁcient education or experience (Boden & Nucci 2000).
In summary, language represents women among the ’poorest and most vulnerable business
owners in the world’ (Elam et al., 2022, p. 45). Not only do these kind of linguistic structures
generally inﬂuence society’s perception of gender in entrepreneurship but they also reinforce
stereotypes (Wigboldus & Douglas, 2007).
2.1.2
Entrepreneurial Stereotypes
Male and female stereotypes play a crucial role in gender perception in entrepreneurship.
The different cultural values and norms that girls and boys grow up with inﬂuence how each
gender usually behaves (Deaux & Major, 1987; Eagly, 1987; West & Zimmerman, 1991).
These values and norms can still exist in adult life, ultimately affecting family and business
roles and creating gender stereotypes (Gabriel & Gardner, 1999; Eagly & Mitchell, 2004).
Stereotypes are generally deﬁned as ’beliefs about the characteristics, attributes, and behav-
iors of members of certain groups’ (Hilton & Von Hippel, 1996, p. 240). In the business
domain, jobs that are, for example, associated with fewer skills and poor outcomes are usu-
ally stereotyped as feminine, whereas jobs that seem to be more successful and have higher
outcomes are associated with men (Levanon, England, & Allison, 2009; England, Allison, &
Wu, 2007). Such stereotypes also exist in entrepreneurship: Ranga and Etzkowitz (2010) ar-
gued that in the technology domain, women are perceived as less innovative than men due to
the social perception of technology more often being related to men than women. As a result,
men usually feel more capable of running a business in, for example, the technology ﬁeld
and, therefore, perceive lower venture risk (Wieland et al., 2019). Among other things, this
can be seen in the numbers of women vs. men starting a business in information, computers
& technology: in Europe in 2021, only 2.7% of women compared to 4.7% of men started a
business in this domain (Elam et al., 2022).
In addition to men feeling more capable of running businesses in male-typed industries, they
also tend to receive greater external acceptance for conforming to gender norms and stereo-
types (Wood et al., 1997). Conversely, women in the entrepreneurial ﬁeld were found to be
often associated with less capital-intensive businesses and lower tolerance for risk, which im-
plies lower growth efforts and, therefore, less desire for ﬁnancial capital that would be needed
for aggressive growth (Cliff, 1998; Loscocco et al., 1991; Morris et al., 2006).
4
==PAGE:14==
Attitudes toward risk represent another important factor in entrepreneurship that are often
stereotypically perceived differently for men and women. However, the literature varies in its
opinion on whether there is any difference in risk aversion between the two genders. Croson
& Gneezy (2009) suggested that women are more risk-averse than men, which is believed to
contribute to the fact that women are less likely to become entrepreneurs (Dawson & Henley,
2015). On the other hand, some research found no signiﬁcant difference in risk perception
between the genders. Instead, risk perception appears to be inﬂuenced by gender-role norms
and subjective assessments that vary across domains (Wieland et al., 2014; Byrnes, Miller, &
Schafer, 1999; Sarin & Wieland, 2016). Men and women were thus found to take more risks
in domains that align with their gender stereotypes (Wieland & Sarin, 2012).
In general, researchers concluded that common and gender stereotypes can impact one’s at-
titude and behavior without conscious awareness (Eccles, 1994; Steele, 1997). Therefore,
stereotypes should be handled with care and vigilance in the domain of entrepreneurship.
2.1.3
Gender-related Differences in Startups
As shown, gender-typed language and gender stereotypes in entrepreneurship do exist and
can inﬂuence entrepreneurial intentions (Dawson & Henley, 2015). In addition, several stud-
ies have focused on the differences between startups founded by men and women, which
may be reinforced by language and stereotypes (Hechavarria & Ingram, 2016). One factor
often discussed is the type of the respective startups. Men prefer high-growth environments,
while women often found businesses in lower-growth industries such as service and retail
(Alsos, Isaksen, & Ljunggren, 2006; Orser, Riding, & Manley, 2006). According to the
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, women currently only represent one in three high-growth
entrepreneurs (Elam et al., 2022). However, women entrepreneurs are overrepresented in the
government, health, education & social services sectors, with 18.5% compared to 10.1% of
men (Elam et al., 2022). This fact is often attributed to women’s caretaker role and their
need to balance work and family (Kanze et al., 2017). Another reason is seen in gaining
higher ﬂexibility and more time at home compared to men (Parasuraman & Simmers, 2001).
In contrast, male entrepreneurs are more likely to start businesses for ﬁnancial gain (Ke-
pler & Shane, 2007). Accordingly, women prefer founding startups that generate social over
economic value, while men are more passionate about gaining economic over social value
5
==PAGE:15==
(Hechavarria & Ingram, 2016). These ﬁndings are consistent with women’s expectations of
their business: their growth expectations are relatively conservative, and their plans for expan-
sion and growth are typically modest (Chaganti, 1986; Cliff, 1998). Studies from the US have
also found that women-owned businesses are typically younger, smaller, and sole proprietor-
ships compared to those owned by men (Brush, 1992; Starr & Yudkin, 1996). This is referred
to as the ’female underperformance hypothesis’ (DuRietz & Henrekson, 2000). However, it
has since been found that this hypothesis is incorrect, as women-owned businesses perform
similarly compared to businesses in their respective sectors (BIS, 2011; Storey, 2011).
Another notable difference between male- and female-founded startups is the underlying
leadership style. Women tend to adopt a more democratic leadership style, while men often
prefer autocratic and directive leadership (Eagly & Wood, 1991). Coming back to the afore-
mentioned gender stereotypes, these leadership styles highly align with gender roles, where
men are seen in the disciplined and leading role, and women are associated with the caring
and warm part (Parsons & Bales, 1995).
2.1.4
Gender-related Differences in Funding
Gaining access to capital and funding is one of the hardest hurdles to overcome in en-
trepreneurship (Neeley & Van Auken, 2010). However, gender-related language and stereo-
types also seem to inﬂuence ﬁnancial backers, resulting in gender differences in funding
access and availability (Guzman & Kacperczyk, 2019).
While there is no consensus in literature, several studies have shown that women have more
difﬁculties to ﬁnd funding (Eddleston et al., 2014; Guzman & Kacperczyk, 2019), and that
investors tend to be biased toward male entrepreneurs (Brooks et al., 2014). Newer, male-
owned companies, for instance, tend to receive the highest amounts of bank ﬁnancing (Ed-
dleston et al., 2014). Additionally, research found that female entrepreneurs often receive
smaller loan amounts (Verheul & Thurik, 2001; Zimmerman, Treichel, & Scott, 2006) and
face higher interest rates compared to their male counterparts (Fraser, 2005; Wu & Chua,
2012). Loan ofﬁcers were also found to employ different evaluative criteria for male and
female entrepreneurs, focusing on personal characteristics and ﬁnancial success for men
and their level of research for their business for women (Carter et al., 2007). Moreover,
female founders are often asked prevention-focused questions during due diligence, while
6
==PAGE:16==
male founders are asked promotion-focused questions (Kanze et al., 2017). Finally, female
entrepreneurs’ requested loan sizes are more likely to be questioned than those requested by
male entrepreneurs (Carter et al., 2007). Overall, these ﬁndings suggest that the stereotype of
entrepreneurs being male inﬂuences lenders to favor investing in male-founded businesses,
which are perceived as an opportunity, over female-founded businesses, which are seen as a
risk (Eddleston et al., 2014). In other words, there appears to be a gender gap in how women
and men are treated during the funding process. This gap does not necessarily mean that
women receive less funding but that implicit biases on the part of ﬁnancial backers create
barriers for women to get access to funding (Eddleston et al., 2014).
However, some research contradicted the theory of women being disadvantaged regarding
funding accessibility. Instead, women may ’simply’ demand less external funding (Coleman
& Robb, 2009), especially equity ﬁnancing (Orser, Riding, & Manley, 2006). This was ex-
plained by the fact that women tend to found in lower-growth industries, making it easier
for them to bootstrap their businesses and avoid the need for external ﬁnancing (Kanze et
al., 2017). Furthermore, gendered investment behavior was found to differ in crowdfunding
investment activities. In this particular funding market, women were found to have an ad-
vantage over men (Johnson, Stevenson, & Letwin, 2018). This may be due to the stereotype
of female entrepreneurs being more trustworthy than male entrepreneurs (Johnson, Steven-
son, & Letwin, 2018). In highly uncertain markets with little information availability, such
as early-stage ventures, this perceived trustworthiness seems more important than perceived
competence, resulting in women being favored over men (Johnson, Stevenson, & Letwin,
2018). Depending on the type of funding, feminine behavior may, therefore, not necessarily
be a disadvantage. Still, Balachandra et al. (2017) found that gender differentiation in fund-
ing is not automatically connected to the sex of the entrepreneur but instead to their behavior.
Besides crowdfunding investors, investors may not be biased against women in general but
rather against what they perceive as feminine behavior (Balachandra et al., 2017). In fact,
Gupta et al. (2009) suggested that both men and women should adopt more masculine be-
havior to gain support from resource providers such as venture capitalists.
7
==PAGE:17==
2.1.5
Entrepreneurial Self-Efﬁcacy
As discussed in the preceding paragraphs, there are gender differences in the types of startups
and funding availability. These differences arise from entrepreneurial rules, norms, and sys-
tems that are inﬂuenced by language and stereotypes and designed according to male behav-
ior, thus not gender-neutral (Elam et al., 2022). Given these circumstances, research found
that women tend to have a different entrepreneurial perception than men (Shinnar, Hsu, &
Powell, 2014), which is also known as entrepreneurial self-efﬁcacy (ESE). Speciﬁcally, ESE
refers to the extent to which entrepreneurs are conﬁdent about their entrepreneurial skills
(Boyd & Vozikis, 1994). Although language and stereotypes are difﬁcult to change, ESE is
one of the factors with greater potential for change and a chance to reinforce the balance of
gender-related differences in entrepreneurship (Kickul et al., 2008). Generally, it has been
proven that individuals who do not feel like starting a business will meet their personal needs
will not have a strong intention to become entrepreneurs (Hsu et al., 2018). Consequently,
the desire to found a startup depends on how entrepreneurial actions align with the person’s
needs (Hsu et al., 2018). Research found that women typically have lower ESE than men
(Shinnar, Hsu, & Powell, 2014; Wilson, Kickul, & Marlino, 2007; Zhao, Seibert, & Hills,
2005; Minniti, 2009). Furthermore, research showed that at a young age, ESE has a stronger
impact on entrepreneurial intention for girls than for boys (Kickul et al., 2008). However,
a difference can partially be seen when ESE is investigated in a domain-speciﬁc manner.
Women were then found to have higher ESE in female-typed domains than men but even
lower ESE in male-typed domains (Drnovsek, Wincent, & Cardon, 2010). This can be ex-
plained by the use of male-typed language in the context of male-typed domains: women’s
entrepreneurial intentions were found to be lower when entrepreneurship is described using
masculine words (Gupta, Turban, & Bhawe, 2008). The phenomenon disappeared when
gender-neutral language was used (Gupta, Turban, & Bhawe, 2008). Moreover, women
who perceive themselves as more similar to men (high male gender identiﬁcation) tend to
have higher entrepreneurial intentions than women who perceive themselves as less simi-
lar to men (low male gender identiﬁcation) (Gupta et al., 2009). Nevertheless, Wheadon
and Duval-Couetil’s (2018) work, which investigated gender behavior in a startup TV show
called ’Sharktank’, found that neither women self-identify as entrepreneurs nor do the angel
investors identify them as entrepreneurs.
8
==PAGE:18==
However, research found that women are not born with less entrepreneurial intention but per-
ceive themselves as being less adequate for the role of an entrepreneur (Santos, Roomi, &
Linan, 2016). This is where the potential for change comes into play. One highly relevant
factor to emphasize change is seen in entrepreneurial education. Raile et al. (2022) suggested
that business school faculty and administrators encourage more women to study business and
emphasize communal aspects of business, speciﬁcally entrepreneurship. Course materials
used in business schools should counter stereotyped assumptions, and school faculty are en-
couraged to explicitly talk about and question implicit bias related to entrepreneurs and busi-
ness stakeholders (Raile et al., 2022). To actively address gendered language, course content
is, among other things, proposed to include examples of successful women entrepreneurs
or alternately use the pronouns he/she/they (Raile et al., 2022). In summary, reshaping and
actively talking about assumptions, beliefs and stereotypes are steps education can take to
reinforce women in entrepreneurship, increase women’s ESE and decrease the gender gap in
entrepreneurship.
2.2
Deﬁnition of Implicit Bias
As previously demonstrated, research indicates that gender disparities in entrepreneurship ex-
ist and appear in factors such as language, stereotypes, funding behavior, and entrepreneurial
self-efﬁcacy. However, this study aimed to investigate implicit gender bias in the context of
entrepreneurship. The concept of implicit bias and how it can be measured is introduced in
the following.
To understand implicit bias, two other mental phenomena ﬁrst need to be introduced: implicit
attitudes and implicit stereotypes. Attitudes are evaluative dispositions that reﬂect whether
someone likes or dislikes something or someone (Greenwald & Banaji, 1995). Expressing
these attitudes explicitly is easy, as it happens when someone shares their opinion about
something or someone. However, implicit attitudes are harder to comprehend and capture
(Greenwald & Banaji, 1995). Karpinski and Hilton (2001) metaphorically compared atti-
tudes to an iceberg, with explicit attitudes residing above the surface of conscious control and
implicit attitudes residing below it. Greenwald and Banaji (1995) deﬁned implicit attitudes as
’actions or judgments that are under the control of automatically activated evaluation, with-
out the performer’s awareness of that causation’ (Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998,
9
==PAGE:19==
p. 1464). To differentiate between explicit and implicit attitudes, decision-making processes
can be used (Greenwald & Krieger, 2006), such as choosing between a male and female
candidate for a job. Explicit attitude expressions can be observed when the decision-maker
decides on a candidate and understands that his or her choice results from favorable attitudes
towards the candidate. In contrast, implicit attitudes can be observed when someone chooses
a candidate but only knows the candidate’s gender. The decision might then come from the
decision-maker having had negative experiences with employees of the same gender as the
candidate. This can, at least in part, be understood as an implicit expression of the decision-
maker’s attitude (Greenwald & Krieger, 2006).
Implicit stereotypes, on the other hand, are deﬁned as ’the introspectively unidentiﬁed (or in-
accurately identiﬁed) traces of past experience that mediate attributions of qualities to mem-
bers of a social category’ (Greenwald & Banaji, 1995, p. 15). Greenwald and Banaji (1995)
ﬁrst demonstrated these stereotypes with an experiment based on the stereotype that links
men to fame-deserving achievement. The experiment showed that the so-called ’false-fame
effect’ was a lot higher when the pronounced names were male and a lot less when the names
were female. Banaji and Greenwald (1995) found this result to be an implicit indicator of the
stereotype that attaches males to fame-deserving achievement.
Now that implicit attitudes and implicit stereotypes have been deﬁned, clarifying the term
bias is important. Bias refers to a ’displacement of people’s responses along a continuum
of possible judgments’ (Greenwald & Krieger, 2006, p. 950). The displacement does not
necessarily indicate the response to be incorrect; instead, it reﬂects people’s different as-
sessments of certain topics (Greenwald & Krieger, 2006). Implicit biases are discriminatory
biases that rely on implicit attitudes or implicit stereotypes. These biases are very interesting
because they can result in behavior that diverges from someone’s endorsed beliefs or princi-
ples (Greenwald & Krieger, 2006).
As already mentioned, implicit biases are hard to capture (Greenwald & Banaji, 1995). In
the past, most models that intended to measure attitudes relied on the belief that attitudes
mainly consist of three components: a cognitive component, an affective component, and a
behavioral component (Karpinski & Hilton, 2001). Accordingly, to measure attitudes toward
a speciﬁc object, the main task was to study someone’s beliefs, feelings, and behavioral ten-
dencies toward this object (Karpinski & Hilton, 2001). However, models have since changed
10
==PAGE:20==
to recognize that attitudes often remain outside of conscious awareness and control, indicat-
ing implicit bias (Greenwald & Banaji, 1995).
In the late 2000s, Tony Greenwald and his colleagues introduced a new method to exam-
ince implicit attitudes: the Implicit Association Test (IAT) (Greenwald, 1998; Greenwald,
McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998). The IAT was designed to measure attitudes between two target
concepts (e.g., ﬂower vs. insect names) and an attribute (e.g., pleasant and unpleasant words
for an evaluation attribute) (Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998). The implicit attitudes
are captured by measuring their underlying automatic evaluation via a stimulus sorting task.
Precisely, the IAT measures how closely associated any given target concept is with an eval-
uative attribute. The measured implicit attitudes are expected to be stronger the more closely
related the concepts and attributes are (Karpinski & Hilton, 2001). The structure of an IAT
and its implementation for this study are described in section 3
2.3
Hypotheses Development
Based on the ﬁndings of previous research conducted in the area of gender in entrepreneur-
ship and the deﬁnition of implicit bias, hypotheses are developed.
In current research, entrepreneurship was still found to be a male-typed and male-dominated
industry. Entrepreneurs are often associated with young and male entrepreneurs in the tech
sector (Knowlton et al., 2015). High-growth entrepreneurship, the commonly perceived form
of entrepreneurship, is highly associated with men, whereas low-growth entrepreneurship,
the less common form, is associated with women (Gupta, Wieland, & Turban, 2018). Lan-
guage additionally supports the perception of entrepreneurship as being masculine, with en-
trepreneurs often being described as bold and aggressive (Ahl, 2003; Marlow, 2002). Based
on these ﬁndings, the following hypothesis is derived:
H1: In the context of entrepreneurship, there exists an implicit male bias.
In addition, factors such as language and stereotypes were found to highly inﬂuence en-
trepreneurial cognitions as well as entrepreneurial self-efﬁcacy: women were found to feel
less capable of starting a career or business in industries that are perceived as male-dominated,
such as entrepreneurship (Gupta, Turban, & Bhawe, 2008). Furthermore, a study investigat-
11
==PAGE:21==
ing gender behavior in a startup TV show called ’Sharktank’ found that neither female par-
ticipants self-identify as an entrepreneur nor do the investors identify them as entrepreneurs
(Wheadon & Duval-Couetil, 2018). Together with the fact that language in the context of
successful entrepreneurship is strongly masculine (Ahl, 2006), it is assumed that women as
well as men have a stronger implicit bias toward men than toward women.
H2: In the context of entrepreneurship, men have a stronger implicit male bias than
implicit female bias.
H3: In the context of entrepreneurship, women have a stronger implicit male bias than
implicit female bias.
The fact that self-efﬁcacy inﬂuences career decisions in such a way that individuals prefer
choosing a career that suits their ’normal’ gender behavior (Wieland et al., 2019) suggests
that men feel more capable of starting a career in entrepreneurship than women. When as-
sessing capabilities, men are therefore hypothesized to see themselves more as entrepreneurs
than women. Consequently, the following hypothesis is derived:
H4: In the context of entrepreneurship, men have a stronger implicit male bias than
women.
A depiction of the hypotheses development for H2, H3 and H4 is shown in ﬁgure 1.
Figure 1: Hypotheses Development
12
==PAGE:22==
3
Method
In order to measure implicit bias, the previously introduced Implicit Association Test was
used. In the following paragraphs, the general structure of an IAT, introduced by Greenwald
and his colleagues (1998) (3.1), and its implementation is described (3.2). Subsequently, the
design of the IAT for this study is explained (3.3).
3.1
Structure of the Implicit Association Test
Participants conduct the test on a computer with a keyboard. Their task is to complete seven
blocks of stimuli sorting trials by using two buttons on the keyboard. In each trial, a word or
picture appears on the screen, representing either an attribute or target category (Greenwald,
McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998). The attribute and target categories each ideally consist of 4-
6 words or pictures (Greenwald et al., 2021). The participants are supposed to sort these
words and pictures as fast as possible by either pressing the left or the right button (e.g.,
left for insects or unpleasant; right for ﬂower or pleasant). During the sorting, the stimuli
switch between target trials (e.g., insects and ﬂowers) and attribute trials (e.g., pleasant and
unpleasant words) (Greenwald, McGhee, &Schwartz, 1998). When participants make an
error, they get an error message and need to correct the error before proceeding (Greenwald,
Nosek, & Banaji, 2003).
• Block 1 is a practice block consisting of 20 target trials (e.g. insects, ﬂowers).
• Block 2 is a practice block consisting of 20 attribute trials (e.g. pleasant, unpleasant).
• Block 3 and block 4 are the ﬁrst blocks that are relevant for the later analysis of the IAT
effect. They usually consist of 20 (block 3) and 40 trials (block 4) of combined tasks
using targets and attributes (e.g. ’incompatible’ block: insects + pleasant, ﬂowers + un-
pleasant). The left/right hand assignments are thereby determined by the assignments
of the two previous blocks in which they were randomly assigned.
• Block 5 is another trial block consisting of 20 attributes, but using reversed hand as-
signments from block 2. This block is used to delete left-right associations which were
learned in the earlier blocks.
13
==PAGE:23==
• Block 6 (20 trials) and block 7 (40 trials) again consist of combined blocks - this time in
reversed positions than in block 3 and 4 (e.g. ’compatible’ block: insects + unpleasant,
ﬂowers + pleasant).
The assessment of the IAT remains on the assumption that the more compatible the target-
attribute pairings are, the faster the stimuli are sorted (Greenwald et al., 2021). If someone,
for instance, thinks that ﬂowers are more pleasant than insects, the person should be faster
in sorting pictures/words when ﬂower and pleasant share a response key. This pairing is
known as the ’compatible block’. Accordingly, this person’s response speed should decrease
when ﬂower and unpleasant share a response key, also known as the ’incompatible block’
(Greenwald et al., 2021). The assessment of the IAT ﬁnally relies on a measure called the
’d-score’ (Greenwald et al., 2003). The d-score algorithm is introduced in Chapter 4.3.
3.2
Implementation of the Implicit Association Test
For the implementation of the IAT, several options are possible. However, since an IAT
requires the measurement of time-sensitive tasks, and this feature is not included in online
survey tools, most options are quite costly. These options include hiring experts from Project
Implicit to implement the IAT directly on their platform or the purchase of software enabling
reaction-time tasks online. Another option, which is cost-free, but requires some technical
knowledge and time, is to develop and host Javascript-based IATs from scratch. This process
can be shortened and simpliﬁed by using code libraries. The implementation of the IAT
conducted for this thesis was done with the help of a code library called MinnoJS. MinnoJS
is a free, open-source platform for conducting behavioral, for example, time sensitive tasks
online (About MinnoJS, 2022). It is funded by Project Implicit, a non-proﬁt organization
consisting of researchers investigating group-based bias and disparities, such as those based
on race, gender, or sexual orientation (About MinnoJS, 2022). The platform provides ready-
made experiments that can be changed with little programming knowledge. The MinnoJS
suite consists of a player that runs the study on the participant’s browser, a server that saves
the participant’s data, and a researcher dashboard in which researchers can create and launch
studies and download the data.
14
==PAGE:24==
3.2.1
Creating the Implicit Associations Test
The IAT code used in this thesis was adapted from a previous experiment that explored im-
plicit bias towards young and old individuals and was modiﬁed to measure implicit gender
bias in entrepreneurship. The adjustments involved substituting the target category pictures
from old and young people to males and females, replacing attribute words from bad and
good words with non-entrepreneurial and entrepreneurial words, and altering the explicit
questions.
The study included several Javascript ﬁles and a folder of images. The ﬁles with the .js
extension contained code required for the study to run, while the .jst ﬁles contained text
used for further explanation of the test.
The images folder contained all images representing the target categories ’Male’ and ’Fe-
male’. The very ﬁrst page of the study was realstart.jst, which provided a brief introduc-
tion to the test. The ageiat.js ﬁle deﬁned the target and attribute categories. instiat age
.jst was used to provide instructions for the test and introduce the words and images to be
sorted. The participants were presented with their results on the debriefing.js page right
after the test. The lastpage.jst provided detailed information on their results and how they
could be interpreted. The explicits.js ﬁle contained the basic framework and detailed im-
plementation of the explicit questions. The most important ﬁle was the mgr.js ﬁle, which
deﬁned the attribute category words and organized all other ﬁles in the correct order. This
ﬁle was also used to start the survey.
3.2.2
Deploying the Implicit Associations Test
In order to make the study available for participants, it needed to be deployed to the web,
meaning the study had to be hosted on a server. The server option used for this study was a
cloud service called DigitalOcean. It was found to be one of the easiest and safest options if
there is no access to a server machine that meets the requirements (Installation, 2021), which
was the case for this study. DigitalOcean is an American company offering cloud computing
services (DigitalOcean, 2023). The service used for this study was a droplet, which is a
virtual server that can be controlled through the DigitalOcean Management Console.
15
==PAGE:25==
3.3
Design of the Implicit Association Test
The general procedure of an IAT was introduced in 3.1, and the same structure was retained
for the IAT of this thesis. As already explained, an IAT consists of sorting stimuli as fast
as possible. These stimuli are words or pictures assigned to the target category and attribute
category. For the choice of the target category (stimuli) and attribute category (stimuli), the
following considerations recommended by Greenwald et al. (2021) were taken into account:
1. All four categories used in the IAT should be familiar to subjects.
2. The primary criterion for selection of exemplar stimuli for each target and attribute
category is that they must be easy for subjects to sort correctly.
3. Exemplars for any target category should differ from those for its contrasted target
category in just one primary feature or one set of highly correlated features; the same
should be true for exemplars of the two attribute categories.
4. For IATs designed to measure stereotypes, avoid confounding the stereotype’s con-
trasted attributes with valence.
5. Avoid exemplars for one attribute category that are negations of possible exemplars for
the contrasted attribute category.
6. Negations can be satisfactory in category labels.
7. In selecting attribute exemplars, avoid exemplars that have an idiosyncratic additional
basis for association with either of the two target concepts.
8. Exemplar stimuli for target and attribute categories are best selected by pilot testing
using the category classiﬁcation tasks planned for the IAT.
9. When all four concepts in an IAT are expressed as words, font variations can be used
to help subjects distinguish target exemplars from attribute exemplars.
Particular reference was made to point 6 for the labels of the attribute categories. Since the
purpose of the IAT in this study was to determine implicit gender bias in entrepreneurship,
one of the two categories was labeled ’Entrepreneur’. However, as ﬁnding a direct opposite
16
==PAGE:26==
of entrepreneurship was challenging, the label ’Non-Entrepreneur’ was deemed the most ap-
propriate for the other attribute category. To distinguish the different categories more easily
during the test, the words were colored in two different shades, with green labels indicating
the target categories ’Male’ and ’Female’ and blue labels indicating the attribute categories
’Entrepreneur’ and ’Non-Entrepreneur’.
For the selection of trial stimuli for the attribute categories, the main goal was to ﬁnd pairs
of roughly opposite words for each category. The words describing entrepreneurial traits
were thus ﬁrst chosen, followed by their counterparts. For the choice of words a study by
Ahl (2006), where words describing entrepreneurs and their opposites were investigated, was
used. Regarding the number of exemplars, Greenwald et al. (2021) suggested using at least
three exemplars for each category. Since one of their earlier publications used 5 or 25 ex-
emplars per category (Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998), this study aimed to use 5
exemplars. Out of several options and under consideration of the recommendations, the fol-
lowing pairs, listed in table 1, were ﬁnally chosen.
#
Entrepreneur
Non-Entrepreneur
1
Risk-taking
Cautious
2
Innovative
Traditional
3
Ambitious
Humble
4
Conﬁdent
Shy
5
Leading
Following
Table 1: Words for Attribute Categories ’Entrepreneur’ and ’Non-Entrepreneur’
The labels for the target category were chosen as ’Female’ and ’Male’. Regarding the rep-
resentation of this category, it was decided to use pictures instead of words. When selecting
the pictures, efforts were made to ﬁnd faces that looked as similar as possible. Therefore,
different races, facial expressions, or accessories were avoided. To ensure consistency, all
faces were chosen based on their similar levels of attractiveness, which has been proven to
inﬂuence the perception of entrepreneurial capability (Brooks et al., 2014). The pictures were
zoomed in as close as possible to avoid any distracting background, and they were all colored
black and white to increase the similarity between them. All of these attempts were made
to avoid the potential inﬂuence of other biases outside the male/female bias when the picture
17
==PAGE:27==
stimuli are sorted. The ﬁnal choice of female and male pictures can be found in ﬁgure 2 and 3.
Figure 2: Attribute Category Representation ’Female’
Figure 3: Attribute Category Representation ’Male’
Regarding the order, the seven-block IAT procedure explained in 3.1 was used for this study.
However, one slight adjustment was made: instead of using only 20 trials in block 5, 28
trials were employed. This was done because the number of trials for block 5 was found to
affect the magnitude of effect on the IAT of the order in which the two combined tasks are
involved (Greenwald et al., 2021). Therefore, an increase in trials was adopted to keep the
effect of the order of combined tasks as minimal as possible (Greenwald et al., 2021). To
additionally decrease the effect, approximately half of the participants were assigned to an
IAT executing the compatible pairing in block 3 ﬁrst (compatible ﬁrst) and the other half to
the IAT executing the incompatible pairing ﬁrst (incompatible ﬁrst). The exact order of both
IATs is shown in table 2. An exemplary run through the IAT can be seen in appendix 2.
18
==PAGE:28==
IAT permutation
IAT block
Left hand
Right hand
Compatible ﬁrst
1
Female
Male
2
Non-Entrepreneur
Entrepreneur
3 (A1)
Female + Non-Entrepreneur
Male + Entrepreneur
4 (A2)
Female + Non-Entrepreneur
Male + Entrepreneur
5
Male
Female
6 (B1)
Male + Non-Entrepreneur
Female + Entrepreneur
7 (B2)
Male + Non-Entrepreneur
Female + Entrepreneur
Incompatible ﬁrst
1
Male
Female
2
Non-Entrepreneur
Entrepreneur
3 (A1)
Male + Non-Entrepreneur
Female + Entrepreneur
4 (A2)
Male + Non-Entrepreneur
Female + Entrepreneur
5
Female
Male
6 (B1)
Female + Non-Entrepreneur
Male + Entrepreneur
7 (B2)
Female + Non-Entrepreneur
Male + Entrepreneur
Table 2: Order of Compatible First and Incompatible First IAT
4
Data
The following paragraphs ﬁrst describe the variables that were used for the analysis (4.1), as
well as the sample selection and descriptive representation of the sample (4.2). Subsequently,
the data cleaning and scoring algorithm (4.3) and the method for the statistical analysis (4.4)
are introduced.
4.1
Description of Variables
The generated data was automatically saved into four different ﬁles:
session data.csv,
ageiat.csv, explicits.csv, mgr.csv. The most important ﬁles thereby were the ageiat.
csv, containing the data of the actual IAT (the implicit measures), and explicits.csv, con-
taining the explicit measures. In the following, the implicit variables are ﬁrst introduced
(4.1.1), followed by the explicit variables (4.1.2).
19
==PAGE:29==
4.1.1
Implicit Variables
The ageiat.csv contained 21 variables per participant. However, many of them had the
same function, and only some of them were needed to calculate the d-score. For this rea-
son, only the important variables, including sessionId, latency, data.score, data.block, and
data.condition are explained.
The variable sessionId speciﬁed the test session and was needed to differentiate between
the participants. studyId and versionId for example had the same function as sessionId,
but their values were longer, which is why sessionId was chosen to specify the partici-
pant. latency was one of the most important variables and represented the response time
of the participant in milliseconds. It was later used as the main measure to compute the
d-score. The variable data.score stored errors made by the participant. If the participant
wrongly assigned the stimuli, data.score took the value ’1’, ’0’ otherwise. data.block spec-
iﬁed the IAT block ranging from 1-7 for each block and ’0’ for the instructions. Finally,
data.condition showed the categories that needed to be sorted within the block. Its val-
ues could be ’Male,Female’, ’Female,Male’, ’NonEntrepreneur,Entrepreneur’, ’Male/Non-
Entrepreneur,Female/Entrepreneur’, ’Female/NonEntrepreneur,Male/Entrepreneur’.
data.-
condition was mainly needed to implement the new variable isCongruentFirst. If data. con-
dition for Block 3 and 4 took the value ’Female/NonEntrepreneur, Male/Entrepreneur’, thus
the participant was ﬁrst shown the congruent pair, isCongruentFirst took the value ’1’, ’0’
otherwise.
The test additionally provided the participant some feedback. The feedback relied on a d-
score calculated by the MinnoJS extension, which was stored in the variable d. However,
the d-score calculated by the extension was only a vague measure and should not be used
for further analysis (Simon & Bar-Anan, 2021). feedback then included the actual feed-
back sentence given to the participant. It could be ’Your data suggest a strong/moderate or
slight automatic preference for Male over Female’, ’Your data suggest no automatic prefer-
ence between Male and Female’, or ’Your data suggest a strong/moderate or slight automatic
preference for Female over Male’.
20
==PAGE:30==
4.1.2
Explicit Variables
To be able to describe the population conducting the test, explicit measures were taken. The
explicit measures were different for Studies 1 and 2. However, both studies included explicit
questions about the participant’s age, gender identity, and sex assigned on their birth certiﬁ-
cates. Study 2 additionally included two explicit questions about the participant’s ethnicity
and their study program. These two explicit questions were added to Study 2 to investigate
potential relations between the ethnicity/study ﬁeld and the implicit bias. To avoid confusion
and ensure the participant’s focus on the IAT, these measures were taken after conducting
the IAT. All explicit variables were automatically saved in the ﬁle explicits.csv. The ﬁle
contained 13 variables per participant, of which the most important are explained in the fol-
lowing.
The variable sessionId speciﬁed the participant. It was the same value as in ageiat.csv.
The variable name speciﬁed the name of the question asked. Its value could be ’feel’ for
the question regarding the participant’s age, ’sex’ for the question regarding the sex that the
participant was assigned to on their birth certiﬁcate, ’gender’ for the question where the par-
ticipant stated the gender they most feel like, ’ethnicity’ for the participant’s ethnicity, or
’study’ for their study ﬁeld. The variable response saved the actual value of the given answer.
For the age question, the numerical value of the age was saved. The variable sex could either
take the value ’1’ indicating female or ’2’ indicating male. For the gender question, the value
could take ’1’ for female, ’2’ for male, ’3’ for transgender-female, ’4’ for transgender-male
or ’5’ for non-conforming. The question regarding ethnicity could take the following values:
’1’ for White or Caucasian, ’2’ for Hispanic or Latino, ’3’ for Black or African American, ’4’
for Asian or Paciﬁc Islander, ’5’ for American Indian or Alaskan Native or ’6’ for Multira-
cial or Biracial. For the question regarding the study ﬁeld, the variable could take 32 different
values ranging from 1-32 and indicating the available Bachelor studies at Danmarks Tekniske
Universitet. The code book for the explicit questions can be found in appendix 3.
4.2
Sample Selection and Descriptive Representation of the Sample
The sample divided into two studies. Both studies used the same pictures and words. Study
1 was sent (via mail, see appendix 1) to three different courses at DTU Entrepreneurship,
with two being Master courses and one being a course for Ph.D. students: Technology In-
21
==PAGE:31==
novation Management, Business Design for Sustainability, and the Patent course. In total,
the study was sent to 494 students. The participants conducted the test on their own device
with a physical keyboard. 56 students participated in Study 1 (participation rate of 11.3%).
However, data for 9 participants were not included in the analysis since they did not fully
complete the study. Of the 47 remaining participants, 16 indicated to be female (34%), and
31 were male (66%). All participants’ gender identity was the same as the sex assigned on
their birth certiﬁcates. The average age of all participants was 26.1 years, with the youngest
being 22 years and the oldest being 58 years.
Since the participation rate in Study 1 was only 11.3%, the study was conducted a second
time to collect more data. Study 2 was a requirement in the Master course ’Developing an
Entrepreneurial Mindset through Serious Games’. The course had 180 participants, of which
171 conducted the test (participation rate of 94%). The participants took the test on their own
device with a physical keyboard. Data for 13 participants were not included in the analysis
since they either did not fully complete the study (5 participants) or had too many fast re-
sponses (8 participants). Of the 158 remaining participants, 51 participants indicated to be
female (32.3%), and 104 participants were male (65.8%) according to their birth certiﬁcates.
3 participants declined to state their sex (1.9%). Regarding the gender that the participants
most feel like, 50 participants indicated female (31.7%), 103 participants male (65.2%), 1 par-
ticipant transgender female (0.6%), and 1 participant indicated to be non-conforming (0.6%).
3 participants declined to answer the question (1.9%). The average age of all participants
was 25.2 years, with the youngest being 20 years and the oldest being 42 years. 3 partic-
ipants declined to specify their ages. Other than in Study 1, the participants for this study
were additionally asked for their ethnicity and study ﬁeld. However, the server did not record
the answer for all students. Out of the 79 answers that were recorded for the ethnicity, 56
participants indicated to be White or Caucasian (70.9%), 4 participants indicated to be His-
panic or Latino (5.1%), 2 participants indicated to be Black or African American (2.5%), 12
participants were Asian or Paciﬁc Islander (15.2%) and 3 participants were Multiracial or
Biracial (3.8%). 2 participants declined to answer the question (2.5%). The question regard-
ing the participant’s study ﬁeld was recorded for 67 participants. 20 participants indicated to
study in an IT-related ﬁeld, i.e. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Data, Computer Engineering, Soft-
ware Technology (29.9%). 19 participants studied in an engineering ﬁeld, i.e. Architectural
22
==PAGE:32==
Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering (28.3%). 14 participants in-
dicated to study in a study ﬁeld other than the options available in the survey (20.9%). The
remaining 14 participants studied in ﬁelds like Design and Innovation, Manufacturing and
Management, and Process and Innovation (20.9%). The descriptive analysis for both sam-
ples is attached in appendix 4.
4.3
Data Cleaning and Scoring
In older versions, the IAT was scored by looking at the reaction times in the two critical
blocks only (blocks 4 and 7) and conducting a within-person t-test that assessed the peoples’
speed (About the IAT, 2023). However, IAT data is now processed using the d-score data
cleaning and scoring algorithm. Contrary to the old method, the d-score now uses all four
combined blocks (blocks 3, 4, 6, 7) (Greenwald et al., 2021). The ’new’ algorithm, which
was used to assess the IAT in this thesis, is described in table 3.
23
==PAGE:33==
Step
Built-in error penalty procedure
1
Designate combined tasks as A (for which faster performance will produce a posi-
tive score) and B (for which faster performance will produce a negative score). With
counterbalancing, half of subjects will encounter A in blocks 3 & 4, half in blocks
6 & 7
2
Discard all trials in blocks 1, 2, and 5
3
Identify blocks for combined task A as A1 and A2; those for combined task B as
B1 and B2. If task A is blocks 3 & 4, block 3 is A1, block 4 is A2
4
Eliminate from remaining data (blocks 3, 4, 6, and 7) only trials with latencies
10,000 ms
5
Eliminate all subjects for whom more than 10% of remaining trials have latencies
faster than 300 ms
6
Compute latency means (MnA1, MnA2, MnB1, MnB2) and SDs (SDA1,SDA2,
SDB1, SDB2) for each of the four blocks for all remaining trials
7
Compute two mean latency differences: B1–A1 = (MnB1–MnA1) and B2–A2 =
(MnB2–MnA2)
8
Compute an inclusive (not pooled) SD1 using all latencies in blocks A1 & B1 ;
another (SD2) using all latencies for A2 & B2 (SD2). These can be computed from
means and SDs from step 6 as shown in the lines below this table
9
Compute (B1–A1) / SD1 and (B2–A2) / SD2
10
D=Average of two quotients computed in step 9
Table 3: Built-in Error Penalty Procedure as Described by Greenwald et al. (2021)
SD1 = SQRT((((NA1−1)⇤SDA12 +(NB1−1)⇤SDB12)+
((NA1+NB1)⇤((MnA1−MnB1)/2)/4))/(NA1+NB1−1))
(1)
SD2 = SQRT((((NA2−1)⇤SDA22 +(NB2−1)⇤SDB22)+
((NA2+NB2)⇤((MnA2−MnB2)2/4))/(NA2+NB2−1))
(2)
24
==PAGE:34==
To calculate the d-score, the open-source software R was used. R provides a package that
calculates the d-score according to the abovementioned algorithm. However, before applying
the formula, the data had to be adjusted slightly using the previously introduced isCongru-
entFirst variable. Because some students were presented with the compatible pairing ﬁrst
(blocks 3 and 4) while others received it second (blocks 6 and 7), the data needed to be struc-
tured uniformly for all participants. For students who received the compatible pairing second
(isCongruentFirst = 0), their block 6 and 7 latencies had to be swapped with their block 3
and 4 latencies. This transformation ensured that every participant’s data had the same struc-
ture. After this procedure, the main formula, cleanIAT, could be used to clean the data and
compute the d-score. The input for cleanIAT is as follows (Martin, 2022):
my data
The raw dataframe to be used
block name
A string of the variable name for the blocks
trial blocks
A vector of the four essential blocks in the seven-block IAT (i.e. 3, 4, 6
and 7)
session id
A string of the variable name identifying each unique participant
trial latency A string of the variable name for the latency of each trial
trial error
A string of the variable name identifying whether a trial was an error or
not, where 1 indicates an error
v error
If 1 (current standard), then means are calculated for the entire set of
latencies. If 2, error latencies will be replaced by the block mean + 600
ms
v extreme
If 1, the no extreme value treatment. If 2 (current standard), delete trial
latencies smaller than 400ms
v std
If 1 (current standard), block SD is performed including error trials (cor-
rected or not). If 2, block SD is performed on correct responses only
For the computation of the d-score, the settings were mainly used as suggested by the current
standard except for the extreme value treatment v extreme. Since the built-in error penalty
procedure described in table 3 does not have an extreme value treatment, this variable was
set to ’1’ instead of ’2’.
The ﬁnal dataset (see appendix 6) that was computed by the algorithm included the following
25
==PAGE:35==
variables: AS and CS for standard deviations - C, thereby indicating the standard deviation
for combined blocks, including correct trials only and A indicating the standard deviation for
combined blocks including all trials. The variable SUBEXCL denoted any exclusion criteria,
with ’0’ being no exclusion data, ’1’ indicating exclusion due to fast response, and ’2’ indi-
cating exclusion due to missing blocks. M denoted the mean latency, N the number of trials,
E the percentage of errors within the block and F the percentage of fast responses within
the block. Additionally, the data included the variables DIFF1, DIFF2, IAT1, IAT2 and IAT.
DIFF1 and DIFF2 represented the result of step 7 in the algorithm, where the mean latency
differences were computed. IAT1 and IAT2 denoted step 9 in the algorithm, and IAT is the
ﬁnal d-score measure that was used for the analysis, computed as the average of IAT1 and
IAT2. The IAT measure, which was the d-score, ranges from -2 to +2, with any number higher
than +0.65 indicating strong male bias or below -0.65 indicating strong female bias. Values
between 0.35 and 0.65 indicate moderate male bias, and values from -0.35 to -0.65 suggest
moderate female bias. Any value ranging from 0.15 to 0.35 indicates a slight male bias, and
values between -0.15 to -0.35 denote a slight female bias. Finally, scores between 0.15 and
-0.15 indicate no bias (Schiff, Kaczykowski-Patermann & Schubert).
4.4
Statistical Analysis
In Chapter 2.3, hypotheses were derived and evaluated with the help of t-tests. T-tests allow
to test whether the mean of a single sample signiﬁcantly differs from an expected value or
whether the means of two samples are signiﬁcantly different (Boslaugh & Watters, 2008).
The hypotheses stated in this paper are directional, therefore, one-sided t-tests were used.
Depending on whether the variances of the two samples were equal or not, either Student
two-sample t-tests (equal variance) or Welch’s two-sample t-tests (unequal variance) were
employed. To determine if the variances were equal, F-tests were conducted. The data
used for both the F-tests and t-tests consisted of d-scores from different combinations of
male/female and male bias/female bias.
For hypothesis 1, the d-score of all participants’ was investigated regarding their mean bias.
H0: There is no implicit bias in the area of entrepreneurship.
H1: There exists an implicit male bias in the area of entrepreneurship.
For hypothesis 2, only the male participants’ d-score was investigated regarding their male
26
==PAGE:36==
and female bias.
H0: Men are equally biased towards males and females.
H1: Men have a stronger implicit male bias than implicit female bias.
For hypothesis 3, only the female participants’ d-score was investigated regarding their male
and female bias.
H0: Women are equally biased towards males and females.
H1: Women have a stronger implicit male bias than implicit female bias.
For hypothesis 4, only male bias, thus a positive d-score was investigated, for both men and
women.
H0: Women and men are equally male biased.
H1: Men have a stronger implicit male bias than women.
5
Results
Before delving into the d-score results in detail, it is important to note that the MinnoJS
extension produced d-score results that differed from those calculated by the scoring algo-
rithm described earlier. While the differences are brieﬂy outlined, the analysis presented in
this paper relied on the data generated by the scoring algorithm, as recommended by Project
Implicit Researchers (Simon & Bar-Anan, 2021). The reason for the discrepancy in the
MinnoJS-generated d-score is the calculation method. Whereas the algorithm separated the
blocks and calculated the mean and standard deviations of only two blocks at a time, and
then took the average (as explained in table 3), the d-score provided by the extension was
calculated the following (Simon & Bar-Anan, 2021):
((MnB1 + MnB2)/2 −(MnA1 + MnA2)/2)/((SDA1 + SDA2 + SDB1 + SDB2)/4)
(3)
Furthermore, latencies below 400 ms were excluded from the extension score calculation,
and the latency of error trials was replaced with the mean latency of that block + 600 ms.
Figure 4 illustrates the differences in d-score results obtained from the MinnoJS extension
and the IAT algorithm. For clarity, only the d-scores from Study 1 are presented. In the
following, the results for Study 1 (5.1) and Study 2 (5.2) are explained separately.
27
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4: Difference in d-scores Study 1
5.1
Results Study 1
The primary measure to calculate the d-score was the latency of the combined blocks A1,
A2, B1, and B2 (formerly blocks 3, 4, 6, and 7). To compare the blocks, block A1 and
A2 were deﬁned as the blocks with the compatible pairing (Female/Non-Entrepreneur and
Male/Entrepreneur), and blocks B1 and B2 were deﬁned as the blocks with the incompatible
pairing (Female/Entrepreneur and Male/Non-Entrepreneur). The overall mean latency for all
blocks was 859.2 ms with an overall error rate of 5.9%. The statistical measures per block can
be seen in table 4. The mean latency for block A1 was 874.29 ms, with the maximum value
being 1755.65 ms and the minimum value 536.45 ms. The average error rate was 4.7%. For
block A2, the mean latency was 776.6 ms, with a maximum value of 1268.1 ms, a minimum
value of 546.15 ms, and a mean error rate of 6.6%. Block B1 had a mean latency of 992.43
ms, a maximum value of 1756.1 ms, and a minimum value of 597.85 ms. The error rate was
6.8%. Finally, block B2 showed a mean latency of 793.49 ms, a maximum value of 1418.9
ms, and a minimum value of 543.18. The error rate was 5.5%. The standard deviations for
blocks A1, A2, B1, and B2 were 228.18 ms, 172.92 ms, 306.23 ms and 208.04 ms, respec-
tively.
28
==PAGE:38==
Block A1
Block A2
Block B1
Block B2
Mean latency
874.29
776.60
992.43
793.49
SD of latency means
228.17
172.92
306.23
208.04
Mean error rate
0.047
0.066
0.068
0.055
Maximum value
1755.65
1268.1
1756.1
1418.9
Minimum value
536.45
546.15
597.85
543.18
Table 4: Statistical Summary of Blocks A1, A2, B1 and B2 in Study 1
The algorithm d-score for this study ranged from -0.79, indicating strong female bias, to 0.95,
indicating strong male bias. The mean algorithm d-score for all participants was 0.11. The
absolute d-score value was 0.38. When looking at the d-score separated by gender (see table
5), the mean d-score for male participants was 0.20, and the mean d-score for female partici-
pants was -0.06.
Finally, when separating the sample by age, the results showed the following: The age group
ranging from 22 to 25 (59.6%) had a mean d-score of 0.12, participants ranging from 26 to 30
(31.9%) showed a d-score of 0.14 and participants aged older than 30 (8.5%) had an average
d-score of -0.01 (see table 5).
Var
Value
N (percent)
M d-score
gender
female
16 (34%)
- 0.06
male
31 (66%)
0.2
age
22 to 25
28 (59.6%)
0.12
26 to 30
15 (31.9%)
0.14
older than 30
4 (8.5%)
- 0.01
N = 47
Table 5: D-scores Separated by Gender and Age for Study 1
Regarding the strength of the biases, the following results, depicted in table 6, were obtained:
5 men and 2 women indicated strong male bias, their average age was 27 years. 7 men and
1 woman, averaging 24.25 years, indicated strong male bias and 6 men and 0 women, aver-
aging 26 years, indicated slight male bias. 5 women, and 6 men did not show any bias. Their
29
==PAGE:39==
average age was 27.27 years. Regarding slight female bias, 4 women and 4 men with an
average age of 25.75 years showed that tendency. 1 man and 4 women, averaging 27 years,
showed moderate female bias, and 0 women and 2 men, with an average age of 24 years,
showed strong female bias.
Bias
N (percent)
N female
N male
M age
Strong male bias
7 (14.9%)
2
5
27
Moderate male bias
8 (17%)
1
7
24.25
Slight male bias
6 (12.8%)
0
6
26
No bias
11 (23.4%)
5
6
27.27
Slight female bias
8 (17%)
4
4
25.75
Moderate female bias
5 (10.6%)
4
1
27
Strong female bias
2 (4.3%)
0
2
24
N = 47
Table 6: Strength of Bias in Study 1
The following results were obtained regarding the hypotheses testing in Study 1 (see table
7). Due to the sample variances being equal for all hypotheses (see F-tests, appendix 5)
only Student t-tests were employed for this study. H1 conﬁrmed that in the context of en-
trepreneurship, there exists implicit male bias (M = 0.1139, SD = 0.4515), t(46) = 1.73, p =
.0451. H2, supposing that men have a stronger male bias (M = 0.4263, SD = 0.2745) than fe-
male bias (M = -0.3451, SD = 0.2554), had to be rejected, t(29) = 0.76, p = .2262. H3, stating
that women also have a stronger male bias (M = 0.3680, SD = 0.3809) than female bias (M
= -0.3125, SD = 0.1819), had to be rejected, t(14) = 0.39, p = .3484. Finally, H4, theorizing
that men have a stronger implicit male bias (M = 0.4263, SD = 0.2745) than women (M =
0.3680, SD = 0.3809), also had to be rejected, t(26) = 0.43, p = .3373.
30
==PAGE:40==
H
t
df
p
95% CI
M x
M y
SD x
SD y
overall d-score
overall d-score
1
1.7304
46
0.0451⇤
0.0034 Inf
0.1139
0.4515
male bias men
female bias men
male bias men
female bias men
2
0.7618
29
0.2262
- 0.0999 Inf
0.4263
- 0.3451
0.2745
0.2554
male bias women
female bias women
male bias women
female bias women
3
0.3979
14
0.3484
- 0.1903 Inf
0.3680
- 0.3125
0.3809
0.1819
male bias men
male bias women
male bias men
male bias women
4
0.4246
26
0.3373
- 0.1758 Inf
0.4263
0.3680
0.2745
0.3809
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001
Table 7: Results t-test in Study 1
5.2
Results Study 2
As described for Study 1, blocks A1 and A2 were deﬁned as the blocks with the compat-
ible pairing (Female/Non-Entrepreneur and Male/Entrepreneur) and blocks B1 and B2 as
the blocks with the incompatible pairing (Female/Entrepreneur and Male/Non-Entrepreneur).
The overall mean latency for all blocks was 941.53 ms with an overall error rate of 5.3%.
As shown in table 8, the mean latency for block A1 was 950.52 ms, with the longest reaction
time being 2382.78 ms and the fastest response time being 471.85 ms. The average error rate
for block A1 was 3.9%. Block A2 had a mean latency of 812.02 ms, a maximum latency of
1541.28 ms, and a minimum latency of 448.75 ms. The average error rate was 5.2%. The
mean latency of block B1 was 1132.49 ms, the maximum latency was 2502.12 ms, the mini-
mum latency was 530.6 ms, and the mean error rate was 5.9%. For block B2 the mean latency
was 871.08 ms, the maximum latency was 1786.78 ms, the minimum latency was 453.95 ms,
and the average error rate was 6.1%. The standard deviations for blocks A1, A2, B1, and B2
were 319.34 ms, 220.85 ms, 426.04 ms and 246.71 ms, respectively.
31
==PAGE:41==
Block A1
Block A2
Block B1
Block B2
Mean latency
950.52
812.02
1132.49
871.08
SD of latency means
319.34
220.85
426.04
246.71
Mean error rate
0.039
0.052
0.059
0.061
Maximum value
2382.78
1541.28
2502.12
1786.78
Minimum value
471.85
448.75
530.6
453.95
Table 8: Statistical Summary of Blocks A1, A2, B1 and B2 in Study 2
Regarding the algorithm d-score, the overall mean was 0.22. The absolute d-score mean was
0.35. The highest d-score was 1.22, indicating strong male bias, and the lowest d-score was
-0.79, indicating strong female bias. When looking at the d-score separated by gender (see
table 9), women showed an average d-score of 0.004, men an average d-score of 0.32, the
transgender female participant had a d-score of 0.12, and the non-conforming participant a
d-score of 0.07.
The separation of the sample by age yielded the following results: the group ranging from 20
to 25 (63.9%) had an average d-score of 0.21, the group ranging from 26 to 30 (27.9%) had
an average d-score of 0.24, and the participants older than 30 showed an average d-score of
0.18 (6.3%).
Var
Value
N (percent)
M d-score
gender
female
50 (31.7%)
0.004
male
103 (65.2%)
0.32
transgender female
1 (0.6%)
0.12
non-conforming
1 (0.6%)
0.07
not speciﬁed
3 (1.9%)
0.33
age
20 to 25
101 (63.9%)
0.21
26 to 30
44 (27.9%)
0.24
older than 30
10 (6.3%)
0.18
not speciﬁed
3 (1.9%)
0.33
N = 158
Table 9: D-scores Separated by Gender and Age for Study 2
32
==PAGE:42==
Regarding the strength of bias in Study 2, the following results could be observed (see table
10): 1 woman, 22 men, and 1 participant who declined to state their gender indicated a strong
male bias. Their average age was 25 years. 5 women and 26 men indicated a moderate male
bias. Their average age was 24.9 years. 10 women, 20 men, and 1 participant who declined to
state their gender showed a slight male bias. Their average age was 25.8 years. No bias could
be observed for 21 women, 27 men, 1 transgender female, 1 non-conforming participant, and
1 participant who declined to state their gender. Their average age was 25.54 years. 7 women
and 3 men, averaging 23.7 years, showed a slight female bias. Moderate female bias was
obtained for 4 women and 4 men, averaging 25.88 years. Finally, 2 women and 1 man with
an average age of 23.34 years showed a strong female bias.
Bias
N (percent)
N female
N male
N other
M age
Strong male bias
24 (15.2%)
1
22
1
25
Moderate male bias
31 (19.6%)
5
26
-
24.9
Slight male bias
31 (19.6%)
10
20
1
25.8
No bias
51 (32.3%)
21
27
3
25.54
Slight female bias
10 (6.3%)
7
3
-
23.7
Moderate female bias
8 (5.1%)
4
4
-
25.88
Strong female bias
3 (1.9%)
2
1
-
23.34
N = 158
Table 10: Strength of Bias in Study 2
As mentioned, Study 2 contained two additional questions regarding the participant’s ethnic-
ity and study ﬁeld. Both questions were used to separate the different strengths of bias into
the participants’ ethnicities and study ﬁelds. For the ethnicity, the following results were ob-
tained: Out of all participants who indicated to be White or Caucasian, 12 participants showed
strong male bias, 11 participants showed moderate male bias, and 9 participants indicated
slight male bias. 17 White/Caucasian participants did not show any bias. 4 White/Caucasian
participants showed slight female bias, 2 moderate female bias, and 1 strong female bias. For
the Hispanic or Latino participants, 1 showed strong male bias, 1 showed slight male bias,
1 showed no bias, and 1 Hispanic/Latino participant showed moderate female bias. The two
33
==PAGE:43==
Black/African American participants showed moderate male bias. Regarding the Asian/ Pa-
ciﬁc Islander participants, 2 showed moderate male bias, 2 showed slight male bias, 6 showed
no bias, 1 indicated slight female bias, and 1 showed moderate female bias. Finally, 1 Mul-
tiracial participant indicated moderate male bias, 1 indicated slight male bias, and 1 showed
no bias. The summary of the biases separated by ethnicity can be seen in table 11.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
White/Caucasian
12
11
9
17
4
2
1
Hispanic/Latino
1
-
1
1
-
1
-
Black/African American
-
2
-
-
-
-
-
Asian/Paciﬁc Islander
-
2
2
6
1
1
-
American Indian/Alaskan Native
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Multiracial/Biracial
-
1
1
1
-
-
-
(1) Strong male bias (2) Moderate male bias (3) Slight male bias (4) No bias (5) Slight female bias (6)
Moderate female bias (7) Strong female bias
N=77
Table 11: Bias Separated by Ethnicity (Absolute Values)
Regarding the bias separated by study ﬁeld, the following results were obtained (see table 12):
Out of the participants who studied an engineering-related degree, 4 showed strong male bias,
6 showed moderate male bias, and 2 indicated slight male bias. 6 engineering participants
showed no bias, and 1 participant indicated moderate female bias. Of the participants who
studied an IT-related degree, 4 showed strong male bias, 4 showed moderate male bias, 3
indicated slight male bias, and 5 did not show any bias. 1 IT-participant showed a slight
female bias, 2 showed moderate female bias and 1 indicated strong female bias. The partic-
ipants who studied in diverse ﬁelds, i.e., chemistry and technology, design and innovation,
etc. showed the following biases: 3 participants indicated strong male bias, 4 participants
indicated moderate male bias, 1 showed slight male bias. 5 participants showed no bias, and
1 showed slight female bias. Regarding the participants whose study ﬁeld wasn’t speciﬁed in
the available options, 1 showed strong male bias, 1 indicated moderate male bias, 4 showed
slight male bias, and 5 showed no bias. Moreover, 2 participants showed slight female bias
and 1 indicated moderate female bias.
34
==PAGE:44==
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Engineering relateda
4
6
2
6
-
1
-
IT/Software relatedb
4
4
3
5
1
2
1
Diversec
3
4
1
5
1
-
-
Other
1
1
4
5
2
1
-
(1) Strong male bias (2) Moderate male bias (3) Slight male bias (4) No bias (5) Slight female bias (6)
Moderate female bias (7) Strong female bias
a Architectural Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Earth and Space Engineering,
Electrical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Environmental Engineering, General Engineering, Life Science
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering
b Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Data, Computer Engineering, Cyber Technology, Data Science and Management,
IT and Economics, Software Technology
c Chemistry and Technology, Design and Innovation, Manufacturing and Management, Process and Innovation
N = 67
Table 12: Bias Separated by Study Field (Absolute Values)
The following results were obtained regarding the hypotheses testing in Study 2 (see table
13). For H1 and H3, Student t-tests were applied. Due to the samples of H2 and H4 having
different variances (see appendix 5), Welch’s t-tests were employed for these two hypotheses.
H1, theorizing that there exists and implicit male bias in entrepreneurship (M = 0.2162, SD =
0.3897), was accepted, t(157) = 6.98, p < .001. H2, stating that men have a stronger male bias
(M = 0.4589, SD = 0.2912) than female bias (M = -0.1985, SD = 0.1868), could be conﬁrmed,
t(51.9) = 5.08, p < .001. H3, stating that women have a stronger male bias (M = 0.2556, SD
= 0.1907) than female bias (M = -0.2482, SD = 0.2149), had to be rejected, t(48) = 0.13, p =
.4487. However, H4 could be conﬁrmed, stating that men have a stronger implicit male bias
(M = 0.4589, SD = 0.2912) than women (M = 0.2557, SD = 0.1907), t(61.5) = 4.06, p < .001.
35
==PAGE:45==
H
t
df
p
95% CI
M x
M y
SD x
SD y
overall d-score
overall d-score
1
6.9755
157
4.01e−11⇤⇤⇤
0.1649 Inf
0.2162
-
0.3897
-
male bias men
female bias men
male bias men
female bias men
2
5.0749
51.9 2.65e−06⇤⇤⇤
0.1745 Inf
0.4589
- 0.1985
0.2912
0.1868
male bias women
female bias women
male bias women
female bias women
3
0.1295
48
0.4487
- 0.0889 Inf
0.2556
- 0.2482
0.1907
0.2149
male bias men
male bias women
male bias men
male bias women
4
4.0638
61.5 6.97e−05⇤⇤⇤
0.1197 Inf
0.4589
0.2557
0.2912
0.1907
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001
Table 13: Results t-test in Study 2
6
Discussion and Conclusion
In the following chapter, the previously described results are discussed in the light of the
theoretical foundations (6.1). Subsequently, limitations of the study and ideas for future
research are shown (6.2). Finally, a brief conclusion is given (6.3).
6.1
Discussion and Practical Implications
Prior research has primarily focused on explicit factors contributing to the gender gap in
entrepreneurship. These factors include language, stereotypes, access to funding, and en-
trepreneurial self-efﬁcacy. However, one factor that has received less attention is the po-
tential for implicit bias to explain this disparity. This study aimed to address that gap by
using an Implicit Association Test to explore implicit bias in the context of gender and en-
trepreneurship. A gender-entrepreneurship IAT was designed and conducted in two studies,
each accompanied by demographic questions. The results revealed a tendency toward male
bias and partially supported the established hypotheses. While the questions regarding age,
ethnicity, and study ﬁeld did not produce any notable ﬁndings in conjunction with the IAT,
the d-scores separated by the participants’ genders revealed noteworthy results. In addition,
Study 2 yielded stronger results overall. This might be due to the higher number of partici-
pants conducting Study 2 and their explicit exposure to bias in entrepreneurship within their
36
==PAGE:46==
course. Returning to the results, however, Study 1 showed an overall d-score of 0.11, which
is associated to no bias in the d-score scale. Nevertheless, a tendency toward slight male bias
was indicated, since the value was positive. For Study 2, the overall d-score was 0.22, indi-
cating slight male bias. For both studies, these ﬁndings were supported by H1, which stated
that there exists an implicit male bias in the context of entrepreneurship. These results are
consistent with literature, which suggests that entrepreneurship is still perceived as a strongly
male-typed domain (Sullivan & Meek, 2012). Language uses masculine words like aggres-
sive, bold, and risk-taking to describe entrepreneurs (Ahl, 2003; Marlow, 2002), and female
entrepreneurs are regarded as poor stakeholders in business (Elam et al., 2022). It, therefore,
appears that the general view of entrepreneurship being a male-typed industry, shapes an
implicit male bias. This bias seems to rely on stereotypes of entrepreneurs being masculine
and inﬂuences factors such as language using masculine traits to describe entrepreneurs (Ahl,
2006) or ﬁnancial backers employing gender-related assessment criteria during the funding
process (Carter et al., 2007).
Not only is society inﬂuenced by the male bias, but also women working in entrepreneurship
seem to be affected by the bias. Research has shown that female entrepreneurs and women
generally tend to have lower levels of ESE than men, particularly in male-dominated indus-
tries (Shinnar, Hsu, & Powell, 2014). Additionally, women often face greater challenges in
securing funding for their ventures compared to men (Guzman & Kacperczyk, 2019). On
the other hand, men tend to have higher levels of ESE, especially in industries where gender
stereotypes align with male characteristics (Drnovsek, Wincent, & Cardon, 2010). These ten-
dencies were reﬂected in the mean d-scores of both studies. In Study 1, the mean d-score for
male participants was 0.2, indicating a slight male bias, whereas the mean d-score for women
was -0.06, indicating no bias. Study 2 showed an even stronger effect, with male participants
exhibiting a bias of 0.32 and female participants indicating a d-score of 0.004. This is consis-
tent with H2 and H4 in Study 2. Both hypotheses, stating that men have a stronger male bias
than female bias and a stronger male bias than women, were conﬁrmed with a p-value of less
than 0.001. Both studies thus veriﬁed that not only society preferably sees men in the role
of entrepreneurs, but also men see themselves as more suitable. In contrast, women did not
exhibit such biases and, therefore, surprisingly appear to have a gender-neutral perspective
of entrepreneurship. However, despite this neutrality, women’s ESE remains considerably
37
==PAGE:47==
lower than men’s (Gupta, Turban, & Bhawe, 2008). One possible explanation is that male
bias in society and men, along with men’s high ESE, shape beliefs in a way that favors men as
entrepreneurs, leading to the widespread adoption of these assumptions. As a result, women
may not feel accepted by society as entrepreneurs. Despite women’s gender-neutral view of
entrepreneurship, these commonly held assumptions, therefore, seem to be powerful enough
to inﬂuence women’s ESE and dissuade them from considering entrepreneurship as a viable
career path (Shinnar, Hsu, & Powell, 2014).
Moreover, it is noteworthy that a higher percentage of participants in both studies exhibited
male bias (44.7% in Study 1 and 54.4% in Study 2) compared to female bias (31.9% in Study
1 and 13.3% in Study 2). Upon closer examination of the data, two key observations could
be made. First, the strength of male bias was consistently higher than that of female bias in
both studies. Second, there were more participants with strong male bias than strong female
bias. In fact, the maximum indicated male bias in Study 1 was 0.95, and in Study 2, it was
1.22. However, for female bias, the maximum value obtained in both studies was only -
0.79. As for the number of participants showing strong bias, in Study 1, seven participants
exhibited a strong male bias, while only two exhibited a strong female bias. In Study 2, 24
participants showed a strong male bias, whereas only three participants indicated a strong
female bias. This ﬁnding reinforces the idea that women are perceived as less capable in the
ﬁeld of entrepreneurship. Even individuals who are strongly supportive of women still exhibit
weaker bias than those who are biased toward men. Furthermore, individuals who exhibit a
strong bias toward men outnumber those who are biased toward women. As stereotypes are
shaped by commonly held beliefs (Stereotypes, 2023), the views of those with a bias toward
men (who make up the majority) tend to outweigh the opinions of those with a bias towards
women (who are in the minority). As a result, the perception that entrepreneurship is a male-
dominated ﬁeld is reinforced.
All of these ﬁndings are critical because increasing women’s involvement in entrepreneurship
requires not only their willingness but also the acceptance of society and men. If men and
society continue to view entrepreneurship as a masculine domain, existing stereotypes will
persist and continue to inﬂuence women’s ESE and stakeholders such as ﬁnancial backers and
mentors. Additionally, factors such as language will be difﬁcult to change and will continue
to shape stereotypes and affect entrepreneurial self-efﬁcacy. However, one step that can be
38
==PAGE:48==
taken in order to close the gap and potentially inﬂuence the bias is entrepreneurial education.
Educational institutions and administrators are encouraged to actively acknowledge, address,
and counteract the issue of gender bias in entrepreneurship (Raile et al., 2022). By doing so,
more women may feel prepared to become entrepreneurs and realize their full potential.
6.2
Limitations and Future Research
Despite the fact that the results of this study are consistent with previous research on gender
in entrepreneurship, the IAT remains a highly controversial research method. One reason is
its low test-retest reliability is, meaning a person may get different results if they take the test
twice (Gawronski et al., 2017). Payne, Vuletich, & Lundberg (2017) and Schimmack (2021)
argued that the IAT measures situational states rather than implicit associations. In addition,
a person’s IAT d-score and actual explicit behavior can diverge signiﬁcantly (Payne, Niemi
& Doris, 2018). Bartels and Schoenrade (2022), therefore, questioned the validity of the IAT
as a predictor of behavior and suggested that its results are only a partial indication of im-
plicit bias because the measurements compare only one target set against another (Bartels &
Schoenrade, 2022). Although the IAT results suggest an automatic preference for one target
over the other, one group can be preferred without the other group being negatively associ-
ated (Brendl et al., 2001).
Moreover, it appears that the IAT’s ability to predict behavior is limited, as demonstrated by
meta-analyses that reported correlations of only r = 0.27 (Greenwald et al., 2009) and r =
0.14 (Oswald et al., 2013) between the IAT and criteria measures. In addition, the IAT was
proven to be weakly correlated with explicit measures of bias (r = 0.14) and not better at
predicting behaviors than explicit measures (Oswald et al., 2013). To improve the study of
implicit bias in entrepreneurship and test the IAT’s predictability behavior for implicit gender
bias in entrepreneurship, future research could include methods to measure explicit attitudes
and compare them to the results of the IAT.
Finally, it is also important to note that the IAT measures implicit bias in a group, not in
an individual, and the feedback given to participants only provides a vague indication of an
individual’s bias (Project Implicit, 2023). Nonetheless, as long as these limitations are taken
into account, the IAT remains an important tool in research (Greenwald & Banaji, 2017).
Another limitation of this study lies in the choice of words and pictures used in the IAT. As
39
==PAGE:49==
countless combinations of words and pictures could be used, the results may differ depending
on the speciﬁc choice of words and pictures (Axt, Feng, & Bar-Anan, 2021). Furthermore,
word IATs compared to picture IATs were proven to show different results on the same topic
(Carnevale et al., 2015). Future research could test different combinations of female/male
and entrepreneur/non-entrepreneur words and/or pictures and compare an ’only word’ IAT to
one that includes words and pictures.
An additional limitation regarding this study is that it was conducted solely with Master’s and
Ph.D. students from Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, resulting in a non-diverse sample con-
sisting of individuals studying in a technical ﬁeld. Since their business interests and attitudes
toward entrepreneurship are likely to be similar, the studies’ results may have been inﬂu-
enced. Nonetheless, as an IAT is primarily useful for discovering biases within large groups
(Project Implicit, 2023), the results would probably differ for groups of a more diverse popu-
lation. Therefore, an intriguing avenue for future research would be to conduct the test with
various groups, including those working in the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship. Examining ﬁnancial
backers is particularly interesting since they seem to be highly inﬂuenced by entrepreneurial
stereotypes and therefore use different evaluative criteria (Brooks et al., 2014).
As entrepreneurship continues to be perceived as a male-dominated ﬁeld (Sullivan & Meek,
2012), it is important to encourage female participation in this ﬁeld. A promising area for
future research is, therefore, seen in the investigation of the role of entrepreneurial education
in shaping ESE, particularly in how it can enhance women’s ESE. Addressing this gap could
be crucial in bridging the gender gap in entrepreneurship.
6.3
Conclusion
The present thesis aimed to determine whether implicit bias contributes to the gender gap in
entrepreneurship. An Implicit Association Test was employed to measure the participants’
implicit bias toward male and female entrepreneurs. The results of both studies showed a
slight tendency toward male bias. Furthermore, the second study supported the established
hypotheses that, in the entrepreneurial context, there exists an implicit male bias (H1), men
have a stronger male bias than female bias (H2), and men have a stronger male bias than
women (H4). These ﬁndings are consistent with literature suggesting that entrepreneurship
is still predominantly viewed as a male-typed ﬁeld. Implicit bias towards men, therefore,
40
==PAGE:50==
seems to inﬂuence how society perceives entrepreneurship, resulting in entrepreneurs be-
ing perceived masculine and affecting factors such as language. Although women indicated
no bias, those working in entrepreneurship still seem affected by the common bias, facing
challenges such as lower levels of ESE and difﬁculties securing funding for their ventures
compared to men. The thesis also highlighted the need for increased acceptance of women in
entrepreneurship by society and men to encourage more female involvement in the ﬁeld. One
suggested approach is to address the gender gap in entrepreneurial education. However, using
the IAT as a research method remains highly controversial due to its low test-retest reliability
and questionable validity in predicting behavior. Future research could therefore examine
the IAT’s capability to predict behavior in the context of gender bias in entrepreneurship and
further investigate the behavior and results of entrepreneurial stakeholders such as venture
capitalists.
41
==PAGE:51==
Appendix
Appendix 1: E-Mail Draft for Study 1
Dear
I hope you are doing well and the exam period went well so far.
One of our PhD students and a fellow master student are currently working on a research
study within entrepreneurship. They’re investigating the perception of entrepreneurship among
different groups.
In order to ﬁnd out, your participation is required in the ﬁrst step. It would be greatly appre-
ciated if you could take 7 minutes of your time to anonymously take part in the pilot study.
It is quite fun and could give you a glimpse of your own inner attitude. And you’d be doing
Farnaz and Christina a huge favor!
IMPORTANT: The study can only be done on a device with a physical keyboard, not on a
touchscreen keyboard.
The study can be found here: http://157.230.18.10/launch/b6ed7ee2f47e61f1b685d9f9cf0cd
19eff37f493/5ffb536f4edc36f76f6269610b4e40d0bbcd51ab
Thank you for your help!
Best regards
42
==PAGE:52==
Appendix 2: Screenshots Implicit Association Test
Welcome Page
Explanation of Target and Attribute Categories
Block 1
43
==PAGE:53==
Example Block 1 including Picture
Block 2
Example Block 2 including Picture
44
==PAGE:54==
Block 3
Example Block 3 including Picture
Block 4
45
==PAGE:55==
Block 5
Block 6
Block 7
46
==PAGE:56==
Debrieﬁng Page 1
47
==PAGE:57==
Debrieﬁng Page 2
48
==PAGE:58==
Appendix 3: Codebook Explicit Questions
Name
Question
#
Answer
feel
What is your age
#
numerical value of age
sex
Which sex were you assigned to on your
birth certiﬁcate?
1
2
Female
Male
gender
To which gender do you most identify?
1
2
Female
Male
3
Transgender Female
4
Transgender Male
5
Non-Conforming
ethnicity
Which ethnic group do you most identify
with?
1
2
White or Caucasian
Hispanic or Latino
3
Black or African American
4
Asian or Paciﬁc Islander
5
American Indian or Alaskan Native
6
Multiracial or Biracial
study
What is your study ﬁeld?
1
Architectural Engineering
2
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Data
3
Arctic Civil Engineering
4
Biomedical Engineering
5
Chemical and Bio Engineering
7
Chemical Engineering and International Business
8
Chemistry and Technology
9
Civil Engineering
10
Computer Engineering
11
Cyber Technology
12
Data Science and Management
13
Design and Innovation
14
Design of Sustainable Energy Systems
15
Earth and Space Physics and Engineering
16
Electrical Engineering Technology
17
Engineering Physics
18
Environmental Engineering
19
General Engineering
20
Global Business Engineering
21
Fisheries Technology
22
Food Safety and Quality
23
Healthcare Technology
24
IT and Economics
25
Life Science Engineering
26
Manufacturing and Management
27
Mathematics and Technology
28
Mechanical Engineering
29
Mobility Transport and Logistics
30
Process and Innovation
31
Software Technology
32
Other
49
==PAGE:59==
Appendix 4: Descriptive Representation of the Samples
Question
Value
Frequency
Percent
Accumulated percent
age
20 to 25
28
59.6
59.6
26 to 30
15
31.9
91.5
above 30
4
8.5
100
gender
female
16
34
34
male
31
66
100
transgender-female
0
0
100
transgender-male
0
0
100
non-conforming
0
0
100
sex
female
16
34
34
male
31
66
100
Descriptive Representation of Sample 1
50
==PAGE:60==
Question
Value
Frequency
Percent
Accumulated percent
age
20 to 25
101
63.9
63.9
26 to 30
44
27.9
91.8
above 30
10
6.3
98.1
not speciﬁed
3
1.9
100
gender
female
50
31.7
31.7
male
103
65.2
96.9
transgender-female
1
0.6
97.5
transgender-male
0
0
97.5
non-conforming
1
0.6
98.1
not speciﬁed
3
1.9
100
sex
female
51
32.3
32.3
male
104
65.8
98.1
not speciﬁed
3
1.9
100
ethnicity
White/Caucasian
56
70.9
70.9
Hispanic/Latino
4
5.1
76
Black/African American
2
2.5
78.5
Asian/Paciﬁc Islander
12
15.2
93.7
Biracial/Multiracial
3
3.8
97.5
ot speciﬁed
2
2.5
100
study ﬁeld
Engineeringa
19
28.3
28.3
IT-relatedb
20
29.9
58.2
Diversec
14
20.9
79.1
Other
14
20.9
100
a Architectural Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Earth and Space Engineering,
Electrical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Environmental Engineering, General Engineering, Life Science
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering
b Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Data, Computer Engineering, Cyber Technology, Data Science and Management,
IT and Economics, Software Technology
c Chemistry and Technology, Design and Innovation, Manufacturing and Management, Process and Innovation
Descriptive Representation of Sample 2
51
==PAGE:61==
Appendix 5: Results F-tests
H
f
num df
denom df
p
95% CI
2
0.8658
8
21
0.8813
0.3012 3.4496
3
0.2279
9
5
0.0532
0.0341 1.0221
4
1.9255
5
21
0.2654
0.5925 12.1583
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001
Results F-tests H2, H3, and H4 in Study 1
H
f
num df
denom df
p
95% CI
2
0.4113
21
80
0.0224⇤
0.2204 0.8837
3
0.7874
24
24
0.5628
0.3469 1.7868
4
2.3329
80
24
0.0215⇤
1.1405 4.2467
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001
Results F-tests H2, H3, and H4 in Study 2
52
==PAGE:62==
Appendix 6: Results Scoring Algorithm
Id*
AS1
CS1
AS2
CS2
SE**
FASTM
M3
N3
E3
F3
M4
N4
E4
F4
M6
N6
E6
F6
M7
N7
E7
F7
DIFF1
DIFF2
IAT1
IAT2
IAT
687
327.9301
327.9301
624.7796
632.3903
0
0
764.6
20
0
0
643.17
40
0.05
0
896.05
20
0
0
1043.675
40
0
0
131.45
400.50
0.4008
0.6410
0.5209
689
449.6623
449.6623
469.8422
316.5246
0
0
939.85
20
0
0
890.55
40
0
0
1185.20
20
0
0
887.6
40
0.025
0
245.35
-2.95
0.5456
-0.0063
0.2697
690
894.0656
894.0656
370.3173
362.8657
0
0
1011.25
20
0
0
779.08
40
0.025
0
1164.55
20
0
0
681.05
40
0.025
0
153.30
-98.02
0.1715
-0.2647
-0.0466
695
297.0867
297.0867
260.2617
240.4433
0
0
868.65
20
0
0
710.43
40
0
0
610.00
20
0
0
681.15
40
0.075
0
-258.65
-29.27
-0.8706
-0.1125
-0.4916
698
179.3497
179.3497
183.9158
183.9158
0
0
772.95
20
0
0
694.93
40
0
0
765.65
20
0
0
642.025
40
0
0
-7.30
-52.90
-0.0407
-0.2876
-0.1642
702
327.2965
244.6780
418.7217
414.4033
0
0
584.65
20
0
0
549.78
40
0.05
0
943.70
20
0.15
0
805.1
40
0.075
0
359.05
255.33
1.0970
0.6098
0.8534
703
274.9200
270.3123
249.1274
246.2282
0
0.00625
775.05
20
0
0
659.05
40
0.025
0.025
968.20
20
0.05
0
913.375
40
0.025
0
193.15
254.33
0.7026
1.0209
0.8617
704
293.4091
281.0474
142.3358
138.9466
0
0
623
20
0
0
614.08
40
0.025
0
936.80
20
0.05
0
614.475
40
0.025
0
313.80
0.40
1.0695
0.0028
0.5362
707
384.6336
384.6336
213.6709
198.3205
0
0
968.45
20
0
0
755.20
40
0.025
0
750.15
20
0
0
595.75
40
0
0
-218.30
-159.45
-0.5676
-0.7462
-0.6569
708
481.5021
504.9235
198.6508
173.1571
0
0
681.2
20
0.15
0
672.45
40
0.125
0
727.55
20
0.05
0
543.175
40
0.075
0
46.35
-129.27
0.0963
-0.6508
-0.2773
712
373.6147
349.3165
576.7751
477.7799
0
0
771.4
20
0.05
0
717.15
40
0.025
0
1076.45
20
0.15
0
1344.675
40
0.2
0
305.05
627.52
0.8165
1.0880
0.9522
713
906.8174
533.2225
990.9120
965.0953
0
0
835.7
20
0
0
1268.10
40
0.075
0
1756.10
20
0.3
0
1279.1
40
0.05
0
920.40
11.00
1.0150
0.0111
0.5130
714
1396.2414
489.1585
844.1320
808.5109
0
0
1253.9
20
0
0
1234.22
40
0
0
1452.85
20
0.05
0
1100.425
40
0.025
0
198.95
-133.80
0.1425
-0.1585
-0.0080
715
303.4955
248.7287
458.0520
431.3678
0
0
987.5
20
0.05
0
1140.15
40
0.025
0
838.20
20
0
0
636.6
40
0
0
-149.30
-503.55
-0.4919
-1.0993
-0.7956
716
217.5144
219.1951
116.7431
106.9010
0
0
624.2
20
0.05
0
575.30
40
0.075
0
772.65
20
0.1
0
616.525
40
0.025
0
148.45
41.23
0.6825
0.3531
0.5178
717
299.7436
227.9749
234.5237
230.7736
0
0
634.7
20
0.05
0
623.30
40
0.075
0
888.90
20
0.2
0
760.675
40
0.125
0
254.20
137.38
0.8481
0.5858
0.7169
718
319.6123
314.1103
267.6500
264.8634
0
0
696.55
20
0
0
614.60
40
0.05
0
1033.20
20
0.15
0
791.425
40
0
0
336.65
176.82
1.0533
0.6607
0.8570
719
736.8855
695.5699
414.4555
379.5544
0
0
977.7
20
0.05
0
874.35
40
0.15
0
1440.85
20
0.2
0
697.775
40
0.05
0
463.15
-176.57
0.6285
-0.4260
0.1012
720
995.5848
838.3481
426.2539
414.9456
0
0
1755.65
20
0.1
0
1034.05
40
0.025
0
1391.75
20
0
0
1069.85
40
0
0
-363.90
35.80
-0.3655
0.0840
-0.1408
721
588.7240
650.2010
327.3076
313.5701
0
0
844.8
20
0.2
0
824.18
40
0.25
0
726.00
20
0.2
0
698.725
40
0.225
0
-118.80
-125.45
-0.2018
-0.3833
-0.2925
731
508.1608
508.1608
350.9085
331.6903
0
0
1015.5
20
0
0
876.00
40
0
0
1075.30
20
0
0
716.675
40
0.075
0
59.80
-159.32
0.1177
-0.4540
-0.1682
734
374.1502
331.7661
214.8664
169.4147
0
0
737.5
20
0
0
585.48
40
0
0
994.90
20
0.05
0
723.775
40
0.025
0
257.40
138.30
0.6880
0.6437
0.6658
739
258.7343
258.7343
186.4413
175.1401
0
0
622.5
20
0
0
563.42
40
0.025
0
707.80
20
0
0
602.2
40
0.025
0
85.30
38.78
0.3297
0.2080
0.2688
743
267.0195
244.4937
251.3279
222.7559
0
0
666.7
20
0.05
0
546.15
40
0.05
0
650.25
20
0.15
0
711.625
40
0.225
0
-16.45
165.48
-0.0616
0.6584
0.2984
746
449.6700
315.6401
437.7725
435.1164
0
0
1034.3
20
0.1
0
924.80
40
0.05
0
711.80
20
0
0
701.05
40
0.025
0
-322.50
-223.75
-0.7172
-0.5111
-0.6142
747
522.7571
536.1639
283.7934
285.3044
0
0
880.45
20
0.1
0
793.40
40
0.025
0
1330.90
20
0
0
772.775
40
0.05
0
450.45
-20.62
0.8617
-0.0727
0.3945
748
436.5845
444.2828
270.1413
195.4864
0
0.0125
857.85
20
0.15
0
677.43
40
0.125
0.025
750.70
20
0.05
0
566.05
40
0.05
0.025
-107.15
-111.37
-0.2454
-0.4123
-0.3289
749
465.4818
461.3658
251.9800
228.2734
0
0
840.65
20
0.05
0
800.93
40
0.05
0
997.75
20
0
0
721.2
40
0.05
0
157.10
-79.72
0.3375
-0.3164
0.0106
750
241.7415
145.0488
303.5568
143.5748
0
0
685.95
20
0
0
716.48
40
0.05
0
747.40
20
0.1
0
670.075
40
0.05
0
61.45
-46.40
0.2542
-0.1529
0.0507
752
270.0413
272.5979
270.6397
262.2759
0
0
750.65
20
0.05
0
645.67
40
0.05
0
632.65
20
0
0
626.175
40
0.025
0
-118.00
-19.50
-0.4370
-0.0721
-0.2545
756
450.8286
272.5288
323.5473
130.9300
0
0
872.75
20
0.1
0
678.38
40
0.05
0
597.85
20
0.05
0
582.35
40
0.05
0
-274.90
-96.02
-0.6098
-0.2968
-0.4533
757
844.0769
844.0769
923.8058
850.9510
0
0
1183.4
20
0
0
1074.28
40
0.025
0
1574.60
20
0
0
1418.875
40
0.025
0
391.20
344.60
0.4635
0.3730
0.4182
758
590.5659
520.0626
194.9995
178.6725
0
0
1223.4
20
0.05
0
692.18
40
0.1
0
1323.75
20
0.1
0
767.075
40
0.075
0
100.35
74.90
0.1699
0.3841
0.2770
759
753.3552
603.7770
380.4886
381.2605
0
0
1371.95
20
0.05
0
951.73
40
0
0
1094.95
20
0
0
737.225
40
0.025
0
-277.00
-214.50
-0.3677
-0.5637
-0.4657
760
453.3251
444.4105
757.3335
797.4189
0
0
836.3
20
0.15
0
812.48
40
0.225
0
802.35
20
0
0
899.5
40
0.1
0
-33.95
87.02
-0.0749
0.1149
0.0200
764
753.8714
753.8714
525.7274
488.2690
0
0.00625
888.65
20
0
0
754.80
40
0.075
0.025
1697.42
19
0
0
1057.1
40
0.05
0
808.77
302.30
1.0728
0.5750
0.8239
765
217.5355
206.3781
202.6371
164.3619
0
0
603.15
20
0.05
0
631.33
40
0.075
0
671.35
20
0.1
0
572.55
40
0.05
0
68.20
-58.77
0.3135
-0.2901
0.0117
770
427.3442
356.2484
297.8458
210.0650
0
0
819
20
0.05
0
746.68
40
0.1
0
836.85
20
0.05
0
682.7
40
0.1
0
17.85
-63.97
0.0418
-0.2148
-0.0865
772
321.8269
244.9869
230.7759
140.7311
0
0
908.05
20
0.1
0
699.53
40
0.075
0
801.75
20
0.05
0
636.475
40
0.025
0
-106.30
-63.05
-0.3303
-0.2732
-0.3018
773
662.0065
662.0065
647.3048
512.1033
0
0
998.65
20
0
0
901.50
40
0.025
0
1120.55
20
0
0
965.325
40
0.025
0
121.90
63.83
0.1841
0.0986
0.1414
775
324.9992
321.9169
356.9413
348.2195
0
0
889.95
20
0
0
811.43
40
0.025
0
896.95
20
0.05
0
855.975
40
0
0
7.00
44.55
0.0215
0.1248
0.0732
778
605.7399
321.1021
439.3407
261.5850
0
0
536.45
20
0
0
684.75
40
0.1
0
1087.05
20
0.1
0
782.025
40
0.1
0
550.60
97.27
0.9090
0.2214
0.5652
779
903.7172
950.3790
933.6756
557.7749
0
0.025
872.45
20
0.15
0.05
1030.22
40
0.425
0
1510.00
20
0.35
0.05
967.4
40
0.125
0
637.55
-62.82
0.7055
-0.0673
0.3191
781
306.3278
306.3278
308.0009
308.0009
0
0
793.35
20
0
0
637.58
40
0
0
789.80
20
0
0
736.075
40
0
0
-3.55
98.50
-0.0116
0.3198
0.1541
782
205.9390
145.6813
413.1147
429.2402
0
0
678
20
0.25
0
770.98
40
0.175
0
641.85
20
0.25
0
636.475
40
0.2
0
-36.15
-134.50
-0.1755
-0.3256
-0.2506
791
853.5705
854.9881
713.4044
712.1353
0
0
993.9
20
0
0
823.45
40
0.05
0
1382.50
20
0.05
0
1060.775
40
0
0
388.60
237.33
0.4553
0.3327
0.3940
792
444.9729
407.8827
279.7999
252.0443
0
0
1158.65
20
0.05
0
795.13
40
0.075
0
890.25
20
0.05
0
721.125
40
0.025
0
-268.40
-74.00
-0.6032
-0.2645
-0.4338
*sessionID, **SUBEXCL
Results Study 1
53
==PAGE:63==
Id*
AS1
CS1
AS2
CS2
SE*
FASTM
M3
N3
E3
F3
M4
N4
E4
F4
M6
N6
E6
F6
M7
N7
E7
F7
DIFF1
DIFF2
IAT1
IAT2
IAT
829
1346.3296
1379.6605
472.3661
455.4822
0
0
769.25
20
0.1
0
746.8
40
0.125
0
1684.1
20
0
0
869.28
40
0.1
0
914.85
122.475
0.6795
0.2593
0.4694
831
490.4263
490.4263
534.2562
537.8603
0
0
1142.30
20
0
0
1018.325
40
0.125
0
1253.7
20
0
0
1010.48
40
0.025
0
111.4
-7.85
0.2271
-0.0147
0.1062
836
434.9958
434.9958
155.6274
155.6274
0
0
726.95
20
0
0
633.325
40
0
0
1015
20
0
0
659.28
40
0
0
288.05
25.95
0.6622
0.1667
0.4145
839
132.3186
130.4435
127.5027
127.5027
0
0
673.60
20
0
0
558.55
40
0
0
688.5
20
0.05
0
601.55
40
0
0
14.9
43
0.1126
0.3372
0.2249
841
361.7389
352.1353
249.5780
241.3666
0
0
784.05
20
0.05
0
708.475
40
0
0
1113.25
20
0.1
0
835.28
40
0.05
0
329.2
126.8
0.9100
0.5081
0.7091
846
442.4851
442.4851
259.6087
248.8816
0
0
814.10
20
0
0
663.225
40
0.025
0
715.75
20
0
0
687.15
40
0.05
0
-98.35
23.925
-0.2223
0.0922
-0.0651
847
217.5812
217.5812
201.4270
193.9240
0
0
788.90
20
0
0
698.875
40
0.05
0
705
20
0
0
657.65
40
0.025
0
-83.9
-41.225
-0.3856
-0.2047
-0.2951
848
331.8868
331.8868
211.6592
199.8470
0
0
851.45
20
0
0
642.7
40
0
0
901.55
20
0
0
731.25
40
0.025
0
50.1
88.55
0.1510
0.4184
0.2847
853
594.3199
594.3199
340.6261
348.9071
0
0
902.40
20
0
0
744.2
40
0.05
0
788.35
20
0
0
801.53
40
0.075
0
-114.05
57.325
-0.1919
0.1683
-0.0118
854
195.6706
184.2574
152.5343
141.2728
0
0
676.75
20
0.05
0
590.6
40
0.025
0
791.65
20
0.1
0
675.05
40
0.075
0
114.9
84.45
0.5872
0.5536
0.5704
856
488.0220
488.0220
622.9446
139.3172
0
0
828.85
20
0
0
539.625
40
0
0
642.55
20
0
0
735.25
40
0.025
0
-186.3
195.625
-0.3817
0.3140
-0.0339
858
532.9272
532.9272
273.6135
273.9348
0
0
836.80
20
0
0
658.6
40
0
0
662.4
20
0
0
669.98
40
0.025
0
-174.4
11.375
-0.3272
0.0416
-0.1428
859
354.7320
356.8612
470.1356
472.5435
0
0
1135.75
20
0.1
0
1025.975
40
0.1
0
1005.25
20
0.15
0
700.05
40
0.05
0
-130.5
-325.925
-0.3679
-0.6933
-0.5306
860
551.9697
425.3350
467.9044
341.6252
0
0
767.20
20
0
0
583.95
40
0.1
0
1177.75
20
0.35
0
999.90
40
0.2
0
410.55
415.95
0.7438
0.8890
0.8164
861
258.3394
258.3394
150.0793
150.0793
0
0
671.50
20
0
0
564.2
40
0
0
717.35
20
0
0
649.65
40
0
0
45.85
85.45
0.1775
0.5694
0.3734
862
575.9273
575.9273
224.2513
210.2231
0
0
1054.55
20
0
0
684.975
40
0
0
743
20
0
0
586.03
40
0.025
0
-311.55
-98.95
-0.5410
-0.4412
-0.4911
864
815.7354
815.7354
342.8356
338.4295
0
0
857.90
20
0
0
830.1
40
0.025
0
1582
20
0
0
985.30
40
0
0
724.1
155.2
0.8877
0.4527
0.6702
865
347.6296
351.3396
336.3049
335.0868
0
0
606.20
20
0.05
0
747.375
40
0.025
0
934.85
20
0
0
748.45
40
0.025
0
328.65
1.075
0.9454
0.0032
0.4743
866
515.9237
521.7942
196.8942
142.8082
0
0
771.70
20
0.05
0
637.725
40
0.05
0
846.5
20
0
0
714.73
40
0.075
0
74.8
77
0.1450
0.3911
0.2680
872
371.6732
314.3581
301.4659
301.4659
0
0
1200.60
20
0.1
0
870.175
40
0
0
1166.05
20
0.1
0
750.00
40
0
0
-34.55
-120.175
-0.0930
-0.3986
-0.2458
876
510.0726
504.2187
274.7970
270.1065
0
0
789.85
20
0.1
0
659.825
40
0.05
0
1011.25
20
0.05
0
638.55
40
0.025
0
221.4
-21.275
0.4341
-0.0774
0.1783
877
325.4184
285.7015
221.3028
125.2023
0
0
723.75
20
0.1
0
633.825
40
0.1
0
1020.55
20
0.1
0
758.35
40
0.125
0
296.8
124.525
0.9121
0.5627
0.7374
878
888.6355
888.6355
507.4511
511.8871
0
0
920.25
20
0
0
885.225
40
0
0
1185.4
20
0
0
774.20
40
0.075
0
265.15
-111.025
0.2984
-0.2188
0.0398
879
537.0838
516.5732
872.4321
713.6872
0
0
911.60
20
0.15
0
1101.875
40
0.4
0
1103.45
20
0.3
0
1186.97
37
0.243
0
191.85
85.0980
0.3572
0.0975
0.2274
886
738.4888
440.7777
286.5833
239.1415
0
0
581.80
20
0
0
610.825
40
0.1
0
1223.05
20
0.05
0
771.90
40
0.15
0
641.25
161.075
0.8683
0.5621
0.7152
887
241.0286
241.0286
185.3320
185.3320
0
0
748.30
20
0
0
604.35
40
0
0
766.45
20
0
0
588.45
40
0
0
18.15
-15.9
0.0753
-0.0858
-0.0052
890
154.6660
153.7813
199.9740
169.2266
0
0
628.30
20
0.05
0
585.35
40
0.05
0
580
20
0
0
592.05
40
0.125
0
-48.3
6.7
-0.3123
0.0335
-0.1394
891
374.4505
319.7602
277.4520
221.3826
0
0
782.00
20
0.05
0
685.875
40
0.2
0
1119.45
20
0.25
0
789.00
40
0.125
0
337.45
103.125
0.9012
0.3717
0.6364
896
336.6803
324.8386
362.1777
273.0536
0
0
868.45
20
0
0
822.275
40
0.075
0
869.45
20
0.05
0
678.98
40
0.1
0
1
-143.3
0.0030
-0.3957
-0.1963
898
881.5208
909.2283
574.2809
580.7515
0
0
1255.20
20
0.05
0
921
40
0.05
0
1436.05
20
0.1
0
1085.58
40
0.2
0
180.85
164.575
0.2052
0.2866
0.2459
899
299.9422
292.0962
321.3596
290.4921
0
0
800.15
20
0
0
756.5
40
0.025
0
922.4
20
0.05
0
847.25
40
0.05
0
122.25
90.75
0.4076
0.2824
0.3450
900
606.5217
563.1169
586.1338
589.9909
0
0.044
980.00
20
0
0
892.225
40
0.1
0.025
1363.5
20
0.15
0.05
988.75
40
0.175
0.1
383.5
96.525
0.6323
0.1647
0.3985
901
383.9453
371.4871
345.0243
345.0243
0
0
978.30
20
0
0
813.75
40
0
0
922.25
20
0.05
0
826.03
40
0
0
-56.05
12.275
-0.1460
0.0356
-0.0552
902
948.4261
686.3525
398.1031
376.8338
0
0
1371.42
19
0.263
0
955.825
40
0.075
0
840.85
20
0
0
593.08
40
0.05
0
-530.5710526
-362.75
-0.5594
-0.9112
-0.7353
903
412.4414
300.8764
286.9702
286.9702
0
0
823.60
20
0
0
675.5
40
0
0
872.9
20
0.05
0
786.35
40
0
0
49.3
110.85
0.1195
0.3863
0.2529
906
397.6799
397.6799
374.0160
370.6399
0
0.013
895.40
20
0
0
767.275
40
0.025
0
552.35
20
0
0.05
756.73
40
0.075
0
-343.05
-10.55
-0.8626
-0.0282
-0.4454
908
413.6959
413.6959
505.1551
446.3991
0
0
1363.17
18
0
0
1032.75
40
0.025
0
1020.45
20
0
0
1122.20
40
0.025
0
-342.7166667
89.45
-0.8284
0.1771
-0.3257
909
857.9421
857.9421
503.5489
448.9390
0
0
844.80
20
0
0
720.275
40
0.05
0
992.35
20
0
0
753.70
40
0.05
0
147.55
33.425
0.1720
0.0664
0.1192
912
414.5250
400.3413
213.7174
213.7174
0
0
924.10
20
0
0
774.6
40
0
0
1092.2
20
0.05
0
817.38
40
0
0
168.1
42.775
0.4055
0.2001
0.3028
918
362.6343
366.4286
250.2484
191.5792
0
0
826.70
20
0.1
0
594.675
40
0.075
0
723.25
20
0.05
0
737.40
40
0.125
0
-103.45
142.725
-0.2853
0.5703
0.1425
919
1026.8041
549.7655
228.1648
216.6741
0
0
787.85
20
0.05
0
648.975
40
0.025
0
1293.15
20
0.1
0
771.75
40
0.05
0
505.3
122.775
0.4921
0.5381
0.5151
920
194.5504
171.9741
113.3753
97.2907
0
0
516.05
20
0.05
0
561.225
40
0.075
0
589.8
20
0
0
492.45
40
0.025
0
73.75
-68.775
0.3791
-0.6066
-0.1138
923
699.2499
557.0001
208.5139
208.5139
0
0
644.33
18
0
0
561.025
40
0
0
1270.4
20
0.05
0
694.28
40
0
0
626.0666667
133.25
0.8953
0.6390
0.7672
924
1000.0895
637.8086
441.1702
299.6729
0
0
1606.35
20
0.1
0
869.125
40
0.075
0
1182.1
20
0.1
0
978.50
40
0.075
0
-424.25
109.375
-0.4242
0.2479
-0.0881
928
259.1950
255.0571
160.2706
153.2464
0
0
696.75
20
0.05
0
640.75
40
0.025
0
849.4
20
0
0
610.10
40
0
0
152.65
-30.65
0.5889
-0.1912
0.1988
929
709.6782
727.3855
694.0630
691.9672
0
0
1228.50
20
0
0
1070.425
40
0.05
0
1429.95
20
0.1
0
980.38
40
0.05
0
201.45
-90.05
0.2839
-0.1297
0.0771
934
354.4194
304.4877
494.7624
429.9039
0
0
765.10
20
0
0
739.125
40
0.05
0
1176.7
20
0.1
0
1263.70
40
0.175
0
411.6
524.575
1.1613
1.0603
1.1108
935
425.8944
268.3820
250.3798
232.9561
0
0
1097.90
20
0.05
0
802.6
40
0.025
0
915.95
20
0.1
0
686.70
40
0.1
0
-181.95
-115.9
-0.4272
-0.4629
-0.4451
936
249.4507
216.8678
164.1684
163.1934
0
0
779.95
20
0.1
0
633.525
40
0.025
0
815.6
20
0.1
0
717.93
40
0
0
35.65
84.4
0.1429
0.5141
0.3285
938
223.1393
218.6630
273.6118
258.3990
0
0
674.85
20
0
0
748.85
40
0.05
0
819.1
20
0.05
0
760.05
40
0.05
0
144.25
11.2
0.6465
0.0409
0.3437
949
283.7949
288.8334
250.0364
253.0831
0
0
733.90
20
0.1
0
769.575
40
0.025
0
842.75
20
0
0
701.03
40
0.025
0
108.85
-68.55
0.3836
-0.2742
0.0547
950
295.7938
243.7382
503.6241
423.2551
0
0
806.50
20
0
0
814.225
40
0.025
0
933.35
20
0.05
0
972.55
40
0.025
0
126.85
158.325
0.4288
0.3144
0.3716
951
289.3438
236.7783
219.4957
217.3253
0
0
820.95
20
0.1
0
611.35
40
0.05
0
786
20
0
0
688.63
40
0.1
0
-34.95
77.275
-0.1208
0.3521
0.1156
*sessionID, **SUBEXCL
Results Study 2 Excerpt 1
54
==PAGE:64==
Id*
AS1
CS1
AS2
CS2
SE*
FASTM
M3
N3
E3
F3
M4
N4
E4
F4
M6
N6
E6
F6
M7
N7
E7
F7
DIFF1
DIFF2
IAT1
IAT2
IAT
955
348.9086
269.9778
513.4501
193.3238
0
0
771.55
20
0.05
0
768.875
40
0.075
0
869
20
0
0
770.93
40
0.075
0
97.45
2.05
0.2793
0.0040
0.1416
958
587.8631
587.8631
639.9039
639.9039
0
0
1261.55
20
0
0
1153.65
40
0
0
1104.1
20
0
0
1036.85
40
0
0
-157.45
-116.8
-0.2678
-0.1825
-0.2252
959
296.0463
296.0463
117.8712
117.8712
0
0
822.80
20
0
0
654.65
40
0
0
816.3
20
0
0
667.30
40
0
0
-6.5
12.65
-0.0220
0.1073
0.0427
960
376.2999
367.0194
231.0264
215.8333
0
0
863.75
20
0.05
0
693.075
40
0.05
0
1062
20
0.15
0
848.93
40
0.025
0
198.25
155.85
0.5268
0.6746
0.6007
961
211.5285
177.1984
133.3787
128.9695
0
0
589.70
20
0.05
0
537.825
40
0.1
0
687.35
20
0.1
0
575.50
40
0.025
0
97.65
37.675
0.4616
0.2825
0.3721
964
676.1805
479.4987
495.5649
498.3179
0
0
1150.75
20
0
0
1069.625
40
0
0
1337.65
20
0.05
0
793.93
40
0.025
0
186.9
-275.7
0.2764
-0.5563
-0.1400
965
1831.7025
1589.1901
572.9601
536.8405
0
0
1024.85
20
0.1
0
894.975
40
0.125
0
2409.2
20
0.1
0
837.55
40
0.075
0
1384.35
-57.425
0.7558
-0.1002
0.3278
966
212.1276
212.1276
827.0263
268.2260
0
0
752.85
20
0
0
892.05
40
0.025
0
713.25
20
0
0
799.95
40
0.05
0
-39.6
-92.1
-0.1867
-0.1114
-0.1490
967
765.1811
728.6277
578.9298
580.1883
0
0
1075.85
20
0.05
0
797.95
40
0
0
1922.85
20
0.1
0
1450.93
40
0.025
0
847
652.975
1.1069
1.1279
1.1174
969
1303.7749
1303.7749
727.9836
736.8981
0
0
1032.20
20
0
0
1165.9
40
0.125
0
1877.2
20
0
0
1488.68
40
0.1
0
845
322.775
0.6481
0.4434
0.5458
970
193.5273
179.9019
339.7511
346.7382
0
0
611.15
20
0.05
0
629.3
40
0.075
0
648.45
20
0.1
0
642.00
40
0.125
0
37.3
12.7
0.1927
0.0374
0.1151
971
946.3621
951.9030
399.8963
399.9820
0
0
1367.85
20
0.05
0
785.975
40
0.075
0
763.45
20
0
0
646.98
40
0.05
0
-604.4
-139
-0.6387
-0.3476
-0.4931
972
915.5393
882.8849
858.1363
860.8196
0
0
1909.95
20
0
0
1449.525
40
0
0
2075.95
20
0.05
0
1786.78
40
0.025
0
166
337.25
0.1813
0.3930
0.2872
973
1343.8194
1033.5222
833.2881
836.3311
0
0
1192.40
20
0
0
1187.55
40
0
0
2092.35
20
0.1
0
1270.70
40
0.05
0
899.95
83.15
0.6697
0.0998
0.3847
974
305.8147
293.0117
229.4023
198.6548
0
0.006
801.35
20
0.1
0
673.375
40
0.075
0.025
793.5
20
0.1
0
733.33
40
0.1
0
-7.85
59.95
-0.0257
0.2613
0.1178
975
473.2142
451.0453
227.5730
216.6334
0
0
992.05
20
0
0
743.8
40
0.05
0
1072.9
20
0.1
0
709.25
40
0.025
0
80.85
-34.55
0.1709
-0.1518
0.0095
976
848.8841
685.3675
335.4826
324.5554
0
0.038
925.90
20
0.15
0
701.325
40
0.05
0
1348.85
20
0.1
0
639.10
40
0.15
0.15
422.95
-62.225
0.4982
-0.1855
0.1564
978
140.3952
140.3952
114.7802
66.9524
0
0
471.85
20
0
0
448.75
40
0.05
0
582.95
20
0
0
453.95
40
0.025
0
111.1
5.2
0.7913
0.0453
0.4183
981
184.1497
184.1497
285.1970
288.5097
0
0
652.60
20
0
0
670.075
40
0.075
0
605.55
20
0
0
674.93
40
0.05
0
-47.05
4.85
-0.2555
0.0170
-0.1192
982
556.6104
506.2312
381.7832
381.7832
0
0
954.40
20
0
0
821.325
40
0
0
1187.75
20
0.05
0
757.38
40
0
0
233.35
-63.95
0.4192
-0.1675
0.1259
983
388.6819
363.9271
395.1587
278.2688
0
0
682.15
20
0.05
0
565.65
40
0.075
0
990.6
20
0.3
0
1006.75
40
0.3
0
308.45
441.1
0.7936
1.1163
0.9549
984
205.8482
162.2943
180.5145
139.2307
0
0
533.50
20
0.1
0
541.125
40
0.075
0
657.95
20
0.05
0
553.33
40
0.1
0
124.45
12.2
0.6046
0.0676
0.3361
985
321.3995
311.7688
268.0961
239.7863
0
0
799.40
20
0.05
0
633.975
40
0.025
0
813.55
20
0
0
727.43
40
0.025
0
14.15
93.45
0.0440
0.3486
0.1963
986
846.0066
846.0066
223.6652
216.1124
0
0
763.25
20
0
0
632.2
40
0.025
0
1802.6
20
0
0
760.83
40
0
0
1039.35
128.625
1.2285
0.5751
0.9018
987
487.6492
487.6492
275.2456
245.5282
0
0
990.35
20
0
0
842.425
40
0.025
0
1204.5
20
0
0
823.28
40
0.025
0
214.15
-19.15
0.4391
-0.0696
0.1848
989
344.4023
350.2083
395.0914
286.6721
0
0
966.20
20
0.05
0
936.45
40
0.1
0
1105.55
20
0.1
0
712.70
40
0.025
0
139.35
-223.75
0.4046
-0.5663
-0.0809
991
351.3939
341.4356
370.1873
281.4055
0
0
551.55
20
0
0
540.225
40
0.125
0
852.05
20
0.05
0
762.68
40
0.15
0
300.5
222.45
0.8552
0.6009
0.7280
993
686.3912
576.8248
777.4679
588.7891
0
0
914.80
20
0.05
0
814.45
40
0.05
0
1611.45
20
0.05
0
1408.75
40
0.05
0
696.65
594.3
1.0149
0.7644
0.8897
994
453.7024
454.3730
380.4748
367.4278
0
0
786.50
20
0.05
0
653.675
40
0.025
0
727.4
20
0.05
0
725.68
40
0.05
0
-59.1
72
-0.1303
0.1892
0.0295
995
277.0364
271.7589
441.9780
405.1294
0
0
775.05
20
0.05
0
876.2
40
0.05
0
687.4
20
0
0
899.68
40
0.1
0
-87.65
23.475
-0.3164
0.0531
-0.1316
996
521.9037
539.4969
514.8445
520.2068
0
0
696.45
20
0.15
0
605.35
40
0.025
0
1133.85
20
0
0
1056.90
40
0.075
0
437.4
451.55
0.8381
0.8771
0.8576
997
191.9724
193.8695
202.2656
177.3100
0
0
568.80
20
0.05
0
574.1
40
0.075
0
727.45
20
0
0
672.95
40
0.075
0
158.65
98.85
0.8264
0.4887
0.6576
998
201.3231
199.4414
250.6218
248.6451
0
0
823.10
20
0.05
0
680.625
40
0.05
0
697.45
20
0
0
778.05
40
0.075
0
-125.65
97.425
-0.6241
0.3887
-0.1177
999
388.6997
388.6997
431.8319
431.8319
0
0
902.45
20
0
0
946.6
40
0
0
1275.45
20
0
0
1070.43
40
0
0
373
123.825
0.9596
0.2867
0.6232
1000
165.8694
165.8694
186.6951
173.0705
0
0.031
604.90
20
0
0
548
40
0.025
0.025
721.95
20
0
0
594.20
40
0.1
0.1
117.05
46.2
0.7057
0.2475
0.4766
1001
515.7857
251.5237
130.1534
115.6574
0
0
871.10
20
0.1
0
541.375
40
0.025
0
530.6
20
0
0
528.20
40
0.075
0
-340.5
-13.175
-0.6602
-0.1012
-0.3807
1004
441.2356
441.2356
470.9442
451.5597
0
0
794.40
20
0
0
981.9
40
0.025
0
927.55
20
0
0
723.13
40
0
0
133.15
-258.775
0.3018
-0.5495
-0.1239
1008
528.4932
540.1084
475.0278
455.4585
0
0
754.20
20
0
0
796.725
40
0.025
0
1254.5
20
0.1
0
972.18
40
0.025
0
500.3
175.45
0.9467
0.3693
0.6580
1009
1057.9567
1057.9567
250.4302
251.1619
0
0
912.90
20
0
0
633.025
40
0.05
0
1705.25
20
0
0
738.55
40
0.025
0
792.35
105.525
0.7489
0.4214
0.5852
1010
441.2125
415.0479
426.2729
288.0985
0
0
935.05
20
0
0
889.925
40
0.025
0
1154.15
20
0.15
0
856.38
40
0.15
0
219.1
-33.55
0.4966
-0.0787
0.2089
1012
1527.2239
813.7813
680.6461
662.8659
0
0
1885.55
20
0.2
0
773.7
40
0.05
0
1501.4
20
0.2
0
1013.53
40
0.075
0
-384.15
239.825
-0.2515
0.3523
0.0504
1014
885.6801
886.4772
704.4698
708.1884
0
0
1129.70
20
0.1
0
1028.85
40
0
0
1398.9
20
0.05
0
1367.28
40
0.05
0
269.2
338.425
0.3039
0.4804
0.3922
1015
220.5817
210.1013
266.9311
170.9648
0
0
592.20
20
0.05
0
647.875
40
0.225
0
662.85
20
0.05
0
636.38
40
0.2
0
70.65
-11.5
0.3203
-0.0431
0.1386
1016
275.2843
257.5263
244.9035
239.1529
0
0
756.75
20
0.05
0
616.6
40
0.075
0
692.65
20
0.05
0
632.45
40
0.05
0
-64.1
15.85
-0.2329
0.0647
-0.0841
1017
355.9352
346.5424
519.8818
525.5089
0
0
716.55
20
0.05
0
892.85
40
0.075
0
982.3
20
0.05
0
918.25
40
0.025
0
265.75
25.4
0.7466
0.0489
0.3977
1019
371.1347
371.1347
356.1280
347.3124
0
0
1052.50
20
0
0
783.2
40
0.05
0
796.2
20
0
0
702.33
40
0
0
-256.3
-80.875
-0.6906
-0.2271
-0.4588
1020
291.6510
265.2870
335.5887
338.9403
0
0
586.75
20
0
0
628.475
40
0.025
0
944.85
20
0.1
0
866.10
40
0.025
0
358.1
237.625
1.2278
0.7081
0.9680
1021
636.3027
631.2904
448.1038
448.0096
0
0
1532.20
20
0.05
0
1048.1
40
0.025
0
944.15
20
0
0
842.83
40
0
0
-588.05
-205.275
-0.9242
-0.4581
-0.6911
1022
465.5321
390.2972
287.3149
254.6525
0
0
810.15
20
0
0
640.9
40
0.025
0
1091.9
20
0.1
0
744.35
40
0.05
0
281.75
103.45
0.6052
0.3601
0.4826
1023
430.9527
121.7907
124.3320
124.3320
0
0
810.00
20
0.05
0
686.025
40
0
0
726.1
20
0
0
639.50
40
0
0
-83.9
-46.525
-0.1947
-0.3742
-0.2844
1024
681.1355
671.3665
343.2466
338.5565
0
0
696.20
20
0.05
0
604.575
40
0.1
0
1527.95
20
0.2
0
1021.33
40
0.2
0
831.75
416.75
1.2211
1.2141
1.2176
1025
328.1277
330.4631
373.8574
377.8456
0
0
714.75
20
0
0
648.925
40
0.075
0
955.9
20
0.1
0
869.45
40
0.025
0
241.15
220.525
0.7349
0.5899
0.6624
1026
237.4203
215.9680
322.7529
305.4242
0
0
758.05
20
0.05
0
722.15
40
0.05
0
655.05
20
0
0
710.50
40
0.05
0
-103
-11.65
-0.4338
-0.0361
-0.2350
*sessionID, **SUBEXCL
Results Study 2 Excerpt 2
55
==PAGE:65==
Id*
AS1
CS1
AS2
CS2
SE*
FASTM
M3
N3
E3
F3
M4
N4
E4
F4
M6
N6
E6
F6
M7
N7
E7
F7
DIFF1
DIFF2
IAT1
IAT2
IAT
1028
594.4815
465.9796
309.3183
307.6761
0
0
1164.25
20
0.05
0
975.4
40
0.025
0
1239
20
0
0
929.88
40
0
0
74.75
-45.525
0.1257
-0.1472
-0.0107
1030
766.3897
766.3897
874.3517
837.0043
0
0
1134.95
20
0
0
1354.275
40
0.075
0
1242.75
20
0
0
985.73
40
0.05
0
107.8
-368.55
0.1407
-0.4215
-0.1404
1032
1164.6687
969.4490
477.1479
408.9127
0
0
1246.95
20
0
0
788.375
40
0.025
0
1227.65
20
0.05
0
915.60
40
0.1
0
-19.3
127.225
-0.0166
0.2666
0.1250
1033
580.4331
485.1612
416.0188
368.1519
0
0.006
718.80
20
0.05
0
856.525
40
0.2
0.025
1111.65
20
0.1
0
870.38
40
0.125
0
392.85
13.85
0.6768
0.0333
0.3551
1037
919.4234
919.4234
619.9070
541.6037
0
0
815.15
20
0
0
789.05
40
0.05
0
1544
20
0
0
1276.85
40
0.125
0
728.85
487.8
0.7927
0.7869
0.7898
1038
542.5754
451.2143
525.0151
452.3390
0
0
1080.60
20
0.1
0
958.925
40
0.1
0
1096.2
20
0.2
0
1136.70
40
0.275
0
15.6
177.775
0.0288
0.3386
0.1837
1039
725.7727
700.9999
547.2211
554.2338
0
0
1198.30
20
0.05
0
943.575
40
0.05
0
1461.5
20
0.15
0
946.80
40
0
0
263.2
3.225
0.3626
0.0059
0.1843
1041
369.8162
362.6765
201.8681
195.9965
0
0
807.20
20
0.05
0
701.725
40
0.05
0
957.85
20
0.1
0
701.05
40
0.025
0
150.65
-0.675
0.4074
-0.0033
0.2020
1042
352.8402
346.2760
363.3821
352.2278
0
0
859.30
20
0.05
0
774.65
40
0.05
0
867.05
20
0
0
817.30
40
0
0
7.75
42.65
0.0220
0.1174
0.0697
1043
737.1500
737.1500
428.5228
428.5228
0
0
997.55
20
0
0
785.675
40
0
0
1278.4
20
0
0
959.08
40
0
0
280.85
173.4
0.3810
0.4046
0.3928
1045
1132.9760
1132.9760
877.3650
877.0802
0
0
1048.50
20
0
0
1032.25
40
0
0
1677.21052619
0
0
1078.43
40
0.025
0
628.7105263
46.175
0.5549
0.0526
0.3038
1046
450.3555
455.7840
303.0193
293.4915
0
0
1084.65
20
0.05
0
713.55
40
0
0
1090.35
20
0
0
862.58
40
0.025
0
5.7
149.025
0.0127
0.4918
0.2522
1048
279.6435
279.6435
311.0336
259.4312
0
0
651.55
20
0
0
602.125
40
0
0
979.65
20
0
0
813.50
40
0.025
0
328.1
211.375
1.1733
0.6796
0.9264
1050
762.4709
762.4709
299.0079
268.5244
0
0
898.65
20
0
0
738.6
40
0.075
0
1007.15
20
0
0
718.75
40
0.025
0
108.5
-19.85
0.1423
-0.0664
0.0380
1054
333.3196
333.3196
141.5036
133.7761
0
0
737.25
20
0
0
600.85
40
0.025
0
754.5
20
0
0
592.13
40
0
0
17.25
-8.725
0.0518
-0.0617
-0.0050
1055
809.2763
862.4911
918.9830
973.7152
0
0
1222.25
20
0.1
0
1408.875
40
0.125
0
1268.2
20
0.15
0
1410.98
40
0.15
0
45.95
2.1
0.0568
0.0023
0.0295
1056
252.0569
233.4761
497.4180
501.9760
0
0
737.85
20
0.05
0
755.45
40
0
0
660.8
20
0.05
0
806.53
40
0.05
0
-77.05
51.075
-0.3057
0.1027
-0.1015
1057
668.3442
494.1311
986.5386
950.0880
0
0
1516.10
20
0.2
0
1528
39
0.051282051
0
867.45
20
0
0
925.05
40
0.025
0
-648.65
-602.95
-0.9705
-0.6112
-0.7909
1058
1241.2309
743.9683
725.0689
725.0689
0
0
1408.35
20
0
0
1311.15
40
0
0
2356.4
20
0.05
0
1604.40
40
0
0
948.05
293.25
0.7638
0.4044
0.5841
1059
950.6389
1030.8070
1199.5857
362.0340
0
0.056
1123.55
20
0.2
0
1167.1
40
0.5
0.2
2016.8
20
0.35
0
794.13
40
0.275
0.025
893.25
-372.975
0.9396
-0.3109
0.3144
1060
1088.5843
1001.7121
1383.7560
1376.3424
0
0
1149.70
20
0.05
0
1149.675
40
0.075
0
1199.95
20
0.25
0
1175.22
40
0.05
0
50.25
25.55
0.0462
0.0185
0.0323
1065
921.8222
873.9462
523.5195
524.8008
0
0
1260.35
20
0
0
985.275
40
0.025
0
1637.3
20
0.1
0
1231.35
40
0.025
0
376.95
246.075
0.4089
0.4700
0.4395
1066
391.7829
246.3974
395.6373
348.1873
0
0
767.65
20
0
0
799.775
40
0.05
0
856.35
20
0.05
0
694.78
40
0
0
88.7
-105
0.2264
-0.2654
-0.0195
1068
711.8825
720.6427
464.4141
433.5591
0
0.013
798.50
20
0.05
0
683.15
40
0.025
0
1640
20
0
0
956.65
40
0.025
0.05
841.5
273.5
1.1821
0.5889
0.8855
1071
792.6496
527.7784
562.4549
582.7977
0
0
723.50
20
0
0
985.05
40
0.125
0
1382.78947419
0.263157895
0
904.08
40
0.1
0
659.2894737
-80.975
0.8318
-0.1440
0.3439
1072
922.4326
896.7712
977.2135
967.0151
0
0
1366.40
20
0.05
0
806.675
40
0.025
0
1763.05
20
0.05
0
1364.20
40
0.025
0
396.65
557.525
0.4300
0.5705
0.5003
1073
420.9173
318.8374
315.8959
317.8763
0
0
797.65
20
0
0
708.475
40
0
0
1149.3
20
0.05
0
835.03
40
0.025
0
351.65
126.55
0.8354
0.4006
0.6180
1075
1713.5250
1713.5250
825.7265
840.3309
0
0.006
787.70
20
0
0
908.675
40
0.1
0.025
2502.11764717
0
0
1103.85
40
0.025
0
1714.417647
195.175
1.0005
0.2364
0.6184
1076
495.6584
496.5780
922.4224
914.5327
0
0
937.80
20
0
0
669.95
40
0
0
961.05
20
0.05
0
1278.03
40
0.075
0
23.25
608.075
0.0469
0.6592
0.3531
1081
977.8179
547.7923
320.5683
298.3160
0
0
1197.90
20
0.15
0
802.25
40
0.1
0
1146.95
20
0.05
0
652.48
40
0.025
0
-50.95
-149.775
-0.0521
-0.4672
-0.2597
1082
962.2927
928.3653
386.0508
381.2400
0
0
1536.50
20
0.1
0
810.85
40
0.075
0
934.2
20
0
0
959.38
40
0.05
0
-602.3
148.525
-0.6259
0.3847
-0.1206
1084
1119.3253
1119.3253
595.1309
595.1309
0
0
1780.35
20
0
0
1013.436
39
0
0
1146.8
20
0
0
768.30
40
0
0
-633.55
-245.136
-0.5660
-0.4119
-0.4890
1088
1179.8903
1239.7898
780.5190
800.3119
0
0
1141.65
20
0.2
0
1310.75
40
0.025
0
1861.94736819
0
0
965.05
40
0.1
0
720.2973684
-345.7
0.6105
-0.4429
0.0838
1090
1386.3662
843.9633
697.5549
653.2008
0
0
1485.25
20
0
0
1078.4
40
0
0
1766.15
20
0.1
0
1102.22
40
0.05
0
280.9
23.825
0.2026
0.0342
0.1184
1094
359.7598
359.7598
237.1775
204.9694
0
0
733.95
20
0
0
684.325
40
0.025
0
1036.65
20
0
0
755.68
40
0.025
0
302.7
71.35
0.8414
0.3008
0.5711
1096
1630.3464
1381.6272
1047.4517
1027.5249
0
0
2382.78
18
0.056
0
1380.975
40
0
0
1974.4
20
0.05
0
1416.65
40
0.05
0
-408.3777778
35.675
-0.2505
0.0341
-0.1082
1102
586.3081
585.8930
327.5840
325.7783
0
0
1062.65
20
0.05
0
767.425
40
0.1
0
934.75
20
0
0
785.78
40
0.025
0
-127.9
18.35
-0.2181
0.0560
-0.0811
1103
372.7478
372.6526
287.3381
283.8436
0
0
625.85
20
0.1
0
721.55
40
0.05
0
861.8
20
0.1
0
723.05
40
0.075
0
235.95
1.5
0.6330
0.0052
0.3191
1105
1273.0302
1120.8112
1158.6778
1170.2829
0
0.006
1963.50
20
0
0
1270.333
39
0
0
2127.9
20
0.1
0
1248.85
40
0.05
0.025
164.4
-21.4833
0.1291
-0.0185
0.0553
1106
756.5709
690.5788
353.7467
302.1265
0
0
914.20
20
0.05
0
683.55
40
0.075
0
1137.1
20
0.05
0
769.20
40
0.05
0
222.9
85.65
0.2946
0.2421
0.2684
1109
882.2125
871.6645
992.7940
1002.3840
0
0
1226.70
20
0
0
1031.75
40
0
0
2203.75
20
0.05
0
1616.80
40
0.1
0
977.05
585.05
1.1075
0.5893
0.8484
1114
314.6696
311.8006
1001.8827
1117.1278
0
0
903.85
20
0.05
0
1201.275
40
0.225
0
837.263157919
0
0
1097.97
39
0.1795
0
-66.58684211
-103.301
-0.2116
-0.1031
-0.1574
1115
275.0878
262.2123
250.3426
232.1636
0
0
707.75
20
0.1
0
607.425
40
0
0
900.2
20
0.2
0
714.46
39
0.2051
0
192.45
107.0365
0.6996
0.4276
0.5636
1119
605.3913
532.8923
343.0958
299.7046
0
0.013
740.95
20
0
0
625.4
40
0.05
0
1278.4
20
0.3
0.05
813.73
40
0.1
0
537.45
188.325
0.8878
0.5489
0.7183
1121
902.5462
602.1793
414.8695
411.1237
0
0
951.55
20
0
0
786.875
40
0.1
0
1444.73684219
0.105263158
0
787.45
40
0
0
493.1868421
0.575
0.5464
0.0014
0.2739
1127
356.4976
360.6469
236.2876
177.3448
0
0
824.35
20
0.05
0
665.95
40
0.05
0
1027.75
20
0.05
0
851.68
40
0.2
0
203.4
185.725
0.5706
0.7860
0.6783
1128
796.7201
841.0752
494.2035
494.2346
0
0
719.20
20
0.2
0
875
40
0.025
0
1110.55
20
0.05
0
854.90
40
0.1
0
391.35
-20.1
0.4912
-0.0407
0.2253
1131
1572.1238
1260.7559
579.1896
586.1956
0
0.019
1614.85
20
0
0
1090.525
40
0.05
0
1678.15
20
0.2
0.05
1008.50
40
0.05
0.025
63.3
-82.025
0.0403
-0.1416
-0.0507
1132
1062.5864
926.1115
498.7425
503.7709
0
0
1023.45
20
0.05
0
1186.825
40
0.075
0
1728.95
20
0.05
0
1009.83
40
0.025
0
705.5
-177
0.6639
-0.3549
0.1545
1134
1371.5068
1407.2393
842.1456
884.7383
0
0
1949.55
20
0
0
1086.775
40
0.125
0
1748.45
20
0.1
0
1141.95
40
0.125
0
-201.1
55.175
-0.1466
0.0655
-0.0406
1137
702.7140
702.7140
415.1702
416.7544
0
0
1123.55
20
0
0
785.625
40
0.025
0
837.25
20
0
0
824.15
40
0.025
0
-286.3
38.525
-0.4074
0.0928
-0.1573
1145
1135.2803
1135.2803
888.3793
874.7100
0
0
1601.40
20
0
0
1541.275
40
0.025
0
2324.3
20
0
0
1673.78
40
0
0
722.9
132.5
0.6368
0.1491
0.3930
*sessionID, **SUBEXCL
Results Study 2 Excerpt 3
56
==PAGE:66==
References
Ahl, H. (2003). The scientiﬁc reproduction of gender inequality: A discourse analysis of
research articles onwomen’s entrepreneurship. Paper presented at Gender and Power
in the New Europe, the 5th EuropeanFeminist Research Conference, Lund University,
Sweden, August 20–24, 2003.
Ahl, H. (2006).
Why research on Women entrepreneurs needs new directions, in: En-
trepreneurship Theory and Practice. Vol. 30 No. 5, pp. 595– 621.
Alsos, G., Isaksen, E. & Ljunggren, E. (2006). New venture ﬁnancing and subsequent busi-
ness growth in men- and women-led businesses. Entrepreneurship, Theory and Prac-
tice, Vol. 30 No. 5, pp. 667-86.
Axt, J., Feng, T. & Bar-Anan, Y. (2021). The good and the bad: Are some attribute words
better than others in the Implicit Association Test?. Behavior Research Methods (53),
pp. 2512-2527.
Balachandra, L., Briggs, T., Eddleston, K. & Brush, C. (2017). Don’t Pitch Like a Girl!:
How Gender Stereotypes Inﬂuence Investor Decisions. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice 2019, Vol. 43 No. 1, pp. 116-137.
Balchandra, L., Fischer, K. & Brush, C. (2021). Do (women’s) words matter? The inﬂu-
ence of gendered language in entrepreneurial pitching. Journal of Business Venturing
Insights 15 (2021), e00224.
Bartels, J. & Schoenrade, P. (2022). The Implicit Association Test in Introductory Psychol-
ogy Textbooks: Blind Spot for Controversy. Psychology Learning Teaching, Vol. 21
(2), pp. 113-125.
Banaji, M. & Greenwald, A. (1995). Implicit Gender Stereotyping in Judgements of Fame.
68 Journal Personality & Social Psychologoly, pp. 181-198.
BIS (2011). Bigger Better Business: Helping Small Firms Start, Grow and Prosper. Depart-
ment for Business, Innovation and Skills, HMSO, London, URL:
https://online.businesslink.gov.uk/Horizontal Services ﬁles/bigger better business.pdf.
Boden, R. & Nucci, A. (2000). On the survival prospects of men’s and women’s new business
57
==PAGE:67==
ventures. Journal of Business Venturing, Volume 15 (4), pp. 347–362.
Boslaugh, S. & Watters, P.A. (2008). Statistics in a Nutshell - A Desktop quick reference. 1st
Edition, Cambridge: O’Reilly.
Boyd, N. & Vozikis, G. (1994). The inﬂuence of self-efﬁcacy on the development of en-
trepreneurial intentions and actions. Entrepreneurship Theory Practice 18, pp. 63–77.
Brooks, A., Huang, L., Kearney, S. & Murray, F. (2014). Investors prefer entrepreneurial
ventures pitched by attractive men. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
(PNAS), Vol. 111 No. 12, pp. 4427-4431.
Brush, C. (1992). Research on women business owners: past trends, a new perspective and
future directions. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Volume 16 (4), pp. 5-30.
Buttner, H. & Moore, D. (1997). Women’s organizational exodus to entrepreneurship: Self-
reported motivations and correlates with success. Journal of Small Business Manage-
ment, Volume 35(1), pp. 34–46.
Buttner, E. & Rosen, B. (1989). Funding new business ventures: Are decision makers biased
against women?. Journal of Business Venturing 4(4), pp. 249–261.
Byrnes, J., Miller, D. & Schafer, W. (1999). Gender Differences in Risk Taking: A Meta-
Analysis. Psychological Bulletin 125 (3), pp. 367–383.
Carnevale, J., Kentaro, F., Han, H. & Amit, E. (2015). Immersion Versus Transcendence:
How Pictures and Words Impact Evaluative Associations Assessed by the Implicit As-
sociation Test. Social Psychological and Personality Science, Vol. 6(1), pp. 92-100.
Carter, S., Shaw, E., Lam, W. & Wilson, F. (2007). Gender, entrepreneurship, and bank
lending: The criteria and processes used by bank loan ofﬁcers in assessing applications.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 31, pp. 427–444.
Chaganti, R. (1986). Management in women-owned enterprises. Journal of Small Business
Management, 24 (4), pp. 18-29.
Cliff, J. (1998). Does one size ﬁt all? Exploring the relationship between attitudes towards
growth, gender, and business size. Journal of business venturing, 13 (6), pp. 523-542.
Coleman, S. & Robb, A. (2009). A comparison of new ﬁrm ﬁnancing by gender: evidence
58
==PAGE:68==
from the Kauffman Firm Survey data. Small Business Economics, 33 (4), pp. 397-411.
Croson, R. & Gneezy, U. (2009). Gender Differences in Preferences. Journal of Economic
Literature, Volume 47 (2), pp. 448–474.
Dawson, C. & Henley, A. (2015). Gender, Risk, and Venture Creation Intentions. Journal of
Small Business Management, Volume 53 (2), pp. 501–515.
Deaux, K. & Major, B. (1987). Putting Gender into Context: an interactive Model of Gender-
related behavior. Psychological Review 94 (3), pp. 369–382.
Drnovˇsek, M., Wincent, J. & Cardon, M. (2010). Entrepreneurial Self-Efﬁcacy and Busi-
ness Start-Up: Developing a Multi-Dimensional Deﬁnition. International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Behaviour Research, 16 (4), pp. 329–348.
DuRietz, A. & Henrekson, M. (2000). Testing the female underperformance hypothesis.
Small Business Economics, 14 (1), pp. 1-10.
Eagly, A. (1987). Sex Differences in Social Behavior: A Social-Role Interpretation, Hills-
dale.
Eagly, A. & Mitchell, A. (2004). Implications for the Sociopolitical attitudes of Women and
Men. The Psychology of Gender, pp. 183–202.
Eagly, A. & Wood, W. (1991). Explaining sex differences in social behavior: a meta-analytic
perspective. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 17, pp. 306-315.
Eccles, J. (1994). Understanding women’s educational and occupationalchoices. Psychology
of Women Quarterly, 18, pp. 585–609.
Eddleston, K., Ladge, J., Mitteness, C. & Balachandra, L. (2014). Do You See What I See?
Signaling Effects of Gender and Firm Characteristics on Financing Entrepreneuial Ven-
tures. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, pp. 489-514.
Elam, A., Baumer, B., Schott, T., Samsami, M., Dwivedi, A., Baldegger, R., Guerrero, M.,
Boutaleb, F. & Hughes, K. (2022). GEM 2021/22 Women’s Entrepreneurship Report -
From Crisis to Opportunity, Global Entrepreneurship Monitor.
England, P., Allison, P. & Wu, Y. (2007). Does Bad Pay Cause Occupations to Feminize,
Does Feminization Reduce Pay, and How Can We tell with longitudinal data?. Social
59
==PAGE:69==
Science Research 36(3), pp. 1237–1256.
Fischer, E., Reuber, A. & Dyke, L. (1993). A theoretical overview and extension of research
on sex, gender and entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing, Volume 8(2), pp.
151–168.
Fraser, S. (2005). Finance for small and medium sized enterprises: A report on the 2004 UK
Survey of SME Finances. Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, Coventry.
Gabriel, S. & Gardner, W. (1999). Are there ‘His’ and ‘Hers’ types of interdependence? The
implications of Gender differences in Collective versus relational interdependence for
affect, behavior, and Cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77(3),
pp. 642–655.
Gawronski, B., Morrison, M., Phills, C. & Galdi, S. (2017). Temporal stability of implicit and
explicit measures: A longitudinal analysis. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
43, pp. 300-312.
Greenwald, A. (1998). The Implicit Association Test: Demonstration and overview of ﬁnd-
ings, Paper presented at the annual meeting of the society of experimental Social Psy-
chology.
Greenwald, A. & Banaji, M. (1995). Implicit social cognition: Attitudes, self-esteem, and
stereotypes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, pp. 4-27.
Greenwald, A. & Banaji, M. (2017). The implicit revolution: Reconceiving the relation
between conscious and unconscious. American Psychologist, Vol. 72, pp. 861–871.
Greenwald, A. & Krieger, L. (2006). Implicit Bias: Scientiﬁc Foundations. California Law
Review 94, pp. 945-967.
Greenwald, A., McGhee, D. & Schwartz, J. (1998). Measuring Individual Differences in
Implicit Cognition: The Implict Association Test. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, Vol. 74, No. 6, pp. 1464-1480.
Greenwald, A., Nosek, B. & Banaji, M. (2003). Understanding and using the Implicit As-
sociation Test: I. An improved scoring algorithm. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85, pp. 197-216.
60
==PAGE:70==
Greenwald, A., Poehlman, T., Uhlmann, E. & Banaji, M. (2009). Understanding and us-
ing the implicit association test: III. Meta-analysis of predictive validity. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 97(1), pp. 17–41.
Greenwald, A., Brendl, M., Cai, H., Cvencek, D., Dovidio, J., Friese, M.. Hahn, A., Hehman,
E., Hofmann, W., Hughes, S., Hussey, I., Jordan, C., Kirby, T., Lai, C., Lang, J.,
Lindgren, K., Maison, D., Ostaﬁn, B., Rae, J., Ratliff, K., Spruyt, A. & Wiers, R.
(2021). Best research practices for using the Impicit Association Test. Behavior Re-
search Methods (2022) 54, pp. 1161-1180.
Gupta, V., Turban, D. & Bhawe, N. (2008). The Effect of Gender Stereotype Activation on
Entrepreneurial Intentions. Journal of Applied Psychology 93 (5), pp. 1053–1061.
Gupta, V., Turban, D., Wasti, S. & Sikdar, A. (2009). The role of gender stereotypes in per-
ceptions of entrepreneurs and intentions to become an entrepreneur. Entrepreneurship
Theory Practice, Volume 33(2), pp. 397–417.
Gupta, V., Wieland, A. & Turban, D. (2018). Gender Characterizations in Entrepreneurship:
A Multi-Level Investigation of Sex-Role Stereotypes about High-Growth, Commerical,
and Social Entrepreneurs. Journal of Small Business Management (57), pp. 131-153.
Guzman, J. & Kacperczyk, A. (2019). Gender gap in entrepreneurship. Research Policy,
Volume 48, Issue 7, pp. 1666-1680.
Hechavarr´ıa, M. & Ingram, A. (2016). The Entrepreneurial Gender Divide: Hegemonic
Masculinity, emphasized femininity and Organizational forms. International Journal of
Gender and Entrepreneurship 8 (3), pp. 242–281.
Hilton, J. & Von Hippel, W. (1996). Stereotypes. Annual Review Psychology 47, pp. 237-
271.
Hsu, D., Burmeister-Lamp, K., Simmons, S., Foo, M., Hong, M. & Pipes, J. (2018). ”I know
I can, but I don’t ﬁt”: Perceived ﬁt, self-efﬁcacy, and entrepreneurial intention. Journal
of Business Venturing, 34(2), pp. 311-326.
Jennings, J. & McDougald, M. (2007). Work–family interface experiences and coping strate-
gies: implications for entrepreneurship research and practice. Academy of Manage-
ment Review 32, pp. 747–760.
61
==PAGE:71==
Johnson, M., Stevenson, R. & Letwin, C. (2018): A woman’s place is in the...startup! Crowd-
funder judgements, implicit bias, and the stereotype content model. Journal of Business
Venturing, Volume 33 Issue 6, pp. 813-831.
Kanze, D., Huang, L., Conley, M. & Higgins, E. (2017). We Ask Men to Win & Women
Not To Lose: Closing the Gender Gap in Startup Funding. Academy of Management
Journal.
Karpinski, A. & Hilton, J. (2001). Attitudes and the Implicit Association Test. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, Volume 81 Issue 5, pp. 774-788.
Kepler, E. & Shane, S. (2007). Are Male and Female Entrepreneurs Really That Different?.
Small Business Research Summary No. 309.
Kickul, J., Wilson, F., Marlino, D. & Barbosa, S. (2008). Are misalignments of perceptions
and self-efﬁcacy causing gender gaps in entrepreneurial intentions among our nation’s
teens?. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development, 15 (2), pp. 321-335.
Knowlton, K., Ozkazanc-Pan, B., Clark Muntean, S. & Motoyama, Y. (2015). Support Or-
ganizations and Remediating the Gender Gap in Entrepreneurial Ecosystems: A Case
Study of St. Louis. MO: Social Science Research Network, Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2685116.
Kowalska, M. (2012). Entrepreneurship and its role form the European Union Perspective.
Working Papers Institute of International Business University of Gdansk, No. 31, pp.
230-242.
Levanon, A., England, P. & Allison, P. (2009). Occupational feminization and pay: assess-
ing Causal dynamics using 1950–2000 U.S. Census data. Social Forces 88 (2), pp.
865–891.
Lewis, P. (2006). The Quest for invisibility: female entrepreneurs and the Masculine norm of
entrepreneurship. Gender, Work, and Organization 13 (5), pp. 453–459.
Loscocco, K., Robinson, J., Hall, R. & Allen, J. (1991). Gender and small business success:
An inquiry into women’s relative disadvantage. Social forces, 70 (1), pp. 65-85.
Marlow, S. (2002). Women and self-employment: A part of or apart from theoretical con-
struct?. Entrepreneurship and Innovation, 3(2), pp. 83-91.
62
==PAGE:72==
Marlow, S. & Patton, D. (2005). All credit to men? Entrepreneurship, ﬁnance, and gender.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 29(6), pp. 717–735.
Martin, D. (2022). Package ’IAT’. URL: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/IAT/IAT.pdf.
Masters, R. & Meier, R. (1988). Sex differences and risk-taking propensity of entrepreneurs.
Journal of Small Business Management, Volume 26(1), pp. 31–35.
Minniti, M. (2009). Gender Issues in Entrepreneurship. Now Publishers.
Morris, M., Miyasaki, N., Watters, C. & Coombes, S. (2006). The dilemma of growth:
Understanding venture size choices of women entrepreneurs. Journal of Small Business
Management, Volume 44(2), pp. 221-244.
Neeley, L. & Van Auken, H. (2010). Differences between female and male entrepreneurs’
use of bootstrap ﬁnancing. Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship, Vol. 15, No.
01, pp. 19-34.
N.N. (2020). Report on Women Entrepreneurs in Europe. URL: https://startupsandplaces.com/
startup-heatmap-europe-report-on-women-entrepreneurs-in-europe/.
N.N. (2021). Installation. URL: https://minnojs.github.io/docs/start/server/installation/.
N.N. (2022). About MinnoJS. URL: https://minnojs.github.io/about/.
N.N. (2023). About the IAT. URL: https://iatgen.wordpress.com/about-iat/.
N.N. (2023). DigitalOcean. URL: https://www.digitalocean.com/.
N.N. (2023). Eurostat Gender Statistics. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
statistics-explained/index.php?title=Gender statistics.
N.N. (2023). Eurostat Gender gap in self-employment rises with age.
URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/w/EDN-20230307-1.
N.N. (2023). Stereotypes. URL: https://genderedinnovations.stanford.edu/terms/stereotypes.html.
N.N. (2023). Women Entrepreneurship and Leadership.
URL: https://eit.europa.eu/our-activities/entrepreneurship/women-entrepreneurship-and-
leadership.
Orser, B., Riding, A. & Manley, K. (2006). Women entrepreneurs and ﬁnancial capital.
63
==PAGE:73==
Entrepreneurship, Theory and Practice, Vol. 30 No. 5, pp. 643-65.
Oswald, F., Mitchell, G., Blanton, H., Jaccard, J. & Tetlock. P. (2013). Predicting ethnic and
racial discrimination: A meta-analysis of IAT criterion studies. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 105(2), pp. 171–192.
Parasuraman, S. & Simmers, C. (2001). “Type of employment, work-family conﬂict and
well-being: a comparative study. Journal of Organizational Behavior 22(5), pp. 551-
568.
Parsons, T. & Bales, R. (1955). Family socialization and interactive process. Glencoe, IL:
Free Press.
Payne, B., Vuletich, H. & Lundberg, K. (2017). The bias of crowds: How implicit bias
bridges personal and systematic prejudice. Psychological Inquiry, 28(4), pp. 233–248.
Payne, K., Niemi, L. & Doris, J. (2018). How to think about ’Implicit Bias’. Scientiﬁc Ameri-
can, URL: https://www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article/how-to-think-about-implicit-bias/.
Raile, A., Kwapisz, A., Bratton, V., Leary, M., Aytes, K., Black, L. & Bryant, S. (2022).
Business as usual is not working for women in business schools: Student perceptions
of business people and entrepreneurs. Gender Work Organ. 2022, pp. 1-18.
Ranga, M. & Etzkowitz, H. (2010). Athena in the World of Techne: The Gender Dimension
of Technology, Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Journal of Technology Management
& Innovation, Volume 5, Issue I, pp. 1-12.
Raposo, M., Rodrigues, R., Dinis, A., Do Pac¸o, A. & Ferreira, J.J. (2014). The inﬂuence of
competitiveness and regulations on entrepreneurial activity in emerging and advanced
economies. Innovar, Volume 24 Issue 1, pp. 113-128.
Rudman, L. & Glick, P. (2021). The Social Psychology of Gender - How Power and Intimacy
Shape Gender. 2nd Edition, The Guilford Press, New York.
Santos, F., Roomi, M. & Linan, F. (2016). About Gender Differences and the Social Envi-
ronment in the Development of Entrepreneurial Intentions. Journal of Small Business
Management 54 (1), pp. 49-66.
Sarfaraz, L., Faghih, N. & Majd, A. (2014). The relationship between women entrepreneur-
64
==PAGE:74==
ship and gender equality. Journal of Global Entrepreneurship Research, 2 (1), pp. 1-11.
Sarin, R. & Wieland, A. (2016). Risk Aversion for Decisions under Uncertainty: Are There
Gender Differences?. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics 60, pp. 1–8.
Schiff, H., Kaczykowski-Patermann, H. & Schubert, R. Auswertung des IAT anl¨asslich der
Ausstellung ”Check Your Stereotypes”, ETH Z¨urich.
Schimmack, U. (2021). The implicit association test: A method in search of a construct.
Perspectives in Psychological Science, 16(2), pp. 396–414.
Shinnar, R., Hsu, D. & Powell, B. (2014). Self-Efﬁcacy, Entrepreneurial Intentions, and
Gender: Assessing the Impact of Entrepreneurship Education Longitudinally. The In-
ternational Journal of Management Education 12(3), pp. 561-570.
Simon, L. & Bar-Anan, Y. (2021). D-Score Calculations. MinnoJS Forum,
URL: https://groups.google.com/g/minnojs/c/hcskbdDi7XM/m/7WaGvH8MBQAJ.
Starr, J. & Yudkin, M. (1996). Women entrepreneurs: A review of current research, Mono-
graph published by Center for Research on Women. Wellesley, MA CRW 15.
Statology (2021). How to Determine Equal or Unequal Variance in t-tests. URL: https://www.statology.org/dete
equal-or-unequal-variance/.
Steele, C. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and perfor-
mance. American Psychologist, 52, pp. 613–629.
Storey, D. (2011). Optimism and chance: the elephants in the entrepreneurship room. Inter-
national Small Business Journal 29(4), pp. 303-321.
Sullivan, M. & Meek, W. (2012). Gender and entrepreneurship: a review and process Model.
Journal of Managerial Psychology 27(5), pp. 428–458.
Verheul, I. & Thurik, R. (2001). Start-up capital: Does gender matter?. Small Business
Economics 16, pp. 329-345.
West, C. & Zimmerman, D. (1991). Doing Gender. in: The Social Construction of Gender,
CA: Sage, pp. 13–37.
Wheadon, M. & Duval-Couetil, N. (2018). The Gendering of Entrepreneurship on Reality
Television. Journal of Small Business Management, pp. 1-22.
65
==PAGE:75==
Wieland, A., Kemmelmeier, M., Gupta, V. & McKelvey, W. (2019). Gendered cognitions: a
socio-cognitive model of how gender affects entrepreneurial preferences. Entrepreneur-
ship Regional Development, 31:3-4, pp. 178-197.
Wieland, A. & Sarin, R. (2012). Domain Speciﬁcity of Sex Differences in Competition.
Journal of Economic Behavior Organization 83 (1), pp. 151–157.
Wieland, A., Sundali, J., Kemmelmeier, M. & Sarin, R. (2014): Gender Differences in the
Endowment Effect: Women Pay Less, but Won’t Accept Less. Judgment and Decision
Making (6), pp. 558–571.
Wigboldus, D. & Douglas, K. (2007). Language, Stereotypes, and Intergroup Relations.
Social Communication, Psychology Press, New York.
Wilson, F., Kickul, J. & Marlino, D. (2007). Gender, Entrepreneurial Self-Efﬁcacy, and
Entrepreneurial Career Intentions: Implications for Entrepreneurship Education. En-
trepreneurship Theory and Practice 31(3), pp. 387-406.
Wood, W., Christensen, N., Hebl, M. & Rothgerber, H. (1997). Conformity to Sex-Typed
Norms, Affect, and the Self-Concept. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
Volume 73 (3), pp. 523–535.
Wood, W. & Eagly, A. (2010). Gender. Handbook of social psychology, 5th edition, Volume
1, pp. 629-667.
Wu, Z. & Chua, J. (2012). Second-order gender effects: The case of US small business
borrowing cost. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 36, pp. 443-463.
Yadav, V. & Unni, J. (2016). Women entrepreneurship: Research review and future direc-
tions. Journal of Global Entrepreneurship Research, Vol. 6, Iss. 12, pp. 1-18.
Zhao, H., Seibert, S. & Hills, G. (2005). The Mediating Role of Self-Efﬁcacy in the De-
velopment of Entrepreneurial Intentions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90 (6), pp.
1265–1272.
Zimmerman, M., Treichel, M. & Scott, J. (2006). Women-owned businesses and access
to bank credit: A time series perspective (evidence from three surveys since 1987).
Venture Capital 8(1), pp. 51–67.
66
==PAGE:76==
Declaration of Authorship
Hereby, I declare that I have composed the presented thesis/seminar paper independently on
my own and without any other resources than the ones indicated. All thoughts taken directly
or indirectly from external sources are properly denoted as such.
I am aware that the digital form of the thesis/seminar paper can be examined for the use of
unauthorized aid and in order to determine whether the thesis/seminar paper as a whole or
parts incorporated in it may be deemed as plagiarism. For the comparison of my work with
existing sources I agree that it shall be entered in a database where it shall also remain after
examination to enable comparison with future works. However, further rights of reproduction
and usage are not granted.
This thesis/seminar paper has neither been previously submitted to another authority nor has
it been published yet.
Munich, 1st of April 2023
Christina Unger
67
