==PAGE:1==
Cyclist Behavior in the Danish and German
Population
Master’s Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Cyclist Behavior in the Danish and German Population
Master’s Thesis
Marts, 2023
By
Casper Lind Larsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over one semester at the Division for Transport, Depart­
ment of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical University of Den­
mark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Casper Lind Larsen ­ s175138
Signature
Date
Cyclist Behavior in the Danish and German Population
ii
22.03.2023
==PAGE:4==
Learning Objectives
After finishing the Master’s Thesis the student will be able to:
• Conduct a literature study and use relevant literature within the scope of the problem
• Argue in favour of the chosen theory and method
• Use factor analysis to investigate possible latent behavioural variables related to
Danish and German cycling culture
• Use statistical software to estimate mathematical models
• Interpret and compare the results of mathematical models
• Be critical towards the results found as well as the methods used
• Discuss and conclude on the results found and put the results into perspective
• Use the discoveries of the analysis to discuss potential solutions and applications
of these
• Present the results of the study in a concise and well­written paper
Cyclist Behavior in the Danish and German Population
iii
==PAGE:5==
 
*Corresponding author. 
Email address: s175138@student@dtu.dk, casperlindlarsen@gmail.com  
URL: www.man.dtu.dk  
 
 
 
 
 
Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population 
Casper Lind Larsen a, * 
a Technical University of Denmark, Department of Management Engineering, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
Abstract 
Introduction: During the last decades cycling has become a more popular mode of transportation, as it 
has been found to be a cheap, healthy, and sustainable type of personal transport. The number of cyclists on 
the road has been steadily rising with more people enjoying the benefits of cycling in their everyday life. 
However, and even tough, cycling has several benefits, an increase in the number of accidents and fatalities 
involving cyclists has been observed, making public health agencies and road safety researchers wonder if 
this is compromising the cost-benefit balance of cycling. Objective: This study investigates how cycling 
behaviour is differing between Danish and German cyclists. It further investigates which factors are 
affecting the behaviour of these cyclists and how these relate to cycling accidents, to give decision support 
when developing and implementing initiatives to improve road safety for cyclists. Methods and Data: The 
study uses data from a large electronic survey, including 1,059 cyclists from Denmark and Germany, as a 
base for the investigations. The survey comprises several questionnaires concerning behaviour in order to 
get an insight into which factors are essential to traffic behaviour, and how they differ between the two 
groups of cyclists. Results: The results of the study indicates that both similarities and differences exists 
between the behaviour of Danish and German cyclists. It was found that the German cyclists in general have 
worse behaviour than Danish cyclists, and that the factors affecting the behaviour of the cyclist is varying a 
lot between the two groups. Cycling errors are the primary cause of accidents amongst Danish cyclists, while 
a lack of positive behaviours was found to be the significant cause to accidents amongst German cyclists. 
While major differences exist between Danish and German cyclists, also several similarities were found, e.g. 
that the use of a mobile device affects cycling behaviour, while also psychological distress have influence on 
behaviour amongst both Danish and German cyclists. Conclusion: The results of the study supports the idea 
that behavioural differences exists between groups of cyclists. Some behaviours were found to have 
significant influence on accident rates, and therefore implementing solutions to improve cycling behaviours 
can help in decreasing accident rates amongst cyclists, allowing for safe and sustainable personal transport 
with many health, social, and economic benefits.  
 
Keywords: Cycling Behaviour Questionnaire (CBQ); Walking Behaviour Questionnaire (WBQ); Distractions; Anger; 
Mental Health; Cycling Accidents; Human Health. 
 
==PAGE:6==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
2 
1. Introduction 
During the past decades the use of bicycling as a mean of transportation has increased in Europe 
(European Commission & Directorate- General for Mobility Transport, 2015), as more people are using the 
bicycle as a cheap, healthy, and convenient type of transport when travelling around the city. The use of 
cycling as an active mode of transportation has shown numerous benefits, for both the individual and the 
public (Prati et al., 2017). First of all, cycling has shown obvious benefits on the individuals physical health 
(Oja et al., 2017; Cavil & Davis, 2007), contribution to a reduced risk of all-cause mortality, i.e. the risk of 
dying prematurely for any given reason. It has moreover turned out to have a significant impact on the risk 
of developing various lifestyle diseases and even cancer. Some of the more noticeable examples being a 
reduced risk of developing colon cancer (Hou et al., 2004), and a reduced risk of developing type-2 diabetes 
(Rasmussen et al., 2016). Research has further found that people who use the bicycle for commuting tend 
to have less absence from work due to sickness, than people using car or public transport for commuting 
purposes (Hendriksen et al., 2010. Avila-Palencia et al. (2017) have found that bicycle commuters had 
significantly lower risk of being stressed than non-bicycle commuters. Besides lowering the risk of stress, 
also other mental health benefits of cycling have been found, such as positive effects on anxiety and 
depression (Cavil & Davis, 2007). A study by Fishman, Böcker and Helbich (2015) concluded that the 
incorporation of active transport in the day-to-day life, serves as an effective mean to significantly reduce 
the emerging health issues of an otherwise sedentary lifestyle. Cycling commuting has further been found 
to be an effective way of reaching the World Health Organization’s (WHO) recommendations on a minimum 
of 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic physical activity throughout the week (World Health 
Organization, 2019).  
Besides the obvious health benefits of cycling, also several environmental gains have been associated to 
the use of cycling as mode of transportation. When more people are using active transportation (i.e. walking 
and cycling) in the day-to-day life, it results in a modal shift away from cars, which is contributing to 
reducing congestion and increasing the efficiency of the transport system as a whole, especially during peak 
hours (Bauman et al., 2008). Less congestion and fewer motorized vehicles on the roads results in a 
reduction of greenhouse gasses, emissions from vehicles, noise, and might even reduce the global 
temperature (de Nazelle et al., 2011). The environmental drawbacks from motorized transportation are 
closely related to public health. Emissions from the transport sector is a large contributor to climate change, 
which is widely recognized as a public health concern (Haines et al., 2009). Transportation has been 
estimated to be the main reason for environmental noise in cities across Europe and noise has been found 
to be the second most harming environmental cause to poor health in western Europe (Khomenko et al., 
2022). Noise from road traffic is disturbing when doing daily activities (e.g. when working or having a 
conversation), which is first of all a source of irritation contributing to less well-being in the day-to-day life, 
while it is also a cause of poor sleep quality, being a precursor for diseases like diabetes, obesity, dementia, 
and high blood pressure (Basner & McGuire, 2018). Basu (2009) found direct effects between temperature 
and mortality, showing that an increase in temperature leads to an increase in mortality.   
An increase in the amount of cycling is not only beneficial for the individual’s health and well-being, but 
in a great extend also for the society as a whole. In an analysis prepared by Odgaard & Münster for the 
Confederation of Danish Industry (2022, June 24), the socioeconomic benefits of an increase in cycling are 
calculated, using Denmark as a case study. It was found that a 10 % increase in vehicle kilometres travelled 
on bicycle would have a socioeconomic gain of DKK 2,509m (2022-prices) in 2025. Looking only at the 
Capital Region of Denmark, the gain would be DKK 1,045m (2022-prices) in 2025. Worth noticing is, that 
the relation between kilometres cycled and socioeconomic health benefits is linear, indicating that a 20 % 
increase in vehicle kilometres travelled on bicycle would have gains twice as high as a 10 % increase.  
The increasing number of cyclists is in general perceived as beneficial for the society, as it serves as a 
remedy to increase the public health, lower congestion on the roads, and lead the transport sector towards 
a more sustainable future. There are, however, some safety concerns arising amongst public health agencies 
and road safety researchers, as more cyclists on the roads might lead to more crashes, injuries and in worst 
==PAGE:7==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
3 
case fatalities (Jacobsen & Rutter, 2012). The World Health Organization has identified traffic accidents as 
the 8th leading cause of death in the world accounting for 1.35 million deaths each year (World Health 
Organization, 2018). It has also been found to be the number one leading cause of death amongst children 
and young adults (people aged 5-29 years old). These numbers only account for deaths directly caused by 
traffic accidents. It is however important to note that accidents without fatal outcome could be a precursor 
to other diseases, as injuries and disabilities resulting from traffic accidents often leads to less physical 
activity. Out of the many fatalities amongst road users, 3 % are accounted for by cyclists, 28 % by motorized 
2-wheelers, and 23 % by pedestrians on a global level. The corresponding numbers for Europe are 5 % for 
cyclists, 11 % for motorized two-wheelers, and 27 % for pedestrians. Vulnerable Road Users (VRUs) thus 
constitutes a large proportion of the fatalities amongst road users. The term VRUs are used to describe the 
road users that are exposed to the highest risk during transport (Yannis et al., 2020). The group comprises 
pedestrians, pedal cyclists, and motorcyclist, as they are the ones most prone to injuries in a vehicular 
collision, as they are not protected by any devices to absorb the impact of a crash.  
When it comes to traffic accidents with cyclists involved, several different factors play a role, with the 
most vital one being exposure, measured in vehicle kilometres travelled on bicycle (Yannis et al., 2005), as 
more time spend in traffic causes more interactions with e.g. cars and thereby a higher risk of collision. Most 
vehicular collisions resulting in injuries and fatalities of cyclists has shown to actually not being caused by 
cyclists themselves, but by actions of motor vehicle drivers (Li et al., 2022). Numbers from the European 
Commission & Directorate-General for Mobility Transport (2021) shows that road traffic fatalities of cyclists 
in all of EU are in 72 % of the cases caused by collision with heavy vehicles and in 5 % off the times in 
collision with other VRUs, while the last 23 % are caused by solo crashes. The corresponding numbers, when 
including only urban areas of EU, are 71 %, 5 % and 23 %, respectively. When it comes to the cause for 
cyclists being involved in solo crashes, several different factors could apply. Some of the most known causes 
to solo accidents include poor infrastructure (ITF, 2013), distractions (Useche et al, 2018a), and cycling 
under the influence of alcohol (Li et al., 1996). Recent research has also found behavioural factors, such as 
traffic violations and errors, to have a significant role in accident rates (Useche et al., 2021). 
1.1. Behavioural Questionnaire Paradigm 
To investigate behaviour of road users self-reported questionnaires are often used, as they have been 
found to be a powerful tool in explaining behavioural patterns, and moreover to have predictive value in 
explaining engagement in various actions and even crash rates. This present study makes use of the Cycling 
Behaviour Questionnaire (CBQ) and Walking Behaviour Questionnaire (WBQ) to investigate the behaviour 
of Vulnerable Road Users (VRUs). 
The CBQ is a part of the Behavioural Questionnaire (BQ) paradigm. The first version of a questionnaire 
within this paradigm was the Driver Behaviour Questionnaire (DBQ; Reason et al., 1990), which were used 
to investigate risky driving behaviours, using questions that on one hand addresses unintended behaviours 
contributing to an increase in the risk of suffering traffic crashes, termed Errors (E), while on the other hand 
addressing conscious infringements of the traffic rules or norms also increasing the probability of suffering 
accidents. These deliberate actions are referred to as Violations (V; Reason et al., 1990). An additional 
subscale was later added to include positive road behaviours (Özkan and Lajunen, 2005). Contrary to the 
two aberrant behavioural subscales, errors and violations, the Positive Behaviours (PB) subscale contributes 
to a decrease in the likelihood of accidents (Özkan and Lajunen, 2005). It should be noted that, the subscale 
does not represent an absence of risky or transgressive behaviours, but rather a presence of proactive 
behaviours (Li et al., 2021). The three-dimensional structure of the DBQ was later adopted and used as the 
foundation for more recently developed questionnaires within the BQ paradigm, such as the Walking 
Behaviour Questionnaire (WBQ; Useche et al., 2020) and the Cycling Behaviour Questionnaire (CBQ; Useche 
et al., 2018b).  
The first instrument that was developed to investigate the riding behaviour of cyclists was the Bicycle 
Rider Behaviour Questionnaire (BRBQ; Hezaveh, 2018). The BRBQ was build based on the DBQ, as well as 
==PAGE:8==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
4 
the Motorcycle Rider Behaviour Questionnaire (MRBQ; Elliott et al., 2007) and uses a 34-item questionnaire, 
with five dimensions termed: Stunts and Distractions, Traffic Violations, Notice Failures, Control Errors, and 
Signalling Violations (Hezaveh, 2018). This was soon followed by others such as Useche et al. (2018b) with 
the first version of the CBQ consisting of 44 items divided into the same three-factor structure as the DBQ, 
namely using the Errors, Violations, and Positive Behaviours subscales. A shorter 29-item version of this 
questionnaire has later been developed and validated in several countries (Useche et al., 2022). 
The Walking Behaviour Questionnaire (WBQ) is another self-reported questionnaire within the BQ 
Paradigm. Several different versions of a walking/pedestrian behaviour scale have been developed parallel 
to each other since the late ‘90s with the Pedestrian Behaviour Questionnaire (PBQ; Diaz, 1997) being the 
pioneer. This questionnaire was also based on a version of the Driver Behaviour Questionnaire (DBQ; Parker 
et al., 1992). Since this first questionnaire on walking behaviour, numerous researchers have given their 
take on a questionnaire accessing pedestrian behaviour including the Pedestrian Behaviour Scale (PBS; 
Granié et al., 2013) and the Adolescent Road User Behaviour Questionnaire (ARBQ; Sullman et al., 2012). 
Useche et al. (2020b) developed the version being used in this study by using the same three-factor 
structure as seen in the often used and well-validated Driving Behaviour Questionnaire (DBQ; Özkan and 
Lajunen, 2005) and Cycling Behaviour Questionnaire (CBQ; Useche et al., 2018b), with two factors 
representing risky behaviours and one factor representing protective behaviours. Even though the same 
structure is used for the WBQ the questions used are unlike the questions from other scales of the 
Behavioural Questionnaire paradigm, due to walking tasks differing from other means of transportation, as 
pedestrians do not have to focus on manoeuvring a vehicle through traffic.  
1.2. Study Setting 
This study uses data gathered as part of the Bike-Barometer project of 2021-2022 (INTRAS, 2023), a 
project including 19 countries, with the continents Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, North America, and South 
America being represented (Useche et al., 2022). The aim of the project is to investigate emerging factors 
and phenomena that are putting the safety and welfare of urban cyclists at risk. Specifically for this study 
the countries Denmark and Germany are investigated.  
Denmark and Germany are both countries with a well-established cycling culture and are widely 
recognized as being some of the most bicycle friendly countries in the world. According to the 
Copenhagenize Index, which provides a comprehensive and holistic ranking of bicycle-friendly cities around 
the world, the Danish capital city Copenhagen is the most bicycle friendly city in the world, while Germany 
has three cities on the top 20 list, namely Bremen, Berlin, and Hamburg (Copenhagenizeindex.eu, 2023). 
According to numbers from the European Cyclists’ Federation (2021) cycling’s modal share at the national 
level is 16 % in Denmark and 11 % in Germany. Furthermore, 12 % of Danes and 15 % of Germans are 
reporting that they use the bicycle as their main mode of transportation (European Commission, 
Directorate-General for Mobility and Transport, 2020). Especially Denmark is a country often being 
presented as a role model in various studies and cycling promoting campaigns. Denmark has e.g. been used 
as a role model for a bike promoting program in Kielce in central Poland (Hartman, 2008), that had the goal 
of promoting cycling by implementing good cycling practices. In a recent study it was found that Danes are 
on average cycling 1.6 kilometres each day and if citizens of all countries of the world did the same, it would 
save the world 414m tons of CO2 each year (Chen et al., 2022), again using Denmark as a positive example.  
Even tough Denmark and Germany are considered as being bicycle-friendly countries, cyclists are still a 
vulnerable group of road users, and accidents leading to injuries and fatalities do occur. The 2021 annual 
statistical report on road safety in the EU found that 23 pedestrian fatalities and 27 bicycle fatalities 
occurred in Denmark, and 379 pedestrian fatalities and 426 bicycle fatalities in occurred in Germany in 
2020 (European Commission, 2022). It is therefore crucial to investigate emerging factors affecting crash 
rates in Denmark and Germany, to get an understanding of what works and what does not, to make sure 
other countries adopt the right cycling traditions and solutions.  
==PAGE:9==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
5 
1.3. Purpose of the Study 
The objective of this study is, first, to investigate differences and similarities in cycling habits and 
behaviours, between Danish and German cyclists. Secondly, it aims to explore which demographic, 
psychological, and cycling-related factors are contributing to bringing the safety of cyclists at risk. 
Ultimately to access how these factors relate to accident rates. 
Besides the main objective also several sub-goals were set. These include an investigation of the validity 
of the CBQ and WBQ in a Danish and German context, an investigation of the association between cycling 
and walking behaviour, a discussion of benefits and disadvantages associated to cycling, and lastly, a 
discussion of measures to prevent cycling accidents. 
2. Methods and Data 
2.1. Study Design and Procedure 
Data collection for this study was conducted as part of the Bike-Barometer project, and was done through 
an electronic survey, using a questionnaire translated to each country’s official language, namely Danish and 
German. The translation was done by the research staff of each country using a convenience translation and 
back-translation method. The staff members were in both Denmark and Germany attached to universities 
in the countries concerned and were therefore familiar with relevant subject-specific terminology. For some 
of the scales, translation was not necessary as they were previously translated as a part of other studies.  
The German questionnaire were created using Google’s data collection method called Google Forms 
(https://www.google.com/intl/en-GB/forms/about/). The survey was available from January 2021 till 
September 2021. The German questionnaire were distributed amongst students at two German universities, 
Technishe Universität Berlin (TU Berlin) and Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena (FSU Jena), as well as in the 
German newsletter Pegasus Network (https://pegasus-netzwerk.de), a newsletter on mobility and 
transport research.  
The 
Danish 
questionnaire 
was 
created 
using 
the 
SurveyXact 
online 
survey 
tool 
(https://www.surveyxact.com). The reason for the difference in data collection platform used, were due to 
GDPR rules at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), not allowing the use of Google Forms. The Danish 
questionnaire 
were 
shared 
amongst 
members 
of 
the 
Danish 
Cyclists' 
Federation 
(https://www.cyklistforbundet.dk), various cycling-related Facebook-groups, and amongst students at 
Danish Universities, specifically DTU and Aalborg University (AAU). The data collection took place from May 
2021 till September 2021, as part of Bike-Barometer, and then again from October 2022 till November 2022, 
in connection with this specific study, as a need for a basis of data more comparable to the German data, 
was present. The data collection in both countries, took place during periods affected by covid-19-
restrictions in both Denmark and Germany. The respondents were, however, asked to answer the questions 
referring to “normal” situations of mobility, meaning situations not affected by any covid-19-restrictions. 
The respondents were required to be living in Denmark or Germany to participate in the study and the 
city of residence were required to be denounced when filling out the survey. The study includes both people 
who use the bicycle often, as well as people using the bicycle rarely. There is no distinction made between 
using an electric bicycle or a regular bicycle when performing the trips. The time consumption to complete 
the survey were estimated to be 20-30 minutes. Respondents were informed that participation was 
voluntary, anonymous and that data is to be used only for research purposes. Lastly, it should be mentioned 
that the participants were offered no economic incentives to be part of the study. The students at the two 
German universities did, however, receive half an hour worth of so-called study hours, which it is mandatory 
to collect a certain amount of, while doing a bachelor’s or master’s degree at one of the two institutions. 
==PAGE:10==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
6 
2.2. Sample 
The study composes a total of n = 1,059 cyclists (ranging from people that rarely used the bicycle to 
people that used the bicycle often) from Denmark and Germany, with an age ranging from 15 to 86 years 
old, with a mean age of M = 38.32 (SD = 15.64) years. The sample consists of 399 male (37.7 %) and 649 
female (61.3 %) participants. The remaining 11 participants (1.0 %) identified themselves as being “other” 
gender than male or female.  
Denmark: A total of 617 Danish cyclists answered the questionnaire (males n = 265, 42.9 %; females n = 
344, 55.8 %; others n = 8, 1.3 %). The mean age was M = 45.54 (SD = 15.04) years old, with ages ranging 
from 15 to 86 years old. On average the Danish cyclists were using the bicycle for 6.00 hours per week (SD 
= 6.23). When it comes to accidents, 16.6 % of the Danes reported that they experienced exactly one accident 
while biking during the past 5 years, while 7.2 % reported that they experienced two or more accidents 
while riding a bike during the past 5 years. Regarding accidents during walking only 2.1 % of the Danes 
experienced an accident in the past 5 years. 
Germany: A total of 442 German cyclists answered the questionnaire (males n = 134, 30.3 %; females n = 
305, 69.0 %; others n = 3, 0.7 %). The mean age was M = 28.3 (SD = 9.83) years old, with ages ranging from 
18 to 84 years old. On average the German cyclists were using the bicycle for 4.14 hours per week (SD = 
3.90). When it comes to accidents, 22.9 % of the Germans reported that they experienced exactly one 
accident while biking during the past 5 years, while 12.7 % reported that they experienced two or more 
accidents while riding a bike during the past 5 years. Regarding accidents during walking only 3.9 % of the 
Germans experienced an accident in the past 5 years.  
Table 1 presents the gender and age distribution of the two study samples (i.e. the Danish and German 
sample), and of the country-level population of Denmark and Germany. The German sample had a much 
higher share of females and a lower mean age than Germany has on country-level. The Danish sample was 
more representative, but also consisted of more females than the country-level and the mean age was 
slightly higher.  
2.3. Study Variables and Description of the Questionnaire 
This self-reported behavioural questionnaire is very extensive and consist of nine sections that all 
together covers demographics, cycling habits, walking and cycling behaviour, risk perception, distractions, 
several personal and mental health indicators, and accident experience. 
2.3.1. 
Demographics and Individual Information 
First of the questionnaire addressed demographic and individual information on the participants. 
 
Table 1 
Study sample and country-level population demographics.  
 
==PAGE:11==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
7 
This includes variables like age, gender, and education, as well as a few questions on cycling habits, such as 
trip purpose, trip length and trip frequency. Additionally, this section includes questions on accidents 
suffered while riding a bicycle and while walking during the past 5 years. 
2.3.2. 
Cycling Behavioural Questionnaire 
To access the behaviour of cyclists the very capable and well-validated Cycling Behaviour Questionnaire 
(CBQ; Useche et al., 2018b) was used. This study used the 29-item version of the CBQ measuring the same 
three behavioural aspects as the larger 44-item version. The subscale Errors (E) includes 15 items (example 
item: Failing to notice the presence of pedestrians crossing when turning), Violations (V) includes 8 items 
(example item: Crossing what appears to be a clear crossing, even if the traffic light is red) and Positive 
Behaviours (PB) has 6 items (example item: I usually keep a safe distance from other cyclists or vehicles).  
All items included in the scale are measured using a 5-level Likert scale (0 = never or almost never; 1 = 
rarely; 2 = sometimes; 3 = frequently; 4 = always or almost always) based on frequency. Even though this 
study has a large focus on cycling behaviour where the CBQ plays an essential role, it is important to note, 
that the CBQ is integrated into a more substantial questionnaire, which composes 8 complementary scales 
in order to assess the convergent validity of the scale. 
2.3.3. 
Risk Perception and Regulation Scale 
The questionnaire makes use of the Risk Perception and Regulation Scale (RPRS; Useche et al., 2018c), a 
Likert scale of 12 items, that are used to access the bicycle riders perceived risk and general knowledge of 
traffic regulations. The proposed structure includes the two-factors Rule Knowledge (example item: I easily 
identify areas prohibited to traffic or bicycle parking) and Risk Perception (example item: I am aware of the 
risks involved in using headphones and mobile phones while I ride a bicycle), using a scale from 0 = totally 
disagree to 4 = totally agree, to indicate the level of agreement with the statements presented. 
2.3.4. 
Cycling Distraction Scale 
The next section of the questionnaire investigates sources of distractions for cyclist, by using the Cycling 
Distraction Scale (CDS; Useche et al., 2018c). A distraction is in this study defined as an element of 
disturbance that causes a shift of attention, from focusing on tasks critical to safe bicycle riding, to another 
marginal activity (Useche et al., 2021). Contrary to all other scales used in the questionnaire, the CDS does 
not use a Likert scale, but a binary scale. It asks the dichotomous question: Normally, do these factors distract 
you and/or impair your cycling performance during your bike trips? followed by eight potential elements of 
distraction, with two answer choices, yes and no.  
2.3.5. 
Walking Behavioural Questionnaire 
The questionnaire is accessing pedestrian behaviour by using an additional branch of the Behavioural 
Questionnaire (BQ) paradigm, namely the Walking Behaviour Questionnaire (WBQ; Useche et al., 2020b). 
The WBQ uses a 5-level frequency Likert scale ranging from never or almost never (0) to always or almost 
always (4), composed of 30 items. The items are distributed in three subscales: Errors (E; 10 items; example 
item: Bumping into an object because you were distracted), Violations (V; 16 items; example item: Walking 
on the bike lane, even for a short time), and Positive Behaviours (PB; 4 items; example item: Looking at both 
sides of the road before crossing, even if you take precedence).  
==PAGE:12==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
8 
2.3.6. 
Cycling Commuting Stress Scale 
The questionnaire is using a Cycling Commuting Stress Scale (CCSS; Useche et al., 2023), which uses 21 
questions related to items that could all potentially influence an individual’s willingness to use the bicycle 
as a mean of transportation. The questionnaire is recently developed and has only been used in a single 
former study, why the structure of the questionnaire is still debatable. Useche et al. (2023) does however 
propose a 4-level structure including the subscales inefficiency and inconvenience (7 items; example item: 
The daily time I spend on this transport mode prevents me from spending more time with my family and/or 
loved ones), unsafety and insecurity (5 items; example item: I frequently witness criminal acts, harassment or 
aggression), congestion and crowding (4 items; example item: Traffic lights in my city do not help traffic move, 
and I frequently find myself waiting for a long time), and lastly physical strain (5 items; example item: After 
my trip somewhere, I feel physically exhausted). The questionnaire uses the standard 0-4 Likert scale ranging 
from totally disagree (0) to totally agree (4).  
2.3.7. 
Anger Traits, Experiences, and Expressions 
The questionnaire deals with anger using a few subscales assessing the respondents anger traits, 
experiences, and expressions. The first one is the Cycling Anger Scale (CAS; Oehl et al., 2019), which is used 
to assess the level of anger the respondent would have felt in a number of hypothetical situations. Common 
for all the situations is that they include an interaction with either a police officer or another road user 
(pedestrian, cyclist, or car driver). An example item from this scale is: A policeman fined you for riding your 
bike with no lights. The level of anger is measured trough a Likert-type scale ranging from absolutely none 
(0) to really a lot (4). The scale is built from 14 of the common cyclist anger expressions presented by 
Huemer, Oehl, and Brandenburg (2018), with the questions having the same style of formulation as those 
from the Driving Anger Scale (DAS; Deffenbacher et al., 1994). The first three situations concern being fined 
by a police officer, the three next concerns being involved in a risky situation with another cyclist, four 
situations concern being exposed to a risky situation by a car, and the last four concerns interactions with 
pedestrians.  
Besides CAS, also the Cyclist Anger Expression Inventory (CAX; Møller & Haustein, 2017) is used to 
evaluate the respondent’s level of anger. CAX presents the survey participants with 13 different situations 
of expressing anger towards other road users. The items included are all Likert-type items scored on a 5-
level scale ranging from never (0) to always (4). Where CAS includes hypothetical situations, all questions 
of CAX relates to actual situations. Nine of the situations from CAX are negatively worded (example item: I 
have insulted another road user out loud) and the remaining four are positively worded (example item: I 
have said to myself to ignore what was happening).  
The last part of the section addressing anger, introduces 10 new items that can be used to create a 
personal anger profile. It uses a 5-level Likert-type scale ranging from never at all (0) to really a lot (4), with 
an example item being I get carried away easily.  
2.3.8. 
Personality Traits 
The questionnaire uses a short 15-item Big Five Inventory (BFI–S; Lang et al., 2011) of personality 
dimensions to make personality characterizations of the respondents. The short version of the BFI used in 
this study, has three statements from each of five historically used dimensions, that has widely been 
labelled: neuroticism (N; example item: I see myself as someone who worries a lot), extraversion (E; example 
item: I see myself as someone who is talkative), openness to experience (O; example item: I see myself as 
someone who has an active imagination), agreeableness (A; example item: I see myself as someone who has a 
forgiving nature), and conscientiousness (C; example item: I see myself as someone who tends to be lazy), since 
this structure was first introduced in the ‘90s (Costa & McCrae, 1995). All of the five dimensions include 
both statements that are positively worded and negatively worded. To measure the respondents’ level of 
==PAGE:13==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
9 
agreement to each of the statements, a 7-level Likert-scale ranging from strongly disagree (0) to strongly 
agree (6) is used.  
2.3.9. 
Psychological Distress 
The last part of the questionnaire makes use of Goldberg’s General Health Questionnaire (GHQ; Goldberg 
et al., 1997) to access psychological distress of the participants of the study. The GHQ was first introduced 
by Goldberg in 1969 in a 60-item version (Goldberg and Blackwell, 1970), but has later been used in shorter 
version including e.g. the GHQ-30, GHQ-28, GHQ-20, and GHQ-12 (Montazeri et al., 2003), with the GHQ-12 
being the one used in this study. The scale includes 12 questions that asks the respondent to answer how 
often certain feelings and situations has been experienced, during the last month before filling in the 
questionnaire. An example item from the GHQ-12 is: Been losing the confidence in yourself. The scale used is 
a 4-level Likert-type scale ranging from 0 = Never (at all) to 4 = Very often. The answers from the GHQ-12 
are used to calculate an indicator for psychological distress. 
2.4. Data Processing 
2.4.1. 
Structural Analysis 
Following the descriptive analysis presenting the demographic characteristics of the Danish and German 
sample, the factorial structure of the scales included in the survey was investigated. Confirmatory Factor 
Analysis (CFA) with successive fit steps (forward), was used to test the Cycling Behaviour Questionnaire 
(CBQ) and the Walking Behaviour Questionnaire (WBQ), since it has several advantages e.g. handling 
missing data and categorical or non-normally distributed variables (Finney and DiStefano, 2013). The use 
of a CFA approach to validate the hypothesized structure of the CBQ and WBQ were further chosen due to 
several previous studies conducted in various countries, already having confirmed the proposed 3-factor 
structure of the CBQ (Useche et al., 2022) and WBQ (Usesche et al., 2020a). As the two behavioural 
questionnaires uses a Likert scale i.e. ordinal data and since the assumption of multivariate normal 
distribution of variables were not met, the Weighted Least Square Mean and Variance adjusted (WLSMV) 
estimator were used (Brown, 2015). The cut-off criteria for accepting factor loadings were set to λ = 0.3 
(Hair et al., 2010). 
The structure of the remaining scales included in the study were tested through Exploratory Factor 
Analysis (EFA), since neither of the scales have previously been investigated and validated in such a degree 
that an underlying factorial structure has been confirmed. The EFA was carried out using the extraction 
method Principal Axis Factoring (PFA) with Promax oblique rotation, as the data was not normally 
distributed (Brown, 2015). The number of factors to include were identified using a combination of several 
visual and analytical tools, including Kaiser’s Eigenvalue, Cattel’s Scree Test, Parallel Analysis, Very Simple 
Structure (VSS), and Velicer’s Minimum Average Partial (MAP), as descried in expert literature (Courtney, 
2013). Besides these tools also the conceptual connection between items were kept in mind. To measure 
how suited the data were for undergoing a Factor Analysis Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) Measure of Sampling 
Adequacy (MSA), were values between 0.6 and 1 would be interpreted as being mediocre to marvellous, 
indicating that data is suitable for analysis (Kaiser & Rice, 1974).  
2.4.2. 
Goodness-of-Fit Criteria 
To evaluate the model fit, indices from the three different fit classes Absolute Fit, Parsimony Correction 
and Comparative fit, were used as suggested by Brown (2015). To evaluate the model on the absolute level 
2 was used and presented together with the degrees of freedom (df), allowing for the calculation of the 
minimum discrepancy ratio between 2/df (CMIN/df). Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA) 
==PAGE:14==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
10 
were used to evaluate the fit adjusting for model parsimony, while the Comparative fit index (or incremental 
fit index) used was the Tucker-Lexis Index (TLI). Marsh et al. (2004) proposes that a TLI above 0.90 and a 
RMSEA below 0.08 would suggest a satisfactory model.  
Other literature suggests different approaches to evaluating model fit, such as Hu and Bentler (1999), 
using RMSEA and SRMR in a two-index strategy, while some sources suggest the use of even more indices 
(Marsh et al., 2004). Based on this a variety of estimators and indices from the different fit classes are further 
presented in tabular format. 
2.4.3. 
Reliability and Internal Consistency 
The reliability (or internal consistency) of the latent variables were assessed trough Cronbach’s alphas 
(), a scale ranging from 0 to 1, where values above 0.60 are considered acceptable (DeVellis, 2012). Even 
though a value closer to 1 implies good reliability, the value can also be too high, as values above .90 could 
indicate multicollinearity (DeVellis, 2012). This may suggest that some items of the scale should be 
removed, as the items are measuring the exact same thing only disguised behind different questions or 
situations, and are therefore redundant (Tavakol & Dennick, 2011). Since the use of Cronbach’s alpha 
coefficients as the only indicator of scale reliability has been criticized (Morera & Stokes, 2016), the 
Composite Reliability Index (CRI) is used as a supplementary indicator. Similarly to Cronbach’s alpha 
coefficients, the CRI ranges from 0 to 1, with a high value indicating high internal consistency.  
2.4.4. 
Correlational Analysis 
Due to the comprehensive questionnaire and the combination of scales, that has not previously been 
included in the same studies, the data set is well-suited for exploratory purposes. Therefore a bivariate 
correlational analysis, with both the full sample and each country’s sample separately, were carried out 
using Spearman’s Rho (). The use of this particular measure of association were chosen, since it does not 
require a linear relationship between variables, as it is the case for e.g. Pearson correlation (Liu et al., 2016). 
It is thus ideal to use when investigating the potential monotonic relationship between the ordinal variables 
included in the data set. Spearman’s  ranges from -1 to 1 indicating a perfect negative and a perfect positive 
correlation, respectively.  
2.4.5. 
Comparative Analysis 
As one objective of this study is to compare cycling habits and behaviours between Danes and Germans, 
country-based one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) tests were conducted to compare mean scores 
between the two population groups for each of the included study variables. ANOVA compares the amount 
of variation between groups with the amount of variation within groups, making it very suitable to compare 
demographic, cycling related, behavioural, and psychological factors between Danish and German cyclists. 
The comparative tests were performed using a cut-off criterion of p < .05, p < .01, and p < .001.  
2.4.6. 
Predictive Models 
To access the second objective of the study, namely a benchmarking of factors contributing to bringing 
the safety of cyclists at risk, Multi-group Structural Equation Modelling (MGSEM) were used.  
The use of MGSEM was chosen since it has been shown to be a robust and powerful tool for predictive 
modelling, even outperforming some of the more sophisticated and historically used statistical techniques, 
such as Multiple Regression (MR; de Rooij et al., 2023; Nusair & Hua, 2010). One of the reasons for Structural 
Equation Modelling (SEM) being such a powerful tool, is the ability to investigate mediational processes 
==PAGE:15==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
11 
(Gunzler et al., 2013). It provides a framework were intermediate variables (mediators) help explain how 
exogenous (independent) variables affect an endogenous (dependent) variable. 
The MGSEM is a Structural Equation Model (SEM), similarly to CFA and has the same assumptions. Since 
similar data is used in the MGSEM and the CFA, the same estimator is used, while the indicines to evaluate 
model fit are also the same (see 2.4.1 and 2.4.2 for more information on this). 
All analyses of the study were conducted using RStudio (version 4.2.1; ©Posit Software, PBC formerly 
RStudio, PBC; https://posit.co) and the Lavaan package.  
3. Results 
3.1. Structural Analysis 
3.1.1. 
Cycling Behaviour Questionnaire 
All items of the Cycling Behaviour Questionnaire are listed in Table 3, separated in a three-factor 
structure as suggested by Useche et al. (2018b), with response means and standard deviations for each of 
the items shown for both countries. For the items in the Violations and Errors factors it applies that a higher 
number indicates a higher inclination to engage in risky behaviours while cycling. The opposite applies for 
the Positive Behaviour factor where a higher number indicates a higher tendency to have positive behaviour 
while cycling. No items were removed as all scores were found adequate (  > 0.3). The table further shows 
the Cronbach’s alpha values for each of the three factors, with all values suggesting an acceptable internal 
consistency i.e. all values above 0.6. The Confirmatory Factor Analysis of the suggested CBQ structure 
indicated an acceptable model fit for both samples. Denmark: 2 = 962.592 with df = 374, RMSEA = 0.051, 
and TLI = 0.966. Germany: 2 = 1111.366 with df = 374, RMSEA = 0.067, and TLI = 0.935. As such, the 
proposed three-factor structure were found appropriate for the data. Additional indices are found in Table 
for the CBQ and the following constructs. Factor loadings and correlations are presented in Figure for the 
Danish sample and in Figure 2 for the German sample. 
3.1.2. 
Walking Behaviour Questionnaire 
With regards to the items of the walking Violations and Errors factors it applies that a higher number 
indicates a higher inclination to engage in risky behaviours while walking. The opposite applies for the 
Positive Behaviour factor where a higher number indicates a higher tendency to have positive behaviour 
while walking. It was found that the Danish sample had factor loadings that were all > 0.3 indicating 
adequate weights for all factors and all Cronbach’s alpha values were above 0.6 indicating reliable factors. 
It was however found for the German sample that two items from the Positive Behaviour scale had factor 
loadings below 0.3, while the Positive Behaviour scale also had an alpha of 0.593, which is considered 
insufficient (<0.6). The Violations and Errors scales both had alphas above 0.6. The Confirmatory Factor 
Analysis of the suggested WBQ structure indicated an unacceptable model fit for both the Danish and the 
German sample. 
 
Table 2 
Fit indices of the structural models and goodness-of-fit.  
 
==PAGE:16==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
12 
 
 
Denmark: 2 = 2980.705 with df = 402, RMSEA = 0.103, and TLI = 0.882. Germany: 2 = 2430.936 with df = 
402, RMSEA = 0.107, and TLI = 0.899. Thus, the original structure of the WBQ were found inappropriate for  
The samples in this study. Due to the CFA showing poor model fit, the WBQ were subject to an Exploratory 
Factor Analysis using the same approach as described in Section 2.4.1 for the remaining scales. 
The Danish sample including 609 observations were used to do the EFA. After using several approaches 
of determining the number of factors, including e.g. inspection of the Scree Plot and Kaiser’s Criterion, it was 
found that using a three-factor structure would be appropriate. The EFA resulted in the removal of a total 
of four items, three from the original Violations scale (items WBQ7, WBQ8 and WBQ15), and one from the 
Positive Behaviours Scale (item WBQ27), due to low factor loadings (i.e. < 0.3). This 26-item three-factor 
solution, that resulted from the EFA were then subjected to a CFA using the German sample. It was found 
through the CFA, that item WBQ29 had a poor loading and was therefore removed. Two items were further 
removed (items WBQ28 and WBQ30), as they were found conceptually inappropriate after the removal of 
items 87 and 89. The CFA resulted in a 23-item three-factor scale, separated in the factors: Violations, Errors, 
and Risky Road Crossing, as shown in Figure. All factor loading were > 0.3, all alphas were > 0.6 and the fit 
indices were: 2 = 812.576 with df = 227, RMSEA = 0.077, and TLI = 0.961. The items of the Walking 
Behaviour Questionnaire are presented in Table 4, including response means, standard deviations, and 
Cronbach’s alpha values. Seven items were removed from the WBQ, which is indicated in the table. The 
items are separated into the three factors found appropriate through factor analysis. Factor loadings and 
correlations are presented in Figure 3for the Danish sample and in Figure 4 for the German sample. 
 
Figure 1: Standardized parameter estimates and factor correlations of CBQ (Denmark). 
==PAGE:17==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
13 
 
Figure 2: Standardized parameter estimates and factor correlations of CBQ (Germany). 
3.1.3. 
Anger Questionnaires 
An EFA was also conducted using all 37-items from the questionnaire parts regarding anger, namely the 
Cycling Anger Scale, Cycling Anger Expression Inventory, and the new scale introduced to build a personal 
anger profile. The EFA was conducted using the Danish sample. By inspecting the various measures used to 
decide on the number of factors, it was found that a five-factor structure would be appropriate. The EFA 
resulted in the removal of a single item (94_3; I am impulsive), due to a factor loading below 0.300. The 
removal of this item was also justified by the fact that it was found conceptually irrelevant, as all other items 
of the scale are negatively loaded, while being impulsive is not unanimously being perceived as being either 
a positive or negative quality. Cronbach’s alpha coefficients showed good internal consistency for all five 
sub-factors. The 36-item five-factor structure were therefore subjected to a CFA using the German sample. 
The CFA showed adequate factor loadings (all above 0.300) and the majority of the fit indices indicated an 
acceptable model. However, it was found that RMSEA = 0.081, which is above the upper limit (0.080) set for 
this indicator and the Cronbach’s alpha value for one of the factors was 0.909, which could be an indication 
of multicollinearity. Based on this item 93_12 (A pedestrian is blocking the bike lane), was removed as it had 
high correlation with item 93_14(A pedestrian is clearly and intentionally blocking the bike lane), while the 
two items also had a very similar wording and could therefore likely be measuring the same thing. The CFA 
resulted in a 35-item solution with the five factors: Interactions with Police, Interactions with Other Road 
Users, Personal Anger Traits, Anger Expressions, and Positive Thinking. All factor loadings were above 0.300 
and Cronbach’s alphas showed good reliability with all values above 0.600. The model fit indices were: 2 = 
==PAGE:18==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
14 
1915.870 with df = 550, RMSEA = 0.075, and TLI = 0.970. Overall it was found that the 35-item five-factor 
structure were appropriate for the data. 
 
Table 3 
CBQ items with standardized factor loadings, standard deviations, and factor reliability. 
 
==PAGE:19==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
15 
Table 4 
WBQ items with standardized factor loadings, standard deviations, and factor reliability. 
 
==PAGE:20==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
16 
 
Figure 3: Standardized parameter estimates and factor correlations of WBQ (Denmark). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Standardized parameter estimates and factor correlations of WBQ (Germany). 
==PAGE:21==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
17 
3.1.4. 
Other Scales and Reverse Coding of Items 
No theoretically appropriate factorial structure could be confirmed for the Risk Perception and 
Regulation Scale, and the Cycling Commuting Stress Scale, why it is not included in the further analyses. 
The last task of the structural analysis was to gather items in the scales found best fitting through the EFA 
and CFA. Before doing so, reverse coding of some items had to be done to make sure the direction of all 
items was the same. Reverse coding was performed for all positively worded items of the CBQ, WBQ, CAS, 
CAX, BFI-15, and GHQ-12.  
3.2. Correlational Analysis 
To evaluate the relationship between pairs of variables included in the study and the significance of these 
relationships, Spearman rho correlations and the related p-values were calculated. The results of the 
correlational analysis are shown in Table 5 for the full sample (n = 1048) and for both sub-samples 
separately (Denmark: n = 609; Germany: n = 439). The analysis revealed the following relationships 
between variables that were existing within all three sub-samples: first of all, a significant [+] relationship 
was observed between age and cycling intensity (hours/week). A significant [+] relationship was found 
between hourly cycling intensity and risky cycling behaviours (violations and errors), and between hourly 
cycling intensity and anger expressions. Ergo, the more time spend cycling, the higher tendency to perform 
risky cycling behaviours and express your anger towards other road users. It was also found that cycling 
intensity were significantly [+] related to the number of accidents suffered while cycling. A significant [+] 
correlation was observed internally between all three sub-scales of the CBQ and the WBQ. It should be noted 
that the positive behaviours scale of the CBQ was reverse coded, resulting in a positive correlation between 
risky behaviours and positive behaviours indicating, that an increased engagement in risky behaviours is 
associated to fewer positive behaviours being performed. The investigation further revealed a significant 
[+] relationship across all sub-scales of the CBQ and all sub-scales of the WBQ. A significant [-] correlation 
was sees between age and police interactions, indicating that older people feel less angry for stopped and 
fined by a police officer. On the other hand was a significant [+] relationship found between age and anger 
expressions, indicating that older people are expressing the anger towards other road users more 
frequently that young people. Lastly, it was found that walking accidents and cycling accidents were 
significantly [+] correlated. 
A country-based correlational analysis revealed some additional interesting relationships: within the 
German sample a significant [-] correlation was found between cycling intensity and personality traits and 
between cycling intensity and psychological distress, indicating that more cycling is related to a better 
mental health and a more positive personality trait profile. The analysis of the Danish sample did not show 
such an association. The analysis of the German sample also revealed a significant [-] association between 
cycling intensity and distractions, while the analysis of the Danish sample revealed a significant [-] 
association between age and distraction.  
3.3. Comparative Analysis 
First off, a chi-square test of independence was performed to test if the proportion of males and females 
are the same for both country samples. Before the analysis all respondents who reported their gender to be 
neither male nor female, were removed from the data set as they were found irrelevant for the analysis. The 
test found that there was a significant gender difference between the two country samples (2 = 18.258; p = 
<0.001). Afterwards, ANOVA tests were performed for the remaining variables to investigate differences 
between the Danish and German sample. The results of the ANOVA tests are presented in Table 6 alongside 
descriptive statistics and 95 % confidence intervals. It was found that the Danish sample had a significantly 
higher mean age than the German sample (M = 45.64 for Danes and M = 28.23 for Germans), and that the 
 
==PAGE:22==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
18 
Table 5 
Bivariate correlations between study variables for the full sample and sub-samples separately. 
 
Danes on average spend significantly more time cycling than Germans (1.8 hours more per week). The 
German participants tends to perform adverse actions more often than the Danish participants, both while 
cycling and walking. The Germans perform a significantly higher average number of cycling violations and 
errors, while they also perform a significantly lower average number of positive behaviours while cycling. 
When walking the Germans show a significantly higher mean score of violations, errors, and risky road 
crossing behaviours. Furthermore are the Germans participants on average distracted by more factors 
impairing the cycling performance (M = 2.79 for Danes and M = 4.48 for Germans). With regards to anger 
the results are more diverse. It was found that the German sample would feel a significantly higher level of 
anger if they were to be fined by the police, while the Danes show a significantly higher tendency to express 
their anger towards other road users. The Germans have a significantly higher mean score on the personal 
anger trait scale, while they also tend to have a less forgiving nature i.e. fewer positive/forgiving thoughts. 
Lastly, the analysis found that the Danes show a significantly better mental health than the Germans, i.e. 
less psychological distress. There were found no significant difference in mean score of cycling accidents 
nor walking accidents between the two country samples.  
==PAGE:23==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
19 
Table 6 
Descriptive statistics and mean comparisons (one-way ANOVA) between Danish and German cyclists. 
 
3.4. Predictive Analysis 
To investigate the CBQ’s ability to “predict” who might get into an accident while cycling, Multi Group 
Structural Equation Modelling (MGSEM) is used. The model is build based on theoretical assumptions and 
findings from previous studies as described in previous sections, as well as the results of the correlational 
analysis. MGSEM allows for a more detailed investigation of differences and similarities between groups, 
than an individual investigation of each group would. The model compares two groups of cyclists, namely 
Group 1: Danish Cyclists and Group 2: German Cyclists, with both samples having an acceptable sample size.  
The theoretically proposed MGSEM showed to have optimal model fit, with 2 = 14.971 with df = 10, 
RMSEA = 0.031, and TLI = 0.934. The model is presented in tabular format in Table 7 and Table 8, and 
graphically in Figure 5 and Figure 6. 
3.4.1. 
Danish Cyclists 
The analysis found 19 direct effects to be significant for the Danish sample. Age positively predicts Errors. 
Cycling Intensity positively predicted Violations, Errors, and Accidents. Texting or Phoning while cycling 
positively predicted Violations, Errors, Positive Behaviours (reverse scored), and Distractions. Helmet Use 
positively predicted Errors and negatively predicted Positive Behaviours (reverse scored). Personality 
==PAGE:24==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
20 
Traits positively predicted Errors and Distractions. Psychological Distress positively predicted Errors, 
Positive Behaviours, and Distractions. With regards to the behavioural measures (Violations, Errors, and 
Positive Behaviours), Errors positively predicted Accidents, while the other two did not significantly predict 
accidents.  
When it comes to indirect effects, Errors showed to have full mediation between six variables. The six 
variables are Age, Texting or Phoning, Helmet Use, Personality Traits, Psychological Distress, and Cycling 
Intensity. No other mediators showed to exert full mediation. 
 
Table 7 
Multi-group Structural Equation Model used to predict accidents amongst Danish cyclists within the last 5 years. 
 
==PAGE:25==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
21 
Table 8 
Multi-group Structural Equation Model used to predict accidents amongst German cyclists within the last 5 years. 
 
3.4.2. 
German Cyclists 
The analysis found 10 direct effects to be significant for the German sample. Cycling Intensity positively 
predicted Violations and Positive Behaviours. Texting or Phoning positively predicted Violations, Errors, 
and Positive Behaviours (reverse scored). Listening to Music positively predicted Errors. Helmet positively 
predicted both Errors and Positive Behaviours. Positive Behaviours was the only of the behavioural 
measures that significantly predicted accidents, which it did positively.  
As for indirect effects, Positive Behaviours showed full mediation between three variables, namely 
Texting or Phoning, Helmet Use, and Cycling Intensity. 
 
==PAGE:26==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
22 
 
Figure 5: Results of MGSEM model for Danish cyclists with significant effects marked with solid lines. 
3.4.3. 
Differences and Similarities between Danish and German Cyclists 
The MGSEM reveals several similarities between the Danish and German group of cyclists, but also some 
major differences. These differences are expressed through the sign, size, and significance off the estimates. 
Regarding similarities it was found that Cycling Intensity has a significant effect on Violations, with the 
size of the estimate being approx. twice as high for the second group (Danish Cyclists:  = 0.071*; German 
Cyclists:  = 0.146*). Texting or Phoning was found to have a significant positive effect on Violations (Danish 
Cyclists:  = 0.275***; German Cyclists:  = 0.384***), Errors (Danish Cyclists:  = 0.199***; German Cyclists: 
 = 0.164*), and Positive Behaviours (Danish Cyclists:  = 0.107*; German Cyclists:  = 0.325***), of both 
groups. Moreover, Helmet Use was found to have a significant effect on Errors (Danish Cyclists:  = 0.097**; 
German Cyclists:  = 0.094*) and Positive Behaviours (Danish Cyclists:  = -0.105*; German Cyclists:  = 
0.117**). When it comes to the use of a helmets effect on Positive Behaviours the sign of the estimates was 
different between the two groups. As the Positive Behaviours factor is reverse coded, and since the sign is 
negative for the Danish group of cyclists, the use of a helmet leads to more positive behaviours for the Danish 
cyclists. For the German group of cyclists the use of a helmet was found to result in less positive behaviours. 
Another similarity between the two groups were that Psychological Distress had a significant effect on 
Errors (Danish Cyclists:  = 0.155***; German Cyclists:  = 0.157**). 
As for differences between the two groups a few structural differences were found. For the Danish sample 
Age had a significant effect on Errors ( = 0.148***) and Positive Behaviours ( = -0.125**), but not for the 
==PAGE:27==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
23 
 
Figure 6: Results of MGSEM model for German cyclists with significant effects marked with solid lines. 
 
German sample. For the Danish group Cycling Intensity had a significant effect on Errors ( = 0.118**) and 
on Cycling Accidents ( = 0.131**), while for the German group Cycling Intensity had significant effect on 
Positive Behaviours ( = 0.224*). Listening to Music had a significant effect on Errors ( = 0.102*), in the 
German Group. Personality Traits has significant effect on Errors ( = 0.129**) and on Distractions ( = 
0.161***), in the Danish Group. Further for the Danish group, Psychological Distress showed to have 
significant effect on Positive Behaviours ( = 0.112*) and on Distractions ( = 0.125**). Lastly for the Danish 
group, Texting or Phoning has significant effect on Distractions ( = 0.126**). 
The two groups had no shared mediators. For the Danish group Errors was the only variable that showed 
to have mediation to Cycling Accidents ( = 0.164*), while Positive Behaviours was the only variable that 
showed to exert mediation to Cycling Accidents ( = 0.232***), for the German group. 
4. Discussion 
4.1. Representativeness 
Several different factors could have affected the representativeness of the data set used in the study. First 
of all, it was found that the demographic distribution of especially the German sample, did not coincide with 
the national distribution, with the sample having more females and a lower mean age. The analyses revealed 
==PAGE:28==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
24 
that age is significantly correlated to several variables. Therefore a more representative sample might have 
resulted in different results. 
Secondly, the study used self-reported data as a foundation for all analyses, which has in previous studies 
been found to be subject to limitations and bias (Rosenman et al., 2011, due to a variety of reasons. The 
design and purpose of the questionnaire, as well as the wording of the questions could have an influence as 
respondents might have different perceptions of what is being asked. Overestimation and underestimation 
are other factors that are often observed, that could compromise the reliability of self-reported 
questionnaires (Ainsworth et al., 1993). Overestimation and underestimating are often caused by people 
having a skewed perception of e.g. the time spend doing certain activities or simply by people forgetting. 
One of the more discussed causes of bias is socially desirable responding (Rosenman et al., 2011; af 
Wåhlberg, 2010; Paulhus, 2002), where people answer in a way that makes them either look good or what 
they believe to be an average response, even though the questionnaire is completely anonymous. Paulhus 
(2002) further distinguish between response styles, being bias that are consistent over time and over several 
questionnaires, and response sets, which is temporary bias caused by e.g. the respondents state of mind 
while answering the questionnaire or the motivation for filling in the survey. af Wåhlberg (2010) describes 
how the use of lie scales can be used to evaluate how susceptible other scales are to social desirability bias. 
In the specific study from 2010, lie scales were used to access social desirability effects in several well-
known driver behaviour inventories, that has previously been used for, and claimed to be good at, predicting 
accident rates. The study found that the predictive power of these driver behaviour inventories was more 
than halved when social desirability bias was accounted for. When using self-reported questionnaire as a 
foundation for traffic research, it is therefore important that the organizations funding the studies are 
approaching the results with some degree of scepticism. They should also make sure to evaluate what 
requirements to the questionnaire is necessary e.g. that the questionnaire is evaluated using lie scales. 
Another aspect that might contribute to the reliability of the questionnaire being reduced is the fact that 
of the scales (i.e. the Cycling Anger Scale) are asking the respondents to access their level of anger given a 
range of hypothetical situations. The use of hypothetical questions in self-reporting questionnaires has both 
advantages and disadvantages (Tourangeau et al., 2000). The advantages include that behaviours that might 
not be observable can be accessed and that actions that only takes place rarely, and therefore requires a 
large sample before being useful, can still be included in the study. The disadvantage of hypothetical 
questions is that people might not be able to accurately predict how they would behave in a given situation 
and thereby reducing the reliability of the answers. To reduce the risk of unreliable data, researchers should 
carefully consider the use of hypothetical questions and preferable include them in combination with actual 
experience questions to get a more complete understanding of the respondents’ behaviours and attitudes, 
as it is the case in this study. Even though several limitations and causes of bias exist within self-reported 
questionnaires, it can still be a reliable tool to measure behaviour if designed and validated properly 
(Deffenbacher et al., 2002).  
4.2. Validity 
Previous studies have found that when using the same instruments in different contexts the appropriate 
factorial structure might vary (Granié et al., 2013). This could be the use of a behavioural questionnaire 
within different countries or cultures. The Bike-Barometer project is the first one using the CBQ and the 
WBQ in a Danish and German context, therefore the validity of the different scales included in the 
questionnaire were assessed using Confirmatory Factor Analysis. The initial CFA found the original 
structure of the CBQ to be suitable for both data sets (i.e. the Danish and the German data set) used in this 
study. The proposed structure of the WBQ on the other hand, were found to be not suitable for the data. A 
subsequent Exploratory Factor Analysis followed by a Confirmatory Factor Analysis was therefore 
conducted. The analyses resulted in the removal of seven items out of the 30 items included in the WBQ 
used by Useche et al. (2020b). All four items of the original Positive Behaviours factor and three items from 
the Violations factor were removed. The remaining items were separated into the three factors Violations, 
==PAGE:29==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
25 
Errors, and Risky Road Crossing, with the latter being a new factor. The new factor includes five items from 
the original Violations factor, with four of them related to crossing the road in a risky or illegal way and the 
last one referring to walking on the road due to a lack of room on the sidewalk. Thereby it conceptually 
makes sense to include these in the same factor. The new Violations factor comprises eight of the 16 items 
that were included in the original Violations scale. The Error factor remains the same as the one proposed 
by Useche et al. (2020b), indicating that this factor is sturdy even when used in different contexts.  
When comparing the factorial construct of the WBQ found in this study with the construct found in 
previous studies e.g. the implementation of the WBQ in a UK context (McIlroy et al., 2020) and the WBQ’s 
country of origin, Spain (Useche et al., 2020b), some differences and similarities are observed. All of the 
aforementioned studies found the original Error factor to be suitable in the concerned study contexts. The 
Error factor refers to undeliberate risky behaviours, meaning that people tend to act similar when it comes 
to unintentional behaviours, based on these studies. On the contrary, the studies found different constructs 
to be appropriate when it comes to the factors concerning deliberate risky behaviours, i.e. Violations and 
Positive Behaviours. This study as well as the UK study found it appropriate to complete remove the Positive 
Behaviour factor, while the items of the Violations factor while included in different ways. This study found 
it appropriate to include a Risky Road Crossing factor, which was also the case in the UK study. The UK study 
further found it appropriate to include a Device Use factor, referring to behaviours involving the use of a 
phone or listening to music, while walking. Having a separate road crossing scale further makes sense, 
theoretically, as previous studies have found that pedestrians are the most unpredictable type of road users, 
and this is especially dangerous when crossing the road as this is when the pedestrians are interacting or 
sharing ground with other road users (Deb et al., 2017). 
Brown and Levinson (1987) describe how politeness is not universal, but rather varies across cultures. 
Different factors such as social hierarchy and cultural values can affect how different cultures have different 
expectations to what is considered polite behaviour. This could also be a reason for the original Positive 
Behaviours factor to not be appropriate across cultures. Brown and Levinson further use the concept of 
"face," referring to the individuals wish for keeping a good reputation. Politeness and behaviour are closely 
related to “saving face” or “losing face”, and different cultures may have different notions of what this 
implies.  
4.3. Cultural Variation: Universalities, Generalities & Particularities 
Regarding the objective of evaluating if differences and similarities in cycling behaviour exist between 
Danish and German cyclists, it was found that some key differences exist. It was however also found that 
many similarities can be observed between the two country groups, which corresponds well with the 
expectations as both countries are well-established cycling countries (Copenhagenizeindex.eu, 2023).  
Regarding the behavioural constructs’ predictive value on cycling accidents, major differences were 
found between the two groups. Amongst Danish cyclists only errors had significant predictive value on 
cycling accidents, while only positive behaviours significantly predicted cycling accidents amongst German 
cyclists. When errors (unintended risky behaviours) are performed, also accidents tend to happen in a 
Danish context. In a German context an absence of positive behaviours, such as keeping a safe distance to 
other cyclists, are resulting in an increased risk of accidents. Both violations and distraction had no 
significant effect on accidents in Denmark nor in Germany. That violations are not significantly affecting 
accident rates appears surprising, as other studies such as the one by Useche et al. (2021), found violations 
to have a particularly high influence on accidents. The same study found distractions to not significantly 
effect accidents, which is consistent with the results of this study. 
The use of a mobile phone for texting or making phone calls when cycling was found to significantly 
influence the number of errors, violations and positive behaviours performed by cyclists, within both the 
Danish and the German sample. While this study found only errors and positive behaviours to have a 
significant effect on accidents, other studies have also found violations and distractions to have an influence 
on accidents (Useche et al., 2021; Useche et al., 2018a). This makes the use of a mobile device a cause of 
==PAGE:30==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
26 
many potential accidents, and as the use of mobile devices when cycling is an increasing problem, especially 
amongst young people (Stelling-Konczak et al., 2017), this makes it an evident focus point when evaluating 
where to make an effort, in the work to reduce cycling accidents.  
In the Danish sample age were found to have significant effect on errors and positive behaviours. As 
errors showed to exert mediation between age and cycling accidents, age was indirectly impacting 
accidents. Surprisingly, age was found to have no significant effect amongst German cyclists. This might be 
caused by the age distribution of the German sample, as primarily young Germans participated in the study. 
Listening to music while cycling was found to have significant influence on errors amongst German 
cyclists, but no significant influence at all amongst Danish cyclists. Again, this could be explained by the age 
distribution of the samples, as mostly young people listen to music while cycling (Stelling-Konczak et al., 
2017). As the German sample were dominated by young cyclists the link between listening to music and 
behaviour might have been caught within the German sample and not within the Danish, where fewer young 
people were represented. As listening to music were found to predict errors amongst German cyclists, it 
might be interesting to look further into music use while cycling. The effects of introducing a prohibition on 
the use of headphones while cycling is a topic that Stelling-Konczak et al. (2017) discusses, and many 
interesting points are presented. They e.g. discuss how the introduction of electric vehicles could potentially 
affect the number of accidents with cyclists listening to music, as electric cars are difficult to hear even when 
not listening to music.  
Cycling intensity, measured in hours cycling per week, had a direct effect on errors, violations, and 
accidents amongst Danish cyclists, and on violations and positive behaviours amongst German cyclists. It 
has previously been found the time spend cycling is the factor most critical to the number of accidents 
(Yannis et al., 2005). Therefore, it makes sense that cycling intensity were also found to have significant 
effects in this study. As the benefits from cycling are tremendous, it would not make sense to try and 
decrease cycling intensity. Contrary, the safety for cyclist should be improved to allow higher cycling 
intensity, with fewer accidents.  
The study also includes personality and psychological variables to access the influence of these on cycling 
behaviours. With regards to personality traits a significant effect was found on errors and distractions 
amongst Danish cyclists, where a higher personality trait score leads to more errors and more distractions. 
In the case of this study, a high personality trait score indicates that a person possesses more traits, that are 
widely recognized as negative personality traits and a low score indicates more positive personality traits. 
Personality traits were found to have no significant effect amongst German cyclists. When it comes to 
psychological distress it was found that a high level of psychological distress, i.e. low mental health, entail 
more errors, more distraction, and less positive behaviours amongst Danish cyclists. Psychological distress 
was significantly affecting errors amongst German cyclists. The results reveal some interesting links 
between cycling behaviour and psychological aspects. In general it was found that cycling behaviour is 
worse if the mental health is low. Therefore introducing measures to improve mental health could 
potentially be helpful in reducing risky cycling behaviour and thereby accidents. 
4.4. Relationship Between Behavioural Constructs 
While the questionnaire primarily focus on cycling behaviour and other cycling related scales, also 
questions on walking behaviour were included. This allows for investigation of the relationship between 
behaviours performed while cycling and those performed while walking. The idea that a relationship exist 
amongst behavioural constructs are based on previous studies that have found these relationships to be 
present. Şimşekoğlu (2015) compared the behaviour of pedestrians and motor vehicle drivers, by using the 
Pedestrian Behaviour Scale (PBS; Granié et al., 2013) and the Driver Behaviour Questionnaire (DBQ; Reason 
et al., 1990). Significant correlations were found between all dimensions of the two scales, indicating that 
people who report risky walking behaviours also report risky driving behaviours. Another study 
investigated the relationship between cycling behaviour and walking behaviour (McIlroy et al., 2022), by 
using the same CBQ and WBQ as used in this study. The structural construct was however slightly different, 
==PAGE:31==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
27 
due to the results of factor analysis. In the study McIlroy et al. found a significant relationship exist between 
most of the dimensions of the two scales, with only one exception, being the relationship between positive 
behaviour in the CBQ and device use in the WBQ. The device use factor was included in the study by McIlroy 
et al. as a separate factor, while the items of this factor it is in this study included in the violations factor.  
By use of bivariate correlation analysis to compare the constructs of cyclists and pedestrians in this study, 
significant correlations were found between all dimensions of both scales. When looking at the results of 
the two previous studies, as well as this study, it is clear that people who perform risky behaviours when 
using one mean of transportation, tends to also perform risky behaviours when using other means of 
transportation. 
4.5. Costs vs. Benefits 
When cycling is used more frequently as a mean of transposition, several benefits are experienced, but it 
is also associated with some risks and disadvantages, with the most crucial being the increase in risk of 
accidents following the increase in cycling kilometres (Jacobsen & Rutter, 2012). This paves the ground for 
an investigation of the extent to which the accidents are compromising the cost-benefit balance of cycling.  
Before any weighing of benefits against disadvantages of cycling is done, it should be noted that cycling 
accidents are subject to extensive underreporting (Juhra et al., 2012; Shinar et al., 2018). The extend of the 
underreporting is difficult to estimate and might vary a lot across cultures. The study by Juhra et al., which 
was conducted in Münster in Germany, found the actual number of accidents exceeded the officially 
reported numbers by nearly two times. Shinar et al. compared the percentage of crashes being reported 
across several countries and found large differences in the results across countries. On average only 10 % 
of the accidents were reported, with Germany being the country with the highest share of reporting (35 %) 
and Israel the country with the smallest share of reporting (0 %). The study further investigated if certain 
people were more likely to report accidents than others. They found no relation between a cyclist’s 
probability of reporting and the cyclist's gender, age, educational level, marital status, being a parent, use of 
helmet, or type of bicycle.  
Even though there is an obvious lack in number of bicycle accidents being reported it is still broadly 
recognized as a substantial problem, with WHO even referring to road injuries and deaths as a global 
epidemic (World Health Organization, 2018). Furthermore United Nations has included a target of reducing 
the number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic accidents in the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs; UN General Assembly, 2015). 
The costs associated with cycling includes costs for the individual, as well as for the society. Before being 
able to cycle one must buy a bicycle and accessories such as lights and a lock. Even though this initial cost 
might be determining when deciding between buying a bicycle or using e.g. public transport for some 
people, studies have found that after only a few months cycling will be a cheaper option than public 
transport (Quick, 2016). This is due to public transport being a constant cost, while cycling is a free mode of 
transportation when owning a bike, except for minor maintenance costs. Besides the direct costs of using a 
bicycle there are also some indirect costs and disadvantages. One is that cycling requires more time 
commitment than most other means of transportation, as it is slower to cycle than using car or public 
transport, unless the trip is very short (Ek et al., 2021). Besides this, cycling time is “wasted” time, as you do 
not have the possibility of e.g. working on your laptop, sleeping, or reading, as you would have in the train 
(Lyons & Urry, 2005). Cycling is furthermore associated to some weather limitations. If the weather is bad, 
it might not be possible to use the bicycle and the risk of getting into an accident is increased, when cycling 
in bad weather (Pazdan, 2020).  
Owning and using a bicycle is also related to some safety and security concerns. When owning a bicycle 
there is a risk that it might get stolen. Cycling theft is a large problem globally with millions of bikes being 
stolen annually (Sidebottom & Johnson, 2014). With an increase in cycling an increase in bicycle theft 
follows, and this is a problem as the fear of bicycle theft is a factor that might discourage bicycle use and 
furthermore many people do not buy a replacement bicycle if one is stolen. 
==PAGE:32==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
28 
Lastly, cyclists are often subject to harassment. A study by Heesch et al. (2011) conducted in Australia, 
including 1830 respondents, found that 76 % of men and 72 % of women reported that they had been 
harassed within the last year before answering the survey. The types of harassment that were reported the 
most were driving too close (66 %), shouting abuse (63 %), and sexual harassment (45 %). 
Besides the disadvantages on a personal level, cycling is also associated to some costs for the society. 
Injuries and fatalities as outcomes from accidents involving cyclists is a large problem for the society (Johan 
de Hartog et al., 2010). When a cyclist is involved in an accident it leads to expenses for the society, due to 
costs associated to e.g. police handling the reporting of the accident and hospital staff treating the injured. 
Another cost for the society related to cycling is that when the level of cycling is increasing, investments in 
new and improved cycling infrastructure, and maintenance of existing infrastructure, is needed (Foltýnová 
& Kohlová, 2002).  
Even though there are some risks and costs that one must take into account, when considering if cycling 
is a good option for oneself, there are also several benefits, that should be taken into account, and it should 
be evaluated if these make up for the disadvantages or not.  
One of the most important benefits, and one that is often a determining factor when deciding on cycling 
or nor, is the health benefits. Cycling in is in general, and especially as a mode of transportation when 
commuting, an effective way to incorporate exercise into the day-to-day life. Being physically activate has 
shown to reduce the risk of several diseases, including hearth disease, cancer, and diabetes (Oja et al., 2011). 
It is often discussed if using a bicycle to commute is entailing other physical activities to be performed less, 
as this would comprise the health benefits of cycling radically. Several studies have been conducted on this 
topic and it has been found that this is not the case (Pedersen & Andersen, 2018; Foley et al., 2018; Foley et 
al., 2019). Besides the benefits on the physical health, cycling has also been found to improve mental health. 
A study by Avila-Palencia et al. (2017) found that cycling commuters had significantly lower risk of being 
stressed than non-bicycle commuters, while other studies have found that regular bicycling may help to 
reduce psychological distress and improve life satisfaction (Ma et al., 2021).  
The transport sector is large contributor to climate change, accounting for around one fifth of all global 
CO2-emissions (Richie, 2020). 74,5 % of the emission from the transport sector are from road transport., 
meaning that a transition to more sustainable modes of transport could have substantial environmental 
benefits. Cycling and walking are considered the most sustainable form of personal transport, helping to 
reduce energy use from transport, CO2-emissions, and pollution (Brand et al., 2021).  
While both benefits and disadvantages regarding cycling exists, studies have found that the benefits 
greatly outweigh the disadvantages. The studies asses the cost-benefit balance of cycling through different 
approaches. One study simply investigated the effects of a modal shift from car to bicycle, comparing the 
costs and benefits of this transition, and found the health benefits to be substantially larger the risks 
28associated to cycling (Johan de Hartog et al., 2010). Other studies have assessed the costs and benefits 
when implementing schemes or scenarios for infrastructure improvements. Rojas-Rueda et al. (2011) 
looking into the effects of implementing a bicycle sharing scheme and found that such a public bicycle 
sharing initiative would have greater benefits than risks to health and reduce carbon dioxide emissions. 
Lastly, several studies have assessed the effects of investing in new infrastructure by comparing the 
expected benefits of more cycling due to the new infrastructure with the costs of making this new 
infrastructure (Foltýnová & Kohlová, 2002; Rich et al., 2020) Both the study by Foltýnová & Kohlová, and 
by Rich et al. found the benefits to outweigh the costs. 
4.6. Means to Avoid Accidents in the Future 
While studies have found the benefits of cycling to be much higher than the disadvantages, an injury or 
fatality is nevertheless still something that is not desirable. Therefore the cycling conditions are constantly 
being improved and new solutions to increase cycling safety are being developed and implemented. 
==PAGE:33==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
29 
4.6.1. 
Physical Means 
While this study is mainly focused on behavioural aspects, there are also several physical means to avoid 
cycling accidents and improve the cycling experience in general.   
First, there are some actions that the cyclists can take themselves to be safer on the roads. This includes 
wearing visible aids, such as lights, reflexes, and reflective clothing (Kwan et al., 2002). Visible aids help 
cyclists become more visible to car drivers and other cyclists, which might be helpful in reducing the number 
of collisions. Wearing a helmet is another initiative that the cyclist can do personally to avoid injuries and 
fatalities. The use of a helmet is not directly contributing to accident prevention, but it be useful in reducing 
the severity of the outcomes of accidents (Juhra et al., 2012). While the use of a helmet as in some studies 
been found to be a helpful mean, other studies have found no reduction in the number of head injuries 
(Jacobsen & Rutter, 2012). The studies also found that when introducing laws that requires cyclists to wear 
a helmet, the level of cycling is reducing. This means that the benefits of cycling, such as an improved health 
and better environment are not gained.  
As cycling has been found to be a very sustainable mode of transportation several national plans on how 
to improve and promote cycling are being developed, such as the Danish national bicycle strategy Denmark 
– on your bike! (Ministry of Transport, 2014) and the German National Cycling Plan 2020 (Federal Ministry 
of Transport, Building and Urban Development, 2020). Reports like these describes how to make cycling 
more attractive, safe, and secure. One of the most effective ways to avoid accidents is to make dedicated 
cycling infrastructure separating the cyclists from motorized vehicles, as it has been found that most 
accidents happening to cyclists are caused by actions of motorized vehicle drivers (Li et al., 2022). Good 
lighting on cycling areas is another effective way of reducing cycling crashes, as cyclist can easier see and 
identify obstacles, but it is also easier for car drivers to identify cyclists (Reynolds et al., 2009). One initiative 
that has been found to be both increasing the level of cycling and increasing the road safety for cyclists is 
the implementation of so-called Cycling Superhighways in Denmark (Rich et al., 2020). The Cycling 
Superhighways are cycling routes that increase the level of cycling and safety through e.g. green cycling 
waves, message signs for cyclists, broad cycling lanes, and measures to prevent right-turn accidents at road 
junctions.  
While several plans and strategies exist, to set the overall frames for a development in cycling 
infrastructure, there is a difficult exercise in making a prioritization of were to first implement new 
infrastructure to get the most out of limited money. To investigate the needs for improved cycling 
infrastructure, previous studies have used bicycle counts and crash statistics, to point out areas and 
stretches that are used the most frequent and were most crashes happen. While these methods have their 
place in some situations, recent studies have taking it a step further and used GPS-data to point out routes 
that cyclists use and which they do not use (Chou et al., 2023). This gives a better base for deciding which 
stretches should be prioritized, when improving infrastructure for cyclists. 
4.6.2. 
Behavioural Means 
As found in this study, cycling behaviours has a significant influence on the number of accidents 
happening. When cyclists perform risky behaviours more accidents tend to happen and opposite, when 
people perform positive behaviours less accidents tend to happen. Therefore, teaching cyclists to have a 
good behaviour when cycling could be a mean to reduce the number of accidents happening. Cyclists are 
one of the most vulnerable types of road users and they are equally as much users of the road system, as 
drivers of motorized vehicles, yet no training in required before getting on a bicycle and heading out into 
traffic. Implementing cycling training from a young age might be a good mean to make sure cyclists know 
the traffic rules and how to interact with other road users. One way of doing this could be implementing a 
cycling training program as a mandatory part of school. Some initiatives to incorporate cycling training into 
school already exist, such as the Danish Cyklistprøven (https://www.sikkertrafik.dk/undervisning/skole/4-
6-klasse/cyklistproven/), which is a programme including a theoretical and practical test. The course is 
==PAGE:34==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
30 
offered by the Danish Road Safety Council, and it is optional for schools to participate in the programme. 
Making it mandatory for schools to participate in such programmes could be a way to make sure children 
know or learn the traffic rules from a young age. It could further be combined with expeditions to practice 
grounds 
such 
as 
the 
Children’s 
Traffic 
Playground, 
in 
Fælledparken, 
in 
Copenhagen 
(https://kk.sites.itera.dk/apps/kk_legepladser_ny/index.asp?mode=detalje&id=117). 
The 
Children’s 
Traffic Playground is a safe area designed with roads and traffic signs to give the children the experience of 
being in real traffic. The playground is staffed with pedagogical personnel, to help the children learn. Having 
professional personnel to teach children to integrate in traffic, contrary to their parents teaching them, 
might be a good way to make sure children learn good practices, and not inherit their parents’ bad habits.  
This study found that psychological distress affects the number of errors performed by cyclists, and 
through this the likelihood of accidents. It was also found that amongst Danish Cyclists, higher levels of 
psychological distress are significantly related to the degree of which cyclists get distracted. If the cyclists 
had more cycling experience and proper training, the probability of accidents might be reduced even when 
the level of psychological distress is high, as the cyclists have a better groundwork.  
To make sure cyclists can react quickly in case of a dangerous situation happening, it would be beneficial 
to not only make sure that cyclist have experience in cycling during normal situations, but also in handling 
suddenly occurring dangerous situation. This could be by implementing cycling courses at practice grounds, 
similarly to the courses at practice grounds, when taking a driver’s license for cars where the students are 
exposed to different potentially dangerous situations. This could e.g. be implemented as part of the Danish 
Cyklistprøven, which already includes a practical cycling test.  
Furthermore, an increased focus on the dangers associated to cycling while drunk and using the phone 
while cycling could be helpful in reducing accidents, as these behaviours have shown to increase the risk of 
accidents (Li et al., 1996; Stelling-Konczak et al., 2017). 
5. Conclusion 
This study firstly assessed the behaviour of Danish and German cyclists using several behavioural 
constructs, including the well-validated Cycling Behaviour Questionnaire (CBQ; Useche et al., 2018b) and 
the Walking Behaviour Questionnaire (WBQ; Useche et al., 2020b). Factor analyses revealed that the 
proposed three-factor structure of the CBQ were appropriate in a Danish and German context. The proposed 
WBQ structure were however found not to be suitable in this context. The results emphasize the importance 
of making sure any self-reported behavioural instrument is well-validated before applying it in a large scale. 
Regarding the main objective of the study (i.e. to investigate differences and similarities between Danish 
and German cyclists), it was found that German cyclists tend to perform more risky behaviours and less 
positive behaviours than Danish cyclists. In a Danish cycling context, accidents were found to be most often 
caused by errors, while it is a lack of positive behaviours that were found to best explain accidents in a 
German cycling context. While some differences exist between Danish and German cyclists, also several 
similarities were found, e.g. that the use of a mobile device affects cycling behaviour, while also 
psychological distress have influence on behaviour.  
While cycling is sometimes associated to injuries and fatalities, there are several benefits related to 
cycling as well. A literature review found that the benefits of cycling are substantially outweighing the risk 
of accidents, due to cycling being a sustainable, healthy, and convenient mode of transportation, with a great 
potential to incorporate exercise into an everyday life where physical activities has been engineered out of 
the modern lifestyle. 
Lastly, solutions to help prevent cycling accidents were discussed. A variety of both behavioural and 
physical solutions exist, including e.g. better cycling education and training from a young age, as well as 
improved cycling infrastructure. 
==PAGE:35==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
31 
6. Limitations of the Study 
The study some strengths as the data sets for both samples (i.e. the Danish and German sample) had 
decent sample size and the internal consistency and reliability was found to be high. There were however 
some limitations that needs to be addressed.  
While the sample size was adequate, the demographic distribution of the participants was not optimal. 
Especially the German sample had an age and gender representation that was not resembling the country 
level age and gender distribution. As both variables have been found to have a significant effect on accident 
rates (McIlroy et al., 2022), it would have had an influence on the results of the study if the gender and age 
distribution would have been different. A data set with a demographic distribution more like the country-
level distribution, would have given more realistic and representative results. The Danish sample were 
more similar to the country-level, making it more representative. This does, however, also make the two 
samples proportionally different, which causes the two samples to be less comparable.  
As previously discussed, the use of a self-reported questionnaire to establish a basis of data has some 
weaknesses. Self-reported questionnaires are often subject to social desirability bias, were the respondent 
answer the questionnaires based on what is socially acceptable, to satisfy the researchers and themselves. 
This is even though the questionnaire is anonymous and not actually in the researcher’s interest, as credible 
answers are more valuable. The respondents further had to participate electronically, which can be 
excluding as e.g. single and older people are less likely to participate in online surveys (Kelfve et al., 2020). 
The questionnaire used in the study is relatively comprehensive, allowing for a long range of relevant 
topics and problems to be investigated. Including even more variables, such as income, would allow for even 
more topics to be investigated. The downside of this is that the required time to answer the questionnaire 
would increase. The estimated time to complete the survey in were 20-30 minutes, which is already a long 
time for something that the respondents do not directly benefit from. It is therefore important to consider 
carefully which questions should be included to best assess the hypothesis of the study.  
Lastly, a large problem with all studies regarding cycling accidents is the problem of underreporting. 
Cycling accidents are subject to extensive underreporting (Juhra et al., 2012; Shinar et al., 2018), which 
could encourage to a discussion on how to get more people to report accidents, as this would allow for a 
better basis of data to conduct studies of cycling accidents. 
Conflicts of Interest 
The author declares that there are no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that 
could have influenced the work reported in this paper. 
Author Contribution Statement 
For this study C.L. Larsen performed investigations and data analyses, wrote the paper, and contributed 
to part of the data collection. K.H. Janstrup, M. Møller, and F.W. Siebert supervised the researched, revised 
the paper and handled most of the data collection. 
Acknowledgements 
The author would like to thank all researchers involved in the Bike-Barometer project, the participants 
of the study, and all people helping in sharing the questionnaire. A special thanks to Kira Janstrup, Mette 
Møller, and Felix Siebert for supporting as supervisors of the project. 
==PAGE:36==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
32 
References 
af Wåhlberg A.E. (2010). Social desirability effects in driver behavior inventories. Journal of safety 
research, 41(2), 99–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsr.2010.02.005  
 
Ainsworth, B.E., Jacobs, D.R., Jr, & Leon, A.S. (1993). Validity and reliability of self-reported physical 
activity status: the Lipid Research Clinics questionnaire. Medicine and science in sports and exercise, 25(1), 
92–98. https://doi.org/10.1249/00005768-199301000-00013 
 
Avila-Palencia I., de Nazelle A., Cole-Hunter T., Donaire-Gonzalez, D., Jerrett, M., Rodriguez, D.A., & 
Nieuwenhuijsen, M.J. (2017). The relationship between bicycle commuting and perceived stress: a cross-
sectional study. BMJ: Britisth Medical Journal, 7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2016-013542  
 
Basner, M. & McGuire S. (2018). WHO Environmental Noise Guidelines for the European Region: A 
Systematic Review on Environmental Noise and Effects on Sleep. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health 15(3). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15030519 
 
Basu, R. (2009). High ambient temperature and mortality: a review of epidemiologic studies from 2001 
to 2008. Environmental health: a global access science source, 8(40). https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-
8-40  
 
Bauman, A., Rissel, C., Garrard, J., Ker, I., Speidel, R., & Fishman, E. (2008). Cycling: Getting Australia 
Moving: Barriers, Facilitators and Interventions to Get More Australian Physically Active Through Cycling. 
Cycling Promotion Fund. 
 
Brand, C., Dons, E., Anaya-Boig, E., Avila-Palencia, I., Clark, A., de Nazelle, A., Gascon, M., Gaupp-
Berghausen, M., Gerike, R., Götschi, T., Iacorossi, F., Kahlmeier, S., Laeremans, M., Nieuwenhuijsen, M. J., Pablo 
Orjuela, J., Racioppi, F., Raser, E., Rojas-Rueda, D., Standaert, A., … Int Panis, L. (2021). The climate change 
mitigation effects of daily active travel in cities. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and 
Environment, 93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2021.102764  
 
Brown, P & Levinson, S.C. (1987). Politeness: Some Universals in Language Usage. Cambridge University 
Press. https://pure.mpg.de/rest/items/item_64421/component/file_2225570/content  
 
Brown, T. A. (2015). Confirmatory Factor Analysis for Applied Research (2). The Guilford Press. 
 
Cavill, N. & Davis, A. (2007). Cycling and health: What’s the evidence? Cycling England. 
 
Chen, W., Carstensen, T.A., Wang, R., Derrible, S., Ruede, D.R., Nieuwenhuijsen, M.J., & Liu, G. (2022). 
Historical 
patterns 
and 
sustainability 
implications 
of 
worldwide 
bicycle 
ownership 
and 
use. Communications Earth & Environment 3(171). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-022-00497-4  
 
Chou, K., Paulsen, M., Nielsen, O.K., Jensen, A.F. (2023).  Analysis of cycling accessibility using detour ratios 
– A large-scale study based on crowdsourced GPS data, Sustainable Cities and Society, 93, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2023.104500  
 
Copenhagenizeindex.eu (2023). Copenhagenize Index 2019. https://copenhagenizeindex.eu  
 
==PAGE:37==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
33 
Costa Jr., P.T., & McCrae, R.R. (1995). Domains and facets: Hierarchical personality assessment using the 
Revised 
NEO 
Personality 
Inventory. 
Journal 
of 
Personality 
Assessment, 
64, 
21–50. 
10.1207/s15327752jpa6401_2 
 
Courtney, M.G.R. (2013). Determining the number of factors to retain in efa: Using the spss r-menu v2. 0 
to make more judicious estimations. Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation, 18(8), 1–14. 
https://doi.org/10.7275/9cf5-2m72  
 
Deffenbacher, J. L., Oetting, E. R., & Lynch, R. S. (1994). Development of a driving anger scale. Psychological 
Reports, 74(1), 83–91. https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.1994.74.1.83  
 
Deffenbacher, J.L., Lynch, R.S., Oetting, E.R., & Swaim, R.C. (2002). The driving anger expression inventory: 
a measure of how people express their anger on the road. Behaviour research and therapy, 40(6), 717–737. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0005-7967(01)00063-8 
 
de Nazelle, A., Nieuwenhuijsen, A.M., Antó, J.M., Brauer, M., Briggs, D., Braun-Fahrlander, C., … Lebret, E. 
(2011). Improving health through policies that promote active travel: A review of evidence to support 
integrated 
health 
impact 
assessment, 
Environment 
International 
37(4), 
766-777. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2011.02.003  
 
de Rooij, M., Karch, J.D., Fokkema, M., Bakk, Z., Pratiwi, B. C., & Kelderman, H. (2023) SEM-Based Out-of-
Sample 
Predictions, Structural 
Equation 
Modeling: 
A 
Multidisciplinary 
Journal, 30(1), 132-
148. 10.1080/10705511.2022.2061494  
 
Deb, S., Strawderman, L., DuBien, J., Smith, B., Carruth, D.W., & Garrison, T.M. (2017). Evaluating 
pedestrian behavior at crosswalks: Validation of a pedestrian behavior questionnaire for the U.S. 
population. Accident; analysis and prevention, 106, 191–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2017.05.020  
 
DeVellis, R. F. (2012). Scale development: Theory and applications, 3. Sage Publications. 
 
Diaz, E.M. (1997). Teoria del Comportamiento Planificado e intencion de infringir normas de transito en 
peatones (Théorie du Comportement Planifié et intention de transgresser les règles routières chez les 
piétons). Estudos des Psicologia 2(2), 335–348.  
 
Ek, K., Wårell, L. & Andersson, L. (2021). Motives for walking and cycling when commuting – differences 
in 
local 
contexts 
and 
attitudes. European 
Transport 
Research 
Review 13(46). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12544-021-00502-5 
 
Elliott, M., Baughan, C., & Sexton, B. (2007). Errors and violations in relation to motorcyclists’ crash risk. 
Accident Analysis & Prevention, 39(3), 491-499. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2006.08.012  
 
European Commission (2015). Road safety in the European Union trends, statistics and main challenges. 
European Commission, Directorate General for Mobility Transport. 
 
European Commission (2020). Special Eurobarometer 495 – September 2019. Mobility and Transport. 
European Commission, Directorate General for Mobility and Transport. 
 
==PAGE:38==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
34 
European Commission (2021). Road safety: European Commission rewards effective initiatives and 
publishes 2020 figures on road fatalities. European Commission, Directorate General for Mobility and 
Transport. 
 
European Commission (2022). Annual statistical report on road safety in the EU, 2021. European Road 
Safety Observatory. European Commission, Directorate General for Mobility and Transport. https://road-
safety.transport.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-05/ERSO_annual_report_20220509.pdf  
 
European Cyclists’ Federation (2021). The state of national cycling strategies in Europe. European 
Cyclists’ Federation. 
https://ecf.com/system/files/The_State_of_National_Cycling_Strategies_2021_final_0.pdf  
 
Federal Ministry of Transport, Building and Urban Development (2020). National Cycling Plan 2020. 
https://orlis.difu.de/handle/difu/232116  
 
Finney, S. J., & DiStefano, C. (2013). Nonnormal and categorical data in structural equation modeling. 
Quantitative methods in education and the behavioral sciences: Issues, research, and teaching. Structural 
equation modeling: A second course, 439–492. IAP Information Age Publishing. 
 
Fishman E., Böcker L., & Helbich, M. (2015). Adult Active Transport in the Netherlands: An Analysis of Its 
Contribution 
to 
Physical 
Activity 
Requirements. 
PLoS 
ONE 
10(4). 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0121871  
 
Foley, L., Dumuid, D., Atkin, A.J., Olds, T., & Ogilvie, D. (2018). Patterns of health behaviour associated with 
active travel: a compositional data analysis. The international journal of behavioral nutrition and physical 
activity, 15(1), 26. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12966-018-0662-8  
 
Foley, L., Dumuid, D., Atkin, A.J., Wijndaele, K., Ogilvie, D., & Olds, T. (2019). Cross-sectional and 
longitudinal associations between active commuting and patterns of movement behaviour during 
discretionary 
time: 
A 
compositional 
data 
analysis. PloS 
one, 14(8), 
e0216650. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0216650  
 
Foltýnová, H.B., & Kohlová, M.B. (2002). Cost-Benefit Analysis of Cycling Infrastructure: A Case Study of 
Pilsen. 
https://www.czp.cuni.cz/czp/images/stories/Vystupy/Seminare/2006%20LOS%20envi%20ekonomie/p
rezentace/bruhovakohlova.pdf  
 
Goldberg D., Gater R., Sartorius N., Ustun T.B., Piccinelli M., Gureje O., & Rutter, C. (1997). The validity of 
two versions of the GHQ in the WHO study of mental illness in general health care. Psychological 
Medicine, 27(1), 191-197. 10.1017/s0033291796004242  
 
Goldberg, D. P. & Blackwell, B. (1970). Psychiatric illness in general practice: A detailed study using a new 
method 
of 
case 
identification. BMJ: 
British 
Medical 
Journal, 
2(5707), 
439–443. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.2.5707.439 
 
Granié, M., Pannetier, M., & Guého, L. (2013). Developing a self-reporting method to measure pedestrian 
behaviors 
at 
all 
ages, 
Accident 
Analysis 
& 
Prevention, 
50, 
830-839. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2012.07.009  
 
==PAGE:39==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
35 
Gunzler, D., Chen, T., Wu, P., & Zhang, H. (2013). Introduction to mediation analysis with structural 
equation modeling. Shanghai archives of psychiatry, 25(6), 390–394. https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1002-
0829.2013.06.009  
 
Haines, A., McMichael, A. J., Smith, K. R., Roberts, I., Woodcock, J., Markandya, A., Armstrong B.G., Campbell-
Lendrum, D., Dangour, A.D., Davies, M., Bruce, N., Tonne, C., Barrett, M. & Wilkinson, P. (2009). Public health 
benefits of strategies to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions: overview and implications for policy makers. The 
Lancet, 374(9707), 2104–2114. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61759-1  
 
Hair, J.F., Black, W.C., Babin, B.J., & Anderson, R.E. (2010). Multivariate data analysis (3rd ed.). Pearson. 
 
Hartman, T. (2008, May 30). Life in the Bike Lane. Deutsche Welle. Available at the web: 
https://www.dw.com/en/germany-looks-to-boost-biking-as-europe-pedals-past/a-3371344  
 
Heesch, K. C., Sahlqvist, S., & Garrard, J. (2011). Cyclists' experiences of harassment from motorists: 
findings from a survey of cyclists in Queensland, Australia. Preventive medicine, 53(6), 417–420. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2011.09.015  
 
Hendriksen, I.J.M., Simons, M., Garre, F.G., & Hildebrandt, V.H. (2010). The association between commuter 
cycling 
and 
sickness 
absence, 
Preventive 
Medicine 
51(2), 
132-135. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2010.05.007  
 
Hezaveh, A., Zavareh, M., Cherry, C., & Nordfjærn, T. (2018). Errors and violations in relation to bicyclists’ 
crash risks: Development of the Bicycle Rider Behavior Questionnaire (BRBQ), Journal of Transport & Health, 
8, 289-298. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2017.11.003  
 
Hou, L., Ji, B., Blair, A., Dai, Q., Gao, Y. & Chow, W. (2004). Commuting Physical Activity and Risk of Colon 
Cancer 
in 
Shanghai, 
China, American 
Journal 
of 
Epidemiology, 
160(9), 
860-867. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwh301 
 
Hu, L.T., & Bentler, P.M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: 
conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modelling: Multidisciplinary Journal, 6, 1–
55. https://doi.org/10.1080/10705519909540118  
 
Huemer, A.K., Oehl, M., & Brandenburg, S. (2018). Influences on anger in German urban cyclists. 
Transportation 
Research 
Part 
F: 
Traffic 
Psychology 
and 
Behaviour, 
58, 
969–979. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2018.07.026  
 
INTRAS (2023). Bike-Barometer 2020-2021. https://www.uv.es/uvweb/university-research-institute-
traffic-road-safety-INTRAS/en/research-groups/dats/experience-research/bike-barometer-2020-2021-
1285893039971/ProjecteInves.html?id=1286143700388  
 
ITF 
(2013). 
Cycling, 
Health 
and 
Safety. 
ITF 
Research 
Reports, 
OECD 
Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789282105955-en  
 
Jacobsen, 
P.L. 
& 
Rutter, 
H. 
(2012). 
Cycling 
safety. 
City 
Cycling. 
141-156. 
https://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk/id/eprint/2572564  
 
==PAGE:40==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
36 
Johan de Hartog, J., Boogaard, H., Nijland, H., & Hoek, G. (2010). Do the health benefits of cycling outweigh 
the risks? Environmental health perspectives, 118(8), 1109–1116. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0901747  
 
Juhra, C., Wieskötter, B., Chu, K., Trost, L., Weiss, U., Messerschmidt, M., Malczyk, A., Heckwolf, M., & 
Raschke, M. (2012). Bicycle accidents - do we only see the tip of the iceberg? A prospective multi-centre 
study in a large German city combining medical and police data. Injury, 43(12), 2026–2034. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.injury.2011.10.016  
 
Kaiser, H.F., & Rice, J. (1974). Little Jiffy, Mark Iv. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 34(1), 111–
117. https://doi.org/10.1177/001316447403400115  
 
Kelfve, S., Kivi, M., Johansson, B., & Lindwall, M. (2020) Going web or staying paper? The use of web-
surveys among older people. BMC Med Res Methodol, 20, 252.  
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-020-01138-0  
 
Khomenko, S., Cirach, M., Barrera-Gómez, J., Pereira-Barboza, E., Iungman, T., Mueller, N., Foraster, M., 
Tonne, C., Thondoo, T., Jephcote, C., Gulliver, J., Woodcock, J., & Nieuwenhuijsen, M. (2022). Impact of road 
traffic noise on annoyance and preventable mortality in European cities: A health impact 
assessment. Environment international, 162, 107160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2022.107160  
 
Kwan, I., Mapstone, J., & Roberts, I. (2002). Interventions for increasing pedestrian and cyclist visibility 
for the prevention of death and injuries. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews(2), CD003438. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD003438  
 
Lang, F.R., John, D., Lüdtke, O., Schupp, J., & Wagner, G.G. (2011). Short assessment of the Big Five: robust 
across survey methods except telephone interviewing. Behavior research methods, 43(2), 548–567. 
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-011-0066-z  
 
Li, G., Baker, S.P., Sterling, S., Smialek, J.E., Dischinger, P.C., & Soderstrom, C.A. (1996). A comparative 
analysis of alcohol in fatal and nonfatal bicycling injuries. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental 
research, 20(9), 1553–1559. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-0277.1996.tb01698.x  
 
Li, X., Useche, S.A., Zhang, Y., Wang, Y., Oviedo-Trespalacios, O., & Haworth, N. (2022).  Comparing the 
cycling behaviours of Australian, Chinese and Colombian cyclists using a behavioural questionnaire 
paradigm, Accident Analysis & Prevention, 164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2021.106471  
 
Liu, J., Tang, W., Chen, G., Lu, Y., Feng, C., & Tu, X.M. (2016). Correlation and agreement: overview and 
clarification of competing concepts and measures. Shanghai archives of psychiatry, 28(2), 115–120. 
https://doi.org/10.11919/j.issn.1002-0829.216045  
 
Lyons, G. & Urry, J. (2005). Travel time use in the information age, Transportation Research Part A: Policy 
and Practice, 39(2–3), 257-276, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2004.09.004  
 
Ma, L., Ye, R., & Wang, H. (2021). Exploring the causal effects of bicycling for transportation on mental 
health, 
Transportation 
Research 
Part 
D: 
Transport 
and 
Environment, 
93, 
102773. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2021.102773  
 
==PAGE:41==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
37 
Marsh, H.W., Hau, K.T., & Wen, Z. (2004). In search of golden rules: comment on hypothesis-testing 
approaches to setting cutoff values for fit indexes and dangers in overgeneralizing Hu and Bentler’s (1999) 
findings. Structural Equation Modelling, 11, 320–341. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15328007sem1103_2  
 
McIlroy, R.C., Useche, S.A., & Gonzalez-Marin, A. (2022). To what extent do our walking and cycling 
behaviours relate to each other, and do we cycle as well as we think we do? Piloting the walking and cycling 
behaviour 
questionnaires 
in 
the 
UK. Accident; 
analysis 
and 
prevention, 168, 
106597. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2022.106597  
 
Ministry of Transport (2014). Denmark – on your bike! https://www.trm.dk/media/qkfpoagy/engelsk-
cykelstrategi-til-web.pdf  
 
Montazeri A., Harirchi A.M., Shariati M., Garmaroudi G., Ebadi M., & Fateh A. (2003). The 12-item General 
Health Questionnaire (GHQ-12): translation and validation study of the Iranian version. Health Qual Life 
Outcomes, 1(66). DOI: 10.1186/1477-7525-1-66  
 
Morera, O.F. & Stokes, S.M. (2016). Coefficient α as a measure of test score reliability: review of 3 popular 
misconceptions. American Journal of Public Health, 106(3), 458–461. 
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2015.302993  
 
Møller, M. & Haustein, S. (2017). Anger expression among Danish cyclists and drivers: A comparison 
based on mode specific anger expression inventories, Accident Analysis & Prevention, 108, 354-360. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2017.09.016  
 
Nusair, K. & Hua, N. (2010). Comparative assessment of structural equation modeling and multiple 
regression research methodologies: E-commerce context, Tourism Management, 31(3), 314-324. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2009.03.010  
 
Odgaard, 
T. 
& 
Münster, 
M. 
(2022, 
June 
24). 
Effekter 
af 
cykling. 
DI 
Transport. 
https://www.danskindustri.dk/brancher/di-transport/analysearkiv/ovrige-analyser/2022/6/effekter-
af-cykling/  
 
Oehl, M., Brandenburg, S., & Huemer, A. K. (2019). Cyclists’ anger experiences in traffic: The Cycling Anger 
Scale, Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 62, 564-574. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2019.02.008  
 
Oja, P., Titze, S., Bauman, A., de Geus, B., Krenn, P., Reger-Nash, B., & Kohlberger, T. (2011). Health benefits 
of cycling: a systematic review. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports, 21(4), 496–509. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0838.2011.01299.x  
 
Özkan, T. & Lajunen, T. (2005). A new addition to DBQ: Positive Driver Behaviours Scale. Transportation 
Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 8. 355-368. 10.1016/j.trf.2005.04.018  
 
Parker, D., Manstead, A.S.R., Stradling, S.G., Reason, J.T., & Baxter, J.S. (1992). Intention to commit driving 
violations: An application of the theory of planned behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77(1), 94–
101. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.77.1.94 
 
==PAGE:42==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
38 
Paulhus, D. L. (2002). Socially desirable responding: The evolution of a construct. In H. I. Braun, D. N. 
Jackson, & D. E. Wiley (Eds.), The role of constructs in psychological and educational measurement (pp. 49–
69). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. 
 
Pazdan, Sylwia. (2020). The impact of weather on bicycle risk exposure. Archives of Transport, 56. 89-105. 
10.5604/01.3001.0014.5629  
 
Pedersen, B.K., & Andersen, L.B. (2018). Fysisk Aktivitet: Håndbog om forebyggelse og behandling. 
Sundhedsstyrelsen. 
https://www.sst.dk/-/media/Udgivelser/2018/Fysisk-aktivitet-håndbog-og-træning/Fysisk-aktivitet-–-
håndbog-om-forebyggelse-og-behandling.ashx  
 
Prati, G., Puchades, V.M. & Pietrantoni, L. (2017). Cyclists as a minority group? Transportation Research 
Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour 47, 34-41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2017.04.008  
 
Quick, 
M. 
(2016). 
Cycling 
v 
public 
transport: 
How 
do 
cities 
compare? 
BBC. 
https://www.bbc.com/worklife/article/20161209-cycling-v-public-transport-how-do-cities-compare  
 
Rasmussen, M.G., Grøntved, A., Blond, K., Overvad, K., Tjønneland, A., Jensen, M.K., & Østergaard, L. (2016). 
Associations between Recreational and Commuter Cycling, Changes in Cycling, and Type 2 Diabetes Risk: A 
Cohort Study of Danish Men and Women. PLoS medicine, 13(7), e1002076. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002076  
 
Reason, J., Manstead, A., Stradling, S., Baxter, J., & Campbell, K. (1990). Errors and violations on the roads: 
a real distinction?, Ergonomics, 33(10-11), 1315-1332. 10.1080/00140139008925335  
 
Reynolds, C. C., Harris, M. A., Teschke, K., Cripton, P. A., & Winters, M. (2009). The impact of transportation 
infrastructure on bicycling injuries and crashes: a review of the literature. Environmental health : a global 
access science source, 8, 47. https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-8-47  
 
Rich, J., Jensen, A., Pilegaard, N. & Hallberg, M. (2020). Cost-benefit of bicycle infrastructure with e-bikes 
and cycle superhighways. 10.13140/RG.2.2.26961.35680  
 
Ritchie, H. (2020). Cars, planes, trains: where do CO2 emissions from transport come from?. Our World in 
Data. https://ourworldindata.org/co2-emissions-from-transport  
 
Rojas-Rueda, D., de Nazelle, A., Tainio, M., & Nieuwenhuijsen, M. J. (2011). The health risks and benefits 
of cycling in urban environments compared with car use: health impact assessment study. BMJ (Clinical 
research ed.), 343, d4521. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.d4521  
 
Rosenman, R., Tennekoon, V., & Hill, L.G. (2011). Measuring bias in self-reported data. International 
journal of behavioural & healthcare research, 2(4), 320–332. 
https://doi.org/10.1504/IJBHR.2011.043414  
 
Shinar, D., Valero-Mora, P., van Strijp-Houtenbos, M., Haworth, N., Schramm, A., De Bruyne, G., Cavallo, V., 
Chliaoutakis, J., Dias, J., Ferraro, O.E., Fyhri, A., Sajatovic, A.H., Kuklane, K., Ledesma, R., Mascarell, O., 
Morandi, A., Muser, M., Otte, D., Papadakaki, M., Sanmartín, J., … Tzamalouka, G. (2018). Under-reporting 
bicycle accidents to police in the COST TU1101 international survey: Cross-country comparisons and 
associated factors. Accident; analysis and prevention, 110, 177–186. 
==PAGE:43==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
 
39 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2017.09.018  
 
Sidebottom, A., & Johnson, S.D. (2014). Bicycle Theft. In: Bruinsma, G., Weisburd, D. (eds) Encyclopedia of 
Criminology and Criminal Justice. Springer, New York, NY. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-5690-2_13  
 
Şimşekoğlu, Ö. (2015) How Do Attitudes, Personality Traits, and Driver Behaviors Relate to Pedestrian 
Behaviors?: A Turkish Case, Traffic Injury Prevention, 16(1), 84-89. 10.1080/15389588.2014.880785  
 
Stelling-Konczak, A., van Wee, G.P., Commandeur, J.J.F., & Hagenzieker, M. (2017). Mobile phone 
conversations, listening to music and quiet (electric) cars: Are traffic sounds important for safe 
cycling?. Accident; analysis and prevention, 106, 10–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2017.05.014  
 
Sullman, M.J., Thomas, A., & Stephens, A.N. (2012). The road user behaviour of school students in 
Belgium. Accident; analysis and prevention, 48, 495–504. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2012.03.004  
 
Tavakol, M., & Dennick, R. (2011). Making sense of Cronbach's alpha. International journal of medical 
education, 2, 53–55. https://doi.org/10.5116/ijme.4dfb.8dfd  
 
Tourangeau, R., Rips, L.J., & Rasinski, K. (2000). The psychology of survey response. Cambridge. 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
UN General Assembly (2015). Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
A/RES/70/1. https://www.refworld.org/docid/57b6e3e44.html  
 
Useche S.A., Alonso F., Montoro L., & Esteban C. (2018a). Distraction of cyclists: how does it influence their 
risky behaviors and traffic crashes? PeerJ, 6:e5616. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.5616  
 
Useche, S.A., Montoro, L., Tomas, J., & Cendales, B. (2018b). Validation of the Cycling Behavior 
Questionnaire: A tool for measuring cyclists' road behaviors. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic 
Psychology and Behaviour, 58, 1021-1030. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2018.08.003  
 
Useche S., Montoro L., Alonso F., & Oviedo-Trespalacios O. (2018c). Infrastructural and Human Factors 
Affecting Safety Outcomes of Cyclists. Sustainability 2018, 10(2), 299. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10020299  
 
Useche, S.A., Alonso, F., Montoro, L., & Esteban, C. (2019). Explaining self-reported traffic crashes of 
cyclists: An empirical study based on age and road risky behaviors. Safety Science, 113, 105-114. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2018.11.021 
 
Useche, S.A., Alonso, F., & Montoro, L. (2020). Validation of the Walking Behavior Questionnaire (WBQ): 
A tool for measuring risky and safe walking under a behavioral perspective.  Journal of Transport & Health, 
18, 100899. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2020.100899 
 
Useche, S.A., Esteban, C., Alonso, F., & Montoro, L. (2021). Are Latin American cycling commuters “at risk”? 
A comparative study on cycling patterns, behaviors, and crashes with non-commuter cyclists. Accident 
Analysis & Prevention, 150, 105915. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2020.105915 
 
Useche, S.A., Alonso, F., Boyko, A., Buyvol, P., Castañeda, I., Cendales, B., … Montoro, L. (2022). Cross-
culturally approaching the cycling behaviour questionnaire (CBQ): Evidence from 19 countries. 
==PAGE:44==
Casper Lind Larsen / Cyclist Behaviour in the Danish and German Population (2023) 
 
40 
Transportation 
Research 
Part 
F: 
Traffic 
Psychology 
and 
Behaviour 
91, 
386-400. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2022.10.025 
 
Useche, S.A., Alonso, F., Boyko, A., Buyvol, P., Castañeda, I., Cendales, B., Cervantes, A., Echiburu, T., Faus, 
M., Feitosa, Z., Gene, J., Gonzalez-Marin, A., Gonzalez, V., Gnap, J., Ibrahim, M.K., Janstrup, K.H. Javadinejad, A., 
Makarova, I., McIlroy, R., … Montoro, L. (2022) Cross-culturally approaching the cycling behaviour 
questionnaire (CBQ): Evidence from 19 countries, Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and 
Behaviour, 91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2022.10.025  
 
Useche, S.A., Marin, C., & Llamazares, F.J. (2023). Another (hard) day moving in the city: Development and 
validation of the MCSS, a Multimodal Commuting Stress Scale. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic 
Psychology and Behaviour [Forthcoming] 
 
World Health Organization (2018). Global status report on road safety 2018. World Health Organization. 
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241565684  
 
World Health Organization (2019). Guidelines on physical activity, sedentary behaviour and sleep for 
children under 5 years of age. World Health Organization. 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/311664  
 
Yannis, G., Nikolaou, D., Laiou, A., Stürmer, Y., Buttler, I., & Jankowska-Karpa, D. (2020). Vulnerable road 
users: Cross-cultural perspectives on performance and attitudes. IATSS Research, 44. 220-229. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iatssr.2020.08.006  
 
Yannis, G., Papadimitriou, E., Lejeune, P., Treny, V., Hemdorff, S., Bergel, R., Haddak, M., Holló, P., Cardose, 
J., Bijleveld, F., Houwing, S., & Bjørnskau, T. (2005). State-of-the-art report on risk and exposure data. 
Deliverable D2.1 of the EU FP6 project SafetyNet, European Commission. 
https://swov.nl/system/files/publication-downloads/2005_fbij-sho_deliverable-d2-1_safetynet.pdf  
 
==PAGE:45==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
