==PAGE:1==
The use of metal-organic frameworks as moisture
buffer material in the Nordic climate
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Master Thesis
Author: Oliver Søndergaard Rasmussen, s173740
Supervisor: Menghao Qin
March 2023
==PAGE:2==
ii
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was carried out as the final project to finish the M.Sc program in Civil
engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
It corresponds to 35 ECTS points and was carried out in the period from the 1st
of September 2022 to the 1st of March 2023.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Great thanks to my supervisor Menghao Qin for giving me inspiration and ideas
for the direction of the project and always being available to help with any problem
I might have.
I would also like to thank Ph.d student Dong Ding for the great assistance during
the climate chamber measurements, and Kurt Kielsgaard Hansen for offering me
to use the climate chamber for several months.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Energy efficiency is on the agenda, and the building sector is accountable for a third
of the worlds primary energy, with HVAC systems responsible for 40% of building
energy consumption. In some climate zones a large part of a buildings operational
energy is used by the air conditioning system to control humidity by removing
moisture from the air. The moisture buffering of materials exposed to the indoor
air reduces the daily humidity fluctuations by adsorbing moisture from the air,
when humidity levels rise, and releasing it back, when humidity levels decrease.
Common building materials have limited moisture buffering capabilities, but a
novel class of material, metal-organic frameworks (MOF), has shown excellent
ability to adsorb and release moisture with typical indoor humidity variations.
The introduction of some of these MOFs to the indoor climate has been a hot
topic in recent research, and has shown the potential to reduce energy spent on
humidity control.
These MOFs are not as accessible as typical building materials, which encourages
the investigation of how to use them as efficiently as possible. The impact of the
moisture buffering of a material depends greatly on the thickness of the material
and the climate in which it is used. Few papers have investigated the relationship
between moisture buffer performance to thickness. The energy saving potential
of MOFs has been investigated for many different climates, but not much for the
Nordic climate.
In this paper a numerical model has been designed, which calculates moisture
accumulation in a material over time when exposed to varying relative humidity at
its surface. The model was validated by comparison to theory and other literature,
where good agreement was found.
The model has been used to find the moisture buffer capabilities of a metal-organic
framework material, MIL-100(Fe), at different thicknesses, which was used to sug-
gest the most efficient thickness for a given environment. The model was also used
to simulate for the case of a MIL-100(Fe) panel placed in a typical office space
located in the Nordic climate using climate data from Copenhagen.
The results have shown good potential to save energy. The effect is especially
significant in the spring and fall. In the summer months, the saving potential is
limited, however, because the material cannot properly regenerate overnight due
to the high outdoor humidity.
v
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Greek letters
α
Ratio factor
-
βν
Convective moisture transfer coefficient
m s−1
ˆβ
Gradient of linear increase of MBV or MBC
-
δν
Water vapor permeability
m2 s−1
η
Air exchange rate
s−1
ν
Vapor concentration
kg m−3
νs
Saturation vapor concentration
kg m−3
ρ
Density
kg m−3
ρa
Density of air
kg m−3
ϕ
Relative humidity
-
ω
Humidity ratio
kg kg−1
air
ωi
Humidity ratio indoors
kg kg−1
air
ωe
Humidity ratio outdoors
kg kg−1
air
vi
==PAGE:7==
Latin letters
A
Area
m2
bv
Vapor effusivity
m s−1/2
Bi
Biot number
-
dt
Duration of one time step
s
dx
Thickness of one element
m
Gi
Internal moisture sources
kg s−1
GMOF
Moisture uptake rate of MOF panel
kg s−1
gv
Vapor transfer rate
kg m−2 s−1
grad
Moisture content gradient indicator
-
L
Thickness of material
m
Leff
Efficient thickness
m
Lopt
Optimal thickness
m
m
Mass
kg, g
mi
Mass of dry air indoors
kg
MBC
Moisture buffer capacity
g m−2
MBV
Moisture buffer value
g m−2 %−1
p
Pressure
Pa
ps
Saturation pressure
Pa
p0
Atmospheric pressure
Pa
Ra
Gas constant of atmospheric air, 287
J kg−1 K−1
r0
Latent heat of vaporization of water, 2260
kJ kg−1
Rv
Gas constant of water vapor, 461.5
J kg−1 K−1
t
Time
s
tp
Duration of one full cycle
s
T
Temperature
K
w
Moisture content
kg m−3
x
Position or depth
m
vii
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
Abstract
v
Nomenclature
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature study and theory
3
2.1
Moisture buffering in the indoor climate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Moisture transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Water vapor diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2
Moisture accumulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.3
Adsorption of water vapor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.4
Two specific moisture accumulation cases of interest . . . . .
7
2.3
MBV theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
Ideal MBV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Practical MBV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.3
MBV of typical building materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Existing models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Properties of MIL-100(Fe) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Energy saving potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6.1
Calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Numerical model
19
3.1
Numerical model for MBV calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.2
Dampening at longer time steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
viii
==PAGE:9==
3.1.3
Program inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Hysteresis and its influence on the desorption curve . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Energy saving potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.1
Building and climate data for testing . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Practical MBV measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Results
29
4.1
MBV and thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
MBV results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Efficient thickness and bi-linear method . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.3
MBV to thickness gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.4
Humidity variation dependency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Energy saving potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Model validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.1
Lumped case and semi-infinite case . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2
Ideal MBV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.3
Practical MBV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Discussion
39
5.1
MBV and thickness relation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.1
Validation of the numerical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Energy saving potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.1
Validation of the energy saving potential . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Conclusion
42
A MATLAB code
48
ix
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Relative humidity in the indoor climate has on many occasions been shown to have
an impact on occupant well-being and health [1–3], and is therefore important to
control. The energy needed to achieve acceptable indoor humidity is different for
different parts of the world, and in many places a large part of a the operational
energy of buildings is used on humidity control [4–8]. HVAC is responsible for
around 20% of the energy consumption in developed western countries [9–11], and
according the Danish Energy Agency, the building sector makes up almost 40% of
energy the total energy consumption in Denmark. This makes HVAC an important
research topic, with reduction of energy use and emissions being a major center of
attention globally.
Humidity is often controlled actively by air conditioning, but one way of passively
controlling humidity is with moisture buffering. The moisture buffering of some
traditional building materials has a noticeable impact on the indoor humidity
fluctuations [12–14]. In recent years, however, a novel class of materials, Metal-
Organic Frameworks (MOFs), is being researched, and the structure of some of
these MOFs allow them to adsorb and release large amounts of water in indoor
climate conditions. This means they have excellent moisture buffering capabili-
ties, and some studies have found MOFs to have good potential in reducing the
operational cost of humidity control [4–6].
One material that has shown such potential is MIL-100(Fe). With MIL-100(Fe)
not being mass produced like other traditional building materials, it is more pre-
cious, and more focus should be put on applying it efficiently. Several studies
have investigated the change of moisture buffering capabilities of a material with
change in material parameters and when placed under different circumstances.
The thickness of the material has been shown to have a large impact [15–18], mak-
ing finding the most efficient thickness relevant for introducing MIL-100(Fe) as a
moisture buffer material in the indoor climate.
1
==PAGE:11==
A model has already been proposed, which can be used to find the most efficient
thickness for most materials [15]. This model uses the average of the adsorption
and desorption curves as an approximation for faster calculations. This is a good
approximation for most materials, and it is an approach adopted from much other
literature. MIL-100(Fe) experiences more hysteresis than most materials, however,
and one of the observations made during this project is, that averaging the sorption
curves is likely to overestimate the moisture buffer capabilities.
In this project, a numerical model is proposed, that can include hysteresis in the
material. This model calculates moisture and vapor content through a material
over time based on given material parameters and environmental conditions. The
program can be run with multiple thicknesses simultaneously in order to investi-
gate the relationship between a materials moisture buffering capabilities and the
thickness of the material. Applying the model to MIL-100(Fe), the most efficient
thickness of MIL-100(Fe) will be found. The model will also be used to simulate
the energy saving potential of using a MIL-100(Fe) panel with this thickness in an
office in the Nordic Climate (Copenhagen).
2
==PAGE:12==
2
Literature study and theory
This section gives an overview of the literature and theory surrounding moisture
buffering, which has been studied during this project. It gives an overview of what
the project is about and should include all the background for calculations done
in later chapters.
2.1
Moisture buffering in the indoor climate
For a typical room, moisture is added from the occupants using the room during the
day, and is removed by ventilation. Normal ventilation removes moisture simply by
replacing the humid indoor air with less humid outdoor air, and since the outdoor
air tends to be less humid at nighttime, ventilation has a higher potential to remove
moisture then. This miss match causes the humidity in the typical indoor climate
to fluctuate with high values later in the day and low values at night and in the
morning.
Cases, where this fluctuation causes the humidity to exceed healthy
and comfortable levels, are when we start to use additional energy on controlling
the humidity, typically when the relative humidity (RH) is high during human
occupation. The recommendation of the Danish Working Environment Authority
for relative humidity level to avoid discomfort is 25% to 60% [19].
Moisture buffering in materials works via moisture adsorbing to surfaces in the
material, when the indoor humidity level increases, and is released again when the
humidity decreases. This is illustrated on figure 2.1 and 2.2. The effect of moisture
buffering is, that the fluctuations are reduced, resulting in less moisture having to
be removed from the air, when it exceeds the level at which it is being controlled.
The moisture buffering potential of most common materials with exposed surfaces
in rooms is limited, and it is generally not worth it to add more of these materials
to a room for the sole purpose of moisture buffering. Some MOFs, however, have
been shown to have very good moisture buffering capabilities, and could assist
3
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: As the humidity rises
from internal sources such as occu-
pants, materials in the room will
adsorb moisture from the air. Pic-
tures from the internet were used to
create this figure.
Figure 2.2: With humidity sources
gone,
and
ventilation
removing
moisture, the humidity decreases.
Adsorbed moisture is released back
to the air. The picture was taken
from the internet.
the air conditioning system - or completely replace it depending on the room -
by controlling humidity passively, thus reducing the operational energy used by
buildings.
2.2
Moisture transfer
The moisture transport occurs mainly by diffusion and the moisture is retained
by the material via adsorption in pores. These are the most important physical
mechanics present during moisture buffering, and theory on this is presented in
this section.
2.2.1
Water vapor diffusion
Diffusion is essentially unprovoked mixing of fluids, where the mixing happens
solely from molecules moving randomly between each other while approaching a
uniform distribution of all the different molecules present in the volume containing
them. This is illustrated on figure 2.3.
The flux of molecules goes from regions of high molecule density to regions of low
molecule density. For vapor diffusion this molecule density is often represented
as vapor pressure or, as in this report, vapor content. The flux is driven by this
vapor content gradient and is described by Fick’s first law. This is a differential
4
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Figure showing diffusion of two gases. Taken from the lecture notes
of the course Heat and Mass Transfer in Buildings [20]. 1) Gases are separated
by a wall. 2) The wall is removed and the gases start to mix by diffusion. 3)
Equilibrium has been reached.
equation, which for water vapor in one dimension is given as:
gv = −δν
∂ν
∂x
(2.1)
where gv is the vapor transfer rate [kg m−2 s−1], ν is water vapor concentration
[kg m−3], x is position or length [m], δν is water vapor permeability [m2 s−1].
2.2.2
Moisture accumulation
When moisture diffuses in and out of a material during a daily cycle it accumulates
and releases.
The accumulation in a volume happens when the vapor content
gradient is not constant causing a different amount of vapor to enter from one side,
than what leaves from the other side, see figure 2.4. The accumulated amount over
Figure 2.4: Vapor transfer rate through an infinitesimally thin element.
time can be expressed as:
5
==PAGE:15==
∂m
∂t =

gv −

gv + ∂gv
∂x dx

· A
∂m
∂t = −∂gv
∂x dx A
∂w
∂t = −∂gv
∂x
(2.2)
where w is the total moisture content [kg m−3], m is the mass of moisture [kg].
w includes both vapor and adsorbed moisture. The relation between change of
total moisture content and change of vapor content is described by the sorption
isotherm and can be expressed as:
∂w
∂t = ∂ν
∂t · ∂w
∂ν
(2.3)
Inserting equation 2.1 and 2.3 into 2.2 yields:
∂ν
∂t · ∂w
∂ν = δ∂2ν
∂x2
(2.4)
This equation is Fick’s second law, and is the governing differential equation of
vapor content in one dimension through a material, when vapor diffusion is the
only driving force of moisture.
For the case of moisture accumulation in a material with thickness L and only one
external surface, the boundary conditions at the surface and back are:
gv = −δν
∂ν
∂t = β · (νa −ν)
x = 0
(2.5a)
gv = −δν
∂ν
∂t = 0
x = L
(2.5b)
where βν is the convective moisture transfer coefficient [m s−1], νa is the ambient
vapor content [kg m−3], L is the thickness of the material [m].
2.2.3
Adsorption of water vapor
As the vapor content in the material increases, the moisture will start to stick to
surfaces in the material. This is adsorption. How much moisture is adsorped at
6
==PAGE:16==
different vapor contents is described by the sorption isotherm (or sorption curve)
of a material. Figure 2.5 shows the sorption curves of two different example ma-
terials. Sometimes the curve looks different depending on whether the material is
adsorbing or releasing moisture. This happens due to hysteresis.
Figure 2.5: Example of a sorption curve for two different materials. I) Adsorption
and desorption curves are different due to hysteresis. II) The adsorbed amount is
always the same at any given vapor content.
Adsorption in metal-organic frameworks happens in different ways. The different
types of adsorption of interest in this report happen at different pore sizes. MOFs
are often microporous or mesoporous materials [21]. Micropores are of size <2 nm
and mesopores are sized 2-50 nm. In these micropores first-order phase transitions
are observed, and the adsorption is continuous and reversible. For increased pore
sizes passing into the mesopore regime, the condensation pressures start to be
lower than the evaporation pressures, causing hysteresis loops. As the pore size
increases, the hysteresis loop becomes wider up to pore sizes of around 10 nm. For
pores large than this, the hysteresis loop width decreases as both condensation
and evaporation pressures approach atmospheric pressure [22].
2.2.4
Two specific moisture accumulation cases of interest
For the case of an infinite slab with constant vapor content throughout, and where
the ambient vapor content has suddenly changed to be different from the vapor
content in the slab, the moisture accumulation can be calculated as:
m(t) = A 2 bv (νa −ν0)
√π
√
t
(2.6)
where m is the accumulated mass of moisture [m], νa is the ambient vapor content
and ν0 is the starting vapor content in the slab [kg m−3].
7
==PAGE:17==
bv is the vapor effusivity which can be calculated as:
bv =
r
δν
∂w
∂ν
(2.7)
A different case is the lumped analysis case, where the vapor in a material is
considered uniformly distributed. The lumped case can be assumed, when the
Biot number is small. The Biot number is defined as:
Bi = L · βν
δν
(2.8)
The vapor content in the material can in this case be described by the differential
equation:
ν(t) = νa −∂w
∂ν
L
βν
∂ν(t)
∂t
(2.9)
The solution to this equation is:
ν(t) = νa + (ν0 −νa) e
−
βν
∂w
∂ν
L t
(2.10)
2.3
MBV theory
The moisture buffer value (MBV) is a parameter, that was introduced by Rode et
al. in 2005 [23]. It explains the moisture buffering capability of a material and is
defined as mass uptake and release per area per change in relative humidity over
a cyclic period of time, where the relative humidity changes between a higher and
lower value. Two approaches to the MBV are described in the literature; the ideal
MBV and practical MBV [23, 24].
2.3.1
Ideal MBV
The ideal MBV is the theoretical MBV of a semi-infinite material, that can be
calculated given a few material parameters. An expression has been found analyt-
ically for the case, where the ambient RH constantly changes between the value
ϕ1 for the duration α · tp and ϕ2 for the duration (1 −α) · tp [23, 24]. tp is the
duration of one cycle and α is the fraction of the cycle spent at the first RH, ϕ1.
It has been solved for the humidity changing harmonically as a sine wave and as
a step change. The step change solution by Zhang M et al. is explained here [24].
8
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.6: Relative humidity step change variation and harmonic variation.
The RH variation for the step change case is seen on figure 2.6 and can be written
as equation 2.11.
ϕ(t) =
(
ϕ1,
if (k −1) tp < t < (k −1 + α) tp
ϕ2,
if (k −1 + α) tp < t < k tp
k ∈Z
(2.11)
Using the Fourier transform on ϕ(t) yields:
ϕ(t) = a0
2 +
∞
X
n=1

an cos nπt
tp
+ bn sin nπt
tp

(2.12)
where
a0
2 = ϕ1α + ϕ2 (1 −α)
an = ϕ1 −ϕ2
nπ
(sin (αnπ) −sin ((1 −α) nπ))
bn = ϕ1 −ϕ2
nπ
(1 + cos (nπ) −cos (αnπ) −cos ((1 −α)nπ))
(2.13)
Based on this equation and Fick’s law from equation 2.1, the moisture flux over
the surface can be expressed:
gv(t) =
∞
X
n=1
δϕan
s
nπ
δϕtp
∂w
∂ϕ cos
nπt
tp
+ π
4

+ δϕbn
s
nπ
δϕtp
∂w
∂ϕ sin
nπt
tp
+ π
4

(2.14)
9
==PAGE:19==
The accumulated moisture uptake and release is the same over each respective
period, and can be found by integrating the moisture flux over either period, for
example:
G =
Z αtp
0
gv(t)dt
(2.15)
Plugging equations 2.13 and 2.14 into 2.15 and simplifying yields:
G = µ(ϕ1 −ϕ2)
s
δϕ
∂w
∂ϕ (α(1 −α))κ
r
tp
π
(2.16)
µ equals 2.253 and κ is approximately 0.535 [23], giving:
G ≈1.27(ϕ1 −ϕ2)
s
δϕ
∂w
∂ϕ (α(1 −α))0.535p
tp
(2.17)
Since the moisture buffer value is uptake per area per difference in relative humid-
ity, the ideal MBV can be expressed as:
MBVideal =
G
∆ϕ · 100% = 0.0127 · (α(1 −α))0.535 ·
s
δϕ
∂w
∂ϕ
p
tp
(2.18)
Translating the equation to expressed for vapor content instead of relative humidity
gives:
MBVideal = 0.0127 · (α(1 −α))0.535 · νs
r
δν
∂w
∂ν
p
tp
(2.19)
where MBV is given in [kg m−2 %−1].
2.3.2
Practical MBV
The practical MBV is, as the name suggests, a more practical approach to the
moisture buffer value. It is an experimental method, where the MBV is calculated
using results found from doing measurements in a climate chamber.
The NORDTEST way of measuring is a gravimetric method, where a sample of
the material is placed on a scale in a climate chamber. The temperature is at a
constant 23 ◦C, and the humidity cycles between 33% RH for 16 hours and 75%
RH for 8 hours. During high humidity the material adsorbs moisture, and during
10
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.7: Picture of a climate chamber used for MBV measurements.
low humidity moisture is released, both of which is registered by the scale. This
weight change can be used to calculate MBV.
MBV =
∆m
A · ∆ϕ · 100
(2.20)
where ∆m is the difference between the mass of the sample at the end of the high
and low cycles respectively [kg], A is the area of the surface of the sample exposed
to the climate chamber air [m2], ∆ϕ is the RH difference between the high and
low humidity cycles [%].
The MBV is very dependent on the conditions under which it is being measured,
for example temperature, RH, air movement in the chamber and thickness of the
material. Having a standard way of measuring MBV is therefore useful, so that
different materials can be compared easily.
The ideal MBV as defined in section 2.3.1 and the practical MBV has mostly the
same ambience conditions, but there is often a difference between the results. This
is due to assumptions made when calculating the ideal MBV; no surface moisture
transfer resistance, infinite thickness, constant moisture properties, perfectly stable
RH. Given these conditions and a linear sorption curve, the ideal MBV and the
practical MBV should be the same.
11
==PAGE:21==
The upside of the practical MBV is, that it is more realistic, and that it does not
use the same assumptions as the ideal MBV. For example the MBV can be found
for a material with a thickness that is smaller than its penetration depth. The
downside is that it requires a climate chamber, and it takes several days to do the
experiment. This contrasts the ideal MBV, which can be calculated quickly, but is
less applicable due to the assumptions it is based on. The difference between the
values depends on how closely the sample being measured matches the assumption
made for calculating the ideal MBV.
2.3.3
MBV of typical building materials
Table 2.1 shows the practical MBV found for some typical building materials [23].
These MBVs are for the material with the thickness around or larger than the
penetration depth. Experimental setup was 8 hours at 75% RH and 16 hours at
33% RH.
Table 2.1: MBV of some typical building materials
Material
MBVprac, g/(m2 %)
Spruce boards
1.22
Concrete
0.42
Laminated wood
0.46
Lightweight aggregate concrete
0.74
A classification of the moisture buffer capacity of a material has been suggested
to follow table 2.2 [23].
Table 2.2: Classification of MBV at 8/16 hours and 75/33% RH [23]
MBVprac
Minimum MBV
Maximum MBV
Neglicible
0
0.2
Limited
0.2
0.5
Moderate
0.5
1
Good
1
2
Excellent
2
-
2.4
Existing models
Section 2.3 describes two methods of finding the MBV of a material; the practical
MBV and the ideal MBV. These methods each have their own downsides, with the
12
==PAGE:22==
practical MBV taking several days to measure and the ideal MBV not always being
applicable or realistic. A numerical model has been developed, that simulates the
moisture uptake of a material exposed to varying humidity conditions [15]. This
model finds the moisture buffer capacity (MBC) of the material, given as mass
uptake per surface area. The relation between MBC and MBV is simply that
MBV is also given per RH change:
MBC = MBV · ∆ϕ · 100
(2.21)
This model was developed as, and is, an easy way to find the optimal thickness of
a material, where the MBC is highest. The relation it found between MBC and
thickness of the material is illustrated on figure 2.8, which is taken from the article
[15]. It found three different stages:
- The growth stage covers the small thicknesses, where the moisture penetrates
the material completely. Here the relation between MBC and thickness is
approximately linear.
- The plateau stage covers large thicknesses, where moisture changes do not
affect the material in the back, because it is to far back for moisture to
penetrate.
Since added material in the back does not interact with the
moisture changes, the MBC remains constant for increasing thicknesses.
- The high-buffer stage is the region in between the growth stage and the
plateau stage, where the relation is more complicated. This is where the
thickness with the highest MBC is found, which the authors describe as
the optimal thickness. The reason, that the MBC decreases again after the
optimal thickness is, that the added material in the back injects and extracts
moisture similarly to the outside air, resulting in slower moisture transfer
through the surface.
The model was also used to find how the MBC changes with changes in other
material properties, but the MBC to thickness ratio was the primary focus, and is
most relevant to this report.
The model is based on a complex analytical calculation of the MBC at a given ma-
terial thickness. The program calculates the MBC at many different thicknesses to
get a curve from which the optimal thickness can be observed. The program is very
fast, because much of it is analytic calculation more than numerical simulation.
For this, however, it has to make assumptions, one of which is, that the sorption
curve is the same for adsorption and desorption. It averages the two curves. This
assumption is often reasonable and has been made in several other studies [15,
13
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.8: The relation between MBC and and thickness of a material. This
figure is taken from an article by H. Wan et al. 2019 [15].
24–26]. This way hysteresis loops are neglected. The assumption should therefore
be worse for materials with larger hysteresis loops, such as MIL-100(Fe), which is
investigated in this report. Since it is unclear how big the impact is of neglecting
the hysteresis loop, this will not be done without preliminary investigation.
A previous model proposed in 2018 by Maskel et al. [16], introduced the bi-linear
method. Statistical evidence was reported, showing that there is a thickness at
which there is no longer any increase of the MBC with increased thickness, and
that before this thickness, the MBC increases linearly. The bi-linear method is a
way to empirically determine the optimal thickness of a material as the intersection
between the initial linear increase in MBC and the later constant MBC. With this
definition the MBC can be calculated as:
MBC =
(ˆβL,
L < Lopt,bi
MBCmax
L ≥Lopt,bi
(2.22)
where ˆβ is the gradient of linear increase at low thicknesses, L is the thickness of
the material [m], Lopt,bi is the optimal thickness of the bi-linear method [m]. From
this the optimal thickness is:
Lopt,bi = MBCmax
ˆβ
(2.23)
This method proposes a very simplified, but easy way to find the optimal thickness
of a material. The MBC has been shown to follow the more detailed relation with
14
==PAGE:24==
thickness seen on figure 2.8 [15]. While the optimal thickness is different for the two
methods, the bi-linear method could still combined with the more sophisticated
MBC to thickness relation to find the end of the growth stage, also referred to as
the efficient thickness, see figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: The bi-linear method applied to the numerical MBC model. The graph
is copied from H Wan et al. 2019 [15]. The text ’proposed method’ was replaced
with ’numerical MBC method’ to avoid confusion, as it is not the same model
proposed in this report.
2.5
Properties of MIL-100(Fe)
MIL-100(Fe) is a MOF material, that has been shown to be able to adsorb large
amounts of moisture in a humidity range, similar to what is seen in the indoor
climate. The properties of MIL-100(Fe) are found in other literature and are listed
in this section.
The sorption curve has been found using dynamic vapor sorption (DVS) by X.
Feng et al. [4]. It is seen on figure 2.10. DVS is a gravimetric method, that
measures how much moisture is adsorbed at different levels of RH. The weight of
a sample is measured on a micro balance starting at 0% RH. The RH is increased
in small steps, each time waiting for the mass to be constant. It continues like this
up to, in this case, 95% for the adsorption curve, after which it slowly decreases
back to 0% to find the desorption curve.
The dry density was found by P. Horcajada et al. to be 690 kg m−3 [27].
Three different studies have reported the permeability of MIL-100(Fe) to be 6.00 ·
15
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.10: Sorption isotherm from X. Feng et al. 2018 [4]. Found by DVS.
10−6, 6.93 · 10−6 and 8.73 · 10−6 m2 s−1 respectively [5, 28, 29]. In each instance
the cup method was used to find the permeability. The difference in permeability
could be caused by a few things. Firstly, samples being compressed differently.
Second, the fact that the value calculated using the cup method includes the
surface resistance in the value. Third, impurities in the material. Which value is
most correct for the simulations in this project is unknown, so the mean is used.
The mean value is 7.22 · 10−6 m2 s−1.
The MBV of a 3 mm sample has been reported to be 7.4 ± 0.2 g m−2 %−1 [4].
2.6
Energy saving potential
The air conditioning system uses energy removing moisture from the air, when the
humidity level is too high. Moisture buffering saves energy by removing moisture
from the air as the humidity level rises, resulting in less moisture having to be
removed by the air condition system.
The rate of moisture removed by a MOF panel placed in a room depends on the
humidity in the room and how much moisture is already adsorped by the panel. In
a typical room the humidity is affected by ventilation, infiltration, internal moisture
sources and sinks, diffusion through the building envelope and air conditioning.
16
==PAGE:26==
2.6.1
Calculation
A similar approach to the calculation done by X Feng et al. 2018 is used [4]. For
this calculation it is simpler to use the humidity ratio rather than vapor content
or pressure, to not have to include temperature in the formulae. The relation
between vapor content and humidity ratio is:
ω = Ra
Rv
pv
p0 −pv
=
ν
ρa,dry
≈ν
ρa
(2.24)
where ω is humidity ratio [kg kg−1
air], pv is vapor pressure [Pa], p0 is atmospheric
pressure [Pa], Ra and Rv are the gas constant of atmospheric air and water vapor
[J kg−1 K−1], ρa is the density of air [kg m−3].
Infiltration is often negligible compared to the mechanical ventilation rate, and the
building envelope almost always has a vapor barrier. Therefore infiltration and
diffusion through the envelope can be neglected. The temperature in the room is
assumed constant and mixing is assumed perfect meaning the vapor distribution
is uniform. Based on this lumped approach an equation can be expressed for the
change of humidity in a typical room, where a plate of MOF has been introduced
as a moisture sink:
∂ωi
∂t = Gi
mi
−GMOF
mi
−(ωi −ωe) · η
(2.25)
where i and e subscripts are interior and exterior, mi is the total mass of the
dry air in the room [kg], Gi is moisture sources [kg s−1], GMOF is the moisture
transfer through the surface of the MOF plate [kg s−1], η is air exchange rate from
ventilation [s−1].
GMOF can be expressed from equation 2.5a:
GMOF = (νi −νMOF,s) · β · AMOF
(2.26)
where νMOF,s is the vapor content at the surface in the MOF plate [kg m−3].
Equation 2.25 is solved numerically in this project, but can be solved analytically
when GMOF is a known function [4]:
ωi = e−mv
mi t
mv
mi
Z
ωe(t)e
mv
mi dt + ωi(0) −(Gi + GMOF)Vi
mv

+ (Gi + GMOF)Vi
mv
(2.27)
where mv is the mass of ventilation air [kg], ωi(0) is the initial indoor humidity
[kg kg−1
air], Vi is the volume of the room [m3].
17
==PAGE:27==
Considering equation 2.27 with and without MOF, the total latent load removed
by the MOF can be found as:
Q = r0mi
Z t2
t1
(ωi,noMOF −ωi,MOF)dt
(2.28)
where Q is the latent load removed by the MOF [J], r0 is the latent heat of
vaporization [J kg−1], t2 and t1 are the time when human occupation starts and
ends [s].
18
==PAGE:28==
3
Numerical model
This chapter contains the description of a numerical model that simulates diffusion
of vapor and adsorption in a material. Additionally, another model, based on the
first model, used for calculating the energy saving potential of a panel of moisture
buffer material in a room, is described. The code can be viewed in the appendix.
3.1
Numerical model for MBV calculation
The program simulates the MBV of a material in a way that is similar to how
the practical MBV is measured, as explained in section 2.3.2, but where the mea-
surements happen in the computer rather than the climate chamber. That means
it considers the case where one plane surface is exposed to the ambient air and
no moisture transfer occurs through any other surfaces. The ambient RH changes
between two constant values, causing the material to adsorp and release moisture.
3.1.1
Calculation
The moisture transfer can be assumed to happen in one dimension into the ma-
terial, x.
For the calculation, the material is divided into smaller elements in
the x-direction, where the thickness of each element is dx. The vapor and total
moisture content in each separate element is assumed uniform. The transport of
moisture happens via vapor diffusion, where the driving force is the vapor pres-
sure gradient through the material as per Fick’s first law seen in equation 2.1. The
vapor transfer rate between two elements is calculated as:
gv,1 = δv · νn−1 −νn
dx
(3.1)
where dx is the distance between the center of each element [m].
Time, t, is similarly divided into time steps of size dt. Vapor transfer through an
element is visualized on figure 3.1. It is similar to figure 2.4, when deducing Fick’s
19
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.1: Vapor transfer between neighboring elements. The thickness of each
element is dx and the distant between the center of each element is dx.
second law, but for the numerical case we already calculate the vapor transfer
through each surface of the element. The vapor transfer between two elements
over the duration of one time step can be deduced from this:
dmv = (gv,1 −gv,2) · A · dt
dmv ·
1
dx · A = (gv,1 −gv,2) · A · dt ·
1
dx · A
dw = (gv,1 −gv,2) · dt
dx
(3.2)
where mv is mass of vapor [kg], dw is the change of total moisture content over
one time step [kg m−3], dx is the thickness of the element [m].
Interesting here is, that inserting equation 3.1 in equation 3.2 is the same as Fick’s
second law from equation 2.4 for the case where dx and dt are infinitely small, and
where no adsorption occurs, meaning that dw = dν, or ∂w
∂ν = 1.
It is important to note, that dw in equation 3.2 actually represents the total change
of moisture content in an element that happens from vapor transfer with one of
its neighboring elements and must be calculated for each neighbor.
Both the
outermost element and the deepest element have only one neighboring element,
and since the outermost layer is exposed to the ambient air, the transfer between
the air and this element must also be calculated. The vapor transfer rate at the
boundaries are very similar to equation 2.5a and 2.5b can be expressed as:
gv =
dν
dx
2δv + 1
βv
Through the front surface
(3.3a)
gv = 0
Through the back surface
(3.3b)
After finding the vapor transfer with equations 3.1, 3.2, 3.3a and 3.3b, the ad-
sorption is calculated. As moisture diffuses and the humidity rises throughout
20
==PAGE:30==
the material, it is adsorped or ”removed” from the air according to the sorption
isotherm - and similarly when the humidity decreases, is the moisture released
again. For this a function is used, which takes the new w for each element after
the vapor transfer is calculated, and returns two values containing what the new ν
is at that w, one for adsorption (dw > 0) and on for desorption (dw < 0). The ad-
sorption and desorption curves are based on the DVS data found in literature and
presented on figure 2.10, where values in between data points are found calculated
using linear interpolation.
3.1.2
Dampening at longer time steps
The smaller dx and dt are, the more accurate, the results will be, and the more
time the simulation takes to run. Additionally, with small dx, the vapor transport
between elements from equation 3.2 becomes larger than the difference in vapor
content between those elements unless dt is also proportionally small. If the vapor
transport is larger than the vapor difference it can in some cases lead to wild vapor
content fluctuations, which results in wrong results. Avoiding this by reducing dt
results in very low dt values, and thus very long simulation run times. This can
also be avoided in a different way, in which the change in vapor content is limited at
10% of the difference in vapor content between two elements. That way the vapor
content in elements does not surpass both of its neighbors at the same time, which
would be impossible in reality, and it allows larger time steps. It is implemented
using the following sequence of equations, where a ’.’ before an operation means
it is an element wise operation:
limits =




max












νa
ν2
ν1
ν3
...
...
νn−1
νn

. −


ν1
ν2
...
νn






. ∗grad




∗0.1




.∗grad+


ν1
ν2
...
νn

(3.4)
First, calculation of a matrix containing two values for each element, the difference
to the element on either side of it. For each element it is multiplied by that ele-
ments corresponding value in grad; a vector containing information about whether
moisture content is increasing or decreasing for each element (1 if increasing, -1
if decreasing). This ensures that the highest value in each row is positive, after
which the ’max’ function is used to create a new vector only containing the highest
vapor content difference each element has to a neighbor. This difference is mul-
tiplied by 10% to get the limits of how much the vapor content in each element
can change. These limits are multiplied element wise by grad again to reapply the
information of whether the moisture content is increasing or decreasing. The limit
to how much the vapor content can change is finally added to the current vapor
21
==PAGE:31==
content to give a vector containing a value that the vapor content must not exceed
for each element. The code can be viewed in the appendix.
When this dampening is applied, it does not reverse the moisture transfer but
rather makes the additional vapor, that was removed by the limit be stored as ad-
sorped moisture. This is theoretically wrong and causes the program to overshoot
the transfer rate. This overshooting is, however, very limited due to the small
time steps, that the dampening is only needed for short periods of time, when
an element changes from adsorption to desorption or opposite (and only for some
sorption curves (explained in section 3.2)).
The MBV was calculated two times for the case with 5 mm thickness and the con-
servative sorption curve (explained in section 3.2), where the dampening happens
most often. One time with 0.005 second time steps without dampening and 0.5
second time steps with dampening. The MBV difference was less than 1% and the
run time reduced drastically.
3.1.3
Program inputs
Table 3.1 contains a list of inputs, that the program needs to run. Other things
such as temperature, dx can dt also be changed, and different function exist for,
for example different sorption approaches and or harmonic ambient humidity vari-
ation.
Table 3.1: Program inputs
Material parameters
Dry density, ρdry
Sorption isotherm data points, [wad(ϕ), wde(ϕ)]
Permeability, δ
Convective moisture transfer coefficient, β
List of thicknesses, [L1, L2, ..., Ln]
External surface area, [A]
Environment parameters
Relative humidity range, [ϕ1, ϕ2]
Duration of high/low humidity, [t1, t2]
22
==PAGE:32==
3.2
Hysteresis and its influence on the desorp-
tion curve
The sorption isotherm of MIL-100(Fe) seen on figure 2.10 shows two curves. The
adsorption curve is simply the limit of how much moisture can be adsorped in the
material at any given RH level. The desorption curve shows how much moisture
is still adsorbed as the RH decreases, specifically when starting at 95% RH. The
desorption curve will look different if the release starts after water uptake stopped
at 70% RH, since obviously the moisture content will not suddenly increase by a
large amount as the material starts releasing moisture. Because of this we know,
that the desorption curve is different depending on what the moisture content is,
when water uptake stops. The desorption curve is therefore unknown, but it is
still needed for calculations, and we must therefore make a qualified guess.
The moisture content during moisture release must be lower than the desorption
curve seen on figure 2.10, and it must be lower than the moisture content, when
moisture uptake stopped. Three approaches are investigated:
Figure 3.2: Alternative desorption curve shown with the DVS sorption curve found
in the literature study.
- The most conservative approach is having the RH decrease until it meets
the 95% desorption curve. This way there is no chance of overshooting the
23
==PAGE:33==
MBV.
- An approach that is commonly used in other literature is to average the
adsorption and desorption curves [15, 24–26], which is an approximation
that neglects hysteresis, making calculation much easier. For this reason it
can be considered advantageous, as long as the approximation is good.
- A third approach is to let the desorption curve follow the same curve as the
95% desorption curve, but shifted down to 75% as seen on figure 3.2.
Figure 3.3: MBV-thickness curve with different approaches to the desorption curve.
On figure 3.3 it is seen, that the desorption approach has a large impact on the
MBV value. The maximum MBV using the averaged curve is 157% higher than the
conservative approach to desorption and 24% higher than the alternative approach,
with the down-shifted desorption curve. From this it must be concluded, that the
MBV is very sensitive to how desorption occurs, and since the actual desorption
is unknown, the MBVs presented in the results are imprecise.
It is, however,
also seen, that the MBV has the same relation to the thickness, in that it follows
a similar curve.
The simulations done in this project will use the alternative
desorption approach.
24
==PAGE:34==
3.3
Energy saving potential
The energy saving potential is analysed using the theory explained in section 2.6,
and this section is a continuation of this and contains an analysis of the energy
saving potential on the basis of the model explained earlier in this chapter.
The humidity ratio in the room can be calculated through time by separating 2.25
and 2.26 and solving them numerically:
ωi,n+1 =
Gi,n
mi
−GMOF,n
mi
−(ωi,n −ωe,n) · η

· dt
(3.5)
GMOF,n+1 = (ωi,n+1 · ρa −νMOF,s,n+1) ·
1
dx
2·δν +
1
βν
· AMOF
(3.6)
The RH can be also be controlled, enabling air conditioning, when the RH exceeds
60%. Counting how much moisture is removed, if any, and adding it all over the
period, is then the total amount removed by the air conditioning.
∆mAC = GAC · mi
if ωi > νs · 0.6
ρa
(3.7)
where mAC is the mass of moisture removed by active air conditioning [kg], GAC
is the moisture removed by air conditioning, νs is the saturation vapor content
[kg m−3].
The difference in this amount, when comparing a simulation with and without a
MOF panel, is the total amount saved by adding the MOF panel.
mMOF = mAC,noMOF −mAC,MOF
(3.8)
The energy saved is calculated as:
Q = mMOF · r0
(3.9)
where r0 is the latent heat of vaporization for water vapor, 2260 kJ kg−1.
3.3.1
Building and climate data for testing
As discussed in section 2.6, the humidity variation in a room, which is assumed
at a constant temperature and perfectly mixed, is mainly impacted by internal
moisture gain, ventilation rate and the humidity control system.
25
==PAGE:35==
For the analysis of the energy saving potential a 48 m2 office space is investigated.
According to the Danish Working Environment Authority the minimum area per
occupant is 7 m2, so 6 people are assumed. The moisture load of a person at
normal conditions is 60 g h−1 resulting in 360 g h−1 total [30]. For adequate indoor
air quality and recommended CO2 levels the ventilation flow rate should be 83 L s
for category II, as per the guidelines of Danish Standard DS/EN 16798:2019 part
1 and 2 [31, 32]. That is an air change rate of 0.43 h−1.
The humidity contribution from ventilation is heavily dependent on the outdoor
climate. The energy saving potential is investigated for a building in the Nordic
climate. In this climate the humidity levels are typically only too high in summer
and too low in winter. The active air conditioning system can remove 226 W,
which corresponds to the latent load from the occupants. It only activates during
occupied hours, when the RH exceeds the limit of 60% set by the Danish Working
Environment Authority.
The whole year is investigated in this report, where a MOF panel is expected to
help reducing the energy used by the active air conditioning system.
Figure 3.4: The humidity dynamics visualized in the BESTEST room. The figure
is copied from an article [4].
The building used for simulations is the BESTEST case from the IEA ECBCS
annex 21 [33, 34]. All relevant room parameters used are seen in table 3.2.
The climate data used is the DRY 2013 of Copenhagen (Design Reference Year).
The only parameter needed for calculations from this data is the outdoor humidity
ratio.
The data set contains a single data point of temperature, RH and air
pressure for every hour of the year. From this the humidity ratio was calculated
using equation 2.24:
ωe = Ra
Rv
·
ϕe · ps
p0 −ϕe · ps
(3.10)
26
==PAGE:36==
Table 3.2: Building parameters used for simulations
Parameter
Values
Internal dimensions
6x8x2.7 m
Air change rate
0.43 h−1
Constant temperature
23 ◦C
Occupancy
9:00-17:00
Moisture gain during occupancy
360 g h−1
Air conditioning
226 W
where the value used for Ra was 287 J kg−1 K−1 and Rv was 461.5 J kg−1 K−1.
ps is the saturation vapor pressure which was calculated using the empirical for-
mula:
ps = 288.68 ·

1.098 + T −273.15K
100
8.02
(3.11)
3.4
Practical MBV measurement
The practical MBV was measured in the climate chamber seen on figure 2.7. The
temperature in the chamber was kept constant at 23.4±0.45 ◦C. The humidity was
controlled at 33.45±0.07% for 16 hours and 76.96±0.16% for 8 hours, and kept
changing between these levels until the average sample mass was constant over 24
hours.
Figure 3.5: Measurements of climate chamber experiment. Sample of 8.18 mm
thickness.
27
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.6: MIL-100(Fe) powder prepared in a petri-dish.
The measurements from one of the experiments with the sample thickness 8.18 mm
can be seen on figure along with relative humidity and temperature variations. On
figure 3.6 the sample is seen prepared in the petri-dish.
28
==PAGE:38==
4
Results
Results from the numerical model are presented in this chapter. These results are
compared with practical MBV results and calculation based on theory presented
in chapter 2.
4.1
MBV and thickness
The MBV was found at different thicknesses using the numerical model outlined
in chapter 3. The inputs used are seen in table 4.1. The alternative sorption curve
was used.
Table 4.1: Program inputs.
Material parameters
ρdry
690 kg m−3
[wad(ϕ), wde(ϕ)]
see appendix, RUNSCRIPT, variable: sorp
δv
7.22e−6 m2 s−1
βv
0.0027 m s−1
[L1, L2, ..., Ln]
see figure 4.1
Environment parameters
[ϕ1, ϕ2]
[0.75,0.33]
[t1, t2]
[28800,57600] s
4.1.1
MBV results
The MBV increases almost linearly with thickness at small thicknesses.
For
75/33% 8/16 hr step change variation, this is observed from 0 mm to 4.5 mm. At
higher thicknesses the MBV is constant, which starts to be seen at 12 mm. Be-
tween 4.5 mm and 12 mm there is a hump, and this is where the MBV is highest.
The highest MBV calculated is 4.83 g m−2 %−1 at the optimal thickness, 7 mm.
29
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.1: MBV of the MIL-100(Fe) at different thicknesses.
4.1.2
Efficient thickness and bi-linear method
The resulting MBV values at each investigated thickness are seen on figure 4.1.
The first three points at 1, 2 and 3 mm and one point from the plateau at 20 mm
were used with the bi-linear method from equation 2.23 to propose an Leff:
Leff =
MBVplateau

MBV1+MBV2+MBV3
L1+L2+L3
 =
4.65 g/(m2 %)

(1.48+2.77+3.73) g/(m2 %)
(1+2+3) mm
 = 3.50 mm
The efficient thickness, Leff, when using the bi-linear method, was found to be
3.50 mm for MIL-100(Fe) for a step change variation of 33/75% RH for 8/16 hours.
4.1.3
MBV to thickness gradient
One way to analyze the MBV to thickness curve is to look at the gradient of the
curve. Figure 4.3 shows how much the MBV increases when increasing the thick-
ness from any current thickness. That means, the first time the curve intersects
zero is the optimal thickness, or the highest possible MBV. The most efficient
thickness can similarly be found if you are able to place a value on MBV versus
value of the material per volume.
30
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.2: Visualization of the bi-linear
method used as a way of proposing an ef-
ficient thickness.
Figure 4.3: Gradient of the MBV to thick-
ness curve.
4.1.4
Humidity variation dependency
For comparing different humidity variations, the MBC value is more useful than
the MBV, since the MBV is dependent on the difference between high and low RH.
See equation 2.21 for changing between MBV and MBC. Using different ambient
RH variations resulted in both different MBC and different Leff. Figure 4.4 and
4.5 shows the MBC-thickness curves for different indoor RH variations.
Figure 4.4 shows the MBC thickness relation at different high and low humidity
limits. 75/33% are the limits used in the NORDTEST and 60/25% are the limits
from the Danish Working Environment Authority.
The alternative desorption
approach, as explained in section 3.2, is used for all the curves seen on the figures.
It is seen that both the maximum MBC and Leff are sensitive to changes in the
upper and lower boundary.
Figure 4.5 compares step change variation to harmonic variation. The MBC is
56% higher for step change variation compared to harmonic at 75/33%, and 63%
higher for 60/33%. From observing the figure, the optimal thickness is similar in
both cases. Analyzing with the bi-linear method; Leff with harmonic variation is
92% and 103% of Leff with step change for 75/33% and 60/33% respectively.
31
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.4: The difference between MBC-thickness curves for ambient relative
humidity variations. All the variation are step change variations with 8/16 hours.
Figure 4.5: The difference between MBC-thickness curves when simulating with a
step change and harmonic ambient relative humidity variation.
32
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.6: Indoor and outdoor relative humidity with no MIL-100(Fe) or air
conditioning. The black lines are 25% and 60% relative humidity at 23 ◦C, the
limits from the Danish Working Environment Authority. The relative humidity is
shown for the entire year (above) and for the first two weeks of June (below).
4.2
Energy saving potential
In this section results from the energy saving potential are presented.
A preliminary analysis of the indoor and outdoor humidity ratio with no MIL-
100(Fe) panel in the room shows, that the RH does exceed 60% for large parts
of the year. This shows that energy will be used to control humidity, and that a
moisture buffer panel can save energy. The regeneration in the summer months
could be limited because of the high outdoor humidity ratio.
The indoor and
outdoor humidity variations are shown on figure 4.6.
Comparing the results on figure 4.6 with the different humidity variations investi-
33
==PAGE:43==
gated earlier, the 60/33% harmonic is found to match best in the months where
most of the energy savings from buffering is expected to occur. Note that the upper
limit will be 60% with air conditioning active. With this humidity variation, the
most efficient thickness was determined to be around 4 mm, simply from observing
the curve on figure 4.5. The MIL-100(fe) panels investigated in this section will
therefore be 4 mm thick.
A simulation was run each for the case with no MIL-100(Fe) panel, with 5 m2 and
with 10 m2. In this simulation the active air conditioning was active when the RH
was above 60% during occupied hours. The total energy used by air conditioning
over the year was 153.6 kWh without the panel. With 5 m2 it was 130.6 kWh with
the panel, which corresponds to savings of 23.0 kWh or 15.0%. With 10 m2 it was
119.2 kWh with the panel, which corresponds savings of to 34.4 kWh or 22.4%.
Figure 4.7: Energy used by the air conditioning system accumulated over the year
for the cases with and without a MIL-100(Fe) panel. The difference in the graphs
is the energy saved by adding the panel.
The majority of the contribution from the moisture buffer panel was in May-
June and September-October. This indicates that the panel is not regenerating
well in July-August, which is where the majority of the energy is used by the air
conditioning. Figure 4.7 shows the energy used by the air conditioning system and
the energy saved by the moisture buffer panel accumulated over a year.
34
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.8: Panel mass and indoor relative humidity from the simulation with a 5
m2 MIL-100(Fe) panel. The panel mass is shown for the entire year (above) and
for the first two weeks of June (below).
A simulation was run with extra night ventilation in July and August, ηnight =
4·ηday. The results were the same, indicating that the problem is, that the humidity
in the nighttime is simply not low enough to properly regenerate the material.
4.3
Model validation
In this section the numerical model is validated with theory and measurements.
4.3.1
Lumped case and semi-infinite case
The two special cases described in section 2.2.4 (semi-infinite slab and lumped
analysis) can be used to compare the numerical model to the theory.
To use
35
==PAGE:45==
equation 2.6 and 2.10 the term
∂w
∂ν , which is normally dependent on the vapor
content, must be assumed constant.
Figure 4.9:
Moisture accumulated with
time.
Figure 4.10:
Vapor content distribution
through the material over 8 hours.
Comparison with the semi-infinite slab theory showed, that the moisture accumu-
lated in the numerical model fits almost perfectly with the theory as seen on figure
4.9.
Comparison with the lumped analysis theory showed, that the vapor content
throughout the material fits well with the constant vapor content calculated using
theory, as seen on figure 4.10. The Biot number for this simulation was 0.05.
4.3.2
Ideal MBV
For the ideal MBV, no surface moisture transfer resistance is assumed, ∂w
∂ν must
be assumed constant in the investigated interval to use equation 2.19, and the
thickness is assumed infinite. For comparison the 75/33% RH, 8/16 hr step change
case is investigated, where the sorption curve is assumed linear and the surface
moisture coefficient is very high (negligible).
The simulated MBV at different
thicknesses can be read from figure 4.11. The noted value should be on the plateau
stage, where the thickness is high enough, that the MBV is no longer increasing.
The MBV at 30 mm thickness is 5.94 g m−2 %−1.
This can be compared with the calculation from equation 2.19. Equation 3.11 can
36
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.11: MBV at different thickness for 75/33% RH, 8/16 hr step change.
be used to find the saturation vapor content along with the ideal gas law.
νs =
ps
RvT = 288.68 ·
 1.098 + T−273.15 K
100
8.02
RvT
MBVideal = 0.0127 · (α(1 −α))0.535 · νs
r
δν
∂w
∂ν
p
tp = 5.94
g
m2%
The ideal MBV matches the results when simulated under the same conditions.
4.3.3
Practical MBV
A simulation was run with the same RH and temperature that was measured by
the humidity sensor. Additionally the fan in the climate chamber was expected to
affect the thicker samples more, since the surface is closer to the top of the petri
dish walls. Thus the moisture transfer coefficient, βν, was set to 1.5x0.0027 and
3x0.0027 m s−1 for the two thickest samples and 0.0027 m s−1 for the rest.
37
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.12: Practical MBV measurements and simulation results.
The results from the practical MBV measurements and from the simulation are
both seen on figure 4.12. These results are found using the conservative desorption
approach rather than the alternative approach.
38
==PAGE:48==
5
Discussion
In this chapter the simulation results are compared to experimental results, theory
and existing models, and the impact of the results are discussed along with how
the impact could be made bigger.
5.1
MBV and thickness relation
The relationship between the MBV and thickness follows a curve of the same shape
for any material parameters. This curve shape matches the description presented
on figure 2.8, in that it has similar growth, high-buffer and plateau stages, as found
by H Wan et al. [15].
From this relationship, the most efficient thickness can be found. One fast way to
estimate it is the bi-linear method, but the result seems a little random, and simply
plotting the MBV-thickness curve and determining the thickness by looking at it
is easier in the end. For a more calculated approach, the gradient of the MBV-
thickness curve can be used, which is useful, if one is able to put a direct value on
MBV. This approach is also useful to find the optimal thickness, since the curve
intersect zero at this thickness.
The MBV-thickness curve has been shown to be sensitive to changes in the ap-
proach to the desorption in the material; the three stages start and end at different
thicknesses and the magnitude of the MBV values change. This becomes an issue
in this project, because MIL-100(Fe) has a large hysteresis loop, where averaging
the adsorption and desorption curves is no longer a good approximation, desorp-
tion curve is only known from 95% RH to 0% RH. For MIL-100(Fe), a future
study should be done investigating the desorption curve as a curve dependent on
where adsorption stops, rather than knowing only one desorption curve for when
desorption stops at 95% RH.
39
==PAGE:49==
The MBV-thickness curve is similarly sensitive to what the maximum and min-
imum RH during the day was. This makes it hard to predict the most efficient
thickness in real indoor conditions as the humidity variations are different through
the year. For a daily RH variation on loop, the efficient thickness is found easily,
however. Finding Leff, when using a humidity variation, that is close to the real
indoor humidity variations in the parts of the year, where a MOF-panel is expected
to have most impact, is likely still a good approximation.
5.1.1
Validation of the numerical model
Results from the numerical simulations matched very well with the theory on
lumped analysis and semi-infinite analysis. Lumped analysis is best applicable for
small thicknesses since the Biot number increases with thickness, and the semi-
infinite analysis applies well to the thicknesses in the plateau stage.
The shape of the curve overall compares perfectly with the MBC to thickness
relation found by H Wan et al. [15], validating the stage between high and low
thicknesses.
Overall the results from the numerical model compares well with other models,
and based on this, the results from simulation are assessed to be correct for the
given material parameters.
5.2
Energy saving potential
The energy saving potential was found to be 15% with a 5 m2 MIL-100(Fe) panel
and 22.4% with a 10 m2 panel.
Most of the energy used by the air conditioning system is during the summer
months, where the outdoor humidity ratio is too high to properly regenerate the
moisture buffer panel overnight.
The energy savings are expected to be much
higher if the panels did regenerate fully during these months. The same case was
simulated but with night ventilation of 4 times the normal ventilation, only during
July and August. The saving potential did not change, which means that the
humidity outdoors is simply too high for the panel to be sufficiently regenerated
by air change alone.
The air conditioning system used 48% of the energy in July and August alone, for
the case with no MIL-100(Fe) panel. Only 12% and 14% of the energy saved by
the 5 m2 and 10 m2 panel was saved in July and August. Based on this, it seems
40
==PAGE:50==
there is potential for actively regenerating the panels to make them more efficient.
This was not investigated, but would be relevant for further study.
Additionally the effect of the panel is not linearly proportional to the area of the
panel. Investigating the relationship between effect and area (similarly to MBV
and thickness), would be interesting, but is not in the scope of this project.
5.2.1
Validation of the energy saving potential
The MBV values calculated by the numerical model were compared with practical
MBV measurements of MIL-100(Fe) done using a climate chamber. The magnitude
of the practical MBV results were on average 14.5% higher than simulated results.
These simulation results were found with the conservative desorption approach,
and they were much higher with the alternative approach. However, it cannot
be concluded from this that the alternative approach overshoots because of the
following comparison;
The simulated MBV of a very thick sample of MIL-100(Fe) was also compared to
the practical MBV reported in an article by X Feng et al. of 7.4±0.2 g m−2 %−1 [4].
Here the alternative desorption approach was used for simulations and the reported
practical MBV was 21% higher than the simulated MBV of 6.11 g m−2 %−1.
It therefore seems that the results are in the range of what is possible with different
ways of using MIL-100(Fe). These deviations are likely due to material param-
eters such as dry density and permeability depending on how the samples were
prepared. Since the parameters used for simulation were found in the literature
study rather than by characterization experiments of a sample matching the one
used for measurements, it may cause mismatch between simulation and experi-
ment. The energy saving potential found in this report should therefore only be
used as an estimate.
41
==PAGE:51==
6
Conclusion
In this study, the relationship between the moisture buffer value (MBV) and the
thickness of a metal-organic framework (MOF), MIL-100(Fe) has been investi-
gated. MIL-100(Fe) can adsorb and release large amounts of water vapor com-
pared to classic building materials, and recent research has found, that using it as
a moisture buffer material in the indoor climate can save energy by autonomously
controlling the indoor relative humidity. While MIL-100(Fe) has much better mois-
ture buffering capabilities than typical building materials, it is also less accessible,
and applying it more efficiently to the indoor climate is of interest. Finding the
relationship between the MBV and the thickness of a material allows for selecting
the most efficient thickness.
A numerical model was designed to find the MBV at any thickness of a material.
The MBV to thickness relation can be divided into three stages, which in the
literature is called the growth stage, the high-buffer stage and the plateau stage.
The most efficient thickness is suggested to be in the regime between the growth
stage and the high-buffer stage. The efficient thickness can alternatively be found
using the gradient of the MBV-thickness curve.
The numerical model was validated with three models from the theory on mois-
ture accumulation and with a different numerical model developed with a similar
purpose, but with a different approach. The model shows agreement with both
the theory and the existing model, and is assessed as giving MBV results with
good accuracy for the given material and environment parameters. The most effi-
cient thickness was determined to be around 4 mm for MIL-100(Fe), at humidity
variations matching those of the indoor climate in the summer.
The energy saving potential was also investigated for a typical office space based
on the BESTEST case, space requirements per occupant from the Danish Working
Environment Authority and ventilation recommendations from Danish Standard.
The building was placed in the Nordic climate using climate data from Copen-
42
==PAGE:52==
hagen. Simulations were done based on the numerical model designed for MBV
calculations, since the moisture transfer in the panel is the same. With 4 mm thick
panels, the energy saving potential is 15.0% when using a 5 m2 MIL-100(Fe) panel
and 22.4% when using a 10 m2 panel.
With no MIL-100(Fe) present, 48% of the energy used by the air conditioning
system was in July and August. Only 12-14% of the energy saved by adding the
panels happened in these months. Additional night ventilation during July and
August was also simulated, and the energy saving potential remained the same.
This shows that there is potential for more savings by actively regenerating the
panels, but this was not investigated further.
The found energy saving potential for MIL-100(Fe) was calculated based on a
certain dry density, vapor permeability and surface transfer coefficient.
These
parameters can change based on how the material is applied. Additionally, the
desorption curve was only found for desorption starting with a sample being fully
saturated at 95% relative humidity, and an assumption had to be made for a
desorption curve starting at 75% RH, which was hard to validate.
43
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
A. V. Arundel, E. M. Sterling, J. H. Biggin, and T. D. Sterling, “Indirect
health effects of relative humidity in indoor environments,” Environmental
Health Perspectives, vol. VOL. 65, 1986, issn: 00916765. doi: 10.1289/ehp.
8665351.
[2]
J. Razjouyan et al., “Wellbuilt for wellbeing: Controlling relative humidity
in the workplace matters for our health,” Indoor Air, vol. 30, no. 1, 2020,
issn: 16000668. doi: 10.1111/ina.12618.
[3]
P. Wolkoff, Indoor air humidity, air quality, and health – An overview, 2018.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijheh.2018.01.015.
[4]
X. Feng, M. Qin, S. Cui, and C. Rode, “Metal-organic framework MIL-
100(Fe) as a novel moisture buffer material for energy-efficient indoor humid-
ity control,” Building and Environment, vol. 145, pp. 234–242, Nov. 2018,
issn: 03601323. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2018.09.027.
[5]
M. Qin, P. Hou, Z. Wu, and J. Wang, “Precise humidity control materials
for autonomous regulation of indoor moisture,” Building and Environment,
vol. 169, 2020, issn: 03601323. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2019.106581.
[6]
M. Qin, O. Feaugas, and K. Zu, “Novel metal-organic framework (MOF)
based phase change material composite and its impact on building energy
consumption,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 273, Oct. 2022, issn: 03787788.
doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2022.112382.
[7]
Z. Wu, M. Qin, and M. Zhang, “Phase change humidity control material and
its impact on building energy consumption,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 174,
pp. 254–261, Sep. 2018, issn: 03787788. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2018.
06.036.
44
==PAGE:54==
[8]
Z. Chen and M. Qin, “Preparation and hygrothermal properties of compos-
ite phase change humidity control materials,” Applied Thermal Engineer-
ing, vol. 98, pp. 1150–1157, Apr. 2016, issn: 13594311. doi: 10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2015.12.096.
[9]
L. P´erez-Lombard, J. Ortiz, and C. Pout, “A review on buildings energy
consumption information,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 40, no. 3, 2008, issn:
03787788. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2007.03.007.
[10]
C. A. Balaras, E. G. Dascalaki, A. G. Gaglia, K. Droutsa, and S. Kontoyian-
nidis, “Energy Performance of European Buildings,” in ASME 2007 Energy
Sustainability Conference, ASMEDC, Jan. 2007, pp. 387–396, isbn: 0-7918-
4797-7. doi: 10.1115/ES2007-36005.
[11]
B. Poel, G. van Cruchten, and C. A. Balaras, “Energy performance assess-
ment of existing dwellings,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 39, no. 4, 2007, issn:
03787788. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2006.08.008.
[12]
H. Zhang, H. Yoshino, and K. Hasegawa, “Assessing the moisture buffering
performance of hygroscopic material by using experimental method,” Build-
ing and Environment, vol. 48, no. 1, 2012, issn: 03601323. doi: 10.1016/j.
buildenv.2011.08.012.
[13]
H. Yoshino, T. Mitamura, and K. Hasegawa, “Moisture buffering and effect
of ventilation rate and volume rate of hygrothermal materials in a single room
under steady state exterior conditions,” Building and Environment, vol. 44,
no. 7, 2009, issn: 03601323. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2008.09.007.
[14]
O. F. Osanyintola and C. J. Simonson, “Moisture buffering capacity of hy-
groscopic building materials: Experimental facilities and energy impact,”
Energy and Buildings, vol. 38, no. 10, 2006, issn: 03787788. doi: 10.1016/
j.enbuild.2006.03.026.
[15]
H. Wan, Z. Sun, G. Huang, X. Xu, and J. Yu, “Calculation of the maximum
moisture buffering thickness of building wall layer of hygroscopic material,”
Building and Environment, vol. 160, p. 106 173, Aug. 2019, issn: 03601323.
doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2019.106173.
[16]
D. Maskell, A. Thomson, P. Walker, and M. Lemke, “Determination of op-
timal plaster thickness for moisture buffering of indoor air,” Building and
Environment, vol. 130, 2018, issn: 03601323. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.
2017.11.045.
[17]
J. Fang et al., “Influence of material parameters on the moisture buffering
in office buildings: a sensitivity analysis of China,”
45
==PAGE:55==
[18]
H. Wan, G. Huang, S. Liu, S. Fan, X. Xu, and J. Yu, “Optimal moisture
buffering thickness of the hygroscopic material layer: Modeling and deriva-
tion,” Building and Environment, vol. 205, 2021, issn: 03601323. doi: 10.
1016/j.buildenv.2021.108257.
[19]
Arbejdstilsynet, Indeklima - Arbejdstilsynet.
[20]
C. Rode, M. Qin, and R. Peuhkuri, Heat and Mass Transfer in Buildings -
Lecture note of course 11122, 2019.
[21]
Y. K. Seo et al., “Energy-efficient dehumidification over hierachically porous
metal-organic frameworks as advanced water adsorbents,” Advanced Mate-
rials, vol. 24, no. 6, 2012, issn: 09359648. doi: 10.1002/adma.201104084.
[22]
B. Coasne, A. Galarneau, R. J. Pellenq, and F. Di Renzo, “Adsorption,
intrusion and freezing in porous silica: The view from the nanoscale,” Chem-
ical Society Reviews, vol. 42, no. 9, 2013, issn: 14604744. doi: 10.1039/
c2cs35384a.
[23]
R. H. Peuhkuri et al., Moisture Buffering of Building Materials (BYG Report
R-127), English, C. Rode, Ed. Technical University of Denmark, Department
of Civil Engineering, 2005, isbn: 87-7877-195-1.
[24]
M. Zhang, M. Qin, C. Rode, and Z. Chen, “Moisture buffering phenomenon
and its impact on building energy consumption,” Applied Thermal Engineer-
ing, vol. 124, 2017, issn: 13594311. doi: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.
05.173.
[25]
M. J. Cunningham, “Effective penetration depth and effective resistance in
moisture transfer,” Building and Environment, vol. 27, no. 3, 1992, issn:
03601323. doi: 10.1016/0360-1323(92)90037-P.
[26]
Y. Chen and Z. Chen, “Transfer function method to calculate moisture ab-
sorption and desorption in buildings,” Building and Environment, vol. 33,
no. 4, 1998, issn: 03601323. doi: 10.1016/S0360-1323(97)00057-7.
[27]
P. Horcajada et al., “Synthesis and catalytic properties of MIL-100(Fe), an
iron(III) carboxylate with large pores,” Chemical Communications, no. 27,
2007, issn: 13597345. doi: 10.1039/b704325b.
[28]
K. Zu, “Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) for energy-efficient indoor mois-
ture control: Synthesis, characterization and applications,” Tech. Rep., 2021.
[29]
Mads Kampmann Petersen, “Title Metal-Organic Framework MIL-100(Fe)
as a Novel Moisture Buffer Material for Indoor Climate Control in European
Climates,” Tech. Rep., 2019.
[30]
J. Toftum, “Load calculations Lecture note 11221 Ventilation and Climatic
Systems,” Tech. Rep., 2020. [Online]. Available: www.byg.dtu.dk.
46
==PAGE:56==
[31]
“DS/EN 16798-1:2019,” Tech. Rep., 2019. [Online]. Available: www.ds.dk.
[32]
“DS/CEN/TR 16798-2:2019,” Tech. Rep., 2019. [Online]. Available: www.
ds.dk.
[33]
R. Judkoff and J. Neymark, “International Energy Agency building energy
simulation test (BESTEST) and diagnostic method,” National Renewable
Energy Laboratory, no. February, 1995.
[34]
L.-G. M˚ansson, Calculation of energy and environmental performance of
buildings. Energy Conservation in Buildings and Community Systems Pro-
gramme, 1998, p. 28, isbn: 1902177045.
47
==PAGE:57==
A
MATLAB code
48
==PAGE:58==
3/1/23 2:51 PM
C:\Users\olive\OneDrive\0dt...\RUNSCRIPT.m
1 of 3
%close all;
clear;
 
%To see run time of code together with last line
tic;
 
 
R=462; %gas constant for water J/kgK
Ra=287; %Gas constant dry air J/kgK
T=23+273.15; %temperature (assumed constant everywhere) K
    ps=288.68*(1.098+(T-273.15)/100)^8.02; %saturation vapour pressure Pa
    nus=ps/(R*T); %saturation water vapour density kg/m3
    rhoa=100000/(Ra*T); %(approx dry) air density indoors kg/m3
L=[0.001,0.002,0.003,0.004,0.005,0.006,0.007,0.008,0.009,0.01,0.012,0.02,0.03]; %
material depth for each sample to be investigated, m
beta=1/(5*10^(7))*(R*T) *ones(1,length(L)); %surface resistance (beta_nu) [m/s]
delta=7.2200e-06; %vapour permeability [m2/s] 
A=0.015*0.015*pi; %surface area m2
rhom=690; %material dry density kg/m3
sorp(:,:,1)=[0,0;5,4.5;10,6.1 ;15,7.7 ;20,9.3;25,11 ;30,32 ;32.5,32.5 ;35,33 ;37.5,33.5 
;40,36.5 ;42.5,44.5 ;45,50.5 ;47.5,51.4;50,51.73 ;52.5,52.07 ;55,52.4 ;60,53.07 ;
70,54.4;80,56 ;95,60.5]; %adsorption, %, %
sorp(:,:,2)=[0,0;5,5;10,6.67;15,8.33;20,10 ;25,13 ;30,38 ;32.5,49.5 ;35,52 ;37.5,52.8 ;
40,53.4;42.5,54;45,54.6 ;47.5,55.2 ;50,55.8 ;52.5, 56.4 ;55,57;60,57.5 ;70,58.7 ;
80,59.5;95,60.5]; %desorption
 
 
%Ambient humidity
si=1; %starting index, 1 starts cycle with high ambient hum, 2 starts with low hum
rh=[0.75,0.33]; %relative humidity for each cycle
    nua=nus*rh; %ambient humidity for each cycle
 
 
%Sorp 2
    sorp2=sorp(:,:,2);
    [a,b]=wrh(0.75,rhom,sorp(:,:,1),sorp(:,:,2));
    wdif=(b-a)/rhom*100;
    sorp2(:,2)=sorp2(:,2)-wdif;
    index=(sorp2(:,2)-sorp(:,2,1))<0;
    sorp2(index,2)=sorp(index,2,1);
sorp(:,:,2)=sorp2; %to use alternative sorption curve
    
 
%timestep sizes, running time and number of cycles
dt=0.5;
tend=[28800,57600]; %Period with high/low ambient humidity [s]
    nt=[uint32(tend(1)/dt),uint32(tend(2)/dt)]; %number of time elements for 
calculation
cycles=9; %number of cycles to display (2 cycles is a "full cycle").
    nttot=nt(1)*ceil(cycles/2)+nt(2)*floor(cycles/2); %total number of time elements
==PAGE:59==
3/1/23 2:51 PM
C:\Users\olive\OneDrive\0dt...\RUNSCRIPT.m
2 of 3
 
 
%element size distribution
nxref=80; %number of elements in thickness at reference thickness
ref=0.03; %reference thickness, m
 
nx=double(uint32(L./ref*nxref)); %number of elements for each sample
x=zeros(length(L),max(nx));
dx=x;
for i=1:length(L)
    dxdis=((1:nx(i))./nx(i))  .*L(i); %
    dx(i,1:nx(i))=(dxdis-[0,dxdis(1:end-1)]); %thickness of each layer
    x(i,1:nx(i))=dxdis-dx(i,1:nx(i))./2; % center of each layer
end
 
 
%%%%%%% -  - %%%%%%%
 
%Starting matrix preallocation
startmatrix=zeros([max(nx), sum(nt)*ceil(cycles/2)+1]); %
 
 
%Defining each matrix for computational speed
nuv=zeros([max(nx),  nttot  ,length(L)]);
wtot=zeros([max(nx),  nttot  ,length(L)]);
 
%%
 
%The calculation
for i=1:length(L)
    fprintf('\n %d/%d - ',[i,length(L)])
    [nuv(:,:,i),wtot(:,:,i)]=massfunctionnew(nx(i),L(i),dt,tend,beta(i),delta,sorp,
rhom,nua,nus,startmatrix,cycles,si,500);
    toc;
end
 
 
%
%MBV
weight=zeros(size(wtot,2),length(L));
MBV=zeros(length(L),1);
 
for j=1:length(L)
    for i=1:size(wtot,2)
        weight(i,j)=dot( wtot(1:nx(j),i,j) + rhom , dx(j,1:nx(j)) ) *A*1000;
    end
    MBV(j)=abs(( (weight(end,j)+weight(end-sum(nt),j))./2 - weight(end-nt( 2-mod
(cycles,2)),j) )/( 100*(rh(2)-rh(1)) * A ));
end
 
==PAGE:60==
3/1/23 2:51 PM
C:\Users\olive\OneDrive\0dt...\RUNSCRIPT.m
3 of 3
%Ideal MBV
[w1,w2]=wrh(rh',rhom,sorp(:,:,1),sorp(:,:,2));
dwdrh=(w1(1)-w2(2))/(rh(1)-rh(2));
  bm=sqrt(delta*dwdrh/(ps*R*T));
  %idealMBV=0.00568*ps*bm*sqrt(sum(tend))*1000; From NORDTEST
  idealMBV=0.0127*(1/3*2/3)^0.535*nus*sqrt(delta*dwdrh/nus) *sqrt(sum(tend))*1000; %
From NORDTEST 2, same result
 
  %%
%Energysim
dt2=300; 
eff=4; %index to use 4th sample
n=0.43/3600;%Ventilation exchange rate 1/s
V=8*6*2.7;%Room volume m3
    mi=rhoa*V;%Weight of dry air in room
Amof=10;%Area of MOF plate
Gi=360/1000/3600;%Moisture sources
omegae=readtable('dry13fullyear.csv');%humidity ratio calculated from DRY2013. One 
value per hour
Gac=Gi;%AC moisture removal capacity
 
[omegai,mAC,mMOF]=Energysim(nx(eff),L(eff),dt,dt2,beta(eff),delta,sorp,rhom,omegae,nus,
Gi,Gac,mi,n,rhoa,Amof);
[omegainomof,mACnomof]=Energysimnomof(dt2,omegae,nus,Gi,Gac,mi,n,rhoa);
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
3/1/23 2:57 PM
C:\Users\olive\OneDr...\massfunctionnew.m
1 of 3
function [nu,wtot,nuatemp] = massfunctionnew(nx,L,dt,tend,beta,delta,sorp,rhom,nua,nus,
startmatrix,cycles,si,maxcycles)
fprintf('cycle no.:')
si=2-mod(si+mod(cycles,2),2);
 
dxdis=((1:nx)./nx).*L; %starting position of each element
dx=(dxdis-[0,dxdis(1:end-1)]); %thickness of each element
dx2=0.5*([0,dx(1:end-1)]+dx); %distance between centerpoints of each element (first is 
between ambience and first point)
 
%Number of elements in time
nt=[uint32(tend(1)/dt),uint32(tend(2)/dt)];
 
 
%initialization
done=0;
cn=0;
 
%for harmonic nua
nueq=(nua(1)*sqrt(tend(1))+nua(2)*sqrt(tend(2)))/(sqrt(tend(1))+sqrt(tend(2)));%
equilibrium vapor content
 
 
%starting moisture density in material.
[~,wde]=wrh(min(nua)/nus ,rhom,sorp(:,:,1),sorp(:,:,2));
[wad,~]=wrh(max(nua)/nus ,rhom,sorp(:,:,1),sorp(:,:,2));
wtottemp=startmatrix + (wad-wde)/(max(nua)-min(nua))*(nueq-min(nua)) + wde;
nutemp=startmatrix + nueq;
 
while done==0 
    cn=cn+1;
    fprintf(' %d',cn)
    
    for j=0:1 
        c=2-mod(j+si,2); %determines which part of the cycle (1:day/2:night)
        istart=1+mod(cn-1,ceil(cycles/2))*sum(nt)  +  j*nt(si);
        nuatemp=nua(c);
        
         for i=istart : istart+nt(c)-1
 
            %Include for harmoinc variation
%             if c==1
%                 nuatemp=nueq+(nua(c)-nueq)*sin(pi/tend(c)* double((mod(i,sum(nt))-nt
(2))) *dt);
%             else
%                 nuatemp=nueq+(nua(c)-nueq)*sin(pi/tend(c)* double(mod(i,sum(nt))) 
*dt);
%             end
 
            %Rate of vapour transport between each element
==PAGE:62==
3/1/23 2:57 PM
C:\Users\olive\OneDr...\massfunctionnew.m
2 of 3
            g=[(nuatemp-nutemp(1,i))  *1./(dx2(1)/delta+1/beta)  ;  ...
                (nutemp(1:nx-1,i)-nutemp(2:nx,i))  *delta./dx2(2:end)'];
            dwtot=(g-[g(2:end);0])  *dt  ./(dx');%change of moisture content in each 
element
 
 
            %One hot encoding that tells whether vapour content is increasing or
            %decreasing. 
            gradOHE=[dwtot>=0,dwtot<0]; %first column is adsorption, second is 
desorption
            grad=gradOHE*[1;-1]; %1 is adsorption, -1 is desorption  
 
 
            %calculating new moisture content at each depth
            wtottemp(1:nx,i+1)=wtottemp(1:nx,i)  +dwtot;
 
 
            %Finding the vapour content limits at the wtot
            [rhad,rhde]=rhwtot( wtottemp(1:nx,i+1) ,rhom,sorp(:,:,1),sorp(:,:,2));  %
function finds what rh limit is at wtot. Based on sorption curve. Somewhat corresponds 
to a vapour to moisture ratio 
            %[rhad,rhde]=rhwtotlinear( wtottemp(1:nx,i+1) ,rhom,sorp(:,:,1),sorp(:,:,2) 
, nua./nus);
            nulim=[rhad,rhde]*nus;
            nulim=sum(nulim.*gradOHE,2);
 
            %If the vapour content is above the limit (for adsorption) or below the
            %limit (for desorption), the vapour content becomes the limit
            nutemp(1:nx,i+1)=nutemp(1:nx,i)  +dwtot;
            index=    (nutemp(1:nx,i+1)-nulim) .*grad      > 0  ; %index notes the 
positions where nu exceeds the limit
            nutemp(index,i+1)=nulim(index);
 
 
 
 
 
            %If the vapour density of a layer has in-/decreased past both its
            %neighbouring layers, its vapor content is reduced to be the same as the
            %most extreme neighbour
            nudif = [[nuatemp;nutemp(1:nx-1,i)] , [nutemp(2:nx,i);nutemp(nx,i)]] -
nutemp(1:nx,i);
            nudif = max(nudif.*grad,[],2);
            nudif = (nudif.*0.1).*grad;
            nulim2 = nutemp(1:nx,i) + nudif;
            index2 = ((nulim2-nutemp(1:nx,i+1)).*grad)<0;
            nutemp(index2,i+1)=nulim2(index2);
        end
 
 
==PAGE:63==
3/1/23 2:57 PM
C:\Users\olive\OneDr...\massfunctionnew.m
3 of 3
        
    end
    
    %Condition for stopping the simulation, when the average moisture
    %content during a day remains constant
    if ( sum( abs(wtottemp(:,i+1)-wtottemp(:,i+1-sum(nt)*1) )) < 0.00001*sum( wtottemp
(:,i+1))  && cn*2>=cycles )|| cn==ceil(maxcycles/2)
        done=2; 
    elseif mod(cn,ceil(cycles/2))==0
        nutemp(:,1)=nutemp(:,end);
        wtottemp(:,1)=wtottemp(:,end);
    end
 
end
 
%sets final matrices in correct order
nutemp(:,1)=[];
wtottemp(:,1)=[];
 
nu=zeros(size(nutemp));
wtot=zeros(size(wtottemp));
cnpos=mod(cn-1,ceil(cycles/2))+1;
for k=1:ceil(cycles/2)
    nu(:,(1+(k-1)*sum(nt)):(k*sum(nt)))=nutemp(:,   (1+(mod(k+cnpos-2,ceil(cycles/2)))
*sum(nt))   :   ((mod(k+cnpos-2,ceil(cycles/2))+1 )*sum(nt))   );
    wtot(:,(1+(k-1)*sum(nt)):(k*sum(nt)))=wtottemp(:,   (1+(mod(k+cnpos-1,ceil
(cycles/2)))*sum(nt))   :   ((mod(k+cnpos-1,ceil(cycles/2))+1 )*sum(nt))   );
end
nu(:, 1:(nt(si)*mod(cycles,2)))=[];
wtot(:, 1:(nt(si)*mod(cycles,2)))=[];
 
fprintf('\n')
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
3/1/23 2:59 PM
C:\Users\olive\OneDrive\0dt...\Energysim.m
1 of 3
function [omegai,mAC,mMOF] = Energysim(nx,L,dt,dt2,beta,delta,sorp,rhom,omegae,nus,Gi,
Gac,mi,n,rhoa,Amof)
fprintf('Day no: ')
 
dxdis=((1:nx)./nx).*L; %starting position of each element
dx=(dxdis-[0,dxdis(1:end-1)]); %thickness of each element
dx2=0.5*([0,dx(1:end-1)]+dx); %distance between centerpoints of each element (first is 
between ambience and first point)
 
%Number of elements in time
nt=floor(length(omegae{:,1})*3600/dt2)-1;
 
%Initialize omegai and mMOF
omegai=zeros(1,nt+1);
mAC=omegai;
omegai(1)=0.5*nus/rhoa;
mMOF=zeros(1,nt);
 
%starting moisture density in material. Start
[~,wde]=wrh(0.5 ,rhom,sorp(:,:,1),sorp(:,:,2));
[wad,~]=wrh(0.5 ,rhom,sorp(:,:,1),sorp(:,:,2));
wtottemp=zeros(nx,2) + (wad+wde)/2;
nutemp=zeros(nx,2) + 0.5*nus;
 
Gi1=0;
 
%For night ventilation
% n1=n;
% n2=n;
% n=n2;
 
 
for i=1:nt
 
    %For night ventilation
%     if i/dt2==4345
%         n2=n2*4;
%     end
%     if i/dt2==5809
%         n2=n2/4;
%     end
 
    if mod(i,3600*24/dt2)==3600*9/dt2
        Gi1=Gi;
        fprintf(' %d', int16(i/3600/24*dt2+1))
        %n=n1;
    end
    if mod(i,3600*24/dt2)==3600*17/dt2
        Gi1=0;
        %n=n2;
==PAGE:65==
3/1/23 2:59 PM
C:\Users\olive\OneDrive\0dt...\Energysim.m
2 of 3
    end
 
    %Internal moisture sources
    omegai(i)=omegai(i)+Gi1/mi*dt2;
    
    %Ventilation
    omegai(i)=omegai(i)+(omegae{floor(i*dt2/3600)+1,1}-omegai(i))*n*dt2;
    
    %Vapor transfer in MOF.
    omegaii=omegai(i);
    if omegaii>0.80*nus/rhoa
        omegaii=0.80*nus/rhoa;
    end
    omegaitemp=omegaii;
    for j=1:dt2/dt
    g=[(omegaii*rhoa-nutemp(1,1))  *1./(dx2(1)/delta+1/beta)  ;  ...
        (nutemp(1:nx-1,1)-nutemp(2:nx,1))  *delta./dx2(2:end)'];
 
        %Same calculation as in massfunctionnew used for MBV
        dwtot=(g-[g(2:end);0])  *dt  ./(dx');
        gradOHE=[dwtot>=0,dwtot<0];
        grad=gradOHE*[1;-1];
        wtottemp(1:nx,2)=wtottemp(1:nx,1)  +dwtot;   
        [rhad,rhde]=rhwtot( wtottemp(1:nx,2) ,rhom,sorp(:,:,1),sorp(:,:,2) ); 
        nulim=[rhad,rhde]*nus;
        nulim=sum(nulim.*gradOHE,2);
        nutemp(1:nx,2)=nutemp(1:nx,1)  +dwtot;
        index=    (nutemp(1:nx,2)-nulim) .*grad      > 0  ;
        nutemp(index,2)=nulim(index);
        nudif = [[omegaii*rhoa;nutemp(1:nx-1,1)] , [nutemp(2:nx,1);nutemp(nx,1)]] -
nutemp(1:nx,1);
        nudif = max(nudif.*grad,[],2);
        nudif = (nudif.*0.1).*grad;
        nulim2 = nutemp(1:nx,1) + nudif;
        index2 = ((nulim2-nutemp(1:nx,2)).*grad)<0;
        nutemp(index2,2)=nulim2(index2);
        %
        nutemp(:,1)=nutemp(:,2);
        wtottemp(:,1)=wtottemp(:,2);
        mMOF(i)=sum((wtottemp(:,1)+rhom)/nx*L*Amof);
    
        %From MOF
        omegaii=omegaii-g(1)/mi*dt*Amof;
    end
    omegai(i)=omegai(i)-(omegaitemp-omegaii);
 
 
    %Air conditioning
    if omegai(i)>0.6*nus/rhoa && mod(i,3600*24/dt2)>3600*9/dt2 && mod(i,3600*24/dt2)
<3600*17/dt2
==PAGE:66==
3/1/23 2:59 PM
C:\Users\olive\OneDrive\0dt...\Energysim.m
3 of 3
        mAC(i)=mAC(i)      +   Gac*dt2;
        omegai(i)=omegai(i)  -   Gac*dt2/mi;
    end
 
 
    %For next loop
    omegai(i+1)=omegai(i);
    mAC(i+1)=mAC(i);
end
 
mAC(1)=[];
omegai(end)=[];
 
fprintf('\n')
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
3/1/23 3:00 PM
C:\Users\olive\OneDri...\Energysimnomof.m
1 of 1
function [omegai,mAC] = Energysimnomof(dt,omegae,nus,Gi,Gac,mi,n,rhoa)
fprintf('Day no: ')
 
%Number of elements in time
nt=floor(length(omegae{:,1})*3600/dt)-1;
 
%Initialize omegai and mMOF and mAC
omegai=zeros(1,nt+1);
mAC=omegai;
omegai(1)=0.5*nus/rhoa;
 
Gi1=0;
 
 
for i=1:nt
    %Internal moisture sources only active during occupied hours
    if mod(i,3600*24/dt)==3600*9/dt
        Gi1=Gi;
        fprintf(' %d', int16(i/3600/24*dt+1))
    end
    if mod(i,3600*24/dt)==3600*17/dt
        Gi1=0;
    end
    %Internal moisture sources
    omegai(i)=omegai(i)+Gi1/mi*dt;
    
    %Ventilation
    omegai(i)=omegai(i)+(omegae{floor(i*dt/3600)+1,1} - omegai(i)) *n*dt;
    
    %Air conditioning
if omegai(i)>0.6*nus/rhoa && mod(i,3600*24/dt)>3600*9/dt && mod(i,3600*24/dt)
<3600*17/dt
    mAC(i)=mAC(i)      +   Gac*dt;
    omegai(i)=omegai(i)  -   Gac*dt/mi;
end
 
    %For next loop
    omegai(i+1)=omegai(i);
    mAC(i+1)=mAC(i);
end
 
mAC(1)=[];
omegai(end)=[];
 
fprintf('\n')
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
3/1/23 3:04 PM
C:\Users\olive\OneDrive\0dtu\0...\rhwtot.m
1 of 1
function [rhad,rhde] = rhwtot(wtot,rhom,adsorp,desorp)
%Linear interpolation between points in sorption curves
%takes moisture content with unit kg/m3
%Results in relative humidity limits, unit [-]
 
 
wtot=wtot./rhom*100;
 
adsorp=[0,0;adsorp];
[w1,I1]=max( adsorp(:,2) - (adsorp(:,2)>wtot').*100 ,[],1);
[w2,I2]=min( adsorp(:,2) + (adsorp(:,2)<=wtot').*100 ,[],1);
rhad=(adsorp(I2,1)-adsorp(I1,1)) ./ (w2-w1)' .* (wtot-w1') + adsorp(I1,1);
rhad=rhad./100;
 
desorp=[0,0;desorp];
[w1,I1]=max( desorp(:,2) - (desorp(:,2)>wtot').*100 ,[],1);
[w2,I2]=min( desorp(:,2) + (desorp(:,2)<=wtot').*100 ,[],1);
rhde=(desorp(I2,1)-desorp(I1,1)) ./ (w2-w1)' .* (wtot-w1') + desorp(I1,1);
rhde=rhde./100;
 
end
 
==PAGE:69==
3/1/23 3:03 PM
C:\Users\olive\OneDrive\0dtu\0. t...\wrh.m
1 of 1
function [wad,wde] = wrh(rh,rhom,adsorp,desorp)
%Linear interpolation between points in sorption curves
%Takes relative humidity, unit [-]
%results in moisture content limits with unit kg/m3
 
 
rh=rh.*100;
 
adsorp=[0,0;adsorp];
[~,I1]=max( adsorp(:,1) - (adsorp(:,1)>rh').*100 ,[],1);
[~,I2]=min( adsorp(:,1) + (adsorp(:,1)<=rh').*100 ,[],1);
wad=(adsorp(I2,2)-adsorp(I1,2)) ./ (adsorp(I2,1)-adsorp(I1,1)) .* (rh-adsorp(I1,1)) + 
adsorp(I1,2);
wad=wad.*rhom./100;
 
desorp=[0,0;desorp];
[~,I1]=max( desorp(:,1) - (desorp(:,1)>rh').*100 ,[],1);
[~,I2]=min( desorp(:,1) + (desorp(:,1)<=rh').*100 ,[],1);
wde=(desorp(I2,2)-desorp(I1,2)) ./ (desorp(I2,1)-desorp(I1,1)) .* (rh-desorp(I1,1)) + 
desorp(I1,2);
wde=wde.*rhom./100;
 
end
 
