==PAGE:1==
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes
in the Behavior of Mocked Services
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
Master Thesis
March, 2023
By
Oliver Rasmussen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU compute, at the Technical Univer­
sity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Oliver Rasmussen ­ s174244
Signature
Date
ii
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
24/03-2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Mock testing is a common technique used by developers where mock objects simulate
dependencies to increase the isolation of tests. This allows developers to avoid time­
consuming and complex dependencies in their unit tests, but it also has the added work­
load of having to maintain the mock objects and ensure that they are always accurately
simulating the dependency.
In this project, we focus on mock objects that simulate web services. Web services may
change at any point and the goal is to ensure that mocks are always accurately simu­
lating the web service and not contributing to misleading test results. This is achieved
by analyzing the differences between OpenAPI versions and performing API response
validation. The results of this analysis are used to provide more accurate tests and show
important changes directly to the developers.
The key findings are that using detection mechanisms such as OpenAPI and API re­
sponse validation can be used to improve test results and make it easier for developers
to maintain mocks and handle changes, but consideration has to be put into how Ope­
nAPI documents are downloaded to avoid poor performance. Future work should aim to
address the performance issues and extend the tool to be able to handle a wider range
of dependencies.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Ekkart Kindler for his guidance throughout the whole
project.
iv
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Software Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Dependencies and Software Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Mock Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Breaking Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Literature Review
9
3.1
Why Mocking is Used by Developers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
How Mocking is Used by Developers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Challenges surrounding the use of Mocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Solutions researched in the literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5
The challenges with mock testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.6
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Conceptual Analysis
17
4.1
API Documentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
API Response Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Maintenance of Mocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.4
Detection and Maintenance: The effect on Developers . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Design
27
5.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
OpenAPI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3
Improving Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.4
Using API Response Validation for Mocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.5
Showing changes to the viewer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6
Implementation
35
6.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2
Dependency Updater
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.3
Api Response Validator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.4
JavaFX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
7
Demonstration and Use Cases of the Tool
41
7.1
Improving Change Management in Internal Environments . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.2
Tracking the Twitter API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
8
Evaluation
47
8.1
Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
8.2
Usability and Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
8.3
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
8.4
Requirements and Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
v
==PAGE:8==
8.5
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
9
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
53
vi
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Microservice architecture and agile development practices, have taken over the software
development scene and have created an environment where software is rapidly iterated
and deployed. This paradigm of constant change makes it hard for developers to ensure
their programs are up­to­date at all times. Software dependencies such as web APIs,
libraries, and databases, both internal and external ones, are evolving at a rapid pace,
putting strain on developers to ensure their software is behaving as intended.
To ensure that the software is behaving as intended, software testing has been a long­
standing part of software development and is used to verify software behavior throughout
all stages of software development. Software testing also includes verifying that a soft­
ware program can communicate with dependencies.
The ever­evolving nature of dependencies has also made testing more challenging. Often
when developers want to test a certain piece of functionality, the code may need access
to various dependencies, to execute the functionality that we want to test.
To avoid many of the challenges that are associated with dependencies, such as time
sinks or availability, mocking is used. When mocking a dependency, we simulate the be­
havior of the dependency, eliminating the need to communicate with the dependency to
perform the test.
While this allows developers to better isolate the code under test, it also adds workload for
the developers. Developers have to ensure that the behavior of the mock, is consistent
with the real­world dependency. Failing to do so, could result in misleading tests, that are
of little use to the developer.
In this thesis, we look at how to handle changes to dependencies, specifically concerning
mock testing. In chapter 3 we perform a literature review, to get a full understanding of
how mock testing is currently used by developers. In the literature review, we also identify
the key challenges to using mocks and form the problem statement that will be used to
guide the development of a tool to address the challenges of mock testing.
The rest of the thesis goes through the development of the tool, including its design,
implementation, and evaluation.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
Mocking tools have become stable in software testing, for many developers. In this chap­
ter, we look at the basics of software testing, dependencies, mocking, and how they all fit
together.
2.1
Software Testing
Software testing is the process of validating the software, ensuring that it meets the spec­
ified requirements for functionality, performance, usability, and more [1]. Software testing
encompasses many different tools, techniques, and responsibilities. Some of the most
common concepts in software testing are different layers of tests, which include, but are
not limited to unit testing, integration testing, and system testing:
• Unit tests focus on individual units of the software to see if the software executes as
expected. Unit tests are low­level and easy to implement and execute. As such, a
test suite predominantly consists of unit tests. One of the main goals of unit testing
is to test small units of code, in isolation from the rest of the system. Isolating the
smallest units of functionality in the code ensures that the test result is not affected
by external factors. If the unit test fails, it is easy to identify the code that is causing
problems.
• Integration testing aims to ensure that different sub­components can communicate
with each other and does so correctly. Modern software often needs several different
components to work together, such as web services and databases, to execute their
tasks. Integration tests verify that data between these components flow as intended.
• System Testing is testing the software as a whole, ensuring the final system delivers
the required functionality. System testing often includes user interface testing, where
the actions an end user would take are simulated.
Figure 2.1: The focus of each area of testing
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
3
==PAGE:12==
The responsibility for each kind of test can be broken down to what is seen in figure: 2.1.
Unit tests focus on an isolated component, disregarding its interaction with the rest of the
system. Ensuring that the component itself works as expected, makes it more pain­free
to do the integration testing. The integration testing verifies that the different components
work together as expected. Finally, the end­to­end test exercises the system as a whole.
The implementation and execution of each kind of test, are vastly different. Unit tests are
quick to execute and easy to implement, whereas integration and system tests, tend to be
slower and more prone to being unreliable or inconsistent. As a result, a test suite often
falls into a pyramid­like structure, with the majority being unit tests and fewer integration
and system tests.
Figure 2.2: Test Pyramid [2]
The importance of testing, cannot be understated. Testing is one of the primary tools
for detecting bugs and verifying program behavior, per the requirements of the program.
Software testing also has a big impact on the cost of the project. Testing is essentially
a cost­benefit analysis, as developers are betting on tests to find bugs and oversights,
which would be much more costly if they were only found once the program is released.
Figure 2.3: The relative cost of fixing a bug, in different stages of software development
[3]
In an analysis made by NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology) [4], it was
found that the cost of fixing bugs, greatly increases at later stages of the software devel­
opment life cycle. Once the code leaves the developer’s focus, bugs can become more
difficult to fix, as the developers need extra time to remember the ins and outs of the sys­
4
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:13==
tem. If bugs and defects are part of released products, costs can be very costly, as fixing
the issues, might disrupt users, and bugs may ruin the company’s reputation, or even be
exploited by malicious users.
To ensure that bugs are not introduced in already tested software, regression testing is
often used. Regression testing is the act of repeatedly running the same tests during de­
velopment, to ensure that previously tested software is still working, after new changes
are made[5]. Regression testing has become important, as software development has
shifted to iterative development, with shorter development cycles.
Regression tests are often set up in an automated fashion, such that whenever changes
are pushed, a test suite is run every time, giving developers fast feedback and allowing
them to quickly revert the changes if tests show that it breaks the program.
2.2
Dependencies and Software Testing
In the broadest terms, a dependency in a software program is anything the program needs,
that it cannot provide itself, to function. Dependencies differ from project to project, but
some of the most common groups of dependencies are as follows:
• Databases: Storing data in databases, is almost impossible to avoid in a large soft­
ware development project. If a unit test needs to fetch data from a database to
execute its task, several considerations need to be taken care of. It takes time to
set up and connect to a database. To ensure consistency, test data will have to
be generated, inserted into the database, and cleaned up afterward. Testers may
use an in­memory database, to avoid the lengthy setup and slow speed of a real
database, but this also adds complexity to the testing process.
• Web Services: With the shift towards microservices, API providers, and cloud ser­
vices, web services are ubiquitous in software development. Performing tests that
make use of web services adds complexity to testing by having to deal with forming
the request, latency, and downtime.
• External Libraries: Third­party libraries allow developers to easily add functionality
to a program, but using such libraries carries great risks. Changes from version
to version might break functionality, but omitting to update a third­party library, can
introduce security risks, that you would have to rely on the developers of the library
to fix in due time.
It is worth mentioning that dependencies can show up both internally and externally. When
dealing with external dependencies, problems are often tied to availability, lack of control,
and speed. When dealing with internal dependencies, you have the freedom to cus­
tomize components however you want, but it might take time to alter the functionality of
the dependencies. In many cases, systems depending on each other will be developed
concurrently, adding to the complexity of software development and testing.
2.3
Mock Testing
Mock testing is a technique that allows developers to simulate dependencies that are nec­
essary to execute unit tests. This allows the developers to test without using any actual
dependencies and also gives them greater control of the behavior of the dependencies.
Being able to control the inputs and outputs of dependencies, provides a more controlled
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
5
==PAGE:14==
environment, which is ideal when executing tests.
In a lot of software, unit tests rely on some data or function that is outside the test scope.
To isolate the code under test, mock testing can be used to simulate these dependen­
cies[6]. If a unit test requires data from an external component, it becomes more akin to
an integration test, which includes the already mentioned downsides of being slower and
more brittle.
Wasting too much time setting up databases or contacting web services, ruins many of
the benefits inherent in unit testing. If a service is down for maintenance, or otherwise
unavailable, it is not possible to run the unit test. When a unit test is not isolated from
its dependencies, the tester may be wondering if the fault is on their side or the external
provider. Unit tests aim to test only a very specific function of a component, so being able
to isolate this piece of code from the rest of the system, is a huge benefit.
When mocking, the developers, specify which data should be returned when a depen­
dency is invoked, thus avoiding the trouble of external components and long execution
time. Since the mocks return the same data every time, the tester can be confident that if
the test fails, it has something to do with the code under test [6]. It is important to note, that
mocking is no substitute for integration testing, but rather a tool to use when integration
is not the focus of the test.
To ease the process of mocking, several frameworks have been developed, such as
Mockito, JMock, and Mocker, which make it easy to set the responses and verify that
certain methods are being called.
2.4
Breaking Changes
Software developers may rely on external providers for many services. Dependencies,
such as API endpoints and third­party libraries, are generally made with backward com­
patibility in mind. But as demands change, vulnerabilities are discovered, and optimiza­
tions are made, the provider of these services may be forced to introduce what is known
as breaking changes.
A breaking change, is a broad term, for any change, which breaks the implementation for
the user of the service[7]. Some of the most straightforward ways, that an API provider
may break the API for its users, is by deleting a resource, modifying required parameters,
or renaming and splitting up resources. These are API­specific examples, but they are
simple to translate into other cases. With a third­party library, a method may be removed,
fields are changed, and method names and functionality be split up.
When unit testing, the focus is entirely on the internal system. If dependencies are re­
quired to execute unit tests, developers may encounter challenges such as the depen­
dencies being time­consuming or difficult to set up. Breaking changes may mislead them
into thinking that the problem is in their software, when in reality the problem they should
be looking at, lies in the external dependency.
This problem is showcased in figure: 2.4. The test scope of unit tests is very small, but
certain data from a dependency may be required to execute the test. This scenario is not
ideal, since the integration is not under test, so the troubles included in communicating
6
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:15==
with the dependency, far outweigh the positives.
Figure 2.4: The problem with dependencies in unit testing
Mocks on the other hand, always supply the tests with the same data and do not break,
since the data it returns, is all controlled by the developer.
Figure 2.5: Mocking in place of external dependencies
The consistency, speed, and simplicity of using and setting up mocks, are what testers
are drawn to. With mocks in place, tests can be run more frequently, and there is no
doubt, that if a test fails, it is because of the code in the test scope, rather than external
dependencies, that the developer cannot control.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:17==
3
Literature Review
There are some developers, that seem to suggest that mocking, is harmful, and should
be avoided. The reason is that using mocking techniques adds unnecessary coupling
and promotes bad testing habits [8, 9]. Despite this, research indicates that mock frame­
works and techniques are used frequently by developers and organizations. In a research
paper[10] that investigated the usage of mocking frameworks in upwards of 5000 open
source java Github projects, 2000 of those projects had test classes. And of these 2000
projects, 23% used at least one mocking framework. It also suggests that mocking is
used more often by larger projects. This begs the question, why and how is mocking
used during development?
3.1
Why Mocking is Used by Developers
While there are not many papers investigating the good and bad effects of using mocking
during development, there are plenty of papers, that look into how mocking is used, and
what kind of dependencies are typically mocked. One of the main reasons for using mock
testing is to isolate tests [6]. It is clear how being able to easily isolate unit tests, is a huge
benefit. Unit tests exist to pinpoint a specific piece of functionality, and nothing more [11].
Any setup or complexity introduced by code that is not being directly tested is essentially
wasted effort.
Some of the common use cases where it could be beneficial to employ mocking is when
classes are highly coupled, complex, or difficult to set up [6]. These categories can easily
overlap, but the end goal of making it easier to isolate the code under test is all the same.
Mocking is also widely used to avoid having to deal with slow or unavailable classes and
services. Classes that take a long time to set up or execute, may be mocked if they are
not the code under test [6]. Similarly, database and web service connections, are often
time­consuming, and less reliable than other parts of a test suite, making them ideal to
mock. In the case of external web services, where the internal workings may not be fully
known or may change at any point without notice, mocking ensures that if a test fails, it
has something to do with their system, rather than an external one.
Mocking also allows developers to continue developing and testing, even when their sys­
tem may rely on unfinished or unavailable services[10]. When multiple components are
being developed concurrently, developers can use mocking as a placeholder, until the
systems become available, to include in their tests. This is also useful for external ser­
vices, as third­party providers, may charge money for invoking their services[10]. This
makes it unfeasible to use those providers and essentially renders them unavailable for
unit testing. Mocking also allows developers to delay their commitments to infrastructure,
such as which database to use, while still being able to work on functionality [11].
An important thing to note is that even though connections to databases and web services
may be mocked, it is not a replacement for integration tests and should not be used as
such[6]. Integration tests aim to test how various components come together and that
they can communicate and work together properly. When mocking, on the other hand,
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
9
==PAGE:18==
these connections are eliminated, because they are not the focus of the test. Mock testing
techniques should be used to improve the speed and reliability of unit tests, and integra­
tion tests should be used to test the flow between different components, that need to
communicate with each other.
3.2
How Mocking is Used by Developers
The main reasons why mocking may be used by developers have been outlined, but how
is mocking currently being used by developers? How mocking is used, varies from project
to project, but it is generally databases, web services, and external dependencies, which
are mocked by developers.
Figure 3.1: How often the examined projects used mocks on different types of dependen­
cies during testing [6]
Figure: 3.1 is a summary of how often a specific type of dependency has been mocked in
a test unit, in the four projects investigated by Spadini et. al [6]. It shows that databases,
web services, and external dependencies are commonly mocked. Their research focuses
on four projects, which all make use of mocking. As such, it is aimed at figuring out how
developers that have already adopted mocking, are using it as part of their test suite.
Two things that each of the commonly mocked dependencies has in common are that they
are often external, and are often time­consuming. Databases, in particular, are known to
be complex and time­consuming when having to generate test data and clean up database
states. A developer that was interviewed during their investigation, suggested that their
database integration tests take upwards of 40 minutes to complete. In unit tests, where
fast execution is often favored, it is easy to see why developers would choose to mock
these dependencies.
In the research carried out on 5000 open source java projects, by Shaikh Mostafa [10]
the main takeaways, are that mocking is widely used in java projects, but the number of
10
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:19==
mocks per project is quite low. They also note that mocking is primarily used on classes
that handle HTTP requests, as well as content repositories.
Lastly, in an empirical study carried out by Gustavo Pereira and Andre Hora [12], 12
projects are examined, which have been chosen based on their star ranking on GitHub.
Similar to the previous two studies, web services, and external dependencies are com­
monly mocked. However, this study found that domain objects are very often mocked,
while databases are rarely mocked.
These three studies are analyzing very different projects, so the kinds of dependencies
that are mocked are different. Web services, in particular, are found to be mocked of­
ten by all three studies. Beyond web services, Databases, external dependencies, and
domain objects are among some of the most commonly mocked dependencies.
3.3
Challenges surrounding the use of Mocks
To understand the challenges with mocking, it is also necessary to understand the chal­
lenges facing the different types of dependencies that developers are mocking.
3.3.1
Web Services and APIs
Web services are commonplace in software development, and providing APIs as a ser­
vice follows with it. However, there are still challenges facing the use of APIs. Developers
writing tests for the APIs that they use face the challenge, that the internal details of the
API are unknown. This limits the ability to generate tests that properly exercise the full
range of inputs and outputs of the API, which makes it hard to ensure that the API is in­
corporated securely in the developers’ system[13].
API providers are often inconsistent when it comes to updating the documentation sur­
rounding their API. This is paired with the providers also not always adhering to the same
documentation standards. This makes it exceedingly hard to automate test generation in
this field.
Another big challenge facing developers is when breaking changes are introduced when
an API provider makes changes to their API offerings [14]. Breaking changes are any
changes that disrupt the expectations that a user has for the provider, for example, if
an endpoint is removed, renamed, or the parameters are changed. Breaking changes,
paired with subpar documentation, makes for a challenging testing environment for the
developers using these API offerings. There is also a lack of standard when it comes to
notifying users of an API of changes [15].
The lack of good practices with documentation and notification of changes means that
developers always have to keep an eye out for changes, that could impact their systems.
Developers have to spend time whenever documentation is updated, to ensure that these
changes are not going to break anything in their system.
3.3.2
Databases
As already alluded to earlier, databases are difficult to test, because of the complexity of
setting up database states and executing the tests in these states [16] [17].
Another challenge facing the users of databases is how to handle changes in the database
schema. When making a new software program, it is written to fit with the given database
design. But as the application evolves, the database schema will need to change, to ac­
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
11
==PAGE:20==
commodate new requirements. The software program will then have to be altered to fit
the new database design.
However, many developers are overwhelmed by this task, which either results in a subpar
application or a subpar database. In an attempt to minimize schema changes, the state
of the database gets progressively worse, in a term coined database decay [18].
3.3.3
External Dependencies
External libraries have similar issues, as those discussed with APIs, which are breaking
changes and security [19][20]. As third­party libraries evolve, breaking changes may be
introduced. Compared to APIs, developers can typically choose to use older versions of
a third­party library, but this comes at a risk. Old versions of third­party libraries, will not
include security patches that fix security vulnerabilities. As a result, developers are forced
to update the versions of their third­party libraries at some point, where they will have to
alter their application so that it is compatible with any changes that have been introduced.
3.3.4
Software Development
Mocking techniques are commonly used for internal dependencies as well. Big projects
often have smaller teams, working on components that are part of a bigger whole, and
mocking can act as a stand­in until all the components are ready to be tested together.
Web services, databases, and other dependencies can be both internal and external, with
each their unique challenges.
When it comes to software development, there is a challenge in handling communica­
tion across teams effectively. When changes are made, and they are not communicated
properly, they can result in incompatible components, because the developers did not
share a common understanding of how the system should be integrated[21][22].
While status meetings can be a useful tool, they are often time­consuming and do not work
for all types of people. Another challenge in communication is finding the right person to
discuss changes with. In some cases, the more experienced developers are consumed
by other tasks. In other cases, when a developer makes a change, they may not know all
the people who are affected by the change, resulting in some people conforming to the
changes, while the changes are unknown to others. This results in incompatible software
components, that will need extra development time to fix.
3.4
Solutions researched in the literature
There are many approaches to using mocks more effectively during the test process. In
this section, we take a look at some of the tools that have been researched and developed
in the literature.
3.4.1
MockSniffer: Recommending mock decisions for unit tests
It has already been covered, that mocks have downsides as well. Mocks generally in­
crease the coupling, and having an over­reliance on mocks could indicate that the code
itself, is tightly coupled. Mocks also need to be maintained. These burdens, have to be
compensated by making the unit tests more reliable and simple to set up.
This is the focus area of MockSniffer[23]. The goal of this tool is to be able to automatically
identify and recommend, which dependencies that should be mocked. They achieve this,
by formulating a set of impact factors, that decide when a dependency should be mocked,
12
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:21==
based on open­source projects, that make use of mocking.
Some of the main contributing factors, to when a dependency is mocked, are classes that
are related to environment or concurrency. This is in line with the other literature that has
already been discussed. Dependencies that are slow to execute or flaky in the results
that they return are beneficial to mock.
Another factor that might indicate when to mock, is if the class is overly complicated.
Classes with many fields or dependencies are difficult to set up. Setting up even more
dependencies for the class to run, makes the testing unnecessarily complicated.
Interestingly, they also found that developers often use the verification feature, which is
found in mock objects. This feature allows the developers to verify that a certain method
was called and how many times it was called. They found that developers use this fea­
ture, to check if the code under test, correctly calls certain methods of the dependencies.
The MockSniffer project was found to have a higher success rate over existing mocking
strategies and shows potential in making mocking recommendations, in cross­version
setups, where the tool can train on historical data from the project, as well as cross­project,
by training on open source projects or other projects in the organization.
3.4.2
MODA: Automating test generation for database applications via
Mock Objects
The MODA project is working to solve some of the challenges, of using databases in test­
ing, such as being unable or unfeasible, to access the database during testing[16].
MODA takes a database schema and creates a mock object, which can replicate common
database actions, such as inserts. This functionality is combined with unit test generation,
using DSE(Dynamic Symbolic Execution). Combining unit test generation with MODA
makes it possible to generate a wider range of tests, since the auto­test generator, is not
limited by the availability or complexity of a real database.
The tool was evaluated on two projects, where it showed an increase of 27.5% and 12.5%
in branch coverage, over Pex, which is a test generation tool by Microsoft[24].
3.4.3
Mocking in Automated Unit Test Generation
The private API access and functional mocking in automated unit test generation project[25],
is looking to make it possible for unit test generation tool to generate their mocks, to cir­
cumvent the issues of real dependencies. They are also looking at combining this, with
increased access to private API methods, but we will focus on the mock part.
The mock functionality is added to Evosuite, which is an automatic test suite generator
for java[26]. When Evosuite needs to resolve a dependency, it has the option of making
a mock of it instead. These mocks are listening in on which methods are invoked during
a test suite, and the invoked mock methods are updated accordingly.
Their evaluation of the tool shows that it increases branch coverage by 3.3% and that it
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
13
==PAGE:22==
also improved fault detection. It does, however, have an increased risk of false positives.
There were also risks of false positives without the use of their tool, so the difference
between the base and their tool will have to be investigated further.
3.4.4
The problems with automated tools
The literature surrounding mocks are primarily researching how mocks can be used to
improve automatic test generation, as can be seen in the three outlined projects. Since
testing is a major time­consuming task in software development, it is no surprise that there
is a dream for testing to be generated automatically.
But case studies on the subject show that full automation still encounters a lot of problems.
For an automated test suite to provide meaningful results, there is still a major need for
manual labor. Developers may have to tweak the test oracle, to improve its fault­detecting
abilities[27]. Developers also still need to interpret the test results.
Dependencies are also a difficult problem, because of their evolving nature. To be able to
automatically update mocks and dependencies, it is necessary to know when dependen­
cies change, and how it affects the code. Dependabot, which is a tool created by Github,
aims to be able to automatically update third­party dependencies [28]. But tools like this,
have not quite won over all developers yet.
Dependabot relies heavily on the project’s test suite, to ensure compatibility with new ver­
sions. It essentially works by executing the project’s test suite using the new version, and
if all tests are still green, it will suggest updating the dependency version. This approach is
unreliable, as test suites are rarely thorough enough, to cover the dependency[29]. Even
though tools like this exist, their reliability means, that developers are often skeptical of
the automatic updates, in fear that they will break something. As such, they often turn to
version locking, outweighing reliability over security.
3.5
The challenges with mock testing
From having looked at all the challenges that surround mock testing, there is one com­
mon theme among them, which is that challenges are introduced when a dependency is
changed. Whether it is an API, database schema, or a third­party library that changes, it is
a challenge to identify how all these changes impact the software that is being developed.
This is a problem for mock testing because it is easy for mock objects to become un­
stable[6]. When the dependencies change, it is necessary to update the mock as well.
As a result, mocks can enter a state of decay, where their behavior is no longer similar to
the dependency it is simulating. When dependencies change, there are no mechanisms
to ensure that mock objects changed as well.
3.6
Problem Statement
The current state of mock testing helps developers in avoiding unnecessary time sinks
and makes it easier to form a reliable and isolated unit test suite. But it comes with the
added responsibility of having to maintain mocks and be on the lookout whenever depen­
dencies change.
Whenever mocked dependencies change, mock objects will have to be altered to be
14
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:23==
compatible with the changes. If the mock objects are not maintained, they are no longer
behaving similarly to the real dependency they are replacing. This can result in mislead­
ing test results.
These flaws have the possibility of going unnoticed until integration tests reveal that the
dependencies are no longer compatible with the system. Even when integration tests re­
veal breaking changes in dependencies, there is still a lot of work in fixing the mocks.
The integration test may reveal which dependency is causing problems, but it cannot
point to the mock object that is now inaccurate. The unit test only fails when the code
under test no longer works, but there is no mechanism to ensure that the mock object that
the unit test relies on, is up to date.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:25==
4
Conceptual Analysis
The goal of the conceptual analysis is to break down the relevant domains. There are
many ways to approach the problem of maintaining mock objects. From here on out,
the focus will be specifically on mock testing concerning web services. Even though
databases and external libraries also make up a large number of mock objects, it would
not be possible to cover all categories in this project.
In this chapter, we will look at how documentation for a web service is described with
the OpenAPI standard and how to categorize API changes.
We will also look at what API response validation is and how it potentially can help in
detecting changes from an API.
Finally, we look at how the detection of changes and maintenance of mocks impact de­
velopers.
4.1
API Documentation
API providers need to change their APIs now and then for a variety of reasons. Depending
on the changes, this can impact developers a lot, or not at all. The classical way of
detecting changes is by reading the documentation provided with the API. This requires
a lot of manual labor since the documentation from provider to provider is vastly different
and is not easily readable by machines. The best bet for developers is to stay updated via
changelogs or subscribe to updates if possible and keep an eye out if there is a change
to an endpoint the developer is using.
4.1.1
OpenAPI
To address the lack of standards in the description of web services, OpenAPI was made.
The OpenAPI specification, is a standard description for the capabilities of an API [30].
This standard allows both humans and computers to easily understand how they can and
should interact with an HTTP service. An OpenAPI documentation of an API contains
important information, such as which endpoints are available, parameters, types, and
response formats.
OpenAPI Example
OpenAPI documents have to follow the rules set by the OpenAPI specifications. We will
take a look at the OpenAPI documentation for the Twitter API.
OpenAPIs are usually split into three distinct parts. The description or metadata is at
the start. The paths and operations describe all the endpoints and how to use them. And
the components, which is where reusable data structures are located.
At the start of an OpenAPI document, is basic information about the API, such as the
title, version, and servers.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: Description of the Twitter API[31]
The second part of the OpenAPI is where the paths and operations are described. From
the top, first is the endpoint and HTTP method that is needed to contact the endpoint,
along with some general information about this operation.
Figure 4.2: The paths in the Twitter API[31]
Then there are the parameters, which describe all the parameters that can be used with
this operation. The parameter ”id” is first described. This parameter is a path parameter,
which means it is used directly in the URL when making a request. It also has required
set to true, which means this parameter has to be included at any time. If a parameter is
not required, it can be left out when making the request.
18
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:27==
The parameter is described by the associated schema. Schemas are used to describe
the input and out data types and hold all the information relevant to this specific data type.
This can be the data type, required elements of the data type, minimum and max length,
default values, and more. Parameters and schemas can also be referenced, as seen in
the parameters and response of the Twitter API.
The response describes the data type and format of the response, also described by
a schema. Default similarly describes the format of the response, if the request is unsuc­
cessful.
The last part of the OpenAPI documentation is the components. The components hold
objects such as schemas and parameter descriptions. These can be referenced as seen
in the Twitter API, so they are easy to reuse throughout the OpenAPI documentation.
OpenAPI Domain Model
To get an overview of how the OpenAPI standard is structured, a simplified domain model
has been made, based on examples of OpenAPIs and the OpenAPI specification:
Figure 4.3: Domain Model of the OpenAPI Specification
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
19
==PAGE:28==
The API object is not likely to change besides the version number. What we can see from
the domain model, is that particularly the schema class is important. The schema is what
describes the data types and formats for the requests and responses. Schemas are often
put as reusable components in an OpenAPI document, which means that a schema is
often used for multiple different operations.
The operation object describes all the endpoints that are available to an API. This ob­
ject plays a big role as well since the operation is what uniquely identifies each resource
of an API. Developers are unlikely to use every single operation that an API has to offer,
but the operation ID can provide an easy way to tell which parts of the API are of interest.
The parameters object describes the parameters that can be used when forming a re­
quest for an operation. The parameters class contains some important information, such
as whether or not a parameter is required when making a request, but a parameter is
mainly described by its schema.
The response and request body class describes the data types and formats of the re­
sponses and requests, but similarly to the parameters, it is described by using a schema.
20
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:29==
4.1.2
Breaking Changes in OpenAPI
The challenge then is to figure out which changes, may break a developer’s system.
Breaking changes have already been explained, but in short, any changes which require
that the developer alter their system are considered breaking changes. But to be a bit
more specific, let us take a look at the most common kinds of breaking changes, according
to Github[32], and how they can be characterized:
• Removing or renaming an operation, parameter, or response field: These are all
essential parts of communicating with the API. In the worst case, if an operation is
removed, the developers have to replace this functionality elsewhere. If a param­
eter is removed, the developers have to change their requests to match the new
parameter format.
Figure 4.4: Excerpt from the OpenAPI Twitter specification[31]
The terms operation, parameter, and response field can be directly translated within
the domain model. figure: 4.4 is an excerpt of an OpenAPI document, which shows
an operation, parameter, and schema. A change of this kind could be a change in
the path at line 1. If the search path is removed, the change is found by looking for
the lack of the pack in the latest version.
Removing a parameter, such as the state found in line 25, also constitutes a break­
ing change. Even though the parameter is not required, developers using the API
may be using the optional parameter for their requests, and the removal of it would
affect the developers’ system.
• Adding a required parameter: Several classes in the domain model, has a variable
which is named ”required”, such as in the request body class. When a new parame­
ter is introduced as required, it puts new requirements on the developers of the API,
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
21
==PAGE:30==
as they have to add this to their requests.
From the Twitter API example, the query parameter on line 11 is an example of
a required parameter. If another parameter similar to this one is added, developers
will need to alter their system, because none of their requests include this new re­
quired parameter.
Detecting a change of this kind primarily involves looking at additions to a path, and
specifically the parameters objects. Since the OpenAPI specifications are made to
be easily readable on machines, one could identify this kind of change by loading
in all the parameter names of a path, and checking if a new parameter has been
added
• Changing requirements of previous parameters: Similarly to above, if a parameter
is changed from optional to required, changes will also have to be made.
From the Twitter API, the parameter state on line 25 could be changed from op­
tional to required in a version change of the API. If developers were not using this
parameter before, as part of their request, they now have to change their requests
to include this parameter. To identify this kind of change, parameters from the same
path in the two different versions have to be found and check if the required tag has
changed from one version to the other.
• Changing the type of a parameter: If the type of a parameter is changed, the devel­
opers of the API will likely have to change how they handle their requests. This sort
of change mainly has to do with the schemas, which describe the types that can be
used with the API. The schema can change in many ways, such as the type from int
to double. The maximum length of responses may change, so the developers will
have to guarantee that their systems can handle these changes.
In the Twitter API, a change of this type could happen to the query parameter. It
currently has a max length of 2048, but if it were to be changed to something like
1024, the developers’ system would break if they continue to use a length of 2048.
Detecting this change is similar to detecting changes in the changes of parameters.
Breaking changes seem hard to identify since they can affect any domain object and they
may be introduced from removal, additions, and changes to the OpenAPI specification.
From the LinkedIn breaking change policy page[33], they also provide an example of a
breaking change, which could be even harder to identify. This is a change to intended
functionality: ”For example, if a DELETE request previously used to archive the resource
but now hard deletes the resource.”[33]. This challenge was also identified in the litera­
ture review. The lack of internal knowledge of how the API works mean that developers
have to rely on good documentation and have to be even more diligent in their testing of
the APIs that they use.
These are the changes that are likely to break a developer’s system, forcing them to
change how they currently implement the API. An API may also undergo a non­breaking
change. These are changes to the API, which do not impact the API’s current users.
These could be [32] additions to operations, and optional parameters. Adding these only
adds functionality, and does not force developers to change how they currently use the
API. The addition of a required parameter can also be considered a non­breaking change
22
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:31==
if it has a default value associated with it. Changing a parameter from required to optional,
would also be a change, but not a breaking one.
4.1.3
The Length of OpenAPI Documents
It can be difficult for developers to determine if a change is a breaking change or simply
a change since the two can look very similar. This is exacerbated by the sheer length of
OpenAPI documents. Recall the excerpt of the Twitter OpenAPI document in figure:4.6
and the mock of the Twitter API in figure:4.7. The OpenAPI specification from Twitter is
over 3000 lines long, but for this particular mock object, only changes that are made to
the search operation are of interest to the developer.
4.2
API Response Validation
It was discussed in the literature review, that mocks are not a replacement for integration
tests. Integration tests have the expressed purpose of testing the integration between
various components, such as a web service, that need to communicate with the rest of
the system. Mocks, on the other hand, are used when the web service is not under test
so that the challenges with testing web services can be avoided.
However, that does not mean the two are completely unrelated. Integration tests can
often tell a lot about how the mocks should behave and when they are no longer accu­
rate. One way that integration tests can detect changes in API behavior, is with response
validation.
4.2.1
What is Response Validation
API response validation is the process of validating the response from the API, ensuring
that the response meets our expectations[34]. This includes processing the response for
important information such as the HTTP status code, HTTP headers, and the response
body.
This process is closely related to the OpenAPI specifications or API documentation in
general. The OpenAPI documentation includes information about expected response
codes, response type and format, and more. When developers use an API, they look
at the documentation and expect the API to respond as described in their documentation.
However, in the literature review, it was discovered that documentation is not always
updated as reliably as possible. The API providers might rush to change the behavior of
the API, but neglect to update their documentation, such as their OpenAPI specification.
With this in mind, it is clear why developers would want to validate their API responses. By
validating the API response, developers ensure that the API is behaving as they expect
and helps them detect unexpected changes to the API’s behavior.
4.2.2
How does Response Validation Impact Mocks
Similar to how OpenAPI documentation can be used to determine if a mock is inaccurate,
integration tests combined with response validation can do the same.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.5: A simple model of a project test suite
Consider this simple model of a test suite. Mocks simulate dependencies, while integra­
tion tests communicate directly with the dependency, yet there is no mechanism to use
the response validation from an integration test, to evaluate if a mock object is no longer
accurate.
In the integration tests, there is likely to be a test that contacts the real dependency,
for example, Twitter. If the response validation from the integration test fails, the API has
likely changed. This means that any mock objects which simulate this Twitter operation
are inaccurate.
4.3
Maintenance of Mocks
The other key problem that was identified in the literature review, besides detection, is the
maintenance of mocks. Maintenance of mocks is the process of updating mock objects in
a software project, so that they always accurately reflect the dependency they are mock­
ing.
24
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:33==
Consider an example, where a developer chooses to mock the Twitter API. To do this,
they look up the OpenAPI and find the following operation they want to mock:
Figure 4.6: Excerpt from the OpenAPI Twitter specification v1.1[35]
Then they implement the following mocks in their test suite where they mock the request
and response for the Twitter API:
Figure 4.7: Example of a mock used in a test suite[36]
If Twitter decides to introduce a breaking change in this operation, that would leave the
developer with a test that contains a mock that is inaccurate. It no longer accurately sim­
ulates the dependency it is replacing.
If the change that is introduced, adds a required parameter, the developer would need
to add this parameter to the other parameters in lines 7 and 8 in figure:4.7. If the change
was related to the response from the API, such as a change to the type of the response
data, then the developer would need to change the example response at line 9. Once the
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
25
==PAGE:34==
mock is updated, the test should again be able to accurately tell if the code under test is
working as intended or not
If on the other hand, the developer fails to maintain their mocks when a breaking change
occurs, they run the risk of their test becoming a false negative. A false negative, is when
a test passes, even though there is a bug or the program is not working as intended. For
example, if the response type is changed by Twitter, but the response type is not updated
in the mock, the test will continue to pass, even though the application might not support
this new type.
Having inaccurate tests can hold back developers in many ways. They will have to spend
more time debugging and identifying broken code if the test suite is not able to isolate
the problem. Inaccurate tests can also result in additional bugs, because the developers
assume that their code is working correctly, based on a false negative test.
4.4
Detection and Maintenance: The effect on Developers
If mocks no longer accurately reflect reality, it can have various consequences for de­
velopers. If changes are not tracked and detected, developers may waste time adding
functionality that is no longer compatible.
Additionally, failing to maintain mocks can impact test reliability. If tests containing mock
objects become false negatives due to lack of maintenance, the developer may think their
application is working as intended when it is not.
Detecting changes and maintaining mocks can be time­consuming for developers. De­
tecting changes in APIs depends largely on the API provider. But in any case, developers
must spend time identifying what has changed, determining whether it affects their appli­
cation, and figuring out where and what changes need to be made.
26
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:35==
5
Design
In this chapter, we will look at the design of the tool that has been created as part of the
project. This includes the rationale behind which functions the tool should have and why
certain design decisions have been made.
The tool is designed as a third­party library, which is intended to be used in the test suite
of a software project, where mocks are found.
The design builds on the concepts that were discussed in the conceptual analysis. The
goal is to figure out how the detection of changes in APIs can and should be used to help
developers easier maintain their mocks.
5.1
Requirements
To figure out how to help developers best, we take a look at the problem from the devel­
opers’ point of view and identify what kind of needs they have.
It was discovered in the literature review, that tools that attempt to automate the test­
ing process, do not have the required accuracy yet to replace the job for the developer.
As a result, the focus is on how to aid the developers and make their job of detecting and
maintaining mocks as fast and simple as possible.
Based on the literature review and analysis of the problems, the following needs of the
developers have been identified:
• As a developer, I want to know when changes are made to APIs that I use and
if they are going to impact my application.
• As a developer, I want to easily be able to see what has changed from one API
version to another and what mocks in my application are affected by these
changes.
• As a developer, I want to ensure that tests that use mock objects are as reliable
as possible and that they are not passing when they should not.
The functions of the tool and the design decisions regarding these functions should ulti­
mately serve one of these three purposes in one way or another.
5.2
OpenAPI
OpenAPI is designed to be read into a machine and is one of the few standards when
it comes to describing APIs. The biggest concern when it comes to building a solution
around OpenAPI documentation, is that not all API providers necessarily provide and
update an OpenAPI specification. However, the alternative is API provider­specific doc­
umentation, which would be even more difficult to make a tool around.
5.2.1
Changes in OpenAPI
Detecting changes in OpenAPI specifications will help developers to know if they need to
change their implementation.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
27
==PAGE:36==
However, only breaking changes should impact a developer’s system, and thus it is im­
portant that breaking changes are detected accurately and conveyed to the developer.
Non­breaking changes may still be useful to the developer. Consider the example of a
breaking change made earlier, where the change is purely internal. That kind of change
could be captured in OpenAPI by changing the description of the operation. This change
would be difficult to classify correctly as a breaking change. The developer may want to
track any kind of change, breaking or not, in mission­critical API operations.
This also allows the developer to be notified of new optional parameters, that they may
find useful, but this is not a priority. There should be a clear distinction between breaking
and non­breaking changes.
5.2.2
Tracking Changes on Specific Operations
Since OpenAPI specifications are often thousands of lines long, there is a lot of unneces­
sary information that developers have to look through. Similarly, this also has to be taken
into account in this project, when detecting changes in the OpenAPI document. There
may be breaking changes, but if it is in operations that the developers do not use, then
this information is useless. As a result, there should be a way for developers to specify
which operations they want to track.
Since paths may contain multiple operations, such as get and post operations, both the
path name and HTTP method are required to specify an operation.
Figure 5.1: How an operation is specified by the developer
The developer puts in the required information about the operation, such as users/search.json,
get and this should result in changes only being reported if they are to this specific oper­
ation.
28
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:37==
5.2.3
Specifying the OpenAPI specification
There are a few decisions that can be made regarding how to specify the OpenAPI spec­
ifications. Since the tool needs to compare two different versions of an OpenAPI specifi­
cation, there are two different approaches, both with strengths and weaknesses.
The first approach is for the developer to provide a link directly to the OpenAPI speci­
fication from the API provider. This link would also be the one that API providers would
update when they make a change to the API. The tool should save this OpenAPI specifi­
cation locally, allowing the tool to compare the local version to the latest version from the
provider at a later date.
Figure 5.2: Design 1: Specifying only the latest OpenAPI specification
The strength of this design is that it is very simple and easy to set up. The developer
only needs to provide a link to the updated site of the OpenAPI specification, and the tool
handles the rest. This approach, however, can be a bit limiting, as it does not provide the
developers with an easy way to compare two OpenAPI specifications of their choosing. If
the tool is used as a way to track changes internally, this approach can be limiting.
The second approach is that the developer specifies both versions of the OpenAPI spec­
ification that they want to compare. This could be a locally stored OpenAPI specification,
that the developer is currently basing their implementation on. The other specification
could then be the same as before, with a link to the latest documentation from the API
provider, or a link to an OpenAPI specification stored on a GitHub repository.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
29
==PAGE:38==
This allows the developers more flexibility, in certain scenarios. For example, an API
provider may update their documentation but still allow developers to use the old version,
while it is being phased out. For internal development, where changes may happen at a
more rapid pace, not being able to specify certain versions would be a problem.
Both of these approaches do not exclude the other, so it would be an option to give the
developers the choice of implementing whichever approach is the best for them. The ap­
proach of specifying both the old and the new OpenAPI seems less prone to error, and
the added flexibility is important, so this approach is the one that will be implemented.
5.3
Improving Test Results
Detecting changes in OpenAPI documents, helps the developers to know when changes
are made to the APIs that they use. But simply detecting changes, does not make tests in
a project more reliable. This responsibility still falls on the developer. To make tests that
make use of mocks more reliable, we propose the following design, which incorporates
the detection of breaking changes as just described, with the unit test suite:
Figure 5.3: The general design behind incorporating the detection mechanisms with the
test suite of a project
The idea is to use the detection results from the OpenAPI specification and put them to
use in a tangible way. There is currently no way of telling if a mock object is inaccurate,
and as a result if the test results are inaccurate. This design aims at making the test
results more accurate, by ensuring that mocks are simulating their real counterpart, as
accurately as possible.
It also aims to make it easier for the developer to know which tests and mock objects
are affected by the changes to the API.
Put into a specific scenario, this should look something like this:
30
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.4: Detecting OpenAPI changes in a unit test
When the unit test is run, it compares the two OpenAPI specifications and determines
whether there are any breaking changes on the users/search.json, get operation. If it
finds a breaking change, the test is gonna fail. If there are no breaking changes, the test
is run as it would normally, where it may pass or fail depending on the results of the test.
This kind of design has the advantage that the detection mechanism is run exactly when
it is needed. When the developer runs their test suite, they can be more confident that as
of right now, the results of their tests are accurate.
5.4
Using API Response Validation for Mocks
Similar to how the OpenAPI specification can be used to detect changes in an API, so can
API response validation. The goal is to use the API response validation from integration
tests and use them as an additional detection mechanism to tell when a mock is inaccu­
rate.
For example, if an integration test is failing because an API has changed, mocks that
simulate this API likely need to be changed as well. It is currently up to the developers to
figure out which mocks object is no longer accurate. This process is prone to errors since
mock objects may simply be forgotten or the developer may waste time when figuring out
which mocks that should be updated.
5.4.1
Analyzing HTTP Responses
The response from an API is likely to be an HTTP response. These contain important in­
formation about the API, besides the response itself. By analyzing the contents of HTTP
responses, we can attempt to determine if there may have occurred unforeseen changes,
since the last time the API was used. This is done by looking at the three main compo­
nents of an HTTP response, which are the status code, headers, and response.
5.4.2
HTTP Response Codes
The HTTP status code has many different codes for different types of errors, which can
be useful to figure out why a request may not be working. When a request is successful,
it will be in the 200­299 range[37]. If a request fails, the status code will indicate why the
request was not able to be fulfilled. For example, the status code 400 bad request, which
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
31
==PAGE:40==
is a client­side error, means that the request could not be processed. This could be the
developer that has not written the request properly. But if the request has worked before,
it could imply that the parameters and types for this request have changed.
The server could also return a 503 service unavailable status code, which is a server­side
error that indicates that the server is unable to handle the request, because the server is
down due to maintenance, is overloaded, or something else. With this kind of response
code, the developer can be fairly certain that there are not any problems on their end.
5.4.3
HTTP Headers
Many different HTTP headers can be included in a response. Some that might be useful,
are the content type and length headers[38]. If these changes, it could indicate that the
developers using the API may need to change their implementation. The headers grouped
as conditionals can also be used to help detect changes in the inner workings of an API.
For example, the ETag header is used to identify the version of a resource, and the Last­
Modified header tells us when is the last time the resource has been modified. There are
many cases where these headers will be irrelevant or not even included in the response,
so they will have to be used on a case­by­case basis. There are also many non­standard
headers that API providers can use to give useful information about the request. For
example, some providers use non­standard headers to provide the version of their API. If
the version of this header changes, it could mean that the API has changed.
5.4.4
HTTP Body
The HTTP body may be useful in certain scenarios as well, but in general, it is the least
usable of the three. The HTTP body only contains the response itself, while the status
code and headers are metadata information. If a request is expected to have the same
response every time, then it would be good to know if the response suddenly changes,
as this would indicate some kind of change in the API. If, on the other hand, the response
is expected to change from request to request, it may be valuable to ensure that the
response is satisfying the developer’s expectations in terms of type, size, structure, and
so on.
5.4.5
The subscription model
Similar to how OpenAPI is used to detect changes, the results and responses from the
integration tests, are used as an additional detection mechanism.
To inform the developer of which mocks may be inaccurate based on the integration test
results, we use a subscription­type system.
32
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.5: A subscription for mocks, that alarm if a subscribed test fails
The idea is that an integration test produces a report on the operation that it is testing, such
as the Twitter search operation. Mocks then subscribe to this operation, and if the results
of the analysis indicate a breaking change, such as the content type being changed in the
HTTP header, then the developer will know that they should look at the mock object, and
ensure that its behavior is accurate.
5.5
Showing changes to the viewer
Beyond marking tests as failed when a breaking change is detected, the tool should also
help the developers in maintaining the mock objects.
At the end of the day, it is still up to the developer to review the changes in the API
that they are using and figure out how these changes should be handled.
To assist them in this task, a comparison view is made for the developers to look at.
This view highlights the changes made between the two OpenAPI versions. This allows
the developers to get a quick overview of the changes and how they should be dealt with.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.6: How changes between two OpenAPI specifications are shown to the devel­
oper
Mock objects which are tracked by the tool can be selected on the left. The window
on the right then shows the comparison and highlights changes between the two ver­
sions. If a specific operation has been specified by the developer, such as the user­
s/search.json, get operation, the OpenAPI specification is automatically cropped to only
show the changes at this operation.
At the top in the right window are the different detection methods which can be used.
Clicking these then shows the comparison window relevant to that method. Red indicates
that a breaking change was found during the OpenAPI analysis. Yellow in the HTTP re­
sponse indicates that a change was found, while green in the HTTP status and integration
test result indicates that no changes were found.
34
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:43==
6
Implementation
In this chapter, we will look at the concrete implementation of the tool that has been cre­
ated. The program has been developed in java and eclipse and tested with JUnit.
First, we will give an overview of the implementation and the responsibility of each of
the classes. Then we will go through each class individually and explain the sequence of
events.
6.1
Overview
The implementation consists of four classes with three distinct purposes. There is the
DependencyUpdater, which is responsible for comparing OpenAPI specifications. Then
there is the ApiResponseValidator which is responsible for validating the API responses
from integration tests. Lastly, the JavaFX and FileDiff classes, are responsible for gener­
ating the view.
Figure 6.1: Class Diagram of the tool
The DependencyUpdater and ApiResponseValidator class is what the developers’ are in­
teracting with and use in their tests. The DependencyUpdater has the public method Alert­
SpecificBreakingChanges, where the developer specifies the operation that they want to
track.
After the OpenAPI specifications have been compared and determined if there is a break­
ing change or not, the results are logged to a local file. This file contains information such
as the name of the mock, the old and new OpenAPI specifications, and the result of the
comparison.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
35
==PAGE:44==
The ApiResponseValidator works in much the same way as the DependencyUpdater. It
uses two local files to hold information about the current response and the response from
the last time the test was run. It compares the two responses’ status codes, headers, and
body. It then logs the results in a local file.
The JavaFX class creates the view by going through the contents generated by the De­
pendencyUpdater and the ApiResponseValidator. The OpenAPI specification and the API
response go through the FileDiff, which compares the old and new versions. The FileDiff
uses an HTML template to generate an HTML page that the JavaFX class can display to
the user.
The JavaFX class generates buttons for all the mocks, their schemas, and relevant API
response results.
6.2
Dependency Updater
Loading the OpenAPI specifications into java is relatively straightforward. Since they are
often provided in a raw format, they can be read directly using the IOUtils package. If the
OpenAPI file is hosted on Github, using the raw function, allows us to read it from there
as well.
To compare the two different OpenAPI specifications, we make use of the library openapi­
diff[39]. This library loads in two OpenAPI specifications, and analyzes them, to deter­
mine if there are breaking changes between the two versions.
The flow of the DependencyUpdater is as follows:
Figure 6.2: Sequence diagram of the AlertSpecificBreakingChange method
It starts by going through the full OpenAPI specification and cutting out the operation that
is specified by the developer. If the operation is missing from either of the two specifica­
tions, a descriptive error is thrown for the developer.
36
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:45==
Then it goes through all the schema references that the OpenAPI has, and finds the
schemas from the components part of the OpenAPI. These are then written to the local
file so that the view also can show comparisons of the schemas that are referenced in an
operation.
Then it determines if there is a breaking change in this particular operation and throws an
error if there is. The result of the comparison is written to the file with the information to
identify the mock, the contents of the OpenAPI operation, and the result of the comparison.
The DependencyUpdater also has the subscribe option, where it checks the status of
validated API responses, and fails the test if the API response has changed. The flow of
the subscribe method is as follows:
Figure 6.3: Sequence diagram of the subscription method
When a mock is subscribed to a category, it is written to the comparison file. This way the
view knows which mocks are subscribed to what categories and can collect this informa­
tion from the API response validation when changes are shown to the viewer.
Afterward, the API validation results matching the category are collected and it goes
through the status results of the API validation. If any of the API validation results in­
dicate a breaking change, the test fails.
6.3
Api Response Validator
To implement the API response validation in the integration test, the developer provides
the tool with the HTTP response. The response is then broken down into its three main
components, the status code, headers, and body.
The status code and body are relatively straightforward. The status code and body are
compared to what their content was, the last time the integration test ran.
For the HTTP body, the response is simply compared to the last time the test ran. There
is potential to utilize the body response in more sophisticated ways. For example, if the
body changes, developers may want to ensure that the response type or length is within
the boundaries of what the developers’ systems can handle.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
37
==PAGE:46==
For the HTTP headers, there are typically only a few headers that are of interest. The
standard ones such as content type and length, are looked at by default. But as mentioned
earlier, the API provider may send back any number of non­standard headers which can
contain important information such as what API version was used to serve the request.
To deal with this, we allow the users of the tool to name specific headers that are of
interest to them. These headers are also compared between integration test runs.
The flow of the API response validation is as follows:
Figure 6.4: Sequence diagram of the API response validation
The API response validator starts by getting the API response from the last time the in­
tegration test was run. It compares this response to the new response that just came in
and writes down the results in the validated response file. It also writes the current API
response to the new data file, so that this response can be compared the next time the
integration test is run.
6.4
JavaFX
The view is created by using JavaFX and uses a webengine to load in HTML pages. The
contents of the webengine are changed by clicking buttons that correspond to mocks,
schemas, and API responses that have been compared.
To get started with the text comparison, the following guide has been used[40]. The text
is compared, and then it is put into an HTML template for formatting.
The flow of the JavaFX component is as follows:
38
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.5: Sequence diagram of the JavaFX start method
At first, the scene elements are created, such as the webengine and the scrollpane. Then
it collects the mocks from the comparisons file. The sequence diagram shows the se­
quence for a single mock, but the process is repeated until the view has been generated
for all mocks.
The mock is taken through the Filediff, which highlights the difference between the old
and new OpenAPI specifications. The Filediff returns an HTML page, which is put into
the JavaFX webengine to display to the user.
A button for the mock is created, which updates the webengine accordingly. This pro­
cess is then repeated for the schemas and the API responses that are relevant to the
mock.
After going through all the mocks, we get the final view, which looks like this:
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.6: Comparison view that highlights the changes for the developer
At the left are each of the mocks that are being tracked. Clicking on one of the mock but­
tons updates the webengine to show the OpenAPI comparison. The color codes indicate
the severity of a change. Red means a breaking change has been found. Yellow means
a non­breaking change has been found. Green means that no changes were found.
In the example the pets get mock has been selected and the OpenAPI comparison shows
that a parameter has been changed from optional to required. At the top are the schema
and API response buttons. Clicking these will change the webviewer, to show these
changes instead. Clicking on another mock to the left will automatically change the top
buttons, to whichever is relevant for that mock.
40
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:49==
7
Demonstration and Use Cases of the
Tool
The purpose of the demonstration is to show how the tool that has been created, can be
implemented as part of a typical project. We will be looking at two different cases. The
first one emphasizes how the tool can be used as part of an internal project as a helping
hand in avoiding mismanagement of changes. The second one shows how it could be
used to track API changes from external API providers.
7.1
Improving Change Management in Internal Environments
In the literature review, it was shown that developers sometimes find themselves having
a hard time coordinating the development effort of a project. Changes from one team are
not properly communicated to another team, which results in wasted work.
This is a problem when one team uses mocks to simulate the behavior they are expecting
from the second team. Because there are few measures to ensure that mocks are accu­
rate, the first team might code for a long time, only to realize their code is not compatible
with the changes made by the second team. The current scenario is this:
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 7.1: How failing to communicate changes, can result in wasted development time
The problem in this scenario is that at some point, changes that had to be made were not
communicated to the correct people. Team 1 was unaware that team 2 had changed their
implementation, from what was originally planned. Team 1 continued its development ef­
fort with the original implementation in mind. When it is time to test the two components
together, it is discovered that they are incompatible. The extra time now has to be spent
by team 1 to remake their code, so that it is compatible with the web service from team 2.
This scenario is not ideal, so we look at how the tool developed in this project, can be
used to help solve this problem. First, a look at how OpenAPI documentation can be
generated.
Documentation has often been a neglected part of development, but new tools and fea­
tures allow developers to generate documentation purely from code. Spring is often used
to create REST APIs, and with a few extra steps, the documentation for them can be
generated automatically, as described in this guide[41].
Using the tool which has been created as part of this project, in an environment where
42
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:51==
the OpenAPI documentation is automatically generated, would allow developers to easily
track changes made by their fellow developers.
From the scenario that was described earlier, team 1 could use this tool to track the
OpenAPI documentation generated by team 2. This would mean that tests would only
pass if no breaking changes have been introduced by team 2. If breaking changes have
been introduced, the developer of team 1, could use the comparison view to see what
has changed and will know exactly what mocks are no longer accurate. On team 2s end,
since the documentation is generated automatically, they would simply have to push their
code to their GitHub repository. The changes and updates to the documentation would
instantly be communicated to team 1.
7.2
Tracking the Twitter API
The second case looks at the Spring Stream Applications[42], which provides various
functions for data integration, such as from the Twitter API. In their test environment, they
demonstrate how to use the functions. To make these tests faster and easier to handle,
they use a mock server and client, which simulates the Twitter API.
Their test suite has three different test files, which are all structured similarly. For ex­
ample, here is how the geo function is set up:
Figure 7.2: Example of setting up a mock in a test environment
You may recognize the structure of this mock, as it is from the same project as the Twitter
user mock example, that was shown during the conceptual analysis. The mock is set up
such that when it receives a request that is formed as described in the when section, it
responds as described in the respond section. The body of the response is set to a locally
stored JSON file. Now that the behavior of the mock is set up, it is used in the test cases.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 7.3: Example of a test verifying the behavior of mock and the response
The Twitter API request is being set up similarly to how it would in a real environment,
but it is sent to the mock client instead, which responds with the predetermined response.
The behavior is with the once method, which checks that the mock client received a re­
quest similar to the one described exactly once. It is also asserted that the response was
received successfully and has the correct size.
So what are the things that could go wrong in this scenario or be improved upon? If
Twitter makes a breaking change to the geo/search.json operation, then this mock test
no longer accurately simulates how the developer would use the Spring Stream Twitter
function. A change in the Twitter API could result in the developer having to use addi­
tional parameters when forming the request. The response could have changed so that
the payload is no longer similar to the payload that would result from a real request. The
biggest problem in this scenario is that the test case continues to pass until the change is
discovered. This could lead to more bugs and wasted development time since the test is
not accurately simulating the real system anymore.
Twitter no longer has the OpenAPI v1.1 available, since it is being out­phased, so a re­
placement URL to Github is used.
44
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:53==
Figure 7.4: How the tool is implemented and used to track the Twitter API
We simulate a breaking change on the geo search operation, by changing a parameter
from optional to required. Now when the test is run, it fails because it has found a breaking
change.
Figure 7.5: The test case fails because there is a breaking change
In addition, it is also possible to display the comparison view, which highlights the changes
between the two OpenAPI specifications and only displays the geo search operation.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 7.6: The comparison view highlights the optional parameter which is now required,
in the geo search operation
By using this tool, the developers benefit in a few ways. First of all, they become aware
of changes to the API that they use. They also avoid having false negative tests, which
could have led to wasted development time. They also get an overview of the relevant
changes for each mock, which they can use to troubleshoot and assess the problem. All
of this is available to them directly in the IDE.
46
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:55==
8
Evaluation
In this chapter, we will be evaluating how well the tool solves the problems and require­
ments it was built to solve. The tool will also be judged on:
• Accuracy: How accurate is the tool in detecting changes and reporting them as
test failures? Does the comparison view accurately highlight the changes, pick the
correct schemas, and show the comparison for the subscribed mocks
• Usability and Integration: How easy is the tool to use and integrate into existing
workflows
• Performance: Is the tools speed gonna pose a potential bottleneck when handling
many mocks and tests
8.1
Accuracy
To test the accuracy, we manually change different elements of an OpenAPI specification
and verify how the program behaves. The scenarios that are tested, are the same sce­
narios described by Github[32] that were explained in the conceptual analysis. First, we
see if the test fails, when we introduce a breaking change. The results are as follows :
Removing an entire Operation
Removing or renaming a parameter
Removing or renaming a response field
Adding a new required parameter
Making a previously optional parameter required
Changing the type of a parameter or response field
Removing enum values
Adding a new validation rule to an existing parameter
X
For each of these tests, is also verified if the comparison view is generated correctly and
the buttons have the correct color. The results show that the tool can find most breaking
changes, with one exception.
It was not able to identify the addition of a validation rule as a breaking change. This
was tested by adding a pattern to a parameter. In all cases, the tool correctly cropped
the correct text and displayed it in the comparison view with the correct buttons and colors.
It was noticed, however, that the highlighted text could be thrown off once a change was
introduced, resulting in the rest of the text being marked after the change. A potential
solution to this could be to perform the comparison on an object­to­object basis. So the
comparison could for example compare the parameters between the two documents, and
then reset before comparing the responses.
From the GitHub page, they also note some non­breaking changes, which were also
tested. The results of those are as follows :
All of the additive changes were correctly identified as non­breaking changes and did not
cause a test fail.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
47
==PAGE:56==
Adding an operation
Adding an optional parameter
Adding an optional request header
Adding a response field
Adding a response header
Adding enum values
The API response validation is also largely tested manually since we need to ensure that
the view is generated correctly. We construct the tests to test if they can catch a change
in the response code, the header, and the body.
The tool can detect when the response changes in all three categories, and the tests
that are subscribed to the API response validation, fail if changes are detected.
One way the response validation could be improved is to perform response validation
with the OpenAPI specification. Currently, the tool is detecting changes from run to run,
but it could be even more accurate if the response was validated against the response
details outlined in the OpenAPI specification.
8.2
Usability and Integration
From the demonstration, we saw how the tool could be implemented into an existing
project. It requires very few lines to implement into a test case. Part of the reason that it
is so easy, is because the tool stores all the data it generates locally, with no need to set
up something like a database.
The comparison view with the color scheme and buttons is very intuitive and should give
the developers a clear idea of the state of their mocks and the changes that might im­
pact them. When there are many schemas and response validations in a single mock,
however, the view starts to get crammed. A potential way to fix this could be to remove
buttons and comparisons for the schemas that have no change at all. You could also
choose to only show comparisons for schemas when a breaking change is detected, but
this puts a lot of pressure on the accuracy.
Another way that the tool may feel unintuitive, is if the user needs to use the same Ope­
nAPI specification multiple times, which could be the case if they use multiple operations
from the same API. Currently, they would need to link to the same OpenAPI document ev­
ery time, which can be a hassle, especially if they all need to be changed for some reason.
The view provides an easy way to spot changes between the old and new content, by
highlighting the changes in the side­by­side comparison, but the formatting of the text is
rather basic. It would be ideal if the text was formatted in a more typical JSON fashion
with indentations. This would make it easier to see which elements belong to each other
and simpler to read in general.
8.3
Performance
Performance is an important metric, because part of the strength of unit tests, compared
to integration tests, is that they are fast to execute. Since all the data is stored in the same
48
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:57==
file, performance could potentially be a problem if many documentations are compared
in a test suite. We use the Twitter OpenAPI specification for the tests, since using the
petstore example in this case, would not be representative of real­world performance.
To evaluate the performance of the program, we compare the time spent executing tests
with and without the tool in use. The results of the performance evaluation are as follows:
Figure 8.1: Time spent on tests, with and without the tool
From the performance evaluation, we can see that the time scales linearly, with every test
introducing roughly a two­second penalty. The majority of these two seconds are spent
on downloading the OpenAPI specification from the URL source. Two seconds per test
may not seem like a lot, but in large projects with many mocks, the time adds up. This
time spent could be enough to dissuade developers from using the tool.
Potential ways to improve the performance of the program is to ensure that the same
OpenAPI specification is not downloaded multiple times in a single run of a test suite.
Another way to manage this problem is to have the OpenAPI specifications downloaded
at an interval in the background. This would allow fast unit test execution by using locally
stored files instead.
8.4
Requirements and Problem Statement
The goal of the tool was to make it easier for developers to maintain their mocks, and
ensure that they are always accurate. How well does the tool fulfill the requirements that
were set?
The first requirement was:
• As a developer, I want to know when changes are made to APIs that I use and
if they are going to impact my application.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
49
==PAGE:58==
The tool was able to detect most breaking changes and was easy to implement. The
biggest challenge in this area is what if the API provider does not provide OpenAPi docu­
mentation for their API. This blind spot was covered by using API response validation in
conjunction with OpenAPI. This means the tool should be able to help the developer in
many cases.
The second requirement was:
• As a developer, I want to easily be able to see what has changed from one
API version to another and what parts of my application are affected by these
changes.
The comparison view makes it easy to compare and spot the difference when changes
are introduced. Having the tool automatically cut down the OpenAPI documentation, to
only show changes relevant to each mock, should make it easy for developers to judge
how the changes are gonna impact the mocks in their code.
The color coding to indicate where the breaking changes are, also helps the develop­
ers to figure out what changes are the most important. There are a few issues, however,
as highlighted earlier during usability. The lack of indentation and sometimes excessive
highlighting of text changes make it harder for developers to spot the changes between
the two API versions.
The third requirement was:
• As a developer, I want to ensure that tests that use mock objects are as reliable
as possible and that they are not passing when they should not.
The detect­and­test method worked well to ensure that mock tests would not pass when
there were breaking changes and thus would produce inaccurate test results. This could
be a big help for developers that work with dependencies that change a lot, and the tool
seemed to be useful for both internal and external use. The biggest factor that could
impact the usefulness of this method, is whether or not the performance issues can be
alleviated enough to the point where using the tool will be a net positive. In its current
form, the added time in executing unit tests would deter a lot of developers.
8.5
Future Work
The developed tool has the potential to help developers, but several problems have been
identified that could be improved upon. Future work should be to work together with de­
velopers to ensure that the tool is targeting the correct problems.
In this project, the focus was on detecting changes in APIs, but as we saw in the liter­
ature review, there are many other forms of dependencies that mocks also tend to simu­
late. The detect­and­test method could also be extended to work databases. Database
schemas and changelogs could form a basis for detecting changes similar to what was
done with OpenAPI.
50
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:59==
9
Conclusion
The goal of this project was to make it easier for developers to maintain their mock objects
and reduce the likelihood of mocks producing inaccurate test results.
This has been achieved by developing a tool that allows developers to utilize OpenAPI
documentation and API response validation to detect changes in the APIs that they use.
The tool prevents inaccurate test results because of mock objects, by detecting break­
ing changes in the API that the mock simulates. It also provides the developers with an
easy way of comparing OpenAPI documentation and API responses, which should make
it easier for them to maintain their mocks.
The biggest weakness of the tool currently, is its performance. The performance of the
tool is hindered by having to download OpenAPI documentation every time unit tests are
run. Future work should aim at addressing these performance issues, as well as extend­
ing the tool to be able to handle a wider range of dependencies, such as databases.
The project was also limited by not having any business collaboration. The demonstration
has shown that the tool has the possibility of fitting into the workflow of developers. But
better collaboration with the intended users of the tool should increase the likelihood of a
successful product. Despite these challenges, the tool provides an easy way for devel­
opers to improve their test suite and maintain their mocks, moving us one step closer to
an ideal test environment.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Antonia Bertolino. “Software testing research: Achievements, challenges, dreams”.
In: Future of Software Engineering (FOSE’07). IEEE. 2007, pp. 85–103.
[2]
Ham Vocke. The Practical Test Pyramid. URL: https://martinfowler.com/articles/
practical-test-pyramid.html. (accessed: 11/12­2022).
[3]
Sanket. The exponential cst of fixing bugs. URL: https : / / deepsource . io / blog /
exponential-cost-of-fixing-bugs/. (accessed: 31/01­2023).
[4]
Strategic Planning. “The economic impacts of inadequate infrastructure for software
testing”. In: National Institute of Standards and Technology 1 (2002).
[5]
Emelie Engström and Per Runeson. “A qualitative survey of regression testing prac­
tices”. In: Product­Focused Software Process Improvement: 11th International Con­
ference, PROFES 2010, Limerick, Ireland, June 21­23, 2010. Proceedings 11. Springer.
2010, pp. 3–16.
[6]
Davide Spadini et al. “Mock objects for testing java systems”. In: Empirical Software
Engineering 24.3 (2019), pp. 1461–1498.
[7]
Thomas Bush. What Are Breaking Changes and How Do You Avoid Them? URL:
https://nordicapis.com/what-are-breaking-changes-and-how-do-you-avoid-them/.
(accessed: 31/01­2023).
[8]
Ben Brazier. Why Mocks Are Considered Harmful. URL: https://levelup.gitconnected.
com/why-mocks-are-considered-harmful-b4e8fe60478d. (accessed: 24/01­2023).
[9]
Eric Elliott. Mocking is a Code Smell. URL: https://medium.com/javascript-scene/
mocking-is-a-code-smell-944a70c90a6a. (accessed: 24/01­2023).
[10]
Shaikh Mostafa and Xiaoyin Wang. “An empirical study on the usage of mocking
frameworks in software testing”. In: 2014 14th international conference on quality
software. IEEE. 2014, pp. 127–132.
[11]
Tim Mackinnon, Steve Freeman, and Philip Craig. “Endo­testing: unit testing with
mock objects”. In: Extreme programming examined (2000), pp. 287–301.
[12]
Gustavo Pereira and Andre Hora. “Assessing mock classes: An empirical study”.
In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution
(ICSME). IEEE. 2020, pp. 453–463.
[13]
Adeel Ehsan et al. “RESTful API Testing Methodologies: Rationale, Challenges, and
Solution Directions”. In: Applied Sciences 12.9 (2022), p. 4369.
[14]
SM Sohan, Craig Anslow, and Frank Maurer. “A case study of web API evolution”.
In: 2015 IEEE World Congress on Services. IEEE. 2015, pp. 245–252.
[15]
Cu D Nguyen, Alessandro Marchetto, and Paolo Tonella. “Challenges in audit test­
ing of web services”. In: 2011 IEEE Fourth International Conference on Software
Testing, Verification and Validation Workshops. IEEE. 2011, pp. 103–106.
[16]
Kunal Taneja, Yi Zhang, and Tao Xie. “MODA: Automated test generation for database
applications via mock objects”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM international con­
ference on Automated software engineering. 2010, pp. 289–292.
[17]
Maxime Gobert et al. “Best practices of testing database manipulation code”. In:
Information Systems 111 (2023), p. 102105.
[18]
Michael Stonebraker, Dong Deng, and Michael L Brodie. “Database decay and how
to avoid it”. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data). IEEE.
2016, pp. 7–16.
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
53
==PAGE:62==
[19]
Ying Wang et al. “An empirical study of usages, updates and risks of third­party li­
braries in java projects”. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Software Main­
tenance and Evolution (ICSME). IEEE. 2020, pp. 35–45.
[20]
Christopher Bogart et al. “How to break an API: cost negotiation and community val­
ues in three software ecosystems”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT
International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering. 2016, pp. 109–
120.
[21]
Nelson Sekitoleko et al. “Technical dependency challenges in large­scale agile soft­
ware development”. In: International conference on agile software development.
Springer. 2014, pp. 46–61.
[22]
Muhammad Ilyas and Siffat Ullah Khan. “Software integration in global software
development: Challenges for GSD vendors”. In: Journal of Software: Evolution and
Process 29.8 (2017), e1875.
[23]
Hengcheng Zhu et al. “Mocksniffer: Characterizing and recommending mocking de­
cisions for unit tests”. In: Proceedings of the 35th IEEE/ACM International Confer­
ence on Automated Software Engineering. 2020, pp. 436–447.
[24]
Nikolai Tillmann and Jonathan De Halleux. “Pex–white box test generation for. net”.
In: Tests and Proofs: Second International Conference, TAP 2008, Prato, Italy, April
9­11, 2008. Proceedings 2. Springer. 2008, pp. 134–153.
[25]
Andrea Arcuri, Gordon Fraser, and René Just. “Private api access and functional
mocking in automated unit test generation”. In: 2017 IEEE international conference
on software testing, verification and validation (ICST). IEEE. 2017, pp. 126–137.
[26]
Gordon Fraser and Andrea Arcuri. “Evosuite: automatic test suite generation for
object­oriented software”. In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSOFT symposium
and the 13th European conference on Foundations of software engineering. 2011,
pp. 416–419.
[27]
Matteo Brunetto et al. “On introducing automatic test case generation in practice:
A success story and lessons learned”. In: Journal of Systems and Software 176
(2021), p. 110933.
[28]
Github. Enabling Dependabot for your enterprise. URL: https://docs.github.com/
en/enterprise-server@3.4/admin/configuration/configuring-github-connect/enabling-
dependabot-for-your-enterprise#about-dependabot-alerts. (accessed: 02/02­2023).
[29]
Joseph Hejderup and Georgios Gousios. “Can we trust tests to automate depen­
dency updates? a case study of java projects”. In: Journal of Systems and Software
183 (2022), p. 111097.
[30]
OpenAPI. OpenAPI Specification v3.1.0. URL: https://spec.openapis.org/oas/latest.
html. (accessed: 19/02­2023).
[31]
Twitter. Twitter API v2. URL: https://api.twitter.com/2/openapi.json. (accessed:
21/02­2023).
[32]
Github. Breaking Changes. URL: https : / / docs . github . com / en / rest / overview /
breaking-changes?apiVersion=2022-11-28. (accessed: 20/02­2023).
[33]
Microsoft. LinkedIn API Breaking Change Policy. URL: https://learn.microsoft.com/
en-us/linkedin/shared/breaking-change-policy. (accessed: 28/02­2023).
[34]
APIScience. 7 Ways to Validate that Your APIs Are Working Correctly. URL: https:
//www.apiscience.com/blog/7-ways-to-validate-that-your-apis-are-working-correctly/.
(accessed: 16/03­2023).
[35]
Twitter. Twitter API. URL: https://github.com/APIs-guru/openapi-directory/blob/
main/APIs/twitter.com/legacy/1.1/swagger.yaml. (accessed: 28/02­2023). Original
author of the API spec is Twitter. APIs guru is the owner of the github repository
which aggregate documentation from multiple API providers.
54
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:63==
[36]
Spring. TwitterUsersFunctionTests. URL: https://github.com/spring-cloud/stream-
applications/blob/main/functions/function/twitter- function/src/test/java/org/
springframework/cloud/fn/twitter/users/TwitterUsersFunctionTests.java. (accessed:
28/02­2023).
[37]
Mozilla. HTTP response status codes. URL: https : / / developer . mozilla . org / en -
US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status#successful_responses. (accessed: 20/02­2023).
[38]
Mozilla. HTTP headers. URL: https://developer.mozilla.org/en- US/docs/Web/
HTTP/Headers. (accessed: 21/02­2023).
[39]
OpenAPITools. openapi­diff. URL: https://github.com/OpenAPITools/openapi-diff.
(accessed: 07/03­2023).
[40]
Ravik ­ its all binary. Compare files side by side and highlight diff using Java | Apache
Commons Text diff | Myers algorithm. URL: https : / / itsallbinary . com / compare -
files-side-by-side-and-hightlight-diff-using-java-apache-commons-text-diff-myers-
algorithm/. (accessed: 07/03­2023).
[41]
Baeldung. Documenting a Spring REST API Using OpenAPI 3.0. URL: https://
www.baeldung.com/spring-rest-openapi-documentation. (accessed: 07/03­2023).
[42]
Spring. Stream Applications. URL: https://github.com/spring-cloud/stream-applications.
(accessed: 11/03­2023).
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Improving Mock Testing: Handling Changes in the Behavior of Mocked Services
==PAGE:65==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
