==PAGE:1==
Towards Explainable Hierarchical
Vision Transformers
Nikiforos Efthymiadis
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of the thesis is to explore existing methods that are trying to explain
decisions made by black-box-trained models. In general, these methods shift the
question from the typical "What type of class is this image depicting?" to "Why
this image depicts this type of class?". Although a number of methods already
exist, there is no clear consensus in the field of explainable AI as to what an
explainable model means. We take a look at the most important and also most
recent and highly praised methods in computer vision and try to adapt them
to more scalable architectures that consist of hierarchical models with the goal
of making a scalable and explainable model that will be used in the future for
tasks that require more than a simple decision. All code and experiments will
be publicly available to ensure the ability to be reproduced.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU Com-
pute) in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering
in Mathematical Modelling and Computation. The master thesis was assigned
to a workload of 30 ECTS and it was supervised by Professor Aasa Feragen and
Manxi Lin, Ph.D. candidate at the DTU Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science Visual Computing. The project has been approved by
Associate Professor Martin Skovgaard Andersen, Head of Studies at the Math-
ematical Modelling and Computation M.Sc. program.
Lyngby, 21-February-2023
Nikiforos Efthymiadis
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my dear friend and Ph.D candidate at DTU, Paraskevas Pe-
gios for the constant help throughout the project, acting as a co-supervisor. His
help and discussions around the thesis obstacles proved crucial for the project
to be successful. I would also like to thank my supervisors, Ph.D candidate
Manxi Lin and Professor Aasa Feragen for giving me the opportunity to work
in a thesis that is very interesting and for giving me support whenever needed.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Transformers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
ViT: An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for
Image Recognition at Scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
SWIN: Hierarchical Vision Transformer using Shifted Win-
dows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Explainable AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.1
CAM: Learning Deep Features for Discriminative Local-
ization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2
Generic Attention-model Explainability
. . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Proposed Method
23
3.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Experimental Evaluation
27
4.1
Experimental Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Experiment 1: ViT [CLS] vs ViT [AVG] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Proposed Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.1
Experiment 2: With and without shifted attention . . . .
32
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.4.2
Experiment 3: Relevancy per stages
. . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.3
Experiment 4: Comparison with GradCAM
. . . . . . .
32
5
Discussion
37
6
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In recent years, deep learning and artificial intelligence have been through sig-
nificant improvements that pave the way for more decisions in the future to
be taken with the help of carefully trained models by domain experts. More
specifically, there has been a plethora of projects in the computer vision field
that tackle problems ranging from simple dog/cat classification settings with
a standard RGB image to more complex ones like segmentation of a medical
CT scan. Even outside of the computer vision field, deep learning models are
trained and accountable for autonomous vehicle driving, providing insurance
or financial predictions, and also in some cases used in the legal systems of a
number of countries.
As the general state of AI progresses, new architectures and modeling techniques
emerge as well.
More precisely, in computer vision, there has been a shift
from the standard convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to the "holy grail"
transformer architecture. Although the former was an architecture specifically
employed and developed in order to deal with images, the latter can handle
various input settings like sequences of text, pixels, and many more. The key
behind the transformer’s architecture is the attention mechanism, which will be
the main point and will be analyzed in the next chapters.
Due to the increasing applications of artificial intelligence in our everyday lives,
new problems arise. With models being in charge of more and more important
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
decisions, the notion of a black-box model no longer stands. In contrast, regula-
tions around the models employed for solving everyday life tasks have made the
notion of explainable neural networks a necessity. For example, when a doctor
is being advised by a neural network by providing a chest X-Ray and asking if
the patient has some type of pneumonia, a sole decision is simply not enough.
The model should be able to explain how the decision was taken so that the
doctor understands the decision-making process and trusts the results. Even
more so, in Europe where the GDPR law has been in effect since May 25th
of 2018 [1], every person affected by a decision taken from a model like this,
has the right to obtain meaningful information on the logic involved or in other
words, the right to an explanation. Some machine learning architectures, like
decision trees, have built-in explainable features, however, this is not the case
with neural networks like CNNs and transformer architectures.
Several ways of explaining neural network decisions have been employed each
adapted to the task in hand. In settings where the input is tabular data, feature
importance techniques are employed where a weight is assigned to each feature
signifying how much importance it holds in the decision-making process.
In
settings where the input is text, either similar techniques that assign weights to
each word take place or more complex approaches, like question-answering. Fi-
nally, in computer vision, which this project focuses around, the main approach
is producing heat-maps that bring forth pixel importance and show where in an
image the model focuses to make its decision.
The main goal of this project is to explore the leading methods that are used
to explain such decisions in computer vision, analyze the architecture and key
mechanisms that are used in transformers, and more importantly, try to com-
bine the two in a scalable architecture. More specifically, Chapter 2 contains
the related background in terms of transformer architectures and explainabil-
ity methods used in the thesis while Chapter 3 provides the proposed method
with the results and metrics being shown in Chapter 4. Next, in Chapter 5
there is a discussion regarding the results and finally, in Chapter 6 there is a
summarization of the thesis and future work.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Transformers
Despite convolutional neural networks (CNN) dominating computer vision tasks
(CV) for many years [2], the landscape significantly changed after the Visual
Transformer paper was published [3], where the transformer architecture, al-
ready established and known from the natural language processing field (NLP)
[4], is tinkered and used for solving computer vision tasks. After that, a boom
of transformer-based models took place in artificial intelligence conferences and
published papers and a trend emerged where transformers are being used in-
crementally.
They manage to achieve state-of-the-art performances in tasks
like image classification [5, 6, 7], segmentation [8, 9, 10], registration [11, 12],
and other computer vision (CV) related tasks, but also in parallel outside of
computer vision (CV), slowly reducing the need for other architectures such
as recurrent neural networks (RNNs), long-short term memory (LSTMs) and
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Nowadays, they provide a universal ar-
chitecture for all kinds of inputs and are the bases for models like Dall-e [13] and
Stable Diffusion [14] that make use of both text and images in order to generate
a synthetic image from text prompts.
There are a couple of differences between CNNs and transformers.
Namely,
CNNs, due to the convolution operation they are based on, inherently have two
==PAGE:14==
4
Background
biases:
• Pixels are related to each other only in a neighborhood as big as the
convolution kernel
• There is no order or absolute position in the pixels of an image
In contrast, transformers, due to the attention mechanism and the use of posi-
tional embeddings, alleviate both of these biases. As a consequence, they need
more training data to fully understand the problem at hand as they gain knowl-
edge of the task in a more relaxed way. An important thing to note here is
that while convolution is a fixed and local operation, attention is a dynamic and
global operation, meaning that the output changes according to the input.
As already mentioned, the attention mechanism is the heart of transformers’
success. The inspiration stems from information retrieval systems theory and
relies on queries, keys, and values. More explicitly, in information retrieval the
idea is, given a query, for example, a sentence, which signifies what we are
looking for, the aim is to measure how similar the query is with all of the keys
in a database and return the values of these keys. In a deep learning setting,
all of the above are represented as token embeddings, where the input before
being tokenized can be either pixels, words, signals, and more. With the help
of the attention mechanism, the model provides a weighted average of a set of
features and can focus or "attend" to the features that are more relevant to the
job at hand. A visual comparison of the convolution operation, a typical fully
connected layer, and an attention layer either global or local, is shown in figure
2.1, giving an intuition on the range each has.
2.1.1
ViT: An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transform-
ers for Image Recognition at Scale
After the wide success of the transformers architecture in natural language pro-
cessing tasks, like language translation where input is given in one language
and the output is the corresponding translation in a different language, a simple
tweak made the adoption of the model to computer vision.
What made it possible was the tokenization process of the image pixels. This
is because if we were to treat each pixel as its own token in a transformer
architecture, the computational cost in order to compute the attention matrices
would be extremely huge and inefficient. This is why it is suggested to treat
a patch of an image as a single token. The bigger the patch size we choose,
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Transformers
5
Figure 2.1: The colors in the attention indicate that these weights are con-
stantly and dynamically changing while in convolution and fully
connected layers, they are slowly changing by gradient descent and
remain fixed when the training process is over. Figure is taken
from [15].
the smaller amount of tokens an image will have, hence there is a trade off
between the patch size and the length of the token sequences. The image is
split into fixed-size non-overlapping patches which in turn are flattened, linearly
embedded, and added a positional embedding as well. Once this process takes
place, the rest, namely the encoder along with its attention mechanism, is almost
identical to a transformer that is being used in natural language processing. It
is important to note here that an additional token is appended to the beginning
of the tokens sequence, which represents the class features and is referred to
as the "CLS" token. In other words, it is an extra learnable parameter that
will learn to capture the essential features of each class and it is the one that
is going to be later fed into a classifier head to perform the classification. It is
noteworthy to mention, that the paper [3] provides an ablation study as well on
the use of the "CLS" token, where instead of its use, the average pooling of all
other features is being fed into the classifier. Both approaches are valid and are
being used but usually in a classification setting is the former one is used.
In the Visual Transformer (ViT) paper [3], positional embeddings are used to
encode the spatial position of each patch (i.e., small image region) within the
input image. This is important because the transformer architecture is designed
to process sequential data, and the patches in the input image do not have a
predefined order. By encoding the spatial position of each patch as a positional
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
Figure 2.2: Left: ViT architecture. A transformer model can have multiple
tranformer encoders. Right: A single transformer encoder archi-
tecture. Image is taken from [3].
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Transformers
7
Figure 2.3: Left: ViT learns the grid-like structure of the image patches via
its position embeddings. Right: The lower layers of ViT have
heads that "attend" far away in the image space, something that
is not possible in a CNN. Image is taken from [3].
embedding, the transformer is able to take into account the relative position
of the patches when processing the image. Moreover, positional embeddings
are implemented as a learned vector that is added to the patch embedding
(i.e., the representation of the patch in the transformer’s hidden space). The
patch and positional embedding are combined by summation, and the resulting
vector is passed through a fully connected layer to produce the final patch
representation. Formally, let P be the matrix of patch embeddings, with each
column representing the patch embedding for a single patch. Let Pi be the patch
embedding for the i-th patch, and let Ei be the positional embedding for the
i-th patch. Then the final patch representation Xi can be calculated as follows:
Xi = FC (Pi + Ei)
(2.1)
where FC is a fully connected layer that processes the summation of the patch
embedding and positional embedding.
The positional embeddings in the ViT paper are learned during training and
are optimized to encode the spatial position of the patches in a way that is
useful for the downstream task (e.g., image classification). They are typically
initialized randomly and are updated along with the other model parameters
during training.
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
Self-attention is a key mechanism used in transformer architecture as it allows
the model to dynamically weight different input elements in order to better focus
on certain parts of the input when processing it. This is particularly useful in
tasks such as language translation, where the meaning of a word depends heavily
on the context in which it is used, or generally in computer vision where there
is no inherent information on the position of each pixel in the image.
At a high level, self-attention operates by calculating a weighted sum of the
input elements, where the weights are determined by the relationship between
each element and a query vector. This query vector is typically generated by
the transformer’s encoder and is used to specify which aspects of the input the
decoder should pay attention to when generating its output.
Mathematically, self-attention can be represented as a function that takes in
three inputs: a set of queries Q, a set of keys K, and a set of values V. These
inputs are typically matrices, with each column representing a single query, key,
or value. The self-attention function then calculates the dot product between
each query and each key and applies a softmax function to these dot products to
obtain a set of attention weights. The final output of the self-attention function
is the weighted sum of the values, where the weights are given by the attention
weights.
More formally, let Q, K, and V be matrices of dimensions (dq ×n), (dk ×n), and
(dv × n) respectively, where dq, dk, and dv are the dimensions of the queries,
keys, and values, and n is the number of elements in the input.
Then the
self-attention function can be defined as follows:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QKT
√dk

(2.2)
O = A · V
(2.3)
Here, the dot product between Q and KT is divided by the square root of dk
in order to scale the dot products and prevent large values from dominating
the attention weights. The resulting matrix is then passed through the softmax
function, which ensures that the attention weights sum to 1 and can be inter-
preted as probabilities. Finally, the output of an attention layer is calculated by
taking the dot product of the attention weights with the values matrix V. Self-
attention can be implemented as a single-headed or multi-headed mechanism. In
a single-headed attention mechanism, the queries, keys, and values are all trans-
formed using a single set of linear transformations, and the attention weights
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Transformers
9
are calculated based on the dot products between the transformed queries and
keys. In a multi-headed attention mechanism, on the other hand, the queries,
keys, and values are transformed using multiple sets of linear transformations,
and the attention weights are calculated based on the dot products between the
transformed queries and keys for each of the different heads. Each independent
head attends to different segments of the input. Intuitively this is similar with
the feature maps of a convolution layer that capture different features. Several
independent heads are applied in parallel and the outputs are concatenated and
reduced back to the input dimensions using another learnable weight matrix.
The use of multiple attention heads allows the model to attend to different
aspects of the input simultaneously, rather than having to rely on a single set
of attention weights. This can be particularly useful in tasks where the input
has multiple types of relationships or dependencies that need to be captured.
For example, in natural language processing tasks, a multi-headed attention
mechanism could allow the model to attend to different types of syntactic or
semantic relationships in the input at the same time. Another advantage of
multi-headed attention is that it allows the model to learn different attention
patterns for different tasks or input types. This can be particularly useful in
cases where the model is trained in a multi-task learning setting, where it is
expected to perform multiple tasks simultaneously.
However, it is important to note that the self-attention mechanism has some lim-
itations when applied to computer vision tasks. One limitation of self-attention
is that it is computationally expensive to compute. This is because self-attention
involves calculating the dot product between every pair of elements in the input,
which requires O(n2) time where n is the number of elements in the input. For
computer vision tasks, the input may be a large image with millions of pix-
els, which even when it is divided into a smaller number of patches, makes it
computationally infeasible to use self-attention on the entire image. Generally,
when the queries, keys, and values are all computed from the same sequence,
attention takes place between that sequence and itself, hence it is called self-
attention. However, it can also happen that the queries are computed from one
sequence while the keys and values are computed from another perhaps from
a different modality (image, text, sound). When the different sequences come
from different modalities the type of attention is called co-attention while when
the different sequences come from the encoder and decoder part of a network in
a generative setting, it’s called encoder-decoder attention [16].
Overall, the visual transformer consists of multiple encoder blocks, each of which
consists of two layers: a multi-headed self-attention layer and a feedforward net-
work. The multi-headed self-attention layer applies self-attention to the input,
using multiple attention heads to capture different aspects of the input. The
output of the self-attention layer is then passed through the feedforward net-
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
work, which applies a series of linear transformations and non-linear activation
functions. The output of the feedforward network is then added to the input
and passed through a residual connection, which helps to alleviate the vanish-
ing gradient problem [17]. The output of the residual connection is then passed
through a layer normalization layer [18], which normalizes the activations across
the dimensions of the input. A mathematical formulation can be seen in equa-
tion 2.4.
z0 =

xclass ; x1
pE; x2
pE; · · · ; xN
p E

+ Epos ,
E ∈R(P 2·C)×D, Epos ∈R(N+1)×D
z′
ℓ= MSA (LN (zℓ−1)) + zℓ−1,
ℓ= 1 . . . L
zℓ= MLP (LN (z′
ℓ)) + z′
ℓ,
ℓ= 1 . . . L
y = LN
 z0
L

(2.4)
Comparing ViT to a standard CNN, it is important to reiterate that due to the
differences in architecture, ViT is able to capture both local and global features
even from the very first layers in the network, while CNNs work in a hierarchical
way where the first layers capture only local features and as we go deeper into
the network the features captured are becoming global. This can be seen also
in the right image in figure 2.3.
Even though transformer have demonstrated state-of-the-art results in image
recognition there are a couple of limitations when using ViT, such as requiring
a vast amount of training data to successfully capture important features and
achieve state-of-the-art performance, while the attention mechanism it employs
is computationally expensive and not scalable in larger images.
Due to the
aforementioned, many variants of the transformer [19, 20, 21] architecture have
been suggested to tackle those limitations.
2.1.2
SWIN: Hierarchical Vision Transformer using Shifted
Windows
The Shifted Windows transformer (SWIN) [20] is a hierarchical vision trans-
former model that has been proposed for general use in computer vision tasks.
It is a variant of the Transformer architecture and was developed in order to
tackle some of the limitations of the Visual Transformer (ViT) such as the
non-scalable complexity of the global self-attention mechanism. The authors
suggest that this model can be used as a general backbone in computer vision
tasks, similarly like ResNet is used when dealing with CNNs while it achieves
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Transformers
11
state-of-the-art performances in various tasks [22, 23].
The architecture consists of a series of transformer encoder stages and patch
merging layers arranged in a sequential fashion. Each stage contains multiple
transformer blocks typically a number divided by 2, as every second block em-
ploys the shifted window attention instead of the normal window attention. It
differs from the standard transformer architecture by not having fixed-length
tokens, as the tokens in SWIN change dimensions after each encoder stage.
SWIN extends the typical transformer architecture to work with images by us-
ing a set of windows to divide the image into a set of patches. Each window
is then processed by a Transformer encoder, which uses the so-called windows
self-attention and the shifted windows self-attention on every second encoder of
each block to capture the dependencies between the pixels within the patches.
After every stage, a patch merging layer, merges patches together increasing
the token dimensions while the number of windows the image is divided in stays
constant, which gives SWIN its hierarchical attribute. This also allows the at-
tention dimensions to be fixed while still attending to larger spatial areas after
each merge. Furthermore, a key concept of SWIN is the shift of windows in the
same hierarchical level achieving in that way connections and flow of informa-
tion between patches that would not normally exist as the window self-attention
layer calculates attention only inside each window. The architecture can be seen
in figure 2.4.
Formally, the input image is divided into m non-overlapping patches using 4×4×
patches which results in 4×4×3 = 48 dimensions by concatenation for each patch
as a standard RGB image contains 3 channels. After the image is tokenized, the
patches enter a linear embedding layer where they are transformed to a fixed
dimension C. In order to yield the final output, a number of swin-transformer
stages (4 in the paper) are applied to the input with a patch merging layer
in between them. The patch merging layer is responsible for the hierarchical
feature representation, as patches in a 2 × 2 neighborhood are merged together
reducing the number of patches while increasing the number of dimensions in
each patch. The merging takes place by concatenating the neighbor patches
together. A smart dimensionality reduction using a simple fully connected layer
takes place to reduce the dimensions of the merged patch from 4 × C to 2 × C.
A swin-transformer block is almost identical to a typical transformer block with
two key differences:
• The standard multi-head self-attention module is replaced by a multi-head
shifted window attention.
• Every second transformer encoder uses a different shift size for the shifted
window attention.
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
Figure 2.4: SWIN architecture. Image taken from [20]
The foundation of SWIN is the shifted window self-attention which is applied
to each window, instead of computing a global self-attention from the very
first stages of the network like is done in ViT. It is referred to as local, as the
attention is computed only within each window, (i.e) tokens from the top-left
part of the image are not able to attend to tokens on the bottom-right part of
the image. The windows are produced in terms of patches, meaning that a single
window contains M ×M patches. This type of attention limits the computations
per image as the number of calculations is linear due to the window constraint.
Below the number of calculations for the global self-attention and for the shifted
window attention is shown:
Ω(MSA) = 4hwC2 + 2(hw)2C
Ω(W-MSA) = 4hwC2 + 2M 2hwC
(2.5)
where h, w are the height and width of the patches respectively, C is the di-
mension of the patches and M is the number of windows.
Hence while the
global self-attention is increasing with a quadratic rate related to h and w, the
shifted window attention is linear, considering the number of windows is fixed.
This makes the architecture scalable when the input is of high-resolution images
and makes the transformer architecture applicable, while it would otherwise be
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Transformers
13
Figure 2.5: Window shifts would lead to different dimensions in each win-
dow. This is why the windows stay the same while the underlying
patches that the windows are composed of are shifted.
Image
taken from [20]
forbidden due to the enormous amount of calculations needed for global self-
attention.
Last but not least, the authors suggest that just by itself, window self-attention
is decreasing the model’s total capabilities since there is no information flow
between different windows in each hierarchical stage [20]. It is important to
note that the model still works and achieves very good results but a simple
tweak can provide better results.
That is why shifted window self-attention
takes place in the second encoder of each SWIN transformer block. While the
name suggests that the windows in each stage are shifted, which would cause
some problems due to windows having different dimensions as can be seen in
figure 2.5, the authors provide a clever way to implement this module. Instead,
the image, and more concretely the feature maps holding a representation of
the image, are shifted while the windows stay the same. Overall window self-
attention can be considered a shifted window self-attention with a shift size of
0.
The output of a SWIN-transformer block can be mathematically written as:
ˆzl = W MSA
 LN
 zl−1
+ zl−1,
zl = MLP
 LN
 ˆzl
+ ˆzl
ˆzl+1 = SW MSA
 LN
 zl
+ zl
zl+1 = MLP
 LN
 ˆzl+1
+ ˆzl+1
(2.6)
where l denotes the layer number, ˆz and z are the outputs of the shifted window
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
Figure 2.6: The cyclic shift of the patches instead of shifting the windows.
Image taken from [20].
attention module and MLP module respectively and LN stands for a normal-
ization layer.
As mentioned, instead of shifting the windows, it is suggested to shift the under-
lying patches, which leads to the same number of windows containing patches
coming from different windows in the previous layer. This is illustrated in 2.6.
In order to yield the same results as by simply displacing the windows and to
avoid creating cross-window connections which would not happen until later
stages in the hierarchical model, a masking mechanism is employed. Typically,
the shift size is half the window size.
Thus, SWIN using the shifted window self-attention module manages to capture
the most relevant features needed and provides a state-of-the-art and scalable
framework for computer vision [20].
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Explainable AI
15
2.2
Explainable AI
All of the models stated so far are considered opaque, in the sense that they act
like a black box, having no part explaining how the logic behind the prediction
is formed. Generally in deep learning and in particular in computer vision, an
explanation is becoming more and more necessary in order to trust the models
and to be sure that the predictions they make rely on essential features and not
on biases created during the training procedure. Vision models have exhibited
such exploitation patterns [24, 25].
Explanations for the predictions are as
important for the expert training the model as for the end-user that utilizes
it. The former can make use of the explanation to be sure that the model is
trained properly and as intended or even enhance the model robustness with the
information from them [26], while the latter will be able to trust the model and
its predictions by being provided an explanation that makes sense depending on
the issue.
The field that deals with explanations in machine learning models is referred to
as Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI). XAI includes a variety of methods
to produce explanations for predictions which can be classified into the following
categories according to the requirements of the methods:
• Model-agnostic
• Model-specific
Model-agnostic methods [27, 28, 29, 30, 31] are developed without taking into
consideration which model they will be applied to. This includes methods like
building an explainable-by-default surrogate model that is trained to mimic the
predictions of the complex and non-explainable model at hand or producing
counterfactual examples to measure feature importance. In contrast, model-
specific methods [32, 33, 34, 35] are developed particularly for single or multiple
specific architectures which either cannot be applied to different models or re-
quire small or significant changes in order to work in different settings. In this
project, the focus is on model-specific methods as the goal is to work specifically
with the transformer architecture which is heavily used in research nowadays.
Although a number of algorithms have been developed in computer vision to
provide explanations via heat-maps [36, 34], this project focuses on the sem-
inal work of Zhou et al [33], Class Activation Mappings (CAM) which is the
foundation for many variances built on top of this method that came afterward
[37, 38, 39, 40, 41]and the ground-breaking work of Chefer et al. [42].
Please note that the majority of the methods proposed, to produce heat maps
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
that signify the spatial positions in an image the model relies on to make a
prediction, are originally developed for convolutional neural networks, and later
some of them were adjusted in order to work with transformer architectures.
More specifically, CAM was developed specifically for CNNs and later was ad-
justed for transformers by the community while the work by Chefer et al [42]
was developed specifically for transformer architecture.
2.2.1
CAM: Learning Deep Features for Discriminative
Localization
Class Activation Mappings, or CAM in short, was proposed in 2016 by Zhou et
al in a paper called "Learning Deep Features for Discriminative Localization",
and can be used to visualize parts of an image that play an important role in
the decision-making process of a convolutional neural network. It is particularly
useful for understanding how the predictions of a convolutional neural network
(CNN) are made and can be used to identify the features that the network has
learned to recognize.
CAM is based on the idea that the final convolutional layer of a CNN contains
information about the presence of objects within an image, while the fully con-
nected layer makes the final decision about the object’s class. By combining the
information from these two layers, CAM can produce heatmaps that highlight
the regions in an image that are most relevant for a given class.
The authors suggest [33] that with a small change in the last layer of a CNN, it
was possible to produce accurate heat maps that could be used for a number of
tasks. One of them is training a weak segmentation model with only image-level
annotations which makes annotation boxes obsolete. That is very important as
having an expert annotate images on a pixel level is extremely time-consuming
and very expensive depending on what the image depicts. On one hand, it is
easy to annotate a dog in a picture that contains animals but on the other hand,
it is very complicated and expert knowledge is required to annotate an illness
in a CT scan. So the model is trained in a classification setting, and after its
training is complete, it is possible to obtain segmentation maps by using heat
maps produced by the CAM method. Another use of this method is to provide
an explanation regarding the decision the network took in that classification
setting. In other words, what pixels of the image are significant with respect to
the class that was predicted.
The change in the typical CNN architecture that the authors suggest is having
a single fully connected layer at the head of the network and having a Global
Average Pooling (GAP) [43] layer exactly before the fully connected layer and
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Explainable AI
17
after the convolutional layers. A Global Average Pooling layer is a layer that
takes as input feature maps, which are the outputs of the convolutional layers,
and turns each map into a single number which in this case is the average of all
the numbers in each feature map respectively.
The mathematical background of CAM with GAP can be broken down into four
main steps:
1. Applying global average pooling on the final convolutional layer, L
2. Taking the dot product of the output of the GAP layer and the weights
of the fully connected layer, F, for a given class, c.
3. Up-sampling the resulting feature map to the same size as the input image.
More concretely, The global average pooling (GAP) layer is used to reduce the
spatial dimensions of the final convolutional layer, L. The GAP layer replaces
the standard fully connected layers of the classification head in CNNs by doing
a spatial average of the feature maps from the final convolutional layer. The
mathematical representation of the GAP operation is:
GAP(Lk) =
1
H ∗W
H
X
i=1
W
X
j=1
Lk[i, j]
Where GAP(Lk) is the output of the GAP layer for the kth feature map, L is
the final convolutional layer, H is the height, and W is the width of the feature
map. Hence, every feature map is reduced to an average number.
The output of the GAP layer, GAP(L), contains information about the presence
of objects within an image, while the fully connected layer, F, makes the final
decision about the object’s class. By combining the information from these two
layers, CAM produces a heatmap that highlights the regions in an image that
are most relevant for a given class.
To produce this heatmap, CAM takes the dot product of the activation maps
and the weights of F for a given class, c. This is represented mathematically as:
M =
K
X
i=1
Ai ∗wi
c
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
Where M is the heatmap, Ak are the k feature maps of the last convolutional
layer, and wk
c is the weight matrix for class c and unit k in the fully connected
layer.
The resulting feature map from the dot product step above may have a dif-
ferent size than the input image, depending on the number and sizes of the
convolutional layers in the architecture. In order to make the heatmap directly
comparable to the input image, it needs to be up-sampled to the same size.
Here, upsampling is the operation of increasing the size of the feature map M.
The resulting heatmap, M, highlights the regions in the input image that is most
important for the classification of class c. Its values are also normalized between
0 and 1 for visualization purposes. By using the GAP layer, CAM can simplify
the architecture of the network by removing the stack of fully connected layers
and replacing it with just the single fully connected layer and also by reducing
the number of parameters which can prevent overfitting. Additionally, the GAP
layer can also improve the computational efficiency of the network.
It should be pointed out, that the heat maps can be class-specific. Meaning that
with the same image as input, different heat maps can be produced depending on
the class we want to visualize for. As a drawback, this method requires a specific
layer that otherwise would not be present in a standard CNN architecture.
Changing the architecture in a model also leads to the need for retraining which
in some cases can be very expensive.
2.2.1.1
Grad-CAM: Visual Explanations from Deep Networks via
Gradient-based Localization
A variaton and improvement in CAM, came later in 2017 with the paper "Grad-
CAM: Visual Explanations from Deep Networks via Gradient-based Localiza-
tion" by Selveraju et al [37]. Gram-CAM is one of the many variations that
followed CAM and the idea behind is really similar to the CAM one. Again, the
authors are trying to exploit the spatial information from the last convolutional
layer, as they suggest it is the one with the best compromise between high-level
semantics and detailed spatial information although it can be applied to any
layer. Moreover, Grad-CAM can be seen as a generalization of CAM as there
is no need for a specific architecture of CNN and it can be applied to many
different architectures without the need for retraining because there is no need
for a GAP layer.
The difference between the two methods is that Grad-CAM does not utilize the
average of the last convolution layers feature maps but instead calculates the
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Explainable AI
19
gradient of the target class yc with respect to the feature maps, i.e
∂yc
∂Ak
ij . Then,
the gradients are globally pooled and averaged to obtain αc
k :
αc
k = 1
Z
X
i
X
j
∂yc
∂Ak
ij
These weights essentially capture the importance of each feature map to the
prediction score. The next step is the same as in CAM where we multiply each
feature map with its weight that was calculated above, which results in:
Lc
Grad−CAM = ReLU
 X
k
αc
kAk
!
It is important to note that the target score is not required to produce the heat
maps as it is replaced by any differentiable activation. What is also different
in the case of Grad-CAM is that a ReLU activation function is applied to the
heatmap after it is calculated in order to ignore negative contributions and then
it is normalized for visualization purposes.
Although not presented in this paper, generally in the community in order to
make both CAM and Grad-CAM work with the existing transformer architec-
tures, the attention maps are used as feature maps in CNNs. For example, in
ViT the last layer before the classification head will be treated as the layer with
the feature maps we want to calculate Grad-CAM on.
2.2.2
Generic Attention-model Explainability
As transformers are becoming the prevailing modeling technique in deep learn-
ing, old methods, originally developed for CNNs, are reworked and a need for
new ones is emerging. The difference here is that while we target specific layers
in CNN approaches, and that is usually the last layer that captures high-level
semantic features, there is no intuition that the same should happen in trans-
formers.
In contrast, instead of convolutional layers transformers have, as mentioned,
various layers of multi-head self-attention layers which raises the following ques-
tions. First and foremost, how do we account for the different heads, and sec-
ondly how do we account for the different layers in order to yield the wanted
result?
Chefer et al, [42] recently proposed a method that tackles these questions with
a new XAI technique which is relevancy based. Relevancy-based methods are
==PAGE:30==
20
Background
built with the concept that every feature map (or attention map in this case),
has a certain value of relevancy to the predicted score. In order to yield the rel-
evancy for each individual map, initialization and a forward or backward pass
are employed. This method is the first one that supports all types of atten-
tion including self-attention, encoder-decoder attention, and co-attention, and
also provides class-specific explanations. Furthermore, its motivation revolves
around the fact that most explainability methods are developed for CNNs and
target specific layers, while for transformers the raw attention is usually consid-
ered which suffers from some drawbacks [34].
Chefer et al, propose a method that produces relevancy maps for each relation-
ship between the input tokens making use of the attention layers in transformers
architecture. To produce this matrix, Chefer et al, start by initializing the rel-
evancy and propagating by a forward pass on the attention layers, in order to
accumulate the relevancies. This is achieved by enforcing the updated rules they
propose. The relevancy matrix is initialized as an identity square matrix with
dimensions equal to the number of tokens of the input image as follows:
R0 = Ik×k
where k is the number of tokens/patches after the tokenization process of the
input image, which is constant throughout the whole network. The tokenized
image is of size k × k as the matrix calculates the relevancies between each
token. It is initialized as an identity matrix as at this stage the tokens do not
have any interactions between them yet and each token is self-contained. In
order to update the relevancy matrix for self-attention the following rules are
applied:
R = R + ¯A · R
where ¯A is the final attention map of the layer that will be used to update
the relevancy matrix. The relevancies are accumulated by adding each layer’s
contribution to the aggregated relevancies in order to account for the skip con-
nections. To compute ¯A, the authors propose weighting the attention maps
with the gradients of the output with respect to the attention maps, to account
for heads that do not entail critical information for the prediction made. Voita
et al [44] show that not all heads are putting in the work and actually learn
to discriminate between important features of an image during training. The
paper provides results that verify that, where a relatively big transformer model
can be pruned up to 75% without a significant loss in performance. This sug-
gests that just averaging the attention heads could lead to skewed results from
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Explainable AI
21
the heads that do not actually learn anything useful for the prediction. The
mathematical formula for ¯A is as follows:
¯A = Eh
 (∇A ⊙A)+
where ⊙is the Hadamard product, A is the attention map of each head, ∇A :=
∂yt
∂A is the gradients of the output the visualization accounts for with respect
to the attention maps and Eh is the averaging across the attention heads. The
gradients act as a weight to each head to alleviate the skewed results from simply
averaging over the heads. Note that after the multiplication of the attention
maps with the gradients, values below zero are clipped.
In order to obtain the final relevancy map for an image in a classification setting,
Chefer et al compute the relevancies between all tokens but only keep the first
row of the matrix since in their experiments ViT is used and only the [CLS]
token is fed into the classification head and plays any role in the prediction
score. After keeping the first row the vector is reshaped to a 2D matrix and
upsampled to match the input image dimensions.
What is important to note here is that many models in the family of transformers
do not utilize the [CLS] token or keep the same dimensions in each attention
layer. One of these examples is SWIN where, while it uses purely self-attention,
not only it does not use a [CLS] token but the attentions are split between
windows and change dimensions as the model is built in a hierarchical way.
==PAGE:32==
22
Background
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Proposed Method
3.1
Motivation
The proposed method’s motivation stems from two factors.
To begin with,
transformers are getting more and more widespread among the deep learning
community and achieving state-of-the-art results. Eventually, the models that
are developed will be tried in real-life scenarios where issues of feasibility will
come into play since transformers are computationally expensive. Moreover, the
need for explanation, either for enforcing the law or debugging or to build trust
in the models, will be a significant factor in models that are assigned to take
sensitive predictions in these situations. This is why the need to make scalable
and explainable transformers comes into place. Our aim is to combine Chefer et
al’s state-of-the-art explainability method with a scalable transformer architec-
ture like SWIN, as the adaptation of the method to SWIN is not straightforward
and has some pitfalls.
==PAGE:34==
24
Proposed Method
3.2
Method
In order to adapt the method to a hierarchical model we need to revisit the dif-
ferences between ViT and SWIN. As previously mentioned, there is a difference
between them from the early stages of the process, namely the tokenization. Af-
ter extracting the image patches and transforming them to a certain embedded
dimension we can notice that there is no [CLS] token in SWIN. While in ViT
an extra token, responsible to capture the essential information of each class,
is concatenated with the tokens of an image and gets fed into the classification
head, in SWIN there is no such token, and instead a step of averaging pooling
the rest of the features before the classification is what acts as input to the
classification head.
Moreover, the key and the most challenging difference between the two archi-
tectures is that even though both use multi-headed self-attention, the attention
mechanisms differ between them. In the case of ViT, global self-attention is em-
ployed where each token can "attend" all other tokens from the very first layers
and has a quadratic computational cost rate with respect to the image dimen-
sions. On the contrary, the attention mechanism used in SWIN, called Shifted
Windows Attention,is employed in small local windows in the early stages of
the model and increases the window size as we go into the deeper layers, very
similar to CNNs. For this reason, we expect similar behavior where early stages
of Swin can attend to fine grade details of the object of interest. This difference
matters a lot, as in the case of SWIN, the attention matrices produced have
different dimensions in each stage of the process, as tokens are merged together
to facilitate the hierarchical process and also the attention matrices refer to dif-
ferent set of tokens in each stage. Thus, the method needs to be reworked to
accommodate these changes.
The initialization process, which is shown below, remains similar being an iden-
tity matrix to account for the self-contained tokens but the dimensions differ.
Here the relevancy matrix Rd×d where d × d is the number of tokens in the
image representation after the tokenization process. Hence we do not calculate
all-to-all relevancies but instead, we calculate the average relevancy per token.
R0 = Id×d
Now, for each attention layer, the dimensions of the attention maps are of size
NW × NH × WS × WS, where NW is the number of windows, NH is the
number of attention heads in the layer and WS is the number of tokens inside
each window size, or in other words the window size.
Please note that the
window size remains constant throughout the entirety of the network while
what changes is that patches are being merged together at the begging of each
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Method
25
stage, excluding the first one. We average over the heads after multiplying with
Hadamard product the attention maps and their gradients in order to deal with
the multi-head part of attention NW.
Looking back at the architecture, the attention maps are divided between win-
dows, and tokens can only "attend" other tokens from the same window. In
other words, only tokens in the same window are relevant to each other. This
is why we decide to take the mean for each token inside a window, which repre-
sents the mean relevancy of that token for the classification score. After taking
the mean relevancy of each token, we now have a mean relevancy score for each
token in every window at each block. Carefully, we reshape and merge windows
together, which will lead us to ¯A1
d×d matrix for the first stage of the SWIN
transformer. The update rule is as follows:
Ri = Ri−1 + ¯Ai · Ri−1
where:
¯
Ai = interpolate(Et(Eh(∇A ⊙A)+)))
Here t are the tokens in each window. Going deeper into the architecture, after
each patch merging layer, the number of tokens decreases since tokens into a
2×2 neighborhood become one. Hence, with the window size fixed, each window
now attends to a larger area of the original image. This is why, at each stage, we
interpolate the matrix ¯A with a scale factor equal to 2j−1, where j represents the
stage number. For the first stage where no patch merging has been encountered
the interpolation scale factor becomes 1, hence no interpolation method takes
place. The interpolation method is a simple bilinear interpolation.
Last but not least, every second SWIN transformer block shifts its windows
in order to create connections between tokens in different windows. Carefully
looking at the implementation, it is noticeable that the authors mimic this
operation by shifting the input instead of the window partitions, resulting in the
wanted outcome. Also, a masking attention mechanism is employed in order to
avoid unwanted connections from tokens that did not come from neighborhood
windows. Hence, to account for the shift in blocks where there is one, to obtain
¯A a masked means is performed on the tokens in each window, as the attention
mechanism is also masked, in order to avoid skewed mean relevancy results.
After that, the map is shifted back to account for the shift performed on the
input and then is interpolated back to the wanted dimensions, d × d
Finally, after going through all layers, the relevancy matrix R which has been
calculated encompasses two matrices since we accumulate relevancies at each
layer. The identity matrix Id×d which we initialized with, and the relevancy
aggregation matrix Fd×d, where F = R −I. As the values of the self-attention
==PAGE:36==
26
Proposed Method
matrices are multiplied by the gradients, their values are reduced and the iden-
tity matrix dominates the outcome. This is why, in order to produce a saliency
map for an image we return the F matrix, and interpolate it back to the original
image dimensions. Future versions of this method will replace the removal of
the identity matrix with a normalization technique on each layers relevancies.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Experimental Evaluation
In this chapter, we provide the experiments carried out and provide qualitative
and quantitative evaluation. In the first experiment, we compare the baseline
when used on a VIT trained with the CLS token and when with average pooling.
After that the experiments revolve around the proposed method, taking a closer
look at stage relevancies, shifting attention and comparing with GradCAM.
The motivation for the order of the experiments is that the first one provides
validation for the proposed method while the ones that follow explore more in
depth the proposed methods nuances.
4.1
Experimental Details
All of the experiments were run on a Tesla V100 (32 GB) GPU card provided
by DTU Compute. The implementation details both for ViT and SWIN are
taken from [45] and the training process of the two is almost identical. Data
augmentation is employed where the images are resized to 256 × 256 normal-
ized, randomly flipped, and augmented with the AugMix process [46], which
essentially performs a random combination of transformations, and was imple-
mented in PyTorch [47].
Moreover, to meet the model’s input requirements
random cropping of 224 × 224 is applied during training, and center cropping
==PAGE:38==
28
Experimental Evaluation
of the same dimensions is applied during inference. All models were pre-trained
and initialized with ImageNet [48] weights making use of transfer learning. Us-
ing a dropout rate of 0.2 was crucial in order to avoid overfitting [49] as it
enforces the network to not rely on a single path to make predictions by ran-
domly turning off neurons in each training epoch. The models were fine-tuned
on OxfordsIIIPets dataset [50] which is a dataset that has 37 classes of dogs and
cats breeds and around 3500 images for training and 3500 images for validation,
which is split in half, in order to yield a validation and a test set. The splitting is
done in a stratified way, making sure that roughly the same number of examples
of each class are present both in the validation and test set. This dataset was
picked in order to demonstrate the methods in a set of images that are easily
understandable without the need for an expert, however, the methods presented
in this thesis are working with any vision dataset, either medical or not. The
optimization algorithm that worked best is SGD with a learning rate of 10−4
and a momentum of 0.9. The number of epochs used for training is 100 but
early stopping has been employed where we store the weights of the model that
achieved the lowest loss in the validation set, again to avoid overfitting. Warmup
for the first 20 epochs was also used to stabilize training [51], where the learning
rate starting from 0 linearly increases until it reaches the given learning rate and
a scheduler to progressively decay afterwards based on a cosine function. Both
for ViT and SWIN the base and standard architectures for the models are used.
For ViT, this means that the model has 12 layers before the classification head,
where the embedded dimension C equals 768, the patch size is 16 × 16 and each
self-attention module has 12 heads, having in total approximately 86 million
trainable parameters. For SWIN the base model has 4 stages, where each stage
has 2, 2, 18, 2 encoding layers respectively. Please note that in SWIN at each
stage there is a minimum of 2 layers as the second one enables cross-window
connections by shifting the input as mentioned in Chapter 2. Here the patch
is 4 × 4, the window size is M = 7 and the trainable parameters sum up to 88
million. Both for ViT and SWIN the input shape is 224 × 224.
4.2
Evaluation Metrics
The metrics used for this project are Average Drop % in confidence and In-
crease % in confidence, suggested in GradCam++ [38] and heavily used in
the XAI literature. As mentioned, there is no clear consensus regarding the
metrics used to evaluate explainability maps. These metrics are measured by
providing to the model the input point-wise multiplied with the explainability
map, upsampled to the image dimensions, produced via Hadamard product. In
other words, we provide as input the parts of the image that the explainabil-
ity method suggests as more important. As the image now has fewer details
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Experiment 1: ViT [CLS] vs ViT [AVG]
29
Figure 4.1: The image on the left depicts the original input image. The im-
age in the middle depicts the relevancy map we get through our
method and the third image is the one produced by multiplying
the first two in order to evaluate the metrics.
comparing it to the original one, it is expected that there will be a drop in
the model’s confidence when predicting the output class. Hence, Average Drop
measures the average percent of that drop with the intuition being that better
explainability maps will lead to a smaller drop in confidence. As a complimen-
tary metric, an increase in confidence is also expected in some cases where the
input captures only important details that help the model predict the correct
class while removing unnecessary noise around the object. Therefore, Increase
in confidence measures the number of times the model’s confidence actually in-
creased by providing the original image multiplied by the explainability map.
An example of input, its explainability map and the image produced to measure
the metrics are shown in figure 4.1. Finally, training validation and test top-1
accuracy metric are shown to demonstrate the model’s training and ability to
predict most of the data points correctly.
4.3
Experiment 1: ViT [CLS] vs ViT [AVG]
In the first experiment, we want to be sure that the method presented in chapter
2 still gives reasonable results when there is no CLS token present in the trans-
former architecture. There is no ablation study for the CLS token use in [42]
so this experiment is necessary to verify the first step for the adaptation of the
method to hierarchical models like SWIN. More specifically, in this experiment,
we fine-tune a ViT with CLS token for the class prediction and one without the
CLS token but instead average the last layers features, where the average acts
as the input to the classification head. Now the key difference between the two
explainability methods is that on the baseline, provided by Chefer et al [42],
==PAGE:40==
30
Experimental Evaluation
Model
Training Acc
Validation Acc
Test Acc
ViT-CLS
90.5%
85.3%
84.4%
ViT-AVG
90.1%
86.6%
85.9%
Table 4.1: Top-1 accuracy for the training, validation, and testing sets on a
ViT trained with CLS token and on ViT trained with average pool-
ing on Oxfords Pet dataset.
Model
Average Drop % ↓
Increase % ↑
ViT-CLS Chefer
54.81
10.66
ViT-CLS GradCAM
31.4
25.99
ViT-AVG Chefer
48.9
12.1
ViT-AVG GradCAM
32.8
23.4
Table 4.2: Drop % and Increase % in confidence measured on the explain-
ability maps produced by Chefer’s method on ViT with CLS, on
GradCAM on ViT with CLS, on the adaptation of Chefer’s method
on ViT with average pooling and on GradCAM on ViT with aver-
age pooling.
we extract the first row of the relevancy map, which corresponds to the rest
of the features’ relevancies towards the classification token, and then reshape
it and upsample it to the image dimensions to get the saliency map. This is
the author’s suggestion as the classification head only "sees" the features from
the CLS token. In order to use the same method to obtain relevancy maps for
the ViT without the CLS token we employ the same method but instead of
taking the first row of the relevancy map to compute the explanation, we take
the average of all the other features along the first dimension which corresponds
to the average relevancy each feature has towards the rest of the features. This
is crucial for later experiments as we can confirm the validity of the proposed
method. Metrics for the top-1 accuracy are shown in table 4.1. For qualitative
evaluation, we provide examples together with their relevancy maps in figure
4.2 where examples from 3 classes are shown produced by ViT with CLS, ViT
without ClS, and Grad-CAM.
4.4
Proposed Method
In order to validate the proposed method we design three separate experiments.
In the first one, a comparison is shown with results obtained by using or not
using the shifted window attention parts of the architecture and taking into
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Proposed Method
31
(a) Input
image
(b) ViT-CLS
[42]
(c) ViT-CLS
GradCAM
(d) ViT-AVG
[42]
(e) ViT-AVG
GradCAM
Figure 4.2: Comparison of relevancy maps, produced by Chefer’s method and
GradCAM, on ViT trained with and without CLS token. AVG
corresponds to the averaging of the tokens when a CLS token is
not present.
==PAGE:42==
32
Experimental Evaluation
Model
Training Acc
Validation Acc
Test Acc
SWIN
95.4%
91.9%
91.6%
Table 4.3: Table 1: Top-1 accuracy for the training, validation, and test sets
on SWIN model trained with Oxfords Pet dataset.
consideration only the blocks with shift size equal to 0, i.e the first blocks of
each Swin transformer encoder. In the second part, we demonstrate the rele-
vancy maps obtained from each stage. In the last experiment, we compare the
results from the suggested method to the results obtained from GradCAM as
implemented in [52].
4.4.1
Experiment 2: With and without shifted attention
In this experiment, we take a closer look at the results of the relevancy maps
when taking into consideration the shifted windows attention and when only the
non-shifted windows attention is used. Furthermore, we provide results when
both of them are utilized for the calculation of the relevancy map. The results
are shown in figure 4.3
4.4.2
Experiment 3: Relevancy per stages
In this experiment, we demonstrate the details each stage captures. Note that
at each stage, the input resolution is different and each window captures a
progressively larger area of the original image.
It can be seen that stage 1
captures fine-grained relevancy maps as each token still represents a small patch
of the original image. The maps become coarser as the stages progress and the
tokens get merged. Visualizations produced from each stage and by all of them
together are shown in 4.4. The maps for each stage are produced by considering
the respective stage only.
4.4.3
Experiment 4: Comparison with GradCAM
Finally, in the last experiment we compare results from the proposed method
with results obtained from GradCAM. In order to adapt GradCAM to SWIN,
the target layer is the last layer before the classification head where the window
is equal to the whole image and no shifted attention is applied as per SWIN
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Proposed Method
33
(a) Input
image
(b) No
shifted
attention
(c) Only shifted
attention
(d) Both
atten-
tions
Figure 4.3: Comparison of relevancy maps and the effect of shifted attention.
==PAGE:44==
34
Experimental Evaluation
(a) Input
(b) Stage 1 (c) Stage 2 (d) Stage 3 (e) Stage 4 (f) Merged
Figure 4.4: Relevancy maps for each of the stages in SWIN transformer. The
last column provides results when all stages are taken into consid-
eration. Relevancy maps produced by the proposed method.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Proposed Method
35
Model
Average Drop % ↓
Increase % ↑
SWIN - Proposed
27.26
22.64
SWIN - Proposed∗
26.26
28.20
SWIN GradCAM
28.28
26.62
Table 4.4: Table 3: Drop % and Increase % in confidence measured on the
explainability maps produced by the proposed method and Grad-
CAM on SWIN architecture. Lower is better for Drop and higher
is better for Increase. ∗Without taking shift blocks into consider-
ation
authors suggestions.
For our method, we report the results of the modified
version where shifted windows are not considered. This is because, the modified
version produced slightly better results than the original proposed method for
our dataset 4.4.
==PAGE:46==
36
Experimental Evaluation
(a) Input
image
(b) SWIN
Ours∗
(c) SWIN
GradCAM
Figure 4.5: Comparison of explainable maps produced by our proposed
method and by GradCAM. *Without accounting for shifted at-
tention
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Discussion
There is something we must pay attention to and keep in mind going through
the experiments. Explainable methods that depend on a model, are only as good
as the model is robust. In other words, these methods aim to decipher how the
model is making its prediction, or what the model is basing its decision on. If
the training procedure is not robust enough, the model might not learn any
useful features to rely on during inference, hence the explanation maps that the
method will produce will also have no meaning [53]. That does not mean that
the explanation method failed to produce a relevant map but rather it means
the training procedure should be reworked to yield a better model. There is also
a lot of criticism behind heat-maps and their use [54] on an individual level. It
can be seen rather as a perk of explainability methods, in order to debug the
model. For example, if the explainability maps of a dog class focus on something
particular in the background, like snow or grass, it is a hint that the training
data require more variance of the dog class with different backgrounds rather
than a hint that the method is failing.
Furthermore, while we provide metrics used in important papers throughout
the years of explainability evolution [38], we must be careful when we interpret
them [55]. Metrics in the XAI field have received criticism on the limitations
and lack of accountability for the end-user. Moreover, while the intuition and
logic behind the creation of these metrics are legit, they rely on an increase or
decrease in the model’s confidence when given an image that could potentially
==PAGE:48==
38
Discussion
be outside of the distribution the model was trained on. An example of the input
to calculate the metrics can be seen in figure 4.1. This is why we consider these
metrics more in a way of comparison between methods rather than how good
is a method performing as a standalone. Nevertheless, the great difference in
average drop and increase in confidence between GradCAM and Chefer’s original
method and adaptation in the first experiment can be explained by looking at
the maps produced by these two methods in figure 4.2. GradCAM generally
produces coarser maps while [42] is able to localize the animal better. In the
case of coarse maps, the input image would be changed significantly less while
in the latter case, only the animal would remain in the image and everything
else would be grayed out.
The first experiment is also important for the proposed method because it vali-
dates that taking the mean of relevancy scores makes sense and yields meaningful
results. Looking at the results, it can be seen that in both ViT based methods
[42] produces meaningful explainable maps while GradCAM fails or produces
maps that are noisy and not very helpful.
This could be justified from the
fact that GradCAM averages over the gradients and multiplies the activation
maps while in ViT-based methods there is an element-wise multiplication taking
place, investigated in [41]. While GradCAM method remains the same for both
ViTs, the underlying models are trained differently hence we produce results
with each of them. GradCAM authors suggest applying the method to the last
layer of a model, so after trying out different layers we picked the second to last
layer before the classification head. It is important to note here, that all results
that are shown were correctly classified samples from all the models that are
shown.
However this dataset was picked, as an easy way to interpret the results, and
in hope of providing localization metrics as well, from annotation boxes created
through the explainable maps but again due to limited time were not carried out.
This aspect of the methods introduced is very important. Besides using them to
debug a model, or gain trust by providing explainability maps, these methods
also act as object localization tools. This is really helpful, for segmentation tasks
where there are no pixel-level annotations. Having only image-level annotations
and a model trained robustly on a classification setting, we can use this method
to obtain boundary boxes for each class that the model has been trained on.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to provide a method towards
explainable hierarchical vision transformers. To achieve this, we consider all
stages and their corresponding layer of Swin Transformer in order to provide
explainable heatmaps. It can be seen in figure 4.3 that taking into consideration
the shifted attention blocks can corrupt the results. We can attribute that to
either a bug in the implementation of the method or to a need for better training.
Further experimentation and applying the method to different datasets will clear
==PAGE:49==
39
the dilemma. Since the method performs better in metrics without taking into
consideration the shifted blocks, the rest of the experiments were carried out
without accounting for the shifted blocks.
Looking at the relevancy maps produced for each stage in figure 4.4 it can be
seen what pixels are most important for the network at each stage. As the model
works in a hierarchical way, we expect lower stages to have more fine-grained
details while later stages to have coarse representations. This can be verified
in some images but is not always the case. It could be that the model pays
heavy attention to an image area at one stage and shift its focus to the next
one. Another reason why it is important to take into consideration all layers in a
transformer model and not only a single layer. During the project, the mean of
all relevancies per stage was considered as well instead of updating the identity
matrix but did not yield good results.
As expected, when comparing maps between our proposed method and Grad-
CAM 4.5, it can be seen that our method produces more meaningful results and
is able to further localize the wanted object. Instead the results from GradCAM,
usually fail to produce a good map, and when they do it’s significantly coarser
than the one produced by our method. This can be also explained by the target
layer of SWIN for GradCAM which is applied to only the last layer before the
classification head, hence it relies only on a 7 × 7 map as in the last block there
is a single window equal to the size of the image and no shifting mechanism is
performed, boiling down to normal attention maps. Generally, detecting fine
grained details is very useful for soft-segmentation and this is why [39], another
variant of CAM, performs better that other CNN-based methods on this task.
LayerCAM aims to produce better maps from shallower stages in a hierarchical
network. This is done by applying a ReLU function to the gradients before
the multiplication with the feature maps. In our case, this is redundant as the
attention scores are being passed through a softmax which results in the ReLU
not playing an important role at that point as there is another ReLU after the
multiplication with the attention scores.
What is also noteworthy, is that the models are not completely robust since
they seem to fail to generalize in some classes looking at the table 4.1. Further
experimentation, on different datasets, would be very important to showcase
the strength of these methods but due to the limited time of the project, are
not shown here. More specifically, larger datasets that the models picked are
less prone to overfitting, as it proved difficult during the training on the Oxford
pets dataset.
==PAGE:50==
40
Discussion
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
To sum up, in this project we took a deep dive into the transformer architec-
ture for vision tasks, analyzing the attention mechanism and the pros and cons
that it comes with. Not stopping there, explainability methods based either on
CNNs or transformers to make black-box models more interpretable are investi-
gated and applied to the Oxford Pets dataset. To the best of our knowledge, we
showcase for the first time explainability maps for SWIN that take into consid-
eration all transformer blocks by presenting an adaptation of one such method
to hierarchical vision transformers. These methods, at the very least, have been
proven to help the debugging process of a training procedure by providing useful
insights into where the model focuses on making each decision. Moreover, they
provide a great tool for weak segmentation, meaning that pixel-level annotations
are not needed to localize an object in an image as long as we have image-level
labels. Future work is broad as different directions can be considered. One of
them would be to prune the network first in hope of less noise coming from
heads that do not contribute to the prediction. Work on soft-segmentation by
explainability could also be considered both for expanding the method and for
getting more interpretable and well defined metrics. Moreover, showcasing the
proposed method results on different datasets will also be proven to be beneficial
for our understanding of the method. Lastly, although metrics and definitions
like trust and explainability still vary between publications of XAI papers it is
bound to happen that they will be improved and unified across the XAI field in
order to make a robust framework to better develop and evaluate these methods.
==PAGE:52==
42
Conclusion
Our hope is that these methods will be used one day to help a doctor trust the
model that assists them more and to be able to incorporate deep learning into
our daily lives with trust and not fear of the unknown.
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1] Paul Voigt and Axel Von dem Bussche. The eu general data protection reg-
ulation (gdpr). A Practical Guide, 1st Ed., Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 10(3152676):10–5555, 2017.
[2] Jiuxiang Gu, Zhenhua Wang, Jason Kuen, Lianyang Ma, Amir Shahroudy,
Bing Shuai, Ting Liu, Xingxing Wang, Gang Wang, Jianfei Cai, et al.
Recent advances in convolutional neural networks.
Pattern recognition,
77:354–377, 2018.
[3] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn,
Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer,
Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Trans-
formers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929,
2020.
[4] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[5] Chun-Fu Richard Chen, Quanfu Fan, and Rameswar Panda.
Crossvit:
Cross-attention multi-scale vision transformer for image classification. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision,
pages 357–366, 2021.
[6] Danfeng Hong, Zhu Han, Jing Yao, Lianru Gao, Bing Zhang, Antonio
Plaza, and Jocelyn Chanussot. Spectralformer: Rethinking hyperspectral
image classification with transformers. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing, 60:1–15, 2021.
==PAGE:54==
44
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[7] Ji He, Lina Zhao, Hongwei Yang, Mengmeng Zhang, and Wei Li.
Hsi-
bert: Hyperspectral image classification using the bidirectional encoder
representation from transformers. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing, 58(1):165–178, 2019.
[8] Sixiao Zheng, Jiachen Lu, Hengshuang Zhao, Xiatian Zhu, Zekun Luo,
Yabiao Wang, Yanwei Fu, Jianfeng Feng, Tao Xiang, Philip HS Torr, et al.
Rethinking semantic segmentation from a sequence-to-sequence perspec-
tive with transformers.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 6881–6890, 2021.
[9] Ali Hatamizadeh, Yucheng Tang, Vishwesh Nath, Dong Yang, Andriy My-
ronenko, Bennett Landman, Holger R Roth, and Daguang Xu.
Unetr:
Transformers for 3d medical image segmentation.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision, pages
574–584, 2022.
[10] Jieneng Chen, Yongyi Lu, Qihang Yu, Xiangde Luo, Ehsan Adeli, Yan
Wang, Le Lu, Alan L Yuille, and Yuyin Zhou.
Transunet: Transform-
ers make strong encoders for medical image segmentation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.04306, 2021.
[11] Junyu Chen, Eric C Frey, Yufan He, William P Segars, Ye Li, and Yong
Du. Transmorph: Transformer for unsupervised medical image registration.
Medical image analysis, 82:102615, 2022.
[12] Junyu Chen, Yufan He, Eric C Frey, Ye Li, and Yong Du. Vit-v-net: Vision
transformer for unsupervised volumetric medical image registration. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.06468, 2021.
[13] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark
Chen.
Hierarchical text-conditional image generation with clip latents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
[14] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and
Björn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion mod-
els, 2021.
[15] Nikolas Adaloglou. How attention works in deep learning: understanding
the attention mechanism in sequence models. https://theaisummer.com/
attention/.
[16] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you
need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
==PAGE:55==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
45
[17] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual
learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.
[18] Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normal-
ization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
[19] Zizheng Pan, Bohan Zhuang, Jing Liu, Haoyu He, and Jianfei Cai. Scal-
able vision transformers with hierarchical pooling. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/cvf international conference on computer vision, pages 377–386,
2021.
[20] Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen
Lin, and Baining Guo. Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer
using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international con-
ference on computer vision, pages 10012–10022, 2021.
[21] Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scal-
ing vision transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 12104–12113, 2022.
[22] Tobias Pohlen, Alexander Hermans, Markus Mathias, and Bastian Leibe.
Full-resolution residual networks for semantic segmentation in street scenes.
In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 4151–4160, 2017.
[23] Devvi Sarwinda, Radifa Hilya Paradisa, Alhadi Bustamam, and Pinkie
Anggia.
Deep learning in image classification using residual network
(resnet) variants for detection of colorectal cancer.
Procedia Computer
Science, 179:423–431, 2021.
[24] Philip T Jackson, Stephen Bonner, Ning Jia, Christopher Holder, Jon
Stonehouse, and Boguslaw Obara. Camera bias in a fine grained classi-
fication task. In 2021 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2021.
[25] Esther Puyol-Antón, Bram Ruijsink, Jorge Mariscal Harana, Stefan K
Piechnik,
Stefan Neubauer,
Steffen E Petersen,
Reza Razavi,
Phil
Chowienczyk, and Andrew P King. Fairness in cardiac magnetic resonance
imaging: assessing sex and racial bias in deep learning-based segmentation.
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine, page 664, 2022.
[26] Hila Chefer, Idan Schwartz, and Lior Wolf. Optimizing relevance maps of
vision transformers improves robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01161,
2022.
==PAGE:56==
46
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[27] Kjersti Aas, Martin Jullum, and Anders Løland.
Explaining individual
predictions when features are dependent: More accurate approximations
to shapley values. Artificial Intelligence, 298:103502, 2021.
[28] Alex Goldstein, Adam Kapelner, Justin Bleich, and Emil Pitkin. Peeking
inside the black box: Visualizing statistical learning with plots of individual
conditional expectation. journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics,
24(1):44–65, 2015.
[29] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. " why should i
trust you?" explaining the predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of
the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery
and data mining, pages 1135–1144, 2016.
[30] Shubham Rathi. Generating counterfactual and contrastive explanations
using shap. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.09293, 2019.
[31] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model
predictions. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[32] Scott M Lundberg, Gabriel G Erion, and Su-In Lee.
Consistent in-
dividualized feature attribution for tree ensembles.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.03888, 2018.
[33] Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Tor-
ralba. Learning deep features for discriminative localization. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
2921–2929, 2016.
[34] Samira Abnar and Willem Zuidema. Quantifying attention flow in trans-
formers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00928, 2020.
[35] Hila Chefer, Shir Gur, and Lior Wolf. Transformer interpretability beyond
attention visualization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 782–791, 2021.
[36] Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution
for deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pages
3319–3328. PMLR, 2017.
[37] Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna
Vedantam, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations
from deep networks via gradient-based localization. In Proceedings of the
IEEE international conference on computer vision, pages 618–626, 2017.
[38] Aditya Chattopadhay, Anirban Sarkar, Prantik Howlader, and Vineeth N
Balasubramanian. Grad-cam++: Generalized gradient-based visual expla-
nations for deep convolutional networks. In 2018 IEEE winter conference
on applications of computer vision (WACV), pages 839–847. IEEE, 2018.
==PAGE:57==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
47
[39] Peng-Tao Jiang, Chang-Bin Zhang, Qibin Hou, Ming-Ming Cheng, and
Yunchao Wei. Layercam: Exploring hierarchical class activation maps for
localization. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 30:5875–5888, 2021.
[40] Haofan Wang, Zifan Wang, Mengnan Du, Fan Yang, Zijian Zhang, Sirui
Ding, Piotr Mardziel, and Xia Hu. Score-cam: Score-weighted visual expla-
nations for convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pages 24–
25, 2020.
[41] Rachel Lea Draelos and Lawrence Carin. Use hirescam instead of grad-cam
for faithful explanations of convolutional neural networks. arXiv e-prints,
pages arXiv–2011, 2020.
[42] Hila Chefer, Shir Gur, and Lior Wolf. Generic attention-model explainabil-
ity for interpreting bi-modal and encoder-decoder transformers. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 397–406, 2021.
[43] Min Lin, Qiang Chen, and Shuicheng Yan. Network in network. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1312.4400, 2013.
[44] Elena Voita, David Talbot, Fedor Moiseev, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov.
Analyzing multi-head self-attention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting,
the rest can be pruned. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09418, 2019.
[45] Ross
Wightman.
Pytorch
image
models.
https://github.com/
rwightman/pytorch-image-models, 2019.
[46] Dan Hendrycks, Norman Mu, Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Justin Gilmer,
and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Augmix: A simple data processing method
to improve robustness and uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02781,
2019.
[47] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury,
Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca
Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning
library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[48] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Ima-
genet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
[49] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and
Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks
from overfitting.
The journal of machine learning research, 15(1):1929–
1958, 2014.
==PAGE:58==
48
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[50] Omkar M Parkhi, Andrea Vedaldi, Andrew Zisserman, and CV Jawahar.
Cats and dogs. In 2012 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 3498–3505. IEEE, 2012.
[51] Ruibin Xiong, Yunchang Yang, Di He, Kai Zheng, Shuxin Zheng, Chen
Xing, Huishuai Zhang, Yanyan Lan, Liwei Wang, and Tieyan Liu. On layer
normalization in the transformer architecture. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, pages 10524–10533. PMLR, 2020.
[52] Jacob Gildenblat and contributors.
Pytorch library for cam methods.
https://github.com/jacobgil/pytorch-grad-cam, 2021.
[53] Amlan Jyoti, Karthik Balaji Ganesh, Manoj Gayala, Nandita Lakshmi
Tunuguntla, Sandesh Kamath, and Vineeth N Balasubramanian. On the
robustness of explanations of deep neural network models: A survey, 2022.
[54] Marzyeh Ghassemi, Luke Oakden-Rayner, and Andrew L Beam. The false
hope of current approaches to explainable artificial intelligence in health
care. The Lancet Digital Health, 3(11):e745–e750, 2021.
[55] Thomas Fel, Julien Colin, Rémi Cadène, and Thomas Serre. What i cannot
predict, i do not understand: A human-centered evaluation framework for
explainability methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04417, 2021.
