==PAGE:1==
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration
activities
Carlos Ramos González
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
MSc in Business Analytics
==PAGE:2==
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
Carlos Ramos González
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Carlos Ramos González
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, MSc in Business Analytics, Building 101, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den-
mark
www.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Department of DTU
Computer, Section for Statistics and Data Analysis, at the Technical University of Den-
mark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and data
science.
Carlos Ramos González - s202961
Signature
Date
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The study of biosignals is a field that has experienced a rapid growth and interest in the
last years, thanks to its variety of potential applications and the new techniques in data
science. The use of these signals can be applied to understand synchrony and correlation
between individuals working in an activity together. Hence, there is a big potential to un-
derstand if certain biological processes translated into biosignals provide information on
interaction between humans, analyzing the synchrony during the collaborative process.
To evaluate this, multiple individuals have taken part in a controlled collaboration exper-
iment, where a set of biosignals have been recorded using a wearable device, together
with their emotional state answered in a questionnaire. These biosignals include Electro
Dermal Activity (EDA), Heart Rate (HR) and Temperature. The data acquired during the
experiment is reliable and useful, and shows level of consistency along the experiments,
with certain deviations. The participants who worked together have shown higher level
of synchrony than during in non-collaborative scenarios, both in terms of biosignals and
feelings. The feelings are seen to be directly related to the extracted features from the
biosignals. Also, the potential application of this acquired data for predictive purposes
has been analyzed, bringing very positive results with the use of Machine Learning (ML).
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acronyms
ACF
Auto Correlation Function
AI
Artificial Intelligence
ANOVA Analysis of Variance
ANS
Autonomic Nervous System
ASD
Autism Spectrum Disorder
BVP
Blood Volume Pulse
CC
Cross Correlation
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
CSCL Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning
CV
Coefficient of Variation
DL
Deep Learning
DTW
Dynamic Time Warping
EDA
Electro Dermal Activity
EDR
Electro Dermal Response
ECG
Electrocardiogram
ECTS European Credit Transfer System
EEG
Electroencephalogram
EGG
Electrogastrogram
EMG
Electromiogram
EOG
Electrooculogram
ERG
Electroretinogram
FFT
Fast Fourier Transformation
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
GSR
Galvanic Skin Response
HR
Heart Rate
Hz
Hertz
IBI
Inter Beating Interval
IID
Independent and Identically Distributed
ILO
intended learning objectives
IPR
Intellectual Property Rights
ML
Machine Learning
NCD
Non Communicable Disease
PACF Partial Auto Correlation Function
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
iv
==PAGE:6==
PDR
Project Definition Report
OCD
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
PGR
Psychogalvanic Reflex
PPG
Photoplethysmogram
RFC
Random Forest Classifier
SPCA Sparse Principal Component Analysis
SCR
Skin Condutance Response
SCL
Skin Conductance Level
TLCC Time Lagged Cross Correlation
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis scope and goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Datasets
8
2.1
Bio Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Participants Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Data privacy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methods
13
3.1
Experiment design, set up and measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Synchrony . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Other methods for synchrony / correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5
Statistical Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.6
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.7
Excluded methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Results and discussion
27
4.1
Excluded signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.3
Participants feelings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.4
Similarity Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.5
Feelings - Biosignal coupling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.6
Participants Synchrony
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.7
Predictive Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.8
Analysis of Project Definition Report Project Definition Report (PDR) . . . . 61
5
Conclusion
63
5.1
Research goal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.2
Research question 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.3
Research question 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5.4
Research question 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.5
Research question 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.6
Future work and perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Bibliography
68
A Appendix 1: Participant Questionnaire
71
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Collaboration and interaction among people are complex phenomena, whose evalua-
tion is hard to perform, as they include several subjective variables. These difficulties
in the quantitative and qualitative measurements of collaboration have been present for
decades, without adequate proposals to target the problem.
A reliable method to understand collaboration metrics would allow us to understand which
variables and factors have influence in this process. This knowledge can be used to
monitor the collaboration level in daily activities; enhance and optimize the factors which
drive collaboration; or link people who share complementary profiles and may have high
collaboration levels.
Hence, this theoretical problem addresses several real problems in everyday life, and
society would benefit of a deeper understanding of what collaboration implies.
A potential solution to understand collaboration with objective variables is the study of
biosignals of the individuals subjected to collaborative work. Biosignals are defined as
space-time records of a biological event, which can be measured and analyzed for differ-
ent applications.
There exists a big set of these signals, which usually are associated with electric current in
our body, such as: Electroencephalogram (EEG), Electrocardiogram (ECG), Electromiogram
(EMG), Electrooculogram (EOG), Electroretinogram (ERG), Electrogastrogram (EGG),
Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) or EDA.
The biosignals are not only restricted to an electrical potential on a given organ, like
the ones enumerated before.
They could have mechanical nature (accelerometer or
mechanomyogram), chemical nature (level of oxygen and pH in a given tissue) and acous-
tic nature.
Some of the aforesaid mentioned signals require complex systems/procedures to be mea-
sured. The list of biosignals used for this project is reduced to a set of easier-to-acquire
data, which include EEG, ECG, EDA, HR, skin temperature and body movement.
1.1.1
History of Biosignals
Biosignals have been used by humans since the very beginning of our history. The use of
inspection, palpation, percussion and auscultation techniques have been used for thou-
sands of years to diagnose any kind of disease or condition. Erasistratus, prominent
Greek physiologist, already used in the III rd Century BC the HR for diagnosis. However,
the use of this biosignals was mainly qualitative and not quantitative [1].
The electrical nature present in the bodies of animals was described in the late XVIII
Century by English scientist John Walsh and Italian anatomist Luigi Galvani. However, no
quantitative analysis was performed more than the qualitative idea that muscle activation
is due to electrical force [2].
The study and use of more refined biosignals did not happen until 1856, when Kolliker
and Mueller discovered the electrical activity associated to heart rate. In 1870, Alexan-
der Muirhead registered the first electrocardiogram during its studies in St Bartholomew’s
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
1
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1.1: History of Biosignals: ECG machine of the 1910s, with elec-
trodes attached to the patients measuring the signal [2]
Hospital, London [3]. The importance and advances of biosignals, like the ECG, is no-
torious as it is regarded as a key diagnostic and investigative tool. For example, Willem
Einthoven, creator of the mercury capillary electrometer applied to ECG, received the
Nobel Prize in physiology and medicine in 1924 [4].
ECG is just an example of the expansion of techniques that have converted the biosignals
analysis to a more quantitative nature.
1.1.2
WristAngel Project
This project is part of a bigger, ambitious project called WristAngel 1, whose aim is to
improve psychotherapeutic treatment of patients with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
(OCD). According to the project responsible, acOCD, is a chronic, costly and disabling
brain disorder for which existing treatments usually produce disappointing outcomes. Ac-
cording to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, the OCD is defined
by the presence of obsessions and/or compulsions that are time-consuming, distressing
or disabling. Obsessions are repetitive thoughts, urges or images that are intrusive and
unwanted, and that in most individuals cause anxiety or distress, for example recurrent
thoughts about accidental death [5].
The WristAngel project is supported by the EmpaticaE4, a wearable device that monitors
several biosignals and can help to predict and identify OCD-episodes with the help of
Artificial Intelligence (AI). More information about this device can be found in section
2.1.1.
1.2
Thesis scope and goals
1.2.1
Scope
The scope of this M.Sc. Thesis, even though it is part of the WristAngel project for OCD
patients, it is exclusively restricted to non-patients. The access of pediatric patients data
is very difficult and confidential due to its nature and will not be used.
Another point to remark is that no other biosignals than the ones measured by the Empat-
ica E4 Device are measured nor used in the project. More recent devices from Empatica
are available in the market at the time of this project release, but are not used.
1https://www.cachet.dk/research/research_projects/wrist-angel
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
2
==PAGE:10==
This project is part of the study program of the author, and corresponds to a workload of
30 European Credit Transfer System (ECTS) credits, which is equivalent to 840 hours of
work. The project is developed during a time span of approximately 6 months, which cor-
respond to around 30 hours of work per week. The first month has been used on the PDR.
This document includes a broad project description, the intended learning objectives and
a project plan stating activities, milestones, deliverables and risks of the project.
1.2.2
Goals
The main research question of this thesis is the following:
Can we identify synchrony in biosignals of people performing a collaborative task
with a wearable device?
This question addresses a real word problem for real world users, which in the mid-long
term could benefit from a solution. The answer to this question can be done breaking the
main research question in smaller ones:
• Question 1: Can we detect collaboration levels from the synchronization biosig-
nals?
• Question 2: Can we generate reliable and useful biosignal data for the synchrony
analysis? Can we set-up and carry out a new experiment to extend the dataset? Is
data consistent along the different experiments?
• Question 3: Which biosignals show the biggest levels of synchrony among partici-
pants?
• Question 4: Can we generate predictive models with this data?
1.3
Literature review
1.3.1
Literature review: Biosignal features extraction
As seen in section 1.1.1, the biosignals have been widely used for years mainly for di-
agnosis purposes. However, the recent advances in computational methods for signal
preprocessing, the advances in biosensors and applications, and the rapid growth and
evolution of data analysis have produced a drastic acceleration of biosignals use. There
are several representative studies of the combination of all these advances, for exam-
ple we can find papers which address topics like: analysis of blink pattern activity using
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [6]; stress detection techniques design via super-
vised ML[7] or hidden features acquisition of patients using Deep Learning (DL) [8]. The
book ”Trends in biomedical signal feature extraction” [9] sets forth the evolution of biosig-
nals analysis over the last decades and presents the most recent techniques applied in
the area.
As from Figure 1.2, we can find 4 generations of feature extraction techniques in biosig-
nals:
• Time domain feature extraction: How values change over time. Some applica-
tions are: biometric modeling, time evolution of a given phenomenon.
• Frequency domain feature extaction: rate of change in signal values (usually
transformed via Fourier transform). Some applications are: Signal separation and
compression or ECG analysis.
•
Joint time frequency domain feature extraction: decomposition of signals to
acquire characteristics that in real world (non-linear and non-stationary signals) can
be revealed.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Biosignal features extraction: Evolution of biomedical signal
feature extraction along different dimensions and decades. [9]
• Sparse domain feature extraction: further evolution of decomposing non-linear,
non-stationary signals into sparse representations (minimizing signal representa-
tion). Like the previous, the use of Sparse Principal Component Analysis (SPCA) it
has multiple applications to obtain insightful features on the analyzed signals.
The extraction of these features is highly dependent on the quality and reliability of the data
generated and stored by the Empatica E4 device. Empatica has improved the access of
monitoring for patients through wearable sensors. There are multiple examples of projects
where biosignal features have been successfully extracted from an Empatica device and
used. For example, we can find: Influenza and common cold detection before symptoms
[10]; digital phenotyping measure of negative symptoms in schizophrenia via acceleration
signals [11]; or arousal classification using EDA [12].
1.3.2
Literature review: Biosignals in collaborative processes
So far, only works related with general biosignal processing and applications have been
discussed. The next set of works and ideas are more strongly related with the M.Sc.
project, where we can find several works which link biosignals analysis of EDA, HR and
temperature with social collaborative processes.
The study of 2018 by the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health [13] shows that phys-
iologic signals, such as HR can offer an objective reliable base to measure collabora-
tion. These measurements can become a proper quantitative and qualitative foundation
to agree on such a biased measurement as it is interaction among humans.
The physiological signals can also indicate how people acting in collaborative environ-
ments with a common goal show similar behaviors. An interesting case of this pattern is
the work published on 2022 by Fang et al. [14], where biosignals followed similar trends
on individuals playing board games with same roles. In these processes, there is a learn-
ing process associated. When these learning participants collaborate as a group, their
affective states are likely to converge, revealing synchrony [15].
Also, the work from Palumbo and colleagues [16], reinforces the idea that social processes
are linked with body signals, as stating that ”social processes operate at the physiological
level [...] synchrony due to external variables may be informative of shared levels of in-
volvement”. However, this same work states that this research area is yet to be explored
and we are in very early stages of the process. This is a motivation point for the thesis,
as it touches areas not fully discovered. A similar work [17] shows the importance of psy-
chophysiologic measures and their link with the exploration of conscious and unconscious
processes.
One of the most important references for this project is the work from Mamberg [18],
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
4
==PAGE:12==
where physiological synchrony and physiological arousal in groups are studied to evalu-
ate Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL). This study concluded that: the
groups which experienced difficulties showed physiological synchrony, while those who
did not experience difficulties did not show synchrony. It leads to the idea that currently
there are no efficient methods and techniques to recognize socially shared regulation of
learning, but new techniques may lead to better understanding on collaboration .
One of the most common signals that we can think of is the HR, as it is easily measurable
with just a clock. This simple metric is a good indicator of regulated emotional responding,
and can be used for better understanding of emotion processes [19]. As an example, the
work from Wu et al. showed implied that certain states, such as amused condition, has
a significantly lower heart rate than angry, fearful and neutral condition [20]. This idea
is corroborated by the clinical trial performed by Kreibig in 2006 [21], where fear- and
sadness-inducing films were used to analyze physiological patterns. The result of this
work showed clear differential physiological response patterns for the different emotions
induced by the films.
As stated before, this project is linked to the WristAngel project for OCD episodes predic-
tion. The idea of studying synchrony in biosignals with interaction is not new. The team
of Calabro published in 2021 [22] a dataset of biosignals studying the synchrony between
patients with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and their therapist. Therefore, even though
the application of these techniques is new, it seems that there is an increasing interest of
AI applications within this medical field.
1.3.3
Literature review: Importance and growth
To understand the importance that the biosignals analysis in collaborative tasks, it is rec-
ommendable to understand the conclusions extracted from Behrens et al. [23]. This work
showed that ”the strong relationship between our bodily responses and social behavior,
and emphasize the importance of studying social processes”, opening the door to further
studies relating both fields.
There are multiple ongoing initiatives, works projects related to the expansion and appli-
cations of physiological biosignals in our daily life. A good example is the BITalino toolkit
[24], which integrates multiple sensors with a software. It allows users to apply the kit in
a wide range of daily activities.
Figure 1.3 shows some examples developed by BITalino users. The subfigures represent:
(a) bicycle handlebars with heart rate monitor; (b)a muscle-activated door lock; (c) a key-
board for continuous ECG acquisition; (d) a game controller fitted with an ECG sensor; (e)
heart monitoring on a mobile phone; and (f) an Android OS interface for heart monitoring.
The application of AI and DL on the biosignals features is analyzed by Supratak et al. [25],
where the authors expose the current problems extracting worthy and reliable features for
biosignal analysis. The usual way of extracting biosignal features is via hand-engineering
(expert knowledge and established knowledge), which proves to be a fairly good solution.
However, this hand-engineering feature approach needs to be combined with new Deep
Learning techniques to learn and extract new features which are not extracted by previ-
ous knowledge. Nevertheless, the addition of these techniques, although promising, are
computationally expensive and features are difficult to understand and analyze.
1.3.4
Literature review: Future perspectives
The evolution of the use of biosignals in different aspects of life in the coming years has
very high expectations. This technology eruption and possible applications will experience
the usual hype cycles in technology passing through peak, disappointment, and recovery
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
5
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.3: Different Applications of BITalino [24], ranging from heart
rate monitor in a bicycle handlebar to an ECG sensor located in a game
controller.
patterns [26]. The World Health Organization estimated in 2012 that around 70% of total
global deaths correspond to the category of Non Communicable Disease (NCD) [27]. The
use extension of biosignals could represent an important milestone in the prevention and
detection of these NCDs. An early detection and treatment of these diseases driven by
an established biomedical signal analysis roadmap [28] may reduce the consequences of
these NCDs, such as: high healthcare costs, limited ability to work and financial insecurity
[29].
Another point to mention is the rapid growth of wearable technologies, which allows easy
integration of biosensors. In 2015, the diffusion of wearable techniques was already at an
early adopter stage [30]. Therefore, nowadays, that technology is more and more present
in our lives, which facilitates the physiological data acquisition process, accelerating the
daily use of biosignals.
To summarize all the prior work, the study and processing of physiological biosignals is a
well studied topic, which currently progresses in the direction of linking this knowledge with
social aspects. That aim of study, together with the rapid evolution of wearable sensors
and computational techniques, will allow this study area to grow in the future.
1.4
Thesis overview
1.4.1
Scope
The scope of this M.Sc. Thesis, even though it is part of the WristAngel project for OCD
patients, it is exclusively restricted to non-patients. The access of pediatric patients data
is very difficult and confidential due to its nature and will not be used.
Another point to remark is that no other biosignals than the ones measured by the Empat-
ica E4 Device are measured nor used in the project. More recent devices from Empatica
are available in the market at the time of this project release, but are not used.
This project is part of the study program of the author, and corresponds to a workload o 30
ECTS, which is equivalent to 840 hours of work. The project is developed during a time
span of approximately 6 months, which correspond to around 30 hours of work per week.
The first month has been used on the Project Definition Report (PDR). This document
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
6
==PAGE:14==
includes a broad project description, the intended learning objectives and a project plan
stating activities, milestones, deliverables and risks of the project.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
7
==PAGE:15==
2
Datasets
There are 2 sources of data: the biosignals recorded by the Wristband, and the partici-
pants surveys filled after every phase.
This section does not show in-depth descriptive analytics of the data used in the project,
as those are considered parts of the Section 4 as the data is a result of the experiments.
Consequently, the information is placed and described there.
2.1
Bio Signals
Most of the signals of biological nature analyzed in this project are driven by the human
Autonomic Nervous System (ANS), which produces responses after given stimuli is re-
ceived.
2.1.1
Measuring device: Empatica E4 Wristband
To acquire the data in the experiments, the participants wear an Empatica E4 Wristband.
This wearable device contains several sensors [31]:
• Photoplethysmogram (PPG) Sensor: measures the Blood Volume Pulse (BVP), al-
lowing to extract the HR.
• 3-axis Accelerometer: motion is measured.
• EDA Sensor: Changes in electrical properties of the skin.
• Infrared Termopile: measures skin temperature.
• Internal Real-Time Clock: high accuracy clock.
• Event button: marks beginnings and ends of events.
Hence, the following signals are possible to be extracted:
• EDA: Electro Dermal Activity measured in microSiemens (μS)
• HR: Heart rate frequency measured in Hz.
• TEMP: Temperature sensor data measured in Celsius (°C)
• ACC: Accelerometer values in x, y and z directions, measured in g.
• BVP: Blood Volume Pulse.
Figure 2.1: Lateral image of Empatica E4 device [31], like the one used
in the experiment for data acquisition.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
8
==PAGE:16==
The Empatica E4 device stores up to 60 hours of data. However, this amount of storage is
not necessary for the experiment, as each of the sessions lasts around 90 minutes. After
every session, the device is connected to a computer and the raw data from the Empatica
E4 is transferred via the E4 Manager Desktop App.
The device is held tightly in the wrist of the participant, preferably in the non-dominant
hand. The inner area where sensors are located must be tightly in contact with the skin
constantly to avoid data acquisition errors.
Figure 2.2: Empatica E4 Manager Desktop App, which allows visualiz-
ing the data recorded in the devices.
2.1.2
EDA - Electro Dermal Activity
The EDA is a property found in humans which show variable electrical conductance in
the skin. The term is often mentioned as galvanic skin response (GSR), electrodermal
response (Electro Dermal Response (EDR)), psychogalvanic reflex (Psychogalvanic Re-
flex (PGR)), skin conductance response (Skin Condutance Response (SCR)) and skin
conductance level (Skin Conductance Level (SCL)). However, for sake of simplicity and,
from now on it will be referred as EDA to understand the overall phenomena.
The EDA is a very useful signal from our body, as it provides a objective source to under-
stand the emotional state of a person. As the Guide for Analysing Electrodermal Activity
states [32], the ”EDA is arguably the most useful index of changes in sympathetic arousal
that are tractable to emotional and cognitive states as it is the only autonomic psychophys-
iological variable that is not contaminated by parasympathetic activity.”.
The acquisition rate of this signal is set at ‘4 Hz.
The EDA can be divided into 2 main components: the tonic EDA and the Phasic EDA
Tonic EDA - Skin Conductance Level
Tonic EDA is associated to slow acting components, and is mainly associated with the
Skin Conductance Level. It is a moving signal, whose changes are considered slow. It
is very common to standardize the Tonic EDA respect to a resting phase to correct for
inter-individual variance.
Phasic EDA - Skin Conductance Response
This biological property is strongly related with the fast changes due to specific stimuli.
It is associated to a sudden increase of the SCR around 3 seconds after the stimulus
(latency in the signal). The threshold required to be considered a phasic activation is in
the order of 0.05 µS.
2.1.3
HR - Heart Rate
Heart rate is the number of heart contractions or beats per unit time. It is measured under
well-defined conditions and is expressed in beats per minute at the level of the peripheral
arteries and in beats per minute at the level of the heart.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
9
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: Typical EDA response [33], splitting the Raw EDA into their
tonic and phasic components.
The HR is extracted from the BVP signal with a frequency of 1 Hz.
2.1.4
TEMP - Skin Temperature
Temperature of the epidermis surface of the participants, measure in the wrist. Histori-
cally, there are some body areas where body temperature has been measured, such as
tongue or armpit. However, wrist is a suitable place to measure temperature as it is more
responsive body part to overall thermal sensation [34].
2.1.5
BVP - Blood Volume Pulse
It is the blood volume change measured across the tissues in contact with the sensor.
The BVP is widely used as the original source to derive the Heart Rate in several devices.
The BVP is measured via the PPG sensor. This sensor emits an infrared light which is
reflected by the tissue. The red blood cells absorb the radiation while other cells reflect
it, calculating the difference.
2.1.6
ACC - Acceleration
Acceleration of the sensor moved in the wrist. This data measures the movement in the
hand of the participant of the experiment. It is measured in the 3 axes.
2.1.7
BioSignals: Data Generated
After every session, the data from the E4 Empatica device is extracted and a zip file with
raw data is downloaded. The raw data is composed of a set of 8 files, shown in the list
below:
• ACC.csv Data from 3-axis accelerometer sensor
• BVP.csv Data from photoplethysmograph.
• EDA.csv Data from the electrodermal activity sensor
• HR.csv Average heart rate
• IBI.csv Time between individuals heart beats. Not used in this project. Derived from
the diastolic points (local minima of the PPG)
• tags.csv Event mark times.Each row corresponds to a physical button press on the
device; the same time as the status LED is first illuminated.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
10
==PAGE:18==
• TEMP.csv Data from temperature sensor
• info.txt Information file about the signals.
All the .csv files in follow the same format: The first row is the initial time of the session,
expressed as unix timestamp in UTC. The second row is the sample rate expressed in Hz.
There is a set of files generated per round per participant, hence, 4 different sets in total
per participant.
Figure 2.4: Visualization of the different biosignals recorded during the
data acquisition experiment.
2.2
Participants Survey
The second data source of the experiment is the set of 12 questionnaires that the partici-
pants of the experiment fill at the end of every phase.
The participant answers every round on a Likert Scale (from 1 to 5) to their current state
from a list of feelings and emotions. These feelings are: Upset, Hostile, Alert, Ashamed,
Inspired, Nervous, Determined, Attentive, Afraid, Active.
In every phase, there is an extra question ”How frustrated are you feeling right now?”,
which is answered in a scale from 0 to 10.
At the end of the second phase of each round (task phase), the user needs to answer the
question ”How difficult did you find the task?”, which is answered in a scale from 0 to 10.
The questionnaire is located at Appendix A.
2.3
Data privacy
The participants sign an informed consent letter at the beginning of the experiment, where
they agree that:
• Data will be collected, pseudo-anonymized and stored for a scientific purpose as
described in the information letter – i.e. data is stored with a key which only the
researches know.
• Data can be made accessible in a public research database in a pseudo-anonymized
version with a random key which is not stored by the researchers. The data include
physiological signals and emotion-questionnaire answers registered during the ex-
periment. Name, age, and gender are NOT included.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
11
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.5: Six GDPR principles to ensure accountability.
• Data collected before withdrawal from the experiment can still be used for the pur-
pose of the experiment.
• Data is protected according to Danish law and European guidelines (GDPR;EU
2016/679).
Overall, the six General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) principles to ensure account-
ability are followed, with the final aim of being compliant with all the data regulations. A
schematic representation of these principles are seen in Figure 2.5.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
12
==PAGE:20==
3
Methods
The 3rd section of the thesis presents the different processes, methods and tools used
in this project. It includes information about: the data acquisition setup and process; the
data processing techniques; the technical explanation of the correlation techniques; the
ML fundamentals used for the data.
3.1
Experiment design, set up and measurements
3.1.1
Experiment Design
Participants are divided in multiple teams of two and compete in a puzzle competition.
Four teams will be competing in an alternating fashion, while the remaining teams will be
in either the pre- or post-task resting phase. The competition consists of four rounds and
has a duration of 76 minutes. The task of the competition is to solve as many tangram
puzzles as possible in total during the four rounds. The task is designed to be difficult. A
solved puzzle yields one point and the team with the most points at the end of the com-
petition wins.
A round consists of 1+3 phases: wristband calibration (1 minute), pre-task resting (5 min-
utes), in-task puzzle solving (5 minutes), post-task resting (5 minutes). 60 seconds at the
end of the pre-task, task and post-task phases are reserved to answer the emotion eval-
uation questionnaire. A timeline of a round is seen in Figure 1. The phases are indicated
in the upper part of the timeline.
A team is handed a 7-piece tangram puzzle and a set of sketches of various puzzles.
The participants of the teams have one role each: an instructor and a puzzle-solver. The
puzzle-solver is the only one who is allowed to touch and assemble the puzzle pieces.
The instructor is the only one who is allowed to look at the puzzle sketches. As a team
they help each other to solve the puzzles. At any point, a puzzle can be skipped and
another can be chosen to be solved. Team roles stay fixed throughout the competition.
Figure 3.1: Timeline of a round of the puzzle competition depicting how phases and ques-
tionnaire answering periods are arranged. At the end of each round, the participants are
to turn off their Empatica E4 wristband. Numbers, [0 : 19], below the vertical line indicates
the time in minutes since the beginning of the round.
For each round, at the end of the pre-task, in-task and post-task phases, participants will
be asked to rate their feelings of a variety of emotions and how difficult it was for them to
solve the task using the following questionnaire:
1. On a scale from 0-5, where 0 is not upset at all and 5 is extremely upset, how upset
are you feeling right now?
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
13
==PAGE:21==
2. On a scale from 0-5, where 0 is not hostile at all and 5 is extremely hostile, how
hostile are you feeling right now?
3. On a scale from 0-5, where 0 is not alert at all and 5 is extremely alert, how alert are
you feeling right now?
4. On a scale from 0-5, where 0 is not ashamed at all and 5 is extremely ashamed,
how ashamed are you feeling right now?
5. On a scale from 0-5, where 0 is not inspired at all and 5 is extremely inspired, how
inspired are you feeling right now?
6. On a scale from 0-5, where 0 is not nervous at all and 5 is extremely nervous, how
nervous are you feeling right now?
7. On a scale from 0-5, where 0 is not determined at all and 5 is extremely determined,
how determined are you feeling right now?
8. On a scale from 0-5, where 0 is not attentive at all and 5 is extremely attentive, how
attentive are you feeling right now?
9. On a scale from 0-5, where 0 is not afraid at all and 5 is extremely afraid, how afraid
are you feeling right now?
10. On a scale from 0-5, where 0 is not active at all and 5 is extremely active, how active
are you feeling right now?
Additionally there are 2 other questions which are answered outside the table of the pre-
vious 10 feelings.
1. On a scale from 0-10, where 0 is not frustrated at all and 5 is ”I could not be more
frustrated”, how frustrated are you feeling right now?
2. (Question only in phase 2): On a scale from 0-10, where 0 is not difficult at all and
10 is extremly difficult, how difficult did you find the task?
3.1.2
Set up
The data acquisition experiments were performed in DTU Compute facilities. There are 2
different sources of data: existing data from previous experiments, and new data acquired
by the author of this report. The data below summarizes the 2 data sources.
Previous experiments
• Number of participants: 14
• Affiliation: Members of the section of Statistics and Data Analysis at DTU Compute,
affiliated to WristAngel project
• Dates: 26/10/2022 (8 participants) and 28/10/2022 (6 participants)
• Location: DTU Compute Building 324
New experiments
• Number of participants: 14 (8+6)
• Affiliation: Members of DTU with no affiliation to WristAngel project
• Dates: 17/12/2021 (8 participants) and 17/08/2022 (6 participants)
• Location: DTU Compute Building 324
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
14
==PAGE:22==
In none of the experiments the participants were compensated economically, but they
were provided light snacks and drinks. Most of the participants were active students/re-
searchers at DTU, so the study group is very homogeneous in terms of age.
3.1.3
Measurements
The data gathered from the participants surveys is treated and analyzed to understand
the baselines and levels for every feeling. The average and standard deviation of values
are calculated, understanding the differences along phases, rounds, roles and correlation
among feelings.
It is very important to remark that there are multiple measurement per participant, as there
are 12 different phases per participant. Therefore, the collection of measurements is not
random and are not mutually independent. Hence, the dataset is not independent and
identically distributed (iid). This implies that in exercises where all data is analyzed, no
t-test can be conducted.
However, we can compare individuals assuming that each of the individuals is mutually
independent.
3.2
Data processing
3.2.1
Raw Data
This section deals with the processing of the data since obtained from the E4 Empatica
until it is transformed in a workable format.
Steps:
1. Excluding IBI measurements and sessions shorter than 1 minute.
2. Division of the data by phases: The data per round is divided in 3 phases with the
information extracted from the tags.csv.
3. Store the new csv in ordered folders by phase, round and device.
The raw data input is transformed into data per phase of around 5 mins of duration, which
are defined by every time the participant marked beginning and end of a phase.
3.2.2
Features extraction
In this step, some of the signals are analyzed and different metrics are obtained. It is very
important to remark the nature of these features. As explained in section 1.3.1, there is an
evolution of the feature extraction in the biosignals area. The features stated below are
all comprised in the Time and Frequency domains, without including and sparse domain
feature extraction. This implies that no high level decomposition is performed, and certain
features remain hidden and not discovered in this project.
EDA
EDA processing is focused on the split between the tonic and phasic EDA values, which
were described in 2.1.2. This process is made with the Python packaged Neurokit [35].
This package allows advanced biosignal processing and has a complete section dedi-
cated to the analysis of EDA.
The decomposition into Phasic and Tonic is performed with the function. The sampling
rate of this signal has a frequency of 4Hz.
The EDA Phasic and EDA Tonic are analyzed both in the time and frequency domains,
in contrast with Temperature and Heart Rate which are only analyzed in the time domain.
The analysis in the frequency domain are obtained with the Fast Fourier Transformation
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
15
==PAGE:23==
(FFT). The FFT allows decomposing the time series analyzed to the frequency domain.
More specifically, the FFT computes the discrete Fourier Transformation of the 2 EDA
components. The DFT can be expressed as:
F(ω) =
∫∞
−∞
f(t)e−jωtdt
(3.1)
The expression in Equation 3.1 can be expressed as a finite sum [36], like the one dis-
played below:
F(ω) =
N−1
∑
i=0
yi(i∆t)e−jω(i∆T)∆T
(3.2)
where N is the length of the Time Series and yi(i∆t) is the actual data value at time iΔt.
The variables can be summarized in the following list:
• EDA
– Symp: Power of EDA in the 0.045-0.25 Hz range. According to Posada-Quintero,
EDA Symp is a good indicator of orthostatic, physical and cognitive stress [37].
Derived via Neurokit package with eda sympathetic function.
• EDA phasic
– Number of peaks - via Neurokit edapeaks() function
– Average Rise and Recovery Time - via Neurokit edapeaks() function
– Hjorth mobility and complexity
* Statistic properties of signals usually applied in ElectroEncephalography,
developed by Hjorth in the 1970s. [38]
* via AntroPy package
– Frequency and Time: mean and standard deviation
– Frequency and Time: min and max
– Frequency spectral entropy
* Spectral power distribution of the signal. The value is based in Shannon
entropy. [39]
* via AntroPy package.
* Method used: Welch
• EDA tonic
– Frequency and Time: mean and standard deviation
– Frequency and Time: min and max slope
– Frequency and Time: min and max
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
16
==PAGE:24==
HR (Only in Time Domain)
• Mean HR per phase
• Std deviation of HR per phase
• Min/Max HR per phase
• Gradient HR
• Min/Max gradient per phase
TEMP (Only in Time Domain)
• Mean TEMP per phase
• Std deviation of TEMP per phase
• Min/Max TEMP per phase
• Gradient TEMP
• Min/Max TEMP gradient per phase
3.2.3
Rolling moving averages
The rolling moving average calculated the unweighted mean value of the previous k val-
ues. This is particularly interesting to smooth time series and focus more on the general
behavior of the series rather than specific peaks in the graph. A visual representation of
this is shown in Figure 3.2.
RMAk = pn−k+1 + pn−k+2 + ... + pn
k
= 1
k
n
∑
i=n−k+1
pi
(3.3)
Figure 3.2: Example of a rolling moving average over a dataset. The
blue line represents the original signal, while the red line is the smoothed
rolling average.
The rolling average of the different graphs are calculated with 2 different time spans: 5
and 30 seconds. With these 2 time averages, we expect to observe both the short and
long term behaviors.
3.3
Synchrony
This section deals with the different techniques used in the synchrony analysis of the data.
It is important to note that this section strictly deals with time series correlation, while the
next section deals with general correlation.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
17
==PAGE:25==
3.3.1
Cross Correlation (CC)
CC is a type of measure of association, used as a common approach of estimating the
level to which two time series are correlated.
r =
n(∑xy) −∑x ∑y
√
[n(∑x2) −(∑x)2][n(∑y2) −(∑y)2]
(3.4)
The cross correlation measure allows understanding how two signals, normally consid-
ered as 2 independent random variables (except in autocorrelation) interact with each
other.
The signals need to have similar amplitude, otherwise the values extracted from the cross
correlation are misleading. If the signals are of different nature or have different ampli-
tude, the series need to be normalized. In this project, all the series analyzed with cross
correlation are previously normalized, even if they are of the same nature.
The output of the crosscorrelation formula range between -1 and 1. The interpretation of
cross correlation is as follows:
• r = 1 The two signals are the same. For values smaller than 1 but still positive,
it implies high correlation between signals. The closer the value is to 1, the more
correlation exists.
• r = 0 . The signals are not correlated at all, and the information provided by signal
X cannot be used to estimate the signal Y.
• r = -1. The signals are very correlated, however negatively. The signals move in
opposite directions.
3.3.2
Auto Correlation Function (ACF)
Autocorrelation refers to the correlation between the same sequence of time series. This
means how correlated the time series is with itself. This technique is specially useful to
identify periodic and seasonal patterns in a signal.
The autocorrelation function assesses the correlation between observations in a time se-
ries for a set of lags. The way of understanding it is the duration and intensity of the
memory of a time series value.
3.3.3
Partial Auto Correlation Function (PACF)
Partial autocorrelation is similar to the ACF, with the difference that it finds the correlation
between the lag residuals and the next lag value rather than just between the lag values.
The use of the residuals allows discarding the already found correlation in the ACF, and
analyze the non-found correlation (residuals) to identify patterns.
3.3.4
Time Lagged Cross Correlation (TLCC)
The TLCC measured the correlation between the datasets with a lag implemented in one
of the time series. This technique allows us to understand if two time series are correlated,
but there is a shift or delay between them.
The lag implemented can be either negative or positive, as it is necessary to analyze if
one signal precedes the other or vice versa.
For a given time delay, we can assume that:
∆t = t2 −t1
(3.5)
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
18
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.3: Example of an ACF - PACF plot of a time series.
ρX,Y (t1, t2) = cov(Xt1, Yt2)
σX, t1σY , t2
(3.6)
Hence, we can find two variables with this technique: the offset and the maximum corre-
lation coefficient located in the lag range. This lag range is assumed to be 30 seconds in
the study of all the variables. This is assumed to be a big enough time period.
3.3.5
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW)
DTW allows measuring similarity between time series. These time series can be of differ-
ent length, although in this projected both signals are approximately of the same length
[40].
Figure 3.4: DTW: Time series aligning [40]
The objective of this algorithm is to build one-to-many and many-to-one matches, calcu-
lating the total distance between the two, and minimizing that distance. DTW outputs the
cumulative distance between the two time series. It can be executed in Python and R.
3.3.6
Phase Synchrony
This measure assumes that the studies signals have certain frequency properties, hence
have a phase associated to them. Assuming they have, the phase synchrony is a good
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
19
==PAGE:27==
measurement of the instantaneous synchronization between the 2 signals. However, not
only the instantaneous can be computed, but also the average phase synchronization
between the 2 signals.
The values of phase synchrony take values in the range of [0 , 1].
3.4
Other methods for synchrony / correlation
3.4.1
Pearson Correlation
The Pearson Correlation Coefficient, PCC from now on, measures linear correlation be-
tween two different datasets. It is defined as:
ρX,Y = cov(X, Y )
σXσY
(3.7)
The Pearson correlation assumes a linear association between the 2 sets of data. When
nonlinear datasets, like the ones used in the project, the PCC loses reliability.
The correlation takes values between -1 and 1. Values close to 0 imply not correlation,
while values close to -1 or 1 imply high correlation (negative and positive, respectively).
It is important to note that, although simplistic, the PCC offers a basic good understand-
ing of the level of correlation between both variables. This is exemplified in 3 different
properties:
• Variables may not be normally distributed
• Time series may not follow a linear relationship, as the biosignals usually follow
non-linear behavior
• Data may have outliers. The measurement device is not perfect and may record
and store outliers
3.4.2
Spearman Correlation
The Spearman Correlation deals with monotonic relationship between variables. This
implies that, like the PCC, measures if given a value, the other increases or decreases,
but not necessarily at a constant rate (non linear).
rs = ρR(X),R(Y ) = cov(R(X), R(Y ))
σR(X)σR(Y )
(3.8)
3.5
Statistical Tests
3.5.1
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)
Definition and Information
ANOVA is the acronym for ANalysis Of VAriance, and is a test to compare the similarity
among multiple groups of data. The ANOVA is strictly univariate, as there is a single
dependent variable in ANOVA. In case of multiple dependent variables in the dataset, the
MANOVA test is used. [41]
ANOVA is the extension of t-test or z-test to more than 2 groups.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
20
==PAGE:28==
Hypothesis
• Null Hypothesis: The mean value along different groups are equal: H0 : µ1 = µ2 =
µ3
• Alternative Hypothesis: There is at least 1 group mean different from other groups.
H1 : Not all µ are equal
Assumptions
• Observations are sampled independently
• Continuous variables (if ordinal variables are used, it is preferred to user other tests,
such as: Mann-Whitney U test, Kruskal-Wallis test)
• Experiment error is normally distributed
Formulas
ANOVA requires multiple steps to finally get the p value. The
Yij = µ + αi + ϵij
(3.9)
where Yij is the j-th observation in the i-th group, µ + αi is the mean for the i-th group
and ϵij is the error for the j-th observation in the i-th group
There are 3 sum of squares:
The total sum of squares:
SST = SSB + SSE =
∑
(yij −¯y)2
(3.10)
The group sum of squares:
SSB =
∑
ni(yij −¯y)2
(3.11)
The residuals sum of squares:
SSW =
∑
(yij −¯y)2
(3.12)
The F value is calculated as the ratio between Mean Squares (sum squares divided by
population size)
F = SSB/n1
SSW /n2
(3.13)
Finally, the p value is obtained from the F value and the number of degree of freedom
How to interpret ANOVA test
The ANOVA test provides 2 main outputs: the F value and the p value.
The p value is the number describing how likely it is that your data would have occurred
by random chance. For simplicity, a single threshold of 0.05 is applied ofr p value.
• p < .05: P value is statistically significant. There are strong evidences against null
hypothesis.
• p > .05: P value is not statistically significant. There are strong evidence for the null
hypothesis.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
21
==PAGE:29==
3.5.2
2 sample t test
Also known as Student’s t-test, is a statistical method that compare 2 the means of 2
different groups. This statistic follows the t distribution [42].
Hypothesis
• Null Hypothesis: The mean value along 2 groups are equal: H0 : µ1 = µ2
• Alternative Hypothesis: Mean of group 1 is higher than group 2 or vice versa . H1 :
µ1 ̸= µ2
Assumptions
• Observations follow normal distributions
• Observations are sampled independently
• Continuous variables (if ordinal variables are used, it is preferred to user other tests,
such as: Mann-Whitney U test)
• Experiment error is normally distributed
• Variances are unknown (otherwise, Z-test should be used)
Formula
The formula is shown below:
t =
¯x1 −¯x2
√
s2( 1
n1 + 1
n2 )
(3.14)
Where ¯x1 ¯x2 are the means of the independent samples, s2 is the pooled sample variance
and n1 n2 are the sample sizes.
The p value is found from the t distribution table.
3.5.3
Kruskal-Wallis test
The Kruskal-Wallis test, also referred as KW test, is an alternative test to the ANOVA test.
This alternative is used when certain assumptions of ANOVA are not met. In this study,
there exists certain non-continuous variables (feelings answered by the participants in the
experiment) where ANOVA cannot be applied [43].
This test is a standardize version of the Mann-Whitney test, which can only be used for
comparing differences between 2 groups.
The interpretation of the Kruskal-Wallis and ANOVA tests are similar. If p value is lower
than the established threshold, there are significant differences between the datasets
analyzed.
Hypothesis
• Null Hypothesis: The mean rank value along different groups are equal: H0 : mr1
= mr2 = mr3
• Alternative Hypothesis: There is at least 1 group mean rank different from other
groups. H1 : Not all mr are equal
Kruskal-Wallis test assumptions
• More than 2 or more independent groups
• Observations from independent group are randomly selected from target popula-
tions
• Dependent variable should be continuous or ordinal
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
22
==PAGE:30==
Formula
H = (
12
N(N + 1)
k
∑
j=1
R2
j) −3 ∗(N + 1)
(3.15)
where N is the total sample size, k is the number of groups, nj is the sample size of the j
group and Rj is the sum of ranks in the j group.
3.5.4
Mann-Whitney U test
The Mann-Whitney U test is the equivalent of the T-test for ordinal and continuous vari-
ables. It is also a reduced version of the Kruskal-Wallis test [44].
Hypothesis
• Null Hypothesis: The median of both groups are equal: H0 : Mdn1 = Mdn2
• Alternative Hypothesis: The median of the groups are different . H1 : Mdn1 ̸= Mdn2
Test assumptions
• Only 2 independent groups
• Observations from independent group are randomly selected from target popula-
tions
• Dependent variable should be continuous or ordinal
Formula
Ux = mn + m(m + 1)
2
−Rx
(3.16)
Uy = mn + m(m + 1)
2
−Rx
(3.17)
U = min(Ux, Uy)
(3.18)
where U is the Mann-Whitey statistic, m is the samples drawn from population X, n is the
samples from population Y, and Rx Ry are the sum of ranks attributed to their populations.
The p value is calculated, comparing the U with the critical value (obtained from Table)
3.6
Machine Learning
3.6.1
Method: Random Forest Classifier (RFC)
Random Forest is a type of ensemble learning method use in machine learning, and can
be used both in classification and regression. It is based on the combination of a set
of decision trees which form an ensemble method. Ensemble methods, as the name
suggest, is the combination of multiple predictive learning algorithms.
The ensemble of these decision trees is done via bagging, also known as bootstrap ag-
gregation, which allows the final random forest method to get better predictions. This
is due to generating multiple models from dataset samples, training the model indepen-
dently and combining the result of all of the models according to their performance. This
reduces the overfitting problem (compared to a single decision tree), but leads to longer
calculation times.
The classification is based on the Gini index:
1https://dsc-spidal.github.io/harp/docs/examples/rf/
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.5: Schematic image of a Random Forest 1, showing the deci-
sion process from the given inputs (x) to the classification result (y)
Gini = 1 −
c
∑
i=1
p2
i
(3.19)
The Gini index allows understanding the occurrence probability of every branch, taking
into account the number of classes (c) and frequency of the class observed (pi).
3.6.2
Metrics
There are 4 metrics used in the evaluation of the model: Accuracy, precision, recall and
F1.
Accuracy shows the ratio of the correct classifications divided by the total number of clas-
sifications. Accuracy is represented in Formula 3.20.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(3.20)
Precision shows the ratio of the true positives divided by the total number of instances
classified as positive. Thus, it evaluates the ability of the model to classify a sample as
positive. Precision is represented in Formula 3.21.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3.21)
The recall measures how the model detects positive samples, as it is divided by the to-
tal number of true values (True positive plus false negatives). Recall is represented in
Formula 3.22.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.22)
Lastly, F1 score is a measure used when there is an unbalance of categories and the
precision and recall may not provide enough insights.F1 is represented in Formula 3.23
F1 = 2 ∗Precision ∗Recall
Precision + Recall
=
2 ∗TP
2 ∗TP + FP + FN
(3.23)
3.6.3
Confusion Matrix
The confusion matrix is a table widely used in classification problems, which shows the
performance of the model by displaying the predictions of the model. These predictions
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.6: Confusion matrix for 2 categories 2, labeled as negative and positive. The
green boxes represent correct classification (true negative and true negative), while the
yellow boxes represent wrong classified instances.
are placed in the table according to the category they were classified and the one they
should have been classified.
Figure 3.6 shows a 2 category classification confusion matrix. This matrix can be extended
to n dimensions, which match the amount of categories of the model. In the analysis of
this report, there are 2 classification exercises, one with 2 categories (like the one shown
in the image), and one with 4 categories. It allows showing visually how model tends to
classify the categories, showing some tendencies into a specific category and showing
dataset unbalancing.
3.6.4
Feature Importance: Permutation
Feature importance allow us to understand how the input variables affect to the perfor-
mance of the model.
Figure 3.7: Permutation technique 3, in this case applied to column XB,
which works as input to predict variable Y
Permutation is a technique to calculate the importance of the different variables used in the
model. These techniques evaluate the performance of the model when the values of the
variable evaluated are scrambled. It uses the accuracy metric to evaluate its performance.
This technique is represented in Figure 3.7, where variable XB values are permutated to
analyze the ability of the model to predict the value y.
Other importance methods were considered for the project, including: impurity decrease
2https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/what-is-a-confusion-matrix-d1c0f8feda5
3https://towardsdatascience.com/feature-importance-with-neural-network-346eb6205743
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
25
==PAGE:33==
importance and drop column importance. The selection of the permutation feature im-
portance method is its good reliability and efficiency, together with its good applicability
to every model. However, its main con is its high computation expense. Although the
main advantage of this method is that it does not require to retrain the model in every
permutation, like the drop column technique.
3.7
Excluded methods
The last section addressed those methods that were originally in the scope of the project,
but were excluded due to different reasons stated below.
3.7.1
Phase Synchrony
The use of phase synchrony in the analysis is discarded due to the nature of the variables
studied in the biosignals. The variables are grouped in 2 main groups:
• Biosignal features: The time series per phase and round are summarized in different
values that contain information on the analyzed. For instance, the mean value of the
heart rate, the maximum temperature during the phase or the number of peaks of
the EDA phasic. However, this represents a single value and the phase synchrony
cannot be applied to it
• Biosignal rolling averages: this set of data is a time series and not a single point as
the features. However, the use of rolling averages smoothes the curve and discards
peaks and valleys, focusing more on the local trends of the values. Thus, the phase
nature of the signal is lost as it does not have a proper phase. A visual representation
of this issue is seen in Figure 3.2.
3.7.2
Dynamic Time Warping
Signals are of similar length, and from TLCC we can see that the offset is not big, where
the maximum level correlation (in the time window) are not far in magnitude from the
instantaneous CC. Plus, rolling averages (which change the understanding of the signal)
are used, and immediate interaction between users lead to not use it.
3.7.3
ACF & PACF
Like in the DTW, the use of rolling averages distorts and eliminates the original signal
nature. Also, the ACF and PACF deal strictly with 1 time series, and the information
that these methods would provide would not be valuable in the scope of this project (no
synchrony involved).
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
26
==PAGE:34==
4
Results and discussion
This section shows and discuss the results of the different analysis performed on the
datasets described in section 2. For a better understanding of the document, the results
and discussion sections are merged in a unique section. Furthermore, the conclusion
section also summarizes some of the most important insights of the discussion, which
are strongly related with the research goals of the project.
4.1
Excluded signals
This first section addresses those signals that were originally in the scope of the project,
but were disregarded due to different reasons.
4.1.1
ACC - Acceleration
The ACC signal is not used in the analysis, even though it was recorded in every single
experiment. There are 2 reasons to discard this signal:
• Not reliable recordings: Some devices were measuring abnormal accelerations,
such as the one observed in Figure 4.1. The acceleration should be constant along 0
in the 3 axes, except in the times where there is movement. However, it is observed
that the device measures long periods of constant acceleration in the 3 axes. This
does not makes sense as the participants are not continuously accelerating their
hands. For simplicity, an example of participant 12 is taken during a resting phase.
Figure 4.1: Example of abnormal accelerations measure: Acceleration
sensor of Participant 12 in Phase 1, Round 1. The acceleration value
should be constant near 0 g in all of the axis, however this behavior is
not found.
• Static hands on participants: It was observed that some of the participants had
the hand (in which the device was set up) completely static against the table. Hence,
movement of the hand was negligible, even when using the other hand.
4.1.2
BVP - Blood Volume Pulse
The signal of BVP was found to be extremely noisy along all the participants. An example
of this behavior is shown in Figure 4.2.
Besides, the main purpose of the BVP was the extraction of the HR signal, which is widely
used in the analysis, being the HR also very correlated with the values of the BVP. Hence,
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.2: Example of BVP measure: Acceleration sensor of Partici-
pant 12 in Phase 1, Round 1. Noisy behavior is found consistently along
participants and phases.
the BVP signal is not used in the analysis, even though it was recorded in every single
experiment.
4.2
Participants
The participants’ information is displayed in Table 4.1. Due to privacy issues, no personal
information which can identify them is stored, other than its biosignals and the anonymized
information related to the experiment (device used, team...)
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
28
==PAGE:36==
# Participant
Device
Team
Role
Session
Comments
1
A03701
1
Child
1
2
A0306B
1
Parent
1
3
A02FBE
3
Parent
1
Round 1 discarded - Insufficient Data
4
A03857
3
Child
1
Round 1 discarded - Insufficient Data
5
A02B10
4
Child
1
6
A03072
4
Parent
1
7
A0388C
2
Parent
1
Round 1 discarded - Insufficient Data
8
A03804
2
Child
1
Round 1 discarded - Insufficient Data
9
A02857
5
Parent
2
10
A03469
5
Child
2
11
A02FC2
6
Parent
2
12
A02FD7
6
Child
2
13
A02FBE
7
Parent
2
14
A02B10
7
Child
2
15
A03469
8
Parent
3
Wednesday morning session
16
A03857
8
Child
3
Wednesday morning session
17
A03701
9
Parent
3
Wednesday morning session
18
A0306B
9
Child
3
Wednesday morning session
19
A03469
10
Child
3
Wednesday afternoon session
20
A03857
10
Parent
3
Wednesday afternoon session
21
A03701
11
Parent
3
Wednesday afternoon session
22
A0306B
11
Child
3
Wednesday afternoon session
23
A0306B
12
Child
3
Friday morning session
24
A03701
12
Parent
3
Friday morning session
25
A03857
13
Parent
3
Friday afternoon session
26
A03469
13
Child
3
Friday afternoon session
27
A03701
14
Parent
3
Error during data acquisition - Not used
28
A03857
14
Child
3
Error during data acquisition - Not used
Table 4.1: Summary of participants along the different data acquisition
experiments. Teams 2,3 and 14 experienced difficulties which led to
limitation on the use of the data.
As reflected in Table 4.1, there are some recordings which cannot be used due to errors
during the data acquisition. These errors are due to:
• Insufficient session length:
– The error has its origin in the manual recording of the phases by the partic-
ipants, as they need to push a button to mark the beginning and end of the
event.
– Teams 2 and 3 did not mark correctly the phase and led to too short recordings
in round 1. Hence, the values are discarded.
• Device turned off during session
– The error is produced when the device restarts or turns off automatically due
to some error.
– Team 14 is discarded as Participant # 27 got errors during 2 rounds, and had
data which was too short to be analyzed. Hence, the experiment is reduced to
13 teams.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
29
==PAGE:37==
4.2.1
Participants data: GDPR Principles
The use of the participant’s data acquired during the experiment is carried out following
the six GDPR principles to ensure accountability.
Principle
Requirement
Action
Lawfulness
The use of data must be transparent
and fair. The data process and use should
be used for the specific purpose agreed
by the user.
The participants sign a document before
the experiment where they are informed about the
type of data stored and its purposes.
The data is not shared nor used outside the scope of this
project. No external use of this data is allowed.
Purpose
limitation
The data collection can only be done
for specified legitimate purposes.
Explicit consent from participants
is required.
As before, the participants sign a document
where they are informed about the data collected
and the purposed of their use. Without explciit
consent, the participant cannot attend the session.
Data
minimisation
To limit the amount of data collected.
Only collect and retain what will be
used in the future.
Participant data is limited to the questionnaire and
the signals measured by the Empatica E4. Both data sources
are extensively used along the project and data
minimization was not required.
Data
accuracy
To ensure the data is kept up to
date and accessible by users.
Data is not updated after the execution of the 3rd
experiment. Participants cannot access their
data as the data is anonymized and there is no link
recorded between the person and their ID.
Storage
limitations
To only keep the necessary data.
Delete the data when no longer necessary
or anonymize it if stored for long.
Participant personal data, such as name, email or
gender, which are used for experiment organizational
purposes, are deleted as soon as the experiment
is set up. Afterward participant information is
anonymized by the use of a participant ID.
Integrity
To ensure a proper data safeguarding.
Processors must protect the data against
processing or loss.
All the data is saved locally in a local computer,
saved by password. This local computer is only used for
educational purposes by the researcher.
Additionally, the physical data (questionnairs
and declaration of consent), are stored in a
closed office at DTU compute.
Table 4.2: The 6 GDPR principles to ensure accountability, together with
the actions carried out to ensure that the requirements are met.
The requirements of the principles are shown together with the actions performed in the
data acquisition process in Table 4.2. Overall, the 6 principles have been followed, and
their requirements have been met when possible. The only deviation that exists is in the
Data Accuracy requirement, as the users do not have access to their data. Their lack
of access to the data is explained by the anonymized participant identification, which are
linked to an ID number, and there is no document that traces the link between participants
and ID.
4.3
Participants feelings
This section analyzes the responses from the participants after every phase. The ques-
tions and responses were described in Section 3.1.1.
The box plot shown in Figure 4.3 represents the distribution of feelings by the participants.
The scale for ”frustrated” and ”difficulty” ranges from 0 to 10, while the scale for the rest
is from 1 to 5. Certain feelings have very low distribution of values, such as ”hostile” and
”afraid”. Another noticeable thing is the low number of outliers, showing the majority of
answers are insider the whisker.
The difficulty is a variable only answered by the participants after the task phase, not
during the pre and post task resting phases. Positive feelings like inspired, determined,
and attentive present the larger mean values, with the negative being presenting lower
values.
These results induce the idea that the participants of the experiment answer the survey
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
30
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.3: Participant feelings: Box plot with the distributions of feel-
ings answered by the participants, including outliers.
in a truthful way, as certain feelings such as afraid or hostile have very low values. This
is expected as the participants are not subjected to any kind of penalty nor hostile envi-
ronment during the whole experiment. Also, no hostile/afraid behavior was shown by any
of the participants during the experiment.
In Figure 4.4 the correlations between feelings are shown. Overall, we can find positive
correlation among all the feelings, except for some specific cases (alert-hostile, alert-
afraid). However, these cases with negative correlation occur with feelings with a very
small variance. As expected, the highest correlation occurs among positive-positive and
negative-negative feelings, such as active-determined, inspired-determined, attentive-
determined, frustrated-upset, afraid-hostile.
4.3.1
Phase Analysis
The participants go through 3 different phases (pre-task, task, and post-task), collaborat-
ing to do the tangram puzzle in the 2nd phase and resting in the other two. Hence, we
can group the pre-task and post-task phases and compare the feelings of the participants
in respect to the task phase.
Figure 4.5 shows the different nature of some feelings in the phases. Overall, the feelings
are reported stronger right after the task phase,
The frustration, active, attentive, determined and alert feelings are noticeably higher in
the task phase than in the rest phase. This is an expected result that further validates the
dataset, as participants are likely to experience more active-related feelings during the
task phase than during resting periods.
4.3.2
Round analysis
The experiment consists of 4 rounds, like the one shown in Figure 3.1. It is interesting
to analyze if the attitude of the participants changes with time (i.e., with rounds). From
the correlation matrix, we can observe that the relation between the round and the feeling
levels in negligible, and the participants do not seem to be affected by the round.
The difficulty associated with the task phase does not seem to be strongly influenced by
the round either. A plausible reasoning behind this is the freedom of the parents to choose
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.4: Participant feelings: Matrix with the correlation of feelings
answered by the participants. Some of the feelings are very positively
correlated, shown in brighter colours.
Figure 4.5: Average difference of feeling of participants between the
task and rest phase. Value is calculated as the difference of feeling
answered between task and rest phase. Positive values imply higher
values during task phase than in rest phase.
the tangram they want, independently of their difficulty. Hence, the difficulty is completely
dependent on the tangrams chosen in the given round.
Figure 4.6 shows the lack of clear influence of the round on the difficulty perception. From
the three first rounds, we can observe a difficulty perceived growth with the rounds. How-
ever, this tendency is broken in the last round.
Also, for Figure 4.4, the correlation between the round variable and the feelings is very
close to 0, displayed by dark colors in the correlation matrix.
4.3.3
Role Analysis
The participants play 2 different type of roles (parent and child), which are kept along the
experiments. This subsection deals with the differences seen by the roles.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
32
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.6: Participant feelings: Box plot with the difficulty level reported
along the different rounds. The difficulty experienced by participants is
similar along rounds
Figure 4.7 shows the average difference of feelings between the different roles.
Figure 4.7: Average difference of feeling of participants between the
parent and the child. Value is calculated as child minus parent. Hence,
positive values imply higher feeling level for children. Difficulty, frustra-
tion and nerves are more felt by children/puzzle maker.
It is interesting to observe the higher intensity for parents of feelings in all the sentiments
except in children, frustration and nerves. The parent feels higher difficulty, frustration
and nervous. However, the child feels specially more active, inspired and attentive.
The negative values (sentiments stronger in parents than in children) are negative. This
is an interesting discovery, as it seems that the one who gives commands is subjected to
higher frustration and nerves associated to the higher difficulty perceived.
4.4
Similarity Validation
Three stages of experiments are held for the data acquisition process. The data from the
2 first experiments already existed and was provided before starting this project. The third
experiment was set up and performed in the scope of this report in an effort to expand
and improve the existing database. However, it is important to understand the similarity
of these datasets, and test the results’ reproducibility. The analysis of this section directly
addresses the second research question Can we generate reliable and useful biosignal
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
33
==PAGE:41==
data for the synchrony analysis? Is data consistent along the different experiments?,
which intended to analyze the data consistency along the different experiments.
To do this activity, the similarity validation is performed via visual inspection and statistical
tests.
4.4.1
Visual analysis
For adequate visual understanding, the values studied along the different experiments
are plotted via the JoyPlot package, which displays the density plot in different axes. The
information obtained from this plot is similar to the box plot analysis, with the advantage
that the distribution of values is visualized directly, without the shape of the values being
misrepresented.
Example 1: Phasic EDA number of peaks
The first example is the Number of peaks measured in the EDA Phasic.
(a) Original dataset
(b) Dataset respect baseline
Figure 4.8: Variables along experiments: Phasic EDA number of peaks.
The distribution of number of peaks is similar in the 3 experiments, by
visual inspection.
The graph, once compared with the baseline of the phase 1, seems to follow a normal
distribution. The shape and scale of the graph is consistent among experiments, showing
reproducibility of results via visual inspection for this variable.
Example 2: Nervous
The second example is the Nervous level of participants answered in the surveys. From
visual inspection in Figure 4.9, we can see that the distribution of values is very similar
along the different experiments, both in the original and normalized datasets.
For this specific variable, we can see a multimodal distribution. This is common in most of
the feelings answers, as the answers in the rest phase and task phase are different. The
left peak, with lower nervous level, corresponds to the rest phase. The lower distribution
around a nervous level of 2.0, corresponds to the task phase answers.
This type of behavior is observed in the majority of feelings answers. Not only they don’t
follow a normal distribution, but do not follow any distribution. However, the visual inspec-
tion is positive for this type of data as the behavior is constant along experiments.
Example 3: EDA tonic values
The analysis of the EDA tonic variables is exemplified in Figure 4.10 and Figure 4.11. It
is very clear that during the session 2, there is some apparent disturbance in the data, as
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
34
==PAGE:42==
(a) Original dataset
(b) Dataset respect baseline
Figure 4.9: Variables along experiments: Nervous level distribution
along experiments reported by participants. Both datasets show very
similar distributions along the 3 experiments.
the mean values of the tonic EDA are unusual. Usual values of the SCR amplitude is 5
µS.
(a) Original dataset
(b) Dataset respect baseline
Figure 4.10: Variables along experiments: EDA tonic mean value dis-
tribution (time domain). The distributions in experiment 1 and 3 are
similar, while experiment 2 is very different from the rest.
The analysis is performed in the mean EDA value for both the time and frequency domain.
This issue is repeated in most of the EDA tonic values. In this point, it is convenient to
analyze the possible reasons behind this issue. The EDA values are a measure of the skin
conductance during the experiment. The skin conductance is affected by several factors,
directly driven by the current emotional and physical state of the person. One of the
manifestations of this state is the dermis transpiration level. Sweat affects electrodermal
activity measures, increasing the spectral power of the EDA to higher frequency bands
than normal state [45]. The second experiment was performed during summer, while
the other sessions were performed during fall, where ambient temperature and humidity
levels are usually very different. This is a plausible explanation of the values, which needs
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
35
==PAGE:43==
(a) Original dataset
(b) Dataset respect baseline
Figure 4.11: Variables along experiments: EDA tonic mean value dis-
tribution (frequency domain). Like in the mean value, the experiment 2
distribution is very different from the others.
to be taken into account for future works.
4.4.2
Statistical Tests
In this subsection, different statistical tests are performed to analyze the hypothesis that
the different datasets along experiments share a common nature. Univariate statistical
tests are used, repeating the test along the set of variables (features) coming from the
biosignals. The plots displayed in the next subsections are the p value of the set of fea-
tures analyzed.
Like in the previous section, there are 2 datasets analyzed: original dataset (features) and
dataset respect baseline (features standardized after subtracting the rest value of round
1 phase 1).
It is important to recall at this point that our dataset does not respect the Independent
and Identically Distributed (IID) principle, as there are multiple records from the same
individual in the experiment. Hence, the use of the statistical tests here needs to be
interpreted under that assumption, with illustrative purposes mainly rather than strictly
statistical analysis.
For simplicity, a common p value threshold of <.05 is used for every test. This value shows
strong evidence against the null hypothesis H0, as the probability that the null evidence
is correct is lower than 5%.
Another very important element to mention is that the rejection of the null hypothesis does
not imply that the alternative hypothesis H1 is true 1 . Hence, other methods, such as vi-
sual inspection, are encouraged to reach a conclusion about the datasets’ similarity.
Continuous variables: ANOVA
The first analysis is the ANOVA, which uses the F-Test to assess how the different ex-
periments differ from each other. Only the continuous variables are taken for the test,
therefore the answers from the participants experiments are discarded in this section due
1https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5017929/
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
36
==PAGE:44==
to their discrete nature. The distribution of p values on the original and standardized
(compared with baseline) datasets are shown in Figure 4.12
Figure 4.12: Variables along experiments: Continuous variable valida-
tion via the ANOVA test. The box plot shows the low p values obtained
in the test, indicating a rejection of the null hypothesis.
The Table 4.3 presents the % of variables that lie above or below the threshold established
of p value, then, accepting or rejecting the null hypothesis.
Dataset
p< .05
p> .05
Original
70%
30%
Baseline
75%
25%
Table 4.3: Variables along experiments. ANOVA test p-values distri-
bution: Only a 25/30 % of variables accept the null hypothesis. This
implies that the continuous variables along datasets do not seem to be
similar.
It is observed that the majority of variables, both from the original features and normalized
features have p value below the threshold, rejecting the null hypothesis. However, it is
important to recall that the ANOVA test show insignificant p-values when at least 1 of the
datasets compared does not follow the trend of the others.
Therefore, the same test must be performed by couples between experiment datasets.
The test to be used is not ANOVA, as ANOVA is strictly used for more than 2 datasets.
Thus, the reduced version for 2 datasets, the t-test, is used.
Continuous variables: t-test
The t-test analyzes the similarity between 2 univariate datasets. The datasets are com-
pared by pairs between experiment 1,2 and 3, so in total we will find 3 comparisons. The
distribution of p values are shown in Figure 4.13. The notation Exp 1-2 corresponds to
the t-test between the values of experiment session 1 and experiment session 2.
Like in ANOVA, it is helpful to identify how many of the variables are found to accept or
reject the null hypothesis of experiment session similarity.
The results of the T-test show a higher percentage of values above the p value threshold
than the ANOVA test. This is because it excludes one of the datasets from the test, which
may differ from the other and fail the test.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
37
==PAGE:45==
(a) Original dataset
(b) Dataset respect baseline
Figure 4.13: Variables along experiments: Continuous variable valida-
tion via T test. Comparing individually the datasets improve the similar-
ity of continuous variables.
Dataset
Experiment
Session
p<0.05
p>0.05
Original
Exp 1-2
55%
45%
Exp 1-3
63%
37%
Exp 2-3
48%
52%
Baseline
Exp 1-2
63%
37%
Exp 1-3
63%
37%
Exp 2-3
49%
51%
Table 4.4: Variables along experiments.
T test p-values distribution
comparing the datasets by pairs. Between 37 % and 52 % of contin-
uous variables accept the null hypothesis. These values represent an
improvement respect the ANOVA test of previous section.
Experiments 1 and 2, the ones performed before the execution of this thesis, have around
a 45% of similarity (percentage above the p = .05 threshold), while experiments 1-3 have
a slightly lower amount of similarity. However, experiments 2 and 3 show the highest level
of variables with p value above the threshold.
This is an interesting insight as from visual inspection we could see that the EDA values
of Experiments 1 and 3 were actually similar, but not the ones from 2. This is an evidence
why the validation of datasets should include statistical tests and not only visual inspec-
tion. Overall, around a 50% of validation among pairs of datasets is obtained. This value
may seem low, but it must be taken into account the difficulties setting up and performing
an experiment in a controlled environment which lead to repeatable results.
Also, the author of this report only performed experiment 3, and was not involved in the
rest of experiments, making it difficult to recreate the same conditions in all of them.
Discrete variables: Kruskal-Wallis test
A different test is required to do a similar for the set of discrete variables, like the analysis
in section 4.4.2. The use of a different test is explained by the suitability of ANOVA test
only for continuous variables and not discrete. For that reason, the Kruskal-Wallis test,
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
38
==PAGE:46==
which allows discrete variables, is applied here.
The discrete variables analyzed are the frustration level, difficulty experienced and the
10 Likert scale feelings stated in the participants questionnaire. For more information on
these variables, please consult Section 3.1.1, where they are named and explained.
Figure 4.14: Discrete variable validation: Kruskal-Wallis test
The discrete variables show a higher level of similarity among datasets in respect to the
continuous values. There are almost no outliers in the boxplot seen in image 4.14, sug-
gesting that the distribution of similarities is similar along variables.
As seen in Table 4.5, the values which do not reject the null hypothesis H0 correspond
to the 50% of the whole dataset. This implies that half of the discrete values mean rank
value are equal, while the other 50% have a different mean rank value.
Dataset
p< .05
p> .05
Original
50%
50%
Baseline
50%
50%
Table 4.5: Kruskal-Wallis test p-values: Discrete variables
It is important to remind the reader that these discrete variables are completely subjec-
tive and dependent on the perception of the participant. Several factors can affect the
answers of the participant, and differ the answers among experiment sessions.
Discrete variables: Mann-Whitney U test
The last statistical test of the section is the Mann-Whitney test, which is equivalent to
the reduction of the Kruskal-Wallis test to a comparison of only 2 datasets. Like in the
continuous variables, the test is applied by pairs on the 3 different experiment sessions.
Figure 4.15 shows the distribution of Mann Whitney U test p-values for the discrete vari-
ables along the experiment pairs. It is noticeable the increase of values above the thresh-
old, which accept the null hypothesis and conclude that the mean rank of the variable
along datasets is similar. This is very notorious for the experiments 1 & 2, with a median
above 0.2 and most of the values above the p value threshold. The experiment 2 & 3 pair
show however a median value lower than the p value threshold of .05. This suggests that
the majority of discrete variables have rejected the H0 hypothesis for this specific pair.
Checking the percentages of discrete variables above the threshold from the table above,
we can observe a majority of discrete variables with similar mean rank value in the pairs
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
39
==PAGE:47==
(a) Original dataset
(b) Dataset respect baseline
Figure 4.15: Discrete variable validation: Mann-Whitney U test along experiments
Dataset
Experiment
Session
p< .05
p> .05
Original
Exp 1-2
17%
83%
Exp 1-3
17%
83%
Exp 2-3
66%
34%
Baseline
Exp 1-2
17%
83%
Exp 1-3
17%
83%
Exp 2-3
66%
34%
Table 4.6: Mann-Whitney U test p-values: Discrete variables
experiment 1-2 and Experiment 1-3, with over 80% of values which accept the null hy-
pothesis. It is interesting to see that, even though the p value distribution of Exp 1 & 2 is
by average higher than 1 & 3, the % of values above the threshold is the same. This is
because it does not matter if a p value is .06 or .6, both of them compute in the same way
(as accepting H0) in the final percentage. The experiment 2 & 3 validation shows very
different results from the other 2 pairs. Around 2/3 of the discrete variables rejected the
null hypothesis, indicating that only 1/3 of them have similar mean rank in both datasets.
This was expected from the boxplot of 4.15, with a very low median p value below .05.
It is interesting to understand why the participants expressed different feelings in exper-
iment 3 respect to 2. As mentioned before, the level of subjectivity of the responses is
very high, and several non-measured factors influence the answers.
4.4.3
Validation on experiment 3 - different sessions analysis
This section strictly deals with the similarity analysis between the different sessions held
in Experiment 3. This experiment had 4 sessions, 2 held on a Wednesday (morning
and afternoon) and a Friday (morning and afternoon). Due to the data shortage on the
sessions held on Friday (morning session only had 1 team, and data from team 13 was
discarded due to corruption), the similarity analysis is applied between the Wednesday
sessions, which had 4 participants each.
This experiment 3 corresponds to the one performed by the author of the report, and it
evaluates the consistency of the data of sessions performed in the same day under same
controlled conditions.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
40
==PAGE:48==
For convenience, the ANOVA statistical test is used for the continuous variables, as in the
previous section.
Dataset
p< .05
p> .05
Original
12%
88%
Baseline
64%
36%
Table 4.7: Variables along experiment 3 sessions. ANOVA test p-values
distribution:Around 90 % of variables reject the null hypothesis. This
implies that the continuous variables along Wednesday sessions are
similar in Experiment 3.
Table 4.7 shows the distribution of values that accept or reject the null hypothesis of the
test. Using the original dataset alone, the p values are mainly above .05, with an 88%
of variables showing similarity along datasets. This is a really high values that imply the
high level of similarity, much higher than in the tests performed for different experiments.
Figure 4.16: Variables along experiment 3: Continuous variable valida-
tion via the ANOVA test. The boxplot shows the high p values obtained
in the test, indicating the similarity between variables along sessions
(Wednesday sessions only.)
Figure 4.16 shows the distribution of p values after the ANOVA test. The majority of
p values in the original dataset are above 0.05, while the normalized dataset (dataset
respect to the baseline, which is the phase 1 of round 1), show lower values. These
lower values suggest a bigger amount of dissimilarity between datasets. Taking only the
original dataset, the results show a big inter-session similarity, where conditions were kept
controlled.
Like in the previous subsection, different tests are applied according to the nature of the
variable. The Kruskal Wallis test is applied for the discrete variables.
Figure 4.17 and Table 4.8 shown the results of the test on the discrete variables along
the experiment 3 two first sessions. The results, in line with the continuous variables’
analysis, show a very high similarity along datasets as the null hypothesis is not rejected.
The null hypothesis states that the mean rank value along different groups are equal.
4.4.4
Similarity Validation Summary
Variability of the data in the experiment is a factor to be taken into account in the analysis.
It has been shown above that data differ from one experiment from another, and a single
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
41
==PAGE:49==
Dataset
p< .05
p> .05
Original
30%
70%
Baseline
30%
70%
Table 4.8: Variables along experiment 3 sessions. Kruskal Wallis test
p-values distribution:Around 70 % of discrete variables reject the null
hypothesis. This implies that the discrete variables along Wednesday
sessions are similar in Experiment 3.
Figure 4.17: Variables along experiment 3: Discrete variable valida-
tion via the Kruskal Wallis test. The boxplot shows the high p values
obtained in the test, indicating the similarity between variables along
sessions (Wednesday sessions only.)
statistical or visual analysis is not a reliable proof for similarity. The complexity of the
problem resides on the lack of convention or strict standards in the set up.
It is convenient to mention here how high the similarity along sessions in Experiment 3
is. This is the experiment performed in the scope of this report (the previous experiments
were already performed), and show a very high similarity on the sessions with more par-
ticipant data. This proves the high level of reproducibility when performing the experiment
under constant controlled conditions.
The nature of the biosignals is very variable, as it includes a lot of heterogeneity because
it does not only depend on the conditions and circumstances in which the experiment
was performed, but also on the physiological state of the person. Experiments were per-
formed in different seasons of the year, different rooms, different hour of the day and
different amount of participants present in every session, for instance. This amount of
differentiating factors may have played a key role in the similarity of the values.
Another important factor to take into account is the lack of independent data sources in
the project. There are 28 participants (26 if we exclude the last team due to error in
data acquisition), which may not be a population big enough to do this type of similarity
analysis.
Furthermore, as we have mentioned in previous chapters, the features are constrained to
time and frequency domain, without performing a feature analysis comparison of sparse
features. This sparse features tend to find further insights via decomposition of the signals,
focusing more on small-time could eliminate the heterogeneity that a whole signal feature
implies.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
42
==PAGE:50==
4.5
Feelings - Biosignal coupling
This section analyzes how the different parameters extracted from the biosignals are re-
lated to the feelings reported by the participants.
4.5.1
Feelings - EDA
This section shows the correlation between the feelings answered in the participants sur-
vey and EDA (without decomposing) features.
(a) Original correlation
(b) Correlation respect to baseline
Figure 4.18: EDA - Feelings correlation tables.
No apparent correlation between the Sympatethic activity and the feelings. The Sympa-
tethic activity is supposed to be a good cognitive stress indicator, but none of the feelings
show significant correlation with the feature.
4.5.2
Feelings - EDA phasic
This section shows the correlation between the feelings answered in the participants sur-
vey and Phasic EDA features.
Phasic EDA (SCR) features show certain negative correlation of the number of peaks and
the average recovery time with the difficulty level in the original dataset (without comparing
with the baseline). The rest of SCR values do not show big correlation.
When comparing the correlation respect to the baseline, we can observe that the corre-
lation of the average recovery time with the feelings is very noticeable, as most of the
correlation values are very negatively correlated with them. The SCR recovery and rise
time have a very high level of inter-individual and intra-individual variability [46]. The SCR
is related to the sweat levels in the dermis, as it influences the skin conductance until it
is reabsorbed or diffused away [47]. The reason behind this is the strong link between
sweat secretion and a set of regulatory processes involved [48]. Other factor that drive
this are the hydration level of the person.
In regard to the number of peaks, this value is considered as a good input of emotional
arousal level[48]. This can be seen in the correlation matrix, where the phasic number of
peaks is correlated with the phase type (rest vs task) and with the difficulty perceived by
the experiment participants.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
43
==PAGE:51==
(a) Original correlation
(b) Correlation respect to baseline
Figure 4.19: Phasic EDA - Feelings correlation tables.
Hence, we can see that these two variables act as good indicators of the current state of
the person, as shown by the previous research and the correlation matrixes .
4.5.3
Feelings - EDA tonic
This section shows the correlation between the feelings answered in the participants sur-
vey and Tonic EDA features.
(a) Original correlation
(b) Correlation respect to baseline
Figure 4.20: Tonic EDA - Feelings correlation tables. The tonic vari-
ables are correlated between each other, but no correlation is found
with feelings.
The original dataset does not show a high level of correlation, with most of the EDA vari-
ables being negligibly correlated with the feelings. The introduction of the normalized
dataset in respect to the baseline shows higher correlation levels, however these are still
not significant.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
44
==PAGE:52==
All of the variables of the Tonic EDA are strongly correlated between each other, showing
bright colors in the lower right area of the matrix.
4.5.4
Feelings - HR & Temp
This section shows the correlation between the feelings answered in the participants’
survey and HR and Temperature features. No strong correlation is shown in any of the
HR or temperature with the feelings, except for the mean temperature values with the
difficulty perceived by the participants.
(a) Original correlation
(b) Correlation respect to baseline
Figure 4.21: Temperature and HR - Feelings correlation tables. No ap-
parent correlation between HR and feelings are found, as expected from
previous works [49].
From a preliminary point, some correlation between the HR and feelings was expected,
as it is a natural idea to think that these 2 elements are correlated. This relationship was
also pointed in papers described in the literature review [19] [20] However, there are other
papers [49], which state that the heart rate is rarely related to emotional state, with only
a minority of subjects showing association between these values in experiments. This is
aligned with the results shown in Figure 4.21.
4.6
Participants Synchrony
The participants’ synchrony section analyzes the level of biosignal cross correlation (CC)
during the whole recording along the different phases and rounds. It is important to men-
tion that the synchrony is calculated using a 30 seconds rolling average for the variables,
smoothing the curve and pointing towards the understanding of the trend. The only biosig-
nal which has a 5 seconds rolling average is the EDA Phasic, due to its short time nature
(usual rise and recovery time are noticeably shorter than 30 seconds).
Every biosignal is analyzed individually in their respective sections, and all of them include
2 different analysis:
• Cross Correlation distribution analysis: The CC is analyzed measuring its distri-
bution of values (between -1 and 1) in different phases. These phases correspond
to resting in phase 1 and activity in phase 2. Phase 3 is not included as it is more
a recovery phase after the puzzle than an actual resting phase. In order to analyze
if the synchrony between participants exists for the analyzed variable, the CC of
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
45
==PAGE:53==
2 participants who are not teamed up together (also referred to as non pairs) are
also analyzed. This non-teamed graphs allow us to see visually how the CC is for
non-teamed up participants behave versus actual teams. These non-teamed up
participants were present at the same time in the same experiment sessions, and
maybe they were subjected to similar stimuli at similar times.
• Time Lagged Cross Correlation analysis: The TLCC, described in Section 3.3.4,
allows understanding how the instantaneous CC changes if a lag is applied. This
activity introduces the idea that some signals may be lagged respect to others, as
the peak in Cross Correlation may occur introducing a lag in the time series. There
are 2 variables obtained and displayed in this analysis: the time offset at which the
CC peak occurs vs the instantaneous; and the magnitude of difference in absolute
cross correlation between the instantaneous and the peak CC. The time window for
the TLCC analyzed ins 30 seconds before and after the instantaneous value.
4.6.1
HR - Heart Rate
The first variable to be analyzed is the Heart Rate.
HR: CrossCorrelation distribution
Figure 4.22 shows the cross correlation of the HR values along phases for team-up and
non-teamed up participants. The most noticeable thing observed in the graph is its par-
ticular shape with 2 maxima found around -0.6 and +0.6, and a minimum located around
the null cross correlation. This idea has two implications:
• Low density in null correlation: The density plot suggests that crosscorrelation
values tend to be different from zero, either in the positive or negative direction. This
lower amount of values in the null cross correlation area implies that there is always
a certain synchrony or correlation in the trends of the participant biosignals.
• Bimodal behavior: The shape indicates that the CC values reach 2 maximas,
showing a bimodal behavior. The negative CC implies that, the values of one of
the participant follow the opposite trend to his/her teammate. For example, the par-
ent could be trying to explain how to do the puzzle to the child, but the child may
not understand clearly the instructions and would get some emotion arousal trans-
formed into its cardiac frequency. On the opposite way, a positive correlation leads
to the idea that both members of the team heart rate tend to increase/decrease
together.
It is observed that the CC values of the participants who are teamed-up follow a similar
curve in the positive area of Cross Correlation, while the values in the negative area differ.
In CC=0, the density associated to Phase 2 is lower than Phase 1. This insight implies that
the overall level of correlation (either positive or negative), is higher when the participants
are doing an activity together than when they are resting. The absolute level of cross
correlation in phase 2 was expected to be higher than 1, and this graph shows this higher
level.
The comparison between pairs and non pairs show that the CC values for the teamed up
members tend to be more positive, while the non pairs density is more shifted to the left-
hand side, where the negative values are. However, the absolute values are very similar.
This is a surprising piece of information, as 2 people with apparent no interaction between
them have similar absolute levels of Cross Correlation in the HR measurements. It must
be stated, though, that the non-pairs were located in the same room and performing the
experiment at the same time, hence a certain level of correlation was expected due to
environmental similarity.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
46
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.22: Heart rate cross correlation distribution along phases. Real
pairs have larger cross correlation levels located on the positive side of
the spectrum, while there is a trend to drop the density near the null
correlation area.
HR: Time lagged CrossCorrelation
The TLCC analyzes the different Cross Correlation values when lags are applied.
(a) HR TLCC difference offset with 30 seconds
window
(b) HR TLCC Cross Correlation difference
Figure 4.23: Heart Rate TLCC analysis: Distribution by phases of Cross
Correlation absolute differences (instantaneous vs absolute in the time
window) with their respective time offsets
From Figure 4.23, we can see that::
• Similar offsets distribution along phases (a): The two density curves that show the
offset of the HR along phases are similar, meaning the cross correlation peak is not
dependent on the phase (resting vs performing the activity together). The offsets
peak in values very close to the time window limit (30 seconds), hence the absolute
cross correlation may be outside the time window.
• The absolute difference in TLCC is lower in Phase 1 (b): The density of Phase 1
is greater in the area with a very low difference in CC. This suggests that during
phase 1, the different between instantaneous cross correlation and the maximum
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
47
==PAGE:55==
cross correlation in the time window are similar. The time window corresponds to
30 seconds before and after the instantaneous measure.
These 2 plots allow us to understand that even if the offset distribution is similar, the rel-
ative absolute difference is small in Phase 1. This implies that the maximum correlation
level in Phase 1 is not very different from the one analyzed instantaneously. The oppo-
site reasoning applied to the phase 2, where a higher correlation difference is observed,
suggesting the idea that the instantaneous correlation is far (in magnitude) from the cor-
relation peak.
4.6.2
TEMP - Temperature
The next variable to be analyzed is the Temperature.
TEMP: CrossCorrelation distribution
Figure 4.24 shows the cross correlation of the HR values along phases for team-up and
non-teamed up participants. Once again, we can observe the bimodal shape seen in the
heart rate.
Figure 4.24: Temperature cross correlation distribution along phases.
The temperature provides opposing behavior to the HR, with lower null
CC (near 0) in Phase 1. Overall, results are similar among groups and
temperature is not an optimal indicator of synchrony.
Temperature shows similar curves for both phase 1 (blue) and 2 (orange) for real paired
participants CC. This similarity was also found on the previous section analyzing the HR.
A big density peak in values around 0.6 are found for both of them, and the same curve
is also appreciated in the negative side of the curve. The values in the area of null cross
correlation present that the density in Phase 2 is more substantial than in Phase 1. This
higher Phase 2 value manifests more null correlation between temperature teammates
during the puzzle phase, and more significant synchrony when not performing the activity
together (but resting together). This difference is not huge, but it is still necessary to be
mentioned.
The curves between real and fake teammates also have the same shape, and all the
curves have a lower density near the null CC area than the Phase 2 (orange line). This is
surprising, as a bigger biosignal correlation was expected in Phase 2 between teammates.
Overall, results are somehow similar among groups and temperature is not an optimal
indicator of synchrony.
TEMP: Time lagged CrossCorrelation
The TLCC analyzes the different Cross Correlation values when lags are applied for the
temperature signal.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
48
==PAGE:56==
(a) Temperature TLCC difference offset with 30
seconds window
(b) Temperature TLCC Cross Correlation differ-
ence
Figure 4.25: Temperature TLCC analysis: Distribution by phases of
Cross Correlation absolute differences (instantaneous vs absolute in
the time window) with their respective time offsets. Lower CC differ-
ence is observed in the Phase 2, with the absolute CC values in the
time window not far from the instantaneous CC.
Plots from Figure 4.25 (a) show a similar distribution in offsets for the TLCC, with the
offset tending to be more positive in the Phase 2 than in the Phase 1. This does not have
a lot of implications, as it is more important the shape of the plots than the direction in
which it is shifted. The reason behind this is that this plot helps to understand the usual
offset of values, which proves to be far from 0 (instantaneous correlation). This may be
explained by the slow-change nature of the temperature, which may require minutes until
trend changes.
The absolute cross correlation values shown in Figure 4.25 (b) show that the absolute
Phase 2 (blue) cross correlation difference is distributed mainly in the range between 0.0
and 0.2 , while the values for the Phase 1 are present until 0.4. This fact suggests that the
shown levels of instantaneous Cross Correlation are not far from the maximum level in the
time window, and instantaneous synchrony can be considered closed to the maximum.
4.6.3
EDA Tonic - SCL
The next variable to be analyzed is the EDA Tonic, also referred as SCL. The EDA tonic
has a very similar shape to the EDA, with the difference that the EDA contains certain
peaks which correspond to the EDA Phasic values (SCR).
EDA Tonic: CrossCorrelation distribution
Figure 4.26 shows the cross correlation of the HR values along phases for team-up and
non-teamed up participants. Tonic EDA shows very different density curves along phases
for the pairs (in the same team). Looking at the blue curve which indicates Phase 1, shows
that the majority of the CC values are located at a positive correlation around 0.6, with
the lowest density in the null cross correlation around 0. This implies that the correlation
of tonic EDA between participants is much higher in resting phases than in the puzzle
activity, which is seen in the orange curve that represents Phase 2.This Phase 2 curve
has a similar cross correlation density around 0 (no correlation) than near 1, implying that
there are similar cases where there is no correlation than those who actually have.
The reason behind this unexpected behavior may be related to the information that tonic
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.26: Tonic EDA cross correlation distribution along phases.
Phase 1, represented in blue, shows low null CC and higher peak of pos-
itive CC, showing common pattern in lower level of emotional arousal
in rest phases.
EDA provides. The EDA (not only the phasic EDA)is a good indicator of emotional arousal
of the subject. Hence, in a resting phase after a collaboration activity between participant,
it is likely that the level of excitation of the participants tend to lower and show similar
patterns.
For this specific biosignal, there is a more visible difference between the real and non-
real pairs in terms of synchrony. It is observable that the positive CC values are more
present in the real pairs, and that the curve of Non Pairs Phase (2) is similar to a normal
distribution centered in 0 (null cross correlation).
EDA Tonic: Time lagged CrossCorrelation
(a) Tonic EDA TLCC difference offset with 30
seconds window
(b) Tonic EDA TLCC Cross Correlation differ-
ence
Figure 4.27: Tonic EDA (SCL) TLCC analysis: Distribution by phases
of Cross Correlation absolute differences (instantaneous vs absolute in
the time window) with their respective time offsets.
SCL is the first biosignal analyzed which show different distributions of Cross Correlation
offsets along phases, as seen from Figure 4.27 (a). The offset in Phase 2 (blue) has
a higher density in the area near 0, where the cross correlation happens closer to the
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
50
==PAGE:58==
instantaneous synchrony. This implies that overall, the maximum CC value is close to the
instantaneous time. This is a very interesting insight, as it suggests that this variable can
be used as a measure for the instantaneous synchrony in certain conditions when doing
an activity instead of resting.
From Figure 4.27 (b), the absolute CC difference is also slightly more concentrated around
0 for Phase 1, like the one seen in the Temperature. This is another insight that suggest
that Phase 2 values instantaneous synchrony represent similar values to the maximum
synchrony in the time window. This is valuable to assume that, measuring the instanta-
neous EDA Tonic cross correlation, we have a good understanding of the overall correla-
tion of the signal.
4.6.4
EDA Phasic - SCR
The last variable to be analyzed is the phasic EDA also known SCR, which corresponds
to peaks in the skin conductance for a small interval of time. It is very important to remark
that this signal is usually stable at 0, rising and decreasing for some seconds after stimuli.
Another element to mention is the use of a 5 seconds rolling aggregate in this signal, in
contrast with the 30 seconds period used in the other signals.
EDA Phasic: CrossCorrelation distribution
Figure 4.28 show the non lagged Cross Correlation of the SCR. The most noticeable
thing from this figure is the density function, which follows a Normal Distribution alike
shape over 0. This is an expected value, as the SCR is a signal which is usually flat at 0
most of the time. Hence, when calculating the Cross Correlation along the whole signal,
a big % of the time the signals are flat, leading to a CC of 0.
In addition, there are other 2 insights to analyze, which provide a lot of information:
Figure 4.28: Phasic EDA cross correlation distribution along phases.
The SCR has a lower CC density of real couples, represented by lower
peak of blue and orange lines, implying higher synchrony of real couples
under stimuli.
• Lower density on CC = 0 for real couples: The height of the distribution of both
phases for real couples is lower, implying there is more CC different from zero cap-
tured. This is a key insight that proves that under the same stimuli, the level of signal
synchrony of real couples is higher than in non-couples.
• Similar behavior of phases in the right tail of the distribution: Phase 2 of both
the pair (orange) and not pair (red) seem to follow a different tail than the others.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
51
==PAGE:59==
This could be due to a higher number of activations of the SCR as the participants
are more subjected to stimuli in the 2nd phase of the experiment.
To sum up, the importance of the information provided by the SCR is vital to consider this
variable as a key indicator of biosignal synchrony.
EDA Phasic: Time lagged CrossCorrelation
Like in the previous signals, the last analysis corresponds to the TLCC.
(a) Phasic EDA TLCC difference offset with 30
seconds window
(b) Phasic EDA TLCC Cross Correlation differ-
ence
Figure 4.29: Phasic EDA (SCL) TLCC analysis: Distribution by phases
of Cross Correlation absolute differences (instantaneous vs absolute in
the time window) with their respective time offsets.
Figure 4.29 show the TLCC plots obtained. There are different shapes of the offset dis-
tribution (a) in respect to other variables (HR. TEMP and SCL). This graph provides
valuable information, showing that the offset is peak is around 0. This idea indicates that,
the maximum correlation usually occurs without introducing a lag in the analysis. This
proves that the synchrony in this signal is very valuable, as most of the information trans-
fer (correlation) occurs without significant delays. The values in the right and left from zero
can be considered noise due to bad timer alignment (some people may have pushed the
event button slightly earlier or later).
In Figure 4.29 (b), once again we can observe how the density plot is higher around 0
for Phase 2, showing that the instantaneous CC is not different in magnitude from the
absolute of the time window.
4.6.5
Feelings synchrony
This section evaluates how synchronized the answers of participants are in after the rest-
ing or the task phases.
The evaluation of the synchrony in terms of feelings is performed getting the difference of
feeling in every phase and round between participants. In other words, the feeling level
answered by the participant is subtracted to the one answered at the same time by its
teammate . This difference in feelings is considered as an asynchrony, as divergence
in answers suggest emotional states that differ. Only the magnitude of this difference is
used, hence the absolute value is taken.
As the mean value of feelings is different among feelings, the coefficient of variation is
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
52
==PAGE:60==
used. This coefficient is the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean (σ\µ), and provides
information about the variability in relation to the mean of the population.
Figure 4.30: Coefficient of variation (CV) of feelings difference between
pairs. Low values indicate high level of synchrony and similarity be-
tween pairs (low dispersion). The feeling of synchrony is consistently
higher in the task phase (gray).
Figure 4.30 shows the coefficient of variation (CV), displaying a lower dispersion during
the task phase (phase 2), which is represented in gray. This difference of feelings is
noticeable in the alert, upset, hostile and ashamed answers. The rest of variables is very
similar along phases.
This suggests that the feeling level shows a bigger level of synchrony after performing a
task together than during the resting phase. This result suggests that not only the unbi-
ased sources of information (biosignals time series and its features) are valid synchrony
measures, but also the more subjective variables.
A variable to mention with a low Coefficient of Variation (CV) is the frustration level dif-
ference between the teammates. Even though in Figure 4.30 one of the roles had a
significantly lower frustration level than the other, we can see that in reality, the disper-
sion is low. This low dispersion shows a common emotional state between participants,
with a very similar level after rest and task phases.
4.6.6
Synchrony summary
After the individual analysis of the participants biosignals synchrony, we can summarize
that:
• There exists a bimodal behavior in correlation, showing a multimodal distribution
with 2 peaks in the density plots, with a valley between them located around null
correlation (CC=0), except in the SCR.
• The HR signal shows higher correlation level during active phase (2), while temper-
ature does it in phase (1). This HR correlation insight is in line with some of the
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
53
==PAGE:61==
ideas obtained in the literature review [13] and [14]. This is a valuable input related
to the general research question.
• The EDA Tonic provides valuable information in terms of correlation for resting
phase, showing extremely low values of null CC.
• The EDA Phasic is a great indicator of synchrony, as their activation is made by the
same stimuli for teammates, showing clear higher levels of synchrony than those
who are not. This insight helps to respond to the 3rd research goal of the project,
as this biosignal can be used as a reliable metric for synchrony among participants.
• The instantaneous CC (without lags) is a very good indicator of the maximum syn-
chrony in Phase 2.
• Overall, the synchrony shown via Cross Correlation between participants in the
same team is higher than those who are not paired together.
• The synchrony of feelings reported by the participants is higher after the task phase
than in the rest phase for a specific set of feelings (alert, upset, hostile and ashamed)
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
54
==PAGE:62==
4.7
Predictive Applications
This section analyzes the viability of biosignals use in predictive applications. Two vari-
ables are estimated: the role of the participant and the frustration level of the participant.
The analysis comprises the performance of a Random Forest Classifier Model. The RFC
is set up with 1000 estimators, Gini criterion for the quality of split and bootstrap used.
4 datasets are used: Feelings + biosignal features of the participant; Only biosignal fea-
tures of the participant; Feelings + biosignal features of both the participant and the task
partner; only biosignal features of the participant and task partner.
The dataset size is comprised by around 300 observations. This number of observations
could produce certain overfitting due to the low amount of data.
4.7.1
Role identification
As aforementioned, there are 2 roles during the experiments: the parent (instructor) and
the child (puzzle maker). The analysis consists in the training of a model which classified
the participant as a parent or child, according to the inputs stated before.
Results
Table 4.9 shows the performance of the model for the different inputs according to the 4
selected metrics.
Metric
Only data of
participant
Only data of
partner
Data of participant
+ partner
Feelings +
Features
Features
Feelings +
Features
Features
Feelings +
Features
Features
Accuracy
74%
72%
84%
78%
87%
83%
Precision
63%
62%
89%
81%
90%
86%
Recall
87%
82%
77%
72%
81%
79%
F1
73%
70%
82%
76%
85%
82%
Table 4.9: Model performance for participant role prediction scores by
different metrics. Datasets with a higher number of input variables (feel-
ings + features and participant + partner) leads to better model perfor-
mance.
From Table 4.9, we can observe that:
• Feelings information is valuable: Even though that questionnaires answers are
not an objective answer as they are driven by the perception of the participant, we
can see that the inclusion of feelings improves the performance.
• Partner information improves significantly the role prediction. The model of-
fers a better performance when data from the partner is included. This is a major
insight as it supports the idea that there exists synchrony among participants.
The confusion matrix of the best performing model is shown in Figure 4.31. The confusion
matrix show an evenly distributed values for the 2 classes, with 49 parent roles and 47
child roles.
The performance of the model is similar for both categories, with a larger tendency to
classify the case as parent than of child. The amount of wrongly classified instances is
around 10-15 %, which is a low amount, showing high accuracy.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.31: Confusion matrix in role prediction. The model is able to classify properly in
a well-balanced class dataset, with low amount of false classified values.
Feature Importance
This section analyzes the most important features in the prediction of the participant role.
The feature importance is performed via permutation, as described in Section 3.6.4.
The Random Forest Classifier, as its own name suggests, has a random component which
makes the reproducibility of results difficult. Hence, if run only multiple times the fea-
ture component analysis, the variables analyzed could have different feature importance.
Therefore, in order to avoid this potential error, the permutations are performed 50 times
and the importance of every variable is analyzed 20 times. This allow us to understand
what are the main variables in the model.
For simplicity, the feature importance is performed in the dataset formed by the data of
both participant + partner, which includes both the biosignals features and the feelings.
This dataset contains more information than the others, then the feature importance anal-
ysis makes more sense to be applied.
Importance
Metric
Source
Importance
Metric
Source
#1
EDA Tonic
Std Variation
Partner
#6
Temperature
gradient
Participant
#2
Temperature
gradient
Partner
#7
EDA phasic
frequency
Partner
#3
Temperature
minimum slope
Participant
#8
HR
minimum value
Participant
#4
HR mean
Participant
#9
EDA phasic
Hjorth Complexity
Partner
#5
Nervous
Participant
#10
Attentive
Partner
Table 4.10: Variables with the most importance in the model for the par-
ticipant role prediction (4 categories). The feature importance variables
are obtained after 50 runs for every variable analyzed.
Table 4.10 shows the top 10 variables for the model that takes Feelings + Features of the
participant and partner data. The metric has the source associated to it displayed, if it
comes from the actual participant or from the partner of the participant. The top 2 values
come from the partner of the participant, a surprising insight as it is the top contributor to
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
56
==PAGE:64==
(a) Mean feature importance by category
(b) Total feature importance by category
Figure 4.32: Feature importance value by variable category. The values
correspond to the model that takes Feelings + Features of the partici-
pant and partner data.
the model was expected to come from the actual participant.
From Figure 4.32, we can see the average importance of the variables of each category
to the model. The category with more importance is the EDA variable without the decom-
position into phasic and tonic.
The number of variables per category in the model are different. More specifically, we
can find 32 Tonic EDA, 26 phasic EDA, 14 Heart Rate, 12 Temperature, 11 feelings and 2
EDA values. This information complements the data of Figure 4.32, which show the total
and mean importance of the features.
4.7.2
Frustration level
For an easier classification, the frustration level is categorized in 4 categories:
• Very low: Frustration levels between 0 and 1
• Low: Frustration levels between 2 and 4
• Medium: Frustration levels between 5 and 7
• High: Frustration levels between 8 and 10
The precision, recall and f1 are calculated as the weighted average of the individual val-
ues.
Table 4.11 shows the results of the predictive model performance for the frustration level.
We can extract that:
• Like in the role analysis, the use of feelings information is valuable to
• The partner data is not very valuable in the prediction of the frustration level of the
participant.
The confusion matrix displayed in 4.33 show a very unbalanced distribution of classes,
with the biggest majority of values on categories Very Low and Low. The model tends
to predict only in the 2 lowest categories due to this unbalancing (which is also present
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
57
==PAGE:65==
Metric
Only data of
participant
Only data of
partner
Data of participant
+ partner
Feelings +
Features
Features
Feelings +
Features
Features
Feelings
+ Features
Features
Accuracy
59%
55%
53%
45%
59%
56%
Precision
53%
52%
46%
40%
53%
50%
Recall
60%
55%
53%
45%
59%
56%
F1
55%
49%
48%
41%
55%
53%
Table 4.11: Model performance for participant role prediction. As in
the role prediction, the use of feelings + features improves the model
performance. However, the addition of partner data does not represent
an improvement.
Figure 4.33: Frustration level confusion matrix. The results shown in
this matrix come from the model which takes only data of participant
and feelings and features.
in the training dataset), with no values predicted in Medium and High, even though there
were 14 and 1 value in those categories respectively.
Figure 4.36 shows the uneven categories distribution which led to the results mentioned
before. Respondents answered mainly low level of frustration,l which makes sense as
this survey was answered after the rest phases too, which usually are associated to lower
frustration level.
Balancing 4 frustration categories
Due to the unbalanced classification of previous section, a new set of categories is pre-
sented. This categories have around a 25% of distribution of values per category, and are
formed by: frustration = 0; frustration = 1; frustration = 2; and frustration bigger or equal
to 3.
As seen in Figure 4.35, the categories are well balanced numerically, but the category of
”3 or higher” is composed by a big set of different answers ranging from 3 to 10.
These categories however do not make real sense, as categories 0, 1 and 2 are very
similar and are not answered according to common standards among participants. This
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
58
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.34: Frustration categories distribution in the whole dataset.
The very low (0-1) and low (2-4) levels of frustration in a 0-10 scale are
dominant.
Figure 4.35: Frustration categories distribution in the whole dataset.
The very low (0-1) and low (2-4) levels of frustration in a 0-10 scale are
dominant.
high subjective component in the answer leads to hgih interchangeability of answers in
this category
The confusion matrix gives us a hint on how the classification algorithm works, as it is
concentrating the classification in the 2 extremes, either in category 0 or in the above 2
level. The performance in the intermediate levels, such as frustration level of 1 or 2, is
very poor, and the values in these categories are categorized in the highest and lowest
categories.
Thus, this algorithm may perform better when applying a lower number of balanced cat-
egories, which will be discussed in the next paragraph.
Reducing frustration categories
The classification is reduced to a binary classification, with the first category (55% of
sample) consisting in very low level of frustration (0 and 1) while the second category is
the rest of values (45% of the sample, composed by answers from 2 to 10).
The result of reducing to a 2 balanced classification is very positive, as observed in Figure
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
59
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.36: Confusion matrix in balanced 4 frustration categories clas-
sification. The algorithm tends to classify the values in the extreme cat-
egories.
Figure 4.37: Confusion matrix in balanced 2 frustration category clas-
sification. The reduction of categories and the better balancing helps
the model performance to classify the participant frustration level pre-
diction.
4.37, with all the metrics scoring above 0.7. The proper balancing together with the reduc-
tion of categories boosts the classification performance, with most of the values classified
correctly. This successful classification is a valuable piece of information to extract, as it
suggests that subjective data, such as frustration feeling, can be estimated at a certain
level.
The algorithm has certain tendency to classify the instances in the Higher category, and
it could be due to the big diversity of frustration levels that hosts. Anyhow, this tendency
is not extremely concerning.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
60
==PAGE:68==
4.8
Analysis of Project Definition Report PDR
This last section of chapter 4 deals with the execution of the project in respect to the
original PDR. The most updated PDR is added to Appendix
4.8.1
Deviations to the PDR
This chapter addresses the deviations and modifications done in the PDR from the original
document submitted in October.
Research question
The first research question was modified to improve the wording. The original question
was Can we correlate collaboration levels with biosignals synchronization?
while the
new one is Can we detect collaboration levels from the synchronization biosignals?.
The first part of the second question was modified for better understandability of the pur-
pose of the data generation. The original question was Can we generate reliable and
useful data for this purpose?
while the new one is Can we generate reliable and useful
biosignal data for the synchrony analysis?
The original question number 3 was modified to not take into account the collaboration
levels into consideration. The original question was Which variables show the biggest
levels of synchrony among people who collaborate in a given task? while the new one is
Which variables show the biggest levels of synchrony among participants?.
The collaboration analysis is still found in Question 1, as it states ”Can we correlate col-
laboration levels with biosignals synchronization?” . The evaluation of the question is
adressed in Section 5.2.
Data access and use
The original PDR opened the possibility to the use of real OCD patients for analysis, apart
from the data of non-patients from experiments. Finally, due to the restrictive nature of
the data and the lack of access to it, this source was discarded and not used in the thesis
project.
Deliverables
In the deliverables section, there were 2 milestones associated with the generation of a
report. These deliverables were:
• Experiment report: set up and analysis on how the experiment was performed.
• Biosignals synchronization identification: small report stating the relevant variables
found to have synchronization on the original dataset (Experiments 1 and 2).
These 2 reports were not done as their information was directly added into the Thesis
document. There would be a duplicity of content and of effort, so to avoid this, all the
information was added in the corresponded chapters of the document.
4.8.2
Risk Analysis identification and impact
The risks identified in the PDR are shown in Table 4.12. No edits are performed in the
table, and it is shown as in the original PDR in order to evaluate how well the risks were
assessed before the project.
The stated risks are analyzed in the bullet points below, once the project is concluded
and we can assess the risks. The risks are names by their associated number from
Table 4.12.
• R1: The original PDR was accurate enough to scope appropriately the objectives,
except for the change in the 3rd research questioned mentioned in 4.8.2. The risk
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
61
==PAGE:69==
#
Title
Description
Risk
Week
R1
Scoping
Project Description did not scope appropriately the
project objectives.
4
40
R2
Existing
data
quality
In the processing of the existing data of the project, the
quality and extension of it may not be adequate. This
risk is reduced performing a new experiment for new data
acquisition
3
42
R3
Experiment
data acquisition
This step is aimed to increase the dataset and reduce
risks associated to the previous point. However, a poor
data acquisition may trigger wrong thesis conclusions.
Hence, the process must be properly set up and docu-
mented.
5
44
R4
Data
merging
issues
Existing and new data may not show similar patterns.
This could trigger the doubt on which dataset must be
used. This is why a proper data acquisition process must
be carried out, thus assuming that new data will be the
valid one.
5
46
R5
Timeline issues
at hand in
Some activities may carry more time than planned in the
Gantt Chart. However, this risk is mitigated as the Thesis
Hand In is scheduled 2 weeks before the actual limit for
the hand in.
2
6
Table 4.12: Risks Analysis from the PDR. 1:low risk, 5:high risk of de-
lays
was mitigated after agreeing with the thesis supervisor to rephrase the learning ob-
jective and stating it in the deviation chapter.
• R2: The risk of low amount of data is present along the whole project, specially for
the Machine Learning applications. This risk is reduced generating more controlled
date via the 3rd experiment.
• R3: The set-up of the experiment was intended to be as controlled and as standard-
ized as possible to ensure a good data quality. The defective datasets generated
during the experiment were discarded to ensure it would not interfere with the rest
of datasets.
• R4: The different datasets arouse the questions of how similar the data would be.
The validation of the similarity of the different datasets are evaluated in a visual and
statistical way, providing reasoning on the possible explanations for the divergences.
Risk was found to be lower than expected (it was marked as high risk of delay)
• R5: The Gantt chart was not followed strictly in terms of starting and ending week,
however the order of activities was accurate and no big delays were experienced in
the different tasks. The thesis writing tasks
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
62
==PAGE:70==
5
Conclusion
5.1
Research goal
Can we identify synchrony in biosignals of people performing a collaborative task
with a wearable device?
The overall research goal has been achieved, with positive results in the synchrony iden-
tification on participants of the experiment. The satisfactory experiment sessions run in
the scope of the project and the data validation and acquisition, together with the dataset
expansion, have enabled to understand how biosignals behave in the experiment. Most
of the biosignals studies, such as HR and EDA show some synchrony insights, which are
reflected in shared information and correlation between teammates. The formulation and
development of the ML models have been fed by these datasets has been successful.
These model have shown a reliable performance in the predictive classification tasks,
with most of the scores over 70%.
More information on every individual research goal is found in the next sections.
5.2
Research question 1
Can we detect collaboration levels from the synchronization biosignals?
Defining collaboration levels has been a challenge in this work, as the only potential mea-
sure of active collaboration in the experiment is the number of Tangram puzzles finished
in the 5 minutes period of the activity. This measure, however, is not exclusively repre-
sentative of collaboration among participants, as it depends also on other factors. These
factors include:
• the difficulty of the Tangram puzzle selected
• proper assignation of parent-child role
• prior knowledge of the other team member
• previous experience doing puzzles, tangrams or collaborative experiments
• Environment conditions of the experiment: number of people in the room, tempera-
ture, room layout and size.
These results go in line with a similar study studying the CSCL [18], where the lack of an
adequate definition of collaboration metrics is stated. This same study also analyzed the
difficulty perception as a team variable, while the experiment conducted as part of this
work , analyzes it dependent exclusively on the individual answers.
A high variability of successfully done tangrams is present, with some teams not achiev-
ing any successful results, while other teams doing up to 6 tangrams in the experiment.
Overall, the whole experiment process served as a learning collaborative experience for
the participants. This collaborative experience led to synchrony in their biosignals in the
experiments, concurring with the affective states’ convergence stated by Duffy et al. [15].
Also, the current measure of collaboration can be assumed to be a performance metric
rather than a collaboration metric. In previous studies, performance in collaboration tasks
was not associated with physiological synchrony [50]. Hence, the number of tangrams
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
63
==PAGE:71==
completed may not be an adequate metric, and consequently has not been actively ap-
plied in the research.
The design and execution of the experiment carried out lacks of a reliable way to measure
collaboration level. This issue needs to be addressed to formulate an objective and unbi-
ased collaboration measure. Some ideas that could be implemented in the future could
be:
• the time extension of phase 2, so participants have longer time to complete the
Tangram, allowing more data to be acquired in the process.
• assignation of points to the specific tangram according to the level of difficulty.
• standardizing the condition of participants, i.e: use of same language, similar level
of acquaintance with the teammate.
• Adding a new response from the participants stating the collaboration level per-
ceived.
5.3
Research question 2
Can we generate reliable and useful biosignal data for the synchrony analysis? Is
data consistent along the different experiments?
The data generated in the experiments is reliable, except for the signals discarded (ACC
and BVP). The issues with the data generation can be overcome with the new Empatica
device Embrace Plus 1, which offers new sensors. These sensors include a clinically-
validated optical PPG for the BVP values and a new accelerometer which include a Gy-
roscope. Not only that, but the rest of sensors are also improved.
The data is not fully consistent along experiments, as some variables seem to differ sub-
stantially from experiments. An example of this difference is the EDA Tonic values, which
follow a different behavior in the 2nd experiment, maybe caused by the experiment con-
ditions (atmospheric conditions influence the skin transpiration, which affects the EDA
recordings). However, given the nature of the experiment, whose data come from human
tasks and answers (big level of variability expected), the results are satisfactory according
to the statistical tests shown in Section 4.4.2. The similarity of biosignal features between
datasets ranges between 37% and 52% (T-test), and the similarity between feelings an-
swered in the questionnaire ranges between 34 % and 83 % (Mann-Whitney U test), as
seen in the discussion of Section 4.4.2.
However, as from Figures 4.16 and 4.17 it has been observed that the data generated
and acquired in the scope of this report (experiment 3), is consistent and similar along
sessions. This statement needs to be taken into account for the 2 sessions with more data
(4 participants in the analyzed sessions vs 2 participants in the others). In consequence,
the discussion must include that the data exclusively dependent on the author’s report set
up is consistent, establishing proof of similarity.
The set-up, execution, data acquisition and data processing of the experiment have been
successful. The new data is added to the dataset of the previous experiments and will be
used for further research.
Further experiments with more consistent environment conditions (like in the sessions
of experiment 3) should be performed in the future for better results, as stated in the
validation summary from Section 4.4.4.
1https://www.empatica.com/en-eu/embraceplus/
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
64
==PAGE:72==
5.4
Research question 3
Which variables show the highest levels of synchrony among participants?
From the variables analyzed, certain synchrony patterns have appeared. We can find
that variables of people doing an activity together tend to have higher level of synchrony
(cross correlation) than those who are not paired together.
In the Heart Rate, the participants experienced marginally higher level of absolute cross
correlation level when performing the task together than in rest phase. This phenomenon
is inverted in the temperature analysis, where participants have a higher synchrony level
in rest phase. The two signals with EDA as origin, phasic and tonic, provide useful infor-
mation of synchrony among participants. More specifically, the SCR, or EDA phasic, is a
good indicator of synchrony as the peaks in this signal appear when a person is subjected
to a stimulus. Therefore, two subjects collaborating in a task are usually subjected to that
stimuli, showing levels of synchrony.
There could exist a lag in correlation among participants, but usually the top values of cor-
relation are identified with instantaneous cross correlation (no lag induced). This suggests
that the highest synchrony level is in the moment that the participants are collaborating.
A last element to be mentioned is the subjective information that the participants provide.
The subjective feelings answered in the questionnaires have a certain level of correlation
with some of the biosignals, providing valuable information to understand the synchrony
among these participants. Furthermore, these feelings answers show lower dispersion in
pairs when they perform a task together rather than when they are in resting phase.
A limitation in this research goal is the lack of use of sparse domain feature extraction in
the analysis. The use of SPCA may be a key driver for automatic event detection, such
as synchrony, using long-term observational signals [51].
Nevertheless, this limitation is mainly understood as a possible future addition to the
project, and does not tarnish the satisfactory results related to the synchrony identification
with biosignals.
5.5
Research question 4
Can we generate predictive models with this data?
The data generated can be used to set up and develop ML algorithms. The classification
models of the target variables (participant role and frustration level) showed a satisfactory
performance, with accuracy and F1 score values above 70% for both the role prediction
and the frustration level.
Due to a majority of participants answers being placed in the very low or low spectrum
of frustration, the distribution of the variable is not balanced. Due to this unbalancing in
frustration, we needed to modify the multi-category classification to a binary classification,
improving the results. This enhancement of performance is seen for the scores change
from Table 4.11 to the ones in Figure 4.37.
The introduction of teammate data into the predictive model is beneficial, as observed
from 2 different analysis:
• Higher score in metrics, shown in Table 4.9
• Feature importance showed teammate variables in the top variables with influence
in the role prediction, as from Table 4.10.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
65
==PAGE:73==
A big limitation of the ML application in this project is the amount of data available. The
scarcity of data affects the quality of results, as low amounts of data usually lead to over-
fitting, together with the fact that the data come from multiple observations from the same
source. Participants carried out 12 phases, with their correspondent questionnaires and
biosignals measures.
This problem was already known and stated in the Risk section of the project report. In
the PDR, it was stated that the data acquisition is a time-consuming process due to all the
requirements and assets necessary to perform the experiment. The risk was mitigated
with the set-up of the new experiment, which duplicated the amount of existent data. The
risk mitigation was successful with the dataset extension, however this process should
not stop here, as the project benefits from larger amounts of data.
The intention of this research question was not the development of a mature ML model
to predict the attitude or emotional arousal of the Empatica E4 holder, but to prove and
show the potential applications of these biosignals. The positive results obtained are in
line with other projects published in the last 2-3 years, such as: bike accident recognition
through biosignals[52]; classification of physical activity level with a wrist device [53] via
EDA, with similarities to the work in this M.Sc. thesis project; further understanding and
interpretability of models fed with biosignals [54]; antiseizure medication effects assess-
ment analyzing EDA and HR via an Empatica device [55]; or other already cited projects
where an Empatica device has been used [10] [11] [12].
Therefore, this specific research goal has been successfully proven, leading to the pos-
sibility for advanced future models. These future models will contain, more data, bigger
variety of signals and a higher level of complexity, such as DL.
5.6
Future work and perspectives
The reflection from section 5.4 suggests that this project may benefit from the addition of
more advanced techniques in the feature extraction process. Future work may include
SPCA techniques which provides more complex features, derived from combinations of
already analyzed biosignals and their features.
One of the tasks to be worked in the future for this project is the addition of the BVP as
a signal for the different analysis performed. Even though the HR signal is synthesized
from the BVP in the Empatica E4 device, the inclusion of the new signal may improve
the quality of the studies performed and may induce better predictive applications. One
example of the full potential of this addition is the work on stress detection algorithm via
an DL network with accuracy results over 92% [56].
A frequently mentioned limitation along the document is the lack of a well established
collaboration measure. The proposed measure was the number of tangrams completed,
however this measure may not take into account the actual collaboration level, as this
may be influenced by other non-observed factors.
Improvements in the experiment set up and instructions may be added, removing exces-
sive resting times and substituting them for task phases where the collaboration level can
be measured, via unbiased metric (team success) or biased (answers in a questionnaire
addressing specifically the feeling of collaboration). These improvements should also pro-
vide more specific information on the set-up, such as exact number of participants in a
session, physical layout and environment conditions of the experiment, or a guideline on
the teammate assignation and distribution.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
66
==PAGE:74==
Furthermore, a joint questionnaire of the team participants could be added to the exper-
iment set up, as collaboration process is a common phenomenon and joint perception
should be taken into account
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
67
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Leonard G Wilson. “ERASISTRATUS, GALEN, AND” THE PNEUMA””. In: Bulletin
of the History of Medicine 33.4 (1959), pp. 293–314.
[2]
Dr. Marc Barton. WILLEM EINTHOVEN AND THE ELECTROCARDIOGRAM. 2017.
URL: https://www.pastmedicalhistory.co.uk/willem-einthoven-and-the-electrocardiogram/
(visited on 09/30/2022).
[3]
BW Johansson. “A history of the electrocardiogram”. In: Dansk Medicinhistorisk
Arbog (2001), pp. 163–176.
[4]
S Serge Barold. “Willem Einthoven and the birth of clinical electrocardiography a
hundred years ago”. In: Cardiac electrophysiology review 7.1 (2003), pp. 99–104.
[5]
Fifth Edition et al. “Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders”. In: Am
Psychiatric Assoc 21.21 (2013), pp. 591–643.
[6]
Alexandra I Korda et al. “Recognition of blinks activity patterns during stress condi-
tions using cnn and markovian analysis”. In: Signals 2.1 (2021), pp. 55–71.
[7]
Md Fahim Rizwan et al. “Design of a biosignal based stress detection system us-
ing machine learning techniques”. In: 2019 international conference on robotics,
electrical and signal processing techniques (ICREST). IEEE. 2019, pp. 364–368.
[8]
Dukyong Yoon et al. “Discovering hidden information in biosignals from patients us-
ing artificial intelligence”. In: Korean Journal of Anesthesiology 73.4 (2020), pp. 275–
284.
[9]
Sridhar Krishnan and Yashodhan Athavale. “Trends in biomedical signal feature
extraction”. In: Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 43 (2018), pp. 41–63.
[10]
Emilia Grzesiak et al. “Assessment of the feasibility of using noninvasive wearable
biometric monitoring sensors to detect influenza and the common cold before symp-
tom onset”. In: JAMA network open 4.9 (2021), e2128534–e2128534.
[11]
Gregory P Strauss et al. “Validation of accelerometry as a digital phenotyping mea-
sure of negative symptoms in schizophrenia”. In: Schizophrenia 8.1 (2022), p. 37.
[12]
Roberto Sánchez-Reolid et al. “One-dimensional convolutional neural networks for
low/high arousal classification from electrodermal activity”. In: Biomedical Signal
Processing and Control 71 (2022), p. 103203.
[13]
Lauri Ahonen et al. “Biosignals reflect pair-dynamics in collaborative work: EDA and
ECG study of pair-programming in a classroom environment”. In: Scientific reports
8.1 (2018), pp. 1–16.
[14]
Cathy Mengying Fang et al. “Cardiac Arrest: Evaluating the Role of Biosignals in
Gameplay Strategies and Players’ Physiological Synchrony in Social Deception
Games”. In: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended
Abstracts. 2022, pp. 1–7.
[15]
Melissa C Duffy et al. “Team regulation in a simulated medical emergency: An in-
depth analysis of cognitive, metacognitive, and affective processes”. In: Instruc-
tional Science 43 (2015), pp. 401–426.
[16]
Richard V Palumbo et al. “Interpersonal autonomic physiology: A systematic review
of the literature”. In: Personality and Social Psychology Review 21.2 (2017), pp. 99–
141.
[17]
Carl Marci and Helen Riess. “The clinical relevance of psychophysiology: Support
for the psychobiology of empathy and psychodynamic process”. In: American jour-
nal of psychotherapy 59.3 (2005), pp. 213–226.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
68
==PAGE:76==
[18]
Jonna Malmberg et al. “Are we together or not? The temporal interplay of monitor-
ing, physiological arousal and physiological synchrony during a collaborative exam”.
In: International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 14 (2019),
pp. 467–490.
[19]
Bradley M Appelhans and Linda J Luecken. “Heart rate variability as an index of
regulated emotional responding”. In: Review of general psychology 10.3 (2006),
pp. 229–240.
[20]
Yan Wu et al. “How do amusement, anger and fear influence heart rate and heart
rate variability?” In: Frontiers in neuroscience 13 (2019), p. 1131.
[21]
Sylvia D Kreibig et al. “Cardiovascular, electrodermal, and respiratory response
patterns to fear-and sadness-inducing films”. In: Psychophysiology 44.5 (2007),
pp. 787–806.
[22]
Gabriele Calabrò et al. “M-MS: A Multi-Modal Synchrony Dataset to Explore Dyadic
Interaction in ASD”. In: Progresses in Artificial Intelligence and Neural Systems.
Springer, 2021, pp. 543–553.
[23]
F Behrens et al. “Physiological synchrony is associated with cooperative success
in real-life interactions”. In: Scientific reports 10.1 (2020), pp. 1–9.
[24]
Hugo Plácido Da Silva, Ana Fred, and Raúl Martins. “Biosignals for everyone”. In:
IEEE Pervasive Computing 13.4 (2014), pp. 64–71.
[25]
Akara Supratak et al. “Survey on feature extraction and applications of biosignals”.
In: Machine learning for health informatics. Springer, 2016, pp. 161–182.
[26]
Ozgur Dedehayir and Martin Steinert. “The hype cycle model: A review and future
directions”. In: Technological Forecasting and Social Change 108 (2016), pp. 28–
41.
[27]
World Health Organization et al. Global status report on noncommunicable diseases
2014. WHO/NMH/NVI/15.1. World Health Organization, 2014.
[28]
Mohamed Elgendi et al. “A six-step framework on biomedical signal analysis for
tackling noncommunicable diseases: Current and future perspectives”. In: JMIR
Biomedical Engineering 1.1 (2016), e6401.
[29]
David E Bloom et al. The global economic burden of noncommunicable diseases.
Tech. rep. Program on the Global Demography of Aging, 2012.
[30]
MESUT Çiçek. “Wearable technologies and its future applications”. In: International
Journal of Electrical, Electronics and Data Communication 3.4 (2015), pp. 45–50.
[31]
Empatica. E4 wristband. 2020. URL: https://www.empatica.com/en-eu/research/e4/
(visited on 09/30/2022).
[32]
Jason J Braithwaite et al. “A guide for analysing electrodermal activity (EDA) & skin
conductance responses (SCRs) for psychological experiments”. In: Psychophysiol-
ogy 49.1 (2013), pp. 1017–1034.
[33]
Erik Vavrinsky et al. “The Concept of Advanced Multi-Sensor Monitoring of Human
Stress”. In: Sensors 21.10 (2021), p. 3499.
[34]
Joon-Ho Choi and Vivian Loftness. “Investigation of human body skin temperatures
as a bio-signal to indicate overall thermal sensations”. In: Building and Environment
58 (2012), pp. 258–269.
[35]
Dominique Makowski. Neurophysiological Data Analysis with NeuroKit2. 2022. URL:
https://neuropsychology.github.io/NeuroKit/ (visited on 09/30/2022).
[36]
Tony Fischer-Cripps. Newnes interfacing companion: computers, transducers, in-
strumentation and signal processing. Elsevier, 2002.
[37]
Hugo F Posada-Quintero. “Electrodermal Activity: What it can Contribute to the As-
sessment of the Autonomic Nervous System”. In: (2016).
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
69
==PAGE:77==
[38]
Bo Hjorth. “EEG analysis based on time domain properties”. In: Electroencephalog-
raphy and clinical neurophysiology 29.3 (1970), pp. 306–310.
[39]
D Devi, S Sophia, and SR Boselin Prabhu. “Deep learning-based cognitive state
prediction analysis using brain wave signal”. In: Cognitive Computing for Human-
Robot Interaction. Elsevier, 2021, pp. 69–84.
[40]
Toni Giorgino. “Computing and visualizing dynamic time warping alignments in R:
the dtw package”. In: Journal of statistical Software 31 (2009), pp. 1–24.
[41]
Skipper Seabold and Josef Perktold. “Statsmodels: Econometric and statistical mod-
eling with python”. In: Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference. Vol. 57.
61. Austin, TX. 2010, pp. 10–25080.
[42]
Pauli Virtanen et al. “SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in
Python”. In: Nature methods 17.3 (2020), pp. 261–272.
[43]
T Van Hecke. “Power study of anova versus Kruskal-Wallis test”. In: Journal of
Statistics and Management Systems 15.2-3 (2012), pp. 241–247.
[44]
Nadim Nachar et al. “The Mann-Whitney U: A test for assessing whether two in-
dependent samples come from the same distribution”. In: Tutorials in quantitative
Methods for Psychology 4.1 (2008), pp. 13–20.
[45]
Hugo F Posada-Quintero et al. “Time-varying analysis of electrodermal activity dur-
ing exercise”. In: PloS one 13.6 (2018), e0198328.
[46]
Claude Breault and Raymond Ducharme. “Effect of intertrial intervals on recovery
and amplitude of electrodermal reactions”. In: International journal of psychophysi-
ology 14.1 (1993), pp. 75–80.
[47]
Mathias Benedek and Christian Kaernbach. “Decomposition of skin conductance
data by means of nonnegative deconvolution”. In: psychophysiology 47.4 (2010),
pp. 647–658.
[48]
Don C Fowles et al. “Publication recommendations for electrodermal measure-
ments”. In: Psychophysiology 18.3 (1981), pp. 232–239.
[49]
Derek W Johnston and Pavlos Anastasiades. “The relationship between heart rate
and mood in real life”. In: Journal of psychosomatic research 34.1 (1990), pp. 21–
27.
[50]
Muhterem Dindar, Sanna Järvelä, and Eetu Haataja. “What does physiological syn-
chrony reveal about metacognitive experiences and group performance?” In: British
Journal of Educational Technology 51.5 (2020), pp. 1577–1596.
[51]
Shengkun Xie and Sridhar Krishnan. “Model based sparse feature extraction for
biomedical signal classification”. In: International Journal 6.1 (2017), p. 11.
[52]
Joo Woo et al. “Wearable Airbag System for Real-Time Bicycle Rider Accident
Recognition by Orthogonal Convolutional Neural Network (O-CNN) Model”. In: Elec-
tronics 10.12 (2021), p. 1423.
[53]
Angelica Poli et al. “Cross-Domain Classification of Physical Activity Intensity: An
EDA-Based Approach Validated by Wrist-Measured Acceleration and Physiological
Data”. In: Electronics 10.17 (2021), p. 2159.
[54]
Marı́lia Barandas et al. “Uncertainty-based rejection in machine learning: Implica-
tions for model development and interpretability”. In: Electronics 11.3 (2022), p. 396.
[55]
Mustafa Halimeh et al. “Wearable device assessments of antiseizure medication
effects on diurnal patterns of electrodermal activity, heart rate, and heart rate vari-
ability”. In: Epilepsy & Behavior 129 (2022), p. 108635.
[56]
Eda Eren and Tuğba Selcen Navruz. “Stress Detection with Deep Learning Using
BVP and EDA Signals”. In: 2022 International Congress on Human-Computer In-
teraction, Optimization and Robotic Applications (HORA). IEEE. 2022, pp. 1–7.
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
70
==PAGE:78==
A
Appendix 1: Participant Questionnaire
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
71
==PAGE:79==
Participant ID: ________    Team ID:_______  Biosensor ID.:__________   Round:_______ 
 
 
 
Pre-task (Phase 1) 
 
Below are a list of different feelings and emotions. Please read each feeling and circle the number that best 
matches how much you feel each feeling right now. Circle 1 if you feel the feeling, ”very slightly or not at 
all”. Choose 5 if you feel the feeling ”extremely”.  
 
 
Very slightly or 
not at all 
A little 
Moderately Quite a bit 
Extremely 
1. Upset 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
2. Hostile 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
3. Alert 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
4. Ashamed 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
5. Inspired 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6. Nervous 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
7. Determined 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
8. Attentive 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
9. Afraid 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
10. Active 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
1. How frustrated are you feeling right now? (Circle the number on the scale below that best describes how 
you are feeling right now.) 
 
 
 
Not at all 
frustrated.  
I could not be 
more 
frustrated. 
==PAGE:80==
Participant ID: ________    Team ID:_______  Biosensor ID.:__________   Round:_______ 
 
 
 
In-task (Phase 2) 
 
 
Below are a list of different feelings and emotions. Please read each feeling and circle the number that best 
matches how much you feel each feeling right now. Circle 1 if you feel the feeling, ”very slightly or not at 
all”. Circle 5 if you feel the feeling ”extremely”.  
 
 
Very slightly or 
not at all 
A little 
Moderately Quite a bit 
Extremely 
1. Upset 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
2. Hostile 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
3. Alert 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
4. Ashamed 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
5. Inspired 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6. Nervous 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
7. Determined 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
8. Attentive 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
9. Afraid 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
10. Active 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
1. How frustrated are you feeling right now? (Circle the number on the scale below that best describes how 
you are feeling right now.) 
 
 
2. How difficult did you find the task? (Circle the number on the scale below that best describes your 
experience.) 
 
 
 
Not at all 
frustrated.  
I could not be 
more 
frustrated. 
Not at all 
difficult.  
Extremely 
difficult. 
==PAGE:81==
Participant ID: ________    Team ID:_______  Biosensor ID.:__________   Round:_______ 
 
 
 
Post-task (Phase 3) 
 
Below are a list of different feelings and emotions. Please read each feeling and circle the number that best 
matches how much you feel each feeling right now. Circle 1 if you feel the feeling, ”very slightly or not at 
all”. Choose 5 if you feel the feeling ”extremely”.  
 
 
Very slightly or 
not at all 
A little 
Moderately Quite a bit 
Extremely 
1. Upset 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
2. Hostile 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
3. Alert 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
4. Ashamed 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
5. Inspired 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6. Nervous 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
7. Determined 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
8. Attentive 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
9. Afraid 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
10. Active 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
1. How frustrated are you feeling right now? (Circle the number on the scale below that best describes how 
you are feeling right now.) 
 
 
Not at all 
frustrated.  
I could not be 
more 
frustrated. 
==PAGE:82==
Biosignal synchrony analysis in collaboration activities
75
==PAGE:83==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 101
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.dtu.dk
