==PAGE:1==
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydro-
gen applications in the aviation sector
Master Thesis
DTU Environmental and Resources Engineering
Section for Quantitative Sustainability Assessment (QSA)
==PAGE:2==
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
Master Thesis
March, 2023
By
Julian Felix Schmidt
s213004
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
H2FLY, 2022
Published by:
DTU, Section for Quantitative Sustainability Assessment (QSA),
Bygningstorvet, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustainability.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over the period of six months at the Section for Quantitative
Sustainability Assessment (QSA), Department of Environmental and Resource Engineer-
ing, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Julian Felix Schmidt - s213004
Signature
Date
ii
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In the transition towards a sustainable future of air transportation, hydrogen powered air-
craft are expected to enter service in the 2030s and achieve a market share of up to 40
% by the half of the century. A key aspect in this development is the set-up of the accord-
ing hydrogen infrastructure. This study attempts to outline a comprehensive overview of
the environmental impact characteristics of the provision of hydrogen, by building sce-
narios for selected airports covering the time span from 2030 to 2050. To account for the
prospective nature of the life cycle assessment, inventory data used in the analysis reflect
on the time-wise changes in processes, while trends in the evolution of regional hydro-
gen markets taken into consideration. The assessment suggests that the environmental
impact of the hydrogen provision is driven by the energy intensiveness of the production
process, with the electricity mix being a decisive factor for the effects of the transition
towards electrolysis as the leading production technology.
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The thesis project has been conducted under the supervision of Alexis Laurent, Nils
Thonemann, and Karen Saavedra Rubio, who have provided guidance and valuable in-
puts throughout the course of the project. In regular meetings, their feedback allowed to
refine the analysis and align the approach with the objectives of the GENESIS project.
In particular the exchange with Cor de Ruiter from GENESIS partner Rotterdam The
Hague Airport provided valuable insights regarding the set-up of a model for the hydrogen
demand estimation.
Alexis Laurent
Associate Professor, Section for Quantitative Sustainability Assessment, DTU
Supervisor, GENESIS Coordinator
Nils Thonemann
PostDoc, Section for Quantitative Sustainability Assessment, DTU
Supervisor
Karen Saavedra Rubio
Research Assistant, Section for Quantitative Sustainability Assessment, DTU
Supervisor
iv
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Abbreviations
1
1
Introduction
2
2
Methodology
3
2.1
Goal and scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Technology framework
5
3.1
Hydrogen powered aviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Hydrogen technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Scenarios
12
4.1
Use of technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2
Rotterdam - RTHA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
Malaga - AGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.4
Paris - CDG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
Hydrogen demand model
16
5.1
Tracking of flights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2
Air traffic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.3
Prospective kerosene demand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.4
Hydrogen demand estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6
Life cycle inventory
24
6.1
Hydrogen production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.2
Hydrogen liquefaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.3
Hydrogen storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.4
Hydrogen transportation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.5
Kerosene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
7
Life cycle impact assessment
30
7.1
Impact assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7.2
Contribution analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
7.3
Process breakdown
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
8
Discussion
37
8.1
Scenarios and processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
8.2
Hydrogen as a kerosene substitute . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
8.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
9
Conclusion and Outlook
40
Bibliography
41
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
v
==PAGE:7==
A Appendix - Scenarios
45
B Appendix - Hydrogen supply chain
48
C Appendix - Life cycle inventory
53
D Appendix - Life cycle impact assessment
60
vi
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:8==
List of Abbreviations
List of Abbreviations
AE
Alkaline electrolysis
AGP
Malaga Airport
AoC
Area of concern
AoP
Area of protection
APS
Announced pledges scenario
AS
Ambitious scenario
BS
Baseline scenario
BWB
Blended wing body
CCH2
Cryo-compressed hydrogen
CCS
Carbon capture and storage
CDG
Paris Charles de Gaulle Airport
CFRP
Carbon fibre reinforced polymer
CH2
Compressed hydrogen
DALY
Disability-adjusted life years
EIS
Entry into service
EQ
Ecosystem quality
FU
Functional unit
GH2
Gaseous hydrogen
H2
Hydrogen
HH
Human health
LCA
Life cycle assessment
LCI
Life cycle inventory
LCIA
Life cycle impact assessment
LH2
Liquid hydrogen
LHOC
Liquid hydrogen organic carriers
LHOC
Liquid hydrogen organic carriers
LNG
Liquid natural gas
NZE
Net zero emissions scenario
PDF
Potentially disappeared fraction of species
PEM
Proton-exchange membrane electrolysis
POX
Partial oxidation
RTHA
Rotterdam The Hague Airport
SAF
Sustainable aviation fuel
SEC
Specific energy consumption
SMR
Steam methane reforming
SSP
Shared socio-economic pathway
TRL
Technology readiness level
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
1
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In recent years, there’s an increasing effort in the investigation of alternative propulsion
systems for aviation, both from the side of the aerospace industry as well as the research
in academia. To meet the growing urgency for the transition towards a sustainable future
of air transportation, the development of aircraft with alternative propulsion systems like
electric, hybrid-electric, sustainable aviation fuels, and hydrogen is in the focus. It is ex-
pected that regional hydrogen aircraft will enter service in the 2030s, while concepts that
have the potential to replace current narrow-body or medium range wide-body aircraft will
be launched in the 2035 to 2045 time frame. [1] By the year 2050, a market share of hy-
drogen aircraft of up to 40% is anticipated. [2] While the energy density characteristics of
hydrogen require the storage in liquid form onboard of aircraft, options for aircraft propul-
sion systems using hydrogen as a propellant are direct combustion in modified turbofan
engines, and the use of fuel cells in combination with an electric power train. [3]
As collaborative effort between various European aerospace companies and research or-
ganisations, the GENESIS project, funded by the Clean Sky 2 Joint Undertaking program,
aims to lay out a pathway towards the development of innovative and sustainable propul-
sion systems for air transportation. [4] The project focuses on the years 2030, 2040, and
2050, which are the relevant time frames that serve as benchmark for aviation industry
to meet increasingly stringent environmental regulations, such as reducing CO2 emis-
sions, noise pollution, and air pollution. The project takes a broad and multi-disciplinary
approach, by outlining the conceptual design of a regional class aircraft with a forward-
looking analyses of system components such as the power train and energy storage. The
building of life cycle inventories to quantify the environmental impact characteristics of fu-
ture aircraft designs and operation scenarios. [5] In that context, a critical investigation
of the supply phase of the hydrogen life cycle marks an important building block for the
environmental assessment of hydrogen aircraft.
To assess the environmental impact characteristics of the supply phase of the hydro-
gen as an aviation fuels throughout the time frames proposed in the GENESIS project, a
prospective approach towards life cycle assessment is necessary. The aim of prospective
life cycle assessment is to base the analysis on a series of assumptions about the future,
such as changes in the expected production volumes as well as the materials and energy
sources used. In the specific case of hydrogen supply chains, this means to account for
changes in the composition of hydrogen production and processing methods, and take
trends in the regional development of hydrogen economies into consideration.
2
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:10==
2
Methodology
In the following the goal and scope of the study are illustrated, by outlining the research
objective and defining the system boundaries as well as the functional unit. A high level
overview of the chosen approach highlights the steps of the analysis.
2.1
Goal and scope
The aim of the project is to assess the environmental impact characteristics of the provi-
sion of hydrogen at airports, which is intended for the use as an aviation fuel. For align-
ment with the scope of the GENESIS project, the time frames of this assessment are the
years 2030, 2040 and 2050, and the geographical region of interest for the investigation is
constraint to Europe. As the scope of the analysis is the supply phase from the production
of hydrogen leading up to the provision at the airport, processes of the hydrogen supply
chain such as the transportation, processing and storage are within the system bound-
aries of the study. In order to obtain a comprehensive understanding for the underlying
processes that drive environmental impact of the provision of hydrogen, a wide spectrum
of anticipated compositions of these processes is supposed to be considered.
To account for the prospective nature of the assessment, it is intended to take anticipated
changes in the use of technology over time and their share in the supply chains into ac-
count. This is reflected by the consideration of trends in the impact characteristics and
composition of processes, as well as potential scaling effects induced by the evolving
demand situation throughout the time frames. To put the impact characteristics of the dif-
ferent pathways for the supply of LH2 into perspective, the functional unit for the life cycle
impact assessment is defined as:
The provision of 1 kg liquid hydrogen at the airport.
It should be noted, that the airport in the functional unit relates to the to the specific airport
which is subject of the scenario under investigation, and that the provision of LH2 occurs
during the respective time frame of interest.
A key objective of the analysis is to identify the steps and processes in the supply chain,
that have a driving factors for the total impact of the hydrogen provision. In context of the
GENESIS project, the aim is therefore to put the results in perspective with regards to the
goal of achieving a more sustainable future of air transportation. This entails identifying
technologies that are desirable with regards to their implementation in the supply chain,
but also pointing to areas of interest for future research in the domain.
2.2
Approach
In order to obtain an accurate representation of possible pathways for the supply of hydro-
gen at European airports in the relevant time frames, scenarios exploring the spectrum of
possible options are build. Different airports are chosen as the foundation of these sce-
narios, which intend to reflect on different profiles in air traffic movement and prospective
hydrogen demand, but also take diverse geographic particularities into consideration. In
an initial assessment of technologies for the production, processing and transportation of
hydrogen, feasible options for use in the modelling of potential supply chains are identified.
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
3
==PAGE:11==
Based on the findings, the according scenarios for different airports in the corresponding
time frames are established.
The demand for hydrogen in the different scenarios is modelled in reference to the equiv-
alent requirements of kerosene for conventional aircraft, following a detailed analysis of
air traffic movements at the different airports. To account for the prospective nature of the
assessment, the inventory data used to model the scenarios should include the contribut-
ing of the time component to differences in process compositions. For that purpose, the
phase of the life cycle impact assessment of this study is making use of the brightway2
framework, that allows the integration of the premise database providing inventory data in
accordance with different predefined climate change trajectories. [6] Processes not rep-
resented in the database are manually constructed based on data of impact assessments
found in literature.
The aim of the live cycle impact assessment phase is to provide a comprehensive and
detailed breakdown of the environmental impact characteristics of the different scenarios.
By assigning the results on a damage level to different impact categories, the cumula-
tive damage in different areas of protection (AoP) and areas of concern (AoC) can be
established. Further processing of the data allows to identify the contribution of individual
processes that drive the overall environmental impact characteristics.
4
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:12==
3
Technology framework
In the following the current state of hydrogen powered aviation in terms of technical ad-
vancements is presented, and various technologies for the production, processing, trans-
portation and storage of H2 are discussed. The aim is to identify methods suitable for the
building of scenarios in Chapter 4, based on aspects such as the technological readiness
level (TRL) and the applicability for the provision of H2 at airports.
3.1
Hydrogen powered aviation
With an expected annual global growth of air transportation of 3.3 %, and an average
annual growth of 1.2 % in the time frame until 2050 in the European Union, there is a
growing market share of aircraft with alternative propulsion systems such as hydrogen,
electric and hybrid-electric propulsion, as well as the use of sustainable aviation fuels
(SAFs) for conventional aircraft. [7][8] Different studies predict hydrogen aircraft will have
a market share of up to 40 % by the year 2050. [2] While regional aircraft with a hydrogen-
based propulsion system are expected to have an entry into service (EIS) in the 2030 time
frame, concepts that have the potential to replace current narrow-body or medium range
wide-body aircraft are likely launched at a later date by the year 2035 to 2040 and 2040
to 2045, respectively. [1] Due to the limitations in energy density of liquid hydrogen, it is
expected that it will not be feasible for the use as an aviation fuel in long range wide-body
aircraft in the foreseeable future. [9]
The two options for aircraft propulsion systems using hydrogen as a propellant are the
direct combustion in modified turbofans or turboprop engines, and the use of fuel cells in
combination with an electric power train. While fuel cell systems reach a gain in overall
propulsive efficiency of 45 to 50 % when compared to conventional propulsion concepts,
combustion engines achieve a slightly lower gain of approximately 40 %. [3] In addition
to that, the propulsion using fuel cells does not lead to any other emissions than water
vapour, whereas the combustion of hydrogen in turbofans or turboprop engines leads to
NOx as a by-product. Despite the better performance in this one to one comparison of
both options, the use of fuel cells is limited to smaller sized and regional types of aircraft
due to the significant increase in system weight that comes with higher power demands
of larger sized aircraft. [1] Next to the choice of the type of propulsion system, there are
two different options for the storage of hydrogen onboard of aircraft. While hydrogen in
its gaseous form (GH2) is easier to handle and different different concepts of hydrogen
aircraft make use of it during their prototype or testing phase, the long term objective is
to use liquid hydrogen (LH2) in the eventual operational phase. [3] This is due to the
volumetric density of LH2 of 71 kg/m3, that is considerably higher than the volumetric
density of GH2 with 42 kg/m3. Using LH2 instead of GH2 therefore does not only reduce
the required storage volume which is favourable from a standpoint of airframe design, but
also leads to reduced system weight of the tanks. [10] [9]
A variety of established aerospace companies and start-ups are currently working on the
development of hydrogen powered aircraft, both the integration of hydrogen propulsion
systems into existing airframes as well as the design of entirely new concepts. In Ta-
ble 3.1 an overview of some of these different projects and initiatives that were launched
in the 2020 time frame is given. The majority of projects that aim at an early entry into
service (EIS) are aircraft for regional air transportation or air-taxi market, such as the E-
STOL concept proposed by Pipistrel. [11] As an example for the conversion of existing
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
5
==PAGE:13==
airframes, both ZeroAvia and Universal Hydrogen are currently in the phase of ground-
testing their fuel cell propulsion systems, with the intention to transition into the phase
of active flight testing throughout the year 2023. [12] While both companies work with
gaseous hydrogen storage in the prototype phase, the intention is to shift to liquid hydro-
gen storage to increase the range for an intended entry into service in 2025. [13] [14]
For a later EIS in the 2035 time frame, Airbus is exploring the combination of hydrogen
propulsion systems in combination with entirely new airframe designs, such as a blended
wing body (BWB) configuration, within the ZEROe programme. [15] In contrast to other
concepts with an earlier EIS, Airbus is focusing on the aircraft in the narrow-body market
and the combustion of hydrogen in modified turbofan and turboprop engines rather than
fuel cells.
Table 3.1: H2 aircraft concepts
Company
Platform
EIS
Propulsion
Storage
Seats
Range
Pipistrel
E-STOL aircraft
2028
Fuel cell
GH2
9
500 NM
ZeroAvia
Dornier DO228 conversion
2025
Fuel cell
GH2 / LH2
19
300 NM
Universal Hydrogen
ATR72-600 conversion
2025
Fuel cell
GH2 / LH2
41
400 / 550 NM
DHC-8 Q300 conversion
2025
Fuel cell
GH2 / LH2
cargo
375 / 570 NM
Torboprop concept
2035
Combustion
LH2
> 100
> 1,000 NM
Airbus
BWB concept
2035
Combustion
LH2
> 200
> 2,000 NM
Turbofan cocnept
2035
Combustion
LH2
> 200
> 2,000 NM
3.2
Hydrogen technology
3.2.1
H2 production technologies
There are various methods and processes for the production of hydrogen. While fossil
resources such as oil, coal and gas serve as the basis for H2 production through steam
methane reforming or partial oxidation, water that is split forms the basis for electrolysis.
[16] Other methods involve biochemical processes such as fermentation, or photonic pro-
cesses like photocatalysis or biophotolysis. While at the present state the vast majority
of global H2 production is based on fossil fuels, there is an ongoing effort towards estab-
lishing electrolysis as the main source for H2 production in the long run. According to the
announced pledges scenario (APS) and net zero emissions scenario (NZE), it can be ex-
pected that electrolysis will account for over 60 % and over 50 % of global H2 production
by the year 2050, respectively. [17]. In Table 3.2 the transition from fossil sources based
to electrolysis production according to the APS and NZE scenario can be found.
Table 3.2: Global H2 supply trends [17]
Category
Year
NZE
APS
Fossil
2020
78.60%
78.70%
2030
55.60%
72.00%
2040
40.80%
55.40%
2050
39.00%
42.50%
Electrolysis
2020
3.90%
1.12%
2030
38.78%
10.40%
2040
57.43%
35.32%
2050
60.95%
51.57%
6
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:14==
As far as the production of H2 is concerned in the scope of this study, the focus should
therefore be on the step-wise change from fossil based to electrolysis production through-
out the different time frames. To assess the overall qualities of the most established
methods or H2 from fossil sources and through electrolysis, in Table 3.3 the technolog-
ical readiness level (TRL) and production cost are presented. [17] The TRL indicates
the readiness of a technology on a scale from 1 to 9, where 1 is equivalent to a stage
of exploration and 9 indicates the characteristics of a proven system within it’s prating
environment. [18]
Table 3.3: H2 production cost and TRL
Category
Production Method
TRL
Cost [$/kg H2]
Coal gasification
7 - 9
0.91
Fossil
Steam Reforming
7 - 9
0.73
Partial Oxidation
7 - 9
0.73
Electrolysis
Alkaline Electrolysis
7 - 9
2.76
PEM Electrolysis
4 - 6
-
In the following, an overview including the underlying physical principles for the main H2
production methods both for H2 from fossil sources as well as H2 from electrolysis is given.
H2 production from fossil sources
The three most commonly used methods for hydrogen production from fossil sources are
steam methane reforming (SMR), partial oxidation (POX), and coal gasification. SMR is
the most widely used method for hydrogen production from fossil sources, accounting
for approximately 95% of the hydrogen produced from natural gas. [16] In this process,
natural gas (CH4) is reformed with steam (H2O) to produce H2 and carbon monoxide
(CO), as portrayed in Equation 3.1 below. The reaction takes place in the presence of a
catalyst and at high temperatures, typically between 700-1100°C. [19]
CH4 + H2O →CO + 3H2
(3.1)
Being a well-established and proven technology with a long history of commercial use,
SMR has several advantages over other methods of hydrogen production. In particular
the use of natural gas allows to produce H2 at a relatively low cost. On the other hand,
drawbacks of SMR are the high energy requirements, high greenhouse gas emissions,
and the need for expensive catalysts. [16] When compared to SMR, POX is a similar
hydrogen production method that involves the partial oxidation of natural gas to produce
hydrogen gas and carbon monoxide, as described in Equation 3.2 where natural gas is
partially oxidised with air to produce H2 and CO. Just as in the case of SMR, the reaction
takes place in the presence of a catalyst, however at slightly higher temperatures between
900-1300°C. [19]
CH4 + 1
2O2 →CO + 2H2
(3.2)
A main advantage of POX is it’s relative simplicity, especially when comparing the pro-
cess to SMR which requires fewer steps, and therefore makes it more efficient and cost-
effective. In addition to that, POX produces a higher concentration of H2 compared to
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
7
==PAGE:15==
SMR. [19] However, next to the greenhouse gas emissions and need for expensive cat-
alysts, a drawback of POX is the potential for explosion if not properly controlled. [16] As
a third method, coal gasification is a process in which coal is converted into H2 through
a series of chemical reactions as displayed in Equation 3.3 below. In the process, coal
is gasified in the presence of steam to produce H2 and CO, at temperatures which are
typically between 700-1100°C, and in the presence of a catalyst. [20]
C + H2O →CO + 2H2
(3.3)
Coal gasification has several advantages over other methods of hydrogen production, for
instance the wide availability of coal as an abundant resource. However, in comparison
to any other type of H2 production, coal gasification has by far the worst performance in
terms of the environmental impact in terms of emissions to air. [16]
A promising approach towards reaching a significant reduction in the emission of CO2
during the production of H2 from fossil sources is the method of carbon capture and stor-
age (CCS). While on the one hand the use of CCS increases the electricity demands for
H2 production as it leads o the addition of extra processes, in has the potential to reduce
the CO2 emissions in the order of 90 % for SMR and 80 % for coal gasification. [21]
The process of CCS is based on the principle of separating the CO2 from other gases
through chemical solvents or membranes, and bringing it to a supercritical state that al-
lows handling it a simplified way. [22] The CO2 is then permanently stored in underground
sites that provide a high-pressure environment, such as depleted oil and gas reservoirs
or former mines. While the theoretical potential for CCS is promising, the degree of it’s
current implementation remains to be limited. This is mostly due to the relatively high
cost associated with the process for capturing CO2 and logistics of handling it, but also
concerns with regards to the potential long-term impacts of underground storage on the
environment and human health. [23]
H2 production from electrolysis
The underlying physical principle of electrolysis is based on the movement of ions in an
electrolyte under the influence of an electrical potential. The electrical potential drives
the migration of positive ions (cations) towards the cathode and negative ions (anions)
towards the anode, where they are oxidised or reduced, respectively. [24] In Equation 3.4
the overall process of electrolysis is shown.
H2O →H2 + 1
2O2
(3.4)
The specific reactions that occur at the cathode and anode can then be represented as
seen in Equations 3.5 and 3.6, respectively.
2H+ + 2e−→H2
(3.5)
H2O →1
2O2 + 2H+ + 2e−
(3.6)
In this expression, H+ represents the hydrogen ions in the electrolyte and e−represents
the electrons flowing through the electrical circuit. The hydrogen ions and electrons com-
bine at the cathode to form H2, while the hydroxide ions and electrons combine at the
anode to form oxygen and water. The efficiency of the electrolysis process is influenced
8
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:16==
by several factors, including the type of electrolyte used, the temperature and pressure of
the electrolyte, and the design of the electrodes.
A well-established and widely used method for hydrogen production is alkaline electrolysis
(AE), that uses an alkaline solution, such as potassium hydroxide (KOH) as the electrolyte,
to split water into hydrogen and oxygen. With energy conversion efficiencies of up to 80%,
AE has a high production efficiency. Next to a relatively low operating cost due to the use
of materials such as the alkaline electrolyte, a further advantage of AE is the stability of
the process which leads to a constant production output. [25] A main flaw flaw of the
of the system is, however, that the corrosive characteristics of the electrolyte leads to a
reduced lifespan of certain components used in the process such as the electrodes and
the cell containers.
A promising method for electrolysis that has several advantages over other methods of hy-
drogen production, including AE, is the so-called proton-exchange membrane electrolysis
(PEM) that uses a proton exchange membrane as the electrolyte to split water into hy-
drogen and oxygen. Two significant strengths of PEM are the low operating temperature,
which requires a limited amount of cooling, as well as the high purity of the produced H2
that is achieved through the membrane which acts as a barrier that prevents the formation
of impurities in the hydrogen stream. [26] A major challenge for the wide implementation
of PEM is the cost for the proton exchange membrane and other components which is
currently still high. In addition to that, PEM electrolysis systems are designed for high-
purity hydrogen production and have a relatively low H2 production rate compared to other
technologies.
3.2.2
H2 Storage
The storage of H2 can be broadly distinguished into physical storage and into chemical
storage, with compressed hydrogen (CH2), liquefied hydrogen (LH2), and cryo-compressed
hydrogen (CCH2) as the three main forms of physical storage. In the case of CH2, the hy-
drogen is stored in high-pressure containers at pressures ranging from 40 to 700 bar. This
method is commonly used in small-scale hydrogen storage systems, where the low volu-
metric density is not a limiting factor. LH2 on the other hand is stored in cryogenic tanks
after cooling it to cryogenic temperatures below -253°C. This method is used primarily for
large-scale hydrogen storage and transportation. A major challenge of this method is the
large amount of energy required to liquefy H2 and maintain the low temperature, which re-
duces the overall efficiency of the storage system. [27] As a combination of CH2 and LH2
storage methods, in the case of CCH2 the H2 is first cooled to cryogenic temperatures and
then compressed to high pressures. The main strength of CCH2 is both a higher energy
density compared to CH2 and a lower energy requirement compared to LH2, however the
method is still in the experimental stage and is not yet widely implemented on a larger
scale.
Chemical hydrogen storage methods involve the storage of hydrogen in chemical com-
pounds, such as metal hybrides, complex hybrides, and liquid hydrogen organic carriers
(LHOC). Metal hybrides are metal alloys that can absorb and release hydrogen at room
temperature, making them a promising candidate for hydrogen storage. However, the
relatively slow hydrogen release kinetics of metal hybrides limit their efficiency and use
for some applications. [28] Another form of hybrides which are chemical compounds that
store hydrogen in their molecular structure are complex hybrides. These compounds can
have high hydrogen storage capacities, but often require high temperatures for the ab-
sorption and desorption of hydrogen. While solid forms of chemical storage are often
limited from a practical standpoint with regards to their handling and scaling potential,
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
9
==PAGE:17==
LHOCs which are still in the experimental stage are an alternative that has high hydro-
gen storage capacities and they can release hydrogen at lower temperatures compared
to other complex hybrides. [28] In Table 6.3 an overview of the different methods for
hydrogen storage is given, including the physical characteristics and potential for use in
large-scale applications.
Table 3.4: H2 storage overview
Characteristic
Classification
Type
Scaling potential
Volumetric density
Energy density
[g/L]
[MJ/L]
Physical Storage
CH2
Yes
24.5 - 41.4
2.94 - 4.97
LH2
Yes
70.8
8.5
CCH2
Yes
80
9.6
Chemical Storage
Metal hybrides
No
110 - 114
13.2 - 13.7
Complex hybrides
No
80
9.6
Physical absorbants
No
20 - 38.5
2.4 - 3.1
LHOC
Yes
47.3 - 56.0
5.68 - 6.72
Tanks for the storage of hydrogen are typically classified into tanks of type I, II, III and IV,
depending on their composition and use. [29] While tanks of type I are commonly made
of materials such as steel and aluminium alloys and store hydrogen at pressures ranging
to ca. 300 bar, type II and III tanks use a combination of metals and composite materials
that allow for storage at a higher pressure while simultaneously being lighter. Being fully
wrapped in a layer of carbon fibre reinforced polymer (CFRP), type III tanks are in this
way capable to store hydrogen at up to 700 bar. To further reduce weight of the structure
while obtaining the same storage capability, tanks of type IV combine the outer CFRP with
an inner liner made of a polymer instead of metal.
3.2.3
H2 Liquefaction
Hydrogen liquefaction is the process of converting gaseous hydrogen into liquid form by
reducing its temperature and pressure. While there is a variety of methods to achieve
this objective, two of the most commonly used step-wise processes are the Claude cycle
and the Brayton cycle. The Claude cycle is a refrigeration cycle that operates based on
the principles of compression, cooling, and expansion. The process begins with the com-
pression of the gaseous hydrogen, which increases its temperature and pressure. The
compressed hydrogen is then cooled in a heat exchanger, typically with a refrigerant such
as helium, which then leads to a drop in pressure and the condensation of the gas that
results in its liquefaction. [30] In contrast to the Claude cycle that uses cooling to reduce
the temperature and pressure which results in liquefaction of hydrogen, the Brayton cycle
is using heating through an external heat source after being initially compressed. The in-
creased temperature of the gaseous hydrogen reduces its pressure and ultimately causes
it to liquefy. [31] The energy efficiency of current liquefaction systems is in the range of
ca. 25 %, however, systems that are currently under development aim to improve that
number towards above 40 % for Claude cycles and more than 50 % for Brayton cyclesm,
thereby reducing the specific energy consumption (SEC) of the process. [30]
3.2.4
H2 Transportation
The transportation of hydrogen can be grouped into three categories; the land-based
transportation via truck or rail, transportation via pipeline and transportation via sea. De-
spite its limitations in terms of the amount of hydrogen that can be transported, land-based
10
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:18==
transportation via truck and rail is most established and readily available method to deliver
hydrogen either in gaseous or liquid form. While trucks that transport GH2 have a capac-
ity of usually 20,000 to 50,000 l, LH2 trucks have the ability of carrying a capacity of up
to 4,000 kg in special trailers. [32] In comparison to that, rail transportation systems are
estimated to have a net carrying capacity in the magnitude up to 100 tons of hydrogen.
[33] The advantage of both road and rail transportation is an existing infrastructure that
does not require any specific developments when compared to the other methods.
While the use of a trucks is suitable for the local distribution, one of the most promis-
ing options for hydrogen transportation is via pipeline, as it can provide an efficient and
cost-effective solution to deliver large quantities of hydrogen over long distances. An ad-
vantage is the already existing network of pipelines for natural gas, that could serve as
a basis for hydrogen transportation by pipeline by either re-purposing the network for the
exclusive use by hydrogen, or by mixing the hydrogen together with the natural gas. [34]
It should be distinguished between high-pressure pipeline networks for the long distance
transportation, and low-pressure grids for the local distribution, that both have a twofold
function of simultaneously serving as a delivery and intermediate storage system. [32]
Depending on the material used for the construction of pipelines, only small modifications
for the suitability of hydrogen are required. An example for this are low-pressure distribu-
tions pipelines, which are commonly produced from fibre-reinforced composite materials
or polyethylene. While the investment for the construction of new pipelines is costly, the
expected lifetime of the system is in the order of 40 to 80 years which leads to low oper-
ational costs.[34]
As a third option, the transportation of hydrogen via ship offers advantages when moving
large quantities over long distances. At distance larger than 2,000 km, it is expected that
the transportation of hydrogen via ship will be less expensive than via pipeline, with a
cost that is consistently lower than 1.5 USD/gkH2. [34] Current projects that investigate
the transportation by ship propose a design involving liquefied hydrogen (LH2) similar to
the one used for liquid natural gas (LNG), with a boil of rate of ca. 0.2% of the LH2 per day.
The conceptual design of Kawasaki Heavy Industries Ltd. consists of an arrangement of
4 spherical tanks on a ship with a combined carrying capacity of 160,000 m3 LH2. [32]
Possible routes for these types of large-scale hydrogen carriers are from the Arabian Gulf
to Europe and North America, or from Australia to Japan. [34]
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
11
==PAGE:19==
4
Scenarios
The aim of building different scenarios for the supply of hydrogen as aviation fuel to air-
ports, in accordance with the time horizon of the GENESIS project, is to showcase the
implications of the deployment and combination of different hydrogen technologies. Si-
multaneously, the goal is to take anticipated trends in the regional hydrogen economies
into account, covering a variety of themes such as the on-site production or long distance
transportation of hydrogen. In order to obtain a framework that is representative for a full
spectrum of flight profiles and according quantities in LH2 demand, the scenarios are build
around a regional airport, a mid-sized airport and a hub airport in Europe.
4.1
Use of technology
In Chapter 3 the different technologies for the production, liquefaction, transportation and
storage of hydrogen were presented. Based on the TRL and scale-ability, as well as the
applicability in the context of supplying hydrogen in liquid form, core technologies serving
as building blocks for the supply chains in the scenarios are selected.
For the production of H2, electrolysis as well as the production from fossil sources, in the
form of steam reforming and coal gasification, is considered in alignment with the global
H2 supply trends presented in 3.2 in Chapter 3. To account for the use of CCS for fossil
H2 production methods, predictions in the NZE and APS scenario for the trends in H2
production are used as a reference. [17] In Table 4.1 the share of CCS for fossil based H2
production in the different time frames, as well as the average of both scenarios is given.
In the building of supply chains for the different airports and time frames, this average is
used.
Table 4.1: Share of CCS for fossil based H2 production
Scenario
2030
2040
2050
NZE
58.82%
80.50%
96.10%
APS
25.56%
33.33%
48.15%
Average
42.19%
56.92%
72.12%
While both alkaline electrolysis and PEM electrolysis are presented as relevant methods
for the production of hydrogen through electrolysis in Chapter 3. It should be noted, how-
ever, that in the context of environmental impact assessment the main driving factor is the
supply of electricity, thereby rendering the difference of other factors as negligible. [35]
In the context of this project, the production of H2 through electrolysis will therefore be
considered in general terms within one process.
In case of the transportation of hydrogen, the transportation by truck, train, pipeline and
ship are discussed and presented as feasible options in Chapter 3. In the build-up of the
supply chains for the different scenarios they are therefore considered, taking the regional
specificities into account. All scenarios have the commonality, that for the 2030 time frame
the supply of LH2 by truck with no onsite storage is considered. It is estimated that in the
early phase of implementation, fuel trucks delivering LH2 have the capacity to supply a
small number of aircraft directly, rendering a fixed storage facility not necessary. [36]
12
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:20==
4.2
Rotterdam - RTHA
With 7,684 annual departures tracked in the year 2019, Rotterdam The Hague Airport
(RTHA) is the reference for the scenario build around a regional airport. [37] As a partner
of the GENESIS project, the specifications of RTHA have previously served as a founda-
tion for research within the initiative. Situated close to the port of Rotterdam, the theme of
the scenario build around the airport is the integration into local initiatives for the hydrogen
supply. At the core of the vision for the port of Rotterdam is the ambition to become a hy-
drogen hub, utilising the electrical energy from nearby wind parks in the north sea for the
hydrogen production through electrolysis. [38][39] Part of this vision is to re-purpose the
existing network of distribution pipelines for natural gas for the local distribution of hydro-
gen. [40] Secondary to that, the scenario around RTHA serves for the investigation of the
concept of onsite hydrogen production. In Figure 4.1 a schematic representation of the
RTHA scenario is presented, while a detailed overview of the supply chain composition is
provided in Figure A.1 in Appendix A.
Figure 4.1: RTHA - schematic representation
In the 2030 time frame, hydrogen provided at RTHA originates in the port of Rotterdam
where it is produced partially through electrolysis and partially through steam reforming.
Subsequently to the liquefaction at the production sites, it is transported to the airport by
truck and provided directly to the aircraft. In the subsequent 2040 time frame, the full
hydrogen production originates in electrolysis, with an additional production site onsite at
RTHA. Next to the transportation of the liquefied hydrogen from the port by truck, a portion
of the hydrogen produced in the port is supplied to RTHA in gaseous form by pipeline,
where it is liquefied and stored with the hydrogen from onsite production. In the final 2050
time frame, all of the hydrogen produced in the port of Rotterdam is transported to RTHA
by distribution pipeline, where it is liquefied and stored together with the hydrogen from
onsite production.
4.3
Malaga - AGP
As an airport with a size in between a regional and a hub airport, the Malaga Airport
(AGP) was frequented by 72,488 departures in the year 2019. [41] Specific to AGP is it’s
geograhic location at the southern point of the Spanish peninsula, in close proximity to
North Africa. Initiatives that propose the production of Hydrogen from a mix of fossil based
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
13
==PAGE:21==
sources and electrolysis in Marocco, suggest the use of the existing pipeline network for
the transportation of natural gas from North Africa to Europe. [42] The AGP scenario
therefore aims at investigating this option, in combination with the regional production
of hydrogen in Spain with a closer proximity to the airport. In Figure 4.2 a schematic
representation of the AGP scenario is presented, while a detailed overview of the supply
chain composition is provided in Figure A.2 in Appendix A.
Figure 4.2: AGP - schematic representation
In the 2030 time frame of the scenario, the hydrogen produced in Spain originates par-
tially from steam reforming and partially from electrolysis. Following the liquefaction at
the production sites it is transported to AGP by truck, where it is directly provided to the
aircraft without intermediate storage. The hydrogen produced in Marocco during the first
time frame is originating in steam reforming, and brought to Spain through a re-purposed
transmission pipeline. It is assumed that in the early phase of implementing this type of
transportation, a complete network of distribution pipelines is not yet in place. The hy-
drogen transported to Spain by pipeline is therefore liquefied and provided to AGP by
truck.
The subsequent 2040 time frame is including electrolysis for the methods of hydrogen
production in Marocco, as well as a full distribution network reaching to AGP, where the
hydrogen is liquefied and stored. The delivery of hydrogen produced locally remains to
be facilitated through the transportation by trucks, which provide the hydrogen directly
to the airport. In the final 2050 time frame 100 % of the hydrogen produced in Spain
originates in electrolysis, as well as a significant part of the hydrogen produced in North
Africa. The supply from both paths ends in liquefied form in the storage at AGP, from
where it is provided to the aircraft.
14
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:22==
4.4
Paris - CDG
With 249,081 annual departures recorded in 2019, Paris Charle de Gaulle Airport (CDG)
is the largest hub airport on the European mainland. [43] Due to the hydrogen demand
situation that can be expected to be considerably higher than for RTHA and AGP, the aim
for the scenario surrounding CDG is to consider the provision of hydrogen from various
different sources. While the AGP scenario is exploring the long-distance transportation of
hydrogen by pipeline, the CDG scenario takes the transportation of LH2 via ship from the
Arabian Gulf region into consideration. The goal of local initiatives in the region to scale
up the hydrogen production, intended for export to Europe and other markets. [44] While
the long-term objective is to increase the share of electrolysis, both coal gasification and
steam reforming are established processes. In Figure 4.3 a schematic representation of
the CDG scenario is presented, while a detailed overview of the supply chain composition
is provided in Figure A.3 in Appendix A.
Figure 4.3: CDG - schematic representation
In the scenario for the 2030 time frame, LH2 provided at CDG is produced regionally in
France and in the Arabian Gulf region. The hydrogen from local production is originating
froom electrolysis and steam reforming, and is transported to the airport by truck after
liquefaction at the respective production site. In the Arabian Gulf region, hydrogen is
produced through coal gasification and steam reforming. After liquefaction it is brought
to France by ship, where it is loaded on trains for. In close proximity to CDG, the LH2 is
then loaded on trucks and provided directly to the aircraft.
Following on this supply chain set-up, the scenario for the 2040 time frame considers the
addition of electrolysis for the production in the Arabian Gulf region, whereas the regional
off-site production in France considers electrolysis exclusively. While the regionally pro-
duced hydrogen is liquefied and provided at CDG by truck, the LH2 from the Arabian Gulf
is kept in storage after transported to the airport by train. In the final 2050 time frame, the
option of hydrogen delivery by pipeline as presented in the AGP scenario is considered
additionally. With the same composition of hydrogen production in Marocco as for the
AGP scenario in 2050, it is assumed that the usable pipeline network for hydrogen ex-
tends all the way up to CDG. All hydrogen delivered to CDG is kept in LH2 storage tanks,
from where it is rovided to the aircraft.
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
15
==PAGE:23==
5
Hydrogen demand model
In order to execute the life cycle assessment for the different scenarios as presented in
Chapter 4, an accurate model for the prospective demand of hydrogen at the three differ-
ent airports is required. Current market outlooks predict in their most optimistic scenarios
that in the time frame until 2050 hydrogen powered aircraft have the potential to substitute
up to approximately 20 to 40 % of aircraft with fossil fuel based propulsion systems, how-
ever these are high level estimations that do not take into consideration specific markets
or airports. [1] [2] The key challenge is to anticipate the technological readiness and eco-
nomic competitiveness of emerging technologies and aircraft designs with different types
of propulsion concepts, as well as the adoption rate of these aircraft on the airline side.
[8] To take the specific characteristics in terms of the type flights and traffic fluctuations
throughout the year into account, a model for the hydrogen demand at the three different
airports is build. It is based on the creation of a kerosene demand model for the time
frame until 2050, from which the corresponding demand for hydrogen is derived. The
steps along this process are executed in the following order:
1. Tracking of all departures from Rotterdam, Malaga and Paris CDG for a total of 7
days and the assignment of the travelled distance for each one of the flights. The
aircraft types are assigned to 4 different categories.
2. Based on historical traffic data, the tracked flights and outlooks that predict the
growth in different markets, a model for the development of the air traffic is es-
tablished.
3. A detailed kerosene demand model is build based on the tracked air traffic that
takes into account the type of aircraft and distance of each flight. Using the air
traffic model, the prospective demand situation for kerosene is derived.
4. The prospective hydrogen demand is modelled for a baseline and ambitious sce-
nario, based on the anticipated efficiency gains of hydrogen aircraft over today’s
aircraft with conventional propulsion systems as well as the properties of kerosene
and hydrogen relative to each other.
An approach that is similar to the one presented, is the one by Hoelzen et al. used for the
estimation of hydrogen demand at the German airports of Bremen, Hamburg and Frank-
furt. [9] However, there are a few key differences between the two methods that concern
the accuracy of the kerosene demand as well as the identifications of peak demands for
hydrogen. While Hoelzen et al. work with average numbers of distances and kerosene
consumption for each category of aircraft, the present approach assigns a specific dis-
tance and kerosene consumption to each individual flight. As the sizing of the hydrogen
storage and transportation infrastructure in is a crucial part for the life cycle assessment of
the different supply chains, the present model represents the hydrogen demand in terms
of the daily and monthly fluctuations instead of an annual average. It should be noted
though that in contrast to Hoelzen et al., incremental improvements in the propulsive ef-
ficiency of fossil fuel powered aircraft and differences in growth rate among the various
aircraft categories are not considered.
Key assumptions underlying the hydrogen demand model concern the continuous recov-
ery of the aviation market, as well as the performance capacity of hydrogen powered
aircraft and the effect of their introduction on air transportation. While global air traffic is
16
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:24==
expected to be fully recovered from the effects of the Corona pandemic between 2023
and 2025 with a return, market growth rates are expected to resume to be steady with a
slight reduction relative to 2019 predictions. [45] [7] In addition it is assumed that through
advancement in hydrogen propulsion technology and aircraft design, hydrogen powered
aircraft will have performance abilities which are comparable to their kerosene powered
counterparts. [1] [46] The prospective mission profile of a hydrogen powered aircraft is
therefore considered to be fully comparable to a conventional aircraft in the respective
category.
5.1
Tracking of flights
To obtain an accurate representation of the air traffic movements at the three different
airports, detailed information regarding the flights and corresponding aircraft is required.
For the period of one week from the 27.11.2022 to the 03.12.2022, all departures from
Rotterdam, Malaga and Paris CDG were tracked using ADS-B data from Flightradar24,
providing data on the airline, type of aircraft, time of departure and destination. [47] In
order to differentiate between the different flights and mission profiles, the tracked aircraft
were categorised as regional, narrow-body and wide-body aircraft according to their size
and range capabilities. [48] [49] As business aviation and general aviation aircraft are not
within the scope of this study, flights of aircraft from these categories were filtered out.
To account for the time wise differences in the progress of the development of hydrogen
aircraft in the hydrogen demand model, the group of wide-body aircraft is further divided
into medium range and long range aircraft as seen in Table 5.1. [1] An overview with the
complete list of all aircraft types that were tracked is given in Table B.1 in Appendix B.
Table 5.1: Aircraft categories
Category
Example aircraft types
Regional
ATR 72, CRJ 900, E170, Dash 8-Q400
Narrow-body
A220-300, A321 ceo, B737-800, E195
Medium range wide-body
A310, A330-300, B767-400
Long range wide-body
A340-300, A350-900, B777-300ER, MD-11
In total a number of 5014 departures were tracked over the given time period, of which
3932 occurred at Paris CDG, 901 in Malaga and 94 in Rotterdam. In Table B.3 in Appendix
B a complete overview of all departures by day and aircraft category is given, as well as
the share of total departures of each category. While the departures per day give an
overview of the fluctuations of traffic intensity throughout the week for each one of the
airports, the hourly representation allows to identify peak times throughout the day for
the different categories of aircraft. In Figure 5.1 the average total amount of departures
across all aircraft categories by hour is found, as well as an overview of the daily changes
in total departures for the period during which flights were tracked.
Table 5.2: En-route extension [50]
Distance [NM]
0-199
200-399
400-599
600-799
800-999
1000-1999
>2000
TMA interface
6.1%
3.5%
2.4%
1.6%
1.1%
0.8%
-
Route extension
4.6%
4.6%
4.0%
3.8%
3.5%
3.3%
3.0%
Total extension
10.7 %
8.1%
6.4%
5.4%
4.6%
4.1%
3.0%
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
17
==PAGE:25==
Based on the origin as well as the location of the destination, a unique straight-line dis-
tance can be determined and assigned to each one of the tracked flights. As in reality
flight routes do not occur on an optimum direct trajectory, a correction for the horizontal
flight efficiency has to be applied. [51] Distortions to a straight-line connection can be
attributed to the routing as well as the interference with the TMA around an airport, and
expressed in terms of percentage depending on the original straight-line distance as seen
in Table 5.2. [50] As no data for long-range flights with distances larger than 2,000 NM
is available, it is assumed that the TMA interference can be considered to be negligible
and the route extension converges towards 3%. In Table B.2 in Appendix B, the average
straight-line distance as well as the average corrected distance for each aircraft category
and airport can be found. While constant efforts are being made to improve the horizontal
flight efficiency, it is assumed that there will be no significant changes to the magnitude
of the correction factors displayed in Table 5.2 during the time frame considered in this
study.
(a) Average departures per hour
Date
Departures
27.11.2022
548
28.11.2022
546
29.11.2022
561
30.11.2022
567
01.12.2022
582
02.12.2022
613
03.12.2022
515
Total
3932
(b) Daily departures
Figure 5.1: Paris CDG - departures (27.11. - 03.12.2022)
5.2
Air traffic model
In order to predict the hydrogen demand situation at the three different airports throughout
the different time frames until the year 2050, it is required to have an accurate represen-
tation of the air traffic situation both in terms of annual departures as well as fluctuations
throughout the year. As the global air transportation took a significant hit through the ef-
fects of the Corona pandemic, traffic numbers from the year 2019 are widely considered
as the basis for scenarios predicting the development of air transportation for the coming
decades. [8] [7] Data on the monthly departures at of Rotterdam, Malaga and Paris CDG
were therefore retrieved as seen in Table 5.3. [37] [41] [43] To model the development of
the air traffic at these three airports, a number of key assumptions are made:
• The flights tracked during one week as listed in Table B.3 in Appendix B are rep-
resentative for air traffic movements throughout the whole year in terms of types of
aircraft and destinations, and can be linearly scaled according to the fluctuations of
overall departures as seen in Table 5.3.
• The typical mission profiles of flights at Rotterdam, Malaga and Paris CDG over
the time frame of the study remain to be the same in terms of destinations and
18
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:26==
size of aircraft, and are not distorted through the implications and limitations of new
technologies or the introduction of regulatory restrictions.
• Differences in the market growth across the different categories of aircraft as spec-
ified in Table 5.1 are negligible, hence their share of the overall fleet stays constant
over time. While there is a projected annual fleet growth of 2.8%, the commercial
market outlook of Boeing expects a virtually same rate of airline fleet expansion
across single-aisle and wide-body aircraft. [52]
Table 5.3: Monthly departures 2019
Month
RTHA
AGP
CDG
January
394
3699
18 795
February
416
3843
17 390
March
549
4939
19 820
April
666
6672
21 032
May
858
6987
21 676
June
831
7506
21 798
July
833
8134
23 146
August
838
8052
23 237
September
826
7399
22 188
October
733
6838
21 884
November
365
4270
18 933
December
375
4149
19 182
Total
7684
72 488
249 081
While the growth at individual airports may deviate due to local conditions and circum-
stances, it is assumed that the country-specific annual growth rates for The Netherlands,
Spain and France of 0.6, 0.8 and 0.7 % provide an accurate base for the individual air
traffic growth rates at Rotterdam, Malaga and Paris CDG. Based on these growth rates as
well as the data baseline from 2019, the air traffic for the considered time span until 2050
is modeled. Table 5.4 illustrates the number of annual departures by aircraft category for
the year 2019, as well as the prospective number of annual departures for 2030, 2040
and 2050 for each one of the three airports.
Table 5.4: Prospective annual departures
Category
Origin
Year
Regional
Narrow-body
Medium range wide-body
Long range wide-body
Total
wide-body
wide-body
RTHA
2019
2207
5477
0
0
7684
2030
2383
5914
0
0
8297
2040
2555
6341
0
0
8896
2050
2740
6799
0
0
9539
AGP
2019
8367
64 121
0
0
72 488
2030
9134
69 995
0
0
79 128
2040
9891
75 800
0
0
85 691
2050
10 712
82 087
0
0
92 799
CDG
2019
30 407
149 879
17 674
51 121
249 081
2030
32 475
160 074
18 876
54 598
266 023
2040
34 477
169 941
20 040
57 964
282 422
2050
36 602
180 418
21 275
61 537
299 832
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
19
==PAGE:27==
5.3
Prospective kerosene demand
In order to obtain the most accurate representation of the kerosene demand situation at
Rotterdam, Malaga and Paris CDG for the period of time during which the flights were
tracked, the demand for each individual flight should be considered. Using the aviation
emissions calculator of the European Environmental Agency, the required trip fuel can
be determined based on the type of aircraft and flown distance. [53] In Table B.4 in Ap-
pendix B the daily and total kerosene demand by aircraft category for the three airports
during the considered time period can be found. With the previously established model
for the prospective air traffic development, the kerosene demand for future time frames
can then be approximated through a process of linear scaling based on the ratio between
the tracked departures between the 7.11.2022 and the 03.12.2022, and the anticipated
number of departures in the future. When following this approach, two key assumptions
are being made:
• The average distance per departure flown by an aircraft of one category at a future
point in time is the equivalent to the average distance flown by an aircraft of one
category during the period in which the flights were tracked.
• There are no significant improvements in the fuel efficiency of conventional aircraft
in each one of the categories, hence the fuel consumption for a specific mission in
terms of aircraft and distance at a future point in time is equal o the fuel consumption
of the same mission in the present time.
In contrast to the second assumption, the anticipated improvements in fuel efficiency are
actually significant. It is estimated that for the next generation of single-aisle and twin-
aisle aircraft introduced in 2035 the improvement in fuel burn will be 22 % and 18 %
respectively, and 38 % and 34 % for a future generation in 2050. [54] However, in the
context of this study the approach towards the modelling of the prospective hydrogen
demand is based on efficiency gains of future hydrogen aircraft relative to the present
state of conventional designs. The estimation of the kerosene demand for future time
frames is therefore based on today’s fuel efficiency of aircraft in each one of the categories,
without any improvements. In Table 5.5 the prospective annual demand for kerosene at
the airports of Rotterdam, Malaga and Paris CDG by category and year can be found.
Table 5.5: Prospective annual kerosene demand [103 kg]
Category
Origin
Year
Regional
Narrow-body
Medium range wide-body
Long range wide-body
Total
wide-body
wide-body
RTHA
2019
3760.2
38 123.5
0.0
0.0
41 883.6
2030
4060.1
41 163.9
0.0
0.0
45 223.9
2040
4353.4
44 137.8
0.0
0.0
48 491.2
2050
4667.9
47 326.7
0.0
0.0
51 994.6
AGP
2019
13 847.7
392 503.6
0.0
0.0
406 351.3
2030
15 116.2
428 459.2
0.0
0.0
443 575.4
2040
16 370.0
463 996.6
0.0
0.0
480 366.6
2050
17 727.8
502 481.5
0.0
0.0
520 209.3
CDG
2019
71 652.2
644 397.6
498 387.9
2 762 311.9
3 976 749.5
2030
76 525.7
688 227.0
532 286.2
2 950 193.5
4 247 232.4
2040
81 243.2
730 653.6
565 099.7
3 132 061.7
4 509 058.1
2050
86 251.5
775 695.6
599 935.9
3 325 141.3
4 787 024.4
20
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:28==
5.4
Hydrogen demand estimation
A key element for the estimation of the prospective hydrogen demand situation at the
airports of Rotterdam, Malaga and Paris CDG is the share of hydrogen aircraft in the
fleet of each one of the different aircraft categories. Hoelzen et al. suggest a baseline
scenario as well as an ambitious scenario for the adoption of hydrogen aircraft for the
time frame until 2050, that take factors such as the time for manufacturing ramp-up and
take-rate of hydrogen aircraft vs. all aircraft deliveries in the one category into account.
[9] While the baseline scenario assumes the entry into service (EIS) of regional hydrogen
aircraft in 2030, the ambitious scenario considers the EIS of hydrogen aircraft of that
category in 2028. In Table 5.6 the share of hydrogen aircraft in each category is illustrated
for the different time frames until 2050. Both scenarios do not expect the introduction
of long range wide-body aircraft until 2050, which is based on the length of cycles for
development and production ramp-up as well as pending technological challenges such
as the development of liquid hydrogen tanks with a sufficiently high gravimetric storage
capability. [1]
Table 5.6: Hydrogen aircraft fleet share
Category
Scenario
Year
Regional
Narrow-body
Medium range
Long range
wide-body
wide-body
Baseline
2030
0.6%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
2040
28.9 %
13.3 %
0.4%
0.0%
2050
61.3 %
49.0 %
19.0 %
0.0%
Ambitious
2030
8.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
2040
48.3 %
35.7 %
3.9%
0.0%
2050
88.8 %
86.9 %
34.3 %
0.0%
While it is anticipated that smaller sized regional aircraft will use a hybrid propulsion sys-
tem consisting of a fuel cell in combination with a battery and an electric motor, it is ex-
pected that larger narrow-body and wide-body aircraft will be propelled by a modified type
of turbofan that uses hydrogen combustion. [1] The GENESIS deliverable D1.2 illustrates
the mission characteristics of a conventionally propelled regional aircraft and a hybrid
electric aircraft that is using electric energy from a fuel cell operated with hydrogen. [4]
Fuel requirements for both a typical 200 NM as well as a 600 NM flight are given, which is
accordance with the average distances of flights tracked as seen in Table B.2 in Appendix
B and is therefore applicable. Based on the ratio of required mass of kerosene and hy-
drogen for each flight, a factor for conversion from kerosene to hydrogen can be derived.
As it is expected that the efficiency of fuel cells will improve over time, a differentiation
is made for regional aircraft in the 2030 to 2040 time frame and the 2040 to 2050 time
frame. A similar approach can be taken by considering the specific energy consumption
for a conventional short-range and mid-range aircraft, as well as a hydrogen short-range
and mid-range aircraft using hydrogen combustion engines, for missions with a range of
800 NM and 2000 NM. [10] Based on the ratio between the required specific energy of
each aircraft type for the same mission, as well as the gravimetric energy density of 33.3
kWh/kg for hydrogen and 12 kWh/kg for kerosene, a conversion factor for the relative
requirement between kerosene and hydrogen for narrow-body and medium range wide-
body aircraft can be determined. In Table 5.7 an overview of the different kerosene to
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
21
==PAGE:29==
hydrogen conversion factors by aircraft category and EIS, as well as the specific propul-
sion type is given.
Table 5.7: Kerosene to hydrogen conversion factors
Category
EIS
Conversion [kg H2 / kg K]
Propulsion Type
Regional
2030
0.227
Fuel cell / electric
Regional
2045
0.213
Fuel cell / electric
Narrow-body
2035
0.404
Combustion
Medium range wide-body
2040
0.424
Combustion
Based on the previously determined development of the kerosene demand at the airports
of Rotterdam, Malaga and Paris CDG, as well as the share of hydrogen aircraft in airline
fleets at the different time frames as indicated in Table 5.6, the prospective hydrogen
demand can be derived. The underlying assumption for the derivation of the amount of
hydrogen that is equivalent to the required amount of kerosene of a conventional aircraft,
is that hydrogen which is not used during the flight can either be fully recovered and re-
used for a following flight, in accordance with the GENESIS deliverable. [4] In Appendix
B the prospective annual hydrogen demand by aircraft category for each time frame and
scenario is given in Table B.5, and the total hydrogen demand by month for each time
frame and scenario is presented in Table B.6. To obtain an overview for the dynamic
evolution of the hydrogen demand situation, it can be visualised in terms of year and
aircraft category as seen in Figure 5.2 for the case of Paris CDG, both for the baseline as
well as the ambitious scenario. In Figure B.1 in Appendix B, the corresponding graphs for
Rotterdam and Malaga can be found.
(a) Paris CDG - baseline scenario
(b) Paris CDG - ambitious scenario
Figure 5.2: Dynamic hydrogen demand by aircraft category - Paris CDG
As seen both in the graphs in the figures as well as the tables, the driving factor for hydro-
gen demand at all three airports are aircraft belonging to the class of narrow-body aircraft.
In order to accurately assess the requirements for the storage and supply infrastructure
of hydrogen, knowledge about the annual peak demand for each one of the three time
frames is required. In Table 5.8 the peak demand of hydrogen for one month is given for
each one of the three airports and time frames. While in the case of Rotterdam and Paris
22
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:30==
CDG this peak demand occurs in the month of August, Malaga has the highest require-
ment for hydrogen in July. It should be noted that for the 2030 time frame, the difference
in the resulting hydrogen demand depending on the respective scenario is significant,
while for the 2040 and 2050 time frame the peak demand is similar in terms of the order
of magnitude or all three airports.
Table 5.8: Peak monthly hydrogen demand [103 kg]
Year
Rotterdam
Malaga
Paris CDG
Baseline
Ambitious
Baseline
Ambitious
Baseline
Ambitious
2030
0.7
8.3
2.5
30.9
10.4
130.2
2040
289.0
745.2
2908.3
7697.4
4226.6
11 517.8
2050
1092.0
1913.7
11 432.3
20 185.1
19 944.7
35 163.6
The kerosene demand required for the hypothetical full coverage of flight operations using
aircraft with conventional propulsion systems has been previously determined as seen in
Table 5.5. Based on this kerosene demand as well as the fleet share of hydrogen aircraft
of each category as found in Table 5.6, the amount of kerosene replaced by LH2 in the
baseline and ambitious scenarios can be determined. In Table 5.9 the corresponding
accumulated annual demand for LH2, and the equivalent amount of kerosene which is
replaced by the LH2 can be found for each scenario, location and time frame.
Table 5.9: Accumulated annual LH2 and kerosene demand [kg]
Location
Year
Baseline
Ambitious
LH2
Kerosene
LH2
Kerosene
RTHA
2030
5.92E+03
2.60E+04
7.40E+04
3.26E+05
2040
2.65E+06
7.11E+06
6.83E+06
1.78E+07
2050
1.00E+07
2.61E+07
1.75E+07
4.53E+07
AGP
2030
2.20E+04
9.69E+04
2.76E+05
1.21E+06
2040
2.59E+07
6.63E+07
6.86E+07
1.73E+08
2050
1.02E+08
2.57E+08
1.80E+08
4.53E+08
CDG
2030
1.12E+05
4.90E+05
1.40E+06
6.14E+06
2040
4.53E+07
1.22E+08
1.23E+08
3.22E+08
2050
2.14E+08
5.47E+08
3.77E+08
9.57E+08
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
23
==PAGE:31==
6
Life cycle inventory
In Chapter 2 brightway2 has been presented as the framework within which the LCA in
this study is performed. In order to comply with the prospective nature of the LCA in
the context of this study, the changes in inventory data throughout the GENESIS time
frames of 2030, 2040 and 2050 should be taken into account. For this purpose, the
premise environment provides a selection of inventories based on the ecoinvent 3 cutoff
database, which consider the evolution of energy and resource pathways in the future.
Within premise, various scenarios are available that are defined in terms of a climate
trajectory as well as a so called ”Shared Socio-economic Pathway” (SSP). [6] For this
study the ”SSP2-PkBudg500” scenario is chosen, that is in alignment with the goals of
the Paris Agreement and has the target of limiting the atmospheric temperature increase
to 1.5 C. This selection aims to reflect on the objectives of the GENESIS project, which has
the intention to draw a pathway that enables the transition towards the environmentally
sustainable operation of aircraft in the future.
While some of the processes outlined for the different scenarios in Chapter 4, such as the
production of hydrogen through steam reforming or coal gasification, are readily available
within the ”SSP2-PkBudg500” databases for the different time frames, others are more
specific and need to be defined individually. For some processes this can be achieved
through modifying the characteristics of existing processes in the database, whereas need
to be build from the ground up using references from similar studies in literature. Under-
lying for all processes considered in the inventory is the assumption of linear scale-ability,
meaning that potentially beneficial impacts from the trend towards larger quantities in pro-
cesses such as the production or storage of hydrogen are not taken into account. In Table
C.1 in Appendix C a complete overview of the inventory of the processes in this study
for the 2030, 2040 and 2050 time frame is given, including their origin from the ”SSP2-
PkBudg500” database or the Thesis Scenario Database (TSD) in which the processes
unique to this study are composed.
6.1
Hydrogen production
The processes for the production of hydrogen are steam reforming of natural gas, coal
gasification, and electrolysis as discussed in Chapter 4. All three processes are repre-
sented in the ”SSP2-PkBudg500” database of premise, and are therefore directly imple-
mented in the building of the respective supply chains. While the process for hydrogen
production from steam reforming is available in the form ’hydrogen production, steam
methane reforming of natural gas, 25 bar’ (kilogram, EUR, None) for Europe and ’hydro-
gen production, steam methane reforming of natural gas, 25 bar’ (kilogram, MEA, None)
for the Middle East and Africa, coal gasification in the Arabian Gulf region is represented
by the process ’methanol synthesis, hydrogen from coal gasification’ (kilogram, MEA,
None). The process of electrolysis is available as ’hydrogen production, gaseous, 25 bar,
from electrolysis’ (kilogram, EUR, None) for Europe and ’hydrogen production, gaseous,
25 bar, from electrolysis’ (kilogram, MEA, None) for the Middle East and Africa.
When considering the production of hydrogen from electrolysis, it should be noted that
the source of the electricity is considered to be the largest contributing factor for the en-
vironmental impact for the process. [35] The energy mix for electricity production in the
”SSP2-PkBudg500” database of premise, which is used for the production of hydrogen in
the two identified processes, should therefore give a sufficiently accurate representation
24
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:32==
of actual anticipated composition of the electricity production in the respective regions. In
Table 6.1 an overview of the composition of the electricity in the process ’market group
for electricity, high voltage’ (kilowatt hour, EUR, None) for Europe and the process ’mar-
ket group for electricity, high voltage’ (kilowatt hour, MEA, None) for the Middle East and
Africa from the ”SSP2-PkBudg500” database for the 2050 time frame is given, in com-
parison to the actual expected mix in the specific countries that are part of the scenarios
outlined in Chapter 4. It can be noted that in the case of Europe there is a good corre-
lation between the ’market group for electricity, high voltage’ (kilowatt hour, EUR, None)
process and the anticipated developments until 2050 of the individual countries in terms
of the total share of renewable energies, however the scenario in premise is slightly more
optimistic with share of 97.99 % as compared to 90.28 %, 87.55 % and 92.57 % for The
Netherlands, France and Spain, respectively. On the other hand Morocco and especially
Saudi Arabia, as a representative of the Arabian Gulf region, show a more significant
deviation from the energy mix for electricity production presented in premise.
Table 6.1: Energy mix for electricity production 2050 in % [55][56][57][58][59]
Category
SSP2-PkBudg500
SSP2-PkBudg500
Marocco
Saudi
The
France
Spain
MEA
EUR
Arabia
Netherlands
Wind
43.77
55.15
35.46
10.00
36.28
43.3
53.82
Solar
52.68
29.85
17.32
40.00
53.99
21.1
35.11
Water
1.54
8.20
27.22
-
-
-
3.64
Other renewables
-
-
-
-
-
23.15
-
Nuclear
1.92
4.28
-
35.00
-
9.80
7.43
Oil
0.01
0.01
9.00
-
-
-
-
Natural Gas
0.01
0.01
-
5.39
2.80
-
Coal
0.01
0.47
22.00
-
3.27
-
-
Other fossil
0.09
2.05
-
15.00
1.06
-
-
Renewable share
97.99
93.20
80.00
50.00
90.28
87.55
92.57
6.2
Hydrogen liquefaction
In Chapter 4 the Claude and Brayton cycle were presented as the two predominant meth-
ods for the liquefaction of gaseous hydrogen. In the context of the IDEALHY project, the
characteristics of the liquefaction process of hydrogen for a Brayton cycle were exam-
ined in detail. [60] A liquefaction plant with a capacity of 50 tonnes of liquefied hydrogen
per day is assumed, that has a lifetime of 30 years. In Table 6.2, building materials for
the construction of the plant are listed among other information. As the liquefaction pro-
cess using the Brayton cycle makes use of cryogenic cooling, a cryogenic hydrogen tank
is considered as a separate item. Throughout the liquefaction an accumulated loss of
1.65 % of the feed hydrogen is taken into account, which is predominantly caused by the
different steps of compression during pre-cooling. [60]
While the theoretical minimum required electrical energy for the process is 2.7 kWh per
kg of hydrogen, in reality the specific energy consumption (SEC) for liquefaction is con-
siderably higher. [31] While at the present state the SEC for the liquefaction process is in
the range of 12 to 15 kWh per kg of hydrogen depending on the process and size of the
liquefaction plant, it is expected that this value will drop to 6 kWh per kg of hydrogen with
the introduction of optimised processes which are currently under development. [61] [30]
This is in accordance with the long term target set out by the Office of Energy Efficiency
& Renewable Energy of the U.S. Department of Energy for large scale liquefaction plants
with a production volume of 300,000 kg of liquid hydrogen per day. [62] The IDEALHY
project assumes an SEC of 6.0, to 6.7 kWh per kg of liquefied hydrogen, however this
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
25
==PAGE:33==
is an idealised value that takes several potential improvements into consideration, and
does not reflect on the current state of the technology. Based on this and in the absence
of a specific timeline for the advancement of liquefaction processes, a SEC with a linear
progression from 12 to 6 kWh electrical energy per kg of hydrogen is assumed for the dif-
ferent time frames as indicated in Table 6.2. As no consistent information about the type
and quantity of the refrigerant in the pre-cooling cycle in current or prospective liquefac-
tion processes could be retrieved, the amount of refrigerant required for the liquefaction
of hydrogen is not considered as part of this study. The build-up of the full combined
process for the creation of 1 kg liquid hydrogen from gaseous hydrogen can be found in
Table C.2 in Appendix C, at the example of the Netherlands in the 2030 time frame.
Table 6.2: Liquefaction plant characteristics [60][30]
Item
Value
Unit
Plant Characteristics
Liquefaction capacity
50
103 kg LH2 / day
Lifetime of plant
30
years
Plant Operation
SEC 2030
12
kWh/kg H2
SEC 2040
9
kWh/kg H2
SEC 2050
6
kWh/kg H2
H2 losses
1.65
%
Plant Construction
Cryogenic H2 tank
1
unit
Carbon steel
380000
kg
Stainless steel
595000
kg
Copper
150000
kg
Aluminium
140000
kg
Concrete
46620
kg
Cryogenic H2 tank
Aluminium Alloy 2219
36382190
kg
Evacuated perlite
8377393
kg
6.3
Hydrogen storage
The storage of liquid hydrogen in tanks is modelled using the conceptual design of a tank
for a heavy duty truck as a reference, both for the on-site storage at airports as well as the
storage for hydrogen transportation via truck or rail. [63] In Table 6.3 the characteristics of
the tank are given, which has has a storage capacity of 4,302 kg LH2 at a total structural
weight of 5,516 kg. While it is assumed that the cycle for the refilling of the tank is equal to
one day in the case of the use for transportation, the storage capacity of tanks on-site at
the airport is dependant on the respective strategy at the airport applied for ensuring the
availability of fuel. The typical operational storage at large airports usually covers a span
of a 3 days during times of peak demand, with a varying approach towards the emergency
supply strategy. [64] In order to obtain the total lifetime storage capacity of an LH2 tank
for the on-site storage, a refill interval of 3 days is therefore considered. Depending on
the characteristics of the LH2 tank, a boil-off of 1.5 to 3.0 % of hydrogen per day can be
assumed. [27] In this study a value of 2.0 % is therefore used as indicated in Table 6.3. In
Table C.3 in Appendix C the build-up of the full process for the storage of liquid hydrogen
is shown at the example of storage in the 2030 time frame.
26
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:34==
Table 6.3: Liquid hydrogen storage characteristics [63][27]
Item
Value
Unit
Storage Characteristics
Storage Capacity
4,302
kg LH2
Lifetime
10
years
Storage Operation
Refill interval - stationary
3
days
Refill interval - transport
1
days
Boil-off
2
% / day
Storage Construction
Aluminium Alloy 2219
3,156
kg
Polyurethane foam
2,360
kg
6.4
Hydrogen transportation
6.4.1
Truck and rail
Within the ”SSP2-PkBudg500” database of premise, the transportation for liquid hydro-
gen is available for the specific case of the transportation of liquid hydrogen via truck
over a distance of 500 km in the combined process ’hydrogen supply, from electrolysis,
by truck, as liquid, over 500 km’ (kilogram, EUR, None) for the supply of hydrogen. In
this process, the transportation part is split up into equally into the processes ’transport,
freight, lorry, unspecified, regional delivery’ (ton kilometer, EUR, None) and ’transport,
freight, lorry, unspecified, long haul’ (ton kilometer, EUR, None). In the same process
in premise, the cooling energy required for the transportation of hydrogen by truck is de-
noted 0.002338 kWh / km. Following this set-up, the same split between regional delivery
and long haul, as well as the cooling energy is taken into account for the new process for
the transportation of liquid hydrogen as presented in Table C.4 in Appendix C for the ex-
ample of the transportation of 1 kg of liquid hydrogen by truck over the distance of 50 km
in The Netherlands in the 2050 time frame. Following the boil-off for the storage of liquid
hydrogen as presented in Table 6.3, a loss of 2 % is considered for the transportation.
For the transportation by rail, which comes to play for the scenario of CDG airport in Paris,
the premise ”SSP2-PkBudg500” database offers the process ’transport, freight train’ (ton
kilometer, FR, None) for the transportation via freight train in France. In a similar fashion as
for the transportation by truck, the process for the transportation of liquid hydrogen by rail
is a combination of the rail transportation in premise as well as the according storage tank
and cooling energy. The build-up of the process can be found in Table C.5 in Appendix C
at the example of the transportation of 1 kg of liquid hydrogen over a distance of 800 km
by train in France in the 2030 time frame.
6.4.2
Pipeline
In Chapter 4, the transportation of pipelines has been discussed as a promising option
for the transportation of large quantities of gaseous hydrogen over long distances. While
one feasible approach for the short- to mid-term is the re-purposing of pipelines that were
initially designed for the transportation of natural gas, the long-term objective is the con-
struction of a pipeline network dedicated for the transportation of hydrogen. [34] Such a
system would rely on larger transmission pipelines for the long distance transportation of
hydrogen, as well as smaller pipelines for the local distribution. In Table 6.4 the charac-
teristics for a transmission pipeline with a diameter of 200 mm and a distribution pipeline
with a diameter of 100 mm are presented, including the quantity of construction materials
required for 1 km of each type of pipeline. [65] Based on the diameter of the pipeline and
pressure of 70 to 100 bar, with an average value of 85 bar, the flow rate for the distribution
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
27
==PAGE:35==
pipeline and transmission pipeline can be determined as 50 and 180 tons of hydrogen per
day, respectively. [66] In order to maintain the pressure level throughout the pipeline, re-
compression at intervals of 250 km with an energy demand of 0.6 kWh is required. For
both types of pipelines, a loss of 0.25 % of hydrogen per 100 km is taken into account.
In Table C.6 in Appendix C, the composition of the process is shown at the example of
the transportation of 1 kg of gaseous hydrogen through a distribution pipeline over the
distance of 50 km in The Netherlands in the 2030 time frame.
Table 6.4: Hydrogen pipeline characteristics [65][66]
Item
Value
Unit
Distribtion
Transmission
Pipeline Characteristics
Diameter
100
200
mm
Pressure
85
85
bar
Flow rate
50
180
t/d
Life time
40
40
years
Pipeline Operation
Recompression
0.6
0.6
kWh/250 km
Losses
0.25
0.25
%/100 km
Pipeline Construction
Primary aluminum
19.4
64.8
kg
Pipeline decommissioning
2700
10900
kg
Silica sand
120
225
t
Steel, low-alloyed
5340
21800
kg
Silicon
570
1900
g
Zinc
15.3
51.1
kg
Drawing of pipe steel
5340
21800
kg
Excavation, hydraulic digger
1200
1200
m3
Excavation, skid-steer loader
9000
9000
m3
Zinc coating
5340
21800
kg
Transport train
1070
4390
t km
Transport lorry
6580
13600
t km
6.4.3
Ship
Within the premise database ”SSP2-PkBudg500”, a combined process for the supply of
liquid hydrogen by ship and through electrolysis exists as ’hydrogen supply, from elec-
trolysis, by ship, as liquid, over 2000 km’ (kilogram, EUR, None). As pointed out in the
overview of technologies for the transportation of hydrogen in 4, the set-up for the trans-
portation of liquid hydrogen ship is similar to the the current design of ships for the sea
transport of liquid natural gas (LNG). Following this, the transportation by ship in the exist-
ing process in premise consists with a fraction of 0.125 of the process ’market for transport,
freight, sea, tanker for liquefied natural gas’ and a fraction of 0.875 of the process ’mar-
ket for transport, freight, sea, tanker for liquid goods other than petroleum and liquefied
natural gas’, with the energy required for the cooling of the liquid hydrogen specified as
0.000258 kWh / km. In Chapter 4 the average distance from the Arabian Gulf to France
via sea was defined as 3,500 NM, which equates to a journey of approximately 10 days
at a cruise speed of 15 knots that is common for tanker ships of the respective category.
[67] With an average boil-off of 0.2 % per day for the transportation by ship, the loss of
liquid hydrogen for the journey is approximately 2 %. [32] In Table C.7 in Appendix C, the
full build-up for the process of the transportation of liquid hydrogen by ship can be found
at the example of the transportation over a distance of 3,500 NM in the 2030 time frame.
28
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:36==
6.5
Kerosene
In order to consider the provision of kerosene equivalent to the determined demand of LH2
as outlined in Table 5.9 in Chapter 5, a corresponding process is required. As the detailed
investigation and modelling of the supply chain for the provision of kerosene at the airports
is not within the scope of this study, this part of LCI is taken into account by including a
readily available process. In the ”SSP2-PkBudg500” database, the supply of kerosene
relevant for RTHA, AGP and CDG is available as ’market for kerosene’ (kilogram, Europe
without Switzerland, None). It entails all steps in the supply chain, leading up to the
distribution of kerosene to the final consumer.
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
29
==PAGE:37==
7
Life cycle impact assessment
In order to assess the impact of the various scenarios and processes, IMPACT World+ is
used as the method for the LCIA. The framework offers the capability to assess impacts
based on 27 distinct impact categories, both on the midpoint as well as damage level.
[68] The characterisation factors used by the method take geographical regions into ac-
count, and various of the impact categories are further subdivided into short-term and
long-term (≥100 years after emission) damages. Within the IMPACT World+ framework,
the impacts at damage level contribute to the damage representation in terms of area of
protection (AoP) and area of concern (AoC). While the AoP’s are subdivided into human
health (HH) and ecosystem quality (EQ), the AoC’s are water and carbon. The following
analysis is performed on the damage level, with a focus on both the overall impact as well
as the performance of individual processes.
7.1
Impact assessment
In order to put the damage characteristics of each scenario presented in Chapter 4 in
perspective, their impacts are assessed per FU for each one of the impact categories as
seen in Table D.1 in Appendix D. In Figure 7.1, the cumulative damage to the EQ is given in
terms of PDF-m2-year/FU for each airport and time frame, subdivided into the contribution
towards the different AoC’s. In this representation, there is a significant increase in the
cumulative EQ damage for each one of the three airports between the 2030 and 2050
time frame. It is notable that RTHA peaks with 213.6 PDF-m2-year/FU in the 2040 time
frame, while the AGP and CDP see a continuous upwards trend. In all scenarios water is
the dominating AoC, with a contribution of over 90 % to the cumulative EQ damage.
(a) Cumulative damage
(b) Damage contribution
Figure 7.1: Damage to EQ by AoC for each scenario
In a similar fashion, the cumulative HH damage per FU can be assessed in terms of
DALY/FU as seen in Figure 7.2. Across all scenarios, the cumulative damage to HH
decreases from the 2030 to the 2050 time frame, with an interim increase for CDG in
2040. The peak cumulative HH damage occurs in the AGP 2030 scenario with 8.00E-05
DALY/FU, whereas the minimum cumulative HH damage is achieved at RTHA in the 2050
time frame with 3.67E-05 DALY/FU. While water is the largest AoC across all scenarios,
30
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:38==
carbon has a significant contribution that is close to equalling water for CDG in the 2050
time frame. It should be noted that in the case of CDG, the contribution of the impacts from
the carbon AoC to the cumulative HH damage is increasing throughout time, whereas for
RTHA and AGP it is continuously decreasing.
(a) Cumulative damage
(b) Damage contribution
Figure 7.2: Damage to HH by AoC for each scenario
To further decompose the damage in terms of the contribution of the different impact
categories to the cumulative damage, it can be assessed with regards to the relative
damage scores in % of scenario with highest score in the respective category. In Figure
D.1 and Figure D.2, the relative damage scores for the impact categories contributing to
EQ and HH are presented. It can be found that for the impact categories contributing
to EQ, the highest scores are distributed between the CDG 2050 as well as the RTHA
2040 scenario. Notable in the case of RTHA is the significant drop in ’climate change’
and ’marine acidification’ from the 2030 to the 2040 and 2050 time frame, while for all
other categories the relative damage score is higher in the 2040 and 2050 time frame as
compared to 2030. This coincides with the behaviour of the cumulative EQ damage for
RTHA exhibited in Figure 7.1.
Table 7.1: Cumulative EQ impacts of annual LH2 provision [PDF-m2-year]
Year
Scenario
RTHA
AGP
CDG
2030
BS
7.78E+05
2.25E+06
1.18E+07
AS
9.73E+06
2.81E+07
1.48E+08
2040
BS
5.66E+08
3.40E+09
3.75E+09
AS
1.46E+09
8.99E+09
1.02E+10
2050
BS
2.10E+09
1.77E+10
4.00E+10
AS
3.68E+09
3.12E+10
7.06E+10
For the impact categories concerning HH, similar observations regarding the relative dam-
age scores can be made. In the case of RTHA there is a significant decrease in ’climate
change’, ’water availability’ and ’ozone layer depletion’ from the 2030 to the 2040 and
2050 time frame, while for all other categories the relative damage score is higher in the
2040 and 2050 time frame as compared to 2030. As for the impact categories concerning
EQ damage, for the CDG scenarios several of the relative damage scores are dropping
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
31
==PAGE:39==
from the 2030 to 2040 time frame, followed by a sharp increase towards the 2050 time
frame. In the case of AGP, the relative damage score of impact categories regarding HH
is either stagnant or rising, with the exception of the ’water availability’ category.
Table 7.2: Cumulative HH impacts of annual LH2 provision [DALY]
Year
Scenario
RTHA
AGP
CDG
2030
BS
3.87E-01
3.87E-01
1.76E+00
AS
4.84E+00
4.84E+00
2.20E+01
2040
BS
9.82E+01
9.82E+01
1.88E+03
AS
2.53E+02
2.53E+02
4.98E+03
2050
BS
3.65E+02
3.65E+02
6.53E+03
AS
6.40E+02
6.40E+02
1.15E+04
In Chapter 5 the total annual demand of LH2 as well as the replaced amount of kerosene
has been determined for each airport and time frame, considering both the BS and AS
scenario for the fleet share of hydrogen aircraft. Based on these results, the total cumula-
tive damage of the annual supply of LH2 to the airports can be assessed as seen in Table
D.2, D.3 and D.4 in Appendix D. In Table 7.1 and 7.2, respectively, a summary of the
cumulative annual EQ and HH damage in terms of PDF-m2-year and DALY is provided.
7.2
Contribution analysis
To investigate the composition of the EQ and HH impacts, and determine the root cause
for the magnitude of observed contributions as well as the relative damage compared to
kerosene, the individual impact categories need to be further analysed. In particular it
is of interest to identify the relevant processes that are the driving factors. In Table D.5
in Appendix D, the contribution to the respective AoP and relative change between time
frames is listed for each impact category. Based on this representation, impact categories
relevant for detailed examination with regards to their damage contribution can be iden-
tified. When further decomposing the water AoC which has been identified as the main
contributing factor for the EQ damage, it can be found that the impact category ’Fresh-
water ecotoxicity, long term’ dominates the cumulative EQ damage with a contribution of
over 90 % across all scenarios. Similarly, the carbon and water AoC are driven by the
impact categories ’Climate change, human health, long term’ and ’Water availability, hu-
man health’, that contribute to the cumulative HH damage in the order of 20 % and 50 %,
respectively.
When further analysing the impact in each one of the identified categories, the relative
contribution to the damage can be assigned to the underlying processes of the specific
scenarios in terms of H2 production, transportation, liquefaction and storage. In Figure 7.3
the relative contributions of these processes to the ’Freshwater ecotoxicity, long term’ cat-
egory is visualised for the different scenarios presented in Chapter 4. It can be found that
across all scenarios the H2 production through electrolysis has a significant contribution,
ranging from 30 % in the 2030 time frame for AGP to over 80 % in the 2050 time frame
for RTHA. This is followed by the liquefaction process, which has a relative contribution
that supersedes the effect of electrolysis for AGP in the 2030 time frame.
Upon further analysis it can be found that the driving factor for the impact of H2 production
through electrolysis and the operation of the liquefaction plant in the ’Freshwater ecotoxi-
city, long term’ category is the process for electricity supply, denoted as ’market group for
32
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:40==
electricity, low voltage’ in the ”SSP2-PkBudg500” in premise. When further investigating
the process, it can be determined that the root cause for the contribution of the electricity
supply is located in the requirement of copper for the distribution network construction,
specifically in the processes for the production and processing of copper (’copper pro-
duction, cathode, solvent extraction and electrowinning process’ and ’electrorefining of
copper, anode’). Secondary to the liquefaction operation, but nonetheless relevant in
terms of the relative contribution, is the liquefaction plant production. The driving factor
here is aluminum used as a construction material for the cryogenic H2 storage tank, rep-
resented by the processes ’aluminium ingot, primary, to aluminium, cast alloy market’ and
’treatment of aluminium scrap, post-consumer, prepared for recycling’ within the premise
database.
Figure 7.3: Relative contributions to ’Freshwater ecotoxicity, long term’
In the same fashion, the relative contributions to the ’Climate change, human health, long
term’ category can be analysed as visualised in Figure 7.4. Here the driving factor for
damage in the category is the fossil based H2 production, with the exception of the RTHA
2040 and 2050 scenarios which make exclusive use of H2 production through electrolysis.
In this case it should be noted, however, that for both scenarios the relative damage score
for climate change (Table D.1, Appendix D) as well as the damage per FU (Figure D.1,
Appendix D) is notably low when compared to the other scenarios. Next to the H2 pro-
duction, the liquefaction is noteworthy to mention for the relative contribution to ’Climate
change, human health, long term’.
When further decomposing the fossil based H2 production, it can be found that the natural
gas ingredient from the process for steam reforming is the defining factor. Upon further in-
vestigation, processes for the refining of natural gas such as the sweetening, represented
by ’sweetening, natural gas’ in the ”SSP2-PkBudg500” database, and the processes as-
sociated with the pipeline transportation of the gas have major contributions to the ’Climate
change, human health, long term’ category in terms of damage. When tracing back the
impact of electricity responsible for the relative contribution of electrolysis and the H2 liq-
uefaction process, the production and processing for the different materials used for the
production of the different power plants can be identified. An example for this would be
the processes ’epoxy resin production, liquid’ and ’nylon 6-6 production, glass-filled’ in the
”SSP2-PkBudg500” database, needed for the construction of wind turbines
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 7.4: Relative contributions to ’Climate change, human health, long term’
Lastly, impacts of the category ’Water availability, human health’ have been identified as
the second driving factor for HH damage. As for the two previous categories, the relative
contributions in terms of high-level processes can be visualised as seen in Figure 7.5.
The largest relative contribution to the impact in that category can be attributed to the
production of hydrogen through fossil sources and electrolysis in the case of RTHA for
the 2040 and 2050 time frame. As for the ’Climate change, human health, long term’
category, it should be mentioned that for both of these scenarios the relative damage
score for water availability is considerably lower than for other scenarios as presented in
Figure D.2 in Appendix D. In addition to the production of hydrogen, a minor contribution
to the category ’Water availability, human health’ in the order of 10 % or less, across all
scenarios, is made by the operational side of the process for H2 liquefaction.
Figure 7.5: Relative contributions to ’Water availability, human health’
Upon further investigation of the impact of electrolysis on the ’Water availability, human
health’ category, it can be determined that the electricity production is the main contribut-
ing factor.
This similarly applies to the liquefaction plant operation in the same way.
When further decomposing the effect of electricity production, it can be traced back to
electricity production processes involving water, such as ’electricity production, hydro,
34
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:42==
reservoir, alpine region’ or ’electricity production, nuclear, pressure water reactor’ in the
”SSP2-PkBudg500” database of premise. Secondary to the electricity production, the pro-
duction of de-ionised water necessary for electrolysis and denoted by ’water production,
deionised’ in premise contributes to the effect of the production process on the impact
category. Regarding the effect of steam reforming on ’Water availability, human health’,
it is directly caused by the use of water in the production process.
7.3
Process breakdown
The contribution analysis of the impact categories indicates that the production of H2, and
to a lesser extent the liquefaction process, are the main drivers for the cumulative EQ
and HH damage. To gain a more complete picture about the role and impact of the differ-
ent methods for H2 production, their processes as represented in the ”SSP2-PkBudg500”
database in premise can be assessed isolated from being embedded in the supply chain
of a specific scenario. In Figure 7.6 the cumulative EQ damage for H2 production is visu-
alised in terms of PDF-m2-year/FU, for each method and broken down into the contribution
of the different AoC’s. It can be found that with a factor of 8 or more, the damage exerted
by H2 production through electrolysis is significantly higher relative to the other methods.
The dominating impact categories contributing to the EQ damage are located within the
water AoC, with the exception steam reforming where the carbon AoC is of relevance.
Figure 7.6: Cumulative EQ damage for H2 production methods by AoC, 2050
In D.3 in Appendix D, the relative damage scores in % of the H2 production method with
highest score for EQ damage is presented. With the exception of climate change, ma-
rine acidification and water availability, H2 production through electrolysis is leading every
relative score. In the case of climate change and marine acidification, steam reforming
is dominant, while for water availability electrolysis is close to being on an equal level
with coal gasification. Of special interest is the category for freshwater ecotoxicity, where
the relative damage score of electrolysis is more than ten times higher than for the other
methods. It should be noted, that the introduction of CCS has a significant impact on
H2 production through steam reforming with regards to the drop in relative impact within
the climate change and marine acidification categories, while simultaneously leading to a
spike in freshwater and marine eutrophication for the process of coal gasification.
In a similar fashion to the EQ damage of H2 production, the HH damage can be analysed.
In Figure 7.7 the cumulative damage of the different methods is decomposed in terms
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
35
==PAGE:43==
of DALY/FU, broken down into the different AoC contributions. Leading in this AoP is
the production through steam gas reforming, whereas the introduction of CCS leads to a
significantly reduced contribution of the water AoC. In the case of electrolysis and coal
gasification, water is the AoC mainly affected.
Figure 7.7: Cumulative HH damage for H2 production methods by AoC, 2050
The relative damage scores in % of the H2 production method with highest score for HH
damage are presented in Figure D.4 in Appendix D. It can be found that steam reforming
is leading the relative damage scores in the impact categories for climate change, water
availability, ionising radiation and ozone layer depletion, whereas the introduction of CCS
leads to a noticeable reduction in climate change and water availability impact. In contrast
to that, both steam reforming and coal gasification have a relative damage scores in the
categories of human toxicity and particulate matter formation, that is only a fraction of the
relative score of the production through electrolysis.
36
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:44==
8
Discussion
Based on the analysis in Chapter 7, the environmental impact characteristics of the sce-
narios presented in Chapter 4 and the contribution of individual processes can be dis-
cussed. To further put the results of the impact assessment into perspective, the provi-
sion of LH2 at airports can be assessed with regards to it’s function as a replacement for
kerosene, by conducting a high level analysis comparing the two.
8.1
Scenarios and processes
The results of the impact analysis allow drawing conclusions about the environmental
impact characteristics of the different scenarios, as well as their relative performance to
each other. Regarding the cumulative damage in terms of AoP, general trends can be
identified. The cumulative EQ damage is increasing throughout the time frames for all
scenarios, with a plateau from 2040 to 2050 for RTHA. Simultaneously, the cumulative
HH damage is decreasing for all scenarios over time. Following the results of the con-
tribution analysis, the damage in both AoP’s is highly dependent on the H2 production
method and changes with the transition from fossil based production towards electrolysis.
Considering this finding, the difference in cumulative EQ and HH damage of the differ-
ent H2 production leading to this result is highlighted in the process breakdown. While
electrolysis is performing better with regards to HH damage than steam reforming, the
cumulative EQ damage impact is multiple times higher than the one of fossil production
methods. Secondary to H2 production, the damage in the assessed impact categories
that dominate the cumulative EQ and HH damage is driven by the demand for electrical
energy in the process of H2 liquefaction.
Different methods for the transportation of H2 in gaseous and liquefied form are imple-
mented in the supply chains scenarios highlighted in Chapter 4, however, the findings of
the impact assessment suggest that the impact of the cumulative damage in the different
AoP’s is minor. In the case of the transportation of LH2 by truck, train and ship, it can be
traced back to the electricity demand for cooling, whereas the for supply of H2 via pipeline
it is associated to the electricity required for re-compression. While the LCIA appears
to render the impact of the LH2 storage as negligible, it should be noted that cooling of
the LH2 was not considered in the LCI of the process for storage presented in Chapter 6.
Considering the findings regarding the impact of the electricity required for cooling in case
of LH2 transportation, an effect of a similar magnitude can be expected for the storage at
the airports.
With regards to the objectives for the project outlined in Chapter 2, it can be stated that
the impact characteristics of the supply chain for the provision of LH2 at the airport are
predominantly defined by the H2 production method. With a H2 supply originating to 100
% in electrolysis, the RTHA scenarios for the 2040 and 2050 time frame are therefore
more distinct with regards to their cumulative EQ and HH damage than other scenarios.
While the energy required for the process of liquefaction is the second biggest driver for
the cumulative damage impacts of the supply chain, the process is not optional for the
provision of LH2. Furthermore, it’s position in the sequence of the supply chain does not
have any significant impact on the overall impact characteristics. This is underlined by
the finding that despite differences in the relative contribution of transportation for impact
categories such as ’Climate change, human health, long term’ as seen in Figure 7.4, the
choice of gaseous H2 transportation vs LH2 has no significant impact on the overall supply
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
37
==PAGE:45==
chain damage characteristics. In that context, it can be stated that the choice of production
location in terms of onsite H2 production at the airport vs long-distance transportation, is
of secondary nature to the method of production.
8.2
Hydrogen as a kerosene substitute
In order to put the total damage of the annual supply of LH2 for the different scenarios
into perspective, it can be compared with the damage caused by the annual supply of
kerosene replaced by LH2 as presented in Table 5.9 in Chapter 5. Using the results for
the cumulative annual impact of both supplies from Table D.2, D.3 and D.4 in Appendix
D, the relative impacts of the LH2 vs. kerosene provision can be represented in terms of
EQ and HH as seen in Figure 8.1 for the AS scenario.
(a) EQ
(b) HH
Figure 8.1: Relative cumulative damage of LH2 vs. kerosene provision, AS scenario
It can be found that for both AoP’s, the cumulative damage of the provision of kerosene
is significantly lower relatively to the LH2 provision. Across all scenarios and time frames,
the relative cumulative EQ damage of the kerosene provision is on average 2.76 % of
the LH2 provision, while the relative cumulative HH damage of the kerosene provision
corresponds on average to 10.09 % of the LH2 provision. The peak discrepancy between
the cumulative damage of the LH2 and kerosene provision occurs for the EQ at RTHA
for the AS scenario and for the 2050 time frame with a ratio of 57.2 to 1, whereas the
maximum discrepancy for the cumulative HH damage occurs at CDG for the AS scenario
and 2040 time frame with a ratio of 13.8 to 1.
By assessing the relative damage scores of the two alternatives in the different impact
categories, a more complete view of the impact characteristics of the provision of LH2 vs
the provision kerosene at the airport can be achieved. In Figure 8.2, the relative damage
scores for the process of provision of LH2 vs kerosene are presented in % of the highest
score for the 2050 time frame at CDG. Based on the figure, it can be determined that
there is a strong discrepancy regarding the order of magnitude for the damage of LH2
and kerosene in the different impact categories. While kerosene is leading the relative
damage scores in the categories for marine acidification, freshwater ecotoxicity, freshwa-
ter acidification, marine eutrophication and land occupation, the provision of LH2 leads to
a higher score in all other categories.
38
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:46==
Figure 8.2: Relative damage sores of LH2 vs. Kerosene provision
8.3
Limitations
In light of the findings with regards to the predominance of the H2 production methods
for the supply chain impact characteristics, limitations to the approach and LCI models
should be pointed out. As this study considers the representation of H2 production on a
high level under the inclusion of general trends, the focus is on H2 generation from pro-
cesses distinctly dedicated to H2 production which disregards H2 as a by-product from
other industrial processes. In particular the finding that the provision of electricity is the
driving factor for the impact of H2 production from electrolysis is suggesting that the com-
position of the electricity mix is crucial. While in this study a general approach towards
the electricity mix is taken as pointed out in Chapter 6, scenarios for RTHA and AGP
entail initiatives for the production of hydrogen at the port of Rotterdam and in Marocco
that are specific with regards to the origin of electricity from wind and solar power. [42]
[38] While modifying the electricity mix would lead to a more accurate representation for
the impact characteristics of the LH2 provision in the specific case of RTHA, the purpose
of selecting the airport is to have a reference scenario that is representative for a wider
range of regional airports as discussed in Chapter 4. It can therefore be argued, that using
the electricity mix as included in the ”SSP2-PkBudg500” database of premise leads to a
less precise impact representation on an instance level, however, it provides a credible
high-level estimate for regional airports.
With regards to the quantities of LH2 demand as outlined in Chapter 5, it should be noted
that for all processes modelled in the LCI linear scaling has been assumed. The an-
nual cumulative EQ and HH impact results displayed in Table 7.1 and 7.2 of Chapter 7,
therefore do not take potential effects of the significant increase in H2 demand volume
throughout the time frames from 2030 and 2050 into account.
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
39
==PAGE:47==
9
Conclusion and Outlook
In the analysis of the different scenarios regarding the environmental impact characteris-
tics for the provision of LH2 at the airport, the production method of H2 has been identified
as the driving factor for the damage in various impact categories. While the scenarios
reflect on the anticipated trend in the production of hydrogen away from fossil sources
and towards electrolysis, this does not lead to an obvious improvement when considering
the opposing trends in cumulative EQ and HH damage. To achieve at a conclusive and
quantitative judgement in that regard, the weighing of the individual damage scores poses
one possible approach.
To account for the findings concerning the significance of H2 production for the environ-
mental impact of the hydrogen supply chain, further research should focus on the precise
representation of the different production methods. In light of the anticipated transition
towards electrolysis as the predominant H2 production method, and in particular with re-
gards to the results of the contribution analysis in Chapter 7, the modelling of the electricity
supply with a high order of accuracy is crucial.
Identifying the composition of theoretical best case scenarios that reduce the environmen-
tal impact of the provision of LH2 to a minimum, a sensitivity analysis for the identification
of an ideal electricity mix could be performed, taking into account the local characteristics
of the energy market at the location of the specific airport. In this context, potential ben-
eficial effects of scaling in the H2 production through electrolysis should be investigated.
The manual set-up of distinct processes that represent the specific production capacities
of plants, or the addition of scaling factors to existing processes in the database could
facilitate the implementation in the according LCI models.
As the aim of this study is to assess the environmental impact of the provision of LH2 at the
airport, it is limited to the supply phase of the life cycle of hydrogen with the intended use as
an aviation fuel. However, the discussion of the LCIA results in Chapter 8 attempts to put
the environmental impact characteristics of the LH2 into perspective, by providing a high-
level comparison with the effects of providing kerosene in the respective quantities that
are substituted for by LH2 as determined in Chapter 5. While this analysis suggests that
LH2 has significantly higher environmental impacts than kerosene in the supply phase,
an assessment of the overall life cycle impact should include the consideration of the use
phase.
Studies taking a holistic approach towards the life cycle assessment of different aviation
fuels suggest, that the total environmental impact of hydrogen aircraft is potentially equiv-
alent to up to 400 % of the impact of kerosene fuelled reference aircraft, whereas the
hydrogen supply phase has a contribution of 30 % to the overall life cycle impact. [69] To
acknowledge the limitations for the applicability of different propulsion systems for hydro-
gen powered aircraft based on the use case as discussed in Chapter 3, further research
on the complete life cycle should distinguish between the use of fuel cells and hydrogen
combustion in the use phase.
40
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1]
McKinsey Company for the Clean Sky 2. Hydrogen-powered aviation, A fact-based
study of hydrogen technology, economics, and climate impact by 2050. Tech. rep.
Publications Office of the European Union, 2020.
[2]
Ph.D. Jayant Mukhopadhaya and Ph.D Dan Rutherford. Performance Analysis of
Evolutionary Hydrogen-Powered Aircraft. Tech. rep. International Council on Clean
Transportation, 2022.
[3]
Robert Thomson et al. Hydrogen | A future fuel for aviation? Tech. rep. Roland
Berger GmbH, 2020.
[4]
Fabrizio Nicolosi et al. Scenarios Requirements for future electric/hybrid propulsion
and conventional A/C. Tech. rep. 2022.
[5]
Genesis, The Project. 2022. URL: https://www.genesis-cleansky.eu/the-project/.
[6]
ZeroAvia, Extract. 2022. URL: https://premise.readthedocs.io/en/latest/extract.html.
[7]
Global Outlook for Air Transport - Times of Turbulence. Tech. rep. IATA, 2022.
[8]
Eamonn Brennan. Eurocontrol Aviation Outlook 2050. Tech. rep. Eurocontrol, 2022.
[9]
J. Hoelzen et al. “H2-powered aviation at airports – Design and economics of LH2
refueling systems”. In: Energy Conversion and Management: X (2022).
[10]
J. Hoelzen et al. “Hydrogen-powered aviation and its reliance on green hydrogen
infrastructure e Review and research gaps”. In: Nature Communications 47 (2022).
[11]
Pipistrel To Supply Electric Propulsion for Airflow’s eSTOL Proof-of-Concept Air-
craft. 2021. URL: https://www.futureflight.aero/news-article/2021-11-12/pipistrel-
supply-electric-propulsion-airflows-estol-proof-concept-aircraft.
[12]
Product, Regional Aircraft. 2023. URL: https://hydrogen.aero/product/.
[13]
ZeroAvia, Powertrain Timeline. 2023. URL: https://www.zeroavia.com/.
[14]
Completing the Hydrogen Value Chain. 2021. URL: https://www.eurocontrol.int/
sites/default/files/2021-10/esf-future-cargo-universal-hydrogen.pdf.
[15]
“Exploring hydrogen - The impact, challenges and options”. In: FAST magazine,
Airbus (Sept. 2021).
[16]
Ibrahim Dincer and Canan Acar. “Review and evaluation of hydrogen production
methods for better sustainability”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 40
(2015).
[17]
Global Hydrogen Review 2021. Tech. rep. International Energy Agency, 2021.
[18]
Technology readiness levels (TRL), HORIZON 2020 – WORK PROGRAMME 2014-
2015. Tech. rep. European Comission, 2020.
[19]
J.D. Holladay et al. “An overview of hydrogen production technologies”. In: Catalysis
Today 139 (2009).
[20]
Adnan Midilli et al. “A comprehensive review on hydrogen production from coal
gasification: Challenges and Opportunities”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen
Energy 46 (2021).
[21]
Amjad Al-Qahtani et al. “Uncovering the true cost of hydrogen production routes
using life cycle monetisation”. In: Applied Energy 281 (2021).
[22]
Trevor M. Letcher. Future Energy - Improved, Sustainable and Clean Options for
our Planet. Elsevier, 2020. ISBN: 9780081028865.
[23]
Mai Bui et al. “Carbon capture and storage (CCS): the way forward”. In: Energy
Environmental Science 1062.11 (2018).
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
41
==PAGE:49==
[24]
Luis M. Gandía, Gurutze Arzamendi, and Pedro M. Diéguez. Renewable Hydrogen
Technologies, Production, Purification, Storage, Applications and Safety. Elsevier,
2013. ISBN: 9780444563613.
[25]
Diogo M. F. SantosI, César A. C. Sequeira, and José L. Figueiredo. Hydrogen pro-
duction by alkaline water electrolysis. Tech. rep. Materials Electrochemistry Group,
ICEMS, Instituto Superior Técnico, TULisbon, 2013.
[26]
S. Shiva Kumar and V. Himabindu. “Hydrogen production by PEM water electrolysis
– A review”. In: Materials Science for Energy Technologies 2.3 (2019).
[27]
Muhammad R. Usman. “Hydrogen storage methods: Review and current status”.
In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 167 (2022).
[28]
Muhammad R. Usman. “Hydrogen Storage Technologies for Future Energy Sys-
tems”. In: The Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering 8 (2017).
[29]
H. Barthelemy, M. Weber, and F. Barbier. “Hydrogen storage: Recent improve-
ments and industrial perspectives”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
42 (2017).
[30]
Saif Al Ghafri et al. “Hydrogen liquefaction: a review of the fundamental physics,
engineering practice and future opportunities”. In: Energy Environmental Science
15 (2022).
[31]
Muhammad Aziz. “Liquid Hydrogen: A Review on Liquefaction, Storage, Trans-
portation, and Safety”. In: Energies 5917.14 (2021).
[32]
Frano Barbir, Angelo Basile, and T. Nejat Veziroğlu. Compendium of Hydrogen En-
ergy. Elsevier, 2016. ISBN: 9781782423638.
[33]
G. Di Lullo et al. “Large-scale long-distance land-based hydrogen transportation
systems: A comparative techno-economic and greenhouse gas emission assess-
ment”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy (2022).
[34]
The Future of Hydrogen, Seizing today’s opportunities. Tech. rep. International En-
ergy Agency, 2019.
[35]
Mathieu Delpierre et al. “Assessing the environmental impacts of wind-based hy-
drogen production in the Netherlands using ex-ante LCA and scenarios analysis”.
In: Journal of Cleaner Production (Mar. 2021).
[36]
Integration of Hydrogen Aircraft into the Air Transport System: An Airports Opera-
tions and Infrastructure Review. Tech. rep. Aerospace Technology Institute & Air-
ports Council International, 2021.
[37]
Feiten en cijfers. 2019. URL: https://www.rotterdamthehagueairport.nl/luchthaven-
en-ik/omgeving-leefbaarheid/feiten-en-cijfers/.
[38]
Port of Rotterdam becomes international hydrogen hub. Tech. rep. Port of Rotter-
dam, 2020.
[39]
Natalya Rijk and Jan van Dinther. Rotterdam Hydrogen Hub. Tech. rep. Smart Port,
2021.
[40]
Igno Notermans et al. Hydrogen for the Port of Rotterdam in an International Context
- a Plea for Leadership. Tech. rep. drift, 2020.
[41]
Malaga Airport Statistics. 2019. URL: https://www.andalucia.com/travel/airports/
malaga/statistics.htm.
[42]
Ad van Wijk et al. A North Africa - Europe Hydrogen Manifesto. Tech. rep. Dii Desert
Energy, 2019.
[43]
Traffic of Paris Aéroport and Groupe ADP airports. 2019. URL: https : / / www .
parisaeroport.fr/en/group/finance/investor-relations/traffic.
[44]
Hydrogen in the GCC. Tech. rep. Netherlands Enterprise Agency, 2020.
[45]
Stan Shparberg and Bob Lange. Global Market Forecast 2022. Tech. rep. Airbus,
2022.
42
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:50==
[46]
Bhupendra Khandelwal et al. “Hydrogen powered aircraft : The future of air trans-
port”. In: Progress in Aerospace Sciences 60 (2013).
[47]
Flightradar24. 2023. URL: www.flightradar24.com.
[48]
Aircraft Technology Roadmap to 2050. Tech. rep. IATA, 2019.
[49]
Moshe Givoni and Piet Rietveld. Choice of Aircraft Size - Explanations and Impli-
cations. Tech. rep. Tinbergen Institute, 2006.
[50]
U.S./Europe Comparison of ATM-related Operational Performance. Tech. rep. Fed-
eral Aviation Administration (FAA) and Eurocontrol, 2009.
[51]
Guglielmo Guastalla. Performance Indicator – Horizontal Flight Efficiency. Tech.
rep. Eurocontrol, 2014.
[52]
Commercial Market Outlook 2022-2041. Tech. rep. Boeing, 2022.
[53]
1.A.3.a Aviation 1 Master emissions calculator 2019. 2019. URL: https://www.
eea.europa.eu/publications/emep- eea- guidebook- 2019/part- b- sectoral- guidance-
chapters/1-energy/1-a-combustion/1-a-3-a-aviation-1/view.
[54]
Volker Grewe et al. “Evaluating the climate impact of aviation emission scenarios
towards the Paris agreement including COVID-19 effects”. In: Nature Communica-
tions 12 (June 2021).
[55]
Morocco targets 80% renewable energy by 2050 with technological evolution in
energy storage, green hydrogen, and decreasing energy costs. 2022. URL: https:
//www.globaldata.com/media/power/morocco-targets-80-renewable-energy-2050-
technological-evolution-energy-storage-green-hydrogen-decreasing-energy-costs-says-
globaldata/.
[56]
Building the Renewable Energy Sector in Saudi Arabia. Tech. rep. K.A.CARE - King
Abdullah City for Atomic and Renewable Energy, 2012.
[57]
Jos Sijm et al. The supply of flexibility for the power system in the Netherlands,
2015-2050. Tech. rep. ECN, 2017.
[58]
Julien Marbaix et al. “CO2 methanation activated by magnetic heating: life cycle
assessment and perspectives for successful renewable energy storage”. In: The
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment (Apr. 2020).
[59]
Guillermo San Miguel and María Cerrato. “Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment of
the Spanish Electricity: Past, Present and Future Projections”. In: Energies (Apr.
2020).
[60]
K. Stolzenburg and R. Mubbala. Integrated Design for Demonstration of Efficient
Liquefaction of Hydrogen (IDEALHY). Tech. rep. Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint
Undertaking, 2013.
[61]
K. Ohlig and L. Decker. The Latest Developments and Outlook for Hydrogen Liq-
uefaction Technology. Tech. rep. Linde Kryotechnik AG, 2013.
[62]
DOE Technical Targets for Hydrogen Delivery. 2015. URL: https://www.energy.gov/
eere/fuelcells/doe-technical-targets-hydrogen-delivery.
[63]
Younseok Choi et al. “Design and analysis of liquid hydrogen fuel tank for heavy
duty truck”. In: International Journey of Hydrogen Energy 47 (2022).
[64]
IATA Guidance on Airport Fuel Storage Capacity, Edition 1. Tech. rep. International
Air Transport Association, 2008.
[65]
Christina Wulf et al. “Life Cycle Assessment of hydrogen transport and distribution
options”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 199 (2018).
[66]
Dennis Krieg. Konzept und Kosten eines Pipelinesystems zur Versorgung des deutschen
Straßenverkehrs mit Wasserstoff. Tech. rep. Forschungszentrum Jülich, 2012.
[67]
Zhongbin Zhao et al. “Fleet Deployment Optimization for LNG Shipping Vessels
Considering the Influence of Mixed Factors”. In: Journal of Marine Science and
Engineering 10 (2022).
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
43
==PAGE:51==
[68]
Cécile Bulle et al. “IMPACT World+: a globally regionalized life cycle impact as-
sessment method”. In: The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment (Feb.
2019).
[69]
Andreas Johanning. Comparison of the Potential Environmental Impact Improve-
ments of Future Aircraft Concepts Using Life Cycle Assessment. Tech. rep. Ham-
burg University of Applied Sciences, 2015.
44
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:52==
A
Appendix - Scenarios
Figure A.1: RTHA - scenario flow charts
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
45
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.2: AGP - scenario flow charts
46
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:54==
Figure A.3: CDG - scenario flow charts
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
47
==PAGE:55==
B
Appendix - Hydrogen supply chain
Table B.1: Aircraft categories by manufacturer
Manufacturer
Type
Category
Airbus
A300-600
Medium range wide-body
A310
Medium range wide-body
A220-100, -300
Narrow-body
A318, A319, A320, A321 ceo
Narrow-body
A318, A319, A320, A321 neo
Narrow-body
A330-200, -300, -8, -9
Medium range wide-body
A340-200, -300, -500, -600
Long range wide-body
A350-800, -900, -1000
Long range wide-body
A380-800
Long range wide-body
Boeing
B717-200
Narrow-body
B727-200
Narrow-body
B737-100, -200, ..., -900
Narrow-body
B737 MAX7, MAX8, MAX9, MAX10
Narrow-body
B747-100, -200, -300, -400, -8
Long range wide-body
B757-200, -300
Narrow-body
B767-300, -400
Medium range wide-body
B777-200LR, -300ER
Long range wide-body
B787-8, -9, -10
Long range wide-body
Embraer
E170, E175, E190
Regional
E195
Narrow-body
EMB-135BJ, -500, -550
Regional
Bombardier
CRJ 700, 900, 1000
Regional
Dash 8-Q300, -Q400
Regional
ATR
ATR 72-200, -500, -600
Regional
McDonnell Douglas
MD-11
Long range wide-body
Table B.2: Average distance to destinations by category [NM]
Category
Type
Origin
Regional
Narrow-body
Medium range
Long range
Total
wide-body
wide-body
Straight-line
Rotterdam
178.5
1067.2
-
-
812.0
Malaga
431.5
898.8
-
-
866.0
Paris
377.9
555.2
2255.9
3715.8
1305.3
Corrected
Rotterdam
197.1
1114.4
-
-
850.9
Malaga
449.8
937.2
-
-
912.3
Paris
404.4
587.5
2328.9
3819.8
1352.7
48
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:56==
Table B.3: Daily departures (27.11. - 03.12.2022)
Category
Origin
Date
Regional
Narrow-body
Medium range
Long range
Total
wide-body
wide-body
Rotterdam
27.11.2022
1
11
0
0
12
28.11.2022
5
12
0
0
17
29.11.2022
5
8
0
0
13
30.11.2022
5
6
0
0
11
01.12.2022
5
11
0
0
16
02.12.2022
5
13
0
0
18
03.12.2022
1
6
0
0
7
Total
27
67
0
0
94
Share
28.7 %
71.3 %
0.0%
0.0%
100.0
%
Malaga
27.11.2022
18
137
0
0
155
28.11.2022
17
120
0
0
137
29.11.2022
11
84
0
0
95
30.11.2022
9
101
0
0
110
01.12.2022
15
89
0
0
104
02.12.2022
20
132
0
0
152
03.12.2022
14
134
0
0
148
Total
104
797
0
0
901
Share
11.5 %
88.5 %
0.0%
0.0%
100.0
%
Paris CDG
27.11.2022
71
330
34
113
548
28.11.2022
64
329
41
112
546
29.11.2022
65
347
42
107
561
30.11.2022
69
342
44
112
567
01.12.2022
72
348
43
119
582
02.12.2022
74
377
43
119
613
03.12.2022
65
293
32
125
515
Total
480
2366
279
807
3932
Share
12.2 %
60.2 %
7.1%
20.5 %
100.0
%
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
49
==PAGE:57==
Table B.4: Daily kerosene demand [t kg]
Category
Origin
Date
Regional
Narrow-body
Medium range
Long range
Total
wide-body
wide-body
Rotterdam
27.11.2022
1.7
67.8
0.0
0.0
69.5
28.11.2022
8.7
76.9
0.0
0.0
85.6
29.11.2022
8.7
62.0
0.0
0.0
70.7
30.11.2022
8.7
48.9
0.0
0.0
57.6
01.12.2022
8.7
66.6
0.0
0.0
75.3
02.12.2022
7.8
97.2
0.0
0.0
104.9
03.12.2022
1.7
47.0
0.0
0.0
48.8
Total
46.0
466.4
0.0
0.0
512.4
Share
9.0%
91.0 %
0.0%
0.0%
100.0
%
Malaga
27.11.2022
30.7
836.5
0.0
0.0
867.2
28.11.2022
30.0
720.6
0.0
0.0
750.6
29.11.2022
14.2
518.7
0.0
0.0
533.0
30.11.2022
7.2
642.0
0.0
0.0
649.2
01.12.2022
31.4
543.8
0.0
0.0
575.2
02.12.2022
32.3
784.9
0.0
0.0
817.2
03.12.2022
26.3
832.1
0.0
0.0
858.4
Total
172.1
4878.7
0.0
0.0
5050.8
Share
3.4%
96.6 %
0.0%
0.0%
100.0
%
Paris CDG
27.11.2022
169.6
1466.4
1118.9
6341.4
9096.4
28.11.2022
151.6
1379.2
1233.8
6087.2
8851.8
29.11.2022
150.7
1502.7
1136.1
5702.1
8491.7
30.11.2022
161.2
1439.7
1079.3
5820.2
8500.4
01.12.2022
171.4
1461.0
1083.9
6364.0
9080.2
02.12.2022
173.7
1573.3
1129.4
6495.6
9372.0
03.12.2022
152.9
1350.2
1086.0
6795.3
9384.5
Total
1131.1
10 172.5
7867.6
43 605.9
62 777.1
Share
1.8%
16.2 %
12.5 %
69.5 %
100.0
%
50
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:58==
Table B.5: Prospective annual hydrogen demand [t kg] by aircraft category
Category
Origin
Scenario
Year
Regional
Narrow-body
Medium range
Long range
Total
wide-body
wide-body
Rotterdam
2030
5.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.9
Baseline
2040
286.6
2362.9
0.0
0.0
2649.5
2050
650.3
9363.2
0.0
0.0
10 013.5
2030
74.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
74.0
Ambitious
2040
478.5
6354.2
0.0
0.0
6832.7
2050
942.6
16 605.4
0.0
0.0
17 548.0
Malaga
2030
22.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
22.0
Baseline
2040
1077.8
24 839.8
0.0
0.0
25 917.6
2050
2469.6
99 412.1
0.0
0.0
101 881.8
2030
275.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
275.6
Ambitious
2040
1799.4
66 798.2
0.0
0.0
68 597.5
2050
3580.0
176 304.3
0.0
0.0
179 884.2
Paris CDG
2030
111.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
111.5
Baseline
2040
5349.0
39 115.2
841.2
0.0
45 305.4
2050
12 015.6
153 465.5
48 309.1
0.0
213 790.1
2030
1395.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
1395.5
Ambitious
2040
8930.1
105 186.8
9344.3
0.0
123 461.3
2050
17 417.7
272 166.1
87 340.2
0.0
376 924.1
(a) Rotterdam - baseline scenario
(b) Rotterdam - ambitious scenario
(c) Malaga - baseline scenario
(d) Malaga - ambitious scenario
Figure B.1: Dynamic hydrogen demand by aircraft category - Rotterdam and Malaga
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
51
==PAGE:59==
Table B.6: Prospective annual hydrogen demand [t kg] by month
Year
Month
Rotterdam
Malaga
Paris CDG
Baseline
Ambitious
Baseline
Ambitious
Baseline
Ambitious
2030
January
0.3
3.8
1.1
14.1
8.4
105.3
February
0.3
4.0
1.2
14.6
7.8
97.4
March
0.4
5.3
1.5
18.8
8.9
111.0
April
0.5
6.4
2.0
25.4
9.4
117.8
May
0.7
8.3
2.1
26.6
9.7
121.4
June
0.6
8.0
2.3
28.5
9.8
122.1
July
0.6
8.0
2.5
30.9
10.4
129.7
August
0.6
8.1
2.4
30.6
10.4
130.2
September
0.6
8.0
2.2
28.1
9.9
124.3
October
0.6
7.1
2.1
26.0
9.8
122.6
November
0.3
3.5
1.3
16.2
8.5
106.1
December
0.3
3.6
1.3
15.8
8.6
107.5
Total
5.9
74.0
22.0
275.6
111.5
1395.5
2040
January
135.9
350.4
1322.6
3500.5
3418.6
9316.1
February
143.4
369.9
1374.0
3636.7
3163.1
8619.7
March
189.3
488.2
1765.9
4673.9
3605.1
9824.1
April
229.6
592.2
2385.5
6313.9
3825.5
10 424.9
May
295.8
762.9
2498.2
6612.0
3942.6
10 744.1
June
286.5
738.9
2683.7
7103.2
3964.8
10 804.6
July
287.2
740.7
2908.3
7697.4
4210.0
11 472.7
August
289.0
745.2
2878.9
7619.8
4226.6
11 517.8
September
284.8
734.5
2645.5
7001.9
4035.8
10 997.9
October
252.7
651.8
2444.9
6471.0
3980.5
10 847.2
November
125.9
324.6
1526.7
4040.8
3443.7
9384.5
December
129.3
333.5
1483.4
3926.3
3489.0
9507.9
Total
2649.5
6832.7
25 917.6
68 597.5
45 305.4
123 461.3
2050
January
513.4
899.8
5198.9
9179.3
16 132.0
28 441.7
February
542.1
950.0
5401.3
9536.7
14 926.1
26 315.6
March
715.4
1253.8
6941.8
12 256.5
17 011.8
29 992.8
April
867.9
1520.9
9377.5
16 557.1
18 052.1
31 826.9
May
1118.1
1959.4
9820.2
17 338.7
18 604.9
32 801.4
June
1082.9
1897.8
10 549.7
18 626.7
18 709.6
32 986.0
July
1085.5
1902.3
11 432.3
20 185.1
19 866.6
35 025.9
August
1092.0
1913.7
11 317.1
19 981.6
19 944.7
35 163.6
September
1076.4
1886.3
10 399.3
18 361.2
19 044.3
33 576.2
October
955.2
1674.0
9610.8
16 969.0
18 783.4
33 116.2
November
475.7
833.6
6001.5
10 596.3
16 250.5
28 650.5
December
488.7
856.4
5831.4
10 296.0
16 464.2
29 027.3
Total
10 013.5
17 548.0
101 881.8
179 884.2
213 790.1
376 924.1
52
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:60==
C
Appendix - Life cycle inventory
Table C.1: Inventory overview, 2030/2040/2050 time frame
Category
Process
Database
Location
Production
hydrogen production, steam
methane reforming of
natural gas, 25 bar
SSP2-PkBudg500
EUR, MEA
hydrogen production, gaseous,
25 bar, from electrolysis
SSP2-PkBudg500
EUR, MEA
methanol synthesis, hydrogen
from coal gasification
SSP2-PkBudg500
MEA
Liquefaction
Hydrogen liquefaction
TSD
NL, FR, ES, MEA
Storage
Liquid hydrogen storage
TSD
NL, FR, ES
Liquid hydrogen storage,
for transportation
TSD
NL, FR, ES
Transportation
Transportation of LH2 by truck,
50 km
TSD
NL
Transportation of LH2 by truck,
100 km
TSD
FR, ES
Transportation of LH2 by train,
800 km
TSD
FR
Transportation of LH2 by ship,
3500 NM
TSD
GLO
Transportation of GH2 by pipeline,
distribution, 50 km
TSD
NL
Transportation of GH2 by pipeline,
distribution, 100 km
TSD
FR, ES
Transportation of GH2 by pipeline,
transmission, 250 km
TSD
ES
Transportation of GH2 by pipeline,
transmission, 800 km
TSD
FR
Transportation of GH2 by pipeline,
transmission, 1000 km
TSD
ES, MEA
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
53
==PAGE:61==
Table C.2: Process for the creation of 1 kg LH2 through the liquefaction of H2, NL, 2030
Process
Exchanges
Name
Amount
Unit
Database
Location
Type
Hydrogen liquefaction,
NL, 2030
Hydrogen liquefaction,
NL, 2030
1
kg
Thesis Scenario Database
NL
production
Liquefaction plant
production, EUR, 2030
1.82648E-09
unit
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
technosphere
market for electricity,
low voltage
12
kWh
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
NL
technosphere
Liquefaction plant
production,
EUR, 2030
Liquefaction plant
production, EUR, 2030
1
unit
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
production
Cryogenic H2 storage
tank production, RER, 2030
1
unit
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
EUR
technosphere
market for steel, unalloyed
380,000
kg
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
EUR
technosphere
steel production, electric,
chromium steel 18/8
595,000
kg
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
EUR
technosphere
market for copper, anode
150,000
kg
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
GLO
technosphere
aluminium alloy
production, AlMg3
140,000
kg
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
RER
technosphere
market for concrete, normal
20.269
m3
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
ROW
technosphere
Cryogenic H2 storage
tank production,
RER, 2030
Cryogenic H2 storage
tank production, RER, 2030
1
unit
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
production
aluminium alloy
production, AlMg3
36,382,190
kg
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
RER
technosphere
market for perlite
8,377,393
kg
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
GLO
technosphere
54
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:62==
Table C.3: Process for the storage of 1 kg LH2
Process
Exchanges
Name
Amount
Unit
Database
Location
Type
Liquid hydrogen
storage, 2030
Liquid hydrogen
storage, 2030
1
kg
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
production
production of liquid
hydrogen storage
tank, 2030
1.9105E-07
unit
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
technosphere
Liquid hydrogen storage,
for transportation, 2030
Liquid hydrogen storage,
for transportation, 2030
1
kg
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
production
production of liquid
hydrogen storage
tank, 2030
6.3685E-08
kWh
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
technosphere
production of liquid
hydrogen storage
tank, 2030
production of liquid
hydrogen storage
tank, 2030
1
unit
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
production
aluminium alloy
production, AlMg3
3,156
kg
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
RER
technosphere
polyurethane adhesive
production
2,360
kg
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
GLO
technosphere
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
55
==PAGE:63==
Table C.4: Process for the transportation of 1 kg LH2 by truck over 50 km, NL, 2030
Process
Exchanges
Name
Amount
Unit
Database
Location
Type
Transportation of LH2 by
truck, 50 km, 2030, NL
Transportation of LH2 by
truck, 50 km, 2030, NL
1
kg
Thesis Scenario Database
NL
production
Truck for hydrogen
transportation, 2030
0.05
t km
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
technosphere
Liquid hydrogen storage,
for transportation, 2030
1
kg
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
technosphere
Cooling for truck
transportation, 2030, NL
50
km
Thesis Scenario Database
NL
technosphere
Truck for hydrogen
transportation, 2030
Truck for hydrogen
transportation, 2030
1
t km
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
production
transport, freight, lorry,
unspecified, regional delivery
0.5
t km
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
EUR
technosphere
transport, freight, lorry,
unspecified,long haul
0.5
t km
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
EUR
technosphere
Cooling for truck
transportation, 2030, NL
Cooling for truck
transportation, 2030, NL
1
km
Thesis Scenario Database
NL
production
market for electricity,
low voltage
0.002338
kWh
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
NL
technosphere
56
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:64==
Table C.5: Process for the transportation of 1 kg LH2 by train over 800 km, FR, 2030
Process
Exchanges
Name
Amount
Unit
Database
Location
Type
Transportation of
LH2 by train,
800 km, 2030, FR
Transportation of
LH2 by train,
800 km, 2030, FR
1
kg
Thesis Scenario Database
FR
production
Train for hydrogen
transportation, FR, 2030
0.8
t km
Thesis Scenario Database
FR
technosphere
Liquid hydrogen storage,
for transportation, 2030
1
kg
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
technosphere
Cooling for train
transportation, 2030, FR
800
km
Thesis Scenario Database
FR
technosphere
Train for hydrogen
transportation, FR, 2030
Train for hydrogen
transportation, FR, 2030
1
t km
Thesis Scenario Database
FR
production
transport, freight train
1
t km
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
FR
technosphere
Cooling for train
transportation, 2030, FR
Cooling for train
transportation, 2030, FR
1
km
Thesis Scenario Database
FR
production
market for electricity,
low voltage
0.002338
kWh
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
FR
technosphere
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
57
==PAGE:65==
Table C.6: Process for the transportation of 1 kg GH2 by distribution pipeline over 50 km, NL, 2030
Process
Exchanges
Name
Amount
Unit
Database
Location
Type
Transportation of GH2
by pipeline, distribution,
50 km, 2030, NL
Transportation of GH2
by pipeline, distribution,
50 km, 2030, NL
1
kg
Thesis Scenario Database
NL
production
pipeline for hydrogen
transportation, distribution,
2030
0.05
t km
Thesis Scenario Database
RER
technosphere
pipeline recompression,
NL, 2030
50
km
Thesis Scenario Database
NL
technosphere
pipeline recompression,
NL, 2030
pipeline recompression,
NL, 2030
1
km
Thesis Scenario Database
NL
production
market for electricity,
low voltage
0.0024
kWh
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
NL
technosphere
pipeline for hydrogen
transportation, distribution,
2030
pipeline for hydrogen
transportation, distribution,
2030
1
t km
Thesis Scenario Database
RER
production
distribution pipeline for hydrogen,
dedicated hydrogen pipeline
3.8052E-07
kg
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
RER
technosphere
58
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:66==
Table C.7: Process for the transportation of 1 kg LH2 by ship over 3,500 NM, 2030
Process
Exchanges
Name
Amount
Unit
Database
Location
Type
Transportation of LH2
by ship, 3500 NM, 2030
Transportation of LH2
by ship 3500 NM, 2030
1
kg
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
production
Ship for hydrogen
transportation, 2030
6.482
t km
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
technosphere
Cooling for Ship
transportation, 2030
6,482
km
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
technosphere
Ship for hydrogen
transportation, 2030
Ship for hydrogen
transportation, 2030
1
t km
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
production
market for transport,
freight, sea, tanker for
liquefied natural gas
0.125
t km
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
GLO
technosphere
market for transport,
freight, sea, tanker for liquid
goods other than petroleum
and liquefied natural gas
0.875
t km
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
GLO
technosphere
Cooling for Ship
transportation, 2030
Cooling for Ship
transportation, 2030
1
km
Thesis Scenario Database
EUR
production
market group for
electricity, low voltage
0.000258
kWh
ecoinvent_remind_SSP2-PkBudg500_2030
GLO
technosphere
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
59
==PAGE:67==
D
Appendix - Life cycle impact
assessment
60
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:68==
Table D.1: Damage per FU for each IMPACT World+ impact category, all airports and time frames
Impact Category
RTHA
AGP
CDG
AoP
AoC
Unit
2030
2040
2050
2030
2040
2050
2030
2040
2050
Climate change, ecosystem quality, short term
1.04E+00
4.04E-01
3.99E-01
1.47E+00
1.44E+00
1.45E+00
1.46E+00
1.57E+00
1.64E+00
EQ
Carbon
PDF-m2-year/FU
Climate change, ecosystem quality, long term
3.49E+00
1.33E+00
1.31E+00
4.66E+00
4.52E+00
4.49E+00
4.65E+00
4.99E+00
5.14E+00
EQ
Carbon
PDF-m2-year/FU
Marine acidification, short term
8.99E-02
3.17E-02
3.13E-02
1.21E-01
1.17E-01
1.15E-01
1.20E-01
1.30E-01
1.32E-01
EQ
Water
PDF-m2-year/FU
Marine acidification, long term
8.28E-01
2.92E-01
2.88E-01
1.11E+00
1.07E+00
1.06E+00
1.11E+00
1.19E+00
1.21E+00
EQ
Water
PDF-m2-year/FU
Water availability, freshwater ecosystem
3.57E-04
3.92E-04
3.84E-04
3.54E-04
3.87E-04
4.27E-04
3.45E-04
3.22E-04
4.48E-04
EQ
Water
PDF-m2-year/FU
Water availability, terrestrial ecosystem
4.17E-04
5.79E-04
5.82E-04
4.08E-04
4.75E-04
5.69E-04
5.48E-04
4.69E-04
6.11E-04
EQ
Water
PDF-m2-year/FU
Thermally polluted water
6.79E-05
9.07E-05
8.87E-05
6.10E-05
7.55E-05
9.38E-05
6.17E-05
5.58E-05
1.01E-04
EQ
Water
PDF-m2-year/FU
Freshwater ecotoxicity, short term
1.11E-01
1.62E-01
1.60E-01
9.57E-02
1.13E-01
1.39E-01
1.12E-01
9.52E-02
1.53E-01
EQ
Water
PDF-m2-year/FU
Freshwater ecotoxicity, long term
1.25E+02
2.09E+02
2.06E+02
9.37E+01
1.23E+02
1.64E+02
9.75E+01
7.38E+01
1.76E+02
EQ
Water
PDF-m2-year/FU
Freshwater acidification
2.76E-02
3.99E-02
3.92E-02
2.53E-02
3.21E-02
4.10E-02
2.75E-02
2.50E-02
4.53E-02
EQ
Water
PDF-m2-year/FU
Freshwater eutrophication
4.30E-04
7.12E-04
6.96E-04
3.81E-04
5.22E-04
7.07E-04
4.14E-04
3.51E-04
7.72E-04
EQ
Water
PDF-m2-year/FU
Marine eutrophication
4.20E-03
6.78E-03
6.65E-03
3.39E-03
4.32E-03
5.65E-03
3.86E-03
3.12E-03
6.21E-03
EQ
Water
PDF-m2-year/FU
Ionizing radiation, ecosystem quality
9.47E-09
1.32E-08
1.29E-08
7.64E-09
8.00E-09
8.93E-09
7.04E-09
5.18E-09
8.99E-09
EQ
Water
PDF-m2-year/FU
Land occupation, biodiversity
1.98E-01
3.53E-01
3.45E-01
1.40E-01
1.84E-01
2.50E-01
1.46E-01
9.72E-02
2.68E-01
EQ
rest of EQ
PDF-m2-year/FU
Terrestrial acidification
1.86E-01
2.72E-01
2.67E-01
1.69E-01
2.12E-01
2.71E-01
1.84E-01
1.65E-01
2.99E-01
EQ
rest of EQ
PDF-m2-year/FU
Land transformation, biodiversity
7.78E-01
1.29E+00
1.27E+00
5.83E-01
8.94E-01
1.28E+00
6.78E-01
5.95E-01
1.44E+00
EQ
rest of EQ
PDF-m2-year/FU
Climate change, human health, short term
4.82E-06
1.87E-06
1.84E-06
6.79E-06
6.67E-06
6.70E-06
6.72E-06
7.24E-06
7.58E-06
HH
Carbon
DALY/FU
Climate change, human health, long term
1.59E-05
6.04E-06
5.95E-06
2.12E-05
2.06E-05
2.05E-05
2.12E-05
2.27E-05
2.34E-05
HH
Carbon
DALY/FU
Water availability, human health
3.67E-05
1.68E-05
1.65E-05
4.54E-05
3.73E-05
2.66E-05
4.05E-05
4.05E-05
2.44E-05
HH
Water
DALY/FU
Ionizing radiation, human health
1.29E-07
2.19E-07
2.14E-07
9.17E-08
1.02E-07
1.25E-07
8.29E-08
4.60E-08
1.25E-07
HH
Water
DALY/FU
Human toxicity cancer, short term
2.94E-06
4.62E-06
4.54E-06
2.44E-06
2.99E-06
3.82E-06
2.39E-06
1.90E-06
4.01E-06
HH
Water
DALY/FU
Human toxicity cancer, long term
4.40E-08
7.18E-08
7.03E-08
3.43E-08
4.31E-08
5.63E-08
3.51E-08
2.66E-08
6.00E-08
HH
Water
DALY/FU
Human toxicity non-cancer, short term
1.46E-06
2.39E-06
2.34E-06
1.21E-06
1.53E-06
2.00E-06
1.25E-06
9.85E-07
2.13E-06
HH
Water
DALY/FU
Human toxicity non-cancer, long term
1.40E-06
2.30E-06
2.25E-06
1.10E-06
1.39E-06
1.82E-06
1.12E-06
8.50E-07
1.93E-06
HH
Water
DALY/FU
Particulate matter formation
2.01E-06
2.98E-06
2.93E-06
1.78E-06
2.15E-06
2.68E-06
1.94E-06
1.67E-06
2.90E-06
HH
Rest of HH
DALY/FU
Photochemical oxidant formation
5.36E-10
6.26E-10
6.14E-10
6.89E-10
7.78E-10
8.96E-10
6.67E-10
6.52E-10
9.57E-10
HH
Rest of HH
DALY/FU
Ozone layer depletion
1.52E-09
8.19E-10
8.09E-10
1.70E-09
1.73E-09
1.66E-09
1.67E-09
1.81E-09
1.75E-09
HH
Rest of HH
DALY/FU
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
61
==PAGE:69==
Table D.2: Cumulative annual damage by AoC and AoP for IMPACT World+ impact categories, RTHA
AoP, AoC
2030
2040
2050
Unit
baseline
ambitious
baseline
ambitious
baseline
ambitious
LH2
EQ, Carbon
2.69E+04
3.36E+05
4.59E+06
1.18E+07
1.71E+07
2.99E+07
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Water
7.44E+05
9.31E+06
5.56E+08
1.43E+09
2.06E+09
3.62E+09
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Rest of EQ
6.88E+03
8.60E+04
5.08E+06
1.31E+07
1.88E+07
3.29E+07
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Total
7.78E+05
9.73E+06
5.66E+08
1.46E+09
2.10E+09
3.68E+09
PDF-m2-year
HH, Carbon
1.23E-01
1.53E+00
2.10E+01
5.40E+01
7.80E+01
1.37E+02
DALY
HH, Water
2.52E-01
3.15E+00
6.94E+01
1.79E+02
2.58E+02
4.52E+02
DALY
HH, Rest of HH
1.19E-02
1.49E-01
7.89E+00
2.04E+01
2.94E+01
5.15E+01
DALY
HH, Total
3.87E-01
4.84E+00
9.82E+01
2.53E+02
3.65E+02
6.40E+02
DALY
Kerosene
EQ, Carbon
8.66E+03
1.08E+05
2.37E+06
5.94E+06
8.67E+06
1.51E+07
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Water
2.24E+04
2.80E+05
6.13E+06
1.54E+07
2.24E+07
3.90E+07
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Rest of EQ
5.89E+03
7.37E+04
1.61E+06
4.04E+06
5.90E+06
1.03E+07
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Total
3.70E+04
4.62E+05
1.01E+07
2.54E+07
3.70E+07
6.43E+07
PDF-m2-year
HH, Carbon
3.96E-02
4.95E-01
1.08E+01
2.71E+01
3.96E+01
6.88E+01
DALY
HH, Water
5.97E-03
7.47E-02
1.63E+00
4.09E+00
5.98E+00
1.04E+01
DALY
HH, Rest of HH
9.33E-03
1.17E-01
2.55E+00
6.40E+00
9.35E+00
1.62E+01
DALY
HH, Total
5.49E-02
6.86E-01
1.50E+01
3.76E+01
5.49E+01
9.55E+01
DALY
62
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:70==
Table D.3: Cumulative annual damage by AoC and AoP for IMPACT World+ impact categories, AGP
AoP, AoC
2030
2040
2050
Unit
baseline
ambitious
baseline
ambitious
baseline
ambitious
LH2
EQ, Carbon
1.35E+05
1.69E+06
1.55E+08
4.09E+08
6.05E+08
1.07E+09
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Water
2.09E+06
2.62E+07
3.21E+09
8.50E+09
1.69E+10
2.98E+10
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Rest of EQ
1.96E+04
2.46E+05
3.34E+07
8.85E+07
1.84E+08
3.25E+08
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Total
2.25E+06
2.81E+07
3.40E+09
8.99E+09
1.77E+10
3.12E+10
PDF-m2-year
HH, Carbon
6.17E-01
7.72E+00
7.06E+02
1.87E+03
2.77E+03
4.88E+03
DALY
HH, Water
1.10E+00
1.38E+01
1.12E+03
2.97E+03
3.49E+03
6.17E+03
DALY
HH, Rest of HH
3.92E-02
4.91E-01
5.58E+01
1.48E+02
2.73E+02
4.82E+02
DALY
HH, Total
1.76E+00
2.20E+01
1.88E+03
4.98E+03
6.53E+03
1.15E+04
DALY
Kerosene
EQ, Carbon
3.22E+04
4.03E+05
2.21E+07
5.77E+07
8.56E+07
1.51E+08
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Water
8.34E+04
1.04E+06
5.71E+07
1.49E+08
2.22E+08
3.90E+08
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Rest of EQ
2.19E+04
2.74E+05
1.50E+07
3.93E+07
5.82E+07
1.02E+08
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Total
1.38E+05
1.72E+06
9.42E+07
2.46E+08
3.65E+08
6.43E+08
PDF-m2-year
HH, Carbon
1.47E-01
1.84E+00
1.01E+02
2.64E+02
3.91E+02
6.88E+02
DALY
HH, Water
2.22E-02
2.78E-01
1.52E+01
3.98E+01
5.90E+01
1.04E+02
DALY
HH, Rest of HH
3.47E-02
4.35E-01
2.38E+01
6.22E+01
9.22E+01
1.62E+02
DALY
HH, Total
2.04E-01
2.56E+00
1.40E+02
3.66E+02
5.42E+02
9.54E+02
DALY
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
63
==PAGE:71==
Table D.4: Cumulative annual damage by AoC and AoP for IMPACT World+ impact categories, CDG
AoP, AoC
2030
2040
2050
Unit
baseline
ambitious
baseline
ambitious
baseline
ambitious
LH2
EQ, Carbon
6.81E+05
8.52E+06
2.97E+08
8.09E+08
1.50E+09
2.64E+09
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Water
1.10E+07
1.38E+08
3.41E+09
9.29E+09
3.81E+10
6.72E+10
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Rest of EQ
1.12E+05
1.41E+06
3.89E+07
1.06E+08
4.30E+08
7.58E+08
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Total
1.18E+07
1.48E+08
3.75E+09
1.02E+10
4.00E+10
7.06E+10
PDF-m2-year
HH, Carbon
3.11E+00
3.89E+01
1.36E+03
3.70E+03
6.84E+03
1.21E+04
DALY
HH, Water
5.05E+00
6.32E+01
2.01E+03
5.47E+03
7.33E+03
1.29E+04
DALY
HH, Rest of HH
2.17E-01
2.71E+00
7.60E+01
2.07E+02
6.27E+02
1.10E+03
DALY
HH, Total
8.38E+00
1.05E+02
3.44E+03
9.38E+03
1.48E+04
2.61E+04
DALY
Kerosene
EQ, Carbon
1.63E+05
2.04E+06
4.07E+07
1.07E+08
1.82E+08
3.18E+08
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Water
4.22E+05
5.28E+06
1.05E+08
2.77E+08
4.71E+08
8.24E+08
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Rest of EQ
1.11E+05
1.39E+06
2.77E+07
7.29E+07
1.24E+08
2.17E+08
PDF-m2-year
EQ, Total
6.97E+05
8.72E+06
1.74E+08
4.57E+08
7.77E+08
1.36E+09
PDF-m2-year
HH, Carbon
7.46E-01
9.33E+00
1.86E+02
4.89E+02
8.31E+02
1.45E+03
DALY
HH, Water
1.12E-01
1.41E+00
2.81E+01
7.38E+01
1.25E+02
2.19E+02
DALY
HH, Rest of HH
1.76E-01
2.20E+00
4.39E+01
1.15E+02
1.96E+02
3.43E+02
DALY
HH, Total
1.03E+00
1.29E+01
2.58E+02
6.79E+02
1.15E+03
2.02E+03
DALY
64
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:72==
Table D.5: Damage contribution to AoP’s and relative change of impacts [%]
Impact Category
RTHA
AGP
CDG
Contribution to AoP
Relative Change
Contribution to AoP
Relative Change
Contribution to AoP
Relative Change
2030
2040
2050
2040
2050
2030
2040
2050
2040
2050
2030
2040
2050
2040
2050
Climate change, ecosystem quality, short term
0.79
0.19
0.19
-61.22
-1.42
1.44
1.10
0.84
-1.75
0.49
1.37
1.89
0.88
7.60
4.79
Climate change, ecosystem quality, long term
2.66
0.62
0.62
-62.05
-1.46
4.56
3.45
2.59
-2.91
-0.66
4.39
6.04
2.76
7.30
2.96
Marine acidification, short term
0.07
0.01
0.01
-64.71
-1.44
0.12
0.09
0.07
-3.39
-1.29
0.11
0.16
0.07
7.63
1.69
Marine acidification, long term
0.63
0.14
0.14
-64.71
-1.44
1.09
0.82
0.61
-3.39
-1.29
1.05
1.45
0.65
7.63
1.69
Water availability, freshwater ecosystem
0.00
0.00
0.00
9.71
-2.11
0.00
0.00
0.00
9.27
10.52
0.00
0.00
0.00
-6.70
39.20
Water availability, terrestrial ecosystem
0.00
0.00
0.00
38.62
0.58
0.00
0.00
0.00
16.43
19.83
0.00
0.00
0.00
-14.34
30.25
Thermally polluted water
0.00
0.00
0.00
33.54
-2.20
0.00
0.00
0.00
23.76
24.26
0.00
0.00
0.00
-9.47
80.61
Freshwater ecotoxicity, short term
0.08
0.08
0.08
46.17
-1.74
0.09
0.09
0.08
18.23
22.63
0.11
0.12
0.08
-15.04
60.54
Freshwater ecotoxicity, long term
94.86
98.04
98.04
67.89
-1.84
91.79
93.44
94.75
30.80
34.21
91.99
93.32
94.45
28.34
32.15
Freshwater acidification
0.02
0.02
0.02
44.53
-1.75
0.02
0.02
0.02
26.95
27.69
0.03
0.03
0.02
-8.90
80.94
Freshwater eutrophication
0.00
0.00
0.00
65.46
-2.17
0.00
0.00
0.00
37.14
35.46
0.00
0.00
0.00
-15.25
120.18
Marine eutrophication
0.00
0.00
0.00
61.46
-1.96
0.00
0.00
0.00
27.39
30.72
0.00
0.00
0.00
-19.38
99.20
Ionizing radiation, ecosystem quality
0.00
0.00
0.00
39.08
-2.26
0.00
0.00
0.00
4.73
11.59
0.00
0.00
0.00
-26.45
73.74
Land occupation, biodiversity
0.15
0.17
0.16
78.70
-2.36
0.14
0.14
0.14
31.53
36.26
0.14
0.12
0.14
-33.27
175.26
Terrestrial acidification
0.14
0.13
0.13
45.97
-1.79
0.17
0.16
0.16
26.10
27.42
0.17
0.20
0.16
-10.28
81.27
Land transformation, biodiversity
0.59
0.61
0.60
66.21
-2.20
0.57
0.68
0.74
53.32
43.51
0.64
0.72
0.77
-12.17
141.57
Climate change, human health, short term
7.36
5.01
5.02
-61.22
-1.42
8.48
9.17
10.43
-1.75
0.49
8.94
9.52
11.40
7.60
4.79
Climate change, human health, long term
24.31
16.20
16.23
-62.05
-1.46
26.51
28.31
31.83
-2.91
-0.66
28.14
29.90
35.17
7.30
2.95
Water availability, human health
56.12
45.06
45.04
-54.28
-1.67
56.70
51.24
41.41
-17.85
-28.60
53.85
53.36
36.65
0.07
-39.89
Ionizing radiation, human health
0.20
0.59
0.58
69.78
-2.26
0.11
0.14
0.19
10.73
23.06
0.11
0.06
0.19
-44.47
171.45
Human toxicity cancer, short term
4.50
12.39
12.39
56.89
-1.62
3.05
4.11
5.94
22.79
27.52
3.18
2.49
6.03
-20.84
111.50
Human toxicity cancer, long term
0.07
0.19
0.19
63.19
-2.00
0.04
0.06
0.09
25.66
30.43
0.05
0.04
0.09
-24.05
124.97
Human toxicity non-cancer, short term
2.23
6.40
6.39
63.73
-1.85
1.51
2.10
3.11
26.45
30.66
1.66
1.30
3.20
-20.95
116.21
Human toxicity non-cancer, long term
2.14
6.17
6.15
64.10
-2.03
1.38
1.91
2.83
26.14
30.74
1.49
1.12
2.91
-24.21
127.63
Particulate matter formation
3.07
7.99
8.00
48.13
-1.46
2.22
2.96
4.17
21.05
24.49
2.58
2.20
4.36
-13.84
73.31
Photochemical oxidant formation
0.00
0.00
0.00
16.78
-1.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
12.94
15.24
0.00
0.00
0.00
-2.20
46.80
Ozone layer depletion
0.00
0.00
0.00
-46.02
-1.16
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.72
-3.95
0.00
0.00
0.00
8.28
-3.04
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
65
==PAGE:73==
Figure D.1: Relative damage scores in % of scenario with highest score - EQ
66
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:74==
Figure D.2: Relative damage scores in % of scenario with highest score - HH
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
67
==PAGE:75==
Figure D.3: Relative damage scores in % of the H2 production method with highest score - EQ
68
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
==PAGE:76==
Figure D.4: Relative damage scores in % of the H2 production method with highest score - HH
Prospective life cycle assessment of hydrogen applications in the aviation sector
69
==PAGE:77==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustainability.man.dtu.dk
