==PAGE:1==
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial
Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Panagiotis Papadamos
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
https://pixabay.com/
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build-
ing 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Compute, Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in par-
tial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc in Computer Science
and Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of epistemic, doxastic
and public announcement logic.
Panagiotis Papadamos - s205637
Signature
Date
ii
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Rational agents have been a topic of research for many years. Their reasoning and the
way they update their beliefs were studied by many scientists of epistemology and dox-
astic logic. This work has the intention to build on existing work and propose a different
view of agents’ reasoning.
Agents are indeed rational; but are they biased? In this work we formalize types of cog-
nitive bias in artificial intelligence and multi-agent systems. Our main goal is to compare
the performance of unbiased and biased agents in truth-tracking and potentially propose
alternative solutions. Additionally, we investigate the behavior of biased agents and dis-
cuss the effect of cognitive bias in truth-tracking. On this journey towards our main goal,
we also briefly propose a modification of the Dynamic Logic for Learning Theory [1], which
we name bias logic, to address an agent’s belief updates under cognitive bias.
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Family and Friends
To everyone who was there and supported me when needed. All of them laid their stone
to this work.
Nina Gierasimczuk , Associate Professor, Supervisor
Gratitude and respect to Nina for her help and ideas, and our smooth collaboration during
the past 3 years.
iv
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
2
The Model
4
2.1
Goal-Oriented Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Basic Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Dynamic Logic for Learning Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Bias Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Bias Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Types of Cognitive Bias
11
3.1
Confirmation Bias
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Framing Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Anchoring Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
In-Group Favoritism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4.1
The Intuition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4.2
The Updates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4.3
In-group communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4.4
Out-group communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Truth tracking under Cognitive Bias
21
4.1
Truth tracking under confirmation bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Truth tracking under framing bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
Truth tracking under anchoring bias
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Truth tracking under in-group favoritism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Addressing Cognitive Bias’ Effect
32
5.1
A Demonstrating Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Simulation
34
6.1
Structure of the Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.2
Custom Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.2.1
Confirmation-biased Belief Revision Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.2.2
Framing-biased Belief Revision Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.2.3
In-group Favoritism Belief Revision Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.3
Randomly Created Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
7
Discussion
44
Bibliography
46
A Appendix
48
A.1 Performance Plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:9==
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Cognitive bias is a systematic human thought pattern, connected with the distortion of
received information, that usually leads to deviation from rationality. Everyone in their
daily life has to make decisions based on incoming information. This information can be
factual or observational. Specifically, factual information concerns facts that may hold
in one’s environment, but not necessarily be observed, and observational information
concerns facts that we observe by our environment, either by communication or individual
perception itself [1].
Decision-making usually needs to be made fast and without consuming high volume of
human’s cognitive resources. That’s where cognitive bias emerges. Encountered in differ-
ent types and forms, some of which will be reviewed in our work, cognitive bias facilitates
fast reasoning and decision-making, without guaranteeing rationality, though.
In our work, the goal is to model cognitive bias in artificial intelligence and multi-agent
systems. We will mainly focus on the significant role of cognitive bias in the decision-
making process and how an agent is affected in a multi-agent system during this process.
First, we will present two examples that motivate our work and then we will go through
how we see cognitive bias in artificial intelligence.
For the first example, consider two computers of a network, A and B. Computer A tries
to communicate with computer B, but for whatever reason, computer A does not receive
B’s response within a specified time range and, wrongly, considers computer B dead.
This inability to communicate leads computer A to change its ‘belief’ about B’s liveness,
and, subsequently, make decisions based on this cognitive bias. This can be seen as an
example of an anchoring bias. Anchoring bias concerns cases where humans, and in our
case artificial intelligence agents, make a decision based on the early piece of information
they receive, ignoring further clarifications. Computer A will use the first information that it
receives to make a decision. In our example, not receiving a response is still information,
and so A makes a decision based on anchoring bias [2], [3].
For the second example, consider three artificial intelligence football-playing agents, A, B
and C. Agent A needs to know whether it is able to make a turn left or right based on the
existence of an opponent behind its back. Its sensors don’t give it the ability to know what
is behind, so agent A has to base its decision on the input of agents B and C. Consider
that agents B and C have only partial overview of that area, so the input that they give to
agent A is not 100% accurate. Consider now the proposition p that stands for ’Agent A
can turn left’. We will not go into details of how the agents process information based on
their sensors to believe or disbelieve p, but let’s assume that agent B believes p (denoted
by BBp) and agent C believes ¬p (i.e. BC¬p). Assume also that agent A processes the
incoming information, based on a ranking between agents, in order to reason faster and
that agent B is of higher ranking compared to agent C. In human context, we could say
that agent B is the captain of the team or is more experienced, and their belief is more
important (more likely to be true) than that of the other agents. This also happens in
artificial intelligence where agents base their belief mostly on the belief of a group based
on ranking (close friends) [2]. Back to our example, if in the real world, w, ¬p is true,
then agent A will make a wrong decision based on the incoming information, as it will
base the decision on agent’s B more trustworthy information. This is an example of in-
group favoritism and briefly demonstrates how agents interact and updates their beliefs
2
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:11==
in a group. As its name reveals, in-group favoritism concerns more than just how humans
communicate. However, in our work, we focus on agents’ communication and its influence
on beliefs. [4]
It’s worth noting that even though many types of cognitive bias are clearly connected
to the existence of erroneous data in the incoming information, we focus only on the
way that an agent perceives the information. Cognitive bias is a result of how a human
perceives the information, the perception can be true and it can be false. It’s clear that in
order for someone to experience cognitive bias there should be erroneous data or false
perception of the available data, either as incoming information or perceived as part of
the environment. The latter will be the main focus of our work. Types of cognitive bias we
will tackle are Confirmation Bias, Framing, Anchoring Bias and In-group Favoritism.
We structured our work as follows: in Section 2 we present the Baltag, Gierasimczuk and
Smets’ work [5] on which we base ours. We present the necessary theoretical concepts
and introduce our Bias Model. In Section 3 we go through the four types of cognitive bias
and give a formalization of them using the Bias Model. Section 4 presents the behavior
of cognitively biased belief-revision methods on truth-tracking. In Section 5 we discuss
cognitive bias’ effect on truth-tracking and investigate ways to get the most out of cog-
nitive bias as heuristic. We test the proposed model in computer simulations, which are
discussed in Section 6. We close with a discussion in Section 7.
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
3
==PAGE:12==
2
The Model
2.1
Goal-Oriented Agents
In our work we consider a multi-agent system where all the agents are rational, but not
omniscient. Baltag, Gierasimczuk and Smets (BGS for short, [5]) have studied learning
scenarios, in which belief-revision agents are able to identify the actual world (state).
Our work will use the BGS framework and extend it to model cognitive bias. Even though in
many cases cognitive bias is known to have irrational effect on belief update and decision-
making, our agents are rational in the sense that they update their belief in a way that is
compatible with their individual rationality. Although an omniscient observer outside the
system may consider an agent’s action irrational, we will see that this action contains a
level of rationality for the agent itself.
As agents are not omniscient, they are not aware of the actual world they are in, but rather
they hold individual beliefs of which is the actual world. The goal of every agent in the
system is to identify which is actually the real world in which the agents exist and act, by
using incoming information to revise their belief and exclude, but not always delete, other
possible worlds.
2.2
Basic Definitions
We will now provide all the necessary definitions and results from BGS [5] and then con-
tinue with our proposal. BGS used plausibility spaces to model belief revision of an agent
after receiving a sequence of information. Their results included three belief revision meth-
ods, namely conditioning, lexicographic revision and minimal revision ([5], [6], [7], [8]).
Definition 2.2.1. Let S = (S, O), where S a non-empty set of worlds (states) and O ⊆
P(S). The pair S = (S, O) is called an epistemic space.
In order to describe an agent’s preference towards some worlds, we introduce a plau-
sibility order ⪯⊆S × S. We consider this order well-founded, as we need a minimum
element, which will be the most plausible world for an agent, or in some cases, the set
of most plausible worlds (in the case the agent is indifferent among some worlds). In this
sense, the plausibility order ⪯is not total, that is there may exists t, s ∈S, such that t ̸= s,
t ⊀s, and t ⊁s.
Definition 2.2.2. The pair B = (S, ⪯), where S is an epistemic space, is called a plausibility
space. The plausibility space B is called standard if the plausibility relation ⪯is well-
founded.
In our work we will consider only standard plausibility spaces, but we will omit the word
standard for simplicity, when we talk about plausibility spaces.
After defining what a plausibility space is, it is important to talk about the information an
agent receives. We consider incoming information as propositions, that are extention-
ally taken to be sets of all the worlds that make the proposition true. For example, if a
proposition p is true in the worlds w, s and t, then p = {w, s, t}. The set of all observable
propositions (or observables) p is the set O ⊆P(S) of a plausibility space B = ((S, O), ⪯).
An agent receives one proposition at a time sequentially and updates its beliefs accord-
ingly.
4
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:13==
For consistency and convenience we will use the same symbols as [5] to define and
describe the necessary terms.
Definition 2.2.3. Let B = ((S, O), ⪯) be a plausibility space. A data stream is an infinite
sequence of observations (propositions) ⃗O = (O1, O2, . . .), where Oi ∈O, for all i ∈N.
A data sequence is a finite sequence of incoming propositions σ = (O1, O2, . . . , On), with
Oi ∈O, i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n}.
Data streams and sequences describe the information an agent receives in any stage of
an information exchange process. Information comes sequentially to an agent and not in
parallel. We stress this point out because as we will see later the order of the incoming
information affects the result of truth tracking for an agent, in case the agent is biased.
Definition 2.2.4. Let ⃗O = (O1, O2, . . .) a stream of incoming data and σ = (O1, O2, . . . , On)
the corresponding sequence. We define:
• ⃗On the n-th observed proposition in ⃗O.
• set( ⃗O) := {O | O ∈⃗O} and set(σ) := {O | O ∈σ} the set of observed propositions
in σ being a data stream and a data sequence.
• σ ⋆τ = (Oσ1, . . . , Oσn, Oτ1, . . . , Oτm) is the concatenation of two data sequences σ
and τ. Note that in this definition τ can also be a data stream, but σ cannot.
• #p(σ) is the frequency of proposition p in σ, where p ∈O.
In our work we will focus on a special type of incoming data streams and sequences,
namely the sound and complete ones. A sound data stream (sequence) is one that con-
tains only true data (with respect to a given possible world). A complete data stream
(sequence) is one that contains every true data (with respect to a given possible world).
Agents are interested in learning the actual world, so in our case we care about data
streams that are sound and complete with respect to the actual world, as this creates the
most accommodating conditions for learning.
Definition 2.2.5. A data stream ⃗O is sound with respect to a state s ∈S if and only if
every element in ⃗O is true in the world s, formally s ∈⃗On, for all n ∈N.
Definition 2.2.6. A data stream ⃗O is complete with respect to a state s ∈S if and only if
every proposition true in s is in ⃗O, formally if s ∈p, where p ∈O an obervable, then there
is an n ∈N, such that p = ⃗On.
Sound and complete data streams play an important role for truth tracking, as has been
shown in [5]. Below we overview some of the results in [5] about conditioning, lexico-
graphic revision, and minimal revision.
Definition 2.2.7. Given an epistemic space S = (S, O) and a data sequence σ, a learning
method L (also referred to it as a learner) in [1], is a function that takes as an input the
epistemic space S and the sequence σ, and returns a subset of S, L(S, σ) ⊆S. This
subset is called a conjecture.
The goal is to use learning methods for agents to identify the actual world. Given the
current belief state of an agent and the incoming information, which is (to some degree)
trusted, the agent learns facts about the actual world step by step in order to achieve
its goal, identifying the actual world. Learning has the form of belief revision using the
incoming information.
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
5
==PAGE:14==
Definition 2.2.8. A one-step revision method R is a function R1 such that for any plau-
sibility space B = (S, ⪯) and any observable proposition p ∈O returns a new plausibility
space R1(B, p).
Based on one-step revision methods we define the general case of revision methods. An
iterated belief revision method R is obtained by iterating the one-step revision method R1
such that:
1. R(B, λ) = B if λ is an empty data sequence;
2. R(B, σ ⋆p) = R1(R(B, σ), p).
We will now make the connection between learning methods and belief revision methods,
but first we present a way to create a plausibility space BS given an epistemic space S.
Definition 2.2.9. Given an epistemic space S = (S, O), a prior plausibility assignment
PLAUS is a map that assigns to the epistemic space S a plausibility relation ⪯on S. In
this way the sought plausibility order between worlds is created. PLAUS(S) = (S, O, ⪯)
is a plausibility space generated from the epistemic space S.
A prior plausibility space is not necessarily created deterministically. Different agents may
have different prior plausibility relations among the plausible worlds, so PLAUS(S) is not
unique, but rather it can be seen as a starting point of the belief revision process. This
assumption is not controversial. The initial beliefs of an agent (or a human), and the way
it perceives their environment differs from individual to individual. The prior plausibility
relation can be seen as the initial belief of which worlds are the most plausible and gives an
idea on where the actual world lies based on each individual. It is also what differentiates
one agent from another.
Definition 2.2.10. Given a belief revision method R and a prior plausibility assignment
PLAUS, a learning method LPLAUS
R
is generated, called belief revision-based learning
method, in the following way LPLAUS
R
(S, σ) := min R(PLAUS(S), σ).
The three belief revision methods that are presented in [5] are conditioning, lexicographic
belief revision and minimal belief revision. We will now give their definitions and present
the proved results.
Definition 2.2.11 (Conditioning). Conditioning, Cond, is an iterated belief revision method
based on the one-step revision method Cond1 that takes as input a plausibility space B =
(S, O, ⪯) and a proposition p ∈O and returns a plausibility space B, that is the restriction
of B to p. Formally, Cond1(B, p) = (Sp, O, ⪯p), where Sp = S ∩p and ⪯p = ⪯∩(Sp × Sp).
Definition 2.2.12 (Lexicographic Revision). Lexicographic revision, Lex, is an iterated
belief revision method based on the one-step revision method Lex1 that takes as input a
plausibility space B = (S, O, ⪯) and a proposition p ∈O and returns a plausibility space
Lex1(B, p) = (S, O, ⪯
′), such that for all t, w ∈S, t ⪯
′ w if and only if t ⪯p w or t ⪯¯p w or
(t ∈p and w /∈p), where ⪯p = ⪯∩(p × p), ⪯¯p = ⪯∩(¯p × ¯p), and ¯p is the complement of
p in S.
In the definition 2.2.12, we claimed that ¯p is the complement of proposition p in S. This can
be also seen as the negation of proposition p, as we will eventually talk about propositions
being true and false. The equivalence between the complement of p and the negation of
p stems from the fact that BGS consider also streams from the set of observables O that
is closed under negation. That makes ¯p ∈O, which is the set of worlds in which ¬p is
true, so all the worlds in which p is false.
6
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:15==
Definition 2.2.13 (Minimal Revision). Minimal revision, Mini, is an iterated belief revi-
sion method based on the one-step revision method Mini1 that takes as input a plausi-
bility space B = (S, O, ⪯) and a proposition p ∈O and returns a new plausibility space
Mini(B, p) = (S, O, ⪯
′) where for all t, w ∈S, if t ∈minp and w /∈minp, then t ⪯
′ w,
otherwise t ⪯
′ w if and only if t ⪯w.
It has been shown that Cond and Lex behave well when given sound and complete in-
coming data streams, and can identify the actual world, while Mini can’t always identify
it. Learning methods like Cond and Lex are called universal. We will now formally define
what a universal learning method is.
Definition 2.2.14. Given an epistemic space S = (S, O), a world s ∈S is identified in the
limit by a learning method L if, for every sound and complete data stream with respect to
s, there exists a finite stage after which L returns always returns the singleton {s}.
An epistemic space S = (S, O) is identified in the limit by a learning method L, if every
s ∈S is identified in the limit by L.
An epistemic space S = (S, O) is identifiable in the limit, if there exists a learning method
L that identifies S in the limit.
Definition 2.2.15. An epistemic space S = (S, O) is identified in the limit by a belief
revision method R if there exists a prior plausibility assignment PLAUS, such that the
learning method LPLAUS
R
identifies S in the limit.
If PLAUS is well-founded, the epistemic space S is standardly identified in the limit by R.
Definition 2.2.16. A revision method R is universal on a class C of epistemic spaces if it
can identify in the limit every epistemic space S ∈C that is identifiable in the limit.
R is standardly universal on C if it standardly identifies every S ∈C.
Proposition 2.2.1. The belief revision method Cond is universal.
Proposition 2.2.2. The belief revision method Lex is universal.
Proposition 2.2.3. The belief revision method Mini is not universal.
We skip the proofs of propositions 2.2.1, 2.2.2 and 2.2.3 in our work, but one can find
detailed proofs on [5]. However, we will use these results and compare them with our
biased belief revision methods, which we present in the next section. To do so, we first
describe the general framework and provide updated definition of already presented terms
when needed.
2.2.1
Dynamic Logic for Learning Theory
Based on the framework presented in the previous section, Baltag, Gierasimczuk, Özgün,
Vargas, Vargas and Smets (BGÖVS for short) introduced the Dynamic Logic for Learning
Theory (DLLT) [1]. BGÖVS, in their work, provided a sound and complete axiomatization
of DLLT with respect to the learning models, which are intersection models enriched with
the learner. [1]. We will not go deep into DLLT as one can find it in [1], but we will use it
in the next section as the base to propose a logic for biased agents.
2.3
Bias Model
We propose a new approach, called Bias Model from now on, which is built upon the BGS
model. The main difference is that in Bias Model the agents are biased, but still rational in
some sense. An agent can be biased towards some specific propositions. To address this
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
7
==PAGE:16==
issue we introduce another representation of the set of observable propositions O. In our
model, the set of observable propositions O can be written as the union of two disjoint sets
of propositions, namely the important ones (I) and the basic ones (O\I), that are different
for every agent. Note that the set of observable propositions remains the same, and what
changes are actually the sets I and O \I that depend on every agent. Essentially, the set
of observables is the same for every agent, but every agent has different idea of what is
important and what is not. The modification will help us deal with the fact that an agent is
biased towards some propositions and doesn’t instantly revise its beliefs when it comes
to these propositions.
Definition 2.3.1. A bias plausibility space, based on the plausibility space (S, O, ⪯), is a
tuple B = (S, O, I, ⪯), where O ⊆P(S) and I ⊆O.
In our work, all the spaces we consider, epistemic, plausibility, and bias spaces, are all
finite. This is something we chose in order to conform with the practical implementation
of Section 6.
The idea behind introducing I is that an agent behaves differently towards the propositions
in that set. The reason why these two set are created is the term we will introduce next,
the stubbornness degree.
Definition 2.3.2. Let B be a plausibility space with O the set of observables, and α an
agent. We define the stubbornness degree of the agent α as the total function Dα : O →
N.
For simplicity and until the multi-agent system is introduced, we will omit the subscript α
and write D instead.
The stubbornness degree is a function that, for every agent, it assigns a natural number to
every observable proposition of O. For unbiased agent the value of the function for every
proposition is 1. That means that an agent unbiased towards every proposition will revise
its beliefs instantly after it receives information inconsistent with its beliefs. The intuition
is that an agent that is biased towards a proposition p ∈I and believes p, should receive
information ¬p D(p)-times in total in order to change its belief to ¬p. With the introduction
of the stubbornness degree we redefine the bias spaces.
The stubbornness degree is essentially the reason why we can write O as the union of
the two sets, I and O \ I. Stubbornness degree of an agent for a proposition p greater
than 1, means that the proposition has some weight for the agent and naturally makes it
important. Stubbornness degree equal to 1 means that the propositions doesn’t have any
special meaning for the agent. Note that the sets I and O \ I are not a partition of O, as
one of the two sets can be empty.
Apart from the stubbornness degree D(p), we will introduce the framing function, FR,
that depends on each agent and maps every data stream of observables to a stream of
subsets Pi ⊆S, FR : O∞→(P(S))∞. This function describes the way that information
is presented to an agent.
Definition 2.3.3. Let B be a plausibility space with O the set of observables, an agent α
and a data stream ⃗O = (O1, O2, . . . ) ∈O∞. We define the framing function for the agent
α as the total function FRα : O∞→(P(S))∞. We will write FR( ⃗O) = (P1, P2, . . . ) and
call Pi the corresponding element of Oi in FR( ⃗O). For every Oi ∈⃗O, i ∈N, Pi ∈P(S) .
We will again, for simplicity, drop the subscript α and write FR instead. Also, in order to
simplify the notations, as observables Oi are in essence observable propositions, when
8
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:17==
the subscript i is redundant we will use, without loss of generality, p when referring to a
single observable of a data stream ⃗O, and P for the corresponding element of p in FR( ⃗O).
Note also that the definition refers to data streams, but framing function can be applied to
data sequences as well.
Based on the Definition 2.3.3, we can see that the framing function takes as an argu-
ment a data stream and returns a tuple of subsets of S, possibly infinite. In this point we
should be careful, as there could be different relations between the elements of the initial
argument ⃗O of the framing function, FR, and the elements of the value FR( ⃗O). More
precisely, consider a data stream ⃗O = (O1, O2, . . . ) and the value of the framing function
FR( ⃗O) = (P1, P2, . . . ). Framing of information could be considered as losing information
about possible worlds, so Pi ⊆Oi, something we will investigate in our work, but also
could be considered as increasing uncertainty about the actual world, so Oi ⊆Pi. In the
latter case, information is still framed and uncertainty increases, by adding more possible
worlds in the information the agent receives. The coming example could be considered a
case of the second relation. In Section 6 we concern cases when framing results in losing
information, based on individual perception or the way the information is delivered.
Consider an image recognition algorithm, in our case the agent, that is already trained
and receives images from a sensor and classifies them, given some categories. Each
image can be considered as incoming information for our agent, based on which the agent
will make a decision and try to identify the correct classifier. Assume that the incoming
image contains an object of a class A and all the information for the algorithm to classify it
correctly. For some reason, e.g., bad network connectivity, part of the image has been lost
and only the other part of the image goes to the agent, which makes a wrong prediction
based on partial information. In this case we have, indeed, loss of information, but if
we consider a proposition p to stand for ’the image belongs to category A’, then after
receiving the new information, the uncertainty increases and the proposition p is true in
more possible world, so it is the case where p ⊆P.
Back to our work, we model incoming information as observable propositions p that are
sets of worlds, in which this proposition is true. Framing in our case can be seen as
missing worlds from a proposition. This is modeled by the framing function FR. If, for
example, there is a proposition p ∈O that is actually true in worlds w, s, t ∈S, then there
could be a case where an agent receives information P = {w, s}.
Framing function is not only about the framing bias. Rather, it is the way that information is
presented to an agent based on some factors, related either to agent’s environment or its
resources. In fact, for most of the biases we will see that for every observable proposition
p ∈O, P = p and we will write that the agent receives p, instead of FR(p), for simplicity’s
sake.
Definition 2.3.4. A bias plausibility space is B = (S, ⪯, D, FR), where S an epistemic
space, ⪯a plausibility order, for every agent, D is the stubbornness degree and FR is
the framing function of the agent.
Note that I is not part of the bias plausibility space, as we defined the stubbornness
degree. Knowing the stubbornness degree of an agent is the same as knowing I and
O \ I.
Stubbornness degree D describes the level of an agent’s bias towards an important propo-
sition. The higher the stubbornness degree, the more biased is the agent towards the
proposition, so the more difficult is to change their belief. For an agent to revise its belief
for an important proposition, there should be strong evidence against it. An interesting
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
9
==PAGE:18==
part of our work is how stubbornness degree changes based on the type of cognitive bias.
Framing function models the way information is presented to the agent. This way can
intentionally or unintentionally, overtly or covertly, change and affect decision-making.
2.3.1
Bias Logic
Here we will propose a slight modification of the DLLT. [1] Note that providing a logic to
captures biased agents’ revision is not the main goal of our work. However, we speculate
that this modification could be a good starting point for a bias logic.
As we will also see in the next chapter, the main characteristic that differs biased agents
from unbiased ones is the fact that an unbiased agent may learn (receive or perceive)
some truthful information, but still believe its contradiction (negation in case we are talking
about formulas). This scenario, of course, is not covered by DLLT’s axiomatization. Our
proposal is the enrichment of DLLT with the below axiom to capture this possibility.
L(¬ϕ) ∧¬ϕ →⋄Bϕ
In the given axiom, L, B and ⋄are as defined in [1] and ϕ a formula of the language given
in [1]. This axiom actually says that even if an agent learns a formula that is, indeed,
true, in this case ¬ϕ, there is still a possibility that it believes its negation, and reflects the
common characteristic of all the types of cognitive bias we refer to here. The addition of
this axioms to the axiomatic system of DLLT is not the only modification we should make.
One should go through all the rules and axioms provided in [1] and investigate whether
they comply with biased agents’ learning or not. However, as said before, this is not our
main goal here, so we will not dig into this topic.
Before we continue to the next chapter, we will give the definition of a Bias Model, based
on the bias plausibility spaces introduced in 2.3.4. These models can be used to evaluate
formulas of the language introduced in [1] and define the semantics of a bias logic.
Definition 2.3.5. A Bias Model is a pair Mbias = (B, || · ||), where B is a bias plausibility
space of our framework and || · || is a valuation function || · || : O →P(S) that maps every
observable proposition to the set of worlds that makes the proposition true.
In the next section we model the four types of cognitive bias, presented in the introduction,
using the Bias Model.
10
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:19==
3
Types of Cognitive Bias
In our work we have included four types of cognitive bias, namely confirmation bias, fram-
ing bias, anchoring bias and in-group favoritism. In this section we will model them using
the model presented in the previous one.
For each type of cognitive bias, we will describe how an agent revises its belief, in case it
succumbs in the specific type of cognitive bias, and provide formal definitions. In the next
section we will compare every biased belief revision method with the three aforementioned
methods, conditioning, lexicographic revision and minimal revision given in [5].
3.1
Confirmation Bias
Hahn and Harries [9] addressed confirmation bias as a list of four ‘cognitions’, namely:
hypothesis-determined information seeking, failure to pursue falsification strategy in the
context of conditional reasoning, resistance to change of belief once formed and overcon-
fidence or illusion of validity of our belief. The first cognition will not concern us, as we
don’t focus on agents that actively seek information, but rather we focus on how passive
agents perceive incoming information.
Let us first give an intuition of revision under confirmation bias. Consider an agent, an
important proposition p ∈I and the stubbornness degree D(p). In confirmation bias we
considered that a biased agent has stubbornness degree greater than 1 towards an im-
portant proposition. Without loss of generality we consider this proposition to be p. The
way we will model confirmation bias will address three of the four cognitions provided by
Hahn and Harries. An agent receives incoming information. If the information contradicts
p, then the agent doesn’t revise its belief as expected. In order for the agent to revise its
belief to ¬p, it needs to receive incoming information that supports ¬p at least D(p)-times.
In case that this doesn’t happen, the agent differentiates between two environments, one
where p is true and one where ¬p is true. This addresses the issues that the agent strug-
gles with falsifying its belief and it has an illusion of its belief’s validity. Although the agent
resists to update their belief to ¬p, it’s not something impossible. The difficulty is related
to the level of the stubbornness degree D(p). In case the agent receives ¬p at least D(p)
times, it revises its belief to ¬p.
For simplicity’s sake we will consider that an agent receives information P = p and use
p below. Recall that p is an observable of O, belonging to the data stream ⃗O that agent
receives and P is the corresponding element of FR( ⃗O). Of course, there could be scenar-
ios where an agent receives part of the information and, frankly, this is usually a reason
that leads to confirmation bias, but we will keep things simple and not tackle the interde-
pendence of biases.
For each type of bias we will give a general definition using the iterated belief revision
methods. For any iterated belief revision method R, as given with the help of Definition
2.2.8, we will provide a confirmation-biased method RCB. RCB will take a bias plausibility
space and a sequence of observables and output a new bias plausibility space. Intuitively,
it will attempt to execute the unbiased version of the revision method, but this will only
succeed if the stubbornness degree allows it.
Definition 3.1.1 (Confirmation-biased methods). Let B = (S, O, ⪯, D, FR) a bias plausi-
bility space based on the plausibility space (S, O, ⪯), σ ∈O∗a data sequence, p ∈O an
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
11
==PAGE:20==
observable and R1 ∈{Cond1, Lex1, Mini1}. A confirmation-biased belief revision method
is a method RCB such that,
RCB(B, λ) = B
(3.1)
RCB(B, σ × p) =
{ R1(RCB(B, σ), p)
if
#p(σ) ≥D(¯p)
RCB(B, σ)
otherwise
(3.2)
where #p(σ) stands for the frequency of p in σ and ¯p the complement of p in S.
We obtain the confirmation-biased conditioning, lexicographic and minimal revision
(CondCB, LexCB, MiniCB) by substituting R1 in the preceding definition by Cond1, Lex1
and Mini1 respectively.
The definitions of the confirmation-biased methods all refer to and use the intersection of
the incoming proposition q with the proposition p, which the agent is stubborn towards.
Even though it is not obvious, by the Definition 3.1.1 in the case that the incoming infor-
mation contradicts proposition p, which the agent is biased towards, the updates happen
based on the intersection of the incoming information with p. However, the real case
is more complex, as the agent could be stubborn towards several propositions. Con-
sider I the set of propositions which an agent is stubborn towards. In confirmation-biased
methods one should consider all the important propositions for the agent, so the updates
happen based on (∩Iα) ∩q, where q the incoming information. In Section 6, where we
run tests to compare the confirmation-biased methods with the unbiased ones, we use
this note to our implementation.
Our framework for confirmation bias could be compared to the Lockean Thesis, as the
inspiration in both cases is the same. As claimed in [10], ‘an agent believes all and only
those propositions to which she assigns ‘‘sufficiently high’’ credence’. Lockean thresh-
old provides a level of assurance for the agent to revise its belief, similar to the level of
stubbornness in our framework that is modeled using the stubbornness degree. Both are
used as a limit for agent’s belief revision. Not to be confused with the optimal Lockean
threshold (inverse of the golden ratio), here we talk about the threshold of probability need
for the agent to revise its belief.
Here comes the main difference of our approach. Contrary to the Lockean Thesis, we in-
troduced the stubbornness degree, which, for every observable proposition, it is a natural
number. That gives the option to an agent to be stubborn enough not to update its belief,
in extreme cases, even if it receives supporting evidence many times, as stubbornness
degree is a natural number. This is not optimal, as in some cases the agent is lead to
wrong decisions, but it is closer to real case scenarios.
3.2
Framing Bias
Framing bias refers to the fact that the way information is presented to an agent can affect
decision-making. In this section we will model Framing Bias, also known as Framing Effect
in the literature [11].
We will consider cases where an agent receives part of an observable proposition. In
this section we will formally model the three belief revision methods, conditioning, lexico-
graphic revision and minimal revision in cases an agent receives or perceives information
partially.
12
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:21==
We consider that all the agents are unbiased towards all the observable propositions
p ∈O, that is D(p) = 1, ∀p ∈O. This could, of course, not always be the actual case.
However, in this section we only want to focus of the effect of framing in decision making.
Consider an agent and, without loss of generality, a proposition p ∈O. As we will see in
this section, the formal definitions don’t change much. However, we will see in the next
section that these changes actually affect truth tracking.
Definition 3.2.1 (Framing-biased methods). Let B = (S, O, ⪯, D, FR) a bias plausibility
space based on the plausibility space (S, O, ⪯), σ ∈O∗a data sequence, p ∈O an
observable, P the corresponding element of p in FR(σ) and R1 ∈{Cond1, Lex1, Mini1}.
We define a framing-biased method in the following inclusively way:
RFR(B, λ) = λ
(3.3)
RFR(B, σ ∗p) = R1(RFR(B, σ), P)
(3.4)
As can be seen in Definition 3.2.1, the only difference with the unbiased belief revision
methods is that the agent revises its beliefs based on P, instead of p.
3.3
Anchoring Bias
Anchoring bias is connected to decision-making influenced by the most recent incoming
information. It is the type of cognitive bias that can be most prominently connected to
lack of resources. Humans, for example, make every day decisions under time pressure.
These decisions are, often unconsciously, influenced by the piece of information received
last [3].
Anchoring bias in real-life scenarios can introduce a level of randomness in decision mak-
ing. A human that is under pressure of resources will eventually make a random decision
in order to be compatible with their resources, e.g. time. Consider, as an example, a
student who takes part in some multiple choice exams and due to lack of time they have
to answer a question without being able to go through it in depth. While reading all the
answers, the student will probably pick one that reminds them something from what they
have studied. This is decision-making based on anchoring bias, as going through the
exercise and rationally solve it (assuming that the student would be able to do so), would
exceed the time limit.
In our model, we will assume that an agent under anchoring bias has the resources to
update their belief infinitely and, as we address rational agents, we will overcome the ran-
domness using the most plausible worlds considered by the agent. One could implement
the limit of resources and make things more similar to real case scenarios. In our work we
only implement lack of resources in Section 6, where we investigate if anchoring-biased
methods can be used as alternatives.
As in the previous types of cognitive bias, we will provide the general definition of anchoring-
biased methods, without taking into consideration the stubbornness degree and the fram-
ing function, in order to simplify things.
Definition 3.3.1 (Anchoring-biased methods). Let B = (S, O, ⪯, D, FR) a bias plausibility
space based on the plausibility space (S, O, ⪯), σ ∈O∗a data sequence, p ∈O an
observable and R1 ∈{Cond1, Lex1, Mini1}. We define the anchoring-biased methods
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
13
==PAGE:22==
RAB as:
RAB(B, λ) = B
(3.5)
RAB1(B, p) = R1(B, min⪯(S ∩p))
(3.6)
RAB(B, σ ∗p) = RAB1(RAB(B, σ), p)
(3.7)
The definition 3.3.1 uses the most plausible worlds where p is true to overcome random-
ness in picking worlds. One could, instead, consider that the agent uniformly in random
picks worlds where p is true, but this is not the most rational strategy given the existence
of the plausibility order. An agent will only select a random world in case there are more
than one worlds in min⪯(p), such that the agent is indifferent among them. If, for example,
min⪯(p) = {w, t}, then the agent will select one of the worlds with equal probability. This
world selection will be used in every anchoring bias belief revision methods and it will be
the key for faster decision making.
Both lexicographic and minimal belief revision are interestingly a form of anchoring bias.
An agent using minimal belief revision actually uses the most plausible worlds where the
incoming information is true to update its belief accordingly. This is actually what anchor-
ing bias refers to. The agent, without over considering the case, update their plausibility
order to support the most plausible worlds where the incoming proposition is true. When
it comes to lexicographic revision, things don’t change a lot. The definition is slightly dif-
ferent from minimal revision’s definition, but the behavior is the same, as, in the end, what
essentially changes the plausibility order between two worlds t and w is whether they
belong to the set of most plausible worlds of the incoming proposition or not.
Recall that, even though the behavior of anchoring bias lexicographic and minimal revision
is the same with minimal revision, there is a significant difference in the way they select the
most plausible world in the end. In Section 6 we will investigate if this difference positively
affects the biased methods.
Some cases of decision-making under anchoring bias lack interest. However, we will
see in the next sections that making a decision under anchoring bias may, sometimes,
facilitate fast truth-tracking, even though we will see that in general case the anchoring
biased belief revision methods are not universal.
3.4
In-Group Favoritism
3.4.1
The Intuition
In-group favoritism is the last type of cognitive bias we tackle in our work. It is of great
interest, as it is naturally dynamic and it engages interaction of several, usually all, agents
of the system. In-group favoritism refers to the individuals’ tendency to favor members
of groups they belong to, behave better to them and be influenced by them to a higher
degree. Thousands daily examples include in-group favoritism, such as group of sports
fans, political groups, races, and many more. An interesting result of [4] is that in-group
favoritism can be formed even when groups of agents are randomly created.
Not to be confused with conformity bias, in-group favoritism concerns cases where a
collective belief is formed and individuals within the group are strongly affected by the
co-members in the group towards this belief. This is the thin line that differs in-group
favoritism from conformity bias. An individual under conformity bias has already formed
an individual belief, but changes it to align it with their peers’ belief, based on different
factors, e.g., fear of exclusion.
14
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:23==
In-group favoritism has different aspects. Behaving better to members of the same group
is an important one. Being influenced by members of the group is another. The latter
will be modeled in our framework. This can be seen as overconfidence in others’ skills,
knowledge, and beliefs, but should not be confused with the overconfidence effect that
concerns cases when individuals over-values their own skills.
We will first give an intuition of an agent updating its belief under In-group favoritism and
then go on and formalize the concept. Initially, we will introduce a simple case. Consider
a set of n agents, N. We will assume that every agent α belongs only to one group Gi,
i ∈{1, . . . , m}. Of course, this is not generally the case, as agents can belong to several
different groups. The collection of groups Gi will be a partition of the set N, that is for
all i ∈{1, . . . , m}, Gi ̸= ∅, for all i, l ∈{1, . . . , m}, Gi ∩Gl = ∅and ∪Gi = N, where
i ∈{1, . . . , m}. Consider also that agents initially have a belief about about whether p
and ¬p are true or false. We choose p without loss of generality. For every agent αj in
a group Gi we will describe its belief as BαjGi , where j ∈{1, . . . , |Gi|}, so if agent αjGi
believes p we write BαjGi (p). We write BαjGi (¬p) in the opposite case. For simplicity
we will drop the subscript of the group and will write Bαj, as we have assumed that an
agent is a member of a single group. A collective (group) belief is formed based on the
individual belief of the agents. To do so, every agents has to publicly announce its belief,
so every other agent learns all the individual beliefs. Recall that agents are rational, but
not omniscient, so public announcements are necessary in order for the agents to be
aware of other agents’ beliefs. These public announcements makes the group knowledge
actual knowledge and not virtual, as in cases of informational cascades. Agents share
information openly, contrary to informational cascades that information is shared implicitly,
after an agent makes a decision. However, here we consider that agents’ beliefs are
independent, as it happens during informational cascades, until the form of the collective
belief, something that is not usually true in real case scenarios, in order to simplify things.
We should note that informational cascades can be formed also in cases of in-group
favoritism, where information is shared openly, which means that communication will not
always lead to correct decisions, as individual rationality may lead to group irrationality
[12].
To relate the above introduction with real case scenarios, we can consider the board of
a company that need to make a decision. The process is pretty similar. Every member
of the board starts with presenting their idea with arguments. After some steps of this
process a collective belief of what is better is being formed and members of the group
are overtly or covertly influenced. There can be members that are not influenced by
the group towards a belief. This form of radicalization has been investigated thoroughly.
Surprisingly, the emergence and existence of radicalization doesn’t need the existence of
extremists. Based on Isenberg in [13] extreme opinions can exist by people even when
their environment stay moderate towards the opinions.
After each announcement, the collective group belief is updated. Here, we will assume
that every agent will stand for their belief and make the announcement, but there are real
life scenarios where this is not the case. This is the reason, why we update the collective
belief after each public announcement. In cases where some agents prefer not to support
and announce their belief, then the last updated collective belief will be the group’s belief.
Each individual’s announcement has as result that every agent learns the belief of the
agent publicly announcing. Consider that an agent αj ∈Gi believes p and makes a
public announcement about its belief. Using PAL [14], this can be described as
[!Bαjp]KαkBαjp, where αk also in Gi, or using the operators of group knowledge,
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
15
==PAGE:24==
[!Bαjp]CGiBαjp, where C is the common knowledge operator of a group of agents [15].
After every public announcement, the collective belief of the group, ColBelGi, is updated.
There are several different ways to update the collective belief, e.g. using weights for
agents. Although here we will first introduce fair unanimity, so each agent’s belief has
the same weight as the others’ belief,
1
|Gi|, where |Gi| is the number of agents in the
group Gi, we also give the definition when the weights are not equal. The weights of
the agents’ beliefs for every proposition can be interpreted as a mass function. Every
weight for a proposition is a positive number in the interval [0, 1], and all of them add to
1 (for each proposition). This will facilitate addressing agents’ beliefs as evidence about
a proposition being true or false, by utilizing probability mass functions [15]. Instead, we
could have considered preference of an agent towards a proposition as a vote and use
the number of votes as evidence. However, this would eventually be problematic when
one assigns weights to agents’ belief, a type of aggregation that works better, as shown
in [16].
In case of fair unanimity, the collective belief of the group is the one that is supported by
the majority of the agents, as we will see in the definition 3.4.1. Otherwise, the collective
belief is changed based on the weights assigned to agents’ belief. In cases where p and
¬p are equally supported by agents, a collective belief is not formed. Every agents keeps
their initial belief. This sometimes can lead to the so called in-group collisions, based
on different situations and factors, e.g. how important is the decision to be made, the
stubbornness of the group members etc [4].
Definition 3.4.1 (Collective Belief). We define the Collective Belief of a group Gi of agents
αj, j ∈{1, . . . , |Gi|} as the partial function ColBelGi : O →O such that,
ColBelGi(p) =
{
p
if
1
|Gi||{j : Bαj(p)}| >
1
|Gi||{j : Bαj(¬p)}|
¬p
if
1
|Gi||{j : Bαj(p)}| <
1
|Gi||{j : Bαj(¬p)}|
In case of |{j : Bαj(p)}| = |{j : Bαj(¬p)}| then the collective belief is not defined and
each agent supports initial belief about p or ¬p.
In the general case where different weights are assigned to agents’ beliefs, the collective
belief is defined as:
ColBelGi(p) =
{ p
if
∑
αj,Bαj p wαj > ∑
αj,Bαj ¬p wαj
¬p
if
∑
αj,Bαj p wαj < ∑
αj,Bαj ¬p wαj
where wαj is the weight assigned to the agent’s αj belief about p or ¬p. Note that the
collective belief for ¬p is the same as p for every observable proposition p ∈O.
Note that, even though it’s not obvious in the Definition 3.4.1, the collective belief is formed
from the perspective of an agent. This is important, especially in the second case, where
different weights are assigned to the agents. These weights are not given by an outside
observer, but they rather depend on each individual agent. In the case of fair unanimity,
the collective belief is the same for everyone. In the other case, the collective belief
represents the perspective of the agent about the group (what the agent considers that is
the actual ’belief of the group’).
The collective belief defined in 3.4.1 plays a crucial role to the re-update an agent’s belief.
Like confirmation bias, the stubbornness degree is the one that determines whether the
agent will update its belief or not. Here we have to be a little cautious. In Section 2.3 we
16
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:25==
introduced stubbornness degree for agents as an entity, without taking into account their
environment. The reality is a bit different. An agent has stubbornness degree on its own,
but this changes when it is a member of a group or community. This leads us to introduce
an adaptive factor ϵGi for each group that modifies the stubbornness degree accordingly.
This factor is responsible to create an inner and an outer stubbornness degree for each
agent. The adaptive factor differs from group to group and it is related to the bonds that
groups members may have. The higher the adaptive factor, the stronger the bonds among
the members and the higher the influence the members have in the group. Consider
for now that the members have equally weights within the group, that is there are no
members whose belief accounts for more. This simplification doesn’t, of course, always
reflect reality and we will investigate case where different weights are assigned to agents’
beliefs in Section 5.
An agent that is a member of a group updates under the influence of the group members.
This can be modeled as transforming the individual stubbornness degree of an agent αj,
Dαj, to the inner stubbornness degree IDαj = ⌈
Dαj
ϵGi ⌉, where ϵGi>0 is the adaptive degree
of group Gi. The inner stubbornness degree is lower than the stubbornness degree and
describes the fact that an agent will update its belief easier when is influenced by other
agents of the same group. We naturally use the ceiling function as the fraction may have
decimal points. The ceiling function also works better for cases that the fraction is lower
than 1. Should we use the floor function, we could have cases where an agent has an
inner stubbornness degree equal to 0, which could account for agents that update their
belief, without even receiving a piece of information. This of course is not a trait of a
rational agent, but rather of a lunatic one.
Similarly, we define the outer stubbornness degree, ODαj, as a natural number such that
IDαj ≤ODαj ≤Dαj. The outer stubbornness degree is the degree used by the agent for
the interaction with members of other groups, the so called out-group interaction. Agents
interact with other agents both in their group and outside of it, but they are influenced in
a higher degree by the members in their group.
3.4.2
The Updates
Here we will concretely give the flow of updates in our framework, which is quite similar
with a family of methods in wisdom of crowds, called Delphi methods [16]. Consider
again the set of n agents, N, and m groups of agents, Gi, that are a partition of N.
Initially, every agent of every group holds a belief about p or ¬p, where p is a random
observable. Every agent of every group publicly announces its belief sequentially within
the group. After each announcement, the collective belief of the group is updated as
Definition 3.4.1 suggests. After all the agents have publicly announced their belief, the
collective belief of the group has been formed, or at least we assume so for the sake of the
description. As the agents are rational and intelligent, after the public announcements the
know whether they should update their belief or not. An agent αj that believes p updates
its belief if the difference between the evidence for supporting ¬p with the evidence for
supporting p is greater or equal than its inner stubbornness degree multiplied by
1
|Gi|,
that is
1
|Gi||{j : Bαj(¬p)}| −
1
|Gi||{j : Bαj(p)}| ≥
1
|Gi|IDαj, and doesn’t update otherwise.
Recall that for now fair unanimity is used among the agents. In case an agent updates its
belief, then it publicly announces this update and it updates its inner stubbornness degree
to IDαj(¬p) = ⌈1
|Gi|(|{j : Bαj(¬p)}| −|{j : Bαj(p)}|)⌉.This leads to a second iteration of
public announcements where another collective belief is formed. As in the first iteration,
some agents may update their belief. If this happens, then the same process is followed.
Otherwise, the final collective belief is formed, let’s call it FColBelkGi, where κ the number
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
17
==PAGE:26==
of communication rounds before the form of the final collective belief.
For the sake of simplicity and to make things easier to understand, we assume, for now,
that agents of a group don’t interact with agents from another group until the final collective
belief is formed. After the final collective belief is formed the agents may interact with
agents of other groups. An agent αj ∈Gi will update its belief if after communicating
with members of other groups will receive a contradiction more than ODαj times. If this is
the case, then the agent publicly announces the update within its group and we have this
procedure. This may end up in a highly dynamic framework of updates, in some cases
infinite, but it’s similar with the update process that happens by humans.
The interaction between members of different groups can, indeed, trigger an update to a
member. This update is one reason that an agent initiates an iteration of public announce-
ments and the form of a new collective belief. Even if there was no interaction between
members of different groups, agents will still be able to update their belief and trigger the
process, e.g. by some personal experience or perception of information.
Note that we haven’t mentioned the ways an agent updates its belief yet. The reason
is because the belief revision method may differ from agent to agent. An agent can use
conditioning while another agent uses lexicographic belief revision. There is an important
detail we should note here. Agents that use conditioning delete worlds when revising their
belief. These agents will not be able to revise to a contradiction again even if they have
received the contradiction enough times. Agents that use lexicographic or minimal belief
revision will be able to update again as what changes is the plausibility order.
The final thing we should note before we continue to the formalization of in-group fa-
voritism methods is that an agent that receives beliefs of other agents handles them as
truthful information. Baltag in [14] talks about agents that can behave differently to incom-
ing information that has the form of belief, as it is something that dynamically changes.
We adopt Baltag’s claim that agents can see the belief as fact that change over time. Be-
liefs may changes over time, but the moment an agent receives a belief we accept that
this belief is actually true (the other agent hasn’t lied about its belief).
If the information comes from another source and not agents’ communication, e.g. sen-
sors, we assume that this is not erroneous information.
3.4.3
In-group communication
First we will formalize in-group communication based on the different belief revision meth-
ods an agent may use. We note again that while an agent may use one belief revision
method, another agent may use a different one. As we did before, we will give the gen-
eral definition of in-group favoritism methods. The definition will be similar with Definition
3.1.1, as in-group favoritism methods are essentially confirmation-biased methods with
different stubbornness degrees for the agents.
Consider an agent αj ∈Gi, group’s adaptive factor ϵGi and a bias plausibility space of
the bias model, B = (S, ⪯, D, FR). For simplicity’s sake we will consider that for every
observable proposition p ∈O it is P = p.
During the in-group communication, an agent updates its belief only towards the final
collective belief. That is after every announcement the collective belief is changed, but
an agent first needs to know what is the collective opinion of the group in order to update
towards it or not. We denote the final collective belief of each public announcements
iteration as FColBelkGi, where k is the number of iterations until the form of the collective
belief. Recall also that for every proposition p ∈O the weights of the agents about p or ¬p
18
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:27==
are a mass function [17]. Every agent for every proposition holds a different mass function
that represents the weights of every agent regarding the proposition and its negation.
This may not be optimal, but reflects the fact that an agent may have experience for one
proposition and not for another, so its weights change. As p and ¬p are complements
based on the given set of worlds S, the two conditions of a mass function are fulfilled [17].
We utilize mass functions in order to perceive agents beliefs as evidence of support for a
proposition.
Definition 3.4.2 (In-group favoritism methods). Let B = (S, O, ⪯, D, FR) a bias plausi-
bility space based on the plausibility space (S, O, ⪯), αj ∈Gi an agent of group Gi and
FCGi = FColBelGi the final collective belief from the perspective of αj . An in-group-
favoritism-biased belief revision method is a method RIG such that,
RIG(B, λ) = B
(3.8)
RCB(B, σ × FCGi) =











R1(RIG(B, σ), FCGi)
if
∑
αj,Bαj FCGi wαj−
∑
αj,Bαj
¯
FCGi wαj ≥⌈
D(
¯
FCGi)
ϵGi
⌉
RIG(B, σ)
otherwise
(3.9)
where #FColBelGi(σ) stands for the frequency of FColBelGi in σ,
¯
FColBelGi the com-
plement of FColBelGi in S, and σ a data sequence of final collective beliefs. As before,
R1 ∈{Cond1, Lex1, Mini1}.
In the the above definition, we use FCGi, instead of FColBelGi for clarity. Note that
the term FColBelGi, in general, is used for clarification reasons, but FColBelGi is an
observable like the rest. Without loss of generality we will continue to address it like a
simple observable, p or ¬p.
In the next section we will see that in-group favoritism conditioning is actually really prob-
lematic during truth-tracking, as there is loss of information (worlds). In cases where the
actual world is in the worlds that are excluded by an agent, the agent itself is not able to
identify the actual world.
One can argue that there are similarities between confirmation bias and in-group fa-
voritism in the way an agent revises its belief. Indeed, we introduced the inner and outer
stubbornness degree for in and out-group favoritism. However, the main difference be-
tween the two biases is that for an agent in a group receiving a contradiction more times
than its stubbornness degree is not enough to revise its belief. The agent bases its deci-
sion for revision on the evidence it receives for supporting a proposition by the group as
a whole. This is modeled by interpreting the weights of agents’ beliefs for a proposition
as a mass function.
3.4.4
Out-group communication
In case where an agent communicates with another agent outside its group, one should
note two differences of the process. The first one is that outer stubbornness degree re-
places inner stubbornness degree to reflect the lower influence that agents outside the
group have compared to the agents within the group. The other difference is that the in-
coming information is not collective belief of a group, or more precisely the agent can’t be
sure that it is a collective belief. In that case we use again the usual notation for propo-
sitions, so if an agent αj ∈Gi interacts with an agent αk ∈Gl then the information that
receives is not FColBelGl, but either p or ¬p.
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
19
==PAGE:28==
The definitions for the out-group communication are same as the in-group communication
with the aforementioned changes implemented.
20
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:29==
4
Truth tracking under Cognitive Bias
In this section we will investigate what is the result of modifying the model presented in
[5] to our bias model. Interestingly, in most cases biased conditioning and lexicographic
belief revision methods are not universal anymore and minimal belief revision behaves
better than the biased one. There are cases, though, where bias can facilitate faster truth
tracking than the normal belief revision methods. We will go through the types of cognitive
bias one by one and present our results.
4.1
Truth tracking under confirmation bias
An agent under confirmation bias updates its belief based on its stubbornness degree.
We will see that this degree is the crucial factor of that breaks the universality of the belief
revision methods presented in [5]. An example will be used to show the propositions 4.1.1,
4.1.2 and 4.1.3.
Proposition 4.1.1. Confirmation biased conditioning is not a universal belief revision
method.
Proposition 4.1.2. Confirmation biased lexicographic belief revision method is not a uni-
versal belief revision method.
Proposition 4.1.3. Confirmation biased minimal belief revision method behaves worse
than the minimal belief revision method in truth tracking, that is there are cases where
minimal belief revision method can identify the true world and the confirmation biased
minimal belief revision method can’t, but not the other way around.
We will present a counter example that works as counter-example for propositions 4.1.1
and 4.1.2. We will slightly modify this example for the left to right part of proposition 4.1.3.
For the right to left part we will give an argument, even though it is straightforward.
Let S = (S, O) where S = {w, t, s, r}, O = {p, q, ¬p, ¬q} and p = {w, t}, ¬p = {s, r}, q =
{w, s} and ¬q = {t, r}. Consider also an agent with stubbornness belief towards p, D(p) =
3 and the data stream ⃗O = (¬p, ¬p, ¬q, ¬q, ...), where ∀i ≥3, Oi = ¬q. The agent has a
prior plausibility order w ⪯t ⪯s ⪯r.
Figure 4.1 shows how the initial plausibility space of the example for lexicographic revision
changes based on the incoming information. Figure 4.2 shows the changes of plausibil-
ity space when conditioning is used as revision method. The initial plausibility space is
the same for conditioning and lexicographic revision, but it changes for the example of
minimal revision, as we will see below. Note that all the figures use the corresponding
elements of p, q, ¬p, ¬q in FR( ⃗O). However, the only cases where we will consider that
these elements are different from p, q, ¬p, ¬q in all our examples will be in next section
where we investigate truth-tracking under framing bias.
Assuming that the actual world is r, the data stream is sound and complete stream to the
actual world, so conditioning and lexicographic belief revision will identify in the limit the
world, as they are universal [5].
For the case of minimal belief revision we have to slightly modify the initial plausibility
order. Consider the plausibility order w ⪯t ⪯r ⪯s as shown in Figure 4.3. Minimal
belief revision will also identify the actual world r, even though it is not universal. Consider
that the agent uses minimal belief revision for its belief updates. After the first incoming
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
21
==PAGE:30==
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
s
r
t
(a) Initial plausibility space
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
s
r
t
(b) Plausibility space after receiving ¬P
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
s
r
t
(c) Plausibility space after receiving the sec-
ond ¬P
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
s
r
t
(d) Final plausibility space
Figure 4.1: Changes of plausibility space using unbiased lexicographic revision
piece of information ¬p the new plausibility space will be Mini((S, ⪯), ¬p) = (S, ⪯
′) where
r ⪯
′ w ⪯
′ t ⪯
′ s. The next incoming piece of information will not actually affect the
plausibility order, as is the same as the first piece of information, so r ⪯
′′ w ⪯
′′ t ⪯
′′ s. As
r is already the most plausible world, neither the 3rd piece of information, ¬q, will change
the order, so r ⪯
′′′ w ⪯
′′′ t ⪯
′′′ s. After this update, the agent will not revise its belief
again, as all the incoming information will be ¬q and the true world is identified by the
agent. Note that minimal belief revision identified the actual world from the first piece of
information, but we described all the three propositions as we did with in the cases of
conditioning and lexicographic revision.
Figure 4.3 shows how the initial plausibility space changes when using minimal revision.
The world r is the most plausible and there can’t be any change to the plausibility order
as long as the agent receives sound and complete, with respect to r, data stream.
We will now investigate what happens if the agent is biased, with bias toward p and stub-
bornness degree D(p)=3. In such case, the agent will revise its belief using the corre-
sponding cognitive biased belief revision methods. Recall that an agent with stubborn-
ness degree D towards a proposition has to receive its contradiction more than D times
in order to update its belief to ¬p. This makes things clear about why the world is not
identified by the agent.
Under confirmation biased conditioning, the agent will not update the set of states when
receiving the first two pieces of information, as it is under confirmation bias towards p and
it actually revises only in the environment where p is true. When the agent receives ¬q, the
new set of states will be the singleton S
′ = {t} and so, even if the agent would potentially
receive ¬p, it would not be able to identify the actual world r. Recall that an agent under
22
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:31==
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
s
r
t
(a) Initial plausibility space
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
s
r
(b) Plausibility space after receiving ¬P
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
s
r
(c) Plausibility space after receiving the sec-
ond ¬P
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
r
(d) Final plausibility space
Figure 4.2: Changes of plausibility space using unbiased conditioning
confirmation bias revises only in the ’environment’ it believes it is in. In our example,
the agent receives ¬p, but it revises based on p, as it believes that this is what holds in
the actual world. Here for simplicity, we consider that agent’s stubbornness degree for
the rest observables is 1, something that we will modify in the randomly created tests of
Section 6.
The agent follows the same process under lexicographic and minimal belief revisions. If
the agent uses lexicographic belief revision, then in the first two pieces of information it
will not change its plausibility order, as the incoming information is ¬p. Once it receive
¬q, the new plausibility order will be ⪯
′, where t ⪯
′ w ⪯
′ s ⪯
′ r, but it will not change
anymore as the agent will not receive ¬p again. Note that in case of confirmation-biased
lexicographic revision receiving ¬p one more time would trigger a belief update.
Finally, if the agent uses confirmation-biased minimal revision , it will again not revise after
the first two incoming pieces of information. The third piece of information, ¬q will trigger
the first update and lead to a new plausibility order, ⪯
′. where t ⪯
′ w ⪯
′ r ⪯
′ s. The agent
is not able to identify the actual world, as it doesn’t receive ¬p again.
This counter-example shows that the confirmation biased conditioning and lexicographic
belief revision methods are not universal and that there is at least one case where the
minimal belief revision identifies the actual world in the limit and the confirmation biased
belief revision method doesn’t.
For the right to left part of 4.1.3 the proof is straightforward and it is based on the fact that
the two revision methods, minimal and confirmation-biased minimal, update the plausi-
bility order in the similar way, but minimal belief revision does it faster. Consider a case
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
23
==PAGE:32==
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
s
r
t
(a) Initial plausibility space
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
s
r
t
(b) Plausibility space after receiving ¬P
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
s
r
t
(c) Plausibility space after receiving the sec-
ond ¬P
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
s
r
t
(d) Final plausibility space
Figure 4.3: Changes of plausibility space using unbiased minimal revision
where confirmation-biased belief revision method can identify the actual world, which be-
longs to a proposition that is contradiction to the proposition that the agent is biased to-
wards. That could mean two things. Either the agent is unbiased, D=1, so it actually uses
minimal belief revision and identifies the actual world, or the agent receives contradiction
more than D times and finally identifies the actual world as the most plausible one. In
the latter case, minimal revision would have already identified the actual world, as in the
first contradiction that the agent receives, it would have updated the plausibility order ac-
cordingly. Thus, for every case where confirmation-biased minimal revision identifies the
actual world, so does unbiased minimal revision.
4.2
Truth tracking under framing bias
In this subsection we will investigate what is the effect of framing in truth-tracking. Recall
that framing bias concerns cases where the agent is presented or perceives itself partial
information. As observable propositions are essentially sets of worlds, we will consider
cases where an agent receives a subset of these worlds P ⊆p and focus on framing
as losing information about possible worlds, but this is not always the case, as explained
in previous section. Before we go through the examples we will separate the framing
functions in two categories, based on whether the values of the functions remain the
same or not.
Definition 4.2.1. Let FR be a framing function as defined in 2.3.3 and ⃗O = (O1, O2, . . . )
a data stream. We call FR static if and only if for every two indices i, j ∈N, with i ̸= j, if
Oi = Oj then Pi = Pj, where Pi, Pj are the ith and jth elements of FR( ⃗O). We call FR
dynamic if and only if there exist two indices i, j ∈N, with i ̸= j, such that Oi = Oj and
Pi ̸= Pj, where Pi, Pj are the ith and jth elements of FR( ⃗O).
24
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:33==
We consider the framing function as introduced in Section 2.3 to be dynamic, as a static
framing function is not of our interest. However, first we will argue what happens if the
framing function is static.
Proposition 4.2.1. If the framing function FR is static, then for truth-tracking the framing
biased belief revision methods behave as the normal belief revision method presented in
[5] if the incoming data stream is sound and complete with respect to the actual world.
Proof. Consider an agent with framing function FR that receives sound and complete
data stream ⃗O with respect to the actual world, let’s say w. As we saw previously, the
incoming data stream ⃗O depends on the framing function FR, and what the agent receives
is actually FR( ⃗O) = (P1, . . . , P2, . . . ). As the stream is sound, w ∈Pi, ∀i ∈N and, as the
stream is complete, ∀p ∈O, such that, p ∈w, ∃j ∈N, such that, p = Pj.
This essentially means that the agent won’t lose any information regarding the actual
world and, as the framing function is static, there is no possibility of losing information in
the future. Of course, there can be states in S where the above doesn’t hold. However,
agent’s goal is to identify the actual world, and this is possible if the stream is sound and
complete with respect to this world.
One can see, using the definitions of framing biased belief revision methods given on the
previous section, that these methods behave in the same way as the normal methods
presented in [5].
As an example consider the framing biased conditioning defined in 3.2.1. The incoming
stream is sound and complete with respect to the actual world w. All the propositions p
true in w will be present total (without lose of information) in the stream, and only them.
The agent will continue conditioning until the set S contains only the actual world w. This
is guaranteed by the stream’s completeness.
Now let’s consider the case where the framing function is dynamic, which is closer to the
real case scenarios.
We will see that in such cases, traits of blindness emerge. Although worlds don’t actually
disappear, an agent may exclude entirely these worlds, based on the data it receives.
Partial truth is also included in scenarios like these, as agent receives a part of truth.
Incoming information is not erroneous. However, part of the information is lost and the
agent may not be able to identify the actual world.
Before we investigate cases where an agent revises its belief under framing bias we will
slightly modify the Definition 2.2.6 about complete streams with respect to a state.
Definition 4.2.2 (Partially Complete). A data stream ⃗O is partially complete with respect
to a state s if and only if for every proposition p that is true in the state s there exists a
subset of the proposition, P, and a natural n ∈N such that P = Pn ∈FR( ⃗O).
This modification of the definition describes our intuition about framing bias considered
as losing information about worlds and that’s why we want every proposition p to have at
least one corresponding subset in FR( ⃗O). What is modified is the incoming information
and not the way that an agent revises. In the case we investigate, an agent under framing
bias receives partially complete data streams and not complete streams as proposed in
[5]. The way the data streams are defined in [5] is stricter than our work and guarantees
universality of two of the three introduced belief revision methods. Here we loose this
definition to better represent real case scenarios and show that agents which receive
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
25
==PAGE:34==
partially complete data streams fail, sometimes, to identify the actual world. Recall that
the partial nature of the incoming information is not necessarily result of how pieces of
information are presented to the agent, but it can be a result of the way the agent perceives
information. Also, one should have in mind that the incoming information is not false, but
rather the true incoming information is partial.
In these dynamic scenarios where the agent receives partial information universality of
the belief revision methods breaks. We will present here the results for framing biased
belief revision methods.
Proposition 4.2.2. Framing biased conditioning is not universal for partially complete
data streams when there exists observation Pn ∈FR( ⃗O) such that s /∈Pn, where s is the
actual world.
Proof. Consider a bias plausibility space B = (S, ⪯, D, FR), where S = {s1, ..., sm} the
set of possible worlds and si the actual world. Without loss of generality we assume that
the plausibility order is ⪯, with s1 ⪯... ⪯si ⪯... ⪯sm.
Consider also an incoming data stream ⃗O that is partially complete with respect to si and
FR( ⃗O) = (P1, P2, . . . ). Assume also that there exists a natural κ ∈N such that si /∈Pκ,
that information about truth is lost in an incoming piece of data.
When the agent receives information Pκ it will revise the set S to S
′, where S
′ is the set of
worlds compatible with the new information. However, si /∈Pκ, so si /∈S
′. After this piece
of information the agent is not able to revise again even if it receives the actual world in a
future piece of data, so the agent will not be able to identify the actual world and framing
biased conditioning is not universal. This happens because when an agent revises using
conditioning, it excludes worlds not compatible with the incoming information, but it can’t
add worlds compatible with it.
Figure 4.4 shows an example where missing information leads to failure of the actual
world’s identification. Consider the actual world r and that the first incoming information
is ¬P = {s}. Agent revises based on this information and then it can’t revise again to
a plausibility space which includes r. In this example, consider that the second piece of
information is ¬P = {s, r} and the third is ¬Q = {r, t}. This example shows that missing
information is fatal for conditioning, something that we investigate deeper in Section 6.
Proposition 4.2.3. Framing biased lexicographic revision is universal if there exists a
natural κ ∈N, such that the data stream FR( ⃗O) = (Pκ+1, . . . ) is sound and complete to
the actual world s, and not universal otherwise.
Proof. The first part of the proof is pretty straightforward. If there exists a natural κ ∈N,
such that the data stream FR( ⃗O) = (Pκ+1, . . . ) is sound and complete to the actual world
s, then the framing biased lexicographic revision behaves like lexicographic revision that
is shown to be universal [5]. This can be seen by the given definitions and the fact that
no information is lost any more. Note that as the agent uses framing biased lexicographic
revision, it doesn’t delete worlds, but rather updates its plausibility order. So, revision to
the actual world is possible.
For the second part we will give a counter-example. Our counter-example will be based
on the absence of a natural κ that satisfies the above proposition. In the absence of this κ
the agent will not be able to identify the actual world, even though it receives information
that contains the actual world infinitely many times.
26
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:35==
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
s
r
t
(a) Initial plausibility space
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
s
(b) Plausibility space after receiving ¬P
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
s
(c) Plausibility space after receiving the sec-
ond ¬P
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
s
(d) Final plausibility space after receiving
¬Q
Figure 4.4: Changes of plausibility space using framing-biased conditioning
Consider the bias plausibility space B = (S, ⪯, D, FR), where S = {w, r, s, t} and s the
actual world. We assume that in this case an agent is unbiased towards every observable
proposition and the framing function is defined as usual. The initial plausibility order is
w ⪯r ⪯s ⪯t and the observable propositions are p = {w, r}, q = {w, t}, ¬p = {s, t} and
¬q = {r, s}.
Consider now the data stream FR( ⃗O) = (¬Q = ¬q, ¬P = ¬p, P3, . . . ) and ∀i ≥3 Pi =
¬p = {s, t}, when i = 2t, t ∈N, and Pi = {t}, when i = 2t + 1, t ∈N.
This interchange between the real value of ¬p and a subset of it leads to the failure of
identification of the actual world, as the agent receives only s and t and t is now more
plausible than s.
Figure 4.5 shows the updates of the plausibility space up to the third incoming piece of
information. After that, the plausibility space remains unchanged and the actual world is
not identified.
Proposition 4.2.4. Framing biased minimal revision behaves worse than minimal belief
revision.
Proof. Framing biased belief revision would behave the same as minimal belief revision
under sound and complete data streams. However, the way the information perception or
acquisition changes makes framing minimal revision unable to identify the actual world.
Note again that this is not due to the way the agent revised, but due to the way the agent
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
27
==PAGE:36==
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
t
s
r
(a) Initial plausibility space
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
t
s
r
(b)
Plausibility
space
after
receiving
FRα(¬Q)
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
t
s
r
(c)
Plausibility
space
after
receiving
FRα(¬P)
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
t
s
r
(d) Final plausibility space
Figure 4.5: Changes of plausibility space using framing-biased lexicographic revision
receives the information. The counter-example used in 4.2 can be also used as a counter-
example here to show that framing biased belief revision could not identify the actual world
s (Figure 4.5).
In the same scenario, if the data stream was sound and complete to every state of S,
both belief revision methods would have been able to identify the actual world. The main
difference between the two methods is that framing biased minimal revision can be used
under partial information as well.
Several similarities can be seen between partial information and erroneous information
presented in [5]. Not surprisingly the results don’t change for conditioning. Condition-
ing loses universality under erroneous data. Framing-biased conditioning is not universal
under partial information as the agent excludes worlds. Lexicographic revision is still
universal as what is changed is actually the plausibility order. However, framing-biased
lexicographic revision is not. In a more philosophical aspect, one who considers per-
ceiving part of the information as erroneous information, as part of the truth is missing,
then they could even see these results equivalent. We keep separating the two cases as
information included in our partial information is always semantically true, as oppose to
erroneous data that include false information.
4.3
Truth tracking under anchoring bias
As we stated in the previous section, anchoring bias is the bias most prominently con-
nected to lack of resources. For example when someone needs to make a decision under
the pressure of time, anchoring bias can be used as heuristic. In this section we will show
28
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:37==
that, even though anchoring bias breaks universality, it can facilitate faster identification
of the actual world.
In this section we consider that the agent is unbiased towards every proposition and that
the framing function is the identity function. However we will still the corresponding ele-
ments P, Q, ¬P and ¬Q in the figures.
Proposition 4.3.1. Anchoring biased conditioning is not a universal belief revision method.
Proof. To show that anchoring bias conditioning is not universal we will give a counter-
example.
Consider the bias plausibility space B = (S, ⪯, D, FR), where S = {w, r, s, t} and s the
actual world. We assume that in this case an agent is unbiased towards every observable
proposition and the framing function is defined as usual. The initial plausibility order is
w ⪯t ⪯s ⪯r and the observable propositions are p = {w}, q = {r, t, w}, ¬p = {r, s, t}
and ¬q = {s}.
Consider also any data stream ⃗O = (¬p, ...). Note that we use the usual notation ⃗O,
as we are not concerned about the framing bias here. We care about the first piece of
information as it is the one that breaks universality. The agent receives ¬p and revises
the set S of possible worlds accordingly to this information. The new set of states, S
′, will
be equal to S
′ = S ∩(min(¬p) × min(¬p)) = {t}. As the new set is the singleton {t} the
agent is not able to identify the actual world s and anchoring biased conditioning is not
universal.
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
t
s
r
(a) Initial plausibility space
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
t
(b) Final plausibility space
Figure 4.6: Changes of plausibility space using anchoring bias conditioning
Figure 4.6 shows how the plausibility space is modified after the agent receives ¬p.
Proposition 4.3.2. Anchoring biased lexicographic belief revision is not a universal belief
revision method.
Proof. Consider the bias plausibility space B = (S, ⪯, D, FR), where S = {w, r, s, t} and
s the actual world. We assume that in this case an agent is unbiased towards every
observable proposition and the framing function is defined as usual. The initial plausibility
order is w ⪯r ⪯s ⪯t and the observable propositions are q = {r, t}, ¬p = {r, s}, p =
{w, t} and ¬q = {w, s}.
An agent using anchoring biased lexicographic revision will not be able to identify the
world not regardless of the incoming data stream, as long as it is sound and complete with
respect to the actual world, due to the initial plausibility ordering. The most plausible world
for the observable proposition ¬q is w and the most plausible world for the observable ¬p
is r. The agent will always consider one of these two worlds more plausible than s and it
will not be able to identify s in the limit.
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
29
==PAGE:38==
Even though anchoring biased lexicographic belief revision is not universal, it can facilitate
faster truth tracking. The argument is similar to the proof for conditioning given below 4.3.3
and includes cases that agent is indifferent between more than one most plausible worlds.
Recall that an agent which uses anchoring-biased lexicographic revision revises similarly
to one that uses unbiased minimal revision, but if the set of the worlds which considers
most plausible is not a singleton, it selects one of the most plausible worlds with equal
probability.
Proposition 4.3.3. Anchoring biased conditioning can identify a world faster than condi-
tioning belief revision method.
Proof. In this proof we will use the key part of anchoring bias, presented in Section 3.
When an agent indifferent between two worlds of min(p), where p is the incoming infor-
mation, then it selects a world randomly. Consider again the counter-example of 4.3. We
now modify the initial plausibility order to be w ⪯r ≃s ⪯t, so the agent is indiffer-
ent between r and s, or more formally r and s are equally plausible. Consider also the
−→
O = (¬p, ...). The agent identifies the actual world in the first piece of information with
probability 1
2. Of course, with probability 1
2 the actual world is exclude and so the agent will
not be able to identify it. An agent using unbiased minimal would be able to identify the
world s only after receiving ¬q. This actually means that anchoring biased conditioning
can be faster than conditioning belief revision method κ −1 times, κ ∈N where Oκ = ¬q
is the first emergence of ¬q in the data stream ⃗O.
Minimal belief revision can be seen as a form of anchoring bias, as an agent that uses
minimal belief revision, minimally updates its belief to be compatible with min⪯(p). Their
difference concerns the way they select the most plausible worlds after each update. An-
choring bias minimal revision and unbiased minimal revision will be compared in Section
6, where we investigate if the randomness included in anchoring-biased minimal revision
improves the performance of the unbiased minimal revision.
4.4
Truth tracking under in-group favoritism
Few new things about truth tracking under in-group favoritism can be said, as one can
address it as a multi-agent system where agents are confirmation-biased with different
inner and outer stubbornness degrees.
The way agents update their belief is the same as presented in 4.1. An omniscient outside
observer that knows what belief revision method each agent uses and their stubbornness
degree will be able to know which agents are able to identify the actual world based on
an incoming data stream.
We will present a general example to show the process of in-group favoritism belief re-
vision and demonstrate how different agents update their belief, without digging into the
ways this update happens.
Consider a group N of 5 agents α, β, γ, δ, ζ that belong in the same group. For simplicity
we will assume that this is the only group that exists and we will not demonstrate out-
group communication. Assume that agents α, β and γ initially believe p and agents δ and
ζ believe ¬p. Consider IDα(p) = 2, IDβ(p) = 1, IDγ(p) = 2, IDδ(¬p) = 2, IDζ(¬p) = 1
and that everyone in the group uses fair unanimity, so every agent’s belief has the same
weight, 1
5. Consider also that the rest degrees are all 1, but they will not be used here.
Finally, assume that in the actual world, ¬p is true, so initially agents’ δ and ζ beliefs are
correct.
30
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:39==
We have the following public announcements:
• [!Bαp]CN Bαp
• [!Bβp]CN Bβp
• [!Bγp]CN Bγp
• [!Bδ¬p]CN Bδ¬p
• [!Bζ¬p]CN Bζ¬p
After this round of public announcement agent ζ is the only one that updates its belief.
This happens as the support to p is equal to its inner stubbornness degree, as 3 agents
support p and 2 support ¬p.
This update will result in a new public announcement that is:
• [!Bζp]CN Bζp
This public announcement will make now agent δ revise its belief, which was initially more
stubborn that agent ζ. However, we can see that in this case in-group favoritism gradually
lead group members towards p.
The last public announcement is:
• [!Bδ(p)]CN Bδp
This announcement doesn’t lead to an agent’s belief revision. In-group communication
has been stabilized to a wrong belief about the actual world. The group members all
believe the same proposition and this will not change without either some outside inter-
ference or some individual experience. In any case, something radical should happen.
Note that supporting the same proposition by all the group members is not always the
case. If, for example, agent δ was more stubborn, let’s say IDδ(¬p) = 3, then only agent
ζ would have revised its belief and there would exist an agent that disagrees with the rest
members of the group. This reflects what it is claimed in [13] about radicalization. Agent
δ would stand for its opinion and disagree with the group without being an extremist, as
we can see by its stubbornness degree, which is not much higher than the rest.
Here we presented a general scenario of in-group favoritism, without talking about how
each agent updates its belief. There are multiple scenarios about unbiased and biased,
under different biases, agents, but our goal is to give the general framework of in-group
favoritism. Note that several issues can emerge, especially when an agent uses condi-
tioning for its belief revision. Excluding a world based on incoming belief can be proven
decisive for an agent, as it will not be able to revise its belief to include a world that has
been already excluded, even if it will receive a proposition that includes the world. As we
see in Section 5, there are ways to restrict, in a degree, in-group favoritism negative effect
to truth-tracking.
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
31
==PAGE:40==
5
Addressing Cognitive Bias’ Effect
In Section 4 we have shown that cognitive bias can have a negative effect on truth-tracking
for rational agents. Biased agents may potentially be affected by their bias and be unable
to track the actual world they are in, even if the incoming information is adequate to do so.
The general case is that cognitive bias has negative effect in truth-tracking, but as have
been shown in [18], types of it are often used as heuristic for reality matching, especially for
social beliefs and structures. We have also shown in our work that, sometimes, cognitive
bias (anchoring bias) can facilitate faster truth-tracking.
With the aforementioned in mind, one should wonder whether we want to completely elim-
inate cognitive bias as a thought pattern or find ways to improve it and get the most out
of it. What if cognitive bias is a tool in the toolbox of rational agents, rather than an ob-
stacle for them? Of course, in the discussed frameworks rationality is of importance for
the agents. However, rationality can be dropped in cases where agents’ resources have
a significant impact on the process. Assuming that an agent has infinite time, memory,
computational power and all the other resources it needs to make a decision, then ratio-
nality is the way to deal with cognitive bias’ effect. The agent can potentially wait infinitely
until it receives all the information need to make the correct decision, based on fully ratio-
nal belief updates. Note that we still consider truthful incoming information, so a rational
update would not lead to a wrong decision.
It seems that confronting cognitive bias in truth-tracking should be considered case by
case and not as a general goal, as cognitive bias may have different effects when cases
change. In the Section 5.1 will give an example of how we can avoid biased decision
based on in-group favoritism.
5.1
A Demonstrating Example
Consider In-group favoritism as introduced in Section 3.4. Agents belong to groups Gi with
adaptive factor ϵi that modifies agents’ stubbornness degree accordingly. In Section 3.4
we assumed that an agent α ∈Gi is indifferent among group members about their opinion
(belief). Here we will see that assigning weights to each agent’s opinion actually has better
result for truth-tracking, with the assumption that behind this assignment there is the notion
of expertise. An agent will assign higher weights to agents that are experts regarding the
proposition on question. This assumption is strong, as an agent can’t always know the
expertise of another agent and, even if this is the case, an expert on a subject is not always
correct (or they may potentially be false). We will assume here at least the latter, that the
experts are always correct to demonstrate that having weighed incoming information can
reduce the effect of bias. Learning other agents’ expertise can happen using experience.
For example, keeping track of the agents that correctly believed something can help an
agent assign weights. These weights can be modified dynamically every time a decision
is made. However, different issues should be under consideration, as, for instance, an
expert on a topic isn’t necessarily an expert on another one.
As we have already seen, supporting evidence for an observable proposition can be seen
as a mass function. For this reason, the weights of all agents in a group should be in the
interval [0,1] and add to 1. In Section 4.4 we showed that fair unanimity could potentially
lead to failure of truth-tracking.
32
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:41==
Consider again the example of Section 4.4. Instead of fair unanimity, weights will be
assigned to agents, based on their expertise about p or ¬p, while their inner stubbornness
degrees will remain the same. Assume that the two agents δ and ζ are experts on the
topic on discussion. We will use this assumption to show that even though the number
of agents believing ¬p is lower than the number of agents believing p, assigning weights
prevents group’s failure on truth-tracking.
Consider now the weights for each agent, wα = 1
6, wβ = 1
12, wγ = 1
12, wδ = 1
3 and wζ = 1
3.
As every agent could utilize different ways for assigning weights, these weights could be
different for each agent. We keep the weights same for everyone for simplicity. With
the given weights, we can easily calculate the evidence for p and ¬p, ∑
Bαjp wαj =
1
3
and ∑
Bαj¬p wαj =
2
3.
In the first round of public announcements, only agent β up-
dates its belief as it holds that ∑
Bαj(¬p) wαj −∑
Bαj(p) wαj >
1
5IDβ(p) = 0.2. Every
other agent supports its initial belief. However, once agent β updates its belief, it pub-
licly announces this update. The evidence for supporting ¬p is now even higher and
this leads the other two agents that belief p, α and γ, to update their belief as well, as
∑
Bαj(¬p) wαj −∑
Bαj(p) wαj > 1
5IDα(p) = 1
5IDα(p) = 0.4. The two agents announce the
updates and no other announcement happens.
The above example, shows that some more rationality (assign more weight to expert
seems rational), can prevent wrong decisions, but one should always have in mind that
individual stubbornness degrees are decisive factors. However, in [12] it is claimed that
irrationality sometimes can play this role. An agent that irrationally doesn’t follow group’s
decision may change the flow of decisions and prevent the form of an in-group informa-
tional cascade. The term irrationality as presented in [12] can be seen as the stubborn-
ness degree of agents in our framework. Although a stubborn agent acts rationally for
itself, an external observer could possibly see levels of irrationality in the agent’s updates
and decisions. Another way to prevent wrong in-group decisions or the form of in-group
informational cascade is said to be an ’info-bomb’, some piece of information not expected
by the group that can change agents’ beliefs. [12]
In case of framing bias, one should investigate thoroughly the reasons of losing informa-
tion. If, for example, an agent loses information due to some sensor’s malfunction, then
the answer is clear. Fixing or replacing the sensor would reduce framing bias’ effect or at
least this is what one would expect. On the other hand, loss of information can be a result
of the agent itself. Recall how an agent revises under confirmation bias. Until the agent
receives the piece of information sufficiently enough times, it revises only in the environ-
ment where it believes it is in. This could potentially be addressed as loss of information
due to agent’s reasoning. This case is more complex and it should be tackled case by
case. What makes the agent stubborn? Consider, for example, a decision making algo-
rithm. Is it an issue of algorithm’s implementation? Is it due to use of bad data for training
the algorithm? In any case, several parameters should be taken into account, as how
important this decision is, what is the error range we can accept etc.
Anchoring bias is the type of cognitive bias that can potentially considered as alterna-
tive to the unbiased methods, when resources are limited. As we will see in Section
6 anchoring-biased methods behave generally better than the unbiased methods when
they are compared under lack of resources.
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
33
==PAGE:42==
6
Simulation
For the simulation of the artificial intelligence agents we used the object-oriented program-
ming language Python [19]. We implemented several Python classes in order to be as
close as we could to the theoretical base presented in the previous sections. We then ran
some tests, both custom and randomly created, to address the practical behaviour of our
theoretical results.
In this section we will first present the structure of our code and then go through the
tests and results. The way we implemented the components of our model differs a little
from the theory. We will present the structure here using a diagram and go through the
components. The code itself will not be presented here, but it can be found on the project
repository on GitHub using this link.
6.1
Structure of the Implementation
Before we present the diagram of the structure, we will briefly mention the classes used
in the implementation and their main purpose. All these classes can be found as Python
files on the project’s repository. Some of them are not used, but they are created for the
sake of completeness.
• Agent
• EpistemicSpace
• BiasedModel
• States
• Observables
• PlausibilityOrder
• DataSequence
• Group
• Valuation
• Player
The artificial intelligence agents are instances of the class Agent. Every belief revision
method is a function of this class, so when an agent is created, it can use these functions.
These functions take as arguments an epistemic space, instance of the class Epistemic-
Space and a proposition, which plays the role of the incoming information. The epistemic
space has two components, the states and the observables, something that complies with
the theory. An agent, has a plausibility order of the given states and after its instantiation
it plays the role of the plausibility space addressed in theory. This difference between
the theory and our implementation stems from the fact that an Agent object has the three
components that complete a plausibility space of the biased model as presented in our
work, that is the plausibility order, the stubbornness degrees and the framing function.
The plausibility order is an object of the class PlausibilityOrder and creates a dictionary
of worlds with values set of worlds. Every world has as value the set of worlds that are
less plausible than itself. In this way we can update the plausibility order after a piece of
34
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.1: Communication of classes
incoming information and find the most plausible worlds at any moment. The stubborn-
ness degree and the framing function are functions of the Agent class. Both return a
dictionary. The stubbornness degree dictionary has the observables as keys and values
the stubbornness degree of the agent for the observable. The framing function returns
a dictionary with the observables as keys and values a subset (or the same set) of the
worlds where the observable is true. This is different than framing function in our theory,
as framing function is defined on data streams, but simplify things when it comes to the
implementation. When an agent is instantiated, its bias is passed as a string argument
and it is used to activated the two aforementioned functions. The former is activated when
the agent’s bias is Confirmation and the latter when the agent’s bias is Framing.
Figure 6.1 shows how classes communicate. The arrows represent which classes send
data to which, when the objects are created automatically. For example, the arrow from
the class States to the class Observables shows that observables’ constructor takes as
argument a States object. The rest arrows work the same, except for the arrow from
the class PlausibilityOrder to the class Agent. Here the difference is that Agent’s con-
structor doesn’t take a PlausibilityOrder object as an argument, but the object is created
withing the Agent’s constructor. We chose this implementation way, as plausibility order
is considered a part of the agent itself. For the same reason one can see that the revision
methods, the stubbornness degree and the framing funtion are part of the Agent’s class.
The class Player is a subclass of the Agent class, so it inherits everything from the class,
but it also includes more function related to the player itself, some of them without further
implementation.
After an agent is instantiated, it can receive a proposition and update either the set of
states or its plausibility order, based on the belief revision method it uses. The way we
pass the information to an agent is represented by an object of the DataSequence class.
When a data sequence is created takes as arguments the states and the observables
created beforehand and it is create to be sound and complete with respect to the actual
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.2: Communication of classes at runtime
world, as it is a hypothesis used both in our work and in [5]. Note that for practical reasons
we can’t use data streams, so we rather use data sequences. In most of the cases, these
sequences include as a subsequence the locking sequence discussed in [5].
The Group class is used for in-group favoritism belief revision methods and models mem-
bership of agents in a group. In order for an agent to use the in-group favoritism methods,
it should be a member of a group with a given adaptive factor.
Figure 6.2 shows how update the epistemic space at runtime. Incoming propositions
are components of a DataSequence object. The agent receives the proposition and it
revises the epistemic space, using the revision methods. Note that in order to use in-
group favoritism methods the agent needs to be a group member and that’s why there is
communication between the agent and a Group object.
The classes Valuation and BiasModel are created for the sake of completeness. One can
see how a bias model is created in our implementation. A bias model takes as arguments
a plausibility space, that is an epistemic space and an agent, and a valuation. A valuation
is an instance of the Valuation class and it is used to identify the truth value of observables
in a given state.
The final class, Player, is solely used for the football example provided in the end. It
inherits everything from the Agent class and additionally it includes some functions related
to football players, not further developed.
Objects of the classes, States, Observables, Agent and DataSequence can be created
either automatically or by the user. In the following subsections we will refer to the custom
and randomly created tests we performed. For the former, the components were created
by the user. In order to do so, the string ”Custom” is passed to the constructor of each
object and the user creates the components during runtime. In the later case, the number
of the states is pass as argument beforehand and the rest are created automatically. The
numbers used for the automatic tests were result of experiments and are numbers that
comply with our computational resources.
36
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:45==
6.2
Custom Tests
We first created custom tests to compare the unbiased belief revision methods with the
corresponding biased. For each pair of comparison we created a custom test, consisting
of a set of worlds, a set of observables and a data sequence of observable propositions,
using functions we created in order to be able to create our custom sets. The custom
tests we used are mostly the examples presented in our work to compare methods. The
results of each test are store in .txt files on the repository of the project. Here we will only
briefly discuss the results.
6.2.1
Confirmation-biased Belief Revision Methods
We used the examples provided in Section 4.1 as custom tests for confirmation bias belief
revision methods. Our goal was to see in practise how an agent revises and validate our
theoretical results. As expected, confirmation bias conditioning and lexicographic revision
are not universal. The files Custom_Tests/
ConfirmationBiasConditioning.txt and Custom_Tests/
ConfirmationBiasLexRevision.txt, which can be found on the project’s repository, show
that in the given example the two biased methods fail to identify the actual world. The ex-
ample related to confirmation bias minimal revision, the results of which can be found in
the file Custom_Tests/ConfirmationBiasLexRevision.txt, show that confirmation bias
minimal revision fails to identify the actual world in an example where unbiased minimal
revision does so. This is an example that verifies our argument, but, of course, not the
proof we gave in the related section.
6.2.2
Framing-biased Belief Revision Methods
Framing-biased belief revision methods needed more attention when it comes to the cre-
ation of the tests, as the identification of the world and the differentiation from the unbiased
belief revision methods depends on the part of the information that is lost.
For the framing-biased conditioning and lexicographic revision, we used the same epis-
temic space, but different framed incoming information. Consider S = {w, t, s, r}, the set
of possible worlds, where r the actual world, and four agents with the same plausibility
order w ⪯t ⪯s ⪯r. The first two use conditioning and framing bias conditioning and the
latter lexicographic and framing bias lexicographic revision. Consider also the set of ob-
servables, O = {p, q, ¬p, ¬q}, where, p = {w, r}, q = {s, r}, ¬p = {t, s} and ¬q = {w, t}.
For the case of conditioning missing the actual world is enough for the framing bias con-
ditioning to fail to identify the actual world. For the case of framing bias lexicographic
revision, there should be a point after which the actual world is not in the data stream.
As there are infinite different data streams that fulfill these requirements, we didn’t in-
clude the data sequences on the results. In the case of framing bias conditioning the
data sequence we used is FR(σ) = (P1, P2, P3, P4), where the second P2 is {w} and
P1 = p, P3 = P4 = q. In the case of framing bias lexicographic revision the data sequence
we used was the same, but the last two framed observables, P3 and P4, were {s}, in-
stead of {s, r}. In this case the idea is that the data stream will continue being not sound
with respect to the actual world, but we provide only a data sequence to demonstrate the
behavior of the method.
For the case of framing bias minimal revision we used the same sets of worlds and ob-
servables, but different plausibility orders. Consider two agents, one that uses minimal
revision and one that uses framing bias minimal revision. Consider also the agents’ plau-
sibility order w ⪯t ⪯r ⪯s. The agents receive the same data sequence as before,
FR(σ) = (P1, P2, P3, P4), but P3 is {s} instead of {s, r}. This loss of information leads to
a plausibility order s ⪯w ⪯t ⪯r. The agent that uses framing bias minimal revision can’t
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
37
==PAGE:46==
identify the actual world after this point even if it receive all the rest information total, as r
is not in the most plausible worlds of any incoming information.
6.2.2.1
Anchoring-biased Belief Revision Methods
Anchoring-biased lexicographic and minimal revision methods behave as the unbiased
minimal belief revision method with a difference in the way the most plausible worlds
are selected after revision. We included an example to see if unbiased and anchoring
bias minimal revision will behave the same, which is what we expected in this specific
example. We also added an example for the anchoring lexicographic revision to compare
it with the unbiased lexicographic revision. Of course, as anchoring bias lexicographic
revision behaves as the unbiased minimal revision, it couldn’t identify the actual world in
the given example. More tests were generated automatically, but the goal was different
and it will be discussed later.
For anchoring bias conditioning we used the example given in Section 4.3. As expected,
unbiased conditioning identified the actual world, but anchoring bias conditioning didn’t.
6.2.3
In-group Favoritism Belief Revision Methods
We intentionally skipped providing custom tests for in-group favoritism belief revision
methods, as in-group favoritism belief revision methods behave as the confirmation bias
belief revision methods. Their difference is the modification of the agents’ stubbornness
degree in the former case, based on the adaptive factor, ϵGi of the group. Instead, we
created a custom tests, called FootballExample.txt to demonstrate how weight assign-
ment can affect decision-making. In this example we are not concerned about revision
methods, but only how the results change based on the weights.
Consider the epistemic space shown in Figure 6.3. The football agents will be created
based on this epistemic space and in every iteration they will have different plausibility
orders. Consider also that P stands for ’Turn left’, Q for ’There is none behind’, and ¬P,
¬Q their negations respectively.
This example concerns four football agents, belonging to the same group (teammates),
namely ’attacking midfielder’, ’captain’, ’midfielder1’ and ’midfielder2’. The first agent is
in question of if it should turn left or pass back and it decides based on its belief and the
influence of the group. Note that we are not talking about actual world’s identification, but
we care about the influence in decision-making.
We ran 2 series of tests, the results of which can be found in the Custom_Tests/
FootballExample.txt file. In the first series, all the agents have the same weights from
the perspective of the ’attacking midfielder’, 1
4. In the second series, the ’captain’ has 2
3,
as it is more experienced, and the rest three agents have equal weights, 1
9. The results
shows that assigning weights will indeed affect decision-making, as in the first series the
agent turned left 38 times and passed back 62 times and in the second series it turned
left 53 times and passed back 47.
We don’t discuss here if turning left is the right decision to make. We rather give this
example to demonstrate how decision-making process changes in a group, even in this
simple case. Considering that a football team has 11 player in the pitch and coaching stuff
on the bench that can affect decision-making, this process can be really complex.
6.3
Randomly Created Tests
Apart from the custom tests created to investigate the behavior of the belief revision meth-
ods, we created random tests in order to validate some hypotheses we formed based on
the theoretical results. First we will present the hypotheses and then discuss them based
38
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:47==
Q
¬P
¬Q
P
w
r
t
s
Figure 6.3: The epistemic space of the football example
on the results of the tests. As in the custom tests, the actual results can be found on the
repository under the folder Randomly_Created_Tests.
The way we created the tests depended mostly on the computational resources we had.
For each case we ran 200 tests. The number of possible worlds in each tests was 5
and the number of observables didn’t overcome 12, as above these limits computational
issues started emerging. The data sequence provided to the agents was created automat-
ically and the length of the sequence was a little larger than the number of the propositions
that were true in the actual world. Note that the data sequence provided to the agents
was constructed in a way such that it was sound and complete to the actual world of each
individual test.
Before creating the tests we formed the below hypotheses and tried to validate them using
the tests’ results, some of which were really interesting.
1. The unbiased conditioning and lexicographic revision should identify the actual world
in every test.
2. The larger the number of observables, the higher the chances for the agent to iden-
tify the actual world. The same holds for the length of the data sequence.
3. Biased belief revision methods, except for anchoring bias lexicographic and minimal
revision methods, should always behave worse than the unbiased ones. This is
related to the number of tests in which the methods identify the actual world.
4. Losing information can be fatal for truth-tracking.
5. Anchoring bias can be used as an heuristic for faster identification of the world.
6. Group membership leads better identification. The stronger the bonds of the group
the better the results of identification.
The results of the tests gave us some good insight related to our hypotheses. Most of
them can be found in the .txt files produced by the test cases and some of them were
consequence of out work to form the tests, so it will only be documented.
Table 6.1 shows the results of a series of 200 tests for the cases we tested. The first and
the last column refer to the methods we compared in the specific series of tests. Note
that these percentages come from a specific series of tests and may change if one runs
the tests again. However, the percentages are expected not to change significantly.
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
39
==PAGE:48==
Table 6.1: Results of the randomly created tests
Confirmation Conditioning
75%
-
97%
Conditioning
Confirmation Lexicographic
68%
-
99%
Lexicographic
Confirmation Minimal
56.5%
-
79%
Minimal
Framing Conditioning
0.5%
-
97.5%
Conditioning
Framing Lexicographic
32.5%
-
97%
Lexicographic
Framing Minimal
31%
-
77.5%
Minimal
Anchoring Conditioning
45.5%
-
94.5%
Conditioning
Anchoring Lexicographic
78.5%
-
98.5%
Lexicographic
Anchoring Minimal
82.5%
-
81.5%
Minimal
In-group Conditioning
77%
-
73%
Confirmation Conditioning
In-group Lexicographic
64.5%
-
62.5%
Confirmation Lexicographic
In-group Minimal
58.5%
-
54%
Confirmation Minimal
Anchoring Minimal (Resources)
50.5%
-
40.5%
Minimal
Anchoring Lexicographic (Resources)
43%
-
40%
Lexicographic
Anchoring Conditioning (Resources)
39.5%
-
36%
Conditioning
Hypothesis 1: A straightforward hypothesis stemmed from the results in [5]. As unbiased
conditioning and lexicographic belief revision methods are universal, we expected them
to identify the actual world in all the test cases. That was not the case, as in a very few
cases methods could potentially fail to identify. Going through the tests results made
us understand that the failure of the methods was a result of the actual world not being
identifiable. As an example, consider a set of worlds S = (w, t, r, s), where the actual
world is r and the observables O = (p, q, o, ¬p, ¬q, ¬o), where, p = {w, t, r}, q = {t, r}
and o = {r, t, s}. Consider also that the agent uses conditioning, so we will not refer to its
plausibility order. For every sound and complete data stream with respect to the actual
world r, the agent is not able to identify the world, as the world t and r will always be in
the set of worlds. Some test cases include this type of example, so we had to rephrase
our hypothesis to ’The unbiased conditioning and lexicographic revision should identify
the actual world in every test where the worlds is identifiable.’
Hypothesis 2: This hypothesis was mostly connected to the biased belief revision meth-
ods. However, after the testing phase we saw that increasing the number of observables
can facilitate the actual world’s identification for the unbiased methods as well. Testing
showed us that the more observables we add, the less the non-identifiable cases exist.
In practice, if one modifies the number observables to be around 6 or less, there may
be some cases where unbiased conditioning and lexicographic revision fail, due to non-
identifiable worlds. However, in the number of observables we used in the final test cases
(∼10-12) the unbiased conditioning and lexicographic belief revision methods didn’t fail,
as there were lower chances for two worlds to be in the exact same observables. Note
that we are not talking about the performance of the methods here, as the unbiased con-
ditioning and lexicographic revision are universal. What we talk about is whether the tests
that are created identifiable actual world or not.
Regarding the methods’ performance we ran a series of tests and it seems that what
actually plays a significant role for their performance is the number of possible states.
The more possible states there are, the poorer the performance of the method is. The
number of observables doesn’t play a significant role to the performance. Changes to the
number of observables result to a fluctuation of the performance, but without affecting it
significantly. The series of our tests included more than 26 observables, but we haven’t
included them in the plots for clarity. An interesting result is that increasing the number of
40
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.4: Number of observables against anchoring bias lexicographic revision’s per-
formance for different number of possible states
states increases the number of non-identifiable worlds. In the appendix we can see that
the random tests that are created include more non-identifiable worlds, as the number of
possible worlds increases. This means that the performances shown on the plots are kind
of unfair as they includes cases where the actual world is non-identifiable.
Figure 6.4 shows the performance of anchoring bias lexicographic revision for different
numbers of possible worlds. As one can see, the higher the number of the possible worlds,
the lower the performance.
Regarding the data sequence, the results were not what we initially expected. An increase
on the length of the data sequence occasionally increased the percentage of success.
Our expectation was that increasing the number of incoming pieces of information will
increases the chance that the agent will receive a contradiction of a proposition, which
is stubborn towards, enough times in order to revise. The results showed that this was
not always the case, but that stubbornness degree plays a more important role in the
performance. In our final cases the length of the data sequence is a little longer (∼2-4)
than the number of the worlds in which the actual world is true.
Figure 6.5 shows the performance of confirmation-biased lexicographic revision for 3 pos-
sible worlds and different number of incoming data sequences.
Hypothesis 3: Let’s first discuss why we excluded from the hypothesis the two anchoring
bias belief revision methods. As these two methods can potentially include a degree of
randomness we expected that there could be cases where these methods identify the
actual world where the unbiased methods can’t, especially when it comes to minimal
revision that it is not universal.
For the rest of the biased belief revision methods, the results were as we expected. The
success percentage of every biased belief revision method, except the anchoring bias
minimal revision, was lower that the unbiased one and can be found in the .txt files on the
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.5: Performance of confirmation-biased lexicographic revision
project’s repository. We ran several rounds of tests and the results were always in the
same range (∼±3%).
Hypothesis 4: We expect that losing information will be negative for framing bias belief
revision methods. The results for framing bias conditioning were fatal, as the method
failed to identify any of the identifiable worlds (or almost any). As conditioning deletes
worlds from the set of possible worlds S it is impossible for the agent to revise to the
actual world again. What we didn’t expect is that framing bias conditioning will fail in
every test. Decreasing the length of the data sequence and the number of observables
could improve the performance of framing bias condtioning, by as a whole one could say
that losing information is fatal for framing bias conditioning.
Losing information worsen the performance of unbiased lexicographic and minimal belief
revision methods, but not in the same rate as conditioning. In the results we saw that
framing bias lexicographic and minimal belief revision methods identified the actual world
in ∼35% of the test cases that is ∼1
3 of the identified cases from unbiased lexicographic
revision and ∼1
2 of the identified cases from unbiased minimal revision respectively.
Hypothesis 5: As anchoring bias revises based on the most plausible worlds of the set of
worlds after each piece of incoming information, we expected that anchoring bias can be
used as an heuristic for worlds identification. We based our hypothesis on the fact that, in
some cases, there is some randomness included in belief revision, using anchoring bias
methods, when the set of most plausible worlds is computed.
We ran two groups of randomly created tests. In the first group we compared unbiased
belief revision methods with anchoring bias methods to see if anchoring bias identify the
world faster than the unbiased methods. Interestingly, only anchoring bias lexicographic
revision was faster than the corresponding unbiased, so it can be used as a faster alter-
native. Note that the unbiased lexicographic revision is still better than the anchoring bias
lexicographic revision when it comes to performance, but anchoring bias lexicographic
revision was faster in the cases where both methods identified the world.
Some interesting results can be found in the AnchoringBiasMinRevisionWithResources.
txt, AnchoringBiasLexRevisionWithResources.txt and
AnchoringBiasConditioningWithResources.txt files as well. These tests cases differ
from the rest, as we included agents’ resources in the revision. We modelled an agent re-
sources as a real number between 0 and 100. What the tests showed is that the lower the
resources of an agent are, the better the anchoring bias methods become compared to
the unbiased ones. This is an important result, as it gives an alternative for truth-tracking
when agents don’t have adequate resources to follow rationality, as it happens in the most
42
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:51==
real case scenarios.
Hypothesis 6: This hypothesis came naturally from the way we modelled in-group fa-
voritism belief revision methods. The results showed that in-group favoritism methods
are, usually, better in identification than the confirmation-biased corresponding ones, but
this difference becomes more obvious when the agent is more stubborn. The more stub-
born an agent is and the stronger the bonds of the group the agent belongs in are, the
better the in-group favoritism methods become compared to the confirmation correspond-
ing ones.
In our tests, we used the incoming information as the collective belief of the group in each
iteration of communication and we didn’t include how every agent revises, as our main
goal was to compare the methods. Note that the actual tests are more complex than the
theory as more than one propositions are considered, contrary to the theory where only
one, p, is concerned.
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
43
==PAGE:52==
7
Discussion
As, day by day, artificial intelligence agents become an integral part of human’s daily life
and the interaction between the two increases exponentially, more discussion should exist
about how much efficient their reasoning is. Agents become responsible for decision-
making and, sometimes, with serious consequences. It is crucial for the agent to make
the correct decision. In our work, we saw that, even though rationality is a powerful tool
for an agent, it’s not always the solution.
Informational cascades are cases where individual rationality and communication can
lead to failure of truth-tracking [12]. This is not the end of the story. Rationality needs
resources and, in daily scenarios, humans and artificial intelligence agents usually lack
of them. Consider a self-driving car that needs to make a decision within seconds. It
would be ideal to have as much time as needed in order to make the best decision, but,
of course, this is not the case.
As we saw, there are biased belief revision methods that, in a level, can substitute the
unbiased ones, in cases where there is lack of resources. Anchoring-biased methods
can be a good alternative to use, as the tests we conducted showed better behavior than
the unbiased methods under lack of resources. However, we also saw that other biased
methods don’t behave as good as the unbiased ones. Framing-biased methods always
had poorer performance than the unbiased methods. This is something that should not
surprise anyone, as missing information negatively affects truth-tracking.
Our proposal is that cognitive bias should be considered a tool or heuristic, used with
caution, as its existence is inevitable. As long as cognitive bias is naturally inherited by
artificial intelligence agents, human should consider how to get the most out of it in some
cases and find ways to reduce the effect of it in others.
Cognitive bias in artificial intelligence is an interesting field of research with a bright future.
In our work we decided to model only some of the cognitive bias’ types, the ones we
consider more applicable in artificial intelligence. Types mostly related to emotions were
intentionally excluded, but they would be very interesting future work, thinking of the day
by day artificial intelligence’s development. Interesting continuation of this work would be
the formalization of more types of cognitive bias in artificial intelligence agents and how
they be implemented in practice.
Even though we talked about the effect of cognitive bias in truth-tracking, we haven’t
really investigated if there is a general framework that could possibly determine when
cognitive bias negatively affects truth-tracking and when positively does. Having this kind
of framework would be useful both in academic and business sectors, as it would reduce
the prejudice against cognitive bias and allow human to dig in more its functionality.
Even though we investigated how randomness on the states, observables and data streams
affects truth-tracking, randomness itself is not a component of every case. Assigning
some bias to the elements of the tests could potentially give better insights for truth-
tracking. For example, the incoming data sequence an agent receives might not be totally
random, but include more occurencies of one proposition than other based on the case.
Digging into such examples could be useful future work.
Finally, in our work we gave an example of how in-group favoritism methods can be used
in football-playing agents. A more general implementation of cognitive-biased methods
44
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:53==
in football-playing agents would be an interesting study case, thinking of all the compu-
tational obstacles that exist. For example, consider the number of possible worlds in a
game with 22 players in an environment (football pitch), where everyone can move freely
(or at least with some rules imposed).
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
45
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
Alexandru Baltag et al. “A dynamic logic for learning theory”. In: Journal of Logical
and Algebraic Methods in Programming 109 (2019), p. 100485. ISSN: 2352-2208.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlamp.2019.100485. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2352220818300890.
[2]
Anthia Solaki, Francesco Berto, and Sonja Smets. “The Logic of Fast and Slow
Thinking”. In: Erkenntnis 86.3 (2021), pp. 733–762. DOI: 10 . 1007 / s10670 - 019 -
00128-z.
[3]
Jafar Rezaei. “Anchoring bias in eliciting attribute weights and values in multi-attribute
decision-making”. In: Journal of Decision Systems 30 (2021), pp. 72–96. DOI: 10.
1080/12460125.2020.1840705. eprint: htps://doi.org/10.1080/12460125.2020.
1840705. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/12460125.2020.1840705.
[4]
Meysam Alizadeh, Claudio Cioffi, and Andrew Crooks. “The effect of in-group fa-
voritism on the collective behavior of individuals’ opinions”. In: Advances in Complex
Systems 18 (Feb. 2015), p. 1550002. DOI: 10.1142/S0219525915500022.
[5]
Alexandru Baltag, Nina Gierasimczuk, and Sonja Smets. “Truth-Tracking by Belief”.
In: Studia Logica (2018), pp. 917–947. DOI: 10.1007/s11225-018-9812-x. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11225-018-9812-x.
[6]
Wolfgang Spohn. “Ordinal Conditional Functions: A Dynamic Theory of Epistemic
States”. In: Causation in Decision, Belief Change, and Statistics: Proceedings of
the Irvine Conference on Probability and Causation. Ed. by William L. Harper and
Brian Skyrms. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 1988, pp. 105–134. ISBN: 978-94-
009-2865-7. DOI: 10.1007/978-94-009-2865-7_6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
94-009-2865-7_6.
[7]
Hans Rott. “Conditionals and theory change: Revisions, expansions, and additions”.
In: Synthese (). DOI: 10.1007/BF00869346.
[8]
Craig Boutilier. “Iterated revision and minimal change of conditional beliefs”. In:
Journal of Philosophical Logic (). DOI: 10.1007/BF00248151.
[9]
Ulrike Hahn and Adam J.L. Harris. “Chapter Two - What Does It Mean to be Biased:
Motivated Reasoning and Rationality”. In: ed. by Brian H. Ross. Vol. 61. Psychology
of Learning and Motivation. Academic Press, 2014, pp. 41–102. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-800283-4.00002-2. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/B9780128002834000022.
[10]
Ted Shear and Branden Fitelson. “Two Approaches to Belief Revision”. In: Erken-
ntnis (2019), pp. 487–518. DOI: 10.1007/s10670-017-9968-1. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10670-017-9968-1.
[11]
Xiaoying Li and Wenquan Ling. “How Framing Effect Impact on Decision Making
on Internet Shopping”. In: Open Journal of Business and Management 03 (2015),
pp. 96–108. DOI: 10.4236/ojbm.2015.31010.
[12]
Alexandru Baltag et al. “Logical Models of Informational Cascades”. In: Sept. 2013,
pp. 405–432. ISBN: 978-1-84890-122-3.
[13]
Daniel J. Isenberg. “Group polarization: A critical review and meta-analysis.” In:
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 50.6 (June 1986), pp. 1141–1151.
DOI: 10.1037/0022- 3514.50.6.1141. URL: https://doi.org/10.1037%2F0022-
3514.50.6.1141.
46
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:55==
[14]
Alexandru Baltag and Bryan Renne. “Dynamic Epistemic Logic”. In: The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Ed. by Edward N. Zalta. Winter 2016. Metaphysics
Research Lab, Stanford University, 2016.
[15]
Ronald Fagin et al. Reasoning About Knowledge. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press,
2003. ISBN: 0262562006.
[16]
Aidan Lyon and Eric Pacuit. “The Wisdom of Crowds: Methods of Human Judge-
ment Aggregation”. In: Handbook of Human Computation. Ed. by Pietro Michelucci.
New York, NY: Springer New York, 2013, pp. 599–614. ISBN: 978-1-4614-8806-4.
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-8806-4_47. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-
8806-4_47.
[17]
Joseph Y. Halpern. Reasoning about Uncertainty. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press,
2003. ISBN: 0262083205.
[18]
Uwe Peters. “What is the Function of Confirmation Bias?” In: Erkenntnis (2022),
pp. 1351–1376. DOI: 10.1007/s10670-020-00252-1. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10670-020-00252-1.
[19]
URL: https://www.python.org/.
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
47
==PAGE:56==
A
Appendix
A.1
Performance Plots
In this section we will include all the plots we created during performance testing. We
expect that running the tests again will give different results, as they are created randomly,
but without high deviation.
Figure A.1: Number of observables against unbiased conditioning ’s performance for dif-
ferent number of possible states
Figure A.2: Number of observables against unbiased lexicographic revision’s perfor-
mance for different number of possible states
48
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:57==
Figure A.3: Number of observables against unbiased minimal revision’s performance for
different number of possible states
Figure A.4: Number of observables against confirmation-biased conditioning’s perfor-
mance for different number of possible states
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.5: Number of observables against confirmation-biased lexicographic revision’s
performance for different number of possible states
Figure A.6: Number of observables against confirmation-biased minimal revision’s per-
formance for different number of possible states
50
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.7: Number of observables against anchoring-biased conditioning’s performance
for different number of possible states
Figure A.8: Number of observables against anchoring-biased minimal revision’s perfor-
mance for different number of possible states
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.9: Number of observables against framing-biased lexicographic revision’s per-
formance for different number of possible states
Figure A.10: Number of observables against framing-biased minimal revision’s perfor-
mance for different number of possible states
52
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
==PAGE:61==
Formal Models of Cognitive Bias in Artificial Intelligence and Multi-agent Systems
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
