==PAGE:1==
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
Using TESS and Gaia Data
Master Thesis
DTU Space
National Space Institute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
Using TESS and Gaia Data
Master Thesis
March, 2023
By
Oliver Dürfeldt Pedros
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Beyond Earthly Skies
Published by:
DTU, National Space Institute, Elektrovej, Building 328, 2800 Kgs. Lyn-
gby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Oliver Dürfeldt Pedros - s174019
Signature
Date
ii
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
15/03/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Stellar oscillations can probe the interior structure of stars, thus providing an understand-
ing of these which is impossible to achieve otherwise. Am and Fm stars are chemically
peculiar stars that experience diffusion due to slow rotation. Such stars were not expected
to be able to pulsate, but observations have proven that this is the case. Turbulent pres-
sure in the HeI/HI ionisation layer is thought to be the cause of this. In this project, 1287
Am and Fm stars are studied using TESS lightcurves and Gaia astrometry to charac-
terise stellar oscillations in these unexpected pulsators. It is found that 20% of Am stars
pulsate. However, theoretical predictions of the number of excited radial orders do not
coincide with the observations, suggesting that the models based on turbulent pressure
fail to describe the pulsations in Am and Fm stars completely.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Victoria Antoci, Senior Researcher, DTU Space
Thank you for precious advice and guidance throughout the entire project and for intro-
ducing me to the fascinating world of oscillating stars.
Jérôme Chenevez, Associate Professor, DTU Space
Thank you for supporting and advising me from the beginning of my studies, all the way
to my Master’s degree.
iv
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Overview of Stars
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Stellar Evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Chemically Peculiar Stars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Stellar Oscillations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Time Series Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3
Data
19
3.1
Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Gaia Astrometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Renson Catalog
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Methods
29
4.1
Am Sample Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Data Acquisition and Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Am Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.4
Frequency Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5
Results
39
5.1
Am Catalog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Am Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
Gaia Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.4
Frequency Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6
Discussion
55
6.1
Am Star Sample Representativeness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
6.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6.3
Frequency Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6.4
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
63
A Appendix
67
A.1 Additional Simulations of Amplitude Spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.2 Additional Graphs Variability Determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.3 Am Stars with Photometric Modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
v
==PAGE:8==
A.4 Extracted Frequencies for Pulsating Am Stars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
vi
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The study of stellar oscillations enables the characterisation of the interior of stars, pro-
viding valuable information that otherwise cannot be retrieved using other observation
methods. Since the advent of helioseismology, successfully constraining the interior of
the Sun, the study has been extended to other types of stars, from main sequence O,B,A,F
stars to white dwarfs [1]. While there are still many unknowns regarding these, astero-
seismology has proved valuable in understanding stellar structure and evolution. In recent
years, space-borne photometry from Kepler and TESS missions have provided long, high
precision time series and allowed for the discovery of pulsation in many stars and rev-
olutionised asteroseismic modelling of these. This has enabled characterisation of the
interior for stars other than the Sun. In particular, TESS [2] provides an all-sky survey of
the brightest stars with short, 2 minute cadence. The wealth of data is valuable to describe
the different populations of stars and further constrain the physical processes within.
Last year, a new Gaia data release was made available, providing unprecedented high-
quality astrometry for more than a billion stars and estimates for many stellar parameters
[3]. This large amount of data is valuable for target selection and combined analysis with
other data sources, and may be particularly powerful to characterise large samples.
Am and Fm stars are chemically peculiar stars characterised by an under-abundance
of Calcium primarily, and over-abundances of metallic elements [4]. They owe these pe-
culiarities to atomic diffusion, a process involving gravitational settling of certain elements
and radiative levitation of metals with rich absorption spectra. This is expected to hinder
stellar oscillations as it leads to He depletion in the HeII ionisation layer, which drives p-
mode pulsations through the κ-mechanism. Yet, a significant fraction of Am stars have
been observed to pulsate, thus challenging current knowledge of excitation mechanism.
Turbulent pressure in the H/HeI ionisation layer is proposed to be responsible for pulsa-
tions in Am stars and simulations of the number of excited radial orders of p-modes have
been computed [5]. No observational data has been collected and analysed in order to
compare with these models, and very little studies of Am stars have been carried out to
date using TESS satellite data. In this project, it is proposed to study the pulsational be-
haviour of a large sample of Am stars from the Renson catalog [6] using TESS and Gaia
data, in order to characterise this population of stars. It will provide the community with
key statistics on different aspects, such as pulsation incidence in Am stars, as well as
help testing whether turbulent pressure can explain the observed pulsations.
An overview of current theory regarding the chemically peculiar Am stars as well as rele-
vant information regarding stellar evolution and oscillations and the fundamental principles
for frequency analysis are provided in chapter 2. In chapter 3, the required data for this
study is presented, followed by an explanation of the methods and assumptions used in
chapter 4. Results are presented in chapter 5. A discussion of certain limitations and
potential future work and conclusions based on the outcome of the analysis are provided
in chapters 6 and 7, respectively.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
This chapter covers the fundamental theoretical concepts for understanding the contents
of the report. The first sections are dedicated to the general description of stars, their
fundamental properties and evolution, as well as the peculiarities of the target stars in this
project, the Am stars. The rest of the chapter presents the essentials of asteroseismology,
and the mathematical tools that enable the analysis of stellar oscillations.
2.1
Overview of Stars
Stars are astronomical objects consisting of gases, for the most part ionised, and emit
electromagnetic radiation through fusion of chemical elements in their core. They consist
predominantly of hydrogen and helium, the two most abundant elements in the universe,
although other heavier elements can be detected.
Stars are in hydrostatic equilibrium, and as such the temperature and density of the gases
composing the stellar structure increase with depth from the surface. Near the centre, re-
ferred to as the core of the star, the star is hot enough for nuclear fusion to occur [7]. The
gravitational pressure exerted by the gas is countered by the outward pressure originating
from the energy released in its core. The energy is carried from the core to the surface
of the star through different modes of transport. The primary energy transport is photon
radiation, where photons are emitted and migrate towards the surface through absorp-
tion and reemission [7]. Radiation escapes the star through emission into space from a
layer of relatively low density called the photosphere, which thus is defined as the outer
surface of the star. Convection of gases also occurs in regions of high opacity, meaning
that photons cannot travel effectively though the medium, or when the amount of energy
to be transported is very large [8]. Similarly to any fluid, hot gas expands and has lower
density, thus rising through parts of the star, while colder gas sinks. Energy is therefore
transported outwards through motion of the matter in the star. These convective layers
only extend through a certain region of the star and contribute to mixing the elements
within [4]. Simplistically, high-mass stars have convective cores while low-mass stars
have convective envelopes, a term used to describe the region outside of the core.
Because of the physical properties of stars, and the distances at which they are from
our Solar System, we are constrained to only study the radiation they emit in order to
learn more about these. Observing a star through photometry or spectroscopy thus cor-
responds to studying the light originating from its surface, and its interactions with the other
components of the stellar atmosphere - gases in outer layers from the photosphere. The
radiation emitted into space has undergone various transformation during the travel from
the stellar core and its surface and does not carry much information about the conditions
in the star’s interior [7]. This therefore limits the understanding of the inner regions of stars.
From observations, a handful of stellar parameters are typically derived to characterise
the star. Some of these are described below.
2.1.1
Effective Temperature
In order to model stars and their emission, some simplifications are commonly made.
The first is to assume that they are blackbodies, which absorb electromagnetic radiation
in an idealised, perfect, manner at all wavelengths [9]. They emit radiation according to
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
3
==PAGE:12==
Planck’s law, which depends on the temperature T.
Bλ(λ) = 2hc2
λ5
1
e
hc
λkBT −1
(2.1)
Equation 2.1 describes the spectral radiance, the power emitted by a blackbody as a func-
tion of wavelength. From this a star can be characterised by a surface effective tempera-
ture, Teff, that would produce a blackbody with the same amount of radiation. Depending
on the effective temperature, the radiation at a given wavelength will vary. Figure 2.1 illus-
trates the difference in the Planck curves for stars with different effective temperatures.
The effective temperatures are 18000 K, 6000 K and 4000 K respectively for the blue,
yellow and red curves. Stars radiate strongly in the visible range of the electromagnetic
spectrum in all cases, but large amounts of infrared radiation can be detected as well. For
the hotter stars, ultraviolet light also is significant. From hereon, focus will remain on the
visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Figure 2.1: Example blackbody Planck curves for stars with different effective tempera-
tures. Credit: Swinburne University.
2.1.2
Apparent Magnitude & Luminosity
Stars are to first order considered spherical, implying that radiation is emitted in all direc-
tions. As it travels through space, the light passes through an increasingly large surface
area and the energy for a given area decreases with distance. This is described by the
inverse-square law in Equation 2.2, which relates how the total luminosity L of a star
decreases with distance d [7].
b =
L
4πd2
(2.2)
When observing a star from Earth, one therefore measures its apparent brightness, b,
which represents the amount of energy passing through a surface area at a given distance.
Originally, stars were classified according to how bright they appeared in the night sky.
The apparent magnitude is a unit-less scale describing how bright a star appears to be as
seen from Earth, and in its modern form can be computed from the apparent brightness
of a star as seen in Equation 2.3.
m = −2.5 log10(b) + c
(2.3)
4
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:13==
However, the apparent magnitude does not tell anything about the true nature of the star,
as an intrinsically more luminous star located further away from Earth may appear fainter
than a star close by. It is therefore useful to relate the brightness to the luminosity, which
requires knowledge of the distance to the star, as can be seen in Equation 2.2. For sim-
plicity and comparison capabilities, this quantity is often expressed in terms of the solar
luminosity, where stars are assigned a value L⊙based on the fraction between their own
luminosity and that of the Sun. Similarly to the apparent magnitude scale, the absolute
magnitude scale is computed from the luminosity of a star and enables comparison of the
magnitude of different stars. It essentially corresponds to the apparent magnitude of the
given star at a distance of 10 pc [8].
Distances
Distances can be estimated in the simplest way by measuring the parallax of a star [7].
As Earth completes its orbit, the motion of the planet means that the line of sight from an
observer to a star shifts. Consequently, the star appears to be moving in the night sky.
This motion can be described by an angle, called the stellar parallax p, and can be used
to infer the distance of a star by using Equation 2.4.
d = 1
p
(2.4)
Here the parallax is given in arcseconds and the distance in parsecs. An obvious limitation
appears from this relation, as it requires that the parallax be determined with extremely
high precision for this method to yield a reliable distance value. As stars are further away
from Earth, the stellar parallax decreases significantly and distances to such stars cannot
be determined reliably [7].
2.1.3
Spectral Classification
The MK Spectral Classification System is based on classifying stars by looking at their
spectra, which represent the light intensity as a function of wavelength, in the blue-violet
region of the visible spectrum [4]. Absorption lines (also simply referred to as lines) can be
found in the spectra. Visually, they appear as dips in intensity and represent interactions
of the light emitted from the photosphere and the gases in the star’s atmosphere. The MK
system uses these to identify patterns and group stars with the same properties, without
making any prior assumptions regarding theory of the nature of the star, thus serving as
a reliable way of grouping stars in classes according to similar characteristics [4]. The
terminology ”metal lines” is used to qualify any line originating from elements other than
hydrogen and helium. Classification is performed by comparing a spectrum with spectra
of standard stars each representing a different class to identify the common lines, and
then assigning the label corresponding to the best match. Stars are typically assigned
labels O, B, A, F, G, K or M depending on their spectra and serves as a temperature
scale, with the hottest stars being assigned class O and the coolest stars being from
class M. The effective temperature has the most impact on the spectrum of a star, as all
have roughly the same chemical composition dominated by hydrogen and helium, with
only 1% of heavier elements [7], [8]. Because of the near-identical compositions, higher
temperature stars also are the ones with larger masses. A summary of the properties of
these spectral classes is provided in Table 2.1.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
5
==PAGE:14==
Spectral Type
Temperature [K]
Mass [M⊙]
O
> 25 000
> 16
B
30 000 - 12 000
2-16
A
11 000 - 7 500
1.5-2
F
7500 - 6000
1.1-1.4
G
6000 - 5000
0.8-1.1
K
5000 - 3500
0.5-0.8
M
< 3500
0.5 <
Table 2.1: Stellar spectral classes with corresponding temperature [8] and mass ranges
[10].
The classes are subdivided by a number ranging from 0 to 9 based on the strength of the
absorption lines, with hotter stars having a smaller number, for more detailed classifica-
tion. One spectral class therefore corresponds to a letter and number association. Early
and late-type stars are used to qualify stars with spectral classes corresponding to hotter
and cooler stars, respectively.
Surface Gravity
Additionally, stars are assigned a luminosity class I-V depending on the width of their
absorption lines, and thus helps distinguish stars further [8]. The surface gravity refers
to the acceleration of a particle at the surface of a given star. It is closely related to the
radius of the star, as a large radius leads to a low surface gravity. Because more radiation
is emitted from a sphere with larger surface area, a larger radius is also correlated to a
higher luminosity. The luminosity classes are therefore ordered as follows:
I. Supergiant
II. Bright giants
III. Giants
IV. Subgiants
V. Main sequence star
These classes represent a sequence of increasing surface gravity and decreasing lumi-
nosity. Main sequence stars, which will be described in the following section and are of
most interest in this project, have the luminosity class V. They are also referred to as
dwarfs. As an example, the Sun is a main sequence star and has the spectral classifica-
tion G2V. This study focuses on A and F type stars. For this reason, a short description
of some key characteristics for these spectral classes is provided below.
A-type Stars
A-type stars have mostly radiative atmospheres and shallow convection zones in the en-
velope. Temperature estimates can most effectively be made by looking at the strength of
Balmer lines, a specific set of hydrogen energy transitions, and the Ca II K-line [4], where
the roman numeral refers to the ionisation state of the element. The mentioned lines are
strongest in A-type stars compared to other classes and serve as ideal tools to identify
the spectral class. The Ca II K-line is particularly useful as it gets stronger for later A-type
stars and can be used to classify the entire range from A0 to A9. Metal lines, for example
those related to Iron (Fe) and Titanium (Ti), grow stronger for later spectral types as well.
F-type Stars
F-type stars show a transition in the stellar atmospheres from A-type stars. The convec-
tion regions become deeper, eventually being the major energy transport mechanism by
6
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:15==
late F-type stars and early G-type stars. Both hydrogen and metal lines can be used for
temperature estimates, although the Ca II K-line seems insensitive to the different sub-
classes in F-type stars [4].
2.1.4
Magnetic Fields & Spots
Magnetic fields are a widespread phenomenon, from small-scale fields powered by ob-
jects on Earth to large magnetic fields around planets and stars and with extremely vari-
able strengths. Late spectral type stars such as our Sun have deep convective regions
that power dynamo magnetic fields [11]. In O, B and A stars, roughly 10% are thought to
be magnetic [12]. These are of fossil origin, i.e. remnant magnetic fields that originated
during stellar formation. Observations of A-type stars has also enabled detection of ultra-
weak magnetic fields, although they are extremely difficult to measure [13]. F-type stars
are known to host the transition from shallow convective outer layers in higher mass stars
to deep convective regions seen in low mass, late type stars. Within this class magnetic
fields have also been detected, with no clear correlation to the effective temperature [11].
Magnetic fields are expected to prohibit mixing within the star, or to be able to affect
the chemical composition of the stellar atmospheres [12]. If they are strong enough, it is
possible for them to induce diffusion along the field lines, resulting in enhancements of
certain elements. Additionally, magnetic fields are known to provoke the appearance of
stellar spots, the best studied example being those on our Sun. They occur in a region
where the magnetic field is strong enough to guide the ionised gases of the star outward.
This region is located further away and is therefore cooler, hence less bright [7]. Such
spots can cause periodic variations in the stellar brightness and can thus be identified
from lightcurves.
2.2
Stellar Evolution
Unless stated specifically, the contents of this section are based on [8]. Stars are evolv-
ing celestial objects. They form in gas clouds as these begin to contract, allowing for
the matter to gather and heat up. When the temperature is high enough at the center
of this protostar, nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium can occur. This process liber-
ates energy, which in turn is radiated into space. Contraction of the star is halted, as the
star now finds itself in hydrostatic equilibrium. The star spends most of its lifetime in the
hydrogen fusion phase, referred to as the main sequence. The length of this phase is
highly dependent on mass, with larger stars fusing hydrogen into helium at higher rates
and thus having shorter lifetimes. The onset of hydrogen burning defines the zero-age
main sequence (ZAMS). Terminal-age main sequence (TAMS) corresponds to the end of
hydrogen fusion in the core.
Eventually, all hydrogen is consumed in the core. The star begins to contract, enabling
hydrogen fusion in a shell around the core. This happens in a gradually increasing region
outside of the core and causes the outer layers to expand. The star’s luminosity increases
but the outer layers cool and the star enters the red giant phase [7].
Ultimately, the temperature in the core reaches the threshold allowing for helium fusion,
producing carbon and oxygen. As a consequence, the core expands and the outer layers
contract, leading to an increase in temperature and slight decrease in luminosity [7]. The
evolution after the main sequence is beyond the scope of this project and will therefore
not be covered in detail. It is worth noting that depending on the mass of the star, fusion of
successively larger elements, such as carbon, neon, oxygen and silicon can occur in the
core while shell fusion of the previous elements remains present. Star sustaining such
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
7
==PAGE:16==
processes enter the supergiant phase.
It follows from the above explanations that the properties of the star vary as they evolve.
The observable surface properties can be used to study the stars and learn about their
current stage in evolution. The Hertzsprung-Russel (HR) diagrams are graphs in which
stars are represented by their luminosity and effective temperature. HR diagrams are
valuable tools to study stars in terms of their intrinsic properties, as they are not randomly
distributed and the location on the HR diagram provides information on their evolutionary
state [7], as is illustrated in Figure 2.2. The departure from main sequence and transition
into the red giant phase results in the motion towards the upper right in the diagram.
Figure 2.2: Example HR diagram, also showing the stellar radius for different portions of
the graph. The main sequence is shown as a red line. Taken from [7].
Binary Systems
Binary systems are star systems involving two stars that are gravitationally bound. Unre-
solved binary systems pose a major challenge to the study of stars. They appear to be
a single star but the measured light is in fact the combination of both sources. As a con-
sequence, they will appear higher in the HR diagram [8]. The colour information is also
an average of that from the two stars and therefore binarity can affect the temperature
estimates of photometric methods involving colour filters. This is relevant when analysing
stars in the HR diagram.
Binary systems can be detected in different ways. Eclipsing binaries are systems ob-
served from a specific angle, where the transit from one star in front of the other results
in a decrease in brightness in photometric time series. Spectroscopic binaries are found
due to Doppler shifts in absorption lines. Finally, astrometric binaries are systems in which
only one star is visible but the motion is perturbed, which follows from gravitational inter-
actions with a companion star.
8
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:17==
In close binary systems, mass transfer can occur as one star goes through its evolu-
tion and the radius expands [14]. The matter from the star may overflow the Roche lobe,
the region in space where it is gravitationally bound to the star, and be capture by the
companion. The chemical composition of stars can be affected by this.
2.3
Chemically Peculiar Stars
Although a reliable stellar classification method based on stellar spectra has been de-
veloped, many stars display unusual characteristics and their spectra deviate from those
of the standard stars. Some stars show unexpected weaker or stronger absorption lines
when compared to stars of a similar spectral class, resulting in either smaller or higher
abundance estimates of certain elements in their photosphere. Consequently, these are
referred to chemically peculiar stars, because their chemical abundances are different
from those of the class they are associated to. In the case of A-type stars, 30% show
such signs and a wide variety of peculiarities have been identified, making it an important
phenomenon to understand and characterise. Unless stated otherwise, the contents of
this section are based on [4].
2.3.1
Am & Fm Stars
Some A-type stars show over-abundances of metallic elements in their atmosphere. Am
stars, also referred to as metallic-lined A stars, are defined as stars having under-abundances
of calcium (Ca) and scandium (Sc), as well as over-abundances of zinc (Zn), strontium
(Sr), yttrium (Y), zirconium (Zr) and barium (Ba) [15]. With the Ca II K-line appearing weak
in these stars, suggesting an early spectral subclass, but other metal lines being strong,
the spectral types derived using these sets of lines differ. For the star to be confirmed as
an Am star, it would need the spectral subclasses to differ by at least 5. As an example,
an Am star could have a Ca-lines corresponding to a spectral class A2 and metal-lines
associated with an A7 star. Should the difference be less than 5 subclasses, the stars are
called marginal Am stars [16]. This phenomenon has also been observed in F-type stars,
where the same principles apply. Because the spectral class differs depending on which
elements are studied, a new notation was developed specifically for Am stars. As can
be seen in the example below [16], an Am star is typical given multiple spectral classes,
based on the K-line spectral type and the metallic line type (m).
A3/5mF0−F5
The peculiarities found in the atmospheres of Am & Fm stars are believed to originate
from a chemical separation in the outer layers of the stars that does not normally take
place for A and F type stars. This process is referred to as atomic diffusion [16]. It con-
sists of two effects, gravitational settling of elements and radiative levitating. In principle,
heavier elements have a tendency to sink into the star as a consequence of the gravita-
tional force, however radiation pressure from the inner part of the star will be larger for an
ionised element with a rich spectrum [17]. By rich spectrum it is implied that the element
has many absorption lines, so that interactions with photons are numerous. The momen-
tum from the photon is transferred to the element upon absorption and as a consequence,
these elements will rise in the atmosphere of the star and chemical peculiarities can arise.
Metals have rich spectra in the ultraviolet region of light, whilst lighter elements such as
helium and calcium do not. The Fm peculiarity can only occur for early F-type stars (down
to F5), as convection becomes more prominent in later spectral classes and helps mix the
elements, hence impeding the Fm phenomenon.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
9
==PAGE:18==
Stars are required to be slowly rotating in order to experience atomic diffusion, with ro-
tational velocities being less than 120 km/s [18]. Rotating stars experience large-scale
circulation in the envelope and this mixing prevents the formation of peculiarities. It was
found that the vast majority of Am stars are slow rotators [17]. Several reasons could
explain how this can occur for A and F type stars. Tidal interactions with another star in
a binary system can cause a rotational slowdown and the development of chemical pe-
culiarities. Statistically, roughly 60-70% of Am stars are estimated to be in binaries [19].
This does leave a significant amount of Am stars to be slowly rotating outside of binary
systems. Another reason could be of magnetic origin, where a strong magnetic field is
thought to break the rotation. However, Am stars have not been found to have magnetic
fields capable of such a phenomenon. However, stellar spots have been observed on Am
stars [15], which are believed to be formed in the presence of magnetic fields or an un-
known mechanism. Ultra-weak magnetic fields have been confirmed in several Am stars
with effective temperatures 9200-9500 K, although it remains unconfirmed whether this
is a feature common to the entire class [20, 21]. Finally, it seems there is evidence for
some Am stars being born with slow rotation [19].
ρ Puppis stars
ρ-Puppis stars, named after the prototype star of this class, are mid F-type stars that show
similar chemical peculiarities to those found in Am & Fm stars [22]. They appear to have
luminosity types II-III, and are believed to be evolved Am stars in the transition phase
where the convective layers deepen, ultimately removing the chemical peculiarities found
in the outer layers. One major limitation to this is that atomic diffusion is not expected to
be able to occur in mid to late type F stars. A proposed alternative is that the observed
abundances are developed through accretion from a companion star, similarly to Barium
stars [22].
2.3.2
Ap Stars
Ap stars, or peculiar A stars, represent another category of chemically peculiar stars. They
have strong magnetic fields, which is moreover expected to explain why they also are are
slow rotators [23]. Diffusion is therefore expected to be the cause of the peculiarities in
these stars as well. They consist of over-abundances of chromium (Cr) and strontium
(Sr), as well as rare-earth elements [23, 24], which differ from metal elements by their
high atomic numbers. Examples are neodymium (Nd) and europium (Eu). Ap stars have
effective temperatures belonging to B-type stars, but can be as cool as F-type stars.
The effect of magnetic fields can be seen as absorption lines belonging to specific el-
ements in Ap stellar spectra, have been found to vary periodically in strength. The varia-
tions can be different between chemical elements, implying that they are concentrated in
specific regions, or spots, on the stellar surface. Ions are sensible to the magnetic field
lines and therefore gather along these, resulting in the observed inhomogeneities.
2.3.3
λ Bootis Stars
λ Bootis stars are a class of generally metal-weak stars, with a consistently weak magne-
sium (Mg) absorption line. They are mostly of spectral classes corresponding to A-type
stars. They are expected to have normal rotational velocities as compared to normal A
stars and should be on or near the main sequence due to their broad hydrogen lines.
Under-abundances of metals in these stars is thought to be a consequence of accretion
of gases, which consist of the most common light elements and are metal-poor, as cir-
cumstellar disks have been observed in several cases.
10
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:19==
2.3.4
HgMn Stars
Mercury-manganese stars, or HgMn stars, are late B-type stars (spectral types B7 to B9)
with exceptionally strong absorption lines related to Hg II and Mn II. These are found in
the blue-violet region of the visible spectrum. Studies of their peculiarities have shown
similarities with those of Am stars, especially hot ones with early A-type hydrogen lines.
HgMn stars are also found in binary systems, with an estimated binary incidence of up to
67%.
2.4
Stellar Oscillations
As has been mentioned before, the observable light from stars is emitted at their surface
and carries little information about the interior conditions. So far, stars have been de-
scribed as generally invariant, except for the different evolutionary stages they go through,
over long time-scales (millions to billions of years). However, the light from stars has been
observed to vary in intensity over time. Time series showing the measured flux from the
star as a function of time, or simply lightcurves, have enabled discoveries of different types
of variability. Extrinsic variability is photometric variability unrelated to the star’s own prop-
erties. An example of this are periodic variations in light intensity induced by eclipses in
some binary systems. Intrinsic variability originates from the star itself. Variations in size
cause brightness changes, also referred to as pulsations or oscillations [25]. In relation
to stellar oscillations, the discipline of asteroseismology has emerged. It deals with the
determination of stellar interior structures from their oscillations, that are used as seismic
waves [25].
2.4.1
Theoretical Overview
Stellar oscillations perturb the physical state of the stars. Under the assumption that
stars are spherical in shape and neglecting rotation and magnetic fields, they can be
described with spherical harmonics [26]. The oscillations can be described through three
wavenumbers:
• l : degree
• m : azimuthal order
• n : radial orders, or overtone
Each unique combination of values for each of these corresponds to a specific oscillation
mode. An example of some modes can be found in Figure 2.3. In stars these are three-
dimensional, although the one-dimensional analogy of a string is helpful in understanding
the terminology. The radial order corresponds to the number of nodes, i.e. points where
the string is not oscillating, on a vibrating string. In the 3D case, these are no longer
points but shells within the star [26]. The degree describes the number of nodal lines
on the surface and the azimuthal order counts the number of these lines that cross the
star’s symmetry axis. Oscillations of degree l = 0 correspond to purely radial modes, i.e.
outward and inward motion of the stellar envelope. The modes shown in Figure 2.3 result
in regions of the star that move inwards (red) and other ones that are displaced outwards
(blue). Because of this, higher degree modes result in more complex, small scale varia-
tions. When observing at large distances as is the case from the Earth, such modes can
be difficult to detect because the flux measured from the point-like star corresponds to the
motion of the entire surface [26].
Oscillation modes are distinguished according to which force restores the star’s equilib-
rium state from these perturbations [26]. Two main forces are considered; pressure and
buoyancy. Pressure modes, or p-modes, are mainly restored from pressure and can be
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
11
==PAGE:20==
found in the stellar envelopes. Gravity modes, also called g-modes, are restored from the
buoyancy force, and occur in the deep interior of stars. The p-modes are found to have
strong radial motions whilst g-modes are horisontal modes. Moreover, modes of different
orders are able to penetrate at different depths in the star, with higher order modes having
only shallow penetration [27]. Identification of different pulsation modes therefore makes
it possible to infer properties of different regions of the stellar interior. Stars that evolve
can host mixed modes, which have p-mode characteristics in the envelope of the star but
behave as g-modes deep inside the star [26].
Figure 2.3:
Example radial components of non-radial oscillation modes for different
wavenumbers. Adapted from [26]. The degree and azimuthal modes (l, m) are given
row by row. Upper row: (1,0), (2,0), (3,0). Bottom row: (1,1), (2,2), (3,3). Blue (red)
regions are moving outwards (inwards).
2.4.2
Pulsation HR Diagram
In this section different classes of pulsating stars are presented. Figure 2.4 is a summary
of all types of pulsators. The red dotted lines represent stellar evolutionary tracks in order
to guide the eye, with the main sequence being shown as a solid red line. It is clear that
stellar oscillations can be found in stars in many stages of their lives, across the entire
HR diagram, although only a subset of these will be considered in this study. A review of
most pulsators can be found in [1].
A and F stars typically have masses in the range 1.2M⊙to 2.5M⊙. Pulsation of such
stars near the main sequence are found in the lower part of the instability strip, which
is shown as black dashed lines. It is a region where numerous types of oscillating stars
are found. The pulsating classes relevant for the study of Am stars are presented in the
following sections, with a quick overview of some key characteristics.
δ-Scuti
stars pulsate in p-modes, with frequencies typically above 4 cycles per day (c/d)
and reaching up to 80 c/d [1]. The oscillations are driven by the κ-mechanism, which oc-
curs in regions of a star where the opacity κ is high. This usually happens when there is at
least partial ionisation of a chemical element, which impedes the transport of energy from
the interior to the surface, ultimately forcing the outer layers to expand in order for the
accumulated energy to be released [25]. This cycle repeats in a valve-like mechanism,
resulting in the observed pulsations. The κ-mechanism is thought to operate in the He II
ionisation layer for δ-Scuti stars.
12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.4: HR diagram showing all classes of pulsating stars. Taken from [1].
δ-Scuti stars are the most common main sequence pulsating class and have diverse
pulsational behaviours [1]. Stars with only a handful of oscillation modes can be found
whereas others pulsate in complex manners with many modes spread over a large range
of observable frequencies. In some cases, stars with very different behaviours have simi-
lar stellar parameters, raising the question of whether an unknown mode selection mech-
anism is at work [1].
A sub-class of δ-Scuti stars are the high amplitude δ-Scuti (HADS) stars, which pulsate
in the radial fundamental (l=0) and first overtone modes [5, 28]. They appear to have
asymmetric lightcurves with high amplitude variations.
γ-Doradus
stars pulsate exclusively in g-modes, which mostly have low frequencies.
Convective flux modulation occurs deep inside the star and drives the g-mode oscillations.
At the base of a convection zone, the flux coming from the core is modulated by the
convective motion, which is thought to generate pulsations in the star [25, 29]. It is similar
to the κ-mechanism in the sense that the opacity at the boundary between the radiative
interior and the base of the convection zone is high. Observations of γ-Dor stars has
enable the study of multiple properties of stellar cores, such as internal rotation, mass
and radius [1].
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
13
==PAGE:22==
roAp
stars are rapidly oscillating Ap stars, a sub-group of the chemically peculiar Ap
stars that pulsate in high radial orders [5]. They enable studies of magnetic fields and
their effect on pulsation [1].
Hybrids
stars pulsate both in p-modes and g-modes, thus having characteristics of both
δ-Scuti and γ-Dor stars [30].
A significant number of stars show this dual behaviour
caused by supposedly two different excitation mechanisms. These stars defied the knowl-
edge of excitation mechanisms and are therefore targets of high interest to study and
understand these pulsations. Theoretical and observational instability strips have been
computed to delimit the region in the HR diagram where δ-Scuti pulsations occur [31],
and likewise for γ-Dor stars [32]. There is a slight overlap between these instability strips,
within which most hybrid stars can be expected to be found.
Am stars
experience diffusion, leading to the sinking of helium and depletion of the
He II ionisation layer. For this reason, Am stars were not expected to pulsate as the κ-
mechanism cannot excite oscillations. However, observations of these have revealed that
stellar oscillations do occur in a significant fraction. Turbulent pressure from the combined
H I and He I ionization layer is believed to contribute to excitation of p-modes [33]. It is
likely present in all δ-Scuti stars, being most prominent for stars with Teff ≈7500K, but
has been proposed as the main mechanism behind Am & Fm pulsations [5].
2.4.3
Asteroseismology
Asteroseismology is the discipline related to modelling the interior of stars using their
identified oscillation modes, much like seismic waves on Earth have enabled a mapping
of its structure. Asteroseismology has enabled accurate calculations of stellar masses and
age [5]. It requires a precise identification of stellar oscillation modes. Detailed reviews of
the methods and applications within asteroseismology can be found [26, 27, 34], although
modelling of stars is beyond the scope of this project. Therefore, no further detail will be
provided on this topic.
2.5
Time Series Analysis
Stars can oscillate in multiple modes and all of these contribute to the global variation
in the stellar brightness over time. These are difficult to identify in the lightcurves, but
can effectively be separated in frequency, as each mode is associated with a specific
frequency and amplitude. The principles of time series analysis will be provided in the
following sections and are based on [34].
2.5.1
Fourier Transform
Periodic variations in a time series can be analysed with Fourier transforms. A periodic
signal is represented with the function shown in Equation 2.5.
v(t) = a0 cos(ω0t −δ0)
(2.5)
a0 is the amplitude of the signal, δ0 is the phase, and ω0 is the angular frequency, which
when divided by 2π yields the oscillation frequency ν0, expressed in cycles per day (c/d)
or micro-Hertz (µHz). The Fourier transform of such a function over an interval of time
[0, T] is shown in Equation 2.6.
V (ω) =
! T
0
v(t)eiωt
(2.6)
14
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.5: Illustration
of the sinc function [34].
Figure 2.6: Example amplitude spectrum generated from sim-
ulated noisy data. The frequencies of oscillation are 0.09 and
0.1 c/d with amplitudes 2 and 3, respectively.
The product of this transform is a spectrum, which describes the frequency content of the
signal. In the considered case, it results in two signals, centered at ν0 and −ν0. Typi-
cally, only the part of the spectrum with positive frequencies is considered, as the two
components are well separated (Tν0 >> 1) and therefore the information is identical both
at positive and negative values. Because the time interval is finite, the terms resulting
from the Fourier transform contain sinc functions, which are defined in Equation 2.7. The
shape of a sinc function is plotted in the frequency domain in Figure 2.5. It consists of a
main peak centered at the frequency ν0 and multiple side lobes of decreasing amplitudes
on both sides.
sinc(x) = sin(x)
x
(2.7)
In the case of stellar oscillations, it is assumed that the time series consists of a linear
combination of periodic signals like the one in Equation 2.5. The Fourier transform of such
a time series would result in a spectrum containing multiple peaks at the frequencies of
oscillation. They can be expected to have similar shapes as shown in Figure 2.5, although
additional processes such as noise, variations in amplitude and aliasing, affect the peaks.
2.5.2
Amplitude Spectra
When analysing pulsation peaks, the amplitude spectrum |V (ω)| is most commonly con-
sidered. Figure 2.6 shows one such spectrum. It was computed from a synthetic lightcurve
consisting of two sine functions with two oscillation frequencies at 0.09 and 0.1 cycles per
day. White Gaussian noise was added to the signal to illustrate the expected effect in real
data. The simulated oscillations have amplitudes of 2 and 3 respectively for the lower
and higher frequency. The noise contributes to the spectrum with a random oscillation at
all frequencies, which can result in suppression or increase of the amplitude. As can be
seen in Figure 2.6, the amplitude of the two peaks does not correspond exactly to their
true values. Because noise is random, the effect is reduced compared to the contribution
from stellar oscillations, resulting in higher signal-to-noise ratios (S/N) for longer observa-
tions.
The shape of the spectrum depends strongly on the sampling frequency of the data.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
15
==PAGE:24==
Lightcurves consist of data points that result from the integration of the stellar flux over a
certain amount of time and are therefore not continuous functions. The oscillations from
the star are therefore sampled at a specific frequency fs. The Nyquist frequency is de-
fined as the highest frequency that can be resolved unambiguously, and can be found in
Equation 2.8.
Nf = fs
2
(2.8)
The frequency range of the amplitude spectrum is therefore limited up until the Nyquist fre-
quency. Higher frequencies present in a signal that is sampled at fs experience aliasing,
distorting the spectrum with artificial peaks, called aliases, spaced periodically at harmon-
ics of the original frequency and affecting the region below the Nyquist frequency [35]. In
order to study δ-Scuti pulsating stars, which most commonly pulsate up to 80 c/d, a high
Nf is therefore required.
 
When observing targets, whether it be from space or on Earth, data cannot be acquired
continuously due to orbits and target selection criteria in large surveys. This introduces
gaps in the time series, which cause aliasing in the amplitude spectrum. An example is
shown in Figure 2.7. The graph is centered around an oscillation frequency, which now
consists of multiple alias peaks of decreasing amplitudes. The effect is more prominent
for larger gaps, but is reduced when combining more data. It is seen from this figure that
aliasing can complicate the identification of the exact frequency of pulsation.
Figure 2.7: Example of effect of aliasing in amplitude spectrum as a consequence of large
data gaps. A single peak contains multiple alias peaks which complicates the identifica-
tion. The difference between two peaks indicates a data gap of roughly 1 year.
16
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:25==
Other important properties of the spectrum are the frequency resolution of the spectrum,
δν, and the smallest frequency difference between two resolvable peaks, which depend
on the length of the observation T, as seen in Equation 2.9.
δω ≈2π
T , δν ≈1
T
(2.9)
A theoretical minimum frequency separation can be derived based on the duration of
observation T, corresponding to the smallest frequency difference between two resolvable
peaks. It is provided in Equation 2.10 and essentially corresponds to twice the peak width
δω in Equation 2.9.
δν = 12
T
(2.10)
To illustrate these principles, artificial lightcurves of different lengths were generated. In
Figure 2.6, the time series was simulated for 10000 seconds. A shorter simulation of
1000 seconds was also carried out to illustrate the effect on the computed spectrum. The
figure can be found in section A.1. The consequence is exactly that reflected by the above
equations: the width of the peaks is increased and the frequency resolution is poorer for
shorter times T. Because certain peaks can be quite wide if the oscillations are recorded
for a relatively short period of time and the amplitudes between different modes may vary
significantly, resolving peaks may prove impossible. If a star contains two modes with
frequencies very close to each other, one mode may end up completely or partially hiding
the signal of the second mode in the spectrum if its amplitude is considerably larger.
This is due to the fact that side-lobes of the large-amplitude pulsation also scale with
the amplitude of the oscillation, and may therefore overshadow the second peak. It was
reproduced by simulating a signal with two oscillations with frequencies at 0.1 and 0.95
c/d and amplitudes of 5 and 1, respectively. The spectrum can be found in section A.1.
2.5.3
Mode Identification
In order to characterise stellar oscillations, it is important to identify the pulsation modes
present in the spectrum. This can prove challenging, as δ-Scuti stars have rich, highly
variable pulsation spectra from one star to another. These oscillation frequencies can be
of weak amplitude, making it difficult to systematically look for modes [36]. High order
g-modes often are very closely spaced in frequency and therefore need long time series
of at least 90 days to be resolved in γ-Dor [1]. Despite this, some important principles
enable the study of stellar oscillations in a first approach, and are presented below.
Asymptotic Relations
Some fundamental properties have been derived for p-modes and g-modes. Firstly, for
increasing orders n of a p-mode, the frequencies increase. On the contrary, the g-modes
decrease in frequency for increasing order [27]. In the asymptotic regime, i.e. for high
orders of a certain pulsation degree, pressure modes are spaced equally in their frequen-
cies. The distance between successive orders is called the large frequency separation. It
can be used to infer the mass of the star [27]. In the asymptotic regime of g-modes, these
are spaced equally according to the periods. It allows to study the region near the core,
if there is a long enough sequence of g-mode overtones [1].
Combination Frequencies and Harmonics
When identifying oscillation modes, the aim is to determine which peaks in a spectrum
are independent and hence truly associated with pulsation. Some peaks are combina-
tion frequencies, which can be written as a linear combination of observed independent
frequencies fi in Equation 2.11.
fc =
"
cifi
(2.11)
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
17
==PAGE:26==
ci can be a positive or negative integer. The combination order, O is given by the sum of
the values of each constant, as shown in Equation 2.12 [37].
Oj =
"
i̸=j
|ci|
(2.12)
Independent frequencies have order 0, indistinguishable frequencies have order 1 and
combination frequencies have order 2 or greater. Harmonics are a subset of the latter, as
they are located at multiples of a single frequency and thus only have one constant c > 0.
These originate from non-sinusoidal variations [37] and are common in eclipsing binary
systems, where the majority of the photometric variation is expected to be due to orbital
motion. Other combination frequencies are believed to come from interference between
the independent oscillations in the star. Resonance between two modes can produce an
artificial signal in the spectrum [38]. Any of these described peaks are not independent
and should not be considered when characterising pulsation [37].
Rotational Multiplets
Stars are known to be able to rotate, with a wide variety of possible rotational velocities.
In the context of stellar oscillations, rotating stars will depart from spherical symmetry and
non-radial oscillations will split into multiplets. The splitting depends on the degree of the
mode, such that the multiplet will consist of 2l + 1 frequencies [39]. Each peak belongs
to the same pulsation mode, and should thus not be identified as independent oscillation
frequencies.
2.6
Summary
In this chapter, a review of all the key theoretical concepts relevant for the understanding
of the project was given. This included firstly the definition of key stellar parameters and
spectral classes, the description of stellar evolution and introduction of the HR diagram.
Additionally, an introduction to chemically peculiar stars was given. Moreover, the basics
of stellar oscillations, from the physical understanding of these to the overview of current
observational knowledge of pulsating A & F stars were provided. Finally, the primary tools
and related challenges for analysing stellar oscillations were introduced.
18
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:27==
3
Data
This chapter is dedicated to presenting the data that will be used for studying stellar os-
cillations in Am and Fm stars. It involves data from TESS and Gaia, as well as a catalog
of chemically peculiar stars from which the sample of Am stars is built.
3.1
Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS)
Earth-based observations are highly limited in quality due to the long temporal gaps in-
duced by the day-night cycle, as well as the influence of the atmosphere. Consequently,
space-born telescopes have revolutionised the study of stellar oscillations and asteroseis-
mology and continue to provide valuable data [1]. The Transiting Exoplant Survey Satellite
(TESS) is a satellite aimed at detecting exoplanet transits in nearby stars. Seen as the
next mission for exoplanet research after the Kepler satellite, it was designed to observe
bright stars that would enable follow-up characterisations of the discovered exoplanets
and was launched in 2017 by NASA [2].
3.1.1
Satellite Characteristics
TESS is located in a highly elliptical orbit with a period of 13.7 days to allow for long,
uninterrupted observations and efficient data transfer conditions. Four identical cameras
are mounted on the satellite, each observing different parts of the night sky. They have a
field of view 24 x 24 degrees, resulting in a combined wide field of view of 24 x 96 degrees.
The band pass filter used for TESS is plotted in Figure 3.1. It was designed to be most
sensible in the red region of the visible spectrum, in order to study stars in the spectral
range F5-M5, which are believed to be ideal targets for exoplanet studies [2].
Figure 3.1: TESS spectral response, from [2].
The primary objective was to carry out an all-sky survey of bright stars over 2 years of
nominal mission. Both hemispheres were divided into 13 sectors, each of which are ob-
served for 27.4 days (corresponding to two full orbits). The observing pattern, shown
in Figure 3.2, results in gradual sector overlap towards the ecliptic poles, which are ob-
served for longer duration over the 2 year period [2]. Since the end of the nominal mission
in 2019, TESS has continued the sky survey, having to date fulfilled 58 sectors.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.2: a) Combined field of view of TESS. b) Illustration of the TESS observing
pattern. c) Estimated duration of observation of the different portions of the night sky.
Taken from [2].
TESS was planned to observe in two different modes. Full frame images (FFI) are ob-
tained with a cadence of 30 minutes. Additionally, flux measurements are recorded for a
list of 200.000 stars at a cadence of one measurement every 2 minutes. The latter results
in a Nyquist frequency of 360 c/d which, combined with the high photometric precision of
TESS [2], enables reliable studies of δ-Scuti stars, including high-order pulsations [40].
3.1.2
Mikulski Archive for Space Telescopes (MAST)
The data obtained with TESS is accessible through the Barbara A. Mikulski Archive for
Space Telescopes (MAST). The data archive contains TESS FFI, and 2-minute cadence
lightcurves. Each file corresponds to observations during one TESS sector (≈27 days).
Multiple files are produced for targets that have been observed in different sectors. The
lightcurves are generated by the TESS Signal Processing Operations Center (SPOC) us-
ing simple aperture photometry (SAP). The flux is determined by summing the individual
values from pixels within an aperture which is chosen to ensure high signal-to-noise ratios
for each star [41].
An example light-curve is shown in Figure 3.3. The flux has been normalised and the
time is given in barycentric Julian days, which corresponds to the Julian Date corrected
for Earth’s motion in the Solar System (which introduces a time delay). This target has
been observed for two successive sectors and data from both of these is shown. Multiple
gaps can be seen in the lightcurve. Most of these appear periodically and are dedicated
to data transmission to Earth, which happens once per orbit. The first gap is larger and is
of different origin. From the above time series, an amplitude spectrum can be computed
and is shown in Figure 3.4. Only the frequency range 0-50 c/d is displayed to facilitate
interpretation, although the entire spectrum goes up to 360 c/d. The amplitude is given in
parts per thousand (ppt). It is near 0 for most of the spectrum with small variations due
to noise contributions, indicating that no oscillations at these frequencies are present in
the star. This is also the case above 50 c/d. At low frequencies and in the region around
12 c/d, the amplitude is significantly higher. As has been explained previously, data gaps
contribute artificially to the spectrum. The interruptions during each orbit, occurring with a
period of 13.7 days, are expected to produce a signal around 0.07 c/d, making the inter-
pretation of low frequencies difficult unless multiple sectors are combined to create long
time series. On the other hand, the frequency peaks at 12 c/d can be interpreted as stel-
lar oscillations. This example illustrates some of the contributions to be aware of when
20
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3: Example TESS lightcurve for two sectors.
Figure 3.4: Example TESS amplitude spectrum obtained from the time series in Fig-
ure 3.3.
analysing spectra.
3.1.3
TESS Input Catalog (TIC)
For large-scale surveys such as the one carried out by TESS, a catalog of the observed
stars is needed for efficient information retrieval. The TESS Input Catalog (TIC) fulfills this
demand. It contains coordinates and stellar parameters for all stars for which lightcurves
have been produced [42]. All stars in the catalog are assigned a unique identification,
referred to as the TIC number. Example of parameters provided in the TIC are:
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
21
==PAGE:30==
• TESS TIC number, an identifier given for each observed star
• Right ascension and declination
• TESS effective temperature
• TESS apparent magnitude
• Cross-matches with other databases, such as the Gaia, KIC and TYC identifiers
The effective temperature provided can either originate from spectroscopic measure-
ments in literature, of from empirical relations used to derive a value for TESS targets that
do not have a good temperature estimate [42]. For validation of the estimation process,
the photometric estimations of temperature from TESS are compared to those provided
in the LAMOST spectroscopic survey. The results can be found in Figure 3.5, for stars
outside the galactic plane and those within 15deg of the galactic plane. The latter shows
larger disagreement with the LAMOST estimates, likely due to high extinction in that re-
gion. The values seem to agree for low effective temperature stars, which are the primary
targets for the TESS mission [42], although the TESS effective temperatures seem to be
slightly lower than LAMOST values for stars above 7000K.
Figure 3.5: Comparison between photometrically derived TESS effective temperatures
and those of the LAMOST spectroscopic survey, from [42].
Because of the large field of view for each camera mounted on TESS, it may occur that
the light from the target is contaminated by a nearby star in the sky. A contamination
value is associated with each target in the TIC, describing the fraction of contaminated
flux present in the aperture for the target [42].
The TESS Asteroseismic Science Operations Center (TASOC) is a data centre hosted by
the TESS Asteroseismic Science Consortium (TASC) at Aarhus University, in Denmark.
It is dedicated to the asteroseismic study of the stars observed with TESS. Dedicated data
processing pipelines for lightcurve have been processed for a handful of TESS sectors.
Importantly, TASOC provides a simple interface to query the input catalog an retrieve
valuable information for the targets of interest.
3.2
Gaia Astrometry
In many astronomical disciplines, precise knowledge of the position of celestial objects
is crucial to perform any data analysis. Astrometry is the study of stellar positions and
motions. One of the major tasks is the determination of stellar parallaxes, which is often
used for distance calculations.
22
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:31==
3.2.1
Satellite Characteristics
Gaia is an initiative from the European Space Agency (ESA) to study the structure and dy-
namics of the Milky Way [43]. The aim of this satellite is to measure the three-dimensional
positions and velocities of a large amount of stars, as well as determine their astrophysical
parameters and potential variability. Gaia was launched in 2013 and has since observed
over a billion stars in our Galaxy, revolutionising the quality and quantity of astrometric
data. It consists of three instruments [44]:
• Astrometric instrument
• Blue and Red Photometers (BP/RP)
• Radial Velocity Spectrometer (RVS)
The astrometric instrument will provide broadband observations in the entire visible range,
from 350 nm to 1000 nm. It will among other things provide Gaia magnitudes G and
parallax estimates for all observed stars. The BP and RP provide low-resolution spectra
with the BP being sensitive in the blue region of the spectrum, from 330 to 680 nm, and the
RP being sensitive in the red region, 640-1000 nm. Finally, the RVS will measure radial
velocities from light in the wavelength range 847-874 nm. A summary of the wavelength
ranges can be found in Figure 3.6. Gaia operates as a full-sky survey, observing all stars
brighter than the limiting magnitude of the satellite, corresponding to G = 20. Therefore,
data from Gaia is ideal for large surveys as the targets are not biased by selection [45].
Figure 3.6: Sensitivity of the different instruments. The Gaia G-band is shown in black,
the BP in blue, the RP in red, and the RVS in green. From [44].
3.2.2
Gaia Archive
All data from the satellite is made available in the Gaia Archive, which is an online database.
Earlier last year, the Gaia Data Release 3 (DR3) was made available to the public [3]. It
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
23
==PAGE:32==
contains data from the first 3 years of observations and provides access to a wealth of
data products through different tables, which will be discussed in the following sections.
A summary of the data release can be found in Table 3.1.
Data Product
Number of Sources
Total stars
1 811 709 771
6-parameter astrometry
585 416 709
  5-parameter astrometry
882 328 109
2-parameter astrometry
343 964 953
G-band
1 806 254 432
BP/RP spectra
219 197 643
RVS spectra
999 645
Variability
10 509 536
Non-single stars
813 687
Table 3.1: Summary statistics of Gaia DR3, from [3].
3.2.3
Astrophysical Parameters Inference System (Apsis)
The Gaia Data Processing and Analysis Consortium derives a wide variety of parameters
for targets stars using their Astrophysical Parameters Inference System (Apsis) [46]. It
contains several modules, which operate under different assumptions and produce esti-
mates for certain parameters. Some operate on subsets of the observed targets, and their
respective coverage in the HR diagram can be found in Figure 3.7. As can be seen in the
figure, these regions overlap, implying that Apsis can assign multiple values for a single
target. An overview of the estimated parameters is provided in Table 3.2. The following
sections are dedicated to presenting the modules that are relevant for the study of Am
stars.
Figure 3.7: Coverage of all Gaia modules, from [46].
24
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:33==
Parameter
GSP-Phot
GSP-Spec
MSC
ESP-HS
FLAME
Teff
X
X
X
X
log g
X
X
X
X
Abs. magnitude MG
X
X
Distance
X
X
Extinction
X
X
X
Luminosity
X
Metallicity [M/H]
X
X
X
Chemical Abundances
X
Table 3.2: Summary of derived stellar parameters in the Apsis modules.
General Stellar Parametrizers (GSP Phot/Spec)
Apsis contains two General Stellar Parametrizers (GSP) modules, for which a detailed de-
scription can be found in [46]. The photometric module (GSP-Phot) uses BP/RP spectra,
G-band magnitude and estimated parallax to estimate stellar parameters. The spectro-
scopic module (GSP-Spec) solely uses RVS spectra for estimations of certain parameters.
GSP-Phot has the widest application range, as seen in Figure 3.7, and determines val-
ues for most stellar parameters in Table 3.2. It provides the best homogeneous sample
of Gaia stellar parameters as a consequence [45].
Final Luminosity Age Mass Estimator (FLAME)
Luminosity, mass, radius and age of the target stars are computed based on inputs from
the GSP modules presented above, such as effective temperature and surface gravity
[46]. This is carried out by the FLAME module. It assumes solar metallicity when deter-
mining the stellar age.
Multiple Star Classifier (MSC)
In the above-mentioned estimations, the target was assumed to be a single star. In the
case of binarity, however, contributions from the companion are not taken into consider-
ation. This can affect the effective temperature considerably. The Multiple Star Classifier
(MSC) computes stellar parameters under the assumption of unresolved binarity, thus
returning one effective temperature measure for each star [46].
The Extended Stellar Parametrizer for Hot Stars (ESP-HS)
The Extended Stellar Parametrizer for Hot Stars (ESP-HS) infers the same stellar param-
eters for stars with effective temperatures greater than 7500K from both BP/RP and RVS
spectra, using other assumptions [47]. Solar composition is assumed. It is mostly tailored
towards O and B type stars, where the estimates from ESP-HS differ most significantly
from GSP-Phot [46].
3.2.4
Uncertainties
For all astrophysical parameters estimated through Apsis, the uncertainties are provided
as lower and upper confidence values in the Gaia Archive, representing a 68% confidence
interval [46]. However, these have a tendency to be underestimated for certain parame-
ters. For example, the effective temperature has unrealistically low uncertainties, of the
order of a few K, for photometric estimations such as those from GSP-Phot. Comparisons
with other catalogs result in a median absolute error of 110K, which is recommended in-
stead. Similarly, a recommended uncertainty of 0.2 dex is given for the surface gravity
values [45]. The values themselves seem to agree with literature, with best performance
noted for stars brighter than magnitude G = 16. On the other hand, it appears that the
log g values are slightly overestimated for main sequence stars. GSP-Spec does not com-
pute parameters for as many stars as GSP-Phot and analyses light emitted at different
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
25
==PAGE:34==
frequencies. Comparing the two modules is therefore difficult and may instead be use-
ful to complement each other, although the effective temperatures seem to agree for the
most [45].
 
The luminosity estimates provided by FLAME seem to agree with other estimates of the
same targets found in literature, with a slight tendency to over-estimate [45]. A dispersion
of roughly 6% is identified for the values. The ESP-HS module operating on hot stars
is suspected of underestimating the stellar parameters. The uncertainties increase with
temperatures and reach 300 K in A-type stars [45]. The Multiple Source Classifier’s perfor-
mance assessment on binary stars is less clear, with analysis of some data showing it has
similar or slightly better performance than GSP-Phot regarding effective temperatures. In
general, it is recommended to use the values of stars in binary systems cautiously [45].
3.2.5
Additional Tables
Aside from stellar parameters, some additional data products are of interest for charac-
terisation of Am stars. These are presented in this section.
Non-single Stars
Along with stellar parameter estimation, the data was also analysed for characterisation
of binary systems. In Gaia DR3, a small fraction of the binaries in the Gaia catalog was
analysed [48]. Four tables are provided and are listed below.
• Two Body Orbit: Contains parameters for two-body orbital solutions
• Acceleration Solutions: Provides acceleration information for stars with non-linear
proper motion
• Non-linear Spectroscopic Binaries: Contains information about trends in spectro-
scopic binaries
• Variability Induced Mover: Delivers solutions for photometrically variable binary sys-
tems
The first table contains solutions for spectroscopic, eclipsing binaries and astrometric bi-
naries and has enabled discoveries of many systems of the latter type [48]. Some selec-
tion criteria were introduced during the data analysis, a detailed description of this being
available in [48]. For studies of spectroscopic binaries, a minimal number of 10 transits is
required. Moreover, the allowed effective temperature range is 3875 - 8215 K. Goodness
of fit requirements are also imposed to remove spurious solutions.
External Tables
The Gaia archive also provides catalogs for the observed stars with estimations that do not
originate from the Apsis modules. An example of this are alternative distance estimates
using Bayesian probabilistic inversion [49]. These can be particularly useful for stars
where the parallax is poorly estimated, and the distance cannot be inferred from it directly.
3.3
Renson Catalog
The Renson catalog gathers information for more that 8000 chemically peculiar stars [6].
It is accessible through the Centre de Données astronomiques de Strasbourg (CDS). An
excerpt of the catalogue can be found in Table 3.3, where each row represents an en-
try for a star, providing its running number (Rsn), coordinates, spectral type, magnitudes
V and y for Johnson and Strömgren systems, and corresponding colour indices. Some
additional notes are provided in the last column, which may include information about for
example magnetic fields and variability [6]. The data provided in the tables are weighted
means of the values compiled from literature. In this table, two identifiers are provided
26
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:35==
for each target, the HD and Tycho (TYC) numbers, although others are available. The
Renson catalog contains 3652 Ap stars, 4299 Am and 162 HgMn stars. Known Fm and
ρ-Puppis stars are included in the Am category. Likewise, Bp stars are also marked as
Ap. λ-Boo stars are not included as their peculiarities originate from accretion.
The spectral class of each star, either Ap, HgMn or Am, is given in the fifth column. For
rapid identification, Am stars are given two classes according to their standard notation,
which are separated by a dash (-). In some cases, the second spectral class is not iden-
tified, and the dash is therefore followed by a blank space. The term Mn Hg is added at
the end of the column for HgMn stars. Ap stars are assigned a single spectral type and
the symbol of the chemical element that is most clearly over-abundant. Confidence esti-
mates regarding the assigned peculiarity are provided for some stars in the fourth column
of Table 3.3, they can be:
/ if the classification is wrong
? if the classification is uncertain
* if the classification is confirmed
The Renson catalog provides the longest list of Am stars to date. It can be used to create
a large sample of Am stars for statistical studies of oscillations in these stars.
3.4
Summary
In this chapter, the data relevant for analysing stellar oscillations in Am stars was pre-
sented. The Renson catalog provides the largest sample of chemically peculiar stars,
specifically Am and Fm stars. Lightcurves for these stars are obtained from the TESS
satellite, from which amplitude spectra will be computed in order to determine the exis-
tence and nature of the oscillations. The Gaia mission provides data for an unprecedented
amount of stars and the derived stellar parameters can be used to complement the anal-
ysis.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
27
==PAGE:36==
Rns
Ra
Dec
Sp
HD
TYC
V
B-V
U-B
b-y
m1
c1
β
Notes
4770
45.95
1.64
?
A7-A9
51-501-1
10.4
0.20
0.20
0.11
0.20
1.01
2.87
4710
45.04
2.17
A1 Cr Eu Sr
18806
55-541-1
9.1
0.06
-0.11
0.05
0.18
0.70
2.78
V P
4820
46.64
2.94
?
A2 Cr Eu
58-1131-1
11.5
0.09
-0.02
0.03
0.21
0.84
2.88
N
4470
42.97
2.91
?
A4 Sr Cr Eu
17835
51-146-1
9.0
0.24
0.17
0.16
0.17
0.96
2.84
D B
4550
44.03
3.20
?
A5-F2
51-1499-1
9.9
0.39
0.17
0.26
0.19
0.71
2.75
4660
44.89
3.52
A1-F0
18597
51-832-1
8.6
V B
4230
40.34
4.43
A1-F2
16763
50-615-1
7.0
0.27
D
5520
53.15
9.37
*
B8 Mn Hg
21933
650-1470-1
5.8
-0.08
-0.29
-0.03
0.12
0.74
2.79
N B R
4940
48.23
11.13
A0-
19963
651-777-1
8.0
0.30
4320
41.24
10.11
?
F0-F2
17094
4.5
0.31
0.08
0.19
0.19
0.76
2.75
NDA B R C
Table 3.3: Excerpt of the Renson catalog of Ap, Am and HgMn stars.
28
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:37==
4
Methods
This chapter presents the various methods used for creating the Am and Fm star data
set and characterising their pulsations. This project begins with a sample of over 4000
Am stars from the Renson catalog before any filtering has been applied. Due to the large
amount of stars considered and the even greater amount of data involved, most steps
needs to be automated to some degree and considerations must be made to facilitate this.
A schematic overview of the data acquisition and preparation is provided in Figure 4.1.
It is worth mentioning that unless stated otherwise, the code required to complete the
various tasks was written in Python 3.8.
Figure 4.1: Overview of the data acquisition process. Details regarding these steps are
provided in section 4.1 and section 4.2.
4.1
Am Sample Selection
The starting point for the creation of an data set of Am/Fm stars is the Renson catalog.
From it, all Am stars are identified by the dash present in their spectral type, and their coor-
dinates are retrieved. A quick investigation of the resulting table showed that no common
identifier is available in the Renson catalog. When working with many targets, it is most
convenient that all stars have a single system to refer to these. Not having this leads
to complications when handling large amounts of data, especially when cross-matching
needs to be done, either locally or with online databases such as MAST and the Gaia
Archive. The TIC numbers constitute the optimal system to keep track of all stars, as
they provide most flexibility. Indeed, the TESS Input Catalog can be used to search for
information on Am stars in multiple databases, such as MAST, TASOC and Simbad.
 
A positional cross-match is carried out with the coordinates obtained from the Renson
catalog, by querying MAST for sources at the corresponding right ascensions and dec-
lination for all stars. A narrow search radius of 5 arcseconds is used. When multiple
IDs are returned from the positional search, information for these is sought in the TASOC
database. All but one number are labelled as artifacts or duplicates and appear to have
significantly lower TESS magnitudes. These can thus be discarded and one final number
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
29
==PAGE:38==
is retained. Similarly, data download from the Gaia Archive is most efficient when using
the Gaia ID. Using the coordinates from the Renson catalog, another positional cross-
match was carried out, in order to retrieve the Gaia DR3 IDs.
 
When constructing both the TIC and Gaia target lists, some stars did not return any re-
sults, and were thus removed from the Am sample. One final filtering step was to consider
the amount of data available from the Gaia Archive for each target. Certain modules of
the Apsis pipeline only process stars that meet certain conditions (see subsection 3.2.2).
For completeness, targets for which no full parameter characterisation could be retrieved
were removed from the sample. This excludes stars that do not have values for effective
temperature, distance, absolute magnitude and log g from GSP-Phot, as well as luminos-
ity from FLAME.
4.2
Data Acquisition and Processing
Once the final target list is defined, data can be retrieved from the different databases. The
Gaia Archive allows for bulk downloads from its numerous tables through with commands
that are provided online. A pipeline was developed in order to retrieve astrophysical pa-
rameters for the target Am stars. TESS 2s cadence lightcurves for all the selected targets
are downloaded from the MAST archive. The processing steps of these time series is
discussed in the sections below.
4.2.1
Lightkurve
Lightkurve is a community-developed Python tool designed for analysing photometric data
from Kepler and TESS satellites [50]. The package makes use of astropy [51, 52, 53] and
astroquery [54]. It allows for download of data directly from MAST and was used to retrieve
lightcurves for stars in the Am target list. In some rare cases, only full-frame images were
available. Thus, stars with no time series data were excluded from the target list.
 
As MAST provides one file for each sector where a target is observed. These were all
downloaded and combined to produce a single, longer time series for each star to improve
the quality of the computed amplitude spectra. Lightcurves are then normalised for each
star, so that they are shown on the same scale and comparisons can be made. The zero-
point of all sectors is set to the same value. The mean flux is computed for each of these
and removed from all data points to shift all sectors towards a mean value of 0. The flux
is normalised and given in units of parts per thousand (ppt).
4.2.2
Lomb-Scargle Periodogram
The next step in the analysis of Am star pulsations is to compute the amplitude spectra
from the downloaded lightcurves. To this effect, the Lomb-Scargle periodogram, which is
part of the Fourier methods family, is used [55]. It assumes uncorrelated white noise, and
is directly implemented in Lightkurve. A periodogram is computed for all stars based on
the combined time series of all sectors. The frequency is given in cycles per day and the
amplitude in parts per thousand.
4.3
Am Classification
Having acquired the relevant data for studying stellar oscillations in Am stars, it is now
possible to proceed to the identification of which stars pulsate and thus which require
extraction of frequencies for a more detailed analysis. This is done through a classification
of variability involving different steps and iterations. A summary of the used pipeline is
given in Figure 4.2.
30
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.2: Overview of the Am star classification process based on their amplitude spec-
tra. The first two steps correspond to the S/N filtering stages to eliminate truly variable
stars. The last step corresponds to the classification based on the shape of the spectrum,
the lightcurve and on contamination analysis.
4.3.1
Variability Determination
Firstly, the aim is to isolate the variable stars from the constant ones. The simplest way to
determine variability is to identify significant frequencies in the amplitude spectrum. It is
important here to not confuse true peaks, those related to pulsation, with spurious ones
that can occur from noise. The identification is based on the amplitude of the peak in
contrast to the background noise. For reliable detection and qualitative assessments, a
signal-to-noise ratio of S/N ≥4 is very commonly used [56].
To quantify the noise, a region of the spectrum devoid of pulsation peaks is preferable.
This is because the power from a pulsation can be spread over a range of frequencies
near the true frequency due to various effects discussed in section 2.5. Moreover, the
process should ideally be automated to allow for efficient processing of the many stars
present in the target list. Upon quick visual inspection of a handful of spectra, it is clear
that very few, if any, frequency peaks are expected to show up in the range 250-360 c/d
for all stars. This region is thus suited to determine a mean value for the noise in each
star’s amplitude spectrum. From this, a target is classified as variable if the frequency
with highest amplitude in the spectrum has S/N ≥4.
Based on this first iteration, all the constant stars were filtered out. A visual inspection
to validate the results showed many sources for which the spectrum contained signatures
that do not originate from pulsations, but still achieve a S/N greater than 4. Possible
explanations can be features introduced from gaps in data or contamination from other
sources. Some examples are shown in Figure 4.3. Constant stars indeed do not show
any distinct features in their amplitude spectra, while marginal variable stars have peaks
that satisfy the S/N criterion. However, in Figure 4.3b these signals are not due to intrinsic
variation from the star. Instead, such a signature matches the expected consequences of
large data gaps between sectors. The lightcurve for the displayed marginal variable star
does confirm this. It can be found in section A.2.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) Amplitude spectrum of a star classified as constant. No distinct signatures are visible.
(b) Amplitude spectrum of a star classified as marginally variable. It is not truly variable, although
a strong signal is present at low frequencies, mostly due to large gaps in data or trends in the
lightcurve.
Figure 4.3: Illustration of constant and marginal variable stars.
Consequently, a second filtering stage is necessary to remove these stars with ”marginal”
variability. A more strict S/N criterion of 10 seems to effectively select stars with variable
behaviour in the spectrum in automated pipelines [31]. This indeed removed all marginally
variable stars, with a few truly variable stars being misclassified. Manual verification of
the results helped identify these special cases.
4.3.2
Variability Characterisation
In summary, an automated analysis using the amplitude spectra was carried out in order
to filter out targets that are not suspected to pulsate. The confirmed variability in the
remaining stars is however not necessarily due to stellar oscillations, as variations in the
flux can be caused by a handful of other effects. The following variability classes are
considered:
• Pulsating stars
• Binary systems
• Modulated lightcurves and other variability
The first category is identified from the amplitude spectrum, with pulsations expected to
32
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:41==
be observed at low frequencies if a γ-Dor star is considered or at higher frequencies in
case of δ-Scuti pulsation. Binary systems can in some cases be identified both from the
lightcurve and the amplitude spectrum, depending on the configuration of the orbit. In the
case of eclipsing binaries, the lightcurve shows distinct, sharp dips in flux when one star
transits in front of the second, as in Figure 4.4a. The depth of the eclipses varies from
one star to another and may not be detected if they are too weak. A second indication
of eclipsing binaries can be found in the amplitude spectrum, where the variations induce
a clear structure, visually similar to that of a comb. An example is shown in Figure 4.4b,
where a series of evenly spaced peaks are visible, as a consequence of the non-linear
nature. Binaries with ellipsoidal variation can also be identified by a well-defined pattern
in the lightcurve such as the one in Figure 4.5. The lightcurves have a characteristic,
M-shaped periodic variation [57].
(a) Lightcurve of a star in an eclipsing binary. The eclipses are very clear, with large dips in
brightness during transits.
(b) Amplitude spectrum of a star in an eclipsing binary. Evenly spaced peaks of decreasing am-
plitude define the characteristic comb structure.
Figure 4.4: Characteristics of an eclipsing binary system.
The class of modulated stars includes Am stars for which periodic variations in brightness
are observed in the lightcurve, which is likely due to star spots on the surface. As the
star rotates, the brightness of the star decreases when the spot is on the hemisphere
facing Earth. This results in significant peaks being detected at low frequencies in the
periodogram. There is a risk of confusion between the ellipsoidal variation and the modu-
lation in the lightcurve, as the shape of the variation can look similar. However, because
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
33
==PAGE:42==
modulation is due to rotation, the velocity is physically limited by the break-up velocity of
the star. This translates to an upper limit for the frequency in the spectrum, of roughly 4
c/d. This is not the case of binary systems, and the frequency at which the peak occurs
can help identify the variability type.
Figure 4.5: Lightcurve showing ellipsoidal variability, characteristic of binary systems.
Classification is carried out manually. An important tool to facilitate this process is to
generate a visual catalog of the Am stars. It consists of one page for each star, in which
the following data products are displayed:
• A table containing Gaia astrophysical parameters
• The lightcurve of the star from one TESS sector
• The star’s entire amplitude spectrum, computed from the full time series
• Subdivisions of the amplitude spectrum to improve readability at low frequencies
and in the δ-Scuti pulsation regime
• The amplitude spectrum on logarithmic scale to aid in the detection of excited fre-
quencies
The catalog was inspected and each star was assigned to one of the above-mentioned
classes, over multiple iterations. Because there is no guarantee that non-eclipsing bina-
ries will show ellipsoidal variation, a literature search was carried out in parallel to search
for previously detected binary systems. If photometric variability is seen but binarity can-
not be confirmed, the star is added to the ”modulated and other variability class”. It is
worth noting that stars can be found in more than one category, as two types of variability
can coexist.
Due to the wide field of view of TESS, there is a chance of light contamination from a
nearby source. Consequently, it is possible that stars classified as pulsating in fact do not
pulsate, but rather that a neighbouring star does. Contamination verification is done in
two ways. Firstly, stars with few excited frequencies with extremely small amplitudes (of
the order of 0.01 ppt) are considered to be contaminated. Usually these stars also have
odd peak morphology, where these appear as single vertical lines, similarly to a Dirac,
see Figure 4.6. Such behaviour is not expected to be found in real spectra affected by
noise, and does in fact stand out from the spectra of other confirmed pulsating stars found
in the sample. Secondly, a contamination estimate for all pulsating stars is retrieved from
34
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:43==
TASOC and used to identify potential impostors. These are then looked up in TASOC for
sky images to search for nearby stars. Depending on the magnitude of the Am star and
those near it, the lightcurve of significant targets are obtained from MAST and the ampli-
tude spectrum is computed in Lightkurve. Neighbour stars were required to be of same
magnitude as the Am star or brighter in order to be considered. The spectra were then
compared to verify the presence of identical features. In the case of similarity, the star for
which the excited frequencies have the largest amplitude is considered as the host star.
Contaminated Am stars are removed from the target list.
Figure 4.6: Example amplitude spectrum of a contaminated star, that was perceived as
pulsating in the automated filtering processes. The amplitude of the peaks are small.
4.4
Frequency Analysis
Once the variable stars are detected and classified such that the pulsating Am stars can
be identified, the pulsations can be characterised.
4.4.1
Frequency Extraction
Frequency extraction, or pre-whitening, corresponds to determining the frequencies of
oscillations present in the lightcurve of the star. The Extraction of CoHerent Oscillations
program (ECHO), developed by Aarhus University, was used to perform iterative pre-
whitening [5]. The spectrum is obtained using a fast Lomb-Scargle periodogram tech-
nique, where Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT) are implemented in certain steps of the com-
putation to reduce the order of operations [58].
Frequencies are extracted from the periodogram using iterative sine-wave fitting [59]. The
method works by fitting a Fourier series with frequencies identified from the periodogram
to the time series data in order to determine the phase and amplitude. This is done for
one frequency at a time, starting with the frequency with highest amplitude as determined
from the spectrum. Once a fit is found, the corresponding signal is removed from the
lightcurve and the next frequency is fitted. The outcome of the algorithm is a list of fre-
quencies with associated phases and amplitudes. Because of the risk of large peaks due
to noise contributions rather than stellar oscillations, the statistical significance of each
peak is evaluated in the extraction process according to a false alarm probability [60]. A
power (or correspondingly, an amplitude) level z0 is defined such that false detections of
peaks only occurs in a fixed fraction of cases p0, as shown in Equation 4.1.
z0 = −ln(1 −(1 −p0)
1
N )
(4.1)
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
35
==PAGE:44==
N corresponds to the number of frequencies searched for. The level increases for smaller
values of p0. It is set to 0.0027 in this project to ensure high significance of the retrieved
frequencies. In addition to the assertion of statistical significance, the reliability of the
extracted signal is determined by comparing its amplitude with that in the original signal
before the extracted signal has been removed. This is a necessary step to avoid the intro-
duction of too many artificial signals that are statistically significant [61]. The amplitudes
are required to agree according to the relation given in Equation 4.2 [5].
α < Aextracted
Aoriginal
< 1
α
(4.2)
The value of α is important, as it has an influence on the number of false detections but
also defines the fraction of true peaks extracted from the spectrum. The recommended
deviation of α = 0.75 is kept, although it was tailored to frequency extraction of 4-year
Kepler lightcurves.
The uncertainties for the frequency, amplitude and phase of the extracted signals are
computed based on the following equations from [62].
σ(f) =
#
2
N σ(m)
(4.3)
σ(a) =
#
2
N
σ(m)
a
(4.4)
σ(φ) =
#
6
N
1
πT
σ(m)
a
(4.5)
N is the number of data points, T the total length of observations, a the amplitude and
σ(m) corresponds to the root-mean-square deviation of the magnitude of the star due to
noise. These should only be considered as lower limits for the errors, as they assume
uncorrelated noise and evenly space data points in the time series.
 
The process described above is carried out over multiple iterations to optimise the ex-
tracted values and take into consideration the influence between peaks, by re-injecting
extracted signals in the time series and computing the amplitudes [5]. ECHO was used to
perform frequency extraction for all pulsating Am stars. A maximum of 500 frequencies
was allowed for each star, although this limit was never reached and in principle is set to
allow for extraction of all frequencies present in the spectrum. All peaks are optimised at
each iteration and the process is stopped once 7 consecutive failures occur. Failures can
be due to not meeting the significance or amplitude criteria discussed before, respectively
Equation 4.1 and Equation 4.2. In some rare cases the frequency extraction did not yield
a satisfactory result, despite clear, high-amplitude peaks being present in the amplitude
spectrum. The amplitude criterion was relaxed to circumvent this issue.
4.4.2
Combination Frequencies
Only independent frequencies are of interest in the analysis of stellar oscillations and
potential asteroseismic modelling. Therefore, it is important to assess the existence of
combination frequencies after pre-whitening. We recall from Equation 2.11 that combi-
nation frequencies are linear combinations of other frequencies. The complexity of the
combination frequency is given by the order O, that depends on the coefficients of the
linear combination, as shown in Equation 2.12. With the development of space-borne
telescopes, the high quality data have enabled detection of significantly more indepen-
dent frequencies. On the other hand, the risk of finding combination frequencies and
36
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:45==
therefore the chance of misinterpretation of data has also increased [37]. Correct iden-
tification of combination frequencies and harmonics is an important step to ensure the
validity of the subsequent analysis. Following the recommended practice from [37], only
combination frequencies of order O = 2, thus involving at most two parent frequencies,
are considered in the first place. The argument is that higher order combination frequen-
cies are unlikely to occur if there are no low-order instances. The combination frequency
search was carried using a module from ECHO. The identified peaks are discarded from
any further analysis.
4.4.3
Radial Mode Identification
As mentioned previously, mode identification is a complex task. Most Am stars showing
γ-Dor pulsation have been observed for 3 sectors or less and therefore possess too little
data for mode identification to be carried out. Consequently characterisation of δ-Scuti
pulsation is the main focus from hereon, specifically the radial modes, with degree l = 0.
The aim is to identify the radial fundamental mode for each star, as well as any higher
orders, to determine how many radial orders are excited in each star. The frequency of
these modes depends on the stellar parameters of the star, the effective temperature,
bolometric magnitude, and surface gravity and can be predicted using the pulsation con-
stant Q, as shown in Equation 4.6 [63].
log Q = −6.454 + log P + 0.5 log g + 0.1Mbol + log Teff
(4.6)
Where the bolometric magnitude Mbol = MG +BC is related to the absolute magnitude of
the star, taken from Gaia in this case, and a bolometric correction provided in Equation 4.7
[63].
BC = −8.499 · (log(Teff −4))4 + 13.421 · (log(Teff) −4)3
−8.131 · (log(Teff) −4)2 −3.901 · (log(Teff) −4) −0.438
(4.7)
In Equation 4.6, P corresponds to the period of the pulsation, and is the quantity of interest
as its inverse defines the frequency at which the radial fundamental and higher orders
can be expected for each star. Pulsation constants for low-degree p-modes, including
the radial modes, have been derived for different masses covering the A & F type mass
range [64]. The mean Q values for the radial fundamental mode (l = 0, n = 0) and
subsequent orders n > 0 are given in Table 4.1. Uncertainties are obtained from Monte
Order
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Q
0.033
0.025
0.020
0.017
0.014
0.013
0.011
0.010
Table 4.1: Summary of expected values for the Q constant for different orders of the radial
l = 0 mode, from [64].
Carlo simulations. The errors for each stellar parameter in Equation 4.6 are assumed to
be Gaussian distributed, with mean value corresponding to the ones in Gaia and standard
deviation the recommended uncertainty given in subsection 3.2.4. Over 10.000 iterations,
the probability distributions for the three stellar parameters are sampled and a value for
the Q constant is derived. The final accepted value corresponds to the median of the
simulations, and the associated uncertainty to the standard deviation of all estimates.
4.5
Summary
In this chapter, the methods used for analysing Am stars were presented. The sample
selection based on the Renson catalog, as well as acquisition and processing of data from
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
37
==PAGE:46==
Gaia and TESS were described. The variability classification frequency extraction stages
were then detailed. Finally, the method adopted for computing the radial orders for each
star was introduced.
38
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:47==
5
Results
This chapter is dedicated to presenting the results from the analysis of Am/Fm stars based
on the Renson catalog and the TESS and Gaia satellites.
5.1
Am Catalog
When working with a large sample of stars, it is important to develop simple tools to quickly
and efficiently get an overview of each star. The first outcome of the Am sample creation
and data acquisition was therefore to develop an Am star catalog that compiles all poten-
tially relevant information for each target in a PDF. One page is dedicated to each star,
see below for an example of the layout. The contents chosen for this tool, from top to
bottom, are the following:
• The TIC and Gaia identifiers
• Information on preliminary variability analysis and number of sectors of data
• Gaia astrophysical parameters, with Gaia uncertainties, summarised in a table
• Lightcurve of the star in a single sector
• Full amplitude spectrum of the star
• Amplitude spectrum zoomed between 1-50 c/d and 50-360 c/d
• Amplitude spectrum in logarithmic scale
Only one sector of data is shown for each star to ensure that the variation in the lightcurve
can be seen, as some stars have large gaps between sectors, hence leading to com-
pressed images where no features can be identified. Because amplitudes can vary greatly
and the scale of the y-axis in all graphs is defined automatically by the highest amplitude
found, it is useful to show subsets of the spectrum for improved readability. The range 0-1
c/d is not shown because high amplitude peaks due to data gaps in this area can reach
amplitudes much larger than those of the pulsations. Most stars have pulsation peaks in
the range 1-50 c/d, which therefore was an optimal window to select for identifying pulsa-
tion. Higher frequencies are then gathered in the second window for completeness.
The red dashed line shows the limit of S/N = 4. It is computed for the entire interval
by the means of a sliding window with varying size. Because this limit should be used to
determine the significance of each peak, it needs a reliable estimate of the background
noise in the spectrum nearby. At low frequencies, many peaks are expected to be lo-
cated close together, so a small window is used to avoid the contribution of other peaks.
As the window moves towards larger frequencies, peaks become rarer and the back-
ground noise can be estimated more reliably with a larger window. This line is only used
to guide the eye when visually identifying significant peaks, which is useful to visually val-
idate the automatic variability classification of all the Am stars in the sample. Variability
classification was done by assuming a single value for the noise over the entire spectrum,
computed from the interval 250-350 c/d, where no peaks should be present to affect the
noise estimate.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
39
==PAGE:48==
==PAGE:49==
The pages for each star are generated individually, which allows flexible catalog genera-
tion by compiling only pages of stars of interest. In this way, catalogs of Am stars were
generated for the following categories:
• Constant stars
• Marginally variable stars
• δ-Scuti stars
• γ-Dor stars
• Hybrid stars
• Binary stars
• Modulated stars
• Contaminated stars
These catalogs are one of the major data products of this study and facilitated the anal-
ysis of such a large sample of Am stars, grouping the stars in categories of interest with
important properties and allowing for efficient inspection of these. They were used in the
first place for verification of the automatic variability determination by inspecting the am-
plitude spectra and identifying those with significant peaks. It was through this inspection
that the marginally variable class was defined, and the S/N = 10 significance criterion
was added to identify frequency peaks associated with pulsation. Secondly, the catalogs
were inspected to identify binary systems by looking for ellipsoidal variability or eclipses
in the lightcurves and comb structures in the spectra. Finally, the pulsating stars, filtered
from the binary systems and modulated stars showing no oscillations, were assigned a
class based on the observed peaks in the spectra, and the number of radial orders were
estimated in a slightly modified version of the layout shown above for stars which showed
p-modes pulsations. This last step will be discussed in greater detail in a later section.
 
Stars can appear in multiple catalogs if multiple characteristics are present, for example
p-mode and g-mode pulsations, or pulsational and binary behaviour. Contaminated stars
were also added to the marginally variable catalog, as the Am stars in these cases are con-
stant but appear variable due to a neighbouring star. All catalogs can be inspected on the
GitHub repository: https://github.com/zartalan/MasterThesis_AmStars. In order to avoid
uploading too heavy documents, the catalogs are split in multiple PDFs each containing
50 stars at most. The documents have the same name but are numbered differently.
5.2
Am Statistics
As an introduction to the study of this Am sample, all targets from the Renson catalog
are displayed in galactic coordinates in Figure 5.1. Those selected for further analysis
based on the above selections are highlighted in red. The Kepler field of view is shown
in blue. This illustrates the homogeneous sample of Am stars across the entire night sky
that has been obtained. Compared to Kepler, the TESS satellite allows observations of
considerably more Am stars and presents a unique opportunity to study their properties
in greater detail.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.1: Overview of the distribution of Am stars in galactic coordinates. The galactic
center is located at the edges of the graph.
In this section, some general statistics on the Am stars in the sample are presented based
on the automatic variability determination and inspection of the catalogs. The key values
are presented in Table 5.1, where constant and marginally variable stars are gathered in
the same category ”constant”. This is done because the marginally variable stars are es-
sentially constant, but were flagged as variable originally due to spurious frequencies or
contamination from a neighbouring star. Out of the 4314 Am stars present in the Renson
catalog, 1287 of them, i.e. 30% of them, were found to have 2 second cadence observa-
tions with TESS and full parameter determination from Gaia. The latter selection criterion
resulted in the exclusion of some stars mostly due to the absence of luminosity estima-
tions from the FLAME module. Nevertheless, a sample of 1287 Am stars is sufficient to
TESS & Gaia: 1287
Type
Occurrence
Fraction
Constant
748
60%
Pulsating Am & ρ Puppis
311
24%
Pulsating Am
254
20%
Binary Systems
153
12%
Modulated Lightcurves
77
6%
Table 5.1: Am star sample statistic.
infer some statistical properties of the Am population. It is found that almost one in four
of the considered targets pulsate, precisely 24%. However, the Renson catalog included
ρ-Puppis stars (also referred to as δ-Del stars) in their Am category. If these are not con-
sidered in the sample, as is done in [65], the final fraction of pulsating Am stars therefore
becomes 20%, which is the value provided in Table 5.1. This is slightly higher than what
is found in [65] with a smaller sample size, where only 12% of the sample consists of
pulsating Am stars. Regardless, this shows that a significant number of Am stars are able
42
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:51==
to pulsate.
77 stars were identified as having photometric variation but not clear pulsations, thus
labelled as ”modulated or other variability”. Because this variation is beyond the scope
of this project, no further investigation of the lightcurves to confirm or deny this has been
carried out. The TIC identifiers for these stars are provided in section A.3.
In general, the different classes shown in Table 5.1 were updated iteratively. After the au-
tomatic variability determination, lightcurve contamination analysis of variable stars was
carried out. Stars with a contamination value greater than 0.1 in TASOC were flagged,
and neighbouring stars were identified, also in TASOC. The lightcurves of these stars
were then obtained from MAST and amplitude spectra were generated to check for the
same peaks and compare their amplitudes. In total, 75 stars were considered for this
stage. Most stars were confirmed to be pulsating or were concluded to not be pulsat-
ing at all, and were added to the marginally variable target list. Only 16 stars showed
pulsation characteristics that originated from clear contamination from a neighbour star.
These were also added to the marginally variable stars and are considered as part of the
constant category in the above statistics. Overall few contaminated stars were identified
in the sample using this method.
5.2.1
Binary Incidence
The binary nature of stars was examined from the lightcurves and amplitude spectra for
all variable stars. Eclipsing binaries are easily identified, whilst ellipsoidal variability can
be confused with modulation from star spots. All suspected binary systems showing the
latter behaviour were included in a literature search with the help of TASOC search tools,
in an attempt to validate the binary nature. A target was confirmed to be binary if an
external source also marked it as binary using spectroscopic observations. In this way,
154 binary systems were found. Out of these, 73 are eclipsing binaries, corresponding to
a fraction of 6% from the entire Am sample. These results are summarised in Table 5.2.
 
As described previously, Gaia DR3 provides for the first time information about binary
star systems. The four data tables related to binary stars were investigated for information
related to Am stars. For the small subset of stars cross-matched in these tables, a handful
had radial velocity estimates but most were flagged as not having solutions. In their first
version, these tables therefore do not provide significant additional information for the
analysis of binary incidence in Am stars and are not considered in this study.
Type
Source
Incidence
Total
Eclipsing Binary
Catalog
73
154
Ellipsoidal Variability
Catalog & Literature
81
Table 5.2: Summary of the binary statistics.
5.3
Gaia Parameters
Gaia DR3 provides a wealth of estimates of stellar parameters. This data was investigated
in order to get an understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of the different modules
and thus enrich the analysis of the final results. Most importantly are the luminosity and
effective temperature estimates, required to place the Am stars in the HR diagram.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
43
==PAGE:52==
5.3.1
Selection of Effective Temperature
Effective temperature values from different modules were retrieved from the Gaia Archive.
Some statistics are provided in Table 5.3. Both GSP-Phot and MSC1 modules provide
values for the entire dataset and therefore present the most interesting solutions for an
unbiased survey of Am stars. The two other modules only provide estimates for a sub-
set of Am stars. Nevertheless, the distribution of the effective values from the different
modules are examined to understand the impact on the location of stars in the HR dia-
gram. In Figure 5.2, the histograms from each module are compared to GSP-Phot, which
is considered the flagship module.
Module
GSP-Phot
GSP-Spec
MSC1
ESP-HS
Number of stars
1287
574
1287
376
Table 5.3: Coverage of the different Gaia Apsis modules for the Am sample of 1287 stars.
Figure 5.2: Distribution of effective temperatures for different Apsis modules in Gaia.
GSP-Phot is included in blue in all graphs. Left: comparison with the multiple star classi-
fier. Centre: comparison with ESP-HS. right: comparison with GSP-Spec.
It appears to a first extent Gaussian distributed when considering the entire sample of Am
stars at low temperatures. A second hump around 10000K is however observed, resulting
in a weak bimodal character for the whole distribution. When comparing with the values
from the multiple star classifier, it appears that MSC1 predominantly assigns a discrete set
of temperatures to the targets. This results in an unphysical distribution of temperatures
when compared to GSP-Phot and leads to an HR diagram where stars are agglomerated
along vertical lines, corresponding to the temperatures with high occurrences in the figure.
This shows that although Am stars likely are in binary systems, the assumption of binarity
leads to effective temperatures that are not sensible in this module. In the second and
third graphs of Figure 5.2, only stars which were analysed by both modules are shown.
In these cases, it is clear that both GSP-Spec and ESP-HS modules do not have the
44
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:53==
same amount of hot stars above 8000K as does GSP-Phot. ESP-HS, which is applied to
hot stars only, seems to provide higher effective temperatures when compared to GSP-
Phot, while the distribution of GSP-Spec is similar, albeit with a larger tail towards lower
temperatures. Figure 5.3 shows the effective temperature estimates of both GSP-Phot
and GSP-Spec for each star. Just as can be seen in Figure 5.2, effective temperatures
are within a sensible range of values for A and F stars in GSP-Spec. For cooler stars,
below 8000K, the two modules provide values with less dispersion.
Figure 5.3: Effective temperature from GSP-Spot compared to that obtained from GSP-
Spec for all stars. Below 8000K, generally good agreement between both modules is
observed.
The high Teff provided by GSP-Phot seem unrealistic for A and F type stars, where GSP-
Spec provides more sensible values. However, for consistency, the temperature of all
stars is taken from the GSP-Phot module. This avoids introducing additional, unidentified
biases in the analysis, as might occur when using effective temperatures from GSP-Spec
or ESP-HS for a subset of stars. The ESP-HS module is best suited for estimations of O
and B type stars, and has higher uncertainties than GSP-Phot. Errors of 300K are very
large when placing stars in the HR diagram and reduces the significance of the analysis,
which supports the use of only GSP-Phot effective temperatures.
5.3.2
Validation of FLAME Luminosity
The luminosity obtained from Gaia is either inferred based on the parallax of the star or the
distance computed through GSP-Phot. In the case of poor parallax estimates, the lumi-
nosity has a tendency to be over-estimated. This is likely for fractional uncertainties of the
order of 15-20% [45]. Figure 5.4 shows the fractional uncertainty for the Am stars, which
in the vast majority is below 15%, meaning that there is little chance of over-estimation
due to poor parallaxes.
 
In parallel with the Gaia Early Data Release 3 (EDR3), distances to all stars were esti-
mated using a probabilistic approach, as distance estimates that follow from the simple
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
45
==PAGE:54==
inversion of parallax are poor if the parallax is not precisely known [49]. This made it pos-
sible to verify the distance estimates provided by Gaia by comparing the distance values
for all Am stars. Such a graph can be found in Figure 5.5. The geometric distance is com-
puted from the parallax and prior probability distribution for the distance, which depends
on the direction the star is located in [49]. Overall, there seems to be good agreement
between both method for this sample of stars, so the GSP-Phot distance appear valid for
luminosity determinations.
Figure 5.4: Fractional uncertainties for the parallaxes obtained from Gaia.
Figure 5.5: Comparison of distance obtained from GSP-Phot and a probabilistic approach
as described in [49].
In conclusion, the GSP-Phot stellar parameters are validated for use in the following anal-
ysis of Am stellar oscillations, although some clear limitations should be kept in mind when
interpreting the results.
46
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:55==
5.4
Frequency Analysis
The output of variability determination is a list of 311 Am stars for which pulsation has been
confirmed in the amplitude spectra. In the following section, the frequency extraction and
analysis of obtained data is presented.
5.4.1
Frequency Extraction
Frequencies are extracted with ECHO with identical initialisation parameters. All possi-
ble frequencies are extracted according to the strategy described in section 4.4. In some
cases, this process did not yield satisfactory results, as many significant frequencies iden-
tified from visual inspection of the stars were rejected due to a large deviation. The peak
rejection process was therefore run a second time for roughly 20 stars, with more lenient
criteria. Results are gathered in a table for each star, as can be seen in Table 5.4. Fre-
quencies for all stars can be found in section A.4.
TIC 1038216
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.0
1e-05
0.24
0.003
0.31
0.01
2
1.85
3e-05
0.08
0.003
0.12
0.03
3
1.35
3e-05
0.07
-
1.16
0.04
4
0.23
3e-05
0.07
0.003
2.37
0.04
5
2.37
4e-05
0.05
0.003
2.5
0.06
6
0.42
0.0001
0.03
0.004
1.22
0.14
7
2.94
0.00011
0.03
0.004
0.34
0.15
8
3.1
7e-05
0.03
-
1.78
0.1
9
6.66
8e-05
0.03
-
2.21
0.1
10
2.29
9e-05
0.03
-
0.09
0.12
11
0.59
0.00013
0.02
-
0.67
0.18
12
2.56
0.00011
0.02
-
2.49
0.15
13
4.12
0.00014
0.02
-
1.78
0.18
14
11.73
7e-05
0.02
0.002
1.21
0.09
15
1.0
0.00016
0.02
-
2.54
0.21
16
7.25
0.0001
0.01
-
1.75
0.14
17
3.31
0.00021
0.01
0.004
0.01
0.28
18
3.83
0.00017
0.01
0.003
2.77
0.23
19
4.3
0.00021
0.01
0.003
0.09
0.27
20
10.26
0.00011
0.01
0.002
0.25
0.15
Table 5.4: Extracted frequencies, amplitudes and phases for TIC 1038216, with associ-
ated errors.
5.4.2
Pulsation Incidence
Based on the extracted frequencies, it is possible to determine the type of pulsation of
each Am star. The classification is based on the typical frequency range of γ-Dor and
δ-Scuti stars. High order g-modes are expected to be found below 4 c/d, while p-modes
mostly are found above this value. Hybrid stars shown pulsation peaks in both intervals. A
summary of the pulsation content of the Am star sample is provided in Table 5.5. The vast
majority of stars pulsate in p-modes, with only a small fraction of pure γ-Dor pulsators,
although g-modes are found in half the stars. The stars are placed in the HR diagram and
colour-coded according to the type of pulsation in Figure 5.6.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
47
==PAGE:56==
γ-Dor
δ-Scuti
Hybrids
41
156
117
13%
50%
37%
Table 5.5: Statistics of the pulsation type of Am stars in the sample.
(a) HR diagram containing all Am stars. Constant stars are marked in gray. Binary systems are
symbolised by a star. Pulsating Am stars are colour-coded as follows. γ-Dor: red, δ-Scuti: blue,
Hybrids: purple. ρ-Puppis stars that are pulsating are marked by orange half-circles. The typical
errorbars are given in the bottom of the graph.
(b) Same HR diagram, zoomed in on the instability strips.
Figure 5.6: HR diagram of Am stars. The δ-Scuti instability strip is taken from [31] and
shown in solid black lines. The γ-Dor instability strip, from [32] is shown in dashed black
lines. Evolutionary tracks are included to facilitate the interpretation of the plot. These are
based on Warsaw–New Jersey models and assume no rotation and solar metallicity [66,
67, 68].
48
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:57==
Binary stars are indicated with another symbol to distinguish them from supposedly sin-
gle stars. Constant Am stars are plotted in gray to give an idea of the entire sample of
stars. ρ-Puppis stars are also included in the diagram, and are marked with an orange
half-circle to distinguish them from pulsating Am stars. The γ-Dor and δ-Scuti instability
strips are shown in dashed and solid black lines, respectively. Because a large range of
temperatures are covered, as can be seen in Figure 5.6a, the region of high data point
density within the instability strip is difficult to read and a second version of the HR dia-
gram is shown in Figure 5.6b where outliers have been ignored. The typical uncertainty
associated with all stars is given in the bottom of the graph.
Most pulsating Am stars are well within their instability strip, with some clear outliers
located outside of these, above 9000K. These will be discussed further in a following
section. Most δ-Scuti are concentrated near the red edge of the instability strip. Quite a
few γ-Dor stars are located far from the instability strip, and would have to be investigated
further to confirm the g-mode pulsations as they may have been misidentified because
of short time series. Hybrid stars are almost all located in the narrow region between
the blue and red edges of the γ-Dor and δ-Scuti instability strips, respectively. Overall, it
seems most pulsating Am stars in the sample are located close to the main sequence, and
would therefore be younger stars. ρ-Puppis stars are clearly located further away from
the main sequence, which is sensible if the assumption that they are evolved Am stars is
true. Generally, it does seem like the distribution of both classes of pulsating stars match
well in the HR diagram.
5.4.3
Range of Pulsation
In the remaining sections, focus is laid on the analysis of the p-mode pulsating Am stars,
as most γ-Dor stars lack enough observations to clearly resolve the g-modes and can
therefore not be analysed in detail. Figure 5.7 depicts the range of excited frequencies
in all p-mode pulsating stars, i.e. pure δ-Scuti and hybrid Am stars. Each star consists
of a column, and are ordered in increasing effective temperature. The excited frequency
range is showed in yellow. It is defined from lowest and highest frequency of pulsation, but
does not imply that all frequencies within this range are excited. From this it is seen that
cool Am stars, with temperatures below 7000K have relatively narrow ranges of excited
frequencies that tend to be around 5-20 c/d. For increasing temperatures, and especially
from 7300K and on, the ranges become broader and extend to higher frequencies.
5.4.4
Radial Orders
As a final step in the analysis of p-mode pulsations in Am stars, the number of excited
radial orders is determined using the method from subsection 4.4.3. The quantities are
added to the amplitude spectra in a modified version of the Am catalog that shows the ex-
tracted frequencies. In this way, the predicted values for the radial orders can be visually
compared to the actual pulsations present in the star. An example of the catalog layout is
provided at the end of this chapter. The extracted frequencies and identified combination
frequencies are shown in the amplitude spectrum in red and blue dashed peaks, respec-
tively. The black vertical lines correspond to the predicted locations of the radial orders.
The spectrum is split into three different intervals. The catalog of pulsating Am stars with
extracted frequencies and radial orders can be examined on GitHub.
From Monte Carlo simulations, the uncertainty intervals for each radial order overlap con-
siderably, rendering the analysis of these impossible. Upon investigation of the different
contributions to the overall error, it is found that the uncertainty of 0.2 dex for the surface
gravity suggested by the Gaia data validation [45] is the major contributor. Figure 5.8 il-
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.7: Range of excited frequencies in p-mode pulsating Am stars. Each column
shows the frequency range from 0 to 80 c/d. The yellow intervals correspond to the excited
frequencies. Dark blue intervals are frequency ranges with no pulsation. The x-axis shows
the effective temperature.
lustrates this impact, where Figure 5.8a shows the uncertainties obtained from the Monte
Carlo simulations. If no errors are assumed for either the absolute magnitude or the ef-
fective temperature, no significant difference is observed. In Figure 5.8b, however, the
intervals shrink considerably when the uncertainty on the value of the surface gravity is
neglected. In order to include uncertainties in the Q constants, it would therefore be nec-
essary to reduce the contribution from the surface gravity by a large amount. Currently, it
will be assumed that the central values are accurately determined and the uncertainties
are ignored, as seems to be the practice in other studies [63].
The number of excited radial orders is then determined by inspecting the modified cata-
logs. An order is considered to be excited if significant pulsation peaks are found in the
interval between the black line determined from the Q constant of the same order and the
next line. If all orders are excited and additional peaks are found at higher frequencies, the
star is considered to have more than 8 orders excited. The results from this analysis are
summarised in the form of an HR diagram, shown in Figure 5.9. Each star is represented
by a colour-coded marker describing the number of excited orders, and ticks oriented in
a specific pattern to show which radial orders are identified in the amplitude spectrum.
The pattern is given in the bottom left of the graph, with numbers 0 to 7 representing the
fundamental up to the 7th overtone. It appears that most stars near the main sequence
have a significant amount of radial orders excited. Stars with more than 8 radial orders
excited are however scatter across the instability strip. Fewest radial orders are excited
near the red edge of the δ-Scuti instability strip. For a few stars, no radial orders were
excited, meaning that the peaks observed at frequencies below the expected position of
the radial fundamental either correspond to low order g-modes or mixed modes.
50
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:59==
(a) Q values and corresponding uncertainties obtained from Monte Carlo simulations. No signifi-
cant difference is observed when assuming no error in the values of the absolute magnitude and
effective temperature.
(b) Q values and corresponding uncertainties obtained from Monte Carlo simulations when no
error is assumed for the surface gravity.
Figure 5.8: Amplitude spectrum of a pulsating Am star, with predicted radial orders and
associated uncertainties.
It is now possible to compare the observed pulsation characteristics with theoretical pre-
dictions of Am pulsation. Turbulent pressure in the HeI/HI ionisation layer is thought to be
the main driving mechanism for pulsations in Am stars. Simulations of He-depleted outer
layers have been carried out in order to prove that this mechanism can induce pulsa-
tions and predict the location of these in the HR diagram [5]. Am stars are modelled with
reduced helium abundance, Y = 0.15 instead of 0.28. Figure 5.10 shows the predicted
number of radial orders excited based on these simulations. Excitation is the highest in
a region centered near 7500K and a luminosity of 1.5R⊙. Towards the red edge of the
instability strip and the main sequence, the amount of excited radial orders decreases.
The hotter region is expected to be devoid of pulsation.
When considering the observational HR diagram from Figure 5.9, it is clear that there
is a dearth of pulsating Am stars in the region oh high radial order excitation, which con-
trasts with theoretical predictions. Most Am stars have less than 8 radial orders excited,
and these are located closer to the main sequence, in fact outside of the region covered
by the simulations. In agreement with Figure 5.10, no or very few Am stars pulsate to-
wards the blue edge of the instability strip, and fewer radial orders are excited near the
red edge. For this analysis, the ρ-Puppis stars are ignored as the κ-mechanism is thought
to have a major role in stellar oscillations. As these have been located in Figure 5.6a, it
is possible to focus solely on the distribution of Am stars in the HR diagram.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.9: HR diagram of pulsating Am stars showing the excited radial orders. The
colours indicate the number of excited orders while the ticks oriented around the central
marker indicate which orders were identified, following the numbering scheme given in
the bottom left of the graph. The typical uncertainty for all stars is given at the bottom as
well. All lines have the same significance as described in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.10: Predicted number of excited radial orders assuming turbulent pressure in
the HeI/HI ionisation layer, taken from [5]. The evolutionary tracks are computed just as
explained in Figure 5.6. The instability strips are identical, with another another set of
theoretical blue and red edges for the δ-Scuti instability strip being shown in solid lines,
see [5].
52
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:61==
5.5
Summary
In this chapter, the results obtained from the data analysis were introduced. The Am cat-
alog used for visual inspection of the stars was presented, and key statistics of the stellar
population considered were summarised. A significant fraction of Am stars are found to
pulsate. Frequencies were extracted in order to characterise the pulsation. Stars con-
taining p-modes were analysed further to determine the number of radial orders excited
and comparison with theoretical predictions was made.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
53
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
6
Discussion
In this chapter, some core results and assumptions related to the study of stellar oscilla-
tions in Am stars are discussed in further details, focusing on the limitations and future
work that can be done to build upon the contents of this report.
6.1
Am Star Sample Representativeness
A sample size of 1287 stars is significant enough to carry out a statistical analysis. How-
ever, one major concern is whether or not the sample is representative of the Am popu-
lation. This requires that potential biases be identified. Firstly, the spectral classification
provided in the Renson catalog contains some uncertainty.
In fact, several stars are
marked with a question mark if the spectral classification is doubtful. This was not taken
into account in the target selection, which means that there is a high chance that some
stars or a significant portion of the target list are not truly Am stars. Additionally, the cata-
log includes ρ-Puppis stars in the Am class. If they are suspected to be evolved Am stars,
this is not necessarily the case [22]. Although most of these are clearly more evolved and
can be separated visually from Am stars in the HR diagram, non conclusions can be made
regarding the most likely theory. Their inclusion in the statistics may have biased the re-
sults presented in the previous chapter and this should definitely be changed if ρ-Puppis
stars turn out to not be related to Am stars. The driving mechanism for pulsations in these
stars is expected to be the κ-mechanism, further confirming that these stars should not
be included when assessing the effect of turbulent pressure on stellar oscillations.
Secondly, the sample may be biased due to the target selection from TESS and Gaia.
All stars in this study were required to have at least one sector of data obtained from
TESS and full parameter estimation in Gaia. The former satellite is known to be mostly
sensible to bright stars, as the goal is to be able to detect small transiting exoplanets [2].
Gaia produces estimates of stellar parameters for faint stars, down to a limiting magnitude
of G < 20, although some parameters are only computed if measurements are of good
enough quality [45]. This has lead to removing multiple stars from the target list. The spa-
tial distribution of the sample of stars seems sensible based on Figure 5.1, although there
is a region away from the galactic center where no stars made it through target selection.
This is likely a bias due to the satellite scan-laws, and will hopefully be solved in the future.
Generally, very little information is available for the considered targets, apart from the
Renson catalog and the estimations from Gaia. Consequently, it is difficult to verify any
doubts regarding the spectral classification, binarity or stellar parameters. This also im-
pedes modelling of these stars to better understand the processes that occur. There is
hence a strong need for spectroscopic surveys of these chemically peculiar stars, which
would help unveil some of their mysteries regarding stellar oscillations.
6.1.1
Binarity
In another study [19], 70 eclipses were found from a sample of 1742 stars, or 4% of the
sample. This number is consistent with a binary fraction of 60-70% in Am stars. The re-
sults presented in this report indicate a slightly higher fraction of binary stars detected, with
73 cases identified in the sample of 1287 resulting in a fraction of 5%. The binary fraction
is determined by computing the detection probability from the SuperWASP observatories
[19]. Similar calculations could be made to determine the TESS detection probability and
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
55
==PAGE:64==
infer the equivalent precentage for this Am sample. In any case, both results show that a
significant fraction of Am stars, in the range of 70%, are in binary systems.
Very few samples are included in the Gaia non-single star tables but the sample is incom-
plete because only the most significant targets were retained [3, 69]. For spectroscopic
binaries, a minimum of 10 transits were required and the temperature range 3875-8125K
was considered [69]. Thus, the remaining Am stars may still truly be binary systems. Gaia
only analysed unresolved binaries, and data is only made available for stars where the
solutions fit well. Targets that have been considered in the analysis but were rejected due
to poor fits are not mentioned anywhere. It could be in future data releases that these non-
single star tables will include more Am stars, and that these can provide some valuable
information.
6.2
Data
In this section, the validity of the data used to analyse the Am star sample, most im-
portantly the Gaia parameters and the reliability of classification of certain groups, are
discussed.
6.2.1
Gaia Stellar Parameters
Stellar parameters from the GSP-Phot and FLAME modules were used in order to anal-
yse the Am stars. Alternatives for GSP-Phot do exist, although the assumption of binary
stars did not yield sensible effective temperature estimates for the sample, and other
modules did not analyse the entire target list. Under the assumption of high quality paral-
lax or distance values, the stellar luminosity and absolute magnitude should be correctly
estimated. Because Am stars are expected to be in binary systems, estimates from GSP-
Phot are likely incorrect [45]. These parameters are expected to be the main source of
uncertainty because they play a major role in the analysis of pulsation, as the effective
temperature and surface gravity are crucial for placing the star in the HR diagram and
determining the number of excited radial orders. Both MSC and ESP-HS modules as-
sume solar metallicity when deriving stellar parameters of stars, which in principle does
not apply to chemically peculiar Am stars and further supports the use of GSP-Phot val-
ues despite the assumption that the star is single [46]. Additionally, all modules process
mean spectra and astrometry, which in case of high variability may not be representative
of the star [46]. In the case of stellar oscillations in Am stars, this effect should probably
not be too significant.
 
As was noticed in Figure 5.6a, several stars are located outside the instability strip and
are labelled as pulsating Am stars due to their high effective temperatures, which is highly
unexpected. A more detailed literature search for these outliers did not provide additional
information, as most targets have not been subject to a detailed study before. One prob-
able explanation is that the effective temperatures are overestimated because the stars
actually are located in binary systems. In that case, Teff will experience a contribution
from both stars and thus be measured as warmer. Based on the values obtained from
different modules in Gaia, see Figure 5.2, this does seem plausible as no stars with tem-
peratures around 10000K are found in GSP-Spec and ESP-HS. When looking at the TESS
temperatures, it appears that the same trend is seen. Using the values from the GSP-
Spec module in the Gaia data could possibly have corrected this phenomenon. However,
this introduces an additional source of bias in the sample and was therefore not attempted.
In summary, spectroscopic observations of at least a subset of the Am stars would be
a sensible step in order to understand the outlier stars and validate the results of the anal-
56
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:65==
ysis of the rest of the sample. Key aspects of such a campaign would be to redetermine
the effective temperature reliably and verify in these stars are present in binary systems.
6.2.2
Analysis of Am Catalog
Some limitations regarding the preliminary analysis of variability should be mentioned.
Firstly, the stars classified as having modulated lightcurves, probably due to stellar spots,
should be verified more thoroughly. The morphology can easily be confused with that of
ellipsoidal variability in binary systems. If the lightcurve is folded with the main period, a
discontinuity should be observed for stars where modulation occurs. This is not the case
for binary systems, where the successive periods will match perfectly because the varia-
tion is governed by the orbital motion. Stellar spots on Am stars are interesting to study
further because they could be evidence of magnetic fields, which as stated before have
only been directly detected in a few stars. The TIC identifiers can be found in section A.3.
Secondly, there is a chance that not all contaminated stars have been found with the
adopted approach. Such stars are important to identify and remove from the statistics.
The TASOC contamination ratio gives a first indication in order to find the strongest cases,
but some stars may have been overseen. In principle, this could be investigated in greater
detail to avoid false positives. In case of binary systems, it is not possible to be sure that
the pulsations originate from the Am star or the companion. The confirmed contaminated
stars do however provide an indication on the overall uncertainty for the number of pul-
sating Am stars, so that the final result becomes 311 ± 16 pulsating stars in the sample.
6.3
Frequency Analysis
This section is dedicated to discussing the frequency extraction process, and all analysis
of stellar oscillations in Am stars that follows.
6.3.1
Frequency Extraction
When inspecting amplitude spectra, it was seen that the large data gaps in some lightcurves
of stars affected the peaks in a similar way to what was shown in Figure 2.7. As a con-
sequence, the exact pulsation frequency can be difficult to estimate precisely. Secondly,
long term trends in the satellite observations can induce false peaks at low frequencies,
which affects g-modes especially [70]. The lightcurve extraction and processing is thus im-
portant to remove these trends. This was not considered in the study, as most lightcurves
did not show clear trends and a large amount of data needed to be processed. It might
be relevant to have a closer look at this in the case of detailed modelling using the ex-
tracted frequencies, especially when considering γ-Dor pulsators for which the pulsations
are found in similar frequency ranges.
 
In this study, the extracted frequencies were used to determine the number of excited
radial orders and the range of excitation for all stars. This did not require the use of all
individual frequencies, but rather a consideration of the global pulsation characteristics.
Thorough validation of the extracted frequencies is however crucial in a case where the in-
dividual frequencies are needed and where ambiguous peaks can affect the interpretation,
such as in asteroseismology. The method of extraction and observational uncertainties
can have a major impact on the outcome of modelling [70].
Another important aspect is the identification of combination frequencies. Following the
procedure described in [37], only simple combinations of frequencies are considered, as
it is unlikely that higher orders occur if no combination frequencies are identified. It is rec-
ommended to include a comparison between observational data and simulations to de-
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
57
==PAGE:66==
termine if the combination frequencies are significant or just coincidental [37]. If these low
order combination frequencies are confirmed, higher order combinations can be sought
for. For simplicity, only low-order combination frequencies were considered in this study.
In case of binary systems or rotating stars, long series of harmonics are expected to
occur, which was indeed seen in all eclipsing binaries of this sample. However, not all
of them were identified in the automatic processing, showing the need for a more thor-
ough analysis for further work on Am stars. The harmonics in the eclipsing binaries are
moreover of high amplitude, which made the analysis of g-modes and low order p-modes
challenging, as these have generally lower amplitudes and may be impossible to iden-
tify. The signature should be removed to enable a full characterisation of the pulsation
spectrum in these stars.
6.3.2
Radial Order Uncertainties
Mode identification is a challenging task, specifically because stellar interiors and excita-
tion mechanisms are not fully understood. δ-Scuti stars display very different amplitude
spectra despite having similar stellar parameters, which hints at an unknown mode selec-
tion mechanism that can be induced by rotation, magnetic fields, diffusion, a combination
of these or something else. Therefore, the simplest approach to mode identification was
carried out in this project, involving the computation of expected frequencies for radial
orders with degree. Modes of higher degree l can be split by rotation and their identifica-
tion is therefore more challenging. Because Am stars are perceived as slow rotators, no
investigation of splitting was considered.
Furthermore, the number of excited radial orders is determined visually by deciding whether
significant peaks are present or not in the different intervals between the predicted orders.
It can be done quite effectively if the values obtained from the Q constants are correct,
with an average error of ±1 radial order. This is however not certain, as the uncertain-
ties are extremely large and the computations are done using Gaia stellar parameters,
for which limitations have already been discussed. Treatment of uncertainties is lacking
in this regard and should definitely be improved to improve the reliability of the analysis.
One major step in this direction is determining surface gravity with smaller errors, as has
been illustrated in Figure 5.8b.
At high radial order p-modes, mode identification becomes clearer as there is conver-
gence towards the asymptotic regime. However, few stars seemed to reach this in the
amplitude spectra, so no substantial effort was put into this. Identifying stars in this regime
and determining the large frequency separation would be valuable for the understanding
of Am stellar oscillations as it is related to the density of the star.
6.3.3
Discrepancy with Theoretical Predictions
When adding the information about the number of radial orders excited to the HR diagram
and comparing with predictions [5], it is clear that the models used for simulations do not
reproduce the observational data. The primary issue is the lack of pulsating Am stars in
the region of the HR diagram where high radial orders are predicted as a consequence of
turbulent pressure in the HeI/HI ionisation layer. This raises the question of whether the
incidence of pulsating Am stars in this area is truly low, which would clash with the current
model, or if some bias effect in the sample causes the difference. The former would indi-
cate that the mechanism causing pulsation operates in a different way. The latter could
be due to a selection bias that excluded stars in this area, or because position of stars
in the HR diagram is wrong. This could be because unresolved binary systems lead to
58
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:67==
overestimations of stellar parameters, as the measured values correspond to contribu-
tions from both the Am star and the companion. Better estimates could lead to a shift in
the position of some stars in parallel to the main sequence, and may change the overall
look of the diagram. Near the main sequence, where most pulsating Am stars have been
identified, up to 8 radial orders seem to be present in the observed Am stars. This is so
far not explained by the turbulent pressure simulations, as the number of excited orders
decreases quickly towards the main sequence.
 
There could be several explanations for why the theoretical predictions do not match the
data. The simulations are carried out in one-dimension, which is a very simplified ap-
proach and may oversee certain aspects. It is however a complex matter to perform three-
dimensional simulations and implement a sensible model for convection in that case. They
may also be affected by the fact that the chemical peculiarities in Am stars are observed
at the surface of these but that there currently is no knowledge about the interior structure
of Am stars. It may be that the internal abundances are different from those seen in the
outer layers, which can also affect stellar oscillations.
6.4
Future Work
In conclusion of this chapter, some considerations for future work are addressed.
6.4.1
Spectroscopic Follow-up at the Nordic Optical Telescope
As has been mentioned multiple times now, there exist a number of uncertainties regard-
ing Am stars which can affect the analysis significantly, such as lacking binary information,
biased effective temperatures and possibly wrong spectral classifications taken from the
Renson catalog. Most Am stars in the sample are only mentioned in the Renson catalog.
This lead to writing an observing proposal for the Nordic Optical Telescope in order to
characterise Am stars spectroscopically and try to answer some of the questions raised.
28 hours of observing time with the high-resolution FIbre-fed Echelle Spectrograph (FIES)
were allocated to this proposal for a total of 45 targets. The aim is to determine radial ve-
locities and effective temperatures, as well as verify the supposed Am star nature. The
data will also be made available for the Am star community to perform chemical abun-
dance estimates.
6.4.2
Study of the γ-Dor Pulsators
In this project, γ-Dor Am stars were simply identified, but no additional work was done
to characterise these. One reason is the lacking number of TESS sectors for these stars
which makes it difficult to resolve the oscillation frequencies. This also implies that some
may have been misclassified as γ-Dor pulsators and it would therefore be good to verify
this result. These stars nevertheless represent an interesting sample, as g-mode oscilla-
tions are driven by another region of the star and provide insight into the near-core region
of Am stars. In the case of hybrid stars, both g-modes and p-modes can be studied and
such stars are expected to be valuable in understanding the internal structure of stars.
With a relatively large sample of γ-Dor Am stars, it should be possible to study the inner
regions of Am stars in the near future, when a sufficient number of TESS sectors can be
combined.
6.4.3
Asteroseismology
So far only radial stellar oscillations have been studied in order to assess the number
of excited radial orders in stars for which p-modes have been identified. Much more
information is contained in the pulsation spectra of these stars, however, and the analysis
can be pushed further in future work through modelling of the stars. Identification of more
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
59
==PAGE:68==
modes and using these for asteroseismology can provide information on the excitation
mechanisms in Am stars and make it possible to constraint the interior structure of these.
60
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:69==
7
Conclusion
In this project, a large sample of Am stars was studied in order to characterise stellar
oscillations of these unexpected pulsators. Taking as starting point the Renson catalog,
a total of 1287 stars were analysed with photometric data from the TESS mission. Stellar
parameters were obtained from the Gaia archive. The data was used to develop a cat-
alog of Am stars, from which the variability was determined and the pulsation spectrum
analysed. Key statistics were computed for the targets in order to provide insight into the
properties of this stellar population. 20% of Am stars are seen to be pulsating, and the
binary incidence is confirmed to be quite high, around 70% of the population. Frequency
extraction using the ECHO pipeline made it possible to determine the number of excited
orders and compare these with theoretical predictions assuming turbulent pressure as the
excitation mechanism.
 
The predictions do not match the observational data, as Am stars pulsating in high radial
orders are primarily located close to the main sequence. Despite uncertainties regarding
potential biases in the sample, it appears clear that turbulent pressure as it is modelled
now cannot account for the Am pulsations alone. Further work is necessary to investigate
what processes can explain the pulsational behaviour of Am stars.
There is a serious need for spectroscopic observations of Am stars, as several elements
provide uncertainties in the analysis of stellar oscillations. Such data can be used to de-
termine reliable effective temperatures, assess the potential binary nature and confirm
the chemical peculiarities. An observing proposal was accepted at the Nordic Optical
Telescope, granting 28 hours of observations for 45 stars spread over the period of April
to September 2023 with the FIES instrument. This should provide precise stellar param-
eters and additional information, serving as a valuable complement to either validate or
disprove the conclusions presented here.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
D. Kurtz. “Asteroseismology across the HR diagram”. In: 2022. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.
2201.11629.
[2]
G. R. Ricker et al. “Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS)”. In: Journal of
Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 1 (2015). DOI: 10.1117/1.
JATIS.1.1.014003.
[3]
Gaia Collaboration et al. Gaia Data Release 3: Summary of the content and survey
properties. 2022. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2208.00211. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2208.00211.
[4]
R. O. Gray and C. J. Corbally. Stellar Spectral Classification. Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 2009. ISBN: 9780691125114. URL: https://press.princeton.edu/books/
paperback/9780691125114/stellar-spectral-classification.
[5]
V. Antoci et al. “The first view of δ Scuti and γ Doradus stars with the TESS mission”.
In: MNRAS 490.3 (2019), pp. 4040–4059. DOI: 10.1093/mnras/stz2787.
[6]
P. Renson and J. Manfroid. “Catalogue of Ap, HgMn and Am stars”. In: A&A 498.3
(2009), pp. 961–966. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/200810788.
[7]
R. A. Freedman, R. M. Geller, and W. J. Kaufmann III. Universe Stars and Galaxies
- Fifth Edition. W. H. Freeman and Company, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-319-04240-0.
[8]
J. Christensen-Dalsgaard. “Lecture Notes on Stellar Structure and Evolution, 6th
Edition”. In: Institut for Fysik og Astronomi, Aarhus Universitet (2008). URL: https:
//users-phys.au.dk/~jcd/evolnotes/.
[9]
Max Planck. Theory of Heat Radiation. Dover Publications, 1991. ISBN: 978-0-486-
66811-6. URL: https://app.knovel.com/hotlink/khtml/id:kt011AIHK4/theory-heat-
radiation/general-introduction.
[10]
G. M. H. J. Habets and J. R. W. Heintze. “Empirical bolometric corrections for the
main-sequence”. In: A&A Supplement Series 46 (1981), pp. 193–237. DOI: 10.1086/
321411. URL: https://doi.org/10.1086%5C%2F321411.
[11]
J. M. Seach et al. “A magnetic snapshot survey of F-type stars”. In: MNRAS 494
(2020), pp. 5682–5703.
[12]
C. Neiner et al. “MOBSTER: MAGNETO-ASTEROSEISMOLOGY OF HOT STARS
WITH TESS”. In: Société Française d’Astronomie et d’Astrophysique 494 (2021),
pp. 5682–5703.
[13]
F. Lignières et al. “First evidence of a magnetic field on Vega”. In: A&A 500 (2009),
pp. 41–44.
[14]
I. Jr. Iben. “The life and times of an intermediate mass star - In isolation/in a close
binary”. In: MNRAS 26 (1985), pp. 1–39.
[15]
S. Joshi et al. “Study of Chemically Peculiar Stars-I : High-resolution Spectroscopy
and K2 Photometry of Am Stars in the Region of M44”. In: MNRAS 510.4 (2022),
pp. 5854–5871. DOI: https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/510/4/5854/6515728.
[16]
D. W. Kurtz. “Metallicism and pulsation: the discovery of ô Senti variability in a clas-
sical Am star, HD 1097”. In: MNRAS 238 (1989), pp. 1077–1084.
[17]
H. A. Abt. “DOES ROTATION ALONE DETERMINE WHETHER AN A-TYPE STAR’S
SPECTRUM IS ABNORMAL OR NORMAL?” In: ApJ 544 (2000), pp. 933–936.
[18]
G. Catanzaro et al. “CAOS spectroscopy of Am stars Kepler targets”. In: MNRAS
451 (2015), pp. 184–195.
[19]
B. Smalley et al. “Eclipsing Am binary systems in the SuperWASP survey”. In: A&A
564 (2014).
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
63
==PAGE:72==
[20]
A. Blazère, P. Petit, and C. Neiner. “The magnetic properties of Am stars”. In: Con-
trib. Astron. Obs. Skalnaté Pleso 48 (2018), pp. 48–52.
[21]
A. Blazère et al. “Detection of ultra-weak magnetic fields in Am stars: β UMa and θ
Leo”. In: A&A 586 (2016).
[22]
C. McGahee et al. “A Spectroscopic Classification Survey to Search for New ρ Pup-
pis Stars”. In: The Astronomical Journal 160.1 (2020), p. 52. DOI: 10.3847/1538-
3881/ab974c.
[23]
A. M. Romanovskaya et al. “Fundamental parameters of the Ap-stars GO And, 84
UMa, and κ Psc”. In: A&A 655 (2021).
[24]
O. Kochukhov. “The spots on Ap stars”. In: Proceedings of the International Astro-
nomical Union 273 (2011), pp. 249–255. DOI: 10.1017/S1743921311015328.
[25]
G. Handler. “Asteroseismology”. In: Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Vol. 4.
Springer Netherlands, 2013, pp. 207–241.
[26]
C. Aerts. “Probing the interior physics of stars through asteroseismology”. In: Rev.
Mod. Phys. 93 (1 2021), p. 015001. DOI: 10.1103/RevModPhys.93.015001. URL:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.93.015001.
[27]
D. Kurtz. “Stellar Pulsation: an Overview”. In: Communications in Asteroseismology
147 (2006), pp. 6–30. DOI: 10.1553/cia147s6.
[28]
D.H. McNamara. “The High-Amplitude δ-Scuti Stars”. In: ASP Conference Series
210 (2000).
[29]
Joyce A. Guzik et al. “Driving the Gravity-Mode Pulsations in γ Doradus Variables”.
In: The Astrophysical Journal 542.1 (2000), p. L57. DOI: 10.1086/312908. URL:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1086/312908.
[30]
A. Grigahcène et al. “HYBRID γ DORADUS–δ SCUTI PULSATORS: NEW INSIGHTS
INTO THE PHYSICS OF THE OSCILLATIONS FROM KEPLER OBSERVATIONS”.
In: The Astrophysical Journal Letters 713.2 (2010), p. L192. DOI: 10.1088/2041-
8205/713/2/L192. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2041-8205/713/2/L192.
[31]
Simon J. Murphy et al. “Gaia-derived luminosities of Kepler A/F stars and the pul-
sator fraction across the δ Scuti instability strip”. In: MNRAS 485.2 (2019), pp. 2380–
2400. DOI: 10.1093/mnras/stz590.
[32]
M.-A. Dupret et al. “Spatial aliasing and distortion of energy distribution in the wave
vector domain under multi-spacecraft measurements”. In: A&A 414 (2003), pp. L17–
L20. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:20031740.
[33]
V. Antoci et al. “THE ROLE OF TURBULENT PRESSURE AS A COHERENT PUL-
SATIONAL DRIVING MECHANISM: THE CASE OF THE δ SCUTI STAR HD 187547”.
In: The Astrophysical Journal 796.2 (2014), p. 118. DOI: 10.1088/0004-637X/796/
2/118. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/796/2/118.
[34]
J. Christensen-Dalsgaard. “Lecture Notes on Stellar Oscillations, 5th Edition”. In:
Institut for Fysik og Astronomi, Aarhus Universitet (2014). URL: http://astro.phys.
au.dk/%E2%88%BCjcd/oscilnotes/.
[35]
Narita Y and Glassmeier K.-H. “Spatial aliasing and distortion of energy distribu-
tion in the wave vector domain under multi-spacecraft measurements”. In: Annales
Geophysicae 27 (2009). DOI: 10.5194/angeo-27-3031-2009.
[36]
Marie-José Goupil et al. “Asteroseismology of δ Scuti stars: Problems and prospects”.
In: Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy 26 (2005), pp. 249–259. DOI: 10.1007/
BF02702333.
[37]
P.I. Pápics. “The puzzle of combination frequencies found in heat-driven pulsators”.
In: arXiv e-prints 27 (2012). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1210.5834.
64
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:73==
[38]
L. A. Balona. “Combination frequencies in high-amplitude δ Scuti stars”. In: Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 459.1 (2016), pp. 1097–1103. DOI: 10.
1093/mnras/stw671. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stw671.
[39]
X. Chen and Y. Li. “Rotational Splitting and Asteroseismic Modeling of the δ Scuti
Star EE Camelopardalis”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 838.1 (2017), p. 31. DOI:
10.3847/1538-4357/aa6339. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/aa6339.
[40]
S. Barceló Forteza et al. “Unveiling the power spectra of δ Scuti stars with TESS”.
In: A&A 638 (2020), p. 12. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201937262.
[41]
M. M. Fausnaugh et al. TESS Data Release Notes: Sector 1, DR1. NASA, 2018,
p. 12. URL: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20190002535.
[42]
K. G. Stassun et al. “The TESS Input Catalog and Candidate Target List”. In: The
Astronomical Journal 156.3 (2018), p. 102. DOI: 10.3847/1538-3881/aad050. URL:
https://doi.org/10.3847%5C%2F1538-3881%5C%2Faad050.
[43]
Gaia Collaboration et al. “The Gaia mission”. In: A&A 595 (2016). DOI: 10.1051/
0004-6361/201629272.
[44]
C. Jordi et al. “Gaia broad band photometry”. In: Astronomy &amp Astrophysics 523
(2010), A48. DOI: 10.1051/0004-6361/201015441. URL: https://doi.org/10.1051%
5C%2F0004-6361%5C%2F201015441.
[45]
M. Fouesneau et al. Gaia Data Release 3: Apsis II – Stellar Parameters. 2022. DOI:
10.48550/ARXIV.2206.05992. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.05992.
[46]
O. L. Creevey et al. Gaia Data Release 3: Astrophysical parameters inference sys-
tem (Apsis) I – methods and content overview. 2022. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2206.
05864. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.05864.
[47]
A. Ulla et al. Gaia DR3 documentation Chapter 11: Astrophysical parameters. Gaia
DR3 documentation, European Space Agency; Gaia Data Processing and Analysis
Consortium. Online at <A href=“https://gea.esac.esa.int/archive/documentation/GDR3/index.html”>
id. 11. 2022.
[48]
Gaia Collaboration et al. Gaia Data Release 3: Stellar multiplicity, a teaser for the
hidden treasure. 2022. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202243782.
[49]
C. A. L. Bailer-Jones et al. “Estimating Distances from Parallaxes. V. Geometric and
Photogeometric Distances to 1.47 Billion Stars in Gaia Early Data Release 3”. In:
The Astronomical Journal 161.3 (2021), p. 147. DOI: 10.3847/1538-3881/abd806.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3847%5C%2F1538-3881%5C%2Fabd806.
[50]
Lightkurve Collaboration et al. Lightkurve: Kepler and TESS time series analysis in
Python. 2018.
[51]
Astropy Collaboration et al. “Astropy: A community Python package for astronomy”.
In: A&A 558 (2013), A33. DOI: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068.
[52]
Astropy Collaboration et al. “The Astropy Project: Building an Open-science Project
and Status of the v2.0 Core Package”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 156.3 (2018),
p. 123. DOI: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f.
[53]
Astropy Collaboration et al. “The Astropy Project: Sustaining and Growing a Community-
oriented Open-source Project and the Latest Major Release (v5.0) of the Core Pack-
age”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 935.2, 167 (2022), p. 167. DOI: 10.3847/1538-
4357/ac7c74.
[54]
A. Ginsburg et al. “astroquery: An Astronomical Web-querying Package in Python”.
In: The Astrophysical Journal 157.3 (2019), p. 98. DOI: 10.3847/1538-3881/aafc33.
[55]
Jacob T. VanderPlas. “Understanding the Lomb–Scargle Periodogram”. In: The As-
trophysical Journal Supplement Series 236.1 (2018), p. 16. DOI: 10.3847/1538-
4365/aab766. URL: https://doi.org/10.3847%5C%2F1538-4365%5C%2Faab766.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
65
==PAGE:74==
[56]
M. Breger et al. “Nonradial pulsation of the delta Scuti star BU CANCRI in the Prae-
sepe cluster.” In: A&A 271 (1993), pp. 482–486.
[57]
J. Greene, C. D. Bailyn, and J. A. Orosz. “Optical and Infrared Photometry of the
Microquasar GRO J1655-40 in Quiescence”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 554.2
(2001), pp. 1290–1297. DOI: 10.1086/321411. URL: https://doi.org/10.1086%5C%
2F321411.
[58]
W. H. Press and G. B. Rybicki. “Fast Algorithm for Spectral Analysis of Unevenly
Sampled Data”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 338 (1989), p. 277. DOI: 10.1086/
167197.
[59]
S. Frandsen et al. “CCD photometry of the δ-Scuti star κ2￿B￿ootis.” In: A&A 301
(1995), p. 123.
[60]
J. D. Scargle. “Studies in astronomical time series analysis. II. Statistical aspects
of spectral analysis of unevenly spaced data.” In: The Astrophyiscal Journal 263
(1982), pp. 835–853. DOI: 10.1086/160554.
[61]
L. A. Balona. “Mode density and frequency extraction in the δ Scuti star HD 50844”.
In: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 439.4 (Feb. 2014), pp. 3453–
3460. DOI: 10.1093/mnras/stu193. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stu193.
[62]
M. H. Montgomery and D. O’Donoghue. “A derivation of the errors for least squares
fitting to time series data”. In: Delta Scuti Star Newsletter 13 (1999), p. 28.
[63]
K. Zwintz et al. “β Cas: The first δ Scuti star with a dynamo magnetic field⋆”. In: A&A
643 (2020). DOI: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038210.
[64]
W. S. Fitch. “L=0, 1, 2, and 3 pulsation constants for evolutionary models of δ-Scuti
stars”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 249 (1981), pp. 218–227. DOI: 10.1086/159278.
[65]
B. Smalley et al. “SuperWASP observations of pulsating Am stars”. In: Astronomy
&amp Astrophysics 535 (2011), A3. DOI: 10.1051/0004- 6361/201117230. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1051%5C%2F0004-6361%5C%2F201117230.
[66]
W. Dziembowski. “Oscillations of giants and supergiants.” In: Acta Astronomica 27
(1977), pp. 95–126.
[67]
A.A. Pamyatnykh et al. “Towards a seismic model of the delta Scuti star XX Pyxidis”.
In: A&A 333 (1998), pp. 141–150. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/9801264.
[68]
A.A. Pamyatnykh. “Pulsational instability domains in the upper main sequence”. In:
Acta Astronomica 49 (1999), pp. 119–148.
[69]
Gaia Collaboration et al. “Gaia Data Release 3: Stellar multiplicity, a teaser for the
hidden treasure”. In: A&A (2022). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2206.05595. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2206.05595.
[70]
Dominic M. Bowman and Mathias Michielsen. “Towards a systematic treatment
of observational uncertainties in forward asteroseismic modelling of gravity-mode
pulsators”. In: Astronomy &amp Astrophysics 656 (2021), A158. DOI: 10 . 1051 /
0004- 6361/202141726. URL: https://doi.org/10.1051%5C%2F0004- 6361%5C%
2F202141726.
66
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:75==
A
Appendix
A.1
Additional Simulations of Amplitude Spectra
Figure A.1: Amplitude spectrum computed for the same signal as in section 2.5.2, with a
duration of only 1000s.
Figure A.2: Amplitude spectrum computed for synthetic signal with two oscillation fre-
quencies at 0.1 and 0.095 with amplitudes 5 and 1, respectively.
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
67
==PAGE:76==
A.2
Additional Graphs Variability Determination
Figure A.3: Lightcurve of the star classified as marginal variable in Figure 4.3b. The
signature found in the amplitude spectrum is due to the large data gap between the two
sectors, and is not caused by pulsation.
A.3
Am Stars with Photometric Modulation
Table A.1: TIC identifier of Am stars with suspected lightcurve modulation.
TIC
101261503
103690778
1038605
106498211
11201915
11289814
117774227
129862323
139232635
140866969
14277051
149600846
150254506
155785420
159164209
162246786
164832047
165152656
166464277
176848605
182586893
206675335
243565174
253153987
25671745
68
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:77==
257540957
259915804
265280041
267081284
271554988
274844723
276871199
279358612
293439831
306021078
309067801
30982266
310394444
311883977
31196767
314364067
316422737
325373452
328934872
328934882
329343467
33594839
343096861
351331505
364398464
370766646
373211642
383553858
38602305
388078603
401667994
403598330
410867750
411481988
41318863
41837914
418754303
423240775
423612056
428884684
433144156
440681752
441133415
445796153
457106096
52244725
54979724
5529673
55651773
56938368
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
69
==PAGE:78==
80137372
83787828
97422633
A.4
Extracted Frequencies for Pulsating Am Stars
TIC 102034461
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
25.26
8e-05
1.3
-
3.01
0.0
2
29.42
0.00017
0.7
0.006
2.55
0.01
3
13.16
0.00017
0.61
0.005
0.74
0.01
4
27.5
0.00019
0.58
0.005
0.37
0.01
5
35.49
0.00025
0.58
-
2.83
0.01
6
30.68
0.00021
0.55
-
2.79
0.01
7
32.55
0.00025
0.55
0.007
2.04
0.01
8
32.89
0.00026
0.55
-
0.31
0.01
9
22.33
0.00024
0.48
-
1.7
0.01
10
15.1
0.00023
0.45
0.005
1.22
0.01
11
15.52
0.00022
0.46
0.005
2.82
0.01
12
27.32
0.0003
0.36
-
2.23
0.01
13
16.88
0.00029
0.36
0.005
1.99
0.01
14
23.79
0.00037
0.33
-
1.07
0.02
15
17.71
0.00037
0.3
-
2.53
0.02
16
35.89
0.00052
0.27
-
1.68
0.03
17
31.7
0.00049
0.26
-
1.33
0.02
18
33.4
0.00066
0.21
-
1.46
0.03
19
26.54
0.00052
0.21
-
0.3
0.03
20
41.18
0.00067
0.2
0.007
0.36
0.03
21
24.06
0.00064
0.18
0.006
1.51
0.03
22
40.86
0.00091
0.15
0.007
2.79
0.05
23
34.87
0.00088
0.16
0.007
2.65
0.04
24
34.21
0.00106
0.13
-
0.12
0.05
25
37.71
0.00101
0.14
-
1.53
0.05
26
15.96
0.00089
0.11
-
0.98
0.04
27
25.92
0.00085
0.12
-
2.89
0.04
28
26.96
0.00088
0.12
0.005
2.54
0.04
29
43.39
0.00112
0.12
-
1.76
0.06
30
21.21
0.00102
0.11
-
1.0
0.05
31
29.74
0.00142
0.09
0.006
2.58
0.07
32
34.08
0.00151
0.1
0.007
0.66
0.07
33
13.48
0.00115
0.09
0.005
1.02
0.06
34
33.91
0.0017
0.08
-
1.3
0.08
35
28.02
0.00138
0.08
-
2.51
0.07
36
38.11
0.0017
0.08
-
1.12
0.08
37
29.17
0.00153
0.08
-
0.79
0.08
38
41.03
0.00167
0.08
0.007
1.78
0.08
39
16.19
0.00132
0.08
-
2.94
0.07
40
32.98
0.00157
0.09
-
2.49
0.08
41
37.79
0.00199
0.07
0.007
1.48
0.1
42
38.84
0.00183
0.07
0.007
1.41
0.09
70
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:79==
43
36.74
0.00197
0.07
0.007
1.76
0.1
44
3.85
0.00214
0.07
0.007
2.85
0.11
45
43.73
0.00179
0.07
-
0.63
0.09
46
14.01
0.00173
0.06
0.005
0.38
0.09
47
28.22
0.00215
0.05
-
0.08
0.11
48
37.92
0.00261
0.05
-
2.29
0.13
49
18.13
0.00186
0.06
0.005
0.54
0.09
50
15.85
0.00167
0.06
-
2.19
0.08
51
12.98
0.00177
0.06
0.005
1.84
0.09
52
43.02
0.00239
0.06
-
2.8
0.12
53
49.35
0.00248
0.05
0.007
1.89
0.12
54
1.5
0.00275
0.05
0.007
1.48
0.14
55
14.68
0.00203
0.05
-
0.64
0.1
56
28.87
0.00275
0.04
-
2.95
0.14
57
5.47
0.003
0.04
0.007
1.89
0.15
58
6.89
0.00286
0.04
-
1.84
0.14
59
11.67
0.00241
0.04
-
3.04
0.12
60
48.14
0.00304
0.04
0.007
2.31
0.15
61
42.22
0.00335
0.04
0.007
2.74
0.17
62
8.59
0.00268
0.04
0.006
1.21
0.13
63
13.58
0.00236
0.04
-
0.47
0.12
64
44.6
0.00327
0.04
-
1.77
0.16
65
19.44
0.00269
0.04
0.006
0.62
0.13
66
14.18
0.00237
0.04
0.005
1.14
0.12
67
10.63
0.00265
0.04
0.005
1.09
0.13
68
21.72
0.00299
0.04
0.006
0.19
0.15
69
38.23
0.0034
0.04
-
1.37
0.17
70
38.03
0.00315
0.04
0.007
2.29
0.16
71
45.03
0.00344
0.04
0.007
2.78
0.17
72
48.55
0.00359
0.04
0.007
1.65
0.18
73
17.01
0.00275
0.04
0.005
1.33
0.14
74
41.77
0.00382
0.04
0.007
2.26
0.19
75
51.46
0.00362
0.04
-
2.63
0.18
76
40.62
0.00338
0.04
-
2.95
0.17
77
28.47
0.00329
0.03
-
0.01
0.16
78
44.43
0.00373
0.04
-
0.8
0.19
79
3.02
0.00419
0.03
0.007
0.18
0.21
80
12.77
0.00303
0.03
0.005
1.49
0.15
81
49.27
0.00395
0.03
-
3.12
0.2
82
46.98
0.00343
0.04
0.006
1.8
0.17
83
47.33
0.00415
0.03
0.007
1.35
0.21
84
22.96
0.00352
0.03
0.006
1.17
0.17
85
4.08
0.00436
0.03
-
0.6
0.22
86
31.27
0.00417
0.03
-
2.44
0.21
87
31.87
0.0043
0.03
-
0.86
0.21
88
36.91
0.00455
0.03
0.007
2.83
0.23
89
56.5
0.00371
0.03
0.006
0.93
0.18
90
0.9
0.00517
0.03
0.007
1.37
0.26
91
34.32
0.00527
0.03
0.007
3.02
0.26
92
48.96
0.00464
0.03
0.007
0.46
0.23
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
71
==PAGE:80==
93
30.28
0.00413
0.03
0.006
0.33
0.21
94
21.14
0.00389
0.03
-
1.32
0.19
95
50.64
0.00444
0.03
-
2.85
0.22
96
45.99
0.00471
0.03
-
0.29
0.23
97
45.27
0.00511
0.03
-
1.34
0.25
98
7.77
0.00432
0.03
0.006
0.05
0.21
99
40.89
0.00439
0.03
-
2.05
0.22
100
23.5
0.00458
0.03
-
2.8
0.23
101
42.79
0.0051
0.03
-
2.25
0.25
102
36.69
0.00515
0.03
-
2.58
0.26
103
54.49
0.00478
0.03
0.006
1.53
0.24
104
49.95
0.00521
0.02
0.006
1.27
0.26
105
6.29
0.00533
0.02
-
1.58
0.26
106
47.18
0.00508
0.03
-
1.11
0.25
107
4.82
0.00532
0.03
0.007
2.33
0.26
108
52.53
0.00483
0.02
0.006
0.73
0.24
109
5.72
0.00545
0.02
-
0.61
0.27
TIC 102192161
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
25.59
0.0
0.82
0.005
0.29
0.01
2
31.54
1e-05
0.6
-
1.44
0.01
3
33.33
1e-05
0.43
-
3.09
0.01
4
28.08
1e-05
0.33
0.005
2.96
0.02
5
37.29
2e-05
0.27
0.006
3.14
0.02
6
27.5
2e-05
0.21
0.004
1.37
0.02
7
24.74
2e-05
0.18
-
0.93
0.02
8
39.93
2e-05
0.1
-
1.17
0.03
9
33.72
2e-05
0.09
-
2.07
0.03
10
23.59
5e-05
0.09
0.006
1.74
0.07
11
36.49
4e-05
0.08
-
2.7
0.06
12
26.82
4e-05
0.07
-
0.42
0.06
13
39.56
6e-05
0.07
-
1.27
0.08
14
43.0
5e-05
0.06
-
1.72
0.06
15
35.69
7e-05
0.06
0.006
2.75
0.09
16
23.66
7e-05
0.06
-
1.95
0.09
17
19.36
6e-05
0.06
-
1.1
0.08
18
40.55
5e-05
0.06
-
0.15
0.07
19
32.55
6e-05
0.05
-
0.2
0.08
20
27.15
6e-05
0.05
-
2.6
0.08
21
40.43
6e-05
0.04
0.004
0.22
0.08
22
21.01
7e-05
0.04
0.004
1.39
0.09
23
27.64
5e-05
0.04
0.003
1.8
0.08
24
42.77
7e-05
0.04
-
1.28
0.1
25
34.57
7e-05
0.04
-
1.52
0.1
26
40.88
0.00013
0.04
0.006
0.53
0.18
27
26.71
9e-05
0.03
0.004
2.39
0.12
72
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:81==
TIC 103580980
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.29
1e-05
0.86
0.012
2.31
0.01
2
1.19
1e-05
0.79
-
2.19
0.02
3
1.42
1e-05
0.82
0.014
0.6
0.02
4
1.15
1e-05
0.76
0.013
0.34
0.02
5
0.38
1e-05
0.64
0.014
1.94
0.02
6
9.27
1e-05
0.63
-
0.18
0.01
7
6.7
1e-05
0.57
-
0.84
0.02
8
2.16
1e-05
0.49
0.009
1.08
0.02
9
2.26
2e-05
0.38
0.01
0.02
0.03
10
7.6
2e-05
0.36
-
0.03
0.04
11
1.35
3e-05
0.33
-
0.31
0.04
12
2.34
2e-05
0.32
-
1.45
0.03
13
1.46
3e-05
0.28
-
2.12
0.05
14
0.58
2e-05
0.3
0.012
2.15
0.04
15
0.29
3e-05
0.28
0.012
0.31
0.04
16
10.41
2e-05
0.28
0.008
1.56
0.03
17
6.79
2e-05
0.27
0.01
0.49
0.04
18
3.76
3e-05
0.25
0.012
2.18
0.05
19
2.38
3e-05
0.21
0.012
0.21
0.05
20
6.33
3e-05
0.19
-
0.45
0.05
21
5.27
4e-05
0.18
0.011
1.63
0.06
22
0.88
5e-05
0.16
0.012
2.77
0.08
23
5.38
3e-05
0.17
0.01
0.39
0.05
24
0.74
5e-05
0.13
-
2.47
0.09
25
6.16
5e-05
0.14
0.012
2.33
0.09
26
0.65
4e-05
0.15
-
0.27
0.07
27
1.49
7e-05
0.13
-
0.41
0.12
28
11.18
2e-05
0.13
0.005
1.98
0.04
29
0.47
6e-05
0.14
0.013
2.73
0.1
30
8.91
4e-05
0.12
-
1.12
0.08
31
7.7
7e-05
0.11
-
0.48
0.12
32
0.84
5e-05
0.14
0.012
1.89
0.09
33
5.56
5e-05
0.12
0.011
1.93
0.09
34
6.25
7e-05
0.1
-
0.05
0.11
35
0.96
8e-05
0.1
0.013
0.92
0.13
36
1.98
6e-05
0.1
0.01
1.56
0.1
37
4.13
7e-05
0.1
-
0.34
0.12
38
5.9
9e-05
0.1
-
1.52
0.16
39
3.81
7e-05
0.1
-
1.54
0.11
40
5.93
8e-05
0.11
-
0.28
0.13
41
5.73
9e-05
0.1
-
2.47
0.15
42
3.93
8e-05
0.09
-
1.53
0.13
43
5.52
6e-05
0.09
0.01
1.85
0.11
44
0.11
8e-05
0.09
-
1.31
0.13
45
7.33
7e-05
0.09
0.011
0.44
0.12
46
5.25
8e-05
0.08
0.011
0.95
0.13
47
10.67
6e-05
0.08
0.007
1.22
0.09
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
73
==PAGE:82==
48
4.75
8e-05
0.09
-
0.1
0.14
49
7.56
0.0001
0.08
-
0.3
0.16
50
6.01
8e-05
0.09
-
0.52
0.14
51
5.11
8e-05
0.08
0.011
1.76
0.13
52
6.47
7e-05
0.08
-
0.53
0.13
53
6.05
0.00012
0.07
0.014
1.3
0.21
54
3.99
0.00011
0.07
0.012
1.15
0.18
55
5.39
8e-05
0.07
0.01
2.31
0.13
56
5.71
0.00011
0.08
-
2.27
0.18
57
1.03
0.00011
0.07
-
2.98
0.19
58
5.93
0.0001
0.08
0.014
1.4
0.17
59
6.92
0.0001
0.07
0.011
2.39
0.17
60
5.35
8e-05
0.07
0.01
0.59
0.14
61
7.02
9e-05
0.08
-
1.43
0.15
62
5.43
8e-05
0.08
0.01
2.22
0.13
63
8.0
0.00013
0.06
-
1.2
0.22
64
5.73
0.00012
0.08
-
2.52
0.2
65
6.38
0.0001
0.06
0.009
2.74
0.16
66
3.41
0.00013
0.06
0.012
2.18
0.21
67
11.13
6e-05
0.06
-
2.56
0.1
68
1.9
0.00013
0.06
-
1.56
0.21
69
4.79
0.00013
0.06
-
1.5
0.21
70
2.07
0.00011
0.05
0.01
0.14
0.18
71
3.85
0.0001
0.06
0.011
2.93
0.17
72
3.9
0.0001
0.07
0.011
1.27
0.17
73
4.47
0.00013
0.06
0.012
1.93
0.22
74
0.62
0.00011
0.06
-
0.98
0.19
75
4.99
0.00011
0.06
-
2.43
0.19
76
7.6
0.00013
0.06
0.013
0.59
0.21
77
4.37
0.00015
0.05
0.013
2.62
0.25
78
4.9
0.00013
0.05
0.012
0.75
0.22
79
7.37
0.00013
0.05
0.011
0.99
0.21
80
3.58
0.00017
0.05
-
1.93
0.28
81
0.73
0.00011
0.06
0.011
1.29
0.18
82
7.85
0.00015
0.05
-
1.17
0.25
83
5.62
0.00014
0.05
0.013
1.79
0.23
84
1.67
0.00015
0.05
-
2.64
0.26
85
7.04
0.00012
0.06
0.011
1.39
0.2
86
7.24
0.00011
0.05
0.01
0.81
0.19
87
8.23
0.00013
0.05
0.011
1.18
0.22
88
4.24
0.00014
0.05
0.012
0.52
0.24
89
7.13
0.00012
0.05
-
1.33
0.2
90
6.71
0.00013
0.05
-
0.61
0.21
91
5.41
0.0001
0.06
0.009
1.27
0.17
92
4.19
0.00015
0.05
0.012
0.2
0.24
TIC 1038216
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.0
1e-05
0.24
0.003
0.31
0.01
74
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:83==
2
1.85
3e-05
0.08
0.003
0.12
0.03
3
1.35
3e-05
0.07
-
1.16
0.04
4
0.23
3e-05
0.07
0.003
2.37
0.04
5
2.37
4e-05
0.05
0.003
2.5
0.06
6
0.42
0.0001
0.03
0.004
1.22
0.14
7
2.94
0.00011
0.03
0.004
0.34
0.15
8
3.1
7e-05
0.03
-
1.78
0.1
9
6.66
8e-05
0.03
-
2.21
0.1
10
2.29
9e-05
0.03
-
0.09
0.12
11
0.59
0.00013
0.02
-
0.67
0.18
12
2.56
0.00011
0.02
-
2.49
0.15
13
4.12
0.00014
0.02
-
1.78
0.18
14
11.73
7e-05
0.02
0.002
1.21
0.09
15
1.0
0.00016
0.02
-
2.54
0.21
16
7.25
0.0001
0.01
-
1.75
0.14
17
3.31
0.00021
0.01
0.004
0.01
0.28
18
3.83
0.00017
0.01
0.003
2.77
0.23
19
4.3
0.00021
0.01
0.003
0.09
0.27
20
10.26
0.00011
0.01
0.002
0.25
0.15
TIC 11295159
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.72
3e-05
2.65
0.102
2.22
0.04
2
2.0
3e-05
1.61
0.057
2.75
0.04
3
1.27
4e-05
1.45
-
0.58
0.06
4
0.27
5e-05
1.24
0.078
0.02
0.06
5
0.79
6e-05
1.09
0.081
0.55
0.07
6
2.08
4e-05
1.03
-
0.08
0.05
7
0.92
6e-05
1.01
0.087
1.13
0.09
8
1.06
6e-05
0.92
0.07
2.97
0.08
9
0.17
0.00011
0.63
0.092
0.73
0.15
10
0.45
6e-05
0.61
0.046
2.57
0.08
11
0.5
9e-05
0.41
0.05
0.07
0.12
TIC 114028559
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
7.79
2e-05
3.17
0.011
0.96
0.0
2
1.66
0.00011
0.66
0.01
2.82
0.02
3
9.58
0.00021
0.41
0.012
2.75
0.03
4
16.35
0.0001
0.42
0.006
0.23
0.01
5
9.28
0.00028
0.31
0.012
1.1
0.04
6
17.43
0.00013
0.34
-
1.89
0.02
7
8.24
0.00033
0.26
-
2.21
0.05
8
17.17
0.00018
0.24
-
2.36
0.02
9
7.62
0.00034
0.22
-
1.69
0.05
10
20.86
0.00017
0.22
0.005
3.05
0.02
11
2.85
0.00024
0.21
-
2.53
0.03
12
6.74
0.00035
0.18
-
0.73
0.05
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
75
==PAGE:84==
13
1.34
0.00042
0.19
-
0.17
0.06
14
18.87
0.00025
0.17
0.006
0.35
0.04
15
18.17
0.00028
0.16
0.006
0.81
0.04
16
15.94
0.0003
0.14
0.006
2.38
0.04
17
18.67
0.00031
0.14
0.006
1.35
0.04
18
15.17
0.00031
0.13
0.006
0.16
0.04
19
3.04
0.00039
0.13
0.007
0.99
0.05
20
18.35
0.0004
0.11
-
0.5
0.06
21
27.98
0.00025
0.11
-
2.29
0.03
22
17.81
0.00047
0.09
0.006
2.73
0.06
23
15.59
0.00041
0.1
0.006
0.16
0.06
24
14.85
0.00044
0.09
-
1.92
0.06
25
10.64
0.00073
0.09
0.009
2.45
0.1
26
6.05
0.00067
0.09
0.008
0.62
0.09
27
22.91
0.0004
0.08
0.005
1.46
0.06
28
0.33
0.00114
0.08
-
2.29
0.16
29
18.57
0.00055
0.08
0.006
1.79
0.08
30
8.05
0.00116
0.07
-
0.85
0.16
31
17.29
0.0006
0.07
-
0.04
0.08
32
8.55
0.00119
0.07
-
0.91
0.17
33
23.47
0.0005
0.06
-
3.01
0.07
34
16.24
0.00071
0.06
-
0.33
0.1
35
0.61
0.00159
0.06
0.013
0.35
0.22
36
22.8
0.0006
0.06
0.005
0.63
0.08
TIC 115198795
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
7.22
0.0
2.73
-
2.18
0.0
2
8.42
1e-05
0.31
-
2.08
0.01
3
1.07
1e-05
0.31
-
0.81
0.01
4
2.99
1e-05
0.25
0.003
0.53
0.01
5
9.58
2e-05
0.1
-
1.86
0.03
6
1.2
3e-05
0.1
-
0.42
0.04
7
0.32
4e-05
0.08
-
0.36
0.06
8
0.15
6e-05
0.05
-
2.55
0.08
9
1.94
7e-05
0.06
0.005
2.95
0.09
10
11.57
4e-05
0.04
-
3.04
0.06
11
1.8
0.0001
0.04
0.005
1.91
0.13
12
11.41
5e-05
0.04
-
0.7
0.06
13
0.39
0.0001
0.03
-
1.77
0.14
14
11.68
5e-05
0.03
-
2.67
0.07
15
1.71
0.0001
0.03
0.004
2.55
0.13
16
2.36
0.00012
0.03
-
2.5
0.16
17
16.84
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.01
0.06
18
2.73
0.00012
0.03
-
3.12
0.16
19
1.49
0.0001
0.03
0.004
1.13
0.13
20
10.98
6e-05
0.02
-
0.99
0.08
21
0.17
0.00012
0.03
-
0.23
0.16
22
1.84
0.00018
0.02
0.006
1.27
0.24
76
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:85==
23
1.15
0.00014
0.02
-
1.66
0.19
24
2.42
0.00015
0.02
0.004
1.15
0.2
25
0.77
0.00019
0.02
0.005
1.23
0.26
26
2.27
0.00018
0.02
-
1.09
0.24
27
2.05
0.00017
0.02
-
1.72
0.23
28
1.54
0.00015
0.02
0.004
1.49
0.2
29
15.64
9e-05
0.02
-
2.02
0.12
TIC 115351036
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
5.17
0.00057
0.96
-
0.49
0.02
2
5.41
0.00066
0.83
0.02
2.15
0.02
3
17.15
0.00036
0.67
-
0.1
0.01
4
17.72
0.00052
0.46
-
2.63
0.02
5
17.52
0.00053
0.45
-
1.12
0.02
6
18.14
0.00062
0.39
0.009
1.39
0.02
7
0.5
0.00184
0.31
-
0.57
0.07
8
0.86
0.00154
0.36
0.02
2.94
0.06
9
4.13
0.00157
0.35
-
0.32
0.06
10
3.66
0.00395
0.14
-
2.1
0.15
11
6.05
0.00346
0.15
0.019
1.4
0.13
12
1.63
0.00382
0.15
-
2.43
0.14
13
6.31
0.00422
0.12
0.019
0.78
0.16
14
3.32
0.00429
0.13
0.02
1.65
0.16
15
5.74
0.00646
0.08
0.02
2.9
0.24
16
2.72
0.00592
0.09
0.02
0.91
0.22
TIC 117151600
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.85
0.0
3.01
0.013
0.78
0.0
2
12.53
0.0
2.12
0.011
0.78
0.01
3
17.09
1e-05
1.1
0.016
2.5
0.01
4
14.66
1e-05
0.66
-
1.57
0.01
5
11.68
1e-05
0.6
0.007
0.38
0.01
6
13.7
1e-05
0.43
0.01
0.05
0.02
7
21.98
1e-05
0.39
-
2.68
0.02
8
17.54
1e-05
0.37
-
0.1
0.03
9
19.07
1e-05
0.32
0.006
0.55
0.02
10
0.74
3e-05
0.23
0.016
0.64
0.07
11
11.1
1e-05
0.22
0.006
1.94
0.03
12
7.37
2e-05
0.18
0.007
0.56
0.04
13
14.13
2e-05
0.16
0.008
2.73
0.05
14
15.25
4e-05
0.14
-
1.64
0.09
15
10.92
2e-05
0.14
-
1.22
0.04
16
2.96
3e-05
0.13
-
1.07
0.07
17
19.55
3e-05
0.11
0.005
3.04
0.05
18
7.14
5e-05
0.1
-
2.06
0.1
19
8.06
5e-05
0.1
0.01
2.12
0.1
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
77
==PAGE:86==
20
7.28
5e-05
0.08
0.008
1.84
0.09
21
6.52
9e-05
0.08
-
2.66
0.18
22
6.42
7e-05
0.08
-
0.89
0.14
23
8.03
6e-05
0.08
-
1.72
0.11
24
6.1
8e-05
0.08
0.013
0.76
0.16
25
25.6
5e-05
0.07
-
1.41
0.1
26
26.23
4e-05
0.07
0.006
2.19
0.08
27
9.17
9e-05
0.06
0.011
1.83
0.19
28
1.79
0.00013
0.06
-
2.67
0.26
29
5.01
0.00012
0.06
-
0.05
0.25
30
16.07
6e-05
0.06
0.007
1.25
0.12
31
8.68
0.0001
0.06
0.013
2.45
0.21
32
6.03
9e-05
0.07
0.012
0.47
0.18
33
5.95
0.0001
0.06
-
1.13
0.19
34
6.46
7e-05
0.07
0.009
2.46
0.13
TIC 11891826
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.05
0.0
4.84
0.019
0.29
0.0
2
16.19
0.0
4.35
0.015
0.38
0.0
3
12.98
0.0
3.19
-
0.92
0.0
4
15.63
0.0
2.75
-
0.11
0.01
5
7.54
0.0
2.1
-
1.11
0.01
6
8.33
1e-05
1.63
-
0.33
0.01
7
8.73
1e-05
1.33
-
2.42
0.01
8
8.3
1e-05
1.4
0.013
3.07
0.01
9
11.06
1e-05
1.38
-
1.56
0.01
10
13.56
1e-05
1.21
0.012
2.28
0.01
11
9.36
1e-05
1.22
-
0.46
0.01
12
6.89
1e-05
0.92
0.008
0.16
0.01
13
13.75
2e-05
0.56
-
0.01
0.02
14
12.66
2e-05
0.55
0.013
0.12
0.02
15
11.0
2e-05
0.49
0.014
2.26
0.03
16
14.34
1e-05
0.47
-
2.32
0.02
17
13.56
1e-05
0.73
0.012
1.07
0.02
18
8.84
2e-05
0.45
-
0.71
0.03
19
10.24
2e-05
0.4
-
1.31
0.02
20
14.64
2e-05
0.41
0.012
2.8
0.03
21
7.16
2e-05
0.33
-
2.32
0.02
22
11.33
3e-05
0.26
0.009
1.77
0.03
23
10.45
4e-05
0.21
-
2.54
0.05
24
0.76
8e-05
0.18
-
2.07
0.11
25
14.77
5e-05
0.19
0.012
1.83
0.06
26
8.66
5e-05
0.17
0.012
1.17
0.07
27
10.08
5e-05
0.16
-
1.0
0.06
28
10.89
5e-05
0.14
0.01
1.9
0.08
29
14.11
5e-05
0.13
-
2.42
0.07
30
7.05
4e-05
0.12
0.007
3.05
0.06
31
12.06
8e-05
0.11
0.013
0.02
0.11
78
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:87==
32
20.75
8e-05
0.11
-
1.59
0.1
33
24.24
5e-05
0.11
0.007
0.13
0.06
34
18.57
6e-05
0.11
-
2.12
0.08
35
9.61
0.00011
0.11
0.017
0.37
0.16
36
0.42
0.00015
0.1
-
0.9
0.21
37
12.15
9e-05
0.09
0.011
1.46
0.12
38
32.39
3e-05
0.09
0.004
0.07
0.04
39
1.35
0.00019
0.08
0.022
1.0
0.26
40
2.06
0.00017
0.09
-
1.2
0.23
41
0.32
0.00021
0.08
0.024
1.33
0.29
42
23.67
6e-05
0.08
-
2.38
0.09
43
10.09
9e-05
0.08
0.01
0.28
0.12
TIC 120597170
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
29.89
0.0003
0.49
-
1.86
0.01
2
18.49
0.00035
0.41
-
1.11
0.01
3
37.54
0.00041
0.34
0.006
0.47
0.02
4
35.08
0.00048
0.3
0.006
2.04
0.02
5
16.23
0.00067
0.21
-
3.09
0.03
6
29.68
0.00072
0.21
-
1.91
0.03
7
19.34
0.00066
0.21
-
1.57
0.03
8
31.28
0.00091
0.15
0.006
2.21
0.04
9
21.21
0.00093
0.15
0.006
2.16
0.04
10
15.87
0.00093
0.15
0.006
2.55
0.04
11
19.24
0.00097
0.15
0.006
0.13
0.04
12
31.85
0.00148
0.09
0.006
0.1
0.06
13
31.0
0.00162
0.09
0.006
1.45
0.07
14
20.62
0.00164
0.09
0.006
0.37
0.07
15
23.18
0.00173
0.08
0.006
2.01
0.07
16
21.56
0.00188
0.08
0.006
1.02
0.08
17
17.36
0.00254
0.06
0.006
0.17
0.11
18
40.84
0.0029
0.05
0.006
3.11
0.12
19
49.85
0.00282
0.05
-
0.42
0.12
20
17.26
0.00372
0.04
-
1.4
0.16
21
34.89
0.00389
0.04
-
0.23
0.16
22
0.3
0.00653
0.03
-
0.8
0.27
23
52.82
0.00421
0.03
0.006
0.86
0.18
TIC 121050405
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
7.13
0.00026
1.34
0.016
1.29
0.01
2
16.03
0.00043
0.67
0.013
1.6
0.02
3
16.68
0.00051
0.55
0.013
2.51
0.02
4
1.43
0.00073
0.5
-
1.93
0.03
5
5.1
0.00069
0.51
-
1.59
0.03
6
1.98
0.00084
0.43
0.017
0.34
0.04
7
5.25
0.0009
0.39
0.016
1.32
0.04
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
79
==PAGE:88==
8
8.52
0.00094
0.39
-
0.91
0.04
9
3.44
0.00108
0.31
0.016
1.21
0.05
10
6.18
0.001
0.35
-
0.82
0.05
11
5.9
0.00144
0.24
0.016
0.84
0.07
12
0.16
0.00151
0.24
-
1.59
0.07
13
9.39
0.00179
0.2
-
1.08
0.08
14
19.11
0.00111
0.22
0.011
0.41
0.05
15
5.6
0.00157
0.22
-
2.31
0.07
16
14.23
0.00195
0.17
-
1.46
0.09
17
18.5
0.00205
0.13
-
1.47
0.1
18
11.21
0.00287
0.14
-
0.24
0.13
19
9.55
0.00319
0.11
0.017
2.38
0.15
20
6.3
0.00286
0.12
-
2.26
0.13
21
4.38
0.00261
0.13
0.016
0.48
0.12
22
2.59
0.00298
0.12
-
2.57
0.14
23
10.4
0.00396
0.09
0.017
0.95
0.18
24
10.51
0.00394
0.09
0.017
0.69
0.18
25
6.03
0.00294
0.12
-
0.85
0.14
26
12.42
0.00343
0.11
0.017
1.73
0.16
27
8.21
0.00383
0.09
0.017
2.94
0.18
28
9.15
0.00333
0.11
0.017
2.74
0.15
29
17.29
0.00302
0.09
0.013
1.19
0.14
30
4.8
0.0042
0.08
-
0.61
0.19
31
11.88
0.00445
0.08
0.018
1.32
0.21
32
9.92
0.00435
0.08
0.017
0.94
0.2
33
14.12
0.00443
0.08
-
0.52
0.21
34
13.32
0.00445
0.08
-
1.18
0.21
35
13.41
0.00493
0.07
-
0.61
0.23
36
9.12
0.00571
0.06
-
3.05
0.26
37
4.6
0.00535
0.07
0.016
0.54
0.25
38
12.51
0.00601
0.06
0.017
3.03
0.28
TIC 121124576
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
10.34
0.0
1.98
-
1.87
0.0
2
12.47
0.0
0.97
0.003
1.02
0.0
3
0.1
2e-05
0.11
-
2.27
0.03
4
21.56
2e-05
0.09
0.003
1.86
0.03
5
15.28
2e-05
0.06
0.002
0.59
0.03
6
0.53
4e-05
0.05
-
2.09
0.09
7
15.87
2e-05
0.05
0.002
1.13
0.04
8
20.34
2e-05
0.05
-
0.42
0.04
9
22.24
2e-05
0.05
0.002
2.13
0.05
10
17.39
2e-05
0.04
0.002
3.04
0.04
11
12.05
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.37
0.06
12
20.8
3e-05
0.04
-
0.05
0.06
13
8.74
3e-05
0.04
-
0.58
0.05
14
22.33
4e-05
0.03
-
1.19
0.08
15
23.06
3e-05
0.03
-
1.68
0.07
80
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:89==
16
15.66
4e-05
0.03
0.003
1.13
0.07
17
20.23
4e-05
0.03
-
2.43
0.07
18
13.24
5e-05
0.03
0.003
0.04
0.09
19
22.72
4e-05
0.02
-
2.29
0.09
20
19.49
5e-05
0.02
-
1.38
0.1
21
15.62
6e-05
0.02
-
1.07
0.13
22
17.18
6e-05
0.02
0.002
1.72
0.13
23
15.53
6e-05
0.02
-
1.07
0.13
24
17.42
6e-05
0.02
0.002
0.91
0.11
25
1.08
0.00013
0.02
-
0.98
0.26
26
23.03
7e-05
0.02
-
2.67
0.13
27
17.64
6e-05
0.02
-
2.74
0.12
28
9.07
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.82
0.13
29
2.14
0.00012
0.01
-
1.82
0.24
30
3.61
0.00011
0.01
-
0.32
0.22
31
14.12
7e-05
0.01
0.002
1.51
0.14
32
0.46
0.00013
0.01
-
0.81
0.26
33
0.03
0.00011
0.02
0.003
0.95
0.22
34
1.36
0.00013
0.01
0.003
1.73
0.25
TIC 122248346
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
40.46
0.0
0.36
-
0.49
0.01
2
35.88
1e-05
0.28
0.005
2.95
0.02
3
25.6
1e-05
0.26
0.003
1.45
0.01
4
29.31
1e-05
0.25
0.003
0.67
0.01
5
43.45
1e-05
0.22
0.004
0.85
0.02
6
38.17
1e-05
0.21
0.003
0.83
0.01
7
31.7
2e-05
0.18
-
0.22
0.02
8
31.44
1e-05
0.18
-
2.12
0.02
9
32.0
2e-05
0.17
-
1.34
0.02
10
27.94
2e-05
0.15
-
0.75
0.03
11
24.67
2e-05
0.13
0.003
1.97
0.03
12
25.93
2e-05
0.11
0.002
2.93
0.02
13
18.06
2e-05
0.09
-
0.39
0.03
14
40.73
2e-05
0.09
0.002
3.05
0.02
15
26.84
3e-05
0.08
0.004
2.74
0.04
16
32.67
2e-05
0.08
0.002
1.09
0.02
17
41.36
3e-05
0.07
-
2.62
0.05
18
34.85
2e-05
0.07
-
2.25
0.03
19
56.3
2e-05
0.06
0.002
1.53
0.03
20
33.99
4e-05
0.07
-
1.62
0.05
21
36.96
3e-05
0.07
0.002
2.88
0.04
22
25.31
3e-05
0.06
-
0.15
0.04
23
31.88
4e-05
0.07
0.003
0.96
0.05
24
40.0
3e-05
0.06
-
3.1
0.04
25
34.08
4e-05
0.06
-
1.23
0.06
26
28.85
4e-05
0.06
-
0.3
0.05
27
31.94
5e-05
0.06
0.004
1.3
0.06
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
81
==PAGE:90==
28
41.72
3e-05
0.05
0.002
0.73
0.04
29
0.19
5e-05
0.05
0.003
2.52
0.07
30
37.29
5e-05
0.05
-
0.33
0.07
31
53.17
6e-05
0.04
0.004
2.45
0.08
32
42.15
3e-05
0.04
-
3.04
0.05
33
62.83
4e-05
0.04
0.002
2.22
0.05
34
20.33
4e-05
0.04
-
2.69
0.05
35
27.63
5e-05
0.04
-
2.65
0.07
36
33.71
5e-05
0.04
-
2.89
0.07
37
24.83
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.6
0.05
38
0.1
6e-05
0.03
0.003
2.85
0.09
39
23.45
6e-05
0.03
-
0.14
0.08
40
40.98
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.73
0.08
41
44.39
4e-05
0.03
0.002
3.06
0.06
42
38.62
7e-05
0.03
0.003
1.52
0.09
43
24.48
7e-05
0.03
0.003
2.78
0.1
44
0.94
0.00012
0.03
0.005
0.62
0.17
45
59.69
0.0001
0.03
0.004
3.03
0.14
46
21.48
8e-05
0.03
0.003
2.14
0.11
47
19.06
6e-05
0.03
0.002
2.83
0.09
48
50.01
7e-05
0.03
0.003
0.55
0.1
49
39.26
7e-05
0.03
0.003
1.05
0.1
50
0.5
9e-05
0.03
-
3.03
0.12
51
26.71
8e-05
0.03
0.003
2.71
0.1
52
48.49
6e-05
0.02
0.002
0.6
0.08
53
19.22
9e-05
0.02
-
0.38
0.13
54
42.43
9e-05
0.02
-
1.73
0.13
55
0.67
0.00014
0.02
-
0.04
0.19
56
37.09
0.00012
0.02
0.003
0.53
0.16
57
1.15
0.00016
0.02
-
2.79
0.22
58
20.77
0.0001
0.02
-
1.29
0.14
59
47.49
9e-05
0.02
0.002
1.43
0.12
60
30.69
0.00012
0.02
0.003
2.55
0.17
61
34.4
0.00012
0.02
0.003
2.24
0.17
62
2.95
0.00016
0.02
0.003
0.15
0.22
63
1.56
0.00021
0.02
0.005
2.39
0.29
64
49.25
0.00012
0.02
0.002
2.75
0.16
65
30.46
0.0001
0.02
0.002
0.87
0.14
TIC 122932763
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.28
0.0003
0.62
-
2.12
0.01
2
20.62
0.00033
0.57
0.009
0.89
0.02
3
24.99
0.00056
0.34
-
2.47
0.03
4
21.91
0.00062
0.3
0.009
0.88
0.03
5
24.46
0.00085
0.23
-
1.74
0.04
6
7.2
0.00151
0.12
-
0.18
0.07
7
27.04
0.00255
0.08
0.009
0.19
0.12
8
0.38
0.00309
0.07
-
1.44
0.15
82
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:91==
9
3.6
0.0028
0.07
-
2.1
0.14
10
0.21
0.00348
0.06
-
0.36
0.17
11
0.68
0.00389
0.05
0.01
0.72
0.19
TIC 12470841
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.67
2e-05
0.23
0.006
2.59
0.03
2
18.67
2e-05
0.23
0.006
2.59
0.03
3
18.67
2e-05
0.23
0.006
2.59
0.03
4
18.67
2e-05
0.23
0.006
2.59
0.03
5
18.67
2e-05
0.23
0.006
2.59
0.03
6
18.67
2e-05
0.23
0.006
2.59
0.03
7
18.67
2e-05
0.23
0.006
2.59
0.03
8
18.67
2e-05
0.23
0.006
2.59
0.03
TIC 12473170
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
16.55
0.00014
1.5
-
0.87
0.01
2
19.33
0.00014
1.39
0.008
0.7
0.01
3
15.71
0.0002
1.03
0.009
2.51
0.01
4
12.75
0.00024
0.83
-
2.31
0.01
5
12.85
0.00026
0.74
0.009
2.27
0.01
6
18.18
0.00029
0.71
-
0.57
0.01
7
14.92
0.00039
0.52
-
3.04
0.02
8
18.57
0.00059
0.34
0.009
0.65
0.03
9
13.79
0.0008
0.25
0.009
0.46
0.03
10
17.08
0.00076
0.27
-
1.06
0.03
11
16.03
0.00082
0.24
0.009
2.33
0.04
12
17.58
0.00099
0.21
-
0.18
0.04
13
15.15
0.00102
0.2
-
2.12
0.04
14
22.06
0.0011
0.18
-
2.36
0.05
15
22.5
0.00134
0.15
-
2.27
0.06
16
19.94
0.00148
0.13
0.009
2.46
0.06
17
11.86
0.00148
0.13
-
3.09
0.06
18
20.38
0.00165
0.12
0.008
2.41
0.07
19
22.88
0.00185
0.1
0.008
2.27
0.08
20
7.34
0.00192
0.1
-
1.09
0.08
21
12.29
0.00233
0.08
-
1.78
0.1
22
0.59
0.00416
0.07
-
2.28
0.18
23
0.85
0.00381
0.07
0.011
2.11
0.16
24
18.01
0.00305
0.07
0.009
0.57
0.13
25
7.87
0.00308
0.06
0.008
2.79
0.13
26
23.09
0.00343
0.06
0.008
0.95
0.15
27
4.17
0.0044
0.05
-
2.72
0.19
28
7.71
0.0037
0.05
-
0.14
0.16
29
23.26
0.00393
0.05
0.008
1.05
0.17
30
29.41
0.00447
0.04
-
0.48
0.19
31
0.34
0.00636
0.04
-
1.5
0.27
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
83
==PAGE:92==
TIC 125620633
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.58
8e-05
2.4
-
1.25
0.0
2
1.68
0.0002
1.24
0.011
1.65
0.01
3
14.0
0.00027
1.06
0.013
3.07
0.01
4
17.17
0.00028
0.73
0.009
0.41
0.01
5
0.56
0.00071
0.41
0.013
0.82
0.03
6
16.83
0.00077
0.29
0.01
2.33
0.03
7
17.85
0.00094
0.2
0.008
2.43
0.04
8
19.27
0.00082
0.19
0.007
0.8
0.04
9
6.72
0.00095
0.18
0.008
1.55
0.04
10
2.45
0.00162
0.14
-
2.94
0.07
11
22.71
0.00102
0.11
0.005
1.31
0.05
12
22.58
0.00103
0.11
0.005
1.16
0.05
13
19.37
0.00181
0.08
-
0.39
0.08
14
13.76
0.00362
0.08
-
2.58
0.16
15
13.84
0.00438
0.06
0.013
0.64
0.2
16
11.85
0.00412
0.06
0.011
0.11
0.19
17
1.32
0.004
0.07
-
2.8
0.18
TIC 125989316
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.35
0.00013
2.74
0.015
1.89
0.01
2
1.99
0.00015
2.68
0.018
1.62
0.01
3
17.88
0.00017
2.01
-
1.9
0.01
4
18.75
0.00026
1.3
-
0.84
0.01
5
2.51
0.0003
1.37
-
0.8
0.01
6
9.43
0.00101
0.43
-
0.92
0.04
7
2.69
0.0012
0.34
-
2.31
0.05
8
10.61
0.00144
0.31
-
2.42
0.06
9
2.1
0.00162
0.26
0.018
2.77
0.07
10
16.28
0.00155
0.25
0.017
2.5
0.07
11
10.2
0.00216
0.21
0.02
2.03
0.09
12
11.41
0.00211
0.21
-
0.09
0.09
13
3.56
0.00238
0.18
-
1.91
0.1
14
19.77
0.00193
0.17
0.014
1.48
0.08
15
19.48
0.0022
0.15
0.014
2.64
0.1
16
20.05
0.0023
0.15
0.015
1.74
0.1
17
12.09
0.00321
0.13
-
0.55
0.14
18
0.48
0.00302
0.14
-
1.71
0.13
19
5.48
0.00414
0.1
0.019
2.78
0.18
20
12.19
0.00375
0.11
-
2.19
0.16
21
11.77
0.00445
0.1
0.018
0.62
0.19
22
40.42
0.00234
0.1
-
2.21
0.1
23
12.28
0.00479
0.08
0.018
1.11
0.21
24
23.41
0.00378
0.08
0.013
1.34
0.16
84
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:93==
25
9.61
0.00571
0.08
0.019
0.13
0.25
26
18.42
0.00472
0.07
-
1.2
0.21
27
10.41
0.00472
0.09
0.019
0.1
0.21
28
8.68
0.00638
0.07
0.019
2.35
0.28
29
37.91
0.00383
0.07
0.011
2.38
0.17
30
5.81
0.00665
0.06
-
2.9
0.29
TIC 127714272
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
45.71
0.0
0.66
0.004
1.02
0.01
2
42.75
2e-05
0.18
0.004
2.65
0.02
3
41.35
2e-05
0.15
0.004
2.1
0.02
4
44.33
2e-05
0.11
0.003
1.52
0.03
5
43.91
2e-05
0.11
-
2.83
0.03
6
39.8
4e-05
0.09
0.004
2.74
0.05
7
43.06
4e-05
0.07
0.004
2.3
0.05
8
39.28
6e-05
0.06
0.005
2.01
0.08
9
44.41
5e-05
0.05
0.004
0.83
0.07
10
40.67
5e-05
0.05
0.004
2.59
0.07
11
37.41
5e-05
0.05
-
2.23
0.07
12
61.28
5e-05
0.05
0.003
2.07
0.07
13
48.45
7e-05
0.04
-
0.38
0.09
14
49.35
8e-05
0.04
0.004
1.75
0.11
15
1.42
0.00011
0.03
0.005
0.71
0.14
16
63.03
0.0001
0.03
0.004
0.12
0.14
17
52.61
0.0001
0.03
0.004
1.13
0.13
18
1.44
0.00012
0.03
-
1.3
0.16
19
0.15
0.0002
0.03
0.008
1.73
0.26
20
35.76
0.0001
0.03
-
0.45
0.14
21
57.17
0.00011
0.03
0.004
1.7
0.14
22
31.98
0.00013
0.03
0.005
1.45
0.18
23
36.5
0.0001
0.03
0.003
3.0
0.14
24
63.06
0.00014
0.03
0.005
2.62
0.18
25
33.52
0.00011
0.02
0.003
2.82
0.14
TIC 127835894
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
16.12
0.0001
0.55
0.008
0.34
0.01
2
26.47
0.0003
0.19
-
2.26
0.04
3
12.86
0.00031
0.18
0.008
2.1
0.04
4
14.19
0.00033
0.16
0.008
1.16
0.05
5
3.75
0.00048
0.13
0.008
1.93
0.07
6
37.92
0.00051
0.11
-
0.28
0.07
7
24.67
0.00068
0.08
0.008
0.91
0.09
8
32.08
0.00066
0.08
-
2.24
0.09
9
36.33
0.00067
0.08
0.007
2.77
0.09
10
16.59
0.00078
0.07
0.008
2.95
0.11
11
18.76
0.00072
0.07
0.007
1.8
0.1
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
85
==PAGE:94==
12
4.77
0.00084
0.07
0.008
0.49
0.12
13
2.51
0.00114
0.05
0.008
0.92
0.16
14
2.83
0.00121
0.05
0.009
0.88
0.17
15
28.93
0.00105
0.05
-
2.03
0.15
TIC 127962386
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
33.0
4e-05
1.21
-
0.54
0.01
2
19.53
8e-05
0.49
0.006
1.33
0.01
3
36.07
0.00012
0.4
0.007
1.57
0.02
4
20.57
0.00013
0.32
-
0.17
0.02
5
27.31
0.00017
0.27
-
1.35
0.02
6
24.21
0.00019
0.25
0.006
3.08
0.03
7
39.72
0.0002
0.23
-
2.27
0.03
8
42.48
0.00025
0.19
-
2.98
0.03
9
6.69
0.00029
0.17
-
1.22
0.04
10
14.11
0.00027
0.16
-
0.67
0.04
11
24.09
0.00027
0.16
0.006
1.14
0.04
12
15.29
0.00029
0.14
-
1.65
0.04
13
19.44
0.00026
0.16
0.006
1.38
0.04
14
17.91
0.00033
0.14
0.007
1.67
0.05
15
6.04
0.00037
0.15
0.007
0.46
0.05
16
9.92
0.00032
0.15
0.007
2.36
0.04
17
25.51
0.00032
0.15
-
1.71
0.04
18
22.97
0.00029
0.14
-
2.09
0.04
19
17.43
0.00034
0.14
0.007
0.01
0.05
20
27.54
0.00031
0.14
-
1.53
0.04
21
64.56
0.00026
0.13
-
1.99
0.04
22
3.54
0.00042
0.13
-
1.03
0.06
23
29.92
0.00035
0.12
-
0.21
0.05
24
36.86
0.00041
0.11
-
2.51
0.06
25
16.92
0.00044
0.1
0.006
2.4
0.06
26
67.29
0.00031
0.1
-
1.34
0.04
27
15.14
0.00042
0.1
0.006
2.41
0.06
28
22.61
0.00046
0.09
-
2.15
0.06
29
8.62
0.00053
0.09
-
0.01
0.07
30
6.78
0.00052
0.09
-
2.33
0.07
31
16.0
0.00047
0.09
-
2.46
0.06
32
8.31
0.00052
0.09
0.006
0.54
0.07
33
38.13
0.00052
0.09
-
1.27
0.07
34
7.07
0.0005
0.1
-
0.99
0.07
35
2.91
0.0006
0.09
-
0.05
0.08
36
18.14
0.00055
0.09
-
1.66
0.08
37
18.67
0.00055
0.09
0.007
0.62
0.08
38
20.84
0.00049
0.09
-
0.37
0.07
39
16.61
0.00056
0.08
0.006
3.08
0.08
40
15.38
0.00056
0.07
-
2.46
0.08
41
4.85
0.00063
0.08
0.007
2.19
0.09
42
31.55
0.00056
0.08
0.006
0.19
0.08
86
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:95==
43
24.72
0.00062
0.08
0.007
2.53
0.09
44
49.28
0.00056
0.07
-
3.02
0.08
45
21.21
0.00059
0.07
0.006
0.71
0.08
46
57.42
0.00051
0.07
0.005
0.46
0.07
47
30.37
0.00059
0.07
0.006
0.02
0.08
48
18.91
0.00065
0.07
-
0.25
0.09
49
12.16
0.0006
0.07
-
2.01
0.08
50
22.68
0.00061
0.07
-
0.2
0.08
51
55.84
0.00057
0.07
-
1.81
0.08
52
3.27
0.00091
0.06
0.007
2.24
0.13
53
35.94
0.00072
0.07
-
2.49
0.1
54
11.79
0.00071
0.06
0.006
0.42
0.1
55
45.85
0.00064
0.06
0.005
1.58
0.09
56
62.85
0.00057
0.06
-
3.07
0.08
57
18.72
0.00079
0.06
0.006
1.16
0.11
58
9.57
0.00081
0.06
0.007
1.24
0.11
59
64.88
0.00062
0.06
0.005
0.84
0.09
60
11.77
0.00074
0.06
0.006
1.02
0.1
61
33.63
0.00088
0.06
0.007
2.51
0.12
62
16.83
0.00084
0.05
0.006
0.1
0.12
63
3.08
0.00084
0.06
-
1.51
0.12
64
79.11
0.00064
0.05
0.005
2.37
0.09
65
29.11
0.00077
0.05
0.006
2.13
0.11
66
21.55
0.00076
0.05
0.006
0.92
0.11
67
13.01
0.00079
0.05
-
0.4
0.11
68
29.28
0.00083
0.05
0.006
2.43
0.12
69
5.3
0.00105
0.05
-
1.08
0.15
70
13.43
0.00091
0.05
0.006
3.08
0.13
71
31.16
0.0009
0.05
0.006
2.53
0.12
72
26.34
0.00103
0.05
0.007
0.7
0.14
73
3.33
0.00097
0.05
-
2.75
0.13
74
27.65
0.00096
0.05
0.006
2.08
0.13
75
23.52
0.00086
0.05
0.006
1.51
0.12
76
43.68
0.00093
0.05
0.006
2.28
0.13
77
17.69
0.00108
0.05
-
3.06
0.15
78
50.66
0.00088
0.05
-
0.48
0.12
79
10.56
0.00098
0.05
0.006
1.09
0.14
80
16.7
0.00101
0.05
0.006
1.33
0.14
81
20.29
0.0009
0.04
-
2.08
0.13
82
27.52
0.00096
0.05
-
2.51
0.13
83
37.12
0.001
0.04
-
0.68
0.14
84
30.46
0.00091
0.05
-
2.54
0.13
85
29.0
0.00091
0.05
0.006
1.94
0.13
86
33.16
0.00111
0.04
-
1.6
0.15
87
38.99
0.00103
0.04
-
0.88
0.14
88
4.82
0.00114
0.04
0.007
2.77
0.16
89
26.56
0.00115
0.04
0.007
2.9
0.16
90
36.28
0.00107
0.04
0.006
0.81
0.15
91
11.89
0.001
0.04
-
1.81
0.14
92
21.92
0.00095
0.04
-
2.75
0.13
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
87
==PAGE:96==
93
23.21
0.00096
0.04
0.006
2.98
0.13
94
2.52
0.0013
0.04
0.008
1.26
0.18
95
13.18
0.00107
0.04
0.006
0.56
0.15
96
50.32
0.00097
0.04
-
0.25
0.13
97
37.4
0.0011
0.04
0.006
0.33
0.15
98
86.11
0.00082
0.04
0.005
0.17
0.11
99
3.87
0.00132
0.04
0.007
0.84
0.18
100
31.17
0.00104
0.04
0.006
2.99
0.14
101
13.62
0.0011
0.04
-
0.04
0.15
102
21.17
0.00108
0.04
-
1.53
0.15
103
3.57
0.00151
0.04
0.007
0.0
0.21
104
29.57
0.00103
0.04
-
3.11
0.14
105
58.32
0.00092
0.04
-
2.32
0.13
106
8.94
0.00123
0.04
-
0.78
0.17
107
31.67
0.00123
0.04
-
2.04
0.17
108
32.04
0.00128
0.04
-
1.07
0.18
109
49.81
0.0011
0.04
-
2.93
0.15
110
29.19
0.00114
0.04
-
1.19
0.16
111
0.64
0.00164
0.04
0.008
1.68
0.23
112
4.4
0.00142
0.04
0.007
2.21
0.2
113
25.02
0.00131
0.04
0.007
1.14
0.18
114
6.57
0.00143
0.04
0.007
2.93
0.2
115
30.72
0.0012
0.03
-
3.09
0.17
116
37.64
0.00128
0.04
0.006
0.93
0.18
117
16.1
0.0012
0.03
-
2.59
0.17
118
1.36
0.00165
0.03
-
2.53
0.23
119
21.07
0.00121
0.03
0.006
2.33
0.17
120
24.11
0.00125
0.04
0.006
2.13
0.17
121
6.97
0.00142
0.03
-
0.96
0.2
122
5.03
0.00149
0.04
-
1.59
0.21
123
1.76
0.00171
0.03
0.008
2.76
0.24
124
58.03
0.00104
0.03
0.005
0.83
0.14
125
43.24
0.00141
0.03
0.006
1.15
0.19
126
10.25
0.00141
0.03
0.006
2.11
0.2
127
36.64
0.00139
0.03
-
1.12
0.19
128
38.94
0.00125
0.04
-
2.3
0.17
129
29.07
0.0012
0.03
0.006
2.03
0.17
130
30.02
0.00132
0.03
-
2.71
0.18
131
5.26
0.00163
0.03
-
1.37
0.23
132
12.57
0.00126
0.03
0.006
2.06
0.18
133
39.83
0.00146
0.03
0.006
0.01
0.2
134
41.73
0.00149
0.03
0.006
1.07
0.21
135
31.07
0.00142
0.03
0.006
0.78
0.2
136
3.35
0.00148
0.04
-
1.31
0.21
137
28.37
0.00144
0.03
0.006
0.81
0.2
TIC 129887115
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.48
0.00015
1.85
0.013
1.42
0.01
88
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:97==
2
13.94
0.00014
1.96
0.013
0.17
0.01
3
26.38
0.00018
1.63
0.014
1.7
0.01
4
13.92
0.00017
1.68
0.013
2.05
0.01
5
19.28
0.00044
0.76
0.016
0.43
0.02
6
17.59
0.00062
0.53
-
0.37
0.03
7
24.48
0.00074
0.46
-
3.0
0.03
8
21.76
0.00075
0.49
-
1.28
0.03
9
21.96
0.00088
0.41
0.017
2.66
0.04
10
11.49
0.00071
0.33
-
1.07
0.03
11
17.12
0.00107
0.3
0.015
0.9
0.05
12
33.32
0.00115
0.23
-
0.73
0.05
13
24.76
0.00129
0.27
0.016
0.2
0.06
14
21.11
0.00138
0.27
-
2.15
0.06
15
24.14
0.00163
0.21
0.016
3.04
0.08
16
18.52
0.00179
0.19
0.016
0.31
0.08
17
35.02
0.00132
0.19
-
0.63
0.06
18
34.88
0.00138
0.18
-
2.74
0.06
19
28.67
0.00163
0.17
0.013
2.63
0.08
20
29.28
0.00158
0.17
0.013
0.67
0.07
21
20.99
0.00229
0.16
0.017
2.3
0.11
22
19.94
0.00224
0.15
-
1.85
0.1
23
22.73
0.00247
0.15
-
3.12
0.12
24
39.15
0.00156
0.14
0.01
2.93
0.07
25
21.44
0.00278
0.13
-
2.69
0.13
26
12.42
0.00202
0.13
-
2.74
0.09
27
20.83
0.00326
0.11
-
1.02
0.15
28
20.64
0.00315
0.11
0.016
2.04
0.15
29
32.4
0.00224
0.11
0.011
0.42
0.1
30
12.69
0.00247
0.1
-
1.61
0.12
31
33.28
0.00138
0.19
0.012
3.01
0.06
32
37.36
0.00255
0.1
-
3.11
0.12
33
30.36
0.00266
0.1
-
0.65
0.12
34
14.58
0.00342
0.09
-
1.86
0.16
35
28.22
0.00284
0.1
-
2.74
0.13
36
28.38
0.00273
0.1
-
0.59
0.13
37
32.43
0.0025
0.1
0.011
1.33
0.12
38
22.57
0.00402
0.09
0.017
1.63
0.19
39
22.25
0.00392
0.09
0.017
2.1
0.18
40
34.61
0.00296
0.09
-
1.86
0.14
41
1.51
0.00411
0.11
-
1.36
0.19
42
29.49
0.00325
0.08
0.013
1.15
0.15
43
25.36
0.00404
0.08
-
0.68
0.19
44
39.3
0.00273
0.08
0.01
2.79
0.13
TIC 129979528
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.82
0.0002
2.15
0.019
1.3
0.01
2
1.64
0.00019
2.18
-
1.48
0.01
3
2.46
0.00024
1.78
0.018
0.06
0.01
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
89
==PAGE:98==
4
3.28
0.00024
1.84
-
0.56
0.01
5
4.1
0.00029
1.54
-
1.54
0.01
6
4.92
0.00032
1.45
-
2.96
0.01
7
5.74
0.00043
1.09
-
1.89
0.02
8
6.56
0.0005
0.92
0.02
2.69
0.02
9
20.16
0.00027
0.77
0.009
2.33
0.01
10
9.85
0.00074
0.59
-
1.44
0.03
11
21.06
0.00036
0.57
0.009
1.7
0.02
12
7.38
0.00077
0.57
0.019
1.7
0.03
13
14.76
0.00058
0.42
0.01
2.0
0.03
14
13.93
0.00061
0.41
0.011
1.36
0.03
15
13.12
0.00066
0.42
-
1.57
0.03
16
8.2
0.00115
0.37
0.018
0.77
0.05
17
20.54
0.00063
0.33
0.009
2.12
0.03
18
15.58
0.00073
0.32
-
2.19
0.03
19
12.3
0.00091
0.34
-
1.68
0.04
20
11.48
0.00129
0.28
0.016
2.37
0.06
21
16.4
0.00077
0.29
0.009
2.74
0.03
22
27.79
0.00064
0.25
-
2.11
0.03
23
22.14
0.00075
0.26
0.008
0.98
0.03
24
24.88
0.00076
0.25
0.008
1.88
0.03
25
34.13
0.00059
0.22
-
1.91
0.03
26
23.77
0.00092
0.21
-
1.89
0.04
27
10.68
0.00166
0.23
0.017
1.84
0.07
28
7.76
0.00208
0.21
0.019
1.58
0.09
29
24.59
0.00098
0.19
-
1.02
0.04
30
17.22
0.00115
0.19
-
2.71
0.05
31
21.31
0.00107
0.19
0.009
2.28
0.05
32
25.41
0.00108
0.17
0.008
1.85
0.05
33
0.41
0.00234
0.19
0.019
1.03
0.1
34
9.18
0.00248
0.17
0.018
1.47
0.11
35
32.79
0.00094
0.15
0.006
1.86
0.04
36
9.44
0.00308
0.14
0.018
0.04
0.13
37
26.23
0.00131
0.14
0.008
2.14
0.06
38
19.21
0.0018
0.12
-
1.85
0.08
39
34.43
0.00108
0.12
0.006
2.15
0.05
40
31.15
0.00121
0.12
0.006
2.85
0.05
41
25.64
0.00162
0.11
0.008
0.61
0.07
42
23.21
0.00175
0.11
-
2.81
0.08
43
18.03
0.00203
0.11
0.009
1.19
0.09
44
10.26
0.00392
0.11
0.018
1.25
0.17
45
40.99
0.00146
0.1
0.006
0.53
0.06
46
27.46
0.00177
0.09
-
2.23
0.08
47
41.81
0.00157
0.09
-
0.82
0.07
48
42.63
0.00158
0.09
0.006
2.35
0.07
49
11.68
0.00415
0.09
0.015
1.84
0.18
50
10.38
0.00495
0.08
0.018
1.31
0.21
51
21.73
0.00238
0.08
0.008
2.64
0.1
52
43.45
0.0017
0.08
0.006
1.05
0.07
53
28.69
0.0021
0.08
-
2.05
0.09
90
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:99==
54
44.27
0.0018
0.08
-
2.73
0.08
55
9.96
0.00569
0.08
-
2.42
0.25
TIC 130647468
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.84
5e-05
1.81
-
0.97
0.0
2
1.56
0.0013
0.13
-
1.79
0.12
3
1.18
0.00188
0.09
0.016
0.32
0.18
4
18.07
0.001
0.1
-
3.04
0.09
5
0.09
0.00248
0.07
0.016
2.39
0.24
6
0.39
0.00239
0.07
0.016
2.75
0.23
7
1.08
0.00252
0.07
0.016
3.02
0.24
8
1.72
0.00268
0.06
-
0.55
0.25
9
3.16
0.00303
0.05
-
3.13
0.29
10
1.06
0.00296
0.06
0.016
0.26
0.28
11
0.23
0.0032
0.05
-
2.28
0.3
TIC 134363162
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.95
4e-05
5.95
0.012
1.07
0.0
2
9.61
0.0002
1.31
-
0.97
0.01
3
9.95
0.00033
0.78
0.013
1.16
0.02
4
14.2
0.00033
0.79
-
1.2
0.02
5
4.12
0.00041
0.69
-
1.87
0.02
6
9.42
0.00039
0.68
0.013
2.3
0.02
7
13.03
0.0005
0.53
-
0.66
0.02
8
7.29
0.00055
0.47
0.012
1.42
0.03
9
14.01
0.00053
0.5
0.013
1.48
0.03
10
6.97
0.00063
0.4
0.012
1.14
0.03
11
11.06
0.00062
0.42
-
0.9
0.03
12
4.29
0.00072
0.39
-
1.58
0.03
13
0.48
0.00117
0.27
0.015
0.93
0.06
14
16.24
0.00111
0.25
0.014
0.78
0.05
15
5.4
0.00112
0.24
0.013
1.32
0.05
16
13.24
0.00108
0.25
0.013
2.14
0.05
17
4.44
0.00119
0.23
0.013
2.39
0.06
18
0.18
0.00169
0.19
0.016
2.96
0.08
19
13.61
0.00128
0.21
-
0.26
0.06
20
7.58
0.00124
0.2
0.012
0.14
0.06
21
5.36
0.00127
0.22
-
0.15
0.06
22
12.07
0.00131
0.19
-
2.07
0.06
23
3.67
0.00138
0.21
0.014
1.17
0.07
24
3.76
0.00157
0.18
0.014
0.26
0.08
25
10.92
0.00148
0.17
0.012
1.84
0.07
26
12.6
0.00171
0.15
0.012
1.91
0.08
27
0.93
0.00158
0.18
-
1.1
0.08
28
15.07
0.00187
0.15
0.013
0.65
0.09
29
3.31
0.00207
0.14
-
1.46
0.1
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
91
==PAGE:100==
30
18.89
0.00217
0.13
0.013
2.37
0.1
31
20.02
0.00197
0.13
-
2.02
0.1
32
8.09
0.00178
0.14
0.012
2.49
0.09
33
3.41
0.0025
0.11
-
2.52
0.12
34
21.55
0.0021
0.11
0.011
2.21
0.1
35
3.92
0.00275
0.1
-
0.52
0.13
36
17.4
0.00274
0.1
-
2.15
0.13
37
1.43
0.00304
0.1
-
1.19
0.15
38
1.53
0.0028
0.1
0.014
2.73
0.14
39
20.07
0.00278
0.09
-
1.1
0.13
40
19.13
0.00324
0.08
0.013
0.77
0.16
41
17.89
0.00335
0.08
0.014
0.44
0.16
42
18.2
0.00351
0.08
-
1.12
0.17
43
12.17
0.00333
0.08
0.012
2.54
0.16
44
15.34
0.00368
0.08
0.013
0.69
0.18
45
6.13
0.00314
0.08
-
2.79
0.15
46
3.6
0.00404
0.07
0.014
1.77
0.2
47
2.58
0.00431
0.07
-
0.85
0.21
48
23.48
0.00318
0.06
-
0.48
0.15
49
5.96
0.00439
0.06
0.013
0.35
0.21
50
19.43
0.00464
0.06
-
0.93
0.22
51
20.26
0.00447
0.06
0.012
1.82
0.22
52
15.68
0.00495
0.06
0.013
2.86
0.24
TIC 135169898
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
11.56
1e-05
1.15
0.02
1.63
0.02
2
21.63
1e-05
0.94
-
0.44
0.01
3
23.95
1e-05
0.58
0.01
1.99
0.02
4
10.86
2e-05
0.59
-
0.17
0.03
5
20.79
1e-05
0.51
-
0.01
0.02
6
25.88
2e-05
0.46
0.01
2.63
0.02
7
27.29
2e-05
0.42
-
1.22
0.02
8
13.02
2e-05
0.4
-
2.98
0.03
9
8.76
2e-05
0.37
0.011
1.08
0.03
10
23.06
2e-05
0.36
-
2.19
0.03
11
23.85
2e-05
0.36
0.012
2.67
0.03
12
26.63
1e-05
0.36
0.007
0.24
0.02
13
20.9
1e-05
0.36
0.007
1.13
0.02
14
25.13
2e-05
0.39
-
3.07
0.03
15
0.19
4e-05
0.32
0.016
1.06
0.05
16
33.1
1e-05
0.32
-
0.27
0.02
17
11.02
2e-05
0.3
-
2.92
0.03
18
21.44
2e-05
0.29
-
2.56
0.02
19
29.34
2e-05
0.28
-
2.35
0.02
20
3.2
3e-05
0.22
0.008
1.46
0.04
21
31.29
3e-05
0.19
0.007
2.83
0.04
22
13.21
6e-05
0.16
-
1.92
0.08
23
0.55
7e-05
0.17
0.017
1.95
0.1
92
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:101==
24
12.67
8e-05
0.17
-
2.68
0.1
25
0.35
8e-05
0.16
0.019
2.91
0.11
26
2.8
5e-05
0.14
-
0.25
0.08
27
20.19
7e-05
0.12
0.011
2.12
0.1
28
14.77
0.00011
0.1
-
2.75
0.15
29
37.84
4e-05
0.11
0.007
2.6
0.06
30
14.65
7e-05
0.11
-
2.2
0.1
31
1.66
8e-05
0.1
-
1.76
0.11
32
1.04
0.00012
0.09
-
1.47
0.16
33
28.76
4e-05
0.08
0.004
1.47
0.05
34
29.82
3e-05
0.08
0.003
2.47
0.03
35
2.17
0.00015
0.08
0.016
2.99
0.21
36
13.88
0.00013
0.07
-
2.7
0.18
37
16.31
8e-05
0.08
-
2.28
0.11
38
0.95
0.00012
0.07
-
2.59
0.16
39
13.15
9e-05
0.09
-
2.19
0.13
40
1.44
0.00011
0.07
0.011
2.85
0.16
41
36.77
4e-05
0.07
-
2.71
0.05
42
26.16
8e-05
0.06
-
1.28
0.11
43
14.06
0.00012
0.06
-
2.5
0.16
TIC 135428006
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
23.24
1e-05
0.77
-
2.28
0.01
2
20.33
1e-05
0.72
-
0.23
0.01
3
33.18
1e-05
0.54
-
1.64
0.01
4
31.33
1e-05
0.43
-
0.03
0.01
5
20.95
1e-05
0.39
-
2.53
0.02
6
27.43
2e-05
0.29
0.007
1.14
0.02
7
19.76
2e-05
0.25
0.008
2.23
0.03
8
25.11
1e-05
0.23
-
1.0
0.02
9
26.66
2e-05
0.23
0.007
0.04
0.03
10
19.43
2e-05
0.23
-
2.3
0.02
11
25.88
2e-05
0.21
-
2.11
0.03
12
14.08
3e-05
0.18
0.008
1.2
0.04
13
2.68
2e-05
0.19
-
2.87
0.02
14
29.29
2e-05
0.19
-
1.68
0.02
15
21.83
2e-05
0.18
0.006
0.07
0.03
16
10.59
4e-05
0.17
-
1.59
0.06
17
10.4
3e-05
0.16
-
2.9
0.04
18
39.73
3e-05
0.14
-
2.35
0.04
19
2.79
3e-05
0.13
-
0.67
0.04
20
31.39
3e-05
0.12
-
1.74
0.04
21
11.71
5e-05
0.13
0.009
2.57
0.07
22
13.75
5e-05
0.11
0.008
2.08
0.07
23
18.31
3e-05
0.11
-
2.23
0.04
24
11.88
4e-05
0.1
0.006
0.78
0.06
25
21.63
4e-05
0.09
0.005
2.23
0.05
26
22.16
4e-05
0.1
-
1.37
0.06
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
93
==PAGE:102==
27
33.18
3e-05
0.1
0.005
1.23
0.05
28
13.56
5e-05
0.09
0.007
0.18
0.07
29
16.02
7e-05
0.09
-
1.39
0.1
30
26.31
6e-05
0.08
0.006
1.73
0.08
31
17.33
8e-05
0.08
0.008
1.58
0.11
32
18.66
5e-05
0.08
-
2.2
0.07
33
24.62
3e-05
0.08
-
0.28
0.05
34
10.23
6e-05
0.08
-
2.02
0.08
35
11.06
8e-05
0.07
-
0.36
0.11
36
30.64
6e-05
0.07
-
2.96
0.08
37
1.29
7e-05
0.07
-
0.66
0.1
38
15.12
0.0001
0.07
0.009
1.76
0.13
39
23.64
7e-05
0.06
-
2.15
0.09
40
13.14
8e-05
0.06
0.006
0.95
0.11
41
2.5
7e-05
0.06
0.005
0.13
0.09
42
2.03
0.00011
0.05
-
1.14
0.15
43
0.35
0.00011
0.06
0.009
0.71
0.15
44
12.76
7e-05
0.06
0.006
0.01
0.09
45
16.31
7e-05
0.06
-
2.38
0.1
46
16.4
8e-05
0.05
-
1.68
0.11
47
13.36
8e-05
0.06
-
0.41
0.11
48
0.18
0.00012
0.05
0.008
0.91
0.17
49
2.12
0.00011
0.05
-
2.75
0.16
50
12.96
7e-05
0.05
-
1.37
0.09
51
15.55
0.00013
0.05
-
2.51
0.17
52
28.88
8e-05
0.05
0.005
2.82
0.11
53
2.2
0.00013
0.05
-
2.08
0.18
54
11.23
0.00012
0.05
-
1.85
0.17
55
15.9
0.00011
0.05
-
1.85
0.16
56
1.94
0.00013
0.04
0.008
1.81
0.18
57
12.5
0.0001
0.04
-
0.5
0.14
58
12.32
0.00015
0.04
0.009
1.71
0.21
59
24.18
7e-05
0.04
-
2.52
0.1
60
10.09
0.00013
0.04
0.008
1.15
0.17
61
11.8
0.00014
0.03
0.006
3.06
0.19
62
19.11
8e-05
0.04
0.004
0.6
0.11
63
9.95
0.00016
0.04
0.009
1.87
0.22
64
15.67
0.00013
0.04
0.007
2.18
0.18
65
14.86
0.00019
0.04
0.011
2.87
0.26
66
14.61
0.00017
0.04
0.009
1.72
0.24
67
15.23
0.00018
0.04
0.009
1.62
0.24
68
12.07
0.00013
0.04
0.007
3.0
0.18
69
25.42
0.00011
0.04
-
0.9
0.15
70
16.2
0.00014
0.04
-
0.73
0.2
71
28.19
0.00011
0.03
0.005
1.68
0.15
72
0.28
0.00016
0.04
0.009
1.18
0.22
73
22.39
0.00011
0.04
0.006
1.75
0.16
74
18.09
0.00013
0.03
-
1.21
0.17
75
37.02
7e-05
0.03
-
1.99
0.1
76
15.84
0.00013
0.04
0.007
1.03
0.19
94
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:103==
77
9.75
0.00016
0.03
-
0.77
0.22
78
2.4
0.00017
0.03
-
2.09
0.24
79
16.82
0.00017
0.03
0.008
2.65
0.23
80
4.19
0.00014
0.03
0.006
1.27
0.2
81
16.61
0.0001
0.04
0.005
0.26
0.14
82
13.28
0.00014
0.03
-
0.86
0.2
83
11.06
0.00016
0.03
0.007
3.01
0.22
84
2.58
0.0001
0.03
0.005
0.79
0.14
85
0.54
0.00014
0.03
0.007
0.83
0.19
86
28.35
8e-05
0.03
0.003
0.37
0.11
TIC 13566784
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.69
0.0
1.17
-
1.06
0.01
2
24.1
1e-05
0.18
-
0.31
0.02
3
15.4
1e-05
0.17
0.002
2.28
0.01
4
14.27
2e-05
0.13
0.004
0.6
0.03
5
1.83
7e-05
0.08
0.007
0.07
0.09
6
16.17
3e-05
0.08
-
2.01
0.03
7
20.87
3e-05
0.08
0.003
2.48
0.04
8
14.53
3e-05
0.06
0.002
1.69
0.04
9
19.66
3e-05
0.07
0.003
3.09
0.04
10
18.92
3e-05
0.06
-
2.24
0.04
11
23.74
4e-05
0.05
0.003
1.68
0.05
12
25.35
2e-05
0.06
0.002
0.64
0.03
13
15.81
3e-05
0.05
-
1.71
0.03
14
1.24
6e-05
0.05
0.004
0.23
0.09
15
31.53
5e-05
0.05
0.003
2.47
0.06
16
25.02
3e-05
0.05
0.002
1.71
0.04
17
22.11
5e-05
0.05
-
2.88
0.06
18
29.06
0.00011
0.04
-
2.62
0.15
19
28.51
5e-05
0.04
-
1.56
0.07
20
26.36
9e-05
0.03
0.004
0.37
0.12
21
16.98
6e-05
0.03
0.003
2.24
0.09
22
33.83
5e-05
0.03
-
0.19
0.06
23
30.47
7e-05
0.03
-
2.83
0.1
24
39.24
8e-05
0.03
0.003
0.47
0.11
25
0.23
0.00011
0.03
0.004
2.65
0.15
26
22.24
9e-05
0.03
0.003
0.3
0.13
27
15.15
8e-05
0.03
-
0.83
0.11
28
20.55
7e-05
0.03
-
1.04
0.1
29
34.29
6e-05
0.03
0.002
1.86
0.08
30
17.08
0.0001
0.02
-
2.01
0.13
31
33.8
6e-05
0.02
0.002
0.38
0.08
TIC 136758057
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.52
0.0
4.08
0.009
1.26
0.0
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
95
==PAGE:104==
2
9.16
0.0
3.1
-
3.0
0.0
3
11.9
0.0
1.98
-
2.07
0.0
4
9.57
0.0
1.82
-
0.24
0.01
5
9.88
0.0
1.69
-
1.64
0.01
6
10.28
0.0
1.4
0.01
1.47
0.01
7
8.22
1e-05
0.85
0.009
2.84
0.01
8
3.31
1e-05
0.62
-
2.3
0.02
9
4.04
1e-05
0.68
-
2.12
0.01
10
1.07
1e-05
0.64
-
1.14
0.02
11
3.7
2e-05
0.43
0.013
1.59
0.03
12
7.39
1e-05
0.41
0.009
0.97
0.02
13
1.43
1e-05
0.35
-
0.87
0.03
14
3.58
1e-05
0.34
-
2.01
0.03
15
9.05
2e-05
0.31
-
1.97
0.03
16
5.1
2e-05
0.26
0.01
1.99
0.04
17
0.73
2e-05
0.27
-
1.23
0.04
18
2.96
2e-05
0.25
0.01
2.72
0.04
19
1.11
2e-05
0.23
-
2.56
0.05
20
10.82
1e-05
0.22
-
2.93
0.02
21
3.49
2e-05
0.26
-
1.7
0.04
22
3.15
2e-05
0.31
0.012
2.95
0.04
23
17.11
2e-05
0.18
-
2.27
0.04
24
3.65
2e-05
0.23
0.011
2.23
0.05
25
4.2
2e-05
0.25
-
0.89
0.04
26
0.51
3e-05
0.18
-
2.09
0.06
27
2.58
3e-05
0.19
-
1.42
0.06
28
0.96
2e-05
0.2
0.01
0.35
0.05
29
2.47
3e-05
0.21
0.013
2.29
0.06
30
2.79
2e-05
0.2
-
1.07
0.05
31
0.27
2e-05
0.25
-
2.69
0.05
32
0.69
3e-05
0.18
0.011
1.5
0.06
33
1.77
2e-05
0.17
0.008
0.2
0.04
34
0.65
2e-05
0.22
-
1.76
0.05
35
4.45
3e-05
0.2
-
1.39
0.05
36
10.93
2e-05
0.17
0.007
2.89
0.04
37
2.85
3e-05
0.19
0.01
1.01
0.05
38
0.47
4e-05
0.17
-
1.43
0.07
39
16.96
2e-05
0.16
0.005
0.06
0.03
40
2.25
2e-05
0.16
-
2.43
0.04
41
0.76
3e-05
0.17
-
1.77
0.06
42
2.73
3e-05
0.17
0.009
1.45
0.05
43
10.7
2e-05
0.14
0.006
0.48
0.04
44
2.69
3e-05
0.14
0.009
2.96
0.07
45
4.34
3e-05
0.18
-
0.2
0.05
46
0.2
4e-05
0.16
0.012
1.0
0.07
47
17.68
3e-05
0.12
0.006
1.3
0.05
48
0.3
3e-05
0.16
-
2.66
0.07
49
0.6
4e-05
0.14
-
2.61
0.08
50
0.16
4e-05
0.15
-
1.23
0.08
51
3.14
3e-05
0.19
0.012
0.7
0.06
96
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:105==
52
4.78
4e-05
0.13
0.011
1.89
0.08
53
17.17
3e-05
0.11
0.008
2.34
0.07
54
3.88
4e-05
0.11
-
2.13
0.07
55
1.39
4e-05
0.14
0.012
0.83
0.09
56
1.36
5e-05
0.13
0.012
1.4
0.09
57
18.15
4e-05
0.1
0.008
2.33
0.08
58
1.13
3e-05
0.16
0.01
1.67
0.06
59
6.02
4e-05
0.1
0.008
1.11
0.09
60
2.93
4e-05
0.12
0.01
1.55
0.09
61
3.32
3e-05
0.16
-
2.1
0.07
62
20.48
4e-05
0.09
-
1.23
0.07
63
3.11
5e-05
0.11
0.01
0.95
0.09
64
1.2
3e-05
0.16
-
1.89
0.07
65
17.74
3e-05
0.11
0.006
0.39
0.06
66
2.04
3e-05
0.11
-
2.94
0.06
67
6.61
5e-05
0.09
0.01
1.19
0.11
68
3.43
4e-05
0.11
-
1.07
0.08
69
1.17
5e-05
0.1
0.01
1.19
0.1
70
16.34
3e-05
0.09
0.005
1.64
0.05
71
1.8
5e-05
0.09
-
1.51
0.1
72
5.22
6e-05
0.09
0.01
1.23
0.12
73
18.47
5e-05
0.07
0.007
2.61
0.1
74
18.87
5e-05
0.07
-
2.83
0.1
75
4.65
0.0001
0.06
0.013
1.28
0.21
76
5.98
6e-05
0.07
-
2.92
0.12
77
2.64
5e-05
0.09
0.009
0.46
0.1
78
2.34
6e-05
0.06
0.007
1.41
0.11
79
17.18
4e-05
0.09
0.008
2.46
0.09
80
20.42
4e-05
0.06
0.006
3.11
0.09
81
2.23
5e-05
0.08
0.007
2.63
0.09
82
16.44
6e-05
0.05
-
1.85
0.12
83
4.81
6e-05
0.08
0.01
2.14
0.11
84
4.5
7e-05
0.08
-
1.99
0.13
85
2.35
5e-05
0.07
-
1.26
0.11
86
5.39
9e-05
0.07
0.012
1.44
0.17
87
11.55
6e-05
0.05
-
0.07
0.13
88
18.41
6e-05
0.06
0.006
0.23
0.11
89
1.83
7e-05
0.06
-
0.45
0.15
90
5.54
0.0001
0.05
0.011
0.16
0.21
91
5.09
8e-05
0.06
0.009
2.54
0.16
92
6.24
8e-05
0.05
-
0.23
0.17
93
4.17
8e-05
0.05
0.008
2.65
0.17
94
5.3
0.0001
0.05
-
2.77
0.2
95
4.67
0.00012
0.05
0.013
1.1
0.24
96
16.75
7e-05
0.04
0.006
2.86
0.15
97
0.85
0.0001
0.04
0.008
2.95
0.2
98
16.55
7e-05
0.04
0.006
1.7
0.15
TIC 137003360
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
97
==PAGE:106==
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.9
4e-05
1.11
-
1.25
0.02
2
2.53
5e-05
0.71
-
2.38
0.02
3
10.28
7e-05
0.53
-
1.11
0.03
4
2.71
0.0001
0.36
-
1.74
0.04
5
3.18
0.00011
0.34
0.015
0.12
0.04
6
5.08
0.0001
0.21
-
1.68
0.04
7
18.64
0.0001
0.21
0.008
2.69
0.04
8
0.94
0.00019
0.18
0.013
0.63
0.07
9
9.68
0.00021
0.19
-
2.92
0.08
10
12.27
0.00016
0.18
0.012
2.62
0.06
11
0.51
0.00023
0.16
-
0.48
0.09
12
9.32
0.00025
0.16
-
2.41
0.1
13
13.68
0.00033
0.13
-
3.02
0.13
14
9.9
0.00025
0.15
-
1.34
0.1
15
1.18
0.00024
0.14
0.014
0.31
0.09
16
13.43
0.00027
0.14
-
2.76
0.11
17
18.24
0.00016
0.13
0.008
1.25
0.06
18
0.55
0.00029
0.12
0.014
0.58
0.11
19
12.3
0.00026
0.11
-
1.5
0.1
20
0.1
0.00033
0.11
0.014
0.47
0.13
21
8.85
0.0003
0.11
-
2.73
0.12
22
10.87
0.00033
0.11
-
2.09
0.13
23
10.79
0.00033
0.12
-
1.9
0.13
24
16.08
0.00021
0.1
-
1.05
0.08
25
10.16
0.00036
0.1
-
0.96
0.14
26
7.7
0.00041
0.09
-
2.87
0.16
27
11.82
0.00034
0.1
-
0.07
0.13
28
12.94
0.00036
0.09
-
1.33
0.14
29
6.86
0.00025
0.09
0.008
2.71
0.1
30
9.55
0.00039
0.1
0.015
0.83
0.15
31
8.77
0.00043
0.08
-
1.22
0.17
32
4.79
0.00028
0.08
0.009
3.02
0.11
33
0.29
0.00043
0.08
0.014
2.9
0.17
34
13.26
0.00046
0.08
0.014
1.33
0.18
35
4.32
0.00043
0.08
0.013
1.19
0.17
36
13.96
0.00044
0.08
0.014
0.47
0.17
37
8.04
0.00049
0.08
0.015
2.23
0.19
38
8.24
0.00048
0.08
-
0.98
0.19
39
12.38
0.00042
0.07
-
1.81
0.16
40
13.65
0.00064
0.07
0.017
3.13
0.25
41
11.28
0.00061
0.06
-
2.94
0.24
42
14.11
0.00054
0.06
0.013
2.78
0.21
43
12.03
0.00052
0.06
0.012
1.3
0.2
44
14.29
0.0006
0.06
-
1.78
0.23
45
8.07
0.00065
0.06
-
0.49
0.25
46
10.04
0.00066
0.06
0.015
1.62
0.26
47
11.43
0.00065
0.06
0.015
0.76
0.26
48
12.87
0.00047
0.06
0.011
1.25
0.18
98
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:107==
49
8.79
0.00043
0.08
0.013
0.2
0.17
50
12.75
0.00046
0.06
-
0.47
0.18
51
13.13
0.00063
0.06
-
2.48
0.24
52
9.35
0.0007
0.05
0.015
2.09
0.27
TIC 13741670
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.01
0.00165
0.65
0.124
2.03
0.19
2
0.02
0.00311
0.34
0.124
2.49
0.36
TIC 138738145
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
7.88
0.0
14.09
-
2.92
0.0
2
5.51
1e-05
6.25
0.053
0.74
0.01
3
8.87
2e-05
1.98
0.046
2.87
0.02
4
5.98
2e-05
1.93
0.053
2.68
0.03
5
3.59
2e-05
1.67
0.04
0.44
0.02
6
1.69
4e-05
1.04
-
2.78
0.06
7
2.71
2e-05
1.0
0.033
2.38
0.03
8
9.16
6e-05
0.75
0.065
0.12
0.09
9
4.71
6e-05
0.66
0.05
0.6
0.08
10
8.71
4e-05
0.66
-
0.89
0.06
11
0.03
0.00013
0.7
0.122
1.81
0.18
12
7.45
7e-05
0.57
0.05
0.97
0.09
13
15.75
4e-05
0.56
0.029
1.93
0.05
14
6.08
6e-05
0.53
-
1.59
0.08
15
13.39
9e-05
0.49
-
0.74
0.13
16
10.34
6e-05
0.48
-
2.26
0.08
17
1.51
6e-05
0.44
0.036
2.23
0.08
18
17.04
4e-05
0.44
0.022
2.82
0.05
19
0.07
0.00021
0.44
-
1.75
0.28
20
4.4
0.0001
0.39
-
1.9
0.13
21
9.74
0.00011
0.36
-
0.24
0.14
22
0.77
0.0001
0.37
-
0.84
0.14
23
1.16
0.0001
0.37
0.05
2.33
0.13
24
10.06
0.00013
0.35
0.061
0.25
0.17
25
15.75
6e-05
0.36
0.029
2.03
0.08
26
13.98
0.00017
0.32
-
0.71
0.22
27
5.1
0.00017
0.33
0.075
2.21
0.23
28
0.8
0.00013
0.31
0.053
2.88
0.17
29
1.93
0.0001
0.32
0.044
2.88
0.14
30
17.03
5e-05
0.31
0.022
2.13
0.07
TIC 141152931
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.14
0.0
2.07
0.001
1.93
0.0
2
20.87
0.0
1.14
-
1.33
0.0
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
99
==PAGE:108==
3
21.66
0.0
0.7
0.001
0.62
0.0
4
31.26
0.0
0.67
-
0.44
0.0
5
19.3
0.0
0.58
-
1.05
0.0
6
11.97
0.0
0.54
0.002
0.63
0.0
7
13.16
0.0
0.46
0.001
0.41
0.0
8
39.7
0.0
0.42
-
0.11
0.0
9
1.2
0.0
0.43
0.002
0.83
0.01
10
19.78
0.0
0.31
0.001
2.11
0.0
11
25.0
0.0
0.29
-
2.31
0.01
12
10.77
0.0
0.26
0.001
0.78
0.0
13
36.84
0.0
0.22
-
1.18
0.01
14
19.32
0.0
0.22
-
3.07
0.01
15
17.04
0.0
0.2
-
0.07
0.01
16
26.67
0.0
0.19
0.001
0.96
0.01
17
1.3
1e-05
0.18
-
2.54
0.01
18
23.25
0.0
0.18
0.001
0.6
0.01
19
30.69
0.0
0.18
-
2.35
0.01
20
2.39
1e-05
0.18
0.002
2.45
0.01
21
31.97
0.0
0.18
0.001
0.47
0.01
22
33.15
0.0
0.16
-
0.39
0.01
23
14.36
0.0
0.16
-
0.05
0.01
24
5.84
1e-05
0.14
0.001
1.39
0.01
25
24.83
0.0
0.14
-
2.13
0.01
26
31.78
0.0
0.13
0.001
2.74
0.01
27
35.19
0.0
0.13
0.001
1.49
0.01
28
31.38
1e-05
0.13
-
1.73
0.01
29
36.7
1e-05
0.13
-
1.14
0.01
30
15.84
1e-05
0.12
-
2.85
0.01
31
33.45
0.0
0.12
-
1.53
0.01
32
11.86
1e-05
0.12
-
1.19
0.01
33
43.03
1e-05
0.11
-
1.37
0.01
34
19.76
1e-05
0.12
-
1.87
0.01
35
34.0
0.0
0.11
0.001
1.58
0.01
36
21.83
1e-05
0.11
0.001
0.16
0.01
37
26.92
1e-05
0.1
0.001
2.53
0.01
38
6.96
1e-05
0.1
-
2.89
0.01
39
21.63
1e-05
0.09
-
0.56
0.01
40
22.55
1e-05
0.09
-
0.78
0.01
41
19.73
1e-05
0.08
0.001
1.64
0.01
42
2.56
1e-05
0.08
0.002
0.61
0.02
43
33.85
1e-05
0.08
0.001
0.07
0.01
44
3.75
1e-05
0.08
0.002
0.45
0.02
45
13.05
1e-05
0.09
-
1.49
0.02
46
31.97
1e-05
0.08
-
0.65
0.01
47
30.95
1e-05
0.08
-
0.54
0.01
48
27.38
1e-05
0.08
0.001
1.53
0.02
49
19.1
1e-05
0.08
0.001
0.58
0.02
50
25.47
1e-05
0.07
0.001
1.44
0.02
51
13.08
1e-05
0.07
-
3.07
0.02
52
25.04
1e-05
0.07
0.002
0.67
0.02
100
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:109==
53
18.6
1e-05
0.07
-
1.52
0.02
54
10.66
1e-05
0.06
-
0.95
0.02
55
5.24
1e-05
0.06
0.002
1.61
0.03
56
13.27
1e-05
0.06
-
0.63
0.02
57
27.41
1e-05
0.06
0.001
1.73
0.02
58
4.95
1e-05
0.06
0.002
0.04
0.03
59
20.82
1e-05
0.06
0.001
1.28
0.02
60
35.52
1e-05
0.06
-
0.34
0.02
61
18.09
1e-05
0.06
-
0.99
0.02
62
16.91
1e-05
0.06
0.001
1.72
0.02
63
49.35
1e-05
0.06
-
2.44
0.02
64
40.11
1e-05
0.06
0.001
0.14
0.02
65
12.07
1e-05
0.06
-
0.61
0.02
66
33.73
1e-05
0.06
0.001
0.74
0.02
67
1.09
2e-05
0.06
-
2.29
0.04
68
39.96
1e-05
0.06
0.001
0.73
0.02
69
15.72
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.94
0.03
70
21.87
1e-05
0.05
-
0.42
0.02
71
19.43
1e-05
0.05
0.001
2.41
0.02
72
25.94
1e-05
0.05
-
0.16
0.02
73
26.37
1e-05
0.05
-
2.05
0.02
74
25.13
1e-05
0.05
-
0.46
0.02
75
27.91
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.27
0.02
76
22.9
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.36
0.02
77
18.73
1e-05
0.05
-
0.94
0.02
78
7.46
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.68
0.02
79
25.39
1e-05
0.05
0.001
2.23
0.02
80
37.78
1e-05
0.05
-
2.04
0.02
81
20.18
1e-05
0.05
-
3.11
0.03
82
30.72
1e-05
0.05
-
2.7
0.02
83
44.07
2e-05
0.04
-
0.77
0.03
84
22.68
1e-05
0.05
-
0.26
0.02
85
11.88
2e-05
0.04
-
2.89
0.04
86
40.45
1e-05
0.04
-
2.58
0.02
87
18.21
2e-05
0.05
0.001
0.78
0.03
88
4.77
2e-05
0.04
-
2.37
0.04
89
40.87
1e-05
0.04
-
1.29
0.03
90
16.03
2e-05
0.04
-
2.12
0.03
91
14.27
2e-05
0.04
-
2.62
0.04
92
25.9
2e-05
0.04
0.001
0.03
0.03
93
2.5
2e-05
0.04
0.002
3.07
0.04
94
15.05
2e-05
0.04
-
3.02
0.03
95
17.9
2e-05
0.04
0.001
2.17
0.04
96
46.43
2e-05
0.04
-
1.55
0.03
97
30.47
1e-05
0.04
-
1.21
0.03
98
24.31
2e-05
0.04
0.001
1.42
0.03
99
42.93
2e-05
0.04
0.001
1.7
0.03
100
32.7
2e-05
0.03
-
0.08
0.03
101
33.67
2e-05
0.04
-
2.67
0.03
102
18.11
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.04
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
101
==PAGE:110==
103
29.44
2e-05
0.04
0.001
1.94
0.03
104
34.7
2e-05
0.04
-
0.16
0.03
105
35.74
2e-05
0.04
0.001
0.1
0.03
106
36.54
2e-05
0.03
0.001
0.57
0.03
107
25.6
2e-05
0.03
0.001
0.72
0.04
108
9.58
2e-05
0.03
0.001
0.67
0.04
109
43.09
2e-05
0.03
-
2.82
0.04
110
15.95
2e-05
0.03
0.001
0.23
0.04
111
39.43
2e-05
0.03
-
0.55
0.03
112
49.32
2e-05
0.03
-
2.36
0.04
113
15.55
2e-05
0.03
-
0.69
0.04
114
28.67
2e-05
0.03
0.001
1.68
0.04
115
0.59
4e-05
0.03
-
1.04
0.07
116
1.41
3e-05
0.03
-
1.9
0.06
117
24.49
2e-05
0.03
-
1.97
0.04
118
40.13
2e-05
0.03
0.001
1.53
0.04
119
47.99
2e-05
0.03
0.001
1.82
0.04
120
29.02
2e-05
0.03
-
2.76
0.04
121
25.13
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.13
0.04
122
15.63
3e-05
0.03
0.001
2.74
0.05
123
10.69
2e-05
0.03
-
0.95
0.04
124
49.93
2e-05
0.03
-
1.96
0.05
125
18.13
2e-05
0.03
0.001
0.63
0.04
126
37.91
2e-05
0.03
0.001
3.06
0.05
127
23.49
3e-05
0.03
-
1.74
0.05
128
1.51
3e-05
0.03
-
2.74
0.06
129
49.4
3e-05
0.03
0.001
0.94
0.05
130
31.71
2e-05
0.03
-
2.93
0.04
131
4.61
3e-05
0.03
-
0.39
0.06
132
3.86
3e-05
0.03
0.002
1.73
0.06
133
23.19
2e-05
0.03
-
2.17
0.04
134
35.39
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.81
0.04
135
48.04
3e-05
0.02
-
1.6
0.05
136
25.44
3e-05
0.02
-
1.64
0.05
137
0.61
5e-05
0.03
-
1.82
0.09
138
14.46
3e-05
0.03
-
0.58
0.05
139
24.7
3e-05
0.02
-
0.25
0.05
140
11.38
3e-05
0.02
0.001
0.38
0.06
141
44.11
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.35
0.06
142
32.83
2e-05
0.02
0.001
2.71
0.05
143
25.33
3e-05
0.02
-
1.9
0.05
144
14.93
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.51
0.06
145
27.85
2e-05
0.02
0.001
1.5
0.05
146
2.98
4e-05
0.02
-
1.42
0.07
147
48.59
2e-05
0.02
-
2.64
0.05
148
32.55
3e-05
0.02
0.001
0.29
0.05
149
50.49
3e-05
0.02
0.001
0.93
0.06
150
59.06
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.68
0.05
151
3.59
4e-05
0.02
-
1.21
0.07
152
15.65
3e-05
0.02
-
0.13
0.06
102
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:111==
153
35.84
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.52
0.05
154
41.82
3e-05
0.02
-
1.85
0.07
155
38.39
3e-05
0.02
-
2.06
0.05
156
45.24
3e-05
0.02
-
2.31
0.05
157
43.63
3e-05
0.02
0.001
0.32
0.05
158
30.23
3e-05
0.02
-
2.55
0.05
159
20.47
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.94
0.05
160
37.78
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.29
0.06
161
46.44
3e-05
0.02
-
0.18
0.06
162
3.64
4e-05
0.02
0.002
1.13
0.08
163
29.24
3e-05
0.02
-
0.45
0.06
164
36.06
2e-05
0.02
-
1.62
0.05
165
29.64
3e-05
0.02
-
2.97
0.06
166
50.53
4e-05
0.02
-
1.63
0.08
167
35.4
2e-05
0.02
0.001
0.39
0.05
168
14.25
4e-05
0.02
-
1.79
0.08
169
34.1
3e-05
0.02
0.001
3.12
0.05
170
11.67
4e-05
0.02
0.001
2.04
0.07
171
28.95
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.74
0.05
172
50.56
4e-05
0.02
0.002
2.96
0.08
173
43.11
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.01
0.06
174
48.0
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.12
0.06
175
34.71
4e-05
0.02
-
0.51
0.07
176
3.09
4e-05
0.02
0.002
0.52
0.08
177
50.51
4e-05
0.02
0.001
0.24
0.08
178
0.54
6e-05
0.02
-
2.21
0.12
179
18.23
4e-05
0.02
0.001
2.35
0.08
180
30.58
3e-05
0.02
-
0.42
0.06
181
27.86
3e-05
0.02
-
3.02
0.06
182
16.4
4e-05
0.02
0.001
0.37
0.08
183
23.17
3e-05
0.02
-
3.04
0.07
184
13.24
5e-05
0.02
0.001
1.57
0.09
185
6.37
5e-05
0.02
0.002
0.64
0.09
186
23.57
4e-05
0.02
0.001
1.65
0.07
187
20.4
3e-05
0.02
-
0.78
0.07
188
40.69
4e-05
0.02
0.001
1.39
0.07
189
5.05
4e-05
0.02
0.001
2.17
0.08
190
38.98
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.4
0.07
191
24.59
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.9
0.07
192
40.77
3e-05
0.02
-
0.1
0.06
193
43.62
3e-05
0.02
-
2.14
0.07
194
17.27
4e-05
0.02
0.001
1.04
0.08
195
49.8
4e-05
0.02
-
0.9
0.07
196
29.57
3e-05
0.02
-
1.33
0.06
197
28.56
4e-05
0.02
-
2.32
0.08
198
27.63
4e-05
0.02
0.001
0.6
0.07
199
45.36
4e-05
0.02
0.001
1.79
0.07
200
9.49
4e-05
0.02
-
0.65
0.08
201
41.76
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.46
0.1
202
28.04
4e-05
0.01
0.001
1.17
0.08
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
103
==PAGE:112==
203
31.64
4e-05
0.01
-
2.64
0.08
204
8.66
4e-05
0.02
-
0.15
0.08
205
5.4
5e-05
0.02
0.001
2.69
0.1
206
12.87
5e-05
0.01
0.001
0.4
0.1
207
15.86
5e-05
0.02
0.001
2.65
0.09
208
5.11
5e-05
0.01
-
2.99
0.1
209
1.39
6e-05
0.01
0.002
1.01
0.12
210
23.29
4e-05
0.02
0.001
2.04
0.08
211
15.43
5e-05
0.02
-
2.13
0.09
212
49.51
4e-05
0.01
-
0.25
0.08
213
3.3
5e-05
0.01
-
2.58
0.1
214
23.41
5e-05
0.01
0.001
1.23
0.09
215
52.92
5e-05
0.01
-
1.56
0.09
216
13.06
5e-05
0.01
-
0.34
0.1
217
40.68
4e-05
0.01
0.001
0.48
0.08
218
7.08
5e-05
0.01
-
1.86
0.1
219
28.27
4e-05
0.01
0.001
2.55
0.08
220
8.3
4e-05
0.01
-
2.51
0.08
221
23.59
5e-05
0.01
0.001
2.8
0.09
222
22.59
5e-05
0.01
-
1.99
0.09
223
6.14
6e-05
0.01
0.001
1.85
0.11
224
43.54
4e-05
0.01
-
1.75
0.09
225
28.54
5e-05
0.01
0.001
2.78
0.09
226
1.93
6e-05
0.01
0.002
2.94
0.12
227
16.25
5e-05
0.01
-
0.93
0.11
228
5.22
7e-05
0.01
0.002
2.85
0.13
229
56.09
4e-05
0.01
0.001
1.84
0.08
230
55.93
4e-05
0.01
0.001
1.15
0.08
231
2.28
8e-05
0.01
-
1.28
0.15
232
54.44
5e-05
0.01
-
1.3
0.09
233
27.39
5e-05
0.01
0.001
2.72
0.1
234
13.79
5e-05
0.01
0.001
1.24
0.1
235
45.54
4e-05
0.01
0.001
0.32
0.08
236
47.8
5e-05
0.01
-
1.8
0.1
237
26.24
5e-05
0.01
-
2.65
0.09
238
26.34
4e-05
0.01
0.001
0.01
0.08
239
4.2
7e-05
0.01
-
1.51
0.13
240
0.18
0.00012
0.01
-
2.74
0.24
241
25.01
7e-05
0.01
-
1.47
0.13
242
33.19
6e-05
0.01
-
1.59
0.11
243
40.87
5e-05
0.01
-
1.02
0.09
244
12.47
6e-05
0.01
0.001
2.78
0.13
245
46.48
6e-05
0.01
0.001
2.91
0.11
246
1.74
8e-05
0.01
-
2.14
0.16
247
52.68
6e-05
0.01
0.001
1.83
0.12
248
27.79
5e-05
0.01
0.001
1.03
0.09
249
2.76
8e-05
0.01
0.002
2.76
0.15
250
54.06
6e-05
0.01
0.001
2.95
0.11
251
0.27
0.00014
0.01
0.003
0.16
0.27
252
43.94
5e-05
0.01
-
2.63
0.1
104
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:113==
253
27.5
6e-05
0.01
0.001
1.32
0.12
254
34.61
5e-05
0.01
0.001
2.76
0.1
255
11.77
7e-05
0.01
0.001
0.82
0.13
256
0.01
0.00011
0.01
-
0.34
0.21
257
3.92
8e-05
0.01
-
0.47
0.15
258
1.14
0.00011
0.01
-
0.54
0.21
259
0.39
0.00012
0.01
0.002
0.93
0.23
260
50.31
5e-05
0.01
0.001
0.83
0.1
261
0.21
0.00012
0.01
0.003
1.86
0.23
262
27.87
5e-05
0.01
0.001
2.64
0.1
263
26.68
7e-05
0.01
-
1.8
0.13
264
0.1
0.00013
0.01
0.003
0.88
0.26
265
0.13
0.00013
0.01
0.003
2.65
0.24
266
10.35
6e-05
0.01
-
2.82
0.12
267
14.23
7e-05
0.01
-
1.12
0.14
268
11.27
7e-05
0.01
0.001
1.98
0.14
269
1.8
8e-05
0.01
0.002
3.02
0.16
270
54.18
7e-05
0.01
-
1.66
0.14
271
3.8
8e-05
0.01
0.002
1.99
0.16
272
3.88
8e-05
0.01
0.002
1.08
0.15
273
41.84
7e-05
0.01
-
1.58
0.13
274
0.17
0.00013
0.01
0.003
2.38
0.25
275
51.68
7e-05
0.01
0.001
1.29
0.13
276
50.67
7e-05
0.01
-
1.45
0.13
277
26.97
6e-05
0.01
-
1.52
0.11
278
13.29
7e-05
0.01
-
2.49
0.14
279
1.59
0.0001
0.01
-
0.12
0.18
280
14.65
7e-05
0.01
-
0.65
0.14
281
1.43
9e-05
0.01
0.002
2.99
0.17
282
0.33
0.00013
0.01
0.003
1.18
0.26
283
0.0
0.00012
0.01
0.003
1.43
0.23
284
27.7
6e-05
0.01
-
2.96
0.12
285
40.17
6e-05
0.01
-
1.58
0.12
286
7.34
7e-05
0.01
0.001
2.24
0.14
287
28.31
6e-05
0.01
-
2.94
0.11
288
20.99
7e-05
0.01
-
0.64
0.13
289
39.25
7e-05
0.01
0.001
0.71
0.13
290
40.42
6e-05
0.01
-
0.14
0.11
291
48.27
6e-05
0.01
0.001
3.01
0.11
292
6.62
9e-05
0.01
-
1.78
0.17
293
49.88
7e-05
0.01
-
0.59
0.13
294
42.88
7e-05
0.01
-
2.32
0.13
295
58.21
5e-05
0.01
-
1.65
0.1
296
49.92
7e-05
0.01
0.001
2.64
0.13
297
3.36
8e-05
0.01
-
2.88
0.15
298
35.73
6e-05
0.01
0.001
1.38
0.12
299
34.5
5e-05
0.01
-
2.65
0.11
300
17.43
8e-05
0.01
-
1.86
0.15
301
31.39
7e-05
0.01
-
0.19
0.13
302
55.99
6e-05
0.01
0.001
2.02
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
105
==PAGE:114==
303
56.84
6e-05
0.01
0.001
2.06
0.12
304
52.41
6e-05
0.01
0.001
2.67
0.12
305
37.92
7e-05
0.01
0.001
0.19
0.13
306
0.7
0.00012
0.01
0.002
2.57
0.23
307
2.68
0.00011
0.01
0.002
1.45
0.21
308
30.31
6e-05
0.01
0.001
1.08
0.12
309
16.22
8e-05
0.01
0.001
1.73
0.16
310
53.66
6e-05
0.01
-
2.8
0.12
311
53.27
7e-05
0.01
0.001
1.11
0.13
312
0.12
0.00016
0.01
-
2.62
0.31
313
46.01
7e-05
0.01
0.001
2.72
0.13
314
17.58
7e-05
0.01
-
1.75
0.14
315
41.8
9e-05
0.01
0.002
1.93
0.17
316
0.2
0.00016
0.01
0.003
3.11
0.32
317
14.13
9e-05
0.01
0.001
1.22
0.17
318
45.51
6e-05
0.01
0.001
2.04
0.11
TIC 141521914
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
38.6
1e-05
0.51
-
2.58
0.01
2
41.74
1e-05
0.44
-
3.0
0.01
3
44.57
0.0
0.41
-
0.61
0.01
4
35.93
0.0
0.39
-
0.24
0.01
5
43.98
1e-05
0.38
0.004
1.2
0.01
6
2.88
0.0
0.33
0.003
0.03
0.01
7
1.62
1e-05
0.27
-
2.05
0.01
8
40.93
1e-05
0.27
0.002
2.05
0.01
9
46.76
1e-05
0.24
0.003
2.34
0.01
10
44.88
1e-05
0.25
-
1.35
0.02
11
3.0
1e-05
0.12
0.003
1.29
0.03
12
2.36
2e-05
0.11
0.004
1.29
0.03
13
35.23
1e-05
0.1
0.002
1.88
0.02
14
47.65
2e-05
0.1
0.003
2.8
0.03
15
43.18
2e-05
0.08
-
2.8
0.03
16
46.38
2e-05
0.08
0.002
2.74
0.03
17
45.2
2e-05
0.07
0.003
2.08
0.03
18
2.14
4e-05
0.08
-
0.02
0.07
19
39.96
3e-05
0.07
-
2.71
0.05
20
35.56
3e-05
0.07
-
0.69
0.05
21
33.12
1e-05
0.07
-
2.7
0.02
22
46.23
2e-05
0.07
-
1.08
0.03
23
47.84
3e-05
0.06
0.003
0.12
0.05
24
37.7
4e-05
0.07
0.005
3.12
0.07
25
1.02
4e-05
0.06
0.005
2.5
0.07
26
41.12
2e-05
0.06
-
2.88
0.04
27
47.63
3e-05
0.06
0.003
1.06
0.05
28
39.88
3e-05
0.05
0.003
1.96
0.05
29
56.41
3e-05
0.06
0.003
2.7
0.04
30
57.29
4e-05
0.06
0.003
2.35
0.06
106
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:115==
31
32.36
1e-05
0.06
0.001
1.4
0.02
32
39.78
2e-05
0.05
0.002
2.8
0.04
33
36.93
2e-05
0.05
-
1.57
0.04
34
42.89
3e-05
0.05
-
1.94
0.05
35
1.32
6e-05
0.05
0.005
0.21
0.1
36
50.85
4e-05
0.05
-
1.83
0.07
37
60.13
5e-05
0.04
-
0.93
0.08
38
1.29
7e-05
0.04
0.005
2.01
0.12
39
37.91
3e-05
0.04
-
1.56
0.05
40
43.59
4e-05
0.04
-
2.58
0.06
41
2.27
5e-05
0.04
0.004
0.03
0.08
42
0.98
7e-05
0.04
-
2.11
0.12
43
0.61
0.0001
0.04
-
1.36
0.16
44
36.49
2e-05
0.04
-
1.8
0.04
45
0.86
6e-05
0.04
0.004
0.27
0.11
46
42.73
4e-05
0.04
0.002
0.4
0.06
47
39.3
2e-05
0.04
-
2.11
0.04
48
43.39
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.33
0.05
49
5.23
3e-05
0.04
-
1.85
0.04
50
40.24
4e-05
0.04
0.002
1.46
0.06
51
59.99
4e-05
0.03
-
1.69
0.07
52
63.54
4e-05
0.03
0.003
1.21
0.08
53
51.18
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.61
0.07
54
0.77
7e-05
0.03
-
0.3
0.11
55
0.59
0.00011
0.04
-
1.52
0.18
56
1.96
9e-05
0.03
0.005
2.57
0.15
57
39.19
3e-05
0.03
0.002
2.8
0.05
58
0.15
0.00013
0.03
0.006
1.99
0.23
59
44.9
8e-05
0.03
-
0.3
0.14
60
1.93
0.0001
0.03
-
0.61
0.17
61
45.61
3e-05
0.03
-
2.34
0.05
62
56.22
4e-05
0.03
0.002
1.47
0.07
63
0.45
0.00013
0.03
-
2.87
0.21
64
63.26
4e-05
0.03
-
0.51
0.07
65
0.12
0.00015
0.03
0.006
1.27
0.25
66
53.41
5e-05
0.03
0.002
3.12
0.08
67
0.31
0.00013
0.03
-
0.93
0.21
TIC 142741538
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.28
0.0
1.81
0.007
3.06
0.0
2
33.09
1e-05
0.8
0.008
1.23
0.01
3
32.02
1e-05
0.72
0.006
1.5
0.01
4
23.49
1e-05
0.48
-
3.11
0.02
5
28.01
1e-05
0.43
0.007
1.1
0.02
6
35.12
2e-05
0.37
-
1.77
0.03
7
22.9
3e-05
0.36
0.013
2.58
0.04
8
23.41
2e-05
0.32
-
1.55
0.03
9
32.2
2e-05
0.28
0.009
1.71
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
107
==PAGE:116==
10
29.49
2e-05
0.28
0.009
2.32
0.03
11
34.88
1e-05
0.26
-
0.46
0.02
12
20.08
2e-05
0.26
-
0.6
0.03
13
35.3
2e-05
0.25
-
0.93
0.02
14
20.45
2e-05
0.24
0.008
0.86
0.03
15
31.83
1e-05
0.24
-
2.08
0.02
16
27.24
1e-05
0.22
-
0.72
0.02
17
23.64
4e-05
0.19
-
2.88
0.05
18
29.3
3e-05
0.19
-
2.16
0.05
19
49.78
4e-05
0.14
0.007
0.97
0.05
20
27.06
4e-05
0.13
-
3.09
0.06
21
0.17
8e-05
0.13
-
1.45
0.12
22
23.16
9e-05
0.11
-
2.18
0.12
23
46.89
6e-05
0.11
-
0.46
0.08
24
27.42
3e-05
0.09
-
0.1
0.04
25
0.33
0.00014
0.09
0.018
0.3
0.2
26
23.93
5e-05
0.09
0.006
0.91
0.07
27
26.8
8e-05
0.08
-
2.5
0.12
28
44.15
7e-05
0.08
0.007
0.15
0.1
29
28.3
6e-05
0.07
-
2.59
0.08
30
29.11
0.00011
0.07
0.01
2.99
0.15
31
25.02
8e-05
0.06
-
2.02
0.11
32
41.07
9e-05
0.06
0.008
1.47
0.13
33
30.52
8e-05
0.06
0.006
0.52
0.11
34
22.57
8e-05
0.06
-
0.03
0.11
35
26.39
7e-05
0.06
-
0.87
0.09
36
49.8
7e-05
0.07
0.007
0.94
0.09
37
22.74
0.00012
0.06
0.01
1.08
0.17
38
0.56
0.00021
0.05
-
1.86
0.28
39
46.89
0.0001
0.07
0.009
1.23
0.14
TIC 143108655
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.41
1e-05
0.17
-
1.6
0.01
2
0.91
3e-05
0.08
-
1.04
0.04
3
2.74
6e-05
0.03
-
0.24
0.08
4
19.71
5e-05
0.02
0.002
2.64
0.07
5
1.83
0.00012
0.02
0.003
1.48
0.17
6
3.65
9e-05
0.02
-
1.06
0.13
TIC 143463658
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
15.54
0.0
8.98
-
1.4
0.0
2
8.42
0.0
6.9
-
2.75
0.0
3
7.67
1e-05
4.18
-
0.59
0.0
4
7.12
2e-05
1.9
0.022
1.82
0.01
5
12.92
2e-05
1.85
-
2.23
0.01
6
14.6
2e-05
1.87
-
0.96
0.01
108
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:117==
7
16.38
3e-05
1.62
0.032
1.48
0.02
8
13.08
2e-05
1.21
0.021
2.55
0.02
9
14.39
3e-05
1.15
0.027
2.7
0.02
10
8.1
3e-05
0.97
-
0.6
0.02
11
12.48
4e-05
0.89
0.025
3.11
0.03
12
10.94
3e-05
0.89
-
0.47
0.02
13
9.16
4e-05
0.9
0.024
2.5
0.03
14
6.26
3e-05
0.87
0.022
0.1
0.02
15
8.14
4e-05
0.79
0.025
1.64
0.03
16
7.94
3e-05
0.81
-
1.67
0.03
17
6.69
4e-05
0.64
-
0.26
0.03
18
12.12
7e-05
0.58
0.029
2.89
0.05
19
11.74
5e-05
0.58
-
0.53
0.04
20
10.42
8e-05
0.56
0.031
0.82
0.05
21
13.27
6e-05
0.52
0.024
2.98
0.05
22
31.09
5e-05
0.38
0.013
0.38
0.04
23
17.04
0.0001
0.37
0.028
0.66
0.08
24
13.43
0.00011
0.3
0.025
1.14
0.08
25
5.49
0.00011
0.26
-
0.27
0.08
26
9.79
0.00019
0.27
0.037
2.4
0.14
27
0.42
0.00013
0.24
-
1.79
0.1
28
13.74
0.00015
0.23
-
2.58
0.11
29
9.62
0.00019
0.2
-
3.05
0.14
30
0.07
0.00014
0.22
-
0.32
0.1
31
18.86
0.00012
0.22
0.02
1.54
0.09
32
11.6
0.00015
0.17
0.019
1.86
0.11
33
28.47
9e-05
0.17
-
2.9
0.06
34
0.45
0.0002
0.17
-
1.88
0.14
35
1.15
0.00023
0.16
0.026
2.39
0.17
36
9.42
0.00022
0.15
0.024
2.05
0.16
37
6.18
0.00023
0.14
-
0.07
0.17
38
31.92
8e-05
0.13
-
1.13
0.05
39
2.99
0.0002
0.13
0.019
0.02
0.15
40
22.36
0.00026
0.12
0.023
0.89
0.19
41
17.4
0.00025
0.12
-
1.13
0.18
42
3.19
0.00029
0.11
0.024
2.42
0.21
43
28.62
0.00014
0.12
-
2.91
0.1
44
21.34
0.00036
0.11
0.03
2.89
0.26
45
13.31
0.00029
0.12
-
0.25
0.21
46
20.15
0.00032
0.11
0.026
0.42
0.23
47
16.45
0.00035
0.12
-
0.97
0.25
48
0.34
0.00028
0.11
-
2.6
0.21
49
13.04
0.00029
0.11
-
1.75
0.21
50
17.99
0.00036
0.1
0.027
2.84
0.26
51
8.64
0.00025
0.1
0.019
2.94
0.19
TIC 144311964
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.97
8e-05
4.08
0.015
0.95
0.0
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
109
==PAGE:118==
2
9.43
9e-05
3.7
0.015
0.95
0.0
3
17.69
0.00013
2.26
-
2.14
0.01
4
8.77
0.00013
2.33
0.014
2.51
0.01
5
17.5
0.00014
2.16
-
2.95
0.01
6
18.93
0.00015
1.92
0.014
1.5
0.01
7
8.24
0.00021
1.43
0.014
2.0
0.01
8
15.49
0.00025
1.28
-
2.91
0.01
9
16.66
0.00027
1.16
-
0.05
0.01
10
8.03
0.00025
1.17
0.014
1.3
0.01
11
14.78
0.00035
0.94
0.015
2.77
0.02
12
13.83
0.00036
0.93
-
1.44
0.02
13
15.27
0.00032
1.01
-
0.97
0.02
14
8.69
0.00031
0.97
-
1.54
0.01
15
15.57
0.00041
0.77
0.015
0.61
0.02
16
12.92
0.00045
0.72
-
0.89
0.02
17
10.1
0.00051
0.62
0.015
2.54
0.02
18
8.59
0.00048
0.62
0.014
2.85
0.02
19
14.19
0.00053
0.62
0.016
2.28
0.03
20
15.84
0.00082
0.38
-
0.06
0.04
21
13.46
0.00096
0.34
0.015
1.65
0.05
22
15.02
0.00101
0.32
-
1.17
0.05
23
13.86
0.00096
0.34
0.016
2.44
0.05
24
18.63
0.00125
0.24
-
1.93
0.06
25
19.97
0.00133
0.23
0.014
0.46
0.06
26
13.99
0.00147
0.22
0.015
3.04
0.07
27
7.19
0.00143
0.2
0.014
3.09
0.07
28
22.81
0.00169
0.17
-
1.73
0.08
29
23.78
0.0017
0.16
-
2.5
0.08
30
14.1
0.00198
0.17
-
1.04
0.09
31
23.82
0.00176
0.16
-
1.29
0.08
32
36.62
0.00096
0.14
0.006
3.12
0.05
33
32.96
0.00197
0.12
0.011
0.98
0.09
34
2.42
0.00248
0.12
-
2.28
0.12
35
24.8
0.00304
0.09
-
1.56
0.15
36
35.37
0.00167
0.1
-
1.24
0.08
37
1.08
0.00381
0.08
-
0.37
0.18
38
18.21
0.00312
0.09
-
2.48
0.15
39
7.8
0.00328
0.09
-
1.08
0.16
40
26.65
0.00335
0.09
-
0.44
0.16
41
26.39
0.00356
0.08
0.014
2.94
0.17
42
11.57
0.00399
0.08
-
0.6
0.19
43
28.35
0.00373
0.08
-
1.88
0.18
44
1.86
0.00397
0.08
0.014
0.97
0.19
45
0.41
0.00418
0.08
0.015
2.59
0.2
46
21.01
0.00404
0.07
0.014
2.71
0.19
47
23.96
0.00368
0.08
-
1.87
0.18
48
2.84
0.00438
0.07
-
1.95
0.21
49
37.86
0.0018
0.07
-
3.03
0.09
50
33.26
0.00349
0.06
-
0.77
0.17
51
16.91
0.00482
0.06
0.015
2.24
0.23
110
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:119==
52
27.62
0.00457
0.06
0.014
1.04
0.22
53
20.08
0.00473
0.06
0.014
2.05
0.23
TIC 144459489
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.03
0.00031
0.85
0.01
1.64
0.01
2
2.27
0.0013
0.2
-
2.02
0.05
3
0.21
0.00167
0.17
-
2.38
0.07
4
1.03
0.0015
0.18
0.011
0.94
0.06
5
2.51
0.00162
0.16
0.011
0.17
0.06
6
10.43
0.00206
0.14
0.011
2.13
0.08
7
0.7
0.00188
0.15
-
2.75
0.07
8
0.34
0.00259
0.11
-
1.32
0.1
9
11.19
0.00376
0.08
-
0.66
0.15
TIC 144506852
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
29.13
0.0
2.12
-
0.39
0.0
2
30.63
1e-05
1.17
0.009
3.09
0.01
3
23.64
1e-05
1.07
-
2.47
0.01
4
15.12
1e-05
0.87
-
0.32
0.01
5
14.69
1e-05
0.76
-
1.5
0.01
6
25.93
1e-05
0.74
0.009
0.8
0.01
7
16.79
1e-05
0.58
-
2.9
0.01
8
13.91
1e-05
0.59
-
2.82
0.01
9
33.88
1e-05
0.48
0.008
1.37
0.02
10
28.36
2e-05
0.45
0.01
0.81
0.02
11
31.0
1e-05
0.47
0.009
0.44
0.02
12
17.6
2e-05
0.34
-
2.06
0.03
13
24.51
1e-05
0.34
0.006
2.74
0.02
14
25.52
2e-05
0.33
-
0.63
0.02
15
29.73
2e-05
0.32
0.009
0.57
0.03
16
34.56
3e-05
0.28
0.01
2.99
0.03
17
26.18
3e-05
0.28
0.011
2.75
0.04
18
22.28
2e-05
0.29
0.006
0.39
0.02
19
29.84
2e-05
0.26
0.008
2.13
0.03
20
13.57
1e-05
0.28
-
2.33
0.01
21
33.62
3e-05
0.24
-
1.77
0.05
22
28.01
2e-05
0.24
-
2.38
0.03
23
33.32
3e-05
0.24
-
2.42
0.05
24
17.92
2e-05
0.22
0.007
2.62
0.03
25
16.12
3e-05
0.22
-
2.02
0.04
26
25.47
3e-05
0.19
0.007
0.54
0.04
27
18.92
3e-05
0.17
0.006
3.03
0.04
28
28.76
3e-05
0.21
-
1.1
0.04
29
35.95
5e-05
0.18
0.013
1.72
0.07
30
26.29
4e-05
0.19
-
2.69
0.06
31
29.54
2e-05
0.18
-
1.64
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
111
==PAGE:120==
32
19.35
3e-05
0.18
-
2.41
0.05
33
33.65
3e-05
0.2
-
0.78
0.05
34
28.85
3e-05
0.17
-
0.31
0.05
35
31.87
6e-05
0.17
0.014
1.84
0.08
36
18.45
7e-05
0.16
0.014
1.36
0.09
37
33.2
5e-05
0.16
0.012
1.56
0.07
38
23.18
3e-05
0.15
-
1.44
0.05
39
16.43
4e-05
0.13
-
0.36
0.06
40
38.49
4e-05
0.15
-
1.54
0.06
41
24.71
5e-05
0.13
-
1.84
0.07
42
8.26
3e-05
0.13
0.006
1.24
0.05
43
34.25
5e-05
0.13
0.008
1.25
0.06
44
13.54
2e-05
0.12
-
1.58
0.03
45
17.26
8e-05
0.12
0.013
0.49
0.11
46
17.89
3e-05
0.15
0.006
2.21
0.04
47
12.33
4e-05
0.11
-
0.47
0.06
48
19.0
5e-05
0.12
0.009
1.04
0.08
49
24.32
3e-05
0.13
-
1.34
0.04
50
19.27
5e-05
0.12
0.008
1.86
0.07
51
35.73
5e-05
0.12
0.009
3.0
0.07
52
26.55
4e-05
0.11
0.006
1.9
0.06
53
27.84
5e-05
0.1
-
1.99
0.06
54
28.15
7e-05
0.1
0.01
2.33
0.1
55
3.23
7e-05
0.1
0.01
0.0
0.1
56
27.11
8e-05
0.1
-
1.35
0.11
57
1.7
9e-05
0.09
-
0.05
0.12
58
21.97
5e-05
0.1
0.006
2.7
0.06
59
35.83
8e-05
0.09
-
1.32
0.11
60
1.93
8e-05
0.1
-
0.81
0.11
61
43.23
9e-05
0.1
0.012
0.43
0.12
62
21.93
5e-05
0.09
0.006
0.23
0.07
63
35.02
6e-05
0.09
-
2.52
0.09
64
10.43
3e-05
0.09
0.003
0.35
0.04
65
40.91
8e-05
0.09
-
1.74
0.11
66
2.45
9e-05
0.09
0.01
0.4
0.12
67
20.7
8e-05
0.09
0.009
1.29
0.1
68
10.15
4e-05
0.08
-
0.23
0.05
69
43.41
0.00011
0.08
0.011
0.01
0.15
70
40.78
0.0001
0.08
0.01
3.12
0.13
71
9.64
4e-05
0.08
0.004
1.03
0.05
72
37.1
0.00011
0.08
-
1.99
0.15
73
21.21
8e-05
0.08
-
2.08
0.11
74
31.62
0.00011
0.07
-
2.5
0.15
75
36.23
0.00011
0.08
0.012
0.43
0.15
76
21.26
8e-05
0.07
0.008
0.15
0.11
77
20.6
9e-05
0.08
0.01
2.36
0.12
78
32.03
0.00012
0.08
-
2.03
0.17
79
33.56
0.00014
0.07
-
3.11
0.2
80
27.39
0.00011
0.07
0.011
1.96
0.16
81
31.12
8e-05
0.07
0.008
0.88
0.11
112
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:121==
82
30.81
0.0001
0.07
0.009
0.33
0.14
83
34.28
0.0001
0.06
-
2.94
0.13
84
7.64
8e-05
0.06
0.007
1.84
0.11
85
38.15
0.00012
0.06
-
1.31
0.16
86
37.07
0.00011
0.07
-
1.54
0.16
87
24.98
7e-05
0.06
-
0.14
0.09
88
45.76
0.00017
0.06
0.013
0.5
0.23
89
19.72
7e-05
0.06
-
2.38
0.1
90
19.03
0.00012
0.06
0.01
0.8
0.16
91
22.82
0.00013
0.06
-
2.66
0.18
92
40.49
7e-05
0.06
0.005
0.5
0.1
93
32.96
0.00012
0.06
-
2.49
0.16
94
34.22
0.0001
0.06
0.008
1.32
0.14
95
5.87
0.00011
0.05
0.008
2.98
0.15
96
20.26
0.0001
0.06
0.008
2.91
0.14
97
43.15
0.00019
0.05
0.013
2.18
0.26
98
41.6
0.00017
0.05
0.012
0.11
0.24
99
24.32
6e-05
0.06
-
1.33
0.08
100
17.37
0.00016
0.05
0.011
1.93
0.22
101
14.2
8e-05
0.05
-
2.74
0.11
102
43.75
0.00012
0.05
0.007
0.26
0.16
103
9.88
7e-05
0.05
0.005
0.25
0.1
104
37.95
0.0001
0.05
0.007
0.2
0.14
105
5.0
0.00014
0.05
0.009
2.21
0.19
106
36.33
0.00018
0.05
-
2.65
0.25
107
2.72
0.00011
0.05
0.007
1.1
0.15
108
3.73
0.00011
0.05
0.007
2.55
0.16
109
0.42
0.00019
0.04
0.011
2.76
0.26
110
41.07
0.0002
0.04
-
0.42
0.28
111
1.09
0.00018
0.05
-
1.77
0.25
112
0.96
0.0002
0.05
-
1.62
0.28
113
19.8
9e-05
0.04
0.005
2.69
0.12
114
43.59
0.00013
0.04
0.008
3.09
0.18
115
40.66
0.00013
0.04
-
0.89
0.18
116
33.99
0.00016
0.04
0.009
0.89
0.22
117
9.23
0.00015
0.04
-
0.96
0.21
118
39.57
0.00014
0.04
0.008
0.93
0.2
TIC 145204601
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
10.16
0.00016
1.87
-
2.16
0.01
2
9.54
0.00016
2.05
0.015
2.34
0.01
3
15.71
0.00015
1.78
-
1.04
0.01
4
14.99
0.0002
1.31
-
2.23
0.01
5
18.14
0.00026
1.01
-
0.8
0.01
6
9.89
0.00039
0.81
0.015
0.85
0.02
7
14.45
0.00039
0.71
-
3.02
0.02
8
9.23
0.00045
0.69
0.015
2.69
0.02
9
8.36
0.00046
0.66
0.015
1.84
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
113
==PAGE:122==
10
10.46
0.00043
0.7
-
2.14
0.02
11
19.85
0.00049
0.51
-
1.66
0.02
12
15.64
0.00054
0.5
-
1.28
0.03
13
13.92
0.0007
0.41
-
1.08
0.03
14
18.55
0.00112
0.24
0.013
0.5
0.05
15
13.63
0.00163
0.19
0.014
0.63
0.08
16
11.94
0.00178
0.18
0.015
2.23
0.08
17
17.69
0.00162
0.16
0.013
2.58
0.08
18
17.86
0.0016
0.16
0.013
0.29
0.08
19
12.81
0.00207
0.16
0.015
2.65
0.1
20
6.45
0.00173
0.15
0.012
2.65
0.08
21
11.37
0.00225
0.13
0.014
1.26
0.11
22
21.48
0.0019
0.13
-
0.7
0.09
23
13.24
0.00248
0.13
0.015
2.0
0.12
24
12.65
0.00279
0.12
0.016
2.12
0.13
25
11.77
0.00274
0.11
-
1.5
0.13
26
16.71
0.00279
0.1
0.013
1.02
0.13
27
20.49
0.00265
0.09
0.012
1.68
0.13
28
0.33
0.00283
0.09
0.012
1.17
0.14
29
8.71
0.00361
0.08
0.014
0.18
0.17
30
0.85
0.00361
0.07
-
0.29
0.17
31
12.29
0.00388
0.08
0.016
0.51
0.19
TIC 147085268
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.52
0.0
1.29
0.009
1.7
0.01
2
12.98
1e-05
1.28
-
2.74
0.01
3
14.94
1e-05
1.12
0.009
2.33
0.01
4
13.95
1e-05
1.12
-
1.97
0.01
5
18.12
1e-05
0.94
0.007
2.36
0.01
6
17.79
1e-05
0.82
0.01
0.53
0.01
7
18.92
1e-05
0.8
-
1.64
0.01
8
17.23
1e-05
0.81
-
1.18
0.01
9
14.23
1e-05
0.72
0.006
0.16
0.01
10
13.42
1e-05
0.69
-
2.56
0.01
11
13.12
1e-05
0.61
-
0.72
0.01
12
1.71
2e-05
0.5
0.011
2.49
0.02
13
13.51
1e-05
0.49
-
0.08
0.02
14
14.32
1e-05
0.45
-
0.4
0.02
15
11.11
1e-05
0.43
-
1.62
0.02
16
11.83
1e-05
0.36
-
0.32
0.02
17
12.49
1e-05
0.36
-
1.78
0.02
18
16.73
1e-05
0.35
0.005
1.99
0.02
19
19.62
1e-05
0.31
-
2.27
0.02
20
7.93
2e-05
0.35
0.011
1.09
0.03
21
7.17
3e-05
0.29
0.01
2.5
0.04
22
6.37
4e-05
0.24
0.014
1.88
0.06
23
19.24
1e-05
0.23
-
1.67
0.02
24
19.08
2e-05
0.22
0.006
2.56
0.03
114
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:123==
25
22.79
2e-05
0.21
-
0.87
0.02
26
14.9
3e-05
0.18
0.008
2.65
0.04
27
15.58
3e-05
0.19
0.009
1.79
0.05
28
19.82
3e-05
0.19
0.007
1.23
0.04
29
18.39
2e-05
0.18
0.006
2.94
0.03
30
6.5
5e-05
0.16
-
1.76
0.07
31
10.71
3e-05
0.16
-
1.62
0.04
32
16.54
3e-05
0.16
-
0.34
0.04
33
5.44
5e-05
0.16
-
1.59
0.06
34
0.52
7e-05
0.16
0.015
1.46
0.1
35
9.3
4e-05
0.14
0.007
1.3
0.05
36
20.52
3e-05
0.16
-
0.94
0.04
37
7.35
7e-05
0.14
0.013
2.67
0.09
38
1.79
4e-05
0.15
-
1.06
0.06
39
20.45
3e-05
0.15
-
1.79
0.04
40
0.94
7e-05
0.14
-
1.64
0.09
41
8.11
5e-05
0.14
0.011
0.21
0.07
42
23.61
3e-05
0.13
-
1.45
0.04
43
10.35
4e-05
0.13
0.007
1.53
0.05
44
11.27
3e-05
0.13
0.006
1.56
0.04
45
12.01
3e-05
0.13
-
0.13
0.04
46
25.53
3e-05
0.12
-
1.12
0.05
47
1.19
8e-05
0.12
0.014
1.3
0.11
48
6.87
7e-05
0.12
0.011
3.01
0.09
49
22.13
3e-05
0.11
-
2.05
0.04
50
7.76
9e-05
0.1
-
0.11
0.12
51
0.68
8e-05
0.12
0.013
0.2
0.11
52
14.48
5e-05
0.11
-
1.36
0.06
53
26.86
6e-05
0.09
-
0.09
0.08
54
8.01
9e-05
0.08
-
0.2
0.13
55
16.94
6e-05
0.08
-
0.69
0.08
56
7.8
0.00011
0.07
0.011
1.26
0.15
57
9.7
7e-05
0.08
0.007
2.14
0.1
58
20.84
8e-05
0.07
-
1.41
0.1
59
9.58
7e-05
0.07
-
2.79
0.1
60
29.42
4e-05
0.07
0.004
2.55
0.06
61
2.93
7e-05
0.07
-
2.92
0.1
62
23.47
5e-05
0.07
-
2.72
0.07
63
1.04
0.00017
0.06
0.015
0.42
0.23
64
9.67
8e-05
0.07
-
2.34
0.1
65
11.21
7e-05
0.07
0.007
2.22
0.1
66
8.28
0.00015
0.07
0.013
1.07
0.2
67
20.27
4e-05
0.07
0.004
2.43
0.06
68
1.57
0.00015
0.07
0.014
0.55
0.21
69
16.18
6e-05
0.06
-
1.83
0.09
70
27.13
6e-05
0.06
-
1.68
0.08
71
21.74
7e-05
0.06
0.006
2.26
0.1
72
6.2
0.00017
0.06
0.014
0.75
0.23
73
15.41
0.0001
0.06
-
1.07
0.14
74
25.92
4e-05
0.05
0.003
1.35
0.06
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
115
==PAGE:124==
75
8.48
0.00012
0.06
0.01
2.36
0.17
76
2.16
0.00012
0.05
-
0.76
0.16
77
25.63
7e-05
0.05
-
2.24
0.1
78
0.16
0.00019
0.05
-
1.22
0.26
79
33.71
8e-05
0.05
0.005
0.79
0.11
80
6.82
0.00014
0.06
0.011
2.97
0.2
81
21.19
7e-05
0.05
-
0.49
0.1
82
1.42
0.00013
0.06
-
0.46
0.17
83
1.48
0.00013
0.05
0.01
0.71
0.18
84
6.57
0.00015
0.05
0.011
1.76
0.2
85
14.55
9e-05
0.05
0.006
3.02
0.13
86
5.76
0.00019
0.05
-
0.48
0.27
87
2.21
0.00013
0.05
-
2.28
0.18
TIC 147940462
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.41
0.0
1.58
-
1.7
0.0
2
0.2
2e-05
0.19
0.005
2.68
0.03
3
12.67
1e-05
0.13
0.001
3.1
0.01
4
6.9
2e-05
0.1
-
0.69
0.04
5
12.18
1e-05
0.09
0.001
0.48
0.02
6
6.96
3e-05
0.07
-
0.23
0.06
7
0.16
7e-05
0.04
0.005
0.08
0.12
8
6.37
5e-05
0.04
-
2.24
0.09
9
12.51
2e-05
0.04
0.001
2.71
0.04
10
6.43
7e-05
0.03
-
0.53
0.12
11
7.96
3e-05
0.03
0.002
0.2
0.05
12
6.69
9e-05
0.03
-
1.93
0.15
13
6.22
8e-05
0.02
0.003
1.04
0.14
14
6.03
5e-05
0.02
-
0.33
0.09
15
0.66
0.00011
0.03
-
0.41
0.19
16
6.43
0.00012
0.02
0.004
1.32
0.2
TIC 149303648
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.64
0.0
1.84
-
2.78
0.0
2
2.56
1e-05
0.94
0.006
1.63
0.01
3
2.55
1e-05
0.89
-
2.22
0.01
4
0.46
4e-05
0.3
-
2.96
0.02
5
0.23
0.0001
0.14
0.008
1.25
0.06
6
2.46
7e-05
0.13
0.006
2.89
0.04
7
2.37
7e-05
0.12
0.005
2.09
0.04
8
5.28
5e-05
0.09
0.003
0.38
0.03
9
5.18
7e-05
0.07
-
1.03
0.04
10
5.1
7e-05
0.06
-
0.08
0.04
11
5.32
8e-05
0.06
-
0.45
0.05
116
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:125==
TIC 14948284
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
10.75
1e-05
8.92
0.119
1.6
0.01
2
0.74
1e-05
8.59
-
0.77
0.01
3
0.37
2e-05
3.81
0.115
1.56
0.03
4
1.11
2e-05
3.69
-
2.02
0.02
5
1.48
3e-05
3.33
0.118
0.55
0.04
6
2.22
1e-05
3.21
0.06
1.83
0.02
7
1.85
2e-05
2.83
-
0.61
0.03
8
20.32
2e-05
2.63
0.085
1.85
0.03
9
11.2
2e-05
2.69
-
2.91
0.03
10
2.96
1e-05
2.69
0.039
0.34
0.01
11
2.59
2e-05
2.3
0.057
2.17
0.02
12
3.7
1e-05
2.24
-
0.84
0.01
13
3.33
1e-05
2.08
-
2.28
0.02
14
4.44
1e-05
1.73
0.018
1.39
0.01
15
4.07
1e-05
1.7
0.031
2.76
0.02
16
20.11
4e-05
1.65
0.101
0.3
0.06
17
18.06
2e-05
1.32
0.038
2.23
0.03
18
13.37
2e-05
1.33
0.044
2.46
0.03
19
4.81
1e-05
1.25
0.024
0.2
0.02
20
5.18
1e-05
1.18
0.011
0.14
0.01
21
8.09
2e-05
1.08
0.036
2.74
0.03
22
17.67
4e-05
1.06
0.061
0.47
0.06
23
17.04
5e-05
1.01
-
0.99
0.06
24
17.78
4e-05
1.02
-
2.46
0.05
25
19.38
3e-05
0.95
0.046
0.81
0.05
26
12.1
6e-05
0.84
-
1.04
0.08
27
24.18
5e-05
0.8
-
2.69
0.06
28
5.55
1e-05
0.83
-
0.91
0.02
29
9.54
3e-05
0.66
-
1.79
0.04
30
19.84
9e-05
0.73
0.087
2.75
0.12
31
20.82
6e-05
0.81
-
3.09
0.08
32
20.83
6e-05
0.8
0.063
2.85
0.08
33
20.21
8e-05
0.73
0.085
1.14
0.12
34
5.92
1e-05
0.69
0.013
2.49
0.02
35
18.41
4e-05
0.67
-
2.75
0.06
36
23.46
6e-05
0.61
0.052
0.9
0.08
37
24.92
4e-05
0.59
-
1.11
0.06
38
1.32
0.00015
0.61
-
1.29
0.21
39
9.88
7e-05
0.56
-
1.67
0.1
40
16.94
8e-05
0.58
0.065
0.01
0.11
41
11.5
0.0001
0.55
0.079
1.37
0.14
42
22.34
9e-05
0.52
0.062
0.48
0.12
43
11.79
0.00013
0.49
0.092
2.17
0.19
44
6.29
3e-05
0.47
0.018
1.47
0.04
TIC 149630117
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
117
==PAGE:126==
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.46
0.0
1.37
0.002
1.16
0.0
2
19.22
0.0
1.26
0.003
2.36
0.0
3
18.63
0.0
1.23
0.003
3.09
0.0
4
2.3
0.0
1.0
0.005
1.81
0.0
5
9.61
0.0
0.82
-
1.57
0.01
6
30.11
0.0
0.77
-
0.87
0.0
7
24.02
0.0
0.69
-
3.1
0.0
8
2.72
0.0
0.69
-
1.07
0.01
9
18.45
0.0
0.63
0.003
0.46
0.0
10
2.38
0.0
0.61
0.005
0.59
0.01
11
9.68
1e-05
0.54
-
0.01
0.01
12
11.15
1e-05
0.48
-
2.75
0.01
13
18.24
0.0
0.48
0.003
1.3
0.01
14
9.55
1e-05
0.36
0.006
0.35
0.02
15
2.22
1e-05
0.35
-
0.48
0.01
16
28.71
0.0
0.31
-
1.17
0.01
17
11.22
1e-05
0.29
-
1.34
0.02
18
23.33
0.0
0.29
0.002
2.94
0.01
19
0.7
1e-05
0.28
0.006
0.81
0.02
20
25.85
0.0
0.25
0.002
1.75
0.01
21
24.99
0.0
0.24
-
2.65
0.01
22
11.09
1e-05
0.23
-
0.82
0.02
23
3.05
1e-05
0.22
0.004
0.67
0.02
24
10.72
1e-05
0.2
-
0.27
0.03
25
1.57
1e-05
0.18
-
1.86
0.03
26
18.54
1e-05
0.19
-
0.03
0.02
27
17.8
1e-05
0.19
0.003
0.28
0.01
28
10.18
2e-05
0.18
-
1.66
0.03
29
18.97
1e-05
0.16
0.003
1.89
0.02
30
16.27
1e-05
0.16
0.002
0.56
0.02
31
8.11
2e-05
0.14
-
1.78
0.04
32
9.15
2e-05
0.14
-
2.07
0.04
33
9.94
2e-05
0.13
0.006
0.88
0.05
34
26.61
1e-05
0.13
-
2.45
0.01
35
19.72
1e-05
0.13
-
2.78
0.02
36
7.15
2e-05
0.14
0.005
0.38
0.04
37
8.93
3e-05
0.13
0.006
1.76
0.05
38
0.6
3e-05
0.12
-
2.17
0.05
39
8.61
2e-05
0.12
0.006
3.11
0.05
40
37.46
1e-05
0.12
-
0.71
0.01
41
9.91
3e-05
0.11
0.006
1.84
0.05
42
9.22
3e-05
0.11
0.006
0.37
0.05
43
2.48
2e-05
0.11
-
3.06
0.04
44
1.64
2e-05
0.11
0.005
2.97
0.05
45
8.44
3e-05
0.1
0.006
1.41
0.05
46
2.23
2e-05
0.11
0.005
2.44
0.04
47
23.39
1e-05
0.1
0.002
0.21
0.02
48
18.99
2e-05
0.1
-
1.03
0.03
118
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:127==
49
18.99
2e-05
0.1
0.003
2.56
0.03
50
8.37
3e-05
0.09
-
1.9
0.06
51
1.51
3e-05
0.09
0.005
3.13
0.05
52
0.88
3e-05
0.1
0.005
1.44
0.05
53
7.31
3e-05
0.1
0.005
2.54
0.05
54
0.28
4e-05
0.09
-
0.68
0.07
55
6.89
3e-05
0.09
-
2.88
0.05
56
24.94
1e-05
0.09
-
0.58
0.02
57
8.17
4e-05
0.08
0.005
0.1
0.07
58
8.67
4e-05
0.08
-
1.2
0.07
59
8.51
4e-05
0.07
0.006
2.48
0.08
60
24.06
2e-05
0.07
-
1.65
0.03
61
8.1
5e-05
0.06
-
1.09
0.1
62
8.84
5e-05
0.06
0.006
1.69
0.1
63
9.09
5e-05
0.06
0.006
0.99
0.09
64
10.28
5e-05
0.06
-
0.24
0.1
65
20.58
2e-05
0.06
-
2.79
0.04
66
17.85
3e-05
0.06
-
1.22
0.05
67
2.78
4e-05
0.06
0.004
2.97
0.07
68
2.98
4e-05
0.06
0.004
0.16
0.07
69
9.53
6e-05
0.05
-
0.52
0.11
70
6.83
4e-05
0.06
-
0.7
0.08
71
41.91
2e-05
0.06
-
0.04
0.03
72
9.0
6e-05
0.06
-
2.01
0.11
73
7.64
6e-05
0.06
-
0.34
0.11
74
1.04
6e-05
0.05
-
2.29
0.11
75
12.66
4e-05
0.05
-
1.77
0.08
76
39.09
2e-05
0.05
-
0.05
0.03
77
27.39
2e-05
0.05
0.002
0.81
0.03
78
8.54
6e-05
0.05
-
1.86
0.1
79
41.87
2e-05
0.05
-
1.68
0.03
80
0.23
6e-05
0.05
0.006
0.91
0.12
81
8.05
6e-05
0.05
0.006
0.84
0.11
82
8.57
6e-05
0.05
-
1.5
0.11
83
14.11
3e-05
0.05
0.002
0.01
0.05
84
7.39
5e-05
0.05
0.005
2.59
0.1
85
1.48
7e-05
0.04
0.005
1.23
0.12
86
1.46
6e-05
0.05
-
1.82
0.1
87
7.99
7e-05
0.05
-
2.84
0.14
88
9.19
7e-05
0.05
-
2.16
0.13
89
8.86
8e-05
0.04
-
0.32
0.14
90
8.16
6e-05
0.05
0.005
0.79
0.11
91
0.33
7e-05
0.05
0.006
1.95
0.13
92
8.79
7e-05
0.05
-
1.68
0.13
93
8.89
8e-05
0.04
0.006
2.4
0.16
94
11.48
6e-05
0.04
0.005
0.61
0.11
95
0.41
8e-05
0.04
-
1.66
0.16
96
8.71
7e-05
0.04
0.006
2.02
0.13
97
10.2
7e-05
0.04
0.006
1.91
0.13
98
10.49
7e-05
0.04
-
1.42
0.13
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
119
==PAGE:128==
99
12.27
6e-05
0.04
0.005
0.44
0.11
100
12.66
6e-05
0.04
0.004
2.43
0.11
101
37.49
2e-05
0.04
0.002
0.59
0.05
102
11.73
8e-05
0.03
0.005
1.9
0.15
103
17.46
4e-05
0.04
-
2.76
0.08
104
8.2
8e-05
0.03
-
2.71
0.16
105
1.02
8e-05
0.04
0.006
2.27
0.15
106
26.71
2e-05
0.04
-
0.52
0.05
107
10.66
8e-05
0.04
-
2.81
0.14
108
10.38
9e-05
0.03
0.005
2.64
0.16
109
15.23
4e-05
0.04
0.002
0.96
0.07
110
18.2
5e-05
0.04
-
2.42
0.09
111
1.43
8e-05
0.04
0.005
2.13
0.14
112
11.91
7e-05
0.04
-
0.73
0.13
113
0.81
9e-05
0.03
0.006
1.57
0.17
114
0.27
8e-05
0.04
-
0.17
0.16
115
3.81
5e-05
0.03
0.003
0.58
0.09
116
6.84
7e-05
0.03
0.004
1.21
0.13
117
12.79
6e-05
0.03
-
1.16
0.12
118
7.88
0.0001
0.03
-
0.24
0.18
119
7.23
8e-05
0.03
0.005
2.22
0.16
120
8.56
9e-05
0.03
-
2.0
0.16
121
8.59
8e-05
0.03
-
0.55
0.16
122
8.39
0.00011
0.03
0.005
2.29
0.2
123
8.82
0.00012
0.03
0.006
2.52
0.22
124
8.24
9e-05
0.03
-
1.38
0.17
125
2.17
9e-05
0.03
0.005
3.12
0.17
126
6.56
7e-05
0.03
-
0.24
0.13
127
0.17
0.00011
0.03
0.006
0.25
0.2
128
10.08
0.0001
0.03
-
1.91
0.19
129
15.43
5e-05
0.03
-
1.33
0.09
130
10.56
0.0001
0.03
0.006
0.77
0.18
131
10.7
0.0001
0.03
0.005
2.98
0.18
132
8.15
0.0001
0.03
0.005
0.32
0.19
133
10.03
0.0001
0.03
0.006
1.03
0.18
134
8.91
0.00012
0.03
0.006
2.7
0.22
135
9.34
9e-05
0.03
0.006
3.06
0.18
136
17.33
5e-05
0.03
-
1.99
0.09
137
12.69
8e-05
0.03
-
1.3
0.14
138
0.58
0.0001
0.03
0.006
0.11
0.19
139
7.71
0.00011
0.03
-
2.13
0.21
140
4.1
5e-05
0.03
-
1.7
0.1
141
21.76
4e-05
0.03
0.002
1.98
0.07
142
0.51
0.00011
0.03
0.006
1.04
0.21
143
12.63
8e-05
0.03
-
1.45
0.16
144
9.7
0.00011
0.03
-
0.07
0.21
145
3.11
7e-05
0.03
0.004
0.73
0.14
146
7.51
0.00011
0.03
0.006
1.9
0.2
147
10.97
0.0001
0.03
0.005
0.19
0.19
148
0.17
0.00013
0.03
-
0.1
0.24
120
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:129==
149
8.74
0.0001
0.03
0.006
0.42
0.19
150
11.87
9e-05
0.03
-
0.51
0.17
151
10.77
0.00012
0.02
0.006
0.85
0.23
152
12.4
0.0001
0.02
-
0.72
0.18
153
1.74
0.0001
0.03
0.005
2.84
0.18
154
8.54
0.0001
0.03
-
1.97
0.19
155
1.96
0.0001
0.03
0.005
2.79
0.19
156
0.42
0.00014
0.03
-
1.59
0.26
157
8.03
0.00014
0.02
0.006
0.68
0.25
158
24.28
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.12
0.07
159
10.22
0.00011
0.03
0.006
1.79
0.21
160
0.3
0.00012
0.03
0.006
1.0
0.23
161
0.08
0.00013
0.03
0.006
1.67
0.24
162
8.04
0.00013
0.03
0.006
1.71
0.24
163
7.78
0.00011
0.03
-
0.11
0.21
164
12.39
9e-05
0.02
-
1.25
0.17
165
15.3
5e-05
0.02
-
0.2
0.1
166
8.41
0.00011
0.03
-
2.56
0.22
167
0.79
0.00013
0.02
-
2.5
0.24
168
7.44
0.00012
0.03
0.005
1.5
0.22
169
38.44
3e-05
0.02
-
0.97
0.06
170
41.9
4e-05
0.02
0.002
2.1
0.07
171
11.34
0.0001
0.02
0.005
2.03
0.19
172
8.89
0.00011
0.03
-
3.06
0.21
173
7.81
0.00013
0.02
0.006
1.24
0.24
174
43.19
4e-05
0.02
-
1.5
0.07
175
10.87
0.00012
0.02
0.005
0.29
0.22
176
1.26
0.00013
0.02
0.006
2.03
0.25
177
8.28
0.00011
0.03
0.005
3.01
0.2
178
8.42
0.00012
0.02
-
0.49
0.23
179
1.89
0.00012
0.02
0.005
2.14
0.23
180
10.62
0.00013
0.02
0.005
0.15
0.24
181
0.32
0.00014
0.02
-
1.87
0.27
182
17.18
6e-05
0.02
-
1.16
0.12
183
7.95
0.00014
0.02
0.006
3.05
0.27
184
9.1
0.00013
0.02
0.006
1.22
0.25
185
13.44
7e-05
0.02
-
0.23
0.14
186
39.32
4e-05
0.02
-
3.05
0.08
187
8.12
0.00014
0.02
-
1.49
0.26
188
6.77
0.00011
0.02
-
1.57
0.2
189
0.36
0.00016
0.02
0.006
2.22
0.3
190
11.81
0.00011
0.02
0.005
0.08
0.21
191
7.87
0.00014
0.02
0.006
0.13
0.26
192
7.98
0.00016
0.02
0.006
1.16
0.29
193
12.93
0.0001
0.02
-
3.02
0.18
194
1.1
0.00013
0.02
-
2.18
0.24
195
6.45
0.0001
0.02
-
2.61
0.18
196
12.77
0.0001
0.02
-
1.94
0.19
197
0.1
0.00016
0.02
-
2.84
0.3
198
1.3
0.00014
0.02
-
1.39
0.26
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
121
==PAGE:130==
199
7.85
0.00014
0.02
-
2.12
0.27
200
10.35
0.00014
0.02
0.005
1.95
0.26
201
7.04
0.00013
0.02
-
1.87
0.25
202
0.89
0.00014
0.02
-
1.91
0.27
203
1.19
0.00013
0.02
-
0.45
0.25
204
0.0
0.00014
0.02
0.005
1.64
0.27
205
0.98
0.00015
0.02
-
1.12
0.28
206
7.25
0.00013
0.02
-
2.89
0.25
TIC 149952437
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
23.38
8e-05
1.91
-
1.2
0.0
2
0.18
0.00136
0.17
-
1.07
0.06
3
27.26
0.00215
0.07
0.007
1.18
0.1
4
29.4
0.00255
0.06
-
2.0
0.12
5
29.99
0.00326
0.05
0.007
0.33
0.15
6
1.15
0.00518
0.04
-
2.7
0.24
7
0.36
0.00587
0.04
-
0.94
0.27
TIC 150183718
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
9.02
8e-05
2.05
-
2.82
0.0
2
9.2
0.00012
1.27
0.007
2.03
0.01
3
0.84
0.00103
0.55
-
3.08
0.05
4
0.19
0.00124
0.45
0.027
2.23
0.06
5
3.55
0.00115
0.37
0.02
0.32
0.06
6
9.42
0.00051
0.29
-
2.77
0.02
7
0.1
0.00183
0.3
0.027
2.92
0.09
8
2.58
0.00154
0.29
-
3.05
0.07
9
1.42
0.00215
0.25
-
1.39
0.1
10
3.78
0.0018
0.23
-
2.91
0.09
11
8.03
0.00095
0.2
0.009
1.06
0.05
12
2.77
0.00217
0.2
0.021
1.15
0.1
13
4.02
0.00224
0.18
0.019
0.36
0.11
14
2.31
0.00307
0.15
0.022
0.93
0.15
15
0.24
0.00331
0.17
-
0.22
0.16
16
4.11
0.00316
0.12
-
1.38
0.15
17
2.5
0.00384
0.12
0.021
1.43
0.18
TIC 150268967
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
35.38
1e-05
0.54
0.007
3.05
0.01
2
27.23
1e-05
0.46
0.007
2.12
0.02
3
24.77
1e-05
0.42
0.007
2.67
0.02
4
36.66
1e-05
0.4
-
0.37
0.01
5
32.63
1e-05
0.39
-
2.91
0.02
6
29.33
1e-05
0.36
-
1.81
0.01
122
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:131==
7
39.91
1e-05
0.32
-
1.29
0.02
8
27.5
1e-05
0.26
0.005
1.88
0.02
9
34.26
4e-05
0.14
-
3.0
0.06
10
33.37
4e-05
0.1
0.005
1.45
0.05
11
24.31
3e-05
0.09
-
1.56
0.05
12
30.03
4e-05
0.09
0.004
2.92
0.05
13
29.03
3e-05
0.09
0.004
1.11
0.04
14
37.74
6e-05
0.08
0.006
2.41
0.08
15
39.95
6e-05
0.08
-
2.79
0.08
16
36.08
5e-05
0.06
-
0.64
0.07
17
30.93
5e-05
0.06
0.004
2.25
0.07
18
23.4
8e-05
0.05
0.006
1.35
0.11
19
56.31
6e-05
0.05
-
2.97
0.08
20
31.41
7e-05
0.05
-
3.13
0.09
21
44.82
9e-05
0.04
-
0.05
0.12
22
49.1
9e-05
0.04
-
0.52
0.12
23
51.01
9e-05
0.04
0.005
1.46
0.12
24
52.25
8e-05
0.04
-
1.8
0.12
25
34.91
9e-05
0.04
-
2.71
0.12
26
1.44
9e-05
0.04
-
2.72
0.13
27
52.15
0.0001
0.03
-
0.1
0.14
28
0.19
0.00015
0.03
0.006
0.43
0.2
29
43.81
0.00012
0.03
-
2.3
0.16
30
59.53
0.00011
0.03
0.004
0.48
0.15
TIC 150357935
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
29.45
0.0
0.79
0.002
1.14
0.0
2
20.1
0.0
0.57
-
0.99
0.0
3
28.51
0.0
0.38
-
1.78
0.0
4
29.8
0.0
0.29
0.001
0.12
0.01
5
27.92
0.0
0.28
-
0.93
0.01
6
31.85
0.0
0.26
0.002
1.52
0.01
7
21.37
0.0
0.25
0.001
1.54
0.0
8
24.14
0.0
0.24
0.001
2.51
0.01
9
30.63
0.0
0.23
-
2.38
0.01
10
20.75
0.0
0.21
0.001
2.33
0.01
11
15.46
0.0
0.19
0.001
2.03
0.01
12
14.68
0.0
0.17
-
1.75
0.01
13
16.98
0.0
0.17
-
1.9
0.01
14
32.46
1e-05
0.16
0.002
1.43
0.01
15
26.89
0.0
0.16
0.002
2.49
0.01
16
24.52
1e-05
0.16
0.002
2.0
0.01
17
20.49
0.0
0.16
-
1.84
0.01
18
19.54
0.0
0.15
0.001
2.79
0.01
19
32.86
1e-05
0.15
-
0.45
0.01
20
26.34
0.0
0.15
-
0.69
0.01
21
16.19
0.0
0.13
0.001
2.02
0.01
22
32.45
1e-05
0.11
-
1.45
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
123
==PAGE:132==
23
14.55
0.0
0.12
-
1.26
0.01
24
28.43
1e-05
0.12
0.002
1.45
0.02
25
26.93
1e-05
0.12
-
2.28
0.01
26
27.87
1e-05
0.11
0.002
2.55
0.01
27
17.55
1e-05
0.11
0.001
2.91
0.01
28
24.73
1e-05
0.11
-
2.95
0.01
29
29.09
1e-05
0.11
0.001
2.03
0.01
30
14.84
1e-05
0.11
-
1.8
0.01
31
15.74
1e-05
0.1
0.001
1.17
0.01
32
33.2
1e-05
0.1
0.001
0.07
0.01
33
23.64
1e-05
0.1
-
2.29
0.01
34
43.83
1e-05
0.1
-
0.52
0.02
35
34.32
1e-05
0.1
0.002
2.55
0.02
36
38.97
1e-05
0.1
-
0.96
0.02
37
15.3
1e-05
0.09
-
0.43
0.01
38
25.24
1e-05
0.09
0.001
3.08
0.02
39
21.79
1e-05
0.09
-
0.84
0.01
40
36.91
1e-05
0.09
-
0.07
0.03
41
24.03
1e-05
0.09
-
3.08
0.01
42
19.12
1e-05
0.09
0.001
0.54
0.01
43
20.54
1e-05
0.08
-
0.4
0.02
44
31.19
1e-05
0.09
0.002
0.47
0.02
45
18.01
1e-05
0.08
-
2.41
0.01
46
0.64
2e-05
0.08
-
2.91
0.03
47
19.04
1e-05
0.09
0.001
1.25
0.01
48
28.38
1e-05
0.08
-
2.35
0.02
49
16.11
1e-05
0.09
0.001
1.32
0.01
50
14.27
1e-05
0.08
0.001
0.44
0.01
51
20.3
1e-05
0.08
-
2.02
0.02
52
26.51
1e-05
0.08
0.001
2.92
0.02
53
19.89
1e-05
0.08
-
1.45
0.02
54
22.76
1e-05
0.08
-
1.89
0.02
55
30.5
1e-05
0.08
-
1.92
0.02
56
29.35
1e-05
0.07
0.002
2.48
0.03
57
17.67
1e-05
0.06
0.001
1.37
0.02
58
30.06
1e-05
0.07
0.001
2.99
0.02
59
19.24
1e-05
0.07
0.001
1.85
0.02
60
25.91
1e-05
0.08
0.001
2.04
0.02
61
22.74
1e-05
0.07
-
2.22
0.02
62
14.08
1e-05
0.07
0.001
1.21
0.02
63
13.94
1e-05
0.07
0.001
1.8
0.01
64
15.54
1e-05
0.07
-
0.39
0.02
65
30.04
1e-05
0.07
0.001
0.73
0.02
66
17.45
1e-05
0.07
-
0.79
0.02
67
22.8
1e-05
0.06
0.001
2.47
0.02
68
24.41
1e-05
0.06
-
3.07
0.02
69
17.52
1e-05
0.06
0.001
1.46
0.02
70
23.36
2e-05
0.06
-
0.77
0.03
71
16.93
1e-05
0.06
-
2.8
0.02
72
21.55
1e-05
0.06
0.001
0.86
0.02
124
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:133==
73
20.27
1e-05
0.06
-
2.4
0.02
74
20.12
1e-05
0.06
0.001
2.67
0.02
75
30.52
1e-05
0.06
-
2.52
0.02
76
25.99
1e-05
0.06
-
2.14
0.02
77
38.97
2e-05
0.06
-
0.69
0.04
78
18.92
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.74
0.03
79
16.39
1e-05
0.05
-
0.47
0.02
80
43.78
2e-05
0.05
0.002
1.02
0.04
81
16.51
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.16
0.02
82
27.55
1e-05
0.05
-
2.54
0.03
83
15.95
1e-05
0.06
0.001
0.94
0.02
84
36.94
2e-05
0.05
-
0.01
0.04
85
23.9
1e-05
0.05
0.001
2.75
0.02
86
35.68
2e-05
0.05
-
0.68
0.03
87
23.67
1e-05
0.05
-
1.15
0.03
88
17.87
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.72
0.02
89
14.95
1e-05
0.05
-
1.89
0.02
90
25.61
1e-05
0.05
-
1.28
0.03
91
24.88
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.77
0.02
92
17.28
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.42
0.02
93
22.63
1e-05
0.05
-
2.59
0.03
94
25.9
1e-05
0.05
0.001
2.34
0.03
95
15.88
1e-05
0.05
-
1.19
0.02
96
16.46
1e-05
0.05
-
2.29
0.03
97
22.49
1e-05
0.04
-
3.11
0.03
98
32.34
2e-05
0.04
0.002
1.54
0.04
99
25.05
1e-05
0.04
0.001
2.38
0.03
100
13.51
1e-05
0.04
0.001
2.45
0.02
101
17.69
1e-05
0.04
0.001
1.66
0.03
102
39.05
3e-05
0.04
-
1.42
0.05
103
18.83
2e-05
0.04
-
1.4
0.03
104
31.19
2e-05
0.04
-
2.97
0.04
105
40.32
2e-05
0.04
-
0.37
0.04
106
31.29
2e-05
0.05
0.002
2.57
0.03
107
16.32
1e-05
0.04
0.001
0.87
0.03
108
15.65
1e-05
0.04
-
0.82
0.03
109
31.76
2e-05
0.04
-
2.74
0.04
110
24.95
2e-05
0.04
-
1.71
0.03
111
19.66
2e-05
0.04
-
1.61
0.03
112
21.51
2e-05
0.04
-
1.6
0.03
113
19.07
1e-05
0.04
0.001
0.82
0.03
114
43.81
3e-05
0.04
0.002
2.71
0.06
115
19.06
2e-05
0.04
0.001
0.37
0.03
116
19.43
2e-05
0.04
0.001
2.0
0.03
117
29.95
2e-05
0.04
0.001
2.96
0.04
118
36.96
4e-05
0.03
-
0.57
0.07
119
18.94
2e-05
0.04
-
1.21
0.03
120
15.78
2e-05
0.03
-
0.62
0.03
121
38.95
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.05
0.05
122
37.22
2e-05
0.04
0.002
2.92
0.05
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
125
==PAGE:134==
123
46.35
3e-05
0.03
0.002
0.36
0.06
124
17.5
2e-05
0.03
0.001
0.82
0.04
125
32.35
3e-05
0.04
0.002
2.21
0.05
126
19.93
2e-05
0.03
-
0.06
0.04
127
27.12
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.84
0.04
128
16.17
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.1
0.04
129
37.99
3e-05
0.03
-
2.22
0.06
130
17.24
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.67
0.03
131
34.15
3e-05
0.03
0.002
1.43
0.05
132
28.99
2e-05
0.03
0.001
0.09
0.05
133
21.98
2e-05
0.03
-
1.55
0.04
134
24.68
3e-05
0.03
0.001
0.72
0.05
135
16.48
2e-05
0.03
-
0.76
0.04
136
39.01
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.05
0.08
137
26.25
2e-05
0.03
-
0.43
0.04
138
23.05
2e-05
0.03
0.001
1.41
0.05
139
22.16
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.96
0.05
140
39.26
4e-05
0.03
0.002
1.12
0.07
141
23.42
3e-05
0.03
0.002
0.59
0.06
142
1.62
3e-05
0.03
0.002
2.76
0.07
143
0.64
5e-05
0.03
0.003
0.24
0.09
144
14.24
2e-05
0.03
-
1.95
0.04
145
41.55
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.06
0.09
146
0.59
5e-05
0.03
-
1.39
0.09
147
15.14
3e-05
0.03
0.001
3.06
0.05
148
39.03
5e-05
0.02
0.002
3.03
0.09
149
31.75
3e-05
0.03
0.002
2.95
0.06
150
42.72
3e-05
0.02
0.002
1.5
0.06
151
43.99
4e-05
0.02
-
0.13
0.07
152
39.22
4e-05
0.03
-
2.97
0.07
153
41.43
5e-05
0.02
0.002
2.08
0.09
154
15.36
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.35
0.06
155
36.96
5e-05
0.02
0.002
2.69
0.1
156
5.52
4e-05
0.02
0.002
1.17
0.07
157
14.39
2e-05
0.02
0.001
2.67
0.05
158
17.63
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.1
0.05
159
13.61
3e-05
0.02
0.001
0.85
0.05
160
43.72
5e-05
0.02
0.002
0.59
0.1
161
26.63
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.53
0.05
162
14.85
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.76
0.05
163
13.72
3e-05
0.02
-
1.63
0.05
164
38.96
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.99
0.09
165
18.36
3e-05
0.02
-
2.55
0.06
166
16.0
3e-05
0.02
-
2.01
0.06
167
19.47
3e-05
0.02
-
2.2
0.07
168
41.67
4e-05
0.02
-
3.08
0.09
169
41.53
6e-05
0.02
0.002
0.54
0.11
170
23.12
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.4
0.05
171
37.31
4e-05
0.02
-
2.57
0.08
172
25.29
4e-05
0.02
0.001
2.4
0.07
126
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:135==
173
18.55
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.23
0.05
174
0.61
7e-05
0.02
-
1.67
0.14
175
41.54
6e-05
0.02
-
2.33
0.11
176
34.6
4e-05
0.02
-
2.13
0.08
177
32.97
4e-05
0.02
0.001
0.66
0.07
178
37.94
5e-05
0.02
-
1.94
0.09
179
25.6
4e-05
0.02
0.001
2.46
0.07
180
35.63
4e-05
0.02
-
0.8
0.07
181
43.77
6e-05
0.02
0.002
3.05
0.12
182
39.75
4e-05
0.02
-
2.86
0.08
183
31.29
4e-05
0.02
-
1.77
0.08
184
24.49
5e-05
0.02
-
1.14
0.09
185
0.67
7e-05
0.02
-
2.46
0.13
186
21.02
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.5
0.06
187
49.94
4e-05
0.02
0.001
1.53
0.07
188
41.6
6e-05
0.02
-
2.42
0.12
189
48.6
4e-05
0.02
-
0.12
0.08
190
46.37
6e-05
0.02
-
1.6
0.11
191
25.88
3e-05
0.02
0.001
0.69
0.07
192
43.73
7e-05
0.02
-
1.84
0.13
193
22.79
4e-05
0.02
0.001
2.58
0.07
194
38.11
5e-05
0.02
-
2.29
0.09
195
48.71
5e-05
0.02
-
0.58
0.09
196
1.44
5e-05
0.02
-
0.24
0.1
197
22.86
3e-05
0.02
-
0.34
0.06
198
56.01
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.41
0.06
199
43.76
6e-05
0.02
-
1.21
0.12
200
24.57
5e-05
0.02
-
0.39
0.1
201
40.36
5e-05
0.02
-
2.74
0.09
202
26.06
4e-05
0.02
0.001
1.03
0.07
203
34.35
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.61
0.1
204
48.58
5e-05
0.02
-
0.24
0.09
205
4.98
5e-05
0.02
0.002
3.03
0.09
206
42.63
5e-05
0.02
-
1.13
0.1
207
28.02
4e-05
0.02
0.001
0.01
0.08
208
14.99
4e-05
0.02
0.001
2.96
0.07
209
16.87
4e-05
0.02
0.001
0.42
0.08
210
25.34
4e-05
0.02
0.001
0.98
0.07
211
38.28
4e-05
0.02
0.001
1.14
0.08
212
1.29
7e-05
0.02
-
0.32
0.14
213
39.7
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.0
0.1
214
43.03
4e-05
0.02
-
1.54
0.08
215
18.31
4e-05
0.02
0.001
0.23
0.08
216
30.67
5e-05
0.02
-
0.5
0.09
217
39.56
6e-05
0.02
0.002
2.65
0.12
218
16.54
4e-05
0.02
-
1.04
0.08
219
37.11
6e-05
0.02
-
2.42
0.11
220
38.06
5e-05
0.02
0.002
0.3
0.1
221
33.42
5e-05
0.02
0.002
2.67
0.1
222
0.61
9e-05
0.01
0.003
0.95
0.18
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
127
==PAGE:136==
223
39.96
5e-05
0.02
0.001
1.85
0.09
224
41.51
7e-05
0.02
0.002
1.61
0.14
225
51.48
4e-05
0.02
-
1.46
0.09
226
41.35
6e-05
0.01
-
2.14
0.11
227
37.3
6e-05
0.01
0.002
1.32
0.11
228
1.03
8e-05
0.01
0.002
0.85
0.15
229
21.95
4e-05
0.01
0.001
1.86
0.08
230
14.94
4e-05
0.01
0.001
2.69
0.08
231
17.84
4e-05
0.02
-
2.39
0.07
232
39.34
8e-05
0.01
0.002
2.51
0.14
233
1.93
6e-05
0.01
-
1.94
0.12
234
41.55
8e-05
0.02
-
1.99
0.16
235
42.74
6e-05
0.01
0.002
1.15
0.11
236
43.04
5e-05
0.01
-
2.22
0.09
237
18.61
4e-05
0.01
-
1.12
0.07
238
43.38
5e-05
0.01
-
1.25
0.1
239
0.88
9e-05
0.01
-
3.05
0.17
240
0.58
9e-05
0.01
-
0.68
0.18
241
36.21
5e-05
0.01
-
0.58
0.09
242
39.28
7e-05
0.01
-
1.3
0.14
243
38.01
7e-05
0.01
-
2.34
0.14
244
46.25
7e-05
0.01
0.002
2.37
0.14
245
1.97
7e-05
0.01
0.002
1.97
0.13
246
41.57
9e-05
0.01
-
1.69
0.17
247
43.62
6e-05
0.01
-
1.95
0.12
248
42.21
5e-05
0.01
-
0.16
0.1
249
23.31
6e-05
0.01
-
2.07
0.11
250
39.74
6e-05
0.01
-
1.57
0.12
251
46.46
6e-05
0.01
0.002
0.82
0.12
252
23.46
6e-05
0.01
-
1.45
0.12
253
46.36
7e-05
0.01
0.002
0.28
0.14
254
0.31
0.00012
0.01
-
0.69
0.22
255
33.68
6e-05
0.01
0.002
0.73
0.12
256
37.98
7e-05
0.01
-
1.04
0.14
257
46.38
7e-05
0.01
-
2.34
0.14
258
51.61
5e-05
0.01
-
1.48
0.1
259
27.48
5e-05
0.01
0.001
0.56
0.1
260
24.66
6e-05
0.01
0.001
1.16
0.12
261
43.78
9e-05
0.01
0.002
2.39
0.17
262
41.53
9e-05
0.01
0.002
2.37
0.17
263
41.53
8e-05
0.01
-
1.07
0.16
264
47.45
6e-05
0.01
-
1.61
0.11
265
13.64
5e-05
0.01
0.001
1.95
0.09
266
31.59
6e-05
0.01
-
3.0
0.12
267
23.08
5e-05
0.01
0.001
0.26
0.1
268
55.21
5e-05
0.01
0.001
2.27
0.1
269
34.92
7e-05
0.01
-
3.0
0.14
270
38.04
8e-05
0.01
-
0.77
0.15
271
36.23
5e-05
0.01
-
2.27
0.1
272
16.6
5e-05
0.01
-
1.03
0.1
128
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:137==
273
40.34
6e-05
0.01
-
1.59
0.12
274
0.41
0.00012
0.01
0.003
2.61
0.23
275
46.26
8e-05
0.01
-
3.02
0.15
276
14.11
5e-05
0.01
-
1.78
0.09
277
18.66
5e-05
0.01
-
1.62
0.09
278
39.31
8e-05
0.01
0.002
0.23
0.15
279
38.8
7e-05
0.01
0.002
2.36
0.14
280
1.39
9e-05
0.01
0.002
2.77
0.17
281
43.99
8e-05
0.01
0.002
1.37
0.15
282
16.68
5e-05
0.01
0.001
1.57
0.1
283
7.69
5e-05
0.01
-
1.56
0.1
284
5.73
7e-05
0.01
-
2.09
0.13
285
48.79
6e-05
0.01
0.001
3.12
0.11
286
40.62
6e-05
0.01
0.001
1.12
0.11
287
0.87
0.0001
0.01
0.002
1.52
0.19
288
21.53
5e-05
0.01
0.001
0.52
0.1
289
38.47
8e-05
0.01
-
0.19
0.15
290
0.18
0.00014
0.01
-
1.92
0.27
291
22.48
5e-05
0.01
0.001
1.51
0.11
292
1.45
8e-05
0.01
-
0.46
0.16
293
46.21
8e-05
0.01
0.002
0.24
0.16
294
34.28
9e-05
0.01
0.002
2.66
0.17
295
41.67
8e-05
0.01
0.002
2.23
0.15
296
41.74
7e-05
0.01
-
1.83
0.13
297
41.58
0.0001
0.01
-
2.72
0.19
298
20.22
6e-05
0.01
0.001
0.03
0.11
299
5.54
7e-05
0.01
-
1.95
0.13
300
46.51
8e-05
0.01
-
0.1
0.15
301
39.33
9e-05
0.01
-
2.92
0.17
302
33.68
7e-05
0.01
-
2.98
0.14
303
25.45
5e-05
0.01
0.001
2.67
0.1
TIC 1506355332
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.9
0.00019
0.39
0.007
1.25
0.02
2
1.96
0.00021
0.38
-
1.9
0.02
3
1.28
0.00025
0.31
-
0.99
0.02
4
20.71
0.00023
0.25
0.005
2.97
0.02
5
2.08
0.00038
0.2
0.007
1.57
0.04
6
1.78
0.0004
0.19
0.007
0.2
0.04
7
6.3
0.00059
0.17
0.009
2.3
0.05
8
0.15
0.00042
0.17
-
1.08
0.04
9
0.54
0.00046
0.15
0.006
1.47
0.04
10
4.93
0.00063
0.15
0.009
1.28
0.06
11
1.14
0.00045
0.17
-
2.54
0.04
12
5.14
0.00075
0.13
0.009
0.05
0.07
13
2.73
0.00067
0.12
0.008
2.75
0.06
14
5.78
0.00135
0.07
-
0.54
0.13
15
2.56
0.00085
0.1
0.008
2.06
0.08
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
129
==PAGE:138==
16
4.22
0.001
0.09
-
0.23
0.09
17
5.29
0.00094
0.1
-
0.73
0.09
18
7.03
0.00112
0.09
-
1.66
0.1
19
5.4
0.00136
0.07
0.009
0.65
0.13
20
0.24
0.00087
0.08
0.007
2.84
0.08
21
6.21
0.00121
0.08
0.009
2.35
0.11
22
1.03
0.00094
0.08
0.007
1.29
0.09
23
4.29
0.00131
0.07
-
2.78
0.12
24
7.12
0.00148
0.07
-
1.69
0.14
25
0.79
0.00098
0.07
-
3.1
0.09
26
4.47
0.00173
0.06
-
0.54
0.16
27
3.22
0.00141
0.06
-
2.1
0.13
28
4.7
0.00164
0.06
-
0.64
0.15
29
2.37
0.00139
0.06
-
0.65
0.13
30
3.66
0.00157
0.06
0.008
1.53
0.15
31
7.43
0.00209
0.05
0.009
0.88
0.2
32
4.63
0.00193
0.05
-
1.91
0.18
33
5.54
0.0018
0.06
-
2.29
0.17
34
8.03
0.00204
0.05
-
2.66
0.19
35
2.35
0.00195
0.04
-
2.59
0.18
36
8.45
0.00221
0.04
0.008
2.56
0.21
37
3.77
0.00234
0.04
0.008
0.71
0.22
38
7.93
0.0026
0.04
0.009
0.01
0.24
39
3.95
0.0026
0.04
-
1.15
0.24
40
5.8
0.00271
0.04
-
1.05
0.25
41
7.18
0.00253
0.04
-
0.27
0.24
42
0.65
0.00206
0.03
-
1.38
0.19
43
7.6
0.003
0.03
-
2.26
0.28
44
4.12
0.00293
0.03
-
2.49
0.27
45
3.43
0.00257
0.03
0.008
1.08
0.24
46
2.64
0.00237
0.04
-
0.84
0.22
TIC 151769040
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
23.87
1e-05
0.23
0.005
2.37
0.02
2
27.56
1e-05
0.23
-
1.26
0.01
3
0.75
2e-05
0.22
-
1.82
0.03
4
24.36
2e-05
0.17
-
0.53
0.02
5
0.91
3e-05
0.14
-
0.69
0.04
6
1.05
3e-05
0.12
-
0.21
0.04
7
25.72
2e-05
0.11
-
3.06
0.03
8
1.57
4e-05
0.11
-
2.86
0.05
9
28.36
3e-05
0.09
0.003
1.93
0.04
10
13.9
7e-05
0.07
0.007
2.43
0.1
11
26.24
3e-05
0.07
0.003
3.03
0.05
12
13.46
7e-05
0.06
-
3.09
0.1
13
1.18
7e-05
0.05
0.005
0.22
0.1
14
13.99
9e-05
0.05
-
2.68
0.12
15
22.96
5e-05
0.06
0.003
0.38
0.06
130
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:139==
16
13.16
9e-05
0.05
-
2.58
0.13
17
1.78
6e-05
0.06
0.005
1.31
0.08
18
13.28
9e-05
0.05
0.006
0.03
0.12
19
13.37
8e-05
0.05
0.006
2.35
0.12
20
1.96
9e-05
0.05
-
0.45
0.13
21
21.33
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.27
0.07
22
3.38
8e-05
0.04
0.004
2.83
0.11
23
23.18
8e-05
0.04
-
2.55
0.1
24
14.18
0.00011
0.03
0.005
2.31
0.15
25
14.79
0.0001
0.04
0.005
2.3
0.13
26
12.89
0.00012
0.04
-
2.43
0.17
27
1.74
0.0001
0.04
0.005
2.18
0.14
28
12.34
0.00012
0.03
-
1.21
0.17
29
14.11
0.00013
0.03
0.005
0.96
0.17
30
15.26
0.00019
0.03
0.007
1.95
0.26
31
22.65
6e-05
0.03
-
1.01
0.09
32
14.82
0.00011
0.03
-
2.34
0.15
33
27.13
8e-05
0.02
0.003
2.69
0.11
34
2.08
0.00019
0.02
-
1.12
0.26
35
27.65
9e-05
0.02
-
0.25
0.12
36
14.48
0.00014
0.03
0.005
0.46
0.19
37
12.08
0.00018
0.02
0.006
1.71
0.25
TIC 152864226
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
41.57
1e-05
1.15
-
1.89
0.01
2
34.74
1e-05
0.73
-
1.24
0.01
3
0.29
2e-05
0.54
-
1.53
0.03
4
32.61
1e-05
0.6
-
1.5
0.01
5
20.35
2e-05
0.45
-
1.73
0.02
6
2.38
2e-05
0.41
-
0.46
0.03
7
28.46
1e-05
0.42
0.004
1.94
0.01
8
22.79
2e-05
0.4
-
2.47
0.03
9
21.8
2e-05
0.36
0.01
1.88
0.03
10
21.06
1e-05
0.35
0.006
2.94
0.02
11
27.96
1e-05
0.35
0.006
1.19
0.02
12
27.33
2e-05
0.36
0.007
2.46
0.02
13
21.83
2e-05
0.35
-
1.61
0.03
14
23.69
1e-05
0.35
0.005
3.14
0.01
15
25.91
1e-05
0.29
-
0.27
0.02
16
18.15
2e-05
0.25
0.006
1.76
0.02
17
10.69
3e-05
0.27
-
2.98
0.04
18
13.8
3e-05
0.24
-
2.58
0.04
19
19.27
2e-05
0.21
-
2.06
0.02
20
12.17
5e-05
0.22
0.014
1.05
0.06
21
28.37
2e-05
0.18
-
0.42
0.02
22
30.27
2e-05
0.17
-
3.03
0.02
23
1.39
8e-05
0.15
0.015
2.57
0.1
24
14.61
4e-05
0.14
0.008
1.75
0.06
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
131
==PAGE:140==
25
11.76
4e-05
0.13
-
2.99
0.05
26
25.4
2e-05
0.14
-
1.87
0.03
27
32.16
3e-05
0.12
0.005
2.76
0.04
28
18.54
2e-05
0.13
0.003
2.94
0.03
29
24.77
2e-05
0.13
0.004
2.26
0.03
30
12.35
8e-05
0.12
0.013
0.0
0.1
31
9.31
7e-05
0.11
-
2.89
0.09
32
1.0
5e-05
0.12
-
2.34
0.07
33
0.1
0.00015
0.07
-
2.68
0.2
34
9.35
8e-05
0.08
0.009
1.7
0.11
35
1.33
0.00014
0.07
0.013
1.6
0.18
36
22.84
7e-05
0.08
0.008
1.89
0.1
37
32.37
3e-05
0.08
0.003
2.56
0.03
38
16.94
6e-05
0.07
-
0.79
0.08
39
27.02
4e-05
0.07
-
0.33
0.05
40
17.46
5e-05
0.07
-
1.04
0.07
41
13.56
0.00015
0.07
-
0.78
0.19
42
13.91
9e-05
0.07
-
2.73
0.12
43
22.48
6e-05
0.06
0.005
1.65
0.08
44
10.25
7e-05
0.06
-
2.41
0.1
45
12.47
0.00014
0.06
0.012
0.44
0.18
46
13.22
0.00015
0.06
-
2.79
0.21
47
2.75
0.00015
0.06
0.012
1.18
0.2
48
13.38
0.00021
0.06
-
2.14
0.27
49
15.05
0.0001
0.06
0.007
2.79
0.13
50
11.53
0.00016
0.06
0.012
3.01
0.21
51
15.26
8e-05
0.06
0.006
2.74
0.1
52
11.0
0.00015
0.06
0.011
0.57
0.2
53
14.38
8e-05
0.05
-
1.37
0.11
54
4.62
5e-05
0.05
0.004
3.07
0.07
55
10.02
0.00013
0.05
-
1.09
0.17
56
29.38
7e-05
0.05
0.005
0.06
0.09
57
44.99
4e-05
0.05
0.002
0.95
0.05
58
10.4
0.0001
0.05
0.007
1.58
0.14
59
4.53
6e-05
0.05
-
0.47
0.08
TIC 154568099
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
16.91
0.0
5.97
-
3.1
0.01
2
13.16
0.0
4.94
-
2.71
0.0
3
16.17
1e-05
4.45
0.038
2.88
0.01
4
14.55
0.0
2.94
0.021
0.1
0.01
5
14.38
1e-05
2.5
0.032
0.21
0.01
6
17.09
1e-05
1.41
0.029
2.08
0.02
7
14.44
2e-05
1.02
-
2.79
0.03
8
14.86
2e-05
0.89
-
1.71
0.03
9
34.29
3e-05
0.5
-
1.91
0.05
10
15.32
4e-05
0.42
-
2.13
0.06
11
33.08
2e-05
0.39
-
0.86
0.04
132
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:141==
12
34.17
3e-05
0.38
0.018
2.37
0.05
13
32.04
3e-05
0.36
-
1.13
0.05
14
0.12
7e-05
0.36
-
0.1
0.12
15
15.5
3e-05
0.36
0.02
2.55
0.05
16
13.55
4e-05
0.3
-
0.47
0.07
17
32.59
5e-05
0.28
-
1.92
0.08
18
16.49
9e-05
0.26
0.041
1.26
0.15
19
14.78
5e-05
0.25
0.023
1.36
0.09
20
0.09
9e-05
0.26
-
0.65
0.15
21
0.2
0.0001
0.26
0.044
0.44
0.17
22
34.29
6e-05
0.27
0.024
2.52
0.09
23
31.58
6e-05
0.22
0.022
2.3
0.1
24
15.95
7e-05
0.21
-
1.14
0.12
25
16.82
9e-05
0.21
-
2.04
0.15
26
0.24
0.00013
0.18
-
1.91
0.22
27
2.71
7e-05
0.19
-
2.9
0.12
28
16.01
0.0001
0.18
0.03
3.07
0.16
29
31.85
5e-05
0.18
-
0.78
0.08
30
1.79
7e-05
0.17
0.019
2.14
0.11
TIC 157016177
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
15.89
0.0
5.01
-
1.88
0.0
2
16.51
0.0
1.81
-
1.55
0.01
3
16.37
0.0
1.71
0.01
0.81
0.01
4
15.3
0.0
1.16
0.007
2.55
0.01
5
16.37
1e-05
1.1
-
1.15
0.01
6
19.75
1e-05
0.64
-
2.16
0.02
7
10.79
1e-05
0.64
0.01
0.09
0.02
8
18.25
1e-05
0.6
0.008
0.9
0.01
9
13.72
1e-05
0.51
0.007
1.34
0.01
10
14.07
1e-05
0.39
-
2.92
0.02
11
13.02
2e-05
0.37
-
1.71
0.02
12
13.96
1e-05
0.34
-
1.73
0.02
13
8.12
2e-05
0.29
-
0.94
0.03
14
12.66
2e-05
0.29
-
2.76
0.02
15
7.56
2e-05
0.27
0.008
1.06
0.03
16
13.57
1e-05
0.29
-
2.01
0.02
17
18.51
1e-05
0.25
-
1.76
0.02
18
6.04
3e-05
0.22
0.01
0.57
0.05
19
17.78
3e-05
0.22
-
1.1
0.04
20
13.68
2e-05
0.22
-
0.37
0.03
21
21.03
2e-05
0.22
-
1.28
0.02
22
13.17
2e-05
0.23
0.007
2.03
0.03
23
12.03
4e-05
0.18
0.01
2.45
0.05
24
0.89
3e-05
0.21
-
0.27
0.04
25
17.28
3e-05
0.19
0.008
0.37
0.04
26
16.7
3e-05
0.15
0.007
0.32
0.05
27
14.18
4e-05
0.16
0.008
2.49
0.05
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
133
==PAGE:142==
28
11.79
3e-05
0.16
0.007
0.1
0.05
29
17.98
4e-05
0.17
0.009
0.27
0.05
30
16.99
3e-05
0.13
-
0.29
0.04
31
10.45
4e-05
0.14
0.008
1.72
0.06
32
13.52
3e-05
0.18
-
1.97
0.04
33
17.57
4e-05
0.15
0.007
0.09
0.05
34
11.95
5e-05
0.14
0.009
1.42
0.06
35
9.46
4e-05
0.13
-
2.98
0.05
36
10.15
6e-05
0.11
0.009
0.13
0.08
37
12.92
5e-05
0.12
-
2.59
0.07
38
11.37
5e-05
0.11
-
2.68
0.06
39
2.06
3e-05
0.14
0.005
0.15
0.03
40
17.86
5e-05
0.13
-
0.06
0.07
41
1.93
4e-05
0.1
-
1.08
0.06
42
19.56
6e-05
0.13
0.01
0.54
0.08
43
0.12
5e-05
0.11
-
0.26
0.07
44
18.59
4e-05
0.12
-
2.41
0.05
45
14.91
5e-05
0.1
-
1.57
0.07
46
10.0
6e-05
0.11
0.009
1.59
0.08
47
12.22
8e-05
0.09
-
1.43
0.1
48
1.48
6e-05
0.1
0.008
2.11
0.08
49
1.67
4e-05
0.1
-
2.08
0.06
50
20.9
5e-05
0.1
0.007
0.64
0.07
51
0.24
4e-05
0.12
0.007
0.5
0.06
52
0.38
5e-05
0.11
0.008
2.78
0.07
53
31.77
5e-05
0.09
-
1.08
0.07
54
22.35
7e-05
0.09
-
1.37
0.09
55
14.57
6e-05
0.09
0.008
1.06
0.09
56
10.32
7e-05
0.09
-
0.3
0.1
57
2.37
7e-05
0.08
-
0.23
0.09
58
1.23
5e-05
0.08
-
1.2
0.07
59
6.41
6e-05
0.1
0.008
0.92
0.09
60
7.17
7e-05
0.09
0.009
2.76
0.1
61
12.83
7e-05
0.09
0.009
1.93
0.09
62
12.56
5e-05
0.1
0.006
1.27
0.07
63
0.83
4e-05
0.12
0.006
0.41
0.05
64
7.79
7e-05
0.09
0.008
2.79
0.09
65
32.85
5e-05
0.08
-
0.53
0.06
66
11.16
0.0001
0.08
-
0.44
0.14
67
18.42
5e-05
0.09
-
1.43
0.06
68
0.68
6e-05
0.09
0.008
2.1
0.09
69
6.69
5e-05
0.08
-
2.12
0.07
70
6.89
8e-05
0.08
0.009
0.94
0.11
71
0.7
7e-05
0.08
0.008
1.34
0.1
72
22.59
9e-05
0.09
-
2.95
0.12
73
11.25
9e-05
0.08
-
0.58
0.13
74
4.21
9e-05
0.06
0.007
0.85
0.12
75
3.93
8e-05
0.07
-
1.48
0.11
76
32.25
5e-05
0.07
-
1.82
0.07
77
22.95
9e-05
0.07
-
2.97
0.12
134
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:143==
78
15.02
6e-05
0.07
0.006
1.18
0.08
79
24.95
8e-05
0.07
0.007
0.29
0.11
80
21.01
4e-05
0.12
-
1.03
0.05
81
0.46
7e-05
0.08
0.008
1.13
0.09
82
18.79
0.0001
0.07
0.009
2.66
0.13
83
14.34
0.00011
0.06
-
2.31
0.15
84
1.08
8e-05
0.07
0.008
1.16
0.11
85
2.9
9e-05
0.07
0.009
1.37
0.12
86
23.82
7e-05
0.06
0.005
2.42
0.09
87
24.01
5e-05
0.06
-
0.91
0.07
88
31.58
8e-05
0.05
0.006
1.75
0.11
89
25.12
8e-05
0.05
-
0.27
0.12
90
2.24
6e-05
0.06
0.005
2.12
0.09
91
9.73
0.00014
0.05
-
2.6
0.19
92
21.04
5e-05
0.09
0.006
2.73
0.06
93
21.13
7e-05
0.06
0.005
1.2
0.09
94
23.91
5e-05
0.06
0.004
0.74
0.07
95
19.41
0.00013
0.06
-
0.14
0.17
96
6.56
9e-05
0.05
-
0.98
0.13
97
0.33
8e-05
0.07
-
1.09
0.11
98
5.02
0.00014
0.05
0.009
2.22
0.2
99
4.91
0.00014
0.05
-
0.9
0.2
100
31.19
9e-05
0.05
0.006
0.97
0.12
101
20.13
0.0001
0.05
-
2.08
0.14
102
32.54
0.0001
0.04
-
2.95
0.14
103
3.11
5e-05
0.06
0.004
2.76
0.08
104
23.7
0.00013
0.05
0.009
2.2
0.18
105
3.13
7e-05
0.05
0.005
0.53
0.09
106
4.66
0.00016
0.05
0.01
1.37
0.22
107
3.78
0.00011
0.05
-
0.66
0.15
108
1.26
9e-05
0.05
-
0.24
0.13
109
3.43
0.00012
0.05
0.008
0.94
0.16
110
25.46
0.00014
0.04
-
1.92
0.19
111
4.41
0.00016
0.04
-
1.17
0.22
112
32.39
0.00012
0.03
-
0.33
0.17
113
23.32
0.00012
0.04
0.007
0.09
0.17
114
23.2
0.0001
0.04
0.006
2.63
0.14
115
30.23
0.00013
0.04
0.007
1.92
0.18
116
22.14
0.00023
0.04
-
1.02
0.32
117
5.44
0.0002
0.04
0.01
1.22
0.27
118
3.62
0.00014
0.04
-
2.11
0.19
119
1.8
0.00012
0.04
0.007
2.13
0.16
120
21.48
0.00013
0.03
0.006
1.14
0.18
121
5.63
0.00021
0.04
-
0.45
0.28
122
29.41
0.00012
0.04
0.006
1.77
0.16
123
31.58
0.00012
0.04
0.006
2.65
0.16
124
32.75
0.00012
0.04
-
0.52
0.17
125
25.42
0.00012
0.04
0.006
2.43
0.17
126
1.54
0.00011
0.04
-
1.27
0.15
127
24.56
0.00017
0.04
-
2.64
0.23
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
135
==PAGE:144==
128
25.08
0.00011
0.04
0.006
2.2
0.16
129
5.17
0.00015
0.04
0.007
1.86
0.2
130
24.45
0.0002
0.03
0.01
2.3
0.28
131
4.84
0.00017
0.04
-
0.61
0.24
132
9.09
0.00018
0.03
0.009
0.24
0.25
133
4.07
0.00015
0.04
-
1.79
0.2
134
8.91
0.00019
0.03
0.009
2.37
0.26
135
32.42
0.00011
0.03
-
1.42
0.16
136
18.93
0.00014
0.04
-
1.11
0.2
137
10.15
0.0002
0.03
-
0.23
0.28
138
9.43
0.00014
0.03
0.006
1.35
0.19
139
12.54
0.00015
0.03
-
3.06
0.21
140
24.07
0.00013
0.03
-
0.15
0.18
141
7.36
0.00019
0.03
-
0.13
0.26
142
3.21
0.00011
0.04
0.005
3.1
0.15
143
3.51
0.00015
0.03
-
2.09
0.21
144
6.67
9e-05
0.05
0.006
0.32
0.12
145
1.64
0.00014
0.03
-
0.8
0.19
146
25.23
0.00014
0.03
0.006
2.94
0.2
147
27.88
0.00016
0.03
0.007
1.41
0.22
148
21.24
0.00013
0.03
0.006
2.63
0.18
149
28.46
0.00014
0.03
0.006
2.66
0.2
150
22.85
0.00017
0.03
-
1.04
0.24
151
2.35
0.00015
0.03
0.007
1.48
0.2
152
31.12
0.00015
0.03
0.006
2.22
0.2
153
8.51
0.00023
0.03
-
2.32
0.32
154
26.73
0.00014
0.03
0.006
1.54
0.19
155
33.51
0.00013
0.03
-
2.6
0.18
TIC 157311610
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.44
0.0
1.1
0.005
1.17
0.0
2
16.62
0.0
1.04
0.005
2.93
0.0
3
29.96
0.0
0.75
0.004
2.36
0.01
4
25.1
1e-05
0.69
0.007
0.44
0.01
5
14.23
1e-05
0.66
0.005
0.78
0.01
6
2.41
1e-05
0.67
0.008
2.9
0.01
7
27.72
1e-05
0.48
0.004
1.73
0.01
8
18.83
1e-05
0.43
-
0.51
0.01
9
17.52
1e-05
0.46
0.007
1.3
0.02
10
1.9
2e-05
0.41
-
2.89
0.02
11
22.59
1e-05
0.39
-
1.01
0.02
12
24.93
1e-05
0.36
-
1.54
0.01
13
23.88
1e-05
0.34
-
2.73
0.01
14
2.23
2e-05
0.33
-
0.35
0.03
15
15.38
1e-05
0.33
0.005
3.05
0.02
16
29.13
1e-05
0.33
-
1.79
0.01
17
22.27
1e-05
0.27
0.004
0.01
0.02
18
25.15
2e-05
0.26
-
0.06
0.02
136
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:145==
19
9.67
3e-05
0.26
-
1.1
0.04
20
8.96
4e-05
0.21
-
2.21
0.06
21
24.01
1e-05
0.18
-
2.61
0.02
22
22.72
2e-05
0.18
0.006
1.82
0.03
23
11.04
4e-05
0.17
-
0.46
0.06
24
20.76
2e-05
0.17
-
1.9
0.03
25
23.21
2e-05
0.16
-
2.04
0.02
26
13.83
3e-05
0.15
-
1.85
0.04
27
19.55
1e-05
0.15
-
2.64
0.02
28
17.84
1e-05
0.14
-
0.01
0.02
29
1.72
5e-05
0.15
0.011
1.46
0.07
30
16.64
2e-05
0.13
0.004
0.55
0.03
31
8.43
6e-05
0.13
0.012
2.98
0.09
32
1.38
7e-05
0.13
-
2.86
0.1
33
34.81
2e-05
0.12
-
3.13
0.02
34
0.76
4e-05
0.13
0.007
2.88
0.05
35
3.57
4e-05
0.13
0.007
0.54
0.06
36
19.9
2e-05
0.12
0.003
1.99
0.02
37
23.56
3e-05
0.11
-
2.54
0.04
38
0.98
8e-05
0.11
0.012
0.46
0.11
39
1.24
8e-05
0.11
-
2.22
0.11
40
23.1
3e-05
0.11
0.004
1.75
0.04
41
14.09
3e-05
0.11
-
2.12
0.04
42
26.26
2e-05
0.11
-
0.97
0.03
43
7.58
7e-05
0.1
-
1.63
0.1
44
32.67
3e-05
0.1
0.005
1.54
0.05
45
28.63
2e-05
0.1
-
0.39
0.03
46
8.19
0.0001
0.1
-
2.42
0.15
47
5.23
4e-05
0.1
0.005
0.25
0.05
48
24.25
2e-05
0.1
-
0.01
0.03
49
0.65
6e-05
0.1
0.009
0.37
0.08
50
9.17
9e-05
0.1
0.012
0.39
0.12
51
33.17
2e-05
0.09
0.003
1.86
0.03
52
8.59
7e-05
0.08
-
1.16
0.1
53
1.56
0.0001
0.1
-
0.99
0.14
54
19.03
3e-05
0.09
0.003
0.48
0.04
55
10.28
7e-05
0.08
0.008
1.16
0.1
56
10.07
9e-05
0.08
0.009
2.22
0.12
57
29.1
3e-05
0.08
0.003
1.07
0.04
58
16.12
3e-05
0.07
0.003
0.58
0.05
59
21.24
3e-05
0.07
0.003
1.69
0.05
60
19.72
3e-05
0.08
-
1.7
0.04
61
8.7
8e-05
0.07
0.008
0.49
0.12
62
10.58
7e-05
0.07
-
0.02
0.11
63
0.82
7e-05
0.07
-
1.21
0.1
64
1.07
0.00013
0.07
0.013
0.71
0.19
65
0.29
8e-05
0.07
-
1.68
0.11
66
21.92
4e-05
0.06
-
3.08
0.05
67
43.54
4e-05
0.06
-
1.21
0.05
68
9.9
9e-05
0.06
-
1.11
0.13
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
137
==PAGE:146==
69
7.66
0.0001
0.06
0.009
2.75
0.15
70
19.66
4e-05
0.06
-
1.7
0.06
71
2.89
0.00012
0.06
-
0.59
0.17
72
0.5
0.00016
0.05
0.012
2.37
0.22
73
12.79
7e-05
0.06
-
0.13
0.1
74
3.2
0.0001
0.06
-
2.02
0.15
75
9.47
0.00012
0.07
-
2.51
0.18
76
26.05
7e-05
0.06
-
2.01
0.09
77
25.91
7e-05
0.06
-
0.26
0.1
78
40.54
5e-05
0.05
-
0.75
0.07
79
10.63
9e-05
0.05
-
1.85
0.12
80
7.79
0.00012
0.05
0.009
1.32
0.17
81
11.17
0.00015
0.05
0.011
0.95
0.22
82
28.31
6e-05
0.05
-
1.12
0.08
83
10.52
0.00012
0.05
0.008
1.06
0.18
84
1.47
0.00022
0.05
-
0.44
0.31
85
2.09
0.00014
0.05
-
2.16
0.2
86
1.69
0.00015
0.05
-
1.4
0.21
87
37.91
5e-05
0.05
-
2.23
0.06
88
9.05
0.00017
0.05
0.012
1.1
0.24
89
8.67
0.00012
0.05
-
1.45
0.17
90
11.98
0.00012
0.05
-
0.81
0.18
91
8.38
0.00018
0.05
0.012
1.76
0.25
92
9.87
0.00013
0.05
0.008
1.44
0.18
93
3.03
0.00017
0.04
-
2.4
0.24
94
10.84
0.00016
0.04
0.01
0.47
0.23
95
10.35
0.00013
0.04
0.008
0.15
0.18
96
21.96
5e-05
0.04
0.003
2.57
0.07
97
41.14
4e-05
0.04
-
1.47
0.06
98
0.69
0.00011
0.05
0.007
0.13
0.16
99
23.28
5e-05
0.04
-
0.5
0.08
100
27.32
4e-05
0.04
-
1.36
0.06
101
0.17
0.0001
0.04
0.006
1.85
0.14
102
0.21
0.00011
0.04
-
0.1
0.16
TIC 157765888
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
9.84
0.0
1.67
0.006
0.16
0.0
2
8.85
0.0
0.44
-
1.87
0.01
3
11.25
1e-05
0.33
0.007
2.87
0.02
4
14.03
1e-05
0.3
-
2.3
0.01
5
1.94
1e-05
0.25
-
3.08
0.02
6
3.68
2e-05
0.21
-
2.13
0.03
7
13.04
1e-05
0.22
0.005
1.02
0.02
8
6.43
1e-05
0.21
-
1.35
0.03
9
22.01
1e-05
0.19
0.005
2.65
0.03
10
19.56
1e-05
0.16
0.005
2.0
0.03
11
10.72
1e-05
0.16
0.003
2.66
0.02
12
14.82
2e-05
0.13
-
0.17
0.04
138
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:147==
13
12.15
2e-05
0.14
-
0.46
0.04
14
23.41
1e-05
0.13
-
3.0
0.02
15
1.73
2e-05
0.12
-
0.44
0.04
16
33.94
2e-05
0.1
-
0.47
0.04
17
12.29
2e-05
0.11
0.005
0.22
0.04
18
7.56
3e-05
0.1
-
2.87
0.05
19
14.49
2e-05
0.09
-
0.18
0.04
20
2.05
3e-05
0.09
0.005
3.01
0.05
21
34.07
1e-05
0.09
-
1.47
0.02
22
30.4
2e-05
0.09
0.003
2.82
0.03
23
19.68
2e-05
0.08
0.004
1.3
0.05
24
17.66
3e-05
0.08
-
2.8
0.06
25
12.64
3e-05
0.08
0.004
1.72
0.05
26
2.21
3e-05
0.07
0.005
1.51
0.06
27
4.28
4e-05
0.07
0.005
0.06
0.07
28
7.82
3e-05
0.07
0.004
2.97
0.06
29
16.41
2e-05
0.07
-
1.42
0.05
30
4.56
5e-05
0.06
0.006
1.02
0.09
31
25.56
4e-05
0.06
-
0.31
0.07
32
29.84
2e-05
0.05
0.003
0.78
0.05
33
29.09
2e-05
0.06
-
1.24
0.04
34
2.83
5e-05
0.05
-
0.36
0.11
35
3.81
7e-05
0.05
0.008
0.49
0.14
36
12.41
5e-05
0.04
0.004
1.39
0.09
37
0.55
6e-05
0.04
0.005
2.13
0.12
38
16.16
7e-05
0.04
-
0.8
0.13
39
11.79
7e-05
0.04
0.006
0.36
0.13
40
13.22
6e-05
0.04
-
2.94
0.12
41
5.14
6e-05
0.04
0.005
0.09
0.13
42
0.47
6e-05
0.04
-
2.81
0.12
43
5.88
6e-05
0.04
0.005
1.03
0.13
44
16.7
6e-05
0.04
-
0.62
0.12
45
27.74
5e-05
0.04
0.004
0.45
0.1
46
8.13
7e-05
0.04
-
1.72
0.13
47
25.84
4e-05
0.04
-
0.52
0.08
48
24.78
6e-05
0.03
0.004
2.95
0.12
49
5.72
9e-05
0.03
0.006
0.53
0.18
50
30.81
3e-05
0.03
0.002
2.18
0.06
51
4.19
8e-05
0.03
0.005
2.74
0.16
52
1.2
0.0001
0.03
0.007
0.61
0.2
53
11.07
7e-05
0.03
0.005
2.43
0.15
54
17.39
8e-05
0.03
-
1.02
0.16
55
35.27
3e-05
0.03
0.002
2.89
0.06
56
17.84
7e-05
0.03
0.005
1.07
0.14
57
20.46
6e-05
0.03
0.004
1.25
0.13
58
19.43
9e-05
0.03
-
0.94
0.18
59
18.47
9e-05
0.03
0.005
3.12
0.18
60
19.65
7e-05
0.03
-
2.28
0.15
61
5.61
0.0001
0.03
0.006
1.98
0.2
62
0.4
8e-05
0.03
0.005
1.68
0.17
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
139
==PAGE:148==
63
30.95
4e-05
0.03
0.002
1.3
0.08
64
5.21
8e-05
0.03
-
0.54
0.16
65
5.02
8e-05
0.03
-
0.28
0.16
66
3.58
0.00014
0.02
-
1.97
0.28
67
26.12
7e-05
0.03
0.003
0.23
0.14
68
22.87
7e-05
0.02
-
2.77
0.15
69
24.56
6e-05
0.02
-
0.43
0.12
70
19.33
0.00011
0.03
0.005
0.82
0.21
71
5.51
0.00013
0.02
0.006
2.86
0.26
72
1.63
9e-05
0.02
0.005
2.2
0.19
73
16.13
0.0001
0.02
-
1.0
0.21
74
23.81
9e-05
0.02
-
2.46
0.19
75
16.97
0.00011
0.02
-
2.86
0.23
76
31.89
7e-05
0.02
-
2.94
0.13
77
19.45
0.00012
0.02
-
0.24
0.25
78
20.08
7e-05
0.02
-
2.74
0.14
79
27.36
6e-05
0.02
0.003
0.55
0.12
80
38.03
5e-05
0.02
0.002
0.97
0.1
81
32.83
4e-05
0.02
-
2.4
0.09
82
21.6
9e-05
0.02
-
1.24
0.19
83
24.16
6e-05
0.02
-
2.03
0.13
84
29.73
6e-05
0.02
-
0.71
0.13
85
35.98
7e-05
0.02
-
0.04
0.13
86
32.98
7e-05
0.02
0.003
1.81
0.13
87
4.64
0.00011
0.02
0.005
2.82
0.23
88
24.74
9e-05
0.02
0.004
0.29
0.18
89
31.45
8e-05
0.02
-
0.47
0.15
90
2.5
0.0001
0.02
0.004
1.1
0.2
91
18.26
8e-05
0.02
-
2.3
0.17
92
25.41
0.00011
0.02
0.004
2.51
0.22
93
3.13
0.00012
0.02
-
0.11
0.24
94
27.55
8e-05
0.02
-
1.25
0.17
95
13.73
0.00012
0.02
-
0.81
0.24
TIC 159050655
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
27.18
0.0
0.78
-
0.29
0.0
2
31.99
0.0
0.63
-
1.41
0.0
3
21.38
0.0
0.38
0.002
2.91
0.01
4
32.21
1e-05
0.17
0.003
0.85
0.02
5
19.96
1e-05
0.16
0.003
2.98
0.02
6
2.81
1e-05
0.12
-
2.28
0.02
7
29.81
2e-05
0.06
-
0.91
0.03
8
28.43
5e-05
0.02
-
3.0
0.1
9
2.78
5e-05
0.02
0.002
0.41
0.1
10
4.11
6e-05
0.02
0.003
0.5
0.13
11
17.03
5e-05
0.02
-
0.09
0.1
12
0.38
9e-05
0.02
0.004
0.36
0.19
13
33.4
5e-05
0.02
-
1.21
0.11
140
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:149==
14
0.23
0.0001
0.02
0.004
1.37
0.22
15
2.01
0.0001
0.02
0.004
1.22
0.21
16
2.41
9e-05
0.02
0.003
1.47
0.19
TIC 160268882
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.57
0.0
9.84
0.012
0.69
0.0
2
0.79
0.0
2.84
-
1.2
0.0
3
2.36
0.0
0.49
0.005
2.51
0.01
4
3.97
0.0
0.47
0.004
1.73
0.01
5
13.38
1e-05
0.48
-
2.13
0.01
6
14.16
1e-05
0.43
0.009
0.08
0.02
7
13.09
1e-05
0.43
0.007
3.12
0.02
8
14.95
1e-05
0.39
0.006
1.87
0.02
9
3.38
1e-05
0.35
0.004
1.38
0.01
10
13.88
1e-05
0.36
-
1.21
0.02
11
12.59
1e-05
0.34
0.005
2.47
0.02
12
13.78
1e-05
0.34
-
1.17
0.02
13
0.04
2e-05
0.27
0.01
2.97
0.04
14
14.57
1e-05
0.25
0.005
0.32
0.02
15
12.99
1e-05
0.24
-
2.48
0.03
16
12.3
1e-05
0.23
0.006
1.47
0.03
17
3.15
2e-05
0.19
0.006
1.42
0.03
18
0.4
3e-05
0.18
0.01
2.9
0.05
19
14.11
2e-05
0.16
-
1.87
0.04
20
0.06
3e-05
0.15
-
1.22
0.07
21
0.73
3e-05
0.16
0.01
3.05
0.06
22
2.4
2e-05
0.14
0.005
0.17
0.03
23
0.85
4e-05
0.13
0.01
1.01
0.08
24
12.21
2e-05
0.13
0.006
2.39
0.05
25
14.66
2e-05
0.11
0.004
0.84
0.03
26
15.29
2e-05
0.1
0.004
2.81
0.04
27
12.82
3e-05
0.08
-
2.48
0.07
28
12.04
4e-05
0.07
-
1.14
0.08
29
11.25
3e-05
0.07
-
2.53
0.06
30
0.1
9e-05
0.06
0.011
1.44
0.18
31
0.39
8e-05
0.06
-
0.55
0.17
32
27.16
3e-05
0.05
0.003
2.4
0.06
33
11.52
5e-05
0.05
0.005
0.43
0.1
34
16.13
4e-05
0.05
-
2.06
0.07
35
15.68
5e-05
0.05
0.005
2.22
0.11
36
11.42
6e-05
0.05
0.005
0.84
0.11
37
12.5
5e-05
0.04
-
1.1
0.11
38
13.28
5e-05
0.04
0.004
1.04
0.11
39
27.94
4e-05
0.04
-
1.96
0.07
TIC 163450908
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
141
==PAGE:150==
1
16.93
9e-05
0.55
-
2.89
0.0
2
19.79
0.0001
0.5
-
2.93
0.0
3
19.28
0.00013
0.4
0.002
2.44
0.01
4
18.31
0.00025
0.2
0.002
0.98
0.01
5
14.69
0.00024
0.18
0.002
1.98
0.01
6
0.73
0.00065
0.09
-
1.02
0.03
7
12.04
0.00047
0.09
0.002
2.07
0.02
8
17.96
0.00061
0.08
0.002
0.54
0.03
9
15.91
0.00099
0.05
-
0.96
0.04
10
19.46
0.00107
0.05
-
2.0
0.05
11
12.22
0.00111
0.04
0.002
1.75
0.05
12
23.99
0.00138
0.04
0.002
0.62
0.06
13
0.52
0.00195
0.03
0.003
0.94
0.09
14
23.17
0.00178
0.03
-
0.69
0.08
15
3.94
0.00233
0.02
0.002
2.15
0.1
16
21.97
0.00227
0.02
-
1.74
0.1
17
8.6
0.00236
0.02
-
2.42
0.1
18
12.59
0.0021
0.02
-
0.09
0.09
19
2.27
0.00297
0.02
-
2.33
0.13
20
4.9
0.00277
0.02
-
0.41
0.12
21
4.46
0.003
0.02
-
0.22
0.13
22
13.12
0.00237
0.02
-
2.83
0.1
23
25.0
0.00282
0.02
0.002
2.05
0.12
24
16.65
0.0027
0.02
-
1.41
0.12
25
29.5
0.00293
0.02
-
0.72
0.13
26
5.15
0.00339
0.02
-
1.0
0.15
27
24.49
0.00334
0.01
0.002
2.32
0.15
28
9.33
0.00297
0.02
-
2.38
0.13
29
8.42
0.00318
0.01
0.002
1.52
0.14
30
34.48
0.00318
0.01
0.002
1.68
0.14
31
23.28
0.00363
0.01
-
1.33
0.16
32
5.43
0.00439
0.01
0.002
2.99
0.19
33
9.03
0.00372
0.01
0.002
0.78
0.16
34
12.87
0.00326
0.01
-
0.44
0.14
35
21.79
0.00406
0.01
0.002
1.54
0.18
36
21.1
0.00421
0.01
0.002
1.59
0.18
37
28.59
0.00445
0.01
-
1.68
0.2
38
32.66
0.00406
0.01
0.002
1.09
0.18
39
2.87
0.00509
0.01
0.002
0.76
0.22
40
6.36
0.00491
0.01
-
2.2
0.22
41
26.55
0.00455
0.01
-
0.18
0.2
42
29.54
0.00384
0.01
0.002
1.78
0.17
43
36.73
0.00374
0.01
0.002
1.22
0.16
44
12.4
0.00433
0.01
0.002
0.82
0.19
45
4.7
0.00578
0.01
0.002
1.41
0.25
46
5.65
0.00521
0.01
0.002
1.98
0.23
47
3.25
0.00583
0.01
0.002
3.12
0.26
48
30.11
0.0053
0.01
0.002
2.97
0.23
49
3.82
0.00654
0.01
0.002
2.1
0.29
142
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:151==
50
7.96
0.00484
0.01
0.002
2.47
0.21
51
22.37
0.00573
0.01
0.002
1.26
0.25
TIC 165110772
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.49
0.00012
2.36
-
1.65
0.01
2
24.88
0.00035
0.49
0.009
1.13
0.02
3
18.63
0.00053
0.44
-
1.29
0.03
4
23.39
0.00048
0.38
-
1.91
0.02
5
14.53
0.00086
0.37
0.016
0.34
0.04
6
0.69
0.00113
0.3
0.017
0.39
0.06
7
1.88
0.00109
0.28
0.015
1.92
0.06
8
3.48
0.001
0.27
0.013
0.88
0.05
9
12.26
0.00119
0.26
-
1.4
0.06
10
18.46
0.00093
0.25
-
2.73
0.05
11
12.96
0.0016
0.21
-
1.07
0.08
12
12.04
0.00134
0.23
0.016
2.29
0.07
13
0.65
0.00139
0.24
-
3.12
0.07
14
13.11
0.00169
0.2
0.017
2.75
0.09
15
13.29
0.00186
0.18
0.017
2.02
0.09
16
29.11
0.00086
0.17
-
2.81
0.04
17
1.81
0.00176
0.17
-
0.69
0.09
18
22.5
0.00115
0.16
0.01
0.21
0.06
19
10.68
0.00181
0.16
0.015
1.98
0.09
20
13.03
0.0027
0.12
-
0.76
0.14
21
17.96
0.00219
0.12
-
0.04
0.11
22
17.1
0.00234
0.11
0.013
1.92
0.12
23
15.89
0.00238
0.12
-
1.8
0.12
24
11.58
0.0026
0.12
-
2.07
0.13
25
2.08
0.00285
0.1
-
0.22
0.14
26
11.26
0.00336
0.09
0.015
2.96
0.17
27
17.43
0.00262
0.1
0.013
2.97
0.13
28
16.96
0.00295
0.09
0.013
0.07
0.15
29
15.53
0.00294
0.1
0.015
1.82
0.15
30
19.39
0.00303
0.07
-
1.06
0.15
31
15.79
0.00443
0.07
-
2.42
0.22
32
1.08
0.00509
0.06
0.017
0.1
0.26
TIC 165918423
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.52
0.0
1.71
-
3.09
0.0
2
25.68
1e-05
1.09
0.011
1.89
0.01
3
23.44
1e-05
0.8
-
0.06
0.01
4
25.97
2e-05
0.46
0.011
1.28
0.02
5
21.28
1e-05
0.42
0.007
0.03
0.02
6
22.72
2e-05
0.35
0.01
1.33
0.03
7
23.66
3e-05
0.36
0.013
0.43
0.04
8
19.73
4e-05
0.23
0.013
0.97
0.06
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
143
==PAGE:152==
9
25.92
3e-05
0.24
0.011
0.3
0.04
10
18.21
3e-05
0.2
0.009
2.6
0.05
11
22.31
5e-05
0.19
0.013
2.4
0.07
12
20.91
4e-05
0.17
0.01
0.05
0.06
13
20.12
6e-05
0.16
-
1.44
0.08
14
21.8
4e-05
0.15
-
2.06
0.05
15
19.87
5e-05
0.15
-
0.77
0.07
16
29.5
6e-05
0.12
0.01
3.07
0.08
17
26.39
7e-05
0.12
0.011
1.22
0.09
18
19.05
9e-05
0.1
-
2.21
0.13
19
14.84
8e-05
0.09
0.01
0.47
0.11
20
27.45
0.00011
0.08
0.012
1.41
0.15
21
16.21
6e-05
0.08
0.006
2.23
0.08
22
30.15
0.00011
0.08
0.011
1.64
0.14
23
0.52
0.0001
0.07
0.01
1.68
0.13
24
23.15
9e-05
0.06
-
2.71
0.12
25
22.04
0.00012
0.06
0.01
2.86
0.16
26
0.8
0.00013
0.06
0.011
2.28
0.18
27
17.32
0.0001
0.06
-
0.36
0.14
28
19.98
0.00015
0.06
-
2.92
0.21
29
16.53
0.0001
0.06
0.008
1.99
0.14
30
33.92
0.00014
0.06
0.011
1.44
0.19
31
24.74
0.0001
0.05
-
2.72
0.14
32
19.57
0.00016
0.06
0.012
1.64
0.22
33
28.35
9e-05
0.06
0.007
2.29
0.13
34
34.32
8e-05
0.05
0.005
3.04
0.11
35
12.5
0.00011
0.05
0.007
0.2
0.15
36
24.01
0.00016
0.05
-
0.07
0.21
37
28.71
0.00012
0.05
-
1.17
0.17
38
11.64
0.00011
0.05
-
1.63
0.16
39
13.2
9e-05
0.05
0.005
0.06
0.12
40
27.23
0.00011
0.04
-
0.53
0.14
41
15.53
0.00013
0.05
-
1.49
0.17
42
33.21
0.00019
0.04
-
0.33
0.26
TIC 165918423
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.52
0.0
1.71
-
3.09
0.0
2
25.68
1e-05
1.09
0.011
1.89
0.01
3
23.44
1e-05
0.8
-
0.06
0.01
4
25.97
2e-05
0.46
0.011
1.28
0.02
5
21.28
1e-05
0.42
0.007
0.03
0.02
6
22.72
2e-05
0.35
0.01
1.33
0.03
7
23.66
3e-05
0.36
0.013
0.43
0.04
8
19.73
4e-05
0.23
0.013
0.97
0.06
9
25.92
3e-05
0.24
0.011
0.3
0.04
10
18.21
3e-05
0.2
0.009
2.6
0.05
11
22.31
5e-05
0.19
0.013
2.4
0.07
12
20.91
4e-05
0.17
0.01
0.05
0.06
144
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:153==
13
20.12
6e-05
0.16
-
1.44
0.08
14
21.8
4e-05
0.15
-
2.06
0.05
15
19.87
5e-05
0.15
-
0.77
0.07
16
29.5
6e-05
0.12
0.01
3.07
0.08
17
26.39
7e-05
0.12
0.011
1.22
0.09
18
19.05
9e-05
0.1
-
2.21
0.13
19
14.84
8e-05
0.09
0.01
0.47
0.11
20
27.45
0.00011
0.08
0.012
1.41
0.15
21
16.21
6e-05
0.08
0.006
2.23
0.08
22
30.15
0.00011
0.08
0.011
1.64
0.14
23
0.52
0.0001
0.07
0.01
1.68
0.13
24
23.15
9e-05
0.06
-
2.71
0.12
25
22.04
0.00012
0.06
0.01
2.86
0.16
26
0.8
0.00013
0.06
0.011
2.28
0.18
27
17.32
0.0001
0.06
-
0.36
0.14
28
19.98
0.00015
0.06
-
2.92
0.21
29
16.53
0.0001
0.06
0.008
1.99
0.14
30
33.92
0.00014
0.06
0.011
1.44
0.19
31
24.74
0.0001
0.05
-
2.72
0.14
32
19.57
0.00016
0.06
0.012
1.64
0.22
33
28.35
9e-05
0.06
0.007
2.29
0.13
34
34.32
8e-05
0.05
0.005
3.04
0.11
35
12.5
0.00011
0.05
0.007
0.2
0.15
36
24.01
0.00016
0.05
-
0.07
0.21
37
28.71
0.00012
0.05
-
1.17
0.17
38
11.64
0.00011
0.05
-
1.63
0.16
39
13.2
9e-05
0.05
0.005
0.06
0.12
40
27.23
0.00011
0.04
-
0.53
0.14
41
15.53
0.00013
0.05
-
1.49
0.17
42
33.21
0.00019
0.04
-
0.33
0.26
TIC 166764367
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
29.1
0.00014
0.98
-
0.57
0.01
2
28.91
0.00015
0.93
0.006
2.43
0.01
3
22.25
0.00023
0.66
-
1.23
0.01
4
33.1
0.00064
0.22
0.007
2.15
0.03
5
27.93
0.00074
0.18
0.006
2.39
0.03
6
23.95
0.00077
0.18
-
2.72
0.04
7
26.11
0.00104
0.13
-
2.58
0.05
8
27.52
0.00108
0.13
0.006
3.04
0.05
9
36.8
0.00142
0.11
-
2.14
0.07
10
0.38
0.00212
0.11
-
0.21
0.1
11
33.34
0.00156
0.09
-
1.24
0.07
12
0.73
0.00261
0.09
-
1.48
0.12
13
34.98
0.00186
0.08
-
2.47
0.09
14
31.64
0.00196
0.07
-
0.8
0.09
15
42.98
0.00241
0.07
0.008
2.87
0.11
16
19.03
0.00226
0.07
0.007
0.5
0.1
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
145
==PAGE:154==
17
44.85
0.00287
0.05
0.007
0.92
0.13
18
38.94
0.00325
0.05
-
2.05
0.15
19
35.77
0.00326
0.05
0.007
1.19
0.15
20
38.17
0.00359
0.05
0.008
0.8
0.17
21
0.52
0.00494
0.05
-
3.05
0.23
22
34.44
0.00404
0.04
0.007
2.07
0.19
23
40.09
0.00447
0.04
-
1.88
0.21
24
1.27
0.00574
0.04
-
1.19
0.27
25
2.98
0.00544
0.04
-
0.93
0.25
TIC 169247417
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
16.01
9e-05
2.3
-
1.68
0.0
2
13.54
0.00057
0.35
0.009
2.96
0.02
3
15.39
0.00072
0.29
0.009
2.5
0.03
4
14.6
0.0009
0.23
0.009
0.84
0.04
5
19.41
0.00134
0.15
0.009
1.54
0.06
6
16.66
0.00195
0.11
0.009
1.01
0.09
7
12.71
0.00173
0.11
0.008
2.56
0.08
8
19.14
0.00203
0.1
-
3.09
0.09
9
31.41
0.00263
0.08
0.009
1.81
0.12
10
30.63
0.00324
0.06
0.009
1.94
0.14
11
0.24
0.00435
0.07
-
0.41
0.19
12
0.58
0.00536
0.05
0.013
0.45
0.23
13
0.98
0.0055
0.05
-
2.66
0.24
14
3.15
0.00561
0.04
-
1.86
0.25
15
0.35
0.00632
0.05
0.013
2.02
0.28
16
10.06
0.00428
0.04
0.008
2.56
0.19
17
17.42
0.0048
0.04
-
2.64
0.21
TIC 171729860
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
30.92
0.0
0.57
0.004
3.11
0.01
2
26.69
1e-05
0.34
0.003
1.11
0.01
3
24.38
1e-05
0.26
0.003
2.77
0.01
4
24.44
1e-05
0.19
0.003
0.05
0.02
5
28.69
1e-05
0.14
0.003
0.18
0.02
6
32.95
2e-05
0.14
0.003
2.21
0.03
7
22.16
2e-05
0.1
0.002
0.91
0.02
8
37.27
3e-05
0.06
0.002
0.33
0.04
9
34.43
3e-05
0.06
-
1.84
0.04
10
35.05
4e-05
0.05
0.002
2.35
0.05
11
41.89
4e-05
0.04
0.002
1.17
0.06
12
40.92
4e-05
0.04
0.003
2.62
0.06
13
41.81
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.1
0.08
14
33.46
7e-05
0.03
-
0.02
0.09
15
29.15
9e-05
0.03
-
0.91
0.13
16
0.52
0.00016
0.02
-
1.71
0.23
146
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:155==
17
1.08
0.00016
0.02
0.004
0.97
0.22
18
41.06
8e-05
0.02
-
2.06
0.11
19
0.26
0.00012
0.02
-
2.71
0.16
20
34.71
0.00012
0.02
-
0.34
0.16
TIC 172366808
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.37
0.0
2.59
0.016
1.97
0.01
2
2.61
1e-05
1.88
0.02
3.1
0.01
3
2.9
2e-05
0.92
-
1.1
0.02
4
28.56
1e-05
0.89
-
1.56
0.01
5
2.75
1e-05
0.82
-
0.69
0.02
6
30.56
1e-05
0.59
0.009
1.55
0.02
7
14.05
2e-05
0.57
0.018
1.19
0.03
8
1.85
2e-05
0.46
-
1.5
0.03
9
19.58
2e-05
0.45
-
1.87
0.03
10
3.08
3e-05
0.44
-
0.31
0.04
11
15.48
3e-05
0.4
0.019
1.47
0.05
12
2.18
3e-05
0.4
-
2.18
0.05
13
12.62
4e-05
0.38
0.02
1.28
0.05
14
24.13
2e-05
0.36
0.009
2.31
0.03
15
15.02
4e-05
0.33
-
2.01
0.05
16
21.28
1e-05
0.33
0.006
1.59
0.02
17
25.73
2e-05
0.28
-
2.88
0.03
18
1.43
4e-05
0.29
-
0.74
0.05
19
17.74
4e-05
0.26
-
1.39
0.05
20
0.99
7e-05
0.22
0.021
2.43
0.1
21
20.47
4e-05
0.22
0.011
2.41
0.05
22
12.21
7e-05
0.2
-
1.87
0.09
23
16.24
6e-05
0.22
-
2.55
0.08
24
11.16
5e-05
0.2
0.015
0.65
0.07
25
15.66
8e-05
0.19
-
0.17
0.11
26
17.08
5e-05
0.18
0.012
2.57
0.06
27
10.76
9e-05
0.19
0.023
2.67
0.12
28
13.39
8e-05
0.17
0.019
2.88
0.11
29
10.0
0.00011
0.16
-
1.17
0.15
30
12.17
8e-05
0.16
0.018
3.1
0.11
31
14.84
0.0001
0.15
-
3.04
0.14
32
11.23
0.0001
0.14
0.018
1.01
0.13
33
11.88
9e-05
0.17
-
1.3
0.13
34
16.15
9e-05
0.13
-
2.11
0.13
35
12.97
9e-05
0.13
-
1.85
0.13
36
14.32
0.00012
0.13
-
1.96
0.17
37
29.43
3e-05
0.13
-
1.64
0.04
38
11.58
0.0001
0.15
0.021
2.17
0.14
39
1.19
0.00014
0.12
0.022
0.0
0.19
40
10.34
0.00016
0.11
-
2.55
0.22
41
13.22
8e-05
0.12
0.013
1.2
0.11
42
11.02
0.0001
0.12
0.015
2.73
0.13
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
147
==PAGE:156==
43
14.27
0.00012
0.13
-
2.14
0.17
44
12.58
0.00011
0.13
-
1.27
0.15
45
0.18
0.00012
0.1
-
1.18
0.16
46
2.24
0.00013
0.11
0.018
2.07
0.17
47
42.09
4e-05
0.1
-
1.92
0.05
48
13.26
8e-05
0.11
0.012
0.72
0.11
49
1.53
9e-05
0.12
0.016
2.51
0.13
50
39.16
5e-05
0.1
-
0.11
0.07
51
14.98
0.00015
0.1
-
0.57
0.21
52
15.38
0.00013
0.1
-
2.05
0.18
53
21.04
4e-05
0.09
-
1.59
0.06
54
0.44
0.00015
0.1
-
0.13
0.21
55
10.59
0.00012
0.1
-
2.06
0.16
56
11.73
0.00015
0.1
0.022
2.86
0.21
57
24.75
5e-05
0.09
0.007
0.43
0.07
58
15.97
0.00015
0.09
0.019
2.15
0.2
59
16.11
0.00012
0.09
-
1.61
0.16
60
0.34
0.00015
0.08
-
1.04
0.21
61
15.2
0.00015
0.09
-
1.91
0.2
62
1.03
0.00016
0.09
0.019
1.6
0.22
63
1.24
0.00018
0.09
-
0.6
0.24
64
29.97
6e-05
0.08
-
2.72
0.08
65
0.6
0.00021
0.08
0.024
0.82
0.28
66
14.61
0.00016
0.09
-
2.34
0.22
67
9.72
0.00016
0.08
0.018
1.82
0.22
68
13.2
0.00011
0.09
-
3.14
0.15
69
9.54
0.00018
0.08
-
0.22
0.24
70
27.19
5e-05
0.07
0.005
0.96
0.07
71
16.34
0.00019
0.08
-
2.6
0.26
TIC 172523786
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.59
0.00016
1.95
0.015
0.69
0.01
2
18.53
0.00015
1.99
-
3.03
0.01
3
20.89
0.00021
1.43
-
0.86
0.01
4
2.26
0.00023
1.41
0.015
0.12
0.01
5
2.17
0.00025
1.32
-
2.35
0.01
6
11.32
0.00037
1.11
0.019
3.04
0.02
7
29.22
0.00026
0.94
0.011
2.9
0.01
8
2.36
0.00036
0.92
0.015
0.72
0.02
9
32.07
0.00025
0.86
-
0.95
0.01
10
19.36
0.00036
0.83
0.014
0.53
0.02
11
21.48
0.00039
0.8
-
3.09
0.02
12
3.13
0.00038
0.82
0.014
1.74
0.02
13
11.74
0.00054
0.8
0.02
1.18
0.03
14
19.96
0.00041
0.71
-
1.7
0.02
15
25.05
0.00057
0.53
-
1.58
0.03
16
1.49
0.00067
0.54
-
0.76
0.03
17
17.28
0.00067
0.47
0.015
0.43
0.03
148
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:157==
18
30.57
0.00055
0.41
0.01
2.32
0.03
19
26.99
0.00077
0.36
-
0.01
0.04
20
0.55
0.00099
0.39
-
1.15
0.05
21
21.0
0.00091
0.33
0.014
2.31
0.04
22
37.21
0.0007
0.32
-
2.94
0.03
23
22.16
0.00102
0.31
-
0.86
0.05
24
27.35
0.0009
0.29
0.012
1.69
0.04
25
11.88
0.00152
0.28
-
1.42
0.07
26
25.44
0.00127
0.24
-
1.11
0.06
27
12.29
0.00221
0.2
0.02
0.5
0.1
28
37.29
0.00104
0.21
-
1.28
0.05
29
31.11
0.00111
0.2
0.01
1.81
0.05
30
13.58
0.00188
0.2
0.018
1.09
0.09
31
16.61
0.00165
0.19
0.015
0.65
0.08
32
12.39
0.0023
0.19
0.02
1.67
0.11
33
11.22
0.00214
0.19
-
2.91
0.1
34
22.25
0.00182
0.18
0.015
1.28
0.09
35
0.43
0.00246
0.16
-
0.32
0.12
36
0.64
0.00271
0.14
-
0.14
0.13
37
47.75
0.00132
0.15
-
0.92
0.06
38
14.52
0.00239
0.15
0.017
0.13
0.11
39
14.0
0.00273
0.14
-
2.49
0.13
40
13.32
0.00323
0.12
0.018
1.43
0.15
41
9.15
0.0025
0.13
-
2.31
0.12
42
10.92
0.00286
0.14
0.019
1.72
0.13
43
13.68
0.00295
0.13
0.018
1.22
0.14
44
9.49
0.00249
0.13
-
0.88
0.12
45
16.93
0.00259
0.12
-
2.02
0.12
46
33.54
0.00197
0.11
0.01
1.77
0.09
47
14.77
0.00334
0.1
0.016
1.12
0.16
48
26.68
0.00263
0.11
0.013
0.68
0.12
49
27.65
0.00249
0.1
-
0.21
0.12
50
22.49
0.00319
0.1
0.015
2.62
0.15
51
8.74
0.00313
0.1
-
2.29
0.15
52
26.42
0.0032
0.09
-
1.61
0.15
53
14.28
0.00392
0.09
0.017
0.6
0.18
54
38.81
0.00247
0.09
0.01
1.54
0.12
55
29.99
0.00254
0.09
-
0.35
0.12
56
44.61
0.00249
0.08
0.01
0.57
0.12
57
35.01
0.00272
0.08
-
1.31
0.13
58
0.98
0.00459
0.09
0.018
0.31
0.22
59
20.14
0.00375
0.08
0.014
2.01
0.18
60
11.64
0.00444
0.1
-
2.98
0.21
61
34.3
0.00281
0.08
0.01
2.11
0.13
62
12.72
0.00543
0.08
-
2.77
0.25
63
27.85
0.00328
0.08
0.012
1.36
0.15
64
3.06
0.0042
0.07
0.014
1.91
0.2
65
15.49
0.00448
0.07
-
2.09
0.21
66
10.23
0.00486
0.07
0.017
2.03
0.23
67
10.02
0.00483
0.07
0.017
2.09
0.23
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
149
==PAGE:158==
TIC 178996712
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.67
0.0
3.65
-
2.77
0.0
2
0.34
0.0
1.84
-
2.81
0.01
3
1.34
0.0
1.75
-
2.87
0.01
4
2.01
0.0
1.7
-
2.54
0.01
5
2.68
0.0
1.6
-
2.55
0.01
6
3.35
0.0
1.57
-
2.07
0.0
7
4.02
0.0
1.47
-
2.0
0.0
8
1.0
1e-05
1.41
-
2.86
0.01
9
4.69
0.0
1.36
-
1.56
0.01
10
2.35
0.0
1.2
-
2.61
0.01
11
1.68
1e-05
1.22
-
2.79
0.01
12
5.36
0.0
1.25
-
1.37
0.01
13
3.02
1e-05
1.15
-
2.4
0.01
14
3.69
1e-05
1.12
-
2.01
0.01
15
6.04
0.0
1.16
-
1.51
0.01
16
4.36
1e-05
1.03
-
1.66
0.01
17
6.71
0.0
1.03
-
1.34
0.01
18
5.03
1e-05
1.0
-
1.39
0.01
19
7.38
0.0
0.94
-
0.93
0.0
20
5.7
1e-05
0.86
-
1.65
0.01
21
6.37
0.0
0.79
-
1.54
0.01
22
8.05
1e-05
0.8
-
0.51
0.01
23
7.04
0.0
0.72
-
1.22
0.01
24
28.77
1e-05
0.65
-
1.74
0.01
25
8.72
1e-05
0.71
-
0.36
0.01
26
7.71
1e-05
0.64
-
0.81
0.01
27
32.55
1e-05
0.62
0.006
1.51
0.01
28
31.51
1e-05
0.57
-
0.57
0.02
29
9.39
1e-05
0.6
-
0.51
0.01
30
8.38
1e-05
0.56
-
0.39
0.01
31
31.93
1e-05
0.46
0.006
2.64
0.01
32
10.06
1e-05
0.49
-
0.27
0.02
33
9.05
1e-05
0.47
-
0.25
0.01
34
9.73
1e-05
0.39
-
0.45
0.01
35
10.73
1e-05
0.38
-
0.16
0.02
36
31.0
1e-05
0.35
0.007
0.28
0.02
37
10.4
1e-05
0.32
-
0.08
0.02
38
11.4
1e-05
0.3
0.004
0.31
0.01
39
11.07
1e-05
0.25
0.004
0.12
0.02
40
27.54
2e-05
0.24
-
0.57
0.03
41
27.38
3e-05
0.2
0.008
0.04
0.04
42
12.07
2e-05
0.21
0.005
0.65
0.02
43
11.73
2e-05
0.19
0.004
0.57
0.02
44
31.73
3e-05
0.19
0.007
3.0
0.04
45
28.24
4e-05
0.18
0.01
1.91
0.05
46
27.09
3e-05
0.17
-
0.96
0.04
47
12.74
2e-05
0.14
0.004
1.0
0.03
150
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:159==
48
27.5
3e-05
0.14
-
1.94
0.05
49
12.41
3e-05
0.12
0.006
0.81
0.05
50
29.45
4e-05
0.12
0.006
1.2
0.05
51
28.09
4e-05
0.11
-
1.29
0.05
52
28.54
5e-05
0.1
-
1.47
0.07
53
24.49
3e-05
0.09
0.004
0.01
0.04
54
18.11
3e-05
0.09
-
1.24
0.04
55
26.6
7e-05
0.08
-
1.53
0.1
56
0.25
0.00011
0.08
-
2.81
0.15
57
13.08
5e-05
0.08
0.006
0.82
0.07
58
17.44
3e-05
0.08
-
1.37
0.04
59
13.41
3e-05
0.08
0.003
0.77
0.04
60
26.21
4e-05
0.07
0.005
1.81
0.06
61
25.35
4e-05
0.08
0.004
2.21
0.06
62
19.45
3e-05
0.08
0.003
0.3
0.04
63
18.78
3e-05
0.08
-
0.46
0.04
64
28.2
8e-05
0.07
0.008
0.38
0.11
65
16.77
4e-05
0.08
-
1.64
0.06
66
27.25
9e-05
0.07
-
3.04
0.12
67
31.24
6e-05
0.07
0.006
1.38
0.08
68
20.12
5e-05
0.07
-
0.04
0.07
69
29.22
8e-05
0.07
-
1.77
0.11
70
16.09
6e-05
0.06
-
1.71
0.08
71
17.1
4e-05
0.06
-
1.46
0.06
72
16.43
5e-05
0.06
-
1.48
0.07
73
18.44
5e-05
0.06
-
1.07
0.07
74
26.84
0.00012
0.06
0.009
0.45
0.16
75
30.68
6e-05
0.05
0.004
1.63
0.08
76
26.26
6e-05
0.05
-
2.04
0.08
77
30.84
5e-05
0.05
-
0.72
0.07
78
31.26
8e-05
0.05
-
1.15
0.11
79
19.78
6e-05
0.05
-
1.29
0.09
80
27.95
9e-05
0.05
0.005
1.9
0.12
81
20.79
6e-05
0.05
0.004
0.43
0.09
82
15.43
6e-05
0.04
-
2.33
0.09
83
13.75
7e-05
0.04
0.004
1.73
0.09
84
20.46
8e-05
0.04
-
1.19
0.11
TIC 179033962
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
12.22
3e-05
0.34
-
0.47
0.05
2
0.82
4e-05
0.26
0.015
2.95
0.06
3
11.72
5e-05
0.25
0.019
0.8
0.08
4
11.79
5e-05
0.22
-
2.32
0.08
5
0.62
5e-05
0.21
-
3.06
0.08
6
0.2
0.0001
0.13
0.019
2.69
0.15
7
1.27
0.0001
0.11
-
0.28
0.15
8
13.11
0.0001
0.12
-
0.46
0.15
9
12.7
0.0001
0.11
-
2.22
0.14
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
151
==PAGE:160==
10
12.4
0.00015
0.1
0.02
3.11
0.21
11
12.98
0.00015
0.08
-
0.14
0.21
12
12.73
0.00012
0.09
0.014
0.4
0.17
13
12.58
0.00014
0.09
0.017
0.03
0.2
14
11.22
0.0002
0.08
0.021
2.93
0.28
15
11.47
0.00019
0.08
-
2.8
0.27
16
1.02
0.00018
0.07
0.017
2.62
0.25
17
13.08
0.00015
0.08
0.017
2.58
0.21
18
11.4
0.00022
0.07
-
0.15
0.31
19
0.36
0.00012
0.07
-
0.77
0.18
20
13.43
0.00017
0.07
0.017
2.44
0.25
TIC 18066482
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.32
0.0
8.63
-
1.08
0.01
2
1.61
1e-05
4.22
-
1.95
0.02
3
0.64
1e-05
4.32
0.058
1.02
0.01
4
0.76
3e-05
1.4
-
2.21
0.04
5
2.75
0.00012
0.55
0.089
2.24
0.16
6
0.29
0.00013
0.44
0.074
1.94
0.17
7
2.47
7e-05
0.46
-
1.2
0.1
8
0.1
0.0001
0.43
0.058
0.35
0.14
9
2.64
0.00013
0.44
0.074
1.71
0.17
10
3.61
0.00012
0.33
-
2.29
0.15
11
0.81
8e-05
0.4
0.045
0.41
0.11
12
0.39
0.00015
0.31
0.059
2.19
0.19
13
0.06
0.00014
0.29
0.053
1.94
0.18
TIC 181789088
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
41.05
0.0
1.31
0.003
0.92
0.0
2
34.42
1e-05
0.46
-
0.93
0.01
3
38.0
1e-05
0.38
-
0.17
0.01
4
32.32
1e-05
0.31
0.004
1.42
0.01
5
34.59
1e-05
0.17
-
0.3
0.01
6
42.83
3e-05
0.12
0.005
0.92
0.04
7
41.16
3e-05
0.07
-
1.92
0.05
8
39.74
4e-05
0.05
0.003
1.3
0.06
9
34.6
3e-05
0.05
-
3.09
0.04
10
29.63
5e-05
0.05
-
2.44
0.07
11
43.52
4e-05
0.05
0.003
1.58
0.06
12
35.89
5e-05
0.05
0.003
3.06
0.06
13
29.69
6e-05
0.05
-
2.31
0.08
14
47.59
7e-05
0.03
0.003
0.07
0.1
15
0.94
0.00016
0.03
-
0.11
0.22
16
0.18
0.00017
0.03
0.006
2.89
0.23
17
43.66
9e-05
0.02
-
2.18
0.13
152
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:161==
TIC 184679514
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
19.41
5e-05
5.04
0.011
1.54
0.0
2
19.46
0.00012
2.0
0.011
2.02
0.01
3
17.58
0.00024
1.07
0.011
0.43
0.01
4
24.75
0.00023
0.87
-
1.22
0.01
5
9.52
0.0006
0.73
0.019
1.14
0.03
6
0.12
0.00076
0.61
-
1.15
0.03
7
2.94
0.00091
0.51
0.02
2.64
0.04
8
8.14
0.00093
0.51
0.02
2.97
0.04
9
16.73
0.00063
0.4
0.011
2.7
0.03
10
23.73
0.00054
0.38
-
2.1
0.02
11
5.46
0.0017
0.29
0.021
1.37
0.07
12
7.43
0.00166
0.29
0.021
2.07
0.07
13
25.84
0.00103
0.19
0.009
2.1
0.04
14
9.15
0.00246
0.18
-
2.35
0.11
15
15.83
0.00146
0.18
0.011
0.85
0.06
16
7.27
0.00248
0.2
0.021
0.22
0.11
17
0.39
0.00237
0.19
-
1.36
0.1
18
6.89
0.0028
0.17
-
1.48
0.12
19
1.01
0.00279
0.15
0.018
2.83
0.12
20
21.29
0.00168
0.14
-
2.64
0.07
21
4.84
0.00369
0.13
-
1.08
0.16
22
37.27
0.00157
0.13
0.009
2.8
0.07
23
30.78
0.0015
0.12
-
2.75
0.06
24
7.69
0.00474
0.1
-
1.3
0.2
25
17.86
0.00213
0.12
0.011
1.15
0.09
26
19.77
0.0021
0.12
-
0.55
0.09
27
38.84
0.00169
0.11
0.008
2.3
0.07
28
0.7
0.00374
0.12
-
0.71
0.16
29
2.58
0.00425
0.11
-
1.17
0.18
TIC 18658256
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
15.93
0.0
2.89
-
1.11
0.0
2
1.72
0.0
1.29
-
1.43
0.01
3
1.8
0.0
1.11
-
0.25
0.01
4
1.33
1e-05
0.8
0.01
2.83
0.01
5
1.89
1e-05
0.62
0.008
0.15
0.01
6
2.0
1e-05
0.47
0.009
2.21
0.02
7
18.67
1e-05
0.41
0.006
3.1
0.01
8
15.76
1e-05
0.4
-
1.25
0.01
9
18.14
1e-05
0.33
-
1.31
0.02
10
16.11
3e-05
0.21
0.008
3.08
0.04
11
15.47
3e-05
0.21
-
1.94
0.04
12
21.14
2e-05
0.21
0.006
0.69
0.03
13
1.43
3e-05
0.23
0.011
3.06
0.05
14
13.48
3e-05
0.2
-
0.99
0.05
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
153
==PAGE:162==
15
11.71
4e-05
0.14
0.009
2.42
0.06
16
12.46
7e-05
0.12
0.011
2.16
0.1
17
11.58
5e-05
0.11
-
0.81
0.07
18
11.74
6e-05
0.1
-
0.04
0.08
19
11.82
4e-05
0.11
-
0.73
0.06
20
0.07
8e-05
0.09
-
2.94
0.11
21
13.18
7e-05
0.09
0.009
0.88
0.09
22
12.71
4e-05
0.14
0.008
2.33
0.06
23
12.2
0.0001
0.08
0.01
0.23
0.13
24
0.3
8e-05
0.08
-
2.98
0.11
25
11.48
6e-05
0.09
-
0.69
0.09
26
1.07
9e-05
0.08
0.011
0.08
0.13
27
11.13
9e-05
0.09
0.011
1.92
0.12
28
12.4
7e-05
0.12
-
1.63
0.09
29
13.92
7e-05
0.09
-
1.89
0.09
30
13.27
9e-05
0.08
-
2.68
0.12
31
13.0
6e-05
0.09
-
3.04
0.09
32
13.61
8e-05
0.08
-
2.23
0.11
33
11.94
5e-05
0.1
-
2.76
0.07
34
0.74
8e-05
0.09
-
0.57
0.11
35
0.77
8e-05
0.09
0.01
0.64
0.11
36
10.41
0.00011
0.06
0.009
0.12
0.15
37
10.85
9e-05
0.08
-
0.89
0.12
38
3.17
9e-05
0.06
0.007
2.31
0.12
39
0.64
0.00013
0.06
-
1.27
0.17
40
13.09
9e-05
0.06
-
0.16
0.13
41
12.43
0.00011
0.08
-
1.13
0.16
42
0.24
9e-05
0.07
-
0.48
0.12
43
10.08
0.0001
0.07
-
3.04
0.13
44
12.27
0.00012
0.06
0.01
0.82
0.16
45
0.91
0.00011
0.06
-
0.66
0.15
46
13.47
0.00011
0.07
0.01
0.64
0.15
47
12.1
0.00012
0.06
0.01
1.91
0.16
48
11.86
9e-05
0.06
0.007
0.99
0.12
49
12.58
0.00014
0.05
0.01
1.1
0.19
50
0.32
0.0001
0.06
-
2.11
0.14
51
10.7
0.00014
0.04
0.009
3.13
0.2
52
2.42
0.00018
0.04
0.011
0.79
0.24
53
11.01
0.00015
0.05
-
0.53
0.21
54
14.33
0.00017
0.04
0.01
2.25
0.24
55
20.67
8e-05
0.04
-
2.75
0.11
56
12.66
0.0001
0.06
0.009
2.75
0.14
57
12.83
0.00012
0.05
-
2.36
0.16
58
12.77
0.0001
0.05
0.007
0.61
0.14
59
13.95
0.00014
0.04
0.008
2.4
0.19
60
3.06
0.00016
0.04
0.008
1.58
0.22
61
10.12
0.00016
0.04
-
1.25
0.22
62
10.65
0.00015
0.04
0.009
0.71
0.2
63
10.48
0.00017
0.04
-
2.19
0.23
64
2.89
0.00017
0.03
-
1.21
0.24
154
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:163==
65
0.42
0.00015
0.03
0.007
0.68
0.21
66
12.0
0.00015
0.04
-
2.34
0.2
TIC 189381343
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.53
0.00046
1.93
-
1.09
0.02
2
9.35
0.00057
1.52
-
0.44
0.02
3
2.83
0.0006
1.49
0.038
2.65
0.03
4
2.41
0.00068
1.31
0.037
1.72
0.03
5
6.56
0.00069
1.28
0.037
1.82
0.03
6
1.48
0.00071
1.17
0.035
0.43
0.03
7
21.67
0.0003
0.93
0.012
0.38
0.01
8
20.16
0.0004
0.83
0.014
0.6
0.02
9
8.26
0.00153
0.6
-
0.58
0.06
10
7.09
0.00169
0.53
0.038
2.96
0.07
11
19.69
0.00085
0.41
0.015
0.88
0.04
12
21.05
0.00083
0.36
0.013
2.23
0.03
13
20.37
0.00111
0.29
0.013
0.2
0.05
14
7.59
0.00431
0.21
0.038
1.28
0.18
15
23.9
0.00102
0.21
-
0.44
0.04
16
7.98
0.00464
0.2
-
0.98
0.19
17
0.47
0.00403
0.19
-
0.44
0.17
18
11.38
0.00373
0.18
-
1.6
0.16
TIC 193042875
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
5.85
3e-05
0.8
-
0.15
0.04
2
8.41
4e-05
0.7
0.036
0.53
0.05
3
2.5
2e-05
0.55
0.013
2.17
0.02
4
0.43
2e-05
0.51
-
3.03
0.03
5
8.1
2e-05
0.65
0.022
1.6
0.03
6
14.96
2e-05
0.48
-
2.36
0.02
7
5.19
5e-05
0.39
0.029
1.72
0.07
8
7.29
5e-05
0.38
-
0.76
0.07
9
13.88
3e-05
0.37
-
1.15
0.04
10
0.8
6e-05
0.31
-
1.33
0.08
11
7.7
4e-05
0.34
0.02
0.66
0.06
12
11.97
3e-05
0.34
-
3.1
0.04
13
1.53
6e-05
0.34
-
0.16
0.08
14
13.93
3e-05
0.31
-
2.77
0.04
15
0.53
5e-05
0.33
0.021
2.01
0.06
16
2.54
3e-05
0.27
0.013
0.26
0.05
17
7.0
4e-05
0.25
-
0.34
0.06
18
6.09
7e-05
0.26
-
0.01
0.09
19
5.91
0.0001
0.24
-
0.1
0.13
20
6.02
7e-05
0.24
-
1.57
0.1
21
16.49
4e-05
0.21
0.011
1.8
0.05
22
0.34
5e-05
0.21
0.016
0.53
0.08
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
155
==PAGE:164==
23
6.41
0.00011
0.21
-
1.23
0.15
24
12.4
4e-05
0.19
0.01
0.25
0.05
25
10.58
5e-05
0.19
0.014
0.5
0.07
26
11.06
8e-05
0.19
-
1.64
0.11
27
1.58
0.00011
0.19
-
3.11
0.15
28
0.71
9e-05
0.16
-
0.7
0.12
29
5.35
8e-05
0.22
0.025
0.53
0.12
30
6.88
5e-05
0.18
0.013
0.39
0.07
31
16.03
8e-05
0.14
-
1.28
0.11
32
0.64
0.0001
0.15
0.021
2.7
0.14
33
9.36
0.00014
0.13
-
1.96
0.19
34
6.78
0.00015
0.12
0.024
0.1
0.21
35
5.44
0.00013
0.13
0.024
2.0
0.18
36
8.98
0.00017
0.12
-
2.61
0.24
37
13.69
7e-05
0.12
0.011
2.79
0.09
38
5.67
0.00014
0.13
0.025
1.25
0.2
39
8.78
0.00017
0.11
0.026
2.45
0.24
40
18.34
4e-05
0.1
-
0.16
0.06
TIC 195212627
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
5.57
0.00029
1.3
0.017
1.3
0.01
2
6.68
0.00038
0.98
-
1.74
0.02
3
3.22
0.00048
0.77
-
2.41
0.02
4
5.66
0.00049
0.78
-
1.87
0.02
5
6.06
0.00057
0.67
-
0.88
0.03
6
16.65
0.00044
0.6
-
0.43
0.02
7
5.17
0.00082
0.46
0.017
0.22
0.04
8
1.18
0.00083
0.44
-
3.04
0.04
9
1.26
0.0009
0.4
-
2.35
0.04
10
7.22
0.00095
0.41
-
0.01
0.04
11
4.56
0.00095
0.39
0.017
2.92
0.04
12
8.11
0.00143
0.28
0.019
0.76
0.07
13
0.48
0.00175
0.2
-
2.31
0.08
14
5.07
0.00188
0.2
-
1.18
0.09
15
17.89
0.00117
0.2
-
0.3
0.05
16
15.59
0.00155
0.19
-
1.06
0.07
17
8.79
0.00204
0.19
0.018
0.24
0.09
18
27.46
0.00066
0.17
-
0.92
0.03
19
6.37
0.00215
0.18
0.018
2.17
0.1
20
19.41
0.00116
0.17
-
2.54
0.05
21
1.9
0.00219
0.16
-
0.69
0.1
22
3.53
0.00245
0.15
0.017
0.37
0.11
23
16.54
0.00175
0.15
0.012
2.8
0.08
24
1.46
0.00242
0.15
0.017
2.3
0.11
25
17.1
0.00195
0.13
-
1.95
0.09
26
0.19
0.00252
0.14
-
2.03
0.12
27
1.79
0.00294
0.12
0.017
0.09
0.14
28
6.31
0.00283
0.14
0.018
0.7
0.13
156
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:165==
29
4.96
0.00268
0.14
-
2.81
0.12
30
9.77
0.00333
0.12
-
2.25
0.15
31
11.49
0.00358
0.1
-
1.62
0.17
32
12.88
0.0032
0.11
-
2.38
0.15
33
14.8
0.0033
0.09
-
2.26
0.15
34
12.23
0.00428
0.09
-
0.24
0.2
35
9.95
0.00465
0.08
-
2.01
0.22
36
4.14
0.00476
0.08
0.017
1.91
0.22
37
10.99
0.005
0.08
0.018
1.4
0.23
38
12.19
0.00497
0.07
0.017
0.98
0.23
39
9.88
0.00551
0.07
0.018
1.63
0.26
40
9.36
0.00543
0.07
-
0.1
0.25
41
10.62
0.00586
0.07
-
1.73
0.27
42
13.66
0.00528
0.06
0.015
2.92
0.24
TIC 19566581
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
11.71
1e-05
1.64
-
1.44
0.01
2
13.42
1e-05
1.63
-
3.14
0.02
3
14.12
1e-05
1.28
0.025
0.79
0.02
4
12.31
2e-05
1.04
-
3.07
0.02
5
13.34
2e-05
1.04
-
0.29
0.03
6
11.38
3e-05
0.88
-
0.94
0.04
7
13.34
4e-05
0.61
-
0.19
0.05
8
12.72
6e-05
0.48
-
2.73
0.08
9
12.95
0.00011
0.26
-
0.13
0.15
10
10.78
4e-05
0.23
0.012
1.99
0.05
11
10.97
4e-05
0.2
0.012
0.83
0.06
12
12.91
0.00019
0.18
0.045
2.72
0.26
13
10.5
9e-05
0.16
0.019
0.43
0.12
TIC 196921106
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
10.37
2e-05
2.19
0.004
1.59
0.0
2
13.2
4e-05
0.98
0.004
3.11
0.0
3
11.23
5e-05
0.77
0.004
0.19
0.0
4
10.26
7e-05
0.69
0.004
0.04
0.01
5
12.06
8e-05
0.53
0.004
1.6
0.01
6
9.47
0.0001
0.45
0.004
2.55
0.01
7
13.86
9e-05
0.45
0.004
1.15
0.01
8
7.32
0.00037
0.13
0.004
2.44
0.03
9
22.32
0.00041
0.1
0.004
0.41
0.04
10
0.96
0.0016
0.05
0.007
1.42
0.14
11
0.39
0.00186
0.04
-
2.73
0.17
12
0.55
0.00245
0.03
0.007
1.25
0.22
13
0.44
0.00235
0.03
-
2.36
0.21
14
1.5
0.00281
0.03
0.007
0.81
0.25
15
1.03
0.00248
0.03
0.007
0.2
0.22
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
157
==PAGE:166==
16
2.87
0.00258
0.03
-
2.08
0.23
17
0.04
0.00295
0.03
-
1.46
0.27
18
20.74
0.00182
0.02
0.004
0.37
0.16
TIC 197647472
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.26
1e-05
2.65
0.032
2.43
0.01
2
1.33
1e-05
2.66
-
1.03
0.01
3
1.43
1e-05
1.89
0.028
0.75
0.01
4
0.9
1e-05
1.88
0.028
0.6
0.01
5
1.68
1e-05
1.75
0.025
0.96
0.01
6
2.59
2e-05
1.08
0.029
0.51
0.03
7
1.78
2e-05
0.79
-
1.64
0.03
8
0.99
3e-05
0.88
-
0.5
0.04
9
14.69
3e-05
0.56
-
3.09
0.04
10
1.03
6e-05
0.49
0.04
2.34
0.08
11
9.46
4e-05
0.41
-
2.47
0.05
12
14.96
3e-05
0.36
0.017
1.75
0.05
13
8.78
5e-05
0.31
0.023
1.69
0.07
14
1.11
8e-05
0.35
-
0.36
0.11
15
9.96
5e-05
0.32
0.021
2.26
0.06
16
8.67
5e-05
0.34
0.026
0.84
0.07
17
0.03
3e-05
0.36
0.016
0.77
0.05
18
6.32
6e-05
0.3
-
2.21
0.09
19
9.37
3e-05
0.27
-
2.91
0.04
20
7.89
0.0001
0.27
-
1.44
0.13
21
0.3
6e-05
0.22
-
0.68
0.09
22
6.56
6e-05
0.25
-
0.69
0.08
23
9.25
3e-05
0.22
-
2.18
0.04
24
9.13
5e-05
0.2
-
1.36
0.07
25
9.34
5e-05
0.17
0.011
1.85
0.06
26
0.4
9e-05
0.16
0.021
2.27
0.13
27
6.0
0.00016
0.13
-
2.83
0.22
28
5.61
0.00014
0.15
-
0.82
0.2
29
9.82
9e-05
0.15
0.019
0.35
0.12
30
10.48
0.00015
0.12
0.026
1.33
0.21
31
6.44
0.00013
0.13
-
2.73
0.18
32
8.25
0.00015
0.13
-
2.35
0.2
33
4.93
0.00013
0.13
-
2.2
0.17
34
3.36
0.00017
0.11
0.027
0.25
0.24
35
6.24
0.00021
0.11
-
2.52
0.29
36
10.84
0.0002
0.1
-
3.13
0.28
TIC 197733707
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
11.38
0.0
4.16
-
1.93
0.0
2
11.83
0.0
1.73
0.011
2.3
0.01
3
12.58
3e-05
0.26
-
3.09
0.04
158
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:167==
4
12.95
5e-05
0.18
0.012
2.08
0.07
5
12.15
3e-05
0.16
0.007
0.19
0.05
6
12.81
7e-05
0.11
0.01
2.9
0.09
TIC 198104956
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.81
0.0
3.06
0.014
0.29
0.0
2
16.58
0.0
2.01
-
1.92
0.0
3
1.64
1e-05
1.6
-
2.83
0.01
4
16.08
0.0
1.62
-
0.24
0.01
5
16.19
1e-05
1.09
0.013
0.67
0.01
6
2.18
1e-05
1.0
-
1.11
0.01
7
21.21
0.0
1.07
0.009
0.97
0.01
8
1.38
1e-05
0.69
0.014
0.02
0.02
9
2.04
1e-05
0.6
0.011
1.5
0.02
10
20.52
1e-05
0.51
0.006
0.74
0.01
11
1.19
2e-05
0.35
-
1.5
0.04
12
15.28
3e-05
0.22
0.01
1.32
0.05
13
18.39
2e-05
0.23
0.009
0.72
0.04
14
12.87
2e-05
0.21
-
0.61
0.04
15
16.41
3e-05
0.21
-
2.19
0.05
16
30.92
3e-05
0.19
0.009
3.03
0.05
17
20.71
2e-05
0.17
-
1.63
0.04
18
1.92
5e-05
0.18
-
2.38
0.09
19
25.74
2e-05
0.16
0.007
1.03
0.04
20
4.33
2e-05
0.16
0.006
1.55
0.04
21
13.33
4e-05
0.15
0.011
1.66
0.07
22
9.88
5e-05
0.15
-
2.24
0.09
23
2.51
6e-05
0.14
-
0.75
0.11
24
36.22
2e-05
0.13
0.006
0.93
0.04
25
9.1
0.00011
0.1
-
2.8
0.19
26
12.58
5e-05
0.12
0.012
0.15
0.09
27
1.48
8e-05
0.12
0.017
2.63
0.14
28
0.7
0.0001
0.1
0.016
1.67
0.17
29
0.14
9e-05
0.13
0.02
0.17
0.16
30
0.23
8e-05
0.13
-
0.62
0.13
31
21.52
6e-05
0.09
-
2.77
0.11
32
12.78
5e-05
0.09
-
2.53
0.08
33
17.94
6e-05
0.09
0.008
1.31
0.1
34
14.42
6e-05
0.08
0.009
0.73
0.11
35
10.16
0.00012
0.09
0.018
2.38
0.2
36
8.51
0.0001
0.08
-
2.57
0.18
37
0.97
0.0001
0.09
0.015
1.81
0.17
38
9.62
9e-05
0.1
0.015
0.55
0.15
39
25.03
4e-05
0.08
-
0.07
0.07
40
12.99
6e-05
0.08
-
1.78
0.11
41
9.85
9e-05
0.08
-
2.59
0.16
42
9.54
0.00012
0.07
-
2.26
0.2
43
3.31
7e-05
0.08
0.009
2.45
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
159
==PAGE:168==
44
26.24
5e-05
0.08
0.006
1.17
0.08
45
8.03
0.00012
0.07
-
1.82
0.21
46
0.5
0.00014
0.08
0.019
0.16
0.24
47
10.25
0.00012
0.07
-
0.1
0.21
48
9.57
0.00011
0.08
-
0.04
0.19
49
10.46
0.00017
0.07
-
1.21
0.29
50
11.11
0.00012
0.07
0.014
2.78
0.2
51
10.84
0.00016
0.07
-
1.05
0.28
TIC 198106247
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
10.25
0.0
2.48
-
2.76
0.0
2
9.56
0.0
1.73
-
1.97
0.0
3
11.47
1e-05
0.28
0.004
2.89
0.02
4
13.72
1e-05
0.24
-
1.94
0.01
5
10.55
1e-05
0.2
0.002
2.82
0.01
6
11.05
1e-05
0.2
-
2.15
0.02
7
11.75
1e-05
0.22
0.005
2.79
0.02
8
12.38
2e-05
0.14
0.004
0.63
0.03
9
2.36
3e-05
0.1
0.005
2.69
0.05
10
13.91
2e-05
0.09
-
1.01
0.03
11
13.06
2e-05
0.08
-
0.04
0.03
12
8.32
3e-05
0.08
0.004
1.04
0.05
13
0.66
4e-05
0.07
-
1.68
0.06
14
0.32
3e-05
0.07
-
1.48
0.06
15
0.44
5e-05
0.05
-
0.02
0.09
16
19.99
6e-05
0.04
0.004
0.86
0.1
17
0.47
6e-05
0.04
-
0.45
0.1
18
19.36
6e-05
0.03
0.003
3.13
0.11
19
20.7
5e-05
0.03
-
1.46
0.09
20
8.34
8e-05
0.03
0.004
2.45
0.14
21
1.51
0.00014
0.03
0.006
0.73
0.23
22
12.76
9e-05
0.02
0.003
1.95
0.16
23
18.77
9e-05
0.02
0.003
0.03
0.16
24
19.81
0.0001
0.02
0.003
0.93
0.16
25
21.37
9e-05
0.02
-
0.41
0.16
26
0.97
0.00014
0.02
0.005
0.96
0.23
27
0.56
0.00013
0.02
0.004
1.11
0.22
TIC 198212148
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.61
2e-05
0.03
-
1.01
0.04
2
0.18
6e-05
0.01
0.001
2.51
0.12
3
1.21
6e-05
0.01
-
1.44
0.12
4
0.15
7e-05
0.01
0.001
2.19
0.15
5
0.37
9e-05
0.01
0.001
2.43
0.19
6
0.19
9e-05
0.01
-
1.18
0.19
7
0.1
0.0001
0.01
0.001
0.94
0.21
160
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:169==
8
0.14
0.0001
0.01
-
0.69
0.2
9
0.09
9e-05
0.01
0.001
1.06
0.18
10
0.41
0.0001
0.01
-
2.52
0.21
11
0.49
0.0001
0.01
0.001
2.12
0.21
12
0.55
0.00012
0.01
0.001
0.09
0.24
13
0.12
0.00012
0.01
-
0.99
0.24
14
0.26
0.00013
0.01
0.001
3.01
0.26
15
0.56
0.00012
0.01
0.001
1.03
0.25
16
0.49
0.00012
0.01
0.001
1.46
0.25
17
0.3
0.00014
0.0
0.001
0.37
0.28
18
0.78
0.00012
0.01
-
0.76
0.24
19
1.14
0.00011
0.0
-
1.1
0.23
20
0.58
0.00014
0.0
-
2.12
0.28
21
0.74
0.00014
0.0
0.001
2.05
0.28
22
0.43
0.00015
0.0
0.001
1.63
0.3
TIC 198491261
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
34.88
0.0
0.48
-
0.43
0.01
2
21.27
0.0
0.47
-
1.73
0.01
3
34.53
0.0
0.47
0.003
0.48
0.01
4
18.94
0.0
0.42
0.003
0.05
0.01
5
17.52
0.0
0.38
-
2.81
0.01
6
18.63
0.0
0.4
-
2.29
0.01
7
17.25
0.0
0.37
0.003
1.26
0.01
8
32.28
1e-05
0.35
0.004
0.68
0.01
9
32.43
0.0
0.35
0.003
2.22
0.01
10
27.37
1e-05
0.33
-
2.91
0.01
11
27.64
1e-05
0.32
-
0.11
0.01
12
21.77
1e-05
0.24
0.004
2.31
0.02
13
20.72
1e-05
0.27
0.003
2.87
0.01
14
29.69
1e-05
0.28
0.003
0.94
0.01
15
16.17
1e-05
0.23
0.003
0.48
0.01
16
29.99
1e-05
0.23
0.004
3.1
0.02
17
18.74
1e-05
0.25
0.003
0.15
0.01
18
28.65
1e-05
0.18
-
3.0
0.02
19
23.13
1e-05
0.18
-
2.47
0.02
20
25.4
1e-05
0.15
0.003
2.14
0.02
21
29.36
1e-05
0.17
0.004
3.08
0.02
22
15.11
1e-05
0.16
-
0.01
0.02
23
28.85
1e-05
0.15
-
0.66
0.02
24
29.99
1e-05
0.15
-
0.06
0.02
25
26.36
1e-05
0.14
-
2.71
0.02
26
24.53
1e-05
0.14
0.003
2.65
0.02
27
21.99
2e-05
0.14
-
0.1
0.03
28
22.57
1e-05
0.12
-
1.6
0.02
29
22.11
2e-05
0.11
0.003
1.46
0.03
30
15.89
1e-05
0.11
0.002
1.3
0.02
31
18.81
2e-05
0.1
-
2.76
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
161
==PAGE:170==
32
25.93
2e-05
0.11
-
1.41
0.03
33
19.43
2e-05
0.09
-
0.09
0.03
34
25.16
2e-05
0.09
0.003
2.75
0.03
35
17.47
2e-05
0.09
0.003
0.17
0.03
36
29.28
2e-05
0.09
-
1.4
0.04
37
26.89
2e-05
0.08
0.003
1.79
0.03
38
28.39
3e-05
0.08
0.003
0.13
0.04
39
18.9
2e-05
0.08
0.003
3.01
0.04
40
11.54
2e-05
0.08
-
0.36
0.03
41
32.76
3e-05
0.07
-
0.93
0.05
42
30.97
2e-05
0.08
0.003
2.35
0.04
43
23.49
2e-05
0.07
0.002
0.74
0.04
44
22.47
2e-05
0.08
0.003
1.12
0.04
45
20.19
2e-05
0.08
-
2.79
0.04
46
19.64
3e-05
0.07
0.003
1.65
0.04
47
31.9
3e-05
0.07
-
1.39
0.04
48
16.96
2e-05
0.08
0.003
2.0
0.03
49
38.1
3e-05
0.07
0.004
0.26
0.05
50
36.1
3e-05
0.06
0.003
2.32
0.04
51
0.84
5e-05
0.05
-
1.99
0.09
52
46.15
4e-05
0.06
-
1.13
0.06
53
23.64
4e-05
0.06
0.004
1.77
0.06
54
24.26
3e-05
0.06
-
1.68
0.05
55
17.08
3e-05
0.06
0.003
2.37
0.05
56
46.44
4e-05
0.06
0.004
0.12
0.07
57
19.88
3e-05
0.05
0.003
1.33
0.06
58
38.44
3e-05
0.06
-
1.36
0.05
59
18.05
3e-05
0.05
0.003
2.18
0.05
60
41.17
4e-05
0.05
0.003
0.49
0.06
61
23.19
4e-05
0.05
0.003
0.38
0.06
62
19.8
3e-05
0.05
0.003
0.39
0.06
63
12.16
3e-05
0.05
0.002
1.66
0.05
64
35.78
3e-05
0.05
0.003
2.8
0.05
65
25.18
3e-05
0.06
0.003
2.12
0.05
66
31.78
3e-05
0.05
-
1.53
0.05
67
32.76
4e-05
0.06
-
2.61
0.06
68
16.94
3e-05
0.05
-
1.0
0.06
69
41.52
4e-05
0.05
-
2.46
0.06
70
18.08
3e-05
0.05
0.003
0.4
0.06
71
36.17
5e-05
0.04
0.003
3.03
0.08
72
42.27
5e-05
0.04
-
1.96
0.08
73
28.95
3e-05
0.04
-
0.76
0.05
74
24.35
4e-05
0.04
-
0.9
0.07
75
24.75
5e-05
0.04
-
0.79
0.09
76
37.33
5e-05
0.04
-
0.12
0.08
77
14.61
4e-05
0.04
0.002
0.72
0.06
78
19.92
4e-05
0.05
-
3.04
0.06
79
26.5
4e-05
0.04
-
2.16
0.07
80
33.38
4e-05
0.04
-
1.53
0.07
81
34.21
4e-05
0.04
0.003
2.98
0.07
162
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:171==
82
14.15
4e-05
0.04
0.003
1.56
0.06
83
26.84
4e-05
0.04
-
2.98
0.06
84
24.0
4e-05
0.04
-
1.68
0.07
85
13.9
4e-05
0.04
0.003
1.1
0.07
86
49.43
5e-05
0.04
-
2.27
0.08
87
14.26
4e-05
0.04
0.003
0.39
0.07
88
12.99
5e-05
0.04
0.003
2.34
0.08
89
23.62
5e-05
0.05
0.004
2.92
0.08
90
37.41
6e-05
0.04
-
2.03
0.09
91
25.09
4e-05
0.04
-
2.46
0.07
92
28.91
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.71
0.08
93
38.06
6e-05
0.03
-
2.22
0.1
94
37.65
6e-05
0.04
-
0.23
0.1
95
26.11
5e-05
0.04
0.003
3.08
0.08
96
0.08
8e-05
0.04
-
1.65
0.13
97
43.58
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.04
0.1
98
33.07
4e-05
0.04
-
2.59
0.07
99
31.17
4e-05
0.04
0.003
0.85
0.07
100
30.8
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.48
0.08
101
40.35
7e-05
0.04
-
0.45
0.12
102
43.23
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.99
0.1
103
1.91
8e-05
0.03
-
2.2
0.13
104
14.76
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.15
0.07
105
40.56
7e-05
0.03
-
2.73
0.11
106
36.69
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.06
0.1
107
41.47
5e-05
0.04
0.003
1.41
0.08
108
20.56
6e-05
0.03
-
1.24
0.09
109
0.33
0.0001
0.03
-
2.68
0.18
110
51.66
6e-05
0.03
-
0.92
0.09
111
45.41
6e-05
0.03
0.003
1.38
0.1
112
19.53
5e-05
0.03
-
2.47
0.09
113
46.78
7e-05
0.03
0.004
3.11
0.12
114
23.96
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.96
0.09
115
1.58
6e-05
0.03
0.004
0.87
0.11
116
26.2
7e-05
0.03
-
2.8
0.11
117
23.04
7e-05
0.03
0.003
1.94
0.12
118
37.61
7e-05
0.03
-
3.05
0.13
119
4.29
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.04
0.1
120
12.82
6e-05
0.03
0.003
1.47
0.1
121
50.14
7e-05
0.03
0.003
2.58
0.12
122
1.26
8e-05
0.02
0.003
0.75
0.14
123
40.51
9e-05
0.03
0.004
0.67
0.15
124
44.8
6e-05
0.02
-
2.26
0.11
125
23.31
7e-05
0.03
-
0.68
0.11
126
36.2
8e-05
0.03
0.003
0.34
0.13
127
35.64
7e-05
0.03
-
2.33
0.11
128
22.87
7e-05
0.02
0.003
2.65
0.12
129
11.96
7e-05
0.02
-
2.92
0.11
130
25.67
5e-05
0.02
0.002
2.04
0.09
131
30.26
7e-05
0.02
0.003
2.83
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
163
==PAGE:172==
132
39.76
8e-05
0.02
-
2.98
0.14
133
46.81
0.0001
0.02
-
2.3
0.17
134
14.34
7e-05
0.02
-
2.49
0.12
135
2.53
8e-05
0.02
-
1.72
0.14
136
28.55
0.0001
0.02
-
2.82
0.16
137
0.49
0.00014
0.02
-
1.21
0.23
138
9.88
8e-05
0.02
-
0.62
0.13
139
30.02
0.00011
0.02
-
0.93
0.19
140
1.16
0.00012
0.02
0.004
2.28
0.2
141
0.86
0.00012
0.02
0.005
3.01
0.2
142
0.39
0.00014
0.02
-
0.56
0.24
143
43.31
0.0001
0.02
-
2.76
0.17
144
7.91
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.9
0.12
145
48.83
0.00012
0.02
0.004
2.85
0.2
146
36.5
9e-05
0.02
-
0.04
0.14
147
39.26
9e-05
0.02
0.003
0.03
0.15
148
22.23
9e-05
0.02
-
1.47
0.15
149
39.51
0.0001
0.02
0.004
0.96
0.16
150
39.44
0.0001
0.02
-
2.41
0.16
151
7.88
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.61
0.12
152
42.31
0.00012
0.02
-
3.02
0.19
153
1.23
0.0001
0.02
-
1.7
0.17
154
44.75
6e-05
0.02
-
1.33
0.11
155
0.17
0.00013
0.02
0.004
0.75
0.22
156
1.2
0.00012
0.02
0.004
3.12
0.19
157
23.07
0.0001
0.02
-
0.21
0.17
158
29.86
0.0001
0.02
-
0.26
0.16
159
19.55
9e-05
0.02
-
2.21
0.15
160
37.13
9e-05
0.02
-
0.62
0.15
161
44.85
8e-05
0.02
0.003
2.84
0.14
162
5.38
0.00011
0.02
-
2.84
0.18
163
44.77
7e-05
0.02
-
0.64
0.12
164
1.78
0.0001
0.02
0.003
2.03
0.18
165
28.46
0.00012
0.02
0.004
2.25
0.2
166
28.5
0.00011
0.02
-
1.96
0.18
167
31.38
0.0001
0.02
0.003
2.05
0.16
168
2.8
0.00016
0.02
-
1.21
0.26
169
47.6
0.0001
0.02
0.003
1.71
0.17
170
8.73
9e-05
0.02
-
0.28
0.15
171
41.49
9e-05
0.02
0.003
1.22
0.15
172
4.49
0.00011
0.02
-
1.42
0.19
173
0.28
0.00015
0.02
0.005
2.14
0.26
174
38.33
0.00011
0.02
0.003
2.48
0.19
TIC 200226408
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.55
0.00013
3.61
0.022
1.22
0.01
2
14.64
0.00015
3.2
0.022
3.09
0.01
3
8.45
0.00015
2.63
-
2.24
0.01
164
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:173==
4
6.42
0.00023
1.68
0.018
2.04
0.01
5
10.59
0.00028
1.53
-
0.67
0.01
6
13.89
0.0005
0.97
0.022
1.93
0.02
7
7.24
0.00041
0.92
-
1.59
0.02
8
27.09
0.00059
0.71
0.019
0.36
0.03
9
15.8
0.00072
0.68
0.023
2.63
0.03
10
29.04
0.00065
0.62
-
1.96
0.03
11
17.45
0.00079
0.63
0.023
2.84
0.04
12
17.02
0.00081
0.61
-
2.07
0.04
13
16.93
0.00075
0.64
-
2.43
0.03
14
19.36
0.00097
0.53
-
2.44
0.04
15
12.7
0.0008
0.59
0.022
1.32
0.04
16
9.55
0.00081
0.51
-
2.17
0.04
17
5.88
0.00086
0.46
0.018
1.2
0.04
18
27.0
0.00117
0.36
0.019
1.87
0.05
19
18.3
0.00148
0.33
0.023
1.28
0.07
20
23.73
0.00149
0.34
0.023
0.09
0.07
21
26.09
0.00135
0.33
-
0.46
0.06
22
22.01
0.00167
0.3
-
2.79
0.08
23
4.54
0.00169
0.24
0.018
3.03
0.08
24
9.64
0.00185
0.23
0.019
0.52
0.09
25
15.13
0.00233
0.2
0.022
0.55
0.11
26
23.38
0.00223
0.22
-
0.74
0.1
27
25.35
0.0023
0.2
0.022
2.56
0.11
28
29.48
0.00195
0.2
-
2.0
0.09
29
18.04
0.00256
0.19
-
2.97
0.12
30
15.69
0.00245
0.2
0.022
0.38
0.11
31
1.09
0.00248
0.18
-
0.62
0.11
32
21.2
0.00285
0.17
0.023
0.14
0.13
33
26.43
0.0024
0.18
0.02
2.6
0.11
34
17.83
0.0031
0.16
0.023
2.98
0.14
35
20.41
0.00291
0.17
0.022
2.12
0.13
36
5.6
0.00236
0.17
0.019
1.09
0.11
37
24.67
0.00314
0.16
-
0.72
0.15
38
21.72
0.0029
0.17
0.023
2.28
0.13
39
27.42
0.00253
0.17
0.019
0.63
0.12
40
1.4
0.00294
0.15
0.02
0.78
0.14
41
0.83
0.00367
0.13
0.021
2.28
0.17
42
0.22
0.00319
0.15
-
1.51
0.15
43
3.33
0.00303
0.14
0.019
1.62
0.14
44
18.75
0.00421
0.12
-
2.58
0.19
45
20.75
0.00436
0.11
0.022
0.71
0.2
46
5.1
0.00321
0.12
-
0.99
0.15
47
2.91
0.00383
0.11
-
2.19
0.18
48
0.14
0.00357
0.14
-
2.61
0.17
49
23.1
0.00473
0.11
-
0.61
0.22
50
22.52
0.00462
0.11
0.023
2.19
0.21
51
26.05
0.004
0.11
-
1.72
0.19
52
32.65
0.00332
0.1
-
1.27
0.15
53
4.89
0.00416
0.1
0.018
1.23
0.19
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
165
==PAGE:174==
54
0.44
0.00496
0.09
0.022
2.36
0.23
55
18.62
0.00521
0.1
0.023
0.38
0.24
TIC 201233593
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.36
1e-05
0.39
-
1.93
0.01
2
0.31
1e-05
0.22
-
0.0
0.02
3
0.63
2e-05
0.19
0.005
0.49
0.03
4
1.28
3e-05
0.11
0.004
0.79
0.04
5
0.19
3e-05
0.1
-
0.19
0.04
6
1.36
4e-05
0.07
-
1.88
0.05
7
10.8
5e-05
0.07
-
1.62
0.07
8
10.66
7e-05
0.06
-
3.11
0.09
9
10.43
7e-05
0.05
-
0.15
0.1
10
10.1
9e-05
0.04
-
0.57
0.13
11
9.43
6e-05
0.04
-
0.48
0.09
12
11.11
0.00011
0.03
0.005
0.68
0.15
13
10.91
9e-05
0.04
-
1.28
0.12
14
9.33
8e-05
0.03
0.004
0.92
0.11
15
10.47
0.00011
0.03
-
1.24
0.15
16
10.27
0.00016
0.02
0.005
0.8
0.22
17
8.48
0.00018
0.03
0.006
2.74
0.25
18
9.64
0.00017
0.03
0.006
2.27
0.23
19
0.81
9e-05
0.03
0.004
2.36
0.13
20
11.0
0.00014
0.02
-
2.62
0.19
21
8.64
0.00018
0.02
-
1.14
0.24
22
8.14
0.00014
0.02
-
1.69
0.2
23
10.13
0.00016
0.02
0.005
2.29
0.22
24
2.21
0.00014
0.02
0.005
2.31
0.2
25
5.99
0.00018
0.02
-
1.43
0.25
26
8.84
0.00019
0.02
-
0.52
0.26
27
1.67
0.00019
0.02
0.005
2.37
0.26
28
3.04
0.00022
0.02
0.006
2.67
0.3
29
7.97
0.0002
0.02
0.005
2.79
0.28
30
8.17
0.00019
0.02
0.005
0.2
0.26
31
2.09
0.00016
0.02
-
2.58
0.22
32
4.44
0.00021
0.02
-
0.75
0.29
TIC 201752367
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.66
0.0
1.19
-
2.48
0.01
2
18.02
1e-05
0.97
0.008
0.23
0.01
3
29.07
0.0
0.89
0.006
1.88
0.01
4
35.45
0.0
0.83
-
1.71
0.0
5
2.38
1e-05
0.83
-
1.77
0.01
6
18.48
1e-05
0.77
-
0.12
0.01
7
2.46
1e-05
0.67
0.013
2.2
0.02
8
11.84
1e-05
0.58
0.012
0.39
0.02
166
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:175==
9
26.43
1e-05
0.51
0.005
0.58
0.01
10
8.39
2e-05
0.48
0.013
2.86
0.03
11
1.32
2e-05
0.44
0.012
1.39
0.03
12
10.52
2e-05
0.38
0.013
2.36
0.03
13
17.4
1e-05
0.39
-
0.46
0.02
14
16.27
1e-05
0.37
-
0.16
0.02
15
7.9
2e-05
0.33
-
2.4
0.03
16
2.9
2e-05
0.32
0.011
1.67
0.03
17
18.14
2e-05
0.32
0.008
3.01
0.02
18
24.8
2e-05
0.31
-
2.65
0.02
19
27.06
1e-05
0.29
-
1.45
0.02
20
29.48
1e-05
0.27
0.004
3.05
0.02
21
12.15
3e-05
0.28
-
1.67
0.04
22
22.27
2e-05
0.27
-
1.24
0.03
23
3.05
3e-05
0.28
0.013
2.59
0.05
24
17.22
2e-05
0.25
-
2.87
0.03
25
9.46
4e-05
0.24
0.014
2.55
0.06
26
8.94
4e-05
0.24
-
0.61
0.06
27
20.64
2e-05
0.22
0.005
0.63
0.02
28
29.93
2e-05
0.21
-
1.99
0.02
29
2.04
5e-05
0.21
-
3.13
0.07
30
2.0
5e-05
0.21
-
3.06
0.07
31
16.13
3e-05
0.2
-
0.85
0.04
32
9.38
5e-05
0.19
-
1.95
0.07
33
17.27
4e-05
0.16
-
1.45
0.05
34
21.87
3e-05
0.16
-
1.18
0.04
35
0.73
5e-05
0.14
-
2.78
0.07
36
3.41
5e-05
0.14
-
1.22
0.08
37
17.82
3e-05
0.15
0.007
0.87
0.05
38
1.1
4e-05
0.14
0.008
1.8
0.06
39
24.43
3e-05
0.13
-
2.21
0.04
40
7.64
8e-05
0.12
0.014
0.13
0.11
41
7.14
5e-05
0.14
-
0.57
0.08
42
11.0
8e-05
0.12
-
2.29
0.12
43
29.56
3e-05
0.12
-
0.02
0.04
44
9.26
6e-05
0.13
-
2.4
0.08
45
13.75
8e-05
0.1
0.011
3.03
0.11
46
13.23
9e-05
0.1
0.013
2.74
0.13
47
8.76
0.00011
0.1
0.015
2.7
0.15
48
16.6
4e-05
0.1
0.006
3.09
0.06
49
7.85
8e-05
0.09
-
1.72
0.12
50
8.06
6e-05
0.1
0.009
0.44
0.09
51
3.58
7e-05
0.1
-
2.81
0.1
52
2.61
0.00012
0.09
-
2.32
0.17
53
9.6
0.00011
0.1
-
0.74
0.15
54
4.31
6e-05
0.09
0.008
2.11
0.09
55
24.48
4e-05
0.09
0.006
1.55
0.06
56
22.69
5e-05
0.09
0.006
2.21
0.07
57
22.01
5e-05
0.09
-
1.67
0.07
58
23.81
5e-05
0.09
-
1.04
0.08
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
167
==PAGE:176==
59
8.29
0.00011
0.08
0.012
1.61
0.16
60
0.34
0.00014
0.08
-
1.47
0.19
61
15.03
7e-05
0.08
-
2.39
0.1
62
8.14
8e-05
0.08
-
1.15
0.12
63
19.43
6e-05
0.07
-
0.31
0.09
64
10.74
9e-05
0.08
-
1.91
0.13
65
24.13
5e-05
0.08
-
0.66
0.06
66
0.54
0.00013
0.08
-
2.59
0.18
67
1.9
0.00013
0.08
-
0.06
0.18
68
21.67
6e-05
0.07
0.006
0.24
0.08
69
28.36
6e-05
0.07
0.006
1.87
0.09
70
10.95
0.00013
0.08
0.014
1.72
0.18
71
1.38
0.00013
0.07
-
1.31
0.19
72
21.36
5e-05
0.07
-
1.2
0.07
73
0.64
0.00015
0.06
-
2.89
0.21
74
23.11
6e-05
0.06
0.005
2.75
0.08
75
21.28
5e-05
0.06
-
1.66
0.08
76
1.81
0.00017
0.06
-
1.62
0.24
77
6.55
0.00012
0.06
0.011
0.2
0.17
78
9.68
0.00014
0.07
-
1.31
0.2
79
31.43
4e-05
0.06
0.003
1.46
0.06
80
13.1
0.00015
0.06
-
0.13
0.22
81
12.02
0.00012
0.06
0.01
1.37
0.17
82
12.67
0.00015
0.06
0.013
0.45
0.21
83
10.91
0.00014
0.06
-
0.61
0.2
84
9.56
0.00018
0.06
0.014
0.34
0.26
85
13.47
0.00014
0.05
0.011
1.34
0.2
86
11.66
0.00016
0.06
-
1.95
0.23
87
15.11
0.00011
0.05
0.008
2.01
0.16
88
27.93
6e-05
0.05
0.005
2.5
0.09
89
19.14
7e-05
0.05
0.005
0.13
0.09
90
22.77
9e-05
0.06
0.007
0.13
0.12
91
10.63
0.00014
0.05
0.011
2.54
0.2
92
0.3
0.0002
0.05
-
0.41
0.28
93
11.24
0.00014
0.06
-
0.67
0.21
94
11.19
0.00015
0.06
-
2.93
0.22
95
7.3
0.00017
0.05
0.012
3.03
0.24
96
20.83
7e-05
0.05
0.005
0.23
0.11
97
15.31
0.00011
0.06
-
2.31
0.15
98
6.86
0.00014
0.05
-
2.09
0.2
99
22.64
8e-05
0.05
-
0.99
0.12
100
17.06
0.00012
0.05
0.008
2.81
0.17
101
14.13
0.00014
0.05
-
1.49
0.19
102
52.67
4e-05
0.05
0.002
2.17
0.05
103
10.81
0.00017
0.05
-
2.67
0.24
TIC 202957427
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
11.92
0.00079
0.44
-
0.91
0.03
168
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:177==
2
0.44
0.0009
0.44
0.017
0.67
0.04
3
11.19
0.00103
0.39
-
0.78
0.04
4
10.48
0.00107
0.42
0.02
2.38
0.05
5
9.71
0.00195
0.24
-
1.87
0.08
6
9.96
0.00188
0.25
0.02
1.79
0.08
7
2.61
0.00125
0.28
0.015
2.84
0.05
8
10.72
0.00201
0.22
-
0.67
0.09
9
9.05
0.00254
0.18
0.02
1.13
0.11
10
8.74
0.00248
0.18
-
1.85
0.11
11
2.55
0.00157
0.22
-
1.43
0.07
12
9.34
0.00253
0.18
0.02
1.26
0.11
13
7.93
0.00226
0.18
0.018
1.67
0.1
14
8.95
0.00299
0.16
0.02
1.04
0.13
15
8.03
0.00248
0.17
-
1.85
0.11
16
8.7
0.00229
0.2
0.019
0.1
0.1
17
7.45
0.00281
0.14
0.017
0.02
0.12
18
10.91
0.00275
0.16
-
0.63
0.12
19
9.46
0.00311
0.15
-
0.34
0.13
20
7.83
0.00349
0.12
0.018
0.62
0.15
21
12.28
0.00288
0.11
0.014
0.96
0.12
22
8.57
0.0041
0.11
0.019
0.51
0.18
23
12.62
0.00295
0.1
0.013
2.29
0.13
TIC 204723714
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.33
1e-05
1.11
0.009
0.9
0.01
2
2.61
1e-05
1.1
0.014
0.04
0.01
3
2.21
1e-05
0.95
-
2.02
0.01
4
18.32
1e-05
0.61
0.012
0.16
0.02
5
19.88
1e-05
0.65
-
0.45
0.02
6
19.34
2e-05
0.54
-
2.1
0.03
7
23.82
1e-05
0.57
0.008
1.06
0.01
8
24.52
1e-05
0.52
0.009
0.55
0.02
9
20.24
2e-05
0.41
0.009
2.56
0.02
10
18.62
3e-05
0.38
-
1.74
0.03
11
18.06
1e-05
0.37
-
1.97
0.02
12
1.48
3e-05
0.35
0.016
1.29
0.05
13
29.01
1e-05
0.32
0.006
1.76
0.02
14
16.9
2e-05
0.33
0.008
2.27
0.02
15
16.38
3e-05
0.32
0.015
2.91
0.05
16
1.31
4e-05
0.3
-
3.1
0.05
17
25.21
2e-05
0.26
0.006
0.73
0.02
18
30.42
3e-05
0.23
0.009
1.5
0.04
19
18.99
5e-05
0.23
-
0.68
0.07
20
13.99
5e-05
0.21
0.014
1.59
0.07
21
27.9
2e-05
0.2
-
0.31
0.03
22
22.7
2e-05
0.19
-
0.48
0.03
23
33.87
2e-05
0.18
-
3.01
0.03
24
23.48
3e-05
0.14
0.007
2.06
0.05
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
169
==PAGE:178==
25
16.78
3e-05
0.16
-
2.27
0.05
26
16.23
9e-05
0.14
-
1.91
0.13
27
21.61
3e-05
0.13
0.005
2.05
0.04
28
32.24
3e-05
0.13
0.005
1.66
0.04
29
0.73
8e-05
0.12
0.013
0.12
0.11
30
0.24
7e-05
0.11
0.01
0.75
0.09
31
24.84
4e-05
0.11
-
1.59
0.05
32
15.84
9e-05
0.1
-
0.05
0.13
33
15.29
0.0001
0.11
-
3.04
0.13
34
17.14
9e-05
0.1
-
0.98
0.13
35
29.47
5e-05
0.1
-
3.1
0.07
36
16.03
0.0001
0.11
0.016
1.94
0.14
37
14.44
0.0001
0.1
-
2.03
0.14
38
17.37
9e-05
0.09
-
1.74
0.12
39
23.96
4e-05
0.1
0.006
0.14
0.06
40
1.65
0.00011
0.09
0.015
0.49
0.16
41
0.56
7e-05
0.09
-
2.99
0.1
42
0.35
0.0001
0.09
-
2.86
0.14
43
13.64
9e-05
0.09
-
1.2
0.13
44
19.17
0.00011
0.08
-
1.9
0.16
45
0.07
9e-05
0.09
0.011
1.52
0.13
46
17.94
8e-05
0.08
-
1.95
0.11
47
15.62
0.0001
0.08
0.01
1.73
0.14
48
30.87
5e-05
0.08
0.005
2.72
0.06
49
18.15
8e-05
0.08
0.009
2.71
0.11
50
25.91
5e-05
0.07
-
2.91
0.06
51
17.28
0.00014
0.07
-
1.62
0.19
52
1.87
0.00017
0.08
-
1.09
0.24
53
0.89
0.00017
0.08
-
0.07
0.23
54
13.12
0.00013
0.08
0.014
2.84
0.18
55
13.46
0.00012
0.07
-
2.52
0.16
56
27.59
5e-05
0.07
0.005
1.08
0.07
57
29.09
8e-05
0.06
0.007
1.02
0.11
58
14.67
0.00017
0.07
-
1.75
0.23
59
13.89
0.00017
0.06
0.015
2.7
0.24
60
0.16
0.00012
0.06
-
0.03
0.16
61
42.86
4e-05
0.06
-
1.06
0.05
62
17.23
0.00015
0.06
0.013
1.42
0.21
63
19.15
0.00016
0.06
-
0.81
0.22
64
13.35
0.00015
0.06
0.012
2.65
0.2
65
28.09
6e-05
0.05
-
2.94
0.09
TIC 20542612
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
10.64
9e-05
2.87
-
1.64
0.0
2
13.51
0.00016
1.26
0.009
2.12
0.01
3
12.61
0.00018
1.2
0.01
1.99
0.01
4
11.04
0.00022
1.2
-
1.8
0.01
5
11.57
0.00023
1.04
0.011
1.25
0.01
170
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:179==
6
1.26
0.00073
0.66
0.022
0.73
0.03
7
9.59
0.00057
0.56
-
1.21
0.03
8
1.8
0.00119
0.41
0.022
2.91
0.05
9
4.78
0.00116
0.39
0.02
1.49
0.05
10
1.17
0.00161
0.31
0.022
0.51
0.07
11
11.91
0.00077
0.31
-
2.56
0.03
12
10.46
0.00093
0.3
0.012
0.25
0.04
13
2.38
0.0019
0.26
0.022
2.65
0.08
14
5.32
0.00181
0.24
-
1.17
0.08
15
4.18
0.00171
0.28
0.021
0.91
0.08
16
0.97
0.00226
0.22
0.022
0.06
0.1
17
22.55
0.00097
0.22
-
2.13
0.04
18
3.82
0.00267
0.18
0.021
0.44
0.12
19
5.43
0.00228
0.19
0.02
3.03
0.1
20
3.15
0.00386
0.13
0.022
2.65
0.17
21
3.29
0.00347
0.14
-
1.2
0.15
22
8.61
0.00298
0.12
0.016
2.45
0.13
23
0.89
0.0041
0.12
-
2.27
0.18
24
5.63
0.00375
0.12
0.019
0.72
0.17
25
2.17
0.0042
0.12
0.022
2.52
0.19
26
13.82
0.00191
0.1
0.009
2.16
0.08
27
5.9
0.00424
0.1
0.019
0.84
0.19
28
0.11
0.00471
0.1
0.022
2.76
0.21
29
10.17
0.00335
0.09
-
2.14
0.15
TIC 206286414
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.18
7e-05
3.22
-
0.48
0.01
2
1.36
9e-05
2.55
0.023
2.0
0.01
3
1.27
0.00015
1.6
-
1.36
0.02
4
1.24
0.00017
1.4
0.024
1.69
0.02
5
1.1
0.00024
1.02
0.025
2.51
0.02
6
1.55
0.00075
0.28
0.022
1.63
0.08
7
0.55
0.00121
0.22
-
2.73
0.12
TIC 206464379
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.66
0.0
6.42
-
0.11
0.0
2
20.81
0.0
2.62
0.006
2.3
0.0
3
19.49
0.0
1.74
0.008
0.8
0.0
4
16.86
1e-05
0.93
-
0.49
0.01
5
18.98
1e-05
1.0
0.009
3.02
0.01
6
17.33
1e-05
0.81
-
1.29
0.01
7
19.24
1e-05
0.63
-
1.95
0.01
8
16.38
1e-05
0.59
0.008
2.75
0.01
9
17.15
1e-05
0.53
0.006
0.47
0.01
10
20.01
1e-05
0.39
-
2.58
0.01
11
21.57
1e-05
0.35
0.005
2.89
0.01
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
171
==PAGE:180==
12
19.12
2e-05
0.29
-
1.51
0.02
13
19.97
1e-05
0.27
-
1.57
0.02
14
16.61
2e-05
0.22
-
1.53
0.03
15
18.43
3e-05
0.17
0.006
2.7
0.04
16
8.6
3e-05
0.16
0.007
1.88
0.04
17
39.12
3e-05
0.13
0.006
2.88
0.04
18
17.7
2e-05
0.16
0.004
0.94
0.03
19
8.33
2e-05
0.14
-
1.97
0.03
20
41.32
2e-05
0.14
-
0.17
0.03
21
0.26
5e-05
0.15
0.01
1.31
0.06
22
40.48
4e-05
0.11
0.006
1.43
0.06
23
12.25
3e-05
0.11
-
3.01
0.04
24
8.86
4e-05
0.11
-
1.36
0.06
25
17.74
3e-05
0.12
0.004
2.32
0.04
26
0.14
4e-05
0.14
0.008
1.48
0.06
27
18.26
4e-05
0.1
-
2.76
0.05
28
0.48
3e-05
0.14
0.006
1.09
0.04
29
9.67
4e-05
0.09
-
2.35
0.05
30
39.59
5e-05
0.08
-
2.46
0.07
31
12.51
4e-05
0.09
-
2.75
0.05
32
0.1
5e-05
0.11
0.008
1.71
0.07
33
10.71
3e-05
0.08
-
0.8
0.05
34
9.4
6e-05
0.08
0.006
0.86
0.08
35
39.91
3e-05
0.08
0.004
0.92
0.05
36
40.01
5e-05
0.07
0.005
1.52
0.07
37
0.33
7e-05
0.1
0.009
1.09
0.09
38
37.19
8e-05
0.07
-
0.38
0.11
39
40.95
5e-05
0.07
-
1.5
0.07
40
39.3
8e-05
0.06
-
2.56
0.1
41
38.13
9e-05
0.06
0.007
0.01
0.12
42
15.5
5e-05
0.07
-
0.04
0.07
43
27.63
6e-05
0.07
-
1.52
0.09
44
40.46
6e-05
0.08
-
0.1
0.08
45
40.94
6e-05
0.06
-
0.27
0.08
46
39.78
5e-05
0.07
0.004
1.36
0.06
47
39.23
5e-05
0.09
0.007
0.34
0.07
48
38.47
9e-05
0.06
-
0.41
0.13
49
38.3
9e-05
0.07
0.008
2.38
0.12
50
39.25
6e-05
0.09
0.007
3.13
0.08
51
27.9
7e-05
0.06
0.006
2.43
0.1
52
32.63
5e-05
0.06
-
1.64
0.07
53
40.15
8e-05
0.05
0.006
2.48
0.11
54
39.5
7e-05
0.06
0.005
0.81
0.09
55
11.74
6e-05
0.05
0.005
0.7
0.08
56
37.95
7e-05
0.06
-
1.74
0.1
57
41.47
4e-05
0.06
-
0.51
0.06
58
33.95
7e-05
0.06
0.006
2.64
0.1
59
13.03
6e-05
0.05
-
1.31
0.09
60
15.8
7e-05
0.05
0.005
0.94
0.09
61
18.72
8e-05
0.06
0.006
0.09
0.11
172
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:181==
62
37.62
0.00011
0.05
0.008
1.08
0.16
63
37.43
0.00011
0.05
-
0.44
0.16
64
28.33
4e-05
0.05
-
1.66
0.05
65
38.64
9e-05
0.06
0.007
1.51
0.12
66
33.74
0.00011
0.05
0.007
0.4
0.15
67
40.81
9e-05
0.05
-
0.97
0.12
68
37.65
0.00011
0.05
0.007
0.65
0.16
69
38.84
7e-05
0.06
0.005
2.55
0.09
70
34.75
9e-05
0.05
-
2.86
0.12
71
37.04
9e-05
0.05
0.006
0.11
0.12
72
1.12
0.00016
0.04
-
2.64
0.22
73
22.32
9e-05
0.04
0.005
0.41
0.12
74
1.37
0.00011
0.05
0.007
2.48
0.15
75
38.92
6e-05
0.05
-
0.61
0.09
76
26.26
7e-05
0.04
0.004
0.24
0.1
77
12.77
7e-05
0.04
-
1.13
0.1
78
36.47
0.00011
0.04
0.006
2.25
0.14
79
36.88
8e-05
0.04
-
1.61
0.11
80
37.76
0.00015
0.03
-
1.38
0.21
81
41.08
0.00011
0.04
-
3.05
0.15
82
0.74
0.00014
0.05
0.009
3.1
0.19
83
33.43
8e-05
0.04
0.005
2.86
0.11
84
33.51
9e-05
0.04
0.005
2.88
0.12
85
1.31
0.00014
0.04
-
0.32
0.19
86
38.97
7e-05
0.05
-
0.2
0.09
87
13.29
6e-05
0.04
-
2.81
0.08
88
3.64
0.00019
0.03
-
1.96
0.26
89
1.91
5e-05
0.06
0.004
1.16
0.06
90
38.45
0.00015
0.04
0.008
1.85
0.21
91
9.3
0.00012
0.03
-
3.1
0.17
92
28.37
6e-05
0.04
0.003
2.89
0.08
93
36.66
0.0001
0.03
-
0.82
0.14
94
38.18
0.00015
0.03
0.007
0.57
0.21
95
1.63
0.0001
0.03
0.005
0.37
0.14
96
1.71
0.0001
0.04
0.005
2.73
0.14
97
2.03
0.00012
0.04
-
2.01
0.16
98
1.83
7e-05
0.04
0.004
2.85
0.09
99
14.45
0.00014
0.03
-
2.84
0.19
100
38.77
0.00012
0.03
0.006
0.71
0.17
101
12.0
0.00012
0.03
0.005
0.34
0.16
102
36.2
0.00011
0.03
0.004
0.25
0.15
103
3.95
0.00024
0.03
0.009
1.66
0.34
104
35.79
0.0001
0.03
-
0.41
0.14
105
29.1
0.00014
0.03
0.006
0.64
0.2
106
0.53
0.00015
0.03
-
1.33
0.21
107
18.04
0.00015
0.03
-
0.3
0.21
108
34.84
0.00016
0.03
0.006
0.85
0.22
109
39.79
7e-05
0.04
0.004
1.18
0.09
110
39.01
0.00012
0.03
0.005
2.44
0.17
111
36.71
9e-05
0.03
-
2.38
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
173
==PAGE:182==
112
41.13
0.00015
0.03
0.006
0.8
0.21
113
28.89
0.00014
0.03
0.005
2.26
0.19
114
35.66
9e-05
0.03
-
2.77
0.12
TIC 206904850
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.17
1e-05
2.24
0.037
2.88
0.02
2
1.57
2e-05
0.84
-
2.35
0.02
3
0.76
2e-05
0.91
0.025
1.24
0.03
4
2.86
2e-05
0.6
-
2.71
0.03
5
2.39
4e-05
0.45
-
1.35
0.06
6
0.92
6e-05
0.43
0.036
1.87
0.08
7
0.17
4e-05
0.4
-
2.42
0.05
8
0.1
7e-05
0.24
0.024
1.98
0.1
9
1.01
0.0001
0.23
-
1.32
0.14
10
0.34
0.00012
0.17
-
2.68
0.17
11
1.14
0.00018
0.13
0.033
1.5
0.25
12
0.25
0.00013
0.15
0.025
1.65
0.17
13
2.81
9e-05
0.15
-
1.15
0.12
TIC 207170637
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
19.83
1e-05
0.42
-
0.51
0.01
2
20.5
1e-05
0.37
0.004
2.9
0.01
3
17.03
2e-05
0.17
0.004
2.83
0.02
4
14.84
2e-05
0.16
-
0.76
0.02
5
22.65
2e-05
0.17
-
0.08
0.02
6
14.58
2e-05
0.15
-
0.5
0.03
7
2.53
2e-05
0.14
0.004
0.78
0.03
8
2.32
2e-05
0.12
0.003
0.62
0.03
9
3.86
3e-05
0.11
0.005
2.02
0.05
10
5.29
3e-05
0.1
-
2.19
0.04
11
2.12
5e-05
0.08
0.005
0.55
0.06
12
3.45
4e-05
0.08
0.005
0.67
0.06
13
1.84
5e-05
0.08
0.006
1.87
0.07
14
1.72
4e-05
0.07
0.005
2.43
0.06
15
5.7
5e-05
0.06
0.005
1.35
0.08
16
2.02
8e-05
0.06
-
3.01
0.12
17
3.84
7e-05
0.05
0.005
0.99
0.1
18
2.78
6e-05
0.04
0.003
1.86
0.08
19
5.28
6e-05
0.04
-
2.59
0.09
20
16.78
6e-05
0.04
0.003
1.85
0.08
21
1.61
8e-05
0.04
-
2.25
0.12
22
1.49
0.0001
0.03
-
1.58
0.14
23
1.08
0.00012
0.03
-
2.57
0.17
24
0.57
0.00013
0.03
0.005
0.29
0.18
25
0.48
0.00015
0.03
-
0.27
0.22
26
1.72
0.00012
0.03
-
0.32
0.17
174
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:183==
27
19.06
9e-05
0.03
-
1.85
0.13
28
7.13
0.00011
0.03
0.004
0.21
0.15
TIC 21223063
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
10.88
1e-05
3.48
0.004
1.01
0.0
2
8.13
1e-05
1.77
-
0.77
0.0
3
11.84
5e-05
0.48
-
2.7
0.01
4
9.99
0.00013
0.22
0.004
2.73
0.02
5
16.22
0.0001
0.16
0.002
3.06
0.01
6
0.5
0.00039
0.13
-
2.28
0.06
7
9.15
0.00021
0.11
0.003
0.72
0.03
8
9.34
0.00025
0.1
0.004
2.27
0.04
9
9.42
0.00028
0.09
-
2.51
0.04
10
8.86
0.00031
0.08
-
1.58
0.04
11
17.78
0.00021
0.07
-
1.53
0.03
12
19.02
0.00026
0.06
0.002
0.22
0.04
13
0.18
0.00093
0.06
0.008
0.22
0.13
14
0.09
0.00116
0.05
-
2.83
0.17
15
17.22
0.00038
0.04
0.002
0.35
0.05
TIC 21831056
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.46
3e-05
2.67
-
0.02
0.0
2
1.49
3e-05
2.61
0.008
2.8
0.0
3
1.14
8e-05
1.0
-
2.17
0.01
4
0.49
9e-05
0.89
-
2.51
0.01
5
1.58
9e-05
0.9
-
1.53
0.01
6
0.62
0.0001
0.84
0.008
2.62
0.01
7
1.81
0.0001
0.86
-
2.65
0.01
8
1.52
0.0001
0.86
-
1.59
0.01
9
1.71
0.00014
0.63
0.008
2.41
0.01
10
0.98
0.00016
0.53
-
0.18
0.01
11
1.16
0.00025
0.32
-
1.77
0.02
12
2.35
0.0003
0.28
-
0.02
0.03
13
0.46
0.00022
0.37
-
0.32
0.02
14
2.02
0.0004
0.21
-
0.74
0.04
15
3.0
0.00041
0.23
-
0.73
0.04
16
1.98
0.00037
0.24
-
1.94
0.03
17
2.96
0.00045
0.21
0.009
1.27
0.04
18
0.38
0.00041
0.21
-
0.14
0.04
19
2.93
0.00045
0.21
0.009
0.43
0.04
20
1.95
0.00046
0.19
-
1.39
0.04
21
1.65
0.00042
0.2
0.008
2.65
0.04
22
0.89
0.00078
0.11
0.008
1.33
0.07
23
2.15
0.00056
0.15
0.008
1.08
0.05
24
2.43
0.00064
0.13
0.008
2.99
0.06
25
3.27
0.00063
0.15
0.009
2.61
0.06
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
175
==PAGE:184==
26
2.59
0.00084
0.11
0.008
1.9
0.08
27
0.81
0.0006
0.14
0.008
0.4
0.06
28
0.03
0.00087
0.09
0.008
1.67
0.08
29
2.89
0.00091
0.11
-
2.94
0.08
30
3.44
0.001
0.1
0.009
1.72
0.09
31
2.77
0.00078
0.12
-
2.68
0.07
32
2.29
0.00095
0.09
-
0.23
0.09
33
2.71
0.00113
0.08
-
2.28
0.11
34
3.73
0.00099
0.09
0.008
0.36
0.09
35
3.58
0.00092
0.1
0.009
2.91
0.09
36
3.03
0.00131
0.07
-
3.02
0.12
37
3.34
0.00157
0.06
-
0.71
0.15
38
3.22
0.00202
0.05
0.009
2.48
0.19
39
3.97
0.00168
0.05
0.008
1.75
0.16
40
4.05
0.00149
0.06
-
0.75
0.14
41
4.12
0.00151
0.05
0.008
2.35
0.14
42
4.5
0.00187
0.04
0.007
2.27
0.17
43
3.82
0.00248
0.04
-
1.31
0.23
TIC 21862361
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
36.21
0.0
1.09
0.005
0.2
0.0
2
24.38
0.0
0.75
0.003
1.93
0.0
3
35.16
1e-05
0.61
0.004
1.48
0.01
4
37.91
1e-05
0.51
-
0.7
0.01
5
29.72
1e-05
0.29
0.004
1.09
0.01
6
34.77
2e-05
0.25
-
2.74
0.02
7
25.9
1e-05
0.24
0.004
1.25
0.02
8
33.26
2e-05
0.19
-
2.14
0.02
9
32.27
2e-05
0.19
-
2.36
0.03
10
31.72
2e-05
0.17
0.004
0.03
0.02
11
24.79
2e-05
0.13
-
2.67
0.02
12
30.34
2e-05
0.13
0.003
1.05
0.02
13
23.49
3e-05
0.09
-
1.19
0.05
14
38.1
3e-05
0.1
-
2.88
0.04
15
37.51
3e-05
0.08
-
1.23
0.04
16
34.32
5e-05
0.08
0.005
1.37
0.07
17
29.49
4e-05
0.07
0.004
0.81
0.06
18
31.12
4e-05
0.06
0.003
2.46
0.05
19
38.67
3e-05
0.06
0.002
1.7
0.04
20
26.83
6e-05
0.05
0.004
1.64
0.08
21
39.53
4e-05
0.05
-
2.59
0.05
22
34.04
5e-05
0.05
-
1.19
0.06
23
35.77
5e-05
0.04
-
2.3
0.07
24
29.3
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.93
0.07
25
41.97
6e-05
0.04
0.003
1.56
0.08
26
26.4
8e-05
0.03
0.004
3.11
0.11
27
0.5
0.00017
0.03
0.008
1.88
0.23
28
32.7
8e-05
0.03
-
0.39
0.11
176
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:185==
29
39.14
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.83
0.09
30
27.4
9e-05
0.03
-
2.19
0.13
TIC 219424956
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
9.1
0.00018
1.68
0.012
0.66
0.01
2
10.28
0.00041
0.71
-
0.3
0.02
3
9.89
0.00062
0.48
0.012
2.87
0.02
4
0.81
0.00078
0.48
0.015
0.38
0.03
5
11.29
0.00083
0.35
-
0.59
0.03
6
0.21
0.00108
0.35
0.015
1.82
0.04
7
0.91
0.00158
0.24
-
0.77
0.06
8
1.37
0.00146
0.26
0.015
0.72
0.06
9
10.87
0.00132
0.22
-
0.11
0.05
10
10.75
0.00121
0.24
0.011
0.18
0.05
11
11.11
0.00154
0.19
0.011
2.2
0.06
12
15.39
0.00266
0.11
0.012
0.35
0.1
13
6.57
0.00338
0.1
0.013
2.83
0.13
14
7.68
0.00385
0.08
0.012
2.41
0.15
15
4.82
0.00434
0.08
-
2.92
0.17
16
5.55
0.00536
0.06
-
1.37
0.21
17
11.75
0.00427
0.07
-
0.05
0.17
18
19.26
0.00489
0.06
-
0.36
0.19
19
17.89
0.00472
0.06
0.012
1.33
0.19
20
7.55
0.00428
0.07
0.012
0.21
0.17
21
17.33
0.00594
0.05
0.012
0.29
0.23
22
6.51
0.00625
0.05
-
0.11
0.25
23
14.03
0.00612
0.05
-
2.39
0.24
24
18.88
0.00578
0.05
-
1.01
0.23
TIC 219459937
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.52
0.0
0.65
0.001
2.49
0.0
2
20.0
0.0
0.44
-
2.12
0.0
3
31.0
0.0
0.42
0.002
1.81
0.0
4
32.72
0.0
0.36
-
0.47
0.0
5
30.86
0.0
0.36
-
2.11
0.0
6
36.55
0.0
0.33
-
1.68
0.0
7
27.08
0.0
0.29
0.002
1.84
0.01
8
24.73
0.0
0.24
-
1.27
0.01
9
26.0
0.0
0.23
0.002
1.06
0.01
10
36.82
0.0
0.22
-
2.06
0.01
11
23.32
0.0
0.19
0.001
1.83
0.01
12
19.54
0.0
0.19
-
0.94
0.01
13
19.36
0.0
0.18
-
1.67
0.01
14
36.25
0.0
0.18
0.001
2.54
0.01
15
26.42
1e-05
0.15
-
2.87
0.01
16
21.31
1e-05
0.13
0.002
2.44
0.01
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
177
==PAGE:186==
17
26.83
1e-05
0.12
-
2.4
0.01
18
21.66
1e-05
0.12
0.001
2.52
0.01
19
31.32
1e-05
0.11
0.002
3.12
0.01
20
31.57
1e-05
0.1
0.001
1.69
0.01
21
22.51
1e-05
0.1
-
0.89
0.02
22
22.6
1e-05
0.09
0.002
2.68
0.02
23
23.51
1e-05
0.08
0.002
0.44
0.02
24
48.94
1e-05
0.08
0.002
0.27
0.02
25
25.15
1e-05
0.08
0.002
3.08
0.02
26
34.48
1e-05
0.07
0.002
0.43
0.03
27
29.19
1e-05
0.07
0.001
1.37
0.02
28
30.5
1e-05
0.07
0.001
0.76
0.02
29
18.94
1e-05
0.07
-
2.11
0.02
30
37.01
1e-05
0.07
0.002
1.56
0.02
31
27.38
1e-05
0.07
0.001
2.95
0.02
32
21.61
1e-05
0.07
-
2.62
0.02
33
24.65
1e-05
0.07
0.002
2.73
0.02
34
19.91
1e-05
0.07
0.002
0.72
0.02
35
16.75
1e-05
0.06
0.002
2.52
0.03
36
23.65
1e-05
0.06
0.001
3.09
0.02
37
19.71
1e-05
0.06
0.002
2.06
0.02
38
28.14
1e-05
0.06
0.002
1.68
0.03
39
29.87
1e-05
0.06
0.001
1.71
0.02
40
34.23
2e-05
0.06
-
2.44
0.03
41
17.46
1e-05
0.06
-
1.36
0.02
42
35.38
1e-05
0.05
-
2.45
0.03
43
31.51
2e-05
0.05
0.001
1.98
0.03
44
48.92
2e-05
0.05
0.002
0.83
0.03
45
25.34
2e-05
0.05
-
1.82
0.03
46
25.44
2e-05
0.05
0.001
2.04
0.03
47
31.84
1e-05
0.05
-
1.73
0.03
48
27.93
2e-05
0.05
0.002
2.4
0.04
49
36.14
1e-05
0.05
-
1.53
0.02
50
31.47
2e-05
0.05
0.002
0.56
0.03
51
29.98
2e-05
0.04
0.002
2.18
0.04
52
18.05
2e-05
0.04
-
1.23
0.04
53
26.5
2e-05
0.04
0.002
2.06
0.05
54
17.17
2e-05
0.04
-
1.18
0.04
55
24.4
2e-05
0.04
0.002
2.1
0.04
56
24.48
3e-05
0.04
-
1.38
0.05
57
27.29
2e-05
0.04
0.002
2.37
0.04
58
43.11
2e-05
0.03
-
1.21
0.03
59
19.48
3e-05
0.03
0.002
1.06
0.05
60
18.99
2e-05
0.03
-
0.46
0.04
61
34.31
3e-05
0.03
0.002
2.05
0.05
62
29.63
3e-05
0.03
-
2.81
0.05
63
37.68
2e-05
0.03
0.001
1.75
0.04
64
42.6
3e-05
0.03
0.002
1.61
0.07
65
50.5
3e-05
0.03
0.002
0.26
0.05
66
0.45
5e-05
0.03
-
2.71
0.09
178
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:187==
67
27.58
2e-05
0.03
-
1.12
0.04
68
23.46
3e-05
0.03
0.002
0.37
0.06
69
25.56
3e-05
0.03
0.001
0.06
0.05
70
31.66
3e-05
0.03
0.002
2.23
0.06
71
35.04
3e-05
0.03
0.002
0.93
0.06
72
52.15
4e-05
0.02
-
0.72
0.07
73
29.1
3e-05
0.03
-
0.6
0.06
74
33.31
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.04
0.08
75
28.28
3e-05
0.03
0.001
1.44
0.05
76
0.87
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.19
0.12
77
24.48
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.08
0.07
78
15.23
3e-05
0.02
-
1.33
0.06
79
58.45
4e-05
0.02
-
2.99
0.08
80
36.0
2e-05
0.02
0.001
0.1
0.05
81
13.54
3e-05
0.02
-
2.21
0.06
82
2.69
6e-05
0.02
-
1.39
0.12
83
34.33
4e-05
0.02
0.002
2.97
0.07
84
38.92
3e-05
0.02
-
2.21
0.06
85
25.63
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.34
0.06
86
58.5
4e-05
0.02
-
2.59
0.08
87
18.88
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.2
0.05
88
22.07
4e-05
0.02
0.002
2.78
0.07
89
20.37
4e-05
0.02
-
0.12
0.07
90
35.24
4e-05
0.02
-
0.04
0.07
91
30.04
4e-05
0.02
0.002
3.0
0.07
92
24.17
3e-05
0.02
0.001
0.33
0.06
93
0.47
8e-05
0.02
0.003
0.59
0.15
94
11.47
4e-05
0.02
-
1.55
0.07
95
37.85
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.04
0.06
96
22.98
4e-05
0.02
-
1.58
0.08
97
49.08
5e-05
0.02
0.002
2.95
0.1
98
55.23
5e-05
0.02
0.002
2.44
0.09
99
16.51
4e-05
0.02
-
2.42
0.07
100
33.27
6e-05
0.02
-
0.1
0.11
101
31.62
5e-05
0.02
-
0.58
0.1
102
28.23
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.97
0.09
103
1.08
7e-05
0.02
0.003
1.79
0.13
104
21.3
5e-05
0.02
-
0.72
0.09
105
14.36
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.15
0.06
106
20.4
4e-05
0.02
-
2.72
0.08
107
0.38
9e-05
0.02
0.003
2.09
0.17
108
61.6
5e-05
0.02
-
3.07
0.09
109
50.31
5e-05
0.01
-
1.6
0.1
110
48.96
7e-05
0.01
0.002
0.32
0.13
111
52.18
6e-05
0.01
-
2.15
0.12
112
1.1
0.0001
0.01
-
0.79
0.19
113
17.62
6e-05
0.01
0.001
1.44
0.11
114
1.47
0.00012
0.01
-
1.66
0.24
115
37.56
5e-05
0.01
0.001
2.77
0.1
116
16.13
6e-05
0.01
-
1.18
0.11
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
179
==PAGE:188==
117
38.62
5e-05
0.01
-
0.58
0.09
118
23.87
6e-05
0.01
-
0.24
0.11
119
1.37
0.00011
0.01
0.003
0.36
0.22
120
1.22
0.00011
0.01
-
1.86
0.21
121
0.68
0.00013
0.01
0.003
0.53
0.24
122
1.97
0.00012
0.01
-
3.07
0.23
123
55.36
7e-05
0.01
-
2.98
0.14
124
0.0
0.00011
0.01
-
0.74
0.2
125
42.57
9e-05
0.01
0.002
2.97
0.17
126
2.44
0.00011
0.01
-
1.58
0.2
127
45.78
8e-05
0.01
0.002
2.16
0.16
128
38.67
5e-05
0.01
0.001
3.02
0.1
129
3.24
0.0001
0.01
0.002
0.21
0.19
130
2.23
0.00011
0.01
0.002
0.13
0.21
131
15.81
5e-05
0.01
-
0.56
0.1
132
1.92
0.00011
0.01
-
1.44
0.2
133
55.25
8e-05
0.01
0.002
0.08
0.15
134
50.49
8e-05
0.01
0.002
1.1
0.15
135
23.98
6e-05
0.01
-
2.96
0.12
136
1.85
0.00011
0.01
0.003
2.46
0.22
137
52.14
7e-05
0.01
0.002
2.31
0.14
138
1.84
0.00012
0.01
-
2.09
0.23
TIC 219987521
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.12
0.00013
2.75
-
3.12
0.01
2
2.59
0.00015
2.09
0.031
3.11
0.01
3
0.47
0.00026
1.39
0.035
2.51
0.02
4
0.26
0.00031
1.2
0.035
2.73
0.03
5
2.38
0.00028
1.2
-
0.01
0.03
6
2.85
0.00032
1.01
0.031
2.37
0.03
7
1.01
0.00061
0.62
0.035
0.42
0.06
8
0.18
0.00092
0.41
-
2.25
0.09
9
4.71
0.00086
0.29
0.023
1.5
0.08
10
4.24
0.00105
0.26
0.026
1.93
0.1
11
4.61
0.00083
0.3
-
2.12
0.08
12
4.14
0.00099
0.28
0.026
1.54
0.09
13
4.51
0.00099
0.26
-
0.77
0.09
14
0.39
0.00143
0.26
0.035
0.53
0.13
15
4.04
0.00144
0.2
0.027
0.62
0.14
16
1.42
0.00204
0.18
-
2.26
0.19
17
5.08
0.00168
0.14
0.022
0.69
0.16
18
4.87
0.00176
0.14
-
1.91
0.17
TIC 229675893
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.97
0.0
1.97
0.008
2.03
0.0
2
7.26
0.0
1.51
-
1.6
0.01
180
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:189==
3
1.39
0.0
1.35
-
3.06
0.01
4
16.61
0.0
1.32
-
2.29
0.0
5
1.43
0.0
1.01
-
1.34
0.01
6
8.32
1e-05
0.64
0.009
2.54
0.01
7
2.1
1e-05
0.64
-
0.99
0.01
8
7.34
1e-05
0.53
0.011
1.32
0.02
9
6.81
1e-05
0.49
-
1.82
0.02
10
17.09
0.0
0.42
-
2.97
0.01
11
16.58
0.0
0.41
0.003
0.15
0.01
12
6.48
1e-05
0.33
-
1.82
0.03
13
15.79
0.0
0.34
0.003
0.81
0.01
14
1.27
1e-05
0.32
-
0.14
0.03
15
7.97
1e-05
0.37
0.01
2.6
0.03
16
16.24
0.0
0.32
0.003
1.28
0.01
17
16.49
0.0
0.31
0.003
1.29
0.01
18
1.92
1e-05
0.29
-
0.4
0.03
19
5.29
1e-05
0.29
-
0.61
0.03
20
5.95
2e-05
0.28
-
2.21
0.04
21
1.0
2e-05
0.27
0.01
0.27
0.04
22
2.7
1e-05
0.27
-
0.48
0.02
23
6.56
2e-05
0.27
-
2.97
0.04
24
1.25
2e-05
0.26
-
2.22
0.03
25
5.82
2e-05
0.23
-
2.23
0.04
26
0.84
2e-05
0.23
-
0.45
0.04
27
2.08
2e-05
0.22
-
1.24
0.03
28
6.98
3e-05
0.2
0.011
3.13
0.06
29
16.36
1e-05
0.21
-
2.29
0.01
30
1.3
2e-05
0.2
0.008
0.38
0.04
31
0.41
3e-05
0.19
0.01
0.29
0.06
32
7.62
3e-05
0.19
0.01
1.32
0.05
33
0.95
3e-05
0.17
-
1.43
0.06
34
8.36
3e-05
0.16
-
1.63
0.06
35
17.37
1e-05
0.14
-
2.7
0.02
36
1.22
3e-05
0.14
0.008
2.73
0.06
37
0.52
4e-05
0.13
-
1.74
0.08
38
8.49
4e-05
0.13
-
1.84
0.07
39
0.35
5e-05
0.11
0.012
2.17
0.1
40
24.22
0.0
0.12
-
2.1
0.01
41
8.2
4e-05
0.11
-
2.89
0.08
42
0.18
5e-05
0.11
-
3.12
0.1
43
0.27
5e-05
0.12
0.011
0.4
0.1
44
6.68
4e-05
0.11
0.01
2.37
0.09
45
7.6
5e-05
0.1
0.011
0.48
0.1
46
0.15
5e-05
0.11
0.011
2.61
0.1
47
0.59
6e-05
0.09
0.011
0.1
0.12
48
8.1
4e-05
0.1
0.009
0.3
0.09
49
8.86
4e-05
0.1
-
1.46
0.07
50
6.45
5e-05
0.09
0.01
1.49
0.11
51
0.36
5e-05
0.1
0.011
1.58
0.11
52
3.36
4e-05
0.09
-
0.19
0.08
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
181
==PAGE:190==
53
9.23
3e-05
0.09
0.006
1.67
0.07
54
8.45
5e-05
0.09
0.01
0.18
0.11
55
8.72
4e-05
0.08
0.007
3.12
0.09
56
0.45
6e-05
0.09
-
0.96
0.12
57
0.54
8e-05
0.07
-
2.92
0.16
58
7.08
8e-05
0.07
-
2.23
0.16
59
0.16
8e-05
0.07
-
2.16
0.17
60
8.67
6e-05
0.07
0.008
1.05
0.12
61
18.58
2e-05
0.07
0.002
1.52
0.03
62
17.37
2e-05
0.07
0.003
2.24
0.04
63
15.73
2e-05
0.07
-
1.73
0.04
64
9.35
5e-05
0.06
0.006
0.09
0.1
65
5.42
6e-05
0.06
0.009
0.27
0.13
66
8.69
6e-05
0.06
0.008
0.72
0.13
67
14.51
3e-05
0.06
0.004
2.57
0.06
68
0.89
8e-05
0.06
0.01
0.38
0.16
69
5.65
7e-05
0.06
0.009
0.65
0.15
70
5.27
6e-05
0.06
-
0.98
0.13
71
7.73
8e-05
0.06
-
1.98
0.18
72
6.9
8e-05
0.06
-
2.94
0.16
73
0.48
7e-05
0.07
-
0.36
0.14
74
0.49
8e-05
0.06
0.01
0.42
0.17
75
7.51
0.0001
0.06
0.012
0.68
0.2
76
8.65
7e-05
0.06
0.008
2.31
0.14
77
15.94
2e-05
0.06
-
1.6
0.04
78
4.18
7e-05
0.06
0.008
0.07
0.14
79
4.0
7e-05
0.05
-
0.66
0.14
80
0.09
8e-05
0.06
-
2.41
0.18
81
7.56
9e-05
0.06
0.011
0.93
0.19
82
7.95
0.0001
0.05
0.01
0.88
0.2
83
0.17
8e-05
0.06
0.011
1.61
0.18
84
5.54
8e-05
0.05
-
0.83
0.16
85
5.23
6e-05
0.06
-
0.96
0.13
86
0.57
9e-05
0.06
0.011
0.39
0.19
87
6.98
0.0001
0.05
0.011
1.3
0.2
88
8.68
7e-05
0.05
0.008
2.91
0.15
89
7.79
0.0001
0.05
0.011
1.14
0.2
90
9.1
7e-05
0.05
0.007
1.52
0.14
91
10.81
6e-05
0.05
-
1.02
0.12
92
0.34
0.00011
0.05
0.012
2.96
0.23
93
1.41
7e-05
0.05
-
2.43
0.14
94
5.14
7e-05
0.05
0.007
2.53
0.14
95
3.99
7e-05
0.05
0.007
0.0
0.15
96
8.45
8e-05
0.06
0.01
2.66
0.17
97
14.64
3e-05
0.05
0.003
2.69
0.07
98
6.08
0.00011
0.05
-
1.0
0.23
99
6.79
0.00011
0.04
0.01
0.47
0.23
100
5.02
7e-05
0.05
0.007
2.57
0.15
101
0.37
0.0001
0.05
-
0.68
0.21
102
11.32
7e-05
0.05
0.006
1.48
0.14
182
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:191==
103
2.59
7e-05
0.04
0.006
0.1
0.15
104
5.68
0.0001
0.05
0.009
1.4
0.21
105
3.94
8e-05
0.04
-
2.42
0.17
106
6.26
0.00011
0.04
0.01
0.63
0.22
107
3.16
8e-05
0.04
-
2.41
0.16
108
6.7
0.0001
0.05
0.01
1.11
0.21
109
6.93
0.00011
0.05
0.01
3.09
0.23
110
7.83
0.00011
0.04
-
2.97
0.23
111
2.84
7e-05
0.04
0.006
2.06
0.14
112
0.39
0.00012
0.04
0.011
2.96
0.25
113
6.51
0.00012
0.04
0.01
1.8
0.25
114
9.1
7e-05
0.05
0.007
1.65
0.15
115
9.03
7e-05
0.04
-
1.22
0.15
116
0.61
0.00012
0.04
0.011
2.12
0.25
117
7.16
0.00013
0.04
0.011
1.74
0.26
118
9.21
7e-05
0.04
0.006
1.14
0.15
119
4.65
8e-05
0.04
0.007
2.43
0.17
120
5.78
0.0001
0.04
-
2.42
0.21
121
10.96
8e-05
0.04
0.006
2.59
0.16
122
2.51
7e-05
0.04
-
2.4
0.15
TIC 229838097
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
11.28
0.0
3.66
0.011
1.47
0.0
2
14.3
0.0
1.91
0.01
0.53
0.01
3
9.28
0.0
0.88
0.004
0.79
0.01
4
14.98
1e-05
0.44
-
2.53
0.01
5
8.12
3e-05
0.18
-
2.21
0.04
6
22.57
3e-05
0.14
-
1.67
0.04
7
25.58
4e-05
0.1
0.006
2.35
0.06
8
0.97
9e-05
0.1
-
1.58
0.13
9
3.01
8e-05
0.07
-
2.89
0.11
10
0.25
0.00013
0.04
-
0.95
0.18
TIC 231014033
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
30.62
0.0
0.86
0.004
2.36
0.01
2
23.6
1e-05
0.57
-
0.86
0.01
3
35.49
1e-05
0.57
0.005
1.78
0.01
4
22.99
1e-05
0.56
-
2.97
0.01
5
22.89
1e-05
0.5
-
1.96
0.01
6
45.01
1e-05
0.42
0.007
1.55
0.02
7
38.16
1e-05
0.4
0.006
0.32
0.02
8
24.05
1e-05
0.38
0.006
2.66
0.01
9
41.09
1e-05
0.36
-
2.56
0.02
10
33.13
2e-05
0.36
-
2.53
0.02
11
24.9
1e-05
0.29
-
1.51
0.02
12
40.17
2e-05
0.28
0.006
2.96
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
183
==PAGE:192==
13
23.42
2e-05
0.23
-
1.25
0.03
14
41.48
3e-05
0.17
0.006
2.63
0.03
15
28.43
2e-05
0.15
0.005
0.67
0.03
16
33.61
3e-05
0.14
-
0.39
0.04
17
39.64
3e-05
0.11
-
1.99
0.04
18
21.94
4e-05
0.1
0.006
0.42
0.06
19
24.86
4e-05
0.09
-
0.14
0.05
20
44.41
5e-05
0.09
0.006
2.31
0.07
21
29.6
5e-05
0.08
-
0.4
0.07
22
52.87
5e-05
0.08
0.005
0.64
0.06
23
60.29
5e-05
0.08
-
0.99
0.07
24
27.96
4e-05
0.08
0.004
2.57
0.05
25
37.17
6e-05
0.07
-
2.87
0.09
26
30.42
5e-05
0.07
-
0.15
0.07
27
34.49
5e-05
0.07
0.005
2.31
0.07
28
26.23
7e-05
0.06
0.006
1.04
0.1
29
2.63
5e-05
0.06
-
0.48
0.06
30
27.61
5e-05
0.06
0.004
2.03
0.06
31
63.41
7e-05
0.06
-
0.92
0.1
32
67.12
6e-05
0.06
-
1.57
0.09
33
29.2
6e-05
0.05
0.004
0.41
0.09
34
19.8
6e-05
0.05
-
0.75
0.09
35
27.64
6e-05
0.05
-
1.09
0.08
36
56.14
8e-05
0.05
0.006
0.59
0.11
37
34.83
7e-05
0.05
0.005
0.59
0.1
38
36.84
8e-05
0.05
-
0.7
0.11
39
59.28
0.0001
0.04
0.006
2.7
0.14
40
34.05
8e-05
0.05
-
0.79
0.11
41
21.4
8e-05
0.04
0.005
1.06
0.12
42
39.26
9e-05
0.04
0.005
0.73
0.12
43
27.85
8e-05
0.04
0.005
2.58
0.11
44
48.77
0.00011
0.04
-
1.56
0.16
45
25.34
9e-05
0.04
-
1.32
0.12
46
54.43
9e-05
0.04
0.005
1.43
0.13
47
28.26
9e-05
0.04
0.005
2.88
0.12
48
0.55
0.00015
0.04
-
2.21
0.21
49
46.91
8e-05
0.04
-
1.26
0.11
50
40.75
9e-05
0.04
-
2.62
0.12
51
0.18
0.00016
0.04
0.008
0.04
0.22
52
0.74
0.00015
0.03
0.007
2.63
0.21
53
21.12
0.00011
0.04
-
1.03
0.15
54
48.43
0.0001
0.03
0.005
1.18
0.14
55
67.2
0.0001
0.03
0.005
1.04
0.14
56
63.68
9e-05
0.03
0.004
2.29
0.13
57
36.38
0.00012
0.03
0.005
0.38
0.16
58
28.83
0.00014
0.03
-
1.39
0.2
59
36.04
0.00011
0.03
-
2.03
0.15
60
74.81
0.0001
0.03
-
0.89
0.14
61
1.01
0.00016
0.03
0.007
1.29
0.22
62
46.33
0.00013
0.03
-
0.24
0.18
184
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:193==
63
59.89
0.00013
0.03
0.005
2.92
0.17
64
52.51
0.00013
0.03
-
0.29
0.18
65
20.92
0.00012
0.03
0.005
0.74
0.16
66
19.4
0.00014
0.03
0.005
0.41
0.19
67
25.9
0.0001
0.03
0.004
0.33
0.13
TIC 23137953
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.73
0.0
1.82
0.01
1.75
0.01
2
22.91
1e-05
1.37
0.011
2.62
0.01
3
13.74
1e-05
1.13
-
2.38
0.01
4
12.26
1e-05
0.73
0.009
2.93
0.01
5
13.34
2e-05
0.51
0.011
3.06
0.02
6
10.57
1e-05
0.43
0.006
2.21
0.01
7
13.05
1e-05
0.42
-
2.65
0.02
8
27.48
2e-05
0.34
0.01
1.27
0.03
9
9.98
2e-05
0.22
0.005
2.17
0.02
10
21.8
2e-05
0.22
-
0.47
0.03
11
20.72
2e-05
0.19
-
2.2
0.03
12
25.62
6e-05
0.18
0.015
3.06
0.08
13
0.23
8e-05
0.14
0.015
0.9
0.11
14
25.77
6e-05
0.13
-
1.84
0.08
15
21.21
5e-05
0.13
0.009
0.73
0.07
16
31.76
4e-05
0.12
0.007
0.22
0.06
17
17.85
3e-05
0.12
0.006
1.06
0.05
18
20.17
4e-05
0.12
-
0.21
0.05
19
1.32
0.00011
0.11
0.017
1.76
0.15
20
20.37
7e-05
0.1
-
0.89
0.09
21
33.4
6e-05
0.1
-
1.01
0.08
22
16.24
4e-05
0.1
0.006
0.07
0.06
23
28.19
5e-05
0.08
0.005
1.84
0.06
24
17.62
5e-05
0.08
0.005
1.04
0.07
25
27.8
7e-05
0.08
-
1.76
0.09
26
26.88
9e-05
0.07
0.009
1.7
0.13
27
21.44
0.0001
0.07
0.01
0.75
0.13
28
31.35
7e-05
0.07
-
0.19
0.1
29
24.9
0.00011
0.07
0.01
1.73
0.15
30
27.15
9e-05
0.08
-
3.11
0.13
31
28.6
7e-05
0.07
-
2.79
0.09
32
0.35
0.00014
0.07
0.014
2.91
0.19
33
11.44
6e-05
0.07
-
2.09
0.08
TIC 231864125
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
25.68
9e-05
0.92
0.008
0.01
0.01
2
33.7
0.00011
0.73
-
2.54
0.01
3
37.72
0.00014
0.63
-
1.57
0.01
4
35.32
0.00015
0.56
0.008
1.78
0.01
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
185
==PAGE:194==
5
30.51
0.00021
0.35
0.007
1.93
0.02
6
31.31
0.00021
0.34
-
2.35
0.02
7
28.72
0.00028
0.29
-
1.24
0.03
8
26.53
0.0004
0.21
0.008
2.52
0.04
9
24.38
0.00048
0.17
0.008
3.09
0.04
10
23.41
0.00055
0.15
-
1.31
0.05
11
31.67
0.00054
0.14
0.007
0.23
0.05
12
22.73
0.00064
0.13
0.008
0.02
0.06
13
25.27
0.00092
0.09
-
3.14
0.08
14
28.84
0.00082
0.1
-
2.26
0.08
15
19.48
0.00085
0.09
-
2.75
0.08
16
20.51
0.00091
0.09
0.007
2.28
0.08
17
27.2
0.00103
0.08
-
1.83
0.1
18
1.14
0.00122
0.08
0.009
1.59
0.11
19
21.42
0.00132
0.06
-
0.29
0.12
20
31.87
0.00126
0.06
-
1.96
0.12
21
40.57
0.00153
0.05
0.008
2.35
0.14
22
19.75
0.00145
0.05
-
2.07
0.13
23
40.77
0.00158
0.05
0.008
2.73
0.15
24
42.41
0.00147
0.05
-
0.05
0.14
25
46.53
0.00157
0.05
-
1.65
0.15
26
35.24
0.00177
0.05
-
0.21
0.16
TIC 233737023
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.15
0.0
0.86
-
1.29
0.0
2
17.74
0.0
0.8
-
0.01
0.0
3
11.05
0.0
0.67
-
2.02
0.0
4
17.98
0.0
0.61
-
1.42
0.0
5
15.8
0.0
0.62
-
2.2
0.0
6
11.58
0.0
0.48
0.001
0.66
0.0
7
14.49
0.0
0.47
0.002
2.07
0.0
8
11.24
0.0
0.42
-
1.37
0.01
9
13.57
0.0
0.37
0.002
1.05
0.0
10
10.7
0.0
0.36
0.001
3.04
0.0
11
16.89
0.0
0.34
0.001
3.14
0.0
12
11.31
0.0
0.35
0.002
0.48
0.01
13
8.74
0.0
0.27
0.001
2.01
0.0
14
10.39
0.0
0.26
-
0.09
0.01
15
11.91
0.0
0.26
0.001
3.09
0.0
16
12.03
0.0
0.25
0.001
1.28
0.01
17
16.3
0.0
0.24
-
1.92
0.0
18
10.32
0.0
0.24
0.002
0.77
0.01
19
12.44
0.0
0.19
-
2.34
0.01
20
15.32
0.0
0.16
0.001
0.29
0.01
21
12.18
0.0
0.16
0.001
0.07
0.01
22
15.19
0.0
0.15
0.001
2.56
0.01
23
9.32
0.0
0.12
0.001
0.96
0.01
24
18.38
0.0
0.11
0.001
1.41
0.01
186
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:195==
25
14.33
1e-05
0.09
-
3.04
0.01
26
12.12
1e-05
0.09
-
0.04
0.01
27
0.79
2e-05
0.07
0.003
1.39
0.05
28
12.74
1e-05
0.07
0.001
1.6
0.01
29
14.64
1e-05
0.07
0.001
1.23
0.02
30
10.5
1e-05
0.06
0.001
2.75
0.02
31
14.06
1e-05
0.06
0.001
0.87
0.02
32
0.92
3e-05
0.05
-
3.05
0.05
33
10.76
1e-05
0.05
0.001
0.95
0.02
34
13.2
1e-05
0.05
-
0.51
0.02
35
12.52
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.76
0.03
36
2.59
2e-05
0.05
0.001
1.4
0.03
37
12.9
1e-05
0.05
-
2.75
0.02
38
8.28
1e-05
0.04
0.001
0.83
0.02
39
10.05
1e-05
0.04
-
2.09
0.02
40
1.81
2e-05
0.04
0.002
0.83
0.05
41
1.79
2e-05
0.04
0.002
2.24
0.05
42
0.16
6e-05
0.03
-
0.19
0.12
43
0.65
4e-05
0.04
0.003
0.11
0.08
44
12.56
1e-05
0.03
0.001
0.48
0.03
45
0.21
6e-05
0.03
0.004
2.5
0.13
46
1.86
3e-05
0.03
0.002
2.59
0.07
47
3.36
3e-05
0.03
0.001
0.36
0.05
48
0.13
7e-05
0.03
0.004
1.79
0.14
49
1.95
4e-05
0.03
-
0.39
0.09
50
0.94
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.57
0.12
51
24.47
2e-05
0.02
-
0.57
0.04
52
1.73
4e-05
0.02
0.002
3.0
0.08
53
13.66
3e-05
0.02
-
2.12
0.06
54
3.25
3e-05
0.02
0.002
1.58
0.07
55
32.08
2e-05
0.02
0.001
1.83
0.04
56
1.01
7e-05
0.02
0.003
0.27
0.15
57
0.87
7e-05
0.02
0.003
3.02
0.14
58
0.29
0.0001
0.02
-
1.04
0.2
59
0.75
8e-05
0.02
-
0.53
0.17
60
13.47
3e-05
0.02
-
0.09
0.06
61
15.98
2e-05
0.02
0.001
0.03
0.05
62
1.02
8e-05
0.02
-
0.96
0.16
63
2.64
4e-05
0.02
0.002
3.11
0.09
64
0.39
0.0001
0.02
-
1.75
0.22
65
0.97
9e-05
0.02
0.003
0.95
0.18
66
3.7
4e-05
0.02
-
1.1
0.09
TIC 234528371
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
32.1
0.0
2.32
0.004
0.29
0.0
2
37.98
0.0
1.59
-
2.46
0.0
3
40.79
0.0
1.23
-
0.24
0.0
4
22.26
0.0
0.99
0.004
0.77
0.0
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
187
==PAGE:196==
5
27.37
0.0
0.95
0.003
1.86
0.0
6
27.18
0.0
0.7
-
2.93
0.0
7
27.29
0.0
0.7
0.003
0.79
0.0
8
34.86
1e-05
0.45
0.004
2.28
0.01
9
21.45
1e-05
0.3
-
2.16
0.01
10
21.14
1e-05
0.23
0.003
0.67
0.01
11
28.31
1e-05
0.23
-
1.9
0.02
12
51.08
1e-05
0.2
0.004
1.01
0.02
13
26.33
1e-05
0.2
-
2.46
0.02
14
54.37
1e-05
0.18
-
1.04
0.02
15
17.48
2e-05
0.18
-
1.26
0.02
16
18.89
2e-05
0.13
0.004
0.51
0.03
17
22.82
2e-05
0.12
-
1.49
0.03
18
17.51
2e-05
0.12
0.004
0.54
0.03
19
30.96
2e-05
0.11
-
3.03
0.03
20
29.86
2e-05
0.09
-
1.36
0.03
21
30.06
3e-05
0.09
0.004
2.86
0.04
22
20.51
3e-05
0.09
0.003
0.28
0.04
23
22.5
3e-05
0.09
0.004
0.72
0.05
24
28.09
3e-05
0.09
0.003
1.21
0.04
25
16.04
3e-05
0.07
-
2.39
0.04
26
15.33
3e-05
0.07
0.003
2.63
0.04
27
21.81
4e-05
0.07
0.003
1.62
0.05
28
14.47
3e-05
0.06
-
2.8
0.05
29
18.24
3e-05
0.06
0.003
2.19
0.05
30
28.58
4e-05
0.06
-
0.99
0.06
31
20.41
4e-05
0.06
0.003
2.43
0.05
32
18.53
5e-05
0.05
0.004
2.1
0.08
33
33.72
4e-05
0.05
-
0.58
0.05
34
31.23
5e-05
0.05
-
2.09
0.07
35
20.15
5e-05
0.05
-
2.76
0.07
36
35.41
5e-05
0.04
0.003
2.66
0.08
37
18.17
5e-05
0.04
-
2.99
0.07
38
5.87
7e-05
0.04
0.004
1.82
0.1
39
15.96
6e-05
0.03
0.003
2.04
0.09
40
54.35
8e-05
0.03
-
2.83
0.11
41
8.69
7e-05
0.03
0.003
2.26
0.11
42
64.21
7e-05
0.03
0.003
0.24
0.11
43
25.06
0.0001
0.03
0.004
0.32
0.14
44
24.95
0.0001
0.03
0.004
0.12
0.14
45
20.71
0.0001
0.02
0.003
1.47
0.15
46
2.82
0.00015
0.02
0.005
2.04
0.21
47
26.92
0.0001
0.02
0.003
0.48
0.15
TIC 23555158
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
34.03
0.0
1.11
-
0.31
0.0
2
30.13
0.0
0.89
-
0.84
0.01
3
35.89
1e-05
0.42
-
2.18
0.01
188
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:197==
4
33.14
1e-05
0.39
0.004
1.86
0.01
5
30.0
1e-05
0.37
0.005
2.22
0.01
6
33.02
1e-05
0.35
-
0.57
0.01
7
32.62
1e-05
0.3
0.004
0.99
0.01
8
36.18
1e-05
0.3
-
0.15
0.01
9
32.76
1e-05
0.22
-
2.18
0.02
10
0.14
4e-05
0.09
-
1.97
0.06
11
0.44
4e-05
0.07
-
0.3
0.06
12
34.84
3e-05
0.06
0.003
1.19
0.05
13
34.56
4e-05
0.06
-
0.32
0.06
14
32.32
4e-05
0.06
0.003
0.58
0.05
15
0.12
7e-05
0.05
0.005
2.77
0.1
16
35.23
7e-05
0.04
-
2.5
0.09
17
0.4
8e-05
0.04
0.004
1.69
0.11
18
34.42
9e-05
0.02
0.003
2.38
0.12
19
29.69
0.00013
0.02
-
0.78
0.18
20
1.02
0.00013
0.02
-
3.06
0.17
TIC 235841944
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
27.35
1e-05
0.39
-
3.01
0.02
2
37.72
2e-05
0.24
-
0.89
0.02
3
34.19
2e-05
0.18
0.006
1.13
0.03
4
19.59
4e-05
0.13
-
2.37
0.05
5
40.7
4e-05
0.09
-
0.66
0.06
6
32.53
4e-05
0.08
-
3.05
0.06
7
25.44
7e-05
0.08
0.007
1.98
0.09
8
30.32
6e-05
0.08
0.007
0.65
0.09
9
26.71
5e-05
0.08
0.006
0.73
0.07
10
35.16
9e-05
0.05
-
3.04
0.13
11
31.46
9e-05
0.05
-
0.66
0.12
12
0.17
0.00015
0.05
-
1.77
0.21
13
35.82
8e-05
0.05
-
2.07
0.11
14
44.04
0.00012
0.04
-
0.48
0.17
15
0.73
0.00021
0.04
-
1.84
0.3
16
34.8
0.00013
0.04
0.008
1.64
0.18
17
3.44
0.00013
0.04
-
1.54
0.18
18
13.4
9e-05
0.04
-
2.93
0.12
19
46.1
0.0001
0.04
0.006
2.54
0.14
20
40.52
9e-05
0.04
0.005
0.46
0.13
21
12.61
8e-05
0.04
0.004
0.7
0.1
22
2.6
0.00015
0.04
0.008
1.29
0.21
23
28.83
8e-05
0.04
-
1.87
0.12
24
0.55
0.00019
0.04
-
0.82
0.26
25
1.28
0.00019
0.04
0.01
1.33
0.26
26
22.96
8e-05
0.04
0.004
0.26
0.11
27
52.54
0.0001
0.04
0.005
0.83
0.14
28
43.39
0.00014
0.04
0.007
1.91
0.19
29
23.19
0.00011
0.04
0.006
2.3
0.16
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
189
==PAGE:198==
30
2.26
0.00016
0.04
-
2.12
0.22
31
26.54
0.00012
0.04
-
3.11
0.17
32
29.38
0.00014
0.04
-
2.63
0.2
TIC 235948971
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.77
0.0
0.5
-
2.2
0.01
2
1.67
1e-05
0.36
0.004
2.45
0.01
3
0.91
1e-05
0.27
0.004
2.09
0.01
4
1.32
1e-05
0.18
0.003
2.41
0.02
5
0.59
2e-05
0.17
0.005
1.71
0.03
6
1.18
1e-05
0.17
-
2.61
0.02
7
1.11
1e-05
0.11
-
2.89
0.02
8
1.01
2e-05
0.09
-
0.17
0.03
9
0.76
3e-05
0.09
0.004
0.23
0.05
10
0.49
3e-05
0.08
0.005
1.44
0.06
11
0.85
3e-05
0.07
0.004
0.76
0.06
12
1.07
3e-05
0.04
-
0.5
0.06
13
1.17
4e-05
0.04
-
1.9
0.08
14
0.1
8e-05
0.04
-
1.93
0.14
15
0.41
7e-05
0.04
-
1.77
0.12
16
0.7
6e-05
0.04
0.004
2.46
0.11
TIC 237913294
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.3
0.00026
1.17
-
2.71
0.01
2
13.03
0.00029
0.94
0.014
1.5
0.01
3
17.68
0.00031
0.94
-
1.99
0.02
4
17.03
0.00044
0.72
0.016
2.95
0.02
5
14.14
0.00048
0.62
-
2.13
0.02
6
15.45
0.00054
0.61
0.016
2.48
0.03
7
12.91
0.00048
0.58
0.014
1.04
0.02
8
14.75
0.00067
0.48
0.016
2.64
0.03
9
15.92
0.00072
0.46
-
2.91
0.04
10
22.03
0.00073
0.29
-
2.74
0.04
11
13.86
0.0011
0.27
-
3.02
0.06
12
17.56
0.00101
0.29
0.015
1.86
0.05
13
14.29
0.00144
0.21
-
1.19
0.07
14
21.33
0.00137
0.17
-
0.16
0.07
15
19.41
0.0017
0.14
0.012
0.44
0.09
16
24.79
0.00151
0.13
-
1.34
0.08
17
16.8
0.00237
0.14
-
2.27
0.12
18
25.75
0.00155
0.13
-
1.49
0.08
19
18.13
0.00222
0.13
-
2.68
0.11
20
17.06
0.00201
0.16
-
0.6
0.1
21
13.61
0.0027
0.11
0.015
2.11
0.14
22
16.46
0.00331
0.1
0.016
0.67
0.17
23
15.01
0.00335
0.1
0.016
2.2
0.17
190
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:199==
TIC 238079810
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.79
0.00011
0.52
0.01
2.24
0.02
2
13.44
0.00018
0.47
0.016
1.62
0.03
3
13.36
0.00019
0.44
-
1.13
0.03
4
1.88
0.00013
0.4
0.01
2.05
0.02
5
12.74
0.00024
0.34
0.015
2.79
0.04
6
1.25
0.00031
0.23
0.013
1.5
0.06
7
13.6
0.0003
0.29
0.015
0.05
0.05
8
2.78
0.00014
0.28
0.007
0.65
0.03
9
14.79
0.00031
0.25
0.014
1.97
0.06
10
2.62
0.00016
0.27
-
0.31
0.03
11
12.66
0.00032
0.26
0.015
0.32
0.06
12
15.4
0.00024
0.23
0.01
2.07
0.04
13
2.7
0.00019
0.22
0.008
2.04
0.03
14
1.32
0.00038
0.19
-
2.14
0.07
15
12.42
0.00059
0.14
0.015
2.99
0.11
16
15.05
0.00045
0.16
0.013
1.91
0.08
17
0.91
0.00046
0.16
0.014
2.69
0.08
18
1.19
0.00042
0.17
0.013
1.58
0.08
19
15.49
0.00033
0.15
-
2.0
0.06
20
1.98
0.00037
0.14
0.01
1.65
0.07
21
15.31
0.00046
0.13
0.011
2.1
0.08
22
11.86
0.00059
0.13
-
2.4
0.11
23
12.43
0.00059
0.14
-
0.6
0.11
24
0.62
0.0005
0.16
-
0.05
0.09
25
14.53
0.00059
0.13
0.014
1.12
0.11
26
0.39
0.00076
0.11
-
0.11
0.14
27
0.22
0.0007
0.13
0.016
2.53
0.13
28
1.39
0.00051
0.14
-
3.01
0.09
29
11.72
0.00073
0.11
-
2.56
0.13
30
13.97
0.0007
0.12
0.015
0.78
0.13
31
14.32
0.00074
0.11
0.015
1.51
0.13
32
12.59
0.00085
0.1
-
0.63
0.15
33
1.68
0.00058
0.1
-
1.0
0.11
34
15.22
0.0007
0.09
-
0.52
0.13
35
11.95
0.00082
0.1
-
2.82
0.15
36
0.08
0.00119
0.08
0.017
0.66
0.22
37
14.01
0.00088
0.09
0.015
0.04
0.16
38
11.48
0.00095
0.08
0.014
0.48
0.17
39
0.26
0.00107
0.08
-
2.74
0.19
40
11.36
0.00092
0.08
-
0.7
0.17
41
12.77
0.00097
0.09
-
0.62
0.18
42
14.87
0.00087
0.08
0.013
0.27
0.16
43
13.86
0.00119
0.07
0.015
2.18
0.22
44
1.25
0.00035
0.21
0.013
0.68
0.06
45
11.21
0.00098
0.08
0.014
0.32
0.18
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
191
==PAGE:200==
46
11.6
0.00102
0.08
0.014
0.63
0.18
47
14.49
0.00108
0.07
0.014
2.44
0.2
48
12.17
0.00104
0.08
0.015
0.01
0.19
49
12.26
0.00128
0.06
0.015
3.13
0.23
50
0.41
0.00119
0.07
0.015
2.82
0.22
51
0.52
0.00106
0.08
0.015
0.19
0.19
52
14.96
0.00115
0.06
-
0.04
0.21
53
0.32
0.00133
0.07
0.016
1.81
0.24
54
14.44
0.00124
0.06
0.014
0.23
0.23
55
1.59
0.00101
0.06
0.012
0.36
0.18
56
14.37
0.00122
0.07
0.015
2.75
0.22
57
14.85
0.00114
0.07
-
1.23
0.21
58
10.81
0.00128
0.06
-
1.1
0.23
59
0.69
0.00133
0.06
-
2.42
0.24
60
13.91
0.00142
0.06
0.015
1.78
0.26
TIC 238225995
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
16.12
0.0
3.15
-
1.14
0.0
2
26.28
0.0
1.64
0.003
1.36
0.0
3
17.21
1e-05
0.87
-
1.54
0.0
4
25.02
1e-05
0.84
-
1.76
0.0
5
19.97
1e-05
0.81
0.004
1.02
0.0
6
18.85
1e-05
0.76
0.004
2.91
0.01
7
20.29
1e-05
0.73
-
2.41
0.0
8
2.16
2e-05
0.65
-
1.48
0.01
9
2.04
3e-05
0.56
0.01
1.72
0.02
10
31.52
1e-05
0.55
0.003
2.51
0.01
11
10.32
3e-05
0.5
0.011
0.81
0.02
12
2.1
3e-05
0.46
-
2.53
0.02
13
2.24
3e-05
0.46
-
1.87
0.02
14
18.67
1e-05
0.46
-
1.1
0.01
15
28.99
1e-05
0.44
0.003
1.41
0.01
16
21.33
2e-05
0.41
0.004
2.98
0.01
17
16.53
2e-05
0.36
-
2.97
0.01
18
15.37
2e-05
0.36
-
2.33
0.01
19
23.53
2e-05
0.35
0.004
0.01
0.01
20
2.54
3e-05
0.36
-
2.16
0.02
21
22.19
2e-05
0.34
0.004
2.93
0.01
22
20.94
2e-05
0.29
-
1.79
0.01
23
20.34
2e-05
0.29
-
1.45
0.01
24
4.12
3e-05
0.28
-
0.63
0.02
25
21.95
2e-05
0.28
0.004
0.58
0.02
26
12.4
7e-05
0.27
0.012
2.1
0.04
27
1.33
5e-05
0.28
0.01
2.61
0.03
28
21.27
3e-05
0.25
-
0.51
0.02
29
27.3
2e-05
0.23
-
0.83
0.01
30
1.99
7e-05
0.21
0.01
2.82
0.05
31
12.44
8e-05
0.21
0.011
1.09
0.05
192
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:201==
32
1.26
8e-05
0.19
0.01
3.08
0.05
33
22.6
3e-05
0.19
0.003
2.47
0.02
34
19.88
3e-05
0.19
0.004
2.95
0.02
35
16.36
4e-05
0.18
0.004
0.19
0.02
36
2.43
7e-05
0.18
-
1.82
0.04
37
19.16
4e-05
0.16
-
0.14
0.02
38
1.47
9e-05
0.15
-
0.2
0.06
39
11.57
0.00012
0.14
-
2.3
0.08
40
1.58
9e-05
0.16
0.009
2.47
0.06
41
9.88
0.00011
0.15
0.011
0.05
0.07
42
11.0
0.00013
0.15
0.012
0.71
0.08
43
14.96
6e-05
0.14
0.005
0.37
0.04
44
7.78
9e-05
0.14
0.008
1.03
0.06
45
2.33
0.0001
0.13
-
1.97
0.06
46
19.53
4e-05
0.13
0.004
2.41
0.03
47
11.76
0.00014
0.14
0.012
1.66
0.09
48
23.73
5e-05
0.13
-
0.25
0.03
49
19.57
4e-05
0.13
0.004
0.97
0.03
50
1.56
0.00012
0.12
-
0.53
0.08
51
13.67
0.00012
0.12
0.01
0.47
0.08
52
10.9
0.00018
0.1
0.012
2.63
0.12
53
11.63
0.00017
0.11
0.012
2.09
0.11
54
12.13
0.00021
0.09
-
1.49
0.13
55
3.74
8e-05
0.1
0.005
1.13
0.05
56
9.65
0.00019
0.09
-
0.4
0.12
57
11.87
0.00021
0.09
0.012
2.74
0.13
58
10.43
0.00018
0.09
-
1.92
0.12
59
3.13
0.00012
0.09
0.007
1.57
0.08
60
29.95
5e-05
0.09
-
2.06
0.03
61
25.13
7e-05
0.08
-
0.64
0.05
62
10.01
0.00019
0.09
-
2.77
0.12
63
24.98
7e-05
0.08
0.004
0.4
0.05
64
23.04
7e-05
0.08
-
2.99
0.04
65
0.85
0.00019
0.08
-
0.43
0.12
66
11.84
0.00027
0.07
-
0.68
0.17
67
24.33
8e-05
0.07
-
0.91
0.05
68
9.03
0.00022
0.07
0.011
3.09
0.14
69
11.51
0.00024
0.07
-
0.2
0.16
70
13.55
0.00021
0.07
-
2.68
0.13
71
0.17
0.00026
0.07
-
2.46
0.17
72
12.57
0.00023
0.07
0.011
2.36
0.15
73
10.81
0.00026
0.07
0.012
1.35
0.17
74
13.47
0.00022
0.07
-
0.08
0.14
75
11.39
0.00026
0.07
0.012
1.47
0.17
76
14.38
0.00015
0.06
0.006
3.09
0.1
77
9.89
0.00029
0.06
-
1.68
0.19
78
0.96
0.00025
0.06
-
0.61
0.16
79
25.5
8e-05
0.07
0.004
1.22
0.05
80
8.7
0.00021
0.06
-
2.58
0.14
81
11.31
0.00027
0.07
0.011
3.09
0.18
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
193
==PAGE:202==
82
25.57
9e-05
0.06
0.004
0.75
0.06
83
0.59
0.00029
0.06
0.012
2.4
0.19
84
18.11
0.0001
0.06
0.004
0.75
0.06
85
1.89
0.00024
0.06
0.01
3.0
0.15
86
12.69
0.00028
0.06
-
0.83
0.18
87
8.08
0.00019
0.06
-
2.0
0.12
88
8.15
0.00019
0.06
-
0.45
0.12
89
22.81
0.0001
0.06
0.004
2.65
0.06
90
9.56
0.00032
0.06
0.012
1.12
0.21
91
9.33
0.00031
0.06
0.012
1.89
0.2
92
10.87
0.00031
0.06
-
0.29
0.2
93
10.71
0.0003
0.06
0.011
1.51
0.2
94
9.41
0.00035
0.05
-
1.88
0.23
95
0.45
0.00035
0.05
-
2.36
0.23
96
11.16
0.00035
0.05
-
2.62
0.23
97
11.72
0.00036
0.05
0.012
2.55
0.23
98
12.48
0.00036
0.05
-
0.18
0.23
99
0.54
0.00036
0.05
0.012
1.68
0.23
100
0.93
0.0003
0.05
0.01
2.27
0.2
101
11.94
0.00039
0.05
0.012
2.1
0.25
102
34.97
0.0001
0.05
-
2.12
0.06
103
8.31
0.00025
0.05
-
1.15
0.16
104
10.64
0.00037
0.05
-
2.87
0.24
105
11.39
0.00037
0.05
0.012
2.03
0.24
106
10.91
0.00039
0.05
-
2.96
0.25
107
9.22
0.0004
0.04
-
1.17
0.26
108
0.37
0.00038
0.05
-
1.5
0.25
109
10.66
0.00033
0.05
0.011
2.95
0.21
110
10.73
0.00038
0.05
-
1.35
0.25
111
10.23
0.00037
0.04
-
0.0
0.24
112
0.27
0.00038
0.05
0.012
1.83
0.24
113
0.1
0.00039
0.04
0.011
1.36
0.26
TIC 238898583
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.94
1e-05
1.32
0.01
0.14
0.01
2
1.5
1e-05
0.35
-
1.36
0.02
3
0.47
3e-05
0.25
0.01
0.83
0.04
4
1.8
2e-05
0.25
-
3.12
0.03
5
12.59
3e-05
0.21
0.01
2.23
0.05
6
12.66
3e-05
0.2
0.01
1.77
0.05
7
13.84
4e-05
0.17
-
1.55
0.06
8
0.31
5e-05
0.16
-
1.84
0.07
9
14.12
5e-05
0.15
-
1.1
0.08
10
2.73
2e-05
0.14
0.005
2.98
0.04
11
1.61
4e-05
0.13
0.007
3.11
0.05
12
12.67
5e-05
0.12
-
3.13
0.08
13
0.11
6e-05
0.12
0.012
1.99
0.1
14
12.02
6e-05
0.11
0.01
2.85
0.09
194
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:203==
15
12.99
5e-05
0.12
-
2.65
0.08
16
13.23
6e-05
0.13
0.011
3.02
0.08
17
12.97
7e-05
0.1
-
0.18
0.1
18
11.7
9e-05
0.09
0.012
0.19
0.13
19
14.59
0.0001
0.1
0.015
0.9
0.14
20
13.8
7e-05
0.1
-
1.35
0.11
21
10.97
9e-05
0.1
0.013
0.54
0.13
22
11.46
9e-05
0.1
-
2.13
0.13
23
13.45
0.00012
0.09
0.015
1.6
0.17
24
10.76
8e-05
0.09
0.011
1.05
0.12
25
13.83
7e-05
0.09
-
2.02
0.11
26
13.22
9e-05
0.08
0.011
2.05
0.14
27
13.13
7e-05
0.09
-
1.5
0.1
28
0.63
9e-05
0.07
0.009
1.34
0.13
29
12.13
0.0001
0.08
0.012
0.45
0.15
30
11.99
9e-05
0.08
0.01
2.72
0.14
31
11.72
9e-05
0.08
0.012
1.1
0.14
32
10.91
0.00011
0.07
-
1.13
0.16
33
13.47
0.00013
0.08
0.015
0.66
0.2
34
14.32
0.00011
0.08
-
1.74
0.16
35
11.33
0.00014
0.07
0.014
0.01
0.2
36
12.83
0.0001
0.08
-
1.19
0.15
37
11.24
0.00015
0.06
-
2.07
0.22
38
14.74
0.00016
0.06
0.014
2.04
0.23
39
13.55
0.00016
0.06
-
2.56
0.24
40
0.36
0.0001
0.06
0.01
3.09
0.15
41
13.99
0.00015
0.06
0.013
0.41
0.23
42
11.53
0.00014
0.06
-
3.06
0.2
43
13.93
0.00012
0.06
-
1.6
0.18
44
14.82
0.00014
0.06
0.013
3.11
0.21
45
14.85
0.00014
0.06
-
2.6
0.21
46
11.02
0.00017
0.05
0.013
1.55
0.25
47
2.81
6e-05
0.05
-
1.65
0.09
48
15.17
0.00016
0.05
-
0.8
0.23
49
14.38
0.00015
0.05
-
0.64
0.22
50
12.1
0.00014
0.05
0.011
2.58
0.2
51
11.42
0.00014
0.06
-
1.06
0.21
52
11.19
0.00017
0.05
-
1.39
0.25
53
14.28
0.00014
0.05
0.011
0.49
0.21
54
12.5
0.00012
0.05
-
0.46
0.18
55
11.9
0.00014
0.05
0.011
2.66
0.21
56
14.6
0.00021
0.05
-
2.33
0.31
57
14.47
0.00019
0.05
0.013
2.17
0.28
58
10.87
0.00018
0.05
-
1.04
0.26
59
15.15
0.00016
0.05
-
2.76
0.24
60
14.98
0.00017
0.04
-
2.66
0.25
TIC 239202625
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
195
==PAGE:204==
1
9.77
2e-05
0.17
0.005
0.29
0.03
2
12.77
4e-05
0.08
-
2.91
0.06
3
11.17
6e-05
0.05
0.005
0.0
0.09
4
8.27
5e-05
0.05
0.004
1.53
0.07
5
16.55
7e-05
0.04
-
2.1
0.1
6
11.68
9e-05
0.04
-
2.57
0.13
7
0.15
0.00014
0.04
0.007
2.35
0.19
8
0.23
0.00016
0.03
-
2.93
0.22
9
0.62
0.00014
0.03
0.006
0.51
0.19
10
10.7
0.0001
0.03
-
3.01
0.13
11
11.72
0.00011
0.03
-
0.1
0.16
12
22.71
0.00011
0.03
0.004
1.04
0.15
13
22.26
0.0001
0.02
-
2.67
0.14
TIC 239984394
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.37
1e-05
12.11
-
3.12
0.0
2
0.73
1e-05
8.94
0.011
0.88
0.0
3
1.1
1e-05
8.52
0.009
2.31
0.0
4
1.46
1e-05
7.9
-
1.39
0.0
5
1.83
1e-05
7.14
-
0.29
0.0
6
2.2
1e-05
6.3
0.006
1.86
0.0
7
2.56
1e-05
5.4
-
2.49
0.0
8
2.93
1e-05
4.48
-
0.71
0.0
9
3.29
1e-05
3.58
0.005
1.03
0.0
10
8.01
3e-05
3.21
-
0.29
0.0
11
3.66
1e-05
2.72
0.005
3.12
0.0
12
4.03
2e-05
1.95
-
1.15
0.0
13
8.1
4e-05
1.96
0.012
0.1
0.01
14
12.73
6e-05
1.57
0.013
1.28
0.01
15
9.23
5e-05
1.45
0.01
0.91
0.01
16
12.52
7e-05
1.36
0.013
0.79
0.01
17
13.09
6e-05
1.33
-
0.73
0.01
18
0.18
7e-05
1.28
0.013
0.68
0.01
19
4.39
3e-05
1.28
0.005
0.64
0.0
20
8.45
6e-05
1.25
0.011
0.65
0.01
21
4.76
5e-05
0.72
0.005
2.17
0.01
22
13.92
8e-05
0.69
0.008
2.95
0.01
23
7.81
0.00013
0.59
0.011
2.58
0.02
24
8.29
0.00016
0.5
0.011
1.71
0.02
25
13.74
0.00013
0.46
0.008
2.25
0.02
26
11.13
0.00019
0.46
0.013
2.28
0.03
27
6.59
0.00012
0.41
0.007
2.24
0.02
28
13.56
0.00015
0.42
-
2.78
0.02
29
6.95
0.00015
0.38
-
3.08
0.02
30
6.22
0.00012
0.37
0.006
2.27
0.02
31
10.44
0.00021
0.36
-
0.93
0.03
32
13.05
0.00024
0.34
-
1.86
0.03
196
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:205==
33
7.32
0.00021
0.32
-
0.23
0.03
34
10.8
0.00029
0.27
0.011
0.6
0.04
35
12.68
0.00032
0.3
0.013
0.8
0.04
36
5.12
0.00015
0.28
-
3.04
0.02
37
5.86
0.00017
0.26
-
0.07
0.02
38
8.37
0.00032
0.25
0.011
0.77
0.04
39
12.29
0.00044
0.22
0.013
2.24
0.06
40
13.65
0.00029
0.21
-
0.62
0.04
41
10.78
0.00036
0.21
-
0.84
0.05
42
14.11
0.00027
0.2
-
2.44
0.04
43
8.49
0.00042
0.19
-
0.25
0.06
44
15.54
0.00026
0.18
0.007
2.19
0.04
45
15.18
0.00029
0.17
-
2.88
0.04
46
9.88
0.00051
0.15
-
3.03
0.07
47
11.78
0.00071
0.14
-
2.62
0.1
48
9.52
0.0006
0.13
-
2.85
0.08
49
14.29
0.00041
0.13
0.007
0.38
0.06
50
11.97
0.00088
0.12
-
1.89
0.12
51
0.23
0.00071
0.13
-
2.4
0.1
52
10.25
0.00066
0.11
0.01
2.32
0.09
53
10.62
0.00067
0.11
0.011
2.55
0.09
54
15.04
0.00046
0.11
0.007
0.87
0.06
55
12.15
0.00097
0.1
0.013
2.65
0.13
TIC 243272097
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
31.56
0.0
1.7
-
1.84
0.0
2
25.38
0.0
0.87
0.002
0.49
0.0
3
22.13
0.0
0.57
0.002
0.87
0.0
4
29.75
0.0
0.54
0.003
1.15
0.01
5
37.82
0.0
0.52
-
1.78
0.01
6
19.16
0.0
0.36
0.002
0.04
0.01
7
29.84
0.0
0.25
-
2.01
0.01
8
25.23
0.0
0.25
-
2.4
0.01
9
17.61
0.0
0.23
-
0.12
0.01
10
20.61
1e-05
0.2
0.002
0.72
0.01
11
1.75
1e-05
0.2
-
0.48
0.03
12
0.12
2e-05
0.18
0.009
1.12
0.05
13
27.92
1e-05
0.17
-
1.5
0.02
14
2.06
1e-05
0.18
0.004
0.27
0.02
15
26.57
1e-05
0.16
-
1.22
0.02
16
2.02
1e-05
0.16
-
2.28
0.03
17
9.22
2e-05
0.16
0.005
0.92
0.03
18
9.01
1e-05
0.15
-
2.85
0.02
19
35.12
1e-05
0.15
0.002
1.5
0.01
20
8.82
1e-05
0.14
0.004
2.63
0.02
21
18.68
1e-05
0.15
0.002
2.09
0.02
22
19.77
1e-05
0.13
0.003
1.43
0.02
23
21.08
1e-05
0.14
0.002
1.34
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
197
==PAGE:206==
24
7.65
1e-05
0.13
0.004
0.2
0.03
25
23.9
1e-05
0.13
-
1.21
0.02
26
2.47
1e-05
0.13
-
0.61
0.03
27
20.73
1e-05
0.12
-
2.44
0.02
28
18.22
1e-05
0.12
0.003
2.85
0.03
29
11.61
2e-05
0.12
0.004
1.64
0.03
30
20.51
1e-05
0.1
0.002
3.01
0.02
31
50.24
1e-05
0.1
-
2.69
0.03
32
17.02
1e-05
0.09
-
1.4
0.03
33
0.25
5e-05
0.07
-
1.55
0.11
34
18.52
1e-05
0.07
-
2.57
0.03
35
27.11
2e-05
0.07
0.003
3.09
0.05
36
41.15
2e-05
0.07
-
1.12
0.04
37
14.98
2e-05
0.06
-
2.31
0.04
38
8.13
3e-05
0.06
0.003
0.82
0.05
39
0.16
6e-05
0.06
-
0.13
0.13
40
11.8
4e-05
0.06
-
0.09
0.08
41
10.27
4e-05
0.05
-
0.25
0.08
42
19.88
2e-05
0.05
-
3.12
0.05
43
18.35
3e-05
0.05
0.004
2.14
0.07
44
8.92
4e-05
0.05
0.004
2.27
0.08
45
22.45
3e-05
0.05
0.003
0.62
0.06
46
1.22
8e-05
0.05
-
2.46
0.16
47
0.4
8e-05
0.04
0.008
2.16
0.17
48
0.48
7e-05
0.05
0.008
2.33
0.15
49
26.06
2e-05
0.05
-
1.6
0.05
50
32.3
2e-05
0.05
0.002
2.18
0.05
51
44.94
3e-05
0.04
0.003
1.03
0.07
52
19.44
3e-05
0.05
-
2.93
0.06
53
8.48
4e-05
0.04
0.004
2.73
0.09
54
7.16
4e-05
0.04
0.003
2.9
0.08
55
2.14
5e-05
0.04
-
2.04
0.11
56
15.59
3e-05
0.04
-
2.48
0.05
57
0.34
9e-05
0.04
0.007
1.76
0.18
58
28.52
2e-05
0.04
-
0.01
0.05
59
0.08
0.00011
0.04
0.008
2.44
0.23
60
1.04
0.0001
0.04
-
2.6
0.21
61
25.46
4e-05
0.04
-
2.8
0.07
62
10.2
5e-05
0.03
0.004
2.77
0.11
63
25.69
3e-05
0.03
-
2.74
0.06
64
37.11
3e-05
0.03
-
1.29
0.06
65
23.94
4e-05
0.03
-
0.14
0.09
66
12.69
5e-05
0.03
0.004
3.1
0.11
67
25.11
3e-05
0.03
-
2.97
0.05
68
9.11
7e-05
0.03
-
1.26
0.15
69
26.26
3e-05
0.03
-
0.42
0.06
70
10.09
7e-05
0.03
0.005
1.71
0.15
71
16.11
4e-05
0.03
-
2.32
0.08
72
11.28
6e-05
0.03
0.004
2.49
0.13
73
23.38
5e-05
0.03
-
1.52
0.1
198
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:207==
74
12.28
6e-05
0.03
-
0.15
0.12
TIC 25060155
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.24
0.0
1.53
0.004
2.25
0.0
2
0.85
2e-05
0.15
0.003
2.81
0.02
3
0.45
0.00012
0.03
0.004
1.8
0.16
4
16.47
6e-05
0.03
-
1.57
0.08
5
0.4
0.00012
0.03
-
1.38
0.17
6
2.69
0.00022
0.02
-
1.55
0.31
7
2.52
0.0002
0.02
0.005
0.14
0.28
8
2.4
0.00013
0.02
0.004
2.1
0.18
9
2.15
0.00011
0.02
-
1.97
0.16
10
2.93
0.00021
0.02
-
0.12
0.3
TIC 252748014
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
5.43
0.00013
0.28
0.003
1.83
0.01
2
6.2
0.00013
0.27
-
1.35
0.01
3
0.2
0.00069
0.07
-
2.06
0.06
4
0.62
0.00076
0.06
0.004
1.74
0.07
5
1.74
0.0021
0.02
0.004
0.84
0.19
6
2.16
0.00265
0.02
0.004
2.01
0.24
7
3.37
0.00239
0.02
0.004
0.14
0.21
8
3.68
0.00262
0.02
-
0.16
0.23
9
5.33
0.00221
0.02
-
0.7
0.2
10
2.88
0.00328
0.01
-
2.59
0.29
11
6.1
0.0025
0.01
-
2.93
0.22
12
4.76
0.00288
0.01
-
1.53
0.26
13
3.39
0.00323
0.01
0.004
3.05
0.29
14
2.74
0.00363
0.01
-
0.54
0.32
TIC 252829836
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
28.04
0.00019
0.98
-
1.16
0.01
2
22.6
0.00038
0.48
-
1.76
0.02
3
29.36
0.00038
0.47
-
1.05
0.02
4
22.97
0.00043
0.42
0.008
0.51
0.02
5
21.67
0.00046
0.38
-
0.41
0.02
6
27.65
0.00064
0.29
0.008
1.42
0.03
7
27.29
0.00066
0.28
0.008
2.19
0.03
8
17.83
0.00072
0.24
0.007
0.6
0.03
9
43.2
0.00074
0.23
-
1.11
0.03
10
34.17
0.0009
0.22
-
1.6
0.04
11
0.05
0.0014
0.2
-
2.39
0.06
12
31.29
0.00094
0.2
0.008
1.26
0.04
13
29.02
0.00111
0.16
-
2.36
0.05
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
199
==PAGE:208==
14
28.58
0.00113
0.16
-
0.47
0.05
15
26.15
0.00134
0.13
0.008
0.14
0.06
16
39.87
0.00146
0.12
0.008
0.52
0.06
17
19.23
0.00149
0.11
-
1.44
0.06
18
23.9
0.00168
0.11
-
0.88
0.07
19
23.41
0.00178
0.1
-
2.94
0.08
20
36.83
0.00194
0.1
0.008
2.05
0.08
21
33.52
0.00214
0.09
0.009
2.23
0.09
22
19.96
0.00208
0.08
0.007
0.2
0.09
23
25.31
0.0022
0.08
0.007
2.83
0.09
24
32.17
0.00255
0.08
-
1.25
0.11
25
37.96
0.00273
0.07
0.008
1.57
0.12
26
37.45
0.00291
0.07
-
1.73
0.12
27
53.98
0.00259
0.06
-
0.29
0.11
28
51.41
0.00274
0.06
0.007
0.27
0.12
29
34.27
0.00338
0.06
0.009
2.37
0.15
30
36.74
0.0036
0.05
-
0.55
0.15
31
28.81
0.00333
0.05
-
1.19
0.14
32
35.62
0.00388
0.05
-
0.46
0.17
33
57.67
0.00333
0.05
0.007
2.31
0.14
34
16.67
0.00399
0.04
0.007
3.13
0.17
35
39.11
0.00418
0.04
0.008
2.28
0.18
36
57.41
0.00377
0.04
0.007
0.09
0.16
TIC 253917376
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
9.15
1e-05
6.45
0.049
1.25
0.01
2
8.39
1e-05
4.63
-
1.52
0.01
3
8.52
1e-05
4.52
0.059
0.98
0.01
4
12.98
1e-05
1.63
0.028
0.41
0.02
5
14.58
2e-05
1.26
0.034
1.42
0.03
6
7.41
2e-05
1.01
-
2.97
0.03
7
17.01
4e-05
0.97
-
1.18
0.05
8
0.86
5e-05
0.73
-
2.9
0.07
9
13.28
3e-05
0.7
-
1.52
0.04
10
7.54
3e-05
0.75
-
1.88
0.04
11
9.29
3e-05
0.67
-
0.65
0.05
12
16.22
7e-05
0.54
0.049
2.03
0.09
13
14.3
4e-05
0.5
-
1.2
0.05
14
10.9
6e-05
0.5
0.044
2.18
0.09
15
18.3
8e-05
0.38
0.043
3.05
0.11
16
13.66
5e-05
0.36
0.024
1.86
0.07
17
11.4
7e-05
0.37
-
2.28
0.09
18
12.29
4e-05
0.37
-
1.12
0.05
19
17.48
0.00013
0.34
-
1.37
0.19
20
0.76
0.00013
0.33
0.059
2.51
0.18
21
15.02
7e-05
0.28
0.025
1.54
0.09
22
11.95
7e-05
0.29
-
1.67
0.1
23
10.69
6e-05
0.29
-
1.68
0.08
200
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:209==
24
11.85
6e-05
0.28
-
2.41
0.08
25
14.05
0.00012
0.24
-
2.22
0.17
TIC 254079940
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.94
8e-05
4.16
-
1.88
0.0
2
8.54
0.00017
2.0
-
0.63
0.01
3
10.64
0.00016
2.01
0.015
1.71
0.01
4
11.96
0.00017
1.85
-
0.24
0.01
5
8.0
0.00019
1.8
0.016
0.31
0.01
6
12.81
0.00021
1.39
-
2.96
0.01
7
9.25
0.00025
1.34
0.015
0.83
0.01
8
9.53
0.00028
1.18
-
0.78
0.01
9
14.71
0.00025
1.09
0.012
0.66
0.01
10
14.4
0.00028
0.97
-
2.94
0.01
11
10.94
0.00038
0.84
-
2.85
0.02
12
12.52
0.00038
0.79
0.014
0.47
0.02
13
12.7
0.00056
0.51
0.013
2.58
0.03
14
12.28
0.00062
0.48
-
2.42
0.03
15
18.66
0.00062
0.42
0.012
2.51
0.03
16
10.32
0.00087
0.37
0.015
0.02
0.04
17
1.65
0.00144
0.28
0.019
2.59
0.07
18
1.82
0.0016
0.25
-
0.01
0.07
19
0.79
0.00222
0.2
-
0.41
0.1
20
6.66
0.00177
0.2
-
0.38
0.08
21
3.31
0.00202
0.18
-
1.97
0.09
22
0.38
0.00253
0.16
0.019
0.49
0.12
23
3.06
0.0024
0.16
0.017
0.69
0.11
24
2.71
0.00279
0.14
-
2.07
0.13
25
3.92
0.00215
0.17
0.016
1.28
0.1
26
3.77
0.00269
0.13
-
2.33
0.12
27
1.58
0.00286
0.14
-
0.2
0.13
28
2.22
0.00263
0.15
-
2.2
0.12
29
0.14
0.00353
0.12
-
0.37
0.16
30
0.83
0.00381
0.11
0.02
3.14
0.18
31
0.08
0.00369
0.11
-
2.82
0.17
32
14.04
0.00239
0.12
-
0.46
0.11
33
18.06
0.00281
0.09
-
1.35
0.13
34
17.87
0.003
0.09
-
1.49
0.14
35
14.84
0.00321
0.08
0.012
2.23
0.15
36
13.3
0.00359
0.08
0.014
0.52
0.17
37
3.52
0.00457
0.08
-
1.26
0.21
38
2.02
0.00507
0.08
0.018
2.9
0.23
TIC 254893790
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.49
0.00027
2.65
-
1.44
0.01
2
1.31
0.00045
1.9
-
0.34
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
201
==PAGE:210==
3
3.65
0.00139
0.45
-
1.51
0.06
4
0.65
0.00213
0.42
0.039
0.29
0.09
5
3.76
0.00158
0.4
0.028
1.54
0.07
6
0.2
0.00313
0.31
0.042
0.61
0.14
7
4.09
0.00171
0.36
-
0.73
0.08
8
1.55
0.003
0.28
0.037
2.58
0.13
TIC 257214809
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.82
1e-05
0.41
0.006
2.81
0.02
2
23.11
2e-05
0.31
0.007
0.86
0.02
3
26.88
3e-05
0.1
-
2.92
0.05
4
16.79
3e-05
0.08
0.004
1.57
0.04
5
27.08
3e-05
0.07
0.003
2.75
0.05
6
26.23
3e-05
0.07
0.003
1.05
0.04
7
24.95
5e-05
0.07
0.005
0.56
0.07
8
24.02
4e-05
0.06
-
1.45
0.06
9
29.45
5e-05
0.05
-
1.98
0.07
10
26.86
7e-05
0.05
-
0.79
0.09
11
28.17
7e-05
0.04
-
0.2
0.09
12
0.62
0.00015
0.04
-
2.26
0.21
TIC 257396059
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.53
9e-05
0.79
-
0.85
0.0
2
19.45
0.00031
0.22
-
0.72
0.01
3
15.25
0.00061
0.12
-
1.78
0.02
4
21.9
0.00114
0.06
0.003
0.26
0.04
5
0.73
0.00208
0.06
-
1.26
0.08
6
19.09
0.00129
0.05
-
2.93
0.05
7
22.81
0.00132
0.05
-
0.8
0.05
8
24.09
0.00135
0.05
0.002
2.77
0.05
9
21.31
0.00181
0.04
-
1.96
0.07
10
23.75
0.00206
0.03
-
2.43
0.08
11
0.45
0.00542
0.02
0.004
1.03
0.2
12
0.69
0.0056
0.02
-
1.96
0.21
13
1.59
0.00733
0.01
0.004
2.25
0.27
TIC 259675399
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
19.9
0.0
1.73
0.002
0.05
0.0
2
36.77
0.0
1.51
-
0.73
0.0
3
33.99
0.0
0.59
0.002
2.42
0.0
4
21.83
0.0
0.39
-
1.74
0.0
5
20.65
0.0
0.39
-
2.7
0.01
6
23.8
0.0
0.39
0.002
1.23
0.01
7
28.34
0.0
0.33
-
3.05
0.01
202
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:211==
8
31.3
1e-05
0.32
-
2.43
0.01
9
18.13
1e-05
0.31
-
1.25
0.01
10
21.76
0.0
0.3
-
0.1
0.01
11
31.27
1e-05
0.29
-
2.24
0.01
12
22.46
0.0
0.3
-
0.14
0.01
13
19.1
1e-05
0.26
-
0.65
0.01
14
20.29
1e-05
0.25
-
0.55
0.01
15
39.84
1e-05
0.2
0.003
2.78
0.01
16
15.72
1e-05
0.18
0.002
1.59
0.01
17
40.3
1e-05
0.2
-
2.56
0.02
18
32.4
1e-05
0.16
0.002
0.61
0.02
19
25.44
1e-05
0.17
0.002
1.85
0.01
20
34.98
1e-05
0.17
0.003
0.25
0.02
21
28.98
1e-05
0.15
0.002
1.21
0.01
22
34.53
1e-05
0.13
0.002
0.86
0.02
23
30.54
1e-05
0.13
0.003
0.11
0.02
24
30.67
1e-05
0.12
-
1.68
0.02
25
29.18
1e-05
0.12
0.002
2.1
0.02
26
31.55
2e-05
0.11
-
0.23
0.02
27
24.7
2e-05
0.1
-
2.29
0.02
28
26.48
2e-05
0.1
-
1.48
0.03
29
25.77
2e-05
0.1
-
2.88
0.02
30
31.46
2e-05
0.09
0.003
0.93
0.03
31
28.06
1e-05
0.09
-
0.05
0.02
32
44.05
2e-05
0.08
-
2.91
0.03
33
23.31
1e-05
0.09
0.002
2.7
0.02
34
24.9
2e-05
0.08
0.002
1.24
0.02
35
28.47
2e-05
0.08
0.002
2.38
0.02
36
48.24
3e-05
0.08
0.003
0.87
0.04
37
43.21
2e-05
0.09
0.003
1.12
0.04
38
30.98
1e-05
0.08
-
1.16
0.02
39
51.33
2e-05
0.08
-
0.57
0.03
40
40.14
3e-05
0.08
-
3.0
0.05
41
43.69
3e-05
0.08
-
3.11
0.04
42
27.83
2e-05
0.08
-
1.0
0.03
43
35.49
2e-05
0.07
0.002
2.53
0.03
44
46.82
3e-05
0.07
0.004
1.57
0.05
45
40.75
3e-05
0.07
0.003
1.77
0.04
46
31.76
2e-05
0.07
0.002
0.79
0.03
47
53.0
4e-05
0.07
-
2.75
0.06
48
53.25
3e-05
0.07
0.003
0.54
0.05
49
41.33
3e-05
0.07
0.003
0.0
0.04
50
30.13
2e-05
0.06
0.002
2.03
0.03
51
50.81
3e-05
0.06
0.003
1.78
0.05
52
50.97
3e-05
0.06
0.002
1.18
0.04
53
39.61
3e-05
0.05
0.002
2.19
0.04
54
56.7
3e-05
0.06
-
1.06
0.04
55
41.82
2e-05
0.06
0.002
0.12
0.03
56
27.35
3e-05
0.06
0.002
0.44
0.04
57
33.25
2e-05
0.07
0.002
1.83
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
203
==PAGE:212==
58
20.12
2e-05
0.06
-
0.7
0.03
59
46.67
4e-05
0.06
0.003
0.36
0.06
60
45.08
4e-05
0.06
-
3.01
0.06
61
44.65
4e-05
0.05
-
1.01
0.06
62
35.89
3e-05
0.05
0.002
1.42
0.04
63
54.74
4e-05
0.05
0.003
0.35
0.05
64
37.24
3e-05
0.06
-
2.23
0.05
65
37.03
4e-05
0.05
-
0.08
0.07
66
48.07
3e-05
0.05
-
2.99
0.05
67
15.62
3e-05
0.05
0.002
1.34
0.04
68
49.63
4e-05
0.05
-
3.0
0.06
69
47.37
5e-05
0.05
-
0.01
0.07
70
43.18
5e-05
0.05
0.003
1.57
0.07
71
26.23
4e-05
0.04
-
2.23
0.06
72
41.15
4e-05
0.04
-
2.24
0.06
73
46.24
4e-05
0.04
0.002
0.67
0.06
74
41.75
3e-05
0.04
-
0.75
0.05
75
11.41
4e-05
0.04
-
1.78
0.06
76
43.13
5e-05
0.04
-
1.4
0.08
77
31.56
4e-05
0.04
-
0.54
0.06
78
49.71
5e-05
0.04
0.003
1.97
0.07
79
39.14
3e-05
0.04
0.002
1.55
0.04
80
44.57
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.51
0.07
81
10.76
3e-05
0.04
0.002
1.63
0.04
82
16.72
4e-05
0.04
-
0.56
0.06
83
53.47
5e-05
0.04
-
2.22
0.08
84
38.51
6e-05
0.03
-
0.19
0.08
85
59.28
6e-05
0.03
0.003
2.88
0.09
86
2.0
7e-05
0.03
-
2.59
0.1
87
43.53
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.28
0.09
88
37.53
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.69
0.07
89
49.72
5e-05
0.04
0.003
2.48
0.08
90
27.0
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.95
0.06
91
29.76
5e-05
0.03
-
2.58
0.08
92
48.33
6e-05
0.03
0.003
1.63
0.09
93
56.42
7e-05
0.03
-
2.67
0.1
94
44.23
5e-05
0.03
0.002
0.07
0.07
95
23.24
3e-05
0.03
0.002
2.26
0.05
96
23.41
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.5
0.06
97
0.78
7e-05
0.03
-
0.36
0.11
98
24.05
4e-05
0.03
-
0.97
0.06
99
40.54
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.3
0.08
100
43.12
7e-05
0.03
-
0.7
0.1
101
38.2
5e-05
0.03
0.002
0.4
0.08
102
51.39
6e-05
0.03
-
1.99
0.09
103
1.79
8e-05
0.03
0.003
1.73
0.12
104
29.46
7e-05
0.02
-
2.75
0.1
105
35.14
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.29
0.09
106
13.64
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.45
0.06
107
49.99
7e-05
0.03
0.003
0.2
0.11
204
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:213==
108
48.21
9e-05
0.02
0.003
2.9
0.14
109
35.22
6e-05
0.03
0.002
2.0
0.08
110
48.61
6e-05
0.03
0.002
3.0
0.08
111
37.79
6e-05
0.03
0.002
1.32
0.09
112
11.79
5e-05
0.03
-
1.33
0.08
113
12.28
6e-05
0.03
-
0.5
0.08
114
1.82
9e-05
0.02
0.003
0.01
0.13
115
47.05
7e-05
0.03
0.003
0.22
0.11
116
61.62
5e-05
0.02
-
0.6
0.08
117
43.41
8e-05
0.03
0.003
0.22
0.12
118
32.02
6e-05
0.02
0.002
0.4
0.09
119
53.05
0.00014
0.02
-
1.07
0.2
120
40.97
7e-05
0.02
-
1.2
0.1
121
41.79
6e-05
0.02
0.002
0.62
0.09
122
56.4
9e-05
0.02
0.003
2.23
0.14
123
39.32
7e-05
0.02
-
0.06
0.1
124
13.8
6e-05
0.02
-
3.14
0.09
125
46.55
0.0001
0.02
-
1.97
0.15
126
4.96
7e-05
0.02
-
2.2
0.1
127
2.44
9e-05
0.02
0.003
1.98
0.13
128
9.08
7e-05
0.02
-
2.57
0.11
129
45.73
6e-05
0.02
-
1.33
0.1
130
49.87
0.0001
0.02
-
1.8
0.14
131
25.62
7e-05
0.02
0.002
1.8
0.1
132
56.02
9e-05
0.02
-
2.81
0.13
133
25.34
8e-05
0.02
0.003
2.54
0.12
134
29.39
7e-05
0.02
0.002
0.2
0.1
135
52.86
7e-05
0.02
-
0.55
0.11
136
29.7
8e-05
0.02
0.003
2.55
0.12
137
40.03
0.00012
0.02
-
2.72
0.17
138
56.54
8e-05
0.02
0.002
1.03
0.11
139
48.19
0.00011
0.02
0.003
0.36
0.16
140
0.86
0.0001
0.02
0.003
0.94
0.15
141
26.16
8e-05
0.02
-
0.29
0.12
142
8.35
8e-05
0.02
0.002
2.99
0.12
143
4.76
9e-05
0.02
0.003
3.13
0.14
144
21.28
5e-05
0.02
-
2.5
0.08
145
62.72
7e-05
0.02
-
1.03
0.11
146
5.4
9e-05
0.02
-
2.66
0.14
147
45.71
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.91
0.1
148
46.68
0.00011
0.02
0.004
0.35
0.17
149
33.68
0.00011
0.02
0.003
0.97
0.16
150
35.49
6e-05
0.02
-
0.0
0.09
151
33.58
9e-05
0.02
0.003
0.99
0.13
152
14.94
8e-05
0.02
-
1.85
0.11
153
50.79
0.00012
0.02
-
0.5
0.17
154
49.03
7e-05
0.02
-
2.8
0.1
155
22.74
8e-05
0.02
0.002
1.43
0.12
156
38.69
8e-05
0.02
-
1.44
0.12
157
38.56
0.0001
0.02
0.003
2.17
0.15
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
205
==PAGE:214==
158
50.42
9e-05
0.02
0.002
2.66
0.13
159
59.77
8e-05
0.02
0.002
1.97
0.12
160
0.2
0.00017
0.02
0.004
1.33
0.25
161
12.88
9e-05
0.02
0.002
1.55
0.13
162
54.22
0.00011
0.02
-
2.5
0.17
163
33.06
8e-05
0.02
0.002
2.61
0.12
164
43.1
0.00012
0.02
-
1.95
0.18
165
58.22
8e-05
0.02
0.002
2.53
0.12
166
38.62
0.00011
0.02
-
2.99
0.17
167
50.95
0.0001
0.02
0.002
0.58
0.15
168
26.62
0.00011
0.02
-
3.06
0.16
169
57.57
0.00012
0.02
-
2.18
0.18
170
47.27
0.00013
0.02
-
2.59
0.19
TIC 259700926
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.34
2e-05
1.63
-
2.38
0.01
2
1.25
2e-05
1.5
-
2.17
0.01
3
0.88
3e-05
1.06
0.016
1.85
0.02
4
0.82
6e-05
0.59
0.016
0.08
0.03
5
0.98
7e-05
0.46
-
2.89
0.03
6
2.22
0.00016
0.2
-
2.98
0.08
7
2.13
0.00018
0.2
-
0.01
0.09
8
1.1
0.00017
0.18
-
1.86
0.08
9
0.21
0.00022
0.16
0.018
2.79
0.11
10
2.4
0.00017
0.18
0.015
0.26
0.09
11
2.59
0.00018
0.15
0.013
3.04
0.09
12
2.17
0.00026
0.13
-
3.01
0.13
13
0.31
0.00025
0.14
-
2.21
0.12
14
2.7
0.00022
0.12
0.013
2.38
0.11
15
0.13
0.00029
0.12
0.017
0.27
0.14
16
2.5
0.00033
0.08
0.014
1.84
0.16
17
2.65
0.00038
0.07
0.013
2.55
0.18
18
1.97
0.00047
0.07
0.017
2.96
0.23
19
1.92
0.0005
0.07
0.017
0.94
0.25
TIC 259915804
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.89
0.0
1.92
0.006
1.86
0.0
2
0.44
0.0
1.46
-
3.09
0.01
3
43.48
1e-05
0.58
-
1.27
0.01
4
42.59
1e-05
0.39
-
1.82
0.01
5
38.0
1e-05
0.35
-
0.55
0.02
6
40.1
1e-05
0.36
-
1.65
0.01
7
36.53
2e-05
0.19
-
0.43
0.02
8
0.05
3e-05
0.19
0.008
0.85
0.04
9
39.38
2e-05
0.15
-
2.76
0.03
10
31.85
3e-05
0.12
0.004
0.51
0.04
206
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:215==
11
43.14
2e-05
0.11
0.004
2.31
0.03
12
35.64
4e-05
0.11
-
3.0
0.05
13
38.49
4e-05
0.09
-
2.96
0.05
14
26.8
3e-05
0.08
0.003
1.6
0.04
15
33.09
4e-05
0.08
0.005
0.9
0.06
16
43.38
4e-05
0.08
-
1.66
0.06
17
29.64
5e-05
0.08
0.005
1.41
0.06
18
38.9
5e-05
0.08
-
0.23
0.07
19
39.73
4e-05
0.07
-
3.0
0.05
20
28.67
5e-05
0.07
-
1.88
0.07
21
39.01
5e-05
0.06
-
2.81
0.07
22
42.48
5e-05
0.06
0.004
0.58
0.07
23
34.53
5e-05
0.05
-
2.67
0.07
24
32.74
6e-05
0.05
0.004
1.33
0.08
25
36.17
8e-05
0.05
0.006
1.93
0.11
26
28.39
7e-05
0.05
-
1.43
0.1
27
25.9
6e-05
0.05
0.004
1.9
0.08
28
44.72
7e-05
0.04
0.004
0.86
0.1
29
28.15
7e-05
0.04
0.004
1.16
0.09
30
27.69
9e-05
0.04
0.004
1.21
0.12
31
32.31
9e-05
0.03
-
0.92
0.13
32
1.78
0.00018
0.03
-
0.63
0.25
33
33.42
9e-05
0.03
-
1.25
0.13
34
28.75
0.0001
0.03
0.004
2.82
0.14
35
29.39
0.00012
0.03
0.005
1.19
0.17
36
34.07
0.00011
0.03
0.005
2.76
0.15
37
38.11
0.00014
0.03
-
0.58
0.19
38
2.88
0.00018
0.03
-
2.54
0.26
39
4.11
0.00018
0.03
0.007
2.0
0.25
TIC 260353074
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
11.99
0.0
2.25
0.004
2.15
0.0
2
20.88
0.0
1.89
0.006
1.54
0.0
3
14.64
0.0
1.83
0.004
1.87
0.0
4
13.0
0.0
1.7
0.004
3.08
0.0
5
12.49
0.0
1.35
-
0.82
0.0
6
23.42
0.0
1.19
-
0.77
0.01
7
14.02
0.0
0.99
-
2.61
0.0
8
11.49
0.0
0.93
-
0.46
0.0
9
9.83
0.0
0.8
0.004
0.42
0.0
10
25.06
0.0
0.71
0.005
2.3
0.01
11
11.82
0.0
0.67
0.003
2.74
0.01
12
24.76
0.0
0.68
-
3.08
0.01
13
12.69
0.0
0.62
-
2.25
0.01
14
23.54
1e-05
0.53
-
2.15
0.01
15
19.8
1e-05
0.45
0.005
3.07
0.01
16
21.26
1e-05
0.45
-
1.55
0.01
17
8.34
1e-05
0.43
0.005
1.43
0.01
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
207
==PAGE:216==
18
10.31
1e-05
0.39
0.004
1.75
0.01
19
19.71
1e-05
0.37
0.006
0.98
0.02
20
19.57
1e-05
0.28
-
0.4
0.02
21
13.43
1e-05
0.26
-
0.42
0.01
22
13.63
1e-05
0.27
-
3.06
0.01
23
0.2
2e-05
0.28
0.013
0.52
0.04
24
1.17
1e-05
0.25
-
0.67
0.03
25
10.45
1e-05
0.25
-
3.13
0.02
26
13.54
1e-05
0.25
0.004
0.66
0.02
27
14.73
1e-05
0.24
-
0.73
0.01
28
8.66
1e-05
0.24
0.003
0.79
0.01
29
18.79
1e-05
0.23
-
1.18
0.02
30
11.59
1e-05
0.23
0.003
1.57
0.01
31
9.5
1e-05
0.21
0.005
2.93
0.02
32
23.59
2e-05
0.2
-
0.63
0.03
33
19.2
1e-05
0.18
0.004
1.36
0.02
34
10.07
1e-05
0.19
0.004
1.98
0.02
35
24.47
2e-05
0.19
0.006
0.58
0.03
36
0.95
2e-05
0.2
0.008
0.71
0.04
37
19.18
1e-05
0.18
0.004
2.17
0.02
38
24.49
2e-05
0.17
0.006
2.08
0.03
39
0.39
3e-05
0.18
0.012
1.72
0.06
40
19.54
1e-05
0.17
0.005
2.15
0.03
41
32.85
1e-05
0.17
0.004
1.62
0.02
42
19.46
1e-05
0.18
-
0.06
0.02
43
20.34
1e-05
0.17
-
0.66
0.02
44
21.2
2e-05
0.17
0.006
2.51
0.04
45
20.84
2e-05
0.17
0.006
1.86
0.04
46
22.47
1e-05
0.16
-
2.64
0.02
47
11.1
1e-05
0.14
0.003
1.62
0.02
48
1.04
3e-05
0.12
-
2.1
0.06
49
27.45
2e-05
0.13
-
1.85
0.04
50
21.45
1e-05
0.13
0.003
3.08
0.02
51
18.19
1e-05
0.13
0.003
2.29
0.02
52
2.12
2e-05
0.13
-
0.74
0.05
53
0.2
5e-05
0.13
0.013
2.98
0.09
54
23.93
2e-05
0.12
-
2.51
0.03
55
2.03
3e-05
0.12
-
2.85
0.05
56
8.95
2e-05
0.12
0.004
1.14
0.03
57
7.81
2e-05
0.11
-
3.06
0.03
58
1.08
3e-05
0.11
-
0.62
0.07
59
23.42
3e-05
0.11
-
1.56
0.05
60
19.25
2e-05
0.11
-
2.34
0.04
61
19.64
3e-05
0.09
-
2.26
0.05
62
18.21
1e-05
0.11
-
0.04
0.02
63
21.98
2e-05
0.1
0.003
1.7
0.03
64
32.28
2e-05
0.1
0.003
2.81
0.03
65
9.79
2e-05
0.1
0.004
0.85
0.04
66
31.03
3e-05
0.1
0.005
1.37
0.06
67
18.46
2e-05
0.1
0.003
0.43
0.03
208
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:217==
68
11.39
2e-05
0.1
-
1.78
0.03
69
18.95
2e-05
0.1
-
2.63
0.03
70
18.9
2e-05
0.1
0.004
0.69
0.04
71
27.8
2e-05
0.09
0.003
1.46
0.03
72
16.11
1e-05
0.09
-
1.6
0.03
73
0.39
7e-05
0.08
-
3.02
0.14
74
1.93
3e-05
0.09
-
3.1
0.06
75
27.04
3e-05
0.08
0.004
0.23
0.05
76
18.86
3e-05
0.08
-
0.05
0.05
77
19.17
3e-05
0.08
0.004
0.19
0.05
78
11.49
2e-05
0.08
-
0.72
0.05
79
9.27
2e-05
0.09
-
1.69
0.04
80
29.33
2e-05
0.08
0.003
0.87
0.04
81
7.53
2e-05
0.08
-
1.21
0.04
82
11.06
2e-05
0.08
-
2.13
0.03
83
0.19
7e-05
0.09
-
0.98
0.14
84
21.09
3e-05
0.08
-
0.43
0.06
85
17.17
2e-05
0.08
0.003
0.6
0.04
86
15.68
2e-05
0.08
0.002
1.63
0.03
87
27.13
4e-05
0.08
0.005
2.03
0.07
88
23.16
2e-05
0.07
-
2.62
0.04
89
27.32
4e-05
0.07
0.006
1.18
0.08
90
9.25
3e-05
0.08
-
0.81
0.05
91
9.24
3e-05
0.07
-
1.81
0.05
92
14.39
2e-05
0.07
0.002
0.12
0.03
93
16.36
2e-05
0.07
-
0.31
0.04
94
29.91
3e-05
0.07
0.004
0.74
0.06
95
33.88
3e-05
0.07
-
1.85
0.05
96
22.89
3e-05
0.06
0.004
2.97
0.06
97
29.04
2e-05
0.07
-
1.27
0.05
98
26.7
3e-05
0.06
0.003
3.05
0.05
99
9.83
3e-05
0.06
0.004
1.08
0.06
100
22.02
3e-05
0.06
0.004
1.39
0.06
101
22.82
3e-05
0.06
-
3.07
0.06
102
32.85
3e-05
0.06
0.004
1.11
0.07
103
16.09
2e-05
0.06
-
0.24
0.04
104
24.4
5e-05
0.06
-
3.14
0.09
105
25.8
3e-05
0.06
-
1.52
0.06
106
15.22
2e-05
0.06
-
2.38
0.04
107
17.52
2e-05
0.06
0.003
0.24
0.05
108
26.25
5e-05
0.06
0.005
3.06
0.09
109
22.99
3e-05
0.06
-
0.11
0.06
110
27.9
3e-05
0.06
0.003
2.64
0.05
111
17.81
3e-05
0.06
-
2.99
0.05
112
30.93
4e-05
0.06
0.004
0.39
0.08
113
7.3
3e-05
0.05
0.003
0.35
0.05
114
0.37
0.00012
0.05
-
2.63
0.23
115
26.54
3e-05
0.05
-
0.04
0.06
116
27.99
3e-05
0.05
0.003
1.3
0.06
117
19.72
6e-05
0.05
0.006
1.82
0.11
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
209
==PAGE:218==
118
17.2
3e-05
0.05
0.003
2.11
0.05
119
16.03
3e-05
0.05
0.003
1.01
0.05
120
7.48
3e-05
0.05
0.003
1.65
0.06
121
20.23
4e-05
0.05
0.003
0.11
0.07
122
1.07
8e-05
0.05
0.007
2.86
0.15
123
18.21
3e-05
0.05
-
1.87
0.05
124
16.4
3e-05
0.05
0.003
2.69
0.06
125
28.98
3e-05
0.05
-
0.27
0.06
126
26.13
4e-05
0.05
0.004
2.57
0.08
127
7.67
4e-05
0.05
0.003
0.84
0.07
128
15.12
3e-05
0.05
0.003
0.97
0.06
129
24.02
4e-05
0.05
-
1.16
0.08
130
35.16
4e-05
0.05
0.004
2.95
0.08
131
28.5
3e-05
0.05
-
1.84
0.06
132
23.25
4e-05
0.05
0.003
2.74
0.07
133
0.99
6e-05
0.06
0.007
2.12
0.12
134
32.12
4e-05
0.05
-
2.91
0.08
135
26.64
3e-05
0.04
0.003
1.96
0.06
136
16.35
3e-05
0.04
0.003
0.23
0.06
137
18.1
3e-05
0.04
-
2.9
0.06
138
32.7
4e-05
0.05
-
2.92
0.07
139
18.81
5e-05
0.04
-
1.38
0.1
140
10.35
5e-05
0.04
0.004
1.1
0.09
TIC 26074369
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.51
0.00022
4.37
-
0.05
0.01
2
12.81
0.00036
2.66
0.042
2.3
0.02
3
11.09
0.00044
2.29
0.045
2.6
0.02
4
12.12
0.00071
1.44
-
2.92
0.03
5
10.26
0.00065
1.46
0.042
1.51
0.03
6
9.71
0.00077
1.16
0.039
0.05
0.03
7
15.45
0.00082
1.02
0.037
0.91
0.04
8
16.43
0.00088
0.89
0.035
2.17
0.04
9
7.03
0.00101
0.84
0.037
2.63
0.04
10
8.36
0.00094
0.88
-
0.58
0.04
11
9.98
0.00113
0.81
-
0.83
0.05
12
8.54
0.00105
0.8
0.037
1.57
0.05
13
6.5
0.00138
0.62
-
2.33
0.06
14
7.39
0.00144
0.6
0.038
0.58
0.06
15
14.59
0.00159
0.59
0.041
1.83
0.07
16
5.68
0.00162
0.54
-
1.36
0.07
17
8.98
0.00191
0.45
0.038
2.55
0.08
18
11.83
0.00244
0.42
0.045
1.15
0.11
19
7.21
0.00242
0.36
0.038
2.29
0.11
20
17.29
0.0024
0.3
0.032
0.99
0.11
21
9.08
0.00287
0.3
0.038
2.6
0.13
22
0.31
0.0044
0.24
0.046
0.85
0.19
210
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:219==
TIC 261129295
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.05
0.00024
0.2
0.005
0.75
0.02
2
0.64
0.00064
0.11
0.007
0.89
0.06
3
23.64
0.00052
0.1
0.005
1.53
0.05
4
21.34
0.00058
0.09
-
0.02
0.05
5
0.19
0.00245
0.03
0.006
2.44
0.22
TIC 262885414
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.83
1e-05
0.2
-
1.13
0.01
2
2.39
2e-05
0.07
0.003
1.57
0.04
3
2.24
3e-05
0.05
0.002
2.86
0.05
4
1.15
3e-05
0.05
-
2.33
0.05
5
1.99
3e-05
0.05
0.003
1.64
0.06
6
0.22
4e-05
0.04
0.003
2.36
0.07
7
5.15
2e-05
0.04
-
0.47
0.04
8
0.33
4e-05
0.04
-
2.64
0.08
9
10.3
2e-05
0.04
-
2.69
0.03
10
3.25
3e-05
0.04
-
2.45
0.06
11
2.26
4e-05
0.04
-
0.61
0.07
12
0.19
4e-05
0.04
0.003
1.3
0.08
13
3.17
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.53
0.07
14
12.27
3e-05
0.03
0.001
2.59
0.05
15
2.21
5e-05
0.03
-
1.18
0.08
16
2.6
5e-05
0.03
-
2.41
0.09
17
2.43
5e-05
0.03
-
1.0
0.1
18
0.97
6e-05
0.03
0.003
2.24
0.1
19
3.34
5e-05
0.03
0.002
2.09
0.08
20
3.78
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.93
0.07
21
0.65
7e-05
0.03
0.003
0.82
0.12
22
1.42
6e-05
0.03
0.003
2.66
0.11
23
1.52
7e-05
0.02
0.003
0.33
0.12
24
0.31
7e-05
0.02
0.003
0.27
0.13
25
4.59
5e-05
0.02
0.002
0.52
0.09
26
2.06
7e-05
0.02
0.003
2.39
0.12
27
14.56
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.44
0.06
28
2.48
8e-05
0.02
-
2.75
0.15
29
7.66
4e-05
0.02
-
1.72
0.07
30
6.62
3e-05
0.02
-
0.77
0.06
31
1.9
8e-05
0.02
0.003
2.63
0.15
32
2.91
6e-05
0.02
-
3.08
0.11
33
3.59
6e-05
0.02
0.002
0.22
0.1
34
3.85
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.98
0.12
35
20.08
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.03
0.06
36
3.0
8e-05
0.01
0.002
0.31
0.15
37
1.21
8e-05
0.02
-
2.44
0.16
38
1.27
0.00011
0.01
-
1.57
0.19
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
211
==PAGE:220==
39
14.05
4e-05
0.01
-
2.98
0.07
40
1.69
0.0001
0.01
0.002
1.97
0.18
41
8.8
4e-05
0.01
0.001
1.49
0.07
42
3.13
9e-05
0.01
0.002
3.02
0.16
43
4.69
9e-05
0.01
-
2.61
0.16
44
6.26
6e-05
0.01
-
0.51
0.1
45
2.09
0.00012
0.01
-
0.31
0.22
46
3.45
7e-05
0.01
0.002
0.51
0.14
47
4.51
8e-05
0.01
0.002
0.8
0.14
48
0.33
0.00012
0.01
-
0.94
0.21
49
14.99
4e-05
0.01
-
3.1
0.08
50
13.24
5e-05
0.01
0.001
1.77
0.08
51
0.59
0.00014
0.01
-
1.31
0.26
52
0.94
0.00011
0.01
0.003
0.87
0.21
53
1.19
0.00012
0.01
-
0.31
0.22
TIC 264003815
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.9
4e-05
0.34
0.008
1.81
0.02
2
1.72
4e-05
0.3
0.009
1.55
0.03
3
0.54
6e-05
0.2
-
0.75
0.04
4
0.38
6e-05
0.17
-
1.75
0.04
5
3.53
8e-05
0.17
-
0.35
0.05
6
2.8
6e-05
0.19
-
1.41
0.04
7
0.29
8e-05
0.16
0.008
0.52
0.05
8
1.38
9e-05
0.15
0.009
2.38
0.06
9
1.1
0.00011
0.12
-
1.13
0.08
10
1.96
9e-05
0.13
-
2.57
0.06
11
1.26
0.00011
0.12
0.009
1.37
0.07
12
0.93
0.00015
0.08
-
3.04
0.1
13
0.74
0.0001
0.1
0.007
0.82
0.07
14
2.95
0.00011
0.1
0.008
3.11
0.08
15
2.41
0.00011
0.1
0.008
2.58
0.07
16
5.64
0.00014
0.09
-
2.04
0.09
17
1.98
0.00011
0.11
-
3.01
0.07
18
5.68
0.00016
0.08
-
1.75
0.11
19
10.05
0.00012
0.08
0.007
0.68
0.08
20
2.57
0.00014
0.08
-
1.52
0.09
21
3.39
0.00016
0.09
-
2.14
0.11
22
8.01
0.00014
0.07
-
1.76
0.1
23
4.87
0.00016
0.07
-
0.95
0.11
24
5.96
0.00021
0.06
-
1.16
0.14
25
7.14
0.00017
0.06
0.007
3.05
0.11
26
7.23
0.00015
0.07
0.007
0.62
0.1
27
2.37
0.00015
0.07
-
2.03
0.11
28
8.48
0.00022
0.06
0.008
2.78
0.15
29
4.48
0.00021
0.05
0.007
2.69
0.14
30
5.59
0.00023
0.05
0.009
1.23
0.16
31
4.62
0.0002
0.05
-
0.29
0.14
212
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:221==
32
0.79
0.00022
0.05
-
1.33
0.15
33
4.41
0.0002
0.05
-
1.28
0.14
34
5.35
0.00024
0.05
-
0.56
0.17
35
1.17
0.00025
0.05
0.009
0.4
0.17
36
4.22
0.00023
0.05
0.007
1.98
0.16
37
3.2
0.00028
0.05
0.009
1.4
0.19
38
4.03
0.00027
0.05
0.008
0.65
0.18
39
3.93
0.00027
0.04
-
1.64
0.18
40
1.57
0.00031
0.04
-
3.06
0.22
41
7.08
0.00025
0.04
-
1.51
0.17
42
2.19
0.00024
0.05
0.008
2.58
0.16
43
6.14
0.00026
0.04
-
2.44
0.18
44
5.79
0.0003
0.04
-
1.48
0.2
45
8.36
0.00034
0.03
0.008
2.92
0.24
46
7.2
0.00025
0.04
-
0.3
0.17
47
4.78
0.0003
0.04
0.007
1.13
0.2
48
4.13
0.00032
0.03
0.008
1.92
0.22
49
11.05
0.00025
0.03
-
0.91
0.17
50
6.59
0.00027
0.04
-
0.33
0.19
51
5.52
0.00033
0.04
0.008
2.63
0.22
52
7.12
0.00024
0.04
0.007
1.72
0.17
53
12.84
0.00025
0.03
0.006
2.24
0.17
54
8.87
0.0003
0.03
0.007
0.05
0.2
55
4.74
0.00032
0.03
-
3.12
0.22
56
1.81
0.00035
0.04
0.009
0.61
0.24
57
12.29
0.00016
0.03
0.003
2.84
0.11
58
6.71
0.0003
0.03
0.007
1.98
0.21
59
3.77
0.00042
0.03
-
0.56
0.29
60
4.54
0.00033
0.03
0.007
1.47
0.22
61
8.67
0.00039
0.03
0.008
2.41
0.27
62
5.19
0.00034
0.03
0.008
0.69
0.24
63
5.43
0.00038
0.03
0.008
0.45
0.26
TIC 26541086
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
15.1
0.0
0.47
0.002
2.64
0.0
2
23.28
0.0
0.44
0.003
0.46
0.01
3
23.85
0.0
0.36
0.003
1.84
0.01
4
14.53
0.0
0.28
-
0.66
0.01
5
27.46
0.0
0.28
-
0.39
0.01
6
25.64
0.0
0.25
-
0.46
0.01
7
13.23
0.0
0.25
-
2.55
0.01
8
24.0
1e-05
0.21
0.003
1.59
0.01
9
11.77
0.0
0.22
0.002
2.18
0.01
10
17.48
1e-05
0.19
0.003
1.63
0.01
11
18.2
1e-05
0.16
-
2.92
0.01
12
19.18
1e-05
0.16
0.003
1.93
0.02
13
14.44
1e-05
0.14
-
1.92
0.02
14
33.19
1e-05
0.13
-
1.29
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
213
==PAGE:222==
15
22.12
1e-05
0.13
0.002
2.51
0.02
16
20.4
1e-05
0.13
-
0.22
0.02
17
22.73
1e-05
0.12
-
1.84
0.02
18
15.85
1e-05
0.12
0.002
1.42
0.02
19
37.63
1e-05
0.12
-
1.99
0.02
20
21.99
1e-05
0.11
-
2.53
0.02
21
29.93
1e-05
0.11
0.003
3.12
0.03
22
19.48
1e-05
0.11
0.002
2.02
0.02
23
36.32
1e-05
0.1
-
1.48
0.03
24
27.2
1e-05
0.09
-
2.92
0.03
25
30.77
2e-05
0.08
-
2.62
0.04
26
15.4
1e-05
0.08
0.002
1.25
0.02
27
30.45
1e-05
0.08
0.002
2.21
0.03
28
20.19
1e-05
0.07
-
1.69
0.02
29
35.61
1e-05
0.07
0.002
3.13
0.03
30
2.41
2e-05
0.07
-
0.33
0.05
31
29.84
2e-05
0.07
0.003
2.56
0.04
32
25.92
2e-05
0.06
-
1.31
0.03
33
20.63
2e-05
0.06
0.003
1.86
0.04
34
27.32
2e-05
0.06
-
2.88
0.04
35
21.3
2e-05
0.06
0.002
1.33
0.04
36
16.27
2e-05
0.06
-
2.37
0.04
37
29.23
2e-05
0.06
-
2.81
0.04
38
12.71
2e-05
0.06
-
2.14
0.04
39
20.09
2e-05
0.05
0.002
1.34
0.04
40
22.62
2e-05
0.05
-
0.91
0.05
41
22.54
2e-05
0.05
0.002
2.62
0.04
42
25.29
2e-05
0.05
-
1.49
0.05
43
23.77
2e-05
0.05
-
2.2
0.05
44
28.04
3e-05
0.05
0.002
0.4
0.05
45
19.37
3e-05
0.04
-
1.1
0.07
46
17.7
3e-05
0.04
0.002
1.55
0.05
47
29.38
3e-05
0.04
-
0.07
0.07
48
18.09
2e-05
0.04
-
2.68
0.05
49
21.52
4e-05
0.03
0.003
2.7
0.08
50
31.63
3e-05
0.04
0.003
2.7
0.07
51
28.27
2e-05
0.04
-
1.62
0.05
52
32.31
3e-05
0.03
0.002
1.88
0.06
53
25.72
3e-05
0.03
-
1.55
0.06
54
35.22
4e-05
0.03
-
2.1
0.08
55
21.19
3e-05
0.03
0.002
1.45
0.06
56
11.5
3e-05
0.03
-
1.27
0.06
57
24.54
4e-05
0.03
-
1.34
0.08
58
1.17
4e-05
0.04
-
0.59
0.09
59
29.0
5e-05
0.03
0.003
0.14
0.1
60
34.46
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.17
0.07
61
16.22
4e-05
0.03
0.003
2.23
0.09
62
30.05
4e-05
0.03
-
1.74
0.09
63
24.96
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.22
0.07
64
12.46
4e-05
0.03
-
0.15
0.08
214
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:223==
65
21.96
3e-05
0.03
-
0.9
0.07
66
32.36
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.82
0.08
67
26.67
3e-05
0.03
0.002
2.87
0.07
68
29.11
4e-05
0.03
-
0.61
0.08
69
4.44
5e-05
0.03
0.003
0.55
0.1
70
9.55
3e-05
0.03
0.002
2.25
0.07
71
23.03
4e-05
0.03
-
2.93
0.08
72
28.4
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.84
0.09
73
28.68
4e-05
0.03
0.002
1.82
0.07
74
1.27
4e-05
0.03
0.002
1.72
0.09
75
32.57
5e-05
0.03
-
1.81
0.1
76
34.5
5e-05
0.03
-
2.56
0.09
77
18.87
5e-05
0.02
0.003
2.88
0.11
78
17.12
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.11
0.09
79
0.86
6e-05
0.03
0.003
1.8
0.13
80
37.97
5e-05
0.02
0.002
0.39
0.09
81
33.92
5e-05
0.02
-
0.17
0.09
82
18.36
4e-05
0.02
-
0.31
0.09
83
15.59
4e-05
0.02
-
1.85
0.08
84
28.14
4e-05
0.02
-
1.98
0.07
85
5.64
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.65
0.11
86
0.43
0.0001
0.02
-
1.46
0.21
87
25.0
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.81
0.1
88
35.47
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.49
0.09
89
1.35
6e-05
0.02
0.003
3.14
0.12
90
36.05
6e-05
0.02
-
0.58
0.13
91
25.38
6e-05
0.02
-
1.66
0.12
92
1.1
8e-05
0.02
0.003
1.4
0.16
93
8.75
6e-05
0.02
-
1.72
0.12
94
26.63
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.81
0.09
95
0.3
7e-05
0.02
0.003
1.17
0.15
96
31.33
5e-05
0.02
-
1.7
0.1
97
3.13
8e-05
0.02
-
0.81
0.16
98
44.78
6e-05
0.02
-
0.59
0.12
99
24.89
6e-05
0.02
-
0.38
0.13
100
35.08
7e-05
0.02
-
1.06
0.15
101
33.36
6e-05
0.02
0.002
2.14
0.13
102
8.36
5e-05
0.02
-
0.94
0.1
103
30.54
6e-05
0.02
-
2.87
0.12
104
1.64
0.0001
0.02
0.004
2.2
0.21
105
27.5
6e-05
0.02
-
0.67
0.13
106
26.38
7e-05
0.02
0.003
0.25
0.15
107
43.84
5e-05
0.02
-
2.0
0.1
108
27.59
7e-05
0.02
-
2.47
0.15
109
1.51
0.00011
0.02
-
0.1
0.22
110
39.33
7e-05
0.02
0.002
3.0
0.14
111
5.45
8e-05
0.02
0.003
1.1
0.17
112
26.44
8e-05
0.02
-
1.02
0.16
113
37.02
6e-05
0.02
-
1.0
0.13
114
26.94
9e-05
0.01
0.003
0.43
0.19
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
215
==PAGE:224==
115
0.2
9e-05
0.02
-
0.93
0.18
116
0.27
8e-05
0.02
-
1.62
0.18
117
2.5
0.0001
0.02
0.003
1.65
0.2
118
10.85
7e-05
0.01
-
1.44
0.15
119
36.96
6e-05
0.02
0.002
1.3
0.13
120
27.02
7e-05
0.01
0.002
1.57
0.14
121
45.02
9e-05
0.02
-
1.54
0.18
122
45.17
6e-05
0.01
-
2.24
0.12
123
1.32
9e-05
0.02
0.003
1.86
0.18
124
1.42
0.00011
0.01
0.003
1.54
0.22
125
35.82
8e-05
0.01
-
0.3
0.17
126
39.65
8e-05
0.01
-
1.29
0.16
127
10.71
8e-05
0.01
-
3.08
0.17
128
8.91
8e-05
0.01
0.002
3.04
0.17
129
44.12
7e-05
0.01
0.002
0.31
0.15
130
12.0
6e-05
0.01
-
0.49
0.13
131
11.61
7e-05
0.01
-
1.92
0.15
132
37.12
8e-05
0.01
0.002
1.74
0.17
133
45.12
6e-05
0.01
-
0.35
0.12
134
35.97
0.0001
0.01
0.003
1.52
0.21
135
46.42
7e-05
0.01
-
0.77
0.14
136
43.16
8e-05
0.01
-
1.51
0.17
137
20.78
8e-05
0.01
0.002
1.89
0.16
138
0.57
0.00015
0.01
-
3.11
0.31
TIC 267255510
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
9.83
9e-05
0.9
0.004
1.55
0.0
2
3.21
0.00176
0.05
-
2.55
0.07
3
0.45
0.00212
0.04
0.004
0.68
0.09
4
1.72
0.00217
0.04
0.004
3.01
0.09
5
3.49
0.00205
0.05
0.004
0.72
0.09
6
19.67
0.00222
0.03
-
1.94
0.09
7
2.09
0.00377
0.02
-
2.54
0.16
8
6.43
0.00456
0.02
0.004
1.15
0.19
TIC 267286649
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
45.91
0.0
0.93
0.006
0.9
0.01
2
40.35
1e-05
0.48
-
1.56
0.02
3
39.24
1e-05
0.47
-
0.26
0.01
4
42.97
1e-05
0.39
0.006
1.76
0.01
5
42.52
1e-05
0.34
-
1.83
0.02
6
47.35
1e-05
0.2
0.004
0.66
0.02
7
37.93
2e-05
0.19
-
2.2
0.03
8
49.57
2e-05
0.16
-
2.71
0.03
9
33.21
2e-05
0.12
0.004
2.27
0.03
10
36.81
3e-05
0.09
-
0.62
0.05
216
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:225==
11
42.05
5e-05
0.08
0.005
1.39
0.06
12
0.19
5e-05
0.07
-
1.07
0.07
13
24.17
9e-05
0.04
0.005
2.23
0.13
14
9.03
9e-05
0.04
0.005
2.75
0.13
15
56.81
9e-05
0.04
0.005
0.43
0.12
16
51.13
9e-05
0.04
-
1.07
0.13
17
8.56
0.00012
0.04
0.006
0.88
0.17
18
61.81
0.0001
0.03
0.005
1.4
0.13
19
32.27
0.00014
0.03
-
1.06
0.19
20
44.9
0.00014
0.03
0.006
2.76
0.19
TIC 269792989
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.32
1e-05
2.07
-
3.06
0.02
2
32.67
0.0
1.57
0.006
1.42
0.0
3
2.38
1e-05
0.76
-
2.91
0.03
4
39.01
0.0
0.67
0.004
1.64
0.01
5
38.92
0.0
0.6
-
0.67
0.01
6
35.65
1e-05
0.59
0.007
1.39
0.01
7
42.26
1e-05
0.52
0.005
2.08
0.01
8
22.13
0.0
0.48
-
1.13
0.01
9
21.86
0.0
0.47
-
2.68
0.01
10
22.79
1e-05
0.31
-
0.33
0.01
11
20.33
1e-05
0.29
0.004
2.45
0.01
12
31.95
1e-05
0.24
-
1.13
0.01
13
28.83
1e-05
0.23
-
1.98
0.02
14
23.37
1e-05
0.24
-
1.73
0.01
15
1.16
6e-05
0.25
0.03
3.14
0.12
16
0.01
8e-05
0.19
0.028
2.63
0.15
17
23.39
1e-05
0.2
0.004
2.73
0.02
18
23.12
1e-05
0.19
-
2.81
0.01
19
45.75
1e-05
0.18
0.005
2.27
0.03
20
2.65
6e-05
0.15
0.018
1.62
0.12
21
0.34
6e-05
0.18
0.022
1.48
0.12
22
0.0
8e-05
0.18
-
0.24
0.15
23
26.46
1e-05
0.17
0.003
0.95
0.02
24
31.1
2e-05
0.17
-
0.2
0.03
25
22.4
1e-05
0.17
-
1.97
0.02
26
33.0
1e-05
0.15
0.004
2.06
0.03
27
35.39
1e-05
0.14
0.004
1.39
0.03
28
28.46
1e-05
0.13
0.003
1.51
0.03
29
0.15
0.00013
0.12
0.029
2.28
0.24
30
20.82
2e-05
0.12
0.004
0.33
0.03
31
33.56
2e-05
0.11
-
1.26
0.03
TIC 270265624
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
7.34
1e-05
25.12
0.421
1.94
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
217
==PAGE:226==
2
7.65
2e-05
5.25
0.149
2.8
0.03
3
0.32
4e-05
4.73
-
3.13
0.06
4
11.78
3e-05
3.97
0.171
2.89
0.04
5
12.16
5e-05
4.11
-
1.87
0.07
6
6.9
6e-05
3.71
-
0.1
0.08
7
0.16
0.00014
2.67
0.505
2.8
0.19
8
14.68
6e-05
2.61
0.205
0.93
0.08
9
0.32
8e-05
2.64
-
0.29
0.1
TIC 271793579
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.92
0.0
1.76
-
1.78
0.0
2
27.29
0.0
0.43
0.002
1.2
0.01
3
22.45
0.0
0.43
-
1.12
0.01
4
1.6
1e-05
0.31
-
0.58
0.02
5
15.48
1e-05
0.28
0.007
1.39
0.03
6
23.79
0.0
0.29
-
1.7
0.01
7
16.08
2e-05
0.26
0.008
1.82
0.03
8
21.32
1e-05
0.24
0.003
1.46
0.01
9
18.17
2e-05
0.23
-
0.31
0.03
10
31.77
1e-05
0.23
0.003
2.94
0.01
11
2.39
1e-05
0.19
-
0.37
0.02
12
19.21
1e-05
0.19
0.005
2.82
0.02
13
17.79
2e-05
0.16
-
2.4
0.04
14
16.76
3e-05
0.17
0.008
2.61
0.05
15
15.36
2e-05
0.17
0.008
2.16
0.05
16
21.23
1e-05
0.15
0.002
0.9
0.02
17
15.63
3e-05
0.16
0.008
1.59
0.05
18
15.98
3e-05
0.15
-
0.98
0.06
19
28.37
1e-05
0.14
-
1.59
0.02
20
15.19
3e-05
0.12
-
1.02
0.07
21
0.78
3e-05
0.13
-
0.04
0.05
22
16.22
3e-05
0.12
0.008
2.29
0.06
23
13.75
2e-05
0.12
-
0.48
0.04
24
1.16
4e-05
0.09
0.007
0.71
0.07
25
0.69
4e-05
0.09
0.007
2.94
0.08
26
33.06
1e-05
0.1
-
0.12
0.03
27
1.3
4e-05
0.09
0.007
1.63
0.07
28
14.53
3e-05
0.1
0.007
0.14
0.07
29
0.56
4e-05
0.09
-
1.01
0.08
30
1.82
3e-05
0.09
0.004
2.1
0.05
31
19.0
3e-05
0.08
0.005
2.77
0.07
32
18.11
3e-05
0.1
0.007
0.87
0.06
33
27.65
2e-05
0.08
0.002
0.06
0.03
34
0.64
5e-05
0.08
0.007
1.66
0.09
35
21.92
1e-05
0.08
0.002
1.8
0.03
36
1.51
3e-05
0.08
-
0.63
0.06
37
0.89
4e-05
0.07
0.006
1.34
0.08
38
21.48
1e-05
0.08
0.002
2.73
0.03
218
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:227==
39
17.88
5e-05
0.08
-
0.03
0.09
40
16.43
6e-05
0.07
-
1.37
0.11
41
14.02
4e-05
0.07
0.005
1.82
0.08
42
18.3
5e-05
0.07
0.007
0.38
0.1
43
0.99
6e-05
0.06
-
0.47
0.11
44
25.82
2e-05
0.07
0.002
2.1
0.03
45
15.91
6e-05
0.07
0.008
2.87
0.11
46
26.06
2e-05
0.06
-
1.76
0.03
47
17.69
7e-05
0.06
-
0.38
0.13
48
18.69
5e-05
0.06
-
2.71
0.1
49
17.18
6e-05
0.07
-
1.96
0.11
50
17.39
6e-05
0.06
0.007
0.07
0.11
51
16.95
6e-05
0.06
-
1.28
0.12
52
20.2
2e-05
0.06
-
0.72
0.05
53
16.61
7e-05
0.06
-
0.93
0.13
54
16.51
6e-05
0.06
-
1.22
0.12
55
14.35
6e-05
0.06
0.006
1.84
0.11
56
16.19
7e-05
0.06
-
2.24
0.13
57
16.18
7e-05
0.06
-
1.57
0.13
58
0.6
6e-05
0.06
-
0.82
0.12
59
16.81
8e-05
0.05
0.008
2.62
0.15
60
0.39
7e-05
0.06
0.008
0.13
0.14
61
0.61
6e-05
0.06
-
2.41
0.12
62
16.37
8e-05
0.05
0.008
0.16
0.15
63
27.77
2e-05
0.05
0.003
0.56
0.05
64
30.33
3e-05
0.05
0.003
2.81
0.05
65
16.92
8e-05
0.05
-
2.63
0.15
66
28.23
2e-05
0.05
0.002
1.88
0.04
67
1.04
7e-05
0.05
-
1.24
0.14
68
0.37
7e-05
0.05
-
1.27
0.14
69
17.62
8e-05
0.05
-
2.19
0.15
70
0.84
7e-05
0.04
0.006
2.3
0.14
71
28.97
3e-05
0.05
-
1.76
0.05
72
19.95
3e-05
0.05
-
3.1
0.06
73
26.67
2e-05
0.05
0.002
3.11
0.05
74
19.0
6e-05
0.05
-
3.04
0.11
75
17.82
8e-05
0.05
-
0.18
0.14
76
5.97
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.16
0.05
77
16.96
8e-05
0.05
0.008
1.31
0.15
78
17.09
7e-05
0.05
0.007
2.76
0.14
79
16.01
0.0001
0.04
-
0.96
0.2
80
23.22
2e-05
0.04
-
0.68
0.04
81
21.36
3e-05
0.04
-
0.49
0.06
82
19.93
4e-05
0.04
-
2.51
0.08
83
16.23
0.0001
0.04
0.008
0.37
0.19
84
30.09
3e-05
0.04
0.002
1.66
0.06
85
15.68
0.00011
0.04
-
0.62
0.21
86
0.2
9e-05
0.04
0.007
1.8
0.18
87
17.3
0.0001
0.04
0.008
2.8
0.19
88
34.88
3e-05
0.04
-
0.55
0.06
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
219
==PAGE:228==
89
24.81
3e-05
0.04
0.002
2.63
0.05
90
18.8
9e-05
0.04
0.006
2.56
0.17
91
13.61
6e-05
0.04
0.005
1.25
0.13
92
19.71
5e-05
0.04
0.003
1.56
0.1
93
22.76
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.12
0.06
94
15.35
0.00011
0.03
-
2.94
0.22
95
14.41
9e-05
0.04
0.006
2.21
0.17
96
13.98
7e-05
0.04
-
2.08
0.13
97
14.44
9e-05
0.04
0.007
2.0
0.18
98
15.09
0.00011
0.04
0.008
1.21
0.22
99
17.35
0.00011
0.04
0.007
1.68
0.21
100
13.73
6e-05
0.04
-
1.42
0.12
101
17.2
0.0001
0.04
0.008
3.01
0.19
102
23.06
3e-05
0.04
0.002
2.95
0.06
103
16.73
0.00012
0.04
-
1.93
0.24
104
16.5
0.0001
0.04
0.007
0.74
0.2
105
18.51
0.00011
0.04
-
2.14
0.21
106
21.15
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.58
0.07
107
17.56
0.00011
0.04
-
2.08
0.21
108
1.09
0.0001
0.03
-
0.95
0.19
109
19.38
6e-05
0.04
-
0.76
0.12
110
17.06
0.00011
0.04
0.008
2.1
0.21
111
28.28
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.83
0.07
112
15.53
0.00012
0.04
-
3.08
0.23
113
21.62
3e-05
0.03
0.002
1.27
0.06
114
17.1
0.00011
0.03
-
0.55
0.21
115
19.13
7e-05
0.03
0.005
1.82
0.14
116
17.62
0.00012
0.03
0.008
0.75
0.24
117
0.39
0.00011
0.03
-
2.88
0.22
118
0.26
0.00012
0.03
-
0.7
0.23
119
1.91
8e-05
0.03
0.005
0.78
0.15
120
34.2
4e-05
0.03
0.003
3.11
0.08
121
16.43
0.00011
0.04
0.008
2.79
0.22
122
17.33
0.00013
0.03
-
2.25
0.25
123
18.97
0.0001
0.03
0.006
0.7
0.19
124
3.28
4e-05
0.03
-
0.77
0.08
125
1.2
0.00011
0.03
0.007
2.92
0.22
126
18.12
0.00012
0.03
0.007
3.06
0.23
127
16.82
0.00012
0.03
0.008
1.64
0.23
128
17.5
0.00012
0.03
0.007
2.57
0.23
129
17.18
0.00011
0.03
-
2.39
0.22
130
14.66
0.00012
0.03
-
1.78
0.24
131
10.64
5e-05
0.03
-
1.31
0.09
132
29.83
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.43
0.08
133
0.15
0.0001
0.03
-
1.59
0.2
134
18.91
0.0001
0.03
0.006
0.22
0.2
TIC 271890182
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
220
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:229==
1
1.04
1e-05
2.5
0.017
2.79
0.01
2
1.13
2e-05
1.09
0.017
2.7
0.02
3
0.92
2e-05
0.98
-
1.61
0.02
4
1.15
3e-05
0.91
0.016
1.98
0.02
5
0.95
8e-05
0.31
0.016
0.95
0.05
6
1.0
0.00014
0.19
-
0.68
0.09
7
0.88
0.00014
0.17
0.015
1.38
0.09
8
1.95
0.0002
0.11
0.014
3.08
0.13
9
2.08
0.00026
0.08
-
0.32
0.17
10
0.09
0.00042
0.07
0.02
0.01
0.27
11
0.25
0.0004
0.07
-
1.54
0.26
12
2.17
0.00029
0.06
-
1.62
0.19
13
0.15
0.0005
0.06
0.02
2.96
0.32
TIC 273621988
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
9.56
0.0
6.34
0.015
2.1
0.0
2
9.53
0.0
3.34
-
0.02
0.0
3
19.26
1e-05
1.51
-
0.08
0.01
4
14.92
0.0
1.13
0.007
0.84
0.01
5
19.0
1e-05
0.89
-
3.06
0.02
6
17.03
1e-05
0.83
-
2.15
0.02
7
8.1
0.0
0.66
-
0.55
0.01
8
16.41
1e-05
0.63
-
1.65
0.02
9
10.5
2e-05
0.52
0.018
1.83
0.03
10
10.36
2e-05
0.4
-
1.2
0.04
11
19.52
2e-05
0.39
-
2.44
0.04
12
15.65
2e-05
0.3
0.013
1.74
0.04
13
16.84
3e-05
0.26
-
1.33
0.06
14
10.1
3e-05
0.27
0.014
0.77
0.05
15
20.62
3e-05
0.25
-
0.8
0.07
16
10.2
3e-05
0.27
0.015
0.82
0.06
17
15.76
1e-05
0.25
0.007
0.9
0.03
18
20.41
4e-05
0.22
-
0.69
0.08
19
17.5
3e-05
0.22
0.014
1.51
0.06
20
19.63
4e-05
0.2
-
2.01
0.08
21
20.31
5e-05
0.19
-
2.15
0.1
22
19.1
4e-05
0.2
-
0.41
0.09
23
17.55
3e-05
0.17
0.012
0.41
0.07
24
28.39
4e-05
0.17
0.012
0.53
0.07
25
24.82
4e-05
0.16
-
2.24
0.09
26
16.02
4e-05
0.15
-
0.44
0.09
27
16.0
4e-05
0.14
-
1.31
0.09
28
17.4
4e-05
0.14
-
1.47
0.09
29
25.79
3e-05
0.14
-
1.67
0.07
30
16.66
3e-05
0.13
-
1.23
0.05
31
26.59
3e-05
0.14
-
2.62
0.06
32
15.94
4e-05
0.13
0.01
2.67
0.08
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
221
==PAGE:230==
33
27.22
4e-05
0.13
0.01
2.68
0.08
34
29.67
5e-05
0.12
0.012
2.12
0.1
35
27.37
3e-05
0.12
-
2.3
0.06
36
27.1
4e-05
0.12
-
1.75
0.09
37
20.09
5e-05
0.12
0.013
3.03
0.11
38
18.84
6e-05
0.11
0.013
0.12
0.12
39
15.7
5e-05
0.11
-
2.86
0.1
40
26.38
6e-05
0.1
-
2.46
0.12
41
0.33
9e-05
0.1
0.019
3.12
0.19
42
18.3
4e-05
0.09
-
1.21
0.07
43
14.72
3e-05
0.09
-
0.29
0.06
44
20.07
6e-05
0.09
-
1.76
0.13
45
0.21
0.00011
0.08
-
2.16
0.24
46
28.4
8e-05
0.09
0.014
0.97
0.16
47
26.31
0.0001
0.08
0.017
0.66
0.21
TIC 273754456
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
26.21
1e-05
0.85
0.005
0.17
0.01
2
21.52
1e-05
0.62
0.005
1.1
0.01
3
27.37
1e-05
0.53
-
3.12
0.01
4
2.25
2e-05
0.51
-
1.44
0.01
5
2.49
2e-05
0.43
-
0.5
0.02
6
2.7
3e-05
0.4
-
0.49
0.02
7
24.67
2e-05
0.36
0.005
2.26
0.01
8
19.89
2e-05
0.36
0.004
1.3
0.01
9
22.2
2e-05
0.34
0.004
1.63
0.01
10
17.79
2e-05
0.33
-
0.86
0.01
11
1.76
5e-05
0.25
0.008
2.86
0.03
12
2.1
5e-05
0.22
-
1.06
0.03
13
22.92
4e-05
0.19
0.005
2.39
0.03
14
20.5
4e-05
0.16
0.004
1.88
0.03
15
2.62
7e-05
0.16
0.008
2.86
0.05
16
21.69
4e-05
0.16
0.005
1.44
0.03
17
8.42
7e-05
0.15
0.008
2.48
0.05
18
5.71
6e-05
0.15
0.007
2.2
0.04
19
6.06
7e-05
0.14
-
0.39
0.05
20
9.86
7e-05
0.16
0.008
0.32
0.05
21
3.74
8e-05
0.14
-
0.67
0.06
22
0.93
8e-05
0.14
0.008
0.05
0.06
23
1.03
8e-05
0.14
0.008
0.35
0.06
24
33.06
5e-05
0.13
-
0.17
0.04
25
11.12
8e-05
0.12
0.007
0.45
0.06
26
0.18
9e-05
0.13
-
2.56
0.06
27
7.59
0.00011
0.11
-
2.21
0.08
28
11.72
9e-05
0.11
-
0.02
0.07
29
20.22
6e-05
0.11
0.004
2.99
0.04
30
28.74
6e-05
0.1
-
2.97
0.04
31
19.02
6e-05
0.1
-
0.34
0.05
222
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:231==
32
8.61
0.00011
0.1
-
2.83
0.08
33
28.31
6e-05
0.09
-
2.36
0.04
34
19.43
7e-05
0.09
0.004
1.41
0.05
35
1.86
0.00012
0.09
0.008
1.62
0.09
36
9.77
0.00013
0.08
-
0.17
0.1
37
23.1
9e-05
0.08
0.005
3.01
0.07
38
6.64
0.00012
0.07
0.006
0.51
0.09
39
22.7
0.0001
0.07
0.005
1.55
0.07
40
3.23
0.00017
0.07
0.008
2.9
0.12
41
22.8
0.0001
0.07
0.005
0.79
0.07
42
18.72
9e-05
0.06
0.004
2.79
0.07
43
25.46
0.0001
0.06
0.005
1.81
0.07
44
2.0
0.00018
0.06
-
0.72
0.13
45
9.56
0.00019
0.06
-
0.33
0.14
46
10.14
0.00018
0.06
-
2.6
0.13
47
2.39
0.00017
0.06
0.007
1.73
0.13
48
0.77
0.00019
0.06
-
1.9
0.14
49
8.72
0.00019
0.06
0.008
0.67
0.14
50
52.62
0.00014
0.05
-
1.4
0.1
51
24.38
0.00013
0.05
0.005
0.25
0.1
52
6.91
0.00017
0.05
-
1.23
0.12
53
22.44
0.00012
0.05
0.004
2.98
0.08
54
3.63
0.00021
0.05
-
1.26
0.16
55
4.42
0.00022
0.05
-
2.01
0.16
56
1.95
0.00026
0.05
-
1.96
0.19
57
24.92
0.00015
0.04
0.005
2.08
0.11
58
8.62
0.00024
0.04
0.008
2.66
0.18
59
26.46
0.00018
0.04
-
0.01
0.13
60
3.43
0.00024
0.04
0.007
2.8
0.17
61
6.85
0.00021
0.04
0.006
0.07
0.15
62
7.37
0.0003
0.04
0.009
0.15
0.22
63
7.07
0.00029
0.04
-
1.81
0.21
64
6.15
0.00027
0.04
0.007
1.92
0.2
65
1.11
0.00033
0.04
-
1.35
0.24
66
0.15
0.00028
0.03
-
0.11
0.2
67
7.18
0.00033
0.03
0.008
2.69
0.24
68
30.0
0.00018
0.03
-
0.15
0.13
69
0.91
0.00031
0.04
0.008
1.75
0.23
70
0.73
0.00035
0.03
-
0.75
0.26
71
8.98
0.00036
0.03
-
3.01
0.27
72
0.22
0.00033
0.03
0.008
2.91
0.24
73
9.36
0.00031
0.03
-
0.15
0.23
74
6.82
0.00029
0.03
0.006
0.97
0.21
75
5.37
0.00027
0.03
-
0.18
0.2
TIC 27652512
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.58
1e-05
0.95
0.002
1.24
0.0
2
15.29
2e-05
0.72
-
2.89
0.0
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
223
==PAGE:232==
3
19.37
2e-05
0.59
0.002
0.21
0.0
4
14.55
4e-05
0.34
0.002
0.2
0.01
5
12.85
4e-05
0.33
-
2.49
0.01
6
16.71
5e-05
0.3
-
0.92
0.01
7
16.63
5e-05
0.3
-
0.26
0.01
8
17.92
8e-05
0.17
0.002
2.78
0.01
9
21.03
0.00018
0.07
-
1.92
0.03
10
19.91
0.00026
0.05
0.002
2.63
0.04
11
20.16
0.00025
0.05
0.002
2.46
0.03
12
14.77
0.00035
0.04
0.002
2.07
0.05
13
22.83
0.00033
0.04
0.002
0.06
0.05
14
0.92
0.00048
0.04
0.003
2.61
0.07
15
19.97
0.00031
0.04
0.002
1.17
0.04
16
6.76
0.00036
0.04
0.002
1.17
0.05
17
0.65
0.00047
0.04
0.003
0.36
0.07
18
2.2
0.00047
0.04
0.002
2.32
0.07
19
7.42
0.00037
0.03
0.002
1.26
0.05
20
17.39
0.0004
0.03
-
2.44
0.06
21
0.18
0.00054
0.04
-
3.04
0.08
22
0.68
0.00057
0.03
0.003
1.73
0.08
23
1.1
0.0007
0.03
0.003
1.9
0.1
24
17.81
0.00049
0.03
0.002
2.5
0.07
25
21.47
0.00046
0.03
0.002
2.67
0.06
26
19.81
0.00045
0.03
-
0.06
0.06
27
19.7
0.00045
0.03
0.002
0.42
0.06
28
0.72
0.00064
0.03
-
1.89
0.09
29
3.27
0.0007
0.03
-
0.94
0.1
30
20.53
0.00052
0.02
0.002
2.49
0.07
31
4.58
0.0007
0.02
0.002
0.35
0.1
32
5.09
0.00073
0.02
-
0.82
0.1
33
23.67
0.00063
0.02
0.002
1.18
0.09
34
26.08
0.00058
0.02
0.002
2.89
0.08
35
21.51
0.00072
0.02
0.002
2.31
0.1
36
8.83
0.00062
0.02
-
0.51
0.09
37
24.32
0.0006
0.02
0.002
2.33
0.08
38
6.26
0.00072
0.02
0.002
1.89
0.1
39
25.38
0.00071
0.02
0.002
1.36
0.1
40
5.98
0.00086
0.02
-
2.29
0.12
41
14.96
0.00081
0.02
0.002
1.26
0.11
42
33.92
0.00068
0.02
-
0.25
0.1
43
27.73
0.0009
0.02
-
0.46
0.13
44
28.35
0.00091
0.02
-
0.88
0.13
45
1.64
0.00135
0.01
-
1.32
0.19
46
1.9
0.00125
0.01
0.003
1.52
0.18
47
1.09
0.0009
0.02
0.003
2.22
0.13
48
26.68
0.001
0.01
-
1.49
0.14
49
0.54
0.00136
0.01
-
2.4
0.19
50
20.86
0.00093
0.01
0.002
0.4
0.13
51
32.0
0.00093
0.01
-
2.89
0.13
52
12.15
0.00089
0.01
-
0.57
0.13
224
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:233==
53
36.0
0.00083
0.01
-
0.75
0.12
54
4.62
0.00138
0.01
0.002
2.64
0.2
55
34.72
0.00091
0.01
0.001
1.7
0.13
56
21.76
0.00125
0.01
-
0.98
0.18
57
1.88
0.00145
0.01
-
0.78
0.21
58
32.22
0.00105
0.01
0.002
0.54
0.15
59
8.55
0.00114
0.01
0.002
0.15
0.16
60
22.64
0.00136
0.01
0.002
0.69
0.19
61
9.08
0.00123
0.01
0.002
1.66
0.18
62
4.47
0.00166
0.01
-
0.21
0.24
63
2.08
0.00181
0.01
-
2.12
0.26
64
33.13
0.00119
0.01
-
3.02
0.17
65
27.47
0.0015
0.01
0.002
1.49
0.21
66
29.83
0.00131
0.01
-
1.41
0.19
67
35.21
0.00115
0.01
0.001
1.35
0.16
68
22.59
0.00144
0.01
-
2.97
0.2
69
31.43
0.00129
0.01
-
0.79
0.18
TIC 278179191
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
28.96
0.0
0.57
0.002
1.45
0.0
2
39.52
1e-05
0.42
0.004
2.58
0.01
3
49.88
0.0
0.42
0.004
0.17
0.01
4
36.44
0.0
0.38
-
1.17
0.01
5
40.72
0.0
0.34
-
1.54
0.01
6
33.51
0.0
0.35
-
0.2
0.01
7
46.28
1e-05
0.3
0.003
0.93
0.01
8
24.79
0.0
0.29
-
0.3
0.01
9
29.92
0.0
0.28
0.002
2.36
0.01
10
29.54
0.0
0.27
-
1.95
0.01
11
43.91
1e-05
0.26
0.003
2.02
0.01
12
27.41
0.0
0.22
0.002
0.95
0.01
13
22.25
1e-05
0.21
0.002
0.39
0.01
14
44.02
1e-05
0.21
-
3.01
0.01
15
35.84
1e-05
0.2
-
1.52
0.01
16
42.8
1e-05
0.18
0.003
0.86
0.01
17
53.44
1e-05
0.15
-
2.92
0.02
18
47.04
1e-05
0.14
-
2.44
0.02
19
24.08
1e-05
0.14
-
2.93
0.01
20
28.5
1e-05
0.14
0.002
1.47
0.01
21
53.24
1e-05
0.13
-
0.93
0.03
22
46.47
1e-05
0.13
-
1.63
0.02
23
28.4
1e-05
0.13
0.002
0.24
0.01
24
63.9
2e-05
0.1
0.004
0.86
0.04
25
43.27
2e-05
0.1
0.003
2.93
0.03
26
27.62
1e-05
0.1
-
0.82
0.02
27
34.16
1e-05
0.1
0.002
0.39
0.02
28
45.2
1e-05
0.1
0.002
1.35
0.02
29
42.15
2e-05
0.09
-
0.16
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
225
==PAGE:234==
30
44.96
2e-05
0.08
0.003
2.45
0.03
31
45.68
1e-05
0.08
0.002
1.05
0.02
32
39.76
2e-05
0.08
0.003
3.11
0.04
33
22.57
2e-05
0.07
-
2.58
0.03
34
53.26
2e-05
0.08
0.003
2.92
0.04
35
35.33
2e-05
0.07
-
1.4
0.03
36
32.74
1e-05
0.07
-
2.39
0.02
37
34.06
2e-05
0.08
-
1.36
0.03
38
33.89
2e-05
0.07
0.003
1.21
0.04
39
47.68
3e-05
0.06
-
2.34
0.05
40
41.2
2e-05
0.07
0.002
1.05
0.03
41
31.32
2e-05
0.06
0.002
0.2
0.03
42
32.88
2e-05
0.06
0.002
2.15
0.03
43
48.84
2e-05
0.06
-
3.06
0.03
44
37.54
2e-05
0.06
0.002
1.1
0.03
45
33.97
3e-05
0.06
-
2.02
0.05
46
38.31
3e-05
0.06
-
1.01
0.05
47
57.87
3e-05
0.06
-
2.81
0.05
48
38.65
2e-05
0.06
-
2.01
0.04
49
44.74
2e-05
0.05
-
2.68
0.04
50
37.16
2e-05
0.05
0.002
0.28
0.04
51
40.57
2e-05
0.05
0.002
2.9
0.04
52
63.82
4e-05
0.06
0.003
2.98
0.06
53
49.96
3e-05
0.05
0.003
3.13
0.06
54
29.76
2e-05
0.05
-
1.71
0.04
55
51.76
3e-05
0.05
0.003
2.81
0.05
56
32.19
3e-05
0.05
-
1.51
0.05
57
29.48
3e-05
0.05
-
0.96
0.04
58
26.54
3e-05
0.05
0.002
0.43
0.05
59
57.05
3e-05
0.05
0.003
1.17
0.06
60
21.21
2e-05
0.04
0.002
2.86
0.04
61
60.21
4e-05
0.05
-
0.58
0.07
62
32.58
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.87
0.05
63
40.18
3e-05
0.04
-
1.55
0.05
64
32.0
3e-05
0.04
-
0.45
0.05
65
50.21
4e-05
0.04
-
0.78
0.07
66
26.45
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.64
0.06
67
64.05
4e-05
0.04
-
2.45
0.07
68
31.7
2e-05
0.04
-
1.21
0.04
69
16.85
3e-05
0.04
-
1.56
0.05
70
41.89
3e-05
0.04
-
1.78
0.06
71
40.02
2e-05
0.04
0.002
1.3
0.04
72
27.03
3e-05
0.04
-
1.06
0.05
73
41.03
3e-05
0.04
0.002
1.81
0.05
74
37.1
3e-05
0.04
0.002
1.27
0.05
75
31.11
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.44
0.05
76
37.61
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.97
0.05
77
27.15
3e-05
0.04
-
1.82
0.05
78
35.55
3e-05
0.04
0.002
1.41
0.05
79
34.45
3e-05
0.04
-
3.11
0.05
226
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:235==
80
21.33
3e-05
0.03
0.002
0.72
0.05
81
43.58
4e-05
0.03
-
0.6
0.06
82
52.47
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.57
0.08
83
60.76
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.96
0.08
84
14.95
3e-05
0.03
-
0.16
0.06
85
54.53
7e-05
0.03
-
3.12
0.12
86
29.26
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.56
0.06
87
56.8
6e-05
0.03
-
0.68
0.1
88
45.62
4e-05
0.03
0.002
2.54
0.06
89
27.48
4e-05
0.03
-
2.86
0.06
90
29.65
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.19
0.08
91
26.99
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.93
0.06
92
53.22
8e-05
0.02
0.003
1.99
0.13
93
30.44
5e-05
0.03
0.002
0.09
0.08
94
53.59
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.17
0.11
95
56.93
7e-05
0.03
0.003
0.14
0.11
96
45.89
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.79
0.07
97
70.77
5e-05
0.03
-
2.55
0.09
98
42.17
5e-05
0.03
-
0.71
0.08
99
32.09
5e-05
0.03
-
0.71
0.08
100
30.38
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.39
0.08
101
48.91
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.0
0.08
102
42.4
4e-05
0.03
-
1.4
0.07
103
60.37
8e-05
0.02
-
1.11
0.14
104
37.13
5e-05
0.03
-
0.55
0.08
105
47.94
6e-05
0.03
0.003
1.36
0.1
106
16.57
5e-05
0.03
0.002
2.09
0.08
107
63.98
8e-05
0.03
-
0.82
0.13
108
22.82
6e-05
0.02
0.002
1.14
0.1
109
27.73
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.44
0.08
110
70.85
6e-05
0.03
0.003
2.3
0.1
111
65.29
6e-05
0.02
0.003
1.06
0.11
112
56.97
8e-05
0.02
-
0.04
0.14
113
58.51
6e-05
0.03
0.002
2.2
0.1
114
26.29
5e-05
0.02
-
1.28
0.08
115
64.17
6e-05
0.02
-
2.37
0.1
116
39.34
5e-05
0.02
0.002
2.44
0.09
117
50.67
5e-05
0.02
-
2.33
0.09
118
38.46
6e-05
0.02
-
2.9
0.09
119
18.41
5e-05
0.02
0.002
0.01
0.08
120
58.88
6e-05
0.02
-
0.06
0.11
121
51.88
7e-05
0.02
-
1.21
0.12
122
54.71
9e-05
0.02
0.004
0.58
0.16
123
44.37
6e-05
0.02
0.002
2.57
0.1
124
48.71
6e-05
0.02
-
2.32
0.1
125
22.66
6e-05
0.02
-
2.98
0.1
126
31.63
4e-05
0.02
0.002
2.24
0.08
127
26.61
6e-05
0.02
0.002
1.63
0.1
128
41.74
7e-05
0.02
0.002
1.76
0.11
129
0.84
0.00012
0.02
-
2.43
0.21
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
227
==PAGE:236==
130
25.28
6e-05
0.02
-
1.27
0.1
131
25.89
6e-05
0.02
-
0.48
0.11
132
68.28
8e-05
0.02
-
1.13
0.14
133
21.59
8e-05
0.02
-
1.74
0.14
134
55.74
8e-05
0.02
-
2.05
0.14
135
36.71
6e-05
0.02
-
1.79
0.1
136
1.43
9e-05
0.02
-
0.67
0.16
137
52.86
6e-05
0.02
-
0.94
0.1
138
70.87
8e-05
0.02
0.003
2.34
0.14
139
58.43
8e-05
0.02
0.003
1.35
0.13
140
51.72
8e-05
0.02
0.003
1.22
0.13
141
52.39
7e-05
0.02
-
1.28
0.12
142
8.04
7e-05
0.02
0.002
0.23
0.13
143
21.74
6e-05
0.02
-
0.51
0.11
144
61.4
9e-05
0.02
0.003
1.07
0.15
145
18.08
5e-05
0.02
-
0.41
0.09
146
60.17
0.00011
0.02
-
1.49
0.19
147
56.47
7e-05
0.02
0.002
1.3
0.12
148
27.94
7e-05
0.02
-
2.88
0.12
149
63.62
7e-05
0.02
-
1.67
0.12
150
56.83
0.00011
0.02
-
1.07
0.18
151
58.62
8e-05
0.02
0.002
1.33
0.13
152
30.82
7e-05
0.02
0.002
0.03
0.12
153
16.11
7e-05
0.02
-
0.46
0.11
154
57.0
0.00011
0.02
0.003
2.03
0.18
155
25.23
6e-05
0.02
-
1.29
0.11
156
0.92
0.00015
0.02
-
0.79
0.26
157
0.87
0.00015
0.02
0.004
0.06
0.26
158
53.12
0.00011
0.02
-
1.44
0.19
159
46.8
9e-05
0.02
-
1.0
0.15
160
0.21
0.00017
0.02
0.005
1.9
0.29
161
58.41
9e-05
0.02
-
3.13
0.16
162
22.87
7e-05
0.02
-
0.22
0.12
163
0.26
0.00019
0.02
-
2.11
0.33
164
60.34
0.00012
0.02
0.003
1.24
0.2
165
15.02
7e-05
0.02
-
2.94
0.12
166
0.48
0.00015
0.02
0.004
1.42
0.25
167
30.74
7e-05
0.02
0.002
0.86
0.12
168
0.66
0.00016
0.02
0.004
2.74
0.28
169
35.17
6e-05
0.02
-
1.59
0.11
170
17.91
7e-05
0.02
0.002
1.64
0.12
171
43.14
0.0001
0.02
0.003
0.34
0.18
172
55.32
0.00011
0.01
0.003
1.11
0.18
173
67.67
9e-05
0.02
0.002
2.75
0.16
174
62.52
0.00012
0.02
-
0.44
0.2
175
57.53
8e-05
0.01
0.002
2.17
0.13
176
38.27
0.00012
0.01
-
1.08
0.2
177
70.79
9e-05
0.02
0.002
0.61
0.15
178
29.46
8e-05
0.02
0.002
1.92
0.13
179
20.25
8e-05
0.01
0.002
1.03
0.14
228
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:237==
180
67.29
0.00015
0.01
-
0.56
0.27
181
0.12
0.00017
0.01
-
2.81
0.3
182
17.28
7e-05
0.01
-
2.97
0.11
183
17.37
8e-05
0.01
0.002
2.39
0.13
TIC 278704172
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
21.56
1e-05
0.41
0.003
2.11
0.01
2
27.76
1e-05
0.36
0.003
2.92
0.01
3
21.15
1e-05
0.32
0.003
0.82
0.01
4
22.84
1e-05
0.3
-
3.08
0.01
5
30.69
1e-05
0.29
0.004
1.4
0.01
6
2.52
2e-05
0.15
0.003
2.45
0.02
7
32.54
1e-05
0.15
0.003
1.06
0.02
8
33.3
2e-05
0.14
0.003
0.88
0.02
9
24.78
2e-05
0.13
0.003
2.42
0.02
10
19.32
2e-05
0.11
0.003
1.72
0.03
11
27.28
2e-05
0.1
-
0.29
0.03
12
26.67
3e-05
0.09
-
0.57
0.03
13
36.35
2e-05
0.09
0.003
1.64
0.03
14
26.0
2e-05
0.08
0.002
2.62
0.03
15
26.84
3e-05
0.06
0.003
1.26
0.04
16
1.89
6e-05
0.05
-
1.86
0.08
17
23.86
3e-05
0.05
0.003
0.51
0.05
18
13.48
5e-05
0.05
0.003
0.18
0.06
19
34.22
4e-05
0.05
-
3.14
0.05
20
31.12
4e-05
0.05
-
0.48
0.05
21
10.96
4e-05
0.05
-
2.77
0.05
22
3.47
6e-05
0.05
-
3.05
0.08
23
23.56
4e-05
0.05
0.003
0.67
0.06
24
20.14
4e-05
0.05
-
2.0
0.05
25
31.37
3e-05
0.05
0.002
2.99
0.04
26
17.68
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.09
0.07
27
26.38
6e-05
0.04
-
0.84
0.08
28
16.85
5e-05
0.04
0.003
2.18
0.07
29
19.76
5e-05
0.04
0.002
1.59
0.06
30
26.04
4e-05
0.03
0.002
1.6
0.06
31
14.78
5e-05
0.03
-
2.42
0.06
32
36.95
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.39
0.07
33
29.99
7e-05
0.03
-
2.61
0.09
34
29.71
6e-05
0.03
0.002
1.28
0.08
35
16.29
7e-05
0.03
0.003
2.21
0.1
36
5.67
6e-05
0.03
0.002
0.89
0.08
37
49.5
6e-05
0.03
-
0.65
0.08
38
0.3
0.00012
0.03
-
0.94
0.17
39
0.13
8e-05
0.03
0.003
1.07
0.12
40
24.53
8e-05
0.02
-
2.13
0.11
41
0.76
0.00019
0.02
-
2.1
0.26
42
20.5
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.19
0.1
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
229
==PAGE:238==
43
0.16
0.00012
0.02
0.003
1.69
0.17
44
31.73
0.00011
0.02
-
1.16
0.16
TIC 279090002
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.05
2e-05
0.37
-
1.06
0.01
2
1.91
7e-05
0.11
0.005
0.89
0.04
3
1.79
7e-05
0.11
0.005
1.86
0.05
4
1.67
0.00011
0.06
-
1.59
0.07
5
1.6
0.00012
0.06
-
0.9
0.08
6
1.63
0.00013
0.05
0.005
1.22
0.09
7
1.74
0.00013
0.05
-
0.15
0.09
8
1.42
0.00015
0.05
-
0.72
0.1
9
1.32
0.00018
0.04
-
0.05
0.11
10
0.21
0.00028
0.03
0.005
0.32
0.18
11
4.1
0.0002
0.03
0.003
1.54
0.13
12
0.26
0.00037
0.02
-
1.96
0.24
13
2.83
0.00023
0.02
0.003
1.73
0.15
14
0.42
0.00039
0.02
0.005
1.59
0.25
15
0.8
0.00039
0.02
-
2.55
0.25
16
3.23
0.00031
0.02
-
0.37
0.2
17
0.24
0.00044
0.02
-
0.76
0.29
TIC 279339318
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
15.59
0.0001
2.69
0.013
0.3
0.0
2
23.77
9e-05
2.32
0.01
2.22
0.0
3
14.32
0.00012
2.3
0.013
2.04
0.01
4
29.83
0.00012
1.92
-
2.98
0.01
5
16.26
0.00017
1.52
-
0.95
0.01
6
14.97
0.00019
1.53
0.013
0.8
0.01
7
19.06
0.00023
1.07
0.012
0.03
0.01
8
24.91
0.0002
1.08
0.01
0.56
0.01
9
24.38
0.00022
0.93
-
2.87
0.01
10
17.99
0.0003
0.86
0.012
1.29
0.01
11
18.13
0.00031
0.83
0.012
2.11
0.01
12
26.01
0.00026
0.81
-
2.67
0.01
13
20.08
0.00035
0.62
-
2.69
0.02
14
22.35
0.00036
0.59
0.01
0.6
0.02
15
21.04
0.00048
0.45
-
3.04
0.02
16
18.87
0.0006
0.42
-
0.45
0.03
17
25.6
0.00051
0.41
-
0.98
0.02
18
18.68
0.00063
0.4
0.012
0.35
0.03
19
9.83
0.00097
0.35
-
0.48
0.05
20
20.18
0.00063
0.35
0.01
1.03
0.03
21
8.7
0.00102
0.34
-
0.87
0.05
22
2.12
0.00105
0.28
0.014
1.91
0.05
23
19.86
0.00075
0.3
-
1.62
0.04
230
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:239==
24
17.44
0.00095
0.28
0.012
1.87
0.04
25
18.41
0.00101
0.25
-
0.38
0.05
26
25.25
0.00092
0.23
0.01
2.24
0.04
27
32.71
0.00112
0.21
-
1.41
0.05
28
27.15
0.00113
0.2
0.011
2.95
0.05
29
27.77
0.00115
0.2
0.011
0.95
0.05
30
2.01
0.00162
0.18
-
2.82
0.08
31
24.12
0.00121
0.17
-
1.2
0.06
32
0.71
0.00174
0.17
-
0.98
0.08
33
10.5
0.00177
0.18
-
2.12
0.08
34
9.51
0.00218
0.16
0.016
1.66
0.1
35
0.18
0.00225
0.13
-
2.37
0.11
36
1.81
0.00223
0.13
-
1.21
0.11
37
23.12
0.00156
0.14
0.01
1.78
0.07
38
0.89
0.00236
0.12
0.014
2.93
0.11
39
34.69
0.00191
0.12
-
1.24
0.09
40
19.7
0.00187
0.12
-
1.87
0.09
41
30.98
0.00218
0.11
0.011
0.2
0.1
42
37.35
0.00188
0.12
0.01
3.08
0.09
43
11.7
0.0028
0.11
0.014
3.02
0.13
44
22.72
0.00212
0.1
0.01
0.09
0.1
45
8.89
0.00311
0.11
-
0.91
0.15
46
29.09
0.0024
0.1
-
2.22
0.11
47
10.01
0.00319
0.11
-
0.31
0.15
48
9.91
0.00338
0.1
-
0.8
0.16
49
11.11
0.00302
0.1
0.015
0.87
0.14
50
35.0
0.00241
0.09
0.011
3.03
0.11
51
1.04
0.00235
0.12
0.014
0.39
0.11
52
7.95
0.0039
0.09
0.016
1.4
0.18
53
21.79
0.00228
0.1
-
2.12
0.11
54
26.73
0.00265
0.08
-
1.61
0.12
55
13.46
0.00352
0.08
-
0.42
0.17
56
8.38
0.00431
0.08
-
1.47
0.2
57
21.58
0.00251
0.09
0.01
2.47
0.12
58
7.3
0.00489
0.07
0.016
1.95
0.23
59
27.4
0.00312
0.07
-
0.61
0.15
60
6.29
0.0048
0.07
-
1.53
0.23
61
36.07
0.00298
0.08
-
0.42
0.14
62
26.96
0.00334
0.07
0.011
2.03
0.16
63
26.15
0.00315
0.07
0.01
3.12
0.15
64
5.31
0.00517
0.07
0.016
0.52
0.24
65
18.97
0.00383
0.07
0.012
1.16
0.18
66
39.35
0.00351
0.06
0.01
0.99
0.17
67
10.81
0.00512
0.06
-
2.92
0.24
68
37.31
0.00325
0.07
0.01
0.54
0.15
69
9.11
0.00583
0.06
0.016
1.22
0.27
70
11.53
0.00548
0.06
-
0.65
0.26
71
13.1
0.00541
0.05
0.014
2.16
0.25
72
7.76
0.0063
0.05
-
2.29
0.3
73
4.69
0.00599
0.05
-
0.6
0.28
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
231
==PAGE:240==
TIC 279361762
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.91
0.0
3.58
0.004
0.32
0.0
2
10.76
0.0
3.51
0.006
0.54
0.0
3
9.67
0.0
2.96
0.005
1.46
0.0
4
6.72
0.0
2.93
0.004
1.22
0.0
5
8.32
0.0
2.65
-
2.09
0.0
6
7.36
0.0
2.54
0.005
1.16
0.0
7
7.63
0.0
1.82
-
2.96
0.0
8
5.89
0.0
1.52
-
1.04
0.0
9
5.69
0.0
1.4
0.004
2.22
0.0
10
9.83
0.0
1.37
-
2.41
0.0
11
8.14
0.0
1.24
-
2.2
0.0
12
6.07
0.0
1.22
-
1.81
0.0
13
9.2
0.0
1.22
-
0.12
0.0
14
10.3
0.0
1.17
-
1.64
0.0
15
6.82
0.0
1.19
-
2.57
0.0
16
6.83
0.0
1.11
0.005
2.14
0.0
17
5.43
0.0
0.94
-
2.43
0.0
18
8.55
0.0
0.92
-
1.22
0.0
19
7.06
0.0
0.81
-
0.58
0.0
20
9.51
0.0
0.79
0.004
2.08
0.01
21
7.77
0.0
0.7
0.004
0.48
0.01
22
4.95
0.0
0.64
0.004
2.18
0.01
23
7.58
0.0
0.65
0.005
2.06
0.01
24
8.03
0.0
0.67
-
0.17
0.01
25
5.13
0.0
0.61
0.003
2.52
0.01
26
8.43
0.0
0.55
-
3.08
0.01
27
11.28
1e-05
0.54
0.006
1.33
0.01
28
6.79
1e-05
0.51
0.005
2.48
0.01
29
7.83
1e-05
0.45
0.004
2.88
0.01
30
9.27
0.0
0.45
-
1.47
0.01
31
9.19
1e-05
0.41
-
2.97
0.01
32
8.66
1e-05
0.4
0.004
3.1
0.01
33
4.39
1e-05
0.39
-
2.09
0.01
34
11.43
1e-05
0.39
-
2.99
0.02
35
7.19
0.0
0.4
-
2.9
0.01
36
4.92
1e-05
0.37
0.004
3.12
0.01
37
5.16
1e-05
0.35
0.003
1.19
0.01
38
6.0
1e-05
0.34
-
1.05
0.01
39
5.54
1e-05
0.32
-
1.39
0.01
40
10.27
1e-05
0.29
-
0.17
0.02
41
7.25
1e-05
0.28
-
2.55
0.02
42
6.23
1e-05
0.25
-
3.13
0.01
43
5.39
1e-05
0.23
-
1.57
0.02
44
5.31
1e-05
0.23
0.004
1.43
0.02
45
10.24
1e-05
0.22
-
2.09
0.02
46
8.35
1e-05
0.21
0.005
2.26
0.02
47
6.3
1e-05
0.18
0.003
2.12
0.02
232
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:241==
48
2.83
2e-05
0.17
0.005
1.5
0.03
49
6.57
1e-05
0.15
-
0.13
0.03
50
4.49
1e-05
0.16
0.004
0.3
0.02
51
19.32
1e-05
0.15
0.003
0.65
0.02
52
6.35
1e-05
0.14
-
2.52
0.02
53
9.94
2e-05
0.15
-
2.93
0.03
54
7.84
2e-05
0.13
-
1.1
0.03
55
13.29
3e-05
0.12
-
1.99
0.05
56
18.3
2e-05
0.12
0.004
1.95
0.03
57
15.68
2e-05
0.12
-
0.3
0.04
58
12.93
2e-05
0.12
0.005
2.76
0.04
59
8.4
2e-05
0.11
-
0.29
0.04
60
14.21
3e-05
0.11
-
2.56
0.05
61
8.21
2e-05
0.11
-
2.33
0.03
62
19.18
2e-05
0.11
0.004
0.84
0.04
63
13.58
3e-05
0.11
0.006
1.7
0.05
64
4.83
2e-05
0.11
-
1.28
0.03
65
10.79
3e-05
0.11
0.006
2.11
0.05
66
11.86
3e-05
0.1
-
0.68
0.05
67
7.57
3e-05
0.1
-
1.51
0.05
68
9.08
3e-05
0.1
0.005
1.97
0.05
69
9.57
2e-05
0.1
-
0.87
0.04
70
3.52
2e-05
0.1
0.004
2.42
0.05
71
17.03
3e-05
0.09
0.004
2.25
0.05
72
1.85
3e-05
0.09
-
0.46
0.06
73
4.28
2e-05
0.09
-
0.61
0.04
74
11.46
4e-05
0.09
-
1.71
0.07
75
14.6
3e-05
0.09
-
2.56
0.06
76
17.99
2e-05
0.08
-
0.96
0.04
77
19.67
1e-05
0.09
-
0.61
0.03
78
4.13
2e-05
0.08
0.004
1.66
0.05
79
11.48
4e-05
0.08
-
2.5
0.08
80
1.67
4e-05
0.08
0.006
0.59
0.07
81
4.5
3e-05
0.08
0.004
2.13
0.05
82
1.55
5e-05
0.07
0.007
1.39
0.1
83
14.01
4e-05
0.07
-
0.1
0.08
84
21.52
2e-05
0.08
-
0.05
0.03
85
20.27
2e-05
0.07
-
3.08
0.03
86
1.35
4e-05
0.08
-
3.06
0.08
87
14.27
4e-05
0.08
0.006
0.59
0.07
88
14.18
4e-05
0.07
-
1.27
0.08
89
13.21
4e-05
0.07
-
1.73
0.08
90
9.18
3e-05
0.07
-
1.92
0.06
91
1.23
5e-05
0.07
-
2.37
0.09
92
18.58
3e-05
0.06
0.003
0.58
0.05
93
15.23
4e-05
0.07
0.004
1.88
0.07
94
2.31
5e-05
0.06
0.006
0.32
0.09
95
1.47
6e-05
0.06
0.007
0.95
0.11
96
2.04
5e-05
0.07
-
2.78
0.09
97
18.41
3e-05
0.06
-
1.24
0.06
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
233
==PAGE:242==
98
12.71
4e-05
0.06
0.005
2.05
0.08
99
0.88
7e-05
0.06
0.008
0.74
0.14
100
8.38
4e-05
0.06
-
0.59
0.08
101
14.15
5e-05
0.06
-
1.1
0.1
102
2.63
5e-05
0.06
-
3.05
0.09
103
3.19
4e-05
0.06
0.005
0.35
0.08
104
19.34
3e-05
0.06
0.003
1.85
0.06
105
12.51
6e-05
0.06
-
2.65
0.11
106
3.96
4e-05
0.06
0.004
0.29
0.07
107
11.83
6e-05
0.05
0.006
1.05
0.11
108
0.59
0.0001
0.05
0.01
0.84
0.19
109
15.56
4e-05
0.05
-
0.39
0.08
110
17.82
4e-05
0.05
0.004
0.43
0.08
111
9.16
4e-05
0.05
0.004
1.47
0.08
112
16.94
4e-05
0.05
0.004
0.61
0.08
113
13.64
5e-05
0.05
-
2.64
0.09
114
13.19
6e-05
0.05
0.005
1.01
0.1
115
15.49
5e-05
0.05
0.004
0.03
0.08
116
0.56
0.0001
0.05
-
2.43
0.18
117
19.39
3e-05
0.05
0.003
0.81
0.06
118
13.87
6e-05
0.05
-
2.47
0.11
119
17.29
5e-05
0.05
-
0.95
0.09
120
20.43
3e-05
0.05
0.002
1.43
0.05
121
1.09
8e-05
0.05
-
0.31
0.14
122
18.38
4e-05
0.05
0.004
2.34
0.08
123
3.02
5e-05
0.05
-
1.35
0.1
124
13.32
6e-05
0.05
-
0.87
0.11
125
15.32
6e-05
0.05
0.005
0.13
0.11
126
2.49
6e-05
0.05
0.005
0.36
0.11
127
18.87
4e-05
0.05
0.004
2.05
0.08
128
17.3
5e-05
0.05
0.004
1.83
0.09
129
12.16
7e-05
0.05
-
1.42
0.13
130
1.04
9e-05
0.04
-
1.23
0.17
131
15.93
5e-05
0.05
0.004
1.54
0.09
132
15.79
5e-05
0.05
-
1.47
0.1
133
16.01
5e-05
0.05
0.004
2.4
0.09
134
13.18
6e-05
0.05
-
0.75
0.11
135
0.44
0.00013
0.04
0.01
3.11
0.24
136
16.48
6e-05
0.04
-
1.21
0.11
137
1.29
8e-05
0.04
0.006
2.33
0.15
138
16.96
5e-05
0.05
0.004
2.53
0.1
139
1.95
7e-05
0.05
0.006
1.87
0.13
140
20.2
3e-05
0.04
-
0.03
0.05
141
15.4
7e-05
0.04
0.005
2.02
0.13
142
0.85
0.00011
0.04
0.009
2.55
0.2
143
1.83
7e-05
0.05
-
1.75
0.13
144
17.06
5e-05
0.04
0.004
1.89
0.1
145
13.24
7e-05
0.04
0.006
0.28
0.14
146
14.65
6e-05
0.04
0.005
0.81
0.11
147
1.62
8e-05
0.04
-
1.89
0.16
234
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:243==
148
13.55
7e-05
0.04
-
0.49
0.14
149
17.81
5e-05
0.04
-
0.78
0.09
150
17.14
6e-05
0.04
-
2.56
0.12
151
3.22
6e-05
0.04
0.004
2.98
0.11
152
0.47
0.00011
0.05
0.01
0.96
0.22
153
3.98
6e-05
0.04
-
0.07
0.11
154
12.22
8e-05
0.04
0.006
0.32
0.16
155
17.24
6e-05
0.04
-
0.68
0.12
156
17.6
6e-05
0.04
0.005
1.34
0.12
157
0.5
0.00013
0.04
-
2.58
0.25
158
0.2
0.00013
0.05
0.011
1.58
0.24
159
2.19
8e-05
0.04
0.006
0.09
0.15
160
2.31
8e-05
0.04
0.006
1.97
0.15
161
19.31
5e-05
0.04
-
1.96
0.09
162
1.07
9e-05
0.04
-
2.12
0.18
163
15.14
6e-05
0.04
-
1.04
0.12
164
1.01
0.0001
0.04
0.007
1.68
0.19
165
18.11
6e-05
0.04
-
1.4
0.11
166
0.73
0.00012
0.04
-
0.76
0.22
167
0.64
0.00014
0.04
-
3.13
0.26
168
0.23
0.00012
0.04
0.01
0.33
0.23
169
17.63
6e-05
0.04
-
1.63
0.11
170
17.49
6e-05
0.04
0.005
2.44
0.12
171
0.08
0.00014
0.04
-
2.42
0.27
172
16.14
7e-05
0.04
-
1.86
0.13
173
19.16
5e-05
0.04
0.004
1.53
0.1
174
0.17
0.00015
0.04
0.011
1.07
0.28
175
16.23
7e-05
0.04
-
2.54
0.14
176
0.25
0.00015
0.04
-
2.46
0.28
177
13.28
8e-05
0.04
0.006
1.36
0.15
178
0.7
0.00013
0.04
-
1.44
0.24
179
12.19
9e-05
0.04
0.006
3.13
0.16
180
18.13
7e-05
0.04
-
1.34
0.13
181
16.54
6e-05
0.04
-
2.99
0.12
182
0.64
0.00014
0.04
0.01
2.79
0.27
183
14.07
9e-05
0.04
0.006
0.75
0.17
184
14.82
8e-05
0.04
0.006
1.66
0.16
185
1.68
9e-05
0.04
0.006
3.13
0.16
186
0.21
0.00013
0.04
0.01
0.44
0.25
TIC 280533871
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
6.41
0.0
5.65
0.022
0.8
0.0
2
7.42
1e-05
3.4
0.026
2.03
0.01
3
4.74
1e-05
2.28
-
2.89
0.01
4
6.75
1e-05
1.51
0.015
1.59
0.01
5
5.86
2e-05
0.98
-
2.91
0.03
6
3.29
3e-05
0.82
0.03
2.86
0.04
7
8.23
3e-05
0.69
-
2.08
0.04
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
235
==PAGE:244==
8
4.66
1e-05
0.64
0.013
2.19
0.02
9
10.0
3e-05
0.51
0.021
2.1
0.04
10
9.88
3e-05
0.5
0.019
0.6
0.04
11
1.7
4e-05
0.44
-
0.2
0.06
12
3.91
4e-05
0.44
0.024
2.13
0.06
13
11.56
5e-05
0.43
-
1.54
0.07
14
0.89
3e-05
0.36
0.014
2.74
0.04
15
11.74
4e-05
0.35
0.02
1.29
0.06
16
5.18
6e-05
0.3
0.024
2.15
0.08
17
3.47
6e-05
0.28
0.024
2.4
0.09
18
12.63
9e-05
0.25
0.03
0.68
0.12
19
4.42
5e-05
0.26
0.017
2.58
0.06
20
12.21
6e-05
0.23
0.02
1.34
0.09
21
15.64
5e-05
0.2
-
2.35
0.07
22
8.96
0.00011
0.22
-
0.22
0.15
23
13.54
9e-05
0.18
0.021
1.62
0.12
24
3.25
0.00012
0.18
0.03
2.53
0.17
25
10.84
0.00013
0.18
-
0.72
0.17
26
9.75
0.0001
0.17
-
1.51
0.14
27
14.43
7e-05
0.17
-
2.73
0.09
28
14.54
6e-05
0.18
-
2.15
0.09
29
16.21
5e-05
0.16
-
0.02
0.08
30
14.85
8e-05
0.16
-
2.17
0.12
31
11.1
0.00014
0.16
0.03
2.32
0.19
32
9.35
0.00013
0.14
0.026
0.11
0.18
33
16.77
7e-05
0.13
-
0.6
0.09
34
0.45
0.00012
0.11
0.019
1.1
0.16
35
13.38
0.00012
0.13
0.022
1.7
0.17
36
0.34
0.00013
0.16
0.029
1.24
0.18
37
7.0
0.00015
0.12
-
0.38
0.21
38
15.08
8e-05
0.12
-
2.56
0.11
39
1.37
0.00015
0.13
-
2.81
0.21
40
0.82
0.0001
0.12
0.017
1.41
0.14
41
15.33
0.00012
0.11
-
0.0
0.16
42
13.13
0.00012
0.11
0.018
1.09
0.16
43
2.64
0.00015
0.11
0.023
0.72
0.21
TIC 280945948
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
7.61
1e-05
18.19
0.026
1.07
0.0
2
7.31
4e-05
6.72
-
2.76
0.0
3
8.16
4e-05
6.68
-
2.59
0.0
4
9.24
7e-05
3.48
0.025
1.02
0.01
5
7.07
0.00013
1.86
0.023
0.08
0.01
6
12.13
0.00013
1.14
0.015
3.01
0.01
7
14.92
0.00018
0.97
-
2.88
0.02
8
10.38
0.0002
1.03
0.02
1.94
0.02
9
9.77
0.00025
0.95
0.023
2.25
0.02
10
15.22
0.00026
0.71
0.018
2.31
0.03
236
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:245==
11
11.6
0.00025
0.67
-
1.35
0.02
12
16.85
0.0003
0.53
0.015
2.98
0.03
13
13.86
0.00033
0.48
0.015
0.41
0.03
14
6.57
0.00044
0.47
0.02
2.93
0.04
15
0.55
0.00068
0.44
0.029
1.99
0.07
16
0.65
0.0008
0.36
-
2.2
0.08
17
0.02
0.00084
0.38
-
2.93
0.08
18
13.84
0.00043
0.36
0.015
2.67
0.04
19
11.51
0.00052
0.32
0.016
2.55
0.05
20
14.68
0.00054
0.31
-
2.93
0.05
21
0.69
0.00111
0.26
-
0.98
0.11
22
15.47
0.00076
0.25
-
2.79
0.07
23
0.3
0.00132
0.24
0.03
0.51
0.13
24
1.63
0.00115
0.2
-
0.07
0.11
25
16.55
0.00084
0.19
0.015
0.36
0.08
26
15.84
0.00105
0.18
-
0.39
0.1
27
1.41
0.00142
0.17
-
0.17
0.14
28
11.03
0.00111
0.17
-
2.88
0.11
TIC 281499618
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
23.86
0.0
1.44
0.006
0.56
0.0
2
23.15
0.0
0.92
-
1.7
0.0
3
41.5
0.0
0.68
-
2.81
0.0
4
30.53
0.0
0.68
-
1.05
0.01
5
22.97
1e-05
0.63
-
0.96
0.01
6
29.79
1e-05
0.49
-
1.13
0.01
7
29.25
1e-05
0.51
0.005
0.18
0.01
8
44.71
1e-05
0.44
0.004
2.85
0.01
9
24.99
1e-05
0.4
0.004
1.34
0.01
10
35.24
1e-05
0.37
0.004
1.01
0.01
11
37.46
1e-05
0.29
0.005
1.66
0.02
12
29.88
1e-05
0.29
-
0.68
0.01
13
33.94
1e-05
0.25
-
0.67
0.02
14
44.0
1e-05
0.22
0.003
2.72
0.02
15
29.17
2e-05
0.22
-
0.92
0.02
16
62.42
2e-05
0.19
0.004
1.42
0.02
17
33.3
1e-05
0.17
0.004
1.75
0.02
18
34.61
2e-05
0.16
0.006
2.76
0.04
19
36.76
2e-05
0.17
0.005
1.57
0.03
20
40.82
2e-05
0.14
0.004
2.2
0.03
21
28.49
2e-05
0.14
0.004
0.21
0.03
22
58.42
2e-05
0.12
-
0.33
0.03
23
39.53
3e-05
0.12
-
0.22
0.05
24
26.01
3e-05
0.11
-
2.24
0.04
25
0.36
6e-05
0.11
-
1.26
0.08
26
5.95
2e-05
0.1
-
1.48
0.03
27
34.51
3e-05
0.1
-
1.66
0.04
28
4.32
3e-05
0.1
-
1.96
0.04
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
237
==PAGE:246==
29
35.52
3e-05
0.09
0.003
1.63
0.04
30
4.74
4e-05
0.09
-
2.27
0.05
31
61.06
3e-05
0.09
0.004
1.68
0.05
32
38.22
2e-05
0.08
0.003
2.92
0.03
33
26.71
3e-05
0.08
-
1.36
0.04
34
33.29
3e-05
0.09
0.004
0.01
0.04
35
24.65
4e-05
0.08
0.004
2.44
0.05
36
55.39
3e-05
0.08
0.003
1.35
0.04
37
2.7
3e-05
0.08
0.004
1.15
0.05
38
32.8
3e-05
0.07
0.003
1.28
0.04
39
5.53
4e-05
0.07
0.004
0.98
0.05
40
59.1
4e-05
0.07
-
3.07
0.06
41
32.08
5e-05
0.07
0.005
2.08
0.07
42
3.96
4e-05
0.06
0.004
2.77
0.06
43
40.22
5e-05
0.06
0.004
2.99
0.07
44
39.89
3e-05
0.06
0.003
1.18
0.05
45
69.57
5e-05
0.06
0.004
2.88
0.07
46
55.32
4e-05
0.06
-
1.7
0.05
47
62.45
6e-05
0.05
-
2.56
0.09
48
27.76
4e-05
0.06
-
0.08
0.06
49
48.36
6e-05
0.05
-
1.66
0.08
50
48.37
5e-05
0.06
0.004
1.96
0.07
51
36.92
6e-05
0.05
0.004
0.45
0.08
52
0.48
0.00012
0.05
0.008
2.71
0.17
53
30.91
5e-05
0.05
-
2.46
0.07
54
31.27
5e-05
0.05
0.004
0.08
0.07
55
31.36
6e-05
0.04
-
1.16
0.08
56
31.41
6e-05
0.04
-
2.54
0.08
57
38.65
5e-05
0.04
-
0.13
0.08
58
48.41
6e-05
0.04
-
2.41
0.09
59
33.05
6e-05
0.04
0.004
2.52
0.09
60
40.0
6e-05
0.04
-
0.49
0.09
61
20.86
6e-05
0.04
-
0.77
0.09
62
34.43
7e-05
0.04
0.004
2.17
0.1
63
1.43
0.0001
0.04
0.005
1.18
0.14
64
25.88
7e-05
0.04
-
2.2
0.1
65
0.65
0.00014
0.04
-
0.66
0.21
66
1.25
0.0001
0.04
-
0.98
0.14
67
32.87
7e-05
0.04
0.004
0.7
0.1
68
21.9
0.0001
0.03
0.004
1.93
0.15
69
48.4
9e-05
0.03
-
2.47
0.13
70
33.1
8e-05
0.03
0.004
0.24
0.12
71
50.51
9e-05
0.03
-
2.96
0.12
72
30.45
9e-05
0.03
-
2.96
0.12
73
31.89
8e-05
0.03
0.003
0.28
0.11
74
48.08
6e-05
0.03
0.003
1.64
0.09
75
36.22
0.0001
0.03
0.004
1.51
0.14
76
28.59
0.0001
0.03
-
0.17
0.14
77
47.46
8e-05
0.03
0.003
2.41
0.12
78
32.0
0.00011
0.03
-
1.63
0.15
238
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:247==
79
27.05
0.0001
0.03
-
3.0
0.14
80
1.12
0.00014
0.03
-
0.97
0.2
81
5.24
0.0001
0.03
0.004
2.98
0.15
82
21.85
0.0001
0.03
-
1.48
0.14
83
22.58
0.00014
0.03
-
0.57
0.21
84
57.65
8e-05
0.02
0.003
2.1
0.12
85
32.7
8e-05
0.02
0.003
2.76
0.12
86
30.2
0.0001
0.02
0.003
1.9
0.14
87
33.61
0.00011
0.02
0.004
2.48
0.15
88
38.75
0.00011
0.02
-
0.35
0.16
TIC 282799114
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
4.87
1e-05
0.59
0.007
2.68
0.01
2
0.96
1e-05
0.45
0.007
1.24
0.02
3
3.55
2e-05
0.42
0.011
0.93
0.03
4
2.19
4e-05
0.17
0.009
1.56
0.05
5
5.83
5e-05
0.16
-
2.13
0.07
6
2.85
7e-05
0.11
0.011
1.76
0.1
7
0.68
7e-05
0.11
-
1.62
0.1
8
1.01
4e-05
0.12
-
2.78
0.06
9
1.75
6e-05
0.08
0.007
3.03
0.09
10
0.25
4e-05
0.09
0.005
1.27
0.06
11
4.4
0.00015
0.07
-
0.1
0.2
12
2.01
0.00011
0.07
-
1.71
0.15
13
2.8
0.00011
0.06
0.009
0.68
0.15
14
1.38
0.00021
0.05
-
2.74
0.28
15
3.44
0.00011
0.05
-
2.63
0.15
16
0.17
9e-05
0.06
-
2.26
0.13
TIC 283091451
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.5
1e-05
2.8
-
2.79
0.01
2
0.29
0.00011
0.18
0.027
3.02
0.15
TIC 28397861
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
23.66
0.0
1.85
-
1.4
0.0
2
12.97
0.0
1.69
0.007
0.77
0.0
3
20.93
0.0
0.94
0.005
1.59
0.0
4
13.16
1e-05
0.56
0.006
2.63
0.01
5
14.54
1e-05
0.48
-
1.71
0.01
6
20.73
0.0
0.54
0.005
0.94
0.01
7
12.68
1e-05
0.46
-
1.52
0.01
8
16.63
1e-05
0.42
0.005
0.14
0.01
9
20.5
0.0
0.41
-
0.91
0.01
10
20.09
1e-05
0.31
-
1.61
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
239
==PAGE:248==
11
14.96
1e-05
0.36
-
1.27
0.01
12
13.56
1e-05
0.31
-
2.17
0.01
13
20.35
1e-05
0.21
-
2.38
0.02
14
13.5
1e-05
0.2
0.005
0.37
0.02
15
21.01
1e-05
0.2
0.005
0.55
0.02
16
18.76
1e-05
0.19
0.004
0.31
0.02
17
15.84
1e-05
0.18
0.004
1.79
0.02
18
21.42
2e-05
0.18
0.008
0.74
0.04
19
17.14
2e-05
0.17
-
1.88
0.03
20
16.05
1e-05
0.17
0.004
0.79
0.03
21
16.31
1e-05
0.15
-
1.66
0.03
22
13.74
2e-05
0.13
-
0.59
0.04
23
21.43
3e-05
0.12
0.008
3.09
0.06
24
18.29
2e-05
0.11
0.006
1.35
0.05
25
16.24
4e-05
0.07
-
2.55
0.07
26
17.99
3e-05
0.07
-
1.27
0.05
27
16.35
3e-05
0.06
0.004
0.29
0.06
28
9.04
5e-05
0.06
0.006
1.09
0.1
29
0.78
8e-05
0.06
-
0.44
0.16
30
9.71
6e-05
0.05
-
1.62
0.13
31
27.09
5e-05
0.05
0.005
0.38
0.09
32
19.29
4e-05
0.04
-
0.49
0.08
33
10.44
0.0001
0.04
-
2.63
0.21
34
0.46
0.00011
0.04
0.009
2.71
0.23
35
29.21
8e-05
0.04
-
0.99
0.16
36
0.86
0.00014
0.03
-
2.62
0.29
37
18.54
5e-05
0.03
0.003
0.22
0.1
38
29.51
6e-05
0.03
-
0.4
0.12
TIC 284063057
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
7.62
1e-05
0.32
-
3.01
0.01
2
12.81
1e-05
0.25
0.002
2.25
0.01
3
11.44
1e-05
0.18
-
2.13
0.01
4
8.97
1e-05
0.15
0.003
0.67
0.02
5
8.44
2e-05
0.13
-
1.99
0.03
6
10.59
2e-05
0.1
0.003
1.51
0.03
7
11.66
2e-05
0.11
-
2.62
0.03
8
0.72
3e-05
0.06
-
1.85
0.04
9
4.05
4e-05
0.06
-
1.22
0.06
10
10.44
5e-05
0.06
-
2.74
0.07
11
1.62
2e-05
0.05
-
1.56
0.03
12
0.85
5e-05
0.04
-
0.01
0.06
13
4.36
6e-05
0.05
-
1.77
0.08
14
12.65
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.42
0.07
15
4.75
5e-05
0.04
0.003
1.38
0.06
16
1.53
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.49
0.04
17
8.02
5e-05
0.04
0.003
1.56
0.07
18
1.53
4e-05
0.03
-
1.38
0.05
240
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:249==
19
3.23
4e-05
0.03
-
2.17
0.06
20
4.2
9e-05
0.03
0.004
2.4
0.13
21
4.8
7e-05
0.03
0.003
2.67
0.09
22
0.2
9e-05
0.03
0.004
0.06
0.13
23
1.02
8e-05
0.03
0.003
2.62
0.12
24
4.54
9e-05
0.03
0.003
0.3
0.12
25
10.33
0.00011
0.02
0.004
2.4
0.16
26
5.67
9e-05
0.02
-
0.09
0.13
27
3.19
9e-05
0.02
-
2.85
0.12
28
0.15
0.00014
0.02
-
2.67
0.19
29
2.0
0.00011
0.02
0.003
1.22
0.15
30
8.58
0.00013
0.02
-
1.86
0.17
31
7.28
0.00013
0.02
0.003
2.2
0.18
32
9.37
0.00013
0.02
0.003
2.56
0.18
33
6.37
0.00013
0.02
-
0.42
0.18
34
1.81
0.00015
0.01
-
2.15
0.21
35
5.7
0.00014
0.01
0.003
2.98
0.2
36
13.43
0.0001
0.02
0.003
0.8
0.14
37
15.04
0.00015
0.02
0.003
0.15
0.2
38
8.27
0.00015
0.01
-
1.28
0.21
39
14.84
0.00018
0.01
0.003
0.34
0.25
40
9.15
0.00015
0.01
-
2.99
0.21
41
6.63
0.0001
0.01
0.002
1.34
0.14
42
3.59
0.00015
0.01
0.003
2.04
0.21
43
0.39
0.00016
0.01
-
0.58
0.23
44
2.63
0.00016
0.01
-
0.82
0.22
45
9.78
0.00021
0.01
-
0.54
0.29
TIC 284479750
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.03
0.00012
0.04
0.003
1.91
0.07
2
0.59
0.00019
0.03
0.003
1.37
0.11
3
2.07
0.00025
0.02
0.002
0.92
0.15
4
0.42
0.00047
0.01
-
1.85
0.28
5
0.92
0.00039
0.01
-
1.57
0.23
TIC 285117481
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
35.36
0.0
1.25
-
2.87
0.0
2
0.26
1e-05
0.51
0.004
0.18
0.01
3
27.2
1e-05
0.43
0.003
2.41
0.01
4
33.21
1e-05
0.36
-
1.8
0.01
5
0.23
1e-05
0.37
-
1.32
0.01
6
26.03
1e-05
0.36
-
2.81
0.01
7
18.0
1e-05
0.25
-
2.17
0.01
8
23.13
1e-05
0.24
0.004
0.76
0.02
9
30.71
1e-05
0.21
-
0.14
0.02
10
36.67
1e-05
0.2
-
2.38
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
241
==PAGE:250==
11
30.14
2e-05
0.2
0.005
0.97
0.02
12
40.85
2e-05
0.15
0.004
2.41
0.03
13
29.73
3e-05
0.13
0.005
2.39
0.04
14
40.65
3e-05
0.12
-
1.56
0.04
15
39.27
4e-05
0.11
0.006
0.75
0.05
16
33.64
3e-05
0.11
-
1.1
0.05
17
33.42
2e-05
0.12
-
1.55
0.03
18
26.25
4e-05
0.11
0.006
1.18
0.05
19
26.71
2e-05
0.1
-
2.43
0.03
20
24.99
3e-05
0.09
0.003
3.07
0.04
21
0.51
3e-05
0.1
-
1.93
0.04
22
34.86
3e-05
0.09
-
0.02
0.04
23
28.55
3e-05
0.08
0.003
1.91
0.04
24
41.25
3e-05
0.07
-
3.03
0.04
25
43.35
4e-05
0.07
0.005
0.84
0.06
26
20.05
3e-05
0.07
-
2.04
0.04
27
43.92
4e-05
0.07
0.004
2.35
0.05
28
7.63
5e-05
0.07
-
2.06
0.07
29
33.63
5e-05
0.07
-
0.42
0.06
30
0.6
6e-05
0.07
0.006
0.83
0.08
31
24.73
3e-05
0.07
-
1.66
0.04
32
37.32
5e-05
0.06
-
2.86
0.06
33
7.22
3e-05
0.06
0.003
0.82
0.04
34
32.52
4e-05
0.06
-
2.09
0.05
35
21.48
3e-05
0.06
0.003
0.15
0.05
36
37.99
4e-05
0.06
-
2.16
0.06
37
42.93
3e-05
0.06
-
0.33
0.05
38
45.41
4e-05
0.06
-
3.02
0.06
39
22.61
5e-05
0.06
-
0.5
0.07
40
18.74
3e-05
0.06
0.002
1.96
0.04
41
54.99
4e-05
0.06
-
2.75
0.06
42
22.83
5e-05
0.05
-
2.06
0.07
43
27.8
6e-05
0.05
-
2.5
0.09
44
41.94
5e-05
0.05
-
2.23
0.07
45
46.7
6e-05
0.05
0.004
2.97
0.09
46
26.78
4e-05
0.05
-
0.61
0.05
47
45.1
7e-05
0.05
0.004
2.24
0.09
48
49.36
6e-05
0.05
-
0.85
0.08
49
14.55
5e-05
0.05
-
0.13
0.07
50
46.34
6e-05
0.04
0.003
2.04
0.08
51
44.72
6e-05
0.05
-
1.19
0.08
52
23.56
6e-05
0.05
0.004
1.99
0.09
53
32.9
6e-05
0.05
0.004
0.32
0.09
54
4.06
7e-05
0.04
0.004
1.15
0.09
55
17.05
7e-05
0.04
0.004
2.43
0.09
56
1.01
5e-05
0.05
-
1.35
0.07
57
28.47
6e-05
0.04
-
1.03
0.08
58
40.55
0.0001
0.04
-
3.09
0.13
59
37.9
5e-05
0.04
0.003
1.71
0.07
60
33.81
6e-05
0.04
-
1.21
0.09
242
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:251==
61
11.83
5e-05
0.04
-
2.55
0.07
62
44.44
7e-05
0.04
-
1.9
0.1
63
9.72
9e-05
0.04
-
0.03
0.12
64
54.2
7e-05
0.04
0.004
2.33
0.1
65
13.83
4e-05
0.04
-
2.35
0.05
66
44.08
0.0001
0.03
-
1.86
0.14
67
38.87
8e-05
0.04
-
2.31
0.12
68
20.23
5e-05
0.04
0.002
2.95
0.07
69
31.01
8e-05
0.03
0.004
2.77
0.11
70
31.18
7e-05
0.04
0.004
1.69
0.1
71
21.75
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.17
0.07
72
50.29
6e-05
0.03
0.003
1.5
0.09
73
15.45
9e-05
0.03
0.004
0.52
0.12
74
2.31
0.00011
0.03
-
0.35
0.15
75
17.28
6e-05
0.03
-
1.86
0.08
76
2.87
0.0001
0.03
-
2.81
0.14
77
49.19
9e-05
0.03
0.004
1.27
0.12
78
5.81
7e-05
0.03
-
0.36
0.1
79
46.2
8e-05
0.03
0.004
0.86
0.12
80
4.58
0.00011
0.03
0.004
0.71
0.15
81
40.2
8e-05
0.03
-
2.5
0.1
82
8.36
0.00011
0.03
0.004
2.62
0.15
83
47.97
0.00013
0.03
0.005
2.9
0.19
84
6.67
0.00012
0.03
0.004
0.38
0.17
85
35.61
0.0001
0.03
0.004
1.19
0.14
86
1.33
9e-05
0.03
0.003
0.7
0.13
87
35.02
0.0001
0.03
0.004
2.49
0.14
88
6.01
8e-05
0.03
-
2.45
0.11
89
51.12
8e-05
0.03
0.003
0.17
0.11
90
23.26
9e-05
0.03
-
1.39
0.12
91
54.17
0.00012
0.03
0.004
0.59
0.16
92
1.93
0.00012
0.02
-
2.83
0.16
93
20.93
0.0001
0.02
0.003
1.52
0.14
94
8.8
0.00017
0.02
0.005
1.72
0.23
95
17.13
0.0001
0.02
-
1.15
0.13
96
41.59
0.00011
0.02
0.003
1.1
0.15
97
11.06
9e-05
0.02
0.003
0.04
0.13
98
31.63
0.0001
0.02
-
1.27
0.15
99
46.5
0.00013
0.02
0.004
1.83
0.17
100
3.28
0.00016
0.02
0.005
0.52
0.22
101
16.64
0.00013
0.02
0.004
1.51
0.18
102
4.66
0.00014
0.02
0.004
1.52
0.19
103
52.69
0.00015
0.02
0.004
2.33
0.2
104
44.37
0.00012
0.02
0.004
0.13
0.16
105
6.78
0.00019
0.02
-
0.65
0.27
106
22.03
9e-05
0.02
0.003
1.9
0.13
107
57.11
7e-05
0.02
0.002
1.17
0.1
108
40.77
0.00015
0.02
0.004
0.6
0.21
109
2.69
0.00018
0.02
0.005
1.23
0.25
110
1.24
0.00013
0.02
-
0.68
0.18
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
243
==PAGE:252==
111
3.64
0.00015
0.02
-
2.91
0.21
112
32.05
0.00017
0.02
0.004
0.02
0.23
113
50.45
9e-05
0.02
-
2.11
0.13
114
20.65
0.00017
0.02
-
0.07
0.24
115
59.38
0.00011
0.02
-
0.57
0.15
116
12.88
0.00017
0.02
-
0.24
0.23
117
21.23
0.00014
0.02
-
1.58
0.19
118
42.75
0.00012
0.02
0.003
1.45
0.16
119
3.4
0.00025
0.02
-
1.3
0.34
120
52.21
0.00016
0.02
-
0.8
0.23
121
50.28
9e-05
0.02
0.003
3.01
0.12
122
46.23
0.00015
0.02
0.004
1.36
0.21
123
29.1
0.00013
0.02
-
2.3
0.18
TIC 29001568
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
222.42
0.00019
0.7
-
1.77
0.02
2
1.82
0.00175
0.54
-
1.59
0.2
3
8.88
0.00354
0.33
-
1.36
0.41
4
348.3
0.00022
0.42
0.011
1.31
0.03
5
386.7
0.00029
0.4
-
1.29
0.03
6
308.13
0.00022
0.4
0.01
0.64
0.03
7
24.43
0.00311
0.39
-
1.31
0.36
8
6.62
0.00265
0.39
-
3.01
0.3
9
243.1
0.00022
0.36
-
0.66
0.03
10
187.96
0.0005
0.35
0.02
0.04
0.06
11
311.4
0.00018
0.34
-
1.55
0.02
12
277.0
0.00037
0.34
-
1.24
0.04
TIC 290924504
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
16.98
9e-05
1.15
0.005
2.55
0.0
2
21.76
8e-05
1.14
0.004
2.45
0.0
3
32.37
8e-05
1.02
0.003
3.13
0.0
4
27.06
0.00013
0.72
0.004
2.45
0.01
5
20.75
0.00017
0.59
0.004
2.97
0.01
6
16.3
0.00032
0.34
0.005
0.58
0.01
7
25.76
0.00027
0.34
0.004
1.06
0.01
8
24.15
0.00031
0.31
0.004
0.07
0.01
9
22.67
0.00032
0.3
-
2.49
0.01
10
30.71
0.00029
0.27
0.003
2.64
0.01
11
16.04
0.00042
0.26
-
2.47
0.02
12
29.61
0.00032
0.26
0.004
3.05
0.01
13
12.46
0.00055
0.25
-
0.65
0.02
14
27.66
0.00057
0.15
-
2.92
0.03
15
25.61
0.00063
0.15
-
0.87
0.03
16
17.31
0.00071
0.15
-
2.59
0.03
17
17.56
0.00085
0.12
0.005
2.86
0.04
244
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:253==
18
25.97
0.00073
0.12
0.004
0.28
0.03
19
10.12
0.00123
0.11
0.006
1.1
0.05
20
20.67
0.00085
0.11
0.004
0.04
0.04
21
10.99
0.00139
0.1
0.006
2.64
0.06
22
0.86
0.0015
0.09
-
2.21
0.07
23
20.32
0.00108
0.09
0.004
2.65
0.05
24
23.33
0.00112
0.08
0.004
0.19
0.05
25
12.66
0.00169
0.08
-
2.18
0.07
26
11.38
0.0016
0.09
0.006
0.27
0.07
27
1.04
0.00182
0.07
-
2.46
0.08
28
2.4
0.00171
0.08
0.006
0.9
0.08
29
37.64
0.00111
0.06
0.003
2.84
0.05
30
12.13
0.00216
0.06
0.006
0.57
0.1
31
8.88
0.00241
0.05
0.006
1.21
0.11
32
15.09
0.00239
0.05
-
1.63
0.11
33
9.96
0.00331
0.04
0.006
1.53
0.15
34
18.88
0.00219
0.04
-
0.15
0.1
35
9.84
0.00324
0.04
-
3.0
0.14
36
42.92
0.0019
0.04
-
1.86
0.08
37
1.55
0.00341
0.04
0.006
2.25
0.15
38
1.92
0.00384
0.03
-
0.98
0.17
39
2.13
0.00418
0.03
-
2.47
0.18
40
11.47
0.00434
0.03
-
1.62
0.19
41
9.62
0.00458
0.03
-
0.63
0.2
42
1.87
0.00456
0.03
-
2.58
0.2
43
5.3
0.00471
0.03
-
0.23
0.21
44
13.59
0.00442
0.03
0.005
1.94
0.2
45
22.59
0.00386
0.03
0.004
2.33
0.17
46
35.43
0.00304
0.02
0.003
0.73
0.13
TIC 292435853
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.08
5e-05
2.93
-
0.92
0.0
2
4.74
0.00013
1.24
0.016
0.99
0.01
3
1.7
0.00041
0.39
-
0.29
0.04
4
4.37
0.00048
0.33
0.016
2.02
0.05
5
4.42
0.00044
0.36
-
0.4
0.04
6
1.79
0.00067
0.24
-
2.28
0.07
7
3.67
0.00063
0.25
0.016
2.59
0.06
8
5.46
0.00055
0.28
-
2.91
0.05
9
0.99
0.00058
0.26
0.015
2.63
0.06
10
0.27
0.00052
0.29
-
2.64
0.05
11
3.27
0.00073
0.22
0.016
1.24
0.07
12
5.43
0.00068
0.23
0.015
0.27
0.07
13
4.27
0.00072
0.22
0.015
1.09
0.07
14
1.16
0.00094
0.17
-
3.05
0.09
15
1.32
0.00101
0.16
-
0.82
0.1
16
3.51
0.00098
0.17
0.016
0.19
0.1
17
5.74
0.00115
0.14
0.016
2.95
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
245
==PAGE:254==
18
2.97
0.00117
0.14
0.016
0.34
0.12
19
5.7
0.0011
0.14
0.016
0.56
0.11
20
1.11
0.0014
0.11
0.016
2.6
0.14
21
1.2
0.00135
0.12
-
2.15
0.14
22
6.02
0.00157
0.1
-
0.91
0.16
23
3.35
0.00149
0.11
-
1.4
0.15
24
3.08
0.00209
0.08
0.016
1.99
0.21
25
0.67
0.00204
0.08
-
2.29
0.2
26
2.5
0.00217
0.07
0.016
2.32
0.22
27
5.51
0.0022
0.07
-
2.83
0.22
28
2.55
0.00231
0.07
-
2.04
0.23
29
0.8
0.00221
0.07
-
0.46
0.22
TIC 292566342
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.79
0.0
1.86
0.004
1.13
0.0
2
22.98
1e-05
0.61
0.006
2.41
0.01
3
38.4
1e-05
0.57
-
1.61
0.01
4
21.43
1e-05
0.54
-
2.24
0.01
5
46.19
1e-05
0.5
0.006
1.8
0.01
6
41.09
1e-05
0.38
-
0.36
0.01
7
36.02
1e-05
0.38
-
1.18
0.01
8
29.0
1e-05
0.31
0.004
1.63
0.01
9
40.05
1e-05
0.3
-
1.01
0.02
10
27.34
1e-05
0.29
0.005
2.84
0.02
11
39.55
1e-05
0.25
-
1.78
0.02
12
0.15
2e-05
0.21
-
1.65
0.03
13
22.08
1e-05
0.22
0.004
3.02
0.02
14
0.29
2e-05
0.19
-
0.85
0.03
15
29.56
2e-05
0.2
0.004
0.11
0.02
16
27.63
3e-05
0.17
0.006
0.32
0.03
17
39.41
2e-05
0.17
0.006
2.05
0.03
18
36.39
2e-05
0.17
-
2.96
0.03
19
27.08
2e-05
0.16
-
0.63
0.03
20
26.56
2e-05
0.15
0.004
0.86
0.03
21
36.93
3e-05
0.14
0.005
2.68
0.04
22
32.14
2e-05
0.15
-
1.47
0.03
23
57.21
2e-05
0.14
0.004
3.07
0.03
24
25.51
2e-05
0.13
-
2.31
0.03
25
17.85
3e-05
0.12
-
0.8
0.04
26
43.27
4e-05
0.11
0.006
0.35
0.05
27
46.91
3e-05
0.1
0.005
0.43
0.05
28
49.67
4e-05
0.09
-
0.34
0.05
29
22.05
3e-05
0.09
0.004
0.96
0.04
30
48.06
4e-05
0.09
0.004
2.32
0.05
31
42.72
4e-05
0.09
-
1.52
0.05
32
4.45
4e-05
0.09
0.005
1.01
0.06
33
0.44
3e-05
0.11
0.005
1.76
0.05
34
18.1
3e-05
0.09
0.004
1.15
0.04
246
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:255==
35
25.0
3e-05
0.08
-
1.31
0.05
36
34.2
3e-05
0.08
0.003
1.09
0.04
37
26.94
4e-05
0.08
0.005
1.96
0.06
38
18.95
3e-05
0.08
0.004
0.93
0.05
39
16.66
3e-05
0.08
0.004
1.03
0.04
40
29.28
3e-05
0.08
-
2.84
0.04
41
2.02
4e-05
0.08
-
0.25
0.05
42
37.39
4e-05
0.08
0.004
1.83
0.05
43
24.62
4e-05
0.08
0.005
2.17
0.06
44
45.15
5e-05
0.07
0.004
2.58
0.06
45
49.24
4e-05
0.07
-
2.33
0.05
46
30.0
4e-05
0.07
-
0.64
0.06
47
65.8
5e-05
0.06
0.004
0.97
0.07
48
7.48
5e-05
0.06
0.004
2.32
0.07
49
17.68
7e-05
0.06
-
1.01
0.1
50
35.79
4e-05
0.06
0.003
2.31
0.05
51
33.16
6e-05
0.06
-
2.17
0.08
52
35.4
5e-05
0.06
0.004
2.56
0.07
53
55.05
5e-05
0.05
-
2.18
0.07
54
18.59
6e-05
0.05
-
2.75
0.08
55
23.27
5e-05
0.05
0.004
1.81
0.07
56
50.4
7e-05
0.05
-
2.19
0.09
57
33.47
6e-05
0.05
0.004
1.7
0.09
58
36.55
6e-05
0.05
0.004
0.59
0.08
59
33.72
6e-05
0.05
-
1.08
0.08
60
30.43
6e-05
0.05
0.004
0.01
0.08
61
6.87
6e-05
0.04
-
2.61
0.08
62
34.29
6e-05
0.04
0.003
2.29
0.08
63
60.88
6e-05
0.04
0.004
1.13
0.08
64
60.87
6e-05
0.04
0.004
2.48
0.08
65
53.92
7e-05
0.04
-
2.5
0.1
66
44.24
5e-05
0.04
-
1.34
0.07
67
43.53
9e-05
0.04
-
0.4
0.12
68
21.92
9e-05
0.04
-
0.19
0.13
69
65.83
8e-05
0.04
0.004
0.64
0.11
70
1.64
8e-05
0.04
-
3.06
0.11
71
3.45
8e-05
0.04
0.004
2.39
0.11
72
52.28
7e-05
0.04
-
1.62
0.1
73
47.75
9e-05
0.04
0.004
0.76
0.12
74
16.5
7e-05
0.03
0.003
2.74
0.1
75
61.93
9e-05
0.04
-
0.24
0.13
76
29.7
7e-05
0.04
0.004
2.24
0.1
77
12.63
7e-05
0.03
0.003
0.65
0.1
78
63.41
0.0001
0.04
0.005
0.64
0.14
79
60.7
9e-05
0.03
0.004
1.93
0.13
80
52.09
0.00012
0.03
-
2.19
0.16
81
59.12
0.0001
0.03
-
2.12
0.14
82
6.02
8e-05
0.03
-
1.34
0.11
83
26.09
0.00013
0.03
-
1.32
0.18
84
14.85
8e-05
0.03
-
2.38
0.11
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
247
==PAGE:256==
85
53.33
0.00012
0.03
-
0.22
0.17
86
41.87
0.00012
0.03
0.004
0.53
0.16
87
64.13
7e-05
0.03
0.003
1.11
0.09
88
24.91
9e-05
0.03
-
1.17
0.13
89
41.96
8e-05
0.03
0.003
2.78
0.12
90
47.25
0.00012
0.02
-
2.41
0.17
91
55.7
0.0001
0.03
-
1.22
0.14
92
35.03
0.0001
0.03
-
1.92
0.14
93
1.04
0.00016
0.02
-
1.98
0.23
94
55.23
0.00011
0.02
0.004
2.6
0.15
95
16.63
0.0001
0.03
0.004
2.77
0.14
96
60.36
0.00017
0.02
-
1.62
0.23
97
1.78
0.00014
0.02
-
0.04
0.2
98
45.9
0.00011
0.02
0.003
1.43
0.15
99
42.5
0.00011
0.02
0.004
1.55
0.15
100
65.52
0.00014
0.02
-
2.33
0.19
101
9.12
0.00014
0.02
0.004
2.38
0.19
102
4.09
0.00015
0.02
-
2.66
0.2
103
56.58
0.00012
0.02
-
2.34
0.17
104
60.24
0.00014
0.02
0.004
1.29
0.2
105
68.8
0.0001
0.02
-
2.89
0.13
106
42.76
0.00018
0.02
0.005
3.13
0.24
TIC 293675860
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.35
0.0
1.69
0.009
1.65
0.01
2
36.16
0.0
1.14
-
2.89
0.01
3
0.19
1e-05
0.89
-
2.48
0.02
4
29.14
0.0
0.86
-
2.68
0.01
5
27.91
1e-05
0.46
-
0.56
0.02
6
29.05
1e-05
0.38
0.004
2.92
0.01
7
0.38
4e-05
0.34
0.021
2.4
0.06
8
33.91
1e-05
0.28
0.005
2.09
0.02
9
22.85
2e-05
0.21
-
0.57
0.02
10
29.73
2e-05
0.19
-
1.75
0.03
11
23.66
2e-05
0.15
0.005
1.3
0.03
12
27.91
4e-05
0.15
-
1.86
0.05
13
30.88
2e-05
0.12
0.004
1.42
0.03
14
28.7
3e-05
0.11
-
0.97
0.04
15
0.85
0.00011
0.09
-
1.76
0.16
16
33.24
4e-05
0.08
0.004
2.92
0.05
17
23.05
3e-05
0.08
-
2.34
0.05
18
21.4
5e-05
0.08
-
2.18
0.07
TIC 293900076
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.91
0.0
6.12
-
0.3
0.0
2
1.46
0.0
3.19
-
2.69
0.0
248
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:257==
3
31.92
0.0
1.38
-
1.66
0.01
4
35.81
1e-05
0.81
-
2.1
0.01
5
32.24
1e-05
0.68
-
2.88
0.01
6
41.21
1e-05
0.46
-
0.25
0.02
7
4.38
2e-05
0.38
0.008
2.65
0.02
8
34.18
2e-05
0.2
0.005
0.32
0.03
9
35.16
2e-05
0.19
0.005
0.25
0.03
10
38.53
2e-05
0.16
0.005
2.86
0.03
11
5.83
3e-05
0.16
0.006
2.95
0.04
12
32.56
3e-05
0.14
-
0.28
0.04
13
38.73
3e-05
0.13
0.006
3.08
0.04
14
21.7
2e-05
0.14
-
0.98
0.03
15
37.45
3e-05
0.13
-
2.72
0.04
16
38.29
3e-05
0.12
-
0.65
0.04
17
38.88
3e-05
0.11
0.005
2.07
0.04
18
33.59
5e-05
0.08
-
0.37
0.07
19
25.71
6e-05
0.08
-
2.63
0.08
20
23.7
5e-05
0.07
-
0.43
0.07
21
26.62
5e-05
0.07
-
1.26
0.07
22
36.71
7e-05
0.08
0.007
2.62
0.09
23
29.7
5e-05
0.07
0.005
0.73
0.07
24
33.38
5e-05
0.06
-
0.68
0.07
25
48.07
7e-05
0.06
0.006
2.38
0.1
26
30.46
8e-05
0.05
0.006
0.49
0.11
27
36.44
7e-05
0.05
0.005
2.64
0.09
28
30.43
9e-05
0.05
-
0.48
0.12
29
26.97
7e-05
0.05
-
2.84
0.09
30
51.72
9e-05
0.05
0.006
0.25
0.13
31
33.93
7e-05
0.04
-
0.82
0.1
32
37.1
9e-05
0.04
0.005
0.22
0.12
33
40.93
8e-05
0.04
-
3.12
0.11
34
30.68
0.0001
0.04
-
0.95
0.14
35
47.66
0.00012
0.04
0.007
2.72
0.17
36
37.65
9e-05
0.04
0.005
0.44
0.13
37
34.42
0.00011
0.04
-
0.67
0.15
38
43.31
0.00013
0.04
0.007
1.06
0.17
39
27.62
0.00011
0.04
-
2.73
0.15
40
48.75
9e-05
0.04
-
3.11
0.12
41
28.05
9e-05
0.04
-
0.78
0.13
42
39.97
0.00012
0.04
-
2.57
0.16
TIC 296632352
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
30.31
0.0001
0.3
0.003
1.36
0.01
2
33.46
0.00016
0.21
-
0.93
0.02
3
28.02
0.00042
0.08
0.003
2.3
0.04
4
36.3
0.00045
0.08
0.003
0.01
0.04
5
0.41
0.00092
0.07
0.006
2.88
0.09
6
28.47
0.00046
0.07
0.003
0.89
0.04
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
249
==PAGE:258==
7
0.2
0.00105
0.06
0.006
2.02
0.1
8
29.59
0.00051
0.06
-
1.67
0.05
9
1.62
0.00109
0.06
0.006
1.04
0.1
10
33.99
0.00063
0.06
-
1.07
0.06
11
1.94
0.00133
0.04
0.006
3.03
0.13
12
1.01
0.00152
0.04
0.006
2.19
0.14
13
30.75
0.00083
0.04
0.003
2.19
0.08
14
2.44
0.00176
0.03
-
0.86
0.16
15
34.47
0.00111
0.03
-
2.68
0.1
16
2.26
0.00157
0.04
-
2.78
0.15
17
36.09
0.00123
0.03
-
1.82
0.12
18
28.8
0.00112
0.03
0.003
3.1
0.11
19
1.58
0.00211
0.03
-
0.14
0.2
20
31.62
0.00126
0.03
0.003
1.26
0.12
21
0.72
0.00234
0.03
-
2.6
0.22
22
1.17
0.00234
0.03
0.006
2.98
0.22
23
0.91
0.00268
0.02
0.006
1.61
0.25
TIC 296632352
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
30.31
0.0001
0.3
0.003
1.36
0.01
2
33.46
0.00016
0.21
-
0.93
0.02
3
28.02
0.00042
0.08
0.003
2.3
0.04
4
36.3
0.00045
0.08
0.003
0.01
0.04
5
0.41
0.00092
0.07
0.006
2.88
0.09
6
28.47
0.00046
0.07
0.003
0.89
0.04
7
0.2
0.00105
0.06
0.006
2.02
0.1
8
29.59
0.00051
0.06
-
1.67
0.05
9
1.62
0.00109
0.06
0.006
1.04
0.1
10
33.99
0.00063
0.06
-
1.07
0.06
11
1.94
0.00133
0.04
0.006
3.03
0.13
12
1.01
0.00152
0.04
0.006
2.19
0.14
13
30.75
0.00083
0.04
0.003
2.19
0.08
14
2.44
0.00176
0.03
-
0.86
0.16
15
34.47
0.00111
0.03
-
2.68
0.1
16
2.26
0.00157
0.04
-
2.78
0.15
17
36.09
0.00123
0.03
-
1.82
0.12
18
28.8
0.00112
0.03
0.003
3.1
0.11
19
1.58
0.00211
0.03
-
0.14
0.2
20
31.62
0.00126
0.03
0.003
1.26
0.12
21
0.72
0.00234
0.03
-
2.6
0.22
22
1.17
0.00234
0.03
0.006
2.98
0.22
23
0.91
0.00268
0.02
0.006
1.61
0.25
TIC 299847109
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.33
0.00022
0.79
0.008
0.08
0.01
2
4.67
0.00284
0.06
-
1.93
0.13
250
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:259==
TIC 301063488
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.36
1e-05
0.56
0.01
2.14
0.02
2
1.09
1e-05
0.58
-
0.67
0.03
3
1.64
1e-05
0.52
0.013
1.81
0.02
4
0.27
2e-05
0.39
0.016
0.03
0.04
5
1.91
2e-05
0.43
-
0.56
0.04
6
0.55
1e-05
0.5
0.012
0.85
0.02
7
2.18
1e-05
0.46
0.012
1.1
0.03
8
2.45
2e-05
0.48
-
0.68
0.03
9
2.73
2e-05
0.36
-
2.5
0.05
10
26.84
1e-05
0.36
0.008
2.46
0.02
11
26.06
1e-05
0.32
-
2.29
0.03
12
21.85
1e-05
0.31
-
0.41
0.02
13
3.27
2e-05
0.28
-
2.68
0.04
14
3.0
2e-05
0.27
-
2.58
0.04
15
12.49
2e-05
0.26
-
3.14
0.05
16
3.14
3e-05
0.28
-
1.8
0.05
17
4.23
2e-05
0.27
-
1.28
0.04
18
22.5
1e-05
0.24
-
2.88
0.02
19
2.86
3e-05
0.28
-
1.0
0.05
20
3.55
2e-05
0.27
-
2.66
0.05
21
3.96
3e-05
0.28
-
1.92
0.05
22
30.44
1e-05
0.25
-
1.95
0.03
23
3.41
3e-05
0.26
0.015
0.1
0.06
24
2.32
2e-05
0.24
-
0.94
0.04
25
19.79
2e-05
0.22
-
1.13
0.03
26
2.05
3e-05
0.23
0.015
2.69
0.06
27
3.82
4e-05
0.2
0.015
1.32
0.08
28
5.05
2e-05
0.2
0.009
0.7
0.05
29
24.12
2e-05
0.18
0.007
1.5
0.04
30
31.06
2e-05
0.17
0.006
0.22
0.03
31
4.09
3e-05
0.18
0.011
3.06
0.06
32
2.54
4e-05
0.16
0.011
1.09
0.07
33
22.89
2e-05
0.16
-
2.17
0.04
34
17.57
2e-05
0.14
0.006
0.64
0.04
35
5.59
2e-05
0.15
0.007
0.45
0.05
36
28.45
2e-05
0.14
-
1.58
0.05
37
12.63
4e-05
0.13
-
1.49
0.08
38
5.32
4e-05
0.13
0.01
2.58
0.07
39
5.87
5e-05
0.12
0.013
0.93
0.11
40
24.54
2e-05
0.12
-
2.09
0.04
41
1.24
4e-05
0.12
0.01
2.32
0.08
42
12.67
5e-05
0.1
-
1.6
0.1
43
33.9
2e-05
0.1
0.005
1.36
0.05
44
6.14
4e-05
0.1
0.008
0.97
0.08
45
11.89
6e-05
0.1
-
1.05
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
251
==PAGE:260==
46
27.94
2e-05
0.09
0.004
2.12
0.05
47
32.04
3e-05
0.08
0.005
1.24
0.06
48
33.18
3e-05
0.08
-
0.43
0.06
49
23.26
3e-05
0.08
-
1.52
0.07
50
17.84
3e-05
0.08
0.004
0.24
0.05
51
12.98
6e-05
0.07
-
0.43
0.12
52
17.21
4e-05
0.08
-
1.97
0.08
53
6.41
6e-05
0.07
-
0.36
0.12
54
9.91
7e-05
0.07
-
0.18
0.14
55
13.95
6e-05
0.07
-
0.63
0.12
56
12.87
7e-05
0.07
-
1.89
0.15
57
44.36
4e-05
0.07
0.006
0.65
0.09
58
16.15
4e-05
0.07
0.006
0.16
0.09
59
11.79
6e-05
0.07
0.008
1.71
0.12
60
13.55
8e-05
0.06
-
1.31
0.15
61
11.36
7e-05
0.06
0.009
2.37
0.15
62
28.66
4e-05
0.06
-
2.21
0.08
63
33.62
5e-05
0.06
-
1.74
0.09
64
18.43
5e-05
0.06
0.006
2.85
0.1
65
13.1
0.00012
0.06
-
1.48
0.24
66
6.69
6e-05
0.06
0.007
0.61
0.12
67
33.5
7e-05
0.05
0.007
0.46
0.13
68
20.74
5e-05
0.05
-
1.94
0.11
69
47.9
3e-05
0.05
0.003
0.64
0.05
70
11.5
9e-05
0.05
0.01
2.78
0.19
71
1.56
0.00013
0.05
0.013
3.0
0.26
72
19.36
7e-05
0.05
-
1.2
0.13
73
18.9
4e-05
0.05
-
3.13
0.08
TIC 302727695
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.38
0.0001
0.07
-
3.09
0.04
2
9.33
8e-05
0.06
-
1.25
0.03
3
1.26
0.00015
0.05
0.003
0.73
0.06
4
16.72
0.00013
0.03
0.002
2.99
0.05
5
15.42
0.00016
0.03
0.002
2.69
0.06
6
9.13
0.00018
0.03
-
2.1
0.07
7
29.09
0.00014
0.03
-
1.03
0.06
8
2.79
0.00036
0.02
0.003
1.65
0.14
9
0.2
0.00037
0.02
0.003
2.39
0.15
10
23.73
0.00029
0.02
0.002
0.59
0.11
11
0.15
0.00042
0.02
0.003
1.09
0.16
12
3.32
0.00043
0.02
0.003
3.11
0.17
13
18.66
0.00031
0.01
0.002
0.69
0.12
14
0.51
0.00055
0.01
-
0.53
0.21
15
3.63
0.00053
0.01
0.003
3.05
0.21
16
3.03
0.00055
0.01
0.003
1.94
0.21
17
1.89
0.00062
0.01
0.003
0.29
0.24
18
0.08
0.00054
0.01
-
3.14
0.21
252
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:261==
19
0.22
0.0005
0.02
0.003
1.6
0.19
20
3.52
0.0006
0.01
-
1.12
0.23
21
2.65
0.00063
0.01
-
2.51
0.24
22
5.26
0.00059
0.01
-
2.29
0.23
23
0.62
0.00066
0.01
-
1.87
0.26
24
14.87
0.00039
0.01
-
2.89
0.15
25
1.42
0.00065
0.01
0.003
2.24
0.25
26
0.95
0.00066
0.01
-
2.63
0.26
27
1.01
0.00068
0.01
-
2.6
0.26
28
12.32
0.00041
0.01
-
0.3
0.16
29
4.82
0.00071
0.01
0.003
1.85
0.27
30
1.78
0.00073
0.01
-
0.59
0.28
TIC 30310995
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.37
0.00014
1.28
-
2.31
0.01
2
2.53
0.00028
0.61
0.016
0.26
0.03
3
0.14
0.00056
0.36
0.019
0.13
0.05
4
1.82
0.0005
0.35
0.016
0.31
0.05
5
7.62
0.00056
0.32
-
2.82
0.05
6
5.94
0.00061
0.33
0.019
3.05
0.06
7
7.96
0.00066
0.26
0.016
2.8
0.06
8
21.52
0.00024
0.21
0.005
2.63
0.02
9
0.31
0.00101
0.2
0.018
0.1
0.09
10
19.38
0.00029
0.17
-
2.66
0.03
11
19.76
0.0003
0.17
0.005
3.14
0.03
12
1.06
0.00115
0.16
-
0.92
0.11
13
0.81
0.00141
0.13
0.017
3.1
0.13
14
3.6
0.00124
0.14
-
1.24
0.11
15
8.33
0.00123
0.13
-
2.09
0.11
16
4.3
0.00138
0.13
0.016
0.59
0.13
17
5.08
0.00158
0.12
0.017
2.86
0.15
18
4.96
0.00183
0.1
-
3.11
0.17
19
0.5
0.0017
0.11
-
0.77
0.16
20
2.23
0.00167
0.11
-
0.06
0.15
21
0.07
0.00213
0.09
-
1.75
0.2
22
5.56
0.00219
0.09
0.018
1.17
0.2
23
0.92
0.00195
0.09
0.016
1.31
0.18
24
5.44
0.0028
0.07
-
2.69
0.26
25
8.8
0.00197
0.07
0.013
1.49
0.18
TIC 304050480
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
4.68
5e-05
15.24
0.036
0.2
0.0
2
3.82
8e-05
10.95
0.039
0.1
0.0
3
0.01
0.00015
6.1
-
2.22
0.01
4
3.58
0.00027
3.13
0.039
1.28
0.01
5
9.36
0.00046
1.45
0.03
1.0
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
253
==PAGE:262==
6
8.26
0.00067
1.04
0.032
3.07
0.03
7
0.86
0.00089
1.01
-
0.57
0.04
8
7.65
0.00089
0.79
0.032
1.54
0.04
9
8.0
0.0016
0.44
0.033
1.9
0.07
10
12.34
0.00126
0.43
0.025
1.56
0.06
11
2.81
0.00295
0.3
0.04
1.42
0.14
12
1.88
0.00282
0.32
-
3.02
0.13
13
11.47
0.00207
0.27
0.026
1.15
0.1
14
12.08
0.00206
0.26
-
0.08
0.09
15
6.71
0.00341
0.21
-
1.31
0.16
16
13.18
0.00202
0.25
0.023
1.65
0.09
17
2.26
0.00388
0.23
-
2.34
0.18
TIC 305293882
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.08
1e-05
3.28
0.009
2.85
0.0
2
9.01
1e-05
2.74
0.012
2.03
0.0
3
8.89
1e-05
2.72
0.011
0.15
0.0
4
9.37
1e-05
2.58
-
1.42
0.0
5
9.44
1e-05
2.14
0.012
0.43
0.01
6
9.06
1e-05
1.92
0.012
0.36
0.01
7
14.57
1e-05
1.72
0.009
0.29
0.01
8
10.43
2e-05
1.29
0.01
1.95
0.01
9
13.23
2e-05
0.89
0.009
0.08
0.01
10
11.57
3e-05
0.85
0.01
2.91
0.01
11
11.77
3e-05
0.85
0.01
0.35
0.01
12
16.04
2e-05
0.76
-
1.49
0.01
13
17.37
4e-05
0.69
0.013
2.21
0.02
14
14.25
4e-05
0.55
-
0.4
0.02
15
10.98
3e-05
0.55
-
0.19
0.01
16
10.8
4e-05
0.49
-
0.93
0.02
17
9.84
6e-05
0.45
0.011
2.48
0.03
18
11.88
5e-05
0.47
-
1.28
0.02
19
12.37
5e-05
0.41
-
1.9
0.02
20
12.08
6e-05
0.38
-
0.72
0.03
21
14.88
5e-05
0.39
-
0.8
0.02
22
12.11
6e-05
0.37
-
1.87
0.03
23
13.49
6e-05
0.36
-
2.87
0.02
24
9.52
7e-05
0.39
-
0.87
0.03
25
16.63
7e-05
0.25
-
2.34
0.03
26
11.25
7e-05
0.26
-
1.41
0.03
27
7.15
9e-05
0.27
-
0.34
0.04
28
12.18
8e-05
0.27
0.01
2.45
0.04
29
9.87
0.0001
0.25
0.011
0.46
0.04
30
17.59
0.00016
0.2
-
0.54
0.07
31
17.38
0.00011
0.26
-
0.79
0.05
32
10.76
9e-05
0.2
-
3.12
0.04
33
11.69
0.00013
0.18
-
1.47
0.06
34
8.42
0.0001
0.18
0.008
0.4
0.04
254
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:263==
35
8.03
0.0001
0.17
-
1.26
0.05
36
15.3
0.00014
0.16
-
0.51
0.06
37
12.93
0.00012
0.16
-
2.67
0.05
38
7.63
0.00013
0.15
-
0.58
0.06
39
17.11
0.00016
0.15
0.01
2.42
0.07
40
22.24
0.0001
0.16
0.007
0.9
0.04
41
0.21
0.00025
0.15
-
0.59
0.11
42
22.23
0.0001
0.16
0.007
0.17
0.04
43
0.46
0.00029
0.14
-
2.8
0.13
44
5.31
0.00026
0.12
-
0.07
0.12
45
13.82
0.00017
0.13
0.009
1.23
0.08
46
13.34
0.00016
0.13
-
0.6
0.07
47
0.15
0.00026
0.14
-
1.35
0.11
48
5.47
0.00029
0.12
0.015
2.21
0.13
49
11.04
0.00016
0.11
0.008
3.1
0.07
50
5.17
0.0003
0.1
-
1.87
0.13
51
5.42
0.00037
0.09
0.015
0.43
0.16
52
0.27
0.00038
0.1
-
2.08
0.17
53
5.63
0.00039
0.1
0.017
0.49
0.17
54
1.44
0.00034
0.09
0.014
0.84
0.15
55
7.94
0.00021
0.08
-
1.45
0.09
56
7.44
0.00026
0.08
0.009
0.57
0.12
57
5.9
0.00054
0.08
-
0.64
0.24
58
19.61
0.00029
0.08
-
1.24
0.13
59
0.29
0.00048
0.08
-
2.55
0.21
60
0.69
0.00056
0.08
-
0.11
0.25
61
5.14
0.0004
0.07
0.013
0.14
0.18
62
8.11
0.00026
0.07
0.008
0.47
0.11
63
10.95
0.00025
0.07
-
2.21
0.11
64
21.7
0.00027
0.07
-
1.88
0.12
65
19.09
0.00029
0.07
0.008
1.41
0.13
66
1.48
0.00047
0.06
-
0.72
0.21
67
0.02
0.00054
0.07
0.016
2.2
0.24
68
6.33
0.00051
0.06
0.014
2.43
0.22
69
18.27
0.0004
0.06
0.011
0.19
0.18
TIC 305679500
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.87
2e-05
5.45
-
2.13
0.01
2
10.38
1e-05
3.8
0.01
0.62
0.0
3
11.08
1e-05
1.38
-
1.94
0.01
4
1.26
0.00015
0.62
0.046
1.7
0.07
5
1.32
0.00023
0.38
-
1.59
0.11
6
9.75
7e-05
0.3
-
1.92
0.03
TIC 306055003
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
6.84
0.00032
0.89
0.013
1.84
0.01
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
255
==PAGE:264==
2
1.15
0.00035
0.87
-
0.47
0.02
3
0.74
0.00043
0.71
-
0.51
0.02
4
0.61
0.00056
0.54
-
1.07
0.03
5
0.87
0.00068
0.45
0.014
2.97
0.03
6
0.3
0.00063
0.47
0.014
0.7
0.03
7
7.92
0.00128
0.22
0.013
1.3
0.06
8
0.57
0.00142
0.21
0.014
0.63
0.07
9
6.13
0.00152
0.21
-
2.02
0.07
10
7.49
0.00173
0.16
-
2.07
0.08
11
10.73
0.00214
0.12
0.012
0.37
0.1
12
7.24
0.00258
0.11
-
2.01
0.12
13
8.16
0.00222
0.13
-
2.31
0.1
14
9.37
0.00235
0.11
0.012
3.07
0.11
15
8.6
0.00289
0.1
-
2.09
0.13
16
5.69
0.00331
0.1
0.015
0.64
0.15
17
4.97
0.00355
0.09
-
0.4
0.16
18
10.23
0.00322
0.08
-
0.4
0.15
19
5.72
0.00363
0.09
0.015
1.37
0.17
20
9.28
0.00316
0.09
-
0.74
0.14
21
6.44
0.00378
0.08
-
2.58
0.17
22
9.62
0.00419
0.06
0.012
1.84
0.19
23
9.67
0.00421
0.06
-
1.3
0.19
24
9.17
0.00444
0.06
-
1.69
0.2
25
5.22
0.00544
0.06
-
0.51
0.25
26
5.93
0.00565
0.06
0.015
1.87
0.26
TIC 308646030
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.69
2e-05
1.27
0.031
1.25
0.02
2
2.58
3e-05
1.19
0.046
2.27
0.04
3
2.38
3e-05
1.08
0.039
2.69
0.04
4
0.7
3e-05
0.95
0.035
1.4
0.04
5
1.4
3e-05
0.75
0.03
2.14
0.04
6
2.78
4e-05
0.58
0.035
0.58
0.06
7
1.61
6e-05
0.4
0.035
2.18
0.09
TIC 308821501
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.8
9e-05
2.6
0.01
0.85
0.0
2
16.9
0.0001
2.23
0.009
2.09
0.0
3
16.26
0.00017
1.28
-
0.08
0.01
4
17.09
0.00023
0.94
0.009
0.22
0.01
5
16.55
0.00024
0.89
-
2.06
0.01
6
16.11
0.00025
0.88
0.009
0.36
0.01
7
15.37
0.00029
0.77
-
2.89
0.01
8
18.16
0.00034
0.61
0.009
2.92
0.01
9
14.36
0.00042
0.53
-
0.75
0.02
10
14.76
0.00051
0.44
-
0.35
0.02
256
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:265==
11
17.0
0.0006
0.35
0.009
2.54
0.03
12
15.0
0.00227
0.1
0.01
2.88
0.1
13
0.44
0.00644
0.06
0.017
0.94
0.28
14
8.85
0.00345
0.06
0.01
1.54
0.15
TIC 311173895
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.99
0.0
0.9
0.005
0.68
0.01
2
22.7
1e-05
0.56
0.005
1.89
0.01
3
22.61
1e-05
0.4
0.005
2.84
0.01
4
23.94
1e-05
0.34
0.007
1.83
0.02
5
22.05
2e-05
0.24
-
1.41
0.03
6
28.18
2e-05
0.17
0.004
1.17
0.03
7
31.97
2e-05
0.12
-
1.07
0.03
8
32.37
3e-05
0.11
-
2.71
0.05
9
19.52
3e-05
0.11
0.005
2.62
0.04
10
18.83
3e-05
0.11
0.004
1.03
0.04
11
67.78
5e-05
0.1
-
0.57
0.06
12
46.86
3e-05
0.09
-
2.28
0.05
13
36.46
3e-05
0.08
0.004
1.13
0.05
14
33.39
5e-05
0.07
-
2.13
0.07
15
40.16
4e-05
0.07
-
1.75
0.06
16
60.65
6e-05
0.07
-
0.65
0.08
17
0.85
8e-05
0.06
0.006
0.94
0.11
18
37.05
4e-05
0.06
0.004
2.33
0.06
19
29.26
4e-05
0.06
-
2.04
0.06
20
27.07
5e-05
0.06
-
0.16
0.06
21
43.18
5e-05
0.06
0.004
0.28
0.06
22
28.64
5e-05
0.06
0.004
1.89
0.06
23
41.91
4e-05
0.06
-
0.79
0.05
24
0.88
8e-05
0.06
0.006
0.98
0.11
25
20.73
6e-05
0.05
0.004
1.25
0.08
26
14.8
4e-05
0.05
0.003
1.69
0.06
27
1.72
8e-05
0.05
0.006
0.53
0.12
28
40.71
5e-05
0.05
0.004
0.69
0.07
29
2.56
9e-05
0.05
-
1.11
0.13
30
0.94
8e-05
0.05
-
0.72
0.12
31
21.74
8e-05
0.04
0.005
0.61
0.11
32
1.66
0.00011
0.04
0.006
3.01
0.15
33
0.52
7e-05
0.04
-
1.08
0.1
34
36.11
7e-05
0.04
-
1.08
0.1
35
21.35
8e-05
0.04
0.005
2.77
0.11
36
19.86
8e-05
0.04
-
0.65
0.1
37
38.89
8e-05
0.04
0.004
0.9
0.11
38
29.22
7e-05
0.04
0.004
2.95
0.1
39
18.48
7e-05
0.04
-
1.73
0.1
40
33.89
8e-05
0.04
-
2.18
0.11
41
21.7
9e-05
0.04
0.005
1.03
0.12
42
20.57
9e-05
0.04
-
3.02
0.13
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
257
==PAGE:266==
43
21.48
0.00014
0.04
-
0.72
0.19
44
1.02
0.00014
0.04
0.007
1.57
0.2
45
42.68
9e-05
0.03
0.004
1.64
0.13
46
28.78
9e-05
0.04
0.004
0.04
0.12
47
35.53
8e-05
0.03
0.004
2.61
0.11
48
28.87
8e-05
0.03
-
1.18
0.11
49
46.44
9e-05
0.03
-
0.02
0.12
50
24.13
0.00011
0.03
0.005
3.11
0.15
51
22.21
0.00018
0.03
0.009
2.06
0.25
52
38.09
0.00012
0.03
-
2.25
0.16
53
29.63
0.0001
0.03
0.004
2.66
0.14
54
31.03
8e-05
0.03
-
3.09
0.11
55
20.87
9e-05
0.03
-
2.58
0.13
56
20.95
9e-05
0.03
-
2.94
0.12
57
34.05
0.00011
0.03
0.005
0.79
0.16
58
57.71
0.0001
0.03
0.004
2.71
0.14
59
38.29
9e-05
0.03
-
1.26
0.12
60
1.76
0.00014
0.03
0.006
0.33
0.2
61
35.1
8e-05
0.03
-
1.07
0.11
62
1.44
0.00014
0.03
0.005
2.39
0.19
63
0.21
0.00011
0.03
0.005
0.53
0.16
64
2.53
0.00017
0.03
-
1.79
0.23
65
19.96
0.00011
0.03
-
0.68
0.16
66
26.66
0.00011
0.03
0.004
1.16
0.15
67
46.42
0.0001
0.03
-
0.98
0.13
68
25.91
9e-05
0.03
0.003
2.37
0.12
69
53.74
0.00013
0.03
0.005
1.0
0.18
70
39.38
0.0001
0.03
0.004
0.17
0.14
71
0.79
0.00016
0.03
0.007
0.26
0.21
72
64.7
0.00012
0.03
0.005
2.82
0.17
73
1.52
0.00015
0.03
0.006
0.23
0.21
74
41.57
0.00011
0.03
0.004
0.11
0.15
75
45.66
0.00015
0.03
0.005
2.97
0.2
76
36.44
0.0001
0.03
0.004
0.13
0.13
77
29.45
0.00011
0.03
0.004
1.42
0.16
78
32.19
0.00011
0.03
0.004
2.82
0.15
79
60.96
0.00013
0.02
-
1.99
0.17
80
36.68
0.0001
0.02
0.003
1.97
0.13
81
63.91
0.00014
0.02
0.005
0.93
0.19
82
2.5
0.00018
0.02
-
0.53
0.25
83
63.81
0.00012
0.02
0.004
0.36
0.17
TIC 311897380
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.19
5e-05
9.74
0.021
0.72
0.0
2
19.1
8e-05
5.35
0.017
1.84
0.0
3
18.31
8e-05
5.06
0.016
0.09
0.0
4
19.28
0.00027
1.48
-
0.38
0.01
5
21.46
0.00041
1.1
0.019
0.05
0.02
258
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:267==
6
17.97
0.00037
0.98
0.015
0.74
0.02
7
15.86
0.00038
0.9
-
0.01
0.02
8
41.29
0.00053
0.72
-
0.48
0.02
9
44.38
0.00048
0.71
-
0.71
0.02
10
23.35
0.00089
0.55
-
2.86
0.04
11
28.9
0.00115
0.43
0.021
0.5
0.05
12
3.09
0.00122
0.38
0.019
1.93
0.05
13
20.07
0.00127
0.35
-
2.83
0.05
14
40.5
0.00122
0.32
0.016
0.29
0.05
15
27.45
0.00161
0.32
0.022
2.09
0.07
16
9.36
0.00107
0.3
-
2.4
0.05
17
24.49
0.00177
0.28
-
1.27
0.07
18
41.48
0.00151
0.25
0.016
0.67
0.06
19
11.42
0.0012
0.25
-
1.41
0.05
20
0.97
0.00212
0.24
0.021
0.43
0.09
21
32.11
0.00208
0.22
-
2.78
0.09
22
6.26
0.00199
0.18
-
1.4
0.08
23
25.23
0.00241
0.2
-
0.87
0.1
24
43.65
0.0021
0.17
0.016
0.51
0.09
25
3.88
0.00259
0.17
0.019
2.14
0.11
26
33.3
0.00292
0.15
0.019
1.35
0.12
27
35.43
0.00299
0.15
-
1.07
0.13
28
63.48
0.00132
0.14
-
2.59
0.06
29
27.28
0.00317
0.16
-
2.75
0.13
30
16.05
0.00257
0.14
-
1.85
0.11
31
38.38
0.00399
0.11
-
1.3
0.17
32
24.38
0.00367
0.13
-
3.03
0.16
33
27.92
0.0039
0.13
0.021
0.3
0.17
34
29.1
0.00517
0.09
0.021
1.76
0.22
35
37.41
0.00374
0.11
0.018
0.73
0.16
36
28.53
0.00409
0.12
-
0.77
0.17
37
35.02
0.00409
0.11
-
0.71
0.17
38
41.08
0.00365
0.1
-
0.36
0.15
39
21.11
0.00481
0.1
0.019
1.13
0.2
40
38.55
0.00412
0.1
-
0.38
0.17
41
30.47
0.00513
0.09
-
0.32
0.22
42
14.6
0.00355
0.09
-
1.79
0.15
43
33.18
0.00473
0.1
0.019
0.79
0.2
44
36.86
0.00477
0.09
-
1.03
0.2
45
3.28
0.00485
0.09
0.019
0.63
0.21
46
30.81
0.00535
0.09
-
2.55
0.23
47
10.59
0.00345
0.08
0.012
1.27
0.15
48
4.4
0.00522
0.08
0.018
2.52
0.22
49
11.71
0.00362
0.08
-
1.17
0.15
50
40.16
0.005
0.08
0.017
0.67
0.21
51
30.6
0.00564
0.08
0.02
0.21
0.24
52
29.23
0.00545
0.09
0.02
1.55
0.23
53
3.47
0.00543
0.08
0.019
3.05
0.23
54
0.73
0.00651
0.08
-
1.42
0.28
55
60.38
0.00291
0.07
-
2.0
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
259
==PAGE:268==
56
37.85
0.00596
0.07
-
1.67
0.25
TIC 312221462
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
42.51
0.00017
0.37
0.009
1.01
0.02
2
41.74
0.00026
0.24
0.009
2.18
0.04
3
44.59
0.0003
0.21
0.009
0.6
0.04
4
36.18
0.00031
0.2
-
1.74
0.04
5
0.36
0.0011
0.08
-
1.64
0.15
6
0.82
0.00124
0.07
0.012
0.33
0.17
7
0.66
0.00145
0.06
-
1.24
0.2
8
1.41
0.00134
0.07
-
1.77
0.19
9
0.46
0.00137
0.06
-
0.79
0.19
10
1.18
0.00151
0.06
-
0.63
0.21
11
1.51
0.00162
0.06
0.013
3.01
0.22
12
2.2
0.00162
0.05
0.012
1.1
0.22
13
0.13
0.00152
0.06
0.012
2.9
0.21
14
0.26
0.00156
0.05
0.012
2.1
0.22
15
0.69
0.00155
0.06
0.012
2.14
0.22
16
1.74
0.0018
0.05
0.013
2.59
0.25
TIC 312662432
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.56
0.0
1.24
-
0.52
0.0
2
29.38
0.0
0.62
0.003
0.7
0.01
3
28.21
0.0
0.52
-
1.13
0.01
4
36.29
0.0
0.47
-
0.39
0.01
5
34.16
1e-05
0.31
0.003
0.26
0.01
6
29.31
0.0
0.34
-
1.76
0.01
7
32.81
1e-05
0.28
0.004
3.04
0.01
8
22.01
1e-05
0.27
-
3.06
0.02
9
36.22
1e-05
0.26
-
2.12
0.01
10
40.21
1e-05
0.22
-
1.98
0.02
11
22.38
1e-05
0.17
-
2.07
0.02
12
43.26
1e-05
0.17
-
0.31
0.02
13
27.81
1e-05
0.14
-
1.48
0.02
14
23.02
1e-05
0.14
-
2.54
0.02
15
18.85
1e-05
0.13
-
0.01
0.02
16
43.21
1e-05
0.13
0.002
0.09
0.02
17
32.68
2e-05
0.11
-
0.74
0.03
18
39.07
1e-05
0.11
-
0.51
0.03
19
21.47
2e-05
0.1
0.003
2.45
0.03
20
25.38
1e-05
0.09
0.002
2.55
0.02
21
29.23
2e-05
0.08
-
2.88
0.04
22
36.42
3e-05
0.07
0.004
1.71
0.05
23
39.13
2e-05
0.07
0.002
0.68
0.04
24
22.73
2e-05
0.07
-
1.17
0.04
25
36.09
1e-05
0.07
0.002
1.43
0.03
260
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:269==
26
29.12
2e-05
0.06
-
2.2
0.05
27
20.3
2e-05
0.06
0.002
3.0
0.04
28
40.26
3e-05
0.07
-
1.08
0.06
29
22.4
2e-05
0.07
0.003
0.71
0.03
30
32.91
3e-05
0.06
-
0.71
0.07
31
39.26
2e-05
0.06
0.002
0.3
0.03
32
30.67
3e-05
0.05
-
0.06
0.06
33
0.12
5e-05
0.05
0.005
1.35
0.09
34
35.95
2e-05
0.04
0.002
2.88
0.05
35
32.93
4e-05
0.05
-
2.13
0.08
36
57.58
6e-05
0.04
0.004
2.12
0.11
37
32.38
2e-05
0.04
-
0.68
0.05
38
32.14
3e-05
0.04
0.002
1.37
0.06
39
31.91
4e-05
0.04
-
0.03
0.08
40
23.57
3e-05
0.04
-
2.04
0.07
41
20.62
4e-05
0.04
0.003
0.4
0.07
42
30.33
3e-05
0.04
0.002
1.16
0.06
43
32.61
5e-05
0.03
0.003
0.9
0.1
44
0.22
5e-05
0.04
0.004
0.67
0.1
45
24.8
4e-05
0.03
-
2.99
0.09
46
38.15
4e-05
0.03
0.003
1.31
0.09
47
0.18
5e-05
0.04
0.004
1.28
0.1
48
64.67
6e-05
0.03
-
2.08
0.12
49
36.03
3e-05
0.03
-
1.27
0.05
50
21.31
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.46
0.08
51
0.07
0.0001
0.03
0.006
2.28
0.2
52
46.08
4e-05
0.03
-
2.75
0.09
53
23.2
5e-05
0.03
0.003
2.94
0.11
54
43.11
5e-05
0.03
0.003
0.39
0.1
55
23.41
5e-05
0.02
0.002
0.42
0.1
56
20.46
5e-05
0.02
-
2.48
0.1
57
35.07
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.13
0.09
58
46.84
7e-05
0.02
-
1.64
0.13
59
38.85
7e-05
0.02
0.003
1.45
0.13
60
43.21
5e-05
0.02
-
1.69
0.1
61
0.33
8e-05
0.03
0.004
0.34
0.16
62
0.41
0.00011
0.03
0.006
0.5
0.23
63
71.69
8e-05
0.02
-
0.67
0.16
64
27.65
5e-05
0.02
-
1.78
0.11
65
0.51
0.00017
0.02
-
2.01
0.34
66
0.78
0.00014
0.02
0.006
2.94
0.28
67
0.86
0.00014
0.02
0.006
0.06
0.28
68
30.5
6e-05
0.02
-
2.95
0.11
69
0.03
0.00011
0.02
-
1.31
0.22
70
27.96
0.0001
0.02
-
2.13
0.2
71
41.57
4e-05
0.02
-
0.48
0.08
72
38.43
7e-05
0.02
0.003
0.37
0.14
73
57.62
0.00012
0.02
0.005
0.13
0.25
74
38.06
8e-05
0.02
-
2.91
0.16
75
24.31
7e-05
0.02
0.003
3.12
0.15
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
261
==PAGE:270==
76
24.13
7e-05
0.02
-
2.41
0.14
77
1.05
0.00013
0.02
-
1.43
0.27
78
25.54
9e-05
0.02
-
1.08
0.18
79
50.37
7e-05
0.02
-
2.49
0.14
80
14.0
6e-05
0.02
-
1.36
0.12
81
41.63
5e-05
0.02
-
0.44
0.1
82
43.39
9e-05
0.02
0.003
2.84
0.18
83
27.41
8e-05
0.02
0.003
0.64
0.16
84
0.97
0.00012
0.02
0.005
0.66
0.25
85
1.01
0.00014
0.02
0.005
0.73
0.28
86
42.86
8e-05
0.02
-
1.56
0.17
TIC 312694132
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.75
5e-05
1.53
-
1.09
0.01
2
1.12
7e-05
1.25
0.011
1.91
0.01
3
0.37
7e-05
1.14
0.011
1.1
0.01
4
1.87
9e-05
0.8
0.01
1.52
0.01
5
1.5
0.0001
0.81
0.011
2.56
0.01
6
48.18
7e-05
0.68
-
2.19
0.01
7
51.61
0.00013
0.38
0.007
1.41
0.02
8
50.71
0.00013
0.39
-
3.14
0.02
9
44.38
0.00014
0.37
0.007
1.45
0.02
10
51.22
0.00014
0.36
-
0.47
0.02
11
43.88
0.00015
0.32
0.007
0.64
0.02
12
44.93
0.00016
0.31
-
2.27
0.02
13
2.86
0.00033
0.2
0.009
0.52
0.05
14
2.25
0.00042
0.17
0.01
1.24
0.06
15
48.31
0.00029
0.16
-
1.78
0.04
16
51.4
0.00037
0.13
-
2.84
0.05
17
41.02
0.00036
0.12
-
1.84
0.05
18
2.62
0.00058
0.12
-
0.99
0.08
19
44.88
0.00053
0.09
-
0.28
0.07
20
0.12
0.00105
0.08
0.012
1.87
0.15
21
44.57
0.00081
0.06
0.007
1.76
0.11
22
51.34
0.0008
0.06
-
2.88
0.11
23
51.72
0.00088
0.05
-
1.25
0.12
24
50.35
0.0009
0.05
0.007
2.58
0.12
25
44.62
0.00095
0.05
-
2.11
0.13
26
47.8
0.00092
0.05
0.006
2.93
0.13
27
3.0
0.00128
0.05
-
2.4
0.18
28
43.63
0.00095
0.05
-
1.67
0.13
29
50.47
0.00101
0.05
-
2.18
0.14
30
43.54
0.00104
0.05
0.007
1.48
0.14
31
47.57
0.00108
0.04
-
0.6
0.15
32
51.49
0.00112
0.04
-
1.92
0.15
33
49.11
0.00119
0.04
0.007
1.35
0.16
34
50.65
0.00129
0.04
0.007
3.13
0.18
262
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:271==
TIC 312694132
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.75
5e-05
1.53
-
1.09
0.01
2
1.12
7e-05
1.25
0.011
1.91
0.01
3
0.37
7e-05
1.14
0.011
1.1
0.01
4
1.87
9e-05
0.8
0.01
1.52
0.01
5
1.5
0.0001
0.81
0.011
2.56
0.01
6
48.18
7e-05
0.68
-
2.19
0.01
7
51.61
0.00013
0.38
0.007
1.41
0.02
8
50.71
0.00013
0.39
-
3.14
0.02
9
44.38
0.00014
0.37
0.007
1.45
0.02
10
51.22
0.00014
0.36
-
0.47
0.02
11
43.88
0.00015
0.32
0.007
0.64
0.02
12
44.93
0.00016
0.31
-
2.27
0.02
13
2.86
0.00033
0.2
0.009
0.52
0.05
14
2.25
0.00042
0.17
0.01
1.24
0.06
15
48.31
0.00029
0.16
-
1.78
0.04
16
51.4
0.00037
0.13
-
2.84
0.05
17
41.02
0.00036
0.12
-
1.84
0.05
18
2.62
0.00058
0.12
-
0.99
0.08
19
44.88
0.00053
0.09
-
0.28
0.07
20
0.12
0.00105
0.08
0.012
1.87
0.15
21
44.57
0.00081
0.06
0.007
1.76
0.11
22
51.34
0.0008
0.06
-
2.88
0.11
23
51.72
0.00088
0.05
-
1.25
0.12
24
50.35
0.0009
0.05
0.007
2.58
0.12
25
44.62
0.00095
0.05
-
2.11
0.13
26
47.8
0.00092
0.05
0.006
2.93
0.13
27
3.0
0.00128
0.05
-
2.4
0.18
28
43.63
0.00095
0.05
-
1.67
0.13
29
50.47
0.00101
0.05
-
2.18
0.14
30
43.54
0.00104
0.05
0.007
1.48
0.14
31
47.57
0.00108
0.04
-
0.6
0.15
32
51.49
0.00112
0.04
-
1.92
0.15
33
49.11
0.00119
0.04
0.007
1.35
0.16
34
50.65
0.00129
0.04
0.007
3.13
0.18
TIC 319126228
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
34.85
1e-05
0.22
0.004
2.67
0.02
2
28.04
1e-05
0.21
0.003
1.72
0.01
3
30.49
1e-05
0.14
-
0.44
0.02
4
30.07
2e-05
0.13
0.003
1.58
0.03
5
32.67
2e-05
0.11
0.002
1.67
0.02
6
34.65
3e-05
0.09
-
1.45
0.04
7
37.9
2e-05
0.09
0.002
0.08
0.03
8
25.62
3e-05
0.07
-
0.05
0.04
9
25.42
3e-05
0.07
-
2.87
0.05
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
263
==PAGE:272==
10
35.57
3e-05
0.06
0.003
2.07
0.04
11
34.69
5e-05
0.05
-
2.71
0.08
12
37.49
4e-05
0.05
-
3.08
0.06
13
30.8
4e-05
0.04
0.002
1.35
0.05
14
46.95
5e-05
0.03
0.002
2.16
0.07
15
38.57
7e-05
0.03
-
2.63
0.11
16
29.39
7e-05
0.03
0.003
1.23
0.11
17
41.66
7e-05
0.03
0.003
2.6
0.09
18
0.19
0.00014
0.03
-
2.52
0.2
19
40.23
7e-05
0.02
-
3.02
0.1
20
32.56
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.59
0.1
21
0.12
0.00014
0.02
0.004
0.28
0.19
22
0.35
0.00017
0.02
-
0.41
0.24
23
1.27
0.00012
0.02
-
1.35
0.17
24
33.2
0.0001
0.02
0.003
2.52
0.14
25
39.57
0.0001
0.02
0.003
1.91
0.15
26
24.63
0.00012
0.02
-
1.32
0.17
27
0.32
0.0002
0.02
-
1.23
0.29
28
37.15
0.0001
0.02
0.003
2.44
0.15
TIC 320603498
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.38
2e-05
0.49
0.003
0.1
0.01
2
28.81
3e-05
0.29
-
1.67
0.01
3
18.39
4e-05
0.19
0.003
2.45
0.02
4
32.78
9e-05
0.08
0.003
0.46
0.04
5
21.96
0.00011
0.07
-
2.16
0.04
6
20.41
0.00012
0.07
0.003
0.28
0.05
7
27.15
0.00014
0.06
0.003
1.87
0.06
8
2.81
0.00023
0.05
0.005
0.32
0.09
9
5.63
0.00023
0.04
-
2.82
0.09
10
34.9
0.00023
0.03
-
2.05
0.09
11
0.1
0.00052
0.03
0.007
0.74
0.2
12
32.2
0.00025
0.03
0.003
2.79
0.1
13
0.49
0.00059
0.03
0.006
2.11
0.23
14
37.42
0.00036
0.02
-
0.81
0.14
15
17.44
0.00033
0.02
-
1.41
0.13
16
32.0
0.00036
0.02
0.003
2.76
0.14
17
2.72
0.00056
0.02
-
1.91
0.22
18
0.45
0.00078
0.02
0.006
0.58
0.31
19
19.53
0.00042
0.02
-
0.48
0.17
20
3.05
0.00062
0.02
-
1.41
0.24
TIC 328860893
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.93
0.0
1.77
-
2.7
0.0
2
15.11
0.0
1.38
0.009
1.69
0.01
3
19.56
1e-05
0.81
-
2.57
0.01
264
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:273==
4
11.31
1e-05
0.59
-
2.0
0.02
5
26.19
1e-05
0.54
-
1.8
0.02
6
12.99
2e-05
0.5
-
0.97
0.02
7
10.3
1e-05
0.48
-
1.24
0.02
8
14.39
2e-05
0.45
-
1.91
0.03
9
8.07
1e-05
0.45
-
2.52
0.02
10
4.11
1e-05
0.39
-
0.28
0.02
11
8.44
2e-05
0.39
-
0.65
0.03
12
31.23
2e-05
0.39
-
2.75
0.03
13
20.86
3e-05
0.37
-
0.72
0.04
14
17.07
2e-05
0.35
-
1.2
0.03
15
11.61
2e-05
0.33
-
2.49
0.02
16
13.4
2e-05
0.31
0.009
3.05
0.03
17
12.87
3e-05
0.29
0.012
0.58
0.04
18
24.5
3e-05
0.26
0.01
0.18
0.04
19
2.35
3e-05
0.27
0.01
2.36
0.04
20
23.8
3e-05
0.25
-
2.68
0.04
21
8.23
3e-05
0.25
-
1.84
0.04
22
16.66
4e-05
0.25
-
1.11
0.05
23
13.88
3e-05
0.24
0.009
2.52
0.04
24
6.59
4e-05
0.23
-
2.89
0.06
25
25.94
5e-05
0.22
-
0.1
0.06
26
27.95
3e-05
0.25
-
0.49
0.05
27
21.49
4e-05
0.21
0.011
0.83
0.05
28
3.62
4e-05
0.21
0.012
2.78
0.06
29
8.92
3e-05
0.21
0.008
0.91
0.04
30
18.51
4e-05
0.18
-
0.43
0.06
31
14.51
4e-05
0.19
-
0.67
0.05
32
18.68
5e-05
0.18
-
1.59
0.06
33
10.62
4e-05
0.19
0.012
2.48
0.06
34
7.44
3e-05
0.18
-
1.74
0.05
35
26.1
4e-05
0.16
0.009
1.4
0.06
36
40.12
2e-05
0.17
-
2.21
0.03
37
9.99
5e-05
0.16
0.01
2.22
0.06
38
20.22
5e-05
0.16
-
2.69
0.07
39
24.7
3e-05
0.17
0.007
1.38
0.04
40
9.55
4e-05
0.15
0.008
2.13
0.05
41
28.71
5e-05
0.13
0.009
0.63
0.07
42
13.16
6e-05
0.13
-
2.79
0.08
43
7.65
5e-05
0.13
-
0.25
0.08
44
26.45
5e-05
0.13
-
1.18
0.07
45
3.36
6e-05
0.13
0.011
2.81
0.08
46
25.1
3e-05
0.12
0.005
1.2
0.04
47
30.87
5e-05
0.13
0.009
0.47
0.07
48
0.77
7e-05
0.13
-
2.05
0.1
49
21.73
7e-05
0.12
0.013
0.7
0.1
50
3.94
6e-05
0.12
-
1.39
0.08
51
4.6
6e-05
0.1
0.009
2.57
0.09
52
16.24
7e-05
0.11
0.012
1.79
0.1
53
10.92
9e-05
0.1
-
2.47
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
265
==PAGE:274==
54
35.12
6e-05
0.11
0.009
1.29
0.08
55
4.74
7e-05
0.11
-
2.86
0.1
56
19.09
8e-05
0.11
-
0.92
0.11
57
0.26
9e-05
0.09
0.011
0.83
0.12
58
23.29
9e-05
0.09
0.011
2.73
0.13
59
28.1
0.0001
0.08
-
1.41
0.14
60
18.86
5e-05
0.09
0.006
1.59
0.07
61
6.74
0.00012
0.08
0.013
1.93
0.17
62
25.44
8e-05
0.08
-
2.88
0.1
63
20.43
0.0001
0.08
0.011
0.96
0.14
64
0.56
8e-05
0.08
0.009
2.54
0.11
65
5.49
0.00012
0.06
-
0.84
0.17
66
26.7
0.00011
0.07
-
0.44
0.15
67
27.14
9e-05
0.07
-
2.17
0.13
68
28.39
0.0001
0.08
0.01
2.0
0.13
69
9.09
0.0001
0.07
0.01
2.88
0.14
70
20.11
0.00012
0.08
-
2.11
0.16
71
5.17
9e-05
0.08
-
2.77
0.12
72
31.6
9e-05
0.07
-
0.73
0.12
73
33.51
4e-05
0.07
0.004
0.51
0.05
74
23.45
0.00012
0.07
0.012
0.77
0.16
75
30.16
7e-05
0.07
0.006
2.9
0.09
76
5.66
0.0001
0.07
-
2.87
0.14
77
1.78
0.00011
0.06
-
0.92
0.15
78
1.48
9e-05
0.07
-
3.02
0.13
79
10.9
0.00013
0.07
0.012
2.46
0.18
80
27.38
9e-05
0.07
-
2.24
0.13
81
41.0
7e-05
0.07
0.006
2.73
0.09
82
35.48
0.00012
0.06
0.01
2.26
0.16
83
1.71
0.0001
0.07
0.01
3.07
0.14
84
1.6
0.0001
0.06
-
0.57
0.13
85
4.63
0.0001
0.06
0.008
0.18
0.14
86
7.2
9e-05
0.07
0.008
3.13
0.12
87
3.34
0.00011
0.06
-
1.89
0.16
88
18.13
0.00014
0.05
0.01
3.07
0.19
89
5.39
0.00011
0.06
0.008
2.28
0.15
90
37.0
9e-05
0.06
0.007
1.02
0.12
91
0.46
0.00011
0.06
0.01
2.54
0.15
92
38.68
8e-05
0.06
0.006
1.91
0.11
93
4.91
0.00016
0.05
-
1.99
0.23
94
25.13
7e-05
0.06
-
0.22
0.09
95
22.86
0.00013
0.05
0.01
1.22
0.18
96
1.08
0.00012
0.07
-
1.65
0.16
97
5.74
0.0001
0.06
0.009
1.04
0.15
98
12.36
0.00013
0.05
-
1.61
0.18
99
6.0
0.00014
0.06
-
2.11
0.19
100
24.97
0.0001
0.05
-
2.91
0.14
101
29.46
8e-05
0.05
0.006
0.04
0.11
102
4.53
9e-05
0.05
0.007
0.54
0.13
103
18.33
0.00014
0.05
0.009
0.19
0.19
266
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:275==
104
7.05
0.00018
0.05
-
3.13
0.25
105
27.78
0.00013
0.05
-
2.25
0.19
106
2.89
0.00015
0.05
-
0.22
0.2
107
24.11
0.00016
0.05
0.01
1.47
0.22
108
39.16
0.0001
0.05
-
1.73
0.13
109
41.63
8e-05
0.05
0.005
1.48
0.11
110
33.49
5e-05
0.05
0.004
0.05
0.07
111
1.32
0.00016
0.05
0.01
0.08
0.22
112
32.34
0.00016
0.05
-
0.7
0.22
113
44.98
0.00012
0.04
-
2.66
0.17
114
22.38
0.00018
0.04
-
2.18
0.25
115
33.06
0.00015
0.04
-
1.69
0.2
116
8.85
0.00013
0.05
-
2.84
0.17
117
5.62
0.00016
0.05
-
0.18
0.22
118
37.61
0.0001
0.04
0.006
1.98
0.14
119
0.69
0.00017
0.04
0.01
1.01
0.24
120
3.02
0.00017
0.04
0.01
0.89
0.24
121
40.33
8e-05
0.04
-
1.33
0.11
122
36.66
8e-05
0.04
-
1.84
0.11
TIC 328861965
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.78
1e-05
0.19
0.002
1.56
0.01
2
20.5
2e-05
0.11
0.002
1.76
0.02
3
2.49
5e-05
0.04
-
3.1
0.07
4
17.71
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.2
0.07
5
6.86
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.39
0.09
6
0.73
0.00012
0.02
-
1.42
0.16
7
4.97
0.00011
0.01
0.002
0.52
0.15
8
0.09
9e-05
0.01
-
1.37
0.12
9
3.26
0.00014
0.01
0.002
1.91
0.2
10
4.2
0.00015
0.01
-
0.46
0.2
TIC 331066260
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
7.13
0.00032
0.12
-
1.01
0.03
2
9.2
0.00051
0.08
-
1.25
0.05
3
15.7
0.00061
0.07
0.004
1.12
0.05
4
13.12
0.00058
0.07
0.004
1.89
0.05
5
7.14
0.00039
0.1
-
3.03
0.04
6
15.13
0.00069
0.06
-
1.06
0.06
7
15.14
0.00075
0.06
0.004
2.28
0.07
8
12.51
0.00133
0.03
-
0.13
0.12
9
13.65
0.00148
0.03
-
0.7
0.13
10
10.5
0.00161
0.03
0.004
2.26
0.15
11
12.08
0.00184
0.02
0.004
1.78
0.17
12
13.35
0.00187
0.02
0.004
1.55
0.17
13
14.2
0.00209
0.02
-
2.5
0.19
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
267
==PAGE:276==
14
8.6
0.00215
0.02
0.004
1.65
0.19
15
0.11
0.0025
0.02
-
2.12
0.23
16
0.74
0.00252
0.02
-
3.06
0.23
17
8.31
0.0021
0.02
0.004
1.53
0.19
18
10.52
0.00215
0.02
-
2.05
0.19
19
14.29
0.00229
0.02
0.004
2.58
0.21
20
12.09
0.0022
0.02
-
0.56
0.2
21
8.1
0.00221
0.02
-
0.1
0.2
22
13.63
0.00212
0.02
-
1.22
0.19
23
11.22
0.00247
0.02
0.004
1.07
0.22
24
0.2
0.00302
0.02
0.005
0.47
0.27
25
9.98
0.00253
0.02
0.004
2.22
0.23
TIC 331749751
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.49
1e-05
0.82
-
0.91
0.01
2
4.69
2e-05
0.39
-
0.14
0.03
3
7.48
1e-05
0.35
0.008
2.61
0.02
4
8.88
2e-05
0.3
0.009
1.24
0.03
5
8.03
2e-05
0.25
0.008
0.29
0.03
6
10.99
3e-05
0.12
0.006
0.46
0.05
7
0.08
5e-05
0.1
0.008
1.84
0.08
8
10.05
4e-05
0.09
0.007
1.41
0.07
9
14.15
4e-05
0.09
-
0.09
0.06
10
9.42
6e-05
0.08
-
2.56
0.1
11
9.36
6e-05
0.08
-
0.49
0.11
12
1.55
7e-05
0.07
0.008
2.76
0.13
13
8.7
6e-05
0.07
-
1.0
0.1
14
3.06
9e-05
0.06
0.009
2.79
0.16
15
2.99
9e-05
0.06
0.009
0.08
0.15
16
1.25
0.00012
0.04
-
1.53
0.21
17
12.84
8e-05
0.05
0.007
1.22
0.14
18
5.34
0.0001
0.05
-
0.93
0.18
19
15.58
6e-05
0.05
0.005
0.91
0.1
20
17.07
6e-05
0.05
-
0.03
0.1
21
0.66
9e-05
0.06
-
2.51
0.16
22
8.87
0.00011
0.05
-
1.18
0.19
23
13.75
7e-05
0.04
0.006
1.08
0.13
24
0.69
0.00013
0.05
0.01
1.34
0.22
25
1.47
8e-05
0.05
-
2.02
0.15
26
6.16
0.0001
0.04
0.007
0.93
0.17
27
11.58
9e-05
0.04
-
2.41
0.15
28
2.77
0.0001
0.04
-
0.6
0.18
29
0.76
0.00015
0.04
-
2.23
0.27
30
3.68
0.00014
0.04
0.009
0.66
0.24
31
10.27
9e-05
0.04
-
1.47
0.16
32
2.35
0.00014
0.04
-
3.09
0.24
33
2.81
0.00014
0.04
0.009
0.16
0.25
34
2.26
0.00016
0.03
-
2.45
0.28
268
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:277==
35
14.73
8e-05
0.03
-
0.89
0.14
TIC 335059689
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.27
0.00014
1.66
-
1.86
0.01
2
22.62
0.00013
1.74
0.011
1.05
0.01
3
15.91
0.00024
1.01
0.011
2.17
0.01
4
15.83
0.00027
0.9
-
0.9
0.01
5
23.38
0.00027
0.85
-
0.88
0.01
6
13.12
0.0003
0.73
-
1.71
0.01
7
14.92
0.00032
0.76
0.011
2.34
0.01
8
20.61
0.00039
0.63
-
3.05
0.02
9
19.14
0.00046
0.53
-
0.19
0.02
10
17.08
0.00038
0.65
0.011
1.75
0.02
11
9.86
0.00039
0.51
-
2.85
0.02
12
21.22
0.00047
0.51
-
0.08
0.02
13
11.35
0.00052
0.39
0.009
2.91
0.02
14
19.39
0.00059
0.42
0.011
2.3
0.03
15
23.56
0.00064
0.37
-
1.83
0.03
16
18.26
0.00069
0.36
-
1.24
0.03
17
25.79
0.0009
0.28
0.011
1.72
0.04
18
11.44
0.00071
0.28
-
2.0
0.03
19
26.74
0.00114
0.23
-
0.06
0.05
20
20.09
0.00104
0.24
0.011
1.06
0.05
21
19.97
0.00144
0.17
-
0.86
0.07
22
0.72
0.00124
0.18
0.01
1.25
0.06
23
12.15
0.00138
0.15
0.01
0.23
0.06
24
19.77
0.00161
0.15
0.011
1.33
0.07
25
24.66
0.00164
0.15
0.011
0.62
0.07
26
0.16
0.00166
0.13
-
3.0
0.07
27
15.2
0.00199
0.12
0.011
1.98
0.09
28
18.02
0.00256
0.1
-
0.91
0.12
29
0.94
0.00239
0.09
-
2.38
0.11
30
1.45
0.00326
0.07
-
1.3
0.15
31
21.66
0.0035
0.07
-
1.13
0.16
32
0.43
0.00345
0.06
0.01
0.69
0.16
33
32.47
0.00436
0.06
0.012
1.68
0.2
34
24.98
0.00418
0.06
0.011
1.1
0.19
35
30.56
0.00442
0.06
-
1.94
0.2
36
11.92
0.00336
0.06
0.009
0.71
0.15
37
29.16
0.00452
0.06
0.011
3.02
0.2
38
37.71
0.00417
0.06
-
1.53
0.19
39
4.1
0.00391
0.05
-
2.84
0.18
40
34.98
0.00442
0.05
-
0.67
0.2
41
8.03
0.0037
0.05
-
0.35
0.17
42
10.38
0.00388
0.05
0.009
1.01
0.18
43
30.21
0.00484
0.05
0.012
2.59
0.22
44
36.76
0.00476
0.05
0.011
1.92
0.22
45
27.29
0.00547
0.05
-
1.31
0.25
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
269
==PAGE:278==
46
30.91
0.00597
0.04
-
3.06
0.27
47
2.57
0.00466
0.05
-
1.44
0.21
48
7.48
0.00444
0.05
0.009
1.07
0.2
49
33.33
0.00624
0.04
0.011
2.14
0.28
50
3.38
0.00471
0.05
0.01
1.46
0.21
51
34.63
0.00567
0.04
0.011
0.25
0.26
52
43.51
0.00481
0.04
0.009
2.42
0.22
53
26.43
0.00628
0.04
-
0.02
0.28
54
6.81
0.00486
0.04
0.009
0.21
0.22
55
16.25
0.0064
0.04
-
0.84
0.29
56
14.17
0.00605
0.04
0.01
0.31
0.27
57
33.8
0.00677
0.04
0.011
0.19
0.31
TIC 33590498
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.47
0.0
4.51
0.012
0.23
0.0
2
2.53
1e-05
1.53
-
0.07
0.01
3
24.14
1e-05
1.35
-
0.02
0.01
4
2.66
1e-05
1.3
0.017
1.35
0.01
5
28.73
1e-05
1.04
0.013
1.91
0.01
6
28.58
1e-05
1.03
0.011
2.24
0.01
7
17.53
1e-05
0.85
0.01
2.66
0.01
8
21.03
1e-05
0.81
0.011
2.6
0.01
9
30.52
1e-05
0.83
0.009
1.89
0.01
10
30.0
1e-05
0.76
-
0.33
0.01
11
19.12
1e-05
0.6
-
1.85
0.01
12
22.26
1e-05
0.48
-
0.9
0.01
13
2.42
3e-05
0.44
-
1.5
0.04
14
28.84
1e-05
0.44
-
1.5
0.02
15
12.83
4e-05
0.3
0.015
2.14
0.05
16
19.91
2e-05
0.28
0.008
0.0
0.03
17
0.66
3e-05
0.29
-
1.95
0.04
18
13.06
3e-05
0.3
-
1.08
0.04
19
29.45
3e-05
0.25
0.01
2.64
0.04
20
26.16
4e-05
0.25
0.013
1.24
0.05
21
47.7
2e-05
0.24
-
2.69
0.02
22
13.45
6e-05
0.22
0.018
2.76
0.08
23
13.3
5e-05
0.21
0.016
1.61
0.07
24
23.63
3e-05
0.19
0.009
0.81
0.05
25
17.62
3e-05
0.19
-
0.85
0.04
26
13.89
8e-05
0.17
-
2.2
0.11
27
16.07
8e-05
0.15
-
0.53
0.11
28
0.4
9e-05
0.15
-
0.55
0.12
29
1.56
6e-05
0.13
-
1.18
0.09
30
11.88
7e-05
0.15
-
2.03
0.1
31
21.22
3e-05
0.14
-
0.42
0.04
32
11.48
0.0001
0.13
0.018
0.19
0.14
33
20.1
5e-05
0.11
0.008
2.99
0.07
34
11.69
0.00013
0.11
-
0.04
0.18
270
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:279==
35
4.09
8e-05
0.11
-
2.78
0.11
36
0.3
0.00011
0.12
0.019
0.32
0.16
37
0.77
7e-05
0.12
-
1.66
0.09
38
10.47
0.00015
0.1
-
0.24
0.21
39
15.48
0.00014
0.09
0.018
2.81
0.19
40
12.65
9e-05
0.12
-
1.98
0.12
41
25.42
7e-05
0.1
0.01
0.29
0.1
42
14.39
0.00011
0.11
-
0.23
0.15
43
2.01
0.00016
0.1
-
0.45
0.22
44
12.34
0.00011
0.09
0.014
3.04
0.15
45
10.81
0.00014
0.09
-
1.94
0.19
46
15.6
0.00013
0.09
0.016
2.26
0.18
47
14.28
0.00013
0.09
-
0.89
0.17
48
10.08
0.00012
0.08
-
2.56
0.16
49
11.35
9e-05
0.1
0.012
0.43
0.12
50
10.54
0.00017
0.08
0.02
1.73
0.24
51
36.46
5e-05
0.08
-
1.39
0.07
52
16.23
0.00012
0.08
0.012
0.43
0.16
53
15.17
0.00025
0.07
0.024
0.34
0.34
54
14.48
0.00012
0.08
0.013
1.56
0.16
55
1.27
0.00019
0.07
-
1.31
0.27
56
9.74
0.00013
0.07
-
1.38
0.18
57
10.3
0.00011
0.07
-
2.62
0.15
58
1.87
0.00013
0.08
-
2.16
0.19
TIC 337085903
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
28.69
4e-05
0.95
0.005
2.29
0.0
2
22.8
5e-05
0.76
-
2.47
0.01
3
28.42
7e-05
0.46
0.004
0.01
0.01
4
23.33
9e-05
0.44
0.005
0.62
0.01
5
28.08
9e-05
0.39
-
2.4
0.01
6
23.07
0.0001
0.37
-
2.38
0.01
7
22.37
0.00011
0.33
0.005
2.89
0.02
8
0.17
0.00017
0.35
0.008
0.3
0.02
9
29.7
0.0001
0.32
0.004
1.42
0.01
10
33.42
0.00014
0.24
-
2.9
0.02
11
44.18
0.00013
0.25
-
1.42
0.02
12
23.59
0.00019
0.21
-
2.65
0.03
13
30.58
0.00018
0.19
-
0.43
0.02
14
29.97
0.00019
0.18
0.005
2.16
0.03
15
37.06
0.00017
0.18
-
2.1
0.02
16
23.2
0.00022
0.17
-
0.84
0.03
17
34.76
0.00024
0.14
0.005
2.8
0.03
18
18.85
0.00024
0.13
0.004
1.93
0.03
19
40.95
0.00024
0.13
0.004
0.46
0.03
20
33.3
0.0003
0.12
0.005
1.54
0.04
21
27.68
0.00029
0.11
0.005
2.26
0.04
22
58.76
0.0003
0.11
-
0.52
0.04
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
271
==PAGE:280==
23
55.02
0.0003
0.11
0.004
0.47
0.04
24
47.8
0.0003
0.11
0.005
2.99
0.04
25
58.82
0.00035
0.1
0.005
0.26
0.05
26
44.05
0.00035
0.09
0.004
0.01
0.05
27
30.71
0.00038
0.09
0.005
1.46
0.05
28
30.23
0.00039
0.09
0.005
2.41
0.05
29
25.61
0.00043
0.08
-
3.11
0.06
30
39.58
0.00035
0.08
0.004
0.2
0.05
31
30.1
0.00042
0.08
-
0.05
0.06
32
2.38
0.00066
0.07
-
2.63
0.09
33
36.8
0.00048
0.07
0.004
3.07
0.07
34
47.1
0.00048
0.07
0.005
2.39
0.07
35
22.1
0.00053
0.07
0.005
1.64
0.07
36
18.96
0.0005
0.06
0.004
2.59
0.07
37
33.33
0.00055
0.07
-
2.35
0.08
38
32.82
0.00057
0.06
0.005
2.67
0.08
39
30.32
0.00055
0.06
-
2.71
0.08
40
40.07
0.00049
0.06
-
2.06
0.07
41
2.32
0.00072
0.07
0.007
0.9
0.1
42
26.0
0.00061
0.06
-
2.47
0.08
43
42.74
0.0005
0.06
-
0.84
0.07
44
58.69
0.0006
0.06
0.005
0.78
0.08
45
39.57
0.00051
0.06
0.004
2.4
0.07
46
2.76
0.00086
0.05
-
2.71
0.12
47
22.94
0.00068
0.06
-
0.62
0.09
48
58.72
0.00063
0.05
-
0.86
0.09
49
25.87
0.00074
0.05
-
2.71
0.1
50
27.96
0.00071
0.05
-
2.82
0.1
51
47.22
0.00064
0.05
-
3.07
0.09
52
2.63
0.00097
0.05
-
2.5
0.13
53
43.54
0.00066
0.05
0.004
2.43
0.09
54
36.85
0.00064
0.05
0.004
0.26
0.09
55
21.39
0.00073
0.05
0.005
0.26
0.1
56
19.17
0.00068
0.05
0.004
0.11
0.09
57
1.8
0.00114
0.05
-
0.89
0.16
58
24.94
0.00091
0.04
0.005
2.25
0.13
59
3.32
0.00106
0.04
0.006
2.26
0.15
60
24.54
0.0009
0.04
0.005
2.89
0.13
61
35.52
0.00082
0.04
0.005
1.49
0.11
62
21.21
0.00081
0.04
-
1.38
0.11
63
36.94
0.0008
0.04
0.004
0.56
0.11
64
46.85
0.00098
0.03
0.005
2.26
0.14
65
65.83
0.00092
0.03
-
2.59
0.13
66
25.21
0.00105
0.03
0.005
1.88
0.15
67
36.35
0.00094
0.04
0.005
1.77
0.13
68
58.52
0.00096
0.04
0.005
1.62
0.13
69
61.32
0.00093
0.03
-
2.48
0.13
70
39.95
0.00094
0.03
0.004
0.52
0.13
71
3.85
0.00134
0.03
-
1.81
0.19
72
38.75
0.00101
0.03
-
2.65
0.14
272
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:281==
73
25.99
0.00112
0.03
0.005
1.88
0.15
74
69.46
0.00101
0.03
-
2.1
0.14
75
35.87
0.00114
0.03
0.005
2.39
0.16
76
42.39
0.00106
0.03
-
2.7
0.15
77
46.98
0.00112
0.03
-
1.76
0.16
78
33.82
0.00126
0.03
0.005
1.79
0.17
79
42.33
0.00101
0.03
0.004
0.83
0.14
80
22.23
0.0013
0.03
-
1.82
0.18
81
65.62
0.00116
0.03
-
2.67
0.16
82
20.51
0.00119
0.03
0.004
1.24
0.16
83
2.92
0.00152
0.03
0.006
0.3
0.21
84
2.69
0.00149
0.03
0.006
2.8
0.21
85
41.82
0.00119
0.03
-
2.38
0.17
86
54.09
0.00118
0.03
-
1.57
0.16
87
42.63
0.00117
0.03
-
1.43
0.16
88
25.74
0.00134
0.03
0.005
3.12
0.19
89
20.15
0.00124
0.03
0.004
1.66
0.17
90
1.53
0.00206
0.03
-
0.5
0.29
91
29.53
0.00126
0.03
0.004
0.56
0.17
92
33.2
0.00138
0.03
0.005
0.54
0.19
TIC 337319844
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
6.64
0.0
20.85
0.053
1.27
0.0
2
7.07
0.0
11.17
-
2.2
0.0
3
10.77
1e-05
3.52
-
2.8
0.02
4
13.28
2e-05
1.55
-
0.93
0.02
5
11.6
2e-05
1.38
-
1.64
0.03
6
13.71
1e-05
1.38
-
2.31
0.02
7
10.43
3e-05
1.32
0.057
2.51
0.04
8
13.13
2e-05
1.39
-
0.02
0.02
9
8.88
2e-05
1.14
-
0.52
0.02
10
14.14
1e-05
0.92
-
0.39
0.02
11
10.97
4e-05
0.8
0.04
0.82
0.05
12
8.75
3e-05
0.53
0.022
1.36
0.04
13
17.4
4e-05
0.38
-
0.61
0.05
14
12.46
8e-05
0.26
0.028
2.87
0.11
TIC 337919172
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
4.24
0.00032
0.67
-
0.02
0.01
2
12.51
0.00044
0.43
0.009
2.66
0.02
3
4.98
0.00057
0.37
-
1.11
0.03
4
10.49
0.00057
0.34
-
1.32
0.03
5
10.85
0.00062
0.32
0.009
1.82
0.03
6
10.14
0.00064
0.3
-
0.52
0.03
7
1.73
0.00076
0.28
0.01
1.97
0.03
8
23.13
0.0004
0.27
-
0.55
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
273
==PAGE:282==
9
4.46
0.0008
0.27
-
0.95
0.04
10
8.26
0.00098
0.21
-
0.85
0.04
11
2.51
0.0013
0.16
0.01
2.25
0.06
12
24.86
0.00062
0.16
0.004
2.34
0.03
13
5.51
0.00131
0.16
-
2.26
0.06
14
2.73
0.00167
0.13
-
2.98
0.08
15
0.44
0.0017
0.12
0.01
2.93
0.08
16
2.23
0.00169
0.13
-
1.32
0.08
17
46.26
0.0005
0.11
-
0.76
0.02
18
21.4
0.00114
0.1
-
2.99
0.05
19
11.21
0.00203
0.1
0.009
1.38
0.09
20
18.14
0.0018
0.08
-
0.06
0.08
21
7.27
0.00282
0.08
0.01
0.74
0.13
22
5.83
0.00272
0.08
0.009
2.02
0.12
23
5.55
0.0023
0.09
0.009
1.4
0.1
24
50.5
0.00087
0.06
0.003
2.5
0.04
25
27.37
0.00141
0.06
-
0.85
0.06
26
14.73
0.0029
0.06
0.007
1.52
0.13
27
6.97
0.00403
0.05
0.01
1.1
0.18
28
26.33
0.00191
0.05
-
0.51
0.09
29
0.35
0.0042
0.05
-
2.78
0.19
30
0.27
0.00458
0.05
0.01
0.15
0.21
31
7.06
0.00485
0.04
0.01
0.95
0.22
32
18.59
0.00337
0.04
0.006
2.18
0.15
33
11.85
0.00452
0.04
0.008
2.21
0.2
34
2.25
0.00343
0.06
-
1.45
0.16
TIC 33836359
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.8
0.0
1.18
0.004
0.13
0.0
2
10.97
0.0
1.14
0.005
1.5
0.0
3
11.4
0.0
0.8
0.004
0.03
0.01
4
10.91
0.0
0.77
-
1.75
0.01
5
13.28
0.0
0.67
0.005
2.97
0.01
6
11.05
0.0
0.68
0.004
0.77
0.01
7
14.07
0.0
0.64
-
1.49
0.0
8
12.82
0.0
0.51
-
1.24
0.01
9
13.25
1e-05
0.42
0.005
2.94
0.01
10
14.31
0.0
0.44
0.003
2.2
0.01
11
14.09
0.0
0.42
0.003
0.06
0.01
12
12.39
0.0
0.38
0.004
2.71
0.01
13
9.31
0.0
0.38
-
0.05
0.01
14
9.76
0.0
0.35
-
1.45
0.01
15
11.19
1e-05
0.31
0.004
1.3
0.01
16
13.33
1e-05
0.28
-
0.51
0.02
17
10.76
1e-05
0.26
0.003
0.15
0.01
18
15.71
1e-05
0.27
0.005
2.32
0.02
19
13.14
1e-05
0.26
0.004
0.26
0.01
20
11.46
1e-05
0.25
0.004
1.17
0.02
274
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:283==
21
12.13
1e-05
0.24
-
0.98
0.01
22
19.83
1e-05
0.24
-
2.38
0.02
23
13.16
1e-05
0.23
0.004
2.5
0.02
24
13.05
1e-05
0.24
0.003
2.94
0.01
25
11.37
1e-05
0.23
0.004
2.56
0.02
26
10.71
1e-05
0.21
0.003
3.14
0.02
27
13.71
1e-05
0.22
0.004
1.37
0.02
28
9.48
1e-05
0.2
0.003
2.19
0.01
29
8.78
1e-05
0.2
0.003
1.1
0.01
30
11.62
1e-05
0.21
0.003
0.29
0.02
31
12.56
1e-05
0.19
0.003
2.68
0.01
32
12.74
1e-05
0.19
0.003
2.35
0.02
33
13.64
1e-05
0.17
0.004
0.26
0.02
34
8.36
1e-05
0.19
0.002
1.06
0.01
35
15.23
1e-05
0.18
0.004
2.66
0.02
36
11.33
1e-05
0.19
-
2.85
0.02
37
12.91
1e-05
0.18
0.003
0.06
0.02
38
8.57
1e-05
0.17
0.003
1.51
0.02
39
14.28
1e-05
0.16
0.003
1.57
0.02
40
13.25
2e-05
0.18
0.005
2.07
0.03
41
13.0
1e-05
0.17
-
1.07
0.02
42
10.48
1e-05
0.16
-
0.77
0.02
43
10.7
1e-05
0.15
0.003
0.14
0.02
44
13.19
2e-05
0.14
-
2.27
0.03
45
13.85
1e-05
0.15
0.004
1.42
0.02
46
15.92
1e-05
0.14
0.004
2.43
0.03
47
15.73
2e-05
0.14
0.005
1.51
0.04
48
9.79
1e-05
0.14
-
2.14
0.02
49
14.5
1e-05
0.13
-
1.21
0.02
50
12.44
1e-05
0.12
0.003
2.77
0.03
51
12.78
1e-05
0.12
0.003
1.62
0.03
52
11.2
2e-05
0.12
-
0.79
0.03
53
17.56
2e-05
0.12
-
0.74
0.03
54
7.8
1e-05
0.12
0.002
2.9
0.02
55
9.71
1e-05
0.12
-
2.15
0.02
56
11.56
2e-05
0.11
0.003
0.24
0.03
57
20.2
2e-05
0.11
-
2.69
0.03
58
7.74
1e-05
0.11
-
1.53
0.02
59
9.98
1e-05
0.1
-
0.7
0.02
60
14.79
2e-05
0.1
0.003
2.94
0.03
61
12.9
2e-05
0.1
-
1.5
0.03
62
10.17
1e-05
0.1
0.002
1.29
0.02
63
9.92
1e-05
0.09
0.003
2.41
0.03
64
15.03
2e-05
0.1
-
2.42
0.03
65
17.47
2e-05
0.09
0.004
0.87
0.04
66
11.16
2e-05
0.09
-
0.69
0.04
67
7.98
1e-05
0.09
-
1.15
0.02
68
19.46
2e-05
0.09
-
1.66
0.04
69
6.19
1e-05
0.09
-
0.19
0.02
70
12.62
2e-05
0.08
0.003
1.45
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
275
==PAGE:284==
71
7.93
1e-05
0.09
-
1.02
0.02
72
22.68
2e-05
0.08
0.003
0.52
0.04
73
15.41
3e-05
0.08
-
2.66
0.05
74
12.63
2e-05
0.09
-
2.55
0.03
75
17.94
2e-05
0.08
-
2.0
0.05
76
15.24
2e-05
0.08
-
0.21
0.05
77
15.22
3e-05
0.07
0.004
1.84
0.05
78
12.27
2e-05
0.07
0.003
0.25
0.04
79
9.56
2e-05
0.07
0.003
2.14
0.04
80
9.33
2e-05
0.07
-
2.85
0.04
81
0.2
5e-05
0.08
0.007
2.35
0.09
82
15.25
3e-05
0.07
-
2.85
0.05
83
0.55
4e-05
0.07
0.005
3.09
0.08
84
19.7
3e-05
0.07
0.004
0.48
0.06
85
13.5
2e-05
0.07
-
0.96
0.04
86
12.33
3e-05
0.07
-
2.79
0.05
87
17.5
3e-05
0.07
0.004
1.63
0.06
88
0.24
6e-05
0.07
0.007
2.76
0.11
89
14.79
2e-05
0.07
0.003
0.47
0.05
90
0.33
7e-05
0.05
0.007
0.17
0.13
91
2.06
3e-05
0.06
-
2.88
0.05
92
19.64
3e-05
0.07
0.004
1.21
0.06
93
19.67
4e-05
0.06
-
0.6
0.07
94
9.64
2e-05
0.06
0.003
1.09
0.04
95
11.74
2e-05
0.06
-
0.54
0.04
96
19.17
3e-05
0.06
-
0.84
0.05
97
15.22
3e-05
0.06
0.004
0.72
0.06
98
0.94
3e-05
0.06
-
2.39
0.07
99
19.99
3e-05
0.06
-
2.06
0.06
100
8.73
2e-05
0.06
0.003
0.27
0.04
101
9.32
2e-05
0.07
0.003
1.35
0.04
102
22.48
3e-05
0.06
0.003
2.51
0.05
103
12.19
3e-05
0.06
0.003
0.18
0.05
104
0.37
5e-05
0.06
0.006
2.81
0.11
105
27.23
2e-05
0.06
0.002
1.67
0.03
106
8.62
2e-05
0.06
-
0.1
0.04
107
12.14
3e-05
0.05
-
1.76
0.06
108
6.64
2e-05
0.06
-
2.75
0.03
109
19.49
4e-05
0.05
0.004
0.4
0.07
110
12.02
2e-05
0.06
0.003
1.27
0.04
111
23.06
3e-05
0.05
0.003
0.93
0.06
112
7.39
2e-05
0.05
0.002
1.6
0.04
113
8.94
2e-05
0.05
0.002
1.57
0.05
114
0.2
7e-05
0.06
0.007
1.42
0.13
115
7.61
2e-05
0.05
0.002
2.5
0.03
116
19.44
3e-05
0.05
0.003
2.99
0.06
117
8.41
2e-05
0.05
-
1.6
0.04
118
11.91
3e-05
0.05
0.003
2.1
0.05
119
0.18
8e-05
0.05
0.007
2.75
0.15
120
8.15
2e-05
0.05
-
0.75
0.05
276
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:285==
121
19.43
4e-05
0.05
0.003
1.69
0.07
122
8.26
2e-05
0.05
0.002
1.68
0.05
123
17.61
4e-05
0.05
-
2.72
0.08
124
25.47
3e-05
0.05
-
0.91
0.06
125
12.09
3e-05
0.05
0.003
1.06
0.06
126
2.81
4e-05
0.05
0.004
1.71
0.09
127
5.72
3e-05
0.04
0.003
1.86
0.06
128
12.03
3e-05
0.05
0.003
0.51
0.06
129
24.68
4e-05
0.04
0.003
0.52
0.07
130
8.11
3e-05
0.04
-
2.76
0.05
131
15.23
4e-05
0.05
0.004
1.74
0.08
132
9.88
3e-05
0.04
-
0.18
0.07
133
8.05
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.75
0.05
134
14.3
3e-05
0.05
-
1.83
0.06
135
7.56
2e-05
0.04
0.002
2.1
0.04
136
18.07
4e-05
0.04
0.003
1.18
0.07
137
8.78
3e-05
0.04
0.003
2.77
0.06
138
0.37
7e-05
0.05
0.006
1.21
0.13
139
25.09
4e-05
0.04
0.003
0.53
0.08
140
0.2
8e-05
0.04
0.007
2.24
0.16
141
15.66
6e-05
0.04
-
1.59
0.11
142
17.64
5e-05
0.04
-
1.96
0.09
143
19.59
5e-05
0.04
-
2.02
0.09
144
23.52
4e-05
0.04
0.003
0.36
0.08
145
24.1
3e-05
0.04
-
2.79
0.06
146
2.86
6e-05
0.04
0.004
0.74
0.11
147
15.16
5e-05
0.04
0.004
0.87
0.1
148
2.52
5e-05
0.04
-
1.25
0.09
149
0.55
7e-05
0.04
0.005
2.15
0.13
150
15.97
4e-05
0.04
0.003
2.64
0.08
151
15.55
6e-05
0.04
-
0.26
0.11
152
2.46
5e-05
0.04
0.004
0.72
0.1
153
23.13
4e-05
0.04
-
2.25
0.08
154
18.86
4e-05
0.04
0.003
2.11
0.07
155
26.28
3e-05
0.04
-
2.68
0.07
156
0.78
6e-05
0.04
-
2.93
0.12
157
22.68
5e-05
0.04
0.003
2.93
0.09
158
18.68
4e-05
0.04
-
1.89
0.09
159
10.12
3e-05
0.04
0.002
3.1
0.06
160
22.31
6e-05
0.04
-
1.3
0.11
161
22.19
5e-05
0.04
0.003
2.75
0.09
162
25.84
4e-05
0.04
-
1.78
0.07
163
22.76
5e-05
0.03
0.003
0.63
0.1
164
17.93
5e-05
0.04
-
1.84
0.09
165
9.15
4e-05
0.04
-
0.77
0.08
166
22.34
5e-05
0.04
-
1.98
0.1
167
17.53
3e-05
0.06
-
2.49
0.06
168
1.12
5e-05
0.03
-
2.54
0.1
169
10.02
4e-05
0.03
-
2.06
0.07
170
19.86
6e-05
0.04
0.004
1.68
0.11
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
277
==PAGE:286==
171
15.72
8e-05
0.03
-
0.55
0.15
172
0.88
7e-05
0.03
-
1.2
0.14
173
27.89
3e-05
0.03
-
1.14
0.06
174
12.68
5e-05
0.03
-
2.05
0.09
175
19.64
6e-05
0.03
-
2.31
0.12
176
0.57
9e-05
0.03
0.005
1.72
0.17
177
0.41
9e-05
0.04
-
2.47
0.17
178
0.21
0.0001
0.04
-
2.03
0.18
179
11.96
4e-05
0.03
-
0.92
0.07
180
15.38
7e-05
0.03
0.004
2.61
0.13
181
2.69
6e-05
0.03
-
2.57
0.12
182
2.34
6e-05
0.03
-
2.03
0.12
183
18.18
5e-05
0.03
0.003
1.54
0.09
184
1.1
6e-05
0.03
-
1.17
0.12
185
9.14
4e-05
0.03
0.003
2.18
0.08
186
25.93
5e-05
0.03
0.003
1.09
0.09
187
7.17
3e-05
0.03
0.002
2.4
0.06
188
11.79
4e-05
0.03
-
1.92
0.08
189
10.65
6e-05
0.03
-
2.82
0.11
190
15.84
8e-05
0.03
-
3.0
0.14
191
23.97
4e-05
0.03
-
0.96
0.08
192
24.29
5e-05
0.03
0.003
1.16
0.1
193
25.46
5e-05
0.03
-
0.6
0.09
194
27.38
3e-05
0.03
-
0.28
0.06
195
0.54
8e-05
0.03
-
2.22
0.16
196
15.38
7e-05
0.03
-
0.06
0.14
197
18.34
5e-05
0.03
0.003
1.43
0.09
198
25.61
4e-05
0.03
-
1.5
0.08
199
0.61
9e-05
0.03
0.005
0.2
0.18
200
11.25
6e-05
0.03
-
2.34
0.12
201
17.85
7e-05
0.03
-
0.77
0.13
202
6.75
3e-05
0.03
-
2.34
0.07
203
22.62
5e-05
0.03
0.003
0.64
0.1
204
19.62
7e-05
0.03
-
2.02
0.14
205
17.5
7e-05
0.03
0.004
1.29
0.13
206
19.21
5e-05
0.03
-
2.46
0.1
207
19.58
7e-05
0.03
-
3.06
0.13
208
21.05
5e-05
0.03
-
1.02
0.09
209
25.12
6e-05
0.03
-
2.29
0.11
210
3.3
6e-05
0.03
0.004
0.67
0.12
211
20.17
6e-05
0.03
-
1.29
0.12
212
0.41
0.0001
0.03
0.006
2.71
0.19
213
0.42
0.0001
0.03
-
0.62
0.2
214
23.67
5e-05
0.03
0.003
0.76
0.1
215
23.61
5e-05
0.03
-
3.04
0.1
216
8.61
5e-05
0.03
-
2.47
0.09
217
3.23
6e-05
0.03
0.004
0.71
0.12
218
20.46
5e-05
0.03
0.003
2.09
0.1
219
19.01
6e-05
0.03
-
0.2
0.11
220
1.09
7e-05
0.03
0.004
0.53
0.13
278
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:287==
221
17.04
4e-05
0.03
0.002
1.14
0.08
222
0.22
0.00013
0.03
0.007
1.12
0.26
223
21.05
6e-05
0.03
-
2.39
0.11
224
17.02
4e-05
0.03
-
0.32
0.09
225
23.22
6e-05
0.03
0.003
1.94
0.12
226
24.55
6e-05
0.03
0.003
2.0
0.11
227
26.3
5e-05
0.03
-
0.29
0.09
228
2.73
8e-05
0.03
-
0.32
0.15
229
3.17
7e-05
0.03
0.003
2.76
0.13
230
12.01
5e-05
0.03
0.003
1.66
0.1
231
6.21
4e-05
0.03
0.002
0.87
0.08
232
15.67
9e-05
0.03
0.005
0.66
0.18
233
25.67
5e-05
0.03
0.003
0.51
0.1
234
22.57
6e-05
0.03
0.003
0.69
0.11
235
6.85
4e-05
0.03
0.002
1.85
0.08
236
13.26
9e-05
0.03
-
1.53
0.17
237
19.19
6e-05
0.03
-
0.25
0.13
238
14.88
6e-05
0.03
-
1.38
0.11
239
12.29
6e-05
0.03
-
2.33
0.12
240
6.67
4e-05
0.03
0.002
1.99
0.07
241
17.91
7e-05
0.03
0.004
3.13
0.13
242
3.41
7e-05
0.03
-
1.0
0.13
243
21.61
5e-05
0.03
-
0.96
0.1
244
22.52
6e-05
0.03
-
2.76
0.11
245
25.45
5e-05
0.03
-
0.32
0.1
246
17.25
6e-05
0.02
0.003
1.53
0.11
247
13.24
9e-05
0.03
-
1.31
0.18
248
24.22
6e-05
0.03
-
0.16
0.11
249
9.58
5e-05
0.03
-
1.32
0.1
250
19.54
7e-05
0.03
-
1.18
0.14
251
17.39
7e-05
0.03
-
1.17
0.14
252
1.48
6e-05
0.03
-
1.4
0.11
253
28.19
3e-05
0.02
-
0.03
0.06
254
8.33
5e-05
0.03
-
1.5
0.09
255
2.2
6e-05
0.03
-
2.57
0.12
256
2.32
7e-05
0.03
0.004
1.76
0.14
257
0.26
0.00014
0.03
-
0.88
0.27
258
0.11
0.00012
0.02
0.006
2.77
0.23
259
19.13
7e-05
0.02
0.003
0.86
0.13
260
17.9
8e-05
0.02
0.004
1.72
0.15
261
12.84
7e-05
0.02
0.003
1.42
0.14
262
19.28
8e-05
0.02
-
1.83
0.15
263
7.3
5e-05
0.02
-
0.8
0.09
264
1.52
6e-05
0.02
-
0.69
0.12
265
14.95
6e-05
0.03
0.003
1.34
0.11
266
17.89
8e-05
0.02
0.004
1.84
0.15
267
18.86
6e-05
0.02
-
1.99
0.12
268
24.78
6e-05
0.02
0.003
2.36
0.12
269
11.29
9e-05
0.02
-
0.19
0.16
270
0.44
0.00012
0.02
0.006
2.88
0.23
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
279
==PAGE:288==
271
8.23
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.31
0.1
272
22.09
7e-05
0.02
-
2.78
0.14
273
12.21
7e-05
0.02
-
0.94
0.13
274
20.26
6e-05
0.02
-
1.61
0.12
275
2.85
9e-05
0.02
0.004
0.18
0.17
276
15.82
9e-05
0.03
-
1.22
0.17
277
16.31
5e-05
0.02
-
3.11
0.11
278
8.52
5e-05
0.02
-
0.33
0.1
279
17.94
7e-05
0.02
-
1.62
0.14
280
19.77
9e-05
0.03
0.004
2.02
0.17
281
3.31
8e-05
0.02
0.004
1.56
0.15
282
9.14
6e-05
0.02
0.003
2.89
0.12
283
23.42
8e-05
0.02
0.004
2.05
0.15
284
7.53
4e-05
0.02
-
0.3
0.08
TIC 33911462
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.55
5e-05
3.5
0.009
2.03
0.0
2
5.56
0.0004
0.55
-
1.27
0.02
3
5.82
0.0004
0.54
0.011
2.49
0.02
4
7.45
0.00051
0.36
0.009
2.16
0.03
5
0.24
0.00138
0.21
0.014
0.56
0.07
6
0.28
0.00123
0.23
-
2.14
0.06
7
5.66
0.00123
0.18
0.011
1.89
0.06
8
0.33
0.00153
0.19
0.014
2.73
0.08
9
6.5
0.00179
0.11
-
0.25
0.09
10
5.07
0.00239
0.1
0.012
0.69
0.12
11
0.56
0.0034
0.08
-
1.33
0.17
12
5.22
0.00275
0.08
0.011
1.84
0.14
TIC 340216382
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
35.35
0.0
0.57
-
2.92
0.0
2
22.89
0.0
0.58
-
0.21
0.0
3
9.7
0.0
0.59
0.005
3.04
0.01
4
20.86
0.0
0.52
-
1.46
0.0
5
27.35
0.0
0.38
0.002
0.25
0.01
6
26.5
0.0
0.36
-
1.73
0.01
7
28.53
0.0
0.38
0.002
0.94
0.01
8
27.58
0.0
0.33
-
2.3
0.01
9
23.7
0.0
0.31
0.002
2.4
0.01
10
8.99
1e-05
0.28
-
1.73
0.02
11
11.58
1e-05
0.29
-
1.07
0.02
12
10.41
1e-05
0.24
0.005
0.19
0.02
13
3.15
1e-05
0.21
-
1.39
0.02
14
12.29
1e-05
0.22
-
2.85
0.02
15
28.74
1e-05
0.21
-
0.08
0.01
16
11.15
1e-05
0.22
0.005
0.77
0.02
280
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:289==
17
11.38
1e-05
0.2
-
0.24
0.02
18
12.18
1e-05
0.2
-
1.43
0.02
19
21.66
1e-05
0.18
0.002
1.18
0.01
20
10.6
2e-05
0.18
-
0.9
0.03
21
8.79
2e-05
0.17
-
0.06
0.03
22
9.51
1e-05
0.17
-
2.79
0.02
23
0.71
2e-05
0.15
0.005
0.56
0.03
24
0.31
2e-05
0.14
-
2.05
0.04
25
27.58
1e-05
0.17
0.002
2.03
0.01
26
11.81
2e-05
0.13
-
2.39
0.04
27
4.63
2e-05
0.12
-
2.55
0.03
28
12.7
2e-05
0.1
-
2.85
0.04
29
20.59
2e-05
0.1
0.003
0.5
0.03
30
0.91
3e-05
0.09
-
1.59
0.05
31
24.52
2e-05
0.09
-
1.28
0.03
32
8.45
3e-05
0.08
0.005
0.9
0.06
33
12.45
3e-05
0.08
0.004
0.92
0.05
34
24.64
2e-05
0.08
0.002
0.67
0.03
35
12.1
3e-05
0.08
-
2.3
0.06
36
2.58
4e-05
0.08
-
1.84
0.06
37
20.55
2e-05
0.08
-
0.07
0.03
38
11.7
4e-05
0.08
-
2.15
0.07
39
25.22
2e-05
0.07
-
2.82
0.03
40
1.37
5e-05
0.07
0.005
1.38
0.08
41
12.71
4e-05
0.06
0.004
2.35
0.07
42
0.9
4e-05
0.07
-
2.27
0.07
43
11.47
4e-05
0.07
0.005
1.51
0.07
44
9.57
4e-05
0.07
0.004
0.61
0.06
45
8.29
4e-05
0.07
-
2.83
0.07
46
18.1
2e-05
0.07
0.002
2.52
0.04
47
2.66
4e-05
0.07
-
2.8
0.07
48
19.81
2e-05
0.06
0.002
3.07
0.04
49
18.15
2e-05
0.06
-
0.02
0.04
50
0.42
6e-05
0.06
-
2.98
0.1
51
1.02
5e-05
0.06
-
2.0
0.08
52
11.99
5e-05
0.06
-
1.4
0.08
53
10.7
4e-05
0.06
0.004
1.04
0.07
54
1.88
4e-05
0.06
0.004
0.01
0.07
55
22.1
3e-05
0.05
0.003
1.92
0.05
56
21.75
3e-05
0.05
0.002
0.92
0.05
57
7.05
4e-05
0.05
0.003
1.49
0.07
58
11.1
6e-05
0.05
-
0.85
0.1
59
11.86
6e-05
0.05
-
0.71
0.1
60
30.52
3e-05
0.05
-
1.28
0.05
61
10.81
7e-05
0.04
0.005
2.52
0.11
62
21.3
3e-05
0.04
0.002
2.53
0.05
63
1.14
7e-05
0.04
-
1.94
0.12
64
29.23
3e-05
0.04
-
0.16
0.05
65
13.73
6e-05
0.04
0.004
0.8
0.1
66
1.53
7e-05
0.04
0.005
1.97
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
281
==PAGE:290==
67
10.77
7e-05
0.04
0.005
1.95
0.12
68
11.55
8e-05
0.03
0.005
2.09
0.14
69
6.5
6e-05
0.03
-
0.0
0.1
70
1.86
8e-05
0.03
0.004
2.61
0.14
71
9.89
8e-05
0.04
-
1.6
0.13
72
10.01
8e-05
0.03
-
0.4
0.13
73
2.69
9e-05
0.03
0.005
2.64
0.15
74
1.11
0.0001
0.03
0.005
1.13
0.16
75
0.8
8e-05
0.04
0.005
1.54
0.13
76
31.69
4e-05
0.03
0.002
3.08
0.07
77
8.14
8e-05
0.03
0.004
2.84
0.14
78
12.17
8e-05
0.04
0.005
1.18
0.13
79
11.5
8e-05
0.03
0.004
2.88
0.14
80
4.68
6e-05
0.03
-
0.36
0.1
81
11.93
0.0001
0.03
-
0.07
0.16
82
2.3
0.0001
0.03
0.005
0.52
0.17
83
1.01
0.0001
0.03
0.005
2.49
0.16
84
1.58
8e-05
0.03
-
1.22
0.14
85
49.7
5e-05
0.03
-
3.13
0.09
86
32.68
5e-05
0.03
-
0.12
0.08
87
12.89
0.0001
0.03
0.004
3.08
0.16
88
0.37
0.00013
0.02
-
3.09
0.21
89
13.08
0.00011
0.02
-
2.01
0.19
90
56.32
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.25
0.09
91
12.83
0.0001
0.02
-
0.54
0.17
92
10.61
0.00013
0.02
-
0.76
0.21
93
21.52
6e-05
0.02
-
2.88
0.11
94
7.41
9e-05
0.02
0.003
1.38
0.15
95
0.88
0.00011
0.03
-
1.04
0.18
96
17.17
8e-05
0.02
-
3.02
0.13
97
1.51
0.00013
0.02
-
3.01
0.22
98
6.82
7e-05
0.02
-
2.43
0.12
99
4.87
8e-05
0.02
-
0.15
0.14
100
2.76
0.00014
0.02
0.005
2.19
0.23
101
11.87
0.00013
0.02
0.005
0.27
0.22
102
4.59
9e-05
0.02
0.003
0.81
0.15
103
9.01
0.00015
0.02
0.005
3.09
0.25
104
5.04
9e-05
0.02
-
1.61
0.14
105
23.14
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.33
0.11
106
9.46
0.00011
0.02
0.004
1.26
0.19
107
14.3
0.0001
0.02
-
2.4
0.16
108
8.61
0.00013
0.02
-
2.02
0.22
109
2.14
0.00015
0.02
-
0.7
0.25
110
10.95
0.00016
0.02
-
1.16
0.26
111
10.02
0.00012
0.02
0.004
0.84
0.2
112
4.21
0.00011
0.02
-
2.55
0.18
113
10.12
0.00011
0.02
0.004
2.34
0.18
114
13.38
0.00012
0.02
0.004
0.99
0.21
115
1.42
0.00017
0.02
0.005
0.64
0.28
116
27.11
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.57
0.12
282
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:291==
117
1.2
0.00015
0.02
0.005
2.03
0.24
118
11.22
0.00013
0.02
-
1.95
0.22
119
0.26
0.00015
0.02
0.005
2.77
0.26
120
0.53
0.00017
0.02
-
2.52
0.28
121
13.2
0.00012
0.02
0.004
1.06
0.2
122
4.98
0.0001
0.02
0.003
1.71
0.16
123
13.35
0.00013
0.02
0.004
0.09
0.21
124
49.78
8e-05
0.02
0.002
0.13
0.13
125
3.76
0.00012
0.02
-
0.67
0.21
126
3.42
0.00012
0.02
0.004
1.68
0.2
127
2.3
0.00015
0.02
-
0.35
0.25
128
2.44
0.00016
0.02
0.005
2.83
0.26
129
1.76
0.00015
0.02
0.005
1.8
0.25
130
13.13
0.00014
0.02
0.004
2.64
0.23
TIC 341041223
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
21.13
0.00014
0.41
-
1.13
0.01
2
19.1
0.00031
0.2
0.006
2.69
0.03
3
19.98
0.00066
0.09
0.005
0.65
0.06
4
3.97
0.00095
0.09
0.008
1.08
0.09
5
36.98
0.00086
0.07
-
0.84
0.08
6
0.25
0.00217
0.05
0.009
2.35
0.2
7
0.08
0.00294
0.04
-
0.05
0.27
8
0.95
0.00251
0.04
-
1.98
0.23
9
0.8
0.00261
0.04
0.009
0.05
0.24
10
2.61
0.00257
0.03
0.008
2.95
0.24
11
16.99
0.00177
0.03
0.005
2.03
0.16
12
17.91
0.00178
0.03
0.005
1.31
0.16
TIC 34276326
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.73
0.00038
0.59
-
0.78
0.02
2
12.47
0.00041
0.53
0.011
1.99
0.02
3
13.06
0.00079
0.29
0.012
0.5
0.04
4
21.22
0.00084
0.3
0.013
0.51
0.04
5
23.71
0.00076
0.28
0.011
0.69
0.04
6
10.0
0.00066
0.28
0.009
1.87
0.03
7
16.88
0.00085
0.28
-
1.87
0.04
8
8.83
0.00071
0.25
-
3.13
0.04
9
23.38
0.00106
0.2
-
2.37
0.05
10
13.17
0.00124
0.18
0.011
0.06
0.06
11
21.81
0.00126
0.19
-
1.57
0.06
12
12.9
0.00123
0.18
0.011
2.16
0.06
13
20.9
0.00141
0.18
-
2.7
0.07
14
16.71
0.00136
0.18
0.012
0.38
0.07
15
21.59
0.00125
0.2
0.013
1.97
0.06
16
0.97
0.00122
0.19
0.012
1.01
0.06
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
283
==PAGE:292==
17
21.14
0.00148
0.17
0.013
2.25
0.07
18
3.24
0.00148
0.14
-
0.23
0.07
19
7.26
0.00128
0.14
0.009
1.54
0.06
20
4.57
0.00153
0.14
-
1.24
0.08
21
22.18
0.00177
0.13
-
0.52
0.09
22
8.44
0.00142
0.12
-
1.73
0.07
23
21.41
0.00197
0.13
0.013
1.5
0.1
24
12.77
0.00188
0.12
0.011
2.1
0.09
25
15.91
0.00199
0.12
0.012
0.37
0.1
26
14.32
0.00217
0.11
0.012
0.69
0.11
27
22.08
0.0021
0.11
-
1.76
0.11
28
4.23
0.0019
0.11
0.01
1.56
0.1
29
12.05
0.00216
0.1
-
0.64
0.11
30
21.51
0.00253
0.1
-
0.48
0.13
31
17.91
0.00259
0.09
-
1.85
0.13
32
7.37
0.00204
0.09
-
1.96
0.1
33
6.35
0.00219
0.08
0.009
0.56
0.11
34
0.3
0.00224
0.1
0.012
2.56
0.11
35
4.39
0.00293
0.07
-
0.53
0.15
36
21.7
0.00326
0.08
-
3.07
0.16
37
5.01
0.00287
0.07
0.01
2.04
0.14
38
17.76
0.00329
0.07
0.012
1.29
0.17
39
2.84
0.00339
0.07
-
0.83
0.17
40
14.71
0.00338
0.07
-
0.43
0.17
41
13.52
0.00357
0.06
-
0.6
0.18
42
15.69
0.00361
0.06
-
2.41
0.18
43
22.46
0.00394
0.06
-
1.72
0.2
44
13.19
0.00187
0.12
-
2.22
0.09
45
20.11
0.00407
0.06
-
1.09
0.2
46
23.57
0.00363
0.06
0.011
2.61
0.18
47
17.1
0.0044
0.05
-
2.29
0.22
48
0.07
0.00429
0.05
0.011
2.09
0.22
49
14.0
0.0037
0.06
0.012
2.12
0.19
50
16.12
0.00437
0.05
0.012
2.31
0.22
51
19.95
0.00448
0.05
-
1.09
0.23
52
21.93
0.00447
0.05
0.012
3.02
0.23
53
6.04
0.00319
0.05
0.008
0.58
0.16
54
18.31
0.00468
0.05
0.012
1.11
0.24
55
26.02
0.00379
0.05
-
1.17
0.19
56
5.22
0.00364
0.05
0.009
3.14
0.18
57
1.24
0.00469
0.05
-
0.12
0.24
58
15.58
0.00465
0.05
0.012
1.69
0.23
59
22.66
0.00471
0.05
-
2.9
0.24
60
24.08
0.00442
0.05
-
2.76
0.22
61
11.59
0.0041
0.05
0.01
2.67
0.21
TIC 34512862
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
12.71
1e-05
39.77
-
1.65
0.0
284
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:293==
2
19.17
0.00015
4.44
-
0.97
0.01
3
25.42
0.00016
3.84
-
1.99
0.01
4
38.13
0.00052
0.8
-
2.21
0.02
5
6.46
0.00087
0.74
0.03
0.2
0.04
6
31.88
0.00075
0.61
0.021
1.6
0.04
7
19.8
0.00203
0.35
-
2.53
0.1
8
22.14
0.00216
0.34
-
0.95
0.1
9
39.7
0.00119
0.33
-
0.87
0.06
10
17.58
0.00217
0.3
0.031
2.35
0.1
11
29.31
0.0016
0.29
-
3.03
0.08
12
10.3
0.00213
0.27
-
0.38
0.1
13
35.69
0.00159
0.26
-
1.24
0.07
14
38.61
0.0016
0.25
-
1.52
0.08
15
0.71
0.00329
0.24
0.038
1.61
0.15
16
34.85
0.00172
0.24
0.019
1.64
0.08
TIC 346571872
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.64
6e-05
3.75
0.01
2.84
0.0
2
25.49
0.00038
0.31
0.005
2.25
0.02
3
18.92
0.00072
0.29
0.01
2.38
0.03
4
19.19
0.00111
0.19
0.01
2.38
0.05
5
19.93
0.00127
0.16
0.01
2.93
0.06
6
19.55
0.00133
0.16
-
2.65
0.06
7
18.67
0.00148
0.14
-
2.56
0.07
8
1.31
0.00131
0.15
0.009
2.76
0.06
9
18.43
0.00158
0.13
0.01
1.87
0.07
10
31.41
0.00074
0.13
-
1.57
0.03
11
18.17
0.00169
0.12
-
3.1
0.08
12
17.93
0.00156
0.13
-
1.48
0.07
13
18.06
0.00138
0.14
-
0.74
0.06
14
19.28
0.00183
0.12
0.01
1.76
0.09
15
19.81
0.00183
0.11
-
0.85
0.09
16
29.61
0.00094
0.11
-
0.82
0.04
17
20.04
0.00178
0.12
-
0.79
0.08
18
17.17
0.00178
0.1
-
1.21
0.08
19
17.49
0.00207
0.09
0.008
2.91
0.1
20
1.11
0.00279
0.07
0.009
1.2
0.13
21
28.74
0.00151
0.07
0.005
2.76
0.07
22
19.47
0.00287
0.07
0.01
2.24
0.13
23
20.39
0.00322
0.06
0.01
0.89
0.15
TIC 347446992
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.5
1e-05
2.05
-
1.25
0.01
2
5.81
1e-05
1.67
-
3.05
0.02
3
12.94
1e-05
1.38
-
1.0
0.02
4
13.65
1e-05
1.16
-
0.56
0.01
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
285
==PAGE:294==
5
6.62
2e-05
1.12
0.036
2.24
0.03
6
13.13
1e-05
1.08
-
0.94
0.01
7
5.85
2e-05
1.11
-
0.24
0.02
8
3.69
2e-05
0.89
-
3.05
0.03
9
10.83
1e-05
0.84
-
1.82
0.02
10
3.6
3e-05
0.85
0.03
2.46
0.04
11
20.64
1e-05
0.78
-
2.1
0.02
12
11.31
2e-05
0.74
-
0.33
0.02
13
13.84
1e-05
0.61
-
2.05
0.02
14
4.36
8e-05
0.45
0.047
1.08
0.11
15
4.57
6e-05
0.49
-
2.59
0.08
16
1.24
4e-05
0.47
0.027
1.46
0.06
17
5.1
5e-05
0.36
0.027
2.07
0.07
18
16.71
3e-05
0.37
-
3.03
0.04
19
11.73
4e-05
0.37
0.02
1.06
0.05
20
6.24
7e-05
0.33
-
1.28
0.09
21
5.01
6e-05
0.39
-
1.33
0.09
22
15.16
2e-05
0.35
-
1.59
0.03
23
4.45
8e-05
0.37
0.043
2.12
0.12
24
0.38
9e-05
0.34
-
1.06
0.12
25
5.48
0.0001
0.29
-
0.04
0.14
26
3.96
8e-05
0.25
-
2.15
0.11
27
2.13
8e-05
0.22
-
0.73
0.11
28
1.78
0.00011
0.22
0.031
2.22
0.15
29
5.59
0.00011
0.25
-
2.78
0.15
30
0.64
0.00013
0.22
-
2.92
0.18
31
6.14
0.0001
0.18
0.026
1.69
0.14
32
12.28
3e-05
0.18
0.008
2.01
0.05
33
6.79
0.00017
0.16
-
0.42
0.24
34
1.03
0.00011
0.15
-
0.43
0.16
35
2.22
0.0001
0.16
0.022
0.27
0.13
36
4.06
0.0001
0.15
0.021
0.72
0.13
37
0.45
0.00018
0.15
0.039
2.91
0.26
TIC 350443417
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.64
0.0
36.08
0.008
1.83
0.0
2
3.29
0.0
26.16
0.004
0.53
0.0
3
0.82
0.0
22.87
-
0.69
0.0
4
4.93
0.0
22.46
-
0.78
0.0
5
2.47
0.0
18.27
-
1.97
0.0
6
6.58
0.0
17.82
-
2.08
0.0
7
4.11
0.0
15.84
0.004
3.02
0.0
8
5.75
0.0
13.08
0.004
1.71
0.0
9
8.22
0.0
12.96
0.003
2.89
0.0
10
7.4
0.0
9.99
0.003
0.4
0.0
11
9.86
0.0
8.41
0.003
1.59
0.0
12
9.04
0.0
6.94
-
0.9
0.0
13
11.51
0.0
4.6
0.002
0.28
0.0
286
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:295==
14
10.68
0.0
4.23
-
2.21
0.0
15
12.33
0.0
2.09
0.002
2.77
0.0
16
13.15
0.0
1.76
-
1.02
0.0
17
18.08
0.0
1.03
-
1.81
0.0
18
22.78
0.0
0.93
0.003
2.66
0.0
19
16.44
0.0
0.88
-
0.5
0.0
20
19.73
0.0
0.76
-
3.1
0.0
21
13.97
0.0
0.61
0.002
1.44
0.0
22
29.2
0.0
0.55
0.003
1.8
0.01
23
17.26
0.0
0.55
0.002
1.96
0.0
24
18.9
0.0
0.51
0.002
0.65
0.0
25
45.04
0.0
0.38
-
0.45
0.01
26
18.82
0.0
0.39
0.002
2.15
0.01
27
43.4
0.0
0.37
0.003
0.82
0.01
28
26.3
0.0
0.36
0.002
1.02
0.01
29
23.5
0.0
0.35
0.003
1.53
0.01
30
21.37
0.0
0.32
0.002
1.86
0.01
31
29.48
1e-05
0.32
0.004
1.67
0.01
32
18.0
0.0
0.31
-
0.24
0.01
33
24.66
0.0
0.31
0.002
2.42
0.01
34
27.17
0.0
0.31
-
1.85
0.01
35
31.12
1e-05
0.31
-
2.81
0.02
36
35.21
0.0
0.31
-
0.25
0.01
37
20.55
0.0
0.28
-
0.6
0.01
38
27.94
0.0
0.26
-
0.32
0.01
39
25.48
1e-05
0.24
-
1.33
0.01
40
15.62
1e-05
0.23
-
3.01
0.01
41
28.81
1e-05
0.23
0.003
0.16
0.01
42
19.64
1e-05
0.22
-
1.61
0.01
43
0.03
6e-05
0.25
-
0.63
0.11
44
27.12
1e-05
0.21
-
2.63
0.01
45
34.52
1e-05
0.21
-
2.26
0.01
46
23.87
1e-05
0.19
0.003
1.12
0.01
47
32.88
1e-05
0.18
-
0.96
0.01
48
36.51
1e-05
0.18
-
0.19
0.01
49
23.83
1e-05
0.16
-
0.04
0.02
50
38.16
1e-05
0.16
0.002
1.77
0.01
51
24.06
2e-05
0.15
-
1.23
0.03
52
30.83
1e-05
0.14
0.003
1.89
0.02
53
62.27
1e-05
0.13
0.003
1.38
0.02
54
33.7
1e-05
0.12
0.002
1.63
0.02
55
28.02
1e-05
0.12
0.002
0.26
0.02
56
29.09
1e-05
0.12
-
1.7
0.03
57
33.76
1e-05
0.12
0.002
0.93
0.02
58
17.18
1e-05
0.1
-
2.21
0.02
59
38.47
1e-05
0.1
0.002
1.88
0.02
60
0.06
0.00014
0.1
0.028
1.24
0.28
TIC 35176192
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
287
==PAGE:296==
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
3.58
0.00026
1.47
0.016
0.71
0.01
2
1.12
0.00042
0.92
0.017
0.27
0.02
3
0.62
0.00058
0.64
-
1.19
0.03
4
4.23
0.00058
0.64
-
1.74
0.02
5
1.89
0.00103
0.36
0.016
2.71
0.04
6
0.11
0.00123
0.3
-
0.8
0.05
7
6.3
0.00133
0.27
0.015
1.47
0.06
8
4.69
0.00154
0.24
-
0.93
0.07
9
7.03
0.00146
0.23
-
1.84
0.06
10
8.95
0.00147
0.19
0.012
1.18
0.06
11
4.09
0.00208
0.17
-
0.36
0.09
12
5.89
0.0025
0.14
-
1.55
0.11
13
2.07
0.00276
0.13
-
0.89
0.12
14
8.09
0.0026
0.12
0.014
0.4
0.11
15
5.73
0.00369
0.1
-
2.62
0.16
16
3.92
0.00405
0.09
-
1.59
0.17
17
5.2
0.00392
0.09
0.016
0.73
0.17
18
4.81
0.0047
0.08
-
0.9
0.2
19
7.16
0.0042
0.08
0.015
2.4
0.18
20
8.38
0.0042
0.07
0.013
2.07
0.18
21
2.62
0.00515
0.07
-
0.52
0.22
22
7.32
0.00558
0.06
0.015
0.93
0.24
TIC 352409254
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.18
0.00034
0.52
-
1.87
0.01
2
2.55
0.00043
0.4
-
1.89
0.02
3
1.67
0.00154
0.12
-
0.68
0.06
4
5.1
0.00139
0.09
-
2.07
0.06
5
2.04
0.00186
0.1
0.008
2.71
0.08
TIC 356051332
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.28
1e-05
1.39
0.024
1.36
0.02
2
11.03
0.0
1.49
-
0.73
0.01
3
13.23
0.0
1.47
0.015
0.44
0.01
4
14.22
2e-05
0.47
0.02
1.18
0.04
5
0.18
3e-05
0.37
-
1.79
0.06
6
0.12
3e-05
0.33
-
1.38
0.06
7
0.24
4e-05
0.29
0.023
2.3
0.08
8
13.65
4e-05
0.28
0.026
0.16
0.09
9
13.67
5e-05
0.25
-
1.76
0.1
10
11.88
2e-05
0.26
0.012
0.95
0.04
11
11.43
2e-05
0.26
-
0.25
0.04
12
10.42
2e-05
0.24
0.01
0.5
0.04
13
12.42
3e-05
0.19
0.011
0.75
0.06
288
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:297==
14
13.77
5e-05
0.19
0.017
2.72
0.09
15
11.91
4e-05
0.19
-
0.31
0.08
16
11.29
4e-05
0.16
-
2.98
0.09
17
0.09
6e-05
0.17
0.019
0.72
0.11
18
13.71
7e-05
0.16
0.022
2.45
0.14
19
19.78
5e-05
0.14
0.015
1.32
0.11
20
17.77
5e-05
0.14
-
0.67
0.1
21
12.48
6e-05
0.13
0.015
0.8
0.11
22
14.16
7e-05
0.09
0.013
2.53
0.14
TIC 356426177
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.41
0.0
2.61
-
0.65
0.0
2
0.88
0.0
2.1
0.01
1.0
0.0
3
1.5
0.0
2.45
0.005
2.4
0.0
4
0.85
0.0
1.69
-
2.19
0.01
5
1.33
1e-05
0.92
0.008
2.69
0.01
6
1.55
1e-05
0.62
-
2.44
0.01
7
0.36
1e-05
0.39
-
1.06
0.02
8
0.61
3e-05
0.25
-
2.39
0.04
9
0.53
2e-05
0.38
-
1.81
0.02
10
3.18
2e-05
0.26
0.005
1.99
0.02
11
0.47
2e-05
0.33
0.007
2.81
0.02
12
0.25
2e-05
0.27
0.009
0.39
0.03
13
3.0
3e-05
0.21
-
0.77
0.04
14
0.69
2e-05
0.27
-
1.59
0.03
15
2.81
4e-05
0.16
0.008
1.55
0.05
16
3.09
3e-05
0.18
0.007
1.04
0.04
17
2.89
3e-05
0.16
-
2.69
0.04
18
0.41
3e-05
0.18
-
3.1
0.05
19
1.73
3e-05
0.15
0.006
1.58
0.04
20
2.82
5e-05
0.12
-
1.58
0.07
21
3.61
8e-05
0.07
0.007
1.49
0.11
22
3.24
4e-05
0.1
0.006
1.72
0.06
23
3.47
9e-05
0.08
-
2.66
0.12
24
1.8
8e-05
0.07
0.008
2.17
0.11
25
2.33
6e-05
0.07
0.006
2.95
0.08
26
2.63
6e-05
0.07
-
0.37
0.08
27
2.49
6e-05
0.06
0.005
0.79
0.08
28
1.06
0.0001
0.05
0.007
1.05
0.13
29
2.74
8e-05
0.06
-
0.14
0.11
30
3.28
8e-05
0.06
-
2.22
0.1
31
4.65
0.00018
0.04
-
1.04
0.25
32
4.33
0.00018
0.04
-
2.29
0.25
33
4.49
0.0002
0.04
-
1.93
0.27
34
4.19
0.00018
0.04
0.01
2.61
0.25
35
5.83
0.00018
0.04
0.009
2.37
0.25
36
6.45
0.0002
0.03
0.009
3.11
0.27
37
2.1
0.00019
0.03
-
1.54
0.27
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
289
==PAGE:298==
38
5.54
0.0002
0.03
0.009
0.1
0.27
39
6.23
0.00015
0.03
0.006
2.66
0.21
40
4.28
0.00019
0.04
0.009
1.83
0.26
TIC 356702180
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
4.33
1e-05
0.34
-
2.55
0.02
2
1.58
2e-05
0.21
0.005
1.91
0.03
3
2.29
2e-05
0.19
0.005
0.81
0.03
4
1.74
2e-05
0.2
-
0.95
0.02
5
4.02
2e-05
0.13
0.004
2.98
0.03
6
19.91
2e-05
0.12
-
1.51
0.02
7
4.83
4e-05
0.09
-
2.59
0.06
8
4.47
3e-05
0.07
0.003
1.86
0.04
9
1.36
7e-05
0.07
0.007
1.37
0.1
10
0.47
5e-05
0.07
0.005
0.09
0.07
11
2.05
4e-05
0.07
0.004
2.89
0.05
12
7.92
3e-05
0.06
-
2.98
0.05
13
0.96
7e-05
0.05
0.005
2.86
0.1
14
2.43
7e-05
0.04
-
2.54
0.09
15
18.75
5e-05
0.03
-
1.58
0.07
16
7.26
0.0001
0.03
-
2.44
0.13
17
3.93
0.0001
0.03
-
2.83
0.14
18
6.31
0.00012
0.03
0.004
1.32
0.16
19
6.89
0.00012
0.02
0.004
2.01
0.17
20
7.62
0.00011
0.02
0.003
0.97
0.15
21
6.57
0.00015
0.02
0.005
1.06
0.21
22
5.62
0.00016
0.02
-
1.33
0.23
23
3.48
0.00013
0.02
0.004
3.13
0.17
24
1.06
0.00018
0.02
-
2.05
0.25
25
3.34
0.00017
0.02
0.005
1.06
0.24
TIC 357469812
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.45
6e-05
1.69
0.009
1.62
0.01
2
18.96
3e-05
1.39
-
2.26
0.0
3
2.07
8e-05
1.17
0.009
2.25
0.01
4
1.81
0.00012
0.73
0.009
0.96
0.01
5
1.7
0.00015
0.62
0.009
0.2
0.01
6
19.4
0.0001
0.46
-
3.13
0.01
7
2.42
0.00021
0.39
0.008
1.27
0.02
8
19.67
0.00016
0.29
-
1.74
0.02
9
2.23
0.00033
0.27
-
2.66
0.03
10
10.18
0.00084
0.12
0.01
2.13
0.08
11
11.28
0.00076
0.12
0.009
3.1
0.07
12
9.83
0.00103
0.09
-
1.11
0.1
13
3.26
0.0009
0.08
-
0.26
0.09
14
0.12
0.00148
0.07
0.011
0.67
0.15
290
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:299==
15
11.64
0.00099
0.09
0.008
2.54
0.1
16
11.86
0.00093
0.09
-
0.83
0.09
17
3.51
0.00093
0.08
0.007
1.39
0.09
18
0.97
0.00122
0.08
0.01
1.17
0.12
19
3.16
0.00109
0.07
-
1.64
0.11
20
9.57
0.0013
0.07
0.009
0.39
0.13
21
0.38
0.00158
0.07
-
0.67
0.16
22
10.02
0.00157
0.06
0.01
0.44
0.15
23
2.99
0.00141
0.05
-
2.83
0.14
24
12.0
0.00156
0.05
0.008
0.4
0.15
25
11.47
0.00173
0.05
-
2.76
0.17
26
17.5
0.00097
0.05
-
0.78
0.1
27
3.59
0.00145
0.05
-
0.08
0.14
28
9.94
0.0021
0.05
-
0.82
0.21
29
0.16
0.00259
0.04
0.011
2.15
0.25
TIC 359031334
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.86
1e-05
7.09
-
2.31
0.01
2
1.66
1e-05
4.0
0.066
1.14
0.02
3
2.0
3e-05
1.68
0.082
0.55
0.05
4
1.83
5e-05
1.4
-
2.28
0.07
5
1.35
6e-05
1.12
-
3.11
0.08
6
23.39
1e-05
0.56
0.009
0.56
0.02
7
2.25
7e-05
0.51
0.051
2.97
0.1
8
18.4
2e-05
0.43
0.015
0.68
0.03
TIC 359433514
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.88
4e-05
0.91
-
2.38
0.01
2
11.73
3e-05
0.98
0.011
0.32
0.01
3
11.52
3e-05
0.99
0.011
2.54
0.01
4
14.8
4e-05
0.8
0.014
0.13
0.02
5
12.59
9e-05
0.4
-
1.38
0.04
6
14.09
7e-05
0.44
-
1.64
0.03
7
13.88
7e-05
0.45
0.012
1.36
0.03
8
12.78
9e-05
0.37
0.014
2.99
0.04
9
13.09
9e-05
0.34
0.012
3.09
0.04
10
13.94
9e-05
0.32
-
0.75
0.04
11
14.63
0.00013
0.28
-
0.57
0.05
12
16.49
0.00011
0.34
0.015
0.33
0.04
13
0.38
0.0002
0.22
0.018
0.64
0.08
14
14.99
0.00015
0.23
-
0.82
0.06
15
10.09
0.00013
0.19
0.009
0.34
0.05
16
11.99
0.00018
0.2
0.014
0.22
0.07
17
16.07
0.00022
0.18
-
3.13
0.09
18
15.38
0.0002
0.17
-
2.07
0.08
19
15.78
0.00023
0.16
-
2.44
0.09
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
291
==PAGE:300==
20
17.1
0.00021
0.15
0.012
0.18
0.08
21
6.93
0.00013
0.15
0.008
2.16
0.05
22
15.26
0.00023
0.14
-
1.23
0.09
23
9.36
0.00019
0.13
-
2.64
0.07
24
11.11
0.0002
0.13
-
1.49
0.08
25
9.79
0.00019
0.12
0.009
0.4
0.07
26
10.6
0.00025
0.12
0.012
0.85
0.1
27
13.85
0.00023
0.13
-
2.51
0.09
28
16.62
0.00032
0.11
0.015
0.75
0.13
29
9.22
0.00021
0.11
0.009
2.48
0.08
30
0.51
0.00038
0.13
0.019
2.58
0.15
31
15.7
0.00033
0.11
-
0.19
0.13
32
7.31
0.00018
0.09
0.007
2.19
0.07
33
18.72
0.00026
0.09
0.009
2.38
0.1
34
0.61
0.00049
0.1
-
1.5
0.19
35
16.09
0.00032
0.12
-
2.84
0.13
36
0.14
0.00055
0.08
-
2.72
0.22
37
7.44
0.00021
0.09
-
1.86
0.08
38
8.72
0.00023
0.09
-
2.72
0.09
39
21.41
0.00042
0.08
-
2.68
0.16
40
20.23
0.00038
0.08
0.012
0.61
0.15
41
19.57
0.00034
0.07
0.01
2.16
0.13
42
16.94
0.00048
0.07
-
1.9
0.19
43
0.19
0.0006
0.07
0.018
2.35
0.24
44
13.45
0.00043
0.07
-
2.45
0.17
45
0.25
0.00067
0.07
-
2.4
0.26
46
9.06
0.00034
0.07
0.009
2.24
0.14
47
0.8
0.00077
0.07
0.02
2.0
0.31
48
12.51
0.00056
0.07
-
0.78
0.22
TIC 363036461
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.5
0.0
1.75
-
2.42
0.0
2
16.86
0.0
1.23
-
0.34
0.01
3
22.3
0.0
1.26
0.005
0.32
0.0
4
18.35
1e-05
0.93
0.014
1.4
0.01
5
22.9
0.0
0.98
0.004
1.48
0.0
6
27.76
1e-05
0.81
-
0.47
0.02
7
26.89
1e-05
0.8
-
0.78
0.01
8
19.34
1e-05
0.65
0.009
1.52
0.01
9
18.05
0.0
0.54
0.004
1.13
0.01
10
25.56
0.0
0.51
0.004
1.78
0.01
11
16.12
1e-05
0.49
-
1.51
0.01
12
25.03
1e-05
0.49
-
1.75
0.01
13
6.52
1e-05
0.49
-
2.87
0.02
14
2.2
1e-05
0.4
0.012
0.41
0.03
15
7.74
2e-05
0.35
-
2.25
0.04
16
2.26
2e-05
0.3
0.01
1.96
0.03
17
21.63
1e-05
0.32
-
1.3
0.02
292
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:301==
18
6.7
2e-05
0.31
-
2.03
0.04
19
15.38
1e-05
0.27
0.003
2.14
0.01
20
2.33
2e-05
0.27
0.01
2.32
0.04
21
15.14
1e-05
0.19
-
1.31
0.02
22
1.41
4e-05
0.18
0.014
2.62
0.07
23
16.15
1e-05
0.2
0.005
0.12
0.02
24
16.96
1e-05
0.18
0.005
1.06
0.03
25
20.63
1e-05
0.18
0.003
1.31
0.02
26
0.5
5e-05
0.16
0.016
0.72
0.1
27
20.81
1e-05
0.16
0.003
2.34
0.02
28
5.05
2e-05
0.15
-
1.47
0.05
29
7.02
4e-05
0.15
0.013
2.92
0.09
30
17.1
3e-05
0.13
0.008
0.53
0.06
31
20.31
2e-05
0.12
0.004
3.14
0.03
32
7.24
5e-05
0.11
-
1.49
0.11
33
8.89
6e-05
0.12
-
1.43
0.11
34
15.88
2e-05
0.11
0.004
1.8
0.04
35
8.34
7e-05
0.11
-
2.84
0.14
36
1.04
6e-05
0.11
-
2.34
0.12
37
1.36
6e-05
0.11
0.014
2.29
0.13
38
20.19
3e-05
0.1
-
2.1
0.07
39
2.57
6e-05
0.09
0.011
2.87
0.12
40
8.15
8e-05
0.1
-
1.96
0.16
41
18.45
4e-05
0.09
-
1.72
0.08
42
0.42
9e-05
0.09
0.016
2.21
0.18
43
9.49
8e-05
0.08
0.012
0.88
0.16
44
13.18
5e-05
0.07
0.007
1.18
0.1
45
3.0
7e-05
0.07
0.01
1.29
0.14
46
9.98
6e-05
0.07
-
0.43
0.12
47
1.15
0.00011
0.07
-
0.25
0.23
48
11.02
7e-05
0.07
-
2.63
0.14
49
28.62
2e-05
0.06
-
0.7
0.04
50
0.85
0.00012
0.06
-
0.51
0.24
51
10.04
7e-05
0.06
-
2.1
0.15
52
14.49
6e-05
0.06
0.008
0.75
0.12
53
7.85
0.0001
0.06
0.012
0.55
0.21
54
0.78
0.00011
0.06
-
1.97
0.23
55
8.75
0.0001
0.06
0.012
0.95
0.21
56
0.6
0.00011
0.06
-
2.89
0.22
57
0.44
0.00013
0.06
-
3.09
0.27
58
5.37
9e-05
0.05
0.01
0.99
0.19
TIC 364268504
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.81
2e-05
0.34
0.004
1.99
0.01
2
1.94
4e-05
0.19
-
2.94
0.02
3
1.36
4e-05
0.16
0.004
0.0
0.02
4
2.29
4e-05
0.14
-
0.44
0.02
5
0.92
0.00016
0.04
0.003
2.94
0.09
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
293
==PAGE:302==
6
0.2
0.00018
0.04
0.004
0.02
0.1
7
0.48
0.0002
0.03
0.003
1.58
0.11
8
2.51
0.00023
0.02
0.003
2.6
0.13
9
2.57
0.00022
0.02
0.003
1.71
0.12
10
4.41
0.00019
0.02
0.002
0.48
0.1
11
3.17
0.00024
0.02
0.002
1.39
0.13
12
0.08
0.00038
0.02
0.004
1.92
0.2
13
0.37
0.0003
0.02
-
0.39
0.16
14
1.01
0.00038
0.02
-
1.35
0.2
15
0.78
0.00033
0.02
0.003
2.62
0.18
16
0.4
0.00038
0.02
-
0.69
0.2
17
0.99
0.00039
0.02
-
1.31
0.21
18
0.47
0.00042
0.02
0.003
3.06
0.22
19
0.79
0.0004
0.01
0.003
1.93
0.22
TIC 36559320
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
23.31
0.00015
1.73
0.012
2.83
0.01
2
20.64
0.00035
0.78
0.013
0.29
0.02
3
46.41
0.00043
0.59
0.012
2.85
0.02
4
36.57
0.00071
0.41
-
0.77
0.03
5
39.66
0.00079
0.4
-
2.48
0.04
6
25.04
0.00066
0.41
0.013
0.49
0.03
7
47.76
0.00065
0.39
0.012
2.34
0.03
8
47.18
0.00069
0.38
-
3.1
0.03
9
33.54
0.00076
0.36
-
2.28
0.04
10
40.77
0.00099
0.31
-
1.75
0.05
11
19.84
0.0012
0.22
-
2.75
0.06
12
22.41
0.00124
0.22
-
2.69
0.06
13
35.4
0.00192
0.15
-
2.84
0.09
14
40.33
0.00209
0.15
0.015
2.63
0.1
15
35.96
0.00189
0.15
-
1.81
0.09
16
42.02
0.0024
0.12
-
2.83
0.11
17
57.17
0.0024
0.12
0.014
1.65
0.11
18
1.65
0.00235
0.12
0.013
1.51
0.11
19
44.99
0.00258
0.1
-
2.76
0.12
20
29.51
0.00302
0.09
-
0.2
0.14
21
42.97
0.00326
0.08
-
2.36
0.15
22
1.19
0.0033
0.09
-
1.43
0.15
23
46.81
0.0033
0.08
0.012
0.95
0.15
24
34.67
0.0038
0.08
-
0.14
0.18
25
43.27
0.0037
0.07
-
1.57
0.17
26
67.59
0.00352
0.07
-
2.46
0.16
27
38.32
0.00447
0.07
0.015
2.17
0.21
28
44.89
0.0037
0.07
-
0.09
0.17
TIC 36871134
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
294
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:303==
1
25.0
0.00021
0.52
-
0.31
0.01
2
20.14
0.00035
0.38
-
1.49
0.02
3
2.05
0.00056
0.23
0.007
2.71
0.03
4
20.97
0.00059
0.22
-
0.68
0.03
5
10.23
0.00071
0.23
-
1.93
0.04
6
23.29
0.00064
0.19
0.006
0.59
0.03
7
0.98
0.00066
0.19
-
2.73
0.03
8
9.09
0.00099
0.16
-
0.98
0.05
9
10.97
0.00098
0.17
-
2.01
0.05
10
0.84
0.00078
0.16
-
3.09
0.04
11
10.5
0.00111
0.15
0.008
2.3
0.06
12
10.69
0.00124
0.13
0.008
2.78
0.06
13
20.53
0.001
0.13
-
2.71
0.05
14
1.07
0.00086
0.15
-
2.99
0.04
15
2.21
0.001
0.13
0.007
2.33
0.05
16
2.12
0.00103
0.13
-
2.27
0.05
17
0.23
0.00102
0.12
-
0.08
0.05
18
9.55
0.00154
0.1
-
1.74
0.08
19
0.53
0.00131
0.09
-
0.96
0.07
20
18.77
0.00145
0.09
-
0.04
0.07
21
8.81
0.00172
0.09
-
0.68
0.09
22
0.44
0.00139
0.09
0.006
1.05
0.07
23
8.26
0.00165
0.09
-
1.05
0.08
24
12.77
0.00195
0.09
-
0.5
0.1
25
23.66
0.00149
0.08
0.006
0.9
0.08
26
0.76
0.00152
0.08
0.006
2.2
0.08
27
8.06
0.00181
0.08
-
0.3
0.09
28
10.06
0.00224
0.07
-
2.12
0.11
29
1.36
0.00164
0.08
-
0.28
0.08
30
18.36
0.00194
0.07
-
2.35
0.1
31
8.34
0.00218
0.07
-
0.41
0.11
32
8.54
0.00245
0.06
0.008
0.94
0.12
33
9.33
0.00228
0.07
-
2.51
0.12
34
13.0
0.00351
0.05
-
2.68
0.18
35
12.15
0.00393
0.04
0.009
1.88
0.2
36
12.84
0.00399
0.04
-
1.41
0.2
37
2.4
0.00337
0.04
-
2.0
0.17
38
17.7
0.00398
0.03
0.007
2.42
0.2
39
7.77
0.00456
0.03
-
0.33
0.23
40
8.51
0.00375
0.04
0.008
2.4
0.19
41
3.29
0.0042
0.03
0.007
2.65
0.21
TIC 37090252
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.85
0.00037
0.15
0.002
0.6
0.01
2
14.07
0.00049
0.14
-
2.72
0.02
3
2.54
0.00066
0.13
-
1.42
0.03
4
25.61
0.00047
0.11
-
2.02
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
295
==PAGE:304==
5
32.77
0.00049
0.11
-
1.62
0.02
6
5.09
0.00083
0.1
0.003
1.15
0.03
7
27.23
0.00056
0.09
0.002
1.86
0.02
8
22.86
0.00059
0.09
0.002
2.08
0.02
9
19.95
0.00065
0.09
-
1.67
0.03
10
0.87
0.00129
0.06
0.003
1.82
0.05
11
21.31
0.0009
0.06
0.002
0.15
0.04
12
17.96
0.00132
0.04
0.002
2.29
0.05
13
22.01
0.00135
0.04
-
0.91
0.05
14
7.64
0.00225
0.04
-
0.28
0.09
15
28.28
0.00151
0.03
0.002
0.89
0.06
16
24.97
0.00162
0.03
-
2.41
0.06
17
9.73
0.00265
0.03
0.003
1.61
0.1
18
30.45
0.00203
0.03
0.002
2.53
0.08
19
24.5
0.00226
0.02
0.002
2.41
0.09
20
34.54
0.0025
0.02
-
0.96
0.1
21
1.47
0.00505
0.02
-
0.88
0.2
22
23.15
0.00316
0.02
-
2.68
0.12
23
0.16
0.00483
0.02
0.003
2.2
0.19
24
3.58
0.00678
0.01
-
1.94
0.27
25
2.23
0.00644
0.01
-
0.66
0.25
26
7.6
0.00356
0.02
0.003
0.65
0.14
27
0.3
0.00582
0.01
-
1.66
0.23
28
10.22
0.00672
0.01
0.003
2.98
0.27
29
8.88
0.00697
0.01
0.003
0.79
0.28
30
0.35
0.00622
0.01
0.003
0.63
0.25
31
11.9
0.00669
0.01
-
1.15
0.26
32
4.06
0.00758
0.01
-
1.52
0.3
33
31.22
0.00499
0.01
0.002
0.97
0.2
34
3.84
0.00692
0.01
-
2.08
0.27
35
4.25
0.00755
0.01
0.003
0.19
0.3
36
3.11
0.00734
0.01
0.003
2.5
0.29
37
3.47
0.00785
0.01
-
2.72
0.31
38
4.49
0.00837
0.01
0.003
2.94
0.33
TIC 372380144
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.5
2e-05
4.02
0.067
3.08
0.02
2
1.31
2e-05
3.71
0.066
0.95
0.02
3
1.02
0.00017
0.63
-
2.73
0.12
4
0.38
0.00015
0.63
0.068
0.55
0.11
5
2.77
0.00014
0.49
-
2.58
0.1
6
1.09
0.00021
0.47
-
0.57
0.16
TIC 380198226
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
40.45
0.00023
0.75
0.008
1.44
0.01
2
43.43
0.00029
0.67
-
1.06
0.01
296
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:305==
3
5.23
0.00041
0.68
-
1.88
0.02
4
2.54
0.00056
0.6
0.015
2.85
0.02
5
34.8
0.00035
0.51
-
2.66
0.02
6
5.62
0.00058
0.47
-
0.59
0.03
7
1.83
0.00079
0.42
-
1.46
0.03
8
5.11
0.0008
0.35
-
1.87
0.04
9
36.54
0.00046
0.38
0.008
0.42
0.02
10
36.66
0.00052
0.33
0.008
2.24
0.02
11
2.72
0.00123
0.26
-
3.03
0.05
12
4.84
0.00113
0.25
-
0.69
0.05
13
37.31
0.00064
0.26
-
0.68
0.03
14
3.04
0.00145
0.22
-
0.98
0.06
15
28.93
0.00108
0.16
0.008
1.04
0.05
16
0.54
0.00256
0.12
0.014
1.53
0.11
17
2.93
0.00264
0.12
0.014
2.39
0.12
18
48.43
0.00222
0.09
0.009
2.15
0.1
19
32.64
0.002
0.09
0.008
0.02
0.09
20
40.93
0.00225
0.08
0.008
2.65
0.1
21
46.46
0.00254
0.07
-
2.05
0.11
22
3.93
0.00497
0.06
-
1.09
0.22
23
1.38
0.00439
0.08
0.015
2.13
0.19
24
42.94
0.00281
0.07
-
0.42
0.12
25
23.17
0.00266
0.06
0.008
2.68
0.12
26
3.51
0.00506
0.06
0.014
1.02
0.22
27
42.75
0.00319
0.06
0.008
3.09
0.14
28
1.93
0.00624
0.05
-
0.82
0.27
29
1.01
0.00555
0.06
0.014
1.88
0.24
30
41.62
0.00354
0.05
0.008
1.87
0.16
31
1.1
0.0063
0.05
-
2.28
0.28
32
5.03
0.00607
0.05
0.012
2.24
0.27
33
56.1
0.00402
0.05
0.008
0.93
0.18
34
38.71
0.0038
0.05
-
0.96
0.17
TIC 380672646
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.56
1e-05
1.26
0.013
1.61
0.01
2
2.8
1e-05
0.66
-
2.88
0.02
3
1.3
6e-05
0.16
-
1.95
0.08
4
3.08
6e-05
0.14
0.012
0.85
0.08
5
1.39
6e-05
0.14
0.012
1.75
0.08
6
2.61
9e-05
0.09
0.012
0.12
0.13
7
2.41
0.0001
0.09
-
1.57
0.14
8
5.58
7e-05
0.06
-
2.13
0.09
9
1.06
0.00016
0.06
0.014
0.74
0.22
10
5.79
7e-05
0.06
-
0.34
0.1
11
0.07
0.00021
0.05
0.015
2.09
0.29
12
1.85
0.00012
0.06
0.011
0.64
0.17
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
297
==PAGE:306==
TIC 38151942
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.5
1e-05
1.01
-
0.84
0.01
2
8.84
1e-05
0.77
-
1.56
0.01
3
13.63
1e-05
0.78
0.009
2.22
0.01
4
10.19
1e-05
0.66
-
1.89
0.01
5
17.73
1e-05
0.54
-
1.23
0.02
6
17.28
1e-05
0.45
-
3.07
0.02
7
13.37
2e-05
0.35
0.009
2.88
0.03
8
6.76
2e-05
0.33
0.009
2.18
0.03
9
8.47
2e-05
0.31
-
2.21
0.02
10
9.27
2e-05
0.32
0.008
1.24
0.02
11
12.04
2e-05
0.28
-
1.22
0.03
12
16.1
2e-05
0.26
-
0.41
0.03
13
5.5
3e-05
0.23
0.009
2.87
0.04
14
16.69
2e-05
0.23
0.007
0.98
0.03
15
22.91
2e-05
0.21
0.006
3.08
0.03
16
19.22
3e-05
0.22
0.01
1.01
0.05
17
6.61
4e-05
0.19
-
2.66
0.05
18
17.99
3e-05
0.19
-
0.89
0.04
19
9.61
2e-05
0.2
0.006
1.67
0.03
20
12.94
3e-05
0.19
-
2.74
0.05
21
14.95
3e-05
0.19
0.008
0.26
0.04
22
13.93
3e-05
0.19
0.008
0.9
0.04
23
8.08
4e-05
0.15
-
3.08
0.05
24
1.79
5e-05
0.15
0.011
1.75
0.08
25
11.05
3e-05
0.14
0.005
0.57
0.04
26
5.17
4e-05
0.14
0.009
2.17
0.06
27
29.39
4e-05
0.14
0.007
1.53
0.05
28
19.54
4e-05
0.15
-
0.03
0.06
29
15.63
4e-05
0.14
0.008
1.31
0.06
30
18.7
4e-05
0.11
0.006
1.27
0.05
31
10.61
6e-05
0.14
-
0.17
0.08
32
11.66
6e-05
0.12
-
2.61
0.08
33
21.89
4e-05
0.13
-
2.38
0.06
34
19.31
5e-05
0.15
-
2.59
0.06
35
16.63
4e-05
0.13
-
0.86
0.05
36
3.18
5e-05
0.13
0.009
2.8
0.07
37
15.84
4e-05
0.12
-
0.19
0.06
38
17.14
5e-05
0.12
0.008
0.06
0.07
39
11.09
3e-05
0.13
-
1.08
0.04
40
18.24
3e-05
0.11
-
0.23
0.04
41
1.08
5e-05
0.12
-
0.62
0.06
42
1.81
6e-05
0.13
-
1.51
0.09
43
4.54
5e-05
0.11
0.007
1.83
0.07
44
0.5
5e-05
0.11
0.007
2.2
0.07
45
12.15
6e-05
0.1
-
0.6
0.09
46
20.57
5e-05
0.1
-
0.93
0.07
47
21.97
7e-05
0.09
0.009
0.25
0.09
298
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:307==
48
1.54
7e-05
0.1
0.009
1.27
0.09
49
4.42
4e-05
0.09
-
1.75
0.05
50
18.73
4e-05
0.1
0.005
0.44
0.05
51
30.58
7e-05
0.08
0.008
2.99
0.1
52
5.04
8e-05
0.06
-
2.64
0.11
53
23.73
0.0001
0.07
-
1.86
0.13
54
22.75
8e-05
0.07
-
0.9
0.11
55
15.29
8e-05
0.07
0.008
0.12
0.11
56
3.59
7e-05
0.07
-
3.13
0.1
57
20.43
8e-05
0.07
0.008
2.36
0.1
58
23.12
0.0001
0.06
-
2.5
0.14
59
7.49
8e-05
0.07
-
1.29
0.11
60
9.01
9e-05
0.06
0.008
1.38
0.13
61
22.42
7e-05
0.06
0.006
1.73
0.1
62
3.79
7e-05
0.06
0.006
0.23
0.1
63
4.21
0.0001
0.06
0.008
2.24
0.13
64
20.02
0.00016
0.06
-
0.96
0.22
65
27.5
8e-05
0.06
0.007
1.5
0.12
66
16.37
9e-05
0.06
-
1.54
0.12
67
24.31
6e-05
0.07
0.006
2.15
0.08
68
1.31
8e-05
0.1
0.011
1.26
0.11
69
4.41
5e-05
0.07
-
1.15
0.08
70
0.17
0.00012
0.05
-
0.72
0.17
71
23.54
0.00013
0.06
-
1.83
0.18
72
20.75
0.0001
0.05
0.007
2.82
0.14
73
7.57
9e-05
0.05
0.007
1.68
0.13
74
11.23
9e-05
0.05
0.007
2.05
0.13
75
25.68
0.0001
0.05
-
0.25
0.14
76
4.04
0.00017
0.05
0.012
1.7
0.24
77
27.4
0.00011
0.05
-
0.48
0.16
78
29.4
0.00011
0.05
-
3.04
0.15
79
4.93
0.00013
0.05
-
1.75
0.18
80
21.3
9e-05
0.05
-
0.49
0.13
81
29.05
0.0001
0.05
0.007
0.56
0.14
82
24.17
0.00011
0.04
-
1.79
0.15
83
15.22
9e-05
0.05
-
1.11
0.12
84
24.22
8e-05
0.04
0.005
0.46
0.12
85
3.87
0.00014
0.04
0.008
1.37
0.19
86
0.06
0.00015
0.04
-
1.46
0.21
87
24.69
0.00015
0.04
0.009
0.27
0.21
88
5.89
0.00014
0.04
0.008
1.24
0.19
89
11.34
0.00011
0.04
-
0.53
0.16
90
28.14
0.00021
0.04
-
0.71
0.29
91
7.85
0.00016
0.04
-
1.65
0.22
92
2.22
0.00017
0.04
0.009
0.0
0.23
93
9.78
0.00011
0.04
0.006
2.39
0.15
94
20.4
0.00016
0.04
0.009
2.64
0.23
95
23.31
0.00017
0.04
0.01
0.36
0.24
96
11.49
0.00012
0.04
-
1.1
0.17
97
21.87
0.0001
0.05
-
0.62
0.14
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
299
==PAGE:308==
98
21.66
0.00015
0.04
0.008
0.91
0.21
99
23.14
0.00017
0.04
-
0.89
0.23
100
22.45
0.00012
0.04
-
2.62
0.16
101
25.82
0.00014
0.04
-
1.53
0.2
102
28.62
0.00011
0.04
0.005
2.79
0.15
103
15.33
0.00018
0.04
-
1.27
0.24
104
21.01
0.00016
0.04
0.008
1.12
0.22
105
0.29
0.00014
0.04
-
1.83
0.2
TIC 382254933
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.52
6e-05
2.84
-
3.14
0.0
2
5.05
0.00051
0.45
0.009
1.95
0.02
3
6.31
0.00057
0.41
0.01
0.96
0.02
4
6.83
0.00077
0.32
-
0.56
0.03
5
6.46
0.00074
0.33
0.01
2.15
0.03
6
0.63
0.00085
0.28
0.01
1.07
0.04
7
6.1
0.00072
0.32
-
2.7
0.03
8
1.88
0.00114
0.21
-
2.29
0.05
9
1.35
0.00135
0.17
0.01
2.9
0.06
10
6.97
0.00126
0.2
0.01
3.02
0.05
11
6.71
0.00129
0.19
0.01
0.05
0.05
12
5.17
0.00158
0.14
0.009
0.27
0.07
13
4.85
0.00166
0.14
-
1.31
0.07
14
1.99
0.00188
0.12
-
0.18
0.08
15
0.31
0.0018
0.14
-
0.64
0.07
16
3.59
0.00238
0.09
-
1.62
0.1
17
8.01
0.00248
0.1
-
2.63
0.1
18
4.68
0.00318
0.07
-
3.04
0.13
19
4.94
0.00399
0.06
-
1.91
0.17
20
4.09
0.0038
0.06
-
1.95
0.16
21
1.24
0.0047
0.05
-
1.63
0.2
22
7.69
0.00529
0.05
-
0.49
0.22
23
2.34
0.00511
0.04
-
0.56
0.21
24
8.73
0.00568
0.04
0.01
2.74
0.24
25
3.91
0.00488
0.05
0.009
1.17
0.2
26
34.98
0.00384
0.04
-
0.52
0.16
27
11.94
0.00622
0.04
-
0.55
0.26
28
1.85
0.00479
0.05
0.01
1.62
0.2
29
3.02
0.0068
0.03
0.01
1.89
0.28
TIC 382341347
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.92
1e-05
4.15
-
1.44
0.01
2
1.8
1e-05
3.67
-
2.27
0.01
3
1.69
1e-05
3.56
0.054
2.08
0.02
4
2.46
1e-05
2.02
-
2.14
0.02
5
1.46
2e-05
1.65
0.048
0.34
0.03
300
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:309==
6
1.5
3e-05
1.3
0.05
1.11
0.04
7
2.21
3e-05
0.84
-
0.18
0.05
8
0.53
5e-05
0.81
-
0.63
0.06
9
1.61
7e-05
0.58
-
1.97
0.1
10
0.03
6e-05
0.6
-
2.1
0.08
11
3.48
8e-05
0.33
0.034
0.68
0.1
12
3.92
7e-05
0.35
0.033
2.94
0.1
13
4.15
9e-05
0.33
-
0.35
0.12
14
4.37
0.0001
0.26
0.037
1.32
0.14
15
1.31
0.00011
0.28
-
3.09
0.16
16
6.13
5e-05
0.25
-
1.57
0.08
17
4.56
9e-05
0.24
0.031
2.66
0.13
18
3.26
0.00018
0.21
-
3.08
0.26
19
2.71
8e-05
0.2
0.023
2.1
0.12
20
4.67
9e-05
0.19
0.025
2.67
0.13
TIC 382384315
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
11.26
0.00016
2.52
0.016
0.41
0.01
2
10.13
0.00032
1.16
-
1.97
0.01
3
10.5
0.00033
1.15
-
1.98
0.01
4
9.82
0.00035
1.07
-
0.89
0.01
5
11.36
0.00054
0.73
0.016
1.46
0.02
6
5.6
0.0006
0.71
-
1.01
0.02
7
12.25
0.00054
0.66
0.015
2.37
0.02
8
21.39
0.00039
0.56
0.009
1.11
0.02
9
21.08
0.00059
0.39
0.009
0.3
0.02
10
12.85
0.00105
0.34
-
1.16
0.04
11
9.12
0.00135
0.29
-
1.7
0.06
12
4.36
0.00131
0.32
0.017
1.62
0.05
13
5.88
0.00134
0.31
0.017
3.04
0.06
14
8.7
0.0013
0.3
0.016
0.82
0.05
15
4.82
0.00187
0.22
-
1.64
0.08
16
4.48
0.0021
0.2
0.017
2.71
0.09
17
2.61
0.00236
0.18
-
1.09
0.1
18
11.73
0.00233
0.16
-
0.57
0.1
19
0.58
0.00302
0.15
-
2.65
0.13
20
16.12
0.00248
0.13
0.013
2.48
0.1
21
0.24
0.00321
0.14
-
0.0
0.13
22
23.0
0.00181
0.1
-
2.32
0.08
23
14.04
0.00371
0.09
-
0.64
0.15
24
7.8
0.0043
0.09
0.016
2.98
0.18
25
8.19
0.00463
0.09
-
2.23
0.19
26
11.91
0.00358
0.1
-
3.0
0.15
27
3.62
0.00516
0.08
0.018
0.51
0.21
28
9.25
0.00484
0.08
-
1.98
0.2
29
3.12
0.00572
0.07
-
1.46
0.24
30
16.07
0.00435
0.07
-
0.37
0.18
31
7.28
0.00578
0.07
0.017
1.37
0.24
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
301
==PAGE:310==
32
8.86
0.00594
0.07
0.017
2.13
0.25
TIC 384069471
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.55
6e-05
0.97
0.006
0.05
0.01
2
34.14
9e-05
0.92
0.008
2.49
0.01
3
21.03
9e-05
0.92
0.008
2.59
0.01
4
20.51
0.00011
0.68
0.008
1.1
0.01
5
44.37
0.00017
0.46
-
1.08
0.02
6
17.32
0.00014
0.38
0.005
3.0
0.01
7
0.28
0.00038
0.34
-
1.3
0.04
8
36.88
0.00023
0.31
0.007
0.06
0.02
9
43.62
0.00025
0.31
-
0.69
0.03
10
16.36
0.00021
0.28
-
2.6
0.02
11
17.88
0.00022
0.26
0.006
2.64
0.02
12
43.37
0.00032
0.24
-
1.59
0.03
13
40.64
0.00029
0.25
-
3.1
0.03
14
31.01
0.00032
0.23
0.007
0.08
0.03
15
31.37
0.00034
0.22
0.007
2.47
0.03
16
19.48
0.00034
0.2
0.007
1.98
0.03
17
37.13
0.0004
0.18
-
0.57
0.04
18
19.6
0.0004
0.17
0.007
0.53
0.04
19
21.13
0.00049
0.17
0.008
0.76
0.05
20
40.59
0.00044
0.16
0.007
2.04
0.04
21
20.1
0.00045
0.16
0.007
0.29
0.05
22
37.25
0.0005
0.15
0.008
0.08
0.05
23
20.63
0.00052
0.15
0.008
2.31
0.05
24
18.0
0.00039
0.15
0.006
1.03
0.04
25
29.91
0.0005
0.13
0.007
3.09
0.05
26
38.19
0.00062
0.12
0.008
3.0
0.06
27
21.92
0.00069
0.12
0.008
0.47
0.07
28
19.85
0.00059
0.12
-
0.53
0.06
29
47.41
0.00052
0.12
0.006
0.16
0.05
30
21.67
0.00073
0.11
-
2.16
0.07
31
39.48
0.00071
0.11
0.008
0.09
0.07
32
22.65
0.00075
0.11
0.008
2.05
0.08
33
40.77
0.00064
0.11
-
0.53
0.06
34
19.33
0.00073
0.09
0.007
2.16
0.07
35
0.32
0.00134
0.1
-
2.31
0.14
36
54.02
0.00088
0.08
-
1.69
0.09
37
50.29
0.00086
0.08
-
0.49
0.09
38
0.92
0.00182
0.07
0.013
2.09
0.18
39
47.28
0.00091
0.07
0.006
3.09
0.09
40
70.77
0.00083
0.07
0.006
3.03
0.08
41
40.46
0.00099
0.07
-
0.97
0.1
42
35.41
0.00117
0.07
-
0.54
0.12
43
50.04
0.00095
0.07
0.007
1.94
0.1
44
35.8
0.00107
0.07
-
2.14
0.11
45
56.69
0.00102
0.07
-
1.34
0.1
302
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:311==
46
46.14
0.001
0.07
0.007
1.15
0.1
47
35.92
0.00121
0.06
0.008
2.11
0.12
48
22.16
0.00129
0.06
0.008
1.3
0.13
49
0.5
0.00179
0.07
0.013
2.31
0.18
50
56.94
0.00119
0.06
0.007
2.52
0.12
51
20.92
0.00131
0.06
-
0.59
0.13
52
47.18
0.00097
0.06
0.006
2.71
0.1
53
25.07
0.00111
0.06
-
1.07
0.11
54
33.17
0.00134
0.06
-
0.07
0.14
55
47.32
0.00099
0.06
-
1.3
0.1
56
36.31
0.00121
0.06
0.007
0.02
0.12
57
35.12
0.00135
0.06
0.008
1.41
0.14
58
0.85
0.00224
0.06
-
0.67
0.23
59
26.43
0.00112
0.06
0.006
0.85
0.11
TIC 38460465
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.33
0.0
1.14
0.002
0.89
0.0
2
32.55
0.0
0.75
0.001
0.8
0.0
3
26.9
0.0
0.65
-
1.36
0.0
4
29.51
0.0
0.47
0.002
2.43
0.0
5
30.86
0.0
0.45
0.002
1.14
0.0
6
19.0
0.0
0.43
0.001
1.16
0.0
7
24.29
0.0
0.42
-
0.33
0.0
8
24.94
0.0
0.38
-
2.53
0.0
9
29.73
0.0
0.32
0.001
2.42
0.0
10
29.92
0.0
0.32
0.001
0.9
0.0
11
34.73
0.0
0.24
-
2.75
0.01
12
29.11
0.0
0.2
-
1.6
0.01
13
28.13
0.0
0.19
-
2.64
0.01
14
26.36
1e-05
0.11
0.001
2.79
0.01
15
20.48
1e-05
0.1
-
2.13
0.01
16
33.5
1e-05
0.09
0.001
2.95
0.02
17
32.31
1e-05
0.08
0.001
1.69
0.01
18
37.31
1e-05
0.07
-
3.08
0.02
19
24.01
1e-05
0.08
-
0.57
0.02
20
38.04
1e-05
0.08
0.002
1.96
0.02
21
25.9
1e-05
0.07
-
1.05
0.02
22
39.18
1e-05
0.07
-
2.22
0.02
23
28.9
1e-05
0.06
-
1.5
0.02
24
1.14
2e-05
0.06
-
1.94
0.04
25
27.39
1e-05
0.06
-
1.96
0.02
26
27.1
1e-05
0.06
-
1.29
0.03
27
25.87
1e-05
0.06
0.001
0.34
0.02
28
31.76
1e-05
0.05
0.001
2.34
0.02
29
26.46
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.81
0.02
30
43.08
1e-05
0.05
0.001
2.82
0.02
31
20.15
2e-05
0.05
0.001
1.74
0.03
32
35.1
2e-05
0.05
-
3.08
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
303
==PAGE:312==
33
35.85
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.01
0.03
34
37.61
2e-05
0.05
0.001
2.18
0.03
35
35.25
2e-05
0.05
0.001
1.56
0.03
36
33.23
2e-05
0.05
-
1.37
0.03
37
31.45
2e-05
0.04
-
0.05
0.03
38
35.81
2e-05
0.04
-
1.89
0.03
39
31.29
2e-05
0.04
-
1.32
0.03
40
23.06
2e-05
0.04
-
2.17
0.04
41
23.31
2e-05
0.04
0.001
1.52
0.04
42
21.7
2e-05
0.04
-
1.95
0.04
43
17.26
2e-05
0.04
0.001
2.32
0.04
44
17.32
2e-05
0.03
0.001
1.24
0.04
45
35.69
2e-05
0.03
-
1.81
0.05
46
28.2
2e-05
0.03
0.001
0.42
0.04
47
27.63
3e-05
0.03
-
2.69
0.06
48
33.34
3e-05
0.03
-
1.62
0.05
49
1.17
5e-05
0.02
-
1.17
0.1
50
21.15
3e-05
0.02
0.001
2.71
0.06
51
36.94
4e-05
0.02
-
2.54
0.07
52
36.11
4e-05
0.02
-
2.44
0.07
53
15.01
3e-05
0.02
-
2.06
0.06
54
31.94
3e-05
0.02
-
1.78
0.06
55
2.45
5e-05
0.02
-
2.71
0.09
56
34.23
3e-05
0.02
-
1.04
0.06
57
34.59
3e-05
0.02
-
3.06
0.06
58
0.9
7e-05
0.02
-
0.21
0.12
59
42.1
4e-05
0.02
-
0.15
0.07
60
17.14
4e-05
0.02
0.001
3.01
0.08
61
0.85
7e-05
0.02
-
2.5
0.12
62
1.26
6e-05
0.02
-
2.76
0.11
63
36.06
4e-05
0.02
-
2.47
0.07
64
39.76
5e-05
0.02
-
2.91
0.09
65
2.76
6e-05
0.02
-
2.41
0.11
66
38.6
4e-05
0.02
0.001
1.1
0.07
67
30.23
4e-05
0.02
0.001
2.21
0.08
68
6.68
6e-05
0.02
0.002
0.71
0.12
69
52.93
5e-05
0.02
-
0.16
0.09
70
2.28
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.79
0.13
71
2.67
8e-05
0.01
0.002
2.07
0.14
72
38.26
5e-05
0.01
0.001
2.6
0.1
73
37.22
5e-05
0.01
0.001
2.8
0.1
74
3.13
7e-05
0.01
0.002
2.41
0.13
75
43.45
5e-05
0.01
-
1.52
0.09
76
28.55
5e-05
0.01
0.001
2.27
0.1
77
0.95
0.0001
0.02
0.003
1.45
0.18
78
0.26
0.00012
0.01
-
2.71
0.22
79
26.19
5e-05
0.01
-
2.89
0.09
80
0.68
0.00011
0.01
0.003
1.49
0.2
81
24.33
6e-05
0.01
0.001
1.36
0.1
82
0.3
9e-05
0.02
0.003
1.51
0.17
304
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:313==
83
6.91
7e-05
0.01
0.002
2.56
0.14
84
36.31
6e-05
0.01
-
2.37
0.11
85
40.08
6e-05
0.01
-
1.66
0.11
86
8.86
6e-05
0.01
0.001
0.76
0.12
87
2.64
9e-05
0.01
-
2.03
0.18
88
0.72
0.00012
0.01
-
2.73
0.22
89
13.71
6e-05
0.01
0.001
0.96
0.12
90
0.43
0.00011
0.01
0.003
1.05
0.21
91
26.57
6e-05
0.01
-
2.05
0.12
92
0.08
0.00011
0.01
0.003
1.84
0.21
93
44.01
7e-05
0.01
0.001
1.16
0.12
94
41.31
7e-05
0.01
0.002
2.64
0.14
95
21.46
7e-05
0.01
-
2.15
0.13
96
10.34
7e-05
0.01
-
0.74
0.13
97
43.56
7e-05
0.01
-
1.31
0.13
98
0.24
0.00011
0.01
0.003
0.59
0.2
99
4.96
8e-05
0.01
-
0.96
0.15
100
11.16
7e-05
0.01
-
2.95
0.13
101
41.13
8e-05
0.01
0.002
2.11
0.15
102
15.99
8e-05
0.01
-
0.98
0.14
103
18.66
8e-05
0.01
-
0.03
0.15
104
2.56
0.00012
0.01
-
0.58
0.22
105
11.83
8e-05
0.01
0.002
2.88
0.16
106
2.54
0.00011
0.01
0.002
2.3
0.21
107
1.96
0.00012
0.01
-
2.38
0.23
108
9.15
8e-05
0.01
-
0.23
0.15
109
0.61
0.00016
0.01
-
0.93
0.31
110
3.02
0.00011
0.01
0.002
2.69
0.2
111
316.72
8e-05
0.01
0.001
1.74
0.15
TIC 38515566
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.14
0.0
12.67
-
1.61
0.0
2
7.95
0.0
5.81
-
2.51
0.0
3
0.61
1e-05
1.13
0.01
1.47
0.01
4
16.09
0.0
0.99
-
0.21
0.0
5
0.68
2e-05
0.87
0.01
1.14
0.01
6
0.65
2e-05
0.91
-
1.57
0.01
7
8.43
1e-05
0.86
-
1.37
0.01
8
0.67
2e-05
0.75
-
1.39
0.01
9
16.29
0.0
0.73
0.002
2.01
0.0
10
8.11
1e-05
0.66
0.005
2.16
0.01
11
0.7
2e-05
0.6
-
1.98
0.02
12
0.6
3e-05
0.6
0.01
2.03
0.02
13
0.62
3e-05
0.48
-
1.24
0.02
14
0.55
4e-05
0.38
-
0.16
0.02
15
0.73
4e-05
0.33
-
0.08
0.03
16
0.58
4e-05
0.35
-
2.96
0.03
17
0.77
4e-05
0.32
0.009
2.73
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
305
==PAGE:314==
18
16.09
1e-05
0.52
-
2.61
0.0
19
0.59
5e-05
0.33
-
0.23
0.03
20
1.02
5e-05
0.26
-
1.66
0.03
21
0.75
5e-05
0.29
-
0.12
0.03
22
0.56
5e-05
0.27
0.009
1.87
0.04
23
0.25
5e-05
0.27
-
0.41
0.03
24
15.89
2e-05
0.21
-
1.28
0.01
25
0.96
7e-05
0.21
-
1.14
0.04
26
0.64
6e-05
0.24
0.01
0.32
0.04
27
0.79
9e-05
0.17
-
3.1
0.06
28
0.32
7e-05
0.22
0.009
2.17
0.04
29
0.98
8e-05
0.18
-
1.92
0.05
30
0.85
8e-05
0.17
-
0.71
0.05
31
0.2
7e-05
0.21
0.009
2.57
0.04
32
0.3
8e-05
0.17
0.009
2.17
0.05
33
9.68
3e-05
0.16
0.003
1.41
0.02
34
0.82
0.00011
0.13
0.009
2.08
0.07
35
0.72
0.0001
0.14
-
0.75
0.07
36
0.3
0.00013
0.11
-
0.74
0.08
37
1.15
0.00012
0.11
-
1.22
0.08
38
0.2
0.0001
0.14
-
0.9
0.06
39
0.32
9e-05
0.16
-
1.53
0.06
40
5.04
0.00014
0.11
-
2.47
0.09
41
0.28
0.00014
0.1
0.009
2.24
0.09
42
1.08
0.00012
0.11
-
1.09
0.08
43
0.0
0.00011
0.13
-
2.68
0.07
44
24.23
4e-05
0.1
0.002
1.69
0.03
45
1.33
0.00013
0.09
-
2.46
0.09
46
16.58
4e-05
0.09
0.002
2.73
0.02
47
0.01
0.00016
0.09
0.009
3.03
0.1
48
7.53
0.0001
0.08
-
2.95
0.06
49
16.06
5e-05
0.08
0.003
1.9
0.03
50
1.18
0.00017
0.08
-
0.11
0.11
51
4.16
0.00019
0.08
-
0.31
0.12
52
0.12
0.00019
0.07
0.009
1.53
0.12
53
0.39
0.00017
0.09
0.01
0.36
0.11
54
5.02
0.00021
0.07
-
1.3
0.14
55
1.06
0.00022
0.07
0.009
1.79
0.14
56
0.3
0.00016
0.09
0.009
0.71
0.1
57
1.0
0.00017
0.08
0.009
0.81
0.11
58
1.1
0.00019
0.07
-
0.38
0.12
59
0.21
0.00017
0.08
-
1.36
0.11
60
24.04
6e-05
0.07
-
1.56
0.04
61
0.55
0.00019
0.08
0.009
3.04
0.12
62
0.09
0.00019
0.07
-
0.62
0.12
63
0.03
0.00022
0.06
-
0.71
0.14
64
7.49
0.00012
0.07
-
0.63
0.08
65
4.38
0.00024
0.06
0.009
2.59
0.15
66
4.35
0.00019
0.07
-
1.62
0.12
67
9.69
7e-05
0.07
-
0.48
0.05
306
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:315==
68
0.18
0.0002
0.07
-
0.49
0.13
69
7.48
0.00014
0.06
0.005
1.24
0.09
70
0.03
0.00017
0.08
0.009
1.64
0.11
71
7.27
0.00015
0.06
-
1.37
0.1
72
0.35
0.00033
0.04
0.009
0.81
0.21
73
3.94
0.00032
0.05
0.01
1.3
0.21
74
0.43
0.00027
0.06
0.009
0.03
0.17
75
4.4
0.00034
0.05
0.01
1.5
0.22
76
4.24
0.00031
0.05
-
0.91
0.2
77
4.29
0.00028
0.05
0.009
2.98
0.18
78
4.0
0.00033
0.05
-
0.33
0.21
79
4.25
0.00026
0.06
0.01
0.01
0.17
80
4.53
0.00022
0.07
0.009
0.07
0.14
81
5.14
0.00025
0.06
0.009
1.22
0.16
82
15.82
8e-05
0.05
-
2.83
0.05
83
4.49
0.00031
0.05
-
0.53
0.2
84
0.51
0.00024
0.06
-
3.05
0.15
85
3.76
0.00037
0.04
0.01
2.4
0.23
86
4.6
0.00027
0.05
-
2.79
0.17
87
4.34
0.00028
0.05
0.009
1.58
0.18
88
16.06
8e-05
0.05
-
0.42
0.05
89
4.63
0.00029
0.05
-
2.85
0.19
90
4.38
0.00033
0.05
0.01
3.07
0.21
91
3.95
0.00036
0.04
-
1.5
0.23
92
17.83
9e-05
0.04
0.002
0.59
0.05
93
4.42
0.00036
0.04
0.01
2.8
0.23
94
0.97
0.00027
0.05
-
0.15
0.17
95
3.9
0.00037
0.04
0.01
1.58
0.23
96
0.39
0.00031
0.05
-
0.91
0.2
97
1.01
0.00031
0.05
0.009
2.75
0.2
98
4.76
0.00038
0.04
-
3.09
0.24
99
4.37
0.00029
0.05
-
1.82
0.19
100
3.95
0.00044
0.04
0.01
2.06
0.28
101
3.61
0.0003
0.05
0.01
0.83
0.2
102
5.13
0.00035
0.04
-
1.4
0.23
103
5.02
0.00033
0.05
-
2.65
0.21
104
1.26
0.0003
0.04
0.008
1.28
0.19
105
8.81
0.00021
0.04
-
2.85
0.13
106
4.26
0.00029
0.05
-
0.38
0.19
107
4.09
0.00034
0.04
-
2.61
0.22
108
3.71
0.00034
0.05
0.01
2.11
0.22
109
16.38
9e-05
0.04
0.002
2.59
0.06
110
8.77
0.00023
0.04
0.006
0.48
0.14
111
5.28
0.00031
0.04
-
2.38
0.2
112
4.6
0.00039
0.04
-
2.39
0.25
113
4.19
0.00034
0.04
-
1.71
0.22
114
1.24
0.0003
0.04
0.008
0.0
0.19
115
10.66
0.00012
0.04
-
2.09
0.08
116
24.43
9e-05
0.04
-
3.03
0.06
117
4.66
0.00035
0.04
0.01
1.31
0.22
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
307
==PAGE:316==
118
3.86
0.00039
0.04
0.01
2.87
0.25
119
4.97
0.00037
0.04
0.01
1.59
0.24
120
4.82
0.00035
0.04
-
2.86
0.23
121
4.83
0.00038
0.04
0.01
2.06
0.24
122
3.77
0.00045
0.04
0.01
1.9
0.29
123
3.64
0.0004
0.04
0.01
1.88
0.26
124
1.12
0.00039
0.04
0.009
0.13
0.25
125
4.87
0.00035
0.04
-
2.19
0.22
126
4.87
0.00044
0.03
0.01
2.02
0.28
127
4.5
0.00033
0.04
-
2.02
0.21
128
4.05
0.0004
0.04
-
2.21
0.25
129
0.05
0.00035
0.04
-
1.59
0.22
130
16.26
0.0001
0.04
0.002
2.97
0.06
131
4.58
0.00039
0.04
-
2.63
0.25
132
5.56
0.0003
0.03
-
2.16
0.19
133
5.09
0.0004
0.04
-
1.82
0.25
134
16.74
0.0001
0.03
0.002
2.84
0.06
135
3.47
0.00045
0.03
-
2.31
0.29
136
0.08
0.00034
0.04
-
0.24
0.22
137
4.42
0.00034
0.05
-
0.1
0.22
138
4.22
0.00038
0.04
0.009
2.19
0.25
139
4.71
0.00045
0.04
-
0.88
0.29
140
3.98
0.00047
0.03
-
0.6
0.3
141
4.69
0.00043
0.04
0.01
1.41
0.27
142
16.26
0.00011
0.03
-
1.75
0.07
143
3.75
0.00047
0.03
0.01
1.56
0.3
144
5.13
0.00043
0.03
0.009
2.57
0.28
145
4.31
0.00035
0.04
0.009
2.74
0.22
146
4.39
0.0004
0.04
-
1.49
0.25
TIC 385509282
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
23.22
5e-05
0.65
0.004
0.6
0.01
2
38.43
5e-05
0.51
0.004
1.51
0.01
3
27.38
7e-05
0.44
0.004
2.43
0.01
4
36.15
7e-05
0.39
-
1.67
0.01
5
24.84
7e-05
0.39
-
2.9
0.01
6
27.69
8e-05
0.37
-
2.32
0.01
7
29.5
0.0001
0.29
-
0.81
0.01
8
33.85
0.00011
0.27
0.004
1.22
0.02
9
21.71
0.00013
0.22
-
2.52
0.02
10
26.7
0.00015
0.19
0.004
1.38
0.02
11
20.61
0.00016
0.17
-
0.7
0.02
12
35.25
0.00018
0.16
-
2.15
0.02
13
39.58
0.00019
0.15
-
2.21
0.03
14
41.16
0.0002
0.14
-
2.6
0.03
15
27.63
0.00022
0.13
-
1.75
0.03
16
46.26
0.00019
0.12
-
0.76
0.03
17
34.29
0.00026
0.11
-
3.06
0.04
308
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:317==
18
18.3
0.00026
0.11
0.004
0.7
0.04
19
41.85
0.00026
0.11
-
1.76
0.04
20
22.35
0.00028
0.1
0.004
1.89
0.04
21
33.6
0.0003
0.1
-
0.65
0.04
22
30.02
0.00031
0.1
0.004
0.63
0.04
23
38.99
0.00031
0.09
0.004
2.01
0.04
24
52.22
0.00034
0.09
0.004
0.99
0.05
25
28.22
0.00036
0.08
0.004
0.11
0.05
26
25.57
0.00035
0.08
-
1.29
0.05
27
21.37
0.00036
0.08
0.004
1.44
0.05
28
28.33
0.0004
0.07
0.004
3.05
0.06
29
36.39
0.00039
0.07
-
2.64
0.05
30
39.39
0.00039
0.07
-
0.51
0.05
31
46.52
0.00034
0.07
0.003
0.99
0.05
32
31.02
0.00048
0.06
-
2.04
0.07
33
31.4
0.00045
0.07
-
0.12
0.06
34
28.93
0.00043
0.07
-
2.01
0.06
35
53.88
0.00046
0.06
0.004
0.36
0.06
36
2.92
0.00059
0.06
0.005
1.74
0.08
37
27.99
0.0005
0.06
0.004
0.2
0.07
38
1.44
0.00074
0.05
-
2.59
0.1
39
24.26
0.00055
0.05
0.004
0.68
0.08
40
64.03
0.00059
0.05
0.004
2.2
0.08
41
43.44
0.00057
0.05
-
1.77
0.08
42
37.32
0.00077
0.04
-
1.74
0.11
43
46.03
0.00054
0.04
0.003
0.14
0.07
44
49.84
0.00065
0.04
0.004
2.58
0.09
45
23.04
0.00075
0.04
-
2.44
0.1
46
28.56
0.0007
0.04
-
2.82
0.1
47
16.49
0.00068
0.04
0.004
2.71
0.1
48
1.07
0.00108
0.04
0.006
0.51
0.15
49
59.23
0.00077
0.04
-
0.15
0.11
50
40.91
0.00075
0.04
0.004
2.15
0.1
51
47.41
0.00066
0.04
-
2.38
0.09
52
21.23
0.00077
0.04
0.004
0.97
0.11
53
18.28
0.00077
0.04
0.004
0.85
0.11
54
22.67
0.00083
0.04
0.004
0.36
0.12
55
37.16
0.00076
0.04
0.004
1.63
0.11
56
32.85
0.00084
0.03
-
1.18
0.12
57
57.29
0.00082
0.03
-
0.75
0.11
58
34.31
0.00083
0.04
-
0.43
0.12
59
65.8
0.00082
0.03
0.004
2.2
0.11
60
30.7
0.00088
0.03
0.004
0.3
0.12
61
53.29
0.00099
0.03
0.004
0.3
0.14
62
65.93
0.00083
0.03
-
0.66
0.11
63
13.99
0.00097
0.03
-
0.09
0.14
64
0.19
0.00154
0.03
-
1.76
0.21
65
39.29
0.00091
0.03
-
2.36
0.13
66
23.32
0.00106
0.03
0.004
0.92
0.15
67
6.53
0.00098
0.03
0.004
0.02
0.14
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
309
==PAGE:318==
68
45.28
0.00079
0.03
0.003
1.75
0.11
69
36.9
0.00094
0.03
-
0.47
0.13
70
33.19
0.00109
0.03
-
0.27
0.15
71
29.76
0.00109
0.03
-
2.91
0.15
72
44.7
0.00092
0.03
-
2.89
0.13
73
34.63
0.0011
0.03
-
0.37
0.15
74
43.02
0.00097
0.03
0.004
0.63
0.13
75
25.75
0.0011
0.03
0.004
1.3
0.15
76
46.94
0.00093
0.03
-
1.89
0.13
77
55.14
0.00112
0.03
-
1.57
0.16
78
62.81
0.00116
0.02
-
0.86
0.16
79
1.47
0.00166
0.02
-
1.8
0.23
80
45.31
0.00107
0.02
-
0.32
0.15
81
55.2
0.00123
0.02
-
1.13
0.17
82
17.12
0.00123
0.02
0.004
1.71
0.17
83
60.92
0.00131
0.02
-
2.28
0.18
84
24.24
0.0013
0.02
-
0.45
0.18
85
33.25
0.00137
0.02
-
2.0
0.19
86
42.29
0.00132
0.02
-
1.64
0.18
TIC 389841253
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.14
7e-05
3.48
-
1.75
0.0
2
26.89
0.00031
1.17
0.018
2.93
0.02
3
13.33
0.00032
0.81
0.012
1.71
0.02
4
31.33
0.00054
0.56
-
2.32
0.03
5
20.98
0.00059
0.49
0.014
0.34
0.03
6
23.59
0.00067
0.49
0.016
0.99
0.03
7
24.15
0.00083
0.41
0.016
2.07
0.04
8
25.17
0.00075
0.42
-
0.72
0.04
9
22.24
0.00075
0.42
0.015
0.9
0.04
10
21.32
0.00076
0.39
0.014
2.17
0.04
11
20.07
0.00075
0.35
-
1.23
0.04
12
29.26
0.00103
0.32
-
2.4
0.05
13
26.35
0.00117
0.3
0.017
1.61
0.06
14
30.17
0.0011
0.29
-
1.15
0.05
15
21.58
0.00102
0.3
-
1.38
0.05
16
13.1
0.00092
0.28
0.012
2.22
0.04
17
31.6
0.00116
0.26
-
0.0
0.06
18
28.8
0.00129
0.27
-
2.68
0.06
19
32.28
0.00118
0.24
-
0.81
0.06
20
25.78
0.00167
0.2
0.016
0.79
0.08
21
0.42
0.00165
0.21
0.017
2.51
0.08
22
25.39
0.00152
0.22
-
0.16
0.07
23
9.36
0.00147
0.19
-
2.69
0.07
24
15.19
0.0014
0.19
-
0.47
0.07
25
41.38
0.00166
0.2
-
1.3
0.08
26
38.93
0.00165
0.19
-
2.45
0.08
27
30.02
0.00182
0.18
-
2.2
0.09
310
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:319==
28
19.56
0.00143
0.18
0.012
2.18
0.07
29
33.78
0.00175
0.17
-
3.08
0.08
30
18.12
0.00155
0.16
-
1.42
0.07
31
33.97
0.00181
0.17
0.014
1.77
0.09
32
17.28
0.00172
0.16
-
0.71
0.08
33
2.12
0.00226
0.16
-
0.65
0.11
34
32.5
0.00186
0.16
-
2.88
0.09
35
19.39
0.00161
0.16
0.012
0.31
0.08
36
0.98
0.00225
0.16
0.017
0.67
0.11
37
43.46
0.00218
0.15
-
0.35
0.1
38
29.74
0.00212
0.15
0.015
3.13
0.1
39
44.26
0.0022
0.14
-
1.07
0.11
40
24.37
0.00208
0.16
0.016
1.47
0.1
41
18.05
0.00188
0.14
-
1.7
0.09
42
33.03
0.00218
0.14
0.015
2.05
0.1
43
1.19
0.00279
0.13
-
1.01
0.13
44
5.52
0.00239
0.14
0.016
2.21
0.11
45
16.43
0.00212
0.12
0.012
0.44
0.1
46
5.45
0.00278
0.12
-
2.37
0.13
47
0.56
0.00279
0.13
-
1.95
0.13
48
22.64
0.00257
0.12
0.015
0.77
0.12
49
33.42
0.00288
0.11
-
0.83
0.14
50
5.8
0.00325
0.1
-
1.56
0.16
51
36.1
0.00306
0.09
0.014
2.28
0.15
52
39.87
0.00368
0.09
-
0.65
0.18
53
23.98
0.00386
0.09
-
0.67
0.19
54
2.84
0.00414
0.08
-
1.98
0.2
55
12.83
0.00336
0.08
0.013
2.81
0.16
56
9.79
0.00368
0.07
0.013
1.18
0.18
57
40.96
0.00465
0.07
0.016
1.28
0.22
58
18.91
0.00344
0.07
-
1.35
0.17
59
23.15
0.00457
0.07
-
2.5
0.22
60
44.48
0.00431
0.07
-
2.94
0.21
61
35.26
0.00419
0.07
-
1.38
0.2
62
34.31
0.00421
0.07
-
1.91
0.2
63
29.59
0.00473
0.07
0.015
2.2
0.23
64
32.79
0.0038
0.08
-
1.53
0.18
65
44.81
0.00457
0.07
-
0.63
0.22
66
22.77
0.00448
0.07
0.015
1.43
0.22
67
7.05
0.0048
0.06
-
1.81
0.23
68
37.04
0.00435
0.07
0.015
0.27
0.21
69
32.91
0.00459
0.07
0.015
2.68
0.22
TIC 391070709
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
10.62
1e-05
2.3
0.011
2.24
0.0
2
0.74
1e-05
2.3
-
2.69
0.01
3
0.89
2e-05
1.11
0.016
2.74
0.01
4
0.4
5e-05
0.65
-
2.6
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
311
==PAGE:320==
5
5.01
5e-05
0.56
0.018
2.27
0.03
6
4.74
5e-05
0.54
0.018
2.45
0.03
7
0.38
5e-05
0.63
0.022
1.56
0.04
8
0.48
6e-05
0.5
0.022
1.6
0.04
9
5.19
5e-05
0.45
0.016
0.1
0.04
10
0.18
8e-05
0.37
0.021
0.97
0.06
11
4.97
7e-05
0.37
0.018
1.48
0.05
12
0.93
7e-05
0.37
-
2.11
0.05
13
0.25
0.0001
0.34
0.022
2.96
0.07
14
0.58
0.0001
0.3
-
2.49
0.07
15
3.98
7e-05
0.31
0.015
0.64
0.05
16
5.13
9e-05
0.25
0.015
2.42
0.06
17
3.75
0.0001
0.26
-
1.88
0.07
18
4.5
0.0001
0.24
-
2.4
0.07
19
0.08
0.00013
0.25
-
2.19
0.09
20
4.34
0.00013
0.19
0.017
2.53
0.09
21
4.8
0.00015
0.2
0.021
2.44
0.1
22
3.86
0.00014
0.17
0.016
1.99
0.09
23
4.01
0.00013
0.18
-
0.74
0.09
24
3.51
0.00016
0.16
0.018
3.02
0.11
25
5.38
0.00013
0.15
0.013
0.38
0.09
26
10.94
0.00012
0.14
0.011
2.49
0.08
27
4.17
0.00018
0.14
0.017
2.59
0.12
28
2.49
0.00021
0.14
0.02
2.71
0.14
29
10.02
0.00023
0.11
0.016
2.06
0.15
30
2.99
0.00026
0.11
0.019
2.58
0.18
31
3.46
0.00025
0.11
0.019
1.37
0.17
32
6.45
0.00035
0.09
0.022
0.86
0.24
33
3.06
0.00028
0.09
-
1.83
0.19
34
2.56
0.00037
0.09
-
1.34
0.25
35
0.65
0.00028
0.09
0.018
0.06
0.19
36
1.97
0.00031
0.09
0.018
2.76
0.21
37
3.37
0.00034
0.08
0.019
0.36
0.23
38
7.28
0.00039
0.08
-
0.72
0.26
TIC 391927456
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
21.15
0.0
0.62
-
2.4
0.0
2
35.04
0.0
0.51
0.002
1.57
0.0
3
25.1
0.0
0.36
-
2.67
0.0
4
35.65
0.0
0.35
0.001
0.57
0.0
5
19.84
0.0
0.36
-
2.44
0.0
6
39.75
0.0
0.33
0.001
0.47
0.0
7
36.18
0.0
0.32
-
0.5
0.0
8
25.92
0.0
0.31
0.001
0.45
0.0
9
31.51
0.0
0.29
0.001
2.35
0.0
10
39.46
0.0
0.27
0.001
0.95
0.0
11
28.84
0.0
0.26
0.001
0.88
0.0
12
23.82
0.0
0.22
-
1.09
0.0
312
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:321==
13
22.85
0.0
0.2
0.001
3.13
0.0
14
16.85
0.0
0.19
-
2.63
0.01
15
30.81
0.0
0.18
0.001
2.08
0.01
16
45.32
0.0
0.17
0.001
0.14
0.01
17
28.67
0.0
0.17
0.002
2.08
0.01
18
31.81
0.0
0.16
-
1.26
0.01
19
45.5
0.0
0.16
-
0.56
0.01
20
40.97
0.0
0.16
0.001
2.45
0.01
21
0.17
3e-05
0.14
0.007
1.41
0.05
22
33.3
0.0
0.13
-
0.99
0.01
23
0.18
3e-05
0.11
0.007
1.41
0.07
24
42.34
1e-05
0.11
0.001
2.84
0.01
25
16.95
1e-05
0.11
0.001
2.22
0.01
26
34.07
1e-05
0.11
0.001
2.06
0.01
27
16.53
0.0
0.1
0.001
0.62
0.01
28
38.11
1e-05
0.1
-
1.32
0.01
29
32.78
1e-05
0.1
-
2.18
0.01
30
56.79
1e-05
0.1
0.001
2.75
0.01
31
22.64
1e-05
0.1
0.001
0.09
0.01
32
24.13
1e-05
0.1
-
1.52
0.01
33
20.08
1e-05
0.09
-
0.86
0.01
34
50.2
1e-05
0.09
0.002
0.27
0.02
35
27.64
1e-05
0.09
0.001
1.16
0.01
36
26.49
1e-05
0.09
0.001
1.69
0.01
37
25.42
1e-05
0.08
-
0.72
0.01
38
0.35
4e-05
0.09
-
2.75
0.08
39
22.71
1e-05
0.08
-
0.62
0.01
40
0.35
4e-05
0.09
0.007
2.6
0.08
41
29.13
1e-05
0.08
0.001
2.99
0.01
42
55.71
1e-05
0.07
-
0.01
0.02
43
51.47
1e-05
0.07
-
1.48
0.02
44
38.22
1e-05
0.07
0.001
1.22
0.02
45
26.46
1e-05
0.07
-
1.46
0.02
46
39.59
1e-05
0.06
-
0.84
0.02
47
21.34
1e-05
0.06
0.001
2.13
0.02
48
26.99
1e-05
0.06
0.001
1.19
0.02
49
38.8
1e-05
0.06
-
2.8
0.02
50
41.64
1e-05
0.06
-
1.65
0.02
51
52.28
1e-05
0.06
0.001
0.7
0.03
52
35.2
1e-05
0.06
0.001
3.09
0.02
53
53.82
1e-05
0.06
-
2.32
0.02
54
20.25
1e-05
0.06
0.001
0.35
0.02
55
36.54
1e-05
0.05
0.001
2.84
0.02
56
39.19
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.28
0.02
57
18.79
1e-05
0.05
0.001
1.6
0.02
58
0.36
7e-05
0.05
0.007
1.3
0.14
59
43.68
2e-05
0.05
-
1.83
0.03
60
28.81
2e-05
0.05
0.001
0.84
0.03
61
28.24
1e-05
0.05
-
2.5
0.02
62
56.74
2e-05
0.05
-
0.06
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
313
==PAGE:322==
63
20.21
1e-05
0.04
0.001
1.43
0.02
64
43.98
2e-05
0.04
-
1.61
0.03
65
20.6
1e-05
0.04
-
2.04
0.02
66
25.38
1e-05
0.04
0.001
1.3
0.02
67
39.11
1e-05
0.04
0.001
2.96
0.02
68
0.21
9e-05
0.04
0.007
2.03
0.17
69
36.79
1e-05
0.04
-
2.65
0.03
70
44.95
1e-05
0.04
0.001
3.05
0.03
71
19.39
2e-05
0.04
-
0.69
0.03
72
33.45
1e-05
0.04
-
1.33
0.03
73
32.77
2e-05
0.04
-
2.07
0.03
74
29.34
1e-05
0.04
-
1.47
0.02
75
36.84
1e-05
0.04
-
1.46
0.03
76
19.4
2e-05
0.03
-
1.71
0.03
77
49.49
2e-05
0.03
0.001
1.17
0.04
78
41.62
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.68
0.04
79
0.39
0.0001
0.04
0.007
2.49
0.19
80
0.26
0.0001
0.04
-
0.4
0.19
81
18.81
2e-05
0.03
0.001
0.44
0.03
82
29.89
2e-05
0.03
0.001
0.12
0.03
83
42.75
2e-05
0.04
0.001
1.59
0.04
84
21.79
2e-05
0.03
0.001
1.92
0.03
85
18.26
1e-05
0.03
-
1.95
0.02
86
59.34
2e-05
0.03
-
2.8
0.04
87
43.67
2e-05
0.03
0.002
1.34
0.05
88
49.49
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.07
0.04
89
36.96
2e-05
0.03
0.001
1.13
0.04
90
36.34
2e-05
0.03
-
2.68
0.04
91
45.24
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.96
0.04
92
0.23
0.0001
0.04
-
1.89
0.2
93
44.81
2e-05
0.03
0.001
0.97
0.04
94
34.23
2e-05
0.03
-
2.86
0.04
95
38.82
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.73
0.05
96
32.07
2e-05
0.03
-
0.56
0.04
97
47.4
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.17
0.03
98
23.35
2e-05
0.03
0.001
2.69
0.03
99
51.28
2e-05
0.03
-
0.48
0.04
100
34.02
2e-05
0.03
0.001
1.36
0.04
101
47.61
2e-05
0.03
0.001
1.08
0.05
102
25.25
2e-05
0.03
0.001
0.76
0.03
103
38.4
2e-05
0.03
0.001
1.89
0.04
104
55.11
2e-05
0.02
-
0.7
0.04
105
50.11
3e-05
0.02
0.001
1.19
0.06
TIC 393479086
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.52
1e-05
0.51
0.004
1.69
0.01
2
3.04
4e-05
0.06
-
1.22
0.06
3
0.9
0.00013
0.03
-
1.29
0.19
314
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:323==
TIC 394818541
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
11.06
6e-05
0.23
-
1.12
0.04
2
11.71
6e-05
0.24
0.009
1.46
0.04
3
12.2
7e-05
0.22
0.01
2.97
0.04
4
10.33
9e-05
0.21
-
1.28
0.05
5
10.93
6e-05
0.23
0.008
0.02
0.04
6
1.31
0.00013
0.16
-
2.31
0.08
7
10.64
0.00011
0.16
0.011
1.1
0.07
8
10.21
0.0001
0.16
-
3.0
0.06
9
10.7
0.0001
0.18
0.011
1.52
0.06
10
1.12
0.00013
0.14
0.012
0.53
0.09
11
12.63
0.00013
0.14
0.011
2.65
0.08
12
0.21
0.00011
0.13
0.009
2.38
0.07
13
2.39
0.00011
0.13
0.01
0.97
0.07
14
2.82
0.00012
0.12
-
1.84
0.07
15
10.99
0.00012
0.11
-
0.86
0.08
16
0.23
0.00016
0.09
0.009
0.76
0.1
17
1.74
0.00023
0.08
0.012
1.97
0.15
18
0.56
0.0002
0.08
-
3.1
0.13
19
12.45
0.0002
0.08
0.01
2.96
0.13
20
0.32
0.0002
0.07
0.009
2.45
0.13
21
0.95
0.00028
0.07
0.013
1.93
0.18
22
9.62
0.00021
0.07
-
1.05
0.14
23
0.62
0.00024
0.07
-
2.24
0.15
24
0.85
0.00027
0.07
0.012
1.58
0.17
25
10.04
0.00028
0.06
-
0.31
0.18
26
8.9
0.00027
0.06
-
1.08
0.18
27
9.36
0.00028
0.05
0.009
0.34
0.18
28
11.37
0.00023
0.05
0.007
1.1
0.15
29
0.16
0.00022
0.07
0.009
1.62
0.14
30
8.39
0.00039
0.05
-
2.39
0.25
31
9.65
0.0003
0.05
-
1.02
0.19
32
12.35
0.00041
0.04
0.012
2.25
0.26
33
2.26
0.00034
0.04
0.01
0.02
0.22
34
13.13
0.00034
0.04
0.01
0.15
0.22
35
8.63
0.00031
0.04
-
0.7
0.2
TIC 396696863
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.22
0.0
3.01
-
1.5
0.01
2
1.21
0.0
2.11
-
0.99
0.01
3
2.46
2e-05
0.47
0.02
1.76
0.04
4
2.44
3e-05
0.29
0.019
2.53
0.07
5
2.44
4e-05
0.29
-
1.09
0.07
6
0.01
7e-05
0.17
-
2.65
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
315
==PAGE:324==
7
0.31
0.00011
0.1
-
2.51
0.21
8
2.49
0.0001
0.1
0.02
1.71
0.19
9
3.65
7e-05
0.09
0.011
0.04
0.13
10
3.71
8e-05
0.08
0.012
2.07
0.15
11
0.15
0.00013
0.09
0.022
1.88
0.24
TIC 397025357
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
10.82
4e-05
12.34
0.021
2.33
0.0
2
22.1
0.00026
0.74
0.009
0.78
0.01
3
9.43
0.00072
0.65
-
0.88
0.03
4
11.66
0.00064
0.59
0.018
2.92
0.03
5
15.7
0.00061
0.51
0.015
1.87
0.03
6
8.03
0.00098
0.47
-
0.41
0.05
7
23.46
0.00035
0.46
-
2.27
0.02
8
6.87
0.00115
0.43
-
0.43
0.05
9
7.18
0.0012
0.39
0.022
0.95
0.06
10
8.37
0.00128
0.36
-
2.86
0.06
11
21.63
0.0006
0.34
0.01
2.95
0.03
12
0.01
0.00172
0.37
0.029
1.14
0.08
13
13.06
0.00139
0.25
0.016
0.41
0.06
14
5.16
0.00204
0.24
0.023
1.09
0.09
15
14.47
0.00143
0.23
-
0.39
0.07
16
0.42
0.00232
0.26
0.028
1.64
0.11
17
22.58
0.00081
0.22
-
1.71
0.04
18
5.99
0.00226
0.22
-
1.61
0.11
19
5.5
0.00264
0.19
0.023
2.87
0.12
20
1.14
0.00265
0.2
0.025
3.13
0.12
21
0.15
0.00365
0.17
-
3.07
0.17
TIC 398835784
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.4
0.00049
0.8
0.017
0.33
0.02
2
10.58
0.0005
0.78
-
1.45
0.02
3
0.19
0.00065
0.61
0.017
2.1
0.03
4
10.34
0.00066
0.6
-
1.93
0.03
5
12.23
0.00083
0.47
-
0.75
0.04
6
0.23
0.00095
0.42
-
1.15
0.04
7
11.43
0.00103
0.37
0.017
2.66
0.04
8
5.34
0.00282
0.14
0.017
2.95
0.12
9
10.92
0.00265
0.15
-
0.01
0.11
10
15.06
0.00299
0.14
0.018
2.85
0.13
11
14.95
0.00341
0.12
-
0.78
0.15
12
2.78
0.00374
0.11
-
0.89
0.16
13
5.45
0.00402
0.1
-
0.6
0.17
14
13.44
0.00401
0.1
0.017
1.99
0.17
15
5.92
0.00418
0.09
-
0.87
0.18
16
17.85
0.00447
0.09
0.018
1.93
0.19
316
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:325==
17
17.66
0.00457
0.09
0.019
0.77
0.2
18
9.85
0.0038
0.1
0.017
3.11
0.16
19
0.99
0.00443
0.09
-
0.59
0.19
20
3.04
0.00466
0.08
-
2.46
0.2
21
6.69
0.00401
0.09
0.016
1.5
0.17
22
7.28
0.00517
0.07
0.017
0.13
0.22
23
9.5
0.00472
0.08
-
0.68
0.2
24
16.84
0.00529
0.08
0.018
2.34
0.23
25
5.63
0.00495
0.08
0.017
1.88
0.21
26
5.25
0.00516
0.08
-
0.85
0.22
27
2.59
0.00487
0.08
-
0.71
0.21
28
4.09
0.00596
0.07
0.017
2.24
0.26
29
16.17
0.00624
0.07
-
1.71
0.27
30
7.43
0.00502
0.08
-
1.44
0.22
31
5.83
0.00549
0.07
-
2.1
0.24
32
4.3
0.00561
0.07
-
1.54
0.24
33
4.54
0.00567
0.07
-
0.17
0.24
34
3.22
0.00581
0.07
-
2.68
0.25
35
2.82
0.00538
0.07
0.017
2.65
0.23
36
13.18
0.00629
0.06
-
0.62
0.27
37
17.17
0.00687
0.06
-
0.65
0.3
38
8.2
0.0063
0.06
-
1.09
0.27
39
17.07
0.00666
0.06
0.018
2.4
0.29
TIC 402318229
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
28.8
1e-05
0.94
-
2.94
0.01
2
25.31
1e-05
0.77
0.009
0.4
0.01
3
32.05
1e-05
0.61
-
2.76
0.01
4
30.48
1e-05
0.49
-
2.47
0.02
5
30.24
1e-05
0.45
0.007
1.02
0.02
6
23.75
2e-05
0.33
-
2.6
0.03
7
24.28
2e-05
0.28
-
2.96
0.02
8
28.02
2e-05
0.25
-
2.47
0.02
9
28.2
2e-05
0.27
0.006
0.28
0.02
10
29.74
4e-05
0.19
-
1.18
0.06
11
37.46
3e-05
0.18
-
1.23
0.04
12
33.7
5e-05
0.16
0.01
0.42
0.06
13
19.37
3e-05
0.15
-
0.82
0.04
14
23.56
5e-05
0.13
0.008
1.84
0.06
15
33.13
3e-05
0.13
0.005
1.7
0.04
16
36.65
4e-05
0.12
0.007
1.31
0.06
17
27.18
5e-05
0.1
0.007
1.71
0.07
18
18.34
4e-05
0.1
-
1.22
0.06
19
26.47
6e-05
0.09
-
1.32
0.08
20
34.5
4e-05
0.08
-
0.2
0.06
21
42.48
7e-05
0.09
0.008
2.84
0.09
22
26.27
5e-05
0.08
-
0.9
0.07
23
20.95
5e-05
0.08
-
0.07
0.07
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
317
==PAGE:326==
24
21.53
6e-05
0.07
0.007
2.46
0.09
25
34.19
8e-05
0.07
-
1.38
0.12
26
35.12
6e-05
0.07
-
1.03
0.08
27
35.85
7e-05
0.07
0.006
0.07
0.09
28
37.76
6e-05
0.07
0.006
2.66
0.09
29
27.54
9e-05
0.07
-
2.33
0.12
30
23.16
8e-05
0.06
-
2.83
0.11
31
40.39
5e-05
0.06
0.004
2.45
0.07
32
38.79
6e-05
0.06
0.005
3.14
0.09
33
43.0
8e-05
0.06
0.006
0.86
0.1
34
33.14
5e-05
0.06
-
3.05
0.07
35
19.05
7e-05
0.05
0.005
2.82
0.09
36
23.72
0.00011
0.06
-
1.74
0.15
37
26.23
6e-05
0.06
-
0.6
0.09
38
18.81
9e-05
0.05
-
2.91
0.12
39
32.86
0.00011
0.05
-
0.15
0.15
40
37.69
8e-05
0.05
0.006
0.26
0.11
41
17.88
0.0001
0.05
-
2.47
0.14
42
35.1
9e-05
0.05
0.006
2.37
0.12
43
31.4
0.0001
0.05
-
1.65
0.14
44
48.06
7e-05
0.04
-
1.81
0.09
45
37.8
0.00011
0.05
0.007
0.95
0.15
46
43.25
0.00014
0.04
-
2.3
0.2
47
28.42
0.00014
0.04
0.008
1.45
0.19
48
22.43
0.00013
0.04
0.007
1.84
0.18
49
47.22
0.00013
0.04
-
2.68
0.17
50
2.18
9e-05
0.04
-
2.44
0.13
51
41.37
0.0001
0.04
-
1.63
0.14
52
35.34
8e-05
0.04
0.005
2.1
0.12
53
21.76
0.00014
0.04
-
2.87
0.19
54
48.02
6e-05
0.04
0.004
2.86
0.08
55
34.59
8e-05
0.04
0.004
1.34
0.11
56
21.24
0.00013
0.04
-
2.33
0.17
57
39.97
0.00013
0.04
-
2.37
0.18
58
20.0
0.00014
0.03
-
2.56
0.19
TIC 403114672
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.73
0.0
4.44
0.009
2.9
0.0
2
7.83
0.0
3.41
0.006
1.64
0.0
3
11.05
0.0
3.03
0.007
2.49
0.0
4
14.33
0.0
1.85
-
0.07
0.0
5
16.18
0.0
1.85
0.008
1.87
0.0
6
10.86
0.0
1.79
0.008
2.02
0.0
7
17.34
0.0
1.14
-
2.47
0.01
8
8.36
0.0
1.11
0.006
0.98
0.01
9
14.82
0.0
0.99
0.008
0.47
0.01
10
9.08
0.0
0.83
-
2.8
0.01
11
9.23
1e-05
0.87
0.01
0.29
0.01
318
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:327==
12
10.59
0.0
0.87
-
1.05
0.01
13
14.13
0.0
0.8
-
2.11
0.01
14
12.81
1e-05
0.73
-
0.55
0.01
15
13.05
0.0
0.69
-
1.19
0.01
16
17.36
1e-05
0.7
-
0.94
0.02
17
12.11
0.0
0.5
0.005
2.91
0.01
18
18.61
1e-05
0.51
-
2.19
0.01
19
9.55
1e-05
0.47
-
0.33
0.01
20
19.59
1e-05
0.46
-
2.82
0.01
21
15.41
1e-05
0.39
-
2.76
0.01
22
12.8
1e-05
0.36
-
1.25
0.02
23
9.09
1e-05
0.36
0.007
0.08
0.02
24
15.94
1e-05
0.34
0.004
0.09
0.01
25
8.24
1e-05
0.31
0.005
2.5
0.02
26
11.02
2e-05
0.22
0.007
2.85
0.03
27
13.91
1e-05
0.21
-
2.77
0.03
28
10.25
2e-05
0.23
0.008
0.8
0.03
29
8.18
1e-05
0.21
0.004
2.91
0.02
30
13.62
1e-05
0.19
0.005
0.2
0.02
31
11.58
1e-05
0.19
0.005
1.19
0.02
32
14.67
1e-05
0.18
0.005
3.11
0.03
33
8.07
1e-05
0.17
0.004
1.73
0.02
34
15.78
1e-05
0.17
0.004
2.12
0.02
35
11.21
2e-05
0.16
0.005
1.71
0.03
36
11.95
1e-05
0.15
-
2.93
0.03
37
13.56
1e-05
0.15
-
3.13
0.02
38
9.63
2e-05
0.15
-
0.13
0.05
39
12.85
2e-05
0.14
-
1.21
0.05
40
11.84
2e-05
0.14
-
0.61
0.05
41
8.11
2e-05
0.13
0.004
1.8
0.03
TIC 404219695
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.69
0.00028
0.52
-
2.67
0.01
2
21.26
0.0003
0.45
-
2.97
0.01
3
1.02
0.00069
0.29
-
1.17
0.03
4
11.65
0.00094
0.31
-
1.37
0.04
5
0.3
0.00083
0.28
0.01
3.0
0.04
6
2.12
0.00066
0.27
-
2.2
0.03
7
9.29
0.00096
0.25
0.01
1.96
0.04
8
10.11
0.00139
0.19
0.012
0.05
0.06
9
24.41
0.00078
0.17
-
0.18
0.03
10
15.86
0.00118
0.16
-
0.87
0.05
11
0.75
0.00141
0.15
0.009
0.47
0.06
12
1.15
0.00127
0.15
0.009
0.32
0.06
13
1.99
0.00134
0.13
0.008
1.41
0.06
14
13.08
0.00222
0.12
-
0.81
0.1
15
12.53
0.00241
0.12
-
2.48
0.11
16
11.41
0.00256
0.11
0.013
1.84
0.11
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
319
==PAGE:328==
17
11.18
0.00241
0.12
0.013
1.53
0.11
18
21.94
0.00136
0.1
0.006
0.68
0.06
19
0.65
0.00214
0.1
0.01
2.5
0.09
20
12.84
0.00278
0.1
-
0.35
0.12
21
9.03
0.0024
0.09
-
1.82
0.11
22
12.45
0.0037
0.08
-
0.55
0.16
23
22.59
0.0018
0.07
0.006
0.2
0.08
24
20.85
0.0019
0.07
0.006
0.81
0.08
25
18.87
0.00228
0.06
-
0.42
0.1
26
1.41
0.00268
0.07
-
1.62
0.12
TIC 404379953
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.64
3e-05
0.32
0.007
1.77
0.02
2
13.33
5e-05
0.23
-
0.03
0.03
3
0.1
4e-05
0.18
-
3.13
0.03
4
13.25
7e-05
0.15
0.008
2.51
0.05
5
2.38
8e-05
0.14
-
0.71
0.06
6
13.83
8e-05
0.13
-
0.57
0.06
7
14.77
6e-05
0.12
-
0.83
0.05
8
0.28
6e-05
0.13
0.005
2.71
0.04
9
14.21
9e-05
0.13
0.008
1.9
0.06
10
12.99
0.00011
0.11
-
2.31
0.08
11
0.38
8e-05
0.1
-
0.63
0.06
12
0.78
8e-05
0.11
-
1.65
0.06
13
16.15
0.00011
0.07
-
2.04
0.08
14
0.67
0.00012
0.08
0.007
0.1
0.09
15
15.11
7e-05
0.07
-
1.48
0.05
16
0.71
0.00011
0.08
-
2.75
0.08
17
14.92
9e-05
0.06
0.004
1.18
0.07
18
16.62
0.00014
0.06
0.006
1.4
0.1
19
14.39
0.00018
0.06
0.007
1.5
0.13
20
1.72
0.00021
0.05
0.008
0.23
0.15
21
3.11
0.00019
0.06
-
2.67
0.14
22
14.58
0.00018
0.05
-
0.15
0.13
23
16.38
0.00013
0.06
0.006
2.46
0.1
24
15.09
9e-05
0.06
-
0.14
0.06
25
2.88
0.00021
0.05
0.008
0.2
0.16
26
12.6
0.00022
0.05
-
0.81
0.16
27
13.76
0.00016
0.05
-
0.64
0.12
28
15.83
0.00025
0.05
-
1.16
0.19
29
12.47
0.00027
0.05
-
1.53
0.2
30
6.24
0.00021
0.05
-
2.11
0.15
31
8.28
0.00019
0.05
-
0.09
0.14
32
2.94
0.00023
0.05
-
2.31
0.17
33
15.16
8e-05
0.05
-
2.61
0.06
34
0.41
0.00019
0.04
0.006
0.45
0.14
35
15.7
0.00033
0.04
-
0.3
0.25
36
11.9
0.00029
0.04
0.008
0.62
0.21
320
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:329==
37
13.03
0.0003
0.04
0.009
2.41
0.22
38
16.26
0.00024
0.03
-
2.63
0.17
39
16.76
0.00022
0.04
-
2.82
0.16
40
15.97
0.00029
0.04
-
3.05
0.21
41
4.06
0.00022
0.04
0.006
2.26
0.16
42
6.51
0.00021
0.04
0.006
2.12
0.15
43
14.89
0.00014
0.04
-
1.4
0.11
44
16.85
0.00026
0.04
-
0.48
0.19
45
1.92
0.00021
0.04
0.006
0.83
0.16
46
11.67
0.00036
0.03
-
1.76
0.26
47
8.35
0.00027
0.03
-
1.62
0.2
48
1.05
0.00028
0.03
-
0.07
0.21
49
13.53
0.00024
0.03
-
0.8
0.18
50
1.36
0.00034
0.04
0.009
2.85
0.25
51
1.99
0.00024
0.03
-
0.68
0.18
52
7.25
0.00031
0.03
0.007
1.93
0.23
53
3.98
0.00025
0.03
0.006
1.89
0.18
54
16.68
0.00022
0.04
0.006
2.18
0.16
55
3.06
0.00035
0.03
-
2.74
0.26
56
11.13
0.00035
0.03
0.008
1.7
0.26
57
6.64
0.00026
0.03
-
2.61
0.19
58
5.48
0.00041
0.03
0.009
1.37
0.3
59
6.81
0.00032
0.03
0.007
1.32
0.24
60
1.62
0.00034
0.03
-
0.84
0.25
61
9.46
0.00035
0.03
-
1.71
0.26
62
7.35
0.0004
0.03
0.008
1.69
0.3
TIC 405484188
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
38.37
2e-05
1.6
0.004
2.16
0.0
2
20.44
3e-05
1.14
-
0.07
0.0
3
26.32
4e-05
0.87
0.005
1.35
0.01
4
32.35
5e-05
0.7
-
0.99
0.01
5
27.26
5e-05
0.69
0.005
2.88
0.01
6
18.69
6e-05
0.57
-
0.35
0.01
7
35.05
7e-05
0.42
0.004
0.59
0.01
8
21.92
0.00015
0.2
-
0.32
0.02
9
28.48
0.00017
0.18
-
3.04
0.02
10
26.74
0.0002
0.17
0.005
1.97
0.03
11
20.85
0.0002
0.16
-
2.56
0.03
12
23.65
0.0002
0.16
0.004
2.31
0.03
13
22.33
0.00029
0.1
-
2.03
0.04
14
19.98
0.00036
0.09
0.005
2.94
0.05
15
58.72
0.00033
0.09
-
2.78
0.05
16
44.96
0.00043
0.07
0.004
2.25
0.06
17
21.39
0.00054
0.06
0.004
2.93
0.08
18
48.83
0.00063
0.05
0.005
3.07
0.09
19
17.89
0.00061
0.05
-
1.59
0.08
20
23.1
0.00064
0.05
0.004
3.05
0.09
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
321
==PAGE:330==
21
25.14
0.00079
0.04
-
0.4
0.11
22
37.54
0.00067
0.04
0.004
2.56
0.09
23
30.09
0.00066
0.04
0.004
1.28
0.09
24
45.11
0.00081
0.04
-
2.52
0.11
TIC 406754583
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.99
0.0
2.51
-
2.75
0.01
2
9.33
0.0
1.84
0.009
2.04
0.01
3
8.35
1e-05
1.71
0.02
2.42
0.01
4
8.02
1e-05
1.21
-
0.07
0.01
5
11.14
1e-05
1.12
-
1.42
0.01
6
12.19
0.0
1.07
-
0.25
0.0
7
10.69
1e-05
0.91
-
0.95
0.02
8
7.68
1e-05
0.71
0.011
2.23
0.02
9
11.82
1e-05
0.47
-
3.06
0.01
10
2.93
2e-05
0.42
0.014
3.07
0.03
11
0.77
4e-05
0.34
0.018
1.53
0.05
12
1.84
7e-05
0.24
0.023
0.26
0.1
13
3.03
5e-05
0.22
-
2.18
0.07
14
0.82
6e-05
0.2
0.017
2.58
0.08
15
10.04
3e-05
0.19
0.008
0.43
0.04
16
3.61
8e-05
0.18
-
1.94
0.11
17
2.18
7e-05
0.19
-
1.88
0.1
18
10.57
3e-05
0.16
0.007
0.46
0.05
19
3.15
9e-05
0.15
-
2.12
0.12
20
0.18
0.00015
0.12
0.024
0.58
0.21
21
1.63
0.00017
0.11
-
0.41
0.23
22
0.0
5e-05
0.49
-
0.54
0.07
23
2.37
0.00012
0.11
-
0.98
0.16
24
0.5
9e-05
0.1
0.011
1.77
0.12
25
4.78
0.00013
0.09
0.016
1.81
0.18
26
15.53
5e-05
0.09
0.006
1.15
0.06
27
1.45
0.00017
0.09
-
1.23
0.23
28
17.52
7e-05
0.09
-
0.81
0.1
29
2.43
0.00014
0.09
0.017
2.24
0.2
30
1.99
0.00018
0.08
0.021
2.69
0.25
TIC 406782000
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.68
1e-05
4.0
0.043
0.66
0.01
2
0.55
2e-05
1.31
0.04
2.96
0.03
3
0.83
3e-05
1.02
-
0.27
0.04
4
1.35
4e-05
0.63
0.031
2.02
0.05
TIC 409901306
322
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:331==
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.98
0.0
1.38
0.004
0.17
0.0
2
1.8
1e-05
0.28
0.005
1.4
0.02
3
5.38
5e-05
0.11
-
2.8
0.07
4
0.95
4e-05
0.12
-
2.58
0.06
5
1.47
5e-05
0.12
0.008
2.07
0.07
6
0.32
6e-05
0.09
-
2.69
0.09
7
0.54
4e-05
0.12
-
0.33
0.05
8
6.38
4e-05
0.11
0.006
3.02
0.06
9
6.3
6e-05
0.09
-
2.45
0.08
10
6.83
9e-05
0.07
0.009
0.05
0.13
11
6.58
4e-05
0.08
-
3.09
0.06
12
1.35
9e-05
0.07
-
2.88
0.12
13
1.04
8e-05
0.06
0.007
1.94
0.11
14
3.48
7e-05
0.06
0.006
1.48
0.1
15
5.82
8e-05
0.05
0.006
0.07
0.11
16
6.02
7e-05
0.05
0.005
2.33
0.09
17
5.52
9e-05
0.05
-
2.16
0.12
18
3.98
8e-05
0.05
0.006
0.57
0.11
19
6.93
0.00011
0.05
0.008
0.67
0.15
20
6.99
0.00011
0.05
0.007
2.45
0.15
21
3.85
7e-05
0.05
0.005
0.48
0.1
22
2.51
0.00011
0.04
-
1.72
0.16
23
2.67
0.0001
0.04
0.006
0.66
0.14
24
0.87
0.00012
0.05
0.008
2.31
0.16
25
3.21
0.00012
0.04
-
0.72
0.16
26
5.04
0.00017
0.04
-
3.05
0.24
27
6.55
9e-05
0.04
0.005
0.43
0.13
28
5.62
0.00011
0.04
-
2.83
0.15
29
4.24
0.00013
0.04
0.006
2.12
0.18
30
0.47
0.00014
0.04
-
0.19
0.2
31
1.97
0.00017
0.03
0.007
3.01
0.24
32
3.73
8e-05
0.03
-
1.8
0.11
33
4.5
0.00017
0.03
0.006
0.98
0.24
34
2.28
0.00019
0.03
-
1.75
0.27
35
5.18
0.0002
0.03
0.007
1.35
0.27
36
7.95
0.00016
0.03
0.006
2.18
0.22
TIC 416518139
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
26.57
0.0001
1.17
-
1.07
0.0
2
22.78
0.00017
0.77
0.006
1.74
0.01
3
23.6
0.00018
0.68
0.006
1.92
0.01
4
22.28
0.00022
0.55
0.006
0.88
0.01
5
23.02
0.00029
0.42
0.006
0.46
0.01
6
28.33
0.00099
0.12
-
2.77
0.05
7
25.12
0.00124
0.09
0.006
1.43
0.06
8
27.08
0.00136
0.09
-
0.71
0.07
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
323
==PAGE:332==
9
0.42
0.0044
0.04
-
2.67
0.22
TIC 41954053
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.82
2e-05
1.92
0.053
0.3
0.03
2
14.5
2e-05
1.91
0.042
2.61
0.02
3
12.49
2e-05
1.5
0.039
2.32
0.03
4
11.37
2e-05
1.06
-
2.24
0.02
5
12.01
4e-05
0.98
-
2.3
0.05
6
11.3
1e-05
1.04
-
1.72
0.02
7
13.51
3e-05
0.87
0.031
2.95
0.04
8
12.37
3e-05
0.71
0.033
2.88
0.05
9
15.1
4e-05
0.56
0.029
0.0
0.05
10
13.56
4e-05
0.62
0.031
1.31
0.05
11
13.67
3e-05
0.59
0.02
2.67
0.03
12
13.62
3e-05
0.55
0.026
2.35
0.05
13
11.77
7e-05
0.39
0.038
1.71
0.1
14
16.75
2e-05
0.27
-
2.74
0.03
15
14.21
7e-05
0.24
0.023
0.0
0.1
TIC 419567638
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.29
1e-05
2.07
-
1.22
0.0
2
21.72
1e-05
1.36
-
1.1
0.01
3
22.75
1e-05
1.13
0.008
2.02
0.01
4
35.77
1e-05
0.6
-
1.93
0.01
5
26.56
2e-05
0.44
0.006
2.93
0.01
6
29.38
4e-05
0.41
0.011
1.01
0.03
7
27.13
3e-05
0.42
0.008
1.66
0.02
8
23.81
4e-05
0.35
-
2.51
0.03
9
28.95
4e-05
0.31
-
1.39
0.03
10
28.0
4e-05
0.28
0.008
2.04
0.03
11
33.74
3e-05
0.22
-
0.69
0.02
12
23.33
5e-05
0.2
0.007
3.02
0.04
13
36.18
4e-05
0.17
-
0.58
0.03
14
33.21
4e-05
0.16
-
0.66
0.03
15
17.97
5e-05
0.15
0.005
2.74
0.04
16
19.25
7e-05
0.14
-
0.55
0.05
17
28.58
0.00011
0.11
0.009
0.95
0.08
18
19.65
9e-05
0.09
-
2.74
0.07
19
34.69
8e-05
0.1
-
1.5
0.06
20
28.34
0.00011
0.09
0.007
2.33
0.08
21
26.27
0.00012
0.08
0.007
1.55
0.09
22
30.92
0.00013
0.07
0.007
1.13
0.09
23
53.22
0.00013
0.07
0.006
0.06
0.09
24
0.53
0.00027
0.06
-
2.74
0.2
25
45.96
0.0001
0.06
0.004
0.42
0.07
26
35.14
0.00012
0.06
0.005
0.44
0.09
324
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:333==
27
27.46
0.00017
0.06
0.007
1.36
0.12
28
49.8
0.00012
0.06
0.005
2.81
0.09
29
24.24
0.00022
0.05
0.008
1.04
0.16
TIC 423700466
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.56
1e-05
0.35
-
3.0
0.01
2
2.08
0.0
0.29
0.002
1.68
0.01
3
0.51
1e-05
0.14
0.002
1.65
0.02
4
10.51
0.00011
0.01
0.001
0.17
0.15
5
4.88
0.00011
0.01
0.001
2.56
0.15
6
4.39
0.00019
0.01
-
2.65
0.27
7
16.55
0.00016
0.01
0.002
1.13
0.22
8
9.37
0.00011
0.01
-
2.25
0.15
9
5.93
0.00016
0.01
-
2.91
0.21
10
6.53
0.00022
0.01
-
2.01
0.31
TIC 426016676
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
14.09
0.0
3.06
0.006
2.05
0.0
2
18.03
0.0
1.73
0.004
0.52
0.0
3
12.08
1e-05
0.92
-
1.73
0.01
4
11.46
1e-05
0.8
-
1.37
0.01
5
11.15
1e-05
0.88
-
2.57
0.01
6
11.39
1e-05
0.81
0.008
0.39
0.01
7
12.7
1e-05
0.53
0.006
1.84
0.01
8
12.28
1e-05
0.53
0.007
2.97
0.01
9
13.16
1e-05
0.53
-
1.43
0.01
10
17.64
1e-05
0.49
-
1.97
0.01
11
15.29
1e-05
0.5
0.006
0.75
0.01
12
13.58
2e-05
0.37
0.009
0.85
0.02
13
10.22
1e-05
0.34
0.006
2.07
0.02
14
1.49
3e-05
0.31
0.011
2.93
0.04
15
16.52
1e-05
0.29
0.004
1.94
0.01
16
5.09
3e-05
0.24
0.01
2.88
0.04
17
11.98
2e-05
0.21
0.006
0.44
0.03
18
15.45
2e-05
0.18
-
2.52
0.02
19
4.85
5e-05
0.14
0.009
0.48
0.06
20
1.01
7e-05
0.12
0.011
1.05
0.09
21
18.38
3e-05
0.12
0.005
1.64
0.04
22
0.24
6e-05
0.11
0.01
0.44
0.08
23
9.35
5e-05
0.1
-
2.48
0.07
24
0.73
8e-05
0.1
0.011
0.48
0.11
25
15.5
3e-05
0.1
0.004
2.14
0.04
26
0.15
8e-05
0.09
0.01
0.21
0.11
27
1.16
7e-05
0.09
0.009
1.96
0.1
28
4.63
7e-05
0.09
-
1.8
0.09
29
1.9
7e-05
0.09
-
0.89
0.1
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
325
==PAGE:334==
30
0.3
7e-05
0.1
0.01
0.63
0.1
31
7.25
9e-05
0.08
-
2.11
0.12
32
21.55
5e-05
0.06
-
1.03
0.07
33
22.97
6e-05
0.07
-
1.93
0.08
34
6.85
9e-05
0.07
0.009
0.42
0.12
35
4.33
0.0001
0.07
0.01
1.64
0.14
36
8.67
0.0001
0.07
-
1.49
0.14
37
8.85
0.0001
0.06
-
0.06
0.14
38
5.6
0.00015
0.06
-
1.31
0.21
39
7.08
0.00011
0.06
-
0.43
0.16
40
0.53
0.0001
0.07
0.009
0.9
0.13
41
6.9
0.00012
0.06
0.01
2.95
0.17
42
7.16
0.00011
0.06
0.009
0.3
0.15
43
5.94
0.00011
0.06
0.01
2.37
0.15
44
6.62
0.00016
0.05
-
1.65
0.22
45
4.56
0.00012
0.05
-
1.85
0.17
46
8.05
0.00013
0.06
0.01
0.68
0.18
47
6.24
0.00017
0.05
-
1.79
0.23
48
9.5
0.00012
0.05
0.008
0.2
0.16
49
21.62
6e-05
0.05
-
1.7
0.09
50
8.42
0.00016
0.04
0.01
1.6
0.22
51
19.01
6e-05
0.04
-
1.26
0.08
52
24.56
7e-05
0.04
-
2.58
0.1
53
11.56
0.00016
0.04
0.009
0.87
0.22
54
7.93
0.00012
0.05
-
1.63
0.16
55
7.85
0.00015
0.04
-
0.48
0.2
56
6.93
0.00017
0.04
-
2.36
0.24
57
0.55
0.00015
0.05
-
0.95
0.21
58
1.85
0.00014
0.05
0.008
2.84
0.19
TIC 427352482
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.79
0.0
6.72
-
3.06
0.0
2
17.34
0.0
3.94
-
0.88
0.0
3
19.75
0.0
2.97
0.01
0.8
0.0
4
19.99
0.0
2.2
-
1.32
0.0
5
15.5
1e-05
1.18
0.012
1.04
0.01
6
15.86
0.0
1.11
0.006
2.52
0.01
7
15.17
1e-05
0.64
0.008
2.84
0.01
8
19.9
1e-05
0.56
0.007
1.68
0.01
9
21.39
2e-05
0.47
0.01
1.3
0.02
10
19.94
1e-05
0.38
-
1.79
0.02
11
16.18
3e-05
0.35
-
2.61
0.04
12
9.43
3e-05
0.2
-
0.78
0.04
13
10.3
2e-05
0.18
0.005
3.06
0.03
14
21.23
5e-05
0.14
-
2.98
0.07
15
37.94
4e-05
0.14
0.008
1.28
0.06
16
38.54
5e-05
0.14
0.009
2.08
0.07
17
20.33
5e-05
0.16
0.011
1.56
0.07
326
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:335==
18
8.93
4e-05
0.14
0.007
2.14
0.05
19
14.59
4e-05
0.13
-
1.59
0.05
20
8.54
3e-05
0.13
0.004
1.46
0.03
21
38.43
7e-05
0.12
-
2.2
0.1
22
7.97
5e-05
0.1
0.007
0.61
0.07
23
26.91
0.00014
0.1
0.018
1.59
0.18
24
25.21
0.00011
0.08
0.012
0.92
0.15
25
22.46
0.00011
0.08
-
1.04
0.15
26
1.94
0.00011
0.08
0.011
2.62
0.14
27
35.38
7e-05
0.08
0.008
1.92
0.1
28
0.72
0.00014
0.08
-
0.76
0.19
29
37.58
0.00014
0.07
0.013
0.78
0.18
30
7.88
0.0001
0.07
-
0.2
0.13
31
18.32
0.00013
0.07
0.011
2.55
0.17
32
8.31
9e-05
0.06
-
2.8
0.12
33
1.08
0.00012
0.07
0.011
2.91
0.16
34
33.72
9e-05
0.06
0.007
2.16
0.12
35
36.97
0.00012
0.06
0.01
0.59
0.16
36
39.23
8e-05
0.06
-
2.27
0.11
37
0.5
0.00018
0.06
0.015
1.28
0.23
38
0.96
0.00018
0.06
0.014
1.3
0.25
39
3.36
0.0001
0.05
-
2.43
0.13
40
36.6
0.00014
0.05
-
2.75
0.19
41
12.55
6e-05
0.06
0.004
1.44
0.07
42
0.26
0.00023
0.05
-
0.41
0.31
43
14.95
8e-05
0.05
-
3.09
0.1
44
38.79
0.00019
0.05
0.013
0.69
0.25
45
21.29
0.00013
0.06
0.01
1.55
0.17
46
10.01
0.0001
0.05
0.006
1.29
0.13
47
2.56
0.00011
0.05
-
1.93
0.14
48
1.4
0.00015
0.05
0.009
0.93
0.19
49
36.03
0.0002
0.05
0.012
1.44
0.26
TIC 434097052
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.55
0.0
1.68
0.011
0.2
0.01
2
1.64
0.0
1.57
0.008
0.99
0.01
3
1.73
0.0
1.26
0.01
0.86
0.01
4
15.14
2e-05
0.45
0.014
2.66
0.03
5
13.37
5e-05
0.11
-
2.81
0.1
6
14.71
7e-05
0.09
0.012
0.54
0.14
7
14.93
6e-05
0.11
-
0.64
0.11
8
13.58
8e-05
0.08
-
1.96
0.17
9
15.32
0.0001
0.08
-
0.81
0.2
10
0.09
9e-05
0.07
-
2.93
0.18
11
16.53
7e-05
0.07
0.01
0.2
0.14
12
14.63
8e-05
0.07
0.011
2.37
0.16
13
16.88
8e-05
0.06
-
1.42
0.16
14
14.33
0.0001
0.05
0.01
0.11
0.2
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
327
==PAGE:336==
15
3.37
9e-05
0.05
-
2.63
0.18
16
16.33
9e-05
0.05
-
2.93
0.19
17
13.12
0.00012
0.05
-
2.57
0.25
18
16.78
0.00013
0.05
0.012
1.09
0.27
19
13.47
0.00011
0.05
0.012
0.7
0.22
20
14.47
0.0001
0.05
-
0.19
0.21
TIC 434107405
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.69
2e-05
0.88
-
0.66
0.02
2
0.7
3e-05
0.44
0.017
3.07
0.04
3
1.4
4e-05
0.36
0.021
2.96
0.06
4
2.25
5e-05
0.27
-
3.08
0.07
5
1.58
7e-05
0.25
0.023
2.69
0.09
6
3.71
9e-05
0.21
-
0.84
0.13
7
1.11
9e-05
0.21
-
0.5
0.12
8
1.29
9e-05
0.18
-
0.02
0.12
9
0.57
0.00012
0.15
-
3.12
0.17
10
3.55
0.00011
0.15
-
0.19
0.15
11
1.74
0.00011
0.15
0.022
0.72
0.15
12
1.01
0.00011
0.14
-
2.52
0.15
13
4.45
4e-05
0.11
0.006
0.16
0.06
14
4.56
4e-05
0.11
-
2.54
0.06
TIC 436315743
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
15.22
1e-05
2.75
-
0.48
0.02
2
15.56
1e-05
1.99
0.052
1.5
0.03
3
17.35
1e-05
1.8
-
0.85
0.02
4
17.03
1e-05
1.42
0.031
2.36
0.02
5
15.1
2e-05
1.15
-
2.96
0.04
6
15.65
2e-05
0.96
0.047
3.03
0.05
7
14.29
2e-05
0.75
0.029
1.64
0.04
8
14.01
2e-05
0.62
-
1.54
0.05
9
16.42
4e-05
0.5
-
1.77
0.08
10
17.48
4e-05
0.4
0.03
2.31
0.08
11
14.43
3e-05
0.31
0.022
0.97
0.07
12
16.56
5e-05
0.29
0.029
0.05
0.1
TIC 440681316
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
5.33
4e-05
0.59
-
2.32
0.01
2
0.43
0.00018
0.27
0.007
1.4
0.02
3
0.21
0.00025
0.2
0.007
2.08
0.04
4
10.66
0.00012
0.16
-
3.08
0.02
5
0.22
0.0003
0.17
-
2.04
0.04
6
0.13
0.00047
0.11
0.007
0.79
0.07
328
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:337==
7
0.47
0.00066
0.07
0.007
3.0
0.09
8
0.17
0.00073
0.07
-
1.18
0.1
9
15.99
0.0003
0.06
0.003
0.93
0.04
10
0.68
0.00081
0.05
-
0.86
0.11
11
0.14
0.00076
0.07
0.007
0.73
0.11
12
0.08
0.00089
0.06
-
1.33
0.12
13
0.49
0.00103
0.05
-
2.73
0.14
14
0.06
0.00108
0.05
0.007
0.21
0.15
15
0.63
0.00128
0.04
-
1.49
0.18
TIC 440690782
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.89
6e-05
0.4
0.003
1.1
0.01
2
24.5
7e-05
0.35
-
1.33
0.01
3
42.76
7e-05
0.35
-
0.38
0.01
4
24.6
7e-05
0.35
-
1.05
0.01
5
33.19
7e-05
0.36
-
0.31
0.01
6
38.0
9e-05
0.26
-
2.22
0.01
7
29.94
0.0001
0.26
-
0.82
0.01
8
31.04
0.0001
0.23
0.003
2.63
0.01
9
40.71
0.00011
0.23
-
0.42
0.01
10
37.04
0.00011
0.22
-
1.79
0.01
11
42.27
0.00011
0.21
0.003
1.18
0.02
12
27.07
0.00011
0.2
-
1.19
0.02
13
33.86
0.00014
0.18
-
3.11
0.02
14
28.35
0.00014
0.18
-
0.61
0.02
15
27.34
0.00012
0.18
-
2.29
0.02
16
25.34
0.00014
0.17
0.003
1.63
0.02
17
32.78
0.00014
0.17
0.003
0.48
0.02
18
28.08
0.00015
0.16
-
0.67
0.02
19
31.94
0.00015
0.16
0.003
0.27
0.02
20
47.65
0.00017
0.15
-
1.24
0.02
21
29.35
0.00016
0.15
-
2.37
0.02
22
35.92
0.00016
0.15
-
0.57
0.02
23
16.47
0.00017
0.14
0.003
1.62
0.02
24
28.52
0.00022
0.11
-
3.01
0.03
25
26.17
0.00024
0.1
-
1.83
0.03
26
29.63
0.0003
0.09
-
1.31
0.04
27
21.47
0.00028
0.09
0.003
0.64
0.04
28
44.74
0.00028
0.09
-
0.37
0.04
29
21.97
0.00029
0.08
0.003
0.48
0.04
30
20.22
0.00028
0.08
0.003
2.87
0.04
31
31.76
0.00032
0.08
-
0.28
0.04
32
38.93
0.00031
0.08
-
2.34
0.04
33
30.61
0.00035
0.07
0.003
2.41
0.05
34
27.56
0.00029
0.07
0.003
1.75
0.04
35
0.22
0.0004
0.07
0.004
1.51
0.06
36
39.95
0.00035
0.07
0.004
0.84
0.05
37
40.46
0.00035
0.07
0.003
1.42
0.05
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
329
==PAGE:338==
38
25.13
0.00037
0.07
0.003
1.88
0.05
39
23.96
0.00036
0.07
0.003
1.23
0.05
40
33.88
0.00039
0.07
-
3.12
0.05
41
22.48
0.00036
0.07
-
0.59
0.05
42
35.78
0.00038
0.06
-
1.98
0.05
43
26.44
0.00037
0.06
-
2.99
0.05
44
45.81
0.00036
0.07
-
0.97
0.05
45
41.38
0.00043
0.06
-
2.78
0.06
46
46.37
0.00042
0.06
0.003
1.51
0.06
47
23.14
0.00045
0.06
-
1.74
0.06
48
24.04
0.00042
0.06
-
0.21
0.06
49
34.8
0.00046
0.06
-
0.95
0.06
50
32.08
0.00042
0.05
0.003
2.07
0.06
51
56.56
0.0005
0.05
0.004
3.06
0.07
52
17.14
0.00043
0.05
0.003
1.11
0.06
53
23.5
0.00046
0.05
-
2.33
0.06
54
25.07
0.00046
0.05
0.003
1.74
0.06
55
46.75
0.00055
0.05
-
0.16
0.08
56
29.21
0.00051
0.05
-
1.25
0.07
57
55.28
0.00063
0.05
-
1.92
0.09
58
41.52
0.00056
0.04
0.003
1.9
0.08
59
26.11
0.00055
0.04
0.003
2.0
0.08
60
54.55
0.00066
0.04
0.004
0.64
0.09
61
34.89
0.00063
0.04
-
1.46
0.09
62
53.32
0.00068
0.04
-
0.65
0.09
63
39.55
0.00065
0.04
-
2.4
0.09
64
30.29
0.00065
0.04
0.003
0.42
0.09
65
37.14
0.00062
0.04
0.003
3.08
0.09
66
0.32
0.00091
0.03
-
1.44
0.13
67
34.03
0.00068
0.04
-
2.63
0.09
68
22.8
0.00068
0.04
-
0.34
0.09
69
39.44
0.00077
0.03
0.004
2.53
0.11
70
65.12
0.0007
0.03
0.003
1.87
0.1
71
29.12
0.00075
0.03
0.003
0.67
0.1
72
31.92
0.00069
0.03
0.003
1.45
0.1
73
27.61
0.00066
0.03
0.003
1.77
0.09
74
0.91
0.00098
0.03
-
0.62
0.14
75
53.35
0.00074
0.04
-
1.71
0.1
76
49.05
0.00084
0.03
-
2.56
0.12
77
0.46
0.00112
0.03
-
2.92
0.16
78
63.32
0.0009
0.03
-
0.19
0.13
79
63.16
0.00095
0.03
-
1.51
0.13
80
38.37
0.00095
0.02
0.003
1.29
0.13
81
59.58
0.00112
0.02
-
2.04
0.16
82
58.39
0.00117
0.02
0.004
0.13
0.16
83
63.13
0.00101
0.02
-
3.11
0.14
84
18.8
0.0011
0.02
0.003
2.85
0.15
85
47.18
0.00112
0.02
0.004
3.12
0.16
86
1.04
0.0013
0.02
-
1.76
0.18
87
32.5
0.00093
0.02
0.003
0.01
0.13
330
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:339==
88
26.79
0.00094
0.02
0.003
1.27
0.13
89
33.57
0.00107
0.02
0.003
0.77
0.15
90
1.56
0.0013
0.02
-
0.57
0.18
91
0.66
0.00146
0.02
-
0.33
0.2
92
51.62
0.00127
0.02
-
2.4
0.18
93
18.9
0.00112
0.02
-
2.23
0.16
94
14.95
0.00122
0.02
-
2.67
0.17
95
60.19
0.00124
0.02
-
3.01
0.17
96
62.08
0.00125
0.02
-
1.62
0.17
97
18.44
0.00118
0.02
-
0.86
0.16
98
53.28
0.00115
0.02
-
0.45
0.16
99
27.94
0.00112
0.02
0.003
1.67
0.16
100
21.61
0.00112
0.02
-
2.6
0.16
101
50.15
0.00119
0.02
0.003
2.47
0.17
102
42.54
0.00117
0.02
-
0.46
0.16
103
19.23
0.00126
0.02
-
1.08
0.17
104
0.31
0.00137
0.02
-
2.0
0.19
105
71.9
0.00117
0.02
0.003
0.7
0.16
106
50.95
0.00134
0.02
-
0.28
0.19
107
38.8
0.00125
0.02
-
3.0
0.17
TIC 441834987
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.31
1e-05
1.52
0.017
2.31
0.01
2
16.05
1e-05
1.43
0.024
0.38
0.02
3
6.12
2e-05
1.16
-
2.25
0.03
4
16.9
1e-05
1.09
-
0.28
0.02
5
8.38
2e-05
0.85
0.025
0.26
0.03
6
0.38
4e-05
0.8
-
1.91
0.05
7
12.19
3e-05
0.71
-
1.19
0.03
8
5.63
3e-05
0.69
0.028
0.06
0.04
9
6.25
3e-05
0.7
-
2.98
0.04
10
1.53
3e-05
0.62
0.027
1.06
0.04
11
8.67
5e-05
0.55
-
3.12
0.07
12
11.29
3e-05
0.54
-
1.84
0.04
13
5.82
5e-05
0.47
-
0.02
0.06
14
0.67
4e-05
0.47
0.025
1.34
0.05
15
12.67
2e-05
0.39
-
0.61
0.02
16
0.22
7e-05
0.31
-
1.03
0.1
17
7.49
5e-05
0.34
-
0.42
0.07
18
7.93
7e-05
0.37
-
0.08
0.1
19
7.73
6e-05
0.33
-
0.14
0.08
20
7.21
8e-05
0.25
0.025
1.74
0.1
21
2.54
8e-05
0.24
-
2.38
0.11
22
7.62
6e-05
0.27
0.023
0.83
0.08
23
6.98
9e-05
0.21
0.024
1.91
0.12
24
5.31
0.00014
0.2
-
2.79
0.18
25
8.98
0.00011
0.24
0.033
1.98
0.14
26
13.49
5e-05
0.19
-
2.08
0.07
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
331
==PAGE:340==
27
10.21
8e-05
0.21
0.021
1.29
0.1
28
6.58
0.00012
0.17
0.028
1.51
0.17
29
8.31
0.00012
0.18
0.029
2.83
0.16
30
0.8
9e-05
0.18
-
1.68
0.12
31
7.41
0.00013
0.18
0.031
1.96
0.17
32
8.47
0.00013
0.15
0.027
0.15
0.17
33
5.15
0.00015
0.16
0.032
2.18
0.2
34
8.79
0.0002
0.14
-
2.77
0.26
35
10.56
0.00012
0.15
-
0.47
0.16
36
4.78
0.00013
0.15
0.027
0.05
0.18
37
15.11
7e-05
0.15
-
0.11
0.09
38
4.29
0.00014
0.14
0.026
2.52
0.18
39
4.39
0.00013
0.14
-
1.94
0.17
40
1.91
0.00015
0.14
-
1.2
0.2
41
9.71
0.00014
0.13
-
0.93
0.18
42
5.45
0.00019
0.14
0.036
0.94
0.26
43
2.08
0.00016
0.12
0.025
2.65
0.21
44
9.32
0.00018
0.12
-
1.83
0.24
TIC 442720907
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.38
0.0
1.36
-
0.13
0.0
2
23.22
1e-05
0.84
-
0.65
0.01
3
41.29
1e-05
0.72
0.008
2.3
0.01
4
32.15
1e-05
0.64
0.008
0.93
0.01
5
26.95
1e-05
0.56
0.007
0.17
0.01
6
32.63
1e-05
0.5
-
2.53
0.01
7
27.86
1e-05
0.44
0.007
2.07
0.02
8
38.03
2e-05
0.36
-
1.64
0.02
9
27.62
2e-05
0.33
0.009
1.98
0.03
10
27.11
2e-05
0.31
0.009
1.93
0.03
11
20.48
2e-05
0.29
0.007
3.0
0.03
12
26.86
2e-05
0.26
0.007
0.82
0.03
13
28.55
2e-05
0.25
0.006
0.83
0.02
14
36.5
2e-05
0.23
0.007
2.59
0.03
15
21.13
2e-05
0.22
-
1.97
0.02
16
20.7
2e-05
0.22
-
0.13
0.02
17
26.76
3e-05
0.18
-
0.12
0.04
18
38.43
3e-05
0.18
-
3.13
0.05
19
21.69
2e-05
0.18
-
2.95
0.03
20
48.2
4e-05
0.17
-
2.85
0.05
21
34.54
4e-05
0.16
-
0.79
0.05
22
22.63
5e-05
0.12
-
1.06
0.06
23
29.85
7e-05
0.13
-
0.13
0.09
24
51.49
6e-05
0.1
-
0.93
0.08
25
25.19
4e-05
0.11
0.006
0.8
0.06
26
28.32
5e-05
0.11
-
1.98
0.07
27
17.69
3e-05
0.11
-
0.8
0.04
28
55.26
4e-05
0.1
-
2.35
0.05
332
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:341==
29
48.16
6e-05
0.1
0.008
2.4
0.08
30
0.16
7e-05
0.09
0.008
2.39
0.09
31
54.89
8e-05
0.09
-
1.74
0.11
32
35.08
7e-05
0.09
0.009
2.98
0.09
33
18.81
6e-05
0.08
0.007
3.0
0.08
34
40.33
6e-05
0.08
-
1.14
0.07
35
0.69
0.00018
0.07
0.016
2.26
0.24
36
44.76
7e-05
0.07
-
1.05
0.09
37
23.97
7e-05
0.07
0.006
2.49
0.09
38
0.58
0.00016
0.06
0.014
0.39
0.22
39
58.11
8e-05
0.07
-
1.23
0.1
40
27.82
9e-05
0.07
0.008
2.23
0.11
41
20.32
8e-05
0.06
-
0.23
0.11
42
21.89
9e-05
0.06
-
0.82
0.12
43
20.89
8e-05
0.06
-
0.98
0.1
44
19.82
8e-05
0.06
0.006
1.28
0.1
45
21.17
6e-05
0.06
-
0.32
0.07
46
25.57
8e-05
0.06
-
0.91
0.1
47
1.9
0.00018
0.06
-
2.18
0.23
48
58.26
9e-05
0.06
0.007
3.0
0.12
49
28.15
0.00013
0.05
-
1.67
0.17
50
25.84
9e-05
0.06
0.007
1.77
0.12
51
19.49
0.0001
0.05
-
2.48
0.13
52
43.16
9e-05
0.05
0.006
2.34
0.12
53
27.9
0.0001
0.05
-
0.14
0.14
54
39.46
0.00011
0.05
-
1.29
0.14
55
0.4
0.00012
0.05
0.007
0.55
0.16
56
53.26
0.00014
0.04
0.008
2.43
0.19
57
51.59
0.00012
0.04
0.007
1.01
0.16
58
37.3
0.00011
0.04
-
0.2
0.15
59
40.06
0.0001
0.04
-
0.56
0.13
60
44.8
0.00011
0.04
0.006
0.3
0.15
61
0.89
0.0003
0.04
0.016
0.27
0.39
62
1.74
0.00015
0.04
0.008
1.44
0.19
63
18.01
0.0001
0.04
-
2.46
0.13
64
26.25
0.0001
0.04
0.005
2.61
0.14
65
32.97
9e-05
0.05
0.005
0.74
0.12
TIC 445072295
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.89
0.0
1.51
-
2.48
0.0
2
20.35
1e-05
0.98
0.011
0.91
0.01
3
20.18
1e-05
1.0
0.008
2.2
0.01
4
9.28
1e-05
0.75
0.011
0.16
0.01
5
8.85
1e-05
0.64
-
1.25
0.01
6
2.36
2e-05
0.5
0.01
2.57
0.02
7
6.66
1e-05
0.5
-
2.36
0.02
8
7.73
2e-05
0.48
0.011
0.83
0.02
9
8.67
1e-05
0.5
0.009
2.23
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
333
==PAGE:342==
10
26.82
1e-05
0.29
-
0.64
0.01
11
25.31
2e-05
0.28
-
1.29
0.02
12
9.92
3e-05
0.24
0.01
2.2
0.04
13
28.12
2e-05
0.25
0.006
0.28
0.02
14
21.74
2e-05
0.25
-
1.19
0.03
15
10.34
3e-05
0.21
0.009
1.71
0.04
16
1.9
3e-05
0.2
-
0.9
0.04
17
3.33
5e-05
0.18
-
0.46
0.07
18
1.03
4e-05
0.14
0.007
1.48
0.05
19
9.74
5e-05
0.16
0.012
0.84
0.07
20
8.17
4e-05
0.17
-
1.85
0.05
21
27.31
2e-05
0.15
-
2.65
0.03
22
8.95
4e-05
0.15
0.008
1.27
0.05
23
10.07
5e-05
0.13
0.009
1.1
0.07
24
11.18
7e-05
0.12
0.011
0.74
0.09
25
1.06
4e-05
0.13
0.007
0.57
0.06
26
8.36
5e-05
0.13
-
2.43
0.08
27
1.87
4e-05
0.12
0.006
2.92
0.05
28
26.43
3e-05
0.13
0.005
1.68
0.04
29
3.01
8e-05
0.09
0.01
2.9
0.11
30
0.17
6e-05
0.09
0.008
1.11
0.09
31
6.82
7e-05
0.1
-
1.21
0.1
32
0.66
9e-05
0.1
-
1.89
0.13
33
0.93
5e-05
0.1
0.007
3.04
0.07
34
26.51
4e-05
0.1
-
3.05
0.05
35
12.73
8e-05
0.1
0.011
2.95
0.11
36
1.3
7e-05
0.07
-
1.06
0.1
37
11.29
9e-05
0.08
0.011
2.46
0.13
38
22.0
5e-05
0.09
-
1.57
0.07
39
10.98
8e-05
0.09
-
1.64
0.11
40
2.03
6e-05
0.09
0.008
0.31
0.09
41
46.51
4e-05
0.08
-
1.41
0.06
42
8.08
6e-05
0.12
0.009
0.44
0.08
43
26.9
4e-05
0.08
0.004
0.28
0.06
44
2.79
5e-05
0.09
0.007
2.03
0.07
45
1.19
7e-05
0.07
0.007
2.11
0.09
46
0.23
5e-05
0.11
0.008
0.39
0.07
47
13.79
0.0001
0.07
-
2.16
0.13
48
11.25
0.00011
0.08
0.012
1.82
0.15
49
12.09
0.00013
0.06
-
0.38
0.17
50
1.38
0.00012
0.06
-
2.23
0.17
51
0.33
9e-05
0.06
0.008
1.32
0.13
52
8.33
0.00012
0.06
-
2.55
0.16
53
22.51
5e-05
0.06
0.004
2.48
0.07
54
12.28
9e-05
0.06
0.007
0.19
0.12
55
6.82
7e-05
0.1
-
2.41
0.1
56
0.83
9e-05
0.07
0.009
2.32
0.12
57
10.55
0.00012
0.06
-
0.08
0.17
58
11.69
0.00011
0.07
-
0.17
0.15
59
10.3
0.0001
0.06
0.008
1.83
0.14
334
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:343==
60
22.81
7e-05
0.05
-
2.91
0.1
61
1.22
8e-05
0.07
0.008
2.91
0.11
62
12.19
0.0001
0.05
-
0.9
0.14
63
28.24
0.0001
0.05
0.007
1.56
0.14
64
15.23
8e-05
0.05
-
0.73
0.11
65
11.4
0.00015
0.05
-
0.16
0.21
66
10.27
8e-05
0.07
0.008
0.63
0.11
67
3.82
0.00012
0.05
-
0.78
0.16
68
2.13
0.00012
0.06
-
2.3
0.16
69
1.57
0.00016
0.05
-
0.15
0.22
70
11.66
0.00013
0.05
0.01
1.05
0.18
71
18.13
0.00012
0.04
-
1.1
0.17
72
7.92
0.00016
0.05
0.011
2.62
0.22
73
12.16
0.00011
0.05
-
2.87
0.15
74
13.23
0.00014
0.04
-
2.11
0.2
75
11.56
0.00021
0.04
-
1.29
0.29
76
10.89
0.00015
0.05
-
0.35
0.2
77
4.32
0.00017
0.04
-
2.86
0.23
78
0.47
0.00017
0.04
0.009
0.87
0.24
79
7.37
0.00019
0.04
-
0.48
0.26
80
1.74
0.00016
0.04
-
0.4
0.22
81
5.12
0.00012
0.04
-
0.87
0.17
82
6.69
0.00016
0.04
0.009
3.06
0.22
83
11.91
0.0002
0.04
0.011
1.32
0.28
84
4.93
0.00014
0.04
-
0.91
0.19
85
14.78
0.00015
0.04
0.008
2.13
0.21
86
10.7
0.00016
0.04
-
0.04
0.21
87
12.43
0.00014
0.04
-
3.13
0.19
88
4.75
0.00014
0.04
-
2.37
0.19
89
3.95
0.00013
0.04
0.007
1.64
0.18
90
23.84
7e-05
0.04
0.004
2.9
0.1
TIC 44628526
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.27
2e-05
0.22
-
0.9
0.02
2
29.19
1e-05
0.18
0.002
1.91
0.01
3
25.89
1e-05
0.11
0.002
0.73
0.02
4
32.35
2e-05
0.08
0.002
0.03
0.03
5
0.15
5e-05
0.09
0.006
0.84
0.07
6
27.57
3e-05
0.04
-
1.79
0.04
7
0.95
8e-05
0.04
-
2.53
0.11
8
32.46
4e-05
0.03
-
0.64
0.06
TIC 447118029
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
19.17
0.00023
0.65
0.008
0.87
0.01
2
26.73
0.00027
0.56
0.008
0.8
0.01
3
0.13
0.00058
0.42
-
1.95
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
335
==PAGE:344==
4
33.18
0.00039
0.44
0.009
2.07
0.02
5
20.63
0.00037
0.4
-
1.22
0.02
6
20.46
0.00038
0.4
-
1.85
0.02
7
27.0
0.00042
0.37
0.008
0.93
0.02
8
31.28
0.00054
0.31
-
2.29
0.03
9
26.58
0.00047
0.32
-
1.19
0.02
10
20.98
0.00058
0.25
-
1.05
0.03
11
24.4
0.00067
0.22
-
0.81
0.03
12
33.76
0.00087
0.19
-
0.84
0.04
13
25.38
0.00084
0.18
0.008
0.88
0.04
14
34.54
0.00094
0.17
-
1.62
0.05
15
24.89
0.00093
0.17
-
0.71
0.05
16
25.82
0.0009
0.16
-
0.79
0.05
17
34.97
0.00107
0.15
0.008
0.14
0.05
18
37.43
0.00123
0.13
0.008
0.88
0.06
19
0.41
0.00159
0.15
0.012
2.72
0.08
20
24.97
0.00127
0.12
-
2.49
0.06
21
20.83
0.00138
0.11
-
2.97
0.07
22
15.35
0.00152
0.1
0.008
0.9
0.08
23
23.92
0.00144
0.1
0.007
2.78
0.07
24
23.1
0.00145
0.11
0.008
0.07
0.07
25
29.07
0.00191
0.08
0.008
1.88
0.1
26
30.79
0.00217
0.08
0.009
2.88
0.11
27
32.73
0.00217
0.08
0.009
0.23
0.11
28
31.99
0.00237
0.07
-
0.18
0.12
29
37.86
0.00225
0.07
0.008
2.2
0.11
30
30.45
0.0025
0.07
0.009
1.32
0.13
31
28.83
0.0023
0.07
0.008
2.46
0.12
32
24.56
0.00244
0.06
0.007
1.75
0.12
33
15.28
0.00235
0.07
-
1.66
0.12
34
41.38
0.00275
0.06
-
2.28
0.14
35
37.7
0.00266
0.06
-
1.1
0.14
36
36.51
0.0024
0.07
-
3.04
0.12
37
28.22
0.00251
0.06
0.008
2.49
0.13
38
36.81
0.00265
0.06
-
0.49
0.13
39
49.65
0.00281
0.06
0.008
0.51
0.14
40
21.83
0.0024
0.06
0.007
1.16
0.12
41
1.63
0.00359
0.06
0.011
0.15
0.18
42
29.16
0.00285
0.06
-
2.23
0.14
43
26.28
0.00243
0.06
-
2.59
0.12
44
27.69
0.00268
0.06
-
1.15
0.14
45
42.51
0.00322
0.05
0.009
0.95
0.16
46
28.68
0.00283
0.06
0.008
1.82
0.14
47
47.96
0.00314
0.05
-
2.05
0.16
48
31.73
0.00318
0.05
0.008
2.47
0.16
49
24.15
0.00281
0.05
0.007
1.98
0.14
50
29.27
0.00297
0.05
-
2.46
0.15
51
21.13
0.00301
0.05
-
1.43
0.15
52
1.35
0.00461
0.05
-
0.35
0.23
53
22.77
0.00316
0.05
0.008
1.65
0.16
336
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:345==
54
40.03
0.00348
0.05
0.008
1.79
0.18
55
16.36
0.00335
0.05
0.008
1.61
0.17
TIC 448807110
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
41.88
1e-05
0.35
0.004
2.56
0.01
2
38.34
1e-05
0.2
-
0.12
0.02
3
31.22
1e-05
0.23
-
0.7
0.02
4
26.34
1e-05
0.21
-
2.0
0.01
5
20.96
2e-05
0.16
-
2.54
0.02
6
32.47
2e-05
0.13
-
3.13
0.03
7
34.61
2e-05
0.1
-
0.71
0.02
8
34.12
2e-05
0.1
-
0.61
0.03
9
37.0
3e-05
0.09
-
0.34
0.04
10
16.67
2e-05
0.09
-
1.77
0.03
11
22.23
3e-05
0.07
0.003
3.03
0.04
12
27.51
4e-05
0.07
0.004
0.09
0.05
13
30.12
4e-05
0.07
-
0.56
0.06
14
43.41
3e-05
0.06
0.003
2.31
0.04
15
27.78
4e-05
0.06
0.003
2.39
0.05
16
22.71
4e-05
0.06
-
3.08
0.06
17
28.6
4e-05
0.06
0.003
2.35
0.06
18
38.94
3e-05
0.06
-
2.78
0.04
19
44.84
4e-05
0.04
0.002
1.6
0.06
20
49.87
6e-05
0.04
0.003
1.3
0.09
21
35.87
6e-05
0.04
-
0.22
0.09
22
23.57
8e-05
0.03
0.004
0.48
0.11
23
19.39
7e-05
0.03
0.003
1.19
0.09
24
47.22
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.65
0.07
25
38.94
6e-05
0.03
-
0.57
0.08
26
46.57
5e-05
0.03
-
0.14
0.07
27
55.74
7e-05
0.03
-
0.38
0.1
28
53.82
8e-05
0.03
0.003
0.04
0.11
29
0.3
8e-05
0.03
-
1.94
0.11
30
28.39
6e-05
0.03
0.002
1.32
0.09
31
21.37
9e-05
0.03
0.003
0.34
0.13
32
0.38
8e-05
0.03
-
0.96
0.11
33
0.25
8e-05
0.03
0.003
1.81
0.1
34
0.17
8e-05
0.03
0.004
0.44
0.12
35
48.57
8e-05
0.03
0.003
2.57
0.11
36
32.29
9e-05
0.02
0.003
0.88
0.12
37
0.68
0.00015
0.02
-
0.41
0.2
38
40.53
0.0001
0.02
-
2.59
0.13
39
27.32
9e-05
0.02
-
1.76
0.12
40
0.98
0.00016
0.02
0.005
2.09
0.22
41
29.92
9e-05
0.02
-
1.24
0.13
42
56.5
6e-05
0.02
-
2.08
0.08
43
42.46
8e-05
0.02
-
1.24
0.12
44
16.94
9e-05
0.02
-
2.02
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
337
==PAGE:346==
45
44.65
9e-05
0.02
-
0.2
0.12
46
34.58
9e-05
0.02
0.002
1.68
0.12
47
55.21
0.00013
0.02
0.003
1.18
0.18
48
31.97
0.00014
0.02
0.004
1.12
0.19
49
28.26
9e-05
0.02
0.002
2.8
0.12
50
36.28
0.00015
0.02
-
2.3
0.2
51
20.85
0.00012
0.02
-
0.89
0.16
52
33.1
0.00011
0.02
-
0.46
0.15
53
35.32
9e-05
0.02
-
2.49
0.13
54
1.27
0.00014
0.02
0.003
3.09
0.19
55
25.29
0.0001
0.02
-
0.22
0.13
56
56.42
9e-05
0.02
0.002
1.43
0.13
57
16.76
0.00012
0.02
0.003
2.73
0.16
58
2.48
0.00014
0.02
-
2.46
0.19
59
0.08
0.00018
0.02
0.004
0.26
0.25
TIC 449364848
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.46
0.00028
0.74
-
0.63
0.01
2
1.56
0.00045
0.49
0.01
3.05
0.02
3
2.81
0.00045
0.5
-
3.04
0.02
4
1.15
0.00049
0.45
-
1.08
0.02
5
2.65
0.00058
0.4
-
2.1
0.03
6
0.27
0.00068
0.3
0.01
2.2
0.03
7
3.5
0.00319
0.07
-
2.24
0.15
8
4.04
0.00374
0.06
-
1.0
0.18
9
0.08
0.00355
0.06
0.01
2.28
0.17
10
4.59
0.0035
0.06
-
2.0
0.16
11
3.86
0.00379
0.06
0.01
1.68
0.18
12
4.85
0.00421
0.05
0.01
2.88
0.2
13
4.35
0.00425
0.05
-
2.28
0.2
14
4.12
0.00525
0.04
-
1.82
0.25
TIC 450302084
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.55
1e-05
1.6
-
0.32
0.01
2
2.39
1e-05
1.16
-
2.59
0.01
3
2.25
1e-05
1.07
-
2.6
0.02
4
19.88
1e-05
1.04
-
1.59
0.01
5
9.37
2e-05
0.62
-
2.96
0.03
6
10.43
2e-05
0.53
0.014
1.03
0.03
7
10.91
3e-05
0.47
0.018
2.23
0.04
8
9.71
2e-05
0.45
-
1.27
0.03
9
20.36
1e-05
0.43
0.008
0.04
0.02
10
18.82
2e-05
0.37
0.01
1.29
0.03
11
13.16
3e-05
0.39
-
1.05
0.04
12
11.54
4e-05
0.38
-
0.25
0.05
13
10.99
4e-05
0.33
0.019
2.18
0.06
338
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:347==
14
0.94
4e-05
0.32
-
0.53
0.06
15
9.7
3e-05
0.3
0.014
2.02
0.05
16
1.31
7e-05
0.24
-
2.19
0.1
17
2.73
3e-05
0.24
-
2.09
0.05
18
10.01
8e-05
0.21
-
3.06
0.11
19
9.63
3e-05
0.26
0.012
1.69
0.05
20
8.39
7e-05
0.2
-
2.41
0.09
21
12.48
7e-05
0.17
-
3.03
0.1
22
11.08
7e-05
0.18
-
1.32
0.1
23
9.21
8e-05
0.17
-
1.15
0.11
24
10.75
6e-05
0.16
-
0.63
0.09
25
11.54
9e-05
0.17
-
0.62
0.12
26
11.92
0.00012
0.11
0.019
1.27
0.17
27
10.2
0.0001
0.11
0.016
0.23
0.14
28
11.83
0.00014
0.11
-
0.78
0.19
29
0.69
0.00013
0.1
-
0.98
0.18
30
1.86
0.00011
0.11
0.016
2.72
0.15
31
8.63
0.0001
0.09
-
1.42
0.14
32
5.46
7e-05
0.09
0.008
1.07
0.09
33
0.25
0.00017
0.09
-
1.2
0.23
34
9.0
0.0001
0.1
-
2.11
0.14
35
9.34
0.00016
0.09
-
0.57
0.22
36
0.56
0.00017
0.09
0.021
1.6
0.23
37
12.24
0.00016
0.08
-
2.95
0.22
38
0.46
0.00021
0.08
-
2.23
0.29
39
8.83
0.00013
0.07
-
2.34
0.18
TIC 452551629
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.38
0.00014
0.24
0.005
2.23
0.02
2
1.57
0.00015
0.22
0.005
0.69
0.02
3
20.03
0.00017
0.16
0.004
2.96
0.03
4
11.81
0.00021
0.16
-
1.68
0.03
5
9.17
0.00023
0.15
0.005
2.58
0.03
6
15.46
0.0002
0.16
0.005
0.91
0.03
7
18.72
0.00019
0.15
0.004
1.43
0.03
8
14.78
0.00025
0.13
-
2.48
0.04
9
32.1
0.0002
0.12
0.003
1.77
0.03
10
0.51
0.00036
0.1
0.006
1.44
0.05
11
9.34
0.00036
0.09
-
1.36
0.05
12
2.14
0.00042
0.08
-
0.68
0.06
13
8.05
0.00049
0.07
-
2.87
0.07
14
2.08
0.00057
0.06
0.005
0.28
0.08
15
6.2
0.00049
0.06
0.005
3.11
0.07
16
21.34
0.00043
0.06
0.004
0.1
0.06
17
3.28
0.00059
0.06
-
3.12
0.09
18
20.47
0.00048
0.06
0.004
1.34
0.07
19
28.59
0.00046
0.05
-
2.44
0.07
20
18.14
0.00056
0.05
0.004
0.48
0.08
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
339
==PAGE:348==
21
3.86
0.00077
0.05
0.005
0.54
0.11
22
4.03
0.00086
0.04
0.005
2.28
0.13
23
24.4
0.00063
0.04
-
2.38
0.09
24
11.1
0.00089
0.04
0.005
1.28
0.13
25
18.25
0.00072
0.04
0.004
2.54
0.11
26
17.76
0.00068
0.04
-
2.18
0.1
27
10.19
0.00089
0.04
-
1.93
0.13
28
6.29
0.00089
0.04
0.005
1.77
0.13
29
0.13
0.00112
0.03
0.005
1.19
0.17
30
8.57
0.0008
0.04
-
1.07
0.12
31
2.55
0.00113
0.03
-
2.87
0.17
32
0.38
0.00096
0.04
0.006
0.03
0.14
33
7.1
0.0009
0.03
0.005
2.64
0.13
34
4.45
0.00111
0.03
-
2.12
0.17
35
12.34
0.00104
0.03
0.005
1.02
0.16
36
3.66
0.00105
0.03
-
2.4
0.16
37
16.42
0.00095
0.03
0.004
2.84
0.14
38
10.39
0.00103
0.03
-
2.41
0.15
39
3.01
0.00111
0.03
-
0.34
0.16
40
31.93
0.00077
0.03
-
0.16
0.11
41
21.03
0.00094
0.03
0.004
1.37
0.14
42
4.4
0.00116
0.03
0.005
1.76
0.17
43
12.44
0.0012
0.03
0.005
2.89
0.18
44
14.68
0.00121
0.03
0.005
1.7
0.18
45
36.57
0.00077
0.03
0.003
2.92
0.11
46
16.59
0.00098
0.03
-
2.32
0.14
47
6.98
0.00112
0.03
0.005
2.87
0.17
48
0.91
0.00124
0.03
0.006
1.98
0.18
49
10.81
0.00127
0.03
-
2.82
0.19
50
20.72
0.00106
0.03
0.004
1.55
0.16
51
8.73
0.00128
0.03
-
2.99
0.19
52
25.12
0.00097
0.02
0.003
0.29
0.14
53
19.94
0.00112
0.02
-
1.41
0.17
54
22.96
0.00115
0.02
0.004
2.65
0.17
55
13.41
0.00152
0.02
-
1.73
0.23
56
5.31
0.00168
0.02
0.005
1.62
0.25
57
19.11
0.00123
0.02
0.004
0.04
0.18
58
1.22
0.00153
0.02
0.005
0.2
0.23
59
35.76
0.00103
0.02
0.003
0.62
0.15
60
13.38
0.00152
0.02
-
2.58
0.23
61
24.87
0.00112
0.02
0.004
0.38
0.17
62
7.54
0.00142
0.02
-
1.51
0.21
63
23.85
0.00121
0.02
-
1.92
0.18
64
12.24
0.0016
0.02
0.005
2.56
0.24
65
7.44
0.00146
0.02
0.005
0.11
0.22
66
27.58
0.00117
0.02
-
0.29
0.17
67
2.99
0.0014
0.02
0.005
0.79
0.21
68
11.56
0.00163
0.02
0.005
0.22
0.24
69
5.46
0.00156
0.02
0.005
0.12
0.23
70
5.27
0.00172
0.02
-
1.94
0.26
340
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:349==
71
17.64
0.0013
0.02
-
0.51
0.19
72
30.33
0.0011
0.02
-
0.65
0.16
73
2.34
0.00177
0.02
-
0.05
0.26
TIC 452590255
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.35
5e-05
0.16
-
0.5
0.07
2
22.52
5e-05
0.17
-
2.04
0.07
3
0.37
6e-05
0.12
-
1.7
0.08
4
22.02
6e-05
0.12
-
1.36
0.09
5
19.92
5e-05
0.16
-
2.35
0.08
6
20.42
8e-05
0.11
0.013
2.27
0.12
7
21.93
6e-05
0.11
0.01
1.88
0.09
8
22.82
7e-05
0.11
-
0.5
0.1
9
20.31
8e-05
0.11
0.012
0.72
0.12
10
19.42
7e-05
0.11
-
2.2
0.1
11
0.3
7e-05
0.11
-
0.03
0.11
12
20.71
7e-05
0.11
-
1.91
0.1
13
20.81
8e-05
0.08
-
3.08
0.12
14
21.02
9e-05
0.09
0.012
2.64
0.13
15
20.46
0.0001
0.09
0.013
1.01
0.15
16
20.96
0.00011
0.07
-
1.52
0.16
17
22.33
0.00012
0.07
0.013
2.06
0.17
18
19.28
9e-05
0.09
-
2.08
0.13
19
22.48
0.0001
0.07
-
3.06
0.16
20
23.31
0.0001
0.07
0.011
1.25
0.15
21
22.07
0.00013
0.06
-
1.42
0.19
22
21.67
0.0001
0.07
-
1.77
0.15
23
0.25
0.00013
0.07
0.012
1.29
0.19
24
21.43
0.00013
0.07
-
0.19
0.19
25
20.56
0.00011
0.08
-
2.77
0.16
26
20.79
0.0001
0.07
-
1.38
0.15
27
20.14
0.0001
0.08
-
1.67
0.16
28
0.61
0.0001
0.07
0.01
1.75
0.15
29
0.31
0.00012
0.07
0.011
2.52
0.17
30
19.16
0.00014
0.06
0.012
3.1
0.2
31
19.55
0.00011
0.06
0.01
2.93
0.16
32
21.22
0.00015
0.06
0.013
2.59
0.22
33
19.04
0.00013
0.05
0.01
2.13
0.2
34
21.08
0.00014
0.06
-
0.99
0.21
35
0.2
0.00014
0.06
0.012
1.37
0.21
36
23.46
8e-05
0.06
-
0.44
0.13
37
0.69
0.00013
0.06
-
2.53
0.19
38
21.98
0.00013
0.05
-
0.06
0.2
39
22.37
0.00013
0.06
0.011
1.83
0.2
40
21.23
0.00015
0.06
-
0.1
0.22
41
0.12
0.00011
0.05
0.009
1.52
0.17
42
0.92
0.00016
0.05
0.011
1.48
0.23
43
21.38
0.00016
0.05
-
1.53
0.24
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
341
==PAGE:350==
44
20.51
0.00018
0.05
0.012
1.38
0.26
45
21.57
0.00019
0.04
-
2.74
0.28
46
0.15
0.00014
0.05
0.01
0.09
0.21
47
22.65
0.00016
0.05
-
2.71
0.23
48
21.0
0.00019
0.04
0.012
1.64
0.28
49
22.31
0.00016
0.05
-
0.71
0.24
50
0.34
0.00017
0.04
-
1.13
0.25
51
19.89
0.00021
0.04
-
2.13
0.32
52
0.82
0.00017
0.04
-
0.6
0.25
TIC 45405286
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
21.71
7e-05
0.79
0.005
1.58
0.01
2
14.27
0.00028
0.26
0.007
2.35
0.03
3
12.81
0.00048
0.16
0.007
1.91
0.04
4
13.76
0.00049
0.15
-
2.11
0.04
5
12.3
0.00062
0.12
0.007
3.06
0.06
6
1.86
0.00076
0.11
0.008
0.37
0.07
7
0.51
0.00094
0.1
0.008
2.35
0.09
8
13.02
0.00085
0.09
-
1.38
0.08
9
28.09
0.00059
0.08
0.004
2.91
0.05
10
15.29
0.00083
0.08
0.006
0.2
0.08
11
22.72
0.00069
0.07
0.005
1.32
0.06
12
0.85
0.00121
0.08
0.008
0.36
0.11
13
27.82
0.00072
0.07
-
1.35
0.07
14
26.64
0.00084
0.06
-
1.73
0.08
15
14.9
0.00127
0.05
-
0.44
0.12
16
1.02
0.00186
0.05
0.008
0.49
0.17
17
11.93
0.0015
0.05
0.007
0.89
0.14
18
2.27
0.00217
0.04
-
1.44
0.2
19
27.14
0.00125
0.04
-
2.47
0.11
20
0.74
0.00261
0.04
0.008
1.85
0.24
21
11.63
0.00249
0.03
-
1.54
0.23
22
1.46
0.0025
0.03
-
0.48
0.23
23
11.42
0.00242
0.03
0.007
1.99
0.22
24
10.92
0.00244
0.03
0.007
1.3
0.22
25
13.88
0.00247
0.03
-
1.39
0.23
26
3.73
0.00247
0.03
-
1.04
0.23
27
0.61
0.00298
0.03
0.008
1.89
0.27
28
13.37
0.00243
0.03
0.007
0.56
0.22
29
3.35
0.00268
0.03
-
3.02
0.24
30
22.83
0.00183
0.03
0.005
2.4
0.17
31
14.62
0.00264
0.03
-
2.9
0.24
32
11.79
0.00273
0.03
-
0.31
0.25
TIC 454667303
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.54
0.00033
0.58
0.009
1.98
0.02
342
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:351==
2
16.57
0.0004
0.5
-
0.72
0.02
3
21.1
0.00037
0.49
-
1.44
0.02
4
13.38
0.00053
0.44
-
1.2
0.02
5
7.64
0.00087
0.37
-
1.32
0.04
6
20.7
0.00052
0.36
0.009
2.89
0.02
7
9.17
0.00101
0.32
-
3.12
0.05
8
1.04
0.00102
0.31
-
1.13
0.05
9
14.54
0.00073
0.31
-
1.96
0.03
10
8.58
0.00104
0.32
0.015
2.35
0.05
11
6.59
0.00121
0.27
-
0.8
0.06
12
10.65
0.00097
0.29
0.013
1.0
0.04
13
7.95
0.00138
0.24
-
2.52
0.06
14
1.23
0.00135
0.23
-
2.41
0.06
15
18.94
0.00078
0.24
-
1.5
0.04
16
0.38
0.00158
0.22
-
1.26
0.07
17
7.73
0.00145
0.22
-
1.14
0.07
18
0.57
0.00164
0.21
0.016
1.7
0.08
19
17.12
0.00102
0.19
0.009
2.82
0.05
20
9.76
0.00179
0.17
0.014
1.47
0.08
21
8.5
0.0015
0.22
-
0.64
0.07
22
7.86
0.00167
0.2
-
2.62
0.08
23
9.99
0.00157
0.19
-
1.37
0.07
24
9.59
0.0021
0.15
-
2.85
0.1
25
17.88
0.00124
0.16
0.009
1.09
0.06
26
15.52
0.00155
0.14
-
2.73
0.07
27
2.07
0.00237
0.14
0.015
0.07
0.11
28
6.29
0.00255
0.13
-
1.45
0.12
29
1.72
0.00286
0.12
0.015
0.61
0.13
30
18.29
0.00162
0.11
0.009
0.47
0.07
31
8.92
0.00365
0.09
-
0.65
0.17
32
11.86
0.00305
0.09
0.012
1.69
0.14
33
11.24
0.00319
0.09
-
1.09
0.15
34
11.09
0.00395
0.07
0.013
1.05
0.18
35
10.25
0.00335
0.08
0.013
1.97
0.15
36
6.02
0.00498
0.07
0.015
2.44
0.23
37
17.65
0.00287
0.07
0.009
2.35
0.13
38
5.87
0.0052
0.06
-
2.84
0.24
39
1.08
0.00437
0.07
-
2.12
0.2
TIC 458689740
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
39.17
0.0
0.85
0.006
1.29
0.01
2
30.82
0.0
0.75
-
1.31
0.01
3
36.43
1e-05
0.44
0.008
1.24
0.02
4
42.54
1e-05
0.45
-
1.06
0.02
5
19.67
1e-05
0.4
0.006
1.44
0.01
6
20.32
1e-05
0.26
0.004
3.09
0.01
7
0.15
1e-05
0.34
0.006
2.74
0.02
8
30.8
1e-05
0.26
-
2.86
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
343
==PAGE:352==
9
36.23
2e-05
0.2
0.006
1.35
0.03
10
22.44
2e-05
0.2
0.005
1.32
0.03
11
19.11
2e-05
0.19
-
1.75
0.03
12
33.16
2e-05
0.17
-
2.22
0.03
13
31.92
2e-05
0.17
0.004
0.7
0.02
14
33.37
2e-05
0.17
-
0.62
0.02
15
39.54
3e-05
0.15
0.005
0.64
0.04
16
18.61
2e-05
0.16
-
2.57
0.03
17
29.31
2e-05
0.13
-
1.24
0.02
18
28.12
2e-05
0.14
-
1.33
0.02
19
48.97
2e-05
0.15
0.004
0.34
0.02
20
49.09
2e-05
0.13
-
0.53
0.02
21
30.26
4e-05
0.11
-
2.12
0.06
22
17.2
3e-05
0.12
-
2.28
0.04
23
21.43
3e-05
0.11
0.005
1.92
0.05
24
45.69
4e-05
0.11
0.006
1.51
0.05
25
26.35
2e-05
0.11
-
2.62
0.03
26
25.15
4e-05
0.1
0.006
2.9
0.06
27
42.88
2e-05
0.1
-
1.74
0.03
28
19.14
4e-05
0.09
-
1.12
0.06
29
20.35
3e-05
0.09
0.004
2.47
0.04
30
31.7
3e-05
0.09
-
1.84
0.05
31
27.67
3e-05
0.09
0.004
0.58
0.04
32
21.54
3e-05
0.08
0.004
2.36
0.05
33
32.72
4e-05
0.08
-
2.4
0.06
34
27.22
4e-05
0.07
-
1.01
0.05
35
58.51
5e-05
0.07
-
1.36
0.07
36
26.11
7e-05
0.06
0.006
0.37
0.1
37
22.93
5e-05
0.06
0.004
1.32
0.07
38
37.07
4e-05
0.07
-
1.15
0.05
39
34.95
5e-05
0.07
0.005
0.02
0.07
40
42.87
4e-05
0.07
0.004
0.12
0.05
41
36.46
9e-05
0.07
-
2.13
0.12
42
22.75
5e-05
0.06
-
0.45
0.08
43
48.96
4e-05
0.06
0.004
0.52
0.06
44
19.85
5e-05
0.06
-
0.87
0.07
45
17.16
7e-05
0.06
0.005
2.77
0.09
46
28.44
7e-05
0.05
-
1.3
0.09
47
22.14
5e-05
0.05
0.004
1.58
0.07
48
23.67
5e-05
0.05
0.003
1.03
0.06
49
16.51
5e-05
0.05
0.004
1.64
0.07
50
24.52
6e-05
0.05
0.004
0.79
0.08
51
0.32
9e-05
0.05
0.006
2.06
0.12
52
17.01
7e-05
0.05
0.005
2.77
0.1
53
1.74
0.0001
0.05
-
1.23
0.14
54
35.49
8e-05
0.04
-
1.95
0.11
55
26.19
0.00011
0.04
-
2.27
0.15
56
23.4
7e-05
0.04
-
2.85
0.1
57
38.11
8e-05
0.03
0.003
1.7
0.11
58
28.76
0.0001
0.03
-
2.37
0.14
344
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:353==
59
52.08
0.00015
0.03
-
1.06
0.21
60
24.02
7e-05
0.03
-
2.35
0.09
61
2.24
0.0002
0.03
-
0.11
0.28
62
46.14
0.00013
0.03
-
2.91
0.19
63
1.1
0.00013
0.03
-
2.21
0.18
64
45.84
0.00012
0.03
-
0.05
0.17
65
0.64
0.00017
0.03
-
1.37
0.23
66
1.62
0.0002
0.03
0.007
1.08
0.28
67
38.02
9e-05
0.03
-
1.84
0.12
68
34.14
0.0001
0.03
0.004
1.93
0.14
69
3.38
0.00012
0.03
0.004
0.72
0.17
70
31.74
0.00012
0.03
-
0.65
0.16
71
33.41
0.00011
0.03
0.004
2.76
0.16
72
44.43
0.00011
0.02
0.004
3.01
0.16
TIC 458689740
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
39.17
0.0
0.85
0.006
1.29
0.01
2
30.82
0.0
0.75
-
1.31
0.01
3
36.43
1e-05
0.44
0.008
1.24
0.02
4
42.54
1e-05
0.45
-
1.06
0.02
5
19.67
1e-05
0.4
0.006
1.44
0.01
6
20.32
1e-05
0.26
0.004
3.09
0.01
7
0.15
1e-05
0.34
0.006
2.74
0.02
8
30.8
1e-05
0.26
-
2.86
0.02
9
36.23
2e-05
0.2
0.006
1.35
0.03
10
22.44
2e-05
0.2
0.005
1.32
0.03
11
19.11
2e-05
0.19
-
1.75
0.03
12
33.16
2e-05
0.17
-
2.22
0.03
13
31.92
2e-05
0.17
0.004
0.7
0.02
14
33.37
2e-05
0.17
-
0.62
0.02
15
39.54
3e-05
0.15
0.005
0.64
0.04
16
18.61
2e-05
0.16
-
2.57
0.03
17
29.31
2e-05
0.13
-
1.24
0.02
18
28.12
2e-05
0.14
-
1.33
0.02
19
48.97
2e-05
0.15
0.004
0.34
0.02
20
49.09
2e-05
0.13
-
0.53
0.02
21
30.26
4e-05
0.11
-
2.12
0.06
22
17.2
3e-05
0.12
-
2.28
0.04
23
21.43
3e-05
0.11
0.005
1.92
0.05
24
45.69
4e-05
0.11
0.006
1.51
0.05
25
26.35
2e-05
0.11
-
2.62
0.03
26
25.15
4e-05
0.1
0.006
2.9
0.06
27
42.88
2e-05
0.1
-
1.74
0.03
28
19.14
4e-05
0.09
-
1.12
0.06
29
20.35
3e-05
0.09
0.004
2.47
0.04
30
31.7
3e-05
0.09
-
1.84
0.05
31
27.67
3e-05
0.09
0.004
0.58
0.04
32
21.54
3e-05
0.08
0.004
2.36
0.05
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
345
==PAGE:354==
33
32.72
4e-05
0.08
-
2.4
0.06
34
27.22
4e-05
0.07
-
1.01
0.05
35
58.51
5e-05
0.07
-
1.36
0.07
36
26.11
7e-05
0.06
0.006
0.37
0.1
37
22.93
5e-05
0.06
0.004
1.32
0.07
38
37.07
4e-05
0.07
-
1.15
0.05
39
34.95
5e-05
0.07
0.005
0.02
0.07
40
42.87
4e-05
0.07
0.004
0.12
0.05
41
36.46
9e-05
0.07
-
2.13
0.12
42
22.75
5e-05
0.06
-
0.45
0.08
43
48.96
4e-05
0.06
0.004
0.52
0.06
44
19.85
5e-05
0.06
-
0.87
0.07
45
17.16
7e-05
0.06
0.005
2.77
0.09
46
28.44
7e-05
0.05
-
1.3
0.09
47
22.14
5e-05
0.05
0.004
1.58
0.07
48
23.67
5e-05
0.05
0.003
1.03
0.06
49
16.51
5e-05
0.05
0.004
1.64
0.07
50
24.52
6e-05
0.05
0.004
0.79
0.08
51
0.32
9e-05
0.05
0.006
2.06
0.12
52
17.01
7e-05
0.05
0.005
2.77
0.1
53
1.74
0.0001
0.05
-
1.23
0.14
54
35.49
8e-05
0.04
-
1.95
0.11
55
26.19
0.00011
0.04
-
2.27
0.15
56
23.4
7e-05
0.04
-
2.85
0.1
57
38.11
8e-05
0.03
0.003
1.7
0.11
58
28.76
0.0001
0.03
-
2.37
0.14
59
52.08
0.00015
0.03
-
1.06
0.21
60
24.02
7e-05
0.03
-
2.35
0.09
61
2.24
0.0002
0.03
-
0.11
0.28
62
46.14
0.00013
0.03
-
2.91
0.19
63
1.1
0.00013
0.03
-
2.21
0.18
64
45.84
0.00012
0.03
-
0.05
0.17
65
0.64
0.00017
0.03
-
1.37
0.23
66
1.62
0.0002
0.03
0.007
1.08
0.28
67
38.02
9e-05
0.03
-
1.84
0.12
68
34.14
0.0001
0.03
0.004
1.93
0.14
69
3.38
0.00012
0.03
0.004
0.72
0.17
70
31.74
0.00012
0.03
-
0.65
0.16
71
33.41
0.00011
0.03
0.004
2.76
0.16
72
44.43
0.00011
0.02
0.004
3.01
0.16
TIC 462549849
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.64
0.0
1.83
-
1.08
0.0
2
19.11
1e-05
1.42
-
2.52
0.01
3
18.97
1e-05
1.09
-
1.29
0.01
4
18.86
2e-05
0.86
0.009
1.51
0.01
5
18.39
1e-05
0.77
-
1.67
0.01
6
20.0
2e-05
0.55
-
0.92
0.01
346
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:355==
7
18.57
3e-05
0.42
0.008
1.54
0.02
8
20.15
3e-05
0.4
0.007
1.32
0.02
9
19.84
3e-05
0.31
0.006
0.48
0.02
10
19.47
3e-05
0.26
0.006
1.22
0.02
11
19.3
5e-05
0.18
0.007
2.4
0.04
12
20.29
5e-05
0.16
-
1.26
0.04
13
19.69
8e-05
0.13
-
1.25
0.05
14
19.32
0.0001
0.1
0.007
1.12
0.07
15
20.44
7e-05
0.09
-
1.85
0.05
TIC 462549849
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.64
0.0
1.83
-
1.08
0.0
2
19.11
1e-05
1.42
-
2.52
0.01
3
18.97
1e-05
1.09
-
1.29
0.01
4
18.86
2e-05
0.86
0.009
1.51
0.01
5
18.39
1e-05
0.77
-
1.67
0.01
6
20.0
2e-05
0.55
-
0.92
0.01
7
18.57
3e-05
0.42
0.008
1.54
0.02
8
20.15
3e-05
0.4
0.007
1.32
0.02
9
19.84
3e-05
0.31
0.006
0.48
0.02
10
19.47
3e-05
0.26
0.006
1.22
0.02
11
19.3
5e-05
0.18
0.007
2.4
0.04
12
20.29
5e-05
0.16
-
1.26
0.04
13
19.69
8e-05
0.13
-
1.25
0.05
14
19.32
0.0001
0.1
0.007
1.12
0.07
15
20.44
7e-05
0.09
-
1.85
0.05
TIC 462636723
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.15
0.00013
0.47
0.005
0.19
0.01
2
1.23
0.00023
0.26
0.005
2.27
0.02
3
1.04
0.00026
0.23
-
2.81
0.02
4
1.27
0.00026
0.23
0.006
1.01
0.02
5
9.89
0.00022
0.23
0.005
1.9
0.02
6
9.75
0.00028
0.18
0.005
2.69
0.03
7
7.16
0.0007
0.08
-
1.7
0.06
8
0.92
0.00063
0.09
-
2.17
0.06
9
0.51
0.00073
0.08
0.005
2.67
0.07
10
7.28
0.00064
0.09
-
0.43
0.06
11
0.29
0.00074
0.08
-
1.82
0.07
12
0.32
0.0009
0.06
-
3.08
0.08
13
7.35
0.00089
0.06
-
3.09
0.08
14
7.18
0.00089
0.06
0.005
1.56
0.08
15
0.57
0.001
0.06
0.005
2.21
0.09
16
1.66
0.00104
0.06
-
0.49
0.1
17
1.51
0.00106
0.06
-
1.15
0.1
18
1.8
0.00124
0.05
0.006
2.53
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
347
==PAGE:356==
19
1.86
0.00127
0.05
-
1.13
0.12
20
4.94
0.00132
0.05
0.006
0.29
0.12
21
7.79
0.00117
0.05
-
2.06
0.11
22
7.63
0.00111
0.05
-
2.52
0.1
23
10.07
0.00106
0.05
-
2.6
0.1
24
6.46
0.00139
0.04
0.005
1.02
0.13
25
6.53
0.00143
0.04
-
2.42
0.13
26
8.86
0.00141
0.04
0.005
0.02
0.13
27
10.03
0.00135
0.04
-
2.27
0.13
28
0.12
0.00181
0.03
-
1.42
0.17
29
3.79
0.00216
0.03
0.006
0.44
0.2
30
8.0
0.00179
0.03
0.005
1.55
0.17
31
6.97
0.00177
0.03
0.005
1.17
0.16
32
9.44
0.00185
0.03
-
2.08
0.17
33
2.36
0.00233
0.03
-
2.87
0.22
34
3.31
0.00238
0.03
-
2.96
0.22
35
6.02
0.00198
0.03
-
1.23
0.18
36
0.21
0.00215
0.03
-
2.08
0.2
37
8.44
0.00231
0.02
-
2.26
0.21
38
0.87
0.00184
0.03
-
0.39
0.17
39
2.18
0.00222
0.03
0.006
0.51
0.21
40
2.76
0.00254
0.02
0.006
1.17
0.24
41
10.69
0.00221
0.02
0.004
1.11
0.2
42
6.16
0.00237
0.02
0.005
2.4
0.22
43
4.38
0.00271
0.02
0.006
1.04
0.25
44
0.43
0.00246
0.02
-
1.74
0.23
45
6.62
0.00242
0.02
-
0.03
0.22
46
5.77
0.00238
0.02
0.005
2.57
0.22
47
6.43
0.00248
0.02
-
2.42
0.23
48
5.41
0.00293
0.02
-
2.71
0.27
49
3.44
0.00324
0.02
-
2.69
0.3
50
5.54
0.00295
0.02
0.005
1.81
0.27
TIC 462636723
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.15
0.00013
0.47
0.005
0.19
0.01
2
1.23
0.00023
0.26
0.005
2.27
0.02
3
1.04
0.00026
0.23
-
2.81
0.02
4
1.27
0.00026
0.23
0.006
1.01
0.02
5
9.89
0.00022
0.23
0.005
1.9
0.02
6
9.75
0.00028
0.18
0.005
2.69
0.03
7
7.16
0.0007
0.08
-
1.7
0.06
8
0.92
0.00063
0.09
-
2.17
0.06
9
0.51
0.00073
0.08
0.005
2.67
0.07
10
7.28
0.00064
0.09
-
0.43
0.06
11
0.29
0.00074
0.08
-
1.82
0.07
12
0.32
0.0009
0.06
-
3.08
0.08
13
7.35
0.00089
0.06
-
3.09
0.08
14
7.18
0.00089
0.06
0.005
1.56
0.08
348
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:357==
15
0.57
0.001
0.06
0.005
2.21
0.09
16
1.66
0.00104
0.06
-
0.49
0.1
17
1.51
0.00106
0.06
-
1.15
0.1
18
1.8
0.00124
0.05
0.006
2.53
0.12
19
1.86
0.00127
0.05
-
1.13
0.12
20
4.94
0.00132
0.05
0.006
0.29
0.12
21
7.79
0.00117
0.05
-
2.06
0.11
22
7.63
0.00111
0.05
-
2.52
0.1
23
10.07
0.00106
0.05
-
2.6
0.1
24
6.46
0.00139
0.04
0.005
1.02
0.13
25
6.53
0.00143
0.04
-
2.42
0.13
26
8.86
0.00141
0.04
0.005
0.02
0.13
27
10.03
0.00135
0.04
-
2.27
0.13
28
0.12
0.00181
0.03
-
1.42
0.17
29
3.79
0.00216
0.03
0.006
0.44
0.2
30
8.0
0.00179
0.03
0.005
1.55
0.17
31
6.97
0.00177
0.03
0.005
1.17
0.16
32
9.44
0.00185
0.03
-
2.08
0.17
33
2.36
0.00233
0.03
-
2.87
0.22
34
3.31
0.00238
0.03
-
2.96
0.22
35
6.02
0.00198
0.03
-
1.23
0.18
36
0.21
0.00215
0.03
-
2.08
0.2
37
8.44
0.00231
0.02
-
2.26
0.21
38
0.87
0.00184
0.03
-
0.39
0.17
39
2.18
0.00222
0.03
0.006
0.51
0.21
40
2.76
0.00254
0.02
0.006
1.17
0.24
41
10.69
0.00221
0.02
0.004
1.11
0.2
42
6.16
0.00237
0.02
0.005
2.4
0.22
43
4.38
0.00271
0.02
0.006
1.04
0.25
44
0.43
0.00246
0.02
-
1.74
0.23
45
6.62
0.00242
0.02
-
0.03
0.22
46
5.77
0.00238
0.02
0.005
2.57
0.22
47
6.43
0.00248
0.02
-
2.42
0.23
48
5.41
0.00293
0.02
-
2.71
0.27
49
3.44
0.00324
0.02
-
2.69
0.3
50
5.54
0.00295
0.02
0.005
1.81
0.27
TIC 465600476
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
21.18
0.0002
1.34
-
2.97
0.01
2
22.42
0.00038
0.68
0.012
1.4
0.02
3
18.53
0.00044
0.66
0.013
2.23
0.02
4
12.82
0.0004
0.6
0.011
1.44
0.02
5
24.61
0.00048
0.54
0.012
0.8
0.02
6
16.06
0.0005
0.51
-
0.82
0.02
7
22.19
0.00052
0.5
0.012
1.19
0.02
8
27.13
0.00054
0.47
-
1.06
0.02
9
19.77
0.00062
0.46
0.013
2.27
0.03
10
13.14
0.00059
0.4
0.011
2.93
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
349
==PAGE:358==
11
15.28
0.00068
0.37
-
0.63
0.03
12
14.95
0.00057
0.44
-
2.14
0.03
13
14.31
0.00064
0.38
-
1.03
0.03
14
24.84
0.00083
0.31
0.012
1.82
0.04
15
24.5
0.00081
0.32
0.012
2.68
0.04
16
22.82
0.00082
0.32
0.012
1.59
0.04
17
21.73
0.00085
0.31
0.012
2.25
0.04
18
16.64
0.00099
0.28
-
2.85
0.04
19
13.69
0.00079
0.31
0.011
1.54
0.04
20
12.14
0.00089
0.27
0.011
1.95
0.04
21
19.26
0.0011
0.26
0.013
0.13
0.05
22
11.95
0.00088
0.28
0.011
2.85
0.04
23
27.56
0.00108
0.24
-
1.37
0.05
24
0.87
0.00119
0.28
0.015
2.99
0.05
25
1.58
0.0014
0.25
0.016
1.16
0.06
26
16.3
0.00124
0.22
-
0.17
0.06
27
29.56
0.00127
0.22
0.013
3.06
0.06
28
16.85
0.00141
0.2
0.013
0.48
0.06
29
25.25
0.00126
0.21
-
3.08
0.06
30
13.31
0.00111
0.21
-
2.04
0.05
31
23.89
0.00125
0.21
0.012
2.68
0.06
32
2.53
0.00179
0.18
-
2.11
0.08
33
27.65
0.00155
0.16
0.012
1.36
0.07
34
20.48
0.00152
0.18
-
2.7
0.07
35
20.1
0.00173
0.16
-
1.67
0.08
36
23.62
0.00183
0.14
0.012
2.07
0.08
37
11.75
0.00147
0.16
0.011
2.65
0.07
38
18.16
0.0021
0.14
-
0.07
0.1
39
25.08
0.00177
0.14
-
2.48
0.08
40
3.57
0.0026
0.12
0.015
1.16
0.12
41
33.71
0.00207
0.12
-
0.54
0.09
42
23.47
0.00219
0.12
-
0.31
0.1
43
28.29
0.00228
0.11
-
1.23
0.1
44
13.77
0.00231
0.11
0.011
0.65
0.11
45
17.25
0.00307
0.09
-
2.25
0.14
46
9.26
0.00243
0.09
-
0.81
0.11
47
2.11
0.00317
0.11
0.015
2.81
0.14
48
28.7
0.00284
0.1
0.012
1.28
0.13
49
1.47
0.00426
0.08
-
2.15
0.19
50
15.59
0.00285
0.09
-
2.4
0.13
51
1.87
0.00334
0.1
0.015
1.62
0.15
52
30.23
0.00326
0.08
0.012
2.03
0.15
53
26.5
0.00269
0.09
-
1.3
0.12
54
29.9
0.00327
0.08
0.012
3.08
0.15
55
3.21
0.00412
0.08
-
1.83
0.19
56
1.17
0.00483
0.07
0.016
1.25
0.22
57
18.7
0.00385
0.08
-
2.12
0.18
58
22.69
0.00336
0.08
0.012
0.77
0.15
59
8.74
0.00331
0.07
0.011
1.18
0.15
60
31.72
0.0034
0.08
0.012
1.86
0.15
350
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:359==
61
10.5
0.00351
0.07
-
0.42
0.16
TIC 465600476
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
21.18
0.0002
1.34
-
2.97
0.01
2
22.42
0.00038
0.68
0.012
1.4
0.02
3
18.53
0.00044
0.66
0.013
2.23
0.02
4
12.82
0.0004
0.6
0.011
1.44
0.02
5
24.61
0.00048
0.54
0.012
0.8
0.02
6
16.06
0.0005
0.51
-
0.82
0.02
7
22.19
0.00052
0.5
0.012
1.19
0.02
8
27.13
0.00054
0.47
-
1.06
0.02
9
19.77
0.00062
0.46
0.013
2.27
0.03
10
13.14
0.00059
0.4
0.011
2.93
0.03
11
15.28
0.00068
0.37
-
0.63
0.03
12
14.95
0.00057
0.44
-
2.14
0.03
13
14.31
0.00064
0.38
-
1.03
0.03
14
24.84
0.00083
0.31
0.012
1.82
0.04
15
24.5
0.00081
0.32
0.012
2.68
0.04
16
22.82
0.00082
0.32
0.012
1.59
0.04
17
21.73
0.00085
0.31
0.012
2.25
0.04
18
16.64
0.00099
0.28
-
2.85
0.04
19
13.69
0.00079
0.31
0.011
1.54
0.04
20
12.14
0.00089
0.27
0.011
1.95
0.04
21
19.26
0.0011
0.26
0.013
0.13
0.05
22
11.95
0.00088
0.28
0.011
2.85
0.04
23
27.56
0.00108
0.24
-
1.37
0.05
24
0.87
0.00119
0.28
0.015
2.99
0.05
25
1.58
0.0014
0.25
0.016
1.16
0.06
26
16.3
0.00124
0.22
-
0.17
0.06
27
29.56
0.00127
0.22
0.013
3.06
0.06
28
16.85
0.00141
0.2
0.013
0.48
0.06
29
25.25
0.00126
0.21
-
3.08
0.06
30
13.31
0.00111
0.21
-
2.04
0.05
31
23.89
0.00125
0.21
0.012
2.68
0.06
32
2.53
0.00179
0.18
-
2.11
0.08
33
27.65
0.00155
0.16
0.012
1.36
0.07
34
20.48
0.00152
0.18
-
2.7
0.07
35
20.1
0.00173
0.16
-
1.67
0.08
36
23.62
0.00183
0.14
0.012
2.07
0.08
37
11.75
0.00147
0.16
0.011
2.65
0.07
38
18.16
0.0021
0.14
-
0.07
0.1
39
25.08
0.00177
0.14
-
2.48
0.08
40
3.57
0.0026
0.12
0.015
1.16
0.12
41
33.71
0.00207
0.12
-
0.54
0.09
42
23.47
0.00219
0.12
-
0.31
0.1
43
28.29
0.00228
0.11
-
1.23
0.1
44
13.77
0.00231
0.11
0.011
0.65
0.11
45
17.25
0.00307
0.09
-
2.25
0.14
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
351
==PAGE:360==
46
9.26
0.00243
0.09
-
0.81
0.11
47
2.11
0.00317
0.11
0.015
2.81
0.14
48
28.7
0.00284
0.1
0.012
1.28
0.13
49
1.47
0.00426
0.08
-
2.15
0.19
50
15.59
0.00285
0.09
-
2.4
0.13
51
1.87
0.00334
0.1
0.015
1.62
0.15
52
30.23
0.00326
0.08
0.012
2.03
0.15
53
26.5
0.00269
0.09
-
1.3
0.12
54
29.9
0.00327
0.08
0.012
3.08
0.15
55
3.21
0.00412
0.08
-
1.83
0.19
56
1.17
0.00483
0.07
0.016
1.25
0.22
57
18.7
0.00385
0.08
-
2.12
0.18
58
22.69
0.00336
0.08
0.012
0.77
0.15
59
8.74
0.00331
0.07
0.011
1.18
0.15
60
31.72
0.0034
0.08
0.012
1.86
0.15
61
10.5
0.00351
0.07
-
0.42
0.16
TIC 466443867
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.76
0.00011
4.43
-
1.37
0.01
2
5.3
0.00034
1.4
-
1.72
0.03
3
3.05
0.00044
1.07
0.043
0.52
0.04
4
18.76
0.00011
0.92
0.009
1.65
0.01
5
1.04
0.00053
0.89
0.043
0.79
0.05
6
1.29
0.00064
0.73
0.043
2.96
0.06
7
17.87
0.00017
0.65
0.01
0.9
0.02
8
16.47
0.0002
0.58
0.011
2.36
0.02
9
0.6
0.00089
0.55
-
2.28
0.08
10
16.89
0.00025
0.47
-
0.04
0.02
11
7.07
0.00108
0.39
-
1.74
0.1
12
6.75
0.00101
0.44
0.041
2.56
0.09
13
2.11
0.00113
0.43
-
1.65
0.1
14
18.29
0.00026
0.4
0.01
2.38
0.02
15
0.26
0.00143
0.35
-
1.98
0.13
16
2.68
0.00177
0.26
0.043
2.55
0.16
17
6.39
0.00153
0.3
0.042
0.12
0.14
18
8.35
0.00131
0.26
-
1.91
0.12
19
7.66
0.00182
0.22
0.036
0.14
0.17
20
17.37
0.00055
0.21
-
0.51
0.05
21
0.69
0.00217
0.22
-
0.05
0.2
22
7.42
0.00222
0.19
0.039
1.23
0.2
23
7.33
0.00255
0.17
0.039
1.77
0.23
24
6.57
0.00238
0.19
-
2.57
0.22
TIC 466443867
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.76
0.00011
4.43
-
1.37
0.01
2
5.3
0.00034
1.4
-
1.72
0.03
352
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:361==
3
3.05
0.00044
1.07
0.043
0.52
0.04
4
18.76
0.00011
0.92
0.009
1.65
0.01
5
1.04
0.00053
0.89
0.043
0.79
0.05
6
1.29
0.00064
0.73
0.043
2.96
0.06
7
17.87
0.00017
0.65
0.01
0.9
0.02
8
16.47
0.0002
0.58
0.011
2.36
0.02
9
0.6
0.00089
0.55
-
2.28
0.08
10
16.89
0.00025
0.47
-
0.04
0.02
11
7.07
0.00108
0.39
-
1.74
0.1
12
6.75
0.00101
0.44
0.041
2.56
0.09
13
2.11
0.00113
0.43
-
1.65
0.1
14
18.29
0.00026
0.4
0.01
2.38
0.02
15
0.26
0.00143
0.35
-
1.98
0.13
16
2.68
0.00177
0.26
0.043
2.55
0.16
17
6.39
0.00153
0.3
0.042
0.12
0.14
18
8.35
0.00131
0.26
-
1.91
0.12
19
7.66
0.00182
0.22
0.036
0.14
0.17
20
17.37
0.00055
0.21
-
0.51
0.05
21
0.69
0.00217
0.22
-
0.05
0.2
22
7.42
0.00222
0.19
0.039
1.23
0.2
23
7.33
0.00255
0.17
0.039
1.77
0.23
24
6.57
0.00238
0.19
-
2.57
0.22
TIC 467125097
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.9
0.00028
0.51
0.006
1.44
0.01
2
2.02
0.00037
0.39
-
2.56
0.02
3
2.44
0.00077
0.18
0.006
2.31
0.04
4
6.01
0.00093
0.16
0.007
1.0
0.04
5
7.54
0.00088
0.17
-
2.68
0.04
6
1.21
0.0009
0.16
-
1.48
0.04
7
6.3
0.00109
0.14
-
0.78
0.05
8
17.34
0.00087
0.13
0.005
0.18
0.04
9
3.34
0.00107
0.13
0.006
1.9
0.05
10
18.55
0.00103
0.1
0.005
0.41
0.05
11
7.79
0.00153
0.09
0.006
0.56
0.07
12
7.31
0.0015
0.1
0.007
1.99
0.07
13
5.34
0.00151
0.1
-
3.08
0.07
14
16.2
0.00128
0.09
0.005
1.6
0.06
15
0.47
0.00155
0.09
0.006
2.5
0.07
16
5.51
0.00197
0.07
-
1.29
0.09
17
2.71
0.00173
0.08
-
2.87
0.08
18
5.77
0.00188
0.08
-
1.29
0.09
19
3.59
0.00182
0.07
0.006
1.82
0.08
20
4.2
0.00208
0.07
-
1.81
0.09
21
5.01
0.00239
0.06
0.007
0.85
0.11
22
5.13
0.00253
0.06
-
2.7
0.11
23
7.46
0.0028
0.05
0.007
1.34
0.13
24
4.65
0.00288
0.05
-
1.3
0.13
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
353
==PAGE:362==
25
4.01
0.00327
0.04
-
0.62
0.15
26
11.72
0.00323
0.04
0.007
0.11
0.15
27
3.24
0.00305
0.05
-
2.01
0.14
28
17.67
0.00321
0.03
-
1.51
0.15
29
3.2
0.00364
0.04
0.006
2.21
0.17
30
4.54
0.00339
0.04
-
2.45
0.15
31
9.19
0.00433
0.03
-
0.04
0.2
32
3.83
0.00398
0.03
0.006
3.11
0.18
33
8.49
0.0055
0.03
-
0.21
0.25
TIC 467125097
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.9
0.00028
0.51
0.006
1.44
0.01
2
2.02
0.00037
0.39
-
2.56
0.02
3
2.44
0.00077
0.18
0.006
2.31
0.04
4
6.01
0.00093
0.16
0.007
1.0
0.04
5
7.54
0.00088
0.17
-
2.68
0.04
6
1.21
0.0009
0.16
-
1.48
0.04
7
6.3
0.00109
0.14
-
0.78
0.05
8
17.34
0.00087
0.13
0.005
0.18
0.04
9
3.34
0.00107
0.13
0.006
1.9
0.05
10
18.55
0.00103
0.1
0.005
0.41
0.05
11
7.79
0.00153
0.09
0.006
0.56
0.07
12
7.31
0.0015
0.1
0.007
1.99
0.07
13
5.34
0.00151
0.1
-
3.08
0.07
14
16.2
0.00128
0.09
0.005
1.6
0.06
15
0.47
0.00155
0.09
0.006
2.5
0.07
16
5.51
0.00197
0.07
-
1.29
0.09
17
2.71
0.00173
0.08
-
2.87
0.08
18
5.77
0.00188
0.08
-
1.29
0.09
19
3.59
0.00182
0.07
0.006
1.82
0.08
20
4.2
0.00208
0.07
-
1.81
0.09
21
5.01
0.00239
0.06
0.007
0.85
0.11
22
5.13
0.00253
0.06
-
2.7
0.11
23
7.46
0.0028
0.05
0.007
1.34
0.13
24
4.65
0.00288
0.05
-
1.3
0.13
25
4.01
0.00327
0.04
-
0.62
0.15
26
11.72
0.00323
0.04
0.007
0.11
0.15
27
3.24
0.00305
0.05
-
2.01
0.14
28
17.67
0.00321
0.03
-
1.51
0.15
29
3.2
0.00364
0.04
0.006
2.21
0.17
30
4.54
0.00339
0.04
-
2.45
0.15
31
9.19
0.00433
0.03
-
0.04
0.2
32
3.83
0.00398
0.03
0.006
3.11
0.18
33
8.49
0.0055
0.03
-
0.21
0.25
TIC 46882571
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
354
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:363==
1
9.36
1e-05
17.43
-
0.11
0.01
2
9.6
1e-05
5.52
-
1.78
0.02
3
10.02
2e-05
2.82
0.077
1.38
0.03
4
18.0
2e-05
2.17
0.07
1.77
0.03
5
0.07
6e-05
1.19
0.097
2.98
0.08
6
18.25
2e-05
1.34
-
1.89
0.03
7
15.31
6e-05
1.09
0.087
3.0
0.08
8
14.97
4e-05
0.86
0.05
0.65
0.06
9
18.39
3e-05
0.86
-
1.94
0.05
10
13.79
2e-05
0.78
-
2.33
0.03
11
18.97
7e-05
0.69
-
0.89
0.1
12
20.93
3e-05
0.7
0.025
2.82
0.04
13
15.45
6e-05
0.71
-
2.5
0.09
14
16.51
4e-05
0.65
0.033
0.0
0.05
15
18.72
0.00011
0.62
0.09
2.57
0.15
16
10.72
4e-05
0.68
0.037
0.16
0.05
17
12.36
4e-05
0.57
-
0.46
0.05
18
23.17
4e-05
0.56
-
2.95
0.05
19
16.37
4e-05
0.54
-
0.95
0.06
20
14.84
6e-05
0.52
0.044
1.02
0.08
21
0.22
0.00013
0.57
-
1.13
0.18
22
12.49
5e-05
0.45
-
1.09
0.07
23
10.11
0.00012
0.37
-
2.86
0.16
TIC 46882571
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
9.36
1e-05
17.43
-
0.11
0.01
2
9.6
1e-05
5.52
-
1.78
0.02
3
10.02
2e-05
2.82
0.077
1.38
0.03
4
18.0
2e-05
2.17
0.07
1.77
0.03
5
0.07
6e-05
1.19
0.097
2.98
0.08
6
18.25
2e-05
1.34
-
1.89
0.03
7
15.31
6e-05
1.09
0.087
3.0
0.08
8
14.97
4e-05
0.86
0.05
0.65
0.06
9
18.39
3e-05
0.86
-
1.94
0.05
10
13.79
2e-05
0.78
-
2.33
0.03
11
18.97
7e-05
0.69
-
0.89
0.1
12
20.93
3e-05
0.7
0.025
2.82
0.04
13
15.45
6e-05
0.71
-
2.5
0.09
14
16.51
4e-05
0.65
0.033
0.0
0.05
15
18.72
0.00011
0.62
0.09
2.57
0.15
16
10.72
4e-05
0.68
0.037
0.16
0.05
17
12.36
4e-05
0.57
-
0.46
0.05
18
23.17
4e-05
0.56
-
2.95
0.05
19
16.37
4e-05
0.54
-
0.95
0.06
20
14.84
6e-05
0.52
0.044
1.02
0.08
21
0.22
0.00013
0.57
-
1.13
0.18
22
12.49
5e-05
0.45
-
1.09
0.07
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
355
==PAGE:364==
23
10.11
0.00012
0.37
-
2.86
0.16
TIC 48084398
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.47
0.0
17.85
-
0.54
0.0
2
0.94
0.0
9.79
0.006
2.05
0.0
3
1.41
0.0
8.84
-
1.63
0.0
4
1.89
0.0
7.52
0.005
0.95
0.0
5
2.36
0.0
6.04
-
2.75
0.0
6
2.83
0.0
4.54
-
0.15
0.0
7
3.3
0.0
3.11
0.003
2.45
0.0
8
3.77
0.0
1.88
-
1.26
0.0
9
11.89
1e-05
0.95
-
0.62
0.01
10
9.5
1e-05
0.88
-
2.26
0.01
11
4.24
0.0
0.9
0.003
1.33
0.0
12
12.64
1e-05
0.71
-
2.07
0.01
13
11.42
1e-05
0.71
-
3.03
0.02
14
9.02
1e-05
0.69
0.013
1.3
0.02
15
13.2
1e-05
0.61
-
2.0
0.02
16
11.03
1e-05
0.56
0.011
1.16
0.02
17
13.04
1e-05
0.51
-
1.81
0.02
18
6.13
0.0
0.46
0.003
2.32
0.01
19
13.17
2e-05
0.45
0.015
1.9
0.03
20
5.66
0.0
0.44
-
0.3
0.01
21
8.98
1e-05
0.37
-
1.58
0.03
22
6.6
0.0
0.37
-
1.37
0.01
23
11.51
1e-05
0.35
-
2.68
0.03
24
13.11
2e-05
0.34
-
2.59
0.04
25
11.98
2e-05
0.28
0.009
2.49
0.03
26
5.18
0.0
0.25
-
2.86
0.01
27
11.32
3e-05
0.25
0.014
1.18
0.06
28
10.85
2e-05
0.22
0.01
0.28
0.04
29
12.73
3e-05
0.21
0.014
0.41
0.06
30
9.06
3e-05
0.22
-
1.45
0.07
31
7.07
1e-05
0.2
0.004
1.24
0.02
32
12.27
2e-05
0.2
-
1.14
0.05
33
4.71
1e-05
0.19
-
2.28
0.01
34
12.4
3e-05
0.17
-
0.56
0.07
35
8.48
2e-05
0.15
-
0.24
0.04
36
8.95
3e-05
0.15
0.009
2.3
0.06
37
10.77
4e-05
0.15
-
0.49
0.09
38
11.8
6e-05
0.14
-
2.57
0.12
39
9.94
2e-05
0.14
0.007
1.05
0.05
40
9.6
5e-05
0.12
0.012
0.17
0.1
41
12.88
4e-05
0.13
-
3.12
0.08
42
0.0
5e-05
0.19
0.02
2.38
0.11
43
9.9
4e-05
0.1
0.007
0.86
0.07
44
12.25
5e-05
0.09
-
1.57
0.11
45
10.64
6e-05
0.09
0.011
0.64
0.13
356
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:365==
TIC 48084398
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.47
0.0
17.85
-
0.54
0.0
2
0.94
0.0
9.79
0.006
2.05
0.0
3
1.41
0.0
8.84
-
1.63
0.0
4
1.89
0.0
7.52
0.005
0.95
0.0
5
2.36
0.0
6.04
-
2.75
0.0
6
2.83
0.0
4.54
-
0.15
0.0
7
3.3
0.0
3.11
0.003
2.45
0.0
8
3.77
0.0
1.88
-
1.26
0.0
9
11.89
1e-05
0.95
-
0.62
0.01
10
9.5
1e-05
0.88
-
2.26
0.01
11
4.24
0.0
0.9
0.003
1.33
0.0
12
12.64
1e-05
0.71
-
2.07
0.01
13
11.42
1e-05
0.71
-
3.03
0.02
14
9.02
1e-05
0.69
0.013
1.3
0.02
15
13.2
1e-05
0.61
-
2.0
0.02
16
11.03
1e-05
0.56
0.011
1.16
0.02
17
13.04
1e-05
0.51
-
1.81
0.02
18
6.13
0.0
0.46
0.003
2.32
0.01
19
13.17
2e-05
0.45
0.015
1.9
0.03
20
5.66
0.0
0.44
-
0.3
0.01
21
8.98
1e-05
0.37
-
1.58
0.03
22
6.6
0.0
0.37
-
1.37
0.01
23
11.51
1e-05
0.35
-
2.68
0.03
24
13.11
2e-05
0.34
-
2.59
0.04
25
11.98
2e-05
0.28
0.009
2.49
0.03
26
5.18
0.0
0.25
-
2.86
0.01
27
11.32
3e-05
0.25
0.014
1.18
0.06
28
10.85
2e-05
0.22
0.01
0.28
0.04
29
12.73
3e-05
0.21
0.014
0.41
0.06
30
9.06
3e-05
0.22
-
1.45
0.07
31
7.07
1e-05
0.2
0.004
1.24
0.02
32
12.27
2e-05
0.2
-
1.14
0.05
33
4.71
1e-05
0.19
-
2.28
0.01
34
12.4
3e-05
0.17
-
0.56
0.07
35
8.48
2e-05
0.15
-
0.24
0.04
36
8.95
3e-05
0.15
0.009
2.3
0.06
37
10.77
4e-05
0.15
-
0.49
0.09
38
11.8
6e-05
0.14
-
2.57
0.12
39
9.94
2e-05
0.14
0.007
1.05
0.05
40
9.6
5e-05
0.12
0.012
0.17
0.1
41
12.88
4e-05
0.13
-
3.12
0.08
42
0.0
5e-05
0.19
0.02
2.38
0.11
43
9.9
4e-05
0.1
0.007
0.86
0.07
44
12.25
5e-05
0.09
-
1.57
0.11
45
10.64
6e-05
0.09
0.011
0.64
0.13
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
357
==PAGE:366==
TIC 50379749
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.53
0.0
2.21
-
1.11
0.0
2
17.84
0.0
1.03
0.002
1.86
0.0
3
21.75
0.0
1.03
0.002
3.07
0.0
4
23.08
0.0
0.91
0.002
2.85
0.0
5
18.15
0.0
0.67
-
2.61
0.0
6
20.72
0.0
0.37
-
1.25
0.01
7
17.47
0.0
0.36
-
1.77
0.01
8
17.44
1e-05
0.31
0.002
0.17
0.01
9
28.4
1e-05
0.28
0.002
2.35
0.01
10
18.63
1e-05
0.26
0.003
1.14
0.01
11
13.17
1e-05
0.19
0.002
1.19
0.01
12
12.11
1e-05
0.16
0.002
0.44
0.01
13
23.49
1e-05
0.16
0.002
1.69
0.01
14
15.51
1e-05
0.13
-
0.83
0.01
15
26.5
2e-05
0.1
-
0.86
0.02
16
25.47
2e-05
0.1
0.002
1.35
0.02
17
16.02
1e-05
0.1
0.002
1.06
0.02
18
28.97
2e-05
0.09
0.002
1.21
0.03
19
15.62
2e-05
0.09
0.002
1.21
0.02
20
20.92
2e-05
0.08
0.002
1.74
0.03
21
19.75
2e-05
0.08
-
0.27
0.03
22
25.85
2e-05
0.07
0.002
1.12
0.03
23
24.96
2e-05
0.06
-
1.32
0.03
24
17.18
2e-05
0.07
-
2.4
0.03
25
15.01
2e-05
0.06
0.002
2.78
0.03
26
14.8
2e-05
0.06
0.002
0.02
0.03
27
12.93
3e-05
0.06
0.002
0.43
0.04
28
22.71
3e-05
0.05
0.002
0.54
0.04
29
25.3
3e-05
0.05
0.002
0.85
0.05
30
22.15
3e-05
0.05
-
1.51
0.05
31
29.31
4e-05
0.04
0.003
1.83
0.06
32
27.14
3e-05
0.04
-
2.81
0.05
33
11.3
4e-05
0.04
-
1.32
0.06
34
26.08
3e-05
0.04
-
1.86
0.05
35
25.75
3e-05
0.04
0.002
1.39
0.04
36
22.32
5e-05
0.04
0.003
2.55
0.07
37
10.78
4e-05
0.03
-
2.85
0.06
38
6.63
5e-05
0.04
0.003
2.04
0.08
39
20.21
5e-05
0.03
0.002
2.55
0.07
40
0.75
9e-05
0.03
0.004
0.4
0.13
41
39.0
4e-05
0.03
-
2.93
0.06
42
4.61
9e-05
0.03
0.003
0.17
0.12
43
16.67
6e-05
0.03
0.002
1.12
0.08
44
19.46
5e-05
0.03
-
1.37
0.07
45
24.06
6e-05
0.03
-
1.39
0.08
46
22.77
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.18
0.08
47
39.04
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.91
0.07
358
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:367==
48
35.6
8e-05
0.02
-
2.34
0.11
49
27.74
6e-05
0.02
0.002
2.2
0.09
50
3.45
7e-05
0.02
-
0.97
0.1
51
24.62
7e-05
0.02
-
0.57
0.1
52
7.71
8e-05
0.02
-
1.78
0.12
53
0.61
0.00013
0.02
0.004
0.66
0.18
54
1.24
0.00011
0.02
0.003
1.11
0.15
55
31.93
7e-05
0.02
-
2.8
0.1
56
40.51
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.4
0.11
57
34.27
8e-05
0.02
0.002
2.85
0.11
58
0.72
0.00015
0.02
-
1.35
0.22
59
1.05
0.00014
0.02
0.004
2.06
0.2
60
4.83
0.00011
0.02
-
1.18
0.16
61
5.77
0.00011
0.02
-
2.63
0.16
62
24.76
9e-05
0.02
-
3.02
0.13
63
28.77
8e-05
0.02
0.002
2.79
0.11
64
40.92
0.00011
0.02
0.003
0.74
0.15
65
24.64
9e-05
0.02
0.002
1.58
0.13
66
0.82
0.00017
0.02
0.004
0.51
0.25
67
1.02
0.00015
0.02
-
2.23
0.22
68
1.5
0.00013
0.02
0.003
2.95
0.19
69
36.99
0.00011
0.02
0.002
1.87
0.15
70
0.39
0.00017
0.01
0.004
1.66
0.25
71
33.58
9e-05
0.02
0.002
0.92
0.13
72
1.78
0.00013
0.01
0.003
1.95
0.19
73
2.06
0.00016
0.01
-
1.27
0.23
74
19.38
9e-05
0.01
-
2.54
0.13
75
16.31
0.00011
0.01
-
2.53
0.15
76
26.8
0.00012
0.01
0.002
2.34
0.17
77
2.46
0.00016
0.01
-
2.04
0.23
78
1.22
0.00016
0.01
0.003
2.95
0.22
79
29.62
0.00011
0.01
-
0.52
0.16
80
3.33
0.00013
0.01
-
1.35
0.19
81
1.84
0.00016
0.01
0.003
2.96
0.24
82
34.18
9e-05
0.01
0.002
0.36
0.14
TIC 50379749
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.53
0.0
2.21
-
1.11
0.0
2
17.84
0.0
1.03
0.002
1.86
0.0
3
21.75
0.0
1.03
0.002
3.07
0.0
4
23.08
0.0
0.91
0.002
2.85
0.0
5
18.15
0.0
0.67
-
2.61
0.0
6
20.72
0.0
0.37
-
1.25
0.01
7
17.47
0.0
0.36
-
1.77
0.01
8
17.44
1e-05
0.31
0.002
0.17
0.01
9
28.4
1e-05
0.28
0.002
2.35
0.01
10
18.63
1e-05
0.26
0.003
1.14
0.01
11
13.17
1e-05
0.19
0.002
1.19
0.01
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
359
==PAGE:368==
12
12.11
1e-05
0.16
0.002
0.44
0.01
13
23.49
1e-05
0.16
0.002
1.69
0.01
14
15.51
1e-05
0.13
-
0.83
0.01
15
26.5
2e-05
0.1
-
0.86
0.02
16
25.47
2e-05
0.1
0.002
1.35
0.02
17
16.02
1e-05
0.1
0.002
1.06
0.02
18
28.97
2e-05
0.09
0.002
1.21
0.03
19
15.62
2e-05
0.09
0.002
1.21
0.02
20
20.92
2e-05
0.08
0.002
1.74
0.03
21
19.75
2e-05
0.08
-
0.27
0.03
22
25.85
2e-05
0.07
0.002
1.12
0.03
23
24.96
2e-05
0.06
-
1.32
0.03
24
17.18
2e-05
0.07
-
2.4
0.03
25
15.01
2e-05
0.06
0.002
2.78
0.03
26
14.8
2e-05
0.06
0.002
0.02
0.03
27
12.93
3e-05
0.06
0.002
0.43
0.04
28
22.71
3e-05
0.05
0.002
0.54
0.04
29
25.3
3e-05
0.05
0.002
0.85
0.05
30
22.15
3e-05
0.05
-
1.51
0.05
31
29.31
4e-05
0.04
0.003
1.83
0.06
32
27.14
3e-05
0.04
-
2.81
0.05
33
11.3
4e-05
0.04
-
1.32
0.06
34
26.08
3e-05
0.04
-
1.86
0.05
35
25.75
3e-05
0.04
0.002
1.39
0.04
36
22.32
5e-05
0.04
0.003
2.55
0.07
37
10.78
4e-05
0.03
-
2.85
0.06
38
6.63
5e-05
0.04
0.003
2.04
0.08
39
20.21
5e-05
0.03
0.002
2.55
0.07
40
0.75
9e-05
0.03
0.004
0.4
0.13
41
39.0
4e-05
0.03
-
2.93
0.06
42
4.61
9e-05
0.03
0.003
0.17
0.12
43
16.67
6e-05
0.03
0.002
1.12
0.08
44
19.46
5e-05
0.03
-
1.37
0.07
45
24.06
6e-05
0.03
-
1.39
0.08
46
22.77
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.18
0.08
47
39.04
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.91
0.07
48
35.6
8e-05
0.02
-
2.34
0.11
49
27.74
6e-05
0.02
0.002
2.2
0.09
50
3.45
7e-05
0.02
-
0.97
0.1
51
24.62
7e-05
0.02
-
0.57
0.1
52
7.71
8e-05
0.02
-
1.78
0.12
53
0.61
0.00013
0.02
0.004
0.66
0.18
54
1.24
0.00011
0.02
0.003
1.11
0.15
55
31.93
7e-05
0.02
-
2.8
0.1
56
40.51
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.4
0.11
57
34.27
8e-05
0.02
0.002
2.85
0.11
58
0.72
0.00015
0.02
-
1.35
0.22
59
1.05
0.00014
0.02
0.004
2.06
0.2
60
4.83
0.00011
0.02
-
1.18
0.16
61
5.77
0.00011
0.02
-
2.63
0.16
360
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:369==
62
24.76
9e-05
0.02
-
3.02
0.13
63
28.77
8e-05
0.02
0.002
2.79
0.11
64
40.92
0.00011
0.02
0.003
0.74
0.15
65
24.64
9e-05
0.02
0.002
1.58
0.13
66
0.82
0.00017
0.02
0.004
0.51
0.25
67
1.02
0.00015
0.02
-
2.23
0.22
68
1.5
0.00013
0.02
0.003
2.95
0.19
69
36.99
0.00011
0.02
0.002
1.87
0.15
70
0.39
0.00017
0.01
0.004
1.66
0.25
71
33.58
9e-05
0.02
0.002
0.92
0.13
72
1.78
0.00013
0.01
0.003
1.95
0.19
73
2.06
0.00016
0.01
-
1.27
0.23
74
19.38
9e-05
0.01
-
2.54
0.13
75
16.31
0.00011
0.01
-
2.53
0.15
76
26.8
0.00012
0.01
0.002
2.34
0.17
77
2.46
0.00016
0.01
-
2.04
0.23
78
1.22
0.00016
0.01
0.003
2.95
0.22
79
29.62
0.00011
0.01
-
0.52
0.16
80
3.33
0.00013
0.01
-
1.35
0.19
81
1.84
0.00016
0.01
0.003
2.96
0.24
82
34.18
9e-05
0.01
0.002
0.36
0.14
TIC 50620400
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.92
0.0
1.29
0.005
2.5
0.0
2
21.31
0.0
1.18
-
1.37
0.01
3
8.24
0.0
0.89
0.005
1.5
0.01
4
7.58
1e-05
0.77
0.01
3.0
0.01
5
9.14
1e-05
0.71
-
1.29
0.01
6
8.69
1e-05
0.67
-
1.71
0.01
7
11.56
1e-05
0.61
-
0.54
0.01
8
8.07
1e-05
0.49
-
1.55
0.01
9
7.39
1e-05
0.4
0.005
0.76
0.01
10
11.74
1e-05
0.44
0.005
1.58
0.01
11
8.82
1e-05
0.44
0.004
1.93
0.01
12
6.31
2e-05
0.36
0.007
3.02
0.02
13
20.02
1e-05
0.32
0.006
1.28
0.02
14
26.05
1e-05
0.36
0.006
0.27
0.02
15
20.61
2e-05
0.32
0.009
2.88
0.03
16
8.53
1e-05
0.34
-
3.02
0.01
17
10.35
1e-05
0.3
0.004
0.62
0.01
18
0.63
1e-05
0.27
0.004
2.4
0.02
19
19.98
2e-05
0.32
-
2.89
0.02
20
9.68
2e-05
0.24
-
0.26
0.03
21
11.88
1e-05
0.31
0.005
2.02
0.02
22
19.36
3e-05
0.2
0.007
2.53
0.04
23
6.16
3e-05
0.23
0.008
0.98
0.03
24
9.44
2e-05
0.24
0.005
2.86
0.02
25
10.53
2e-05
0.19
0.004
0.36
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
361
==PAGE:370==
26
8.14
2e-05
0.28
0.006
0.31
0.02
27
9.76
2e-05
0.22
0.007
2.26
0.03
28
17.83
4e-05
0.2
0.01
0.12
0.05
29
1.57
1e-05
0.23
-
0.87
0.02
30
18.4
2e-05
0.2
-
1.63
0.03
31
2.45
2e-05
0.19
-
0.15
0.03
32
6.61
3e-05
0.19
-
3.0
0.05
33
6.8
2e-05
0.21
-
1.37
0.02
34
26.55
3e-05
0.18
-
0.45
0.03
35
19.41
3e-05
0.21
-
1.11
0.03
36
9.32
2e-05
0.19
0.005
1.6
0.03
37
9.63
2e-05
0.23
0.007
2.93
0.03
38
11.04
2e-05
0.22
-
2.34
0.03
39
6.66
3e-05
0.19
-
1.57
0.04
40
7.89
2e-05
0.22
-
0.91
0.02
41
8.43
2e-05
0.19
-
0.67
0.03
42
1.31
2e-05
0.19
0.004
1.38
0.02
43
20.4
3e-05
0.18
-
2.84
0.04
44
9.0
3e-05
0.14
0.005
0.42
0.04
45
6.95
2e-05
0.14
-
3.12
0.03
46
7.74
3e-05
0.16
0.007
1.33
0.04
47
0.67
2e-05
0.19
0.004
1.72
0.02
48
10.82
2e-05
0.18
-
0.31
0.03
49
6.22
3e-05
0.18
0.008
2.43
0.04
50
9.96
2e-05
0.2
0.005
0.51
0.02
51
6.48
5e-05
0.13
0.009
0.56
0.07
52
10.14
2e-05
0.15
0.005
0.38
0.03
53
9.22
3e-05
0.16
-
2.28
0.04
54
5.99
5e-05
0.12
-
2.62
0.07
55
7.04
2e-05
0.18
0.006
2.36
0.03
56
23.11
5e-05
0.14
-
1.8
0.07
57
5.08
5e-05
0.11
0.007
2.28
0.06
58
10.66
2e-05
0.16
-
1.54
0.02
59
1.88
5e-05
0.11
0.007
1.06
0.06
60
1.16
2e-05
0.15
-
2.33
0.03
61
1.05
2e-05
0.16
0.005
0.74
0.03
62
1.38
1e-05
0.2
-
0.08
0.02
63
2.63
3e-05
0.15
0.006
1.94
0.04
64
1.78
3e-05
0.14
0.006
1.04
0.05
65
28.13
4e-05
0.12
-
2.74
0.06
66
5.71
5e-05
0.12
0.009
2.55
0.07
67
1.62
3e-05
0.11
-
2.94
0.04
68
7.69
4e-05
0.13
-
1.08
0.05
69
2.19
3e-05
0.13
-
3.1
0.03
70
11.31
3e-05
0.14
0.006
1.57
0.04
71
12.66
3e-05
0.12
-
0.3
0.04
72
12.2
3e-05
0.1
-
2.97
0.04
73
2.27
3e-05
0.1
0.004
0.67
0.04
74
6.91
2e-05
0.16
-
2.09
0.02
75
5.37
2e-05
0.13
-
1.63
0.03
362
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:371==
76
21.71
6e-05
0.11
0.008
1.1
0.07
77
9.47
3e-05
0.15
0.006
1.56
0.04
78
0.7
2e-05
0.14
-
0.38
0.02
79
18.62
6e-05
0.1
-
2.15
0.07
80
24.45
4e-05
0.11
0.006
2.82
0.06
81
6.03
7e-05
0.09
-
2.61
0.09
82
0.47
4e-05
0.12
0.007
2.8
0.06
83
11.25
3e-05
0.15
-
2.41
0.04
84
10.71
2e-05
0.13
0.004
2.19
0.03
85
6.86
2e-05
0.13
-
1.42
0.03
86
2.97
3e-05
0.13
0.004
0.54
0.03
87
0.89
3e-05
0.11
0.004
1.74
0.04
88
3.11
2e-05
0.12
0.004
0.1
0.03
89
2.72
4e-05
0.12
-
2.27
0.05
90
1.5
2e-05
0.14
-
0.13
0.02
91
0.75
2e-05
0.12
-
0.76
0.02
92
19.31
5e-05
0.11
-
1.7
0.06
93
8.88
2e-05
0.13
0.003
0.74
0.02
94
1.56
1e-05
0.18
0.003
2.24
0.02
95
6.76
4e-05
0.11
0.005
0.06
0.05
96
7.01
3e-05
0.12
0.005
0.92
0.04
97
8.0
4e-05
0.12
0.007
0.62
0.05
98
5.33
4e-05
0.09
-
2.53
0.05
99
10.24
3e-05
0.1
-
2.5
0.03
100
3.73
4e-05
0.11
0.005
1.76
0.05
101
12.8
4e-05
0.09
-
2.05
0.05
102
1.26
3e-05
0.12
-
2.38
0.04
103
6.42
6e-05
0.09
0.008
0.09
0.08
104
3.35
3e-05
0.08
0.003
1.97
0.04
105
2.39
3e-05
0.11
0.004
1.24
0.04
106
4.33
4e-05
0.08
-
0.48
0.05
107
5.43
3e-05
0.1
-
1.8
0.04
108
4.86
6e-05
0.09
0.007
0.59
0.08
109
2.1
5e-05
0.09
0.005
3.09
0.06
110
5.78
7e-05
0.09
-
0.55
0.09
111
5.61
7e-05
0.08
0.007
2.63
0.09
112
7.78
5e-05
0.08
0.005
2.85
0.07
113
0.24
2e-05
0.14
-
0.79
0.03
114
11.99
4e-05
0.09
0.004
0.19
0.05
115
2.62
4e-05
0.1
0.006
0.0
0.06
116
4.45
5e-05
0.08
-
2.56
0.06
117
16.23
5e-05
0.08
0.005
0.99
0.07
118
8.63
5e-05
0.08
-
0.64
0.06
119
12.41
7e-05
0.08
-
0.15
0.09
120
5.29
4e-05
0.09
-
2.81
0.05
121
16.11
8e-05
0.07
-
1.93
0.11
122
1.44
4e-05
0.07
-
2.16
0.05
123
9.88
7e-05
0.06
0.006
2.5
0.09
124
10.32
4e-05
0.08
0.004
0.32
0.05
125
11.16
4e-05
0.07
0.004
2.67
0.06
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
363
==PAGE:372==
126
3.79
7e-05
0.05
-
3.04
0.09
127
15.74
4e-05
0.06
0.003
0.97
0.05
128
3.44
3e-05
0.1
0.004
2.86
0.04
129
3.07
5e-05
0.06
-
1.38
0.07
130
18.9
8e-05
0.07
-
2.92
0.11
131
13.75
0.0001
0.05
0.007
2.38
0.13
132
1.92
6e-05
0.08
-
0.08
0.08
133
2.0
5e-05
0.08
-
2.83
0.07
134
4.52
6e-05
0.07
0.006
0.14
0.08
135
2.79
9e-05
0.06
0.007
1.62
0.12
136
10.09
5e-05
0.06
-
2.21
0.07
137
20.97
0.00012
0.06
-
2.86
0.16
138
2.35
4e-05
0.08
-
0.36
0.05
139
0.42
9e-05
0.05
-
2.46
0.11
140
13.28
8e-05
0.05
0.005
1.5
0.11
141
12.58
5e-05
0.07
-
2.97
0.07
142
10.69
5e-05
0.06
-
1.65
0.07
143
13.86
8e-05
0.07
0.007
1.12
0.1
144
11.21
6e-05
0.07
-
1.21
0.08
145
22.01
8e-05
0.06
0.007
2.22
0.11
146
0.37
5e-05
0.07
-
2.49
0.07
147
0.82
4e-05
0.06
0.003
1.4
0.05
148
10.43
4e-05
0.06
0.003
2.36
0.05
149
14.51
5e-05
0.07
-
3.1
0.06
150
13.02
5e-05
0.05
0.003
0.08
0.07
151
12.09
6e-05
0.06
-
0.61
0.08
152
5.53
6e-05
0.07
0.006
0.24
0.08
153
22.15
9e-05
0.06
0.007
1.17
0.12
154
25.23
0.0001
0.05
-
1.07
0.14
155
12.91
3e-05
0.06
-
3.14
0.04
156
3.23
4e-05
0.07
-
1.1
0.05
157
17.18
7e-05
0.06
0.006
2.02
0.09
158
5.03
7e-05
0.08
-
1.97
0.09
159
3.94
8e-05
0.05
-
0.12
0.1
160
16.91
6e-05
0.06
0.005
1.52
0.08
161
4.64
8e-05
0.06
-
1.0
0.11
162
5.13
9e-05
0.06
-
2.02
0.12
163
13.7
0.0001
0.06
0.008
1.89
0.14
164
20.07
6e-05
0.07
0.005
1.21
0.08
165
14.86
0.00012
0.04
-
0.28
0.15
166
14.3
0.00011
0.04
-
0.94
0.15
167
16.86
7e-05
0.06
-
1.45
0.09
168
4.28
6e-05
0.06
0.005
0.65
0.08
169
3.85
6e-05
0.06
0.005
0.23
0.09
170
15.66
7e-05
0.04
-
0.17
0.1
171
22.55
7e-05
0.05
-
2.04
0.09
172
18.47
8e-05
0.06
-
2.01
0.1
173
18.08
9e-05
0.05
-
2.97
0.12
174
0.15
6e-05
0.07
-
1.97
0.08
175
0.2
6e-05
0.06
-
1.12
0.08
364
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:373==
176
14.73
0.0001
0.05
-
2.22
0.13
177
10.62
5e-05
0.05
0.003
1.3
0.06
178
15.85
4e-05
0.07
0.004
0.98
0.05
179
15.83
4e-05
0.06
-
2.89
0.06
180
19.69
8e-05
0.05
-
2.27
0.1
181
12.97
5e-05
0.05
-
1.11
0.07
182
15.12
0.00015
0.04
0.008
1.04
0.2
183
15.51
0.00013
0.05
0.008
1.76
0.17
184
13.98
0.00014
0.04
0.007
2.7
0.18
185
14.42
0.0001
0.04
-
1.99
0.14
186
14.45
8e-05
0.05
0.005
0.69
0.11
187
14.8
0.00012
0.04
0.007
1.2
0.16
188
10.85
8e-05
0.05
0.006
0.21
0.11
189
16.31
8e-05
0.04
-
1.47
0.1
190
15.95
0.0001
0.04
-
2.72
0.13
191
17.04
0.00018
0.04
-
1.07
0.23
192
14.56
8e-05
0.04
0.005
1.46
0.11
193
12.51
0.00011
0.05
-
3.02
0.14
194
5.87
0.00015
0.04
0.008
2.95
0.19
195
20.24
0.00014
0.04
-
3.03
0.18
196
13.39
0.0001
0.04
-
0.52
0.14
197
13.45
0.00013
0.04
0.006
1.1
0.17
198
32.15
0.00011
0.03
-
1.09
0.15
199
4.68
0.00011
0.04
0.006
1.78
0.14
200
14.97
0.00019
0.04
0.009
0.96
0.25
201
15.28
0.00016
0.03
0.006
3.12
0.21
202
12.2
5e-05
0.06
-
1.27
0.06
203
12.25
0.0001
0.04
-
2.47
0.13
204
2.53
0.00013
0.03
0.006
2.51
0.17
205
18.15
0.00011
0.03
-
0.18
0.15
206
27.18
0.00015
0.03
0.006
1.89
0.2
207
4.05
0.00016
0.03
0.007
0.07
0.21
208
13.19
0.00014
0.03
-
1.99
0.19
209
29.15
0.00013
0.03
0.005
1.62
0.17
210
16.69
0.00013
0.04
0.007
3.09
0.18
211
14.18
0.00015
0.03
0.006
1.36
0.2
212
17.26
0.00014
0.03
-
1.55
0.19
213
19.09
0.00018
0.04
-
0.94
0.24
214
24.86
0.00015
0.03
0.006
1.36
0.21
215
18.05
0.00013
0.03
0.005
0.9
0.17
216
21.89
0.00022
0.03
-
2.87
0.29
217
31.96
0.00013
0.03
-
1.2
0.17
218
15.19
0.00012
0.04
-
0.83
0.16
219
15.16
0.00016
0.03
0.007
0.64
0.21
220
17.46
0.00019
0.03
-
2.3
0.25
221
28.97
0.00013
0.03
-
0.73
0.17
222
14.06
0.00019
0.03
-
0.54
0.26
223
4.97
0.00018
0.03
-
2.56
0.23
224
21.75
0.00025
0.03
-
0.48
0.34
225
16.45
0.00011
0.03
-
2.8
0.15
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
365
==PAGE:374==
226
7.1
0.00017
0.03
0.006
0.81
0.22
TIC 50620400
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.92
0.0
1.29
0.005
2.5
0.0
2
21.31
0.0
1.18
-
1.37
0.01
3
8.24
0.0
0.89
0.005
1.5
0.01
4
7.58
1e-05
0.77
0.01
3.0
0.01
5
9.14
1e-05
0.71
-
1.29
0.01
6
8.69
1e-05
0.67
-
1.71
0.01
7
11.56
1e-05
0.61
-
0.54
0.01
8
8.07
1e-05
0.49
-
1.55
0.01
9
7.39
1e-05
0.4
0.005
0.76
0.01
10
11.74
1e-05
0.44
0.005
1.58
0.01
11
8.82
1e-05
0.44
0.004
1.93
0.01
12
6.31
2e-05
0.36
0.007
3.02
0.02
13
20.02
1e-05
0.32
0.006
1.28
0.02
14
26.05
1e-05
0.36
0.006
0.27
0.02
15
20.61
2e-05
0.32
0.009
2.88
0.03
16
8.53
1e-05
0.34
-
3.02
0.01
17
10.35
1e-05
0.3
0.004
0.62
0.01
18
0.63
1e-05
0.27
0.004
2.4
0.02
19
19.98
2e-05
0.32
-
2.89
0.02
20
9.68
2e-05
0.24
-
0.26
0.03
21
11.88
1e-05
0.31
0.005
2.02
0.02
22
19.36
3e-05
0.2
0.007
2.53
0.04
23
6.16
3e-05
0.23
0.008
0.98
0.03
24
9.44
2e-05
0.24
0.005
2.86
0.02
25
10.53
2e-05
0.19
0.004
0.36
0.02
26
8.14
2e-05
0.28
0.006
0.31
0.02
27
9.76
2e-05
0.22
0.007
2.26
0.03
28
17.83
4e-05
0.2
0.01
0.12
0.05
29
1.57
1e-05
0.23
-
0.87
0.02
30
18.4
2e-05
0.2
-
1.63
0.03
31
2.45
2e-05
0.19
-
0.15
0.03
32
6.61
3e-05
0.19
-
3.0
0.05
33
6.8
2e-05
0.21
-
1.37
0.02
34
26.55
3e-05
0.18
-
0.45
0.03
35
19.41
3e-05
0.21
-
1.11
0.03
36
9.32
2e-05
0.19
0.005
1.6
0.03
37
9.63
2e-05
0.23
0.007
2.93
0.03
38
11.04
2e-05
0.22
-
2.34
0.03
39
6.66
3e-05
0.19
-
1.57
0.04
40
7.89
2e-05
0.22
-
0.91
0.02
41
8.43
2e-05
0.19
-
0.67
0.03
42
1.31
2e-05
0.19
0.004
1.38
0.02
43
20.4
3e-05
0.18
-
2.84
0.04
44
9.0
3e-05
0.14
0.005
0.42
0.04
45
6.95
2e-05
0.14
-
3.12
0.03
366
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:375==
46
7.74
3e-05
0.16
0.007
1.33
0.04
47
0.67
2e-05
0.19
0.004
1.72
0.02
48
10.82
2e-05
0.18
-
0.31
0.03
49
6.22
3e-05
0.18
0.008
2.43
0.04
50
9.96
2e-05
0.2
0.005
0.51
0.02
51
6.48
5e-05
0.13
0.009
0.56
0.07
52
10.14
2e-05
0.15
0.005
0.38
0.03
53
9.22
3e-05
0.16
-
2.28
0.04
54
5.99
5e-05
0.12
-
2.62
0.07
55
7.04
2e-05
0.18
0.006
2.36
0.03
56
23.11
5e-05
0.14
-
1.8
0.07
57
5.08
5e-05
0.11
0.007
2.28
0.06
58
10.66
2e-05
0.16
-
1.54
0.02
59
1.88
5e-05
0.11
0.007
1.06
0.06
60
1.16
2e-05
0.15
-
2.33
0.03
61
1.05
2e-05
0.16
0.005
0.74
0.03
62
1.38
1e-05
0.2
-
0.08
0.02
63
2.63
3e-05
0.15
0.006
1.94
0.04
64
1.78
3e-05
0.14
0.006
1.04
0.05
65
28.13
4e-05
0.12
-
2.74
0.06
66
5.71
5e-05
0.12
0.009
2.55
0.07
67
1.62
3e-05
0.11
-
2.94
0.04
68
7.69
4e-05
0.13
-
1.08
0.05
69
2.19
3e-05
0.13
-
3.1
0.03
70
11.31
3e-05
0.14
0.006
1.57
0.04
71
12.66
3e-05
0.12
-
0.3
0.04
72
12.2
3e-05
0.1
-
2.97
0.04
73
2.27
3e-05
0.1
0.004
0.67
0.04
74
6.91
2e-05
0.16
-
2.09
0.02
75
5.37
2e-05
0.13
-
1.63
0.03
76
21.71
6e-05
0.11
0.008
1.1
0.07
77
9.47
3e-05
0.15
0.006
1.56
0.04
78
0.7
2e-05
0.14
-
0.38
0.02
79
18.62
6e-05
0.1
-
2.15
0.07
80
24.45
4e-05
0.11
0.006
2.82
0.06
81
6.03
7e-05
0.09
-
2.61
0.09
82
0.47
4e-05
0.12
0.007
2.8
0.06
83
11.25
3e-05
0.15
-
2.41
0.04
84
10.71
2e-05
0.13
0.004
2.19
0.03
85
6.86
2e-05
0.13
-
1.42
0.03
86
2.97
3e-05
0.13
0.004
0.54
0.03
87
0.89
3e-05
0.11
0.004
1.74
0.04
88
3.11
2e-05
0.12
0.004
0.1
0.03
89
2.72
4e-05
0.12
-
2.27
0.05
90
1.5
2e-05
0.14
-
0.13
0.02
91
0.75
2e-05
0.12
-
0.76
0.02
92
19.31
5e-05
0.11
-
1.7
0.06
93
8.88
2e-05
0.13
0.003
0.74
0.02
94
1.56
1e-05
0.18
0.003
2.24
0.02
95
6.76
4e-05
0.11
0.005
0.06
0.05
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
367
==PAGE:376==
96
7.01
3e-05
0.12
0.005
0.92
0.04
97
8.0
4e-05
0.12
0.007
0.62
0.05
98
5.33
4e-05
0.09
-
2.53
0.05
99
10.24
3e-05
0.1
-
2.5
0.03
100
3.73
4e-05
0.11
0.005
1.76
0.05
101
12.8
4e-05
0.09
-
2.05
0.05
102
1.26
3e-05
0.12
-
2.38
0.04
103
6.42
6e-05
0.09
0.008
0.09
0.08
104
3.35
3e-05
0.08
0.003
1.97
0.04
105
2.39
3e-05
0.11
0.004
1.24
0.04
106
4.33
4e-05
0.08
-
0.48
0.05
107
5.43
3e-05
0.1
-
1.8
0.04
108
4.86
6e-05
0.09
0.007
0.59
0.08
109
2.1
5e-05
0.09
0.005
3.09
0.06
110
5.78
7e-05
0.09
-
0.55
0.09
111
5.61
7e-05
0.08
0.007
2.63
0.09
112
7.78
5e-05
0.08
0.005
2.85
0.07
113
0.24
2e-05
0.14
-
0.79
0.03
114
11.99
4e-05
0.09
0.004
0.19
0.05
115
2.62
4e-05
0.1
0.006
0.0
0.06
116
4.45
5e-05
0.08
-
2.56
0.06
117
16.23
5e-05
0.08
0.005
0.99
0.07
118
8.63
5e-05
0.08
-
0.64
0.06
119
12.41
7e-05
0.08
-
0.15
0.09
120
5.29
4e-05
0.09
-
2.81
0.05
121
16.11
8e-05
0.07
-
1.93
0.11
122
1.44
4e-05
0.07
-
2.16
0.05
123
9.88
7e-05
0.06
0.006
2.5
0.09
124
10.32
4e-05
0.08
0.004
0.32
0.05
125
11.16
4e-05
0.07
0.004
2.67
0.06
126
3.79
7e-05
0.05
-
3.04
0.09
127
15.74
4e-05
0.06
0.003
0.97
0.05
128
3.44
3e-05
0.1
0.004
2.86
0.04
129
3.07
5e-05
0.06
-
1.38
0.07
130
18.9
8e-05
0.07
-
2.92
0.11
131
13.75
0.0001
0.05
0.007
2.38
0.13
132
1.92
6e-05
0.08
-
0.08
0.08
133
2.0
5e-05
0.08
-
2.83
0.07
134
4.52
6e-05
0.07
0.006
0.14
0.08
135
2.79
9e-05
0.06
0.007
1.62
0.12
136
10.09
5e-05
0.06
-
2.21
0.07
137
20.97
0.00012
0.06
-
2.86
0.16
138
2.35
4e-05
0.08
-
0.36
0.05
139
0.42
9e-05
0.05
-
2.46
0.11
140
13.28
8e-05
0.05
0.005
1.5
0.11
141
12.58
5e-05
0.07
-
2.97
0.07
142
10.69
5e-05
0.06
-
1.65
0.07
143
13.86
8e-05
0.07
0.007
1.12
0.1
144
11.21
6e-05
0.07
-
1.21
0.08
145
22.01
8e-05
0.06
0.007
2.22
0.11
368
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:377==
146
0.37
5e-05
0.07
-
2.49
0.07
147
0.82
4e-05
0.06
0.003
1.4
0.05
148
10.43
4e-05
0.06
0.003
2.36
0.05
149
14.51
5e-05
0.07
-
3.1
0.06
150
13.02
5e-05
0.05
0.003
0.08
0.07
151
12.09
6e-05
0.06
-
0.61
0.08
152
5.53
6e-05
0.07
0.006
0.24
0.08
153
22.15
9e-05
0.06
0.007
1.17
0.12
154
25.23
0.0001
0.05
-
1.07
0.14
155
12.91
3e-05
0.06
-
3.14
0.04
156
3.23
4e-05
0.07
-
1.1
0.05
157
17.18
7e-05
0.06
0.006
2.02
0.09
158
5.03
7e-05
0.08
-
1.97
0.09
159
3.94
8e-05
0.05
-
0.12
0.1
160
16.91
6e-05
0.06
0.005
1.52
0.08
161
4.64
8e-05
0.06
-
1.0
0.11
162
5.13
9e-05
0.06
-
2.02
0.12
163
13.7
0.0001
0.06
0.008
1.89
0.14
164
20.07
6e-05
0.07
0.005
1.21
0.08
165
14.86
0.00012
0.04
-
0.28
0.15
166
14.3
0.00011
0.04
-
0.94
0.15
167
16.86
7e-05
0.06
-
1.45
0.09
168
4.28
6e-05
0.06
0.005
0.65
0.08
169
3.85
6e-05
0.06
0.005
0.23
0.09
170
15.66
7e-05
0.04
-
0.17
0.1
171
22.55
7e-05
0.05
-
2.04
0.09
172
18.47
8e-05
0.06
-
2.01
0.1
173
18.08
9e-05
0.05
-
2.97
0.12
174
0.15
6e-05
0.07
-
1.97
0.08
175
0.2
6e-05
0.06
-
1.12
0.08
176
14.73
0.0001
0.05
-
2.22
0.13
177
10.62
5e-05
0.05
0.003
1.3
0.06
178
15.85
4e-05
0.07
0.004
0.98
0.05
179
15.83
4e-05
0.06
-
2.89
0.06
180
19.69
8e-05
0.05
-
2.27
0.1
181
12.97
5e-05
0.05
-
1.11
0.07
182
15.12
0.00015
0.04
0.008
1.04
0.2
183
15.51
0.00013
0.05
0.008
1.76
0.17
184
13.98
0.00014
0.04
0.007
2.7
0.18
185
14.42
0.0001
0.04
-
1.99
0.14
186
14.45
8e-05
0.05
0.005
0.69
0.11
187
14.8
0.00012
0.04
0.007
1.2
0.16
188
10.85
8e-05
0.05
0.006
0.21
0.11
189
16.31
8e-05
0.04
-
1.47
0.1
190
15.95
0.0001
0.04
-
2.72
0.13
191
17.04
0.00018
0.04
-
1.07
0.23
192
14.56
8e-05
0.04
0.005
1.46
0.11
193
12.51
0.00011
0.05
-
3.02
0.14
194
5.87
0.00015
0.04
0.008
2.95
0.19
195
20.24
0.00014
0.04
-
3.03
0.18
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
369
==PAGE:378==
196
13.39
0.0001
0.04
-
0.52
0.14
197
13.45
0.00013
0.04
0.006
1.1
0.17
198
32.15
0.00011
0.03
-
1.09
0.15
199
4.68
0.00011
0.04
0.006
1.78
0.14
200
14.97
0.00019
0.04
0.009
0.96
0.25
201
15.28
0.00016
0.03
0.006
3.12
0.21
202
12.2
5e-05
0.06
-
1.27
0.06
203
12.25
0.0001
0.04
-
2.47
0.13
204
2.53
0.00013
0.03
0.006
2.51
0.17
205
18.15
0.00011
0.03
-
0.18
0.15
206
27.18
0.00015
0.03
0.006
1.89
0.2
207
4.05
0.00016
0.03
0.007
0.07
0.21
208
13.19
0.00014
0.03
-
1.99
0.19
209
29.15
0.00013
0.03
0.005
1.62
0.17
210
16.69
0.00013
0.04
0.007
3.09
0.18
211
14.18
0.00015
0.03
0.006
1.36
0.2
212
17.26
0.00014
0.03
-
1.55
0.19
213
19.09
0.00018
0.04
-
0.94
0.24
214
24.86
0.00015
0.03
0.006
1.36
0.21
215
18.05
0.00013
0.03
0.005
0.9
0.17
216
21.89
0.00022
0.03
-
2.87
0.29
217
31.96
0.00013
0.03
-
1.2
0.17
218
15.19
0.00012
0.04
-
0.83
0.16
219
15.16
0.00016
0.03
0.007
0.64
0.21
220
17.46
0.00019
0.03
-
2.3
0.25
221
28.97
0.00013
0.03
-
0.73
0.17
222
14.06
0.00019
0.03
-
0.54
0.26
223
4.97
0.00018
0.03
-
2.56
0.23
224
21.75
0.00025
0.03
-
0.48
0.34
225
16.45
0.00011
0.03
-
2.8
0.15
226
7.1
0.00017
0.03
0.006
0.81
0.22
TIC 50792556
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.83
0.00021
0.83
-
1.96
0.01
2
16.14
0.00027
0.73
-
0.64
0.01
3
30.66
0.00038
0.53
0.008
1.67
0.02
4
11.46
0.00037
0.53
0.008
0.2
0.01
5
12.94
0.00046
0.44
-
0.57
0.02
6
15.26
0.00047
0.42
-
2.59
0.02
7
30.05
0.00055
0.36
0.008
2.48
0.02
8
0.36
0.00079
0.3
-
1.8
0.03
9
9.8
0.00072
0.28
0.008
0.95
0.03
10
20.25
0.00067
0.28
-
1.29
0.03
11
21.14
0.00071
0.26
0.007
0.42
0.03
12
17.72
0.00102
0.18
0.007
1.79
0.04
13
26.74
0.00129
0.16
-
1.48
0.05
14
18.0
0.00128
0.15
0.007
0.86
0.05
15
17.15
0.00135
0.14
0.008
0.04
0.05
370
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:379==
16
33.45
0.00135
0.15
-
3.03
0.05
17
10.83
0.00161
0.12
0.008
2.33
0.06
18
28.33
0.00187
0.12
-
2.69
0.07
19
0.18
0.00215
0.11
-
2.05
0.09
20
33.19
0.00177
0.11
0.008
2.06
0.07
21
2.89
0.0023
0.1
-
0.63
0.09
22
34.41
0.00223
0.09
0.008
2.88
0.09
23
35.23
0.00225
0.08
-
0.44
0.09
24
25.8
0.00242
0.08
-
2.03
0.1
25
21.46
0.00229
0.08
-
2.08
0.09
26
31.65
0.00309
0.07
0.008
2.46
0.12
27
4.17
0.00337
0.07
0.009
1.86
0.13
28
2.57
0.00396
0.06
-
1.42
0.16
29
34.08
0.00317
0.06
0.008
2.81
0.13
30
1.87
0.00437
0.05
-
2.59
0.17
31
28.64
0.00393
0.06
0.009
0.6
0.16
32
28.16
0.00418
0.05
-
0.66
0.17
33
7.28
0.00416
0.05
-
3.13
0.16
34
3.06
0.00482
0.05
-
0.06
0.19
35
33.66
0.00422
0.05
0.008
1.44
0.17
36
23.69
0.00418
0.04
-
1.45
0.16
37
25.62
0.00391
0.05
0.008
1.89
0.15
38
0.95
0.00445
0.05
-
2.02
0.18
39
0.75
0.00467
0.05
0.009
1.81
0.18
40
29.79
0.00475
0.04
0.008
1.75
0.19
41
46.39
0.00463
0.04
0.008
0.07
0.18
42
37.01
0.00469
0.04
0.007
2.75
0.19
43
21.27
0.0043
0.04
0.007
2.13
0.17
44
22.12
0.00419
0.04
0.007
2.8
0.17
45
22.29
0.00413
0.04
-
1.15
0.16
46
3.24
0.00583
0.04
0.009
1.79
0.23
47
47.41
0.00502
0.04
0.008
2.91
0.2
48
36.34
0.00496
0.04
0.007
2.14
0.2
49
15.36
0.00532
0.04
-
1.37
0.21
50
23.78
0.00453
0.04
-
2.18
0.18
51
49.34
0.00507
0.04
0.008
0.53
0.2
52
25.45
0.00512
0.04
-
2.52
0.2
TIC 50792556
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
18.83
0.00021
0.83
-
1.96
0.01
2
16.14
0.00027
0.73
-
0.64
0.01
3
30.66
0.00038
0.53
0.008
1.67
0.02
4
11.46
0.00037
0.53
0.008
0.2
0.01
5
12.94
0.00046
0.44
-
0.57
0.02
6
15.26
0.00047
0.42
-
2.59
0.02
7
30.05
0.00055
0.36
0.008
2.48
0.02
8
0.36
0.00079
0.3
-
1.8
0.03
9
9.8
0.00072
0.28
0.008
0.95
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
371
==PAGE:380==
10
20.25
0.00067
0.28
-
1.29
0.03
11
21.14
0.00071
0.26
0.007
0.42
0.03
12
17.72
0.00102
0.18
0.007
1.79
0.04
13
26.74
0.00129
0.16
-
1.48
0.05
14
18.0
0.00128
0.15
0.007
0.86
0.05
15
17.15
0.00135
0.14
0.008
0.04
0.05
16
33.45
0.00135
0.15
-
3.03
0.05
17
10.83
0.00161
0.12
0.008
2.33
0.06
18
28.33
0.00187
0.12
-
2.69
0.07
19
0.18
0.00215
0.11
-
2.05
0.09
20
33.19
0.00177
0.11
0.008
2.06
0.07
21
2.89
0.0023
0.1
-
0.63
0.09
22
34.41
0.00223
0.09
0.008
2.88
0.09
23
35.23
0.00225
0.08
-
0.44
0.09
24
25.8
0.00242
0.08
-
2.03
0.1
25
21.46
0.00229
0.08
-
2.08
0.09
26
31.65
0.00309
0.07
0.008
2.46
0.12
27
4.17
0.00337
0.07
0.009
1.86
0.13
28
2.57
0.00396
0.06
-
1.42
0.16
29
34.08
0.00317
0.06
0.008
2.81
0.13
30
1.87
0.00437
0.05
-
2.59
0.17
31
28.64
0.00393
0.06
0.009
0.6
0.16
32
28.16
0.00418
0.05
-
0.66
0.17
33
7.28
0.00416
0.05
-
3.13
0.16
34
3.06
0.00482
0.05
-
0.06
0.19
35
33.66
0.00422
0.05
0.008
1.44
0.17
36
23.69
0.00418
0.04
-
1.45
0.16
37
25.62
0.00391
0.05
0.008
1.89
0.15
38
0.95
0.00445
0.05
-
2.02
0.18
39
0.75
0.00467
0.05
0.009
1.81
0.18
40
29.79
0.00475
0.04
0.008
1.75
0.19
41
46.39
0.00463
0.04
0.008
0.07
0.18
42
37.01
0.00469
0.04
0.007
2.75
0.19
43
21.27
0.0043
0.04
0.007
2.13
0.17
44
22.12
0.00419
0.04
0.007
2.8
0.17
45
22.29
0.00413
0.04
-
1.15
0.16
46
3.24
0.00583
0.04
0.009
1.79
0.23
47
47.41
0.00502
0.04
0.008
2.91
0.2
48
36.34
0.00496
0.04
0.007
2.14
0.2
49
15.36
0.00532
0.04
-
1.37
0.21
50
23.78
0.00453
0.04
-
2.18
0.18
51
49.34
0.00507
0.04
0.008
0.53
0.2
52
25.45
0.00512
0.04
-
2.52
0.2
TIC 52323003
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
31.71
0.0
1.01
0.002
1.84
0.0
2
28.24
0.0
0.58
-
1.81
0.0
3
27.45
0.0
0.52
-
1.74
0.0
372
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:381==
4
25.46
0.0
0.4
-
1.46
0.0
5
30.66
1e-05
0.22
0.002
2.39
0.01
6
34.15
1e-05
0.1
0.002
2.1
0.02
7
35.03
2e-05
0.09
0.002
2.43
0.02
8
32.12
2e-05
0.08
-
0.99
0.02
9
29.91
2e-05
0.06
0.001
0.04
0.02
10
26.82
2e-05
0.05
0.002
2.71
0.04
11
30.93
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.62
0.05
12
26.17
3e-05
0.03
0.001
2.95
0.04
13
32.86
3e-05
0.03
0.001
1.05
0.05
14
34.36
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.9
0.07
15
0.39
9e-05
0.02
0.003
1.26
0.13
16
33.15
5e-05
0.02
0.001
1.89
0.07
17
29.47
6e-05
0.02
-
2.56
0.08
18
32.84
5e-05
0.02
0.001
0.31
0.07
19
25.64
8e-05
0.01
-
3.04
0.11
20
0.79
0.00012
0.01
0.002
1.15
0.17
21
0.18
0.00015
0.01
0.003
1.86
0.21
22
31.29
8e-05
0.01
-
0.09
0.12
23
0.22
0.00019
0.01
-
3.0
0.27
TIC 52323003
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
31.71
0.0
1.01
0.002
1.84
0.0
2
28.24
0.0
0.58
-
1.81
0.0
3
27.45
0.0
0.52
-
1.74
0.0
4
25.46
0.0
0.4
-
1.46
0.0
5
30.66
1e-05
0.22
0.002
2.39
0.01
6
34.15
1e-05
0.1
0.002
2.1
0.02
7
35.03
2e-05
0.09
0.002
2.43
0.02
8
32.12
2e-05
0.08
-
0.99
0.02
9
29.91
2e-05
0.06
0.001
0.04
0.02
10
26.82
2e-05
0.05
0.002
2.71
0.04
11
30.93
3e-05
0.04
0.002
0.62
0.05
12
26.17
3e-05
0.03
0.001
2.95
0.04
13
32.86
3e-05
0.03
0.001
1.05
0.05
14
34.36
5e-05
0.02
0.002
1.9
0.07
15
0.39
9e-05
0.02
0.003
1.26
0.13
16
33.15
5e-05
0.02
0.001
1.89
0.07
17
29.47
6e-05
0.02
-
2.56
0.08
18
32.84
5e-05
0.02
0.001
0.31
0.07
19
25.64
8e-05
0.01
-
3.04
0.11
20
0.79
0.00012
0.01
0.002
1.15
0.17
21
0.18
0.00015
0.01
0.003
1.86
0.21
22
31.29
8e-05
0.01
-
0.09
0.12
23
0.22
0.00019
0.01
-
3.0
0.27
TIC 53085877
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
373
==PAGE:382==
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.17
0.00021
2.92
-
0.13
0.01
2
2.28
0.00023
2.65
0.027
2.64
0.01
3
8.1
0.0004
1.55
0.028
2.98
0.02
4
1.49
0.00035
1.66
0.026
2.31
0.02
5
8.21
0.00047
1.28
0.027
0.74
0.02
6
17.83
0.00027
1.13
-
0.51
0.01
7
18.42
0.00027
1.09
0.013
1.85
0.01
8
0.97
0.0005
1.1
0.025
2.67
0.02
9
19.57
0.00027
0.94
0.011
1.34
0.01
10
0.69
0.00058
0.97
0.025
2.3
0.03
11
2.55
0.00065
0.92
0.027
2.35
0.03
12
17.04
0.00045
0.76
-
2.86
0.02
13
1.41
0.00077
0.75
0.026
1.01
0.03
14
20.92
0.00032
0.72
0.011
1.24
0.01
15
18.54
0.00041
0.68
-
0.87
0.02
16
2.44
0.00096
0.62
0.027
1.3
0.04
17
20.0
0.00046
0.54
0.011
1.2
0.02
18
1.68
0.00123
0.47
0.026
0.09
0.06
19
17.34
0.0008
0.42
0.015
0.35
0.04
20
7.52
0.00193
0.32
-
0.72
0.09
21
7.98
0.00188
0.33
0.028
0.25
0.08
22
2.76
0.00207
0.29
-
1.83
0.09
23
5.92
0.00214
0.31
-
2.6
0.1
24
8.32
0.00211
0.28
-
2.08
0.1
25
7.25
0.00233
0.27
0.028
2.42
0.11
26
1.08
0.00192
0.29
0.025
2.21
0.09
27
17.67
0.00145
0.22
0.014
0.9
0.07
28
36.25
0.00089
0.16
0.007
2.36
0.04
29
7.11
0.00391
0.16
-
0.87
0.18
30
18.77
0.00181
0.15
0.013
1.83
0.08
31
5.84
0.00395
0.16
-
0.37
0.18
32
5.68
0.00425
0.15
-
1.97
0.19
33
5.33
0.00452
0.13
0.027
1.49
0.2
34
8.85
0.0045
0.13
0.026
1.24
0.2
TIC 53085877
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.17
0.00021
2.92
-
0.13
0.01
2
2.28
0.00023
2.65
0.027
2.64
0.01
3
8.1
0.0004
1.55
0.028
2.98
0.02
4
1.49
0.00035
1.66
0.026
2.31
0.02
5
8.21
0.00047
1.28
0.027
0.74
0.02
6
17.83
0.00027
1.13
-
0.51
0.01
7
18.42
0.00027
1.09
0.013
1.85
0.01
8
0.97
0.0005
1.1
0.025
2.67
0.02
9
19.57
0.00027
0.94
0.011
1.34
0.01
10
0.69
0.00058
0.97
0.025
2.3
0.03
374
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:383==
11
2.55
0.00065
0.92
0.027
2.35
0.03
12
17.04
0.00045
0.76
-
2.86
0.02
13
1.41
0.00077
0.75
0.026
1.01
0.03
14
20.92
0.00032
0.72
0.011
1.24
0.01
15
18.54
0.00041
0.68
-
0.87
0.02
16
2.44
0.00096
0.62
0.027
1.3
0.04
17
20.0
0.00046
0.54
0.011
1.2
0.02
18
1.68
0.00123
0.47
0.026
0.09
0.06
19
17.34
0.0008
0.42
0.015
0.35
0.04
20
7.52
0.00193
0.32
-
0.72
0.09
21
7.98
0.00188
0.33
0.028
0.25
0.08
22
2.76
0.00207
0.29
-
1.83
0.09
23
5.92
0.00214
0.31
-
2.6
0.1
24
8.32
0.00211
0.28
-
2.08
0.1
25
7.25
0.00233
0.27
0.028
2.42
0.11
26
1.08
0.00192
0.29
0.025
2.21
0.09
27
17.67
0.00145
0.22
0.014
0.9
0.07
28
36.25
0.00089
0.16
0.007
2.36
0.04
29
7.11
0.00391
0.16
-
0.87
0.18
30
18.77
0.00181
0.15
0.013
1.83
0.08
31
5.84
0.00395
0.16
-
0.37
0.18
32
5.68
0.00425
0.15
-
1.97
0.19
33
5.33
0.00452
0.13
0.027
1.49
0.2
34
8.85
0.0045
0.13
0.026
1.24
0.2
TIC 54003108
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.6
4e-05
12.01
0.025
0.93
0.0
2
16.78
0.00011
4.62
0.024
0.47
0.01
3
14.3
0.00015
3.22
0.023
0.98
0.01
4
12.77
0.00023
1.96
0.021
0.29
0.01
5
13.86
0.00045
1.06
0.022
0.35
0.02
6
35.21
0.00095
0.42
-
0.77
0.04
7
34.38
0.00126
0.33
0.019
2.92
0.06
8
14.92
0.00161
0.33
0.024
1.3
0.07
9
0.18
0.00242
0.26
0.03
2.2
0.11
10
24.6
0.00169
0.3
-
2.57
0.08
11
18.9
0.00224
0.27
-
1.92
0.1
12
10.6
0.00162
0.23
0.017
0.16
0.08
13
31.67
0.00233
0.21
-
0.29
0.11
14
6.95
0.00181
0.21
0.018
1.2
0.08
15
3.17
0.0024
0.21
0.023
2.73
0.11
16
2.59
0.0025
0.21
0.024
0.27
0.12
17
8.27
0.00195
0.2
-
1.22
0.09
18
22.89
0.003
0.18
-
0.56
0.14
19
0.56
0.00376
0.16
-
2.07
0.17
20
30.46
0.00298
0.16
-
0.68
0.14
21
33.62
0.00265
0.17
-
1.61
0.12
22
9.11
0.00245
0.16
0.018
2.84
0.11
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
375
==PAGE:384==
23
7.6
0.00238
0.16
-
2.7
0.11
24
11.4
0.00271
0.14
0.018
0.12
0.13
25
15.24
0.00356
0.15
-
2.36
0.17
26
52.8
0.00227
0.14
-
0.88
0.11
27
31.28
0.00391
0.13
0.023
0.68
0.18
28
32.66
0.00377
0.12
-
2.41
0.18
29
29.67
0.00364
0.14
0.023
2.69
0.17
30
24.8
0.00415
0.12
-
0.35
0.19
31
30.22
0.0043
0.11
0.022
2.92
0.2
32
22.65
0.00475
0.12
0.026
2.79
0.22
33
31.9
0.0043
0.11
0.023
2.95
0.2
TIC 54003108
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.6
4e-05
12.01
0.025
0.93
0.0
2
16.78
0.00011
4.62
0.024
0.47
0.01
3
14.3
0.00015
3.22
0.023
0.98
0.01
4
12.77
0.00023
1.96
0.021
0.29
0.01
5
13.86
0.00045
1.06
0.022
0.35
0.02
6
35.21
0.00095
0.42
-
0.77
0.04
7
34.38
0.00126
0.33
0.019
2.92
0.06
8
14.92
0.00161
0.33
0.024
1.3
0.07
9
0.18
0.00242
0.26
0.03
2.2
0.11
10
24.6
0.00169
0.3
-
2.57
0.08
11
18.9
0.00224
0.27
-
1.92
0.1
12
10.6
0.00162
0.23
0.017
0.16
0.08
13
31.67
0.00233
0.21
-
0.29
0.11
14
6.95
0.00181
0.21
0.018
1.2
0.08
15
3.17
0.0024
0.21
0.023
2.73
0.11
16
2.59
0.0025
0.21
0.024
0.27
0.12
17
8.27
0.00195
0.2
-
1.22
0.09
18
22.89
0.003
0.18
-
0.56
0.14
19
0.56
0.00376
0.16
-
2.07
0.17
20
30.46
0.00298
0.16
-
0.68
0.14
21
33.62
0.00265
0.17
-
1.61
0.12
22
9.11
0.00245
0.16
0.018
2.84
0.11
23
7.6
0.00238
0.16
-
2.7
0.11
24
11.4
0.00271
0.14
0.018
0.12
0.13
25
15.24
0.00356
0.15
-
2.36
0.17
26
52.8
0.00227
0.14
-
0.88
0.11
27
31.28
0.00391
0.13
0.023
0.68
0.18
28
32.66
0.00377
0.12
-
2.41
0.18
29
29.67
0.00364
0.14
0.023
2.69
0.17
30
24.8
0.00415
0.12
-
0.35
0.19
31
30.22
0.0043
0.11
0.022
2.92
0.2
32
22.65
0.00475
0.12
0.026
2.79
0.22
33
31.9
0.0043
0.11
0.023
2.95
0.2
376
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:385==
TIC 55937327
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
33.22
1e-05
0.41
0.005
2.01
0.01
2
30.29
2e-05
0.23
0.005
1.11
0.02
3
0.39
3e-05
0.17
0.008
2.74
0.05
4
33.76
2e-05
0.16
0.004
0.26
0.02
5
0.19
3e-05
0.16
-
0.24
0.04
6
35.2
2e-05
0.14
-
1.32
0.03
7
28.2
2e-05
0.1
-
0.81
0.03
8
30.16
4e-05
0.07
0.004
0.92
0.06
9
30.77
3e-05
0.07
-
1.63
0.05
10
40.88
5e-05
0.05
0.003
0.15
0.07
11
38.4
6e-05
0.04
0.003
0.16
0.08
12
1.71
0.0002
0.03
0.01
2.06
0.28
TIC 55937327
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
33.22
1e-05
0.41
0.005
2.01
0.01
2
30.29
2e-05
0.23
0.005
1.11
0.02
3
0.39
3e-05
0.17
0.008
2.74
0.05
4
33.76
2e-05
0.16
0.004
0.26
0.02
5
0.19
3e-05
0.16
-
0.24
0.04
6
35.2
2e-05
0.14
-
1.32
0.03
7
28.2
2e-05
0.1
-
0.81
0.03
8
30.16
4e-05
0.07
0.004
0.92
0.06
9
30.77
3e-05
0.07
-
1.63
0.05
10
40.88
5e-05
0.05
0.003
0.15
0.07
11
38.4
6e-05
0.04
0.003
0.16
0.08
12
1.71
0.0002
0.03
0.01
2.06
0.28
TIC 56129374
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
9.88
0.00019
3.32
0.03
3.1
0.01
2
11.95
0.00088
0.65
-
0.49
0.04
3
10.04
0.00102
0.62
0.03
1.85
0.05
4
0.08
0.0016
0.54
-
1.1
0.07
5
11.28
0.00151
0.38
-
1.3
0.07
6
12.62
0.00219
0.25
0.026
0.57
0.1
7
12.5
0.00233
0.24
-
1.67
0.11
8
11.36
0.00245
0.24
0.027
2.21
0.11
9
8.69
0.0032
0.21
0.032
0.55
0.15
10
3.15
0.00445
0.19
-
2.43
0.21
11
1.31
0.00425
0.19
-
0.6
0.2
12
2.65
0.00542
0.15
0.039
0.18
0.25
13
24.17
0.00379
0.14
-
0.82
0.18
14
20.35
0.00442
0.14
0.029
2.26
0.21
15
12.36
0.00396
0.14
0.026
2.28
0.18
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
377
==PAGE:386==
16
3.49
0.00592
0.14
0.039
0.94
0.28
17
0.73
0.00587
0.14
-
0.56
0.27
18
5.54
0.00637
0.13
0.037
2.58
0.3
19
23.53
0.00474
0.12
-
2.96
0.22
20
12.65
0.00327
0.17
-
1.53
0.15
21
2.75
0.00697
0.12
-
1.25
0.33
22
24.4
0.00442
0.12
0.025
2.39
0.21
TIC 56129374
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
9.88
0.00019
3.32
0.03
3.1
0.01
2
11.95
0.00088
0.65
-
0.49
0.04
3
10.04
0.00102
0.62
0.03
1.85
0.05
4
0.08
0.0016
0.54
-
1.1
0.07
5
11.28
0.00151
0.38
-
1.3
0.07
6
12.62
0.00219
0.25
0.026
0.57
0.1
7
12.5
0.00233
0.24
-
1.67
0.11
8
11.36
0.00245
0.24
0.027
2.21
0.11
9
8.69
0.0032
0.21
0.032
0.55
0.15
10
3.15
0.00445
0.19
-
2.43
0.21
11
1.31
0.00425
0.19
-
0.6
0.2
12
2.65
0.00542
0.15
0.039
0.18
0.25
13
24.17
0.00379
0.14
-
0.82
0.18
14
20.35
0.00442
0.14
0.029
2.26
0.21
15
12.36
0.00396
0.14
0.026
2.28
0.18
16
3.49
0.00592
0.14
0.039
0.94
0.28
17
0.73
0.00587
0.14
-
0.56
0.27
18
5.54
0.00637
0.13
0.037
2.58
0.3
19
23.53
0.00474
0.12
-
2.96
0.22
20
12.65
0.00327
0.17
-
1.53
0.15
21
2.75
0.00697
0.12
-
1.25
0.33
22
24.4
0.00442
0.12
0.025
2.39
0.21
TIC 61822201
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.64
0.0002
0.83
0.008
2.26
0.01
2
1.74
0.00026
0.63
-
0.44
0.01
3
2.03
0.00049
0.33
-
0.45
0.02
4
0.22
0.0008
0.25
0.009
2.83
0.04
5
3.48
0.00181
0.08
0.006
1.39
0.08
6
0.33
0.00221
0.09
-
1.92
0.1
7
3.76
0.00201
0.07
-
0.17
0.09
8
0.68
0.00334
0.06
0.008
3.08
0.15
9
0.39
0.00378
0.05
0.009
2.81
0.17
10
4.05
0.00324
0.04
0.006
1.64
0.14
11
3.2
0.00356
0.04
-
0.45
0.16
378
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:387==
TIC 61822201
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.64
0.0002
0.83
0.008
2.26
0.01
2
1.74
0.00026
0.63
-
0.44
0.01
3
2.03
0.00049
0.33
-
0.45
0.02
4
0.22
0.0008
0.25
0.009
2.83
0.04
5
3.48
0.00181
0.08
0.006
1.39
0.08
6
0.33
0.00221
0.09
-
1.92
0.1
7
3.76
0.00201
0.07
-
0.17
0.09
8
0.68
0.00334
0.06
0.008
3.08
0.15
9
0.39
0.00378
0.05
0.009
2.81
0.17
10
4.05
0.00324
0.04
0.006
1.64
0.14
11
3.2
0.00356
0.04
-
0.45
0.16
TIC 61981530
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.46
0.0
2.33
0.012
1.5
0.01
2
2.33
0.0
2.35
0.013
0.14
0.01
3
2.61
1e-05
1.09
-
0.76
0.01
4
26.05
1e-05
0.81
0.008
1.7
0.01
5
1.59
1e-05
0.72
0.014
2.47
0.02
6
15.25
1e-05
0.72
-
0.72
0.01
7
15.76
2e-05
0.58
-
2.58
0.02
8
17.86
3e-05
0.37
0.014
2.51
0.04
9
21.65
2e-05
0.37
0.008
1.3
0.02
10
29.61
2e-05
0.32
0.008
2.76
0.03
11
23.82
2e-05
0.29
-
3.04
0.03
12
21.16
2e-05
0.28
0.007
1.91
0.02
13
15.4
3e-05
0.26
0.01
0.65
0.04
14
30.52
3e-05
0.24
0.009
0.77
0.04
15
18.76
6e-05
0.21
-
0.53
0.08
16
32.17
3e-05
0.19
0.007
2.62
0.04
17
19.36
6e-05
0.19
-
1.89
0.09
18
17.71
7e-05
0.13
-
1.62
0.1
19
27.0
3e-05
0.13
0.006
2.3
0.05
20
17.9
8e-05
0.13
0.015
3.02
0.11
21
25.27
4e-05
0.12
0.006
0.61
0.05
22
0.69
0.0001
0.1
0.015
2.66
0.14
23
16.73
7e-05
0.09
-
0.1
0.1
24
15.49
8e-05
0.1
-
1.38
0.1
25
19.75
0.0001
0.09
0.012
1.14
0.13
26
12.78
8e-05
0.09
-
0.13
0.11
27
16.69
6e-05
0.1
0.008
0.48
0.08
28
14.66
0.00017
0.08
0.019
2.31
0.24
29
0.48
0.00012
0.1
-
1.61
0.16
30
0.4
0.00015
0.08
-
2.17
0.21
31
32.21
7e-05
0.08
-
2.5
0.09
32
15.14
9e-05
0.09
0.01
0.5
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
379
==PAGE:388==
33
25.15
7e-05
0.07
0.007
1.43
0.1
34
17.1
0.0001
0.08
0.011
2.9
0.14
35
27.58
7e-05
0.06
0.006
0.71
0.09
36
18.1
0.00011
0.08
0.012
2.47
0.15
37
13.82
0.00015
0.06
0.012
2.33
0.21
38
20.07
0.00012
0.06
0.01
1.28
0.17
39
13.98
0.00014
0.06
0.011
2.41
0.19
40
12.97
0.00016
0.05
0.012
2.49
0.22
41
16.97
0.00012
0.06
0.01
1.13
0.17
42
16.58
0.00012
0.06
-
0.45
0.17
43
19.0
0.00018
0.05
0.013
1.76
0.25
44
14.22
0.00024
0.05
-
1.31
0.33
45
19.74
0.00013
0.06
-
1.87
0.18
46
32.07
0.00012
0.05
0.008
1.14
0.16
TIC 61981530
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.46
0.0
2.33
0.012
1.5
0.01
2
2.33
0.0
2.35
0.013
0.14
0.01
3
2.61
1e-05
1.09
-
0.76
0.01
4
26.05
1e-05
0.81
0.008
1.7
0.01
5
1.59
1e-05
0.72
0.014
2.47
0.02
6
15.25
1e-05
0.72
-
0.72
0.01
7
15.76
2e-05
0.58
-
2.58
0.02
8
17.86
3e-05
0.37
0.014
2.51
0.04
9
21.65
2e-05
0.37
0.008
1.3
0.02
10
29.61
2e-05
0.32
0.008
2.76
0.03
11
23.82
2e-05
0.29
-
3.04
0.03
12
21.16
2e-05
0.28
0.007
1.91
0.02
13
15.4
3e-05
0.26
0.01
0.65
0.04
14
30.52
3e-05
0.24
0.009
0.77
0.04
15
18.76
6e-05
0.21
-
0.53
0.08
16
32.17
3e-05
0.19
0.007
2.62
0.04
17
19.36
6e-05
0.19
-
1.89
0.09
18
17.71
7e-05
0.13
-
1.62
0.1
19
27.0
3e-05
0.13
0.006
2.3
0.05
20
17.9
8e-05
0.13
0.015
3.02
0.11
21
25.27
4e-05
0.12
0.006
0.61
0.05
22
0.69
0.0001
0.1
0.015
2.66
0.14
23
16.73
7e-05
0.09
-
0.1
0.1
24
15.49
8e-05
0.1
-
1.38
0.1
25
19.75
0.0001
0.09
0.012
1.14
0.13
26
12.78
8e-05
0.09
-
0.13
0.11
27
16.69
6e-05
0.1
0.008
0.48
0.08
28
14.66
0.00017
0.08
0.019
2.31
0.24
29
0.48
0.00012
0.1
-
1.61
0.16
30
0.4
0.00015
0.08
-
2.17
0.21
31
32.21
7e-05
0.08
-
2.5
0.09
32
15.14
9e-05
0.09
0.01
0.5
0.12
380
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:389==
33
25.15
7e-05
0.07
0.007
1.43
0.1
34
17.1
0.0001
0.08
0.011
2.9
0.14
35
27.58
7e-05
0.06
0.006
0.71
0.09
36
18.1
0.00011
0.08
0.012
2.47
0.15
37
13.82
0.00015
0.06
0.012
2.33
0.21
38
20.07
0.00012
0.06
0.01
1.28
0.17
39
13.98
0.00014
0.06
0.011
2.41
0.19
40
12.97
0.00016
0.05
0.012
2.49
0.22
41
16.97
0.00012
0.06
0.01
1.13
0.17
42
16.58
0.00012
0.06
-
0.45
0.17
43
19.0
0.00018
0.05
0.013
1.76
0.25
44
14.22
0.00024
0.05
-
1.31
0.33
45
19.74
0.00013
0.06
-
1.87
0.18
46
32.07
0.00012
0.05
0.008
1.14
0.16
TIC 63481822
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
35.65
0.00016
1.31
-
3.1
0.01
2
22.22
0.00029
0.75
0.01
0.79
0.01
3
22.88
0.00033
0.67
-
1.87
0.01
4
33.38
0.00043
0.46
-
0.42
0.02
5
20.61
0.00054
0.41
0.01
1.31
0.02
6
24.09
0.00052
0.42
0.01
0.42
0.02
7
23.15
0.00059
0.37
0.01
0.36
0.03
8
18.03
0.0006
0.36
0.01
0.84
0.03
9
21.44
0.00065
0.34
0.01
0.03
0.03
10
27.15
0.00073
0.28
-
2.33
0.03
11
21.63
0.00084
0.27
0.01
1.25
0.04
12
25.98
0.00082
0.25
0.009
1.13
0.04
13
28.63
0.00088
0.23
-
1.74
0.04
14
29.64
0.00085
0.23
0.009
2.8
0.04
15
29.0
0.0009
0.22
0.009
1.6
0.04
16
3.25
0.00117
0.22
0.012
1.07
0.05
17
22.64
0.00113
0.2
0.01
2.77
0.05
18
39.37
0.00161
0.13
-
2.69
0.07
19
42.64
0.00139
0.14
0.009
2.26
0.06
20
1.61
0.00193
0.13
0.012
0.78
0.09
21
30.09
0.00144
0.14
-
1.96
0.07
22
29.8
0.00167
0.12
-
1.67
0.08
23
11.59
0.00297
0.09
0.012
2.4
0.13
24
19.31
0.00228
0.09
0.01
2.03
0.1
25
27.6
0.00199
0.1
-
2.38
0.09
26
11.72
0.00296
0.09
0.012
2.0
0.13
27
20.13
0.00266
0.08
-
1.48
0.12
28
6.51
0.00324
0.08
0.011
1.35
0.15
29
1.06
0.00379
0.07
-
0.64
0.17
30
1.17
0.00362
0.07
0.012
0.05
0.16
31
0.24
0.00373
0.07
-
2.61
0.17
32
25.29
0.00312
0.07
0.009
0.76
0.14
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
381
==PAGE:390==
33
27.65
0.00271
0.07
0.009
1.6
0.12
34
24.05
0.00308
0.07
-
0.27
0.14
35
10.3
0.00378
0.07
-
1.77
0.17
36
31.1
0.00298
0.07
-
1.75
0.14
37
31.0
0.00301
0.07
-
3.12
0.14
38
10.37
0.00391
0.07
0.012
2.89
0.18
39
28.37
0.00335
0.06
0.009
0.78
0.15
40
11.06
0.0045
0.06
0.012
2.12
0.2
41
24.99
0.0035
0.06
0.01
0.05
0.16
42
1.28
0.00446
0.06
-
2.28
0.2
43
26.22
0.0035
0.06
0.009
0.76
0.16
44
12.89
0.00439
0.06
0.011
2.59
0.2
45
11.76
0.00437
0.06
-
0.84
0.2
46
37.03
0.0039
0.05
0.01
0.16
0.18
47
12.07
0.00459
0.06
-
2.02
0.21
48
2.06
0.00468
0.05
0.011
2.53
0.21
TIC 63481822
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
35.65
0.00016
1.31
-
3.1
0.01
2
22.22
0.00029
0.75
0.01
0.79
0.01
3
22.88
0.00033
0.67
-
1.87
0.01
4
33.38
0.00043
0.46
-
0.42
0.02
5
20.61
0.00054
0.41
0.01
1.31
0.02
6
24.09
0.00052
0.42
0.01
0.42
0.02
7
23.15
0.00059
0.37
0.01
0.36
0.03
8
18.03
0.0006
0.36
0.01
0.84
0.03
9
21.44
0.00065
0.34
0.01
0.03
0.03
10
27.15
0.00073
0.28
-
2.33
0.03
11
21.63
0.00084
0.27
0.01
1.25
0.04
12
25.98
0.00082
0.25
0.009
1.13
0.04
13
28.63
0.00088
0.23
-
1.74
0.04
14
29.64
0.00085
0.23
0.009
2.8
0.04
15
29.0
0.0009
0.22
0.009
1.6
0.04
16
3.25
0.00117
0.22
0.012
1.07
0.05
17
22.64
0.00113
0.2
0.01
2.77
0.05
18
39.37
0.00161
0.13
-
2.69
0.07
19
42.64
0.00139
0.14
0.009
2.26
0.06
20
1.61
0.00193
0.13
0.012
0.78
0.09
21
30.09
0.00144
0.14
-
1.96
0.07
22
29.8
0.00167
0.12
-
1.67
0.08
23
11.59
0.00297
0.09
0.012
2.4
0.13
24
19.31
0.00228
0.09
0.01
2.03
0.1
25
27.6
0.00199
0.1
-
2.38
0.09
26
11.72
0.00296
0.09
0.012
2.0
0.13
27
20.13
0.00266
0.08
-
1.48
0.12
28
6.51
0.00324
0.08
0.011
1.35
0.15
29
1.06
0.00379
0.07
-
0.64
0.17
30
1.17
0.00362
0.07
0.012
0.05
0.16
382
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:391==
31
0.24
0.00373
0.07
-
2.61
0.17
32
25.29
0.00312
0.07
0.009
0.76
0.14
33
27.65
0.00271
0.07
0.009
1.6
0.12
34
24.05
0.00308
0.07
-
0.27
0.14
35
10.3
0.00378
0.07
-
1.77
0.17
36
31.1
0.00298
0.07
-
1.75
0.14
37
31.0
0.00301
0.07
-
3.12
0.14
38
10.37
0.00391
0.07
0.012
2.89
0.18
39
28.37
0.00335
0.06
0.009
0.78
0.15
40
11.06
0.0045
0.06
0.012
2.12
0.2
41
24.99
0.0035
0.06
0.01
0.05
0.16
42
1.28
0.00446
0.06
-
2.28
0.2
43
26.22
0.0035
0.06
0.009
0.76
0.16
44
12.89
0.00439
0.06
0.011
2.59
0.2
45
11.76
0.00437
0.06
-
0.84
0.2
46
37.03
0.0039
0.05
0.01
0.16
0.18
47
12.07
0.00459
0.06
-
2.02
0.21
48
2.06
0.00468
0.05
0.011
2.53
0.21
TIC 70443079
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.56
0.00014
2.39
-
2.66
0.01
2
20.92
0.00016
1.61
-
0.7
0.01
3
20.38
0.0002
1.29
0.011
1.66
0.01
4
20.03
0.00024
1.09
-
1.06
0.01
5
22.76
0.00026
0.89
-
2.01
0.01
6
1.41
0.00057
0.59
0.015
2.18
0.02
7
2.89
0.0006
0.57
0.015
0.34
0.03
8
0.55
0.00085
0.4
0.015
0.4
0.04
9
2.12
0.00093
0.36
-
0.27
0.04
10
22.05
0.00088
0.27
0.01
0.5
0.04
11
21.66
0.00107
0.23
0.011
2.2
0.05
12
19.48
0.00134
0.2
0.012
0.73
0.06
13
0.75
0.00182
0.19
0.015
2.07
0.08
14
18.8
0.00175
0.15
-
0.75
0.08
15
26.86
0.00186
0.12
-
0.53
0.08
16
19.76
0.00218
0.12
-
2.92
0.1
17
0.4
0.0031
0.11
0.015
2.83
0.14
18
7.68
0.00277
0.11
0.014
0.5
0.12
19
6.92
0.00303
0.1
-
2.61
0.13
20
10.06
0.00312
0.1
-
0.71
0.14
21
8.94
0.00358
0.09
0.014
0.46
0.16
22
43.14
0.0032
0.07
0.009
1.1
0.14
23
0.84
0.00451
0.07
0.015
0.2
0.2
24
11.23
0.00511
0.06
0.014
0.41
0.22
25
10.26
0.00496
0.07
-
2.69
0.22
26
10.67
0.00523
0.06
-
0.83
0.23
27
5.82
0.00506
0.06
-
0.07
0.22
28
12.16
0.00574
0.06
0.014
0.16
0.25
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
383
==PAGE:392==
29
7.8
0.00564
0.06
-
2.0
0.25
TIC 70443079
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.56
0.00014
2.39
-
2.66
0.01
2
20.92
0.00016
1.61
-
0.7
0.01
3
20.38
0.0002
1.29
0.011
1.66
0.01
4
20.03
0.00024
1.09
-
1.06
0.01
5
22.76
0.00026
0.89
-
2.01
0.01
6
1.41
0.00057
0.59
0.015
2.18
0.02
7
2.89
0.0006
0.57
0.015
0.34
0.03
8
0.55
0.00085
0.4
0.015
0.4
0.04
9
2.12
0.00093
0.36
-
0.27
0.04
10
22.05
0.00088
0.27
0.01
0.5
0.04
11
21.66
0.00107
0.23
0.011
2.2
0.05
12
19.48
0.00134
0.2
0.012
0.73
0.06
13
0.75
0.00182
0.19
0.015
2.07
0.08
14
18.8
0.00175
0.15
-
0.75
0.08
15
26.86
0.00186
0.12
-
0.53
0.08
16
19.76
0.00218
0.12
-
2.92
0.1
17
0.4
0.0031
0.11
0.015
2.83
0.14
18
7.68
0.00277
0.11
0.014
0.5
0.12
19
6.92
0.00303
0.1
-
2.61
0.13
20
10.06
0.00312
0.1
-
0.71
0.14
21
8.94
0.00358
0.09
0.014
0.46
0.16
22
43.14
0.0032
0.07
0.009
1.1
0.14
23
0.84
0.00451
0.07
0.015
0.2
0.2
24
11.23
0.00511
0.06
0.014
0.41
0.22
25
10.26
0.00496
0.07
-
2.69
0.22
26
10.67
0.00523
0.06
-
0.83
0.23
27
5.82
0.00506
0.06
-
0.07
0.22
28
12.16
0.00574
0.06
0.014
0.16
0.25
29
7.8
0.00564
0.06
-
2.0
0.25
TIC 70869839
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
28.4
0.00052
0.42
-
2.18
0.02
2
20.29
0.00073
0.27
-
1.94
0.03
3
27.0
0.00084
0.26
-
2.99
0.04
4
25.76
0.00103
0.2
0.009
3.09
0.04
5
25.29
0.00115
0.18
-
2.83
0.05
6
21.95
0.00119
0.17
0.009
2.25
0.05
7
27.62
0.00171
0.13
0.01
0.33
0.07
8
26.23
0.00212
0.1
-
2.5
0.09
9
23.77
0.00202
0.1
0.009
3.05
0.09
10
22.57
0.00218
0.1
0.009
1.57
0.09
11
23.34
0.0023
0.09
-
0.38
0.1
12
28.48
0.00255
0.09
-
0.22
0.11
384
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:393==
13
29.96
0.00278
0.08
0.009
2.25
0.12
14
30.75
0.00331
0.06
0.009
2.67
0.14
15
24.94
0.00343
0.06
0.009
1.23
0.15
16
37.05
0.00371
0.06
-
0.07
0.16
17
0.31
0.00461
0.06
-
1.62
0.2
18
1.62
0.00469
0.05
-
1.97
0.2
19
23.13
0.00399
0.05
0.009
2.14
0.17
20
0.6
0.00502
0.05
-
1.81
0.22
TIC 70869839
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
28.4
0.00052
0.42
-
2.18
0.02
2
20.29
0.00073
0.27
-
1.94
0.03
3
27.0
0.00084
0.26
-
2.99
0.04
4
25.76
0.00103
0.2
0.009
3.09
0.04
5
25.29
0.00115
0.18
-
2.83
0.05
6
21.95
0.00119
0.17
0.009
2.25
0.05
7
27.62
0.00171
0.13
0.01
0.33
0.07
8
26.23
0.00212
0.1
-
2.5
0.09
9
23.77
0.00202
0.1
0.009
3.05
0.09
10
22.57
0.00218
0.1
0.009
1.57
0.09
11
23.34
0.0023
0.09
-
0.38
0.1
12
28.48
0.00255
0.09
-
0.22
0.11
13
29.96
0.00278
0.08
0.009
2.25
0.12
14
30.75
0.00331
0.06
0.009
2.67
0.14
15
24.94
0.00343
0.06
0.009
1.23
0.15
16
37.05
0.00371
0.06
-
0.07
0.16
17
0.31
0.00461
0.06
-
1.62
0.2
18
1.62
0.00469
0.05
-
1.97
0.2
19
23.13
0.00399
0.05
0.009
2.14
0.17
20
0.6
0.00502
0.05
-
1.81
0.22
TIC 71334169
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.96
1e-05
2.39
-
1.82
0.01
2
21.96
1e-05
1.66
-
2.74
0.01
3
21.09
0.0
1.38
0.008
2.79
0.01
4
22.72
2e-05
0.93
-
2.35
0.03
5
21.52
1e-05
0.83
0.007
0.88
0.01
6
21.31
1e-05
0.42
0.008
1.57
0.02
TIC 71334169
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
22.96
1e-05
2.39
-
1.82
0.01
2
21.96
1e-05
1.66
-
2.74
0.01
3
21.09
0.0
1.38
0.008
2.79
0.01
4
22.72
2e-05
0.93
-
2.35
0.03
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
385
==PAGE:394==
5
21.52
1e-05
0.83
0.007
0.88
0.01
6
21.31
1e-05
0.42
0.008
1.57
0.02
TIC 73176502
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
16.43
7e-05
3.61
-
0.4
0.0
2
16.13
0.00011
2.05
0.01
0.82
0.01
3
21.9
0.00016
1.42
0.01
1.81
0.01
4
16.75
0.00018
1.34
0.011
0.05
0.01
5
18.53
0.00026
0.89
0.01
0.01
0.01
6
16.91
0.00029
0.82
0.011
0.75
0.01
7
18.38
0.00027
0.85
-
0.72
0.01
8
26.07
0.00031
0.72
0.01
2.71
0.01
9
19.19
0.00044
0.53
0.01
0.8
0.02
10
21.72
0.00051
0.44
0.01
2.75
0.02
11
30.91
0.0006
0.38
-
2.59
0.03
12
43.25
0.00058
0.37
-
2.95
0.03
13
21.17
0.00072
0.31
-
0.4
0.03
14
40.35
0.00074
0.3
-
0.46
0.03
15
27.15
0.00071
0.3
-
1.06
0.03
16
32.53
0.00092
0.25
0.01
2.85
0.04
17
29.0
0.00095
0.24
0.01
1.36
0.04
18
18.18
0.00101
0.23
-
2.64
0.04
19
40.97
0.00147
0.15
0.01
2.05
0.07
20
1.7
0.00216
0.16
0.015
1.77
0.1
21
20.96
0.00181
0.12
0.01
2.87
0.08
22
35.9
0.00201
0.12
-
1.97
0.09
23
23.72
0.00205
0.1
-
2.9
0.09
24
13.14
0.00211
0.1
-
1.61
0.09
25
28.83
0.00241
0.09
0.01
0.57
0.11
26
27.97
0.00248
0.09
-
1.36
0.11
27
27.3
0.00244
0.09
0.01
0.45
0.11
28
0.62
0.00412
0.08
0.015
1.95
0.18
29
14.21
0.00277
0.08
-
2.75
0.12
30
1.4
0.00441
0.08
0.015
0.42
0.2
31
29.09
0.00285
0.08
-
0.4
0.13
32
1.94
0.00502
0.07
0.015
1.31
0.22
33
28.31
0.00295
0.08
-
1.24
0.13
34
27.69
0.00275
0.08
-
1.97
0.12
35
27.85
0.0029
0.08
-
0.11
0.13
36
0.18
0.00511
0.07
-
2.15
0.23
37
24.53
0.00308
0.07
0.009
0.8
0.14
38
48.45
0.00298
0.06
0.009
1.58
0.13
39
37.91
0.00334
0.07
0.01
3.06
0.15
40
24.03
0.00324
0.06
0.009
1.4
0.14
41
40.27
0.00365
0.06
0.01
1.89
0.16
42
24.37
0.00344
0.06
-
1.13
0.15
43
35.09
0.00435
0.05
0.01
1.49
0.19
44
30.39
0.00428
0.05
0.01
2.34
0.19
386
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:395==
45
32.56
0.004
0.06
0.01
2.37
0.18
46
32.87
0.00436
0.05
0.01
3.14
0.19
47
37.76
0.00453
0.05
-
1.5
0.2
48
18.81
0.00471
0.05
-
2.71
0.21
49
0.27
0.0067
0.05
0.015
1.61
0.3
50
0.44
0.00697
0.05
0.015
2.04
0.31
TIC 73176502
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
16.43
7e-05
3.61
-
0.4
0.0
2
16.13
0.00011
2.05
0.01
0.82
0.01
3
21.9
0.00016
1.42
0.01
1.81
0.01
4
16.75
0.00018
1.34
0.011
0.05
0.01
5
18.53
0.00026
0.89
0.01
0.01
0.01
6
16.91
0.00029
0.82
0.011
0.75
0.01
7
18.38
0.00027
0.85
-
0.72
0.01
8
26.07
0.00031
0.72
0.01
2.71
0.01
9
19.19
0.00044
0.53
0.01
0.8
0.02
10
21.72
0.00051
0.44
0.01
2.75
0.02
11
30.91
0.0006
0.38
-
2.59
0.03
12
43.25
0.00058
0.37
-
2.95
0.03
13
21.17
0.00072
0.31
-
0.4
0.03
14
40.35
0.00074
0.3
-
0.46
0.03
15
27.15
0.00071
0.3
-
1.06
0.03
16
32.53
0.00092
0.25
0.01
2.85
0.04
17
29.0
0.00095
0.24
0.01
1.36
0.04
18
18.18
0.00101
0.23
-
2.64
0.04
19
40.97
0.00147
0.15
0.01
2.05
0.07
20
1.7
0.00216
0.16
0.015
1.77
0.1
21
20.96
0.00181
0.12
0.01
2.87
0.08
22
35.9
0.00201
0.12
-
1.97
0.09
23
23.72
0.00205
0.1
-
2.9
0.09
24
13.14
0.00211
0.1
-
1.61
0.09
25
28.83
0.00241
0.09
0.01
0.57
0.11
26
27.97
0.00248
0.09
-
1.36
0.11
27
27.3
0.00244
0.09
0.01
0.45
0.11
28
0.62
0.00412
0.08
0.015
1.95
0.18
29
14.21
0.00277
0.08
-
2.75
0.12
30
1.4
0.00441
0.08
0.015
0.42
0.2
31
29.09
0.00285
0.08
-
0.4
0.13
32
1.94
0.00502
0.07
0.015
1.31
0.22
33
28.31
0.00295
0.08
-
1.24
0.13
34
27.69
0.00275
0.08
-
1.97
0.12
35
27.85
0.0029
0.08
-
0.11
0.13
36
0.18
0.00511
0.07
-
2.15
0.23
37
24.53
0.00308
0.07
0.009
0.8
0.14
38
48.45
0.00298
0.06
0.009
1.58
0.13
39
37.91
0.00334
0.07
0.01
3.06
0.15
40
24.03
0.00324
0.06
0.009
1.4
0.14
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
387
==PAGE:396==
41
40.27
0.00365
0.06
0.01
1.89
0.16
42
24.37
0.00344
0.06
-
1.13
0.15
43
35.09
0.00435
0.05
0.01
1.49
0.19
44
30.39
0.00428
0.05
0.01
2.34
0.19
45
32.56
0.004
0.06
0.01
2.37
0.18
46
32.87
0.00436
0.05
0.01
3.14
0.19
47
37.76
0.00453
0.05
-
1.5
0.2
48
18.81
0.00471
0.05
-
2.71
0.21
49
0.27
0.0067
0.05
0.015
1.61
0.3
50
0.44
0.00697
0.05
0.015
2.04
0.31
TIC 75540884
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
11.24
0.0
0.71
-
0.03
0.01
2
10.3
1e-05
0.7
-
1.94
0.01
3
1.9
1e-05
0.53
0.005
1.46
0.01
4
1.01
1e-05
0.49
0.01
1.97
0.02
5
2.0
1e-05
0.39
-
2.7
0.01
6
8.06
2e-05
0.35
-
0.43
0.02
7
0.5
2e-05
0.32
0.01
2.03
0.03
8
19.75
2e-05
0.25
-
1.22
0.02
9
1.86
2e-05
0.21
-
0.15
0.03
10
3.0
3e-05
0.2
0.01
2.83
0.05
11
18.75
3e-05
0.21
0.008
1.31
0.04
12
22.56
2e-05
0.2
0.006
2.37
0.03
13
13.14
4e-05
0.19
0.011
1.81
0.05
14
8.17
3e-05
0.17
-
2.41
0.05
15
9.2
2e-05
0.16
0.004
2.33
0.03
16
9.11
2e-05
0.21
-
0.24
0.03
17
15.79
3e-05
0.17
0.007
1.53
0.04
18
13.15
5e-05
0.15
0.01
0.81
0.07
19
12.1
5e-05
0.14
-
1.25
0.07
20
21.76
3e-05
0.12
-
2.47
0.05
21
18.53
5e-05
0.11
-
1.85
0.06
22
7.36
4e-05
0.12
0.007
3.04
0.06
23
21.15
4e-05
0.1
0.005
2.78
0.05
24
20.65
3e-05
0.11
0.005
1.14
0.04
25
17.47
6e-05
0.11
-
2.26
0.08
26
14.78
6e-05
0.11
-
0.26
0.08
27
9.71
8e-05
0.08
0.009
0.75
0.11
28
17.16
4e-05
0.1
-
0.27
0.06
29
6.7
8e-05
0.09
0.009
2.89
0.11
30
19.15
5e-05
0.09
-
1.26
0.07
31
4.77
7e-05
0.08
-
1.77
0.09
32
15.35
6e-05
0.09
0.007
2.35
0.08
33
17.71
5e-05
0.08
0.006
1.94
0.07
34
7.62
7e-05
0.08
0.008
1.05
0.1
35
16.13
0.0001
0.08
0.01
1.62
0.13
36
15.56
8e-05
0.08
0.009
0.07
0.12
388
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:397==
37
5.71
8e-05
0.07
-
1.53
0.11
38
24.46
4e-05
0.08
-
1.94
0.06
39
1.31
0.00012
0.06
-
2.27
0.17
40
0.4
0.00012
0.07
-
2.68
0.16
41
4.37
6e-05
0.07
0.006
0.08
0.09
42
16.86
0.0001
0.06
0.009
2.35
0.13
43
5.8
7e-05
0.06
-
0.18
0.1
44
3.81
0.00013
0.06
0.01
1.16
0.18
45
13.59
0.00012
0.06
-
1.22
0.17
46
7.33
7e-05
0.06
-
0.0
0.09
47
21.91
7e-05
0.06
0.006
0.53
0.1
48
4.67
0.00012
0.05
-
1.75
0.17
49
10.75
0.0001
0.05
-
0.49
0.14
50
12.65
9e-05
0.06
0.007
0.92
0.12
51
0.32
0.0001
0.06
-
0.09
0.14
52
9.5
0.00011
0.06
0.008
2.38
0.15
53
8.98
0.0001
0.06
-
2.85
0.14
54
3.39
0.0001
0.05
0.007
1.04
0.14
55
9.46
0.00013
0.05
0.008
2.35
0.18
56
18.14
0.00013
0.04
0.008
0.44
0.18
57
12.95
0.00018
0.04
-
1.23
0.24
58
8.63
0.00019
0.04
-
1.31
0.26
59
23.8
7e-05
0.04
0.004
0.76
0.1
60
5.0
0.00018
0.04
-
2.91
0.25
61
6.21
0.00016
0.04
-
2.85
0.22
62
28.26
7e-05
0.03
0.003
1.42
0.1
63
0.24
0.0002
0.04
0.01
3.02
0.28
64
5.74
0.00015
0.04
0.008
1.98
0.21
65
3.42
0.00013
0.03
-
1.3
0.18
66
35.67
7e-05
0.03
-
2.26
0.1
67
2.44
0.00017
0.03
0.008
1.7
0.24
68
10.4
0.00022
0.03
0.01
1.09
0.3
TIC 75540884
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
11.24
0.0
0.71
-
0.03
0.01
2
10.3
1e-05
0.7
-
1.94
0.01
3
1.9
1e-05
0.53
0.005
1.46
0.01
4
1.01
1e-05
0.49
0.01
1.97
0.02
5
2.0
1e-05
0.39
-
2.7
0.01
6
8.06
2e-05
0.35
-
0.43
0.02
7
0.5
2e-05
0.32
0.01
2.03
0.03
8
19.75
2e-05
0.25
-
1.22
0.02
9
1.86
2e-05
0.21
-
0.15
0.03
10
3.0
3e-05
0.2
0.01
2.83
0.05
11
18.75
3e-05
0.21
0.008
1.31
0.04
12
22.56
2e-05
0.2
0.006
2.37
0.03
13
13.14
4e-05
0.19
0.011
1.81
0.05
14
8.17
3e-05
0.17
-
2.41
0.05
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
389
==PAGE:398==
15
9.2
2e-05
0.16
0.004
2.33
0.03
16
9.11
2e-05
0.21
-
0.24
0.03
17
15.79
3e-05
0.17
0.007
1.53
0.04
18
13.15
5e-05
0.15
0.01
0.81
0.07
19
12.1
5e-05
0.14
-
1.25
0.07
20
21.76
3e-05
0.12
-
2.47
0.05
21
18.53
5e-05
0.11
-
1.85
0.06
22
7.36
4e-05
0.12
0.007
3.04
0.06
23
21.15
4e-05
0.1
0.005
2.78
0.05
24
20.65
3e-05
0.11
0.005
1.14
0.04
25
17.47
6e-05
0.11
-
2.26
0.08
26
14.78
6e-05
0.11
-
0.26
0.08
27
9.71
8e-05
0.08
0.009
0.75
0.11
28
17.16
4e-05
0.1
-
0.27
0.06
29
6.7
8e-05
0.09
0.009
2.89
0.11
30
19.15
5e-05
0.09
-
1.26
0.07
31
4.77
7e-05
0.08
-
1.77
0.09
32
15.35
6e-05
0.09
0.007
2.35
0.08
33
17.71
5e-05
0.08
0.006
1.94
0.07
34
7.62
7e-05
0.08
0.008
1.05
0.1
35
16.13
0.0001
0.08
0.01
1.62
0.13
36
15.56
8e-05
0.08
0.009
0.07
0.12
37
5.71
8e-05
0.07
-
1.53
0.11
38
24.46
4e-05
0.08
-
1.94
0.06
39
1.31
0.00012
0.06
-
2.27
0.17
40
0.4
0.00012
0.07
-
2.68
0.16
41
4.37
6e-05
0.07
0.006
0.08
0.09
42
16.86
0.0001
0.06
0.009
2.35
0.13
43
5.8
7e-05
0.06
-
0.18
0.1
44
3.81
0.00013
0.06
0.01
1.16
0.18
45
13.59
0.00012
0.06
-
1.22
0.17
46
7.33
7e-05
0.06
-
0.0
0.09
47
21.91
7e-05
0.06
0.006
0.53
0.1
48
4.67
0.00012
0.05
-
1.75
0.17
49
10.75
0.0001
0.05
-
0.49
0.14
50
12.65
9e-05
0.06
0.007
0.92
0.12
51
0.32
0.0001
0.06
-
0.09
0.14
52
9.5
0.00011
0.06
0.008
2.38
0.15
53
8.98
0.0001
0.06
-
2.85
0.14
54
3.39
0.0001
0.05
0.007
1.04
0.14
55
9.46
0.00013
0.05
0.008
2.35
0.18
56
18.14
0.00013
0.04
0.008
0.44
0.18
57
12.95
0.00018
0.04
-
1.23
0.24
58
8.63
0.00019
0.04
-
1.31
0.26
59
23.8
7e-05
0.04
0.004
0.76
0.1
60
5.0
0.00018
0.04
-
2.91
0.25
61
6.21
0.00016
0.04
-
2.85
0.22
62
28.26
7e-05
0.03
0.003
1.42
0.1
63
0.24
0.0002
0.04
0.01
3.02
0.28
64
5.74
0.00015
0.04
0.008
1.98
0.21
390
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:399==
65
3.42
0.00013
0.03
-
1.3
0.18
66
35.67
7e-05
0.03
-
2.26
0.1
67
2.44
0.00017
0.03
0.008
1.7
0.24
68
10.4
0.00022
0.03
0.01
1.09
0.3
TIC 7597696
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.02
2e-05
1.09
0.025
2.89
0.02
2
1.1
2e-05
0.86
-
0.4
0.03
3
1.32
2e-05
0.76
-
2.28
0.03
4
7.95
3e-05
0.63
0.025
1.45
0.04
5
1.78
3e-05
0.55
-
1.24
0.04
6
1.18
3e-05
0.5
-
1.14
0.04
7
1.94
4e-05
0.45
-
0.4
0.06
8
1.37
4e-05
0.49
-
2.98
0.06
9
1.47
4e-05
0.46
-
2.31
0.06
10
1.42
4e-05
0.46
0.027
0.68
0.06
11
1.28
3e-05
0.44
-
2.36
0.05
12
0.85
4e-05
0.41
-
1.22
0.06
13
8.06
4e-05
0.4
0.023
0.59
0.06
14
2.04
7e-05
0.29
0.027
1.08
0.1
15
0.67
5e-05
0.34
-
0.52
0.08
16
0.4
5e-05
0.33
-
2.89
0.07
17
8.36
6e-05
0.3
0.027
0.51
0.09
18
1.51
7e-05
0.28
0.028
0.69
0.1
19
1.65
6e-05
0.28
0.023
2.15
0.08
20
8.52
8e-05
0.24
-
1.5
0.11
21
1.99
8e-05
0.23
-
1.68
0.12
22
8.57
8e-05
0.22
0.026
1.61
0.12
23
8.32
8e-05
0.23
0.027
2.18
0.12
24
6.58
0.0001
0.2
-
0.15
0.14
25
0.51
7e-05
0.23
0.024
2.73
0.11
26
9.41
8e-05
0.19
0.023
2.91
0.12
27
1.73
8e-05
0.18
0.022
0.19
0.12
28
7.29
0.00011
0.17
0.027
2.89
0.16
29
0.53
8e-05
0.2
0.022
0.89
0.11
30
9.07
6e-05
0.22
-
0.44
0.09
31
10.64
0.00012
0.17
0.03
1.28
0.17
32
9.32
0.00012
0.17
-
2.33
0.17
33
8.68
0.00013
0.15
-
1.58
0.19
34
10.05
0.00011
0.17
0.027
1.66
0.16
35
7.68
0.0001
0.17
-
2.96
0.14
36
0.66
0.00012
0.15
0.025
1.51
0.17
37
7.34
0.00013
0.15
0.028
0.74
0.19
38
6.68
0.00013
0.15
-
0.05
0.18
39
8.44
0.00012
0.16
-
0.12
0.17
40
8.12
0.00013
0.14
0.026
1.58
0.18
41
7.47
0.00015
0.13
0.029
0.58
0.22
42
10.24
0.00014
0.14
0.029
2.35
0.21
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
391
==PAGE:400==
43
9.12
0.00012
0.13
0.022
1.48
0.17
44
7.59
0.00012
0.13
0.024
0.56
0.18
45
10.46
0.00017
0.12
-
1.12
0.24
46
0.57
0.00012
0.12
-
0.19
0.17
47
10.35
0.00017
0.11
0.027
0.34
0.24
48
6.7
0.00017
0.12
-
0.25
0.24
49
9.9
0.00019
0.1
0.027
0.08
0.27
50
6.34
0.0002
0.11
-
0.58
0.29
51
0.24
0.00014
0.12
0.024
1.54
0.2
52
10.85
0.00019
0.1
-
1.84
0.28
53
6.5
0.00021
0.1
0.03
1.96
0.29
54
7.44
0.00019
0.1
-
0.75
0.27
55
7.39
0.00018
0.1
-
0.84
0.26
56
11.03
0.00016
0.1
0.022
2.79
0.22
57
6.75
0.00022
0.1
-
0.96
0.31
58
0.18
0.00017
0.1
0.025
0.47
0.24
59
0.73
0.00018
0.1
-
1.82
0.26
60
9.95
0.0002
0.1
-
1.61
0.28
TIC 7597696
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.02
2e-05
1.09
0.025
2.89
0.02
2
1.1
2e-05
0.86
-
0.4
0.03
3
1.32
2e-05
0.76
-
2.28
0.03
4
7.95
3e-05
0.63
0.025
1.45
0.04
5
1.78
3e-05
0.55
-
1.24
0.04
6
1.18
3e-05
0.5
-
1.14
0.04
7
1.94
4e-05
0.45
-
0.4
0.06
8
1.37
4e-05
0.49
-
2.98
0.06
9
1.47
4e-05
0.46
-
2.31
0.06
10
1.42
4e-05
0.46
0.027
0.68
0.06
11
1.28
3e-05
0.44
-
2.36
0.05
12
0.85
4e-05
0.41
-
1.22
0.06
13
8.06
4e-05
0.4
0.023
0.59
0.06
14
2.04
7e-05
0.29
0.027
1.08
0.1
15
0.67
5e-05
0.34
-
0.52
0.08
16
0.4
5e-05
0.33
-
2.89
0.07
17
8.36
6e-05
0.3
0.027
0.51
0.09
18
1.51
7e-05
0.28
0.028
0.69
0.1
19
1.65
6e-05
0.28
0.023
2.15
0.08
20
8.52
8e-05
0.24
-
1.5
0.11
21
1.99
8e-05
0.23
-
1.68
0.12
22
8.57
8e-05
0.22
0.026
1.61
0.12
23
8.32
8e-05
0.23
0.027
2.18
0.12
24
6.58
0.0001
0.2
-
0.15
0.14
25
0.51
7e-05
0.23
0.024
2.73
0.11
26
9.41
8e-05
0.19
0.023
2.91
0.12
27
1.73
8e-05
0.18
0.022
0.19
0.12
28
7.29
0.00011
0.17
0.027
2.89
0.16
392
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:401==
29
0.53
8e-05
0.2
0.022
0.89
0.11
30
9.07
6e-05
0.22
-
0.44
0.09
31
10.64
0.00012
0.17
0.03
1.28
0.17
32
9.32
0.00012
0.17
-
2.33
0.17
33
8.68
0.00013
0.15
-
1.58
0.19
34
10.05
0.00011
0.17
0.027
1.66
0.16
35
7.68
0.0001
0.17
-
2.96
0.14
36
0.66
0.00012
0.15
0.025
1.51
0.17
37
7.34
0.00013
0.15
0.028
0.74
0.19
38
6.68
0.00013
0.15
-
0.05
0.18
39
8.44
0.00012
0.16
-
0.12
0.17
40
8.12
0.00013
0.14
0.026
1.58
0.18
41
7.47
0.00015
0.13
0.029
0.58
0.22
42
10.24
0.00014
0.14
0.029
2.35
0.21
43
9.12
0.00012
0.13
0.022
1.48
0.17
44
7.59
0.00012
0.13
0.024
0.56
0.18
45
10.46
0.00017
0.12
-
1.12
0.24
46
0.57
0.00012
0.12
-
0.19
0.17
47
10.35
0.00017
0.11
0.027
0.34
0.24
48
6.7
0.00017
0.12
-
0.25
0.24
49
9.9
0.00019
0.1
0.027
0.08
0.27
50
6.34
0.0002
0.11
-
0.58
0.29
51
0.24
0.00014
0.12
0.024
1.54
0.2
52
10.85
0.00019
0.1
-
1.84
0.28
53
6.5
0.00021
0.1
0.03
1.96
0.29
54
7.44
0.00019
0.1
-
0.75
0.27
55
7.39
0.00018
0.1
-
0.84
0.26
56
11.03
0.00016
0.1
0.022
2.79
0.22
57
6.75
0.00022
0.1
-
0.96
0.31
58
0.18
0.00017
0.1
0.025
0.47
0.24
59
0.73
0.00018
0.1
-
1.82
0.26
60
9.95
0.0002
0.1
-
1.61
0.28
TIC 76987890
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.61
0.00015
6.01
-
2.02
0.01
2
0.8
0.00015
5.87
0.038
3.1
0.01
3
1.27
0.00054
1.47
-
1.88
0.02
4
2.28
0.0015
0.44
0.029
2.92
0.07
5
2.88
0.00253
0.23
0.025
0.59
0.11
6
2.66
0.00297
0.21
-
0.58
0.13
TIC 76987890
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.61
0.00015
6.01
-
2.02
0.01
2
0.8
0.00015
5.87
0.038
3.1
0.01
3
1.27
0.00054
1.47
-
1.88
0.02
4
2.28
0.0015
0.44
0.029
2.92
0.07
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
393
==PAGE:402==
5
2.88
0.00253
0.23
0.025
0.59
0.11
6
2.66
0.00297
0.21
-
0.58
0.13
TIC 79283165
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
5.69
0.0
2.39
0.004
1.8
0.0
2
1.27
1e-05
0.31
0.003
2.67
0.01
3
2.35
1e-05
0.23
0.002
2.23
0.01
4
2.02
1e-05
0.2
-
1.66
0.02
5
15.95
2e-05
0.14
0.003
1.24
0.03
6
2.23
1e-05
0.13
-
0.67
0.02
7
1.08
1e-05
0.14
-
0.61
0.02
8
2.41
1e-05
0.14
0.002
1.47
0.01
9
2.74
1e-05
0.09
0.002
1.12
0.02
10
1.34
2e-05
0.13
-
0.7
0.02
11
0.99
2e-05
0.13
-
2.05
0.02
12
2.81
1e-05
0.09
0.002
1.45
0.02
13
2.36
1e-05
0.1
-
2.02
0.02
14
1.54
3e-05
0.07
0.003
2.11
0.03
15
2.64
2e-05
0.07
-
1.67
0.03
16
2.71
2e-05
0.07
-
0.62
0.02
17
11.88
3e-05
0.07
-
0.85
0.04
18
17.33
2e-05
0.08
0.002
0.89
0.02
19
2.95
2e-05
0.09
0.002
2.35
0.03
20
1.16
2e-05
0.08
-
2.28
0.03
21
1.3
3e-05
0.09
0.003
1.51
0.04
22
2.5
3e-05
0.07
0.003
0.89
0.04
23
0.78
4e-05
0.06
0.003
1.35
0.05
24
0.38
2e-05
0.06
0.002
0.17
0.03
25
18.47
4e-05
0.07
0.003
0.64
0.05
26
10.76
3e-05
0.06
-
2.67
0.04
27
2.85
2e-05
0.06
0.002
0.1
0.03
28
3.5
3e-05
0.07
-
1.43
0.04
29
17.11
4e-05
0.06
0.003
1.04
0.05
30
3.21
5e-05
0.05
-
2.54
0.07
31
4.7
4e-05
0.06
-
3.1
0.05
32
6.53
3e-05
0.06
0.002
1.59
0.04
33
0.16
4e-05
0.05
-
0.87
0.06
34
2.08
3e-05
0.07
-
0.51
0.04
35
0.35
2e-05
0.06
-
0.63
0.03
36
3.43
4e-05
0.06
0.003
1.1
0.05
37
4.77
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.87
0.06
38
4.18
5e-05
0.04
-
1.72
0.07
39
2.8
2e-05
0.07
-
0.84
0.03
40
13.53
4e-05
0.05
-
2.32
0.05
41
7.65
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.92
0.07
42
0.32
2e-05
0.05
-
3.04
0.03
43
0.93
5e-05
0.05
0.003
0.14
0.06
44
1.62
3e-05
0.06
-
1.33
0.04
394
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:403==
45
3.08
5e-05
0.04
-
0.32
0.07
46
3.04
6e-05
0.04
0.003
1.54
0.08
47
0.61
6e-05
0.04
-
0.95
0.08
48
1.75
4e-05
0.04
0.002
2.5
0.06
49
1.67
4e-05
0.04
0.002
1.51
0.06
50
4.49
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.01
0.07
51
1.52
4e-05
0.05
0.003
2.08
0.05
52
0.76
4e-05
0.05
-
3.1
0.05
53
7.74
7e-05
0.03
-
2.96
0.1
54
3.29
6e-05
0.04
-
1.59
0.09
55
7.91
8e-05
0.03
-
1.38
0.11
56
4.29
7e-05
0.04
0.003
0.47
0.09
57
0.45
3e-05
0.05
-
2.79
0.04
58
19.77
7e-05
0.03
0.003
2.65
0.09
59
19.45
9e-05
0.03
-
3.04
0.12
60
0.54
8e-05
0.03
-
2.77
0.11
61
15.57
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.06
0.1
62
4.02
0.00011
0.02
0.004
2.17
0.15
63
0.23
6e-05
0.02
-
2.49
0.08
64
0.25
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.51
0.06
65
10.66
9e-05
0.02
0.003
2.89
0.13
66
10.73
8e-05
0.02
0.003
0.67
0.11
67
7.56
9e-05
0.02
-
0.63
0.12
68
3.82
0.00013
0.02
-
2.35
0.17
69
0.4
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.77
0.07
70
7.45
0.00012
0.02
-
1.44
0.16
71
2.47
7e-05
0.02
0.002
3.11
0.09
72
21.81
0.00012
0.02
-
0.08
0.15
73
18.62
0.00011
0.02
0.003
0.44
0.15
74
7.03
8e-05
0.02
-
2.57
0.1
75
16.72
0.00011
0.02
0.002
2.98
0.15
76
15.0
0.00014
0.02
-
2.03
0.19
77
4.38
0.00021
0.02
0.004
1.13
0.28
78
4.61
0.00013
0.02
-
0.73
0.18
79
2.27
0.00012
0.02
0.003
2.33
0.16
80
6.6
0.00012
0.01
-
2.16
0.16
81
26.24
8e-05
0.01
-
0.02
0.11
82
9.39
0.00017
0.01
-
0.42
0.23
83
3.85
0.00021
0.01
0.004
2.57
0.27
84
25.45
9e-05
0.01
0.002
0.83
0.12
85
18.55
0.00019
0.01
0.003
2.34
0.26
86
18.3
0.00015
0.01
-
0.26
0.2
87
3.67
0.00017
0.01
0.003
2.02
0.23
88
10.25
0.0002
0.01
-
0.85
0.26
89
10.06
0.00018
0.01
0.003
2.22
0.24
90
1.45
0.00016
0.01
0.003
0.55
0.21
91
0.49
0.00014
0.01
-
0.7
0.19
92
6.96
0.00014
0.01
-
0.43
0.18
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
395
==PAGE:404==
TIC 79283165
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
5.69
0.0
2.39
0.004
1.8
0.0
2
1.27
1e-05
0.31
0.003
2.67
0.01
3
2.35
1e-05
0.23
0.002
2.23
0.01
4
2.02
1e-05
0.2
-
1.66
0.02
5
15.95
2e-05
0.14
0.003
1.24
0.03
6
2.23
1e-05
0.13
-
0.67
0.02
7
1.08
1e-05
0.14
-
0.61
0.02
8
2.41
1e-05
0.14
0.002
1.47
0.01
9
2.74
1e-05
0.09
0.002
1.12
0.02
10
1.34
2e-05
0.13
-
0.7
0.02
11
0.99
2e-05
0.13
-
2.05
0.02
12
2.81
1e-05
0.09
0.002
1.45
0.02
13
2.36
1e-05
0.1
-
2.02
0.02
14
1.54
3e-05
0.07
0.003
2.11
0.03
15
2.64
2e-05
0.07
-
1.67
0.03
16
2.71
2e-05
0.07
-
0.62
0.02
17
11.88
3e-05
0.07
-
0.85
0.04
18
17.33
2e-05
0.08
0.002
0.89
0.02
19
2.95
2e-05
0.09
0.002
2.35
0.03
20
1.16
2e-05
0.08
-
2.28
0.03
21
1.3
3e-05
0.09
0.003
1.51
0.04
22
2.5
3e-05
0.07
0.003
0.89
0.04
23
0.78
4e-05
0.06
0.003
1.35
0.05
24
0.38
2e-05
0.06
0.002
0.17
0.03
25
18.47
4e-05
0.07
0.003
0.64
0.05
26
10.76
3e-05
0.06
-
2.67
0.04
27
2.85
2e-05
0.06
0.002
0.1
0.03
28
3.5
3e-05
0.07
-
1.43
0.04
29
17.11
4e-05
0.06
0.003
1.04
0.05
30
3.21
5e-05
0.05
-
2.54
0.07
31
4.7
4e-05
0.06
-
3.1
0.05
32
6.53
3e-05
0.06
0.002
1.59
0.04
33
0.16
4e-05
0.05
-
0.87
0.06
34
2.08
3e-05
0.07
-
0.51
0.04
35
0.35
2e-05
0.06
-
0.63
0.03
36
3.43
4e-05
0.06
0.003
1.1
0.05
37
4.77
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.87
0.06
38
4.18
5e-05
0.04
-
1.72
0.07
39
2.8
2e-05
0.07
-
0.84
0.03
40
13.53
4e-05
0.05
-
2.32
0.05
41
7.65
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.92
0.07
42
0.32
2e-05
0.05
-
3.04
0.03
43
0.93
5e-05
0.05
0.003
0.14
0.06
44
1.62
3e-05
0.06
-
1.33
0.04
45
3.08
5e-05
0.04
-
0.32
0.07
46
3.04
6e-05
0.04
0.003
1.54
0.08
47
0.61
6e-05
0.04
-
0.95
0.08
396
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:405==
48
1.75
4e-05
0.04
0.002
2.5
0.06
49
1.67
4e-05
0.04
0.002
1.51
0.06
50
4.49
5e-05
0.04
0.003
0.01
0.07
51
1.52
4e-05
0.05
0.003
2.08
0.05
52
0.76
4e-05
0.05
-
3.1
0.05
53
7.74
7e-05
0.03
-
2.96
0.1
54
3.29
6e-05
0.04
-
1.59
0.09
55
7.91
8e-05
0.03
-
1.38
0.11
56
4.29
7e-05
0.04
0.003
0.47
0.09
57
0.45
3e-05
0.05
-
2.79
0.04
58
19.77
7e-05
0.03
0.003
2.65
0.09
59
19.45
9e-05
0.03
-
3.04
0.12
60
0.54
8e-05
0.03
-
2.77
0.11
61
15.57
7e-05
0.02
0.002
2.06
0.1
62
4.02
0.00011
0.02
0.004
2.17
0.15
63
0.23
6e-05
0.02
-
2.49
0.08
64
0.25
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.51
0.06
65
10.66
9e-05
0.02
0.003
2.89
0.13
66
10.73
8e-05
0.02
0.003
0.67
0.11
67
7.56
9e-05
0.02
-
0.63
0.12
68
3.82
0.00013
0.02
-
2.35
0.17
69
0.4
5e-05
0.03
0.002
1.77
0.07
70
7.45
0.00012
0.02
-
1.44
0.16
71
2.47
7e-05
0.02
0.002
3.11
0.09
72
21.81
0.00012
0.02
-
0.08
0.15
73
18.62
0.00011
0.02
0.003
0.44
0.15
74
7.03
8e-05
0.02
-
2.57
0.1
75
16.72
0.00011
0.02
0.002
2.98
0.15
76
15.0
0.00014
0.02
-
2.03
0.19
77
4.38
0.00021
0.02
0.004
1.13
0.28
78
4.61
0.00013
0.02
-
0.73
0.18
79
2.27
0.00012
0.02
0.003
2.33
0.16
80
6.6
0.00012
0.01
-
2.16
0.16
81
26.24
8e-05
0.01
-
0.02
0.11
82
9.39
0.00017
0.01
-
0.42
0.23
83
3.85
0.00021
0.01
0.004
2.57
0.27
84
25.45
9e-05
0.01
0.002
0.83
0.12
85
18.55
0.00019
0.01
0.003
2.34
0.26
86
18.3
0.00015
0.01
-
0.26
0.2
87
3.67
0.00017
0.01
0.003
2.02
0.23
88
10.25
0.0002
0.01
-
0.85
0.26
89
10.06
0.00018
0.01
0.003
2.22
0.24
90
1.45
0.00016
0.01
0.003
0.55
0.21
91
0.49
0.00014
0.01
-
0.7
0.19
92
6.96
0.00014
0.01
-
0.43
0.18
TIC 80717580
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.2
6e-05
3.44
-
0.62
0.01
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
397
==PAGE:406==
2
2.07
6e-05
3.33
-
0.35
0.01
3
2.36
8e-05
2.42
-
1.6
0.01
4
1.95
0.00015
1.25
0.018
1.76
0.01
5
12.12
0.00029
0.66
-
2.77
0.03
6
1.53
0.00032
0.6
0.018
2.8
0.03
7
18.83
0.0002
0.56
0.01
1.93
0.02
8
14.37
0.00048
0.36
0.016
1.35
0.04
9
11.69
0.00061
0.32
0.018
1.48
0.06
10
12.24
0.00056
0.34
-
0.19
0.05
11
13.05
0.00075
0.25
0.017
1.88
0.07
12
11.52
0.00073
0.26
-
0.19
0.07
13
1.41
0.00087
0.22
0.018
2.76
0.08
14
9.88
0.00119
0.16
-
3.05
0.11
15
12.32
0.00133
0.14
0.018
0.05
0.12
16
4.28
0.00128
0.13
-
2.37
0.12
17
4.15
0.00152
0.12
-
0.52
0.14
18
11.22
0.00213
0.09
-
2.15
0.2
19
11.37
0.00154
0.12
-
0.19
0.14
20
9.46
0.00176
0.1
-
1.77
0.16
21
11.57
0.0018
0.11
0.018
2.67
0.17
22
2.54
0.00198
0.1
-
2.35
0.18
23
4.44
0.00199
0.09
0.016
0.41
0.18
24
10.61
0.00214
0.09
-
2.82
0.2
25
10.71
0.00282
0.07
-
0.06
0.26
26
14.2
0.00177
0.1
-
0.54
0.16
27
0.03
0.00227
0.09
0.018
0.49
0.21
28
0.21
0.00262
0.08
0.018
2.44
0.24
29
10.29
0.00238
0.08
0.017
0.23
0.22
30
14.27
0.00223
0.08
0.016
2.98
0.21
31
7.19
0.00245
0.07
-
2.86
0.23
32
12.51
0.00227
0.08
-
2.72
0.21
33
19.3
0.00169
0.06
0.01
2.7
0.16
34
14.92
0.0025
0.06
-
0.7
0.23
35
11.07
0.00267
0.07
-
0.86
0.25
36
13.97
0.00249
0.07
-
0.36
0.23
37
12.94
0.00298
0.06
0.017
2.72
0.28
TIC 80717580
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.2
6e-05
3.44
-
0.62
0.01
2
2.07
6e-05
3.33
-
0.35
0.01
3
2.36
8e-05
2.42
-
1.6
0.01
4
1.95
0.00015
1.25
0.018
1.76
0.01
5
12.12
0.00029
0.66
-
2.77
0.03
6
1.53
0.00032
0.6
0.018
2.8
0.03
7
18.83
0.0002
0.56
0.01
1.93
0.02
8
14.37
0.00048
0.36
0.016
1.35
0.04
9
11.69
0.00061
0.32
0.018
1.48
0.06
10
12.24
0.00056
0.34
-
0.19
0.05
398
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:407==
11
13.05
0.00075
0.25
0.017
1.88
0.07
12
11.52
0.00073
0.26
-
0.19
0.07
13
1.41
0.00087
0.22
0.018
2.76
0.08
14
9.88
0.00119
0.16
-
3.05
0.11
15
12.32
0.00133
0.14
0.018
0.05
0.12
16
4.28
0.00128
0.13
-
2.37
0.12
17
4.15
0.00152
0.12
-
0.52
0.14
18
11.22
0.00213
0.09
-
2.15
0.2
19
11.37
0.00154
0.12
-
0.19
0.14
20
9.46
0.00176
0.1
-
1.77
0.16
21
11.57
0.0018
0.11
0.018
2.67
0.17
22
2.54
0.00198
0.1
-
2.35
0.18
23
4.44
0.00199
0.09
0.016
0.41
0.18
24
10.61
0.00214
0.09
-
2.82
0.2
25
10.71
0.00282
0.07
-
0.06
0.26
26
14.2
0.00177
0.1
-
0.54
0.16
27
0.03
0.00227
0.09
0.018
0.49
0.21
28
0.21
0.00262
0.08
0.018
2.44
0.24
29
10.29
0.00238
0.08
0.017
0.23
0.22
30
14.27
0.00223
0.08
0.016
2.98
0.21
31
7.19
0.00245
0.07
-
2.86
0.23
32
12.51
0.00227
0.08
-
2.72
0.21
33
19.3
0.00169
0.06
0.01
2.7
0.16
34
14.92
0.0025
0.06
-
0.7
0.23
35
11.07
0.00267
0.07
-
0.86
0.25
36
13.97
0.00249
0.07
-
0.36
0.23
37
12.94
0.00298
0.06
0.017
2.72
0.28
TIC 81003138
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.87
0.0
21.4
-
0.8
0.0
2
8.81
0.0
19.8
0.016
0.6
0.0
3
14.1
0.0
3.94
0.02
2.63
0.01
4
13.45
1e-05
2.08
-
1.02
0.01
5
17.62
1e-05
2.27
-
2.37
0.01
6
14.52
1e-05
1.0
-
0.57
0.02
7
17.73
1e-05
1.28
-
0.39
0.01
8
14.36
1e-05
1.01
0.016
0.33
0.02
9
14.45
1e-05
0.95
0.016
2.28
0.02
10
0.05
4e-05
0.49
0.027
0.06
0.05
11
22.96
3e-05
0.49
-
2.75
0.04
12
22.32
2e-05
0.45
0.012
1.06
0.03
13
7.46
1e-05
0.38
-
0.85
0.02
14
0.08
4e-05
0.52
0.028
1.52
0.05
15
22.27
2e-05
0.34
0.011
2.42
0.03
16
26.49
5e-05
0.32
0.023
2.28
0.07
17
23.23
6e-05
0.27
-
0.79
0.08
18
26.43
5e-05
0.26
0.019
0.96
0.07
19
23.26
7e-05
0.26
0.027
2.35
0.1
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
399
==PAGE:408==
20
22.78
7e-05
0.22
-
0.09
0.1
21
5.23
5e-05
0.21
0.014
3.05
0.07
22
0.0
1e-05
4.47
-
3.12
0.01
23
13.61
7e-05
0.18
0.016
1.28
0.09
24
23.03
7e-05
0.16
-
0.52
0.1
25
4.64
6e-05
0.16
0.013
2.09
0.08
26
28.13
5e-05
0.15
-
1.01
0.06
27
14.1
9e-05
0.16
0.02
1.57
0.12
28
12.93
6e-05
0.13
-
2.05
0.08
29
5.66
7e-05
0.13
-
2.03
0.1
30
3.56
5e-05
0.12
0.008
0.7
0.07
31
22.88
0.00013
0.11
0.018
2.45
0.17
32
31.68
0.00017
0.11
-
2.04
0.23
33
23.31
0.00015
0.12
-
3.08
0.21
34
31.14
9e-05
0.1
0.013
1.41
0.13
35
3.52
5e-05
0.1
-
0.88
0.07
36
26.99
6e-05
0.09
-
2.35
0.08
37
16.32
3e-05
0.09
0.004
1.75
0.05
TIC 81003138
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.87
0.0
21.4
-
0.8
0.0
2
8.81
0.0
19.8
0.016
0.6
0.0
3
14.1
0.0
3.94
0.02
2.63
0.01
4
13.45
1e-05
2.08
-
1.02
0.01
5
17.62
1e-05
2.27
-
2.37
0.01
6
14.52
1e-05
1.0
-
0.57
0.02
7
17.73
1e-05
1.28
-
0.39
0.01
8
14.36
1e-05
1.01
0.016
0.33
0.02
9
14.45
1e-05
0.95
0.016
2.28
0.02
10
0.05
4e-05
0.49
0.027
0.06
0.05
11
22.96
3e-05
0.49
-
2.75
0.04
12
22.32
2e-05
0.45
0.012
1.06
0.03
13
7.46
1e-05
0.38
-
0.85
0.02
14
0.08
4e-05
0.52
0.028
1.52
0.05
15
22.27
2e-05
0.34
0.011
2.42
0.03
16
26.49
5e-05
0.32
0.023
2.28
0.07
17
23.23
6e-05
0.27
-
0.79
0.08
18
26.43
5e-05
0.26
0.019
0.96
0.07
19
23.26
7e-05
0.26
0.027
2.35
0.1
20
22.78
7e-05
0.22
-
0.09
0.1
21
5.23
5e-05
0.21
0.014
3.05
0.07
22
0.0
1e-05
4.47
-
3.12
0.01
23
13.61
7e-05
0.18
0.016
1.28
0.09
24
23.03
7e-05
0.16
-
0.52
0.1
25
4.64
6e-05
0.16
0.013
2.09
0.08
26
28.13
5e-05
0.15
-
1.01
0.06
27
14.1
9e-05
0.16
0.02
1.57
0.12
28
12.93
6e-05
0.13
-
2.05
0.08
400
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:409==
29
5.66
7e-05
0.13
-
2.03
0.1
30
3.56
5e-05
0.12
0.008
0.7
0.07
31
22.88
0.00013
0.11
0.018
2.45
0.17
32
31.68
0.00017
0.11
-
2.04
0.23
33
23.31
0.00015
0.12
-
3.08
0.21
34
31.14
9e-05
0.1
0.013
1.41
0.13
35
3.52
5e-05
0.1
-
0.88
0.07
36
26.99
6e-05
0.09
-
2.35
0.08
37
16.32
3e-05
0.09
0.004
1.75
0.05
TIC 8152515
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.11
0.0
6.29
-
0.62
0.0
2
8.33
0.0
5.47
0.035
2.74
0.01
3
12.6
1e-05
1.75
-
1.86
0.02
4
8.5
1e-05
1.65
-
0.84
0.02
5
7.68
1e-05
1.45
-
0.04
0.02
6
13.02
1e-05
1.46
0.02
1.1
0.01
7
13.18
2e-05
1.11
-
2.52
0.02
8
12.14
2e-05
1.05
0.027
2.37
0.03
9
13.82
2e-05
0.86
-
0.73
0.02
10
14.0
2e-05
0.61
-
2.67
0.03
11
11.78
3e-05
0.6
0.022
1.91
0.04
12
8.7
3e-05
0.55
-
0.31
0.04
13
10.52
4e-05
0.49
0.027
0.93
0.06
14
12.77
4e-05
0.52
0.028
3.07
0.05
15
12.9
3e-05
0.46
0.018
2.7
0.04
16
9.56
3e-05
0.38
0.016
1.9
0.04
17
10.29
3e-05
0.32
0.012
3.05
0.04
18
7.51
0.0001
0.21
-
2.64
0.13
19
9.87
3e-05
0.18
-
1.69
0.04
20
16.43
8e-05
0.16
-
2.7
0.11
TIC 8152515
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
8.11
0.0
6.29
-
0.62
0.0
2
8.33
0.0
5.47
0.035
2.74
0.01
3
12.6
1e-05
1.75
-
1.86
0.02
4
8.5
1e-05
1.65
-
0.84
0.02
5
7.68
1e-05
1.45
-
0.04
0.02
6
13.02
1e-05
1.46
0.02
1.1
0.01
7
13.18
2e-05
1.11
-
2.52
0.02
8
12.14
2e-05
1.05
0.027
2.37
0.03
9
13.82
2e-05
0.86
-
0.73
0.02
10
14.0
2e-05
0.61
-
2.67
0.03
11
11.78
3e-05
0.6
0.022
1.91
0.04
12
8.7
3e-05
0.55
-
0.31
0.04
13
10.52
4e-05
0.49
0.027
0.93
0.06
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
401
==PAGE:410==
14
12.77
4e-05
0.52
0.028
3.07
0.05
15
12.9
3e-05
0.46
0.018
2.7
0.04
16
9.56
3e-05
0.38
0.016
1.9
0.04
17
10.29
3e-05
0.32
0.012
3.05
0.04
18
7.51
0.0001
0.21
-
2.64
0.13
19
9.87
3e-05
0.18
-
1.69
0.04
20
16.43
8e-05
0.16
-
2.7
0.11
TIC 82551645
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
6.93
1e-05
13.18
-
3.08
0.0
2
6.77
2e-05
5.95
0.009
2.56
0.0
3
6.59
2e-05
4.27
0.009
0.26
0.0
4
6.7
3e-05
3.13
-
2.75
0.0
5
7.09
4e-05
2.43
0.009
3.02
0.0
6
13.67
6e-05
1.54
0.008
2.4
0.01
7
6.67
8e-05
1.31
-
1.94
0.01
8
13.7
8e-05
1.22
-
1.72
0.01
9
7.64
0.0001
0.94
0.009
1.83
0.01
10
10.01
9e-05
0.97
0.008
0.15
0.01
11
6.28
0.00011
0.97
-
2.24
0.01
12
13.43
0.00011
0.82
-
2.44
0.01
13
4.16
0.00013
0.78
0.009
0.54
0.01
14
9.34
0.00012
0.79
0.008
2.66
0.01
15
13.87
0.00013
0.72
-
0.56
0.01
16
9.17
0.00014
0.68
0.009
1.27
0.01
17
8.78
0.00015
0.62
-
1.52
0.01
18
5.87
0.00018
0.56
0.009
1.34
0.02
19
3.7
0.00021
0.48
0.009
2.74
0.02
20
8.89
0.00021
0.43
-
0.02
0.02
21
7.54
0.00024
0.4
-
3.03
0.02
22
4.3
0.00026
0.39
0.009
2.55
0.02
23
0.12
0.00028
0.41
0.011
2.34
0.03
24
3.94
0.00026
0.39
-
0.17
0.02
25
9.81
0.00029
0.31
-
3.13
0.03
26
12.13
0.00032
0.3
0.009
2.72
0.03
27
5.65
0.00032
0.31
0.009
2.01
0.03
28
0.28
0.00038
0.31
0.011
1.05
0.03
29
3.97
0.00035
0.28
0.009
1.35
0.03
30
3.74
0.00039
0.26
0.009
1.89
0.04
31
0.46
0.00047
0.27
-
3.08
0.04
32
4.09
0.00044
0.23
-
1.06
0.04
33
10.88
0.00044
0.21
-
2.39
0.04
34
13.34
0.00035
0.26
0.008
1.38
0.03
35
12.84
0.00059
0.16
0.009
0.57
0.05
36
0.4
0.00079
0.16
-
1.52
0.07
37
0.49
0.00085
0.15
0.011
2.17
0.08
38
20.6
0.00048
0.14
-
0.58
0.04
39
4.42
0.00068
0.15
-
0.05
0.06
402
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:411==
40
8.86
0.0006
0.15
0.008
2.6
0.05
41
3.6
0.00082
0.12
0.009
0.29
0.07
42
11.19
0.00074
0.12
0.008
0.5
0.07
43
13.3
0.00065
0.14
0.008
0.68
0.06
44
3.22
0.00108
0.09
0.009
2.67
0.1
45
0.52
0.001
0.12
0.011
2.29
0.09
46
14.23
0.001
0.1
-
0.56
0.09
47
4.06
0.00104
0.1
0.009
0.3
0.09
48
20.46
0.0007
0.1
0.006
1.2
0.06
49
20.63
0.00061
0.11
-
3.1
0.06
50
16.71
0.00092
0.08
0.007
2.81
0.08
51
0.31
0.00106
0.11
0.011
0.78
0.1
52
15.94
0.00106
0.08
0.007
2.97
0.1
53
16.28
0.00102
0.08
-
1.38
0.09
54
20.37
0.00077
0.09
-
0.94
0.07
55
0.65
0.00116
0.11
0.011
1.43
0.11
56
20.2
0.00093
0.07
-
1.5
0.08
57
14.57
0.00129
0.07
-
0.67
0.12
58
15.83
0.0012
0.07
-
0.48
0.11
59
0.77
0.00166
0.07
0.011
1.61
0.15
60
16.75
0.00124
0.06
-
0.94
0.11
61
9.87
0.00162
0.06
0.008
1.12
0.15
62
3.4
0.00158
0.06
-
2.66
0.14
63
3.63
0.00177
0.06
-
0.82
0.16
64
20.81
0.00134
0.05
0.006
0.31
0.12
65
16.85
0.00154
0.05
0.007
1.27
0.14
66
4.86
0.00173
0.06
0.009
2.6
0.16
67
4.93
0.00185
0.05
0.009
3.05
0.17
68
0.85
0.00229
0.05
-
0.36
0.21
69
12.32
0.00215
0.05
0.009
2.95
0.2
70
3.07
0.00232
0.04
0.009
2.71
0.21
71
10.64
0.00209
0.04
-
0.33
0.19
72
13.02
0.00216
0.04
-
1.85
0.2
73
14.11
0.00233
0.04
-
0.98
0.21
74
16.04
0.00204
0.04
0.007
0.25
0.19
TIC 82551645
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
6.93
1e-05
13.18
-
3.08
0.0
2
6.77
2e-05
5.95
0.009
2.56
0.0
3
6.59
2e-05
4.27
0.009
0.26
0.0
4
6.7
3e-05
3.13
-
2.75
0.0
5
7.09
4e-05
2.43
0.009
3.02
0.0
6
13.67
6e-05
1.54
0.008
2.4
0.01
7
6.67
8e-05
1.31
-
1.94
0.01
8
13.7
8e-05
1.22
-
1.72
0.01
9
7.64
0.0001
0.94
0.009
1.83
0.01
10
10.01
9e-05
0.97
0.008
0.15
0.01
11
6.28
0.00011
0.97
-
2.24
0.01
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
403
==PAGE:412==
12
13.43
0.00011
0.82
-
2.44
0.01
13
4.16
0.00013
0.78
0.009
0.54
0.01
14
9.34
0.00012
0.79
0.008
2.66
0.01
15
13.87
0.00013
0.72
-
0.56
0.01
16
9.17
0.00014
0.68
0.009
1.27
0.01
17
8.78
0.00015
0.62
-
1.52
0.01
18
5.87
0.00018
0.56
0.009
1.34
0.02
19
3.7
0.00021
0.48
0.009
2.74
0.02
20
8.89
0.00021
0.43
-
0.02
0.02
21
7.54
0.00024
0.4
-
3.03
0.02
22
4.3
0.00026
0.39
0.009
2.55
0.02
23
0.12
0.00028
0.41
0.011
2.34
0.03
24
3.94
0.00026
0.39
-
0.17
0.02
25
9.81
0.00029
0.31
-
3.13
0.03
26
12.13
0.00032
0.3
0.009
2.72
0.03
27
5.65
0.00032
0.31
0.009
2.01
0.03
28
0.28
0.00038
0.31
0.011
1.05
0.03
29
3.97
0.00035
0.28
0.009
1.35
0.03
30
3.74
0.00039
0.26
0.009
1.89
0.04
31
0.46
0.00047
0.27
-
3.08
0.04
32
4.09
0.00044
0.23
-
1.06
0.04
33
10.88
0.00044
0.21
-
2.39
0.04
34
13.34
0.00035
0.26
0.008
1.38
0.03
35
12.84
0.00059
0.16
0.009
0.57
0.05
36
0.4
0.00079
0.16
-
1.52
0.07
37
0.49
0.00085
0.15
0.011
2.17
0.08
38
20.6
0.00048
0.14
-
0.58
0.04
39
4.42
0.00068
0.15
-
0.05
0.06
40
8.86
0.0006
0.15
0.008
2.6
0.05
41
3.6
0.00082
0.12
0.009
0.29
0.07
42
11.19
0.00074
0.12
0.008
0.5
0.07
43
13.3
0.00065
0.14
0.008
0.68
0.06
44
3.22
0.00108
0.09
0.009
2.67
0.1
45
0.52
0.001
0.12
0.011
2.29
0.09
46
14.23
0.001
0.1
-
0.56
0.09
47
4.06
0.00104
0.1
0.009
0.3
0.09
48
20.46
0.0007
0.1
0.006
1.2
0.06
49
20.63
0.00061
0.11
-
3.1
0.06
50
16.71
0.00092
0.08
0.007
2.81
0.08
51
0.31
0.00106
0.11
0.011
0.78
0.1
52
15.94
0.00106
0.08
0.007
2.97
0.1
53
16.28
0.00102
0.08
-
1.38
0.09
54
20.37
0.00077
0.09
-
0.94
0.07
55
0.65
0.00116
0.11
0.011
1.43
0.11
56
20.2
0.00093
0.07
-
1.5
0.08
57
14.57
0.00129
0.07
-
0.67
0.12
58
15.83
0.0012
0.07
-
0.48
0.11
59
0.77
0.00166
0.07
0.011
1.61
0.15
60
16.75
0.00124
0.06
-
0.94
0.11
61
9.87
0.00162
0.06
0.008
1.12
0.15
404
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:413==
62
3.4
0.00158
0.06
-
2.66
0.14
63
3.63
0.00177
0.06
-
0.82
0.16
64
20.81
0.00134
0.05
0.006
0.31
0.12
65
16.85
0.00154
0.05
0.007
1.27
0.14
66
4.86
0.00173
0.06
0.009
2.6
0.16
67
4.93
0.00185
0.05
0.009
3.05
0.17
68
0.85
0.00229
0.05
-
0.36
0.21
69
12.32
0.00215
0.05
0.009
2.95
0.2
70
3.07
0.00232
0.04
0.009
2.71
0.21
71
10.64
0.00209
0.04
-
0.33
0.19
72
13.02
0.00216
0.04
-
1.85
0.2
73
14.11
0.00233
0.04
-
0.98
0.21
74
16.04
0.00204
0.04
0.007
0.25
0.19
TIC 85368942
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.39
0.00018
1.83
-
3.13
0.01
2
1.55
0.00042
0.8
-
1.17
0.02
3
0.77
0.00053
0.68
-
2.04
0.02
4
0.97
0.00053
0.67
-
1.32
0.02
5
1.81
0.00077
0.42
-
1.76
0.03
6
1.96
0.0011
0.29
-
2.1
0.05
7
0.21
0.00209
0.18
-
0.03
0.09
8
2.2
0.00269
0.11
0.014
0.21
0.12
9
2.05
0.00301
0.1
0.014
3.06
0.14
10
2.88
0.00341
0.08
-
2.9
0.15
TIC 85368942
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
1.39
0.00018
1.83
-
3.13
0.01
2
1.55
0.00042
0.8
-
1.17
0.02
3
0.77
0.00053
0.68
-
2.04
0.02
4
0.97
0.00053
0.67
-
1.32
0.02
5
1.81
0.00077
0.42
-
1.76
0.03
6
1.96
0.0011
0.29
-
2.1
0.05
7
0.21
0.00209
0.18
-
0.03
0.09
8
2.2
0.00269
0.11
0.014
0.21
0.12
9
2.05
0.00301
0.1
0.014
3.06
0.14
10
2.88
0.00341
0.08
-
2.9
0.15
TIC 85414240
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.63
3e-05
0.61
0.013
0.14
0.02
2
1.29
8e-05
0.3
-
2.17
0.06
3
1.26
0.00019
0.13
0.017
0.71
0.14
4
0.53
0.00018
0.09
0.012
1.78
0.13
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
405
==PAGE:414==
TIC 85414240
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.63
3e-05
0.61
0.013
0.14
0.02
2
1.29
8e-05
0.3
-
2.17
0.06
3
1.26
0.00019
0.13
0.017
0.71
0.14
4
0.53
0.00018
0.09
0.012
1.78
0.13
TIC 86231820
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.04
6e-05
0.7
-
1.17
0.01
2
29.73
7e-05
0.68
0.005
2.93
0.01
3
26.58
8e-05
0.56
0.005
2.08
0.01
4
32.32
0.0001
0.5
0.005
2.07
0.01
5
24.18
0.00011
0.43
0.005
0.46
0.01
6
27.45
0.00014
0.34
-
1.15
0.01
7
30.03
0.00017
0.28
0.005
2.1
0.02
8
14.48
0.00022
0.2
0.004
0.95
0.02
9
31.59
0.00025
0.18
0.005
2.98
0.02
10
28.31
0.00028
0.17
-
0.17
0.03
11
16.09
0.00027
0.17
0.005
2.86
0.03
12
26.08
0.0003
0.16
-
1.83
0.03
13
30.05
0.00031
0.15
-
1.31
0.03
14
10.93
0.00035
0.13
0.004
0.86
0.03
15
19.71
0.00033
0.13
0.004
1.47
0.03
16
37.55
0.00028
0.17
-
0.63
0.03
17
33.23
0.00044
0.11
-
2.83
0.04
18
38.45
0.00051
0.1
-
2.62
0.05
19
13.55
0.0005
0.08
0.004
2.56
0.05
20
35.77
0.00057
0.08
0.005
2.4
0.06
21
33.71
0.00057
0.08
0.005
0.17
0.06
22
39.08
0.00059
0.08
-
0.38
0.06
23
11.06
0.00054
0.08
0.004
1.39
0.05
24
23.1
0.00052
0.08
0.004
1.39
0.05
25
13.64
0.00051
0.08
0.004
0.94
0.05
26
20.41
0.00053
0.08
-
0.32
0.05
27
35.21
0.00067
0.07
0.005
0.98
0.07
28
18.42
0.0006
0.07
0.004
0.44
0.06
29
22.74
0.0006
0.07
-
0.27
0.06
30
32.87
0.00066
0.07
-
1.12
0.07
31
37.45
0.00071
0.07
0.005
0.28
0.07
32
19.21
0.00067
0.06
0.004
2.75
0.07
33
31.23
0.00067
0.07
-
2.93
0.07
34
25.53
0.00072
0.07
0.005
1.37
0.07
35
42.49
0.00068
0.07
-
2.69
0.07
36
35.92
0.00072
0.06
-
1.63
0.07
37
28.85
0.00078
0.06
-
2.0
0.08
406
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:415==
38
15.75
0.00076
0.06
0.004
1.1
0.08
39
11.97
0.00074
0.06
-
2.71
0.07
40
21.63
0.00069
0.06
-
0.67
0.07
41
14.79
0.00082
0.05
0.004
2.28
0.08
42
32.63
0.00082
0.06
-
0.29
0.08
43
22.98
0.00076
0.05
-
0.71
0.08
44
14.7
0.00085
0.05
-
2.18
0.09
45
31.87
0.00091
0.05
0.005
1.46
0.09
46
33.87
0.00096
0.05
0.005
1.65
0.1
47
34.77
0.00096
0.05
-
1.86
0.1
48
47.2
0.00104
0.05
0.005
2.53
0.1
49
13.48
0.0009
0.05
-
1.66
0.09
50
22.65
0.00097
0.04
0.004
0.61
0.1
51
47.29
0.00112
0.04
-
2.65
0.11
52
40.34
0.00109
0.04
-
0.88
0.11
53
48.82
0.00111
0.04
-
1.27
0.11
54
45.9
0.00123
0.04
0.005
2.72
0.12
55
38.11
0.00119
0.04
-
1.05
0.12
56
20.26
0.00089
0.05
-
1.69
0.09
57
20.63
0.001
0.04
-
1.99
0.1
58
20.23
0.00093
0.04
0.004
1.02
0.09
59
34.29
0.00115
0.04
-
2.18
0.12
60
36.03
0.00117
0.04
-
0.82
0.12
61
48.62
0.0012
0.04
0.005
1.95
0.12
62
2.56
0.00123
0.04
-
1.86
0.12
63
26.69
0.00117
0.04
-
0.66
0.12
64
47.5
0.00128
0.04
0.005
2.34
0.13
65
10.22
0.00124
0.04
0.005
1.88
0.12
66
20.43
0.0011
0.04
0.004
1.53
0.11
67
36.55
0.00137
0.04
0.005
2.74
0.14
68
22.54
0.00121
0.03
0.004
0.53
0.12
69
38.27
0.00151
0.03
0.005
1.61
0.15
70
31.13
0.00139
0.03
-
1.67
0.14
71
0.89
0.00149
0.03
0.005
2.26
0.15
72
23.65
0.00141
0.03
0.004
1.82
0.14
73
10.52
0.00144
0.03
-
1.0
0.14
74
35.31
0.00161
0.03
0.005
0.77
0.16
75
36.99
0.00161
0.03
0.005
0.47
0.16
76
28.08
0.00137
0.03
-
1.61
0.14
77
1.62
0.00179
0.03
0.005
2.88
0.18
78
45.81
0.00177
0.03
0.005
2.38
0.18
79
0.97
0.00189
0.03
-
2.08
0.19
80
35.16
0.00168
0.03
-
1.16
0.17
81
20.98
0.00149
0.03
0.004
2.39
0.15
82
42.64
0.00166
0.03
-
1.19
0.17
83
33.79
0.00169
0.03
0.005
0.11
0.17
84
1.29
0.00205
0.03
-
2.92
0.21
85
1.95
0.00207
0.03
-
0.49
0.21
86
0.1
0.00178
0.03
-
1.82
0.18
87
35.19
0.00183
0.03
0.005
1.59
0.18
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
407
==PAGE:416==
88
12.39
0.00164
0.03
0.004
1.99
0.16
89
0.19
0.00196
0.03
-
1.3
0.2
90
34.93
0.00201
0.02
0.005
0.54
0.2
91
5.63
0.00198
0.02
-
2.27
0.2
92
51.82
0.0019
0.02
0.004
2.33
0.19
93
22.81
0.00171
0.02
-
0.81
0.17
94
9.26
0.00213
0.02
0.005
2.33
0.21
TIC 86231820
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
17.04
6e-05
0.7
-
1.17
0.01
2
29.73
7e-05
0.68
0.005
2.93
0.01
3
26.58
8e-05
0.56
0.005
2.08
0.01
4
32.32
0.0001
0.5
0.005
2.07
0.01
5
24.18
0.00011
0.43
0.005
0.46
0.01
6
27.45
0.00014
0.34
-
1.15
0.01
7
30.03
0.00017
0.28
0.005
2.1
0.02
8
14.48
0.00022
0.2
0.004
0.95
0.02
9
31.59
0.00025
0.18
0.005
2.98
0.02
10
28.31
0.00028
0.17
-
0.17
0.03
11
16.09
0.00027
0.17
0.005
2.86
0.03
12
26.08
0.0003
0.16
-
1.83
0.03
13
30.05
0.00031
0.15
-
1.31
0.03
14
10.93
0.00035
0.13
0.004
0.86
0.03
15
19.71
0.00033
0.13
0.004
1.47
0.03
16
37.55
0.00028
0.17
-
0.63
0.03
17
33.23
0.00044
0.11
-
2.83
0.04
18
38.45
0.00051
0.1
-
2.62
0.05
19
13.55
0.0005
0.08
0.004
2.56
0.05
20
35.77
0.00057
0.08
0.005
2.4
0.06
21
33.71
0.00057
0.08
0.005
0.17
0.06
22
39.08
0.00059
0.08
-
0.38
0.06
23
11.06
0.00054
0.08
0.004
1.39
0.05
24
23.1
0.00052
0.08
0.004
1.39
0.05
25
13.64
0.00051
0.08
0.004
0.94
0.05
26
20.41
0.00053
0.08
-
0.32
0.05
27
35.21
0.00067
0.07
0.005
0.98
0.07
28
18.42
0.0006
0.07
0.004
0.44
0.06
29
22.74
0.0006
0.07
-
0.27
0.06
30
32.87
0.00066
0.07
-
1.12
0.07
31
37.45
0.00071
0.07
0.005
0.28
0.07
32
19.21
0.00067
0.06
0.004
2.75
0.07
33
31.23
0.00067
0.07
-
2.93
0.07
34
25.53
0.00072
0.07
0.005
1.37
0.07
35
42.49
0.00068
0.07
-
2.69
0.07
36
35.92
0.00072
0.06
-
1.63
0.07
37
28.85
0.00078
0.06
-
2.0
0.08
38
15.75
0.00076
0.06
0.004
1.1
0.08
39
11.97
0.00074
0.06
-
2.71
0.07
408
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:417==
40
21.63
0.00069
0.06
-
0.67
0.07
41
14.79
0.00082
0.05
0.004
2.28
0.08
42
32.63
0.00082
0.06
-
0.29
0.08
43
22.98
0.00076
0.05
-
0.71
0.08
44
14.7
0.00085
0.05
-
2.18
0.09
45
31.87
0.00091
0.05
0.005
1.46
0.09
46
33.87
0.00096
0.05
0.005
1.65
0.1
47
34.77
0.00096
0.05
-
1.86
0.1
48
47.2
0.00104
0.05
0.005
2.53
0.1
49
13.48
0.0009
0.05
-
1.66
0.09
50
22.65
0.00097
0.04
0.004
0.61
0.1
51
47.29
0.00112
0.04
-
2.65
0.11
52
40.34
0.00109
0.04
-
0.88
0.11
53
48.82
0.00111
0.04
-
1.27
0.11
54
45.9
0.00123
0.04
0.005
2.72
0.12
55
38.11
0.00119
0.04
-
1.05
0.12
56
20.26
0.00089
0.05
-
1.69
0.09
57
20.63
0.001
0.04
-
1.99
0.1
58
20.23
0.00093
0.04
0.004
1.02
0.09
59
34.29
0.00115
0.04
-
2.18
0.12
60
36.03
0.00117
0.04
-
0.82
0.12
61
48.62
0.0012
0.04
0.005
1.95
0.12
62
2.56
0.00123
0.04
-
1.86
0.12
63
26.69
0.00117
0.04
-
0.66
0.12
64
47.5
0.00128
0.04
0.005
2.34
0.13
65
10.22
0.00124
0.04
0.005
1.88
0.12
66
20.43
0.0011
0.04
0.004
1.53
0.11
67
36.55
0.00137
0.04
0.005
2.74
0.14
68
22.54
0.00121
0.03
0.004
0.53
0.12
69
38.27
0.00151
0.03
0.005
1.61
0.15
70
31.13
0.00139
0.03
-
1.67
0.14
71
0.89
0.00149
0.03
0.005
2.26
0.15
72
23.65
0.00141
0.03
0.004
1.82
0.14
73
10.52
0.00144
0.03
-
1.0
0.14
74
35.31
0.00161
0.03
0.005
0.77
0.16
75
36.99
0.00161
0.03
0.005
0.47
0.16
76
28.08
0.00137
0.03
-
1.61
0.14
77
1.62
0.00179
0.03
0.005
2.88
0.18
78
45.81
0.00177
0.03
0.005
2.38
0.18
79
0.97
0.00189
0.03
-
2.08
0.19
80
35.16
0.00168
0.03
-
1.16
0.17
81
20.98
0.00149
0.03
0.004
2.39
0.15
82
42.64
0.00166
0.03
-
1.19
0.17
83
33.79
0.00169
0.03
0.005
0.11
0.17
84
1.29
0.00205
0.03
-
2.92
0.21
85
1.95
0.00207
0.03
-
0.49
0.21
86
0.1
0.00178
0.03
-
1.82
0.18
87
35.19
0.00183
0.03
0.005
1.59
0.18
88
12.39
0.00164
0.03
0.004
1.99
0.16
89
0.19
0.00196
0.03
-
1.3
0.2
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
409
==PAGE:418==
90
34.93
0.00201
0.02
0.005
0.54
0.2
91
5.63
0.00198
0.02
-
2.27
0.2
92
51.82
0.0019
0.02
0.004
2.33
0.19
93
22.81
0.00171
0.02
-
0.81
0.17
94
9.26
0.00213
0.02
0.005
2.33
0.21
TIC 86232782
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
7.42
0.0
16.23
-
0.89
0.0
2
7.83
0.0
11.43
-
2.68
0.0
3
8.16
0.0
4.23
-
1.17
0.0
4
15.25
0.0
1.94
0.009
2.06
0.0
5
14.83
0.0
1.3
-
2.7
0.01
6
9.96
1e-05
1.11
0.009
1.64
0.01
7
10.29
0.0
1.08
-
2.53
0.01
8
7.17
1e-05
0.68
0.01
1.53
0.01
9
15.67
1e-05
0.56
-
3.01
0.02
10
0.42
2e-05
0.46
-
2.29
0.02
11
10.04
2e-05
0.42
-
0.24
0.02
12
15.57
1e-05
0.44
-
2.44
0.02
13
7.07
2e-05
0.38
0.009
2.09
0.02
14
14.39
1e-05
0.34
0.005
0.24
0.02
15
14.91
2e-05
0.29
0.009
3.03
0.03
16
5.86
2e-05
0.23
0.005
2.34
0.02
17
15.0
3e-05
0.24
0.009
1.91
0.04
18
0.08
3e-05
0.25
0.011
1.5
0.04
19
10.87
2e-05
0.24
-
2.46
0.02
20
22.66
2e-05
0.18
-
0.06
0.03
21
9.2
3e-05
0.16
-
1.27
0.04
22
0.26
5e-05
0.16
0.011
1.17
0.07
23
0.67
5e-05
0.14
0.01
2.14
0.07
24
0.74
4e-05
0.14
0.009
3.12
0.06
25
1.57
5e-05
0.12
-
1.19
0.07
26
23.08
2e-05
0.12
0.003
2.02
0.03
27
17.71
3e-05
0.11
-
0.33
0.04
28
22.25
3e-05
0.11
0.005
2.34
0.05
29
0.34
4e-05
0.15
0.009
0.72
0.06
30
9.39
4e-05
0.1
-
1.89
0.06
31
3.42
0.00011
0.08
-
1.11
0.16
32
17.37
4e-05
0.09
0.005
1.43
0.05
33
9.79
6e-05
0.08
0.007
0.54
0.08
34
14.59
5e-05
0.09
-
0.25
0.07
35
0.24
8e-05
0.1
-
2.37
0.11
36
0.11
7e-05
0.11
-
0.83
0.09
37
3.84
8e-05
0.09
0.01
0.04
0.11
38
0.45
8e-05
0.09
0.01
2.59
0.12
39
4.21
0.0001
0.07
-
2.95
0.14
40
15.15
8e-05
0.08
-
2.07
0.11
41
14.15
5e-05
0.07
-
1.69
0.08
410
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:419==
42
17.46
4e-05
0.07
-
1.38
0.06
43
4.23
0.00011
0.07
-
0.46
0.15
44
1.8
0.0001
0.06
0.008
2.88
0.14
45
3.16
0.00014
0.05
-
2.3
0.2
46
0.64
0.00012
0.06
-
2.52
0.16
47
4.77
0.00015
0.06
-
2.78
0.21
48
1.11
0.00012
0.05
0.009
2.47
0.17
49
15.99
0.0001
0.05
-
2.57
0.14
50
14.47
8e-05
0.05
-
2.7
0.11
51
3.55
0.00016
0.05
0.011
0.13
0.22
52
15.48
0.00011
0.05
-
2.59
0.16
53
22.99
5e-05
0.05
0.004
2.94
0.07
54
3.29
0.00016
0.05
0.011
0.24
0.22
55
3.64
0.00016
0.05
0.01
1.02
0.22
56
22.55
6e-05
0.05
0.004
1.3
0.09
57
1.65
0.00014
0.05
-
3.07
0.19
58
14.67
0.00012
0.04
0.007
1.14
0.17
59
21.81
6e-05
0.04
-
0.85
0.08
TIC 86232782
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
7.42
0.0
16.23
-
0.89
0.0
2
7.83
0.0
11.43
-
2.68
0.0
3
8.16
0.0
4.23
-
1.17
0.0
4
15.25
0.0
1.94
0.009
2.06
0.0
5
14.83
0.0
1.3
-
2.7
0.01
6
9.96
1e-05
1.11
0.009
1.64
0.01
7
10.29
0.0
1.08
-
2.53
0.01
8
7.17
1e-05
0.68
0.01
1.53
0.01
9
15.67
1e-05
0.56
-
3.01
0.02
10
0.42
2e-05
0.46
-
2.29
0.02
11
10.04
2e-05
0.42
-
0.24
0.02
12
15.57
1e-05
0.44
-
2.44
0.02
13
7.07
2e-05
0.38
0.009
2.09
0.02
14
14.39
1e-05
0.34
0.005
0.24
0.02
15
14.91
2e-05
0.29
0.009
3.03
0.03
16
5.86
2e-05
0.23
0.005
2.34
0.02
17
15.0
3e-05
0.24
0.009
1.91
0.04
18
0.08
3e-05
0.25
0.011
1.5
0.04
19
10.87
2e-05
0.24
-
2.46
0.02
20
22.66
2e-05
0.18
-
0.06
0.03
21
9.2
3e-05
0.16
-
1.27
0.04
22
0.26
5e-05
0.16
0.011
1.17
0.07
23
0.67
5e-05
0.14
0.01
2.14
0.07
24
0.74
4e-05
0.14
0.009
3.12
0.06
25
1.57
5e-05
0.12
-
1.19
0.07
26
23.08
2e-05
0.12
0.003
2.02
0.03
27
17.71
3e-05
0.11
-
0.33
0.04
28
22.25
3e-05
0.11
0.005
2.34
0.05
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
411
==PAGE:420==
29
0.34
4e-05
0.15
0.009
0.72
0.06
30
9.39
4e-05
0.1
-
1.89
0.06
31
3.42
0.00011
0.08
-
1.11
0.16
32
17.37
4e-05
0.09
0.005
1.43
0.05
33
9.79
6e-05
0.08
0.007
0.54
0.08
34
14.59
5e-05
0.09
-
0.25
0.07
35
0.24
8e-05
0.1
-
2.37
0.11
36
0.11
7e-05
0.11
-
0.83
0.09
37
3.84
8e-05
0.09
0.01
0.04
0.11
38
0.45
8e-05
0.09
0.01
2.59
0.12
39
4.21
0.0001
0.07
-
2.95
0.14
40
15.15
8e-05
0.08
-
2.07
0.11
41
14.15
5e-05
0.07
-
1.69
0.08
42
17.46
4e-05
0.07
-
1.38
0.06
43
4.23
0.00011
0.07
-
0.46
0.15
44
1.8
0.0001
0.06
0.008
2.88
0.14
45
3.16
0.00014
0.05
-
2.3
0.2
46
0.64
0.00012
0.06
-
2.52
0.16
47
4.77
0.00015
0.06
-
2.78
0.21
48
1.11
0.00012
0.05
0.009
2.47
0.17
49
15.99
0.0001
0.05
-
2.57
0.14
50
14.47
8e-05
0.05
-
2.7
0.11
51
3.55
0.00016
0.05
0.011
0.13
0.22
52
15.48
0.00011
0.05
-
2.59
0.16
53
22.99
5e-05
0.05
0.004
2.94
0.07
54
3.29
0.00016
0.05
0.011
0.24
0.22
55
3.64
0.00016
0.05
0.01
1.02
0.22
56
22.55
6e-05
0.05
0.004
1.3
0.09
57
1.65
0.00014
0.05
-
3.07
0.19
58
14.67
0.00012
0.04
0.007
1.14
0.17
59
21.81
6e-05
0.04
-
0.85
0.08
TIC 88118183
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.07
0.00023
1.5
-
1.38
0.01
2
31.04
0.00026
1.56
0.018
1.91
0.01
3
3.83
0.00051
0.83
0.019
1.81
0.02
4
16.85
0.00056
0.64
-
1.53
0.02
5
17.71
0.00077
0.45
0.015
2.0
0.03
6
20.45
0.00083
0.43
0.016
3.0
0.04
7
16.28
0.00108
0.32
-
2.43
0.05
8
16.97
0.00113
0.31
-
2.62
0.05
9
10.29
0.00195
0.19
0.017
0.57
0.09
10
30.5
0.00233
0.17
0.018
0.29
0.1
11
7.55
0.00245
0.16
-
2.86
0.11
12
24.76
0.00216
0.17
0.016
2.94
0.1
13
21.32
0.00222
0.16
-
0.88
0.1
14
20.62
0.00318
0.11
-
0.77
0.14
15
39.45
0.00207
0.15
0.013
2.22
0.09
412
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:421==
16
7.66
0.00272
0.14
0.017
0.55
0.12
17
32.01
0.00284
0.14
-
1.67
0.13
18
33.79
0.00265
0.15
-
2.54
0.12
19
2.4
0.00344
0.13
0.019
0.89
0.15
20
10.1
0.00278
0.14
-
0.14
0.12
21
16.07
0.00228
0.15
0.015
1.86
0.1
22
16.76
0.0021
0.17
-
1.65
0.09
23
42.47
0.00208
0.13
-
2.14
0.09
24
40.68
0.00231
0.12
-
2.48
0.1
25
44.7
0.00225
0.12
0.012
0.56
0.1
26
21.68
0.00308
0.12
0.016
1.74
0.14
27
47.26
0.00232
0.12
-
0.88
0.1
28
26.08
0.00307
0.13
0.017
1.44
0.14
29
22.62
0.00316
0.11
-
0.28
0.14
30
19.66
0.00321
0.11
0.016
0.97
0.14
31
27.27
0.00376
0.1
-
0.83
0.17
32
17.51
0.00322
0.1
0.015
0.47
0.14
33
26.59
0.0039
0.1
0.017
0.14
0.17
34
19.49
0.00342
0.11
0.016
1.98
0.15
35
42.57
0.00299
0.09
0.012
2.43
0.13
36
29.99
0.00429
0.09
-
1.21
0.19
37
0.3
0.00593
0.08
0.021
1.44
0.26
38
18.57
0.00355
0.09
-
0.62
0.16
39
21.49
0.0037
0.1
0.016
0.63
0.16
40
34.81
0.0041
0.09
0.016
0.13
0.18
41
2.17
0.00469
0.09
-
0.89
0.21
42
3.17
0.00456
0.09
-
2.37
0.2
43
27.92
0.00421
0.09
0.017
0.7
0.19
44
24.62
0.00425
0.09
0.017
1.45
0.19
45
0.46
0.00523
0.09
0.021
0.03
0.23
46
13.79
0.00391
0.09
0.015
1.92
0.17
47
34.22
0.00434
0.09
-
1.86
0.19
48
38.16
0.00426
0.08
0.015
0.04
0.19
49
4.66
0.00536
0.08
-
2.7
0.24
50
46.28
0.00341
0.08
0.012
1.11
0.15
51
28.4
0.0046
0.08
-
0.28
0.2
52
25.14
0.00466
0.08
-
2.19
0.21
53
36.71
0.00439
0.08
-
0.39
0.19
54
6.76
0.00521
0.08
0.017
1.67
0.23
55
40.49
0.00357
0.08
-
2.33
0.16
56
3.74
0.0055
0.08
0.019
0.26
0.24
57
52.37
0.00329
0.07
-
2.5
0.15
58
14.13
0.00492
0.07
-
0.18
0.22
59
20.13
0.00507
0.07
0.016
2.62
0.22
60
43.94
0.00403
0.07
0.012
0.34
0.18
61
36.39
0.00486
0.07
-
1.57
0.22
62
28.61
0.00548
0.07
-
3.0
0.24
63
6.19
0.00574
0.07
0.018
2.62
0.25
64
9.23
0.00547
0.07
0.017
0.13
0.24
65
19.06
0.00499
0.07
-
0.83
0.22
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
413
==PAGE:422==
66
5.1
0.00622
0.07
-
0.71
0.28
67
8.48
0.00541
0.07
0.017
1.05
0.24
68
25.8
0.00504
0.08
-
1.19
0.22
69
0.19
0.00698
0.07
0.021
2.57
0.31
70
33.85
0.00459
0.09
0.017
1.99
0.2
71
27.38
0.00571
0.07
-
1.71
0.25
72
1.59
0.00701
0.06
-
0.98
0.31
TIC 88118183
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.07
0.00023
1.5
-
1.38
0.01
2
31.04
0.00026
1.56
0.018
1.91
0.01
3
3.83
0.00051
0.83
0.019
1.81
0.02
4
16.85
0.00056
0.64
-
1.53
0.02
5
17.71
0.00077
0.45
0.015
2.0
0.03
6
20.45
0.00083
0.43
0.016
3.0
0.04
7
16.28
0.00108
0.32
-
2.43
0.05
8
16.97
0.00113
0.31
-
2.62
0.05
9
10.29
0.00195
0.19
0.017
0.57
0.09
10
30.5
0.00233
0.17
0.018
0.29
0.1
11
7.55
0.00245
0.16
-
2.86
0.11
12
24.76
0.00216
0.17
0.016
2.94
0.1
13
21.32
0.00222
0.16
-
0.88
0.1
14
20.62
0.00318
0.11
-
0.77
0.14
15
39.45
0.00207
0.15
0.013
2.22
0.09
16
7.66
0.00272
0.14
0.017
0.55
0.12
17
32.01
0.00284
0.14
-
1.67
0.13
18
33.79
0.00265
0.15
-
2.54
0.12
19
2.4
0.00344
0.13
0.019
0.89
0.15
20
10.1
0.00278
0.14
-
0.14
0.12
21
16.07
0.00228
0.15
0.015
1.86
0.1
22
16.76
0.0021
0.17
-
1.65
0.09
23
42.47
0.00208
0.13
-
2.14
0.09
24
40.68
0.00231
0.12
-
2.48
0.1
25
44.7
0.00225
0.12
0.012
0.56
0.1
26
21.68
0.00308
0.12
0.016
1.74
0.14
27
47.26
0.00232
0.12
-
0.88
0.1
28
26.08
0.00307
0.13
0.017
1.44
0.14
29
22.62
0.00316
0.11
-
0.28
0.14
30
19.66
0.00321
0.11
0.016
0.97
0.14
31
27.27
0.00376
0.1
-
0.83
0.17
32
17.51
0.00322
0.1
0.015
0.47
0.14
33
26.59
0.0039
0.1
0.017
0.14
0.17
34
19.49
0.00342
0.11
0.016
1.98
0.15
35
42.57
0.00299
0.09
0.012
2.43
0.13
36
29.99
0.00429
0.09
-
1.21
0.19
37
0.3
0.00593
0.08
0.021
1.44
0.26
38
18.57
0.00355
0.09
-
0.62
0.16
39
21.49
0.0037
0.1
0.016
0.63
0.16
414
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:423==
40
34.81
0.0041
0.09
0.016
0.13
0.18
41
2.17
0.00469
0.09
-
0.89
0.21
42
3.17
0.00456
0.09
-
2.37
0.2
43
27.92
0.00421
0.09
0.017
0.7
0.19
44
24.62
0.00425
0.09
0.017
1.45
0.19
45
0.46
0.00523
0.09
0.021
0.03
0.23
46
13.79
0.00391
0.09
0.015
1.92
0.17
47
34.22
0.00434
0.09
-
1.86
0.19
48
38.16
0.00426
0.08
0.015
0.04
0.19
49
4.66
0.00536
0.08
-
2.7
0.24
50
46.28
0.00341
0.08
0.012
1.11
0.15
51
28.4
0.0046
0.08
-
0.28
0.2
52
25.14
0.00466
0.08
-
2.19
0.21
53
36.71
0.00439
0.08
-
0.39
0.19
54
6.76
0.00521
0.08
0.017
1.67
0.23
55
40.49
0.00357
0.08
-
2.33
0.16
56
3.74
0.0055
0.08
0.019
0.26
0.24
57
52.37
0.00329
0.07
-
2.5
0.15
58
14.13
0.00492
0.07
-
0.18
0.22
59
20.13
0.00507
0.07
0.016
2.62
0.22
60
43.94
0.00403
0.07
0.012
0.34
0.18
61
36.39
0.00486
0.07
-
1.57
0.22
62
28.61
0.00548
0.07
-
3.0
0.24
63
6.19
0.00574
0.07
0.018
2.62
0.25
64
9.23
0.00547
0.07
0.017
0.13
0.24
65
19.06
0.00499
0.07
-
0.83
0.22
66
5.1
0.00622
0.07
-
0.71
0.28
67
8.48
0.00541
0.07
0.017
1.05
0.24
68
25.8
0.00504
0.08
-
1.19
0.22
69
0.19
0.00698
0.07
0.021
2.57
0.31
70
33.85
0.00459
0.09
0.017
1.99
0.2
71
27.38
0.00571
0.07
-
1.71
0.25
72
1.59
0.00701
0.06
-
0.98
0.31
TIC 88851703
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.01
0.0002
1.14
0.01
1.85
0.01
2
0.73
0.00062
0.33
0.009
1.26
0.03
3
1.45
0.00108
0.18
-
0.86
0.05
4
11.23
0.00134
0.13
0.008
2.25
0.06
5
2.07
0.00217
0.09
-
2.73
0.1
6
10.25
0.0024
0.07
0.008
1.62
0.11
7
11.96
0.00278
0.06
0.007
0.17
0.12
8
11.0
0.00294
0.06
0.008
0.58
0.13
9
11.45
0.00275
0.06
-
2.82
0.12
10
9.28
0.00418
0.04
0.008
0.57
0.18
11
12.21
0.00378
0.04
0.007
2.14
0.17
12
9.82
0.0043
0.04
-
2.08
0.19
13
10.5
0.00468
0.04
-
1.92
0.21
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
415
==PAGE:424==
14
12.24
0.00459
0.04
-
2.49
0.2
15
13.49
0.00501
0.03
0.008
0.55
0.22
TIC 88851703
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
0.01
0.0002
1.14
0.01
1.85
0.01
2
0.73
0.00062
0.33
0.009
1.26
0.03
3
1.45
0.00108
0.18
-
0.86
0.05
4
11.23
0.00134
0.13
0.008
2.25
0.06
5
2.07
0.00217
0.09
-
2.73
0.1
6
10.25
0.0024
0.07
0.008
1.62
0.11
7
11.96
0.00278
0.06
0.007
0.17
0.12
8
11.0
0.00294
0.06
0.008
0.58
0.13
9
11.45
0.00275
0.06
-
2.82
0.12
10
9.28
0.00418
0.04
0.008
0.57
0.18
11
12.21
0.00378
0.04
0.007
2.14
0.17
12
9.82
0.0043
0.04
-
2.08
0.19
13
10.5
0.00468
0.04
-
1.92
0.21
14
12.24
0.00459
0.04
-
2.49
0.2
15
13.49
0.00501
0.03
0.008
0.55
0.22
TIC 9263764
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.73
0.0
2.82
-
0.87
0.0
2
18.66
1e-05
0.95
-
2.41
0.01
3
20.09
1e-05
0.61
-
2.54
0.01
4
17.6
1e-05
0.55
-
2.07
0.02
5
32.48
1e-05
0.51
0.008
0.78
0.02
6
15.66
1e-05
0.45
0.006
0.67
0.01
7
30.03
1e-05
0.37
-
0.32
0.02
8
27.88
1e-05
0.27
0.005
2.48
0.02
9
29.37
2e-05
0.24
-
0.26
0.03
10
27.48
2e-05
0.21
-
0.88
0.03
11
26.21
2e-05
0.18
-
0.29
0.03
12
25.48
2e-05
0.17
-
1.16
0.03
13
24.61
1e-05
0.16
-
0.12
0.02
14
16.72
3e-05
0.15
-
1.92
0.04
15
29.03
2e-05
0.15
-
1.27
0.03
16
32.48
4e-05
0.13
-
1.98
0.06
17
23.69
4e-05
0.13
-
2.91
0.05
18
31.88
4e-05
0.12
-
0.98
0.06
19
24.25
3e-05
0.12
0.005
1.0
0.04
20
35.47
5e-05
0.11
-
2.07
0.07
21
38.45
5e-05
0.1
0.007
0.77
0.07
22
29.37
7e-05
0.08
0.008
2.64
0.1
23
50.76
4e-05
0.08
0.005
2.92
0.06
24
30.03
6e-05
0.08
-
0.06
0.08
25
31.73
9e-05
0.07
0.008
1.38
0.12
416
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:425==
26
3.1
7e-05
0.07
-
1.28
0.1
27
24.05
9e-05
0.07
-
0.57
0.13
28
23.88
0.0001
0.07
-
0.65
0.14
29
26.46
7e-05
0.06
0.006
2.28
0.1
30
44.6
9e-05
0.06
-
3.09
0.12
31
7.53
6e-05
0.06
0.004
2.14
0.08
32
22.84
0.0001
0.05
0.007
1.49
0.14
33
12.9
8e-05
0.05
0.006
0.08
0.11
34
1.61
0.00015
0.05
-
0.11
0.21
35
18.3
8e-05
0.05
-
2.25
0.11
36
23.69
0.0001
0.05
-
2.5
0.14
37
33.6
0.0001
0.04
-
2.75
0.15
38
2.07
0.00014
0.04
0.008
2.95
0.19
39
41.47
0.00015
0.04
-
2.52
0.2
40
12.17
9e-05
0.04
0.005
0.39
0.13
41
30.6
0.0001
0.04
0.005
2.76
0.14
TIC 9263764
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
20.73
0.0
2.82
-
0.87
0.0
2
18.66
1e-05
0.95
-
2.41
0.01
3
20.09
1e-05
0.61
-
2.54
0.01
4
17.6
1e-05
0.55
-
2.07
0.02
5
32.48
1e-05
0.51
0.008
0.78
0.02
6
15.66
1e-05
0.45
0.006
0.67
0.01
7
30.03
1e-05
0.37
-
0.32
0.02
8
27.88
1e-05
0.27
0.005
2.48
0.02
9
29.37
2e-05
0.24
-
0.26
0.03
10
27.48
2e-05
0.21
-
0.88
0.03
11
26.21
2e-05
0.18
-
0.29
0.03
12
25.48
2e-05
0.17
-
1.16
0.03
13
24.61
1e-05
0.16
-
0.12
0.02
14
16.72
3e-05
0.15
-
1.92
0.04
15
29.03
2e-05
0.15
-
1.27
0.03
16
32.48
4e-05
0.13
-
1.98
0.06
17
23.69
4e-05
0.13
-
2.91
0.05
18
31.88
4e-05
0.12
-
0.98
0.06
19
24.25
3e-05
0.12
0.005
1.0
0.04
20
35.47
5e-05
0.11
-
2.07
0.07
21
38.45
5e-05
0.1
0.007
0.77
0.07
22
29.37
7e-05
0.08
0.008
2.64
0.1
23
50.76
4e-05
0.08
0.005
2.92
0.06
24
30.03
6e-05
0.08
-
0.06
0.08
25
31.73
9e-05
0.07
0.008
1.38
0.12
26
3.1
7e-05
0.07
-
1.28
0.1
27
24.05
9e-05
0.07
-
0.57
0.13
28
23.88
0.0001
0.07
-
0.65
0.14
29
26.46
7e-05
0.06
0.006
2.28
0.1
30
44.6
9e-05
0.06
-
3.09
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
417
==PAGE:426==
31
7.53
6e-05
0.06
0.004
2.14
0.08
32
22.84
0.0001
0.05
0.007
1.49
0.14
33
12.9
8e-05
0.05
0.006
0.08
0.11
34
1.61
0.00015
0.05
-
0.11
0.21
35
18.3
8e-05
0.05
-
2.25
0.11
36
23.69
0.0001
0.05
-
2.5
0.14
37
33.6
0.0001
0.04
-
2.75
0.15
38
2.07
0.00014
0.04
0.008
2.95
0.19
39
41.47
0.00015
0.04
-
2.52
0.2
40
12.17
9e-05
0.04
0.005
0.39
0.13
41
30.6
0.0001
0.04
0.005
2.76
0.14
TIC 93548492
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
29.1
0.0
1.09
-
0.09
0.01
2
22.28
0.0
0.63
-
0.68
0.01
3
35.9
1e-05
0.63
-
0.24
0.01
4
27.8
1e-05
0.37
0.004
2.13
0.01
5
33.51
1e-05
0.28
0.004
1.9
0.02
6
28.74
1e-05
0.27
-
0.17
0.01
7
21.37
1e-05
0.23
0.003
2.27
0.01
8
27.41
2e-05
0.17
-
1.52
0.02
9
21.47
1e-05
0.17
-
1.74
0.01
10
39.62
2e-05
0.13
0.004
2.68
0.03
11
22.82
2e-05
0.14
-
2.67
0.03
12
18.82
2e-05
0.12
0.004
2.42
0.03
13
31.02
2e-05
0.09
-
0.8
0.03
14
24.01
3e-05
0.08
-
1.61
0.04
15
34.17
3e-05
0.07
0.003
2.38
0.05
16
28.36
5e-05
0.05
0.003
0.2
0.07
17
23.81
5e-05
0.05
-
1.89
0.07
18
19.09
6e-05
0.05
0.004
1.51
0.08
19
0.03
8e-05
0.05
0.006
2.43
0.12
20
57.09
6e-05
0.03
0.003
1.96
0.09
21
26.32
8e-05
0.03
0.003
0.51
0.12
22
21.51
7e-05
0.03
-
2.79
0.1
23
0.66
0.00017
0.03
0.006
2.35
0.25
24
7.51
0.0001
0.02
-
1.74
0.15
25
1.25
0.00017
0.02
0.006
0.5
0.25
26
2.94
0.00016
0.02
-
1.96
0.23
27
2.29
0.00016
0.02
0.005
2.63
0.23
TIC 93548492
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
29.1
0.0
1.09
-
0.09
0.01
2
22.28
0.0
0.63
-
0.68
0.01
3
35.9
1e-05
0.63
-
0.24
0.01
4
27.8
1e-05
0.37
0.004
2.13
0.01
418
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:427==
5
33.51
1e-05
0.28
0.004
1.9
0.02
6
28.74
1e-05
0.27
-
0.17
0.01
7
21.37
1e-05
0.23
0.003
2.27
0.01
8
27.41
2e-05
0.17
-
1.52
0.02
9
21.47
1e-05
0.17
-
1.74
0.01
10
39.62
2e-05
0.13
0.004
2.68
0.03
11
22.82
2e-05
0.14
-
2.67
0.03
12
18.82
2e-05
0.12
0.004
2.42
0.03
13
31.02
2e-05
0.09
-
0.8
0.03
14
24.01
3e-05
0.08
-
1.61
0.04
15
34.17
3e-05
0.07
0.003
2.38
0.05
16
28.36
5e-05
0.05
0.003
0.2
0.07
17
23.81
5e-05
0.05
-
1.89
0.07
18
19.09
6e-05
0.05
0.004
1.51
0.08
19
0.03
8e-05
0.05
0.006
2.43
0.12
20
57.09
6e-05
0.03
0.003
1.96
0.09
21
26.32
8e-05
0.03
0.003
0.51
0.12
22
21.51
7e-05
0.03
-
2.79
0.1
23
0.66
0.00017
0.03
0.006
2.35
0.25
24
7.51
0.0001
0.02
-
1.74
0.15
25
1.25
0.00017
0.02
0.006
0.5
0.25
26
2.94
0.00016
0.02
-
1.96
0.23
27
2.29
0.00016
0.02
0.005
2.63
0.23
TIC 95747759
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
7.54
3e-05
18.71
-
1.96
0.0
2
9.81
0.00012
5.53
-
2.36
0.01
3
8.94
0.00023
2.82
0.029
0.7
0.01
4
8.7
0.00028
2.28
-
2.41
0.01
5
16.88
0.00043
1.57
0.031
0.96
0.02
6
13.7
0.00051
1.33
-
0.11
0.02
7
12.77
0.00058
1.12
-
1.72
0.03
8
10.82
0.00063
1.04
0.03
2.39
0.03
9
11.55
0.00059
1.08
0.029
2.51
0.03
10
12.69
0.00064
1.0
0.029
3.03
0.03
11
14.16
0.00076
0.9
0.031
2.01
0.03
12
17.36
0.00093
0.73
0.031
2.86
0.04
13
16.48
0.00119
0.57
-
1.7
0.05
14
15.09
0.00109
0.6
-
1.17
0.05
15
15.61
0.00147
0.46
0.031
0.33
0.07
16
8.83
0.0012
0.54
-
2.47
0.05
17
16.56
0.00154
0.44
0.031
1.34
0.07
18
10.69
0.00167
0.39
0.029
2.59
0.08
19
0.87
0.00191
0.37
-
1.7
0.09
20
11.25
0.00178
0.37
0.03
2.66
0.08
21
17.65
0.00211
0.32
-
2.25
0.1
22
10.49
0.00213
0.3
-
2.83
0.1
23
19.51
0.00273
0.25
-
2.74
0.12
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
419
==PAGE:428==
24
20.22
0.00279
0.23
-
2.53
0.13
25
6.21
0.00268
0.25
0.03
2.8
0.12
26
18.67
0.00295
0.23
0.031
2.49
0.13
27
15.16
0.00286
0.23
0.03
1.34
0.13
28
0.41
0.00313
0.23
0.032
1.68
0.14
29
19.68
0.00298
0.23
-
0.07
0.13
30
0.13
0.00253
0.29
0.033
2.77
0.11
31
20.31
0.00313
0.21
0.03
1.52
0.14
32
0.52
0.0034
0.21
0.032
2.69
0.15
33
24.43
0.003
0.17
-
0.83
0.14
34
17.7
0.00338
0.21
-
1.33
0.15
35
11.09
0.00392
0.16
-
2.41
0.18
36
1.39
0.00445
0.15
0.031
0.44
0.2
37
1.1
0.00444
0.16
0.031
2.55
0.2
38
25.23
0.00318
0.15
0.021
3.06
0.14
39
17.76
0.00403
0.17
0.032
1.31
0.18
40
18.24
0.00473
0.15
0.033
0.48
0.21
41
15.03
0.00436
0.15
0.03
0.65
0.2
42
19.85
0.00503
0.13
0.03
0.74
0.23
43
14.01
0.00512
0.13
-
0.26
0.23
TIC 95747759
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
7.54
3e-05
18.71
-
1.96
0.0
2
9.81
0.00012
5.53
-
2.36
0.01
3
8.94
0.00023
2.82
0.029
0.7
0.01
4
8.7
0.00028
2.28
-
2.41
0.01
5
16.88
0.00043
1.57
0.031
0.96
0.02
6
13.7
0.00051
1.33
-
0.11
0.02
7
12.77
0.00058
1.12
-
1.72
0.03
8
10.82
0.00063
1.04
0.03
2.39
0.03
9
11.55
0.00059
1.08
0.029
2.51
0.03
10
12.69
0.00064
1.0
0.029
3.03
0.03
11
14.16
0.00076
0.9
0.031
2.01
0.03
12
17.36
0.00093
0.73
0.031
2.86
0.04
13
16.48
0.00119
0.57
-
1.7
0.05
14
15.09
0.00109
0.6
-
1.17
0.05
15
15.61
0.00147
0.46
0.031
0.33
0.07
16
8.83
0.0012
0.54
-
2.47
0.05
17
16.56
0.00154
0.44
0.031
1.34
0.07
18
10.69
0.00167
0.39
0.029
2.59
0.08
19
0.87
0.00191
0.37
-
1.7
0.09
20
11.25
0.00178
0.37
0.03
2.66
0.08
21
17.65
0.00211
0.32
-
2.25
0.1
22
10.49
0.00213
0.3
-
2.83
0.1
23
19.51
0.00273
0.25
-
2.74
0.12
24
20.22
0.00279
0.23
-
2.53
0.13
25
6.21
0.00268
0.25
0.03
2.8
0.12
26
18.67
0.00295
0.23
0.031
2.49
0.13
420
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:429==
27
15.16
0.00286
0.23
0.03
1.34
0.13
28
0.41
0.00313
0.23
0.032
1.68
0.14
29
19.68
0.00298
0.23
-
0.07
0.13
30
0.13
0.00253
0.29
0.033
2.77
0.11
31
20.31
0.00313
0.21
0.03
1.52
0.14
32
0.52
0.0034
0.21
0.032
2.69
0.15
33
24.43
0.003
0.17
-
0.83
0.14
34
17.7
0.00338
0.21
-
1.33
0.15
35
11.09
0.00392
0.16
-
2.41
0.18
36
1.39
0.00445
0.15
0.031
0.44
0.2
37
1.1
0.00444
0.16
0.031
2.55
0.2
38
25.23
0.00318
0.15
0.021
3.06
0.14
39
17.76
0.00403
0.17
0.032
1.31
0.18
40
18.24
0.00473
0.15
0.033
0.48
0.21
41
15.03
0.00436
0.15
0.03
0.65
0.2
42
19.85
0.00503
0.13
0.03
0.74
0.23
43
14.01
0.00512
0.13
-
0.26
0.23
TIC 95867504
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
25.2
0.0
0.5
-
1.47
0.01
2
31.49
1e-05
0.44
-
1.94
0.01
3
36.71
1e-05
0.41
-
3.07
0.01
4
27.66
1e-05
0.27
0.004
1.04
0.02
5
23.27
2e-05
0.11
-
2.51
0.03
6
1.12
3e-05
0.11
-
0.65
0.04
7
32.65
3e-05
0.08
0.003
0.08
0.04
8
39.76
3e-05
0.08
0.003
2.31
0.04
9
39.9
3e-05
0.07
0.003
2.66
0.04
10
19.26
3e-05
0.06
0.002
2.64
0.04
11
34.08
6e-05
0.04
-
1.69
0.08
12
43.91
7e-05
0.03
-
2.87
0.1
13
29.47
7e-05
0.03
-
1.1
0.1
14
46.02
9e-05
0.03
0.003
2.56
0.12
15
0.2
0.00023
0.03
-
0.03
0.31
16
37.8
0.00011
0.02
0.004
0.71
0.16
17
33.39
8e-05
0.02
0.003
0.96
0.12
TIC 95867504
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
25.2
0.0
0.5
-
1.47
0.01
2
31.49
1e-05
0.44
-
1.94
0.01
3
36.71
1e-05
0.41
-
3.07
0.01
4
27.66
1e-05
0.27
0.004
1.04
0.02
5
23.27
2e-05
0.11
-
2.51
0.03
6
1.12
3e-05
0.11
-
0.65
0.04
7
32.65
3e-05
0.08
0.003
0.08
0.04
8
39.76
3e-05
0.08
0.003
2.31
0.04
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
421
==PAGE:430==
9
39.9
3e-05
0.07
0.003
2.66
0.04
10
19.26
3e-05
0.06
0.002
2.64
0.04
11
34.08
6e-05
0.04
-
1.69
0.08
12
43.91
7e-05
0.03
-
2.87
0.1
13
29.47
7e-05
0.03
-
1.1
0.1
14
46.02
9e-05
0.03
0.003
2.56
0.12
15
0.2
0.00023
0.03
-
0.03
0.31
16
37.8
0.00011
0.02
0.004
0.71
0.16
17
33.39
8e-05
0.02
0.003
0.96
0.12
TIC 95962115
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.04
2e-05
11.28
-
2.05
0.0
2
1.02
6e-05
4.85
-
0.98
0.0
3
32.95
0.00022
0.77
-
2.49
0.01
4
19.85
0.00032
0.66
0.009
0.3
0.01
5
23.29
0.00048
0.56
0.012
0.12
0.02
6
27.05
0.00064
0.39
0.011
1.78
0.03
7
12.26
0.00079
0.28
-
1.23
0.03
8
32.4
0.00064
0.28
-
1.4
0.03
9
17.57
0.00081
0.26
0.009
1.8
0.04
10
36.94
0.00061
0.24
0.006
0.24
0.03
11
4.09
0.00085
0.23
0.009
1.48
0.04
12
26.39
0.00102
0.24
-
0.45
0.04
13
22.36
0.00109
0.22
0.011
0.88
0.05
14
29.93
0.00098
0.22
0.009
2.86
0.04
15
1.59
0.00123
0.2
0.011
1.16
0.05
16
28.52
0.00123
0.17
0.009
0.26
0.05
17
21.0
0.00118
0.18
0.009
2.4
0.05
18
21.25
0.00125
0.18
-
0.59
0.05
19
28.22
0.00121
0.18
-
2.18
0.05
20
31.22
0.00128
0.15
-
0.09
0.06
21
17.85
0.00143
0.15
-
0.17
0.06
22
25.33
0.00182
0.14
-
0.19
0.08
23
11.23
0.00183
0.11
-
2.21
0.08
24
11.98
0.00188
0.12
0.009
0.25
0.08
25
12.7
0.00239
0.1
0.01
0.74
0.1
26
18.39
0.00236
0.09
-
2.52
0.1
27
29.27
0.00243
0.09
0.01
0.16
0.11
28
26.03
0.00283
0.09
-
1.94
0.12
29
20.49
0.00239
0.09
-
1.08
0.1
30
14.29
0.00282
0.08
0.01
3.06
0.12
31
45.37
0.00198
0.07
0.006
0.52
0.09
32
21.77
0.00336
0.07
0.01
2.27
0.15
33
27.62
0.00334
0.07
0.01
2.35
0.15
34
25.0
0.00409
0.07
-
1.47
0.18
35
31.86
0.00284
0.06
0.008
2.7
0.12
36
47.37
0.00243
0.06
0.006
1.79
0.11
422
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:431==
TIC 95962115
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.04
2e-05
11.28
-
2.05
0.0
2
1.02
6e-05
4.85
-
0.98
0.0
3
32.95
0.00022
0.77
-
2.49
0.01
4
19.85
0.00032
0.66
0.009
0.3
0.01
5
23.29
0.00048
0.56
0.012
0.12
0.02
6
27.05
0.00064
0.39
0.011
1.78
0.03
7
12.26
0.00079
0.28
-
1.23
0.03
8
32.4
0.00064
0.28
-
1.4
0.03
9
17.57
0.00081
0.26
0.009
1.8
0.04
10
36.94
0.00061
0.24
0.006
0.24
0.03
11
4.09
0.00085
0.23
0.009
1.48
0.04
12
26.39
0.00102
0.24
-
0.45
0.04
13
22.36
0.00109
0.22
0.011
0.88
0.05
14
29.93
0.00098
0.22
0.009
2.86
0.04
15
1.59
0.00123
0.2
0.011
1.16
0.05
16
28.52
0.00123
0.17
0.009
0.26
0.05
17
21.0
0.00118
0.18
0.009
2.4
0.05
18
21.25
0.00125
0.18
-
0.59
0.05
19
28.22
0.00121
0.18
-
2.18
0.05
20
31.22
0.00128
0.15
-
0.09
0.06
21
17.85
0.00143
0.15
-
0.17
0.06
22
25.33
0.00182
0.14
-
0.19
0.08
23
11.23
0.00183
0.11
-
2.21
0.08
24
11.98
0.00188
0.12
0.009
0.25
0.08
25
12.7
0.00239
0.1
0.01
0.74
0.1
26
18.39
0.00236
0.09
-
2.52
0.1
27
29.27
0.00243
0.09
0.01
0.16
0.11
28
26.03
0.00283
0.09
-
1.94
0.12
29
20.49
0.00239
0.09
-
1.08
0.1
30
14.29
0.00282
0.08
0.01
3.06
0.12
31
45.37
0.00198
0.07
0.006
0.52
0.09
32
21.77
0.00336
0.07
0.01
2.27
0.15
33
27.62
0.00334
0.07
0.01
2.35
0.15
34
25.0
0.00409
0.07
-
1.47
0.18
35
31.86
0.00284
0.06
0.008
2.7
0.12
36
47.37
0.00243
0.06
0.006
1.79
0.11
TIC 96061794
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.17
0.00045
0.55
-
1.85
0.02
2
1.84
0.00055
0.45
0.013
2.51
0.03
3
0.34
0.00066
0.4
-
3.0
0.03
4
0.85
0.00079
0.35
0.014
0.44
0.04
5
1.91
0.00111
0.22
-
0.92
0.06
6
2.88
0.00128
0.17
0.011
2.05
0.06
7
2.53
0.00134
0.18
0.012
1.9
0.07
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
423
==PAGE:432==
8
2.62
0.00142
0.16
-
1.29
0.07
9
3.09
0.00243
0.09
0.011
1.92
0.12
10
3.66
0.00206
0.1
0.011
0.99
0.1
11
1.21
0.00314
0.08
-
0.05
0.16
12
1.3
0.00354
0.07
-
0.73
0.18
13
3.78
0.00299
0.07
0.011
0.26
0.15
TIC 96061794
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
2.17
0.00045
0.55
-
1.85
0.02
2
1.84
0.00055
0.45
0.013
2.51
0.03
3
0.34
0.00066
0.4
-
3.0
0.03
4
0.85
0.00079
0.35
0.014
0.44
0.04
5
1.91
0.00111
0.22
-
0.92
0.06
6
2.88
0.00128
0.17
0.011
2.05
0.06
7
2.53
0.00134
0.18
0.012
1.9
0.07
8
2.62
0.00142
0.16
-
1.29
0.07
9
3.09
0.00243
0.09
0.011
1.92
0.12
10
3.66
0.00206
0.1
0.011
0.99
0.1
11
1.21
0.00314
0.08
-
0.05
0.16
12
1.3
0.00354
0.07
-
0.73
0.18
13
3.78
0.00299
0.07
0.011
0.26
0.15
TIC 97222747
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
16.32
0.00023
1.39
-
1.05
0.01
2
0.37
0.00046
1.0
-
1.87
0.02
3
16.19
0.00061
0.55
0.017
1.46
0.03
4
10.71
0.00089
0.5
-
1.1
0.05
5
1.9
0.00078
0.5
-
1.76
0.04
6
11.08
0.00105
0.45
-
0.67
0.05
7
14.21
0.00121
0.41
-
0.41
0.06
8
6.89
0.0009
0.36
0.016
0.13
0.05
9
1.81
0.00114
0.34
0.02
2.68
0.06
10
7.25
0.00108
0.3
-
2.69
0.05
11
12.32
0.00183
0.3
0.027
2.41
0.09
12
1.73
0.00133
0.29
0.02
2.03
0.07
13
10.34
0.00166
0.26
0.021
0.77
0.08
14
14.73
0.00199
0.23
0.023
0.55
0.1
15
16.95
0.00127
0.22
-
2.06
0.06
16
1.57
0.00185
0.21
-
1.92
0.09
17
6.52
0.00153
0.21
0.017
3.04
0.08
18
0.73
0.00212
0.2
0.022
3.04
0.11
19
13.0
0.00241
0.23
-
2.57
0.12
20
2.1
0.00183
0.21
-
0.43
0.09
21
11.45
0.00263
0.2
0.026
1.44
0.13
22
14.09
0.00273
0.19
0.026
1.58
0.14
23
12.57
0.00284
0.19
0.028
2.3
0.14
424
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:433==
24
14.6
0.00253
0.18
-
0.45
0.13
25
10.12
0.00274
0.15
-
1.95
0.14
26
15.24
0.00293
0.14
-
2.93
0.15
27
14.52
0.00327
0.14
-
3.08
0.17
28
13.33
0.00384
0.14
-
2.55
0.19
29
13.14
0.00392
0.14
0.028
0.34
0.2
30
1.29
0.00275
0.15
0.021
2.7
0.14
31
12.24
0.0042
0.13
0.027
1.34
0.21
TIC 97222747
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
16.32
0.00023
1.39
-
1.05
0.01
2
0.37
0.00046
1.0
-
1.87
0.02
3
16.19
0.00061
0.55
0.017
1.46
0.03
4
10.71
0.00089
0.5
-
1.1
0.05
5
1.9
0.00078
0.5
-
1.76
0.04
6
11.08
0.00105
0.45
-
0.67
0.05
7
14.21
0.00121
0.41
-
0.41
0.06
8
6.89
0.0009
0.36
0.016
0.13
0.05
9
1.81
0.00114
0.34
0.02
2.68
0.06
10
7.25
0.00108
0.3
-
2.69
0.05
11
12.32
0.00183
0.3
0.027
2.41
0.09
12
1.73
0.00133
0.29
0.02
2.03
0.07
13
10.34
0.00166
0.26
0.021
0.77
0.08
14
14.73
0.00199
0.23
0.023
0.55
0.1
15
16.95
0.00127
0.22
-
2.06
0.06
16
1.57
0.00185
0.21
-
1.92
0.09
17
6.52
0.00153
0.21
0.017
3.04
0.08
18
0.73
0.00212
0.2
0.022
3.04
0.11
19
13.0
0.00241
0.23
-
2.57
0.12
20
2.1
0.00183
0.21
-
0.43
0.09
21
11.45
0.00263
0.2
0.026
1.44
0.13
22
14.09
0.00273
0.19
0.026
1.58
0.14
23
12.57
0.00284
0.19
0.028
2.3
0.14
24
14.6
0.00253
0.18
-
0.45
0.13
25
10.12
0.00274
0.15
-
1.95
0.14
26
15.24
0.00293
0.14
-
2.93
0.15
27
14.52
0.00327
0.14
-
3.08
0.17
28
13.33
0.00384
0.14
-
2.55
0.19
29
13.14
0.00392
0.14
0.028
0.34
0.2
30
1.29
0.00275
0.15
0.021
2.7
0.14
31
12.24
0.0042
0.13
0.027
1.34
0.21
TIC 99839685
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.81
1e-05
1.7
-
1.81
0.01
2
14.74
1e-05
1.21
-
0.57
0.01
3
7.54
1e-05
1.09
-
1.73
0.02
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
425
==PAGE:434==
4
12.82
1e-05
1.05
-
2.11
0.01
5
15.35
1e-05
0.84
-
2.05
0.02
6
6.2
4e-05
0.69
0.037
0.06
0.05
7
7.82
3e-05
0.69
-
0.16
0.04
8
6.79
2e-05
0.58
-
0.73
0.03
9
7.72
4e-05
0.56
-
2.95
0.05
10
5.35
3e-05
0.54
0.021
0.32
0.04
11
2.19
3e-05
0.41
-
0.99
0.05
12
8.4
5e-05
0.42
0.028
2.1
0.07
13
14.13
3e-05
0.43
0.018
1.76
0.04
14
1.67
6e-05
0.36
-
2.1
0.08
15
1.81
6e-05
0.38
-
1.22
0.08
16
7.1
6e-05
0.36
0.03
0.48
0.08
17
5.62
5e-05
0.32
0.022
2.79
0.07
18
0.28
7e-05
0.29
-
1.69
0.1
19
0.86
6e-05
0.25
0.021
2.44
0.08
20
16.15
4e-05
0.27
0.016
0.24
0.06
21
16.75
3e-05
0.24
0.009
0.16
0.04
22
8.98
0.0001
0.22
0.029
0.79
0.13
23
9.97
0.0001
0.2
0.027
2.02
0.13
24
1.1
9e-05
0.19
-
3.02
0.12
25
0.16
0.0001
0.22
-
2.72
0.14
26
18.41
4e-05
0.19
0.012
1.6
0.06
27
1.33
0.0001
0.17
0.022
1.45
0.13
28
3.22
6e-05
0.17
0.015
0.23
0.09
29
0.74
9e-05
0.15
-
0.91
0.13
30
3.03
0.00014
0.15
0.031
3.02
0.2
31
1.29
0.00011
0.15
0.021
1.16
0.15
32
21.1
4e-05
0.14
-
2.85
0.06
33
10.71
8e-05
0.14
-
1.12
0.1
34
15.22
5e-05
0.14
0.01
2.45
0.07
35
15.63
7e-05
0.13
-
2.12
0.09
36
9.3
0.00013
0.13
-
1.38
0.18
37
5.96
0.00018
0.12
-
2.52
0.25
38
3.34
8e-05
0.12
-
2.49
0.11
39
1.38
0.00014
0.14
-
0.21
0.19
40
17.41
6e-05
0.12
0.01
1.87
0.08
41
8.14
0.00016
0.12
0.028
2.38
0.23
42
9.19
0.00016
0.11
0.025
2.49
0.22
43
7.3
0.00016
0.12
0.027
1.44
0.22
44
11.25
8e-05
0.11
-
2.09
0.11
45
4.1
0.0001
0.1
-
0.93
0.13
46
20.85
6e-05
0.1
-
2.47
0.08
TIC 99839685
Number
Frequency [c/d]
Error [c/d]
Amplitude
Error
Phase
Error
1
13.81
1e-05
1.7
-
1.81
0.01
2
14.74
1e-05
1.21
-
0.57
0.01
3
7.54
1e-05
1.09
-
1.73
0.02
426
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
==PAGE:435==
4
12.82
1e-05
1.05
-
2.11
0.01
5
15.35
1e-05
0.84
-
2.05
0.02
6
6.2
4e-05
0.69
0.037
0.06
0.05
7
7.82
3e-05
0.69
-
0.16
0.04
8
6.79
2e-05
0.58
-
0.73
0.03
9
7.72
4e-05
0.56
-
2.95
0.05
10
5.35
3e-05
0.54
0.021
0.32
0.04
11
2.19
3e-05
0.41
-
0.99
0.05
12
8.4
5e-05
0.42
0.028
2.1
0.07
13
14.13
3e-05
0.43
0.018
1.76
0.04
14
1.67
6e-05
0.36
-
2.1
0.08
15
1.81
6e-05
0.38
-
1.22
0.08
16
7.1
6e-05
0.36
0.03
0.48
0.08
17
5.62
5e-05
0.32
0.022
2.79
0.07
18
0.28
7e-05
0.29
-
1.69
0.1
19
0.86
6e-05
0.25
0.021
2.44
0.08
20
16.15
4e-05
0.27
0.016
0.24
0.06
21
16.75
3e-05
0.24
0.009
0.16
0.04
22
8.98
0.0001
0.22
0.029
0.79
0.13
23
9.97
0.0001
0.2
0.027
2.02
0.13
24
1.1
9e-05
0.19
-
3.02
0.12
25
0.16
0.0001
0.22
-
2.72
0.14
26
18.41
4e-05
0.19
0.012
1.6
0.06
27
1.33
0.0001
0.17
0.022
1.45
0.13
28
3.22
6e-05
0.17
0.015
0.23
0.09
29
0.74
9e-05
0.15
-
0.91
0.13
30
3.03
0.00014
0.15
0.031
3.02
0.2
31
1.29
0.00011
0.15
0.021
1.16
0.15
32
21.1
4e-05
0.14
-
2.85
0.06
33
10.71
8e-05
0.14
-
1.12
0.1
34
15.22
5e-05
0.14
0.01
2.45
0.07
35
15.63
7e-05
0.13
-
2.12
0.09
36
9.3
0.00013
0.13
-
1.38
0.18
37
5.96
0.00018
0.12
-
2.52
0.25
38
3.34
8e-05
0.12
-
2.49
0.11
39
1.38
0.00014
0.14
-
0.21
0.19
40
17.41
6e-05
0.12
0.01
1.87
0.08
41
8.14
0.00016
0.12
0.028
2.38
0.23
42
9.19
0.00016
0.11
0.025
2.49
0.22
43
7.3
0.00016
0.12
0.027
1.44
0.22
44
11.25
8e-05
0.11
-
2.09
0.11
45
4.1
0.0001
0.1
-
0.93
0.13
46
20.85
6e-05
0.1
-
2.47
0.08
Study of Stellar Oscillations in Am Stars
427
==PAGE:436==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 328
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
