==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
3D blade model updating by coupling 
HAWC2 and ABAQUS
María Luz Castilla Mena
DTU Wind-M-0581
March 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0581 
March 2023
Project period: 
September 2022 - March 2023
ECTS: 35
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Xiao Chen
Xingyuan Miao
Ju Feng
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: María Luz Castilla Mena
Title:
3D blade model updating by coupling HAWC2 
and ABAQUS
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
iii
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
Abstract
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Master of Science in Wind Energy
3D blade model updating by coupling HAWC2 and ABAQUS
by Maria Luz Castilla Mena
The
wind
energy
sector
has
developed
considerably
in
terms
of
technology
improvements, cost reductions, and implementation.
More wind turbines are being
constructed in coastal areas where there is a high energy demand and an ample wind
resource. As a result, extreme wind conditions such as typhoons and hurricanes pose a
signiﬁcant danger to the structural integrity of wind turbines. Under extreme weather
conditions, damage may be induced in wind turbine blades and their stiﬀness properties
may experience signiﬁcant degradation. In the aeroelastic context of a wind turbine, it is
important to consider the mutual eﬀects of the aerodynamic loads and the structural
properties.
An approach to improve the analysis of a wind turbine blade’s behaviour
under extreme wind conditions is to couple software for aeroelastic and structural
simulations. This work presents the coupling of the aeroelastic simulation tool HAWC2
and the 3D FE software ABAQUS through an interface developed in MATLAB. This
interface will link the aerodynamic loads computed by the aeroelastic tool HAWC2 and
use them as an input to calculate the structural properties on 3D FE blade sections. If
damage is encountered on the 3D blade structure, the stiﬀness properties will be
updated into the aeroelastic tool to compute the new aerodynamic loads. This way, the
interface considers the degradation of the stiﬀness properties of wind turbine blade
structures in the calculations of aerodynamic loads, taking into account structural
non-linearities associated with geometry and composite layup that are neglected in the
beam theory model used by the aeroelastic tool HAWC2. In other words, interactions
between aerodynamic loads and structural properties of blade structures in the time
response of a wind turbine are achieved with this interface.
An extreme wind proﬁle
based on real wind turbulence measurements has been modelled for this study, and the
DTU 10 MW Reference Wind Turbine has been employed.
Keywords: Extreme wind, structural integrity, aeroelastic modelling, turbulence,
ﬁnite element analysis
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
iv
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to all my supervisors. Xiao Chen
and Xing-Yuan Miao, my main supervisors, thank you for believing in me and showing
interest and support throughout all the project. As for my co-supervisors, Ju Feng and
Suguang Dou, thank you for transferring your knowledge about the HAWC2 aeroelastic
simulation tool and the turbulence modelling of wind proﬁles. All your help is reﬂected
in the development of this project.
In addition, I would like to thank my parents for always showing support in every decision
I have faced in my life. Even though we are not in the same country, I always feel you close.
I would also like to thank my friends in both Denmark and Spain for all the encouragement
received during these last two years. Especially to my roommates, who have been by my
side in all the process, making me feel home.
Last but not least, I would like to show my gratitude to DTU and my home university
in Spain, Universidad Pontiﬁcia Comillas ICAI, for allowing me participate in the TIME
programme, with which I had the opportunity to study the MSc in Wind Energy in
Denmark. Looking forward to see what the future holds.
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
v
Contents
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Theoretical background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Overview of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Methodology
6
2.1
Workﬂow of the interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Structure of the interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Aeroelastic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Wind model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
Aerodynamic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.3
Structural and cross-sectional model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
3D FE model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Modelling and simulation
15
3.1
Aeroelastic setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Wind turbine speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.2
Wind proﬁle modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.3
Conversion of moments to rotational displacements . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
3D FE model set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
Components and material properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Geometric model and numerical set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.3
Loading and boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.4
Computer information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.5
Update of stiﬀness properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.6
Blade failure analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Results and discussion
29
4.1
Case study 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Sensitivity study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Case study 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Change of foam core material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4.1
Case study 3: Wind proﬁle from Case study 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4.2
Case study 4: Wind proﬁle from Case study 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Conclusions and future work
36
Bibliography
37
==PAGE:10==
vi
A Appendix: Pseudocodes
41
==PAGE:11==
vii
List of Figures
Figure 1.1
Oﬀshore wind turbines under the inﬂuence of a storm.
. . . . . . . . .
1
Figure 1.2
Wind turbine blade deﬂection under the inﬂuence of a storm. . . . . . .
2
Figure 1.3
DTU 10MW Reference Wind Turbine Power Curve. . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Figure 1.4
Overview of the interface’s workﬂow presented in this thesis. . . . . . .
5
Figure 2.1
Overall workﬂow of the MATLAB interface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
Figure 2.2
Structure of the MATLAB interface.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Figure 2.3
Flapwise and edgewise moments in a wind turbine blade. . . . . . . . .
9
Figure 2.4
Visual scheme of HAWC2’s aerodynamic model. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Figure 2.5
Wind turbine blade structure modelled in HAWC2. . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Figure 3.1
Extreme wind proﬁle obtained from data ﬁle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
Figure 3.2
Dimensions of the turbulence box. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
Figure 3.3
Turbulence box front view.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
Figure 3.4
Constrained wind ﬁeld. Top plot: Blue curve shows the time series of a
turbulence ﬁeld at the centre of the turbulence box before the application
of constraints. Black curve shows the required constraint. Red curve
shows the time series of the turbulence ﬁeld after the application of the
constraint.
Middle plot: a cross-section of the unconstrained ﬁeld is
shown, in the x-z plane at the middle position in y. Black line indicates
where the constraint is applied (at the middle position in z. Bottom
plot: shows a cross-section of the turbulence ﬁeld in the x-z plane after
the application of the constraint in the u component. The location with
higher wind speed that meets the constraint requirements is highlighted
in red with a stronger shading.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Figure 3.5
Comparison between real data wind proﬁle (blue curve) and wind proﬁle
modelled in HAWC2 (red curve).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
Figure 3.6
Calculation of the rotation angle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
Figure 3.7
Components and materials of the 3D wind turbine blade section. . . . .
23
Figure 3.8
Mesh details and reference node (marked with an x). . . . . . . . . . .
24
Figure 3.9
Materials that can fail during the loading. Figure on the left: Foam core
of the sandwich structures. Figure on the right: Unidirectional laminate.
27
==PAGE:12==
viii
Figure 4.1
Case study 1. Cross-sectional bending moments in the peak zone of the
modelled extreme wind proﬁle.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
Figure 4.2
Case study 1. Rotational displacements corresponding to the bending
moments in the peak zone of the modelled extreme wind proﬁle. . . . .
30
Figure 4.3
Case study 1. No plastic deformation in the foam core material of the
blade structure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Figure 4.4
Case study 2. Extreme wind proﬁle with a mean wind speed of 80 m/s.
32
Figure 4.5
Case study 2. Cross-sectional bending moments in the peak zone of the
new extreme wind proﬁle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
Figure 4.6
Case study 2. Rotational displacements corresponding to the bending
moments in the peak zone of the new extreme wind proﬁle.
. . . . . .
33
Figure 4.7
Case study 4. Plastic deformation in the foam core material of the blade
structure.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:13==
ix
List of Tables
Table 2.1
Cross-section properties needed in HAWC2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Table 3.1
Initial parameters to calculate the dimensions of the turbulence box. . . .
17
Table 3.2
Dimensions of the turbulence box. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
Table 3.3
Turbulence box generation parameters (see List of Symbols 1). . . . . . .
19
Table 3.4
Standard deviation of the real data wind proﬁle (h = 41m) and wind
proﬁle modelled in HAWC2 (h = hub height). . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
Table 3.5
Order of magnitude of the cross-sectional forces under an extreme wind
proﬁle.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
Table 3.6
Young’s modulus of the composite material in the 3D blade section. . . .
23
Table 3.7
Shear modulus of the composite material in the 3D blade section. . . . .
24
Table 3.8
Poisson’s ratio of the composite material in the 3D blade section. . . . .
24
Table 3.9
Material properties of PVC foam core material.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Table 3.10
Ultimate strain components of composite materials (unit: mm mm−1).
.
28
Table 4.1
Case study 1. Check for delamination in the UD composite material.
. .
31
Table 4.2
Minimum value of rotational displacement in the x direction, θx, to induce
damage in the blade section. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
Table 4.3
Minimum value of rotational displacement in the y direction, θy, to induce
damage in the blade section. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
Table 4.4
Case study 2. Check for delamination in the UD composite material.
. .
33
Table 4.5
Change in the mechanical properties of foam core material.
. . . . . . .
34
Table 4.6
Case study 3. Check for delamination in the UD composite material.
. .
34
Table 4.7
Case study 4.
Degradation of the stiﬀness properties after damage
induced in the blade structure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Table 4.8
Case study 4. Check for delamination in the UD composite material.
. .
35
==PAGE:14==
x
List of Symbols
Turbulence
Lx
Length of the turbulence box in longitudinal (x) direction
m
Ly
Length of the turbulence box in transverse horizontal (y) direction
m
Lz
Length of the turbulence box in transverse vertical (z) direction
m
Nx
Dimension of the turbulence box in longitudinal (x) direction
-
Ny
Dimension of the turbulence box in transverse horizontal (y) direction
-
Nz
Dimension of the turbulence box in transverse vertical (z) direction
-
dx
Spacing between data points along the x-coordinate
m
dy
Spacing between data points along the y-coordinate
m
dz
Spacing between data points along the z-coordinate
m
L
Mann model turbulence length scale parameter
-
Γ
Mann model turbulence anisotropy parameter
-
αϵ
Mann model turbulence parameter
-
Structural
E
Elasticity modulus
N/m2
G
Shear modulus
N/m2
A
Cross-sectional area
m2
Ix
Moment of inertia in the x direction
m4
Iy
Moment of inertia in the y direction
m4
J
Torsional moment of inertia
m4
kx
Shear factor for force in the principal bending xe direction
-
ky
Shear factor for force in the principal bending ye direction
-
==PAGE:15==
==PAGE:16==
1
1 Introduction
Wind energy is currently a fundamental element of the electricity grid, subject to
regulations for power quality and reliability.
The wind energy sector has developed
considerably in terms of technology improvements, cost reductions, and implementation.
Due to these factors, wind energy is expected to produce 50% of power in Europe by
2050, 44% in North America, and more than 30% in Greater China, Latin America, and
South East Asia [1].
In a world where energy demand is expanding and there is a growing feeling of urgency
about environmental issues, an increasing number of countries are turning to oﬀshore wind
energy to meet these diﬃculties. While oﬀshore wind energy brings signiﬁcant potential,
it also poses considerable concerns [2], [3]. More wind turbines have been constructed in
coastal areas where there is a high energy demand and an ample wind resource. As a result,
high wind conditions such as typhoons and hurricanes pose a signiﬁcant danger to wind
turbine structural integrity [4]. Figure 1.1, taken from reference [5], shows an oﬀshore
wind farm under extreme weather conditions.
On the basis of in-depth investigation
and phenomenological evaluation, wind turbine structural failure incidents brought on by
strong winds have been regularly documented in recent years [3].
Figure 1.1: Oﬀshore wind turbines under the inﬂuence of a storm. Figure taken
from reference [5].
However, not only are oﬀshore wind turbines aﬀected by extreme weather conditions but
also land-based wind turbines, although less frequently. Figure 1.2, taken from reference
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1. Introduction
2
[6], shows how a tornado puts the structural response of a wind turbine blade at the limit.
The tornado took place in Crowell, Texas on May 4, 2022.
Figure 1.2: Wind turbine blade deﬂection under the inﬂuence of a storm. Figure
taken from reference [6].
As wind turbines are exposed to external conditions it is inevitable that that their
performance will deteriorate over time. In the aeroelastic context of a wind turbine, it is
important to emphasize that both the aerodynamic forces and the structural ﬂexibility
inﬂuence each other.
When the aerodynamic forces change,
the wind turbines
deformations change. These deformations change the blades orientation with respect to
the wind ﬂow, making the aerodynamic forces change again. This is what it is called a
coupled problem, in which both the aerodynamic forces and the structural deformations
inﬂuence each other. Weak sections can appear in the blades and, under extreme wind
conditions, such as storms, blades could fail.
The aim of this study is to determine if, under extreme weather conditions, the structural
properties of wind turbine blades are signiﬁcantly degraded when their interaction with
aerodynamic loads is considered. For this purpose, an interface is developed to couple
an aeroelastic tool together with a 3D ﬁnite element (FE) software, in order to compute
the stiﬀness properties using high-ﬁdelity 3D ﬁnite element modelling, to account for
structural non-linearities associated with geometry and composite layup. It is important
to emphasise that this possible degradation of the structural properties of wind turbine
blades may occur under extreme weather conditions, as these are situations outside the
design limits and it is uncertain how the wind turbine might react. Under normal weather
scenarios there would be no signiﬁcant change in the structural properties of wind turbine
blades.
1.1
Theoretical background
Wind turbines are vulnerable to storms because the maximum wind speeds that can
be reached in those conditions may surpass wind turbines’ designed limitations [7]. Loss
of blades and buckling of the supporting tower are two possible failure scenarios under
this circumstances. Blades are often rather simple to replace, although their loss might
result in additional structural damage [8].
To understand the reason why exceeding the design limits of wind turbines is undesirable,
the power curve of a wind turbine needs to be explained. The power curve displays a
wind turbine’s power production in relation to the mean wind speed, as shown in Figure
1.3. The cut in speed is the wind speed at which the blades start rotating and generating
power. As wind speed increases, more electricity is generated until the rated wind speed
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 1. Introduction
3
is reached. At this point, the wind turbine generates its maximum, or rated power. The
power generated by the wind turbine remains constant at this point as the wind speed
continues to increase, until the cut out speed is reached. The cut out speed is the maximum
wind speed at which the generator is designed to produce usable energy. When the cut
out wind speed is reached, the wind turbine shuts down to avoid excessive strain on the
rotor [5].
Figure 1.3: DTU 10MW Reference Wind Turbine Power Curve.
The power curve displayed above corresponds to the DTU 10 MW Reference Wind
Turbine. The data was taken from reference [9]. In this case, the cut-in wind speed is 4
m/s, the rated wind speed is 11.4 m/s, the cut out wind speed is 25 m/s, and the rated
power is 10 MW [10].
Every wind turbine is equipped with an anemometer to measure wind speed and a wind
vane to monitor wind direction.
The wind turbine shuts oﬀautomatically when the
anemometer detects wind speeds greater than the cut-out speed. Furthermore, when the
rated wind speed is detected, the blades begin to feather. This means that the blades
edge starts facing to the wind with the aim of reducing their surface area. Even though
it is uncommon, the blades can sometimes be locked down to withstand strong winds.
This is called parked condition. The yaw driver, which is housed in the wind turbine’s
nacelle, continues to point the rotor into the wind despite this switch oﬀ, even when
weather patterns change as they pass by [5].
Following the wind turbine design standard IEC61400-3 Design Load Cases (DLCs) [11],
the DLCs are speciﬁed for each design situation by their related metocean conditions and
control system operational behavior, fault scenarios, and other occurrences. Speciﬁcations
are given and recommended to be followed when encountering one of these scenarios.
Design situations 6.x and 7.x reﬂect the parked condition without and with fault scenarios,
respectively [12].
These are common ways to act when a wind turbine is under the inﬂuence of a storm.
However, they do not allow to predict if a wind turbine blade will be potentially damaged
under the extreme weather conditions. As previously remarked, in these circumstances
the relation between the aerodynamic loads and the structural properties may lead to a
possible degradation of the structural properties of the blade. A blade is relatively easy
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 1. Introduction
4
to replace, but if not replaced on time it could potentially damage the whole wind turbine
structure.
1.2
State of the art
Given the fact that under extreme wind conditions the behaviour of a wind turbine
blades is uncertain, to predict the damage in wind turbine blade structures, Jeong et
al. [13] consider an approach to detect damage at an early stage through the real-time
monitoring using digital image correlation (DIC) to predict the location of the damage. In
Chen et al. [14], infrared thermography, digital image correlation, and acoustic emission
(AE) are used to identify and monitor damage, allowing to identify imminent structural
failure and steady damage growth.
Coupling an aeroelastic tool with a 3D FE software can also help in predicting the
behaviour of wind turbine blade structures. This link between diﬀerent programmes is
needed because the aeroelastic tool models the wind turbine structure as beam elements
to calculate the aerodynamic loads in a more eﬃcient manner.
The aeroelastic tool
makes beam theory assumptions and considers a wind turbine blade section as a beam
element, where neither the geometry nor the composite layup of the blade structure is
considered. Using a 3D FE software helps in a more exact computation of the stiﬀness
properties of the blade.
In Larsen et al. [15] the eﬀects of including large blade
deﬂections in aeroelastic calculations are considered, using non-linear approaches to
quantify these eﬀects. However, non-linearities dealing with large blade deﬂection such
as material properties, buckling or delamination are not part of the analysis.
The
non-linearity addressed in the study is the result of computing the inertia at the
deﬂected region and imposing loads on the deﬂected structure.
Integrating several software that are dedicated to particular aspects of wind turbine
design and analysis is a step towards integrated design of wind turbines [16]. In Kaufer
et al. [17], integrated analysis is done for oﬀshore wind turbines. Flex5, a commonly used
wind turbine simulation tool, and Poseidon, a ﬁnite element software used for structural
analysis,
are coupled together with the purpose of combining aerodynamic and
hydrodynamic loading taking into consideration the dynamic response of the support
structure.
In this case both software are coupled together without the need of an
external
software.
In
Garzon
et
al.
[16],
the
aeroelastic
tool
HAWC2
and
MATLAB/Simulink have been linked together to simulate a semi-variable speed wind
turbine.
This allows for study of the interactions between the aeroelastic, structural,
electrical, and control systems of wind turbines and the grid.
HAWC2 simulates the
aeroelastic behavior of wind turbines in the time domain, while MATLAB/Simulink is
designed to perform control and power system simulations.
In Papazafeiropoulos.
et
al. [18], the link between 3D FE software ABAQUS and MATLAB is created to take into
consideration ﬁnite element modeling and mathematical analysis.
This connection
provides up new prospects for mathematical optimization, statistical analysis, and
results post-processing, among many other potential applications.
In this study, an interface is developed in MATLAB to couple the aeroelastic tool HAWC2
together with the 3D ﬁnite element (FE) software ABAQUS. The interface will use the
aerodynamic loads computed by the aeroelastic tool and will update the low-ﬁdelity beam
theory computed stiﬀness properties with the ones obtained with a high-ﬁdelity 3D ﬁnite
element approach, taking into account the geometry of the blade section and the composite
layup. Blade failure analysis will also be developed to consider delamination in composite
materials and foam core crush.
The idea behind the development of this interface is
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 1. Introduction
5
to predict whether or not a blade is going to fail in the upcoming of extreme weather
conditions and assess the option whether the blade should be replaced, for instance, before
or after a storm. Simulations will be carried out linking both software and, if damage
is induced in the blade structure, the interface will update the structural properties of
the blade and therefore, the aerodynamic loads. This way, degradation of the stiﬀness
properties will be considered during the wind turbine’s response in the time domain.
Figure 1.4 shows a general overview of the interface’s workﬂow.
Figure 1.4: Overview of the interface’s workﬂow presented in this thesis.
1.3
Overview of the thesis
After a brief introduction to the theoretical background and the state of the art of
the project in Chapter 1, Chapter 2 will focus on the methodology, where the overall
workﬂow and structure of the developed interface that links both software will be
explained, together with an explanation of the aeroelastic and structural models.
Chapter 3 includes the aeroelastic and the structural modelling setup, the numerical
setup used in all software to the development of the simulations that prove that the
interface works, along with the computer environment settings.
It includes the wind
turbine employed for the study, how an extreme wind proﬁle is modelled, and an
overview of the 3D blade section modelled in the 3D FE software. The description of the
case studies performed to test the operation of the developed interface is given in
Chapter 4, along with a discussion of the obtained results. In Chapter 5, the conclusions
are summarized and a future improvement is suggested.
==PAGE:21==
6
2 Methodology
In order to analyse blade structural response in operational wind turbine environments,
an interface is developed to link the aeroelastic tool HAWC2 and the 3D FE software
ABAQUS. The interface is developed in MATLAB [19]. With this interface, interactions
between aeroelastic and structural systems are considered, since both the aerodynamic
loads and the structural response inﬂuence each other. The aerodynamic loads have impact
on the structural properties of the wind turbine, and changes in the structural properties
also inﬂuence the aerodynamic loads.
Under extreme weather conditions damages can be induced in the blade structure, reducing
the stiﬀness of the structure. The change in the structural properties leads to a change
in the aerodynamic loads that the aeroelastic tool would not notice when using the beam
element assumptions. Updating the stiﬀness properties in the aeroelastic tool with a 3D
ﬁnite element approach can make a diﬀerence in the calculation of a wind turbine blade
time response. The main purpose of developing this interface is to investigate the response
of blade structure under extreme wind events taking into account the possible degradation
of stiﬀness properties, to see whether the change in the stiﬀness properties aﬀects the time
response of a wind turbine blade. The overall workﬂow of the MATLAB interface is shown
in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Overall workﬂow of the MATLAB interface.
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Methodology
7
2.1
Workﬂow of the interface
As shown in Figure 2.1, the overall workﬂow of the MATLAB interface consists of the
following six main steps.
• Step 1: Model wind proﬁle. First, the extreme wind proﬁle needs to be described
so that it can be modelled by the aeroelastic simulation tool and use it as an input.
• Step 2: Run aeroelastic simulation. Once the extreme wind proﬁle is modelled,
the aeroelastic simulation is run and the aerodynamic loads in the wind turbine
blades are computed.
• Step 3: Obtain aerodynamic loads. The interface reads the results obtained
from the aeroelastic simulations.
• Step 4: Run 3D FE simulation. Subsequently, the aerodynamic loads are applied
to the 3D blade structure, the 3D FE simulation is run and the structural properties
are obtained.
• Step 5: Obtain stiﬀness properties. The interface reads the results obtained
from the 3D FE simulations and computes the new stiﬀness properties of the wind
turbine blade sections.
• If failure is found on the blade stucture:
– Step 6: Update stiﬀness properties. The interface updates the stiﬀness
properties in the aeroelastic simulation tool.
As a result, new aerodynamic
loads can be computed again by running the aeroelastic simulation.
• If no failure is found on the blade structure. No update of stiﬀness properties is
needed and the aerodynamic loads can be computed again by running the aeroelastic
simulation tool.
This workﬂow allows to simulate the time response of wind turbine blades under
operational wind turbine environments and, if damage is induced on the blade structure,
it allows to update the stiﬀness properties using 3D FE models of blade sections.
In
short, it allows to analyze structural behaviours of blade structures in detail during a
simulation. In each iteration, structural failures will be checked in the blade. Steps two
to six are repeated until the simulation time is reached.
2.2
Structure of the interface
To couple the aeroelastic simulation with 3D FE simulation, the structure shown in
Figure 2.2 is used in the interface. It consists of a main code where the entire simulation
is conducted. Within the main code, functions are called to perform speciﬁc tasks. This
is done with the intention of making the main code simpler and clearer. The pseudocodes
for all the codes can be found in the Appendix A.
Inside the main code, and after the initialization, the extreme wind proﬁle is next to be
speciﬁed. Real wind data measurements will be read using the function readwindprofile
and turbulence ﬁles will be generated. In this work, HiperSim is used to generate the
turbulence ﬁles for the aeroelastic tool to model the wind proﬁle. A detailed explanation
of the generation of turbulence ﬁles is found in Section 3.1.2.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Methodology
8
Figure 2.2: Structure of the MATLAB interface.
The aeroelastic tool will then be run by the interface to compute the aerodynamic loads
corresponding to the modelled wind proﬁle, and the function Read_HAWC2 will read and
store the following results:
• Time vector of the simulation (s).
• Wind speed in the x, y, and z direction at the hub height (m/s).
• Cross-sectional forces and moments in the speciﬁed location of the blade (N and
N m, respectively).
Wind speed results are collected and compared to the real wind measurements to
demonstrate that the aeroelastic tool accurately modelled the extreme wind proﬁle.
Regarding the aerodynamic loads, cross-sectional forces will be neglected in the blade
section analysis and will focus instead on the cross-sectional moments Mx and My, also
referred to as bending moment in the ﬂapwise direction and bending moment in the
edgewise direction, respectively. Figure 2.3 shows how the ﬂapwise (Mx) and edgewise
(My) moments look in a wind turbine blade, taken from the reference [20].
The
cross-sectional moment Mz,
also referred to as torsional moment,
is smaller in
comparison with the ﬂapwise and edgewise moments and is also neglected from this
analysis. Table 3.5 in Section 3.1.2 shows the order of magnitude of the cross-sectional
aerodynamic loads.
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Methodology
9
Figure 2.3:
Flapwise and edgewise moments in a wind turbine blade.
Figure
adapted from reference [20].
Given that the modelled blade section is very complex and has many details, to ease the
convergence of the structural simulation the cross-sectional moments will be expressed
in terms of angular rotations. This implies that rotational displacement will be applied
instead of moments to the 3D blade section, and the conversion will be done with the
function convert_mom2ang. A detailed explanation of how the conversion of moments
to angular rotations is done can be found in Section 3.1.3. Function inp2m creates the
function inp_initial which is responsible for writing the input data needed by the 3D
FE software. The last mentioned function creates the input ﬁle to be read by the 3D FE
software.
The next step is to run the 3D FE simulation and read the results obtained using the
function Read_ODB_outputs_node. Information on stress and strain of the blade section,
among others, can be obtained at this point and will be used later for blade failure
analysis.
The
stiﬀness
properties
will
be
obtained
using
the
function
obtain_stiffness_prop. In Section 3.2.5 the process to obtain the stiﬀness properties
from the 3D blade section model will be described. If damage is found on the 3D blade
sections, function Read_blade_st will read the current stiﬀness properties used by the
aeroelastic tool and function update_HAWC2 will update them so that in the next
iteration the updated aerodynamic loads can be computed, the ones corresponding to
the structural situation of the blade sections at the point. If no damage is found on the
blade sections, the loop will jump to the next iteration without updating the stiﬀness
properties.
Damage is user-deﬁned in the code as the minimum percentage of
degradation of stiﬀness properties.
If the percentage of degradation obtained after
running the simulation is above that value, the code detects that damage has been
induced in the blade section and will update the stiﬀness properties in the aeroelastic
tool.
With the results obtained from the 3D FE simulation, a blade failure analysis is performed
to study the inﬂuence of the extreme wind proﬁle in wind turbine blade sections. Foam
core crush and delamination of the unidirectional (UD) composite laminate are the two
failure scenarios to be checked in this study.
Further details are explained in Section
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2. Methodology
10
3.2.6. This procedure is not currently implemented in the MATLAB interface but checked
manually.
2.3
Aeroelastic model
For this study, HAWC2 (which stands for Horizontal Axis Wind turbine Code 2nd
generation) is the aeroelastic tool used to compute the aerodynamic loads. It is a tool for
modelling a wind turbine’s response in the time domain. This aeroelastic wind turbine
simulation tool is currently being developed at DTU Wind [21]. Special focus will be given
to the wind model, the aerodynamic model, and the structural model.
The HAWC2 software is used to study the dynamic behaviour of a wind turbine. In the
aeroelastic context of a wind turbine, the mutual eﬀects of the aerodynamic forces and the
structural properties are considered. The HAWC2 structural formulation is coupled to an
aerodynamic model that can compute the aerodynamic forces acting on the blades using
the aerodynamic Blade Element Momentum (BEM) model. In addition, HAWC2 software
allows to model the extreme wind proﬁle. With the built-in Mann turbulence generator,
HAWC2 can generate turbulent wind ﬁelds based on site-speciﬁc wind data [22].
2.3.1
Wind model
The wind model that HAWC2 employs to reproduce the wind ﬁeld in which the wind
turbine operates is explained in the following subsection. An overview of turbulence and
how turbulence ﬁelds are generated in HAWC2 is given. The Mann model [23] receives
special consideration as it is completely integrated with the HAWC2 software.
It is convenient to distinguish between properties related to the mean wind speed and the
turbulence properties. On one hand, the mean wind properties take into account the mean
wind speed at hub height, the wind shear (wind velocity proﬁle as function of height), and
the wind direction (the positive direction is the wind seen from the wind turbine). On
the other hand, turbulence is deﬁned by a turbulence vector ﬁeld, with a mean value of
zero in all directions: u,v and w. The u component represents the direction of the mean
wind speed. The perpendicular component is called v, and the vertical direction speciﬁed
upwards is the w component [24].
HAWC2 turbulence ﬁeld generation is based on the Mann model formulation [23], as it
generates a spatial vector ﬁeld in cartesian coordinates. The local speed and direction of
the ﬂow are represented by a three-dimensional vector at each point of the vector ﬁeld.
The Taylor’s assumption is used, also known as frozen turbulence assumption, states that
large turbulence structures are transported with the mean wind speed and do not vary
over time. Then the Mann model is used, and the solution is the creation of a ﬁeld that is
perfectly correlated between variations in the u, v, and w directions. Isotropic turbulence
is assumed, which explains that the length scale and variance level is the same for the
three directions [25].
Applying the turbulence model is relatively straightforward, since there are mainly four
input parameters. The ﬁrst parameter is the alpha-epsilon value, αϵ, which is the one that
determines the variance level. The second parameter is the length scale L, matching the
most energetic turbulent motions. The third parameter is the shear parameter gamma, Γ,
which gives the magnitude of shear. An isotropic turbulence without shear has a Γ value
of zero. Last, but not least, the fourth parameter is the high frequency compensation,
which relates to the discretization of the vector ﬁeld [25].
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Methodology
11
2.3.2
Aerodynamic model
As previously mentioned, HAWC2’s aim is to model the aeroelastic response of a
wind turbine to external force conditions. The aerodynamic model is based on a Blade
Element Momentum (BEM) formulation, a relatively simple model that requires limited
computation time. With this model the aerodynamic forces over the wind turbine rotor
can be computed in a relatively simple and fast way by combining two levels. The rotor
aerodynamics are modeled on the ﬁrst level, and the steady and unsteady aerodynamic
forces acting on the 2D airfoil sections that deﬁne each blade element are described in the
second level [26]. Figure 2.4 shows a schematic of HAWC2’s aerodynamic model.
Figure 2.4: Visual scheme of HAWC2’s aerodynamic model.
The ﬁrst level takes into account that the rotor slows the air ﬂow by capturing its
energy.
This is an eﬀect called induction, where the ﬂow approaching the rotor is
modiﬁed in speed and direction by the presence of the rotor itself.
The rotor
aerodynamic is modelled with a Blade Element Momentum approach, which assumes
that the wind turbine rotor can be modelled as an ideal rotor.
The BEM model
discretizes the area swept by the rotor into independent concentric annular blade
elements. Computing the aerodynamic forces on each blade element is simpliﬁed to a 2D
problem.
The problem is solved using engineering models with low computational
requirements for 2D Airfoil Section aerodynamics, as explained by the second level. The
dynamics of the lift and drag forces are represented by the 2D Airfoil Section model,
taking into account the rotor aerodynamic eﬀects previously mentioned [26].
The two levels of the aerodynamic model are tightly linked to one another. To compute
the aerodynamic forces on the airfoil section of a blade element, the speed and direction
of the ﬂow seen by the blade section needs to be known. The wind ﬁeld, the motion of the
structure, and the induction eﬀects from the rotor aerodynamics will all have an impact
on the ﬂow seen by the blade section. The aerodynamic forces acting on the structure
have an inﬂuence on its motion. In addition, the induction eﬀects over the rotor depend
on the wind ﬁeld and the aerodynamic forces operating on the rotor area, resulting in a
signiﬁcant interaction among the various levels of the aerodynamic model [26].
2.3.3
Structural and cross-sectional model
The ﬂexible multibody dynamics explains how the structure is modelled in HAWC2,
also referred to as ﬂoating frame of reference [27].
A multibody formulation couples
diﬀerent independent bodies together using algebraic constraints. Each body is divided
into a set of Timoshenko beam elements with six degrees of freedom to allow for ﬂexibility.
This implies that ﬂapwise, edgewise, and torsional ﬂexibility are taken into consideration
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2. Methodology
12
in the context of a blade.
The main bodies serve as the framework of the structure.
They ensure that every translation and rotation with respect to one another is taken
into account. The Timoshenko beam elements add the eﬀect of ﬂexibility to each body.
Beam elements have stiﬀness, mass and inertia, properties that are constant over each
Timoshenko beam element [27]. If the beam properties are well deﬁned, the dynamics of
a ﬂexible multibody simulation are fairly precise and useful for load analyses.
Figure 2.5 taken from reference [27] shows a graphical representation of how the blade
structure is modelled in HAWC2. Beams are one dimensional: they only have a length,
no width nor height. This beam model serves as a simple representation of a wind turbine
blade.
Figure 2.5: Wind turbine blade structure modelled in HAWC2. Figure taken from
reference [27].
The top ﬁgure shows a 3D FE blade modelled with a large amount of elements, where
the stiﬀness properties are deﬁned by the material properties and a detailed description
of the geometry. For an aeroelastic simulation, it would be too computationally costly.
The middle and bottom ﬁgures show a beam model, which is less computationally heavy
and employed by HAWC2. The complex blade geometry is simpliﬁed to a single line for
a beam model, along which the stiﬀness, mass, and inertia properties of various
cross-sections must be speciﬁed. As a result, the structural cross-sectional parameters
must be known in advance, as HAWC2 does not support the analysis of generating
cross-sectional parameters.
The BECAS software (which stands for Beam Cross section Analysis Software) is used to
determine the cross-sectional stiﬀness and mass properties of a beam cross section in the
aeroelastic tool HAWC2 [28]. This 2D ﬁnite element software computes the cross-section
stiﬀness matrix, a 6x6 matrix that relates, for linear elastic beams, the cross-sectional
forces and moments with the strains and curvatures.
It is important to be aware that each beam element is modelled as isotropic, which means
that structural parameters are constant over one single beam element.
The isotropic
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Methodology
13
approach of computing cross-sectional stiﬀness will be considered for ease of simplicity.
The following constitutive relation (see equation 2.1) can deﬁne the blade modelled as an
isotropic beam element, taken from reference [29]. This is the reason why the constitutive
matrix has only diagonal terms.
The left-hand side corresponds to the cross-sectional
forces and moments, and the right-hand side represents the strains and curvatures. To
model isotropic beam elements for a simple cross-section the following parameters (Table
2.1) are needed by HAWC2.








Fx
Fy
Fz
Mx
My
Mz








=








GA · kx
0
0
0
0
0
0
GA · ky
0
0
0
0
0
0
AE
0
0
0
0
0
0
EIx
0
0
0
0
0
0
EIy
0
0
0
0
0
0
GJ








·








γx
γy
γz
κx
κy
κz








(2.1)
The diagonal terms included in the constitutive matrix are:
• GAkx: Shear stiﬀness in the x direction.
• GAky: Shear stiﬀness in the y direction.
• AE: Axial stiﬀness.
• EIx: Bending stiﬀness about the x axis.
• EIy: Bending stiﬀness about the y axis.
• GJ: Torsional stiﬀness.
Table 2.1: Cross-section properties needed in HAWC2.
Parameter
Deﬁnition
Unit
r
Point of the blade where the section starts
m
m
Mass per unit length
kg/m
xm
X-coordinate of the mass center
m
ym
Y-coordinate of the mass center
m
rix
Radius of gyration in x
m
riy
Radius of gyration in y
m
xs
X-coordinate of the shear center
m
ys
Y-coordinate of the shear center
m
E
Modulus of elasticity
N/m2
G
Shear modulus of elasticity
N/m2
Ix
Area moment of inertia in x
m4
Iy
Area moment of inertia in y
m4
J
Torsional stiﬀness constant
-
kx
Shear factor in x
-
ky
Shear factor in y
-
A
Cross-sectional area
m2
θz
Structural pitch
degrees
xe
X-coordinate of center of elasticity
m
ye
Y-coordinate of center of elasticity
m
For wind turbine blades, the longitudinal stiﬀness often has little impact on simulation
results. In addition, a wind turbine cross section has the ﬂapwise bending stiﬀness (about
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2. Methodology
14
the horizontal x-axis) and the edgewise bending stiﬀness (about the vertical y-axis). The
two caps of a blade are the ones that provide the main part of the ﬂapwise bending
stiﬀness. It is important to position the caps as separate from each other as possible,
as the ﬂapwise bending stiﬀness scales with the square of the distance between the caps.
Suﬃcient ﬂapwise bending stiﬀness is important to prevent the blades from crashing into
the tower. Moreover, the torsional stiﬀness is an important parameter for wind turbine
blades, as a twisting deformation changes the aerodynamic angle of attack and, therefore
inﬂuences the aerodynamic forces. Furthermore, shear webs are added to wind turbine
blades to provide enough shear stiﬀness.
As previously mentioned, HAWC2 uses the
Timoshenko beam theory, which describes the lateral deformation of a beam based on
both bending and shear stiﬀness. When a shear web couples the two caps together, the
deformation of the blade is reduced [30]. Figure in Section shows the basic elements of a
wind turbine blade section.
2.4
3D FE model
On the other hand, ABAQUS is a 3D ﬁnite element simulation software used to
compute structural performance of wind turbine blades. In this case, a 3D section of a
wind turbine blade is modelled in ABAQUS to compute high-ﬁdelity structural
properties.
To describe the mechanical behaviour of wind turbine blades, HAWC2 relies on beam
theory. As a result, inputs such as beam cross-section stiﬀness and mass properties are
needed. Although the beam theory model assumptions used to calculate the cross-sectional
stiﬀness properties of a wind turbine blade are suﬃcient for calculating aerodynamic loads,
they fall short of what is required to analyse the structural performance of a blade when
damaged due to exposure to extreme weather conditions.
For those purposes, a 3D blade section is modelled in ABAQUS to account for structural
non-linearities associated with geometry and composite layup that are neglected in the
beam theory model used by the aeroelastic tool. A 3D ﬁnite element modelling approach
is used to compute stiﬀness properties of 3D blade sections and to conduct advanced
progressive failure analysis, which enables precise composite failure and foam crushing
prediction [31]. For this study, foam core crush will be analysed together with delamination
of the unidirectional (UD) composite laminate.
Foam core crush is in built model in
ABAQUS, whereas delamination is obtained post calculation.
The input ﬁle for the 3D FE modelling of blade sections includes the mesh, the loading
and boundary conditions, layup conﬁguration, material properties, element type, and
numerical settings, and will be further explained in Chapter 3, Section 3.2.
==PAGE:30==
15
3 Modelling and simulation
The models used in the aeroelastic tool HAWC2 and the 3D FE software ABAQUS
are described in the following chapter, respectively.
First, the aeroelastic model is
described, including the most relevant speciﬁcations of the wind turbine modelled in the
study,
the
extreme
wind
proﬁle
modelling,
and
detailed
explanations
on
how
cross-sectional
moments
are
transformed
into
rotation
angles
(needed
to
solve
convergence issues, as will be explained). Subsequently, the 3D FE set-up is described,
including the modelling of a 3D blade section, the components and material properties of
the structure, the loading and boundary conditions, the numerical settings, and the
computer environment.
In addition, an explanation on how to calculate the stiﬀness
properties from the 3D blade model is described, together with the failure analysis
criterion employed to determine whether the blade section experiences composite failure
or foam core crush.
3.1
Aeroelastic setup
3.1.1
Wind turbine speciﬁcations
The DTU 10MW Reference Wind Turbine has been selected as the wind turbine for
this study. This section covers the most crucial aspects relevant to this study. For more
details, please see the cited source [10].
The DTU 10MW Reference Wind Turbine has a cut in wind speed of 4 m/s and and a cut
out wind speed of 25 m/s, as mentioned in Section 1.1. The wind turbine has three blades
and a rotor diameter of 178.3 m, with a blade length of more than 80 m. Regarding the
structural design, the blade has been divided in 51 sections across its length, and for each
section the cross-sectional stiﬀness properties were calculated using the 2D ﬁnite element
software BECAS. As mentioned in Section 2.3, the beam theory assumptions have been
used, where the sections of the blade have been modelled as beam elements. The model
is assumed as isotropic.
3.1.2
Wind proﬁle modelling
One of the objectives for the blade behaviour prediction interface is to model an
extreme wind proﬁle in HAWC2 with data obtained from real wind measurements. To
start with, the meaning of extreme wind proﬁle needs to be deﬁned. According to the
Saﬃr–Simpson hurricane intensity scale [32], a wind proﬁle with a sustained mean wind
speed around 33 to 43 m/s is considered to be dangerous and produce potential damage.
The modelled extreme wind proﬁle will fulﬁll this characteristic, and in addition it will
have a remarkable wind gust. This is a sudden, brief increase in the speed of the wind.
The next step is to ﬁnd real wind data measurements that fulﬁll these speciﬁc
requirements. In order to do so, the DTU’s Database on Wind Characteristics [33] was
consulted.
This repository contains a turbulence measurement collection [34] which
consists of time series of turbulence measurements. The measurements primarily include
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
16
wind speed and wind direction signals, and are primarily intended for wind turbine
design.
The collection contains a list of sites with documentation about the
measurement setup and instrumentation.
This list may be used as a help to ﬁnd the
appropriate measurement data before downloading.
The turbulence measurement collection was ﬁltered to search for collections with extreme
wind proﬁles. For the selected collections, to optimize the searching process a MATLAB
code was developed to ﬁnd a wind proﬁle with the desired characteristics. The code unzips
the downloaded collection, opens the ﬁles, and saves the maximum mean wind speed along
with the sensor that measured the wind speed, and the location of the corresponding ﬁle.
After running the code, the time series of turbulence measurements that better fulﬁlls
the extreme wind proﬁle requirements corresponds to data measurements from three tall
met masts at Skipheya, on the Norwegian island of Frøya [35].
This dataset contains
raw time series measurements of wind speed and direction as well as run statistics. The
duration covers more than three years of observations starting in 1992.
The data ﬁle
corresponds to day 360 in the year 1992, and it is named by ’1700_010.dat’.
Sensor
number 10 measurements are the ones that better represent an extreme wind proﬁle, with
a mean wind speed of 34.55 m/s and a local peak of 49.1 m/s, as seen in Figure 3.1. The
sensor is placed at a height of 41m, and the time series has a duration of 3600 seconds
and was sampled at a frequency of 0.85 Hz. The modelled wind proﬁle has a remarkable
wind gust and the mean wind speed value satisﬁes the speciﬁcations.
Figure 3.1: Extreme wind proﬁle obtained from data ﬁle.
To model the chosen wind proﬁle, HAWC2 requires the turbulence ﬁles of the three wind
ﬁeld components: u, v, and w. The turbulence component u is obtained by subtracting
the mean wind speed from the ﬁle measurements, whereas the v and w components are
calculated using Turbgen, a turbulence ﬁeld generation and constrained turbulence
simulation package.
The Turbgen package is part of the HiperSim software. Hipersim is a turbulence box
generation tool available as a free Python package (pypi.org/hipersim). This tool was
used in the Hiperwind project [36]. The turbulence-related functionalities of Hipersim are
specially provided by the Turbgen module. The Turbgen module’s main purpose is to
produce wind ﬁelds complying to Mann’s spectral tensor speciﬁcation [37] using Mann’s
turbulence generation algorithm [23]. An additional function is to generate turbulence
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
17
boxes based on speciﬁed constraints, with the objective of specifying the exact values of
the wind ﬁeld at a list of points that shape the turbulence box. More information of the
constrained simulation algorithm is provided in Dimitrov and Natajaran [38].
To create the turbulence ﬁles for the chosen wind proﬁle, the last mentioned functionality
is used. Using the Hipersim Turbgen tools, a constrained turbulence box can be simulated
to recreate the ﬂow structures seen in observations [36]. The turbulence box is generated
by constraining a single component, which in this case is the u component, as it is the one
obtained from the data ﬁle turbulence measurements. To calculate the dimensions of the
turbulence box, the following initial parameters are needed:
• Mean wind speed at hub height, wsp.
• Standard deviation of the turbulence measurements, std.
• Turbulence intensity of the u component, tint, obtained dividing the standard
deviation of the turbulence measurements by the mean wind speed.
• Duration of the time series, time_sim.
However, the selected data measurements correspond to a height of 41m, and HAWC2
models the wind proﬁle at a height corresponding to the hub height.
Since the main
purpose of this project is the analysis of the blades behaviour under extreme wind
conditions, it is suﬃcient to translate the wind proﬁle from the data measurements to
hub height, but taking into account the wind shear eﬀects. Using the power law shear
deﬁnition (3.1) with an α coeﬃcient equal to 0.3, the mean wind speed at hub height
U(zref) can be computed knowing the mean wind speed at the sensor height U(z). The
α exponent is an empirically calculated coeﬃcient that changes with atmospheric
stability.
U(z) = U(zref)
( z
zref
)α
(3.1)
The initial parameters used to generate the turbulence box are summarized in the following
table (Table 3.1), obtained from the extreme wind proﬁle "1700_010.dat" ﬁle.
Table 3.1: Initial parameters to calculate the dimensions of the turbulence box.
Initial parameters
wsp
std
tint
time_sim
Value
47.683 m/s
4.390
0.092
3600 s
The dimensions of the turbulence box are calculated manually to match the speciﬁcations
of the wind turbine. The turbulence box dimensions are represented with Lx, Ly, and Lz,
as shown in Figure 3.2, taken from reference [25]. The length of the turbulence box Lx
should correspond to the simulation time to store all the wind proﬁle information during
that time, and it is computed as the duration of the time series multiplied by the mean wind
speed during that time. Ly and Lz are computed manually and correspond to the ones
that make the centre of the wind turbine to match the grid points of the turbulence box
to increase the method’s accuracy. Important to take into account that the turbulence
box should cover the entire wind turbine rotor, so the cross-section dimensions should
be higher than the diameter swept by the wind turbine blades, as shown in Figure 3.3,
modiﬁed based on reference [39]. The turbulence box is located at a height of 20 m above
the ground, and its centre coincides with the centre of the wind turbine. The computed
values are shown in Table 3.2.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
18
Table 3.2: Dimensions of the turbulence box.
Lx (m)
Ly (m)
Lz (m)
171658.800
206.667
206.667
Figure 3.2: Dimensions of the turbulence box. Figure taken from reference [25].
Figure 3.3: Turbulence box front view. Figure adapted from [39].
Once the dimensions of the turbulence box are known, the turbulence ﬁeld parameters
can be deﬁned with the values shown in Table 3.3, and the unconstrained turbulence ﬁeld
can be generated. In the list of symbols, the deﬁnitions of the parameters and their units
are provided. Regarding the high frequency compensation parameter (HighFreqComp),
it determines if the turbulence generation is subject to high frequency compensation as
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
19
stated in [23]. The values corresponding to dx, dy, and dz are calculated with equations
3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 respectively.
Table 3.3: Turbulence box generation parameters (see List of Symbols 1).
Parameters
Value
Nx
4096
Ny
32 (default)
Nz
32 (default)
dx
41.91
dy
6.66
dz
6.66
L
29.4 (default)
Γ
3.9 (default)
αϵ
0.1
HighFreqComp
1
Seed number
10
dx = Lx
Nx
(3.2)
dy =
Ly
Ny −1
(3.3)
dz =
Lz
Nz −1
(3.4)
To constrain the turbulence ﬁeld, constraint arrays need to be speciﬁed in the directions of
the turbulence box (x,y,z) and in the u direction of the wind. The x constraint array has
a length corresponding to Lx, the y constraint array speciﬁes the middle of the turbulence
box, and the z constraint array speciﬁes the height at which the turbulence ﬁeld will be
generated. The component u constraint is applied at the hub height, and it is an array with
the turbulence measurements obtained in the "1700_010.dat" ﬁle. Constraints are applied
and the new constrained turbulence ﬁeld is generated, obtaining modiﬁed, constrained
wind ﬁeld components u, v and w, as can be seen in Figure 3.4.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
20
Figure 3.4: Constrained wind ﬁeld. Top plot: Blue curve shows the time series
of a turbulence ﬁeld at the centre of the turbulence box before the application of
constraints. Black curve shows the required constraint. Red curve shows the time
series of the turbulence ﬁeld after the application of the constraint. Middle plot:
a cross-section of the unconstrained ﬁeld is shown, in the x-z plane at the middle
position in y. Black line indicates where the constraint is applied (at the middle
position in z. Bottom plot: shows a cross-section of the turbulence ﬁeld in the x-z
plane after the application of the constraint in the u component. The location with
higher wind speed that meets the constraint requirements is highlighted in red with
a stronger shading.
Now that the three wind ﬁeld components are deﬁned, they can be extracted as turbulence
ﬁles and used in the aeroelastic tool to model the wind proﬁle. The following ﬁgure (Figure
3.5) shows a comparison between the wind measurements from the "1700_010.dat" ﬁle
(blue curve) and the wind proﬁle generated by HAWC2 (red curve). It can be seen that
the turbulence pattern in both proﬁles is practically the same, measured with the standard
deviation of the wind proﬁle, and that the mean wind speed is the only diﬀerence. This is
due to the fact that the wind proﬁle has been shifted upwards to model it at hub height, as
explained above. Table 3.4 shows the values of standard deviation of both wind proﬁles,
which are really close to each other. Note that the parameter Nx in Table 3.3 has a
value of 4096, when normally a value of 8092 is used for 10 minute wind speed time series.
However, this did not aﬀect the resolution of the wind proﬁle.
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
21
Figure 3.5: Comparison between real data wind proﬁle (blue curve) and wind proﬁle
modelled in HAWC2 (red curve).
Table 3.4: Standard deviation of the real data wind proﬁle (h = 41m) and wind
proﬁle modelled in HAWC2 (h = hub height).
(h = 41 m)
(h = Hub height)
Standard deviation, std
4.390
4.079
As mentioned in Section 2.2, with a wind proﬁle with these magnitudes, the order of
magnitude of the cross-sectional forces and moments correspond to the ones reﬂected in
Table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Order of magnitude of the cross-sectional forces under an extreme wind
proﬁle.
Forces, N
(Fx, Fy, Fz)
Torsional moment, Nm
(Mz)
Bending moments, Nm
(Mx, My)
≈104
≈104
≈105
3.1.3
Conversion of moments to rotational displacements
As a extremely complex and detailed 3D blade section has been modelled in a 3D FE
software, in order to avoid convergence issues the cross-sectional moments obtained with
the aeroelastic tool are converted into rotational displacements. For this purpose, the
beam theory has been used. The blade section can be modelled as a beam with a bending
moment applied at both ends. Two bending moments are applied in the blade section, the
ﬂapwise bending moment (moment in the x direction) and the edgewise bending moment
(moment in the y direction) as shown in Figure 2.3.
First, the ﬂapwise moment will
be applied and the rotation angle in the x direction, θx, will be obtained, and then the
edgewise moment will be applied to compute the rotation in the y direction, θy. The same
procedure will be used for both bending moments.
To compute the rotation angle due to the presence of a bending moment, the curvature κ
is ﬁrst to be obtained. The curvature is deﬁned as the bending moment at the end of the
beam divided by the bending stiﬀness, as shown in equation 3.5. The same equation is
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
22
used for both the bending moment in the x direction and for the bending moment in the
y direction, with its respective moments of inertia. The bending stiﬀness (equation 2.1)
are inputs already deﬁned in the aeroelastic tool, as previously mentioned.
κ = M
E I
(3.5)
The curvature κ is known to be the reciprocal of the radius of curvature R, as shown in
equation 3.6.
R = 1
κ
(3.6)
By means of trigonometric relations, the rotation angle θ can be obtained as shown in
Figure 3.6 and following equations 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9. δ is the displacement of the end of
the deformed beam with respect to its undeformed position, in meters, and Lsec is the
length of the blade section, in meters.
Figure 3.6: Calculation of the rotation angle.
β = arccos(Lsec/2
R
)
(3.7)
δ = R (1 −sin(β))
(3.8)
θ = arctan(
δ
Lsec/2)
(3.9)
Important to highlight that both θx and θy are expressed in radians, as the 3D FE software
needs to receive rotational displacement in radian units.
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
23
3.2
3D FE model set-up
3.2.1
Components and material properties
The 3D blade section that has been used for this study is the same as the one used in
Miao & Chen [31], and has been modelled according to the DTU 10MW Reference Wind
Turbine structural design [10]. The blade is made from glass ﬁber reinforced composites
and sandwich structures with foam core material. The composite layup of the blade is
described in terms of a stacking-sequence of layers that represented multidirectional plies.
Figure 3.7 shows the components of a wind turbine blade section, based on reference [40]. It
consists of two leading edge panels, two tailing edge panels, and two spar caps separated by
two shear webs. Section 2.3.3 explained the main functionality of the components. It also
shows the materials of which the 3D blade section is made. The most relevant materials
for this study are the unidirectional composite materials and the foam core inside the
sandwich structures (shear webs, and leading and trailing edge panels).
Foam core is
found in the shear webs and the leading edge and trailing edge panels. Unidirectional
composite material is found in the spar caps, biaxial in shear webs and triaxial all around
the blade section.
Figure 3.7: Components and materials of the 3D wind turbine blade section. Figure
based on reference [40].
The elastic properties of the composite material are displayed in Table 3.6, Table 3.7, and
Table 3.8, all taken from reference [31]. For the foam core inside the sandwich structures,
a PVC foam Divinycell H45 material was used, with the material properties displayed in
Table 3.9.
Table 3.6: Young’s modulus of the composite material in the 3D blade section.
Table taken from reference [31].
Materials
Young’s modulus (GPa)
E11
E22
E33
Unidirectional (0◦)
39.00
13.00
13.00
Biaxial (±45◦)
12.50
12.50
12.50
Triaxial (0◦/±45◦/90◦)
17.80
13.05
13.05
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
24
Table 3.7: Shear modulus of the composite material in the 3D blade section. Table
taken from reference [31].
Materials
Shear modulus (GPa)
G12
G13
G23
Unidirectional (0◦)
3.40
3.40
3.40
Biaxial (±45◦)
10.30
10.30
10.30
Triaxial (0◦/±45◦/90◦)
9.10
9.10
9.10
Table 3.8: Poisson’s ratio of the composite material in the 3D blade section. Table
taken from reference [31].
Materials
Poisson’s ratio
ν12
ν13
ν23
Unidirectional (0◦)
0.205
0.205
0.350
Biaxial (±45◦)
0.498
0.498
0.498
Triaxial (0◦/±45◦/90◦)
0.472
0.472
0.472
Table 3.9: Material properties of PVC foam core material.
Material
Young’s Modulus
Poisson’s ratio
Yield strength
Yield stress ratio
ρ / kg m3
E / MPa
ν
σ0
c / MPa
k
45
30.0
0.3
0.5
1.0
3.2.2
Geometric model and numerical set-up
The blade section modelled in the 3D FE software ABAQUS is 1 m long. The length
has been modiﬁed with respect to the blade section used in Miao & Chen [31] because in
the aeroelastic tool HAWC2 the blade sections are approximately 1 m long. Finite element
mesh details are shown in Figure 3.8. The 3D blade model employs solid components of
the C3DR8 element type. Typical mesh sizes range from 25 × 38 × t mm for solid elements
at sandwich panels to 25 × 27 × t mm for spar cap regions and 25 × 8 × t mm for trailing
edge bondlines, where t denotes the range of material thicknesses. Mesh sensitivity studies
were done in [31] to determine the mesh size.
Figure 3.8: Mesh details and reference node (marked with an x).
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
25
Two diﬀerent types of simulations are conducted in this study. The dynamic option is
conducted to model the blade section under the dynamic loading conditions obtained
from the aeroelastic tool HAWC2, whereas the stiﬀness properties are computed under
static loading conditions.
The dynamic option is frequently used for nonlinear
applications and allows for direct integration of a dynamic displacement response in
ABAQUS. However, instabilities caused by the structure’s nonlinear response challenge
convergence. The following numerical settings are made to improve the convergence [41]:
• Cross-sectional bending moments are converted into rotational displacement.
• The initial time increment for the dynamic step is set to 1 × 10−6. The minimum
time increment is set to 1 × 10−13 and the maximum to 0.5. The dynamic option
is often used for nonlinear applications and provides direct integration of a dynamic
displacement response in Abaqus studies [41].
• The NOHAF parameter is employed to disable the computation of half-increment
residuals and so avoid certain accuracy checks for the automated time incrementation
system.
• The APPLICATION=TRANSIENT FIDELITY parameter is predetermined as the
default approach for issues in the model without contact to select a method for an
accurate solution with minimal numerical damping.
• The
TIME
INTEGRATOR=HHT-TF
parameter
is
conﬁgured
to
use
the
Hilber-Hughes-Taylor time integrator with default parameter values that oﬀer little
numerical damping.
This is the default for APPLICATION=TRANSIENT
FIDELITY.
• The SINGULAR MASS=ERROR parameter is used to display an error message
and cease operation if a singular global mass matrix is found while computing the
velocity and acceleration adjustments.
The static simulation is conducted to compute the stiﬀness properties of the 3D blade
section. To avoid convergence issues, the following numerical settings are used [41]:
• The initial time increment for the static step is set to 1 × 10−6. The minimum time
increment is set to 1 × 10−10 and the maximum to 0.05.
• The STABILIZE parameter is used to activate automatic stabilization, to avoid
sudden buckling or collapse without materially changing behavior while the issue
remains stable.
In addition, two additional parameters inside the control option are deﬁned in the step
set-up to obtain a solution in case extreme nonlinearities occur. It helps in obtaining a
more eﬃcient solution [41].
• The ANALYSIS=DISCONTINUOUS parameter is used to increase performance for
highly discontinuous behavior by permitting a large number of iterations before
starting any convergence rate checks.
• The PARAMETERS=FIELD parameter is employed to provide conditions that
fulﬁll a ﬁeld equation.
In this situation, the ﬁeld for which the parameters are
being given can be deﬁned by this parameter.
• The PARAMETERS=TIME INCREMENTATION is conﬁgured to establish the
settings for time increment control.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
26
To simulate foam core crush failure in the blade structure, the foam core is modelled as a
crushable material based on a phenomenological constitutive relation. The development
of the yield surface is determined by isotropic hardening [31].
3.2.3
Loading and boundary conditions
A rigid body reference node, indicated by an x mark in Figure 3.8 is set in the blade
section in order to concentrate all the loads applied in the respective section. The two ends
are clamped, and the reference node is allocated a local coordinate system and positioned
at the elastic center.
For the dynamic analysis, rotational displacements in both the x and y directions are
applied on the reference nodes, simulating the eﬀects of ﬂapwise and edgewise moments
respectively. In addition, the boundary conditions are set to allow rotation in both x and
y direction.
For the static analysis, diﬀerent loading and boundary conditions are applied. The stiﬀness
properties of the 3D blade section are computed by running six diﬀerent simulations.
Forces and moments applied in the three directions are applied independently to the
blade structure. The boundary conditions involve ﬁxing one of the sections of the blade
and applying the force or moment in the reference node in the free section of the blade,
allowing movement just in the direction of the force or moment.
3.2.4
Computer information
The simulations are performed on the ABAQUS DTU Cluster [42] with E5-2640 v3, 8
cores processor, 2.6-3.4GHz, and 128 GB installed RAM.
3.2.5
Update of stiﬀness properties
If damage is induced in the blade section, the stiﬀness properties will be recalculated
for the blade structure with the 3D FE software ABAQUS, and the interface will update
them into the aeroelastic tool HAWC2 for the next calculation of aerodynamic loads.
As described in Section 2.3.3, the cross-sectional stiﬀness properties of the blade are
computed using BECAS (BEam Cross section Analysis Software), a 2D ﬁnite element
based approach. However, the initial stiﬀness parameters established in the aeroelastic
tool will be recalculated with the 3D FE program to ensure that the ones employed by
the aeroelastic tool and those acquired with the 3D FE software are the same.
To calculate the diagonal terms, the constitutive relation representing the stiﬀness matrix
mentioned in Section 2.3.3 is used (shown in equation 2.1). Each cross-sectional force and
moment will be applied independently in the 3D blade section, as described in Section
3.2.2. As a result, displacements and rotational displacement are obtained in the 3D FE
simulation. Strains and curvatures in the x, y, and z directions are computed, and with
equations 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, and 3.15 the stiﬀness properties of the 3D blade
section are obtained.
GAkx = Fx
γx
(3.10)
GAky = Fy
γy
(3.11)
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
27
AE = Fz
ϵz
(3.12)
EIx = Mx
κx
(3.13)
EIy = My
κy
(3.14)
GJ = Mz
κz
(3.15)
To obtain the elastic modulus E and the shear modulus G, the system of equations
deﬁned by stiﬀness matrix shown in the previously indicated equation 2.1 is solved. The
cross-sectional area A together with the shear factors kx and ky are already known, since
they depend on the geometry of the structure. Once E and G are known, the stiﬀness
properties are updated in the aeroelastic tool HAWC2 so that the following aerodynamic
loads can be computed accordingly.
3.2.6
Blade failure analysis
The composites, foam core and adhesive materials can fail during the loading [31]. The
blade structure is subject to bending moments in both the x and y directions, and the
main component that is responsible for supporting these loads are the spar caps, which
are coupled together by the shear webs. The spar caps are the ones that provide the most
of bending stiﬀness to the structure. In this work, the delamination of the unidirectional
(UD) composite laminate and foam core crushing are evaluated. To evaluate the failure in
the UD composite laminate, the maximum strain failure criterion will be employed. On the
other hand, the foam core crush failure will also be evaluated in the sandwich structures.
Figure 3.9 shows which materials are prone to failure under the above mentioned loading
conditions, and their location in the blade section structure.
Figure 3.9: Materials that can fail during the loading. Figure on the left: Foam
core of the sandwich structures. Figure on the right: Unidirectional laminate.
The maximum strain failure criterion is employed to detect delamination of the UD
material.
If the strains of the material are higher than the ultimate strains shown in
Table 3.10, the UD material experiences delamination.
The table is taken from
reference [31].
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3. Modelling and simulation
28
Table 3.10: Ultimate strain components of composite materials (unit: mm mm−1).
Table taken from reference [31].
Materials
ϵu,t
33
ϵu
13
ϵu
23
Unidirectional (0◦)
0.0021
0.0110
0.0081
Biaxial (±45◦)
0.0122
0.0122
0.0135
Triaxial (0◦/±45◦/90◦)
0.0122
0.0122
0.0135
Due to the production process, anisotropy in foam core materials is usual. Foam core
materials with higher density exhibit greater anisotropy than those with lower density.
The foam core material used in this study has a nominal density of 45 kg m3, lower than
1000 kg m3, so it can be treated as isotropic in the simulations as its anisotropy is not
signiﬁcant [31].
==PAGE:44==
29
4 Results and discussion
Several case studies have been conducted to test the performance of the developed
interface. A perfect new blade is assumed in Case study 1 and Case study 2. For Case
study 1 the aerodynamic loads corresponding to the extreme wind proﬁle modelled in
Section 3.1.2 are applied to the 3D FE blade section. A sensitivity analysis is then carried
out to ﬁnd the minimum rotational displacements values in both x and y directions that
induce damage to the blade structure. Case study 2 reﬂects the situation where the blade
structure is subject to a wind proﬁle that produces the minimum rotational displacement
to induce damage to the blade structure. Finally, for both Case study 3 and Case study 4
the foam core material used in the sandwich structures has been changed to another with
lower mechanical properties than the ones used in the initial design of the blade structure,
and the wind proﬁles used for Case study 1 and 2 will be applied again to the modiﬁed
blade structure.
4.1
Case study 1
In the following case study the extreme wind proﬁle modelled in Section 3.1.2 is applied
to the wind turbine. Of the total duration of 3600 s, 50 s corresponding to the peak zone
of the wind proﬁle will be used for the 3D FE simulation. The obtained cross-sectional
moments are converted to rotational displacements with the procedure explained in Section
3.1.3, obtaining the values shown in Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.1: Case study 1. Cross-sectional bending moments in the peak zone of
the modelled extreme wind proﬁle.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
30
Figure 4.2: Case study 1. Rotational displacements corresponding to the bending
moments in the peak zone of the modelled extreme wind proﬁle.
The total time of the 3D FE simulation is of 60 sec, counting with 10 additional seconds
to unload the structure, as the stiﬀness properties need to be computed in the unloaded
structure. However, no damage is induced in the blade structure with the designed extreme
wind proﬁle, so an update of the stiﬀness properties of the blade structure is not considered
for this case study. Failure analysis is performed to the blade structure, where Figure 4.3
shows that there is no plastic deformation on the foam core material. Delamination of the
unidirectional composite material does not occur either, as shown in Table 4.1, since the
maximum strains in the speciﬁed directions are lower than the ultimate strains.
Figure 4.3: Case study 1. No plastic deformation in the foam core material of the
blade structure.
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
31
Table 4.1: Case study 1. Check for delamination in the UD composite material.
UD composite material
ϵ33
ϵ13
ϵ23
Ultimate strain
2.100e-03
1.100e-02
8.100e-03
Simulation max. strain
1.658e-04
2.761e-04
8.037e-05
Even though an extreme wind proﬁle was applied to the blade structure, no damage has
been induced. This justiﬁes the good design of the blade structure and an appropriate
selection of materials. A perfect new blade is assumed in this study, and fatigue loads,
manufacturing ﬂaws or blade degradation is not considered.
4.2
Sensitivity study
A sensitivity study is carried out to ﬁnd the values of rotational displacement in x and
y direction to induce damage in the blade structure. Static analysis are performed and
the following results are obtained (Table 4.2). A value of 0.0055 radians for the rotational
displacement in the x direction, θx, is the minimum value for which the blade structure
experiences foam core crush, this is plastic deformation in the foam core material in the
sandwich structures. On the other hand, the minimum rotational displacement in the y
direction, θy, is 0.002 radians in order for the blade structure to experience foam core
failure (Table 4.3).
Table 4.2: Minimum value of rotational displacement in the x direction, θx, to
induce damage in the blade section.
θx
Foam core crush
Delamination UD composite
0.005
No
Yes (just ϵ33)
0.0055
Yes
Yes (just ϵ33)
Table 4.3: Minimum value of rotational displacement in the y direction, θy, to
induce damage in the blade section.
θy
Foam core crush
Delamination UD composite
0.001
No
No
0.002
Yes
Yes (just ϵ33)
4.3
Case study 2
Knowing the minimum values at which the blade structure experiences permanent
damage, a diﬀerent wind proﬁle will be modelled in order to reach at least those values
and thus induce damage to the structure. The new wind proﬁle is shown in Figure 4.4.
This new extreme wind proﬁle has a mean wind speed of 80 m/s, a turbulence intensity
of 0.055, and a total duration of 1500 s. The peak zone is the one to be used in the 3D
FE simulation, following the same approach as in Case study 1. Of the total duration, 50
s corresponding to the peak zone will be used for the dynamic simulation. By increasing
the mean wind speed to 80 m/s and using a lower turbulence intensity with respect to the
modelled extreme wind proﬁle, higher bending moments in the x direction are obtained
in the new extreme wind proﬁle.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
32
Figure 4.4: Case study 2. Extreme wind proﬁle with a mean wind speed of 80 m/s.
The bending moments for the peak in both the x and y directions are shown in Figure
4.5, and their respective rotational displacement θx and θy in Figure 4.6. The maximum
rotational displacement in the x direction reaches the value of 0.0036 radians, not enough
to damage the blade structure, as it does not reach the minimum value to induce failure in
the structure. Due to the turbulence pattern used in the aeroelastic tool the mean wind
speed could not be increased anymore.
Figure 4.5: Case study 2. Cross-sectional bending moments in the peak zone of
the new extreme wind proﬁle.
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
33
Figure 4.6: Case study 2. Rotational displacements corresponding to the bending
moments in the peak zone of the new extreme wind proﬁle.
Simulations in the 3D FE software were performed either way and, as expected thanks to
the sensitivity study, no damage is induced in the blade structure with the new extreme
wind proﬁle. Delamination in the unidirectional composite material was also checked and
Table 4.4 shows that no delamination occurred either. However, the strain values obtained
in this simulation are higher than in Case study 1, as higher loads are applied with this
new extreme wind proﬁle.
Table 4.4: Case study 2. Check for delamination in the UD composite material.
UD composite material
ϵ33
ϵ13
ϵ23
Ultimate strain
2.100e-03
1.100e-02
8.100e-03
Simulation max. strain
1.250-03
1.379e-03
4.576e-04
Although a new extreme wind proﬁle was applied in this case study to induce damage
in the blade section, results show that even in this extreme conditions the wind turbine
can withstand the higher loads. Again, this is proof that the blade structure design is
remarkable and the materials used can even resist the highest of the extreme loading
conditions. It should be noted that the 3D modelled blade structure is assumed to be a
perfect new blade that has not suﬀered from fatigue loads, and manufacturing ﬂaws nor
blade degradation are considered.
4.4
Change of foam core material
Given that the blade structure design can withstand both wind proﬁles from Case
studies 1 and 2 respectively, a change in the foam core material of the sandwich structures
will be studied to analyse how the blade structure will react under the previous wind
conditions if having materials with diﬀerent mechanical properties.
Table 4.5 reﬂects
the change of the foam core material properties from the ones used in the original blade
structure.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
34
Table 4.5: Change in the mechanical properties of foam core material.
Foam core material
Young’s Modulus, E (MPa)
Yield strength, σy (MPa)
Original
30
0.5
Defective
10
0.1
4.4.1
Case study 3: Wind proﬁle from Case study 1
When applying the modelled extreme wind proﬁle from Case study 1 to the modiﬁed
blade structure, still no damage is induced in the wind turbine blade structure. Although
the mechanical properties of the foam core material are lower in this case, the extreme
wind proﬁle from Case study 1 is not extreme enough to produce failure in the blade
section. Table 4.6 shows that no delamination occurs either in the unidirectional composite
material.
Table 4.6: Case study 3. Check for delamination in the UD composite material.
UD composite material
ϵ33
ϵ13
ϵ23
Ultimate strain
2.100e-03
1.100e-02
8.100e-03
Simulation max. strain
1.658-04
2.760e-04
8.291e-05
4.4.2
Case study 4: Wind proﬁle from Case study 2
However, when applying the extreme wind proﬁle from Case study 2, damage is
induced in the blade structure, as the foam core in both the leading and the trailing
panels experience plastic deformation, as shown in Figure 4.7. Since the blade structure
has permanent damage, the stiﬀness properties need to be computed with the 3D FE
software and updated into the aeroelastic tool.
Figure 4.7: Case study 4. Plastic deformation in the foam core material of the
blade structure.
Table 4.7 shows the percentage of degradation of the stiﬀness properties in this case study.
As previously mentioned in Section 3.2.5, the update of stiﬀness properties is done with the
stiﬀness matrix (equation 2.1). Each of the diagonal terms are computed with equations
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
35
3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14 and 3.15, and the elastic modulus E and shear modulus G can
be obtained with the cross-sectional area of the blade section and the shear factors, as
mentioned in Section 3.2.5.
Table 4.7:
Case study 4.
Degradation of the stiﬀness properties after damage
induced in the blade structure.
Stiﬀness properties
Before loading
After loading
% degradation
E (GPa)
10.937
10.913
0.22%
G (GPa)
2.177
2.095
3.78%
Table 4.8 shows that no delamination of the UD material occurs in these circumstances.
It makes sense, since the UD composite material has not been changed, just the foam core
properties, and it makes sense that no delamination occurs in this case either.
Table 4.8: Case study 4. Check for delamination in the UD composite material.
UD composite material
ϵ33
ϵ13
ϵ23
Ultimate strain
2.100e-03
1.100e-02
8.100e-03
Simulation max. strain
1.354-03
1.380e-03
4.867e-04
Although in this scenario damage is induced in the blade structure, it is important to
remark that the modiﬁed foam core material has extremely low mechanical properties,
which would not be realistic to have in a real-life scenario. These low mechanical properties
in the foam core materials would only have sense in the case the material has pre-existing
in-service damage. A extremely light foam is chosen to study the degradation of stiﬀness
properties when damage is induced in the blade structure, and to analyse the signiﬁcance
of updating the stiﬀness properties when damage occurs, since the aerodynamic loads will
be aﬀected by this change in the structural properties.
==PAGE:51==
36
5 Conclusions and future work
The purpose of this study is to couple an aeroelastic tool with a 3D FE software through
an interface developed in MATLAB to study the possible degradation of wind turbine
blade stiﬀness properties when damage is induced in the wind turbine blade structure.
Under normal weather conditions there should be no induced damage in blade structures.
However, their behaviour under extreme wind conditions is uncertain given that they are
in an scenario that is outside of their design limits.
In this project, 3D blade model updating is done by coupling HAWC2 and ABAQUS, to
account for structural non-linearities associated with geometry and composite layup that
are neglected in the beam theory model used by the aeroelastic tool HAWC2. An interface
that links the aeroelastic simulation of wind turbines and 3D FE modelling of blades has
been developed using MATLAB. Using the HAWC2 software, the extreme wind proﬁle
is modelled, and the aerodynamic loads are calculated and used as boundary conditions
of 3D FE modelling of blade sections. The structural stiﬀness predicted using the FEA
software ABAQUS is inputted to HAWC2 to update the aerodynamic loads if damage
is induced in the blade structure. Since both the aerodynamic loads and the structural
properties of the blade inﬂuence each other, the behaviour of the blade can be predicted
with 3D blade model updating.
A wind proﬁle was modelled for this study fulﬁlling the characteristics of an extreme wind
proﬁle that can be found in adverse weather conditions. Real turbulence measurements
were employed in the creation of this extreme wind proﬁle to study how the DTU 10
MW Reference Wind Turbine will perform under extreme weather environments. The
study showed that the blade structure for the mentioned wind turbine has great design
speciﬁcations along with a good choice of materials, as it is capable to withstand extreme
wind speeds. A perfect new blade structure was assumed, without considering fatigue
loads, manufacturing ﬂaws or blade degradation, and no damage was induced in the blade.
However, to test the performance of the developed interface, the foam core material in the
blade structure was weakened, in order to induce damage in the blade structure and study
the degradation of the stiﬀness properties. Under this scenario, degradation of the blade
stiﬀness properties was found, and the interface correctly updated the results into the
aeroelastic tool HAWC2. This way, a step has been moved towards the integrated design
of wind turbines where both the aeroelastic and structural context of wind turbine blades
are considered. Even though for these case studies the wind proﬁle and the material had to
be changed to induce damage in the blade structure, this has no impact in the interface’s
performance. This interface can work with inﬁnite wind proﬁle models and other blade
structures belonging to other wind turbines, with diﬀerent geometry and diﬀerent material
conditions.
The idea behind the development of this interface creates added value to the research
community, as this interface helps in the wind turbine blade behaviour prediction under
certain wind conditions.
The interface can help in the decision process of repairing a
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 5. Conclusions and future work
37
wind turbine blade before or after the upcoming of a storm. Future work to improve the
interface’s performance could include:
• Include a code to allow automatic blade failure analysis in the blade structure.
Currently, after obtaining the stiﬀness properties the update can be done if there is
damage induced in the blade, but the detection of foam core crush and delamination
is checked manually by checking the 3D blade structure in ABAQUS.
• Build a Graphical User Interface (GUI) in MATLAB to make the interface more
user-friendly.
• Consider a dynamic approach inside the aeroelastic tool HAWC2 to update the
stiﬀness properties of blade structures automatically during the simulations.
==PAGE:53==
38
Bibliography
[1] B. H. Jørgensen, P. H. Madsen, G. Giebel, I. Martí, K. Thomsen, and L. Assessment,
“DTU international energy report 2021: Perspectives on wind energy,” 2021.
[2] D.
Hutchins,
“The
risks
and
opportunities
of
oﬀshore
wind
energy.”
Available
on:
https://www.globalriskintel.com/insights/
risks-and-opportunities-offshore-wind-energy#:~:text=Offshore%20wind%
20farms%20face%20a,political%20considerations%2C%20and%20residential%
20complaints. (accessed on February 15, 2023).
[3] X. Chen and J. Z. Xu, “Structural failure analysis of wind turbines impacted by super
typhoon usagi,” Engineering failure analysis, vol. 60, pp. 391–404, 2016.
[4] X. Chen, C. Li, and J. Xu, “Failure investigation on a coastal wind farm damaged
by super typhoon: A forensic engineering study,” Journal of Wind Engineering and
Industrial Aerodynamics, vol. 147, pp. 132–142, 2015.
[5] D.
Schroeder,
“How
do
wind
turbines
survive
severe
storms?.”
Available
online:
https://www.energy.gov/eere/articles/
how-do-wind-turbines-survive-severe-storms
(accessed
on
February
12,
2023).
[6] S. Chasing, “Crazy texas tornado bends wind turbine blades.” Available online:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dRht4tkQJIM (accessed on February 12, 2023).
[7] R. P. Worsnop, J. K. Lundquist, G. H. Bryan, R. Damiani, and W. Musial, “Gusts and
shear within hurricane eyewalls can exceed oﬀshore wind turbine design standards,”
Geophysical research letters, vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 6413–6420, 2017.
[8] S. Rose, P. Jaramillo, M. J. Small, I. Grossmann, and J. Apt, “Quantifying the
hurricane risk to oﬀshore wind turbines,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, vol. 109, no. 9, pp. 3247–3252, 2012.
[9] NREL,
“Turbine
models.”
Available
online:
https://github.com/NREL/
turbine-models/blob/master/Offshore/DTU_10MW_178_RWT_v1.csv (accessed on
February 27, 2023).
[10] C. Bak, F. Zahle, R. Bitsche, T. Kim, A. Yde, L. C. Henriksen, P. B. Andersen,
A. Natarajan, and M. H. Hansen, “Design and performance of a 10mw wind turbine,”
J. Wind Energy, 2013.
[11] IEC 61400-3., “International electro technical committee iec 61400-3: Wind turbines
part 3: Design requirements for oﬀshore wind turbines.,” Edition1, Geneva, 2009.
[12] G. Hagerman, “Tap-672-development of an integrated extreme wind, wave, current,
and water level climatology to support standards-based design of oﬀshore wind
projects,” 2013.
==PAGE:54==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
39
[13] I. Jeong, H. Kim, H. Cho, H. Park, and T. Kim, “Initial structural damage detection
approach via fe-based data augmentation and class activation map,” Structural Health
Monitoring, p. 14759217221149612, 2023.
[14] X. Chen, S. Semenov, M. McGugan, S. H. Madsen, S. C. Yeniceli, P. Berring,
and K. Branner, “Fatigue testing of a 14.3 m composite blade embedded with
artiﬁcial defects–damage growth and structural health monitoring,” Composites Part
A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, vol. 140, p. 106189, 2021.
[15] T. J. Larsen, A. M. Hansen, and T. Buhl, “Aeroelastic eﬀects of large blade
deﬂections for wind turbines,” Proceedings of The Science of Making Torque from
Wind, pp. 238–246, 2004.
[16] B. B. Garzon, L. C. Henriksen, A. D. Hansen, N. A. Cutululis, and P. E. Sørensen,
“Coupling of hawc2 and matlab: Towards an integrated simulation platform,” in
2010 European Wind Energy Conference and Exhibition, European Wind Energy
Association (EWEA), 2010.
[17] D. Kaufer, N. Cosack, C. Böker, M. Seidel, and M. Kühn, “Integrated analysis of the
dynamics of oﬀshore wind turbines with arbitrary support structures,” in European
Wind Energy Conference, Marseille, France, Citeseer, 2009.
[18] G.
Papazafeiropoulos,
M.
Muñiz-Calvente,
and
E.
Martínez-Pañeda,
“Abaqus2matlab:
A suitable tool for ﬁnite element post-processing,” Advances
in Engineering Software, vol. 105, pp. 9–16, 2017.
[19] MATLAB, MATLAB version 9.9.0 (R2020b).
Natick,
Massachusetts:
The
MathWorks Inc., 2021.
[20] M. A. Eder and X. Chen, “Fastigue:
A computationally eﬃcient approach for
simulating discrete fatigue crack growth in large-scale structures,” Engineering
Fracture Mechanics, vol. 233, pp. 1–17, 2020.
[21] T. Larsen and A. Hansen, “How 2 hawc2, the user’s manual,” User Manual, Risø
National Laboratory, 2021.
[22] T. U. of Denmark, “A servo-aeroelastic wind turbine simulation tool.” HAWC2
Selfstudy, Lecture notes, DTU Wind Energy, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[23] J. Mann, “Wind ﬁeld simulation,” Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics, vol. 13, no. 4,
pp. 269–282, 1998.
[24] T. U. of Denmark, “Large scale wind systems and local turbulence.” HAWC2
Selfstudy, Lecture notes, DTU Wind Energy, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[25] T. U. of Denmark, “Modelling turbulence ﬁelds in hawc2.” HAWC2 Selfstudy, Lecture
notes, DTU Wind Energy, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[26] T. U. of Denmark, “Aerodynamic model.” HAWC2 Selfstudy, Lecture notes, DTU
Wind Energy, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[27] T. U. of Denmark, “Structural model.” HAWC2 Selfstudy, Lecture notes, DTU Wind
Energy, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[28] R. D. Bitsche and J. P. Blasques, “Introduction to becas.” HAWC2 Selfstudy, Lecture
notes, DTU Wind Energy, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
==PAGE:55==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
40
[29] K. Branner, J. Blasques, T. Kim, V. Fedorov, P. Berring, R. Bitsche, and
C. Berggreen, “Anisotropic beam model for analysis and design of passive controlled
wind turbine blades,” 2012.
[30] R. D. Bitsche, “An introduction to beam cross section stiﬀness and mass properties.”
HAWC2 Selfstudy, Lecture notes, DTU Wind Energy, Technical University of
Denmark, 2013.
[31] X.-Y. Miao and X. Chen, “Structural transverse cracking mechanisms of trailing
edge regions in composite wind turbine blades,” Composite Structures, vol. 308,
pp. 116–680, 2023.
[32] N. H. Center and C. P. H. Center, “Saﬃr-simpson hurricane wind scale.” Available
on: https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/aboutsshws.php (accessed on February 27, 2023),
2022.
[33] T.
U.
of
Denmark,
“Database
on
wind
characteristics.”
Available
on:
https://gitlab.windenergy.dtu.dk/fair-data/winddata-revamp/
winddata-documentation/-/blob/master/readme.md/
(accessed
on
October
24, 2022).
[34] K. S. Hansen, N. Vasiljevic, and S. A. Sørensen, “Turbulence measurements.”
Available
on:
https://doi.org/10.11583/DTU.c.5405292.v14
(accessed
on
October 24, 2022).
[35] K. S. Hansen, N. Vasiljevic, and S. A. Sørensen, “Turbulence measurements from
the skipheya masts..” Available on: https://doi.org/10.11583/DTU.14380766.v1
(accessed on October 24, 2022).
[36] M. McWilliam, N. Bonﬁls, N. K. Dimitrov, and S. Dou, “Wind farm parameterization
and turbulent wind box generation,” Hiperwind, 2022.
[37] J. Mann, “The spatial structure of neutral atmospheric surface-layer turbulence,”
Journal of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 273, pp. 141−168, 1994.
[38] N. Dimitrov and A. Natarajan, “Application of simulated lidar scanning patterns
to constrained gaussian turbulence ﬁelds for load validation,” Wind Energy, vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 79–95, 2017.
[39] T.
Carlinco,
“Wind
turbine
on
white
background
front
view
3d
image.”
Available
on:
https://www.123rf.com/photo_3361701_
wind-turbine-on-white-background-front-view-3d-image.html
(accessed
on February 15, 2022).
[40] X. Chen and M. A. Eder, “Introduction to design of large composite structures.”
Desing of Large Composite Structures, Lecture notes, DTU Wind Energy, Technical
University of Denmark, 2022.
[41] M. Smith, ABAQUS/Standard User’s Manual, Version 6.22. United States: Dassault
Systèmes Simulia Corp, 2022.
[42] D. W. Energy, “Vind abaqus cluster.” Available on: https://docs-devel.hpc.ait.
dtu.dk/clusters/abaqus/readme/ (accessed on February 20, 2023).
==PAGE:56==
41
A Appendix: Pseudocodes
Algorithm 1 main.m
1: Initialisation: Deﬁne the number of iterations of the whole simulation, the time of the
unloading step, and indicate if the Mz moment is going to be neglected.
2: for The number of iterations do
3:
Check working folder.
4:
Simulation setup: name of the .htc ﬁle, .dat ﬁle, .inp ﬁle and wind proﬁle ﬁle (each
iteration has its own ﬁles).
5:
Call the function readwindprofile to obtain the .bin turbulence ﬁles.
6:
Run HAWC2.
7:
Obtain HAWC2 outputs: Open .sel ﬁle, read, and store results.
8:
Call the function convert_mom2ang to convert the cross-sectional moments Mx
and My into rotational displacements θx and θy.
9:
Save θx and θy as .inp ﬁles (loading input ﬁles for ABAQUS).
10:
Call the function inp2m to create the function that will create the .inp ﬁle with
HAWC2 loading.
11:
Call the function inp_initial_v8 to create the ABAQUS input .inp ﬁle.
12:
Call ABAQUS to run the simulation.
13:
Call function Read_ODB_outputs_node to read the ABAQUS results.
14:
Compute stiﬀness properties: call ABAQUS to run the .inp ﬁles to compute the
stiﬀness properties.
15:
Call the function obtain_stiffness_prop to obtain the stiﬀness properties.
16:
if damage induced in blade section then
17:
Call the function update_HAWC2 to update the new stiﬀness properties in
HAWC2.
18:
end if
19:
Plot results
20: end for
==PAGE:57==
Appendix A. Appendix: Pseudocodes
42
Algorithm 2 readwindproﬁle.m
1: Open the folder where the turbulence measurements are.
2: Open the wind proﬁle ﬁle in read mode and save the results in fidw.
3: Scan the text and save it in variable Cw.
4: Get the number of lines in Cw.
5: Initialise dummy variables for the forloop.
6: for the number of lines in Cw do
7:
Search for the header section of the ﬁle.
8:
Search for the sensor statistics section of the ﬁle.
9:
Search for the data ﬁeld section of the ﬁle.
10:
if reached header section then
11:
Search for the duration of the wind proﬁle.
12:
Search for the frequency of the samples.
13:
if reached duration then
14:
Save the value of the duration of the data measurements in variable
total_time_w.
15:
end if
16:
if reached frequency then
17:
Save the value of the frequency of the samples in variable freq.
18:
end if
19:
end if
20:
if reached sensor statistics section then
21:
Dummy variable countsensor to count how many times it gets inside the if
statement.
22:
The sensor measures where wsp is max is deﬁned before.
23:
if count sensor == position where wsp is max then
24:
Get the information of that sensor measurements and save it in the following
variables sensor_height, wsp, std_num, max_wind_speed, and tint.
25:
end if
26:
end if
27:
if reached data ﬁeld section then
28:
Save the data ﬁeld corresponding to the selected sensor measures.
29:
end if
30:
If statements to change between sections.
31: end for
32: Substract the mean wind speed wsp from the data measurements to get the turbulence
measurements.
33: Write them in a .dat ﬁle so that HiperSim can read the turbulence measurements from
the turbulence ﬁle.
34: Plot the wind proﬁle
35: Close the ﬁle.
36: Go back to the MATLAB folder.
==PAGE:58==
Appendix A. Appendix: Pseudocodes
43
Algorithm 3 function [sig, Freq, Time, Flag, Binary] = ReadHawc2(FileName)
1: Open FileName (.sel ﬁle) in read mode and save the status in fid variable
2: if ﬁd == -1 then
3:
Variable Flag = 0
4:
Display warning message that the ﬁle could not be found
5:
sig matrix = [], variable Freq = 0, variable Time = 0, variable Binary = 0
6: end if
7: Skip ﬁrst 8 lines of .sel ﬁle (useless information)
8: Read line number 9 and store the values for number of scans N, number of channels
Nch, time Time, and ﬁle format FileType
9: Close ﬁle
10: Calculate the sampling frequency Freq as N/Time
11: Store the time of the simulation manually as t = [1/Freq: 1/Freq:Time]′
12: if ﬁle format == BINARY then
13:
Set Binary = 1
14:
Open .dat ﬁle in read mode and save the status in fid variable
15:
Store values in matrix sig
16:
if sig is empty then
17:
Variable Flag = 0
18:
Display warning message that there is no data in .dat ﬁle
19:
sig matrix = [], variable Freq = 0, variable Time = 0, variable Binary = 0
20:
Return
21:
end if
22:
Read scale factor from the .sel ﬁle
23:
Update sig by multiplying it by the scale factor
24:
Close ﬁle
25:
Variable Flag = 1
26: else if ﬁle format == ASCII then
27:
Set Binary = 0
28:
Read the .dat ﬁle and save the status in sig variable
29:
Store values in matrix sig
30:
if sig is empty then
31:
Variable Flag = 0
32:
Display warning message that there is no data in .dat ﬁle
33:
sig matrix = [], variable Freq = 0, variable Time = 0, variable Binary = 0
34:
Return
35:
end if
36:
if ﬁrst column of sig matrix is lower than the number of scans N then
37:
Variable Time computed as Time = length(sig(:, 1))/Freq
38:
Variable Flag = 2
39:
Display warning message that there is not full data in .dat ﬁle
40:
Return
41:
end if
42:
Variable Flag = 1
43: else
44:
Display warning message that it is an unknown ﬁle type
45:
Variable Flag = 0
46: end if
47: Asign the simulation time t to the ﬁrst column of the matrix sig
==PAGE:59==
Appendix A. Appendix: Pseudocodes
44
Algorithm 4 function [theta_x, theta_y] = convert_mom2ang(blade_sec_data, L_sec,
Mx_HAWC2, My_HAWC2)
1: blade_sec_data is a vector with the cross-section properties deﬁned in Table 2.1.
2: L_sec is the value of the length of the blade section (1 m).
3: Mx_HAWC2 and My_HAWC2 are the cross-sectional moments obtained after
running HAWC2.
4: Compute k11, k22, k33, k44, k55, and k66, the diagonal terms of the stiﬀness matrix
deﬁned in equation 2.1.
5: for the length of the cross-sectional moments vector do
6:
if Mx_HAWC2 is negative then
7:
Parameter neg_x = 1
8:
else
9:
Parameter neg_x = 0
10:
end if
11:
if My_HAWC2 is negative then
12:
Parameter neg_y = 1
13:
else
14:
Parameter neg_y = 0
15:
end if
16:
Calculate the curvature κ using equation 3.5 for both the x and y direction.
17:
Calculate the radius of curvature using equation 3.6 for both the x and y direction.
18:
Calculate the angle β using the equation 3.7 for both the x and y direction.
19:
Calculate the displacement δ using equation 3.8 for both the x and y direction.
20:
Calculate the rotational displacement theta_x and theta_y using equation 3.9.
21:
Assign the correct sign to the rotational displacement angle.
22:
if neg_x == 1 then
23:
theta_x has negative sign.
24:
end if
25:
if neg_y == 1 then
26:
theta_y has negative sign.
27:
end if
28: end for
==PAGE:60==
Appendix A. Appendix: Pseudocodes
45
Algorithm 5 inp2m.m
1: Check working folder.
2: Write the constructor .m ﬁle to create a function in a MATLAB script that will
generate the .inp ABAQUS ﬁle, as OutputFileName = inp_initial.m.
3: Open a new ﬁle for writing in text mode and save the status in fileID variable.
4: Print the name of the function and the input variables, which are the name of the .inp
ABAQUS ﬁle, and the rotational displacements theta_x and theta_y stored in .inp
ﬁles.
5: Print the name of the .inp ﬁle.
6: Print the command to open the .inp ﬁle for writting in text mode.
7: Open the current .inp ABAQUS ﬁle and scan the text.
8: Indicate the number of amplitudes that there will be in the .inp ﬁle and its respective
angles.
9: Initialise dummy variables for the forloop.
10: for the number of lines in the .inp ﬁle do
11:
Search for the amplitude zone. When reached, variable amplitude will not be 0.
12:
Search for the loads zone. When reached, variable load will not be 0.
13:
Search for the dynamic step zone. When reached, variable time_dyn will not be
0.
14:
Search for the static step zone. When reached, variable time_st will not be 0.
15:
Search for the node output zone. When reached, variable reach_output will not
be 0.
16:
Search for the node print zone. When reached, variable reach_print will not be 0.
17:
if reached amplitude zone then
18:
Count the number of times it gets inside the if statement.
19:
Variable Cline stores information regarding the amplitude name and its
respective angle.
20:
if ﬁnished reading amplitude lines then
21:
Reset the count.
22:
end if
23:
end if
24:
if reached load zone then
25:
Count the number of times it gets inside the if statement.
26:
Variable Cline stores information regarding the load name in ABAQUS and its
respective amplitude name.
27:
if ﬁnished reading load lines then
28:
Reset the count.
29:
end if
30:
end if
31:
if reached dynamic step zone, dummy variable dynamic == 1 then
32:
Variable Cline stores information regarding the time increment, the duration of
the step, the minimum and the maximum time increment.
33:
Set dummy variable dynamic = 0.
34:
end if
35:
if reached static step zone, dummy variable static == 1 then
36:
Variable Cline stores information regarding the time increment, the duration of
the step, the minimum and the maximum time increment.
37:
Set dummy variable static = 0
38:
end if
39:
[...]
40: end for
==PAGE:61==
Appendix A. Appendix: Pseudocodes
46
Algorithm 6 inp2m.m: Continuation
1: for the number of lines in the .inp ﬁle do
2:
[...]
3:
if reached output or print zone, dummy variable output == 1 or print == 1 then
4:
Variable Cline stores information regarding the ABAQUS variables desired as
outputs.
5:
Set dummy variable output and print = 0.
6:
end if
7:
Print variable Cline.
8:
if reached dynamic step zone then
9:
Dummy variable dynamic = 1 to indicate that the next line in the ﬁle is going
to be modiﬁed.
10:
end if
11:
if reached static step zone then
12:
Dummy variable static = 1 to indicate that the next line in the ﬁle is going to
be modiﬁed.
13:
end if
14:
if reached output step zone then
15:
Dummy variable output = 1 to indicate that the next line in the ﬁle is going to
be modiﬁed.
16:
end if
17:
if reached print step zone then
18:
Dummy variable print = 1 to indicate that the next line in the ﬁle is going to
be modiﬁed.
19:
end if
20: end for
==PAGE:62==
Appendix A. Appendix: Pseudocodes
47
Algorithm 7 [t_abq, Mx_abq, My_abq, Mz_abq, UR1_abq, UR2_abq, UR3_abq] =
function Read_odb_outputs_node(name_dat_ﬁle, name_sta_ﬁle)
1: name_dat_ﬁle and name_sta_ﬁle are outputs ﬁle from ABAQUS.
2: while exist(name_dat_ﬁle, ’ﬁle’) == 0 do
3:
Pause the code if the .dat ﬁle (ABAQUS output ﬁle) does not exist.
4: end while
5: Open name_dat_file and save the status in fidd variable.
6: Initialise dummy variable ii, to count the number of lines.
7: Initialise dummy variable jj, to store the results in the function output variables.
8: while the end of the ﬁle indicator is not reached do
9:
Store the text in the current line tline, and ii = ii + 1.
10:
if tline == ’NODE OUTPUT’ then
11:
Count the number of steps.
12:
Read the next line and ii = ii + 1.
▷This is done to skip the lines until the
results part is reached.
13:
while tline has no numbers do
14:
Read the next line.
15:
Find the phrase ’ALL THE VALUES IN THIS TABLE ARE ZERO’.
16:
if phrase found then
17:
jj = jj + 1;
18:
Save
output
variables
Mx_abq(jj),
My_abq(jj),
Mz_abq(jj),
UR1_abq(jj), UR2_abq(jj), UR3_abq(jj) as zeros.
19:
end if
20:
ii = ii + 1;
21:
end while
22:
while tline has numbers do
23:
jj = jj + 1;
24:
Scan tline and save it in data_f.
25:
Save
output
variables
Mx_abq(jj),
My_abq(jj),
Mz_abq(jj),
UR1_abq(jj), UR2_abq(jj), UR3_abq(jj).
26:
Read the next line so it gets out of the while loop and ii = ii + 1.
27:
end while
28:
end if
29: end while
30: Open name_sta_file and save the status in fid_sta variable.
31: Scan the text and save it in variable C_sta.
▷Read the total time of the ABAQUS
simulation from the .sta ﬁle.
32: Initialise dummy variables exit and rr.
33: while exit == 0 do
34:
Count rr = rr + 1.
35:
Detect if the time step has the letter U (when there are convergence issues, several
number of iterations can be done in a same time step. The iterations appear as
’1U’, ’2U’,...).
36:
if no letter then
37:
Continue the while loop
38:
end if
39:
for number of iterations with letter do
40:
if letter then
41:
Delete that row.
42:
end if
43:
end for
44: end while
45: If there are 2 steps in the ABAQUS job, store each time to its respective step.
==PAGE:63==
Appendix A. Appendix: Pseudocodes
48
Algorithm 8 [D_sim1, D_sim2, D_sim3, phi_sim1, phi_sim2, phi_sim3] = function
Read_odb_outputs_node_stiﬀness_prop(name_dat_ﬁle)
1: name_dat_ﬁle is the output ﬁle from ABAQUS.
2: while exist(name_dat_ﬁle, ’ﬁle’) == 0 do
3:
Pause the code if the .dat ﬁle (ABAQUS output ﬁle) does not exist.
4: end while
5: Open name_dat_file and save the status in fidd variable.
6: Initialise dummy variable i, to count the number of lines.
7: Initialise dummy variable j, to store the results in the function output variables.
8: while the end of the ﬁle indicator is not reached do
9:
Store the text in the current line tline, and i = i + 1.
10:
if tline == ’NODE OUTPUT’ then
11:
Count the number of steps.
12:
Read the next line and i = i + 1.
▷This is done to skip the lines until the
results part is reached.
13:
Erase the lines.
14:
while tline has no numbers do
15:
Read the next line and i = i + 1.
16:
Erase the lines.
17:
ii = ii + 1;
18:
end while
19:
while tline has numbers do
20:
j = j + 1;
21:
Scan tline and save it in data_f.
22:
Save
output
variables
D_sim1(j),
D_sim2(j),
D_sim3(j),
phi_sim1(j), phi_sim2(j), phi_sim3(j).
23:
Read the next line so it gets out of the while loop and i = i + 1.
24:
end while
25:
end if
26: end while
27: Close ﬁle.
==PAGE:64==
Appendix A. Appendix: Pseudocodes
49
Algorithm 9 [up_stiﬀ_prop] = function update_stiﬀness_prop(name_axial_dat_ﬁle,
name_sh_x_dat_ﬁle,
name_sh_y_dat_ﬁle,
name_bend_x_dat_ﬁle,
name_bend_y_dat_ﬁle, name_torsion_dat_ﬁle)
1: Deﬁne the lenght of the blade section L_sec.
2: Deﬁne the loads applied in each direction: Fx_applied, Fy_applied, Fz_applied,
Mx_applied, My_applied, Mz_applied.
3: State the paths of the .dat ﬁles.
4: Read .dat ﬁles.
5: For the six ﬁles, the displacements and rotational displacement in the 3 directions (x,
y, z) will be obtained to calculate the strains and curvatures. With the stiﬀness matrix
in equation 2.1 the diagonal terms of the matrix will be computed.
6: Call
the
function
[ua_x,
ua_y,
ua_z,
phia_x,
phia_y,
phia_z]
=
Read_ODB_outputs_node_stiffness_prop(axial_dat_path).
▷Axial ﬁle: Fz.
7: Compute strains and curvatures: ea_x, ea_y, ea_z, ka_x, ka_y, ka_z.
8: Compute EA as Fz_applied/ea_z.
9: Call
the
function
[ubx_x,
ubx_y,
ubx_z,
phibx_x,
phibx_y,
phibx_z]
=
Read_ODB_outputs_node_stiffness_prop(bend_x_dat_path). ▷Bending moment
x direction ﬁle: Mx.
10: Compute strains and curvatures: ebx_x, ebx_y, ebx_z, kbx_x, kbx_y, kbx_z.
11: Compute EIx as Mx_applied/kbx_x.
12: Call
the
function
[uby_x,
uby_y,
uby_z,
phiby_x,
phiby_y,
phiby_z]
=
Read_ODB_outputs_node_stiffness_prop(bend_y_dat_path). ▷Bending moment
y direction ﬁle: My.
13: Compute strains and curvatures: eby_x, eby_y, eby_z, kby_x, kby_y, kby_z.
14: Compute EIy as My_applied/kby_y.
15: Call
the
function
[ut_x,
ut_y,
ut_z,
phit_x,
phit_y,
phit_z]
=
Read_ODB_outputs_node_stiffness_prop(torsion_dat_path).
▷Torsion moment
ﬁle: Mz.
16: Compute strains and curvatures: et_x, et_y, et_z, kt_x, kt_y, kt_z.
17: Compute GJ as Mz_applied/kt_z.
18: Call
the
function
[usx_x,
usx_y,
usx_z,
phisx_x,
phisx_y,
phisx_z]
=
Read_ODB_outputs_node_stiffness_prop(sh_x_dat_path).
▷Shear force x
direction ﬁle: Fx.
19: Compute strains and curvatures: esx_x, esx_y, esx_z, ksx_x, ksx_y, ksx_z.
20: Compute GAkx as Fx_applied/esx_x.
21: Call
the
function
[usy_x,
usy_y,
usy_z,
phisy_x,
phisy_y,
phisy_z]
=
Read_ODB_outputs_node_stiffness_prop(sh_y_dat_path).
▷Shear force y
direction ﬁle: Fy.
22: Compute strains and curvatures: esy_x, esy_y, esy_z, ksy_x, ksy_y, ksy_z.
23: Compute GAky as Fy_applied/esy_x.
24: Write the equations of the stiﬀness matrix: forces = stiﬀness matrix · strains and
curvatures.
25: Solve the system of equations to obtain the components of the stiﬀness matrix.
26: Knowing the area of the blade section, and component k33, the elastic modulus E is
obtained.
27: Knowing k44 and k55, Ix and Iy are obtained.
28: The shear modulus G is obtained with either k11 or k22.
29: The torsional moment of inertia J is obtained dividing k66/G.
30: The vector up_stiff_prop stores the values of E and G.
==PAGE:65==
Appendix A. Appendix: Pseudocodes
50
Algorithm
10
function
[blade_sec_data,
blade_st_data]
=
Read_blade_st(blade_st_ﬁle, r_blade)
1: blade_st_file indicates the path to the .dat ﬁle that stores the cross-sectional
properties of the blade sections.
2: r_blade indicates the section that is modelled in ABAQUS.
3: Open blade_st_file in read mode and save the status in fidb variable.
4: Scan the text and save it in variable Cb.
5: Get the number of lines in Cb.
6: Save line number 4 in Cb into the variable blade_st_data, which stores the information
of the columns in Cb.
7: for the number of lines in Cb do
8:
Search for the information for the blade section indicated in r_blade.
9:
if reached blade section then
10:
Save the cross-sectional properties in blade_sec_data.
11:
end if
12: end for
13: Close ﬁle.
Algorithm
11
function
[blade_sec_data_updated,
blade_st_data]
=
update_HAWC2(up_stiﬀ_prop,
name_updated_blade_st_ﬁle,
name_blade_st_ﬁle,
blade_st_ﬁle, r_blade, name_updated_htc_ﬁle, name_htc_ﬁle)
1: Open blade_st_file in read mode and save the status in fidu variable.
2: Scan the text and save it in variable Cb.
3: Get the number of lines in Cb.
4: Initialise dummy variable done.
5: for the number of lines in Cb do
6:
Search for the information for the blade section indicated in r_blade.
7:
if reached blade section then
8:
Update the stiﬀness properties in Cb with the values in up_stiff_prop.
9:
end if
10: end for
11: Close ﬁle.
