==PAGE:1==
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low
coverage samples
Master Thesis
Ángela Miranda Segura
March, 2023
DTU Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
Master Thesis
March, 2023
By
Ángela Miranda Segura
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Kemitorvet, Building 204, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
http://www.healthtech.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Modern and Ancient
Genomes, Department of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and biology.
Ángela Miranda Segura - s210496
Signature
Date
ii
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
14/03/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Ancient DNA is a great source of information to learn about the culture in the past and the
history of humanity. One of the main unresolved questions is the frequency of individuals
with genetic disorders and their role in society. This lack of information is mainly due to
two factors. First, the diagnosis of these genetic conditions using only morphological data
is diﬀicult due to the variability of the symptoms. Second is the nature of the ancient
DNA, which shows fragmentation, contamination, and damage patterns. In this project,
we develop a program able to predict the probability of genetic conditions in ancient
individuals using Bayesian probability and modeling the number of reads mapped to a
reference genome. The results obtained prove this is the most robust method to date to
detect genetic conditions in ancient DNA samples.
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Juani and Antonio, my parents who have always been there for me. These two last
years have been diﬀicult, but they are stronger than anything in this world and I am proud
of them for keep fighting.
Marthe Gautier, discoverer of the trisomy of chromosome 21 in Down syndrome. Thanks
for her years of work and her contribution to the discovery of Down syndrome. I hope we
can learn from her history and in the future, everyone gets the recognition they deserve
no matter the sex, race or religion.
Gabriel Renaud, my supervisor for supporting and teaching me during these 6 months.
Nicola, Josh, Louis and Jan, for helping me with all my silly questions and make me
the path easier, I wouldn’t have been able to finish this project without their help.
Isin Altankaya, who started this program along with Gabriel.
iv
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Summary
1
2
Introduction
2
2.1
Ancient DNA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Sex chromosome disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Distributions to model the number of reads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
State-of-art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.6
Applications of the program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Materials
7
4
Methods
9
4.1
Structure of the program
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
GC bias correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Mappability bias removal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.4
Probability calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Results
15
5.1
GC bias removal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Poisson distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.3
Negative binomial distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.4
Performance of the program on simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.5
Performance of the program in time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.6
Results for empirical samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.7
Results according to effective size method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.8
Minimal coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
Discussion
23
6.1
Poisson and Negative Binomial distributions for simulations . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
Empirical samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.3
Using or not a mappability file
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.4
Minimal coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7
Conclusion
27
Bibliography
29
A Appendix
33
A.1 Workflow of the program
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
A.2 Pipeline for obtaining mappability score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
A.3 Extract of config file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
A.4 Plots generated by the program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
A.5 Additional information about empirical files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
5.1
LOESS plots for empirical and simulated samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Probability of suffering some conditions given the data and following a
Poisson distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.3
Probability of suffering some conditions given the data and following a
Negative Binomial distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.4
Percentage indicating the number of replicates where the program has pro-
duced the correct condition having the highest probability in simulations . .
20
A.1 Workflow of the program using Negative Binomial distribution
. . . . . . .
33
A.2 GC bias correction for empirical sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
A.3 P estimation plot in empirical sample
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
A.4 Mean and variance plot for empirical sample
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
A.5 Predicted and observed number of reads for a condition for an empirical
sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
vi
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
4.1
Equivalence for the number of reads and the expected coverage value . . . .
13
6.1
Comparison of llik between Smith-Magenis condition and male condition
for Poisson and Negative Binomial distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
A.1 Extract of the configuration file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
vii
==PAGE:10==
List of Abbreviations
Complete name
Abbreviation
Adenine
A
Ancient DNA
aDNA
Base pairs
bp
Before Present
BP
Binary Alignment Map
BAM
Cell-free DNA
cfDNA
Chromosome
chr
Copy number variation
CNV
Compressed Reference-oriented Alignment Map
CRAM
Cytosine
C
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
Expected coverage
ecov
Guanine
G
Locally estimated scatterplot smoothing
LOESS
Negative Binomial
Nbinom
Number of successes
r
Polymerase Chain Reaction
PCR
Premature ovarian failure
POF
Probability mass function
pmf
Probability of success
p
Single-cell DNA
sc-DNA
Single-cell RNA sequencing
scRNA-seq
Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms
SNP
Thymine
T
Unknown nucleotide
N
viii
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:11==
1
Summary
Background
The analysis of ancient DNA (aDNA) is essential to learn about the history of past human
populations, their culture and migrations. Nowadays, chromosome conditions like Down,
Klinefelter or Turner syndromes can be detected in populations thanks to psychological
and morphological traits, however symptoms can vary a lot, so genetics analysis is the
most accurate way of detecting these conditions. We would like to know what was the
incidence of genetic conditions and their role in society in the past. However, the nature
of ancient DNA makes this a hard task. The three main problems when working with
aDNA are damage patterns, fragmentation and modern contamination. Therefore, the
purpose of this project is to develop a program able to detect chromosome conditions in
ancient DNA samples by using Bayesian probability and the number of reads following a
statistical distribution.
Results
We design a program that based on the number of reads predicts the condition with the
highest probability using Bayesian probability.
The program starts by calculating the
number of reads aligning against a reference genome and then filtering these reads accord-
ing to their mapping quality, length, and if they are duplicated. Then, the GC bias and
mappability bias are removed from the data using LOESS and the effective genome size.
Next, the likelihood for the different conditions is calculated using a Poisson and Negative
Binomial distributions and this likelihood is used to calculate the posterior probabilities of
the conditions given the data. The program has been tested with simulated and empirical
data, and even though Poisson distribution works well with simulated data, it sometimes
fails for empirical data. The empirical samples have been downsampled and the program
identifies the correct condition up to a coverage value of 0.003-0.001, which is a really low
coverage value, so the program is suitable for aDNA. The probabilities obtained for the
correct condition are close to 99%, showing the robustness of the program. .
Conclusions
Our findings demonstrate Negative Binomial distribution is an adequate distribution to fit
the number of reads in ancient DNA and detect the condition with the highest probability.
So far, this has been the most reliable method developed to identify chromosome condi-
tions in low-coverage DNA and it could have many applications. It can be applied to the
study of ancient culture and population movements and migrations. But since it is a tool
able to work with very low coverage DNA, it could have some applications in the diagnosis
of diseases like cancer using single-cell DNA and allow a more inclusive investigation in
the future, thanks to a cost reduction in sequencing analysis.
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
2.1
Ancient DNA
Ancient DNA (aDNA) represents an important source of information for studying the
past. It can be obtained from different ancient organic materials, such as bones, teeth or
hair, but also from herbaria and environmental samples [1].
Over time, aDNA suffers post-mortem degradation (including fragmentation and damage
patterns), and it is contaminated by all the external DNA which surrounds it. If the en-
vironmental conditions have not allowed the conservation of the sample, the DNA might
become unrecoverable. These environmental conditions include among others the weather,
the humidity content, and the presence or absence of microorganisms.
Post-mortem degradation causes the fragmentation of DNA molecules into ultra-short
DNA fragments, the cross-linking of DNA to other molecules and the conversion of the
nucleotides into derivatives [2]. Cross-linking is the most important type of damage since
it limits the amount of amplifiable ancient DNA by preventing template denaturaliza-
tion [3]. In general, cytosine (C) is deaminated resulting in uracil (U). This is misread
as thymine (T) [4] by the DNA polymerases during the DNA library preparation. This
deamination occurs close to the ends of the fragment, causing a C-T and guanine-adenine
(G-A) misincorporation at the 5’ and 3’ sequence ends [5]. In addition, the produced
fragments of aDNA accumulate purines (adenine and guanine) towards the 5’ ends of the
fragments, resulting in biased sequencing coverage patterns, where the number of reads
aligning to the reference is different for the different regions. [5].
Contamination makes harder the detection and identification of authentic human ancient
DNA since there is a high proportion of DNA coming from different sources like microbial,
environmental, and modern human DNA. Out of these sources, the most problematic in
the case of the aDNA is modern human contamination due to its similarity with the in-
trinsic DNA. Sequences coming from microbes and the environment are different enough
so they can be filtered out using human reference genomes for mapping. Human DNA is
very abundant in the environment, and it can produce unusual patterns of ploidy, leading
to false signals. This might get particularly problematic in projects that focus on the
measurement of fragment abundance within genome [1].
This contamination, fragmentation and post-mortem degradation results in low numbers
of endogenous human DNA fragments in a sample. Subsequently, this leads to fewer align-
ments to the human reference genome and, therefore, a low depth of coverage (1x or less)
[6].
2.2
Sex chromosome disorders
Almost half of the world population is female, with two X chromosomes (XX) and the
other half is male with one X chromosome and one Y chromosome (XY). However, it can
2
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:13==
also occur chromosome disorders where the individual gains or losses entire sex chromo-
somes or part of sex chromosomes. They are also called sex chromosome aneuploidies. The
most known sex aneuploidies are: Turner syndrome (X0), Klinefelter syndrome (XXY),
trisomy X (XXX), Jacobs (XYY), and XXYY. The most common cause of sex chromo-
some aneuploidies is the failure in homologous chromosomes to properly separate and it
can occur during meiosis or early stages of postzygotic development [7].
The range of symptoms for the different sex chromosome disorders is very varied, and
it can have morphological and psychological effects on an individual. Sometimes these
traits are noticeable, and the condition can be diagnosed at an early age, but on other
occasions, the symptoms can be misinterpreted, and the condition is not diagnosed until
later in adulthood or never. The most important sex chromosome disorders and their
main characteristics are described in the following paragraphs.
Turner syndrome is a monosomy of the X chromosome (45, X0), and it is the most fre-
quent genetic disorder in humans, present in around 2% of the population based on data
from Europe, Japan and the United States. It affects women, and it can be the result
of the total or partial loss of the second sexual chromosome, resulting in highly variable
clinical features [8]. The main symptoms associated with this disorder affect sex hormone
regulation and the development of reproductive organs. It can also produce congenital
malformations of the heart (occurring during intrauterine life) or endocrine disorders, os-
teoporosis, autoimmune disorders and other medical conditions [9].
Klinefelter syndrome (karyotype of 47, XXY) is the most frequent chromosome disorder
in men, with a prevalence of 1-2 in 1000 male births [10]. The 47, XXY karyotype is
the most common chromosomal pattern, but also mosaic (46, XY/47, XXY) and variant
patterns can occur [11]. This condition also shows highly variable clinical features, but
the frequent features are small testes, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (the abnormal
function of gonads which decrease testosterone in males) and azoospermia (lack of sperm
in semen in a man’s ejaculate) [10]. In most cases, Klinefelter syndrome is detected due
to infertility problems [12].
Trisomy X (karyotype of 47, XXX) is more common than other female sex chromosome
disorders affecting 1 in 1000 female births, but it is rarely clinically identified since the
individual can be mildly affected or asymptomatic. The individuals suffering from this
condition are often taller, and they can suffer seizures, renal and genitourinary disorders
(problems affecting the urinary and genital tract), as well as premature ovarian failure
(POF). Related to the psychological traits, the individuals can show motor and speech
delays, attention deficits and mood disorders like anxiety and depression [13].
Despite their prevalence in the general population, these disorders often go underdiag-
nosed, and the specific genetic mechanisms underlying their phenotypes are poorly un-
derstood [7]. As already mentioned, the physical and psychological traits are not enough
defined to have a direct diagnosis, but they provide the first signal to suspect the pos-
sibility of suffering a chromosome disorder.
However, this is information that an old
skeleton cannot provide, so it is necessary to develop low-cost tools which can bring light
to the topic without having additional information (physiologically and/or psychologi-
cally) about the individual. Our program, named Marthe in honor of Marthe Gautier,
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
3
==PAGE:14==
can detect autosomal and sex chromosome disorders in aDNA using Bayesian probability
and the number of reads. Marthe Gautier was the main discoverer of trisomy of chromo-
some 21 causing Down syndrome in the late 1950s, but her authorship was undermined by
her male colleagues, being one more of the many cases of sexism that took place in labs [14].
2.3
Distributions to model the number of reads
The program will distribute the number of reads using some distribution, but the litera-
ture does not provide much information about the most appropriate distribution to use
on DNA reads. Most of the papers that use the number of reads with a statistical distri-
bution use it for single-cell RNA sequence (scRNA-seq). Since we are also working with
the number of reads in aDNA we should be able to use the same distributions, always
taking into account the differences between scRNA-seq, DNA and aDNA. RNA-seq shows
high variability in the number of reads due to the different levels of transcription [15].
However, in the case of DNA and aDNA, where the number of reads does not depend on
the cell state. In the case of aDNA, the problem resides in low sequencing depths.
The most common distributions used when working with the number of reads in the analy-
sis of scRNA-seq are Poisson, Negative Binomial (NBinom) and Zero-inflated distributions
[15]. Poisson is the simplest distribution and it has only one parameter (λ) which equals
to both mean and variance. Negative Binomial distribution is more complex and indicates
the overdispersion of variance related to the mean. Zero-Inflated distributions deal with
the data when there is an excess of zeroes. It has two components: a point mass at zero
and a common distribution which can be Poisson and NBinom for reads. According to
Jiang et al., a gene’s expression distribution can be described by different statistical mod-
els for the same data that has been generated using different protocols. This is mainly
applicable to zero-inflated distributions, which can be useful for certain types of data but
not for others [16]. This is why zero-inflated distributions are discarded from the project
and only Poisson and Negative Binomial distributions will be used.
2.4
State-of-art
The amount of existing literature on aDNA research is limited compared to modern DNA.
Specifically, the study of disorders in sex chromosomes in aDNA has only been investi-
gated on a few occasions. In a recent paper by Roca-Rada et al., Klinefelter’s syndrome
in aDNA is investigated using Bayesian probability based on the number of sequencing
reads mapping to the X, Y or autosomal chromosomes, including morphological data too
[17]. The topic of this paper is similar to the one proposed in this project. However, the
goal of this project is bigger since it aims to develop a strategy to predict the condition
with the highest probability in a wide range of autosomal and sex chromosome conditions
in ancient DNA samples.
Mostly, the study of the aDNA has been based on the analysis of single-nucleotide poly-
morphisms (SNPs) and structural variations like copy number variations (CNV) remain
ignored. Nonetheless, more and more tools are appearing based on those structural varia-
tions. It is the case of CONGA, a program which tries to genotype a sequence given some
candidate’s CNVs from BAM files [18]. Most of these programs are mainly focused on the
analysis of single-cell DNA (scDNA) in order to diagnose cancer [19], and not all of them
are adapted to work with low-coverage DNA. HMMcopy is one of the few programs that
4
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:15==
can be used for low and normal coverage DNA [20]. To sum up, the study of ancient DNA
using structural variations is an unexplored field open for discoveries and improvements.
2.5
Research Questions
Based on the introduction provided in this chapter and the research objective, we reduce
our research questions to the following main question:
Is there a confident method able to predict a sex chromosome or autosomal
disorders in low coverage DNA, such as aDNA?
This main question is composed of multiple research questions. The first 2 questions try
to provide an overview of the available information in literature:
1. Is there already an existing method to detect genetic conditions in low-coverage
DNA?
2. What is the most suitable methodology to study low-coverage DNA?
Based on the literature review, we start creating a program which will use the number
of mapped reads to predict probabilities of suffering different conditions, and we come
up with the following sub-questions. Attempting to provide the necessary information in
order to develop the program:
1. Is Bayesian likelihood a good method to calculate the probabilities for the considered
conditions?
2. Is the count of mapped reads a good method to study chromosome conditions?
3. Which is the most suitable distribution to model the number of reads?
4. What is the confidence of the results obtained in the program?
5. Which is the minimum coverage of the sample for which we can obtain confident
results?
2.6
Applications of the program
The study of the aDNA allows to assess questions related to the culture and lives of
the ancients, genetic changes and much more. These are some of the contributions the
program may make:
• Study of population movements: aDNA studies can be useful to know the
possible migrations and issues of prehistorical population continuity [21].
• Study of the culture: The way the person was buried, and the clothing and
accessories the body was wearing give us a lot of information about the possible
role a person would have had in society in the past. Additionally, knowing if this
person presented some kind of chromosome disorder can help us to know more about
the culture back then and if those individuals presenting sex chromosome anomalies
were included or left out of social life.
• Diagnosis of diseases: even if the focus of this project is aDNA, the program is
able to work well with low-coverage DNA. Other types of DNA, like cell-free DNA
(cfDNA) and fetal cfDNA from no invasive prenatal testing, show low coverage too.
Cell-free DNA can be obtained through no invasive methods like body fluids (plasma,
serum, urine), and it is emerging as a non-invasive biomarker for the diagnosis and
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
5
==PAGE:16==
prognosis of various diseases like cancer [22]. The diagnosis can be done by detecting
somatic copy number alterations and estimating the tumour content in the blood
(Canver.gov). In addition, cfDNA can reflect the heterogeneity of the tumour [22].
Therefore, this tool can be further developed so that in the future, it could be used
in the diagnosis of diseases and disorders using cfDNA.
• Low-coverage sequencing: Low coverage sequencing methods are gaining impor-
tance due to their affordability and the possibility of sequencing a higher number
of samples. This low-cost genotyping technology combines genotype imputation ap-
proaches to recover the missing genotypes [23]. This allows a much larger number of
individuals to be studied, which is especially important in the case of understudied
populations like African populations, where the lack of data can give biased results
[24].
6
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:17==
3
Materials
The program has been tested with simulated and empirical data. A list of documents
are needed for the program to run successfully, these will be explained in the following
paragraphs.
The program has first been tested with a set of simulated tiles. This set of simulated files
contained the following conditions: unaffected female (XX), unaffected male (XY), Turner
syndrome (X), Klinefelter syndrome (XXY), Jacobs syndrome (XYY) and one autosomal
condition, Down syndrome. The coverage of the generated files is 10x, however, the cov-
erage value of the simulations employed in the testing in the program will be in the range
of 5x to 6E-7x.
The simulated samples used for the testing part of the program have been generated by
gargammel, a sequence simulator for ancient DNA which generates paired-end short Illu-
mina reads with post-mortem damage. This program generates sequences with the most
common bias observed in ancient DNA by simulating the entire molecular process. These
reads have sequencing errors, causing the mismapping of the reads [25]. This mismapping
will be taken into account in the program for the calculation of the probabilities.
The empirical samples are BAM files obtained from the servers of the section for Geo-
Genetics, at the University of Copenhagen, Denmark. The sources of the samples are
very diverse, having been extracted from different locations around the globe, from differ-
ent periods and they show different coverage values. In the Appendix A.5, you can find
a description of the most important samples mentioned in this report. These empirical
files will be used for testing the program when the program has proved to work fine with
simu-lations. One of the empirical samples used for the testing has been identified as a
Down syndrome individual by analysing morphological features [26] and genetics traits
[27]. Another empirical sample contains information about an ancient individual suffering
from Klinefelter syndrome [17].
The reference FASTA file used is hs37d5 was used for all the tests since it is necessary
for the program to run and it is obtained from the Full 1000 Genomes project. It is an
integrated reference from the GRCH37 primary genome assembly [28]. This assembly is
also termed hg19 and GRCh37.
The GC content file contains the percentage of guanine and cytosine in genomic windows
of 30bp. It has been obtained from UCSC Genome Browser [29][30]. By default, the file
has the GC percentage calculated for 30 base pairs (bp) windows and it has to be modified
to calculate the percentage in 1Mb windows.
Another of the files the program needs to run is a ”config” file. This file has been created
doing scientific research on chromosomal conditions and it includes a list of 27 autosomal
and sex chromosome conditions, the affected region, if it is a deletion or duplication of
that region, and the predominance of that condition in the population. However, only
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
7
==PAGE:18==
the most common pattern of the condition is shown, without taking into account other
possible variants. As in the case of the Klinefelter syndrome, the most common pattern
is 47 XXY, but also mosaic (46, XY/47,XXY) can be found, but it is not included. A
fragment of the config file can be found in Appendix A.3. The conditions that will be
tested in the program are: unaffected male, unaffected female, Down, Edwards, Patau,
Cat eye (different versions), 1q21_1 deletion, 1q21_1 duplication, Wolf-Hirschhorn, cri
du chat (different versions), Williams, Jacobsen, Miller Dieker, Smith Magenis, DiGeorge,
22q13 deletion, Angelman Prader-Willi, Distal18q, Klinefelter, Turner, Trisomy X, XXYY
and Jacobs.
The mappability map is needed to obtain more accurate results since it identifies the re-
gions of the reference genome where the sequence is highly unique. The file was obtained
by the SNPable method by Heng Li (SNPable). This method consists in masking out
the sites in the reference genome where overlapping kmers of a certain length cannot be
mapped uniquely [31], and then produce a file with the regions which are uniquely map-
pable. The length of the kmer used to produce this mappability map is 35bp.
The programs, with their respective versions, used in the project are R 3.6.3, Python 3.8.8,
samtools 1.10, and tabix 1.10.2.
You can find some of the mentioned files (reference FASTA, GC content file, config file) in
the GitHub repository, as well as a README file with an introduction about the program
and instructions about how to run the program and interpret the results.
8
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:19==
4
Methods
4.1
Structure of the program
Our developed program ”marthe” takes an alignment file and calculates the probability
that the individual in the sample presents some genetic condition or it is an unaffected
male or female. For the program to work, it needs a reference genome, a gc content file,
and a config file. The sample is given to the program as an alignment file BAM (Bi-
nary Alignment file) or CRAM (Crompressed Reference-oriented alignment map). These
alignment files must have been done against the hs37d5 reference genome. The reference
genome is divided into non-overlapping windows of 1Mb and the reads are mapped to
this reference file. Then, the program filters out the reads with a length below 35bp, a
mapping quality below 30 and duplicated reads.
The read counts have to be corrected in order to remove two possible biases: mappability
and GC bias. Both of them are deeper explained in the next sections. In brief, GC bias
is removed using a LOESS (locally estimated scatterplot smoothing) regression, whereas
the mappability bias has to be removed using the effective genome size.
Finally, the probability of each condition given the data is calculated using the likelihood,
the prior probability and the independent data. We find the condition with the highest
probability. These probabilities calculations are explained in 4.4. A schema of the whole
process is shown in figure A.1.
4.2
GC bias correction
The GC content bias is the dependence between the read coverage and the GC content
found in Illumina sequencing data. In regions where the content of cytosine and guanine
is elevated, the number of reads is increased. This happens because cytosine and guanine
are bound by 3 hydrogen bonds, while adenine and thymine are bound by only 2 hydrogen
bonds. The amount of energy needed to break 3 hydrogen bonds is higher and the melting
temperature is higher. During sequencing, when the fragments anneal to the flow cell
surface, DNA fragments with a high content of CG will tend to form stronger bonds with
the flow cell surface. This will result in a preferential immobilization and clustering of
these fragments and an under-representation of these regions [32].
However, in Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) we can find an opposite effect. It has been
found that the incorporation of nucleotides during sequencing is less eﬀicient for templates
with really low GC [33]. This results in a largely unimodal effect of the GC content in
human genomes, where fragments extremely rich and extremely poor in GC present a
lower coverage [34].
The selected method to solve the GC content bias is the LOESS regression model. This
is a modeling method that combines the simplicity of linear least square regression with
the flexibility of non-linear regression. This model finds the nearest neighbors of the ob-
served data using a simple Euclidean distance. Then, it converts these distances into a set
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
9
==PAGE:20==
containing weights that assign importance to the different neighbours according to their
distances. Neighbors with larger distances will be associated with lower weights. Finally,
the estimate is calculated using a simple weighted linear regression [35].
There is a consensus about the procedure to remove GC bias. This method consists in
dividing the fragment count file and GC content file in bins, and estimate the conditional
mean fragment count per GC value in a curve [34]. This is the strategy used in this project.
The GC content file and the fragment count file have been divided in 1Mb windows and
a value of -1 is displayed when the reference sequence for that window contains at least 1
unknown nucleotide base, which is represented as ”N”.
For the GC correction, only the regions which are not affected by any of the disorders are
selected, this translate in selecting the regions where only diploid chromosomes are ex-
pected. The goal of the GC correction is predicting the read count for diploid chromosomes
using the GC content. It is important that we know for sure that one region is diploid,
otherwise the result could be biased in case the individual - from where the sample was
taken - showed any of the conditions recorded in the configuration file. The smoothness
of the data is selected in order to produce smooth curves capable of capturing the main
trend in the data, a default value of 0.7 is selected. In the Results section (5) there are
two plots showing the GC bias and the corrected read counts after having removed it.
After the LOESS GC correction, the program predicts the number of reads for different
GC percentages. These predictions are clustered in bins according to the GC percentage.
Afterwards, the GC value from every genomics region will tell us which is the predicted
read count in that region.
4.3
Mappability bias removal
In the program, we need to assess the effective genome size, which corresponds to the
length of the mappable genome. This can be calculated in two different ways:
• Based on the number of non-N bases.
• Based on the number of regions that are uniquely mappable.
For the first method, the number of Ns is counted from the reference FASTA file for
each genomic window, and the proportion of Ns is obtained. Once the GC bias has been
corrected, the number of reads observed is corrected by dividing with the proportion of
Ns in each genomic window.
corrected read count = observed read count
proportion Ns
(4.1)
predicted read count = predicted read count
proportion Ns
(4.2)
For the second method, the program takes a mappability file which indicates the regions
in the reference genome in which we trust the mapping to be of high quality because
the reference sequence is unique. Using tabix, the program gets these uniquely mappable
regions from the mappability file for a specific window. Tabix is a generic indexer for
10
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:21==
files containing TAB-delimited genome position [36]. Then, a size is selected (35 is one
of the most recommended read length), and the unique regions with a length lower than
this size are discarded. The regions which have passed this filter are divided into non-
overlapping fragments of this size, and the number of fragments is counted. The total
number of non-overlapping fragments with a length of 35 for the total genomics window is
calculated. Then, the mappability score is calculated as the division between the number
of uniquely mappable fragments and the total number of reads. The pipeline for obtaining
these mappability scores can be found in Appendix A.2.
The windows with a mappability score below 15% are discarded, and the observed number
of reads and predicted number of reads are corrected by dividing between the mappability
score. This threshold of 15% can be modified to make the program more strict by increas-
ing the percentage of mappability score, or more flexible by allowing regions with a lower
mappability score.
corrected read count = observed read count
mappability score
(4.3)
predicted read count = predicted read count
mappability score
(4.4)
The first method is a simpler and quicker estimation but is not very accurate. So it is
recommended to use a mappability file for better results.
4.4
Probability calculation
Once we have the number of reads in every genomic window, this read count will be used
to calculate the probability of having a certain condition given the observed data. This is
represented by the posterior distribution, calculated by considering the prior probabilities
for the conditions, the likelihood and the observed data. The likelihood of every hypoth-
esis given the observed data is proportional to the probability of obtaining the observed
data given that the hypothesis is true [37].
The formula for the calculation of the posterior distribution in Bayesian probability is:
Posterior = likelihood ∗prior
observed data
Applying this formula to our case, we obtain the following:
P[condition|observed data] = P[observed data | condition] ∗P[condition]
P[observed data]
(4.5)
Being the probability of observed data, the sum of the prior*likelihood probabilities for
all the conditions:
P[observed data] =
∑
c in Conditions
P[observed data | c ] ∗P[c]
(4.6)
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
11
==PAGE:22==
We work with the probabilities in the log space because it eases the calculations. Since the
probabilities take values between 0 and 1, the logarithm of the probabilities will be valued
between −∞and 0, which is a much wider range of numbers [38]. Equations simplify
significantly because the products turn into sums and the exponents turn into products.
log(prior ∗likelihood) = log(prior) + log(likelihood)
(4.7)
The prior probability is not calculated but taken from the literature instead. It represents
the incidence rate of a certain condition in the population. Some of these incidence rates
are gathered in the table A.1 in the Appendix. The prior probabilities have to be stan-
dardized so the sum of all probabilities adds up to 1.
The log-likelihood of the condition is calculated by adding the log-likelihoods for all the
genomics windows. This is explained by the independence in the number of reads for the
different genomic regions. So the likelihood of two regions can be calculated as in equation
4.8. Where L is the likelihood and log-L is the log-likelihood.
L(AB) = L(A) ∗L(B) →log −L(AB) = log −L(A) + log −L(B)
(4.8)
Two distributions have been taken into account for the likelihood calculation: Poisson and
negative binomial. These two are usually used in the analysis of differential expression of
genes [39][15].
4.4.1
Poisson distribution
Poisson distribution describes the number of events taking place independently in a interval
of time and with a constant rate.
This distribution has a single parameter which is
determined by its mean. The assumption of Poisson is restrictive since it predicts smaller
variations than what is observed in the data, so it does not control type-I error (it rejects
the null hypothesis when it is actually true) [40]. The probability mass function (pmf) of
the Poisson distribution is:
f(k; λ) = Pr(X = k) = λke−λ
k!
(4.9)
Where X is a discrete random variable and k is the number of occurrences [41]. When
implementing Poisson distribution into the program, the procedure is simple since we will
use the observed read count as the number of occurrences (k) and the predicted read count
as the mean (λ). Therefore, the closer the values of the observed read count are to the
predicted read count, the higher will be the likelihood.
4.4.2
Negative binomial distribution
The negative binomial distribution represents the number of repeated trials that produce
a certain number of successes. It can arise as a continuous mixture of Poisson distributions
where the gamma distribution quantifies the variation across replicates and removes the
12
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:23==
limitation found in Poisson, where the mean equals the variance. The probability mass
function of the negative binomial distribution is calculated as:
f(k; r, p) ≡Pr(X = k) =
(k + r −1
k
)
(1 −p)kpr
(4.10)
Where X is a discrete random variable, k is the number of failures, r is the number of
successes, and p is the probability of success in each experiment [42].
Since the number of successes (r) and the probability of success (p) are unknown, they
have to be estimated. The method chosen is the Maximum likelihood estimation for the p
variable. The R library ”EnvStats” contains a function called enbinom, which estimates
the probability parameter of a negative binomial distribution taking as input arguments
a vector of a non-negative integer indicating the number of trials, and the number of
successes [43].
The probability parameter (p) can be understood as the event of obtaining a read from
a certain region in the genome. p has been calculated for the different GC bins using the
observed read counts in every bin as input argument and a fixed value (5) for the number
of successes (r). The probability of success (p) can vary across different regions due to
different sources, like the GC content as I have explained in sec 4.2, where the percentage
of gc would modify the number of reads. Afterwards, the parameter r is estimated for
every genomic region for each condition. The parameter r is calculated using the mean
equation:
mean = r ∗(1 −p)
p
→r = mean ∗p
1 −p
(4.11)
The mean corresponds to the predicted read count for a specific condition and region, and
it will be calculated as explained in the next section.
4.4.3
Likelihood calculation
The predicted read count is corrected as indicated in section 4.3, using the effective genome
size. We have to take into account that this predicted read count refers to chromosomes
with two copies (diploids), a situation that changes according to the different conditions
and genomic regions. The number of copies in the chromosomal regions goes from 0 to 3
copies, and this is going to be translated into the expected coverage (ecov). Table 4.1 shows
the equivalence between the number of copies in a chromosome and the expected coverage:
Table 4.1: Equivalence between the number of copies in a genomics region and the expected
coverage for the specific condition
Number of copies
Expected coverage
3
1.5
2
1
1
0.5
0
0
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
13
==PAGE:24==
If the individual doesn’t suffer any condition affecting the autosomes, the ecov for those
autosomic regions will be 1 because these regions have 2 copies of each chromosome. The
sexual chromosomes are more changing, unaffected females have 3 copies of X chromo-
somes, so the ecov is 1; and unaffected males have 1 copy of chromosome X and 1 copy
of chromosome Y, so the ecov is going to be 0.5 for chromosome X and Y. Therefore, the
calculation for the real prediction of the number of reads will be:
predicted read countcondition = predicted read count ∗ecov
(4.12)
Where we take the read predictions in a specific region of an individual with a specific
condition and the ecov found in that same region for that condition.
In order to create a robust program, we have to take into account the mismapping rate
when predicting the number of reads. Mismapping rate quantifies the percentage of reads
mapping to the wrong place [44]. The typical value of the mismapping rate varies depend-
ing on several factors, like the specific experimental conditions, the quality of the reference
genome used for the alignment, the sequencing depth, or the read length and quality. The
program will use a default value of 0.01. According to the previous explanation, when the
expected coverage of a region for a condition is 0, the predicted number of reads should
also be 0. This happens for example in the case of a Female, which has an ecov of 0 for
the Y chromosome. However, in real life, we will find some reads mapped to the Y chro-
mosome, so the program should predict some reads mapping to that region. Therefore,
when the ecov is 0, the predicted number of reads will be calculated as:
predicted read countcondition = predicted read count ∗mismapping rate
(4.13)
The following pseudocode shows the calculation of the predicted number of reads in a
certain region for a condition according to all the previous criteria that I have explained:
Algorithm 1 Pseudocode for Predicted read counts calculations
for c ∈conditions do
for r ∈regions do
if ecov == 1 then
▷The chromosome is diploid
predicted count = lambda
else if ecov ̸= 1 then
▷The number of copies is not 2
if ecov == 0 then
▷The expected coverage is 0
predicted count = lambda ∗mismapping
▷Introduce mismapping rate
else if ecov > mismapping then
predicted count = lambda ∗ecov
▷Recalculate predicted reads
end if
end if
end for
end for
The total log-likelihood is then calculated for each condition as the sum of the log-
likelihoods for every genomic region. This log-total likelihood will be used to calculate
prior ∗likelihood for every condition as it is shown in equation 4.7. Then, the observed
data is calculated as in equation 4.6 the probability of each condition is calculated as in
equation 4.5.
14
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:25==
5
Results
In this section, I will present the results obtained from the program for the simulated and
empirical data. The simulated data includes BAM files with the following conditions: un-
affected male, unaffected female, Klinefelter, Jacobs, Turner and Down. These
files have been downsampled so the coverage goes from 5x to 6E-7x. The empirical dataset
consists of 25 samples with different coverage values, according to the papers from where
they have been extracted, all of them belong to unaffected male or female, except for
2, which belongs to a Klinefelter individual (sample ”22994”) and a male with Down
syndrome (sample ”PNH07”). The empirical files have kept the names they had in the
original papers, therefore names do not follow any kind of order.
5.1
GC bias removal
The following plots show the distribution of reads against the GC content before and after
the GC bias removal for a simulated sample and an empirical sample. The selection of
the samples has been arbitrary. The black dots represent the observed number of reads
and the red line represents the fitted regression. The plot 5.1(a) shows the absence of GC
bias in the simulations. It was obtained for the Unaffected Male sample with an average
coverage of 5x. Whereas the plot 5.1(b) was obtained for ”Labrana sample” and it shows
a wide range of a number of reads for the different GC content, which translates into a
GC bias. ”Labrana sample” belongs to a female individual with a coverage of 2.48x and
it was found in Spain [45].
(a) LOESS regression model for a
simulation (Unaffected Male 5x)
(b) LOESS regression model for an empirical
sample (Labrana)
Figure 5.1: LOESS regression of the observed number of reads against the GC content for
simulation and empirical samples. The black dots represent the observed data points, the
red line represents the corrected read counts after LOESS regression.
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
15
==PAGE:26==
5.2
Poisson distribution
The following plots 5.2 represent the posterior probability of a condition for different simu-
lated samples using a Poisson distribution. The conditions of the different simulations are
the ones indicated in the titles and descriptions of the plots. In the first row, we can find
unaffected male and unaffected female, in the second row Klinefelter and Turner,
and in the third row Jacobs and Down (male). For each plot, we are plotting the real
condition in each sample. In the first plot, since we know the condition of that simulation
is unaffected male, I am representing only unaffected male that is the condition of
interest.
The x-axis represent the coverage value of the sample, the y-value represents the poste-
rior probability for the condition indicated in the label. The dotted red line represents a
threshold of 0.9 (90% of probability), above this threshold the results are confident and
we can trust the program has identified the correct condition. The posterior distribution
has been calculated using equation 4.5.
The plots can be divided in three sections. The first section goes from a high coverage
sample to a coverage value of around 5E-4x. In this part, the correct condition has the
highest probability (>99%). 5E-4x is an extremely low coverage for ancient DNA, so even
if it is simulated data we can appreciate the great robustness of the program when using
a Poisson distribution.
In the second part of the plot, there is a transition state where the program starts failing
and the correct condition is not always the one with the highest probability. Therefore,
the probability of the correct condition drops. This happens at a coverage value of 5E-6x
in plots 5.2(c),5.2(d) and 5.2(e), at a coverage value of 5E-5 in plot 5.2(f), and at a cov-
erage value of 9E-7x in plots 5.2(a) and 5.2(b).
In the last part of the plots, the coverage of the sample is so low that there is a high num-
ber of regions with 0 reads mapped. When this happens, the likelihood is almost zero, and
the prior probability is bigger. Therefore, the posterior probability of the condition will
only depend on the prior probability. Since unaffected male and unaffected female
are the two conditions with the highest predominance in the population (around 50%),
the program will indicate that these two conditions are the most likely in the sample, no
matter what the actual condition was.
5.3
Negative binomial distribution
The following plots 5.3 represent the posterior probability of a condition for different simu-
lated samples using a Poisson distribution. The conditions of the different simulations are
the ones indicated in the titles and descriptions of the plots. In the first row, we can find
unaffected male and unaffected female, in the second row Klinefelter and Turner,
and in the third row Jacobs and Down (male). For each plot, we are plotting the real
condition in each sample. In the first plot, since we know the condition of that simulation
is unaffected male, I am representing only unaffected male that is the condition of
interest.
16
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:27==
(a) P(Unaffected male|data) for Poisson
distribution. Karyotype 46, XY
(b) P(Unaffected female|data) for Poisson
distribution. Karyotype 46, XX
(c) P(Klinefelter|data) for Poisson distribution
.Karyotype 47, XXY
(d) P(Turner|data) for Poisson distribution.
Karyotype 45, X
(e) P(Jacobs|data) for Poisson distribution.
Karyotype 47, XYY
(f) P(Down male|data) for Poisson distribution.
Karyotype 47, XY,+21
Figure 5.2: Probability of suffering some conditions given the data and following a Poisson
distribution
The x-axis represent the coverage value of the sample, the y-value represents the poste-
rior probability for the condition indicated in the label. The dotted red line represents a
threshold of 0.9 (90% of probability), above this threshold the results are confident and
we can trust the program has identified the correct condition. The posterior distribution
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
17
==PAGE:28==
has been calculated using equation 4.5.
The plots can be divided into three sections. The first section goes from a high coverage
(5x) to a coverage value of around 5E-4x.
In this part, the correct condition has the
highest probability (>99%). 5E-4x is an extremely low coverage for ancient DNA, so even
if it is simulated data we can appreciate the great robustness of the program when using
a Negative Binomial distribution.
In the second part of the plot, there is a transition state where the program starts failing
and the correct condition is not always the one with the highest probability. Therefore,
the probability of the correct condition drops. This happens at a coverage value of 5E-6x
in plots 5.3(c) and 5.3(d), at a coverage value of 5E-4x in plot 5.3(e), at a coverage value
of 5E-5x in plot 5.3(f) and at a coverage value of 9E-7x in plots 5.3(a) and 5.3(b).
In the last part of the plot, the coverage of the sample is so low that there is a high number
of regions with 0 reads mapped. When this happens, the likelihood is almost zero, and
the prior probability is bigger. Therefore, the posterior probability of the condition will
only depend on the prior probability. Since unaffected male and unaffected female
are the two conditions with the highest predominance in the population (around 50%),
the program will indicate that these two conditions are the most likely in the sample, no
matter what the actual condition was.
5.4
Performance of the program on simulations
The percentage of successes has been calculated for the different simulations with different
coverage. I have run 50 replicates per sample and per coverage value and these plots (5.4)
show the percentage of times that the program told that the condition with the highest
probability was the correct condition.
As we can appreciate, the performance of the program when following a Poisson distribu-
tion is slightly better than when following a NBinom distribution. This can be observed
in the case of Klinefelter, where the program shows a higher probability for the correct
condition for a lower coverage in Poisson (5.4(a)) than in Negative Binomial (5.4(b)). For
Poisson, the percentage of correct conditions is 100% up to a coverage of 5E-5x, while
for Nbinom the percentage of correct condition is 100% up to a coverage of 5E-4x. For
Jacobs and Turner conditions we can also see better results in Poisson than in Negative
Binomial. In Jacobs, when the coverage is 5E-5x, the program does not find the cor-
rect condition for NBinom, but it is correct 18% of times with Poisson. In Turner, the
program is correct 100% of the times up to a coverage of 5E-3x in Nbinom and 5E-4x in
Poisson.
By checking the number of times the program is right, for Poisson we can appreciate the
program breaks (the program does not detect the correct condition with a probability
above 90%) when the coverage value falls under 5E-4x, whereas for Negative Binomial the
program breaks earlier, when the coverage falls under 5E-3x.
18
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:29==
(a) P(Unaffected male|data) for Negative
Binomial distribution. Karyotype 46, XY
(b) P(Unaffected female|data) for Negative
Binomial distribution. Karyotype 46, XX
(c) P(Klinefelter|data) for Negative Binomial
distribution.Karyotype 47, XXY
(d) P(Turner|data) for Negative Binomial
distribution. Karyotype 45, X
(e) P(Jacobs|data) for Negative Binomial
distribution. Karyotype 47, XYY
(f) P(Down male|data) for Negative Binomial
distribution. Karyotype 47,XY,+21
Figure 5.3: Probability of suffering some conditions given the data and following a Negative
Binomial distribution
5.5
Performance of the program in time
The average and standard error of the running time of the program has been calculated
for a subset of 12 empirical samples using Poisson distribution and Negative Binomial
distribution. The program was running on a cluster in parallel using 12 nodes. The value
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
19
==PAGE:30==
(a) Percentage of successes for Poisson
distribution
(b) Percentage of successes for Negative
Binomial distribution
Figure 5.4: Percentage indicating the number of replicates where the program has pro-
duced the correct condition having the highest probability
of user time is: 2.348 ± 0.033s and the value for the sys time is 0.770 ± 0.126s.
The
coverage of the samples tested goes from 0.01x to 35x. Therefore we can appreciate that
the coverage values don’t have a great impact on the timing of the program.
5.6
Results for empirical samples
Poisson and Negative binomial distributions have been tested for a subset of 16 empirical
samples. These have been chosen arbitrarily and the subset includes samples ”PNH07”
and ”22994” which have been identified as male with Down syndrome and Klinefelter
syndrome respectively, according to literature. The rest of the samples are identified as
unaffected male and female in their respective papers. Out of 16 samples tested, 2 of
them where showing some kind of autosomic condition (”Oase” and ”SB515A2”) when
using Poisson distribution, but not when using NBinom distribution. For both samples,
the condition with the highest probability was Smith-Magenis in male with probabilities
above 95%. Smith-Magenis is an autosomal condition which is caused by a heterozygous
deletion on part of chromosome 17. It is characterized by some distinctive physical fea-
tures, like coarse facial features, and problems related to development, behaviors, sleep or
obesity [46]. For the rest of the samples, both distributions agree on the sex and condition
of the individual. I have to highlight samples ”PNH07” and ”22994”, ”PNH07” has been
identified as a male with Down syndrome using both distributions, and ”22994” sample
has been identified as Klinefelter syndrome using both distributions. These results will
be discussed later.
5.7
Results according to effective size method
For negative binomial distribution, I have checked the difference between correcting the
effective genome size with a mappability file or using the number of Ns nucleotides. Out
of 14 samples tested using both methods, there was only one case (sample ”prs012WGC”)
where the result differed. When a mappability file was not used, the most likely condition
for that sample was unaffected male; when the mappability file was used, the most likely
condition was Jacobs. In both cases, the probability was above 99%. For the rest of the
cases, the most likely conditions for both methods agreed on sex and condition. These
20
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:31==
results will be discussed in the next section 6.
5.8
Minimal coverage
The samples ”22944” and ”PNH07” have been downsampled in order to get the minimum
coverage value for which the program detects the correct condition with a probability
above 90%. This test has been done using NBinom distribution and a mappability file.
The obtained results are 0.001x for sample ”22994” and 0.003x for sample ”PNH07”. The
downsampling has only been done with these two samples since they are the only sam-
ples that do not belong to unaffected male or unaffected female. As I mentioned
previously, when the coverage is really low, the number of reads is almost zero for all the
regions and the likelihood is also closed to zero. In this situation, the prior probability
is much higher than the likelihood and it will affect the posterior probability. Therefore,
the conditions with the highest probabilities will be the conditions with the highest prior
probability, unaffected male and unaffected female since they have prior probabili-
ties of 50%. To sum up, when the coverage of the sample is really low the program will
always predict unaffected male and unaffected female and if the sample did not show
any kind of chromosomal condition, we cannot know at what coverage value the program
breaks.
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
21
==PAGE:32==
22
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:33==
6
Discussion
In this section I will discuss the results obtained in the previous section 5.
6.1
Poisson and Negative Binomial distributions for
simulations
I have tested the program with simulated data and using Poisson and Negative Binomial
distributions in order to identify the conditions with the highest probabilities and then
minimum coverage for which the program produces confident results. The simulated data
include the following conditions: unaffected male, unaffected female, Klinefelter, Jacobs,
Turner and Down, and the files have been downsampled. As we could see in the plots
5.2 and 5.3 in the Results section (5), the performance of the program is very similar for
both distributions. In those plots, the posterior probability of the correct condition for
each simulated file is represented. When using Poisson distribution, the program obtains
a probability above 90% for the correct condition up to a coverage of 0.000005x (5E-4x)
on average. In Negative Binomial distribution, the program obtains a probability above
90% for the correct condition up to a coverage of 0.00005x (5E-5x) on average. When the
coverage of the simulated data is lower than those thresholds, the results cannot be trusted
and we say the program breaks. In general, we can see that the Poisson distribution has
a better performance for the simulations than Negative Binomial since it keeps a higher
probability for a lower coverage value in the case of Klinefelter and Turner syndromes.
Checking the percentage of success for every distribution, Poisson shows a better perfor-
mance in general, with a higher percentage of correct predictions than Negative Binomial.
Negative Binomial allows flexibility, which is really important in cases like the RNA tran-
scripts, where some genes can be expressed and others not, having as a consequence great
differences for the different regions. However, in the case of the simulations, a simpler
distribution works best.
The posterior probability tends to the prior when the coverage values are under 0.00005x.
For these coverage values, the likelihood of the condition is close to 0, so the posterior
probability will be mostly due to the prior probability. Since the incidence rates of the
chromosomal disorders are much lower than the probability of being an unaffected male
or female (50%), for low coverage values the conditions with the highest probabilities will
be unaffected male, and unaffected male and the program will not be able to identify
anything else.
6.2
Empirical samples
After testing the program with simulated data, we can see that Poisson and Negative
Binomial distributions work fine when calculating the probability of different conditions
in simulated aDNA samples. Even though Poisson works slightly better, both of them
give good results for really low-coverage samples. Therefore, we tested the program with
empirical data to check if the program is still able of predicting the correct condition and
which is the minimum coverage value for which the program gives a probability above
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
23
==PAGE:34==
90% for the correct condition.
The conditions of the empirical samples tested were unaffected males and unaffected fe-
males, but two samples (”PNH07” and ”22994”) present Down syndrome and Klinefelter
syndrome, respectively, according to literature.
The program was tested for empirical
samples using a mappability file. Poisson and Negative Binomial distributions agree in
the sex and condition of most of the individuals. However, for a couple of samples (”Oase”
and ”SB515A2”), Poisson shows an autosome disorder, whereas Negative Binomial indi-
cates the individual is not affected by any condition.
Since the predominance of the
autosomal conditions predicted by Poisson is low, it is highly unlikely that this is the real
condition. I took one of the samples and researched what was the reason for this difference.
For sample ”Oase”, I checked the regions which are affected in Smith-Magenis syn-
drome (chromosome 17, region 16000001-22200000) and checked the observed number of
reads and predicted number of reads for conditions ”Unaffected Male” and ”Smith-
Magenis male” using a Poisson and Negative Binomial distribution. The results can be
found in table 6.1. The regions from chromosome 17 which are not included in the table
was because they were not affected by the deletion in Smith-Magenis syndrome or
they had a mappability score less than 15%.
Table 6.1: Summary table with the observed and predicted number of reads for conditions:
”Unaffected male”and ”Smith-Magenis male” and calculated log-likelihood for the differ-
ent conditions and distributions (Poisson and Negative Binomial). The regions column
indicate the window number for a specific region. Region 2511 corresponds to chromoso-
some (chr) 17 positions 15000001-16000000, region 2512 corresponds to chr 17 positions
16000001-17000000 and region 2514 corresponds chr 17 to positions 18000001-19000000.
Poisson
Unaffected male
Smith Magenis male
Region
Observ reads
Predict reads
Log-likelihood
Predict reads
Log-likelihood
2511
1001
1622
-142.29
811
-25.05
2512
976
1074
-8.98
537
-148.42
2514
828
1433
-155.19
716
-12.52
sum(likelihood)
-306.46
-185.99
Negative Binomial
Unaffected male
Smith Magenis male
Region
Observ reads
Predict reads
Log-likelihood
Predicted reads
Log-likelihood
2511
1001
1622
-8.66
811
-6.87
2512
976
1074
-6.50
537
-8.50
2514
828
1433
-8.76
716
-6.58
sum(likelihood)
-23.92
-21.95
For Poisson and Negative Binomial distributions, the likelihood of Smith-Magenis condi-
tion was higher than for Unaffected Male in that specific region (chromosome 17, region
16000001-22200000). However, this difference is much higher in the case of Poisson dis-
tribution (log-lik(Smith-Magenis)=-185.99, log-lik(male)=-306.46) than for Nbinom dis-
tribution (log-lik(Smith-Magenis)=-23.92, log-lik(male)=-21.95). This happens because
24
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:35==
Poisson assumes the mean equals the variance and it is a more restrictive distribution, so
the probability mass function drops fast when the difference between the observed num-
ber of reads and the predicted number of reads increases. However, for negative binomial
distribution this drop in probability is softened because it allows for variance, and it does
not expect the mean and the variance to be equal, as in the case of Poisson distribution.
That is why Poisson distribution might not be good enough in certain occasions.
For Negative Binomial distribution, the total log-likelihood of Smith-Magenis male for
all the regions is -17086.25 and the total log-likelihood for Unaffected male for all the
regions is -17088.22, the log-likelihood of Smith-Magenis male is still higher than for un-
affected male, but the difference is really small. Since the prior probability of unaffected
male is much higher than the prior probability for Smith-Magenis, when calculating
prior ∗likelihood according to eq.4.7, the higher prior balances with the lower likelihood
and the result is higher for unaffected male, being unaffected male the condition with
the highest probability.
Despite Poisson having a better performance for simulations, this distribution has proved
not to be flexible enough for empirical samples. We have to take into account that the
simulations were too simple, even if they had included the typical characteristics of ancient
DNA they cannot be as complex as real empirical samples. To sum up, Poisson has proved
to be more or less adequate to fit the number of reads in ancient DNA samples, but in
some cases it can fail, and NBinom is a more reliable distribution.
6.3
Using or not a mappability file
After checking which is the most adequate distribution, I need to check if the program
provides the same results when using or not using a mappability file. The mappability bias
can be removed using the effective genome size, and this can be calculated in two different
ways: using the proportion of Ns and using only the uniquely mappable regions. When
the user provides the program with a mappability file with the uniquely mappable regions
of the reference genome, the effective genome size is calculated as indicated in the second
way. In this section, we are checking the different results obtained for empirical files using
Negative Binomial distribution when we provide or not to the program a mappability file.
After testing all 25 empirical files, we can see that for 24 samples the obtained condition
with the highest probability was the same when using a mappability file or not. However,
for ”prs012WGC” sample the condition with the highest probability when not using a map-
pability file is unaffected male with a probability of 99%, and when using a mappability
file is Jacobs syndrome the condition with the highest probability with a probability
of 78%. The ”prs012WGC” sample was identified as a male in its original paper, it was
obtained in Ireland, it is estimated to be from 6500 years BP and it has a coverage value
of 0.07x [47]. Jacobs is a condition that affects 0.1% of newborn males worldwide. It
consists of an additional Y chromosome and it is a condition really diﬀicult to diagnose
because patients usually have few if any, phenotypical anomalies. The most important are
macroorchidism (the size of the testes is twice for age and there is no androgenization),
tall stature, increased distance between eyes and macrocephaly. In general, individuals
with this syndrome suffer from learning disabilities and behavioral disturbances [48].
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
25
==PAGE:36==
I checked the raw number of reads generated in chromosome Y, and I discarded those
regions where there were no uniquely mappable regions. I finally got a small region of 5M
bases where the number of reads where between 200-250, and the number of reads for the
autosomes was in the same range, which means that these regions of the Y chromosome
show 2 copies. When not using a mappability file, the program uses all the regions, in-
cluding those that are not mappable. These regions that are not mappable contain a lower
number of reads and zero reads in some regions, so the likelihood of being unaffected male
is higher than the likelihood of Jacobs syndrome due to these regions in the Y chromosome
with a lower number of reads since for calculating the likelihood of a condition it takes into
account the likelihood of all regions and the regions with low number of reads compensate
for the regions with a high number of reads.
In the original paper where this DNA sample was analyzed [47], the sex of the skele-
tons was identified using the method proposed by Mittnik [49]. This method, called Rx
method, uses the ratio of the alignments to chromosome X to the alignments to autosomes
and normalized against the overall number of alignments to the reference genome, which
is not a robust method to detect sex in ancient samples since it is not able to handle well
samples with a very reduced number of reads (a few hundred). As mentioned previously,
the number of reads in autosomes and chromosome X was in the range of 300-200, so it is
expected the Rx method fails with this sample and it is not able to detect the real condition.
Since the traits of Jacobs condition are diﬀicult to diagnose and the Rx method is not
robust enough to detect the condition in really low coverage samples, it is diﬀicult to
determine which is the correct condition for sample ”prs012WGC”. The only clear infor-
mation is that is a male.
6.4
Minimal coverage
The minimal coverage of the sample for which the program is correct is extremely low,
lower than the usual ancient DNA coverage. Out of all the empirical samples tested, the
lowest coverage found was 0.03, 10 times higher than the minimum coverage the program
can reach. Therefore, we can conclude the program works fine with low-coverage DNA
samples. Also, it is robust against problems related to fragmentation and contamination
since the program filters out duplicated reads, and we only consider alignments with a
mapping quality higher than 35.
26
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:37==
7
Conclusion
When running the program with simulations, we can see that the Poisson distribution
has a better performance than when using a Negative Binomial distribution since it can
predict the correct condition with a probability above 90% for samples with lower cov-
erage. The minimum coverage value for simulations is really low for both distributions,
around 5E-4x. For empirical samples, the minimum coverage value obtained is higher,
around 0.001x, but it is still really low for ancient DNA. The empirical samples tested in
the program have different coverage, and origins and the quality changes a lot, but still,
the program has shown to be robust and provides confident results.
However, the program shows some weaknesses. One of them is the lack of representation of
the different genetic disorders. For example, as mentioned previously, Klinefelter syn-
drome might be caused by an additional X chromosome, but there are also other variants
and mosaicisms. Including all the variants can be diﬀicult, since the predominance and
patterns are not totally known.
Also, the program is not able to detect or remove contamination from modern human
DNA, which could cause the program to fail since the fragments from modern human
DNA would align to the reference genome file and cause overexpression of the coverage
in certain regions. Therefore, the user should remove this possible contamination as a
previous step before using the program.
Literature research has not provided a lot of information about methods to detect genetic
conditions in low-coverage DNA. It exists some programs which analyze low-coverage
DNA, but they mainly focus on SNPs, and not a lot use structural variations, like the
number of reads. The existing programs using the number of reads for low-coverage DNA
show a good performance, so we will follow a similar strategy. As we have seen in this
report, Bayesian likelihood and the number of reads mapped to a genome are useful for
calculating probabilities in low-coverage DNA, like ancient DNA. The most common dis-
tributions used for working with the number of reads in scRNA-seq have proved to be
suitable also with ancient DNA reads, being Negative Binomial slightly better than Pois-
son due to its flexibility. The confidence in the results is really high, obtaining the correct
condition with a probability above 99% up to a coverage value of 0.001x, which is a really
low value for ancient DNA.
To sum up, even though there could be some minor improvements, the program has shown
to be accurate and robust, and a new alternative for sex and genetics condition detection
in ancient DNA samples. It can be applied to modern DNA too for the detection of dis-
eases like cancer in low-coverage DNA or one strategy to reduce the time and money costs
of sequencing, allowing for a wider range of sequences and a more inclusive investigation
in the future.
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
27
==PAGE:38==
28
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
[1]
Stéphane Peyrégne and Kay Prüfer. “Present-Day DNA Contamination in Ancient
DNA Datasets”. IN: Bioessays 42.9 (2020).
[2]
Ludovic Orlando, Robin Allaby, Pontus Skoglund, Clio Der Sarkissian, Philipp W
Stockhammer, María C Ávila-Arcos, Qiaomei Fu, Johannes Krause, Eske Willerslev
and Anne C Stone. “Ancient DNA analysis”. IN: Nature Reviews Methods Primers
1.1 (2021), pages 1–26.
[3]
Anders J Hansen, David L Mitchell, Carsten Wiuf, Lakshmi Paniker, Tina B Brand,
Jonas Binladen, David A Gilichinsky, Regin Rønn and Eske Willerslev. “Crosslinks
rather than strand breaks determine access to ancient DNA sequences from frozen
sediments”. IN: Genetics 173.2 (2006), pages 1175–1179.
[4]
Stéphane Peyrégne and Benjamin M Peter. “AuthentiCT: a model of ancient DNA
damage to estimate the proportion of present-day DNA contamination”. IN: Genome
biology 21.1 (2020), pages 1–16.
[5]
Matthew Parks and David Lambert. “Impacts of low coverage depths and post-
mortem DNA damage on variant calling: a simulation study”. IN: BMC genomics
16.1 (2015), pages 1–12.
[6]
Ruoyun Hui, Eugenia D’Atanasio, Lara M Cassidy, Christiana L Scheib and Toomas
Kivisild. “Evaluating genotype imputation pipeline for ultra-low coverage ancient
genomes”. IN: Scientific reports 10.1 (2020).
[7]
David Skuse, Frida Printzlau and Jeanne Wolstencroft. “Sex chromosome aneuploi-
dies”. IN: Handbook of clinical neurology 147 (2018), pages 355–376.
[8]
Francisco Álvarez-Nava and Roberto Lanes. “Epigenetics in Turner syndrome”. IN:
Clinical Epigenetics 10.1 (2018), pages 1–20.
[9]
Claus H Gravholt, Mette H Viuff, Sara Brun, Kirstine Stochholm and Niels H An-
dersen. “Turner syndrome: mechanisms and management”. IN: Nature Reviews En-
docrinology 15.10 (2019), pages 601–614.
[10]
Michael Zitzmann, Lise Aksglaede, Giovanni Corona, Andrea M Isidori, Anders
Juul, Guy T’Sjoen, Sabine Kliesch, Kathleen D’Hauwers, Jorma Toppari and Jolanta
Słowikowska-Hilczer. “European academy of andrology guidelines on Klinefelter syn-
drome endorsing organization: European Society of Endocrinology”. IN: Andrology
9.1 (2021), pages 145–167.
[11]
Miguel W Mandoki and Gayla S Sumner. “Klinefelter syndrome: the need for early
identification and treatment”. IN: Clinical pediatrics 30.3 (1991), pages 161–164.
[12]
Anne M Wikström and Leo Dunkel. “Klinefelter syndrome”. IN: Best practice &
research clinical endocrinology & metabolism 25.2 (2011), pages 239–250.
[13]
Nicole R Tartaglia, Susan Howell, Ashley Sutherland, Rebecca Wilson and Lennie
Wilson. “A review of trisomy X (47, XXX)”. IN: Orphanet journal of rare diseases
5.1 (2010), pages 1–9.
[14]
Elisabeth Pain. After more than 50 years, a dispute over Down Syndrome discovery.
2014.
[15]
Siyun Liu, Yuan Jiang and Tao Yu. “Modelling RNA-Seq data with a zero-inflated
mixture Poisson linear model”. IN: Genetic epidemiology 43.7 (2019), pages 786–799.
[16]
Ruochen Jiang, Tianyi Sun, Dongyuan Song and Jingyi Jessica Li. “Statistics or
biology: the zero-inflation controversy about scRNA-seq data”. IN: Genome biology
23.1 (2022), pages 1–24.
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
29
==PAGE:40==
[17]
Xavier Roca-Rada, Sofia Tereso, Adam B Rohrlach, André Brito, Matthew P Williams,
Cláudia Umbelino, Francisco Curate, Ira W Deveson, Yassine Souilmi and António
Amorim. “A 1000-year-old case of Klinefelter’s syndrome diagnosed by integrating
morphology, osteology, and genetics”. IN: The Lancet 400.10353 (2022), pages 691–
692.
[18]
Arda Söylev, Sevim Seda Çokoglu, Dilek Koptekin, Can Alkan and Mehmet Somel.
“CONGA: Copy number variation genotyping in ancient genomes and low-coverage
sequencing data”. IN: PLOS Computational Biology 18.12 (2022).
[19]
Xian Fan, Mohammadamin Edrisi, Nicholas Navin and Luay Nakhleh. “Methods for
Copy Number Aberration Detection from Single-cell DNA Sequencing Data”. IN:
bioRxiv (2019).
[20]
Samuele Soraggi, Johanna Rhodes, Isin Altinkaya, Oliver Tarrant, François Balloux,
Matthew C Fisher and Matteo Fumagalli. “HMMploidy: inference of ploidy levels
from short-read sequencing data”. IN: Peer Community Journal 2 (2022).
[21]
Frederika A Kaestle and K Ann Horsburgh. “Ancient DNA in anthropology: meth-
ods, applications, and ethics”. IN: American Journal of Physical Anthropology: The
Oﬀicial Publication of the American Association of Physical Anthropologists 119.S35
(2002), pages 92–130.
[22]
Devika Ganesamoorthy, Alan James Robertson, Wenhan Chen, Michael B Hall,
Minh Duc Cao, Kaltin Ferguson, Sunil R Lakhani, Katia Nones, Peter T Simpson
and Lachlan JM Coin. “Whole genome deep sequencing analysis of cell-free DNA in
samples with low tumour content”. IN: BMC cancer 22.1 (2022), pages 1–13.
[23]
Changheng Zhao, Jun Teng, Xinhao Zhang, Dan Wang, Xinyi Zhang, Shiyin Li, Xin
Jiang, Haijing Li, Chao Ning and Qin Zhang. “Towards a Cost-Effective Implemen-
tation of Genomic Prediction Based on Low Coverage Whole Genome Sequencing
in Dezhou Donkey”. IN: Frontiers in Genetics 12 (2021).
[24]
Yun Li, Carlo Sidore, Hyun Min Kang, Michael Boehnke and Gonçalo R Abeca-
sis. “Low-coverage sequencing: implications for design of complex trait association
studies”. IN: Genome research 21.6 (2011), pages 940–951.
[25]
Gabriel Renaud, Kristian Hanghøj, Eske Willerslev and Ludovic Orlando. “gargam-
mel: a sequence simulator for ancient DNA”. IN: Bioinformatics 33.4 (2017), pages 577–
579.
[26]
Maïté Rivollat, Dominique Castex, Laurent Hauret and Anne-marie Tillier. “An-
cient Down syndrome: An osteological case from Saint-Jean-des-Vignes, northeast-
ern France, from the 5–6th century AD”. IN: International Journal of Paleopathology
7 (2014), pages 8–14.
[27]
Lara M Cassidy, Ros Ó Maoldúin, Thomas Kador, Ann Lynch, Carleton Jones,
Peter C Woodman, Eileen Murphy, Greer Ramsey, Marion Dowd and Alice Noonan.
“A dynastic elite in monumental Neolithic society”. IN: Nature 582.7812 (2020),
pages 384–388.
[28]
1000 Genomes Project Consortium. “A global reference for human genetic variation”.
IN: Nature 526.7571 (2015), page 68.
[29]
Thomas Derrien, Jordi Estellé, Santiago Marco Sola, David G Knowles, Emanuele
Raineri, Roderic Guigó and Paolo Ribeca. “Fast computation and applications of
genome mappability”. IN: PloS one 7.1 (2012).
[30]
Furey TS Roskin KM Pringle TH Zahler AM Haussler D Kent WJ Sugnet CW. “The
human genome browser at UCSC”. IN: Genome Res. 12.6 (2002), pages 996–1006.
[31]
Milan Malinsky, Hannes Svardal, Alexandra M Tyers, Eric A Miska, Martin J Gen-
ner, George F Turner and Richard Durbin. “Whole-genome sequences of Malawi
30
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:41==
cichlids reveal multiple radiations interconnected by gene flow”. IN: Nature ecology
& evolution 2.12 (2018), pages 1940–1955.
[32]
Daniel Aird, Michael G Ross, Wei-Sheng Chen, Maxwell Danielsson, Timothy Fen-
nell, Carsten Russ, David B Jaffe, Chad Nusbaum and Andreas Gnirke. “Analyz-
ing and minimizing PCR amplification bias in Illumina sequencing libraries”. IN:
Genome biology 12.2 (2011), pages 1–14.
[33]
Tim Holm Jakobsen, Martin Asser Hansen, Peter Østrup Jensen, Lars Hansen, Leise
Riber, April Cockburn, Mette Kolpen, Christine Rønne Hansen, Winnie Ridderberg
and Steffen Eickhardt. “Complete genome sequence of the cystic fibrosis pathogen
Achromobacter xylosoxidans NH44784-1996 complies with important pathogenic
phenotypes”. IN: PloS one 8.7 (2013).
[34]
Yuval Benjamini and Terence P Speed. “Summarizing and correcting the GC content
bias in high-throughput sequencing”. IN: Nucleic acids research 40.10 (2012).
[35]
N Alan Heckert, James J Filliben, C M Croarkin, B Hembree, William F Guthrie, P
Tobias and J Prinz. “Handbook 151: NIST/SEMATECH e-handbook of statistical
methods”. IN: (2002).
[36]
Heng Li. “Tabix: fast retrieval of sequence features from generic TAB-delimited files”.
IN: Bioinformatics 27.5 (2011), pages 718–719.
[37]
Alex Etz. Understanding Bayes: A Look at the Likelihood — alexanderetz.com. https:
//alexanderetz.com/2015/04/15/understanding- bayes- a- look- at- the- likelihood/.
[Accessed 08-Jan-2023]. 2015.
[38]
Rhodes college. naive-bayes-log-probs.pdf. https : / / www . cs . rhodes . edu / ~kirlinp /
courses/ai/f18/projects/proj3/naive-bayes-log-probs.pdf. (Accessed on 01/09/2023).
[39]
Xu Ren and Pei-Fen Kuan. “Negative binomial additive model for RNA-Seq data
analysis”. IN: BMC bioinformatics 21 (2020), pages 1–15.
[40]
Simon Anders and Wolfgang Huber. “Differential expression analysis for sequence
count data”. IN: Nature Precedings (2010), pages 1–1.
[41]
Wikipedia. Poisson distribution — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. http://en.
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Poisson%20distribution&oldid=1128606467. [Online;
accessed 08-January-2023]. 2023.
[42]
Wikipedia. Negative binomial distribution — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. http:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Negative%20binomial%20distribution&oldid=
1131962523. [Online; accessed 08-January-2023]. 2023.
[43]
Steven P. Millard. EnvStats: An R Package for Environmental Statistics. New York:
Springer, 2013. isbn: 978-1-4614-8455-4.
[44]
Antonio Ribeiro, Agnieszka Golicz, Christine Anne Hackett, Iain Milne, Gordon
Stephen, David Marshall, Andrew J Flavell and Micha Bayer. “An investigation of
causes of false positive single nucleotide polymorphisms using simulated reads from
a small eukaryote genome”. IN: BMC bioinformatics 16.1 (2015), pages 1–16.
[45]
Inigo Olalde, Morten E Allentoft, Federico Sánchez-Quinto, Gabriel Santpere, Charleston
WK Chiang, Michael DeGiorgio, Javier Prado-Martinez, Juan Antonio Rodriguez,
Simon Rasmussen and Javier Quilez. “Derived immune and ancestral pigmenta-
tion alleles in a 7,000-year-old Mesolithic European”. IN: Nature 507.7491 (2014),
pages 225–228.
[46]
Ann CM Smith and Andrea L Gropman. “Smith–Magenis Syndrome”. IN: Cassidy
and Allanson’s Management of Genetic Syndromes (2021), pages 863–893.
[47]
Federico Sánchez-Quinto, Helena Malmström, Magdalena Fraser, Linus Girdland-
Flink, Emma M Svensson, Luciana G Simões, Robert George, Nina Hollfelder, Göran
Burenhult and Gordon Noble. “Megalithic tombs in western and northern Neolithic
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
31
==PAGE:42==
Europe were linked to a kindred society”. IN: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 116.19 (2019), pages 9469–9474.
[48]
Brittany Sood and Roselyn W Clemente Fuentes. “Jacobs Syndrome”. IN: StatPearls
[Internet]. StatPearls Publishing, 2021.
[49]
Alissa Mittnik, Chuan-Chao Wang, Jiří Svoboda and Johannes Krause. “A molecular
approach to the sexing of the triple burial at the Upper Paleolithic Site of Dolní
Věstonice”. IN: PloS one 11.10 (2016).
[50]
Qiaomei Fu, Mateja Hajdinjak, Oana Teodora Moldovan, Silviu Constantin, Swapan
Mallick, Pontus Skoglund, Nick Patterson, Nadin Rohland, Iosif Lazaridis and Birgit
Nickel. “An early modern human from Romania with a recent Neanderthal ancestor”.
IN: Nature 524.7564 (2015), pages 216–219.
32
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:43==
A
Appendix
A.1
Workflow of the program
Schematic representation of the program when using a Negative Binomial distribution.
Figure A.1: Workflow of the program using Negative Binomial distribution.
For the Poisson distribution the program follows a similar path with the following differ-
ences:
• The probability of success is not calculated.
• The number of successess is not calculated.
• The equation for the pmf uses the observed number of reads and the predicted
number of reads, instead of the observed number of reads, the probability of success
and the number of successes.
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
33
==PAGE:44==
A.2
Pipeline for obtaining mappability score
This command takes the mappability file and using windows of 1Mb and a size of 35bp, it
calculates the mappability score of every regions. This is an example for the first region
of the first chromosome.
1
tabix mappability_file 1:1-1000000 | awk '!(NR%2) if ($3-$2$ >= 35)' {print
int(($3-$2$)/35)} | awk '{s+=$1$} END {print (s*35)/1000000}' >>
map_score_file
Listing A.1: Command to calculate the mappability score when using a mappabilty file
for windows of 1Mb and size of 35bp
34
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:45==
A.3
Extract of config file
In this table you can find an extract of the configuration file used for the program. It
includes the information about the conditions which have been mentioned and/or plotted
in the report.
Table A.1: Extract of the configuration file found in the GitHub repository. Smith-Magenis
syndrome shows a deletion in chromosome 17, regions 16000001-22200000.
Name of the condition
Karyotype
Region affected
Prior probability
Unaffected male
46, XY
No region affected
0.5
Unaffected female
46, XY
No region affected
0.5
Klinefleter
47, XXY
Chr X0
0.00153846153
Turner
45, X
Chr X
0.0004
Jacobs
47, XYY
Chr Y
0.001
Down
47, XY + 21
Chr 21
0.001
Smith Magenis
-
Chr 17
0.00005
This is a fragment of the configuration file to check the format of the conditions.
1
autosomes: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
2
sex: X Y
3
unaffectedfemale: X X 0.5
4
unaffectedmale: X Y 0.5
5
#chr abnormalities autosomes
6
#trisomy
7
Down: a 21D 0.001
#1 duplication of
chr21, 1/1000 wikipedia
8
Edwards: a 18D 0.0002
#1 duplication of chr
18 1/5000 wikipedia , maybe add parts of chr18
9
Patau: a 13D
0.00005
#1 duplication of chr
13, 1/20000 wikipedia
10
Cat_eye: a 22D 0.0000045045
# duplication of chr
22, incidence 1 in 74,000 (wikipedia , 3 cases so divided by 3)
11
Cat_eye_shortarm: a 22:1-15062592D 0.0000045045
# duplication short
arm
12
Cat_eye_longarm: a 22:15062592-51304566D 0.0000045045 # duplication long
arm
13
#chr abnormalities sex chr
14
klinefelter: M XD 0.00153846153
# duplication of the
X in males, incidence 1/650
wikipedia
15
Turner: F Xd 0.0004
# deletion of X,
1/2500 wikipedia
16
XXX: F XD 0.001
# duplication of X,
incidence 1/1000 wikipedia
17
XXYY: M XD YD 0.00003333333
# duplication of X
and Y in males, incidence 1/30000 wikipedia
Listing A.2: Fragment of text from config file.
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
35
==PAGE:46==
A.4
Plots generated by the program
The program generates 3 files containing the following plots. The first plot shows the GC
bias correction. The black dots represent the observed data and the red line represents
the created model.
The second plot shows the estimated p values according to the GC percentage when the
number of successes (r) is fixed and takes a value of 5. The range of the p is really narrow,
and it can be assume p has the same value.
The third graphic shows the mean and variance for the different GC bins.
The fourth plot shows the comparison between the observed number of reads (blue points)
and the predicted number of reads (read lines).
Figure A.2: LOESS regression for GC bias correction in empirical sample ”Labrana”.
space
space
space
space
space
space
space
space
space
36
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:47==
Figure A.3: Plot showing the variation in p estimated when r is fixed for empirical sample
”PRS012WGC”.
Figure A.4: Predicted number of reads (lambda) and variance for different GC bins for
empirical sample ”PRS012WGC”.
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure A.5: Comparison between the observed and predicted number of reads for empirical
sample ”PRS012WGC” and the condition male with Down syndrome. The blue points
represent the observed number of reads and the read lines represent the predicted number
of reads. The program will produce one pdf file containing one plot per condition, so the
program can check the most likely conditions in a visual way.
38
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
==PAGE:49==
A.5
Additional information about empirical files
Information about important empirical files:
• Oase: this sample was collected in Peştera cu Oase, Romania. The DNA is taken
from a 37,000-42,000-year-old modern human and it belongs to a male. The Oase
sample is composed of tow datasets, Oase1 and Oase2. The first one is taken from
a mandible and Oase2 is taken from a cranium. The coverage of the sampe is low
[50]. It is not known to which dataset this information belongs.
• 22994: this sample was collected in Torre Velha, Portugal. The DNA is taken from
a person with Klinefelter syndrome and it is dated to be from 1000BP. The coverage
is very low, 0.03x [17].
• PNH07: this sample was collected in Ireland. It belongs to a male with Down
syndrome with a estimated date of 5500BP and it has an average coverage of 1.38x
[27]
• PRS012WGC: this sample was collected in Ireland. It belongs to a male, it is
estimated to be from 6500 years BP and it has a coverage value of 0.07x [47].
Evaluating chromosomal disorders in low coverage samples
39
==PAGE:50==
Ancient DNA is a great source of information to learn about the culture in the past and the history of
humanity. One of the main unresolved questions is the frequency of individuals with genetic disorders
and their role in society. This lack of information is mainly due to two factors. First, the diagnosis
of these genetic conditions using only morphological data is diﬀicult due to the variability of the
symptoms. Second is the nature of the ancient DNA, which shows fragmentation, contamination,
and damage patterns.
In this project, we develop a program able to predict the probability of
genetic conditions in ancient individuals using Bayesian probability and modeling the number of
reads mapped to a reference genome. The results obtained prove this is the most robust method to
date to detect genetic conditions in ancient DNA samples.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kemitorvet, Building 204
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
http://www.healthtech.dtu.dk
