==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Generating Secure Smart Contract Code
From Process Diagrams
Georg Cornelius Lorentzen Thomassen (s134545)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Blockchain technology provides transparency, immutability, and a tamper-proof
mechanism to execute inter-organization business processes. These features are
desirable if mutually untrusted parties are involved in a process or to introduce
transparency in governmental business processes where fraud or corruption tends
to be a problem. Existing approaches based on model-driven engineering already
exist for automatic translation of business processes to smart contracts for a
specific blockchain. In these approaches, security has been a second-class citizen,
and only in recent versions security aspects like access control has been introduced.
This thesis aims to challenge the current state of the art regarding security. It
proposes a framework based on SecBPMN2BC, implementing security aspects
from the Reference Model on Information Assurance and Security. The proposed
framework also allows for targeting different blockchains in the Model-to-Text
translation from business processes to smart contracts to exploit the features
the different blockchains offer. As some security requirements conflict with the
immutable nature of the blockchain, an architecture is proposed. The architecture
consists of a blockchain component, an off-chain component, and a web portal
for interacting with and orchestrating the running business process. The result is
evaluated by comparison with current state-of-the-art and by empirical validation
by interviewing a subject with a strong background in BPMN modeling. The
thesis concludes that it is possible to implement a blockchain-agnostic framework
by utilizing an adapter implementation approach and that it is possible to exploit
the features of a blockchain to enforce security requirements to a satisfactory
degree.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a M.Sc degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
The thesis was developed during the period between August 2022 and March
2023 with an assigned workload of 35 ECTS credits.
The thesis was conducted under the supervision of Giovanni Meroni, Assistant
Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at DTU
Compute with co-supervision from Andrea Burattin, Associate Professor and
Nicola Dragoni, Professer and Head of Section, Department of Applied Mathe-
matics and Computer Science at DTU Compute
Kongens Lyngby, March 15, 2023
Georg Cornelius Lorentzen Thomassen (s134545)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor, Giovanni Meroni, my supervisor,
for guidance and invaluable help during my project and our weekly meetings.
Second I would like to thank the company Staun&Stender for their willingness
to spare and answer questions on the proposed framework and thus contributing
to the empirical validation of my work.
I would also like to thank my family and girlfriend for their neverending help and
support during challenging times when my time has been scarce. Their support
means everything.
==PAGE:6==
Acronyms
BC
Blockchain
BFT
Byzantine Fault Tolerance
BPM
Business Process Management
BPMN Business Process Model Notation
BPMS
Business Process Management System
BoD
Binding of Duties
ETH
Ether
M2M
Model-to-Model
M2T
Model-to-Text
PBFT
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
PoW
Proof-of-Work
Pos
Proof-of-Stake
RBAC Role-Based Access Control
RMIAS Reference Model on Information Assurance and Security
RQ
Research Question
SoD
Separation of Duties
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Acronyms
iv
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theoretical Background
7
2.1
Blockchains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Consensus algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Smart Contracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.3
Public blockchains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.4
Ethereum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.5
Private blockchains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.6
Hyperledger Fabric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Business Process Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.1
BPMN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.2
SecBPMN2BC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Related Work
29
3.1
Caterpillar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Lorikeet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Proposed framework and implementation
35
4.1
Framework Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.1
Mapping SecBPMN2BC elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
4.2.2
Setup of architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Evaluation
51
6
Conclusion and future work
55
6.0.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The topic of business processes is well known and explored in depth, thus making
a lot of companies use the tools surrounding business processes to navigate and
communicate processes or chains of actions and tasks, often involving multiple
participants, be it multiple persons or different organizations. Fraud, however,
is an everlasting threat to organizations and their counterpart, regardless if it is
a Citizen, Employee, or any other actor. Bribery, for example, has been one of
the issues because of the lack of transparency in said processes. As not every
part of the process is visible to all parties involved, fraud or malicious actions are
possible to carry out. This is why smart contracts can greatly help as business
processes often can be represented as a smart contract [KMS23].
We know for a fact that scandals involving fraud, like bribery, especially in gov-
ernmental or political settings, can and will lead to distrust between citizens and
the government and lower their regard for contributing politicians and govern-
ment leaders [BK04]. This is why the issue must be addressed for the greater
good. As blockchains have gained much popularity over the past few years, this
thesis wants to explore the possibility of utilizing the technology and its benefits
even though the technology has had its fair share of controversy and negative
press coverage [Mar21]. The technology, however, is also praised by many. In
a report from September 2025 by World Economic Forum, they list it as one
of six mega trends and state that ”The blockchain, an emerging technology, re-
places the need for third-party institutions to provide trust for financial, contract
and voting activities.” [For15]. The book Blockchain Technology - From Theory to
Practice[Tan22] also describe blockchains as: ”.. a modern technology that brings
trust and reliability to various business operations”. Thus a recurring emphasize
on trust. These statements confirm the idea of using the technology to provide
trust and transparency in different sectors. The World Economic Forum report
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
later states that 10% of the gross domestic market will use blockchain technology
by the end of 2025, indicating that blockchain technology has come to stay.
All the enthusiasm surrounding blockchain technology began with Bitcoin, the
first cryptographic currency utilizing blockchain technology. It was first described
in Satoshi Nakamotos whitepaper [Nak08]. The paper introduced the concept of
a decentralized, peer-to-peer electronic payment system that would allow for se-
cure and anonymous transactions without the need for intermediaries such as
banks but instead relies on a network of nodes that maintain a shared ledger of
transactions. The paper highlights the security through the use of cryptography
and the blockchain, which provides a tamper-proof record of all transactions. Fur-
thermore, the use of public keys ensures the anonymity of users [War21]. Several
other blockchains has since emerged, also called second-generation blockchains
[Pau+19], like Ethereum and Hyperledger, all trying to tackle and take on dif-
ferent shortcomings of the others. The founder of Ethereum, Vitalik Buterin,
described, in his whitepaper on Ethereum [But14], how his blockchain built on
the idea and foundation laid by the Bitcoin blockchain, however also including
a full-fledged Turing-complete programming language to support encoding arbi-
trary state transition functions, for use cases like cryptographic currencies, smart
properties, non-fungible tokens and ”many others that we have not yet imag-
ined”. Bitcoin and Ethereum are considered public blockchains, meaning that
the networks are open to anyone wanting to participate. Anyone with the nec-
essary hardware and software can become a miner or validator on the network.
This permissionless model provides a level of decentralization that enhances trans-
parency, security, and resistance to censorship. Hyperledger, a private blockchain,
as stated in their whitepaper [Fou18], is deployed on a private network with re-
strictions and requires permission from a central authority to participate. In a
private blockchain, the network is controlled by a group of pre-approved nodes,
and transactions are only visible to those who have been granted access to the
network but are still Turing-complete. This is where things get interesting as this
allows for the implementation of arbitrary programs, also called smart contracts,
that can help prevent fraud in business processes as the programs can use the
shared ledger, allowing for transparency for one thing.
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) is a widely accepted and stan-
dardized graphical notation for business process modeling. BPMN provides a
visual representation of a process, allowing outsiders to understand the workflow
better and facilitating communication between different departments and teams
within an organization. BPMN is a modeling language and a methodology for
managing and improving business processes. It allows organizations to identify
ineﬀiciencies and bottlenecks in their processes and to implement improvements.
==PAGE:11==
1 Introduction
3
BPMN models can be used to analyze, optimize, and redesign business processes,
resulting in increased eﬀiciency, productivity, and profitability [WAP14; OMG14].
To support the demand for secure business processes, several extensions to the
BPMN specification have been proposed i.e. SecBPMN in [SDG15], the updated
version SecBPMN2 [SPG16] or SecureBPMN in [Bru+12]. New research on the
area is then combining the secure extension of BPMN and the secure nature of
blockchains with SecBPMN2BC in [KMS23]
As implementing these business processes as smart contracts manually is not only
time-consuming but also prone to errors [Del+16; KMS23], this thesis aims at
designing a framework for use in an automated way. The focus will first be on
designing a blockchain-agnostic version of the framework in order to be able to
target multiple blockchains. With a framework able to automatically generate
smart contract code, the risk of faulty implementation will drastically decrease,
thus securing the end-user of the framework that the security requirements for
their business processes are in place and implemented correctly. Not only would
this save companies already trying to manually implement such business processes
as smart contracts a lot of money by decreasing the implementation time. It
would also allow companies not daring to try to implement such smart contracts
the tools to do so safely and cheaply. As business processes is an well-established
way to formalize the agreement between participants, transforming the business
process to smart contract, would allow for utilizing and exploiting the features
of a blockchain to enforce such agreements.
Implementing the framework on
specific blockchains makes sense as proof of work. Both a public and a private
blockchain with the benefits and drawbacks each one provides regarding security
requirements.
This paper will therefore try to answer the research questions :
RQ1: Can we make the framework blockchain agnostic?
RQ1.1: Are there any common elements of different blockchains?
RQ1.2: Can we represent an abstract blockchain with a modeling language?
By answering if possible to make the framework blockchain agnostic, it would be
possible to swap the choice of blockchain to another and exploiting the features
that specific blockchain offers, e.g., the differences between a public and private
blockchain, or even between different kinds of public and private blockchains. By
finding out if a subset of elements of different blockchains are the same it allows
for less specific implementation details when generating smart contracts from the
business processes for the different blockchains.
RQ2: Can smart contract code enforce security requirements?
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
RQ2.1: Can we identify patterns needed in order to enforce specific security
constraints?
RQ2.2: Is it possible to combine multiple patterns to support the enforcement?
By researching different security requirements to apply for inter-organizational
business processes to make security an important aspect in an agreement be-
tween different participants, the thesis aims to answer if we can enforce those
requirements with a smart contract and utilize the blockchain to enforce them.
RQ3: Can we generate blockchain-specific implementations from process mod-
els?
RQ3.1: What parts of the process models can be put on-chain and what should
be off-chain?
RQ3.2: Is it possible to implement security requirements on a blockchain
As the thesis aims to provide a blockchain agnostic framework, it will explore
if it possible to target a blockchain of choice given the same business process
model. It might be required to put some of the elements on the blockchain and
some of the elements on an off-chain component in order to enforce and support
the security requirements. It is needed to explore if implementing the security
requirements is doable and makes sense on a blockchain.
1.1
Thesis Objectives
The thesis aims to design a framework that supports the security requirements
of enterprise systems, expressed as business processes. The framework should
automatically generate blockchain-agnostic code, and challenge the current state-
of-the-art within the field of automatic code generation from business processes.
Not only by supporting security requirements expressed by the secure BPMN
extensions, but also by targeting multiple blockchains, and even allow for end
users to support any arbitrary blockchain of choice. This will in turn help the
next generation of applications address lack-of-trust issues in inter-organizational
businesses. With this and the short introductory text above in mind, the thesis
will present the following objectives:
• A throughout problem analysis to better understand blockchain technology,
Business Process Management, and BPMN.
• A thorough study on the interactions between blockchains and business
processes with security requirements.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Thesis Objectives
5
• A framework for transforming secure BPMN diagrams to on-chain and off-
chain code, including a mapping of the different elements to their corre-
sponding abstract representation.
• A proof-of-work platform that implements the proposed framework, includ-
ing an off-chain component and several on-chains components for public
and private blockchains.
• At last, we will evaluate the produced framework by empirically validating
the implemented platform, and comparing it to the current state-of-the-
art in the field of generating smart contract program code from BPMN
diagrams.
==PAGE:14==
6
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical
Background
2.1
Blockchains
Blockchain technology was popularized by Nakamotos whitepaper on Bitcoin in
2008 [Nak08] but is actually a relatively old technology. In 1982 David Chaum
proposed a blockchain-like protocol in [Cha79] and a cryptographically secure
chain of blocks was described in 1991 in [HS91]. Blockchain can be defined as a
peer-to-peer (P2P) network, which consists of multiple numbers of nodes linked
with each other in a distributed manner, it can be used for carrying out trans-
actions (TXs) and storing records securely using digital signatures, distributed
ledger technology, and cryptography [Tan22]. As stated in the introduction, sev-
eral industries can benefit from using blockchain technology, which is already seen
in industries like banking, healthcare, and insurance [Hat+19; Han21; Tan22].
A P2P network is a distributed system that is becoming increasingly attractive as
the upsurge in technology has led to an increased need for computers to commu-
nicate and connect through a high-speed network, requiring a distributed system.
Distributed system, is a system in which independent computers at different sites
communicate and coordinate their work to appear as a single entity to the end
user, depicted in Figure 2.1. The nodes of the distributed system may be com-
puters, containers, virtual machines, or physical servers, which interact with each
other through message passing. The purpose of a distributed system is to make
resources available to all nodes and achieve transparency by presenting multiple
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Theoretical Background
nodes in front of their users while hiding their details of location, access, migra-
tion, etc. The system abstracts away its internal workings from the users, as
they do not require that knowledge to use it. Distributed systems fundamentally
differ from centralized systems, where a central authority controls all nodes; in
distributed systems, everyone collectively executes a job/process.
Based on their architecture, distributed systems can be categorized into four cate-
gories: client-server architecture, three-tier, n-tier, and peer-to-peer architecture.
Distributed systems offer several benefits, such as scalability, where more nodes
can be added as required, enhancing the system’s performance. It also protects
the system against a single point of failure, as the failure of any node does not
affect the entire system’s performance. However, implementing distributed sys-
tems poses several challenges, including security concerns, especially in public
networks where an intruder can attack to leak confidential information.
The
second challenge is coordination between nodes, as the simultaneous transfer of
data between nodes can overburden the system and cause data loss in the net-
work without proper coordination. Therefore, a system that can overcome these
security issues and handle many nodes interacting with each other in the system
without any conflict and data loss is necessary. [Tan22; Cou11; Sha+21]
Figure 2.1: A distributed system. Figure adapted from Fig 1.1. in [Tan22] .
A distributed system may feature a central authority or coordinating node with
greater control and decision-making capabilities than other nodes. In a decen-
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Blockchains
9
tralized system, on the other hand, decision-making and control are dispersed
throughout all nodes. Moreover, users can enter or exit the system anytime in
an open-channel decentralized system. Despite this flexibility, security concerns
persist, as malicious attackers can penetrate the system and manipulate mes-
sages sent to others.
Consequently, resolving security concerns in distributed
and decentralized systems is imperative. To this end, blockchain technology has
emerged as a favored approach for providing security to network users [Tan22;
Sha+21].
Blockchain, being a decentralized, distributed system, tries to overcome these
above-mentioned shortcomings by operating as a network with an open ledger
that records all transactions of participating nodes, i.e., a list of records called
blocks linked with each other in a decentralized way. This ledger of transactions
is then transparent to all participants in the network, meaning any user can
request to add their data to the ledger on the blockchain, ensuring transparency
in the system. The name blockchain then makes perfect sense in light of the
fact that new transactions are prepacked into ”blocks” of information and then
added onto the end of a ”chain” of prevailing blocks consisting of every earlier
transaction, as seen in Figure 2.2 The blocks are linked by joining the earlier
block’s hash1 to the recent block, the recent block to the current block, and so
on. New blocks-to-be undertake transactions in a serial order, thus a transaction
cannot be changed antedated without changing its block and all the following
blocks [Tan22; Sha+21]. The structure can be seen in Figure 2.2. It makes it
very clear that a blockchain has a chain-like structure, and shows the dependency
of previous blocks in the current block of the chain. This chain-like structure
makes the data on the blockchain immutable as any change to a previous block
would mess up every block after the changed block as the hashes would not match
anymore therefore only new data can be added to the blockchain addressing some
of the security shortcomings of a regular decentralized network.
As computers can compute the hash values quickly, utilizing hash values is, how-
ever, not enough to stop users with malicious intent. If a malicious user were
interested in tempering with the data, the user would be able to compute all the
hash values of other blocks to make the blockchain valid once again in a rela-
tively few seconds. This is why blockchain technology maintains the integrity of
transactions in the network using cryptographic algorithms and requires a con-
sensus mechanism to ensure security in the system. The fundamental principle is
that all the nodes in the network agree on the same decision regarding the data
requested to be added to the blockchain.
1A hash is the result of a hash-function mapping arbitrary data to a fixed value
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Theoretical Background
Block n-2 txs
Block n-2 Header
Previous Hash
Merkle Root
Block n-1 txs
Block n-1 Header
Previous Hash
Merkle Root
Block n txs
Block n Header
Previous Hash
Merkle Root
Figure 2.2: The basic structure of a blockchain. Figure adapted from Fig 10.6.
in [Sha+21] .
2.1.1
Consensus algorithms
Several different consensus algorithms exist in order to agree on the decision re-
garding adding data to a blockchain. The consensus algorithm computes, with
the majority of nodes in the network, which nodes are faulty and which are not.
Faulty nodes, also called Byzantine nodes, will be removed by the consensus al-
gorithm to keep to network healthy and trustworthy. Removing such Byzantine
nodes will provide the system with Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT), further
decreasing the probability of system failure. [Tan22; Bal17]. Arati Baliga states
in the whitepaper [Bal17] that ”a blockchain based system is as secure and ro-
bust as its consensus model.”
emphasizing the importance of such consensus
algorithms. The applicability and eﬀiciency of a consensus protocol are validated
by respecting the following three properties;
• Safety: The safety of a consensus protocol is established when all partici-
pating nodes generate identical outputs, and those outputs comply with the
established rules of the protocol. This condition is commonly recognized as
the consistency of the shared state.
• Liveness: A consensus protocol is said to provide liveness assurance when
all non-faulty nodes taking part in the consensus process eventually produce
an output
• Fault Tolerance: The ability of a consensus protocol to withstand the
failure of a participating node and recover from it
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Blockchains
11
While all three properties are essential for the applicability and eﬀiciency of a
consensus protocol, it was proved in [FLP85] that no deterministic consensus
protocol can guarantee safety, liveness, and fault tolerance in an asynchronous
systemm, also called the FLP Impossibility Result. So with fault tolerance being
crucial for globally distributed networks to operate, designers of distributed sys-
tems tend to choose between safety and liveness depending on their requirements
and assumptions of the system. Poor choice of a consensus mechanism can render
the blockchain platform useless thereby compromising the data recorded on the
blockchain. The following is a list of some of the issues that can arise when a
consensus mechanism fails [Bal17];
• Blockchain Fork: Blockchain fork occurs when different nodes within the
system converge on different blocks as being part of the blockchain. While
temporary forks may arise in Bitcoin due to network latencies, the protocol
has been designed to ensure the eventual convergence of all nodes onto a
single chain. A blockchain fork can disrupt applications, causing signifi-
cant inconsistencies in the recorded data on the blockchain and inducing
unpredictable behavior in the applications relying on it.
• Consensus Failure: Maybe the most obvious fail is that lack of consensus
as some consensus algorithms do not guarantee the ability to achieve con-
sensus. For instance, a consensus algorithm that requires a super-majority
vote from a certain percentage of nodes may fail to reach consensus if the
number is not attained due to node or network failures, non-compliant
nodes, or the inability of valid and honest nodes to make a decision owing
to inconsistent messages received from other nodes.
• Dominance: A consensus protocol that lacks resilience against Sybil at-
tacks can be subject to manipulation of consensus round outcomes by one
or a group of entities. In such an attack, a single or a handful of nodes can
generate millions of identities that they control, enabling the dominating
group to confirm transactions and blocks according to their rules, including
double-spending cryptocurrency transactions.[Tan22]
• Cheating: Validating nodes, either individually or in collusion, can main-
tain parallel forks in the blockchain of fraudulent transactions or modified
reality that can be presented as proof to an auditor or external third party.
To safeguard the blockchain platform against such attacks, the consensus
and blockchain reading mechanism must be designed to prevent their oc-
currence.
• Poor Performance: The time required for consensus converging under
certain conditions may be more than expected. These conditions may be
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Theoretical Background
dynamic, such as when other nodes become malicious or a network partition
occurs, causing delays in the exchange of messages between nodes.
Some of the most used consensus algorthims includes Proof-of-Work, Proof-of-
Stake and Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT)
2.1.2
Smart Contracts
As mentioned in the Introduction on Page 2 smart contracts are a vital selling
point of modern second-generation blockchains. In addition to the internal work-
ings and rules of a given blockchain, custom rules can be applied by deploying
smart contracts on the blockchain. Nick Szabo coined the term Smart Contract
already in 1997 in his paper [Sza97] with the aim of automating traditional con-
tracts with hardware and software. The need for automated contracts arose when
an old-fashioned contract, which included a somewhat trusted third party, like
a bank or lawyer, to do the paperwork between the parties involved in the con-
tract, became a time-consuming and expensive task which made it maybe not
so trustworthy a process, after all. The blockchain technology’s decentralization
eliminates the need for centralized governing systems or third parties, enabling
the deployment of digital smart contracts without the bottlenecks associated with
traditional centralized systems [Tan22]. The blockchain ensures that all ledger
participants have knowledge of the contract details and that agreement terms
are implemented mechanically once conditions are met [Sha+21]. The benefits of
smart contracts are many with some of the most important being; speed and eﬀi-
ciency, trust and transparency, and security [IBM23a; Sha+21; Tan22]. Namely
because once a condition is met, the contract is executed immediately. As there’s
no third party involved, and because encrypted records of transactions are shared
across participants, there’s no need to question whether information has been al-
tered for personal benefit. Blockchain transaction records are encrypted, which
makes them very hard to hack. Moreover, because each record is connected to
the previous and subsequent records on a distributed ledger, hackers would have
to alter the entire chain to change a single record. [IBM23a]
This all boils down to some key features of blockchain technology desired for
secure and modern implementations of transparent platforms [Sha+21]:
• Decentralized: In centralized systems, each transaction requires valida-
tion through a central trusted agency, such as a central bank, resulting in
performance bottlenecks and associated costs at the central servers. To ad-
dress this issue, blockchain networks have multiple participants who agree
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Blockchains
13
on transactions using a consensus algorithm. Unlike centralized systems,
blockchain networks enable peer-to-peer transactions without authentica-
tion by a central agency, thus reducing costs and mitigating performance
bottlenecks. [Cro+16; Zhe+18; Sha+21]
• Secure: Transactions in a blockchain are encrypted and linked to the pre-
ceding transaction as shown in Figure 2.2. As a result, criminal activities
such as hacking, fraud, or unauthorized access to critical information can
be prevented.
• Immutable: Blockchain technology follows the append-only ledger princi-
ple, making it immutable. Any alteration to the data in one block will have
a ripple effect, necessitating changes to subsequent blocks and rendering
the overall system infeasible. In immutable ledgers, participant consensus
verifies transactions, and the resulting log cannot be altered or replaced
[Nak08]
• Distributed Ledger: As all participating nodes share a copy of the ledger,
the remaining nodes continue to work, even if one node fails, ensuring no
disturbance in the network.
• Scalable: The block rate is determined by the combination of throughput
and information propagation time. However, this rate is contingent on the
consensus algorithm and the number of participants involved in the transac-
tion. A large number of participants can limit the desired high throughput.
Each node holds information about other blocks in a blockchain, so scala-
bility becomes crucial when the data size is large. [Cro+16; Sha+21]
• Transparent: As all nodes share the same information, it is by nature
transparent as every participant can see finished transactions.
• Auditable: As every transaction in the blockchain is attested and recorded
with a timestamp, users can easily verify past records by accessing any node
in the distributed network
• Extendable: As new generation blockchains allow for smart contracts
developed with a Turing-complete programming language, it is possible to
extend the set of rules for a given blockchain with custom rules allowing all
industries to benefit from a blockchain.
The type of blockchain can be broadly categorized into three different types. A
public or permissionless blockchain, a private or permissioned blockchain, and a
hybrid of the two. Subtypes do also exist, like a Consortium blockchain, which
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Theoretical Background
is a special kind of private blockchain that is governed by a group of participants
[Sha+21]. This paper, however, will focus on private and public blockchains.
2.1.3
Public blockchains
As the name suggests, a public blockchain is one where everyone can connect to
the network, and everything is publicly available. This also means that no one
has full control over the network, and everyone can read and write to the ledger.
As no one grants authority, they are also known as permissionless blockchains, as
participants do not need permission to access the blockchain. Public blockchains
are considered secure despite their open and public nature. Transaction informa-
tion, such as wallet numbers, amounts, and dates, is the only information that
is openly available. The public blockchain is equipped with self-governance, and
a heightened level of security, as individuals can read and write the blockchain’s
code in a proactive manner. The principal advantage of such a system is its uncon-
trollability, which ensures that no entity can exercise complete control over the
entire network.[Tan22; Sha+21]. Examples of public blockchains include Bitcoin
and Ethereum.
2.1.4
Ethereum
This paper will focus on Ethereum as the public blockchain. The Ethereum plat-
form is an open-source and distributed computing platform primarily designed for
executing smart contracts. At its core, the Ethereum platform operates through
a runtime environment known as the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM), which
must be operational on each node. To power the Ethereum ecosystem, a native
cryptocurrency called Ether (Eth) is employed. Individuals who intend to use
the platform to execute transactions or run applications are required to pay for
these services using Ethers [Sha+21; But14].
2.1.4.1
Consensus mechanism
At launch Ethereum was using a consensus mechanism called Proof-of-Work
(PoW) where every participant has to prove their contribution to the consensus.
This consensus mechanism involves the process of mining, which means nodes
compete to find solutions to complex mathematical puzzles. The answer to these
puzzles demands a significant amount of computational power. Upon successfully
solving the puzzle, the node responsible can add its block to the blockchain and
receive an award. The puzzles are asymmetrical, requiring a considerable time
to solve, yet the answers can be promptly verified. Solving these puzzles employs
the trial and error method, requiring greater computational power to solve them
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Blockchains
15
quickly [Tan22; Nak08]. This consensus mechanism is still the consensus mecha-
nism for the Bitcoin blockchain [Nak08]. The reason for the high requirements in
computational power is that it makes it very hard to do attacks to the blockchain
as if the mathematical puzzles was easy it would allow for one person to operate
multiple nodes with ease.
On September 15, 2022, Ethereum wenth though with ”The Merge”, where they
changed from PoW to Proof-Of-Stake (PoS). Proof-of-State are designed to over-
come the disadvantages associated with PoW in terms of high electricity consum-
tion required for solving the mathematical puzzles. Everyone can still participate
in the consensus mechanism, however, instead of buying a setup suited for mining,
you stake coins to a validator or setup a validator as a whole. Proof-of-Stake is
therefore also much faster in terms of reaching consensus, as only the validators
has to reach consensus on the network. The probability of a node creating a new
block is then based on the number of tokens, Ethers in Ethereums example, that
the validator is willing to put up as collateral [Fou23b; Tan22].
The price of setting up a validator is 32 ETH, which at the time of writing,
is just above $50.000 USD. It provides full participation rewards, improves the
decentralization of the network, and never requires trusting anyone else with your
funds, whereas, with the option to participate in ”pooled/liquid staking”, offered
by third parties, you stake any amount of Ether, to a validator pool, and when
the pool of validator gets rewarded, the user get rewarded corresponding to the
amount of Ether staked [Fou23a].
2.1.5
Private blockchains
Unlike a public blockchain, a private blockchain only allows invited users to par-
ticipate in the network and are, therefore, a popular choice for organizations
wanting to keep data in-house. In contrast to the decentralized nature of public
blockchains, private blockchains are centralized networks governed by a central
authority responsible for granting permissions to write transactions and deter-
mining which parties have access to specific transaction information, hence often
referred to as permissioned blockchains. The central authority also retains the
authority to override or modify mining rights. Within this framework, adminis-
trators can grant or revoke user permissions. Transaction information remains
private even while participants might know the identity of one another. Higher
transaction speeds and greater eﬀiciency characterize a private blockchain com-
pared to public blockchains. However, the security features are less robust than
those of public blockchains. Consensus is reached via a single party or a few
select entities, which may result in manipulation to some extent despite the
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Theoretical Background
cryptographic security measures in place [Tan22].
Another benefit of using a
private blockchain and the fact that validators are known beforehand and added
as needed, is that the risk of a 51% attack is near non-existing. Transactions are
also very cheap on a private blockchain as they only need to be verified by a few
nodes, instead of participants validating the transactions as is often the case for
a public blockchain. One very popular private blockchain is Hyperledger Fabric,
a blockchain developed by IBM
2.1.6
Hyperledger Fabric
For the private blockchain part of this thesis, Hyperledger Fabric will be the
chosen blockchain. Hyperledger Fabric is an open-source project established by
the Linux Foundation and is the primary blockchain framework and standard for
enterprise blockchain platforms. It is intended as the foundation for the devel-
opment of enterprise-grade applications and industry solutions. The framework
boasts a modular and open architecture, leveraging plug-and-play components to
enable a diverse range of use cases. [IBM23b]
Hyperledger Fabric being a permissioned blockchain incorporates several features
to ensure confidentiality, including its channel architecture and private data ca-
pability. The channel architecture establishes a sub-network on a Fabric network,
with every member granted visibility to a particular set of transactions. Conse-
quently, only nodes participating in a channel have access to the smart contract
and transacted data on that channel, preserving confidentiality and privacy. Ad-
ditionally, private data allows for collections between channel members, provid-
ing similar protection to channels without incurring the overhead of creating and
maintaining a separate channel [Fou23c].
2.1.6.1
Consensus mechanism
In Hyperledger Fabric the administrator of the network can choose between dif-
ferent consensus mechanism depending on needs. Currently Hyperledger Fabric
supports two consensus mechanisms out of the box, the Practical Byzantine Fault
Tolerance algorithm (PBFT) and its variation SIEVE that is able to handle non-
deterministic chaincode execution [Bal17; Fou23c].
Using the default consensus mechanism of PBFT, which is based on the Byzantine
Generals’ Problem, like the well-known ”Two Generals’ Problem” the scenario
involves a group of generals, each commanding a segment of the Byzantine army,
that has encircled an enemy city. For the generals to attack the city, a consensus
on a battle plan must be reached. The generals can communicate only through
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Blockchains
17
messengers, which might be intercepted and never reach the other general. The
challenge in reaching an agreement is that one or more generals could be traitors
and might attempt to undermine the battle plan by sending false, distorted, or
no messages at all. Nevertheless, all loyal generals will act in accordance with
the plan, and a small number of traitors should not persuade the loyal generals
to adopt an inferior strategy [Bal17].
PBFT enables a distributed system of computers to come to an agreement on a
decision or value, even if some of the computers are malfunctioning or behaving
maliciously as might be the example in a blockchain network. This is accom-
plished by having each computer in the group communicate with every other
computer to exchange information about the decision or value. After evaluat-
ing the received information, each computer then shares its evaluation with the
other computers. This process is repeated several times until all computers reach
a consensus on the final decision [CL99].
The consensus mechanism can then be split into three phases
• Request phase: A client sends a request to the primary node, which then
distributes the request to all other nodes within the network
• Prepare phase: Each node receives the request and validates its authen-
ticity.
In the event that the request is deemed valid, the primary node
sends a pre-prepare message, containing the request, a sequence number,
and the request hash, to all other nodes. The nodes subsequently send pre-
pare messages to one another, signifying their approval of the pre-prepare
message.
• Commit phase: The primary node transmits a commit message to all
other nodes, indicating that the request has been approved. The nodes then
exchange commit messages with one another to demonstrate their agree-
ment on the commit message. After a node has received commit messages
from at least two-thirds of the nodes within the network, it can execute the
request.
Overall, these three phases ensure that all nodes have validated the request and
reached a consensus on its approval, ultimately ensuring the security and relia-
bility of the consensus mechanism within the distributed system.
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Theoretical Background
2.2
Business Process Management
Business Process Management (BPM) refers to the discipline of managing how
work is executed in an organization to ensure consistent outcomes and take ad-
vantage of opportunities for improvement. The concept of ”improvement” may
vary depending on the organization’s objectives but often involves reducing costs,
execution times, and error rates and achieving competitive advantage through
innovation. Improvement initiatives can be either one-time or continuous and
involve incremental or radical changes. It is important to note that BPM is con-
cerned not with improving individual activities but managing entire chains of
events, activities, and decisions that generate value for the organization and its
customers. These chains of events, activities, and decisions are called processes
[Dum+18].
These chains of activities are performed in coordination in an organization and
technical environment and together they realize a goal of a business. The defini-
tion of a business process in [Wes19] states that ”Each business process is enacted
by a single organization, but it may interact with business processes performed
by other organizations” thus enabling inter-organizational processes and later
defines BPM as including the concepts, methods and techniques to supper the
design, administration, configuration, enactment and analysis of such business
processes. Therefore reaching a business goal by transforming inputs to outputs
that are valuable to a customer or another process; it can both be executed by
human or be automated and has a clearly defined beginning and end.
Business processes can be found everywhere, be it an governmental agency or a
typical company. An easy to grasp process is the Order-to-Cash process seen at
most, if not all, companies selling a product. The process for an online stores
point of view might look something like in Figure 2.3. The process is modeled
with the Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) which we will describe
in detail in Section 2.2.1.
Figure 2.3: Simple Order-to-Cash process for an online store.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Business Process Management
19
The management of activities related to business processes can be arranged in
a cyclical structure referred to as the BPM life cycle. Although defined differ-
ently depending on the source. This thesis will be based on the definition from
[Dum+18]. In its implementation, a business process may require modifications
if it fails to meet expectations later on. To this end, continuous monitoring of
the process is necessary. Analysts should thoroughly examine the data collected
during monitoring to detect areas needing adjustments. Adjustment will always
be needed in a ever changing landscape of customer needs, competition and tech-
nology. This happens in the monitoring step of the life cycle and is mainly why
the life cycle of BPM should be seen as circular as visualized in Figure 2.4.
Process
Monitoring
Process
Discovery
Process
Analysis
Process
Implementation
Process
Redesign
Process
Identification
Figure 2.4: Lifecycle. Figure adapted from Fig 1.7 in [Dum+18].
The life cycle model from [Dum+18] consists of six different phases:
• Process identification: In the initial phase of the business process man-
agement life cycle, a business problem is identified, and relevant processes
are defined, delimited, and interrelated. The result of this phase is a revised
==PAGE:28==
20
2 Theoretical Background
or novel process architecture, which presents a comprehensive view of the
organizational processes and their connections. This architecture serves as
a basis for determining which processes or process sets will be managed
throughout the remaining phases of the life cycle.
• Process discovery: In this phase the current state of each of the relevant
processes is documented, and thus outputs a process model as is.
• Process analysis: The issues associated with the process from the prior
phase are identified, documented, and whenever possible quantified using
performance measures. The output is then a structured collection of issues
which are prioritized based on their potential impact and the estimated
effort required to resolve them.
• Process redesign: Also often called process improvement, is to identify
changes to the process that would help to address the issues identified. It
also allows the organization to meet its performance objectives. This phase
then outputs a new process model to be.
• Process implementation: As the name suggest, this phase allows for im-
plementation of the process model from the redesign phase as it differs from
the process from the as-is model from the discovery phase. The implemen-
tation phase of the process life cycle consists of two primary components:
organizational change management and automation. Organizational change
management encompasses the range of activities necessary to alter the pro-
cesses of all participants involved. Meanwhile, process automation refers to
developing and deploying IT systems that facilitate implementing the new
process, including improved versions of existing systems.
• Process monitoring: As described earlier, the monitoring phase is for
keeping an eye on the now running process.
Based on the performance
measures and objectives, data is collected and analyzed.
2.2.1
BPMN
As briefly mentioned earlier, Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) is
used to represent business processes in a graphical way like in Figure 2.3. BPMN
is a standard from the Object Management Group (OMG) [OMG14]. The BPMN
specification includes over 100 different symbol and is thus a fairly complex com-
plex language [Dum+18]. Even though there are that many different symbol,
does not mean, everyone is frequently used, and it actually boils down to six
different main symbols:
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Business Process Management
21
• Events: Visualized as circles, it states any form of event in a business
process. A process must always start with a start event, visualized as a
non-filled circle and end with an end event visualized as a bold non-filled
circle. Other events exists as well, like a message catch event, that will have
the symbol of an envelope in its circle.
• Activities: Activities are visualized as rounded rectangles, stating an ac-
tivity that should be performed, often with a verb and noun for the naming
convention like Send products.
• Flows: Flows are the relation between the different elements in BPMN.
Sequence Flow is the one allowing for continuation of the process and sym-
bolize what comes next in the process, visualized by a solid black arrow.
Another frequently used Flow is the Message Flow allowing two different
processes to be connected. The are visualized by a dotted arrow and be
used to show the interrelation between two different organizations or par-
ticipants in a process model, like a customer and the store.
• Gateways: Gateways allows for splitting flows into multiple flows or col-
lecting multiple flows into one. The most common gateways are the exclu-
sive gateway and the parallel gateway. They work as the names suggest,
the parallel gateway will split a flow into multiple flows or collect multiple
flows into one. The exclusive gateway will, based on a condition, send the
flow to one of multiple recipients or allow for further progression in process
if just one of multiple incoming flows go into the exclusive gateway.
• Pools: The pool elements collects the other elements as a group in the
pool. The pool often refers to an organization or participant.
• Lane: The lane element is to divide pools into different subgroups. A big
organization will often have multiple lanes for each department included in
a process.
Most of the discussed elements can be seen in Figure 2.5. It is a more elaborate
version of the order-to-cash business process from Figure 2.3. In this elaborate
example two pools are included, one for the customer and one for the store, each
only including a single lane. Parallel gateways are included and shows how the
flow gets split into multiple flows and vice-versa, gets collected into a single flow
at the end. This means that all incoming flows to the parallel gateway has to be
present in order to progress further in the business process. Message flows are
also used to visualize the communication between the store and the customer. A
message is sent to the store as the customer places an order. Only then will the
process for the store start.
==PAGE:30==
22
2 Theoretical Background
Figure 2.5: More elaborate order-to-cash business process. Figure adapted from
Fig 1.3 in [Dum+18].
2.2.2
SecBPMN2BC
Even though there being over 100 different symbols in the standard BPMN spec,
it is missing a key element. Security. As mentioned in Chapter 1 several attempts
has been made to tacke this issue with extension of of the standard BPMN spec.
Namely SecureBPMN[Bru+12] and SecBPMN[SDG15]. SecureBPMN proposes
an extension of BPMN, that allows for role-based access control (RBAC), in order
to have granular control over who can do which activity. It also allows for the
security requirements that is Separation of Duties (SoD) and Binding of Duties
(BoD). Seperation of Duties is the sequrity requirement that enforces that not
two users should be able to access the same activity if not allowed by the process.
A customer should of course not be able to check an order and vice-versa should a
store owner not be able to do the activities of the customer. This, of course, only
being a example, but makes the idea clear of the separation of duties. Contrary
the Binding of Duties is the security requirement that an entity performing one
action is bound to perform another action e.g. a customer placing an order is
bound to also pay the invoice that is associated with that order.
SecBPMN is a more elaborate extension than SecureBPMN and states in their
paper [SDG15] that the current extensions do not enable the specification of
security policies for the entire process. Alternatively, some of BPMN extensions
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Business Process Management
23
incorporate predefined sets of policies or BPMN patterns that describe desirable
behavior, yet they do not support the creation of custom security policies.
Concerning the challenge of verification, current techniques face two primary lim-
itations. Firstly, these techniques focus on general-purpose policies, which need
more explicit support for security policies and rely on an overly broad vocabu-
lary. Secondly, the set of policy types needs to be expanded, primarily restricted
to access control, thus covering only a tiny portion of the information security
spectrum. That is why SecBPMN chose the Reference Model on Information As-
surance and Security (RMIAS) [CH13] which was assembled through an analysis
and classification of security aspects proposed by the most known reference mod-
els on information assurance and security [SDG15]. The security requirements is
listed in Table 2.1
Name
Definition
Accountability
An ability of a system to hold users responsible for their
actions ( e.g. misuse of information)
Auditability
An ability of a system to conduct persistent, non-by passable
monitoring of all actions performed by humans or machines
within the system
Authenticity
An ability of a system to verify identity and establish trust
in a third party and in information it provides
Availability
A system should ensure that all system’s components are
available and operational when they are required by autho-
rised users
Confidentiality
A system should ensure that only authorised users access
information
Integrity
A system should ensure completeness, accuracy and absence
of unauthorised modifications in all its components
Non-
Repudiation
The ability of a system to prove (with legal validity)
occurrence/non-occurrence of an event or participation/non-
participation of a party in an event
Privacy
A system should obey privacy legislation and it should enable
individuals to control, where feasible, their personal informa-
tion (user-involvement).
Table 2.1: Security aspects covered by the RMIAS reference model. Tabel taken
from Table 1 in [SDG15].
==PAGE:32==
24
2 Theoretical Background
The extension also proposes a new modeling language, SecBPMN-ML to model
said BPMN diagrams with support for the security requirements from RMIAS.
The modeling language will, like BPMN, have a graphical representation of the
security requirements as annotations to the different elements of standard spec
of BPMN. This means the annotations, depending on the security requirement,
can be linked to different elements, the elements being Activity, Data Objects
and Message Flows [SDG15; SPG16].
Three variations of the security annotation Auditability exist that signify dif-
ferent forms of auditability in a business process.
These variants include Au-
ditabilityAct, which asserts that the executor of an activity should have their
actions tracked when attempting to carry out the activity. The second variant,
AuditabilityDO, requires recording all actions related to a specific data object,
such as writing, reading, and storing. Finally, AuditabilityMF is the third vari-
ant that mandates tracking all actions executed while handling communication,
such as send and receive actions, within a Message Flow.
Authenticity comes in two versions and is identified based on the BPMN elements
they apply. AuthenticityAct refers to verifying the identity and authenticity of
the users involved in an activity. On the other hand, AuthenticityDO requires
that a data object’s genuineness is verifiable. This involves ensuring that the
data object has not been tampered with by unauthorized parties and contains
evidence of the identity of the entities who created or modified it.
The Availability security requirement ensures that activities, data objects, and
message flows are always available and ready for execution when needed in a busi-
ness process. There are three different versions of this extension. AvailabilityAct
specifies that an activity should be ready for execution whenever encountered
in the control flow of the business process. AvailabilityDO specifies that a data
object should be available when required by authorized users. AvailabilityMF
specifies that communicating through the linked Message Flow should always be
possible.
Confidentiality can be specified for Data Objects, and Message Flows. Confiden-
tialityDO specifies that authorized users can only access the linked data object.
This means that the data is protected from unauthorized access, ensuring the con-
fidentiality of the data. ConfidentialityMF specifies that only authorized users
can use the linked message flow, which means that unauthorized users cannot
send or receive messages through the flow. This ensures the confidentiality of the
information exchanged through the message flow.
Integrity also comes in three variants. Firstly, the IntegrityAct variant mandates
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Business Process Management
25
that the functional capabilities of an activity are safeguarded against deliberate
corruption. The security attributes of personnel, hardware, and software play
a crucial role in determining the entities to be protected from such intentional
corruption during the execution of the activity.
IntegrityDO necessitates the
safeguarding of the linked data object from intentional corruption. Lastly, the
IntegrityMF variant dictates protecting all messages transmitted via a message
flow from deliberate corruption.
Non-Repudiation has two variants, depending on the element to which it is ap-
plied: NonRepudiationAct and NonRepudiationMF. The former refers to the
provability of the execution or non-execution of the activity, while the latter
relates to the verifiability of the usage or non-usage of a message flow.
At last, Privacy has two variants in the proposed extensions to BPMN. Privacy-
Act specifies that an activity should comply with privacy legislation and enable
users to control their data, similar for PrivacyDO but for the linked Data Object.
A newer and updated version of SecBPMN, SecBPMN2 [SPG16], also includes
the security requirements proposed in SecureBPMN, namely separation of duties,
bind of duties and a new requirement; non-delegation. Non-delegation being the
new requirement, that states an activity should only be executed by the user
assigned to the activity.
With all these annotations in place for security a solid foundation for secure busi-
ness process modeling is made. There is, however, still work to be made in order to
utilize a blockchain to enforce the security requirements. SecBPMN2BC is there-
fore another extension of BPMN with security requirements with blockchains
in mind [KMS22; KMS23]. The SecBPMN2BC specifications builds upon the
security requirements proposed in SecBPMN2 with miner changes and a few ad-
dition security requirements for expressiveness. One change is the merging of
Accountability and Auditability. Blockchains structurally enforce Accountability
since all traces of actions executed are available to all accounts, as the nature of
blockchains store every transaction as described earlier. The confidentiality secu-
rity annotations are also substituted for a new annotation, the privity spheres, as
they are far more expressive [KMS22]. The privity spheres comes in five different
variants; public, static, private, strong dynamic and weak dynamic. Is stated
in [KMS22] that ”An implementation of such a process model fulfills the privity
requirements if, for every annotated data object or message d and every possible
execution trace, only members of the required sphere of d can read d.”.
The
private and public spheres are then well suited for implementation based on the
type of blockchain used to run the smart contract for the given business process.
The public spheres specifies that everyone should have access to the linked data
==PAGE:34==
26
2 Theoretical Background
objects or messages, whereas the private sphere specify that the data object or
message is private and thus matches well with private blockchains. The dynamic
spheres allow for, as the name suggest, dynamic access control to the linked el-
ement. The weak-dynamic sphere specifies which users possible can access the
linked data object whereas the strong dynamic specifies what users certainly will
access the data object.
The last addition in SecBPMN2BC is the enforceability annotation. It comes
in four variants; enforceability of the control-flow, enforceability of decisions for
public, private and user-defined sets. The enforceability of control-flow requires
that the correctness of the control-flow is proactively enforced by the developed
system. It must be unfeasible not to comply with the prescribed control-flow
[KMS22; KMS23]. For the enforceability of decisions the paper states for the
public set that decisions, i.e. gateways in a business process, are verified by a set
of nodes which is larger than the set of participants of the process, thus this can
be full-filled by smart contracts on a public blockchain. The private set requires
that all participants of the process verify the correctness of the decision, and can
then naturally be full-filled by smart contracts on private blockchains. Finally,
the user-defined annotation allows the modeler to provide a set of participants,
that can verify the decision. As for the other security annotations, the new ones
can only be linked to some elements, as shown in Table 2.2.
SecBPMN2BC Element
Connected Elements
EnforceCF
Definitions, SubProcess, Pools
EnforceGW
Inclusive gateways, Exclusive gateways, Complex gateway
Privity
Data Object, Message
Table 2.2: Connectable elements for enforceability and privity.
Table taken
from Table 2 in [KMS22].
As SecBPMN2, SecBPMN2BC also proposes a modeling language, SecBPMN2BC-
ML, in order to model business processes with the security requirements proposed
in the specification. In addition to the security requirement, some blockchain
specific annotation is also included. The BlockchainType for process definitions,
refers to what type of blockchain the given model should be implemented on, i.e.
private or public. OnChainModel states if the linked element, definition, pools,
and subprocess should be onchain or not. OnChainExecution states if the linked
activity should be exetuted onchain or not and OnChainData, sets the linked el-
ement, Data Object or Message, to either unecrypted, encrypted, digest or none.
None meaning no data should be on the blockchain, digest if only a digest should
be on the blockchain. Encrypted and unecrypted meaning the data should be
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Business Process Management
27
on the blockchain either clear-text or encrypted [KMS22]. The graphical annota-
tions from SecBPMN2BC can be seen in Table 2.3, and will be used in Chapter 4
when implementing a framework using the annotations.
Table 2.3: Graphical annotations of SecBPMN2BC-ML. Table taken from Table
1 in [KMS22].
The paper then suggests the SecBPMN2BC method, a model-driven and security-
by-design approach, to implementing business process on a blockchain in a secure
manner. The method includes a workflow consisting of four different phases as
illustrated in Figure 2.6. The four phases are; P1 models a smart contract as
a secure business process using SecBPMN2BC-ML; P2 identifies conflicts and
BPMN elements to be executed or stored on a blockchain using SecBPMN2BC-
Tools, a set of rules and algorithms to check for requirements incompatible with
each other; P3 revises the business process to solve conflicts; P4 generates smart
contract code based on the specified process [KMS22].
This thesis is heavily based on the work done in [KMS22] and will focus on phase
four of the SecBPMN2BC method in order to answer the research questions stated
in Chapter 1.
==PAGE:36==
28
2 Theoretical Background
Figure 2.6: The SecBPMN2BC method.
Figure adapted from Fig 1 in
[KMS22].
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Related Work
As stated in Section 2.2.2 this thesis will focus on phase four of the method
proposed in [KMS22], that is generating smart contract code based on a given
business process model. This includes the security requirements set for the given
business process. This chapter aims to find related research in the area of au-
tomated smart contract generation based on business process models modelled
with BPMN.
A survey on the the literature surrounding the topic of automated smart contract
generation, and business process management on blockchains shows that several
existing solution already exist. Literature reviews have already been carried out
on the topic in [Lau+20]. It reviews over 300 publications on the topic and the
quantitative analysis identified that the research field is relatively young, and
the identified papers can be grouped into three topic clusters: application areas
and challenges, process architecture and design, and process execution-related
publications. The paper TABS: Transforming automatically BPMN models into
blockchain smart contracts [BLJ22] also does a literature survey on the topic and
finds that work on the topic has already been done in [Bra+18] on transforming
BPMN to smart contracts targeting Ethereum, describing how UML, BPMN, and
ER models can be used to model such blockchain-based applications. The paper
did not, however, offer any concrete proposal. Another epoch-making paper in
this field of research is ”Untrusted business process monitoring and execution
using blockchain” [Web+16]. This paper presents an architecture for generating
smart contracts using a distributed application described as a BPMN model. The
transformation process comprises two main phases: design and execution. During
the design phase, the BPMN model is analyzed and converted into a distributed
application that leverages blockchain smart contracts. The system consists of
two primary components: an off-chain component that receives input from ex-
ternal applications and converts it into method calls to the smart contract and
an on-chain component that includes the smart contract methods and a runtime
monitor responsible for managing the orchestration of task activities depicted
by BPMN elements. The proposed architecture aims to facilitate the develop-
==PAGE:38==
30
3 Related Work
ment of smart contracts by leveraging the benefits of BPMN modeling while also
addressing challenges associated with designing and executing distributed appli-
cations on a blockchain [BLJ22; Web+16]. Two significant follow up projects
is based on this paper, Caterpillar [Lóp+19a] and Lorikeet [TLW18]. Common
for a lot literature on the subject is the mention of those two projects. [KMS23;
Lau+20; BLJ22], and several proposed frameworks on the topic actually used
either Caterpillar or Lorikeet, if not both, to evaluate their solution. Blockchain
support for collaborative business processes [Cic+19] another model-driven solu-
tion using BPMN for generation of the methods of a smart contracts uses both
Caterpillar and Lorikeet, while Integrated model-driven engineering of blockchain
applications for business processes and asset management [Lu+20] uses Lorikeet
for the evaluation of their solution. We therefore consider Catarpiller and Lori-
keet the state-of-the-art in this field of research, and will thus also be using those
solutions to measure against and also challenge in regard to blockchain-agnostic
implementations and support for security requirements, after an introduction to
the two.
3.1
Caterpillar
Caterpillar is a working prototype of a Business Process Management System
(BPMS) built upon the Ethereum platform, leveraging the translation of process
models into smart contracts. This framework operates by taking in a process
model specified in BPMN format as its input. It is subsequently transformed into
a set of smart contracts, scripted in Ethereum’s Solidity language to capture the
system’s underlying behavior. Once generated, these contracts can be compiled
and deployed onto public or private Ethereum networks using standard tooling.
Additionally, Caterpillar provides a RESTful API, enabling users to interact with
the running instances of the deployed process models [Lóp+19a; Cat20].
Caterpillar has been further developed with the ability to support roles dynami-
cally using a proposed policy specification language based on Petri net semantics
[Lóp+19b; Lóp+22]. The proposal has been incorporated into the Caterpillar
project software as seen on their GitHub repository [Cat20] tagged as different
versions. The latest tagged version, version 3.0, tackles the problem of the im-
mutable nature of a blockchain, as any change to a given business process would
have to be transformed to a new smart contract and then redeployed to the
blockchain as new. Caterpillar 3.0 describe their proposed solution in [Lop+19].
The approach in the newer versions was evaluated with positive results [BLJ22].
For enforcement the policy specification is transformed into methods of smart con-
tracts when generated from the BPMN diagrams. The architecture of Caterpillar
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Lorikeet
31
can be seen in Figure 3.1
Figure 3.1: The architecture of Caterpillar.
Figure taken from Fig 2 in
[Lóp+19a] .
3.2
Lorikeet
Lorikeet, being another gold standard, or state-of-the-art tool for business process
management on blockchains, is also a model-driven engineering tool. Lorikeet is
also capable of generating smart contract code that is thoroughly tested, based on
specifications encoded in the given business processes and data registry models,
through the use of implemented model transformations. It consists of a modeller
UI, and three backend components; a BPMN translator, a registry generator and
the blockchain trigger. Lorikeet also have a lot of focus on asset management in
the tool. [TLW18]
==PAGE:40==
32
3 Related Work
Lorikeet extends the standard BPMN specification with two new elements, the
RegistryReference, and the ActionInvocation. A RegistryReference represents an
asset data store on a blockchain, while an ActionInvocation shows the asset reg-
istry action to invoke. In the context of Lorikeet, the registry modeler interface
allows users to input data into the registry model, which comprises four compo-
nents: basic information (registry name, description, user-defined data fields, and
their associated types), registry type (either single or distributed), basic CRUD
operations, and advanced operations (such as record lifecycle management and
foreign key). Additionally, Lorikeet implements an access control policy to gov-
ern registry manipulation.
Process instances can modify the registry records,
and any changes made to the registry are only finalized once the execution of the
corresponding process step logic is completed.
Lorikeet’s back-end components, which consist of the BPMN translator, Registry
generator, and Blockchain trigger, are designed to adhere to a microservice-based
architecture and are deployed as independent Docker containers. The BPMN
translator automatically generates Solidity smart contracts from BPMN models,
including information on how to call registry functions and instantiate and ex-
ecute process models. The Registry generator creates Solidity smart contracts
based on registry models that specify data structure, registry types, and basic
and advanced operations. These contracts can be deployed on the blockchain by
users. The Blockchain trigger communicates with an Ethereum blockchain node
and handles the compilation, deployment, and interaction with the generated
Solidity smart contracts. The UI for the BPMN and registry modeler interacts
with the back-end microservices through an API gateway, which forwards API
calls from the modeler UI to the corresponding microservice. The corresponding
Solidity smart contract code is altered accordingly at design time after making
changes to the BPMN model [TLW18; Cic+19]. The architecture of Lorikeet can
be seen in Figure 3.2
For comparison, both uses a model driven engineering approach. Both does sup-
port access control, sequence enforcement and discovery of incorrect behavior.
Participant selection is possible on Lorikeet by defining the participants before-
hand. The BPMN element support is better on Caterpillar [Cic+19].
Both do have some limitations concerning security, however. Even though recent
versions of Caterpillar and Lorikeet have an implementation in place for some
form of role-based access control, they support fewer security requirements than
proposed in the SecBPMN specification. As both solutions only offer a limited
amount of security regarding the business process translated, they can get away
with placing most, if not all, of the business process on a blockchain. The web por-
tal part is mainly for managing and interacting with the business process before
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Lorikeet
33
Figure 3.2: The architecture of Lorikeet. Figure taken from Fig 1 in [TLW18] .
and after deployment to the blockchain. Another limitation is that both solu-
tions only offer model translation to one blockchain, Ethereum. While Ethereum
might be well-suited for the requirements of the solutions, the additional value
might be gained by exploring translation to different blockchains and exploiting
the features the different blockchains have to offer.
==PAGE:42==
34
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Proposed framework
and implementation
As discussed in Chapter 3 a lot of research has been done in the field of translating
business processes to smart contracts for blockchains. Lorikeet and Caterpillar
being the most prominent proposed tools to do so.
Even though Caterpillar
has added role based access control in the latest version, and Lorikeet already
supporting some kind of access control and asset management a lot of the men-
tioned security requirements from Section 2.2.2 is still missing from the current
field.
We therefore propose a framework based on the work in [KMS22] and
their BPMN extension SecBPMN2BC in order to support said security require-
ments. As mention in [KMS22] some of the blockchain specific annotation in
SecBPMN2BC-ML can target both public and private blockchains. They also
mention the problems arising with storing private data on a public blockchain, or
even a private blockchain, as GDPR requires the user the right to ”be forgotten”
and states, “The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller
the erasure of personal data concerning him or her without undue delay and the
controller shall have the obligation to erase personal data without undue delay”
[Wol20], which is by the nature of the immutable nature of the blockchain simply
not possible, thus requiring an off-chain component as well in order support the
privacy security requirement.
With the proposed framework this thesis aims to answer the three research ques-
tions, one of them being if we can make the framework blockchain agnostic. To
address the research questions, this thesis propose a framework that allows busi-
nesses to transform SecBPMN2BC models into smart contract code for Ethereum
and Hyperledger Fabric out of the box, with the possibility to support other
blockchains. The architecture of the generated artifacts is shown in Figure 4.1.
As well as Lorikeet and Caterpillar, the architecture will make use of a web-based
user interface to interact with the generated smart contract, as is the standard
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Proposed framework and implementation
Figure 4.1: Simple overview of the architecture of the generated artifacts using
the proposed framework.
when implementing dApp1.
The architecture then includes a component for
the off-chain elements, including an off-chain data store. The architecture also
includes the blockchain component utilizing the ledger of the blockchain of choice.
Based on the SecBPMN2BC model that will be the output from the second
phase of the SecBPMN2BC method described in Section 2.2.2, the OnChainModel
property of some elements in the SecBPMN2BC model will be set to true and
thus have to run on the blockchain component, while, when set to false, will
have to run on the off-chain component. The framework described below, will
therefore have to support different combination of the OnChainModel property,
and the architecture will have to orchestrate the intercommunication between the
off-chain component and the blockchain component trough the web portal.
4.1
Framework Description
With the general architecture in place we now need to focus on the framework, in
charge of generating artifacts in order to run said architecture. The general idea
of the framework can be seen in Figure 4.2. It takes, as input, a SecBPMN2BC
model, and uses Model-To-Text transformation to transform the model into sev-
1A decentralized application (dApp) is an application built on a decentralized network that
combines a smart contract and a frontend user interface.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Implementation details
37
eral files to run in the platform. As seen in Figure 4.2 the Model-To-Text activ-
ity is shown as a hexagon, with inspiration from Hexagon Architecture [Mar12].
Hexagon Architecture is an architectural pattern used in software design. It aims
at creating loosely coupled application components that can be smoothly linked
to their software environment utilizing ports and adapters. With the emphasize
on adapters, the reasoning is, that a blockchain can be added to the framework
by writing an ”adapter” for it. The adapter would then be in charge of the imple-
mentation details for both the blockchain specifics and the web-portal specifics.
The proposed framework also comes with an adaptor for the web-portal, but can,
as the blockchain adapters, be easily changed if desired. This makes for a very
customizable architecture.
SecBPMN2BC
Model-to-Text
Web Portal /
Off-chain 
component
Ethereum
adapter
Custom
adapter
Hyperledger
adapter
Blockchain
Web-portal
Blockchain
Web-portal
Blockchain
Web-portal
Figure 4.2: The proposed framework.
In order to showcase the workings of the framework we will implement an adapter
for Ethereum and for Hyperledger Fabric, as well as a default Web Portal/Off-
chain component.
4.2
Implementation details
For the sake of implementation and continuously validating the work, the frame-
work will take basis in the running example from [KMS22] as the SecBPMN2BC
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Proposed framework and implementation
model shown in figure Figure 4.3. The process includes some of security anno-
tations discussed in Section 2.2.2, as well as three different pools, some with
multiple lanes, and therefore makes for a good example to test the framework.
Figure 4.3: Running example of a SecBPMN2BC-ML diagram for a road mis-
construction claim. Figure taken from Figure 3 in [KMS22].
Some of the frameworks discussed in Related Work in Chapter 3 uses a Hierar-
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Implementation details
39
chical State Machine (HSM) to capture the state of the running process, while
others, including Caterpillar uses a Petri Net to capture the state. Petri Net was
chosen as the technology because of the easy comparison of Petri Nets and Busi-
ness Processes. Petri Nets is described in [Wes19] as ”.. one of the best known
techniques for specifying business processes in a formal and abstract way” con-
firming the choice of using a Petri Net for the implementation of the framework.
Petri Nets can be seen as state machines with support for multiple states which is
a desired feature for a business process as the flow of the business process can be
split up when encountering a split gateway, thus requiring a way to support such
splits of states. A Petri net of a simple business process is shown in Figure 4.4.
The Petri net is in its begenning state as token can only be found in its first place,
as no transitions have been used. The transitions representing an activity in a
business process.
p1
receive order
p2
process order
p3
p4
send products
update inventory
p5
p6
complete order
p7
Figure 4.4: A simple Petri net representing a business process. Figure adapoted
from Fig 4.26 from [Wes19].
No transitions can be fired if there is no token in the place preceding the transition.
This means only the Receive Order transition can be fired in the shown Petri net.
This also holds for transitions with multiple places preceeding it like the Complete
Order transition. It can only be fired p5 and p6 contains a token. A split of tokens
is shown in Figure 4.5. Here the Process Order transitions has been fired putting
a token in both p3 and p4. Thus confirming the Petri net being able to be in
multiple states.
Even though Petri net enabling tokens in multiple places there still is the issue
with multiple instances of a process. Were we to start another instance of the
process, and thus put a token in p1, it would not be possible to distinguish the
different tokens from the different instances. Therefore colored Petri nets can be
used. We ”color” each token corresponding to the process instance and can use
the color of the token to distinguish between the different instances. An simplified
example is shown in Figure 4.6, where it can be seen that three different instances
of the process is running; one process with its tokens colored green, one with its
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Proposed framework and implementation
p1
receive order
p2
process order
p3
p4
send products
update inventory
p5
p6
complete order
p7
Figure 4.5: A simple Petri net representing a business process. With tokens in
multiple places..
tokens colored red and the last one with its token colored yellow.
The color
represents data that a colored Petri net can encode in the token. A colored Petri
net is defined by [Wes19] as; a tuple (Σ, P, T, A, N, C, G, E, I) such that
• Σ is a nonempty finite set of types, called color sets
• P is a finite set of places
• T is a finite set of transitions
• A is a finite set of arc identifiers, such that P ∩T = P ∩A = T ∩A = ∅
• N : A →(P × T) ∪(T × P) is a node function that maps each arc identifier
to a pair (start node, end node) of the arc
• C : P →Σ is a color function that associates each place with a color set
• G : T →BooleanExpr is a guard function that maps each transition to a
predicate
• E : A →Expr is an arc expression that evaluates to a multi-set over the
color set of the place
• I is an initial marking of the colored Petri net
We can add a few more requirements to the definition of a colored Petri net in
order to achieve a Workflow net. It has three requirements in addition to the
listed above;
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Implementation details
41
• It has a distinguished place i ∈P (called initial place) that has no incoming
edge, that is, •i = ∅
• It has a distinguished place o ∈P (called final place) that has no outgoing
edge, that is, o• = ∅.
• Every place and every transition is located on a path from the initial place
to the final place.
Basically saying that the Workflow net should have a beginning, and end and
every transition between them should be reachable and be able to reach a final
place.
p1
receive order
p2
process order
p3
p4
send products
update inventory
p5
p6
complete order
p7
Figure 4.6: A Colored Petri net representing a business process. Each color
represents a different instance of the process..
For the splits in a business process [Wes19] shows to way of enabling the behavior
in a workflow net. An explicit split where a place for each outgoing connection,
or arc, and an implicit split, where the gateway, is simply removed and only a
single place is needed to enable the subsequent transitions. The implicit way
does, however, enable all of the subsequent transitions concurrently. This thesis
will use the explicit way throughout, as there might be situations where it is not
desired to enable both transitions concurrently. With the use of Arc Expressions
from the definition of colored Petri nets in combination with the explicit split,
it is possible to only put a token in the right place based on the evaluation of
the arc expression. Looking at the running example in Figure 4.3 an XOR split
gateway like one, after the activity Check Claim, that routes the flow based on if
the claim is local or not, will only put a token in the right place and will therefore
not allow Asses urgency and the XOR join, and in turn the Managed event, to
be enabled concurrently.
For us to be doing Model Driven Engineering we need to use the given model and
a Model-To-Text transformation tool. Eclipse Foundation has a project called
Eclipse Modeling Project which in turn includes a project called Model-To-Text
==PAGE:50==
42
4 Proposed framework and implementation
Figure 4.7: Sample workflow nets illustrating the difference between explicit
xor split (a) and implicit xor split (b). Figure taken from Figure
4.49 from [Wes19].
(M2T). There are three sub-projects in the M2T project; Jet, Acceleo and XPand
[Fou22]. This thesis will make use of Acceleo as the chosen M2T tool. The choice
is justified by the fact that Acceleo still seems to be under active development. Jet
has not been updated since 2011, XPand since 2016. Acceleo recieved the latest
update 2022-11-29 at the time of writing. This itself doesn’t mean Acceleo is the
best tool of the three. It might mean Jet and XPand is already feature complete,
however a quick survey also showed that Acceleo has the best documentation
of online learning resources making it the obvious choice of tool for a modern
MDE framework. The work done in [KMS22] also includes a plugin for Eclipse
to support the SecBPMN2BC models. With this plugin and Acceleo in place
it is possible to load the SecBPMN2BC model and start using Acceleo for the
Model-to-Text transformation and generate textual artifacts to run.
4.2.1
Mapping SecBPMN2BC elements
With the M2T tool in place and a understanding of how to express business
processes as workflow nets, we can map the different elements to pieces using
Acceleo. The following section will discuss the mapping of some of the important
elements.
Using a workflow net we obviously need a token for each instance of the process.
This is done by creating an object with properties on the owners wallet address
and a generated process ID that is based on the owners wallet and the times-
tamp of the current block on the blockchain. By adding the timestamp we allow
for the same wallet to generate multiple processIDs without collision as seen in
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Implementation details
43
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Creation of Tokens
Token ←{
ProcessID ←hash(wallet, timestamp)
▷Using keccak
Owner ←wallet
}
For each activity in the process the M2T generation needs to look at incoming
and outcoming connections. A special case exists for activities with no incoming
connections, proposed the start event of the whole process. This special activ-
ity is then in charge of creating the Token from Algorithm 1 and storing in the
running program be it on a blockchain or the off-chain component. The function
in will then put a token for all outgoing activity connections. The framework
use a naming convention for token storage; that is token_to_from. An example
from the running example would be token_reportClaim_startProcess.
Af-
ter a Citizen would start the process a token is therefore created and put in
token_reportClaim_startProcess, only then should it be possible for the Citi-
zen to start the activity Report Claim. Is the SoD security requirement annotated
on the process or activity the M2T transformation will add checks in place for
making sure the caller is of the right type of participant.
Algorithm 2 Starting the process
if Separation of Duties then
add check for caller = participant
end if
create Token
for outgoingConnections do
if outgoingConnection = XOR Split then
to ←crawlForActivity
if choice then
put Token in token_to_this
end if
else
to ←incomingConnection
put Token in token_to_this
end if
end for
For all activities in the model with incoming connections, we will need to add a
check for the token being in place before execution. As of right now, we also takes
==PAGE:52==
44
4 Proposed framework and implementation
into consideration four different scenarios for an activity. We can have a plain
activity in the business process and thus the generated method signature will only
have the processID as input, if the activity is followed by a XOR gateway, routing
the flow to a specific place based on a condition, the method signature will also
include an input for the choice of route. The third scenario is when then activity
creates a Data Object, by defining an outgoing connection to a Data Object, the
method signature will need inputs for each Data Object linked to the activity,
e.g., the reportClaim activity will need input for the Citizen’s data Data Object.
The last scenario the framework will consider is the combination of the three, i.e.
the activity is followed by an XOR gateway and the activity is creating Data
Objects, the method signature will need inputs for the processID, the choice for
the gateway and inputs for the Data Objects. Afterwards the M2T will generate
a check to see if the right tokens are in place before allowing the execution of said
activity. As gateways might be between the preceding activity and the current,
we need to recursively crawl for activities preceding the current. An example
would be the Asses Urgency activity that needs a token from the Check claim
activity. Another example is if the preceding gateway is a join gateway like for
the Managed end event for the Resident Registration lane. In that case we would
have to traverse all the way back to Check Claim, Send Gift Card and Notify std
case. Only if one of those holds a valid token the Managed event can be fired. An
visual demonstration is shown in Figure 4.8 of multiple, in this scenario parallel,
gateways in a row. The recursive function will then map the tokens as seen in
Figure 4.9. It is obviously also required to delete said tokens after execution,
which will use the same logic as the checks. Lastly, as for the special case for
starting events, the executed activity will put tokens in the right places, even
when followed by XOR splits. Pseudo code can be seen in Algorithm 3. It might
seem ineﬀicient to loop over the same incoming connections multiple times, but
that choice is justified as the translation is only to be run once or seldom, and
by doing so the generated code has a much higher level of both readability and
maintainability.
As stated in the SecBPMN2BC: sepecifcations and rules in [KMS23]. A lot of the
security requirements can actually be enforced natively on the blockchain. The
general algorithm holds for both Ethereum and Hyperledger Fabric, but with
minor differences in the implementations details. Specially some of the security
requirements will have different implementation details for different blockchains,
being either public or private as mentioned earlier. For Hyperledger Fabric, users
are added by a governing entity, as described in Section 2.1.6, meaning for the
Authenticity rule the identity of the participating users will already be known,
however for Ethereum being a public blockchain, additional logic will have to
be implemented in order to enforce the security requirement. This is done by
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Implementation details
45
Activity A
Activity D
Activity C
Activity B
Figure 4.8: Example of multiple gateways in a row.
Activity A
token_activityB_activityA
token_activityC_activityA
token_activityD_activityA
Activity B
Activity C
Activity D
Figure 4.9: How the mapping of tokens is done for Figure 4.8.
==PAGE:54==
46
4 Proposed framework and implementation
Algorithm 3 Generation of methods for activities
if activityHasXORSplit and activityHasDataObjects then
function ActivityName(processID, choice, DO_inputs)
else if activityHasDataObjects then
function ActivityName(processID, DO_inputs)
else if activityHasXORSplit) then
function ActivityName(processID, choice)
else
function ActivityName(processID)
end if
for incomingConnections do
if incomingConnection = XOR Gateway then
from ←crawlForActivity
check for Token in token_this_from
end if
from ←incomingConnection
check for Token in token_this_from
end for
for incomingConnections do
if incomingConnection = XOR Gateway then
from ←crawlForActivity
check for Token in token_this_from
end if
from ←incomingConnection
check for Token in token_this_from
end for
for incomingConnections do
if incomingConnection = XOR Gateway then
from ←crawlForActivity
delete Token from token_this_from
end if
from ←incomingConnection
delete Token from token_this_from
end for
for Data Objects of digest, encrypted, unecrypted do
retrieve Data Object for processID
end for
for outgoingConnections do
if outgoingConnection = XOR Split then
to ←crawlForActivity
if choice then
put Token in token_to_this
end if
else
to ←incomingConnection
put Token in token_to_this
end if
end for
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Implementation details
47
checking if any activity in the process has its OnChainExecution property set to
true and also the Authenticity annotation is on the model, if so the M2T will
generate a mapping of wallets to identities, and also add a method for adding an
identity as shown in Algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4 Authenticity
if
activity has OnChainExecution = true and Authenticity
annotation is set then
create dictionary mapping wallet to identity
function addIdentity(identity):
UserIdentityMap(wallet) ←identity
end if
As different pools can have different values set for the OnChainModel it is also
required to check for that case. If the Citizen pool were to be on-chain and the
Resident Registration off-chain methods on the smart contract will be generated
in order to allow the off-chain component to inquire part of the Workflow net on
the blockchain. This means the Workflow net can be divided into multiple parts,
i.e. in order to start the Receive Claim event on the off-chain component it needs
to inquire the blockchain if a token is available. Likewise when the managed is
finally fired, it will communicate to the blockchain that a token should be placed
in front of the Receive Notification event, thus allowing the Citizen on blockchain
to start the Receive Notification event. This means the M2T generation will have
to generate methods to answer request if the activity is allowed to be executed or
not. The methods is provided on the basis of Message Flows between the pools.
If the other end of the Message Flow is of different OnChainModel value, methods
will be generated, as seen in Algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 Function for availability checks
function activityAvailable
if
activity has outgoing message flows and receiving end has
OnChainModel=false then
if tokens required is set then
delete tokens
return true
end if
end if
Likewise for incoming message flows, we need to put tokens on the blockchain,
see Algorithm 6
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Proposed framework and implementation
Algorithm 6 Function for enabling activity on-chain
function enableActivity
if
activity has incoming message flows and receiving end has
OnChainModel=false then
put Token in token_to_this
end if
We also need too support the OnChainExecution property, as if set to false, the
task will be handled off-chain. As the task is handled off-chain the application has
no way of enforcing the execution and must rely on trust from the participant
doing the task. The running example in Figure 4.3 has been assigned a value
of false for the OnChainExecution property on for the Send gift card activity.
The M2T translation will therefor generate methods for starting the activity and
ending the activity. A user then has to execute the start activity method when
doing the task, and obviously execute the end task, upon completion of the task.
The mapping of the methods to the workflow net, will be as if the two methods
was two different activties. This means the start activity method will consumes
a token and put a token in front of the end method, and the end method will
consume said token and out in front of the following activities based on the same
logic as for the other activities shown in Algorithm 3.
For the web-portal specifics part of the driver different solutions must be imple-
mented. For Ethereum, in order to connect to the blockchain, different JavaScript
libraries exist. Ethers.js [Eth22] is a Ethereum Foundation backed library that
connects to the Ethereum blockchain via JavaScript. The M2T generation will
then generate methods for each activity with OnChainExecution set to true, and
exposes the methods to the web-portal.
For Hyperledger Fabric the web-portal specifics of the adapter differ quite a bit
from Ethereum. Like for the Ethereum driver a function file will be generated,
but instead of using the Ethers.js library, Hyperledger offers a NodeJS Gate-
way[Fou18] that provides a simplified, minimal API for submitting transactions
to a Fabric network.
As the Gateway API has to run as an application the
driver will also generate an Express.js REST API, that will communicate with
the blockchain with its Gateway API and expose the endpoints corresponding
the the functions on the smart contract. The function file will therefore, instead
of using Ethers.js, send request to the REST API, and expose the methods to
the web-portal. A detailed view of the files generated for the Ethereum and Hy-
perledger Fabric driver is shown in Figure 4.10. The web-portals functions files,
exposes the same functions to the web-portal, but how they communicate with
the blockchain is clearly different. The arrows shows the line of communication
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Implementation details
49
on the off-chain side.
The off-chain component also implements a workflow net as mentioned earlier.
And the generated file will, depending on the OnChainModel for the given process
put a token on the blockchain by utilizing the function file or put a token locally,
in a in-memory storage Algorithm 7. Also based on BlockchainType property
of the model, function will be added to off-chain component for adding Identities
used for the Authenticity security annotation.
Algorithm 7 Put token on the right component
if OnChainModel=true) then
blockchainFunctions.enableNextActivity
else
add token_to_from in local storage
end if
4.2.2
Setup of architecture
In order to run the generated code some components must be in place beforehand.
For the off-chain component a React application is used. React is a JavaScript
framework created by Meta for building UIs. This is exactly what we are using
it for, as we need a UI to interact with the application. The generated off-chain
component is then inserted into the React application and React will render the
UI based on the generated code.
For local development Hardhat [Har22] was used for, compiling the produced So-
lidity contract, setting up a local Ethereum network, and deploying the compiled
smart contract. When setting up the Ethereum network, it creates test accounts
with pre-deposited Ethers on, for easy testing. This speeds up the development
time significantly as we do not have to worry about gas fees and the like.
For Hyperledger Fabric, Hyperledger offers a commandline tool for local devo-
plement. The commandline tool sets up Docker containers for all the required
nodes, including the orderer node, and organization nodes. For this thesis the
commandline script, was edited to support three different organizations, one for
each participant in the running example from Figure 4.3. Unlike Ethereum, there
is no gas fees on Hyperledger as discussed in Section 2.1, but we still need ac-
counts for the different participants. These have to be manually added for local
development in order to test the architecture.
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Proposed framework and implementation
Model-To-Text
Ethereum
Hyperledger
Solidity
Smart Contract
JavaScript
Smart Contract
Web-portal
functions
with Ether.js
Web-portal
functions
REST API
Gateway
with Hyperledger 
NodeJS library
SecBPMN2BC
Figure 4.10: Detailed overview of the files generated for the Ethereum and Hy-
perledger driver.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Evaluation
In order to evaluate the proposed framework we can compare it to the state-
of-the-art in the field.
This includes Caterpillar and Lorikeet as described in
Chapter 3. It has not been possible to get working demo for Lorikeet as it has
been patented for commercial use and thus we can only compare it to the written
details of the software. Caterpillar on the other hand is open-source and a demo
of the software can be run.
The first thing that comes to mind when using Caterpillar, and looking a screen
recordings of Lorikeet is the visual impression one gets. As both Lorikeet and
Caterpillar implements more features regarding managing the BPMN models,
and for newer versions, to edit processes in their application, the minimal viable
product produced for this thesis is simple lacking in terms of ease of use. Both
Caterpillar and Lorikeet implements BPMN.js, a JavaScript library for visualizing
and editing BPMN processes created by Camunda, a well-established company
offering software tools for BPM [Gmb22]. As discussed in Chapter 3 both of them
doesn’t support SecBPMN, and only limited security, like access control, in their
respective web application.
The focus in this thesis has been on the translation of business processes to
multiple blockchains and support for more security requirements as proposed in
SecBPMN and in turn SecBPMN2BC. This is where the proposed framework
shines as we challenge the state-of-the-art on that aspect. As we support dif-
ferent blockchains we also exploits the features of each which both Lorikeet and
Caterpillar does not.
We also evaluated the proposed framework and architecture by performing an
empirical survey based on the approach given in [Woh+12]. The approach guides
the designers of software systems to a critical analysis on the validity threats.
In order to address the research question defined in the introduction, the following
empirical research questions have been identified.
==PAGE:60==
52
5 Evaluation
• ERQ1 To what extent is the architecture, generated artifacts of the trans-
lator and the translation rules blockchain agnostic?
• ERQ2 To what extent are the produced smart contracts considered secure,
given the security requirements listed for the process diagram?
• ERQ3 To what extent can the generated code shorten the development
time for the blockchains targeted?
ERQ1 aims at validating that the proposed framework is blockchain agnostic in
some form, and thus help in answering the research question on the topic. ERQ2
focus on the security part of the framework, and how well the produced smart
contract implements the given security requirements for the business process.
At last ERQ3 aims at validating the work on shorten the development time for
application-specific implementation. We will focus on persons of knowledge in the
sector of business processes and BPMN modeling, preferable with knowledge on
security and blockchains to some extent and will therefor target specific persons
instead of anonymous subjects.
In order to answer the given empirical research questions a questionnaire is pro-
posed consisting of six questions;
1. Do you consider the produced architecture blockchain agnostic?
2. Would you consider it easy to implement an adaptor for another blockchain
of choice?
3. Would you consider the implementation secure regarding the given security
requirement?
4. Seeing the produced code, would you consider it a help in shortening devel-
opment time, and do you feel it exploits the features of Ethereum?
5. Seeing the produced code, would you consider it a help in shortening de-
velopment time, and do you feel it exploits the features of Hyperledger
Fabric?
6. Is the setup of the framework easy enough for practical use?
The questionnaire ended up as an interview with a single person. Partner and
co-founder of the consulting house Staun&Stender, which specialize in enterprise
==PAGE:61==
5 Evaluation
53
architecture, and uses BPMN on a frequent basis, offered to spare on the proposed
framework. A short explanation of the framework and architecture was given, in
order to lay a foundation for him to answer the question upon. Also the running
example of from Figure 4.3 was shown and a short explanation of the security
and blockchain annotation was given.
For question 1 and 2 the answer was positive in regard to the architecture being
blockchain agnostic. He emphasized the fact that the framework is using the idea
of a hexagon architecture being a good idea, and after seeing the translation rules
being essentially the same but outputting different syntax based on the target
language he thought it would be fairly simple to implement another blockchain.
He made a though experiment on how easy it would be to swap out the imple-
mentation for a non-blockchain one. If the blockchain element instead would be
implemented as a Java application with a MySQL database and if that would be
possible easily as well. With how the web-portal is working and just expecting
the function exposed from the function file generated, he agreed that even that
would be a doable task, thus labeling the architecture as blockchain agnostic.
Although not knowing all the security annotations beforehand, and not knowing
the secure expansion of BPMN, the security annotations that was shown during
the interview, he thought was fine. A screenshot of the web-portal was shown for
when Separation of Duties annotations was on the process and when it was not,
which shows the UI of the web-portal changing based on that condition. Likewise
the generated code fragments of the security requirements was shown for multiple
annotations, including Authenticity. Based on those things he was convinced the
implementation was secure regarding the security requirements to an acceptable
extent.
For question 4 and 5 the answer was mostly the same as for question 1 and 2.
He definitely felt it would shorting development time for both blockchains, and
praised the way it scaffolds a skeleton smart contract and off-chain component in
order to implement business logic for the tasks. As his knowledge of blockchains,
especially private blockchains like Hyperledger Fabric, is limited, he could not say
to what extent the framework exploits the features of the different blockchains.
He could only agree that, for Authenticity, when the private blockchain has native
support for that, he agreed it was used in the M2T translation.
For the last question, he was sceptical on the setup was easy enough for practical
use. The fact that you need to run a M2T framework as plugin in Eclipse and
setup the architecture to run the web-portal and off-chain component was a bit
off-setting for practical and easy use.
==PAGE:62==
54
5 Evaluation
With these questions answered, we can in turn answer the empirical research
questions. Overall the feedback was very positive. Especially with the imple-
mentation of the hexagon architecture was praised as a good thing and how the
adaptors could easily be swapped for some other implementations. The overall
sentiment was also, that the framework and generated code would shorten the
development time, and the user of the framework could focus on implementing
business domain logic.
Even though the feedback was overall positive for the proposed framework and
architecture provided, the feedback is, however, based on the feedback from a
single person. In order to verify the usefulness of the framework more validation
is needed.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and
future work
With the still increasing interest in blockchain technology from from different
areas of business, while an ever increasing demand for higher security, this thesis
aim was to explore the possibility of exploiting blockchain technology to bring
transparency in inter-organizational business processes. The proposed framework
relies on the SecBPMN2BC method and M2T translation for opening new to
secure and transparent business processes.
The main goal of the thesis can be considered successfully fulfilled, even if more
evaluation still needs to be carried out. The thesis objectives in Section 1.1 was
successfully accomplished and eﬀiciently drove, together with the research ques-
tion, the thesis in the desired direction. It has been shown that the proposed
architecture is somewhat blockchain agnostic, by using a modular hexagon ar-
chitecture allowing adapters for different blockchains. The proposed framework
generates smart contracts that enforce a lot of different security requirements,
and given a business process models with security and blockchain annotations we
it can generate blockchain specific implementations.
6.0.1
Future work
Since only the security requirements from the SecBPMN specifications have been
implemented in the framework, thus missing the different privity and enforceabil-
ity annotations from SecBPMN2BC, future work would definitely look into and
implement those as well, as they offer greater security and finer control of read
data access for the linked elements statically and dynamically. We simply ran
out of time before exploring those security annotations to its fullest.
In order to reach the same level of usability as the current state-of-the-art, future
work includes polishing the web-portal in order to allow for business process
==PAGE:64==
56
6 Conclusion and future work
management, and possible viewing and editing SecBPMN2BC models, e.g. by
forking and extending the open source library BPMN.js mentioned in Chapter 5.
To get on par with the latest version of Caterpillar, future work might also include
dynamic data structures, enabling the possibility of redeploying a the generated
smart contract, a feature desirable, in order to become a full-fledged BPMS.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[Bal17]
Arati Baliga. “Understanding blockchain consensus models.” In: Per-
sistent 4.1 (2017), page 14.
[BK04]
Shaun Bowler and Jeffrey A. Karp. “Politicians, Scandals, and Trust
in Government.” In: Political Behavior 26.3 (September 2004), pages 271–
287.
[BLJ22]
Peter Bodorik, Christian Liu, and Dawn Jutla. “TABS: Transform-
ing automatically BPMN models into blockchain smart contracts.”
In: Blockchain: Research and Applications (2022), page 100115. issn:
2096-7209. doi: 10.1016/j.bcra.2022.100115.
[Bra+18]
Santiago Bragagnolo et al. “SmartInspect: solidity smart contract
inspector.” In: 2018 International workshop on blockchain oriented
software engineering (IWBOSE). IEEE. 2018, pages 9–18.
[Bru+12]
Achim D. Brucker et al. “SecureBPMN.” In: Proceedings of the 17th
ACM symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies. ACM,
June 2012. doi: 10.1145/2295136.2295160.
[But14]
Vitalik Buterin. “Ethereum White Paper: A Next Generation Smart
Contract & Decentralized Application Platform.” In: (2014). url:
https://ethereum.org/669c9e2e2027310b6b3cdce6e1c52962/
Ethereum_Whitepaper_-_Buterin_2014.pdf.
[Cat20]
Caterpillar. Caterpillar repository. 2020. url: https : / / github .
com/orlenyslp/Caterpillar (visited on March 10, 2023).
[CH13]
Yulia Cherdantseva and Jeremy Hilton. “A Reference Model of In-
formation Assurance & Security.” In: 2013 International Conference
on Availability, Reliability and Security. 2013, pages 546–555. doi:
10.1109/ARES.2013.72.
[Cha79]
David Lee Chaum. Computer Systems established, maintained and
trusted by mutually suspicious groups. Electronics Research Labora-
tory, University of California, 1979.
==PAGE:66==
58
Bibliography
[Cic+19]
Claudio Di Ciccio et al. “Blockchain Support for Collaborative Busi-
ness Processes.” In: Informatik Spektrum 42.3 (May 2019), pages 182–
190. doi: 10.1007/s00287-019-01178-x.
[CL99]
Miguel Castro and Barbara Liskov. “Practical Byzantine Fault Toler-
ance.” In: Proceedings of the Third Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation. OSDI ’99. USENIX Association, 1999,
pages 173–186. isbn: 1880446391.
[Cou11]
George F. Coulouris. Distributed Systems. Pearson Education, 2011.
isbn: 978-0273760597.
[Cro+16]
Kyle Croman et al. “On Scaling Decentralized Blockchains.” In: Fi-
nancial Cryptography and Data Security. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2016, pages 106–125. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-53357-4_8.
[Del+16]
Kevin Delmolino et al. “Step by Step Towards Creating a Safe Smart
Contract: Lessons and Insights from a Cryptocurrency Lab.” In: Fi-
nancial Cryptography and Data Security. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2016, pages 79–94. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-53357-4_6.
[Dum+18]
Marlon Dumas et al. Fundamentals of Business Process Management.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-56509-
4.
[Eth22]
Ethers. Ethers - a simple, compact and complete library for all your
Ethereum needs. 2022. url: https : / / ethers . org/ (visited on
March 12, 2023).
[FLP85]
Michael J. Fischer, Nancy A. Lynch, and Michael S. Paterson. “Im-
possibility of Distributed Consensus with One Faulty Process.” In: J.
ACM 32.2 (April 1985), pages 374–382. doi: 10.1145/3149.214121.
[For15]
World Economic Forum. Deep Shift - Technology Tipping Points
and Societal Impact. September 2015. url: https://www3.weforum.
org/docs/WEF_GAC15_Technological_Tipping_Points_report_
2015.pdf.
[Fou18]
The Hyperledger Foundation. “Introduction to Hyperledger.” In: (2018).
url: https://www.hyperledger.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/
07/HL_Whitepaper_IntroductiontoHyperledger.pdf.
[Fou22]
Eclipse Foundation. Model To Text (M2T). November 2022. url:
https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/modeling.m2t/ (vis-
ited on March 11, 2023).
[Fou23a]
Ethereum Foundation. Ethereum Staking. 2023. url: https : / /
ethereum.org/en/staking/ (visited on March 6, 2023).
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
59
[Fou23b]
Ethereum Foundation. What is Ethereum. 2023. url: https : / /
ethereum.org/en/what-is-ethereum/ (visited on March 6, 2023).
[Fou23c]
Hyperledger Foundation. Hyperledger Fabric Introduction. 2023. url:
https://hyperledger- fabric.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
whatis.html (visited on March 7, 2023).
[Gmb22]
Camunda Services GmbH. BPMN 2.0 viewer and editor. 2022. url:
https://bpmn.io/toolkit/bpmn-js/ (visited on March 13, 2023).
[Han21]
Jing Han. “Intelligent Data Management System and Performance
Joint Blockchain Model for Commercial Bank Management Account-
ing.” In: 2021 Fifth International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in
Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC). 2021, pages 1525–
1528. doi: 10.1109/I-SMAC52330.2021.9641031.
[Har22]
Hardhat. Ethereum development environment for professionals. 2022.
url: https://hardhat.org/ (visited on March 12, 2023).
[Hat+19]
Jigna Hathaliya et al. “Blockchain-Based Remote Patient Monitor-
ing in Healthcare 4.0.” In: 2019 IEEE 9th International Conference
on Advanced Computing (IACC). 2019, pages 87–91. doi: 10.1109/
IACC48062.2019.8971593.
[HS91]
Stuart Haber and W. Scott Stornetta. “How to time-stamp a digital
document.” In: Journal of Cryptology 3.2 (January 1991), pages 99–
111. doi: 10.1007/bf00196791.
[IBM23a]
IBM. Smart contracts defined. 2023. url: https://www.ibm.com/
topics/smart-contracts (visited on March 1, 2023).
[IBM23b]
IBM. What is Hyperledger Fabric? 2023. url: https://www.ibm.
com/topics/hyperledger (visited on March 6, 2023).
[KMS22]
Julius Köpke, Giovanni Meroni, and Mattia Salnitri. SecBPMN2BC:
specifications and rules. 2022. url: http://purl.org/secbpmn2bc.
[KMS23]
Julius Köpke, Giovanni Meroni, and Mattia Salnitri. “Designing se-
cure business processes for blockchains with SecBPMN2BC.” In: Fu-
ture Generation Computer Systems 141 (April 2023), pages 382–398.
doi: 10.1016/j.future.2022.11.013.
[Lau+20]
Corey Lauster et al. “Blockchain-based Cross-Organizational Execu-
tion Framework for Dynamic Integration of Process Collaborations.”
In: WI2020 Zentrale Tracks. GITO Verlag, March 2020, pages 1802–
1817. doi: 10.30844/wi_2020_r10-klinger.
==PAGE:68==
60
Bibliography
[Lop+19]
Orlenys Lopez-Pintado et al. “Interpreted Execution of Business Pro-
cess Models on Blockchain.” In: 2019 IEEE 23rd International En-
terprise Distributed Object Computing Conference (EDOC). IEEE,
October 2019. doi: 10.1109/edoc.2019.00033. url: https://doi.
org/10.1109/edoc.2019.00033.
[Lóp+19a]
Orlenys López-Pintado et al. “Caterpillar: A business process execu-
tion engine on the Ethereum blockchain.” In: Software: Practice and
Experience (May 2019). doi: 10.1002/spe.2702.
[Lóp+19b]
Orlenys López-Pintado et al. “Dynamic Role Binding in Blockchain-
Based Collaborative Business Processes.” In: Advanced Information
Systems Engineering. Springer International Publishing, 2019, pages 399–
414. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-21290-2_25.
[Lóp+22]
Orlenys López-Pintado et al. “Controlled flexibility in blockchain-
based collaborative business processes.” In: Information Systems 104
(2022), page 101622.
[Lu+20]
Qinghua Lu et al. “Integrated model-driven engineering of blockchain
applications for business processes and asset management.” In: Soft-
ware: Practice and Experience 51.5 (November 2020), pages 1059–
1079. doi: 10.1002/spe.2931.
[Mar12]
Fowler Martin. Patterns of Enterprise Application Architecture (Addison-
Wesley Signature Series (Fowler)). Addison-Wesley Professional, March
2012.
[Mar21]
Bernard Marr. The 5 big problems with blockchain everyone should be
aware of. July 2021. url: https://bernardmarr.com/the-5-big-
problems-with-blockchain-everyone-should-be-aware-of/.
[Nak08]
Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.
December 2008. url: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.
[OMG14]
Object Management Group (OMG). Business Process Model and
Notation. January 2014. url: https://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN.
[Pau+19]
Remigijus Paulavičius et al. “A Decade of Blockchain: Review of the
Current Status, Challenges, and Future Directions.” In: Informatica
30.4 (January 2019), pages 729–748. doi: 10.15388/informatica.
2019.227.
[SDG15]
Mattia Salnitri, Fabiano Dalpiaz, and Paolo Giorgini. “Designing
secure business processes with SecBPMN.” In: Software & Systems
Modeling 16.3 (October 2015), pages 737–757. doi: 10.1007/s10270-
015-0499-4.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
61
[Sha+21]
Neha Sharma et al. “Introduction to blockchain and distributed
systems—fundamental theories and concepts.” In: Blockchain for
Smart Cities. Elsevier, 2021, pages 183–210. doi: 10.1016/b978-
0-12-824446-3.00002-8.
[SPG16]
Mattia Salnitri, Elda Paja, and Paolo Giorgini. “Maintaining Secure
Business Processes in Light of Socio-Technical Systems’ Evolution.”
In: 2016 IEEE 24th International Requirements Engineering Confer-
ence Workshops (REW). IEEE, September 2016. doi: 10.1109/rew.
2016.038.
[Sza97]
Nick Szabo. “Formalizing and Securing Relationships on Public Net-
works.” In: First Monday 2.9 (September 1997). doi: 10.5210/fm.
v2i9.548.
[Tan22]
Sudeep Tanwar. Blockchain Technology. Springer Nature Singapore,
2022. isbn: 978-981-19-1488-1. doi: 10.1007/978-981-19-1488-1.
[TLW18]
An Binh Tran, Qinghua Lu, and Ingo Weber. “Lorikeet: A Model-
Driven Engineering Tool for Blockchain-Based Business Process Ex-
ecution and Asset Management.” In: International Conference on
Business Process Management. 2018.
[WAP14]
Stephen A White, Thomad Allweyer, and Nathaniel Palmer. BPMN
2.0 Handbook Second Edition: Methods, Concepts, Case Studies and
Standards in Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN). CreateS-
pace Independent Publishing Platform, November 3, 2014. isbn: 978-
1503045750.
[War21]
Craig Warmke. “What is bitcoin?” In: Inquiry (January 2021), pages 1–
43. doi: 10.1080/0020174x.2020.1860123.
[Web+16]
Ingo Weber et al. “Untrusted business process monitoring and execu-
tion using blockchain.” In: Business Process Management: 14th Inter-
national Conference, BPM 2016, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, September
18-22, 2016. Proceedings 14. Springer. 2016, pages 329–347.
[Wes19]
Mathias Weske. Business Process Management: Concepts, Languages,
Architectures. English. Springer, June 22, 2019, page 434. isbn: 978-
3-662-59432-2.
[Woh+12]
Claes Wohlin et al. Experimentation in Software Engineering. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2012. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-29044-2.
[Wol20]
Ben Wolford. GDPR - Right To Be Forgotten. April 2020. url:
https://gdpr.eu/right-to-be-forgotten/ (visited on March 11,
2023).
==PAGE:70==
62
Bibliography
[Zhe+18]
Zibin Zheng et al. “Blockchain challenges and opportunities: a sur-
vey.” In: International Journal of Web and Grid Services 14.4 (2018),
page 352. doi: 10.1504/ijwgs.2018.095647.
