==PAGE:1==
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis
in sugar based Biorefinery sector
A structured decision making framework to prioritize target applications.
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
A structured decision making framework to prioritize target applications.
Master Thesis
March, 2023
By
Manas Pandharinath Dalvi
(MSc. Industrial Engineering and Management)
In collaboration with
Aquaporin A/s (Denmark)
Under the guidance of
DTU’s Supervisor:
Michael Bruhn Barford
(Associate Professor - Department of Technology, Management and Economics DTU)
Aquaporin’s Supervisor
Dr. Nicola Michelon (Head of Commercial Engineering Forward Osmosis)
Adarsh Raj (Market Development Manager)
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Products: Aquaporin A/s & Background: Ilja C. Hendel,
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Technology, Man-
agement and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. in Industrial Engineering and
Management
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of general process flow, excel and
statistics.
Manas Pandharinath Dalvi - s123456
Signature
Date
ii
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis presents a comprehensive techno-commercial analysis of the application of
Forward Osmosis (FO) technology in the sugar-based biorefinery sector. The biorefin-
ery industry is growing considering the potential of biofuels to replace fossil fuels due to
their high greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs). However, biofuel production is complex
and requires multi-step processing, and it is also water and energy-intensive. Forward
Osmosis is an emerging technology that provides simple and efficient industrial solutions
for addressing concentration and water recovery requirements in a process.
The master’s thesis presents a comprehensive techno-commercial analysis of Forward
Osmosis (FO) technology in the sugar-based biorefinery sector that produces bioethanol.
The study aims to provide decision-makers with insights by comparing the impact of FO
technology with the current state in commercial and technical aspects. To achieve this,
a structured decision-making framework is utilized, which consists of a combination of
different decision gates with predefined objectives, powered by independent evaluation
methodologies. The framework helps to evaluate possible application scenarios for FO,
providing decision-makers with clear outcomes for the applications they should focus on.
In this study, a sugarcane-based biorefinery setup was analyzed. The process and pro-
cess parameters were studied, and 10 possible scenarios were identified where Forward
Osmosis (FO) could be applicable. These 10 scenarios were preliminarily assessed for
feasibility check with current FO product limitations. Four out of those were further eval-
uated for technical and commercial benefits over the existing process. The results of the
technical and commercial assessments were further combined to give a single compara-
ble metric for further decision-making.
The outcome of this study is a prioritized target application list based on the assessment
mentioned above. This list would assist decision-makers in concluding the feasibility of
Forward Osmosis (FO) application in this sector. It would also help in facilitating clear fo-
cus in their business development strategy and quantifying the benefits of their technology
to the customer.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Manas Pandharinath Dalvi, MSc Industrial Engineering and Management, DTU
As I hand in my master thesis, life brings me much closer to the final step of another
amazing chapter of my life. This submission brings a bittersweet feeling of accomplish-
ment, nostalgia along with the reality of bidding adieu to one of the most wonderful years
of my life. This was an indeed a roller coaster experience filled with abundance of enlight-
enment and knowledge, which now comes to a haul.
Firstly, I would like to extend my gratitude to Michael Bruhn Barford, my supervisor at
DTU who was very supportive throughout the process. His expertise, guidance and en-
couragement have been extremely helpful in shaping this thesis. Moreover, I would also
like to thank Department of Technology, Management and Economic at DTU, that allowed
me to structure my thesis the way I wanted.
Additionally, a heart filled appreciation for Aquaporin A/s that offered me a challenging
problem around which I could construct my thesis. Special shout out to Dr. Nicola Mich-
elon and Adarsh Raj, who have provided their timely encouragement, unwavering assis-
tance and infinite inputs with their industry insights that helped me grasp the practicality
aspects.
Moreover, I big thanks to all my friends and colleagues who have helped me in vari-
ous difficult times during this process. Lastly, but most importantly, deeply grateful to my
family who have supported and pushed me unconditionally, despite being 6000 km away.
iv
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:7==
0.1
Abbreviations
Table 1: Important abbreviation used in the report.
Description
Abbreviation
Forward Osmosis
(FO)
Hollow Fiber Forward Osmosis
(HFFO)
Reverse Osmosis
(RO)
Aquaporin - Company
(AQP)
1st - 2nd - 3rd Generation
(1G) - (2G) - (3G)
Capital Expenditure
(CAPEX)
Operational Expenditure
(OPEX)
Cost-Benefit Analysis
(CBA)
Net Present Value
(NPV)
Business to Cost Ratio
(BCR)
Internal Rate of Return
(IRR)
Feasibility Risk Assessment
(FRA)
Multi- Criteria Decision Analysis
(MCDA)
Analytical Hierarchy Process
(AHP)
Composite Model of Assessment
(COSIMA)
Total Dissolved Solids
(TDS)
Total Suspended Solids
(TSS)
Total Nitrogen
(TN)
Total Phosphorous
(TP)
Total Potassium
(TK)
Parts per million
(ppm)
Multi Effect Evaporator
(MEE)
Effluent Treatment Plant
(ETP)
Condensate Polishing Unit
(CPU)
Ultra-Filtration
(UF)
High Pressure Reverse Osmosis
(HPRO)
These are used frequently, however the additional abbreviation are mentioned in their
respective sections.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
0.1
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Aquaporin - Rethinking water filtration with Biotechnology . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Techno-commercial exploration in Forward Osmosis . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Biorefinery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methodology
17
3.1
Decision Making Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Analysis and Findings
27
4.1
Gate 1: Preliminary Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Gate 2: Techno-commercial Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3
Gate 3: Composite Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.4
Final Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5
Discussion and Conclusion
47
Bibliography
51
A Appendix: Data Set for evaluation.
57
A.1 SugarCane_Stream_Data.xlsx
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.2 SugarCane_Industry_Mass_Balance.xlsx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
B Appendix: GATE 1
59
B.1 ELECTRE_Preliminary Assessment.xlsx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
C Appendix: Gate 2
60
C.1 OPEX_Assumptions.xlsx
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
C.2 CBA-FRA-Scenario5.xlsx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
C.3 CBA-FRA-Scenario6.xlsx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
C.4 CBA-FRA-Scenario7.xlsx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
C.5 CBA-FRA-Scenario8.xlsx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
C.6 Technical Analysis_MCDA.xlsx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
D Appendix: Gate 3
64
D.1 Composite Assessment_COSIMA.xlsx
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.5 Degrees Celsius
This number represents a global commitment that requires an enormous effort from around
the world to make it a reality. The number was established during a historic agreement on
December 12, 2015, during the United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP21) in
Paris [1], with the aim of addressing climate change and its adverse effects. This agree-
ment was a significant step forward, adopted by 196 countries, which pledged to provide
a sustainable and low-carbon future for future generations. However,
World is off track to meet Paris Agreement climate Targets
UN Environment Programme | Copenhagen Climate Center (September 2021)
At the current rate, the probability of exceeding the 1.5-degree Celsius temperature rise
is increasing, which could result in not achieving the goals established during COP21 [2].
One of the most crucial aspects of this issue is controlling greenhouse gas (GHG) emis-
sions. The transportation sector contributes to 17% of global GHG emissions, accounting
for 7.64 gigatons (Gt) of carbon dioxide (CO2), which is one of the most significant green-
house gases [3]. CO2 constitutes 60-75% of GHG emissions [4]. In 2021, global CO2
emissions were recorded at 37.9 Gt of CO2 [5], indicating that transportation alone con-
tributes to 20% of global CO2 emissions.
What measures have been taken to reduce the negative impact of GHG emissions? While
electric vehicles are often thought of as a solution, the 2021 statistics indicate that they
alone are insufficient. Therefore, alternative approaches that further reduce the consump-
tion of fossil fuels are needed. Recent developments have demonstrated the potential
of biofuels to mitigate some of the undesirable aspects of fossil fuels, such as GHG
emissions[6]. Biofuels are produced by processing biomass, including crops and their
residues, in a biorefinery. Substituting biofuels for fossil fuels would not only reduce GHG
emissions but also decrease reliance on foreign oil suppliers. According to the US EPA,
bioethanol has been shown to be effective in combustion and reducing GHG emissions.
Studies have demonstrated that using bioethanol instead of gasoline can reduce GHG
emissions by at least 19% and up to 86%[7]. Bioethanol is produced through a fermenta-
tion process that converts sugars into ethanol, which is a complex process involving mul-
tiple steps. Moreover, bioethanol production is water-intensive, with water consumption
as high as 1,827,000 liters per ton of feedstock produced[8]. Therefore, water recycling
is a crucial aspect to consider when promoting biofuel production.
To tackle the challenge of water reclamation and reuse, innovative, sustainable, and
energy-efficient technologies are required. Membrane-based solutions have proven ef-
fective, but there is still room for optimization. Forward Osmosis (FO) is a new, highly
selective, energy-efficient membrane-based process with less fouling that maximizes wa-
ter reuse. In this case study, Aquaporin’s FO technology was assessed for its potential
in sugar-based biorefineries. However, it was crucial to identify the actual potential and
quantify it to facilitate decision-making. It is also important to have an alignment between
the sales and technical teams. Therefore, a combined techno-commercial impact re-
search needs to be conducted to translate both impacts into a common language that
could help Aquaporin decide on its target focus area for this sector.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
1
==PAGE:12==
The objective of this study is to assess the technical and commercial advantages of us-
ing forward osmosis in a sugar-based biorefinery for bioethanol production via a techno-
commercial analysis. The study follows a particular framework to ensure a comprehensive
and combined techno-commercial outcome that would prioritize target applications in the
sugar-based biorefinery sector. It would provide a rationale for both sales and technical
teams to make informed decisions.
The study begins by discussing the key terms used in the title, namely Forward Osmosis,
Techno-Commercial Analysis, and Biorefinery. This section provides an understanding
of the focus area and the processes involved in sugar-based biorefinery where forward
osmosis can be applied. Next, a decision-making framework is explained, which con-
ducts independent technical and commercial analyses and further combines them into a
single value. This value is ranked, and a prioritized outcome is achieved. Various stan-
dard frameworks are used to calculate these techno-commercial impacts, which undergo
sensitivity analysis to ensure robustness and accuracy for decision making.
2
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
This chapter breaks down the title into its keywords and explains each of it in detail. First
an overview of the case company Aquaporin is presented that would cover the under-
standing of Forward Osmosis. Further, a short literature review of techno-commercial/
economic cases in field of Forward osmosis is summarized. This would put a light on the
prior art, its approach and the drawbacks. Lastly, the key aspect of this study, i.e. Biore-
finery would be elaborated in order to understand the concept and the way the focus of
this study has scoped down. These three sections then leads to the problems statement
and the research questions that would be answered through this study.
2.1
Aquaporin - Rethinking water filtration with
Biotechnology
2.1.1
Company Introduction and Background
Aquaporin A/s is an innovative and one of its kind company that offers water treatment so-
lutions by combining filtration with biotechnology to enhance the filtration process. Aqua-
porin was incorporated in 2005 by a visionary entrepreneur and scientist Peter Holme
Jensen, with its headquarters in Denmark and operations extended in Singapore, the
United States and Turkey. Water is one of the most important resource for the existence
of life on earth, however this resource is limited and need to be cared for a responsibly
used. With a vision of preserving this valued resource, Aquaporin is on a mission to offer
clean, natural drinking water for all and promoting sustainable resuse of water in industrial
applications [9].
With humble beginnings to being an industry giant, Aquaporin has come a long way in
over 18 years and listing its Initial Public Offering (IPO) in 2021 and achieving differ-
ent milestone throughout from concept to commercialization phase. A brief timeline of
Aquapoirn’s key achievements can be seen in Figure 2.1 below.
Figure 2.1: The Aquaporin journey from concept to commercialization [10].
Along with their constant focus on open innovation, excellence, customer satisfaction,
Aquaporin is dedicated to sustainability and practices it committing to UN’s Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs)[11].
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
3
==PAGE:14==
2.1.2
Core Technology - Aquaporin Inside®
Aquaporin incorporate its one technology in everything that they make, which is called
Aquaporin Inside. The Aquaporin Inside Technology is where a cutting edge integration
of Biology with Engineering is seen. Aquaporin uses aquaporin proteins, nature’s own
water filter that have existed for a long time on earth but were first discovered by scientist
Peter Agre from John Hopkins University in 1992. Later Dr. Peter Agre was awarded by
Noble Prize in chemistry for his discovery of aquaporins in the year 2003 [12].
Aquaporin Inside technology incorporates these aquaporin proteins to replicate nature’s
way of water filtration. It is estimated to be more effective than any man-made filter as one
square meter of man-made filter produces 50 liters per hour whereas one gram of aqua-
porin can filter 700 liters per second [13]. The way Aquaporin showcases bio mimicry is
by infusing a tiny fraction of these proteins on a synthetic customized support layer. Fig-
ure 2.2 below gives a clarity in concept of how the infused aquaporin protein on a support
layer looks like.
Figure 2.2: Aquaporin Inside®Technology [13].
2.1.3
Product Portfolio
Based on this technology, Aquaporin makes a wide range on products, these products
work on the principle of osmosis. Osmosis is a greek word for ’push’ and is referred
to the net movement of water from a lower concentration side to higher concentration
through a semipermeable membrane in order to maintain equilibrium [14]. Osmosis is also
referred to as Forward Osmosis (FO), moreover, when the movement of water happens
in the opposite direction in presence of pressure is called as Reverse Osmosis (RO). The
Figure 2.3 below is a representation of these two principles of osmosis.
Figure 2.3: Comparison of Forward and Reverse Osmosis [14].
4
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:15==
Aquaporin has a product line that works on both, FO and RO principle. However, for this
case study focus was more on Forward Osmosis products, since the assessment is it.
Forward Osmosis: Technology & Products
In the FO category, Aquaporin has two product offering for now. HFFO2[15] (suitable for
application development and pilot trials) and HFFO14 [16] (suitable for industrial appli-
cations). Here the term HFFO means Hollow Fiber Forward Osmosis, and the number
preceding denotes the active filtration area of that module. Hollow Fiber is one of the
many membrane configurations in world of membranes and has diameters which is less
than 1 millimeter. However, just having Forward Osmosis technology doesn’t work, as
it needs a technology coupled to regenerate water moved to higher concentration part,
in order to get clean water. This coupling with forward osmosis technology is referred
to as draw regeneration. Thereby, having a HFFO - Draw Regeneration based solution
applied for product concentration, wastewater treatment and clean water reuse [17]. A
graphical representation of coupled HFFO & draw regeneration could be used for clear
understanding.
Figure 2.4: Process of a Forward Osmosis based solution.
Here, the draw solution is at higher concentration than the feed, thereby based on Fig-
ure 2.3, clean water is recovered. There are numerous benefits of using HFFO technol-
ogy, some are; lower footprint, compact size, energy efficient, treats challenging stream
and so on. Therefore, this technological process would be used for further evaluation.
2.2
Techno-commercial exploration in Forward Osmosis
This section focuses on understanding prior literature on techno-commercial or techno-
economic assessment in the field of Forward-Osmosis (FO). Recent literature (After 2019)
was reviewed in order to understand current developments. A recent article from 2020
shows development done in the field of Forward Osmosis in the past two decades. Fig-
ure 2.5 below shows the field of research in Forward Osmosis area.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.5: Field of research in Forward Osmosis and its percentage per year over last
two decades [18].
As it can be seen, techno-economic assessments constitutes of 2.5% of total research
done in two decades, out of which 1.7% was done in 2020. Therefore, not much focus
was given on a combined techno-economic or techno-commercial assessment in field
of FO. The recent techno-commercial assessment done were for certain specific focus
area. For instance, one type of evaluation is combining how FO performs in one particu-
lar application by simulating different scenarios on a laboratory scale [19][20][21][22]. In
certain cases, two membrane based technologies were compared and evaluated based
on their performance and energy costs, but also on lab and pilot scale. In one article,
economic analysis was done using net present value calculation for FO combined with
other technologies and technical analysis was compared over one parameter [23]. In
other article, economics values were compared for FO along with another technology and
technical performance was also examined, however the study was restricted to one appli-
cation and compared with a non-commercialized technology [24]. A different example is
of evaluating FO in energy intensive industries to show energy savings with lower FO en-
ergy consumption [25][26].However, all the above mentioned analysis done had following
drawbacks,
• Focus was either on technology or application.
• There is no comparison with the current technologies that are in same application
at industrial scale. This could show the commercial impact FO could have.
• The results achieved were either commercial numbers or technical performance
parameters, but none had a common parameter for comparison. This way, the
evaluations gave results however were not drafted for a 1 to 1 comparison.
• The commercial/ economic and technical benefits were listed separately and there
weren’t any cases were both these results were clubbed to show FO’s impact both.
technically and commercially.
Therefore a structure approach for techno-commercial analysis is required in order to
explore the sugar based biorefinery opportunity. Before moving into structuring the ap-
proach, it is important to understand the scope of this study. Biorefinery in general is a
huge ocean with indefinite categories, therefore scoping down the focus for this study is
necessary and the way it is done is explained further in section 2.3.
6
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:17==
2.3
Biorefinery
2.3.1
General Definition
Bio-refinery is basically an industry that converts biomass as feed-stocks and converts
into various value based products [27]. The concept of bio-refinery is an analogy to a
petroleum refinery in order to overcome the dominance of petroleum based fuels and in-
troducing bio-fuels by creating new value chain and reducing waste by reusing in produc-
tion process of bio fuels. As defined by International Energy Agency (IEA) Bioenergy Task
42, ”Biorefining is the sustainable processing of biomass into a spectrum of marketable
products and energy”[28].
The same IEA Bioenergy Task 42 has developed a standard scheme of classifying a bio-
refinery. The classification is generally based on four groups, namely [27][28][29][30][31],
• Feedstock: Type of biomass used in a biorefinery to process into products. The
feedstock used in biorefineries majorly come from four key sources and are further
classified as crops and crop residues. The possible options that can be used a feed-
stock in a biorefinery along with its categorization can be seen below in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Different types of feedstock used in Biorefinery setup [29].
• Platforms: Platforms are the link between raw material and end products. These
are considered to be key for biorefinery classification. The relevance of a platform
is to understand the purpose of the biorefinery. Some platforms are namely, Biogas,
Sugar, Syngas etc.
• Conversion Processes: Conversion Process are processes that are used for pro-
cessing the feedstock to its desired outcome. There are majorly four process cate-
gorise, Thermochemical, Chemical, Biochemical and Mechanical. There are differ-
ent process further in these 4 process categorise.
• Products: A product is the end result after complete conversion of a feedstock that
possesses a value. The biorefinery products are generally categorized as material
driven (products that can be further used for consumption or energy generation) or
energy driven (the product is primarily an energy carrier, fuel, heat, electricity, etc).
The general biorefinery classification table including the four major groups and their re-
spective subgroups can be found below in Figure 2.7.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.7: Groups and subgroups for a biorefinery classification [28].
A biorefinery classification is not independent for the above four categories but is a com-
bination of a different parameters from each group. An example can be seen below in
Figure 2.8
Figure 2.8: Biorefinery setup example.
Here it can be seen that a feedstock has to go through a pre-treatment process 1, then
through a certain platform where its is accordingly processed to get product 1 and 2.
Similarly different feedstock are processed to achieve a variety of products through a
biorefinery setup, the pathway for different setups can be seen below.
8
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.9: Different pathway in a biorefinery setup [29].
2.3.2
Sugar Based Bio-refinery
Referring to the Figure 2.9 above in section subsection 2.3.1, this study focuses on sugar
based biorefineries. This means that the pathways belonging to platform C5 & C6 sugars
were considered. These platform use C5 - C6 sugars derived from various feedstock and
convert them into biofuels and other byproducts using various intermediate processes.
Biofuel produced through sugar platforms is either biodiesel that is mixed with gas oil or
bioethanol that is mixed with gasoline. In 2019 IEA projected the consumption of biofuel
and categorized under biodiesel and bioethanol, of which 71% of biofuel produced was
bioethanol and 20% was biodiesel [8]. Moreover, its projection until 2024 remains the
same as per their forecasting [32]. Considering the market trend the report was scoped
down looking at sugar based biorefinery pathways that produced bioethanol.
The sugar platform for bioethanol production used different feedstock for sugar conversion
and fermentation for alcohol production. These feedstock were basically classified as
crops or crop residues.
• Crops
– Sugar Crops: Sugar juice derived from sugar crops is fermented for bioethanol
production [27]. These sugar crops are majorly sugarcane, sugar beet and
sweet sorghum stalk.
– Starch Crops: Starch crops such as corn, wheat, barley and sorghum are used
for bioethanol production. However, the conversion is not as simple as sugar
crops [27]. The starch is obtained from starch crops goes through a sacchar-
ification process where the starch is broken down to sugars by enzymatic re-
action. Then these sugars are further fermented for bioethanol production.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
9
==PAGE:20==
• Crop Residues: Crops residues refer to the parts that are left over after crop har-
vesting and processing, which includes, stalks, leaves, etc. These residues are rich
in three components, lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose. These components are
converted to simple fermentable sugars using enzymatic hydrolysis [33]. Further,
the sugar obtained are fermented for bioethanol production.
• Algae Feedstock: Algae was used as a feedstock for producing biodiesel, however
their potential carbohydrate content (mostly starch) makes it possible for obtaining
sugar through various hydrolysis processes that can be further fermented to produce
bioethanol [34]
The overview of these processes for bioethanol production from these feedstock can be
seen from the Figure 2.10 below. Here lignocellulosic biomass is usually referred to feed-
stock from crop residues.
Figure 2.10: Production of bioethanol using different feedstock [35].
The bioethanol produced through the above mentioned feedstock is further classified into
different generations based on the raw material. Bioethanol generated from crops that
are used as food, eg: corn, wheat, barley, sugarcane, etc. is classified as 1st generation
(1G) bioethanol. If produced from non-food crops or crop residues, then it is categorized
under 2nd generation (2G) bioethanol and when produced from aquatic feedstock then it
comes under 3rd generation (3G) [36], [37], [35].
In order to scope down the focus area for this report, feedstock and processes for pro-
ducing 1st generation bioethanol were studied. This is because of the current market of
1G Bioethanol and availability of data. Moreover, top 5 bioethanol producing countries
are producing bioethanol through 1G pathway [38]. Additionally, there is a push towards
moving from 1G to 2G, due to consumption of food crops in fuel production that leads to
price increase [37]. However the setup cost for 2G ethanol production is more and has
been a major hindrance to the transition, for example, in a study it was observed that the
Capital Expense (CAPEX) to setup a 2G bioethanol plant was 10 times to that of setting
up a 1G bioethanol plant [39]. Moreover, if the current global status is seen, then 94%
of global bioethanol produced is through the 1G pathway [40]. Therefore considering the
current readiness level of 1G pathway further exploration was conducted.
10
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:21==
As discussed above, the focus of this study is scoped down to 1G bioethanol. Therefore
the feedstock used for producing 1G bioethanol are sugar crops (Sugar cane, Sugar beet,
Sweet Sorghum Stalk) or starch crops (Corn, Wheat, Barley, etc). However, this study
focuses on evaluating possible application for Aquaporin’s HFFO technology, therefore it
can be done in two ways. One way is selecting one specific area across all the feedstock
crops, or selecting one feedstock crop and evaluating deeper into all application possibil-
ities. It made more sense to do the later part as it gives a comprehensive overview and
analysis for Aquaporin on which could be the possible target application to focus on in a
particular feedstock crop. Moreover, the model and result of this study could be replicated
for other feedstocks in future by Aquaporin.
For selecting a particular feedstock for further assessment in this study, different param-
eters were considered. Top 5 global bioethanol countries have corn or sugarcane as
their primary feedstock for producing 1G bioethanol [38]. If different global geographies
are considered then different feedstock are used, for instance in the US (world’s largest
bioethanol producer) corn is used as primary feedstock, whereas wheat is used in Europe
and sugarcane is used in Brazil (second largest bioethanol producer), India and china [8].
As per Organization for Economic Operation and Development along with Food and Agri-
culture Organization (FOA)’s data, corn is the primary feed stock being 60%, followed by
sugar cane and molasses being 32%, and remaining with other feed stocks [41]. There-
fore corn and sugar cane were considered the feedstock out of which one was further
assessed for this study.
Corn and sugarcane are considered for 1G bioethanol production, corn is only used in the
US, whereas sugarcane is used in many other countries. Considering the top 5 bioethanol,
India and Brazil contributes to 580 plants for production of bioethanol, which is more than
twice to that of number of plants in the US [38]. If the feedstock’s impact on bioethanol
is considered, then the average biomass productivity (i.e. rate of biomass generation per
unit area) of sugarcane is 28 tonnes per hectare whereas corn is 9 [8]. Furthermore,
ethanol yield of sugarcane is almost twice to that of corn [8] and if to be accurate, then
it is somewhere around 0.5 L/ Kg of sugarcane processed, which is apparently the high-
est yield amongst all feedstock used for 1G bioethanol production [35]. Therefore from a
market point of view, 1G bioethanol production through sugarcane was selected as the
feedstock which would be analysed further in detail for checking application possibility of
Aquaporin’s HFFO.
2.3.3
Process Layout of a Sugarcane Biorefinery for 1G Bioethanol
Production
For a sugarcane based biorefinery, bioethanol of produced from two sugar sources, sugar
cane juice or sugar cane molasses (thick syrup which is left after producing refined sugar).
There are usually two type of setups in biorefinery that use sugar cane as a feedstock,
autonomous and annexed mill [42]. In autonomous mill, the bioethanol producing distillery
is independent of the sugar producing mill. That means that sugar cane juice or molasses
is sent to the distillery for bioethanol production. Whereas, in an annexed mill, the sugar
and bioethanol production is done in the same facility, therefore is interdependent. For this
study processes in both, autonomous and annexed sugar cane biorefinery were studied.
To understand the sugar processing right from raw material intake to final product were
studied. For this different feasibility and environment reports of various sugarcane mills
and distilleries were studied. Some of the reports are referred below in Table 2.1.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
11
==PAGE:22==
Table 2.1: List of sugarcane based biorefineries studied for 1G bioethanol production
understanding.
Pingale Sugar & Agro Products Private Limited
[43]
Shree Laxmi Narshinha Sugars LLP
[44]
Green Power Sugars LTD
[45]
Indian Sucrose Limited
[46]
Ganpati Sugar Industries Limited
[47]
Modi Sugar Mills Limited
[48]
Bidar Kissan Shakkar Karkhana Ltd.
[49]
Bhimashankar Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana Ltd
[50]
Hutatma Kisan Ahir SSK Ltd.
[51]
Daund Sugar Pvt. Ltd.
[52]
Shree Renuka Sugars Ltd.
[53]
VINP Distilleries and Sugars Pvt. Ltd.
[54]
Someshwar Sugars Limited
[55]
Godavari Biorefineries Limited
[56]
Shahabad Cooperative Sugar Mill Ltd.
[57]
The Gurdaspur Sugar Mills Limited
[58]
Coper Co-operative Sugar Limited
[59]
Bindal Paper Mills Limited
[60]
KPR Sugar and Apparels Limited
[61]
Dwarkadish Sakhar Karkhana Limited
[62]
After understanding these report, it was concluded to study the 1G bioethanol produc-
tion process by dividing it into three groups, first is the Sugar Mill part, where sugarcane
is processed to make sugar cane and the sugar juice or molasses are sent to distillery
for bioethanol production. Second is Distillery Setup - I and third is Distillery Setup - II.
The difference between the two distillery setups is the steps included in bioethanol pro-
duction. Therefore the sugar juice and molasses from sugar mill can be sent to either of
these distilleries depending on the setup a specific mill owner follows. There is no rules or
standardization for which distillery setup is followed, however, if the distillery is annexed,
meaning the sugar mill and distillery is one facility, then the distillery follows setup - I, if
distillery is autonomous then it follows setup - II. Detailed process flow for Sugar Mill, Dis-
tillery Setup - I and Distillery Setup - II can be seen below from Figure 2.11a, Figure 2.11b
and Figure 2.11c, respectively.
As described above in section 2.1, Aquaporn’s HFFO technology can be applied to stream
where either dewatering or valuable component concentration, sometimes both is re-
quired. Therefore, bioethanol production processes studied from report listed in Table 2.1
were drafted as per the groups mentioned above and streams were identified where con-
centration or water recovery is required. These are the streams where Aquaporin could
apply their technology, prima facie all the streams were identified together with key Aqua-
porin’s stakeholder based on the inputs where there found a scope for dewatering and
valuable concentration. These identified streams would be evaluated further through de-
cision making framework as explained below in section 3.1.The production layout for 1G
bioethanol is explained in detail below. Moreover, streams where HFFO technology can
be applied was also identified and the same is denoted with the term FO.
Based on the following Figure 2.11, scenarios where the selection criteria was if a treat-
ment scheme for concentration or water recovery was needed. This is basically derived
from from all the report mentioned in Table 2.1.
12
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:23==
(a) Process Layout for Sugar Mill
(b) Process Layout for Distillery Setup - I
(c) Process Layout for Distillery Setup - II
Figure 2.11: A combined process flow for a sugar cane based biorefinery.
The abbreviations used in Figure 2.11 are listed below;
• FO: Forward Osmosis
This was placed to get a picture of where Aquaporin’s HFFO can be incorporated in
the process.
• ETP: Effluent Treatment Plant
It is a centralized plant comprising of different steps of technologies for effluent treat-
ment. Effluent is basically used to determine a outgoing wastewater stream. A typi-
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
13
==PAGE:24==
cal ETP setup used in sugar cane based biorefinery and as mentioned in the report
from Table 2.1 is: Bar Screen →Oil Skimmers →Equalization Tank →Primary Clar-
ifier →Anaerobic Treatment →Aerobic Treatment →Secondary Clarifier →Sand
Filter →Carbon Filter →Treated Water reuse for irrigation and gardening.
• CPU: Condensate Polishing Unit
When a evaporator is used, all the evaporated water that is condensed is referred
as condensate. However, this condensate needs to be treated before reusing and
therefore it is passed through a condensate polishing unit. As referred from reports
in Table 2.1, a typical CPU consists of: Equalization Tank →Neutralization Tank
→Anaerobic - Aerobic Digestion →Clarification →Ultra-filtration (UF) →Reverse
Osmosis (RO) →Treated water reused back in the process.
• A, B C Hv.: A, B & C Heavy Molasses
Molasses is basically sugar syrup that can not be further crystallized and A, B and
C are the stages in which sugar is made, usually A is the highest priority of sugar
and then followed by B & C, therefore molasses quantity differs if a plant operates
on A or B or C sugar.
• CO2: Carbon Dioxide
During the fermentation process, the sugar breaks down to yield ethanol and carbon
dioxide.
This layout is replicated as actual process flow to determine flow rate of each of the
streams and to estimate the overall material balance of a sugarcane biorefinery. There
were some assumptions made based on literature and different industry considerations
for estimating the material balance. This is thereby attached as section A.2 along with
this report. The identified application possibilities for Aquaporin’s HFFO technology from
Figure 2.11 are summarized in table below. The identified application possibilities are
referred as scenarios here onwards.
Table 2.2: Application possibilities for Aquaporin’s HFFO technology in a sugar cane biore-
finery process.
Scenarios
Description
Scenario 1
Concentrating clarified sugar juice before evaporation
to reduce load on evaporator for sugar production.
Scenario 2
Concentrating clarified sugar juice before fermentation
to produce ethanol.
Scenario 3
Treating Spent Wash from distillation for fermented cane syrup
before further evaporation.
Scenario 4
Treating Spent Wash from distillation of fermented cane molasses
before further evaporation.
Scenario 5
Treating biomethanated spent Wash from fermented cane syrup
distillation before further evaporation.
Scenario 6
Treating biomethanated spent Wash from fermented cane molasses
distillation before further evaporation.
Scenario 7
Treating sugar mill effluent
Scenario 8
Treating Spent Lees after distillation.
Scenario 9
Treating Sugar Mill Evaporator Condensate
Scenario 10
Treating Distillery Evaporator Condensate
14
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:25==
Now since all the possible applications have been identified for Aquaporin, choosing the
right one and prioritizing based on its techno-commercial value is a challenge. This brings
the problem statement focused on for this study.
What applications should Aquaporin focus on for their HFFO technology application in
the sugar based biorefinery (sugar cane biorefinery for this study) considering both its
commercial and technical benefits.
In order to address the problem statement, a structured decision making framework method-
ology was followed, which is elaborated below in chapter 3. Through this methodology
some research questions were also considered.
• Which are the scenarios that are feasible or non feasible for Aquaporin’s HFFO
technology?
• What is the stream quality (Flow, TDS) of a scenario for HFFO to treat and how
much does it vary?
• How are the scenarios addressed currently?
• What impact can Aquaporin’s HFFO technology can bring to these scenarios?
• How can this impact be calculated, quantified and compared?
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
15
==PAGE:26==
16
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:27==
3
Methodology
In the previous section 2.3 10 possible FO applications were mapped, hereafter referred
as scenarios, which were further evaluated for a techno-commercial analysis. However,
considering the summary projected in section 2.2, it was well understood that prior re-
search of techno-commercial analysis in field of Forward Osmosis was limited and had
some drawbacks. The proposed framework in this study fills the voids found in the sec-
tion 2.2 and gives a combined result for technical as well as commercial analysis that will
be a tangible parameter for stakeholders to make better decisions.
3.1
Decision Making Framework
There are different tools and methodologies that can be used to assess these scenar-
ios across a particular sector, monetary and non-monetary, both. However, for having
a comprehensive analysis along with comparing monetary and non monetary impacts, a
combination of these methodologies is required.
A similar approach is used in this study for prioritizing target FO applications in sugar
based bio refinery sector as elaborated in section 2.3. The framework is majorly inspired
from a study done within Decision Support Systems (DSS) within the transportation pro-
jection. The paper proposed a composite decision support process by combining Cost
- Benefit Analysis (CBA) and Multi Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) for assessment of
economic and strategic impacts respectively [63]. The framework used in this study is an
extension of the referred one.
This decision making framework consists of 3 decision making gates, where the listed
scenarios would be evaluated based on various criteria and each gate is based on differ-
ent evaluation techniques and has its own results for further assessment. The general
scheme of the decision making framework can be seen in Figure 3.1 below and it also
acts as an pathway of execution for this study.
Figure 3.1: Methodology of Decision Making Framework used for prioritizing the target
FO applications mapped in the sugar bio-refinery sector.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
17
==PAGE:28==
Each of the gates mentioned in the Figure 3.1 will be explained much in detail in the
upcoming sections and emphasize would be given more on the following points.
• Objective of the gate.
• Technique used for assessment in the gate.
• Expected outcome, could be scoring or eliminating the scenarios.
3.1.1
Gate 1: Preliminary Assessment
Gate 1 is a preliminary assessment of the mapped 10 possible application for FO in sugar
based industry. Since the 10 applications are mapped on the basis of Aquaporin’s FO
concentration and/ or water recovery, few more aspects need to be considered. These
aspects are more related to Aquaporin’s HFFO product specifications that would limit it’s
application feasibility. Moreover, it can be pre determined if the scenario is valid for further
evaluation based on the results of Gate 1.
This gate aims to establish an outranking inter-relationship between the scenarios and
achieving scenarios where there is no outranking relationship. In order to have an out-
ranking relationship between the scenarios ELECTRE technique is used.
Electre is a technique from the MCDA family and is one of the oldest and the simplest
outranking method. The inputs required for execution of ELECTRE are different alterna-
tives, which in this study are the possible for applications, secondly, set of criteria with
its weighted importance are identified, across which a pair wise outranking relationship is
establish across scenarios. The outranking is achieved by three parameters, namely con-
cordance index, discordance index and threshold value [64]. The parameter’s significance
can be seen below and the calculation part is explained through and example in Table 3.1,
Table 3.1: Sample table for ELECTRE parameters
criteria →
C1
C2
C3
criteria Weights →
2
5
3
10
←Sum of criteria Weights
Scenario (a)
4
2
5
←Score of scenario for each criteria
Scenario (b)
3
5
2
• Concordance Index C(a,b)
Concordance index is a measures that establishes an preliminary outranking rela-
tionship between two scenarios [65]. It is calculated as sum of all criteria weights
where rank of scenario a is greater than b, divided by the overall criteria weights.
With the given example above in Table 3.1,
C(a,b) = (4 + 5)/10 = 0.9
This is because, when scenario a is compared with b, it has higher ranking in criteria
1 & 2, and hence weights of criteria 1 & 2 are selected.
• Veto Threshold Vi
The Veto Threshold indicates the maximum difference that can be accepted for given
comparison between scenarios that can negate the outranking relationship indicated
by other criteria [66]. This is used in calculating discordance index that is explained
below, therefore, considering a veto threshold of 2 for example in Table 3.1.
18
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:29==
• Discordance Index D(a,b)
Discordance index refers to establish an index based on veto threshold and specifies
the strength of evidence against the hypothesis that scenario a is better than b or
vice versa [66][65]. The discordance index is calculated as
D(a,b) =
{
1,
ri(a) > ri(b) + Vi0,
otherwise
Considering example in Table 3.1 and veto threshold given above, discordance in-
dex for scenario a when compared to b is, 0, since the given condition does not
satisfy for criteria 1 and 3.
Based on the above parameters, 4 outranking relationship can be obtained when com-
pared scenario a with b through ELECTRE [65],
1. Strong Preference: Scenario a outranks scenario b.
2. Weak Preference: Scenario b outranks scenario a.
3. Indifference: Where scenario a is equal to scenario b
4. Incomparable: Where scenario a can not be compared to scenario b due to absence
of evidence.
To obtain any of these outranking relationship, two additional threshold values need to
be set by the decision make, first is Concordance threshold Ci, it means what is the
allowable concordance index accepted for decision making. Second is the discordance
threshold Di, and since the discordance indices are binary (either 0 or 1), therefore the
threshold is set to 0. Considering the concordance and discordance indices and setting
their respective threshold, outranking can be achieved in a way described in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Logic to establish outranking relationship between scenario a & b.
The summary of executing ELECTRE technique can be seen below in Figure 3.3.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.3: Step wise summary for ELECTRE execution.
The non-outranked scenario would move ahead to the next gate for commercial and tech-
nical feasibility analysis.
3.1.2
Gate 2: Techno-commercial Analysis
Gate 2.1: Commercial Analysis
Cost - Benefit Analysis (CBA)
This section aims to check the economic feasibility of the scenarios selected in subsec-
tion 3.1.1. The idea here is to see the if the scenario is profitable from customer’s per-
spective and for that a discounted net present value (NPV) calculation is used. The as-
sumptions made for this gate are as follows,
• Project Start: 2023 (Year in which the project construction is started)
• Construction Period: 3 years (Number of years taken for project to complete instal-
lation and commissioning)
• Opening Year: 2026 (Its the first year after construction where the project starts to
generate impact.)
• Calculation Period: 10 years (Number of years where the project’s cost and impacts
would be calculated and discounted.)
• Discount Rate: 8% (Rate at which the future cash flows are considered for their
present value) This discount rate is an average discount rate used by sugar com-
panies of the top 2 sugar cane producers in world, Brazil and India [67] and some
data can be found in Table 3.2 below.
20
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:31==
Table 3.2: Discount rates used in top sugar factories from India and Brazil.
Sr. No.
Companies
Country
Discount Rate
Reference
1
Avadh Sugar & Energy
India
6.92%
[68]
2
Balrampur Chini Mills
India
7.00%
[69]
3
Dhamapur Sugar Mills
India
7.20%
[70]
4
Shree Renuka Sugars
India
11.17%
[71]
5
Dalmia Sugar
India
6.65%
[72]
6
Magadh Sugar
India
6.81%
[73]
7
Andhra Sugars Limited
India
11.80%
[74]
8
Simbhaoli Sugars
India
6.45%
[75]
9
Copersucar
Brazil
10%
[76]
10
Biosev
Brazil
8.57%
[77]
11
Sao Martinho
Brazil
8.60%
[78]
The primary principle of doing CBA is to check how much it benefits the customer against
the investment made to implement Aquaporin’s HFFO technology in the given scenario.
This is calculated by checking the savings in the yearly operational expense for a spe-
cific application stream (Difference between what customer pays now and what it would
pay after implementing Aquaporin’s HFFO technology). This savings is therefore used
to check break even for customer’s capital investment in Aquaporin’s HFFO technology,
thereby calculation NPV, Business to Cost Ratio (BCR) and Internal Rate of Return (IRR).
BCR is ratio of benefits to that of cost incurred and IRR is the discount rate at which the
NPV is 0. Formula for calculating NPV, BCR, IRR are given below,
NPV =
∑
n=10(OPc) −(OPm)
[1 + r]n
−CAPm
(3.1)
BCR =
∑
n=10(OPc)−(OPm)
[1+r]n
CAPm
(3.2)
IRR = [
∑
n=10(OPc) −(OPm)
CAPm
]
1
n −1
(3.3)
In Equation 3.1, Equation 3.2, Equation 3.1 and Equation 3.3,
• CAPm: Capital Investment for Aquaporin’s solution in the selected scenario.
For calculating Capital Investment, Aquaporin has an in house tool that gives an
treatment scheme and associated costs. This tool takes Flow, Total Dissolved Solids
(TDS) and target recovery as inputs. These inputs are taken from the Flow and
stream composition data presented in section A.2 and Appendix A respectively.
• OPc: Current operational expense paid by the customer for the selected scenario.
Operational expense for the technologies used for scenarios currently have been
gathered from literature and presented in section C.1.
• OPm: Operation expense customer would pay after implementing Aquaporin’s so-
lution for the selected scenario.
Similar to CAPEX, Aquaporin’s tool also gives an estimation for operational expense
for their technology, which is considered for the CBA calculations.
• r: Discount rate.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
21
==PAGE:32==
• n: Time period (in years).
The detailed analysis would follow in subsection 4.2.1.
Feasibility Risk Assessment (FRA)
The results from CBA section above are further considered for a feasibility risk assess-
ment. This is because the results obtained are based on one data set and does not
account for the variance in input that could drastically affect the output, in this case BCR.
Objective of FRA is to the single point estimate into interval results depicting cumulative
probability curves of the outcome from CBA [79][80].
In this section, Monte Carlo simulation is used to generate probability curves for BCR
value, which is dependent on capital investment and operational expense. There are cer-
tain input variables which highly impact these values and the deviation in data gathered
for these input variables is used for the simulation. Since this framework is used for the
first time conducting a techno-commercial analysis, there isn’t any standard distribution
curves used in prior literature that could be used for FRA in this study. Therefore, normal
distribution curve would be used for which mean and standard distribution would be re-
quired. In order to get these distribution parameters for capital investment and operational
expense, the parameters are calculated as a function of the input variables. These param-
eters of mean and deviation for the input variables are computed by sensitivity analysis on
how it would reflect on the final values of mean-standard deviation for capital investment
and operation expense. Therefore, mean and deviation for each of the selected scenario
are used as normal distribution parameters for executing Monte Carlo simulation in FRA.
The dependency of input variables on capital investment and operation expense can be
seen in Figure 3.4 below.
Figure 3.4: Dependency of input variable to derive mean and standard deviation values
for FRA simulation.
Here µ and σ represent mean and average values for their respective parameters. These
values except the Energy Price, are very case specific and the process of computing
can be understood well in subsection 4.2.1. For energy price, the report from European
Commission [81] was referred where the average price (µE) and the standard deviation
(σE) were 0.2 €/kWh and 23% respectively. Here the EU price is considered since the
Aquaporin’s tool offers CAPEX-OPEX prices as per EU standards, therefore being a more
22
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:33==
accurate way of evaluation.
Gate 2.2: Technical Analysis
In any assessment for a project it is not only necessary to evaluate its commercial benefit,
but also look at it technical feasibility and impact. The water Industry that Aquaporin is
a part of, technical benefit of a project is as important as its commercial benefit. More
often, customer oversee the economics if the solution is adding value in technical terms
and solving an issue, thereby contributing to sustainability in different aspects. In this in-
dustry the customer usually considers a bigger picture and would be interested to invest
in a solution that’s more long term, reliable, efficient and sustainable. Therefore for the 10
scenarios referred in section 2.3, of which are selected after preliminary assessment, it is
important to assess how Aquaporin’s HFFO solution would add value when compared to
the value that current treatment solutions offer.
In order to assess the technical feasibility and impact of scenarios, few performance pa-
rameters are selected. These performance parameters are selected based on efficiency
of the solution and certain operating parameters. The sugar industry in a bio refinery
setup is one of the few industries to adapt circularity, which means from raw materials to
the finished products (sugar & bio-ethanol), the unprocessed material like bagasse, straw
are either reused for power generation or up cycled to make different products. Sugar
cane processing, both for sugar and bio-ethanol production is a water intensive industry
and the water consumption per metric tonne of sugar produced is somewhere between
1.00 - 1.35 [60][62]. Therefore, recovery and reuse of water from the necessary becomes
a necessity in order to reduce fresh water abstraction, where the average water tap water
prices in EU is around 4 €/ cubic meter of water [82], but much cheaper in countries like
India. However, the regulations are stringent which sets a mandate on the industries for
effective waste and wastewater management. For getting an Environment Clarence (EC)
for safe operation, sugar plants need to adapt to a zero liquid discharge (ZLD) scheme
[83]. Moreover, the wastewater from sugar has a heavy nutrient load that can be used to
make fertilizer or on-site fertigation, therefore nutrient recovery is also essential.
These were some on the surface description of performance indicators that could be
used for technical analysis and the ones used along with their importance and relevance
are mentioned in subsection 4.2.2. For technical assessment, as mentioned earlier, two
things are compared, firstly, the current value of a specific criteria and the modified value
that would be an impact for the customer if Aquaporin’s HFFO solution is implemented.
A judgement on if that impact of Aquaporin’s solution is positive or not can evaluated by
taking a relative value of it (ratio of current value to modified value or vice versa), and
higher or lower the value positive is the impact depending on the way the value is derived
and on the criteria. These criteria, their calculation and impact interpretation is found in
subsection 4.2.2.
Once the relative values for scenarios across also technical criteria are derived. It is
important to have a common quantitative score that will be the basis for decision making.
Since a scenario needs to be evaluated across a lot of criteria for calculating its tech-
nical feasibility and impact, an MCDA approach is required here. As ELECTRE, that is
used in subsection 3.1.1, is one of the techniques of MCDA family, however, there are
more than 25 techniques with each having a unique usability over other. In order to se-
lect an appropriate technique, a traditional MCDA selection guideline was referred [84].
This guideline considers numerous parameters under consideration, such as, guideline,
decision preference, data type, number of decision makers and so on. Looking at the
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
23
==PAGE:34==
data used in this study and the decision making process at Aquaporin, the most promis-
ing MCDA technique as per guidelines was found to be Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP).
Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) is a multi-criteria technique and one of the most used
technique in the decision making process and was developed by Thomas Saaty in 1970s
[85]. However, in this study, AHP is only use to get weighted scores of criteria, since
scores for scenarios are already present by calculating its relative value, as mentioned
above. The scores for scenario are normalized on a scale of 0 - 1, which is dividing a value
for a specific criteria for a scenario by maximum or minimum value of all the values for
that criteria, depending on the scale interpretation. For assigning criteria weights, every
criteria was compared with the rest and a score of 1-9 (AHP scale), was given if criteria a
was better than the other, or else the reciprocal value(1/9 -1) was assigned. After listing
these values, weights are calculated by taking geometric mean of criteria across all sce-
narios. Geometric mean is used over arithmetic mean (which is commonly used in AHP)
because its more accurate and less affected by skewed data [86], which in this study is
present.
The final scores for scenario are calculated using the Equation 3.4 below,
AHPSca =
i
∑
i=n
Cwi · [ScoreSca]i
(3.4)
where,
AHPSca: Final AHP score for scenario a,
Cwi: Criteria Weight for criteria i,
[ScoreSca]i: Score of scenario a for criteria i.
3.1.3
Gate 3: Composite Assessment
The results obtained from Gate 2 for technical as well as commercial analysis are com-
bined here for a composite assessment. The nature of both the results is different, one is
monetary whereas other is not. More often the non monetary impact is overseen during
the decision making process because it doesn’t have an attractive representation as of
the monetary impact, for example, profit-loss, which gives a sense to what extent is the
project worth venturing. In order to put the non-monetary impact (technical analysis) on
the same as of the monetary impacts (commercial analysis), the non monetary impacts
need to be translated into a commercial language.
Composite Model of Assessment (COSIMA) approach is used for combining monetary
and non-monetary results, where the non-monetary impacts are translated into economic
impact. The COSIMA approach is a comprehensive methodology that offers a combined
result that offers decision makers an systematic , transparent and explicit decision mak-
ing process [87]. The approach of composite assessment using COSIMA for this study is
executed using following steps,
1. Compile Results of Commercial Analysis - CBA&FRA (Gate 2.1) and Technical Anal-
ysis - MCDA (Gate 2.2).
2. Translating MCDA values using Shadow price (SP) concept.
This procedure has three steps,
• Gather scores of scenarios across criteria, in this case the AHP scores from
subsubsection 3.1.2.
24
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:35==
• Normalize these scores on the scale of 0 to 100, where o is minimum value
and 100 is maximum.
• Consider a MCDA (%) value for initial calculation, MCDA (%) is the share of
non-monetary assessment in the final decision making value and is denoted
by αMCDA, for this study 50% was considered.
• Equivalent MCDA Sum is calculated based on the monetary benefit from CBA
results for the scenario. It is calculated as,
MCDA_Sum = Ba · αMCDA
1 −αMCDA
(3.5)
where,Ba: Benefit for scenario a
• Based on MCDA Sum value, shadow prices for every scenario for every criteria
is calculated. The calculation is as follows,
SPia = MCDA_Sum
∑n
i=1 NSia·Wi
Wi
(3.6)
where, SPia: Shadow price for criteria i for scenario a,
NSia: Normalized AHP scores (scale of 0-100) of criteria i for scenario a,
Wi: Weight of criteria i.
3. Summing shadow prices for all criteria i for a scenario a as total MCDA value
T_MCDAa.
4. Adding MCDA value to monetary benefit of scenario a and calculating Total Rate of
Return (TRR). This is calculated as,
TRR = 1
Ca
· (Ba + T_MCDAa)
(3.7)
5. Sensitivity Analysis for TRR by changing αMCDA for best (considering shadow prices
for scenario with highest BCR), worst (considering show prices for scenario with
lowest BCR) and realistic case (shadow prices based on the respective benefits of
scenarios), therefore conclusion based on patterns.
Therefore, below in Figure 3.5 is the summary of decision support framework methodology
used in this and results for the same are presented in chapter 4.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.5: Summary of Decision Making Framework as a methodology for this study.
Techniques used for each gate and the expected output is also listed.
3.2
Data Collection
Based on the 10 application streams (Scenarios) mapped in section 2.3, the data required
along with its gathering process is described below.
• Flow rate of stream.
Referring the sugar cane process flow in a annexed sugar cane plant (Sugar + Bio-
ethanol production), an excel sheet was made which could simulate the mass flow of
every stream based on certain considerations. This is elaborated in the excel sheet
attached under section A.2. The input for the sheet is basically the capacity of bio-
ethanol production, for this study a 100 KLD (Kilo Liters/ day) capacity is selected.
This would then calculate the stream flows for all 10 FO possibilities that are mapped
in section 2.3 with certain consideration. The reference for these considerations is
mentioned in the sheet, however, these considerations act as variables and can be
changed based on evolving industry practices.
• Chemical composition of stream.
The data for chemical composition have been gathered through various literature
available. It is gathered majorly from research papers and various feasibility, pre-
feasibility, environment clearance reports of actual sugarcane refineries. This data
gathered together in excel sheet attached under Appendix A.
These are the two major data categories that needed to be in place before moving further
with the analysis.
26
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:37==
4
Analysis and Findings
4.1
Gate 1: Preliminary Assessment
As explained in subsection 3.1.1. ELECTRE outranking technique was used to determine
an outranking relationship between the selected 10 scenarios. However, to achieve the
outranking relationship, standard procedure was followed that can be seen in Figure 3.3,
and these steps are elaborated below.
Step 1.1: Identifying criterion to evaluate scenarios.
For this study particularly 5 criteria were selected. These criteria are primarily considered
before evaluating any application for Aquaporin’s HFFO technology, since they highly
affect the HFFO feasibility and performance. Moreover, the criteria are pertains the spec-
ification of HFFO products. The identified criteria and their relevance for this preliminary
assessment are as follows,
1. pH: Aquaporin’s HFFO technology works within a pH range of 3 to 9 [16]. Highly
acidic pH (<3) would damage the membrane whereas highly basic pH (>9) would
cause salts to precipitate on membranes thereby reducing performance. Therefore
range between is ideal to work with, the best case if when pH is between 6-8.
2. Temperature: Stream temperature has a direct impact on osmotic pressure, viscos-
ity and diffusion coefficient. Increase in pH could lead to salt passage from draw to
feed side hence the feed temperature should be maintained below 40 Deg C [16]
[88].
3. Total Suspended Solids - TSS: High TSS could cause the HFFO to choke, thereby
reducing its performance. Therefore the TSS content should be less than 30 ppm
for pre-treatment free operation. Higher TSS can be treated using different filtration
technologies [88].
4. Total Dissolved Solids - TDS: TDS content basically affects the draw recovery tech-
nology. Higher the TDS content advance would be the draw regeneration which is
higher in power consumption and price. Therefore Aquaporin has set range for inlet
TDS that could predict the complexity of draw regeneration technology.
5. Oil and Grease - O&G: Presence of O&G provokes severe fouling on membrane
and needs to be under 20 ppm for safer operation, however if concentration higher,
then can be pre-treated using different technologies like air flotation, ultra filtration
[88].
Step 1.2: Define a scale corresponding to a value range for each criteria.
For every criteria, the range at which Aquaporin’s HFFO solution can operate is different.
For this case study a scale of 1 - 5 is used, where 1 being lowest and 5 being the highest.
The scale and its corresponding value range for each criterion can be found below,
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
27
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.1: Scale with their corresponding value range across identified criteria for Gate 1.
Scale (Importance)
pH
Temperature
TSS
TDS
O&G
1 (Very Low)
9 - 11
>40
> 5000 or No Data
>50000 | <6000 | No data
> 150 or No Data
2 (Low)
2 - 5
No Data
1000 - 5000
35000 - 50000
100 - 150
3 (Average)
8 - 9
35 - 40
500 - 1000
25000 - 35000
50 - 100
4 (High)
5 - 6
25 - 35
30 - 500
15000 - 25000
20 - 50
5 (Very High)
6 - 8
15 - 25
0 - 30
6000 - 15000
0 - 20
The scale assigned to the value ranges of criteria in Table 4.1 above is based on the prod-
uct data sheet [16], user manual [88] and discussion with the internal decision makers,
which is not documented as its seen but comes more from experience.
Step 1.33: Assign weights to each criteria.
Since not every criteria is equally important, having different weights was necessary to
build an effective outranking relationship between scenario. This would help Aquaporin
prioritize better based on their focus area. The weight assignment was done in agreement
with the decision makers at Aquaporin, and is described in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Weight for criteria based on their importance.
Criterion
pH
Temperature
TSS
TDS
O&G
Sum of Weights
Weights
4
5
3
2
2
16
The weights are also on the scale of 1 to 5, where 5 being of highest importance whereas
1 being lowest. Criteria with same weights meaning equal importance.
Step 1.4: Listing actual values for every scenario across the criteria listed in Step 1 then
Translating criterion values to their assigned scale.
Listing the values for scenarios as mapped in Appendix A and are summarized in the
Table 4.3 below,
Table 4.3: Actual values for scenarios across listed criteria.
pH
Temperature
TSS
TDS
O&G
Weights →
4
5
3
2
2
Scenario 1
7.3
80
663
12594
0
Scenario 2
7.3
80
663
12594
0
Scenario 3
4.2
35
13600
54400
NA
Scenario 4
4.3
30
25023
100092
116
Scenario 5
7.3
35
10000
20000
0
Scenario 6
7.6
34,5
21500
29500
NA
Scenario 7
6.5
38,4
681
3311
112
Scenario 8
4.1
NA
750
5500
NA
Here ’NA’ means that values for that scenario across that specific criteria couldn’t be found
from the literature.
This is basically comparing Table 4.1 and Table 4.3, and translating the table from ac-
tual values to its respective rank assigned to the value range, below in Table 4.4 is the
translation.
28
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:39==
Table 4.4: Translating actual value to ranks based on value range assigned.
pH
Temperature
TSS
TDS
O&G
Weights →
4
5
3
2
2
Scenario 1
5
1
3
5
5
Scenario 2
5
1
3
5
5
Scenario 3
2
4
1
1
1
Scenario 4
2
4
1
1
2
Scenario 5
5
4
1
4
5
Scenario 6
5
4
1
3
1
Scenario 7
5
3
3
1
2
Scenario 8
2
1
1
5
1
Step 2:Calculating concordance and discordance index.
Calculation of concordance and discordance index with scenarios is discussed in sub-
section 3.1.1, one value that had to be determined was veto threshold. Based on the
criteria identified, it was seen that 2 & 3, were the ranges where veto value could be sim-
ulated across different concordance threshold unless a definite outranking relationship
was established. Before simulating those outcomes, the matrices for concordance and
discordance can be seen below in Table 4.5 and Table 4.6,
Table 4.5: Concordance Indices C(a,b), where scenario as column is ’a’ and the rows is ’b’
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Scenario 4
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Scenario 9
Scenario 10
Scenario 1
1.00
1.00
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.69
1.00
0.81
0.81
Scenario 2
1.00
1.00
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.69
1.00
0.81
0.81
Scenario 3
0.31
0.31
1.00
0.88
0.50
0.63
0.44
0.88
0.69
0.69
Scenario 4
0.31
0.31
1.00
1.00
0.50
0.63
0.56
0.88
0.69
0.69
Scenario 5
0.69
0.69
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.81
0.88
0.81
0.81
Scenario 6
0.56
0.56
1.00
0.88
0.75
1.00
0.69
0.88
0.69
0.69
Scenario 7
0.75
0.75
0.69
0.69
0.44
0.56
1.00
0.88
0.69
0.69
Scenario 8
0.44
0.44
0.69
0.56
0.31
0.44
0.13
1.00
0.69
0.69
Scenario 9
0.63
0.63
0.69
0.69
0.31
0.31
0.44
0.88
1.00
1.00
Scenario 10
0.63
0.63
0.69
0.69
0.31
0.31
0.44
0.88
1.00
1.00
Table 4.6: Discordance Indices D(a,b), where scenario as column is ’a’ and the rows is ’b’
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Scenario 4
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Scenario 9
Scenario 10
Scenario 1
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
Scenario 2
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
Scenario 3
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
Scenario 4
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
Scenario 5
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
Scenario 6
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
Scenario 7
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
Scenario 8
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
Scenario 9
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
Scenario 10
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
Step 3: Setting thresholds for simulating outranking relationship. As mentioned above,
Veto Threshold (Vi) 2 & 3 were considered for concordance threshold Ci starting from 0.6,
since considering the scenario is at least 60% of the idealistic scenario i.e.100%. How-
ever, Ci values are simulated until a definite outranking relationship is found, wherein
there are at least some scenarios which are not outranked by any scenarios, therefore
these scenarios would be pushed further in ht Gates for detailed analysis.The outranking
relationship is established based on the logic explained in Figure 3.2.
Outranking matrices for veto 2 and 3 at different Ci can be seen below,
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
29
==PAGE:40==
(a) Ci = 0.6
(b) Ci = 0.65
(c) Ci = 0.7
(d) Ci = 0.75
Figure 4.1: Outranking relationship for scenarios at Vi of 2.
(a) Ci = 0.6 & 0.65
(b) Ci = 0.7
(c) Ci = 0.75 & 0.8
(d) Ci = 0.85
(e) Ci = 0.9
Figure 4.2: Outranking relationship for scenarios at Vi of 3.
Step 4: Results As it can be seen from both the results for simulating veto values 2 & 3
across different concordance thresholds. Scenario 5 - 6 - 7 - 8 are not outranked by any
other scenario (marked in green). This means that these scenarios pass the preliminary
assessment and are eligible for further techno-commercial analysis. To summarize sce-
narios that move ahead for further assessment in Gate 2.1 & 2.2 are,
30
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:41==
• Scenario 5: Treating Bio-methanated Spent Wash from fermented Cane Syrup dis-
tillation before further evaporation.
• Scenario 6: Treating Bio-methanated Spent Wash from fermented Cane Molasses
distillation before further evaporation.
• Scenario 7 : Treating combined sugar mill effluent.
• Scenario 8 : Treating Spent Lees after rectification.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
31
==PAGE:42==
4.2
Gate 2: Techno-commercial Analysis
4.2.1
Gate 2.1: Commercial Analysis
Cost - Benefit Analysis
4 out of 10 possible scenarios from for Aquaporin’s HFFO solution were selected from
section 4.1 for techno-commercial analysis. As mentioned in subsection 3.1.2, for calcu-
lating CBA, economics for current state and after modifying with Aquaporin’s solution is
required.
For current state, a specific technology is used for a scenario, and that an operational ex-
pense is paid (OPc). For different scenarios different technologies or set of technologies,
therefore different (OPc). section C.1 gives a sample calculation basis for calculating OPc
of these scenarios.
For modification state, i.e. after applying Aquaporin’s solution, an modified operational
expense is paid (OPm), moreover, that modification with Aquaporin’s solution comes with
an initial capital investment (CAPm), these two things are calculated by Aquaporin’s Sales
Tool, that takes Flow, TDS-TSS and Target Water Recovery as inputs.
Below, the treatment scheme current and after modification would be explained for each
scenario along with its economics.
• Scenario 5: Treating Bio-methanated Spent Wash (Cane Syrup)
Current State: This BMSW of spent wash is treated through a Multi-Effect Evapo-
ration (MEE) of 5 stages and the concentrated BMSW is used for fertigation. The
mass flow scheme of current state for scenario 5 can be seen Figure 4.3 below,
Figure 4.3: Process flow for current state of scenario 5.
Operational expense for the current state (OPC) is 1.84 M€/year (see Appendix C -
section C.2), this is taking sugarcane bagasse as a fuel for steam generation which
is at 25€/ tonne [89].
Aquaporin’s HFFO Solution: Considering the Flow rates and TDS, values, Aqua-
porin’s sales tool gives a projection for Ultra-filtration - Forward Osmosis - High
Pressure Reverse Osmosis ( UF - FO - HPRO) scheme. UF is basically used as
treatment and FO is using their HFFO technology. However, the scheme has a
a limitation for concentration, therefore the concentrate from FO is further feed to
the evaporator. Therefore, this scheme acts as a treatment before evaporator, for
energy and OPEX savings. The scheme with mass flows is shown in Figure 4.4
below,
32
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.4: Process flow for scenario 5 after modification with Aquaporin’s technology.
The CAPm for Aquaporin’s solution was projected around 5.5 M€ and OPm around
0.9 M€/year (see Appendix C - section C.2).
• Scenario 6: Treating Bio-methanated Spent Wash (Cane Molasses)
Current State: Similar to scenario 5, BMSW of cane molasses is treated through
MEE of 5 stages. However, the TDS and TSS is more when compared to BMSW-
Cane Syrup, as seen in Appendix A. Flow scheme is seen below,
Figure 4.5: Process flow for current state of scenario 6.
Operational expense for the current state (OPC) is 2.24 M€/year (see Appendix C
- section C.3). Aquaporin’s HFFO Solution: Similarly, the treatment scheme that
sales tool offers is a UF - FO - HPRO with a further concentration using MEE.
Figure 4.6: Process flow for scenario 6 after modification with Aquaporin’s technology.
Due to change in flow rate, TDS and recovery, the CAPm and OPm of Aquaporin’s
solution for scenario 6 is 5.1 M€ and OPm around 1.3 M€/year (see Appendix C -
section C.3).
• Scenario 7 : Treating combined sugar mill effluent
Current State: The effluent generated from sugar mill is further sent to a Effluent
Treatment Plant (ETP). This effluent treatment plant is a series of different tech-
nologies for the effluent treatment, which can also be seen in Figure 4.7.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.7: Process flow for current state of scenario 7.
Operational expense for the current state (OPC) is 32 K€/year (see Appendix C
- section C.4). Aquaporin’s HFFO Solution: The projected treatment scheme of
Aquaporin for scenario 7 is shown in figure Figure 4.8. The advantage of having
this scheme over the current one would be the smaller footprint and simple operation
with less technological steps.
Figure 4.8: Process flow for scenario 7 after modification with Aquaporin’s technology.
The CAPm and OPm of Aquaporin,s solution for scenario 6 is 4.17 M€ and OPm
around 0.25 M€/year (see Appendix C - section C.4).
• Scenario 8 : Treating Spent Lees after rectification
Current State: The spent lees after rectification is sent mixed with evaporator con-
densate and treated through a Condensate Polishing Unit (CPU). The CPU is also
a line of treatment with different technology steps. Figure 4.9 shows a typical CPU
scheme used for treating spent lees.
Figure 4.9: Process flow for current state of scenario 8.
Operational expense for the current state (OPC) is 61.1 K€/year (see Appendix C -
section C.5). Aquaporin’s HFFO Solution: UF - FO - HPRO scheme was projected
by Aquaprin’s tool and similar to scenario 7, the advantage here would be the smaller
footprint and simple operation with less technological steps. Figure 4.10 represents
the treatment scheme for scenario 8.
34
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.10: Process flow for scenario 8 after modification with Aquaporin’s technology.
The CAPm and OPm of Aquaporin,s solution for scenario 6 is 1.32 M€ and OPm
around 90 K€/year (see Appendix C - section C.5).
As mentioned in subsubsection 3.1.2, OPC for current state and CAPm-OPm for mod-
ification after Aquaporin’s solution, are the parameters required for executing the CBA
calculations. Equation 3.1, Equation 3.2 and Equation 3.3 were used to calculate the
CBA parameters for 10 years period with a discount rate of 8%. The summary of CBA is
given below in Table 4.7.
Table 4.7: Summary of CBA for scneario 5,6,7 & 8
Scenario →
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Discounted CAPM_m
-6.43
-5.95
-4.88
-1.54
M€
Discounted OP_m
-6.52
-10.03
-1.84
-0.65
M€
Scrap Value
2.16
2.05
1.71
0.66
M€
Discounted OP_c
13.35
16.24
0.23
0.44
M€
NPV
2.56
2.30
-4.78
-1.09
M€
BCR
1.24
1.17
0.05
0.29
IRR
13%
13%
-7%
-3%
Feasibility Risk Assessment
As mentioned in subsubsection 3.1.2, FRA is executed to find probability of CBA outcomes
from Table 4.7. In order to execute FRA for each scenario, mean and standard deviation
values for CAPm,OPm and OPc was found using the sensitivity analysis described in Fig-
ure 3.4. Therefore µ and σ values for flow, TDS fromsection A.2, section A.2 respectively
for each scenario are summarized in Table 4.8
Table 4.8: Parameters summary for sensitivity analysis to determine for mean and stan-
dard deviation for FRA simulation.
Scenario →
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Parameters
Flow
Mean (µflow)
1000
900
660
125
m3/d
Deviation (σflow)
0
50
200
0
m3/d
Deviation (%)
0%
6%
30%
0%
TDS
Mean (µTDS)
20000
29500
3311
5500
ppm
Deviation (σTDS)
2000
2121
2281
0
ppm
Deviation (%)
10%
7%
69%
0%
Energy
Mean (µE)
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
€/ kWh
Deviation (σE)
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
€/ kWh
Deviation (%)
25%
25%
25%
25%
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
35
==PAGE:46==
The sensitivity analysis was done for 500 simulations and the impact on CAPm,OPm and
OPc. For CAPm and OPm, these parameters were studied using Aquaporin’s sales tool
calculation and for OPm only change in electric prices was studied. The result on how the
deviation in input variables from Table 4.8, impact CAPm,OPm and OPc is summarized in
Table 4.9
Table 4.9: Summary of mean and deviation values for FRA Monte Carlo simulation.
Scenario →
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
CAPm
Mean (µCAPm)
6.43
5.95
4.88
1.54
M€
Deviation (σCAPm)
0.018
0.212
0.962
0
M€
CAP(Membranes)
Mean (µCAPmem)
1.25
1.05
0.913
0.161
M€
Deviation (σCAPmem)
0.015
0.06
0.25
0
M€
OPm
Mean (µOPm)
6.52
10.03
1.84
0.652
M€
Deviation (σOPm)
0.617
1.040
0.124
0.0425
M€
OPc
Mean (µOPc)
13.35
16.24
0.23
0.44
M€
Deviation (σOPc)
0.333
0.406
0.0581
0.11
M€
The values derived after sensitivity analysis are listed in Table 4.9. These parameters
were used to execute Monte Carlo simulation for 2000 iterations for generating a cumu-
lative probability outcome of the CBA results. For executing Monte Carlo Equation a
Normal Distribution Curve was used for which mean and deviation are considered from
Table 4.9 above. The calculations can be found in the respective scenario FRA workbooks
attached under Appendix C. The BCR was recalculated based on the simulated values
from Monte Carlo simulation and its probability of occurrence was measured. Therefore,
the Figure 4.11 below illustrated the FRA results for scenario 5, 6, 7, 8 combined.
Figure 4.11: Probability curves of FRA simulation for scenario 5, 6, 7 & 8
To be a bit more quantitative, FRA results are concluded below in Table 4.10. These
36
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:47==
numbers basically represent probability of the scenario to be profitable for Aquaporin’s
customer (i.e. probability at wich BCR = 1).
Table 4.10: FRA result for scenario 5, 6, 7, & 8
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Results
0.71
0.66
NA
NA
Since scenario 7 & 8 have a BCR less than 0, the FRA results are NA (Not applicable).
Table 4.11: Final results for commercial analysis of scenario 5, 6, 7, & 8
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
CBA
NPV (M€)
2.56
2.30
-4.78
-1.09
BCR
1.24
1.17
0.05
0.29
IRR (%)
13%
13%
-7%
-3%
FRA
0.71
0.66
NA
NA
4.2.2
Gate 2.2: Technical Analysis
After evaluating the scenarios from their commercial impacts, these scenarios were evalu-
ated for checking its technical feasibility and impact that Aquapoirn’s solution would have
when compared to the current state. For this evaluation, certain criteria relate to solu-
tion’s performance were selected. These criteria are highly considered during evaluating
any application in this space. Therefore, selected criteria along with its importance and
calculation are mentioned in Figure 4.12 below,
Figure 4.12: Overview of criteria selected for technical analysis.
The criteria are selected based on observations made when an application case is eval-
uated for checking FO feasibility and benefits. The basis behind selecting the 8 criteria is
as follows.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
37
==PAGE:48==
• Relative Water Recovery: The amount of water recovered is an important parameter
when checking effectiveness of water treatment solutions. In this case the parame-
ter is relative so that a comparison of the current status to that with HFFO solution
can be compared. Higher the relative ratio, higher is the rank.
• Treatment Objective: As mentioned in section 2.1, FO technology focuses on vol-
ume concentration and water recovery. However, in some concentration processes
the rejected feed is the product and is sometimes referred to as nutrient recovery.
There is a certain value add-up if the application is not just concentrating but also
nutrient recovery because that’s where FO can bring a change and hence is also
important to consider while scouting applications. Since its a qualitative criteria,
highest preference is given for concentration + nutrient recovery application and
lowest for just concentration application.
• Implementation Feasibility: It is important to know if the current process has a scope
for retrofit. Then the chances of getting the technology accepted in the industry are
higher. Therefore if Aquaporin can have their solution up and running in the current
setup, then its a win win for customer and Aquaporin. Since this is a qualitative scale
the ranking is based on implementation feasibility. Solution that caters old and new
plants get the highest and rest goes below.
• Operational day: It is important to know how many days the site is operational,
higher the number of days, higher is the operation, higher are the expenses. There-
fore, customer would like to have a cheaper solution.
• Relative Power Consumption: It is important for the company to evaluate the power
consumption as it directly impacts the operational cost. Therefore an energy efficient
solution would automatically reduce the OPEX, thereby offering monetary benefits to
the customer. Here the criteria is relative, since a comparison is required to quantify
the benefits of Aquaporin’s solution over the current one.
• Critical Component Concentration: When streams in such industries are treated us-
ing membrane technologies, the composition of the stream is a deciding parameter
for the technology performance. Based on data available, three key components
were chosen, which are usually considered by Aquaporin during evaluation, listed
as follow
– Biochemical Oxygen Demand (COD): COD is usually crucial because if high
COD streams are not dealt properly that could lead to anaerobic conditions
and that is hazardous for the environment. Therefore, while treating high COD
streams, there are chances that certain particles would move towards the clean
water side, which would need further treatment. Therefore higher the COD,
lower rejection in clean water are anticipated.
– Sulphates: Sulphates are can precipitate as salts and clog the membrane re-
ducing its operational life. Therefore higher the sulphates, higher reduction in
operational life.
– Chlorides: High concentration have proven to oxidize the membrane, make its
performance poor, therefore, expected outcome is not achieved.
Higher values of critical component concentration, lower is the score and average
for all the three parameters is considered as final criteria score
• Valuable component concentration: As there are critical components, so are valu-
38
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:49==
able components present. As per the reports in Table 2.1 and the process mentioned
in Figure 2.11, it is seen that certain stream are concentrated for fertigation, which
means the nutrients are concentrated to make the reject as their product. For ferti-
gation, three key components are seen, Total Nitrogen - Phosphorous - Potassium
(TN-TP-TK). Higher the concentration of these components in the stream, more is
the value added in the business case for Aquaporin.
• Relative Permeate Quality: The word permeate refers to the water that is recovered/
recycled during the process. The quality of permeate is important to determine the
requirement of a post-treatment. However, several factors are considered for that
decision but for this case it is important to see if the quality is getting better or worse.
This is checked by estimating TDS in the permeate. For the current technologies,
this number comes from the excel workbook attached under Appendix A. Perme-
ate quality for Aquaporin’s solution is an output from their sales tool. Therefore,
both the TDS values are compare and higher the value, better quality of permeate
Aquaporin’s solution has, so higher rank and vice versa.
It is important to understand that the selected criteria are considered based on their rele-
vance in the decision making as of now, but are subjected to change in the future.
• Calculating scores for scenarios across criteria.
As mentioned above in Figure 4.12, scores are calculated based on formulas given
under calculation tab and then normalized, no formulas (-) in Figure 4.12 means that
the data is not relative, as it is in C1,C5 and C8. Once the calculation is done the
normalized scores are calculated based on their scale value. For C2 & C3, data is
qualitative, hence the normalized scores are assigned directly. For other calculation
if the the scale is 1 when max, then the individual score is normalized by dividing
each value by the maximum value of that criteria, with minimum when scale is 1
for min, as for C6. The calculation for scenarios for every criteria can be found in
section C.6. Normalized scores for scenarios across every criteria are listed below
in Table 4.12.
Table 4.12: Scenario scores across listed criteria for MCDA.
Criteria
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
C1
0.94
1.00
0.62
0.75
C2
1.00
1.00
0.33
0.33
C3
1.00
1.00
0.33
0.33
C4
0.60
1.00
0.60
1.00
C5
1.00
0.80
0.04
0.15
C6
0.96
0.00
0.97
0.94
C7
0.14
1.00
0.01
0.00
C8
0.02
0.02
1.00
0.04
• Calculating weights by comparing criteria importance using AHP (As refereed in
subsubsection 3.1.2)
Every listed criteria in Figure 4.12, were compared against each other in order to de-
rive a relative weight that describes their importance for the technical analysis. For
deriving weights, AHP technique was used. Scenario were evaluated from scale of
1 - 9, the intensity of importance with respect to the scale can be seen in Figure 4.13
below.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.13: AHP scale and its corresponding scale value [90].
For example if importance of Ca over Cb is 5, the importance of Cb over Ca is the
reciprocal, i.e. 1/5. Based on these scale, the criteria were evaluated and the results
are presented in Table 4.14 below.
Table 4.13: Comparison of criteria based on thei relative importnace on AHP scale.
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
C1
1.00
3.00
2.00
5.00
0.20
3.00
0.33
0.20
C2
0.33
1.00
3.00
4.00
0.17
0.20
0.20
0.33
C3
0.50
0.33
1.00
1.00
0.14
0.20
0.20
0.33
C4
0.20
0.25
1.00
1.00
0.11
0.17
0.17
0.25
C5
5.00
6.00
7.00
9.00
1.00
0.25
0.25
0.17
C6
0.33
5.00
5.00
6.00
4.00
1.00
4.00
5.00
C7
3.00
5.00
5.00
6.00
4.00
0.25
1.00
4.00
C8
5.00
3.00
3.00
4.00
6.00
0.20
0.25
1.00
Here criteria listed as column were referred as Ca and the ones listed as rows re-
ferred as Cb.
• Calculating GEOMEAN and Normalized weights for criteria.
The GEOMEAN for values in Table 4.14 was calculated using excel function for
GEOMEAN and then the weights were normalized over scale of 0 - 1, basically by
dividing geomean value for each criteria, by the sum of all geomean value. The
GEOMEAN and normalized weights are shown in ?? below.
Table 4.14: Comparison of criteria based on thei relative importnace on AHP scale.
GEOMEAN
Normalized weights
C1
1.02
0.10
C2
0.55
0.05
C3
0.36
0.03
C4
0.28
0.03
C5
1.45
0.14
C6
2.82
0.26
C7
2.55
0.24
C8
1.65
0.15
Total
10.69
1.00
• Calculating final AHP scores.
40
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:51==
As mentioned in Equation 3.4 under subsubsection 3.1.2, the final AHP scores for
all the 4 scenarios cane be seen in Table 4.15 below
Table 4.15: Final AHP scores across every criteria.
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
C1
0.09
0.10
0.06
0.07
C2
0.05
0.05
0.02
0.02
C3
0.03
0.03
0.01
0.01
C4
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.03
C5
0.14
0.11
0.01
0.02
C6
0.25
0.00
0.26
0.25
C7
0.03
0.24
0.00
0.00
C8
0.00
0.00
0.15
0.01
For the final scores, all the AHP scores for a scenario are summed across criteria. The
results are in Table 4.16 below. The detailed analysis can be found in excel sheet attached
under section C.6.
Table 4.16: Final results for Technical Analysis of scenario 5, 6, 7 & 8.
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Results
0.617
0.655
0.520
0.401
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
41
==PAGE:52==
4.3
Gate 3: Composite Assessment
4.3.1
COSIMA
Results of each step discussed in subsection 3.1.3 are as follows,
• Step 1: Compiling Commercial & Technical Analysis results.
Table 4.17: Combined results for Techno-commercial Analysis (Gate 2).
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Commercial
CBA
NPV (M€)
2.56
2.3
-4.78
-1.09
Analysis
BCR
1.24
1.17
0.05
0.29
IRR
13%
13%
-7%
-3%
FRA
0.71
0.66
NA
NA
Technical
Analysis
MCDA
C1 (W1:0.10)
0.090
0.096
0.059
0.072
C2 (W2:0.05)
0.052
0.052
0.017
0.017
C3 (W3:0.03)
0.034
0.034
0.011
0.011
C4 (W4:0.03)
0.016
0.026
0.016
0.026
C5 (W5:0.14)
0.136
0.108
0.005
0.020
C6 (W6:0.26)
0.252
0.000
0.256
0.248
C7 (W7:0.24)
0.034
0.239
0.001
0.000
C8 (W8:0.15)
0.004
0.003
0.154
0.007
Total MCDA Score
0.617
0.558
0.520
0.401
Here the W is the respective criteria weight calculated through AHP.
• Step 2: Translate MCDA values to their shadow prices.
– Normalizing MCDA scores from Table 4.17, ona scale of 0 - 100, 0 to minimum
and 100 to maximum score.
Table 4.18: Normalized AHP scores on 0 - 100 scale.
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
C1
85
100
0
35
C2
100
100
0
0
C3
100
100
0
0
C4
0
100
0
100
C5
100
79
0
11
C6
98
0
100
97
C7
14
100
1
0
C8
0.36
0
100
3
– Setting preliminary αMCDA to calculate MCDA_Sum.
αMCDA considered as 50% for calculation. Therefore MCDA_Sum values for
each scenario are listed below.
Table 4.19: MCDA_Sum at 50% αMCDA
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
MCDA_Sum
13352
16249
232
443
T€
42
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:53==
– Calculating Shadow prices.
Shadow prices were calculated as per formula explained in Equation 3.6 and
they are presented in Table 4.20 below.
Table 4.20: Shadow Prices for scenarios across every criteria.
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
C1
21.41
28.05
0.53
1.27
C2
11.58
15.17
0.29
0.69
C3
7.64
10.00
0.19
0.45
C4
5.90
7.72
0.15
0.35
C5
30.49
39.94
0.75
1.81
C6
59.03
77.31
1.46
3.50
C7
53.49
70.05
1.32
3.17
C8
34.50
45.19
0.85
2.05
• Step 3: Combining Commercial and Technical Analysis (CBA+MCDA) to calculate
effective Total Rate of Return (TRR) as per Equation 3.7.
– Best Case: Considering shadow prices of scenario with highest BCR.
Table 4.21: Shadow Prices for scenarios across every criteria (Best Case Scenario).
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Method
Unit
Investment Costs
-10.790
-13.942
-5.014
-1.538
CBA
M €
Benefits
13.352
16.249
232
443
CBA
M €
BCR
1.24
1.17
0.05
0.29
CBA
C1
1823
2141
0
753
MCDA
T €
C2
1158
1158
0
0
MCDA
T €
C3
764
764
0
0
MCDA
T €
C4
0
590
0
590
MCDA
T €
C5
3049
2405
0
343
MCDA
T €
C6
5792
0
5903
5699
MCDA
T €
C7
753
5349
27
0
MCDA
T €
C8
13
0
3450
87
MCDA
T €
Total MCDA Value
13352
12407
9380
7472
MCDA
T €
Total Value
26.704
28.656
9.612
7.915
CBA +
M €
(Benefits+T_MCDA)
MCDA
TRR
2.47
2.06
1.92
5.15
– Worst Case: Considering shadow prices of scenario with lowest BCR.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
43
==PAGE:54==
Table 4.22: Shadow Prices for scenarios across every criteria (Worst Case Scenario).
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Method
Unit
Investment Costs
-10.790
-13.942
-5.014
-1.538
CBA
M €
Benefits
13.352
16.249
0.232
0.443
CBA
M €
BCR
1.24
1.17
0.05
0.29
CBA
C1
45
53
0
19
MCDA
T €
C2
29
29
0
0
MCDA
T €
C3
19
19
0
0
MCDA
T €
C4
0
15
0
15
MCDA
T €
C5
75
59
0
8
MCDA
T €
C6
143
0
146
141
MCDA
T €
C7
19
132
1
0
MCDA
T €
C8
0
0
85
2
MCDA
T €
Total MCDA Value
330
307
232
185
MCDA
T €
Total Value
13.682
16.556
0.464
0.628
CBA +
M €
(Benefits+T_MCDA)
MCDA
TRR
1.27
1.19
0.09
0.41
– Realistic Case: Considering shadow prices of respective scenario.
Table 4.23: Shadow Prices for scenarios across every criteria (Realistic Case Scenario).
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Method
Unit
Investment Costs
-10.790
-13.942
-5.014
-1.538
CBA
M €
Benefits
13.352
16.249
0.232
0.443
CBA
M €
BCR
1.24
1.17
0.05
0.29
CBA
C1
1823
2805
0
45
MCDA
T €
C2
1158
1517
0
0
MCDA
T €
C3
764
1000
0
0
MCDA
T €
C4
0
772
0
35
MCDA
T €
C5
3049
3149
0
20
MCDA
T €
C6
5792
0
146
338
MCDA
T €
C7
753
7005
1
0
MCDA
T €
C8
13
0
85
5
MCDA
T €
Total MCDA Value
13352
16249
232
443
MCDA
T €
Total Value
26.704
32.498
0.464
0.886
CBA +
M €
(Benefits+T_MCDA)
MCDA
TRR
2.47
2.33
0.09
0.58
• Step 4: Sensitivity Analysis for αMCDA values from 0% to 80%. Below is the graph
of sensitivity analysis for best, worst and realistic case. The trend how change in
αMCDA affects the Total Rate of Return.
44
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:55==
(a) Best Case Scenario
(b) Worst Case Scenario
(c) Realistic Case Scenario.
Figure 4.14: Sensitivity Analysis by changing αMCDA for COSIMA results.
The detailed calculation for above executed composite assessment can be referred in
Appendix D.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
45
==PAGE:56==
4.4
Final Results
Table 4.24: Summary of results from Gate 2 (2.1 - 2.2) & Gate 3
Gate 2.1
Gate 2.2
Gate 3
CBA - BCR
FRA
MCDA - AHP
COSIMA - 50%
MCDA Realistic
Scenario 5
1.24
0.71
0.62
2.47
Scenario 6
1.17
0.66
0.56
2.33
Scenario 7
0.05
0
0.52
0.09
Scenario 8
0.29
0
0.40
0.58
Ranking the assessed scenarios based on average rank value.
Table 4.25: Assigning ranks for scenarios assessed.
Gate 2.1
Gate 2.2
Gate 3
CBA - BCR
FRA
MCDA - AHP
COSIMA - 50%
Average
Final
CMCDA Realisitic
Rank
Rank
Scenario 5
1
1
1
1
1.00
1
Scenario 6
2
2
2
2
2.00
2
Scenario 7
4
4
3
4
3.75
4
Scenario 8
3
3
4
3
3.25
3
The above ranking denotes the focus and the priority for target application of a sugar
cane biorefinery. This result is valid, if the assumption and variables considered during
execution are verified.
46
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:57==
5
Discussion and Conclusion
Discussion
The results obtained above are good enough to align the target focus but needs further
optimization to be more accurate in the decision making process. Some aspects are dis-
cussed below and recommendations are made for Aquaporin to consider during their fur-
ther investigation in this study. These recommendations are usually around Aquaporin,s
technology-product, general scope in sugar biorefinery and decision making considera-
tions.
Recommendations based on Aquaporin’s technology-product:
Looking at the results, scenario 5 (treating biomethanated spent wash of fermented cane
syrup) and scenario 6 (treating biomethanated spent wash of fermented can molasses)
are more attractive than other two. This is because of the major OPEX savings when
compared to an evaporator. The fuel used for evaporator in this study is bagasse which
is a by-product of the sugarcane biorefinery and is reused in the same facility for power
generation. In this study evaluation is made by giving bagasse a monetary value. This is
based on assumption that if not utilized internally, bagasse has a monetary value. Hav-
ing a business case with this hypothesis is quite inaccurate. Therefore, for these two
scenarios the target biorefineries should be on that rely on other sources of fuel that are
purchased externally.
Since the report analyzed for this study were from India, the evaporation technology used
in those setups is mostly 5 stage multi effect evaporator (MEE-5). The steam consump-
tion of MEE-5 is lower when compared to the evaporator with lesser stages. This means
for lower stages steam consumption is high, that would drastically increase the operating
expense. Therefore Aquaporin’s focus for evaporator scenarios should be the ones with
stages lower than 5. Lesser the stages, better the business case.
Another aspect is the draw regeneration technique, as explained above in sectionFigure 2.4,
is currently a reverse osmosis based technology that is highly electric energy intensive.
The biorefineries have a power generation unit in-house, and a abundance of waste heat is
generated. Possibilities to explore new draw regeneration techniques that are not electric
energy demanding but can works primarily on heat transfer, such a membrane distillation
and thermolytic draw regeneration.
For scenario 7 (treating sugar mill effluent) and scenario 8 (treating spent lees), it can
be seen that the profitability is negative, however the streams are simple and offer ease
of treatment. Investigation should be done further on the challenges faced by the current
treatment schemes and if FO can overcome those, but for now those streams are techni-
cal feasible whereas commercially not attractive.
The 6 scenarios that were eliminated in the first stage were due to the limitation of cur-
rent product limitation of Aquaporin. Moreover, Aquaporin is constantly in a process of
launching products that addresses pain points of the market, here is a scope where they
can evaluate a product market fit for this industry and there are reasons to support this.
One of Aquaporin’s market is Food & Beverage industry, where juice concentration is
done, and a similar sugar juice concentration is required for sugar production and fer-
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
47
==PAGE:58==
mentation as described above in Figure 2.11. For same, Aquaporin has traction from the
industry and customer are willing to explore that opportunity but the current product’s tem-
perature limitation restricts aquaporin from doing so. Secondly, if the commercial analysis
in subsubsection 4.2.1 is considered, a process called as Ultra-filtration is used as a pre-
treatment. This process nearly accounts to 1/3 of the CAPEX and a significant part of
OPEX. The need of pre-treatment is also due to the treatment limitation of Aquaporin,
therefore this scenarios could also be reassessed if the next generation products address
the current limitation and make widen the feasibility of technology.
Recommendations based on Aquaporin’s scope in sugar based biorefinery:
Regarding the overall sugar based biorefinery sector with a focus on 1G bioethanol pro-
duction, sugarcane is one of the many feedstock assessed in this report. The results from
this report can be replicated to 1G bioethanol industries with different feedstocks and this
could help Aquaporin to conclude their current potential in the 1G bioethanol sector plus
open doors for exploring new opportunities with the upcoming line of products.
The study focused on an Indian perspective, as the feasibility report mentioned in Ta-
ble 2.1 pertains to setups in India. However, this approach can be applied to other re-
gions by testing the decision-making variables and validating the results. The process
layout used in the study is specific to India, while the pricing considered is based on EU
standards due to a lack of data. Therefore, the economic variables can be used to ver-
ify these results as well.Additionally, the market for 2G - 3G - 4G bioethanol is evolving
and therefore it offers new pathways for Aquaporin to be the first movers in innovating
the traditional process setup for these industries. Moreover, the focus should not just be
restricted to bioethanol, but other biofuels, also other pathways in the biorefinery setup.
Recommendations based on Decision Making.
The current decision making framework was executed majorly from the author’s perspec-
tive and the experience author gained while understanding different evaluation processes
at Aquaporin. Hence, the assessment can be subjective and this could be optimized or
restructured if the relevant decision makers are involved in the said assessment. This
would not only help in effective decision making but would also help decision makers to
guide their decisions that aligns with the company’s goal and strategy.
48
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:59==
Conclusion
The objective of this thesis was to conduct a techno-commercial analysis for Forward Os-
mosis (FO) in Sugar based biorefinery sector. Forward Osmosis is a new and developing
technology and for venturing in to new applications, a comprehensive study is required
that gives a tangible outcome for effective decision making. Prior art shows the tiny por-
tion of such assessment over two decades, moreover the study also overcomes many of
their limitation. This study gives an insight of a specific type of sugar based biorefinery and
the applications where Forward Osmosis technology can make a difference. The inten-
sity of impact FO would have on this application is drafted through a structured decision
making framework. This is done by highlighting on the status quo for the said industry,
its technicalities and economics. Furthermore, the study quantifies the benefit of having
Aquaporin’s technology over the current scenario in both, technical and commercial as-
pects.
The decision making framework used, was a combination of different decision gates with
a pre-defined objective. These gates were powered with independent methodologies for
evaluation and delivering results to align with the decision making objectives. Integration
of these gates in a specific sequence helped to evaluate the possible application scenarios
for FO, thereby giving decision makers a clear outcome for the applications they should
focus or not. If focus, then which ones are the target application. From this specific study
it can be seen that out of the 10 possible applications, 6 were not feasible and this decision
was able to be made because of a preliminary assessment gate. This helped Aquaporin
in acknowledging their technology limitations and the application their technology was un-
able to cater. The remaining 4 scenarios were further assessed for their commercial and
technological benefit over the current state. Thereby, combining their results and giving
one single value for decision making, thereby addressing the limitations of the previous
research conducted in such evaluations for FO.
The techno-commercial evaluation of these 4 scenarios was a single value direct compa-
rable metrics, and based on that a clear ranking was concluded to prioritize the target ap-
plication. This prioritized list would help Aquaporin to have a clear focus in their business
development strategy along with the relevant supporting that would be able to quantify the
benefits of their technology to the customer.However, considering the recommendations
made in the section above, it is foremost important to verify the results for different vari-
ables and test the robustness of the framework. Like being said, the result is just a first
step to identify focus area in a given segment. There are more underlying uncertainties in
different aspects that could be identified, developed and optimized by engaging with the
customers. This then would facilitate Aquaporin in having a concrete decision making on
their technology and product readiness for the sugar based biorefinery sector.
To conclude, this study has offered Aquaporin with a focus area in a particular segment
of the sugar based biorefinery, under certain assumptions. This provides a structured ap-
proach for such a kind of market evaluation that would give Aquaporin a clear result based
decision making. In the future outlook, Aquaporin can verify the data gathered along with
its results. Furthermore Aquaporin can replicate and validate the results for other seg-
ments in the sugar based biorefinery sector. However, the scope of the framework is
broad and can be implement for conducting detailed assessment for other industries.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
49
==PAGE:60==
50
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations - Climate Action. The Paris Agreement. URL: https://aquaporin.
com/company/.
[2]
UN Environment Program - Copenhagen Climate Center. World is off track to meet
Paris Agreement climate Targets. Sept. 2021. URL: https://aquaporin.com/company/.
[3]
Statista. Transportation emission worldwide - statistics and facts. URL: https://
www.statista.com/topics/7476/transportation-emissions-worldwide/#topicOverview.
[4]
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US-EPA). Global Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Data. URL: https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/global-greenhouse-gas-
emissions-data.
[5]
EU Science Hub. Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions Data. URL: https://www.epa.
gov/ghgemissions/global-greenhouse-gas-emissions-data.
[6]
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US-EPA). Economics of Biofuel.
URL: https://www.epa.gov/environmental-economics/economics-biofuels.
[7]
Athar Mahmood et al. “Perspectives on Bioenergy Feedstock Development in Pak-
istan: Challenges and Opportunities”. In: Sustainability 13.15 (2021). ISSN: 2071-
1050. DOI: 10.3390/su13158438. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/13/15/
8438.
[8]
Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN) and Fondazione Eni Enrico
Mattei (FEEM). Roadmap to 2050: The Land-Water-Energy Nexus of Biofuels. 2021.
URL: https://roadmap2050.report/static/files/roadmap-to-2050-biofuels.pdf.
[9]
Aquaporin A/s. About Us - Aquaporin. URL: https://aquaporin.com/company/.
[10]
Aquaporin A/s. Company Timeline - Aquaporin.
[11]
Aquaporin A/s. Sustainability - Aquaporin. URL: https://aquaporin.com/sustainability/.
[12]
Dennis Brown. “The Discovery of Water Channels (Aquaporins)”. In: (June 2015).
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15984652/.
[13]
Aquaporin A/s. Aquaporin Inside Technology - Aquaporin. URL: https://aquaporin.
com/inside/.
[14]
Michael J. Lopez and Carrie A. Hall. “Physiology, Osmosis”. In: (Mar. 2022). URL:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557609/.
[15]
Aquaporin A/S. Aquaporin Inside HFFO2 module - Hollow Fiber Forward Osmosis
Module. Oct. 2021. URL: https://aquaporin.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/
Aquaporin-HFFO2-Datasheet-web.pdf.
[16]
Aquaporin A/S. Aquaporin Inside HFFO14 module - Hollow Fiber Forward Osmosis
Module. Oct. 2021. URL: https://aquaporin.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/
Aquaporin-HFFO14-Datasheet-web.pdf.
[17]
Aquaporin A/s. Forward Osmosis - the most frequently asked questions. URL: https:
//aquaporin.com/what-is-forward-osmosis/.
[18]
Wafa Suwaileh et al. “Forward osmosis membranes and processes: A comprehen-
sive review of research trends and future outlook”. In: Desalination 485 (2020),
p. 114455. ISSN: 0011-9164. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2020.114455.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0011916420305154.
[19]
Jung Eun Kim et al. “Techno-economic assessment of fertiliser drawn forward os-
mosis process for greenwall plants from urban wastewater”. In: Process Safety and
Environmental Protection 127 (2019), pp. 180–188. ISSN: 0957-5820. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2019.05.014. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0957582019305099.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
51
==PAGE:62==
[20]
“Techno-economic feasibility of recovering phosphorus, nitrogen and water from
dilute human urine via forward osmosis”. In: Water Research 150 (2019), pp. 47–
55. ISSN: 0043-1354. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2018.11.056. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0043135418309850.
[21]
Agata Zarebska-Mølgaard et al. “Techno-economic assessment of a hybrid forward
osmosis and membrane distillation system for agricultural water recovery”. In: Sep-
aration and Purification Technology 283 (2022), p. 120196. ISSN: 1383-5866. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2021.120196. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1383586621019018.
[22]
Sung Ju Im et al. “Techno-economic evaluation of an element-scale forward osmosis-
reverse osmosis hybrid process for seawater desalination”. In: Desalination 476
(2020), p. 114240. ISSN: 0011-9164. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2019.
114240. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001191641931272X.
[23]
Sergi Vinardell et al. “Techno-economic analysis of combining forward osmosis-
reverse osmosis and anaerobic membrane bioreactor technologies for municipal
wastewater treatment and water production”. In: Bioresource Technology 297 (2020),
p. 122395. ISSN: 0960-8524. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2019.122395.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960852419316256.
[24]
“Techno-economic comparison between forward osmosis (FO) and temperature-
enhanced osmotic membrane distillation (T-OMD) in agricultural fertigation”. In: Jour-
nal of Water Process Engineering 43 (2021), p. 102216. ISSN: 2214-7144. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2021.102216. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2214714421003032.
[25]
José Martínez et al. “Techno-economic analysis of a membrane-hybrid process as
a novel low-energy alternative for zero liquid discharge systems”. In: Energy Con-
version and Management 211 (2020), p. 112783. ISSN: 0196-8904. DOI: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2020.112783. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0196890420303216.
[26]
Argyris Panagopoulos. “Techno-economic assessment of minimal liquid discharge
(MLD) treatment systems for saline wastewater (brine) management and treat-
ment”. In: Process Safety and Environmental Protection 146 (2021), pp. 656–669.
ISSN: 0957-5820. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2020.12.007. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957582020319340.
[27]
Kurt Wagemann and Nils Tippkötter. Biorefineries. Apil 2018. URL: https://link.
springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-319-97119-3.
[28]
IEA Bioenergy. “Global biorefinery status report 2022.” In: (Sept. 2022). URL: https:
//www.ieabioenergy.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/IEA-Bioenergy-Task-42-
Global-biorefinery-status-report-2022-220712.pdf.
[29]
Francesco Cherubini et al. “Toward a common classifcation approach for biorefin-
ery.” In: (Apr. 2009). URL: https://www.benthis.eu/upload_mm/0/b/1/4960c94a-
c5d8-4065-827d-4fdcc3028cb3_T42_Classification%5C%20paper%5C%20BIOFPR.
pdf.
[30]
Valentina Aristizábal-Marulanda and Carlos A. Cardona Alzate. “Methods for de-
signing and assessing biorefineries: Review”. In: (Jan. 2018). URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/bbb.1961.
[31]
Geoff Bell et al. “IEA Bioenergy Task 42 Biorefining - Sustainable & synergetic pro-
cessing of biomass into marketable food and food ingredients, chemicals, materials
and energy.” In: (Aug. 2014). URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
bbb.1961.
52
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:63==
[32]
International Energy Agency (IEA). Renewable 2019 Transport. 2019. URL: https:
//www.iea.org/reports/renewables-2019/transport.
[33]
Atul Choudhari (Tata Consulting Engineers Limited). Overview: Second Generation
Bioethanol Process Technology. URL: https://www.tce.co.in/pdf/Overview-Second%
5C%20Generation%5C%20Bioethanol%5C%20Process%5C%20Technology.pdf.
[34]
Didem Özçimen and Benan İnan. “An Overview of Bioethanol Production From Al-
gae”. In: (2015). Ed. by Krzysztof Biernat. DOI: 10.5772/59305. URL: https://doi.
org/10.5772/59305.
[35]
Pobitra Halder et al. “Prospects and technological advancement of cellulosic bioethanol
ecofuel production”. In: (Jan. 2019). DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-08-102728-8.00008-5.
[36]
Marwa R. Elkatory, Mohamed A. Hassaan, and Ahmed El Nemr. “Chapter 12 - Algal
biomass for bioethanol and biobutanol production”. In: (2022). Ed. by Mostafa El-
Sheekh and Abd El-Fatah Abomohra, pp. 251–279. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-823764-9.00014-5. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/B9780128237649000145.
[37]
Vineet Sikarwar et al. “Progress in biofuel production from gasification”. In: Progress
in Energy and Combustion Science 61 (July 2017), pp. 189–248. DOI: 10.1016/j.
pecs.2017.04.001.
[38]
Tuan-Dung Hoang and Nhuan Nghiem. “Recent Developments and Current Sta-
tus of Commercial Production of Fuel Ethanol”. In: Fermentation 7.4 (2021). ISSN:
2311-5637. DOI: 10.3390/fermentation7040314. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2311-
5637/7/4/314.
[39]
Tirath Raj et al. “Recent advances in commercial biorefineries for lignocellulosic
ethanol production: Current status, challenges and future perspectives”. In: Biore-
source Technology 344 (2022), p. 126292. ISSN: 0960-8524. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biortech.2021.126292. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0960852421016345.
[40]
Attia Iram, Deniz Cekmecelioglu, and Ali Demirci. “Integrating 1G with 2G Bioethanol
Production by Using Distillersrsquo; Dried Grains with Solubles (DDGS) as the
Feedstock for Lignocellulolytic Enzyme Production”. In: Fermentation 8.12 (2022).
ISSN: 2311-5637. DOI: 10.3390/fermentation8120705. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/
2311-5637/8/12/705.
[41]
Anne Rodl - Hamburg Open Online University (HOOU). Advanced Fuels. Dec. 2021.
URL: https://www.hoou.de/projects/advanced-fuels/pages/overview.
[42]
Steffi Formann et al. “Beyond Sugar and Ethanol Production: Value Generation
Opportunities Through Sugarcane Residues”. In: Frontiers in Energy Research 8
(2020). ISSN: 2296-598X. DOI: 10.3389/fenrg.2020.579577. URL: https://www.
frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fenrg.2020.579577.
[43]
Pingale Sugar and Agro Products Private Limited. Pre-Feasibility Report for 5000
TCD Sugar Plant 35 MW Co-generation Power Plant along with 80 KLPD Disillery.
[44]
Mitcon Consultancy and Engineering Services Ltd. Environmental Impact Assess-
ment Report for Shree Laxmi Narshinha Sugars LLP. May 2020.
[45]
Green Power Sugars Limited. Pre-Feasibility Report for 5000 TCD Sugar Plant 28
MW Co-generation Power Plant along with 45 KLPD Disillery.
[46]
Vardan Environet. Environmental Impact Assessment for Indian Sucrose Limited.
Dec. 2018.
[47]
Pioneer Enviro Laboratories and Consultants Pvt. Ltd. Environmental Impact As-
sessment Report for Ganpati Sugar Industries Limited, Molasses based Ethanol
Unit along with 2 MW captive Power Unit. Aug. 2015.
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
53
==PAGE:64==
[48]
UPPCB Joint Committee of CPCB and Direct Admistration. Joint Inspection Report
for Modi Sugar Mills Limited. Jan. 2022.
[49]
Mitcon Consultancy and Engineering Services Ltd. Pre-Feasibility Report for Bidar
Kissan Shakkar Karkhana Ltd.
[50]
Mitcon Consultancy and Engineering Services Ltd. Environmental Impact Assess-
ment for Bhimashankar Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana Ltd.
[51]
Mitcon Consultancy and Engineering Services Ltd. Integrated project of sugar plant
expansion (5000 to 7500 TCD), ethanol plant expansion (30 to 100 KLPD) with
incineration boiler/TG /auxiliaries for ZLD and cogeneration power plant (44 MW).
[52]
Mantras Green Resources Ltd. Pre-Feasibility Report for Exapnsion of Sugar 6000
TCD to 7500 TCD Sugar Plant and Molasses Based Distillery from 90 KLPD to 120
KLPD at Daund Sugar Pvt Ltd.
[53]
Pioneer Enviro Laboratories and Consultants Pvt. Ltd. Environmental Impact As-
sessment Report for Shree Renuka Sugars Limited.
[54]
Environmental Health and Safety Consultants Pvt Ltd. Environmental Impact As-
sessment Report for VINP Distilleries and Sugar Pvt. LTd. July 2021.
[55]
Someshwar Sugars Limited. Environmental Impact Assessment Report for Somesh-
war Sugars Limited.
[56]
Sanrakshan Consultants. for Godavari Biorefineries Limited.
[57]
Vardan Environet. Environmental Impact Assessment Report for Shahabad Coop-
erative Sugar Mills Ltd. Sept. 2015.
[58]
Eco Chem Sales and Services. Environmental Impact Assessment and Environ-
ment Management Plan for The Gurdaspur Cooperative Sugar Mills Ltd. Mar. 2022.
[59]
en-Vision Enviro Technologies Pvt Ltd. Environmental Impact Assessment and EMP
Report for Coper Co-operative Sugar Limited. July 2019.
[60]
M/s Bindal Papers Mills Limited. PROPOSED ESTABLISHMENT OF INTEGRATED
PROJECT FOR SUGAR CANE CRUSHING CAPACITY - 10000 TCD, CO GEN
POWER – 12 MW, MOLASSES BASED DISTILLERY CAPACITY - 150 KLD ALONG
WITH CO-GENERATION POWER PLANT – 3.5 MW. Jan. 2022. URL: http : / /
environmentclearance.nic.in/writereaddata/Online/TOR/29_Jan_2022_16470792046514809PreFeasibiltyBin
pdf.
[61]
Mitcon Consultancy and Engineering Services Ltd. Environmental Impact Assess-
ment Report for KPR Sugar and Apparels Limited. Jan. 2021.
[62]
Vasantdada Sugar Institute. Pre-Feasibility Report Expansion of Sugar Unit from
2500 to 5000 TCD and Molasses/ Sugar Juice/ Sugar Syrup based distillery from
30 to 105 KLPD. July 2022.
[63]
Michael Bruhn Barfod, Kim Bang Salling, and Steen Leleur. “Composite decision
support by combining cost-benefit and multi-criteria decision analysis.” In: Decision
Support Systems 51.1 (2011), pp. 167–175. ISSN: 0167-9236. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.dss.2010.12.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0167923610002381.
[64]
Wen-Chih Huang and Chien-Hua CHEN. “Using the ELECTRE II method to ap-
ply and analyze the differentiation theory.” In: 5 (Jan. 2005). URL: https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/241735610_Using_the_ELECTRE_II_method_to_
apply_and_analyze_the_differentiation_theory.
[65]
José Figueira et al. “An overview of ELECTRE methods and their recent exten-
sions”. In: Journal of Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis 20 (Apr. 2013). DOI: 10.1002/
mcda . 1482. URL: https : / / www . researchgate . net / publication / 263248758 _ An _
overview_of_ELECTRE_methods_and_their_recent_extensions.
54
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:65==
[66]
Mir Seyed Mohammad Mohsen Emamat et al. “Using ELECTRE-TRI and Flow-
Sort methods in a stock portfolio selection context.” In: Financial Innovation 8 (Feb.
2022). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40854- 021- 00318- 1. URL: https://jfin-
swufe.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40854-021-00318-1.
[67]
World Population Review. Sugar Producing Countries 2023. 2023. URL: https://
worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/sugar-producing-countries.
[68]
Avadh Sugar & Energy LTD. Annual Report 2022. 2022. URL: https://trendlyne-
media-mumbai-new.s3.amazonaws.com/uploaded-documents/annual-report/61540/.
[69]
Balrampur Chini Mills LTD. Annual Report 2022. 2022. URL: https://trendlyne-
media-mumbai-new.s3.amazonaws.com/uploaded-documents/annual-report/157/.
[70]
Dhamapur Sugar Mills LTD. Annual Report 2022. 2022. URL: https://trendlyne-
media-mumbai-new.s3.amazonaws.com/uploaded-documents/annual-report/325/.
[71]
Shree Renuka Sugars Limited. Annual Report 2022. URL: https://renukasugars.
com/pdf/annual-reports/srsl-annual-report-fy-2021-22.pdf.
[72]
Dalmia Bharat Sugars and Industries LTD. Annual Report 2022. URL: https://www.
dalmiasugar.com/wp-content/themes/Sugar/assets/pdf/Annual%5C%20Report%5C%
202021-22.pdf.
[73]
Magadh Sugar & Energy LTD. Annual Report 2022. URL: https://trendlyne-media-
mumbai-new.s3.amazonaws.com/uploaded-documents/annual-report/61541/.
[74]
The Andhra Sugars Limited. Annual Report 2022. URL: https://theandhrasugars.
com/wp-content/uploads/ASL-Annual-Report-1.10.20221.pdf.
[75]
Simbhaoli Sugars Limited. Annual Report 2022. URL: https://www.simbhaolisugars.
com/files/pdffile/Annual%5C%20Reports%5C%20For%5C%20The%5C%20Financial%
5C%20Year%5C%202021-22.pdf.
[76]
Copersucar S.A: Financial Statements as of March 31,2022. URL: https://copersucar.
com/wp-content/uploads/2022/07/1049958-03-DF-CCSA-Ingles_CLIENTE.pdf.
[77]
Biosec S.A: Individual and Consolidated Financial Statements For the Year Ended
March 31, 2021. URL: https://api.mziq.com/mzfilemanager/v2/d/6c70e7e8-9164-
444f-88f3-0d704387b0fa/8f2a925b-36e3-74c0-86a4-148ac7410371?origin=2.
[78]
Sao Martinho S.A: 22 Financial Statements. URL: https://ri.saomartinho.com.br/
Download.aspx?Arquivo=SXuAJ97Ugn5ZVN4cg5LbLQ==.
[79]
Kim Bang Sailing. “Assessments of Transport Projects: Risk Analysis and Decision
Support.” In: (2008). URL: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/
4980374/Assessment+of+Transport+Projects+-+Risk+Analysis+and+Decision+
Support.pdf.
[80]
Kim Bang Salling. “A New Approach to Feasibility Risk Assessment within Transport
Infrastructure Appraisal”. In: Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 74 (2013).
Selected papers from the 26th IPMA (International Project Management Associa-
tion), World Congress, Crete, Greece, 2012, pp. 468–477. ISSN: 1877-0428. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.03.047. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S187704281300476X.
[81]
European Commission. Quarterly report on European Electiciy Market. URL: https:
//energy.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-01/.
[82]
Water New Europe. Water prices compared in 36 EU-cities. Mar. 2021. URL: https:
//www.waternewseurope.com/water-prices-compared-in-36-eu-cities/.
[83]
Ministry of Petroleum NITI Aayog and Natural Gas. Roadmap for Ethanol Blending
in India 2020-25. June 2021. URL: https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2021-
06/EthanolBlendingInIndia_compressed.pdf.
[84]
Adel Guitouni and Jean-Marc Martel. “Tentative guidelines to help choosing an ap-
propriate MCDA method”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 109.2
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
55
==PAGE:66==
(1998), pp. 501–521. ISSN: 0377-2217. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-
2217(98)00073-3.
[85]
Tatjana Atanasova-Pacemska, Martin Lapevski, and Riste Timovski. “Analytical Hi-
erarchial Process (AHP) Method Application in the process of selection and evalu-
ation.” In: (Nov. 2014).
[86]
D. Clark-Carter. “Measures of Central Tendency”. In: (2010). Ed. by Penelope Pe-
terson, Eva Baker, and Barry McGaw, pp. 264–266. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-08-044894-7.01343-9. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/B9780080448947013439.
[87]
Michael Bruhn Barfod, Kim Bang Salling, and Steen Leleur. “Composite decision
support by combining cost-benefit and multi-criteria decision analysis”. In: Decision
Support Systems 51.1 (2011), pp. 167–175. ISSN: 0167-9236. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.dss.2010.12.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0167923610002381.
[88]
Aquaporin A/S. Hollow Fiber Forward Osmosis User Manual. Apr. 2022.
[89]
Meghana Munagala et al. “Production of Bio-CNG from sugarcane bagasse: Com-
mercialization potential assessment in Indian context”. In: Industrial Crops and Prod-
ucts 188 (2022), p. 115590. ISSN: 0926-6690. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
indcrop.2022.115590. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0926669022010731.
[90]
Meenu Singh et al. “Online Academic Social Networking Sites (ASNSs) Selection
Through AHP for Placement of Advertisement of E-Learning Website”. In: (Mar.
2018), pp. 1008–1017. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-76348-4_97.
56
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:67==
A
Appendix: Data Set for evaluation.
A.1
SugarCane_Stream_Data.xlsx
For this evaluation, data related to the physio-chemical composition of the mapped 10
scenarios from section 2.3. The data gathered is categorized individually for the scenario,
i.e one worksheet per scenario. This includes, generic data like pH, temperature, solid
content etc, but also more detailed composition like the cationic and anionic concentration
which is also important from chemistry perspective. The excel workbook has an overview
worksheet that gives an average summary of all composition values for each scenario
and there are separate worksheets that have individual composition data along with their
source listed. Table A.1 shows the generic, composition of the 10 scenariosm the detailed
composition (cationic and anionic concentrations) can be found in the workbook.
Table A.1: General composition of the 10 mapped scenario in a sugarcane biorefinery
setup.
Total
Total
pH
Temperature
Electric
Total
Dissolved
Supended
Conductivity
Solids
Solids
Solids
(Deg C)
(uS/cm)
TS (ppm)
TDS (ppm)
TSS (ppm)
Scenario 1
7.28
80
13257
12594
663
Scenario 2
7.28
80
13257
12594
663
Scenario 3
4.16
35
68000
Scenario 4
4.32
30
28054
125115
69573
10489
Scenario 5
7.25
35
27000
30000
20000
10000
Scenario 6
8
35
27000
51000
29500
21500
Scenario 7
6.5
38
733
3992
3311
681
Scenario 8
4.05
6250
5500
750
Scenario 9
5.00
55
300
200
100
Scenario 10
5
56
970
177
154
24
BOD
COD
Alkalinity
Total
Total
Total
Nitrogen
Phosphorous
Potassium
(ppm)
(ppm)
(ppm)
(ppm)
(ppm)
(ppm)
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
30850
45200
365
101
1843
Scenario 4
51878
114290
7894
1694
728
10411
Scenario 5
3085
6780
365
101
1843
Scenario 6
5900
37750
2650
1000
10000
Scenario 7
1637
1575
1425
26
5
Scenario 8
3125
8750
Scenario 9
350
400
50
Scenario 10
2257
4230
A.2
SugarCane_Industry_Mass_Balance.xlsx
The attached excel workbook is a layout as explained above in Figure 2.11 under sec-
tion 2.3. This sheet was drafted to estimate flow rates for different streams of a sugar
cane biorefinery. For estimating the flow rates, the only input that needs to be given is
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
57
==PAGE:68==
the bioethanol production rate, in this study 100 Kilo-Liters per day (KLPD) was used.
The attached file, consists of three worksheets,
• Mass Balance_Scenario_Overview: This sheet summarizes the flow rates for the
mapped 10 scenarios as in Table 2.2.
• Mass Balance_FlowScheme: The actual calculation through the process layout can
be understood in this sheet. This gives an overview of what the current state it and
how material is handled and processed within the biorefinery setup. The procedure
is to determine bioethanol production output and then setting the variables.
• Mass Balanace_Assumption: The variables in the previous sheet are the industry
considerations for drafting a sugarcane biorefinery process. These considerations
used for calculating the flow rates along with their respective references can be
found here.
Table A.2 below describes the flow rates for 10 identified scenarios in a 100 KLPD sug-
arcane based bioethanol production setup.
Table A.2: Flow rates for the 10 mapped scenario in a sugarcane biorefinery setup.
Average Flow (m3/day)
Deviation (m3/day)
Scenario 1
5700
4518
Scenario 2
5700
4518
Scenario 3
1000
-
Scenario 4
900
71
Scenario 5
1000
-
Scenario 6
900
71
Scenario 7
660
523
Scenario 8
125
-
Scenario 9
4446
3524
Scenario 10
793
101
The average and deviation values are further used in feasibility risk assessment as de-
scribed in subsubsection 4.2.1
58
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:69==
B
Appendix: GATE 1
As it can be seen from Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2, an outranking relationship between the
scenarios was established. The attached workbook consists of calculation and simulation
for the preliminary screen. The workbook has 4 worksheets, each sheet is described
below.
• Scenario Descritpion: Summary of all 10 mapped scenarios that could be possible
FO application.
• Input (Criteria-Weight-Rank): This sheet consists of defining variables required for
executing ELECTRE and the flow as described in subsection 3.1.1.
• Calculation: As name refers, the sheet calculates outranking relationship between
scenarios through estimating concordance and discordance indices by setting veto
and concordance thresholds. As mentioned in section 4.1, ELECTRE was executed
for threshold 2 & 3 at different concordance indices.
• OutrankingGraphVeto_2: This sheet consists of simulations for veto threshold 2 and
different concordance thresholds from previous sheet.
• OutrankingGraphVeto_3: This sheet consists of simulations for veto threshold 3 and
different concordance thresholds from previous sheet.
B.1
ELECTRE_Preliminary Assessment.xlsx
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
59
==PAGE:70==
C
Appendix: Gate 2
C.1
OPEX_Assumptions.xlsx
As mentioned in the subsubsection 3.1.2, current operational expense denoted as OPc is
needed to do a cost benefit analysis. The attached excel workbook gives a background
on how OPc for the 4 selected scenarios is estimated. The workbook is further divided
into worksheets, one worksheet gives the overview of OPc in terms of per unit volume
treated. However the supporting calculation to estimate those numbers is presented in
other worksheets, which is explained as follows.
• MEE 5 Evaporator OPEX: In scenario 5 & 6, current technology used is a Multi Ef-
fect Evaporator of 5 Stage (MEE 5), which uses heat for evaporation and removal
of water for concentration. Therefore the OPEX is majorly dependent on heat and
electricity consumption. The electric consumption for an evaporator is obtained from
Aquaporin’s database.
However, for heat energy, fuel is required.
In this case
biomass - bagasse is used as a fuel. Therefore, quantity of fuel required based on
rate of evaporation is calculated in detail.
• ETP OPEX: ETP stands for effluent treatment plant and is a combination of different
technologies in a specific sequence (refer section 2.3). For every technology, eco-
nomics were found from the literature and combined together as per reference. The
OPEX festimated specific technologies used in an ETP can be seen in Table C.1
below.
Table C.1: Estimated OPEX for an Effluent Treatment Plant
OPEX (€/m3 of feed)
Bar Screen
0.001
Oil Skimmers
0.009
Equalization Tank
0.007
Primary Clarifier
0.002
Anaerobic Treatment
0.014
Aerobic Treatment
0.015
Secondary Clarifier
0.006
Chlorination
0.003
Sand Filter
0.12
Carbon Filter
0.12
Total Opc
0.297
• CPU OPEX: CPU stands for condensate polishing unit and is similar to an ETP
except the technologies used are different. The estimated OPEX for a CPU unit can
be seen in Table C.2 below.
For commercial Analysis, a cost benefit analysis followed by a feasibility risk assessment
was performed subsubsection 4.2.1 and subsubsection 4.2.1. The results were summa-
rized in the respective sections. Detailed calculation for the results can be found in excel
60
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:71==
Table C.2: Estimated OPEX for a Condensate Polishing Unit
OPEX (€/m3 of feed)
Equalization Tank
0.007
Neutralization Tank
0.007
Anaerobic Digestion
0.014
Aerobic Digestion
0.015
Primary Clarification
0.002
Secondary Clarification
0.006
Ultra-Filtration
0.83
Reverse Osmosis
0.75
Total
1.631
workbooks attached below. Each workbook is dedicated to one scenario, therefore 4
workbooks in total. The workbooks are structured in the following way.
• Scenario Description
• Scenario - Base: Layout, process flow and economics of the current state.
• Scenario - AQP: Modifications with Aquaporin’s solution, process flow and eco-
nomics associated. The entire part is projected by Aquaporin’s in-house sales tool
and due to company’s privacy policy the tool is not attached.
• CBA_Scenario: Commercial parameters are calculated as per Equation 3.1, Equa-
tion 3.2 and Equation 3.3.
• Distribution Values_Scenario: Sensitivity analysis based on varying input parame-
ters related to flow and composition to estimate mean and deviation for economic
parameters (CAPEX-OPEX).
• FRA_Scenario: Feasibility Risk Assessment for checking feasibility probability by
executing Monte Carlo Simulation using a Normal Distribution Curve with mean and
deviation from the above worksheet.
C.2
CBA-FRA-Scenario5.xlsx
C.3
CBA-FRA-Scenario6.xlsx
C.4
CBA-FRA-Scenario7.xlsx
C.5
CBA-FRA-Scenario8.xlsx
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
61
==PAGE:72==
C.6
Technical Analysis_MCDA.xlsx
Calculating scores for scenarios across different criteria.
1. Criteria 1 (C1): Relative Water Recovery
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Rc (%)
92.50%
87.25%
90%
90%
Rm (%)
94%
94%
60%
73%
Relative Recovery (Rm/Rc)
1.02
1.08
0.67
0.81
Normalized Relative Water Recovery
0.94
1.00
0.62
0.75
2. Criteria 2 (C2): Treatment Objective (TO)
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
TO
Concentration +
Concentration +
Concentration
Concentration
Nutrient Recovery
Nutrient Recovery
TO - Score
1.00
1.00
0.33
0.33
Normalized TO
1.00
1.00
0.33
0.33
3. Criteria 3 (C3): Implementation of Feasibility (Aquaporin’s solution) (FAQP )
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
FAQP
(Existing +
(Existing + )
New Plants
New Plants
New Plants)
New Plants)
FAQP Scores
1.00
1.00
0.33
0.33
Normalized FAQP
1.00
1.00
0.33
0.33
4. Criteria 4 (C4): Operational Days
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Operational Days
180
300
180
300
Normalized Operational Days
0.6
1
0.6
1
5. Criteria 5 (C5): Relative Power Consumption (Er)
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Ec (kWh/m3)
43.70
34.37
0.62
3.39
EAQP (kWh/m3)
5.89
5.81
2.26
3.14
Er
7.42
5.91
0.28
1.08
Normalized Er
1.00
0.80
0.04
0.15
6. Criteria 6 (C6): Critical Component Concentration (CC)
62
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:73==
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
CCCOD (ppm)
6780
37750
1575
8750
Normalized CCCOD
0.82
0.00
0.96
0.77
CCChlorine (ppm)
0
8000
448.55
75
Normalized CCCl
1.0
0.0
0.9
1.0
CCPhenol (ppm)
0
7500
0
0
NormalizedCCPhenol
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
CCSulphates (ppm)
0
4000
36.6
0
Normalized CCSulphates
1.00
0.00
0.99
1.00
Normalized CC
Average normalized
0.96
0.00
0.97
0.94
scores for CCChlorine,
CCPhenol,& CCSulphates
7. Criteria 7 (C7): Valuable Component Concentration
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
Total Nitrogen
365
2650
25.85
0
TN (ppm)
Normalized TN
0.138
1.0
0.010
0.0
Total Phosphorous
100.5
1000
5.4
0
TP (ppm)
Normalized TP
0.10
1.00
0.01
0.00
Total Potassium
1842.5
10000
0
0
TK (ppm)
Normalized TK
0.18
1.00
0.00
0.00
Normalized Scores
Average of normalized
0.14
1.00
0.01
0.00
score of TN-TP-TK
8. Criteria 8 (C8): Relative Permeate Quality (RP)
Scenario 5
Scenario 6
Scenario 7
Scenario 8
RPc(ppm TDS)
154
150
2100
154
RPAQP (ppm TDS)
520
600
162
270
RP
0.30
0.25
12.96
0.57
Normalized RP
0.02
0.02
1.00
0.04
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
63
==PAGE:74==
D
Appendix: Gate 3
D.1
Composite Assessment_COSIMA.xlsx
COSIMA combines the results from technical and commercial analysis. As explained in
subsection 3.1.3, the attached workbook gives a step wise calculation for COSIMA. It con-
sists an input cell for setting αMCDA to analyze how the technical benefits are quantified
in from not been considered to be majorly considered in decision making. Moreover, the
decision making biases are also evaluated by conducting a sensitivity analysis for best,
worst and realistic case scenario. Best case is when the decision maker would be a bit
optimistic while calculating the shadow prices of technical benefits, basically consider-
ing that the technical benefits would perform the same way as they did for the scenario
with highest business to cost ratio (BCR), vice versa for the worst case. While assess-
ing realistic case, the consideration for quantifying technical benefits depends much on
scenario’s respective shadow prices.
64
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
==PAGE:75==
Techno Commercial analysis of Forward Osmosis in sugar based Biorefinery sector
65
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
