==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Page 1 of 105 
 
 
 
Persistence and transmission of antimicrobial  
resistance in gut microbiomes of a model organism 
(gregarious cockroach - Pycnoscelus surinamensis) 
 
Emilie Egholm Bruun Jensen (s173703) 
 
 
Master’s thesis - 30 ECTS points 
Research group for Genomic Epidemiology 
National Food Institute - Technical University of Denmark 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Saria Otani (saot@food.dtu.dk)  
Amalia Bogri (amabog@food.dtu.dk)  
Christian Brinch (cbri@food.dtu.dk)  
Frank Møller Aarestrup (fmaa@food.dtu.dk)  
 
Submission date: 22.02.2023 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
Page 2 of 105 
Table of contents 
 
1. Abstract 
5 
2. Acknowledgements 
6 
3. Abbreviations 
7 
4. Introduction 
8 
4.1 Project aim 
8 
4.2 Gut microbiome 
8 
4.2.1 Definition and importance 
8 
4.2.2 Insect gut microbiome 
9 
4.2.3 Gut microbiome transmission in gregarious insects 
9 
4.3 The Pycnoscelus surinamensis cockroach 
10 
4.3.1 Morphology and life cycle 
10 
4.3.2 Gut microbiome composition 
10 
4.4 Antimicrobials and resistance 
10 
4.4.1 Antimicrobial agents 
10 
4.4.2 Antimicrobial resistance 
11 
4.4.3 Spread of and selection for antimicrobial resistance genes 
11 
4.4.4 Surveillance of antimicrobial resistance 
12 
4.4.5 Tetracycline and tetracycline resistance 
12 
4.5 Metagenomics 
13 
4.5.1 Introduction 
13 
4.5.2 Metagenomic shotgun sequencing workflow 
13 
4.5.3 K-mer alignment of raw reads against databases 
14 
4.5.4 Alpha diversity 
14 
4.5.5 Compositional data analysis 
15 
5. Methods 
17 
5.1 Main experiment design 
17 
5.2 Study species 
18 
5.3 Soil collection and preparation 
19 
5.4 Paint test 
19 
5.5 Tetracycline hydrochloride solution preparation 
19 
5.6 Feeding and treating 
20 
5.7 Cockroach sampling and dissection 
20 
5.8 Soil sampling 
21 
5.9 Cockroach painting and mixing 
21 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
Page 3 of 105 
5.10 DNA extraction 
21 
5.10.1 Cockroach gut DNA extraction 
21 
5.10.2 Soil DNA extraction 
21 
5.11 DNA measurements 
22 
5.12 Metagenomics sequencing 
22 
5.13 Quality control and trimming 
22 
5.14 K-mer alignment of raw reads against databases 
22 
5.15 Reference length correction and taxa filtering 
23 
5.16 Alpha diversity 
23 
5.17 Compositional data analysis 
23 
5.17.1 Characterising the soil and gut microbiomes 
23 
5.17.2 Ordination analysis 
24 
5.17.3 Tetracycline resistance 
24 
5.17.4 Heatmap clustering 
24 
5.17.5 clr mean difference between groups to identify drivers of separation 
25 
6. Results 
26 
6.1 Paint test 
26 
6.2 Cockroach count, mortality, and moulting 
26 
6.3 Sample summary and DNA concentration 
27 
6.4 Mapping summary 
28 
6.5 Filtering reads mapped to the genomic database 
30 
6.6 Alpha diversity 
30 
6.7 Compositional data analysis 
34 
6.7.1 Characterising the soil and gut microbiome 
34 
6.7.2 Ordination analysis on cockroach and soil samples 
35 
6.7.3 Microbiome compositional changes between cockroach gut and their soil 
40 
6.7.4 Tetracycline resistance 
43 
6.7.5 Heatmap clustering 
44 
6.7.6 Microbiome composition changes 
48 
7. Discussion 
54 
8. Conclusion 
61 
9. References 
62 
10. Appendix 
68 
Appendix 1: Amount of soil used for extraction 
68 
Appendix 2: Sample summary table 
69 
Appendix 3: Mapping summary 
72 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
Page 4 of 105 
Appendix 3.1: Genomic mapping, bacteria/eukaryotic ratio 
72 
Appendix 3.2: ResFinder mapping 
73 
Appendix 4: Alpha diversity 
74 
Appendix 4.1: Chao1 richness at the bacterial genus level 
74 
Appendix 4.2: Shannon diversity index on the bacterial genus level 
75 
Appendix 4.3: Simpson diversity index at bacterial species and genus level 
76 
Appendix 4.4: Shannon’s evenness at the genus level 
78 
Appendix 5: Soil and cockroach gut microbiome on a species level 
79 
Appendix 5.1: Non-treated cockroach gut microbiome, N day 1 box 2 
79 
Appendix 5.2: Non-treated soil microbiome, N day 2 box 2 
80 
Appendix 6: Reducing the number of features for ordination analysis 
81 
Appendix 6.1: Bacterial species 
81 
Appendix 6.2: Resistance genes 
82 
Appendix 6.3: Resistance gene classes 
83 
Appendix 7: Cumulative explained variance 
84 
Appendix 7.1: Bacterial genus and bacterial species 
84 
Appendix 7.2: Resistance genes and resistance gene classes 
84 
Appendix 8: Reducing the number of features for the heatmap clustering 
85 
Appendix 8.1: Cockroach gut and soil bacterial genera 
85 
Appendix 8.2: Cockroach gut and soil resistance genes 
85 
Appendix 9: Clr Euclidean clustering with all features 
86 
Appendix 9.1: Cockroach gut and soil bacterial genera 
86 
Appendix 9.2: Cockroach gut and soil resistance genes 
87 
Appendix 10: Compositional changes of the cockroach gut microbiome 
88 
Appendix 10.1: Non-treated day 1 vs non-treated and treated day 8 
88 
Appendix 10.2: Non-treated day 8 vs all day 15 samples 
90 
Appendix 10.3: Treated day 8 vs all day 15 samples 
95 
Appendix 10.4: Non-treated day 1 vs all day 15 samples 
100 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
Page 5 of 105 
1. Abstract 
Semi-social insects are good models for microbiome research as they practise gregarious 
behaviour which facilitate transmission of bacterial communities of the gut microbiome. Here, 
we investigated how the live and complex gut microbiome of a model organism (Pycnoscelus 
surinamensis cockroach) responded to a stressor in the form of antibiotic treatment. We 
showed that tetracycline treatment disturbed the gut microbiome and showed a decrease in 
diversity, which was detectable using metagenomics. When the gut microbiome of the model 
organisms was stressed by tetracycline treatment, the composition suffered, selecting certain 
bacteria taxa while others decreased. The host-host interaction and semi-social behaviour 
have shown to facilitate transmission of bacteria from treated to susceptible individuals. We 
investigated the complex dynamics of this dissemination and showed that the gregarious 
behaviour of the Pycnoscelus surinamensis cockroach increased the recovery of the gut 
microbiome of treated individuals when in contact with non-treated individuals.  
Tetracycline resistance was selected for in the population of tetracycline treated cockroaches. 
When mixed with a susceptible population, this resistance was transmitted and persisted in all 
populations throughout the experiment. Tetracycline resistance was also detectable within the 
microbiome of the faeces-rich soil of the cockroaches, suggesting even an external 
dissemination of the AMRs and bacterial communities.  
These results show a marked effect on live microbiomes when stressing them with antibiotics, 
and those changes were passed through the host social behaviour without being subjected to 
direct stress. This signifies the complex dynamics of gut microbiome dissemination and 
highlight the importance of considering the gut microbiome as well as the soil microbiome of 
cockroaches as a reservoir of antimicrobial resistance genes.  
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
Page 6 of 105 
2. Acknowledgements 
Thanks to Saria Otani for teaching me scientific thinking, being there for continuous support 
and encouraging me to explore on my own. In general, just being awesome.  
 
Thanks to Christian Brinch for making the compositional data analysis seem less scary.  
 
Thanks to Amalia Bogri for the company in the lab, for always having a plan and always 
thinking of the minor details.  
 
Thanks to Thomas Nordahl Petersen for Computerome support during the Christmas break. 
Additional thanks to Baptiste Jacques Philippe Avot for Computerome support.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
Page 7 of 105 
3. Abbreviations  
alr 
 
Additive log-ratio 
AMR  
Antimicrobial resistance 
bp 
 
Base pair 
clr 
 
Centered log-ratio 
CoDa  
Compositional data analysis 
DNA 
 
Deoxyribonucleic acid 
dsDNA 
Double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid 
HGT 
 
Horizontal gene transfer 
ITS 
 
Internal transcribed spacer 
MAG  
Metagenome-assembled genome 
mRNA  
Messenger ribonucleic acid 
NGS 
 
Next-generation sequencing 
OTU 
 
Operational taxonomic unit 
PCR 
 
Polymerase chain reaction 
PBS 
 
Phosphate-buffered saline 
QC 
 
Quality control 
rRNA  
Ribosomal ribonucleic acid 
sp 
 
Species 
tRNA  
Transfer ribonucleic acid 
WHO  
World Health Organization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
Page 8 of 105 
4. Introduction 
4.1 Project aim 
This master’s thesis aims to investigate how stress affects the complex gut microbiome 
community in a population of the gregarious cockroach, Pycnoscelus surinamensis.  
The gut microbiome of the model organism was disturbed by delivering antibiotics as a 
stressor. This disturbance was examined at the gut microbiome compositional level as well as 
an antimicrobial resistance (AMR) level. It is hypothesised that the semi-social effect, i.e., the 
gregarious behaviour of Pycnoscelus surinamensis, will facilitate bacterial and gene 
transmission between individuals and that those can be detectable with metagenomics.  
To understand the emergence and transmission of AMR in the complex gut microbiome of the 
model organism, one population was treated with antibiotics and compared to a control. This 
thesis aims to answer the following scientific questions: 
 
1) How do antibiotics affect live gut microbiome composition of the model organism in 
vivo? 
2) How does the gut microbiome recover post treatment? 
 
The transmission of AMR between populations was investigated by mixing the treated and 
non-treated population to answer the following: 
 
3) Understand AMR dissemination and dynamics by investigating how the treated 
population transmit AMR to the susceptible population.  
4) What happens when a non-treated population is continuously exposed to treated 
individuals?  
 
Understanding emergence and transmission of AMR is key to gain further insight into how it 
threatens human health as well as how to act against it [1]. This study aims to contribute to 
this important field of research using metagenomics sequencing and analyses.  
4.2 Gut microbiome  
4.2.1 Definition and importance 
The gut microbiome is the collection of microorganisms (bacteria, fungi, archaea, protists and 
viruses) and their genes within the gut of an organism [2] [3]. The complex communities of the 
gut are seen in both mammals as well as insects [4]. These symbionts are essential to host 
fitness and survival. Several beneficial functions are provided by the host gut microbiomes, 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
Page 9 of 105 
those include food digestion, synthesis of amino acids and vitamins as well as pathogen 
protection [5] [2]. 
4.2.2 Insect gut microbiome  
Insect gut consists of three compartments: The foregut, the midgut, and the hindgut. The food 
is stored in the foregut before the digestion and absorption in the midgut. Faeces is stored in 
the rectum of the hindgut. In cockroaches, part of the hindgut also functions as a fermentation 
chamber where nutrients are absorbed [2].  
The evolutionary success of insects can largely be attributed to their gut microbiome. By 
improving otherwise nutrient-poor diets, the gut microbiome has allowed insects to occupy 
specific ecological niches [2]. This mutualistic relationship between insects and their gut 
microbiome means that some insects simply are not able to survive without their gut 
microbiome (obligate symbiosis) [6].  
Diet, environment, and host phylogeny select which microorganisms can colonise and 
establish themselves in the gut. Diet is often shared between individuals of the same species, 
stabilising the composition of the gut microbiome [7]. Over time, diet as well as the 
physicochemical conditions of the gut compartments will determine long-time association 
allowing for diversification and co-speciation within the gut microbiome [2] [7].  
4.2.3 Gut microbiome transmission in gregarious insects 
Gregarious insects, like the Pycnoscelus surinamensis cockroach, aggregate and live closely 
together. Even though this cockroach species is not a eusocial organism like ants, bees and 
termites with cooperative parental care and sociality, they do however share several social 
characteristics of eusocial members, e.g., group living and kin recognition, and importantly 
they transmit gut microbiome members through grooming and potential trophallaxis [2]. This 
makes them suitable model organisms to investigate shifts and changes in gut microbiome 
compositions through feeding experiments [7].  
Gut microbiome transmission between individuals can be either horizontal i.e., among the 
population or vertical i.e., from parent to offspring. Horizontal transmission includes 
coprophagy i.e., ingesting faeces, trophallaxis i.e., feeding between individuals via mouth-to-
mouth or anus-to-mouth or transmission through the shared environment of the population. 
Studies have shown that coprophagy is a significant factor of shaping the gut microbiome of 
cockroaches [6] [8]. In the German cockroach, Blattella germanica, the bacterial composition 
of the gut microbiome and the faeces is highly similar, highlighting the importance of faeces 
as a means of re-colonising and establishing the gut microbiome [6]. In addition, chemical 
cues produced by bacteria of the gut microbiome and released with the faeces promote 
aggregation and thereby transmission of the gut microbiome between individuals [9]. 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
 
Page 10 of 105 
4.3 The Pycnoscelus surinamensis cockroach 
4.3.1 Morphology and life cycle 
Pycnoscelus surinamensis, also known as the Surinam cockroach or the Greenhouse 
cockroach, is endemic to the Indomalayan region. It is a burrowing cockroach regarded as a 
plant pest known for inhabiting heated greenhouses. The cockroach is nocturnal, lives in loose 
soil and feeds on plant matter [10] [4] [11] [12]. 
The Pycnoscelus surinamensis cockroach has incomplete metamorphosis: After the egg 
hatches the cockroach goes through multiple nymph stages. The cockroach moults i.e., sheds 
its exoskeleton when the cockroach has grown too big. After moulting, the exoskeleton is 
initially white but then hardens and gets dark. When the cockroach enters the adult stage it 
also grows wings but are regarded as poor flyers [12] [13]. It is important for this project to 
know the various developmental stages of the cockroach as they vary in their gut microbiome 
composition. Therefore, the experimental setup (below) used individual cockroaches of the 
similar developmental stages to minimise the variations in the gut microbiomes.  
Pycnoscelus surinamensis reproduces via thelytokous parthenogenesis [10] [4] [14], which is 
a type of asexual reproduction where female offspring are developed from unfertilized eggs 
[14]. The egg case, the ootheca, is carried internally (ovoviviparous) and contains the eggs 
where the embryos are developing until ready to hatch [15]. This allows a single female 
cockroach to found a new population [16]. This is beneficial for gut microbiome experiments 
as the host population is homogenised (semi-clonal), which eliminates the effect of host 
genetic background on shaping the microbiomes, leaving mainly the effect of the stressor (the 
antibiotic treatment here) on the microbiome composition.  
4.3.2 Gut microbiome composition 
Lampert et al. [17], investigated the gut microbiome of Pycnoscelus surinamensis fed oak leaf 
litter using 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. The gut microbiome was shown to be 
predominantly composed of the Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Spirochaetes 
phyla and the most abundant genera were Bacteroides, Castellaniella, Dysgonomonas, 
Enterococcus, Fusobacterium, Lactobacillus, Pseudomonas and Serratia.  
 
 
 
 
 
4.4 Antimicrobials and resistance 
4.4.1 Antimicrobial agents 
Antimicrobial agents are substances, either being natural or synthetic, that have the ability to 
kill or inhibit the growth of microorganisms. Antibiotics are antimicrobials produced by bacteria 
or fungi to fight competing organisms for the limited resources of their habitat [18].  
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
Page 11 of 105 
Antibiotics are being used therapeutically to treat and prevent bacterial infections. These can 
be broad- or narrow-spectrum. Broad-spectrum antibiotics target both gram-positive and 
gram-negative bacteria. This is useful when treating a bacterial infection where the pathogen 
is unknown or when aiming to disturb the entire commensal gut microbiome in research 
studies. Narrow-spectrum antibiotics target a limited number of bacteria. This makes the 
disruption of the commensal bacterial community less severe than when using broad-
spectrum antibiotics [19].  
4.4.2 Antimicrobial resistance 
Antimicrobial resistance can be either intrinsic i.e., natural resistance or acquired [18]. For 
example, vancomycin, a glycopeptide antibiotic, works by preventing the synthesis of the 
peptidoglycan of the cell wall. The outer membrane of the gram-negative bacteria naturally 
prevents this antibiotic from accessing the cell wall at all, giving them intrinsic resistance to 
vancomycin [20]. Other intrinsic resistance mechanisms include non-specific efflux pumps and 
enzymes for antibiotic inactivation, normally all encoded on the chromosome of the bacteria 
[21].  
Acquired resistance occurs when a former susceptible bacteria develops resistance. This can 
be either due to genetic mutations preventing the antibiotic from accessing and/or changing 
the target, or by taking up resistance genes from the environment or another bacteria [18].  
4.4.3 Spread of and selection for antimicrobial resistance genes 
Spread of antimicrobial resistance genes occurs through horizontal gene transfer (HGT). 
These genetic exchange mechanisms include transfer of AMR genes between bacteria 
through transduction by bacteriophages, transformation with free-floating DNA of the 
environment, and direct transfer between two bacteria through plasmid conjugation [21].  
Acquired resistance might not improve the fitness of the bacterial cell under normal 
circumstances. However, a selective pressure for resistance is placed upon the bacterial 
community when treated with antibiotics. This gives the resistant bacteria an advantage 
compared to the susceptible bacteria and will select for their survival [18]. Even though such 
acquired resistance can be induced by other factors than antibiotic usage, as mentioned 
above, this acquired resistance is problematic for humans when treating pathogenic infections 
with antibiotics and pose a major global health threat. Especially broad-spectrum antibiotics 
are of concern because of the selective pressure for resistance on both pathogenic and 
commensal bacteria. Selection for resistance in commensal, non-pathogenic bacteria can act 
as a resistance genes reservoir which might be transferred to pathogenic bacteria in time. This 
is particularly problematic in complex bacterial communities such as host microbiomes [19].  
==PAGE:12==
 
 
 
Page 12 of 105 
The effects of broad-spectrum antibiotics have been shown to have a detrimental effect on the 
commensal gut microbiome of both humans and other animals. This can have severe 
consequences that even short-term treatment might have long-term effects on the gut 
microbiome. This disruption might affect the positive functions of the gut microbiome such as 
food degradation, nutrient absorption, production of vitamins and pathogen protection [19].  
4.4.4 Surveillance of antimicrobial resistance 
In 2014, WHO published the first report on the emergence of AMR and the global health threat 
it poses [22]. This estimated that antibiotic resistant infections will account for more than 10 
million deaths every year by 2050 [22] [23]. In the Global Action Plan to tackle AMR from 2015, 
WHO describes surveillance as being one of the essential tools in disease prevention and 
control response. This sparked the initiative to set up AMR surveillance programs [24]. Global 
monitoring of AMR has been tested on urban sewage using a metagenomic approach. 
Previous surveillance often focused on a selection of pathogens, which did not capture AMR 
from commensal bacteria in healthy humans. However, the shotgun metagenomic sequencing 
approach allowed for detection of AMR genes across species present in a sample [25]. This 
proof of concept showed that shotgun sequencing can be used to monitor AMR levels.  
4.4.5 Tetracycline and tetracycline resistance 
Tetracycline is a broad spectrum, bacteriostatic antibiotic used to treat bacterial infections [26]. 
Its precursor, chlortetracycline, is produced by and isolated from the bacteria Streptomyces 
aureofaciens [18].  
Tetracycline inhibits the protein synthesis of bacteria. In bacteria, mRNA is translated to amino 
acids by the ribosomes consisting of the 30S and 50S subunits. Here, transfer ribonucleic acid 
(tRNA) binds to the acceptor site and elongates the growing polypeptide chain. Tetracycline 
binds to this acceptor site of the 30S ribosomal subunit and inhibits the binding of tRNA thereby 
preventing elongation of the polypeptide chain. This mechanism of action prevents the 
bacteria from producing new proteins, making it impossible for the cell to grow and replicate 
further i.e., the drug has a bacteriostatic effect [26].  
Resistance to tetracycline is mainly due to the acquisition of tet or otr genes [27] and can occur 
in three ways: Enzymatic inactivation of the drug, efflux pump to remove the drug from the cell 
or ribosomal protection proteins to prevent the drug from binding. The latter two are especially 
well-studied resistance mechanisms, often located on plasmids or on transposable elements 
such as mobile plasmids transposons and conjugative transposons [26] [28].  
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
Page 13 of 105 
4.4.6 Tetracycline resistance in microbiomes 
Tetracycline treatment has been shown to disturb the gut microbiome of an insect model 
organism and select for tetracycline resistance [29]. In addition, tetracycline resistance has 
been found in the commensal gut microbiome of production animals e.g., pig and poultry [30] 
[31], as well as in global urban sewage samples [25]. This is of concern since the gut 
microbiome can act as an AMR reservoir and facilitate dissemination to pathogens [19]. 
4.5 Metagenomics 
4.5.1 Introduction 
Metagenomics is the sequencing-based study and analysis of all genetic information in an 
environmental sample. The advances of next-generation sequencing (NGS), as well as the 
field of metagenomics, have impacted and improved the way microbial ecology is studied [32].  
Metagenomic sequencing is divided into two approaches: Metagenomic shotgun sequencing 
and marker gene sequencing. Both methods are culture-independent. However, marker gene 
sequencing allows for taxonomic profiling of a community with only a single marker gene. 
These marker genes are specific regions in the genome of a specific taxonomic group. 
Generally, for bacteria and archaea it is the 16S rRNA gene, for fungi it is the internal 
transcribed spacer (ITS) region and for eukaryotes it is the 18S rRNA gene.  
In comparison, metagenomic shotgun sequencing allows for characterization of the taxonomic 
composition and diversity as well as a functional analysis of the microbial community. Shotgun 
sequencing is not limited to marker genes but allows the investigation of all genetic material 
in a sample. This does require more sequencing effort, however, with enough sequencing 
depth, full genomes can be assembled (MAGs) and draft genomes of unculturable organisms 
might be obtained [32].  
4.5.2 Metagenomic shotgun sequencing workflow 
The first step of studying a microbiome with metagenomic shotgun sequencing is to sample 
the microbiome. Then, the DNA is extracted. In general, no matter sample type and 
commercial kit, DNA extraction has three steps: Lysis, precipitation and clean up. The aim of 
the lysis process is to disrupt the cells to get free-floating genomic DNA. In the precipitation 
steps, protein is degraded, and DNA is separated from the other cellular components. Clean 
up consists of washing with ethanol to remove impurities [33] [34] [35].  
After sampling and DNA extraction, the quality of the eluted DNA is checked. Then, the library 
prep is performed to prepare the DNA for sequencing. First, the DNA is fragmented followed 
by DNA end repair to achieve blunt ends. Next step is the DNA adaptor ligation. These 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
 
Page 14 of 105 
adaptors contain sequencing binding sites and a complementary sequence for hybridization 
with the flow cell. If needed, the library can be amplified using PCR. Often, only a small number 
of cycles are performed to avoid PCR bias [36]. The libraries can now be sequenced on the 
flow cell.  
When sequencing has completed, the FASTQ output files can be demultiplexed to assign the 
different reads to the correct sample. Each sample now has its own FASTQ file. First step of 
the bioinformatics data analysis is quality control. This includes trimming the sequencing 
adaptors, trimming the low-quality base calls, and removing short and low-quality reads. Then, 
the high-quality data can be used for the downstream bioinformatics data analysis [32].  
4.5.3 K-mer alignment of raw reads against databases  
The trimmed reads post quality control can be mapped against redundant databases e.g., 
ResFinder to identify resistance genes. The bioinformatics tool KMA (k-mer alignment) solves 
this task by applying k-mer seeding to match the query k-mers and database followed by 
alignment of mismatched regions using the Needleman-Wunsch algorithm. Conclave scoring 
is then applied to pick the best alignment [37].  
From the mapping against databases, abundance tables can be constructed and used for e.g., 
a compositional data analysis.  
4.5.4 Alpha diversity 
From the mapped abundance tables, alpha diversity can be calculated. Alpha diversity, 
borrowed from the field of ecology, has been used in metagenomics to quantify within sample 
diversity in microbiome datasets [38]. Both species richness i.e., the number of different 
species as well as the evenness i.e., the species abundance distribution determines the 
diversity of a community [39]. Both the Shannon and Simpson index are two diversity indices 
commonly used to estimate species diversity in metagenomics [38]. The Shannon index is 
calculated as shown in Equation 1. Here richness and evenness are weighted equally [40]. 
 
(1)  
Equation 1: Shannon diversity index. Here, ni is the relative abundance of species i. R is the total number of 
species.   
 
The Simpson diversity index is shown in Equation 2. This provides more weight on evenness 
than richness. The Simpson index ranges between 0 and 1 [40]. 
  
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
Page 15 of 105 
       
 
(2)  
Equation 2: Simpson diversity index. Here, ni is the relative abundance of species i and N is the total number of 
individuals.   
 
The simplest richness measure is the total number of observed species in a sample. However, 
the data only describes a random sampling point and some, especially rare species, will be 
left out. Chao1 is an example of an estimator of richness from abundances. The estimation is 
based upon the presence of rare species, as seen in Equation 3 [41]. 
 
 
(3)  
Equation 3: Chao1 richness. Here, R is the total number of species, F1 is the number of species observed once 
and F2 is the number of species observed twice.  
 
Evenness is commonly calculated using Shannon evenness (also known as Pielou’s J). 
Shannon evenness (Equation 4) is calculated from the Shannon diversity index, H, and the 
maximum Shannon index, Hmax i.e., if all species were equally likely. If the Shannon evenness 
is 1, the relative abundance of all species in the sample are the same [40]. 
 
 
(4)  
Equation 4: Shannon’s evenness. Here, H is the Shannon diversity index and Hmax is the maximum Shannon 
diversity index which equals ln(N), where N is the total number of species.  
 
4.5.5 Compositional data analysis 
Microbiome datasets are compositional in nature. The abundance tables obtained from k-mer 
alignment of raw reads against databases describe a random sampling point of the relative 
abundance of the underlying data [42]. 
In ecological datasets, the migration of one species into a habitat might not affect the number 
of another species. However, since microbiome datasets are constrained by the number of 
reads provided by the sequencing machine, only a fixed number of slots exists. If e.g., one 
bacterial taxa increase, another one must decrease. The information of the abundance tables 
is therefore not contained in the read counts themselves, but in the relationship between parts. 
This means that sequenced samples contain information about the relative abundance and 
not the absolute abundance [43] [42]. 
Following a compositional data analysis (CoDA) approach, the first step for analysing the beta 
diversity (comparisons between samples) of microbiome data is to perform a ratio 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
 
Page 16 of 105 
transformation. By applying the log to the ratios, the data is made symmetric. Equation 5: 
shows how the centred-log (clr) ratio is calculated [42].  
 
 
 
 
(5)  
 
Equation 5: Centred-log transformation calculated for D features in a given sample x = [x1,x2, … ,x3]. Here, 
features can be taxa, genes, OTUs and so on. G(x) is the geometric mean.  
 
The microbiome abundance tables contain taxa that are not shared between all samples. This 
means that the data will contain zeroes. Before applying centred-log transformation to the 
data, this must be addressed. Different methods exist for zero replacements e.g., replacement 
by small pseudo counts or by a Bayesian estimation of the likelihood of observing zero [43] 
[44]. 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
 
Page 17 of 105 
5. Methods 
5.1 Main experiment design 
The main experiment lasted 16 days, see Figure 1 for a visual pipeline. The following describes 
the design of this experiment. Details regarding the feeding/treating, sampling and dissection 
process will be described later. 
Figure 1: Design of the main experiment. Cockroaches from two 2021 colonies were starved for one week prior 
to the start of the experiment. On day 1, 250 juvenile cockroaches were isolated and transferred to an initial box. 
The first part of the main experiment started on day 1 and lasted until day 8. It consisted of two boxes with 
cockroaches: Box 1 contained 155 cockroaches who received treatment and food each day and box 2 contained 
85 cockroaches who only received food each day. Cockroach samples were taken from box 2 on day 1 and day 8 
(9 cockroach guts pooled into 3 samples) and from box 1 on day 8. Soil samples were taken from box 2 on day 2 
and day 8 and from box on day 8 as well. The second part of the experiment started on day 8 and ended on day 
15. All boxes were fed each day and only box C received treatment as well. Box A initially contained 40 treated 
cockroaches which were sampled on day 10, 12 and 15. Box B contained a mix between treated and non-treated 
cockroaches with both populations sampled on day 10, 12 and 15. Box C initially contained 51 treated cockroaches. 
10 of these cockroaches were transferred to box D on day 8, 10, 12 and 14. On day 15 cockroach samples were 
taken from box C. Box D initially contained 32 non-treated cockroaches receiving only food. The box received 10 
treated cockroaches from Box C on day 8, 10, 12 and 14. On day 15, the non-treated population was sampled. Soil 
samples were taken from box A, B, C and D on day 15. 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
 
Page 18 of 105 
Initially, on day 1, 250 juvenile cockroaches were isolated and starved for 1 week prior to the 
start of the experiment.  
 
The first part of the experiment lasted 8 days. For each cockroach sample point, 9 cockroaches 
were collected and pooled into 3 samples (3 guts per sample). All cockroach samples were 
dissected on the day of collection.  
On day 1, 10 cockroaches were sampled (9 to be pooled into 3 samples and 1 for a practice 
dissection). Then, the 240 remaining cockroaches were split into two boxes: Box 1 contained 
155 cockroaches receiving treatment consisting of 0.04 g/mL tetracycline hydrochloride 
solution (5 μL per cockroach) added to a slice of pear. Box 2 contained 85 control cockroaches 
which were only fed pear. The cockroaches were fed/treated each day around 10 am.  
 
The second part of the experiment started on day 8. Here, 9 treated cockroaches were 
sampled from box 1 and 9 control cockroaches were sampled from box 2. The remaining 
cockroaches were counted and then painted to distinguish treated from non-treated 
cockroaches and then mixed into new boxes: Box A contained 40 treated cockroaches (37 
juveniles and 3 adults), which did not receive further treatment. Box B contained 40 treated 
(37 juveniles and 3 adults) and 43 control cockroaches, which did not receive further 
treatment. Box C contained 51 treated cockroaches (47 juveniles and 4 adults) which 
continued the treatment for the last part of the experiment. Box D contained 32 control treated 
cockroaches and initially 10 treated cockroaches (8 juveniles and 2 adults) which were not 
treated further.  
 
On day 10, 12 and 14, box D received 10 treated cockroaches from Box C. 9 cockroaches 
were sampled on day 10, 12 and 15 from box A as well as 18 cockroaches from box B (9 
treated and 9 control cockroaches). On day 15, 9 cockroaches from box C and D were 
sampled as well.  
 
Soil samples were collected during the main experiment. On day 2, soil was collected from 
box 2 (control box). On day 8, soil was collected from both box 1 and 2. On day 15 soil was 
collected from box A, B, C and D.  
5.2 Study species 
The Pycnoscelus surinamensis cockroaches used in the experiment, were isolated from two 
colonies from 2021. The cockroaches were kept in a climate room with 50% relative humidity 
and a temperature of 27oC.  
==PAGE:19==
 
 
 
Page 19 of 105 
5.3 Soil collection and preparation 
Soil for the boxes containing the cockroaches was collected on-site at DTU in Lyngby. It was 
stored at -80oC O/N and thawed the following day. This was repeated one additional time to 
kill insects and lyse bacterial cells. After being thawed the second time, the soil was sieved 
and then added to the boxes containing cockroaches. The mixing of the soil was performed a 
week before the main experiment to avoid adding additional stress on the cockroaches.  
Approximately around ~1 cm of soil was used for each box. The exact amount of soil used per 
box was adjusted according to the number of cockroaches in the box. The density of the soil 
impacts how much the cockroaches interact and in addition, too little soil would prevent them 
from burrowing behaviour and therefore act as a stressor.  
5.4 Paint test 
The cockroaches were painted during the main experiment to distinguish treated from non-
treated individuals. A paint test was performed to make sure the paint would not wear off over 
time. Posca pens were chosen, since they were water-based, non-toxic and have no smell 
[45]. In addition, they are commonly used for marking bees, cockroaches, and ants [46] [47] 
[48]. 
The behaviour of the cockroaches was also observed to observe any social change due to the 
paint. A test box containing 10 juvenile cockroaches were prepared for the paint test. The 
cockroaches were held by soft entomological forceps and the Posca markers were used to 
mark them. Different colours were tested: Green, yellow, white, and pink. After marking, the 
cockroaches were left in a petri dish for 5 minutes to dry. Then, they were transferred to a petri 
dish with soil. The colour was checked on day 2 and day 8.  
5.5 Tetracycline hydrochloride solution preparation 
The broad-spectrum antibiotic, tetracycline hydrochloride, was used to modify the gut 
microbiome composition of the cockroaches. From a previous in-house experiment, 200 μg 
tetracycline hydrochloride per cockroach in a 5 μL solution per cockroach i.e., a tetracycline 
hydrochloride concentration of 0.04 g/mL was shown sufficient to observe an effect in the 
microbiome composition without seeing an increase in mortality.  
Inside a flow hood, 0.28 g tetracycline hydrochloride was added to 7 mL 60% ethanol in a 
falcon tube. The falcon tube was vortexed until the tetracycline hydrochloride was fully 
dissolved. Then, the antibiotic solution was filtered through a blue Sartorius filter using a 
syringe. The solution was distributed to seven 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes, each containing 1 μL. 
The tubes were stored in the -22oC freezer.  
==PAGE:20==
 
 
 
Page 20 of 105 
A second tetracycline hydrochloride batch was prepared later with the same protocol as 
described above. Here, 0.1 g tetracycline hydrochloride was added to 2.5 mL 60% ethanol to 
get a concentration of 0.04g/mL.  
5.6 Feeding and treating 
During the main experiment, the cockroaches were fed/treated daily. First, the food status (if 
the cockroaches ate everything) and mortality was checked. The amount of food was 
adjusted based on how much the cockroaches ate the previous day. If a lot of pear was left 
in the boxes receiving treatment, the pear was transferred to the next day. 
Then, the pear was prepared. For each box, two 6 cm petri dish lids were used. The top of the 
lid was marked with a letter describing which box they should go in. On the first day, the pear 
was washed with distilled water. During the rest of the experiment, the brown part of the pear 
was removed before cutting a new piece. The pear was stored in a plastic bag in the 4oC 
fridge. 
The prepared tetracycline hydrochloride was removed from the -20oC freezer and thawed in a 
box of ice. Then, the solution was vortexed and transferred with a 200 μL pipette to the pear 
in the dishes going into boxes receiving treatment. The amount of tetracycline hydrochloride 
was adjusted depending on the number of cockroaches (5 μL per cockroach in the box).  
The old dishes were removed with sterilised forceps and the new dishes were added and dug 
into the soil to avoid the cockroaches having to climb the side of the dish.  
5.7 Cockroach sampling and dissection 
Cockroaches were sampled in triplicates on day 1 (initial box), 8 (box 1 and box 2), 10 (box A, 
box B non-treated cockroaches and box B treated cockroaches), 12 (box A, box B non-treated 
cockroaches and box B treated cockroaches) and 15 (box A, box B non-treated cockroaches 
and box B treated cockroaches). For each of these sampling points, 9 cockroaches were 
dissected and pooled into 3 replica samples (3 guts per sample).   
The cockroaches were transferred to a falcon tube and stored in the fridge for 20 minutes for 
immobilization. The forceps used for dissection was sterilised with 70% ethanol and cleaned 
in the flame of a Bunsen burner (burning on 96% ethanol) in between samples. The final 
sample tubes were prepared by adding 500 μL phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to each of 
the 1.5 mL LoBind Eppendorf tubes.  
Dissection was performed in a petri dish with PBS added in small pools. First, the head of the 
immobilized cockroach was removed with two forceps and the cockroach was sterilised in 
70% ethanol. Then, the legs were removed, and the abdomen opened. Carefully, as to not cut 
it open, the gut was removed. Easily separated fat was removed. The gut was added to one 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
Page 21 of 105 
of the prepared 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and placed on ice. When a sample tube contained 3 
guts, it was removed from the ice box and stored in the -20oC freezer. 
5.8 Soil sampling 
As the model cockroaches do coprophagy, and their soil is visibly heavily carrying cockroach 
faeces, soil samples were also collected to investigate if the effect of tetracycline treatment 
would be traceable in the soil microbiome.  
Soil samples were collected on day 2 (box 1), 8 (box 1 and 2) and 15 (box A, B, C and D). 5-
8 mL of soil were added to a falcon tube and stored in the -20oC freezer. 
5.9 Cockroach painting and mixing  
On day 8 of the main experiment the cockroaches were transferred to petri dishes and placed 
in the fridge for 20+ minutes for immobilization. Then, they were counted to account for 
mortality and moulting. The cockroaches were marked with a posca pen: Treated cockroaches 
were painted green and non-treated cockroaches were painted white. They were left in the 
petri dish for 5 minutes to dry and were then transferred to the correct box (A, B, C or D) for 
the second part of the experiment.  
On day 10, 12 and 14 of the main experiment, 10 cockroaches were transferred from box C 
to box D. Only treated cockroaches (marked green) were picked to avoid transferring 
cockroaches who had moulted during the experiment.  
5.10 DNA extraction 
5.10.1 Cockroach gut DNA extraction 
DNA extraction on cockroach gut samples 1-42 was performed using the QIAamp Microbiome 
Kit from Qiagen. The official protocol [33] was followed with the following additions:  
 
1. Incubation time was increased from 30 to 40 minutes in step 8. 
2. Incubation time was increased from 10 to 15 minutes in step 10. 
3. The elution buffer AVE was preheated to 56oC before added in step 17.  
4. Steps 17 and 18 were repeated to elute DNA twice instead of once.  
5.10.2 Soil DNA extraction  
DNA extraction on soil samples was performed using the DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit from 
Qiagen. Around ~0.2 g of soil was used (see appendix 1 for exact amount used for each 
sample). The official protocol [34] was followed with the following additions:  
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
Page 22 of 105 
 
1. For step 2, the TissueLyser II option was chosen to homogenise samples. 
2. The elution buffer Solution C6 was preheated to 56oC before added in step 18.  
3. Steps 18 and 19 were repeated to elute DNA twice instead of once.  
5.11 DNA measurements  
The concentration was measured before sequencing to ensure a minimum of 200 ng DNA in 
each sample. If less than 200 ng was present, elution 1 and 2 was combined and the 
concentration was re-measured. 
The Invitrogen Qubit 4 Fluorometer was used to measure dsDNA concentration. The official 
protocol [49] was followed using the broad range kit option (accurately measures DNA 
concentration on samples with concentration range from 0.2 ng/μL to 2000 ng/μL [50]).  
If possible, the extracted DNA samples were left in the fridge for at least one day to achieve a 
more accurate concentration measurement.  
2 μL of sample and 198 μL of working solution was mixed and the concentration was measured 
after initial calibration using the broad range standards.  
5.12 Metagenomics sequencing 
The metagenomic sequencing was carried out on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 sequencing 
platform. Library preparation was performed with KAPA PCR-free kits with minimal PCR 
cycles (4 cycles) on all samples.  
5.13 Quality control and trimming 
Quality control was performed on the raw reads with FastQC version 0.11.5 [51] before and 
after trimming. Trimming was performed with bbduk2 from BBTools suite version 36.49 [52]. 
Here, contaminating adapters were identified and removed using 19-mers. Right end trim was 
applied to bases with phred scores below 20 (ensuring a base call accuracy of at least 99%). 
Reads ending up being shorter than 50 bp were discarded.  
5.14 K-mer alignment of raw reads against databases 
The trimmed reads were mapped against databases using KMA version 1.4.2 [37]. The 
ResFinder_20200125 database was used to map against resistance genes and the 
genomic_20220524 database was used to map against the full genomes. The latter included: 
bacteria, archaea, bacteria draft genomes, human, fungi, plasmid, mitochondrion, and plastid. 
From the output .mapstat files the fragmentCountAln i.e., the aligned fragments were used to 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
 
Page 23 of 105 
make abundance tables for the downstream analysis. A fragment is defined as if 1) both the 
forward read (R1) and the reverse read (R2) are mapped or 2) if only one of R1 or R2 is 
mapped. Both instances count as 1 aligned fragment [53]. 
5.15 Reference length correction and taxa filtering 
The k-mer alignment counts of the raw reads against the ResFinder database were corrected 
according to their reference length, see Equation 6. Longer references would have a higher 
chance of a hit than shorter references.  
 
 
(2)  
Equation 6: Adjusted fragment count. Calculated from the fragment count and the reference length which is the 
length of e.g., the resistance gene the fragment was mapped against. The reference length is divided with 1000 to 
avoid very small numbers to interfere with the zero replacements of the compositional data analysis. 
 
The reads mapped to the genomic database were not adjusted, since the information on the 
reference length was not available. The data was however filtered for the downstream analysis 
to only include bacterial reads. 
5.16 Alpha diversity 
The diversity indices (chao1 richness, Shannon diversity index, Simpson diversity index and 
Shannon’s evenness) were calculated for each sample using the skbio alpha diversity python 
package [54]. Here, the taxa filtered and adjusted fragment counts obtained from the genomic 
KMA mapping were used. 
5.17 Compositional data analysis 
The taxa filtered and adjusted fragment counts were used for the compositional data analysis. 
The mapping against the ResFinder database was used when investigating resistance genes 
and resistance gene classes and the mapping against the genomic database was used when 
investigating the bacterial genera and bacterial species.  
5.17.1 Characterising the soil and gut microbiomes  
The cockroach and soil microbiomes were characterised. For the cockroach samples this was 
performed first on the non-treated, N day 1 samples from box 2 and for the soil samples, this 
was on the soil from the non-treated population in box 2 on day 2.  
==PAGE:24==
 
 
 
Page 24 of 105 
The abundance data from the mapping against the genomic database was used. Clr was 
calculated for the subset of data e.g., the three N day 1 samples. The mean of the three clr 
values for each taxa was calculated, and the data then sorted to identify the most abundant 
across three samples. 
5.17.2 Ordination analysis 
The ordination analysis was performed on the cockroach and soil samples to investigate if the 
composition of the resistance genes, resistance gene classes, bacterial genera and bacterial 
species were different. The number of features were reduced to be smaller than the number 
of samples: A threshold on low-abundant features across samples was implemented to avoid 
low-abundant features with high variance. In addition, a threshold on low variance was used 
to only include features with high variance across samples. These features would capture the 
separation between the two groups (soil and cockroach). Low-variance features would not 
contribute to this separation. 
It is important to note that the ordination analysis only shows a subset of the data by 
implementing these thresholds. However, a filtering step is necessary to perform the ordination 
and visualisation. After filtering low-abundant, low-variant features away, zero replacement 
was performed followed by recalculation of the clr values. The ordination analysis, including 
calculation of clr, was performed using the pyCoDa python package [55].  
5.17.3 Tetracycline resistance 
To investigate if tetracycline resistance increased compared to other resistance gene classes 
in the treated samples, clr was calculated for the cockroach samples as well as for the soil 
samples. This was visualised in a boxplot over time, coloured by treatment status: non-treated, 
treated, non-treated recipient and treated donor.  
5.17.4 Heatmap clustering 
A heatmap clustering was used to investigate the clustering of samples within the cockroach 
group and the soil group. For a clear heatmap visualisation, the number of features were 
reduced. The filtering of features was based on a clr variance and clr median threshold like 
the ones used during the ordination analysis. This was to filter out low-abundant, low-variable 
features. After the filtering, the clr values were re-calculated and then used as input for the 
heatmap clustering. This was performed using the seaborn clustermap python library [56], 
which is based on the Euclidean distance between the clr values. Using this approach on the 
clr values and not the counts allow for a CoDa approach [44].  
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
Page 25 of 105 
5.17.5 clr mean difference between groups to identify drivers of separation 
Clr mean difference of the features across samples were used as a measure of investigating 
which features were increased as a part in a group of samples compared to another group 
e.g., soil vs cockroach samples. First, clr was calculated for all features e.g., resistance genes. 
Then, the clr mean of both groups were calculated as well as the distance between these 
means. The features with the largest clr mean distance between groups indicates a feature 
which has increased as a part in one of the groups compared to the other group i.e., drives 
the separation between the two groups. 
This measure was applied to a comparison between the cockroach and soil samples but also 
to different groups within these e.g., treated cockroach vs untreated cockroach.  
 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
 
Page 26 of 105 
6. Results 
6.1 Paint test 
The cockroaches were observed to continue their gregarious behaviour while painted. The 
state of the paint was inspected on day 2 and day 8 and was confirmed to last and not wear 
off over time without an effect on the cockroach social behaviour (Figure 2). The green and 
white colour were chosen for the experiment. 
 
A 
 
 
 
 
      B 
 
            
     
 
Figure 2: Paint test results. A) Day 2 post painting. B) Day 8 post painting. 
 
6.2 Cockroach count, mortality, and moulting 
During the main experiment, the surface of the soil was checked for visible mortality each day 
before treating/feeding. No mortality was observed. On day 8 and 15 the cockroaches were 
counted, which allowed to account for actual mortality. Table 1 shows the number of 
cockroaches in box 1 and 2 during the first part of the experiment. Table 2 shows the same, 
but for box A, B, C and D in the last part of the experiment. The tables also account for 
cockroaches moulting and turning adults during the experiment as well as the mortality 
(calculated from the expected number of cockroaches vs the observed number).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
 
Page 27 of 105 
Table 1: Cockroach mortality and count table during the first part of the main experiment. Box 1 received 
treatment. Box 2 did not receive treatment. Box 2 has negative mortality on day 8, meaning that the box contained 
3 cockroaches more than expected. This does not make sense and is likely a counting error from when the 
cockroaches were transferred on day 1 (they could have stuck to each other resulting in two cockroaches being 
transferred instead of one).  
Box 1  
Day 1 
Day 8 
Box 2  
Day 1 
Day 8 
Treated juveniles 
155 
139 
Non-treated juveniles 
85 
85 
Treated adults 
0 
11 
Non-treated adults 
0 
3 
Total 
155 
150 
Total 
85 
88 
Expected 
- 
155 
Expected 
- 
85 
Mortality since day 1 
- 
5 
Mortality since day 1 
- 
-3 
 
Table 2: Cockroach mortality and count table during the last part of the main experiment. The “expected” 
row reflects the transfer of cockroaches between boxes during the second part of the experiment as well as the 
continuous sampling. 
Box A 
Day 8 
Day 15 
Box C 
Day 8  
Day 15 
Treated juveniles 
37 
13 
Treated juveniles 
47 
14 
Treated juveniles with no 
paint left 
0 
5 
 
Treated juveniles with no 
paint left 
0 
1 
Treated adults 
3 
3 
Treated adults 
4 
3 
Total 
40 
20 
Total 
51 
18 
Expected 
- 
22 
Expected 
- 
21 
Mortality since day 8 
- 
2 
Mortality since day 8 
- 
3 
Box B 
Day 8 
Day 15 
Box D 
Day 8 
Day 15 
Treated juveniles 
38 
8 
Treated juveniles 
8 
28 
Non-treated juveniles 
43 
14 
Non-treated juveniles 
32 
20 
Juveniles with no paint left 
0 
19 
Juveniles with no paint left 
0 
15 
Treated adults 
2 
2 
Treated adults 
2 
2 
Total 
83 
43 
Total 
42 
65 
Expected 
- 
47 
Expected 
- 
72 
Mortality since day 8 
- 
4 
Mortality since day 8 
- 
7 
 
In all cases except one, enough juveniles survived to allow sampling of 9 guts pooled into 3 
samples. However, on day 15, only 8 treated juveniles were left in box B. The sample, TN 
replica 3 from box B day 15 therefore only contained 2 guts.   
 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
 
Page 28 of 105 
Since no visible mortality was observed, but mortality did occur, the cockroaches must have 
ingested the cadaver. Small parts of the exoskeleton were found in the soil which might have 
been from either cockroaches moulting and changing exoskeleton or pieces from dead 
cockroaches. Interestingly, most of the found left-over pieces were all covered in paint, see 
Figure 3, suggesting that this was not a desirable part to eat.  
    
 
      A   
 
 
 
        B 
 
 
Figure 3: Left-over cockroach exoskeleton parts not consumed. These might originate from either shredded 
exoskeletons or from dead cockroaches. A) Left-over exoskeleton found in Box C on day 15 of the main experiment. 
B) Left-over exoskeleton found in Box A on day 15 of the main experiment. 
 
6.3 Sample summary and DNA concentration 
The samples are summarised in appendix 2. The first and second elution of 11 cockroach 
samples were combined to increase the amount of DNA present.  
All samples went through 5 PCR cycles during library prep to amplify the library content, since 
the initial library prep showed low DNA molarity and concentration.  
6.4 Mapping summary 
The aligned fragment counts i.e., the total number of fragments mapped to the genomic 
database are summarised on a log-scale in Figure 4A for the cockroach samples and Figure 
4B for the soil samples. The log-scale was chosen because of the large difference in counts. 
Figure 4 shows this on the super kingdom level, revealing that the vast majority of the mapped 
reads are bacteria. Appendix 3.1 contains the bacteria/eukaryotic ratio, suggesting that the 
bacterial reads are many times greater in each sample compared to eukaryotic. Appendix 3.2 
contains the total aligned fragment counts figures for the mappings against the ResFinder 
database.   
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
 
Page 29 of 105 
A 
 
B 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Number of super kingdom fragments aligned against the genomic database on a log-scale. The 
x-axis labels reflect the samples. Dx is the xth day of the experiment, rx is the xth replica. The treatment is described 
as: N (No treatment for the first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), TN (treatment for the first 8 days, then 
no treatment for the last 8 days. TN donor (treatment for the first 8 days, then no treatment for the last 8 days 
however in a mixed population with NN Recipient), NN Recipient (No treatment for the 16 days, however in a mixed 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
Page 30 of 105 
population with TN Donor the last 8 days), TT (continuous treatment for 16 days), NN+TN (soil from the NN+TN 
population). A) Cockroach samples. B) Soil samples.   
6.5 Filtering reads mapped to the genomic database 
The reads mapped to the genomic database were filtered for the compositional data analysis 
to only include bacterial reads. 2678 different genera were found out of which 1910 were 
bacterial genera. 8574 different species were found, out of which 6715 were bacterial species. 
6.6 Alpha diversity 
Chao1 richness was estimated for the cockroach gut bacterial species (Figure 5) and for the 
soil bacterial species (Figure 6). Appendix 4.1 contains this analysis at the genus level for 
both the cockroach and soil samples. 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Chao1 species richness for the cockroach samples. The samples are coloured according to their 
treatment status: N (No treatment for the first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), TN (treatment for the first 
8 days, then no treatment for the last 8 days. TN donor (treatment for the first 8 days, then no treatment for the last 
8 days however in a mixed population with NN Recipient), NN Recipient (No treatment for the 16 days, however in 
a mixed population with TN Donor the last 8 days) and TT (continuous treatment for 16 days). 
 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
Page 31 of 105 
 
 
Figure 6: Chao1 species richness for the soil samples. The samples are coloured according to their treatment 
status: N (No treatment for the first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), TN (treatment for the first 8 days, then 
no treatment for the last 8 days, NN+TN (soil from the mixed NN+TN population) and TT (continuous treatment for 
16 days). 
 
Bacterial species diversity was calculated using Shannon diversity index in cockroach guts at 
the species level (Figure 7), and in soil (Figure 8). Appendix 4.2 contains the analysis on the 
genus level. Simpson diversity index was calculated as well, see appendix 4.3.  
 
 
 
Figure 7: Shannon diversity index for the cockroach samples at the species level. The samples are coloured 
according to their treatment status: N (No treatment for the first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), TN 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
Page 32 of 105 
(treatment for the first 8 days, then no treatment for the last 8 days. TN donor (treatment for the first 8 days, then 
no treatment for the last 8 days however in a mixed population with NN Recipient), NN Recipient (No treatment for 
the 16 days, however in a mixed population with TN Donor the last 8 days) and TT (continuous treatment for 16 
days).  
 
 
 
Figure 8: Shannon diversity index for the soil samples at the species level. The samples are coloured 
according to their treatment status: N (No treatment for the first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), TN 
(treatment for the first 8 days, then no treatment for the last 8 days, NN+TN (soil from the mixed NN+TN population) 
and TT (continuous treatment for 16 days).  
 
The evenness at the species level was investigated using Shannon’s evenness for the 
cockroach guts (Figure 9). The same analysis was applied to the soil samples in Figure 10. 
Appendix 4.4 contains the analysis on the genus level. 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
Page 33 of 105 
 
 
Figure 9: Shannon’s evenness for the cockroach samples at the bacterial species level. The samples are 
coloured according to their treatment status: N (No treatment for the first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), 
TN (treatment for the first 8 days, then no treatment for the last 8 days. TN donor (treatment for the first 8 days, 
then no treatment for the last 8 days however in a mixed population with NN Recipient), NN Recipient (No treatment 
for the 16 days, however in a mixed population with TN Donor the last 8 days) and TT (continuous treatment for 16 
days). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Shannon’s evenness for the soil samples at the species level. The samples are coloured according 
to their treatment status: N (No treatment for the first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), TN (treatment for 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
Page 34 of 105 
the first 8 days, then no treatment for the last 8 days, NN+TN (soil from the mixed NN+TN population) and TT 
(continuous treatment for 16 days).  
6.7 Compositional data analysis 
6.7.1 Characterising the soil and gut microbiome  
The bacterial gut microbiome in the non-treated cockroach was characterised using a CoDa 
approach (see method section). Table 3 contains the top 20 most abundant bacterial genera 
across the three (triplicates) non-treated cockroach samples from day 1. Appendix 5.1 
contains the analysis on a species level.  
 
Table 3: Top 20 most abundant bacterial genera in the three non-treated N day 1 box 2 cockroach samples. The 
table is sorted descending on the clr mean.  
 
clr of the N day 1 
box 2 replica 1 
clr of the N day 1 
box 2 replica 2 
clr of the N day 1 
box 2 replica 3 
clr mean 
Ensifer 
9.79 
10.35 
9.22 
9.79 
Enterococcus 
9.39 
9.38 
10.19 
9.66 
Azomonas 
9.97 
9.90 
8.80 
9.56 
Pseudocitrobacter 
9.68 
7.59 
10.29 
9.18 
Mycolicibacterium 
8.57 
8.67 
8.94 
8.73 
Ereboglobus 
8.92 
8.27 
8.64 
8.61 
Bacillus 
8.02 
9.04 
8.57 
8.54 
Mesorhizobium 
8.88 
8.86 
7.48 
8.40 
Serratia 
12.91 
7.67 
4.37 
8.31 
Lactococcus 
7.72 
8.04 
9.06 
8.27 
Pseudomonas 
8.51 
8.02 
7.75 
8.09 
Paucilactobacillus 
8.14 
7.60 
8.36 
8.03 
Streptomyces 
6.71 
8.11 
8.62 
7.81 
Microbacterium 
8.31 
8.23 
6.57 
7.70 
Luteimonas 
7.22 
8.64 
5.84 
7.23 
Lacticaseibacillus 
6.86 
7.17 
7.50 
7.18 
Stenotrophomonas 
7.63 
5.41 
8.08 
7.04 
Loigolactobacillus 
6.82 
6.92 
7.32 
7.02 
Devosia 
5.95 
7.62 
6.27 
6.61 
Klebsiella 
7.53 
4.02 
8.24 
6.59 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
Page 35 of 105 
The soil microbiome from the non-treated cockroaches on day 2 was characterised. The 20 
most abundant bacterial genera are listed in Table 4. Appendix 5.2 contains this analysis on 
the species level.  
 
Table 4: Top 20 most abundant bacterial genera in the three soil samples from box 2 containing the non-treated 
cockroaches, sampled at day 2. The table is sorted descending on the clr mean.  
 
clr of the N day 2 
box 2 replica 1 
clr of the N day 2 
box 2 replica 2 
clr of the N day 2 
box 2 replica 3 
clr mean 
Aeromicrobium 
10.39 
10.75 
9.94 
10.36 
Microbacterium 
9.87 
10.32 
9.83 
10.01 
Mycolicibacterium 
9.88 
10.36 
9.72 
9.99 
Bradyrhizobium 
9.84 
9.42 
10.05 
9.77 
Mesorhizobium 
9.49 
9.87 
9.32 
9.56 
Nocardioides 
9.48 
9.36 
9.72 
9.52 
Azomonas 
9.71 
9.32 
9.42 
9.48 
Streptomyces 
9.34 
9.03 
9.62 
9.33 
Enterococcus 
9.65 
9.44 
8.83 
9.31 
Gordonia 
9.25 
9.39 
9.07 
9.24 
Luteimonas 
8.83 
9.07 
8.88 
8.93 
Agromyces 
8.79 
8.69 
9.11 
8.86 
Pseudactinotalea 
8.66 
8.77 
8.82 
8.75 
Pseudomonas 
8.60 
8.30 
9.01 
8.64 
Ensifer 
8.69 
8.23 
8.99 
8.63 
Luteitalea 
8.78 
8.18 
8.76 
8.57 
Pseudonocardia 
8.38 
8.87 
8.39 
8.54 
Cellulosimicrobium 
8.18 
8.74 
8.08 
8.33 
Saccharopolyspora 
8.46 
8.10 
8.21 
8.26 
Reyranella 
8.31 
7.75 
8.44 
8.17 
 
6.7.2 Ordination analysis on cockroach and soil samples 
The difference between cockroach and soil samples were investigated using an ordination 
analysis for both bacterial taxa and resistance gene and gene class-level. As mentioned in the 
method, the number of features had to be reduced before the ordination analysis, since the 
number of features should be less than the number of samples. This was performed by 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
 
Page 36 of 105 
implementing a threshold on clr variance and clr median: As suggested by Table 5, some 
genera have a high clr variance across samples as well as a low clr median. This suggests 
that the feature is low abundant (low clr median) and highly variable across the samples (high 
clr variance), e.g., the genera Luteitaelea and Citrobacter. A combination of a threshold on clr 
variance and clr median was used to avoid these highly variant features with low abundance. 
Instead, the features used in the ordination analysis were chosen to be features highly variant 
and with high abundance across samples, since these would capture the separation between 
cockroach and soil samples.  
 
Table 5: Top 5 bacterial genera with highest variance across both cockroach and soil samples. 
Bacterial genus 
clr variance 
clr median 
Luteitaelea 
21.73 
 -0.23 
Citrobacter  
21.14 
-0.30 
Pseudocitrobacter  
19.84 
5.74 
Serratia 
18.93 
8.51 
Pseudactinotalea 
17.75 
5.37 
 
 
The bacterial genera were filtered with clr variance > 5 and a clr median > 2.5, since these 
thresholds would capture the most variant and abundant bacterial genera (Figure 11). This 
reduced the number of bacterial genera from 1910 to 54.  
 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
Page 37 of 105 
 
   A 
 
 
 
 
 
       B 
     
 
 
                                   C 
 
 
Figure 11: Bacterial genera feature filtering based on a clr variance and a clr median threshold. A) Clr 
variance filtering. The red line indicates the threshold used: clr variance > 5 B) clr median filtering, the red line 
indicates the threshold used: clr median > 2.5. C) Clr variance and clr median combined filtering. The 54 bacterial 
genera located in the upper right box (black dots) were used in the ordination analysis. 
 
This filtering was repeated for the bacterial species, resistance gene and resistance gene 
class. Appendix 6 contains details on the thresholds used.  
 
The cockroach guts and soil samples harboured distinct bacterial genera and species (Figure 
12). Here, the majority of the differences between samples are captured by the first principal 
component. Appendix 7.1 contains the cumulative explained variance for the first 10 principal 
components of the ordination analysis.  
 
In addition, the cockroach guts and soil samples also harboured different resistance genes 
and resistance gene classes (Figure 12). Appendix 7.2 shows the accumulated variance 
explained for the first 10 principal components. 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
Page 38 of 105 
A 
 
B 
 
Figure 12: PCA of cockroach guts and soil samples. A) Bacterial genera. B) Bacterial species. 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
Page 39 of 105 
A 
            
 
B 
              
 
Figure 13: PCA on the cockroach guts and soil filtered abundance data. A) Resistance genes. B) Resistance 
gene classes. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
Page 40 of 105 
6.7.3 Microbiome compositional changes between cockroach gut and their soil 
To investigate which features drive the separation between cockroach gut and soil 
microbiomes, the clr mean of the two groups were calculated followed by the distance between 
these two clr means. Features with high distance between groups indicate features that drive 
the separation observed in the ordination analysis.  
 
Table 6 shows the top 5 driving resistance genes abundant in cockroach samples. Of interest, 
three tet resistance genes are involved in making the cockroach guts distinct from their soil. 
Table 7 shows that no tet genes are in the top 5 resistance genes most abundant in soil 
samples. However, the aad genes (aminoglycosides) and dfr (folate pathway antagonist) are 
abundant drivers in the soil. This is also reflected in  
Table 9 showing the driving resistance gene classes abundant in soil samples.  
 
Table 6: Top 5 driving resistance genes abundant in cockroach guts compared to the soil samples. 
Resistance gene 
Cockroach clr mean 
Soil clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
tet(O)_2_M20925 
3.75 
-0.25 
4.00 
Cockroach gut 
tet(O/32/O)_5_FP929050 
3.86 
-0.00 
3.86 
Cockroach gut 
aac(6')-Ic_1_M94066 
3.36 
-0.10 
3.46 
Cockroach gut 
tet(41)_1_AY264780 
2.75 
-0.05 
2.80 
Cockroach gut 
blaSST-1_1_AB008455 
2.89 
0.08 
2.80 
Cockroach gut 
 
 
Table 7: Top 5 driving resistance genes abundant in soil samples compared to cockroach guts. 
Resistance gene 
Cockroach clr mean 
Soil clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
aadA6_1_AF140629 
1.78 
5.81 
4.02 
Soil 
aadA11_1_AY144590 
1.17 
4.69 
3.53 
Soil 
dfrB3_1_X72585 
-0.21 
2.73 
2.94 
Soil 
dfrB7_1_DQ993182 
-0.22 
2.72 
2.94 
Soil 
ole(C)_1_L06249 
0.84 
3.54 
2.71 
Soil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
Page 41 of 105 
Table 8: Top 3 driving resistance gene classes abundant in cockroach guts compared to the soil samples. 
Resistance gene class 
Cockroach clr 
mean 
Soil clr mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Beta-lactam 
3.06 
1.05 
2.01 
Cockroach gut 
Oxazolidinone, 
Amphenicol, Lincosamide, 
Streptogramin A, 
Pleuromutilin 
0.32 
-1.57 
1.89 
Cockroach gut 
Tetracycline 
5.25 
3.82 
1.43 
Cockroach gut 
 
 
Table 9: Top 3 driving resistance gene classes abundant in soil samples compared to cockroach guts. 
Resistance gene class 
Cockroach clr mean 
Soil clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Folate pathway 
antagonist 
-1.09 
2.48 
3.57 
Soil 
Macrolide 
-0.01 
2.28 
2.29 
Soil 
Macrolide, Lincosamide, 
Streptogramin B 
-0.24 
1.65 
1.89 
Soil 
 
 
The analysis on the bacterial taxa that drive the separation between soil and cockroach guts 
were repeated on the bacterial genera and bacterial species level.  
Table 10 shows the top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in cockroach guts and Table 11 
shows the top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in soil. The same was characterised for 
bacterial species in guts (Table 12) and soil (Table 13). 
 
 
Table 10: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in cockroach guts compared to the soil samples. 
Bacterial genera 
Cockroach 
clr mean 
Soil clr 
mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Putridiphycobacter 
7.48 
-1.12 
8.60 
Cockroach gut 
Solibacillus 
5.78  
-0.89 
6.67 
Cockroach gut 
Taibaiella  
 
7.53 
1.60 
5.93 
Cockroach gut 
Cecembia 
3.97 
-1.49 
5.46 
Cockroach gut 
Porphyromonas 
5.32 
-0.13 
5.45 
Cockroach gut 
Dysgonomonas 
7.40 
2.12 
5.28 
Cockroach gut 
Citrobacter 
4.57 
-0.64 
5.20 
Cockroach gut 
Serratia 
10.29 
5.13 
5.16 
Cockroach gut 
Parabacteroides 
3.98 
-0.95 
4.93 
Cockroach gut 
Hydrogenoanaerobacterium 
3.53 
-1.35 
4.88 
Cockroach gut 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
Page 42 of 105 
Table 11: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in soil samples compared to the cockroach guts. 
Genera 
Cockroach 
clr mean 
Soil clr 
mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Luteitalea 
1.04 
9.45 
8.41 
Soil 
Solirubrobacter 
-0.57 
7.79 
8.36 
Soil 
Marmoricola 
-0.39 
7.34 
7.73 
Soil 
Afipia 
-0.54 
7.07 
7.61 
Soil 
Iamia 
-0.60 
7.00 
7.59 
Soil 
Usitatibacter 
-0.60 
6.99 
7.58 
Soil 
Pseudactinotalea 
2.33 
9.82 
7.49 
Soil 
Knoellia 
-0.01 
7.45 
7.46 
Soil 
Cellulosimicrobium 
1.83 
9.21 
7.38 
Soil 
Agrococcus 
-0.22 
7.03 
7.25 
Soil 
 
Table 12: Top 10 driving bacterial species abundant in cockroach guts compared to the soil samples. 
Bacterial species 
Cockroach 
clr mean 
Soil clr 
mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Putridiphycobacter roseus 
7.76 
-0.99 
8.75 
Cockroach gut 
Devosia marina 
8.65 
0.00 
8.64 
Cockroach gut 
Taibaiella koreensis 
7.32 
-0.22 
7.54 
Cockroach gut 
Taibaiella helva 
6.84 
-0.59 
7.43 
Cockroach gut 
Serratia marcescens 
10.31 
3.33 
6.98 
Cockroach gut 
Serratia sp. NGAS9 
6.74 
-0.13 
6.86 
Cockroach gut 
Solibacillus isronensis 
6.06 
-0.75 
6.81 
Cockroach gut 
Chitinophaga agrisoli 
5.12 
-1.45 
6.57 
Cockroach gut 
Dysgonomonas gadei 
5.43 
-0.61 
6.04 
Cockroach gut 
Serratia bockelmannii 
4.37 
-1.454 
5.82 
Cockroach gut 
 
Table 13: Top 10 driving bacterial species abundant in soil samples compared to cockroach guts. 
Bacterial species 
Cockroach 
clr mean 
Soil clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Saccharopolyspora euryhalodurans 
-0.32 
8.37 
8.70 
Soil 
Cellulosimicrobium cellulans 
0.81 
9.10 
8.28 
Soil 
Luteitalea pratensis 
1.32 
9.58 
8.26 
Soil 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
Page 43 of 105 
Streptomyces sp. S6 
-0.14 
8.09 
8.23 
Soil 
Bradyrhizobium erythrophlei 
-0.32 
7.76 
8.08 
Soil 
Bradyrhizobium sp. CCBAU 051011 
0.24 
8.28 
8.04 
Soil 
Rhodococcus opacus 
-0.32 
7.68 
8.00 
Soil 
Bradyrhizobium ottawaense 
-0.13 
7.85 
7.96 
Soil 
Bradyrhizobium paxllaeri 
-0.13 
7.82 
7.95 
Soil 
Saccharopolyspora endophytica 
0.53 
8.47 
7.94 
Soil 
 
6.7.4 Tetracycline resistance 
Centred-log ratio of the tetracycline resistance reservoir was compared to the other resistance 
gene classes to identify a change in the resistome of the microbiomes. Figure 14 shows the 
clr tetracycline gene class for different cockroach guts and Figure 15 for the soil samples.  
 
 
 
Figure 14: Cockroach clr tetracycline gene class resistance. At different time points, the boxes were sampled in 
triplicates. These are coloured by treatment: N (Non-treatment), T (treatment), TN (Treatment the first 8 days, then 
no treatment), NN Recipient (No treatment the first 8 days, no treatment for the following 8 days, but mixed with a 
treated population for the last 8 days), TN Donor (Treated the first 8 days, no treatment for the following 8 days, 
but mixed with a non-treated population), TT (treatment the first 8 days as well as the last 8 days). 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
Page 44 of 105 
 
 
Figure 15: Soil clr tetracycline gene class resistance. The soil was sampled from the different boxes at different 
time points in triplicates. These are coloured by which cockroaches inhabited the boxes: N (no treatment for the 
first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), NN+TN (a mix of cockroach that did not receive treatment at all and 
cockroaches that did receive treatment the first 8 days, but not the last 8 days), TT (treatment for the first and last 
8 days). 
 
6.7.5 Heatmap clustering 
The heatmap clustering was performed on the bacterial genera and the resistance genes for 
the cockroach guts as well as the soil subset.  
A threshold for clr variance and clr median was implemented to reduce the number of features 
for the heatmap visualisation, the approach as used for the ordination analysis. See appendix 
for the thresholds used for the different subset of data.  
Figure 16A shows the clustering heatmap of the cockroach gut bacterial community and Figure 
16B shows it for the soil subset. The samples are coloured by their treatment status. Clustering 
using all features are shown in appendix 9. Here, the heatmap part was left out because of 
the large amount of features. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
Page 45 of 105 
A 
 
B 
 
Figure 16: Heatmap clustering on the clr transformed data using Euclidean distance. The samples are 
coloured based on treatment status: N (No treatment for the first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), TN 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
Page 46 of 105 
(treatment for the first 8 days, then no treatment for the last 8 days. TN donor (treatment for the first 8 days, then 
no treatment for the last 8 days however in a mixed population with NN Recipient), NN Recipient (No treatment for 
the 16 days, however in a mixed population with TN Donor the last 8 days), TT (continuous treatment for 16 days), 
NN+TN (soil from the NN+TN population). A) Cockroach bacterial genera-based clustering. B) Soil bacterial 
genera-based clustering. 
 
Figure 17A shows the cockroach gut clustering heatmap of the resistance genes and Figure 
17B shows the clustering heatmap of the resistance genes for the soil samples.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
Page 47 of 105 
A 
 
 
B 
 
Figure 17: Heatmap clustering on the clr transformed resistance genes. The samples are coloured based on 
treatment status: N (No treatment for the first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), TN (treatment for the first 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
Page 48 of 105 
8 days, then no treatment for the last 8 days. TN donor (treatment for the first 8 days, then no treatment for the last 
8 days however in a mixed population with NN Recipient), NN Recipient (No treatment for the 16 days, however in 
a mixed population with TN Donor the last 8 days), TT (continuous treatment for 16 days), NN+TN (soil from the 
NN+TN population). A) Cockroach resistance genes-based clustering. B) Soil resistance genes-based clustering. 
 
6.7.6 Microbiome composition changes 
To study the compositional changes in the gut microbiome of the cockroach guts as well as 
the soil microbiome, clr variance was used as a measure to identify parts (features) that are 
changing the most over time, e.g., when treating with antibiotics. Figure 18 shows the bacterial 
drivers of the separation between the non-treated and treated cockroaches from day 8 
compared to the non-treated cockroach samples from day 1. The green arrow pointing up 
shows a compositional increase from day 1 to day 8, these drive the day 8 samples. The red 
arrow pointing down shows a compositional decrease from day 1 to day 8, these drive the N 
day 1 samples. Here, for example, the bacterial genus Blattabacterium increased 
compositionally from the non-treated cockroaches on day 1 to both treated and non-treated 
cockroaches on day 8.  
 
 
 
N day 1                     vs 
 
 
 
 
T day 8 
↑ Blattabacterium 
↓ Pseudocitrobacter 
↑ Riemerella 
 
↓ Ereboglobus 
↑ Cupriavidus 
 
↓ Stenotrophomonas 
↑ Solibacillus 
 
↓ Bacillus 
↑ Cecembia 
 
↓ Buttiauxella 
 
N day 8 
↑ Blattabacterium 
↓ Ereboglobus 
↑ Pararhodobacter 
↓ Serratia 
↑ Enterobacillus  
↓ Lactococcus 
↑ Citrobacter 
 
↓ Stenotrophomonas 
↑ Luteitalea 
 
↓ Bacillus 
 
Figure 18: Top 5 bacterial genera increasing (green arrow up) and decreasing (red arrow down) compositionally 
from the non-treated day 1 samples in comparison with the treated samples from day 8 and the non-treated 
samples from 8. Refer to appendix 10.1 for the top 10 abundant drivers of the groups and their clr median as well 
as the distance between the groups.  
 
The non-treated and treated cockroach guts were compared at day 8. Table 14 shows the 
abundant drivers of the treated samples and Table 15 shows the abundant drivers of the non-
treated samples.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
 
Page 49 of 105 
Table 14: Top 5 driving bacterial genera abundant in the treated box 1 day 8 population compared to the non-
treated population, N day 8. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 8 
clr mean 
T box 1 day 8 clr 
mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in  
Lactococcus 
0.03 
10.82 
10.80 
T box 1 day 8 
Serratia 
-1.13 
8.63 
9.75 
T box 1 day 8 
Luteimonas 
-0.11 
6.13 
6.23 
T box 1 day 8 
Krasilnikoviella 
1.46 
7.11 
5.65 
T box 1 day 8 
Actinotalea 
-1.14 
4.30 
5.44 
T box 1 day 8 
 
Table 15: Top 5 driving bacterial genera abundant in the non-treated population, N day 8 compared to the treated 
population, T day 8. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 8 
clr mean 
T box 1 day 8 clr 
mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Pseudocitrobacter 
8.59 
-1.28 
9.87 
N box 2 day 8 
Citrobacter 
7.45 
1.97 
5.48 
N box 2 day 8 
Pectobacterium 
3.39 
-1.28 
4.67 
N box 2 day 8 
Cytobacillus 
3.37 
-1.29 
4.66 
N box 2 day 8 
Enterobacter 
3.01 
-1.29 
4.30 
N box 2 day 8 
 
 
The non-treated cockroaches from day 8 were compared to all of the samples in the different 
boxes on day 15, see Figure 19.  
 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
Page 50 of 105 
                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    N day 8                vs 
 
 
 
Box A: TN day 15 
↑ Lactococcus 
             ↓ Blattabacterium 
↑ Serratia 
             ↓ Pseudocitrobacter 
↑ Pediococcus 
             ↓ Mycolicibacter 
↑ Dysgonomonas              ↓ Lacticaseibacillus 
↑ Porphyromonas              ↓ Desulfobotulus 
 
Box B: TN Donor day 15 
↑ Lactococcus 
             ↓ Pseudocitrobacter 
↑ Serratia 
             ↓ Geomicrobium 
↑ Pediococcus 
             ↓ Candidatus Nanosyncoccus 
↑ Secundilactobacillus         ↓ Gordonia 
 
↑ Porphyromonas              ↓ Blattabacterium 
 
Box C: TT day 15 
↑ Serratia 
             ↓ Pseudocitrobacter 
↑ Lactococcus 
             ↓ Citrobacter 
↑ Clostridioides 
             ↓ Blattabacterium 
↑ Luteimonas 
             ↓ Pectobacterium 
↑ Porphyromonas              ↓ Desulfobotulus 
 
Box D: NN Recipient day 15 
↑ Lactococcus 
             ↓ Pseudocitrobacter 
↑ Serratia 
             ↓ Geomicrobium 
↑ Pediococcus 
             ↓ Citrobacter 
↑ Secundilactobacillus         ↓ Cytobacillus 
↑ Luteimonas 
             ↓ Mycolicibacter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Box B: NN Recipient day 15 
↑ Lactococcus 
            ↓ Blattabacterium 
↑ Serratia 
            ↓ Citrobacter 
↑ Pediococcus 
            ↓ Enterobacillus 
↑ Luteimonas 
            ↓ Nocardiopsis 
↑ Secundilactobacillus        ↓ Luteitalea 
 
 
Figure 19: Top 5 bacterial genera increasing (green arrow up) and decreasing (red arrow down) compositionally 
from the non-treated day 8 samples in comparison with the day 15 samples. Refer to appendix 10.2 for the top 10 
abundant drivers of the groups and their clr median as well as the distance between the groups.  
 
The treated cockroaches from day 8 were also compared to all of the day 15 samples, see  
Figure 20. 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
 
Page 51 of 105 
 
 
                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     T day 8               vs  
 
 
Box A: TN day 15 
↑ Pediococcus 
 
↓ Blattabacterium 
↑ Porphyromonas  
↓ Cellulosimicrobium 
↑ Candidatus Nanogingivalis ↓ Nakamura 
↑ Dysgonomonas  
↓ Pseudomonas 
↑ Saezia  
 
↓ Ensifer 
 
Box B: TN Donor day 15 
↑ Pediococcus 
 
↓ Ensifer  
↑ Porphyromonas  
↓ Cellulosimicrobium 
↑ Lactiplantibacillus 
↓ Actinotalea 
↑ Secundilactobacillus 
↓ Pseudactinotalea 
↑ Loigolactobacillus 
↓ Microbacterium 
 
Box C: TT day 15 
↑ Clostridioides 
 
↓ Blattabacterium 
↑ Porphyromonas  
↓ Citrobacter 
↑ Cytobacillus 
 
↓ Desertihabitans 
↑ Dysgonomonas  
↓ Riemerella 
↑ Peribacillus 
 
↓ Acidisoma 
 
Box D: NN Recipient day 15 
↑ Pediococcus 
 
↓ Krasilnikoviella 
↑ Secundilactobacillus 
↓ Riemerella 
↑ Lactiplantibacillus 
↓ Actinotalea 
↑ Porphyromonas  
↓ Cellulosimicrobium 
↑ Loigolactobacillus 
↓ Geomicrobium 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Box B: NN Recipient day 15 
↑ Pseudocitrobacter 
↓ Blattabacterium 
↑ Pediococcus 
 
↓ Riemerella 
↑ Porphyromonas  
↓ Loigolactobacillus 
↑ Lactiplantibacillus 
↓ Actinotalea 
↑ Saezia  
 
↓ Isoptericola 
 
 
Figure 20: Top 5 bacterial genera increasing (green arrow up) and decreasing (red arrow down) compositionally 
from the treated day 8 samples in comparison with the day 15 samples. Refer to appendix 10.3 for the top 10 
abundant drivers of the groups and their clr median as well as the distance between the groups.  
 
The two mixed populations in box B, NN Recipient and TN donor, were compared on day 15. 
Table 16 shows the NN Recipient abundant drivers and Table 17 shows the TN Donor 
abundant drivers.  
 
Table 16: Top 5 bacterial driving genera abundant in the NN Recipient box B day 15 in comparison to the TN Donor 
box B day 15. 
Genera 
TN Donor box B 
day 15 clr mean 
NN Recipient box B 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance 
between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Pantoea 
-0.85 
4.10 
4.94 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Pseudocitrobacter 
2.43 
7.06 
4.62 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Gluconobacter 
-0.85 
3.55 
4.40 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Microvirga 
1.68 
5.48 
3.80 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Pseudactinotalea 
-0.84 
2.91 
3.75 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
 
Page 52 of 105 
Table 17: Top 5 driving bacterial genera abundant in the TN donor box B day 15 in comparison to the NN Recipient 
box B day 15. 
Genera 
TN Donor box B 
day 15 clr mean 
NN Recipient box B 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance 
between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Citrobacter 
5.99 
0.63 
5.36 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Blattabacterium 
2.46 
-1.72 
4.18 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Entomomonas 
3.38 
0.35 
3.03 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Thiocystis 
0.41 
-1.71 
2.13 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Candidatus 
Nanogingivalis 
3.51 
1.52 
2.00 
TN Donor box B day 15 
The non-treated cockroaches from day 1 samples were compared to the samples of day 15, 
see Figure 21.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N day 1           vs 
 
  
Box A: TN day 15 
↑ Pediococcus 
 
↓ Ereboglobus 
↑ Clostridioides 
 
↓ Stenotrophomonas 
↑ Entomomonas 
 
↓ Pseudomonas 
↑ Acetatifactor 
 
↓ Pseudocitrobacter 
↑ Anaeromassilibacillus 
↓ Bacillus 
 
Box B: TN Donor day 15 
↑ Pediococcus 
 
↓ Ereboglobus 
↑ Secundilactobacillus 
↓ Bacillus 
↑ Entomomonas 
 
↓ Ensifer 
↑ Anaeromassilibacillus 
↓ Pseudomonas 
↑ Loigolactobacillus 
↓ Stenotrophomonas 
 
Box C: TT day 15 
↑ Clostridioides 
 
↓ Pseudocitrobacter 
↑ Luteitalea 
 
↓ Ereboglobus 
↑ Anaeromassilibacillus 
↓ Buttiauxella 
↑ Acetatifactor 
 
↓ Stenotrophomonas 
↑ Serratia 
 
↓ Pseudomonas 
 
Box D: NN Recipient day 15 
↑ Pediococcus 
 
↓ Bacillus 
↑ Blattabacterium  
↓ Ereboglobus 
↑ Secundilactobacillus 
↓ Buttiauxella 
↑ Nocardioides 
 
↓ Pseudocitrobacter 
↑ Anaeromassilibacillus 
↓ Priestia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Box B: NN Recipient day 15 
↑ Pediococcus 
 
↓ Ereboglobus 
↑ Secundilactobacillus 
↓ Stenotrophomonas 
↑ Loigolactobacillus 
↓ Bacillus 
↑ Lactococcus 
 
↓ Ensifer 
↑ Anaeromassilibacillus 
↓ Priestia 
 
 
Figure 21: Top 5 bacterial genera increasing (green arrow up) and decreasing (red arrow down) compositionally 
from the non-treated day 1 samples in comparison with the day 15 samples. Refer to appendix 10.4 for the top 10 
abundant drivers of the groups and their clr median as well as the distance between the groups.  
 
 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
 
Page 53 of 105 
Several bacteria varied in their abundances between our controls and the treated gut. For 
example, the Lactococcus genus reported in the top 10 genera that compositionally increasing 
the most (appendix 10.4, Table 46), was abundant in the non-treated day 1 sample, but got 
even more abundant in the TN box A day 15 samples (from 8.44 clr mean to 13.24 clr mean). 
This was also the case for Secundilactobacillus (from 3.56 clr mean to 7.71). 
Secundilactobacillus (from 3.60 clr mean to 9.55) and Loigolactobacillus (from 7.15 clr mean 
to 11.76) from the top 10 genera increasing the most from N day 1 to TN donor box B day 15, 
was also abundant in the non-treated cockroach on day 1, but increased compositionally to 
be even more abundant as well (appendix 10.4, Table 48). 
For the NN Recipient box B day 15 in comparison to the N day 1 (appendix 10.4, Table 50), 
this was also the case for Secundilactobacillus (from 3.78 clr mean to 8.96), Loigolactobacillus 
(from 7.32 to 11.68 clr median) and Lactococcus (from 8.58 to 12.83 clr mean).  
For the TT box C day 15 compared to the N day 1 (appendix 10.4, Table 52), this was the 
case for Serratia (from 8.69 clr mean to 13.97), Lactococcus (from 8.65 to 13.80 clr mean).   
For the NN Recipient box D day 15 compared to the N day 1 (appendix 10.4, Table 54), this 
was observed for Secundilactobacillus (from 3.69 clr mean to 9.97), Nocardioides (from 2.31 
to 6.90 clr mean), Loigolactobacillus (from 7.24 clr mean to 11.34) and Lactococcus (from 8.49 
to 12.19 clr mean).   
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
 
Page 54 of 105 
7. Discussion 
Here we have evaluated the effect of antibiotic treatments on semi-social species of 
cockroaches with rich innate microbial communities. Our results showed that live and complex 
microbiomes can respond quickly to stressors such as antibiotic treatment with tetracycline 
detectable by metagenomics. We also showed that host-host interactions influenced the 
bacterial community structure and dissemination including their gene reservoir.  
 
The triplicate non-treated cockroach guts from day 1 were used to characterise the healthy 
gut microbiome of the Pycnoscelus surinamensis cockroach. Lampert et al. [17], showed that 
the gut microbiome of the oak leaf litter fed Pycnoscelus surinamensis cockroach was 
abundant in Bacteroides, Castellaniella, Dysgonomonas, Enterococcus, Fusobacterium, 
Lactobacillus, Pseudomonas and Serratia genera. Enterococcus was highly abundant in the 
non-treated cockroaches of this study. Serratia and Pseudomonas were also present in the 
top 20 most abundant bacterial genera (Table 3). The differences in abundant bacterial genera 
compared to earlier studies might be because of e.g., dietary differences, sequencing method 
(16s rRNA amplicon sequencing vs metagenomic sequencing), method of abundance 
calculation or rearing conditions. 
The non-treated soil shared bacterial genera with the cockroach samples e.g., 
Mycolicibacterium, Azomonas, Streptomyces and Enterococcus. This is to be expected, since 
the soil samples are rich with cockroach faeces (Table 4). However, as revealed by the 
ordination analysis comparing the bacterial microbiome composition of cockroach and soil, 
these were distinct both at a genus and a species level (Figure 11). The main drivers abundant 
in the cockroach guts were genera such as Putridiphycobacter, Solibacillus, Taibaiella, 
Cecembia and Porphyromonas. The Serratia genus, a known genus of the Pycnoscelus 
surinamensis gut microbiome [17], was abundant in the cockroach samples with a clr mean of 
10.29. It was still one of the top abundant drivers of the cockroach samples even though 
present in the soil samples with a clr mean of 5.13 (Table 10). This was mainly the Serratia 
marcescens, Serratia sp. NGAS9 and Serratia bockelmannii species (Table 12).  
Dysgonomonas, also a known and abundant genus of the Pycnoscelus surinamensis gut 
microbiome [17], was one of the top drivers of the separation between cockroach and soil 
(Table 10).  
Almost all of the top 10 genera drivers abundant in the soil samples were compositionally low 
abundant in the cockroach gut microbiome. These include the Luteitalea, Solirubrobacter, 
Marmoricola, Afipia and Iamia genera (Table 11).   
The soil and cockroach guts were also different in regard to their resistance genes (Figure 
13A). Some of the cockroach samples were abundant in different tet genes, suggesting that 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
Page 55 of 105 
these samples were the tetracycline treated ones. It was mainly the tet(O)_2_M20925, 
tet(O/32/O)_5_FP929050 and tet(41)_1_AY264780 tetracycline resistance genes abundant in 
the cockroach samples in comparison to the soil samples (Table 6). No tet resistance genes 
were in the top 5 abundant drivers of the soil samples (Table 7). 
tet(O) encodes a ribosomal protection protein and has been shown to be associated with 
conjugative plasmids [57], tet(O/32/O) is a mosaic tetracycline resistance gene encoding a 
ribosomal protection protein [58] and tet(41) encodes a tetracycline efflux pump identified in 
Serratia [59]. This association between Serratia being dominant in cockroach samples as well 
as the Serratia encoded tetracycline efflux pump is interesting, since it suggests Serratia might 
be one of the genera carrying tetracycline resistance. However, further investigation of the 
association would have to be performed before drawing conclusions.  
Other resistance genes were abundant in both the cockroach and soil samples. For the 
cockroach samples, these were the aminoglycoside resistance gene, aac(6')-Ic_1_M94066 
and the beta-lactam resistance gene blaSST-1_1_AB008455 (Table 6). AAC(6')-Ic is an 
aminoglycoside acetyltransferase encoded on the chromosome of Serratia marcescens [60]. 
In addition, the beta-lactam resistance gene, blaSST-1, has previously been associated with 
S. marcescens [61]. Serratia marcescens is known for producing beta-lactamase and being 
highly resistant to a wide range of broad-spectrum beta-lactams [62]. However, again, a further 
investigation of the association between these resistance genes and S. marcescens would 
have to be performed before drawing conclusions. 
The top resistance gene drivers abundant in the soil samples in comparison to the cockroach 
samples were aadA6_1_AF140629 and aadA11_1_AY144590 (Table 7). aadA6 is an 
integron-encoded aminoglycoside nucleotidyltransferase found in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 
Enterobacter hormaechei, Providencia rettgeri and Serratia marcescens [63] and aadA11 
encodes the same function but in e.g., Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
Serratia marcescens [64]. Again, S. marcescens seems to be related to the resistance 
detected in both cockroach and soil samples. However, worth mentioning is that S. 
marcescens is a well-studied opportunistic human pathogen [61] [62] [60]. 
 
Those observed variations (figure 11) between the faeces-rich soil and cockroach gut 
microbiomes are due to several factors. First, reducing the number of features for the 
ordination analysis was needed. Here, the most variable and abundant features were included 
since non-variable features would not add to the separation observed. Secondly, the bacteria 
of the soil are adapted to their environment. These conditions are different from e.g., the gut 
of a cockroach, and will therefore select for a different set of bacteria. Therefore, even with 
the faecal rich soil, the soil microbiome might share a number of core bacterial taxa yet also 
harbour soil specific ones.   
==PAGE:56==
 
 
 
Page 56 of 105 
The effect of tetracycline disturbance of the cockroach gut microbiome was observed by 
diversity indices (mainly Shannon). The non-treated cockroaches showed that their bacterial 
gut microbiomes had lower diversity after 8 days of tetracycline treatment (Figure 7). This was 
also reflected by Shannon’s evenness describing the abundance distribution. The  gut 
bacterial communities in the non-treated cockroaches were more even compared to the 
treated ones on day 8 (Figure 9). The mixed population of non-treated and treated 
cockroaches showed a more diverse bacterial community on day 15 than the treated 
population left to recover on its own. The same pattern was observed for the evenness of the 
gut microbiome. Here, the treated population left to recover on its own (box A) in the second 
part of the experiment showed a more uneven abundance distribution. This suggests that the 
semi-social behaviour of the cockroaches facilitate transmission which increases the recovery 
of the gut microbiome post tetracycline treatment. Our results showed that when gut bacteria, 
in vivo, are stressed by tetracycline treatment, the bacterial composition suffers and exhibits 
increased abundance of certain taxa (Figure 18, Figure 19, Figure 20 and Figure 21). This 
adds a selective pressure on the bacterial community, leading to a decrease in diversity 
(Figure 7) as well as the evenness (Figure 9). Some bacterial taxa decrease, e.g., 
Ereboglobus and Pseudocitrobacter and some increase e.g., Clostridioides and Serratia 
(Figure 12, box C TT day 15).  
 
The tetracycline resistance gene class was investigated in the cockroach samples (Figure 14). 
Here, the tetracycline resistance part increased in the treated cockroaches on day 8 compared 
to the non-treated of day 1. This was to be expected since the gut microbiome was under 
selective pressure for tetracycline resistance. The tetracycline gene class part increased 
additionally compared to other resistance genes in the population treated for 15 days.  
The TN population of box A was left to recover on its own. However, the tetracycline resistance 
level stayed the same during the last part of the experiment (day 10, 12 and 15). For the mixed 
population in box B, the non-treated NN recipient population had an increase in tetracycline 
resistance, suggesting AMR transmission from the TN Donor population to the recipient 
cockroaches. The NN Recipient population of box D, where the stressor was continually kept 
on the population by adding cockroaches that are treated continuously from Box C, also had 
an increase in tetracycline resistance on day 15. However, the clr median of this was smaller 
than the NN Recipient population of box B. 
The soil samples showed the same patterns of increased tetracycline resistance when treating 
its cockroach population (Figure 15). Compared to the soil from the box containing the non-
treated population on day 2 and 8, the soil of the treated population on day 8 had an increase 
in tetracycline resistance compared to the other resistance gene classes. This is likely caused 
by excreted cockroach faeces and shows that resistance can be detected from the soil without 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
 
Page 57 of 105 
sampling and dissection of the cockroaches. The soil from the treated population was 
distributed into box A and C of the second part of the experiment. As expected, tetracycline 
resistance was detected in both boxes on day 15, with the population treated for 15 days 
having the highest tetracycline clr median. However, even the soil from the non-treated box of 
the first part of the experiment showed increased tetracycline resistance compared to the other 
resistance classes on day 15. This suggests that resistance can be detected in the soil 
originating from the TN donor of these mixed populations post treatment. Our soil bacterial 
community results suggest that AMR transmission could also occur between microbiomes of 
different environments. As mentioned in the introduction, it is of concern when non-pathogenic 
bacteria act as resistance genes reservoirs since this might be transferred to pathogenic 
bacteria.  
 
The cockroach samples clustered according to their treatment status based on the most 
variant bacterial genera across samples (Figure 16A). The non-treated, N day 8 samples 
clustered on its own, leaving the rest of the samples to be separated into a more related 
cluster. This first part of this cluster contained all the samples of box A, B and D i.e., the 
samples that did not retrieve treatment during the second part of the experiment. This also 
included the NN recipient samples, indicating that the gregarious behaviour indeed did allow 
for transmission of gut microbiome between a mixed population of non-treated and treated 
cockroaches. Had this not been the case, the NN recipient samples would have clustered 
more closely to the N samples. The treated cockroaches TT and T clustered together with one 
of the TN day 10 samples. This can be explained by the TN population only having two days 
to recover from treatment.  
As initially shown by the ordination analysis on the soil and cockroach samples (Figure 12), 
some of the variance was explained by high abundance of Lactococcus and Serratia in the 
cockroach samples, the latter being a known genus of the Pycnoscelus surinamensis 
cockroach foregut and midgut [17]. This is supported by the heatmap clustering (Figure 16A), 
where all the samples except the non-treated, N day 8, were highly enriched in these two 
genera. Additionally, all samples were enriched in Dysgonomonas, a known genera of both 
the cockroach foregut, midgut, and hindgut [17].  
Interestingly the samples not receiving treatment for the second part of the experiment (TN, 
TN donor and NN Recipient) had an increased abundance in the genera: Paucilactobacillus, 
Loigolactobacillus, Lacticaseibacillus and Secundilactobacillus. These are all lactic acid 
bacteria (gram-positive, non-spore forming) [65], suggesting that when left to recover post 
tetracycline treatment, lactic acid bacteria are selected for.   
Tetracycline disturbance of the bacterial soil community was not observed by the diversity 
indices (Figure 6, Figure 8 and Figure 10). The bacterial soil samples did not cluster based on 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
 
Page 58 of 105 
the population of its box (Figure 16B). This is likely due to the soil nature as an open 
microbiome, where influx of bacteria might interrupt the community, compared to the guts that 
are considered a more enclosed environment. However, as suggested by the investigation of 
tetracycline gene class presence in the soil (Figure 15), the soil did cluster based on the 
treatment status of its cockroach population when looking at resistance genes (Figure 17B). 
Here, especially tet(M) was associated with the soil of the treated populations. This is 
interesting, since tet(M) has been reported in association with a lot of different bacteria taxa. 
This is explained by the gene being located on a conjugative plasmid with well documented 
horizontal transfer abilities [66] [67].  
Interestingly, dfrB7 and dfrB3 were enriched in almost all soil samples, suggesting that those 
resistance genes are common in soil microbiomes. This is supported by these two genes being 
in the top 5 driving resistance genes abundant in the soil samples in comparison to the 
cockroach samples (Table 7). Both genes encode a dihydrofolate reductase and have been 
associated with multidrug-resistant bacteria (Enterobacter hormaechei, Enterobacter kobei, 
Klebsiella pneumoniae and Serratia marcescens) from environmental samples [68] [69].  
The treated cockroaches also showed an increase in the tet(M) resistance gene. In addition, 
the three tetracycline resistance genes: tet(O/32/O), tet(O) and tet(S). For some of the treated 
samples, tet(41) was also dominant. This resistance gene encodes a tetracycline efflux pump 
in Serratia [59]. 
 
Further analyses of microbiome compositional changes in the cockroach guts showed that the 
bacterial community composition of the non-treated cockroach guts changed from day 1 to 
day 8. This was visible in the heatmap clustering (Figure 16A), where these did not cluster 
together. Visible inspection of the heatmap suggested that this was because of the low 
abundance of Serratia and Lactococcus in the non-treated after 8 days. This finding was 
supported by the driving bacterial genera between these two groups (Figure 18). This 
compositional change of the gut microbiome of the non-treated cockroaches from day 1 to day 
8 is likely explained by the stress of being isolated from the original colony and transferred to 
a new environment. Those differences are commonly observed in animal hosts that are lab-
reared [70].   
As discussed, the non-treated cockroaches had a compositional decrease of Serratia and 
Lactococcus from day 1 to day 8. This was however not observed in the treated population, 
but species recovery might have occurred in the second part of the experiment (below). This 
could be because these two genera gained a fitness advantage and were selected for because 
of tetracycline resistance. However, this would need further investigation. 
After mixing these two populations in box B, Lactococcus and Serratia got abundant yet again 
in the non-treated cockroaches on day 15 (appendix 10.2, Table 30). This is an example of 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
 
Page 59 of 105 
transmission between cockroaches during grooming or cooperative behaviour, and how this 
influenced composition of their live and complex microbiome in vivo.  
Some bacteria were able to adapt to the new conditions, while some were not. For example, 
Blattabacterium became more abundant in both the treated and non-treated samples on day 
8 compared to the non-treated day 1 (Figure 18). However, when mixing these two populations 
in box B, this genus was less abundant on day 15 in both box B populations; TN Donor and 
NN Recipient samples, as well as in the TN box A (Figure 19 and Figure 20).  
Ereboglobus is another example, this genus was less abundant in all populations compared 
to the initial non-treated day 1 (Figure 21). As opposed to the Lactococcus and Serratia, 
Ereboglobus was not abundant in any of the cockroaches going into the mixed population 
(Figure 17), which explains why this genus did not have a chance to increase compositionally 
during the last part of the experiment. Pediococcus, on the other hand, was the top driver of 
all populations on day 15 compared to day 1 except the population having received treatment 
during the entire experiment (Figure 20). However, like Ereboglobus, this genus was not 
abundant in the treated or non-treated population (appendix 10.2 and appendix 10.3). These 
are all examples of the complex dynamics shaping the bacterial community. 
Pediococcus did however first increase compositionally during the second part of the 
experiment, where tetracycline treatment had ceased. This suggests that Pediococcus is great 
at establishing itself in a disturbed gut microbiome post treatment where there is no selection 
for resistance. Pediococcus is a lactic acid bacteria [65]. As previously mentioned, lactic acid 
bacteria seemed to be related to post-tetracycline recovery of the gut microbiome (Figure 
16A). This finding was supported by the lactic acid bacteria, Secundilactobacillus, 
Lactiplantibacillus and Loigolactobacillus [65] also being abundant drivers of the post-
treatment populations (Figure 20).  
 
Serratia seems to be associated with tetracycline resistance. The genus increased 
compositionally when the population of cockroaches were treated with tetracycline. This 
treatment adds a selective pressure on the gut microbiome of the treated cockroach, selecting 
for tetracycline resistance. A number of bacteria are considered opportunistic and colonise 
when diversity drops in a population or during the disturbance (Intermediate Disturbance 
Hypothesis [71]). Serratia could have colonised the disturbed microbiome after eliminating 
other taxa during the antibiotic treatment. However, even though the compositional increase 
of Serratia and the literature supports tetracycline resistance in this genus, further investigation 
needs to be performed for this specific study. This is to elucidate if tetracycline resistance 
genes we characterised are partially Serratia-driven. Preferably, assembly into contigs 
followed by binning to obtain metagenomic-assembled genomes (MAGs). This would allow for 
taxonomic and functional annotation, which could be used to identify where and in which 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
 
Page 60 of 105 
bacteria the resistance genes were located. In addition, it would be interesting to see if there 
was a difference in which bacteria the resistance was located in between the recipient 
cockroach population and the treated one (e.g., plasmid vs chromosomal).  
 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
 
Page 61 of 105 
8. Conclusion 
Our findings have provided insight into how antibiotic treatment affects the live and complex 
gut microbiome of a semi-social organism (Pycnoscelus surinamensis cockroach) and has 
shown that such stressors reduce host bacterial diversity. We have shown that host-host 
interaction facilitates dissemination of bacterial communities between non-treated and treated 
hosts and that this increased recovery of the stressed gut microbiome post treatment.  
Antimicrobial resistance was selected for when treating a population, and transmitted to a 
susceptible population of cockroaches when the hosts were mixed. Resistance was even 
detectable in the faeces-rich soil of the cockroaches. These results support the importance of 
regarding both the commensal gut microbiome of cockroaches as well as their soil as a 
resistance gene reservoir which, in time, might be transmitted to pathogens.  
Further exploration on these findings within the model organism could include investigating 
the association between resistance genes and specific bacterial species, and even testing 
this setup in other model organisms closer related to humans.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
 
Page 62 of 105 
9. References 
[1] 
A. H. Holmes et al., “Understanding the mechanisms and drivers of antimicrobial 
resistance,” Lancet, vol. 387, no. 10014, pp. 176–187, Jan. 2016, doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00473-0. 
[2] 
P. Engel and N. A. Moran, “The gut microbiota of insects – diversity in structure and 
function,” FEMS Microbiol Rev, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 699–735, Sep. 2013, doi: 
10.1111/1574-6976.12025. 
[3] 
H. Neuman and O. Koren, “The Gut Microbiome,” Encyclopedia of Cell Biology, vol. 2, 
pp. 799–808, Jan. 2016, doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394447-4.20083-7. 
[4] 
C. Richards, S. Otani, A. Mikaelyan, and M. Poulsen, “Pycnoscelus surinamensis 
cockroach gut microbiota respond consistently to a fungal diet without mirroring those 
of fungus-farming termites,” PLoS One, vol. 12, no. 10, Oct. 2017, doi: 
10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0185745. 
[5] 
A. E. Pérez-Cobas, E. Maiques, A. Angelova, P. Carrasco, A. Moya, and A. Latorre, 
“Diet shapes the gut microbiota of the omnivorous cockroach Blattella germanica,” 
FEMS Microbiol Ecol, vol. 91, no. 4, p. 22, Apr. 2015, doi: 10.1093/FEMSEC/FIV022. 
[6] 
T. O. Onchuru, A. Javier Martinez, C. S. Ingham, and M. Kaltenpoth, “Transmission of 
mutualistic bacteria in social and gregarious insects,” Curr Opin Insect Sci, vol. 28, pp. 
50–58, Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1016/J.COIS.2018.05.002. 
[7] 
J. Renelies-Hamilton, K. Germer, D. Sillam-Dussès, K. H. Bodawatta, and M. 
Poulsen, “Disentangling the Relative Roles of Vertical Transmission, Subsequent 
Colonizations, and Diet on Cockroach Microbiome Assembly,” mSphere, vol. 6, no. 1, 
Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1128/MSPHERE.01023-20. 
[8] 
T. Rosas, C. García-Ferris, R. Domínguez-Santos, P. Llop, A. Latorre, and A. Moya, 
“Rifampicin treatment of Blattella germanica evidences a fecal transmission route of 
their gut microbiota,” FEMS Microbiol Ecol, vol. 94, no. 2, p. 2, Feb. 2018, doi: 
10.1093/FEMSEC/FIY002. 
[9] 
A. Wada-Katsumata, L. Zurek, G. Nalyanya, W. L. Roelofs, A. Zhang, and C. Schal, 
“Gut bacteria mediate aggregation in the German cockroach,” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A, vol. 112, no. 51, pp. 15678–15683, Dec. 2015, doi: 
10.1073/PNAS.1504031112/SUPPL_FILE/PNAS.201504031SI.PDF. 
[10] 
D. v. Alford, Pests of ornamental trees, shrubs and flowers : a colour handbook. 
Accessed: Feb. 19, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.routledge.com/Pests-of-
Ornamental-Trees-Shrubs-and-Flowers-A-Colour-Handbook-
Second/Alford/p/book/9781138034068 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
Page 63 of 105 
[11] 
“Pycnoscelus surinamensis - Surinam Cockroach, Greenhouse Cockroach - 
arthropodafotos.de.” 
https://arthropodafotos.de/dbsp.php?lang=eng&sc=0&ta=t_37_bla_0_blab&sci=Pycno
scelus&scisp=surinamensis (accessed Oct. 31, 2022). 
[12] 
W. Bell, “Cockroaches,” Cockroaches, Oct. 2018, doi: 10.1353/BOOK.3295. 
[13] 
“Cockroaches : their biology, distribution and control,” 1999. 
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/who-cds-cpe-whopes-99.3 (accessed Oct. 31, 
2022). 
[14] 
M. Pearcy, O. Hardy, and S. Aron, “Thelytokous parthenogenesis and its 
consequences on inbreeding in an ant,” Heredity 2006 96:5, vol. 96, no. 5, pp. 377–
382, Mar. 2006, doi: 10.1038/sj.hdy.6800813. 
[15] 
C. W. Schwabe, “Observations on the Life History of Pycnoscelus surinamensis 
(Linn.), the Intermediate Host of the Chicken Eyeworm in Hawaii.” Hawaiian 
Entomological Society, 1949. Accessed: Feb. 19, 2023. [Online]. Available: 
http://hdl.handle.net/10125/16194 
[16] 
L. Zangl, G. Kunz, C. Berg, and S. Koblmüller, “First records of the parthenogenetic 
Surinam cockroach Pycnoscelus surinamensis (Insecta: Blattodea: Blaberidae) for 
Central Europe,” Journal of Applied Entomology, vol. 143, no. 3, pp. 308–313, Apr. 
2019, doi: 10.1111/JEN.12587. 
[17] 
N. Lampert, A. Mikaelyan, and A. Brune, “Diet is not the primary driver of bacterial 
community structure in the gut of litter-feeding cockroaches,” BMC Microbiol, vol. 19, 
no. 1, p. 238, Oct. 2019, doi: 10.1186/S12866-019-1601-9. 
[18] 
E. Purssell, “Antimicrobials,” Understanding Pharmacology in Nursing Practice, pp. 
147–165, 2020, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-32004-1_6. 
[19] 
R. J. Melander, D. v. Zurawski, and C. Melander, “Narrow-spectrum antibacterial 
agents,” Medchemcomm, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 12–21, 2018, doi: 10.1039/C7MD00528H. 
[20] 
F. van Bambeke, M. P. Mingeot-Leclercq, Y. Glupczynski, and P. M. Tulkens, 
“Mechanisms of Action,” Infectious Diseases, 2-Volume Set, pp. 1162-1180.e1, Jan. 
2017, doi: 10.1016/B978-0-7020-6285-8.00137-4. 
[21] 
E. Peterson and P. Kaur, “Antibiotic resistance mechanisms in bacteria: Relationships 
between resistance determinants of antibiotic producers, environmental bacteria, and 
clinical pathogens,” Front Microbiol, vol. 9, no. NOV, p. 2928, Nov. 2018, doi: 
10.3389/FMICB.2018.02928/BIBTEX. 
[22] 
WHO, “ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE Global Report on Surveillance,” 2014. 
[23] 
“Antimicrobial Resistance: Tackling a crisis for the health and wealth of nations,” 
2014. 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
Page 64 of 105 
[24] 
“Global Antimicrobial Resistance and Use Surveillance System (GLASS) .” 
https://www.who.int/initiatives/glass (accessed Oct. 25, 2022). 
[25] 
R. S. Hendriksen et al., “Global monitoring of antimicrobial resistance based on 
metagenomics analyses of urban sewage,” Nat Commun, vol. 10, no. 1, Dec. 2019, 
doi: 10.1038/S41467-019-08853-3. 
[26] 
M. C. Shutter and H. Akhondi, “Tetracycline,” Kucers the Use of Antibiotics: A Clinical 
Review of Antibacterial, Antifungal, Antiparasitic, and Antiviral Drugs, Seventh Edition, 
pp. 1195–1203, Jul. 2022, doi: 10.1201/9781315152110. 
[27] 
I. Chopra and M. Roberts, “Tetracycline antibiotics: mode of action, applications, 
molecular biology, and epidemiology of bacterial resistance,” Microbiol Mol Biol Rev, 
vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 232–260, Jun. 2001, doi: 10.1128/MMBR.65.2.232-260.2001. 
[28] 
M. C. Roberts and S. Schwarz, “Tetracycline and Phenicol Resistance Genes and 
Mechanisms: Importance for Agriculture, the Environment, and Humans,” J Environ 
Qual, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 576–592, Mar. 2016, doi: 10.2134/JEQ2015.04.0207. 
[29] 
K. Ignasiak and A. Maxwell, “Oxytetracycline reduces the diversity of tetracycline-
resistance genes in the Galleria mellonella gut microbiome,” BMC Microbiol, vol. 18, 
no. 1, pp. 1–8, Dec. 2018, doi: 10.1186/S12866-018-1377-3/TABLES/2. 
[30] 
H. Juricova, J. Matiasovicova, T. Kubasova, D. Cejkova, and I. Rychlik, “The 
distribution of antibiotic resistance genes in chicken gut microbiota commensals,” 
Scientific Reports 2021 11:1, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–10, Feb. 2021, doi: 
10.1038/s41598-021-82640-3. 
[31] 
P. Munk et al., “Abundance and diversity of the faecal resistome in slaughter pigs and 
broilers in nine European countries,” Nat Microbiol, vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 898–908, Aug. 
2018, doi: 10.1038/S41564-018-0192-9. 
[32] 
A. E. Pérez-Cobas, L. Gomez-Valero, and C. Buchrieser, “Metagenomic approaches 
in microbial ecology: an update on whole-genome and marker gene sequencing 
analyses,” Microb Genom, vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 1–22, 2020, doi: 
10.1099/MGEN.0.000409. 
[33] 
“QIAamp DNA Microbiome Handbook - QIAGEN,” 2014. 
https://www.qiagen.com/us/resources/resourcedetail?id=c403392b-0706-45ac-aa2e-
4a75acd21006&lang=en (accessed Oct. 06, 2022). 
[34] 
“DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit Handbook - QIAGEN,” 2021. 
https://www.qiagen.com/dk/resources/resourcedetail?id=9bb59b74-e493-4aeb-b6c1-
f660852e8d97&lang=en (accessed Oct. 06, 2022). 
[35] 
S. Otani, “From Organisms to Genomics: From Alive to Live - Slides from lecture 1 of 
Course 23260 - Applied Methods in Metagenomics, Technical University of Denmark,” 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
Page 65 of 105 
2021. https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/80364/viewContent/310269/View 
(accessed Feb. 19, 2023). 
[36] 
H. Kucuktas and Z. Liu, “Library Construction for Next Generation Sequencing,” 2011, 
Accessed: Feb. 19, 2023. [Online]. Available: 
www.neb.com/nebecomm/products/productM0348.asp 
[37] 
P. T. L. C. Clausen, F. M. Aarestrup, and O. Lund, “Rapid and precise alignment of 
raw reads against redundant databases with KMA,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 19, no. 
1, pp. 1–8, Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1186/S12859-018-2336-6/TABLES/2. 
[38] 
“Chapter 8 Alpha Diversity | Orchestrating Microbiome Analysis.” 
https://microbiome.github.io/OMA/alpha-diversity.html (accessed Feb. 07, 2023). 
[39] 
“en:diversity_analysis [Analysis of community ecology data in R].” 
https://www.davidzeleny.net/anadat-r/doku.php/en:diversity_analysis (accessed Feb. 
18, 2023). 
[40] 
“en:div-ind [Analysis of community ecology data in R].” 
https://www.davidzeleny.net/anadat-r/doku.php/en:div-ind (accessed Feb. 07, 2023). 
[41] 
M. J. Vavrek, “fossil: Palaeoecological and palaeogeographical analysis tools,” vol. 
14, p. 16, 2011, Accessed: Feb. 20, 2023. [Online]. Available: http://palaeo-
electronica.orghttp://palaeo-electronica.org/2011_1/238/index.html 
[42] 
G. B. Gloor, J. M. Macklaim, V. Pawlowsky-Glahn, and J. J. Egozcue, “Microbiome 
datasets are compositional: And this is not optional,” Front Microbiol, vol. 8, no. NOV, 
p. 2224, Nov. 2017, doi: 10.3389/FMICB.2017.02224/BIBTEX. 
[43] 
M. Luz Calle, “Statistical Analysis of Metagenomics Data,” Genomics Inform, vol. 17, 
no. 1, 2019, doi: 10.5808/GI.2019.17.1.E6. 
[44] 
G. B. Gloor and G. Reid, “Compositional analysis: A valid approach to analyze 
microbiome high-throughput sequencing data,” Can J Microbiol, vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 
692–703, Apr. 2016, doi: 10.1139/CJM-2015-0821/SUPPL_FILE/CJM-2015-
0821SUPPL.PDF. 
[45] 
“FAQ | POSCA USA.” https://poscausa.com/faq (accessed Oct. 24, 2023). 
[46] 
S. C. Cook, “Compound and Dose-Dependent Effects of Two Neonicotinoid 
Pesticides on Honey Bee ( Apis mellifera) Metabolic Physiology,” Insects, vol. 10, no. 
1, Jan. 2019, doi: 10.3390/INSECTS10010018. 
[47] 
M. Fortin, C. Vitet, C. Souty-Grosset, and F. J. Richard, “How do familiarity and 
relatedness influence mate choice in Armadillidium vulgare?,” PLoS One, vol. 13, no. 
12, p. e0209893, Dec. 2018, doi: 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0209893. 
[48] 
I. Will, B. Das, T. Trinh, A. Brachmann, R. A. Ohm, and C. de Bekker, “Genetic 
Underpinnings of Host Manipulation by Ophiocordyceps as Revealed by Comparative 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
Page 66 of 105 
Transcriptomics,” G3 Genes|Genomes|Genetics, vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 2275–2296, Jul. 
2020, doi: 10.1534/G3.120.401290. 
[49] 
T. Fisher Scientific, “Qubit TM 4 Fluorometer Catalog Number Q33226 Publication 
Number MAN0017209 Revision D.0 ii Qubit TM 4 Fluorometer User Guide Qubit TM 4 
Fluorometer User Guide,” 2018. 
[50] 
“QubitTM dsDNA BR Assay Kit”, Accessed: Oct. 06, 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://assets.thermofisher.com/TFS-
Assets/LSG/manuals/Qubit_dsDNA_BR_Assay_UG.pdf 
[51] 
“Babraham Bioinformatics - FastQC A Quality Control tool for High Throughput 
Sequence Data.” https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/ 
(accessed Oct. 26, 2022). 
[52] 
“BBTools - DOE Joint Genome Institute.” https://jgi.doe.gov/data-and-tools/software-
tools/bbtools/ (accessed Oct. 26, 2022). 
[53] 
T. N. Petersen, “KMA mapstat - CGE wiki.” 
http://wiki.cge.dtu.dk:10090/display/CWP/mapstat (accessed Feb. 08, 2023). 
[54] 
“Alpha diversity measures (skbio.math.diversity.alpha) — scikit-bio 0.1.3 
documentation.” http://scikit-bio.org/docs/0.1.3/math.diversity.alpha.html (accessed 
Feb. 18, 2023). 
[55] 
C. Brinch, “genomicepidemiology / pycoda — Bitbucket.” 
https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/pycoda/src/master/ (accessed Jan. 28, 
2023). 
[56] 
“seaborn.clustermap — seaborn 0.12.2 documentation.” 
https://seaborn.pydata.org/generated/seaborn.clustermap.html (accessed Jan. 29, 
2023). 
[57] 
“tet(O) - The Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database.” 
https://card.mcmaster.ca/ontology/36329 (accessed Feb. 09, 2023). 
[58] 
“tet(O/32/O) - The Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database.” 
https://card.mcmaster.ca/ontology/45696 (accessed Feb. 09, 2023). 
[59] 
“tet(41) - The Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database.” 
https://card.mcmaster.ca/ontology/36708 (accessed Feb. 09, 2023). 
[60] 
K. J. Shaw et al., “Characterization of the chromosomal aac(6’)-Ic gene from Serratia 
marcescens,” Antimicrob Agents Chemother, vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 1447–1455, 1992, doi: 
10.1128/AAC.36.7.1447. 
[61] 
F. P. Matteoli, F. Pedrosa-Silva, L. Dutra-Silva, and A. J. Giachini, “The global 
population structure and beta-lactamase repertoire of the opportunistic pathogen 
Serratia marcescens,” Genomics, vol. 113, no. 6, pp. 3523–3532, Nov. 2021, doi: 
10.1016/J.YGENO.2021.08.009. 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
Page 67 of 105 
[62] 
A. Khanna, M. Khanna, and A. Aggarwal, “Serratia marcescens- a rare opportunistic 
nosocomial pathogen and measures to limit its spread in hospitalized patients,” J Clin 
Diagn Res, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 243–246, Feb. 2013, doi: 
10.7860/JCDR/2013/5010.2737. 
[63] 
“aadA6 - The Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database.” 
https://card.mcmaster.ca/ontology/39006 (accessed Feb. 09, 2023). 
[64] 
“aadA11 - The Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database.” 
https://card.mcmaster.ca/ontology/39011 (accessed Feb. 09, 2023). 
[65] 
J. Zheng et al., “A taxonomic note on the genus Lactobacillus: Description of 23 novel 
genera, emended description of the genus Lactobacillus beijerinck 1901, and union of 
Lactobacillaceae and Leuconostocaceae,” Int J Syst Evol Microbiol, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 
2782–2858, Apr. 2020, doi: 10.1099/IJSEM.0.004107/CITE/REFWORKS. 
[66] 
“tet(M) - The Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database.” 
https://card.mcmaster.ca/ontology/36325 (accessed Feb. 10, 2023). 
[67] 
M. Akhtar, H. Hirt, and L. Zurek, “Horizontal transfer of the tetracycline resistance 
gene tetM mediated by pCF10 among enterococcus faecalis in the house fly (Musca 
domestica L.) alimentary canal,” Microb Ecol, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 509–518, May 2009, 
doi: 10.1007/S00248-009-9533-9/METRICS. 
[68] 
“dfrB7 - The Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database.” 
https://card.mcmaster.ca/ontology/42461 (accessed Feb. 10, 2023). 
[69] 
“dfrB3 - The Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database.” 
https://card.mcmaster.ca/ontology/39456 (accessed Feb. 10, 2023). 
[70] 
K. A. Tinker and E. A. Ottesen, “Differences in Gut Microbiome Composition Between 
Sympatric Wild and Allopatric Laboratory Populations of Omnivorous Cockroaches,” 
Front Microbiol, vol. 12, p. 703785, Jul. 2021, doi: 
10.3389/FMICB.2021.703785/FULL. 
[71] 
E. Santillan, H. Seshan, F. Constancias, D. I. Drautz-Moses, and S. Wuertz, 
“Frequency of disturbance alters diversity, function, and underlying assembly 
mechanisms of complex bacterial communities,” npj Biofilms and Microbiomes 2019 
5:1, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–9, Feb. 2019, doi: 10.1038/s41522-019-0079-4. 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
Page 68 of 105 
10. Appendix 
Appendix 1: Amount of soil used for extraction 
Around 0.2 g of soil was used per sample for extraction using the DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit 
from Qiagen. The following shows the exact amounts.  
 
Table 18: Amount of soil used for extraction. 
Sample name 
Weight (g) 
80_D02_So_r1 
0.2104 g 
81_D08_So_r1 
0.2109 g 
82_D08_So_r1 
0.2134 g 
83_D15_So_r1 
0.2103 g 
84_D15_So_r1 
0.2066 g 
85_D15_So_r1 
0.2093 g 
86_D15_So_r1 
0.2048 g 
87_D02_So_r2 
0.2004 g 
88_D08_So_r2 
0.2069 g 
89_D08_So_r2 
0.2101 g 
90_D15_So_r2 
0.2111 g 
91_D15_So_r2 
0.2119 g 
92_D15_So_r2 
0.2081 g 
93_D15_So_r2 
0.2078 g 
94_D02_So_r3 
0.2057 g 
95_D08_So_r3 
0.2067 g 
96_D08_So_r3 
0.2074 g 
97_D15_So_r3 
0.2134 g 
98_D15_So_r3 
0.2099 g 
99_D15_So_r3 
0.2105 g 
100_D15_So_r3 
0.2139 g 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
 
Page 69 of 105 
Appendix 2: Sample summary table 
 
Table 19: Sample summary table. All cockroach gut samples contained 3 pooled guts except sample 
33_D15_TC_r3 which only contained 2 guts. If the first elution did not contain enough DNA, it was pooled together 
with the second elution and the concentration was re-measured. The description column describes the sample. X 
in rx is the replica number e.g., replica 1 of 3. X in dx is the day number e.g., day 1. The first letters describe 
treatment status: N (No treatment for the first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), TN (treatment for the first 
8 days, then no treatment for the last 8 days. TN donor (treatment for the first 8 days, then no treatment for the last 
8 days however in a mixed population with NN Recipient), NN Recipient (No treatment for the 16 days, however in 
a mixed population with TN Donor the last 8 days), TT (continuous treatment for 16 days), NN+TN (soil from the 
NN+TN population). 
Computerome 
sample name 
Sample type 
Description 
Concentration (ng/μL) 
01_D01_N_r1 
Cockroach gut 
C D1 Box 2 r1 
10.5 
02_D01_N_r2 
Cockroach gut 
C D1 Box 2 r2 
14.4 
03_D01_N_r3 
Cockroach gut 
C D1 Box 2 r3 
11.7 
04_D08_N_r1 
Cockroach gut 
C D8 Box 2 r1 
7.59 
05_D08_N_r2 
Cockroach gut 
C D8 Box 2 r2 
7.98 
06_D08_N_r3 
Cockroach gut 
C D8 Box 2 r3 
4.28 (elution 1+2) 
07_D08_T_r1 
Cockroach gut 
T D8 Box 1 r1 
2.62 (elution 1+2) 
08_D08_T_r2 
Cockroach gut 
T D8 Box 1 r1 
6.18 
09_D08_T_r3 
Cockroach gut 
T D8 Box 1 r1 
6.5 
10_D10_NN_r1 
Cockroach gut 
CC Recipient D10 box B r1 
12.9 
11_D10_NN_r2 
Cockroach gut 
CC Recipient D10 box B r2 
10.3 
12_D10_NN_r3 
Cockroach gut 
CC Recipient D10 box B r3 
7.81 
13_D10_NT_r1 
Cockroach gut 
TC Donor D10 box B r1 
3.64 (elution 1+2) 
14_D10_NT_r2 
Cockroach gut 
TC Donor D10 box B r2 
3.79 (elution 1+2) 
15_D10_NT_r3 
Cockroach gut 
TC Donor D10 box B r3 
7.7 
16_D10_TN_r1 
Cockroach gut 
TC D10 box A r1 
3.81 (elution 1+2) 
17_D10_TN_r2 
Cockroach gut 
TC D10 box A r2 
6.01 
18_D10_TN_r3 
Cockroach gut 
TC D10 box A r3 
4.46 (elution 1+2) 
19_D12_NN_r1 
Cockroach gut 
CC Recipient D12 box B r1 
7.59 
20_D12_NN_r2 
Cockroach gut 
CC Recipient D12 box B r2 
6.93 
21_D12_NN_r3 
Cockroach gut 
CC Recipient D12 box B r3 
13.7 
22_D12_TN_r1 
Cockroach gut 
TC Donor D12 box B r1 
11.5 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
 
Page 70 of 105 
23_D12_TN_r2 
Cockroach gut 
TC Donor D12 box B r1 
9.85 
24_D12_TN_r3 
Cockroach gut 
TC Donor D12 box B r1 
10.8 
25_D12_TC_r1 
Cockroach gut 
TC D12 box A r1 
11.4 
26_D12_TC_r2 
Cockroach gut 
TC D10 box A r2 
10.6 
27_D12_TC_r3 
Cockroach gut 
TC D10 box A r3 
15.4 
28_D15_NN_r1 
Cockroach gut 
CC Recipient D15 box B r1 
9.13 
29_D15_NN_r2 
Cockroach gut 
CC Recipient D15 box B r2 
1.61 (elution 1+2) 
30_D15_NN_r3 
Cockroach gut 
CC Recipient D15 box B r3 
10.5 
31_D15_TC_r1 
Cockroach gut 
TC Donor D15 box B r1 
10.1 
32_D15_TC_r2 
Cockroach gut 
TC Donor D15 box B r2 
3.53 (elution 1+2) 
33_D15_TC_r3 
Cockroach gut 
TC Donor D15 box B r3 
9.14 
34_D15_TC_r1 
Cockroach gut 
TC D15 box A r1 
12.7 
35_D15_TC_r2 
Cockroach gut 
TC D15 box A r2 
6.35 
36_D15_TC_r3 
Cockroach gut 
TC D15 box A r3 
7.78 
37_D15_NN_r1 
Cockroach gut 
CC Recipient D15 box D r1 
6.55 
38_D15_NN_r2 
Cockroach gut 
CC Recipient D15 box D r2 
8.92 
39_D15_NN_r3 
Cockroach gut 
CC Recipient D15 box D r3 
6.75 
40_D15_TT_r1 
Cockroach gut 
TT D15 box C r1 
2.41 (elution 1+2) 
41_D15_TT_r2 
Cockroach gut 
TT D15 box C r2 
2.93 (elution 1+2) 
42_D15_TT_r3 
Cockroach gut 
TT D15 box C r3 
2.36 (elution 1+2) 
80_D02_C_r1 
Soil 
C D2 box 2 r1 
7.04 
81_D08_C_r1 
Soil 
C D8 box 2 r1 
13.1 
82_D08_T_r1 
Soil 
T D8 box 1 r1 
17.1 
83_D15_TC_r1 
Soil 
TC D15 box A r1 
21.5 
84_D15_CC_r1 
Soil 
TC+CC D15 box B r1 
7.6 
85_D15_TT_r1 
Soil 
TT D15 box C r1 
8.82 
86_D15_CC_r1 
Soil 
TC+CC D5 box D r1 
16.2 
87_D02_C_r2 
Soil 
C D2 box 2 r2 
15.4 
88_D08_C_r2 
Soil 
C D8 box 2 r2 
5.66 
89_D08_T_r2 
Soil 
T D8 box 1 r2 
39.0 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
 
Page 71 of 105 
90_D15_TC_r2 
Soil 
TC D15 box A r2 
18.5 
91_D15_CC_r2 
Soil 
TC+CC D15 box B r2 
16.8 
92_D15_TT_r2 
Soil 
TT D15 box C r2 
22.6 
93_D15_CC_r2 
Soil 
TC+CC D5 box D r2 
34.2 
94_D02_C_r3 
Soil 
C D2 box 2 r3 
16.9 
95_D08_C_r3 
Soil 
C D8 box 2 r3 
35.7 
96_D08_T_r3 
Soil 
T D8 box 1 r3 
18.2 
97_D15_TC_r3 
Soil 
TC D15 box A r3 
22.4 
98_D15_CC_r3 
Soil 
TC+CC D15 box B r3 
15.7 
99_D15_TT_r3 
Soil 
TT D15 box C r3 
27.5 
100_D15_CC_r3 
Soil 
TC+CC D5 box D r3 
32.5 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
 
Page 72 of 105 
Appendix 3: Mapping summary 
Appendix 3.1: Genomic mapping, bacteria/eukaryotic ratio 
 
A 
 
B 
 
 
Figure 22: Superkingdom aligned fragments bacteria/eukaryotic ratio, from the mapping against the genomic 
database. A) Cockroach samples. B) Soil samples. 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
 
Page 73 of 105 
Appendix 3.2: ResFinder mapping 
 
         A 
 
        B 
 
 
Figure 23: Aligned fragment counts against resistance genes from the mapping against the ResFinder database. 
A) Cockroach samples. B) Soil samples. 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
 
Page 74 of 105 
Appendix 4: Alpha diversity  
Appendix 4.1: Chao1 richness at the bacterial genus level 
 
 
Figure 24: Chao1 bacterial genera richness on the cockroach samples. 
 
 
Figure 25: Chao1 bacterial genera richness on the soil samples. 
 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
 
Page 75 of 105 
Appendix 4.2: Shannon diversity index on the bacterial genus level 
 
 
Figure 26: Shannon diversity index on the cockroach samples on the bacterial genera level. 
 
 
Figure 27: Shannon diversity index on the soil samples on the bacterial genera level. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
 
Page 76 of 105 
Appendix 4.3: Simpson diversity index at bacterial species and genus level 
 
A 
 
B 
 
 
Figure 28: Simpson diversity index for the cockroach samples. A) Bacterial species. B) Bacterial genera. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
 
Page 77 of 105 
A 
 
 
B 
 
 
Figure 29: Simpson diversity index for the soil samples. A) Bacterial species. B) Bacterial genera. 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
 
Page 78 of 105 
Appendix 4.4: Shannon’s evenness at the genus level 
 
 
Figure 30: Shannon’s evenness for the cockroach samples at the genus level. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 31: Shannon’s evenness for the soil samples at the genus level.  
==PAGE:79==
 
 
 
Page 79 of 105 
Appendix 5: Soil and cockroach gut microbiome on a species level 
Appendix 5.1: Non-treated cockroach gut microbiome, N day 1 box 2 
 
Table 20: Top 20 most abundant bacterial species in the three non-treated N day 1 box 2 cockroach samples. The 
table is sorted descending on the clr mean. 
 
clr 
N day 1 box 2 R1 
clr 
N day 1 box 2 R2 
clr 
N day 1 box 2 R3 
clr mean 
Azomonas 
macrocytogenes 
10.36 
10.38 
9.27 
10.00 
Enterococcus 
nangangensis 
9.58 
9.69 
9.94 
9.73 
Ensifer sp. T173 
8.42 
10.60 
9.32 
9.45 
Pseudocitrobacter 
sp. G163CM 
9.79 
7.91 
10.57 
9.42 
Ensifer adhaerens 
9.99 
9.26 
8.52 
9.25 
Ereboglobus luteus 
9.31 
8.75 
9.11 
9.06 
Bacillus mycoides 
8.34 
9.47 
8.99 
8.93 
Mycolicibacterium 
gilvum 
8.46 
8.87 
8.85 
8.73 
Lactococcus lactis 
8.11 
8.52 
9.53 
8.72 
Enterobacteriaceae 
bacterium strain 
FGI 57 
9.00 
7.19 
9.87 
8.68 
Mesorhizobium 
microcysteis 
9.05 
9.08 
7.83 
8.65 
Paucilactobacillus 
vaccinostercus 
8.52 
8.08 
8.83 
8.48 
Enterococcus 
devriesei 
7.54 
7.95 
9.82 
8.44 
Pseudocitrobacter 
faecalis 
8.65 
6.15 
9.00 
7.93 
Luteimonas marina 
7.52 
9.05 
6.29 
7.62 
Loigolactobacillus 
bifermentans 
7.20 
7.40 
7.79 
7.46 
Pseudomonas sp. 
S34 
7.50 
6.92 
7.14 
7.19 
Devosia marina 
6.24 
8.09 
6.71 
7.01 
Lacticaseibacillus 
absianus 
6.45 
7.42 
6.68 
6.85 
Mycolicibacterium 
tusciae 
6.61 
6.79 
7.13 
6.85 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
 
Page 80 of 105 
Appendix 5.2: Non-treated soil microbiome, N day 2 box 2 
 
Table 21: Top 20 most common bacterial species in the three soil samples from box 2 containing the non-treated 
cockroaches, sampled at day 2. The table is sorted descending on the clr mean.  
 
clr 
N day 2 box 2 R1 
clr 
N day 2 box 2 R2 
clr 
N day 2 box 2 R3 
clr mean 
Aeromicrobium 
tamlense 
10.44 
10.61 
9.66 
10.24 
Azomonas 
macrocytogenes 
9.94 
9.39 
9.43 
9.59 
Mycolicibacterium 
gilvum 
9.67 
9.98 
9.08 
9.57 
Mesorhizobium 
microcysteis 
9.58 
9.70 
8.95 
9.41 
Enterococcus 
nangangensis 
9.85 
9.48 
8.09 
9.14 
Luteimonas marina 
9.01 
9.03 
8.82 
8.96 
Pseudactinotalea 
terrae 
8.85 
8.77 
8.79 
8.80 
Gordonia 
rubripertincta 
8.89 
8.80 
8.48 
8.72 
Luteitalea pratensis 
9.02 
8.25 
8.77 
8.68 
Nocardioides luteus 
9.00 
8.31 
8.72 
8.68 
Aeromicrobium 
phoceense 
8.62 
9.04 
8.26 
8.64 
Microbacterium 
terrae 
8.57 
8.70 
8.10 
8.46 
Ensifer adhaerens 
8.61 
8.00 
8.68 
8.43 
Bradyrhizobium 
algeriense 
8.57 
7.94 
8.46 
8.32 
Cellulosimicrobium 
cellulans 
8.18 
8.54 
7.83 
8.18 
Reyranella soli 
8.47 
7.71 
8.35 
8.18 
Krasilnikoviella 
flava 
8.19 
8.33 
7.82 
8.11 
Microbacterium 
flavescens 
8.11 
8.40 
7.80 
8.10 
Microbacterium 
atlanticum 
8.08 
8.32 
7.84 
8.08 
Pseudonocardia 
ammonioxydans 
8.10 
8.42 
7.68 
8.06 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
 
Page 81 of 105 
Appendix 6: Reducing the number of features for ordination analysis 
Appendix 6.1: Bacterial species 
Only bacterial species with a clr median greater than 4 and a clr variance greater than 5.5 
were used in the ordination analysis. This reduced the number of bacterial species to 61.  
 
   A  
 
 
 
 
 
       B 
     
 
 
  
 
 
C 
 
 
Figure 32: Bacterial species feature filtering based on a clr variance and a clr median threshold. A) Clr variance 
filtering. The red line indicates the threshold used: clr variance > 5.5. B) Clr median filtering. The red line indicates 
the threshold used: clr median > 4. C) Clr variance and clr median combined filtering. The 61 resistance genes 
located in the upper, right box (black dots) were used for the ordination analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
 
Page 82 of 105 
Appendix 6.2: Resistance genes 
Only resistance genes with a clr median greater than 0 and a clr variance greater than 1 were 
used in the ordination analysis. This reduced the number of resistance genes to 20.  
    A  
 
 
 
 
 
      B 
     
 
 
  
 
 
C 
 
Figure 33: Resistance gene features filtering based on a clr variance and a clr median threshold. A) Clr variance 
filtering. The red line indicates the threshold used: clr variance > 1. B) Clr median filtering. The red line indicates 
the threshold used: clr median > 0. C) Clr variance and clr median combined filtering. The 20 resistance genes 
located in the upper, right box (black dots) were used for the ordination analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
 
Page 83 of 105 
Appendix 6.3: Resistance gene classes 
Only resistance gene classes with a clr median greater than -0.07 and a clr variance greater 
than 0.5 were used in the ordination analysis. This reduced the number of resistance gene 
classes to 11.  
 
      A   
 
 
 
 
         B 
     
 
 
  
 
 
C 
 
Figure 34: Resistance gene class features filtering based on a clr variance and a clr median threshold. A) Clr 
variance filtering. The red line indicates the threshold used: clr variance > 0.5. B) Clr median filtering. The red line 
indicates the threshold used: clr median > -0.07. C) Clr variance and clr median combined filtering. The 11 
resistance gene classes located in the upper, right box (black dots) were used for the ordination analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
 
 
Page 84 of 105 
Appendix 7: Cumulative explained variance 
The following figures show the cumulative explained variance of the first 10 principal 
components of the ordination analysis on all samples (cockroach gut and soil).  
Appendix 7.1: Bacterial genus and bacterial species 
 
A  
 
 
 
 
 
      B 
   
 
 
Figure 35: Cumulative explained variance of the first 10 principal components of the ordination analysis. A) 
Bacterial genus. B) Bacterial species.  
 
Appendix 7.2: Resistance genes and resistance gene classes 
 
  A  
 
 
 
 
 
       B 
   
          
 
 
Figure 36: Cumulative explained variance of the first 10 principal components of the ordination analysis. A) 
Resistance genes. B) Resistance gene classes. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
 
Page 85 of 105 
Appendix 8: Reducing the number of features for the heatmap clustering 
Appendix 8.1: Cockroach gut and soil bacterial genera 
For the cockroach samples, a threshold of clr variance > 3 and a clr median > 1 was used. For 
the soil samples, a threshold of clr variance > 2 and clr median > 1 was used. After filtering, 
the number of bacterial genera of the cockroach subset data was reduced to 47 genera. For 
the soil subset, the number was reduced to 43. 
 
     A   
 
 
 
 
         B  
   
     
 
Figure 37: Clr variance and clr median threshold on the bacterial genera subset data for reducing the number of 
features used for the heatmap clustering. A) Cockroach bacterial genera. B) Soil bacterial genera. 
Appendix 8.2: Cockroach gut and soil resistance genes 
For the cockroach samples, a threshold of clr variance > 0.5 and a clr median > 0 was used. 
For the soil samples, a threshold of clr variance > 0.2 and clr median > 0.1 was used. After 
filtering, the number of bacterial genera of the cockroach subset data was reduced to 27 
genera. For the soil subset, the number was reduced to 26.  
 
A  
 
 
 
 
 
      B 
   
 
Figure 38: Clr variance and clr median threshold on the resistance gene subset data for reducing the number of 
features used for the heatmap clustering. A) Cockroach resistance genes. B) Soil resistance genes. 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
 
Page 86 of 105 
Appendix 9: Clr Euclidean clustering with all features 
The heatmap part was left out, since too many features made this part meaningless.  
Appendix 9.1: Cockroach gut and soil bacterial genera 
 
Figure 39: Euclidean clustering using all bacterial genera features. The samples are coloured based on 
treatment status: N (No treatment for the first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), TN (treatment for the first 
8 days, then no treatment for the last 8 days. TN donor (treatment for the first 8 days, then no treatment for the last 
8 days however in a mixed population with NN Recipient), NN Recipient (No treatment for the 16 days, however in 
a mixed population with TN Donor the last 8 days), TT (continuous treatment for 16 days), NN+TN (soil from the 
NN+TN population). A) Cockroach bacterial genera. B) Soil bacterial genera. 
A 
 
 
 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
 
Page 87 of 105 
Appendix 9.2: Cockroach gut and soil resistance genes 
 
A 
 
 
 
B 
 
 
Figure 40: Euclidean clustering using all resistance genes features. The samples are coloured based on 
treatment status: N (No treatment for the first 8 days), T (treatment for the first 8 days), TN (treatment for the first 
8 days, then no treatment for the last 8 days. TN donor (treatment for the first 8 days, then no treatment for the last 
8 days however in a mixed population with NN Recipient), NN Recipient (No treatment for the 16 days, however in 
a mixed population with TN Donor the last 8 days), TT (continuous treatment for 16 days), NN+TN (soil from the 
NN+TN population). A) Cockroach resistance genes. B) Soil resistance genes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
 
 
Page 88 of 105 
Appendix 10: Compositional changes of the cockroach gut microbiome 
Appendix 10.1: Non-treated day 1 vs non-treated and treated day 8 
 
N day 1 vs N day 8: 
 
Table 22: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 2 day 8 population in comparison to N box 2 day 
1. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 
N box 2 day 8 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Blattabacterium 
-1.73 
7.07 
8.80 
N box 2 day 8 
Pararhodobacter 
-0.65 
3.63 
4.28 
N box 2 day 8 
Enterobacillus 
-2.08 
1.84 
3.92 
N box 2 day 8 
Citrobacter 
4.07 
7.75 
3.68 
N box 2 day 8 
Luteitalea 
-2.08 
1.59 
3.67 
N box 2 day 8 
Cytobacillus 
0.28 
3.67 
3.39 
N box 2 day 8 
Corynebacterium 
-2.08 
1.24 
3.32 
N box 2 day 8 
Chitinophaga 
2.54 
5.65 
3.11 
N box 2 day 8 
Vogesella 
-1.73 
0.81 
2.54 
N box 2 day 8 
Nesterenkonia 
-2.09 
0.44 
2.53 
N box 2 day 8 
 
Table 23: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 2 day 1 population in comparison to the N box 2 
day 8. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 
N box 2 day 8 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Ereboglobus 
8.76 
-0.85 
9.61 
N box 2 day 1 
Serratia 
8.46 
-0.83 
9.30 
N box 2 day 1 
Lactococcus 
8.43 
0.35 
8.08 
N box 2 day 1 
Stenotrophomonas 
7.20 
-0.83 
8.02 
N box 2 day 1 
Bacillus 
8.70 
1.39 
7.31 
N box 2 day 1 
Luteimonas 
7.38 
0.20 
7.19 
N box 2 day 1 
Priestia 
6.08 
-0.83 
6.92 
N box 2 day 1 
Buttiauxella 
5.69 
-0.85 
6.54 
N box 2 day 1 
Pseudomonas 
8.25 
1.96 
6.28 
N box 2 day 1 
Pseudactinotalea 
5.17 
-0.85 
6.02 
N box 2 day 1 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
 
Page 89 of 105 
N day 1 vs T day 8: 
 
Table 24: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the T box 1 day 8 population in comparison to the N box 2 
day 1. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 
T box 1 day 8 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Blattabacterium 
-1.68 
6.93 
8.62 
T box 1 day 8 
Riemerella 
-2.03 
3.76 
5.79 
T box 1 day 8 
Cupriavidus 
-1.15 
3.46 
4.61 
T box 1 day 8 
Solibacillus 
2.44 
6.72 
4.28 
T box 1 day 8 
Cecembia 
0.34 
4.59 
4.25 
T box 1 day 8 
Paeniglutamicibacter 
-2.05 
1.89 
3.94 
T box 1 day 8 
Nocardioides 
2.28 
6.13 
3.85 
T box 1 day 8 
Luteitalea 
-2.05 
1.71 
3.76 
T box 1 day 8 
Isoptericola 
0.27 
3.95 
3.68 
T box 1 day 8 
Puerhibacterium 
-1.31 
1.86 
3.16 
T box 1 day 8 
 
 
Table 25: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 2 day 1 population in comparison to the T box 1 
day 8. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 
T box 2 day 8 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Pseudocitrobacter 
9.37 
-0.94 
10.32 
N box 2 day 1 
Ereboglobus 
8.80 
-0.92 
9.72 
N box 2 day 1 
Stenotrophomonas 
7.23 
0.29 
6.94 
N box 2 day 1 
Bacillus 
8.73 
1.88 
6.86 
N box 2 day 1 
Buttiauxella 
5.73 
-0.92 
6.65 
N box 2 day 1 
Priestia 
6.12 
0.24 
5.88 
N box 2 day 1 
Macellibacteroides 
4.73 
-0.94 
5.66 
N box 2 day 1 
Porphyromonas 
4.95 
-0.56 
5.51 
N box 2 day 1 
Desulfovibrio 
6.54 
1.29 
5.25 
N box 2 day 1 
Klebsiella 
6.78 
1.59 
5.19 
N box 2 day 1 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
 
 
 
Page 90 of 105 
Appendix 10.2: Non-treated day 8 vs all day 15 samples 
 
N day 8 vs TN box A day 15: 
 
Table 26: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the TN box A day 15 population compared to N box 2 day 
8. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 8 clr 
mean 
TN box A day 15 clr 
mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Lactococcus 
0.02 
12.89 
12.87 
TN box A day 15 
Serratia 
-1.16 
10.97 
12.13 
TN box A day 15 
Pediococcus 
-0.62 
7.14 
7.76 
TN box A day 15 
Dysgonomonas 
3.23 
8.97 
5.74 
TN box A day 15 
Porphyromonas 
0.79 
6.50 
5.71 
TN box A day 15 
Clostridioides 
-1.16 
3.76 
4.92 
TN box A day 15 
Candidatus 
Nanogingivalis 
0.48 
5.33 
4.85 
TN box A day 15 
Entomomonas 
-1.17 
3.52 
4.68 
TN box A day 15 
Acetatifactor 
-1.17 
3.50 
4.67 
TN box A day 15 
Lacrimispora 
0.58 
4.91 
4.33 
TN box A day 15 
 
 
Table 27: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 2 day 8 population compared to TN box A day 
15 
Genera 
N box 2 day 8 clr 
mean 
TN box A day 15 clr 
mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Blattabacterium 
6.75 
-1.26 
8.01 
N box 2 day 8 
Pseudocitrobacter 
8.57 
1.73 
6.84 
N box 2 day 8 
Mycolicibacter 
5.18 
0.40 
4.78 
N box 2 day 8 
Lacticaseibacillus 
8.50 
3.83 
4.67 
N box 2 day 8 
Desulfobotulus 
3.26 
-1.27 
4.54 
N box 2 day 8 
Cytobacillus 
3.34 
-0.89 
4.23 
N box 2 day 8 
Nocardiopsis 
5.26 
1.10 
4.16 
N box 2 day 8 
Geomicrobium 
7.46 
3.34 
 
N box 2 day 8 
Pectobacterium 
3.38 
-0.41 
3.79 
N box 2 day 8 
Aminivibrio 
2.43 
-1.27 
3.71 
N box 2 day 8 
. 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
 
Page 91 of 105 
N day 8 vs TN Donor box B day 15: 
 
Table 28: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the TN Donor box B day 15 population in comparison to 
the N box 2 day 8. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 8 
clr mean 
TN Donor box B 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Lactococcus 
-0.06 
11.08 
11.14 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Serratia 
-1.24 
8.35 
9.59 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Pediococcus 
-0.72 
6.19 
6.91 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Secundilactobacillus 
3.75 
9.20 
5.45 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Porphyromonas 
0.70 
5.63 
4.93 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Entomomonas 
-1.26 
3.15 
4.42 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Dysgonomonas 
3.14 
7.34 
4.21 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Solibacillus 
2.38 
5.86 
3.47 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Anaeromassilibacillus 
-1.26 
2.20 
3.46 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Acetatifactor 
-1.26 
2.07 
3.33 
TN Donor box B day 15 
 
 
Table 29: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 2 day 8 population in comparison to the TN 
Donor box B day 15. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 8 clr 
mean 
TN Donor box B 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Pseudocitrobacter 
8.48 
2.21 
6.27 
N box 2 day 8 
Geomicrobium 
7.36 
1.96 
5.40 
N box 2 day 8 
Gordonia 
7.63 
2.99 
4.64 
N box 2 day 8 
Candidatus 
Nanosyncoccus 
4.19 
-0.44 
4.63 
N box 2 day 8 
Blattabacterium 
6.66 
2.23 
4.43 
N box 2 day 8 
Nocardiopsis 
5.17 
0.77 
4.40 
N box 2 day 8 
Pectobacterium 
3.28 
-1.10 
4.38 
N box 2 day 8 
Desulfobotulus 
3.17 
-1.10 
4.26 
N box 2 day 8 
Mycolicibacter 
5.09 
1.00 
4.09 
N box 2 day 8 
Cytobacillus 
3.25 
-0.73 
3.99 
N box 2 day 8 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
 
 
 
Page 92 of 105 
N day 8 vs NN Recipient box B day 15: 
 
Table 30: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the NN Recipient box B day 15 population in comparison 
to the N box 2 day 8. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 
8 clr mean 
NN Recipient box 
B day 15 clr mean 
Distance 
between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Lactococcus 
0.23 
12.53 
12.30 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Serratia 
-0.94 
6.71 
7.65 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Pediococcus 
-0.41 
6.90 
7.31 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Luteimonas 
0.08 
6.11 
6.03 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Secundilactobacillus 
4.05 
8.66 
4.61 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Porphyromonas 
1.00 
5.56 
4.55 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Gluconobacter 
-0.60 
3.61 
4.20 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Pseudactinotalea 
-0.95 
2.98 
3.92 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Pseudonocardia 
0.94 
4.82 
3.88 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
Aeromicrobium 
3.31 
6.99 
3.67 
NN Recipient box B day 15 
 
 
Table 31: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 2 day 8 population in comparison to the NN 
Recipient box B day 15. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 8 clr 
mean 
NN Recipient box B 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Blattabacterium 
6.96 
-1.66 
8.62 
N box 2 day 8 
Citrobacter 
7.64 
0.69 
6.95 
N box 2 day 8 
Enterobacillus 
1.74 
-1.64 
3.39 
N box 2 day 8 
Nocardiopsis 
5.47 
2.12 
3.35 
N box 2 day 8 
Luteitalea 
1.50 
-1.65 
3.14 
N box 2 day 8 
Pectobacterium 
3.58 
0.51 
3.07 
N box 2 day 8 
Mycolicibacter 
5.39 
2.47 
2.92 
N box 2 day 8 
Candidatus 
Nanosyncoccus 
4.49 
1.67 
2.82 
N box 2 day 8 
Mycobacteroides 
1.11 
-1.64 
2.76 
N box 2 day 8 
Blastopirellula 
2.65 
0.11 
2.54 
N box 2 day 8 
 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
 
Page 93 of 105 
N day 8 vs TT box C day 15: 
 
Table 32: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the treated population, TT box C day 15 compared to the 
non-treated N box 2 day 8. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 8 clr 
mean 
TT box C day 15 clr 
mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Serratia 
-0.92 
13.65 
14.56 
TT box C day 15 
Lactococcus 
0.26 
13.48 
13.22 
TT box C day 15 
Clostridioides 
-0.91 
7.63 
8.54 
TT box C day 15 
Luteimonas 
0.12 
7.28 
7.16 
TT box C day 15 
Porphyromonas 
1.03 
7.87 
6.84 
TT box C day 15 
Pseudonocardia 
0.98 
6.79 
5.81 
TT box C day 15 
Peribacillus 
0.26 
6.07 
5.81 
TT box C day 15 
Dysgonomonas 
3.47 
9.12 
5.64 
TT box C day 15 
Nakamurella 
0.35 
5.78 
5.44 
TT box C day 15 
Corallococcus 
0.70 
6.13 
5.43 
TT box C day 15 
 
 
Table 33: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the non-treated population, N day 8 compared to the treated 
population, TT day 15. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 8 clr 
mean 
TT box C day 15 clr 
mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Pseudocitrobacter 
8.81 
-1.41 
10.22 
N box 2 day 8 
Citrobacter 
7.67 
-1.79 
9.46 
N box 2 day 8 
Blattabacterium 
6.99 
-1.78 
8.77 
N box 2 day 8 
Pectobacterium 
3.61 
-1.77 
5.38 
N box 2 day 8 
Desulfobotulus 
3.50 
-1.79 
5.29 
N box 2 day 8 
Enterobacter 
3.23 
-1.77 
5.00 
N box 2 day 8 
Aminivibrio 
2.67 
-1.78 
4.45 
N box 2 day 8 
Synergistes 
2.20 
-1.78 
3.98 
N box 2 day 8 
Escherichia 
2.20 
-1.77 
3.97 
N box 2 day 8 
Blastopirellula 
2.69 
-1.11 
3.80 
N box 2 day 8 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
 
Page 94 of 105 
N day 8 vs NN Recipient box D day 15: 
 
Table 34: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the NN Recipient box D day 15 population in comparison 
to the N box 2 day 8. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 8 
NN Recipient box D 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Lactococcus 
0.09 
11.87 
11.78 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Serratia 
-1.06 
10.32 
11.38 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Pediococcus 
-0.55 
6.08 
6.63 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Secundilactobacillus 
3.92 
9.65 
5.73 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Luteimonas 
-0.03 
5.31 
5.35 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Fournierella 
-1.09 
2.42 
3.51 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Porphyromonas 
0.86 
4.35 
3.48 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Anaeromassilibacillus 
-1.09 
2.16 
3.25 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Brevundimonas 
-1.08 
1.86 
2.93 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Aeromicrobium 
3.18 
6.02 
2.84 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
 
Table 35: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 2 day 8 population in comparison to the NN 
Recipient box D day 15. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 8 
NN Recipient box D 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Pseudocitrobacter 
8.65 
2.66 
5.98 
N box 2 day 8 
Geomicrobium 
7.53 
1.68 
5.85 
N box 2 day 8 
Citrobacter 
7.51 
2.41 
5.10 
N box 2 day 8 
Cytobacillus 
3.44 
-0.78 
4.22 
N box 2 day 8 
Mycolicibacter 
5.26 
1.50 
3.75 
N box 2 day 8 
Nocardiopsis 
5.33 
1.64 
3.70 
N box 2 day 8 
Rickettsiella 
4.66 
1.21 
3.46 
N box 2 day 8 
Candidatus 
Nanosyncoccus 
4.36 
1.36 
3.00 
N box 2 day 8 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
 
Page 95 of 105 
Mycobacterium 
7.21 
4.27 
2.94 
N box 2 day 8 
Enterobacillus 
1.60 
-1.31 
2.91 
N box 2 day 8 
Appendix 10.3: Treated day 8 vs all day 15 samples 
 
T day 8 vs TN box A day 15: 
 
Table 36: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant the TN box A day 15 population in comparison to T day 8 
population. 
Genera 
T box 1 day 8 clr 
mean 
TN box A day 15 clr 
mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Pediococcus 
-0.97 
7.11 
8.08 
TN box A day 15 
Porphyromonas 
-0.96 
6.47 
7.43 
TN box A day 15 
Candidatus 
Nanogingivalis 
-1.34 
5.30 
6.64 
TN box A day 15 
Dysgonomonas 
2.58 
8.94 
6.36 
TN box A day 15 
Saezia 
-1.35 
3.95 
5.29 
TN box A day 15 
Parabacteroides 
-0.70 
4.57 
5.27 
TN box A day 15 
Clostridioides 
-1.35 
3.72 
5.08 
TN box A day 15 
Entomomonas 
-1.35 
3.49 
4.84 
TN box A day 15 
Acetatifactor 
-1.34 
3.47 
4.81 
TN box A day 15 
Citrobacter 
1.92 
6.66 
4.74 
TN box A day 15 
 
Table 37: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the treated population, T day 8 compared to TN day 15. 
Genera 
T box 1 day 8 clr 
mean 
TN box A day 15 clr 
mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Blattabacterium 
6.52 
-1.28 
7.80 
T box 1 day 8 
Cellulosimicrobium 
4.70 
0.04 
4.66 
T box 1 day 8 
Nakamurella 
3.58 
-0.56 
4.15 
T box 1 day 8 
Pseudomonas 
4.28 
0.29 
3.99 
T box 1 day 8 
Ensifer 
7.48 
3.53 
3.95 
T box 1 day 8 
Actinotalea 
4.25 
0.36 
3.90 
T box 1 day 8 
Cupriavidus 
3.05 
-0.59 
3.64 
T box 1 day 8 
Mesorhizobium 
8.15 
4.62 
3.52 
T box 1 day 8 
Isoptericola 
3.54 
0.04 
3.50 
T box 1 day 8 
Nocardiopsis 
4.56 
1.07 
3.49 
T box 1 day 8 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
 
Page 96 of 105 
T day 8 vs TN Donor box B day 15: 
 
Table 38: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the TN Donor box B day 15 in comparison to the T box 1 
day 8. 
Genera 
T box 1 day 
8 clr mean 
TN Donor box B 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Pediococcus 
-1.06 
6.18 
7.23 
TN Donor box B day 15 
Porphyromonas 
-1.06 
5.62 
6.68 
TN Donor  box B day 15 
Lactiplantibacillus 
-1.44 
4.55 
5.99 
TN Donor  box B day 15 
Secundilactobacillus 
3.27 
9.19 
5.92 
TN Donor  box B day 15 
Loigolactobacillus 
5.90 
11.40 
5.50 
TN Donor  box B day 15 
Saezia 
-1.45 
3.63 
5.08 
TN Donor  box B day 15 
Dysgonomonas 
2.50 
7.33 
4.83 
TN Donor  box B day 15 
Candidatus 
Nanogingivalis 
-1.42 
3.27 
4.69 
TN Donor  box B day 15 
Entomomonas 
-1.43 
3.14 
4.57 
TN Donor  box B day 15 
Paucilactobacillus 
6.48 
10.80 
4.31 
TN Donor  box B day 15 
 
Table 39: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 2 day 8 population in comparison to the TN 
Donor box B day 15. 
Genera 
T box 1 day 8 clr 
mean 
TN Donor box B 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Ensifer 
7.39 
1.30 
6.09 
T box 1 day 8 
Cellulosimicrobium 
4.61 
-0.74 
5.35 
T box 1 day 8 
Actinotalea 
4.16 
-1.10 
5.26 
T box 1 day 8 
Pseudactinotalea 
3.63 
-1.09 
4.72 
T box 1 day 8 
Microbacterium 
7.18 
2.47 
4.71 
T box 1 day 8 
Krasilnikoviella 
6.97 
2.29 
4.68 
T box 1 day 8 
Isoptericola 
3.46 
-1.09 
4.55 
T box 1 day 8 
Pseudomonas 
4.19 
-0.19 
4.38 
T box 1 day 8 
Riemerella 
3.28 
-1.09 
4.36 
T box 1 day 8 
Gordonia 
7.20 
2.98 
4.22 
T box 1 day 8 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
 
Page 97 of 105 
T day 8 vs NN Recipient box B day 15: 
 
Table 40: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the NN Recipient box B day 15 in comparison to the T box 
1 day 8. 
Genera 
T box 1 day 8 clr 
mean 
NN Recipient box B 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Pseudocitrobacter 
-1.05 
7.17 
8.22 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Pediococcus 
-0.66 
6.95 
7.62 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Porphyromonas 
-0.69 
5.62 
6.31 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Lactiplantibacillus 
-1.04 
4.69 
5.73 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Saezia 
-1.04 
4.25 
5.29 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Pantoea 
-1.02 
4.21 
5.23 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Loigolactobacillus 
6.29 
11.44 
5.15 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Secundilactobacillus 
3.66 
8.72 
5.06 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Gluconobacter 
-1.03 
3.67 
4.70 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Cytobacillus 
-1.02 
3.35 
4.37 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
 
Table 41: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 2 day 8 in comparison to NN Recipient box B 
day 15. 
Genera 
T box 1 day 8 
clr mean 
NN Recipient box B 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Blattabacterium 
6.83 
-1.59 
8.42 
T box 1 day 8 
Riemerella 
3.66 
-1.61 
5.28 
T box 1 day 8 
Actinotalea 
4.56 
-0.37 
4.93 
T box 1 day 8 
Isoptericola 
3.85 
-0.02 
3.86 
T box 1 day 8 
Ensifer 
7.79 
4.05 
3.74 
T box 1 day 8 
Desertihabitans 
2.09 
-1.23 
3.32 
T box 1 day 8 
Luteitalea 
1.61 
-1.62 
3.23 
T box 1 day 8 
Paeniglutamicibacter 
1.79 
-1.24 
3.02 
T box 1 day 8 
Puerhibacterium 
1.75 
-1.08 
2.83 
T box 1 day 8 
==PAGE:98==
 
 
 
Page 98 of 105 
Desertimonas 
3.48 
0.65 
2.83 
T box 1 day 8 
 
 
T day 8 vs TT box C day 15: 
 
Table 42: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the treated population, TT day 15 in comparison to the 
treated population, T day 8. 
Genera 
T box 1 day 8 clr 
mean 
TT box C day 15 clr 
mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Clostridioides 
-1.11 
7.53 
8.64 
TT box C day 15 
Porphyromonas 
-0.73 
7.77 
8.50 
TT box C day 15 
Cytobacillus 
-1.09 
5.18 
6.27 
TT box C day 15 
Dysgonomonas 
2.83 
9.02 
6.18 
TT box C day 15 
Peribacillus 
0.04 
5.97 
5.92 
TT box C day 15 
Thermaerobacter 
-1.12 
4.65 
5.76 
TT box C day 15 
Saezia 
-1.11 
4.65 
5.76 
TT box C day 15 
Parabacteroides 
-0.43 
5.01 
5.44 
TT box C day 15 
Phocaeicola 
-1.10 
3.92 
5.02 
TT box C day 15 
Klebsiella 
1.42 
6.23 
4.81 
TT box C day 15 
Serratia 
8.82 
13.55 
4.73 
TT box C day 15 
 
Table 43: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the treated population, T day 8 in comparison to the 
treated population, TT day 15. 
Genera 
T box 1 day 8 clr 
mean 
TT box C day 15 clr 
mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Blattabacterium 
6.77 
-1.86 
8.63 
T box 1 day 8 
Citrobacter 
2.19 
-1.89 
4.09 
T box 1 day 8 
Desertihabitans 
2.03 
-1.53 
3.56 
T box 1 day 8 
Riemerella 
3.61 
0.24 
3.36 
T box 1 day 8 
Acidisoma 
0.78 
-1.87 
2.65 
T box 1 day 8 
Archangium 
0.73 
-1.88 
2.61 
T box 1 day 8 
Blastopirellula 
1.20 
-1.22 
2.42 
T box 1 day 8 
Pseudomonas 
4.53 
2.16 
2.37 
T box 1 day 8 
Tissierella 
1.18 
-1.15 
2.32 
T box 1 day 8 
Propylenella 
0.82 
-1.34 
2.16 
T box 1 day 8 
 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
 
Page 99 of 105 
T day 8 vs NN Recipient box D day 15: 
 
Table 44: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the NN Recipient box D day 15 in comparison to T box 1 
day 8. 
Genera 
T box 1 day 8 
NN Recipient box 
D day 15 clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Pediococcus 
-0.81 
6.13 
6.94 
NN Recipient box 
D day 15 
Secundilactobacillus 
3.52 
9.70 
6.18 
NN Recipient box 
D day 15 
Lactiplantibacillus 
-1.19 
4.39 
5.58 
NN Recipient box 
D day 15 
Porphyromonas 
-0.80 
4.40 
5.19 
NN Recipient box 
D day 15 
Loigolactobacillus 
6.15 
11.06 
4.91 
NN Recipient box 
D day 15 
Enterobacter 
-1.18 
2.73 
3.90 
NN Recipient box 
D day 15 
Pseudocitrobacter 
-1.16 
2.71 
3.87 
NN Recipient box 
D day 15 
Fournierella 
-1.19 
2.47 
3.66 
NN Recipient box 
D day 15 
Lacticaseibacillus 
6.48 
9.94 
3.46 
NN Recipient box 
D day 15 
Anaeromassilibacillus 
-1.18 
2.20 
3.37 
NN Recipient box 
D day 15 
 
Table 45: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in T box 1 day 8 population in comparison to NN Recipient 
box D day 15. 
Genera 
T box 1 day 8 
NN Recipient box D 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Krasilnikoviella 
7.22 
1.98 
5.24 
T box 1 day 8 
Riemerella 
3.51 
-1.25 
4.76 
T box 1 day 8 
Actinotalea 
4.42 
-0.00 
4.42 
T box 1 day 8 
Cellulosimicrobium 
4.86 
0.50 
4.37 
T box 1 day 8 
Geomicrobium 
6.08 
1.73 
4.35 
T box 1 day 8 
Isoptericola 
3.70 
-0.52 
4.22 
T box 1 day 8 
Erythrobacter 
4.89 
0.74 
4.15 
T box 1 day 8 
Nakamurella 
3.77 
-0.35 
4.12 
T box 1 day 8 
==PAGE:100==
 
 
 
Page 100 of 105 
Azomonas 
7.45 
3.76 
3.70 
T box 1 day 8 
Sphingobacterium 
3.20 
-0.47 
3.66 
T box 1 day 8 
 
Appendix 10.4: Non-treated day 1 vs all day 15 samples 
 
N day 1 vs TN box A day 15: 
 
Table 46: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the TN box A day 15 population in comparison to the N box 
2 day 1. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 
clr mean 
TN box A day 15 clr 
mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Pediococcus 
-1.69 
7.49 
9.18 
TN box A day 15 
Clostridioides 
-2.06 
4.11 
6.17 
TN box A day 15 
Entomomonas 
-2.07 
3.88 
5.95 
TN box A day 15 
Acetatifactor 
-2.07 
3.85 
5.92 
TN box A day 15 
Anaeromassilibacillus 
-2.06 
3.10 
5.16 
TN box A day 15 
Candidatus 
Nanogingivalis 
0.87 
5.68 
4.81 
TN box A day 15 
Lactococcus 
8.44 
13.24 
4.80 
TN box A day 15 
Secundilactobacillus 
3.65 
7.71 
4.06 
TN box A day 15 
Riemerella 
-2.05 
1.94 
3.99 
TN box A day 15 
Lacrimispora 
1.54 
5.26 
3.72 
TN box A day 15 
 
Table 47: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 1 day 1 population in comparison to the TN box 
A day 15. 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 clr 
mean 
TN box A day 15 clr 
mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Ereboglobus 
8.78 
-0.92 
9.70 
N box 2 day 1 
Stenotrophomonas 
7.21 
-0.56 
7.77 
N box 2 day 1 
Pseudomonas 
8.26 
0.69 
7.58 
N box 2 day 1 
Pseudocitrobacter 
9.35 
2.09 
7.26 
N box 2 day 1 
Bacillus 
8.71 
1.98 
6.73 
N box 2 day 1 
Buttiauxella 
5.71 
-0.92 
6.63 
N box 2 day 1 
Nakamurella 
5.94 
-0.19 
6.13 
N box 2 day 1 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
 
Page 101 of 105 
Ensifer 
9.96 
3.92 
6.04 
N box 2 day 1 
Sinirhodobacter 
5.13 
-0.12 
5.25 
N box 2 day 1 
Desulfobotulus 
4.17 
-0.91 
5.08 
N box 2 day 1 
 
 
N day 1 vs TN Donor box B day 15: 
 
Table 48: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant the TN Donor box B day 15 population in comparison to the N 
box 2 day 1. 
 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 clr 
mean 
TN Donor box B day 
15 clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Pediococcus 
-1.75 
6.54 
8.28 
TN Donor box 
B day 15 
Secundilactobacillus 
3.60 
9.55 
5.95 
TN Donor box 
B day 15 
Entomomonas 
-2.14 
3.50 
5.65 
TN Donor box 
B day 15 
Anaeromassilibacillus 
-2.11 
2.53 
4.64 
TN Donor box 
B day 15 
Loigolactobacillus 
7.15 
11.76 
4.61 
TN Donor box 
B day 15 
Acetatifactor 
-2.11 
2.42 
4.53 
TN Donor box 
B day 15 
Blattabacterium 
-1.74 
2.59 
4.34 
TN Donor box 
B day 15 
Pararhodobacter 
-0.67 
3.45 
4.12 
TN Donor box 
B day 15 
Cecembia 
0.28 
4.14 
3.86 
TN Donor box 
B day 15 
Furfurilactobacillus 
-2.13 
1.72 
3.85 
TN Donor box 
B day 15 
 
Table 49: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 1 day 1 population in comparison to the TN Donor 
box B day 15. 
 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 clr 
mean 
TN Donor box B day 
15 clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Ereboglobus 
8.74 
-0.74 
9.48 
N box 2 day 1 
Bacillus 
8.67 
0.26 
8.41 
N box 2 day 1 
Ensifer 
9.92 
1.65 
8.26 
N box 2 day 1 
==PAGE:102==
 
 
 
Page 102 of 105 
Pseudomonas 
8.22 
0.17 
8.06 
N box 2 day 1 
Stenotrophomonas 
7.17 
-0.73 
7.90 
N box 2 day 1 
Pseudocitrobacter 
9.31 
2.55 
6.77 
N box 2 day 1 
Pseudactinotalea 
5.15 
-0.74 
5.89 
N box 2 day 1 
Priestia 
6.06 
0.44 
5.62 
N box 2 day 1 
Sinirhodobacter 
5.09 
0.07 
5.03 
N box 2 day 1 
Microbacterium 
7.83 
2.83 
5.00 
N box 2 day 1 
 
 
N day 1 vs NN Recipient box B day 15: 
 
Table 50: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the NN Recipient box B day 15 population in comparison 
to the N box 2 day 1. 
 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 clr 
mean 
NN Recipient box B 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Pediococcus 
-1.57 
7.19 
8.77 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Secundilactobacillus 
3.78 
8.96 
5.18 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Loigolactobacillus 
7.32 
11.68 
4.36 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Lactococcus 
8.58 
12.83 
4.25 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Anaeromassilibacillus 
-1.93 
2.13 
4.06 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Catellatospora 
0.06 
4.01 
3.95 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Acetatifactor 
-1.93 
1.57 
3.50 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Furfurilactobacillus 
-1.94 
1.55 
3.49 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Nocardioides 
2.40 
5.70 
3.31 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
Lactiplantibacillus 
1.69 
4.93 
3.23 
NN Recipient 
box B day 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
 
Page 103 of 105 
Table 51: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 1 day 1 population in comparison to the NN 
Recipient box B day 15. 
 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 clr 
mean 
NN Recipient box B 
day 15 clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Ereboglobus 
8.91 
-1.37 
10.28 
N box 2 day 1 
Stenotrophomonas 
7.35 
0.08 
7.27 
N box 2 day 1 
Bacillus 
8.85 
2.40 
6.45 
N box 2 day 1 
Ensifer 
10.09 
4.27 
5.82 
N box 2 day 1 
Priestia 
6.23 
0.68 
5.56 
N box 2 day 1 
Buttiauxella 
5.84 
0.57 
5.28 
N box 2 day 1 
Glaciibacter 
4.31 
-0.36 
4.67 
N box 2 day 1 
Scandinavium 
3.21 
-1.36 
4.58 
N box 2 day 1 
Pseudomonas 
8.40 
3.86 
4.54 
N box 2 day 1 
Photobacterium 
3.97 
0.22 
3.75 
N box 2 day 1 
 
 
N day 1 vs TT box C day 15: 
 
Table 52: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the TT box C day 15 population in comparison to the N 
box 2 day 1. 
 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 
TT box C day 15 
clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Clostridioides 
-1.85 
7.95 
9.80 
TT box C day 15 
Luteitalea 
-1.86 
6.30 
8.16 
TT box C day 15 
Anaeromassilibacillus 
-1.89 
3.82 
5.71 
TT box C day 15 
Acetatifactor 
-1.85 
3.53 
5.38 
TT box C day 15 
Serratia 
8.69 
13.97 
5.28 
TT box C day 15 
Catellatospora 
0.13 
5.39 
5.25 
TT box C day 15 
Lactococcus 
8.65 
13.80 
5.15 
TT box C day 15 
Cytobacillus 
0.51 
5.60 
5.09 
TT box C day 15 
Nocardioides 
2.46 
7.15 
4.69 
TT box C day 15 
Thermaerobacter 
0.40 
5.07 
4.67 
TT box C day 15 
Cutibacterium 
-1.87 
2.65 
4.52 
TT box C day 15 
Pilibacter 
-1.86 
2.47 
4.33 
TT box C day 15 
==PAGE:104==
 
 
 
Page 104 of 105 
Table 53: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 1 day 1 population in comparison to the NN 
Recipient box B day 15. 
 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 
TT box C day 15 clr 
mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Pseudocitrobacter 
9.56 
-1.10 
10.66 
N box 2 day 1 
Ereboglobus 
8.98 
-1.44 
10.42 
N box 2 day 1 
Buttiauxella 
5.91 
-1.10 
7.01 
N box 2 day 1 
Stenotrophomonas 
7.42 
0.93 
6.48 
N box 2 day 1 
Pseudomonas 
8.47 
2.58 
5.89 
N box 2 day 1 
Desulfobotulus 
4.37 
-1.47 
5.85 
N box 2 day 1 
Citrobacter 
4.27 
-1.44 
5.72 
N box 2 day 1 
Escherichia 
3.87 
-1.46 
5.32 
N box 2 day 1 
Enterobacter 
3.87 
-1.45 
5.32 
N box 2 day 1 
Desulfonatronovibrio 
3.77 
-1.44 
5.22 
N box 2 day 1 
 
N day 1 vs NN Recipient box D day 15: 
 
Table 54: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the NN Recipient box D day 15 population in comparison to 
the N box 2 day 1. 
 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 
TT box C day 15 clr 
mean 
Distance between 
groups 
Abundant in 
Pediococcus 
-1.65 
6.40 
8.05 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Blattabacterium 
-1.68 
6.03 
7.70 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Secundilactobacillus 
3.69 
9.97 
6.28 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Nocardioides 
2.31 
6.90 
4.58 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Anaeromassilibacillus 
-2.03 
2.48 
4.50 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Loigolactobacillus 
7.24 
11.34 
4.10 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Lactococcus 
8.49 
12.19 
3.70 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Catellatospora 
-0.02 
3.25 
3.28 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
Lactiplantibacillus 
1.61 
4.66 
3.05 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
==PAGE:105==
 
 
 
Page 105 of 105 
Cecembia 
0.37 
3.34 
2.97 
NN Recipient 
box D day 15 
 
Table 55: Top 10 driving bacterial genera abundant in the N box 1 day 1 population in comparison to the NN 
Recipient box B day 15. 
 
Genera 
N box 2 day 1 
NN Recipient box D 
clr mean 
Distance 
between groups 
Abundant in 
Bacillus 
8.76 
0.45 
8.31 
N box 2 day 1 
Ereboglobus 
8.83 
1.75 
7.07 
N box 2 day 1 
Buttiauxella 
5.76 
-0.99 
6.75 
N box 2 day 1 
Pseudocitrobacter 
9.40 
2.99 
6.42 
N box 2 day 1 
Priestia 
6.15 
-0.24 
6.40 
N box 2 day 1 
Nakamurella 
5.99 
-0.09 
6.07 
N box 2 day 1 
Azomonas 
9.78 
4.03 
5.75 
N box 2 day 1 
Pseudomonas 
8.31 
2.92 
5.39 
N box 2 day 1 
Stenotrophomonas 
7.26 
2.01 
5.26 
N box 2 day 1 
Sinirhodobacter 
5.18 
-0.07 
5.25 
N box 2 day 1 
 
 
