==PAGE:1==
Invisible Deception
Redesigning Honeytokens to Combat Finger­
printing
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Invisible Deception
Redesigning Honeytokens to Combat Fingerprinting
Master Thesis
March, 2023
By
Akos Pilis
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Akos Pilis ­ s210523
Signature
Date
ii
Invisible Deception
19 - 03 - 2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis consists of studying existing deception techniques together with the known fin­
gerprinting techniques used to identify them. The knowledge gathered from this research
is used to design and implement a stealthy and authentic looking PDF­based honeytoken.
Even though deception technologies are powerful tools they are not without weaknesses,
the research shows that there are specific artifacts within these entities that can be used by
adversaries to distinguish them from real resources. This is also known as fingerprinting.
For PDFs and other file­based honeytokens these artifacts include file size, metadata
and a fixed length ID. In this design, these values are modified whenever a new PDF is
generated, and further obfuscation techniques are used to make analysis of these files
harder for adversaries. A text generation model is also used to customize the contents of
the files, making them appear authentic when opened.
Evaluation of this new honeytoken was done by comparing it with an open­source PDF­
based honeytoken, showing that it is clearly an improvement. An automated passive
fingerprinting tool was used to try to identify this file as a honeytoken which failed. Lastly,
a survey was conducted to assess the authenticity and stealthiness of this honeytoken.
Most participants of the survey felt that the file was genuine, but one of the main issues
that is apparent for any file­based honeytoken became clear. They are very dependent
on the application that is in interaction with them.
The goal is to create a stealthy and authentic honeytoken that counters fingerprinting. It
is shown that there is no publicly available automatic fingerprinting tool that can detect
our file. It is possible to detect the alert mechanism hidden inside the file, but to do so,
many PDF analysis tools must be used together with a password cracking tool. Having
several PDF files in a target system makes it, so it is time­consuming for adversaries to
scan each of them, resulting in wasting their resources.
Invisible Deception
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis for the guidance during
the period of the thesis.
iv
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
2
2
Related Work
4
2.1
Honeypots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Honeytokens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Moving Target Defense
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Fingerprinting
9
3.1
Honeypot fingerprinting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Honeytoken fingerprinting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Choosing a honeytoken type
13
5
Designing a stealthy token
14
5.1
Honeytoken conceptual design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.2
PDF Honeytoken . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.3
PDF file format and features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.4
Text Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.5
Server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
6
Implementation
21
6.1
PDF template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6.2
Generation of new PDF files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.3
Server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.4
Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7
Evaluation
29
7.1
Comparison with Canary PDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
7.2
PDF analysis tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7.3
Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
8
Conclusion
33
Bibliography
35
A Web application
41
B Survey
42
C PDF honeytoken visual representation
45
Invisible Deception
1
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Deception has been a very successful tactic that was mainly used in military operations in
the past. One of the most recent examples was in WW2 [1], where the allied forces used
a combination of different methods in order to mislead the Germans about the location of
their upcoming invasion of Normandy. These methods included having phantom armies
placed at different locations, which were indistinguishable from real ones when viewed by
radars or from passing by planes.
Cyber deception is an emerging field of cybersecurity that has become increasingly im­
portant in today’s digital age. With the rapid growth of the digital world, securing sensitive
information and data has become a top priority for organizations and individuals alike. In
response to the growing threat of cyberattacks, deception technologies have emerged as
a powerful defense mechanism to protect against these attacks [2]. These technologies
use various strategies to deceive hackers by creating a false environment, which leads
them to waste resources attempting to breach fake targets while the actual system re­
mains protected. As a result, the use of deception technologies has gained significant
momentum in recent years, with organizations using them as an additional layer of de­
fense to detect and prevent cyberattacks.
Deception technologies are an active response to the growing sophistication of cyber
threats, and they aim to disrupt the attacker’s activities before they can do significant
harm. These technologies can be deployed across multiple layers of the IT infrastructure,
including endpoints, networks, and applications. By presenting decoys and false data,
deception technologies can divert the attention of attackers away from real systems and
data, and help to identify the nature and intent of the attack.
The implementation of deception technologies can help organizations to identify attack
vectors and vulnerabilities in their systems, improve their incident response capabilities,
and minimize the potential impact of a successful attack. Although deception technologies
are not a silver bullet, they can significantly enhance an organization’s overall security
posture and provide a proactive approach to cyber defense.
There are several types of deception technologies used in cybersecurity today, each with
its own strengths and weaknesses. These include honeypots, honeytokens as the two
greatest types, among others. Although these technologies can be highly effective at de­
tecting and deterring attacks, they require careful planning, management, and integration
with other security measures to be truly effective. Honeypots are decoy systems or de­
vices that are designed to lure attackers away from real systems and into a controlled
environment [3]. Honeypots can be used to collect information about attackers’ tactics,
techniques, and procedures, as well as to distract attackers and delay their progress. On
the other hand, honeytokens involve the planting of false data or credentials in a network
or system, with the objective of detecting unauthorized access or activity [4].
Honeytokens are typically pieces of data or credentials that have no legitimate use, but
are designed to appear attractive to attackers, such as fake user accounts/passwords
[5, 6], directories [7], URLs [7], data entries [8] or false sensitive documents [7]. The
versatility of honeytokens is noteworthy, as they can take the shape of any digital entity
and be located throughout an organization’s entire system. This fact makes it, so even if
adversaries can evade some honeytokens they may be trapped by others. Additionally,
the fact that the number and placement of these deceptive entities are unknown could
2
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:8==
slow down the attackers and maybe even discourage them from launching an attack [9].
This last effect is also known as the deterrent effect, which is similar to having signs on
someone’s property ’beware of the dog’ or ’CCTV’ to prevent burglaries. There are also
some open­source honeytoken implementations available on GitHub [7, 10, 11, 12, 13].
Although both of these technologies provide valuable extensions of the security of an
organization, their effectiveness is mostly dependent on their ability to fool adversaries
into thinking that they are real resources. As more sophisticated attackers may be able
to distinguish fake assets from real ones, this is also known as fingerprinting. There have
been many publications of tactics that can be utilized to identify these deceptive entities
[14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21].
The goal of this project is to study different types of honeytokens and select one of them to
improve in order to counter fingerprinting by attackers. The following research questions
are attempted to be answered:
1. What strategies can be employed to remove or mitigate signatures for the selected
honeytoken type, making them more difficult to be detected?
2. What methods can be utilized to enhance the selected honeytoken type to make it
appear more authentic?
3. Which alert mechanism available for the selected honeytoken type provides the best
balance of effectiveness and stealthiness?
The remainder of the thesis is structured as follows. In Section 2 related work of honeypots
and honeytokens are summarized. Section 3 and an overview of different attacks on these
deception technologies are presented. In Section 4 the design of a chosen honeytoken
is described. The way it is implemented is shown in Section 5. The work is evaluated in
Section 6 and finally the thesis is concluded in Section 7.
Invisible Deception
3
==PAGE:9==
2
Related Work
Deception in computer science is the act of intentionally providing false or misleading in­
formation to an individual or entity in order to achieve a specific objective, such as gaining
unauthorized access to a system or network, stealing sensitive information, or disrupting
normal system operations.
Historically, deception was primarily used by hackers to gain unauthorized access to com­
puter systems and networks. Kevin Mitnick, one of the most notorious hackers in history,
has authored books on the subject of deception in cybersecurity. Mitnick asserts that the
human element is often the weakest link in the security of a system. In his book “The Art
of Deception” [22], he delves into the art of social engineering, which involves manipu­
lating individuals to reveal confidential information or perform actions that may not be in
their best interests. The book serves as a practical guide to help individuals and orga­
nizations defend against social engineering attacks by understanding the various tactics
and techniques used by attackers. Mitnick’s book ’Ghost in the Wires’ [23] takes a more
biographical approach, but still offers insights into social engineering attacks and ways to
protect yourself against them.
However, deception has gained greater recognition as a powerful tool for cyberdefend­
ers to detect, prevent, and mitigate attacks. The first accountancy of using a honeypot
was done by Stoll [24] when he wrote a book about his real­life experience of tracking
a hacker who had infiltrated his computer system using a fake computer environment.
“Honeypots: Tracking Hackers” [25] is another fascinating read that delves into the uti­
lization of honeypots, a cybersecurity tool designed to lure hackers into a trap. The book
outlines how honeypots can be utilized to monitor and collect data on attackers, and how
this knowledge can be used to bolster security measures.
Numerous surveys have been conducted to compile deception techniques. Fraunholz et
al. [26] conducted a survey of honeypots and honeytokens, with a particular emphasis on
key aspects such as psychological, formal, legal, and ethical considerations. Han et al.
[27] took a different approach, although most previous surveys mainly evaluated techni­
cal contributions of deception technologies, they classified and provided a comprehensive
survey on deception techniques and their use in computer security. He used a four di­
mensional classification, based on goal, unit, layer, and deployment of deception. The
largest survey to date describes three main deception technologies that have been used
in the last three decades [9]. These technologies are honeypots, honeytokens, and mov­
ing target defense. They have been classified based on a two­layer taxonomy. Firstly, by
looking at which phase in the kill­chain it disrupts and then further categorized by the four
deception stacks: network, system, software, and data layers.
2.1
Honeypots
Honeypots are decoy systems that are designed to simulate vulnerable targets to attract
and deceive attackers [3]. There are several types of honeypots that can be deployed,
depending on the specific goals and objectives of the organization.
2.1.1
Types
Early on, honeypots were separated into two types [28]. These are:
4
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:10==
• Research honeypots, which are essential for collecting intelligence on the threat
landscape. It is mostly used by academics and researchers as it not directly con­
tributing/improving the security of any organization.
• Production honeypots, which are used for detecting and mitigating attacks on pro­
duction networks. They are usually deployed in the production environment to detect
and respond to attacks in real­time.
Later, Mokube et al.
[29] proposed that these deception technologies can further be
grouped based on their interaction level:
• Low­interaction honeypot, which is designed to simulate only a few services or
protocols, such as web servers or DNS servers. These honeypots are simpler to set
up and maintain, but they offer a less realistic environment for attackers to interact
with. Low­interaction honeypots can still capture valuable information about attacker
activities and can be used to detect and prevent certain types of attacks, such as
port scanning or web application attacks.
• Medium­interaction honeypots are a type of honeypot that provides a moderate
level of interaction with attackers, meaning that they can simulate some services or
applications of a real system. Unlike low­interaction honeypots that simulate only
the most commonly used protocols, medium­interaction honeypots can offer a more
realistic environment for attackers to interact with.
• High­interaction honeypot, which is designed to mimic a complete system with
multiple services and applications. These honeypots are usually more complex to
set up and maintain, but they offer a more realistic environment with which attackers
can interact. High­interaction honeypots can capture a lot of information about an at­
tacker’s activities and behaviors, but they also pose a higher risk to the organization
as they can potentially be compromised.
Research in this area has resulted in a number of articles discussing specific topics con­
cerning honeypots and how honeypots can be created and deployed. Several articles
have explored the use of honeypots as an educational tool for IT students and academic
institutions [30, 31]. This research indicates that honeypots can be an effective tool in
security education. Mairh et al. [32] discussed the use of honeypots in different environ­
ments, these being hybrid and educational. A significant amount of work is available that
details the benefits of honeypots [33, 34]. There are also articles that describe specific ap­
plications of honeypots as building blocks for a system such as a honeycomb [35], which
is used to create intrusion detection signatures. Mokube et al. [29] provides a general
overview of concepts and benefits associated with honeypots. Bringer et al. [36] con­
ducted a survey of honeypot advances, separating them into different areas like coping
with new threats, increase threat detection accuracy, avoiding detection, reducing costs,
legal and ethical issues associated with the use of honeypots.
2.1.2
Existing Honeypots
Honeypots have been extensively studied in the field of computer security. One of the
first works on honeypots was presented by Spitzner in 2003 [3], describing how to handle
the insider threat, which is very different from an external adversary.
An attacker’s reconnaissance is crucial for gaining a tactical advantage in a campaign.
Sticky honeypots, like LaBrea [37] and Greasy [38], can slow down scanning activities by
taking over unused IP addresses and creating virtual hosts that mimic real ones. LaBrea
and Greasy can also generate false network topologies to confuse attackers. Other hon­
Invisible Deception
5
==PAGE:11==
eypot techniques, such as HoneyD [39], simulate virtual systems with customizable fin­
gerprints, services, and routing topologies. Sethia et al. [40] proposed the use of a low­
interaction honeypot that emulates a number of vulnerable services to capture malware
and zero­day attacks.
Honeypots can also be used to improve security in IoT devices. La et al. [41] proposed
a game­theoretic approach to the security of the Internet of Things (IoT) that involves the
use of honeypots. An actual implementation of a low­interaction IoT honeypot is HosTaGe
[42] which is designed to detect and analyze attacks on mobile devices.
In order to disrupt later attack phases, attackers can be redirected to a high­interaction
honeypot. Where their goals and tactics can be studied, not to mention this resulting in
them wasting time and resources. OpenFire [43] is a tool that creates fake targets for
attackers by making it seem like all IPs and ports in an organization’s network are open.
Any suspicious activity is then directed to a cluster of decoy machines. In a cloud envi­
ronment, Biedermann et al. [44] propose redirecting potential attacks on an operational
virtual machine (VM) to a cloned honeypot VM that has the same configuration as the
original VM but without sensitive data. This enables the analysis of the attack’s impact
without putting the original target VM at risk.
In general, research on honeypots has demonstrated their effectiveness as a tool for
detecting and analyzing attacks, as well as their potential for enhancing the security of
critical infrastructure.
2.2
Honeytokens
Honeytokens are pieces of false information that are intentionally created and placed
within an organization’s systems or networks [4]. They are designed to lure attackers into
interacting with them, and in doing so, trigger an alert that signals a potential attack.
2.2.1
Types
There are several types of honeytokens that can be used, each with its own strengths and
weaknesses. Considering the flexibility of these entities when it comes to the amount of
different resources they can mimic, defining general types is a little more difficult. Surveys
that studied these deception technologies have proposed different classifications of known
honeytokens.
Voris [45] surveyed how different decoy objects could be deployed and what characteris­
tics each should possess to fool and detect intruders. These characteristics are Believabil­
ity, Enticingness, Conspicuousness, Detectability, Variability, Stealth, Non­interference,
Differentiability, and Shelf life.
Juels and Tech [46] discussed 2 properties that every honey system should have, these
were: indistinguishably and secrecy.
Another attempt was made to classify honey­token technologies based on the domain of
which each technology is part of [26]. These domains being: Server, File, Authentication,
Database. Furthermore, each technology is labeled as Host­based or Network­based.
In Honeysweeper [21] honeytokens are classified based on their operation level and the
technique used to fingerprint them. The operation levels are the following: Network, Ap­
plication/File, System, and Data. The fingerprinting techniques will be discussed in a later
chapter.
6
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:12==
2.2.2
Existing Honeytokens
Throughout the years of the use of honeytokens, many types have been proposed. Even
though before the name existed, deception has already been used. Honeytokens pro­
vide great flexibility when it comes to disrupting attackers. There are notable differences
between different token technologies.
HoneyGen [8] describes an automatic fake database entry generation making use of a
machine learning algorithm. The algorithm studies existing real db entries to create be­
lievable fake ones.
Honeypatches [47] describes a way to make a patched vulnerability of a system appear
unpatched in order to attract attackers. Once these honeypatches are accessed by the
adversaries, they are forwarded to a honeypot to further disrupt their actions and/or mon­
itor them. A similar idea was proposed called ghost patches [48]. This also introduces
fake vulnerabilities when patching a software.
The use of fake honeypots [49] was also proposed in order to leverage the fear of an
attacker who discovers that there is a honeypot present. This would make the adversaries
more cautious and thus slow them down in their actions or completely turn them away.
Different solutions were mentioned to protect passwords. One of these were HoneyWords
[5], which introduces fake passwords together with real ones. A custom authentication
mechanism called honey checker, which would keep track of the real and the fake pass­
words and notify whenever a decoy password is used. Another solution to password
cracking and leaking was proposed by the name of ErsatzPasswords [6]. This includes a
machine­dependent function on the authentication server in order to prevent off­site pass­
word cracking. Whenever a hash is decrypted, the result will be a fake password, and the
login attempt using these passwords will result in an alert.
A study was also conducted to determine how malicious entities act when they get ac­
cess to cloud­based resources [50]. This was done by populating a Google spreadsheet
with fake bank account credentials and transfer links and published to the cloud. These
documents were closely monitored and sent notifications whenever somebody accessed
them.
In Fraunholz F. et al. [51] six deception techniques are proposed to protect Web Servers .
These include fake banner replies, which could mislead the attacker about which specific
server/OS version is present. Fake entries in the robots.txt file and honeycomments inside
comments, both of these can direct the adversaries to honey or decoy files. Fake error
code responses in order to counter automated scanning tools. Lastly, adaptive delaying
can exhaust an attacker’s resources, resulting in them turning towards a different target.
2.3
Moving Target Defense
Moving Target Defense (MTD) is a proactive measure that seeks to prevent or limit the
success of cyberattacks by dynamically changing the attack surface or making it harder
for attackers to predict or locate targets. The idea behind MTD is to create a constantly
changing and unpredictable cyber environment that increases the cost and complexity
of launching successful cyberattacks. The objective of MTD is to increase uncertainty,
complexity, and unpredictability, making it harder for attackers to pinpoint and exploit vul­
nerabilities [52]. MTD is founded on the principle of security through diversification, first
proposed at the National Cyber Leap Year Summit in 2009 [53].
Invisible Deception
7
==PAGE:13==
2.3.1
Types
Over the past few years, numerous new approaches to MTD have been developed,
prompting the creation of a taxonomy to organize and classify this research. One such
taxonomy, proposed by Hobson et al. [54], categorized MTD techniques based on their
coverage, unpredictability, and timeliness. Another study by Zhuang et al. [55] suggested
considering three critical aspects: the specific component of the system to move, the spa­
tial parameters in which it can be relocated, and the optimal timing for the movement.
Building on these concepts, Cai et al. [56] further expanded the taxonomy by introducing
the three key factors that every MTD technique should consider: what to move, how to
move it, and when to move it. These three elements can be easily remembered as “what,
how, and when.” Hong et al. [57] classified MTD techniques into three categories: shuffle,
diversity, and redundancy.
2.3.2
Existing MTD techniques
Several techniques are part of MTD. Like IP obfuscation, which is a technique used to
mask or conceal the IP address of a network device or system to protect it from potential
attackers. This technique involves altering the IP address in a way that makes it difficult
to recognize or track, by either changing the IP address periodically or by assigning tem­
porary, randomly generated virtual IP addresses that are linked to the system’s actual IP
address. DyNAT [58] which stands for dynamic network address translation that dynam­
ically changes the source and destination IP addresses and the number of TCP ports of
packets as they move through a network. Network address space randomization (NASR)
[59] that modifies the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol server to have short IP address
leases so that host machines’ IP addresses are changed frequently, making it harder for
attackers to track them. OpenFlow Random Host Mutation (OF­RHM) [60], which ran­
domly mutates the IP addresses of network hosts using OpenFlow­enabled switches.
OS obfuscation, which is a technique used to hide or obscure the specific operating
system (OS) running on a device or server on a network. Kampanakis et al. [61] suggest
a technique based on software­defined networking that obfuscates OS information by
randomizing TCP sequence numbers and payload patterns.
Dynamic system, which refers to a system that can change its behavior or characteris­
tics in response to changing conditions or attacks. The most common is Address Space
Layout Randomization (ASLR) [62, 63], which is a security technique used to prevent at­
tacks that rely on knowledge of memory layout by randomly arranging the address space
positions of key data areas of a program during its execution.
Dynamic software, which generally refers to software components that can change their
behavior, configuration, or implementation in response to changing threats. Larsen et al.
[64] conducted a systematic literature review that examines the state of the art in auto­
mated software diversity techniques. The authors define software diversity as the practice
of introducing random or deterministic variations into the software code or its execution
environment. One of these examples was ChameleonSoft [65], that has a biology inspired
architecture called Cell Oriented Architecture. This architecture separates software into
cells that can be changed and shuffled together separately.
8
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:14==
3
Fingerprinting
The strength of honeypots and honeytokens lies in the attackers’ ability to identify them
also known as fingerprinting. Fingerprinting can be either active or passive. While pas­
sive fingerprinting involves analyzing information about a device or application passively,
active fingerprinting involves actively probing a device or application to gather information.
3.1
Honeypot fingerprinting
Honeypots are intentionally vulnerable systems designed to attract and deceive attack­
ers. While they can be useful in detecting and analyzing attack techniques, they are not
immune to attacks.
Holz et al. [14] discusses various attacks that can be used to identify honeypots. These
attacks include fingerprinting, which involves examining the behavior of the system to
find unique characteristics that are associated with honeypots. For example, an attacker
might look for details such as the operating system version, port numbers, or other system
details that are commonly associated with honeypots. Traffic analysis involves analyzing
network traffic patterns to identify suspicious behavior that might indicate the presence
of a honeypot. For example, an attacker might look for traffic that is unusually regular or
that has a high volume of connections to a single IP address. Lastly, timing­based attacks
involve looking for patterns in system behavior that might indicate the presence of a hon­
eypot. For example, an attacker might send a series of packets at specific intervals and
look for deviations in the response times. If the response times are unusually consistent
or regular, this may suggest the presence of a honeypot.
Bitter Harvest [19] discussed a way to systematically fingerprint low­ and medium­interaction
honeypots that implement important network protocols. Their findings prove that most of
these honeypots are poorly maintained, containing known signatures that can be lever­
aged in order to identify them. Two scans were conducted, their findings can be seen in
Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Results of the Internet­Wide Scan done by Bitter Harvest, taken from: [19]
Specialized tools such as Degreaser [16] can efficiently fingerprint sticky honeypots, also
known as network tarpits, by sending specially crafted probe packets and distinguishing
between real hosts and fake ones based on the response. Similarly, Fu et al. [17] describe
a way to successfully fingerprint a honeypot called HoneyD using timing­based attacks.
Galleros et al. [66] were also able to identify the low­interaction honeypot mentioned
previously by fingerprinting their network services.
Mukkamala et al. [15] proposed a way to detect virtual environments and low­interaction
honeypots, using system­ and network­level based fingerprinting. Previous methods mostly
relied on system­level fingerprinting, but in order to have access to this information, an
Invisible Deception
9
==PAGE:15==
attacker must be able to execute arbitrary code on the target machine. This is where
network­based fingerprinting might be more successful when talking about stealthy detec­
tion. Network service tests were conducted using a well­known honeypot called HoneyD
compared to real systems. The results can be seen in Figure 3.2, and we can clearly see
that even though the services are implemented when trying to use them, the honeypot falls
short. The timing analysis that was conducted can be seen in Figure 3.3, which shows
the cumulative average of the response times over the wired connection of each machine
tested. The difference in delay is clear between virtual machines and real systems.
Figure 3.2: Service features tested
taken from [15]
Figure 3.3: Wired cumulative average taken
from [15]
Srinivasa et al. [18] proposed a multistage fingerprinting method to identify honeypots.
It includes both active­ and passive­fingerprinting methods. On the active side, probe
based fingerprinting is used, while Metascan was used to gather information passively.
The results of using these two techniques in an internet wide scan can be seen in Figure
3.4.
Figure 3.4: Honeypots detected by type and technique, taken from: [18]
3.2
Honeytoken fingerprinting
While honeytokens are designed to detect attacks and suspicious activity, they can them­
selves be targeted by attackers. Similarly to honeypots, the attacker’s first step is to
10
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:16==
identify the fake resource in order to avoid it or try to exploit it in a way that does not
reveal their true intentions.
Srinivasa et al.[20] proposed a proof­of­concept of fingerprinting honeytokens. The honey
token types were classified into 4 groups based on the level they operate and the finger­
printing technique associated with the particular level. These four levels are the following:
• Network­Level: Honeytokens at this level impersonate a network entity or use the
network to send alerts. This means that tokens that are residing in different levels
may initiate calls over the network. To detect such calls, passive fingerprinting tech­
niques like sniffing network traffic are used. For example, a file­level honeytoken
such as PDF uses an alert mechanism that resolves a DNS call. Even though sniff­
ing packets are very successful at identifying these entities, they are not considered
stealthy, as the alert will be triggered.
• Application/File­Level: Honeytokens at this level are specific file formats like PDF
or DOCX that contain an alert mechanism hidden within the file. The alert is trig­
gered if the file is opened with certain applications like Adobe Reader or Microsoft
Word. Fingerprinting techniques rely on file decompression and obtaining the file’s
metadata, where obfuscated DNS triggers can be found, which is used for the alert­
ing mechanism.
• System­Level: Honeytokens at this level use operating system features like event
logs and inotify calls as alert mechanisms. Fingerprinting techniques involve moni­
toring background processes to check for the inotify call and looking for changes in
the file or directory path.
• Data­Level: Honeytokens at this level mimic real data and can be hard to distinguish
from actual data. Fingerprinting techniques vary depending on the emulated data
and its alert mechanism. Viewing the file’s metadata can help attackers determine if
it’s a possible honeytoken. For example, if fake user accounts are generated to de­
ceive attackers on a Windows machine, adversaries can use PowerShell scripts to
recover metadata about the Active Directory accounts to identify fake user accounts.
The paper proposes a proof of concept by succesfully fingerprinting a publicly available
PDF honeytoken produced by Canarytokens. A packet sniffer tool Wireshark was used
to see if there are any calls to known honeytoken services, and a stealthier approach
included the use of a PDF parser to look into the metadata and identify if there are any
signatures pointing to the previously mentioned services.
HoneySweeper [21] proposed a way to fingerprint all of these open­source Canarytokens.
Similarly to the previous paper, tokens have to be classified in order to determine which
fingerprinting method is suitable for each of them. They propose a multi layer classification
that builds on the one proposed by Srinivasa et al. [20]. They firstly add the classification
called dependency layer, which can either be Application or Operating System. Meaning
that some tokens will only be triggered when viewed/opened in a specific application, e.g.,
Adobe Reader for PDFs or Microsoft Word for DOCX files. There could also be specific
honeytokens that are only operational in a specific operating system. After this, each
token is classified based on their base of operations, these being: DNS, URL, SMTP, IP,
and access keys base. Further, studying the trigger channels of these tokens, they have
determined that DNS based tokens will use DNS, while URL based tokens will use HTTP
protocol as their triggering mechanism.
As all of these are open source honeytokens, the authors had access to the way all of
Invisible Deception
11
==PAGE:17==
these entities are generated and were able to conduct a white­box testing that resulted
in finding various artifacts that could be used to fingerprint them. These included a fixed
length ID of the token, hard­coded data that was used to generate certificates and template
file usage which resulted in static metadata.
After these findings, further testing was done where all of these tokens were generated
and interacted with in order to gather further information. These included finding static
metadata within the honeytoken, triggering the alert mechanism and identifying the chan­
nel it has been done at, monitoring applications and OS to find further information about
the triggering mechanism.
To mitigate these attacks, honeypots and ­tokens should be designed with security in
mind. They should be properly secured and monitored for signs of suspicious activity.
This includes implementing strong authentication and access controls, monitoring logs
and alerts for unusual activity, and keeping software and systems up­to­date with the lat­
est security patches. They should be deployed in a secure network environment to min­
imize the risk of unauthorized access. Additionally, users should be educated about the
risks associated with honeytokens and trained to recognize and avoid social engineering
attacks.
12
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:18==
4
Choosing a honeytoken type
We recognize that every type of honeytoken has its own strengths and limitations, and
the decision to choose file­based honeytokens was not taken lightly. We believe that file­
based honeytokens offer several advantages that make them an effective detection tool
against attackers.
• File­based honeytokens can be embedded in various file formats that are widely
used in different settings, making them versatile and applicable in a range of sce­
narios.
• File­based honeytokens can be made more stealthy by using steganography tech­
niques, such as hiding the honeytoken within the file’s metadata, making it difficult
to detect.
• File­based honeytokens can be customized to suit specific use cases by embedding
them in different file formats and varying the content and appearance of the file.
• Developing and implementing file­based honeytokens requires a deep understand­
ing of the file formats and the associated software, making it a technically challeng­
ing but rewarding task.
Among the various file formats that can be used as honeytokens, PDF­based honeyto­
kens have been chosen for this thesis after careful consideration of other file formats
such as Word documents, Excel spreadsheets. While each file format has its own unique
strengths and weaknesses, PDFs offer several advantages that make them an effective
detection tool against attackers. These advantages include:
• PDF files are commonly used in business and academic settings, making them a
natural target for attackers. This ubiquity also means that PDF­based honeytokens
have the potential to attract a wide range of attackers.
• PDF files are highly complex and can contain a variety of features and structures that
can be used to obfuscate the presence of a honeytoken. This complexity provides
opportunities to create highly sophisticated honeytokens that are difficult to detect.
• PDF files can contain interactive elements, which can be used to create dynamic
honeytokens that respond to user actions, increasing their effectiveness as a detec­
tion tool.
Invisible Deception
13
==PAGE:19==
5
Designing a stealthy token
5.1
Honeytoken conceptual design
As previously described, a honeytoken is an attractive resource for adversaries placed in
a well­planned location within an organization. However, what distinguishes honeytokens
is their ability to trigger an alert when accessed by an unauthorized user. The alerting
mechanism may vary depending on the type of token that is embedded in this special
resource. The conceptual design was well described in HoneySweeper [21] which is
shown in Figure 5.1. Firstly the adversary interacts with the honeytoken, which is placed
at a specific deception layer which could be: Application, OS or Network. This results
in the consumption of the token and a request that is sent to the honeytoken service,
where information of the adversary is gathered and a notification is sent to the user that
an illegitimate use of the resource happened.
Figure 5.1: Honeytoken architecture taken from: [21]
5.2
PDF Honeytoken
When designing a stealthy token, a couple of options have to be taken into consideration.
Firstly, as the goal of this project is to create a stealthy alerting mechanism hidden inside
a PDF document, it is important to understand the structure of the file. By studying all the
options that are possible, we will be able to hide an alerting mechanism inside the file. As
mentioned in section 3 it is not enough to just have a file that raises an alert once opened,
some countermeasures must be made in order to remain hidden from adversaries.
The fact that adversaries are able to analyze specific properties of a file even before they
are opened proposes the biggest threat, as this can be done without triggering the alert.
These include the size and metadata of the file which is the author, creation date and last
modification date. Additionally, the ID of the token should be randomized to further avoid
fingerprinting. These must be altered before the files are deployed. These issues were
discovered by HoneySweeper [21]. These properties must be dynamically changed for
each PDF that is generated.
Furthermore, once the document is opened, even though that the notification would al­
ready be sent, it is important to make the file appear as “real” as possible for the reader.
14
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:20==
Using a language processing artificial intelligence model in order to generate text, the
document will appear human­generated to the reader. By doing this, the issue with the
size of the file would also disappear, as every document will contain different data. The
design of our system can be seen in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Design of our System
Once documents are able to trigger an action which connects to a URL, many APIs can
be used to gather information of the IP address that is making the request. This infor­
mation includes general location and internet service provider. It is important to note that
this geolocation is quite inaccurate. In addition, there are many ways that someone can
hide/mask their IP address [67], rendering the location detector useless. The methods to
hide someone’s private IP address include VPNs, proxy servers, and the TOR browser.
But as gathering information of the attacker is only secondary, we still receive the alert
about illegitimate access to our document.
5.3
PDF file format and features
Portable Document Format is the most common format that is used to present documents
throughout all operating systems using different programs as readers. PDF was invented
by Adobe, making Adobe Acrobat Reader the original program that was used to create/p­
resent these files. It also unlocks the full potential of these documents, as they are not
only used to present text but many other types of objects together with various actions.
Each PDF version has a reference which is an international standard(ISO), this contains
the structure, elements, and behavior of the electronic documents. The reference docu­
mentation of PDF 1.7 [68] was studied for the development of this honeytoken.
5.3.1
PDF structure
Every PDF has 4 elements: Header, Body, ’xref’ Table, Trailer. The elements of a PDF
can easily be viewed with a hex editor or opened with a text editor, among other things.
Invisible Deception
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 5.3: PDF Structure [68]
• Header is the first line of the document. It contains the version number that the
PDF was developed in. This indicated the start of the document, and it only has to
appear among the first 1023 bytes of the file. When opening the document with a
PDF reader, the previously entered bytes are ignored.
• Body contains the definition of the pages and every object that is contained in each
page. This represents the actual content of the document.
• X­ref table is an index table that contains all the offsets of every object inside the
document.
• Trailer has the reference to the root object of the document and a reference to the
cross­reference table.
The objects that populate the PDFs might be used to execute different actions. Firstly,
there are Events connected to the objects which are connected to a specific action that is
executed using a Target. Even though all of these elements are described in the reference
document published by Adobe, many publications have been made studying PDF files
that are used by adversaries to gain access to their victims machines [69, 70, 71]. By
studying these papers, different ways to weaponize these documents as defenders can
be found. For example, an overview of all the different actions and the way they are set
up is visualized in the paper called Portable Document Flaws 101 [69], which is shown in
Figure 5.4.
16
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:22==
Figure 5.4: Events ­ Actions ­ Targets taken from: [69]
PDF 101 [69] also included test results of so­called “Information Disclosure” attacks, which
resolved a URL once the document was opened. In this test, 16 out of 28 readers were
vulnerable to these attacks. As these issues were found, looking for vulnerabilities that
malicious entities may expose, they have been delivered to the application providers to
look into and change if they see fit. We have tried all the events that would be triggered
once the document is opened. Google Chrome, Firefox, Microsoft Edge, Adobe Acrobat
Reader, Adobe Acrobat Pro and Foxit Reader were used to conduct these tests. Unfor­
tunately, only the Adobe applications and Foxit Reader supported these events.
5.3.2
Events
Different events may be used to trigger actions within a PDF. In order to have a function­
ing honeytoken the event itself have to be one that always triggers whenever somebody
opens the file. For this purpose, the open action event may be used contained inside the
Catalog object. This object represents the root of the entire document. Unfortunately, this
“path” of action have been restricted by Adobe as it resulted in many vulnerabilities that
were exploited by malicious entities. Luckily, there is a different event that can be used
to trigger actions.
Each object in the first row of figure 5.4 can contain a child element called Additional
Action (/AA). This element describes a specific event that triggers an action. There are
many events in this category, including mouse movement, button/key presses, or releases
when interacting with specific elements of the document. As mentioned before, we can
not predict how an adversary would interact with a document once opened. The events
that would fire no matter what the adversary does is the opening or closing the first Page
object of the document. Figure 5.5 shows an object inside a document that represents a
page. Inside this object there is an Automated Action which calls upon object 5 once the
page is opened. This open action is represented by the annotation ’/O’.
Invisible Deception
17
==PAGE:23==
Figure 5.5: Page Open Action
5.3.3
Actions
Once an event is triggered, a specific action is launched. These actions are visible in
figure 5.4. As the goal of this project is to access a URL over the internet, the actions that
can be used to achieve this goal are the following:
• Launch is an action that starts an external application/program.
• Thread action jumps to a specific thread action inside this document or an external
one.
• GoToE is an action that navigates to an embedded resource.
• GoToR is an action that navigates to a remote resource.
• ImportData import Form Data Format into the document from a different file.
• Submit Form is an action that sends the names and values of specified fields to a
specific URL.
• URI stands for Uniform Resource Identifier and resolves a specific resource over
the internet.
• JavaScript makes the JavaScript interpreter compile and execute a script.
With Launch we can launch a browser and access our domain, Thread, GoToE, GoToR
and ImportData can point to an external file placed in our domain. Even though in the­
ory all of these actions could be used, most of them have been modified throughout the
years as malicious entities have misused them for their own gains. For example GoToE
and GoToR actions were used to connect to a web server and download a PDF file from
there, by doing this unsuspecting users would fall victims to NTLM Credential thefts [72].
The Launch action was used to execute different commands in the terminal of the tar­
get system. There have been many security changes that have been implemented as
countermeasures [73], the one that affects our goal is called “bDisablePDFRedirectAc­
tions” which disables access to links via most of the actions except URI, Submit Form,
and JavaScript. This setting is only visible/changeable with administrator privileges. This
setting is also visible in Figure 5.6.
18
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:24==
Figure 5.6: Disable PDF Redirect, taken from: [73]
While JavaScript is the most flexible among these three actions when it comes to execut­
ing customized code, using this is not that simple as most readers have many restrictions
when it comes to executing scripts. This is due to malicious entities exploiting readers
before. Using either Submit Form or URI in order to resolve a resource on the internet
are both good solutions, but as there is no need to transfer data from inside the PDF
document, using the URI action is the most suitable for this specific honeytoken imple­
mentation.
5.3.4
Targets
In the figure 5.4 we can see that there are four different target types that could be used
within an action. Accessing files, which could be placed locally on the computer, embed­
ded inside the document itself, or somewhere inside the network share. Any of these
options would be an overkill for this project. The best solution is to use URL, which is also
the only option that could be used with the URI action. Figure 6.1 shows an object that
contains the URI action. The value of “/S” describes the type of action, which is in this
case is “/URI”. The second attribute is the URI that the action points to.
Figure 5.7: URI Action
Once the right action is inside the document, there is an issue that when viewing the
document in a text editor, the exact value of the URI can be seen. There are different
ways to obfuscate this value that is supported by PDF parsers [74]. The URL address
can be converted to hexadecimal or octal string, which are recognized and handled when
a PDF is loaded into a reader. Even both can be used to further hide the value. By doing
so, automated analyzers that are looking for URLs could be bypassed.
5.4
Text Generation
The field of natural language processing (NLP) has seen tremendous progress in recent
years, thanks in part to the development of powerful text generation models. Three of the
Invisible Deception
19
==PAGE:25==
most well­known and widely used text generator tools in NLP research and development
are OpenAI’s GPT­3 [75], Google’s BERT [76], and T5 [77].
GPT­3 is a highly sophisticated language model that has achieved impressive perfor­
mance on a variety of NLP tasks. It is known for its ability to generate coherent and
natural­sounding text, and has been used in a wide range of applications, from chatbots
and virtual assistants to content creation and translation.
BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) is another popular lan­
guage model developed by Google. Unlike GPT­3, BERT is designed to work bidirection­
ally, which means it can take into account both the left and right contexts of a given text
sequence. This has led to improved performance on a variety of NLP tasks, including text
classification and sentiment analysis.
T5 (Text­to­Text Transfer Transformer) is a more recent development from Google that
builds on the success of BERT. It is designed to work in a “text­to­text” fashion, meaning
it can take in a range of input formats and generate a wide range of output formats. This
makes it highly flexible and useful for a variety of NLP applications.
Although all three of these tools have their strengths and weaknesses, one key difference
between them is that only OpenAI’s GPT­3 currently provides an API that can be easily
accessed by developers and researchers. This is why it has been chosen as the tool to
integrate into our application to handle the text generation.
5.5
Server
A server should be set up to receive requests and generate/provide the honeytoken doc­
uments. The server should contain two different pages, the main page where users are
able to generate a document and download them. A PDF template will be used where the
previously mentioned metadata is changed, a newly generated ID is inserted with a URL
pointing to our server. The best available text generation API of Open AI is used, called
’text­davinci­003’, to generate some text that is inserted into the document.
After the generation of the documents are handled, another page should be provided
where users are able to view whenever one of their tokens were triggered and the infor­
mation of the person who triggered it. In the background, there should also be a way
to ping the server from inside the PDF document pointing to a specific token in order to
retrieve information of the sender and save it for further viewing.
Furthermore, a database should be set up in which every generated token and the infor­
mation of its alerts are saved for further inspection. For this purpose, MongoDB will be
used [78]. This is a NO­SQL database that is using JSON­like objects.
As for hosting the server, Vercel will be used, which is a cloud­based platform that provides
a comprehensive set of tools for building, deploying, and managing web applications [79].
It was created with the goal of making it easy for developers to deploy their projects and
make them instantly available to users around the world. Vercel supports a wide range of
programming languages and frameworks. With Vercel, developers can focus on building
great applications without worrying about the complexities of server management and
infrastructure maintenance.
20
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:26==
6
Implementation
The primary goal of the project was to create a stealthy PDF honeytoken that would appear
as a regular file. To achieve this objective, the project utilized the Python programming lan­
guage to develop a system that would enable the embedding of tokens and AI­generated
text within PDF documents in a way that would not arouse suspicion.
The project began with the creation of a PDF template that could accommodate the in­
sertion of tokens and AI­generated text.
Next, a function was developed to enable the automatic addition of tokens, AI­generated
text and metadata to the document. The function was designed to ensure that the docu­
ment appeared like a legitimate file, thereby enhancing the stealthiness of the honeytoken.
A database was set up to store information related to the honeytoken, such as the gen­
erated tokens, email addresses for notifications, redirect URLs for further deception and
the corresponding alerts. The database would be accessed by the server during the con­
sumption of the honeytoken to retrieve and update the necessary information.
Finally, a server was established to handle the generation of the honeytokens, display
alerts associated with a specific token and to handle the incoming calls/alerts emanating
from honeytokens.
6.1
PDF template
As mentioned in section 5.3.3, there are multiple options for initializing a call to a URL
once a PDF document is opened, but we are only considering “/URI” and “/SubmitForm”.
As both of these actions can be used to achieve our goal, we had to test each of these to
select the best option. In order to decide which is better, two PDFs have been created with
the minimum amount of objects/data to study the behavior of these actions. Using Adobe
Acrobat DC, we were able to see that the URI action opens the specified URL in the default
browser. To deceive the individual who triggers the alert, a potential workaround involves
redirecting the request to a separate domain when the server is contacted. Among other
things, this could be the companies website where the honeytoken has been deployed.
Even though this would result in avoiding raising suspicion, it will not stop attackers in
fingerprinting the token when looking at network packets, but as this is considered active
fingerprinting, the alert has already been made. The URI action can be seen in Figure
6.1.
Figure 6.1: URI Action object
Doing the same with the SubmitForm action, once the document is opened in the bottom
right corner of the application, a small window appears indicating that data is being sent
Invisible Deception
21
==PAGE:27==
and received. After this is done, the received data is processed and Adobe attempts to
open it. Because of this, an alert message appears asking for user permission to open
the file which was created in the user’s Temp folder. It does not matter what choice does
the user make as the call has already been made to the server, but still this is not ideal.
It is possible that if the server returns a PDF object when the form is submitted, this alert
message does not appear but the newly received document will be opened in a new tab
in Adobe. This file could be transferred quickly depending on its size/contents, but if our
goal is to not raise suspicion in the person interacting with the document, this file must
be a larger one containing data that appears legitimate. The SubmitForm action can be
seen in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: SubmitForm Action object
Both of these actions have some elements that could raise suspicions in an adversary
when interacting with the PDFs. The URI action is more suitable for the purpose of this
project, which is to send a request to the Server. As transferring data back to the entity
that triggered the alert is completely unnecessary, not to mention that it would increase
the loading of the initial document if we wished to transfer a larger PDF back to lower
suspicion.
Once we have chosen the action and created a simple file, there is one issue that can be
seen. They were generated in notepad, as PDF is just a format this can be done easily.
The problem is, if somebody inspects the contents of the file using any kind of text or hex
editor, all the objects are human­readable. Name­ and String­objects can be obfuscated
by converting them to octal or hexadecimal, string objects can also be obfuscated by en­
crypting the file [74]. But the problem still remains that the format does not resemble a PDF
created by a genuine application. The reason for this is most applications use automatic
compression by combining content streams, objects and applying a compression method
that is supported by PDF. These compressions include /FlateDecode, /ASCIIHexDecode,
/LZWDecode, etc.... To combat this, the file can be saved using a PDF editor or a python
module. The chosen method will be described in the next paragraph.
As the PDF containing the action is just a blank page to the human eye, a template includ­
ing graphics has been chosen from Word and created a PDF from it. Having the visuals
from the template makes the document more pleasing to the human eye. The next step
is to combine this template with the previously described file containing the URI action.
There are different ways to combine two pages into one, in python there are modules like
PyPDF and pikepdf that can easily achieve this. When merging pages using PyPDF the
compression of objects is reversed and the PDF structure will become human­readable
once again. It does not matter what is the format of the initial document and how com­
pressed they are. On the other hand, when pikepdf is used the resulting combined PDF
will be compressed appearing as any other document that was created with Adobe Acro­
bat, for example. The merging of the documents can be seen in the Figure 6.3.
22
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:28==
Figure 6.3: Merge two PDF pages
While the structure appears like any other PDF, there are still indicators inside the file’s
metadata that it was not generated using an application. For example, the producer of the
file is pikepdf and there are key values that are missing from the documents’ metadata,
but this will be handled later just before the PDF is ready to distribute. More details about
this in section 6.2.3.
6.2
Generation of new PDF files
The steps to reach the end results include generating a fresh token, inserting it into the
file as the value of the /URI action, request the AI API to generate a text which will also be
loaded into the document. And finally, alter the metadata of the file, so the last indicators
that might point to it being an illegitimate document also disappear.
6.2.1
Token creation & embedding
A new token has to be generated every time we wish to create a new PDF, this token is a
random length ID between 25 and 32 characters. This makes it easy to avoid automated
scans that are looking for a fixed length ID. Once this randomized string is generated,
it is saved into the database and embedded into the PDF /URI action combined with the
domain/address of the web server. This is done once again using the pikepdf dependency,
making it simple to locate a specific object inside the PDF file and change its value. This
can be seen in Figure 6.4. As we know the structure of the template PDF, we are just
looking down the tree of object inside the first page. From Automated Action to Open
Action and changing the value of the /URI to the combination of the domain and the fresh
token.
Figure 6.4: Update URI value
6.2.2
AI generated text
To integrate OpenAI API into a Python program, registration is needed for an API key,
installation of the OpenAI package, set the API key, call the OpenAI API and use the re­
sponse object in the Python program. The OpenAI package needs to be imported into
Invisible Deception
23
==PAGE:29==
the Python file and the API key set using the openai.api_key method. To call the OpenAI
API, use the openai.Completion.create method with the desired parameters. Once the re­
sponse object is received, the generated text can be accessed using the response.choices[0].text
property. This can be seen in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: OpenAI API call
The text generation method in the OpenAI API has several attributes that can be used
to fine­tune the text generation process. These attributes include the engine, prompt,
temperature, max_tokens, n, stop, presence_penalty, frequency_penalty, and best_of.
These attributes are used to customize the text generation process according to the spe­
cific use case. The engine attribute specifies the ID of the GPT model to use for text
generation, while the prompt attribute specifies the initial prompt text. The temperature
attribute controls the creativity of the generated text, and the max_tokens attribute spec­
ifies the maximum number of tokens to generate (one token is roughly 4 characters in
regular English text). Other attributes control aspects like stopping conditions, penalty for
repeating text, and the number of completions to generate.
Once we receive the generated text, we have to insert it into the document. To achieve
this, ReportLab is used, which is a powerful Python library for creating PDF documents.
It provides a range of features for creating complex documents with custom layouts and
formatting, including support for graphics, tables, and fonts. The library includes a module
called Canvas that provides an easy­to­use interface for drawing on PDF pages. We set
the fonts of each type of text, as we are using four of these: title, subtitle, section, and
the content. The position of these inputs also need to be determined using a coordinate
system that represents the page.
6.2.3
Metadata
Another important part that has to be modified when working with templates in order to
generate honeytokens is the underlining metadata. Metadata is information embedded
in a file that can include details such as the file creation date, author, and software used
to create the file. When a honeytoken file has metadata that does not match typical file
data, it can be easily identified as a fake and fail to attract an attacker.
To alter/insert metadata into a file, the pikepdf package is used once again. The way this
is done can be seen in Figure 6.6. The Document and Instance IDs are values that are
random IDs associated with each file when created using a regular tool. As this is missing
when created by pikepdf we insert new values here. Two other important values are
Producer and CreatorTool which are pretty self­explanatory, they point to the application
24
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:30==
that created the file. In our case, we use the values that are associated with the conversion
of a Word document into a PDF using Adobe Acrobat Pro. The final values that need to be
attended to are the important dates connected to the document. We set these dates to the
time when the new honeytoken PDF is created. The attribute called set_pikepdf_as_editor
with the value false in order to be able to change the producer and the creator tool of the
document.
Figure 6.6: Alter metadata
After this, the PDF is nearly done, we just have to take care of one more thing. Even
though the file is compressed when analyzing it using a decompression algorithm, the
URI action and its value can be viewed and therefore identified as a honeytoken. As
mentioned before, the string objects can be obfuscated inside a PDF, but using hex or
octal will be translated before the compression of the document. Making it pointless to use.
The only option that is possible to use is to encrypt the PDF using the built­in encryption
method that is supported by PDFs. The algorithm used differ based on the version of
the PDF, but for version 1.7 AES 256 is used. This is encryption standard is a widely­
used symmetric key algorithm to protect sensitive data. The “256” in AES 256 refers to
the key length of the algorithm, which is 256 bits. AES 256 works by breaking data into
blocks and applying mathematical transformations using the encryption key, resulting in
a highly­secure encrypted message that can only be decrypted with the correct key.
Even though this algorithm requires a key of exactly 256 bit in length, PDFs can be en­
crypted using an empty string as password. This may sound impossible, but the encryp­
tion key used to encrypt the contents of the file is not derived from a password, but rather
from a key that is embedded in the PDF file itself. This key is typically derived from the
file’s metadata or other information. Making it so there is no password required to open
the file and still encrypt/obfuscate the contents of the object streams inside the PDF. This
is possible because the same encryption method is used for Digital Rights Management
protection, which limits who can view, copy, print, or modify the document.
6.3
Server
Vercel will be used to host the web server. Setting up Vercel is pretty simple, the first step
is to register on their website [79]. After this, the Vercel CLI, which is a command­line
interface that has to be downloaded in order to create, manage and deploy projects. After
this some environments variables have to be set up which are keys used to connect to
APIs. These keys are the MongoDB API Key which is used to connect to the database
and the OpenAI key which is used to connect to the text generator API. Once this is done
Invisible Deception
25
==PAGE:31==
and the Python project is deployed, the web application is ready to use. The URL where
the server is hosted and where the actual code is available is shown in Appendix A.
6.3.1
Home page
The home page consists of two halves, each is responsible for two different actions. The
simplistic design of the page can be seen in Figure 6.7. The first half has 6 input fields and
a button, all connected to the generation of a new PDF. On the other hand, the other side
has a single input field and a button which is connected to the showing alerts. Once the
generate button is pressed, the previously described series of functions are executed that
result in the creation of a new PDF file which is provided to the user making the request as
an attachment. When the manage token button is pressed, all the alerts that have been
triggered by the given token will be displayed to the user.
Figure 6.7: Home page
6.3.2
Alert handling
Once an alert is triggered, the server takes the token which is the path of the URI. Checks
if this token exists in the database, if yes the IP address of the machine that triggered
the call is used to gather information through IP­API. This can be seen in Figure 6.8 This
information is the following: country, region, city, internet service provider(ISP). Creating a
dictionary from these values together with the token, IP address and the timestamp when
the alert has been processed, and saving it to the database. After this, the email address
that is connected to the token in the database is retrieved and used to send an email
containing the previously mentioned information. Lastly we check if a redirect address is
connected to the token inside the database, if so we redirect the request to that address.
26
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:32==
Figure 6.8: Retrieve information connected to an IP address
For sending the notification, a Gmail account is set up called honeytoken.alert@gmail.com.
Here, SMTP access has to be enabled, which generates a new key that can be used from
programs. Using the smtp library in python to authenticate to the Gmail SMTP server, we
gain access to sending mails programmatically.
6.3.3
Limitations
Even though Vercel is a powerful platform for deploying and scaling serverless applica­
tions, it has some limitations that users should consider. These include resource limits,
build time limits, limited server­side functionality, limited time­out for serverless functions,
limited control over server infrastructure, and pricing. For this small application, most of
these are not significant concerns, but the time­out limitations are quite significant as we
as using a serverless function(OpenAI API) to generate the text which could take some
time depending on the resources available, processing time and the availability of the ser­
vice. There are 3 different tiers available in Vercel, the time limits for serverless functions
are 5 seconds, 15 seconds and 30 seconds. Only the first tier is free to use, which is used
to host the program.
6.4
Database
As mentioned before, for saving and managing data, MongoDB is used. For setting up,
an account has to be created on their website [78]. Here you can customize a cluster by
adding different collections, where your data will be stored. In this implementation, we are
using 2 different collections: one for tokens and another for alerts. Using the pymongo
package, we gain access to all the API calls to our MongoDB. The initialization can be
seen in Figure 6.9.
Figure 6.9: Database initialization
Invisible Deception
27
==PAGE:33==
Once we have the database connection set up, the next step is to declare the functions
that will be used in our application using the API calls. These functions are the following:
• add_token: For saving newly generated tokens together with the email address
that is associated with it, where the alert will be sent later.
•
add_alert : Whenever an alert is triggered, information is gathered using the IP
address of the machine that has triggered the alert. After this, all this information is
saved into the database.
• get_tokens: A function which reads all existing tokens from the database.
• get_alerts: A function which reads all existing alerts triggered by a token from the
database.
• get_mail_address : A function to retrieve an email address that is connected to a
specific token.
• get_redirect_address : A function to retrieve a redirect address that is connected
to a specific token.
28
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:34==
7
Evaluation
The evaluation of the PDF honeytoken involves a three­part analysis aimed at assessing
the effectiveness of its alert mechanism, its stealthiness, and the level of authenticity
of the document. The first part involves comparing our honeytoken to that of a canary
token, which is an existing provider of PDF honeytokens. The second part involves using
various PDF analysis tools to determine if any of them is able to detect the presence of
honeytokens. Finally, PDF honeytokens are provided to select people for viewing and
asked to fill out the survey, which focuses on inquiring the authenticity of the document
and its stealthiness. By analyzing the results of these three evaluation methods, we can
better understand the effectiveness of this honeytoken as a security measure, and identify
any areas for improvement.
7.1
Comparison with Canary PDF
In evaluating the similarities and differences between our honeytoken and a Canary PDF
[7], it is observed that both employ the same action to facilitate a URI call. Despite the
acknowledged drawbacks associated with this action, it is deemed the optimal choice
for resolving a URI call. In anticipation of potential suspicion arising from an alert being
triggered, our web server offers the capability to redirect to an ordinary website to lower
suspicion.
The rest of the characteristics differ between the two files. There are many artifacts that
have been found in Canary PDF honeytokens which can be used to fingerprint them, and
these have been listed by Honeysweeper [21]. For starters, the size of them are always
approximately 5 KB, there are no contents inside the document, it is just a blank page.
The metadata that is inside every Canary PDF can be seen in Figure 7.1. Having the same
dates associated with different documents maybe can be considered a coincidence, but
having the same unique identifiers is a dead giveaway that these are in fact the same
documents. While this is static for these files for our PDFs, they are changed whenever
a new PDF is generated.
Figure 7.1: Canary PDF metadata
The Canary tokens also have fixed length identifiers, which makes it easier to automate
the detection of these honeytokens. As we are using random length IDs, this makes
detection more difficult. Having our files encrypted provides one more level of obfuscation
Invisible Deception
29
==PAGE:35==
that hides the URL from being detected, unless targeted with a decryption attack first.
More details about decryption will follow in the next section.
7.2
PDF analysis tools
7.2.1
Honeysweeper
As previously mentioned in Section 3.2, Honeysweeper [21] is a highly effective tool for
identifying the majority of Canary tokens. Its source code is publicly accessible at [80],
and it has proven successful in fingerprinting PDF­based Canary tokens. The finger­
printing procedure can be split into two steps: first, all URLs within the document are
identified, followed by the identification of the Canary tokens themselves. Honeysweeper
was specifically designed through the reverse engineering of the Canary token generation
process, allowing it to recognize the fixed­length IDs that are employed by Canary tokens.
Therefore, the tool is incapable of recognizing our files as honeytokens as the structure
of our IDs differ from those of the Canary. Figure 6.2 presents the results of the scan.
Figure 7.2: Honeysweeper result
Even if the identification of the honeytoken were to be completely modified, for instance,
by searching for our exact domain and disregarding the unique identifier, Honeysweeper
would still be unable to extract any URLs because the PDF files have been encrypted to
obscure their background contents from analysis by any application.
7.2.2
Other tools
There are a number of tools that have been developed by Didier Stevens [81], that can be
used to generate, encrypt, decrypt, and analyze PDF files. As we focus on the analyzing
of the files, two tools will be used for this purpose, PDFid and PDF­parser. PDFid is a
tool that analyzes a PDF file and identifies any potential security risks by checking its
metadata, structure, and embedded objects. The result of scanning our file with PDFid
can be seen in Figure 7.3. We can see that it has been able to identify that there is an
additional action(/AA) inside the document, but it did not pick up on any action that this
event would trigger. There are some objects stream(/ObjStm) elements found though,
which can contain additional objects, in this case we know that there is a URI action there
somewhere. So let’s continue with the next tool to see if we are able to find it.
PDF­parser is a tool that parses and analyzes the internal structure of a PDF file, allow­
ing users to extract and analyze individual elements. Some key features of PDF­parser
include the ability to extract embedded objects, detect malicious JavaScript, identify sus­
picious URLs, and analyze the structure of the PDF file. It can also be used to search for
specific strings or patterns within the file, which can be useful for identifying hidden con­
tent or malicious code. Using this tool to scan our file, we can identify the AA and some
ObjStm elements. This tool was also used by Srinivasa et al. [20] to fingerprint Canary
PDFs successfully. While the object streams can be decompressed in those files as our
file is encrypted, the tool is not capable to do so. Therefore, it is not able to find any URLs
that would point to our direction. The password cracking capability is intentionally missing
30
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:36==
according to the developer to avoid issues that may arise when malicious entities would
try to decrypt legitimate PDFs containing Digital Rights Management protections.
Figure 7.3: PDFid scan
Unfortunately, there are several tools that can be used to decrypt PDFs without knowing
the password, some of which are designed specifically for this purpose, while others have
more general decryption capabilities. As there is no lock­out protection after any amount
of wrong password attempts, it is possible to brute force it, using these tools. For this
reason, having a more complex password would merely just slow down the adversaries.
Using any of these tools to decrypt the PDF and then return using PDF­parser, the URL
will be successfully retrieved from the file.
So in the end, there is a way to fingerprint our honeytokens, but it would require multiple
tools and manual checking. As automatic detection is off the table, this makes it difficult
and time­consuming to identify honeytoken documents among authentic ones when there
are several of these scattered around an organization.
7.3
Survey
As for the last part of the evaluation, a honeytoken has been generated and distributed
to some people. They were asked to open the file and fill out a survey regarding their
reactions about the document. The PDF that was used was created with the following
inputs:
• Title: PLS Studio Kft.
• Subtitle: Executive Summary
• Section: Business Plan
• Context: Write a 200 word confidential business plan for the architecture firm called
PLS Studio Kft..
• Email:
Invisible Deception
31
==PAGE:37==
• Redirect: https://adobe.com
The token corresponding to this document is: “an4jupf417hu9sdabgcoftykns9df8”. The
visual representation of the document can be seen in Appendix C.
The survey comprises five questions. Two questions inquire about the operating system
and application used to open the file. Two questions pertain to the document’s authenticity
– one asks for the initial impression, while the other asks for feedback after reading. The
reason for splitting this question into two parts is to account for non­English speakers
who may not detect grammatical errors in the text when using translation tools, which are
not always 100% accurate and may create errors themselves. The final question asks
whether respondents have experienced any unexpected behavior when interacting with
the PDF. The results of the survey are visible in Appendix B.
The data shows that out of the 17 participants who responded, 9 of them utilized Adobe
Acrobat in some capacity, while 5 used Google Chrome, 2 used Microsoft Edge, and 1
used Preview. The majority of these applications were running on Windows, with only 2
running on Mac. It is reasonable to infer that one of these Mac applications was Preview.
The majority of participants indicated a high level of confidence in the authenticity of the
file (71%), although this decreased to 65% after reading the document. When asked if
they encountered any unexpected behaviors while interacting with the file, the majority did
not report any issues. However, 4 participants did observe irregularities: 3 reported that
their browser was opened to https://adobe.com, and 1 encountered a security warning that
requested permission to connect to the domain honeytokens.vercel.app. In comparison to
the notifications received, which numbered 7 in total, only 4 participants reported anything
unusual. The alerts can be seen in Figure 7.4.
Figure 7.4: Received alerts
It is worth noting that the small size of the study group limits the generalizability of the
results. Nonetheless, the data suggests that Windows and Adobe Acrobat are the most
commonly used operating system and application, respectively, for interacting with PDFs,
which aligns with global usage patterns. Additionally, most instances of Adobe Acrobat
triggered an alert, with only half of these users noting something anomalous.
32
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:38==
8
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to study the current state of honeytokens and enhance one of
them by developing a stealthier version that can evade fingerprinting.
Available deception technologies were described in Chapter 2. Including honeypots, hon­
eytokens and moving target defense. In Chapter 3 known fingerprinting attacks against
honeypots and honeytokens were discussed. We could see that there are many unique
characteristics, also known as artifacts, that are associated with these technologies. By
pinpointing these attributes, it makes it easy to distinguish fake systems/entities from real
ones. Using the knowledge that have been gathered throughout the research of honeyto­
kens a design of a stealthy honeytoken have been proposed in Chapter 5. This contains
countermeasures of known fingerprinting techniques against these honeytokens. Chang­
ing the metadata, content, file size and using a random length ID makes it so passive
fingerprinting techniques are much harder to accomplish.
The implementation of design is described in Chapter 6, where we have arrived to more
specific choices regarding the structure of the PDF. Using URI action, which is currently the
best among available actions that are supported by PDFs. Having an AI natural language
processor to generate the contents of the file, making it customizable for specific needs
and appear as any other authentic document that was produced by humans.
In Chapter 7, a three part evaluation has been conducted on the newly developed PDF
honeytoken. First, we compared it to an existing open source PDF honeytoken produced
by Thinkst Canary [7]. Seeing several differences that were used in our implementation
to counter fingerprinting techniques. This could be seen further in the second part where
Honeysweeper, an open source canary fingerprinting tool, was used to try to identify our
product which was unsuccessful. These differences include:
• Different metadata for each file
• Different content for each file
• Random length IDs
• Encrypted structure
• provide redirecting to an external URL
We were able to use other manual tools to passively fingerprint this file, but this included
multiple tools and the use of a password cracker that would exploit the security of PDF
files.
In the last part, a survey was conducted, by providing a PDF honeytoken to a select
few and asking their impressions on them. We could see that most of them graded the
contents of the file being very good. Roughly half of them used some version of Adobe
Acrobat to interact with the file, most of these triggered an alert and only half of them
noticed any irregularities, this being the opening of the browser. This could be due to the
fact that the browser opened at the home page of Adobe, as this was provided as the
redirecting address connected to the token.
While file­based honeytokens could be a valuable addition to the security of a system,
they have their own limitations. Firstly, the alerting mechanism that is hidden inside the
Invisible Deception
33
==PAGE:39==
files are heavily depended on the application that is opening them. Both the type of the
application and the security settings that are set up within them. These applications (in
most cases) are continuously developed and changed, making it difficult to have a mech­
anism hidden in a file that would be working indefinitely. In the case of PDFs currently,
while every version of Adobe Acrobat supports actions to be triggered once a document
is opened, other applications like the most popular browsers don’t. The alert that is trig­
gered, no matter if it is a DNS call or an HTTP, the network packets are always present
and adversaries are able to see that there is a request call pointing to our domain or IP ad­
dress. As this is considered active fingerprinting, we consider this a minor inconvenience
as the alert is always triggered.
Having these properties makes this the stealthiest open source PDF­based honeytoken
available currently, making them very difficult to be passively fingerprinted.
34
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
[1]
Mason B. Webb. Deception in WWII. https://warfarehistorynetwork.com/article/
deception-in-wwii/.
[2]
Cliff Wang and Zhuo Lu. “Cyber deception: Overview and the road ahead”. In: IEEE
Security & Privacy 16.2 (2018), pp. 80–85.
[3]
Lance Spitzner. “Honeypots: Catching the insider threat”. In: 19th Annual Computer
Security Applications Conference, 2003. Proceedings. IEEE. 2003, pp. 170–179.
[4]
Lance Spitzner. Honeytokens: The Other Honeypot. https://community.broadcom.
com/symantecenterprise/communities/community-home/librarydocuments/viewdocument?
DocumentKey=74450cf5-2f11-48c5-8d92-4687f5978988&CommunityKey=1ecf5f55-
9545-44d6-b0f4-4e4a7f5f5e68&tab=librarydocuments.
[5]
Ari Juels and Ronald L Rivest. “Honeywords: Making password­cracking detectable”.
In: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC conference on Computer & communica­
tions security. 2013, pp. 145–160.
[6]
Mohammed H Almeshekah et al. “Ersatzpasswords: Ending password cracking and
detecting password leakage”. In: Proceedings of the 31st Annual Computer Security
Applications Conference. 2015, pp. 311–320.
[7]
Thinkst Applied Research. Canarytokens. https://github.com/thinkst/canarytokens.
[8]
Maya Bercovitch et al. “HoneyGen: An automated honeytokens generator”. In: Pro­
ceedings of 2011 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Infor­
matics. IEEE. 2011, pp. 131–136.
[9]
Li Zhang and Vrizlynn LL Thing. “Three decades of deception techniques in ac­
tive cyber defense­retrospect and outlook”. In: Computers & Security 106 (2021),
p. 102288.
[10]
Adel Karimi. Honeybits. https://github.com/0x4D31/honeybits.
[11]
Adel Karimi. Honeylambda. https://github.com/0x4D31/honeyLambda.
[12]
3CORESec. Trapdoor. https://github.com/3CORESec/Trapdoor.
[13]
Secureworks. DCEPT. https://github.com/secureworks/dcept.
[14]
Thorsten Holz Frederic Raynal. “Detecting Honeypots and other suspicious environ­
ments”. In: Workshop on Information Assurance and Security. Vol. 1. 2005, p. 1555.
[15]
S Mukkamala et al. “Detection of virtual environments and low interaction honey­
pots”. In: 2007 IEEE SMC Information Assurance and Security Workshop. IEEE.
2007, pp. 92–98.
[16]
Lance Alt, Robert Beverly, and Alberto Dainotti. “Uncovering network tarpits with de­
greaser”. In: Proceedings of the 30th Annual Computer Security Applications Con­
ference. 2014, pp. 156–165.
[17]
Xinwen Fu et al. “On recognizing virtual honeypots and countermeasures”. In: 2006
2nd IEEE International Symposium on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Com­
puting. IEEE. 2006, pp. 211–218.
[18]
Shreyas Srinivasa, Jens Myrup Pedersen, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. “Gotta
catch’em all: a Multistage Framework for honeypot fingerprinting”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.10652 (2021).
[19]
Alexander Vetterl and Richard Clayton. “Bitter harvest: Systematically fingerprint­
ing low­and medium­interaction honeypots at internet scale”. In: 12th {USENIX}
Workshop on Offensive Technologies ({WOOT} 18). 2018.
Invisible Deception
35
==PAGE:41==
[20]
Shreyas Srinivasa, Jens Myrup Pedersen, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. “To­
wards systematic honeytoken fingerprinting”. In: 13th International Conference on
Security of Information and Networks. 2020, pp. 1–5.
[21]
Mikkel M Andersen, H David, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. “Honeysweeper:
Towards stealthy honeytoken fingerprinting techniques”. In: ().
[22]
Kevin D Mitnick and William L Simon. The art of deception: Controlling the human
element of security. John Wiley & Sons, 2003.
[23]
Kevin Mitnick. Ghost in the wires: My adventures as the world’s most wanted hacker.
Hachette UK, 2011.
[24]
Cliff Stoll. The cuckoo’s egg: tracking a spy through the maze of computer espi­
onage. Simon and Schuster, 2005.
[25]
Lance Spitzner. Honeypots: tracking hackers. Vol. 1. Addison­Wesley Reading,
2003.
[26]
Daniel Fraunholz et al. “Demystifying deception technology: A survey”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.06196 (2018).
[27]
Xiao Han, Nizar Kheir, and Davide Balzarotti. “Deception techniques in computer
security: A research perspective”. In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 51.4 (2018),
pp. 1–36.
[28]
Lance Spitzner. Honeypots: Tracking hackers addison wesley professional. 2002.
[29]
Iyatiti Mokube and Michele Adams. “Honeypots: concepts, approaches, and chal­
lenges”. In: Proceedings of the 45th annual southeast regional conference. 2007,
pp. 321–326.
[30]
Jeremiah K Jones and Gordon W Romney. “Honeynets: an educational resource
for IT security”. In: Proceedings of the 5th conference on Information technology
education. 2004, pp. 24–28.
[31]
Karthik Sadasivam, Banuprasad Samudrala, and T Andrew Yang. “Design of net­
work security projects using honeypots”. In: Journal of Computing Sciences in Col­
leges 20.4 (2005), pp. 282–293.
[32]
Abhishek Mairh et al. “Honeypot in network security: a survey”. In: Proceedings of
the 2011 international conference on communication, computing & security. 2011,
pp. 600–605.
[33]
John Harrison. Honeypots, the Hottest Thing in Intrusion Detection. 2003.
[34]
William W Martin et al. “Honey pots and honey nets­security through deception”. In:
SANS Institute Paper (2001).
[35]
Christian Kreibich and Jon Crowcroft. “Honeycomb: creating intrusion detection sig­
natures using honeypots”. In: ACM SIGCOMM computer communication review
34.1 (2004), pp. 51–56.
[36]
Matthew L Bringer, Christopher A Chelmecki, and Hiroshi Fujinoki. “A survey: Re­
cent advances and future trends in honeypot research”. In: International Journal of
Computer Network and Information Security 4.10 (2012), p. 63.
[37]
Tom Liston. LaBrea: ”Sticky” Honeypot and IDS. https://labrea.sourceforge.io/labrea-
info.html.
[38]
Leslie Shing. An improved tarpit for network deception. Tech. rep. Naval Postgrad­
uate School Monterey United States, 2016.
[39]
Niels Provos et al. “A Virtual Honeypot Framework.” In: USENIX Security Sympo­
sium. Vol. 173. 2004. 2004, pp. 1–14.
[40]
Vasu Sethia and A Jeyasekar. “Malware capturing and analysis using dionaea hon­
eypot”. In: 2019 International Carnahan Conference on Security Technology (ICCST).
IEEE. 2019, pp. 1–4.
36
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:42==
[41]
Quang Duy La et al. “Deceptive attack and defense game in honeypot­enabled
networks for the internet of things”. In: IEEE Internet of Things Journal 3.6 (2016),
pp. 1025–1035.
[42]
Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis et al. “This network is infected: Hostage­a low­interaction
honeypot for mobile devices”. In: Proceedings of the Third ACM workshop on Se­
curity and privacy in smartphones & mobile devices. 2013, pp. 43–48.
[43]
Kevin Borders, Laura Falk, and Atul Prakash. “OpenFire: Using deception to reduce
network attacks”. In: 2007 Third International Conference on Security and Privacy
in Communications Networks and the Workshops­SecureComm 2007. IEEE. 2007,
pp. 224–233.
[44]
Sebastian Biedermann, Martin Mink, and Stefan Katzenbeisser. “Fast dynamic ex­
tracted honeypots in cloud computing”. In: Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Workshop
on Cloud computing security workshop. 2012, pp. 13–18.
[45]
Jonathan A Voris et al. “Bait and snitch: Defending computer systems with decoys”.
In: (2013).
[46]
Ari Juels. “A bodyguard of lies: the use of honey objects in information security”. In:
Proceedings of the 19th ACM symposium on Access control models and technolo­
gies. 2014, pp. 1–4.
[47]
Frederico Araujo et al. “From patches to honey­patches: Lightweight attacker misdi­
rection, deception, and disinformation”. In: Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC
conference on computer and communications security. 2014, pp. 942–953.
[48]
Jeffrey Avery and Eugene H Spafford. “Ghost patches: Fake patches for fake vul­
nerabilities”. In: IFIP International Conference on ICT Systems Security and Privacy
Protection. Springer. 2017, pp. 399–412.
[49]
Neil C Rowe, E John Custy, and Binh T Duong. “Defending cyberspace with fake
honeypots.” In: J. Comput. 2.2 (2007), pp. 25–36.
[50]
Martin Lazarov, Jeremiah Onaolapo, and Gianluca Stringhini. “Honey sheets: What
happens to leaked google spreadsheets?” In: 9th Workshop on Cyber Security Ex­
perimentation and Test (CSET 16). 2016.
[51]
Daniel Fraunholz and Hans D Schotten. “Defending web servers with feints, distrac­
tion and obfuscation”. In: 2018 International Conference on Computing, Networking
and Communications (ICNC). IEEE. 2018, pp. 21–25.
[52]
Hamed Okhravi, William W Streilein, and Kevin S Bauer. “Moving target techniques:
leveraging uncertainty for cyber defense”. In: Lincoln Laboratory Journal 22.1 (2016),
pp. 100–109.
[53]
AK Ghosh, D Pendarakis, and WH Sanders. “Moving target defense co­chair’s
report­National Cyber Leap Year Summit 2009”. In: Tech. Rep., Federal Networking
and Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD) Program (2009).
[54]
Thomas Hobson et al. “On the challenges of effective movement”. In: Proceedings
of the First ACM Workshop on Moving Target Defense. 2014, pp. 41–50.
[55]
Rui Zhuang, Scott A DeLoach, and Xinming Ou. “Towards a theory of moving target
defense”. In: Proceedings of the first ACM workshop on moving target defense.
2014, pp. 31–40.
[56]
Gui­lin Cai et al. “Moving target defense: state of the art and characteristics”. In:
Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic Engineering 17.11 (2016), pp. 1122–
1153.
[57]
Jin B Hong and Dong Seong Kim. “Assessing the effectiveness of moving target
defenses using security models”. In: IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing 13.2 (2015), pp. 163–177.
Invisible Deception
37
==PAGE:43==
[58]
Dorene Kewley et al. “Dynamic approaches to thwart adversary intelligence gather­
ing”. In: Proceedings DARPA Information Survivability Conference and Exposition
II. DISCEX’01. Vol. 1. IEEE. 2001, pp. 176–185.
[59]
Spyros Antonatos et al. “Defending against hitlist worms using network address
space randomization”. In: Proceedings of the 2005 ACM workshop on Rapid mal­
code. 2005, pp. 30–40.
[60]
Jafar Haadi Jafarian, Ehab Al­Shaer, and Qi Duan. “Openflow random host mu­
tation: transparent moving target defense using software defined networking”. In:
Proceedings of the first workshop on Hot topics in software defined networks. 2012,
pp. 127–132.
[61]
Panos Kampanakis, Harry Perros, and Tsegereda Beyene. “SDN­based solutions
for moving target defense network protection”. In: Proceeding of IEEE International
Symposium on a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks 2014. IEEE.
2014, pp. 1–6.
[62]
PaX Team. “PaX address space layout randomization”. In: http://pax.grsecurity.net/docs/aslr.txt
(2003).
[63]
Lixin Li, James E Just, and R Sekar. “Address­space randomization for windows
systems”. In: 2006 22nd Annual Computer Security Applications Conference (AC­
SAC’06). IEEE. 2006, pp. 329–338.
[64]
Per Larsen et al. “SoK: Automated software diversity”. In: 2014 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy. IEEE. 2014, pp. 276–291.
[65]
Mohamed Azab, Riham Hassan, and Mohamed Eltoweissy. “ChameleonSoft: A
moving target defense system”. In: 7th International Conference on Collaborative
Computing: Networking, Applications and Worksharing (CollaborateCom). IEEE.
2011, pp. 241–250.
[66]
Eleazar Aguirre­Anaya et al. “A new procedure to detect low interaction honeypots”.
In: International Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering 4.6 (2014), p. 848.
[67]
Gabe Turner Aliza Vigderman. How To Hide IP Addresses. https://www.security.
org/vpn/hide-your-ip-address/.
[68]
Adobe Systems Incorporated. PDF Reference sixth edition. https://opensource.
adobe.com/dc-acrobat-sdk-docs/pdfstandards/pdfreference1.7old.pdf. 2006.
[69]
Jens Müller, Christian Mainka Dominik Noss, and Jörg Schwenk Vladislav Mlade­
nov. Portable Document Flaws 101. https://www.blackhat.com/us-20/briefings/
schedule/#portable-document-flaws--20387. 2008.
[70]
Laurent Frayssignes Alexandre Blonce Eric Filiol1. Portable Document Format (PDF)
Security Analysis and Malware Threats. https://www.blackhat.com/presentations/
bh-europe-08/Filiol/Presentation/bh-eu-08-filiol.pdf. 2008.
[71]
Dan­Sabin Popescu. “Hiding malicious content in PDF documents”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1201.0397 (2012).
[72]
Check Point. NTLM CREDENTIALS THEFT VIA PDF FILES. https : / / research .
checkpoint.com/2018/ntlm-credentials-theft-via-pdf-files/.
[73]
Adobe. FeatureLockDown (Lockable Settings). https://www.adobe.com/devnet-
docs/acrobatetk/tools/PrefRef/Windows/FeatureLockDown.html.
[74]
Didier Stevens. PDF, Let Me Count the Ways... https://blog.didierstevens.com/2008/
04/29/pdf-let-me-count-the-ways/.
[75]
OpenAI. GPT­3: Language Models are Few­Shot Learners. https://openai.com/gpt-
3/. Accessed: March 2023. 2020.
[76]
Jacob Devlin et al. “BERT: Pre­training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Lan­
guage Understanding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018). Accessed: March
2023.
38
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:44==
[77]
Colin Raffel et al. “Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text­
to­Text Transformer”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10683 (2020). Accessed: March
2023.
[78]
MongoDB Inc. MongoDB. https://www.mongodb.com/.
[79]
Vercel Inc. Vercel. https://vercel.com/home.
[80]
AAU Network Security. canarytokensfingerprinter. https://github.com/aau-network-
security/canarytokens_finger_printer.
[81]
Didier Stevens. PDF Tools. https://blog.didierstevens.com/programs/pdf-tools/.
Invisible Deception
39
==PAGE:45==
40
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:46==
A
Web application
The honeytoken web application which is used to generate PDFs, view alerts and han­
dle the receiving the alerts and sending notifications is accessible at https://honeytokens.
vercel.app/. To inspect the code that is deployed at the web hosting service, go to https:
//github.com/akosP/honeytoken_project.
Invisible Deception
41
==PAGE:47==
42
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:48==
B
Survey
Windows
Mac
Linux
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
88%
12%
0%
Respondents
15
2
0
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Very Poor
Below avarage
Avarage
Above avarage
Very good
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
0%
12%
6%
12%
71%
Respondents
0
2
1
2
12
Very poor
Below avarage
Avarage
Above avarage
Very good
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
6%
6%
12%
12%
65%
Respondents
1
1
2
2
11
What operating system are you running?
 
What application are you using to view PDF files?
Acrobat Reader
Adobe Acrobat
Adobe Acrobat DC
Adobe Acrobat DC
Adobe Acrobat DC
Adobe Acrobat Pro
Adobe Arcobat Reader
Google Chrome
Google Chrome
Google Chrome
Microsoft Edge
Microsoft Edge
Preview
adobe acrobat
adobe acrobat reader
chrome
google chrome
How genuine did the file appear on first glance?
 
How genuine did the file appear after reading?
 
Invisible Deception
43
==PAGE:49==
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
New
Distributed
Partially Complete
Complete
Rejected
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
0%
0%
0%
100%
0%
Respondents
0
0
0
17
0
Did anything unexpected happen when opening the document?
A security warning has appeared saying that the document is trying to connect to: "honeytokens.vercel.app". Asking permission
if it should be allowed or blocked.
Adobe.com has opened on Google Chrome.
Google Chrome came into the foreground loading adobe.com.
No
No
No
No.
Not at all!
Nothing happened
Nothing out of the ordinary.
Nothing special happened
Nothing that I have noticed.
Nothing unexpected happened.
The home page of Adobe has opened in the browser.
no
no
no
Overall Status
 
44
Invisible Deception
==PAGE:50==
C
PDF honeytoken visual representation
Invisible Deception
45
