==PAGE:1==
Situation awareness for autonomous clean-
ing robot
Mads Frimann Madsen (s134109)
Master of Science in Engineering
2022
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
b
(empty)
==PAGE:3==
Situation awareness for autonomous cleaning robot
Report written by:
Mads Frimann Madsen (s134109)
Advisor(s):
Jens Christian Andersen, Associate Professor at Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineer-
ing
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
22 August 2022- 5 March 2023
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfilment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Mads Frimann Madsen, 2022
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Achieving autonomous behavior can be challenging. The framework proposed here en-
ables complex behavior by connecting simpler modules to create both strong situational
awareness and opportunities to expand over time as more sensors or actions become
available.
Situation awareness involves perceiving, understanding, and anticipating the future.
By using action modules and a decision module, the hardware platform can gradually
be expanded over time. The modules are self-contained, and the decision modules are
designed to handle any number of action modules. This makes the overall system eas-
ily scalable. The current implementation handles a case where a mobile robot with a
sweeping unit is tasked with cleaning in a semi-rough environment. The proposed frame-
work allows users to construct sophisticated behaviors and responses without needing
to describe a complete explicit state machine.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical and Photonics Engi-
neering at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. degree in Electrical Engineering.
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Analysis
3
2.1
State of the art of Situational Awareness for Robots . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Framework
5
3.1
Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Situation awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
Action modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.5
Decision module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Situation awareness modules
9
4.1
Overview of blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Cleanliness of the area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Battery level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
People in the area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.5
Experimental Setups in area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.6
Combined map
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.7
Remaining space in bin on the sweeping unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.8
Possible improvements to system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.9
Example of a Situation awareness module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Action modules
19
5.1
Overview of modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Clean area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3
Return to docking station
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:10==
vi
Contents
5.4
Local and Global Planner
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.5
Kill module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.6
Parallel modules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.7
Possible improvements to system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.8
Example of an Action module code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Decision Module
29
6.1
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2
Possible improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Sensors
31
7.1
Possible sensors that could better the system in the future . . . . . . . .
34
7.2
Test of localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
8
Tools
37
9
Discussion and perspective
39
9.1
System tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
9.2
Perspective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
10 Conclusion
47
Bibliography
49
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Autonomous behavior for cars, mobile robots, and other controlled systems can be chal-
lenging to program. The first step is to understand the environment and internal state
using sensors. Sensors provide current information and give the system the knowledge it
needs to complete tasks like driving or controlling actions. While sensors provide data,
they do not provide situational awareness, hereunder understanding. A system is needed
to gather information and build this understanding. Current systems often use state ma-
chines, which can be explained as being a graph of nodes which have actions associated
with them. These nodes correspond to different states of the system. Another approach
involves defining real-world rules for the robot to follow when working. This project
proposes a new framework to achieve complex behavior through simple, interconnected
modules. These modules will include situation awareness, action, and decision modules.
1.1
Objectives
Developing a modular system to provide situation awareness for a mobile robot, enabling
it to autonomously clean in a semi-rough environment.
The robot must be able to
localize itself in the environment while monitoring its internal health, including but not
limited to battery life. Localization is only half the challenge. The situation awareness
modules must then assess the situation and appropriately deliver the results to the
decision module. After a decision has been made, a mission is planned to clean the area
autonomously and safely.
1.2
Limitations
The project will not focus on the raw sensors, but only the assessment of this data, also
object detection and human detection lays outside the scope. The hardware is also not
a part of the project, as this could be changed given the modularity of the system the
project works on developing. This also means that most of the hardware choices lays
outside the project and will therefore be a possible limitation.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
1.3
Thesis outline
• Chapter 2: Analysis
The overall concept of the framework and situational awareness is explained.
• Chapter 3: Framework
Going deeper into the structure of the proposed framework, both the parts that
are developed in this project and the parts that are included to help solve the
current case.
• Chapter 4: Situation awareness modules
The chapter explains every situation awareness module in depth, as well as the
complementary modules.
• Chapter 5: Action modules
The chapter explains every action module in depth, as well as the complementary
modules.
• Chapter 6: Decision Module
The module explains its structure and internal workings.
• Chapter 7: Sensors
The chapter explains some of the more complex sensors and localization methods,
especially simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), which enables the robot
to determine its location.
• Chapter 8: Tools
The chapter discusses some tools utilized in the project and describes the robotics
platform Fejemis.
• Chapter 9: Discussion and perspective
The framework’s strengths and weaknesses are explored through several cases.
• Chapter 10: Conclusion
The conclusions of the project
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
Making autonomous robots is not easy, and there are many ways of achieving it. The
software framework this project will develop and test tries to be a novel way of achieving
a high level of customizability without having to completely describe the ontology for
the system. To help in the process of developing the framework, it has been chosen to
apply it to a concept, in this case cleaning (sweeping). This will help figure out which
modules should be developed to test the framework. But remember that the framework
are intended to be able to be customized in regard to the desired purpose.
2.1
State of the art of Situational Awareness
for Robots
The state of the art in the field mostly uses state machines and complete ontologies.
This means that the designer need to think about every situation the robot can find
itself in and have a solution for those situations. The latter approach can be found used
in [Asm+].
Other approaches to situational awareness for robots use deep learning to make
decisions based on data from sensors. This approach uses a large amount of data to
make decisions, but the decisions are made within a “black box”, meaning the decision-
making process is not transparent.
This project takes a different approach to situational awareness for robots. Simply
having a “black box” system where the robot’s reasoning is opaque leads to problems
that are hard to solve, especially regarding bias. However, fully describing a robot’s
state machine or programming all its rules is diﬀicult and makes adapting the robot to
new environments or tasks challenging. Therefore, by developing easy-to-use modules
and intuitive connections, an implicit state machine emerges that is much easier to
modify for different jobs or environments. Instead of simply feeding data into a black
box that makes decisions without providing the user a clear understanding of why, a
more nuanced approach is needed.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Framework
The base of the system is the framework integrating both situation awareness (SA),
Action modules and the decision module.
The framework provides a structured approach for decision-making, enabling the
system to respond to changing situations in a timely and effective manner. Instead of
growing more complex as the task and more situations need to be handled, the system
uses many smaller modules where complexity arises from interconnections. Each module
will be described in further detail in later chapters.
As the framework can work with any number of modules for both situation awareness
and actions, it is easy to start using and then improve further over time as problems are
found, or new actions can be done by the robot.
Figure 3.1: Overview of the framework
Shown in figure 3.1 a simplified diagram shows each layer of the framework: Sensors,
Situations awareness, Action modules and Decision module, while the arrows in between
shows the flow of the connections.
In this chapter, each section will be explained in regard to the framework, while in
later chapters each module will be explained in greater detail.
3.1
Sensors
The framework will not work without sensors. Therefore, the system starts with reading
values from both external and internally from the robot. Some sensor values are more
or less just used as they are received from the hardware, while others are complex
==PAGE:16==
6
3 Framework
computation made from “raw” signals such as the pose coming from the camera through
the process of Visual odometry.
Most of the sensors are not part of the project and will just be described in regard
to the use here.
Further detail about the sensor section can be read in a later chapter.
3.2
Connections
The heart of the system comes from all the connections between the modules.
This is one of the great design parameters for this framework, as the designer needs
to take great care in understanding how to get the best insight in each situation that
should be tracked.
And for each action module, the correct situations should be tracked to make sure
the correct actions are planned, and that the correct score is decided.
3.3
Situation awareness
These modules will each keep track of one predefined situation. To make sure the right
modules are created and used, it is important to analyze the tasks and environments
that the work will be done in, when using the framework.
Each module will operate by analyzing data from the sensors needed to understand
the situation. Since the system may not have a direct sensor for the required conditions,
multiple sensors may be necessary during the data collection phase.
Analyzing sensor data will improve understanding of the current situation. This can
involve complex analysis and will depend heavily on available sensors and the situation
that needs assessment. When creating the comprehension, it is a good idea to be able
to project its values into the future, allowing the module to understand not only the
current situation but also what will likely happen.
This means the modules can adjust their output accordingly, such as changing output
to tell the action modules that light levels will soon be too low, before they actually get
too low for the localization system. This allows the robot to return home safely before
the low light levels and avoid getting stuck.
As chosen in the analysis chapter this project will focus on using the framework for
a cleaning robot, a further analysis is conducted in the Situation awareness chapter.
==PAGE:17==
3.4 Action modules
7
3.3.1
What is Situation Awareness (SA)
Situation Awareness as described by Endsley [End95] as both perception, comprehension
and projection of relevant elements and their significance both now and in the future. By
keeping track of chosen situations, the system will be able to do more than just navigation
and simple tasks. It will be able to do complex planning to ensure the desired outcome
is reached. This is done by balancing the many possible action modules.
3.4
Action modules
These modules are very specific for the chosen overall problem formulation. Therefore, as
the robot needs to sweep the floors, certain actions should be developed. As development
of hardware can be expensive and take time, one should always try to use a simple system
to handle the problem before investing in something more complex. After putting the
system to work, it will be possible to determine which actions could have been needed
to increase the usability.
For this project the framework will be used on a cleaning robot and the action
important are therefore in regard to this. a further analysis is conducted in the action
module chapter.
Each module have three important parts. firstly, the plan that should be executed if
the module is chosen to run. Secondly, the score that tells the decision module to which
degree the action is wanted and an ID number.
This ID number will be imported as the system expands, making it easier to com-
municate between all the action modules and the decision module.
3.5
Decision module
This simple module determines the overall framework’s course of action. It ranks the
scores from the action modules and adds a constant to the highest-scoring module when
choosing actions to stabilize it. The module works by publishing a flag and ID number:
first indicating if anything should run, and next which module that should be.
==PAGE:18==
8
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 4
Situation awareness
modules
4.1
Overview of blocks
This chapter will dive into the modules that give the system situation awareness. Mod-
ules track only small parts, making them easy to build and maintain, yet they still
provide a high level of detail for the Actions modules to handle a variety of scenarios.
The current system have these modules:
• Cleanliness of the area
• Battery level
• People in the area
• Setups in area
• Remaining space in bin on the sweeping unit
4.2
Cleanliness of the area
It is important to keep track of the cleanliness of the whole area in order to make
informed decisions about where to send the robot for cleaning. By having an up-to-date
map of the area’s cleanliness, the robot can be sent to the dirtiest areas first, ensuring
that the most eﬀicient cleaning process is followed. Additionally, by having an accurate
map of the cleanliness of the area, the robot can avoid areas that are already clean, thus
conserving energy and time that could be better spent elsewhere.
4.2.1
How does it function
The modules function by overlaying (in the form of an occupancy grid) a map of the
area and gradually increasing the amount of filthiness. As the robot moves around, the
spots it visits are marked as clean again. The status of cleanliness only changes if the
robot’s brushes are running. The module continually updates its overlay and outputs
the coordinates for the dirtiest spot in order to direct the action module there.
==PAGE:20==
10
4 Situation awareness modules
4.2.2
Test
A test of the system shows how the internal map becomes progressively dirtier over time.
This needs improvement to avoid dirtying areas the robot can’t clean.
The current
approach may cause the robot to repeatedly try planning to clean inaccessible areas,
creating a loop. What the figure will also show is that the area that the robot drives
over is cleaned.
Figure 4.1: Screenshot of RViz showing map with Cleanliness overlay
The occupancy map works by having a large grid of numbers corresponding to each
coordinate. If a spot is clean, the map’s value is 100 and shown as black, while 0 is
white. This can be seen in the figure and gives the map its grayness, with black spots
indicating cleaned areas.
The screenshots also gives a glimpse of the map made by RTAB-Map and the local
map with a cost map overlay. Normally the global map would be “cleaned” from every
not permanent thing, so the robot would be able to navigate there normally, and only
when it tries it sees with the local map that it can’t get there. Here, the global map
has not been “cleaned”. “Cleaning” the map works by ensuring that black areas are out
of reach for the robot, while white areas are accessible. Therefore, if not “cleaned”, the
global map would not allow the robot to go places where there were some temporary
obstacles during mapping.
4.2.3
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
The module takes a few inputs from sensors and the system itself.
==PAGE:21==
4.3 Battery level
11
The locations of the robot are received and the transform from the odom frame to
the map frame used to track the placement of the robot on the map.
The module subscribes to the enable status of the brush from the robot. (right now
this is not implemented since the robot is not publishing that information, a simulated
input is instead used.)
The output from the module is the (x,y) coordinates of the most dirty section in the
area.
Internally, the module keeps a map that can be subscribed to for diagnostics and
logging.
4.2.4
Possible improvements
Improve the way of making the area dirty
The module’s current technique for determining a dirty area relies solely on time, which
can be improved in many ways. By tracking people in the area, the module could better
infer if an area should be more or less dirty. Monitoring where people spend the most
time in the area could indicate places that should be considered dirtier. The time of
year is also a factor, as some seasons bring more mud and fallen leaves.
Improve stability
Another improvement comes from the fact that the modules utilize the robot’s pose.
Should RTAB-Map fail to publish it for any reason, the cleaning tracking will not occur.
Here, a sensor fusion system with the IMU could work and has been tested, but due to
unforeseen issues with transformations and TFs in ROS (Robot Operating System), the
pose from the topic does not overlay the map.
Improve correctness of module
Lastly, the cleaned area is only the single index in the array, but should cover an area
with the same size as the cleaning head.
4.3
Battery level
Keeping track of battery level is important for several reasons. It helps determine when
to replace batteries over the long run. It also shows the current charge, so we know if
the robot and sweeper can continue cleaning or only explore. We want to avoid getting
stuck with a low battery and unable to return to the charger. Monitoring both the robot
and sweeper batteries lets us know when it is safe to clean and when we should limit to
exploring the area. Instead of just the remaining battery percentage or estimating the
minutes left before the battery drains, these modules convert the sensor inputs into an
estimate of the remaining distance that can be driven or area that can be cleaned. Since
the batteries operate independently, so do the modules.
==PAGE:22==
12
4 Situation awareness modules
4.3.1
How
The module is currently a simulation, as the robot is not yet publishing its sensor data.
Thus, the module’s functionality is not fully implemented in this project. However, the
module’s structure is in place, so it provides the same outputs as it would if it received
real sensor data. Calculating the remaining meters would be its own project and is left
as a possible improvement.
4.3.2
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
Due to the lack of the real sensor, this block uses an internal variable called battery that
starts at 100 and slowly drains over time. The output for the module will also just be
simulated as a number.
4.3.3
Possible improvements
Battery specific curves By using more precise information about the batteries used,
the battery level could be determined more accurately. However, some uncertainty would
still remain.
4.4
People in the area
Keeping track of people in the area is one thing, but using the information in a situation
awareness sense gives much more insight. The map produced is an occupancy grid map,
where areas are “turned” on or off depending on where the people are found.
The process goes like this.
• The module receives information about a person’s location, movement, and the
time the observation was made.
– If the timestamp is older than a predefined period of time, the module just
discards it.
• Check if the person is inside a predefined area and if so close that area on the
occupancy grid.
• If not, use the location of the person and block off an area around the person.
• Publish the map.
• Over time, gradually unlock areas that were previously closed off.
==PAGE:23==
4.5 Experimental Setups in area
13
4.4.1
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
The inputs the system receives are the locations, times, and if the person was moving.
This simulated input data comes from a complex sensor module outside the scope of
this project. The time measurements come from the ROS platform.
The module creates and outputs an occupancy grid map that can be used by a
planner to know where the robot can and cannot go.
4.5
Experimental Setups in area
This module will track setups in the area and close off regions with setups for extended
periods. While the person module expects people to tidy up after themselves before
leaving the area, this module aims to track setups as they tend to be more permanent.
This module tracks inaccessible regions with respect to setups and maintains a timer
to recheck those regions if they remain unvisited for long periods. Initially, the module
logs any experimental setup locations. If it encounters a setup in the same region again,
the timer restarts.
As it can be diﬀicult to detect experimental setups, the way the system should
conclude if a region have a setup in it or not would take some consideration. This is not
part of the project, so only a simulated system will be described.
The process would go like this.
• The module receives information about a setup’s location, and the time the obser-
vation was made.
– If the timestamp is older than a predefined period of time, the module just
discards it.
• Check if the setup is inside a predefined area and if so close that area on the
occupancy grid. This would be the normal way the system would work, as the
setups would be found in predefined places.
• If not, use the location of the setup and block off an area around the setup.
• Publish the map.
• Over time, gradually unlock regions that were previously closed off.
Use an occupancy grid map the same way as the people block.
==PAGE:24==
14
4 Situation awareness modules
4.5.1
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
The inputs the system receives are where setups are seen and when they were seen. This
input comes from a complex sensor module that is not part of this project, and the input
here are therefore just simulated. The time comes from the ROS platform.
The module creates and outputs an occupancy grid map that can be used by a
planner to know where the robot can and cannot go.
4.5.2
Possible improvements
Calendar for experimental setups
If the input also included the take-down timestamp for the setup, the system would
know when to go back and check the area instead of just having it unlock over time.
4.6
Combined map
Having multiple occupancy maps is unusable since the planner does not know how to
combine them. Therefore, an internal block combines the three occupancy maps into
one that the planner can use. Firstly, the occupancy map made by RTAB-map utilizing
the camera to determine accessible and inaccessible regions. This map is combined with
the map of people locations and the map of setup regions. The navigation block then
uses this combined map for navigation, ensuring that the robot avoids forbidden regions
and other inaccessible locations.
note: A planner is simple, the module that handles navigation and planning the
path for the robot to drive.
This could be achieved by the use of a ROS package like multirobot_map_merge
[Hor]. It has not been implemented in this project, but was investigated as a viable
possibility.
4.7
Remaining space in bin on the sweeping
unit
As the cleaning robot moves around with the sweeping unit turned on, the bin will slowly
fill up. This module keeps track of the amount of empty space in the sweeping unit. By
measuring the distance traveled and the status of the sweeping unit, the bin will be filled
at a constant rate relative to the distance traveled, such as 0.1% per meter.
When the robot’s bin reaches capacity, it will stop sweeping, return to the charger,
and wait until someone empties it.
==PAGE:25==
4.8 Possible improvements to system
15
4.7.1
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
The inputs for the module are:
• The enable status of the brush (simulated for this project).
• A reset button (not implemented for this project).
• The distance traveled as reported by RTAB-Map. Since this distance comes as a
running total, a simple calculation will determine the distance traveled since the
last time the loop ran inside the module.
The output from the module will be the estimated meters before the bin is full.
4.8
Possible improvements to system
Modules in this section are not yet built, but have a strong potential to improve the
performance of the current system.
4.8.1
Light level
The light level in the environment is crucial for the localization system. The robot must
track this to ensure that it does not lose its position while cleaning. This module will
monitor the light level, so the robot avoids going out to clean when it is too dark.
4.8.1.1
How
This module will function by utilizing a light sensor, but will also infer light levels based
on the time of day.
4.8.1.2
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
The sensor value from the light sensor is read and the time of day is calculated from
UTC.
The output will not simply indicate the current light level, but will assess whether
the level is adequate and will remain so for a suﬀicient period to allow cleaning.
4.8.1.3
Possible improvements
Weather prediction and sun setting times
By integrating weather knowledge with information on sunset times, predictions about
future light levels will become more stable when calculating ahead.
==PAGE:26==
16
4 Situation awareness modules
Light control or headlights
The robot could be given the ability to turn on the light in the room or have headlights
installed.
4.8.2
Work time
Knowing when to work is useful. The key idea is that customers may only want the
robot operating at certain times, on specific days, or simply when particular conditions
are met. Tracking these conditions and understanding how they change and when they
need to signal the robot to stop working is valuable. Therefore, a high-level module
should be built to assess a set of conditions and determine if it is a suitable time to work
or not.
4.8.2.1
How
The complexity of this module depends greatly on the user’s specific criteria, so it is
diﬀicult to describe without knowing those details. Suﬀice it to say that it could vary
widely and is therefore left to another project.
4.8.2.2
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
The inputs could include both sensors on the robot and a calendar in which the user
registers the time when they want the robot to run, along with other criteria.
The criteria would not merely be: “run only when there is light due to the localization
module”, but rather higher-level criteria.
4.9
Example of a Situation awareness module
This is the Python code for a Situation awareness module that is the base module.
Comments in the code will explain each part.
1 #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3 ## Imports used for the module , this would normally also include other ROS
packages with definitions for other msg.
4 from ast import If
5 import rospy
6 from std_msgs.msg import String
7
8 # debug
9 debug_on = 1
10
11 ## Remeber Global variables for the callback functions
==PAGE:27==
4.9 Example of a Situation awareness module
17
12 #global subscriber_template_variable
13
14 ## subscriber callback functions
15 ## Here all the callback functions are made, this will be called when an
interrupt is called and the actions are done.
16
17 def subscriber_template(msg):
18 ## Choose the value you need from the msg
19 # global_variable = msg
20
21 ## local functions
22 ## These functions would be helping functions that are used by the code
and have to be called manually.
23 def template_func():
24 ## make local funcs
25
26 ## main function for the block
27 def main_func():
28 ## init
29 ## This creates the node in the ROS network
30 rospy.init_node('SA_temp_node', anonymous=True)
31
32 ## Setting the rate set the loop's speed as the function depends on the
rate.
33 rate = rospy.Rate(60) # 60Hz
34
35 ### You can have as many subscribers as you need.
36 ## initialize the subscribers and publishers
37 # rospy.Subscriber("topic", type, callback)
38
39 ## publisher for the output from the block
40 # message_pub = rospy.Publisher("topic", type, queue_size=10)
41
42 ## as we normally require information from the ROS network , we wait until
a connection to a node is made before starting the loop.
43 while subOdom.get_num_connections() == 0:
44
rospy.loginfo('Waiting for subscriber...')
45
rate.sleep()
46
47 while not rospy.is_shutdown():
48
## Start the loop
49
## Inside the loop, the massage need to be made to be published
50
## Multiple messages can be made.
51
52
out_going_msg = something
53
54
## for debugging
55
if debug_on:
56
rospy.loginfo(out_going_msg)
57
58
## Publish the data to ROS
59
## More than one thing can be published
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Situation awareness modules
60
pub.publish(out_going_msg)
61
62
## Sleep until the next time the block should run
63
rate.sleep()
64
65 if __name__ == '__main__':
66 try:
67 main_func()
68 except rospy.ROSInterruptException:
69 pass
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5
Action modules
This chapter will go through all the different action modules made for the system. As
Situation awareness is really important, not much would be done if no actions were
performed. Therefore, the next part of the framework, is the action modules. These are
even more specific to the overall task of the robotic system. As it is a cleaning robot,
the system is being designed for, we have specific actions like “clean area”. Many of
the other action modules could be used for many other systems. Some specific to the
robotic platform like the front wheel being able to go up and down, but also others that
will work on most systems like stop motors.
Each Action module will publish a score that tells the decision module how important
the module thinks its action is at the current moment.
The plan created by these modules is stored as internal variables. To actually execute
the plan, the decision module needs to enable it by flipping a flag to ’on’. This avoids
having to pass the plan around. However, this introduces a problem: when creating
and scoring a plan, this proposed plan should be the one chosen to run as it would be
that plans score, therefore the modules have both a running plan and a proposed plan.
The score from the modules will always be linked to the proposed plan. As soon as a
proposed plan it set to run, the plan is saved as the running plan and new plans can be
created without changing the current running plan.
Driving limitations
We would not like the robot to drive backwards, as it introduces problems.
Driving backwards can introduce issues since the robot can only see directly ahead
in its current build. This means the robot’s knowledge of the environment behind it
relies on old data and no current sensor input. All the planning systems have therefore
been given the limitation that they can only drive forward.
5.1
Overview of modules
The current system have these modules:
• Clean area
==PAGE:30==
20
5 Action modules
• Return to docking station
• Stop motors
• Modules that work alongside other modules
5.2
Clean area
This action is all about doing the cleaning in the area. This module will receive the
coordinates of the dirtiest place on the map, plan a route there, and then use a coverage
Path Planning strategy to clean that area first. Instead of sectioning the area up the
path will fill the whole map, but possibly due to battery drain or a filled sweeping bin,
the plan will be cut off and the next time a plan starts, it will be from another location.
Thus over time it will clean the whole area.
A possible implementation could be using ipa_coverage_planning [Bor+18] via ROS.
This will segment the area and clean sections at a time, perfect for this action module.
The implementation of the code have not been done for this project as focus have been
on the situation awareness.
This means that the total strategy is as follows:
• Receive the coordinates of the dirtiest place on the map.
• Plan a direct route there and start cleaning.
• Use ipa_coverage_planning to plan an area covering path to clean the section
with the dirtiest place on the map first,
• Then continue until the battery runs dry, or the bin fills up.
The score for the module will be highest when the battery is fully charged and the
bin is empty. Given the chosen design parameters, the score will decrease if the battery
is low or the bin is full. This should serve a dual purpose, as both this module’s score
will be low if the conditions for cleaning are bad, and the scores for returning to the
charger and emptying the bin will be high.
5.2.1
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
For determining the place to clean, these inputs are used.
• The combined occupancy map made from RTAB-Map, people in the area and
setups in the area.
• The position of the robot.
==PAGE:31==
5.3 Return to docking station
21
To calculate the module’s score, these inputs are used.
• The battery level of both the robot and the sweeping unit.
• Remaining space in the sweeping bin.
The output for this module is only the score, as the plan that is made in the module
is just waiting for the enable flag to be set high, and not outputted from the module.
5.2.2
Possible improvements
Clean the edge
This module will make a path that covers the whole area but, the edge of the area can
be dirty and accumulate dirt quicker than the middle of the floor. An action module
that focuses on the edge would therefore make good sense, but to make such a module
it would make sense to use a LIDAR or another more precise distance sensor to follow
the edge.
Enough room for cleaning
It would be beneficial to include an assessment for the module that determines how
much space is free in the area that needs cleaning. This should prevent the robot from
starting cleaning if the whole area is already clean or the area is covered in setups or
people.
5.3
Return to docking station
This module is rather simple as all it does is calculating the plan back to the docking
station. while the action part of the module is rather simple, the score part is a bit more
complex.
The distance from the current position to the docking station is compared to the
estimate from both the estimated battery level in meters and the remaining space in the
bin (in meters). When the distance to the charger compared to the distance left on the
battery or meter before full bin is within some range, will the module set the score very
high, to indicate a return to the charger is needed.
In this manner it will make sure that it can always return without running out of
power or driving around with a full bin not being able to sweep anymore any way.
The module will either have a constant for the coordinates of the changer, or an init
script could set information like this.
==PAGE:32==
22
5 Action modules
5.3.1
Inputs, Outputs, and internal variables
Input used to calculate the route to the charger are the current position of the robot,
and the combined occupancy map, so it knows where it can drive. The planner used is
the standard ROS navigation stack.
Inputs used to calculate the score are the battery level, the remaining space in the
bin and the internal variable ”distance”, coming from the proposed plan.
The output for this module is only the score, as the plan that is made in the module
is just waiting for the enable flag to be set high, and not outputted from the module.
The score is a measure of how good an idea it is to drive home.
5.3.2
Possible improvements
Time of day
Integrating the time of day as an input. The robot could also be “commanded” to return
home at a certain time of day.
5.4
Local and Global Planner
A bit of background on using global and local maps.
The global path provides the
robot’s primary route, but to avoid obstacles and stay safe, the robot also needs a local
planner. The local planner divides the global path into smaller sections, which it then
uses to calculate a local path for the robot. This local path continuously adapts to the
current environment, such as obstacles. The local planner constantly updates the path
as the robot moves, ensuring the most eﬀicient route. This allows the robot to safely
navigate its environment and reach its destination.
5.5
Kill module
Stop all motors and end all other actions until restart. This module has not yet been
created as the system currently lacks the necessary signals, and the focus has been on
situation awareness modules.
This module is very important for an autonomous robot, as many situations can
happen where the best cause of action is to stop and wait.
The module reads the motor power and will send a stop signal to the system if the
power draw goes over a certain threshold. The core function of this module is to prevent
other modules from operating until a user resets the system.
==PAGE:33==
5.6 Parallel modules
23
5.5.1
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
The Power draw of each motor will be supplied by the robot. The module will also be
able to receive a reset signal as an input from a user.
The output will be a kill signal for the system.
5.5.2
Possible improvements
Try to remove yourself from danger
If the module detects danger, it will firstly stop and assess the situation. It will try to
resolve the issue on its own, like raising its front wheel or backing up slightly. If that
works, the module will then look for an escape route to avoid the area.
Incident report
If that level of automation is build out, there should also be build an incident report
including important topics like the camera feed.
5.6
Parallel modules
5.6.1
Communication with user
One or more modules could monitor other modules and send the user an email if user
action is needed.
This module has not been created, in this project.
• Empty bin
When the bin is full, it should send a message to ask for help emptying it.
• Call for help (stuck)
When the robot gets stuck somewhere, either due to an error, low battery, or
because it ran into something and the kill module halted the system.
• Charge up the robot.
If the robotic system doesn’t have a working automated docking station, it will
send out a message.
5.6.1.1
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
Inputs would be the storage bin level, the battery level and the kill signal.
The output from this module would be the emails to the user.
==PAGE:34==
24
5 Action modules
5.6.1.2
Possible improvements
A website for the system to provide information and enable control would be a huge
improvement. This system could also log data over longer periods of time to gain insight
into the health of the system.
5.6.2
Special sub-functions
These modules are submodules as they are not meant to be their own modules, but
merely functions that would be used inside the other modules.
The two functions that lower and raise the front wheel are not build in this project,
and at the time of writing the platform, we are not provided control over the front wheel
through ROS.
5.6.2.1
Lover wheel
When cleaning, the front wheel will be lowered such that the sweepers touch the ground.
5.6.2.2
Raise wheel
If the robot needs to explore or gets stuck, it must lift its front wheel to raise the brush
off the floor. This prevents the unit from getting stuck on cables and instead allows it
to drive over them.
5.7
Possible improvements to system
Modules in this section are not yet built, but have a strong potential to improve the
performance of the current system.
5.7.1
Exploring
This module enables the robot to autonomously explore an area. While the other module
that drives the robot around also activates the sweeping unit, the system will shut it
down if the bin is full.
However, having a robot with plenty of battery and an old map of the area regarding
any obstacles or people, it would be wasteful not to use the time to explore the area and
update its maps and general awareness.
==PAGE:35==
5.8 Example of an Action module code
25
5.7.1.1
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
The input for the module would be the current position of the robot and the different
maps. These would be used to explore those areas that provide the most information as
quickly as possible.
The module would evaluate the need for further exploration to update its knowledge
of the environment. It would develop an internal plan and determine a score indicating
whether more exploration is required for the system to improve its understanding.
5.8
Example of an Action module code
This is the Python code for an action module that is the base module. Comments in
the code will explain each part.
1 #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3 ## Imports
4
5 from ast import If, Subscript
6 from distutils.ccompiler import _Macro
7 import rospy
8 from std_msgs.msg import String
9
10 ## debug
11
12 STOP = 1
13 debug_on = 1
14
15 ## Remember Global variables for the callback functions
16
17 #global subscriber_template_variable
18 global DS_flag
19
20 ## subscribers
21
22 ## This is the flag from the decision module , telling the module if it
should run its plan.
23
24 def DS_subsriber(msg):
25
global DS_flag
26
if debug_on:
27
print(DS_flag)
28
29
DS_flag = msg.data
30
31 def subscriber_template(msg):
32
## Choose the value you need from the msg and save it in the global
variable
33
# global_variable = msg
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Action modules
34
if debug_on:
35
print(msg)
36
return 1
37
38 ## local functions
39 def template_func():
40
return 1
41
42 def planing_func():
43
## make the plan for what to do
44
plan = 0
45
46
return plan
47
48 def scoring_plan():
49
## calculate the score for the plan taking into account the different
values from SA.
50
score = 0
51
52
return score
53
54 def do_plan(current_plan , halt):
55
## do the current plan if not
56
if debug_on:
57
print(current_plan)
58
if halt:
59
## stop the mission
60
if debug_on:
61
print("Running mission")
62
else:
63
## Run the mission
64
if debug_on:
65
print("stopping mission")
66
67
return 1
68
69 ## main function for the module
70 def main_func():
71
## init publisher node
72
rospy.init_node('SA_temp_node', anonymous=True)
73
rate = rospy.Rate(60) # 60Hz
74
75
DS_flag_old = 0
76
## You can have as many subscribers as you need.
77
## initialize the subscribers and publishers
78
# rospy.Subscriber("topic", type, callback)
79
rospy.Subscriber("/DS", String , DS_subsriber)
80
81
## publisher for the output from the module
82
# message_pub = rospy.Publisher("topic", type, queue_size=10)
83
plan_pub
= rospy.Publisher("topic", type, queue_size=10)
84
==PAGE:37==
5.8 Example of an Action module code
27
85
while not rospy.is_shutdown():
86
87
## make the plan and score
88
proposed_plan = planing_func()
89
score = scoring_plan(proposed_plan)
90
91
## Publish the score
92
plan_pub.publish(score)
93
94
## run the plan
95
if DS_flag:
96
## save the plan into current plan, so we can do that while
updating the new plan
97
if DS_flag != DS_flag_old:
98
DS_flag_old = DS_flag
99
current_plan = proposed_plan
100
## run plan
101
do_plan(current_plan , 0)
102
else:
103
## stop the plan
104
do_plan(current_plan , STOP)
105
106
## Sleep until the next time the module should run
107
rate.sleep()
108
109 if __name__ == '__main__':
110
try:
111
main_func()
112
except rospy.ROSInterruptException:
113
pass
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 6
Decision Module
The purpose of the decision module is to determine the optimal course of action based
on the scores from the various action modules. It is critical because it allows the robot
to prioritize essential tasks while ensuring tasks are completed suﬀiciently.
Without
this module, the robot would not be able to effectively determine and pursue the most
essential course of action at any given time.
6.1
Inputs, outputs, and internal variables
The module receives both a score and an ID from each module, keeping track via an
internal list of each ID and the latest score received. This is because each action module
sends out its score with the ID attached to the same ROS topic, meaning that the score
of each module is being updated at the rate of that module. Each action module does
not need to have the same update rate. The decision module’s rate does not need to be
the same either.
Using this strategy enables scaling the system without manually adding each con-
nection between action modules and the decision module in both directions.
As all
communication will be done on only two topics and not two topics per action module.
The module also receives special signals, such as the kill signal. The kill signal ensures
stopping the robot and keeping it stopped until a reset signal is given.
The output from the decision module is a flag signal. This flag contains two pieces
of information: first, a simple on/off value (1/0), and next the ID of the action module
that has been chosen to run.
After receiving the scores, it will save them in a list where new IDs are saved in a
new row and scores from IDs already known are updated. This list is the backbone of
the system, as it keeps track of which actions are most important to attend to. At a
certain rate, the module will sort the list and find the element with the highest score. If
this score is five points higher than the score was when the decision module last decided
an action to do, it will switch which action is done by updating the flag that the module
then publishes. If not, the flag stays the same. When changing actions, the module also
saves the scores to be used for the stability test. Five is a tuning parameter. Tuning
this parameter requires trial-and-error to ensure the robot switches to the most critical
task, but also completes tasks for a suﬀicient duration.
==PAGE:40==
30
6 Decision Module
6.2
Possible improvements
As a decision module, improvement could be placed on the ranking of tasks, but as this
has been chosen to be a part of each action module instead, it would not make sense.
Diagnostics could be straightforward to extract from this module. For example, it
would be easy to determine which tasks have not been done or if there are patterns for
when certain actions typically occur.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 7
Sensors
Many of the sensors used in the project are not actually part of the project and have
actually just been simulated, as the robotics system does not publish real values as of
writing. However, some of them are rather important, and a short section will therefore
be dedicated to them here.
• Pose via Visual odometry via RTAB-Map
– Camera, IMU
– Wheel odometry (not used in this project)
• Global and local map via RTAB-Map
– Camera, IMU
– Wheel odometry (not used in this project)
• Space in the bin
• Battery sensor for both driving unit and sweeping unit
• Motor current for the driving unit
• People in the area
• Experimental setup in the area
As the list shows, some sensors can go through multiple steps before use, while others
can be used more directly. Some variables, such as pose, will be described further in
this chapter.
7.0.1
Global and local map via RTAB-Map (SLAM)
To produce both the local and global occupancy map, the software RTAB-Map is
used.[LM19] It can be configured in many ways, but as the default settings are used,
only the parameters changed will be explained.
Firstly, the inputs to RTAB-Map are the Intel RealSense camera, which produces
RGBD pictures, and an IMU. The parameters changed in RTAB-Map are:
==PAGE:42==
32
7 Sensors
• Marker/Detection: true
Enables detection of chosen markers.
• Marker/Dictionary: 9
Sets the type of marker to DICT_ARUCO_6X6_100, this is just the type of
marker used, it will be important to have them placed firmly before mapping the
area as their location is saved and used when doing localization. The type and ID
of tags should differ from those used elsewhere in the area, as duplicate tags would
disrupt the system.
• Marker/Length: 0.17
If RTAB-Map is not provided the marker sizes beforehand, mapping becomes more
involved. The depth camera needs to estimate the markers sizes by viewing markers
perpendicularly during initialization.
• DbSqlite3/InMemory: true
Running the database in the memory instead of a file on the hard disk, optimizes
the system but takes more RAM. This is needed to reduce the time the processing
could take, especially for the visual odometry.
• VhEp/Enabled: true
Verify the visual loop closure hypothesis by computing a fundamental matrix before
transformation computation when RGBD/Enabled is on. This cleans up feature
matching in each image using RANSAC, a method for confirming loop closure and
ensuring the match is good enough, as concluded in [HH20] and [GC15].
• Vis/FeatureType: 6
The feature type chosen is GFTT/BRIEF as this will provide the best balance
between speed and accuracy using the tools provided in RTAB-Map [GC15]
• Vis/MinDepth: 0.6
Minimum depth of the features found and used is set to 0.6 meters due to the
accuracy of the camera.
• Optimizer/Strategy: 2
The graph optimization techniques used in this project are GTSAM, following the
recommendations stated in the paper [Del+21].
• Optimizer/Robust: true
Robust graph optimization using Vertigo. Vertigo is a technique for optimizing
graph structures that are robust to small changes in the graph. It allows finding
graph structures that are stable and insensitive to minor variations in the graph,
rather than optimizing strictly for a single objective.
This can produce graph
solutions that are more reliable and less prone to overfitting.[mat20]
==PAGE:43==
7 Sensors
33
• RGBD/OptimizeMaxError: 0
Disabled as it cannot be used in combination with Robust graph optimization.
7.0.2
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM)
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is an algorithm that enables a robot
to map out its environment and localize itself within the map.
SLAM algorithms here involve a combination of data from sensors such as cameras,
depth cameras, as well as odometry data from an IMU. The data is used to build a
map of the environment and localize the robot within the map. When building the map
of the environment, it will also localize the robot in the map. The map is updated in
real-time as the robot moves through the environment.
For this project, Online SLAM will initially be used to build the map. However, once
the map has been constructed using a joystick to navigate the robot around the area,
Offline SLAM will be employed. It will still take in data and localize, as well as update
a local map just around the robot. Then the data will be discarded, so the database of
the map will no longer grow, making the SLAM problem computationally less intensive.
[Das18]
7.0.3
Visual odometry
Feature-based visual odometry (FVO) has been used to estimate the pose of the robot
in this project. It has been done by using RTAB-Map and the settings chosen are just
the default. According to [HH20] we can conclude that ORB provides the best real-time
performance compared to SIFT and SURF, but also that RANSAC is important for
loop closure.
7.0.4
Wheel odometry
The robot is publishing its wheel odometry, and along with the camera feed and IMU
this should be able to help provide a good, stable robot odometry. But due to incorrect
settings on the robot that lays outside the scope of the project, the covariance of the
wheel odometry makes the system unstable. This means that if it was used in conjunction
with the camera feed and IMU through a Kalman filter, the wheel odometry would
always be the clearest signal out. This means that even if the robot slips, the system
will interpret that as the truth, making the odometry of the robot incorrect. Therefore,
the system has been build without the use of data.
==PAGE:44==
34
7 Sensors
7.0.5
Light detection and ranging (LIDAR)
The project investigated the use of a LIDAR but found that the system in its current
configuration did not benefit enough compared to the added complexity. The purpose
of the LIDAR was to increase the stability of the system’s odometry and improve local-
ization. However, this did not occur, purely due to added complexity and the LIDAR
data not being synchronized with the camera feed. In the future, this idea could be
revisited, but as of now, visual odometry is stable and accurate enough for the task, as
shown in a later test in this chapter.
7.1
Possible sensors that could better the
system in the future
Sensor for the bin on the sweeping unit
A sensor that keeps track of the amount of filth in the sweeping units’ bin could be a
good edition, as it right now just uses time and distance driven while sweeping to make
an estimate.
7.2
Test of localization
Having robots drive around for cleaning requires localization that is accurate enough.
Therefore, a couple of tests have been executed.
7.2.1
Consistency test
The first test determined if the robot could repeatedly drive in a square and return to
the starting point, and if the distance traveled closely matched the real-world distance.
It can be concluded that RTAB-Map’s measurement is imperfect but, as stated,
perfection is unnecessary. The robot only needs location accuracy suﬀicient for its needs.
The important conclusions from the test are:
RTAB-Map
Real world measurement
First walk
Second walk
Edge 1
8.32
8.6222
8.7044
Edge 2
8.63
9.0111
9.1293
Edge 3
7.91
7.9052
8.1982
Edge 4
8.9
10.1989
9.7385
Table 7.1: Table of data from real-world measurement and RTAB-Map readings.
==PAGE:45==
7.2 Test of localization
35
((a)) The pose in a XY-plot
((b)) Plot of the distance traveled
Figure 7.1: plots of data reported by RTAB-Map
The two walks around the square closely overlap, as can be seen on figure 7.1, in-
dicating the robot’s position is consistent. The distances traveled are also consistent,
as seen in table 7.1. These factors, combined with building a local map, mean path
planning for cleaning will be good enough. Over time, the robot will clean the same
places, as drift is minimal. The local map also means the robot will avoid collisions, as
this map is always made from the current perspective of the robot and do not need good
localization on the global map.
In summary, while RTAB-Map is imperfect, it provides the robot’s location with
suﬀicient accuracy for its cleaning task.
7.2.2
Use of Markers for Localization
The second test evaluated the use of ArUco markers to help the system determine its
location. As shown, the system initially localizes itself accurately. When traversing
unmapped areas, the system relies solely on visual odometry, causing it to drift slightly.
Upon returning to mapped areas, the system quickly corrects its position when detecting
the markers, as can be seen on figure 7.2
==PAGE:46==
36
7 Sensors
((a)) Pose in XY plot
((b)) The position variance in x and y as well
as what landmarks are seen
Figure 7.2: plots of data reported by RTAB-Map
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 8
Tools
8.0.1
Fejemis
The robot platform used is the Fejemis build by Jens Christian Andersen.
Fejemis is a floor cleaning robot. It has a drivetrain, front wheel lift, and sensors, that
allows the right software suite to have it clean floors autonomously. Though currently
limited to driving with a joystick, Fejemis aims to become fully autonomous with the
addition of cameras and improved software.[Mad]
8.0.2
Onshape (CAD)
In the development of the Fejemis, a 3D CAD model have been used to make 3D prints,
and figure out the best placement for different components such as the camera.
By having access to a 3D model of the system, it was possible to use that to create
a URDF file. This file was created using the program Onshape to URDF.
8.0.2.1
Onshape to URDF
Onshape to URDF is a tool for converting Onshape 3D models into the URDF file
format. The URDF file format is used to define the physical properties of robots, such
as their geometry, kinematics and dynamics. Onshape to URDF enables users to quickly
and easily convert their Onshape models into URDF files, which can then be used with
the Robot Operating System (ROS) for robot development and control.[RE20]
8.0.3
ROS
For the whole software framework that drives the whole system from driving the robot
around to finding its position, the framework ROS has been used. Robot Operating
System (ROS) is a software framework for robot development. It provides a library of
tools and software packages to quickly and easily develop robotic systems. ROS provides
a common language for robot applications.[Sta18]
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 9
Discussion and perspective
9.1
System tests
To validate the framework’s functionality and performance, several cases are examined.
The following describes each case and how each module would handle the particular
situation. These cases demonstrate how the framework operates and enables the robot
not just to complete the task, but also to do so appropriately for the circumstances.
The current modules are examined, not the improved modules. This highlights limi-
tations and clarifies why enhancements are important.
As many modules perform the same functions in most cases, only distinct aspects of
each case will be described after the first one.
9.1.1
Case 1
The environment:
• Bright, Monday morning.
• The area is Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA) (building 330D), a large
indoor warehouse with asphalt floor.
• The lights are off, but enough light comes in from outside for the camera to localize
the robot.
• No people are in the area.
• All setups have already been reported to the system.
Since the area is empty and the modules cannot track light levels, the only things
happening in the framework is that the robot will update its maps, report a healthy
battery level and empty the bin.
The system will indicate to the action modules that it should start cleaning.
The cleanliness map has gradually become dirtier overnight, so it is certain that some
areas need cleaning. As no people are detected in the area, the occupancy map is clear
and only shows the setup locations and outer perimeter.
==PAGE:50==
40
9 Discussion and perspective
The action modules determine from the situation awareness modules that there is
plenty of battery power, an empty bin and areas to clean. It will therefore start cleaning
from the dirtiest part of the area first and then gradually move outwards in sections.
As the cleaning action begins, the situation modules start receiving new information
from the environment and updating the cleanliness map for the areas traversed by the
sweeping unit.
The battery levels of the sweeping unit and robot will gradually decrease as they
operate. The bin in the sweeping unit will fill up as long as the sweeping unit is on.
The action module responsible for returning the robot to the docking station will at
some point have a very high score forcing the system to return as the battery level or
remaining space in the bin is lower than some threshold regarding the robot’s current
location.
At the same time, the system will send a message for an operator to come empty the
bin.
If the system could explore without the sweeping unit running, it could interpret the
battery and space in the bin as separate metrics. It could then start exploring instead
of cleaning, keeping all the situation awareness modules up to date while monitoring the
battery and waiting for an operator to empty the bin. However, as this module is not
implemented, the robot will just return to the docking station.
This means the robot’s day will end when its trash bin is full or its battery is low.
The day will not end sooner unless the robot gets stuck, in which case it will message
for help and stop moving until it receives a reset signal.
It would be a good idea to have a module that tracks the work schedule, as the robot
has no concept of the workday.
The framework should ensure that the robot is either cleaning or returning to the
docking station in the current implementation.
While cleaning, the robot will update its map with the latest layouts and occupants.
As the system gathers new information about those subjects, it will revise the map
accordingly.
9.1.2
Case 2
The environment:
• It is a dark evening
• The area is Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA) (building 330D), a large
indoor warehouse with asphalt floor.
==PAGE:51==
9.1 System tests
41
• The light is off, and the dim light from outside is insuﬀicient to illuminate the area
adequately for the camera to localize the robot.
• There are no people in the area.
• All setups have already been reported to the system
As the conditions are the same as in case one, except for the light level, the system will
handle it similarly. However, the risk of losing position using the camera for localization
is much higher. If this occurs, multiple issues could arise.
If the position of the robot is lost completely, the system will not be able to plan any
path with the different planning systems, and the robot will stop at that point.
If the robot’s position is lost at any point, it could stop until the pose is reacquired.
The navigation system needs the robot’s position to know when it has reached its goal
or subgoals.
The system could also lose track of its position and wrongly believe it is elsewhere.
This could lead the system to be unable to reach goals in the real world.
As the decision module may have decided a plan that is now misaligned with the
map, that plan should be abandoned. However, this will not happen until the decision
module selects a new plan.
To fix these issues, multiple steps could be taken. Ensuring that the robot does not
operate when conditions are inadequate could help, but will limit the times the system
can run. Alternatively, the localization system could be improved, possibly using GPS
(if available) or LIDAR or more landmarks (like ArUco Markers). These would help the
system relocalize correctly on the map, even if lost for some time.
9.1.3
Case 3
The environment:
• Bright, Monday morning.
• The area is Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA) (building 330D), a large
indoor warehouse with asphalt floor.
• The lights are off, but enough light comes in from outside for the camera to localize
the robot.
• There are a lot of people in the area in all sectors.
• All setups have already been reported to the system.
==PAGE:52==
42
9 Discussion and perspective
The system sees that the battery level is high and the bin is empty, so it wants to
start cleaning.
However, the occupancy map shows that most of the area is occupied by people or
setups. The system cannot clean those areas.
The system can only clean a few square meters here and there. For now, the system
will start cleaning those available areas. But this may not be ideal and the framework
should tell the system that it is a bad time for cleaning and moving around.
The system will continue cleaning available areas even after initially cleaning them.
The action module for cleaning always starts cleaning at the dirtiest coordinate, no
matter how clean it already is. A threshold could prevent the system from cleaning
already-clean areas.
9.1.4
Case 4
The environment:
• Bright, Monday morning.
• The area is Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA) (building 330D), a large
indoor warehouse with asphalt floor.
• The lights are off, but enough light comes in from outside for the camera to localize
the robot.
• There are no people in the area.
• All setups have already been reported to the system.
• The battery level is low.
As the system starts up, the frameworks start planning where to clean. However, the
system quickly sees that the battery level is low, so the action module for returning to the
docking station takes over and returns the robot to the dock. The module responsible
for communication with the user also sends a message informing that the robot has run
out of power.
9.1.5
Case 5
The environment:
• Bright, Monday morning.
• The area is Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA) (building 330D), a large
indoor warehouse with asphalt floor.
==PAGE:53==
9.1 System tests
43
• The lights are off, but enough light comes in from outside for the camera to localize
the robot.
• There are no people in the area.
• All setups have already been reported to the system.
• The robot has been running and now all paths from the current location is blocked
by obstacles.
In this situation, all the situation awareness modules would handle the new situation
no differently than in case 1. However, as the robot is now stuck due to obstacles, the
local occupancy map from RTAB-Maps now shows an object blocking the robot’s path.
The robot can therefore not get to the next location planned either by the “cleaning”
action module or the “return to docking station” action module. The robot’s navigation
stack would now simply have the robot standing still, but no situation awareness is
gained in this case.
The action module could listen to the navigation stack. If it reported that no path
could be found, it could call for help.
A new situation awareness module should be created to track the robot’s location
and assess the situation the robot is in regarding its position. This module could inform
the system that if the robot stands still in certain regions, the “call for help” module
should be activated.
9.1.6
Case 6
The environment:
• Bright, Monday morning.
• The area is Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA) (building 330D), a large
indoor warehouse with asphalt floor.
• The lights are off, but enough light comes in from outside for the camera to localize
the robot.
• There are no people in the area.
• The system is placed at the charger, but with the front against the cabin.
The action modules can only plan driving paths to move forward, and therefore
cannot get out of this situation. However, as in Case 5, the framework does not know
this and the same new module should be implemented. The problem now would be that
even though the new module was implemented, it would not work, as the zone around
the charger would be a normal place for the robot to stand still.
==PAGE:54==
44
9 Discussion and perspective
Therefore, the position alone is not enough. The pose, or orientation, must also be
considered since the robot is placed in a specific spot and facing a particular direction
that does not allow it to exit.
Another solution would be to enable the robot to drive backwards, but this brings
many considerations. Mainly regarding safety, as the robot would then need to perceive
the world behind it, or the designer should choose to rely on the information from
memory.
9.1.7
Case 7
The environment:
• Bright, Monday morning.
• The area is Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA) (building 330D), a large
indoor warehouse with asphalt floor.
• The lights are off, but enough light comes in from outside for the camera to localize
the robot.
• There are no people in the area.
• All the setups have been reported to the system already.
• The localization system has lost track of the robot’s position after it has been
operating for some time. The robot is now in the middle of the area.
In this case, similar to case 2, the system loses its position. However, since the system
cannot rely on light conditions to ensure the robot does not start moving around, the
solution is to look for ways to ensure that the system can regain its position. The ideas
are the same as case 2.
Another way to try regaining its position could be to use the last known position
and then use dead reckoning to go to a location with a landmark (ArUco markers). This
would likely ensure that the system regained its position.
Using dead reckoning would rely only on internal measurements and is prone to
cumulative errors. If the nearest landmark is far away, it may not work due to the
cumulative errors. However, it makes sense to do further investigation into this solution.
Other ways the system could lose its position would be if the camera got loose or
got damaged. This should trigger an error so that the action modules “stop motor” and
“call for help” are activated.
A situation awareness module could monitor the localization system and disable
the robot if performance fell below acceptable levels. This module could analyze data
==PAGE:55==
9.2 Perspective
45
over time to detect when components may have been damaged, helping ensure that the
system only operates properly.
It could continually assess the robot’s status and shut it down if its functionality was
compromised. This would help guarantee that the robot only runs when functioning as
intended.
9.1.8
Case 8
The environment:
• Bright, Monday morning.
• The area is Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA) (building 330D), a large
indoor warehouse with asphalt floor.
• The lights are off, but enough light comes in from outside for the camera to localize
the robot.
• There are no people in the area.
• All the setups have been reported to the system already.
• The robot’s performance has degraded suddenly after one of its tires became loose.
As described in case 7, a situation awareness module that keeps track of the health
of the entire system could also monitor for sudden defects. This would be able to tell
the “stop motors” action module to halt the motors even if it is not a power issue.
9.2
Perspective
The framework developed in this project aims to give users the possibility to have com-
plex behaviors with less effort than current systems without using a black box approach.
The analysis has been done regarding the objectives and with the plan to use it with an
autonomous cleaning robot. The framework could also apply to other types of projects.
9.2.0.1
Automated home assistants
When setting up home automation, different systems can be used. One of the more pop-
ular systems is Home Assistant, an open-source system that integrates over thousands
of products and other systems. [Sch13]
The biggest obstacle is setting everything up from the beginning. Here is where
the framework could assist.
The designer would create situation awareness modules
regarding how a person would perceive the home. This means creating modules that
==PAGE:56==
46
9 Discussion and perspective
not only monitor temperature and humidity separately but give awareness of some overall
situation, such as the air quality, floor cleanliness, and more. All these modules would
then trigger actions like turning on the AC or opening the window, but would require
logic to determine when each action should occur. The benefit of using the proposed
framework would be that these modules would be highly reusable. Both for the situations
and the actions. The user could start with a few blocks and over time as more sensors
are installed, and more actions become available, the system would just balance which
action to take to better the living conditions for the people living in the house.
9.2.0.2
Automated warehouses
In this project, one robot has been controlled and gathered data to improve situational
awareness of the environment. However, the framework is not limited to gathering data
from one robot or only controlling one robot. Having multiple agents requires great care
to either have “all hands on deck” by putting all agents to do the same task at the same
time, as the current implementation of the framework for this module would do. Instead,
a “divide and conquer” approach would coordinate different agents performing different
tasks. To achieve this, improvements to the decision module are necessary.
9.2.1
Possible improvements to the framework
The framework could benefit from an improved integrated development environment
(IDE) for creating modules, connecting them, and monitoring their performance. This
would help the system grow into something more usable. The decision module may
currently be too simplistic and require too much fine-tuning. Tuning is actually one of
the greatest obstacles with the system. The framework builds on each action module
itself reporting how significant it believes it to be, so the designer needs to take great
care in using the same scale for each module, so no module run more than intended.
An improvement here could be to create a better simulation environment that could
simulate many days of having the system running, and then the designer could more
easily see if the tasks are performed to a suﬀicient level. This could be done through an
optimization process where the statistics of objectives are tracked and the scale of each
score is tuned until a satisfying outcome is reached.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
The proposed framework enables users to construct sophisticated behaviors and re-
sponses without necessitating describing of a complete explicit state machine or com-
plete ontology. It offers reusable modules for situational awareness and actions that can
be combined in diverse configurations. This decreases the effort needed to construct
intelligent systems capable of perceiving and reacting suitably across various settings.
Specifically, the framework could provide pre-built modules that can detect situa-
tional details and determine appropriate reactions. Users can select from these modules
and connect them together in ways that generate the desired intelligent behavior for
their use case. Overall, the framework will drastically reduce the diﬀiculty of building
systems that exhibit intelligent behavior in different environments.
Compared to what was proposed by the project, both the framework and the chosen
case can be seen to work. It enables a cleaning robot to drive around a semi rough
environment and there have been done test to the localization system.
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[Asm+]
Boulos El Asmar et al. AWARE: A Situational Awareness Framework for
Facilitating Adaptive Behavior of Autonomous Vehicles in Manufacturing.
url: https://www.vda.de/en.
[Bor+18]
Richard Bormann et al. Indoor Coverage Path Planning: Survey, Implemen-
tation, Analysis. 2018. isbn: 9781538630815. doi: 10 . 1109 / ICRA . 2018 .
8460566. url: https://github.com/ipa320/ipa_coverage_planning.
[Das18]
Sagarnil Das. “Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) using RTAB-
MAP.” In: (September 2018). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.02989.
[Del+21]
An ¯ Dela et al. A Comparison of Graph Optimization Approaches for Pose
Estimation in SLAM INTEL MIT M3500 M3500a M3500b M3500c Sphere-
a Torus Cube Garage Cubicle Rim. 2021. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/9596721.
[End95]
M. R. Endsley. “Toward a theory of situation awareness in dynamic systems.”
In: Human Factors 37 (1 1995), pages 32–64. issn: 00187208. doi: 10.1518/
001872095779049543.
[GC15]
Oguzhan Guclu and Ahmet Burak Can. “A comparison of feature detectors
and descriptors in RGB-D SLAM methods.” In: volume 9164. Springer Verlag,
2015, pages 297–305. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-20801-5_32.
[HH20]
Bo Hu and He Huang. “Visual odometry implementation and accuracy eval-
uation based on real-time appearance-based mapping.” In: Sensors and Ma-
terials 32 (7 July 2020), pages 2261–2275. issn: 09144935. doi: 10.18494/
SAM.2020.2870.
[Hor]
Jiri Horner. multirobot_map_merge - ROS Wiki. url: http://wiki.ros.
org/multirobot_map_merge.
[LM19]
Mathieu Labbé and François Michaud. “RTAB-Map as an open-source lidar
and visual simultaneous localization and mapping library for large-scale and
long-term online operation.” In: Journal of Field Robotics 36 (2 2019). issn:
15564967. doi: 10.1002/rob.21831.
[Mad]
Jens Christian Andersen Mads Madsen. Autonomous Fejemis wiki. Accessed:
20223-03-28.
[mat20]
matlabbe. Robust Graph Optimization - introlab/rtabmap Wiki. 2020. url:
https://github.com/introlab/rtabmap/wiki/Robust-Graph-Optimization.
==PAGE:60==
50
Bibliography
[RE20]
CNRS Rhoban laboratory of computer science of Bordeaux University and
ENSEIRB-MATMECA. OnShape to Robot (SDF/URDF). April 24, 2020.
url: https://github.com/Rhoban/onshape-to-robot.
[Sch13]
Paulus Schoutsen. Home Assistant. 2013. url: https://www.home-assistant.
io/.
[Sta18]
Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory et al. Robotic Operating System.
Version ROS Melodic Morenia. May 23, 2018. url: https://www.ros.org.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
51
==PAGE:62==
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
