==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
CAWS Data Upload Scaling
Scaling a high throughput data management in-
frastructure using a microservice architecture
Stefan Harabagiu (s213805)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This M.S.c.
thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in Computer
Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, March 15, 2023
Stefan Harabagiu (s213805)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Digital phenotyping platforms have been benefiting from modern advancements in
technology that allow the collection of a wide variety of physical data from a person
with the use of sensors in mobile and wearable devices. By using these large amounts
data that are being recorded in a continuous manner, researchers can perform studies
into the treatment, prevention and diagnosis of diseases both mental and physical.
At the Copenhagen Center for Health Technology(CACHET), such a digital phe-
notyping platform called the CACHET Research Platform(CARP) is being developed
to allow researchers to conduct their own studies.
However, the CARP Web Services(CAWS) project which provides the component
for handling the data uploaded by the participant devices presents scalability issues
due to its monolithic implementation. Currently the data upload component can not
handle operating under high workloads and scaling it would affect the entire system.
This thesis will attempt to solve the scalability issues of this component by migrat-
ing it into a microservice and integrating it with the rest of the CAWS components.
Furthermore, a deployment strategy will be devised as well as configuring an environ-
ment in order to allow for the individual scaling of the component.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Jakob E. Bardram for the help and guidance
throughout the course of this thesis. I would also like to thank the CARP development
team for their help in discussing aspects of the project. Last but not least, I would
like to thank my family and friends for their continuous support.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research goals and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Impact - innovation and application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Related Work
7
2.1
MD2K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
RADAR-base . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Migrating to microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Analysis
11
3.1
CARP Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
CAWS Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Design
21
4.1
Current CAWS project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Decoupling the services
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Microservice Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Deployment architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Implementation
29
5.1
RabbitMQ communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
DataUpload component message handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.3
Containerization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Docker Swarm and the deployment environment
. . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.5
Deploying the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Deployment Operations
43
6.1
Scaling the DataUpload service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Discussion
49
7.1
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8
Conclusion
55
A
NGINX reverse proxy
57
B
Docker Swarm ingress network
59
C
Accessing the source code
61
D
Acronyms
63
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The modern technological advancements in the healthcare industry allow for the de-
velopment of new techniques for diagnosing, treating and data gathering on patients.
The process of collecting and using data generated by electronic devices such as smart-
phones and wearables is called Digital Phenotyping[HVC19]. DP has huge potential
due to the high availability of data gathering devices thanks to the massive popularity
of smartphone and wearable technology.
DP is being used in the health care sector to record large amounts of data from
the devices of study participants or patients in order to analyze it with the purpose of
finding potential diagnoses, treatment or just for the purpose of monitoring. Chapter
10 of the book Mental Health in a Digital World [Car+21] discusses the potential of
DP in psychiatry and how it can be used to solve problems encountered by clinicians.
Because the clinician does not need to be present for observing the patient, the book
states that the patient may participate in the assessment on their own time and in
their natural environment, removing many of the logistical barriers associated with
clinical assessment; it also mentions that because of the nature of how the data is
collected it can lead to more reliable data as it eliminates the bias between patient
and clinician.
A prominent combination with DP is the use mobile sensing.[Bau19] Smartphones
have great DP capabilities due to the amount of sensors built into them by default but
also because of the large amount of health monitoring devices that can be connected
to a smartphone such as Fitbit1 for general monitoring or even wearable ECG mon-
itors2. Because of this, mobile health(mHealth) applications contain great potential
for increasing the capabilities of DP. The chapter mHealth Applications: Potentials,
Limitations, Current Quality and Future Directions[Mes+19] of the book Digital Phe-
notyping and Mobile Sensing[Bau19] presents the potential of mHealth applications
for health services and provides evidences to the benefits of using them in the health
care sector. Among others, evidence is presented to support the eﬀicacy of mHealth
apps in supporting treatment adherence in patients, but also in the treatment of
depression.
1https://www.fitbit.com/global/eu/home
2https://getwellue.com/products/duoek-hand-held-wearable-ekg-tracker
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
At the Copenhagen Center for Health Technology(CACHET), a digital phenotyp-
ing platform called the CACHET Research platform(CARP) is being developed with
the purpose of allowing researchers to create customized studies based on the retrieval
of sensor data from mHealth apps.
Among the services made available through CARP, the CARP Web Services(CAWS)
project provides a cloud-based backend platform for managing research studies. The
service provides the REST APIs used to manage studies, participants and also record
the data sent by the participants’ devices. However, the project is implemented as
a modular monolith and the data upload component presents scalability issues and
can not handle higher workloads.
This project aims to help solve the issues described above by using a microservice
architecture as well as creating a deployment environment to allow for a scalable
component that can handle higher resource utilization.
1.2
Problem statement
As explained above, the data upload component of the CAWS platform needs to
be refactored into a more scalable solution that can handle higher loads under use.
Furthermore, the implementation of CAWS has to follow the CARP Core domain
model and provides other functionalities like, user management and study manage-
ment, therefore the integration with the domain and the rest of the components has
to be considered.
Taking this into account, the following problem statement can be formulated:
How can a microservice architecture and deployment environment be
designed so that the data upload component can be scalable and integrated
with the domain and other components?
From this problem statement, the following sub-problems can be outlined:
• How can scalability be achieved through a microservice architecture?
• How can the microservice architecture be integrated?
• How can a deployment environment be designed to support the scalability prop-
erties of the data upload component?
• How can scalability be showcased?
The goal of this thesis can be summarized as follows: To re-design the data upload
component as a microservice, integrate it with the CAWS components and deploy
them in a suitable environment with the scope of making it be operable under higher
upload rates.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Research goals and methods
3
1.3
Research goals and methods
This section will further detail the sub-problems defined in the previous section as
well as explain how possible solutions for them will be investigated and chosen in
order to fulfill the goal of providing scalability to the data upload component.
1.3.1
How can scalability be achieved through a microservice
architecture?
Scalability is a property of software that represent its ability to either raise or decrease
its performance depending on the workload it is experiencing. The plan to ensure
this property for the data upload component is to first research the key aspects of a
microservice architecture that allow for easily scalable components and how they can
be translated in the context of the CAWS project. Then, the proper technologies with
which to design and implement such an architecture have to be analyzed. The tools
and frameworks utilized should be chosen based on how well they can contribute to
achieve a scalable microservice and also on how their design allows them to be used
in a scalable environment.
1.3.2
How can the microservice architecture be integrated?
The data upload component has to be able to function as part of the CARP architec-
ture by using the CARP Core domain, but also by being available to the rest of the
components in the CAWS project. It should also be able to integrate with the other
components on a deployment environment.
The plan is to research the proper technologies that will allow the microservice
to communicate with the components that have dependencies on modules that are
part of the data upload domain. These technologies should facilitate the interaction
between the services without adding unnecessary overhead to the resource consump-
tion of the system and they should be robust enough to ensure that there will be no
miscommunication during runtime.
1.3.3
How can a deployment environment be designed to
support the scalability properties of the data upload
component?
With a component designed to be scalable it is important to provide an environment
where the scalability property can be benefited from. The deployment environment
but also the tools used to deploy the system should allow for services to be scaled up
or down without requiring time consuming processes and configurations in order for
the system to be agile when adapting to situations in a production environment.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
The plan is to look into what environments best suit the deployment of a mi-
croservice architecture and allow for fast scalability of its services. At the same time,
looking into what tools are best suited to package and deploy the solution on the
environment is equally important. The deployment tool used should provide func-
tionalities that allow for easy scaling of services but it should also be able to function
out-of-the-box regardless of the environment it is deployed in.
1.3.4
How can scalability be showcased?
Scalability can be achieved through the design and implementation of the system,
using the right tools and technologies that facilitate and enable it; and providing the
right environment that can allow for scaling to be used.
The plan to properly demonstrate how a service can be scaled after it is imple-
mented and deployed is to provide examples of operations that can be used to either
scale up or down the data upload component. The examples should show how both
the design of the architecture but also the choice of deployment tools and environment
allow for the component to be scaled.
1.4
Impact - innovation and application
The aim is to allow the CARP platform to handle a larger number of devices to
be connected to mHealth applications in order to support broader studies on larger
amounts of participants(mHealth applications with a large user base). This, in turn,
supports the spread of using digital phenotyping by making it more available to
researchers.
1.5
Thesis outline
The next chapters will describe how a solution to the scalability problems of the data
upload component was investigated, designed and implemented.
The second chapter will provide a look at other similar platforms and their ar-
chitecture and technologies. The analysis chapter discusses how scalability can be
achieved through a microservice architecture, how the component can be integrated
with the existing monolith and how a cloud deployment strategy will complement the
microservice architecture. The design chapter will illustrate how the ideas presented
during analysis take shape and how the chosen technologies will be used to achieve a
scalable system. The implementation chapter showcases how the design choices were
put into practice and provides more concrete examples on how the system and de-
ployment environment were configured as well as how the deployment was executed.
The scalability achieved through this system will be demonstrated in the next chapter
and showcase how the component can be scaled in the cloud deployment, and how
the architecture of the cloud environment can be changed to meet the business needs.
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Thesis outline
5
Lastly, the discussions chapter will show how the research goals defined in the begin-
ning have been fulfilled as well as provide some details about limitations that were
encountered and future work for the project. The conclusion chapter will summarize
the work done as part of this thesis.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
This chapter presents some digital phenotyping projects that are similar to the CARP
platform as well as discusses some literature that is related to the stated problem.
2.1
MD2K
MD2K is a platform for gathering mobile and wearable sensor data and analysing it
in order to gain insight on the factors that influence the health of the participants.
The tools and software of the MD2K platform are open source and made available
for researchers to configure them for their own study cases. [MD223d]
The mCerebrum mobile phone software provided by them allows for the collection
and streaming of sensor data recorded by the participants phone but also from other
devices that are connected to the phone. This means that mCerebrum is able to
collect data from a wide range of devices like Chestband ECG sensor, blood pressure,
carbon monoxide, wrist devices and many more. The collected data is sent to the
Cerebral Cortex which they call the cloud companion of mCerebrum [MD223c]. Cere-
bral Cortex is a cloud backend that was designed to support large scale data handling
and be paired up with the mCerebrum app; it provides data analysis and visualiza-
tion capabilities to support research studies based on the collected data [MD223a].
The platform has a highly modular architecture, where parts of it are separated into
containerized services with Docker. There is not much detailed documentation avail-
able for it unfortunately, but by inspecting the multiple repositories available on
GitHub for it a few things can be noted. The platform is written in Python and uses
Flask as a framework to create the REST API that connects to the mCerebrum app.
The REST API then sends the data to the CerebralCortex-DataIngestion component
which is a separate service implemented in Python that uses Kafka as a Big Data
ingestion tool.[MD223b]
Even though the ingestion component is a separate service, it is designed to work
within the architecture of the overarching Cerebral Cortex cloud server platform and it
is not a suitable replacement to be used within the CARP environment. Furthermore,
its Python implementation would not allow for the integration with the CARP Core
domain model which is a collection of Kotlin defined interfaces.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Related Work
However, it can be noticed that the architecture of the cloud platform is based
on microservices, with the component that handles data retention implemented as
a separate service. Unfortunately, there is no documentation available as to how it
is deployed on the cloud environment and what server architecture they use; in the
GitHub documentation the instructions for setting up the Cerebral Cortex backend
state that it should be done via docker-compose, which implies that it will run on a
single physical node.
2.2
RADAR-base
RADAR-base is another open source platform that can handle the collection of data
from wearable and mobile devices for providing data visualization and study manage-
ment for the purposes of conducting health related research.
The platform features an architecture based on plugins that can be extended to
include data collection from additional devices that are not supported in its basic
version. They also feature a highly modular architecture with different decoupled ser-
vices forming a single platform. However, the extensibility provided by RADAR-base
through plugins is made to not limit the researchers’ studies by not supporting the
collection of data from the devices they require. Therefore, the individual components
of the RADAR-base architecture are implemented to function within that design and
their deployment architecture. [RAD23a]
The architecture of the RADAR-base project is based on microservices deployed
using Kubernetes and Helm. This makes the solution deployable on any cloud provider
and they state in the GitHub documentation that it can run on a single server or server
cluster environment. [RAD23b]
2.3
Migrating to microservices
The conference paper Transform Monolith into Microservices using Docker[SS18]
discusses a strategy of refactoring a monolith into a microservice architecture. It is
suggested that a progressive approach should be taken by extracting smaller parts of
a monolith into a microservice that is fully decoupled and repeating this process until
the monolith is either stripped down entirely or it becomes a microservice itself.
When creating a microservice from a part of the monolith they list a few steps
to be taken. Firstly, is to determine what modules from the monolith should form
the microservice. It is not recommended to consider every module as a microservice
and instead focus first on modules that use in-memory databases, resource intensive
algorithms or are central to the business value and are often changed and updated.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Migrating to microservices
9
After the modules that will form the microservice are chosen, they should first be
decoupled from the monolith by establishing Inter Process Communication(IPC). Af-
ter decoupling is achieved the microservice can be containerized with Docker to be
run as a completely separate process from the monolith. In the paper, Docker is also
recommended as it facilitates the cloud deployment and it allows for scaling services
and automating the deployment process.
The paper Monolithic vs. Microservice Architecture: A Performance and Scalabil-
ity Evaluation[BOP22] presents an evaluation made on a web application to test its
performance under a monolithic implementation and then a microservice implemen-
tation. The motivation behind the paper is to test if the migration to microservices is
beneficial in the context of smaller monolithic systems; the purpose is to investigate
the effects of a microservice architecture on a system that does not operate on the
scale of top tech giants like Netflix, Amazon, etc. The most noteworthy finding of the
paper are that a monolith performs better than its microservice counterpart when
it is running on a single machine and the microservice implementation outperforms
the monolith in the cloud when deployed on multiple physical nodes. Because of this,
the designing and setup of a multi-node deployment environment is motivated as a
part of this thesis; with the scope of providing the data upload microservice with a
runtime environment where it can benefit from its scalability property.
==PAGE:20==
10
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis
This chapter presents the topics, architectures and technologies that are relevant to
solving the problem.
3.1
CARP Domain
Figure 3.1: CARP Domain Diagram.
The CARP Core project provides the business logic and data models required
by the research platform but without any of the components needed to actually run
the platform. The CARP Webservices project uses the domain and business layer
provided by CARP Core and acts like a wrapper around that allows it to function
properly such as the API, security, authentication, database storage. This approach
follows a Hexagonal Architecture in which the components are decoupled from the
environment, making the CARP Core project independent of the technologies chosen
for web, messaging and database storage.
The CARP Core domain is presented
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Analysis
in diagram 3.1 which showcases the different separated components that define the
business logic for the research platform.
3.2
CAWS Architecture
The CARP Web Services (CAWS) project follows the domain defined by CARP Core,
its current implementation can be described as a modular monolith where the imple-
mentation of the domain components described in the previous section are grouped
together in modules. These modules are implemented as REST APIs with a clear sep-
aration between their functionalities, however these modules are not decoupled from
one another completely and some dependencies still remain. Moreover, all of these
REST APIs are part of the same Spring Boot web application and are containerized
and deployed in the same Docker container. Because of this all of the modules are
part of the same machine process and therefore, compete for resources. The Data
Upload component suffers the most out of this because it needs to be able to handle
a high throughput of requests coming from the devices that send the data acquired
from the study participants.
The issue in scalability that the CAWS project is facing can be attributed to its
monolithic design that does not allow for individual scaling of its modules. In order
to be able to scale the Data Upload component both vertically and horizontally so
that its performance can be improved, migrating to a microservice architecture is
essential.
3.2.1
Modularity vs Microservice Architecture
In comparison, modularity can be viewed as a precursor step in achieving a microser-
vice architecture. The conference paper from the International Conference on Infor-
mation Management and Technology (ICIMTech) in 2020 mentions how grouping a
monolithic system into modules is an important step in migrating from a monolithic
to a microservices architecture. [PMA19]
In chapter 2 of the book Practical Microservices Architectural Patterns the differ-
ences between a modular monolith and a miscroservices based system are detailed.
It states that modularity refers to grouping related functionalities together in the
form of multiple files or libraries and that a modular monolith lacks flexibility when
it comes to scalability. In the same chapter the book illustrates the architecture of
a modular monolith and states that in such a monolith it is not possible to scale
horizontally specific modules that are under more load or to scale vertically modules
that have a higher cost of failure. [Chr19]
By creating a microservice from the DataUpload component both vertical and hor-
izontal scalability can be fine tuned for it so that it can operate in optimal conditions.
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Communication
13
As mentioned before in subsection 3.2.1 a microservice architecture allows us to pick
and choose which services need to be scaled up.
3.3
Communication
When migrating to a microservice architecture a very important step is to decide how
to handle the communication between the services. Usually, in a modular monolith
interactions between modules are easily handled through dependencies; whenever
one of the modules needs to exchange data with another one this can be easily done
through simple method calls as the modules are part of the same runtime and process.
In a microservice architecture the communication has to be done through a transfer
protocol between the separate processes.
There are several ways to do that such
as through a TCP socket connection, HTTPS requests, etc. but the most widely
adopted way to handle communication between microservices is through Message
Brokers.
3.3.1
Message Brokers
Message brokers are pieces of software that handle the flow of communications be-
tween the services of a system. They allow for the components of a system to be
completely decoupled from one another as they can operate in a fire-and-forget way
without having to wait for a reply and block the process. Most message brokers utilize
a queue data-structure to be able to store and ensure delivery to the recipient. When
the broker receives a message it stores it in a queue until they are processed by the
receiver.
When it comes to which tools to use as message brokers, RabbitMQ and Apache
Kafka are the most popular choices. The article Microservice development using Rab-
bitMQ message broker published in the Science, Engineering and Technology journal
[ĆBL22] provides insights into how RabbitMQ works but also the benefits it provides
as a means of communication in a microservice architecture. It states that RabbitMQ
is a lightweight tool that can handle the delivery of messages between microservices
with no loss, it is fault tolerant, scalable and easily accessible. In the article it is
also presented a comparison between the use cases where RabbitMQ or Kafka is a
better fit. Kafka is overall a more complex tool that requires more resources to run
because it can perform significantly more complex tasks than RabbitMQ. Overall
Kafka is a better choice when there is also the need for processing and analysis of Big
Data whereas RabbitMQ is the right choice for light weight communication between
services.
Another aspect that has to be taken into account is that currently the CAWS
project already uses RabbitMQ for the sending of emails and receiving data points.
When factoring this in along with the information presented above it does not seem
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Analysis
viable to introduce Kafka just for the communication between the microservices for
a number of reasons. First of all, Kafka requires more resources than RabbitMQ and
it would also be added along with it unless the whole project is refactored to not
use RabbitMQ anymore. This is something to be avoided since the purpose is to
make the system use less resources not more. Secondly, the reason for the need of a
message broker in the microservice architecture is for the communication between its
components and as it has been presented above, RabbitMQ is more than capable of
handling this task.
3.4
Deployment
Deploying an application or software system means running it on a remote host
(server) where it can be publicly accessed by the users. When deploying a system
there are two main decisions that have to be considered; what kind of server is needed
and how can the system run on the server. The most common approach for this is
to use a Cloud Platform as a server provider and a containerization tool to provide the
server with something it can compile and run.
3.4.1
Cloud Platforms
Cloud Platforms deliver computing resources over the internet without the need for the
organization developing the system to have an internal infrastructure or hardware.
They are a type of Cloud Services that operate on the concept of Platform as a Service
(PaaS) and they have been adopted by many organizations for their benefits.
In chapter 3 of the book Impact of Cloud Adoption on Agile Software Development
describes the benefits of using cloud services in an agile development environment
and states that tools provided by cloud services contribute to a reduced economic
investment and instant availability of the developed product. [Kar13]
3.4.2
Cloud Platform Providers
There are numerous cloud platform providers available that offer great performance
and a wide array of features, however, for the purpose of this thesis three of them will
be taken into consideration: Amazon Web Services (AWS), Google Cloud Platform
(GCP) and Digital Ocean. AWS and GCP are two of the most used providers and
they were chosen for their diverse range of features, but also because of their free
tier offers when it comes to pricing. Digital Ocean is a more simple provider with
less features and it is taken into consideration because it is already being used by
CACHET to host the CAWS project which can lead to better and easier integration
with the internal infrastructure of CACHET, but also because it offers better pricing
options.
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Deployment
15
3.4.2.1
Amazon Web Services
AWS is one of the most used Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) and it is a very ma-
ture platform at the moment as it was launched in 2006 by Amazon and has been
constantly evolving over the years.
They provide many services that can suit an
organizations needs for infrastructure with a good payment policy of pay-as-you-go,
which bills their clients based on the resources they have used. You can use AWS for a
variety of services like hosting applications, storage, databases, etc. and the benefits
of that is that they are very flexible and easy to scale up or down, giving instant
access to thousands of servers. The AWS regional availability is used worldwide by
organizations and they provide very good coverage in most parts of the world.[Ser23a]
Moreover, AWS provides a generous free tier access to users that want to test the
platform or use it for small personal projects. Their 12 month free tier access gives the
user the possibility to experiment with most of the features available on AWS with
certain limitations. What is most relevant to the scope of this thesis is the Amazon
Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) which provides host machines on the cloud that can
be used to host applications. EC2 offers virtual environments they call instances,
which can be configured to run a variety of operating systems, different combinations
of CPU, RAM, storage and networking capacities and they also allow to configure
different security groups for your instances to limit how they can be reached over the
internet. [Ser23b]
3.4.2.2
Google Cloud Platform
Google Cloud Platform (GCP) is another popular platform for cloud services provided
by Google and one of AWS’s main competitors on the market. It provides many ser-
vices similarly to AWS such as compute engines, storage, database services, however
it only provides a Kubernetes engine for the handling of containers and deployment
as opposed to Amazon which offers plain Docker support as well.
Overall, GCP provides similar features as AWS and for the scope of this thesis the
relevant aspects to compare between the two is their computing engines that provide
the servers for the CAWS project to be deployed on; EC2 and Google Compute
Engine (GCE) which are also quite similar as well. However, the technology used
for deploying and managing the multi-container architecture of the project has to
be taken into account as well. The choice of the tools to do that are detailed in
section 3.4.4 Container Orchestration Tools and the fact that GCP only provides
Kubernetes support can have influence on the decision.
3.4.2.3
Digital Ocean
Digital Ocean is a newer CSP that has been rising in popularity due to its com-
petitive pricing and robust features of cloud computing, database management, app
deployment platform and Kubernetes cluster management. It is a platform oriented
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Analysis
specifically to developers that is simple to use, it has a more intuitive and well de-
signed UX than AWS and GCP.
Digital Ocean is currently the platform that the CARP project is using to host
their deployments and therefore this platform is also taken into account when deciding
for a suitable CSP. A good benefit to using Digital Ocean is that the new version of
the CAWS project can be integrated into CACHET’s cloud provider and that I also
get access to their resources which are significantly better than the free tiers that AWS
and GCP provide. Moreover, migrating from one CSP to another is a time consuming
task which can also be costly and result in potential down times for the system; and
it should be considered when the benefits of changing the CSP far outweigh the
drawbacks.
3.4.3
Docker
Containerization is the main process that is used when preparing your software to be
deployed on a server and through this process the code is packaged together with all
the files and operating system libraries and dependencies it needs to run the code. By
creating such a container the software can be easily deployed on any infrastructure
without the need of any setup on the server. Furthermore, a container is lightweight
and portable which makes it easy to be deployed, re-run or moved to another host
which speeds up tasks that can be costly. [Inc22b]
The most used tool for containerizing an application is Docker, an open source
project published by Docker Inc. Docker is used as it is the best performing tool
available that creates lightweight containers which have very good CPU, memory
and disk usage performance. Aside from its resource eﬀiciency docker containers are
highly portable as they can run on any supported Linux version which is an important
feature when using a microservice architecture deployed on a Cloud Platform.[Pot+20;
Ser21]
Docker helps with the deployment process by allowing a web application to be con-
tainerized and run in a Linux environment making it possible to easily deploy your
application on any machine without the need of extensive setup. In a microservice
architecture the application is split into separate services that can each run in their
own Docker container. Through the use of docker-compose these containers can be
grouped together and define a single multi-container application. The Compose tool
of Docker runs these containers on the same local network allowing for easy communi-
cation between them as every container can discover the others. This is very helpful
as it means that every service runs independently from the other and eliminates the
single point of failure dangers of a monolithic application. It is also great in terms
of scalability as new services can be easily added into the architecture in a plug and
play manner. However, with Compose all of these containers are deployed on the
same server meaning that they still compete for resources and if the server becomes
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Deployment
17
overloaded then the entire system suffers from it regardless of the decoupling between
them.
In order to solve this issue, the containers need to be deployed on a network of
multiple hosts that can communicate with each other. In this way, the containers
can be separated into groups and deployed on their own servers, allowing the system
as a whole to have access to more resources.
In order to achieve this, Container
Orchestration Tools can be used to facilitate this process as well as providing other
benefits to the system.
3.4.4
Container Orchestration Tools
The main issue that a container orchestration tool can solve in the context of this
thesis is management of these containers in the cloud across multiple hosts. With
these tools, multiple containers that are part of the same system can be grouped
together in clusters where the orchestration tool handles the communication on the
same network.
Furthermore, these tools provide other benefits such as avoiding the need to handle
every container manually or handling network communication; they can also provide
features like load balancing on the incoming traﬀic as well. To summarize, these tools
provide many benefits and can save a significant amount of time spent on managing,
monitoring and planning actions on each container. [MK20] There are several such
tools available that can be used, but in this thesis two of them are considered, Docker
Swarm and Kubernetes
3.4.4.1
Docker Swarm
Docker Swarm is an orchestration tool part of the Docker project. It is contained
in the Docker Engine by default therefore no further installation is needed besides
having docker. The concept of Docker Swarm is that multiple hosts that are running
in swarm mode form together a swarm in which they can have the role of manager,
worker or both. A Node in swarm mode refers to any instance of Docker part of
the swarm and across these instances the manager node of a swarm distributes tasks
according to the services specified when deploying to the swarm.
To differentiate
between standalone container and a container that is part of a swarm, the Docker
documentation refers to a running container in a swarm as a task. A service is the
specification of task that tells the manager node details about how to run the task in
the swarm, it can specify the number of replicas, ports, container image, commands,
etc. In a swarm, the Docker containers run distributed across the hosts and they can
be easily scaled by specifying the number of replicas for each of them.
Docker Swarm provides useful features that make it desirable to be used in the
context of this thesis like, integration with the Docker Engine, automatically bringing
back replicas that crashed through desired state reconciliation, built in load balancer,
automatically handling network communication between nodes.[Inc23]
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Analysis
3.4.4.2
Kubernetes
Kubernetes is a container orchestration tool originally created by Google and since
it was made open source it has been hosted and maintained by the Cloud Native
Computing Foundation (CNCF). Chapter 3 of the book Introducing Azure Kuber-
netes Service showcases the parts of a Kubernetes cluster and what they are used for
as well as providing an overview of its key features, widespread usage and complex
architecture. Kubernetes is currently the most popular orchestration tool available
widely used by most developer teams and even offered as managed services by the
top cloud providers. Kubernetes allows the deployment, management and scaling
of Docker containers within a fast growing community and ecosystem. The impor-
tant features provided by Kubernetes are: scaling up or down of the containers, load
balancing, self-healing by automatic restarting the failed containers and plenty oth-
ers. Kubernetes has a pretty complex architecture which allows for complicated and
specific deployments to be defined.
In figure 3.2 provided by the Kubernetes documentation [Kub22] the structure
of a Kubernetes cluster is illustrated. A Kubernetes cluster refers to a set of worker
nodes that run containers which are all managed by the Control Plane. The control
plane of a cluster acts as a manager as it can make decisions regarding the nodes and
events that occur inside it.
k-proxy
kubelet
sched
sched
sched
Control Plane
Node
etcd
Kubernetes cluster
api
api
api
c-c-m
c-c-m
c-c-m
c-m
c-m
c-m
Node
Node
k-proxy
kubelet
kubelet
k-proxy
Control plane
Scheduler
sched
Cloud controller
manager
(optional)
c-c-m
Controller
manager
c-m
kubelet
kubelet
kube-proxy
k-proxy
(persistence store)
etcd
etcd
Node
API server
api
Figure 3.2: Kubernetes Architecture.
In Kubernetes, the containers that have to be deployed are first defined as Pods.
Pods act as a configuration wrapper around the containers and are then put inside of
the cluster nodes. Services and Deployments can also be declared which allow for
the grouping together of Pods and specifying replicas for pods respectively. [BRB20]
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Deployment
19
3.4.5
Docker Swarm vs Kubernetes
As shown in the previous subsections, both Docker Swarm and Kubernetes are fully
developed container orchestration tools that can manage a deployment like the one
planned for the CAWS and DataUpload microservices. In this section a comparison
between the two will be presented and based on that one of the two tools will be
chosen.
In the Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing journal from 2019 The
comparison of container orchestrators paper discusses the difference between these
two and presents some key ideas that are important.
Docker Swarm is overall a
simpler tool with less features than Kubernetes. Kubernetes is a more mature tool
that underwent more development and therefore it provides a wide range of features
on top of the basic needs of a generic orchestration tool. However, Kubernetes is
much more complex and harder to setup as it requires more configuration. These
ideas are also supported in the paper A performance comparison of cloud-based con-
tainer orchestration tools published in the 10th IEEE International Conference on
Big Knowledge conference, in which performance were run with containers running
an application that detects patterns from LiDAR data using machine learning. The
outcome of the experiments shows that Swarm performs very well, and even though
Kubernetes showed higher overheads they were reasonably low. The increase in the
Kubernetes overheads is due to the additional components that Kubernetes has to
run which can be expensive for small sized clusters. However, in large deployments
for complex and big systems Kubernetes is an overall better choice for orchestration.
[MP19; Pan+19]
From the information presented so far the orchestration tool that will be used to
handle the deployment and management of the CAWS system will be Docker Swarm.
The architecture of the solution is composed of two microservices running in their own
containers as well as the PostgreSQL and RabbitMQ containers. This is not a highly
complex structure and therefore many of the Kubernetes features are not needed
in this case. Moreover, Kubernetes requires much more configuration and Docker
Swarm is better fitted for smaller projects with a low number of containers. The
important functionalities that provide fault tolerance, load balancing and network
communication are provided by both tools, therefore Docker Swarm is more than
adequate to handle the needs of the deployment.
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Design
In this chapter it is presented the design of the microservice architecture based on
the technologies and concepts described in chapter 3 Analysis.
In order to start designing the microservices first of all the current CAWS project
has to be inspected to look at its structure for how the modules are implemented,
the dependencies between them and identify what part of the project constitutes the
Data Upload component that needs to be extracted into a separate service. After that
it will be presented the design changes made to the base CAWS project in order to
allow the decoupling of the modules that constitute the Data Upload component, how
communication between the services fits in the architecture and the overall design of
the microservice architecture along with the deployment architecture design.
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Design
4.1
Current CAWS project
Diagram 4.1 showcases the current structure of the CAWS project. The modules
displayed are all separated into their own packages and it can also be seen how they
relate to the CARP domain shown at the beginning of the previous chapter.
CAWS
Module
Module
Document
Consent
File
Account
Colllection
Summary
Security
Study
DataPoint
Deployment
Consent
Protocol
Data
Figure 4.1: CAWS Implementation.
4.1.1
Dependency inspection
What comes to attention at a first glance are the Data and DataPoint modules which
constitute the implementation of the Data Upload component. The DataPoint mod-
ule contains the API code for creating, retrieving and deleting data points. It contains
the DataPointServiceImpl class which holds the business logic required to process the
requests and the DataPointRepository class as the database adapter. Because these
two classes provide the functionality of the component it is important to investigate
if the other modules in the projects have any dependencies on them. Any coupling be-
tween the DataPoint module and another one will have to be resolved by establishing
communication between them over RabbitMQ so that the DataPoint module can be
extracted out of the project without breaking the functionality of the other modules.
The Deployment, Summary and Study modules are dependent on DataPoint as they
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Current CAWS project
23
require instances of either the DataPointServiceImpl class or the DataPointReposi-
tory in the flow of their business logic. The next module that will be part of the
DataUpload microservice is the Data module. The Data module is responsible for
handling the management of data streams which are used for handling data points
received in batches. Just like the other module, the classes which provide the func-
tionality to this module are investigated to check for dependencies in the logic of
the other modules, in this case we are looking at the DataStreamServiceImpl, Core-
DataStreamService and the repository interfaces under the repository package. By
investigating the project it is apparent that the Deployment and Summary modules.
The dependency diagram in figure 4.2 more clearly illustrates how these modules
depend on each other. The diagram is not a complete depiction of the classes and
models inside of each module as it contains only the relevant components. There are
also some classes that are closely related to the ones that have dependencies on the
data modules and they are present in the diagram to provide a general overview of
the structure.
Deployment
StudyDeploymentController
CoreParticipationService
CoreDeploymentService
Repository
StudyDeploymentController
Study
CoreParticipantRepository
StudyController
CoreStudyRepository
Summary
SummaryController
SummaryServiceImpl
ResourceExporterServiceImpl
SummaryRepository
DataPoint
DataPointService
DataPointRepository
Data
CoreDataStreamService
DataStreamService
DataStreamSequenceRepository
Figure 4.2: Dependency diagram.
As it can be seen in the dependency diagram the Deployment module has 2 depen-
dencies, one is on the DataPointService as the API controller StudyDeploymentCon-
troller contains a statistics endpoint which requires the getStatistics method from
the DataPointService. The other one is on the CoreDataStreamService class which is
required by the CoreDeploymentService class. This dependency is not based on any
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Design
explicit method or parameter but instead it requires an instance of the CoreDataS-
treamService. This is because classes that are prefixed with the keyword Core are
used to import parts of the domain defined by the CARP Core project.
The Summary, similarly to the Deployment module, also has one dependency one
each of the data upload related modules.
The ResourceExporterServiceImpl class
depends on both the DataPointService and DataStreamSequenceRepository as it is
responsible for exporting data points and data stream sequences in Json file formats.
Both of these dependencies are based on method calls as they require to retrieve data
from the Data and DataPoint modules.
The Study module has one dependency on the DataPointRepository class as the
CoreStudyRepository class, when removing a study it needs to communicate with all
the services that manage data related to studies and trigger their respective deleteAll
methods.
4.2
Decoupling the services
Now that the dependencies between the modules have been identified, this section
will illustrate how they will be decoupled from each other. When decoupling compo-
nents from a project with the purpose of moving them into a separate service it is
important that the communication and interaction between them remains agnostic
to their internal logic and implementation. This is where RabbitMQ comes into play
as it will allow for completely decoupling the CAWS modules from the DataUpload
ones.
Summary
Study
DataPoint
Deployment
Data
RabbitMQ
Instance
DataStream
ServiceAdapter
Figure 4.3: Decoupled Services Diagram.
Figure 4.3 depicts how the modules will be decoupled form one another through
the use of RabbitMQ. With this design, the modules will communicate with eachother
through the RabbitMQ middleware which will receive messages from the components
and forward them to the correct consumers. As a result, instead of requiring the
DataUpload modules as a direct dependency, the CAWS modules can send messages
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Decoupling the services
25
with the necessary parameters for the execution of the DataUpload methods and lis-
ten for the response when it is done. Another noteworthy change is the addition of
the DataStreamServiceAdapter component as a dependency to the Deployment mod-
ule, because the module requires an instance of the DataStreamService and passes
it to instantiate the DeploymentService. This service is defined in the CARP Core
project through the use of interfaces and requires an instanced object that imple-
ments the DataStreamService interface which is also defined in the core project. The
implementation of this interface is done by the CoreDataStreamService class, how-
ever this needs to be moved as it is part of the DataUpload domain. In order to
solve this dependency issue, an adapter component can be used as a wrapper and
passed to the DeploymentService as a replacement for the CoreDataStreamService
class. This adapter will implement the interface and use RabbitMQ communication
to communicate with the DataUpload service.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Design
4.3
Microservice Architecture
Now that the modules that form the DataUpload component have been identified and
determined how they will be decoupled from the CAWS service, the architecture of
the microservices will be presented in this section.
CAWS
DataUpload
RabbitMQ
Microservice
environment
API
Gateway
Figure 4.4: Microservice Architecture.
In figure 4.4 the microservice architecture is illustrated as a diagram where the 2
services that will form the system are the CAWS microservice and the DataUpload
microservice. Each of them are attached to their own PostgreSQL database instance
and use the RabbitMQ middleware to communicate with each other. The API Gate-
way is a service that will receive all the incoming requests from the outside and route
them to the correct microservice endpoint. With this architecture, the DataUpload
component can run as a separate process completely detached from the base CAWS
service. This will allow for the component to be scaled individually to achieve the de-
sired operational performance. By deploying it on a separate host machine it can be
scaled up to have access to more hardware resources and it can be scaled horizontally
through replication.
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Deployment architecture
27
In order to be able to perform these scaling operations on the component, however,
the system needs to be deployed in an environment that allows for it. To do that, the
container orchestration tool Docker Swarm is used to deploy the system on a Cloud
Service Provider.
4.4
Deployment architecture
This section will cover the deployment environment of the system and how it is
designed to allow for a scalable DataUpload component.
For the designing of the deploy environment two key aspects have to be taken into
account. First, the Docker Swarm environment and how the containers are distributed
across the swarm cluster and second, how many host machines are needed on the cloud
environment and how many resources they require.
A node in Docker Swarm represents a host machine on which it runs containers
and replicas of containers. By referring to the Microservice Architecture in figure 4.4
it can be noticed that at least 6 containers are required to be distributed throughout
the swarm, as each service in the diagram should be containerized with Docker. De-
pending on how these containers are distributed in the swarm, we get a clearer view
of what type of cloud host machines are needed.
Swarm manager
Worker Node
Worker Node
Worker Node
CAWS
DataUpload
RabbitMQ
Gateway
Figure 4.5: Swarm Architecture.
Figure 4.5 showcases the design of the node cluster and how the services will
be deployed on it. The manager node in a swarm is responsible for controlling the
distribution of containers across the swarm. They do that by scheduling the services
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Design
to be run on specific nodes and by maintaining the desired state of the swarm by
adding and removing replicas of a service. Because of this the best practice is for the
manager node to be a separate machine that does not perform any other tasks than
scheduling. However, the manager node acts by default as a worker node as well to
allow for the use of more resources when there is a lower number of cloud machines
available. In this design, the API Gateway was chosen to run on the manager node
to avoid having another host machine just for it. This is because the API Gateway
does not require a large amount of resources to run and the manager node can handle
the extra load.
The other three worker nodes are responsible for running the microservices in the
architecture. The CAWS and DataUpload containers are paired together with their
own database service to comply with the Database-Per-Service concept of microser-
vices. This way the system avoids having a single point of failure as either service can
still function if the other fails. As a result of this distribution, both of these nodes
will be the most resource intensive to run and therefore their assigned host machines
will require the most resources out of them all.
The third worker node is responsible for running the RabbitMQ instance that
will handle the communication between the CAWS and DataUpload services.
As
RabbitMQ is a lightweight service this node will not require many resources and can
therefore be deployed on a smaller machine like the manager node.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
In this chapter, the implementation of the design described in chapter 4 will be pre-
sented. The structure and order will roughly follow the one in the design chapter
by starting first with resolving the dependencies between the modules through Rab-
bitMQ communication, containerizing the new DataUpload microservice, setting up
the swarm in a cloud environment and then deploying the solution on the swarm.
5.1
RabbitMQ communication
To setup the communication the queues have to be defined and then those queues can
be bound to an exchange. The exchange type that is used is the direct exchange as
it is the one that performs the fastest; the fanout exchange type is not a good fit for
this scenario and the topic exchange has been avoided for performance reasons. The
code shown will be grouped into 3 sections, each section containing the setup in each
of the modules that have dependencies on the DataUpload component: Summary,
Study and Deployment.
5.1.1
Study
The Study module has a dependency on the DataPointRepository class in the remove
method from CoreStudyRepository. This method is called when an entire study has
to be removed and therefore all associated data points have to be removed from the
repository as well. First, the DataPoint delete queue has to be created and bound to
a direct exchange. Listing 5.1 shows how the direct exchange and queue is created
using the rabbit.data-upload.datapoint.delete.queue identifier and then bound together
with the BindingBuilder.
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Implementation
1 val DATA_UPLOAD_DATAPOINT_DELETE_QUEUE = environment.getProperty("rabbit.
data-upload.datapoint.delete.queue")
2
3 @Bean
4 fun dataUploadDatapointDeleteDirectExchange(): DirectExchange
5 {
6
return DirectExchange(DATA_UPLOAD_DATAPOINT_DELETE_QUEUE)
7 }
8
9 @Bean
10 fun dataUploadDatapointDeleteQueue(): Queue
11 {
12
return QueueBuilder.durable(DATA_UPLOAD_DATAPOINT_DELETE_QUEUE).build()
13 }
14
15 @Bean
16 fun dataUploadDeleteBinding(): Binding
17 {
18
return BindingBuilder.bind(dataUploadDatapointDeleteQueue()).to(
dataUploadDatapointDeleteDirectExchange()).with(
DATA_UPLOAD_DATAPOINT_DELETE_QUEUE)
19 }
Listing 5.1: Queue and exchange definition and binding.
The rest of the queues which will be used are created in a similar and therefore
only the listing for the creation of this one is showed.
The next step is to send a message on this queue and replace the dataPointRepos-
itory.deleteAllByDeploymentIds call. To do that the RabbitTemplate class from the
org.springframework.amqp.rabbit.core.RabbitTemplate package is used to send mes-
sages to a queue. The instance of the helper class is created by Spring Boot and
through Spring Boot’s dependency injection functionality it can be accessed by adding
private val rabbitTemplate: RabbitTemplate to the constructor of a class that
is autowired by Spring.
Listing 5.2 shows how the a message containing the deploymentIdsString is sent
through the delete queue using the convertAndSend method of the RabbitTemplate.
1
rabbitTemplate.convertAndSend(environment.getProperty("rabbit.data-
upload.datapoint.delete.queue")!!, deploymentIdsString)
Listing 5.2: Sending a message through the delete queue.
5.1.2
Summary
The Summary module has a dependency on the DataPointService and DataStreamSe-
quenceRepository classes in the ResourceExporterServiceImpl. The exportDataPoints
and exportDataStreamSequences methods are used to retrieve information about data
points or data stream sequences and export them in a Json file format. To decouple
this from the DataPoint and Data modules these 2 methods are refactored to send a
==PAGE:41==
5.1 RabbitMQ communication
31
message on the queue to ask for the necessary data for execution to be retrieved and
receive them as a reply from the DataUpload component through the same queue.
Listing 5.3 illustrates how the exportDataPoints method is refactored to use Rab-
bitMQ communication.
The converSendAndReceiveAsType method of the Rabbit-
Template sends a message on the queue and creates a callback queue that is consumed
when the reply is available. The ParameterizedTypeReference type is used in line 3
to create a custom type that can be specified to the rabbitTemplate so that the reply
can be stored in the val dataPoints: List<Any>? variable.
1 override fun exportDataPoints(deploymentIds: List<String>, rootFolder: Path,
summaryLog: SummaryLog)
2 {
3
class ResponseFromDataUpload : ParameterizedTypeReference <List<Any>>()
4
val dataPoints: List<Any>? =
5
rabbitTemplate.convertSendAndReceiveAsType(
6
environment.getProperty("rabbit.data-upload.datapoint.
getAllForDownload.queue")!!,
7
deploymentIds ,
8
ResponseFromDataUpload())
9
10
if (dataPoints.isNullOrEmpty())
11
{
12
LOGGER.info("No datapoint data was found.")
13
summaryLog.infoLogs.add("No datapoint data was found.")
14
return
15
}
16
val dataPointsPath = resolveFullPathForFilename("${rootFolder.fileName}/
datapoints.json")
17
createFileForResourceOnPath(dataPointsPath , dataPoints , summaryLog)
18 }
Listing 5.3: ExportDataPoints method.
5.1.3
Deployment
The Deployment module has a dependency on the CoreDataStreamService in the
CoreDeploymentService and a dependency on the DataPointService in the StudyDe-
ploymentController. To decouple the controller from the service is very similar to
the exportDataPoints listing shown before: create a type reference using Parame-
terizedTypeReference then request the necessary information with convertSendAn-
dReceiveAsType.
What is more noteworthy here is the creation of the DataStreamServiceAdapter
shown in Figure 4.3 of Section 4.2 in the Design chapter.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Implementation
DataUpload
CAWS
CAWS
<<Interface>>
DataStreamService
+ appendToDataStreams(studyDeploymentId, batch)
+ closeDataStreams(studyDeploymentIds)
+ getDataStream(dataStreamId, from, to): DataStreamBatch
+ openDataStreams(configuration)
+ removeDataStreams(studyDeploymentIds): Set<UUID>
CoreDataStreamService
CoreDeploymentService
<<Interface>>
DataStreamService
+ appendToDataStreams(studyDeploymentId, batch)
+ closeDataStreams(studyDeploymentIds)
+ getDataStream(dataStreamId, from, to): DataStreamBatch
+ openDataStreams(configuration)
+ removeDataStreams(studyDeploymentIds): Set<UUID>
DataStreamServiceAdapter
RabbitMQ
CoreDeploymentService
CoreDataStreamService
Figure 5.1: DataStreamServiceAdapter decoupling.
Figure 5.1 illustrates how the DataStreamServiceAdapter will be implemented and
decouple the Deployment module in the CAWS service from the DataUpload service.
In the top section it is showcased the current implementation where CoreDataStream-
Service is part of the CAWS project and directly implements the DataStreamService
interface.
In the bottom section, the DataStreamServiceAdapter class implements
the interface and each of the methods will contain code that sends messages through
RabbitMQ to the CoreDataStreamService which will handle the requests and send
back replies when needed.
In Listing 5.4 is showcased the implementation of 3 of the methods of the data
stream adapter. The appendToDatastreams and closeDataStreams methods use the
convertAndSend rabbit template methods to send data through their associated queues
so that the CoreDataStreamService in the DataUpload component will execute prop-
erly. The getDataStream method is another requets/reply scenario that uses the con-
==PAGE:43==
5.2 DataUpload component message handling
33
vertSendAndReceiveAsType method to retrieve a data stream batch from the Core-
DataStreamService and throws a ResourceNotFound exception in case the service
failed to retrieve them.
1 override suspend fun appendToDataStreams(studyDeploymentId: UUID, batch:
DataStreamBatch) {
2
val message = AppendToDataStreamMessage(studyDeploymentId , batch)
3
rabbitTemplate.convertAndSend(environment.getProperty("rabbit.data-
upload.datapoint.appendToDataStreams.queue")!!, JSON.encodeToString(
message))
4 }
5
6 override suspend fun closeDataStreams(studyDeploymentIds: Set<UUID>) {
7
rabbitTemplate.convertAndSend(environment.getProperty("rabbit.data-
upload.datapoint.closeDataStreams.queue")!!, studyDeploymentIds)
8 }
9
10 override suspend fun getDataStream(
11
getDataStream: DataStreamId ,
12
fromSequenceId: Long,
13
toSequenceIdInclusive: Long?
14 ): DataStreamBatch {
15
val message = GetDataStreamMessage(getDataStream , fromSequenceId ,
toSequenceIdInclusive)
16
class ResponseFromDataUpload : ParameterizedTypeReference <
DataStreamBatch >()
17
18
return rabbitTemplate.convertSendAndReceiveAsType(
19
environment.getProperty("rabbit.data-upload.datapoint.getDataStream.
queue")!!,
20
message,
21
ResponseFromDataUpload()
22
) ?: throw ResourceNotFoundException(getDataStream.toString())
23 }
Listing 5.4: Adapter implementation.
5.2
DataUpload component message handling
Now that the modules in the CAWS service are decoupled from the DataPoint and
Data modules, the DataUpload microservice can be created using these modules. To
keep the functionality of the CAWS service RabbitMQ listeners have to be added to
this service in order to handle the messages sent showcased in Section 5.1.
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Implementation
To do this, a separate class called DataUploadMessageListeners is created where
all the RabbitListener methods can be grouped together. The implementation of this
class is shown in Listing 5.5.
1 class DataUploadMessageListeners {
2
@Autowired
3
@Lazy
4
lateinit var dataPointRepository: DataPointRepository
5
6
@Autowired
7
@Lazy
8
lateinit var dataPointService: IDataPointService
9
10
@Autowired
11
@Lazy
12
lateinit var dataStreamService: DataStreamService
13
14
@Autowired
15
@Lazy
16
lateinit var dataStreamSequenceRepository: DataStreamSequenceRepository
17
18
@RabbitListener(queues = ["\${rabbit.data-upload.datapoint.delete.queue}
"])
19
fun receiveDelete(deploymentIdsString: Set<String>)
20
{
21
dataPointRepository.deleteAllByDeploymentIds(deploymentIdsString)
22
}
23
24
@RabbitListener(queues = ["\${rabbit.data-upload.datapoint.
getAllForDownload.queue}"])
25
fun receiveGetAllForDownload(deploymentIds: List<String>): List<
DataPoint>
26
{
27
return dataPointService.getAllForDownload(deploymentIds)
28
}
29
30
@RabbitListener(queues = ["\${rabbit.data-upload.datastream.
findAllDataStreamSequences.queue}"])
31
fun receiveFindAllDataStreamSequences(deploymentIds: List<String>): List
<DataStreamSequence >
32
{
33
return dataStreamSequenceRepository.findAllByDeploymentIds(
deploymentIds)
34
}
35
36
@RabbitListener(queues = ["\${rabbit.data-upload.datastream.
appendToDataStreams.queue}"])
37
fun receiveAppendToDataStreams(message: AppendToDataStreamMessage)
38
{
39
runBlocking {
40
dataStreamService.appendToDataStreams(message.studyDeploymentId ,
message.batch)
41
}
42
}
43
==PAGE:45==
5.2 DataUpload component message handling
35
44
@RabbitListener(queues = ["\${rabbit.data-upload.datastream.
closeDataStreams.queue}"])
45
fun receiveCloseDataStreams(studyDeploymentIds: Set<UUID>)
46
{
47
runBlocking {
48
dataStreamService.closeDataStreams(studyDeploymentIds)
49
}
50
}
51
52
@RabbitListener(queues = ["\${rabbit.data-upload.datastream.
getDataStream.queue}"])
53
fun receiveGetDataStream(message: GetDataStreamMessage): DataStreamBatch
54
{
55
val result = runBlocking {
56
dataStreamService.getDataStream(message.getDataStream , message.
fromSequenceId , message.toSequenceIdInclusive)
57
}
58
59
return result
60
}
61
62
@RabbitListener(queues = ["\${rabbit.data-upload.datastream.
openDataStreams.queue}"])
63
fun receiveOpenDataStreams(configuration: DataStreamsConfiguration)
64
{
65
runBlocking {
66
dataStreamService.openDataStreams(configuration)
67
}
68
}
69
70
@RabbitListener(queues = ["\${rabbit.data-upload.datastream.
removeDataStreams.queue}"])
71
fun receiveRemoveDataStreams(studyDeploymentIds: Set<UUID>): Set<UUID>
72
{
73
val result = runBlocking {
74
dataStreamService.removeDataStreams(studyDeploymentIds)
75
}
76
77
return result
78
}
79
80
@RabbitListener(queues = ["\${rabbit.data-upload.datapoint.getStatistics
.queue}"])
81
fun receiveGetStatistics(deploymentIds: List<String>):
DeploymentStatisticsResponseDto
82
{
83
return dataPointService.getStatistics(deploymentIds)
84
}
85 }
Listing 5.5: DataUploadMessageListeners class implementation.
By using the @RabbitListener annotation a method can be configured as a lis-
tener to a specific queue which is specified in the queues parameter of the annotation.
These methods are called whenever a message is consumed from the queue by the
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Implementation
service and use the DataPointRepository, DataPointService, DataStreamService and
DataStreamSequenceRepository to execute the correct business logic for the case. For
example, the receiveDelete method listens and consumes the messages send on the
DataPoint delete queue showcased in Listings 5.1 and 5.2. The method deleteAllBy-
DeploymentIds which was needed as a dependency in the CAWS service is now used
in this listener in the DataUpload service. Other listeners like receiveGetAllForDown-
load listeners also have a return type and therefore also return a result back to the
sender instead of just executing a method. This is how the request/reply pattern
becomes functional and allows for communication like the one showed in Listing 5.3.
5.3
Containerization
Now that the DataUpload service has been decoupled from the CAWS service and the
communication between has been established with RabbitMQ, the DataUpload ser-
vice can be containerized with Docker so that it can be deployed. The CAWS service
is already set up for containerization and therefore only the DataUpload component
requires this step.
To do this it is pretty straightforward and all that is required is the addition of a
Dockerfile that specifies how to build the solution.
1 FROM gradle:6.8.3-jdk11 AS builder
2 COPY ./ /src
3 USER root
4 WORKDIR /src
5 RUN gradle clean bootJar -x test
6
7
8 FROM openjdk:15
9 WORKDIR /app
10 COPY --from=builder /src/build/libs/data-upload.jar .
11
12 RUN chown -R root:root /app
13 USER root
14
15 ENTRYPOINT ["java","-jar","data-upload.jar"]
16
17 CMD ["java", \
18
# -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+UseCGroupMemoryLimitForHeap >
lets the JVM respect CPU and RAM limits inside a Docker container
19
"-XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions", "-XX:+UseCGroupMemoryLimitForHeap",
"-XshowSettings:vm", \
20
# -XX:+ExitOnOutOfMemoryError > JVM exits on the first occurrence of an
out-of-memory error
21
"-XX:+ExitOnOutOfMemoryError","-XX:+HeapDumpOnOutOfMemoryError", "-XX:
HeapDumpPath=/tmp","-XX:ErrorFile=/tmp/jdk.error", \
22
"-XX:TieredStopAtLevel=1", \
23
"-Djava.security.egd=file:/dev/./urandom", \
24
"-Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote", \
25
"-jar", "/app/data-upload.jar"]
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Docker Swarm and the deployment environment
37
Listing 5.6: Dockerfile for the DataUpload service.
The Dockerfile first specifies to use gradle as a build tool and compiles the .jar files
needed for execution as a first step, and then as a second step using openjdk uses the
compiled data-upload.jar file along with some extra Java runtime arguments specified
in CMD to run the application. With this file, Docker can create an image which can
then be used to create and run a Docker container that holds the DataUpload service.
This can be done using command line arguments or with docker-compose, however,
in this case before creating and running the container a few more steps have to be
taken.
5.4
Docker Swarm and the deployment environment
In order to create the containers and setup the microservices, the cloud environment
has to be configured followed by initializing the swarm on the virtual hosts. After
those are configured, the images for both of the services can be created using the
Dockerfiles, transported on the remote host and then deployed in the Docker Swarm
to be run as containers.
The cloud environment where the system will be hosted is on DigitalOcean, the
reasoning for this is because CACHET already uses this platform to host their current
apps including CAWS and they can provide two Droplets that can be used as host
machines.
The AWS free tier unfortunately does not provide machines powerful
enough to run any of the microservices as they run out of memory when trying to
deploy the system on them.
Therefore, because there is access to only two host
machines this means that the architecture presented in Figure 4.5 cannot be fully
realised in this scope. Because the focus is on the DataUpload component, one of the
droplets will be used to host the CAWS service, database, RabbitMQ and gateway;
and the other droplet will be reserved for the DataUpload service. After the Droplets
are created and configured so that they can be accessed through a ssh connection,
the only configuration they need is to install Docker on both of them.
5.4.1
Initializing the Swarm
Now that both Droplets have Docker running on them a Swarm can be initialized
from the machine that should be manager, in this case it will be from the host that
will contain the CAWS service. To do thi, the docker swarm init command has to
be executed, after that the other droplet can be added to the swarm as a worker
node with the docker swarm join command. With the manager and worker node
connected in a swarm, this means that the containers deployed inside it will be on
the same network by default and also under Docker Swarm’s automatic container
discovery, so any communication between containers on different nodes is handled by
the swarm. This is a great benefit since it means that the containers communicate
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Implementation
with each other through the DNS addresses they have assigned by Docker Swarm so
if any of them get reassigned to another node with a different IP address there is no
extra configuration needed.
The next step is to get access to the Docker images needed to create and run the
containers. For the Postgre and RabbitMQ instances there is no further configuration
needed as they can just be pulled from Docker Hub, however for the CAWS and
DataUpload services it is different. To be able to run the services in the swarm it
needs to have access to the images of the containers, there are multiple ways to do
that: the images can be packaged in a compressed file from the local computer and
transferred to the remote with the help of a transfer tool, the host machine can pull
the projects from Git and create the images themselves or the images can be built on a
local computer and uploaded to a private DockerHub repository. However, the second
option is not very practical since it would make it hard to automate the deployment
process if CI/CD pipelines will be set up in the future and using DockerHub is an
overall more practical solution that eliminates the need of doing file transfers anyways
so the 3rd option is chosen in this case.
To do this, a private DockerHub repository has to be created using their on-
line tools; the repository created was named dra5ke/thesis-repository. With the use
of the Dockerfiles created for both services the images for them can be created lo-
cally with the commands docker build -t dra5ke/thesis-repository:webservices . and
docker build -t dra5ke/thesis-repository:dataupload . The -t option tags the images
with the name of the repository followed by an identifier for the specific image af-
ter the : character, this is necessary so that when using docker push <REPOSI-
TORY_NAME:IMAGE_IDENTIFIER> Docker knows how to find the correct pri-
vate repository on DockerHub. Now that the images have been successfully pushed
to the online repository, on the manager node in the swarm the personal Docker ac-
count credentials can be used for authentication which will allow the use of the docker
pull command followed by the repository_name/image_name combination showed
before.
5.5
Deploying the system
There are a few ways of deploying containers to a swarm, but when there are multiple
services it is better to create a compose file where they are all specified in the same
place. This file is called in the Docker Swarm documentation a stack deploy file and
it is similar to a normal docker-compose file but with a few changes that allow for
specifying Swarm mode specific parameters. Listing 5.7 shows the stack deploy file
that is used to deploy the containers as well as use the Docker Swarm functionalities
that allow to scale individual services.
==PAGE:49==
5.5 Deploying the system
39
1 version: '3.9'
2
3 services:
4
postgres:
5
image: postgres:latest
6
ports:
7
- 5434:5434
8
expose:
9
- "5434"
10
command: -p 5434
11
environment:
12
- POSTGRES_USER=carp
13
- POSTGRES_PASSWORD=carp
14
- PGDATA=/data/postgres
15
volumes:
16
- postgres:/var/lib/postgresql/data
17
- ./docker_postgres_init.sql:/docker-entrypoint -initdb.d/
docker_postgres_init.sql
18
deploy:
19
mode: replicated
20
replicas: 1
21
placement:
22
constraints: [node.role == manager]
23
rabbitmq-prod:
24
container_name: carp-rabbitmq-prod
25
image: rabbitmq:3-management
26
hostname: rabbitmq-prod
27
ports:
28
- 5672:5672
29
- 15672:15672
30
- 15692:15692
31
volumes:
32
- rabbitmq_prod:/var/lib/rabbitmq/data
33
- ./rabbitmq.conf:/etc/rabbitmq/rabbitmq.conf
34
- ./enabled_plugins:/etc/rabbitmq/enabled_plugins
35
network_mode: host
36
deploy:
37
mode: replicated
38
replicas: 1
39
placement:
40
constraints: [node.role == manager]
41
cans-ws-data-upload-staging:
42
image:
dra5ke/thesis-repository:dataupload
43
ports:
44
- 8080:8080
45
expose:
46
- "8080"
47
environment:
48
- SPRING_PROFILES_ACTIVE=staging
49
deploy:
50
mode: replicated
51
replicas: 2
52
placement:
53
constraints: [node.role == worker]
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Implementation
54
cans-ws-staging:
55
image: dra5ke/thesis-repository:webservices
56
ports:
57
- 8081:8081
58
expose:
59
- "8081"
60
environment:
61
- SPRING_PROFILES_ACTIVE=staging
62
deploy:
63
mode: replicated
64
replicas: 2
65
placement:
66
constraints: [node.role == manager]
67
68 volumes:
69
postgres:
70
rabbitmq_prod:
Listing 5.7: Stack deploy file.
The contents are very similar to a normal docker compose file where for every ser-
vice the build image, ports, volumes and environment variables are specified, but the
noteworthy differences are under the deploy keywords. The deploy section for each
service represents the usage of the Docker Swarm container orchestration tool. The
first parameter, mode, is used to specify if the service should be deployed either repli-
cated or global. Global means that Docker Swarm will create one container on every
physical node in the swarm, replicated means that there will be as many containers as
specified under replicas and they will be distributed automatically by Docker Swarm
through the nodes unless constraints are specified. In this case, because there are 2
physical nodes available and the aim is to isolate the DataUpload service containers
on their own physical nodes so that they do not compete for resources with the others,
placement constraints are specified for each service to ensure it. As it can be noticed,
the cans-ws-data-upload-staging services is constrained to the worker node through
the use of constraints: [node.role == worker] and the others on the manager node.
Both the CAWS and DataUpload components are configured to be deployed with 2
replicas, this means that Docker Swarm will create two containers that run the web
service for each component at the same time. The replica functionality is a key aspect
that provides great scalability to both services and it can be further tweaked once an
initial deployment is done. The reason for setting two replicas for a service as a base
case even though both of the replicas will run on the same node is to provide fault
tolerance by default.
With the deploy file configured, the system can now be deployed on the cloud
environment. To do that, the stack deploy file is transfered on the manager node, the
necessary Docker images are pulled so that they can be accessed and the system is
deployed using the command docker stack deploy –compose-file docker-compose.yml
CAWSstack. The first options parameter specifies what file to use for the deploy and
it is then followed by a name that will be assigned to the stack, in this case it is
CAWSstack. Figure 5.2 shows the output of the command where it can be seen how
==PAGE:51==
5.5 Deploying the system
41
Docker Swarm first creates an overlay network for the containers and then it brings
up every service one by one.
Figure 5.2: Output of the stack deploy command.
With Docker Swarm the stack and services can be inspected to see if the container
creation and assignment worked as intended. With the use of the docker stack ps and
docker service ls commands more information can be accessed about the status of the
swarm, Figure 5.3 shows the output of these commands after the deploy.
Figure 5.3: Status of the services after deploy.
There are a few noteworthy pieces of information displayed in this. First of all, in
the stack inspection it can be noticed that some of the containers have failed to run.
This is due to the fact that the order in which the services are being run is random,
ans services like CAWS and DataUpload for example depend on others to be up and
running so that they can establish a connection during startup. However, this is not
an issue due to Docker Swarm state management functionality.
Because we have
specified that two replicas of the CAWS and DataUpload to be running, whenever
one of the replicas fail, another one is automatically created by the swarm to maintain
the desired state. It can be noticed that the swarm operates in the desired state with
the output of the service ls command where it can be seen that the desired number of
replicas for each service is correct. This example also showcases how fault tolerance
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Implementation
is achieved with this setup in a production environment, as if one of the CAWS or
DataUpload fail and crash, the other running replicas will still be functional and be
able to handle requests while Docker Swarm runs another replica to maintain the
state.
One last thing to inspect is whether the allocation of the containers respects
the intended design, the DataUpload component should be running on the worker
node and the rest of the services on the manager node. To do that the docker node
ps command can be used from a manager node to list the containers running on any
node of the swarm, this can also be achieved by ssh-ing into the worker node manually,
however in a scenario where a large number of nodes would be part of a swarm, using
the manager node is more practical. Figure 5.4 shows the list of containers running on
the worker node and it can be seen that both replicas as well as leftover information
about the initial failed container have been scheduled to run on the worker node
which is named stefan-thesis-dataupload.
Figure 5.4: Containers running on the worker node.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Deployment
Operations
The aim of this chapter is to showcase the new functionalities that are introduced by
deploying the microservice architecture that has been created in the cloud environ-
ment on Digital Ocean with the use of Docker Swarm. Because the initial deployment
has been realized and the microservices are successfully running and using the repli-
cation feature, this chapter aims to showcase how this setup can be operated to
provide as much scaling as needed for any specific service. The way these features
will be showcased is through the premise of possible scenarios that might occur in a
production environment.
6.1
Scaling the DataUpload service
With the current deployment showcased in Section 5.5 the DataUpload microservice
has been deployed to a separate physical node, decoupled from the the other services.
This way, the service has more resources available for itself since there are no other
processes on that node to take up part of them and there are also multiple replicas
of it running to ensure fault tolerance. By comparing that environment with the
current CAWS project deployment where the data upload component is part of the
same process as the others and run on the same machine, it can be noticed that the
DataUpload component has been scaled to an increased amount of resources made
available and multiple instances that However, even though the component has been
scaled, the purpose of this section is to showcase how the scalability property has
been achieved through the changes introduced with this thesis.
A scenario that can illustrate how scalability is achieved is when in a production
environment, a component experiences much heavier load due to increased traﬀic
which can lead to exhausting the available resources and then failure. Lets assume
that during normal operations a new study is being deployed and part of this study a
high number of participants are going to start sending a large amount of data at fast
rate to be handled by the DataUpload component. This amount of extra load on the
component is considered to be so high that the current physical node it is deployed
begins getting close to using up all of its resources and is in danger of crashing and
==PAGE:54==
44
6 Deployment Operations
failing. To further scale this component up another node can be added to the swarm
and then more replicas of the service can be created to run on that node. Because
Docker Swarm provides its own load balancer, the incoming traﬀic will be balanced
between the nodes that run containers of the DataUpload service.
In the context of this thesis, because only two Droplets are available on Digital
Ocean, to simulate the addition of another node to the swarm, the system will be
redeployed to have all services running on the manager node, and the empty worker
node will be removed from the swarm.
In Figure 6.1 it is shown the swarm with only a single node available after the
worker node has been removed. With this swarm setup the system can be deployed
to this node after removing the [node.role == worker] constraint of the data upload
service from the docker-compose file.
Figure 6.1: Single node swarm.
Figure 6.2 shows the status of the services after they have been deployed and it
can be seen that the only the manager node is in use.
Figure 6.2: Services running on a single node.
With this setup the premise of the scenario is that the current node will be put
under very high load due to the DataUpload service receiving high traﬀic and will
start reaching the limit of the resources available for it. In order to prevent the node
from crashing and experiencing downtime, but also to be able to handle the extra
traﬀic a new node can be added to the swarm and the data upload service can be
scaled up to more replicas. Firstly, a new node has to be added to the swarm to
increase the overall resources the swarm has access to, Figure 6.3 shows the swarm
after the node has been added to it.
With the new node added to the swarm, the data upload can now be scaled up
using the docker service scale command. As it can be seen in Figure 6.4 the command
requires the name or in this case id of the service and the number of replicas the service
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Scaling the DataUpload service
45
Figure 6.3: Joining a node to the swarm.
should have. In this case since there are 2 replicas running already on the manager
node, the service is being scaled up to 4 replicas.
Figure 6.4: Scaling up the DataUpload service.
When inspecting the service it now has 4 replicas as shown in Figure 6.5. What
is important to note is where those two new replicas are running in the swarm; when
connecting to the worker node and executing the docker ps command there should be
two containers running the data upload component automatically assigned there by
the swarm in order to not overload the manager node.
Figure 6.5: Service status after scaling up.
Figure 6.6 shows that when listing the containers on the new node there are two
new containers running the data upload service. This means that the service has been
successfully scaled up and now it has access to more resources to be able to handle
the extra load.
However, constantly deploying multiple replicas and adding more nodes to the
environment increases the cost of maintaining the cloud environment and it is not
cost eﬀicient to do so. The environment should be monitored and adapted to the
needs of the system. Large study releases with a very high participant count require
to scale up a system, but there are scenarios when it can require less resources to run
and maintaining the extra nodes becomes an unnecessary expense.
==PAGE:56==
46
6 Deployment Operations
Figure 6.6: New containers on the worker node.
For example, after a large study is completed and removed from the system like in
the code example from Section 5.1.1 the participants will be removed as well and stop
uploading data resulting in decreasing the workload for the data upload component.
Scaling back down the data upload component can now be easily achieved with Docker
Swarm. The number of replicas can easily be brought down to a lower number to
decrease the CPU usage of the nodes and if even less performance is required a node
can be easily removed from the swarm and then Docker will reassign the replicas to
an available one as part of its desired state reconciliation mechanism.
The following setup shown in Figure 6.7 shows a deployment of the CAWS system
with two replicas of the data upload deployed on two separate nodes. In order to
scale down the system to reduce the upkeep cost of the cloud environment, the node
running one instance of the data upload component can be removed from the swarm
as shown in Figure 6.8.
Figure 6.7: Multi node deployment before scaling down.
Figure 6.8: Remove node from the swarm.
With the node removed from the swarm the replica that was running on it will
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Scaling the DataUpload service
47
shutdown as it loses the connection. Docker will then bring up another replica to
maintain the desired state of 2 replicas on the manager node as it is the only available
node in the swarm that can receive tasks. In Figure 6.9 it is shown the stack status
after the node was removed. It can be noticed that the container running on the
stefan-thesis-dataupload node was shutdown and the one above it was brought up
instead on the stefan-thesis-webservices node. Now the system has been scaled down
to use less nodes in the deployment environment and decrease performance but also
decrease upkeep expenses. Note that when deployed on a CSP like AWS which offers
pay-as-you-go type billing the decrease in cost occurs automatically as the node will
not use resources anymore, however on a monthly payment plan like the one on Digital
Ocean the node has to be removed from the payment plan using their online portal.
Figure 6.9: Scaled down component running on a single node.
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
In this chapter the goals set in the beginning of the project are discussed in relation
to the work done as part of this thesis. After that limitations that were encountered
as part of the project are presented and lastly, what lies in the future of this project
is discussed.
7.1
Goals
In Section 1.3 a number of goals set to be achieved by this project were presented and
detailed; this section aims to present how each of those goals were realized through
the work done as part of this thesis.
7.1.1
How can scalability be achieved through a microservice
architecture?
The research done as part of Chapter 2 showed that larger digital phenotyping plat-
forms approach a microservice design with Docker as a containerization tool and are
deployed in a cloud environment with the use of container orchestration tools. The
papers presented in this chapter mention the scalability and performance benefits
of adopting a microservice architecture. Furthermore, in Chapter 3 the differences
between a moddular monolith and a microservice architecture have been investigated
and showed that microservices provide the potential to scale specific services of the
system.
By analyzing the CAWS architecture and design, the data upload microservice
has been designed as part of Chapter 4 to be completely decoupled from the mono-
lith project and containerized by itself in order to allow for the service to be scalable.
This design was implemented using the technologies analyzed in Chapter 3 and demon-
strated in Chapter 6 how the service can be scaled using deployment technologies.
7.1.2
How can the microservice architecture be integrated?
In Chapter 3 communication technologies and tools have been looked into to ensure
that the data upload microservice will be able to integrate with the monolith. Then
in Chapter 4 it is presented how the microservice can be integrated both with the
==PAGE:60==
50
7 Discussion
other CAWS modules but also with the CARP Core domain by using RabbitMQ and
refactoring the hard dependencies between then. The implementation of this design
and how communication is achieved is showcased in Chapter 5.
7.1.3
How can a deployment environment be designed to
support the scalability properties of the data upload
component?
The proper tools and technologies that can allow for the scaling of microservices as
well as what deployment environment is required for it have been analyzed as part
of Chapter 3. Then Chapter 4 shows how a Docker Swarm architecture has been
designed to be deployed on a multi-node cloud environment and then implemented
and deployed as part of Chapter 5.
7.1.4
How can scalability be showcased?
In Chapter 6 it is showcased how the microservice architecture provides scalability
to the data upload component by using Docker Swarm in the cloud environment to
scale up or down the data upload microservice based on the demand of the system.
The microservice can be deployed as part of a larger multi-node system together with
the CAWS monolith by design, with the added benefit of providing fault tolerance
and scalability for both services.
7.2
Limitations
This section will present the limitations encountered throughout the project and dis-
cuss possible solutions.
7.2.1
Asynchronicity
In a microservice architecture the communication between services should be asyn-
chronous and not block the flow of a service when it sends a message. This is done
in some of the cases in the communication between the data upload service and the
CAWS service, however because of limitations from the Spring Boot framework and
which is synchronous and has no mechanism for registering callbacks to method calls
for asynchronously waiting for replies some of the communication between the ser-
vices is done synchronously. This issue can be solved by migrating to an asynchronous
Java based framework like Spring WebFlux, Play Framework or Vert.x but the limited
time prevented from including this refactor in the project.
==PAGE:61==
7.2 Limitations
51
7.2.2
Database
The current database configuration and deployment is not up to par with microservice
standards but due to time constraints it has been ommitted in this thesis.
First
of all, the database should be separated so that the each microservice has its own
database. The logical separation of the tables is already achieved by base version of
the CARP platform as each service modifies their own table. Also the deployment
of the database solution requires more configuration; the Postgre service should be
configured for database replication so that multiple replicas of the database service
can be deployed to the swarm like with the microservices. Doing this requires more
manual configuration and a good understanding or research into how PostgreSQL
works.
This is a more complicated task in general as databases are by design a
stateful service and measures have to be put in place to ensure the integrity of the
stored data. Doing this, however, will ensure high availability and fault tolerance of
the persistence layer, but can in turn be resource intensive and research should be
done to see how much replication is needed and if other database technologies than
PostgreSQL provide more eﬀicient replication mechanisms. It is also noteworthy that
some CSPs provide features and support to achieve database replication on a more
robust and secure level.
7.2.3
Dependencies
To achieve a more ideal deployment the Authentication and User modules should
be extracted out of the monolith as well.
With the current implementation this
dependency is repeated in both microservices and should not exist ideally. Having
these modules extracted would be of good benefit as they serve as an entry-point to
all requests into the system and being able to scale and replicate them in the swarm
would load balance the requests between them and eliminate the ”funnel” that is
formed with the current architecture, but again due to development time constraints
this change is not part of the project.
7.2.4
Cloud resources
Another limitation of this project was the available resources on the cloud which was
mentioned before in this paper. The initial design of the deployment environment
which is shown in Chapter 4 specifies multiple nodes to be used. This is because in a
microservice architecture critical services like the API Gateway or the message broker
instance should run in their own physical node to prevent having a single point of
failure and ensure that the app is constantly available and the communication between
the services has constant uptime.
==PAGE:62==
52
7 Discussion
7.2.5
Working reverse-proxy
An important limitation encountered that prevented the ability of conducting perfor-
mance tests on the architecture was the lack of a working reverse-proxy. In order to
be able to test the performance of the scaled up component in the cloud, an NGINX
reverse-proxy was set up as part of the deployment with the purpose of exposing
the system to incoming requests from the outside and routing them to the correct
service domain in the swarm. This proxy was developed to a point where it was
close to being functional, but because of limited development time it was not finished.
The issue encountered was a connection issue over the network between the NGINX
container and the other services and there was no more time to look into alternative
technologies/solutions or other potential fixes for the issue. Because of this, a detailed
performance analysis where the deployed system is measured empyrically to compare
to the monolithic deployment is not part of this thesis report.
7.3
Future work
This section will discuss what future improvements or additions can be done to build
upon this project.
7.3.1
Expand the architecture
The platform would benefit from having the rest of the monolith transformed incre-
mentally into a full microservice architecture. By extracting one service at a time
and introducing it on the deployment environment, small incremental steps that also
maintain the platforms production availability can be taken until the monolith is
completely transformed into microservices.
7.3.2
Cloud Service Provider in-depth analysis
Research could be done into the multiple CSPs or even just the one that CARP
currently uses to create a detailed cost/performance analysis to see how many nodes
are viable to be maintained in the cloud environment. As mentioned in the limitations
part, creating nodes on a CSP is a costly process and the ones provided by their free
tiers do not have the necessary resources to be able to run the system. With proper
funding a more detailed analysis into how much performance is gained through each
node compared to how much it costs to maintain it could give more insights into a
more optimal architecture but also on more feasible CSPs
7.3.3
Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment
CI/CD is an important addition to any software system that can increase their avail-
ability and facilitate a faster development cycle. By setting up automated build and
==PAGE:63==
7.3 Future work
53
deploy pipelines, changes to the services can be taken on the deployment environ-
ment in a more faster pace. With the current data upload microservice deployed on
a cloud environment a CI/CD pipeline would make it much more easy to update on
production as the entire monolith is not required to be built and redeployed with
every change.
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This thesis involved investigating and solving the scalability issues of the data up-
load component of the CARP platform in order to allow for higher workloads to be
processed.
In the beginning a research into other digital phenotyping platforms was conducted
to investigate their architecture and technologies that are used. Relevant papers about
the migration from an already existing monolothic system to a microservice based one
were investigated to gain insight into the benefits, but also to devise a methodology
for approaching such a task.
The analysis chapter discussed how a microservice architecture provides scalabil-
ity to its components in comparison with the CARP monolithic architecture. It then
presented how scalability can be achieved through a deployment environment, how
communication can be achieved to decouple the service and integrate it with the rest
of the architecture and what considerations to take before designing a deployment
environment and choosing an orchestration tool. The chapter also presents and com-
pares different technologies that can be used to achieve the afore mentioned tasks
along with arguments as to why they were chosen to be used in the context of this
project.
The design and implementation chapters materialize the research and learning
done as part of the previous chapters before them. The design of the system details
how each consideration identified in the analysis chapter has been taken into account
in order to create a scalable component, but also to design a deployment strategy
and environment which allows to perform scaling operations on the microservices.
The chapter provides diagrams and explanations to support the choices made in its
conception and how the technologies chosen in the analysis chapter will be used in
the architecture. The implementation chapter then presents how the microservices
were implemented acording to the design and how the deployment strategy has been
used to deploy the system on a cloud environment that supports scaling the services.
Finally, a discussion was conducted to showcase how the scalability of the data
upload component has been achieved and how the architecture allows for its scaling
to be manipulated through the tools and technologies chosen and implemented in this
==PAGE:66==
56
8 Conclusion
project.
Overall, the data upload component of the CARP platform has achieved scalability
both vertically, as the microservice can be replicated across as many nodes as needed
with the use of Docker Swarm, and horizontally, as the vertical scaling of each node
can be configured as well through the CSP it is deployed on. There is more work ahead
of the project to be considered fully production ready, but the methodologies used
in this project can be replicated to deploy a microservice system that is completely
scalable with a deployment strategy already designed to be hosted by powerful cloud
hosts across a multi-node environment.
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A
NGINX reverse proxy
NGINX is a open source web server that can be used to provide support to a web based
application like load balancing, caching, reverse proxy. NGINX was used as part of
the deployment process and design of the microservice architecture with the purpose
of acting as a reverse proxy. The usage of a reverse proxy is to expose the system
to outside requests, which then the NGINX instance can route to the appropriate
services.
In this appendix details regarding its implementation and usage will be
presented.
In order to create a reverse proxy with NGINX, a configuration file has to be
configured first.
In this file the port on which the server to listen for incoming
requests has to be declared as well as the upstream paths and routing paths.
1 upstream cans-ws-staging {
2
server cans-ws-staging:8081;
3 }
4
5 upstream cans-ws-data-upload-staging {
6
server cans-ws-data-upload-staging:8080;
7 }
8
9 server {
10
listen 80;
11
12
location /cans-ws-staging {
13
proxy_pass http://cans-ws-staging/;
14
}
15
16
location /cans-ws-data-upload-staging {
17
proxy_pass http://cans-ws-data-upload-staging/;
18
}
19 }
Listing A.1: NGINX configuration file.
Listing A.1 shows the nginx.conf file used to configure the NGINX web server for
the deployment of the system. After this file is created, a Dockerfile can be written
which builds the NGINX server using the publicly available image online and then
replacing the configuration file with the one written above.
==PAGE:68==
58
A NGINX reverse proxy
1 FROM nginx:1.15
2
3 COPY nginx.conf /etc/nginx/conf.d/default.conf
Listing A.2: NGINX Dockerfile.
After adding this as a service to the docker-compose file the swarm deploy will
contain an instance of the web server and will be able to accept HTTP requests.
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX B
Docker Swarm ingress
network
This appendix is dedicated to explaining some inner workings of Docker Swarm which
are deemed important to still mention to further explain how it can provide scalability
to a system.
As shown in Chapter 5 Implementation, Docker Swarm allows to create replicas
of any service that is part of it. A replica of a service is basically another identi-
cal container that runs the same process. This feature is what provides horizontal
scalability to a service and can be used to distribute the incoming workload between
the replicas of a service to balance it between the nodes of a swarm. This is possible
because of Docker Swarm’s ingress network and load balancing capabilities which will
be explained in this appendix.
Figure B.1 is an example diagram taken from the Docker documentation[Inc22a]
available online and it provides a good overview of a potential setup.
Figure B.1: Docker Swarm Ingress Network example.
==PAGE:70==
60
B Docker Swarm ingress network
In this figure, an example of 3 physical nodes is illustrated, where a replicated
service called my-web is deployed in the swarm. The first 2 nodes each run a replica
of the my-web service while the third node has none. As it can be seen the ingress
network created by Docker Swarm is an overlay over all the nodes that participate
in the swarm. Moreover, it can be noticed that each node in the swarm has also
an instance of the swarm load balancer running even though there are no containers
scheduled on them.
What the ingress network and load balancers provide is that whenever a request
targeted at the my-web service comes in from the outside it is redirected to one of
the replicas of the service. As expected, each node has a different IP address like
the ones shown in the figure, however, the overlay network allows for the creation of
virtual IP addresses for every replica like shown in the figure: the my-web. 1 replica is
accessible through the 10.0.0.1:80 address and the other replica on the virtual address
10.0.0.2:80.
This means that whenever a request is being redirected by a proxy like the one
showed in Appendix A to the my-web:8080 address, the request will be routed to a
load balancer which has access to the virtual IPs of the service’s replicas and then
redirected to the exposed port of the replica.
Because of this implementation, replicas of a service distributed on multiple nodes
will split the incoming workload between them and balance the resource utilization
in the network. This feature is what allows for the horizontal scaling of a service
with Docker Swarm, whenever more replicas are distributed on additional nodes the
resource utilization is automatically distributed due to the ingress routing mesh and
load balancing capabilities of Docker Swarm
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX C
Accessing the source
code
This appendix will provide the links to access the source code related to this project.
The code is divided between two GitHub repositories; one is the CAWS repository
where a separate branch called stefan-thesis was created from the development branch
and the other repository is a completely separate one containing the data upload
microservice and it is called CAWS-DataUpload.
The CAWS repository which contains the monolith without the data upload
modules can be accessed at: https://github.com/cph-cachet/carp.webservices-
docker/tree/stefan-thesis
The link should open the repository on the correct branch which is stefan-thesis
The data upload component’s source code can be accessed at:
https://github.com/Dra5ke/CAWS-DataUpload
This repository also contains the docker-compose.yml file which was showcased
in Chapter 5. This file is used to deploy the application on the cloud environment
and it can be found in the root folder of the repository. The NGINX reverse proxy
mentioned in Appendix A is contained in the reverse-proxy folder in the root of this
repository.
Because the docker-compose file is configured for a stack deployment to a Docker
Swarm; a separate file is created to be used for running the system locally called
docker-compose.local.yml. However, in order to run it locally on a single machine
some extra steps still have to be taken.
First of all, both the CAWS and DataUpload service images have to be built with
Docker. This can be done by opening a command prompt in the root folder of each
project and running these commands:
docker build -t dra5ke/thesis-repository:dataupload .
and
docker build -t dra5ke/thesis-repository:webservices .
==PAGE:72==
62
C Accessing the source code
The first command is for the data upload project and the other one for the web-
services project.
After those images are build the reverse proxy image has to be built in a similar
way. This can be done by opening a command prompt in the reverse-proxy folder of
the data upload project and running this command:
docker build -t dra5ke:reverse-proxy .
After that, the system can be run from the root folder of the data upload project
with the command: docker-compose -f docker-compose.local.yml up
Note that in order to run the system like this all the swarm configurations about
nodes and replicas from the original compose file had to be removed from this one
and therefore, running the system like this is not an accurate representation of the
cloud environment.
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX D
Acronyms
CACHET Copenhagen Center for Health Technology
CARP CACHET Resarch Platform
CAWS CARP Web Services
REST
Representational state transfer
API
Application programming interface
HTTP
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
ECG/EKG Electrocardiogram
PaaS
Platform as a Service
CNCF
Cloud Native Computing Foundation
CSP
Cloud Service Provider
EC2
Elastic Compute Cloud
AWS
Amazon Web Services
GCP
Google Cloud Platform
GCE
Google Compute Engine
IPC
Inter Process Communication
==PAGE:74==
64
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[Bau19]
Harald Baumeister. Digital Phenotyping and Mobile Sensing. eng. Springer
International Publishing, 2019. isbn: 303031619x, 3030316203, 9783030316198,
9783030316204.
[BOP22]
Grzegorz Blinowski, Anna Ojdowska, and Adam Przybylek. “Monolithic
vs. Microservice Architecture: A Performance and Scalability Evalua-
tion.” eng. In: Ieee Access 10 (2022), pages 20357–20374. issn: 21693536.
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3152803.
[BRB20]
Steve Buchanan, Janaka Rangama, and Ned Bellavance. “Inside Kuber-
netes.” In: Introducing Azure Kubernetes Service : A Practical Guide to
Container Orchestration. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2020, pages 35–50. isbn:
978-1-4842-5519-3. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-5519-3_3. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-5519-3_3.
[Car+21]
Lior Carmi et al. “Digital Phenotyping.” eng. In: Mental Health in a
Digital World (2021), pages 207–222. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-822201-
0.00002-2.
[ĆBL22]
Amar Ćatović, Nevzudin Buzađija, and Samir Lemes. “Microservice de-
velopment using RabbitMQ message broker.” und. In: Science, Engineer-
ing and Technology 2.1 (2022), pages 30–37. issn: 27442527. doi: 10.
54327/set2022/v2.i1.19.
[Chr19]
Binildas Christudas. “Introducing Microservices.” eng. In: Practical Mi-
croservices Architectural Patterns (2019), pages 21–34. doi: 10.1007/
978-1-4842-4501-9_2.
[HVC19]
Kit Huckvale, Svetha Venkatesh, and Helen Christensen. “Toward clinical
digital phenotyping: a timely opportunity to consider purpose, quality,
and safety.” In: NPJ digital medicine 2.1 (2019), pages 1–11.
[Inc22a]
Docker Inc. Use swarm mode routing mesh. 2022. url: https://docs.
docker.com/engine/swarm/ingress/ (visited on February 14, 2023).
[Inc22b]
Docker Inc. What is a container? 2022. url: https://www.docker.com/
resources/what-container/ (visited on February 14, 2023).
[Inc23]
Docker Inc. Swarm mode overview. 2023. url: https://docs.docker.
com/engine/swarm/ (visited on February 15, 2023).
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
[Kar13]
Sowmya Karunakaran. “Impact of Cloud Adoption on Agile Software
Development.” eng. In: Software Engineering Frameworks for the Cloud
Computing Paradigm (2013), pages 213–234. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-
5031-2_10.
[Kub22]
Kubernetes. Kubernetes Components. 2022. url: https://kubernetes.
io/docs/concepts/overview/components/ (visited on February 15,
2023).
[MD223a]
MD2Korg. Cerebral Cortex Cloud Platform. 2023. url: https://github.
com/MD2Korg/CerebralCortex/tree/3.3#readme (visited on March 13,
2023).
[MD223b]
MD2Korg. CerebralCortex Data Ingestion (CC-DI). 2023. url: https:
//github.com/MD2Korg/CerebralCortex-DataIngestion/tree/3.2#
readme (visited on March 13, 2023).
[MD223c]
MD2Korg. mCerebrum. 2023. url: https://archive.md2k.org/software-
under-the-hood/software-uth-mcerebrum.html (visited on March 13,
2023).
[MD223d]
MD2Korg. MD2K Overview. 2023. url: https://archive.md2k.org/
about.html (visited on March 13, 2023).
[Mes+19]
Eva-Maria Messner et al. “mHealth Applications: Potentials, Limitations,
Current Quality and Future Directions.” In: Digital Phenotyping and Mo-
bile Sensing: New Developments in Psychoinformatics. Edited by Harald
Baumeister and Christian Montag. Cham: Springer International Publish-
ing, 2019, pages 235–248. isbn: 978-3-030-31620-4. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
030-31620-4_15. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-31620-
4_15.
[MK20]
Marek Moravcik and Martin Kontsek. “Overview of Docker container
orchestration tools.” eng. In: Iceta 2020 - 18th Ieee International Confer-
ence on Emerging Elearning Technologies and Applications, Proceedings
(2020), pages 475–480. doi: 10.1109/ICETA51985.2020.9379236.
[MP19]
Lubos Mercl and Jakub Pavlik. “The comparison of container orchestra-
tors.” eng. In: Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 797 (2019),
pages 677–685. issn: 21945365, 21945357. doi: 10.1007/978-981-13-
1165-9_62.
[Pan+19]
Yao Pan et al. “A performance comparison of cloud-based container or-
chestration tools.” eng. In: Proceedings - 10th Ieee International Confer-
ence on Big Knowledge, Icbk 2019 (2019), pages 191–198. doi: 10.1109/
ICBK.2019.00033.
[PMA19]
Francisco Ponce Mella, Gastón Márquez, and Hernán Astudillo. “Migrat-
ing from monolithic architecture to microservices: A Rapid Review.” In:
September 2019.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
67
[Pot+20]
Amit M. Potdar et al. “Performance Evaluation of Docker Container
and Virtual Machine.” eng. In: Procedia Computer Science 171 (2020),
pages 1419–1428. issn: 18770509. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2020.04.152.
[RAD23a]
RADAR-base. Concepts and components of RADAR-base. 2023. url:
https://radar- base.org/docs/concepts- and- components- of-
radar-base/ (visited on March 13, 2023).
[RAD23b]
RADAR-base. RADAR-Kubernetes. 2023. url: https://github.com/
RADAR-base/RADAR-Kubernetes#readme (visited on March 13, 2023).
[Ser21]
Amazon Web Services. Whitepapers. 2021. url: https://docs.aws.
amazon.com/whitepapers/latest/docker-on-aws/container-benefits.
html (visited on February 14, 2023).
[Ser23a]
Amazon Web Services. About AWS. 2023. url: https://aws.amazon.
com/about-aws/ (visited on February 22, 2023).
[Ser23b]
Amazon Web Services. What is amazon EC2? - Amazon Elastic Compute
Cloud. 2023. url: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/
UserGuide/concepts.html (visited on February 22, 2023).
[SS18]
Sarita and Sunil Sebastian. “Transform Monolith into Microservices using
Docker.” eng. In: 2017 International Conference on Computing, Commu-
nication, Control and Automation, Iccubea 2017 (2018), page 8463820.
doi: 10.1109/ICCUBEA.2017.8463820.
==PAGE:78==
