==PAGE:1==
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic
Communication
Master Thesis
DTU Hearing Systems
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
Master Thesis
March, 2023
By
Junzhe Wang
Supervisors: Martha Shiell, Johannes Zaar, Jens Hjortkjær
Project Period: October 2022 ­ March 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science in Engineering Acoustics
Cover photo: Alastair Philip Wiper
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months in collaboration with Eriksholm Research
Centre, at the Section for Hearing Systems, Department of Health Technology, at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Sci­
ence in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Junzhe Wang ­ s181187
Signature
Date
ii
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In everyday life, people are always engaged in social communications. One important
aspect of social communication is through face­to­face interactive conversations. To en­
hance understanding of the acoustic speech signals, people tend to move their eye gaze
towards the talker. Movement of eye gaze can be studied as a proxy of cognitive pro­
cesses a in visual world paradigm. In the present study, we analysed the eye gaze shift
during conversational transitions by using multilevel logistic regression (MLR) and psycho­
metric function fitting from a data set collected in triad conversations in quiet and three
noise levels with listeners in different hearing status (younger normal hearing, older nor­
mal hearing and older hearing impaired). Firstly, we suggested a method for identifying
conversational transitions and defined the floor transfer (the time when the new talker
starts talking). Then, we categorized eye gaze in terms of whether or not it fixates on the
new talker. When using MLR, we considered time bins in with 100 ms apart in categorical
variables as fixed effects, while including participant indices as a random effect. When us­
ing psychometric function fitting, we considered time as a continuous variable, and applied
the model into different data aggregation levels in terms of hearing status of participants
(normal hearing with younger age, older age and hearing impairment with older age) and
different background noise levels. The results from the psychometric function fitting show
that eye gaze largely follows the fit, and suggests eye gaze fixates towards the new talker
after 6 seconds from the floor transfer. With MLR, it was not computationally feasible to
use such a long time window as the model considered time bins as multiple categorical
variables. We also found that the quality of fit may be improved while considering time as
a continuous variable in MLR and extending the time window of interest. In comparison
to related studies, our finding suggests that eye gaze in interactive conversations may
respond more slowly than in passive listening situations without engagement.
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank for my main supervisor Martha Shiell, for offering tremendous
support in providing me the overview of current researches in eye gaze movements, help­
ing me to understand the literature, providing scientific inputs and encouraging me to keep
motivated during this thesis. I would also like to thank for Jens Hjortkjær and Johannes
Zaar, for their effort in providing feedback through each checkpoint during this thesis, es­
pecially in documentation of this report. I do appreciate everyone who guided and helped
me in everything during my days at Eriksholm Research Centre. It was a nice and unfor­
gettable experience in these five months there.
I am so grateful for all support and encouragement from my parents, my girlfriend and all
my friends, in every time when I face challenges. I’ll not able to achieve this academic
goal without each of them. I also appreciate everyone who had been previously inspired
me in my whole academic journey from Australia to Denmark and UK, especially the one
happened to bring up my motivation in human hearing system research in 2019.
At last, I would like to send my best wishes to my main supervisor Martha and her little
baby. I wish them to be surrounded by happiness on every day with the growing up of the
new family member.
iv
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature background in eye gaze movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Scope of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Method
3
2.1
Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Identification of conversational transition events
. . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2
Pre­processing of eye gaze data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Motivation for using time as a predictor variable . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Multilevel logistic regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.3
Psychometric function fitting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.4
Flowchart formed summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Results
15
3.1
Analysis of conversational dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
MLR in passive listening and interactive conversation
. . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
Psychometric function fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Discussion
25
4.1
Comparison between MLR and psychometric function fitting . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Comparison between passive listening and interactive conversation
. . . . 25
4.3
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Conclusion
29
Bibliography
31
A Psychometric fitting results
33
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The first section describes the motivation driven by literature review. The second section
includes an overview of scientific background. The third section presents the aim of the
study by defining research questions that are going to be addressed. Finally, the structure
of this thesis is outlined in the last section.
1.1
Motivation
The algorithms of audio signal processing blocks in modern hearing aids are optimized
based on speech intelligibility (SI) models [1]. Most developed SI models are based on
the spectral­temporal nature of the speech itself (e.g.[2][3][4][5][6][7]). Besides the au­
dio signal of the speech, visual information of the articulators of the speaker impacts the
understanding of the listener. In 1935, Cotton [8] found out the difference of speech under­
standing between the presence and absence of the visual information of the articulators
of the speaker, and pointed out that situations with hearing difficulties will normally require
visual assistance, thus the eyes of the listener tended to track the face of the speaker. The
visual contribution to speech intelligibility was further quantified by Sumby and Pollack in
1954 [9], where adding a visual component was found to be equivalent to an increase of
signal­to­noise ratio by 15­20 dB.
Besides audio signals and visual information, contents in realistic conversations also play
an important role. Comprehending conversation requires complex brain activity from the
listener [10]. However, a typical listening test or audiovisual test does not capture the
whole procedure of perception and cognition of the brain [11]. To investigate the nature
and behaviours of people engaging in realistic conversations to provide better assistance
for people with difficulties in conversations, we need to understand the sensory and cog­
nitive mechanisms that underlie an individual experience of a listener.
Huettig et al. [12] reviewed comprehension studies using a visual world paradigm where
the eye gaze of the listener is a proxy of underlying cognitive processes. Barr [13] pro­
posed multilevel logistic regression (MLR) to analyse eye gaze data from visual world eye
tracking experiments, by treating time as a continuous variable and eye location as a cat­
egorical variable (on target or off target) in log odds. The advantage of the MLR model
is that it separates the confounding of anticipatory and rate effects and also takes into
account the fact that the data are naturally grouped from collection. This approach has
been further applied by Shiell et al. [14] in a data set containing eye gaze shifts from par­
ticipants with hearing impairment watching a recording of a dialogue with conversational
transitions, where an increase of the probability that listeners looked at the new talker
during conversational transitions was found. However, this phenomenon only captures a
passive listening situation instead of live interactive conversation.
1.2
Literature background in eye gaze movement
In interactive conversations, Hadley et al. [15] found eye gaze in normal hearing listeners
was more focused on the listener’s face in one­to­one face­to­face conversations while
degrading auditory input by increasing background noise level. However, hearing im­
pairment, also considered as audio degradation, does not necessarily lead more visual
attention of the listener, since Lu et al. [16] found no major differences in the propor­
tion of time where eye gaze aligned towards the speaker between people with normal
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
1
==PAGE:10==
hearing and hearing impairment across different background noise levels, in interactive
conversations between the participant and two other confederates.
In response to visual stimuli, a saccade requires approximately from 100 ms to 200 ms to
plan [17]. The gap in time between the previous talker and the new talker is approximately
around 200 ms [18] for people with normal hearing. Inter­talker saccades of the listener
do not often occur at the same time as the conversational transition to make the eye gaze
focus on the new talker. Eye gaze has been used to study anticipation of turn end cues
during question­answer pairs [19] and attention during a realistic conversation [20]. The
precision of timing of turn ends can be uniquely dependent on the auditory modality alone
[21] and can also be deduced from unimodel visual cues alone [22]. With both degraded
audio cues and visual cues for listeners with hearing impairment, turn end perceptions and
synchronization of the eye gaze with the new talker in conversational transitions might be
impacted.
1.3
Scope of the project
The aim of the study is to assess the applicability and limitations of the MLR model applied
in [14] for eye gaze data in real time interactive conversations. Inspired by MLR, we also
perform psychometric function fitting. The central research questions are:
• What is the difference of eye gaze movement between passive listening situations
and interactive conversations?
• What are the practical implementations of the MLR model and psychometric function
fitting in terms of eye gaze movement in interactive conversations?
To answer these questions, we analyse the data set collected by Lu et al. [16] in real time
conversations with three people by using MLR and psychometric function fitting. The data
set contains time stamps of the starting times and finishing times of the speech segments
for each individual during the sessions with four different background noise levels. The
azimuth of eye gaze from each test participant over time with respect to the stationary
environment is also recorded.
1.4
Outline
The report consists of 5 chapters. Chapter 2 of this report describes the experimental set
up and format of available data provided by [16]. Thereafter, the methods of processing
and analysing eye gaze data in both MLR and psychometric function fitting are explained
in detail. Chapter 3 presents results from analysing conversational dynamics, MLR and
psychometric function fitting. Answering the research questions, Chapter 4 discusses the
advantages and disadvantages of MLR and psychometric function fitting in terms of the
results, and discusses some reasons leading to the difference between passive listen­
ing situations and interactive conversations. Conclusions are drawn in Chapter 5 of this
master thesis.
2
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:11==
2
Method
This chapter firstly describes the method of experimental setup and the format of avail­
able data provided by [16]. The second section introduces the eye gaze data processing
strategy. The last section describes the theory and computational implementation for both
MLR and psychometric function fitting.
2.1
Experiment
In the experiment from [16], there were 30 test participants divided into three groups ­
YNH (normal hearing with younger age), ONH (normal hearing with older age) and OHI
(hearing impairment with older age). Initially, each group consists of 10 participants. Since
2 participants from the OHI group had hearing thresholds significantly lower than others
in the group and higher than participants in the ONH group, they were excluded from the
data set. Each of the remaining 28 participants (nY NH = 10, nONH = 10, nOHI = 8) had a
conversation with free topics in 21 minutes and 20 seconds without awareness of the aim
of the study. Each conversation was divided into 4 segments with different background
noise levels in random order: no noise, 50 dB sound pressure level (SPL), 60 dB SPL
and 70 dB SPL. The background noise was recorded in a restaurant scene without any
intelligible speech. Each segment consists of 5 minutes and 20 seconds.
The experiment set up by [16] took place inside an acoustic chamber with dimensions
of 3m × 4m × 2.6m height. Figure 2.1 shows the room plan of the acoustic chamber.
The test participant was sitting at one side of the coffee table, and the other two confed­
erates were sitting next to the corners of the table across the participant with a distance
of approximately 1 metre from the participant. The azimuth of the confederates from
each participant varies between ±6◦to ±30◦. The loudspeakers playing back immersive
background noise in natural settings were placed in a pattern of hexagon, with two at ap­
proximately ±90◦azimuth from the participant, and the other four were placed close to the
corner of the chamber. The background noise was used from a recording of restaurant
scene with two recording channels, and did not contain any intelligible speech.
Figure 2.1: A schematic diagram of the room plan of the acoustic chamber. Figure taken
from [16].
Data collection
During all conversations, the time stamps of the start and the end of the speech segments
from each talker were labelled by using an unsupervised voice activation detection (VAD)
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
3
==PAGE:12==
algorithm [23] for the conditions with no background noise or with 50 dB background noise
level. Since the VAD algorithm picked up the background noise and considered it as
speech in higher background noise levels, the speech segments were labelled manually
in conditions with 60 dB and 70 dB background noise level. For both methods of labelling,
the minimum duration of the speech was 0.1 s and the minimum silent duration within a
talker was 1 s. The azimuth of the eye gaze with respect to the stationary environment
was recorded as a function of time at a sampling rate of 100 Hz by the Tobii Pro Glasses
(Danderyd, Sweden) worn by each participant.
The data set provided by [16] consists of following:
• Time stamps of the start of the conversation for each participant (10 YNH, 10 ONH,
8 OHI)
• Time stamps of the start and the end of the speech segments from the participant
and both confederates
• The azimuth of eye gaze of the participants over time with respect to the stationary
room
• The azimuth of head orientation of the participant over time with respect to the sta­
tionary room
• Background noise level in each segment for each participant
• The azimuth of confederates (including whether confederate A was sitting on the
left or right; the other confederate was sitting the other way around)
Due to confidentiality, the speech recordings are not provided in the data set.
2.2
Data processing
2.2.1
Identification of conversational transition events
This section introduces the method of identification of conversational events based on the
start time of the previous talker and the end of the new talker by illustrating an hypothetical
example.
Figure 2.2 shows an illustration of turn taking stages defined by [14], according to the
start and the end of the speech segments from each talker during the conversation. The
conversational transition from the previous talker to the new talker is identified where the
start of the new talker is after the start of the previous talker, and the end of the new talker is
after the end of previous talker. Both talkers are confederates, and no interruptions occur,
meaning they are the only talkers during their speech. In this illustration, an overlap­
transition from talker 2 to talker 1 is identified between t1 and t2, where the start of the
previous talker (talker 2) at t1 is before the start of the new talker (talker 1), and the end of
the new talker at t2 is after the end of the previous talker. Since the new talker takes over
the speech before the previous talker ends, it is defined as an overlap­transition. Similarly,
a silence­transition from talker 1 to talker 2 is identified between t3 and t4, where the new
talker starts after the end of the previous talker, leaving a short period of silence. The
duration of the silence­transition is defined as floor transfer offset (FTO). Same as [18],
FTO of overlap­transitions are negative.
4
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: An illustration of turn taking stages during a conversation consisting of three
talkers. Figure adapted from [14].
In the following sections, each period containing an overlapping transition such as be­
tween t1 and t2, or a silence transition such as between t3 and t4 will be considered as
an event. To analyse inter­talker saccades during conversational transitions, we apply
time­windowing for each event into the recorded azimuth of eye gaze. Since each event
has different time stamps of start (t1 and t3) and end (t2 and t4), an alignment procedure
is needed to compare eye gaze in time between each event.
Each event consists of three stages 1) the previous talker alone, 2) the overlap­ or silence­
transition period and 3) the new talker alone. In the data set collected in the passive
listening experiment in [14] for silence­transitions, all events were aligned at the end of
2) and beginning of 3) by changing the time stamp there to 0. For overlap transitions in
the data set collected by [16], we also consider the end of 2) and beginning of 3) as time
stamp 0. The time stamp 0 is defined as floor transfer in the rest of this report.
2.2.2
Pre­processing of eye gaze data
In [16], the azimuth of the eye gaze follows a bimodal distribution in degrees. Therefore,
we can categorize it into binary: eye gaze fixating at the side of the one talker or the other.
After categorization, similar to [14], we apply further processing based on [17], where a
fixation to a talker lasts at least 100 ms. Any spikes or missing eye gaze data less than
100 ms can be smoothed out as shown in the hypothetical example in Figure 2.3.
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Hypothetical examples of eye gaze pattern to be smoothed out and considered
as constantly fixating at the talker 1. Panel (a) shows a spike less than 100 ms and panel
(b) shows a period of missing data lasting less than 100 ms, where the fixation does not
change before and after the missing data.
Figure 2.4 shows an example of pre­processing, where the azimuth of eye gaze in degrees
was transformed into the side where the participant was fixating at over time.
Figure 2.4: An example of pre­processing of eye gaze data from participant #30 with a
background noise level of 60 dB. The left panel shows the azimuth of eye gaze in degrees,
and the right panel shows pre­processed data.
2.3
Data Analysis
2.3.1
Motivation for using time as a predictor variable
To analyse the time course of the eye gaze shift across different listening situations, as­
sessing the probability of eye gaze fixating at the target talker over time is the most direct
way. Adapting the hypothetical experiment proposed by Barr [13], we consider some
hypothetical events which could possibly happen in the data set collected by Lu et al.
[16]. Figure 2.5 presents some hypothetical examples of eye gaze patterns after the floor
transfer. The calculation of the proportion of eye gaze fixating at the new talker in each
hypothetical condition as shown in (a) and (e) is expressed as:
proportion = 1
T
Z T
0
(β0 + β1t)dt,
(2.1)
6
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.5: Time­window analysis (a) shows the proportion of the eye gaze fixating at the
new talker in condition 1 higher than in condition 2. Panel (b)­(d) shows three hypothetical
eye gaze patterns unfolding over time after the floor transfer. Panel (e) shows no effect
between conditions, and (f)­(g) show hypothetical patterns underlying it. Note that the y­
axis in (b)­(d) and (f)­(g) represents the probability of eye gaze fixating at the new talker.
Figure adapted from [13].
where β0 represents the probability of eye gaze fixating at the new talker prior to the floor
transfer, referred as anticipatory effect in [13], realized as y­intercept in (b)­(d) and (f)­(g);
β1 represents the change in it overtime after the new talker starts, referred as rate effect
in [13], realized as slope in (b)­(d) and (f)­(g); T represents the duration of the new talker;
t represents the time variable in seconds.
While collapsing time as in Equation (2.1), the results from (b)­(d) returns the same as
shown in (a), where the probability of eye gaze fixating at the new talker in condition 1
is larger than in condition 2. In (b), there is no difference in the anticipatory effect in eye
gaze fixating at the new talker between both conditions, and the probability of eye gaze
fixating at the new talker in condition 1 increases over time, and in condition 2 decreases.
This particular data pattern in (b) means that condition 1 lets the new talker attract more
attention from the listener after the floor transfer and condition 2 decreases attention from
the listener to fixate at the new talker. However, in (c), the difference in the anticipatory
effect alone will also lead to the same result in (a). In (d), with more anticipatory effect
in condition 1, while the probability of the eye gaze fixating at the new talker decreases
over time in condition 1 and increases in condition 2, a similar result in (a) can be still
calculated, although (d) shows the opposite trends of (b).
In (f), no difference in anticipatory effect and no rate effects, results no difference in the
proportion of the eye gaze fixating at the new talker in both conditions as shown in (e).
However, in (g), with confounding of anticipatory and rate effect, the probability of fixating
at the new talker increases in condition 1 and decreases in condition 2. In (h), the increase
of probability of eye gaze fixating at the new talker in condition 1 is larger than in condi­
tion 2. The difference of effects brought by condition 1 and 2 cannot be reflected in (e).
Therefore, the proportion of the time when eye gaze is fixating at the target talker is not
a sufficient predictor for analyzing the precision of timing in turn­end cues. By unfolding
over time and fit the eye gaze behaviour by using the equation for a line,
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
7
==PAGE:16==
P(new) = β0 + β1t,
(2.2)
we are able to separate the confounding of anticipatory and rate effect.
2.3.2
Multilevel logistic regression
The linear regression model in Equation (2.2) is based on two assumptions: 1) the range of
the dependent variable is unbounded and 2) the samples are independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.).
The eye gaze data in each time stamp are not independent. Each saccade requires
approximately 100 ms to 200 ms to reach its destination [17] and cannot move immediately
from one position to another, eye movement during planning is more or less correlated
by the position in 100 ms before. To filter out these dependencies, we can down­sample
each 10 eye gaze data in time stamps from a sampling frequency of 100 Hz, into time
bins with a sampling frequency of 10 Hz as shown in boxes in Figure 2.6. In this way, the
probability of eye gaze fixating at the new talker for each time bin can be calculated.
Figure 2.6: The schematic diagram for down­sampling eye gaze in time stamps in every
10 ms (the cross marks) into time bins in every 100 ms (the boxes) in a hypothetical
example.
Although [13] suggested that time can be used as a continuous variable, many studies
(e.g. [14][24][25][26]) still considered time bins as being multiple categorical variables,
before knowing whether or not eye gaze movement is related to time. Thus, we decide
to consider time bins as multiple categorical variables first, to enable us to visualize the
shape of eye gaze movement.
However, assumption 1) is violated since the probability and proportions are bounded from
0 and 1. Furthermore, the samples will no longer be identically distributed, if the standard
error is related to the fitting. Suppose we have a standard error of σ where the mean is
0.5. If the mean is above 1 −σ, it is not possible to have a standard error of σ, because
the probability has to reach at least above 1, for data above 1 −σ to introduce the same
standard error. Thus, the standard error is related to the mean, and assumption 2) is still
violated. Thus, it is therefore not sufficient to use a linear regression model to analyze
the probability of eye gaze fixating at the talkers. To unbound the response variable, we
transform probability P into log odds by using
η = logit(P) = ln

P
1 −P

= β0 +
N
X
i=1
βixi,
(2.3)
8
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.7: Hypothetical eye gaze patterns in time in probability scale (panel a) and log
odds scale (panel b). The blue curve represents eye gaze behaviour in one listening
condition and the red curve represents another. Figure adapted from [13].
where i denotes the index of the time bin, xi denotes each time bin (e.g. x1 = 1 and
x2...N = 0 for time bin #1), N denotes total amount of time bins and βi denotes regression
coefficient refer to the change of log odds η when xi changes by one unit. However, while
the eye gaze remains fixating at the previous talker or the new talker during the whole
time bin, the probability P for this time bin will be either 0 or 1, and the calculated log
odds will approach negative or positive infinity. Instead, we compute the empirical logit
suggested by Agresti [27]:
η
′ = ln

y + 0.5
n −y + 0.5

,
(2.4)
where n denotes the total amount of time stamps grouped in a time bin (n = 10), and y is
the amount of time stamps with eye gaze fixating at the target (y = 2 for the time bin 0 in
the hypothetical example shown in Figure 2.6).
Performing logistic regression instead of linear regression helps us to avoid mis­estimation
of anticipatory and rate effects [28]. Figure 2.7 shows an example of comparison between
two hypothetical eye gaze patterns, where only anticipatory effect exists in (b) on the log
odds scale. However, on the probability scale in (a), the anticipatory effect is not easy to
visualize, and the rate effect appears as a false positive.
Assessing independence between samples
After transforming the probability into log odds scale, we allowed the range of depen­
dent variable to be unbounded. However, we did not assess independence between the
samples.
In the experiment from [14], each participant were passively watching and listening to
the same recording of a dialogue, thus experiencing the same conversational transitions
(events) played back. A sampling hierarchy is plotted in Figure 2.8, where all same events
were repeated for each participant, reflected in red branches from level 3 to level 2. The
eye gaze data collected from each conversational transition (each blue box in level 2) were
naturally grouped correspondingly by each participant and each event. In level 1, for ex­
ample, the eye gaze data inside time bin #1 and time bin #101 were grouped by the same
participant, and the eye gaze data inside time bin #1 and time bin #301 were grouped
by the same event from the sampling hierarchy. Thus, each time bin is not completely
independent from each other. To solve the problem of non­independence, [13] and [14]
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.8: The sampling hierarchy applied in [14] showing all time bins collected were
naturally grouped by each participant and each event (conversational transition from the
recording). Figure adapted from [13].
considered the grouping factors, participant indices and event indices, as random effects
in multilevel logistic regression (MLR) suggested in [29].
The experimental eye gaze data collected in [16] were slightly different from [14]. In inter­
active conversations with arbitrary topics, the nature of conversational transitions (context,
syntax, floor transfer offset, duration of the previous and the new talker, etc.) between the
confederates was no longer repeated in each participant. For example, in the sampling
hierarchy in Figure 2.9, conversational transitions experienced by participant #1 (event
#1 to #5) were not experienced by participant #2 or #3, and vice versa.
Figure 2.9: The sampling hierarchy applied in [16]. Each participant experienced different
amount of and different nature of conversational transitions (event #1 to #5 for participant
#1, event #6 to #13 for participant #2 and event #14 to #17 experienced by participant #3).
Note that the amount of eye gaze in time bins collected in each event is not necessarily
the same.
10
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:19==
Implementation of MLR
We use the glmer function from the lme4 package in R to implement the MLR model by
using the command:
glmer(gazeTarget ~ timeBin + (1|TP) + (1|event), data = df, family = binomial(link
= 'logit')),
where gazeTarget denotes whether the eye gaze is on the new talker (with values of either
0 or 1), timeBin denotes the time bin as fixed effect, (1|TP) and (1|event) denotes the
participant indices and event indices, separately, as random effects. And df denotes
the data set modelled by MLR, which was replaced by dfALL for data set containing eye
gaze movements for all participants, dfYNH for participants in the YNH group, dfONH for
participants in the ONH group, and dfOHI for participants in the OHI group. However,
based on the sampling hierarchy in Figure 2.9, the events were not repeated either across
different participants or within the same participant. Considering event index as a random
effect variable will lead to failure of convergence of the model. Thus, we only include
participant indices as a random effect:
glmer(gazeTarget ~ timeBin + (1|TP), data = df, family = binomial(link = 'logit')).
The variance explained is calculated from:
var <- MuMIn::r.squaredGLMM(fmon),
and the log odds of gaze fixating at the new talker over time is printed by:
fmoncoeff <- coefTable(fmon).
2.3.3
Psychometric function fitting
If eye gaze movement is related to time from the MLR analysis, we can consider time as
a single continuous variable instead of multiple categorical variables. By considering time
bin xi in Equation (2.3) as a continuous variable, log odds can be re­written as:
ln

P
1 −P

= k(t −c),
(2.5)
where k denotes the change of log odds when t changes by one second, c denotes the
crossover point of where log odds equals to zero. The probability P can be expressed as:
P =
1
1 + e−k(t−c) ,
(2.6)
which is known as standard logistic function. The slope s at the midpoint c is:
s = dP
dt

t=c
=
ke−k(t−c)
(1 + e−k(t−c))2 = k
4.
(2.7)
By substituting Equation (2.7) into Equation (2.6), yields:
P =
1
1 + e−4s(t−c) .
(2.8)
Sometimes, probability of participants fixating towards the new talker does not start from
0 and does not end at 1. Instead, the fit can start from the baseline b to the peak p.
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.10: Shape of logistic function with 4 main parameters indicated. Figure taken
from [30].
Therefore, the slope should be normalized by p−b. While P →p while t →∞and P →b
while t →−∞, probability is expressed as:
P =
p −b
1 + e4·
s
p−b·(c−t) + b.
(2.9)
This is the same equation for psychometric function fitting in [30]. We fit this function to
the probability of eye gaze fixating at the new talker if it is related to time. This method
allows us to reduce several features from MLR into 4 main parameters (the peak p, the
baseline b, the midpoint c and the slope s), as shown in Figure 2.10.
Data aggregation and implementation of psychometric function fitting
We use the lsqcurvefit function in MATLAB to implement psychometric function fitting
by using the command:
lsqcurvefit(fun,pguess,timeBin,gazeTarget,LB,UB),
where fun denotes the psychometric function in Equation (2.9), LB denotes the lower
bounds of peak, baseline, slope and midpoint, UB denotes the upper bounds, and pguess
denotes the initial guess for these 4 parameters. The values of these are in Table 2.1.
peak p
baseline b
midpoint c
slope s
lower bounds
0
0
­1
0
upper bounds
1
1
3
1000
initial guess
1
0
0
1
Table 2.1: Lower bounds, upper bounds and initial guess for peak, baseline, midpoint and
slope.
While applying psychometric function fitting for each event without aggregation, the length
of the vector of the input data timeBin and the response data gazeTarget equals the
12
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:21==
amount of data for each event. To aggregate data, events are concatenated one followed
by another in timeBin and gazeTarget, thus the length of timeBin and gazeTarget equals
the summation of the amounts of data for all aggregated events.
By using psychometric function fitting, not only are we able to parameterize each event in
peak, baseline, slope and midpoint, but we can also easily aggregate the data across the
events in each participant or each group for each background noise level, to descriptively
reflect general patterns of movement of eye gaze in realistic conversational transitions.
2.3.4
Flowchart formed summary
Figure 2.11: A flowchart of data analysis for the present study.
In summary, we draw a flowchart in Figure 2.11 to show our stages of data analysis. First,
we confirm whether or not the eye gaze follows bimodal distribution. If it does, we can
categorize it into eye gaze fixating at the side of the one talker or the other. Then, before
knowing eye gaze patterns over time, we use time bins as multiple categorical variables in
MLR. Finally, we justify whether or not the eye gaze is time related, by visualizing the plot
of eye gaze patterns over time from the MLR results. If it is, we can use time as a single
continuous variable in psychometric function fitting. If not, time bins should be remained
as categorical variables.
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:23==
3
Results
This chapter consists of three sections. The first section includes results some general
analysis of conversational dynamics in the experiment from [16]. The second section
includes results from MLR model. The last section includes results from psychometric
function fitting to eye gaze data in different aggregation levels.
3.1
Analysis of conversational dynamics
This section shows analysis of conversational dynamics in terms of the proportion of
speaking time, occurrence of conversational transitions, density distributions of FTO and
duration of the new talker. Some replicate the analysis reported in [16]. In addition, the
distribution of eye gaze before and after pre­processing is also included.
Proportion of speaking time
Figure 3.1 shows the group averaged proportion of speaking time for the participants
and both confederates in different background noise levels. Although a slight difference
can be observed between the re­calculated values and the plots from [16], the curves
roughly follow similar patterns by visualizing the upper and lower panel. The averaged
proportion of speaking time of participants is significantly larger than both confederates
(F = 235, p < 0.00001). The averaged proportion of speaking time of participants in
the OHI group is larger than that of the normal hearing groups (F = 29, p < 0.00001),
meaning participants with hearing impairment talked significantly more than participants
with normal hearing.
Figure 3.1: The figures in upper panels show the re­calculated mean proportion of speak­
ing time of participants and confederates during the 320 seconds session in each listening
situation according to the data set supplied by [16]. The figures in lower panels are directly
taken from the publication of [16]. The error bars represent ±1 standard error.
Validity of eye gaze data pre­processing
To make sure the azimuths of eye gaze of the participants follows a bi­modal distribution,
we re­calculated the probability density distribution for all listening conditions and plotted
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.2: The re­calculated probability density distribution of azimuths of eye gaze in
different listening conditions.
them in Figure 3.2. The patterns of bi­modal distribution for all listening conditions are
more pronounced comparing to Figure 3.3 taken from [16]. Therefore, instead of analysing
the azimuth of eye gaze, we can focus on whether or not the participant fixates at the target
talker in the following logistic regression analyses.
After categorizing the azimuth of eye gaze, we pre­processed the data using the proce­
dure described in Section 2.2.2 and re­calculated the values of mean proportion of time
when the eye gaze of the participant was fixating at the target talker (the speaking con­
federate) and compared it to the raw values from [16] in Figure 3.4. Similar values can be
observed, and all participants looked at the target talker approximately 60% to 80% of the
time. However, in difficult listening conditions, hearing impaired participants looked at the
target talker significantly less when the background noise level was at 60 dB and 70 dB,
compared to participants with normal hearing (F = 10.21, p < 0.005). This phenomenon
is also reflected in Figure 3.2 and 3.3, where more overlap between the curves with both
colours can be observed, in the rightmost two plots in the bottom row compared to other
rows.
Occurrence of conversational transitions
Based on the definition illustrated in Figure 2.2, we identified and counted the amount of
conversational transitions in terms of overlap­transitions and silence­transitions for each
participant in the different background noise level. Figure 3.5 shows box plots of occur­
rence of overlap­transitions and silence­transitions for participants in each group in each
background noise level. The occurrence of silence transitions is significantly more than
overlap transitions (F = 16.85, p < 0.0001).
Table 3.1 shows results of a 3­way ANOVA analysis with factors of 1) transition type (si­
lence or overlap) 2) group and 3) background noise level, and interactions between them.
Each factor alone shows a significant effect on occurrences, and no major effect can be
16
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: The distribution of the azimuths of eye gaze and head orientation of the partic­
ipants averaged in each listening condition. The coloured bars represent the azimuth of
the confederates, the solid line curves represent the azimuth of eye gaze with respect to
the room, and dashed line curves represent the azimuth of head orientation with respect
to the room. The area between the curves and x­axis is 1. Figure taken from [16].
Figure 3.4: The figure in the left panel shows the re­calculated mean proportion of time
when eye gaze of the participant was fixating at the target talker. The figure in the right
panel is directly taken from the publication [16].
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
17
==PAGE:26==
F
p
transition type
16.85
<0.0001
group
9.88
<0.0001
background noise level
30.78
<0.0001
background noise level and group
0.24
0.96
background noise level and transition type
1.8
0.15
group and transition type
4.69
0.01
Table 3.1: Result of 3­way ANOVA analysis. The last three rows show interactions be­
tween factors.
Figure 3.5: Box plots of occurrences of overlap­transitions (top panels) and silence­
transitions (bottom panels), for each group (left to right: YNH, ONH, OHI), as a function
of background noise level.
observed with interactions between background noise level and group, or interactions
between background noise level and transition type. There is a significant interaction
between group and transition type.
Floor transfer offsets of and duration of the new talker
Figure 3.6 shows the density distribution of the FTO and duration of the new talker of all
conversational transitions collected from all participants in all background noise levels.
Defined in Section 2.2.1 and [18], the FTO for overlap­transitions are negative, and for
silence­transitions are positive. The distribution of FTO follows a bell shape, where 98%
are inside the interval between −2.6 s to 3.2 s, with a mean of 228 ms and standard devi­
ation of 1.09 s, which slightly differed from the results reported in [18] (for English: mean
≈236 ms, SD ≈520 ms). The centre of the bell shaped curve slightly shifted from 0 to­
wards positive values, resulted only 40% of conversational transitions have negative floor
transfer, reflected in fewer overlap­transitions than silence­transitions. The duration of
the new talker roughly follows an exponential distribution, where 2% of the conversational
transitions have it larger than 8.4 seconds.
18
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.6: The left panel shows density distribution of FTO (FTO) of all conversational
transitions. The right panel shows density distribution of duration of the new talker.
3.2
MLR in passive listening and interactive conversation
In [14], Shiell et al. found that participants with hearing impairment in passive listening
situations tended to fixate towards the new talker in silence­transitions on average around
200 ms from the floor transfer. As illustrated in the right panel of Figure 3.7 taken from
that study, the log odds of participants fixating at the side of new talker monotonically
increased over time, until 1 s after the floor transfer, and then remained stable at around
2 logits, meaning the probability of participants fixating at the side of the new talker was
approximately 7.4 times of the probability of participants fixating at the side of the previous
talker (e2 ≈7.4). Since considering all time bins is not computationally feasible, a further
windowing in time was applied in [14] from 500 ms before the floor transfer (or the end of
the previous talker, if it was later than 500 ms before the floor transfer) to 2.5 s after the
floor transfer (or the end of the new talker, if it was before 2.5 s after the floor transfer).
Note that only silence­transitions are included in [14].
Figure 3.7: The log odds of gaze fixating towards new talker. The left panel shows the
data collected in [16] for interactive conversations with all participants in all background
noise levels, and the right panel is directly taken from [14] for participants with hearing
impairment while passive listening. The error bars represent confidence intervals.
Thus, as suggested in [14], time can be considered as a predictor in analysis of eye gaze in
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
19
==PAGE:28==
conversational transitions in passive listening situations. We performed a similar analysis
for the interactive conversations from [16], while considering time bins as a fixed effects
and only participant indices as random effect.
Motivated from the time windowing strategy in [14] to save computational power and cap­
ture the time region of interest, we applied a similar window, truncating from 500 ms before
the floor transfer and 2 s after the floor transfer. We can still see a trend of increase of the
log odds of eye gaze fixating at the new talker over time, but the intercept where it crossed
0 (equal gaze to both talkers) is at 900 ms after the floor transfer. Thus, moving from pas­
sive listening into interactive conversations, the time variable can still be considered as
a predictor in regression analysis. However, since event indices were not included as
random effect here, the results in Figure 3.7 cannot be directly compared by method of
statistical inference. Descriptively, the contrast between the probability of participants fix­
ating at the new and the previous talker seems to be smaller in interactive conversations
comparing to passive listening situations, as reflected in a shallower curve closer to the
horizontal axis.
We also applied MLR in each group (YNH, ONH and OHI) with different listening situa­
tions. The results are shown in Figure 3.8. Patterns of increasing log odds of eye gaze
fixating at the new talker over time can still be observed from participants with normal
hearing (in both YNH and ONH group). For participants with hearing impairment (in the
OHI group), it is difficult to conclude much due to larger confidence intervals on each
time bin. The result of MLR for each group in each background noise level is attached in
Appendix B.
Table 3.2 shows an overview of variance explained by the applied MLR model in [14]
and the MLR model we applied to data collected in [16]. When considering participant
indices and event indices as random effects, the variance explained increased 16 per­
centage points for participants with hearing impairment in passive listening situations.
In interactive conversations, while only considering participant indices as random effect,
the variance explained increased by 12.6 percentage points for participants in the YNH
group, 6.8 percentage points for participants in the ONH group and 6.3 percentage points
for participants in the OHI group. Since event indices are not considered as random ef­
fect in the applied MLR model for interactive conversations, we cannot directly compare
the variance explained by full models (R2
c) between passive listening and interactive con­
versations. However, while only including time bins as a fixed effects, R2
m for passive
listening situations is clearly larger than R2
m for interactive conversations.
Figure 3.8: The log odds of gaze fixating towards new talker in each group with different
listening situations. The left panel represents participants in YNH group, the middle panel
represents participants in ONH group and the right panel represents participants in OHI
group.
20
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:29==
in [14]
All participants in [16]
YNH in [16]
ONH in [16]
OHI in [16]
R2
c
38.7%
10.7%
14.9%
9.3%
9.9%
R2
m
22.7%
2.2%
2.3%
2.5%
3.6%
Table 3.2: Variance explained by MLR with the full model (R2
c) and fixed effect of time
alone (R2
m) in percents. Note that the full model in [14] includes participant and event as
random effects, and the model we applied for analyzing data collected in [16] only includes
participant as random effect.
3.3
Psychometric function fitting
The log odds of eye gaze seems to increase over time on the right panel in Figure 3.7,
indicating that eye gaze is related to time. Thus, we are able to consider time as a single
continuous variable in psychometric function fitting. This type of analysis was done with
different data aggregation levels. Firstly, we aggregated all events from all participant
groups in all background noise levels to visualize a general eye gaze behaviour. Then, we
aggregated all events in each participant group (3 fits) and in each background noise level
(4 fits) separately. We also aggregated for each participant groups in each background
noise level (12 fits).
Figure 3.9 shows the psychometric function fit while aggregating all eye gaze data sam­
ples for all events with all participants in all background noise levels. In the left panel, the
time of interest ranges from approximately 20 seconds before the floor transfer (when the
earliest previous talker starts to talk) to approximately 22 seconds after the floor transfer
(when the last new talker finishes to talk). As shown, the probability of eye gaze fixating
at the new talker does not monotonically increase over time, reflected by outliers before
5 seconds from the floor transfer and outliers after 8 seconds from the floor transfer. Out­
liers from both sides show trends of decreasing probability of eye gaze fixating at the new
talker over time.
Figure 3.9: Psychometric function fit of probability of eye gaze fixating at the new talker
in time. The left panel includes the range from the start of the previous talker to the end
of the new talker. The right panel only includes the range from 3.2 seconds before the
floor transfer for silence­transitions or 2.6 seconds before the floor transfer for overlap­
transitions to 8.4 seconds after the floor transfer. The size of the circles is related to the
number of observations in the time bin.
If the FTO is too long, eye gaze might switch back and forth between the confederates. If
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.10: Psychometric function fit of probability of eye gaze fixating at the new talker
in time with a shorter time region of interest.
Figure 3.11: Log odds of eye gaze fixating at the new talker in time.
the new talker has a long duration of speech, eye gaze might not keep fixating at the new
talker. Therefore, it is necessary to shorten the time region of interest, while maintaining
sufficient amount of eye gaze data. Inspired by the density distribution of FTO and duration
of new talker in Figure 3.6 in Section 3.1, we truncate the time window from 3.2 s before the
floor transfer for overlap­transitions or 2.6 s before the floor transfer for silence­transitions,
to 8.4 seconds after the floor transfer, as shown in the right panel in Figure 3.9. In this way,
98% of the transitions are inside this time window. Clearly, the outliers from the left panel
are removed by shortening the time window, and the probability of eye gaze fixating at the
new talker in time inside the time window of interest follows the shape of psychometric
function curve, while using time as a predictor.
Figure 3.10 shows the psychometric function fit with an even shorter time window, from
0.5 seconds before the floor transfer to 2 seconds after the floor transfer, same as the
time window applied in MLR. Clearly, the R2 value obtained with the time window used in
the right panel of Figure 3.9 exceeds that found with the short window.
The result in the right panel of Figure 3.9 can be also transformed into the log odds scale
by using Equation (2.3), plotted in Figure 3.11. The zero crossing point of the fit indicating
the probability of eye gaze fixating at the new talker becoming larger than fixating at the
previous talker, is t0 ≈943 ms. The log odds of eye gaze on the new talker converges to
approximately 2.4 logits after around 6 seconds from the floor transfer.
22
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:31==
To investigate the difference introduced by different participant groups and background
noise levels, we aggregated all events separately in terms of each group in Figure 3.12
and in terms of each background noise level in Figure 3.13. As shown, in all groups and
all background noise levels, the eye gaze shifts from the previous talker to the new talker
over time. However, since the confidence intervals of fitting parameters from Equation
(2.9) are not available, we are not able to compare differences in the fitting parameters
across conditions or participant groups.
A more detailed overview for the aggregated events in each participant group in each
background noise level is shown in Figure 3.14. Since the curves significantly correlate
with the data (p < 0.0001 for all), time can still be considered as a predictor for probability
of eye gaze fixating at the new talker in conversational transitions in all listening situa­
tions. As reflected by the size of circles, fewer samples are observed for difficult listening
conditions, especially with the OHI group at a background noise level of 60 and 70 dB.
Figure 3.12: Psychometric function fit for each participant group. The size of the scatter
is related to the amount of samples on the time bin.
Figure 3.13: Psychometric function fit for each background noise level. The size of the
scatter is related to the amount of samples on the time bin.
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.14: Psychometric function fit for each participant group in each background noise
level. The size of the scatter is related to the amount of samples on the time bin.
Since psychometric function fits in Figure 3.14 are based on very few samples, we are not
able to directly compare the quality of fit and time where the fitted psychometric function
crossing 0.5. We also tried to fit psychometric function in aggregated events for each par­
ticipants in each background noise level and each event without aggregation. A summary
of results is attached in Appendix A.
24
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:33==
4
Discussion
This chapter discusses the results presented above. We discuss practical implementa­
tions between MLR model and psychometric function fitting, and we also compare the
MLR results between the passive listening situations and interactive conversation. At the
end, we suggest possible alternative methods of data collection to allow more powerful
statistical inference.
4.1
Comparison between MLR and psychometric function
fitting
One difference between the MLR and the psychometric function fitting methods is that the
MLR method includes participant indices as random effect, and the psychometric function
fitting method aggregated data across events and participants, thus ignoring random ef­
fects. The results from the psychometric function fitting in the right panel of Figure 3.9 and
Figure 3.11 show the participants starting to look at the new talker more than at the previ­
ous talker at 941 ms after the floor transfer, denoted as the x­intercept of the fitting curve.
The MLR fitting results in the left panel of Figure 3.7 shows an x­intercept of approximately
900 ms. Descriptively, these are similar results.
Without including participant indices as random effect, inside the time window from 0.5
seconds before the floor transfer to 2 seconds after the floor transfer, the variance ex­
plained by time alone from the MLR method is 2.2% (refer to Table 3.2), and in the psy­
chometric function fitting method is 1.7% (refer to Figure 3.10). By extending the time
window, in Figure 3.9, the quality of the fit is significantly improved to 14.2% (referred
from the right panel), reflected as a clearer behaviour of how participants fixate towards
the new talker. With additional fitting parameters (the baseline b and the peak p in Equa­
tion (2.9)), the quality of fitting is also improved.
While including participant indices as random effect in MLR and remaining the same
length of the time window, the quality of fit is improved to 10.7% (refer to Table 3.2). How­
ever, extending the time window while considering time as multiple categorical variables
in time bins xi in Equation (2.3) in MLR is not computationally feasible since the amount
of predictors (N in Equation (2.3)) is inflated.
In psychometric function fitting, time was considered as a single continuous variable t in
Equation (2.9). Since the psychometric function fitting curve well explained the eye gaze
data over time in Figure 3.11, we can consider time as one continuous variable in MLR
and extend the duration. In fact, we found that such a modified MLR model accounted
for much more variance (R2
c = 26.2%) comparing to the previous MLR model without
extending the duration (R2 = 10.7%).
4.2
Comparison between passive listening and interactive
conversation
There are slightly different test setups between [14] and [16]. All participants in [14] are
hearing impaired and watched the video recording with a background noise level of 60 dB.
Therefore, to make fair comparisons with eye gaze movements in [16], we should only
compare results from participants with the same hearing status in the same background
noise level. However, the plot shows low R2 value and small circles in the second from
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
25
==PAGE:34==
the right in the bottom row from Figure 3.9, indicating a lack of data from participants with
hearing impairment in the background noise level of 60 dB. The MLR result for participants
in the OHI group in the right panel in Figure 3.8 is also inconclusive. Furthermore, talkers
in the video recording in [14] were placed 20◦apart from each other, but confederates in
[16] were sitting 12◦∼60◦apart, in various angle for each participant. In the MLR anal­
ysis, both participant indices and event indices are considered as random effects in [14],
whereas only participant indices are considered as a random effect in the present study.
Therefore, we are not able to compare results in both experiments directly, but visualize
the figures from MLR and psychometric function fitting for all participants in all background
noise levels from interactive conversations, and give descriptive explanations.
In Figure 3.7, the log odds of eye gaze fixating towards the new talker in interactive conver­
sations are significantly lower than in passive listening situations after the floor transfer.
This means eye gaze in interactive conversations is less likely to follow the new talker
compared to passive listening situations, within 2 seconds after the floor transfer. The
time where eye gaze starts to be more likely to fixate at the new talker than the previous
talker in interactive conversations is at 900 ms after the floor transfer, which is 700 ms
later compared to passive listening situations (200 ms after the floor transfer as reported
in [14]).
The pattern of log odds is significantly flattened with a time window from 0.5 seconds be­
fore the floor transfer to 2 seconds after the floor transfer for interactive conversations,
and does not seem to converge over time. While performing the psychometric function
fit in a longer time window in Figure 3.11, we can observe a very similar pattern for inter­
active conversations comparing to the right panel in Figure 3.7 for passive listening. The
log odds of eye gaze fixating at the new talker reaches to approximately 2 logits in inter­
active conversations after around 4.5 seconds from the floor transfer, whereas in passive
listening, it converges to 2 logits after only 1 second from the floor transfer. The slope of
increasing in log odds for interactive conversations is smaller, meaning that participants in
interactive conversations reacted more slowly than in passive listening situations in terms
of eye gaze.
The similar eye gaze pattern observed from passive listening situations and interactive
conversations is in line with results from [20], but with a lag in time course. Participants
in [16] in interactive conversations had a significant delay to fixate at the new talker com­
paring to participants in passive listening situations in [14].
The reason of the difference in eye gaze behaviour may be due to different social settings
between the tasks in passive listening and interactive conversations. In passive listen­
ing situations, participants were presumbly focused on improving speech intelligibility by
moving their eye gaze more quickly towards the target talker to understand the dialogue
they were watching [14][20][24]. Instead, in interactive conversations, participants may
have been aiming to engage in the conversation. Improving speech intelligibility may no
longer have been the main goal, since participants were able to ask confederates to clarify
every time they did not understand.
4.3
Outlook
In the discussions above, we only investigated eye gaze behaviour while combining peo­
ple with all different hearing status and listening conditions. The data set collected in [16]
does not enable us to investigate the difference in eye gaze behaviour between these
situations, due to limited amount of available data. Therefore, analysis results obtained in
this study are not conclusive with respect to potentially different effects of different hear­
26
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:35==
ing status and listening conditions. Since audio recordings were not available, we are not
able to analyse the interaction between contents from the conversations and eye gaze be­
haviour. Therefore, we suggest some possible research directions for future experiments
and analysis:
• Increase the amount of test participants up to 30 in each hearing status. We expect a
plot similar to Figure 3.11, where eye gaze data will be more converged as compared
to Figure 3.12 and 3.13 for each participant group and background noise level.
• After data collection, categorize types of conversational transition contents such as
Q&A pairs, or the new talker taking over the conversation by interrupting the speech
of another talker, etc. This will allow us to look for the relation between eye gaze
behaviour and contents.
• We can also apply the MLR method while considering time as a continuous variable
and including participant indices as a random effect, to investigate the eye gaze
behaviour when the participant was taking over the conversational transition or con­
federates taking over from the participant.
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:37==
5
Conclusion
In the present study, we compared the difference of eye gaze movement during con­
versational transitions in passive listening from data collected in [14] and in interactive
conversations from data collected in [16]. In general, participants tend to look towards
the new talker after conversational transitions in both passive listening situations and in
interactive conversations. However, participants in interactive conversations started to
look towards the new talker much later than participants in passive listening. This is pre­
sumably due to social settings during both experiments, where participants in passive
listening were focused on improving speech intelligibility, and participants in interactive
conversations were aiming for engagement.
These phenomena were found by using MLR and psychometric function fitting. While
considering time bins as multiple categorical variables in MLR, we were able to justify
whether or not the eye gaze pattern was similar to the logistic function curve. To cap­
ture more eye gaze behaviour, we further extended the time window of conversational
transitions and used psychometric function fitting. We found the probability of eye gaze
fixating at the new talker over time follows the psychometric function curve (p < 0.00001).
The quality of fit was significantly improved when including participant indices as random
effect in MLR, and when extending the time window. Thus, we suggest using time as a
single continuous variable in MLR.
For future studies, we recommend recruiting 30 participants for each hearing status to in­
vestigate the difference in eye gaze between normal hearing and hearing impairment. We
also suggest looking for interactions between different types of conversational transition
contents and eye gaze behaviour.
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
[1]
Asger Heidemann Andersen et al. “Creating clarity in noisy environments by using
deep learning in hearing aids”. In: Seminars in Hearing. Vol. 42. 03. Thieme Medical
Publishers, Inc. 2021, pp. 260–281.
[2]
Karl D Kryter. “Methods for the calculation and use of the articulation index”. In: The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 34.11 (1962), pp. 1689–1697.
[3]
S3 22­1997 ANSI. “Methods for calculation of the speech intelligibility index”. In:
American National Standard Institute (1997).
[4]
Herman JM Steeneken and Tammo Houtgast. “A physical method for measuring
speech­transmission quality”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
67.1 (1980), pp. 318–326.
[5]
Ray L Goldsworthy and Julie E Greenberg. “Analysis of speech­based speech trans­
mission index methods with implications for nonlinear operations”. In: The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 116.6 (2004), pp. 3679–3689.
[6]
James M Kates and Kathryn H Arehart. “Coherence and the speech intelligibility
index”. In: The journal of the acoustical society of America 117.4 (2005), pp. 2224–
2237.
[7]
Cees H Taal et al. “An algorithm for intelligibility prediction of time–frequency weighted
noisy speech”. In: IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing
19.7 (2011), pp. 2125–2136.
[8]
Jack C Cotton. “Normal” Visual Hearing””. In: Science 82.2138 (1935), pp. 592–593.
[9]
William H Sumby and Irwin Pollack. “Visual contribution to speech intelligibility in
noise”. In: The journal of the acoustical society of america 26.2 (1954), pp. 212–
215.
[10]
Simon Carlile and Gitte Keidser. “Conversational interaction is the brain in action:
Implications for the evaluation of hearing and hearing interventions”. In: Ear and
hearing 41 (2020), 56S–67S.
[11]
Gitte Keidser et al. “The quest for ecological validity in hearing science: What it is,
why it matters, and how to advance it”. In: Ear and hearing 41.Suppl 1 (2020), 5S.
[12]
Falk Huettig, Joost Rommers, and Antje S Meyer. “Using the visual world paradigm
to study language processing: A review and critical evaluation”. In: Acta psycholog­
ica 137.2 (2011), pp. 151–171.
[13]
Dale J Barr. “Analyzing ‘visual world’eyetracking data using multilevel logistic re­
gression”. In: Journal of memory and language 59.4 (2008), pp. 457–474.
[14]
Martha M Shiell et al. “Multilevel Modelling of Gaze from Hearing­impaired Listeners
following a Realistic Conversation”. In: bioRxiv (2022), pp. 2022–11.
[15]
Lauren V Hadley, W Owen Brimijoin, and William M Whitmer. “Speech, movement,
and gaze behaviours during dyadic conversation in noise”. In: Scientific reports 9.1
(2019), pp. 1–8.
[16]
Hao Lu et al. “Investigating age, hearing loss, and background noise effects on
speaker­targeted head and eye movements in three­way conversations”. In: The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 149.3 (2021), pp. 1889–1900.
[17]
Ethel Matin, Kuo­Chih Shao, and Kenneth R Boff. “Saccadic overhead: Information­
processing time with and without saccades”. In: Perception & psychophysics 53
(1993), pp. 372–380.
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
31
==PAGE:40==
[18]
Tanya Stivers et al. “Universals and cultural variation in turn­taking in conversation”.
In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106.26 (2009), pp. 10587–
10592.
[19]
Marisa Tice and Tania Henetz. “The eye gaze of 3rd party observers reflects turn­
end boundary projection”. In: Procs. of the 15th Workshop on the Semantics and
Pragmatics of Dialogue (SEMDIAL 2011/Los Angelogue). Citeseer. 2011, pp. 204–
205.
[20]
Jessica Dawson and Tom Foulsham. “Your turn to speak? Audiovisual social atten­
tion in the lab and in the wild”. In: Visual Cognition 30.1­2 (2022), pp. 116–134.
[21]
Nida Latif, Agnès Alsius, and KG Munhall. “Knowing when to respond: the role of
visual information in conversational turn exchanges”. In: Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics 80 (2018), pp. 27–41.
[22]
Nida Latif, Agnès Alsius, and KG Munhall. “Seeing the way: The role of vision in
conversation turn exchange perception”. In: Multisensory Research 30.7­8 (2017),
pp. 653–679.
[23]
Guillaume Lathoud, Iain A McCowan, and Jean­Marc Odobez. “Unsupervised location­
based segmentation of multi­party speech”. In: Proceedings of the 2004 ICASSP­
NIST Meeting Recognition Workshop. CONF. 2004.
[24]
Tom Foulsham and Lucy Anne Sanderson. “Look who’s talking? Sound changes
gaze behaviour in a dynamic social scene”. In: Visual Cognition 21.7 (2013), pp. 922–
944.
[25]
Joy E Hanna, Michael K Tanenhaus, and John C Trueswell. “The effects of com­
mon ground and perspective on domains of referential interpretation”. In: Journal of
Memory and Language 49.1 (2003), pp. 43–61.
[26]
Pia Knoeferle et al. “The influence of the immediate visual context on incremental
thematic role­assignment: Evidence from eye­movements in depicted events”. In:
Cognition 95.1 (2005), pp. 95–127.
[27]
Alan Agresti. Categorical data analysis. Vol. 792. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[28]
T Florian Jaeger. “Categorical data analysis: Away from ANOVAs (transformation
or not) and towards logit mixed models”. In: Journal of memory and language 59.4
(2008), pp. 434–446.
[29]
Stephen W Raudenbush and Anthony S Bryk. Hierarchical linear models: Applica­
tions and data analysis methods. Vol. 1. sage, 2002.
[30]
Ashley Farris­Trimble and Bob McMurray. “Test–retest reliability of eye tracking in
the visual world paradigm for the study of real­time spoken word recognition”. In:
(2013).
32
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:41==
A
Psychometric fitting results
There are 112 sessions for all participants in all background noise levels (28*4 = 112), and
7 sessions does not contain conversational transitions between confederates (participant
#15 without background noise, #20 with background noise level of 60 and 70 dB, #22
in 70 dB, #23 in 60 dB, #25 in 60 dB, #28 in 70 dB). In the remaining 105 sessions, 5
sessions does not contain eye gaze shift (remained fixating at the new talker: participant
#2 in background noise level of 60 and 70 dB, #12 in 60 dB, #25 in 70 dB; remained
fixating at the previous talker: participant #30 without background noise).
Figure A.1 shows the histogram of variance explained by psychometric function fits for the
remaining 100 sessions containing eye gaze shifts. The quality of fit is generally low due
to lack of data in each session. One example is in the right panel in Figure A.2. Therefore,
aggregating events for each participant in each background noise level does not lead to
any conclusive results.
Figure A.1: The histogram of variance explained by psychometric function fits (R2) for the
remaining 100 sessions containing eye gaze shifts.
Figure A.2 shows two examples of psychometric function fit for aggregated events. Some­
times participants shifted their eye gaze towards the new talker during conversational
transitions, resulted in a good quality of fit in the left panel. Sometimes participants move
their eyes around without fixating towards any confederate in all conversational transitions
during the whole session, results in a worse quality of fit in the right panel.
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure A.2: The left panel shows an example of psychometric function fit for aggregated
events for participant #7 in background noise level of 70 dB. The right panel shows the fit
for participant #4 in background noise level of 50 dB.
Without aggregation, we tried to fit psychometric functions for each event. Short events
lasting less than 200 ms were excluded due to low chances of observing conversational
transitions. The events with eye gaze data at the first available time bin later than 1 second
after the floor transfer were excluded due to large probability of eye gaze remaining fixated
at the new talker. The events with the eye gaze data at the last available time bin before
the floor transfer were excluded due to large probability of eye gaze remaining fixated at
the previous talker. After exclusion of these events, 306 out of 934 events contained eye
gaze variation.
The histogram of variance explained by the psychometric function fit (R2) for those re­
maining 306 events is shown in Figure A.3. It roughly follows a bi­modal distribution,
where most events have R2 values close to 1, others have R2 values around 0. Since the
peak value p in Equation (2.9) is restricted to be larger than the baseline value b, negative
values of R2 appears while the eye gaze shifting from the new talker to the previous talker.
Figure A.3: The histogram of variance explained by psychometric function fit (R2) for all
events. Note that negative values represent eye gaze shifting from the new talker to the
previous talker.
If the eye gaze in the conversational transition shifts only once from the previous talker to
the new talker, as shown in the left panel in Figure A.4, the R2 value approaches to 1. If
34
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
==PAGE:43==
the eye gaze shifts back and forth as shown in the example in the right panel in Figure A.4,
a psychometric function does not sufficiently explain the eye gaze behaviour, resulting in
a low R2 value.
Figure A.4: Two examples of psychometric function fits in different events. The left panel
shows the eye gaze shifted from the previous talker to the new talker only once, the right
panel shows the eye gaze moving back and forth between the previous and the new talker.
Comparing with event aggregation, fitting the psychometric function for each event results
in inability to model the eye gaze behaviour while it switches between talkers more than
once. Therefore, we focus on the psychometric function fitting with event aggregation.
Analysis of Eye­gaze Behaviour in Realistic Communication
35
==PAGE:44==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.hea.healthtech.dtu.dk/
