==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
Biomarkers Identification in Images of
Eyes using Deep Learning Approaches
Feature Extraction from Eyes’ Fundus Scans
Marco Placenti
s202798
Supervisor:
Anders Bjorholm Dahl, Prof.
Co-supervisor:
Vedrana Andersen Dahl, Ass.Prof.
Josefine Vilsbøll Sundgaard, Postdoc
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
Project Title
Biomarkers Identification in Images of Eyes using Deep Learning Approaches
Authors
Marco Placenti (s202798)
Supervisors
Supervisor: Anders Bjorholm Dahl, Prof.
Co-supervisor: Vedrana Andersen Dahl, Ass.Prof.
Co-supervisor: Josefine Vilsbøll Sundgaard, Postdoc
Project Period
September 2022 - February 2023
ECTS
35
Field
Deep Learning, Metric Learning, Medical Image Analysis, Feature Extraction
Type
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Biological markers identification in medical imaging plays a critical role in the diagno-
sis and treatment of various eyes’ diseases as well as neurological and cardiovascular
conditions. This thesis explores three deep unsupervised learning approaches for ex-
tracting latent vector representations - that can be interpreted as biological markers
- from retinal fundus scan images.
The representations are generated from the fundus’ photographs of the partici-
pants of the UK BioBank cohort, a population-based study that collected various
demographic and medical data between 2006 and 2010. After the application of a
few strategic filters, the final dataset consisting of 104,964 images belonging to 52,482
subjects is constructed.
The latent representations, or embeddings, for each image, are generated using
4 different neural architectures: two Auto-Encoders using the same architecture but
optimizing their weights according to different losses; a modified Inception-V3 network
using a triplet margin loss; and a Momentum Contrast network using a symmetrized
contrastive loss. The extent to which the embeddings retain information is evaluated
against two benchmark tasks set by the team Methods, Innovation & Outreach in
Novo Nordisk, which previously employed deep supervised learning to classify sex
and hypertension status (defined as having a systolic blood pressure higher than 140
mmHg). The benchmarks’ accuracies are 87.2% and 68.7%, respectively.
To make the comparison, the learnt embeddings are input into a non-parametric
classifier such as the k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN), which is a very basic rule-based
method that does not require any additional learning.
Such an approach allows
seeing whether the information is encoded into the latent vector representations. This
approach achieves a 72.39% accuracy on sex classification and 70.91% on hypertension
classification according to the best models, thus slightly outscoring the benchmark in
the latter (68.7%) but not in the former (87.2%). Despite some limitations that will be
explored later in the document, this study demonstrates the potential of unsupervised
deep learning in offering a scalable alternative to supervised learning for very large
datasets. Furthermore, it constitutes a foundation for future research in this area.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in fulfillment of the
requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence. The work contained in this Thesis was conducted in the Fall of 2022.
The project outline was proposed by the department of Methods, Innovation &
Outreach (MIO) in Novo Nordisk in the figures of Senior Postdoc Josefine Vilsbøll
Sundgaard and Principal Data Scientist Trine Abrahamsen. Access to the data and
the computational resources was provided by Novo Nordisk as well.
The Thesis has been supervised by Professor and Head of Section Anders Bjorholm
Dahl, and co-supervised by Associate Professor Vedrana Andersen Dahl from the
group Visual Computing at DTU. Josefine Vilsbøll Sundgaard, who is also part of
the group Visual Computing at DTU, has been an active participant in the supervision
process - ensuring that the methods applied throughout the study were appropriate
for a MSc. Thesis and relevant for MIO.
The entire code used in the thesis is contained in this GitHub repository. Every-
thing was fully developed in Python 3.8, using PyTorch and PyTorch-Lightning as
frameworks for the neural networks.
Kongens Lyngby, February 28, 2023
Marco Placenti
s202798
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to start by sincerely thanking Josefine Sundgaard for her guidance and
inspiration throughout the thesis. Your ability to clearly express the relevance of
what I was doing was instrumental to keep me motivated when things were not going
my way. A big thank you for also making me feel welcome and part of the team since
the first day.
A big thank you goes obviously to Professor Anders B. Dahl and Associate Profes-
sor Vedrana A. Dahl for their valuable and fruitful feedback and suggestions during
every supervision. I appreciated all your comments, feedback, and questions about
the thesis, which make me want to doubt and always improve my work.
I also want to thank all the people working in MIO, that immediately welcomed
me into the team making me feel included.
Finally, I want to thank my partner Miriam that always showed a genuine interest
in this thesis, asking me diﬀicult questions that sometimes made me realize I did not
know as much as I thought I did. Thanks for pushing me those times I had no will.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Aim of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
7
2.1
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1
Convolutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Deconvolutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.3
Pooling Layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
Activation Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.5
Fully Connected Linear Layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Regularization Layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Training process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Mini Batching and Sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Data & Pre-processing
15
3.1
Rule-based Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Circle Hough Transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Multiple Color-space Fusion Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Data Augmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Methods
23
4.1
Auto-Encoders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Perceptual Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.2
Structural Dissimilarity Index Measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.3
AE Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.2
Inception Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.1
Triplet Loss and Mining Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Triplet Sampler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.3
Inception Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Momentum Contrast Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3.1
InfoNCE Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2
Momentum Contrast Sampler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.3
Momentum Contrast Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Evaluation Methods
37
5.1
K-Nearest Neighbors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Davies-Bouldin Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Results
41
6.1
Training Performances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.1.1
AE with Perceptual Loss
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.1.2
AE with DSSIM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.1.3
InceptionV3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.4
MoCo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Side Classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Sex Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.4
Hypertension Classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.5
Multi level Hypertension Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.6
Classifications with larger Embedding space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Discussion
57
7.1
Data & Pre-Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2
Methods and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.3
Comparison with MIO’s benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.4
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
8
Conclusion
63
Bibliography
65
Appendix
71
A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
Acronyms
81
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
The human eye is a complex and intricate organ that plays a critical role in our
ability to perceive the world that surrounds us.
The eyes are part of the visual
system and their main function is to capture light and convert it into electrical signals
that are sent to the brain. These signals are then interpreted by the brain, allowing
us to see and perceive the world in the way we do. Overall, eyes are essential for
vision and allow us to navigate and interact with our environment. They also play
an important role in our emotional and psychological well-being, which is why it
should not come as a surprise that many diseases and disorders can manifest in
the eyes [24]. Diabetic Retinopathy, Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD), and
Hypertensive Retinopathy are only a few of them [11] [13]. We also know that some of
these conditions can be asymptomatic at the early stages and regular eye exams are
important to detect them early [11]. In addition to the strictly eye-related diseases,
other studies have shown that certain features detected in the eyes can indicate the
presence of serious cardiovascular and neurological conditions [32] [51] [26]. These
premises mark the study of the eye as a clinically relevant domain to investigate.
Some of the mentioned studies have made use of the UK BioBank, a cohort of
over 500,000 participants based in the United Kingdom, that provides valuable data
to analyze, including fundus and Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) scans, di-
etary habits, medical history, and physical measurements. This thesis uses the data
contained in this cohort, which are introduced more in detail in chapter 3.
In recent years, deep learning has emerged as a powerful tool in the analysis
of medical images, as it has the potential to offer better, faster, and more scalable
diagnostic and prognostic capabilities. Ophthalmology, the branch of medicine spe-
cializing in the care of the eyes, makes no exception to this trend - and numerous
studies have been published on the matter [14] [34] [20] [46] [29] [21] [48]. In the med-
ical domain, deep learning has generally been applied for classification tasks, such as
diagnosing diabetes or classifying stages of cancer, through supervised learning, or
segmentation tasks, such as identifying regions of interest in organs. This has been
the favourite approach by researchers so far, and while it has proven overall beneficial,
it has generated some debates on their usability due to the absence of transparency
in their discrimination process. Other approaches, on the other hand, are specifically
designed to favor a meaningful discrimination by spatially separating diverse objects
and clustering similar ones.
Representation and metric learning belong to a branch of learning that tries to
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
generate useful vector representations of input data, such as images, text, or even
sound. Although related, these two methods are different concepts in machine learn-
ing, yet have shown relevant results in the medical domain. Landi et al. [22] have
learnt patients’ vector representations via unsupervised learning starting from their
electronic health record, and successfully clustered similar patients together. Such
kind of ”dimensionality reduction” potentially offers scalable solutions in the medical
image analysis domain.
The goal of representation learning is to extract features
from those data, preserving as much information as possible, that can be used in a
second moment for a specific task, such as classification, clustering or generation. It
can be seen, basically, as a way to compress highly dimensional and complex data.
On the other hand, the goal of metric learning is to capture the differences across
the data in a way that is useful for a specific task, such as image retrieval or face
recognition. This is done by transforming the data to a new space, and attempting
to group together similar samples and pushing away dissimilar samples, through a
pre-defined distance metric.
In few words, representation learning focuses on learning a compact, meaningful
and informative representation of the input data, whereas metric learning focuses on
learning a distance metric between the input data that captures their similarity in a
way that is useful for a specific task.
1.1
Related Work
When it comes to automating processes that learn from data, it is now widely known
that the quality of the data fed into the learning procedure is crucial for a successful
outcome.
A model’s robustness, its reliability and the trust that its users put in
it, ultimately depends on whether the data used to train it were good.
The UK
Biobank does not check for the quality of the images before releasing the data to the
public, so MacGillivray et al. [25] analyzed a subset of the fundus scans of the cohort.
They showed that just 68% of the participants had both eyes suitable for automation,
while 84% of the participants had only either left or right eye suitable for automation.
Although the study was considered highly informative, their solution was diﬀicult
to apply to the entire dataset, or to new datasets, as they relied on expert human
operators to grade the images.
Several researchers attempted at automating the grading procedure, some even
before MacGillivray et al. [25] formalized the necessity to do so. Over time, this task
has taken the name of Retinal Imaging Quality Assessment (RIQA, fort short). One
of the seminal studies in this area was conducted by Niemeijer et al. [30]. It tried
to learn a compact image representation based on the underlying structure of the
fundus scan, and then cluster those representations based on the manually annotated
quality levels using simple statistical models. A step forward was done by Lamiaa et
al. [1] using a wavelet transform to infer information about sharpness, illumination,
homogeneity, field definition, and content of the fundus scans. Similar work was done
by Shao et al. [39] that, in conjunction with structure, added information about the
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Related Work
3
illumination and naturalness of the image. In both cases, the features were used as
input for machine learning methods such as Support Vector Machines (SVMs) and
Decision Trees.
The main limitation of these approaches lies in the fact that they use a limited
set of ”hand-crafted” features and characteristics of the images, which excluded the
detection of other complex or possibly unknown relevant features.
More recently
introduced methods based on neural architectures show significant improvements in
this regard, as they are able to independently detect relevant features in the scans
rather than explicitly looking for specific ones. Yu et al. [49] used a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) to automatically learn features from the images and feed
them into a SVM to grade the quality of the scan. Zago et al. [50] achieved supe-
rior results by dropping the SVM and using a CNN to not only learn the features
but classify the quality of the scan as well.
Shi et al.
[40], used a ResNet-50 as
the backbone, and the approach was overall the same, while Fu et al. [10] achieved
outstanding results by addressing a few issues present in the previous methods. First,
they propose an architecture that accounts for different color-spaces in addition to
the RGB (HSV and LAB), enabling the network to explore the images in different
modalities. Furthermore, they significantly extend the size of the training dataset by
re-annotating part of the eyePACS dataset available on Kaggle 1 and approaching the
task as a multi-class classification one (images can be ”Good”, ”Usable”, and ”Re-
ject”) rather than binary as opposed to all the previously mentioned solutions. The
UK Biobank is one of the hold-out datasets they use to evaluate their solution. This
method is the one I use in this thesis, hence it is explained in more detail in chapter 4.
The research efforts of deep learning within the field of ophthalmology have mainly
been directed to classification and segmentation tasks as pointed out by Jeong et al.
[18]. Various studies have even shown that it is possible to infer systemic biological
markers like sex, age and blood pressure, from retinal fundus photography [32] [35],
defeating a commonly accepted believe that some of these biomarkers were impos-
sible to identify in images because humans were not able to. This new established
knowledge was the foundation of the work conducted by Tsangalidou et al. [43]2,
that managed to develop two neural networks able to infer sex and hypertension sta-
tus from fundus scans with an accuracy of 85.2% and 67.9%, respectively. Thus, it
is natural to consider these results as the benchmarks to assess this thesis results
against.
However, only few papers have tried applying representation and metric learning
to fundus scan images, which is a significantly harder approach as there are no labels
that the networks can use as references to improve on. Variational Auto-Encoders
(VAEs) [45], despite being conceived for generative modeling, may be a good choice
for the task at hand. The original purpose of this family of models was to learn a
latent probability distribution, in the form of a prior and a noise distribution (mean
1https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/diabetic-retinopathy-detection/data
2The authors of this paper are part of the MIO team in Novo Nordisk
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
and variance), that is assumed to have generated the data, to then sample from such
distribution and generate new unseen data. The learnt prior could be interpreted
as the eye’s embedding (throughout the document, the words latent representation
and ”embeddings” is used interchangeably). Mandal et al. [27] use VAEs in their
Deep Feature Consistent Network (DFC-Net) to learn how to reconstruct the optic
disk that was cropped away from a fundus scan, and use the learnt prior to classify
Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) through supervised methods. However, the authors of
the study are not checking whether the information about DR is actually retained
in the embeddings, they rather project them into a hyperplane and learn how to
discriminate between cases with DR and without DR.
Additional other techniques fall within the category of contrastive learning, which
is more suitable for the purpose of this thesis. Contrastive learning is a machine
learning technique that attempts at learning general features from an input, clustering
together inputs that are similar to each other and distancing away those that are
dissimilar. Xie et al. [47] proposes an image-based Genome-Wise Association Study
(iGWAS) to learn a vector representation of retinal fundus scans to eventually use as
phenotypes. Their study focused on vascular structures, meaning that they extracted
a binary mask containing only veins and arteries from the scan and used it as input
for an InceptionV3 network. The strength of this kind of network, in addition to its
relatively low number of parameters, is that it applies convolutions of different sizes
to the same image, so the features are extracted at different scales and then stacked
together.
The process is then repeated for several layers [42].
For their purpose,
Xie et al. [47] replaced the last layer of the pre-trained InceptionV3 architecture,
originally developed for classification, with a linear layer of 128 nodes and used the
Arcface as the loss function [9]. The advantage of this metric loss function is that it
projects the embeddings into the unit sphere and uses a geodesic distance to maximize
the distance between inter-class samples while minimizing that between intra-class
samples. The Arcface loss [9] addresses some drawbacks of two of the most used
loss function in metric learning (specifically for face recognition): triplet margin loss
[38] and the softmax loss [4]. The former suffers from an explosion in the number of
triplets when dealing with large datasets, and the miners not always guarantee good
sampling during training, while the latter discriminates poorly across different classes,
and its dimensionality increases linearly with the number of classes (in case of face
recognition, an individual is a class) as it is typically employed for classification.
Another powerful contrastive learning method is Momentum Contrast, or MoCo
for short, proposed by He et al.
[16] which has been proven to be more eﬀicient
than using siamese networks [28]. In siamese networks, two different sets of images
belonging to the same class, or object, are fed through two separate but equal networks
and weights are updated through back-propagation for both of these networks. MoCo
proposes an encoder to create the representation for a query image, and a key encoder
having the same architecture of the encoder, acting like a very eﬀicient memory bank,
as it does not store all the sample representations in memory at once. In contrast
to siamese networks, the back-propagation algorithm is only performed on the query
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Aim of the thesis
5
image’s encoder, while the weights of the memory bank, or key encoder, are updated
with a momentum-based moving average of the query encoder weights. The authors
of SimCLR [5] achieved better performances without the use of a memory bank. They
propose several improvements in the contrastive learning space, showing how larger
batches, larger models, stronger data augmentation, as well as adding a learnable
linear layer in between representations and contrastive loss, significantly improves
the learning. SimCLR obtained comparable results to a supervised approach on the
ImageNet dataset, although using many more parameters.
The authors of MoCo
reiterated their proposal incorporating the findings from SimCLR in two successive
version of MoCo, namely MoCo-v2 [7] and MoCo-v3 [6], where they further improve
their score and arguably close the gap with supervised approaches in the image space.
1.2
Aim of the thesis
This thesis aims to develop a pipeline to extract vector representation from scans of
the fundus of the eye using both deep representation and metric learning methods.
Quality checks on the data are performed in the form of Retinal Image Quality Assess-
ment (RIQA) in order to discard low quality images that may affect and potentially
deteriorate the performances of the learnt representation, as found by MacGillivray
et al. [25]. The end goal is to be able to interpret such representations as biological
markers that characterize well enough the subject of the image. Through the use
of self-supervised and unsupervised learning approaches, this thesis investigates the
potential of deep learning to extract meaningful information from fundus scans, and
embed those in low dimension vector representations. This thesis explores many of
the methods mentioned in section 1.1, albeit with some variations, in order to find
the best approach for embedding the images in latent vector representations. Such
representations, to be interpreted as biological markers, could be either saved in a
feature store to be later used for analysis in conjunction with other data such as
clinical trials measurements, genetic discoveries as found by Xie et al. [47], or more
simply as input for various classification tasks. In fact, images could be problematic
to work with due to their size: typically, a fundus scan is an RGB image with resolu-
tion 2048x1536, resulting in over 3 millions pixels (descriptors) per channel, and over
9 millions overall. Even resizing the image to a small-enough resolution, say 200x200,
would result in 120,000 descriptors per image in total. Representation and metric
learning can help to further reduce the number of descriptors significantly (128 or
512 in this thesis’ case) saving memory and compute power in future analysis.
The quality of the generated representations is evaluated against two benchmarked
downstream classification tasks (sex and hypertension detection), in order to assess
whether the information have been successfully retained. The benchmarks are repre-
sented by previous results obtained by the Novo Nordisk’s team Methods, Innovation
and Outreach (MIO), that has used supervised learning with plain images as input,
and either biological sex and hypertension status as targets to optimize the neural
network on [43]. Using only fundus scans, MIO managed to predict biological sex with
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
an accuracy of 85.2% and whether the subject suffered from hypertension (defined
as having a systolic blood pressure higher than 140 mmHg) with an accuracy of 67.9%.
In the next chapter, the most fundamental deep learning concepts are gently intro-
duced in order to facilitate the comprehension of the rest of the thesis. In chapter 3,
the data used throughout the thesis are introduced and all the pre-processing steps
explained. In chapter 4 the models chosen to extract the embeddings from the im-
ages are explained in detail, followed by chapter 5 which explains what methods and
metrics are used to evaluate the output of the chosen models. The results are then be
presented in chapter 6, followed by a discussion about the findings and the identified
drawbacks in chapter 7. Finally, chapter 8 presents the conclusions together with
some ideas for future work.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER2
Theory
Deep learning is a sub-field of machine learning that is concerned with the develop-
ment of algorithms and models, and it is inspired by the structure and function of
the brain. These models are called ”deep” because they have multiple layers, that
allow them to learn increasingly complex representations of the input data. The most
common deep learning architectures are Feed-Forward Neural Networks (FFNN), Re-
current Neural Networks (RNN), and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). In this
thesis, the main interest is focused on CNNs, as they are the most used in image
processing.
Deep learning approaches can be categorized in 3 groups, depending on what the
task requires:
• Supervised learning: given an input vector x, the model tries to predict its
label y, effectively trying to learn a posterior distribution p(y|x). The term
”supervised” is used because there is a target label y that assist the network to
learn.
• Unsupervised learning: this is a type of learning where the model is trained
on a dataset without any labeled y. It is used to uncover hidden patterns or
intrinsic structures in the data that may not be visible with other techniques.
It is generally considered more challenging as there is no labels to guide the
learning and larger datasets are needed to identify some structures.
• Semi-supervised learning: this is a type of learning that combines both super-
vised and unsupervised techniques. The model is trained on a dataset that is
partially labeled, meaning that only a subset of the data has the desired out-
comes or responses. The goal is to use the labeled data to make inferences about
the unlabeled data, and to predict the outcomes or responses of the unlabeled
data.
• Self-supervised learning: this is a sub-field of unsupervised learning, where no
labels are provided and the model is trained to guess correctly what instance
the input comes from. In this thesis’s case, an instance is an individual.
In this thesis, the focus is on unsupervised and self-supervised learning, as it is
the natural choice given the aim of the project.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theory
2.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a type of neural architecture that works
best with data having a spatial structure, like images and videos. It is designed to
process data with a grid-like topology, using a mathematical operator called convolu-
tion, where the network learns a set of filters that scan the input image and extract
features such as edges, textures, and shapes. These features are then passed through
multiple layers in the network, each of which learns increasingly complex represen-
tations of the input data. Convolutional layers are typically spaced-out from each
other by few other transformations, mostly pooling layers and activation functions:
a down-sampling technique and a non-linear transformation, respectively.
2.1.1
Convolutions
Assuming an 2D image I is given as input, a filter, or kernel, K acts as a sliding
window over patches of the images, as shown in Figure 2.1. The output feature map
is calculated by taking the dot product between the input I and the filter K. The
stride is the hyper-parameter regulating how many pixels the window shifts right
and down.
The spatial size of the output feature map can also be controlled by
padding, which is the process of adding pixels around the input data to preserve
the spatial dimensions of the output feature map and prevent loss of information
around the edges. Padding can either be zero-padding or mirror-padding. One single
convolutional layer has multiple filters, each of which detects a shape, or a pattern in
the feature map.
×1 ×0 ×1
×0 ×1 ×0
×1 ×0 ×1
0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0
0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0
0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0
0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0
0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0
0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0
1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0




























∗
1 0 1
0 1 0
1 0 1





=
1 4 3 4 1 1
1 2 4 3 3 0
1 2 3 4 1 1
1 3 3 1 1 0
3 3 1 1 0 0
2 1 1 0 0 0




















I
K
I ∗K
Figure 2.1: Convolution operation, where I is the input feature map (or the image
for the first convolution where each value is a pixel intensity), K is the
filter (a 3x3 in this case), and I ∗K is I convolved with K, resulting in
the output feature map used as input for the next layer. This example
has stride = 1 and padding = 0.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Convolutional Neural Networks
9
2.1.2
Deconvolutions
A Deconvolution, or transposed convolution, is the inverse operation of a convolution,
and it is used to increase the spatial resolution of an image or a feature map. The
deconvolution applies a set of filters to the input feature map, but with the filter
weights being flipped in both x and y direction. The output is also up-sampled by a
specific factor.
2.1.3
Pooling Layers
As mentioned above, a pooling layer is generally applied after a convolution and it
is useful to down-sample the output feature map.
It works by applying a sliding
window to non-overlapping regions of the feature map. The assumption here is that
the location of the feature relative to other features is more important than its precise
location. The most used pooling layer are the max and the mean one. Although
simple, it is a powerful method to a) reducing the computational cost, b) preventing
overfitting. The way it works can be seen in Figure 2.3.
2
1
1
0
0
0
3
3
1
1
0
0
1
3
3
1
1
0
1
2
3
4
1
1
1
2
4
3
3
0
1
4
3
4
1
1
3 × 3 max pooling
3
1
4
4
Figure 2.2: Max Pooling Transformation using a 3x3 kernel.
2.1.4
Activation Functions
An activation function is a mathematical function applied to the output of a node in
a neural network. It is used to determine the output of the node, or whether it should
be ”activated” and pass its information to the next layer of the network. Most of the
CNNs use a Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function:
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
(2.1)
The main advantage of such function is that it addresses the issue of vanishing
gradients present in two of the other most used functions, namely the hyperbolic
tangent, or tanh, and the sigmoid.
tanh(x) =
2
1 + exp −2x −1
(2.2)
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
sigm(x) =
1
1 + exp −x
(2.3)
A vanishing gradients means that when x becomes large, the gradients become
virtually 0, causing the network to converge slowly or never at all.
2.1.5
Fully Connected Linear Layers
A fully connected linear layer is a type of layer in a neural network that takes as
input a linear combination of the nodes from the previous layer. The output of a
fully connected linear layer is another vector of activations that can be fed into the
next layer in the network.
x0
x1
...
xD
y1
...
yC
input
output
Figure 2.3: A fully connected linear layer where an edge is a weight and a node is
the input.
2.2
Regularization Layers
Regularization is a technique used to prevent overfitting in deep learning models.
Overfitting occurs when a model is trained too well on the training data and per-
forms poorly on new, unseen data.
A type of regularization widely used in deep
learning and CNNs architecture, are the dropout layers. This type of layers work
by randomly ”dropping out” a certain percentage of nodes from the network during
each training iteration, effectively reducing the number of nodes that contribute to
the final output. This has the effect of making the model less sensitive to the specific
weights of individual nodes, and helps to reduce overfitting.
2.3
Training process
Training a neural network consists of two steps: the forward pass and the backward
pass.
In the case of image analysis, and specifically for learning latent representations
of those images, the forward pass is the process of computing the predicted outputs
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Training process
11
ˆY ∈RD of a neural network given its input X ∈Rmxn where m and n represent
the resolution of the input image X, and D is the embedding space of the output
vector representation ˆY .
In a way, a neural network can be seen as a mapping
function ˆY = f(X) that maps X to ˆY through the application of various layers of
transformation until the final layer is reached. Each transformation layer, that could
be a convolution, an activation function, or a linear combination, is parametrized by
a set of weights θl, resulting in a map ˆY = f(X, θ).
The backward pass is the process that allows the network to actually learn, i.e. by
finding the best set of θ that minimize a given cost function, or loss function. The loss
functions, can be several and they depend strictly on the task to solve, but generally
they give a measure of how well the networks learn, meaning that minimizing the loss
function would yield the set of weights θ that best model the data. The algorithm that
allows to do that is the backpropagation algorithm [37], which computes the gradient
of the loss with respect to the weights from the output layer all the way back to the
input layer, and adjusts the weights by taking a step in the direction of the negative
gradient. How large the step towards the negative gradient has to be, is dictated
by the learning rate. A smaller learning rate means that the optimizer takes smaller
steps and makes slower progress towards the optimal solution, while a larger learning
rate means that the optimizer takes larger steps to make faster progress towards the
optimal solution. However, choosing a learning rate that is too large can cause the
optimizer to overshoot the optimal solution and converge to a sub-optimal solution,
or diverge altogether. On the other hand, choosing a learning rate that is too small
can cause the optimizer to converge too slowly and require many more iterations to
reach the optimal solution as shown in Figure 2.4. Thus, choosing an appropriate
learning rate is crucial for achieving good performance from the model.
θ
Cost
Random
initial
value
ˆθ
θ
Cost
Random
initial
value
ˆθ
Figure 2.4: An example of learning rate too small (left) and too large (right). On
the horizontal axis, θ is the parameters’ search space, ˆθ the optimal
set for the network (which minimizes the cost function, placed on the
vertical axis).
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
Optimizers like Adam (ADAptive Moment estimation) have an internal mecha-
nism to adjust the learning rate over time, which is known as adaptive learning rate,
that considers the historical information of the gradients and adjusts the learning rate
of the weights based on it. The idea behind such method is that the learning rate
starts high and gradually decreases as the optimizer approaches the optimal solution
as shown in Figure 2.5. This is beneficial because it allows the optimizer to make
fast progress in the early stages of training, when the model weights are far from
the optimal solution, and then slow down as the optimizer gets closer to the optimal
solution.
θ
Cost
Random
initial
value
ˆθ
Figure 2.5: An adaptive optimization example, where the learning rate is progres-
sively decreased as it approaches the minimum of the loss function.
2.4
Mini Batching and Sampling
Datasets used in deep learning are generally large, and often contain hundreds of thou-
sand, or even million, of samples. Fitting all these samples in memory at once, process
them through large networks, and compute the gradients would be not feasible.
Sampling
Figure 2.6: Example of random sampling process with an unbalanced dataset, with
full dataset on the left and mini batches on the right. Assuming S = 16
and B = 8, the risk here is to have a batch with all pink samples in it
and another batch with none.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Mini Batching and Sampling
13
Sampling
Figure 2.7: Example of sampling process to avoid unbalanced mini-batches, with
the same dataset as in Figure 2.6, but with a non-random sampling
technique.
Assuming again S = 16 and B = 8, the risk of having
a batch with all pink samples in it and another batch with none is
avoided.
Batching is a technique that solves this computational issue and speeds up the
training process as it inputs only a subset of the whole dataset at once. Formally, a
dataset having size S ∈Z+ is broke down into N = S/B portions, where B ∈Z+ is
the batch size.
While in most cases it is acceptable to decide randomly what samples go into
the mini-batches, it is sometimes desirable or even necessary to pair specific samples
together into the mini-batch, for instance when having unbalanced datasets as the one
in Figure 2.6. Applying non-random sampling consists in picking specific samples to
go into one mini-batch according to certain criteria. Such technique can help prevent
the model from becoming biased towards the majority class, as shown in Figure 2.7.
This leads to better performance on the minority class and can also help the model
generalize better to new data.
==PAGE:24==
14
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER3
Data &
Pre-processing
The UK BioBank is a large, long-term health resource that aims to improve the
prevention, diagnosis and treatment of a wide range of serious and life-threatening
illnesses, including cancer, heart disease, stroke, and diabetes. It is a population-
based cohort that recruited over 500,000 participants aged between 40 and 69 from
across the United Kingdom between 2006 and 2010.
The dataset includes a wide range of information on each participant, including:
• Demographic information such as age, sex, and ethnicity;
• Medical history in the form of self-reported assessment and GP records;
• Physical measures such as height, weight, blood pressure, and lung function;
• Blood and urine samples for genetic and biological marker analysis;
• Lifestyle data in the form of type of diet, physical activity, smoking, and alcohol
consumption;
• Cognitive and psychological assessments from questionnaires.
The data is collected through interviews, questionnaires, physical examinations,
and biological samples. The UK Biobank is considered as one of the most valuable
resources for health research, as it is available to researchers worldwide. The collection
is continuously updated, with new data such as images added to the dataset, making
it a reliable rich resource for health research.
Health organizations world-wide are now investing in this resource, and are hopeful
to extract valuable information from this data. Access to the dataset was provided
by Novo Nordisk, one of most active companies in this space, and more specifically
by the team of MIO.
Among the imaging data present in the database, the most relevant for this thesis
are the fundus scans, which are photographs capturing detailed images of the back of
the eye collected through a non-invasive method. The images are typically taken with
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Data & Pre-processing
a specialized camera called a fundus camera which captures high-resolution images
of the retina, macula, and optic disc as shown in Figure 3.12.
Figure 3.1: Elements of the eye present in a fundus scan.
Fundus imaging is typically used to detect and monitor a variety of eye diseases
such as Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD), Diabetic Retinopathy, and glau-
coma, but more recently have been used to detect cardiovascular diseases as well. In
the UK BioBank the images are captured at a resolution of 2048 pixels along the
horizontal axis and 1536 pixels along the vertical axis. The dataset is composed of
175,815 images from 85,715 participants.
The UK Biobank dataset does not provide any information concerning the quality
of the scans, and some measurements are faulty, blurred and overall unusable. The
current models developed in MIO do not take this problem in consideration, hence
potentially affecting the performance as well as the stability of the training process.
In order to ensure a good quality dataset to train the models on, few techniques to
filter the candidates that would eventually form the training dataset were employed.
The three requisites to qualify for the final selection are described in the following
sections:
• a rule-based candidates selection;
• a Hough transform layer to discard scans lacking fundamental geometrical fea-
tures;
2Credits: Schmidt-Erfurth et al.
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Rule-based Selection
17
• a Retinal Image Quality Assessment (RIQA) based on a neural network ap-
proach.
3.1
Rule-based Selection
The original dataset consisted of 85,715 participants, with their fundus scans taken
between 2006 and 2010. Each participant typically has one scan per eye, but there
are few exceptions. For instance, the UK BioBank dataset was further enlarged in
2012 and 2013 with some follow-ups measurements, resulting in some participants
having an extra measurement per eye. These new scans are excluded from this study,
both to control the size of the dataset and ensure the dataset to be balanced across
the participants. For the same reasons, those participants that do not have both eyes
scanned are removed from the dataset. Finally, as the quality of the embeddings is to
be evaluated on downstream tasks such as sex detection and hypertension detection,
those participants that have either missing information about their biological sex or
missing measurement about systolic blood pressure, are removed from the dataset.
3.2
Circle Hough Transform
In each scan, the fundus is supposed to be perfectly circle-shaped, hence MIO had
decided to apply a Hough trasform to identify the circular structure forming the
image and crop it accordingly [43]. The Hough transform [17] is a popular technique
used in image processing and computer vision to detect shapes, such as lines and
circles in an image. This type of transformation is particularly useful for detecting
shapes that are partially obscured or have low contrast, which can certainly be the
case in fundus scans. Through this transformation, the image was cropped outside
the detected circle and hence the background was removed. In addition to that, I
have decided to horizontally flip all right eyes, as shown in Figure 3.2. This is done
to standardize the images to have same structure and prevent the neural network to
naively learn only whether the image is right or left (nevertheless, this experiment is
performed as a baseline in section 6.2, in order to ensure the models are capable of
encoding basic information).
Participants whose scans do not include a circle are removed from the dataset. If
a participant eye’s scan includes a circle but the other eye does not, the participant
is disqualified from the dataset.
The characteristics of the remaining candidates after the rule-based selection and
the Hough transform are presented in Table 3.1.
Finally, the images are resized along both the horizontal and the vertical axis,
resulting in images of resolution of 224x224 - which is the required input dimension for
the Multiple Color-space Fusion Network and also for some of the network described
in chapter 4.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Data & Pre-processing
Figure 3.2: On the top row a subject’s original left and right eye scan.
On the
bottom row, the right eye scan was flipped horizontally in order to
make it structurally similar to the left one.
Table 3.1: Summary of selected samples (units are participants).
SBP/Sex
Female
Male
Total
< 140
24,564
16,876
41,440
≥140
19,204
19,512
38,716
Total
43,768
36,388
80,156
3.3
Multiple Color-space Fusion Network
The third layer of the pre-processing consists in assessing whether the scans contains
actual information. This is done because it was seen empirically that the circular
structure in the fundus scan, detected with the Hough transform, was not always
informative enough. This is indeed consistent with the findings from MacGillivray et
al. [25] and shown in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Three poor quality scans where circular structure was detected but that
cannot be used for analysis as the most important features are barely
visible.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Multiple Color-space Fusion Network
19
As mentioned in section 1.1, Retinal Image Quality Assessment (RIQA) is an
automated approach used to check for the quality of retinal imaging, and guarantee
the reliability of diagnoses by ophthalmologists or automated analysis systems. Fu
et al. [10] re-annotated a subset of the EyePacs dataset, namely the EyeQ dataset,
classifying scans in either ”Good”, ”Usable” or ”Reject”. Although this granularity
is not necessarily relevant for this thesis, it may be relevant for future projects in the
MIO team. The main novelty about their solution, MFC-Net, consists in analyzing
the images in different color spaces additionally to RGB. As it can be seen in Figure
3.4 taken from Fu et al. [10], the image is converted to LAB and HSV, and then input
into three parallel base networks all having the same backbone. The output features
are then concatenated together and sent through an additional linear transformation
layer to make the prediction. The weights of the model are publicly available, hence
I use those for running inference on the UK Biobank dataset.
Figure 3.4: The MCF-Net Architecture proposed in Fu et al. [10], where the Base
Network is a DenseNet121 and the Fusion Block is simply made of linear
layers and concatenations.
I qualify a scan to have ”good quality” if its ”Reject” score is no more than half the
combined score of ”Usable” and ”Good”. If both participant’s eyes scans meet such
requirement, the participant is kept for this final selection. Essentially, all participants
with both eyes scan with a ”Usable+Good” score of at least 66.7% are included in the
final dataset. Although quite strict, this requirement is chosen to ensure that only
high quality images are selected and ”borderline” ones are excluded. The rejection
rate is 35%, slightly higher but consistent with the 32% found by MacGillivray et al.
[25]. The class proportions for the resulting final dataset are summarized in Table
3.2.
Overall, the dataset is quite balanced, with 46.4% of the participant having hy-
pertension (defined as having Systolic Blood Pressure higher than 140 mmHg) and
55.8% being female. The majority cross-class is females without hypertension (32.5%)
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Data & Pre-processing
Table 3.2: Summary of final dataset (units are participants).
SBP/Sex
Female
Male
Total
< 140
17,042
11,089
28,131
≥140
12,262
12,089
24,351
Total
29,304
23,178
52,482
and the minority one is males without hypertension (21.1%).
3.4
Data Augmentation
The process of data augmentation is the process of artificially increasing the number
of training samples by applying small alterations to the original data. This is done
in order to expand the dataset, since deep learning networks are well known to work
better with large dataset, and to improve the robustness of the models. In fact, as
explained above, the dataset is made of only 2 images per participant, one per each
eye. However, the variation in the image should not be as varied as face images, which
typically have changes of expression, different point of view, lightning conditions, etc.,
while the fundus scans are taken in a standard format through a machine where the
eye is ”posing” for the photograph. For these reasons, the augmentation technique
employed in this thesis consists in applying a) a small random rotation of 15° either
left or right, and b) a random light color jittering.
As shown in Figure 3.5, I repeat this process for 4 times per eye - using the
original image as a blueprint (left most image). Although PyTorch allows to apply
transformations on the fly on an input image during training, I augment the data once
and store the result. In fact, each model is trained on a different machine, resulting
in the pseudo-random seeding being different every time, thus generating different
augmentations on each training process. Such seeding issue would have flawed the
comparison across the models as they would have effectively been trained on different
data.
Color jittering is a technique used in image processing and computer vision to
augment the data by applying random perturbations to the color channels of an
image. It is a form of data augmentation that helps to make the model more robust
to small variations in color and lighting conditions. The idea behind color jittering is
to randomly adjust the brightness, contrast, and saturation of an image by applying
small random perturbations to the color channels.
This can be done by adding
or subtracting a small random value from the color channels, or by multiplying or
dividing the color channels by a random value.
The augmented dataset and the non-augmented dataset are kept separate, effec-
tively creating two different ones summarized in Table 3.3 and Table 3.4.
Because one of the models introduced in chapter 4 requires an input resolution of
299x299 instead of 224x224, I create a replica of the two datasets and modify their
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Data Augmentation
21
Figure 3.5: Left most images are the blueprint - the following 4 row-wise are a
version of the blueprint with random rotation of 15° and random color
jitter applied.
SBP/Sex
Female
Male
Total
< 140
34,084
22,178
56,262
≥140
24,524
24,178
48,702
Total
58,608
46,356
104,964
Table 3.3: Summary of non-augmented dataset (units are number of scans). Num-
ber of participants are the same as in Table 3.2.
SBP/Sex
Female
Male
Total
< 140
170,420
110,890
281,310
≥140
122,620
120,890
243,510
Total
293,040
231,780
524,820
Table 3.4: Summary of augmented dataset (units are number of scans). Number of
participants are the same as in Table 3.2.
size, effectively creating 4 versions of the same data: two non-augmented versions
with images having resolution 224x224 and 299x299, respectively, and two augmented
versions with resolution 224x224 and 299x299.
Since the goal of this thesis is not to create a model that is able to generalize to
new unseen data, no split was done in training/validation/test set. The dataset is
kept as one large set, assuming that ”losing” training samples would deteriorate the
training performances.
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER4
Methods
As explored in section 1.1, several approaches have been used to extract vector rep-
resentation from images - and all of them have different assumption at their core.
Some learn to reconstruct the image using VAEs, which were originally conceived
for generation, and interpreted the prior as the embedding for that image [27], while
others applied knowledge in metric learning acquired from face recognition and ba-
sically turned it into ”eye recognition” [47]. Other methods like MoCo-v3 [6], that
can arguably be defined as state-of-the-art in representation learning, have not been
applied to the domain of medical imaging and specifically to fundus scans imaging,
but may yet constitute a valid approach to explore. In this thesis, I investigate which
of the three above works best with the UK BioBank dataset. The following sections
introduce the methods I employ, their architectures, and explain the rationale behind
the choice. In few cases, I implement some modifications to the original methods, as
I consider them to better suit the project.
4.1
Auto-Encoders
The first method is heavily inspired by Mandal et al. [27] but with some conceptual
alterations concerning the type of architecture. VAEs and Auto-Encoders (AEs) are
both neural network models that are used for unsupervised learning. However, they
differ in their approach in the interpretation of representation learning.
AEs, showed in Figure 4.1, consist of an encoder and a decoder. The encoder
compresses the input data into a lower-dimensional representation, known as the bot-
tleneck representation, and the decoder then reconstructs the original data from the
bottleneck representation. The goal of this kind of architecture is to learn a compact
representation of the data that can be used for tasks such as data compression, denois-
ing, or generation. Formally, given an input x, the encoder maps it to the bottleneck
representation z = f(x) and the decoder maps it back to the output ˆx = g(z). The
network is then trained to minimize the reconstruction error, generally defined as the
Mean Squared Error (MSE) L(x, ˆx) = ||x −g(f(x))||2.
VAEs, instead, are a type of generative model that are built on top of AEs. VAEs
introduce a probabilistic interpretation to the bottleneck representation. Specifically,
the bottleneck representation is modeled as a Gaussian distribution, with the mean
and the variance parameters learned by the encoder, as shown in Figure 4.2.
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Methods
latent repr.
x1
ˆx1
x2
ˆx2
x3
ˆx3
x4
ˆx4
x5
ˆx5
input
output
Figure 4.1: A simplified Auto-Encoder where a 5-D vector input is compressed into a
3-D (green) through the left part of the network, and then reconstructed
in the right most part of the network.
µ
σ
sample
x1
ˆx1
x2
ˆx2
x3
ˆx3
x4
ˆx4
x5
ˆx5
input
output
Figure 4.2: An example of Variational Auto-Encoder very similar to Figure 4.1. As
one can see, the decoder on the right hand side of the network uses a
vector (green) sampled from a learnt distribution having mean µ (yellow)
and variance σ (blue).
In short, VAEs can generate new data samples that are similar to the training data,
whereas AEs can only reconstruct the data. Additionally, VAEs can model complex
distributions, such as multi-modal distributions, as the learnt Gaussian distribution
can represent multiple modes.
However, the goal of the thesis is not to generate
data but to learn a latent vector representation of the input images that could be
seen as a compression process, hence employing an AEs as opposed to VAEs is much
more conceptually sound. The latter is not discussed further in this thesis. The final
network architecture of the AE is shown in Figure 4.3, and it is a more complex version
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Auto-Encoders
25
than what proposed in Mandal et al. [27]. That is because this thesis considers the
whole input images rather than the optic disc alone, hence it is essential to have a
network capable of extracting sparser, diverse and overall more complex structures
and features. Furthermore, Mandal et al.’s DCF-Net [27] takes as input a 128x128
RGB image, whereas this thesis proposes images that have a resolution of 224x224.
Minimizing the reconstruction error using MSE is often sub-optimal, as the error
is computed pixel-wise and therefore does not guarantee semantically meaningful
differences. A more appropriate loss function may be the so-called perceptual loss,
which considers high level features and preserves structural information [19]. Another
choice could be the inverse of the Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM), which
can be interpreted as the dissimilarity between two images in a structural, as well
as in a semantic way. However, it is less commonly used than the other two losses
mentioned so far, and its performance may vary significantly depending on the specific
task and data being used. In this thesis, I explore both perceptual loss and Inverse
SSIM (DSSIM) because the aim is to investigate which method is the most performing
contingently on the dataset.
4.1.1
Perceptual Loss
A perceptual loss, introduced for the first time by Justin et al. in 2016 [19], measures
the difference between the output of a model and the target image in terms of the
high-level features that are perceived by humans.
This loss is typically computed by passing the output of the model ˆx and the
original image x through a pre-trained deep neural network and comparing the feature
activations in the higher layers of the network. As mentioned in chapter 2, these
activations represent the high-level features of the image, such as edges, textures,
and shapes, that are more relevant to human perception than the raw pixel values.
The most common method for the perceptual loss is using a pre-trained network
as feature extractor and comparing the output of the model and the target image in
the higher layers of the network. The most widely used network for this is VGG-16
and VGG-19, but other networks like ResNet, Inception and DenseNet can also be
used. This thesis uses a VGG-16 architecture, as proposed by Justin et al. [19] and
Mandal et al. [27], extracts the features from the first 3 convolutional layers as shown
in Figure 4.4, and then computes the difference pixel-wise for each of them as in Eq.
4.1
L(x, ˆx) =
3
X
n=1
MSE(fn(x), fn(ˆx))
(4.1)
4.1.2
Structural Dissimilarity Index Measure
The Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) is generally considered a more robust
measure of image quality than traditional methods such as MSE and peak signal-to-
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Methods
x
convf=16,k=3,s=1,p=1
norm
LeakyReLU
convf=32,k=3,s=2,p=1
norm
LeakyReLU
convf=64,k=3,s=1,p=1
norm
LeakyReLU
convf=128,k=3,s=2,p=1
norm
LeakyReLU
convf=256,k=3,s=2,p=1
norm
LeakyReLU
convf=256,k=4,s=3,p=1
norm
LeakyReLU
Flatten
fc linearin=D,out=128
norm
LeakyReLU
fc linearin=128,out=128
z
Sigmoid
deconvf=3,k=3,s=1,p=1,op=0
LeakyReLU
norm
deconvf=16,k=3,s=2,p=1,op=1
LeakyReLU
norm
deconvf=32,k=3,s=1,p=1,op=0
LeakyReLU
norm
deconvf=64,k=3,s=2,p=1,op=1
LeakyReLU
norm
deconvf=128,k=3,s=2,p=1,op=1
LeakyReLU
norm
deconvf=256,k=4,s=3,p=1,op=2
LeakyReLU
norm
Unflatten
fc linearin=128,out=D
LeakyReLU
norm
˜x
L(˜x, x)
Figure 4.3: The AE neural architecture that this thesis employs. The encoder ar-
chitecture is on the left hand side, the decoder on the right hand side.
The input image x is sent through several convolutional layers, batch
normalization layers and leaky relu activation functions. The ”Flatten”
layer reshapes the feature maps to a single dimension, which is then
reduced through a couple of fully connected layers, finally creating the
latent vector z. Such vector is then sent through the decoder which tries
to reconstruct step by step the various up-sampling transformations of
the image. The final sigmoid layer squeezes the values in the range [0, 1]
creating ˆx, so that the values are bounded to have the same range as x.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Auto-Encoders
27
x
c
f1(x)
f2(x)
f3(x)
Conv 1-1
Conv 1-2
Pooling
Conv 2-1
Conv 2-2
Pooling
Conv 3-1
Conv 3-2
Conv 3-3
Pooling
Conv 4-1
Conv 4-2
Conv 4-3
Pooling
Conv 5-1
Conv 5-2
Conv 5-3
Pooling
FC-1
FC-2
FC-3
Figure 4.4: Original image x and reconstruction ˆx are fed into a pre-trained VGG-
16 network. The corresponding features f1, f2, and f3 are computed
for both input x and ˆx, and if the images are similar, or perceived as
similar by the network, the three features should be similar as well.
noise ratio (PSNR) as it takes into account both the local and global structural
information of the images. In fact, SSIM uses a 11x11 square window sliding over
patches of the image and computing three components for each of those patches: the
luminance component, which measures the difference in pixels intensities between
the images; the contrast component, which measures the difference in brightness
between the images; and the structure component, which measures the similarity of
the textures in the images [44]. Finally the windows are averaged component-wise,
resulting in a score for luminance similarity Lum, one for contrast similarity Con and
one for texture similarity Tex. Finally, the three elements are averaged as in Eq. 4.2
SSIM(x, ˆx) = Lum(x, ˆx) ∗Con(x, ˆx) ∗Tex(x, ˆx)
(4.2)
The index is between -1 and 1, where 1 indicates that the images are identical and
-1 indicates that the images are completely dissimilar. One way to invert the value of
SSIM and turn it into a dissimilarity measure DSSIM to minimize has been proposed
by Loza et al. [23]:
DSSIM(x, ˆx) = c0 −SSIM(x, ˆx)
c1
(4.3)
where c0 = 1 and c1 = 2 map the distance into an interval [0, 1], with 0 indicating
perfect similarity and 1 perfect dissimilarity.
As Loza et al. [23] point out, DSSIM is not a proper distance metric as it does
not respect triangular inequality. Such inequality states that for any three points A,
B, and C in a metric space, the distance between A and C is always less than or equal
to the sum of the distances between A and B and between B and C. In other words,
the distance between two points should never be longer than when going through a
third point as shown in Eq. 4.4
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Methods
d(A, C) ≤d(A, B) + d(B, C)
(4.4)
Nevertheless, DSSIM may still be a valid approach for the purpose of this thesis as
suggested by Ataei et al. [2] where they use a DSSIM combined with a perceptual loss
to denoising and reconstructing images from the medical domain, although belonging
to the branch of CT scans.
4.1.3
AE Experimental Setup
The training of the network is performed on a Amazon Web Services (AWS)-based
HPC. I use an Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) p3.2xlarge instance, which consists on
1 Tesla V-100 GPU with a 16GB memory together with 8 virtual CPUs with a total
memory of 61GB.
As the network is quite large and occupies a significant chunk of memory, mini-
batches have size of 4. The network is trained for a maximum of 20 epochs, applying
early stopping with a patience p = 3, hence if the loss does not change for 3 consecu-
tive iterations, the training procedure is stopped and the weights considered to have
converged to their optimal value. The network is trained with an Adam optimizer,
and the initial learning rate is set to lr = 0.001. A scheduler is employed to reduce
the learning rate by a factor of 10 when the loss does not decrease significantly for
3 consecutive epochs. In all experiments, the networks are trained from scratch and
the weights initialized with a Xavier initialization [12].
The experiments are listed in Table 4.1.
Loss function
Dataset
Input Resolution
Perceptual
Augmented
224x224
Perceptual
Non-Augmented
224x224
DSSIM
Augmented
224x224
DSSIM
Non-Augmented
224x224
Table 4.1: List of experiments performed with the architecture shown in Figure 4.1.
4.2
Inception Network
The Inception network architecture initially proposed by Szegedy et al. in 2015 [41] is
a popular choice for many imaging tasks, and represents a sensible choice for analyzing
medical images due to its ability to detect features at different scales. Fundus scans,
in fact, may contain macroscopic objects (e.g. optic disc, macula, large lesions) as
well as microscopic ones (e.g. blood vessels, micro-aneurysm, tiny lesions).
The key to extracting information at different granularity level is the Inception
module. An Inception module is made of several building blocks and may have dif-
ferent configurations, but most commonly it includes multiple parallel convolutional
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Inception Network
29
filters of different kernel sizes and pooling operation, which ultimately capture fea-
tures at different scales. The outputs of the different parallel filters are then con-
catenated together to produce a final feature map that encodes the input map at a
higher abstraction level. This thesis’ Inception module uses the same configuration
of components proposed by Xie et al. [47], which again are inspired from a version of
Inception called Inception-V3 [42], and are showed in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: The Inception module. The input feature map (Previous Activation)
is input on parallel on 4 different layers of transformations, which are
eventually stacked together to form the new feature map encoding the
features at every granularity1.
The original network was thought for the ImageNet classification task, meaning
that the final fully connected layer was made of 1,001 nodes, each of which represented
the probability of the input image to be an instance of a specific class. Given the aim
of this thesis, I replace the final linear layer with a series of fully connected linear
layers that reduce the output to a 128 dimensional vector (from 1,024 halved until
128). The Inception network is shown and described in Figure 4.6.
In addition to changing the last layer, an appropriate loss suited for metric learn-
ing is required. Xie et al. [47] use an Arcface loss [9] to project the two eyes from
one subject closer into the embedding space and far away from eyes of other sub-
jects, which has shown significant improvements in the metric learning space for face
recognition as discussed in section 1.1. Although their findings makes this loss the
preferred choice for the task, due to numerical instability I opt for a triplet margin
1Credits: https://datahacker.rs/building-inception-network/
2Credits: https://paperswithcode.com/method/inception-v3
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Methods
Figure 4.6: The Inception-V3 architecture. The sequential inception modules can
be observed throughout the image. In this thesis, the last fully con-
nected linear layer of 1,001 nodes (right most part of the drawing) is
replaced by several fully connected layers having size 1,024, 512, 256,
and 128, respectively2.
loss [38]. The disadvantage of such change lies mainly in computational cost but it
is not expected to dramatically influence the learning performances.
4.2.1
Triplet Loss and Mining Strategies
Triplet loss is a method for training neural networks for embedding-based tasks. The
basic idea is to train the network to embed similar samples (e.g. fundus scan belonging
to the same individual) closer to each other in the embedding space, while pushing
dissimilar ones (e.g. scans of different individuals) farther away. Furthermore, the
assumption here is that given a relatively small embedding space, samples having
similar features, although being from separate individuals, will be somewhat enforced
to cluster together.
The loss function is based on the concept of a triplet, which consist of having
an anchor sample a, a positive sample p (i.e. another sample from the same subject
of the anchor a), and a negative sample n (i.e. a sample from a subject different
than anchor a). The network is trained to minimize the distance between the anchor
and the positive sample, while maximizing the distance between the anchor and the
negative sample. An additional hyper-parameter called ”margin” regulates how far
from each other positive and negative samples need to be.
The formula for the triplet margin loss shown in Eq.
4.5 ensures that if the
distance between anchor a and positive sample p is shorter than the one between
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Inception Network
31
anchor a and the negative sample n plus some margin m, the loss is 0. Otherwise, it
is larger than 0.
L(a, p, n) = max(d(a, p) −d(a, n) + margin, 0)
(4.5)
In the context of triplet margin loss, an important component is the miner, which
is responsible to select what triplets will be used to update the model’s weights during
the training process. There are several strategies that the miner can implement as
shown in Figure 4.7, and those depend on the particular problem at hand and the
desired trade-off between speed and accuracy, but the most used ones are the ”hard”
and ”semi-hard”.
Figure 4.7: Mining strategies. Given the anchor T a placed at the center of the im-
age, and its positive sample Xp violating the margin (only slightly in
this case), a hard miner would create only one triplet with the negative
sample being blue Xn. An easy miner, instead, would create a triplet
using orange Xn as negative sample because it is farther away to the
anchor compared to the positive sample. The green Xn would be se-
lected for the semi-hard strategy, which is a trade-off between the other
two mentioned strategies3.
Both consider a subset of all the triplets that violate the margin, but while the
”hard” selects all the triplets in which the negative sample is closer to the anchor than
the positive, the ”semi-hard” is a shallower version, as it selects all triplets in which
the margin is violated but the positive sample is nevertheless closer to the anchor
than the negative sample.
3Credits: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Semi-hard-triplet-selection-scheme
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Methods
4.2.2
Triplet Sampler
As introduced in chapter 2, in some cases it is beneficial to use a sampler to decide
how to structure the mini-batches that are iteratively fed into the network to update
its weights (i.e. when having a dataset that is unbalanced in the class distribution).
Although the dataset is perfectly balanced since there are exactly 2 images per indi-
vidual, using a default random sampler would be detrimental for the training process.
In fact, also due of the size of the dataset, it is very unlikely that a mini-batch would
contain the positive sample of any anchor. That way, the miner would not be able
to construct the triplets, the loss would not be computed, and the model’s weights
would not be updated through back-propagation. Therefore, it is necessary to use a
non-random sampler.
The chosen sampling strategy is implemented by iterating through the whole
dataset DIJ where I is the number of subjects in the study (52,482) and J is the num-
ber of samples for subject (2 for the non-augmented dataset, 10 for the augmented
one). For each individual image di,j, I sample one of its positive counterpart and
placed in the batch. For the non-augmented dataset, the positive counterpart is sim-
ply the other eye. To complete the mini-batch of size B, I randomly sample without
reintroduction other (B/2) −1 subjects different than i, and find their positive coun-
terparts. I repeat this for every di,j ∈DIJ. This way, each mini-batch consists of B/2
subjects, all having 2 images each, and therefore both positive and negative samples
are present for each possible anchor in the batch. Although this strategy causes a
B-fold increase in the number of batches, and therefore of the actual data used to
train the network, the issue is easily mitigated by reducing the training epochs. This
strategy guarantees that is always possible to build a triplet, and introduces some
level of variation in the batches, as opposed to, for instance, dividing the batches in
predefined groups of B/2 subjects.
Furthermore, the proposed strategy scales and generalizes to the augmented dataset,
where the sampled positive counterpart for di,j is one of the other 9 images, and all
images are guaranteed to be in a batch at least once.
4.2.3
Inception Experimental Setup
Just like for the AEs, the training of the network is performed on the same HPC
based on AWS infrastructure. This time I use a larger Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)
instance, namely p3.8xlarge, which consists on 4 Tesla V-100 GPU with a 64GB
memory together with 32 virtual CPUs with a total memory of 244GB. The necessity
for this larger instance is dictated by the fact that I initialize the Inception-V3 network
using the weights from the ImageNet task provided by PyTorch, which also requires
a 299x299 input. The network is trained twice: once with the augmented dataset and
once with the non-augmented dataset.
On the flip side, a larger memory allows to use a larger mini-batch of size 8.
The network is trained for a maximum of 15 epochs, with an early stopping and a
learning rate scheduler similar to the AEs’ experiments: if the loss does not change for
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Momentum Contrast Network
33
3 consecutive iterations, the training procedure is stopped and the weights considered
to have converged to their optimal value. The learning rate is set to begin at a value
of lr = 0.0001 as it empirical tests shows that this initialization yields the best results
together with an Adam optimizer.
4.3
Momentum Contrast Network
Momentum Contrast (MoCo) is a method for unsupervised representation learning
that was introduced in He et al. [16] and improved over time with a second and a
third iteration [7] [6]. In this thesis only the third iteration (MoCo-v3) is employed
and hence discussed.
Like other contrastive learning methods discussed previously in this thesis, MoCo-
v3 aims to learn representations by encouraging similar instances to be close to each
other in the feature space, while pushing dissimilar instances apart.
However, it
differs significantly in the training approach. The most important concepts in this
type of architecture are the query instance and the key instance, as well as a dynamic
queue acting as a memory bank, shown in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: MoCo architecture as shown in the MoCo-v2 paper [7]. The query q is
input on the encoder (left-hand side) and the keys k into the momentum
encoder. Once the representations are generated, the queue is appended
to the keys’ representations, acting as negative samples. Then the loss
is computed and error back-propagated through the encoder only.
A query instance q is an image from the training dataset that is passed through the
network encoder fq to generate a query feature representation fq(q). A key instance
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Methods
k, instead, is an augmented version of the query instance, and it is passed through a
momentum encoder fk to generate a key feature representation fk(k). In this thesis,
k is an image belonging to the same individual that q belongs to, rather than strictly
an augmented version, hence it is interpreted as a positive sample to the anchor q. A
more accurate description of how q and k are paired is provided in subsection 4.3.2.
The momentum encoder fk has the same architecture as fq but differs in the
way its weights are updated. In fact, once the loss L is computed, the error is back-
propagated only through fq. On the other hand, fk’s weights are updated with the
encoder fq’s weights θq using a momentum update m as shown in Eq. 4.6
θk ←(m)θk + (1 −m)θq
(4.6)
In this thesis, m = 0.999 consistently with the findings from He et al. [16], result-
ing in the momentum encoder’s weights θk being updated very slowly so that historical
weights are not heavily influenced by θq and potentially ”suddenly” forgotten.
The chosen backbone architecture for both fq and fk is a Residual Network with
50 layers (ResNet50) [15], a deep convolutional neural network architecture originally
designed to address the vanishing gradient problem that occurs in deep networks.
In fact, very deep networks have the issue that the error gradients get smaller and
smaller as they propagate through the network, leading to slow or ineffective training
[15].
The key innovation in ResNet is the use of residual connections, where the input to
a layer is also added to its output before being passed onto the next layer as visually
shown in Figure 4.9. This allows the network to learn an identity mapping for the
input data, making it easier for the gradients to flow back through the network during
training. The basic building block of the ResNet architecture is therefore the residual
block, which contains two or more convolutional layers with batch normalization and
activation functions. The input to the block is added to its output, which is then
passed on to the next block. The ResNet architecture can have varying depths, but it
typically has several residual blocks stacked on top of each other, followed by a global
average pooling layer, and finally a fully connected layer that outputs the predictions.
Figure 4.9: ResNet architecture. The last fully connected layer, for the purpose
of this thesis, is replaced by a 128 dimensional vector representing the
embeddings4.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Momentum Contrast Network
35
Once both fq(q) and fk(k) are computed, the negative samples are needed in order
to compute the loss. The negative samples are all the keys in the queue, which is a
dynamic memory bank based on the Last in First out (LIFO) principle where the new
representations generated by fk are stored on top of the queue and the oldest one are
removed. This is done in order to have a larger pool to draw negative samples from,
compared to, say, a triplet where the pool is limited to the samples of the mini-batch.
Therefore, each query q has one positive sample k+ in the queue, while all the other
keys are seen as negative samples k−.
4.3.1
InfoNCE Loss
The authors of MoCo, throughout all the iterations of their papers, use the InfoNCE
loss [31], which is a type of contrastive loss used in representation learning, par-
ticularly in the field of self-supervised learning.
It stands for ”Information Noise-
Contrastive Estimation”, and the basic idea behind it is to predict the relationship
between the positive sample and negative samples.
In the context of MoCo, the InfoNCE loss helps the network to predict if the
encoding fq(q) of the query image q is more similar to the positive key k+ encoding
fk(k+) or to fk(k−) for every k−in the negative samples set (i.e. the dynamic queue
previously introduced). The positive key k+ is assigned a label of 1 and the negative
samples k−are all assigned a label of 0. The InfoNCE loss measures the negative
log-likelihood of the predicted labels, with the goal of maximizing the probability of
the positive sample being closer to the anchor sample than to the negative samples.
Formally, it can be expressed as follows:
Lq(q, k+, {k−}) = −log
exp(q · k+/τ)
exp(q · k+/τ) + P
k−exp(q · k−/τ)
(4.7)
where τ = is a temperature hyper-parameters affecting the magnitude of the loss
L.
In order to make training more robust, the InfoNCE loss is computed in a sym-
metrized fashion. Essentially, an image x1 and an image x2 both belonging to subject
A, are fed through the query encoder fq and the momentum encoder fk, generating 4
representations q1 = fq(x1), q2 = fq(x2), k1 = fk(x1), and k2 = fk(x2). The loss for
x1 is computed considering q1 as the anchor’s representation, and k2 as the positive
key. Likewise, the loss for x2 is computed considering q2 as the anchor’s representa-
tion, and k1 as the positive key. The two losses are summed up together resulting in
the final loss for the input:
L = Lq1(q1, k2, {k−}) + Lq2(q2, k1, {k−})
(4.8)
4Credits: https://blog.devgenius.io/resnet50-6b42934db431
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Methods
4.3.2
Momentum Contrast Sampler
It is immediately clear from the sections just concluded that also in this case a custom
sampler is needed, such that the symmetrized loss with the four representations can
be computed and the encoder network updated accordingly.
Assuming a batch of size B, the chosen strategy consists in selecting B/2 images
from the training dataset belonging to B/2 different subjects.
For each subject,
another single instance is sampled from the pool of images belonging to that subject,
hence creating the pairs x1 and x2 for each subject in the batch.
For the non-augmented dataset, the positive sample is the subject’s other eye at
it was the only other positive instance available in the dataset. For the augmented
dataset, a random instance from all the other instances belonging to the subject is
sampled. The positive sample is not bound to be one of the images of the same eye
side of the same subject, in order to ensure a certain level of robustness and variety
in the pairs.
4.3.3
Momentum Contrast Experimental Setup
MoCo requires less memory than Inception-V3, thus a p3.2xlarge EC2 instance is
suﬀicient to train the whole network. However, training is significantly slower, and
to compensate for it I reduced the number of epochs to a maximum of 10. Batch
size is set to 4, and the learning rate scheduler’s rule is the same as the previous two
setups. The initial learning rate is set to 0.001 and a variant of Adam is used, namely
AdamW, that handles the weight decay differently. This optimizer is chosen as it is
the one recommended by the authors of all MoCo’s versions. Both augmented and
non-augmented datasets are used and the input resolution is 224x224 as this is the
one used by the authors.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER5
Evaluation Methods
In order to evaluate the quality of the embeddings, Mandal et al. [27] have used
supervised learning to check whether the DCF-Net’s generated representations re-
tained information about Diabetic Retinopathy (DR). However, this approach is not
robust and may be considered flawed, as they basically find an hyperplane through
a Support Vector Classifier (SVC) that is able to linearly separate the embeddings
of those participants being diagnosed with DR from those that have not. Further-
more, any new classifier would need to be trained with different target labels if the
embeddings were to be used for another classification task, say detecting AMD or
Hypertensive Retinopathy. The goal of this thesis is to rather encode as much in-
formation contained in the image inside a vector representation. Hence, the learnt
vectors should already embed the information about DR, sex or hypertension in it,
and similar individuals should ideally already be clustered together regardless of any
specific classification task. As mentioned in chapter 1, MIO attempted at classifying
biological sex and hypertension (defined as having a systolic blood pressure of at least
140 mmHg) using supervised learning. Thus, the embeddings are going to be evalu-
ated in terms of their ability to encode information regarding the subjects’ biological
sex and hypertension.
It is therefore natural to consider algorithms that a) do not learn any mapping to
separate the embeddings; b) give one or more metrics to make direct comparison with
a supervised approach; c) tell how well the clusters are separated from each other.
5.1
K-Nearest Neighbors
K-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) is a type of non-parametric supervised machine learning
algorithm that is used for classification and regression. It is based on the idea that
an object is similar to the objects that are closest to it in the feature space. KNN is
considered as a simple, yet powerful algorithm, as it is easy to implement and does
not require any assumptions about the underlying distribution of the data, thus does
not learn any mapping to discriminate across the inputs. However, KNN is sensitive
to the scale of the features and it can be computationally expensive when working
with large datasets.
The KNN algorithm, shown visually in Figure 5.1, works by taking an input object
x, and then finding the k number of examples that are closest to it in the feature
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Evaluation Methods
space. The predicted class ˆy of x is then determined by the majority class among
the k nearest neighbors. For example, assuming k = 3 and the closest samples to x1
belonging to class A, B and A, x1 will be classified as belonging to class A. Thus, it
is possible to compute the accuracy of the KNN, which is the same metric used in
MIO’s benchmark [43] to classify sex and hypertension.
Figure 5.1: To classify the green circle using k = 3, the inner non-dotted circle is
considered. Since the three closest objects belongs to one ”blue square”
and two ”red triangles”, the green circle will be classified as ”red tri-
angle”. However, using k = 5, all objects inside the dotted circle are
considered neighbors, and the green circle will be classified as ”blue
square”1.
The only hyper-parameters of the KNN algorithm are therefore the number of
neighbors k and the distance metric used to measure similarity. Common distance
metrics include Euclidean distance, Manhattan distance, and cosine similarity. I use
the default one given by the scikit-learn package which is the Euclidean one.
Since each single eye has a corresponding embedding, I opt to represent a subject
by aggregating his/her right eye embedding and left eye embedding, and taking the
mean. Only the mean embedding is kept for the rest of the evaluation. This aggrega-
tion strategy is shown in Figure 5.2, and it is considered more conceptually correct.
The augmented data, are not considered in this phase. Additional experiments are
performed without this aggregation strategy and the results are reported in Appendix
A.
5.2
Davies-Bouldin Index
While KNN is a useful method that meets some of the required criteria, it has no
metric that indicates how well the embeddings are automatically clustered. Many
1Credits: https://vitalflux.com/k-nearest-neighbors-explained-with-python-examples/
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Davies-Bouldin Index
39
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure 5.2: A simplified 2D version of the aggregation strategy. Each color is a
subject, with the triangles representing the right eye’s embedding, the
circle the left eye and the square the mean of the two embeddings. Only
the mean embeddings (square ones) are kept to fit the kNN on.
different clustering metrics have been extensively used to evaluate the quality of a
clustering, such as the Silouetthe score [36], the Adjusted Rand Index [33], or the
CH index [3].
However, although being the most used ones, all of them have a
time complexity of O(N 2) where N is the number of feature vectors, or embeddings,
to evaluate.
Such complexity means that this algorithms can be computationally
expensive when applied to large datasets, which is certainly the case for this thesis.
In this scenario, it may be necessary to use a faster, approximative version of the
metric or to use a different metric that has a lower time complexity.
One metric that has a lower time complexity than the others listed above is the
Davies-Bouldin (DB) [8] index, which has a time complexity of O(NC), where C is
the number of clusters, and N the number of embeddings. The DB index is based on
the average distance between the centers of clusters, which can be calculated more
eﬀiciently than the distances between all pairs of samples that are used by some of
the other metrics.
The core idea is that the similarity between two clusters should be related to the
similarity between their centroids, and that clusters should be similar to their own
centroid rather than to other clusters’ centroids. The DB index is calculated as the
average similarity between each cluster and its most similar cluster, where similarity
is defined as the ratio of the distance between the cluster centroids to the average
distance of the points in the cluster to the centroid as defined in Eq. 5.1
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Evaluation Methods
DB = 1
C
C
X
c=1
max{Rc,j=0, Rc,j=1, ..., Rc,j=C}
∀j ∈C \ {j = c}
(5.1)
where Rc,j is a measure indicating how good the clustering scheme is between
cluster c and cluster j as shown in 5.2.
Rc,j = (Sc + Sj
Mc,j
))
(5.2)
where Mc,j is a measure of separation between cluster c and cluster j, and Sc is
the euclidean average distance between the embeddings in cluster c and the centroid
of the cluster. More specifically, assuming Ac to be the centroid of cluster c, Ac,k the
kth element of Ac, and X a collection of N embeddings assigned to cluster c:
Sc = ( 1
N
N
X
n=1
∥Xn −Ac∥)
(5.3)
Mc,j =
v
u
u
t
K
X
k=1
∥ac,k −aj,k∥
(5.4)
where k is the number of clusters, S(i, j) is the similarity between cluster i and j,
and max(S(i, j)) is the maximum similarity between cluster i and any other cluster
j.
The index ranges from 0 to infinity, with a small value indicating perfect clustering,
and a value of infinity indicating that there is actually no clustering.
While the DB index is relatively easy to understand and interpret, and works
with clusters of different sizes, it has few drawbacks to be aware of. For instance, it
is sensitive to the number of clusters and may not perform well when the number of
clusters is not appropriate. This is indeed a risk in using such index, as the number
of clusters may just as well be 2 (male/female, hypertension/no hypertension), 4 (a
combination of sex and hypertension status), or even thousands since each subject
could be interpreted as a cluster itself. Moreover, the index may be less reliable than
other metrics in the presence of noise or outliers and does not take into account the
intrinsic structure of the data.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER6
Results
Training the networks with very distinct loss functions makes the direct comparison
across models meaningless. In fact, there is no benefit in comparing the final loss of
MoCo - that uses a symmetrized contrastive loss - with, say, the final loss of the AEs,
regardless of whether that is the perceptual loss or the DSSIM. Hence, the main in-
terest lies in the evaluation of the embeddings, although a good training performance
may be indicative of the quality of the embeddings. The training performances are
briefly presented in section 6.1 for each model individually. Before evaluating the
embeddings on the real tasks like sex classification (section 6.3) and hypertension
classification (section 6.4), a baseline for sanity check is introduced in section 6.2. In
section 6.5, additional experiments are presented in the interest of completeness.
6.1
Training Performances
6.1.1
AE with Perceptual Loss
Figure 6.1 shows the training loss over 20 training epochs. The green curve continues
much longer obviously as it is the training on the augmented dataset.
The non-
augmented loss stops at a value of 0.3565 whereas the augmented one at a value of
0.3633.
Figure 6.1: Training loss for the AE trained with the perceptual loss on non-
augmented data (red) and augmented data (green).
==PAGE:52==
42
6 Results
Figure 6.2 shows how the model trained with non-augmented data reconstructs
two images.
Intuitively, as mentioned in chapter 4, the more accurate the recon-
struction, the more information the embeddings retain. One can clearly see that the
reconstruction is very accurate around the optic disc and more approximate in the
rest of the image. Furthermore, some patterns are artificially generated (visible espe-
cially in the bottom right of the reconstruction), probably due to the VGG-16 feature
extractor.
Figure 6.2: Reconstruction (right) of an input image (left) resulting from the AE
trained with a perceptual loss on the non-augmented dataset.
Training time, including inference, with the augmented dataset was 52 hours,
while only 12 with the non-augmented one.
6.1.2
AE with DSSIM
The training behaviour of the AE using the DSSIM loss is very similar to its counter-
part trained using the perceptual loss, as shown in Figure 6.3, although on a different
scale. The best loss reached by this model is 0.0559 with the augmented dataset and
0.0565 with the non-augmented one. Training time is significantly lower, as the out-
put does not pass through additional layers - resulting in a training time of 9 hours
for the non-augmented dataset and 46 for the augmented one, including inference
time.
Reconstructions, as shown in Figure 6.4, are overall more accurate than the ones
shown in Figure 6.2 since there are no artifact patterns, the image is less blurred, and
the blood vessels farther from the optic disc are better defined. However, the bottom
and the right most part of the reconstruction present some defections, probably due
to padding and output padding in the convolutional layers.
==PAGE:53==
6.1 Training Performances
43
Figure 6.3: Training loss for the AE trained with the DSSIM loss on non-augmented
data (blue) and augmented data (green).
Figure 6.4: Reconstruction (right) of an input image (left) resulting from the AE
trained with a perceptual loss on the non-augmented dataset.
The
subject is the same as in Figure 6.2.
6.1.3
InceptionV3
Inception-V3 training performances are shown in Figure 6.5, where once again it
is possible to note how the model trained with the non-augmented data (grey line)
converges faster than the one trained with the augmented data (blue one), although
convergence is not fully reached. Training time for the former is 28 hours including
inference time, while for the latter 70 hours are needed. Inception-V3 is indeed a
much larger model than the AEs presented in previous sections. The final loss is
0.0077 for the model trained on augmented dataset, and 0.0151 for the one trained
on the non-augmented dataset. It is worth noting that, contrarily to the AEs, the
augmented dataset benefits the model’s performance.
==PAGE:54==
44
6 Results
Figure 6.5: Training loss for the InceptionV3 network trained with the triplet loss
on non-augmented data (grey) and augmented data (blue).
6.1.4
MoCo
MoCo’s learning, as opposed to the other models’, is not as smooth and rather shows
an erratic behaviour as shown in Figure 6.6. The model is trained only for 10 epochs
due to the slow training: 17 hours, including inference, for training the non-augmented
dataset and 78 hours for the augmented dataset. Overall, the loss using the augmented
dataset (bordeaux line) is always lower than the one using the non-augmented dataset
(grey line), although displaying a similar pattern.
Figure 6.6: Training loss for MoCo trained with the INFONce loss on non-
augmented data (grey) and augmented data (bordeaux).
6.2
Side Classification
To ensure that the models are capable of detecting basic information from the im-
ages, an additional experiment is performed in the form of ”side” classification. Five
thousand (5, 000) subjects are sampled from the non-augmented dataset randomly,
==PAGE:55==
6.2 Side Classification
45
and the right eyes’ scans are flipped horizontally once again, effectively restoring the
original images. This way this mini-dataset is composed of 5, 000 left eyes and 5, 000
right eyes. This data is then fed through an AE which is optimized according to the
perceptual loss. This architecture is chosen simply because outperformed the other
methods initially, and therefore was considered for such explorative task. Once the
embeddings are generated, the k-NN classifier with k = 5 using the side (left or right)
as target is employed. This is done to see whether obvious information such as the
side of the eye are retained in the embeddings. Results are presented in Table 6.1.
Accuracy
DB index
Prec.
Rec.
F1-score
0.9761
7.27
0.9803
0.9721
0.9762
Table 6.1: Results for Side classification using Non-augmented dataset.
Figure 6.7 shows the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve at different
thresholds, and the corresponding Area Under the Curve (AUC) indicating how good
the model is.
Figure 6.7: ROC Curve with AUC for Side classification using an AE trained with
the perceptual loss and 5, 000 subjects from the non-augmented dataset.
Furthermore, UMAP, a form of non-linear dimensionality reduction, is applied to
the embeddings to map them into a 2D space as shown in Figure 6.8. One can clearly
see two clusters (green at the top being the true positives and cyan at the bottom
==PAGE:56==
46
6 Results
being the true negatives) representing the two classes ”left” and ”right”. In between,
the violet and the blue dots are the misclassified inputs.
Figure 6.8: 5, 000 128-D embeddings after UMAP to map them in 2-D. Color coding
is done according to the k-NN classifier for side classification using an
AE trained with the perceptual loss and the non-augmented dataset.
==PAGE:57==
6.3 Sex Classification
47
6.3
Sex Classification
Similarly to the previous section, the embeddings are mapped down to a 2D represen-
tation using UMAP in order to see if any clear separation or clustering can be visually
seen. Figure 6.9 shows the transformed embeddings in 2D for every model using the
non-augmented dataset. Like above, green dots are true positive classifications, cyan
dots are true negatives, while blue dots and violet dots are false positive and false
negative classifications, respectively.
Figure 6.9: 2-D UMAP applied to the 128-D embeddings learnt by the four models
trained on the non-augmented dataset. Green and Cyan dots represent
the true positives and true negatives according to the k-NN classifier
on the sex classification task, whereas blue and violet dots are the false
positives and false negatives according to the same model. No clear
clustering can be seen in any of these maps.
No pattern can be seen in these plots, suggesting that the k-NN classifier fails
to assign the right class to the samples. However, this is likely a sign that UMAP
loses a lot of information when mapping the data from a 128-D representation to a
2-D one. Table 6.2 and Table 6.3, in fact, present the metrics of the k-NN classifer
for the non-augmented and the augmented dataset, respectively, and demonstrate
that classification is not random.
The comparison between the two tables shows
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Results
that training on the augmented dataset actually slightly degrades the performances
for all models except for MoCo’s accuracy (from 69.68% to 69.93%), which however
significantly worsen its DB index and do not surpass the metrics of the other models
with either dataset.
Model
Img.Res
Accuracy
DB index
Prec.
Rec.
F1-score
MoCo
224
0.6968
49.17
0.7782
0.7078
0.7413
Inception
299
0.7176
13.59
0.7748
0.7219
0.7474
AE Percep.
224
0.7184
32.22
0.7812
0.7324
0.7560
AE DSSIM
224
0.7239
28.59
0.8106
0.7266
0.7663
Table 6.2: Results for Sex prediction using Non-augmented dataset. In bold, the
best performing model in that particular metric.
Model
Img.Res.
Accuracy
DB index
Prec.
Rec.
F1-score
MoCo
224
0.6993
98.52
0.7779
0.7109
0.7429
Inception
299
0.7058
19.34
0.7750
0.7196
0.7463
AE Percep.
224
0.7167
32.74
0.7783
0.7316
0.7542
AE DSSIM
224
0.7227
26.78
0.8075
0.7265
0.7649
Table 6.3: Results for Sex prediction using Augmented dataset.
Focusing on the results of Table 6.2, the scores of the two AEs and the Inception
model, are not that far away from each other, with an accuracy ranging between
71.76% and 72.39%. The AE trained with a DSSIM loss is the best model in accuracy
(72.39%), precision (81.06%) and F1-score (76.63%). Its counterpart trained with a
perceptual loss surpasses it on the recall metric (73.24% against 72.66%), but overall
it is not as good. This is also consistent with the ROC and AUC presented in Figure
6.10, where the AE-DSSIM reaches an AUC of 0.79, against the AE-Perceptual’s 0.78,
the Inception’s 0.77 and MoCo 0.75.
Moreover, the precision scores (ranging between 77.48% and 81.06%) are higher
than the recall scores (between 70.78% and 73.24%) for every model, meaning that all
the models tend to have fewer false positives (actual females classified as males) than
false negatives (actual males classified as females) in relation to the true positives
(actual females classified as females). This can also be observed in Figure 6.11, where
”female” represent the positive class and ”male” the negative, and shows a summary
of the classification task. It is also worth noting that all the models are much less
accurate when considering only male subjects (for instance, the AE-DSSIM in the
top left corner has an accuracy of 61.43% when predicting only actual males), which
explains the difference between accuracy (72.39%) and precision (81.06%).
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Sex Classification
49
Figure 6.10: ROC Curves and AUC for Sex Prediction for all models using the non
augmented dataset. All of them manifest a similar behaviour, confirm-
ing how relatively similar the models are. The key differentiation here
is the AUC, which ultimately establish what models is the best one.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Results
Figure 6.11: Confusion Matrices for Sex Prediction for all models using the non
augmented dataset and aggregating the embeddings by subject.
==PAGE:61==
6.4 Hypertension Classification
51
6.4
Hypertension Classification
Just like in the previous section, in Figure 6.12 the 128-D embeddings learnt by the
models have been mapped down to a 2-D representation using UMAP. Color coding
is done similarly as in side and sex classification, and no pattern can be clearly be
seen due to the loss of information in the process of reducing the dimensionality.
Figure 6.12: 2-D UMAP applied to the 128-D embeddings learnt by the four models
trained on the non-augmented dataset as in Figure 6.9. Color coding
is the same but applied to the hypertension classification task. No
clear clustering can be seen in any of these maps either.
The results for the hypertension binary classification task, defined as having a
systolic blood pressure of at least 140 mmHg, are presented in Table 6.4 and Table
6.5.
MoCo is once again the least capable of retaining information among the models,
reaching an accuracy of 69.01% as opposed to the other models that all surpass the
70% threshold.
On the non-augmented dataset, Inception reaches an accuracy of
70.91% in this task, outscoring the AE trained with the perceptual loss (70.33%),
and also the AE-DSSIM (70.07%) that performed better at the sex prediction task.
All the other metrics are in favor of the Inception model as well, with the exception of
recall that is slightly favourable to the AE trained with the perceptual loss (72.07%
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Results
Model
Img.Res.
Accuracy
DB index
Prec.
Rec.
F1-score
MoCo
224
0.6901
56.43
0.7418
0.6986
0.7196
Inception
299
0.7091
10.86
0.7465
0.7207
0.7334
AE Percep.
224
0.7033
36.41
0.7126
0.7281
0.7203
AE DSSIM
224
0.7007
40.39
0.7282
0.7176
0.7229
Table 6.4: Results for HT prediction using Non-augmented dataset.
Model
Img. Res.
Accuracy
DB index
Prec.
Rec.
F1-score
MoCo
224
0.6954
26.26
0.7445
0.7041
0.7237
Inception
299
0.7046
12.58
0.7458
0.7152
0.7302
AE Percep.
224
0.7045
36.77
0.7194
0.7265
0.7229
AE DSSIM
224
0.7011
38.76
0.7181
0.7225
0.7203
Table 6.5: Results for HT prediction using Augmented dataset.
against 72.81%). However, like in the sex prediction task, the accuracy of all the
models are very similar to each other, ranging between 69.01% and 70.91%. Curiously,
data augmentation improves the performances of MoCo according to every considered
metric even though does not surpass the other models in any of them. Both the AEs
improve marginally their scores, contrarily to the sex prediction task where they
slightly degraded.
Also in the hypertension prediction tasks, precision (between 71.26% and 74.65%)
is generally higher than recall (between 69.86% and 72.81%) in almost every exper-
iment using the non-augmented dataset, meaning that all the models tend to have
more false negatives (subjects with hypertension being classified as not having hy-
pertension) than false positives (subjects with no hypertension classified as having
hypertension) compared to the true positives (subjects without hypertension classi-
fied correctly as not having hypertension). Once again, this behaviour can be also
seen in Figure 6.13.
However, the gap between the average precision and the average recall is smaller
compared to the ones found in the sex prediction task, indicating a more balanced
model across the classes. In fact, considering the Inception model confusion matrix in
the bottom left plot, if one was to consider the accuracy including only subjects with-
out hypertension (equals to the precision), the accuracy would be 74.65%. Including
only subjects with hypertension, the accuracy would be 66.59%.
==PAGE:63==
6.4 Hypertension Classification
53
Figure 6.13: Confusion Matrices (top two rows) and ROC Curves with AUCs (bot-
tom rows) resulting from the k-NN classifiers on hypertension (ht)
status for all models using the non augmented dataset and aggregat-
ing the embeddings by subject at the top. Just like in Figure 6.10, all
the ROC curves manifest a similar behaviour to confirm the similarity
across the models. Again, the key differentiation here is the AUC.
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Results
6.5
Multi level Hypertension Classification
According to the American Heart Association8, hypertension can be divided in differ-
ent stages depending on its severity, as it can be seen in Table 6.6.
SBP Range
Description
Severity level
SBP < 120
Normal
0
120 ≤SBP ≤129
Elevated Blood Pressure
1
130 ≤SBP ≤139
Hypertension Stage 1
2
140 ≤SBP ≤179
Hypertension Stage 2
3
SBP > 180
Hypertensive Crisis
4
Table 6.6: Hypertension stages according to the American Heart Association.
The same embeddings learnt by the Inception network, which has the best accu-
racy on the hypertension classification task, are used to further test how well they
cluster for more complex tasks.
The hypertension level distribution for the non-
augmented dataset is relatively unbalanced: 10,109 (19.26%) subjects have normal
blood pressure, 8,438 (16.08%) have elevated blood pressure, 9,584 (18.27%) are in
stage 1 hypertension, 22,660 (43.17%)are in stage 2 hypertension, and only 1,691
(3.22%) are in hypertensive crisis. For this purpose, a multi-class k-NN with k = 5
is again employed, and reaches an accuracy score of 54.26% and a DB index of 31.08.
Figure 6.14 shows a confusion matrix summarizing the predictions, whereas Figure
6.15 a 2-D UMAP of the embeddings color coded by the predicted severity level on
the right hand side (black being the least severe, red the hypertensive crisis).
Figure 6.14: Confusion Matrix for the multi-level hypertension (mlht) classification
task using the Inception’s embeddings aggregated by subject.
8Guideline for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure
in Adults
==PAGE:65==
6.6 Classifications with larger Embedding space
55
Figure 6.15: UMAP color coded by predicted severity level of hypertension status.
Red dots are subjects classified as the most severe, the black ones are
the subjects classified as the healthiest ones. The gradients in between
represents the subjects classified in between.
6.6
Classifications with larger Embedding space
For completeness, an additional experiment is performed to investigate whether a
larger space would retain more information in the latent representations, as shown by
Mandal et al. [27]. However, I perform the experiment using once again the Inception
network, as it is the one that on average performs better on the two classification tasks
presented in the thesis. The same experimental setup is used, only the embedding
space is enlarged from 128 to 512 dimensions. The non-augmented dataset is used and
the embeddings are once again aggregated by subject before using a k-NN classifier
with k = 5. The results are presented in Table 6.7 and Figure 6.16.
Task
Emd. Space
Accuracy
DB Index
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Sex class.
512
0.7055
15.37
0.7779
0.7181
0.7468
Sex class.
128
0.7176
13.59
0.7748
0.7219
0.7474
Hypert. class.
512
0.7071
12.64
0.7467
0.7181
0.7321
Hypert. class.
128
0.7091
10.86
0.7465
0.7207
0.7334
Table 6.7: Sex and hypertension classification using an Inception network and a
512-dimension embedding space compared against the results obtained
with the Inception network and a 128-dimension embedding space.
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Results
Figure 6.16: Confusion Matrices for classification and sex classification from 512-
dimension embeddings learnt using an Inception network.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER7
Discussion
7.1
Data & Pre-Processing
In machine learning, datasets are generally split into two or three sets: a training set
to learn the weights of the model; a validation set to ensure that the model is not
overfitting to the training set eventually ending up generalizing poorly; and optionally
a test set to make inference on and assess how well the model performs on new and
unseen data. Such split is typically carried out in a stratified fashion, i.e. by keeping
the same proportion of classes across the splits. However, as mentioned in chapter 3,
in this thesis I do not split the dataset since the aim is not to have a model able to
generalize to unseen data but to rather explore whether it is possible to compress the
image into a latent vector representation to interpret as a biological marker. Although
a stratified split could be applied to both learn the latent representation and generalize
to new data, such a split would be biased by the specific task (sex and hypertension
classification). Assuming a stratified split that would keep the same proportion of,
say, sexes across the two/three splits, there was no guarantee that the stratification
would apply to hypertension, too, or any other relevant disease for that matter, which
ultimately is the goal of the thesis.
Applying a valid multi-level stratification to
mitigate the risk of major imbalances, requires further exploration of the eye and
all the characteristics and conditions that can be found in it - which is out of scope
for this thesis, but constitutes a vast and crucial area to investigate in the future.
Furthermore, because of how unsupervised learning operates, the model is not exposed
to the sex and hypertension labels, as it is instead done in supervised learning, thus
arguably preventing explicit overfitting.
Remaining in the data pre-processing step of the pipeline, and specifically to the
RIQA, it is worth mentioning the chosen threshold to qualify a scan as ”good” or ”not
good”. As reported in chapter 3, a scan is discarded when its probability of being a
”reject” is equal to or higher than 33.3%. This threshold is arbitrarily chosen, and
although conservative, I believe it is a sensible value given the nature of the data.
Different thresholds and strategies could be worth investigating, as the current one
would, for instance, keep a scan whose ”good” score is just 2%, while the ”usable”
score is 65% and the ”reject” score is 33%. Although the effectiveness of such RIQA
filtering is not explored in this thesis directly, i.e. by training the models both with
and without the rejected images, members of the MIO team have replicated their
experiments (initially proposed in Tsangalidou et al.
[43]) removing the images I
==PAGE:68==
58
7 Discussion
flagged as ”bad”. The results show an improvement in both the sex classification
task (from 85.2% to 87.8%) and the hypertension classification task (from 67.9% to
68.8%), thus the benefit of removing the poor quality images is taken for granted.
7.2
Methods and Results
Relative to the results presented in chapter 6, one could clearly see how the augmen-
tation of the data does not produce any major benefit in the large majority of the
experiments. In some cases, it even deteriorates the performances, especially in the
sex classification task where the two AEs and the Inception network lose accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-score.
The only model to slightly benefit from the data
augmentation is MoCo, which marginally improves its accuracy but compromises the
quality of its embeddings (see DB index score).
It is overall quite clear that the
data augmentation technique confuses the models, at least for sex classification, and
causes a loss of quality in the clustering, as shown by the DB index, except for the
AE DSSIM which actually improves its own.
The same patterns, but with lower
magnitudes, are visible in Table 6.4 and Table 6.5 for the hypertension classification
task. This behaviour may be due to the weak augmentations implemented, which
only barely rotate the image and apply very small color jittering. However, the fact
that the scans are taken at a standardized angle does not offer large margins to change
the rotation approach: rotating randomly of, say, 45° or 90° instead of 15° to add
variability to the dataset would totally create an unrealistic dataset. On the other
hand, the hyper-parameters of the color jittering transformation may be tweaked
and engineered more, and additional relevant different augmentations may be worth
introducing.
The discrepancy between precision and recall highlighted in chapter 6 is an issue
that needs to be addressed and currently poses a limit to the applicability of the
models on a larger scale. Especially in the hypertension classification task, which is
the medically more relevant one out of the two considered in this thesis, the tendency
of having a high number of false negatives (subjects with hypertension being flagged
as not having hypertension) is an undesirable behaviour as it may cause the decision
to not treat subjects that actually need treatment. This is particularly important
when knowing that early diagnosis and intervention are key for some diseases. A
potential solution may be to plot a precision-recall curve and see what threshold best
mitigates the risk of labeling sick subjects as healthy.
The precision-recall discrepancy is even larger in the sex classification task, lead-
ing to thinking that all models have some sort of bias towards the majority classes
(females and non-hypertension). This realization, together with the knowledge that
the UK BioBank is a relatively healthy cohort of participants, gives reasons to think
that the same behaviour could potentially be seen for a different classification task,
possibly more life-threatening than hypertension like major adverse cardiovascular
events (MACE).
==PAGE:69==
7.2 Methods and Results
59
The k-NN using the embeddings learnt by MoCo is generally the worse performing
model across those considered in this thesis, which is expected when looking at Figure
6.6.
In fact, the training loss of MoCo for both augmented and non-augmented
dataset, display a very strange behaviour that repeats itself despite several attempts
at investigating the reasons behind it.
An analysis of the parameters and hyper-
parameters of the training components, such as the gradients, the optimizer, and the
learning rate, provided no hint concerning the root cause. However, the relatively
small distance from the accuracy of the other models (which ultimately has roots
in the incapacity of the model to extract valuable features regarding the minority
classes, as one can see from the confusion matrices in Figure 6.11 and Figure 6.13)
suggests that MoCo may have the potential to close the gap with the other models’
performances.
Overall, the Inception model is arguably the best performing model, as it outscores
the AE trained with a DSSIM loss on average on the two tasks. It also tends to
cluster the embeddings much better than all the other models while balancing better
precision, recall, and accuracy. In the multi-level hypertension experiment presented
in section 6.5, it can also be seen that the hypertension information is generally
retained at a multi-stage level but the same bias towards the majority class can be
seen as well. The accuracy reached (54.26%) may be considered relatively good given
the increased number of classes (from 2 to 5), and that a random classification would
have yielded an accuracy of just 20.0%, while a majority-class (hypertension stage
2) classification would have an accuracy of 43.17%. Overall, the imbalance of the
dataset seems to play a crucial role in the ability of the k-NN to discriminate across
classes. The limited number of subjects in hypertensive crisis causes the classifier to
correctly classify only 85 out of 1,691 of them (5.02%), which is certainly an issue in
such a delicate condition. Actual healthy subjects (severity levels 0 and 1) are better
classified (5, 525/10, 109 = 54.66% and 3, 382/8, 438 = 40.08%, respectively) but tend
to have many subjects marked as hypertensive cases in stage 2, which is however not
an ”adjacent” severity level: one could, in fact, consider the misclassification to one
of the adjacent stages as a less serious error. The misclassification is rather due to
the majority class bias.
Furthermore, the additional experiment of training the Inception model with a
larger embedding space (512D rather than 128D), suggests that there is no benefit in
doing so as the performances actually worsen in both sex classification (71.76% using
128-dimension embeddings, 70.55% using 512-dimension) and hypertension classifica-
tion (70.91% using 128-dimension embeddings, 70.71% using 512-dimension embed-
dings).
This may be due because the triplet loss simply tries to cluster together
images that are instances of a subject ignoring the similarities across subjects. A
possible explanation is that a smaller space somehow forces the network to implic-
itly project similar subjects closer to each other, while a larger space offers more
freedom to learn sparser vector representations. AEs, on the other hand, may give
better results when increasing the embedding space, as they are designed to retain
information to reconstruct the input. Intuitively, allowing a larger embedding space
would improve the reconstruction, implying that more information about the input
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Discussion
would be encoded in the embedding, as pointed out by Mandal et al. [27]. For these
reasons, it would be beneficial to explore how the models’ performances change when
increasing or decreasing the embedding space.
It is worth mentioning, however, that AEs’embeddings are learnt starting from
a more lossy input compared to the Inception’s since the former takes as input the
image at a resolution of 224x224 whereas the latter takes it at a resolution of 299x299.
Such a difference may be significant considering that the k-NN performances show
such little difference across the models. Valuable insights may be found by repeating
the AEs’ experiments and inputting the 299x299 dataset. In the interest of time, this
experiment could not be performed.
7.3
Comparison with MIO’s benchmarks
Overall, the results reported in chapter 6 indicate that the proposed unsupervised
approach surpasses the results obtained by the MIO’s supervised approach for the
hypertension binary classification (68.8% considering the new benchmark after RIQA
against the 70.91% of this thesis). Improvements are seen according to all metrics
reported by Tsangalidou et al. [43] for the ”fundus only” experiments. This is actually
surprising as the expectation is to have a supervised approach always outperforming
an unsupervised one, and such peculiarity requires further investigation.
However, such improvements are not repeated in the sex classification task, which
is significantly better using the supervised approach (87.8% against 72.39%). The
proposed additional experiments may help close the gap with it, and hopefully, further
improve the hypertension classification task.
The results obtained by Tsangalidou et al. [43] find that introducing the OCT
modality in conjunction with the fundus scans actually enhances the classification
performances by some margin. Sex classification accuracy went up to 91.0% from
85.2% (and to 92.2% from 87.8% using the RIQA analysis carried out in this thesis),
and hypertension classification accuracy to 68.5% from 67.9% (70.0% from 68.8%
using RIQA). Thus, it is natural to think that the result obtained in this thesis can be
further improved by including additional modalities, like OCT scans. Furthermore,
MIO’s two-modalities approach suggests that introducing the OCT scans, greatly
improves the recall score, which is definitely a concerning weakness of all the models
explored so far in the thesis.
7.4
Future Work
As highlighted throughout this chapter, although achieving good results in one of the
classification tasks, there is a lot of room for improvement. Quite obviously, the erratic
behaviour in MoCo’s training needs to be adjusted and, since it is widely considered
to be the state of the art in unsupervised learning, could be yielding outstanding
results. Still relative to the models’ architectures, it could be interesting to explore
==PAGE:71==
7.4 Future Work
61
the proposal made by Ataei et al. [2], that have combined the perceptual loss together
with the DSSIM loss, and showed how such a strategy benefited the learning process.
This would allow to combine the two AEs proposed into one. Additionally, one can
see, in some experiments, how the model’s weights have not fully converged to their
best solution, like in the case of Figure 6.5 on the non-augmented dataset. Tweaking
some hyperparameters and allowing the networks to train for a longer time may be key
to further increasing the amount of information encoded in the latent representations.
Finally, it is crucial to explore if, and how well, the learnt embeddings are capable
of encoding information regarding a much wider range of diseases, arguably harder
to diagnose and detect early by doctors and/or specialized machines. Subjects are
in fact very likely clustered according to complex features and characteristics as in
Landi et al. [22], thus requiring further and much more thorough analysis.
==PAGE:72==
62
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER8
Conclusion
In this thesis, several approaches for identifying biological markers in fundus scan
images using deep learning techniques are proposed. The approaches involve unsu-
pervised learning methods such as the Auto-Encoder, implemented with two different
losses, and self-supervised methods such as a pre-trained Inception-V3 network fine-
tuned with a triplet margin loss, as well as a Momentum Contrast trained with a
symmetrized contrastive loss. All the models learn a vector representation for each
individual in the UK BioBank dataset having good quality scans of both eyes, and
such representations are used as the training set for a k-NN classifier to predict the
sex and hypertension status of the subjects. These two classification tasks are then
compared against the current benchmarks obtained by MIO.
The results show that the proposed methods learn representations that achieve
a 72.39% accuracy on sex classification and 70.91% on hypertension classification
according to the best models. These accuracies are lower than the supervised bench-
marks in some cases (87.2% in sex classification, 68.7% in hypertension classification),
but still constitute a noteworthy accomplishment given the unsupervised nature of
the approach. Moreover, unsupervised learning has the potential to be more scal-
able and robust than supervised approaches, making it a valuable area for biological
marker identification in medical imaging.
One of the limitations of the study consists in not having investigated how well the
representations encode information about other diseases, especially those that are less
prominent in the cohort. Furthermore, the UK BioBank is a relatively healthy dataset,
and there seems to be a bias toward the majority groups that may be detrimental to
the applicability on large scale.
In conclusion, this thesis provides a valuable contribution to the field of biologi-
cal marker identification in medical imaging using unsupervised deep learning. The
proposed approaches have the potential to identify biomarkers in fundus scan images
with a high level of accuracy, sometimes even higher than supervised approaches.
==PAGE:74==
64
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Lamiaa Abdel-Hamid et al. “Retinal image quality assessment based on image
clarity and content.” In: Journal of Biomedical Optics 21.9 (2016), page 096007.
doi: 10.1117/1.JBO.21.9.096007. url: https://doi.org/10.1117/1.JBO.
21.9.096007.
[2]
Sepehr Ataei, Javad Alirezaie, and Paul Babyn. “Low Dose CT Denoising Using
Dilated Residual Learning with Perceptual Loss and Structural Dissimilarity.”
In: 2020 IEEE 5th Middle East and Africa Conference on Biomedical Engineer-
ing (MECBME). 2020, pages 1–5. doi: 10.1109/MECBME47393.2020.9265165.
[3]
T. Caliński and J. Harabasz. “A dendrite method for cluster analysis.” In: Com-
munications in Statistics 3.1 (1974), pages 1–27. doi: 10.1080/03610927408827101.
eprint: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/03610927408827101.
url: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03610927408827101.
[4]
Qiong Cao et al. VGGFace2: A dataset for recognising faces across pose and
age. 2017. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1710.08092. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1710.08092.
[5]
Ting Chen et al. A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of Visual Rep-
resentations. 2020. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2002.05709. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2002.05709.
[6]
Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. An Empirical Study of Training
Self-Supervised Vision Transformers. 2021. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2104.02057.
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.02057.
[7]
Xinlei Chen et al. Improved Baselines with Momentum Contrastive Learning.
2020. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2003.04297. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2003.04297.
[8]
David L. Davies and Donald W. Bouldin. “A Cluster Separation Measure.” In:
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence PAMI-1.2
(1979), pages 224–227. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.1979.4766909.
[9]
Jiankang Deng et al. “ArcFace: Additive Angular Margin Loss for Deep Face
Recognition.” In: IEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence (2021). doi: 10.1109/tpami.2021.3087709. url: https://doi.org/10.
1109%5C%2Ftpami.2021.3087709.
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
[10]
Huazhu Fu et al. “Evaluation of Retinal Image Quality Assessment Networks
in Different Color-Spaces.” In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer
International Publishing, 2019, pages 48–56. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-32239-
7_6. url: https://doi.org/10.1007%5C%2F978-3-030-32239-7_6.
[11]
Diane M. Gibson. “Diabetic Retinopathy and Age-Related Macular Degener-
ation in the U.S.” In: American Journal of Preventive Medicine 43.1 (2012),
pages 48–54. issn: 0749-3797. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.
2012.02.028. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0749379712002218.
[12]
Xavier Glorot and Y. Bengio. “Understanding the diﬀiculty of training deep
feedforward neural networks.” In: Journal of Machine Learning Research - Pro-
ceedings Track 9 (January 2010), pages 249–256.
[13]
A Grosso et al. “Hypertensive retinopathy revisited: some answers, more ques-
tions.” In: British Journal of Ophthalmology 89.12 (2005), pages 1646–1654. issn:
0007-1161. doi: 10.1136/bjo.2005.072546. eprint: https://bjo.bmj.com/
content/89/12/1646.full.pdf. url: https://bjo.bmj.com/content/89/
12/1646.
[14]
Jae-Ho Han. “Artificial Intelligence in Eye Disease: Recent Developments, Ap-
plications, and Surveys.” In: Diagnostics 12.8 (2022). issn: 2075-4418. doi: 10.
3390/diagnostics12081927. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4418/12/8/
1927.
[15]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2015. doi:
10.48550/ARXIV.1512.03385. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[16]
Kaiming He et al. Momentum Contrast for Unsupervised Visual Representation
Learning. 2019. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1911.05722. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1911.05722.
[17]
Paul V C Hough. Method and means for recognizing complex patterns. U.S.
Patent 3069654A, Dec. 1962.
[18]
Yeonwoo Jeong, Yu-Jin Hong, and Jae-Ho Han. “Review of Machine Learning
Applications Using Retinal Fundus Images.” In: Diagnostics 12.1 (2022). issn:
2075-4418. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics12010134. url: https://www.mdpi.
com/2075-4418/12/1/134.
[19]
Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual Losses for Real-
Time Style Transfer and Super-Resolution. 2016. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1603.
08155. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.08155.
[20]
Małgorzata Kozikowska et al. “Ocular manifestations in patients with systemic
sclerosis.” In: Reumatologia/Rheumatology 58 (December 2020), pages 401–406.
doi: 10.5114/reum.2020.102004.
[21]
Carson Lam et al. “Automated detection of diabetic retinopathy using deep
learning.” In: AMIA summits on translational science proceedings 2018 (2018),
page 147.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
67
[22]
Isotta Landi et al. “Deep representation learning of electronic health records
to unlock patient stratification at scale.” In: npj Digital Medicine 3 (December
2020). doi: 10.1038/s41746-020-0301-z.
[23]
Artur Loza et al. “Structural Similarity-Based Object Tracking in Video Se-
quences.” In: 2006 9th International Conference on Information Fusion. 2006,
pages 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ICIF.2006.301574.
[24]
T J MacGillivray et al. “Retinal imaging as a source of biomarkers for di-
agnosis, characterization and prognosis of chronic illness or long-term condi-
tions.” In: The British Journal of Radiology 87.1040 (2014). PMID: 24936979,
page 20130832. doi: 10.1259/bjr.20130832. eprint: https://doi.org/10.
1259/bjr.20130832. url: https://doi.org/10.1259/bjr.20130832.
[25]
Thomas J MacGillivray et al. “Suitability of UK Biobank Retinal Images for
Automatic Analysis of Morphometric Properties of the Vasculature.” In: PLOS
ONE 10.5 (May 2015), pages 1–10. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127914.
url: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0127914.
[26]
Ayesha Majeed et al. “Ophthalmic Biomarkers for Alzheimer’s Disease: A Re-
view.” In: Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 13 (2021).
[27]
Sayan Mandal, Alessandro A. Jammal, and Felipe A. Medeiros. Assessing glau-
coma in retinal fundus photographs using Deep Feature Consistent Variational
Autoencoders. 2021. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2110.01534. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2110.01534.
[28]
Shentong Mo, Zhun Sun, and Chao Li. Siamese Prototypical Contrastive Learn-
ing. 2022. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2208.08819. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2208.08819.
[29]
K. K. Mujeeb Rahman, Mohamed Nasor, and Ahmed Imran. “Automatic Screen-
ing of Diabetic Retinopathy Using Fundus Images and Machine Learning Algo-
rithms.” In: Diagnostics 12.9 (2022). issn: 2075-4418. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics12092262.
url: https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4418/12/9/2262.
[30]
Meindert Niemeijer, Michael D. Abràmoff, and Bram van Ginneken. “Image
structure clustering for image quality verification of color retina images in dia-
betic retinopathy screening.” In: Medical Image Analysis 10.6 (2006), pages 888–
898. issn: 1361-8415. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . media . 2006 .
09.006. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1361841506000739.
[31]
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation Learning with
Contrastive Predictive Coding. 2018. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1807.03748. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.03748.
[32]
Ryan Poplin et al. “Prediction of cardiovascular risk factors from retinal fundus
photographs via deep learning.” In: Nature Biomedical Engineering 2.3 (Febru-
ary 2018), pages 158–164. doi: 10.1038/s41551-018-0195-0. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1038%5C%2Fs41551-018-0195-0.
==PAGE:78==
68
Bibliography
[33]
W. M. Rand. “Objective Criteria for the Evaluation of Clustering Methods.” In:
Journal of the American Statistical Association 66 (1971), pages 846–850.
[34]
Tyler Rim et al. “Prediction of systemic biomarkers from retinal photographs:
development and validation of deep-learning algorithms.” In: The Lancet Digital
Health 2 (October 2020), e526–e536. doi: 10.1016/S2589-7500(20)30216-8.
[35]
Tyler Rim et al. “Prediction of systemic biomarkers from retinal photographs:
development and validation of deep-learning algorithms.” In: The Lancet Digital
Health 2 (October 2020), e526–e536. doi: 10.1016/S2589-7500(20)30216-8.
[36]
Peter J. Rousseeuw. “Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and
validation of cluster analysis.” In: Journal of Computational and Applied Math-
ematics 20 (1987), pages 53–65. issn: 0377-0427. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0377- 0427(87)90125- 7. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0377042787901257.
[37]
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. “Learning rep-
resentations by back-propagating errors.” In: nature 323.6088 (1986), pages 533–
536.
[38]
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. “FaceNet: A unified
embedding for face recognition and clustering.” In: 2015 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition CVPR. IEEE, 2015. doi: 10.1109/
cvpr.2015.7298682. url: https://doi.org/10.1109%5C%2Fcvpr.2015.
7298682.
[39]
Feng Shao et al. “Automated Quality Assessment of Fundus Images via Anal-
ysis of Illumination, Naturalness and Structure.” In: IEEE Access 6 (2018),
pages 806–817. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2776126.
[40]
Chuying Shi et al. “Assessment of image quality on color fundus retinal images
using the automatic retinal image analysis.” In: Scientific Reports 12 (June
2022). doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-13919-2.
[41]
Christian Szegedy et al. “Going deeper with convolutions.” In: 2015 IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2015, pages 1–9.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298594.
[42]
Christian Szegedy et al. Rethinking the Inception Architecture for Computer
Vision. 2015. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1512.00567. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1512.00567.
[43]
Zoi Tsangalidou et al. “Multimodal deep transfer learning for the analysis of op-
tical coherence tomography scans and retinal fundus photographs.” In: NeurIPS
2022 Workshop on Learning Meaningful Representations of Life. 2022.
[44]
Zhou Wang et al. “Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural
similarity.” In: IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 13.4 (2004), pages 600–
612. doi: 10.1109/TIP.2003.819861.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
69
[45]
Ruoqi Wei and Ausif Mahmood. “Recent Advances in Variational Autoencoders
With Representation Learning for Biomedical Informatics: A Survey.” In: IEEE
Access 9 (2021), pages 4939–4956. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3048309.
[46]
Zhichao Wu et al. “Predicting Progression of Age-Related Macular Degenera-
tion Using Optical Coherence Tomography and Fundus Photography.” In: Oph-
thalmology Retina 5 (June 2020). doi: 10.1016/j.oret.2020.06.026.
[47]
Ziqian Xie et al. “iGWAS: image-based genome-wide association of self-supervised
deep phenotyping of human medical images.” In: medRxiv (2022). doi: 10.1101/
2022.05.26.22275626. eprint: https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/
2022/05/26/2022.05.26.22275626.full.pdf. url: https://www.medrxiv.
org/content/early/2022/05/26/2022.05.26.22275626.
[48]
Kele Xu, Dawei Feng, and Haibo Mi. “Deep Convolutional Neural Network-
Based Early Automated Detection of Diabetic Retinopathy Using Fundus Im-
age.” In: Molecules 22 (November 2017), page 2054. doi: 10.3390/molecules22122054.
[49]
FengLi Yu et al. “Image quality classification for DR screening using deep
learning.” In: 2017 39th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engi-
neering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC). 2017, pages 664–667. doi:
10.1109/EMBC.2017.8036912.
[50]
Gabriel Tozatto Zago et al. “Retinal image quality assessment using deep learn-
ing.” In: Computers in Biology and Medicine 103 (2018), pages 64–70. issn: 0010-
4825. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2018.10.004. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001048251830297X.
[51]
Li Zhang et al. “Prediction of hypertension, hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia
from retinal fundus photographs via deep learning: A cross-sectional study of
chronic diseases in central China.” In: PloS one 15.5 (2020), e0233166.
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
Appendix
A
Model
Img.Res
Aggr.
Accuracy
DB index
Prec.
Rec.
F1-score
MoCo
224
No
0.6964
61.99
0.7758
0.7082
0.7405
Inception
299
No
0.7182
13.82
0.7802
0.7326
0.7557
AE Percep.
224
No
0.7098
43.52
0.7724
0.7256
0.7483
AE DSSIM
224
No
0.7176
36.98
0.8093
0.7198
0.7619
Table 1: Results for Sex prediction using Non-augmented dataset without the ag-
gregation strategy.
Model
Img.Res.
Aggr.
Accuracy
DB index
Prec.
Rec.
F1-score
MoCo
224
No
0.6979
113.68
0.7736
0.7108
0.7409
Inception
299
No
0.7035
19.99
0.7711
0.7186
0.7439
AE Percep.
224
No
0.7080
46.58
0.769
0.7248
0.7462
AE DSSIM
224
No
0.7159
34.50
0.8022
0.7206
0.7592
Table 2: Results for Sex prediction using Augmented dataset without the aggrega-
tion strategy.
Model
Img.Res.
Aggr.
Accuracy
DB index
Prec.
Rec.
F1-score
MoCo
224
No
0.6885
71.14
0.7317
0.7005
0.7158
Inception
299
No
0.7201
11.05
0.7573
0.7305
0.7437
AE Percep.
224
No
0.6978
49.18
0.7083
0.7225
0.7153
AE DSSIM
224
No
0.7040
52.22
0.7355
0.7188
0.7271
Table 3: Results for HT prediction using Non-augmented dataset without aggrega-
tion strategy.
==PAGE:82==
72
Appendix
Model
Img. Res.
Aggr.
Accuracy
DB index
Prec.
Rec.
F1-score
MoCo
224
No
0.6909
30.31
0.7395
0.7006
0.7195
Inception
299
No
0.7094
13.00
0.7513
0.7192
0.7349
AE Percep.
224
No
0.6991
52.32
0.7086
0.7241
0.7163
AE DSSIM
224
No
0.7013
49.92
0.7285
0.7182
0.7233
Table 4: Results for HT prediction using Augmented dataset without aggregation
strategy.
Figure 1: Confusion Matrices for sex classification without aggregation strategy.
Embeddings trained on non-augmented dataset.
==PAGE:83==
A
73
Figure 2: ROC Curves and AUC for sex classification without aggregation strategy.
Embeddings trained on non-augmented dataset.
==PAGE:84==
74
Appendix
Figure 3: Confusion Matrices for hypertension (ht) classification without aggrega-
tion strategy. Embeddings trained on non-augmented dataset.
==PAGE:85==
A
75
Figure 4: ROC Curve and AUC for hypertension classification using non-augmented
dataset, without aggregation strategy.
==PAGE:86==
76
Appendix
Figure 5: Confusion Matrices for sex classification without aggregation strategy.
Embeddings trained on augmented dataset.
==PAGE:87==
A
77
Figure 6: ROC Curves and AUC for sex classification without aggregation strategy.
Embeddings trained on augmented dataset.
==PAGE:88==
78
Appendix
Figure 7: Confusion Matrices for hypertension (ht) classification without aggrega-
tion strategy. Embeddings trained on augmented dataset.
==PAGE:89==
A
79
Figure 8: ROC Curve and AUC for hypertension classification using augmented
dataset, without aggregation strategy.
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
Acronyms
Adam
Adaptive Moment Estimation
AE
Auto Encoder
AMD
Age-related Macular Degeneration
AUC
Area Under the Curve
AWS
Amazon Web Services
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
DB
Davies-Bouldin
DFC-Net Deep Feature Consistent Network
DR
Diabetic Retinopathy
DSSIM Dissimilar SSIM
EC2
Elastic Cloud Computing
GP
General Practitioner
HPC
High Performance Computing
HSV
Hue, Saturation, Value
iGWAS image-base Genome-Wise Association Study
k-NN
k-Nearest Neighbors
MIO
Methods, Innovation & Outreach
mlht
Multi-level hypertension
MoCo
Momentum Contrast
MSE
Mean Squared Error
OCT
Optical Coherence Tomography
==PAGE:92==
82
Acronyms
PSNR
Peak Signal to Noise Ratio
ReLU
Rectified Linear Unit
ResNet Residual Network
RIQA
Retinal Images Quality Assessment
ROC
Receiving Operating Characteristics
SSIM
Structural Similarity Index Measure
SVM
Support Vector Machine
UMAP Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
VAE
Variational Auto Encoder
==PAGE:93==
==PAGE:94==
