==PAGE:1==
Master of Science in Engineering
Master Thesis in Management Engineering
Utilizing Actigraphy-Estimated Sleep Data
for Mental Health Analysis
Author: Shuangling Yang
Student ID: s210306
Supervisor: Assoc Prof.Line H.Clemmensen (DTU Compute)
Co-supervisor: Emilie Pattyn (KU Leuven)
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Sleep is an essential part of our daily lives and profoundly impacts our physical and
mental health. In recent years, the use of wearable devices to detect sleep has become
increasingly popular due to its low cost and longitudinal nature.
This thesis aims
to optimize and validate the algorithm developed by IMEC for sleep detection using
actigraphy data. The optimized algorithm will be applied to the SWEET dataset, which
includes actigraphy, physiological, demographic, and EMA data. Our analysis aims to
explore the algorithm’s effectiveness in detecting sleep, investigate the internal and
external factors that affect sleep quality, and examine how sleep affects the relationship
between mental health and physiological data. On average, the operational efficiency of
the sleep algorithm improved by a factor of 7, while there was only a slight improvement
in accuracy, according to the results. Poor sleep was associated with high levels of
depression and stress, and there was a significant difference between the good sleep
group and the poor sleep group in terms of depression levels and stress levels(The p-
values of the Wilcox test for depression level and stress level were 1.07e-08 and 6.457e-12,
respectively). In addition, a random forest model using sleep to predict stress levels
achieved an accuracy of 0.75, with sleep holding high importance. Overall, this paper
provides an overview of sleep, actigraphy, and wearables and discusses the potential
implications of our findings for future mental health research and clinical practice.
Key words: actigraphy, wearable devices, sleep detection algorithm, stress, and
mental health
ii
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
2
2.1
Sleep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1
Importance of sleep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.2
Mental health and sleep
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.3
Sleep and Covid-19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Sleep monitoring using wearable devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.1
Actigraphy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.2
Multimodal sensing technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Sleep monitoring using traditional methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3.1
Polysomnography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3.2
Self-reported sleep diary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Materials and Methods
7
3.1
Imec’s sleep detection algorithm (SDA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
SWEET dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.1
Physiological dataset through wearables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.2
Demographic dataset through questionnaire and self-rated assessment
11
3.2.3
Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Modification of Imec’s sleep detection algorithm (SDA) . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Sleep algorithm validation on SWEET dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Statistical analysis and ML analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.6
What are the internal and external factors affecting sleep quality? . . . . . .
18
3.7
How does sleep affect the relationship between stress and physiology? . . . .
19
3.7.1
Statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.7.2
Application of Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Results
21
4.1
Sleep detection algorithm modification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.1
Results after applying gap-filling function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.2
Optimization of feature calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Apply sleep detection algorithm on SWEET dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Validation of the modified algorithm using sleep diary . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4.1
The relationship between PSQI and DASS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4.2
What are the internal and external factors affecting sleep quality? . .
28
4.4.3
How does sleep affect the relationship between stress and physiology?
32
4.4.4
Application of Random Forest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Discussion
38
5.1
Optimization of the sleep detection algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
iii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
5.2
Validation of the sleep detection algorithm on the SWEET dataset . . . . . .
38
5.3
The relationship between PSQI and DASS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4
What are the internal and external factors affecting sleep quality? . . . . . .
39
5.5
How does sleep affect the relationship between stress and physiology? . . . .
40
6
Conclusion
42
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
II
References
III
iv
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
Sleep is an important aspect of our daily lives and significantly impacts our physical and
mental health. Lack of sleep or poor sleep quality is associated with various physical and
mental health problems, such as cardiovascular disease, obesity, diabetes, and depression.
With the development of the times, dramatic changes in people’s lifestyles, and the pandemic
of Covid-19 disease, the pace of people’s lives has become disturbed, leading to sleep disorders
becoming more prevalent in modern society. Therefore, developing accurate and reliable
methods to measure sleep quality is essential for identifying and treating sleep disorders.
Wearable devices that track sleep patterns have become increasingly popular in recent
years, as they offer a convenient and non-invasive way to monitor sleep quality.
These
devices are equipped with various sensors, such as accelerometers and heart rate monitors,
that collect data on body movement, heart rate, and other physiological signals during
sleep. One of the most common methods for analyzing sleep data from wearable devices is
actigraphy. Actigraphy is a well-established wearable device method to collect and analyze
sleep data. It involves recording movement patterns during sleep and can be used to identify
periods of sleep and wakefulness.
Algorithms for detecting sleep using actigraphy data
have been developed and applied in various studies, including detecting sleep disorders and
assessing sleep quality.
In this master thesis, the goal is to improve and validate an algorithm for detecting
sleep using actigraphy data, which IMEC previously developed. We will use the SWEET
dataset, which was collected as part of the Workplace Stress Study, and includes behavioral
data, physiological data, demographic data, and stress level data from 1151 participants.
Specifically, we aim to explore whether the optimized algorithm effectively detects sleep from
activity, obtains sleep parameters, and uses the sleep quality (detected by the algorithm)
and demographic data (collected by the questionnaires) to investigate internal and external
factors affecting sleep quality. Finally, we will use the data on sleep quality and stress levels
detected by the algorithm to explore the relationship between how sleep affects mental health
and physiological data.
Overall, this thesis will provide an overview of sleep, actigraphy, and wearables and
discuss an algorithm for detecting sleep using actigraphy data. We will also explore the
relationship between sleep and mental health and discuss the potential implications of our
findings for future research and clinical practice.
Page 1 of 42
==PAGE:6==
2
Literature review
2.1
Sleep
2.1.1
Importance of sleep
Adequate sleep plays an essential role in maintaining individuals’ overall health and well-
being as it contributes to physical recovery, emotional stability, enhanced immunity, weight
maintenance, and cognitive processes such as behavior and memory consolidation [1–11].
Sleep deprivation is linked to a higher risk of chronic illnesses such as obesity and diabetes,
and psychiatric disorders. It also has a detrimental impact on cognitive function and per-
formance, affecting mental flexibility, psychomotor and cognitive speed, vigilance, executive
attention, and higher cognitive abilities such as abstract concept formation, memory, judg-
ment, and decision-making. [2–5]. Insufficient sleep has resulted in higher unemployment
rates, reduced productivity, increased accidents and injuries, and healthcare costs, which
creates economic burdens on the society [12–15].
Sleep is divided into two categories: non-rapid-eye-movement (NREM) and rapid-eye-
movement (REM) sleep. NREM sleep is further broken down into three phases, starting
from the lightest phase N1 and ending with the deepest stage N3, known as slow-wave sleep.
The brain activity during NREM sleep slows down significantly, making it difficult to wake
a person up. REM sleep is characterized by quick eye movements, increased brain activity,
and reduced muscle tone. During this stage, dreaming is most likely to occur. NREM and
REM sleep alternate every 90 minutes, with an average of 4-6 cycles of both throughout the
night. The frequency and depth of these sleep cycles and the body’s reactions to them are
useful in diagnosing a patient’s sleep disorders [16].
2.1.2
Mental health and sleep
Sleep deprivation has a larger effect on an individual’s mental health compared to his
cognitive function and performance [6]. Mental health effects include depression, anxiety,
and other disorders. Furthermore, people with trouble sleeping are more likely to suffer from
mental health issues [7]. Moreover, functional MRI research has indicated that insomnia
significantly affects the consolidation of emotional memories (positive and negative) and
emotion regulation in patients with depression [8] [9]. When sleep is disrupted, recollection
of negative memories or stimuli triggers greater amygdala and occipital area responses, while
the responses for neutral and positive memories decreased significantly [9].
2.1.3
Sleep and Covid-19
The outbreak of COVID-19 began in 2019 and has since affected millions of people
worldwide. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), as of September 2022, there
were over 600 million confirmed cases and over 6 million related deaths [17]. Multiple studies
and surveys have shown that a significant portion of the global population has experienced
sleep difficulties due to the pandemic.
This has been attributed to increased stress and
anxiety, as well as a change in daily habits and sleep routines, which have led to a rise in
Page 2 of 42
==PAGE:7==
2.2
Sleep monitoring using wearable devices
the incidence of insomnia and mental health problem [18]. Additionally, enforcing epidemic
precautions, like stay-at-home orders, quarantines, and lock-downs, has resulted in greater
disruptions in work, daily activities, and sleep patterns [19–21].
These disruptions have
created higher stress, fear, and uncertainty levels during the epidemic.
2.2
Sleep monitoring using wearable devices
Wearable devices that gather movement-based data for sleep detection have gained
significant attention among sleep researchers and clinicians due to their cost-effectiveness
compared to alternative methods like electroencephalographic (EEG), which provides op-
portunities for extensive long-term sleep studies [22]. Traditional wearables usually collect
information only containing one signal, often based on an accelerometry and sampled at high
frequency [23]. As technology evolves, newer wearables incorporate multiple sensors, which
allow the collection of multiple data sources, such as heart rate, skin temperature, and skin
conductance response. Multi-sensor technology and optimized algorithms provide a more
comprehensive and accurate evaluation of sleep patterns and quality. At the same time, a
single-sensor method is a more straightforward and cost-effective option. Both can be used
to estimate sleep parameters such as total sleep time, sleep efficiency, and wake after sleep
onset, providing additional scoping for sleep research [24].
2.2.1
Actigraphy
Actigraphy is a non-invasive technique for evaluating an individual’s sleep and wakes
patterns. It uses accelerometers to gather data on a person’s movements, which are then
analyzed through mathematical algorithms to determine sleep parameters [25]. Accelerome-
ters can be inserted in devices worn on the wrist, waist, or ankle for relatively inconspicuous
monitoring that can range from days to weeks [25]. Figure 1 shows an example of such a
device, which is usually comfortable and convenient to wear, making them ideal to use in
daily life [26]. Actigraphy enables individuals to undergo sleep monitoring in their familiar
environment, contributing to a more accurate representation of their typical sleep patterns.
Additionally, it significantly reduces the cost of sleep monitoring compared to traditional
polysomnography (PSG), which costs an average of $2,000 per night as it requires special-
ized equipment and involves the expertise of trained personnel [27,28].
Figure 1: Actigraphy Sleep Monitoring
Page 3 of 42
==PAGE:8==
2.3
Sleep monitoring using traditional methods
The validity of actigraphy for the sleep-wake classification has been evaluated in several
studies over the past four decades [25, 27, 29–33].
Mullaney et al.
(1980) demonstrated
that actigraphy could be scored manually to distinguish sleep from wakefulness with an
accuracy approaching that of EEG scoring and proposed the possibility of automatic scoring
of actigraphy data [27]. This was developed and validated by Webster et al. (1982), who
established the standard for actigraphy-based sleep-wake classification models by creating
an automated scoring algorithm with an agreement rate of over 90% between actigraphy and
PSG recordings [26]. Cole et al. (1992) sought to improve Webster’s findings by applying
the principles to newer commercial micro-computerized actigraphic devices and found an
accuracy rate of 88.25% compared to PSG [34]. Sadeh et al. (2011) further developed a new
means of automatic scoring and addressed the lack of pediatric and sleep-disordered patients
in previous validation efforts, achieving an accuracy rate of over 91% between actigraphy
and PSG scoring [33].
2.2.2
Multimodal sensing technology
More recently, multisensory devices such as Fitbit trackers, Apple Watches, and Oura
Rings have become popular [35]. These devices track physical activity and record aspects of
cardiac function, including heart rate and heart rate variability. This provides the potential
for greater accuracy and specificity in sleep-wake estimation and multi-stage sleep classifi-
cation. Snyder et al. (1964) found that heart rate (HR) decreases gradually throughout the
night, specifically as an individual enters deeper stages of sleep. This trend is consistent
across individuals and can be used to improve the accuracy of sleep-wake classification by
scoring algorithms [36]. Additionally, heart rate variability (HRV) has been used to improve
the accuracy of sleep classification by using frequency-domain analysis techniques. HRV is
related to the parasympathetic and sympathetic control of the autonomic nervous system,
and specific frequency bands offer insight into the different sleep stages, which have been
shown to be well-correlated with various sleep stages [37,38].
2.3
Sleep monitoring using traditional methods
2.3.1
Polysomnography
Polysomnography is a traditional method used to monitor physiological parameters
during sleep and is considered the most accurate method to study sleep. This is achieved
through the use of sensors that are positioned in specific locations (Figure 2) and allows
the recording of electroencephalography (EEG), electrooculogram (EOG), electromyogram
(EMG), airflow, and breathing patterns [16].
Page 4 of 42
==PAGE:9==
2.3
Sleep monitoring using traditional methods
Figure 2: The location of various electrodes of the PSG are used to monitor sleeping
The collected physiological signals are used to detect sleep stages. Figure 3 shows the
physiological recording of EEG, EOG, and chin EMG during wakefulness and sleep stage N2
(commonly considered real sleep onset) [16]. The EEG recordings are analyzed to determine
the stage of sleep based on brain activity patterns. For instance, during rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep, brain activity is similar to that seen during wakefulness, whereas, during
non-REM sleep, brain activity slows down and becomes more synchronized.
The EOG
recordings provide information about eye movements, which are unique to each sleep stage.
During REM sleep, the eyes move rapidly in different directions, while during non-REM
sleep, eye movements are minimal. The EMG recordings measure muscle activity, which
decreases during non-REM sleep and increases during REM sleep. The sensors that monitor
airflow and breathing patterns help identify sleep-related breathing disorders, such as sleep
apnea, by tracking changes in breathing during sleep. By analyzing the physiological data,
healthcare professionals can determine a person’s sleep stage and use that information to
diagnose sleep disorders and develop effective treatment plans.
However, using advanced and precise polysomnography (PSG) technology also has sev-
eral drawbacks.
First, the participants must wear multiple sensors and spend the night
sleeping in a laboratory with professional monitoring [39]. This can result in an unfamiliar
and uncomfortable environment for the participant, causing sleep disruptions and potentially
leading to unrepresentable sleep patterns and diagrams. Additionally, the cost of PSG is rel-
atively high as it requires specialized equipment, supplies, and trained personnel to perform
and interpret the study.
Page 5 of 42
==PAGE:10==
2.3
Sleep monitoring using traditional methods
Figure 3: 30-s Epoch consisting of the parameters of staging sleep (EEG, EOG, and chin
EMG) showing under wakefulness and sleep onset
2.3.2
Self-reported sleep diary
A sleep diary is a written or digital record of sleep-related information. A sleep diary
typically contains the following detailed information: the bedtime and the lights-off time, the
wake-up time, how long it took to fall asleep, the number and duration of sleep interruptions,
the number and duration of naps during the day, the perceived sleep quality, the intake of
alcohol, caffeine, and tobacco, information regarding intake of medication and exercise. The
diary can also help people to identify sleep interruptions and other factors that may impact
their sleep quality. Detailed information about habits that affect sleep can show patterns
that help explain sleep problems. Sleep logs and actigraphy results are typically similar.
Still, a sleep diary is simpler and less expensive, while actigraphy provides more objective
data and prevents participants from forgetting and recording inaccurately.
Page 6 of 42
==PAGE:11==
3
Materials and Methods
The first section of this chapter outlines the dataset employed in the master thesis, as
well as the steps taken for data preprocessing. This includes cleaning, feature engineering,
handling of missing values and outliers, and exploratory data analysis. The next section
delves into the logic behind IMEC’s original sleep detection algorithm. The interpretation
of the algorithm’s final output, i.e., sleep parameters, and its use in stress analysis is also
discussed. Finally, the chapter outlines the statistical tests and machine learning methods
used to analyze the data.
3.1
Imec’s sleep detection algorithm (SDA)
Imec’s sleep detection algorithm (SDA) integrates validated sleep algorithms previously
presented in academic literature. These algorithms include the Heuristic algorithm for de-
tecting the sleep period time (SPT-window), as proposed by Van Hees et al. [40] in 2018,
Webster’s algorithm [26] in 1982, and updates made by Cole et al. [34] in 1992. The inte-
grated function flow is shown in figure 4.
The procedure starts with obtaining the accelerometer data from the x, y, and z axes,
which is then inputted into "feature calculation". This involves computing the median of the
data in each direction over a 5-second interval and using formula 1 to calculate the z-angle.
The ’Seqdiff_Z’ feature is then calculated as the difference between consecutive elements of
the z-angle (i.e., Seqdiff_Z(i) = anglez(i) −anglez(i −1)) and is utilized in subsequent
steps. During the "initial score" stage, if the maximum Seqdiff_Z within a minute exceeds 5,
the corresponding minute’s ACC is assigned a value of 0, indicating the individual is awake.
In contrast, if the maximum Seqdiff_Z is less than 5, the ACC for that minute is assigned
a value of 1, indicating the individual is asleep.
anglez = (tan−1
az
a2
x + a2
y
) ∗180/π
(1)
Figure 4: Original Sleep algorithm function flow
Page 7 of 42
==PAGE:12==
3.1
Imec’s sleep detection algorithm (SDA)
The SPT-Window algorithm is a heuristic approach used to determine the sleep period
time. It follows a sequence of steps as shown in Figure 5. Step 1 and 2, calculate z-angle.
Steps 3 to 5, find the median of the difference between each set of 5-second z-angle averages
over a 5-minute period. This makes the algorithm work the same way regardless of how the
accelerometer is positioned on the wrist and captures changes over time. in steps 6 and 7,
the tenth percentile of the result obtained in step 5 for each day (noon to noon) is multiplied
by 15 to identify segments with a high or low frequency of posture changes, which is defined
as a threshold. Only the periods where the outcome from step 5 is below this threshold and
is sustained for a minimum of 30 minutes are retained. Then, the intervals between these
periods are examined. Step 8 assesses the duration of the intervals between the observation
blocks identified in step 7 whether it is less than 60 minutes. If the condition is met, these
gaps are included as part of the identified blocks. Finally, the longest period in a half day is
considered the main sleep period (step 9). This is the time between when the user goes to
sleep (start of the period) and the time when the user wakes up (end of the period).
Figure 5: Original sleep algorithm function flow
Webster et al. and Cole et al. conducted research on detecting sleep/wake cycles using
wrist actigraphy data collected in 1-minute intervals. Webster et al. [26] proposed a method
using equation 2, which classifies the subject as awake if the sum of 2-second activity values
is greater than or equal to 1.
Cole et al. [34] aimed to replicate and expand Webster’s
work and used a different equation (equation 3) to calculate the sleep/wake status with an
accuracy of 87.05% after finding the optimal parameters (equation 4).
D = 0.025[0.15 ∗T(i −4) + 0.15 ∗T(i −3) + 0.15 ∗T(i −2) + 0.08 ∗T(i −1)
+ 0.21 ∗T(i) + 0.12 ∗T(i + 1) + 0.13 ∗T(i + 2)]
(2)
In equation 2, T(i) represents the sum of the 2-second activity values of the wrist
actigraphy recorder in one minute at time i. If D >= 1, it is classified as awake, otherwise
it is classified as sleep.
Page 8 of 42
==PAGE:13==
3.2
SWEET dataset
D = P[W−4 ∗A−4 + W−3 ∗A−3 + W−2 ∗A−2 + W−1 ∗A−1
+ W0 ∗A0 + W+1 ∗A+1 + W+2 ∗A+2]
(3)
In equation 3, P is a scaling factor, W0, W−1, W+1, and A0, A−1, A+1 represent the
weights and activity scores for the present, previous, and next minutes.
D = 0.00001[404 ∗A−4 + 598 ∗A−3 + 326 ∗A−2
+ 441 ∗A−1 + 1408 ∗A0 + 508 ∗A+1 + 350 ∗A+2]
(4)
Webster et al. [26] also made some correction rules to Cole’s method to address mis-
classifications, which include the following: (a) if at least 4 minutes are recorded as wake,
then the next 1 minute recorded as sleep is reclassified as wake; (b) if at least 10 minutes
are recorded as wake, then the next 3 minutes recorded as sleep are reclassified as wake; (c)
if at least 15 minutes are recorded as wake, then the next 4 minutes recorded as sleep are
reclassified as wake; (d) if 6 minutes or less of sleep are surrounded by a minimum of 10
minutes of wake, both before and after, they are reclassified as wake; (e) if 10 minutes or less
of sleep are surrounded by a minimum of 20 minutes of wake, both before and after, they
are reclassified as wake. Some empirical rules were implemented in addition to webster rules
(c): if the first night of sleep contains less then 15 min of wake data before sleep, relabel the
first 4 minutes of sleep.
The last step "sleep parameters using ESM" combined the predicted sleep and EMA to
determine the following sleep parameters: Total Sleep Time (TST), Wake After Sleep Onset
(WASO), and Sleep Efficiency (SE).
3.2
SWEET dataset
The SWEET dataset (Stress in the Work EnvironmEnT) used in the study was collected
from 1002 office workers who were recruited in 11 technology-oriented, banking and public
sector firms. Office workers were monitored in a free-living environment for five consecutive
days (from Thursday to Monday). There are three sets of data in this SWEET dataset:
physiological data collected by wearables, demographic data collected by questionnaire and
self-rated assessment, and EMAs (Ecological Momentary Assessment) collected by the mo-
mentary assessment on a smartphone. Participants were asked to wear wearable devices on
the wrist (using the Minifornax sensor) and chest (using the Stingray sensor) during the
day to collect activity and physiological data automatically and they needed to remove the
devices when exercising and taking a bath (Figure 6). Furthermore, participants were re-
quired to complete the questionnaires to provide personal data and self-rated assessments,
including DASS and PSQI assessments, to provide baseline psychological and physiological
information. Lastly, the hourly stress levels and daily sleep diary were recorded by EMA.
Page 9 of 42
==PAGE:14==
3.2
SWEET dataset
3.2.1
Physiological dataset through wearables
The accelerometer data from Minifornax sensor is collected on the wrist and that from
the Stingray sensor is collected on the chest. The Minifornax sensor includes acceleration
(ACC), galvanic skin response (GSR) and skin temperature (ST) while the Stingray sensor
includes acceleration (ACC) and electrocardiogram (ECG). In the study, ACC from Mini-
fornax was chosen as the data source because accuracy of using wrist actigraphy (ACC) to
predict sleep has been validated in previous studies [24,26,34,40,40,41].
Figure 6: Wrist and chest-worn wearable devices
The acceleration (ACC) data of the wearable device was collected at a frequency of
32Hz in three-axis direction. The features were calculated as the median value within a
5-second window with no overlap. Of the 906 users who participated in the study, only 176
users (17%) had at least one night of ACC data and could be used for sleep detection. A
total of 467 days of ACC during the night were recorded by 176 users, with an average of 2.6
nighttime ACCs per user. 53 users recorded only one night, while 103 users recorded more
than two nights (3-5). Figure 7 shows the ACC data among five days of user 0097 for the x,
y, and z axes, represented by blue, orange, and green lines, respectively. A high-density line
indicates a higher level of activity, while a low-density line suggests the user may be resting
or sleeping. It’s important to note that some ACC values in the figure do not change over
time in all three axes, shown in the black dashed box in the figure 7, which could be due to
the device being turned on but not worn.
Figure 7: ACC for user 0097
Page 10 of 42
==PAGE:15==
3.2
SWEET dataset
During the study, physiological data, including ECG, GSR, and ST were collected and
sampled at frequencies of 256 Hz, 256 Hz, and 1 Hz, respectively. A total of eighteen features
were derived from the collected physiological data, including six features derived from the
time and frequency domains of the ECG signal, eight features related to tonic and phasic
aspects of GSR, and four features based on ST [42]. The features were calculated in 5-
minute windows with 4-minute overlaps. Moreover, since these signals are prone to artifacts
due to incorrect sensor connections or movement, a signal quality assessment is necessary.
For ECG and GSR, quality indicators were calculated based on the methods mentioned by
Orphanidou et al [43] and Kocielnik et al [44]. Only windows with QI largeer or equal to
0.8 were considered as good quality. For ST, windows outside the range of 20 to 40 degrees
Celsius were removed as they were considered low quality [45]. The boxplots in the figure
8 show the distributions of the skin conductance, skin temperature, and ECG for 469 users
after removing the low quality data.
Figure 8: Physiological data boxplot of 469 users
3.2.2
Demographic dataset through questionnaire and self-rated assessment
Before the trial began, participants were asked to complete several questionnaires and
self-assessments.
The questionnaires collected information about age, sex, height, weight, sports activity
frequency, and caffeine and alcohol consumption. A total of 934 completed questionnaires
were collected. Figure 9 illustrates the age distribution of the participants and the BMI by
gender. As shown in the bar chart, there were 484 male and 450 female participants, with
7.4% (36) of men and 12.6% (57) of women being overweight. The pie chart reveals that
the majority of participants were in their 30s (31.56%) and 40s (30.07%), with only a small
number (0.64%) being elder.
Page 11 of 42
==PAGE:16==
3.2
SWEET dataset
Figure 9: Gender, BMI and AGE
Self-assessments, including the DASS and PSQI, were used to evaluate participants’
baseline levels of depression, stress, and sleep. A total of 605 participants completed both
DASS and PSQI assessments. The DASS is a 42-item self-report instrument designed to
measure three negative emotional states (depression, anxiety, and tension/stress), but only
depression and stress were investigated in this study. For these two emotions, scores were
divided into five levels: no depression/stress, mild, moderate, severe, and extremely severe.
The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) is a self-reported questionnaire used to evaluate
an individual’s sleep quality over the previous month. Higher scores on the index indicate
poorer sleep quality, with a threshold of 5 distinguishing "poor sleepers" from "good sleepers"
who score below this value. All questionnaires and assessments used in the data collection
have been validated in previous research.
3.2.3
Ecological momentary assessment (EMA)
Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) captures people’s thoughts and actions in
their natural environment by repeatedly collecting data in real-time or close to the time
of behavior. In the study, participants were asked to fill out a sleep diary each morning
and track their stress level 12 times per day using EMA. Figure 10 displays the assessment
interface on the participant’s smartphone with daily and hourly reminders to encourage
engagement with the app.
In the study, 906 participants reported a total of 3333 sleep diary entries, with an
average of 3.6 entries per user. Half of the participants submitted more than four entries,
but only 172 users provided at least one stress-level EMA, and many of them recorded less
than 30 entries (equivalent to 2 days).
Page 12 of 42
==PAGE:17==
3.3
Modification of Imec’s sleep detection algorithm (SDA)
Figure 10: Ecological Momentary Assessments
3.3
Modification of Imec’s sleep detection algorithm (SDA)
The "modified function" has streamlined the previous algorithm by consolidating the
scattered functions from both Python and Matlab scripts into a single Python script. The
algorithm is divided into three sections: ’Pre-Processing’, ’Sleep Detection’, and ’Sleep Pa-
rameters Calculation’. Each section is well-documented with text and figures. Additionally,
further optimizations are added as indicated by the yellow boxes in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Modified Function Flow
The first section of Pre-processing has introduced two new functions: "extract ACC"
and "start & end time detection". The data gathered from the wearable device is saved in
the Hdf5 file format, which is a file format and library used to store scientific data, employing
Page 13 of 42
==PAGE:18==
3.4
Sleep algorithm validation on SWEET dataset
a structure resembling a "file directory" that enables data within the file to be structured in
various ways. The ’extract ACC’ function extracts the ACC data from datasets with distinct
storage paths. ACC data is collected in segments, with each restart of the device constituting
a new segment. Each segment encompasses the recorded time and the acceleration recorded
by the accelerometer along the x, y, and z axes. The ’start & end time detection’ function
detects and archives the start and end times of each segment’s recording, readying it for the
next step.
The second part of the process, sleep detection, has incorporated several new features,
including the Night ACC, gap filling, non-wear detection, and optimized feature calculation.
To be eligible for the Night ACC, the total recording time for all of the user’s segments must
be greater than 48 hours, and there must be at least one continuous recording of over 7 hours.
This requirement helps to reduce the running time and enhance efficiency by excluding users
who do not have sufficient night ACC data from the second part of the process. The gap
filling feature addresses the gaps in time between ACC segments, which can range from a
few minutes to several days, by extending these gaps based on the ACC sampling rate and
setting the value to a very high acceleration level. This ensures that the gaps are treated
as a wake state in subsequent analysis, avoiding the mistaken interpretation of two ACC
segments with time gaps as one continuous ACC. The Not wear detection feature is included
to address the situation where the algorithm predicts that the user is asleep while the device
is actually on but not worn. This is achieved by checking that the sum of consecutive Z-
angle differences is less than one over a period of more than two hours. In this case, the time
period is reclassified as a non-wear state rather than a sleep state.
To improve the efficiency of the feature calculation sub-equation, which is the most
time-consuming part of the algorithm, several measures were taken. The main cause of the
long processing time is the excessive use of list.append(), which frequently resizes the list
and reallocates more memory when new elements are added. To address this, the solution
is to allocate sufficient memory before assigning values and to use list.extend() instead,
which can add multiple elements at once. Additionally, list comprehensions are utilized,
which are executed entirely in C, closer to machine code, and can provide clearer and faster
code. Many of Python’s built-in functions, which have been optimized and rigorously tested,
are also used. Finally, the use of global variables is avoided as local variables are quicker to
reference than global or built-in variables because the interpreter allocates specific memory
locations to them within function calls.
The third section is "Sleep Parameters Calculation". The original algorithm utilized
EMA data, which serves as the benchmark for a user’s sleep, including their bedtime, sleep
time, wake-up time, and getting-out-of-bed time. Sleep parameters are calculated by com-
bining the predicted and actual sleep data. A new path is included in the modified function
that solely relies on the predicted sleep to determine sleep parameters.
3.4
Sleep algorithm validation on SWEET dataset
To evaluate the sleep algorithm’s accuracy in detecting sleep on the SWEET dataset, we
compared the sleep results predicted by the algorithm to the sleep diaries recorded by users.
The sleep diary data frame, depicted in figure 12, includes the bedtime, wakeup time, and
Page 14 of 42
==PAGE:19==
3.4
Sleep algorithm validation on SWEET dataset
the number of wakeups per day for all users. The attributes are named ’TIME_TO_BED’,
’GET_UP’, and ’WAKE_UP’, respectively. The sleep diary is a daily record of a user’s
sleep patterns, entered manually on their mobile phone. However, the lack of a standardized
data entry format leads to inconsistencies in the collected data, with some users using a
24-hour time format while others use a 12-hour time format. Users may also enter some
characters incorrectly or record times in float format. These issues result in confusing for-
mats, such as a recorded bedtime of "22:00" being represented in various formats like "10",
"22", "10 pm", "22:00r," or "22?00". When processing data, it can be challenging to create a
specific for-loop equation to standardize these messy and irregularly formatted data because
every formatting error is often unique. Therefore, instead of using an automated method,
we manually identified the irregularly formatted data and used the .replace() method to
standardize it. This method involves identifying and replacing specific patterns or characters
in the data with desired ones, allowing us to transform messy and inconsistent data into a
more organized and uniform format.
Figure 12: sleep diary dataset
After formatting the data, the sleep diary is used to validate the accuracy of the results
of the sleep algorithm, and some insight could be obtained by comparing the results of the
two methods. The time recorded in actigraphy is UTC time, while the time recorded in sleep
diaries is local time, and the local time is divided into daylight saving time and winter time.
UTC time, which stands for Coordinated Universal Time, is a standard time that is not
affected by geographical location or daylight saving time. Local time, on the other hand,
refers to the time in a specific region and is often based on the local standard time. Daylight
saving time and winter time are calculated according to the regulations of different regions.
During daylight saving time, the time advances one hour, while during winter time, the time
is delayed one hour backward. The SWEET project is done in Belgium, where daylight
saving time usually starts on the last Sunday of March and lasts until the last Sunday of
October each year. During daylight saving time, Belgium advances its local time by one
hour, which is UTC+2. During winter time, Belgium delays its local time by one hour,
which is UTC+1.
Page 15 of 42
==PAGE:20==
3.5
Statistical analysis and ML analysis
In figure 13, the sleep diary times that have been standardized are compared with the
results of the sleep algorithm. The green and purple lines represent the bedtime and wake-up
time from the diary, respectively, while the black line depicts the sleep period detected by
the algorithm. The gaps between the start and end nodes of the sleep period and the green
and purple lines represent the differences between the two methods of sleep monitoring.
Analyzing these gaps can help identify the disparities between the two methods and explore
the reasons behind them.
Figure 13: Sleep algorithm validation using sleep diary
3.5
Statistical analysis and ML analysis
The methods used in this study include statistical and machine learning analysis to
address different research questions. This section will shortly explain the adopted models
and tests.
Linear model(LM): A linear model describes the linear relationship between a de-
pendent variable (y) and independent variables (X), assuming a normal distribution of the
variables. It is represented by a mathematical equation 5,
y = β0 + β1x1 + β2x2 + ... + βnxn + ϵ
(5)
where y is the dependent variable and x1, x2..xn are the independent variables and ϵ is
the error term. The intercept, β0, represents the mean value of y when X=0, while the
coefficients β1, β2...βn indicate the mean change of y for a unit change of each element
x1, x2..xn respectively.
Mixed-effect linear model(MELM): A Mixed-Effects Linear Model is an extension
of a traditional linear model that incorporates both fixed and random effects. The fixed
effects represent population parameters that do not vary, such as the population means,
which can be estimated through linear regression. The random effects, on the other hand,
represent parameters that can vary between groups of dependent data points. For example,
if multiple measurements are taken on the same individuals, the mean of these measurements
can be used to estimate one parameter, while each individual may have a unique estimate.
This allows the capability of MELMs to capture both the general trends and patterns in
the population as well as the unique characteristics of individual observations within that
Page 16 of 42
==PAGE:21==
3.5
Statistical analysis and ML analysis
population. The equation for a mixed-effect linear model is shown in equation 6:
y = Xβ + Zu + ϵ
(6)
where y is the response variable, X is a design matrix for the fixed effects,β is the vector of
fixed-effects coefficients, Z is a design matrix for the random effects, u is a vector of random-
effects coefficients,ϵ is the error term. In linear mixed-effect models, some coefficients are
treated as fixed effects (i.e., they are the same for all observations), while others are treated
as random effects (i.e., they vary across observations).
Wilcoxon test: The Wilcoxon test, also known as the Wilcoxon rank-sum test or
Mann-Whitney U test, is a non-parametric statistical test used to compare two independent
samples. It is often used as an alternative to the independent samples t-test when the data
do not meet the assumption of normality. The test works by ranking all the values in the
two groups combined and calculating the sum of the ranks for each group. It then compares
the sum of the ranks between the two groups to determine if there is a significant difference
in their distributions. The Wilcoxon test is commonly used in scientific research and data
analysis to determine if there is a significant difference between two groups in terms of a
particular variable.
Shapiro-Wilk test: The Shapiro-Wilk test, often referred to as the Shapiro test, is
a statistical test used to determine whether a given sample of data is normally distributed.
The test works by calculating a test statistic based on the sample data and comparing it
to a critical value. If the test statistic is greater than the critical value, the null hypothesis
is rejected (the data is normally distributed), and the data is considered non-normal. If
the test statistic is less than the critical value, the null hypothesis is not rejected and the
data are considered normally distributed. The Shapiro test is commonly used in scientific
research and data analysis to assess the normality of data before applying statistical tests
that assume a normal distribution. It is worth noting that the Shapiro test is sensitive to
sample size, and for large samples, even small deviations from normality can lead to the
rejection of the null hypothesis.
Random forest trees machine learning: Random Forest is a type of supervised
machine learning algorithm that utilizes an ensemble of decision trees. In a random forest,
the trees are grown in a random manner, with each split based on a random subset of the
features, which helps to reduce the variance in the tree predictions. For regression problems,
a random forest is made by aggregating the predictions from each decision tree in the forest.
This is achieved by traversing each tree in the forest from the root node to a leaf node and
using the average of the training samples in that leaf node as the prediction. For classification
problems, the prediction is based on majority voting. The class with the most votes from
individual trees is chosen as the final prediction, as Figure 14 shows. This method aims to
limit overfitting by constructing multiple decision trees and aggregating their results into
more robust predictions.
Page 17 of 42
==PAGE:22==
3.6
What are the internal and external factors affecting sleep quality?
Figure 14: Random forest classifier
3.6
What are the internal and external factors affecting sleep qual-
ity?
Drawing on prior research (Robillard et al., 2020; Monk et al., 2003; Milojevich et
al.,2016) [46–48], it has been established that multiple factors, both internal and external,
such as demographics, lifestyle, and mental health, can impact an individual’s sleep pat-
terns.The objective of this study was to identify the most significant factors that affect sleep
quality by analyzing data that encompasses all three of these aspects. The first research
question aimed to determine which internal and external factors affect sleep quality. We
selected a subset of the available attributes that are known to influence sleep from the litera-
ture, including age, gender, marital status, number of children in the family, general health,
coffee intake, alcohol intake, depression level, stress level, perceived stress level, social func-
tion, and pain level. The dependent variable in this study is the total PSQI score, calculated
from the PSQI questionnaire, which is an assessment of sleep quality over the past month,
with scores ranging from 0-21, with higher scores indicating poorer sleep quality.
After merging all the attributes, we obtained a comprehensive dataset consisting of
932 users and used a linear model to analyze data.
Linear models were chosen due to
their simplicity, ease of interpretation, and ability to accommodate the large number of
features in the data, whereas nonlinear models were deemed too complex and susceptible to
overfitting. The initial model included all independent variables related to the dependent
variable.
We then used backward stepwise regression to optimize the model.
Backward
stepwise is a technique used in statistics to select the most important features for a given
predictive model. An example shows in figure 15. The idea is to start with a full model
that includes all features and then iteratively remove the least important features based on
their p-values until the desired subset of features is obtained. The model’s evaluation is
carried out at each selection stage to guarantee that the adjusted R square increases as each
feature is dropped. Finally, interpret the results of the optimal model to gain insight into
the relationships between variables.
Page 18 of 42
==PAGE:23==
3.7
How does sleep affect the relationship between stress and physiology?
Figure 15: Backward elimination example with five variables
3.7
How does sleep affect the relationship between stress and phys-
iology?
3.7.1
Statistical analysis
For this section, the dependent variable was the stress level recorded by participants
through EMA. A total of 13,278 stress level records were received from 478 users, with an
average of 27.7 records per user. Initially, the stress levels were divided into five levels, shown
in figure 16, but due to insufficient data for levels 4 and 5, they were combined with level 3
to balance the data.
Figure 16: stress frequency for 478 users
To analyze the relationship between stress, physiology, and sleep, data from multiple
datasets needed to be merged. During the merging process, each user was required to have
at least two days of recorded stress levels, ensuring that the corresponding previous night’s
sleep quality could be found. After merging the data, a total of 89 users were obtained.
The merged dataset consists of three subsets. The first set consists of physiological signals
recorded one hour prior to the recording of stress levels, including features such as HRV, skin
temperature, and skin conductance response. The second set includes daily user sleep data
Page 19 of 42
==PAGE:24==
3.7
How does sleep affect the relationship between stress and physiology?
estimated using the ACC data (collected using the wearable wristband), while the third set
consists of demographic data (this data was also used in the previously mentioned analysis).
The second research question aimed to investigate the effect of sleep on the relationship
between stress and physiology. The analysis procedure consisted of two stages: firstly, esti-
mating stress levels using solely physiological data, and secondly, using physiological data in
conjunction with sleep and demographic information to estimate stress levels. Both stages
were carried out through statistical analysis and significance testing. Finally, the results ob-
tained from the two stages were compared to investigate the effect of sleep on the relationship
between stress and physiology.
3.7.2
Application of Random Forest
We used a machine learning approach to investigate the effects of sleep on stress to obtain
more comprehensive and accurate findings. Compared with statistical test analysis, machine
learning methods have greater advantages for handling large-scale, high-dimensional, non-
linear, and non-normal types of data. Before conducting the machine learning analysis, we
preprocessed the raw data to improve the accuracy and reliability of the model. We first
performed data cleaning to remove outliers and data with quality indicators less than 0.8
in each physiological feature. Next, we performed within-group normalization by user ID
grouping to reduce the influence of the dependent variable by individual differences. Then,
we performed feature selection to exclude attributes with correlations higher than 0.8 and
to select features that are easy to understand and interpret. Finally, we selected random
forests with high accuracy and robustness as the model for analysis.
For cross-validation, initially, we chose Out-Of-Bag (OOB) validation, which simply
divides the dataset into training and validation sets in proportion to evaluate the performance
of machine learning models. However, since multiple physiological data are recorded by the
same user in the dataset of this study and there are correlations between samples, simply
dividing the dataset into training and testing sets may lead to data leakage. To avoid this
problem, we used Leave One Group Out (LOGO) validation. The idea, as shown in figure
17, is to leave out one entire group from the training set and use it as the validation set,
ensuring that there is no individual overlap between the training and test sets, avoiding
overfitting and overly optimistic performance estimates.
Figure 17: Leave One Group Out (LOGO) validation
Page 20 of 42
==PAGE:25==
4
Results
4.1
Sleep detection algorithm modification
4.1.1
Results after applying gap-filling function
The gap-filling algorithm was developed using the same dataset as the original SDA. As
shown in Figure 18, there is a difference between the algorithm’s results with and without
gap-filling. The algorithm detects a 20-minute gap between 21:30:20 and 21:50 and fills it
with a non-sleep state. Comparing the two results confirms slight changes when gap filling
is applied to data with the 20-minute gap, causing some vertical lines to disappear and
others to appear. This is because gap-filling shifts the overall dataset, causing changes in
the sampled values within each minute. The subsequent "initial score" function checks data
for every 12 intervals (1 minute). Without gap filling, there may be instances where the
maximum Seqdiff_Z in a minute is greater than five, initially scored as awake. However,
after applying the gap-filling function, the maximum Seqdiff_Z in the same minute may
become less than five, resulting in a change in the initial score from awake to sleep. In other
words, the gap-filling function can cause the initial scoring of wake or sleep to change due
to the changes in the data resulting from the gap-filling process.
Figure 18: gap filling
Figures 19 and 20 show the sleep detection results for users 2077 and 2044, both with
and without gap filling. The left subfigures present the results without gap filling, while the
right subfigures show the results after filling the gaps. A black line at the bottom of the right
figures represents the filled gap; user 2077 had a 4-hour gap, and user 2044 had a 15-hour
gap. The red-marked time points in the figures indicate the start of a sleep period (bedtime),
and the green-marked time points represent the end (wake time). The green vertical line
Page 21 of 42
==PAGE:26==
4.1
Sleep detection algorithm modification
indicates the user’s recorded bedtime, and the purple line represents the recorded out-of-bed
time. The impact of gap filling varies depending on the length of the gap, with some changes
in bedtime and wake time ranging from a few seconds to a few minutes, as well as changes
in the number of wake periods after sleep onset.
After using the gap-filling function on data of participant 2077 (Figure 19), the first
sleep period’s sleep time is shifted forward by five seconds, and the wake time is advanced
by two minutes. The middle vertical wake-after-sleep-onset (WASO) line disappears. The
second sleep period is delayed by five seconds, and the wake time is delayed by eight minutes,
closer to the user’s recorded wake time, indicating an optimal result.
Figure 19: Sleep prediction results for users in 2077 without and with gap filling
After using the gap-filling function on data of participant 2044 Figure 20, there are five
sleep periods with slightly shifted sleep and wake times, ranging from a few seconds to a
few minutes. The fourth sleep period is the most affected, with a wake-up time 11 minutes
earlier than recorded by the user, indicating a suboptimal result.
Figure 20: Sleep prediction results for users in 2044 without and with gap filling
Comparing the results of the two users with and without the gap-filling function, it is
evident that the gap length varies among users, ranging from a few hours to tens of hours,
Page 22 of 42
==PAGE:27==
4.1
Sleep detection algorithm modification
directly affecting the results of sleep prediction. More specifically, the impact on changes in
the detected times of sleep and wake ranges from a few seconds to a few minutes, depending
on the user’s recorded time. It is possible to achieve optimized or sub-optimized results
by using the gap-filling function to improve the accuracy of the sleep detection algorithm.
However, adding the gap-filling is a logically correct step, regardless of the impact on the
results.
4.1.2
Optimization of feature calculation
The data has a sampling frequency of 125Hz, and each user’s dataset contains mil-
lions of samples, making it very large. For example, user 2077 had more than six million
(6,118,943) samples from two days of actigraphy, while user 2044 had more than eighteen
million (18,034,239) samples from five days of actigraphy. In the original algorithm, user
2077 required 13 minutes and 39 seconds to extract the necessary features from the raw
acceleration data, while user 2044 required more than half an hour to complete the attribute
extraction equation. It would take day and night for nearly a month to complete the capture
of one thousand users’ attributes.
In Figure 21, the impact of optimizing the feature calculation process is demonstrated
by comparing the time taken before and after the optimization. The time taken to extract
attributes for user 2077 decreased from 13min39s to 36s, and for user 2044, it decreased from
34min19s to 2min44s. The total time reduction for both users was reduced by a factor of 7
on average. The speedup resulting from the optimization is substantial. Similarly, applying
the optimization measures to the initial score equation also resulted in significant speedups.
Figure 21: Comparison of the running time of the original function and the modified function
for user 2077 and user 2044
Page 23 of 42
==PAGE:28==
4.2
Apply sleep detection algorithm on SWEET dataset
4.2
Apply sleep detection algorithm on SWEET dataset
After modifying the sleep function, we utilized it on the SWEET dataset. Figure 22
illustrates the sleep prediction for user0094 over four consecutive days. The upper portion
of the figure displays the original ACC’s acceleration values on the x, y, and z axes. In
contrast, the lower part illustrates the prediction using the modified sleep algorithm. The
y-axis displays the predicted sleep state with an orange line, a 1 indicating a sleep state and
a 0 indicating a waking state. To demonstrate the predicted results of the sleep algorithm,
green and purple lines have been added to the graph to indicate the time of sleep and waking
time, respectively, recorded by the user in the sleep diary. This allows a visual comparison
of the sleep predicted by the algorithm and the sleep recorded in the diary.
From the above original ACC graph, we can observe that user0094 has recorded five
daytime and four nighttime ACC data. The high-density part represents high activity (day-
time), while the low-density part represents low activity (nighttime). It’s worth noting that
on June 12th, between 6:30 am and 8:00 pm, there is a prolonged period of unvarying ac-
celerometer value in the three-axis direction. This indicates that the device was on but
not worn. Below the figure, we see the results of the modified function. The algorithm
detects the periods with low accelerometer value changes as sleep states and the periods
with rapid changes as non-sleep states. It doesn’t erroneously identify the case of the device
not being worn in a sleep state. Instead, the vertical lines within each sleep period indi-
cate the user’s significant activity during sleep, and each successive wake period indicates a
wake-after-sleep-onset (WASO) time.
Figure 22: sleep prediction for user0094
In the SWEET dataset, only 19.5% (224 out of 1151) of users recorded at least one
nighttime ACC, resulting in 471 observations after excluding short nap periods during the
Page 24 of 42
==PAGE:29==
4.3
Validation of the modified algorithm using sleep diary
day. On average, each user had only 2.1 nighttime ACCs. Sleep parameters were extracted
from these observations, including total sleep time (TST), sleep efficiency, wake-after-sleep-
onset (WASO) times, and minutes. The results are presented in a violin plot in Figure 23,
where the thicker parts of the violin indicate areas of high density, and the thinner parts
represent areas of low density. It shows that the TST falls mostly within the 400-500 minute
range, while the sleep efficiency mostly falls within the 0.95-0.975 range. Wake-up minutes
during the nightfall in the 0-20 minute range, and the number of wake-ups during the night
falls within the 3-5 times range. The violin plot also shows that the tails of the plot represent
outliers in the predicted sleep data. For instance, there is an instance of total sleep time
being 800 minutes, which could be due to the user waking up in the morning with low
activity and then going back to sleep, leading the algorithm to detect multiple sleep periods
as a single sleep period.
Figure 23: sleep prediction violin plot
4.3
Validation of the modified algorithm using sleep diary
Figure 24 shows the average differences between the sleep and wake times recorded in
the sleep diary and those predicted by the sleep algorithm for 222 nights for 112 users. The
table from the right shows sleep algorithm predicted a sleep time that was, on average,
7.02 minutes later than the user-recorded "TIME_TO_BED" time, with a between-person
variance of 27.9 minutes and a within-person variance of 19.34 minutes. In addition, the
algorithm predicted waking time to be an average of 3.78 minutes later than the user-recorded
"GET_UP" time, with a between-person variance of 20.49 minutes and a within-person
variance of 14.90 minutes.
Page 25 of 42
==PAGE:30==
4.3
Validation of the modified algorithm using sleep diary
Figure 24: sleep prediction box plot
Figure 25 shows the box plot of sleep time and wake time differences. The whiskers,
which are the lines extending vertically from the box, show the range of the data excluding
the outliers. Notably, the range of data for differences in bedtime is considerably wider than
for differences in wake-up time. This disparity may be attributed to the fact that individuals
usually record their previous night’s sleep soon after waking up in the morning, thus having
a clearer memory of their wake-up time than their bedtime.
Therefore, it is reasonable
to expect differences between sleep diaries and sleep algorithms in terms of detecting the
beginning and end of sleep periods since sleep diaries may record the time the user spends
in bed, while sleep algorithms detect the actual sleep onset period. For example, some users
may go to bed and meditate, and when awake, they may check their phones before getting
out of bed. For instance, some users may engage in activities such as meditation or checking
their phones while in bed, which could affect their perceived time of sleep onset and offset.
Figure 25: sleep prediction box plot
Using a sleep diary to validate the sleep algorithm may not be adequate or reliable
because the data recorded in a sleep diary is subject to individual biases and inaccuracies.
Some people may forget to record certain details, such as the number of times they wake up
or fall asleep. Omissions and errors in data may occur due to forgetfulness or memory bias.
People’s perceptions of their sleep quality can differ greatly, leading to potential exaggeration
or underestimation in their records. Therefore, relying solely on the results of a sleep diary
Page 26 of 42
==PAGE:31==
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
may not prove the value of using an activity monitor to detect sleep. However, comparing the
results of the sleep diary with those of an activity monitor can provide a more comprehensive
and objective evaluation of an individual’s sleep quality and condition.
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
4.4.1
The relationship between PSQI and DASS
To investigate the relationship between sleep and mental health, the study conducted
a preliminary group analysis of user sleep quality (PSQI), and psychological status (DASS)
collected from questionnaires. Figure 26 compares depression and stress levels among users
based on their reported sleep quality. The left plot depicts the distribution of depression
levels for 605 users grouped by their sleep quality, while the right plot shows the distribution
of stress levels for 780 users also grouped by their sleep quality. The dots of different colors in
the figure indicate different levels of depression or stress, where blue represents the absence of
these two negative emotions, while red indicates severe depression or stress. The plot shows
that most users in both groups have no or mild depression or stress (represented by blue and
orange dots). Still, users with severe and extremely severe depression or stress(represented
by red and purple dots) mostly came from the poor sleep group.
Figure 26: Distributions of DASS-Depression and DASS-Stress grouped by PSQI
Subgroup analyses comparing differences in depression levels and stress levels between
good sleepers and bad sleepers were performed. Figure 27 shows subgroup analyses com-
paring differences in depression levels and stress levels between groups of poor sleepers and
good sleepers. The results in the table show that the bad sleep group had higher depression
and stress levels on average than the good sleep group, with good sleepers having an average
of 3.1 and bad sleepers having an average of 4.5 when looking at depression. For stress, good
Page 27 of 42
==PAGE:32==
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
sleepers had an average of 4.97, and bad sleepers had an average of 6.84. 7% of bad sleepers
and 1.4% of good sleepers are severely/extremely depressed (DASSS>10) and 9.6% of bad
sleepers and 3% of good sleeper are severely/extremely stressed (DASSD>12).
Figure 27: Group analysis of mental health grouped by PSQI
The normality test revealed the non-normal distribution of depression and stress scores
for both sleep groups, with p-values lower than 0.05, necessitating non-parametric tests. The
Wilcoxon tests performed on depression and stress scores for good and poor sleep groups
also yielded p-values below 0.05, indicating significant differences. These findings suggest a
correlation between sleep quality and mental health, with poor sleep quality being associated
with higher levels of depression and stress, in contrast to good sleep quality.
4.4.2
What are the internal and external factors affecting sleep quality?
The result shows the linear regression model with the PSQI (Pittsburgh Sleep Qual-
ity Index) score as the dependent variable and several independent variables including age,
gender, marital status, number of children, lifestyle (such as caffeine and alcohol consump-
tion), and psychological factors (such as depression, stress, and perceived stress). Equation 7
presents the full model equation for the initial analysis, while the results of the initial linear
regression analysis for PSQI are presented in Table 1.
Page 28 of 42
==PAGE:33==
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
PSQI = 9.569 −0.003AGE −0.081GENDER + 0.695MARITAL_STATUSdivorced
+ 0.223MARITAL_STATUSmarried + 0.012MARITAL_STATUSsingle+
0.546MARITAL_STATUSwidowed + 0.038HEALTHY + 0.033PSS
−0.092CHILDREN_MANY + 0.014CAF_BEV_MANY + 0.048DASSS+
0.022ALCOHOL_MANY −0.003EMOTIONAL_WELL_BEING
−0.035ENERGY −0.015SOCIAL_FUNCTIONING −0.015PAIN
−0.012GENERAL_HEALTH −0.001HEALTH_CHANGE + 0.031DASSD
(7)
In the table 1, the results at the bottom show the p-value for the F-statistic (F-statistic:
14 on 19 and 669 degrees of freedom, p-value: < 2.2e-16) is less than 0.05, indicating that
there is evidence of a linear relationship between the independent and dependent variables
and that the model is statistically significant. In addition, the R-squared value of 0.2845
suggests that the model explains about 28% of the variation in PSQI based on the inde-
pendent variables included. The adjusted R-squared value of 0.264 considers the number of
independent variables in the model and provides a more accurate measure of the model’s fit.
The initial results of the full model indicate that not all attributes were significant,
leaving room for model optimization. Lifestyle factors, such as coffee intake and alcohol
consumption, as well as marital status, did not show significant results with p-values of
0.087, 0.115, and above 0.05, respectively.
However, these attributes showed a positive
relationship with PSQI, indicating a negative relationship with sleep quality based on the
estimated coefficient values. Similarly, the number of children in the family structure did
not show significant results with a p-value of 0.330, but it was positively associated with
sleep quality. Among the internal factors, the attributes from the RAND-36 questionnaire,
including energy, social functioning, and pain, were significant at the 0.05 level with p-values
of 3.28e-06, 0.007, and 0.009, respectively. The RAND-36 questionnaire items were scored
on a scale of 0 to 100, where 100 represents the highest possible level of functioning, and
these important variables were negatively correlated with the PSQI, suggesting that users
may have a better sleep experience if they have better functioning in the areas of energy,
social functioning, and pain.
Page 29 of 42
==PAGE:34==
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
Table 1: Results of initial linear regression analysis for PSQI
Variable
Estimate
Std. Error
t-value
p-value
(Intercept)
9.569
1.322
7.236
1.27e −12 ***
AGE
-0.003
0.011
-0.301
0.763
GENDER
-0.081
0.182
-0.447
0.655
MARITAL_STATUSdivorced
0.695
0.408
1.703
0.089
MARITAL_STATUSmarried
0.223
0.239
0.934
0.350
MARITAL_STATUSsingle
0.012
0.256
0.048
0.961
MARITAL_STATUSwidowed
0.546
0.928
0.589
0.556
CHILDREN_MANY
-0.092
0.095
-0.975
0.330
HEALTHY
0.038
0.052
0.743
0.458
CAF_BEV_MANY
0.014
0.008
1.712
0.087
ALCOHOL_MANY
0.022
0.014
1.576
0.115
DASSD
0.031
0.041
0.753
0.452
DASSS
0.048
0.032
1.497
0.135
PSS
0.033
0.023
1.417
0.157
ENERGY
-0.035
0.007
-4.692
3.28e −06 ***
EMOTIONAL_WELL_BEING
-0.003
0.010
-0.293
0.770
SOCIAL_FUNCTIONING
-0.015
0.006
-2.724
0.007 **
PAIN
-0.015
0.006
-2.630
0.009 **
GENERAL_HEALTH
-0.012
0.006
-1.830
0.068
HEALTH_CHANGE
-0.001
0.004
-0.274
0.784
Multiple R-squared: 0.285, Adjusted R-squared: 0.264
Residual standard error: 2.184 on 669 degrees of freedom
F-statistic: 14 on 19 and 669 DF, p-value: < 2.2e-16
Note: Significance codes: 0 ’***’ 0.001 ’**’ 0.01 ’*’ 0.05 ’.’ 0.1 ’ ’ 1
Page 30 of 42
==PAGE:35==
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
Equation 8 represents the final model obtained through backward elimination, which includes the variables of alcohol
intake, stress level, health, and social functioning as attributes, while the results of the optimized linear regression analysis
for PSQI are presented in Table 2.
PSQI = 8.9791 + 0.0294ALCOHOL_MANY + 0.0294DASSS + 0.0368PSS −0.0341ENERGY
−0.0205SOCIAL_FUNCTIONING −0.0177GENERAL_HEALTH
(8)
Table 2: Results of the optimized linear regression model analysis of PSQI
Variable
Estimate
Std. Error
t-value
p-value
(Intercept)
8.9791
0.7749
11.587
< 2e-16 ***
ALCOHOL_MANY
0.0294
0.0124
2.380
0.0176 *
DASSS
0.0294
0.0283
2.031
0.0426 *
PSS
0.0368
0.0205
1.797
0.0727 .
ENERGY
-0.0341
0.0064
-5.343
1.22e-07 ***
SOCIAL_FUNCTIONING
-0.0205
0.0050
-4.093
4.73e-05 ***
GENERAL_HEALTH
-0.0177
0.0056
-3.161
0.0016 **
Multiple R-squared: 0.2732, Adjusted R-squared: 0.2673
Residual standard error: 2.184 on 669 degrees of freedom
F-statistic: 46.6 on 6 and 744 DF, p-value: < 2.2e-16
Note: Significance codes: 0 ’***’ 0.001 ’**’ 0.01 ’*’ 0.05 ’.’ 0.1 ’ ’ 1
The intercept has a significant estimate of 8.9791. The independent variables, ALCOHOL_MANY, DASSS, ENERGY,
SOCIAL_FUNCTIONING, and GENERAL_HEALTH are all statistically significant at the 0.05 significance level, while PSS
is marginally significant(p-value of 0.0725). Compared to the full model, this optimized model includes fewer independent
variables. Furthermore, the adjusted R-squared value of the optimized model (0.2673) is slightly higher than that of the
first full model (0.264), which means that the optimized model explains a slightly bigger proportion of the variation in the
dependent variable. Overall, the optimized model is more precise and retains the most important predictors, making it more
interpretable.
Page 31 of 42
==PAGE:36==
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
4.4.3
How does sleep affect the relationship between stress and physiology?
This section focuses on modeling reported stress levels using physiological data. The
first model, shown in equation 9 and Table 3, primarily uses physiological data to analyze
stress levels. The second model combines physiological data with sleep and demographic
data to model stress levels. The optimal model equation is shown in equation 10, and the
statistical results are presented in Table 4. Both models have "Stress" as the dependent
variable. The "random effect for each user id" term represents the portion of the statistical
model the random effect explains.
The "Random Effects" section in both tables shows that individual differences in base-
line stress levels are modeled as a random effect (called "random intercept effect"). In the
first model, this effect is assumed to follow a normal distribution with a mean of 0 and a vari-
ance of 0.2297. The estimated variance of the residuals is 0.2490. In the second model, the
variance of the random intercept effect is 0.2007, and the estimated variance of the residuals
is 0.2476. The fact that both the random intercept and the variance of the residuals have
decreased in the second model suggests that the fixed effects capture more of the relevant
information in the data.
Both optimized models demonstrated statistical significance for all included features.
However, Model 2 excluded skin temperature while incorporating additional sleep-related
features, such as sleep time, efficiency, wake-up times, and demographic data (depression
index). The largest impact on the dependent variable "stress" was attributed to changes in
sleep efficiency, with an estimated coefficient of -0.6928. Including new features in Model 2
improved its ability to account for changes in the outcome variables.
Page 32 of 42
==PAGE:37==
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
Stress =1.518 −0.01104GSR_SCPh + 0.02942GSR_SCRR + 0.02324GSR_SCdiff2
−0.03070GSR_SCmag + 0.005932ST_slope + 0.01021ECG_mean_heart_rate
−0.01027ECG_rmssd + (random effect for each userid)
(9)
Table 3: Results of model 1, estimating stress using physiology data
Variable
Estimate
Std. Error
df
t-value
p-value
(Intercept)
1.464e+00
5.286e-02
1.021e+02
27.700
< 2e-16 ***
GSR_SCPh
-2.476e-04
6.123e-05
5.473e+04
-4.044
5.27e-05 ***
GSR_SCRR
6.047e-01
6.548e-02
5.471e+04
9.235
< 2e-16 ***
GSR_SCdiff2
4.375e+04
4.936e+03
5.467e+04
8.864
< 2e-16 ***
GSR_SCmag
-3.016e-05
3.173e-06
5.468e+04
-9.506
< 2e-16 ***
ST_slope
1.721e+00
6.278e-01
5.466e+04
2.741
0.00613 **
ECG_mean_heart_rate
6.071e-04
1.791e-04
5.474e+04
3.390
0.00070 ***
ECG_rmssd
-1.075e-05
2.347e-06
5.465e+04
-4.578
4.70e-06 ***
Random Effects
Groups
Name
Variance
Std.Dev.
userid
(Intercept)
0.2297
0.4792
Residual
0.2490
0.4990
REML criterion at convergence: 79849.7
Number of obs: 54747, groups: userid, 89
Note: Significance codes: 0 ’***’ 0.001 ’**’ 0.01 ’*’ 0.05 ’.’ 0.1 ’ ’ 1
Page 33 of 42
==PAGE:38==
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
Stress =1.500 −0.01336GSR_SCPh + 0.03286GSR_SCRR + 0.02277GSR_SCdiff2
−0.03046GSR_SCmag + 0.01151ECG_mean_heart_rate −0.009756ECG_rmssd−
−0.03989Sleep_eff_Night_Only + 0.03901WASO_times −0.03327TST_min
+ 0.1758DASSD + (random effect for each userid)
(10)
Table 4: Results of model 2, estimating stress using physiology, demographic and sleep data
Variable
Estimate
Std. Error
df
t-value
p-value
(Intercept)
2.033e+00
8.890e-02
3.661e+02
22.869
< 2e-16 ***
GSR_SCPh
-2.994e-04
6.125e-05
5.473e+04
-4.889
1.02e-06 ***
GSR_SCRR
6.754e-01
6.600e-02
5.472e+04
10.233
< 2e-16 ***
GSR_SCdiff2
4.285e+04
4.924e+03
5.467e+04
8.703
< 2e-16 ***
GSR_SCmag
-2.993e-05
3.165e-06
5.468e+04
-9.455
< 2e-16 ***
ECG_mean_heart_rate
6.844e-04
1.786e-04
5.474e+04
3.831
0.000128 ***
ECG_rmssd
-1.021e-05
2.328e-06
5.465e+04
-4.384
1.17e-05 ***
Sleep_eff_Night_Only
-6.928e-01
6.030e-02
5.472e+04
-11.488
< 2e-16 ***
WASO_times
1.199e-02
1.689e-03
5.363e+04
7.097
1.29e-12 ***
TST_min
-3.364e-04
3.840e-05
5.433e+04
-8.760
< 2e-16 ***
DASSD
5.915e-02
1.501e-02
8.675e+01
3.941
0.000164 ***
Random Effects
Groups
Name
Variance
Std.Dev.
userid
(Intercept)
0.2007
0.4479
Residual
0.2476
0.4976
REML criterion at convergence: 79560.1
Number of obs: 54747, groups: userid, 89
Note: Significance codes: 0 ’***’ 0.001 ’**’ 0.01 ’*’ 0.05 ’.’ 0.1 ’ ’ 1
Page 34 of 42
==PAGE:39==
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
4.4.4
Application of Random Forest
This section created a random forest classifier to predict stress levels using physiological,
demographic, and sleep data. Figure 28 and Table 5 show the performance results using OOB
validation. The overall accuracy of the classifier is relatively high at 0.96. When looking
at the classification of individual pressure levels, the model is most accurate in predicting
pressure level 1 with an accuracy of 0.98. The number of samples correctly predicted pressure
level 1 was 9900 out of 10088. However, for stress level 3, the model’s accuracy dropped
considerably to 0.88. This means the model correctly classified 88% of the samples for stress
level 3. For stress level 3, the number of correctly predicted samples was 1,111 out of 1,255.
The results also show that the model’s performance seems to decrease as the number of test
sets decreases with increasing stress levels.
Figure 28: Confusion Matrix for Random Forest Classifier
Table 5 shows that the model has achieved high precision, recall, and F1-score for all
three classes.
Class 1 has the highest precision (0.96) and recall (0.98) among all three
classes, followed by class 3 with a precision of 0.96 and class 2 with a precision of 0.94. The
overall F1-score for the model is 0.94, which means that the model has performed well across
all three classes.
Class
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Support
1
0.98
0.96
0.98
0.97
10088
2
0.93
0.94
0.93
0.94
5082
3
0.88
0.96
0.88
0.92
1255
Average/Total
0.96
0.95
0.93
0.94
16425
Table 5: Classification report
Page 35 of 42
==PAGE:40==
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
However, the results were significantly different when using LOGO validation. Table 6
displays the model performance results validated using LOGO validation. The data were
divided into groups based on Userid, and the model was trained and tested on different user
groups.
Userid
accuracy
precision
recall
f1_score
91
0.836667
0.700011
0.836667
0.762263
94
0.797227
0.635571
0.797227
0.707280
97
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
100
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
103
0.500000
0.250000
0.500000
0.333333
...
...
...
...
...
938
0.843501
0.711494
0.843501
0.771895
939
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
941
0.643603
0.414225
0.643603
0.504045
942
0.790604
0.625055
0.790604
0.698150
943
0.910876
0.829695
0.910876
0.868393
Mean
0.75
0.61
0.75
0.66
Table 6: Results of Group cross-validation
Table6 shows the performance metrics (accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score) of the
model for each group of users. For example, the first row shows the model’s performance
for Userid 91, where the accuracy is 0.837, the precision is 0.7, the recall is 0.837, and the
F1 score is 0.762. The table shows that the model’s performance differs for different user
groups. Some groups, such as Userid 97, 100, and 939, achieved perfect accuracy, precision,
recall, and F1 score, indicating that the model performs very well for these groups. However,
some groups, such as Userid 103 and 941, achieved lower accuracy, precision, recall, and F1
scores, indicating that the model performs poorly for these groups. In addition, the table
also shows the combination of the average performance metrics for all groups. The average
accuracy was 0.75, a decrease of 0.2 compared to the results using OOB validation. The
average precision was 0.61, the average recall was 0.75, and the average F1 score was 0.66,
significantly lower than the results verified using OOB. Specifically, the average precision
was 0.34 lower, the average recall was 0.18 lower, and the average F1 score was 0.26 lower
than the OOB results.
Figure29 shows the relative importance of each input feature in the predictions of the
random forest model.
The list indicates that the most important feature in predicting
stress level is "GSR_SCPh" with an importance value of 0.128. The second and third most
important features are "ECG_rmssd" and "ECG_mean_heart_rate", which have the same
importance value of 0.079. This highlights the significant contribution of physiological data
in the estimation of stress. Additionally, sleep features were found to influence the model’s
performance, with "Sleep_eff_Night_Only" being the most important sleep feature with
an importance value of 0.066432, ranking fourth in the feature importance list. The other
sleep features, "TST_min" and "WASO_times," have importance values of 0.063456 (fifth
Page 36 of 42
==PAGE:41==
4.4
How does sleep affect your mental health?
in importance) and 0.044287 (ninth in importance), respectively. Finally, the least important
feature in predicting stress levels is "GENDER" with an importance value of 0.006. This
suggests that this feature has little or no impact on the model’s performance in predicting
stress levels.
Figure 29: Confusion Matrix for Random Forest Classifier
Page 37 of 42
==PAGE:42==
5
Discussion
5.1
Optimization of the sleep detection algorithm
The results presented in this section show that using a gap-filling function effectively
enhances the accuracy of sleep detection by minimizing false positives and false negatives.
Gaps in data can be caused by various factors, such as device shutdown or user decision not
to record sleep. These gaps are typically longer and require a technique to fill with non-sleep
data to maintain data continuity and accuracy. However, there is room for improvement in
the gap-filling process, particularly short gaps caused by poor device contact. In such cases,
filling the missing data points with non-sleep values alone may not be accurate. Instead,
machine learning algorithms can identify and fill different types of gaps with appropriate
values.
Other techniques, such as interpolation and extrapolation, can estimate missing
values between known points or fill gaps, leading to more accurate gap filling.
Moreover, optimizing the sleep detection algorithm can significantly improve its ef-
ficiency.
Although Python is a user-friendly programming language, it is an interpreted
language, which can make it slower compared to other programming languages, particularly
when dealing with large and complex datasets. Therefore, optimizing the Python code is
essential to ensure efficient processing. As applied in this study, vectorization speeds up the
processing by avoiding iterations over each dataset element. A future optimization that can
be applied to sleep algorithms is parallelization, which splits the task into multiple parts and
runs them simultaneously on multiple processors. This approach can significantly reduce
run time and memory usage, making the process more efficient. Thus, using vectorization
and parallelization techniques can make sleep detection algorithms more efficient.
5.2
Validation of the sleep detection algorithm on the SWEET
dataset
The sleep algorithm was applied to the SWEET dataset, revealing the sleep pattern
distributions of participants. Only 19.5% of users with nighttime accelerometer recordings,
resulting in 471 observations from which sleep parameters, including total sleep time, sleep
efficiency, and wake-after-sleep-onset times, were extracted and presented in a violin plot,
which mostly showed normal distributions with outliers. Typically, total sleep time ranged
between 400-500 minutes, sleep efficiency was around 0.95-0.975, waking time during the
night was mainly 0-20 minutes, and the number of night awakenings was predominantly 3-5
times. Compared to the previous literature, where the average sleep duration for adults
is 420-540 minutes, sleep efficiency is around 0.85-0.90, and adults typically wake up 1-2
times per night [49,50]. There could be several reasons for these observed differences. One
potential explanation is the SWEET dataset’s relatively small sample size (n=471) and its
limited demographic scope, which may differ from the general population in terms of age,
lifestyle, and other factors that can affect sleep. Additionally, the methods used to collect
and analyze the data may account for the discrepancies, as the SWEET dataset relies on
accelerometers to detect sleep, while other studies may use other measurements, such as
Page 38 of 42
==PAGE:43==
5.3
The relationship between PSQI and DASS
polysomnography and a sleep diary. Lastly, the sleep detection algorithm may have different
sensitivity and specificity than other methods, leading to the identification of different sleep
parameters.
The algorithm’s detection results show that the user in the diary only a few minutes
away from the times records the estimated sleep and wake-up times. This shows that the
algorithm is able to detect sleep and wake times accurately and is a promising development
in the field of sleep monitoring. It should be noted, however, that the algorithm had difficulty
distinguishing between lying down and actual sleep, which could be due to factors such as
movement before falling asleep, changes in sleep patterns over time, and individual differences
in sleep and wake times. In addition, there were significant differences between individuals,
with some participants’ estimated sleep durations differing by more than 30 minutes from
those recorded in sleep diaries. This may be due to different sleep habits, some of which
may involve more active movement throughout the night, affecting the algorithm’s accuracy.
It’s also possible that people wear wearables differently, with some preferring a looser fit,
resulting in less sensitivity for the device to detect activity.
5.3
The relationship between PSQI and DASS
This part of the study aimed to investigate whether there is a relationship between sleep
quality(PSQI) and mental health, particularly depression(DASSD) and stress(DASSS), by
analyzing data obtained from a questionnaire. The results showed that good and bad sleep
quality might be associated with low or high levels of depression and stress. These findings
are also consistent with previous studies that suggest that insomnia may be an important
factor contributing to depression [51].
However, there are limitations in the analytical process as it relies only on self-reported
data from the questionnaire, which may not be completely objective and accurate, as self-
reports of sleep quality and mental health status may be affected by several factors, including
participants’ recall bias, varying degrees of self-awareness, and personal interpretation of the
questions asked. Furthermore, the data was collected from a specific subset of individuals,
namely company employees, who are more likely to have similar sleep habits regularly due
to the need to conserve energy for the next day’s work. As a result, the findings suggest that
they were relatively consistent in their levels of mental health, with only a small proportion
experiencing elevated levels of stress or depression, which could have skewed the data. De-
spite these limitations, the results of this study suggest a significant correlation between sleep
and mental health, providing directions and preliminary conclusions for future analyses.
5.4
What are the internal and external factors affecting sleep qual-
ity?
This part of the study assesses individuals’ sleep quality by analyzing internal and
external factors such as demographics, lifestyles, and mental health. Findings showed an
adjusted R-squared value of 0.264, suggesting that the model explained approximately 26%
of the variability in the PSQI. It is worth noting that there is no uniform standard for a rea-
sonable R-squared value, and different fields may have different requirements and standards.
Page 39 of 42
==PAGE:44==
5.5
How does sleep affect the relationship between stress and physiology?
Especially in many demographic kinds of literature, the R-squared value is usually less than
0.5 [52]. Therefore, a low R-squared value does not necessarily mean the model is invalid; it
may still provide valuable insight or be useful for predicting the dependent variable.
The linear regression analysis results show a significant relationship between the inde-
pendent and dependent variables. Findings showed that better energy, social functioning,
and pain were significantly associated with improved sleep quality (p-values 1.22e-07, 4.73e-
05, 0.009, respectively), highlighting the influence of internal mental health factors on sleep.
In addition, alcohol intake as an external factor was also found from the results to affect
sleep quality negatively.
However, some variables expected to be associated with sleep quality, such as age,
gender, and caffeine intake [53], were not significant in the analysis.
This may be due
to the joint effect of multiple independent variables masking the personal effects of some
independent variables on the dependent variable. In addition, sample size and data collection
methods also greatly influence the research results. For example, the sample size of this
study is only 670 people, and the data collection method is a cross-sectional questionnaire
survey, while the literature research [53] is a longitudinal collection of sleep data from 400
participants for 15 consecutive days.
A limitation of this analysis is the cross-sectional design of the data collection mentioned
in the previous paragraph, the collection of stress levels, sleep quality, and demographics only
represents data at a time point, and changes in variables over time cannot be captured and
are more difficult to determine the causal relationship between variables. Future studies
may consider using a longitudinal study design to examine these relationships more fully,
investigating how mental health, sleep patterns, and demographic factors interact.
5.5
How does sleep affect the relationship between stress and phys-
iology?
This section details the statistical and machine learning analysis for estimating stress
levels using physiological data, sleep patterns, and demographic information.
In the statistical analysis, two models were developed, one containing only physiological
data and the other containing physiological data, sleep, and demographic data. Both models
demonstrate statistical significance for all features used. The second model incorporating
sleep and demographic data outperformed the first model using only physiological data,
as evidenced by lower REML and ANOVA analyses, AIC and BIC values, and significant
differences between the two models. This means that adding new variables such as sleep
duration, efficiency, WASO times, and depression index can improve the model’s ability to
explain changes in stress levels. These findings are consistent with previous studies, such
as that of Cheng et al. (2016) found that including sleep-related variables improved the
prediction of perceived stress levels in college students [54].
A random forest model using physiological data, sleep, and demographic data to predict
stress was developed in machine learning analysis. The model achieved an accuracy of 0.96
with out-of-bag validation, but the accuracy decreased to 0.75 with leave-one-group-out
validation.
This significant decrease in accuracy may be attributed to changes in data
Page 40 of 42
==PAGE:45==
5.5
How does sleep affect the relationship between stress and physiology?
distribution between the two validation methods, as well as increased complexity and noise
in the data after using leave-one-group-out validation. Additionally, there may be a grouping
bias present in the data, whereby the model performs better in some groups with similar
characteristics than in others.
Finally, overfitting may have occurred during out-of-bag
validation, leading to high accuracy but poor generalization when switching to leave-one-
group-out validation.
The list of feature importance showed a greater correlation between sleep attributes
and predicted stress.
These variables identified as important may be useful for further
investigation or developing interventions to improve mental health. The findings here are
similar to those found in the analysis of statistical studies.
Those results also have many practical implications, as combining physiology with sleep
data to predict stress levels could have important applications in healthcare and workplace
settings. For example, healthcare professionals can use this information to identify whether
individuals may be at risk for chronic stress-related diseases and intervene early to prevent
or alleviate problems.
Likewise, employers can use this information in the workplace to
monitor employees’ stress levels and adjust work schedules, workloads, or other internal and
external factors that may contribute to stress, potentially improving employee well-being
and productivity while reducing stress levels.
However, while the current study found that sleep-related variables improved their abil-
ity to predict stress levels, it did not investigate whether interventions to improve sleep
quality reduce stress levels. In addition, the current study focused on a specific population
(the working population). Still, it would be interesting to compare the findings with other
populations, such as children, adolescents, or the elderly, in healthy and clinical populations.
Comparing these findings may help determine whether the relationship between physiology,
sleep, and stress is consistent across populations and diseases.
Page 41 of 42
==PAGE:46==
6
Conclusion
The research results show that the improved sleep algorithm can detect sleep accurately
and quickly and extract relevant sleep parameters from SWEET data, providing valuable
sleep pattern information for sleep-related psychiatric research or disease prediction. While
a sleep algorithm may not be perfect, it can still provide individuals with proper sleep and
wake time estimates, which can help assess sleep quality and state.
When exploring the internal and external factors that affect sleep, it was found that
better energy, social function, and pain function were significantly related to the improvement
of sleep quality, indicating that mental health has a significant impact on sleep quality,
which further proves that exploring the use of sleep data to evaluate mental health meaning.
Alcohol consumption was also significantly associated with sleep quality, with a negative
effect. Some variables predicted to be associated with sleep quality, such as age, sex, and
caffeine intake were insignificant in the analysis. However, the study relied on self-reported
data, which may be subject to reporting bias.
Robust statistical analysis of stress levels using physiological, sleep, and demographic
data. The results provide insight into factors that influence stress levels and highlight the
importance of sleep in managing stress.
The developed model can predict stress levels
accurately and help individuals monitor and manage them effectively.
Page 42 of 42
==PAGE:47==
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
Actigraphy Sleep Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
The location of various electrodes of the PSG are used to monitor sleeping
.
5
3
30-s Epoch consisting of the parameters of staging sleep (EEG, EOG, and
chin EMG) showing under wakefulness and sleep onset
. . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Original Sleep algorithm function flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
Original sleep algorithm function flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6
Wrist and chest-worn wearable devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
7
ACC for user 0097
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
8
Physiological data boxplot of 469 users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
9
Gender, BMI and AGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
10
Ecological Momentary Assessments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
11
Modified Function Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
12
sleep diary dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
13
Sleep algorithm validation using sleep diary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
14
Random forest classifier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
15
Backward elimination example with five variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
16
stress frequency for 478 users
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
17
Leave One Group Out (LOGO) validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
18
gap filling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
19
Sleep prediction results for users in 2077 without and with gap filling
. . . .
22
20
Sleep prediction results for users in 2044 without and with gap filling
. . . .
22
21
Comparison of the running time of the original function and the modified
function for user 2077 and user 2044
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
22
sleep prediction for user0094 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
23
sleep prediction violin plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
24
sleep prediction box plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
25
sleep prediction box plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
26
Distributions of DASS-Depression and DASS-Stress grouped by PSQI . . . .
27
27
Group analysis of mental health grouped by PSQI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
28
Confusion Matrix for Random Forest Classifier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
29
Confusion Matrix for Random Forest Classifier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Page I of VII
==PAGE:48==
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Results of initial linear regression analysis for PSQI . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2
Results of the optimized linear regression model analysis of PSQI
. . . . . .
31
3
Results of model 1, estimating stress using physiology data . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Results of model 2, estimating stress using physiology, demographic and sleep
data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Classification report
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Results of Group cross-validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
Page II of VII
==PAGE:49==
References
References
[1] N. E. Fultz, G. Bonmassar, K. Setsompop, R. A. Stickgold, B. R. Rosen, J. R. Polimeni,
and L. D. Lewis, “Coupled electrophysiological, hemodynamic, and cerebrospinal fluid
oscillations in human sleep,” Science, vol. 366, no. 6465, pp. 628–631, 2019.
[2] Y. Harrison and J. A. Horne, “The impact of sleep deprivation on decision making: a
review.,” Journal of experimental psychology: Applied, vol. 6, no. 3, p. 236, 2000.
[3] W. D. Killgore, “Effects of sleep deprivation on cognition,” Progress in brain research,
vol. 185, pp. 105-129, 2010.
[4] N. B. Kribbs and D. Dinges, “Vigilance decrement and sleepiness.,” 1994.
[5] N. Kleitman, “Sleep and wakefulness,” 1987.
[6] J. J. Pilcher and A. I. Huffcutt, “Effects of sleep deprivation on performance: a meta-
analysis,” Sleep, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 318-326, 1996.
[7] D. Freeman, B. Sheaves, G. M. Goodwin, L.-M. Yu, A. Nickless, P. J. Harrison, R. Ems-
ley, A. I. Luik, R. G. Foster, V. Wadekar, et al., “The effects of improving sleep on men-
tal health (oasis): a randomised controlled trial with mediation analysis,” The Lancet
Psychiatry, vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 749-758, 2017.
[8] S.-S. Yoo, N. Gujar, P. Hu, F. A. Jolesz, and M. P. Walker, “The human emotional
brain without sleepâa prefrontal amygdala disconnect,” Current biology, vol. 17, no. 20,
pp. R877-R878, 2007.
[9] V. Sterpenich, G. Albouy, M. Boly, G. Vandewalle, A. Darsaud, E. Balteau, T. T. Dang-
Vu, M. Desseilles, A. D’Argembeau, S. Gais, et al., “Sleep-related hippocampo-cortical
interplay during emotional memory recollection,” PLoS biology, vol. 5, no. 11, p. e282,
2007.
[10] A. Mathews and C. MacLeod, “Cognitive vulnerability to emotional disorders,” Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology(2005), vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 167-195, 2005.
[11] G. E. Matt, C. Vázquez, and W. K. Campbell, “Mood-congruent recall of affectively
toned stimuli:
A meta-analytic review,” Clinical psychology review, vol. 12, no. 2,
pp. 227-255, 1992.
[12] S. Farrell, “The detrimental effects of inadequate sleep on the economy,” 2021.
[13] D. F. Dinges, “An overview of sleepiness and accidents,” Journal of sleep research, vol. 4,
pp. 4–14, 1995.
[14] J. Horne and L. Reyner, “Vehicle accidents related to sleep: a review.,” Occupational
and environmental medicine, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 289-294, 1999.
Page III of VII
==PAGE:50==
References
[15] A. T. McCartt, S. A. Ribner, A. I. Pack, and M. C. Hammer, “The scope and nature of
the drowsy driving problem in new york state,” Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 28,
no. 4, pp. 511-517, 1996.
[16] S. R. Pandi-Perumal, D. W. Spence, and A. S. BaHammam, “Polysomnography: an
overview,” Primary Care Sleep Medicine: A Practical Guide, pp. 29–42, 2014.
[17] WHO, “Who coronavirus disease (covid-19) dashboard,” 2022.
[18] H. Meaklim, M. F. Junge, P. Varma, W. A. Finck, and M. L. Jackson, “Pre-existing and
post-pandemic insomnia symptoms are associated with high levels of stress, anxiety, and
depression globally during the covid-19 pandemic,” Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine,
vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 2085-2097, 2021.
[19] B. Pfefferbaum and C. S. North, “Mental health and the covid-19 pandemic,” New
England Journal of Medicine, vol. 383, no. 6, pp. 510-512, 2020.
[20] C. Blume, M. H. Schmidt, and C. Cajochen, “Effects of the covid-19 lockdown on human
sleep and rest-activity rhythms,” Current Biology, vol. 30, no. 14, pp. R795-R797, 2020.
[21] K. P. Wright Jr, S. K. Linton, D. Withrow, L. Casiraghi, S. M. Lanza, H. de la Iglesia,
C. Vetter, and C. M. Depner, “Sleep in university students prior to and during covid-19
stay-at-home orders,” Current biology, vol. 30, no. 14, pp. R797-R798, 2020.
[22] A. Sadeh, M. Sharkey, and M. A. Carskadon, “Activity-based sleep-wake identification:
an empirical test of methodological issues,” Sleep, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 201-207, 1994.
[23] J. L. Martin and A. D. Hakim, “Wrist actigraphy,” Chest, vol. 139, no. 6, pp. 1514–1527,
2011.
[24] D. M. Roberts, M. M. Schade, G. M. Mathew, D. Gartenberg, and O. M. Buxton,
“Detecting sleep using heart rate and motion data from multisensor consumer-grade
wearables, relative to wrist actigraphy and polysomnography,” Sleep, vol. 43, 03 2020.
zsaa045.
[25] M. T. Smith, C. S. McCrae, J. Cheung, J. L. Martin, C. G. Harrod, J. L. Heald,
and K. A. Carden, “Use of actigraphy for the evaluation of sleep disorders and circadian
rhythm sleep-wake disorders: an american academy of sleep medicine systematic review,
meta-analysis, and grade assessment,” Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, vol. 14, no. 7,
pp. 1209–1230, 2018.
[26] J. B. Webster, D. F. Kripke, S. Messin, D. J. Mullaney, and G. Wyborney, “An activity-
based sleep monitor system for ambulatory use,” Sleep, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 389–399, 1982.
[27] D. Mullaney, D. Kripke, and S. Messin, “Wrist-actigraphic estimation of sleep time,”
Sleep, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 83–92, 1980.
Page IV of VII
==PAGE:51==
References
[28] M. J. C. Brandon Peters, “What is an overnight sleep study (polysomnogram)?,” Very-
well Health, 2020.
[29] T. Morgenthaler, C. Alessi, L. Friedman, J. Owens, V. Kapur, B. Boehlecke, T. Brown,
A. Chesson Jr, J. Coleman, T. Lee-Chiong, et al., “Practice parameters for the use of
actigraphy in the assessment of sleep and sleep disorders: an update for 2007,” Sleep,
vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 519–529, 2007.
[30] A. W. De Weerd, “Actigraphy, the alternative way?,” Frontiers in Psychiatry, vol. 5,
p. 155, 2014.
[31] M. Marino, Y. Li, M. N. Rueschman, J. W. Winkelman, J. Ellenbogen, J. M. Solet,
H. Dulin, L. F. Berkman, and O. M. Buxton, “Measuring sleep: accuracy, sensitivity,
and specificity of wrist actigraphy compared to polysomnography,” Sleep, vol. 36, no. 11,
pp. 1747–1755, 2013.
[32] L. Tarokh, J. M. Saletin, and M. A. Carskadon, “Sleep in adolescence: Physiology,
cognition and mental health,” Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews, vol. 70, p. 182,
2016.
[33] A. Sadeh, “The role and validity of actigraphy in sleep medicine: an update,” Sleep
medicine reviews, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 259–267, 2011.
[34] R. J. Cole, D. F. Kripke, W. Gruen, D. J. Mullaney, and J. C. Gillin, “Automatic
sleep/wake identification from wrist activity,” Sleep, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 461–469, 1992.
[35] K. G. Baron, J. Duffecy, M. A. Berendsen, I. C. Mason, E. G. Lattie, and N. C. Manalo,
“Feeling validated yet?
a scoping review of the use of consumer-targeted wearable
and mobile technology to measure and improve sleep,” Sleep medicine reviews, vol. 40,
pp. 151–159, 2018.
[36] F. Snyder, J. A. Hobson, D. F. Morrison, and F. Goldfrank, “Changes in respiration,
heart rate, and systolic blood pressure in human sleep,” Journal of applied physiology,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 417–422, 1964.
[37] P. Bušek, J. Vaňková, J. Opavsk`y, J. Salinger, and S. Nevšímalová, “Spectral analysis
of heart rate variability in sleep,” Physiol res, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 369–376, 2005.
[38] E. Yuda, Y. Yoshida, R. Sasanabe, H. Tanaka, T. Shiomi, and J. Hayano, “Sleep stage
classification by a combination of actigraphic and heart rate signals,” Journal of Low
Power Electronics and Applications, vol. 7, no. 4, p. 28, 2017.
[39] H. S. SOLUTIONS, “Pros and cons of an in-lab sleep study.”
[40] V. T. van Hees, S. Sabia, S. E. Jones, A. R. Wood, K. N. Anderson, M. Kivimäki, T. M.
Frayling, A. I. Pack, M. Bucan, M. Trenell, et al., “Estimating sleep parameters using
an accelerometer without sleep diary,” Scientific reports, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 12975, 2018.
Page V of VII
==PAGE:52==
References
[41] E. Yuda, Y. Yoshida, R. Sasanabe, H. Tanaka, T. Shiomi, and J. Hayano, “Sleep stage
classification by a combination of actigraphic and heart rate signals,” Journal of Low
Power Electronics and Applications, vol. 7, no. 4, 2017.
[42] E. Smets, E. Rios Velazquez, G. Schiavone, I. Chakroun, E. DâHondt, W. De Raedt,
J. Cornelis, O. Janssens, S. Van Hoecke, S. Claes, et al., “Large-scale wearable data
reveal digital phenotypes for daily-life stress detection,” NPJ digital medicine, vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2018.
[43] C. Orphanidou, “Quality assessment for the photoplethysmogram (ppg),” in Signal Qual-
ity Assessment in Physiological Monitoring, pp. 41–63, Springer, 2018.
[44] R. Kocielnik, N. Sidorova, F. M. Maggi, M. Ouwerkerk, and J. H. Westerink, “Smart
technologies for long-term stress monitoring at work,” in proceedings of the 26th IEEE
international symposium on computer-based medical systems, pp. 53–58, IEEE, 2013.
[45] L. A. Jones and S. J. Lederman, Human hand function. Oxford university press, 2006.
[46] R. Robillard, M. Saad, J. Edwards, E. Solomonova, M.-H. Pennestri, A. Daros, S. P. L.
Veissière, L. Quilty, K. Dion, A. Nixon, et al., “Social, financial and psychological stress
during an emerging pandemic: observations from a population survey in the acute phase
of covid-19,” BMJ open, vol. 10, no. 12, p. e043805, 2020.
[47] T. H. Monk, C. F. Reynolds III, D. J. Buysse, J. M. DeGrazia, and D. J. Kupfer, “The
relationship between lifestyle regularity and subjective sleep quality,” Chronobiology
international, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 97–107, 2003.
[48] H. M. Milojevich and A. F. Lukowski, “Sleep and mental health in undergraduate stu-
dents with generally healthy sleep habits,” PloS one, vol. 11, no. 6, p. e0156372, 2016.
[49] M. Hirshkowitz, K. Whiton, S. M. Albert, C. Alessi, O. Bruni, L. DonCarlos, N. Hazen,
J. Herman, E. S. Katz, L. Kheirandish-Gozal, et al., “National sleep foundationâs
sleep time duration recommendations: methodology and results summary,” Sleep health,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 40–43, 2015.
[50] M. M. Ohayon, “Epidemiology of insomnia: what we know and what we still need to
learn,” Sleep medicine reviews, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 97–111, 2002.
[51] C. Baglioni, G. Battagliese, B. Feige, K. Spiegelhalder, C. Nissen, U. Voderholzer,
C. Lombardo, and D. Riemann, “Insomnia as a predictor of depression:
a meta-
analytic evaluation of longitudinal epidemiological studies,” Journal of affective dis-
orders, vol. 135, no. 1-3, pp. 10–19, 2011.
[52] J. R. Marks, J. M. Schectman, H. Groninger, and M. L. Plews-Ogan, “The association
of health literacy and socio-demographic factors with medication knowledge,” Patient
education and counseling, vol. 78, no. 3, pp. 372–376, 2010.
Page VI of VII
==PAGE:53==
References
[53] A. Reyner and J. Horne, “Gender-and age-related differences in sleep determined by
home-recorded sleep logs and actimetry from 400 adults,” Sleep, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 127–
134, 1995.
[54] P. Cheng, D. A. Kalmbach, G. Tallent, C. L. Joseph, C. A. Espie, and C. L. Drake, “De-
pression prevention via digital cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia: a randomized
controlled trial,” Sleep, vol. 42, no. 10, p. zsz150, 2019.
Page VII of VII
