==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Identifying patterns in parliamentary
speeches using Natural Language
Processing
Georgios Tsimplis
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
It is widely recognized that the majority of NLP tools have been developed for the
English language, creating a void in the research of this field for other languages. This
thesis aims to explore the feasibility of utilizing machine learning and NLP techniques to
facilitate the analysis of parliamentary speeches within the Danish context. Specifically,
the research concentrates on the application of unsupervised and supervised approaches
for text classification in order to identify the sentiment and ideology found in parliamen-
tary speeches.
The effectiveness of lexicon-based sentiment analysis relies heavily on the size and
consistency of the sentiment lexicons utilized. In view of this, the present study sought
to expand the Danish AFINN sentiment lexicon through the employment of a technique
previously applied to the English VADER lexicon. Three distinct sets of pre-trained
word embeddings are compared to assess the feasibility of leveraging their semantic
associations to automatically assign sentiment scores to lexicon-absent terms. The em-
pirical analysis reveals that the generalization of this approach was not feasible, as only
one of the three sets provided information regarding the sentiment of words. Neverthe-
less, for the set that satisfied the necessary conditions, the approach yielded improved
accuracy and coverage in two distinct sentiment analysis tasks.
Additionally, the present study utilizes Danish parliamentary speeches spanning from
the period 2009 to 2017 to investigate whether it is possible to automatically classify
these speeches based on the political party aﬀiliation or broader ideological categories of
the speaker. A comparison is conducted between a non-linear and a linear SVC utilizing a
nested cross-validation methodology. The outcomes indicate that both classifiers exhibit
similar levels of performance, surpassing the baseline model by a considerable margin.
Furthermore, the error analysis suggests that this approach can be utilized not only to
predict the ideology of a speaker but also to draw valuable inferences regarding the way
that different parties form their political discourse.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This M.Sc thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a M.Sc degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
Kongens Lyngby, March 10, 2023
Georgios Tsimplis (s200166)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I express my appreciation to my supervisor, Line Katrine Harder
Clemmensen, for her invaluable guidance, and support throughout the project. Her ex-
perience, insights and suggestions have been instrumental in shaping this work. I am
also deeply grateful to my friend, Nefeli, for her constant support, motivation, and will-
ingness to listen to me during the challenging times. Her belief in my abilities has been
a great source of strength. I am also grateful to my friend Giorgos for our constructive
conversations, which have challenged and enriched my thinking. I would like to extend
my thanks to my brother, Nikos, for his encouragement, advice, and support during the
course of this study. His support has been a source of strength and inspiration.
Last but not least, I would like to express my honest appreciation to my parents,
Christos and Olga, who have been my pillars of strength throughout my academic jour-
ney. Their unconditional love, encouragement, and unwavering support have been my
constant source of motivation.
Thank you all for your valuable contributions, encouragement, and support.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Purpose and Research Hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
NLP in politics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Sentiment Analysis in the Political Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Research on Sentiment Lexicons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Research on Party Aﬀiliation Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theoretical Background
9
3.1
Natural Language Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Text Classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.2
Sentiment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.3
Text Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3.1
N-gram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.3.2
Tokenization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.3.3
Stop-word/Punctuation Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.3.4
Stemming-Lemmatization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.3.5
Part of Speech Tagging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.4
Text Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.4.1
Local Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
3.1.4.2
Word Embeddings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Support Vector Classifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Classification Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Nested Cross-Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Methodology
24
4.1
The AFINN Sentiment Lexicon
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Lexicon Expansion Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.1
Empirical Exploration of Sentiment in Word Embeddings . . . . .
26
4.2.2
Dynamic Neighborhood Lexicon Expansion Algorithm
. . . . . .
28
4.2.2.1
Testing the expanded lexicons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Predicting Party Aﬀiliation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.1
The Danish Parliament Corpus 2009 - 2017 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.1.1
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3.2
Methodology Schema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3.2.1
Ideology Grouping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3.2.2
Class Distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3.2.3
Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3.2.4
Classification Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2.5
Model Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Results
37
5.1
Lexicon Expansion Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.1
Exploring Word Embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.2
Searching for Sentiment in Word Embeddings: Empirical Evidence
39
5.1.2.1
Co-occurrence Distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.3
Validating the Algorithm on the Lexicon . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.3.1
Comparing AFINN with the Expanded Lexicons
. . . .
46
5.2
Ideology Classification Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.1
Political Party Aﬀiliation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.2
Ideology Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Discussion
57
6.1
Summary of Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
Suggestions for Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
Conclusion
60
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
A
An Appendix
62
A.1 Co-occurrence Distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2 Confusion Matrices for Europarl1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.3 Confusion Matrices for Europarl2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.4 Classification Reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.5 Classification Reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.6 Word Clouds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
Bibliography
70
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
In the past decade, and particularly in recent years, citizens and governments have
encountered numerous challenges including climate change, pandemic, geopolitical in-
stability, and economic uncertainty. In this complex environment, politicians’ speeches
and promises have become a key source of information for citizens and businesses, provid-
ing insights into the government’s strategy in addressing these problems. The language
used by politicians and political parties, including their choice of words and how they
express their ideas, is a crucial element for comprehending their future agendas. Usually,
the actions of politicians are influenced by the ideological tendencies of the parties they
represent. Therefore, identifying the political ideology based on the linguistic features
from textual data is crucial in understanding how different political parties approach
important issues.
Traditionally, the analysis of political and parliamentary speeches has primarily been
the focus of social scientists. The digitalization of data and the progress of natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) and machine learning techniques have revolutionized the field
of computational analysis, allowing the processing of vast amounts of data that would
be impossible for humans to analyze. This developement offered significant applications
on political analysis, as it enables researchers to gain insights into large-scale trends
and patterns that were previously inaccessible, contributing to a more comprehensive
understanding of political systems and processes.
Although there is a large volume of digital texts available in multiple languages,
the majority of research has been centered around the English language[33]. The perfor-
mance of various NLP tasks heavily relies on the availability of tools, which are primarily
developed for the English language. Specifically, in lexicon-based sentiment analysis, the
sentiment lexicon plays a critical role in the analysis process.
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Purpose and Research Hypotheses
2
As an international student at the Technical University of Denmark with a keen in-
terest of the country’s political context, I faced the challenge of utilizing my academic
background to identify patterns in the parliamentary speeches of the Folketing. The
aforementioned challenges of the current era, coupled with the limited availability of
NLP tools for languages other than English, have served as the motivation for the initi-
ation of this project.
1.2
Purpose and Research Hypotheses
The primary objective of this project is to leverage machine learning and NLP techniques
to create tools and findings that facilitate the analysis of political speeches and the
identification of variations and trends in the way that politicians communicate their
views among different parties. Towards this direction, the research will concentrate on
testing the subsequent hypotheses:
• H1: Word embeddings may include information about words’ sentiment scores.
• H2: Using word embeddings to expand an existing lexicon we can achieve higher
performance and coverage for political sentiment analysis tasks.
• H3: Each speech represents the ideology of a specific party. Therefore the different
ideologies of the parties are separable into the tf-idf vector space.
The methodology for testing the aforementioned hypotheses will be presented and
discussed in a subsequent chapter.
1.3
Structure of the Thesis
The thesis, apart from the current first chapter, comprises of six chapters, each of which
deals with a specific aspect of the study. The second chapter offers a review of the
literature on NLP and its applications to political analysis. The third chapter presents
the fundamental concepts utilized during the study, including a brief description of NLP
and the models employed. The fourth chapter focuses on the methodologies employed to
investigate the research hypotheses. Subsequently, the fifth chapter presents the findings
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Structure of the Thesis
3
of the study, including the results of the comparison conducted on three distinct types
of embeddings and the outcomes of predicting party aﬀiliation using the three grouping
strategies. The sixth chapter contextualizes and interprets the findings of the previous
chapter, addresses the limitations and constraints of the study, and provides potential
ideas for future research. Finally, the conclusion chapter summarizes the information of
the previous chapters.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
The following review aims to provide a solid overview of the current trends and strategies
used for text information extraction and its applications in political analysis. It com-
mences with a general introduction of the applications, terminologies, and methodologies
found in the literature. Subsequently, it delves into specific areas of the applications of
NLP in politics, including sentiment analysis and identification of party aﬀiliation.
2.1
NLP in politics
Due to the fact that NLP can contribute in extracting information that is not overtly
stated, a lot of studies focusing on social sciences have employed this offshoot of AI over
the last few years[1]. A number of parameters such as the variable that we are interested
in, the techniques of text mining as well as the different types of text sources where there
is information about political opinions, created the need for a variety of approaches.
The majority of existing studies that investigate NLP applications in political science
rely on textual data obtained from Twitter as their primary source of data.[43]. The
methods employed span from simple statistical analysis to supervised and unsupervised
machine learning techniques. During this study, a number of significant terminology
inconsistencies worthy of mention were noticed. An example of this is the classification
of a speaker’s party aﬀiliation, which is referred to as ideology detection[10] by some
researchers and party prediction by others[25]. In the present study, we will refer to
this task as ”party aﬀiliation prediction”. The term ”sentiment analysis” has also been
used to cover a broad range of studies that differ greatly concerning the objective of the
study. In a recent study, Mohammad et al. conducted several experiments using support
vector machine (SVM) classifiers, lexicon-based approaches, neural network classifiers,
and multiple political corpora including parliamentary speeches, to prove that sentiment
and stance are distinct concepts[39]. Given that researchers have historically used the
term ”sentiment analysis” interchangeably to encompass various variables, such as the
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Sentiment Analysis in the Political Domain
5
outcome of legislative voting, psychological emotions, and others, in order to avoid
misunderstandings, I will always be specifying the variable of interest referred to as
”sentiment analysis” in subsequent sections.
Figure 2.1: Distribution of different data sources [43] .
2.2
Sentiment Analysis in the Political Domain
Traditionally, parliamentary speeches have been studied at a theoretical sociological
analysis level. In the last decade, advancements in the field of computational linguistics
have prompted computer scientists to address the challenge of performing automatic
sentiment analysis utilizing a variety of resources and methods. From a methodologi-
cal perspective, the approaches utilized in the existing literature can be clustered into
two main categories[9]. The lexicon-based approaches which are considered as an un-
supervised classification task that determines the sentiment score of a sentence or a
paragraph based on the sentiment orientation of individual words taken from a lexi-
con[58]. On the other hand, supervised sentiment analysis which requires labeled texts,
involves the training process of supervised Machine Learning/Deep Learning models to
group unseen data into sentiment categories.
Concerning the supervised approaches, in one of the first studies, Thomas et al.
examined the possibility of determining whether a speaker is expressing support or op-
position during a legislative process using a SVM classifier on speeches taken from the
U.S. Congress[56]. Other researchers have conducted comparative studies to evaluate
the effectiveness and eﬀiciency of various machine learning models applied in the field
of political sentiment analysis. Duthie et al. compared the performance of a SVM, a
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Sentiment Analysis in the Political Domain
6
Naive Bayes, and a Maximum Entropy model in a complex NLP pipeline in their effort
to explore ethos in UK Parliamentary speeches[14]. In the following years, due to the
progress in NLP, more sophisticated methods were employed to study the sentiment
in political texts. Abercrombie et al. utilized a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and, in
addition to the UK parliamentary speeches, incorporated the speaker’s party aﬀiliation,
ID number, and the proposing party of the legislation as learning features to predict the
vote of the speaker[2]. All the above methods used bag-of-words methods to vectorize the
texts. The advantage of word embeddings to reflect the semantics of the words led more
researchers to use them in sentiment analysis tasks. Rudkowsky et al. used pre-trained
German word embeddings as an input in a Neural Network to compute the negativity of
the speeches using a five-point scale of negativity[51]. Recently, researchers focused on
the multilingual aspect of the task, attempted to implement a uniform methodology for
multi-aspect parliamentary speech analysis, comparing results from speeches in six Eu-
ropean national parliaments[38]. They employed a multilingual BERT[57] transformer
and they concluded that Spanish, Czech, and UK parliament express more positive sen-
timents compared to French, Slovenian, and Bulgarian.
Although supervised classifiers often show exceptional performance on the datasets
they are trained on, the need for flexibility has prompted many researchers to adopt
lexicon-based approaches.
These approaches employ manually or automatically con-
structed lexicons consisting of words engaged with their sentiment score to evaluate
the overall sentiment of a sentence or a paragraph. According to this review, lexicon-
based approaches have mostly been carried out by interdisciplinary teams consisting of
social and computer scientists. In this context, Onyimadu et al. utilized MPQA lexi-
con[60] and employed heuristic classifiers based on syntactic rules to classify speeches
from the UK Parliament firstly into objective-subjective, and then into positive-negative
[46]. Recently, a multidisciplinary team analyzed the tweets of the political parties in
the Portuguese parliament to explore the emotions during covid-19 pandemic using a
lexicon-based approach[5]. They utilized a translated version of a lexicon developed by
Mohammad et al. and they computed the negativity and the positivity of a tweet based
on the number of the positive and negative words[40]. Other researchers has focused
on performace comparison of the sentiment analysis task using various lexicons, such
as VADER[23] and Liu Hu[21], and found that both can effectively extract the polarity
from parliamentary speeches[36].
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Research on Sentiment Lexicons
7
2.3
Research on Sentiment Lexicons
In the lexicon-based approaches described in the above section, the most important
tool is the sentiment dictionary used, with the majority of existing sentiment lexicons
being manually generated. The requirement for domain-specific lexicons, the labor/cost-
intensive process of manual lexicon generation, and the limited coverage of existing
lexicons in many cases, has driven researchers to explore automatic methods for gener-
ating or expanding existing lexicons[12]. Salah et al. updated the SentiWordNet 3.0[6]
lexicon using an annotated corpus of speeches from the U.K Parliament[53]. The schema
that they developed was based on the idea that positive words tend to occur frequently
in positive sentences and similarly, negative words tend to occur frequently in negative
sentences. Other studies focused on lexicon expansion utilized semi-supervised learning
to propagate sentiment by exploiting synset relationships[35]. Recently, word embed-
dings inspired researchers to develop new methods in order to expand existing lexicons.
Viegas et al. exploited the semantic relationships of the words in an embedding space to
expand VADER and SO-CAL[50] achieving higher performance and coverage in lexicon
based sentiment analysis tasks[59].
2.4
Research on Party Aﬀiliation Prediction
One of the most challenging classification tasks in the political domain is the so-called
ideological stance detection which is usually reflected as party aﬀiliation. This occurs as
a result of political speech being distinct from everyday speech in terms of terminology
and the way emotions are expressed when people express their opinion on a topic[62].
In this context, a significant portion of the early work has been carried out using Sup-
port Vector Machine (SVM) binary classifiers to classify speakers into distinct categories,
such as liberals or conservatives[19]. Other studies also employed bag-of-words vectoriza-
tion in combination with machine learning classifiers, treating the task as a multi-class
classification challenge to determine the speaker’s political party aﬀiliation from among
multiple options[25, 20]. Budhwar et al. examined thousands of legislative speeches
from California state to generate models that predict the votes of the speakers[7]. They
evaluated the performance of a SVM classifier, a Random Forest classifier, and an RNN
on both balanced and imbalanced datasets, and found that all models performed simi-
larly with the RNN slightly outperforming the others.
==PAGE:16==
2.4 Research on Party Aﬀiliation Prediction
8
All the methods described in the paragraph above, rely on bag-of-words models and
word-level statistics for text vectorization. However, the desire to incorporate additional
information prompted scientists to develop new text mining techniques. In this direc-
tion, Chen et al. combined information from a knowledge graph model with tf-idf vectors
achieving higher performance in ideology detection[10]. The last years researchers uti-
lized word embeddings to capture the semantic relationships from the texts. Studies
have indicated that models using word embeddings exhibit superior performance when
trained on extensive collections of texts from the domain of interest[30]. Rheault L.
and Cochrane C. created party embeddings by aggregating the word embeddings of
parliamentary speeches delivered by political parties across multiple years[49]. After
projecting the embeddings into a lower-dimensional space, they observed that the party
embeddings captured distinct regions of the latent space.
Despite the diﬀiculty in developing NLP applications for non-English languages due
to the limited availability of resources and tools, research efforts have been undertaken
to apply NLP in the Danish political context. In 2020, Navarretta C. and Hansen D.
conducted a study to investigate the differences in the speeches delivered by two left-
wing and two right-wing political parties in the Danish parliament[42]. The study aimed
to explore how these differences, which reflect the basic stances of the parties, can be
leveraged for automatic identification of the political aﬀiliation of politicians based on
their speeches. Last year, the same team along with Jongejan B. in another study used
topic modelling to outline the main themes in the immigration debates[41].
This study extends the previous work by incorporating additional political parties
in the analysis and evaluating the performance using various party grouping approaches
based on their political leanings(left - center - right).
The decision to abstain from
employing the latest state-of-the-art NLP models, which are based on neural networks,
is attributed to their lack of explainability. The objective of the study was not solely
to forecast the ideology, but also to derive insights from the learning features. Finally,
given the limited availability of NLP tools for non-English languages, this study aims to
make an effort to expand an existing Danish sentiment lexicon by exploiting pretrained
word embeddings.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Theoretical Background
This chapter seeks to offer an overview of the fundamental concepts utilized during the
research. In the following section, a brief description of the foundational term Natural
language processing (NLP), which forms the basis of this project, will be presented. This
will be followed by a detailed discussion of the models employed during the course of
the research.
3.1
Natural Language Processing
Natural language processing is an interdisciplinary technology that merges linguistics,
computer science, and artificial intelligence to facilitate the conversion of human lan-
guage into a machine-readable format that can be more readily processed by computer-
ized systems[61]. The term NLP in mainly used to describe the process of developing
algorithms that facilitate the analysis of verbal or written speech[24].
Figure 3.1: NLP in a Venn diagram .
==PAGE:18==
3.1 Natural Language Processing
10
To comprehend the nature of NLP, it is imperative to acknowledge that the term is
relatively broad in its application. Therefore, the following outline enlists some funda-
mental tasks of NLP to offer insight into its core functions.
• Machine Translation: Refers to the process of utilizing software to convert text or
speech from one language to another.
• Named entity recognition: is a component of information extraction which aims
to find and categorize named entities from a text into predetermined categories,
including but not limited to, people’s names, organizations, and places.
• Part Of Speech Tagging: describes the process of labeling the words a text with
their part of speech.
• Morphological Segmentation: refers to the process of dividing words into mor-
phemes (the primary semantic units)[47].
• Discourse Analysis: involves the identification of the way in which text is connected
within a given social context.
The origins of NLP can be traced back to the late 1940s when initial efforts towards
machine translation were made, despite the absence of the term at the time[27]. The
initial applications of NLP relied on rule-based systems, which were capable of executing
basic NLP tasks. However, the constraints of this approach prevented these systems
from being able to adapt to the demands of complex domains that require flexibility.
During the period from 1990 to 2010, the field of NLP experienced a significant change
known as the ”statistical NLP era”. This was primarily driven by the emergence of
advanced technology and the introduction of machine learning algorithms that enabled
the automatic extraction of information from text data. Nowadays, deep neural networks
has enabled the processing of vast amounts of textual or voice data with greater accuracy
in various NLP tasks.
3.1.1
Text Classification
It is widely acknowledged that a significant proportion of data available in organiza-
tional contexts are unstructured and predominantly in the form of textual data[28].
However, the task of manually classifying text into relevant categories is diﬀicult and
time-consuming for human operators. In the context of NLP, text classification refers to
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Natural Language Processing
11
the automated process of categorizing texts into predefined categories. This can be per-
formed at different levels, including the sentence, paragraph, or document level. Given
a set D = {d1, d2, . . . dn} of documents, where each document is associated with a class
from a set C = {c1, c2, . . . cm}, the problem is to determine a function f that can ac-
curately assign each document to a specific category (or multiple categories in certain
cases).
f : D →C
The entire process can be considered as a pipeline in which the data initially flows in
an unstructured format. NLP techniques are then applied to transform the data from
unstructured to structured. Subsequently, the training process takes place, followed by
the evaluation of the model. Finally, the model is deployed to classify new documents.
Figure 3.2: Overview of text classification process .
Text classification enables the automation of processes and the discovery of insights.
As a result, it provides benefits for both organizations and employees, ultimately re-
sulting in improved decision-making. Due to this fact, this process is widely applied in
various industries, including health, social sciences, and commerce.
3.1.2
Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment analysis, which is also known as opinion mining, refers to the computational
process of examining the sentiments and opinions that are expressed in textual data[63].
Although sentiment analysis and opinion mining are often used interchangeably in the
literature, opinion refers to a broader concept that encompasses a person’s attitude
toward a specific entity. Specifically, sentiment can be considered as a component of
opinion that pertains to the expression of positive or negative emotions[32].
==PAGE:20==
3.1 Natural Language Processing
12
Prior to 2010, there was limited research conducted in this field.
Over the past
decade, the extensive usage of the internet and the widespread use of social media plat-
forms, which allows individuals to express their feelings, has led to a dramatic increase
in the study of sentiment analysis. As a result, new methods have been developed to
detect and quantify sentiment. In the literature, the techniques for automatically cat-
egorizing sentiments expressed in textual data are broadly categorized into supervised
and unsupervised sentiment analysis[22].
However, recent efforts have also explored
semi-supervised approaches that involve unlabeled data[13].
Supervised sentiment analysis can be considered as a text classification process that
involves the utilization of a machine learning or deep learning classification model that
is trained on labeled data. This approach is widely adopted due to its exceptional per-
formance, particularly with the utilization of the latest state-of-the-art language mod-
els. However, the limitations associated with supervised learning, such as insuﬀicient
or biased training data, have prompted researchers to turn to unsupervised sentiment
analysis methods[34]. These methods do not rely on labeled data and instead use unsu-
pervised models or sentiment lexicons to accomplish the classification task. Specifically,
lexicon-based approaches utilize a pre-existing lexicon containing words labeled as ei-
ther positive, negative, sometimes with an assigned value indicating the intensity of the
sentiment. Finally, a formula or an algorithm that aggregates the scores of the words in
the document is employed in order to calculate a sentiment score at the document-level.
3.1.3
Text Preprocessing
As has already been stated, NLP is the technology used to convert human language
into a machine-readable format for computational processing. The initial and one of
the crucial steps in this direction is the text preprocessing phase. This phase involves
various techniques that are employed to prepare the text before being transformed into
numerical representations that can be effectively processed by computers.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Natural Language Processing
13
Figure 3.3: Typical text preprocessing flowchart .
Figure 3.3 illustrates a typical text preprocessing flowchart. Every step that will
be examined in the next paragraphs, eliminates elements that are considered as noise
for the model. However, depending on the specific objective of a given task, it may be
necessary to omit certain text preprocessing steps or add additional ones. For instance,
when developing a spam detection model, it may be necessary to eliminate the step that
converts the letters to lowercase because words in uppercase letters contain valuable
information for the model to accurately classify spam messages.
3.1.3.1
N-gram
N-gram is a preprocessing technique that determines which features of the text will be
transformed into numerical representations. This method considers the text a series
of sequential elements and depending on the level of analysis these elements could be
characters, words, or phrases. The two examples presented below provide insights into
the process.
Example 1 (character level):
tekst: (uni-grams) →[t, e, k, s, t]
tekst: (bi-grams) →[te, ek, ks, st]
Example 2 (word level):
Dette er et eksempel: (uni-grams) →[Dette, er, et, eksempel]
Dette er et eksempel: (bi-grams) →[Dette er, er et, et eksempel]
3.1.3.2
Tokenization
Before studying the details of this phase, it is worth exploring how the human language
works. All languages are composed of a unique set of characters that are combined to
form words. Every text is a collection of words that form a vocabulary. Tokenization,
==PAGE:22==
3.1 Natural Language Processing
14
refers to the process of dividing a text into smaller segments which are called tokens[4].
Depending on the level of analysis, these tokens can be characters, words or even phrases.
This process has been structured using the n-gram model, which represents the text as
a sequence of n elements. In the word level analysis for the European languages, the
delimeter that is used to divide the text into tokens is the space between the words.
Therefore a uni-gram represents a single word, a bi-gram is a pair of words and so on.
3.1.3.3
Stop-word/Punctuation Filtering
During the preprocessing stage, a crucial step is the removal of stop words, which are
commonly occurring words that are not meaningful for text analysis, and are often iden-
tified by referencing a stoplist. These words are considered as noise in a model and the
elimination of them during preprocessing provides various advantages, such as the re-
duction of the vector space and the improvement of the accuracy on classification tasks.
Some general types of stopwords for the majority of the languages are the determin-
ers, the conjuctions, and the prepositions[26]. However, in certain instances, particular
words that may contain significant information for one domain may be irrelevant for
another domain and thus regarded as stop-words.
Another important preprocessing
step is punctuation removal. Punctuation marks are used to segment text into smaller
phrases and to clarify meaning, but they can decrease the performance of classification
algorithms, particularly when the model relies on word frequencies. However, in specific
cases such as the ”spam detection” task, it has been demonstrated that punctuation can
add significant predictive power[16].
3.1.3.4
Stemming-Lemmatization
One of the significant challenges in NLP tasks is the high dimensionality of the data.
In particular, when dealing with large corpora, the resulting vocabulary may contain
hundreds of thousands of tokens. The situation can worsen further if words sharing
the same root are treated as distinct. Stemming and lemmatization are considered as
text normalization techiques that help to convert inflected words into their base form[54].
Although both methods share the common goal of normalizing text, there are differences
in the resulting output when applying either of them.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Natural Language Processing
15
Figure 3.4: Differences between Stemming - Lemmatization .
Stemming: is a text normalization technique that involves the removal of word
suﬀixes to achieve a common stem[48]. Although stemming does not take into consid-
eration the grammatical rules of the language, it preserves the semantic meaning of the
word after the transformation[55].
Lemmatization: is a technique that involves the elimination or substitution of in-
flected parts of words to attain a common lemma[44]. In contrast to stemming, lemma-
tization accounts for the grammatical rules of the language, resulting in a word that can
be found in the language’s vocabulary.
Although stemming and lemmatization are are considered as equivalent in NLP, the
selection of the technique, depends on the specific case of study. For example, research
has demonstrated that lemmatization performs slightly better on sentence similarity
tasks[48]. On the other hand, stemming is a more straightforward and computationally
eﬀicient process.
3.1.3.5
Part of Speech Tagging
Part-of-speech (POS) tagging is a fundamental area of research and a key component
of many natural language processing applications. The objective of this process is to
automatically assign each word in a sentence to its appropriate part of speech (Noun,
Verb, etc)[11]. It can be regarded as a classification process that is of great significance,
as it serves as a critical preprocessing step for numerous NLP applications such as: word
sense disambiguation, information extraction, and machine translation.
==PAGE:24==
3.1 Natural Language Processing
16
Figure 3.5: Part-of-Speech Tagging .
3.1.4
Text Representations
In all languages, written speech comprises a sequence of symbols arranged in a specific
order to produce meaningful information. Due to the nature of computers working with
numerical data, one of the primary challenges in NLP is the conversion of textual char-
acters into numerical representations that accurately capture as much information as
possible. The process of converting textual data into numerical representations is a cru-
cial factor that has a significant impact on the performance of various natural language
processing tasks, particularly in the domain of text classification. This is mainly due to
the fact that the numerical representations generated serve as input to the classification
algorithm, which can heavily influence the accuracy and overall eﬀicacy of the task.
3.1.4.1
Local Representations
Count Vectorizer
Local representations are the most commonly utilized and straightforward methods for
transforming texts into vectors. The simplest version among local representation tech-
niques is the Count Vectorizer model.
In this approach, the words of a corpus are
considered as features, and each document is transformed into a vector by employing
the word frequencies present in that document.
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Natural Language Processing
17
Figure 3.6: Bag-of-Words Text Representation .
Although the aforementioned method is commonly utilized, it can sometimes result
in issues due to the fact that frequently occurring words may provide insignificant infor-
mation to the model.
Term Frequency - Inverse Document Frequency(tf-idf)
This method is an updated version of the Count Vectorizer approach, which aims to
mitigate the impact of high-frequency words in the corpus by introducing the factor
idf. In every NLP task, the corpus can be regarded as a collection of m documents
D = {d1, d2, . . . dm} and the vocabulary as a set of k terms T = {t1, t2, . . . tk}. Let n(di)
represent the total number of words at document i, n(di, tj) the frequency of term j at
document i and n(D, tj) the number of documents containing the term j. According
to tf-idf approach, the corpus is transformed into a structured matrix where the rows
represent each document and the columns each term in the vocabulary. Every element
of the matrix is computed by utilizing a formula:
tf-idf(di, tj) = tf(di, tj) × idf(tj, D)
(3.1)
where: tf(di, tj) = n(di,tj)
n(di) , and idf(tj, D) = log
m
n(D,tj)
Though the aforementioned methods are broadly used, one of the primary limita-
tions is their inability to incorporate the semantics of the text, as they do take into
consideration the sequential arrangement of the words. Additionally, in cases of large
corpora where the number of distinct words is high, it results in sparse matrices. This
==PAGE:26==
3.1 Natural Language Processing
18
results in high-dimensional spaces that can pose challenges in identifying data patterns
and achieving model generalization(curse of dimensionality).
3.1.4.2
Word Embeddings
The limitations of the previously mentioned methods were remedied with the intro-
duction of word embeddings. Word embeddings are dense distributed numerical word
representations capable of capturing the semantics of the words[3]. These representa-
tions are derived from initially high-dimensional, sparse local representations through a
training process that aims to project them into a lower-dimensional space while preserv-
ing important semantic relationships between words. One of the most crucial studies in
this direction was conducted by Mikolov et al. introducing two neural network architec-
tures for training word vectors on large corpora, leading to the emergence of the word
embeddings revolution[37].
Figure 3.7: CBOW & Skip-Gram architectures[37].
Both of the models employ a context window c, which defines the range of words c
positions to the left and right of the target word wt. Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBOW)
model takes the context words as input in one-hot encoding format, and attempts to
predict the target words while Skip-Gram has the opposite architecture. Specifically,
Skip-Gram model tries to maximize the probability:
1
T
T
∑
t=1
∑
−c≤j≤c,j̸=0
log p(wt+j|wt)
where p(wt+j|wt) is the probability of observing wt+j in the context of wt and it is
calculated using the softmax function.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Support Vector Classifier
19
3.2
Support Vector Classifier
Support Vector Classifier (SVC) is a type of Supervised Machine Learning algorithm used
for classification problems. According to the literature review, this type of classifier is
widely used when dealing with high-dimensional data, such as textual data, where the
number of features (i.e., words, n-grams, or other text-based features) is typically much
larger than the number of instances[15]. It works by finding the linear decision boundary
that best separates the classes in the feature space.
Figure 3.8: The Separable Case of SVC.
Given a binary classification problem with two perfectly separated classes, the train-
ing data is a set of pairs {(x1, y1), (x2, y2), . . . , (xn, yn)}, where xi ∈Rp and yi ∈{−1, 1}
the algorithm defines the hyperplane:
xTβ + β0 = 0
(3.2)
that separates the two classes optimally. The function that maps a point into one of the
two classes is:
F(x) = sign[xTβ + β0]
(3.3)
The distance between the hyperplane and the points that are closest to it (support vec-
tors) is called margin and is equal to 1/∥β∥. The goal of the algorithm is to compute
==PAGE:28==
3.3 Classification Metrics
20
the vectors β and β0 that maximize the margin. This can be achieved by solving the
optimization problem:
min
β,β0
∥β∥
(3.4)
s.t. yi(xT
i β + β0) ≥1, i = 1, . . . , n
3.3
Classification Metrics
In every classification task, the selection of a suitable evaluation metric is very important
for achieving the optimal classifier during the training process. Therefore, a thoughtful
consideration of the evaluation metric is essential.
In a binary classification task, the classification performance of a model is evaluated
based on the correct classification of instances into two classes, namely ”POSITIVE” and
”NEGATIVE”. The confusion matrix is a way to visualize and organize this information.
Figure 3.9: Confusion Matrix of a Binary Classification Task.
It is divided into four parts, each containing information about the predicted and
actual class labels of a binary classification problem. Specifically:
• TP = The number of instances that were correctly classified as POSITIVE.
• TN = The number of instances that were correctly classified as NEGATIVE.
• FP = The number of instances that were classified as POSITIVE but they are
NEGATIVE.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Classification Metrics
21
• FN = The number of instances that were classified as NEGATIVE but they are
POSITIVE.
Accuracy is a widely used evaluation metric for classification models that measures the
ratio of correctly classified instances out of the total number of instances N.
Accuracy = TP + TN
N
(3.5)
Though accuracy is a reasonable metric for evaluating a classification model’s perfor-
mance, it has its limitations. In particular, accuracy does not provide a complete picture
of a model’s performance in cases where a misclassified instance of a specific class costs
more or cases where the class distribution is imbalanced. For instance, in the hypothet-
ical scenario where a model is used to classify patients based on the presence or absence
of a rare disease, in a sample of 100 patients where only 2 have the disease, a model that
classifies all patients as healthy would have an accuracy of 0.98. However, the question
arises as to whether such a model can be considered to have high performance despite
misclassifying all patients with the disease.
Precision and Recall are two metrics that give a more objective picture about model’s
performance in cases similar to the above.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.6)
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3.7)
Precision, represents the proportion of true positives (TP) out of the total number of
instances that the model identified as positive. It answers the question of how many
instances that were identified as positive by the model, were actually positive. Recall
indicates the number of true positive samples in a dataset that were accurately identi-
fied as positive by the model. Depending on the context, there may be instances where
precision is a more suitable performance metric, while in other cases, recall may be more
appropriate. For instance, in the field of medical diagnosis where a positive outcome
signifies the presence of a disease, it is commonly preferred to use recall as a metric,
given that identifying true positives is more important.
F1 score is another commonly used metric in classification tasks that combines pre-
cision and recall into a single score. It provides a balance between precision and recall
==PAGE:30==
3.4 Nested Cross-Validation
22
by taking their harmonic mean.
F1 = 2 Precision ∗Recall
Precision + Recall
(3.8)
F1 score is another reliable metric used in imbalanced datasets because it takes into
account both precision and recall. Precision, recall, and F1 score can be extended and
applied in multiclass classification problems. In the case of multiclass classification, pre-
cision, recall, and F1 score can be calculated for each class separately, treating it as a
binary classification problem between one specific class versus the rest. Subsequently,
these metrics that are specific to each class, can be integrated to generate average met-
rics that offer a comprehensive assessment of the model’s performance. For instance,
in imbalanced multiclass classification problems, weighted F1 score is computed as the
weighted average of the F1 scores of each class, where the weight is the number of sam-
ples in each class divided by the total number of samples.
3.4
Nested Cross-Validation
The performance of machine learning and NLP models is heavily dependent on the
selection of hyperparameters. Regularization parameters, kernel type in SVC, and max-
imum number of features included in the model are examples of hyperparameters that
researchers sought to optimize in order to improve the performance. Furthermore, the
choice of performance estimation methodology can also impact the generalization of the
model. For instance, estimating the performance of a model based simply on an inde-
pendent test set can lead to an optimistic estimation. Nested cross-validation is a widely
used resampling algorithm that tackles the above issues by determining the optimal hy-
perparameters and providing an estimate of the model’s generalization error.
Initially, the algorithm divides the data into K1 outer folds. Each outer training
fold is then subdivided into K2 inner training and validation folds. All models defined
by various hyperparameters are trained on each inner training fold and validated on
the corresponding validation fold. For each model, the validation error is estimated by
averaging the individual errors across the validation folds. Subsequently, the optimal
model of the inner folds is trained on the outer folds and tested on the test folds. The
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Nested Cross-Validation
23
generalization error is then estimated as the average error across all test folds. The
algorithm’s operation is illustrated in the following figure.
Figure 3.10: Nested Cross-Validation Process.
Algorithm 1 Nested cross-validation
Require: K1, K2, folds in outer and inner cross-validation
Require: M1, ....MS, The S different models to cross-validate
Ensure: ˆEgen is the estimate of generalization error
1: for i = 1, ..., K1 do
2:
Outer cross-validation loop. First make the outer split into K1 folds
3:
Let Dpar
i
, Dtest
i
be the ith split of D
4:
for j = 1, ..., , K2 do
5:
Inner cross-validation loop. Use cross-validation to select optimal model
6:
Let Dtrain
j
, Dval
j
be the jth split of Dpar
i
7:
for s = 1, ...S do
8:
Train MS on Dtrain
j
9:
Let Eval
Ms,j be the validation error of model Ms when is tested on Dval
j
10:
end for
11:
end for
12:
For each s compute: ˆEgen
S
=
∑K2
j=1
|Dval
j
|
|Dpar
i
|Eval
Ms,j
13:
Select the optimal model M∗= M∫∗where s∗= arg mins ˆEgen
S
14:
Train M∗on Dpar
i
15:
Let Etest
i
be the test error of the model M∗when it is tested on Dtest
i
16: end for
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
This chapter aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the methodologies employed
to investigate the research hypotheses. The chapter will commence with a detailed ex-
planation of the methodology employed to expand a sentiment lexicon, and the method
of conducting sentence-level sentiment analysis. Subsequently, in the context of research
hypothesis H3, the preprocessing steps undertaken to prepare the corpus of parliamen-
tary speeches for further investigation will be discussed. This will be followed by a de-
scription of the approach used to predict party aﬀiliation of the parliamentary speeches.
4.1
The AFINN Sentiment Lexicon
AFINN is a sentiment lexicon that was developed by Finn Arup Nielsen for sentiment
analysis in microblogs[45]. However, it has been demonstrated to be a valuable tool
for lexicon-based sentiment analysis in other domains[31]. The initial version consisted
of 1468 distinct English unigrams and bigrams that were manually annotated with an
integer sentiment score ranging from -5(negative sentiment) to 5(positive sentiment).
Notably, the lexicon does not contain neutral words with a score of 0. This list was
expanded and translated into Danish using Google Translate and a manual assessment
to form a Danish sentiment lexicon of 3552 words and phrases. The table below provides
a sample of the lexicon:
AFINN Lexicon
stem
score
absorberet
1
bedste
3
nærig
-2
katastrofal
-4
mirakel
4
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Lexicon Expansion Method
25
The approach for expanding the sentiment lexicon relies on word embeddings and
not on embeddings of phrases. Consequently, phrases present in the original AFINN
lexicon were removed, resulting in a lexicon of 3526 words. The distribution of scores
assigned to words in the resulting lexicon is presented in the following figure.
Figure 4.1: Distribution of scores in the Danish AFINN lexicon.
The lexicon displays a greater frequency of negative words compared to positive
words, thereby indicating the possibility of an inherent bias in the algorithm for lexicon
expansion, which will be further elaborated upon in the following chapter.
4.2
Lexicon Expansion Method
Inspired by the study of Viegas et al[59], the objective is to extend their approach to
the Danish language by implementing the Dynamic neighborhood algorithm to expand
the AFINN sentiment lexicon and compare the expanded version with the original, in
a lexicon based sentiment analysis task. Specifically, the comparison will be conducted
on parliamentary speeches given by Danish members of the European Parliament. An
essential step towards this direction, is to test the H1 hypothesis mentioned in Section
1.2. The idea behind the hypothesis H1 derives from the fact that the words that are
used in the same context, tend to cluster together within the vector space. However,
within a specific region of the vector space, words expressing similar sentiment tend to
be located closer together than those with opposing sentiment. For example, the words
nice, good, beautiful, bad, awful can be used in the same context to characterize an
entity. However, it is hypothesized, that the words nice, good, and beautiful are closer
together in comparison to the word bad or awful. The concept underlying hypothesis
==PAGE:34==
4.2 Lexicon Expansion Method
26
H1 is demonstrated in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Words into a vector space.
4.2.1
Empirical Exploration of Sentiment in Word
Embeddings
To elaborate on the methodology used to empirically check if hypothesis H1 mentioned
in Section 1.2 holds, it is essential to define the concept of α-neighbors.
Definition:
Two word vectors v, w with angle θ are called α-neighbors in a vector space if cos(θ) ≥α
Cosine similarity is a metric that is extensively utilized in data science and is given
by the formula:
similarity(v, w) = cos(θ) =
vw
∥v∥∥w∥
(4.1)
Let W = {w1, w2, w3, . . . , wn} be the set that contains all the words of the AFINN
lexicon with sentiments taken from the set S = {−5, −4, −3, . . . , 5}. Then, Wα is the
multiset that contains all the pairs of α-neighbor words w.
Wα = {(wi, wj)|∀wi, wj ∈W : i ̸= j},
such that similarity(wi, wj) ≥α
Furthermore, the multiset Sα = {(s, s′)} includes the pairs of sentiment scores that cor-
respond to the set Wα. For example, if the embeddings of the words ”godt” (sentiment
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Lexicon Expansion Method
27
value 3) and ”pæn” (sentiment value 2) have a cosine similarity higher than 0.7 then the
pair (3,2) belongs to the multiset S0.7. The above process, creates the joint probability
distribution:
pα(s, s′) = P(S = s, S′ = s′)
(4.2)
To evaluate hypothesis H1, six joint distributions were generated using various
threshold values for the neighborhood definition, denoted by α. Subsequently, to as-
certain whether the mutual information increases by increasing the threshold, the nor-
malized mutual information was computed using the formula:
NMI(S, S′) =
∑
s,s′ pα(s, s′)log2
pα(s,s′)
pα(s)pα(s′)
−∑
s,s′ pα(s, s′)log2pα(s, s′)
(4.3)
where the nominator represents the mutual information and the denominator joint en-
tropy of the random variables S, S′.
The implementation of the above method relied on utilizing three types of pre-trained
word embeddings, namely1:
• conll17: 100-dimensions word vectors trained on CoNLL 2017 Text Collection
using word2vec model equipped with skip-gram architecture.
• dslreddit.da.wv: 300-dimensions word vectors trained on reddit data from the dan-
ish stance dataset using word2vec model equipped with CBOW architecture.
• wiki.da.wv: 300-dimensions word vectors trained on Wikipedia dataset using fast-
Text model equipped with skip-gram architecture.
The results of the aforementioned test will be presented in the following chapter.
1Danish embeddings downloaded from GitHub repository:
https://github.com/alexandrainst/danlp/blob/master/docs/docs/tasks/embeddings.md
==PAGE:36==
4.2 Lexicon Expansion Method
28
4.2.2
Dynamic Neighborhood Lexicon Expansion
Algorithm
After the hypothesis H1 was tested, the set of word embeddings that performed the best
was selected for expanding the AFINN lexicon. Viegas et al proposed two algorithms.
This study utilized only the Dynamic Neighborhood Algorithm which is the following[59]:
Algorithm 2 Dynamic Neighborhood Lexicon Expansion Algorithm
Input: A sentiment lexicon L with sentiment scores sl
A set of words to be evaluated V
A set of word embeddings W
A parameter α ∈[0, 1]
Output: The augmented lexicon Laug
1: WL ←−WordEmbeddings(W, L)
2: WV ←−WordEmbeddings(W, V)
3: Laug ←−L
4: for v ∈V do
5:
S ←−∅
6:
for l ∈L do
7:
if cos(wv, wl) ≥α then
8:
S ←−S ∪{sl}
9:
end if
10:
end for
11:
sv ←−Average(S)
12:
Laug ←−Laug ∪{v, sv}
13: end for
The algorithm takes as input a sentiment lexicon and a set of candidate words to
be added to the lexicon. For each candidate word, calculates its sentiment score by
computing the average sentiment score of the words from the lexicon that are identified
as similar to the candidate word.
4.2.2.1
Testing the expanded lexicons
In order to test the hypothesis H2, the expanded lexicons were compared with the
original lexicon by performing lexicon-based sentiment analysis using the datasets Eu-
roparlSentiment1 and EuroparlSentiment22. These datasets consist of Danish sentences
obtained from the European Parliament, each annotated with a positive or negative score.
2https://github.com/alexandrainst/danlp/blob/master/docs/docs/datasets.md
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Predicting Party Aﬀiliation
29
Prior to analysis, the sentences preprocessed using specific steps including lowercasing
and lemmatization of words, removal of numbers and punctuation, and POS tagging to
include only nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs for sentiment analysis. Subsequently,
all the words that the sentences contained formed the vocabulaty of the task. The initial
lexicon was expanded six times for each dataset by considering six different values for
the parameter α. Therefore, for each dataset was performed seven lexicon-based senti-
ment analysis processes(One using the AFINN lexicon and six using the six expanded
lexicons). The sentiment score for each sentence was obtained by adding the scores of
each individual word in the sentence that was present in the lexicon. The polarity of the
sentence(positive or negative), was determined based on the sign of the final sentiment
score.
4.3
Predicting Party Aﬀiliation
4.3.1
The Danish Parliament Corpus 2009 - 2017
The national parliament in Denmark, known as the ”Folketing”, comprises 179 members
participating in the meetings to discuss and pass laws on behalf of the Danish people.
Members of the Folketing are elected every four years through a proportional represen-
tation system, where political parties receive a number of seats based on the percentage
of votes they receive. The present part of the study utilizes the Danish Parliament
Corpus (2009-2017) v23 which is is an updated form of the Danish Parliament Corpus
(2009-2017), v14. The original dataset contains the transcripts of speeches delivered dur-
ing the period 2009-2017 along with metadata associated with each speech, including
information on the speaker and the date on which the speech was delivered. However,
this dataset provided the information concerning the subject of the meetings using a
coded format used in the Danish Parliament to describe the discussed agenda. Hansen
et al. developed a semi-automatic annotation approach to leverage this information and
classified the speeches into 20 distinct subject areas of discussion and this information is
included in DPCv2[18]. The revised version of the dataset used in the study comprises
381,949 speeches and statements, each of which is associated with additional metadata
regarding the speaker, including but not limited to gender, age, and political party aﬀil-
3https://repository.clarin.dk/repository/xmlui/handle/20.500.12115/44
4https://repository.clarin.dk/repository/xmlui/handle/20.500.12115/8
==PAGE:38==
4.3 Predicting Party Aﬀiliation
30
iation. The statements made by the president of the parliament were excluded from the
study on the basis of the assumption that they lack political polarization. As a result,
the corpus consists of 232,562 minutes of speeches containing 38,812,482 words(more
than 350,000 unique tokens) with the average time per speech to be 1.2 minutes.
4.3.1.1
Data Preparation
In the exploratory analysis, it was discovered that the distribution of words per speech
was right skewed, with a substantial portion of speeches consisting of less than 100
words, including stop words. This raises the question of whether a parliamentary speech
containing only 100 words can be confidently classified as politically polarized or if it is
merely a procedural statement. Is it possible even for a human listener to predict accu-
rately the party aﬀiliation of a speaker based on a brief statement? The challenges posed
by the large feature space generated by the distinct tokens, as well as the prevalence of
brief statements in the dataset, were addressed through the following two assumptions:
• Assumption 1: The Parts-of-Speech that contain significant information regard-
ing the party aﬀiliation of the speaker are: Nouns, Verbs, Adjectives, and Adverbs.
• Assumption 2: A text in the dataset, represents a parliamentary speech if it
contains at least 100 tokens from the above categories.
Therefore, in this study all the Parts-of-Speech that are not mentioned in the Assumption
1 are considered as stopwords. Figure 4.3 illustrates the preprocessing schema that was
utilized based on the aforementioned assumptions.
Figure 4.3: Text Preprocessing schema.
In the pre-processing stage of the dataset, several steps were taken to transform
the raw text into a more usable format for analysis. Firstly, all letters in every speech
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Predicting Party Aﬀiliation
31
were converted to lowercase. Next, all numerical values were substituted with the token
”num”, and all punctuation and symbols were removed. The speeches were then tok-
enized into individual words, and lemmatization was performed to reduce the feature
space. Part-of-speech (POS) tagging was carried out on the lemmatized words to iden-
tify nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs. Words that did not belong to any of these
categories were removed from the dataset. Finally, speeches containing less than 100
tokens were filtered out, as they are typically considered to be procedural statements.
The final dataset utilized in the present study comprised of 36,206 speeches, belonging
exclusively to the political parties that maintained a continuous presence in the parlia-
ment throughout the 2009-2017 period. Therefore, the parties inlcluded in the analysis
are the following:
Table 4.1: Speech per Party
Symbol
Party
No. of Speeches
V
Venstre
7567
S
Socialdemokraterne
7554
DF
Dansk Folkeparti
4774
SF
Socialistisk Folkeparti
3908
EL
Enhedslisten
3582
KF
Konservative Folkeparti
3359
RV
Radikale Venstre
3161
LA
Liberal Alliance
2301
The final dataset is slightly imbalanced having an imbalance ratio between the ma-
jority and the minority class IR = Nmaj
Nmin = 3.28.
4.3.2
Methodology Schema
4.3.2.1
Ideology Grouping
As proposed in hypothesis H3, each speech indicates a particular party’s ideology. How-
ever, there is a possibility for two opposing parties to have similar views on a specific
issue. In legislative processes, it is sometimes possible for all parties to agree on spe-
cific topics or for a group of parties to disagree with the proposed legislation. Also
the parliamentary period plays a significant role in the way that political parties ex-
press their opinions. For instance, during the parliamentary period of 2019-2022, the
==PAGE:40==
4.3 Predicting Party Aﬀiliation
32
Socialdemokraterne Party formed the government while Venstre was in opposition. How-
ever, in the current parliamentary period, the two parties have formed an alliance to
govern together, indicating a similarity in their expressed ideas.
Due to the above reasons, the hypothesis H3 will be tested using 3 different cases.
In the first experimental setup, the dataset was considered to have 8 distinct classes,
each corresponding to a different political party. In the second case, the parties were
grouped into left-wing and right-wing categories. Given the current political context, it
is also of interest to investigate the historical tendency of the Socialdemokraterne and
Venstre parties to form a separate group based on the way they expressed their ideology
in the parliament. Therefore the definitions of the cases are the following:
• Case 1:
Every political party is considered as a distinct class.
• Case 2:
The set {S, EL, SF, RV} forms the left-wing class while the set {V, DF,
KF, LA} forms the right-wing class
• Case 3:
The set {S, V} forms the center class, the set {EL, SF, RV} forms the
left-wing class and the set {DF, KF, LA} forms the right-wing class
4.3.2.2
Class Distributions
From Table 4.1 it is apparent that for the Case 1 the class distribution is uneven. In
this scenario, the resampling technique is often employed as a means of addressing this
challenge. One choice is to use the undersampling approach, which removes randomly
instances from the majority class. However, this approach presents certain drawbacks,
such as the possibility of overfitting, given that the resulting dataset is smaller in size.
Moreover, undersampling may also introduce some degree of bias, as the chosen subset
may not be truly representative of the original class distribution. An alternative ap-
proach to handling class imbalance, is the use of oversampling techniques particularly in
the minority class. One widely used oversampling technique is the Synthetic Minority
Over-sampling Technique (SMOTE). This technique generates synthetic instances of a
minority class using existing examples. Nevertheless, in NLP problems involving sparse
and large feature spaces, such as tf-idf, SMOTE’s implementation with K-nearest neigh-
bors (KNN) can easily fail due to the curse of dimansionality.
Another way to address the challenge of imbalanced datasets is to use represenative
metrics for model selection and evaluation. Due to the above, and taking into consid-
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Predicting Party Aﬀiliation
33
eration the imbalance ratio of IR = 3.28 which indicates a slight imbalance, the most
suitable method to tackle this scenario is to utilize the F1 score.
(a) Case 2
(b) Case 3
Figure 4.4: Distribution of Classes.
Figure 4.4 illustrates the class distribution for Case 2 and Case 3 respectively. In
the second case, the dataset can be considered almost ideally balanced, whereas in the
third, the class imbalance ratio is IR = 1.44.
4.3.2.3
Feature Extraction
In section 3.1.4, it was noted that there exist several approaches for extracting features
from textual data. Word embeddings are commonly utilized as inputs in studies that
employ deep neural networks for document classification. However, there is a series of
research that employs word embeddings as inputs in machine learning models using aver-
aging or concatenation methods to transform the text into a structured data matrix[52,
17]. These methods are primarily used in cases where the input text is very short, such
as a sentence. Nonetheless, averaging word embeddings of longer texts like parliamen-
tary speeches may result in information loss and such approaches have not demonstrated
superior performance compared to traditional text representation methods[52, 8].
An alternative option for representing the speeches was the CountVectorizer method.
However, this approach ignores words that may not occur frequently but are significant
for text classification. Moreover, this method places greater emphasis on high-frequency
==PAGE:42==
4.3 Predicting Party Aﬀiliation
34
words, which may be considered as stopwords for the specific task.
Based on the aforementioned factors, the decision was made to utilize the tf-idf
vectorizer using uni-grams, bi-grams, and tri-grams to represent the speeches. To reduce
the dimensionality of the resulting feature matrix, words that occurred in over 60% and
less than 0.8% of the speeches were filtered out. In addition, to reduce the sparsity of
the tf-idf matrix, the vocabulary was built considering only the 9000 words with the
highest frequency. These filtering values, could be considered as hyperparameters which
could be tuned through the nested cross-validation procedure.
Nevertheless, due to
the limited availability of computational resources, a comprehensive exploration of the
hyperparameter space was unfeasible.
Figure 4.5: Distribution of Word Counts in Parliamentary Speeches.
Figure 4.5 illustrates the distribution of word counts in the speeches. It is apparent
that the distribution is right skewed with a median equal to 172 and contains many
outliers. Speeches that are longer may result in higher tf-idf scores due to the fact that
they contain more words, even if these words are not important for the model. For this
reason, l1-normalization was applied to the vectors to reduce the impact of document
length on the tf-idf values. Finally, a variant of the tf-idf vectorizer was employed, which
applies logarithmic scaling to the term frequency values. Specifically, this variant of the
vectorizer modifies the term frequency values according to the following formula:
wf(di, tj) =





1 + log(tf(di, tj)), if tf(di, tj) > 0
0, otherwise
(4.4)
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Predicting Party Aﬀiliation
35
This variant was utilized to adjust the weighting of words that occur frequently in a
speech but provide limited information to the model. By applying logarithmic scaling
to the term frequency values, the impact of highly frequent but uninformative words can
be attenuated, enabling the model to better focus on the most informative terms.
4.3.2.4
Classification Models
According to the literature review, a significant number of studies that utilized machine
learning algorithms for text classification, employed SVC resulting in superior perfor-
mance compared to other models. For this reason, in the present study, both linear and
non-linear SVC were utilized in order to compare the performance of the algorithm us-
ing different kernels. The non-linear SVC was equipped with the Radial Basis Function
(RBF) kernel.
K(x, v) = e−γ∥x−v∥2
(4.5)
This function is used by SVC to measure the similarity between a training point and
a support vector.
Using this kernel function, the dataset is projected into a higher-
dimensional space where classes can potentially be separated by a linear decision bound-
ary. The algorithm’s implementation utilized the default value of the parameter γ from
the sklearn library. This default value is determined through the following formula:
γ =
1
N ∗var(X)
(4.6)
where N is the number of the documents and X the tf-idf matrix.
Both methods were implemented using penalized approaches that introduce a penalty
term in the objective function, which is controlled by the hyperparameter C. This hy-
perparameter tries to broaden the margin while simultaneously minimizing the missclas-
sification loss. For this reason, the value of C needs to be tuned carefully to achieve the
right balance between the bias and variance of the model.
Finally, a baseline dummy classifier which predicts the most frequent class in the
training data, without considering the input features, was implemented for comparison
purposes.
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Predicting Party Aﬀiliation
36
4.3.2.5
Model Selection
The choice of the hyperparameters play a significant role on the performance and the
generalization of the model. By choosing appropriate hyperparameters, it is possible
to obtain a well-performing model that can generalize well to the unseen data. On the
other hand, the selection of random hyperparameters can lead to a model with poor
performance or a model that ”overfits” on the training data.
Figure 4.6: Methodology of Model Selection.
Figure 4.6 illustrates the approach used to select and test the optimal model. The
dataset was partitioned into a training set (80%) and a test set (20%) using stratified
sampling to maintain the distribution of the classes at both the training and test set. In
order to compute a generalized score and find the optimal hyperparameters, the training
set underwent nested cross-validation with K1 = K2 = 5, where the hyperparameter C
was the only hyperparameter tuned. Although other hyperparameters, such as γ for the
non-linear classifier or the hyperparameters of the tf-idf vectorizer, could also be tuned,
computational resource constraints limited the number of combinations that could be
tuned. The best model was selected based on certain criteria that will be discussed in
the following chapter and was trained on the entire training set. Finally, the predictions
were made on the test set in order to draw conclusions.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Results
The purpose of this chapter is to present the findings of this study. Initially, the results
of the experiments conducted on three distinct types of embeddings will be reported
to assess whether they can be utilized effectively in the lexicon expansion algorithm.
The sets of word embeddings that satisfy the hypothesis H1 will be used to expand the
AFINN lexicon. The performance of the expanded lexicons in a sentiment analysis task
will be compared to that of the AFINN lexicon. Finally, this chapter will present and
analyze the outcomes of predicting the political ideology expressed in speeches using
three grouping strategies.
5.1
Lexicon Expansion Results
5.1.1
Exploring Word Embeddings
As stated in Section 4.2, the implementation of the lexicon expansion algorithm involved
the utilization of three sets of word embeddings. A variety of parameters such as the
corpus on which the embeddings were trained, the dimensionality of the embeddings,
and the training method employed (e.g. Skip-gram or CBOW) have a substantial im-
pact on the resulting representations. Consequently, it is observed that certain types of
embeddings are more suitable for specific tasks than others.
Firstly, it was necessary to determine the extent to which the words in the AFINN
lexicon were represented in the vocabulary of the word embeddings. As was expected the
three types of embbedings did not cover the whole lexicon but a significant proportion.
Table 5.1: Coverage of word embeddings on AFINN Lexicon
Type:
conll17
wiki.da.wv
dslreddit.da.wv
Coverage:
96.4 %
84.8 %
89.9 %
==PAGE:46==
5.1 Lexicon Expansion Results
38
Three rounds of PCA were conducted on the data matrices generated from the
AFINN lexicon and the three sets of word embeddings to gain deeper insight into the
nature of the different word embedding sets.
Figure 5.1: PCA wiki.da.wv.
Figure 5.2: PCA conll17.
Figure 5.3: PCA dslreddit.da.wv.
In order to improve the interpretability of the visualizations, the words in the lexicon
were grouped into positive and negative. It can be observed that for the majority of the
conll17 and wiki.da.wv word vectors, the two categories capture different regions in the
projection on the two principal components. For the dslreddit.da.wv set of vectors, the
two classes overlap significantly. However, it was decided to further test all three sets of
embeddings.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Lexicon Expansion Results
39
5.1.2
Searching for Sentiment in Word Embeddings:
Empirical Evidence
The approach utilized to examine empirically if hypothesis H1 holds was described in
Section 4.2.1. The multiset Sα = {(s, s′)} was constructed by generating all possible
combinations of word embeddings present in the lexicon and adding the corresponding
pair of sentiments (s, s′) to the multiset if the cosine similarity between them exceeded
the threshold value α, which defines the neighborhood. This process created the joint
probability distribution (4.2).
In the following subsections, the co-occurrence probability distribution for varying
threshold values of α and the results of the validation process for the three sets of word
embeddings will be presented.
5.1.2.1
Co-occurrence Distributions
wiki.da.wv
The co-occurrence distribution obtained from the aforementioned methodology for four
different values of the parameter α using wiki.da.wv word embeddings is depicted in
Figure 5.4 on the next page. To provide a quantitative measure of the results, the nor-
malized mutual information was also computed.
It is apparent that using a low threshold, the values of the variables s and s′ asso-
ciated with the words w and w′ in the sentiment lexicon are widely dispersed in the
heat map. This is reasonable as a low value of α defines a broad neighborhood enabling
the inclusion of words with opposite polarity to be included in the neighborhood. The
figure also indicates that as the threshold increases, the number of the pairs (s,s′) de-
creases, but their values tend to cluster around the main diagonal. This implies that
a smaller neighborhood restricts a number of pairs of words to be considered similar
in terms of sentiment.
However, the similarity metric is more effective in capturing
pairs of words that exhibit similar sentiment. The above findings are also supported by
the NMI metric. Specifically, it was observed that as the parameter α increases, the
NMI value also increases. This observation provides a further evidence that a larger
neighborhood parameter captures pairs of words that are indeed sentimentally similar,
==PAGE:48==
5.1 Lexicon Expansion Results
40
ultimately resulting in a higher NMI value. Consequently, it is anticipated that there
will be a trade-off between the quantity of words integrated into the extended sentiment
lexicon and the accuracy of the predicted sentiment.
Figure 5.4: Co-occurrence distribution & NMI for various thresholds α using
wiki.da.wv word embeddings.
conll17
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Lexicon Expansion Results
41
Figure 5.5 illustrates the co-occurrence distribution for conll17 set of word embeddings
at different values of the threshold parameter α.
Figure 5.5: Co-occurrence distribution & NMI for various thresholds α using conll17
word embeddings.
Setting the parameter α = 0.6 the sentiment values s and s′ are more dispersed
across the heatmap compared to the previous set of embeddings. When a higher value
such as alpha = 0.8 is imposed, the values tend to cluster around the main diagonal.
However it seems that the embbedings fail to find similarities in the positive class and
==PAGE:50==
5.1 Lexicon Expansion Results
42
there is a bias towards the negative. The fact that the AFINN sentiment lexicon con-
tains more negative than positive words plays a significant role on this tendency as a
similar pattern was noticed in the previous set of embeddings. However, in the previous
case, this pattern was more balanced. Moreover, imposing the strict value of α = 0.875,
only a few pairs of words surpassed this threshold in order to be identified as similar.
All the above, are refleted to the NMI which increases as the α parameter increases, but
remains in low levels compared with the wiki.da.wv set of embbedings.
dslreddit.da.wv
The co-occurrence distribution for the third set of embeddings is depicted in Figure
5.6 on the following page. It is obvious that this set of word embeddins exhibits weak-
nesses in capturing similarities in terms of sentiment for the majority of the words. The
NMI remains at very low levels as the threshold that defines the neighborhood is in-
creased. After, imposing higher values on the parameter α, only a few couples of words
identified as similar. Table 5.2 shows the pairs of words that surpassed the similarity
threshold for alpha = 0.875. It is observed, apart from one pair, that the sentiments
are indeed similar, suggesting that the hypothesis stating that neighbor words in the
embedding space are more likely to share similar sentiment is not invalid. Nevertheless,
the nature of this particular set of word vectors tends to ignore numerous words in the
lexicon that share similar sentiment.
Table 5.2: Co-occurrence Distribution for α = 0.875
Pairs of words:
Pairs of Sentiment Scores
(’forarget’, ’forundret’)
(-3.0, -2.0)
(’forbløffet’, ’forundret’)
(2.0, -2.0)
(’forgribe’, ’forgriber’)
(-2.0, -2.0)
(’fortørnet’, ’forundret’)
(-2.0, -2.0)
(’frifundet’, ’frikendt’)
(2.0, 2.0)
(’mishandlet’, ’tortureret’)
(-3.0, -4.0)
(’skælder’, ’skældte’)
(-2.0, -2.0)
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Lexicon Expansion Results
43
Figure 5.6: Co-occurrence distribution & NMI for various thresholds α using dslred-
dit.da.wv word embeddings.
5.1.3
Validating the Algorithm on the Lexicon
In order to further assess the eﬀiciency of the proposed algorithm, a validation process
was conducted to evaluate its ability to accurately predict the sentiment of individual
words within the lexicon. This was achieved by treating each word in the lexicon as a
candidate word v ∈V for inclusion in the expanded lexicon, rather than an existing com-
==PAGE:52==
5.1 Lexicon Expansion Results
44
ponent of the lexicon. The algorithm was then implemented using the remaining words
l of the lexicon L and the accuracy of the sentiment prediction was evaluated by com-
puting the absolute error |s−ˆs| between the true sentiment and the predicted sentiment.
Figure 5.7: Absolute Errors wiki.da.wv.
Figure 5.8: Absolute Errors conll17.
Figure 5.9: Absolute Errors dslreddit.da.wv.
Based on the above histograms, it can be observed that, using wiki.da.wv word em-
beddings, a significant portion of the evaluated words has an absolute error of less than
1 for all values of α. Moreover, the lines that represent the height of the histogram’s
bars for wiki.da.wv word vectors converges faster to lower values in comparison to the
other two sets, indicating that the algorithm’s predictions on the lexicon were more pre-
cise for this particular set of word embeddings. Lastly, for dslreddit.da.wv and conll17
word vectors, it was observed that increasing the threshold value to have more precise
predictions, led to the algorithm’s failure in identifying sentimentally similar words.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Lexicon Expansion Results
45
Table 5.3 presents a summary of the general information obtained from the results
of the aforementioned process.
Table 5.3: Summary Information of the Validation Process
α
wiki.da.wv
conll17
dslreddit.da.wv
Words evaluated∗
(%)
0.6
79.04 %
96.85 %
65.6%
0.7
66.73 %
83.52 %
25.02%
0.8
48.28 %
31.58 %
3.5%
0.875
26.45 %
2.03 %
0.38%
M.A.E∗∗
0.6
0.528
1.023
1.165
0.7
0.309
0.823
1.105
0.8
0.201
0.631
0.826
0.875
0.197
0.600
0.667
Words with∗∗
|s −ˆs| > 1
(%)
0.6
22.42 %
37.04 %
46.27%
0.7
14.08 %
28.54 %
47.04%
0.8
9.21 %
28.15 %
43.24%
0.875
7.46 %
33.33 %
41.67%
Words predicted∗∗
with opposite
polarity
(%)
0.6
7.53 %
15.92 %
18.76%
0.7
5.26 %
10.71 %
18.28%
0.8
3.12 %
7.18 %
10.81%
0.875
3.67 %
7.25 %
8.33%
*As a percentage of the total words of the AFINN lexicon.
**Considering only the words evaluated by the algorithm
As we can see, the M.A.E of the predictions using wiki.da.wv word embeddings are signif-
icantly smaller compared to the other two sets for the different values of α. Furthermore,
this set of word vectors exhibits superiority over the other two in all other comparison
categories. For this reason this set will be used to conduct sentence level sentiment
analysis on EuroparlSentiment1 and EuroparlSentiment1 datasets.
==PAGE:54==
5.1 Lexicon Expansion Results
46
5.1.3.1
Comparing AFINN with the Expanded Lexicons
Due to the fact that the goal of this study was to quantify the ability of the expanded lex-
icons to detect sentiment in sentences that are indeed sentimentally polarized, the level
of sentiment analysis was binary (positive - negative). Therefore, the neutral sentences
of the datasets were eliminated. The distribution of the classes of the final datasets is
presented in the table below.
Table 5.4: Class Distribution
Dataset:
EuroparlSentiment1
EuroparlSentiment2
POSITIVE
51
246
NEGATIVE
53
215
Table 5.4 indicates that the classes are almost ideally balanced. Therefore, the per-
formance was evaluated using the accuracy metric. Due to the fact that a number of
sentences didn’t contain any word from either the AFINN or the expanded sentiment
lexicons, the utilized method failed to attach a sentiment. These sentences were consid-
ered as misclassified. The confusion matrices of the classifications are provided in the
Appendix.
On the following page, Figures 5.10 and 5.11 depict the Coverage achieved by the
AFINN lexicon and its expansions utilizing six distinct threshold values α.
As the
threshold value decreases, more words are incorporated into the lexicon, facilitating
the classification of additional sentences as either positive or negative. Specifically for
α = 0.5, the expanded lexicons demonstrated a remarkable ability to detect sentiment
in almost all of the sentences present in both datasets.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Lexicon Expansion Results
47
Figure 5.10: Coverage on
EuroparlSentiment1.
Figure 5.11: Coverage on
EuroparlSentiment2.
Figures 5.12 and 5.13 illustrate the Accuracy achieved by the AFINN lexicon and
the expansions of it using six different threshold values α.
Figure 5.12: Accuracy on
EuroparlSentiment1.
Figure 5.13: Accuracy on
EuroparlSentiment2.
==PAGE:56==
5.1 Lexicon Expansion Results
48
It is obvious that the use of expanded lexicons for all the different values of α resulted
in improved performance of sentiment analysis. It was also observed that a lower value
of α led to an increase in accuracy. This suggests that, despite the introduction of some
levels of error for the words in the expanded lexicon, the increased coverage compensates
for that, leading to improved performance.
The following table gives a sample of the words from EuroparlSentiment1 that in-
cluded in the expanded lexicon for α = 0.8.
Table 5.5: Words added to AFINN for α = 0.8
Word
Score
Word
Score
forfærdelig
-3.00
naturkatastrofe
-2.00
myrde
-3.00
indtrængende
-2.00
initiativ
1.00
tilhænger
1.00
understrege
-2.00
kommission
-3.00
togulykke
-2.00
arbejdsløshedsprocent
-2.00
forkastelse
-2.75
korruptionsskandale
-2.00
ryste
-2.00
beskyttelse
1.00
gennemføre
2.00
interessere
2.00
konsekvens
-2.00
videnskabelig
-3.00
fortjene
1.00
gennemførelse
2.00
Based on the results presented in Table 5.5, it can be observed that the algorithm as-
signed a negative sentiment score to 13 out of 20 words. The number of positive/negative
words added to the lexicon is influenced by two factors. Firstly, the balance between the
number of positive and negative words in the original lexicon affects the balance of the
set of words added to it. Additionally, the corpus from which the words are extracted
also affects this balance. After a manual inspection, it can be noted that all but a couple
of words (”videnskabelig” and ”ryste”) were correctly classified as positive or negative.
Finally, the scale of the sentiment scores appears reasonable, but this also depends on
the scaling of the original lexicon used.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Ideology Classification Results
49
5.2
Ideology Classification Results
As previously mentioned in the methodology chapter, three cases were examined utilizing
three distinct grouping methods to investigate whether party ideologies can be separated
within the tf-idf vector space. The outcomes of these experiments are presented in the
following sections.
5.2.1
Political Party Aﬀiliation
In this initial case, each political party was treated as a distinct class. The F1 scores,
obtained while tuning the parameter C using the nested cross-validation process, are
illustrated in the following figure. As depicted, for both models, the level of overfit-
ting rises as the regularization parameter C increases. This phenomenon occurs because
increasing the parameter C results in more complex models, allowing the classifier to
consider more features (words), that may not carry significant information. Particu-
larly, using the Rbf kernel in SVC allows the model to fit the non-linear hyperplane
using redundant features, which makes it more diﬀicult for the model to generalize well,
resulting in much higher levels of overfitting.
Figure 5.14: SVC Linear.
Figure 5.15: SVC Rbf.
The regularization parameter and the estimated F1 score for the best performing
models are presented in the following table.
==PAGE:58==
5.2 Ideology Classification Results
50
Table 5.6: Best Performing Models
Model:
SVC Linear
SVC Rbf
Baseline
C
4
4
-
F1 score
0.61
0.63
0.07
Due to the fact that the performance of the two models is similar, the decision was
made to test the SVC with a Linear kernel, taking into consideration the following
factors:
• Simplicity: A simpler model is more likely to generalize well on new data. Espe-
sially in this case that the levels of overfitting are higher using the Rbf kernel.
• Speed: The computational complexity of the linear kernel is much lower.
• Explainability: The use of a Linear kernel in SVC provides the ability to compare
the coeﬀicients and understand which features are considered as more important
by the model.
The following table presents the classification report for the Linear SVC. The model
achieved the optimal trade-off between Precision and Recall for the DF class which
implies that the model detected patterns in the speeches of this party that enabled
the correct identification of a substantial proportion of the speeches of this party while
minimizing the number of misclassified speeches of other parties in the predictions. This
suggests that the representatives of DF tended to express their ideas in a distinct way,
allowing the classifier to effectively differentiate this class from the others.
Table 5.7: Classification Report SVC(Linear)
Class
Precision
Recall
F1-score
DF
0.68
0.76
0.72
EL
0.61
0.77
0.68
KF
0.59
0.64
0.61
LA
0.58
0.73
0.64
RV
0.53
0.54
0.53
S
0.69
0.52
0.59
SF
0.46
0.44
0.45
V
0.65
0.62
0.64
Weighted avg.
0.62
0.61
0.61
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Ideology Classification Results
51
The lower F1 score is observed in class SF. This indicates that the parliamentary
group of this party displayed greater diversity in terms of political ideologies during
the years covered in this study. The following confusion matrix can provide a clearer
understanding regarding the directions of misclassifications.
Figure 5.16: Confusion Matrix of SVC Linear.
The majority of missclassifications in the confusion matrix relate to the classification
of speeches from the SF party as belonging to the EL party. This is reasonable as both
parties are considered left-wing, and thus share similar political ideas. However, the EL
class does not leak much into other classes, indicating that the speeches of this party are
politically polarized in a unique way that allows the model to identify them accurately.
Interestingly, approximately 15% of speeches from the left-wing RV party were clas-
sified as speeches of the right-wing V party. A similar pattern was observed for the S
party, where the correct identifications also leaked towards the V party. This obser-
vation provides a good signal for Case 3, where the two parties will be grouped into a
single class. The above finding, suggests that these two parties shared similarities in the
way that they form their political speech.
In order to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the origins of misclassifica-
tions, an effort was made to identify for each party, the specific topics discussed in the
==PAGE:60==
5.2 Ideology Classification Results
52
speeches that resulted in the misclassifications. Sankey diagrams were thus created to
illustrate the connections between the discussed agenda and the party towards which
the leakage occurred. Due to the report’s length restrictions, only the diagrams that
were deemed particularly important will be presented.
Figure 5.17: RV misclassifications.
Figure 5.18: EL misclassifications.
Figure 5.19: V misclassifications.
Figure 5.20: S misclassifications.
Figure 5.17 reveals that a significant proportion of misclassifications in speeches from
RV, was incorrectly classified as originating from V. This trend was particularly noticed
in speeches addressing economic issues, implying a significant degree of similarity in the
economic discourse of RV and V representatives. In contrast, for the EL party, mis-
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Ideology Classification Results
53
classifications tended to occur towards the SF party, with a focus on topics such as
Labor, Healthcare, Justice, and Economy. Further, Figures 5.19 and 5.20 present the
primary topics for which misclassifications occurred for V and S, respectively. These
misclassifications were observed in both directions, from V to S and vice versa, and were
more diverse in terms of the discussed topics, with Economy being the dominant theme.
It is also crucial to identify the features that the model has deemed important in the
classification of the classes. This can be achieved by analyzing the absolute values of
the coeﬀicients of the classifier. The following figure presents the top 20 features that
the algorithm identified as more important.
Figure 5.21: Feature Importance of Linear SVC.
It is apparent that the model considers the names of the parties as the most important
features. This is reasonable as it is a common practice for the members of the parliament
to mention the name of their party or other parties during legislative processes. Thus,
the model primarily uses these features and, in combination with other inputs, attempts
to identify the party aﬀiliation of the speaker.
==PAGE:62==
5.2 Ideology Classification Results
54
5.2.2
Ideology Detection
To examine whether the classifiers’ performance improves when grouping parties into
broader ideology categories, two additional cases were investigated. As the results of
these cases were found to be similar, they will be presented together.
The F1 scores, obtained through tuning the parameter C using the nested cross-
validation process for both cases, are illustrated in the following figure.
Figure 5.22: SVC Linear(2 Classes).
Figure 5.23: SVC Rbf(2 Classes).
Figure 5.24: SVC Linear(3 Classes).
Figure 5.25: SVC Rbf(3 Classes).
Similar to the observation made in the case of eight classes, a comparable phe-
nomenon is observed in this instance. The gap between the F1 score on the training
set and the test set is larger for the non-linear classifier. The reasons behind this were
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Ideology Classification Results
55
analyzed in the previous section.
In both cases, the non-linear classifier performed
slightly better. The optimal regularization parameters C, as well as the generalized F1
score for both cases, are presented in the following table.
Table 5.8: Best Performing Models
Model:
SVC Linear
SVC Rbf
Baseline
2 Ideologies Case
C
2
3
-
F1 score
0.76
0.79
0.34
Accuracy
0.76
0.79
0.50
3 Ideologies Case
C
2
2
-
F1 score
0.72
0.74
0.25
Accuracy
0.72
0.74
0.42
It is apparent that merging the parties’ ideologies into broader ideological categories
leads to an increase in performance.
In both cases, the performance is significantly
higher compared to the baseline model. For the same three reasons discussed in the
previous section, the chosen model being evaluted on the test was the Linear SVC. The
classification reports for both cases are presented in the appendix. The following figures
depict the confusion matrices for both cases.
Figure 5.26: 2 Ideologies Case.
Figure 5.27: 3 Ideologies Case.
In the case of two classes, an equal number of correct predictions and misclassifica-
==PAGE:64==
5.2 Ideology Classification Results
56
tions is observed. The reason for merging the ideologies of the S and V parties into
one category(CENTER), was to investigate if there were indications from the studied
period about the current government alliance. The analysis of the eight distinct classes
revealed that the majority of misclassifications for speeches from S were predicted as
speeches for V, and vice versa. This pattern is confirmed by Figure 5.27, where the
two parties formed the most stable ideological category, suggesting that the two parties
had a tendency to form a distinct ideological group for some years now. Moreover, a
expected pattern noticed here, is that the majority of misclassifications for both the
LEFT and RIGHT ideological groups leak towards the CENTER.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
The purpose of this chapter is to contextualize and interpret the findings of the previous
chapter and establish their connection to the research hypotheses.
In addition, this
chapter will address the limitations and constraints of this study and provide potential
ideas for future research.
6.1
Summary of Results
Concerning the lexicon expansion task, three sets of Danish word embeddings were com-
pared using the Danish version of AFINN sentiment lexicon to examine whether the
sets are sentimentally charged. Empirical analysis showed that only one set exhibited
indications of containing information about words’ sentiment. This suggests that the
hypothesis H1 cannot be generalized, and the potential of word vectors to convey sen-
timent information is dependent on multiple factors, including the size and the nature
of the corpus on which they are trained, the model utilized to train those embeddings,
and the choice of dimensions.
The set of word embeddings that displayed signals of containing sentiment infor-
mation was employed by an algorithm to expand the AFINN sentiment lexicon. The
expanded lexicons were then evaluated through two straightforward lexicon-based senti-
ment analysis tasks, and all the expanded lexicons demonstrated superior performance
and coverage in those tasks.
Finally, this study conducted a comparison between a linear and non-linear SVC to
classify parliamentary speeches based on either the speaker’s political party aﬀiliation or
their wider ideological stance. The evaluation showed that both classifiers were able to
successfully classify the parliamentary speeches, with F1 scores significantly higher than
the baseline model. Despite the comparable performance of both classifiers, it should be
noted that the non-linear SVC showed evidence of overfitting. The performance of both
==PAGE:66==
6.2 Limitations
58
classifiers increased significantly when the parties were grouped into broader political
ideologies. The classifiers were evaluated on an independent test set, and the outcomes
facilitated the formulation of inferences concerning the similarities and differences in the
discourse generation mechanisms of the parties.
6.2
Limitations
In order to have a comprehensive understanding of this study, it is important to acknowl-
edge the limitations and constraints as a means to identify areas for future research and
to interpret the findings accurately.
The initial set of limitations pertains to the constraints that were inherented by the
AFINN sentiment lexicon, which served as a foundation for the expansions. According
to Lauridsen et al., a random examination of the AFINN sentiment lexicon revealed
certain limitations[29]. Notably, the term ”udsigtsløs” (meaning ”hopeless” in English)
was rated positively with a score of 2. Due to time constraints, it was not feasible to
conduct a comprehensive manual inspection of all the words in the sentiment lexicon.
Consequently, potential inaccuracies in the manual evaluation of the AFINN lexicon
could result in introducing bias in the model employed for the expansion of the senti-
ment lexicon. In addition, the imbalance between the positive and negative words of
the AFINN sentiment lexicon had implications on it’s expansions. As the expansion al-
gorithm is fed with a greater number of sentimentally negative lemmas, the expansions
of the original lexicon increases the existing class imbalance.
An additional limitation arises from the preprocessing stage of the ideology classifica-
tion model. The simplicity of the preprocessing steps may have resulted in the inclusion
of numerous redundant features as inputs to the model, which probably caused over-
fitting of the non-linear classifier. The implementation of a more sophisticated prepro-
cessing approach, such as filtering out words that are devoid of ideological information,
could potentially lead to improved performance. Lastly, due to computational resource
limitations, several hyperparameters, including γ for the non-linear classifier, could not
be tuned during the nested cross-validation process.
==PAGE:67==
6.3 Suggestions for Future Research
59
6.3
Suggestions for Future Research
As the present study has provided preliminary insights into the computational analysis
of political discourse, several areas remain to be explored, in order to achieve a more
comprehensive understanding of the subject. For instance, the study utilized pre-trained
word embeddings derived from a general domain corpus to expand an existing sentiment
lexicon. However, political discourse differs significantly from ordinary speech, indicat-
ing the need for further investigation. Therefore, a study employing word vectors trained
on a vast corpus of parliamentary speeches could provide a domain-specific sentiment
lexicon focused specifically on political discourse.
The analysis indicated that the SVC assigned great importance to the names of the
political parties mentioned by the members of parliament during their speeches. While
these words may have significantly aided the model in separating the different classes,
they did not necessarily provide insight into the linguistic strategies employed by mem-
bers of the Danish parliament. A model that excludes these words from the vocabulary
could provide additional insights and contribute to gain a deeper understanding of the
political discourse in the Danish parliament.
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This study utilized machine learning and NLP methods to support the computational
analysis of parliamentary speeches. The objective was to extend the applicability of
established methods that have been widely utilized in the English language or other
languages, to the Danish context. The study focused on two main areas. Firstly, to
investigate the potential of using word embeddings to expand a sentiment lexicon for
more accurate sentiment analysis of parliamentary speeches, and secondly, to explore
the feasibility of automatically classifying Danish parliamentary speeches according to
the speaker’s political aﬀiliation.
The investigation of three sets of word embeddings demonstrated the feasibility of
leveraging the semantic information to expand a specific sentiment lexicon under cer-
tain conditions. The results for the set that fufilled the requirements are in agreement
with those previously reported by Viegas et al.[59]. The utilization of wiki.da.wv word
embeddings enabled the augmentation of the AFINN sentiment lexicon, thereby facili-
tating more effective sentiment analysis of parliamentary sentences. Specifically, while
the AFINN lexicon failed to identify the sentiment in a considerable proportion of emo-
tionally charged sentences within the two datasets (ranging from 24.95% to 33.65%), the
expansions enabled the detection of sentiment in nearly all of the sentences, resulting in
higher accuracy.
Finally, the present thesis investigated a text classification task based on ideology as
indicated by party aﬀiliation, in the context of the morphologically complex Danish lan-
guage. The text was vectorized using the tf-idf approach, and the performance of both
linear and non-linear classifiers was evaluated using the nested cross-validation method.
Notably, both classifiers exhibited similar levels of performance, with outcomes that are
consistent with previous studies conducted in English and other languages.
In conclusion, this thesis has demonstrated the feasibility of leveraging machine learn-
ing and NLP methods for the computational analysis of Danish parliamentary speeches.
==PAGE:69==
7 Conclusion
61
By expanding a sentiment lexicon using word embeddings and exploring automatic text
classification based on ideology, the study has contributed to the development of more
effective and eﬀicient methods for analyzing Danish political discourse. Overall, this
study contributes to the growing research on NLP for the Danish language and provides
a foundation for future work in this area.
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Co-occurrence Distributions
Figure A.1: wiki.da.wv α = 0.5.
Figure A.2: wiki.da.wv α = 0.5.
Figure A.3: conll17 α = 0.5.
Figure A.4: conll17 α = 0.75.
==PAGE:71==
A.1 Co-occurrence Distributions
63
Figure A.5: dslreddit.da.wv. α = 0.5.
Figure A.6: dslreddit.da.wv. α = 0.75.
==PAGE:72==
A.2 Confusion Matrices for Europarl1
64
A.2
Confusion Matrices for Europarl1
Figure A.7: AFINN.
Figure A.8: α = 0.875.
Figure A.9: α = 0.80.
Figure A.10: α = 0.75.
==PAGE:73==
A.2 Confusion Matrices for Europarl1
65
Figure A.11: α = 0.70.
Figure A.12: α = 0.60.
Figure A.13: α = 0.50.
==PAGE:74==
A.3 Confusion Matrices for Europarl2
66
A.3
Confusion Matrices for Europarl2
Figure A.14: AFINN.
Figure A.15: α = 0.875.
Figure A.16: α = 0.80.
Figure A.17: α = 0.75.
==PAGE:75==
A.4 Classification Reports
67
Figure A.18: α = 0.70.
Figure A.19: α = 0.60.
Figure A.20: α = 0.50.
A.4
Classification Reports
Table 5.7: Classification Report SVC(Linear)
Class
Precision
Recall
F1-score
LEFT
0.77
0.76
0.77
RIGHT
0.76
0.77
0.76
Weighted avg
0.77
0.77
0.77
==PAGE:76==
A.5 Classification Reports
68
A.5
Classification Reports
Table 5.7: Classification Report SVC(Linear)
Class
Precision
Recall
F1-score
CENTER
0.74
0.75
0.75
LEFT
0.68
0.69
0.69
RIGHT
0.72
0.70
0.71
Weighted avg
0.72
0.72
0.72
A.6
Word Clouds
Figure A.21: RV party.
Figure A.22: V party.
==PAGE:77==
A.6 Word Clouds
69
Figure A.23: S party.
Figure A.24: DF party.
Figure A.25: EL party.
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
[1]
Gavin Abercrombie and Riza Batista-Navarro. “Sentiment and position-taking
analysis of parliamentary debates: a systematic literature review.” In: Journal of
Computational Social Science 3.1 (2020), pages 245–270.
[2]
Gavin Abercrombie and Riza Theresa Batista-Navarro. “‘Aye’or ‘no’? Speech-level
sentiment analysis of Hansard UK parliamentary debate transcripts.” In: Proceed-
ings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC 2018). 2018.
[3]
Felipe Almeida and Geraldo Xexéo. “Word embeddings: A survey.” In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1901.09069 (2019).
[4]
Murugan Anandarajan et al. “Text preprocessing.” In: Practical text analytics:
Maximizing the value of text data (2019), pages 45–59.
[5]
Joao Tiago Aparicio, João Salema de Sequeira, and Carlos J Costa. “Emotion anal-
ysis of portuguese political parties communication over the covid-19 pandemic.” In:
2021 16th Iberian Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI).
IEEE. 2021, pages 1–6.
[6]
Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, Fabrizio Sebastiani, et al. “Sentiwordnet 3.0:
an enhanced lexical resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining.” In: Lrec.
Volume 10. 2010. 2010, pages 2200–2204.
[7]
Aditya Budhwar et al. “Predicting the vote using legislative speech.” In: Proceed-
ings of the 19th annual international conference on digital government research:
governance in the data age. 2018, pages 1–10.
[8]
Denis Eka Cahyani and Irene Patasik. “Performance comparison of tf-idf and
word2vec models for emotion text classification.” In: Bulletin of Electrical Engi-
neering and Informatics 10.5 (2021), pages 2780–2788.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
71
[9]
Rosario Catelli, Serena Pelosi, and Massimo Esposito. “Lexicon-Based vs. Bert-
Based Sentiment Analysis: A Comparative Study in Italian.” In: Electronics 11.3
(2022). issn: 2079-9292. doi: 10.3390/electronics11030374. url: https://
www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/11/3/374.
[10]
Wei Chen et al. “Opinion-aware Knowledge Graph for Political Ideology Detec-
tion.” In: IJCAI. Volume 17. 2017, pages 3647–3653.
[11]
Alebachew Chiche and Betselot Yitagesu. “Part of speech tagging: a systematic
review of deep learning and machine learning approaches.” In: Journal of Big Data
9.1 (2022), pages 1–25.
[12]
Gulsen Demiroz et al. “Learning domain-specific polarity lexicons.” In: 2012 IEEE
12th International Conference on Data Mining Workshops. IEEE. 2012, pages 674–
679.
[13]
Huu-Thanh Duong and Tram-Anh Nguyen-Thi. “A review: preprocessing tech-
niques and data augmentation for sentiment analysis.” In: Computational Social
Networks 8.1 (2021), pages 1–16.
[14]
Rory Duthie, Katarzyna Budzynska, and Chris Reed. “Mining ethos in political
debate.” In: Computational Models of Argument: Proceedings from the Sixth In-
ternational Conference on Computational Models of Argument (COMMA). IOS
Press. 2016, pages 299–310.
[15]
Asif Ekbal and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. “Bengali named entity recognition using
support vector machine.” In: Proceedings of the IJCNLP-08 workshop on named
entity recognition for south and south east Asian Languages. 2008.
[16]
Wael Etaiwi and Ghazi Naymat. “The impact of applying different preprocess-
ing steps on review spam detection.” In: Procedia computer science 113 (2017),
pages 273–279.
[17]
Lihao Ge and Teng-Sheng Moh. “Improving text classification with word embed-
ding.” In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data). IEEE.
2017, pages 1796–1805.
[18]
Dorte Haltrup Hansen et al. “Towards the Automatic Classification of Speech
Subjects in the Danish Parliament Corpus.” In: DHN. 2019, pages 166–174.
[19]
Graeme Hirst, Yaroslav Riabinin, and Jory Graham. “Party status as a confound
in the automatic classification of political speech by ideology.” In: Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Statistical Analysis of Textual Data (JADT
2010). 2010, pages 731–742.
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography
72
[20]
Bjørn Høyland et al. “Predicting party aﬀiliations from European Parliament de-
bates.” In: Proceedings of the acl 2014 workshop on language technologies and
computational social science. 2014, pages 56–60.
[21]
Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. “Mining and summarizing customer reviews.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge dis-
covery and data mining. 2004, pages 168–177.
[22]
Xia Hu et al. “Unsupervised sentiment analysis with emotional signals.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 22nd international conference on World Wide Web. 2013, pages 607–
618.
[23]
Clayton Hutto and Eric Gilbert. “Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for
sentiment analysis of social media text.” In: Proceedings of the international AAAI
conference on web and social media. Volume 8. 1. 2014, pages 216–225.
[24]
Sethunya R Joseph et al. “Natural language processing: A review.” In: International
Journal of Research in Engineering and Applied Sciences 6.3 (2016), pages 207–
210.
[25]
Jurgita Kapočiūtė-Dzikienė and Algis Krupavičius. “Predicting party group from
the Lithuanian parliamentary speeches.” In: Information Technology and Control
43.3 (2014), pages 321–332.
[26]
Jashanjot Kaur and P Kaur Buttar. “A systematic review on stopword removal
algorithms.” In: International Journal on Future Revolution in Computer Science
& Communication Engineering 4.4 (2018), pages 207–210.
[27]
Diksha Khurana et al. “Natural language processing: State of the art, current
trends and challenges.” In: Multimedia tools and applications (2022), pages 1–32.
[28]
Vandana Korde and C Namrata Mahender. “Text classification and classifiers:
A survey.” In: International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications 3.2
(2012), page 85.
[29]
Esben Kran and Søren Orm. “EMMA: Danish Natural-Language Processing of
Emotion in Text: The new State-of-the-Art in Danish Sentiment Analysis and a
Multidimensional Emotional Sentiment Validation Dataset.” In: Journal of Lan-
guage Works-Sprogvidenskabeligt Studentertidsskrift 5.1 (), pages 92–110.
[30]
Siwei Lai et al. “How to generate a good word embedding.” In: IEEE Intelligent
Systems 31.6 (2016), pages 5–14.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
73
[31]
Gustav Aarup Lauridsen, Jacob Aarup Dalsgaard, and Lars Kjartan Bacher Svend-
sen. “SENTIDA: A new tool for sentiment analysis in Danish.” In: Journal of
Language Works-Sprogvidenskabeligt Studentertidsskrift 4.1 (2019), pages 38–53.
[32]
Bing Liu. “Many facets of sentiment analysis.” In: A practical guide to sentiment
analysis (2017), pages 11–39.
[33]
Siaw Ling Lo et al. “Multilingual sentiment analysis: from formal to informal and
scarce resource languages.” In: Artificial Intelligence Review 48 (2017), pages 499–
527.
[34]
Zohreh Madhoushi, Abdul Razak Hamdan, and Suhaila Zainudin. “Sentiment anal-
ysis techniques in recent works.” In: 2015 science and information conference (SAI).
IEEE. 2015, pages 288–291.
[35]
Fawaz HH Mahyoub, Muazzam A Siddiqui, and Mohamed Y Dahab. “Building
an Arabic sentiment lexicon using semi-supervised learning.” In: Journal of King
Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences 26.4 (2014), pages 417–424.
[36]
Katja Meden. “Speech-level Sentiment Analysis of Parliamentary Debates using
Lexicon-based Approaches.” In: ().
[37]
Tomas Mikolov et al. “Eﬀicient estimation of word representations in vector space.”
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
[38]
Kristian Miok et al. “Multi-aspect Multilingual and Cross-lingual Parliamentary
Speech Analysis.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.01054 (2022).
[39]
Saif M Mohammad, Parinaz Sobhani, and Svetlana Kiritchenko. “Stance and sen-
timent in tweets.” In: ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT) 17.3
(2017), pages 1–23.
[40]
Saif M Mohammad and Peter D Turney. “Crowdsourcing a word–emotion associ-
ation lexicon.” In: Computational intelligence 29.3 (2013), pages 436–465.
[41]
Costanza Navarretta, Dorte Haltrup Hansen, and Bart Jongejan. “Immigration
in the Manifestos and Parliament Speeches of Danish Left and Right Wing Par-
ties between 2009 and 2020.” In: Proceedings of the Workshop ParlaCLARIN III
within the 13th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. Marseille, France:
European Language Resources Association, June 2022, pages 71–80. url: https:
//aclanthology.org/2022.parlaclarin-1.11.
[42]
Costanza Navarretta and Dorte Haltrup Hansen. “Identifying parties in manifestos
and parliament speeches.” In: Proceedings of the Second ParlaCLARIN Workshop.
2020, pages 51–57.
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
74
[43]
Renáta Németh. “A scoping review on the use of natural language processing in
research on political polarization: trends and research prospects.” In: Journal of
Computational Social Science (2022), pages 1–25.
[44]
Garrett Nicolai and Grzegorz Kondrak. “Leveraging Inflection Tables for Stemming
and Lemmatization.” In: Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2016, pages 1138–1147.
[45]
Finn Årup Nielsen. “A new ANEW: Evaluation of a word list for sentiment analysis
in microblogs.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1103.2903 (2011).
[46]
Obinna Onyimadu et al. “Towards sentiment analysis on parliamentary debates in
Hansard.” In: Semantic Technology: Third Joint International Conference, JIST
2013, Seoul, South Korea, November 28–30, 2013, Revised Selected Papers 3.
Springer. 2014, pages 48–50.
[47]
Hoifung Poon, Colin Cherry, and Kristina Toutanova. “Unsupervised morpholog-
ical segmentation with log-linear models.” In: Proceedings of Human Language
Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics. 2009, pages 209–217.
[48]
Rio Pramana, Jonathan Jansen Subroto, Alexander Agung Santoso Gunawan, et al.
“Systematic Literature Review of Stemming and Lemmatization Performance for
Sentence Similarity.” In: 2022 IEEE 7th International Conference on Information
Technology and Digital Applications (ICITDA). IEEE. 2022, pages 1–6.
[49]
Ludovic Rheault and Christopher Cochrane. “Word embeddings for the analysis of
ideological placement in parliamentary corpora.” In: Political Analysis 28.1 (2020),
pages 112–133.
[50]
Filipe N Ribeiro et al. “Sentibench-a benchmark comparison of state-of-the-practice
sentiment analysis methods.” In: EPJ Data Science 5 (2016), pages 1–29.
[51]
Elena Rudkowsky et al. “More than bags of words: Sentiment analysis with word
embeddings.” In: Communication Methods and Measures 12.2-3 (2018), pages 140–
157.
[52]
Tarik Sabri, Omar El Beggar, and Mohamed Kissi. “Comparative study of Arabic
text classification using feature vectorization methods.” In: Procedia Computer
Science 198 (2022), pages 269–275.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
75
[53]
Zaher Salah, Frans Coenen, and Davide Grossi. “Generating domain-specific sen-
timent lexicons for opinion mining.” In: Advanced Data Mining and Applications:
9th International Conference, ADMA 2013, Hangzhou, China, December 14-16,
2013, Proceedings, Part I 9. Springer. 2013, pages 13–24.
[54]
Amri Samir and Zenkouar Lahbib. “Stemming and lemmatization for information
retrieval systems in amazigh language.” In: Big Data, Cloud and Applications:
Third International Conference, BDCA 2018, Kenitra, Morocco, April 4–5, 2018,
Revised Selected Papers 3. Springer. 2018, pages 222–233.
[55]
Sundar Singh and RK Pateriya. “A survey on various stemming algorithms.” In:
Int. J. Comput. Eng. Res. TRENDS 2.5 (2015), pages 310–315.
[56]
Matt Thomas, Bo Pang, and Lillian Lee. “Get out the vote: Determining sup-
port or opposition from Congressional floor-debate transcripts.” In: arXiv preprint
cs/0607062 (2006).
[57]
Iulia Turc et al. “Well-Read Students Learn Better: On the Importance of Pre-
training Compact Models.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08962v2 (2019).
[58]
Peter D Turney. “Thumbs up or thumbs down? Semantic orientation applied to
unsupervised classification of reviews.” In: arXiv preprint cs/0212032 (2002).
[59]
Felipe Viegas et al. “Exploiting semantic relationships for unsupervised expansion
of sentiment lexicons.” In: Information Systems 94 (2020), page 101606.
[60]
Janyce Wiebe and Ellen Riloff. “Creating subjective and objective sentence classi-
fiers from unannotated texts.” In: Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text
Processing: 6th International Conference, CICLing 2005, Mexico City, Mexico,
February 13-19, 2005. Proceedings 6. Springer. 2005, pages 486–497.
[61]
Wikipedia. Natural language processing — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
http : / / en . wikipedia . org / w / index . php ? title = Natural % 20language %
20processing&oldid=1139326365. [Online; accessed 16-February-2023]. 2023.
[62]
Bei Yu, Stefan Kaufmann, and Daniel Diermeier. “Classifying party aﬀiliation
from political speech.” In: Journal of Information Technology & Politics 5.1 (2008),
pages 33–48.
[63]
Jun Zhao, Kang Liu, and Liheng Xu. Sentiment analysis: mining opinions, senti-
ments, and emotions. 2016.
==PAGE:84==
