==PAGE:1==
Route Analyser
Traffic Infrastructure evaluation
Master Thesis
Avi Raj
2023
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Route Analyser
Proposed Algorithms and Web Application Design for Traﬀic Infrastructure Monitoring
Avi Raj (s210252)
Master of Science in Engineering
2022
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Route Analyser, Proposed Algorithms and Web Application Design for Traﬀic Infrastructure Monitor-
ing
Report written by:
Avi Raj (s210252)
Advisor(s):
Emil Vincent Ancker,R&D Manager, Dynatest
Jens Christian Andersen,Associate Professor, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Associate Professor, Department of Electrical Engineering Automation and Control
DTU Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
1 February 2023- 26 March 2023
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc
Field:
Autonomous Systems
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Avi Raj, 2022
==PAGE:5==
d
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
This master’s thesis presents an approach for analyzing the traﬀic infrastructure of a
locality. The purpose of this study is to extract traﬀic information from images. In order
to achieve the objective, both 2D and 3D computer vision techniques were utilized. The
study was carried out at the Technical University of Denmark and Dynatest A/S.
The findings of the project present solutions that do not rely on neural networks and
only utilize traditional computer vision techniques. The project introduces pipelines and
techniques to develop a working solution and then further presents a discussion about
its qualities and suggestions about some key aspects that would need to be looked into
for creating a production-level version of the project for various use cases.
Overall, this master’s thesis contributes to the knowledge and understanding of com-
puter vision, web development, and geospatial analysis, and provides a foundation for
future research in this area.
==PAGE:7==
ii
==PAGE:8==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincerest thanks to Professor Jens Christian Andersen for his
support, encouragement, and guidance throughout my thesis. His expertise, patience,
and dedication, provided me with a lot of support without which this project would not
have been possible. His insightful feedback and constructive criticism have helped me
grow as an engineer, I am truly grateful for his mentorship.
I would also like to thank Mr . Emil Vincent Ancker for providing me with the
opportunity at Dynatest.
His insight was extremely useful for coming up with the
project idea.
Once again, I am deeply grateful to Professor Jens Christian Andersen for his men-
torship and support, and I deeply appreciate Mr Emil Vincent Ancker’s assistance in
ensuring that I have an exciting and engaging project that offers both scientific insights
and practical applications.
==PAGE:9==
iv
==PAGE:10==
Preface
“If you want to go fast, go alone.
If you
want to go far, go together.”
The accomplishment of this project is a testament to the strength my family and
friends provide me. Their unwavering support was the driving force behind my thesis.
Their encouragement and guidance helped me to stay motivated and focused throughout
the project, even during the most challenging times. Whenever I needed to bounce off
ideas or needed a listening ear, they were always there for me. Without their unwavering
support, this project would not have been possible, and for that, I will always be grateful.
==PAGE:11==
vi
==PAGE:12==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Preface
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Overview of the report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Significance of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.6
Scope and Limitations of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Analysis of Objectives
5
2.1
Traditional computer vision techniques vs. Neural Networks
. . . . . . .
5
2.2
Traﬀic Sign Recognition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Web Application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Geospatial analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Proposed Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
Input Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Detection of Traﬀic Signs
13
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Current technologies and Chosen Solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Classification of Traﬀic Signs
21
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Triangulation of Traﬀic Signs
31
5.1
Proposed solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:13==
viii
Contents
5.2
Chosen solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Route Planning
41
6.1
Response from Google Maps API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7
Web Application
45
7.1
General Requirements of Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.2
Front End . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.3
Application Peripheral Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.4
Back End
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.5
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8
System Assessment
49
8.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.2
User Friendliness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.3
Reliability and Availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.4
Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.5
Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.6
Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.7
Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.8
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.9
Maintenance and Upgrades . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.10 System Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.11 Overall assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9
Conclusion
55
9.1
Results and Reflections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
9.2
Limitation and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Appendices
57
A Application User Manual
59
B Code Snippets
63
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Analysis of traﬀic signs in transportation infrastructure is of huge importance to road
safety authorities as well as businesses that provide navigation facilities to customers or
for other research purposes.
This thesis aims to address this problem by creating a database of traﬀic signs using
images taken from cameras mounted on cars. The database will be used to assist with
route analysis and make it easier for road safety authorities to access information about
their road infrastructure better as well as allow them to easily update the database with
more recent data.
This thesis is performed in collaboration with the company Dynatest. The company
provides the dataset on which the classifiers are trained.
1.1
Background
Dynatest[17] is a Denmark-based company that works in the pavement solutions industry.
They have a huge range of products that they are in the process of revamping and
they wish to create an ecosystem that is shared by their products. This thesis is a
proof of concept for them as they wish to include an integrated platform for image
analysis combined with measurements from their instruments somewhere down the line.
Therefore, they wish to explore this idea and evaluate which direction would be better
suited if they wish to ever make a production-level platform for this technology.
1.2
Problem Statement
It is evident that, as of today, there doesn’t exist a simple integrated platform that
allows for an individual or an organization to upload street view images and analyze
them for any information on the traﬀic infrastructure of a city or locality. There is a
huge opportunity for faster and better deliverables by companies and businesses to their
customers by switching to a shared, one-stop platform for such analyses. In this case, it
so happens that the object of interest is traﬀic signs but this application can quite easily
and reliably be modified for any other type of road-based data as well.
==PAGE:15==
2
1 Introduction
1.3
Objectives
The problem statement discussed above can be broken down into the following objectives
that can be developed as individual components of a larger whole.
1. From a database of street view images taken from cameras mounted on cars. Ex-
tract relevant information about traﬀic signs that correspond to the navigation
path chosen by a user.
2. Present the extracted information to the user in an integrated web application.
3. For the overall design choices, prioritize traditional computer vision techniques
over deep learning or CNN.
1.4
Overview of the report
The thesis report focuses on the development of algorithms or pipelines that can perform
the detection and classification of street signs inside images, obtain their GPS coordi-
nates, and integrate Google Maps API for route planning. The report starts with an
introduction that provides background information, the problem statement, objectives,
the significance of the study, and the scope and limitations of the research. The litera-
ture review covers the current state-of-the-art in street sign detection and classification
algorithms.
The proposed solution is then presented in the form of several algorithms, starting
with an overview of the entire design. Then followed by detailed explanations of the
various algorithms that would be used.
The report concludes with a discussion of the findings and their implications for
future research in the field of street sign detection and classification. Overall, the thesis
report presents a comprehensive approach to solving the problem of street sign detection
and classification using image processing techniques and machine learning algorithms.
1.5
Significance of the Study
To achieve the objectives mentioned above, one can apply several techniques. However,
for this thesis, a self-imposed restriction has been put to not use Convoluted Neural
Networks (CNN) or deep learning in this project. The reason for that is, that at Dynatest
another student is trying to implement a similar platform where the detection and
classification are performed using CNN. The significance of this study is to compare
the results of these two processes and compare the result. Essentially, Dynatest wishes
to compare results between CNN and traditional computer vision techniques.
==PAGE:16==
1.6 Scope and Limitations of the study
3
This research contributes to the field by developing a method to use images to find
GPS coordinates of objects of interest and a faster traﬀic sign detection algorithm than
an average CNN algorithm.
1.6
Scope and Limitations of the study
Due to the scale and complexity of the project in its complete form. The scope of the
project has been limited in various aspects to ensure that the project can be contained
within a period of a semester as well as ensure that the scope is reasonable for a single
person to accomplish.
These limitations include:
1. Although the user can plan a route between any two places, the image dataset is
only defined for some fixed paths that are mentioned in table 1.1.
2. The algorithms are only designed to work for traﬀic signs that are Red or Blue in
color as well as only detect traﬀic signs that are of the following shapes: Rectangle,
Triangle, Circle. This is done to reduce complexity as according to the list of traﬀic
signs used in Denmark [12] these conditions only exclude 9 out of the 66 types of
signs in use in the country.
Table 1.1: A table defining the defined routes for the web application. (User can choose
between the start point and endpoint in every route).
Endpoint A
Endpoint B
Route 1
Lundtoftevej 162
DTU Enviorment
building
Route 2
DTU Skylab
Zleep hotel
The thesis also includes a discussion of the limitations faced during the research
and the future directions for the research such as becoming camera independent and
including IMU sensors to improve SfM.
==PAGE:17==
4
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis of Objectives
To achieve the objectives of this project it is quintessential to analyze the current state-
of-the-art research that has been done already in these areas.
There are two broad directions when thinking about the recognition of traﬀic signs
in images: one involving traditional computer vision techniques, and the other involving
neural networks.
After reviewing numerous papers, some insights have been gained
about both of them.
2.1
Traditional computer vision techniques vs.
Neural Networks
As discussed in 1.5, it has been decided not to utilize neural networks for object recog-
nition in this project. There were several reasons why Dynatest wishes to experiment
between these concepts, and after reviewing numerous papers several insights were made
about the pros and cons of using neural networks vs traditional computer vision. The
decision was based on the desire to experiment with building both these solutions and
observe these differences themselves. Through analyzing the current state of traditional
computer vision techniques, insights were gained from resources [33],[26], [31], and [35],
while resources [39], [5], and [11] provided insights into neural network methods. Tradi-
tional computer vision techniques have been extensively researched and applied in diverse
domains, achieving accuracy in the range of 90%-95% in object recognition tasks[33].
Conversely, in similar tasks, neural networks have demonstrated an accuracy of around
99% [39] across several different models in recent years, showing significant potential.
Traditional computer vision algorithms rely on feature extraction, which can be
time-consuming and also requires significant domain knowledge, to be able to choose
the right type of features suited for an application. On the other hand, deep learning
algorithms can learn the features from the data automatically, which reduces the need for
manual feature engineering [35]. However, deep learning models require large amounts
of labeled data to learn effectively, and their performance can suffer when the training
data is limited [31].
However, traditional computer vision techniques have several advantages over neural
networks. For example, they are more interpretable, meaning that it is easier to under-
==PAGE:19==
6
2 Analysis of Objectives
stand how the algorithm arrived at a certain conclusion. They are also faster and require
less computational power, making them more suitable for real-time applications and also
extremely enticing options for embedded systems. In contrast, neural networks are often
considered ”black boxes,” as it is diﬀicult to understand how they make their decisions.
They also require more computational resources, which can make them impractical for
certain applications [35].
Another advantage of traditional computer vision techniques is that they can be
easily customized and fine-tuned for specific tasks. This is particularly important in
cases where the objects to be recognized have unique or complex features that require
specialized algorithms[31].
In conclusion, while neural networks have shown great promise in object recognition
tasks, traditional computer vision techniques remain a reliable and practical option, espe-
cially in cases where there are limitations on the use of neural networks. The strengths of
traditional computer vision techniques, such as interpretability and customization, can
be leveraged to achieve high accuracy rates in object recognition tasks. The strategy
proposed in [48] provides a road map for achieving the goal with a high level of accuracy,
and great computational power economy, utilizing the strengths of traditional computer
vision techniques. As such, it is a valuable resource for researchers and practitioners in
the field of computer vision.
2.2
Traﬀic Sign Recognition
The article by F Zaklouta and B Stanciulescu [48] proposes a compelling strategy that
breaks down the goal into three distinct steps. The first step involves pre-processing the
images to enhance their quality and remove noise. This is followed by a feature extraction
step, where important features are extracted from the images using traditional computer
vision techniques. Finally, a classification algorithm is used to identify the objects in
the images. This approach has an estimated success rate of 90%, which is higher than
the average accuracy of traditional computer vision techniques alone.
The pipeline laid down in [48] suggests the following step-by-step approach for traﬀic
sign recognition (detection + classification):
• Segmentation
• Shape Detection
• Classification
The article [33] by Markus Mathias suggests a Histogram of Gradient or HOG-
based object recognition.
This method is based on dividing an image into n smaller segments and for each
segment, the magnitude and angle of the gradient are calculated for each pixel. These
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Localization
7
values are accumulated into a histogram of m number of bins. These n · m values are
used to define a vector that acts as a unique descriptor for an image.
HOG is a popular feature descriptor that can be utilized for various object detection
tasks. Its simplicity and eﬀiciency make it a suitable choice for real-time applications
as it can be computed quickly. However, in complex scenes with numerous objects that
share a similar appearance, HOG may not perform well. Moreover, HOG’s performance
is heavily dependent on the quality of the object’s edges and may not be effective when
dealing with objects that have poor edge quality or high texture. Another limitation of
HOG is that it is sensitive to changes in object scale, making it diﬀicult to detect objects
that appear differently in size[44],[15],[34].
Considering the pros and cons of HOG-based object recognition, it seems there might
be the following issues:
• While detecting traﬀic signs, the amount of similarity between signs is quite high
and it doesn’t work well with similar objects.
• The algorithm prefers clear edges, but in outdoor conditions, the traﬀic signs
wouldn’t always stay undented and clean from the elements all the time.
• A huge database would be required for performing comparisons.
Considering the qualities of both the suggested approaches, it seems that article [48]
has a more promising solution.
2.3
Localization
For most applications, it is not highly valuable to accurately find out the pose of the
camera w.r.t to any standardized global coordinate system. A simple system that uses
the initial point of the camera as the origin is often used. Some techniques that utilize
this concept are Visual Odomotery and VSLAM. However, it is possible to combine data
received from a process like Visual Odometry and combine it with an initial value in a
global coordinate system. However, this system is not perfect as can be seen in [36] and
a lot of pre-existing knowledge of roads is required to avoid runaway error issues.
Visual Servoing is another method used for localization. In this method, generally,
an arbitrary object is chosen from the scene of the camera of the robot and that object
is used to stabilize the position of the robot by analyzing the changes in the position and
size of the image of the object in the scene [13]. This can be used for course correction,
hovering, or other related tasks. The algorithm can further be improved to also keep
track of the orientation of the localizing feature for better pose tracking as well. This can
be done by using localizing features that are symmetric in only one axis and calculating
the magnitude and angle of the gradient [20].
==PAGE:21==
8
2 Analysis of Objectives
Figure 2.1: Visual Servoing [38].
Another method is to use known features from the scene. In this method, some
features from the city are pre-processed and stored in a database of known features [42].
In this method, the algorithm is on the lookout for descriptive features that are already
stored in its database. Once it has found one, it approximates where it is in relation to
that landmark.
Comparing all these options the following conclusion can be made:
• Most localization algorithms do not rely on GPS data and consider an arbitrary
point in space as their origin for navigating.
• The algorithms that do utilize GPS navigation information in localization are not
suited for long-range localization or scanning a large number of images taken over
long distances.
• Other options require maintaining a large database of known features in a city
that can be used as a landmark.
Hence, a novel solution should be thought of to accomplish localization in the GPS
coordinate system.
2.4
Web Application
For the purpose of this project, it is critical to have an integrated platform in order to
perform any analysis. Since the scale of this project can potentially include very large
datasets it seems prudent to structure the platform in a manner that can be scaled up
or scaled down, as and when required. Hence a Full Stack application is chosen.
==PAGE:22==
2.4 Web Application
9
The next design choice would be to either make a native application or a web appli-
cation. Here again, the choice is made in favor of a web application. This is because
performing Structure from Motion is a very computationally expensive task and also on
a full-scale version, the process of stitching up a user’s route information would also be
very computationally expensive. Having a large server to handle this processing would
be a better alternative than having all of these computations be performed by a single
core of a user’s personal computer.
Another important reason for choosing a web application is the memory requirements
of a full-scale version of this application. The raw data required to run the pipelines
would need a lot of storage space. Even if a native device could handle this amount
of data, it would not be an ideal situation. Also, having this system on the web en-
sures that a local copy of this dataset is not required by every user. A server can be
updated by many users and can be accessed by all of them too without overloading their
computational and memory resources.
2.4.1
Front-end
For the front end of the project, a conscious decision was made to work with a platform
that is based on the .NET Framework. This is because Dynatest prefers to develop its
solutions in that framework.
This leaves a few good options to choose from:
• ASP.NET: ASP.NET is a server-side web development platform that uses C#,
Visual Basic andF#. It is a very popular platform and has been around since
2002.
• Blazor framework: It is a relatively recently launched platform that allows for both
server-side web application development as well as web assembly web application
development. It allows for JavaScript interoperability as well.
Considering these options, Blazor framework seems like a more practical solution.
This is because it offers multiple development paradigms and allows one to work with
JavaScript as well. This will be incredibly useful when dealing with API calls.
2.4.2
Back-end
The back end is where most of the processing takes place. This is part of the application
that handles the image analysis part, the 3D reconstruction, and the geospatial analysis.
It is, therefore, important to consider a technology that offers the versatility to be able
to handle all these aspects and also one that has a high degree of familiarity.
==PAGE:23==
10
2 Analysis of Objectives
The Python programming language offers several libraries that are easily accessible
that fulfill several of these requirements. Libraries like GeoPandas,UTM andOpenCV
offer a lot of built-in capabilities that can cater to the requirements.
2.4.3
Application Programming Interface
An Application programming interface or API acts as an interface that enables the front
end and the back end to send and receive data. Python offers several frameworks that
can be used to make these APIs:
• FLASK micro-framework: It is a lightweight and easy-to-use framework.
It is
relatively easy, to begin with, but is not ideal for large-scale systems.
• Django: This framework offers a wide variety of features already built-in and works
well with large-scale systems too. However, it is not easy to start with and has a
steep learning curve.
• FastAPI: It is a new framework that has very high-level features already built in.
However, it is still relatively small in terms of developers. Combine that with its
steep learning curve it becomes hard to get started with the framework.
Considering the fact that the requirement in terms of API capabilities for this project
is small, a fast and easy-to-use framework would be a good idea. Hence FLASK seems
like a good option.
2.5
Geospatial analysis
The geospatial analysis would be required to perform the traﬀic sign triangulations and
route planning. For the route planning part of the analysis, a geographical information
system solution would have to be used. Two of the most commonly used systems are:
• Esri ArcGIS APIs: Esri offers a great software system for geospatial analysis that
can be integrated into an application via their APIs. However, their solutions are
designed for much more complicated requirements and it has a very steep learning
curve to get started with the system.
• Google Maps API: Google Maps also offers APIs that can be used in other appli-
cations. The API is more limited in features when compared to ArcGIS.However,
it is much more simpler to get started with and the design of the API makes it
very easy to use.
Considering the options, Google Maps seems suﬀicient enough for simple tasks like
route planning and therefore seems like the better option for this application.
==PAGE:24==
2.6 Proposed Solution
11
2.6
Proposed Solution
Looking at all the possible alternatives and weighing their pros and cons. The chosen
solution is mentioned below.
2.6.1
Algorithms and Pipelines
After careful evaluation of some of the possible solutions, the following flow diagram
seems most suitable in order to integrate all of the pipelines in a coherent and sequential
manner:
1. Detect traﬀic signs in the image data set.
2. Classify the detected traﬀic signs.
3. Obtain the GPS coordinates of the detected traﬀic signs.
4. Store the information in a database.
5. Plan user’s route
6. Display relevant information
2.6.2
Web Application
Considering all the design choices the following decisions seem most suited for the appli-
cation:
• Create a front end using the Blazor framework and Javascript. The UI can be
made solely with Blazor and Javascript can be used to make API calls and provide
this data to the UI.
• Use the FLASK micro-framework to create the interface between the front end
and back end.
• Use Python and its relevant libraries to perform all the analyses.
• Use Google Maps API for the route planning part.
2.7
Input Data
For the purpose of this project, it was assumed that the raw data that would be analyzed
by the application would be provided by Dynatest. However, due to some unforeseeable
issues, the collaboration with the company had to be dissolved. This meant that there
==PAGE:25==
12
2 Analysis of Objectives
would be no data provided. Therefore, to develop the system datasets and images taken
by the student were relied on.
For training the classification model the GTSDB [10] which is a dataset of annotated
images containing the German traﬀic signs.
For the raw image datasets. The system expects .csv files that contain the GPS
coordinates of the camera positions when the images were taken and the directory path
to where the images are stored.
Since data collection is not considered a part of this project. It is assumed that if
the raw image data would have been provided, it would have also been provided in this
format and the company would have taken care of that process.
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3
Detection of Traﬀic Signs
3.1
Introduction
In this project, the process of detecting and classifying traﬀic signs is independent of
other components and is based solely on classical computer vision techniques and a
content-based classifier.
The process of sign detection can be divided into two main parts:
• Color detection 3.2.1
• Shape detection 3.2.2
Color detection involves identifying the pixels in the image that correspond to the
desired color of the traﬀic signs.
Shape detection involves identifying the shape and contour of the traﬀic signs in the
image. This can be done using image processing techniques such as edge detection, blob
analysis, or contour tracking.
3.2
Current technologies and Chosen
Solution
Segmentation here refers to processing the image and ”extracting” regions of the image
that are of the desired color or shade. The paper utilizes the RBG color space. How-
ever, further analysis suggests that utilizing the HSV color space could result in better
solutions [14].
3.2.1
Color Detection
In order to detect street signs in an image, the first step is to identify areas in the image
that describe a street sign. To do this, the focus will be on the colors red and blue, as
these are the most commonly used colors for street signs
==PAGE:27==
14
3 Detection of Traﬀic Signs
There are different ways to represent the color of a pixel in an image, and each of
these methods has its own advantages and disadvantages. One particularly useful color
space for detecting colors is the HSV (hue, saturation, value) color space. [9]
The HSV color space represents the value of a pixel in terms of its Hue, Saturation,
and Value respectively. In this color space, the color of a pixel is described in the value
of these terms.
• The Hue component corresponds to the dominant color as perceived by the human
eye. It represents the purest form of the color, without any white light mixed in.
• The Saturation component represents the amount of white light that is mixed in
with the hue. A high saturation indicates that the color is pure and intense, while
a low saturation indicates that the color is pale or washed out. [25].
• The Value parameter of a pixel in the HSV color space is a representation of
the brightness or intensity of the color. A higher amount of the value parameter
indicates that the color is comparatively bright, while a lower value is an indication
towards the color’s darkness or dullness property.
Combining the Hue, Saturation, and Value aspects. It is possible to the color of any
pixel in the HSV color space. These values can also be utilized to identify and isolate
colors in an image.
Figure 3.1: HSV Color Space [21].
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Current technologies and Chosen Solution
15
One method used to detect a specific color in an image using the HSV color space
or any color space is to set thresholds on the values of its parameters. In this particular
case, set thresholds for the hue, saturation, and value values of the pixels in the image.
This can be done to obtain a type of image known as a mask image. It is a binary
image, of the same height and width as that of the original image. However, here every
white pixel represents that the pixels had met the threshold criteria, and every black
pixel represents the pixels that it does not. A mask image is obtained by setting a range
of acceptable values for the hue, saturation, and value of the pixels in an image and
identifying the pixels that meet these thresholds.
A bitwise AND operation can be performed on a mask image and its original image
to filter out all the pixels in the original image that do not match the desired color. In
this operation, the pixel values of the original image are compared to a pixel’s values in
the mask image. If the value of the pixel is 255 (white) in the mask image, the original
color of the pixel is preserved in the resulting image. However, if the pixel’s value in
the mask image is 0 (black), the resulting pixel value is also set to zero as well. The
resultant image from this operation contains only the pixels whose HSV values match
the desired color, as identified in the mask image. This resultant image can then be
utilized to locate and classify the objects of interest that were present in the original
image and are of the desired color.
Figure 3.2: Isolating Red color from an Image.
In the HSV color space, the red color is not present in a continuous range. Instead,
it is spread out over two separate ranges: H value ranges from 0 −10 and 160 −180.
Hence it requires a a combination of two ranges. The ones used here are:
• (0, 100, 20) TO (10, 255, 255)
• (160,100,20) TO (179,255,255)
On the other hand. For the color blue, all the shades in the HSV color space lie
within a continuous region, the range used here is:
• (128, 255, 255) TO (90, 50, 70)
==PAGE:29==
16
3 Detection of Traﬀic Signs
By setting the appropriate thresholds for hue, saturation, and value that lie in be-
tween the ranges mentioned, a mask image can be created for every image that can filter
out the pixels that do not match the desired color and allows to locate and classify the
objects in the image that are colored red or blue.
3.2.2
Shape Detection
Most traﬀic signs can be categorized into squares, circles, and triangles. Once all the
colored regions of interest have been calculated from an image, the mask image left from
those is used for detecting the shapes. This is done so because, the contrast of black
and white areas within the image, is highly conducive to the pipeline used for shape
detection.
The procedures used to detect each shape are quite similar. However, the underlying
algorithms used for each of the shapes are different, The steps used to detect them can
be described as:
• Rectangle Detection: To detect a rectangle in the mask image the following
steps are taken:
1. Take the grayscale image and apply thresholding techniques to convert it into
a binary image.
2. Find all the closed contours in the image.
3. Calculate their areas and filter them out based on that.
4. Bound the remaining contours within a minimum bounding rectangle. This
can be done using the Rotating Calipers algorithm [41]. This algorithm
works by overlapping two parallel lines and then rotating them across all
points on a contour till it discovers the minimum bounding rectangle for that
contour.
5. Calculate the percentage of area covered by the contour w.r.t the bounding
rectangle.
6. If the percentage of covered area overlap is satisfactory, then that closed
contour can be classified as a rectangle.
7. Calculate the coordinates that bound the contour.
8. Crop the region from the image bounding the rectangle.
9. The region containing the rectangle can now be saved for further processes.
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Current technologies and Chosen Solution
17
Figure 3.3: Detecting a rectangle in a synthetic image.
[Note: The logic of using this area-based and vertices-based pipeline may not be
intuitive at first, but it reduces the errors introduced by issues like a dirty traﬀic
sign or the fact that the actual traﬀic post has smooth edges]
• Circle Detection: To detect a circle in the mask image the following pipeline is
used:
1. Take the grayscale image and apply thresholding techniques to convert it into
a binary image.
2. Find all the closed contours in the image.
3. Calculate their areas and filter them out based on that.
4. Bound the remaining contours within a minimum bounding circle. This can
be done using the Welzl’s algorithm [45]. This algorithm works by finding
a circle that fits a smaller subset of the points in the contour and incrementally
increasing the size of the circle until it bounds the whole contour.
5. Calculate the percentage of area covered by the contour w.r.t the bounding
circle.
6. If the percentage of covered area overlap is satisfactory, then that closed
contour can be classified as a circle.
7. Calculate the coordinates that bound the contour.
8. Crop the region from the image bounding the circle.
9. The region containing the circle can now be saved for further processes.
==PAGE:31==
18
3 Detection of Traﬀic Signs
Figure 3.4: Detecting Circles in a synthetic image.
• Triangle Detection: To detect a triangle in the mask image requires following
a lot of steps that are similar to the ones used in the rectangle detection pipeline.
The triangle detection pipeline follows the given steps:
1. Take the grayscale image and apply thresholding techniques to convert it into
a binary image.
2. Find all the closed contours in the image.
3. Calculate their areas and filter them out based on that.
4. Bound the filtered contours within a minimum bounding triangle. This can be
done using the QuickHull algorithm [7]. This algorithm works by dividing
the points on the contour into convex hulls. A convex hull is a convex polygon
that can contain all the points in the contour within itself. It performs this
operation iteratively until the minimum enclosing triangle is detected.
5. Calculate the percentage of the area covered by the contour w.r.t the bounding
triangle.
6. If the percentage of the covered area overlap is satisfactory, the closed contour
can be classified as a triangle
7. Calculate the coordinates that bound the contour.
8. Crop the region from the image bounding the Triangular.
9. The region containing the triangle can now be saved for further processes.
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Results
19
Figure 3.5: Detecting Triangle in a synthetic image.
Note:Figure 3.4,3.5, 3.3 are synthetic images used to develop these algorithms. In
figure 3.6 below, the algorithms are tested all together on an actual image.
Figure 3.6: Traﬀic Sign detection on an image in the application.
3.3
Results
Considering the accuracy speed and reliability, the detection algorithm’s performance is
better than expected.
==PAGE:33==
20
3 Detection of Traﬀic Signs
The algorithm was stress tested for repeatability by providing it with the same image
and checking if the results vary. This process was repeated 10 times per image and it
provided the same result every time.
As for the accuracy of the system, it has been found that unless the picture is too
bright or in some rare cases when there are a lot of elements present in the image that
are of similar color. The algorithm is able to detect and isolate a traﬀic sign 96.667% of
the time (the test provided positive results 29 times out of 30).
Another huge benefit of using an algorithm based on calculable values inside an image
is that there is no requirement for a huge training dataset.
The code snippet used for executing the pipeline is mentioned in the appendix B.2
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 4
Classification of Traﬀic Signs
4.1
Introduction
Following the approach mentioned in 2.2 the next step is to look into the classification
of the traﬀic signs detected in the images. As discussed in section 1.5, the solution
needs to be based on techniques that do not involve neural networks or deep learning
models. Therefore, whichever classification technique is utilized would have to be based
solely on analyzing the contents of the image. This form of classification is referred to
as content-based image retrieval or CBIR.
One popular CBIR method used is called the Bag of Visual Words technique [47].
This technique is a derivative of a popular algorithm called Bag of words, which is used
quite extensively in natural language processing models[49].
The Bag of words technique is based on encoding given sentences by looking at
unique keywords present in them and keeping track of their occurrences. It then uses
this information to compare sentences and thereby perform the classification.
Figure 4.1: Bag of Words[28].
==PAGE:35==
22
4 Classification of Traﬀic Signs
4.1.1
Bag of Visual Words
The Bag of Visual Words or BoVW is based on the idea that it is possible to
represent an image by something known as a visual histogram. A visual histogram is
a representation of the measure of the occurrence of all the unique features that have
been identified in an image.
It is a vector that encodes an image by comparing its
content to a Visual Dictionary.
A Visual Dictonary is a collection of all the possible unique features or Visual
Words that can exist in the dataset of all the images available. However, that list can
become too big, and not all unique features present in an image would be helpful for the
process of classification. Hence the visual words are clustered and only the ones that
form the centers of those clusters are used.
Since the visual dictionary remains the same for every comparison, the visual his-
tograms become an easy way to identify images by their occurrence of visual words in an
image compared to all the other images in the dataset. At this point, the actual image
becomes irrelevant and only the histograms are necessary for the classification.
The algorithm can be better understood from the table below:
1. Selection of a corpus of images: The first step in implementing a BoVW
classification model, is to select a set of images to use as the basis for forming the
visual vocabulary. This corpus of images is often referred to as the ”training set”.
A visual dictionary is a vector collection of all the important features that exist
in an image dataset. This allows a standard yardstick that can be referred to as
create visual histograms.
2. Extraction of local features: Next, local features are extracted from each image
in the training set. Local features are distinctive patterns or structures in the image
that are resistant to changes in scale, orientation, and aﬀine transformation. Exam-
ples of local features include SIFT (Invariant Feature Transforms), SURF(Speeded
up robust features), and ORB (Oriented FAST and Rotated BRIEF). In this
project Scale or SIFT features, are used. [29]
3. Clustering of local features: However, creating a standard dictionary is a
slightly more complex task than just lining up all the possible features into a huge
list. Therefore, Once the local features have been extracted, they are typically
clustered using techniques such as k-means to create the visual vocabulary. Each
cluster of local features is known as a visual word. For the visual dictionary to be
useful it needs to be as small as possible while still not compromising on accuracy.
This is explained further in 4.1.1.1.
4. Quantization of local features: To create the BoVW for a given image, the
local features in that image are quantized to the closest visual words in the vocab-
ulary. This can be done using techniques such as nearest neighbor search or vector
quantization.
==PAGE:36==
4.1 Introduction
23
5. Creation of a histogram of visual word frequencies: The final step in creat-
ing a BoVW is to create a histogram of visual word frequencies. This histogram is
a statistical summary of the visual content of the image. It measures the frequency
of occurrence of all the visual words in the visual dictionary and plots them in a
histogram.
Figure 4.2: Visual Bag of Words.
BoVW has the advantage of being relatively simple and computationally eﬀicient
compared to other image representation methods. However, it can be sensitive to vari-
ations in the local features and the visual vocabulary, and it may not capture the full
complexity of the visual content of an image.
4.1.1.1
K Nearest Neighbour Mean Clustering Algorithm
K-NN algorithm is an unsupervised clustering algorithm that is used to separate out
clusters as regions in a graph. This allows for forming centers that can be used as a
dictionary.
The centers are calculated by finding the average sum of distances from a center to
all the points and then finding the points that minimize that average.
arg min
S
k
∑
i=1
1
|Si|
∑
x,y∈Si
∥x −y∥2arg min
S
k
∑
i=1
1
|Si|
∑
x,y∈Si
∥x −y∥2
(4.1)
==PAGE:37==
24
4 Classification of Traﬀic Signs
Figure 4.3: K-means algorithm clusters,visualized in 3D[22].
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Introduction
25
When working with a Bag-of-Visual-Words (BoVW) representation, it is important
to find the right balance between the number of clusters and the number of features to
avoid overfitting or underfitting.
A high number of clusters can lead to overfitting, as the BoVW representation will
have more features, and the model may become overly complex and fit the noise in
the training data, leading to poor generalization to new data. On the other hand, a
low number of clusters can lead to underfitting, where the BoVW representation will
have fewer features, resulting in a less expressive representation of the data and lower
accuracy.
Finding the optimal number of clusters in a BoVW representation is a trade-off
between performance and complexity. A good way to find this balance is to use the Elbow
method[32], where the performance of the model is evaluated with different numbers
of clusters and select the number of clusters that provides the best trade-off between
performance and complexity.
The elbow method when applied to this dataset, reveals that around 3000 clusters
are the most optimum amount of clusters that should be used. As can be seen in figure
4.4
Figure 4.4: Elbow Method for determination of the number of clusters,k.
==PAGE:39==
26
4 Classification of Traﬀic Signs
4.1.1.2
Classifiers
Once a visual dictionary or vocabulary has been formed. Image’s features can be com-
pared to that of the dictionary and visual words can be made out of them.
Figure 4.5: Representation of the data preparation for classification [6].
To convert an image into a visual word, the SIFT features extracted from that image
need to be compared to the visual dictionary. Then the frequency of occurrence of the
clusters found using the KNN algorithm is mapped and the resultant histogram becomes
the visual word for that image
Once this process is complete, what is effectively achieved is that now a dataset of
images has been converted into a collection of visual words that can be treated as any
labeled dataset and run through a number of classifiers.
For this project, four different classifiers were tested to check for the best accuracy.
These are:
1. Support Vector Machines
2. Random Forest Classifier
3. Decision Tree Classifier
4. Logistic Regression
The accuracy of all of these for classifiers for a number of clusters, k = 3000 can be
seen from the bar graph 4.6, mentioned below:
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Introduction
27
Figure 4.6: Accuracy of different classifiers on the dataset and the time taken to train
them.
As seen in the graph 4.6, the Random Forest classifier is the most suited for this
dataset as it provides the highest accuracy of 78.6199%
However, the shape and color of the street signs can already be calculated by the
techniques mentioned in section 3. Since the visual dictionary is calculated based on
clustering all the features, it stands to reason that if the corpus is a lot more similar,
the accuracy of the classifier may improve. Hence, a whole new range of classifiers is
trained on sub-sets of the entire corpus. The sub-sets are based on the information that
section 3 can already provide. That is:
• Color:
– Red
– Blue
• Shape:
==PAGE:41==
28
4 Classification of Traﬀic Signs
– Rectangle
– Circle
– Triangle
Based on these two categories the following sub-categories of classifiers are trained:
• Triangles
• Circles
• Red Color
• Blue Color
• Red Circles
• Blue Circles
• Red Triangles
These are the results that were obtained:
Figure 4.7: Accuracy of different sub-classifiers on the dataset and the time taken to
train them.
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Introduction
29
Figure 4.8: PCA Axes and their variance.
As previously discussed PCA is a linear dimensionality reduction technique, and it
is generally used to reduce the number of features in a dataset to a smaller number of
principal components, which can improve the performance of models that are sensitive
to the number of features, such as linear models. However, in this case, we’re using a
clustering-based approach (k-means) to form a bag of features, and reducing the number
of dimensions of the feature ’feat’ may not be beneficial as it can discard some important
information, and it can also make it harder to interpret the results of the clustering
algorithm.
Moreover, PCA is a linear dimensionality reduction technique, it assumes that the
data is linear and is not able to capture non-linear relations between features. While
k-means clustering is a linear method and it is sensitive to the initial state, it can become
trapped in poor local optima, so applying PCA on ’feat’ may not guarantee that the
results will be better.
In addition, it’s also important to keep in mind that the bag of features function is
essentially a histogram of the features, and it’s not sensitive to the number of dimensions
of the features, reducing the number of dimensions may not have a significant effect on
the performance of the algorithm.
Therefore, it’s important to consider the trade-offs between reducing the number of
dimensions using PCA and preserving the information in the features before using PCA
on ’feat’.
==PAGE:43==
30
4 Classification of Traﬀic Signs
4.2
Results
The classifier thus trained to categorize traﬀic signs presents itself as a viable option
for CBIR. The model trained in this particular project has only a modest accuracy of
around 79%. Even then the model seems to be overfitted to the dataset.
The classification performs better if it has a bigger picture to analyze with less
occlusion.
Although this implementation has a modest result. BoVW, by itself, is quite a capa-
ble technique, the accuracy, and precision might improve by changing the way features
are extracted in the image. Or new methods can be devised to create and extract features
that would be more meaningful to this specific application.
A combination of spatial information using HOG and BoVW called Enhanced Visual
Bag of Words has been shown to achieve 99.31% accuracy [2].
Once the model has been trained, the code snippet used to predict the traﬀic signs
is given in appendix B.3
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 5
Triangulation of Traﬀic Signs
5.1
Proposed solutions
As discussed in section 2.3, a novel solution is required to achieve the task of localization.
Some ideas were considered as possible solutions:
• Since the GPS coordinate of the image is known, use Visual Odometry to create
a vector from the origin to the signpost.
– Pros: VO is fast and does not require 3D reconstruction.
– Cons:
∗VO doesn’t work well over large distances due to runaway errors.
∗VO requires the algorithm to be run continuously to keep track of the
whole path.
• Use VSLAM to trace the route traveled so far, and create a vector from the origin.
Calculate the UTM coordinates from the origin’s UTM coordinates and convert
the result back to GPS.
– Pros: VSLAM is very accurate and widely used in robotics
– Cons:
∗VLSAM requires 3D reconstruction
∗ideally should be used in a closed loop circuit.
∗Requires other sensors apart from the GPS sensor required to collect the
coordinates of the images itself.
• Perform Structure from Motion on the image dataset, use UTM coordinates sys-
tems along with the world coordinate system of the point cloud to calculate the
GPS coordinates.
– Pros:
∗It requires a relatively less number of points than others.
∗It can be used in open loop circuits
∗It can be used over relatively much larger distances as there is no drift.
– Cons:
==PAGE:45==
32
5 Triangulation of Traﬀic Signs
∗Required 3D reconstruction.
∗Accuracy can vary a lot depending on the scene.
5.2
Chosen solution
After careful evaluation, the solution involving Structure from Motion and UTM coor-
dinate systems was chosen.
5.2.0.1
Structure from motion
Structure from Motion or SfM is a method of 3D reconstruction. It utilizes a large
collection of images to triangulate the 3D coordinates of points in the images while
considering one of the camera positions as the origin. This is commonly referred to as the
camera coordinate system. The SfM algorithm works by calculating the relative position
between two camera positions and accordingly calculating their projection matrix. This
is done by using the intrinsic camera matrix and the rotational and translational vector
between the camera positions when compared to the camera location being considered as
the origin in the camera coordinate system. After the projection matrix for all the camera
positions has been calculated, it is possible to calculate the 3D coordinates(triangulate)
of any point by using the projection matrices and the image coordinates of the point
corresponding images.
For this implementation, Incremental SfM is chosen as the algorithm of choice. In-
cremental SfM is a method of performing SfM in which images are fed sequentially as
opposed to all at once (Global SfM).
This reduces the complexity of the algorithm as the steps required to create the
sequence of images that when analyzed one after the other would produce the best
result are avoided. In incremental SfM, the images are taken in a continuous manner
which means that any two consecutive images are optimal matches for each other.
Before it’s possible to get further with the SfM pipeline. It is important to get some
basic information about the system. In this case, it is important to know the properties
of the camera being used. The process of calculating the properties of the camera is
known as Camera Calibration.
• Camera calibration is an important step in the process of 3D reconstruction and
Object tracking. The camera calibration process allows for the calculation of the
intrinsic as well as the extrinsic camera parameters [18].
• The OpenCV library provides a process for the calculation of the intrinsic and
extrinsic parameters. It requires the use of an image from a specific set of known
images for which their functions are tailored.
==PAGE:46==
5.2 Chosen solution
33
• In this case the image used is a known image of a chessboard attached to a flat
surface. The program first finds the corners inside the chessboard between multiple
images and tries to find a mathematical relation between them. This helps to
calculate both the intrinsic as well as extrinsic parameters of the camera.
• To estimate the fundamental matrix from a set of correspondences, the program
provides a choice between some algorithms. Namely:
1. Least Median of Squares (LMEDS).
2. RANdom SAmple Consensus (RANSAC).
Both algorithms are robust to outliers, meaning that they can handle a certain
percentage of erroneous correspondences in the input data.
The LMEDS algorithm estimates the fundamental matrix by minimizing the median
of the squared distances between the points and the epipolar lines. It is generally less
sensitive to outlier correspondences than the FM RANSAC algorithm, but it is also
slower and requires more memory.
The RANSAC algorithm estimates the fundamental matrix by randomly sampling a
subset of correspondences and fitting a model to the subset. It then verifies the model
using the remaining correspondences. This process is repeated multiple times, and the
model with the highest number of inliers (correspondences that are correctly fitted by
the model) is chosen as the final estimate.
Generally, the RANSAC algorithm is faster and it also requires less memory. How-
ever, it is more sensitive to outlier correspondences. It is more accurate than the LMEDS
algorithm when the input data contains a significant percentage of outlier correspon-
dences. However, if the input data is relative to low noise with a low percentage of
outlier correspondences between the images, the LMEDS algorithm has a good chance
of being more accurate. For the purposes of this project, the RANSAC algorithm is used.
For this project, only a single camera is used. Therefore, this calculation only needs
to be performed once as the camera matrix will always be the same.
K =


fx
0
px
0
fy
py
0
0
1


(5.1)
Now, that some information about the cameras is available, it is possible to start the
process of performing SfM.
NOTE: Since the intrinsic parameters of the camera are now known, it is good
practice to always undistort the images before any further calculations are done. This
helps with removing the errors that can occur due to the lens distortion of the camera.
==PAGE:47==
34
5 Triangulation of Traﬀic Signs
• Corresponding Image coordinates For this part of the process, the SIFT fea-
ture extraction and feature matching [29] algorithm is used. Since SfM typically
requires a large amount of data, it is important to find correspondences across
several images. To achieve this a set of images is taken and then ordered pairs are
made between them. For example if there are 4 images, then the combinations
would be (1, 2), (1, 3), (1, 4). Once these comparisons are done the SIFT features
that were common for all instances of the first image are used to find corresponding
points that are common across the set.
By doing so, an ordered data frame of points can be made for n number of images
such that each column represents image coordinates for the nth image and each
row represents the same SIFT feature across the n images.
However, it can be observed that as the number of images is increased in the set,
the number of correspondences also drop.
==PAGE:48==
5.2 Chosen solution
35
Figure 5.1: Corresponding SIFT features across multiple images.
• Extraction of Camera Motion An Essential matrix represents the relationship
between the relative orientation of two camera positions. To calculate the essen-
tial matrix between two images the following formula, as mentioned in the book
”Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision” by Hartley and Zisserman [24] can
==PAGE:49==
36
5 Triangulation of Traﬀic Signs
be used:
E = KT · F · K
(5.2)
Here, F represents the fundamental matrix [30]. It is a matrix that describes the
relationship between corresponding points and their epipolar lines between images.
According to the book, ”Given a set of corresponding image points and the camera
matrices, there is a unique fundamental matrix relating the two images.”.
It is also worth noting that the fundamental matrix is sensitive to scale, so if the
images were taken from different distances or with different focal lengths, the fun-
damental matrix will not be unique. In these cases, it is necessary to use additional
information, such as known distances between points in the images or the intrinsic
parameters of the cameras, to determine the correct fundamental matrix.
(Note: It should be pointed out that this entire process so far used to capture the
pose of the cameras is only required for the first two images. For further images, a
different algorithm called the ”Perspective n-point Algorithm” is used. This is done
to maintain a good computational resource economy. However, it is not possible
to use this algorithm from the get-go. The algorithm is discussed later on in the
same section.)
Once the essential matrix has been calculated, it can be decomposed using singular
value decomposition(SVD) to find the rotational vector and translation vector that
describes the origin of the camera positions relative to each other [43].
According to the book, performing SVD for an essential matrix actually results
in four mathematically valid solutions. For a given essential matrix E if the SVD
results in a rotational vector R and a translational vector t. The mathematically
valid solutions are:
1. (R, t)
2. (−R, t)
3. (R, −t)
4. (−R, −t)
This is known as the Chirality Constraint.
==PAGE:50==
5.2 Chosen solution
37
Figure 5.2: 4 mathematically valid solutions after decomposing the Essential matrix.
As seen in the figure 5.2, although mathematically there is more than one correct
solution. In reality, there will be only one solution where the points lie in front of
both cameras. hence the pose that results in the maximum number of points with
a positive Z-axis value after triangulation is considered the correct solution.
• Triangulation of corresponding points The triangulation process is performed
by first multiplying the image coordinates of a point by the projection matrix on
that camera position.
The result of this multiplication describes a ray in the
camera coordinate system such that the point could lie anywhere along that ray.
By performing the same operation with a different image and its projection matrix
for a corresponding point, another ray can be calculated along which the point
can lie. If the camera positions do not lie on the same coordinate in the camera
coordinate system (in are case they do not since the pictures are taken from a
moving vehicle) the resulting rays would not be parallel. Using these two rays it
is then possible to find their intersection point and that point would describe the
coordinates of the desired point in the camera coordinate system.
• Perspective n-Point algorithm for subsequent images Perspective n-point
algorithm essentially works the opposite way of a projection matrix. If the real-
world 3D coordinates of the point are multiplied by the projection matrix it results
in the image coordinates from the perspective of the camera viewpoint. However,
if the 3D world coordinates and the image coordinates are provided instead. The
perspective n-point algorithm can algebraically calculate a matrix that could de-
scribe this relation. That matrix would be nothing else but the projection matrix
of that camera position.
• Bundle AdjustmentOnce all of the calculations have been performed.
It is
important to optimize the solution obtained. This is particularly important for
==PAGE:51==
38
5 Triangulation of Traﬀic Signs
SfM because several algorithms that are being used throughout the process are
iterative algorithms and not deterministic algorithms. What that means is that
they try to find the best solution given the information but that doesn’t necessarily
mean that it is the correct solution. The solution could simply be a result of the
algorithm being stuck in local minima.
Bundle adjustment is an algorithm that has the goal of minimizing the residual
error function in general. in this particular case, the residual error function is
the sum of distances between the estimated world coordinates of a point and the
actual world coordinates of the point.
It uses the Least Squares Algorithm to help reduce the residual error function.
Figure 5.3: SfM algorithm flow chart.
==PAGE:52==
5.2 Chosen solution
39
5.2.0.2
GPS Coordinate Systems
• The GPS coordinates are known for the image being used as the origin and the
distance between that camera and the traﬀic sign has now been calculated in the
camera coordinate system. However, these cannot be simply transformed from
one to another. This is because the GPS coordinate system uses latitudes and
longitudes. Longitudes all intersect at the pole and hence they are not a true
Cartesian coordinate system. To compare GPS coordinates to Cartesian coordi-
nates, a transformation must be applied to convert between the two reference
systems. This transformation involves accounting for the curvature of the Earth’s
surface and its orientation in space, as well as any other factors that may affect
the accuracy of the transformation.
• There is another form of a coordinate system called the UTM (Universal Trans-
verse Mercator) coordinate system. This coordinate system is perfectly designed to
be used with other Cartesian coordinate systems. It uses zones numbers and hemi-
sphere alphabets eg, 32 N. This system divides the surface of the Earth into small
grids within which the error caused in distance calculations due to the curvature
of the Earth can be ignored.
To convert between GPS coordinates and UTM coordinates for a given location.
The following steps are followed:
– To convert a set of GPS coordinates to UTM coordinates:
– To convert a set of UTM coordinates to GPS coordinates:
• From GPS Coordinates of the Camera to GPS of the Traﬀic Sign Once all the con-
version algorithms are set up. It is time to actually calculate the GPS coordinates
of objects in an image. To do that the following steps are followed:
– Extract the GPS coordinates of an image from the database and convert it
into its UTM coordinates.
– If there is a unique traﬀic sign in that image (unique here refers to a traﬀic
sign that has not been already identified) then perform Structure from Motion
on a smaller subset of the data where that particular image is the middle of
the subset.
– Take that particular image and the image right after it and identify the same
traﬀic sign. In case the same sign doesn’t exist in the next image take the
previous image and detect the same traﬀic sign.
– Using the image coordinates of the centroid of the traﬀic sign detected and
the projection matrix of both images, triangulate the position of the traﬀic
sign in a camera coordinate system with the camera center on the first image
as the origin.
– Convert the X, Y, Z values into meters in case it is not.
==PAGE:53==
40
5 Triangulation of Traﬀic Signs
– Since the UTM coordinate also has a scale in meters, simply add the X and
Y coordinates to the UTM coordinates of the image. The resultant now is
the UTM coordinates of the object recognized in the same zone number and
hemisphere.
– Convert the UTM coordinates back into GPS coordinates.
5.3
Results
The triangulation pipeline has a unique issue that inhibits very factual tests to confirm
the accuracy of the pipeline. This is because to confirm the results obtained, the best way
is to look at the result and check it manually, however, all commercial GPS sensor that is
available for non-military use is scrambled to introduce an inaccuracy of ±2meters. This
means that even when the results cannot be verified more accurately than ±2 meters.
The results from SfM also vary a lot depending on the images being analyzed, images
with more clear and more unique features provide more accurate results than the ones
that are taken in places where there are fewer unique features or the quality of an image
is affected by the weather. However, during its development, it was observed that the
accuracy varies in the range of (1 −10) meters.
This brings the total inaccuracy range between (±3 to ± 12) meters
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 6
Route Planning
For the route planning part of the project, the system relies on API calls to Google Maps
API or other services provided by Google.
To start the process of planning a route to travel between two places the user first
needs to enter the geo-locations of the places. However, it would create unnecessary
inconvenience if the user is required to know the GPS coordinates of the places.
Google provides an API called Google Places API. This service provides reverse
geo-coding capabilities to an application.
Reverse geo-coding refers to converting a
human-interpretable description of a location for example the name of a place, road, or
locality into a mathematical description of that location, for example, GPS coordinates.
In other words, it allows the conversion of a set of GPS coordinates to be converted into
street names or places.
Once the user inputs have been geo-coded, the application then takes those sets of
coordinates and called the Google Maps API to calculate the optimal route.
This API uses a cornucopia of tools to predict the optimal route between any two
points. These include but are not limited to [1, 23]:
• Dijkstra’s Algorithm: This algorithm is a method of finding the shortest pathway
between two nodes by adding a cost to each intermediate step taken by the algo-
rithm in order to reach the goal state. The Maps API uses this by converting a
street map into a graph where the locations are considered as nodes in the graph
and then the algorithm tries to find the shortest path[27].
• A* search Algorithm: The A* algorithm is an extension of the Dijkstra algorithm.
It introduces a heuristic function to help optimize Dijkstra’s Algorithm by adding
a component into it that rewards or punishes the algorithm depending on how
likely is a graph search to lead to the goal state based on some preset strategies
[4].
• Hidden Markov Model: This is a more sophisticated version of Markov’s local-
ization process. Here, the value of the current position is only dependent on the
previous state and not the history of states. The word hidden refers to the fact
that the state can only be observed via indirect observation. The Maps API uses
this to analyze historical and current traﬀic flow patterns. This information can
be useful for avoiding traﬀic congestion [19].
==PAGE:55==
42
6 Route Planning
• Machine learning algorithms: The Maps API uses several machine learning al-
gorithms to optimize the search results for individual users by observing their
behavior and then tailoring its responses accordingly.
6.1
Response from Google Maps API
The API call to Google Maps returns a .JSON object.
The object contains all the
necessary details required to follow the navigation path. One of the key important parts
in that .JSON file is a depth in its hierarchy called 'steps'.
Figure 6.1: Google Maps response to a navigation query.
This depth divides the complete paths into individual segments, this is identical to
the segments between two consecutive prompts that one gets while navigating using the
Google maps app for real-time navigation.
These steps can be visualized independently as seen below:
==PAGE:56==
6.1 Response from Google Maps API
43
Figure 6.2: Splitting the path into steps.
6.1.0.1
Algorithm for fetching the correct data files for route steps
For this project, the input data is assumed to be for all the possible route steps that fall
along the routes chosen for the proof-of-concept stage testing as mentioned in chapter 1.
A method needs to be devised to match the correct data files when a user asks the app
to plan a route. For this purpose, a simple distance-based technique is used. The Google
Maps API returns all the collection of each individual step that when put together would
result in the whole navigation path. For the data fetching function, the GPS coordinates
of both endpoints for each step are extracted and stored in the program’s memory. Then
for each step of the route, the function checks each and every data file to check which
one fits the best.
To check which data file fits best, the GPS coordinates for each file are compared to
the endpoint of the step. Let’s call the endpoints of the step EndpointAstep, EndpointBstep
and let’s call the endpoints of the data file being checked EndpointAdata, EndPointBdata.
The distances EndpointAstep - EndpointAdata and EndpointAstep - EndpointBdata are
calculated, and the minimum of both is selected. Similarly the distances EndpointAstep
- EndpointAdata are calculated and the minimum of both is selected. The fact about
which of the two distances turns out to be the minimum indicates whether the user
wishes to travel between the locations in the direction in which the data was collected
or against it. Once the best fit based on the direction between a step and the data file is
done, the sum of the minimum distance is stored in a matrix. This process is repeated
==PAGE:57==
44
6 Route Planning
for each route step with each data file and these values are saved in rows of the same
matrix. Then to find find out which data file best corresponds to which route step only
the minimum distance across each row needs to be calculated. The data file that best
describes a route step would have the lowest sum of distances between endpoints in each
row.
6.2
Results
Since the route planning part of the project is borrowing from the techniques used by
Google to implement real-time navigation assistance, it is safe to say that the results
given by the application are just as good as the best state-of-the-art most commercially
used.
Although, even with the extremely simplistic version of data fetching being used in
the project that is only defined for pre-determined parts. The algorithm has a linear
time complexity. Therefore it might start becoming ineffective for longer routes due to
the fact that for a database with n analyzed data files, any route that has m steps would
require 2 ∗m ∗n distance measurements before the best fit can be picked.
Figure 6.3: Time complexity graph for different number of route steps.
To incorporate handling longer routes, it would be better to design algorithms that
have better time complexity. For example, Logarithmic Time Complexity or Sublinear
Time Complexity [8] or Logarithmic Time Complexity [3].
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 7
Web Application
As already mentioned in section 2.4, a Full Stack application is required for this project.
However, before getting into the actual design of the system it is important to quantify
the requirements the system would have to fulfill.
7.1
General Requirements of Application
For the application to be useful it needs to fulfill the following checklist:
• Have an interactive user interface that allows to user to choose a route.
• The application should be able to provide an interface for the developer to load
an image dataset with all the required attributes.
• The application should be able to call python scripts that analyze the dataset and
store all the information collected.
• The application should be able to find the relevant information for the user’s path
from its GPS coordinates and provide that to the user.
7.2
Front End
The front-end and most of the MVC part of the website are designed in the Blazor
Framework. The blazer framework actually allows for full-stack web development by
itself. However, it does not fulfill all the requirements for the back end of this application.
The Blazor framework uses Razor pages as elements that can be used to make the
individual pages and the CSS file and all the other necessary HTML files that are shared
in the project are already made available in an empty project. The elements like buttons,
displays, and user input fields or to generalize, all the User Interface elements required
for a basic MVC architecture are designed within the framework. The framework also
includes a JavaScript interpreter or JavaScript Run-time DLL. This is useful because it
allows for the integration of the navigation aspect of the project into the system. All
the API calls to the back end and Google Maps API are also handled in JavaScript.
JavaScript functions get responses from the Google MAPS API through service calls. It
==PAGE:59==
46
7 Web Application
is also responsible for all the HTTP requests and data transfers to and from the FLASK
app server through GET and POST methods.
7.3
Application Peripheral Interface
The system utilizes the FLASK microframework to create the APIs through app routes
and responses that are used by the front end and the back end for exchanging information.
In this system, the backend takes inputs and data files from the frontend through API
calls and executes the respective python functions, and responds back to the frontend or
client with data frames in .JSON format including any processed image directory paths.
7.4
Back End
The back end which is designed in Python is where all the various pipelines are executed.
The input of the back end are the .csv files that contain the path to the location where
the images are saved and their GPS coordinates. Whenever an analysis needs to be done
the images are first loaded into the recognition pipeline. It performs its operations and
detects and classifies all the traﬀic signs that it can find.
This is done by first detecting the traﬀic sign using the algorithms designed and then
making another image from a cropped region of the original image containing the traﬀic
sign. Then the classification is performed on the cropped region. This also insures that
the classification process is least affected by the background content in the image. This
copy is also saved locally to be used later for displaying on the UI or client.
If consecutive images detect traﬀic signs then a check is performed to confirm whether
the images contain the same traﬀic sign. This is done by comparing their GPS locations
and comparing their distance to a predetermined threshold. If the distance is less than
the threshold value then it is considered the images contain the same traﬀic sign.
Once a traﬀic sign is identified. This information is passed onto the triangulation
pipeline.
It then performs Structure from Motion on a subset of all the images by
selecting n number of images before and after the pair of images containing the same sign.
This provides the camera projection matrices for the camera at all locations the images
were taken. Using the camera project matrix of the 2 images, the image coordinates
of the same traﬀic sign in the same images, and the GPS coordinates of the images,
the GPS coordinate of the traﬀic sign is triangulated. Once both these calculations are
done, the combined result is saved as another .csv file that can be passed on to the UI
whenever needed.
To ensure the system works as desired even if more than one traﬀic signs are present
in an image it is important to know that the way the pipelines are designed the process
of estimating the shape, color, and type of a traﬀic sign is not affected at all. This is
because the classification is done on each cropped region independently. However, for
==PAGE:60==
7.5 Architecture
47
the triangulation part, it is important to know the image coordinates of corresponding
traﬀic signs in multiple images. To ensure that. Every entry in the data frame contains
all the traﬀic signs arranged by shape and also within each shape they are arranged by
size. This means that for every image the resultant file will store all the rectangular
traﬀic signs first followed by triangular signs and then circular signs and in case there is
more than one within a shape they will be sorted out by area. This ensures that all the
signs in any two consecutive images are stored in the exact same order.
The resultant .csv file contains the file location of where the local copy of the cropped
region from the images containing the traﬀic signs is stored. It also contains the shape,
color, type, and GPS coordinates of all the traﬀic signs that are recognized.
7.5
Architecture
The diagram presented below helps visualize the architecture better.
Figure 7.1: System Architecture.
A dry run of the sequence in which all the processes in the application will be executed
is mentioned below:
• In cases where the application is being used for the first time and the database is
still empty:
1. The user inputs the .csv files into the system and analyses them
==PAGE:61==
48
7 Web Application
2. The results from the analysis of those images are stored in another .CSV
format file.
• In cases where the system has already analyzed the images and performed the
calculations:
1. The user enters the start and end locations of the route to be analyzed.
2. The front end makes a GET API call to fetch the relevant data.
3. The back-end processes fetch the relevant .csv files and stitch them together
into a single data frame and perform a PUSH API call and send the information
to the UI.
Figure 7.2: System Flow Diagram.
A user manual on how to use the application is given in the appendix A. The code
snippet used to execute this sequence is given in the appendix B.1.
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 8
System Assessment
8.1
Introduction
This section is an evaluation of the system design, its features, and its vulnerabilities.
The system consists of several pipelines and utilizes various platforms therefore a cumu-
lative assessment of all these independent pipelines working synchronously is crucial in
order to measure the performance of the system and build trust in it
8.2
User Friendliness
The UI design has been made with the user’s ease in mind. The system works very
similarly to how a user would input their start and end locations into the Google Maps
application. The user will simply be presented with more additional information about
the traﬀic infrastructure of their route along with the navigation plan itself. No addi-
tional training is required to start using the application, even for non-technical users.
Just in case, the report is also supplemented with a user manual for the application in
the appendix A.
8.3
Reliability and Availability
The system has been shown to be very robust in its ability to detect traﬀic signs in a
wide range of situations. In that regard, the detection algorithm is quite reliable 3.3.
The classification model on the other hand has shown to be not very accurate and that
seems to hint that the model has been overfitted 4.2. Overall, the system at its current
stage should be considered a work in progress and it would not be ideal to use it today
to make decisions that can have very real consequences for human lives.
The reliability of the triangulation varies depending upon the quality of data as
discussed in section 5.3. These results could be improved by increasing the number of
images used in the pipeline at the cost of computation time. The result could also be
improved by adding additional sensors or optimizing the code.
As for the availability of the system. The system itself can be made readily available
to as many users as needed, in most cities of the world. However, since the models have
==PAGE:63==
50
8 System Assessment
not been trained on the traﬀic signs anywhere except Germany, the classifications can
be wrong, there might be cases where this is not an issue since most traﬀic signs are
symbols and share a high degree of similarity in terms of design across countries.
The system is also not equipped with any raw data to analyze except for the data
used to test the pipelines. This means that although technologically the system might
be sound. It is not available to any user who might wish to try it.
A lot of test functions have been designed to test the results of intermediate steps. For
the recognition pipeline, it is still much easier to just confirm the quality of the results
obtained, visually as seen in figure 3.6, but that is not the case with the triangulation
pipeline. Therefore, the test functions are designed in a way that allows for the individual
steps in the pipeline can also be verified visually or mathematically wherever possible.
For example, in figure 5.1. Another example is the fundamental matrix. A test function
has been written to check if the fundamental matrix being calculated is correct or not.
It outputs 2 images, placed side-by-side where a point of a specific color in one image
would lie on the epipolar line of the same color in the other image and visa-versa.
Figure 8.1: Result of test function for fundamental matrix.
At present, the user does not possess any method to provide any feedback to the
system about the quality of results it provides, especially when talking about the classi-
fication model. However, since the classifications are not based on any utility function
or score. To incorporate user feedback, a new classification algorithm would be required.
==PAGE:64==
8.4 Security
51
For the purposes of this project, the API calls have been limited to provide routes only
for private cars and are not designed to support multi-modal transportation for example
pedestrian and cycling routes. And since the route planning is taken care of completely
by Google Maps, the system is immune to issues like handling different types of terrain,
road conditions, or detours. One drawback of this is that the system would be ineffective
in areas where Google has not done much mapping. However, this is not a huge problem
since according to Google Maps, as of September 2021, they have information for over
220 countries and territories, and provide directions and information for over 200 million
places[1]. Another study also finds that 83% of the roads globally have been mapped,
and more than 40% of countries have a fully mapped street network[16].
The system is trained on the GTSDB dataset[10]. This dataset is based on images
taken from the German Traﬀic infrastructure.
This means that the system is only
capable of classifying detected traﬀic signs into the signs recognized in the German
traﬀic infrastructure. To accommodate signs from different countries the system would
have to be trained on datasets of those countries. However, during the literature survey
process, it was found that there is a huge lack of such datasets. This issue can sometimes
lead to misclassification of the detected traﬀic sign. However, the detection algorithm
and the triangulation pipeline are independent of the classification model. Hence other
aspects of the system remain unaffected by misclassifications.
Another factor that can play a role in the reliability of the system is weather or
lighting conditions. Low light or issues such as rain and snow can affect the visibility
of the camera a lot.
This can create a problem in the detection and classification
algorithms. The detection algorithm is designed to include a wide range of shades of
Red and blue (the colors majorly used in traﬀic signs). This makes the system fairly
robust to weather conditions but within reason. As for the classification model, the
GTSDB dataset includes images of the same traﬀic signs in several weather conditions
and in various sizes. This allows the system to be more robust. However, there are still
limitations, the system fails to perform correct classifications if the lighting conditions
are too bad or the image is taken from too far away.
8.4
Security
At present, the project is only being considered to act as a proof-of-concept rather than a
full-fledged working solution. Therefore, the application at this moment is not equipped
to handle any potential security threats. However, if a production-stage version of this
project is ever built. It would need to be designed with keeping system security in mind
too. Some potential areas of security vulnerabilities could be:
• There is no user authentication and authorization built into the system. There
should be safeguards put in place to ensure that a malicious agent cannot alter
the application for their own purpose.
==PAGE:65==
52
8 System Assessment
• All the raw data is uploaded to a single server and if the data is lost for any number
of reasons there need to be backup and disaster recovery procedures. The database
could be designed in a way that maintains redundancies.
• A malicious agent could also be interested in just the raw images of the trans-
portation infrastructure of a city. Therefore, as an added security measure with
the authentication process, the data could also be encrypted to prevent the agent
from obtaining any usable information.
• The system uses sensitive API keys and on a production-scale version such sensitive
information needs to be protected from malicious agents
8.5
Privacy
The application can raise potential concerns about user data. In this section a discussion
about some potential issues and their solutions:
• A route planning algorithm that uses Google Maps could potentially be used to
track a user. However, in this particular application, the system is not designed to
provide real-time navigation. The use cases of this project only require the system
to be used by businesses and city municipalities to perform an analysis of their
traﬀic infrastructure. Therefore, the live location of the user is never updated in
the application. At present all the raw image data is stored privately on a local
server.
• A production-level version of the application would have to be GDPR compliant.
It needs to be careful about recording live data from the roads as it can have
pictures of people who did not explicitly consent to their pictures being published
online. However, this issue can also be easily avoided. The application uses tra-
ditional computer vision techniques for traﬀic sign recognition. This also means,
that unless a malicious agent gets access to the raw database or can modify the
application with their own algorithm, there is no way to look at the images or use
the application to identify any individual. Once the signs have been recognized
and triangulated. The raw image data is not required to be stored on the server.
It can be deleted as soon as the raw data is processed to avoid any privacy issues.
• The data collection and data revision is not a part of this project. The project
assumes that the business or the municipality can collect its own data. Also, with
the current trend in technological improvement in cars, more and more of them
in the future would be equipped with cameras facing toward the road. This could
allow for an open-source data collection concept where drivers (or in the case of
autonomous driving cars, passengers) can volunteer to update the database every
time they go somewhere.
==PAGE:66==
8.6 Scalability
53
To summarise, a production-level version of this application would have to keep in
mind these issues and maybe more to protect its user’s data privacy but at this stage,
there seem to be no issues.
8.6
Scalability
The system architecture is designed in a way that would support the transition from a
proof-of-concept to a production-stage application. The components of the web applica-
tion only communicate with each other via API calls and hence can be independently
scaled up or they can be completely redesigned from scratch. However, there are some
processes that at the moment are not equipped to handle large amounts of data. For
example, the algorithm that is being used to extract relevant information for the user
from the pre-processed data is only equipped to handle fixed start and end points for a
route. To be able to select any random point in a locality as a start point or the end-
point would require a new approach completely. This is because of two reasons, one, the
algorithm assesses which .csv file corresponds to each navigation path iteratively and it
has a linear time complexity graph as can be seen in figure 6.3. This could increase the
computation time significantly as the database is scaled up. Second, the current design
cannot start from a random point on the map so it cannot process raw data that is not
categorized as an endpoint for a step.
8.7
Integration
The application is designed to act as a stand-alone independent system. This means,
that the client or front end is not designed to be integrated into a company’s existing
IT infrastructure. However, the APIs can still be made to access by any other clients if
needed.
8.8
Performance
The system performance was tested repeatedly by running the application several times
on the same dataset and also by running a couple of datasets one time. The system
performance was great in terms of repeatability and robustness. It can handle raw data
in various sizes. It also passed all the test functions that were designed to check the
validity of the data. There are still inaccuracies in the system, but they fall well within
what was decided to be an acceptable range.
==PAGE:67==
54
8 System Assessment
8.9
Maintenance and Upgrades
Since the project is at a very nascent stage, no maintenance is required for the system.
There is no garbage data created as system logs or user profiles or user history. It is a
simple application that acts as a platform where all the pipelines can work synchronously.
8.10
System Requirements
As for the hardware and software requirements to run the system. The hardware part
is not considered for the purposes of this project, this is because the hardware required
would be utilized for the process of data collection and data revision. Even then, some
information can be mentioned here, the system would require a GPS sensor and a camera
to take street-view images and record the GPS positions of the camera when the images
were taken.
For the software requirements, the system requires to run on a device that has all
the necessary dependencies and the following libraries:
• The system should be able to run the Blazor framework.
• The following libraries are critical for the working of the system, the versions
mentioned below are the ones that have been used for development purposes. It
is unclear if using a different version of some of these libraries would result in
incompatibilities:
– Python (version 3.9.13)
– Opencv (version 4.5.1)
– GeoPandas (version 0.12.2)
– UTM (version 0.7.0)
– Math (version 0.0.1)
The system requires a stable internet connection and web browser to perform its
functions. This is because it requires making API calls to Google Maps API for the
navigation route planning part.
8.11
Overall assessment
Overall, the system is able to fulfill its requirements and provide satisfactory results.
The system is capable of running all the pipelines together and providing results with
reasonable accuracy. The system is still not capable of performing triangulations with
uncalibrated cameras but its recognition pipeline can perform well on images taken from
a wide range of cameras.
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
9.1
Results and Reflections
Looking at the system assessments, it looks like the system’s performance is majorly
a success. Looking back the choice of solely relying on a camera and a GPS sensor
had both its benefits and drawbacks. The process of triangulating the traﬀic sign re-
quires estimating the position of the traﬀic sign in the camera coordinate system. This
arrangement between these sensors and the pipelines will fundamentally have a longer
processing time compared to adding another sensor to the system like adding an IMU
sensor to quickly calculate the rotational and translational vectors between every camera
position or replacing the existing camera with a stereo camera to calculate the depth
values in real-time. Performing the computationally expensive Structure from Motion
3D reconstruction for triangulation of a small fraction of points that the algorithm can
potentially calculate is not resource effective.
On the other hand, relying on just the two most commonly found sensors in most
robots or cars or for that matter, mobile phones opens up the system to a lot more
potential users and applications. For now, the system is focused just on traﬀic signs
but the recognition pipeline can very easily be swapped or upgraded to add or change
the scope of recognizable objects with minimal changes to the system. This flexibility
and scalability are one of the major reasons why just the camera and GPS sensor were
chosen to design than the whole system.
Looking at the recognition pipeline, it is safe to say that the performance of the
traﬀic sign detection algorithm has been a lot better than expected in terms of accuracy
and speed. The classification on the other hand has shown a bit of an accuracy issue.
The goal was to create a system without the use of neural networks in order to check the
feasibility of the system. In the project, the findings were that the best strategy for a fast
and accurate system would be a combination of traditional computer vision techniques
and a CNN-based system. The detection algorithms can be used for reducing the size
of the image the sliding windows has to scan across the image to make a prediction.
This would provide the best combination of traditional and cutting-edge techniques.
ALthough, if for some reason the requirement of not using neural nets persists beyond
just this proof-of-concept project. Enhanced Bag of Visual Words technique mentioned
in section 4.2 can also be explored.
The web application is able to fulfill all the requirements of a user and the modular
nature of all the pipelines and platforms all for very easy customization to modify the
==PAGE:69==
56
9 Conclusion
scale at which the application may be required to perform. The architecture is sound
and can be used as the foundation for a production-scale version of the application with
of course the security and privacy concerns mentioned in section 8.4 and8.5 being met
additionally.
9.2
Limitation and Future Work
There is a long way to go before this application can go from a proof-of-concept stage
to a production-level stage. All the algorithms being used would have to be optimized
for performance. Concepts like parallel programming and data structure optimizations
would have to be used in all functions wherever applicable. However, there are some key
fundamental areas where there is scope for conceptual change:
• A different type of classification algorithm can be used to allow the system’s per-
formance to be improved using the user’s feedback. Some potential ideas could
be:
1. Active Learning [37]
2. Reinforcement Learning [40]
3. Human-in-the-Loop Machine Learning [46]
• The algorithm being used right now for data fetching is based on an iterative
process of checking the best correspondence for every step one by one. A new
algorithm can be used for data fetching that would allow for vectorized operations
such that all of the calculations can be done in one loop.
• The function that is used to check whether two consecutive images contain the
same traﬀic sign based on the distance between the positions when the images were
taken is based on a very practical approach that given a small enough threshold,
there would practically be no chance that between two images the scene would
change so drastically that some traﬀic signs are not captured in one of the images
or the other image contains completely different signs. However, in the future, a
more concrete test could be designed to mathematically prove that the content in
the image is the same object.
• The route planning could be improved further to include the options of alternate
routes.
==PAGE:70==
Appendices
==PAGE:71==
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX A
Application User Manual
To start using the application adhere to the following steps:
1. Once at the home screen, click on Add Dataset button.
Figure A.1: Home Page.
2. Once on that page select the correct .csv files and click on sendImage button.
This would analyze the data file and save the relevant information.
==PAGE:73==
60
A Application User Manual
Figure A.2: Load data file for analyzing.
3. Once the data files have all been processed. It is possible to analyze a navigation
route. Click on the Select Path button.
Figure A.3: Go to Select Path.
4. Enter any of the start and end location pairs given in table 1.1. The application
would show you the optimal path on a map.
==PAGE:74==
A Application User Manual
61
Figure A.4: Navigation Route.
5. The result would be displayed in the following format.
Figure A.5: Results.
NOTE:The UI design might be changed later for aesthetic effects
==PAGE:75==
62
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX B
Code Snippets
1
2
3 previous_img = None
4 previous_CameraGPS = None
5 previous_imgcoordinates = None
6 details = []
7 predict = []
8 GPS = []
9 for j in range(step1["Coordinates"].count()):
10
img = cv2.imread(step1["paths"].iloc[j])
11
if previous_img
is not None:
12
img = cv2.imread(step1["paths"].iloc[j+1])
13
CameraGPS = step1["Coordinates"].iloc[j]
14
CameraGPS = tuple(float(x) for x in CameraGPS.strip('()').split(','))
15
ROI,color,shape,imgcoordinates = SignPicker(img)
16
17
ROIImg = []
18
if ROI != []:
19
if CheckSameSign(previous_CameraGPS ,CameraGPS ,100):
20
for i,roi in enumerate(ROI):
21
cv2.imshow("roi",roi)
22
cv2.waitKey(0)
23
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
24
classification= Predict(centres ,clf,roi ,3000)
25
clsNew = str(classification[0])
26
predict.append(clsNew)
27
a = str(i)
28
today = datetime.datetime.utcnow()
29
millisec = today.timestamp()*1000000
30
xc=str(millisec)
31
newID = a+xc[0:-2]
32
cv2.imwrite("Flask/static/dirbin/"+newID+".png",roi)
33
entry = {
34
"Signal" : i,
35
"image" : "http://127.0.0.1:5000/static/dirbin/" + newID +
".png"
36
}
37
ROIImg.append(entry)
38
if previous_img is not None:
39
frames = 5
40
lw_idx = max(j-frames ,0)
41
hg_idx = min(j+frames,step1.shape[0])
==PAGE:77==
64
B Code Snippets
42
images = [cv2.imread(path) for path in step1.iloc[
lw_idx:hg_idx]['paths']]
43
if 0 <= lw_idx < len(images):
44
index = lw_idx
45
elif 0 <= hg_idx < len(images):
46
index = hg_idx - len(images)
47
# res = SfM(images ,K_,dist_)
48
optimized_camera_params = res.x[:len(images)*9].
reshape((len(images), 9))
49
CameraCoordinate ,_ = linearTriangulation(
recover_projection_matrix(optimized_camera_params[
index][:6]),previous_imgcoordinates[i],
recover_projection_matrix(optimized_camera_params[
index+1][:6]),imgcoordinates[i],K_)
50
GPS_coordinates = TriangulateTrafficSign(
CameraCoordinate ,CameraGPS)
51
GPS.append(GPS_coordinates)
52
previous_img=img
53
previous_CameraGPS =CameraGPS
54
previous_imgcoordinates = imgcoordinates
55
56
elif ROI == []:
57
predict.append("not found")
58
GPS.append("not found")
59
details.append([{'ROI':ROIImg, 'color': color, 'shape': shape,'
Classification':predict ,'GPS coordinates':GPS}])
60
step = pd.DataFrame({"details":details},index = None)
61
step = step.assign(CameraCoordinates =step1["Coordinates"])
62
step = step.assign(Classification =predict)
Code Listing B.1: Pythoncode for system flow.
1 def SignPicker(img):
2
def ColorPicker(img,color,debugger =False):
3
result = img.copy()
4
img = cv2.cvtColor(img,cv2.COLOR_BGR2HSV)
5
if color =='Red' or color =='RED' or color == 'red':
6
# lower boundary RED color range values; Hue (0 - 10)
7
lower1 = np.array([0, 100, 20])
8
upper1 = np.array([10, 255, 255])
9
10
# upper boundary RED color range values; Hue (160 - 180)
11
lower2 = np.array([160,100,20])
12
upper2 = np.array([179,255,255])
13
14
lower_mask = cv2.inRange(img, lower1, upper1)
15
upper_mask = cv2.inRange(img, lower2, upper2)
16
17
mask = lower_mask + upper_mask
18
19
result = cv2.bitwise_and(result, result, mask=mask)
20
21
elif color =='Blue' or color =='BLUE' or color == 'blue':
==PAGE:78==
B Code Snippets
65
22
# lower boundary Blue color range values; Hue (0 - 10)
23
upper = np.array([128, 255, 255])
24
lower = np.array([90, 50, 70])
25
26
mask = cv2.inRange(img, lower, upper)
27
28
result = cv2.bitwise_and(result, result, mask=mask)
29
30
if debugger ==True:
31
cv2.imshow("Original", img)
32
cv2.imshow('mask', mask)
33
cv2.imshow('result', result)
34
cv2.waitKey(0)
35
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
36
37
confirmation = not np.all(result == 0)
38
return mask,result,confirmation
39
40
def DetectShape(img,imgOriginal ,shapeType ,debugger =False):
41
gray = img.copy()
42
thresh = cv2.bitwise_not(gray)
43
area_threshold=100
44
# find the contours
45
contours ,_ = cv2.findContours(thresh, cv2.RETR_TREE ,cv2.
CHAIN_APPROX_SIMPLE)
46
contours = sorted(contours , key=cv2.contourArea)
47
imgROI = []
48
label = []
49
imgCoordinates = []
50
for cnt in contours:
51
if not np.any(cnt==[0,0]):
52
area = cv2.contourArea(cnt) #check
53
if shapeType == 'Square' or shapeType =='SQUARE' or
shapeType == 'square':
54
if area>img.shape[0]*img.shape[1]/area_threshold:
55
a,b,c,d = cv2.boundingRect(cnt)
56
partial_area_percent = cv2.contourArea(cnt)/(c*d)
57
if partial_area_percent >= 0.8 and
partial_area_percent <0.99:
58
padding = 10
59
imgROI.append(imgOriginal[b-padding:b+d+
padding ,a-padding:a+c+padding])
60
label.append("Rectangle")
61
imgCoordinates.append((d/2,c/2))
62
if shapeType == 'Triangle' or shapeType =='TRIANGLE' or
shapeType == 'triangle':
63
if area>img.shape[0]*img.shape[1]/area_threshold:
64
areaTriangle ,triangle = cv2.minEnclosingTriangle(
cnt)
65
partial_area_percent = cv2.contourArea(cnt)/
areaTriangle
66
if partial_area_percent >= 0.8 and
==PAGE:79==
66
B Code Snippets
partial_area_percent <0.99:
67
coordinates = []
68
for i in range(0,3):
69
coordinates.append((int(triangle[i][0][0])
,int(triangle[i][0][1])))
70
coordinates = np.array(coordinates)
71
print(area)
72
padding =10
73
imgROI.append(imgOriginal[min(coordinates
[0][1],coordinates[1][1],coordinates[2][1])
-padding:
74
max(coordinates[0][1],
coordinates[1][1],
coordinates[2][1])+
padding ,
75
min(coordinates[0][0],
coordinates[1][0],
coordinates[2][0])-
padding:
76
max(coordinates[0][0],
coordinates[1][0],
coordinates[2][0])+
padding])
77
label.append("Triangle")
78
imgCoordinates.append((int((min(coordinates
[0][0],coordinates[1][0],coordinates[2][0])
+
79
max(coordinates[0][0],
coordinates[1][0],
coordinates[2][0]))/2),
80
int((min(coordinates[0][1],
coordinates[1][1],
coordinates[2][1])+
81
max(coordinates[0][1],
coordinates[1][1],
coordinates[2][1]))/2)))
82
if shapeType == 'Circle' or shapeType == 'CIRCLE'or
shapeType == 'circle':
83
if area>img.shape[0]*img.shape[1]/area_threshold:
84
(x,y), radius = cv2.minEnclosingCircle(cnt)
85
a = cv2.contourArea(cnt)
86
partial_area_percent = cv2.contourArea(cnt)/(math.
pi*radius**2)
87
if partial_area_percent >.9:
88
padding =10
89
radius = int(radius)
90
center = (int(x),int(y))
91
imgROI.append(imgOriginal[max(0,center[1]-
radius-padding):min(center[1]+radius+
padding ,imgOriginal.shape[0]),
92
max(0,center[0]-
radius-padding):
==PAGE:80==
B Code Snippets
67
min(center[0]+
radius+padding ,
imgOriginal.shape
[1])])
93
label.append("Circle")
94
imgCoordinates.append(center)
95
return imgROI,label,imgCoordinates
Code Listing B.2: Python code for the detection algorithm.
1 def Predict(centres ,clf,img,k):
2
def CalcFeatures(img):
3
sift = cv2.SIFT_create()
4
kp, des = sift.detectAndCompute(img, None)
5
return des
6
7
def bag_of_features(features , centres , k = 500):
8
vec = np.zeros((1, k))
9
for i in range(features.shape[0]):
10
feat = features[i]
11
diff = np.tile(feat, (k, 1)) - centres
12
dist = pow(((pow(diff, 2)).sum(axis = 1)), 0.5)
13
idx_dist = dist.argsort()
14
idx = idx_dist[0]
15
vec[0][idx] += 1
16
return vec
17
18
img_des = CalcFeatures(img)
19
if img_des is not None:
20
img_vec = bag_of_features(img_des , centres ,k)
21
preds = clf.predict(img_vec)
22
return preds
Code Listing B.3: Python code for classification.
==PAGE:81==
68
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
[1]
9 things to know about Google’s maps data: Beyond the Map. https://cloud.
google.com/blog/products/maps-platform/9-things-know-about-googles-
maps-data-beyond-map. Accessed: 2023-03-25. 2019.
[2]
Lotfi Abdi, Rahma Kalboussi, and Aref Meddeb. “Enhanced bags of visual words
representation using spatial information.” In: Image Analysis and Processing-ICIAP
2017: 19th International Conference, Catania, Italy, September 11-15, 2017, Pro-
ceedings, Part II 19. Springer. 2017, pages 171–179.
[3]
Humam Abo Alraja. Logarithms and Exponents in Complexity Analysis. https:
//tinyurl.com/ss8n3kdb. Accessed: 2023-03-25. 2023.
[4]
Amit. Introduction to A*. http://theory.stanford.edu/~amitp/GameProgramming/
AStarComparison.html. Accessed: Accessed: 2023-16-02. 2023.
[5]
Riadh Ayachi et al. “Traﬀic signs detection for real-world application of an ad-
vanced driving assisting system using deep learning.” In: Neural Processing Letters
51 (2020), pages 837–851.
[6]
Bag of Visual Words. https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/
62232-bag-of-visual-words. Accessed: 2022-18-12. 2023.
[7]
C Bradford Barber, David P Dobkin, and Hannu Huhdanpaa. “The quickhull algo-
rithm for convex hulls.” In: ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS)
22.4 (1996), pages 469–483.
[8]
Paul E. Black. sublinear time algorithm. https://xlinux.nist.gov/dads/HTML/
sublinearTimeAlgo.html. Accessed: 2023-03-25. 2019.
[9]
Dibya Jyoti Bora, Anil Kumar Gupta, and Fayaz Ahmad Khan. “Comparing the
performance of L* A* B* and HSV color spaces with respect to color image seg-
mentation.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.01472 (2015).
[10]
SAFA BOUGUEZZI. GTSDB - German Traﬀic Sign Detection Benchmark. https:
//www.kaggle.com/datasets/safabouguezzi/german-traffic-sign-detection-
benchmark-gtsdb. Accessed: 2023-16-02. 2023.
[11]
Andrew Campbell, Alan Both, and Qian Chayn Sun. “Detecting and mapping
traﬀic signs from Google Street View images using deep learning and GIS.” In:
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 77 (2019), page 101350.
==PAGE:83==
70
Bibliography
[12]
Content creator-Rhino Car Hires. Denmark Road Signs! https://www.rhinocarhire.
com/Drive-Smart-Blog/Drive-Smart-Denmark/Denmark-Road-Signs.aspx.
Accessed: 2023-16-02. 2023.
[13]
François Chaumette, Seth Hutchinson, and Peter Corke. “Visual servoing.” In:
Springer handbook of robotics (2016), pages 841–866.
[14]
Edgar Chavolla et al. “Color spaces advantages and disadvantages in image color
clustering segmentation.” In: Advances in soft computing and machine learning in
image processing (2018), pages 3–22.
[15]
A Chayeb et al. “HOG based multi-object detection for urban navigation.” In: 17th
international IEEE conference on intelligent transportation systems (ITSC). IEEE.
2014, pages 2962–2967.
[16]
Adam Millard-Ball Christopher Barrington-Leigh. The world’s user-generated road
map is more than 80% complete. https : / / journals . plos . org / plosone /
article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0180698. Accessed: 2023-03-26. 2017.
[17]
Content creator-Dynatest. Dynatest website. https://dynatest.com/who-we-
are/. Accessed: 2023-03-25. 2023.
[18]
Arturo De la Escalera and Jose Marı́a Armingol. “Automatic chessboard detection
for intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameter calibration.” In: Sensors 10.3 (2010),
pages 2027–2044.
[19]
Sean R Eddy. “Hidden Markov models.” In: Current opinion in structural biology
6.3 (1996), pages 361–365.
[20]
István Engedy and Gábor Horváth. “A global, camera-based mobile robot local-
ization.” In: (2009).
[21]
Kemal Erdoğan and Nihat Yılmaz. “Shifting Colors to Overcome not Realizing
Objects Problem due to Color Vision Deficiency.” In: December 2014. doi: 10.
15224/978-1-63248-034-7-27.
[22]
Piali Das Gitansh Chadha and Zohar Karnin. K-means clustering with Amazon
SageMaker. https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/machine-learning/k-means-
clustering-with-amazon-sagemaker/. Accessed: 2023-03-25. 2018.
[23]
Viddit Haria et al. “The working of google maps, and the commercial usage of nav-
igation systems.” In: International Journal of Innovative Research in Technology
6.5 (2019).
[24]
Richard Hartley and Andrew Zisserman. Multiple view geometry in computer vision.
Cambridge university press, 2003.
[25]
D Hema and Dr S Kannan. “Interactive color image segmentation using HSV color
space.” In: Science and Technology Journal (2020).
[26]
Sebastian Houben et al. “Detection of traﬀic signs in real-world images: The Ger-
man Traﬀic Sign Detection Benchmark.” In: The 2013 international joint confer-
ence on neural networks (IJCNN). Ieee. 2013, pages 1–8.
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
71
[27]
Adeel Javaid. “Understanding Dijkstra’s algorithm.” In: Available at SSRN 2340905
(2013).
[28]
Koushik Kumar. NLP: Bag of words and TF-IDF explained! /koushik1102.medium.
com/nlp- bag- of- words- and- tf- idf- explained- fd1f49dce7c4. Accessed:
2023-03-25. 2021.
[29]
David G Lowe. “Object recognition from local scale-invariant features.” In: Proceed-
ings of the seventh IEEE international conference on computer vision. Volume 2.
Ieee. 1999, pages 1150–1157.
[30]
Quan-Tuan Luong and Olivier D Faugeras. “The fundamental matrix: Theory,
algorithms, and stability analysis.” In: International journal of computer vision
17.1 (1996), pages 43–75.
[31]
Sumaira Manzoor, Sung-Hyeon Joo, and Tae-Yong Kuc. “Comparison of object
recognition approaches using traditional machine vision and modern deep learning
techniques for mobile robot.” In: 2019 19th International Conference on Control,
Automation and Systems (ICCAS). IEEE. 2019, pages 1316–1321.
[32]
Dhendra Marutho, Sunarna Hendra Handaka, Ekaprana Wijaya, et al. “The deter-
mination of cluster number at k-mean using elbow method and purity evaluation
on headline news.” In: 2018 international seminar on application for technology of
information and communication. IEEE. 2018, pages 533–538.
[33]
Markus Mathias et al. “Traﬀic sign recognition—How far are we from the solu-
tion?” In: The 2013 international joint conference on Neural networks (IJCNN).
IEEE. 2013, pages 1–8.
[34]
Kosuke Mizuno et al. “Architectural study of HOG feature extraction processor for
real-time object detection.” In: 2012 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems.
IEEE. 2012, pages 197–202.
[35]
Niall O’Mahony et al. “Deep learning vs. traditional computer vision.” In: Advances
in Computer Vision: Proceedings of the 2019 Computer Vision Conference (CVC),
Volume 1 1. Springer. 2020, pages 128–144.
[36]
Ignacio Parra et al. “Visual odometry and map fusion for GPS navigation assis-
tance.” In: 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Electronics. IEEE.
2011, pages 832–837.
[37]
Burr Settles. “Active learning literature survey.” In: (2009).
[38]
Haowen Shi. A method to solve the inverse kinematics problem for robot manipu-
lators with flexible links. https://haowensh.com/projects/visual-servoing-
for-flexible-robot-manipulators.html. Accessed: 2023-03-25. 2020.
[39]
Domen Tabernik and Danijel Skočaj. “Deep learning for large-scale traﬀic-sign
detection and recognition.” In: IEEE transactions on intelligent transportation
systems 21.4 (2019), pages 1427–1440.
[40]
Sebastian Thrun and Michael L Littman. “Reinforcement learning: an introduc-
tion.” In: AI Magazine 21.1 (2000), pages 103–103.
==PAGE:85==
72
Bibliography
[41]
Godfried T Toussaint. “Solving geometric problems with the rotating calipers.” In:
Proc. IEEE Melecon. Volume 83. 83. 1983, A10.
[42]
Jonathan Ventura et al. “Global localization from monocular slam on a mobile
phone.” In: IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 20.4 (2014),
pages 531–539.
[43]
Wei Wang and Hung Tat Tsui. “A SVD decomposition of essential matrix with
eight solutions for the relative positions of two perspective cameras.” In: Proceed-
ings 15th International Conference on Pattern Recognition. ICPR-2000. Volume 1.
IEEE. 2000, pages 362–365.
[44]
Yun Wei et al. “Multi-vehicle detection algorithm through combining Harr and
HOG features.” In: Mathematics and Computers in Simulation 155 (2019), pages 130–
145.
[45]
Emo Welzl. “Smallest enclosing disks (balls and ellipsoids).” In: New Results and
New Trends in Computer Science: Graz, Austria, June 20–21, 1991 Proceedings.
Springer. 2005, pages 359–370.
[46]
Xingjiao Wu et al. “A survey of human-in-the-loop for machine learning.” In: Future
Generation Computer Systems (2022).
[47]
Jun Yang et al. “Evaluating bag-of-visual-words representations in scene classifi-
cation.” In: Proceedings of the international workshop on Workshop on multimedia
information retrieval. 2007, pages 197–206.
[48]
Fatin Zaklouta and Bogdan Stanciulescu. “Real-time traﬀic sign recognition in
three stages.” In: Robotics and autonomous systems 62.1 (2014), pages 16–24.
[49]
Yin Zhang, Rong Jin, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. “Understanding bag-of-words model: a
statistical framework.” In: International journal of machine learning and cybernet-
ics 1.1 (2010), pages 43–52.
==PAGE:86==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:87==
Remove this for a blank page or write your own text
Or remove the back page completely from main.tex, if you prefer.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej 326
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.electro.dtu.dk
