==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Failure analysis of a composite wind turbine 
blade using X-ray CT and SEM
Chi-Jen Chen
DTU Wind-M-0580 
March 2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis provides the fractography on the cut-out specimen from one of the delamination
sections in the 14.3m blade, which was subjected to fatigue load and the delamination progressed
at the spar caps. X-ray computed tomography (CT) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) are
employed to analyze the internal details of cracks and morphology. From the X-ray CT shows that
delamination exists within the interlaminar without migrating into other layers. Additionally, the
edge of the wrinkle has propagated furthest, possibly due to variations in the cracks speed of two
unidirectional layers caused by resin. Another possible reason might be because of the susceptibility
to cracking at the edge of the wrinkle, resulting in stress concentration. Fractographic evaluation
from SEM reveals different fracture features in fatigue and static failure. It can also be concluded
from the fractographic observation that fatigue surfaces are dominated by mode II and static sur-
faces are dominated by a mixture of mode I and II. In summary, this study provides experimental
observation on wrinkle-induced delamination to understand the different fracture features and its
fracture mode, which could provide a case study in the future as a root cause analysis of the blade
which fails in the field.
Keywords: Composite, Artificial wrinkle, Delamination, X-ray Computed Tomography, Scan-
ning Electron Microscope
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to all those who have supported me through-
out my journey of completing this thesis. First and foremost, I would like to extend my heartfelt
thanks to my main supervisor, Xiao Chen, and co-supervisor, Seyedsina Samarehmousavi, Søren
Fæster and Hilmar Kjartansson Danielsen for their invaluable guidance, support, and encourage-
ment throughout the entire research process. Also thanks to Steffen Rasmussen for helping me
conduct a compression test and Xing-Yuan Miao for providing a lot of support during this period.
Their expertise and dedication have been instrumental in shaping my thoughts and helping me
navigate the complexities of my research. I would also like to acknowledge the contribution of Wind
Energy department, which provided me with the necessary resources and facilities to carry out my
research. Finally, I would like to acknowledge all the participants who kindly agreed to participate
in my research. Their invaluable input has been essential to the success of this project. This thesis
is a testament to the support and guidance I have received from all these individuals, and I am
grateful to each and every one of them.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Wind turbine blades failures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Delamination fracture analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Contribution of this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Overview of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Methodology
8
2.1
The coordinate setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Visual observation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
X-ray CT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Compression test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Results and Discussions
16
3.1
Visual observation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
X-ray observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Crack observation from the edge of the wrinkle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
Crack front observation from the top . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.3
Summary of X-ray scanning before compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Compression test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.1
Summary of the compression test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
X-ray CT re-scanning analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4.1
Crack observation from the edge of the wrinkle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4.2
Crack observation from the middle of the specimen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4.3
Summary of the X-ray re-scanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Scanning Electron Microscope analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5.1
Fatigue fracture analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5.2
Static fracture analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.5.3
Summary of SEM observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Conclusion
35
References
37
iii
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Wind turbine blades failures
Wind power has become popular nowadays worldwide. The sizes of wind turbine blades become
increasingly huge thanks to the constantly developing state-of-the-art techniques and also because of
the commercial aspect. Blade damages play an important role within the commission lifespan, which
are inevitable due to different kinds of factors [1], especially when the blade scale becomes bigger.
Many factors are responsible for the damage and failure of blades: operational loads, environmental
effects, structural design, material properties and manufacturing effects [2].
Among that, early
blade failures typically occur at manufacturing defects. The laminate wrinkles in spar caps, core
materials and skin laminates debond in sandwich panels, adhesive joint debonds in trailing edge,
and adhesive joint debonds between the shear web and the spar cap are the most typical types of
defects found in wind turbine blades [3, 4]. Chen et al. [5] investigated a 52.3m composite blade
under static loads and found that the blade exhibited multiple failure modes. Among various failure
modes observed, delamination of unidirectional laminates in the spar cap was identified to be the
plausible root cause of the catastrophic failure of the blade.
1.1.1
Delamination fracture analysis
Delamination has often been considered to be the "Achilles heel" of laminated composite. This
damage can develop from sources such as impact events, notches, manufacturing defects and stress
concentrations caused by changes in structural detail [6–9], and the detailed examination of fracto-
graphic observations are described [10,11]. The delamination is caused by high interlaminar stresses
in conjunction with the very low through-thickness strength. Due to the fact that the fibres do not
provide reinforcement through the thickness, therefore the composite relies on the relatively weak
matrix to carry loads in that direction. In practice, delamination in structures is a combination of
mode I(peel) and mode II(shear) [12]. These fracture modes allow for the simplification of the stress
analysis, turning complex three-dimensional problem into two dimentional whose solutions can be
superimposed for general loadings, these are also invaluable for the prediction of crack initiation,
crack growth, and crack path evolution [13]. Under the inspection of fracture modes under quasi-
static loading [14] and fatigue loading [15], fractography analysis reveals distinct differences between
quasi-static and fatigue loading in carbon/epoxy composites. Figures 1 and Figure 2 introduced
the typical features of fatigue fracture surfaces, while Figure 3 demonstrated the typical features of
static fracture surfaces of carbon/epoxy composites. Under fatigue loading, some typical features
can be seen especially in mode II failures: Cusps, matrix rollers and striations. Mode II fracture
surfaces exhibit considerably more evidence of fatigue fracture than mode I surface. Cusps are one
of the most important fractographic features observed in composites. It can be observed both in
static and fatigue loading under mode II surfaces, the latter shape of each cusp was less pointed [16];
it can also be observed from the cusps thickness that differentiates the percentage of mode II on the
fracture surface. A large extent of mode II leads to a large angle between the preferential directions,
and thereby larger, deeper and more numerous cusps [16]. The cusps can also provide evidence of
crack direction, the cusps lean towards the initiation of failure on the fiber-dominated surface, i.e.
the opposite direction to the crack growth direction, whereas under a matrix-dominated surface,
the cusps tilt away from the initiation site, i.e. in the direction of crack growth [14]; striations are
commonly observed in the fiber imprints under fatigue loading. These features appear as regular
ripples or marks on the fracture surfaces. The striations spacing can be reliably related to the fa-
Page 1 of 39
==PAGE:7==
1.1
Wind turbine blades failures
tigue loading and also the test temperature [17]. When viewed under SEM, tilting of the specimen
to an angle of approximately 45 degree or more may assist in the identification of striations [15].
Furthermore, their formation is dependent on the loading conditions, they appear not to develop
at low global load levels(i.e. low stress intensities) [15]. The matrix rollers are generally charac-
teristic for pure mode II fatugue loading, as specified in Figure 1, but were seen even 50 % mode
II fatigue loading, but the latter size of the matrix rollers is smaller and the number of rollers is
much lower [16]. While the fatigue features shown in Figure 1 are relatively easy to distinguish, the
static features shown in Figure 3 and 4 may be more difficult to discern, since the features which
are shown in the surface could be observed in both static and fatigue loadings.
Figure 1: Fatigue features with carbon/epoxy unidirectional layers from reference [15]
Figure 2: Fracture surfaces generated under pure mode II (a) static and (b) fatigue from reference
[15]
Page 2 of 39
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Wind turbine blades failures
Figure 3: Mode I features with carbon/epoxy unidirectional layers from reference [14]
Figure 4: Mode I features with carbon/epoxy unidirectional layers from reference [18] under tensile
failure (a) River lines (b) textured microflow
Under pure mode I, fracture initiates as microcracks at the fibre/matrix interface. These mi-
crocracks extend towards one another and coalesce to form the characteristic of "river" markings
morphology [19]; therefore, the river marks become the evidence of the mode I fracture feature.
River marks, or so-called river lines, form owing to local variations in the matrix properties causing
fracture within the resin to occur on slightly different planes. They are formed where adjacent
planes of fracture meet. It may be expected that river lines can be used to determine easily the
overall direction of crack propagation in mode I fractures; however, because of the fibre bridging, a
typical mechanism happened in mode I fracture which is formed owing to the delamination opens
and the weakly bonded fibres are pulled out of both surfaces, the fibres are bridged in both di-
rections and the apparent direction of crack propagation as indicated by the river lines would be
different between two adjacent areas of fracture [18].
In order to observe the inner fracture surfaces features, some methods are used to identify
these hidden defects. There are different Non-Destructive Test(NDT) techniques to detect differ-
ent defects [20, 21]. Implementing suitable NDT techniques can reduce both manufacturing and
maintenance costs, as well as minimize downtime. Ultrasonic, thermography, x-ray computed to-
mography are among the most relevant and popular NDT techniques for inspecting internal defects.
Thermography, which is contactless and has a relatively low inspection time, has proven effective in
Page 3 of 39
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Background information
detecting delaminations. However, it is limited in detecting high thickness measurements, making
it difficult to inspect wind turbine blades. ultrasonics is a popular NDT techniques in industry [22],
providing qualitative information regarding defect type, size, and depth by using pulse-echo or
through-transmission mode. Although it is applicable in thick parts, its complex signal processing
and longer acquisition time are issues. Additionally, the resolution is limited to the order of around
one millimetre [23]. Therefore, in order to fully unveil the failure features and their implications to
the design, modeling and testing of composite blades, x-ray Computed Tomography (CT) is intro-
duced as it has an excellent advantage in providing 3-dimensional volumetric imaging of internal
defects images with high resolution [24], which applied to analyze different part of wind turbine
blade, i.e. Jr Leon et al. [25] employed x-ray CT to analyze leading edge erosion, while Chen [4]
used x-ray CT to investigate the failure of sandwich panels. Beside the x-ray CT, Scanning Electron
Microscope (SEM) is introduced here to provide detailed views on composite structures for higher
resolution analysis of fracture surfaces, illustrating crack propagation and fracture features on the
fracture surfaces [25–27].
1.2
Background information
During the manufacturing process, defects can be introduced into wind turbine blades, resulting
in damage. It is well known that rotor blade show typical damage types such as delamination, ad-
hesive joint debonding, skin/core debonding, some of which are caused by manufacturing-induced
defects, e.g., laminate wrinkles, which can lead to a serious blade fracture [28–33]. To study the
impact of defect-induced damage, four types of artificial defects are inserted into the 14.3m blades
and subjected to fatigue loading to initiate damage [34]. Since delamination is an important defect
that would influence the strength of the blade, lots of companies have investigated this defect; how-
ever, due to the confidentiality, the observed results are usually not published. Therefore, it’s worth
discussing delamination damage. For the artificial-inserted defects blade [34], it was unpainted and
made of fiberglass/ polyester composite materials. Several types of layouts were used to manufac-
ture the blade: unidircetional (UD), bi-axial (BIA) and tri-axialas (TRI) laminates, chopped fiber
mats and PVC foams [34], as described in Table 1. The blade has been tested under fatigue bending
loading following IEC-64100-23 [35]. The detailed descriptions of the defects are shown in Table 2.
The locations and types of these defects were predetermined, as seen in Figure 5 (a).
Four resin-inserted wrinkles are embedded in the spar cap laminate to create out-of-plane wrin-
kles. The resin inserts have a wave height of 4mm and a width of 40mm, which are cast between
two UD fiber layers in the spar cap, as depicted in Table 2. The current wrinkle shape is selected
since it is really general and can be represented easily with a ratio between wave amplitude and
wavelength equal to 1/10, which has been found in a 50m commercial wind turbine blade [2]. After
fatigue testing and the failure existence, the section is cut out from the spanwise location at 7.3m.
It should be mentioned that the delamination damage is observed from the blade surface after the
blade fatigue testing [34], as shown in Figure 5 (b). The delamination(7.3m, WK#1) growth in the
spar cap under flapwise fatigue in Figure 6 (a) is identified with black curves marking 18,600 cycles.
It can be observed that delamination exhibits a similar belly shape on the surface, which rises the
interest in whether the delamination will exist in other parts of layers. Therefore, a post-mortem
investigation is conducted by cutting the delamination regions into small parts to investigate how
the delaminations grow around wrinkle and the failure characterization. X-ray CT and SEM will be
used for analyzing the fracture surfaces. At the same time, the compression test is also conducted
to simulate the real-life case to observe the blade behaviors when it had already cracked under fa-
Page 4 of 39
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Background information
tigue and observe the influence of cracks propagation and the surface features difference after static
compression failure. The experimental procedure is illustrated in Figure 7. First, x-ray CT analysis
will be conducted to examine the cracks inside the specimen under fatigue failure. Subsequently,
a compression test will be performed to apply static compression loading, investigating the static
fracture behavior on the top of fatigue fracture. After that, re-scanning will be carried out to ana-
lyze the crack changes after new compression load has been applied. SEM will be conducted in the
end to analyze the fractographic morphology and the dominance of the fracture modes, in fatigue
and static failure surfaces.
Table 1: Material properties taken from the 14.3m blade [34]
Table 2: The detailed descriptions of defects that are embedded in the blade to be tested under
fatigue [34]. In this research, it is focused on WK#1
Page 5 of 39
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Background information
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: (a) Distribution of artificial defects [34]. In this paper will be focused on Wrinkle insert:
WK#1 (b) Delamination growth in the spar cap under flapwise fatigue [34]. The delamination
growth in the spar cap surfaces can been seen.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: (a) The delamination located at 7.3m (WK#1) (b) The geometry of cut-out part from
the 7.3m section to observe the delamination at inner layers
Page 6 of 39
==PAGE:12==
1.3
Contribution of this study
Figure 7: schematic diagram of experiment flow chart
1.3
Contribution of this study
In this report, the following work presents an extensional analysis of the artificial defects em-
bedded in 14.3m blade [34], which focus on the part from 7.3m delamination section to analyze the
wrinkle-triggered delamination fractographic surfaces under both fatigue and static loading appli-
cation by using two kinds of techniques, i.e.x-ray CT and SEM.
The objectives of this research are:
1. Providing fractographic observation for the effect of wrinkle-triggered delamination, which is
of significance to the existing knowledge.
2. Understanding and analyzing the fractographic morphology difference and the dominant frac-
ture mode under fatigue and static failure.
3. Providing a case study in the future as a root cause analysis when the blade fails in the field.
1.4
Overview of the thesis
The report is structured as follow: Section 2 will introduce three different methodologies and
the setup of the compression test, as well as experimental setup. Section 3 first elaborates on the
results from the X-ray CT scanning, investigating and analyzing how cracks propagate, determining
the crack front, and the phenomenon along the extracted cracks; the compression test results are
analyzed later on to observe the fracture surfaces difference between the static and fatigue failure
fractures. Then re-scan the specimen again to look into detail on the cracks grow after the com-
pression failure. The SEM method will be conducted in the end to investigate the fracture surface
behavior of the observed cracks. Section 4 summarizes the results and makes conclusions of this
study.
Page 7 of 39
==PAGE:13==
2
Methodology
2.1
The coordinate setup
To ensure accurate experimental results, it was crucial to align the coordinate system throughout
the entire scanning process. As shown in Figure 8, the coordinate system was set up with the X
direction parallel to the layer of the cross-section, the Y direction through the thickness direction,
and the Z direction along the longitudinal side of the specimen.
Figure 8: Coordinate system for the specimen
2.2
Visual observation
The delamination can be clearly seen in the cut YZ surface, as seen in Figure 9 (a). However,
not all delaminations and the location of the crack fronts can be clearly observed. Therefore, in
order to observe the delamination more clearly, the flashlight is used from the top of the specimen
to lighten all the delaminations in the entire specimen. This approach provided a better view to
observe the location of the crack, as shown in Figure 9 (b).
Figure 9: The cutting specimen to observe the delamination at inner layers (a) original specimen
(b) Visual observation from the flashlight penetrating through the specimen. Obvious delamination
can be found.
Page 8 of 39
==PAGE:14==
2.3
X-ray CT
2.3
X-ray CT
The X-ray CT is applied to obtain 3D density information from the sample. Each row on a
2D detector provides a density map of a cross-section through the sample. When stacking all the
reconstructed density maps on top of each other, a full 3D image is obtained. Cross-sections are
reconstructed from the measurement of attenuation coefficients of X-ray beams passing through
the volume of the object. This method requires the object to rotate up to 360◦, images are taken
during the rotation and then reconstructs virtual slices of the object. It is crucial to ensure that
the specimen does not move around during the scan, as the position must be precise to ensure that
the system always knows the sample’s location.
(a)
(b)
Figure 10: (a) Steps for X-ray CT. Since there will be six scans at each part, therefore the last step
for each scanning would be stitch the previous scan together (b) X-ray CT schematic diagram for
the setup, which could refer to Figure 11 (b)
The source is comprised of an evacuated X-ray tube, which integrates a cathode, emitting elec-
trons into the vacuum, and an anode collecting the electrons. The voltage is applied to accelerate
the cathode toward the anode. When the accelerated electrons interact with the target material in
anode, it generates an X-ray spectrum which is able to hit the sample to produce projections. As for
the detector, in order to convert the X-rays into visible light that can be collected on a photodiode
and then convert the visible light into electrons that can be stored and read out as an image, the
first thing has to do is to have a scintillator to convert X-ray into visible light. Besides the ini-
tial geometric magnification, the projected image impinges on a scintillator, which is subsequently
magnified by an optical objective before reaching the detector. Due to the variations in material
density, thickness or composition, different parts of a test piece will absorb different percentages of
the penetrating radiation. Therefore, the damage can be clearly observed when selected the specific
density range.
Page 9 of 39
==PAGE:15==
2.3
X-ray CT
(a) Zeiss Xradia 520 Versa used for 3D X-ray Com-
puted Tomography
(b) Specimen setup
Figure 11: Versa 520: X-ray scanning machine
The schematic illustration for the scanning regions is shown in Figure 12, which is conducted
with the voxel size of 6.4 micrometers, meaning the scanning area will be 12.8 mm × 12.8 mm
based on the detector pixel size of 2k × 2k by using machine Xradia Versa 520, as shown in Figure
11. The features of this machine combine High-Aspect Ratio Tomography, which enables to space
variable projections so that you collect fewer projections along the broad side of a flat sample and
more along the thin side; furthermore, it makes the scanning easier to tune X-ray energy spectrum
with source filters by Automated Filter Changer, which helps to change filters efficiently without
disrupting the workflow.
(a)
(b)
Figure 12: (a) Selected scanning region, the error occurred at green boxes, thankfully didn’t influence
the results (b) The size for each scan based on the detector pixel size of 2k×2k.
Page 10 of 39
==PAGE:16==
2.3
X-ray CT
According to Figure 7 flow chart, X-ray will be conducted twice during this research: once before
the compression test and once after. The parameter settings for both scans will be the same as
those shown in the red and blue boxes in Figure 12 (a). The only difference is that during the first
scanning, only ten scans were conducted due to an error in the last two scans, as shown in Figure 12
(a) green boxes. Fortunately, these errors do not affect the results. For the second X-ray scanning,
all 12 scans were performed. The source-to-sample and detector-to-sample distances will be 31 mm
and 134 mm, respectively, and the exposure time will be 4 seconds with 5001 projections. The filter
is used as LE6 with the a transmittance of around 31.68%.
Furthermore, after the scanning, the cracks are identified using threshold segmentation in the
Avizo software, if the scanning resolution is sufficient, which is based on the voxel difference to
extract the cracks, providing the precise location of cracks and also some of the surface features.
Page 11 of 39
==PAGE:17==
2.4
Compression test
2.4
Compression test
A static compression test is conducted to investigate the propagation on the top of the exist-
ing cracks induced by the previous fatigue test. This test is designed to examine the influence of
static-induced failure on top of fatigue failure, investigating fracture features difference on surfaces
between static and fatigue failure surfaces. Meanwhile, it is also valuable to investigate the domi-
nant fracture mode under different loading failure.
The setup for the compression test is shown in Figure 13, which includes the use of metal plates
to avoid any additional factors causing fracture when clamped directly onto the specimen. A camera
is set up to record the crack propagation. However, the recorded video could only be reviewed each
time the applied load reloaded. In order to make the crack more visible, light was used from the
side, and a rope was utilized for safety concerns.
Given that the specimen already has existing cracks, a displacement rate of 0.2 mm/min is
chosen. This rate is deliberately not set too high to ensure that the crack propagation could be
captured before the collapse of the specimen. If the setting load is too high, the specimen would
break immediately which makes this test meaningless to conduct. As specified in Table 3, the load
is first applied from 100 N, and it is increased gradually until the crack propagation is observed,
indicating the occurrence of some cracks at that stage.
Figure 13: Instron 5567 is used for compression test by using load control and displacement rate of
0.2mm/min. Camera here is to record the changes on the specimen in each of the designed load;
the light is to penetrate the specimen to have a better view of cracks
Load Progression
100 N
200 N
400 N
1 kN
4 kN
8 kN
10 kN
Table 3: Designed load progression applied on the specimen
Page 12 of 39
==PAGE:18==
2.5
SEM
2.5
SEM
SEM is the most widely used method for studying fracture surfaces because of high resolution
and good depth of field. Different from optical microscope that uses photons or light, scanning elec-
tron microscope uses electrons which have shorter wavelength, which are able to achieve significant
magnification capacity. The electrons interact with atoms in the sample, producing various signals
that contains information within the surface tomography.
The electron Gun is used where free electrons are generated by thermionic emission from a
tungsten filament. The electron beam follows a vertical path through the microscope, which is held
within a vacuum. The beam travels through electromagnetic fields and lenses, which focus the beam
on the sample. Once the beam hits the sample, electrons and X-rays are ejected from the sample.
Detectors, which are backscattered and secondary electrons, collect these X-rays and convert them
into a signal that is sent to a screen similar to a television; however, they have different results
with separate interactions. Secondary electrons are a result of inelastic collision and scattering of
incident electrons with specimen electrons. They are generally characterized by possessing energies
of less than 50eV. They are used to reveal the surface structure of a material with a resolution
of around 10nm or better [36], thus very sensitive to surface topography, providing an excellent
view of fracture morphology. Backscattered electrons are a result of elastic collision and scattering
between incident electrons and specimen nuclei or electrons. It can be generated further from the
surface of the material and help to resolve topographical contrast and atomic number contrast with
a resolution bigger than 1 micron [36]. Therefore, the choice of the detector depends on what kind
of outputs want to be detected.
Since the SEM utilizes vacuum conditions and uses electrons to form an image, water need
to be removed beforehand otherwise it would vaporize in the vacuum, resulting in damaging the
machine, also using alcohol first to clean the surface of the sample to avoid grease from the fingers
or some stain from the environment; furthermore, the sample needs to be conductive or made con-
ductive by covering with a thin layer of conductive material. In this case, carbon is used to coat
on the surface of the sample as seen in Figure 14 (b). The value of accelerating voltage depends on
the type of sample material. Choosing the right voltages is critical to obtain clear image. The more
conductive material the better it will behave under high voltages.
Page 13 of 39
==PAGE:19==
2.5
SEM
(a) SEM-VEGA3
(b) Coating carbon on the top of
the sample to make surface con-
ductive
Figure 14: SEM and the coating machine
(a)
(b)
Figure 15: Schematic diagram of (a) Cutting section and focused fracture layers for the SEM
analysis: Dashed line 1: the surface crack from the edge of the wrinkle. Dashed line 2: the middle
surface crack. Dashed line 3: the crack closest to specimen surface. (b) The total amount of targeted
fracture surfaces and their geometry
Page 14 of 39
==PAGE:20==
2.5
SEM
The surface samples for SEM scanning is divided into three sections, each focusing on areas
where cracks have been observed in both the X-ray scanning results and the images captured under
a flashlight (refer to Figure 9), as well as from the compression test results. The three surfaces
include:
1. The surface from the edge of the wrinkle to the end of the crack front, marked in 1 with blue
dashed line, as depicted in Figure 15 (a). This surface was also scanned via X-ray CT.
2. The middle surface cracks, marked in 2 with green dashed line, as depicted in Figure 15 (a).
This surface was also scanned via X-ray CT.
3. The cracks closest to specimen surface, which exhibit significant crack propagation after the
static compression test and are marked in 3 with yellow dashed line, as depicted in Figure 15
(a).
Each of these cut surfaces contains either fatigue/static cracks or the boundary between these
cracks. The SEM analysis of these fracture surfaces serves two main purposes:
1. To distinguish different fracture features on the surfaces under static and fatigue failures.
2. To reveal the surface fractography under both fatigue and static compression fracture, thus
determining the dominant fracture modes in the interlaminar surfaces.
Page 15 of 39
==PAGE:21==
3
Results and Discussions
3.1
Visual observation
By comparing the specimen with and without the flashlight, several delaminations can be ob-
served clearly, as well as the approximate location of the crack front, as shown in Figure 16 (b).
Under the red box, it is observed that there are two furthest delaminations on the specimen, which
would be the two main areas of further investigation.
Figure 16: The cutting specimen to observe the delamination at inner layers (a) original specimen
(b) Visual observation from the flashlight penetrating through the specimen. Obvious delamination
is marked as red box
3.2
X-ray observation
3.2.1
Crack observation from the edge of the wrinkle
The first scanning section under high resolution, as depicted in Figure ??, reveals the 2D surface
that shows the cracks in-between two unidirectional layers (marked as red line). It is hard to know
where exactly the crack starts, but the crack near the edge of the wrinkle can be clearly observed
and then propagated along the direction between the two unidirectional layers.
Figure 17: The X-ray 2D result. Under the black box, the crack can be clearly seen, which is marked
as red line
Page 16 of 39
==PAGE:22==
3.2
X-ray observation
Since the 2D image can only observe the crack existence but not the crack front and the whole
crack surfaces, the 3D crack extraction is used here, as depicted in Figure 18.
This 3D image
provides an overview of the cracks in the designated area, as shown in Figure 18 yellow box. The
3D crack image can reveal several distinct characteristics of the crack surfaces, particularly the crack
front and crack behavior, which will be explored in more detail later on.
Figure 18: 3D cracks segmented by using constant threshold, where the blue surface represents the
crack between the unidirectional layers. The green arrow indicates the direction from the edge of
the wrinkle to the place where the crack front is
Page 17 of 39
==PAGE:23==
3.2
X-ray observation
Figure 19: The location of crack front from X-ray crack extraction, which matches the crack front
found by visual observation, as located at 30.6mm (a) The cracks overview from top view (b) Crack
path from the visual observation
Since the 3D crack is extracted, the location of the crack front in the Z direction can be deter-
mined using the global coordinate system outlined in Figure 8. The scanning size is 12.8 mm×12.8
mm per scan and 76.8mm in total for six scans.
During stitching, there is an overlap of 22%,
resulting in a total distance within the scanning range of 60mm. Therefore, the precise location of
the crack front in the software can be calculated as 20mm from the starting point, which is the first
scan starting from the 5 mm in the left hand side, as depicted in Figure 19 (b), which translates
to 25.6mm in real length. Given that the first scan starts from 5mm, the actual location of the
crack front is determined to be 30.6mm, which is consistent with the visual observation, as shown
in Figure 19(b).
Page 18 of 39
==PAGE:24==
3.2
X-ray observation
Figure 20: Crack line in between fiber bundles: (a) From top view showing the crack paths (three
dimmed trails) (b) From cross-section view (A-A) with dimmed trails highlighted with red dash
lines, corresponding to each of fiber bundle.
The second observation in the first scanning can be found in Figure 20 . From the top view shown
in 20(a), three distinct dimmed trails are identified at Z direction and marked under red dashed
lines in (b). When considering cross-section view, as illustrated in figure 20 (b) at A-A cross-section,
it is found that the crack trails are corresponding to each fiber bundle, which is reasonable since
the fiber bundles exhibit higher strength than the matrix, they tend to imprint onto the matrix if
the crack exists. Upon examining the extracted crack, it’s also well noted that the cracks propagate
along in-between two unidirectional layers from the edge of the wrinkle to the observed crack front
without migrating into the other layers.
3.2.2
Crack front observation from the top
The crack from the middle of the specimen is extracted together with the crack from the edge
of wrinkle, which provides evidence of where is the exact location of the dark blue crack. The dark
blue cracks displayed in Figure 21 (b) depict the crack propagation and it location.
Page 19 of 39
==PAGE:25==
3.2
X-ray observation
(a)
(b)
Figure 21: Overview from top scan (a) X-ray scanning result, showing the 2D crack lines (b) Using
constant threshold to extract cracks in 3D, yellow and red arrow indicate the directions of the two
cracks
Additionally, the crack front in the middle of the specimen, which is the dark blue crack surface
in Figure 22 (a), is found at the location marked by a vertical orange dashed line in Figure 22 (d).
The distance from the starting point, which is also the same as 5mm from the first scan starting
from the left side, is calculated to be 22mm in the scanning range, which corresponds to 28.2mm in
real length, taking into account the stitching overlap. This translates to a real location of 33.2mm,
which is in agreement with the visual observation, as shown in Figure 22 (d).
Figure 22: The middle of specimen crack observation.
From the 3D crack extraction, the two
major cracks can be observed in (a), the crack in light blue below is the crack from the edge of
the wrinkle. (b) is demonstrated the extracted crack area; The extracted crack area is displayed in
(c). (d) provides a visual comparison of the calculated crack front location with the actual location
observed.
Page 20 of 39
==PAGE:26==
3.2
X-ray observation
(a)
(b)
Figure 23: Overview from middle of specimen crack scan to investigate the existence of black surface.
(a) the 7.3m section to show where is the cutting specimen located(b) the crack surface where the
black surface(under red box) exist
Further observation can be investigated as the huge black region in the fracture surface, as
referred in Figure 23 (b) under red box. It is unusual to have only side cracks instead of cracks
that extend over the entire surface. According to the [34], the fatigue exciter was located at 5.2m
from the fixed end, and the location for the cutting section was located at 7.3m, as referred to 23
(a), indicating that point A from the Figure 23 is closer to fatigue exciter than point B, which have
higher fatigue bending loading, which might be the reason why there is a region without cracks
since it is further to the exciter. However, the cracks only propagate on both sides of the black
region, which extends the crack front. When checking the 2D cross-section of these black region
slices from X-ray scanning, it shows the same scenario that cracks only exist on each side. It might
be because of a notch or even porosity on these surfaces when manufacturing on the side which
makes the load concentration. But it is hard to conclude why only side cracks happen based only on
these extracted crack surfaces, further investigation is needed to analyze for example, the porosity
inside the matrix, which will cause detrimental effects on the mechanical properties and result in
generating cracks. Additionally, it is noteworthy that the crack front originating from the edge
of the wrinkle plane exhibits a greater distance than that of the middle crack. This phenomenon
provides a plausible explanation that the edge of the wrinkle is more susceptible to cracking, which
could be caused by the load concentration or variations in the crack speed of two unidirectional
layers due to the resin.
3.2.3
Summary of X-ray scanning before compression
The X-ray scanning is conducted to investigate the specimen crack location and crack front after
fatigue testing. Two crack surfaces are observed from the edge of the wrinkle and the middle of
the specimen, which shows that the crack surfaces are within the interlaminar. The locations of
the two crack fronts calculated from X-ray observation are consistent with the locations measured
from visual observation. Besides, fiber bundle imprints can be observed at the edge of the wrinkle
surface. On the other hand, the crack surface from the middle of the specimen shows a huge black
region where there are only side cracks. It is hard to conclude the reasons only based on the X-
ray scanning results, side cracks propagation might be because of the load concentration due to a
notch or porosity when blade manufacturing. In contrast, plausible explanations for the edge of the
wrinkle crack exhibiting a complete crack and further crack surface than the middle of the specimen
could be caused by load concentration or variations in the crack speed of two unidirectional layers
due to the resin.
Page 21 of 39
==PAGE:27==
3.3
Compression test
3.3
Compression test
The slope of the load-displacement curve is an important factor in determining if something has
happened in the specimen. Until the 8 kN load, the specimen is able to withstand the compression
load without any damage. However, when the designed load is adjusted to 10 kN, the slope of
the curve after 7.8 kN becomes flatter than usual, indicating that some parts of the specimen
start to crack, a little bit buckling is also observed after 7.8kN from the observation of both load-
displacement curve and from video, but at this moment the load was still able to be carried until the
applied load reached 9.18kN. At this point, the delamination occurs and propagates from the edge
to the end of the specimen(yellow horizontal dashed line) and results in releasing of energy which
causes the resin on the edge of the wrinkle, right-hand side close to the rope, flying away, as shown in
Figure 24 (b) red circle in (ii) and (iii). The delamination causes the load to be redistributed which
results in significant crack propagation on the layers closest to the specimen surface, as observed
in Figure 24 (b) from the recorded camera results(dark yellow vertical dashed line). Since it is
difficult to observe whether the crack front changes for the edge of the wrinkle and middle crack
surfaces(vertical blue dashed line), as depicted in Figure 25 marked as red box, it is necessary to
conduct a re-scan in order to observe any changes in the crack surface.
(a) Load-Displacement under different designed load
(b) The visual observation before compression test (i)
and the comparison before(ii) and after(iii) 10kN load
applied.
Figure 24: Applied load under compression test and the crack happen before(ii) and after(iii)
designed 10kN load apply. The delamination happens (mark as yellow horizontal dashed line in
(iii)), which causes the resin to fly out (mark as red circle). The load starts redistributing and the
crack can be obviously seen (from the vertical dashed yellow line)
Page 22 of 39
==PAGE:28==
3.3
Compression test
Figure 25: Specimen crack observation before and after compression test under visual observation.
Here the crack propagation can be seen closed to surface (mark as yellow box). However, the cracks
under red box, which is the location where the X-ray scanning was performed, do not have obvious
crack propagation visually, therefore it will investigate again under X-ray scanning
3.3.1
Summary of the compression test
By the static compression testing, a slight buckling is observed from the video at 7.8kN, as
well as from the slope change in the load-displacement curve.
At 9.18kN, the delamination on
the opposite side of the edge of the wrinkle occurs which causes the resin to fly away. This is
accompanied by a sudden redistribution of the load, primarily affecting the cracks closest to the
surface. A significant crack then occurs on that surface, while no noticeable changes are observed
on the original investigated crack surfaces. To investigate any changes, a re-scan will be conducted
in the exact same regions, as shown in Figure 12.
Page 23 of 39
==PAGE:29==
3.4
X-ray CT re-scanning analysis
3.4
X-ray CT re-scanning analysis
The re-scanning is conducted on the same region as the first scanning, as depicted in Figure 12
with the purpose of observing whether the static compression failure will influence the crack paths
and the crack surfaces behavior.
3.4.1
Crack observation from the edge of the wrinkle
After the compression test is conducted on the specimen, as described in Section 3.3, a re-
scanning process is performed. The crack surface is extracted from the edge of the wrinkle, and 3D
comparison images are shown in Figure 26. These images reveal slight changes in the crack front.
Figure 26: The 3D fracture surfaces from the edge of the wrinkle to the crack fronts (a) before
compression test(b) after compression test. Green line indicate the crack growth direction
When viewing from the top, two different loading failure surfaces, cracks under fatigue bend-
ing(Figure 27(a)) and the crack propagation based on the static compression failure on the top of
fatigue failure(Figure 27(b)), are compared. The crack front has propagated 2.6mm after the com-
pression test. The observation of crack propagation indicates that the compression static loading
caused failure has influenced the edge of the wrinkle crack.
Page 24 of 39
==PAGE:30==
3.4
X-ray CT re-scanning analysis
(a) Crack front before applying compression
loading
(b) Crack front after applying compression loading
Figure 27: X-ray scanning from top view, which shows the crack front location and the crack
propagation from before and after compression. The crack has propagated 2.6mm.
3.4.2
Crack observation from the middle of the specimen
Additionally, 3D cracks are extracted from the middle crack of the specimen. These cracks ex-
hibit more visible changes on their surfaces compared to the edge of the wrinkle crack, as illustrated
the crack before (a) and after (b) the compression test in Figure 28.
Figure 28: The 3D fracture surfaces from the middle of the specimen (a) before compression (b)
after compression
The crack front is observed from the middle of the specimen, as shown in Figure 29. The crack
has only propagated slightly by 0.6mm after the compression test. Even though the crack front only
propagates slightly, it can be observed that the big black region, as mentioned in Figure 23, turns
out to be complete crack on that area, which indicates the compression load applied in the specimen
has damaged that area and made the crack propagation. Furthermore, the crack surfaces from two
Page 25 of 39
==PAGE:31==
3.4
X-ray CT re-scanning analysis
different locations, i.e. the edge of the wrinkle and middle of the specimen crack, show the same
behavior as the cracks still locate at the interlaminar without migrating to different layers. Last but
not least, the observation in both the edge of the wrinkle and middle of the specimen crack surface
after the compression test shows relatively rough surfaces and more black tiny spaces compared to
the surfaces before the compression test. Since it is impossible that the cracks disappear after a new
load has been applied, and since the setting threshold within the crack extraction process is similar,
which indicates the extraction size might not be a factor in this case. Since the parameters input is
exactly the same, the only difference for the input parameter of these two scan is the slight angle
difference between specimen and vertical line, as depicted in Figure 30, which causes the specimen
lean into a small angle, the angle difference might come from the thickness of glue which stick to the
bottom metal stage. However, the angle is important if it is focused on 2D slices, but it would not
be a problem if it is focused on the segmented fracture surface, like the 3D cracks investigation in
this case, so the angle difference would also not be a reason for the rough surface. Therefore, further
research is needed to understand whether the phenomenon occurs consistently when scanning the
different delamination parts under the same loading conditions.
(a) Crack front before applying compression
loading
(b) Crack front after applying compression load-
ing
Figure 29: X-ray scanning from top view, which shows the crack front location and the crack
propagation from before and after compression. The crack has propagated 0.2mm.
Page 26 of 39
==PAGE:32==
3.4
X-ray CT re-scanning analysis
Figure 30: The schematic diagram of angle slight difference from two scans, red line: first scan, blue
line: second re-scan. Note: angle exaggerated for clarity
3.4.3
Summary of the X-ray re-scanning
It is important to note that the two primary crack surfaces propagate through the interlaminar
region in both fatigue and static loading failures, providing evidence for why delamination is often
referred to as interlaminar failure. Additionally, the crack front increases more in the edge of the
wrinkle than in the middle of the specimen, both in these two different loading failures. This pro-
vides more plausible evidence that the edge of the wrinkle is more prone to cracking, which could
be caused by load concentration or variations in the crack speed of two unidirectional layers due to
the resin. In addition, the presence of the black region at the middle of the specimen crack surface
before compression test as discussed in Figure 23, shows that the crack now fully propagates in
that region, this observation raises interest to investigate the fracture characteristics of this surface.
Finally, the rough crack surfaces in both layers after compression test require further investigation
across different specimens under the same loading conditions to determine what factors cause the
surface differences observed during X-ray crack extraction.
Upon conducting two times scanning by using X-ray CT, several limitations are observed.
Firstly, it can only be utilized for post-mortem fracture investigation when the cracks are already
present instead of providing instantaneous crack detection. Secondly, the sample size is also re-
stricted and can not provide full scanning for the blade at the same time. Finally, it takes time for
each scan, depending on the parameters setup, for example, the resolution, projection number, and
exposure time. Nevertheless, the X-ray CT offers excellent insights into not only the precise crack
locations and crack front, but also the crack behavior on crack surfaces.
Page 27 of 39
==PAGE:33==
3.5
Scanning Electron Microscope analysis
3.5
Scanning Electron Microscope analysis
Conducting SEM is to distinguish different fracture features on the surfaces under static and
fatigue failures. The surface setup is shown in Figure 15. The analysis will divide into two main
part, fatigue surface in 3.5.1 and static surface in 3.5.2.
3.5.1
Fatigue fracture analysis
The features of the fractures induced by the previous fatigue testing are investigated first. The
region 3 layer(marked as horizontal dashed yellow line in Figure 31) locates at where the significant
crack happens after compression test. The surface 3-3, as shown in Figure 31, is selected where it
has cracked after fatigue failure. The fatigue surface exhibites two types of features: matrix rollers
and striations. Figure 32 shows that matrix rollers are clearly visible, while striations are not as
clear as in Figure 1 from reference. Several possible reasons for this. First, the SEM machine lacks
a tilt function, which presents a problem as a tilt angle is necessary for the clear observation of
striations [15]. Second, it may be affected by the static loading since from the reference, fatigue
features are always conducted under pure loading instead of applying different load on the top of
the original loading. Furthermore, the other possible reason might be because the formation of
striations is dependent on the loading conditions, i.e. if it was a low-stress intensity, the striation
would not exist or would be really hard to observe [15]. Despite this, the presence of matrix rollers
and striations provides evidence that the surface is dominated by mode II fatigue fracture.
Figure 31: First analysis 3-3 surface under fatigue loading
Page 28 of 39
==PAGE:34==
3.5
Scanning Electron Microscope analysis
Figure 32: Fatigue features observation at 3-3 surface(green arrow is the direction of crack propa-
gation), which observes the typical fatigue mode II features: matrix rollers and striations
Another part of fatigue surface is chosen at 1-1, this surface contains the boundary between
fatigue and static fracture found by using X-ray scanning, as illustrated in Figure 33. Under the
SEM scanning, the feature observed in the fatigue surface is matrix rollers, but the size of matrix
rollers is comparatively smaller and there are not as many as in the pure fatigue surface, which
could be compared between Figure 32 and Figure 33 under magnification of 1500. It might be due
to the fact as mentioned in [16], the size and amount would be smaller and the number of them
would be fewer if mode I fracture exists but the percentage of mode II is no lesser than 50%, which
means, in this case, this surface has the mixture of mode fracture, but the mode II will weigh more
than mode I.
Figure 33: Fatigue features observation at 1-1 surface together with X-ray scanning fracture surface
extracted(green arrow is the direction of crack propagation). Here the matrix rollers are observed
Page 29 of 39
==PAGE:35==
3.5
Scanning Electron Microscope analysis
Figure 34: Fatigue features observation at 3-1 surface with a manual tilt angle(green arrow is the
direction of crack propagation). The cusps are observed here to provide evidence of mode II fracture
Figure 34 shows the presence of cusps under fiber-dominated surface, which are observed on
the 3-1 surface at the edge of the wrinkle under fatigue fracture. To obtain a clearer view of the
cusps, the surface is manually titled at a specific angle since the SEM machine does not have a tile
function. While it is difficult to provide conclusive evidence that the cusps observed in Figure 34
are caused by fatigue or static failure compared to those from the reference in Figure 2, it can be
concluded that this fatigue surface is dominated by the mode II fracture.
Page 30 of 39
==PAGE:36==
3.5
Scanning Electron Microscope analysis
3.5.2
Static fracture analysis
In Figure 35, 2-2 surface is investigated, specifically the region as mentioned in Figure 23 that
has parts without showing any cracks. After compression load, this black surface shows the crack
propagating toward this black region, indicating that the fracture surface has the possibility of
showing static fracture features. Under the SEM scanning in this region, it finds out that the river
lines and textured microflow are clearly observed, as shown in similarity features as depicted from
the reference in Figure 3 and 4, which are evidence of mode I features [14]. Therefore, even though
the static fracture features are not observed, these two features, as shown in Figure 35, show the
mode I fracture.
Figure 35: Static features observation at 2-2 surface together with X-ray scanning fracture surface
extracted(green arrow is the direction of crack propagation). The river lines and textured microflow
are observed, which can refer to reference [14] mode I fracture.
Page 31 of 39
==PAGE:37==
3.5
Scanning Electron Microscope analysis
Figure 36: Static features observation at 2-2 surface together with X-ray scanning fracture surface
extracted(green arrow is the direction of crack propagation). The cusps are observed here to provide
evidence of mode II fracture
Furthermore, as a different location is selected at 2-2 surface, it finds out the feature of cusps at
the matrix-dominated surface, as demonstrated in Figure 36. As discussed in Figure 34 how cusps
are present not only in fatigue fracture surfaces, but also in static fracture surfaces. The presence
of cusps indicates the existence of mode II fracture, regardless of the type of load. Additionally,
the inclination of the cusps can reveal the direction of the crack. In the matrix-dominated surface
shown in Figure 36, the cusps are tilted away from the initiation site, indicating the direction of
crack growth [15]. Therefore, by observing cusps, one can not only identify the fracture mode, but
also deduce the direction of crack growth from the cusp tilt direction. In conclusion, surface 2-2
exhibits three distinct features, including both mode I and mode II fractures, but the dominant
mode cannot be determined solely from these observations.
Page 32 of 39
==PAGE:38==
3.5
Scanning Electron Microscope analysis
Figure 37: Static features observation at 2-3 surface(green arrow is the direction of crack propaga-
tion). The cusps and textured microflow are observed to provide evidence of mixture of fracture
mode
Additionally, the surface 2-3 undergoes static fracture as depicted in Figure 37. This is the region
where the load is redistributed and the crack propagates significantly. Under SEM observation, it
can be seen that the static features are not easily discernible. However, the presence of cusps and
a textured microflow on this surface provides evidence of a mixed mode of fracture occurring since
cusps primarily exist under mode II fracture and textured microflow exists under mode I fracture.
However, this information can only provide evidence of mixture of mode fracture on this surface,
but it can not determine which weighs the most.
3.5.3
Summary of SEM observation
From the SEM observation, several distinct fractographic characteristics can be found. Within
the investigation of several fatigue surfaces, the typical fatigue features are found, which are matrix
rollers and striations, which provide evidence of mode II-dominated fracture. Cusps are also found
in fatigue surfaces, which is also evidence of mode II fracture. Based on these observations, it could
be deduced that under the fatigue failure, the inner surfaces are mainly mode II-dominated; when
it comes to the static surface, it shows variation characteristics. At the 1-1 the boundary between
fatigue/static surface, the crack propagation part after the compression loading failure, the matrix
rollers are found within that region. Having a comparison between size and amount with pure
fatigue surfaces, it is found that both size and amount are smaller and fewer, indicating the surface
contains a mixture of mode I and mode II fracture.
Page 33 of 39
==PAGE:39==
3.5
Scanning Electron Microscope analysis
Upon examining the surface with a black region in the 2-2 surface, the crack surface exhibits
typical mode I fracture features, including riverlines and textured microflow. At the same time, the
cusps are also found at 2-2 surface, indicating this surface is also the mixture fracture mode. On
the 2-3 surface, it is also observed the mode I and mode II feature, textured microflow and cusps,
respectively. Based on these observations, it can be concluded that the surfaces under fatigue are
primarily dominated by mode II fracture, as all of the fatigue surfaces are observed mode II features.
However, it is unclear which mode dominates the static crack surfaces after compression loading
failure, as a mixture mode is found during the inspection.
In general, SEM provides images of fractographic features, allowing for the observation of differ-
ent features under different loading failures and the determination of the dominant fracture mode.
However, some of the factors that may influence the SEM results are: when tearing surfaces apart
for analysis, some degree of surface damage is inevitable, which could impact the outcomes of the
SEM scanning. Additionally, once the surface is sanitized, it should be kept in the cleanest possible
environment to avoid contamination, which otherwise could also affect the images. Another consid-
eration for SEM scanning is the need to attach the surface to a small stage using conductive tape,
which can damage the surface and render it unusable for further analysis. Since the two surfaces
which are torn apart contain one with matrix-dominated and one with fiber-dominated surfaces, it
is advisable to analyze both surfaces to gain a more complete understanding of the fracture surfaces.
Page 34 of 39
==PAGE:40==
4
Conclusion
This study presented a fractographic investigation on the cutting part from the 7.3m delamina-
tion section. The cracks were scanned by the X-ray CT and 3D cracks were extracted by using a
constant threshold method. The crack fronts and the crack behavior were analyzed. A compression
test was conducted here to initiate crack propagation under static loading failure and to observe the
surface fractographic difference after it has already cracked under fatigue loading. A re-scanning
was conducted to investigate the crack changes after the compression test and SEM was utilized to
investigate the fracture surfaces.
From the observation of X-ray CT, it is discovered that cracks observed from both the edge
of the wrinkle and the middle of the specimen are within interlaminar without migrating through
other parts of the layers. In addition, the effects of compression test can also be observed under
X-ray scanning, with the crack front for both cracks propagating, but the edge of wrinkle crack
propagated slightly further. Another noteworthy observation from the X-ray CT is that the edge of
the wrinkle has a further crack front than the crack at the middle of the specimen, for both fatigue
and static loading failure. These phenomena provide a plausible explanation that the edge of the
wrinkle is more susceptible to cracking, which could be caused by load concentration at the edge of
the wrinkle or the variations in the crack speed of the two unidirectional layers due to the resin in
between.
SEM analysis reveals that the majority of the fatigue surfaces display typical features observed
under fatigue failure, providing evidence of mode II fracture. Although some of the fatigue surfaces
do not exhibit features that would only exist in fatigue surfaces, mode II fractures are observed in
all fatigue surfaces, leading to the conclusion that fatigue fractures are predominantly dominated
by mode II fractures. On the other hand, instead of displaying static fracture characteristics, it is
observed both mode I and mode II fractures in static surfaces. Overall, it is difficult to conclude
which fracture mode dominates under static compression failure because of the mixture fracture
modes. Nevertheless, mode II fracture, in general, plays an important role under the combination
of fatigue and static failure.
A few conclusions can be made:
1. From the X-ray CT crack extractions, the crack contained in the interlaminar regardless of
different applied loads, providing evidence of delamination as an interlaminar fracture.
2. From the X-ray observation, the furthest crack propagation at the edge of the wrinkle could
be attributed to several plausible factors, the load concentration at the edge of the wrinkle or
the variations in the crack speed of the two unidirectional layers due to the resin in between.
3. SEM provided detailed views of surface fractography to distinguish fatigue and static features.
4. Fractographic analysis from SEM showed that under fatigue failure, the fatigue surfaces would
result in mode II-dominated; whereas the static compression failure on top of fatigue load
failure, the static surfaces showed the mixture of mode I and mode II. In general, mode II
appears to play a significant role under the combination of fatigue and static failure.
5. Based on the observations from this research, these information could serve as a useful refer-
ence for a future root cause analysis case study for a failure blade in the field.
Page 35 of 39
==PAGE:41==
This research is limited to investigating one of the delamination parts of 7.3m section, which is
difficult to conclude based on the results to map into the entire blade; therefore, as a continuation
of this research, the different part of the delamination section might be an interesting extensional
research to analyze the fractography difference within different locations of the delamination.
Page 36 of 39
==PAGE:42==
References
References
[1] Bladena, Kirt, and Thomsen, “Wind turbine blades handbook - a shared lingo of terms and
definitions for wind turbine blades,” 2019.
[2] X. Chen and M. A. Eder, “A critical review of damage and failure of composite wind tur-
bine blade structures,” IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, vol. 942,
p. 012001, oct 2020.
[3] D. S. Cairns, T. Riddle, and J. Nelson, “Wind turbine composite blade manufacturing : the
need for understanding defect origins, prevalence, implications and reliability.,”
[4] O. T. Thomsen, “Sandwich materials for wind turbine blades: Present and future,” Journal of
Sandwich Structures & Materials, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 7–26, 2009.
[5] X. Chen, “Fracture of wind turbine blades in operation part i: A comprehensive forensic inves-
tigation,” Wind Energy, vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 1046–1063, 2018.
[6] E. Greenhalgh, Characterisation of Mixed-mode Delamination Growth in Carbon-fibre Com-
posites. University of London 1998., 1998.
[7] R. Olsson, “Factors influencing the interlaminar fracture toughness and its evaluation in com-
posites,” NASA STI/Recon Technical Report N, 12 1992.
[8] M. Hiley, “Delamination between multi-directional ply interfaces in carbon-epoxy compos-
ites under static and fatigue loading,” in Fracture of Polymers, Composites and Adhesives
(J. Williams and A. Pavan, eds.), vol. 27 of European Structural Integrity Society, pp. 61–72,
Elsevier, 2000.
[9] D. Hull and T. W. Clyne, An Introduction to Composite Materials. Cambridge Solid State
Science Series, Cambridge University Press, 2 ed., 1996.
[10] E. S. Greenhalgh, C. Rogers, and P. Robinson, “Fractographic observations on delamination
growth and the subsequent migration through the laminate,” Composites Science and Technol-
ogy, vol. 69, no. 14, pp. 2345–2351, 2009. The Sixteenth International Conference on Composite
Materials with Regular Papers.
[11] M. R. Wisnom, “The role of delamination in failure of fibre-reinforced composites,” Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, vol. 370,
no. 1965, pp. 1850–1870, 2012.
[12] K. Friedrich, Application of Fracture Mechanics to Composite Materials. Composite Materials
Series, Elsevier, 1987.
[13] A. T. Zehnder, Modes of Fracture. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2013.
[14] E. S. Greenhalgh, ed., 4 - Delamination-dominated failures in polymer composites. Woodhead
Publishing Series in Composites Science and Engineering, Woodhead Publishing, 2009.
[15] E. S. Greenhalgh, ed., 5 - Fatigue failures of polymer composites. Woodhead Publishing Series
in Composites Science and Engineering, Woodhead Publishing, 2009.
Page 37 of 39
==PAGE:43==
References
[16] E. Armanios, R. Bucinell, D. Wilson, L. Asp, B. SjĂśgren, and E. Greenhalgh, “Delamina-
tion growth and thresholds in a carbon/epoxy composite under fatigue loading,” Journal of
Composites Technology Research - J COMPOS TECH RES, vol. 23, 04 2001.
[17] A. SjĂśgren and L. E. Asp, “Effects of temperature on delamination growth in a carbon/epoxy
composite under fatigue loading,” International Journal of Fatigue, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 179–184,
2002.
[18] M. Hiley, “Fractographic study of static and fatigue failures in polymer composites,” Plastics,
Rubber and Composites, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 210–227, 1999.
[19] V. MollĂłn, J. Bonhomme, J. ViĂąa, A. ArgĂźelles, and A. FernĂĄndez-Canteli, “Influence
of the principal tensile stresses on delamination fracture mechanisms and their associated mor-
phology for different loading modes in carbon/epoxy composites,” Composites Part B: Engi-
neering, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1676–1680, 2012.
[20] R. RaiĹĄutis, E. Jasiuniene, R. Sliteris, and A. VladiĹĄauskas, “The review of non-destructive
testing techniques suitable for inspection of the wind turbine blades,” Ultrasound, vol. 63, 01
2008.
[21] S.-J. Park and M.-K. Seo, Chapter 8 - Composite Characterization, vol. 18 of Interface Science
and Technology. Elsevier, 2011.
[22] W. Boyes, ed., Chapter 31 - Non-Destructive Testing. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann, fourth
edition ed., 2010.
[23] I. Amenabar, A. Mendikute, A. LĂłpez-Arraiza, M. Lizaranzu, and J. Aurrekoetxea, “Com-
parison and analysis of non-destructive testing techniques suitable for delamination inspection
in wind turbine blades,” Composites Part B: Engineering, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1298–1305, 2011.
[24] S. Garcea, Y. Wang, and P. Withers, “X-ray computed tomography of polymer composites,”
Composites Science and Technology, vol. 156, pp. 305–319, 2018.
[25] M. Leon, S. FĂŚster, and S. D. Rad, “Mechanisms and computational analysis of leading edge
erosion of wind turbine blades,” IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering,
vol. 942, p. 012025, oct 2020.
[26] O. Al-Khudairi, H. Hadavinia, A. Waggott, E. Lewis, and C. Little, “Characterising mode
i/mode ii fatigue delamination growth in unidirectional fibre reinforced polymer laminates,”
Materials Design (1980-2015), vol. 66, pp. 93–102, 2015.
[27] M. KENANE, S. BENMEDAKHENE, and Z. AZARI, “Fracture and fatigue study of unidirec-
tional glass/epoxy laminate under different mode of loading,” Fatigue & Fracture of Engineering
Materials & Structures, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 284–293, 2010.
[28] X. Chen, “Fracture of wind turbine blades in operation part i: A comprehensive forensic inves-
tigation,” Wind Energy, vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 1046–1063, 2018.
[29] J. Bender, S. Hallett, and E. Lindgaard, “Parametric study of the effect of wrinkle features on
the strength of a tapered wind turbine blade sub-structure,” Composite Structures, vol. 218,
pp. 120–129, 2019.
Page 38 of 39
==PAGE:44==
References
[30] S. Mukhopadhyay, M. I. Jones, and S. R. Hallett, “Compressive failure of laminates containing
an embedded wrinkle; experimental and numerical study,” Composites Part A: Applied Science
and Manufacturing, vol. 73, pp. 132–142, 2015.
[31] N. Xie, R. A. Smith, S. Mukhopadhyay, and S. R. Hallett, “A numerical study on the influence
of composite wrinkle defect geometry on compressive strength,” Materials
Design, vol. 140,
pp. 7–20, 2018.
[32] S. Mukhopadhyay, O. J. Nixon-Pearson, and S. R. Hallett, “An experimental and numerical
study on fatigue damage development in laminates containing embedded wrinkle defects,” In-
ternational Journal of Fatigue, vol. 107, pp. 1–12, 2018.
[33] S. Mukhopadhyay, M. I. Jones, and S. R. Hallett, “Tensile failure of laminates containing an
embedded wrinkle; numerical and experimental study,” Composites Part A: Applied Science
and Manufacturing, vol. 77, pp. 219–228, 2015.
[34] X. Chen, S. Semenov, M. McGugan, S. Hjelm Madsen, S. Cem Yeniceli, P. Berring, and
K. Branner, “Fatigue testing of a 14.3m composite blade embedded with artificial defects â
damage growth and structural health monitoring,” Composites Part A: Applied Science and
Manufacturing, vol. 140, p. 106189, 2021.
[35] I. E. Commission, “Iec standard 61400-23, wind turbines part 23: Full-scale structural testing
of rotor blades, edition 1.0.,” International Electrotechnical Commission, 2014.
[36] B. Cheney, “Introduction to scanning electron microscopy,” Materials Engineering department
San Jose State University, 2007.
Page 39 of 39
