==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Automatic Detection of Microsleep Events using
Modified Sleep Staging Techniques
Sleep detection beyond the boundaries of the 30 second
rule
Sindri Jónsson (s202056)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) is a serious public health problem with significant prevalence in
the general population and has severe effects on peoples life quality. It is diﬀicult to clinically evaluate
whether people have EDS, as current methods demonstrate a lack of consistency between subjective and
physiological results. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in examining microsleep, which
are short intrusions of sleep during wakefulness, as a potential biomarker for assessing EDS. However,
there are numerous obstacles pertaining to microsleep research, such as: absence of a common definition,
lack of physiological data labelled with microsleep, and the tedious task of labelling data for microsleep.
The objective of this thesis was to develop a method to automatically detect microsleep events.
In order to achieve the aforementioned objective, the obstacles relating to microsleep research were
addressed. This included creating a common definition for microsleep, accumulating physiological data
labelled with microsleep, and modifying well established automatic sleep staging methods towards mi-
crosleep detection. Three different approaches were developed for the automatic detection of microsleep:
i) post-processing and thresholding high frequency sleep stage probabilities (patU-Sleep), ii) fine-tuning
a high frequency sleep staging model via transfer learning (mU-Sleep), iii) using a sleep staging model
as a feature extractor via self-supervised learning (mU-SSL). The models were validated against state-
of-the-art methods for automatic microsleep detection, which consisted of three feature based classifiers
(random forest, support vector machine, recurrent neural network) and a raw input convolutional neu-
ral network. All of the aforementioned models were trained and evaluated using a publicly available
dataset of 76 maintenance of wakefulness (MWT) recordings with labelled microsleep events.
A common definition and guidelines for scoring microsleep were developed and are currently being
used for microsleep scoring. Moreover, a database of 325 MWT recordings labelled with microsleep from
277 subjects was assembled and is pending approval. The highest performing method for microsleep
detection developed as part of this thesis was the mU-Sleep model, where a high frequency sleep staging
model was fine-tuned via transfer learning. The mU-Sleep model obtained an F1 score of 0.78 on a test
dataset, achieving better performance than most of the state-of-the-art methods. However, one of the
state-of-the-art methods, the feature based recurrent neural network (FB-LSTM), performed slightly
better than mU-Sleep with an F1 score of 0.79. The other methods developed as part of this thesis,
patU-Sleep and mU-SSL, performed worse than all of the state-of-the-art methods with an F1 score of
0.59 and 0.60, respectively.
The results of this thesis demonstrate that traditional sleep staging models can be adapted towards
microsleep detection, particularly when using fine-tuning via transfer learning. Furthermore, the results
suggest that capturing temporal context, using recurrent neural networks, plays an important role in
detecting microsleep. Additionally, the findings of this thesis showed the effect of microsleep duration,
where the models struggled to detect short events and performed better on longer events. In light of
these findings, limitations of this work were outlined along with future avenues to explore relating to
microsleep research.
The work of this thesis has laid out a foundation to build upon for microsleep research by provid-
ing solutions to the various challenges it faces, as well as novel methods for automatically detecting
microsleep.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Health Technology, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Biomedical En-
gineering. This thesis was conducted with the North-Atlantic Brain Research Program, a collaboration
program between DTU Health Tech, Stanford University (USA), and Rigshospitalet (DK).
February 27, 2023
Sindri Jónsson (s202056)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would first and foremost like to commemorate my supervisor Helge B. D. Sørensen. I owe Helge all of
my gratitude for seeing my potential and believing in me, which played a major role in my development
throughout my masters degree and ultimately my thesis. Helge supported me throughout this thesis
with critical feedback and technical supervision which helped me grow as an engineer. Furthermore,
he always had my well-being at heart during tough moments and he would tell cheeky ”dad-jokes” to
lighten the mood, which I will forever keep as a memory of Helge. My deepest sympathy goes out to
his family and loved ones, may he rest in peace.
I would also like to express my gratitude to my co-supervisors, Dr. Emmanuel Mignot and Dr. Poul
J. Jennum, who provided me with clinical insight on microsleep. I would especially like to extend my
gratitude to Dr. Mignot, for his continuous efforts in getting data for this thesis. Also, my deepest
appreciation to my supervisors and co-supervisors, for inviting me to conduct this thesis as part of the
North-Atlantic Brain Research Program.
A special thanks goes out to Dr. Oliver Sum-Ping, for his efforts in getting data for this thesis and
collaboration in the development of the microsleep scoring guidelines.
I would also like to thank Nannapas Banluesombatkul (Bam) for our critical discussions on the de-
velopment and evaluation of deep learning models - khàawp khun krab!
I would like to extend my gratitude to Mathias Perslev, the author and creator of U-Sleep, for giv-
ing me access to his private U-Sleep repository.
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
iv
Nomenclature
AASM
American Academy of Sleep Medicine
ANN
Artificial Neural Network
AR
Auto-Regressive
BP
Band-Pass
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
CV
Cross-Validation
ED
Episode of Drowsiness
EEG
Electroencephalography
ELU
Exponential Linear Unit
EOG
Electrooculography
FFNN
Feed-forward Neural Network
FIR
Finite Impulse Response
HC
Healthy Cohort
HP
High-Pass
iRBD
Isolated REM Behavioral Disorder
LDA
Linear Discriminant Analysis
LP
Low-Pass
LSTM
Long Short-Term Memory
ML
Machine Learning
MSE
Microsleep Episode
MSEc
Microsleep Episode Candidate
MSLT
Multiple Sleep Latency Test
MWT
Maintenance of Wakefulness Test
NDD
Neurodegenerative Diseases
NN
Neural Network
RBD
REM Bevhavioural Disorder
RBF
Radial Basis Function
REM
Rapid Eye Movement
RF
Random Forest
RLS
Recursive Least Square
ROC
Receiver Operating Characteristic
PD
Parkinsons Disease
PSD
Power Spectral Density
PSG
Polysomnogram
SNR
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
SSL
Self-Supervised Learning
SVM
Support Vector Machine
t-SNE
t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Sleep Primer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Microsleep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Methods
36
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2
Modified Sleep Staging Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3
Benchmark Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.4
Performance Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4
Results
51
4.1
Model Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2
Test Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Discussion
57
5.1
Interpretation of the model test performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Effect of microsleep duration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3
Considerations for model comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.4
Limitations and outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
62
A
Appendix
67
A.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.2 Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.3 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.4 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
141
A.5 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
142
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
We spend about a third of our lives sleeping and it plays an important role in our health and our
ability to function in daily life. But, what about when we fall asleep involuntarily? Excessive daytime
sleepiness (EDS) is a condition where people experience a lack of wakefulness and repeatedly fall asleep
during the day. EDS is a serious public health problem, with an estimated prevalence of 18% in the
US population [1]. Sleep related disorders, such as EDS, can have severe effects on life quality and
cause fatal accidents. A relationship between poor health and EDS has been reported on numerous
standardized health measurements [2], as well as reduced cognitive function which affects professional
performance [3]. Early reports from 1974 include patients with EDS falling asleep while in conversation,
driving, cooking, and even working, which ultimately lead to two of the patients losing their job and
one causing a car accident [4]. Beyond the personal implications of EDS, it can cause serious harm to
others. The National Highway Traﬀic Safety Administration reported 663 deaths in 2020 due to sleepy
drivers [5]. The most common causes of EDS are sleep deprivation and obstructive sleep apnea, and less
commonly hypersomnia (e.g. narcolepsy) [6]. There are standardized measures in place for evaluating
daytime sleepiness. It can be measured subjectively via questionnaires such as the Stanford Sleepiness
Scale [7] and Epworth Sleepiness Scale [8], or through physiological assessment which measures sleep
latency, e.g. the Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT) and the Maintenance of Wakefulness Test (MWT)
[9]. However, it is diﬀicult to evaluate daytime sleepiness because of the inconsistency between subjective
and physiological results [10].
In Guilleminault, Phillips, and Dement [4], a population with suspected EDS performed an array of
physical and cognitive experiments while physiological signals were continuously measured. Interestingly,
they found very short repetitive periods of ”microsleep”, which the patients did not recollect, but were
detrimental to their performance. Microsleep is commonly described as a short intrusion of sleep (3−15
seconds) during wakefulness. More recent work has demonstrated the importance of microsleep as a
potential parameter in assessing sleep health [11, 12] and for monitoring vigilance when driving [13, 14].
Although numerous studies have investigated microsleep since the reports from Guilleminault, Phillips,
and Dement [4], there are still several challenges pertaining to microsleep research. First and foremost,
there does not exist a recognized definition for microsleep. This could be due to international guidelines
for sleep scoring only considering sleep in 30 second intervals, an outdated rule from the time when
sleep was scored on paper [15]. Another problem in microsleep research is the lack of physiological
recordings professionally scored with microsleep events.
Furthermore, the task of manually scoring
sleep, and in particular microsleep, is a diﬀicult and tedious task. There are studies which have pro-
posed traditional machine learning and deep learning models to detect microsleep automatically, some
reaching substantial performance [16, 17].
In the past decades, there have been significant advancements in automatically scoring sleep (based
on the 30 second definition), where some models reach expert level performance [18]. Automatic mi-
crosleep detection hasn’t been investigated as much as the classical automatic sleep stage classification
task. Thus, it could be plausible to look for inspiration in the advanced work which has been accom-
plished for automatic sleep staging models, and possibly utilize it for automatic detection of microsleep.
To date, there has not been any work performed which attempts to use these high-performing classical
sleep staging models for microsleep detection. That is perhaps because most of these methods use
deep learning, which require vast amounts of data. There exist various approaches of deep learning to
mitigate the problem of data scarcity, such as transfer learning, where pre-trained models are adapted
to a specific task using minimal data [19]. Another promising approach in low labeled data regimes is
==PAGE:9==
1 Introduction
2
self-supervised learning [20].
On the grounds of the clinical value microsleep may have, and its presence concerning traﬀic safety,
there is a need for developing a method to automatically detect microsleep. In this thesis a method to
automatically detect microsleep events will be developed by utilizing the advancements of automatic
sleep staging models. This will be done by modifying state-of-the-art sleep staging models towards
microsleep detection in an attempt to mitigate the obstacles of data scarcity and lack of definition.
Project Aims
Main Goal:
Automatically detect microsleep events using modified sleep staging techniques. This
objective will be achieved through the following project aims, each aimed at a specific problem at hand.
1. Database: Due to the lack of data with scored microsleep, a database of recordings with scored
microsleep will be obtained.
This will be achieved by accumulating data from collaborating
institutions. Furthermore, data available for this thesis will be scored for microsleep.
2. Definition: A common definition for microsleep will be proposed based on a literature review.
These guidelines will then be used to score microsleep on the available data in this thesis.
3. Model development: Modify state-of-the-art automatic sleep staging models to detect mi-
crosleep.
3.a Using a high-resolution sleep staging model (U-Sleep [18]) and translating sleep stage proba-
bilities to microsleep predictions through different post-processing and thresholding methods.
3.b Via transfer learning, where the model (U-Sleep [18]) is fine-tuned towards microsleep detec-
tion.
3.c Via self-supervised learning, where a sleep staging model will be trained as a feature extractor
using a self-supervised approach [20, 21].
4. Validation: Replicate state-of-the-art methods developed for microsleep detection and use for
comparison [16, 17].
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter will provide the necessary background information for the contents of this thesis. This in-
cludes an introduction to the relevant clinical information on sleep, as well as the definition of microsleep.
Thereafter, an introduction on the technical methods used in automatic sleep scoring, i.e. neural net-
works and deep learning, will be provided. This chapter then concludes with a state-of-the-art review
on automatic sleep scoring and microsleep detection.
2.1
Sleep Primer
In order to understand microsleep it is helpful to get an introduction to sleep in general. Many people
are unaware of the complex processes that take place during sleep which play an important role in their
health and functioning in daily life. In the past decades, research has shed light on the importance
of sleep health and its link to cardiovascular diseases, obesity, mental health, and neurodegenerative
diseases [22]. The following subsections will give information on how sleep is measured and analyzed.
2.1.1
Polysomnography
A polysomnography is a comprehensive and systematic process that records multiple physiological sig-
nals from the body during sleep and is considered to be the gold-standard for diagnosing breathing
related sleep disorders [23]. A polysomnogram (PSG) includes recordings of brain activity, eye move-
ment, muscle activity, and heart activity via electroencephalography (EEG), electrooculography (EOG),
electromyography (EMG), and electrocardiography (ECG), respectively. Furthermore, blood oxygen
saturation is measured using a pulse oximeter, snoring via microphone, airflow through a nasal cannula,
and respiratory effort from transducer belts on the thorax and abdomen. A schematic illustration of a
PSG setup is shown in Figure 2.1.
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Sleep Primer
4
Figure 2.1: Schematic illustration of the measurements in a PSG, with a two lead EEG, EOG, chin-
EMG, airflow, pulse oximeter, and respiratory belts. Schematic adapted from [24].
EEG and EOG
The main modalities utilized in this thesis are EEG and EOG, therefore more detail will be provided on
these two measuring modalities. An EEG recording is a non-invasive method for quantifying electrical
activity in the brain using electrodes placed on the scalp. These electrodes measure the voltage difference
between each electrode and a common reference (commonly placed on the mastoid) and are often referred
to as derivations. The neurons in the brain communicate by firing electrical impulses, which gives rise
to the measurement of voltage differences. During an EEG recording the spontaneous voltage changes
generate a time series signal of voltage (in microvolts) for each electrode. These signals are used to
measure neural oscillations and therefore quantify ”brain activity”. The placements of EEG electrodes
are commonly by the 10-20 system (see Figure 2.2), where each electrode is measuring certain regions
of the brain. The electrodes placed on the forehead, top of the head, and back of the head measure the
frontal, central, and occipital regions of the brain, respectively.
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the 10-20 electrode placement system [25]. Figure adapted from [26].
Eye movement can be quantified using EOG recordings. An EOG consists of two electrodes placed
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Sleep Primer
5
on the outer canthus of each eye. There is an electrical potential difference between the retina and
cornea, which creates a dipole. Therefore, when the eye moves there is a change in the electromagnetic
field from the dipole, which is measured as a voltage change by the electrodes.
2.1.2
Sleep Analysis
The American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) has provided a manual to guide users in conducting
a polysomnograhpy study, scoring sleep stages and other events, and interpretation of PSG results
[27]. These guidelines have defined five sleep stages: Wake, Rapid Eye Movement sleep (REM), and
Non-Rapid Eye Movement sleep (NREM) sleep with stages 1, 2, and 3 (i.e. N1, N2, and N3). These
stages are generally defined and scored from the EEG, EOG, and chin-EMG measurements. The EEG
frequencies are usually split into five activities: Slow wave activity (0.5 −2.0 Hz) with peak-to-peak
amplitude greater than 75µV , Delta (0 −3.99 Hz), Theta (4 −7.99 Hz), Alpha (8 −13 Hz), and Beta
(≥13 Hz). The aforementioned sleep stages are commonly characterized by:
• Wake: Alpha activity dominant in occipital regions (in individuals that generate alpha activity
with eyes closed), eye blinks, rapid eye movement associated with normal or high chin muscle
tone.
• N1: Replacement of alpha activity (for individuals with alpha) or slowing of background fre-
quencies by ≥1 Hz from Wake, with low-amplitude mixed frequency EEG (theta dominant).
Additionally slow eye movement and vertex sharp waves.
• N2: Presence of one or more K-complexes or sleep spindles. K-complexes are sharp negative de-
lineations followed by a positive component protruding from the background EEG. Sleep spindles
are trains of sinusoidal waves in the frequency range of 11 −16 Hz.
• N3: Slow wave EEG and delta activity in the frontal regions.
• REM: Presence of rapid eye movement with low chin EMG muscle tone and low amplitude mixed
frequency EEG without K-complexes or sleep spindles. Also, an EEG pattern of trains of sharp
triangular waves, referred to as sawtooth waves.
The AASM scoring guidelines score these sleep stages in 30 second segments, commonly referred to
as epochs. The sleep stages are generally scored when the majority of the epoch corresponds to a certain
sleep stage (in addition to some more complicated heuristics). A typical night of sleep will consist of
4 to 5 cycles lasting approximately 90 minutes, where the progression of sleep stages in a cycle follows
as N1, N2, N3, N2 to REM (starting with the transition of Wake to N1 in the beginning of the night).
The sleep stages are predominantly NREM in the beginning of the night and then proceed to be more
REM in the later periods of the night with decreasing NREM [28]. The transition of sleep cycles during
the night and the corresponding characteristics of the sleep stages can be seen in Figure 2.3.
2.1.3
MSLT and MWT
The most common tests for assessing EDS physiologically are the Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT)
and the Maintenance of Wakefulness Test (MWT) [6]. These tests essentially measure the sleep onset
latency, i.e. the time it takes for a person to fall asleep. Both these tests require EEG (frontal, central,
and occipital), EOG, EMG, and ECG recordings, as well as audiovisual recordings. In an MSLT, five
nap trials are conducted throughout the day with 2 hours between each nap. The patient is instructed
to try to fall asleep. If the patient does not fall asleep within 20 minutes the trial is terminated. The
sleep onset is then marked as the first epoch of AASM defined sleep. In an MWT, four 40-minute trials
are conducted throughout the day with 2 hours between each trial. During these trials the person is
sat in a dimly lit room and instructed to try to stay awake. The trial is terminated if the patient has
three consecutive epochs of N1 sleep, one epoch of any other AASM defined sleep, or after 40 minutes
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Microsleep
6
Figure 2.3: EEG features characterising sleep stages and a hypnogram of the sleep stages. The right
side shows a hypnogram, which illustrates the progression of sleep stages throughout 8
hours of sleep at night. The left side shows the EEG characteristics of each sleep stage.
Figure adapted from [24].
without falling asleep. For both these tests, a full night polysomnography is recorded prior to the test
[9].
2.2
Microsleep
In sleep medicine, there exist standardized and widely accepted guidelines on how to score sleep, such as
the AASM Manual for the Scoring of Sleep and Associated Events [27] and the Manual of Standardized
Terminology, Techniques and Scoring System for Sleep Stages of Human Subjects by Rechtshaffen and
Kales [29].
However, there do not exist standard guidelines for scoring microsleep.
The following
sections will provide a general definition and guidelines on how to score microsleep based on a literature
review. Note that throughout this thesis microsleep, microsleep event, and microsleep episodes are used
synonymously.
2.2.1
Common Definition
Due to the fact that a consensus definition of microsleep does not exist, a literature review of studies
pertaining to microsleep was performed with the objective of finding a common definition within the
literature.
Microsleep is identified in various ways. Some studies do so behaviourally where they assess per-
formance in cognitive or visual motor tasks [30], others use visual assessment from face videography
observing drowsy facial features such as eyelid closure, yawning, and head drooping [31]. Physiological
modalities (EEG, EOG, EMG, etc.) have also been used, where they analyze the measurements for
features resembling sleep [12, 32–43]. In this thesis, microsleep is only considered from physiological
measurements, therefore the definition of microsleep will be based on physiological measurements.
A summary of microsleep definitions from 13 published papers is shown in Table 2.1. In most
studies, a PSG setup was used, although the microsleep definition was based on only a few modalities.
All of the studies required EEG for the definition of microsleep, with some studies additionally utilizing
EOG measurements [32, 35–37], EMG measurements [38, 39] or face videography [42]. There seemed
to be an agreement for the criteria of an event being microsleep, with the majority of studies defining it
by a slowing or disappearance of alpha activity and an intrusion of theta or delta activity. Additionally,
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Microsleep
7
studies used slow eye movements, sharp vertex waves or eyelid closure as supplementary features to aid
in identifying microsleep [32, 35, 36, 42]. Some studies utilized the AASM scoring guidelines for defining
microsleep, simply as a non-REM [38, 39] or REM sleep stage within a set duration [32]. Only one study
insisted that the criteria for microsleep should be fulfilled on all EEG channels [35], although the other
studies considered microsleep as a local phenomenon (occurring in at least one channel). Furthermore,
most studies included the requirement for the EEG signal to be uncontaminated by movement, blinking,
or other artifacts. There was some variation in the duration criteria for microsleep. One study set a
minimum duration of 1 second [42], while another had no upper limit of duration and that it only needed
to be longer than 3 seconds [35]. However, the majority of studies set the duration for microsleep to be
3 to 15 seconds.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Microsleep
8
Table 2.1: Summary of studies defining microsleep. The table includes the type of data, duration,
modalities, and criteria used for defining microsleep. PVT: Psychomotor and Vigilance
Task. O-MWT: OSLER-MWT, a modified version of MWT.
Author
(Year)
Data
Duration
Modalities
Criteria
Des Champs de
Boishebert et al.
(2021) [32]
MWT
3 – 15 s
EEG
EOG
• Appearance of theta or
delta waves with disappearing
alpha with eyes closed
• Slow eye movements
Morrone et al.
(2020) [37]
MWT
3 – 15 s
EEG
EOG
• Intrusion of theta rhythms
• No EEG, EOG or EMG artefacts
Annis et al.
(2020) [12]
MWT
3 – 14 s
EEG
• Slowing the EEG
• Dominant theta activity
Savuet et al.
(2020) [38]
Arnal et al.
(2015) [39]
MSLT
3 – 14 s
EEG
EOG
ECG
EMG
• AASM N1, N2, N3 [27]
within duration limit
• Preceded by 15 seconds
of wakefulness
Bougard et al.
(2020) [40]
(2018) [41]
PVT [40]
MWT [41]
3 – 14 s
EEG
EOG
• Alpha activity replace
by theta activity
• Artifact free
Hertig-Godeschalk
et al.
(2019) [42]
MWT
1 – 15 s
EEG
EOG
Video
• Predominant irregular theta
activity
• Absent alpha activity with
simultaneous dropping beta activity
• Eyelids closed ≥80%
Boyle et al.
(2008) [43]
PVT
3 – 14 s
EEG
• Artifact free
• Theta replaces alpha activity
Blavias et al.
(2007) [33]
MSLT
3 – 15 s
EEG
• Dominant theta activity
• Absence of alpha activity
Paul et al.
(2005) [34]
PVT
3 – 14 s
EEG
• Artifact free
• Theta replaces alpha activity
Priest et al.
(2001) [35]
O-MWT
≥3 s
EEG
EOG
• Theta rhythm replacing alpha
rhythm or appearing on a
background of desynchronized EEG
on all four EEG channels,
and without eye-blinking artifacts
• Slow eye movements.
Harrison, Y., &
Horne, J. A.
(1996) [36]
MSLT
5 – 14 s
EEG
EOG
• Increase in theta activity
• Decrease in alpha activity
• No blink or movement artifacts in
EEG or EOG
• Presence of clearly defined
sharp vertex wave
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Microsleep
9
2.2.2
Scoring Guidelines
Microsleep scoring guidelines were developed from the aforementioned literature review on the definition
of microsleep, these guidelines can be seen in full detail in Appendix A.1.1. The content of the microsleep
scoring guidelines includes which modalities to use, required and supplementary features for identifying
microsleep, the duration criteria, as well as a schematic flowchart on how to score microsleep. The
modalities required for scoring microsleep are at least two frontal, central, and occipital EEG derivations
and preferably two EOG derivations. The required features for a segment to be microsleep is an intrusion
of theta activity with diminishing alpha activity or slowing of background EEG (depending on whether
the subject generates alpha activity during wake). The EEG and EOG signals must be artifact free
and slow-eye movement and vertex sharp waves can be used as supplementary features. The duration
of microsleep is defined as ≥3 and ≤15 seconds. Due to the fact that sleep technicians are skilled at
scoring sleep stages according to AASM guidelines [27], an alternative route for scoring microsleep was
included. If any AASM defined sleep stage was identified and within the set duration criteria it should
be scored as microsleep [32, 38, 39]. A schematic flowchart for scoring microsleep can be seen in Figure
2.4.
Figure 2.4: Schematic illustration for identifying and scoring microsleep.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Microsleep
10
Example: Scoring Microsleep
In order to give a better understanding of microsleep scoring, a walk-through example of the scoring
guidelines will be given for a 30 second segment of EEG and EOG signals. In Figure 2.5, two EOG
derivations (E1-M1 and E2-M1) and two occipital EEG derivations (O1-M2 and O2-M1) are shown,
along with the time-frequency estimate (spectrogram) of the respective EEG derivations. For analyzing
this signal segment for microsleep, the flowchart in Figure 2.4 will be used in a step-by-step process:
1. There is a strong presence of alpha activity in the EEG signals as can be seen from 0 to 15
seconds and after 25 seconds.
Furthermore, the EOG signal in these time intervals includes
blinks, suggesting wakefulness. Hence, it can be deduced that the subject generates alpha activity
during wakefulness.
→Follow ”Yes” from the top block in the flowchart.
2. By examining the EEG signals and their power spectral estimates, it can be seen that shortly
after 15 seconds, the alpha activity diminishes and there is increased theta activity (particularly
in O1 from approximately second 18 to 25).
→Follow ”Yes” from the second block in the flowchart.
3. There are no signs of movement or blinking artifacts masking the EEG signals.
→Follow ”No” from the artifact block in the flowchart.
4. Alpha activity begins diminishing around second 16 with intruding theta activity thereafter until
approximately second 25, when alpha activity emerges again. This segment is approximately 9
seconds long and within the duration criteria of microsleep.
→Follow ”Yes” from duration criteria block in the flowchart and score segment as microsleep.
• Additionally, slow eye movement can be seen in the EOG signal during the suspected microsleep
segment.
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Neural Networks
11
Figure 2.5: Example of microsleep in a 30 second segment. The top two subplots show the EOG
derivations (E1-M1 and E2-M1), the middle subplots show the occipital EEG derivations
(O1-M2 and O2-M1) and their corresponding spectrograms (0dB = 1µV 2/Hz) in the
bottom two subplots. The spectrogram was obtained using the Burg method with a 16th
order AR model with a moving window size of 1 second with a step size of 0.2 seconds,
and frequency resolution of 0.2 Hz. The green shaded area marks the microsleep event.
2.3
Neural Networks
Manual sleep scoring is a diﬀicult and tedious task. In the past two decades, there have been numerous
methods developed for automatic sleep scoring. The highest performing methods use artificial neural
networks (ANN). They have become increasingly popular in numerous fields, including sleep research.
They are trained to find underlying, non-linear relationships between the data and a given task through
supervised learning. In the following sections, a basic introduction to ANN will be given, including
their structures and the different types available, how they are trained, as well as different applications
of ANN in low labelled data regimes.
2.3.1
Feed-Forward Neural Networks
Intuitively, ANNs are often conceptualized like the brain, where millions of interconnected neurons pass
on information from one to another via synapses. Although ANN share a similar structure as neural
networks in the brain, they are far simpler. In order to understand neural networks, it is best to start
with a simple network, let us first consider a feed-forward neural network (FFNN) and walk through
the forward propagation of the network. A FFNN with one hidden layer (containing M hidden neurons)
and two layers of weights (denoted by w) is shown in Figure 2.6.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Neural Networks
12
Figure 2.6: A schematic illustration of FFNN with D many inputs, M hidden units in one hidden
layer, and K outputs..
In the case of supervised learning, we have inputs with associated targets or labels. The network
shown above has D many inputs x and K many outputs y. The computations of neural networks are
layered, where each layer computes a weighted sum of the output from the previous neurons (a) and
applies a non-linear function (h) to the weighted sum. Considering that for the first layer, the network
input x is processed by computing
a(1)
j
=
D
X
i=1
w(1)
ji xi + w(1)
j0
(2.1)
z(1)
j
= h1

a(1)
j

(2.2)
where a(1)
j
is the weighted sum of the inputs for neuron j in the first layer, h1 is the non-linear function
of the first layer and z(1)
j
is the output of the neuron j in the first layer. The terms of aj can be
simplified by adding an extra input x0 which is always set to one and extending the sum:
a(1)
j
=
D
X
i=0
w(1)
ji xi
(2.3)
As mentioned earlier, the outputs of the previous neurons are then passed to the next layer in the same
way. Therefore the computations for the second layer (output layer) are as follows:
a(2)
j
=
M
X
i=0
w(2)
ji z(1)
i
(2.4)
yj = h2

a(2)
j

(2.5)
Although this forward propagation was through a small network, the same equations hold for deep
networks which contain more hidden layers.
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Neural Networks
13
2.3.2
Activation Functions
The equations previously explained are similar to that of a simple linear model. However, it is the non-
linear functions, often referred to as activation functions, which allow neural networks to learn complex
non-linear relationships between the input and the output. If it were not for these activation functions,
the entire network could be collapsed down to a simple linear regression model. There are various
activation functions which can be used, most commonly tanh, rectified-linear unit (ReLU), sigmoid and
softmax functions.
sigmoid(x) =
1
(1 + e−x)
(2.6)
tanh(x) = ex −ex
ex + e−x
(2.7)
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
(2.8)
The activation of these functions can be seen in Figure 2.7
Figure 2.7: Morphology of the sigmoid, ReLu, tanh and ELU activation functions for input [−10, 10].
As can be seen from Figure 2.7, the different functions map the input to an output of different
ranges. The sigmoid function projects the input to a range (0, 1), the tanh function onto a range of
(−1, 1), and the ReLU function projects it to (0, ∞]. The exponential linear unit (ELU) activation is
particularly displayed since it is used in the models within this thesis. It resembles the ReLU function,
but differs for negative values, giving it a smooth transition unlike ReLU. It has the benefit of shorter
training time and higher accuracy for neural networks [44]. The ELU function is as follows, with α
commonly equal to 1:
ELU(x) =
(
x
x ≥0
α(ex −1),
x ≤0
The softmax function is usually exclusively used for the output layer of a classification neural network,
where it uses all the output neurons and transforms each output to a probability distribution.
softmax(zi) =
ezi
P
j ezj
(2.9)
2.3.3
Loss Functions
It has been summarized how input to a neural network is propagated through the layers of the network
to generate a prediction. But it is necessary to be able to evaluate how close the prediction is to the
target based on the model parameters. In doing so we must define a loss function, E(w), which measures
how far the output of the network, y(x), is from the target t. When training neural networks using
supervised learning the dataset must have input-output pairs, where the input x has a corresponding
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Neural Networks
14
target t. So let’s consider a dataset with N observations D = {(xn, yn)|n = 1, . . . , N}. Loss functions
are built on maximizing the likelihood function of the model output against the true target:
p(t1, . . . , tN|x1, . . . , xN, w) =
N
Y
n=1
p(tn|xn, w)
(2.10)
This states that the optimal model parameters are the ones that result in model ouputs that are
closest to the targets. However, this equation refers to a regression problem, where the targets are
continuous and it follows the assumptions of the observations being independent and identically dis-
tributed. In the case of a classification problem, the targets are discrete or categorical. When working
with classification problems and neural networks, the target labels are often converted using one-hot
encoding, where discrete values are mapped to an array of zeros with the target value set to one. An ex-
ample of one-hot encoding of a 3 class problem where the middle class is the target would be t = [0, 1, 0].
Now the maximum likelihood function above can be transformed for a classification problem, using the
one-hot encoded target labels.
p(tn|xn, w) =
K
Y
k=1
[yk(xn)]tnk
(2.11)
where K is the number of classes and tnk is the one-hot encoded target. In this case, it is only the prob-
ability of the correct probability which is selected, as for encodings corresponding to zeros [yk(xn)]0 = 1.
This equation can be extended to all observations by adding a product over the observations.
p(tn|xn, w) =
N
Y
n=1
K
Y
k=1
[yk(xn)]tnk
(2.12)
The probability distribution of the targets ¯p(tn|xn) is known and we also have the probability
distribution of the estimated likelihood function p(tn|xn, w). Now it is possible to quantify the difference
(”distance”) between these two distributions using the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD).
KLD(¯p||p) =
X
tn
¯p(tn|xn)log
 ¯p(tn|xn)
p(tn|xn, w)

=
X
tn
¯p(tn|xn) (log(¯p(tn|xn)) −log(p(tn|xn, w))
=
X
tn
¯p(tn|xn)log(¯p(tn|xn)) −
X
tn
¯p(tn|xn)log(¯p(tn|xn, w))
(2.13)
Note that our loss function E(w) pertains to the parameters (weights) of the model. Therefore,
we are only interested in the second term in Equation 2.13 and we want to minimize this function to
obtain the optimal parameters of the model. By inserting Equation 2.12 into the logarithm and the
distribution of the target labels, we obtain:
E(w) = −
N
X
n=1
K
X
k=1
tnklog(yk(xn))
(2.14)
This equation is defined as the cross entropy loss, which is one of the most common loss functions
used when training neural networks in multi-class classification tasks. Note that if the classification
problem only contains two classes, the cross-entropy function simplifies down to a binary cross-entropy
function:
E(w) = −
N
X
n=1
[tnlog(yk(xn)) + (1 −tn)log(1 −yk(xn))]
(2.15)
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Neural Networks
15
2.3.4
Stochastic Gradient Descent and Backpropagation
In the previous section, we defined loss functions E(w), which quantify how close the probability outputs
of our model are to the target label. In this section, it will be shown how the loss is used to update the
weights of the model to improve predictions of the model. When training a model, it is the objective
to maximize the likelihood of the model predictions through a minimization problem, i.e. minimizing
the loss. Due to the non linear properties of neural networks the problem of minimizing E(w) is a
non-convex problem, meaning that there are numerous local minima (see Figure 2.8).
Figure 2.8: A conceptual sketch of the optimization problem of minimizing E(w) in the space of
weights w1 and w2. The points WA and WB refer to weights in local minima and Wc
refers to the weights at the point of the gradient operation. Adapted from [45].
The updates of the weights are done by making use of the fact that the loss function is differentiable,
so the gradient information is used to guide the search of finding a local minima and thus optimal
weights. This process is called gradient descent, however when training neural networks a subset of
the data (training data) is used, thus making the process a stochastic gradient descent. The gradient
descent process essentially consists of changing the weights in steps with a step size η (often referred to
as learning rate) opposite the parameter gradient direction:
wnew = w −η∇E(w)
(2.16)
where ∇is the parameter gradient operator. Since E(w) is a scalar function, when ∇is applied to E(w)
it produces a vector where the j-th component of the vector is the derivative of E(w) with respect to
the j-th parameter.
Neural networks are layered models, so a method called backpropagation is used to eﬀiciently com-
pute the gradients in each layer of the model. This is achieved through the chain-rule of differentiation:
∂f(g(w))
∂w
= ∂f(g)
∂g

g=g(w)
∂g(w)
∂w
(2.17)
We are interested in updating the weights of the model, therefore we take the derivative of the loss
function with respect to w. If we consider a FFNN with L layers, the gradient with respect to a weight
in the last layer can be calculated as:
∂E(w)
∂w(L)
ji
=
K
X
k=1
∂E(w)
∂a(L)
k
∂a(L)
k
∂w(L)
ji
(2.18)
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Neural Networks
16
observe that the weight w dependencies in E(w) are through the output of the last layer a(L)
1
, . . . , a(L)
K .
Then if this were to be extended to layers further back than the last layer, e.g. L −1, the equation
would be:
∂E(w)
∂w(L−1)
ji
=
K
X
k=1
∂E(w)
∂a(L)
k
∂a(L)
k
∂a(L−1)
k
∂a(L−1)
k
∂w(L)
ji
(2.19)
Now if we were to apply this to our example of a FFNN in Figure 2.6, the gradient for the weights
in the second layer would be:
∂E(w)
∂w(2)
kj
=
K
X
k=1
∂E(w)
∂h2
∂h2
∂w(2)
kj
(2.20)
Note that the a(2)
1 , . . . , a(2)
K are nested inside the activation function h2, and therefore the replacement
in the equation. This could then be further extended to the weights in the first layer:
∂E(w)
∂w(1)
ji
=
K
X
k=1
∂E(w)
∂h2
∂h2
∂h1
∂h1
∂w(1)
ji
(2.21)
Therefore, the process consists of forward propagating an input through the network, then calcu-
lating the loss, calculating the gradient operator with respect to each weight in the network through
backpropagation, and updating the weights in the opposite direction of the gradient parameter by step
size η. This process is then iteratively repeated until an adequate training loss is achieved. There are
numerous parameters to control for when training a network, such as the learning rate, momentum,
and regularization. Furthermore, training tricks such as mini-batching and early stopping can be used.
This section only provided a general overview neural networks and their training, to get further detail
please review [46].
2.3.5
Convolutional Neural Networks
The previous sections focused on a simple FFNN, which receives an input of one-dimension and out-
puts a prediction through fully connected hidden layers (dense layers). But can neural networks be
used for other input data, such as images (two-dimensional)? Images are essentially matrices of pix-
els which can be flattened to a one-dimensional array and passed through a simple FFNN to make
predictions. Although, it would likely result in poor performance because we lose spatial information.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) make use of spatial information using convolutional filters and
work exceptionally well on two- and three-dimensional data. A CNN can be used for classification by
extracting meaningful features from the input which are subsequently used in a fully connected FFNN
for classification. An illustrative example of a CNN can be seen in Figure 2.9
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Neural Networks
17
Figure 2.9: A schematic illustration of a convolutional neural network. Adapted from [47].
The feature learning part of a CNN usually consists of three operations performed in multiple series:
i) Convolution, ii) Activation, and iii) Pooling. A convolutional layer uses a kernel of weights of some
size n × m. This kernel is moved along the input and performs element-wise multiplication between the
kernel weights and a corresponding patch of the input. An illustrative example of this operation can
be seen in Figure 2.10
Figure 2.10: A schematic illustration of an input image (green) processed by convolutional layer using
a kernel (yellow) with set of weights (red digits).
On the right is the result of the
convolutional operation of the image using the kernel. Image adapted from [47].
The size of the kernel is determined in the model design, as well as the way it is moved (stride) along
the input and the resulting dimensionality (kernel size and padding). The output of the convolution is
a new matrix, usually of reduced dimensionality. However, the output can also be of equal or increased
size if padding is used. Note that a convolutional layer can consist of K many kernels, which results in
K many outputs of the processed input. The output of the convolutional layer is then passed through an
activation function, chosen by design. Thereafter, a pooling operation is applied to the output matrix.
The pooling operation is used to further decrease the dimensionality and extract dominant features.
The pooling operation works in a similar way as the convolutional layer, where a patch of the input is
processed by moving a window over the data and computing a value from that patch. The value is ei-
ther computed as the maximum value (Max Pooling) or an average (Average Pooling) within that patch.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Neural Networks
18
2.3.6
Recurrent Neural Networks
Humans have the ability to store information and use it later on when processing new information, much
like when reading this thesis, understanding is accumulated based on the information from previous
sections. The neural networks summarized in the previous sections lack the ability to process a sequence
of data and share information throughout the sequence of data. Recurrent neural networks (RNN)
address this issue, they are networks with loops in them that allow information to persist and be passed
on. RNN can be thought of as multiple copies of the same network receiving inputs at different time
points, where information processed by the networks is passed between each other which allows for
capturing the temporal context of sequence data (e.g. text, videos or time series). In order to capture
long and short term dependencies of the data, a specialized type of RNN needs to be used: a long short
term memory network (LSTM). Humans have the ability to store information and use it later on when
processing new information, much like when reading this thesis, understanding is accumulated based
on the information from previous sections. The neural networks summarized in the previous sections
lack the ability to process a sequence of data and share information throughout the sequence of data.
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) address this issue, they are networks with loops in them that allow
information to persist and be passed on. RNN can be thought of as multiple copies of the same network
receiving inputs at different time points, where the networks transfer processed information between
each, thus capturing the temporal context in sequence data (e.g. text, videos or time series). In order
to capture long and short term dependencies of the data, a specialized type of RNN needs to be used:
a long short term memory network (LSTM).
When using simple RNN, they are unable to capture long term dependencies due to the vanishing
gradient problem (see [48] for more information). LSTM networks address this problem by using gated
hidden units. Consider the following LSTM network in Figure 2.11, which is composed of a chain of
neural networks connected by the specialized LSTM module.
Let’s consider some sequence data x, where xt is data at time point t. In the LSTM network there is
a cell state Ct, which saves information about long and short term changes of the input and works as a
Figure 2.11: Chain of neural networks connected using an LSTM module. The input to the networks
is sequence data x at time point xt, the cell state and the hidden state of the modules
are Ct and ht at time point t, respectively. The image also shows the forget gate ft,
input gate it, output gate ot, and cell candidate ˜Ct at time point t. Image adapted from
[49].
==PAGE:26==
2.3 Neural Networks
19
conveyor belt that passes information along the chain of networks. The saved information is regulated
by gates which have the ability to remove or add information to the cell state. These gates include an
input gate it and a forget gate ft. The forget gate decides which information to discard from the cell
state by using the hidden state from the previous network ht−1 and the new input xt:
ft = σ (Wf · [ht−1, xt] + bf)
(2.22)
where σ is the sigmoid function, W and b are weights and bias terms (Wf and bf refers to the forget
gate), and [ht−1, xt] is the previous hidden state and the current input concatenated. The output of the
forget layer is in the range of [0, 1], where 1 represents information to definitely keep and 0 information
to definitely forget. The next step is to decide which information to store in the cell state. This is
performed in two steps: first the input gate decides which values to update, then candidate values ˜Ct
are computed which can be added to the cell state.
it = σ (Wi · [ht−1, xt] + bi)
(2.23)
˜Ct = tanh (Wc · [ht−1, xt] + bc)
(2.24)
Now the old cell state Ct−1 can be updated as a new cell state Ct as follows:
Ct = ft ∗Ct−1 + it ∗˜Ct
(2.25)
where the first term is ”forgetting” information from the previous cell state and then the updated
information to store is added to the cell state in the second term. Lastly, it is decided what is going to
be the output of this module (ht) and passed on forward in the current network and communicated to
adjacent networks. The output is a filtered version of the cell state Ct. First, a sigmoid layer decides
which parts of the cell state are going to be in the output. Then the current cell state is put through a
tanh function to push values between −1 and 1 which is then multiplied with the output of the sigmoid
gate so that the output only contains parts that we decide.
ot = σ (Wo · [ht−1, xt] + bo)
(2.26)
ht = ot ∗tanh(Ct)
(2.27)
This memory allows the neural networks to learn the temporal context of the sequence data. Note
that the trainable parameters of the modules in LSTM layers are the weights and bias term (W, b).
Through training an LSTM network these weights learn to capture long and short term temporal context
from the input.
2.3.7
Transfer Learning
Deep neural networks (DNN) are complex algorithms that require vast amounts of data in order to
perform well. There may be scenarios where one would like to use deep neural networks to solve a
specific task with a small dataset, but how can that be achieved considering the data requirements of
DNN? Transfer learning is a technique where a model with priori knowledge is adjusted for a new, but
related task. It does so by using the knowledge learnt from one domain to learn a new task with the
small amount of data available, thus reducing the requirement of data.
A domain D refers to a features space X of n dimensions where X = {x1, . . . , xn}. In transfer
learning, the domain where priori knowledge was obtained is called the source domain (DS), and the
domain of the new task with unknown knowledge is called the target domain (DT ). A task is a learning
objective that consists of a label space Y and a prediction function θ(·). In this, context the labels of
the source and target would be YS and YT , respectively. Therefore, the task of the source and target
domain would be TS = {YS|θ(XS)} and TT = {YT |θ(XT )}, respectively. Note that there is a condition
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Neural Networks
20
that either the domains or tasks are different but similar to some extent (DS ̸= DT or TS ̸= TT ).
Therefore, transfer learning is when there is a difference between the domains or tasks, and the priori
knowledge in DS to solve TS can be transferred to the target domain DT to solve TT .
When utilizing transfer learning in the context of DNN, a model which has been trained in a source
domain is fine-tuned in the target domain. Fine-tuning is the process of training a pre-trained model in
the target domain, where the weights of certain layers or the entire model are re-trained. In cases where
the source and target tasks differ (TS ̸= TT ) then the output layer is often replaced according to the
target task, e.g. when the source task is to classify 5 sleep stages and the target task is to classify wake
or sleep (2 class problem). A schematic illustration of fine-tuning a DNN is shown in Figure 2.12.
Figure 2.12: Schematic illustration of transfer learning of DNN using fine-tuning. This example shows
a pre-trained model trained on a large source dataset on a source task. The pre-trained
model output layer is then replaced according to the target task and certain layers of
the model are fine-tuned on a target task using a smaller target dataset. This example
is the scenario of DS = DT and TS ̸= TT .
2.3.8
Self-supervised Learning
Another promising approach for using deep learning with low data availability is self-supervised learning
(SSL). Unlike the other methods discussed in the previous sections, SSL is an unsupervised learning
technique. That means that learning is not solely performed using labelled input and output pairs, but
instead, the structure of the data is exploited to provide supervision. SSL is comprised of a ”pretext”
and a ”downstream” task. An example of a pretext task would be providing a model with an input
image where patches of the image had been shuffled (like a jigsaw puzzle) and the objective of the
model was to reorganize the image back to its original structure. In this scenario, the known input
data can be used as a target for the output of the model, thus the data itself has been exploited to
provide supervision. Considering that the model performs this task reasonably well, it is plausible that
the model has learned some of the structure of the image and can be used as a feature extractor or a
starting point in a supervised learning problem (downstream task). The downstream task is essentially
the task of actual interest, but which lacks or has limited labelled data, e.g. classifying sleep stages
using a small dataset. The use of SSL and other pretext tasks for EEG signals are provided in Section
3.2.4 and for more detailed information on SSL please refer to [20].
==PAGE:28==
2.4 State of the Art
21
2.4
State of the Art
In order to conduct relevant and meaningful research, it is essential to perform a literature review of
state-of-the-art papers within the research topic. This section includes a summary of 13 published
papers which relate to the objective of this thesis: Automatic Detection of Microsleep Events using
Modified Sleep Staging Techniques. The papers reviewed in this state-of-the-art review span a wide
range within technology and sleep research, from the development of a microsleep scoring criteria, signal
processing, machine learning techniques and complex deep learning networks to detect microsleep. This
section concludes with a summary of the reviewed papers, along with key take-away points.
2.4.1
Search Methodology
The topic of automatic microsleep detection is a relatively untouched research avenue and therefore
requires precise and vigorous search in the literature. In finding the most relevant research papers
certain search procedures and criteria were used.
The main search engines used were DTU Findit and Google Scholar with the following keywords:
Microsleep, Deep Learning, Automatic Detection, Machine Learning, EEG, Polysomnygraphy. In order
to ensure that the published papers were of high quality they had to be be published by a recognized
scientific journal (e.g. IEEE, Nature, SLEEP) and preferably published in the last 5 −10 years. An
additional criteria was set for papers pertaining to microsleep detection, i.e. the data used in the study
should preferably be scored for microsleep using physiological signals (e.g. EEG or EOG) and not by
behavioural assessment. The literature review also included research papers on automatic sleep stage
classification with unique abilities which could be used for microsleep detection.
2.4.2
Literature review
The following sections are summaries of the selected papers including their objectives, data, methods,
results and personal remarks. Note that the summary of four papers are listed in Appenidx A.1.2.
Microsleep episodes in the borderland between wakefulness and sleep
Hertig-Godeschalk, Skorucak, Malafeev, Achermann, Mathis, and Schreier (2020) [42]
The objective of this study was to explore the borderland and transition between wakefulness and sleep
through the development of a continuous and high-resolution wake-sleep criteria (BERN).
Data Description:
MWT recordings of 76 patients which included standard EEG, EOG, EMG,
respiratory flow, and face videography. The EEG signals were sampled at 200 Hz, filtered via a 70 Hz
LP and 0.3 Hz HP filter and a 50 Hz powerline notch filter.
Method:
The BERN criteria scored MSE of 1 −15 s duration using visual analysis of the occipital
EEG leads, face videography and EOG. The classification was primarily focused on wakefulness and
microsleep episodes (MSEs), with the additional classes of MSE candidates (MSEc) and episodes of
drowsiness (ED). Wakefulness was defined according to the AASM scoring guidelines with the exception
that it could be of any duration more than 1 s. MSE were identified in a similar manner as N1 (according
to AASM guidelines [27]) with the additional criteria of ≥80% eyelid closure according to the facial
videography. More detailed explanation of the classification can be seen in Figure A.6 in Appendix
A.1.2. Interscorer reliability of the BERN criteria was calculated using two independent expert scorings.
The visual scoring was compared with spectral feature analysis of the EEG data to obtain an
objective and quantitative measure of the visual scoring. The occipital EEG derivations were represented
as a spectrogram, using an AR model of order 16. Quantitative features were derived from the data:
==PAGE:29==
2.4 State of the Art
22
powerbands (delta, alpha, theta, and beta),
θ
α+β ratio (T/AB), median EEG frequency (range: 0.8-26
Hz) and eye movements (ratio of delta in EOG and occipital EEG). Lastly, descriptive statistics of
scored MSEs were derived and analyzed. The aforementioned steps are illustrated in Figure 2.13
Figure 2.13: Schematic illustration of the methods in developing the BERN scoring criteria.
Results:
Comparison of the BERN scoring criteria to quantitative features revealed the following
characteristics in the transition from wakefulness to MSE:
• Diminished alpha activity along with a drop in beta activity followed by increased theta activity.
• Increase in the T/AB ratio
• Reduced median frequency in EEG
The EEG features of MSEs were also partially relevant for MSEc, but no clear pattern was identified
for ED. Therefore, the differentiation from wakefulness to MSE should be most prominent, but most
diﬀicult between wakefulness and ED. Interscorer reliability calculations yield a substantial identification
of MSE versus wakefulness (kappa = 0.75 ± 0.08) and slight identification of MSEc versus wakefulness
(kappa = 0.19 ± 0.04) and of ED versus wakefulness (kappa = 0.07 ± 0.02).
Remarks:
This study provides the most detail, as well as most strict, scoring criteria for microsleep.
Their data is publicly available (https://zenodo.org/record/3251716#.Yqr6W6hByUk [50]). The data
and scoring criteria in this study could be used in addition to other MWT data available for this thesis.
The ambiguous definition of MSEc and ED, and their low interscorer reliability raises concern. Perhaps,
MSEc and ED should be ignored in this thesis or clustered with MSE and Wake, making it a two class
problem. The inclusion of MSEc and ED should be considered carefully.
Automatic detection of microsleep episodes with feature-based machine
learning
Skorucak, Hertig-Godeschalk, Schreier, Malafeev, Mathis, and Achermann (2020) [16]
The objective of this study was to automatically detect microsleep using feature-based machine learning.
Data Description:
The data used in this study were MWT recordings of 76 patients with annotations
from Hertig-Godeschalk et al. [42]. The data included standard EEG, EOG, EMG, respiratory flow,
and face videography. The EEG signals were sampled at 200 Hz, filtered via a 70 Hz LP and 0.3 Hz
HP filter and a 50 Hz powerline notch filter. This study only used occipital EEG derivations (O2-M1
and O1-M2) and EOG.
==PAGE:30==
2.4 State of the Art
23
Method:
Initially, ECG artifacts were removed using an pattern detection and subtraction algorithm
[51]. Spectral analysis of the EEG was performed using an AR model of order 16 (Burg method [52])
with a 1 s moving window in steps of 200 ms. Thereafter, the following 7 features were extracted from
EOG and EEG (O2-M1 and O1-M2):
• EEG powerbands
(delta: 0.8 −4 Hz, theta: 4 −8 Hz, alpha: 8 −12, beta: 12 −26 Hz)
• EEG T/AB ratio (=
alpha
theta+beta)
• Median EEG frequency [0.8 −26Hz]
• Eye movement approximation as ratio between EEG delta power and EOG delta power.
In total this resulted in 14 features (7 from each occipital channel).
They used three different
classifiers: Random Forrest (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and an LSTM. These classifiers
were trained and tested to classify 200 ms segments as either wakefulness or MSE. The RF classifier
consisted of 100 tress (RF-100) and the SVM utilized a radial basis function (RBF) as a kernel. The
LSTM network had 14 input neurons, 2 LSTM layers (100 neurons each), followed by a dropout layer,
fully connected layer (2 neurons), sofmax layer, and classification layer. The classifiers were trained
and tested using a 70/30 split, respectively. They additionally investigated feature importance of the
classifiers. The method process is illustrated in Figure 2.14.
Figure 2.14: Schematic illustration of the methods used in Skorucak et al. [16].
Results:
The performance of the classifiers are summarized in Table 2.2. The highest performing
classifier is the LSTM across all classification problems, whereas RF-100 and SVM have similar perfor-
mance. The classification performance decreases drastically by including unilateral MSE, MSEc and
ED. The classification performance of the LSTM slightly outperformed human scoring, with an average
kappa of 0.68, whereas the human interscorer kappa was 0.67 (average across 5 recordings).
Table 2.2: Mean Cohen’s kappa across patients in the test set and standard error of the mean for
all classifiers across different classification problems. The classification problems consist of
different merging approaches for bilateral (”b” prefix) and unilateral (”u” prefix) merging
of labels.
Classification Problem / Classifier
RF-100
SVM
LSTM
bMSE vs bWake
0.75 ± 0.08
0.78 ± 0.08
0.83 ± 0.06
bMSE vs {bWake, uMSE, MSEc, uED}
0.63 ± 0.08
0.66 ± 0.07
0.68 ± 0.06
{bMse, uMSE, uMSEc, uED} vs bWake
0.52 ± 0.08
0.55 ± 0.08
0.58 ± 0.06
{bMSE, uMSE, uMSEc} vs {bWake, uED}
0.64 ± 0.08
0.66 ± 0.07
0.64 ± 0.08
Excluding features yielded high feature importance of eye movement for all three classifiers, addition-
ally T/AB ratio for RF-100 and alpha power for the SVM. The LSTM performance was only marginally
effect by excluding any feature, indicating that neural networks are robust.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 State of the Art
24
Remarks:
This study shows that feature-based machine learning, albeit simple, performs slightly
better than expert scoring. Furthermore, it shows that the use of neural networks (LSTM) has the
highest performance and is robust, compared to other standard machine learning (ML) classifiers. The
methods developed in this study are candidates for benchmark models in this thesis. They further
hypothesize that the LSTM performs better because it utilizes temporal context. It is also interesting
that the performance is heavily affected by including unilateral MSE, MSEc and ED labels in the
classification problem. Although, their results suggest that MSEc is closer to MSE and ED is closer to
wakefulness, which should be taken into account when using their data and scored labels.
Automatic Detection of Microsleep Episodes With Deep Learning
Malafeev, Hertig-Godeschalk, Schreier, Skorucak, Mathis, and Achermann (2021) [17]
The objective of this study was to automatically detect MSE using deep learning on raw data.
Data Description:
The data used in this study was the same data as in the previous two papers,
which had been scored using the BERN criteria [16, 42].
In this study, they only used raw EEG
derivations and EOG channels.
Method:
In this study, they used a random combination of one occipital EEG derivation and two
EOG channels (effectively doubling the training set). Band pass filtering (0.5 −45 Hz) was applied to
data using a Fourier filter, thereafter they standardized and clipped the data depending on the network
type. Additionally, to increase the robustness of the networks, they added Gaussian noise (σ = 0.0005)
to the data. They trained and validated numerous networks, i.e. 7 CNN networks of varying input
window size and subsequently depth, and 1 CNN-LSTM. The networks were constructed of numerous
layers consisting of convolution, batch normalization, activation function and max pooling, which output
was flattened before being passed through three dense layers and finally a softmax layer giving the class
probabilities (see Figure A.7 in Appendix A.1.2). The CNN-LSTM differed by containing two LSTM
layers and one dense layer following the flattening. In this study they classified all four classes (Wake,
MSE, MSEc and ED). They used a 70/15/15 train, validation and test split. Only the best performing
network was evaluated using the test dataset. The process is illustrated in Figure 2.15.
Figure 2.15: Schematic illustration of the implemented method.
They furthermore used t-SNE, a dimensionality reduction method, with the output of the last
feature layer to project the data on to onto a two-dimensional space to visualize the network’s internal
representation of the data.
Results:
The best performing network was a CNN with an input window of 16 seconds (CNN_16s),
which obtained the following Cohen’s kappa scores: Wake—0.59; MSE—0.69; MSEc—0.05; ED—0.11.
The performance of CNN_16s and of the inter-rater agreement was good for MSEs and wakefulness
(∼0.7), but poor for MSEc and ED (< 0.1).
The performance of the algorithms varied slightly
by the window length of the input. Correcting for class imbalances did not effect the performance.
==PAGE:32==
2.4 State of the Art
25
Visualization of the classes in the 2D feature space showed clear separation between Wake and MSE,
but not for MSEc and ED.
Remarks:
This study seems to be a valid candidate as a benchmark model, based on the data
and performance. The methods used in this study could be used as a starting point to build upon
and perhaps create a more robust and complex network which achieves higher performance.
It is
interesting to see how the performance varies with the amount of data the network sees, whereas it is
unaffected by the class imbalance between wake and MSE. There is further argument for the ambiguity
for the definition and scoring of MSEc and ED, where the network is unable to seperate the two. It is
questionable whether all classes should be included when using their data and scoring in this thesis.
U-Time: A Fully Convolutional Network for Time Series Segmentation Applied to
Sleep Staging
Perslev, Jensen, Darkner, Jennum, and Igel (2019) [53]
The objective of this study was to develop a general fully feed-forward deep learning approach to classify
fixed length time series of physiological signals, mainly developed for the analysis of sleep data.
Data Description:
The data used in this study is a collection PSG recordings from seven sleep
datasets, in total 1666 PSG recordings. The datasets span over a long time, measuring different cohorts
with different equipment. The datasets have all been annotated using verified scoring guidelines [27,
29].
Method:
All EEG signals were re-sampled to 100 Hz using polyphase filtering with automatically
derived FIR filter and they were individually scaled for each recording to median 0 and inter-quartile
range 1. The network they developed, U-Time, can take a signal(s) of custom length and output class
predictions at a custom rate. The input signal (EEG) to the model was set to 17.5 minutes which
should output class predictions at a rate of 1/30 Hz, i.e. 30 s epochs. The U-Time model consists of
three logical submodules:
• Encoder: takes the raw physiological signal and represents it by a deep stack of feature maps,
where the input is sub-sampled several times.
• Decoder: learns a mapping from the feature stack back to the input signal domain that gives a
dense point-wise segmentation.
• Segment Classifier: uses the dense segmentation to predict the final sleep stages at a chosen
temporal resolution.
An illustration of the process and U-Time network are illustrated in Figure 2.16
Figure 2.16: Schematic illustration of the methods used and the U-Time network.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 State of the Art
26
Results:
The U-Time performance had global F1-scores spanning from 0.68 to 0.79 on the different
datasets. For all datasets it had the highest or equal classification performance compared to other
state-of-the-art networks [54–58].
Remarks:
U-Time has good performance in classifying sleep stages, especially considering the minor
pre-processing performed. The network is particularly interesting as it is able to output classification
probabilities at a high temporal resolution. Therefore, this network could be used to classify MSE by
adjusting the output resolution to ≤1 s. Furthermore, the network can take any amount of input
channels, so that could be adjusted as well in case we want to include more EEG channels or apply a
multi-modal approach.
U-Sleep: resilient high-frequency sleep staging
Perslev, Darkner, Kempfner, Nikolic, Jennum, and Igel (2021) [18]
The objective of this study was to develop and validate a resilient high-frequency sleep staging net-
work (U-Sleep) on a large dataset of diverse cohorts and investigate the diagnostic information of high
resolution sleep staging.
Data Description:
This study used data consisting of 19, 924 PSG recordings from 15, 660 partici-
pants of 16 independent clinical studies, in total 21 datasets. The main signals of interest were EEG
and EOG channels.
Method:
The U-Sleep network is an adapted version of it’s predecessor (U-Time [53]), with some
modifications. Although, the U-Sleep network differs in numerous ways, e.g. it is much deeper with 12
endcoder- and decoder blocks, it has more trainable parameters, and performs feature mapping more
slowly by using smaller max-pooling kernels. Furthermore, the U-Sleep network uses ELU activation
functions and the final segment classifier uses two convolutional operations to allow for non-linear
weighted combinations. The U-Sleep network was trained and validated using all possible EEG and
EOG combinations. The input signals were resampled to 128 Hz, scaled using outlier robust scaling
and outlier values were clipped. Furthermore, augmentation was applied, by using a random subset
of batch elements which were partially or entirely replaced with Gaussian noise, in order to force the
model to consider both channels and complex distant relations in the signal. The U-sleep network uses
a segment length of 17.5 min to score epochs at a rate of 1/30 Hz. As the U-Sleep network uses all
combinations of EEG and EOG, it utilizes the predictions of each combination by combining them into
one final hypnodensity graph to make a final prediction of the segment. The methods and architecture
of this study are illustrated in 2.17.
Figure 2.17: Schematic illustration of the methods used and the U-Sleep network.
The U-Sleep network was trained, validated and tested using partial splits of 13 datasets and purely
tested using 8 unseen datasets. The network was also compared to consensus scoring of five experts on
two datasets of OSA and HC patients, as well as other well known sleep-staging networks.
==PAGE:34==
2.4 State of the Art
27
Furthermore, they investigated the usefulness of high-frequency sleep staging by classifying OSA
and HC patients. They used the U-Sleep network to make sleep stage predictions at frequencies of
2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 768, 1280, 1920, 3840, 7680 predictions/min.
They used the sleep stage
predictions to construct sleep stage transition triplets which were used as an input to a random forest
classifier.
Results:
The U-Sleep network achieved a mean global F1 score of 0.79 ± 0.03 across the 21 datasets
(minumum F1 = 0.73 and maximum F1 = 0.85). The U-Sleep network matched the best perform-
ing human expert on the HC subjects with an F1 score of 0.79 ± 0.07 and performed as well as the
SimpleSleepNet [59] and DeepSleepNet [54] models. Furthermore, it scored higher on Wake and N1
then all experts. For the OSA subjects, the U-Sleep network had the highest mean performance of F1
0.76 ± 0.1, and scored N1 higher than all human experts and Wake only slightly worse than one expert.
U-Sleep performed as well or better than the reference models [54, 59, 60]. Classification performance
of separating HC and OSA had a performance of a 0.6 F1 score with prediction resolution of 2 per
minute. However, the scoring performance increased when more than 128 predictions per minute were
made, then peaked and plateaued at 768 predictions per minute with an F1 score of 0.94.
Remarks:
The results of this study show that the U-Sleep network is highly robust and on par with
state-of-the-art networks in sleep stage scoring. More interestingly for the purpose of this thesis, it
shows equal or better classification performance of Wake and N1 compared to consensus scoring, which
is the transition state from wake to sleep and is useful for detecting microsleep. Furthermore, they
demonstrate the diagnostic information available when scoring sleep at a high resolution.
Perhaps,
a classification task between HC and OSA/narcolepsy/hyper-insomnia patients from the microsleep
detection can be used as an additional analysis in this thesis.
Automatic detection of cortical arousals in sleep and their contribution to
daytime sleepiness
Brink-Kjaer, Olesen, Peppard, Stone, Jennum, Mignot, and Sorensen (2020) [61]
The objective of this study was to automatically detect cortical arousal in sleep and their contribution
to daytime sleepiness. For the purpose of this thesis, the main focus will be on their multi modal deep
learning approach to detect arousal.
Data Description:
The data used in this study consisted of four sleep datasets of PSG recordings
which were annotated using the standard AASM guidelines and microarousal scoring was defined by
the AASM manual [27]. The model was trained on 2889 PSGs from two datasets, validated on 271
PSGs on datasets unseen in training and tested on 996 PSGs sampled from each dataset.
Method:
In this study, they used a multi modal approach for their deep learning model, using EMG,
EEG and EOG as input signals. The signals were pre-processed by first resampling the signal to 128 Hz
prior to filtering. An IIR band pass filter was used to remove powerline interference at 60 Hz and low
frequency artifacts. The IIR filters for the EEG and EOG signals had a passband range from 0.5 to 35
Hz, whereas the EMG signal was filtered with the passband starting at 10 Hz. Thereafter, RLS adaptive
filters were used to remove ECG and ocular movement artifacts in the EEG. The signals were finally
standardized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. The network consisted of
a CNN which design a set of features describing the input signals which was followed by a bi-directional
LSTM network and a fully connected layer with two heads for scoring {wake vs sleep} and {arousal vs
non-arousal}. The network architecture was heavily influenced by He et al. [62]. A detailed schematic
of the network is shown in Figure A.10 in the Appendix A.1.2. The output of the network consisted
of probabilities for arousal and wake at a rate of 1 Hz. These probabilities were post-processed using an
==PAGE:35==
2.4 State of the Art
28
optimal threshold which was found using a validation set, connecting events within a set duration and
discard short events. An illustration of the aforementioned methods are summarized in Figure 2.18.
Figure 2.18: Schematic illustration of the methods used to detect arousal vs non-arousal and wake vs
sleep.
Results:
Arousal events were detected with an F1 score of 0.76, and wake was detected with specificity
and recall of 0.96 and 0.92, respectively. However, arousal samples (predictions at 1 Hz) only had an
F1 score of 0.68. When the predicted arousal events were compared to consensus scoring, the model
performed significantly better than 5 experts and equally as well as 4 experts, with an performance
significantly better than the mean across all experts.
Remarks:
This study showed impressive results in automatically predicting arousal events and dis-
tinguishing wake from sleep. Although arousal events are not of interest in this thesis, they require
higher temporal resolution much like microsleep detection and in this study they demonstrate good
performance of such a task. The approach of applying a probability threshold in post-processing could
be utilized when automatically detecting microsleep from wake.
Automatic sleep stage classification using time–frequency images of CWT and
transfer learning using convolution neural network
Jadhav, Rajguru, Datta, and Mukhopadhyay (2020) [63]
The objective of this study was to use a pre-trained image classification model for transfer learning on
time-frequency images of EEG to perform automatic sleep staging.
Data Description:
The data used in this study is the Physionet Sleep EDF-x dataset [64], which
contains 61 PSG records from 42 subjects. These PSG records are composed of two full night PSG
recordings from 22 healthy subjects (except one subject which only had one recording) and one full night
PSG from 20 subjects reporting mild diﬀiculty sleeping. Each record contained two EEG channels (FPz-
Cz and Pz-Oz) with a sampling rate of 100 Hz, EOG and chin-EMG. The EEG channels were only used
in this study. The data contained manual scoring of sleep stages according to the AASM guidelines
[27].
Method:
The EEG signal was segmented into 30 second segments (epochs) according to the annotated
sleep stages. A 4-th order Butterworth BP filter (0.5 −32 Hz) was used to remove noise and artifacts
from the signal. Thereafter, each epoch was standardized by removing the mean and dividing by the
standard deviation. The time-frequency image of each epoch was calculated using a continuous wavelet
transform using three different mother wavelets; Analytic Morlet (Amor), Generalized Morse (Morse),
and Bump (Bump). The CWT scalograms were then rescaled to (224 × 224 × 3). In total 6 datasets
were generated from the combination of using either 1 or 5 epochs with the aforementioned mother
wavelets. The Squeezenet model [65], which is a CNN composed of convolutional, max-pooling, Fire,
==PAGE:36==
2.4 State of the Art
29
global average and softmax layers, was used as a base model for transfer learning. The Squeezenet
model was pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset [66], which contains 1000 classes (e.g. cars, dogs, cats,
etc.). Therefore, they replaced the output layer with a 5 node classification head, corresponding to
the sleep stages. The entire model was fine tuned on the time-frequency images of the EEG using
stochastic gradient descent with a learning rate of 0.001, momentum 0.9 and batch size of 512.
A
schematic illustration of the methods applied in this study are shown in Figure 2.19.
Figure 2.19: Schematic illustration of the methods used in Jadhav et al. [63].
Results:
The results from the study are summarized in Table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Transfer learning results using EEG channel FPz-Cz for the different combinations of
mother wavelets and input epoch lengths. The results include the per-class average sensi-
tivity (Sn) and specificity (Sp), as well as the overall accuracy.
Average
Overall
Epoch (s)
Wavelet
Sn
Sp
Accuracy
30
Morse
74.03
95.43
83.34
30
Bump
74.4
96.67
83.61
30
Amor
72.34
95.35
83.17
150
Morse
77.03
95.85
84.74
150
Bump
76.69
95.83
84.67
150
Amor
77.06
95.78
84.55
It can be seen that the performance does not vary much by the mother wavelet, but there is a slight
increase in performance when 5 epochs are used as input to the model. The highest performing method
uses a generalized Morse mother wavelet with of 5 epochs.
Remarks:
This study demonstrates the remarkable power of transfer learning, where they use a
base model, which was initially trained to classify cars, dogs, cats and other image classes, to classify
sleep stages from time-frequency images of EEG. Here, the source domain and target domain differ
substantially, as well as their task. However, they are able to fine-tune the feature representation from
Squeezenet on EEG to classify sleep stages, obtaining impressive results using a relatively small target
domain dataset.
Towards More Accurate Automatic Sleep Staging via Deep Transfer Learning
Phan, Chen, Koch, Lu, McLoughlin, Mertins, and De Vos (2021) [19]
The objective of this study was to develop a more accurate automatic sleep staging model in the case
of data-ineﬀiciency and data-variability using transfer learning.
==PAGE:37==
2.4 State of the Art
30
Data Description:
This study used four different datasets, one as the source domain and three
as target domains. The target datasets contained recordings which differed from the source domain
dataset in terms of recording measurements used. The severe data mismatch is due to the Surrey-
cEEGrid using behind-the-ear EEG measurements instead of the standard EEG placements. All of the
datasets contained sleep stage labels according to the AASM scoring guidelines [27] or a transformation
of the Rechshaffen and Kales stages [29]. The datasets are summarized in Table 2.4.
Table 2.4: Summary of datasets used in Phan et al. [19].
Domain
Dataset
# Subjects
EEG
EOG
EMG
Mismatch
Source
MASS
200
C4-A1
ROC-LOC
CHIN1-CHIN2
-
Target
Sleep-EDF-SC [64]
20
FPz-Cz
ROC-LOC
-
Slight
Sleep-EDF-ST [64]
22
FPz-Cz
ROC-LOC
Submental
Slight
Surrey-cEEGrid [67]
12
cEEGrid
ROC-A2
CHIN1-CHIN2
Severe
Method:
This study developed two models, SeqSleepNet+ and DeepSleepNet+. The models consist
of an epoch processing block (EPB), sequence processing block (SPB) and a softmax layer. In the EPB,
an input epoch is transformed into an epoch-wise feature vector. The SPB consisted of a bidirectional
recurrent layer which encoded the sequence of the generated epoch-wise features. The softmax layer
outputs the sleep probabilites of each index thorugh a shared layer to reduce the number of parameters
in the model. The two aforementioned models differ by their input, where the SeqSleepNet+ receives a
log-scale time-frequency representation as input and the DeepSleepNet+ receives the raw input signals.
More detailed schematics of the models can be seen in Figures A.12 and A.13 in Appendix A.1.2.
The models were pre-trained on the MASS dataset and then fine-tuned using the target datasets. They
varied the training between the source and target domains by alternating input measurements and
the layers of the pre-trained model to be fine-tuned. The input to the models were sequences of 20
epochs consisting of combinations or solely EEG, EOG and EMG. The models were pre-trained for 10
training epochs (i.e. iterations of the training dataset, not to be confused with 30 second epochs used
in sleep scoring) and then fine-tuned until no accuracy improvement was seen for 50 finetuning steps.
A simplified schematic illustration of the methods used in this study is shown in Figure 2.20.
Figure 2.20: Simplified schematic illustration of the methods used in Phan et al. [19]. Note that the
source and task refer to the dataset used for training a base model and fine-tuning a
pre-trained base model, respectively.
==PAGE:38==
2.4 State of the Art
31
Results:
The results of this study are summarized in Table 2.5, for different applications of transfer
learning and signal input to the aforementioned models.
Table 2.5: Summary of the results using different transfer learning methods and models for different
input channel combinations. FT: Pre-trained on source dataset and fine-tuned on task
dataset. DT: Pre-trained on source dataset and directly used on target dataset. S: Trained
on task dataset. κ: Cohen’s kappa.
Channels
Source
EEG - EOG - EMG
EEG - EOG
EEG
EOG
EEG
Task
EEG - EOG - EMG
EEG - EOG
EEG
EOG
EOG
Method - Model
TL
κ
κ
κ
κ
κ
Sleep-EDF-SC
FT - SeqSleepNet+
Yes
-
0.766
0.789
0.737
0.709
FT - DeepSleepNet+
Yes
-
0.782
0.781
0.713
0.707
DT - SeqSleepNet+
Yes
-
0.601
0.733
0.53
0.3
DT - DeepSleepNet+
Yes
-
0.586
0.651
0.396
0.235
S - SeqSleepNet+
No
-
0.744
0.746
0.688
0.688
S - DeepSleepNet+
No
-
0.744
0.731
0.652
0.652
Sleep-EDF-ST
FT - SeqSleepNet+
Yes
0.727
0.732
0.734
0.722
0.71
FT - DeepSleepNet+
Yes
0.722
0.721
0.738
0.682
0.661
DT - SeqSleepNet+
Yes
0.703
0.615
0.722
0.531
0.363
DT - DeepSleepNet+
Yes
0.645
0.6
0.541
0.586
0.116
S - SeqSleepNet+
No
0.709
0.711
0.667
0.693
0.693
S - DeepSleepNet+
No
0.634
0.629
0.603
0.574
0.574
Surrey-EEGrid
FT - SeqSleepNet+
Yes
0.762
0.752
0.65
0.758
0.749
FT - DeepSleepNet+
Yes
0.588
0.687
0.391
0.682
0.745
DT - SeqSleepNet+
Yes
0.062
0.051
-0.015
0.085
0.09
DT - DeepSleepNet+
Yes
0.025
0.02
0.012
0.214
0.195
S - SeqSleepNet+
No
0.748
0.739
0.597
0.737
0.737
S - DeepSleepNet+
No
0.535
0.534
0.195
0.579
0.579
It can be seen that fine-tuning the models in transfer learning increases the classification performance
for both models. When a pre-trained model is applied directly to the task data, the fine-tuning method
performs better by 10.3%, 5.6% and 62.2%. Furthermore, the fine-tuning also outperforms the model
being trained on the target data from scratch.
Remarks:
This study shows the boost in performance when using transfer learning (fine-tuning) when
automatically scoring sleep stages on a small task datasets with high data variability. They show that
the use of transfer learning performs better than training a new model from scratch on the small target
datasets, highlighting the benefits of utilizing more trained and robust networks as a starting point for
learning on new, scarce and varying data.
Uncovering the structure of clinical EEG signals with self-supervised learning
Banville, Chehab, Hyvärinen, Engemann, and Gramfort (2021) [20]
The objective of this study was to investigate self-supervised learning (SSL) to discover structure of
unlabeled data and learn the representations of EEG signals. They aimed to compare the utilization of
SSL in classification tasks against standard baseline methods in EEG based sleep staging and pathology
detection. For the purpose of this thesis, we will only focus on the SSL in relation to sleep staging part
of this study.
Data Description:
The data used in this study were overnight PSG recordings from 994 subjects
with (suspected) sleep apnea. The data included EEG, EOG, chin EMG, respiration airflow and oxygen
saturation. The data was labelled according to the AASM guidelines by 7 trained scorers [27]. There
were 6 EEG channels recorded with a sampling rate of 200 Hz.
==PAGE:39==
2.4 State of the Art
32
Method:
In this study, they only used the F3-M2 and F4-M1 EEG derivations. The raw EEG was
first filtered using a 30 Hz FIR LP filter with a Hamming window before it was downsampled to 100 Hz.
Non-overlapping windows of 30s seconds were extracted. Finally, windows with peak-to-peak amplitude
below 1µV were rejected. The remaining windows were normalized to have zero-mean and unit standard
deviation. Their method of applying SSL in a sleep staging task essentially consisted of training an
embedder using pre-text tasks, where the embedder uses the EEG data to learn about it’s structure
and representation, which output was then used to perform sleep stage scoring with labelled data in a
downstream task. The downstream task was a (multinomial) linear logistic regression model. A block
diagram overview of the methods in this study are illustrated in Figure 2.21.
Figure 2.21: Schematic illustration of the methods used to train an embedder (StagerNet) using SSL
and then using the embedder with EEG data and multinomial logistic regression classifier
to score sleep stages. 1) The embedder is trained via pre-text tasks using the EEG signal.
2) The trained embedder is used to create a feature space from the EEG signal. 3) The
features created from the embedder are used to train and test sleep staging using a linear
logistic regression.
They developed three methods of SSL where an embedder was trained on a pre-text task:
• Relative-Positioning (PR): where the objective is to learn a latent space representation to discrim-
inate the positioning of a pair of windows, whether an anchor window is leading or following in a
temporal context.
• Temporal-Shuffling (TS): where the objective is to learn a latent space representation to predict
the correct temporal order for a triplet of windows that have been shuffled.
• Constrastive-predictive-coding (CPC): where the objective is to learn a latent space representation
of windows to predict the future window.
The embedder used (StagerNet) is a 3-layer CNN with 16 convolutional channels and batch nor-
malization after temporal and spatial convolutions with max pooling without padding which outputs a
feature layer of D = 100 neurons. The details of the StagerNet model can be seen in Figure A.8 in
the Appendix A.1.2.
The baseline models that they used as a comparison were a conventional application of a fully
supervised deep learning network (StagerNet), handcrafted features with a RF classifier, an auto-encoder
trained StagerNet, and a StagerNet with random weights (untrained). In the downstream task, they
varied the number of exmaples per class in training the sleep stage classifier.
==PAGE:40==
2.4 State of the Art
33
Results:
The results of this study in sleep stage scoring using the different SSL approaches and
baseline methods are summarized in Figure 2.22.
Figure 2.22: Impact of number of labeled examples per class on downstream performance for SSL
tasks (blue), supervised approaches (yellow) and unsupervised baselines (green). Down-
stream task performance was evaluated by training linear logistic regression models on
the extracted features for the labeled examples, with at least one and up to all existing
labeled examples in the training set. Results are the average of five runs with same
initialization but different randomly selected examples.
Adapted from Banville et al. [20].
The SSL-learned features outperform baseline approaches in most data regimes, especially in low-
labelled data, including full supervision and handcrafted features. The SSL-learned features reach a
maximum performance of 72.3% balanced accuracy (average per-class recall).
Remarks:
The methods and results of this study are particularly interesting. It can also be seen that
conventional fully supervised deep learning approaches only begin to outperform the SSL features once
more than 1000 labelled examples are available per class. Considering that there is very little labelled
data available for microsleep, applying a SSL to pre-train an embedder for feature extraction could be
a useful tool to boost the classification performance for the work in this thesis. However, the embedder
would have to be trained on a smaller window of EEG data in order to generate features at a higher
temporal resolution to capture MSE.
2.4.3
Summary
An overview of the previously summarized papers is presented in Table 2.6. As was initially mentioned,
the topic of microsleep detection is a relatively new research topic, therefore there were only a few
papers which focused specifically on microsleep detection. Most of the papers reviewed used automatic
sleep scoring of the traditional AASM labels at a higher temporal resolution [18, 53, 61, 68, 69]. It
is clear from the reviewed papers that a CNN is the optimal choice for performing automatic sleep
scoring.
The highest classification performance in detecting MSE (κ = 0.83) was achieved by an
feature-based LSTM [16], whereas a purely deep learning approach with a CNN [17] achieved a slightly
==PAGE:41==
2.4 State of the Art
34
worse performance (κ ∼0.7) in a more diﬀicult classification task. Furthermore, there are techniques
available to mitigate data requirements for developing robust classifiers, such as transfer learning [19,
63] and self-supervised learning [20]. In conclusion of the reviewed papers, the studies made by the
research group in Switzerland are the most recent and relevant work on microsleep detection [13, 16,
17, 42]. Their work offers a scoring criteria to manually identify microsleep, as well as access to labelled
data, and provide methods and results to use as benchmark models to validate the methods developed
in this thesis. There are some key take-away points from this state-of-the-art study:
• There is a microsleep scoring critera (BERN), with publicly available and labelled data from MWT
recordings of 76 subjects [42, 50].
• The definition between MSEc/ED and Wake/MSE is poor and could cause ambiguous scoring
[42].
• Most studies use EEG, EOG or a combination of EEG and EOG to automatically score sleep.
• CNN networks are the most commonly used networks and have the highest performance [17, 18,
53, 61].
• Feature based approaches show promising performance for detecting microsleep [16].
• U-Sleep is a robust and high performing network capable of scoring sleep at a high temporal
resolution [18].
• Transfer learning (fine-tuning) is a powerful method when data is scarce and the task differs
slightly from that of a base model [19]. It has been proven to work well when transferring learning
from one domain to another [63].
• SSL has been shown to perform better than handcrafted features and traditional supervised deep
learning models when labelled data is minimal [20].
• Using automatically detected micro events in sleep increases the performance for separating a
healthy cohort from people with sleep pathologies [18, 61].
• A validation set can be used to find an optimal threshold in a two-class classification problem,
rather than setting a default probability threshold of 0.5 [61].
==PAGE:42==
2.4 State of the Art
35
Table 2.6: Overview of the reviewed papers including the data, methods and results. The order of the
papers listed in the table have been sorted by relevance to the proposed research topic. κ:
Cohen’s Kappa, VT: Visual Tracking. NA: Not Applicable.
Author,
Year
Data
Info
Data
Modality
Task
Classification
Method
Results
Hertig-Godeschalk
et al., 2020, [42]
MWT
(n = 76)
EEG
EOG
Video
{Wake, MSE,
MSEc, ED}
Visual Scoring
Feature analysis
(NA)
1263 MSE
Malafeev et al.,
2021 [17]
MWT
(n = 76)
EEG
EOG
Wake, MSE,
MSEc, ED
CNN (16s)
κ:
Wake = 0.59
MSE = 0.69
MSEc = 0.05
ED = 0.11
Skorucak et al.,
2020, [16]
MWT
(n = 76)
EEG
EOG
Bilateral:
MSE vs Wake
Feature-based
LSTM
κ:
0.83 ± 0.06
Perslev et al.,
2021 [18]
PSG
(n = 19924)
EEG
EOG
AASM:
{Wake, REM,
N1, N2, N3}
HC vs OSA
U-Sleep:
CNN
Mean global F1:
0.79 ± 0.03
HCA vs OSA (F1):
0.60 @ 1/30 Hz
0.94 @ 12.8 Hz
Banville et al.,
2021 [20]
PSG
(n = 994)
EEG
AASM:
{Wake, REM,
N1, N2, N3}
SSL Features
+
(Multinomial)
Linear Logistic
Regression
#: Accuracy (%)
100 : 40%
101 : 57%
102 : 62%
103 : 72%
Jadhav et al.,
2020 [63]
PSG
(n = 61)
EEG
AASM:
{Wake, REM,
N1, N2, N3}
Time-frequency
images
via
SqueezeNet [65]
transfer learning
SN = 77.03
SP = 95.85
Acc = 84.74
Phan et al.,
2021 [19]
PSG
(nS = 200)
(nT = [20, 22, 12])
EEG
EOG
EMG
AASM:
{Wake, REM,
N1, N2, N3}
CNN-LSTM
transfer learning
κT = [0.78, 0.73, 0.75]
Brink-Kjaer et al.,
2020 [61]
PSG
(n = 4156)
EEG
EOG
EMG
(ECG)
{Wake vs
Sleep}
{Arosual vs
Non-Arousal}
CNN-LSTM
Arousal:
F1 = 0.76
Wake:
Specificity = 0.96
Recall = 0.92
Skorucak et al.,
2020 [13]
MWT
(n = 10)
EEG
EOG
Bilateral:
MSE vs Wake
Feature-based
LSTM [16]
κ:
0.63 ± 0.06
Perslev et al.,
2019 [53]
PSG
(n = 1666)
EEG
AASM:
{Wake, REM,
N1, N2, N3}
U-Time:
CNN
Global F1 scores:
[0.79, 0.76,
0.77, 0.79,
0.77, 0.68,
0.73]
Correa, Orosco
and Laciar,
2014 [68]
PSG
(n = 16)
EEG
{AS vs DS}
AS: Wake
DS: S1 [29]
Feature based
ANN (FFNN)
Mean Accuracy:
85.5%
Cesari et al.,
2019 [69]
PSG
(n = 199)
EEG
EOG
{Wake,
REM,
NREM}
CNN
κ:
0.77 ± 0.10
0.74 ± 0.16
0.60 ± 0.15
0.60 ± 0.16
Eldele et al.,
2021 [70]
PSG
(n = 427)
EEG
AASM:
{Wake, REM,
N1, N2, N3}
AttnSleep:
2xCNN
+ TCE
κ:
[0.79, 0.73, 0.78]
Krishnamoorthy
et al., 2019 [71]
1D VT
(n = 8)
EEG
{Responsive
vs
Microsleep}
CNN
Specificity:
[0.60, 0.64]
Sensitivity:
[0.95, 0.92]
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
This chapter describes the methods used in this thesis, including data description, the models developed
as part of this thesis, the replication of benchmark models, and the performance evaluation used. Note
that although some of the content in this chapter has been summarized in Section 2.4, it will be covered
in more detail in this chapter along with modifications made to comply with the work of this thesis.
3.1
Data
The dataset used for this thesis was a publicly available dataset of 76 MWT recordings scored for
microsleep [50]. The dataset includes EEG and EOG recordings from the third trial of a MWT session.
There were no medical inclusion or exclusion criteria for the patients in this dataset. The EEG signals are
two occipital derivations according to the 10-20 system (O1-M2 and O2-M1), and the EOG signals are
derivations from the right and left eye (E1-M1 and E2-M1). The raw data were recorded using RemLogic
(Embla Systems LLC) devices. The sampling rates were 200 Hz, and included the following hardware
filters: a high-pass at 0.3 Hz, a low-pass at 70 Hz, and a notch filter at 50 Hz. The aforementioned
dataset was provided in .mat data format and the signals had further been band-pass filtered at 0.5 and
45 Hz using a Fourier filter. The data were scored according to the BERN scoring criteria as described
in Hertig-Godeschalk et al. [42]. The scoring includes four labels: Wake, episode of drowsiness (ED),
microsleep episode candidate (MSEc), and microsleep episode (MSE). When scoring MSE, unilateral
and bilateral labels were applied, therefore the labels include unilateral MSE (MSEu). Ultimately, the
raw labels consisted of five labels. The recordings were scored at the same rate as the signals, i.e. at
200 Hz, which corresponds to one label per sample.
The labels of this dataset were slightly manipulated for this thesis, mainly due to the ambiguous
definition of the ED and MSEc, and for compatibility with the methods developed as part of this thesis.
Firstly, the resolution of the labels was changed from 200 Hz to 1 Hz, i.e. one label per 200 samples of
data. This was done by converting the label array to five binary arrays corresponding to each of the
five original labels. Then a moving median with a window size and step size of 1 second was applied to
the binary arrays to convert the labels to a 1 Hz resolution. In cases of equal number of zeros and ones
within a window, that window was set as one. Thereafter, the label arrays were grouped to form a two
class problem: Wake versus microsleep (MS). The resampled labels Wake and ED were grouped together
as Wake, whereas MSEc, MSEu and MSE were grouped together as MS. It has been shown that ED and
MSEc have low inter-rater reliability [42] and are diﬀicult to separate in a feature space representation
[17]. It has also been argued that ED and MSEc are closer to wake and microsleep, respectively [16,
17, 42]. Furthermore, the method of scoring microsleep using the BERN criteria required > 80% eyelid
closure, which is a more stringent requirement than the common criteria for microsleep, however, MSEc
did not require eyelid closure. Therefore, the grouping of the different sub-classes of microsleep was
more in line with the common criteria for microsleep scoring. A summary of the data used in this
thesis is shown in Table 3.1, along with demographic information and MS statistics after resampling
and grouping. A comparison table from the raw labels and the labels used in this thesis can be seen in
Table A.4 in Appendix A.2.1.
==PAGE:44==
3.2 Modified Sleep Staging Techniques
37
Table 3.1: Summary of the data used in this thesis, including demographic information and microsleep
statistics after grouping and resampling the raw labels. The information is shown for the
overall data, training, and test splits. MS: Microsleep, Q(): quartile.
Overall
Train
Test
N
76
53
23
Male
50
38
12
Female
26
15
11
Age
45.6
46.4 ± 19.0
43.8 ± 15.2
MS statistics after grouping and resampling
Count
1347
988
359
# Patient ≥1 MS
47
34
13
Mean duration (s)
11.86
12.02
11.43
Min duration (s)
1.00
1.00
1.00
Q(1) duration (s)
3.00
4.00
3.00
Median duration (s)
6.00
6.00
5.00
Q(3) duration (s)
13.00
13.00
13.00
Max duration (s)
278.00
278.00
190.00
Duration 3 - 15s (%)
66.2%
66.5%
65.8%
It is worth mentioning that some MS events had a duration longer than 15 seconds. This is due to
the BERN scoring rules, which allow scoring of microsleep events longer than 30 seconds as long they
are not 3 consecutive epochs of AASM defined sleep. Although, the majority of MS labels were within
the 3 to 15 second limit. The dataset was split using a 70/30 train/test split, same split as was used
in Skorucak et al. [16]. Note that there is an imbalance between the two classes for the labels used in
this thesis. Where 9.6% of the labels are MS, more specifically 10.2% and 8.1% in the train and test
sets, respectively.
Other data sources
The initial objectives of this thesis were to accumulate a large database of recordings scored with
microsleep.
Numerous collaborating institutions agreed to share data for this thesis, but the data
sharing was ultimately blocked due to legal and regulatory issues, despite continuous efforts to comply
with the legal and regulatory terms for receiving personal medical data. Furthermore, seven of our own
MWT recordings were outsourced to be scored for microsleep using the developed scoring guidelines,
but the scoring was not completed in time for this thesis. An overview of the expected data for this
thesis which was not received in time can be seen in Table A.5 in Appendix A.2.1. This database
consists of 325 MWT recordings scored for microsleep from 277 subjects from different cohorts. The
database is currently pending approval.
3.2
Modified Sleep Staging Techniques
In this section, the models developed as part of this thesis are explained. The first section will explain the
U-Sleep model in more detail, which is the model which will be modified towards detecting microsleep.
The next two sections will explain how the U-Sleep model was modified towards detecting microsleep
using post processing and thresholding techniques, as well as transfer learning. Lastly, the method of
self-supervised learning for microsleep detection will be explained.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Modified Sleep Staging Techniques
38
3.2.1
U-Sleep: robust high temporal resolution sleep staging model
U-Sleep is a fully convolutional neural network that has been trained and evaluated on a large dataset of
PSG recordings for automated sleep scoring. The U-Sleep model can receive any arbitrary combination
of EEG and EOG channels to give sleep predictions at a rate of ≤1/30 Hz. The U-Sleep architecture is
based on the popular U-Net architecture [72]. U-Sleep is composed of three sub-modules: an encoder,
a decoder, and a specialized segment classifier (see Figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1: Schematic illustration of the U-Sleep architecture, composed of an encoder module (left),
decoder module (middle), and segment classifier (right). Image adapted from [18].
Encoder:
The encoder module receives the input signal and extracts a deep stack of feature maps
through a series of convolutional operations. Through these series of feature extractions, the resulting
feature map has a lower resolution compared to its input. The encoder module consists of 12 encoder
blocks. An encoder block processes the input through a convolutional layer (kernel size 9, stride 1),
ELU activation function, batch normalization, and max-pooling (kernel size 2, stride 2). The number
of filters in each convolutional layer cl increases by
√
2 from that of the previous layer, i.e. cl+1 = |cl
√
2|
for l ∈{1, . . . , 11}.
Decoder:
The decoder module up-scales the compact feature maps from the encoder module to match
the temporal resolution of the input signals. It does so through a series of 12 decoder blocks. Each
decoder block processes the input by a nearest neighbour up-sampling (kernel size 2), convolutional layer
(kernel size 2, stride 1), ELU activation function, and batch normalization. The up-sampling results
in a doubling of the length of the feature map along the temporal axis. The up-scaled feature map is
then concatenated with the output of the corresponding encoder block (i.e. output before max-pooling).
This concatenated feature map is then passed onto a convolutional layer, activation function, and batch
normalization to conclude a decoder block. In contrast to the encoder, each decoder block scales down
the number of learned filters by a factor of
√
2. The output of the decoder module can be thought of
as a complex intermediate representation of sleep stages at the same temporal resolution as the input
signal.
Segment Classifier:
The segment classifier module is a specialized module that maps the intermedi-
ate high temporal resolution output from the decoder to sleep stage probabilities at a given prediction
rate. It does so by first applying a dense segmentation using a convolutional layer (kernel size 1, stride
1) with a tanh activation function. Then for a given window length i (desired prediction rate) a per-
channel mean-pooling operation (kernel size i, stride i) is applied. Thereafter, a point-wise convolutional
operation (kernel size 1, stride 1) is applied with an ELU activation function. This is followed by the
same convolutional operation but with a softmax activation function to give a probability prediction
for each class at the desired prediction rate.
==PAGE:46==
3.2 Modified Sleep Staging Techniques
39
The U-Sleep model requires some pre-processing steps for the input to the model. First, it re-samples
the signals to 128 Hz using a polyphase filter. Thereafter, the EEG and EOG signals are scaled on
a per-recording and per-channel basis such that the entire signal has a median of 0 and inter-quartile
range (IQR) of 1. Thereafter, values that deviated from the median by 20 times the IQR are clipped.
The input dimensions to the U-Sleep model are (S, L, C), where C is the number of channels, L is
length of a signal interval, and S is the number of contiguous signal intervals. The U-Sleep model was
trained using 35 signal intervals of 30 seconds (L = 30 × 128) for two channels, i.e. a tensor with shape
(35, 3840, 2). For more details on the training procedure of the U-Sleep model, please refer to [18]. As
previously mentioned, the U-Sleep architecture uses all possible combinations of EEG and EOG signals.
The model therefore gives a probability prediction for each channel combination. The U-Sleep model
averages the probabilities from each channel combination to give a final probability prediction output
(akin to majority voting).
The code for U-Sleep is available in the publicly available U-Time repository (https://github.com/
perslev/U-Time). However, to gain access specifically to the fully trained model from Perslev et al.
[18], one must request access to the https://github.com/perslev/U-Sleep repository. The modules
available in the aforementioned repositories were extensively used in the next two sections.
3.2.2
Post-processing and thresholding U-Sleep (patU-Sleep)
One of the methods developed as part of this thesis was to apply the trained U-Sleep model directly on
the MWT recordings and find a probability of sleep that corresponds to microsleep. In doing so, certain
post-processing had to be performed on the U-Sleep model output, because it was initially designed to
score sleep according to 30 second epochs and the 5 AASM sleep stages.
The U-Sleep model was used to output sleep stage probabilities at four different prediction rates,
R = {32, 16, 8, 1} Hz. All four possible EEG and EOG combinations of the MWT data were used
to output an average probability at each prediction rate. This resulted in a probability matrix P of
size (N × K) for each recording. In this notation, K is the five sleep stages and N is the number of
predictions, i.e. N = R × T, where T is the length of the recording in seconds. Various post-processing
methods were developed in order to translate the 5 sleep stage probabilities to microsleep predictions.
Post-processing and thresholding
The process of converting the U-Sleep probabilities (P) to a microsleep prediction followed the same
series of operations: (i) compute probability of sleep ˆP, (ii) apply thresholding, (iii) resampling if
necessary. Different methods for computing a probability of sleep were developed. Let’s consider a
probability matrix P obtained from the U-Sleep model with a prediction rate R > 1 Hz. The output will
then be N predictions and of five sleep stages, let the order of K be as K = {Wake, N1, N2, N3, REM},
where Wake is indexed at k = 1 and REM at k = 5. One of the methods for computing the probability
of sleep was simply to compute the sum of the sleep stages, equivalently 1 minus the probability of
Wake:
ˆPn = 1 −Pn1
(3.1)
This probability method will be referred to as probsSum. Another method for computing the prob-
ability of sleep was to choose the highest AASM sleep probability:
ˆPn = max{Pn2, Pn3, Pn4, Pn5}
(3.2)
This probability method will be referred to as probsMax. Note that when the prediction rate was
higher than the resolution of the labels (R > 1 Hz), the aforementioned sleep probabilities can be used
in a bin-wise manner. That means that the mean of ˆP within the time range of the corresponding label
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Modified Sleep Staging Techniques
40
can be computed. These probabilities will be referred to as probsBinSum and probsBinMax.
Thresholding was then applied to the aforementioned sleep probabilities ˆP. The threshold range was
set from 0.025 to 1.0 in steps of 0.025, i.e. t = {0.025, 0.05, . . . , 1.0}. Subsequently, a sleep probability
was set to one when ˆP ≥t. This resulted in a binary array for each threshold corresponding to a
prediction. Note that when R > 1 Hz the binary arrays do not match the resolution of the labels and
therefore resampling was required. The resampling was based on the time range of the labels, where the
beginning and end of a label were extracted and used to index the binary array. Then a majority voting
procedure was applied within the indexed binary array to set the predictions to the same resolution as
the labels. The output of this process is an array of microsleep predictions ˆy matching the resolution
of the labels.
In addition to the aforementioned methods of translating the U-Sleep output to a microsleep pre-
diction, a more simple approach was taken. This consisted of making a microsleep prediction directly
from the U-Sleep output by choosing class k from P with the highest probability.
ˆzn = argmax
k
{Pn.}
(3.3)
ˆyn =
(
1,
if ˆzn > 1
0,
otherwise
Where ˆzn is the class with the highest probability which is set to a microsleep prediction ˆy = 1 if
the class is not wake. This method will be referred to as predsArgmax. Thresholding was not applied
in this method since this method outputs a prediction directly, however, resampling was applied in the
same manner if R > 1 Hz. A similar approach was also developed, where instead of resampling the
predictions, the probabilities were averaged within each bin. Then the class with the highest probability
in each bin was chosen as the prediction, referred to as predsBinArgmax. In summary, six different
methods were used to convert the U-Sleep output to microsleep predictions which will be referred to
as follows: predsSum, predsBinSum, predsMax, predsBinMax, predsArgmax, predsBinArgmax. These
methods are summarized in Table 3.2:
Table 3.2: Summary of the different methods for post-processing the U-Sleep outputs. This includes
how the probabilities were handled, whether the probabilities were binned or resampled,
and whether thresholding was applied.
Method
Post-processing
U-Sleep output
Bin
(>1 Hz)
Resampling
(>1 Hz)
Apply
Thresholding
predsArgmax
Choose class with
highest probability and
convert to wake or MS
No
Yes
No
predsBinArgmax
Choose class with
highest probability and
convert to wake or MS
Yes
No
No
predsSum
Sum only
sleep probabilities
No
Yes
Yes
predsBinSum
Sum only
sleep probabilities
Yes
No
Yes
predsMax
Choose highest
sleep probability
No
Yes
Yes
predsBinSum
Choose highest
sleep probability
Yes
No
Yes
==PAGE:48==
3.2 Modified Sleep Staging Techniques
41
Model selection and cross-validation
Since this approach consisted of four different prediction rates and six different post-processing methods
it contains 24 different ”models”. A 5-fold cross-validation (CV) was used to evaluate the different
models and select the optimal model (see Figure 3.2). In order to simplify the terminology, we will
refer to the aforementioned training set as development set. The 5-fold CV was performed by splitting
the development set into 5 subsets of training and validation data. The training and validation subsets
were made from a 80/20% split of the development set, respectively. Each combination of the training
and validation subsets used different partitions of the development set for training and validation.
Then each model was trained and evaluated in an iterative process for each fold using the training and
validation subsets, respectively. The training only consisted of finding an optimal threshold (a threshold
which gave the highest F1 score, see Section 3.4) for the model using the training data and then the
model was evaluated by using the model with the optimal threshold on the validation subset. After the
5-fold CV the average F1 score was computed over the folds for each model and the model with the
highest F1 score was chosen as the optimal model. The optimal model was then ”re-trained” using the
entire development set to find an optimal threshold. This optimal model and threshold were then used
on the test data to produce predictions which were evaluated against the labels of the test data.
Figure 3.2: Schematic illustration of the CV process for selecting the optimal model of post-processing
and thresholding U-Sleep output at different prediction rates. 1) 5-fold CV to evaluate the
different models. 2) Find the optimal model (prediction rate and post-processing method)
from the CV. 3) Re-train the optimal model on the entire development set to find the
optimal threshold. 4) Use the optimal model and threshold on test data. Dotted lines in
the post-processing box represent skip connections.
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Modified Sleep Staging Techniques
42
From this point forward, the optimal model from the post-processing and thresholding approach
will be referred to as ”patU-Sleep”. The ”pat” prefix abbreviates post-processing and thresholding.
3.2.3
U-Sleep via transfer learning (mU-Sleep)
Transfer learning and fine-tuning was another approach used for modifying U-Sleep to detect microsleep.
In order to do so the U-Sleep model had to be adapted for the new target task. The original U-Sleep
segment classifier had to be replaced with a new segment classifier which was designed to output pre-
dictions for 2 classes at a prediction rate of 1 Hz, rather than 5 classes at a prediction rate of 1/30
Hz. This consisted of creating a new convolutional layer with tanh activation function, average poling
operation, and the last two convolutional layers. The temporal resolution was changed via the aver-
age pooling operation by changing the kernel size to 128 rather than 3840 as in the original U-Sleep
architecture. This resulted in the average pooling generating an output with temporal resolution of 1
prediction per second rather than per 30 seconds. The number of classes to predict was changed via
the last two convolutional layers by setting the number of filters to 2, rather than 5. Due to the fact
that some recordings were shorter than 17.5 minutes (i.e. first dimension size of the original U-Sleep
model), the input dimensions of the model were also changed so that all training data available could be
used. The input dimensions of the model were changed so that it received 9.5 minutes of contiguous 30
second intervals, i.e. (19, 3840, 2), which was the shortest recording in the training dataset. In summary
the original U-Sleep model was modified so that it had a new input dimension and outputs two class
predictions at a rate of 1 Hz. Note that prior to the aforementioned changes, the weights of the model
were set to the ones obtained from the pre-trained U-Sleep model [18].
The modified U-Sleep model was then trained to detect microsleep using the MWT recordings from
the training split available for this thesis. The model was trained using a batch size of 64, making the
input to the model (64, 19, 3840, 2) during training. Each batch was sampled by choosing a random
recording and a random sequence of 19 contiguous 30 second intervals from a random EEG and EOG
channel combination. The transfer learning and fine-tuning was conducted in two training phases. In
the first phase, only the model weights of the new segment classifier were set to be trainable and the rest
of the model weights were set as non-trainable (”frozen”). Then the model was trained for 30 epochs
(i.e. full iterations of the entire training set). A cross entropy loss was used as a loss function, and
the model weights were updated using an Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001. In the second
phase, all of the model weights were set to be trainable and fine-tuned through a second iteration of
training. The model was trained in the same way as in the first phase, except the learning rate was
set to 1 × 10−7. The decreased learning rate was chosen because the model is very large (> 3 × 106
trainable parameters) and is being trained on a small dataset. Therefore, if the learning rate was high,
the model would be at risk of overfitting to the data due to large weight updates. The model made
predictions using the averaged probabilities from each channel combination, as in the original U-Sleep
model.
After training the model, it was used to make predictions on the test dataset. A schematic illustration
of the process to adapt U-Sleep to microsleep detection via transfer learning is shown in Figure 3.3.
From this point forward, the fine-tuned U-Sleep model will be referred to as mU-Sleep. The name is
derived from the SI prefix for micro units µ, thus adequately fitting the objective of the model: to
detect micro-sleep.
==PAGE:50==
3.2 Modified Sleep Staging Techniques
43
Figure 3.3: Schematic illustration of the workflow adapting U-Sleep to microsleep detection using
transfer learning. The top of the figure shows the U-Sleep model trained on the source
task TS in the source domain DS. The bottom half of the figure shows the transformation
of knowledge through transfer learning where a target task TT (microsleep detection) is
learned in the target domain DT .
3.2.4
Microsleep Detection with Self-Supervised Learning (mU-SSL)
The use of SSL was another approach used to create a modified sleep staging technique to detect mi-
crosleep. This approach consisted of training a feature extractor using a pretext task, and subsequently
using the extracted features to classify microsleep in a separate downstream task. The pretext task
was relative positioning (RP), where windowed data pairs were predicted to be close or far away in time.
Firstly, the MWT data was zero-padded for 7 seconds at the beginning and end of the recording.
Then the data was re-sampled to 100 Hz to reduce the dimensionality of the data. Thereafter, 15 second
windows of the data were extracted with a 1 second overlap. Note that the zero-padding was performed
so that the number of windows would match the number of labels per recording. The window data
consisted of a EEG and EOG combination resulting in the window dimension of (1500×2). There were
four windows for each 15 second window of data, corresponding to the four possible EEG and EOG
combinations. The label of each window corresponded to the label at the center of the window. Then
channel wise standardization, setting the signal to zero mean and unit variance, was performed for each
window. The window data was then partitioned into training and test datasets, where the training
dataset was further split into a training and validation subset for the pretext task.
In the pretext task, let’s consider a window of data which starts at time point t as xt and define the
label space as Y ∈{−1, 1}. The windows are of dimension (T, C), where T is the length of the window
and C is the number of channels. In the RP task, a pair of windows from a recording is sampled (xt, xt′),
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Modified Sleep Staging Techniques
44
where the windows start at different time points t ̸= t′. The parameters which control the difference
between the two time points are τpos and τneg, which determine whether the windows are close or far
away in time, respectively. Subsequently, these parameters control the label corresponding to a window
pair (xt, xt′) where:
y =
(
1,
if |t −t′| ≤τpos
−1,
if |t −t′| ≥τneg
Then N many labelled pairs can be sampled for the RP task as:
ZN =
n
((xti, xt′
i), yi)|i ∈N, (ti, t′
i) ∈T , yi ∈Y
o
(3.4)
where N = {1, . . . , N}. Note that T is essentially all pairs of time indices (ti, t′
i) which can be
constructed from windows of size T for a given signal based on the constraints of τpos and τneg. Window
pairs which are outside the positive and negative time constraints are ignored, i.e. when τpos < |ti−t′
i| ≤
τneg. The task of discriminating the relative position between two pairs of time windows consists of a
feature extractor hθ and a contrastive module g. The feature extractor hθ maps the input window x
to its representation in the feature space of size D using the trainable parameters θ. It is the objective
that the feature representation learned in the pretext task can be used in a different downstream task.
The contrastive module g then computes the elementwise absolute difference between the features of
each window to highlight their differences and ultimately simplify the contrastive task.
g(hθ(xt), hθ(x′
t)) = |hθ(xt) −hθ(x′
t)|
(3.5)
The output of the contrastive module is then passed on to a linear model with D trainable weights
w and bias term w0 to make a prediction ˆy. The model can then be trained using a binary logistic loss
for the predictions of g by making a joint loss function as:
E(θ, w, w0) =
X
(xt,xt′,y)∈ZN
log
 1 + exp(−y[wT g(hθ(xt), hθ(x′
t)) + w0])

(3.6)
Note that during training the value from the linear model is used to quantify the loss. However, in
the convention of the label space described above, the prediction ˆy is the sign of the output from the
linear model (ˆy = sgn[wT g(hθ(xt), hθ(x′
t)) + w0]).
In this thesis, the feature extractor used was a modified version of a sleep staging architecture de-
veloped by Chambon et al. [21]. The feature extractor was a three-layer CNN, comprised of spatial
convolution, a feature extracting module, and concluded with a fully connected layer. The spatial con-
volution was performed using a convolutional layer over the channels (kernel size 2 and stride 1). The
feature extracting module consisted of two blocks of a convolutional layer (16 filters, kernel size 25, and
stride 1), ReLU activation function, and max pooling (kernel size 7). The fully connected layer was
a dense layer with 832 neurons which gave an output of 100 features. There were N = 1200 labelled
window pairs Z extracted from each recording in the training and validation subsets, as well as the test
set. Note that because all four possible channel combinations were used, this effectively quadrupled
the amount of training data. The time constraints of the RP task were set to τpos = 15 and τneg = 60
seconds. These time constraints are shorter than in Banville et al. [20], but they were chosen under
the assumption that MWT data changes more quickly than in a normal overnight PSG recording. This
model was trained on the pretext task for 50 epochs with early stopping if the validation loss did not
decrease after 10 consecutive epochs. A batch size of 256 was used during training where the model
weights were updated using an Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.005.
After the pretext task, the trained feature extractor was used in the downstream task. The down-
stream task was to classify each window of data as either wake or microsleep. Therefore, all of the
windows in the dataset were passed through the feature extractor to create a dataset of features with
==PAGE:52==
3.3 Benchmark Models
45
corresponding labels pertaining to the downstream task. The features in each window were standard-
ized prior to classification. The classification model for the downstream task was a regularized logistic
regression model. A logistic regression model can be thought of as an extension of a linear regression
model which performs classification by using the probabilities. It makes the assumption that the prob-
ability of a class y given some input features x can be approximated as a sigmoid function of the linear
combination of input features.
p(Y |x, β) = σ
 β0 + x ˙β

(3.7)
Where σ is the sigmoid function, and β are the terms of the linear model. The terms of the logistic
regression classifier are found by the optimization problem of maximizing the log-likelihood using gra-
dient ascent. The classifier was trained using L2-regularization with balanced class weights. Although
the classifier was trained on each channel combination window separately, the final prediction used the
average probabilities from all channel combinations per window to give a final probability. Lastly, the
classifier was used on the test data. A schematic illustration of the SSL approach can be seen in Figure
3.4
Figure 3.4: Schematic illustration of the self-supervised learning approach. The figure shows the pre-
text task of relative positioning, where a window pairs are sampled and passed through
a feature extractor, h(·), to generate features for the windows which are used by a con-
trastive module and linear model to determine if the relative positioning of the window
pair. Then the trained feature extractor from the pretext task is used to generate feature
to be used by a logistic regression classifier to classify microsleep versus wake in a down-
stream task.
The SSL approach was implemented using Python 3.9.0 with extensive use of the braindecode and
MNE Python libraries [73, 74].
3.3
Benchmark Models
This section will describe the replication of the benchmark models for automatic microsleep detection
along with the modifications applied in order to be able to compare them with the models developed
as part of this thesis. The benchmark models for this thesis were three feature based classifiers and
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Benchmark Models
46
one raw input CNN, which were proposed in Skorucak et al. [16] and Malafeev et al. [17], respectively.
These methods were chosen as benchmark models based on their relevance to the objective of this thesis
and are, to this date, the best performing and ecologically valid methods available in the literature.
3.3.1
Feature Based Classifiers
The methods described in Skorucak et al. [16] were reproduced in Matlab R2021b (The MathWorks
Inc., Natick, MA).
Feature engineering
As stated in Section 2.4.2, the classifiers are based on a vector of generated features from two occipital
EEG derivations (O1-M2 and 02-M1) and two EOG derivations. The features were generated from
spectral analysis of the signals. The spectral analysis was performed by estimating the power spectral
density (PSD) using the Burg method, which fits an auto-regressive (AR) model to the signal. The
PSD estimate of an p-order AR model is given as:
ˆPAR(f) = 1
fs
σ2
e
1 + Pp
k=1 ˆake−2πjkf/fs2
(3.8)
where ˆak are the estimated AR parameters, σ2
e is the variance of the white noise input to the AR model,
f is the frequency, and fs is the sampling rate. The Burg method estimates the AR parameters by
minimizing the forward and backward prediction errors while satisfying the Levinson-Durbin recursion.
The Burg method differs from other AR estimation methods, since it does not calculate the autocor-
relation function, but rather estimates the reflection coeﬀicients directly. For more information on the
power spectral estimation using the Burg method, please refer to [75]. The AR model was set to order
16 for an input signal with a sampling rate of 200 Hz and the PSD estimate was set to an equidistant
frequency resolution of 0.2 Hz. The PSD estimate was made using a 1 second sliding window with a
step size of 1 second, to match the resolution of the labels. The pburg() function in Matlab was used
to compute the PSD estimate. Thereafter, seven features were generated from the PSD estimate of
each window: power in the delta (0.8–4 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–12 Hz), and beta (12–26 Hz)
bands, theta versus alpha and beta ratio, median frequency, and eye movement. The aforementioned
powerbands were calculated as:
Pband =
X
band
ˆPAR(f) · df
(3.9)
where df is the frequency resolution. In Skorucak et al. [16], the powerbands were smoothed with a 1
second moving median, however, this was not performed in the implementation of this work because
there was no overlap of the sliding window used to obtain the PSD. The ratio of the theta powerband
against the alpha and beta powerbands was calculated as:
PT AB =
Pθ
Pα + Pβ
(3.10)
The median frequency was calculated within the range of 0.8-26 Hz, referred to as the delta-beta band.
This was done by normalizing the power at each frequency within the delta-beta band with the total
power within that range, obtaining the normalized power estimate N.
N =
ˆPAR(f)
P
δ−β ˆPAR(f)
f = 0.8, 1.0, . . . , 26.0
(3.11)
Then computing the cumulative sum of the normalized power.
==PAGE:54==
3.3 Benchmark Models
47
C = {c1, c2, . . . , ck}
where, ck
=
k
X
i=1
Ni
(3.12)
The cumulative sum was then subtracted by 0.5 and the lowest absolute value corresponded to the
median frequency (fm).
fm = argmin
f
(|C −0.5|)
(3.13)
The eye movement was derived by computing the ratio between the delta powerband from the difference
of the EOG signals and the delta powerband of a occipital EEG signal [76]. The seven aforementioned
features were generated for each occipital EEG signal, yielding in a total of 14 features for each 1 second
window of data.
Classifiers
Three feature based classifiers: Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and a neural
network with long-short term memory (LSTM) were trained using the aforementioned features.
RF classifiers are composed of multiple decision tree classifiers. A decision tree uses features xi
from observation i to predict a discrete output yi in the case of classification trees, and for regression
trees a continuous-valued yi. This is done by creating a series of rules for the given input to make its
predictions. These rules are determined based on impurity measures and purity gain, which evaluate
how well a certain rule balances and separates the classes. If we let a rule within a tree be denoted as
a root (r) with K branches (v), then the purity gain for that rule can be computed as:
∆= I(r) −
K
X
k=1
N(vk)
N(r) I(vk)
(3.14)
where N denotes the number of observations and I is the impurity function. The impurity is calculated
at the root and for each branch, therefore high purity gain is obtained when the impurity at individual
splits is low. The weighting by the fraction is used to make the measure focus more on larger group
splits. There are numerous impurity functions, such as entropy, classification error and Gini. The Gini
impurity function is given as:
Gini(v) = 1 −
C
X
c=1
p(c|v)2
(3.15)
where C is the number of classes and p(c|v) is the probability of the class given the observations v
in that branch. A branch can lead to a prediction (single leaf) or to another split (rule). When cre-
ating tree classifiers the size of the tree must be set, this can be achieved through early stopping or
pruning. Early stopping includes conditions such as stopping the tree growth once a certain depth is
reached or a branch contains less then a specific number of observations, i.e. reaches a minimum leaf
size. Pruning allows growing a full tree and then backtracking through the tree finding splits that can
be replaced by a single leaf. Decision trees are easily interpretable, but they often lack accuracy and
can have high variance if they are deep. Random forest counteracts this problem by growing multiple
trees using bagging, where the trees are grown using random sub-selections of features for each split of
the tree. Then majority voting from the trees is used to make a final prediction. As a result, random
forest models lose their interpretability but gain a boost in performance and reduce the variance while
maintaining similar bias. For more information on RF classifiers, please refer to [77]. The random
forest classifier was created using the TreeBagger class in Matlab. The RF classifier consisted of 100
trees with minimum leaf size of 1, where 4 features were randomly selected with replacement for each
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Benchmark Models
48
split.
SVM classifiers aim to find a linear decision surface that separates classes such that there is the
largest distance between border-line observations. If it is not possible to find a linear decision surface,
SVM can map the input data onto a higher dimensional space using the ”kernel trick”, where such a
linear decision surface may exist. SVM find a global minimum of an either unconstrained or constrained
convex function. For an SVM classifier trained on N feature inputs x1, x2, . . . , xN and corresponding
classification labels y1, y2, . . . yn ∈{−1, +1} using the kernel trick, a new observation x* can be found
as:
G(x*) = sgn[ˆb0 + x*T
n
X
i=1
ˆaiyiΦ(x*, xi)]
(3.16)
where the ˆa are coeﬀicients from the optimization of the convex problem and Φ is the kernel function
which maps the features onto a higher dimensional feature space. For more information on SVM, please
refer to [78]. The SVM classifier was created using the fitcsvm() function in Matlab, with a radial
basis kernel function.
The neural network classifier with LSTM layers was a relatively simple network. The network was
composed of an input layer (14 neurons), followed by two blocks of unidirectional LSTM layers with
100 neurons and dropout layers (probability 0.3), a fully connected layer (2 neurons), softmax layer and
finally a classification output layer. Unlike the RF and SVM classifiers, the neural network received
sequenced data using a moving window of 9 seconds with 1 second step size. The training dataset was
passed through the network 16 times during training (16 epochs), with an adaptive moment estimation
optimization algorithm (Adam) to update the network weights during training with a learning rate of
1 × 10−4.
When training the classifiers, all the training data was used when training the neural network, how-
ever the data was balanced when training the RF and SVM classifiers. That means, that for the amount
of data points corresponding to MS, the equal amount of random data points corresponding to Wake
were used for training. Furthermore, a 9 second moving median filter was applied to the predictions of
the RF and SVM to account for temporal context of the data (chosen to match the input size of the
neural network). Throughout this thesis, the aforementioned classifiers will be referred by the feature
based prefix ”FB-” and the classifier type: Random Forest (FB-RF), SVM (FB-SVM), and neural net-
work with LSTM layers (FB-LSTM).
The replication of the feature based classifiers were compared to the results from the original study
[16], the results of this comparison can be seen in Appendix A.2.2.
3.3.2
Raw Input CNN
The methods described in Malafeev et al. [17] were reproduced using Python 3.9.0 and TensorFlow
(v 2.10.0) [79]. The optimal model was a CNN with a 16 second input window of one occipital EEG
signal and two EOG signals [17]. This model was reproduced as a benchmark model for this thesis as
described in Section 2.4.2 with some modifications.
The data was first pre-processed by dividing the signal by 100 and then clipping values to the range
[−1, 1], followed by 8 seconds of zero-padding the edges of the signals. The signal was segmented into
window segments of 16 seconds and the target of that specific segment corresponded to the label in the
middle of the window. The resampled and grouped labels described in Section 3.1 were used. Note that
since the model expects two EOG signals and one EEG, the training data is effectively doubled, since
each segment uses either one of the EEG signals.
==PAGE:56==
3.4 Performance Evaluation
49
The model was a CNN with a 16 second moving window input. The input layer of the model ex-
pected data of dimensions (3200 × 1 × 3), which corresponds to 16 seconds of data from three channels.
Following the input layer, Gaussian noise (σ = 0.0005) was added to the input signals. The main build-
ing block of the network were convolutional blocks which consisted of a convolutional layer, followed
by batch normalization, ReLU activation function, and max pooling. The network was relatively deep:
beginning with two convolution blocks with 32 and 64 filters in the convolution layer, followed by four
and then six convolutions blocks with filter sizes of 128 and 256, respectively. The output of the last
convolution block was then flattened and passed through a batch normalization layer and a dropout
layer (probability 0.5). Thereafter, it went through a dense layer with 256 hidden neurons and ReLU
activation function, followed by another batch normalization and dropout layer. The network concluded
with a dense layer using a softmax activation of 2 neurons (i.e. number of classes), which was changed
from 4 as in Malafeev et al. [17]. A schematic of the network can be seen in Figure A.7 in Appendix
A.1.2.
The model was trained for 3 epochs using the Adam optimizer with Nesterov momentum (Nadam)
with a learning rate of 0.002 and batch-size 200. The window segments were chosen randomly and
shuffled after each epoch. Furthermore, the class imbalance was accounted for by applying weights
to the training inversely proportional to the frequency of the classes. Applying class weights works
by penalizing misclassification of the minority class proportionally more than misclassification of the
majority class. Note that when making predictions on the test data using this model, the probability of
a segment from both combinations of the two EOG signals and EEG signals were averaged and the class
with the highest probability was the prediction. This is one of the major changes from how the model
was evaluated in Malafeev et al. [17] and was made such that the model predictions were compatible
with the work of this thesis and other benchmark models. From hereafter, this model will be referred
to as CNN-16s.
3.4
Performance Evaluation
The labels of the data and predictions from the models were encoded into two classes, i.e. {−1, 1}, where
wakefulness was set as the negative class and MS as the positive class. In order to derive meaningful
performance metrics one must compute the count of true positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false
positivies (FP) and false negatives (FN). The TP and TN are the instances when positive and negative
classes were correctly identified, respectively. On the contrary, FP and FN are the instances when
positive and negative predictions were made when the actual class was negative or positive, respectively.
In this thesis, the precision, recall and F1-score were computed. Recall quantifies the ratio of correct
positive predictions over all actual instances of the positive class, i.e. sum of TP over the sum of TP and
FN. The precision quantifies how well the classifier predicted the positive class as the ratio of correct
positive predictions over all positive predictions made, i.e. sum of TP over the sum of TP and FP. The
F1-score is the harmonic mean of equally weighted precision and recall scores to give a single metric of
classification performance. The equations of the aforementioned metrics are:
Recall =
P TP
P TP + FN
(3.17)
Precision =
P TP
P TP + FP
(3.18)
F1 = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
(3.19)
Note that accuracy was not used an evaluation metric in this thesis due to the severe class imbalance
in the dataset. The accuracy is calculated as the sum of TP and TN over the sum of TP, TN, FP and
FN. Therefore, considering that approximately 90% of the labels are wake, a classifier which predicts
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Performance Evaluation
50
all instances as wake would have accuracy 90% even though the classifier is naive and useless.
The aforementioned metrics were calculated on per sample and per event basis. In the case of per
sample evaluation, the 1 second resolution of the labels and predictions was used and the evaluation was
based on the corresponding label samples and predicted samples. An event was defined as continuous
samples of the positive class predictions and the actual positive samples. In the per event case, if a
predicted positive class event had any overlap with an actual positive class event it was marked as a TP.
Equally so, if a predicted positive class event had no overlap with an actual positive class event it was
marked as a FP. All of the actual positive class events which did not overlap with any of the predicted
positive class events were marked as FN. The true negatives were not quantified on a per event basis,
they are also not required when calculating precision, recall and subsequently the F1-score. This is the
same per event evaluation as used in Brink-Kjaer et al. [61].
Due to the fact that some recordings in the test set did not contain any MS instances (n = 10),
the performance evaluation was made by concatenating the predictions and labels of all the recordings
to calculate the aforementioned performance metrics on the pooled data. Nonetheless, per recording
evaluations were also made, but recordings which did not contain any MS were discarded when calcu-
lating the mean and standard error of the performance metrics across recordings. In the case of model
predictions on recordings where the TP + FN = 0 and TP + FP = 0, the recall and precision were
set to zero, respectively, because it is invalid to divide a number by zero. Subsequently, when precision
and recall were zero, the F1 score was also set to zero.
As can be seen in Table 3.1, some of the microsleep labels used in this thesis are outside the
duration limit of 3 −15 seconds. The aforementioned performance metrics were also computed within
this range. This was done by discarding predictions from the models and labels in the test set which
were outside the duration criteria.
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4
Results
In the following sections, the results of this thesis will be summarized. This includes the results from the
model development, i.e. the model selection for patU-Sleep and the pretext task of mU-SSL. Thereafter,
the test performance of the models developed as part of this thesis will be summarized and compared
to the benchmark models.
4.1
Model Development
4.1.1
patU-Sleep: Model Selection
The results of the 5-fold CV model selection procedure are shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Average F1 score and standard error of the mean across the 5-fold cross validation model
selection procedure. The models evaluated used different post-processing methods and
thresholding for U-Sleep probabilities at different prediction rates (patU-Sleep).
The highest performing ”model” consisted of post-processing the U-Sleep probabilities by choosing
the highest class (predsArgmax) with a prediction rate of 1 Hz. This model obtained an average F1-score
of 0.57 (±0.02) over the 5 folds. The post-processing of the probabilities was a definitive prediction
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Test Performance
52
from the probabilities, therefore no thresholding was applied. It can be seen that the main difference
between the model performance was from the post-processing method rather than the prediction rate.
Although, there seems to be a slight decrease in performance with increasing prediction rate.
The
results for each fold for the different models are summarized in Tables A.10 and A.11 in Appendix
A.3.1.
4.1.2
mU-SSL: Pretext task performance
The training curves for the feature extractor in the pretext task can be seen in Figure A.14 in
Appendix A.3.2. The test performance of the feature extractor on the pretext task, relative positioning,
is summarized in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Test performance of the feature extractor on the pretext task, relative positioning..
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
τpos
0.82
0.86
0.84
τneg
0.85
0.81
0.83
The feature extractor had an average F1 score of 0.83, with similar performance in identifying
window pairs close (τpos) and far apart (τneg) in time. These results show that the feature extractor
performs well on the pretext task.
4.2
Test Performance
The performance of the classifiers developed as part of this thesis is summarized in the following tables.
The tables include the performance evaluation on the test data by concatenating the predictions and
target labels from all the recordings (pooled data) and on a per recording basis. Additionally, the
performance of the benchmark models are included in the tables as a comparison.
Microsleep of any duration
The results of microsleep detection of any duration are listed in the following tables. The test perfor-
mance evaluated on a per sample basis (i.e. each label) are summarized in Table 4.2.
==PAGE:60==
4.2 Test Performance
53
Table 4.2: Performance of the classifiers evaluated on a per-sample basis on the test data. The metrics
are evaluated by concatenating across recordings and on a per recording basis (mean ±
standard error of the mean, N = 13).
Model
Precision
Recall
F1
mU-Sleep
0.83
0.74
0.78
0.63 ± 0.11
0.51 ± 0.11
0.53 ± 0.11
patU-Sleep
0.54
0.66
0.59
0.55 ± 0.11
0.48 ± 0.10
0.46 ± 0.10
mU-SSL
0.46
0.88
0.60
0.50 ± 0.09
0.71 ± 0.10
0.52 ± 0.10
FB-LSTM
0.79
0.79
0.79
0.61 ± 0.10
0.59 ± 0.10
0.59 ± 0.10
FB-RF
0.53
0.85
0.66
0.51 ± 0.09
0.66 ± 0.10
0.54 ± 0.10
FB-SVM
0.55
0.79
0.65
0.51 ± 0.10
0.60 ± 0.09
0.52 ± 0.10
CNN-16s
0.49
0.94
0.64
0.46 ± 0.09
0.77 ± 0.10
0.55 ± 0.09
Considering the performance evaluation of the pooled data, the highest performing model developed
as part of this thesis was the mU-Sleep model, which obtained an F1 score of 0.78. However, the FB-
LSTM had a slightly higher F1 score of 0.79. The mU-Sleep model and the FB-LSTM both had high
precision and recall scores, resulting in a higher F1 score. However, the other models had much lower
precision (i.e. more false positives) and higher recall (i.e. fewer false negatives). This means that the
models were more sensitive and less precise in their predictions and thus had a lower F1 score. The
hierarchy of performance changes slightly when considering the mean performance across individual
recordings. The mU-Sleep model was still the highest performing model developed as part of this thesis,
however the FB-LSTM, FB-RF and CNN-16s show slightly higher mean F1 scores. Nonetheless, the
large standard error of the mean and little difference in performance suggests that this difference may
not be substantial. It should be taken into consideration that the evaluation metrics were discarded for
recordings that did not have any microsleep labels. This means that models that make multiple false
positive predictions were not penalized for these recordings. The patU-Sleep and mU-SSL had a lower
performance than all the benchmark models.
The test performance evaluated on a per event basis, i.e. based on overlapping predictions and
target labels, are summarized in Table 4.3.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Test Performance
54
Table 4.3: Performance of the classifiers evaluated on a per-event basis on the test data. The metrics
are evaluated by concatenating across recording and on a per recording basis (mean ±
standard error of the mean, N = 13).
Precision
Recall
F1
Model
mU-Sleep
0.74
0.59
0.66
0.60 ± 0.10
0.48 ± 0.10
0.50 ± 0.10
patU-Sleep
0.28
0.63
0.38
0.46 ± 0.09
0.55 ± 0.09
0.45 ± 0.08
mU-SSL
0.29
0.72
0.42
0.49 ± 0.08
0.68 ± 0.08
0.52 ± 0.08
FB-LSTM
0.74
0.71
0.72
0.63 ± 0.10
0.59 ± 0.10
0.60 ± 0.10
FB-RF
0.40
0.65
0.49
0.56 ± 0.10
0.58 ± 0.08
0.52 ± 0.08
FB-SVM
0.38
0.63
0.47
0.48 ± 0.10
0.56 ± 0.08
0.48 ± 0.09
CNN-16s
0.36
0.85
0.51
0.48 ± 0.08
0.76 ± 0.09
0.57 ± 0.08
The mU-Sleep model was also the highest performing model amongst the ones developed as part
of this thesis on a per-event basis, obtaining a pooled F1 score of 0.66. Then again, the FB-LSTM
was the highest performing model with a pooled F1 score of 0.72. In general, the performance is lower
across all models on a per-event basis than on a per-sample basis for the pooled data. However, on
a per-recording basis the performance is higher for all models compared to the per-recording sample
evaluation. The patU-Sleep and mU-SSL models also had the lowest performance on a per-event basis.
Microsleep within 3 −15 seconds
The results of microsleep detection within a 3 −15 second duration are listed in the following tables.
The test performance evaluated on a per sample basis (i.e. each label) are summarized in Table 4.4.
==PAGE:62==
4.2 Test Performance
55
Table 4.4: Performance of the classifiers evaluated on a per-sample basis on the test data only con-
sidering predictions and target labels within 3 −15 seconds. The metrics are evaluated by
concatenating across recordings and on a per recording basis (mean ± standard error of
the mean, N = 13).
Model
Precision
Recall
F1
mU-Sleep
0.61
0.41
0.49
0.44 ± 0.09
0.33 ± 0.07
0.36 ± 0.08
patU-Sleep
0.27
0.23
0.24
0.35 ± 0.10
0.24 ± 0.07
0.23 ± 0.07
mU-SSL
0.26
0.55
0.35
0.37 ± 0.08
0.56 ± 0.09
0.38 ± 0.07
FB-LSTM
0.58
0.58
0.58
0.50 ± 0.08
0.47 ± 0.08
0.47 ± 0.08
FB-RF
0.32
0.57
0.41
0.35 ± 0.08
0.44 ± 0.08
0.35 ± 0.07
FB-SVM
0.29
0.53
0.38
0.32 ± 0.09
0.39 ± 0.08
0.31 ± 0.07
CNN-16s
0.25
0.77
0.38
0.27 ± 0.05
0.67 ± 0.09
0.36 ± 0.06
It can be seen in Table 4.4 that the performance for all models is substantially lower than when
microsleep of any duration was considered. Nonetheless, the mU-Sleep model is again the highest per-
forming model of the ones developed in this thesis (pooled F1 score = 0.49), but it is considerably lower
than the FB-LSTM, which is the highest performing model (pooled F1 score = 0.58).
The test performance evaluated on a per event basis considering only microsleep events within 3−15
seconds are summarized in Table 4.5.
The same pattern of classifier performance can be seen on a per-event basis as the per-sample basis.
Table 4.5: Performance of the classifiers evaluated on a per-event basis on the test data only consider-
ing predictions and target labels within 3 −15 seconds. Predictions and target labels not
within 3 −15 seconds were discarded. The metrics are evaluated by concatenating across
recordings and on a per recording basis (mean ± standard error of the mean, N = 13).
Precision
Recall
F1
Model
mU-Sleep
0.60
0.38
0.47
0.41 ± 0.09
0.28 ± 0.07
0.32 ± 0.07
patU-Sleep
0.25
0.26
0.25
0.30 ± 0.09
0.25 ± 0.07
0.23 ± 0.07
mU-SSL
0.30
0.33
0.31
0.45 ± 0.08
0.29 ± 0.05
0.31 ± 0.05
FB-LSTM
0.58
0.56
0.57
0.48 ± 0.08
0.44 ± 0.07
0.45 ± 0.07
FB-RF
0.39
0.42
0.40
0.47 ± 0.10
0.33 ± 0.06
0.36 ± 0.07
FB-SVM
0.33
0.43
0.37
0.35 ± 0.09
0.34 ± 0.08
0.31 ± 0.08
CNN-16s
0.32
0.45
0.37
0.34 ± 0.06
0.34 ± 0.07
0.32 ± 0.06
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Test Performance
56
The mU-Sleep model is the highest performing model among the ones developed as part of this thesis
(pooled F1 = 0.47) and the FB-LSTM is the highest performing model (pooled F1= 0.57).
In summary, the mU-Sleep model performed better than all the benchmark models, except the
FB-LSTM. Considering microsleep of any duration the mU-Sleep model obtains similar results as the
FB-LSTM, whereas the patU-Sleep and mU-SSL perform worse than all of the benchmark models. The
same hierarchy of model performance can be seen when considering the model performance on a per-
event basis. There was a substantial drop in performance across all of the models when microsleep
was only considered for 3 −15 seconds. In that scenario, the difference in performance between the
mU-Sleep model and FB-LSTM was more noticeable. The overall drop in model performance when
only considering MS within 3−15 seconds suggests that the model performance in microsleep detection
may vary based on the duration of the predictions or microsleep target labels.
The test predictions from all the models per recording are shown in Appendix A.3.4.
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
5.1
Interpretation of the model test performance
In this section the test performance of the different models developed in thesis will be interpreted, where
the possible reasons for the performance variation between models will be discussed.
patU-Sleep
The method of post-processing U-Sleep output probabilities resulted in poor performance on the test
data compared to the other models. There are a number of possible reasons for this. First of all, the
original U-Sleep model was trained on overnight PSG recordings, which contain longer periods of sleep
with fewer periods of wake, and in general consist of few movement and blinking artifacts. However,
in MWT recordings, the patient is awake and resisting to fall asleep. This results in the recording
containing longer periods of wake with fewer and shorter periods of sleep. Therefore, there is some
variability between the data and task that U-Sleep was originally trained on compared to the data and
the task of this thesis. Keeping that in mind, this method of microsleep detection did not consist of
any training, where the model has the opportunity to learn and adjust its weights to the task at hand.
Furthermore, it seems that the U-Sleep model is susceptible to noise in some of the MWT recordings,
e.g. 6Jvj and EyTS (see Figures A.21 and A.25 in Appendix A.3.4). In these recordings the U-Sleep
model outputs high probabilities of N2 sleep stage when there is absence of microsleep in the recording,
thus making multiple FP predictions.
mU-SSL
Although the feature extractor performed well on the pretext task, the classifier did not perform well
when classifying microsleep in the downstream task. This suggests that although the features extracted
were useful for the relative positioning task, they were not informative when it came to detecting
microsleep. This could be due to the chosen pretext task and the time constraints chosen. In Banville
et al. [20], the time constraints were chosen with the assumption that sleep stages last for longer periods
of time and the changes in the EEG data would progress slowly overtime. Since they were working
on overnight PSG data and had the objective to score sleep in 30 second epochs, the task of relative
positioning and the chosen time constraints were appropriate for their downstream task.
Perhaps
this does not apply for the work in this thesis, as the data consists of MWT recordings where the
transition from wake to sleep is faster and more sporadic. Furthermore, they used a hyperparameter
search procedure to find the optimal time constraints in the pretext task that would result in the
best performance in the downstream task. Another possible reason for the poor performance in the
downstream task could be that the logistic regression model was not a suitable classifier, and perhaps
a classifier with more dynamic and non-linear properties could work better.
mU-Sleep
The mU-Sleep model was the highest performing model of the ones developed as part of this thesis
and achieved similar performance as the FB-LSTM, and outperformed the other benchmark models.
This could be attributed to the benefits of transfer learning, where the fine-tuning of the model weights
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Effect of microsleep duration
58
allowed it to achieve better performance in detecting microsleep. The fine-tuning of the model weights
allowed the model to learn the patterns of the new data and counteract the sensitivity of the original
U-Sleep model to the noise in the MWT data. The new classification head and fine-tuning also allowed
the model to adapt its weights towards the specific task of microsleep detection, unlike the static U-
Sleep model. The mU-Sleep model still retains the ability of the original U-Sleep model to identify sleep.
This behaviour can be seen in the figures in Appendix A.3.4, where the probabilites from mU-Sleep
and patU-Sleep are similar except for noisy recordings like EyTS and 6jvJ. Although, the question still
remains how the mU-Sleep model would perform on a dataset with different MWT recordings.
Benchmark Models
The FB-RF, FB-SVM, and CNN-16s did not perform as well as the mU-Sleep model. On all accounts
they had lower precision and higher recall, meaning that they were able to classifiy more TP but at
the cost of having more FP. However, the FB-LSTM was the highest performing model, outperforming
the mU-Sleep model. On all accounts it had higher recall and similar precision as the mU-Sleep model.
These results suggest that utilizing the temporal context might be beneficial when detecting microsleep.
Additionally, the features used for the feature based benchmark models should be considered. This is
because the benchmark models and labelled MWT dataset were created by the same authors. When
the MWT data was scored in Hertig-Godeschalk et al. [42], they used the same features as the feature
based models [16], to quantitatively evaluate their scoring. Therefore, there might be some information
leakage between the scoring and features that the FB benchmark models use. Therefore, it would be
interesting to compare the models developed as part of this thesis with the benchmark models on a
separate dataset which had been scored for microsleep without the influence of these features during
scoring.
5.2
Effect of microsleep duration
The results showed that the performance of all the classifiers dropped substantially when microsleep
was only considered within 3 −15 seconds. This drop in model performance could be explained when
analyzing the recall in relation to the duration of microsleep labels, and precision in relation to the
duration of the model predictions. In Figure A.15 in Appendix A.3.3, the recall of the models is
shown in relation to the duration of the microsleep labels. It can been seen that the recall of the models
is lowest for short MS labels (< 3 sec) and begins to gradually increase until it reaches recall of ≈0.9
for microsleep labels > 15 seconds. This behaviour in recall performance suggests that the models are
less capable of correctly detecting shorter microsleep events and perform better on longer microsleep
events. Therefore, when the performance evaluation is only performed on microsleep labels and predic-
tions within 3 −15 seconds, the high recall for longer microsleep labels are not included. Furthermore,
when examining the percentage of FO for the different durations of predictions made by the models (see
Figure A.16 in Appendix A.3.3), it can be seen that the FP rate decreases with increasing prediction
duration. This means, that when classifiers predict longer segments of microsleep there are fewer false
positives. Therefore, when predictions longer than 15 seconds are discarded, predictions with low FP
rates are discarded and the remaining predictions with higher FP rates remain in the performance
evaluation. Note that the microsleep labels less than 3 and longer than 15 seconds account for 2.3%
and 58.9% of the microsleep samples in the test dataset, respectively. These aforementioned points
constitute a plausible cause for the decrease in performance when evaluating the model performance
only for microsleep labels and predictions within 3 −15 seconds.
There was a noticeable drop in performance, where per-sample basis evaluation had higher pooled
performance than the the per-event evaluation (see Tables 4.2 and 4.3). This can also be explained by
the the duration effect of predictions and target on the model performance. The per-event only counts
one TP no matter how much of an overlap there is between the prediction and the target. Therefore,
==PAGE:66==
5.3 Considerations for model comparison
59
the high recall for longer microsleep targets does not count as much. This can further be seen in Tables
4.5 and 4.5, where the evaluation only considers predictions and target labels within 3 −15 seconds,
the difference in performance is not as noticeable as when predictions and target labels of all durations
were considered.
5.3
Considerations for model comparison
There are numerous factors which can be taken into account when assessing the models developed in this
thesis and the benchmark models. A selection of attributes pertaining to the models are summarized
in Table A.12 in Appendix A.4.1.
The models vary in numerous ways, such as the length of the input signal, dependencies on manual
features, and performance. Considering the application for automatic microsleep detection, the prefer-
able model may vary based on their attributes. If one were interested in using automatic microsleep
detection for vigilance monitoring, e.g. when driving, it would be preferable to use a model which
requires shorter signals of input data and is more sensitive (i.e. has higher recall). In that case the
benchmark models would be more suitable as they require shorter input signals than the models devel-
oped in this thesis, and they have high recall. The CNN-16s model would perhaps be more approriate
as it does not require the step of manual feature generation. On the other hand, , other factors might be
more important if one would like to use automatic microsleep detection as an assistive tool for clinical
assessment of sleep health and excessive sleepiness. In such cases, the need for shorter input signals is
not as important and precision might be more important than recall. Therefore, the mU-Sleep model
and the FB-LSTM might be more suitable for such situations.
5.4
Limitations and outlook
First and foremost, the main limitation of this thesis, and in microsleep research in general, was that the
dataset was relatively small. Although the methods developed as part of this thesis aimed to mitigate
the lack of data, there are still limitations of having a small dataset. When the dataset is small, it
is diﬀicult to properly evaluate the performance of the models, as it can vary by the train/test split
and it is unclear how the models would perform on different datasets recorded by different devices.
Furthermore, the dataset used in this thesis was scored by only one expert. It would be ideal to have
scoring from multiple scorers to create a consensus scoring and compare the models to individual scorers
as well as the consensus scoring to properly evaluate their performance. When the dataset contains
scoring from only one scorer, it is diﬀicult to be sure that the scoring is accurate. However, with scoring
from more individuals, it is possible to assess the individual scorers reliability and create a less biased
consensus scoring from the multiple scorers. Moreover, the absence of a common definition and scoring
guidelines for microsleep amplifies the problem of having only one scorer. This is because the manually
scored labels will have a strong bias based on the clinic and professional scoring the recordings which
results in label noise that subsequently affects the model performance.
In hindsight, considering the aforementioned points, it would have been more appropriate to evaluate
the models using cross-validation. By using cross-validation, the mean and standard error of the model
performance across the different test sets can be computed. This would give more information on the
models ability to generalize on new data, and evaluate their performance dependency on the train/test
splits. Furthermore, the dataset contained microsleep labels with durations outside the common defini-
tion of microsleep. However, in this thesis the microsleep labels of any duration were used for training
the models and during evaluation. This decision was made based on the facts that although annotated
sleep events were longer than the common definition of microsleep duration, it would be diﬀicult to train
a model to learn to detect microsleep from sleep solely based on the duration of the event. Therefore,
the step of evaluating the model within the aforementioned duration limit was performed.
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Limitations and outlook
60
There are numerous avenues to explore in automatic detection of microsleep which were not fully
investigated in this thesis. Given that there is a larger dataset available, thresholding methods could
be further pursued, where a separate validation set could be used to find an optimal threshold for
microsleep using the probability outputs from the models. This could perhaps boost the performance of
the models and give insight to where the probability of microsleep lies within the sleep stage probabilities.
Considering the SSL approach, although this method did not perform well in this thesis, it would be
interesting to see whether automatically generated features learned from a pretext task could be used
for a more complex classifier, e.g. an LSTM. In this thesis, it was shown that the FB-LSTM had the
highest performance using handcrafted features, but it would be interesting to see whether the automatic
features from SSL would perform equally well or better, thus eliminating the step of manual feature
creation. Furthermore, considering that the FB-LSTM had the best performance, it might suggest that
capturing temporal context is important when detecting microsleep and future work could include using
LSTM modules when developing deep learning models for automatic microsleep detection. There are
potential methods to explore when considering the problem of microsleep labels outside the common
duration limits and the diﬀiculty of training a model to distinguish microsleep from sleep solely based
on the duration. A deep learning model with two classification heads could be developed to counteract
the aforementioned problem. This model could then have one classification head to classify sleep vs
wake, and the other classification head could classify microsleep vs not microsleep. This approach would
be particularly interesting because it could give information how microsleep differs from normal sleep.
Lastly, future work could include exploratory analysis using the model outputs to assess whether they
are informative for separating cohorts of healthy sleep versus sleep disorders (e.g. OSA, hypersomnia,
narcolepsy). In doing so, one could generate features or descriptive statistics from the model output and
use them to give informative decision boundaries, which could potentially be used as a new biomarker
for assessing EDS or other sleep disorders.
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this thesis, the main obstacles of microsleep research were addressed. This included the creation of a
common definition for microsleep and scoring guidelines, which are currently being used to score MWT
recordings. Furthermore, a database of MWT recordings scored for microsleep has been assembled from
collaborating institutions and is pending approval. However, the main objective of this thesis was to
develop models to automatically detect microsleep by modifying automatic sleep staging models. In
total three methods were developed which consisted of post-processing and thresholding high frequency
sleep stage probabilities (patU-Sleep), fine-tuning a high-frequency sleep staging model (mU-Sleep),
and by creating a self-supervised feature extractor (mU-SSL). State-of-the-art methods for automatic
microsleep detection were replicated and used as benchmark models against the aforementioned meth-
ods. This included three feature based classifiers and a CNN. The models were trained and evaluated
using a publicly available dataset of 76 MWT recordings scored for microsleep. The highest performing
model developed as part of this thesis was the mU-Sleep model, which reached an F1 score of 0.78. The
mU-Sleep model outperformed most of the benchmark models and had comparable performance to the
feature based LSTM classifier.
The results of this thesis demonstrate that models which were originally trained for automatically
scoring sleep stages in 30 second segments can be modified towards microsleep detection. This was
particularly effective when using transfer learning, where the parameters of a pre-trained model were
fine-tuned towards the task of microsleep detection (mU-Sleep). Although the other methods devel-
oped were not as effective, they may still hold some potential and methods of improvement have been
outlined in this thesis. Upon further inspection of the model performances, it was deduced that the
model performances were dependent on the duration of the microsleep target labels and model pre-
dictions. This was apparent from the fact that the models had increasingly better performance when
detecting longer microsleep events than events of shorter duration. Furthermore, model predictions of
short duration had more false positives and progressively became more precise with longer predictions.
These results have given insight to the time dependencies in the challenge of automatically detecting
microsleep. The performance between models also varied in their sensitivity (recall) and precision, as
well as their requirement of manual features and their input size. These are important factors to ac-
count for depending on the possible application of these models, e.g. as an assistive clinical tool or for
vigilance monitoring when driving.
The main limitation of this thesis was the lack of labelled data. However, future work could use the
database that was gathered in this thesis. There are many avenues left to explore in the field of mi-
crosleep research which have been outlined in this thesis. This includes different methods for automatic
detection of microsleep to boost performance and/or give more insight into the differences between
microsleep and normal sleep. Furthermore, future work should investigate whether information from
the automatic microsleep detection models could be used to distinguish between different cohorts of
sleep health.
The work of this thesis tackled the main obstacles of microsleep research and presented numerous
ways of modifying automatic sleep staging models for microsleep detection. In conclusion, the work of
this thesis has laid out foundations to build upon in further research on microsleep
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Leslie M Swanson et al. “Sleep disorders and work performance: findings from the 2008 National
Sleep Foundation Sleep in America poll.” In: Journal of sleep research 20.3 (2011), pp. 487–494.
[2]
Emilia Sforza et al. “Personality, anxiety and mood traits in patients with sleep-related breathing
disorders: effect of reduced daytime alertness.” In: Sleep medicine 3.2 (2002), pp. 139–145.
[3]
Ian Chen et al. “A survey of subjective sleepiness and consequences in attending physicians.” In:
Behavioral sleep medicine 6.1 (2008), pp. 1–15.
[4]
Christian Guilleminault, Robert Phillips, and William C Dement. “A syndrome of hypersomnia
with automatic behavior.” In: Electroencephalography and clinical neurophysiology 38.4 (1975),
pp. 403–413.
[5]
Timothy Stewart. Overview of Motor Vehicle Crashes in 2020. Tech. rep. 2022.
[6]
JF Pagel. “Excessive daytime sleepiness.” In: American family physician 79.5 (2009), pp. 391–396.
[7]
Azmeh Shahid et al. “Stanford sleepiness scale (SSS).” In: STOP, THAT and one hundred other
sleep scales. Springer, 2011, pp. 369–370.
[8]
Murray W Johns. “A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: the Epworth sleepiness scale.”
In: sleep 14.6 (1991), pp. 540–545.
[9]
Lois E Krahn et al. “Recommended protocols for the multiple sleep latency test and maintenance
of wakefulness test in adults: guidance from the American Academy of Sleep Medicine.” In: Journal
of Clinical Sleep Medicine 17.12 (2021), pp. 2489–2498.
[10]
Ronald D Chervin, Helena C Kraemer, and Christian Guilleminault. “Correlates of sleep latency
on the multiple sleep latency test in a clinical population.” In: Electroencephalography and clinical
neurophysiology 95.3 (1995), pp. 147–153.
[11]
Vijaya L. Tirunahari et al. “Microsleep and sleepiness: a comparison of multiple sleep latency
test and scoring of microsleep as a diagnostic test for excessive daytime sleepiness.” en. In: Sleep
Medicine 4.1 (Jan. 2003), pp. 63–67. issn: 13899457. doi: 10.1016/s1389-9457(02)00250-2.
url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1389945702002502.
[12]
Angela M. Anniss, Alan Young, and Denise M. O’Driscoll. “Microsleep assessment enhances in-
terpretation of the Maintenance of Wakefulness Test.” en. In: Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine
17.8 (Aug. 2021), pp. 1571–1578. issn: 1550-9389, 1550-9397. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.9250. url:
http://jcsm.aasm.org/doi/10.5664/jcsm.9250.
[13]
Jelena Skorucak et al. “Automatically Detected Microsleep Episodes in the Fitness-to-Drive As-
sessment.” In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 14 (Jan. 2020). issn: 1662453X. doi: 10.3389/fnins.
2020.00008.
[14]
Nhat Pham et al. “WAKE: a behind-the-ear wearable system for microsleep detection.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 18th International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services. 2020,
pp. 404–418.
[15]
Jens B Stephansen et al. “Neural network analysis of sleep stages enables eﬀicient diagnosis of
narcolepsy.” In: Nature communications 9.1 (2018), pp. 1–15.
[16]
Jelena Skorucak et al. “Automatic detection of microsleep episodes with feature-based machine
learning.” In: Sleep 43 (1 Jan. 2020). issn: 15509109. doi: 10.1093/sleep/zsz225.
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
63
[17]
Alexander Malafeev et al. “Automatic Detection of Microsleep Episodes With Deep Learning.” In:
Frontiers in Neuroscience 15 (Mar. 2021). issn: 1662453X. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.564098.
[18]
Mathias Perslev et al. “U-Sleep: resilient high-frequency sleep staging.” In: npj Digital Medicine
4 (1 Dec. 2021). issn: 23986352. doi: 10.1038/s41746-021-00440-5.
[19]
Huy Phan et al. “Towards More Accurate Automatic Sleep Staging via Deep Transfer Learning.”
en. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 68.6 (June 2021), pp. 1787–1798. issn:
0018-9294, 1558-2531. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2020.3020381. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/9181436/.
[20]
Hubert Banville et al. “Uncovering the structure of clinical EEG signals with self-supervised
learning.” In: Journal of Neural Engineering 18 (4 Aug. 2021). issn: 17412552. doi: 10.1088/1741-
2552/abca18.
[21]
Stanislas Chambon et al. “A deep learning architecture for temporal sleep stage classification
using multivariate and multimodal time series.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering 26.4 (2018), pp. 758–769.
[22]
Lauren Hale, Wendy Troxel, and Daniel J Buysse. “Sleep health: an opportunity for public health
to address health equity.” In: Annual review of public health 41 (2020), p. 81.
[23]
Jessica Vensel Rundo and Ralph Downey. “Polysomnography.” en. In: Handbook of Clinical Neu-
rology. Vol. 160. Elsevier, 2019, pp. 381–392. isbn: 978-0-444-64032-1. doi: 10 . 1016 / B978 -
0 - 444 - 64032 - 1 . 00025 - 4. url: https : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii /
B9780444640321000254.
[24]
Suresh Menon. “Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome.” In: Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery for the
Clinician. Springer, 2021, pp. 1577–1589.
[25]
Richard W Homan, John Herman, and Phillip Purdy. “Cerebral location of international 10–20
system electrode placement.” In: Electroencephalography and clinical neurophysiology 66.4 (1987),
pp. 376–382.
[26]
Revati Shriram, Dr Sundhararajan, and Nivedita Daimiwal. “EEG Based Cognitive Workload
Assessment for Maximum Eﬀiciency.” In: IOSR Journal of Electronics and Communication Engi-
neering (IOSR-JECE) (Aug. 2012).
[27]
Conrad Iber. “The AASM manual for the scoring of sleep and associated events: Rules.” In:
Terminology and Technical Specification (2007).
[28]
Aakash K Patel, Vamsi Reddy, and John F Araujo. “Physiology, sleep stages.” In: StatPearls
[Internet]. StatPearls Publishing, 2021.
[29]
Allan Rechtschaffen. “A manual for standardized terminology, techniques and scoring system for
sleep stages in human subjects.” In: Brain information service (1968).
[30]
P. R. Davidson, R. D. Jones, and M. T.R. Peiris. “Detecting behavioral microsleeps using EEG
and LSTM recurrent neural networks.” In: vol. 7 VOLS. Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Inc., 2005, pp. 5754–5757. isbn: 0780387406. doi: 10.1109/iembs.2005.1615795.
[31]
Gustavo Lenis et al. “Detection of microsleep events in a car driving simulation study using elec-
trocardiographic features.” In: Current Directions in Biomedical Engineering 2.1 (2016), pp. 283–
287.
[32]
Ludivine Des Champs de Boishebert et al. “Microsleep versus Sleep Onset Latency during Main-
tenance Wakefulness Tests: Which One Is the Best Marker of Sleepiness?” en. In: Clocks & Sleep
3.2 (Apr. 2021), pp. 259–273. issn: 2624-5175. doi: 10.3390/clockssleep3020016. url: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2624-5175/3/2/16.
[33]
Allen J. Blaivas et al. “Quantifying microsleep to help assess subjective sleepiness.” en. In: Sleep
Medicine 8.2 (Mar. 2007), pp. 156–159. issn: 13899457. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2006.06.011.
url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1389945706001973.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
64
[34]
Amit Paul et al. “Variability of Driving Performance During Microsleeps.” en. In: Driving as-
sessment 2005 : proceedings of the 3rd International Driving Symposium on Human Factors in
Driver Assessment, Training, and Vehicle Design. Rockport, Maine, USA: University of Iowa,
2005, pp. 18–24. doi: 10.17077/drivingassessment.1138. url: http://pubs.lib.uiowa.edu/
driving/article/id/28225/.
[35]
Benoit Priest et al. “Microsleep during a Simplified Maintenance of Wakefulness Test: A Validation
Study of the OSLER Test.” en. In: American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine
163.7 (June 2001), pp. 1619–1625. issn: 1073-449X, 1535-4970. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm.163.7.
2007028. url: https://www.atsjournals.org/doi/10.1164/ajrccm.163.7.2007028.
[36]
Y. Harrison and J.A. Horne. “Occurrence of ‘microsleeps’ during daytime sleep onset in normal sub-
jects.” en. In: Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 98.5 (May 1996), pp. 411–416.
issn: 00134694. doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(96)95612-6. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/0013469496956126.
[37]
Elisa Morrone et al. “Microsleep as a marker of sleepiness in obstructive sleep apnea patients.” en.
In: Journal of Sleep Research 29.2 (Apr. 2020). issn: 0962-1105, 1365-2869. doi: 10.1111/jsr.
12882. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jsr.12882.
[38]
Fabien Sauvet et al. “Beneficial effects of exercise training on cognitive performances during total
sleep deprivation in healthy subjects.” en. In: Sleep Medicine 65 (Jan. 2020), pp. 26–35. issn:
13899457. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2019.07.007. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S1389945719302448.
[39]
Pierrick J. Arnal et al. “Benefits of Sleep Extension on Sustained Attention and Sleep Pressure Be-
fore and During Total Sleep Deprivation and Recovery.” en. In: Sleep 38.12 (Dec. 2015), pp. 1935–
1943. issn: 1550-9109, 0161-8105. doi: 10.5665/sleep.5244. url: https://academic.oup.com/
sleep/article/38/12/1935/2417960.
[40]
C Bougard et al. “Motorcycling performance and sleepiness during an extended ride on a dynamic
simulator: relationship with stress biomarkers.” en. In: Physiological Measurement 41.10 (Oct.
2020), p. 104004. issn: 0967-3334, 1361-6579. doi: 10.1088/1361-6579/abb75e. url: https:
//iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6579/abb75e.
[41]
Clément Bougard et al. “Daytime microsleeps during 7 days of sleep restriction followed by 13 days
of sleep recovery in healthy young adults.” en. In: Consciousness and Cognition 61 (May 2018),
pp. 1–12. issn: 10538100. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2018.03.008. url: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1053810017302271.
[42]
Anneke Hertig-Godeschalk et al. “Microsleep episodes in the borderland between wakefulness and
sleep.” In: Sleep 43 (1 Jan. 2020). issn: 15509109. doi: 10.1093/sleep/zsz163.
[43]
Linda Ng Boyle et al. “Driver performance in the moments surrounding a microsleep.” en. In:
Transportation Research Part F: Traﬀic Psychology and Behaviour 11.2 (Mar. 2008), pp. 126–136.
issn: 13698478. doi: 10.1016/j.trf.2007.08.001. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S1369847807000484.
[44]
Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter. “Fast and accurate deep network
learning by exponential linear units (elus).” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07289 (2015).
[45]
DTU Compute. DeepLearningDTU. url: https://github.com/DeepLearningDTU/02456-deep-
learning-with-PyTorch#readme.
[46]
Christopher M Bishop and Nasser M Nasrabadi. Pattern recognition and machine learning. Vol. 4.
4. Springer, 2006.
[47]
Sumit Saha. “A Comprehensive Guide to Convolutional Neural Networks — the ELI5 way.” In:
towards data science (2018). url: https://towardsdatascience.com/a-comprehensive-guide-
to-convolutional-neural-networks-the-eli5-way-3bd2b1164a53.
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
65
[48]
Sepp Hochreiter. “The vanishing gradient problem during learning recurrent neural nets and
problem solutions.” In: International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based
Systems 6.02 (1998), pp. 107–116.
[49]
Christopher Olah. Understanding LSTM Networks. Aug. 2015. url: http://colah.github.io/
posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs.
[50]
Hertig-Godeschalk Anneke et al. Maintenance of Wakefulness Test (MWT) recordings. Version v1.
Zenodo, Sept. 2019. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3251716. url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
3251716.
[51]
S. M. Purcell et al. “Characterizing sleep spindles in 11,630 individuals from the National Sleep
Research Resource.” In: Nature Communications 8 (June 2017). issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/
ncomms15930.
[52]
Burg J. P. “A new analysis technique for time series data.” In: paper presented at Advanced
Study Institute on signal Processing, NATO Enschede, Netherlands, 1968 (1968). url: https:
//cir.nii.ac.jp/crid/1570854175224026368.
[53]
Mathias Perslev et al. “U-Time: A Fully Convolutional Network for Time Series Segmentation
Applied to Sleep Staging.” In: (Oct. 2019). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.11162.
[54]
Akara Supratak et al. “DeepSleepNet: A model for automatic sleep stage scoring based on raw
single-channel EEG.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering
25.11 (2017), pp. 1998–2008.
[55]
Huy Phan et al. “Joint classification and prediction CNN framework for automatic sleep stage
classification.” In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 66.5 (2018), pp. 1285–1296.
[56]
Fernando Andreotti et al. “Multichannel sleep stage classification and transfer learning using
convolutional neural networks.” In: 2018 40th annual international conference of the IEEE Engi-
neering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE. 2018, pp. 171–174.
[57]
Orestis Tsinalis, Paul M Matthews, and Yike Guo. “Automatic sleep stage scoring using time-
frequency analysis and stacked sparse autoencoders.” In: Annals of biomedical engineering 44.5
(2016), pp. 1587–1597.
[58]
Albert Vilamala, Kristoffer H Madsen, and Lars K Hansen. “Deep convolutional neural networks
for interpretable analysis of EEG sleep stage scoring.” In: 2017 IEEE 27th international workshop
on machine learning for signal processing (MLSP). IEEE. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[59]
Antoine Guillot et al. “Dreem open datasets: Multi-scored sleep datasets to compare human and
automated sleep staging.” In: IEEE transactions on neural systems and rehabilitation engineering
28.9 (2020), pp. 1955–1965.
[60]
Huy Phan et al. “SeqSleepNet: end-to-end hierarchical recurrent neural network for sequence-to-
sequence automatic sleep staging.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering 27.3 (2019), pp. 400–410.
[61]
Andreas Brink-Kjaer et al. “Automatic detection of cortical arousals in sleep and their contribu-
tion to daytime sleepiness.” In: Clinical Neurophysiology 131 (6 June 2020), pp. 1187–1203. issn:
18728952. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2020.02.027.
[62]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[63]
Pankaj Jadhav et al. “Automatic sleep stage classification using time–frequency images of CWT
and transfer learning using convolution neural network.” en. In: Biocybernetics and Biomedical
Engineering 40.1 (Jan. 2020), pp. 494–504. issn: 02085216. doi: 10.1016/j.bbe.2020.01.010.
url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0208521620300152.
[64]
Ary L Goldberger et al. “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: components of a new re-
search resource for complex physiologic signals.” In: circulation 101.23 (2000), e215–e220.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
66
[65]
Forrest N Iandola et al. “SqueezeNet: AlexNet-level accuracy with 50x fewer parameters and<
0.5 MB model size.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360 (2016).
[66]
A Krizhevsky, I Sutskever, and GE Hinton. “Imagenet classification with deep convolutional
neural networks. 2012 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS).” In: Neural
Information Processing Systems Foundation, La Jolla, CA (2012).
[67]
Annette Sterr et al. “Sleep EEG derived from behind-the-ear electrodes (cEEGrid) compared to
standard polysomnography: a proof of concept study.” In: Frontiers in human neuroscience 12
(2018), p. 452.
[68]
Agustina Garcés Correa, Lorena Orosco, and Eric Laciar. “Automatic detection of drowsiness
in EEG records based on multimodal analysis.” In: Medical engineering & physics 36.2 (2014),
pp. 244–249.
[69]
Matteo Cesari et al. A Clinically Applicable Interactive Micro and Macro-Sleep Staging Algorithm
for Elderly and Patients with Neurodegeneration. 2019. isbn: 9781538613115. doi: 10.0/Linux-
x86_64.
[70]
Emadeldeen Eldele et al. “An Attention-Based Deep Learning Approach for Sleep Stage Classifi-
cation with Single-Channel EEG.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering 29 (2021), pp. 809–818. issn: 15580210. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2021.3076234.
[71]
Venkat Krishnamoorthy et al. Deep Learning with Convolutional Neural Network for detecting
microsleep states from EEG: A comparison between the oversampling technique and cost-based
learning. 2019. isbn: 9781538613115. doi: 10.0/Linux-x86_64.
[72]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
ical image segmentation.” In: Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–
MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings,
Part III 18. Springer. 2015, pp. 234–241.
[73]
Robin Tibor Schirrmeister et al. “Deep learning with convolutional neural networks for EEG
decoding and visualization.” In: Human Brain Mapping (Aug. 2017). issn: 1097-0193. doi: 10.
1002/hbm.23730. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hbm.23730.
[74]
Alexandre Gramfort et al. “MEG and EEG data analysis with MNE-Python.” In: Frontiers in
Neuroscience 7 (2013), p. 267. issn: 1662-453X. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2013.00267. url: https:
//www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnins.2013.00267.
[75]
Steven M Kay. Modern spectral estimation: theory and application. Pearson Education India, 1988.
[76]
Peter Achermann. Sleep. Apr. 2006. doi: 10.1002/9780471740360.ebs1096. url: https://doi.
org/10.1002/9780471740360.ebs1096.
[77]
Trevor Hastie et al. The elements of statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction.
Vol. 2. Springer, 2009.
[78]
Nello Cristianini, John Shawe-Taylor, et al. An introduction to support vector machines and other
kernel-based learning methods. Cambridge university press, 2000.
[79]
Martín Abadi et al. TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Systems. Soft-
ware available from tensorflow.org. 2015. url: https://www.tensorflow.org/.
[80]
Ping He, G Wilson, and C Russell. “Removal of ocular artifacts from electro-encephalogram by
adaptive filtering.” In: Medical and biological engineering and computing 42.3 (2004), pp. 407–412.
[81]
Sajad Mousavi, Fatemeh Afghah, and U Rajendra Acharya. “SleepEEGNet: Automated sleep stage
scoring with sequence to sequence deep learning approach.” In: PloS one 14.5 (2019), e0216456.
[82]
Yudong Sun et al. “Deep convolutional network method for automatic sleep stage classification
based on neurophysiological signals.” In: 2018 11th International Congress on Image and Signal
Processing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (CISP-BMEI). IEEE. 2018, pp. 1–5.
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Background
A.1.1
Microsleep
Microsleep scoring guidelines
PDF copies of the microsleep scoring guidelines, excluding references, developed by Sindri Jónsson and
Dr. Oliver Sum-Ping.
==PAGE:75==
Microsleep
Scoring Guidelines
Authors:
Sindri Jónsson
Oliver Sum-Ping
A.1 Background
68
==PAGE:76==
Microsleep: Scoring Guidelines
January 12, 2023
Introduction
Microsleep (MS) are brief periods of sleep intrusion during wakefulness, lasting from 3
to 15 seconds. Although the American Academy of Sleep Medicince (AASM) guidelines
provide a gold standard method for scoring wake and sleep stages [1], it is unable to
capture MS due to the 30 second epoch rule. In this document, a common definition and
guidelines for scoring MS will be provided, based on recent work on microsleep [2–15]
General Information
The following terminology should be used for the stages in microsleep scoring:
· Wake (wakefulness)
· MS (microsleep)
Every sample in the recording will be considered Wake, unless otherwise scored as MS.
Therefore, the task is only to detect and score MS - there is no need to score other samples
as Wake. The location and duration of MS is not restricted to a set epoch length, MS
should be scored from MS onset until MS offset.
Modalities
The main modalities used for scoring MS are electroencephalography (EEG) and elec-
trooculography (EOG) derivations.
EEG:
There should be two frontal, central, and occipital EEG derivations viewed when
scoring MS. Preferably accoring to AASM guidelines.
EOG:
There should be preferably two EOG derivations viewed when scoring MS.
1
A.1 Background
69
==PAGE:77==
Microsleep: Scoring Guidelines
January 12, 2023
Microsleep Identification
The common definition of MS is diminishing/absent alpha activity with an intrusion
of theta activity in an artifact free EEG signal. In order to score MS the following is
required in at least one EEG derivation:
R1.a During wakefulness alpha activity (8−13 Hz) diminishes or is absent and there is an
intrusion or dominance of theta (4 −7 Hz) activity in the EEG. The theta activity
may be low-amplitude, mixed frequency (LAMF). In some cases slower wave activity
may also appear in the delta band (0 −4 Hz).
or
R1.b In circumstances where alpha activity is absent during wakefulness, MS should be
scored when there is theta activity in the EEG with slowing of background frequen-
cies by ≥1 Hz from that in Wake.
and
R2. The EEG signal must not be masked by movement or blinking artifacts.
When scoring MS, the following can be used supplementary features:
S1. Slow eye movements (SEM)
S2. Vertex shape waves (V waves).
If any AASM defined sleep stage (N1, N2, N3, REM) is identified and within the duration
criteria of MS, it should be scored as MS.
Duration:
The duration of scored MS is 3 to 15 seconds. Therefore, when scoring MS
the following duration criteria should be applied:
· Events < 3 seconds should not be scored as MS
· Events ≥15 seconds should not be scored as MS
· Events ≥3 and < 15 seconds should be scored as MS.
The schematic flowchart shown in Figure 1 illustrates how to determine whether to score
a segment as MS.
2
A.1 Background
70
==PAGE:78==
Microsleep: Scoring Guidelines
January 12, 2023
Figure 1: Schematic illustration of how to identify and score microsleep.
3
A.1 Background
71
==PAGE:79==
A.1 Background
72
A.1.2
State of the Art
Literature Review
This section contains summaries from a selection of papers which were not included in the main part
of this thesis.
Automatically Detected Microsleep Episodes in the Fitness-to-Drive Assessment
Skorucak, Hertig-Godeschalk, Achermann, Mathis, and Schreier (2020) [13]
The objective of this study was to investigate the relationship between automatically detected MSEs
and driving performance, as well as assessing the algorithm performance for MSE detection in severly
sleepy participants.
Data Description:
The data in this study consisted of two MWT recordings (before and after sleep
deprivation) and driving simulator tracking paralleled with EEG for 18 participants. The MWT record-
ings contained the same channels as in the previous papers [16, 17, 42], while the driving simulator
recorded deviations from the lateral position and off-road events. Only MWT recordings of 10 partici-
pants were scored using the BERN criteria.
Method:
The classification method used in this study was a feature-based LSTM neural network,
which was developed in a previous study [16]. The MWT data and EEG data from the driving simulator
were classified using the aforementioned algorithm and measures of driving deviation and off-road events
were derived from the driving simulator. Numerous MSE metrics such as, latency to MSE, median
MSE duration, cumulative MSE duration, and MSE rate were derived and analyzed for correlations
with driving simulator metrics. An illustration of the methods in this study are shown in Figure A.1.
Figure A.1: Schematic illustration of the methods used.
Results:
The automatic detection of MSEs had a substantial identification of Cohen’s kappa = 0.64
overall, and a slightly better performance after sleep deprivation (kappa = 0.66). They found significant
correlations between MSE from EEG when driving and driving performance:
• Cumulative duration off road and median MSe duration (rs = 0.53, p < 0.05), MSE rate (rs = 0.47,
p < 0.05), cumulative MSE duration (rs = 0.49, p < 0.05)
• Amount of off road events per minute and median MSE duration (rs = 0.47, p < 0.05)
However, no correlations were found between MSE in MWT and driving performance.
==PAGE:80==
A.1 Background
73
Remarks:
In this study they show that the classification algorithm is robust by obtaining a substantial
identification performance on a severely sleepy cohort although it was trained and validated on a
moderately sleepy cohort. Although they were unable to find correlations between MWT MSE and
driving performance, multiple correlations were found in the driving EEG and driving performance. This
may indicate that there is a close- and time-related relationship between sleepiness and performance,
proving the importance of MSE detection. This study provides more of a feasibility inspiration to the
objective of this thesis rather than any state of the art methodologies.
A Clinically Applicable Interactive Micro and Macro-Sleep Staging Algorithm for
Elderly and Patients with Neurodegeneration
Cesari, Christensen, Sixel-Doring, Muntean, Mollenhauer, Trenkwalder, Jennum, and Sorensen (2019)
[69]
The objective of this study was to develop a sleep staging algorithm which can classify both 30 s
epochs (macro-staging) and 5 s mini-epochs (micro-stating) using a deep CNN with heuristic epoch
classification and certainty scores, applied to an elderly cohort with and without neuro-degenerative
disease (NDD).
Data Description:
The data in this study consisted of PSG data from 199 patients (81 HC, 57 PD,
30 PD+RBD, 31 iRBD) which was scored into 30s epochs using the AASM guidelines. The PSG data
had a sampling rate of 256 Hz. Sleep stages were reduced to Wake, NREM (N1, N2, N3) and REM.
Method:
In this study, they only used C4-A1 EEG, and the LOC-A2 and ROC-A1 EOG channels.
The signals were pre-processed by removing saturation and electrode pop-up artifacts, which were
identified as signals exceeding 1 × 104µV or plateauing at 0µV for 10 samples. Then EOG and ECG
artifacts were removed the EEG signal, and ECG artifacts removed from the EOG signals by adaptive
filtering [80]. Thereafter, a 4-th order zero-phase band-pass Butterworth filter (0.5−35 Hz) was applied,
before finally down-sampling the signal to 100 Hz with an anti-aliasing FIR low-pass filter. The signals
were then transformed to a scalogram using a wavelet transform with Morse mother wavelet (6 voices per
octave and time bandwidth of 60), including only frequencies 0.5 −40 Hz. The scalograms were binned
into 5 s mini-epochs with 50% overlap, which were normalized in the range 0-1. Then 3D matrices,
consisting of scalograms of the three signals used, were provided as inputs to a CNN (see Figure A.9 in
the appendix). The class probabilities from the CNN were then converted to 30 s epochs by smoothing
the probabilites using a Blackman window of length 38. The resulting probabilities are then averaged
within the 30 s epoch and the stage with the highest probability was then classified. An illustration of
this process is summarized in Figure A.2.
Figure A.2: Schematic illustration of the classification method.
The network was trained and validated on 30 and 10 healthy participants, respectively. Furthermore,
thresholds for determining the certainty of the epochs were developed, using ROC analysis from 10-fold
CV, for each class.
==PAGE:81==
A.1 Background
74
Results:
The classification results of this study are summarized in Table A.1.
Table A.1: Classification performance when all epochs are included and when uncertain epochs are
excluded (mean and standard deviation across participants).
Cohen’s Kappa
Group
All
No Uncertain
Test HC
0.77 ± 0.10
0.81 ± 0.10
Test PD
0.74 ± 0.16
0.80 ± 0.17
Test iRBD
0.60 ± 0.15
0.73 ± 0.15
Test PD+RBD
0.60 ± 0.16
0.76 ± 0.16
The classification performance is the highest for the HC group, where as it considerably worse for
iRBD and PD+RBD cohorts. The classification performance is also considerably improved by excluding
uncertain epochs.
Remarks:
In relation to this thesis, the main drawback of this study is that they do not validate the
micro-staging against labelled data, but rather use 30 s epochs. Therefore, it is diﬀicult to evaluate
the feasibility of this method in microsleep detection. Additionally, it is questionable how little and
uniformal data they use in training and validating the algorithm.
However, they apply interesting
methods including the certainty evaluation, scalogram inputs to a CNN and a heuristic probability
voting.
An Attention-Based Deep Learning Approach for Sleep Stage Classification with
Single-Channel EEG
Eldele, Chen, Liu, Wu, Kwoh, Li, and Guan (2021) [70]
The objective of this study was to develop a novel attention-based deep learning network to classify
sleep stages using a single EEG channel.
Data Description:
Three publicly available datasets of PSG recordings.
The Sleep-EDF-20 and
Sleep-EDF-78 datasets were scored according to AASM guidelines and the EEG signals were sampled
at 100 Hz, with Fpz-Cz as the chosen signal. The SHHS dataset were converted to AASM scoring by
merging S3 and S3 to N3 and the EEG signals were sampled at 125 Hz, with C4-A1 as the chosen signal.
Overall, the datasets contained 427 subjects.
Method:
In this study, they developed a network (AttnSleep) which is composed of three modules
and trained using a custom made loss function. The overall framework of the network is shown in
Figure A.3.
The functions of each sub-module are summarized as follows:
• The multi-resolution CNN has two CNN architectures of different kernel sizes, which allows for
extracting high-frequency features by the small kernel and low-frequency features by the large
kernel.
• The adaptive feature recalibration adaptively selects and highlights the most important features by
modelling the inter-dependencies between features and adaptively selects the most discriminative
features.
• The temporal context encoder (TCE) module captures the long-term dependencies in the input
features. The self-attention layer assigns features with higher weights to regions of interest and vice
versa to regions of low interest. The multi-head attention improves the self-attention by expanding
==PAGE:82==
A.1 Background
75
Figure A.3: Overall framework of the AttnSleep model. Retrieved from Eldele et al. [70].
the models ability to focus on different positions to increase the learning of temporal dependencies
and by splitting the input features into different partitions increases the representation subspaces
to boost classification accuracy.
• The class aware loss function is a weighted cross-entropy loss, where the weighting is controlled by
the number of samples of the class and the distinction of the class which is a tuned hyperparameter
for each dataset. The purpose of this modified function is to counteract the effect of class imbalance
on the model training.
They compared the AttnSleep model with other state-of-the-art networks [55, 60, 81, 82].
Results:
The AttnSleep model obtained an overall Cohen’s kappa of 0.79, 0.73 and 0.78 for the dif-
ferent datsets. The AttnSleep model had a better Cohen’s kappa than the reference models for all the
datasets. However, it had a low per-class F1 score for N1 (ranging from 33.2 to 42.6). They were able
to boost their performance when using 3 epochs as input to a Cohen’s kappa of 0.80, 0.77 and 0.81.
Remarks:
This study used some novel methods for feature extraction, temporal context encoding
and a custom loss function for sleep stage scoring. The performance of AttnSleep network is rather
impressive, however it lacks performance in classifying N1 compared to other methods reviewed. This
is particularly problematic for the objective of this thesis, as the objective of this thesis it to distinguish
the transition state from wake to sleep (mircrosleep) in a matter of seconds. Perhaps, the custom loss
function they developed could be assessed further whether it could be used for the class imbalance in
recordings with MSE.
Automatic detection of drowsiness in EEG records based on multimodal analysis
Correa, Orosco, and Laciar (2014) [68]
The objective of this study was to develop an automatic method to detect drowsiness stages in EEG
records using time, spectral and wavelet analysis.
Data Description:
The data used in this study consisted of 18 PSG recordings from 16 healthy male
subjects. The EEG channels used in this sudy were C3-O1, C4-A1 and O2-A1 which were sampled at
250 Hz. The data was scored by experts according to the Rechtschafen and Kales criteria [29]. The
epochs labelled as ”Awake stage” and ”Stage 1” were mapped to ”Alertness State” (AS) and ”Drowsiness
State” (DS), respectively. They used a balanced number of AS and DS epochs, i.e. 10, 074 of each.
==PAGE:83==
A.1 Background
76
Method:
The EEG signals were initially filtered with a 2nd order bidirectional Butterworth BP
filter (0.5 −60 Hz), followed by a cascade of adaptive filters to filter biological noise and powerline
interference. Then the signals were segmented into 5 second epochs. Feature extraction was applied
where they obtained temporal, spectral and wavelet features. The 19 features derived in total, from
each domain are summarized as follows:
• Temporal: Maximum (Max), Minimum (Min), Standard Deviation (STD)
• Spectral: Central Frequency (CF), Peak Frequency (PF), Ratio H/L (R/HL), First Quartile Fre-
quency (QF1), Third Quartile Frequency (QF3), Spectral Standard Deviation (SSD), Interquartile
Range (IR), Maximum Frequency (MaxF), Asymmetry Coeﬀicent (AC), Kurtosis Coeﬀicent (KC)
• Wavelet: Scales 3, 4 and 5 have equivalent bandwidth as Theta (θ), Alpha (α), and Beta (β) to
calculate Zero Crossing (ZC) and Integrated EEG (IEEG).
The PSD was estimated using a 20-th order Burg method, whereas the EEG segments were decom-
posed using the Daubisches 2 stationary wavelet transform. They then proceeded to a feature selection
procedure using an LDA classifier with a step-wise selection based on a Lambda of Wilks parameter.
The remaining features were then provided as input to a simple feed-forward neural network with one
hidden layer with varying number of hidden neurons (10 −40) which yielded an output through a
tan-sigmoid transfer function. The aforementioned methods are summarized in the block diagram in
Figure A.4.
Figure A.4: Schematic illustration of the methods used to detect alertness state (AS) vs drowsiness
state (DS).
Results:
The automatic feature selection resulted in the following 13 parameters: CF, STD, Q1F,
maxF, IEEGθ, IEEGα, AC, RH/L, SSD, ZCα, IEEGβ, KC, IR. However, they tested different amount
of features as input to the neural network, obtaining similar results despite reduced feature input. The
results are summarized in Table A.2.
Table A.2: Neural network classification results (%), rows indicate the true labels and columns repre-
sent the network predictions. The number of hidden neurons are 25, 25, and 35 for 19, 13,
and 7 features, respectively.
Number of features input to ANN
19
13
7
AS
DS
AS
DS
AS
DS
AS
88.30
11.70
86.47
13.53
87.46
12.54
DS
16.18
83.82
15.02
84.98
16.14
83.86
They report an average accuracy of 85.5% for correct predictions, for both stages.
Remarks:
The results of this study suggest a robust system, however, there are certain aspects that
should be taken into account. They use a small sample size and make a rather simplistic assumption by
translating traditional sleep scoring to microsleep episodes. The possibility of using traditionally scored
==PAGE:84==
A.1 Background
77
N1 or S1 stages in a PSG as microsleep does not seem like a viable solution to generating microsleep
data as it does not pertain to actual microsleep. Furthermore, it is unclear how they evaluate their
model and the evaluation metrics are not informative. Nonetheless, they obtain a rather impressive
classification accuracy with simple feature engineering and shallow neural network. Furthermore, post-
hoc quantitative analysis of false positives showed that they often predicted drowsiness state prior to
the actual event. This is an interesting aspect of their study and predicting microsleep prior to onset
could possibly be a parallel avenue to explore.
Deep Learning with Convolutional Neural Network for detecting microsleep
states from EEG: A comparison between the oversampling technique and
cost-based learning
Krishnamoorthy, Shoorangiz, Weddell, Beckert, and Jones (2019) [71]
The objective of this study was to explore the effectiveness of CNNs to detect microsleep states from
EEG. They also aimed to investigate class imbalance mitigation techniques with regard to resource
requirements, training time and performance.
Data Description:
The data used in this study were recordings from 15 healthy subjects which
underwent two 1 hour sessions performing 1D continuous tracking tasks. EEG, tracking performance
and videos were recorded of the subjects. The EEG was recorded with 16 electrodes with a sampling
rate of 256 Hz. Only 8 subjects had at least one definite microsleep in at least one session. Microsleep
was defined from video and tracking analysis. On average, the ratio of microsleep states to responsive
states, were 1 : 17, respectively.
Method:
The raw EEG signals were filtered using an FIR bandpass filter with cut-off frequencies
at 1 −45 Hz. The filtered signals were then re-referenced to a common average to improve the SNR.
Artifact-subspace reconstruction was then used to remove any artifacts with a z-score above 5.
A
4 second window of the 16 EEG signals were used as input to a CNN. The CNN consisted of four
blocks of convolutional layers, ReLU activation functions and max-pooling before connecting to a fully
connected layer with a softmax function and classification layer. Details of the network can be seen
in the Appendix, Figure A.11. They applied two different methods to handle the class imbalance,
over-sampling and cost-based learning. The over-sampling simply replicated random samples of mi-
crosleep states without augmentation and the cost-based learning used a weighted cross-entropy loss
function which proportionally penalizes misclassification based on the class imbalance. A block diagram
illustrates the methods used in this study in Figure A.5.
Figure A.5: Schematic illustration of the methods used to detect microsleep vs responsive states.
The model was trained and evaluated using a leave-one-out cross validation and the performance of
each optimal model averaged.
==PAGE:85==
A.1 Background
78
Results:
The results of this study are summarized in Table A.3:
Table A.3: The performance of the network using different class imbalance approaches.
Over-sampling
Cost-based
Imbalanced
Sensitivity
0.60
0.64
0.36
Specificity
0.95
0.92
0.97
The network obtains high specificity, but lower sensitivity, meaning that it is lacking performance
in detecting microsleep. They also demonstrate that the training time using over-sampling is twice as
long compared to cost-based learning and caused memory issues.
Remarks:
The performance of this study is considerably worse than in other studies previously
reviewed. This could be due to the labelling of the data, which is based of behavioural data rather than
physiological signals (EEG). It is interesting though, that the model sensitivity increases considerably
when applying class imbalance corrections, which is contrary to what was seen in Malafeev et al. [17].
Considering the small sample size. behavioural labelling and poor performance in this study, it can
neither be considered as a benchmark for the work in this thesis nor provide inspiration to possible
methodologies. However, it demonstrates the importance of a large sample size and proper labelling of
the data.
Supplementary Figures
This sections contains supplementary figures from papers used in the state-of-the-art literature review.
==PAGE:86==
A.1 Background
79
Hertig-Godeschalk et al.
Figure A.6: BERN scoring criteria.
Retrieved from Hertig-Godeschalk et al. [42].
==PAGE:87==
A.1 Background
80
Malafeev et al.
Figure A.7: Structure of the CNN (A) and the CNN-LSTM (B) networks.
Retrieved from Malafeev et al. [17]..
Banville et al.
Figure A.8: Structure of the StagerNet CNN
Retrieved from Banville et al. [20] .
==PAGE:88==
A.1 Background
81
Cesari et al.
Figure A.9: Structure of the CNN network.
Retrieved from Cesari et al. [69].
==PAGE:89==
A.1 Background
82
Brink-Kjaer et al.
Figure A.10: Structure of the network.
Retrieved from Brink-Kjaer et al. [61].
==PAGE:90==
A.1 Background
83
Krishnamoorthy et al.
Figure A.11: Structure of the network.
Retrieved from Krishnamoorthy et al. [71].
==PAGE:91==
A.1 Background
84
Phan et al.
Figure A.12: The generic model structure used for DeepSleepNet+ and SeqSleepNet+, consisting of
an EPB, SPB and shared softmax layer. Adapted from Phan et al. [19].
Figure A.13: Illustration of the EPBs of (a) SeqSleepNet+ and (b) DeepSleepNet+. The EPB of (a)
consists of filterbank layers coupled with bidirectional recurrent layers. The EPB of (b)
is a two branch CNN. Adapted from Phan et al. [19].
==PAGE:92==
A.2 Methods
85
A.2
Methods
A.2.1
Data
Label conversion
Table A.4: Summary statistics of the raw labels scored from Hertig-Godeschalk et al. [42] and the
labels used in this thesis after grouping the raw labels and resampling to 1 Hz.
This
includes the count of the events, number of patients with more than one event, duration
statistics of the events and the percentage of events within 3 to 15 seconds. The statistics
of the grouped and resampled labels are also provided for the training and test split used
in this thesis.
Raw labels (200 Hz)
MS after grouping (1 Hz)
ED
MSEc
MSEu
MSE
Overall
Train
Test
Count
1257
966
295
1053
1348
988
359
# Patient (n ≥1)
59
45
34
39
47
34
13
# Samples (%)
5.4
1.8
0.4
7.5
9.6
10.3
8.1
Duration (s)
Mean
7.17
3.04
2.21
11.74
11.86
12.02
11.43
Min
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
25th Percentile
3.19
2.12
0.07
3.47
3.00
4.00
3.00
Median
5.65
2.91
1.75
6.57
6.00
6.00
5.00
75th Percentile
8.84
3.92
3.18
12.64
13.00
13.00
13.00
Max
65.23
14.70
16.12
190.01
278.00
278.00
190.00
3 - 15 (%)
70%
48%
28%
60%
66.2%
66.5%
65.7%
Expected Data
An overview of the expected data from collaborating institutions for this thesis is summarized in Table
A.5, along with the number of subjects, recordings and cohorts.
==PAGE:93==
A.2 Methods
86
Table A.5: Summary of the data expected from collaborating instituions for this thesis. OSA: Obstruc-
tive Sleep Apnea, tOSA: treated OSA, utOSA: untreated OSA, N: Narcolepsy, NT1/NT2:
Narcolepsy type 1 / 2, HC: Healthy Cohort.
Institution
Country
Data
Type
# Subjects
# Recordings
Cohorts
Microsleep
Scored
Eastern Health
Australia
MWT
48
48
tOSA (n=13)
utOSA (n=23)
N/IH (n=12)
Yes (48)
Hospices Civils de Lyon
France
MWT
110
110
OSA (n=82)
NT1 (n=28)
Yes (90)
No (20)
Hospices Civils de Lyon
France
24h PSG
100
100
NT1 (n=25)
NT2 (n=25)
IH (n=25)
HC (n=25)
Yes (40)
No (60)
French Armed Forces
Biomedical Research
Institute
France
MWT
12
60
HC (n=12)
Yes (60)
Stanford University
USA
MWT
7
7
NT1 (n=5)
NT2 (n=2)
Yes (7)
Total
277
325
tOSA: 13
utOSA: 23
OSA: 82
NT1: 58
NT2: 27
IH: 25
N/IH: 12
HC: 37
245
A.2.2
Benchmark Models
This section includes tables comparing the results obtained in Skorucak et al. [16] (Tables 2.−5.) and a
replication of their methods used as benchmark for this thesis (labelled this work in the tables). There
are some discrepancies between the results obtained in Skorucak et al. [16] and the ones from this work.
There are numerous possible reasons for this:
• The data used in Skorucak et al. [16] were the same recordings as used in this work, as well as
the same train/test split between patients. However, in Skorucak et al. [16] they performed ECG
artifact removal. This was not possible using the public data they provided because the ECG
signal was not included in their public repository. Therefore, the signals differ quite substantially
due to ECG artifacts.
• The random seed used for selecting random wake segments when training the RF and SVM
classifiers is most likely different. Therefore, different signal segments of wake are used when
training the RF and SVM classifiers.
• In Tables 2. −5. in Skorucak et al. [16], they provide the performance of the classifiers for the
different grouping methods of wake, ED, MSEc, and MSE as a mean across patients and the
standard error of the mean. In all of the tables they state that patients with less than 2 MSE
were excluded (n=13). However, when applying the different grouping methods, the count of MSE
changes for the patients. In this work, for the different grouping methods, that is {13, 13, 9, 10}
as can be seen in the caption of the tables. This will create a major difference in the mean and
standard error of the mean performance measures of the classifiers.
In the following tables the performance of the classifiers in Skorucak et al. [16] and their replication in
this work for different grouping methods of the original labels are summarized. In this comparison, the
models were only trained on bilateral MSE versus bilateral Wake, and tested on the various different
grouping methods, analogous to Skorucak et al. [16]. The performance measures include sensitivity,
specificity, precision, accuracy, and Cohen’s kappa coeﬀicients. Overall performance measures across
==PAGE:94==
A.2 Methods
87
all patients (numbers without standard errors of the mean; data of all patients were pooled) and mean
across patients and standard error of the mean. Recordings not having MSEs (≤1 MSE) were excluded
for calculation of mean performance for sensitivity, precision and Cohen’s kappa since these measures
take into account positives (i.e. MSEs). The performance of all classifiers was calculated based on a
200 ms resolution.
Table A.6: Performance taking only into account bilateral MSE and bilateral wakefulness. Number
of subjects excluded for mean calculations (n=13 & n=13 [16]).
.
Model
LSTM
RF
SVM
Sensitivity
[16]
0.92
(0.88 ± 0.05)
0.91
(0.84 ± 0.06)
0.88
(0.80 ± 0.06)
This work
0.94
(0.92 ± 0.03)
0.92
(0.87 ± 0.05)
0.85
(0.80 ± 0.05)
Specificity
[16]
0.98
(0.99 ± 0.01)
0.99
(0.98 ± 0.01)
0.98
(0.98 ± 0.01)
This work
0.99
(0.98 ± 0.01)
0.97
(0.97 ± 0.02)
0.97
(0.97 ± 0.02)
Precision
[16]
0.85
(0.86 ± 0.07)
0.82
(0.82 ± 0.08)
0.77
(0.81 ± 0.09)
This work
0.83
(0.86 ± 0.06)
0.69
(0.76 ± 0.11)
0.71
(0.78 ± 0.10)
Accuracy
[16]
0.98
(0.98 ± 0.01)
0.98
(0.98 ± 0.01)
0.97
(0.97 ± 0.01)
This work
0.98
(0.98 ± 0.01)
0.97
(0.96 ± 0.01)
0.97
(0.96 ± 0.01)
Kappa
[16]
0.88
(0.83 ± 0.06)
0.85
(0.78 ± 0.08)
0.81
(0.75 ± 0.08)
This work
0.87
(0.85 ± 0.05)
0.77
(0.73 ± 0.10)
0.75
(0.70 ± 0.08)
Table A.7: Performance of the classifiers when unilateral MSEs, MSEc and ED were assigned to
the category of wakefulness versus bilateral MSE. Number of subjects excluded for mean
calculations (n=13 & n=13 [16]).
Model
LSTM
RF
SVM
Sensitivity
[16]
0.92
(0.88 ± 0.05)
0.89
(0.82 ± 0.07)
0.87
(0.80 ± 0.06)
This work
0.94
(0.92 ± 0.03)
0.92
(0.87 ± 0.05)
0.85
(0.80 ± 0.05)
Specificity
[16]
0.97
(0.96 ± 0.01)
0.97
(0.96 ± 0.01)
0.97
(0.96 ± 0.01)
This work
0.96
(0.96 ± 0.01)
0.95
(0.94 ± 0.02)
0.96
(0.95 ± 0.02)
Precision
[16]
0.66
(0.64 ± 0.07)
0.67
(0.64 ± 0.08)
0.64
(0.63 ± 0.08)
This work
0.64
(0.65 ± 0.07)
0.56
(0.58 ± 0.09)
0.58
(0.60 ± 0.08)
Accuracy
[16]
0.97
(0.96 ± 0.01)
0.97
(0.96 ± 0.01)
0.96
(0.96 ± 0.01)
This work
0.96
(0.96 ± 0.01)
0.95
(0.95 ± 0.02)
0.95
(0.95 ± 0.02)
Kappa
[16]
0.75
(0.68 ± 0.06)
0.75
(0.66 ± 0.07)
0.71
(0.63 ± 0.08)
This work
0.74
(0.69 ± 0.05)
0.67
(0.60 ± 0.08)
0.66
(0.59 ± 0.07)
Table A.8: Performance of the classifiers when unilateral MSEs, MSEc and ED were assigned to the
category of MSE versus bilateral wake. Number of subjects excluded for mean calculations
(n=9 & n=13 [16]).
Model
LSTM
RF
SVM
Sensitivity
[16]
0.56
(0.54 ± 0.08)
0.52
(0.51 ± 0.09)
0.50
(0.54 ± 0.08)
This work
0.59
(0.48 ± 0.09)
0.56
(0.45 ± 0.09)
0.51
(0.42 ± 0.08)
Specificity
[16]
0.99
(0.99 ± 0.01)
0.99
(0.98 ± 0.01)
0.98
(0.98 ± 0.01)
This work
0.99
(0.98 ± 0.01)
0.97
(0.97 ± 0.02)
0.97
(0.97 ± 0.02)
Precision
[16]
0.88
(0.81 ± 0.08)
0.86
(0.78 ± 0.11)
0.81
(0.84 ± 0.09)
This work
0.87
(0.85 ± 0.07)
0.74
(0.71 ± 0.10)
0.76
(0.75 ± 0.09)
Accuracy
[16]
0.93
(0.92 ± 0.01)
0.92
(0.92 ± 0.02)
0.91
(0.91 ± 0.02)
This work
0.93
(0.93 ± 0.02)
0.91
(0.91 ± 0.02)
0.91
(0.90 ± 0.02)
Kappa
[16]
0.65
(0.58 ± 0.06)
0.60
(0.55 ± 0.08)
0.57
(0.52 ± 0.08)
This work
0.67
(0.48 ± 0.08)
0.59
(0.39 ± 0.09)
0.56
(0.37 ± 0.07)
==PAGE:95==
A.2 Methods
88
Table A.9: Performance of the classifiers when unilateral MSEs, MSEc were assigned to the category of
MSE, and ED were assigned to the category of wakefulness. Number of subjects excluded
for mean calculations (n=10 & n=13 [16]).
Model
LSTM
RF
SVM
Sensitivity
[16]
0.81
(0.72 ± 0.08)
0.78
(0.73 ± 0.07)
0.76
(0.71 ± 0.07)
This work
0.85
(0.64 ± 0.10)
0.82
(0.61 ± 0.10)
0.75
(0.56 ± 0.09)
Specificity
[16]
0.98
(0.97 ± 0.01)
0.98
(0.97 ± 0.01)
0.97
(0.97 ± 0.01)
This work
0.97
(0.97 ± 0.01)
0.96
(0.95 ± 0.02)
0.96
(0.96 ± 0.02)
Precision
[16]
0.75
(0.67 ± 0.08)
0.75
(0.74 ± 0.07)
0.71
(0.72 ± 0.08)
This work
0.73
(0.68 ± 0.08)
0.64
(0.61 ± 0.10)
0.65
(0.63 ± 0.09)
Accuracy
[16]
0.96
(0.96 ± 0.01)
0.96
(0.96 ± 0.01)
0.96
(0.95 ± 0.01)
This work
0.96
(0.96 ± 0.01)
0.95
(0.95 ± 0.02)
0.95
(0.94 ± 0.01)
Kappa
[16]
0.76
(0.64 ± 0.08)
0.74
(0.66 ± 0.07)
0.71
(0.64 ± 0.08)
This work
0.76
(0.55 ± 0.09)
0.69
(0.48 ± 0.10)
0.67
(0.46 ± 0.09)
==PAGE:96==
A.3 Results
89
A.3
Results
A.3.1
Model Selection (patU-Sleep)
Table A.10: Results from the 5-fold CV for finding the optimal model of post-processing and thresh-
olding U-Sleep outputs (patU-Sleep).Average F1 score is reported as well as the standard
error of the mean (SEM) across folds..
Method
Hz
F1 ± SEM
predsArgmax
1
0.57 ± 0.02
predsMax
1
0.54 ± 0.03
predsSum
1
0.55 ± 0.02
predsArgmax
8
0.56 ± 0.02
predsBinArgmax
8
0.56 ± 0.02
predsBinMax
8
0.55 ± 0.02
predsBinSum
8
0.54 ± 0.02
predsMax
8
0.53 ± 0.02
predsSum
8
0.55 ± 0.02
predsArgmax
16
0.55 ± 0.02
predsBinArgmax
16
0.56 ± 0.02
predsBinMax
16
0.55 ± 0.02
predsBinSum
16
0.54 ± 0.02
predsMax
16
0.53 ± 0.02
predsSum
16
0.54 ± 0.02
predsArgmax
32
0.54 ± 0.03
predsBinArgmax
32
0.55 ± 0.02
predsBinMax
32
0.54 ± 0.02
predsBinSum
32
0.52 ± 0.02
predsMax
32
0.53 ± 0.02
predsSum
32
0.54 ± 0.02
Table A.11: Results for each fold from the 5-fold CV for finding the opti-
mal model of post-processing and thresholding U-Sleep outputs
(patU-Sleep).
Hz
Method
k-Fold
Threshold
F1
Precision
Recall
1
predsArgmax
1
NaN
0.55
0.75
0.43
1
predsArgmax
2
NaN
0.55
0.76
0.43
1
predsArgmax
3
NaN
0.59
0.51
0.70
1
predsArgmax
4
NaN
0.63
0.59
0.66
1
predsArgmax
5
NaN
0.52
0.51
0.53
1
predsMax
1
0.45
0.47
0.71
0.35
1
predsMax
2
0.45
0.51
0.73
0.39
1
predsMax
3
0.42
0.59
0.53
0.67
1
predsMax
4
0.42
0.62
0.61
0.63
1
predsMax
5
0.42
0.49
0.48
0.51
1
predsSum
1
0.65
0.52
0.82
0.38
1
predsSum
2
0.65
0.53
0.84
0.38
1
predsSum
3
0.57
0.57
0.48
0.71
1
predsSum
4
0.57
0.62
0.57
0.68
1
predsSum
5
0.55
0.51
0.48
0.55
8
predsArgmax
1
NaN
0.56
0.70
0.46
8
predsArgmax
2
NaN
0.56
0.73
0.45
Continued on next page
==PAGE:97==
A.3 Results
90
Table A.11: Results for each fold from the 5-fold CV for finding the opti-
mal model of post-processing and thresholding U-Sleep outputs
(patU-Sleep).
Hz
Method
k-Fold
Threshold
F1
Precision
Recall
8
predsArgmax
3
NaN
0.57
0.47
0.72
8
predsArgmax
4
NaN
0.61
0.55
0.69
8
predsArgmax
5
NaN
0.51
0.47
0.55
8
predsBinArgmax
1
NaN
0.52
0.76
0.39
8
predsBinArgmax
2
NaN
0.53
0.79
0.40
8
predsBinArgmax
3
NaN
0.60
0.54
0.67
8
predsBinArgmax
4
NaN
0.62
0.61
0.64
8
predsBinArgmax
5
NaN
0.53
0.54
0.52
8
predsBinMax
1
0.42
0.51
0.72
0.40
8
predsBinMax
2
0.42
0.52
0.74
0.41
8
predsBinMax
3
0.40
0.58
0.49
0.72
8
predsBinMax
4
0.40
0.62
0.59
0.66
8
predsBinMax
5
0.40
0.49
0.47
0.52
8
predsBinSum
1
0.68
0.49
0.82
0.35
8
predsBinSum
2
0.65
0.53
0.82
0.39
8
predsBinSum
3
0.60
0.56
0.45
0.71
8
predsBinSum
4
0.65
0.62
0.59
0.65
8
predsBinSum
5
0.60
0.52
0.48
0.56
8
predsMax
1
0.42
0.49
0.68
0.38
8
predsMax
2
0.40
0.52
0.66
0.43
8
predsMax
3
0.40
0.56
0.47
0.70
8
predsMax
4
0.40
0.61
0.58
0.64
8
predsMax
5
0.40
0.48
0.46
0.50
8
predsSum
1
0.68
0.50
0.79
0.37
8
predsSum
2
0.68
0.53
0.82
0.39
8
predsSum
3
0.60
0.55
0.45
0.72
8
predsSum
4
0.62
0.61
0.55
0.69
8
predsSum
5
0.62
0.53
0.51
0.55
16
predsArgmax
1
NaN
0.59
0.69
0.51
16
predsArgmax
2
NaN
0.58
0.71
0.48
16
predsArgmax
3
NaN
0.53
0.41
0.75
16
predsArgmax
4
NaN
0.59
0.50
0.73
16
predsArgmax
5
NaN
0.48
0.42
0.57
16
predsBinArgmax
1
NaN
0.52
0.76
0.39
16
predsBinArgmax
2
NaN
0.53
0.78
0.40
16
predsBinArgmax
3
NaN
0.59
0.52
0.67
16
predsBinArgmax
4
NaN
0.62
0.61
0.63
16
predsBinArgmax
5
NaN
0.52
0.53
0.51
16
predsBinMax
1
0.45
0.50
0.77
0.37
16
predsBinMax
2
0.42
0.55
0.74
0.44
16
predsBinMax
3
0.42
0.58
0.50
0.70
16
predsBinMax
4
0.42
0.62
0.59
0.65
16
predsBinMax
5
0.42
0.49
0.49
0.50
16
predsBinSum
1
0.68
0.50
0.81
0.36
16
predsBinSum
2
0.68
0.52
0.84
0.38
16
predsBinSum
3
0.62
0.55
0.45
0.71
16
predsBinSum
4
0.62
0.60
0.53
0.70
16
predsBinSum
5
0.62
0.51
0.48
0.56
16
predsMax
1
0.42
0.51
0.68
0.41
16
predsMax
2
0.42
0.54
0.71
0.43
16
predsMax
3
0.40
0.54
0.43
0.74
16
predsMax
4
0.42
0.60
0.58
0.62
16
predsMax
5
0.42
0.47
0.46
0.48
16
predsSum
1
0.72
0.47
0.83
0.33
16
predsSum
2
0.70
0.54
0.84
0.39
16
predsSum
3
0.65
0.55
0.46
0.71
16
predsSum
4
0.68
0.60
0.55
0.66
16
predsSum
5
0.65
0.52
0.49
0.55
32
predsArgmax
1
NaN
0.59
0.65
0.53
Continued on next page
==PAGE:98==
A.3 Results
91
Table A.11: Results for each fold from the 5-fold CV for finding the opti-
mal model of post-processing and thresholding U-Sleep outputs
(patU-Sleep).
Hz
Method
k-Fold
Threshold
F1
Precision
Recall
32
predsArgmax
2
NaN
0.58
0.69
0.50
32
predsArgmax
3
NaN
0.51
0.38
0.79
32
predsArgmax
4
NaN
0.58
0.47
0.75
32
predsArgmax
5
NaN
0.46
0.37
0.60
32
predsBinArgmax
1
NaN
0.51
0.75
0.39
32
predsBinArgmax
2
NaN
0.53
0.78
0.40
32
predsBinArgmax
3
NaN
0.58
0.51
0.67
32
predsBinArgmax
4
NaN
0.61
0.59
0.63
32
predsBinArgmax
5
NaN
0.52
0.52
0.52
32
predsBinMax
1
0.45
0.51
0.76
0.39
32
predsBinMax
2
0.45
0.53
0.78
0.40
32
predsBinMax
3
0.42
0.56
0.46
0.73
32
predsBinMax
4
0.42
0.61
0.55
0.68
32
predsBinMax
5
0.42
0.48
0.44
0.52
32
predsBinSum
1
0.70
0.46
0.82
0.32
32
predsBinSum
2
0.68
0.53
0.83
0.38
32
predsBinSum
3
0.62
0.53
0.41
0.73
32
predsBinSum
4
0.68
0.60
0.56
0.65
32
predsBinSum
5
0.65
0.51
0.48
0.55
32
predsMax
1
0.45
0.50
0.74
0.38
32
predsMax
2
0.45
0.52
0.75
0.40
32
predsMax
3
0.42
0.55
0.45
0.72
32
predsMax
4
0.45
0.60
0.61
0.59
32
predsMax
5
0.42
0.47
0.43
0.51
32
predsSum
1
0.72
0.48
0.82
0.34
32
predsSum
2
0.72
0.53
0.87
0.38
32
predsSum
3
0.68
0.55
0.45
0.70
32
predsSum
4
0.70
0.60
0.55
0.65
32
predsSum
5
0.68
0.52
0.49
0.55
==PAGE:99==
A.3 Results
92
A.3.2
mU-SSL: Pretext Task
Figure A.14: Training curves for the relative positioning task when developing the feature extractor
for mU-SSL..
==PAGE:100==
A.3 Results
93
A.3.3
The effect of microsleep label duration and prediction duration
Figure A.15: Recall of the different classifiers calculated as a function of microsleep label duration.
The top plot show the recall of the classifiers when only considering microsleep labels
of a certain duration. The lines represent a rolling mean of 5 adjacent microsleep label
durations to clarify the plot. The bottom plot shows the mean recall of the classifiers
for microsleep labels of duration 1 −3, 3 −15, and 15+ seconds.
==PAGE:101==
A.3 Results
94
Figure A.16: Percentage of FP for the different classifiers calculated as a function of prediction dura-
tion. The plots show the mean percentage of false positives over the prediction durations.
==PAGE:102==
A.3 Results
95
A.3.4
Model output on test data
The following figures show the performance of the models developed as part of this thesis on the test data,
including the output probabilities from the models, predictions and their corresponding performance
metrics.
Figure A.17: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording 0pai. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:103==
A.3 Results
96
Figure A.18: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording 3P0D. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:104==
A.3 Results
97
Figure A.19: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording 40kO. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:105==
A.3 Results
98
Figure A.20: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording 6iwd. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:106==
A.3 Results
99
Figure A.21: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording 6JVj. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:107==
A.3 Results
100
Figure A.22: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording BSvO. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:108==
A.3 Results
101
Figure A.23: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording csxQ. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:109==
A.3 Results
102
Figure A.24: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording DSfb. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:110==
A.3 Results
103
Figure A.25: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording EyTS. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:111==
A.3 Results
104
Figure A.26: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording hcml. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:112==
A.3 Results
105
Figure A.27: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording hRMy. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:113==
A.3 Results
106
Figure A.28: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording ibbz. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:114==
A.3 Results
107
Figure A.29: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording IhpU. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:115==
A.3 Results
108
Figure A.30: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording kj2l. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:116==
A.3 Results
109
Figure A.31: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording Kn9O. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:117==
A.3 Results
110
Figure A.32: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording mBks. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:118==
A.3 Results
111
Figure A.33: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording mZje. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:119==
A.3 Results
112
Figure A.34: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording N1nM. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:120==
A.3 Results
113
Figure A.35: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording Otq3. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:121==
A.3 Results
114
Figure A.36: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording R2f3. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:122==
A.3 Results
115
Figure A.37: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording tG6i. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:123==
A.3 Results
116
Figure A.38: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording Xg1l. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
==PAGE:124==
A.3 Results
117
Figure A.39: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis on recording Xii6. The plots
include the target labels, model output probabilities, predictions and performance met-
rics..
The following figures show the performance of the models developed as part of this thesis and the
benchmark models on the test data, i.e. their predictions and corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:125==
A.3 Results
118
Figure A.40: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording 0pai. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:126==
A.3 Results
119
Figure A.41: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording 3P0D. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:127==
A.3 Results
120
Figure A.42: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording 40kO. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:128==
A.3 Results
121
Figure A.43: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording 6iwd. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:129==
A.3 Results
122
Figure A.44: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording 6JVj. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:130==
A.3 Results
123
Figure A.45: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording BSvO. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:131==
A.3 Results
124
Figure A.46: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording csxQ. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:132==
A.3 Results
125
Figure A.47: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording DSfb. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:133==
A.3 Results
126
Figure A.48: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording EyTS. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:134==
A.3 Results
127
Figure A.49: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording hcml. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:135==
A.3 Results
128
Figure A.50: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording hRMy. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:136==
A.3 Results
129
Figure A.51: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording ibbz. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:137==
A.3 Results
130
Figure A.52: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording IhpU. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:138==
A.3 Results
131
Figure A.53: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording kj2l. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:139==
A.3 Results
132
Figure A.54: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording Kn9O. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:140==
A.3 Results
133
Figure A.55: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording mBks. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:141==
A.3 Results
134
Figure A.56: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording mZje. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:142==
A.3 Results
135
Figure A.57: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording N1nM. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:143==
A.3 Results
136
Figure A.58: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording Otq3. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:144==
A.3 Results
137
Figure A.59: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording R2f3. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:145==
A.3 Results
138
Figure A.60: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording tG6i. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:146==
A.3 Results
139
Figure A.61: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording Xg1l. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:147==
A.3 Results
140
Figure A.62: Test performance of the models developed in this thesis and benchmark models on
recording Xii6. The plots include the target labels, model output predictions and the
corresponding performance metrics.
==PAGE:148==
A.4 Discussion
141
A.4
Discussion
A.4.1
Model attributes
Table A.12: Summary of model performances and attributes. The performance metrics include the
per-sample evaluation for any microsleep duration and within the limit of 3 −15 seconds.
NA: Not applicable, features generate using SSL, training terminated early (35 epochs).
mU-Sleep
patU-Sleep
mU-SSL
FB-LSTM
FB-RF
FB-SVM
CNN-16s
F1
0.83 (0.61)
0.54 (0.27)
0.46 (0.26)
0.79 (0.58)
0.53 (0.32)
0.55 (0.29)
0.49 (0.25)
Recall
0.74 (0.41)
0.66 (0.23)
0.88 (0.55)
0.79 (0.58)
0.85 (0.57)
0.79 (0.53)
0.94 (0.77)
Precision
0.78 (0.49)
0.59 (0.24)
0.60 (0.35)
0.79 (0.58)
0.66 (0.41)
0.65 (0.38)
0.64 (0.38)
Input (s)
30
30
15
9
9
9
16
Manual
Features
No
No
No*
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Training
Epochs #
100
NA
50**
16
NA
NA
3
Model
Size
3 × 106
3 × 106
9 × 104
1.3 × 105
100 Trees
NA
1.3 × 106
==PAGE:149==
A.5 Code
142
A.5
Code
The code for this thesis can be found in the following Github repository:
https://github.com/
sindrijonsson/microsleep_master_thesis
