==PAGE:1==
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric
Correction for Sentinel-3 data
Master Thesis
Mira Backes
March, 2023
DTU Space
Department of Space
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3
data
Master Thesis
March, 2023
By:
Mira Backes
Supervisors:
João Mendonça
Stine Kildegaard Rose
Frontpage photo:
ESA/ATG medialab
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Mira Backes - s174037
Signature
Date
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The determination of the Sea Surface Height (SSH) has grown in urgency as the ef-
fects of climate change have become noticeable in the last decade. Satellite altimetry
missions have evolved to provide SSH at centimetre-level accuracy. This accuracy
is affected by path delays due to several atmospheric effects.
In this thesis, a retrieval algorithm for correcting one of these effects, the Wet
Tropospheric Correction (WTC) is proposed for the Sentinel-3A (S3A) satellite. The
proposed retrieval algorithm is a Neural Network (NN) building on the architecture
of current and legacy satellite altimetry missions. Through in-depth data analysis
of a created learning dataset, and validation of the NN in various steps such as
cross-validation the finalised model is determined.
The final model is evaluated by deploying it on three different datasets. Root Mean
Square Error (RMSE) values of this deployment showed no improvement over the
performance of the currently implemented NNs. The model was evaluated for its pre-
cision by analysing the Sea Surface Height Anomaly (SSHA). For all three datasets,
the results of this evaluation were inconclusive due to large values in the SSHA
stemming from other sources than the WTC.
The model’s results revealed patterns in the residuals’ autocorrelation and in their
correlation with other variables. The findings suggest that by incorporating knowl-
edge from the residuals in a new network architecture, it may be feasible to improve
the WTC retrieval algorithm for S3A.
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
João Mendonça Senior Researcher, Department of Space Research and Technology
Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics - DTU.
Thank you, João, for your unwavering support of this thesis.
Your suggestions,
comments and curiosity have made this thesis go further than expected and helped
explore new valuable perspectives.
Stine Kildegaard Rose Postdoc, Department of Space Research and Technology
Geodesy and Earth Observation - DTU.
Thank you, Stine, for your bright and acute insights into the topic of this thesis.
Your knowledge, ideas and principled approach, have helped with the soundness of
the methodology and informed the results of this thesis in multiple ways.
Chris Finlay Professor, Department of Space Research and Technology Geomag-
netism and Geospace - DTU.
Thank you, Chris, for your clear observations in the field of Machine Learning. The
discussions with you and remarks from you have grounded, bounded and cultivated
the machine learning methodology of this thesis.
Stephan A. Nielsen Backes Husband.
Thank you, Stephan, your encouragement and patience have been vital for the com-
pletion of this thesis. I am deeply grateful for the love, faith and optimism you have
in my work, even during the times I did not have it myself.
Lastly, I would like to thank my oﬀice mates, especially David and Ali who have
engaged with me in countless conversations and normalised my intake of tea and
coffee by comparison. Their support and motivation have kept my spirit high and
have been a light in the dark winter months.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Satellite Altimetry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Data
19
3.1
Study Area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Origin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
The Contents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Validation Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Methods
25
4.1
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Results
59
5.1
The Finalised Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Generalisation of the Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Mixed Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.4
Sea Surface Height Anomaly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6
Discussion
75
6.1
Results of the NN Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.2
Comparison to Existing Literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.3
Limitations & Weaknesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.4
Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Conclusion
81
8
Future Work
83
Bibliography
85
A Data & Model
90
A.1
Dataset analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
==PAGE:8==
A.2
Model analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.3
Model validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
B Project Plan Review
100
C Code overview
101
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
Notation
Description
σ0
Altimeter Backscatter coeﬀicent
Adam
ADAptive Moments
AMR-2
Advanced Microwave Radiometer–2
API
Application Programming Interface
ATBD
Algorithm Theoretical Baseline Definition
DTC
Dry Tropospheric Correction
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
ECMWF
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts
Envisat
Environmental satellite
ERA5
Fifth generation ECMWF atmospheric reanal-
ysis of the global climate
ESA
European Space Agency
EUMETSAT
European Organisation for the Exploitation of
Meteorological Satellites
GNSS
Global Navigation Satellite System
GPU
Graphics processing unit
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-
neers
IQR
Interquartile Range
KDE
Kernel distribution Estimation
LDS
Learning DataSet
LM
Levenberg-Marquardt
MDS
Mixed DataSet
ML
Machine Learning
MS
Mediterranean Sea
MSE
Mean Square Error
MSS
Mean Sea Surface
MWR
MicroWave Radiometer
NN
Neural Network
NS
North Sea
NWM
Numerical Weather Model
==PAGE:10==
Notation
Description
PC
Principal Component
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
Q-Q
Quantile-Quantile
RMSE
Root Mean Square Error
RNN
Recurrent Neural Network
S3A
Sentinel-3A
SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
SLA
Sea Level Anomaly
SLSTR
Sea and Land Surface Temperature Radiome-
ter
SRAL
Synthetic aperture Radar ALtimeter
SSB
Sea State Bias
SSH
Sea Surface Height
SSHA
Sea Surface Height Anomaly
SST
Sea Surface Temperature
SVD
Singular Value Decomposition
TB
Brightness Temperature
TCWV
Total Column Water Vapour
VDS
Validation DataSet
WPD
Wet Path Delay
WTC
Wet Tropospheric Correction
WTCC
Composite WTC
WTCM
Modelled WTC from ECMWF data
WTCR3
Radiometer WTC with 3 inputs
WTCR5
Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs
WV
Water Vapour
==PAGE:11==
Notation
Vector Notation
In this thesis, vectors are written in lower-case bold letters e.g. x, y. Matrices are
written in upper-case bold letters e.g. X, Y. The index of vector rows is denoted
with i, while the columns are denoted with j, creating a vector or matrix with indices
i × j. The i,j’th value of a matrix is denoted as xi,j while the value of the vector is
denoted as xi. Superscript T denotes the transposed of a vector or matrix, i.e. xT
or XT.
Programming
When a term related to programming is used, the text mode texttt is used. The
mode is used when referring to languages like Python or packages such as Tensorflow.
The text mode indicates that the referenced term is specific to the applied program-
ming used in this thesis.
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1. Introduction
1
Introduction
The aspiration of this thesis is to incorporate the principles of the data-driven field
of Machine Learning (ML), to address a topic ever-increasing in urgency; Climate
change. A key variable for understanding climate change is the Sea Surface Height
Anomaly (SSHA) which describes the height changes of the sea in reference to a
Mean Sea Surface (MSS) [1]. In this thesis the Wet Tropospheric Correction (WTC)
applied to the SSHA, for a more precise determination, is sought to be improved for
the Sentinel-3A (S3A) satellite. The WTC is currently retrieved by Neural Networks
(NNs) with differing configurations in S3A [2]. The work of this thesis encompasses
the determination of a new NN for this task.
The two European Space Agency (ESA) sentinel satellites S3A and S3B collect
satellite altimetry data. S3A, launched in February 2016 [3], is equipped with the
altimeter Synthetic aperture Radar ALtimeter (SRAL) and a MicroWave Radiome-
ter (MWR) and provides new measurements with a 27-day cycle, enabling a more
than monthly coverage [4]. The collected altimetry data contribute to almost three
decades of satellite altimetry measurements for monitoring the Sea Surface Height
(SSH) [5]. Through a combined effort from several nations and organisations, satel-
lite altimetry has made it possible over the years to monitor these effects to cen-
timetre accuracy [5].
The effect of the troposphere on satellite altimetry data contributes significantly to
uncertainties in the accuracy of the SSH estimates [6]. The WTC is challenging
to determine due to its high spatiotemporal variability [7].
Collocated satellite
measurements are consequently seen as the most accurate method for retrieving
this correction for satellite altimetry data [6]. For S3A the main WTC retrieval
algorithm is a three input NN, called 3P [2], inherited from the Environmental
satellite (Envisat) [2],[8]. 3P is the algorithm used for the correction of the SSHA
product for S3A [9]. This algorithm was later joined by a five input NN [10], an
algorithm that is additionally included in the S3A altimetry products [2].
An assessment of the WTC retrieval algorithm indicated that they perform worse
than WTCs computed for other satellite missions such as Jason-3 [4]. The Jason-3
Advanced Microwave Radiometer–2 (AMR-2) measures at three microwave frequen-
cies, and the S3A radiometer only at two. Comparisons between the performance
of the two-channel and three-channel microwave radiometers indicate a better per-
formance for the three-channel microwave radiometers [11]. To overcome the limita-
tions of the hardware in S3A different NN architectures, [12] or combinations with
other datasets [13] have been suggested.
The goal of this thesis is to continue this research for a suitable structure of a WTC
retrieval algorithm for S3A.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
1
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1. Introduction
The first step in this work is a presentation of the main concepts in terms of satellite
altimetry and in the ML methods and algorithms that are used to aim for the best
performing NN structure. This information is covered in Chapter 2.
To train and test the NN, a learning dataset is required. The learning dataset for
this thesis contains data from two sources, which have to be combined into a cohesive
dataset, the Learning DataSet (LDS). The scoping of the data and the requirements
for the constructed dataset are presented in Chapter 3.
The starting point of the methodology of this thesis is the LDS. Chapter 4, starts
with preprocessing of the data into the LDS and thereafter describes the process of
modelling the NN. The aim of the chapter is to represent the process from raw data
to fine-tuned finalised NN.
To evaluate the performance of the finalised model, it is deployed on three different
datasets: the LDS, the Validation DataSet (VDS) and the Mixed DataSet (MDS).
The results of this deployment are presented in Chapter 5. The performance of the
model is evaluated both in terms of the predictions made by the NN and on the
descriptive statistics of the SSHA.
The documented performance is subsequently scrutinised both in terms of the method-
ology in this thesis and in the context of the current body of research.
These
comparisons include performance estimates of current and proposed WTC retrieval
algorithms and evaluation of SSHA values seen in other literature. These aspects
are presented in Chapter 6.
Based on the discussion and the complete work presented in the thesis conclusive
remarks are made in Chapter 7, summarising the findings and recommendations
from the work.
Chapter 8 provides recommendations for future work. The aim of this chapter is
to illuminate the potential of the work and how paths for future research could be
traced.
The ambition of this thesis is to further the field within the niche of WTC retrieval
for S3A. This ambition is motivated by an acknowledgement of the value in precise
SSH determination to monitor climate change.
The accuracy of the WTC and
consequently the SSH has a considerable impact on the current research pertaining to
ocean dynamics and climate change. The study of the WTC therefore supports the
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14, to support and preserve marine resources.
By contributing to this domain knowledge the work in this thesis aspires to also
contribute to SDG 13 and the goal of encouraging climate action.
2
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2. Theory
2
Theory
For the theoretical framework in this thesis, two main aspects are covered: the data
itself and the ML methods applied to the data.
The sections are the following,
Section 2.1 - Gives an introduction to the measurements, measurement principles
and the geophysical corrections applied to them.
Section 2.2 - Introduces the applied Machine Learning methods and provides back-
ground on how they are used for the thesis.
The first of the two sections is essential for understanding the background of the
data and is, therefore, most relevant for the chapter on data, Chapter 3 on page 19.
The second section is relevant for the Methods, Chapter 4 on page 25.
2.1
Satellite Altimetry
In satellite altimetry, the Earth’s surface height is measured from a satellite with
altimeters. The change of this surface height in terms of the SSH, can be used to
study the Earth’s climate and the changes to it [5]. In this section, the main working
principle, the measurements and the corrections which are used in satellite altimetry
for measuring SSH are introduced.
2.1.1
Main Concept
Satellite altimeters measure the travel time from a radar signal emitted by a satel-
lite to the Earth’s surface. The altitude, a, from a satellite to the Earth’s surface
is expressed by the travel time of the signal ∆t, travelling from the satellite to the
surface and back [1]. Most satellite altimetry applications are focused on marine ob-
servations because of the variations in surface reflectivity over land and the ensuing
diﬀiculties with retrieving the signal [14].
If the atmosphere were a vacuum and the ocean surface could be assumed to have
a well-known distribution of waves the altitude a, of the satellite could be described
by [15] see Equation (2.1),
a = c∆t
2
(2.1)
where c denotes the speed of light. Together with the altitude, it can be used to com-
pute the surface height h above a reference ellipsoid [1] as shown in Equation (2.2),
h = a −R
(2.2)
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
3
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Theory
2.1. Satellite Altimetry
The range R, describes the distance from the sea surface to the satellite [16] and
the reference ellipsoid describes a mathematical approximation of the Earth’s shape.
The relationship between the range, the altitude and the surface height in relation
to the satellite and the Earth are shown in Figure 2.1,
Figure 2.1: A depiction of both the altitude a of the satellite above the reference
ellipsoid, the Range R and the instantaneous Sea Surface Height h in relation to the
reference ellipsoid, the sea surface and the satellite. The Mean Sea Surface (MSS)
is the averaged sea surface over time and space. The Sea Surface Height Anomaly
is the anomaly between the MSS and the range.
The height h, only provides the instantaneous SSH at the point it is measured as
the SSH is time-dependent. The SSHA is similarly, retrieved with the altimeter and
contains the difference between the MSS and SSH retrieved from the range. It can
be expressed as,
SSHA = R −MSS
(2.3)
The SSH is highly dependent on the corrections applied to it which can contribute
with a factor of several meters.
2.1.2
Corrections
The signal from the radar pulse, that has returned from the Earth’s surface, is what
the altimeter detects as received power. This received power can be converted to a
waveform and this waveform can be fit to an analytical model to retrieve the SSH
and the significant wave height [16]. To measure the true SSH, the signal from the
waveform has to be corrected for contamination from the atmosphere and the ocean
surface.
4
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:16==
2.1. Satellite Altimetry
Chapter 2. Theory
Figure 2.2: The satellite and the geophysical corrections to the range. The cor-
rected range is denoted with ∆R. Depicted are the different corrections that cause
a path delay to the signal in a non-vacuum atmosphere with a non-smooth surface.
The different corrections shown in Figure 2.2 can be used to write the corrected
range ∆R as,
∆R = R −∆Rdry −∆Rwet −∆Riono −∆RSSB
(2.4)
The Sea State Bias (SSB), ∆RSSB, is used to correct the range to a MSS. The bias
corrects for the presence of waves on the measured ocean [17].
The ionospheric correction, ∆Riono corrects the path delay caused by the signal
interacting with the electrons in the ionosphere. The signal is dependent upon the
solar magnetic activity and varies both diurnally, and seasonally. The correction
can be made by using either models or additional frequencies such as the C-band,
a band in the range of 4.0 to 8.0 GHz as defined by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) [18].
The wet correction, ∆Rwet, the WTC, is caused by water in the troposphere that
the signal travels through. This includes both water vapour but also cloud droplets
and rain. The WTC ranges in magnitude from about 5-50 cm but is highly variable
both in time and space.
The dry correction, ∆Rdry, the Dry Tropospheric Correction (DTC), is due to the
dry gas component in the atmosphere that causes a path delay [19]. The delay has
a magnitude of more than two meters but a small spatiotemporal variation.
The corrections in Equation (2.4) make the measured range appear shorter than
it is, but they vary greatly in magnitude and complexity. This corrected range is
given without a reference system, most often the range will be further processed by
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
5
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Theory
2.1. Satellite Altimetry
also adding a correction regarding the tides, ∆Rtides and a Dynamic Atmospheric
Correction (DAC), ∆RDAC [15]. The tide correction, ∆Rtides is used to correct the
range for signals stemming from the height variations due to the position of the
sun and moon. The order of magnitude of this correction is both temporally and
spatially dependent. The dynamic atmospheric correction, ∆RDAC corrects the SSH
from changes in atmospheric pressure.
It is similarly varying in magnitude and
contains both low- and high-frequency signals [15].
A table containing the atmospheric corrections and the mean of their impact on the
range is given in Table 2.1 the mean values are taken from Table 5.1 on page 108 in
[15],
Correction
Mean [cm]
∆RSSB
-5
∆Riono
-8
∆Rwet
-16
∆Rdry
-231
Table 2.1: Geophysical corrections with their mean and the type. The mean values
in this table were taken from Table 5.1 on page 108 in [15]. They reflect the mean
impact that the corrections have on the path delay of the signal.
In Table 2.1 the DTC is seen to be the most significant contributor. This correction
is often modelled with the use of a Numerical Weather Model (NWM). Currently,
the Fifth generation ECMWF atmospheric reanalysis of the global climate (ERA5)
NWM provides appropriate 2-D pressure grids at sea level in 6-hour intervals that
provide the most accurate DTCs [6]. The DTC is consequently often modelled with
a NWM and is not diﬀicult to obtain with accuracy.
The second largest correction is made from the WTC. Due to its high variability,
the tropospheric water vapour content and the resulting correction are challenging
to model [6].
2.1.3
Wet Troposheric Correction
The WTC is one of the most significant contributors to uncertainty when computing
the global mean sea level [20]. This stems from its impact on the uncertainty in
estimating the SSH. This uncertainty is especially big in coastal regions, 20-25 km
from the coast [13], with Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) differences being up to
1.8 cm compared to Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) derived WTC [4].
These issues are also prevalent in areas with sea ice where often only model data can
be used. The issues in both cases stem from contamination in the MWR retrieved
measurements [13].
Using only model data the WTC can be expressed in terms of the Total Column
Water Vapour (TCWV) [6]. The WTC is caused mainly by the Water Vapour (WV)
content as the liquid water content can be seen as negligible in comparison to the
WV [6]. The TCWV describes the mass of the WV in a cross-section of 1 m2.
6
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:18==
2.1. Satellite Altimetry
Chapter 2. Theory
A direct relationship between the WV and humidity profiles from the European Cen-
tre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) was given in [21] and rewritten
in [6] in terms of the WTC as,
WTC = −
(
a0 + a1[TCWV ] + a2[TCWV ]2 + a3[TCWV ]3)
(2.5)
With a0 = 6.8544, a1 = -0.4377,a2 = 0.014, a3 = −0.0038. Equation (2.5) is not the
most commonly adopted method to compute the WTC from NWM data but has
similar results to other methods when computing WTC from only numerical model
data [22] and provides an insight into the relationship between NWM data and the
WTC.
For satellite missions, the WTC is often retrieved from measurements by an onboard
MWR. In non-rainy conditions, the WTC can be calculated from Brightness Tem-
peratures (TBs) in frequencies close to the water absorption band and one or two
additional frequencies in the atmospheric window channels [6]. More details on the
MWR are given in Section 2.1.4 on the next page.
The relationship between the measured TBs and the WTC is non-linear [8]. The
WTC derived from these measurements have been established by statistical regres-
sion and inversion methods [23], [24]. In these methods, coeﬀicients are derived from
large generated databases containing TBs.
Previous altimeter satellite missions such as GEOSAT and TOPEX/Poseidon satel-
lites used statistical inversion methods to obtain the coeﬀicients from the large
databases [24], [8]. For Envisat a NN retrieval algorithm was suggested to replace
this method [8]. The NN retrieval algorithm obtained higher accuracy than the pre-
vious retrieval algorithms and was subsequently implemented in the legacy missions
such as S3A [9]. The proposed NNs algorithms have also been adopted due to their
simplicity, robustness and because they do not need a priori information on the
non-linear relationships in the data [8].
In S3A’s approach, a shallow NN is implemented to compute the NN based on
different inputs. S3A has two different WTC retrieval algorithms [2],
3P - A three input NN. The inputs are two TBs and the Altimeter Backscatter
coeﬀicent (σ0).
5P - A five input NN, the three inputs from 5P are used, and additionally the Sea
Surface Temperature (SST) and the atmospheric lapse rate.
The addition of the SST and the lapse rate were implemented to provide additional
information on the ground temperature and specific atmospheric temperature pro-
files [2].
Assessments of the implemented retrieval algorithms 3P and 5P indicate that there
are opportunities for improvement for the retrieval algorithms [4], [12]. Different
approaches for a more accurate retrieval algorithm have been presented. Sentinel-6
has a different altimeter for this purpose. The AMR-2 features 3 different bands
instead of two [25]. These three channel radiometers have in general a more accurate
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
7
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Theory
2.1. Satellite Altimetry
retrieval of the WTC [26]. The design of the AMR-2 is built upon the legacy of the
TOPEX and Jason satellites instead of Envisat’s which was used for S3A [25].
Newer WTC models that use both data from GNSS stations and data from scanning
imaging MWR onboard other satellites have also been proposed. These showed a
significant improvement compared to WTC values that were computed purely from
the model and MWR data.
This improvement was especially prominent in the
coastal areas [13].
Central to the retrieval of the WTC, also for the newer approaches, is the use of
an onboard MWR. The MWR onboard a satellite provides a method to provide
collocated values for WTC.
2.1.4
Microwave Radiometer
The MWR is a passive sensor that measures the emitted microwave energy from
the Earth and atmosphere. The MWR onboard S3A is a two-channel radiometer.
This configuration is inherited from the Envisat MWR that featured the same two
channels [2].
The S3A MWR has the channels at the frequencies 23.8 GHz and
35.6 GHz. The first is chosen close to the water vapour absorption line while the
second is sensitive to liquid water in clouds [2]. Figure 2.3 shows an image of the
MWR before it was mounted onto S3A.
Figure 2.3: The MicroWave Radiometer before it was placed onboard Sentinel-3A.
The reflector dish is the bright yellow disc. The two feeders, one for each band, are
positioned above the reflector dish.
In Figure 2.3 both the reflector dish and the two feeders which are used for noise
injection are seen. The background noise can be quantified by the use of the σ0,
which indicates the smoothness of the measured surface. The backscatter is corre-
lated to the surface roughness and for sea measurements thereby also dependent on
wind speed [27].
The received signal from the antennas goes through two main processing steps. In
terms of the WTC, the first step is deriving the antenna temperature from the
8
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:20==
2.2. Machine Learning
Chapter 2. Theory
raw signal.
Secondly, the antenna temperatures are corrected from radiometric
contributions, in the case of S3A this is only the side-lobe contribution [2],[12]. The
TBs can then be retrieved from the corrected antenna temperatures.
The measured TBs correlate to the physical temperature of the measured body. At
microwave frequencies, this can be expressed with the Rayleigh Jean approximation
[28]. In the approximation, the relation between the TB and the physical temper-
ature T are related by the emissivity of the greybody ϵ so that the TB can be
expressed as,
TB = ϵT
(2.6)
The relationship between the TCWV and two linearised TBs is linear [29]. The
radiation the MWR receives within the water absorption band at 22.235 GHz is
thereby dependent on the TCWV and the surface emissivity [16]. The frequency
22.235 GHz is, however, sensitive to more than columnar integrated water vapour,
and therefore a frequency close to, either 21.0 or 23.8 GHz is used, even though it
requires more calibration. This frequency is often paired with a nearby frequency
such as 35.6 GHz to provide a reference.
Several newer MWRs, such as the AMR-2, feature a third channel at around 18 GHz
to correct further for changes in the sea-surface emissivity caused by wind [16]. The
choice of ϵ is based on the use for the computed TB. For the MWR onboard S3A
the surface ϵ value for computing the TBs is chosen to correspond to the open ocean
[13].
After the TBs have been corrected they can be used as input for ML models, together
with other input parameters, to retrieve the WTC.
2.2
Machine Learning
The methods, algorithms and applications for ML vary but in essence, a statistical
analysis is used to quantify an underlying structure in the data and accomplish a task.
Through optimisation of a given quantity, such as a loss function ML algorithms
return a result based on a learned structure in the data. Many ML algorithms are
consequently solving an optimisation problem [30].
Which structure or pattern is discovered by the algorithm is dependent upon both
the data and the algorithm itself. The second is highly dependent upon the first
and often a ML method can be used in preprocessing the data before it is fed into
the algorithm that completes the main task. These preprocessing strategies can
be utilised to both reduce noise in the data, reduce the artificial complexity of the
problem or lower the computation speed [31]. In this thesis, two ML approaches to
finding patterns in the data are used,
• Unsupervised Learning
• Supervised Learning
Unsupervised learning is used for exploratory analysis of the data.
This is part
of the preprocessing to discover potential correlations, dependencies and whether
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
9
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Theory
2.2. Machine Learning
a dimensionality reduction is practical, the unsupervised method is presented in
Section 2.2.1
Supervised learning is used for the regression task of the thesis. Based on a select
subset of input variables, a reasonable prediction of a target value is made. The
target values are the values that the NN learns to match for its predictions. This
approach is introduced in Section 2.2.2 on page 12.
2.2.1
Unsupervised Learning
In unsupervised learning, no ground truth data is provided to the algorithm. The
learning that the algorithm is doing is, therefore, not based upon a target by the user,
but rather defined by the patterns in the data. This type of analysis is well-equipped
for exploratory analysis or reduction of the complexity of the problem.
In this thesis, a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is employed for the task of
exploratory analysis.
Principal Component Analysis
The PCA is a statistical analysis that can be used for data exploration, visualisation
or reduction of the dataset size. In the PCA a Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
is used to order the dimensions of the data in terms of their variance by their
eigenvalues [32].
The ordered data can then be projected onto a new space, by
order of variance. Dimensions with low variance can thus be disregarded in favour
of dimensionality reduction or the projection can be used to reveal linear relations
in the data.
The PCA itself has three main steps,
1. Normalisation, sometimes this also includes a standardisation.
2. Computing the n eigenvectors which have the n largest eigenvalues.
3. Projecting the data onto the subspace spanned by the first n principal compo-
nents.
The measurements in the dataset, xi can be described as an i×j-dimensional matrix
X. The rows of this vector, i describe the number of measurements and the columns
j describe the different features considered as input. Since the features may vary
in their size, from SST in Kelvin to distance in Kilometres the data first has to be
normalised. This is to ensure that the data has the same scale and a mean of zero
which avoids bias in the eigenvalues based purely on the scale of different parameters.
The mean can simply be subtracted by,
˜xi = xi −1
N
N
∑
i=1
xi
(2.7)
The data can then be normalised by,
˜xi,j = ˜xi,j
σi
,
σi =
√∑N
j=1(˜xi,j −¯xi)2
N −1
−
(2.8)
10
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:22==
2.2. Machine Learning
Chapter 2. Theory
The normalised dataset ˜X can be used in the SVD. In the SVD the matrix ˜X is split
into three matrices UΣV, assuming that the dataset matrix is real their relation
can be written as,
UΣVT = ˜X
(2.9)
The matrix V contains the eigenvectors of XTX and is sorted by its eigenvalues.
The first n principal components can be projected onto the new subspace b with the
coordinates,
B = ˜XVn
(2.10)
A figure showing a 2-dimensional representation of how data is projected onto three
different subspaces is shown in Figure 2.4 a figure taken from [32], page 35.
x1
x2
−4
−2
0
2
4
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
x1
x2
−4
−2
0
2
4
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
x1
x2
−4
−2
0
2
4
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
xT v1
−5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
xT v1
−5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
xT v1
−5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Figure 2.4: A 2-dimensional dataset projected onto three different subspaces each
representing a different choice of a basis vector vn. The bottom panes show the dis-
tribution of the 2-dimensional datasets in the different subspaces. Figure borrowed
from [32] page 35 with permission of the authors.
In Figure 2.4 three different subspaces are shown in the three columns of the fig-
ure. The bottom pane illustrates how the correct choice of subspace ensures the
amount of variance captured in the data. The rightmost subspace preserves the
most information as the data points are spread out the most.
This new projection can be used as a projection of the dataset at a lower dimension-
ality but with a variance big enough given by a threshold, often set at 90-95% of
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
11
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Theory
2.2. Machine Learning
variance kept. The projection can be used either as a new dataset for dimensionality
reduction or instead only for data exploration, in this thesis the PCA was used for
data exploration only as covered in Section 4.1.3 on page 34.
Since PCA is a linear transformation, non-linear information may be lost when
using it for dimensionality reduction. Consequently, the PCA does not visualise the
non-linear relationships in the data [33].
2.2.2
Supervised Learning
In supervised learning, a labelled dataset is used. This labelled dataset provides the
ground truth values or labels that the ML algorithm is trained to learn.
In this thesis the supervised task is regression and so the task for the algorithm is
to learn how to compute output which corresponds correctly to the input data. For
this, a loss function is implemented and through optimising to the minimum of the
loss, the NN is calibrated.
2.2.3
Neural networks
The fundamental idea behind artificial neurons is that a network of neurons, each
doing a simple calculation could be used to express an arbitrarily complex logic,
function or pattern, given enough neurons.
The artificial neuron is heavily inspired in concept by its biological counterpart [34].
An artificial neuron uses a simple arithmetic called an activation function, such as
sigmoid, linear or tanh, and connects to another artificial neuron. This behaviour is
meant to resemble the neurons in our brains. Organising these neurons in a network
enables increasingly complex pattern recognition of the network which in the end
can be used to identify and calculate trends and patterns in large sets of data. While
the NN itself does not intuitively recognise patterns, the sheer amount of volume of
data that it is fed enables it to detect them [35].
Architecture of the Neural Network
A NN consists of different components which are all placed within three different
types of layers,
Input layer - In this layer, the input is fed to the network. This layer can consist
of only one or multiple input neurons depending on how many input features
are used in the NN.
Hidden layer(s) - The hidden layers enable the network to learn complex patterns.
The number of hidden layers determines how deep the network is and is depen-
dent upon the complexity of the data. A single hidden layer creates a shallow
network, and many hundreds of layers create a deep learning network.
Output layer - The output layer is the final layer in the NN. The number of neurons
is highly dependent on the desired data output. Different types of outputs can
be computed and they vary from probabilities to integer values or booleans.
The layers are often described and illustrated as sequential and should be imagined
as stacked after each other, starting with the input, ending with the output and
12
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:24==
2.2. Machine Learning
Chapter 2. Theory
the hidden layers sandwiched in between. A depiction of the layers in connection to
each other is given in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: The structure of the different layers in a Neural Network. The first
layer to the left is the input layer (red), here shown with only one input. The input
layer is connected to the three neurons in the hidden layer (blue). These neurons
are then again connected to the output layer (green). The input goes through a
forward pass through the hidden layer and then ends as output.
The neurons in the layer are connected to the neurons in the previous layer and the
layer after. In a fully connected also called dense NN all neurons from the previous
layer are connected to the neurons in the current and so forth. The neurons are not
connected to each other within the layer itself.
Feedforward Network
Feedforward networks pass information only in one direction; from the input to the
output layer. The passing of the information is consequently called a forward pass.
In the first step of the forward pass, the inputs x = [x1, x2, x3]T are fed into the net-
work. Thereafter the weights of the first layer, w1 = [w1,1, w1,2, w1,3]T are multiplied
onto the inputs and a bias-vector, one bias for each neuron b1, is added,
z1 = w1x + b1
(2.11)
The strength of the connection between the neurons in two separate layers is deter-
mined by the weights. The weights determine the magnitude of the output from a
specific neuron together with the bias, b. After the weighted input w1x and the
bias b1 are summed to an output of the neuron z1 an activation function, such as
the tanh function is applied,
a1 = tanh(z1)
(2.12)
In a shallow NN with only one hidden layer the output from the hidden layer is
then forwarded to the output layer. From the hidden layer to the output layer, the
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
13
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2. Theory
2.2. Machine Learning
output a1 is again multiplied with a weight matrix w2 and the bias is added from
the output neurons,
z2 = w2a1 + b2
(2.13)
The output layer activation function is often also called the transfer function. The
transfer function determines the type of output that the NN produces. After the
transfer function, the result is the predicted values ˆy,
ˆy = σ(z2)
(2.14)
The structure of the neuron with inputs is shown in Figure 2.6, where both the inputs,
bias, sum, activation function and output are shown in relation to one another.
Figure 2.6: A simple sketch of a single neuron with three inputs. The inputs
are weighted and then summed together with a bias, the bias is shown as only one
node for illustration, but a bias exists for each input. This is then sent through an
activation function and finally, an output is produced. Here only a single neuron in
the hidden layer is shown.
The output from the neuron shown in Figure 2.6 is transformed by the activation
function, the weights and biases. While the activation functions are constant through
training an NN the weights and biases are changing.
The weights of the NN to a large part determine the final output of the network
and together with the biases they form its learning. The biases act as offsets and
are either reduced or increased during the training of the network.
The biases can determine whether a neuron is activated and whether the output of
the neuron has to be shifted to a positive or negative output. The biases themselves
are initialised together with the weights before the training begins. They are set
14
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:26==
2.2. Machine Learning
Chapter 2. Theory
to a low value, but not zero. This is due to an inherent symmetry in multilayer
networks which causes a saddlepoint in the performance surface at w = b = 0. In
contrast, too large values of the weights and biases could lead to a region in the
performance surface which is flat, and therefore it would take a long time to reach
the global minima [35].
While the forward pass does compute output values, the ML algorithm does not learn
to predict correctly in this step. This is because the output of the network is not
compared to a target value. Most feedforward NN, therefore, utilise backpropagation
to learn.
Backpropagation
Backpropagation describes the process of updating the weights and biases in the net-
work based on a performance index, the loss. For regression tasks, this performance
index could be the Mean Square Error (MSE) of the output value from the NN and
the expected value. It should here be noted that the existence of an expected value
is often unique to supervised learning, where a ground truth value exists.
The backpropagation algorithm is based on an optimisation algorithm such as gra-
dient descent to find the global minima by taking steps in the negative direction. In
these steps the weights and biases are optimised either for a set period of iterations
or until an acceptable value of the performance index has been reached.
Based on the predicted values ˆy from Equation (2.14) on the previous page from
the forward pass, the loss can be computed if the target value yi is known. For the
MSE the loss function F can be written as,
F = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
||ˆyi −yi||2
(2.15)
In the gradient descent, this loss is then used to update the weights and biases
iteratively. The update uses the gradient of the loss with respect to the weights,
wm+1 = wm −η
∂F
∂wm+1
(2.16)
where m describes the number of the current layer.
Here η is the learning rate
which is used to determine the slope of the update of the weights. A similar update
is performed on the biases.
Gradient Descent
Equation (2.16) presents how the updates are made through gradient descent. When
these updates are made to the ML model is a choice in the model architecture. The
updates in gradient are made in the context of an epoch. An epoch is completed
when all of the training data has passed through the NN. Three different methods of
gradient descent are commonly used [36] and they depend on the size of the training
set, N, used before updating ∆U,
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
15
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2. Theory
2.2. Machine Learning
Stochastic - The NN is updated after each example in the training set, ∆U = N.
Batch - A loss is computed for each example in the training set, but the model is
only updated after all examples have been computed by an average of their
loss ∆U = 1. An update is made once per epoch.
Minibatch - The training set is split into several small batches, B, and the model
is updated by an average of the loss for each batch, ∆U = N
B .
The Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) method is the most computationally expen-
sive. With updates to the model after each training example, the loss is noisy and
it may take more updates to reach convergence [36].
The batch gradient descent, on the other hand, requires a large memory, especially
for datasets with several thousands of data points, and the more stable gradient loss
may lead it to be stuck in a local minimum.
The minibatch method with an appropriate batch size balances these challenges.
It utilises the parallelisation of GPUs if an appropriate batch size is chosen. This
furthermore constrains the step size to perform a quicker search of the problem
surface than if a stochastic gradient descent is used [36].
An illustration of how these methods converge differently from each other is shown
in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: An illustration of the behaviour of the loss function pr. epoch for
three different gradient descent models. The leftmost graph depicts the smooth loss
of a batch gradient descent. The centre graph depicts the jagged loss over time as
seen in Stochastic Gradient Descent. The rightmost figure represents the minibatch
gradient descent which is a trade-off between the two previous gradient descents.
The choice of batches works in tandem with the choice of optimisers. While the
batches define how often a step is taken on the problem surface, the optimisers
decide how that step is taken.
16
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:28==
2.2. Machine Learning
Chapter 2. Theory
Optimisers
For this thesis, two different optimisers are considered for the architecture of the NN.
To evaluate these choices a brief introduction to the optimisers and their differences
is given.
A popular backpropagation optimiser is the ADAptive Moments (Adam) optimiser.
This optimiser has an adaptive learning rate so that the momentum, the rate at
which the weights are updated, is slowed down in diﬀicult error regions and sped up
in easier regions. Adam has proved successful, especially for diﬀicult regions com-
pared to similar optimisers [37]. The strength of Adam is the adaptive estimation of
the first and second-order moments for individual weights and biases in the network.
The moments in the network determine the speed at which they move along the
trajectory of the optimisation problem. The weight update determines how quickly
changes are made in the NN as it moves along the optimisation space.
The Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) optimiser works well with a Mean Squared Error
(MSE) loss function [35] and is therefore often used for these tasks. This loss is com-
puted after training for each epoch. The LM is used to compute the gradient for
the loss, and thereafter either a Gauss-Newton method or a SGD is used based on
the gradient. For small gradients the quicker Gauss-Newton method is used, for big
gradients, the SGD is used to mitigate the risk of non-convergence. Optimisation
methods like the SGD are good at converging to minima but are computationally
expensive due to the derivatives [35]. Methods such as Gauss-Newton are computa-
tionally less expensive but do often not converge if the error surface of the problem is
not well-behaved. The LM-optimisation is an attempt to balance these optimisers.
The choice of optimiser represents one aspect of NN architecture. Further choices
are often made through fine-tuning the model to enhance its performance on the
training data. The data consequently often informs the model architecture.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
17
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2. Theory
2.2. Machine Learning
18
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3. Data
3
Data
In this chapter, the data of the thesis is introduced. The following four sections
cover this,
Section 3.1 - Introduces the location, extent and shape of the study area along
with a brief description thereof.
Section 3.2 - Describes the origin of the data and how it was sourced.
Section 3.3 - The structure, variables and other relevant data features are de-
scribed.
Section 3.4 - The second dataset which is used for validation of the model is intro-
duced.
The objective of these four sections is to provide a rationale for the data chosen and
an overview of its scope. In this chapter, only the raw and unprocessed data are
presented. How this data is transformed into a dataset is described in Chapter 4,
Section 4.1 on page 25.
3.1
Study Area
In order to maintain the scope of this thesis, the data was confined to a non-global
scale, with the Mediterranean Sea (MS) being selected as the primary study area.
The choice of this region was primarily due to three reasons,
1. Scoping
2. Satellite coverage & data issues
3. Variability
A more in-depth explanation of these three reasons is given in the following.
Scoping
Utilising only the MS region as opposed to a global scale considerably reduces the
required time scope to build the LDS. The LDS was not chosen to be the main focus
of the thesis work since the allocated time for the thesis work was focused on the
NN. Discussion of the impacts this decision could have on the output of the NN is
given in the discussion chapter, Chapter 6, Section 6.3 on page 77.
Satellite coverage & potential data issues
The MS was also chosen due to its location. In [12] only measurements between
the latitudes 50◦N and 50◦S were used. This avoids sea ice which contaminates
the signal and leads to incorrect path delays, see Chapter 2 Section 2.1.3 on page 6.
Additionally, the data can be subsequently compared with results from other satellite
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
19
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3. Data
3.2. Origin
altimeter missions such as Jason-3 which only reaches an inclination of 66.042◦[38].
In [12] a flag is also applied to discard any values which are closer than 30 km to the
coast. This flag has also been applied in the thesis, to remove those values.
Variability
The Mediterranean Basin, encompassing the sea and adjacent countries, has ob-
served a 1.5 ◦C higher warming in air and sea temperature compared to the global
temperature rise [39]. Furthermore, the MS has a high seasonal variability in terms
of the SST with a standard deviation of 3.5 −4 K, seen in Figure 5 in [12] for the
year 2017. Lastly, the region also had relatively high RMSE values in [12] for the
case of comparing the 5P and 3P algorithms with other algorithms. These three
observations make the MS a region that has a significant trend in the input pat-
tern, high variability in terms of input parameters to the model and challenges in
modelling the output parameter.
3.2
Origin
To build the LDS for the MS data, two different data sources are required,
S3A - The Sentinel-3A satellite measurement data.
ERA5 - The Fifth generation ECMWF atmospheric reanalysis of the global climate
model data.
Both products are available online from European Organisation for the Exploitation
of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) and ECMWF respectively.
The data
from S3A is used as the main data source while the ERA5 data only provides one
input, the SST. While this input could also be provided collocated from the Sea and
Land Surface Temperature Radiometer (SLSTR) onboard S3A, a recent study found
it to be computationally more complex and with no significant benefit in accuracy
[40].
3.2.1
The S3A Measurements
Due to issues with altimetry data over land as explained in Section 2.1 on page 3
only measurements over water in larger bodies of interest are considered in this
thesis. The S3A water measurements are provided by EUMETSAT as NetCDF-files.
EUMETSAT is responsible for the ocean data as part of the Copernicus Programme
[41]. The water measurement files for S3A from EUMETSAT are masked and con-
tain only satellite data of measurements over water. For this thesis, this data was ac-
cessed via an internal server located at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
Level-2 products were used with a baseline processing of either Baseline 003 or
Baseline 002. For most data files denominated with S3A_S2_WAT either a reduced,
standard or enhanced version was provided. For this thesis, the files denoted with
standard were used as they were available for most of the S3A_S2_WAT files and
consequently ensured a larger dataset.
3.2.2
The ERA5 model data
The ERA5 data was downloaded from EUMETSAT via the Copernicus Climate
Data store [42]. The ERA5 Reanalysis set was chosen at a single pressure level,
20
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:32==
3.3. The Contents
Chapter 3. Data
close to the sea surface. The data was chosen at 6-hour intervals for all days of
2017 and 2018. The data was downloaded as a NetCDF file directly from the web-
Application Programming Interface (API).
3.3
The Contents
This section provides an overview of the contents of the datasets. In the following,
the focus is on the extent and resolution of the datasets along with a comparison of
the two. The objective of this is to provide an overview of the different aspects of the
datasets. This is key to understanding how the LDS is created later in Chapter 4,
Section 4.1.1 on page 25.
3.3.1
Extent
The first step for accessing the right contents was filtering the data to the MS.
The S3A measurements and the ERA5 downloads had defined upper latitudes and
longitudes. This meant that the data still contained measurements from the North
Atlantic Sea and the Black Sea. To ensure that the dataset only contains MS data
a rough polygon was applied to the S3A data. The filtering of the ERA5 data is
presented in Chapter 4 in Section 4.1.1 on page 25. The mask was created as a
shape file (.shp) in Google Earth [43]. The data mask can be seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1:
The polygon that was used to mask the Sentinel-3A files to only
contain Mediterranean Sea measurements, shown with a yellow outline. The image
was generated using Google Earth [43].
The split between the MS and other bodies of water as defined by the polygon in
Figure 3.1 may be erroneous in places like the Strait of Gibraltar or the Suez Canal
due to the roughness of the boundaries set by the polygon.
For both datasets only data from the years 2017 and 2018 were used, this was chosen
for better comparison with the Vieira, Fernandes, and Lázaro [12] paper that uses
a dataset for those years. In the article only the year 2017 is used for training, and
2018 is used for evaluation.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
21
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3. Data
3.3. The Contents
Due to concerns about too few data points in the LDS both 2017 and 2018 are
used. For comparison, a new region is used instead of a new year. The S3A data
is measured while the ERA5 data is modelled.
This creates differences in their
resolution both in time and space.
3.3.2
Resolution
The S3A data used in the LDS is given along-track with a resolution of 1 Hz. The
satellite only periodically measures the MS due to its repeat cycle of 27 days [4].
These satellite tracks can be seen in Figure 3.2 for the distance to coast attribute
for both descending and ascending tracks.
Lat. [deg]
Lon. [deg]
10°W
0°
10°E
20°E
30°E
32°N
37°N
42°N
50
100
150
200
250
300
[Km]
Figure 3.2: The distance to coast attribute plotted as a function of latitude and
longitude. The distance is given in Kilometres. Measurements that were closer to
the coast than 30 km were excluded. Due to size concerns the number of points in
the figure is reduced from ∼166,000 to ∼16, 600 this has not affected the visual
appearance of the tracks.
Figure 3.3: The Sea Surface Temperature as given by the Fifth generation ECMWF
atmospheric reanalysis of the global climate (ERA5) data download. The data shown
only reflects a single instance in time, in this case, the first value at 01-01-20117 at
00:00:00, with time given in the format - hh : mm : ss.
22
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:34==
3.4. Validation Area
Chapter 3. Data
In Figure 3.2 on the previous page the coloured stripes show both the value of the
distance to the coast in metres and illustrate the satellite tracks. These satellite
tracks represent all tracks which are captured in the LDS. Due to the number of
points in the database, around 166,000, the graph has been reduced slightly to 16,600
due to file-size concerns. The chosen visualisation has not affected the density of
the tracks in the figure.
In contrast, the ERA5 data is given as a grid over the area with a chosen temporal
resolution of 6 hours and a spatial resolution of 0.5◦× 0.5◦at ocean level. In the
ERA5 datafile only the variable: Sea Surface Temperature is contained. A plot
of the grid is given in Figure 3.3 on the previous page.
Figure 3.3 on the previous page showcases the very dense grid of the ERA5 data. In
comparison, the satellite tracks shown for the S3A data in Figure 3.2 on the previous
page are less densely populated.
3.3.3
Comparison
Both the ERA5 data and the S3A data have overlapping data for the same coor-
dinates but at different time points. The ERA5 data is modelled on a grid, and
so the same coordinates are used for each instance in time. A more comprehensive
overview of the differences between the resolution of the two datasets is given in
Table 3.1.
Source
Type
Temporal res.
Spatial res.
Extent
S3A
Measured
1 Hz
27 day repeat cycle
1 km
N 46.647◦, S 30.172◦,
W 355.575◦, E 36.250◦*
ERA5
Modelled
6 hours
0.5◦× 0.5◦
N 47.0◦, S 30.0◦,
W -14.5◦, E 38.0 ◦
Table 3.1: An overview of the differences in type, resolution and extent between
the two data sources. The extent of the Fifth generation ECMWF atmospheric
reanalysis of the global climate (ERA5) data was chosen as bigger than the Mediter-
ranean Sea to get a quadratic grid. The values in the table are rounded up to only
have a precision of 2 decimal degrees, whereas the used values which were used for
Sentinel-3A (S3A) data featured 7 decimal degrees.
Due to the different resolutions, the data has to be combined by matching points
before the data can be used in the NN. The longitude of the S3A data is also given
in the range from [0;360] while the longitude of ERA5 is given in [-180:180], this has
to be taken into account when matching the data. The combination of the data to
build the dataset is explained in Section 4.1.1 on page 25 in Chapter 4.
3.4
Validation Area
The LDS consists of data only of the MS. To avoid evaluating the model only on
data it has seen before, or data very similar to it, a new area is used for validation
of the model. The area chosen for this thesis is the North Sea (NS).
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
23
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3. Data
3.4. Validation Area
The NS was chosen due to a different climate, the absence of sea ice and since it is
a more open ocean area. The sources for the NS data are the same as for the MS
dataset and similarly, a rough polygon was also used to mask the dataset [44]. The
used polygon and the satellite tracks are shown together in Figure 3.4.
(a) The polygon, shown with a yellow outline,
that was used to mask the Sentinel-3A (S3A) files
to only contain North Sea measurements. The
image was generated using Google Earth [44].
Lat. [deg]
Lon. [deg]
4°W 2°W
0°
2°E 4°E 6°E 8°E
50
100
150
200
250
[Km]
(b) The distance to coast attribute plot-
ted as a function of latitude and longi-
tude.
Values closer to the coast than
30 km were excluded.
Due to size con-
cerns the number of points in the figure
is reduced from ∼59,300 to ∼5, 930 this
has not affected the visual appearance of
the tracks.
Figure 3.4: The polygon used to mask the North Sea shown with a yellow outline
(left) and the satellite tracks in the NS S3A measurements (right).
The satellite tracks in Figure 3.4b appear more sparse due to the zoom on the area.
The NS dataset contains fewer measurements, only 59,331, than the MS dataset.
Since the NS dataset is only used for a VDS the amount of data points is assumed
to be suﬀicient. The LDS and the VDS contain all data used in this thesis. The VDS
is created in the same manner as the LDS with the process explained in Chapter 4
Section 4.1.1 on the following page.
24
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4. Methods
4
Methods
In this chapter, the methodology of the work in the thesis is presented. The method-
ology is described in two main sections,
Section 4.1 - Covers how the raw data is transformed into a cohesive dataset and
gives an overview of the data contained within the dataset.
Section 4.2 - Presents the modelling of the Neural Network from the first iterations
to the final model.
The sections explain the workflow and decisions from raw data to the finalised NN.
The results from the finalised model are thereafter presented in the results chapter,
Chapter 5 on page 59.
4.1
Preprocessing
The preprocessing in this thesis has several steps. Firstly, the datasets from S3A
and ERA5 have to be merged into a cohesive dataset, the LDS. Thereafter, the
content of the LDS is reviewed. Lastly, a dimensionality reduction of the dataset is
considered. The tasks in the preprocessing are consequently threefold,
Building the Dataset - This includes combining the two different data-sources
from S3A and ERA5 into the LDS. The process is presented in Section 4.1.1.
An Exploratory Data Analysis - This entails visualising distributions of differ-
ent attributes, detecting potential trends and visualising them, this is shown
in Section 4.1.2 on page 28.
A Principal Component Analysis - A PCA is performed both to explore dimen-
sionality reduction and correlations, see Section 4.1.3 on page 34.
The three main tasks provide an overview of the LDS. The resulting insights are
vital for both modelling the data and evaluating the results. An overview of the files
containing code, for these tasks is given in Appendix C on page 101. Figure C.2a on
page 102 contains a diagram of the files needed to build the dataset. Figure C.2b
displays the files for the analysis.
4.1.1
Building the Dataset
The two different data sources, S3A and ERA5 have different resolutions in space
and time. The main task in building the dataset is combining the two sources to
match in time and space.
The ERA5 dataset contains a 2-dimensional grid for every 6-hour instance. This
grid contains the SST as a function of latitude and longitude at one instance in time,
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
25
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.1. Preprocessing
an example of this is shown in Figure 3.3 on page 22. This 2-dimensional quadratic
grid, from now on called scene contains a 1 × N × N number of SST-values, where
N represents the number of longitude and latitude points.
In contrast, for each time instance, only one measurement with one set of longitude
and latitude coordinates exists in the S3A dataset. The frequency of these mea-
surements is 1 Hz so a new measurement from S3A is made every second at a new
position. A graphical representation showing the differences in the layers is given
in Figure 4.1a on the following page.
The ERA5 grid is temporally very coarse compared to the individual S3A measure-
ments, but it is consistent and densely populated. To combine the data sources the
ERA5 scenes have to be matched to the S3A measurements.
This match is made in the following steps,
1. Find the time differences between all measurements and all ERA5 scenes.
2. For each measurement tn, choose the two ERA5 scenes which are closest in
time to the measurement. The scenes are denoted Sn−1 and Sn+1.
3. In the first scene, Sn−1 the two SST values which are spatially nearest to the
measured point are selected, SSTn−1,1 and SSTn−1,2.
4. A weighted average SSTn−1 is thereafter calculated. This SST is calculated by
computing the distance di to the point as a weight of the two nearest values
in space, see Equation (4.1),
SSTn−1 =
∑n=2
i=1 diSSTn−1,i
∑n=2
i=1 di
(4.1)
5. The two previous steps are repeated in the second scene, so that a second SST
is computed, SSTn+1.
6. The weighted average SST values from the two scenes, SSTn−1 and SSTn+1,
are used to compute a new weighted average. This weighted average is based
on the temporal distance the two scenes have from the measurement, ∆t, see
Equation (4.2),
SST =
∑n=2
i=1 ∆tiSSTi
∑n=2
i=1 ∆ti
(4.2)
7. This new weighted average is now added to the dataset as the SST-value.
A graphical representation of choosing the scenes is given in Figure 4.1b on the
following page. The difference in the resolutions is seen in the grids in Figure 4.1.
The curvature of the distance between two latitudes and longitudes is not taken
into account as the scenes are matched. This decision was made due to the MS’s
proximity to the equator.
The S3A measurement and the ERA5 values have a significant difference in timescale,
1 Hz vs. 6-hour intervals. This results in SST weighted averages that are almost 6
26
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:38==
4.1. Preprocessing
Chapter 4. Methods
(a) Graphical representation of the two
data sources,
the sparse Sentinel-3A
(S3A) measurements (left) and the grid-
ded Fifth generation ECMWF atmo-
spheric reanalysis of the global climate
(ERA5) values (right). The stacked lay-
ers represent instances in time of the
different measurements.
For S3A this
represents different instances of measure-
ments while the ERA5 stacks represent
different scenes.
(b) Graphical representation of match-
ing the two closet scenes with a sin-
gle measurement point.
The red point
represents a single measurement point,
while the green points on the grid repre-
sent two ERA5 Sea Surface Temperature
(SST) values.
Figure 4.1: Representation of how the ERA5 values are matched with the S3A
measurements. Figure 4.1a shows the structure of the two different datasets. Fig-
ure 4.1b displays how two scenes are used to match one measurement point.
hours away from the measurement. Furthermore, the measurements have varying
spatial distances to the ERA5 grid points with up to 0.70◦, where the distance in
kilometres changes corresponding to changes in the latitude. This means that some
SST values are duplicates due to the low spatial and temporal resolution for a given
measurement point. This method was chosen over interpolating S3A points to the
ERA5 grid in order to reduce interpolation-caused bias that could transfer into the
NN.
To validate the match between the SST values and the S3A measurements the SST
values in the dataset are visualised. They are plotted together with the median SST
values in the ERA5 dataset. This is shown in Figure 4.2 on the next page.
Both the median of the SST from the ERA5 data and the SST dataset values show
seasonal variability in Figure 4.2. This indicates that the data has been matched
correctly in time as the temperature increases in the typically warmer months in
the Mediterranean. The dataset values are for all instances in time lower than the
median. This indicates that the weighted averages are weighted more towards lower
SST values.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
27
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.1. Preprocessing
01
03
05
07
09
11
01
Time [Month]
275
280
285
290
295
300
305
SST [K]
Soure
ERA5
Range ERA5
DS
Figure 4.2: The Sea Surface Temperature values over the year 2017. The Fifth
generation ECMWF atmospheric reanalysis of the global climate (ERA5) values are
the median for each time instance. The dataset, (DB), values are the values from the
Learning DataSet. The blue band reflects the range of the values for each instance
in time for ERA5. To reduce the size of the figure only every 100th value is plotted
for the DB.
The same plot has also been produced for the year 2018. Here the seasonal vari-
ability is less pronounced in the median but is indicated by the range of the values.
The seasonal variability is more evident in the dataset than for the median ERA5
values, the dataset for 2018 is, therefore, accepted as it has seasonal variability. The
figure can be seen in Appendix A.1, Figure A.1 on page 90. The ERA5 SST values
combined with the S3A measurements constitute the LDS. With the two combined
the next step is data analysis and exploration.
4.1.2
Data Analysis
In order to understand the output of the NN, it is crucial to understand the under-
lying patterns in the input data. The data analysis reveals biases and correlations
in the data that the NN weights and biases may pick up and consequently transfer
into the results.
The Features
After the data is consolidated into the LDS, nine features are kept for analysis. The
term features describes the data variables which are considered as input to the NN.
This classification contains both the features which are used directly as input for
prediction to the NN and the target values, which are used for training the NN. In
this thesis, the considered input variables are the TBs, σ0, the SST and the dist. to
coast. A short description of these together with their shorthand name and their
units is given in Table 4.1 on the following page.
28
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:40==
4.1. Preprocessing
Chapter 4. Methods
Feature
Shorthand Unit
Description
Brightness
Tempera-
ture 23.8
TB238
K
The main beam brightness tem-
perature for 23.8 GHz frequency,
1 Hz.
Brightness
Tempera-
ture 36.5
TB365
K
The main beam brightness tem-
perature for 36.5 GHz frequency,
1 Hz.
Backscatter coeﬀicient
σ0
dB
Backscatter coeﬀicient from the
MWR, chosen for the Ku-band at
1 Hz.
Sea Surface Tempera-
ture
SST
K
Weighted averages of the ERA5
SST values matched to S3A mea-
surements.
Distance to coast
Dist. coast
m
The distance from the coast vari-
able contained within the S3A
baseline product, chosen at 1 Hz
frequency.
Table 4.1: The five considered input variables. Their name, shorthand and the
units for them are given along with a short description.
All of the features in Table 4.1, except the dist.
to coast-variable, were chosen
because they have been used as input for NN for WTC retrieval before [12]. The
dist. to coast-variable has been included to explore correlations between the variable
and the WTC. The dist. to coast has been shown to influence the accuracy of the
WTC retrieval [4], [13].
The features that are considered as target variables are 4 different versions of the
WTC all contained in the S3A NetCDF file.
The Radiometer WTC with 3 inputs (WTCR3) and the Radiometer WTC with 5
inputs (WTCR5) are both heritage from the Envisat mission [8], [10]. The Modelled
WTC from ECMWF data (WTCM) is used when the radiometer WTCs fail. The
Composite WTC (WTCC) uses both the radiometer WTCs and the WTCM to
produce a composite WTC that uses either one or the other depending upon which
is more suitable. All WTCs are given in the Metres. For a more in-depth explanation
of the different WTCs see the Level-2 SRAL MWR Algorithm Theoretical Baseline
Definition (ATBD) document [9]. The different WTCs, as well as their shorthand
and a short description of their input, is given in Table 4.2 on the next page.
The features in Table 4.1 and Table 4.2 on the next page constitute the main com-
ponents of the dataset. Three more variables are included in the dataset, Time,
Latitude and Longitude. These are used for plotting, splitting the data and as an
index. The dataset contains NaN-values. These values represent missing measure-
ments. Measurements, where any feature has a NaN value, are dropped from the
dataset. The final number of data points in the LDS is 166,639.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
29
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.1. Preprocessing
Feature
Shorthand Description
Radiometer WTC,
3 inputs
WTCR3
The WTC from the MWR at 1Hz with three
inputs. The two TBs and the σ0.
Radiometer WTC,
5 inputs
WTCR5
The WTC from the radiometer with five in-
puts. The two TBs, σ0, SST and the lapse
rate.
Model WTC
WTCM
The modelled WTC computed from a 3d me-
teorological model at measured altitude. The
source is the ECMWF but it is contained
within the S3A baseline-2 product.
Composite WTC
WTCC
A composite WTC computed from the other
WTCs dependent on the surface type flag
(land, ice, ocean, coast).
Table 4.2: The different Wet Tropospheric Correction (WTC)s included in the
level-2 processing products from Sentinel-3A. The unit of the WTCs is given in
Metres.
An initial overview of the contents and scope of the features is provided by summary
statistics of the features. Table 4.3 provides these for the dataset’s features.
Feature
mean
std.
var.
median
range
TB238
164.79
11.29
127.39
163.72
116.64
TB365
162.49
7.83
61.25
160.95
112.20
σ0
12.14
2.76
7.62
11.46
35.07
SST
287.95
2.24
5.03
287.23
7.34
Dist. coast
102571.63
61860.51
3826722779.10
85237.00
311426.00
WTCR3
-0.12
0.04
0.00
-0.12
0.41
WTCR5
-0.13
0.05
0.00
-0.12
0.41
WTCM
-0.13
0.04
0.00
-0.12
0.28
WTCC
-0.20
0.11
0.01
-0.17
0.48
Table 4.3: Summary statistics of attributes in the Learning DataSet (LDS) without
NaN-values.
The summary statistics in Table 4.2, show that the first 5 features do not have
a mean that is close to zero. Furthermore, the values of the feature Dist. coast
are several magnitudes bigger than the other four features in that category. This
indicates that the features need to be normalised before they can be input into the
NN to not let one feature dominate the weights. The differences between the mean
and median for both the σ0 and the Dist. coast variable further indicate the features
are not normally distributed.
The four WTC values have means which are close to zero with small standard
deviations, all under 0.2. The standard deviation of the WTCC is much higher than
for the rest of the dataset, this difference is also seen later in plotting the WTCs
together, see Figure 4.4 on page 32. The mean and medians are negative for the
30
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:42==
4.1. Preprocessing
Chapter 4. Methods
WTCs. This is due to them being corrections, the positive symmetric equivalent to
the WTC is the Wet Path Delay (WPD). To evaluate the distribution of the features
they have been plotted as histograms. The SST and the σ0 are shown in Figure 4.3.
285
286
287
288
289
290
291
292
SST [K]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Density
(a) Distribution of the Sea Surface Temper-
ature (SST) in the Learning DataSet (LDS)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0 [db]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Density
(b) Distribution of the Altimeter Backscat-
ter coeﬀicent (σ0) in the LDS.
Figure 4.3: Distribution of the two input features SST and σ0 used in the LDS.
The histogram in Figure 4.3a shows that the SST is not normally distributed within
the dataset. In general, values that are colder, 287 K and below, are more present
than warmer temperatures. Figure A.2 on page 91 in the Appendix A.1, shows that
the distribution of the SST, is a relatively uniform distribution for both years of SST
values per month. So that this distribution in the histogram is not due to a skewed
sampling over time. The histogram for the feature σ0 has a high kurtosis combined
with a high skewness, leaning towards the lower values, resulting in a non-normal
distribution with a long tail of up to 35 dB.
Similarly, the distribution of the rest of the input features has been plotted. These
plots are shown in the Appendix A.1.2 on page 91. The histograms show that none
of the input features are normally distributed. The features, therefore, need to be
normalised, not standardised, before being fed to the NN.
To evaluate and compare the WTC values their histograms together with their
Kernel distribution Estimation (KDE) are shown in Figure 4.4 on the next page.
Four out of the five WTCs in Figure 4.4 have a similar distribution.
WTCR3,
WTCR5 and WTCM have a similar mean of around -0.1 m as also seen in Table 4.3
on the previous page. The WTCC has a noticeably different distribution. It is
flatter and also has a mean of around -0.2 m.
The difference between WTCC and the other WTCs indicates that the WTCC is
not good for either comparison or as a target variable. In an independent assessment
done on the S3A WTCC, shortcomings of the composite value were detected. These
stem from the way in which the WTCC algorithm replaces invalid points [4]. Either
WTCR5 or WTCR3 should be used as a target variable instead. For this thesis
WTCR5 from 5P is chosen as the target variable as it was implemented to improve
upon the performance of 3P [10].
This first preliminary data analysis both indicated how the data should be nor-
malised, and which WTC value could be a good target value. To visualise the data
further and explore patterns correlation matrices are computed.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
31
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.1. Preprocessing
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
WTC [m]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Density
WTC type
WTCR3
WTCR5
WTCM
WTCC
Figure 4.4: Histogram plotted together with the Kernel distribution Estimation
for the four different Wet Tropospheric Corrections (WTC).
Correlation Matrices
Data correlation matrices are created in order to identify probable trends and pat-
terns in the data. A combined correlation matrix is used to visualise the correlation
between the input features and the target values. This correlation matrix, shown in
Figure 4.5 on the following page indicates both the positive and negative correlations
the features have with each other. The correlation is indicated with colour, where
a yellow or green colour indicates a positive correlation and a teal-to-blue colour
indicates a negative correlation.
The two TBs in Figure 4.5 show a high positive correlation, as they are both mea-
suring a similar quantity with the same instrument. A slightly positive correlation
can also be seen between the SST and the TB238 variable. The same correlation
is not indicated with the other TB. The correlation between TB238 and the SST,
is probably due to the sensitivity of that frequency to the total precipitable water
over the ocean [45], which correlates with the SST [46].
There is a high positive correlation between WTCR3, WTCR5 and WTCM. This
indicates that the WTCM has similarities with the WTCs retrieved from the MWR,
WTCR3 and WTCR5. Three WTCs show a clear negative correlation to TB238:
the two radiometer-WTCs and the WTCM. These three also feature a negative
correlation to both the other TB and the SST.
To further evaluate and quantify some of the correlation the five input parameters
and the four WTCs have been plotted together respectively. The plot is similar
to Figure 4.5 but their correlation values are also shown in the plots.
The two
correlation matrices are shown in Figure 4.6 on page 34.
32
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:44==
4.1. Preprocessing
Chapter 4. Methods
TB238
TB365
0
SST
Dist. coast
WTCR3
WTCR5
WTCM
WTCC
TB238
TB365
0
SST
Dist. coast
WTCR3
WTCR5
WTCM
WTCC
0.95
0.02
1.00
Correlation
Figure 4.5: Correlation matrix showing the correlation between the different fea-
tures. A high positive correlation is marked in yellow to green whereas a low corre-
lation is marked in turquoise and a high negative correlation is purple.
The strongest correlation between two different features in Figure 4.6a on the next
page is seen between the two TBs. This strong correlation was also seen previously
in Figure 4.5. In general, the two TBs seem to have the strongest correlations to
the other input features. The Dist. coast parameter has the weakest correlation to
the other parameters.
In Figure 4.6b the same strong correlation between the two radiometer-WTCs is
seen.
The WTCM has a stronger correlation with WTCR3 than with WTCR5.
This indicates that the model data, at least in the case of the LDS correlates more
with the WTCR3 than with the WTCR5.
The low correlation between WTCC and the other WTCs which was indicated in
the histogram in Figure 4.4 is also seen in Figure 4.6b. This further indicates that
the WTCC is not a suitable target variable.
The analysis of the correlation matrices showed both patterns for the input features
and for the WTCs. For the input features the correlation between the two TBs
was seen clearly. TB238 was also seen to correlate strongly with the SST. For the
WTCs a low correlation between the WTCC and the rest of the WTCs was shown.
Furthermore, a high correlation between the WTCM and the radiometer WTCs was
seen with a slightly higher correlation between the WTCR3 and the WTCM.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
33
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.1. Preprocessing
TB238
TB365
0
SST
Dist. coast
TB238
TB365
0
SST
Dist. coast
1.00
0.75
-0.04
0.56
0.04
0.75
1.00
-0.26
0.16
0.03
-0.04
-0.26
1.00
0.15
-0.05
0.56
0.16
0.15
1.00
0.00
0.04
0.03
-0.05
0.00
1.00
0.26
0.37
1.00
Correlation
(a) The correlation matrix of the 5 input
features.
WTCR3
WTCR5
WTCM
WTCC
WTCR3
WTCR5
WTCM
WTCC
1.00
0.97
0.96
0.21
0.97
1.00
0.93
0.20
0.96
0.93
1.00
0.19
0.21
0.20
0.19
1.00
0.19
0.60
1.00
Correlation
(b) The correlation matrix of the four Wet
Tropospheric Correction values.
Figure 4.6: The number in the tiles shows the amount of correlation between the
two variables along the x-and y-axis. A high positive number shows a high positive
correlation, also marked in yellow colour. A high negative number is given in dark
purple and shows a high negative correlation. The values which are close to turquoise
show a low correlation between the two features.
Strong correlations in the data can indicate that the LDS has too many features.
This is especially true for large datasets but smaller datasets with less than 10
features can also benefit from analysing this aspect. In this thesis, a PCA is used
for this.
4.1.3
Principal Component Analysis
Strong linear trends in the data are highlighted by the PCA. The PCA has been
carried out by linearly transforming the features into five Principal Components
(PCs). The features have been normalised before performing the PCA as the differing
magnitudes of the input data might otherwise obscure relevant data patterns.
The PCA is used to investigate linear trends in the dataset as well as determine
whether the dimensionality of the data may be reduced, i.e.
features could be
eliminated. This reduction can lead to lower computation time for the NN. The five
PCs with their loadings are shown in Table 4.4 on the following page, together with
the explained variance for each component.
The loadings in Table 4.4 reflect the correlation between the PC and the features.
A large loading reflects a high correlation between the PC and the feature. The
first PC primarily features positive loadings in Table 4.4. To therefore have a large
projection onto PC1 most values have to be positive. The magnitudes of the loadings
differ for the first PC. The SST has the biggest influence on PC1, with a value of
0.98. In contrast, the second biggest value is only 0.19 for TB238. This indicates
that an attribute with a high projection onto PC1 would have a high SST. This is
visualised in Figure 4.7 on the following page.
34
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:46==
4.1. Preprocessing
Chapter 4. Methods
PC
TB238
TB365
σ0
dist. coast
SST
var
PC1
0.19
0.05
0.04
0.98
0.01
0.63
PC2
0.02
0.01
-0.02
-0.01
1.00
0.26
PC3
0.68
0.62
-0.37
-0.15
-0.03
0.07
PC4
0.35
0.14
0.92
-0.11
0.01
0.04
PC5
-0.62
0.77
0.12
0.08
0.00
0.01
Table 4.4: The five Principal Components (PC)s with the corresponding loadings
for the five input variables. The last column shows the explained variance for each
PC.
Figure 4.7: The Sea Surface Temperature (SST) as a function of the two first
Principal Components. The SST is normalised in this plot.
A clear correlation between the first PC on the x-axis and the SST can be seen in
Figure 4.7. This indicates the SST value correlates with a linear transformation that
explains about 60% of the explained variance in the dataset. This feature should
therefore be considered for the NN as it impacts the variance of the dataset.
For PC2 all loadings have relatively low values except for the Dist. coast, which
has the highest possible positive projection. Both SST and σ0 are slightly negative
while the TBs have a slightly low positive correlation. A high projection onto PC2,
therefore, depends almost entirely on the distance to the coast. This relation is
shown in Figure 4.8 on the next page.
The Dist. coast feature is seen to be positively correlated to the PC2 as expected.
The grouping shows that higher values of Dist. coast are positively correlated with
PC2. A negative correlation between the two TBs and the Dist. coast were also
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
35
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.1. Preprocessing
Figure 4.8: The distance to coast as a function of the first two Principal Compo-
nents. The dist. coast variable is normalised in this plot.
seen in the correlation matrix Figure 4.6a on page 34. Since the loadings of the PC2
for the two TBs are negative but the Dist. coast loading is positive which results in
an overall positive projection onto PC1.
The rest of the PCs and their loadings are not analysed in the same way, since The
larger PCs often have too much noise to make a conclusive analysis [32].
The WTCR5 has been plotted as a function of the two first PCs to visualise whether
a clear grouping can be seen from just the two first components. Figure 4.9 on the
following page can consequently be used to explore whether the strength of the
correlation between the two first PCs. For a very strong correlation, the grouping
is clearly visualised which indicates that a dimensionality reduction is feasible.
In Figure 4.9 a faint correlation is seen between the WTC values and the two first
PCs.
The grouping in terms of PC2 is not clear.
This indicates that reducing
the dataset to only the first two PCs is not sensible as it would remove too much
information.
The last column in Table 4.4 on the previous page indicates the variance explained
by each PC. The first PC represents almost 50% of the explained variance, while
the second explains about 30%. The fourth and fifth PC explain much less with the
third representing about a tenth of it.
To visualise the explained variance of the PCs this together with the cumulative
explained variance is plotted in Figure 4.10 on the following page.
36
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:48==
4.1. Preprocessing
Chapter 4. Methods
Figure 4.9: The Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs with five components plotted as
a representation of the two first Principal Components.
1
2
3
4
5
Principal Component
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Variance explained
Variance
Cum. var.
Threshold
Figure 4.10: The five Principal Components (PC)s of the Principal Component
Analysis in the x-axis as a function of the variance explained by the components. The
blue variance shows the variance explained by each component. The orange, striped
line shows the cumulative variance (cum. var.) explained. The black horizontal
striped line shows a threshold set at 95%, so that by the Cum. var. crossing the
thresholds signifies that more than 95% of the variance is explained by the PCs.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
37
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.2. Modelling
In Figure 4.10, a threshold is given at 95% explained variance. It is shown by a
striped black line.
The cumulative variance can be seen to cross that threshold
at three PCs. Similarly, it can be seen that most of the variance is explained by
the first 3 components so a threshold of about 90% would have allowed an even
lower dimensionality. A dimensionality reduction might consequently be performed
without substantially reducing the explained variance.
However, since there are
only 5 input features that are taken into consideration and using PCs would only
result in a dimensionality reduction of two.
The PCs are consequently utilised
for visualisation and not as input to the NN. Furthermore, since they would be
linear transformations rather than merely the input characteristics, the use of the
PCs would reduce the transparency of the input data and might reduce non-linear
correlations in the data.
Based on the PCA the features chosen for the PC are seen as appropriate and
especially strong patterns are shown for both the SST with the rest of the data but
were also seen for the Dist. coast variable. It is therefore considered as an input
variable for a new proposed NN. Furthermore, no clear pattern was seen just for the
first two PCs and the target variable, indicating that a lower dimensionality of the
LDS is not recommended. The PCA concludes the data preprocessing. The data is
transformed into the cohesive LDS, and the input features are chosen along with a
target value. These are now ready to be fed into a NN.
4.2
Modelling
In this section, the process of the initial network design to the finalised model is
explained. The process contains the following steps,
Neural Network Structure - The structure, loss function and hyperparameters
are presented, see Section 4.2.1
Training the Neural Network - The fine-tuning and training of the NN is de-
scribed in Section 4.2.2 on page 41.
Validation of the Neural Network - The validation of the NN is described and
the final structure of the network is presented, see Section 4.2.4 on page 53
The sections describe the iterative process until a final model is chosen. The choices
of structure, hyperparameters and the performance of the finalised model are pre-
sented before it is used in Chapter 5 on page 59.
The files containing code for
creating the model are visualised in Appendix C Figure C.3 on page 103.
4.2.1
Neural Network Structure
The structure of the NN used in this thesis is based on the results in [12] which in
turn is based on the Envisat NN [8], [10]. The network was kept shallow with only
8 hidden neurons in a single layer. The network is a feed-forward network so that
the output of a layer does not affect a previous layer. The 8 hidden neurons all have
the same activation function, the sigmoid function. The output layer uses a linear
transformation function. All neurons are connected to the neurons in the previous
and the next layer and the network is therefore fully connected.
38
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:50==
4.2. Modelling
Chapter 4. Methods
The number of input neurons is selected later in a comparison of different models
during the training of the networks. In the training the minibatch gradient descent
is used, for a review of the reasons see Section 2.2.3 on page 15. A final model
structure is subsequently chosen based on the performance. The ”base” NN is seen
as the network with 4 input units as described by [12]. An illustration of the base
network is given in Figure 4.11.
TB 23.8
TB 36.5
SST
WTC
Figure 4.11: The 4 - input Neural Network (NN) as described as the best perform-
ing NN in [12]. The inputs are the two radiometer- Brightness Temperatures, (TB
23.8 and TB 36.5) the Altimeter Backscatter coeﬀicent (σ0) and the Sea Surface
Temperature (SST). The red circles indicate the input neurons, the blue circles are
the hidden neurons (hn) and the green circle represents the output neuron, in this
case, the Wet Tropospheric Correction (WTC).
In Figure 4.11 the red input values are based on the input values in the base NN.
The hidden neurons are shown in blue and finally, the output which is the output
WTC value is shown in green. The total number of neurons is 13 in the base NN
which corresponds to the number of biases in the NN.
In the shallow NN connections between the input layer and the hidden layer are
equal to the number of weights between the layers. The total number of weights in
the base NN is 4×8+8×1 = 32+8 = 40. The weights are initialised randomly to low
values and are updated during the training of the NN. This is through computing
the gradient with backpropagation with a suitable optimiser.
To implement the NN the Python package Tensorflow was used. Tensorflow en-
ables the user to use a functional API within the scripting language Python to set
up a NN without having to program it from scratch. Listing 1 on the next page
shows how the previously described base NN is setup in Tensorflow.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
39
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.2. Modelling
model = tf.keras.Sequential([
tf.keras.layers.Normalization(input_shape=[4,],axis=-1)
layers.Dense(units=8,activation = 'sigmoid'),
layers.Dense(units=1)
])
Listing 1: The Python code for a fully connected feed-forward Neural Network in
Tensorflow that has four normalised inputs, one hidden layer with eight neurons
and a sigmoid activation function, and one output with a linear transformation.
Two different backpropagation algorithms were considered for the implementation
of the NN, the Adam and LM optimiser. The Adam algorithm is implemented in
Tensorflow and only needs to be chosen as an algorithm with no further package.
Listing 2 shows this implementation.
model.compile(
optimizer = tf.keras.optimizers.Adam(learning_rate = lr_int),
loss = tf.keras.losses.MeanSquaredError(),
metrics=['RootMeanSquaredError'])
Listing 2:
The functional Application Programming Interface for defining the
model for training with the Adam optimiser. The package used is the Tensorflow
package within the scripting language Python. The loss is chosen to be the Mean
Square Error.
The LM optimiser is not a standard optimiser within Tensorflow, instead, a GitHub
Repository with a LM implementation for Tensorflow was used called tf - levenberg
-marquardt [47]. Two separate approaches for using the algorithm are presented in
the GitHub repository, a model wrapper or using a custom training loop. In this
work the approach with a model wrapper is used, this is to call the fit method with
the LM repository. The implementation of the optimiser and the loss are given by
the .compile functional API. Listing 3 shows this implementation.
model.compile(
optimizer = tf.keras.optimizers.SGD(learning_rate=.1),
loss = lm.MeanSquaredError(),
metrics=['RootMeanSquaredError'])
Listing 3:
The functional Application Programming Interface for defining
the model for training with the Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) optimiser.
The
lm.MeanSquaredError loss is implementing the LM loss where lm is defined as
the module containing the LM functions.
For the network, no regularisation techniques were used. Since the network is shal-
low and not very wide, with few neurons in the hidden layer, it was not assumed
40
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:52==
4.2. Modelling
Chapter 4. Methods
that it would memorise the data instead of training to the underlying pattern. A
normalisation was however used at the start of the NN to normalise the data fur-
ther before inputting it into the NN. To construct the model, choices about not only
the optimisers but also other hyperparameters have to be made. This process is
explained in the next section.
4.2.2
Constructing the network
To learn the patterns within the dataset the network needs to be trained. During
this training, the network is fed data in batches. The data is chosen at random from
the dataset and is split into three categories,
• Training
• Testing
• Validation
The split in the data was set at 0.4 between the test and the training size so that
40% goes towards testing. From the 60% that is set aside for training 20% is used
for validation. The training, test and validation data can not overlap. Overlapping
data would obscure the generalisation ability of the model as it would be tested on
the same data it has trained on.
In the training phase, the network is initialised with random sets of weights and
biases and thereafter feed with the training data. The training phase is the process
in which the network updates its weights and biases through backpropagation. After
the weights and biases are trained the network is fed the testing dataset. In this
set, the error of the NN is computed. The results of the testing indicate how well
the network performs on data it has not been fed before. The validation set is used
for finetuning the model. The hyperparameters such as learning rate, epoch number
and batch size are chosen based on the validation data.
Three different NNs are explored. Networks with three, four and five inputs. The
network with three inputs is legacy from the S3A network and is denoted M3. The
network with four inputs is based on the network from [12] and is denoted M4. The
last model, M5, has five inputs. It contains the same four inputs as M4 and the
Dist. Coast-feature. It is motivated by the correlations and variance seen in the
PCA Table 4.4 on page 35.
On top of the three different models, two different optimisers are used. These are
the Adam optimiser and the LM optimiser. The LM optimiser is chosen based on
its use in the S3A algorithms, while the Adam optimiser is easy to implement and
has been seen to perform well on a range of ML problems [48].
The 6 different models, three model configurations with two different optimiser con-
figurations, are compared to each other for fine-tuning in choosing the best final
model. To evaluate the models on their performance in general, a baseline model is
used. This baseline model uses a SGD optimiser and a MSE loss function. There
is one baseline function each for M3, M4 and M5. The baseline model provides a
benchmark for which the model has to perform better to be considered useful.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
41
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.2. Modelling
In this case, the benchmark model chosen was a multiple linear regression. The
model was chosen based on the strong correlations seen in the correlation matrix
in Figure 4.5 on page 33. Another typical choice could have been using the mean
of the target variable as a baseline. The multiple linear regression model, however,
enables the benchmark to scale in complexity alongside the NNs as the number of
input features is increased.
Choosing the Optimiser
To find the best optimiser for the task, different runs of them were compared. A run
is a sweep through the entire dataset multiple times. Each sweep splits the dataset
into a fixed amount of batches with each set of batches containing the entire dataset.
This is done for a set amount of times, the number of epochs. In these runs, all
6 configurations of the models were used. The runs were compared based on time,
RMSE and loss. The hyperparameters and amount of data points used for these
runs are given in Table 4.5.
Name
Value
Dataset size
50.000
Learning rate
0.001
batch size
64
epoch size
500
training size
40%
Table 4.5: The dataset size and hyperparameters which were used for running
Neural Network for choosing an optimiser. These parameters were kept constant for
both runs.
The first set of runs for all three models was done with LM optimiser. Since the
runs of the NN have variability due to the random sampling of the dataset this is
only used as a basis for comparison not to evaluate the NN itself. However, the
sampled datasets are big enough so that the runs are comparable. The loss, RMSE
and timing of the runs are presented in Table 4.6 for a single run.
M3
M4
M5
M3B
M4B
M5B
RMSE [m]
175.83
9.82
10.28
11.32
10.82
10.74
µRMSE,50
0.84
0.03
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.02
Loss
13312.36
0.45
0.69
0.26
0.23
0.23
µLoss,50
3.15
2 × 10−3
5 × 10−3
5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
Time
0:06:05
0:52:56
0:53:42
0:03:26
0:03:21
0:03:59
Table 4.6:
Performance of a single Neural Network run for 6 different models,
the models which end with B are the baseline models.
The NNs are using the
Levenberg-Marquardt optimiser. The total Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) and
loss are computed and the average of the last 50 epochs is denoted with µi,50. All
performance variables except time are given in metres, the time format is given in
h : mm : ss.
42
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:54==
4.2. Modelling
Chapter 4. Methods
The RMSE for the last 50 runs is seen to be consistently lower for the baseline
algorithms. This indicates that for these runs the NNs are not better than simply
using multiple linear regression algorithms. The baseline models are quicker, taking
about 3 minutes each while the NN models take between 6 minutes to 50 minutes.
The best performing NN is M4. It has both the lowest loss and the lowest RMSE.
M3 on other hand has very high values at the start of the run which could indicate
a spurious batch which has affected the run.
To compare the performance of the M4LM model a distribution of both the predic-
tions and boxplots of the residuals are given in Figure 4.12.
(a)
Distribution of the predictions for
model M4-Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) and
the baseline together with the test data.
The test data is what the Neural Network
(NN) and baseline are trained to predict.
(b) Boxplot of the residuals of the test val-
ues from both the NN and the baseline
model.
The residuals show how well the
algorithm was able to match the test val-
ues.
Figure 4.12: The two graphs display how the baseline and the M4LM model com-
pare to the test data. The leftmost plot shows the distribution of the prediction and
the test data while the rightmost compares the baseline and M4LM via a boxplot.
The histogram with KDE in Figure 4.12a shows that the test-data and the predic-
tions from the two algorithms follow the same overall distribution skewed to the
left. The mode of the distribution for the NN has a lower count than the test data
and the baseline’s mode is the lowest of the three. While the distributions generally
overlap they are not identical and vary in their modes and tails.
The boxplots of the residuals in Figure 4.12b show that the NN has a larger spread of
residual values. While the range for the residual values is ∼0.25 m for the baseline
it is ∼0.3 m for the NN.
The results both of table Table 4.6 on the previous page and Figure 4.12 indicate
that the models require fine-tuning. Even the best-performing model M4LM does
not perform better than the baseline and takes more than 10 times as long to run.
The same run is completed for the models with the Adam algorithm. The same
statistics as for the LM optimiser run are given in Table 4.7 on the next page.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
43
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.2. Modelling
M3
M4
M5
M3B
M4B
M5B
RMSE [m]
8.61
8.01
8.11
11.30
11.03
10.81
µRMSE,50
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
Loss
0.15
0.13
0.15
0.26
0.24
0.23
µLoss,50
4 × 10−4
4 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
Time
0:03:50
0:03:50
0:03:51
0:03:27
0:03:26
0:03:27
Table 4.7: Performance of a single Neural Network run for 6 different models, the
models which end with B are the baseline models. The NNs are using the Adam
optimiser. The total Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) and loss are computed and
the average of the last 50 epochs is denoted with µi,50. All performance variables
except time are given in metres, the time format is given in h : mm : ss.
In contrast to the LM optimiser, the baseline runs have a higher loss than the NNs
in Table 4.7 by a small margin. The time taken for a single run is, however, very
similar for all 6 models. In the NN runs M4A performs better than the other two
models.
The same visualisation of the distributions of predictions and boxplot of the residuals
is given, see Figure 4.13.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
WTC [m]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Density
Type
test
NN
BSL
(a)
Distribution of the predictions for
model M4A and the baseline together with
the test data.
The test data is what
the Neural Network (NN) and baseline are
trained to predict.
NN
BSL
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
Res. [m]
(b) Boxplot of the residuals of the test val-
ues from both the NN and the baseline
model.
The residuals show how well the
algorithm was able to match the test val-
ues.
Figure 4.13: The two graphs display how the baseline and the M4-Adam model
compare to the test data. The leftmost plot shows the distribution of the prediction
and the test data while the rightmost compares the baseline and M4-Adam models
via a boxplot.
The KDE overlaps closely at the peak between the M4A and the test set. The mode
of the baseline is slightly lower than the two others. The distribution for all three
has again a skewness towards the left tail similar to the previous distribution with
the other optimiser, Figure 4.12a on the previous page. The boxplot of the residuals
shows that the range of the residuals is larger for the baseline than for the NN. The
interquartile range is also bigger for the baseline, indicating that the NN has more
residuals close to zero.
44
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:56==
4.2. Modelling
Chapter 4. Methods
The LM-optimiser is considerably slower than the Adam optimiser. This difference
could be attributed to the specific implementation of this LM-optimiser and might
have been different if the LM-optimiser was natively included with the Tensorflow-
package or if it had been coded from scratch for the thesis. Furthermore, the loss
and RMSE values are similar for both models. Therefore, the Adam optimiser was
chosen as the most suitable optimiser and is implemented in the rest of the fine-
tuning of the network.
4.2.3
Tuning the network
The fine-tuning of the NN consists of changing the hyperparameters of the model
and evaluating the models after a run. In this thesis, the number of neurons in
the hidden layer and the output layer is not considered for change. The number
of hidden layers is also kept to one for each model iteration. Instead, only three
hyperparameters are considered,
Batch size - The batch size defines how many data points are passed through before
the NN model uses backpropagation to update its weights and biases.
Number of Epochs - The number of epochs defines how often a complete pass
through the whole dataset is made. Bigger datasets require more passes as a
general rule.
The Learning Rate - The learning rate η is tuned to adjust to the problem surface.
Even though the learning rate in Adam is adaptive, the initial learning rate is
set in Tensorflow.
Each of these different choices heavily affects not only the accuracy of the model but
also the time it takes to make a single run. The choices of the three hyperparameters
is informed by knowledge of the dataset size and complexity. In this thesis, a small
grid-like search is considered for each of the hyperparameters.
Batch Size
The batch size of a NN determined how often the weights and biases of the model
are updated. There is a trade-off between a too-small batch size which primarily cap-
tures noise and a too-big batch size which does not update the model substantially
[49] but is quicker, for a more in-depth explanation see Section 2.2.3 on page 15.
As a rule of thumb, with multiple Graphics processing units (GPUs) the number of
batches is often chosen as a number in the geometric sequence with a power of 2.
This convention stems from the optimisation of batch sizes to computer hardware.
The batch size in general optimises the training time, more than the accuracy of the
model, it is therefore optimised as one of the first parameters [36].
For this thesis, three different configurations of batch size are evaluated: 16, 64 and
256. The batch size of 64 was used in Section 4.2.2 on page 42 for choosing the opti-
miser, so the results from there are used for evaluation. The other hyperparameters
which are kept constant are given in Table 4.8 on the next page.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
45
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.2. Modelling
Name
Value
Dataset size
50.000
Learning rate
0.001
epoch size
500
training split
40%
Table 4.8: The dataset size and hyperparameters which were used for running
the Neural Networks for choosing the best batch size. These parameters were kept
constant for both runs.
To compare the different batch size the average loss, RMSE and time is picked for
comparison, for the NN models only. An average of all three models is chosen in
Table 4.9. This is to avoid a spurious dataset affecting the comparison too much.
batch size
Loss [m]
RMSE [m]
Time
16
3 × 10−4
0.02
0:15:20
64
4 × 10−4
0.02
0:03:50
256
10 × 10−4
0.03
0:01:28
Table 4.9: Different batch sizes and the average of all three, M3, M4 & M5, models.
The loss and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) is an average of the last 50 values
in a run of 500 epochs. The time format is given in h : mm : ss.
Table 4.9 shows an increase in loss and RMSE as the batch size goes up.
This
could indicate that a larger batch size is unsuitable for the problem surface and that
smaller changes in gradient are better suited. However, the time difference between
the batch size of 16 and the batch size of 256 is about 5 times as high.
The table with the metrics for the performance of the models with batch size 16 is
given in the Appendix A.2 Table A.1 on page 92. The loss and RMSE in the table
show that the NN models perform better than the baseline models in all cases. The
difference between the baseline and the NN models for the models with batch size =
16 can also be seen in their learning curves. The loss of the best-performing model,
M4, is shown in Figure 4.14 on the following page.
The baseline loss in Figure 4.14 on the following page is seen to be on average around
0.0005 while the loss of the validation is around 0.0003, this is also confirmed in
Table 4.9 in the Appendix A.2. The baseline loss also has higher spikes in values
relative to the average loss than the validation. The validation loss is close to the
training loss, which could indicate that the model could be trained for a longer
period, for example by using more epochs. The spikes themselves occur because of
the batch-size, see Figure 2.7 on page 16.
For comparison, the loss of the best model, M3, run with a batch size of 256 is
presented in Figure 4.15 on the following page.
The spikes of the baseline are
smaller with a larger batch size. This is expected because the regression can be
updated with more values and is not impacted as much by individual data points.
46
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:58==
4.2. Modelling
Chapter 4. Methods
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Epoch #
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Loss [m]
1e
3
train
validation
bsl. val.
Figure 4.14: The loss of model M4 with a batch size of 16. The validation loss
(blue) is shown together with the baseline (purple) and training loss (green). Due
to high values at the start of training, only the values after the first 100 epochs are
shown.
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Epoch #
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
Loss [m]
1e
4
train
validation
bsl. val.
Figure 4.15: The loss of model M3 with a batch size of 256. The validation loss
(blue) is shown together with the baseline (purple) and training loss (green). Due
to high values at the start of training, only the values after the first 100 epochs are
shown.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
47
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.2. Modelling
The model in Figure 4.15 is still learning as the validation steadily becomes smaller.
This configuration of the model could, therefore, potentially become better or equal
to a smaller batch size if the correct length of epochs is chosen.
Number of Epochs
The number of epochs describes how many times the NN is trained on the whole
dataset. Adjusting the number of epochs down avoids overfitting but too few mean
that the model does not finish learning the pattern. In Figure 4.15 on the previous
page the loss of the validation was still going down, indicating that the model has
not yet finished learning as it is still improving.
The model has therefore been trained for 1000 epochs instead of only 500 to see if
the loss improved. Furthermore, to get closer to the true big dataset the dataset size
has been doubled as this is important for the number of epochs. Table 4.10 shows
the hyperparameters which were used. For the increased dataset two runs with a
batch size of 64 and with 256 were made.
Name
Value
Dataset size
100.000
Learning rate
0.001
epoch size
1000
training size
40%
Table 4.10: The dataset size and hyperparameters which were used for running
the Neural Networks for choosing the epoch number. The epoch number is kept
constant but the batch sizes are changed between runs.
All six configurations of the models are run two times for the two different batch
sizes for 1000 epochs. As in the previous section the means of the mean loss and
mean RMSE are then computed and they are shown in Table 4.11.
batch size
Loss [m]
RMSE [m]
Time
64
3 × 10−4
0.02
0:16:36
256
6 × 10−4
0.37
0:05:09
Table 4.11: Different batch sizes and the average of all three, M3, M4 & M5,
models. The loss and RMSE is an average of the last 50 values in a run of 1000
epochs. The time format is given in h : mm : ss.
Both the loss and the RMSE are lower with a batch size of 64 than 256. Based
on this, and the performance shown for batch size = 16 in Table 4.9 on page 46
the model should keep a batch size of 64. The time taken for the model runs in
Table 4.9 are not in direct comparison to the time for the model with batch size 64
in Table 4.11. The dataset for this model run is double the size which impacts the
run time.
The loss and RMSE are not significantly improved with a higher number of epochs
at 1000 compared to 500. For a higher number of epochs, the model may begin to
48
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:60==
4.2. Modelling
Chapter 4. Methods
over-fit. The learning curve of M5 may indicate that such overfitting is taking place,
see Figure 4.16.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Epoch #
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
Loss [m]
1e
4
train
validation
bsl. val.
Figure 4.16: The loss of model M5 with a batch size of 64, and 1000 epochs. The
validation loss (blue) is shown together with the baseline (purple) and training loss
(green). Due to high values at the start of training, only the values after the first
100 epochs are shown.
The validation loss in Figure 4.16 is close to or slightly lower than the training loss
in the first 500 epochs. Thereafter, the validation loss takes on a slightly positive
trend compared to the training loss. This indicates overfitting. An epoch length of
around 500 might therefore be the best suitable option.
It should be noted that the loss for the M3 model in the same configuration does not
show a trend of overfitting over 1000 epochs but the loss is consistently higher and
the model, therefore, has a worse performance. In general, the M3 model seems to
generalise quicker as the validation loss is already below the training loss after 100
epochs, but there is no real downward trend that indicates learning. This is also be
seen in Table A.2 on page 92 in Appendix A.2, which compares the performances of
the models. The loss of M3 is likewise in the Appendix A.2 Figure A.5 on page 92 .
The loss curve for M4 in this configuration is close to oscillating around the training
loss but does not seem to converge with the training loss after 500 epochs. The
learning curve can be seen in Appendix A.2 Figure A.6 on page 93.
For comparison, an epoch length of 500 but with a dataset size at 100,000 is run.
For this run the mean loss over the three runs is 0.00003, the mean RMSE is 0.017.
The average time it took for the models was 0:07:28.
It is, therefore, performing approximately the same as the model with 64 for 1000
epochs but takes about 9 minutes less to run. This model is, therefore, preferred.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
49
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.2. Modelling
This model is the same model run as in Section 4.2.2 on page 42 and the results
are also similar in RMSE and loss as seen in the table in that section, Table 4.7 on
page 44. The last hyperparameter that is considered is the learning rate, η.
The Learning Rate
The choice of learning rate is essential to ensure that the algorithm is not stuck
in a local minimum due to a too-small step size but also does not overshoot with
a too-large step size from a global minimum. The learning rate which is declared
in Tensorflow is set as a constant. The choice of the learning rate for the NN in
Tensorflow describes the size of the steps taken towards a minimum after every
batch.
For the Adam optimiser the standard proposed learning rate is η = 0.001 [48]. There
are three more parameters which could be tweaked in the optimiser, two exponential
decay rates called β1 and β2 and a small non-zero value that prevents division by zero
ε. The decay rates ensure that more recent gradients weigh more in the parameter
updates than older ones, making the optimiser able to adapt to changes in the
optimisation surface. These three are not tuned in this thesis as they are highly
dependent upon the learning rate, see Algorithm 1 in [48].
Two different choices of learning rates were explored η = 0.01 and η = 0.0001. The
hyperparameters which were kept constant are presented in Table 4.12.
Name
Value
Dataset size
100.000
Batch size
64
epoch size
500
training size
40%
Table 4.12: The dataset size and hyperparameters that were used for running the
Neural Network for choosing the learning rate.
Again all three configurations of the models were run two times for the different
learning rates. The mean loss and mean RMSE are presented in Table 4.13.
Learning rate (η)
Loss [m]
RMSE [m]
Time
0.01
3 × 10−4
0.02
0:07:37
0.0001
15 × 10−4
0.03
0:07:58
Table 4.13: Different learning rates and the average of all three, M3, M4 & M5,
models. The loss and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) is an average of the last 50
values in a run of 500 epochs. The time format is given in h : mm : ss.
The RMSE values indicate that the lowest learning rate, η = 0.0001 explored is not
suitable, featuring both a higher loss and a higher RMSE. The higher learning rate
of η = 0.01 does also not present any real improvements compared to the run with
the standard learning rate for the same setup.
50
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:62==
4.2. Modelling
Chapter 4. Methods
The best-performing model in the run for η = 0.0001, M4, has an average loss of
0.0009 for the last 50 epochs. This is higher than for any models in a run with
η = 0.001 with this data size. More in-depth values for the run are given in the
Appendix A.2, Table A.3 on page 93.
The learning curves of the three models with η = 0.0001 do, however, differ in
terms of convergence. While the loss curve for M4 does seem to have converged, see
Figure A.7 on page 94 in Appendix A.2. The loss for both M3 and M5 still shows
a downward trend for η = 0.0001. Both learning curves are shown side-by-side in
Figure 4.17.
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Epoch #
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
Loss [m]
1e
4
train
validation
bsl. val.
(a) The model loss for M3 for η = 0.0001.
The last 400 epochs are shown out of 500.
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Epoch #
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
Loss [m]
1e
4
train
validation
bsl. val.
(b) The model loss for M5 for η = 0.0001.
The last 400 epochs are shown out of 500.
Figure 4.17: The learning curves of M3 and M5 for η = 0.0001. Only the last 400
epochs are shown out of 500 epochs are shown. The blue line shows the validation
loss, the green shows the training loss and the purple shows the validation loss.
The loss curve for M3 indicates that the model has not yet finished learning through
the downward trend but is in general underfitting.
This can be seen from the
validation loss that is consistently higher than the training and does not converge
to the training loss. For M5 the model is also not finished learning but is in general
overfitting and is not able to generalise. Both cases show that the complexity of the
model needs to be considered also in terms of the learning rate.
For the NN, a learning rate of η = 0.001 is considered the most appropriate. This
together with a batch size of 64 and an epoch number of 500 concludes the hyper-
parameter tuning.
The Tuned Network
The final hyperparameters together with the full dataset are finally run. The hyper-
parameters chosen are given in Table 4.14 on the next page.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
51
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.2. Modelling
Name
Value
Dataset size
166.639
Learning rate
0.001
Batch size
64
epoch size
500
training size
40%
Table 4.14: The full dataset size and the hyperparameters chosen for the finalised
Neural Network.
The results of this run for all three models and the baseline are given in Table 4.15.
M3
M4
M5
M3B
M4B
M5B
RMSE [m]
8.41
7.48
7.43
11.25
10.67
10.71
µRMSE,50
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
Loss
0.14
0.11
0.11
0.25
0.23
0.23
µLoss,50
3 × 10−4
3 × 10−4
3 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
Time
0:15:33
0:15:41
0:15:50
0:13:50
0:13:47
0:13:56
Table 4.15: Performance of a single Neural Network run for 6 different models, the
models which end with B are the baseline models. The NNs are using the finalised
hyperparameters. The total Root Mean Square Error and loss are computed and
the average of the last 50 epochs is denoted with µi,50. All performance variables
except time are given in metres, the time format is given in h : mm : ss.
The times in Table 4.15 reflect the larger amount of data in the dataset. This is
seen by the increase in time that also occurs for the baseline models. The loss and
RMSE indicate that the models still perform well with the chosen hyperparameters
even for the full dataset. M4 and M5 both perform slightly better in terms of RMSE
than M3. The learning curve of M3 is shown in Figure 4.18 on the following page.
The validation loss is again consistently lower than the training loss but oscillates
closely to the training loss. The learning curves for M4 and M5 are given in A.2,
Figure A.8 on page 94 and Figure A.9 on page 95 respectively. These two models
feature a validation loss that is more closely converged with the training loss.
Both the distribution of the predictions and the boxplot of the residuals for M4
closely resemble the runs portrayed in Figure 4.13 on page 44 where only about a
third of the dataset was used. The distribution of the predictions can be seen in
Appendix A.2, Figure A.10 on page 95, the boxplot of the residual is likewise given
in Appendix A.2 Figure A.11 on page 96.
From the results on the bigger dataset with 100,000, the hyperparameters are pre-
sumably still a good choice for the whole dataset. Before the model is finalised the
choice of the number input variables has to be made. As M4 and M5 in many of
the tests performed similarly, a k-fold cross-validation is used. This also evaluates
the generalisability of the model on the dataset.
52
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:64==
4.2. Modelling
Chapter 4. Methods
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Epoch #
3
4
5
6
7
Loss [m]
1e
4
train
validation
bsl. val.
Figure 4.18: The learning curve of M3 with the finalised hyperparameters. Only
the last 400 epochs are shown out of 500 epochs are shown. The blue line shows the
validation loss, the green shows the training loss and the purple shows the validation
loss.
4.2.4
Validation of the Network
In the k-fold cross-validation, the dataset is split into K different folds. Each of these
folds then uses a different subset of the data for training and evaluation. The average
of each error for each fold can then be computed which results in the generalisation
error of the NN. Since a new subset of the data is used in each fold for training and
testing spurious values in the dataset do not largely affect the generalisation error.
In this thesis, it was also used to compare the different NNs. For this, a k-fold of
k = 10 was chosen on a dataset of the size of 50,000. This dataset was sampled
randomly from the whole dataset but with a set random state so that the sample
would remain the same for all three models. The dataset size was chosen to limit
the time taken for the total run and because the performance of the network was
seen to be very similar for both the size of 50,000 data points and the full dataset
size. The averages of the runs are given in Table 4.16.
M3
M4
M5
RMSE [m]
0.02
0.01
0.01
Loss [m]
3 × 10−4
2 × 10−4
2 × 10−4
Time
1:04:27
1:07:04
1:12:13
Table 4.16: Average loss, Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) and the time it takes
for a run for each Neural Network model. This is for the finalised hyperparameters
and in a 10-fold cross-validation run.The time format is given in h : mm : ss.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
53
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.2. Modelling
The RMSE for the models lie close in Table 4.16 on the previous page, especially for
M4 and M5. The biggest difference is seen in the time it takes to run the models.
Here M5 is slower with about 5 minutes over the whole k-fold. The loss of the three
models in comparison to the baseline is shown in Figure 4.19.
Figure 4.19: The mean loss of the 10-fold cross-validation for the three models.
The number of features denotes the configuration of the model. The loss is averaged
for each model over loss per fold.
Figure 4.20:
Boxplots of the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)-values for all
three models. The number of features describes the model, either M3, M4 or M5
respectively. There are k=10 RMSE values for each model.
54
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:66==
4.2. Modelling
Chapter 4. Methods
The NN-model losses are seen to be lower than the ones for the baseline. There is
also a visible difference between M3 but the difference between M4 and M5 is small.
To compare how well the models perform over the 10 folds their boxplots are shown
in Figure 4.20 on the previous page. The distribution of the different quantiles for
M4 and M5 shows a difference in the precision of the models. The RMSE values for
the M4 model have the quantile ranges 1.45×102 m to 1.50×102 m so that they have
a general range of 5.00 × 104 m. The RMSE quantiles ranges for M5 are in contrast
between 1.50 × 102 m to 1.41 × 102 m so that they have a range of 9.00 × 104 m.
This indicates that the M5 model has a higher accuracy but lower precision than
the model with 4 features. To check the variability in the data the RMSE values
over the 10-folds are plotted in Figure 4.21.
Figure 4.21: The Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) values as a function of their
folds. The M3 RMSE values are shown in a solid purple line, the M4 values are
shown in a dashed turquoise and the M5 values are shown in a dotted green.
The RMSE of M3 given in purple is seen to be higher than for M4 and M5. The
variability of both M3 and M5 is higher than for M4 which features a lower range
of values as expected from the boxplots. From the RMSE-values in Figure 4.21
there is not a specific fold which give cause for significantly higher RMSE-values
for all models. The same trends as for the RMSE are also seen for the loss. This
indicates that no specific fold featured particularly many unusual input and output
combinations and that the data points for the folds were well distributed.
M4 has comparable accuracy but higher precision than M5. Following the principle
of Occam’s razor, using the simplest suitable model [50], the M4 model is preferred
as a finalised model. To ensure no significant difference between the two, the M4
and M5 models are compared with a student-t distribution.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
55
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.2. Modelling
Hypothesis Testing
From the 10-fold cross-validation, the M4 model is more precise but less accurate. To
determine whether there is a significant difference in accuracy between the models,
the following hypotheses are tested,
Hypothesis H0: There is no significant performance difference
between M4 and M5.
Hypothesis H1: There is a significant performance difference
between M4 and M5.
To carry out the test first a cross-validation was performed. Because the losses of
the models are not known to be normally distributed, a k-fold of k=50 was chosen
to satisfy the central limit theorem, so that a student-t distribution could be used.
The losses were then computed as a L2 loss, using the MSE. A confidence interval
with a significance level of α = 0.05 was chosen. Using the differences of the losses
zi = zM4
i
−zM5
i
as the parameter µ and variance of that loss as σ2 in the student-t
distribution a confidence interval together with the t-value and p-value where com-
puted. This methodology is introduced in [32], in the method; 11.3.4: Comparing
two regression models on page 213.
The k-folds were performed on a dataset with the size of N = 50,000 and otherwise
the same hyperparameters as stated for the final model. Figure 4.22 shows the loss
for both M4 and M5 over the 50 folds.
Figure 4.22: The loss of the models M4 and M5 with the finalised hyperparameters
for a data size of N = 50,000. A 50-fold cross-validation was used to compute a loss
for each fold. The loss is based on the Mean Square Error.
56
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:68==
4.2. Modelling
Chapter 4. Methods
The losses of the model in Figure 4.22 are in the range between 1.2 × 10−4 and
∼6 × 10−5 have lower values than the average losses for the finalised model in the
10-fold cross-validation given in Table 4.16 on page 53. This difference is due to
using the MSE as a performance metric for the loss instead of the RMSE. The losses
shown in Figure 4.22 on the previous page are not directly comparable to previous
RMSE losses. The losses indicate that the loss varies over the k-folds and that no
particular k-fold was particularly spurious.
The confidence interval for this comparison is,
[zL, zU] = [−2.99 × 10−5, 3.33 × 10−5] m2
This indicates that the distribution of the mean differences between the two models
lies within that interval with a 95% confidence. The range of these values shows
that the difference between the models is very small. The distributions of the two
losses are plotted together in Figure 4.23. The distribution of the loss indicates a
non-normal distribution with a long right tail, for M5 but also a higher peak for M5.
M5 generally has larger tails than M4 which indicate lower precision compared to
M4. For further analysis, the p-value for the student-t distribution was computed,
pval = 0.45
Since this value is higher than the significance level the null hypothesis can not be
rejected. The models are not significantly different. Since there is no significant
difference the simpler M4 model, which only has 4 inputs is preferred.
Figure 4.23: Distribution of the loss of M4 and M5 for the 50-fold cross validation.
The finalised hyperparameters were used for a data size of N = 50,000.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
57
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 4. Methods
4.2. Modelling
58
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 5. Results
5
Results
This chapter presents the results of the model, M4, deployment from Chapter 4.
The deployment and evaluation of the model are covered in four sections,
Section 5.1 - Evaluates the model on the Learning DataSet.
Section 5.2 - Evaluates the finalised model on a new dataset in a new area using
the Validation DataSet in the North Sea.
Section 5.3 - The model is applied to the Mixed DataSet, featuring both regions,
the Mediterranean Sea and the North Sea.
Section 5.4 - Compares the Sea Surface Height Anomaly values from the different
models in the different regions.
In Section 5.1 the main focus is a soundness check of the model.
Furthermore,
relations between the residuals and other features are explored. Section 5.2 covers
the generalisation of the fitted model to a new dataset, the VDS i.e. how well it
performs on unseen data. In Section 5.3 the model is fitted and evaluated on a mixed
dataset. This is to assess whether there are biases in the two separate datasets that
affect the performance of the model. Finally, in Section 5.4 all three predictions from
the different sections are compared based on their SSHA estimates. A schematic
overview of the files used for this chapter is given in Appendix C Figure C.4 on
page 104.
5.1
The Finalised Model
In this section, the finalised model is tasked with predicting the same data it was
trained on. The target feature has remained the WTCR5 value, as also done in the
previous training of the model. The residuals are evaluated as part of the soundness
check of the model as they show the performance of M4 on the regression task it
is created for. Furthermore, they highlight any potential model flaws and provide
a deeper knowledge of how the model interacts with the data. The evaluation of
M4 in this section, where predictions and targets are compared is not used as a
performance indicator in comparison to the S3A. In this case, the M4 has ”seen” all
values that it is tasked to predict. An advantage that the S3A model did not have,
consequently the performances in this section are not comparable.
The finalised model, from now on referred to as M4 uses the hyperparameters de-
scribed in Table 4.14 on page 52 in the previous section. After the hyperparameters
are set for the model it is finalised. M4 is finalised by training it on all 166,639
measurements in the LDS. The summary statistics of WTCR5 and the M4 predic-
tions for the target are shown in Table 5.1 on the next page, together with the same
statistics for their residuals.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
59
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5. Results
5.1. The Finalised Model
Model
µ [m]
σ
min
25 %
50%
75%
max
WTCR5
-0.13
0.05
-0.43
-0.16
-0.12
-0.09
-0.02
M4
-0.13
0.05
-0.43
- 0.16
-0.12
-0.09
-0.02
Table 5.1: Summary statistics for target and prediction. The target is the Ra-
diometer WTC with 5 inputs while the prediction is made by the M4 model. The
whole LDS with 166,639 points was used to make the predictions. All variables are
given in metres.
There is no difference between the prediction and the target seen in Table 5.1 at
the precision of 10−2. The biggest difference between the two models is in the outer
points of the range. The whole range of S3A is 0.411 m while the whole range of M4
is 0.407 m for the WTC values.
To compare the spread of the two sets of WTC values, the distributions of the
predictions and the targets are plotted together in Figure 5.1.
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
WTC [m]
0
1
2
3
4
Density
WTC
WTCR5
M4
Figure 5.1: Distribution of the targets and the predictions.
The target is the
Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs while the prediction is made by the M4 model. The
whole dataset of 166,639 points was used to make predictions.
The target value and the predictions overlap closely for most of the distribution in
Figure 5.1. There are small differences in the two KDEs in the models but they both
centre around -0.13 m, as seen in Table 5.1. This similarity between the distribution
is supported by the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient between the two distributions,
which is R = 0.99. A Quantile-Quantile (Q-Q)-plot between the two distributions is
given in Appendix A.3, Figure A.12 on page 96. The fit of the Q-Q-plot indicates a
60
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:72==
5.1. The Finalised Model
Chapter 5. Results
high similarity for the two distributions. This strong linear correlation demonstrates
that the M4 predictions are similar to the S3A targets.
The small differences between the predictions and the target indicate either that the
model performs well on the LDS or that the LDS has a low enough complexity for
the NN to memorise important correlations. The differences between S3A and M4
can be seen in the residuals, a histogram of the residuals is presented in Figure 5.2.
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Res. [m]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Density
Figure 5.2: Distribution of the residuals between the target and the predictions.
The target is the Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs while the prediction is made by
the M4 model.
The residuals in the distribution in Figure 5.2 are very closely centred around zero.
A few residuals exist ranging to around ±0.06 m but most are within ±0.02 m. The
RMSE between the prediction and the target is,
RMSE = 6.0 × 10−3 m
This RMSE is higher than the residual for the model in the 10-fold cross-validation
seen in Table 4.16 on page 53 which was RMSE = 2.0 × 10−4 m. This difference
indicates that the model has begun to over-fit on the larger dataset of the whole
LDS. In comparison, the dataset of the 10-fold cross-validation was 50,000 for each
fold.
To discern if there is a noticeable pattern between the residuals and any of the other
features, their correlation is determined. The highest negative correlation between
the residuals and an attribute is r = −0.295 and is between the residual and the
latitude. In Figure A.13 on page 97 in Appendix A.3. the residuals are plotted
against the latitude. While most residuals are close to zero, the extreme negative
residuals are located mostly close to the high latitudes. The extreme positive values,
are spread out but are most prominent in the lower latitudes.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
61
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 5. Results
5.1. The Finalised Model
The highest positive correlation between the residuals and an attribute is r = 0.134
and is between the residual and the distance to the coast. The residuals against the
distance to the coast are plotted in Figure A.14 on page 97 in Appendix A.3. In the
figure, there is a clear grouping of the bigger residuals closer to the coast. Indicating
that values which are closer to the coast have bigger differences between the target
values and the predictions. To evaluate whether patterns in the residuals between
the targets and predictions are visible spatially, the residuals have been plotted on
the map in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: The residuals between the target and predictions shown as a function
of latitude and longitude. Residuals which are further away from zero have been
increased in size to improve visualisation. The target is the Radiometer WTC with
5 inputs while the prediction is made by the M4 model.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
lag
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Autocorrelation
Figure 5.4: The autocorrelation of the residuals for the Mediterranean Sea dataset,
the Learning DataSet. The confidence interval with α = 0.05 is illustrated with light
blue shading seen close to the x-axis at y = 0.
62
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:74==
5.2. Generalisation of the Model
Chapter 5. Results
The larger residuals in Figure 5.3 on the previous page are continuous along a
satellite track. One example of this is seen close to the coast of Tunisia and Libya
where several tracks have visible positive residuals. The measurements in Figure 5.3
are plotted on top of each other and the more extreme values are visually amplified.
A specific region is, therefore, not necessarily the cause for the residuals, but more
so a set of continuous measurements.
To further evaluate whether the residuals are due to issues along-track an autocor-
relation plot of the residuals is presented in Figure 5.4 on the previous page. The
number of lags represents the number of measurements which are assumed to be
correlated in time. The lag k represents the correlation a measurement M has with
itself Mk and the previous measurement Mk−1 [51]. The number of lags to analyse
in Figure 5.4 on the previous page was determined by the median value of an along-
track satellite measurement in the region. This value was determined by finding
all shifts in time in the measurements that were longer than 1 hour and thereafter
taking the median of the number of measurements before a shift.
The confidence interval with α = 0.05 is illustrated with the light blue shading seen
close to the x-axis at 0. The autocorrelation is seen to be above the confidence
interval for all ∼70 lags. This indicates that the residuals are highly correlated
to each - other in time and not just spurious data points. To determine how well
the M4 model performs compared to the S3A model a new dataset is required: the
VDS.
5.2
Generalisation of the Model
The VDS is used to evaluate how well the model generalises. To not only evaluate
the model based on very similar new data, which was evaluated in the 10-fold cross-
validation, the VDS measurements are from a different area, the NS.
The same preprocessing steps in terms of building the LDS were applied to the VDS.
SST values were matched with a new set of measurements for the NS with the same
methods. Values that were within 30 km of the coastlines were removed along with
NaN-values. This resulted in the VDS with a size of 59,331 data points, from the
years 2017 and 2018.
The summary statistics of the VDS can be found in the Appendix A.3, Table A.4 on
page 98. Noticeably, the mean values of the four WTC values are all lower for the
VDS than for the LDS. The values for the WTC values in the LDS are in the range
of [-0.12:-0.20] metres, see Table 4.3 on page 30, the range of the VDS is [-0.10:-0.16]
metres. There are also differences for all input features. These differences could
influence the ability of M4 to perform well on the VDS and should be considered
when analysing the results of the predictions made on the VDS.
The M4 model was tasked to predict WTC values for the VDS. The summary
statistics of the predictions, the targets and their differences are given in Table 5.2
on the next page.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
63
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 5. Results
5.2. Generalisation of the Model
Model
µ [m]
σ
min
25 %
50%
75%
max
WTCR5
-0.10
0.04
-0.34
-0.13
-0.09
-0.06
-0.01
M4
-0.06
0.04
-0.34
- 0.08
-0.05
-0.03
-0.07
Table 5.2: Summary statistics for target and prediction for the Validation DataSet.
The target is the Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs while the prediction is made by the
M4 model. The whole dataset of 59,331 data points was used to make predictions.
All variables are given in metres.
The differences in mean and the interquartile range between the predictions and
the target are larger for the VDS than for the LDS. The differences in standard
deviation and the minimum are lower than seen for the LDS in Table 5.1 on page 60.
The range for the WTCR5 values is 0.36 m while the range for the M4 is 0.42 m.
These ranges are similar in size to the ranges observed for the LDS in Table 5.1.
The mean of the predictions and the targets have a difference of 0.04 m in Table 5.2.
This could indicate that the distribution of the predictions is skewed compared to
the targets. The distributions of the predictions and the target values are shown in
Figure 5.5.
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
WTC [m]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Density
WTC
WTCR5
M4
Figure 5.5: Distribution of the targets and the predictions for the VDS. The target
is the Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs while the prediction is made by the M4 model.
The whole dataset of 59,331 points was used to make predictions.
The distribution of the predictions shifted the WTC values closer to zero compared
to the targets. While the distributions have the same overall shape, the distribution
of the target has a lower peak than the prediction distribution. The distributions
of the predictions and the targets have a similar shape, but the predictions have a
prominent bias. The correlation coeﬀicient for the two distributions is weaker than
for the LDS and is R = 0.93. A Q-Q-plot comparing the two distributions is given
in Appendix A.3, Figure A.15 on page 98.
64
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:76==
5.2. Generalisation of the Model
Chapter 5. Results
The residuals between the two distributions have a mean of µ = −3.97 × 10−2 m.
This reflects a shift compared to the distribution of the residuals seen for the LDS
seen in Figure 5.2 on page 61. The range of the residuals is also higher with a value
of ∼0.17 m for the VDS while it is ∼0.12 m for LDS. The RMSE for the target and
the prediction is,
RMSE = 4.1 × 10−2 m
This results in a difference of centimetres in accuracy compared to the fitted finalised
model on the MS which was RMSE = 6.0 × 10−3 m. To evaluate the impact the
features have on the residuals, the correlations of the residuals to the features are
explored.
The highest positive and highest absolute correlation was found with TB365 at r =
0.503. The TBs were seen to correlate strongly with each other in the correlation
matrix for the LDS, see Figure 4.6 on page 34. Similarly, their correlation for the
VDS is also r = 0.818. The residuals, however, do not have a strong correlation with
TB238, only a correlation of r = 0.150. To further explore this relation, the TB265
and residuals are plotted together in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: The residuals of the targets and the predictions for Sentinel-3A and
M4 trained on the Validation DataSet plotted against the TB365 feature.
The
predictions cover the whole dataset.
The residuals in Figure 5.6 show a positive correlation with TB365. Their distribu-
tion is also correlated with low values of TB365 where the spread of their grouping
is broad. For values of TB365 above 240 K, the residuals are fewer but more spread
out. This indicates that the differences between the S3A and the predicted values
have a lower general spread in values between 180 K to 220 K for the TB365.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
65
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 5. Results
5.3. Mixed Dataset
The highest negative correlation with the residuals is found with the SST at r =
−0.352. Figure A.17 on page 99 in Appendix A.3 shows the relation between the
residuals and the SST. Most of the residuals have values between -0.050 m and -
0.025 m, there are also positive residuals, mostly placed over 290 K. The median
SST for the MS is 287.23 K while the range is 7.34 K. The median for the NS is
287.85 K while the range is 11.00 K in the VDS. These differences in range compared
to the differences in median could influence the NN’s ability to predict on the VDS.
The differences in the datasets could be due to relations in the datasets that the
model is not able to recognise. Since the dataset is finite and no other areas are
considered for this thesis, a new approach is chosen to evaluate the generalisation
of the model. The datasets from the two different regions are mixed. The model is
then trained and evaluated on the mixed dataset, the MDS.
5.3
Mixed Dataset
To evaluate whether the bias is inherent to training the NN on only one region, the
MDS is introduced. The MDS contains measurements from both the MS and NS.
The dataset was created by merging the LDS and the VDS. After the merge, the
datasets were split and a random sample of 60% was set aside as a training dataset.
The rest of the dataset was set aside for testing and validation. The training dataset
had a size of 133,582 and the test dataset had a size of 90,388. The same runs as
previously were made, and the summary statistics are given in Table 5.3.
Model
µ [m]
σ
min
25 %
50%
75%
max
WTCR5
-0.12
0.05
-0.43
-0.15
-0.08
-0.06
-0.01
M4
-0.15
0.05
-0.38
-0.17
-0.14
-0.11
-0.02
Table 5.3: Summary statistics and differences for target and prediction on the
Mixed DataSet. The target is the Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs while the predic-
tion is made by the M4 model The size of the dataset on which the predictions were
made was N = 90,388. All variables are given in metres.
The differences in µ for the mixed dataset are smaller than for the VDS but they
are larger than just for the LDS. The differences for the inner quantiles in the LDS,
Table 5.1 on page 60 are on the magnitude of 10−5, while the differences for both
the VDS, Table 5.2 on page 64 and for the MDS are on a magnitude of 10−2. The
model trained on the MDS has a lower difference in range than the model evaluated
on the VDS and is thus indicated to have performed better.
The distribution of the predicts vs. the targets in Figure 5.7 on the following page
visualises that there is still a bias in the predictions as was seen previously in the
VDS in Figure 5.5 on page 64. The bias in the MDS is smaller but still present in
Figure 5.7. In the VDS the bias shifted the values of the prediction closer to zero, in
the MDS predictions the opposite is seen. The predictions are shifted more towards
negative WTC values.
This skewness is translated to the residuals presented in
Figure 5.8 on the following page.
66
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:78==
5.3. Mixed Dataset
Chapter 5. Results
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
WTC [m]
0
1
2
3
4
Density
WTC
WTCR5
M4
Figure 5.7: Distribution of the targets and the predictions for the model fitted on
the Mixed DataSet (MDS). The target is the Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs while
the prediction is made by the M4 model. The test MDS of 90,388 points was used
to make predictions.
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Res. [m]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Density
Figure 5.8: Distribution of the residuals between the target and the predictions for
the model fitted on the Mixed DataSet. The target is the Radiometer WTC with 5
inputs while the prediction is made by the M4 model.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
67
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 5. Results
5.3. Mixed Dataset
The mean of the residuals is µ = 2.97 × 10−2 m for the MDS. This mean is about a
centimetre closer to zero than for the VDS. This indicates that the model trained
on the MDS performs better than the model only trained on the LDS and then
evaluated on the VDS. The RMSE of the predictions and the targets is,
RMSE = 2.9 × 10−2 m
This RMSE is lower than for the VDS. This supports that the differences between
the two datasets, the LDS and VDS are not captured by the model. This is also
indicated by the residuals and their correlations with the features. The strongest
absolute correlation between the residuals and the features is given r = −0.302 and
is with the TB238. The correlation between the two values is shown in Figure 5.9.
Figure 5.9: The residuals of the targets and the predictions for Sentinel-3A and
M4 trained on the Mixed DataSet (MDS) plotted against the TB238 feature. The
predictions were made on the test MDS.
The negative correlation between the residuals and the TB238 is clear in Figure 5.9.
The residuals mostly have values around 0.00 m to 0.06 m and are between the values
140 K to 200 K of the TB. Residuals which are negative are seen mostly in the higher
TB values of around 220-240 K. A difference in the TB values is present in the two
datasets when comparing their summary statistics given in Table 4.3 on page 30
and Table A.4 on page 98 in Appendix A.3 for the LDS and the VDS respectively.
The variance for the TB238 attributes for the MS is 127.39 K while it is 136.38 K for
the NS. This difference in the variance of the datasets could indicate that the model
would need more training data to make better predictions. The highest positive
correlation in the whole dataset is 0.057 for the dist. coast feature. This correlation
is close to zero and indicates that most correlations from the residuals are close to
zero or negative.
68
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:80==
5.4. Sea Surface Height Anomaly
Chapter 5. Results
The residuals of the model are also significantly correlated in time, as can be seen
in Figure 5.10.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
lag
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Autocorrelation
Figure 5.10: The autocorrelation of the residuals for the Mixed DataSet. The
number of lags was chosen as the median of the lengths of the satellite track mea-
surements. The confidence interval with α = 0.05 is illustrated with the light blue
shading seen close to the x-axis at y = 0.
The correlation over the lags is similar as seen for the LDS in Figure 5.4 on page 62.
The lags over the combined datasets are in general smaller, which indicates that the
sampling shortens the continuous satellite tracks. Since the model is agnostic to
time series this should ideally not affect it.
The results from the MDS show that the model does not generalise well. The best-
performing model was for the LDS where the model already knew the data. The
performance of the MDS was better than for only the VDS, which could indicate a
bias in the datasets that the model does not capture. To compare the results of the
datasets further the SSHA for the three different datasets are compared.
5.4
Sea Surface Height Anomaly
The statistics of the SSHA are chosen as a backdrop for comparing the two differently
fitted models. For the SSHA the descriptive statistics are assumed to become smaller
for a better-performing model. The SSHA in the S3A measurements is provided as,
SSHA = a −∆R −MSS
(5.1)
Here a is the satellite altitude, ∆R is the corrected range and MSS is the Mean Sea
Surface. Chapter 2 in Section 2.1.2 on page 4 introduces some of the corrections: The
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
69
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 5. Results
5.4. Sea Surface Height Anomaly
dry atmospheric correction: ∆Rdry, the WTC: ∆Rwet, the ionospheric correction:
∆Riono and the Sea State Bias correction: ∆RSSB. The aforementioned corrections
are not the only corrections that are commonly applied to the SSHA. The SSHA
is often also corrected for tides, the inverted barometer effect and high-frequency
fluctuations, all available in the S3A product [52] to not only have an instantaneous
SSHA. The ∆Rwet is the variable that is swapped in the comparison of the SSHA,
all other values are kept the same. So that the different SSHA values are computed
as,
SSHAWTCR5 = SSHAS3a + WTCR3 −WTCR5
(5.2)
SSHAM4 = SSHAS3a + WTCR3 −WTCM4
(5.3)
SSHAWTCM = SSHAS3a + WTCR3 −WTCM
(5.4)
The SSHA product that is included in S3A uses the WTCR3 instead of WTCR5
to correct the SSHA. Since this thesis uses the WTCR5 for comparison, this is also
used in this section.
The comparison of the SSHAs is carried out for the LDS, VDS and the MDS. The
LDS is used as a reference for the results of the latter two.
5.4.1
The SSHA for the LDS
In this section, the SSHA for the model trained and evaluated on the LDS is exam-
ined. The SSHA corrected with the M4 WTC is compared to the SSHA corrected
with the WTCR5 and the WTCM. Descriptive statistics, similar to the previous
sections are presented in Table 5.4.
Model
µ [m]
σ
min
25 %
50%
75%
max
Range
WTCR5
0.05
0.13
-15.27
-0.00
0.06
0.11
3.50
18.77
M4
0.05
0.13
-15.30
-0.00
0.06
0.11
3.50
18.80
WTCM
0.06
0.13
-15.37
-0.00
0.06
0.11
3.50
18.87
Table 5.4:
Summary statistics for three different Sea Surface Height Anomaly
(SSHA) variations for the LDS. One with the Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs
(WTCR5), the second with the M4 model and the last with the Modelled WTC
from ECMWF data (WTCM). All are given in metres.
The descriptive statistics in Table 5.4 are similar for three SSHAs. The biggest
difference between the three is seen in the minimum value for the model which is
0.10 m smaller than S3A and 0.7 m smaller than M4. This difference consequently
affects the range as well. The minimum value for all three SSHAs is ∼15 m away
from the mean and median which are both close to zero.
This could indicate that the SSHA either has a very large range in general or that
there are outliers. Since the standard deviations for the WTC values were seen to
be lower by a magnitude of 10, see Table 4.3 on page 30 for the same dataset, the
increase in range is not assumed to be due to the WTCs.
To visualise the extent of the values that are outside of the upper and lower quantiles,
boxplots for the three SSHA are plotted in Figure 5.11 on the following page.
70
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:82==
5.4. Sea Surface Height Anomaly
Chapter 5. Results
WTCR5
M4
WTCM
15.0
12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
SSHA [m]
Figure 5.11:
The Sea Surface Height Anomaly (SSHA) values computed with
Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs, the M4 values and Modelled WTC from ECMWF
data. The SSHA values were computed for the Learning DataSet, using the whole
dataset for training and testing.
The values which are furthest away from the median are present for all three SSHA
estimates in Figure 5.11. From the boxplot alone, there is no discernible difference
between the SSHA values for the three models. The width of the upper and lower
quantiles visualise how most of the SSHA values are centred close to zero. Since
all three features have a value at ∼−15 m it can be assumed that this effect is not
due to a difference in the WTC values but rather one of the other corrections in the
SSHA.
5.4.2
The SSHA for the VDS
The SSHA is evaluated in the same manner for the VDS as for the LDS. The
descriptive statistics of the computed SSHA for the VDS are shown in Table 5.5.
µ [m]
σ
min
25%
50%
75%
max
Range
WTCR5
0.07
0.12
-1.93
0.01
0.07
0.14
2.26
4.18
M4
0.03
0.12
-1.95
-0.03
0.03
0.10
2.22
4.16
WTCM
0.08
0.12
-1.94
0.01
0.08
0.15
2.26
4.20
Table 5.5:
Summary statistics for three different Sea Surface Height Anomaly
(SSHA) computations for the VDS. One with the Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs
(WTCR5), the second with the M4 model, and the last with the Modelled WTC
from ECMWF data (WTCM). All are given in metres.
The range for the SSHA in the VDS is on average 77.6% smaller for the models
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
71
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 5. Results
5.4. Sea Surface Height Anomaly
compared to the LDS. This is caused by a reduced minimum value that is only
∼−2 m compared to the ∼−15 m for the LDS. This indicates issues with some of
the parameters in the SSHA that have very high values. The mean and the median of
the models show the most variability between the models. The mean of the WTCR5
and the WTCM are close to each other with only about 0.01 m in difference, while
the M4 SSHA has a difference of 0.4 m and 0.5 m to the WTCR5 and the WTCM
mean respectively. To visualise whether there are more values which are far out of
the Interquartile Range (IQR) as seen for the Mediterranean, a boxplot of the IQR
is given in Figure 5.12.
WTCR5
M4
WTCM
2
1
0
1
2
SSHA [m]
Figure 5.12: The Sea Surface Height Anomaly (SSHA) values computed with the
Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs values and with M4 WTC values, together with the
model values. The SSHA values were computed for the North Sea dataset, using
the test dataset.
Most SSHA values in Figure 5.12 are within the range of [-1,1] m. Compared to
the LDS the range is significantly smaller. This further supports that the very high
negative values in the LDS could be classified as outliers, as values of this magnitude
are not present in the VDS.
To visualise the distribution of the SSHA for the three models they are plotted to-
gether, with a limited range of [-1,1] m. The visualisation is shown in Figure 5.13 on
the following page. The KDE of the distributions between the SSHA from WTCR5
and the model WTC lie closer to each other than the M4. The M4 SSHA is shifted
slightly to the left, and has its peak closer to zero, as also seen in Table 5.5 on the
previous page.
The distribution and the descriptive statistics indicate a good performance of the
NN model - M4. The differences with the standard S3A or the model are small and
72
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:84==
5.4. Sea Surface Height Anomaly
Chapter 5. Results
the distributions of the SSHA values are similar. The M4 has the smallest range
and a smaller mean and median than the other two models. To further evaluate this
indication the same analysis is also done for MDS.
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
SSHA [m]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Density
SSHA
WTCR5
M4
WTCM
Figure 5.13: The distribution of the Sea Surface Height Anomaly (SSHA) deter-
mined with three different models. The SSHA was computed with the predictions
made on the test dataset. The view presented is a zoomed-in view to only show the
x-axis between -1 to 1.
5.4.3
The SSHA for the MDS
The MDS is once more used to evaluate how well the model does on a dataset with
higher variability, but where it has been trained on both areas. The SSHA from M4
for the MDS is again compared with the WTCR5 and the WTCM. The descriptive
statistics of the SSHA for the MDS are presented in Table 5.6.
µ [m]
σ
min
25%
50%
75%
max
Range
WTCR5
0.06
0.13
-15.27
0.00
0.06
0.12
3.50
18.77
M4
0.09
0.13
-15.33
0.03
0.09
0.15
3.52
18.86
WTCM
0.06
0.13
-15.37
0.00
0.06
0.12
3.50
18.87
Table 5.6:
Summary statistics for three different Sea Surface Height Anomaly
(SSHA) computations for the MDS. One with the Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs
(WTCR5), the second with the M4 model, and the last with the Modelled WTC
from ECMWF data (WTCM). All are given in metres.
Based on the range in Table 5.6 some of the highly negative values in the LDS are
sampled in the test dataset of the MDS. The mean and median values for the SSHA
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
73
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 5. Results
5.4. Sea Surface Height Anomaly
are higher for all parameters compared to the two previous datasets. This could re-
flect high variability in the dataset. Furthermore, This indicates that the descriptive
characteristics of the SSHA are influenced by the variability in the dataset. While
the variances are the same for all three models the ranges and medians and corre-
sponding means vary. The WTCR5 and the WTCM have the same medians and
mean while the mean and median are higher for the M4 predictions. However, the
range is 0.01 m smaller for the M4 SSHA than for the WTCM. The range is smallest
for the SSHA corrected with the WTCR5.
To visualise their distribution and minimise the impact of the more extreme values
on that visualisation, a KDE-plot is shown in Figure 5.14.
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
SSHA [m]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Density
SSHA
WTCR5
M4
WTCM
Figure 5.14: A zoomed in Kernel distribution Estimation plot of the Sea Surface
Height Anomaly (SSHA) values for the three models. The SSHA was computed with
the predictions made on the test Mixed DataSet. The view presented is a zoomed-in
view to only show the x-axis in the range [-1,1].
The KDE-plot shows a high similarity of the distributions. The WTCM SSHA and
the M4 SSHA are very similarly distributed, and at the peak are more similar to
each other than to the WTCR5 SSHA. This indicates that some of the dissimilarity
seen in Table 5.6 on the previous page could stem largely from the more extreme
values.
74
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 6. Discussion
6
Discussion
6.1
Results of the NN Model
The proposed network, M4, was evaluated for accuracy and precision to establish
whether it performed better than the already implemented retrieval algorithms. The
following section focuses on the resulting RMSE values and compares them for the
relevant datasets.
6.1.1
The Targets and Predictions
The accuracy was measured in terms of the RMSE values between the predicted
WTC values from M4 and the target values from the 5P algorithm. M4 was eval-
uated on two different regions with three different datasets: the LDS, VDS and
MDS. The results from Section 5.1 on page 59, with the LDS, are not used as a
measurement of performance, as the target and testing values were the same. The
RMSE values from the two other datasets are shown in Table 6.1.
Dataset
RMSE [cm]
VDS
4.1
MDS
2.9
Table 6.1: The Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) values, between the predictions
and the targets. The values are given for the two datasets in which M4 has not seen
the values it was tasked to predict: the Validation DataSet (VDS) and the Mixed
DataSet (MDS).
M4 had the highest RMSE and thereby lowest accuracy on the VDS. For this dataset,
the model had been trained on data from the MS region but tasked to predict on data
from the NS region. The high RMSE reflects M4’s inability to generalise between
the two regions. This inability was most clearly seen in the high bias that occurred
between the target values and the predictions, seen in Figure 5.5 on page 64.
In comparison, the RMSE for the MDS was 1.2 cm lower. For the MDS, the model
was trained on data from both regions and tasked to make predictions on a new
dataset also containing data from both regions.
The predictions, however, still
featured a significant bias compared to the target values as seen in Figure 5.7 on
page 67.
The 10-fold cross-validation resulted in the lowest RMSE for M4.
The NN was
fitted and trained for about 50,000 points from a subset of the LDS and evaluated
on a subset of the 50,000 points. The average RMSE, the generalisation error, was
1.47 cm for the 10-fold cross-validation. In the 10-fold cross-validation M4 did not
have to generalise to a new region.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
75
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 6. Discussion
6.2. Comparison to Existing Literature
The results demonstrate that M4 fails to generalise to different areas when only
trained on one region. Furthermore, higher variability in the data, as in the MDS
leads to a higher RMSE by introducing a bias in the distributions of the predictions
and the targets.
6.1.2
The SSHA
To estimate the precision of M4, the SSHA values from M4 were compared with
SSHA corrected with WTCR5 and WTCM values. The range of the SSHA values
and the deviation of their means from zero were used as criteria. All three datasets
were used in the comparison, their differences are given in Table 6.2.
Model
∆µ [m]
∆Range [m]
LDS
VDS
MDS
LDS
VDS
MDS
WTCR5 - M4
0.00
0.04
-0.03
-0.03
0.02
-0.09
WTCM - M4
0.01
0.05
-0.03
0.07
0.04
0.01
Table 6.2: The differences in mean and range between the Radiometer WTC with
5 inputs (WTCR5) and the Modelled WTC from ECMWF data (WTCM) in their
Sea Surface Height Anomaly values. The differences are given for all three datasets:
the Learning DataSet (LDS), the Validation DataSet (VDS) and the Mixed DataSet
(MDS).
The differences in the mean, µ and the range in Table 6.2 indicate that the three
compared models have differences in range and µ on the scale of millimetres. The
M4 model has the highest differences in µ and Range in the MDS and performs best
in terms of precision on the VDS.
For both the LDS and the MDS large negative values of a size up to 15 m occurred
in the SSHA. The values could not be attributed to differences in WTC values
and therefore do not indicate the performance of the NN. The extreme values are
likely outliers stemming from one of the non wet-troposhere corrections, to the
SSHA. Their effect on the SSHA, however, obfuscates its determination for the two
datasets and the resulting analysis.
In the VDS which did not contain extreme
values of this magnitude, the M4 model had mean values closer to zero and smaller
ranges compared to both the WTCR5 and the WTCM. These results indicate that
the M4 model could potentially have a higher precision but the extreme values in
the LDS and MDS should be removed to support this.
6.2
Comparison to Existing Literature
Several studies have been conducted to improve the data product from S3A. These
studies have sought to asses or improve upon the limitations of MWR’s hardware
due to the significance of S3A’s altimetry product. In this section, some of this
research is highlighted and utilised to asses M4’s performance. Additional literature
concerning the expected range of values for the SSHA in the regions NS and MS are
also used for evaluation.
A previous independent assessment of the implemented five-input WTC retrieval
algorithm, 5P, of S3A in [4] resulted in RMSE values in the range of 0.9 cm to
76
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:88==
6.3. Limitations & Weaknesses
Chapter 6. Discussion
1.5 cm for six different WTC sources, see Table 1 in [4] on page 9. In a more recent
evaluation in [12] the RMSE values for measurements along-track the RMSE of 5P
on a global scale was found to be RMSE = 1.22 cm, see Figure 12 in [12]. The
RMSE-value in [12] is determined in relation to independent MWR measurements.
These RMSE values are much lower than for any of the results seen for M4. The M4
is consequently not seen as an improvement to the currently implemented algorithms.
Probable causes for this failure to improve upon the WTC retrieval algorithm are
discussed in Section 6.3.
In [4] the authors note that high values of RMSE were observed in areas with lower
latitudes, ±50◦. The WTC values in this region have both a higher absolute value
and a higher variability, than for other regions. In general the highest variability
and values in WTC are found in the tropical regions [6]. This dependence of the
WTC on the latitude supports some of the biases M4 has in the predictions between
the two areas.
The SSHA values for the LDS and consequently the MDS had a large range with
absolute values of up to 15 m. This magnitude in the range was not featured in the
VDS and the values could consequently be outliers.
In [53] the Sea Level Anomaly (SLA) is given in reference to the MSS for the
Mediterranean. Since the SLA is given in reference to the MSS it is considered to be
comparable to the SSHA. In [53] the SSHA values stem from the XTRACK/ALES
dataset [54] containing data from Jason 1, 2 & 3 as along-track data and are pre-
sented for the years 2002-2018. In Figure 13 on Page 17 in [53] the SSHA values
are seen to be within the ranges of ±1 m for the satellite altimetry product. These
bounds were found to be exceeded both in the positive and negative range in the
S3A SSHA product for the MS.
In comparison, the ranges of the SSHA in VDS, data from the NS, were found to
be considerably smaller not exceeding the range of ±2.3 m. This range still exceeds
the range set as SLA values, in reference to a MSS, for the NS in a recent dataset
published in [55].
The SSHA ranges presented in this thesis are consequently deemed to be out of
bounds for all datasets. Further processing of the SSHA data is required before
conclusions about NN precision based on SSHA evaluation are credible.
6.3
Limitations & Weaknesses
Two aspects of methodology were the main foci of this thesis: the datasets and the
NN. The limitations and weaknesses in their creation are discussed in the following
two sections.
6.3.1
The Datasets
All values within the LDS, except the SST, are from the S3A baseline-2 product at
1 Hz. With an orbital cycle of 27 days, this meant that the repetition of the same
geographical point on the ground was repeated about monthly. While most of the
variability in the WTC stems from annual or inter-annual signals, short-time events
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
77
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 6. Discussion
6.3. Limitations & Weaknesses
such as turbulence at the scale of hours and seconds also can affect it [7]. Moreover,
the SST values in the LDS indicated a weaker seasonal signal than the median of
the ERA5 dataset. The weaker signal implies a sampling that is not representative
of the true SST signal.
The differences in the two different regions ensured that the generalisation of the
model could be explored for different atmospheric conditions. From the results seen
in Section 5.2 on page 63, this difference introduced a significant bias in the predic-
tions. This bias was not seen from the model in the 10-fold cross-validation when
only a single region, the MS, was used. In [12] a new NN WTC retrieval algorithm
was trained with a dataset containing 104,030 measurement points from S3A. These
values were sampled to be adequately spaced globally and were considered for the
year 2017. In comparison, the datasets used in this thesis are more densely spaced
spatially but span over two years instead. M4’s results suggest that a smaller spatial
span severely impairs the NNs ability to predict on new regions.
Training and evaluating the model on the MDS resulted in lesser but still present
bias. The bias in the model trained on the MDS indicates that the NN either needs
more global training data or that a more complex model could be advantageous.
6.3.2
The Model
The model architecture of M4 was not a significant departure from the already
implemented retrieval algorithms. The model configuration consisted of a shallow
feed-forward NN with a varying amount of inputs but 8 neurons in the single hidden
layer. This simple but robust architecture has the advantage of a lowered complexity
but also fails to acknowledge temporal and spatial correlations in the data. In the
thesis, only varying the number of input features was considered. This choice was
made both to limit the scope of the thesis and for a better comparison with previous
algorithms.
The autocorrelation in the residuals shown in Figure 5.4 on page 62 indicates that the
residuals are highly correlated in time. The number of lags evaluated corresponded
to the median satellite track length over the area. The data was, therefore, not
de-trended and the correlations are not assumed to be due to a seasonal signal as
they span atmost over minutes. A network architecture aware of time-series data
could provide alleviation to this residual correlation. Implementing a sequence-aware
network would mean giving up the simplicity of the existing retrieval NNs as a trade-
off. An increase in the complexity of the model often requires an increase in the
needed computation power.
This trade-off needs to be considered when selecting a different model structure.
This was also considered when choosing the simpler M4 model compared to the M5
model even though they had no significant difference in accuracy. A more complex
model, like M5 or a deeper network, is recommended for future study as M5 shows
promise in terms of accuracy, even if it needs more data and processing power to
perform better.
78
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:90==
6.4. Impact
Chapter 6. Discussion
6.4
Impact
The NN developed in this thesis did not improve upon the performance of the
already implemented WTC retrieval algorithms in S3A. M4 had comparable RMSE
values in the 10-fold cross-validation with a subset of the LDS, to the implemented
algorithms. However, the RMSE values increased when applied to the VDS or with
the MDS. While the developed NN model itself does not add improvements to the
body of research, the relations in the residuals have the potential to support the
development of new NN models with different architectures.
The precise estimation of the WTC and SSHA have significant implications for
climate models and the current knowledge about ocean dynamics. The research
into the residuals of these models could help refine climate models and support
efforts of sustainable marine resources in line with SDG 14. This work aligns with
SDG 13 and the larger objective of promoting climate action by adding to the body
of research pertaining to SSHA estimation.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
79
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 6. Discussion
6.4. Impact
80
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:92==
Chapter 7. Conclusion
7
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to propose a new NN algorithm for the retrieval of the
WTC for S3A. The WTC has a significant impact, up to 50 m, on the maritime
altimetry measurements performed by S3A. These measurements are used to inform
important climate variables, and so the precise determination of the WTC has an
impact on the reliability of climate models.
S3A features a two-channel MWR,
a radiometer that has been shown to generally achieve less accurate WTC values
compared to three-channel MWRs. The aim of the proposed NN in this thesis was
to aid in overcoming that performance gap.
The proposed NN, denoted M4, was trained only on regionally delimited datasets.
Two different versions of M4 were compared. One trained on a dataset with mea-
surements from the MS, the LDS, and one trained on a mixed dataset containing
values from both the MS and the NS, the MDS. The version of M4 trained only on
the MS was evaluated on the same dataset it had been trained on and on a new
dataset from the NS, it had not been trained on, the VDS. For the VDS, the model
showed a considerable bias, shifting the predicted WTC to lower values than the
target. The second iteration of M4 trained on the MDS also predicted values with a
bias but shifted the predictions towards negative WTC estimates compared to the
target values.
The resulting RMSEs between the target and the predictions were 4.1 cm and 2.9 cm
for the VDS and the MDS respectively. Previous independent assessments of the
S3A retrieval algorithms resulted in RMSE-values of around 0.9 cm to 1.5 cm. The
M4 did thus not perform better than previous iterations of retrieval algorithms for
S3A.
To further determine the precision in the M4 model the SSHA values were evaluated.
The SSHA corrected with the WTCR5, the WTCM and the M4 WTC values were
compared. For the NS dataset, the mean and the range of the M4 model were smaller
than for the two other corrections. This indicates that the M4 model potentially has
a higher precision than the two evaluated WTC values from the S3A data product.
In the two other datasets, the LDS and consequently the MDS extreme negative
values for the SSHA were observed. These values indicate that outliers from other
corrections than the WTC should be removed before conclusive statements about
the NN precision, based on the SSHA determination, can be made.
While the proposed NN did not outperform the established NNs, the work in the
thesis uncovered trends and patterns in the input data and the residuals of the
already established models. For the residuals of the NN trained on the LDS from
the MS and evaluated on that same dataset a clear autocorrelation was found. The
number of lags, corresponding to the median length satellite track measurements,
showed relations well over the confidence level. These same patterns were seen in
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
81
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 7. Conclusion
the MDS. These correlations stimulate further research for the NN structures to be
time-series aware.
In the 10-fold cross-validation of the M4 model, the dataset was evaluated only on
the LDS. The generalisation error of the model was in this case, RMSE = 1.47 cm for
a dataset size of training and testing of N = 50, 000. While the recommended NN in
[12] had the lowest RMSE of 0.98 cm on a global scale along the track, the results of
the 10-fold cross-validation indicate that regional WTC retrieval algorithms could
perform well with smaller datasets.
The findings in this thesis do not support the implementation of the proposed NN
structure trained on a regionally delimited dataset for a global WTC retrieval algo-
rithm. Instead, the findings could be utilised to animate further forays into different
network architectures for the WTC retrieval algorithm. Suggestions for further work
with the research topic of this thesis are given in Chapter 8 on the following page.
82
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 8. Future Work
8
Future Work
Two main aspects for further research are suggested based on the findings in this
thesis: The input data and the NN architecture.
The M4 model trained and evaluated on data for only the MS performed better
than any other iteration of the M4 algorithm. An exploration into WTC retrieval
methods that are trained and evaluated using only local data might be conducted
in light of M4’s results in the 10-fold cross-validation.
The input features chosen for the proposed NN were inherited largely from previous
satellite missions. The legacy-based approach is tied to previous statistical regression
analysis, but the current narrow scope in the input parameters might not embrace
the full capabilities of a ML approach. In this thesis, an attempt where the distance
to the coast was implemented as an input feature showed potential for further re-
search. While this input feature was rejected due to a lower precision than M4, its
performance in terms of accuracy had no significant difference from M4. A novel
approach could be with an in-depth parameter evaluation based on correlations to
the WTC parameter. For this, a Sensitivity Analysis of the input parameters could
be implemented to better evaluate their impact on the NN performance [35].
The correlations of the residuals in time suggest a potential for a new NN-architecture.
By implementing a network which retains information about previous input, the NN
might be able to better estimate the WTC. A fitting network type for this task is a
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) that in contrast to the current network features
internal states that remember information about sequences of data. Lastly, based
on the type of data, a deep NN is suggested instead of a shallow NN [56]. In [56] the
authors argue that since many phenomena in the natural sciences take place in pro-
cesses of differing scales, a deeper network, that can recognise compositional logic
could be better suited than a shallow network. While the authors in [56] require
a leap of faith from the reader to follow this hypothesis further work with WTC
retrieval algorithms could explore this analysis with a focus on the processes in the
atmosphere.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
83
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 8. Future Work
84
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:96==
Bibliography
Bibliography
Bibliography
[1]
G. Seeber, Satellite Geodesy: Foundations, Methods, and Applications, 2nd ed.
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2003, pp. 443–454. [Online]. Available: https://
www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/9783110190081/html (visited on
10/18/2022).
[2]
M.-L. Frery, M. Siméon, C. Goldstein, et al., “Sentinel-3 Microwave Radiome-
ters: Instrument Description, Calibration and Geophysical Products Perfor-
mances,” Remote Sensing, vol. 12, no. 16, p. 2590, Aug. 12, 2020, [Online;
accessed 2022-09-13].
[3]
G. D. Quartly, F. Nencioli, M. Raynal, et al., “The Roles of the S3MPC:
Monitoring, Validation and Evolution of Sentinel-3 Altimetry Observations,”
Remote Sensing, vol. 12, no. 11, May 29, 2020, [Online; accessed 2022-09-13].
[4]
M. Fernandes and C. Lázaro, “Independent Assessment of Sentinel-3a Wet
Tropospheric Correction over the Open and Coastal Ocean,” Remote Sensing,
vol. 10, no. 3, p. 484, Mar. 20, 2018, [Online; accessed 2022-09-01].
[5]
S. Abdalla, A. Abdeh Kolahchi, M. Ablain, et al., “Altimetry for the future:
Building on 25 years of progress,” Advances in Space Research, vol. 68, no. 2,
J. Verron, B. Ryan, P. B. Bonnefond, and J. Benveniste, Eds., pp. 319–363,
Mar. 23, 2021, [Online; accessed 2022-10-18].
[6]
M. J. Fernandes, C. Lázaro, and T. Vieira, “On the role of the troposphere in
satellite altimetry,” Remote Sensing of Environment, vol. 252, no. 1, p. 112 149,
Jan. 2021, [Online; accessed 2022-09-01].
[7]
E. Vieira, C. Lázaro, and M. J. Fernandes, “Spatio-temporal variability of
the wet component of the troposphere – Application to satellite altimetry,”
Advances in Space Research, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1737–1753, Mar. 2019, [Online;
accessed 2023-02-08].
[8]
E. Obligis, L. Eymard, N. Tran, S. Labroue, and P. Femenias, “First Three
Years of the Microwave Radiometer aboard Envisat: In-Flight Calibration, Pro-
cessing, and Validation of the Geophysical Products,” Journal of Atmospheric
and Oceanic Technology, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 802–814, Jun. 1, 2006, [Online;
accessed 2022-11-23].
[9]
S. ESLs, “Level 2 SRAL MWR Algorithm Theoretical Baseline Definition,”
Sentinel Online, no. 2, Jul. 1, 2019, [Online; accessed 2022-09-12].
[10]
E. Obligis, A. Rahmani, L. Eymard, S. Labroue, and E. Bronner, “An Im-
proved Retrieval Algorithm for Water Vapor Retrieval: Application to the En-
visat Microwave Radiometer,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 3057–3064, Sep. 2009, [Online; accessed 2023-01-02].
[11]
S. Thao, E. Obligis, B. Picard, M.-L. Frery, and L. Eymard, “Comparison of
retrieval algorithms for the wet tropospheric path delay,” in 2014 13th Special-
ist Meeting on Microwave Radiometry and Remote Sensing of the Environment
(MicroRad), [Online; accessed 2022-09-12], IEEE, Mar. 2014.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
85
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
Bibliography
[12]
T. Vieira, M. J. Fernandes, and C. Lázaro, “An enhanced retrieval of the
wet tropospheric correction for Sentinel-3 using dynamic inputs from ERA5,”
Journal of Geodesy, vol. 96, no. 4, Apr. 19, 2022, [Online; accessed 2022-09-01].
[13]
C. Lázaro, M. J. Fernandes, T. Vieira, and E. Vieira, “A coastally improved
global dataset of wet tropospheric corrections for satellite altimetry,” Earth
System Science Data, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 3205–3228, Dec. 8, 2020, [Online;
accessed 2022-09-01].
[14]
A. Tarpanelli and J. Benveniste, “On the potential of altimetry and optical sen-
sors for monitoring and forecasting river discharge and extreme flood events,”
in Satellite Remote Sensing of Terrestrial Hydrology. Springer Nature, 2019,
pp. 267–287, [Online; accessed 2022-10-18].
[15]
O. Andersen and R. Scharroo, “Range and Geophysical Corrections in Coastal
Regions: And Implications for Mean Sea Surface Determination,” in Coastal
Altimetry. Springer Science & Business Media, Jan. 3, 2011, pp. 103–139, [On-
line; accessed 2023-01-10].
[16]
D. B. Chelton, J. C. Ries, B. J. Haines, L.-L. Fu, and P. S. Callahan, “Chapter
1 satellite altimetry,” in Satellite Altimetry and Earth Sciences: A Handbook
of Techniques and Applications. Elsevier, 2001, pp. 1–131.
[17]
C. P. Gommenginger and M. A. Srokosz, “Sea state bias - 20 years on,” eng,
European Space Agency, (special Publication) Esa Sp, ESA Special Publication,
vol. 614, p. 76, Jul. 2006, issn: 16090438.
[18]
J. Eaves and E. Reedy, Principles of Modern Radar, 1st ed. New York, NY:
Springer, Jun. 30, 1987, p. 26, [Online; accessed 2023-02-03].
[19]
M. Fernandes, C. Lázaro, A. Nunes, and R. Scharroo, “Atmospheric Correc-
tions for Altimetry Studies over Inland Water,” Remote Sensing, vol. 6, no. 6,
pp. 4952–4997, May 30, 2014, [Online; accessed 2022-10-04].
[20]
M. Ablain, B. Meyssignac, L. Zawadzki, et al., “Uncertainty in satellite esti-
mates of global mean sea-level changes, trend and acceleration,” Earth System
Science Data, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1189–1202, Aug. 7, 2019, [Online; accessed
2022-11-23].
[21]
J. Stum, P. Sicard, L. Carrere, and J. Lambin, “Using Objective Analysis of
Scanning Radiometer Measurements to Compute the Water Vapor Path Delay
for Altimetry,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 49,
no. 9, pp. 3211–3224, Sep. 2011, [Online; accessed 2023-01-11].
[22]
M. Fernandes, A. Nunes, and C. Lázaro, “Analysis and Inter-Calibration of
Wet Path Delay Datasets to Compute the Wet Tropospheric Correction for
CryoSat-2 over Ocean,” Remote Sensing, vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 4977–5005, Oct. 14,
2013, [Online; accessed 2023-01-11].
[23]
S. Brown, “A Novel Near-Land Radiometer Wet Path-Delay Retrieval Algo-
rithm: Application to the Jason-2/OSTM Advanced Microwave Radiometer,”
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 1986–
1992, Apr. 2010, [Online; accessed 2022-11-23].
[24]
C. Ruf, R. Dewan, and B. Subramanya, “Combined Microwave Radiometer
and Altimeter Retrieval of Wet Path Delay for the GEOSAT Follow-On,”
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 34, no. 4, p. 991,
Jul. 1996, [Online; accessed 2022-11-23].
86
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:98==
Bibliography
Bibliography
[25]
C. J. Donlon, R. Cullen, L. Giulicchi, et al., “The Copernicus Sentinel-6 mis-
sion: Enhanced continuity of satellite sea level measurements from space,”
Remote Sensing of Environment, vol. 258, p. 112 395, Jun. 2021, [Online; ac-
cessed 2022-11-23].
[26]
M. J. Fernandes, C. Lázaro, M. Ablain, and N. Pires, “Improved wet path
delays for all ESA and reference altimetric missions,” Remote Sensing of En-
vironment, vol. 169, pp. 50–74, Nov. 2015, [Online; accessed 2023-01-10].
[27]
P. Hoogeboom and L. Lidicky, “Introduction to microwave active techniques
and backscatter properties,” in Remote Sensing of the European Seas, V. Bar-
ale and M. Gade, Eds. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2008, pp. 251–268.
[28]
N. Skou, “Microwave radiometry and radiometers for ocean applications,” in
Remote Sensing of the European Seas. Springer Science & Business Media,
Mar. 15, 2008, [Online; accessed 2022-11-11].
[29]
G. Elgered, B. O. Rönnäng, and J. I. H. Askne, “Measurements of atmo-
spheric water vapor with microwave radiometry,” Radio Science, vol. 17, no. 5,
pp. 1258–1264, Sep. 1982, [Online; accessed 2023-02-03].
[30]
K. P. Bennett and E. Parrado-Hernandez, “The Interplay of Optimization and
Machine Learning Research.,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 7,
no. 46, pp. 1265–1281, Jan. 1, 2006, [Online; accessed 2022-12-05].
[31]
C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer Verlag,
Aug. 17, 2006, [Online; accessed 2022-12-05].
[32]
T. Herlau, M. N. Schmidt, and M. Mørup, Introduction to Machine Learning
and Data Mining, 1.2. Kgs. Lyngby: Polyteknisk Kompendie, Apr. 6, 2021.
[33]
B. Schölkopf, A. Smola, and K.-R. Müller, “Nonlinear Component Analysis as
a Kernel Eigenvalue Problem,” Neural Computation, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1299–
1319, Jul. 1998, [Online; accessed 2023-01-12].
[34]
W. S. McCulloch and W. Pitts, “A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in
nervous activity,” Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, vol. 52, no. 1-2, pp. 99–
115, Jan. 1990, [Online; accessed 2023-01-13].
[35]
M. Hagan, H. Demuth, M. Beale, and O. D. Jesus, Neural Network Design
(2nd Edition), 2nd ed. Sep. 2014, [Online; accessed 2023-01-02].
[36]
Y. Bengio, “Practical Recommendations for Gradient-Based Training of Deep
Architectures,” in Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade. Springer, Nov. 14,
2012, pp. 437–478, [Online; accessed 2023-01-23].
[37]
S. Ruder, An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms, 2016. doi:
10.48550/ARXIV.1609.04747. [Online]. Available: %5Curl%7Bhttps://arxiv.org/
abs/1609.04747%7D.
[38]
C. : SALP-MU-M-OP-16118-CN, E. : TBD, J. : TBD, and N. : TBD, Jason-3
Products Handbook, 2nd ed. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra-
tion, 2020, [Online; accessed 2022-11-01].
[39]
W. Cramer, J. Guiot, K. Marini, et al., Medecc 2020 summary for policymakers.
climate and environmental change in the mediterranean basin – current situa-
tion and risks for the future. first mediterranean assessment report, version 1,
Nov. 2020. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.5513887. [Online]. Available: %5Curl%7Bhttps:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5513887%7D.
[40]
P. Aguiar, T. Vieira, C. Lázaro, and M. J. Fernandes, “Synergistic Use of
the SRAL/MWR and SLSTR Sensors on Board Sentinel-3 for the Wet Tropo-
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
87
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
Bibliography
spheric Correction Retrieval,” Remote Sensing, vol. 14, no. 13, p. 3231, Jul. 5,
2022, [Online; accessed 2022-09-01].
[41]
EUMETSAT, Sentinel-3 OLCI Marine User Handbook, [Online; accessed 2022-
12-19], Mar. 12, 2021.
[42]
H. Hersbach, B. Bell, P. Berrisford, et al., “Era5 hourly data on single levels
from 1959 to present,” Climate Data Store (CDS), vol. NaN, Accessed on ¡
01-10-2022 ¿), 10.24381/cds.adbb2d47.
[43]
GeoBasis-DE/BKG, Google earth v 9.182.0.0 the mediterranean basin. 35◦07’
51”n, 17◦32’07”e, camera alt 6,160 km. 2009. [Online]. Available: %5Curl%
7Bhttp://www.earth.google.com%7D (visited on 09/26/2022).
[44]
GeoBasis-DE/BKG, Google earth v 9.182.0.0 the north sea. 55◦50’ 32”n,
1◦19’06”w, camera alt 2,565 km. 2009. [Online]. Available: %5Curl%7Bhttp:
//www.earth.google.com%7D (visited on 12/05/2022).
[45]
Q. ( Liu, C. Cao, C. Grassotti, and Y.-K. Lee, “How Can Microwave Obser-
vations at 23.8 GHz Help in Acquiring Water Vapor in the Atmosphere over
Land?” Remote Sensing, vol. 13, no. 3, p. 489, Jan. 30, 2021, [Online; accessed
2022-11-07].
[46]
X. Wang, K. Zhang, S. Wu, et al., “The correlation between gnss-derived
precipitable water vapor and sea surface temperature and its responses to el
niño–southern oscillation,” Remote Sensing of Environment, vol. 216, pp. 1–12,
2018, issn: 0034-4257. doi: \url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2018.06.029}.
[Online]. Available: %5Curl%7Bhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0034425718303079%7D.
[47]
F. Di Marco, Tf-levenberg-marquardt, https://github.com/fabiodimarco/tf-
levenberg-marquardt, [Online; accessed 2023-01-02], 2020.
[48]
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization, https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980, [Online; accessed 2023-01-23], Dec. 22, 2014.
[49]
S. McCandlish, J. Kaplan, D. Amodei, and O. D. Team, An Empirical Model
of Large-Batch Training, https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.06162, [Online; accessed
2023-01-23], Dec. 14, 2018.
[50]
I. H. Witten, E. Frank, M. A. Hall, and C. J. Pal, “Chapter 5 - Credibility:
Evaluating what’s been learned,” in Data Mining (Fourth Edition), Fourth
Edition. Morgan Kaufmann, 2017, pp. 161–203, [Online; accessed 2023-02-16].
[51]
H. Madsen, Time series analysis, eng. Chapman & Hall, 2007, vol. 72, p. 7,
isbn: 142005967X. doi: 10.1201/9781420059687.
[52]
EUMETSAT, “S3ipf - product data format specification - sral and mwr level
2 marine,” EUMETSAT, no. 3, Dec. 1, 2021, [Online; accessed 2023-02-17].
[53]
S. Bruni, L. Fenoglio, F. Raicich, and S. Zerbini, “On the consistency of coastal
sea-level measurements in the Mediterranean Sea from tide gauges and satel-
lite radar altimetry,” Journal of Geodesy, vol. 96, no. 6, Jun. 2022, [Online;
accessed 2023-02-11].
[54]
F. Birol, F. Léger, M. Passaro, et al., “The X-TRACK/ALES multi-mission
processing system: New advances in altimetry towards the coast,” Advances
in Space Research, vol. 67, no. 8, pp. 2398–2415, Apr. 2021, [Online; accessed
2023-02-11].
[55]
D. Dettmering, F. L. Müller, J. Oelsmann, et al., “North SEAL: A new dataset
of sea level changes in the North Sea from satellite altimetry,” Earth System
88
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:100==
Bibliography
Bibliography
Science Data, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 3733–3753, Aug. 2, 2021, [Online; accessed
2023-02-11].
[56]
H. Mhaskar, Q. Liao, and T. Poggio, “When and Why Are Deep Networks
Better Than Shallow Ones?” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 31, no. 1, Feb. 13, 2017, [Online; accessed 2023-02-08].
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
89
==PAGE:101==
Appendix A. Data & Model
A
Data & Model
This appendix contains three sections with figures that did not fit into the main
text,
Appendix A.1 - Dataset analysis.
Appendix A.2 - Model Analysis.
Appendix A.3 - Model validation
These three sections are sequenced in the order of relevance to the main text of the
thesis.
A.1
Dataset analysis
The figures presented in this part of the Appendix are part of the first section in
the Chapter 3 Section 4.1 on page 25 which contain the preprocessing of the LDS.
A.1.1
SST ERA5 values
01
03
05
07
09
11
01
270
275
280
285
290
295
300
305
SST [K]
Soure
ERA5
Range ERA5
DS
Figure A.1: The Sea Surface Temperature values over the year 2018. The Fifth
generation ECMWF atmospheric reanalysis of the global climate (ERA5) values are
the median for each time instance. The dataset, (DB) values are from the Learning
DataSet. The blue band reflects the range of the values for each instance in time
for ERA5. To reduce the size of the figure only every 100th value is plotted for the
DB.
90
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:102==
A.2. Model analysis
Appendix A. Data & Model
A.1.2
Histograms
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
Time [Month]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Density
1e
3
(a) Distribution of the database values for
Sea Surface Temperature (SST) over the
year 2017.
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
Time [Month]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Density
1e
3
(b) Distribution of the database values for
Sea Surface Temperature (SST) over the
year 2018.
Figure A.2: Distribution of the Learning DataSet (LDS) values for SST over the
two years 2017 and 2018 in the LDS.
140
160
180
200
220
240
TB238 [K]
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.035
Density
(a) Distribution of Brightness Temperature
for the frequency 28.6 GHz in the dataset.
160
180
200
220
240
260
TB365 [K]
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
Density
(b) Distribution of Brightness Temperature
for the frequency 36.5 GHz in the dataset.
Figure A.3:
Distribution of the two TB measurements used in the Learning
DataSet
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Dist. coast [km]
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Density
Figure A.4: Distribution of the distance to coast feature in the dataset.
A.2
Model analysis
The tabels and figures in this Appendix contain analyses from Chapter 3 Section 4.2
on page 38. The figures and tables consequently are related to model architecture
and tuning the network.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
91
==PAGE:103==
Appendix A. Data & Model
A.2. Model analysis
A.2.1
Batch-size
M3
M4
M5
M3B
M4B
M5B
RMSE
8.4021
7.7529
7.6985
11.3608
11.2298
11.1621
µRMSE,50
0.0175
0.0164
0.0162
0.0222
0.0220
0.0221
Loss
0.1414
0.1206
0.1190
0.2591
0.2530
0.2503
µLoss,50
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0005
0.0005
0.0005
Time
0:15:10
0:15:21
0:15:30
0:13:16
0:13:27
0:13:28
Table A.1: Performance of the runs with batch-size = 16. The different runs have
the same other hyperparameters as stated in Section 4.2.3 on page 45.
A.2.2
Epoch number
M3
M4
M5
M3B
M4B
M5B
RMSE
16.7407
15.3132
14.9099
22.4876
21.9168
21.5264
µRMSE,50
0.0182
0.0175
0.0167
0.0221
0.0215
0.0211
Loss
0.2816
0.2356
0.2237
0.5058
0.4804
0.4635
µLoss,50
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0005
0.0005
0.0005
Time
0:16:25
0:16:42
0:16:41
0:14:51
0:14:57
0:16:36
Table A.2: Performance of the runs with batch = 64 for 1000 epochs and otherwise
the hyperparameters stated in Section 4.2.3 on page 48.
Figure A.5: The loss of model M3 with a batch-size of 64, and 1000 epochs. The
validation loss (blue) is shown together with the baseline (purple) and training loss
(green). Due to high values in the start of training only the values after the first 100
epochs are shown.
92
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:104==
A.2. Model analysis
Appendix A. Data & Model
Figure A.6: The loss of model M4 with a batch-size of 64, and 1000 epochs. The
validation loss (blue) is shown together with the baseline (purple) and training loss
(green). Due to high values in the start of training only the values after the first 100
epochs are shown.
A.2.3
Learning rate
M3
M4
M5
M3B
M4B
M5B
RMSE
9.6918
8.3418
8.9671
11.4009
10.7335
10.5601
µRMSE,50
0.0273
0.0246
0.0289
0.0224
0.0211
0.0207
Loss
0.4766
0.1776
0.4003
0.2600
0.2305
0.2231
µLoss,50
0.0018
0.0009
0.0018
0.0005
0.0005
0.0004
Time
0:07:57
0:07:42
0:08:15
0:06:57
0:07:15
0:07:00
Table A.3: Performance of the runs with η = 0.0001 and otherwise the hyperpa-
rameters stated in Section 4.2.3 on page 50.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
93
==PAGE:105==
Appendix A. Data & Model
A.2. Model analysis
Figure A.7: The loss of model M4 with η = 0.0001. The validation loss (blue) is
shown with the baseline (purple) and training loss (green). The first epochs are not
shown, as they have a very high loss
A.2.4
The tuned network
Figure A.8: The loss of model M4 with the finalised hyperparameters. The valida-
tion loss (blue) is shown with the baseline (purple) and training loss (green). The
first epochs are not shown, as they have a very high loss.
94
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:106==
A.2. Model analysis
Appendix A. Data & Model
Figure A.9: The loss of model M5 with the finalised hyperparameters. The valida-
tion loss (blue) is shown with the baseline (purple) and training loss (green). The
first epochs are not shown, as they have a very high loss.
Figure A.10: Distribution of the predictions for model M4 and the baseline to-
gether with the test data. The models are run with the finalised hyperparameters.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
95
==PAGE:107==
Appendix A. Data & Model
A.3. Model validation
Figure A.11: Boxplot of the residuals of the test values from the M4 (NN), and
the baseline model. The residuals show how well the algorithm was able to match
the test values. This model run was done with the finalised hyperparameters.
A.3
Model validation
The figures and tables in this Appendix were used for validation of the model in
Chapter 5 on page 59.
A.3.1
LDS
Figure A.12: A Quantile-Quantile-plot of the targets and the predictions. The
target is the Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs while the prediction is made by the M4
model. The computed correlation coeﬀicient is the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient.
96
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:108==
A.3. Model validation
Appendix A. Data & Model
Figure A.13: The residuals of the targets and the predictions for Sentinel-3A and
M4 trained on the Mediterranean Sea plotted against the latitude feature.
The
predictions cover the whole LDS.
Figure A.14: The residuals of the targets and the predictions for Sentinel-3A and
M4 trained on the Mediterranean Sea plotted against the distance to coast feature.
The predictions cover the whole dataset.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
97
==PAGE:109==
Appendix A. Data & Model
A.3. Model validation
A.3.2
VDS
Feature
mean
std.
var.
median
range
TB238
160.69
11.68
136.48
158.93
102.08
TB365
166.32
10.71
114.78
163.53
106.57
σ0
11.00
1.98
3.93
10.75
27.44
SST
288.63
3.13
9.81
287.85
11.00
Dist. coast
123147.81
63633.00
4049159118.09
112548.00
268763.00
WTCR3
-0.10
0.04
0.00
-0.09
0.34
WTCR5
-0.10
0.04
0.00
-0.09
0.36
WTCM
-0.10
0.04
0.00
-0.10
0.24
WTCC
-0.16
0.09
0.01
-0.14
0.43
Table A.4: Summary statistics of attributes, The Validation DataSet (VDS) with
59,331 data points. The VDS has been cleaned for NaN values and matched with Sea
Surface Temperature data points from the Fifth generation ECMWF atmospheric
reanalysis of the global climate (ERA5) dataset.
Figure A.15: A Quantile-Quantile-plot of the targets and the predictions. The
target is the Radiometer WTC with 5 inputs while the prediction is made by the
M4 model.
98
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:110==
A.3. Model validation
Appendix A. Data & Model
Figure A.16: The residuals of the targets and the predictions for Sentinel-3A and
M4 trained on the North Sea plotted against the distance to coast feature. The
predictions cover the whole dataset.
Figure A.17: The residuals of the targets and the predictions for Sentinel-3A and
M4 trained on the Validation DataSet plotted against the Sea Surface Temperature
feature. The predictions cover the whole dataset.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
99
==PAGE:111==
Appendix B. Project Plan Review
B
Project Plan Review
This appendix provides information on how the objectives described in the project
plan and description for the thesis differ from the work in the thesis itself. The
objectives stated in the project plan and description can be mainly divided into two
categories: deliverables and milestones.
The deliverables in the project plan have all been completed, although the specific
region of interest, stated in the last deliverable has been changed from a polar
region to the North Sea. The polar region was regarded as too contaminated after
closer scrutiny. The Altimeter Backscatter coeﬀicent is distorted when measuring
open ocean with sea ice and therefore the North Sea region was chosen instead as a
validation area.
The milestones in the project plan were categorised into three tiers: A, B and C.
The first two: A and B were completed. The C-tier milestone focused on exploring
a Bayesian methodology, for example by implementing a Physics Informed Neural
Network. This approach was not pursued in the interest of limiting the scope of the
thesis. The implementation of this approach was also not suggested in the Future
work Chapter since the author of this thesis does not possess the crucible knowledge
to evaluate the fruitfulness of such an implementation.
The dates for both the data processing and writing milestones were too optimistic.
The first phase of the data processing, creating the datasets, took longer than ini-
tially projected. The writing milestones suffer from the same optimism and while
all milestones were achieved, they were not reached by the expected date except the
hand-in.
Apart from the C-tier, all milestones and deliverables were accomplished. The result
of this is seen in the work of this thesis.
100
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:112==
Appendix C. Code overview
C
Code overview
In this appendix, an overview of the structure of the code used for this thesis is
given. All code was written in Python. The code is provided as an attachment in
the hand-in of the thesis as a zip-file. This zip file can also be requested from the
author and is saved in a private GitHub repository.
The code is categorised into four main workflows, which are visualised in Figure C.1.
Figure C.1: The four main categories that the code falls into. The arrows indicate
the sequence in which the code should be run.
Overviews of the code are drawn schematically in Figure C.2 on the next page,
Figure C.3 on page 103 and Figure C.4 on page 104. The diagrams only indicate the
dependencies the different Python-files have with each other. It is assumed that the
reader possesses the necessary data-files or can retrieve them from reading Chapter 3
on page 19.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
101
==PAGE:113==
Appendix C. Code overview
(a) The four files needed for creating the
dataset(s). The purple colour indicates files
which were created for this purpose, and
the grey init.py-file is used in every cod-
ing structure of the thesis.
(b) The four files needed for analysing the
dataset(s). The dark blue colour indicates
the files created only for this purpose. The
grey init.py-file is used in every coding
structure of the thesis.
Figure C.2: An overview of the files needed to create the dataset (left) and to
analyse it (right). The arrows indicate the dependencies that the files have upon
each other. For both file structures, only the files that have the prefix main have to
be run.
102
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:114==
Appendix C. Code overview
Figure
C.3:
The files used for creating the Neural Network (NN). The
levenberg_marquardt.py file is from a GitHub Repository [47] and is not writ-
ten by the author of this thesis. The arrows indicate the dependencies among the
files. To create the NN only the file prefixed with main has to be run. The turquoise
colour indicates the files for the purpose of creating the NN. The grey init.py-file
is used in every coding structure of the thesis.
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
103
==PAGE:115==
Appendix C. Code overview
Figure C.4: The files needed to finalise and evaluate the model. The arrows in-
dicate the dependencies among the files. The square boxes all indicate files, and
the round ”finalised model”, is output from main_fin_model.py. It is the finalised
model trained on the relevant training set. Two different finalised models are in-
cluded in the zip file, one trained on the LDS and one trained on the MDS. The
green boxes indicate the files created only for the purpose of evaluating and finalis-
ing. The turquoise file is needed to finalise the model, and the grey init.py-file is
used in every coding structure of the thesis.
104
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
==PAGE:116==
Appendix C. Code overview
A Neural Network for the Wet Tropospheric Correction for Sentinel-3 data
105
==PAGE:117==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 328
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.space.dtu.dk/
