==PAGE:1==
Microstructure and corrosion investigation of
Al­Cu bus bars for automotive electrification
Master Thesis
Author : Reuben Jacob,
Supervisors : Prof. Rajan Ambat, Emad Hasan Bartawi
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Section of Materials and Surface Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Microstructure and corrosion investigation of Al­Cu bus bars for automotive elec­
trification
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By,
Reuben Jacob
Supervisors,
Prof. Rajan Ambat (Professor in Corrosion and Surface Engineering),
Emad Hasan Bartawi (PhD Student)
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Cross­section SEM images of sample C, sample E, sample D and sample
F taken during the thesis showing different forms of corrosion,
Published by:
DTU Construct, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Section
of Materials and Surface Engineering, Produktionstorvet, Building 425,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://construct.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section of Materials and Surface
Engineering, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Materials and Manufacturing Engineering, MSc Eng.
Reuben Jacob ­ s210339
Signature
February 28, 2023
Date
iii
ReubenJacob
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere thanks to my supervisor, Dr. Rajan Ambat (Professor
in Corrosion and Surface Engineering) for his constant support and guidance extended to
me throughout my project, especially for his valuable time to answer all my queries and
providing me with suggestions regarding my work. His broad research experience and
insightful comments has contributed extraordinarily to my work. I would also like to thank
my co­supervisor Emad Hasan Bartawi (PhD student) for his guidance and assistance
in planning the experiments as well as troubleshooting when things didn’t work out as
planned. I am also grateful for the help extended to me by Avinash Ingle (Postdoc, DTU
Construct) during corrosion morphology characterization of the samples and the SEM us­
age.
My sincere gratitude to all MTU staff, especially Niklas Brinckman Gammeltoft­Hansen,
Peter Westermann and Gitte Salomon for their unrelenting support during my project.
I would like to thank Mr. Jan Halvor Nordlien and Mr. Jonas Kristoffer Sunde (Inno­
vation & Technology ­ Precision Tubing, Hydro Extrusions), for providing the friction stir
welded samples for this project.
Most importantly, none of this would have been possible without the support of my par­
ents, friends and colleagues.
Reuben Jacob,
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Friction stir welded (FSW) Aluminium­Copper samples were prepared using aluminium
alloys(AA) AA6101 and AA1370 by varying the process parameters i.e., force applied,
tool rotation speed, tool feed rate and tool offset from aluminium interface in order to
study its influence on microstructure and corrosion behavior. The active regions of the
sample were identified by using the gel test consisting of 0.01M NaCl and a universal
indicator. Effect of environmental condition was tested by conducting a thin film test by
depositing 50 μg/cm2 NaCl for 72 hours in a climatic chamber with a STAGNA Marine
condition profile. The electrochemical characterization was done using polarization test
in 3.5 wt% NaCl electrolyte solution. For correlating corrosion to microstructure, FSW
cross section was investigated using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Energy
Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) analysis to understand the corrosion mechanism and the
role of secondary phase particles.
Results obtained in this work are relevant in providing a better understanding of the fail­
ure mechanism and corrosion behavior in FSW processed Aluminium and Copper. The
gel test conducted showed that the FSW region is the most active region for corrosion
as compared to the base metals. The thin film test yielded confirmation of the gel test
results as the FSW region shows signs of pitting across the region. The electrochemi­
cal study showed that AA6101 has a lower OCP value as compared to AA1370 which
is slightly more active than the aforementioned alloy. It also showed that increasing the
force applied, reduces the activity of the FSW region thereby reducing the corrosion rate.
Increasing the tool rotation speed and the tool feed rate also reduces the activity across
the FSW region. Reduction in the tool offset from the aluminium interface also yielded
in reduction of anodic activity of the FSW region. Optical microscopy of the FSW region
post polarization test was conducted. It showed preferential pit formation on the border
of the copper dispersoids and pitting in the parent/base aluminium metal. The region at
the edge of the FSW is prone to severe pitting and inter granular corrosion (on AA6101
alloy) that appeared as a spider web on the surface. Crystallographic corrosion due to
higher energy state of the said grains was also observed in FSW with both AA6101 and
AA1370 alloy. The microstructure study of the cross section of the FSW region showed
that galvanic corrosion was the main cause of concern with respect to mechanical failure
of the FSW. Since the interface between the Aluminium and Copper is sharp, the galvanic
corrosion penetrates through opening the interface for more corrosion. The AA6106 alloy
was also seen to undergo matrix dissolution after the initiation of the galvanic corrosion
many a times branching out of the pit left by the galvanic corrosion. Crystallographic
corrosion was also visible in the FSW regions of both alloys.
v
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
AC
Alternating Current
Al
Aluminium
BSE
Back Scatter Electron
cm2
Square Centimeter
Cu
Copper
DC
Direct Current
EDS
Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy
eqn
Equation
FSW
Friction Stir Welding
GMAW Gas Metal Arc Welding
GTAW Gas Tungsten Arc Welding
HAGB High angle grain boundary
HAZ
Heat Affected Zone
Hr/hr
Hour
IGC
Inter granular corrosion
IMC
Inter metallic compounds
LAGB Low angle grain boundary
LOM
Light Optical Microscope
ml
Milli­litre
mV
Milli­Volt
NaCl
Sodium Chloride
OCP
Open Circuit Potential
PWC Preferential Weld Corrosion
Rh
Relative humidity
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscope/Microscopy
Soln
Solution
TMAZ Thermo­mechanical affected zone
USD
United States Dollar
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Certificate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aims and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Outline of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Aluminium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Friction Stir Welding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Corrosion Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.5
Microstructure Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3
Methods of Experimentation
25
3.1
Test samples received . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Gel Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3
Thin film Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.4
Electrochemical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.5
Corrosion Morphology Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4
Results and Discussion
33
4.1
Gel Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Thin film Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.3
Electrochemical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.4
Corrosion Morphology Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5
Summary
54
6
Future Work
57
List of Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
List of Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
A Appendix: Gel Experiment Results
X
B Appendix : STANAG Marine environment temperature and humidity profile XVI
C Appendix : Thin Film Experiment Results
XVII
D Appendix : Light optical microscopy after Electrochemical analysis
XXIII
E
Appendix : Scanning Electron Microscopy
XXVIII
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Research Motivation
In power distribution, a busbar is a metallic strip or bar that is used to connect the local
electric grid to the power lines coming straight from the generating station. They come
in various shapes and sizes such as flat strips, solid bars, or rods. They are designed in
such a way that they can also dissipate heat that is generated due to the high voltages
being transmitted. With the changes in the application of electricity, busbars have found
applications in various fields. Once such emerging field is the electric vehicle industry.
The busbar serves the purpose of connecting the battery pack to the motor and other
sub systems. Since it is a crucial part within the electric vehicle, understanding the failure
modes especially due to corrosion under operating environmental conditions becomes an
important task.
Figure 1.1: Generic copper busbar.
As the busbar’s main application is conducting electricity between 2 points, copper be­
comes the ideal material of choice. Copper (Cu) has been the preferred and the most
dominant material when it comes to anything electrical. Copper wires have been used
in power generation, power transmission, power distribution, telecommunications, elec­
tronic circuitry, and countless other types of electrical and electronic devices. Nearly half
of all the copper mined in the world is transformed into electrical wires and cable con­
nectors [1]. This preference is due to its excellent material and electrical properties. The
material is malleable, has high tensile strength, high ductility, creep resistance, corro­
sion resistant, is solderable and is easy to work with. Due to its excellent conductivity,
annealed copper became the international standard to which other conductors are com­
pared. The uniqueness of copper is that it has strength and ductility together which is
not found in most metals. This makes copper a preferred metal for wire drawing applica­
tion. In recent years, the cost of copper has skyrocketed as shown in Fig 1.2, with the
introduction of electrification in the automotive sector, the demand for commercially pure
copper has increased multifold. As the cost of production and global availability becomes
an issue, the industry is in the process to identify a suitable alternative having low cost
1
==PAGE:12==
and light weight option that can replace or reduce the overall dependence of the industry
on copper. This is where aluminium is ahead of copper. Aluminium (Al) has a satisfactory
conductivity coefficient as compared to copper (around 59% to 63%), is significantly less
costly (almost half the cost) and lighter. Aluminium is used to transmit power in the form
of overhead lines. It is able to tolerate the environmental conditions while also providing
sufficient structural stiffness to ensure long service.
Figure 1.2: Global copper prices from 1986 to 2011 in USD per metric ton.[2]
Aluminium industries are looking for new products in connection with electrified vehicles.
One major application is aluminium busbars. While the conductivity of aluminium is not
at par with copper, it brings in lower density and lower material cost to the table which
is often seen as a boon to the automotive industry. Combining copper and aluminium
together to form the busbar brings out most of the desirable properties that is required
for the application such as being lightweight, having good conductivity, structural stiffness
etc. But combining the two also leads to galvanic corrosion issues and such concerns
in the long run, could lead to reliability issues as oxides of aluminium act as dielectric
and could impede in conduction of electricity as the corrosion progresses. Aluminium is
also plagued with pitting issues that could cause concerns with connection integrity as
the corrosion progresses. Also, the process used in joining the two pieces of copper and
aluminium would determines how degradation could happen.
Usually, aluminium alloys are bonded with each other using Tungsten Inert Gas (TIG)
welding, Metal Inert Gas (MIG) welding or Friction Stir Welding (FSW). TIG welding is an
arc welding process that produces a weld using a non­consumable electrode. The weld­
ing process is shielded by Inert gas flowing from the electrode holder which prevents the
formation of oxides in and around the weld zone by displacing oxygen as well as helps
in cooling the weld zone quickly. MIG welding, is similar in process to TIG welding with
the only difference being the electrode used here is a consumable. This process also
employs Inert gas to shield the weld pool from oxidizing and speeds up the cooling pro­
cess. FSW process uses a non consumable tool to join two workpieces without melting
the material.
2
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.3: Friction Stir Welding schematic
1.2
Aims and Objectives
Aim:
The main aim of this project is to investigate the corrosion behaviour and microstructural
characteristics of the Al­Cu busbars manufactured using FSW process by Norsk Hydro
A/S, Norway using two different aluminium alloys (AA1370, AA6101) and also with varying
process parameters such as tool rotation speed, feed rate, force applied by tool shoulder
etc.
Objectives
• Investigation of corrosion behaviour of the welded busbar using Gel exposure test,
Humidity exposure test, and Electrochemical methods (Polarization tests).
• Investigate microstructure of welded cross­sections (Optical microscopy(LOM), SEM
and SEM­EDS)
1.3
Outline of the thesis
This thesis report consists of five chapters that will systematically explain in detail all the
steps followed in this study. They are :
• Chapter 1 : Introduction : This section introduces the topic and discusses the
motivation behind the research project. It provides an aim set for the project to
meet and divides the final goal into smaller objectives that needs to be met in order
to have a better understanding of the mechanisms at play.
• Chapter 2 : Literature review : This section provides the basic knowledge regard­
ing aluminium and the friction welding process based on research conducted till
date.
• Chapter 3 : Methods of Experimentation : This section discusses the materials,
experimental and characterization techniques used in this project. It covers sample
3
==PAGE:14==
preparations, and experimental procedures which were undertaken in this research.
Some of the techniques utilized include SEM, EDS, Thin film test using a climatic
profile and Gel test to understand and identify the localized anodic and cathodic
regions on the surface of the sample.
• Chapter 4 : Results and Discussion : This section presents the results which
were obtained from the different experimentation techniques employed in this the­
sis project and compared them with the results seen in available literature. It also
provides insights on why certain phenomena occur based on previously published
research.
• Chapter 5 & 6 : Summary and Future work : These sections summarises the
results achieved by this project and provides ideas for future experimentation to
increase the understanding on the topic respectively.
4
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Introduction
Aluminium alloys provide an exceptional combination of material properties that makes
it the most economical, attractive, and versatile metallic material suitable for a variety of
engineering applications. Owing to the low density of aluminium, aluminium alloys al­
low weight reduction while at the same time providing high strength to the structures due
to which they are considered as the most widely used structural material second only
to steels. This makes it suitable particularly in the aerospace and automotive industries.
Further, aluminium is resistant to progressive oxidation that often causes rusting in steels.
Rather, when aluminium undergoes oxidation, it forms a thin film of aluminium oxide that
is inert hence resistant to corrosion. Aluminium classically exhibits excellent thermal and
electrical properties making it suitable for applications requiring high electrical conductiv­
ity and mechanical strength such as power lines and busbars. With the rise of the electric
vehicle industry, the demand for copper has increased exponentially as well as the cost of
procuring it. Since fabrication of aluminium and its alloys can be accomplished econom­
ically and with material properties such as low density and good electrical conductivity,
aluminium becomes the most viable material replacement to the more expensive copper.
But to use this along with copper, aluminium parts must be fitted with copper contacts
to reduce the contact resistance. The newest method of joining two dissimilar metals is
friction stir welding (FSW) which is a cheap and reliable method when compared to other
methods.
In this chapter, discussion is focused on aluminium as a material, methods used to join it
with itself and with other metals, FSW process and parameters effecting it, corrosion as
well as microstructural properties of the joint made using FSW process.
2.2
Aluminium
The history of aluminium is associated to alum. The first written record of alum dates
back to 5th century BCE by the Greeks where they used it as a dye fixative. The name
aluminium is derived from the french word alumine which in turn is derived from a latin
word alumen, the mineral from which it is extracted. Though attempts were being made to
produce aluminium since 1763 [3], it was first extracted by Danish physicist Hans Christian
Ørsted in the year 1824. He had reacted aluminium chloride with potassium amalgam that
yielded a lump of metal that looked similar to tin [4]. He presented his results and showed
a sample of the new metal in the year 1825.
Aluminium has a density (2.70 g/cm3) lower than most metals at approximately one third
the density of steel. Chemically, aluminium comes from the boron group. It forms com­
pounds primarily in +3 oxidation state which is a characteristic of elements in the boron
family. It readily forms a protective oxide layer when exposed to the open environment.
It is soft, non­magnetic and ductile in nature. Its strong affinity towards oxygen leads it
to be commonly associated with oxygen in nature in the form of oxides. For this reason,
aluminium is found on earth primarily in the form of rocks in the crust, where it is the
third most abundant element after oxygen and silicon. The ore containing aluminium is
known as Bauxite. The process used to extract aluminium in its ore is known as Bayer’s
process.The flow chart of aluminium is described below :
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: Aluminium life cycle [5]
• 1. Bauxite mining : Aluminium production begins with the extraction of its ore
(bauxite), which contains 15­25% aluminium and is found mostly in a belt around the
equator. There are around 29 billion tonnes of known reserves of bauxite. Australia
is the world’s largest bauxite ore producer with an estimated 110 million metric tones
of ore being produced in the year 2021.
• 2. Alumina refining :Alumina is extracted from the ore using the Bayer process
shown in eqn 2.1 in a refinery. The ore slurry which contains a mixture of hydrated
salts of aluminium oxide is reacted with sodium hydroxide(NaOH) in a heated pres­
sure vessel to form soluble sodium aluminate(NaAlO2).
Al2O3 + 2 NaOH
2 NaAlO2 + H2O
(2.1)
Lime is added to precipitate out silica as calcium silicate. Carbon dioxide is then
bubbled through the filtered solution from the previous step to form aluminium hy­
droxide precipitate (Al(OH)3) and sodium carbonate.
2 NaAlO2 + 3 H2O + CO2
2 Al(OH)3 + Na2CO3
(2.2)
The aluminium hydroxide is then decomposed by heating it to form alumina(Al2O3).
2 Al(OH)3
Al2O3 + 3 H2O
(2.3)
The alumina is then used to produce the primary metal at a ratio of 2:1 (2 tonnes of
alumina = 1 tonne of aluminium).
• 3. Primary aluminium production : Aluminium is extracted from alumina using
the Hall–Héroult process. The aluminium atom in alumina is bonded to oxygen
and needs to be broken by electrolysis to produce aluminium metal which sinks to
the bottom of the molten mixture. This is done in large production lines and is an
energy­intensive process requiring a lot of electricity.
• 4. Aluminium fabrication : The most common uses of primary aluminium are
extruding, rolling and casting:
– a. Aluminium extruding : The process of pulling a metal through a die of
desired shape is called Extrusion. Extrusion allows shaping of aluminium into
almost any form imaginable using ready­made or tailored profiles.
– b. Aluminium rolling : The process of thinning a metal ingot/sheet to the
required thickness by passing it through two rotating cylinders with a known
controllable gap between them is called rolling. The aluminium foil we use in
6
==PAGE:17==
our kitchen is a good example of a rolled aluminium product. Given its extreme
malleability, aluminium can be rolled from 60 cm to 2 mm and further processed
into foil as thin as 0.006 mm and still be completely impermeable to light, aroma
and taste.
– c.
Aluminium casting : The process of manufacturing a part by pouring
molten metal into a mold that has a negative of the desired part is called cast­
ing. Creating an alloy with another metal changes the properties of aluminium,
adding strength, brilliance and/or ductility. Our cast house products, such as
extrusion ingots, sheet ingots, foundry alloys, wire rods and high purity alu­
minium, are used in automotive, transport, buildings, heat transfer, electronics
and aviation.
• 5. Recycling : Recovery of the metal by recycling the scraps is an important task
within the aluminium industry. Recycling aluminium involves melting the scrap alu­
minium which uses only 5% of the energy required for producing primary metal.
Also, aluminium doesn’t deteriorate from recycling and about 75% of all aluminium
ever produced is still in use.
2.2.1
Alloys of Aluminium
In recent years, Aluminium alloys are gaining popularity in the industries owing to their
outstanding physical and mechanical properties as well as cost when compared to other
metals. Selection of alloying elements is based on the properties of the individual met­
als since they affect the performance and structural characteristics of the matrix[6]. The
modifier’s choice has a great impact on the material integrity during the service period as
they result in better mechanical, tribological and corrosion resistance characteristics. It is
therefore important to understand the required inoculants which can improve the overall
mechanical properties of aluminium. Figure 2.2 shown below illustrates the designation
of wrought and alloys of aluminium.
Figure 2.2: AA Designation of wrought aluminium and its alloys[7].
• Pure Aluminium (1xxx series):­
Aluminium 1000 series has at least 99% alu­
minium with no major alloying additives. They have excellent corrosion resistance,
high thermal and electrical conductivity. They are soft and extremely ductile with ex­
7
==PAGE:18==
cellent workability and are primarily used in food, chemical and brewing industries;
Capacitors; Solid and stranded conductor wire; Bus Conductors; Transformer strip.
• Aluminium­Copper alloys (2xxx series):­ Aluminium­copper alloys contain 2%
to 10% of copper along with other trace elements. Copper helps improve mechan­
ical strength and allows precipitation hardening. On the other hand, it reduces the
corrosion resistance as well as the ductility of the alloy [6].
• Aluminium­Manganese alloy (3xxx series):­ Aluminium­manganese alloys have
improved strength and strain hardening ability. however, there is no significant in­
crease in corrosion resistance or ductility of the alloy. The strength of the alloy is
retained when applied to non­heat treatable materials. This alloy is useful in heat
exchangers, radiators, cooking utensils etc [6].
• Aluminium­Magnesium alloy (5xxx series):­ 5000 series aluminium is alloyed
with magnesium, is readily weldable and used in various applications including pres­
surised vessels, buildings and automotive sector. It is not suitable for high temper­
ature applications. It possess good corrosion resistance in marine atmosphere. But
as this alloy contains high magnesium content, it is prone to stress corrosion [8].
• Aluminium­Magnesium­Silicon alloy (6xxx series):­ Alloys of this group have
magnesium and silicon as their major alloying elements. They have moderate strength
which is achieved using heat treatment or cold working. They can be easily anodized
and commonly used in Hardware, furniture parts, rings, fuses, electrical conductors
etc [9].
• Aluminium­Zinc alloy (7xxx series):­ Alloys of this group has the highest strength
of all the series. Zinc is the major alloying element in this series. They have excellent
fatigue properties. This series can be easily spot welded but not fusion welded.
These alloys must be anodized, primed, painted or protected with some type of
protective chemical film when using in corrosive environment. Commonly used in
Fin stock and applications requiring high strength [10].
2.2.2
Methods of joining Aluminium [11]
Engineers and designers are always on the lookout for new, improved and innovative
ways to join aluminium together to improve performance and aesthetics.
There is significant difference in the melting point of aluminium (660◦C) and its oxide layer
on the surface (2060◦C for Al2O3). This means that the oxide layer needs to be removed to
effectively melt the aluminium to get a good fusion bond. Mechanical grinding is effective
in removing the oxide layer, but it quickly grows back. Thus, there is a need for bonding
methods that can be used irrespective of the oxide layer.
As with other metal alloys, Aluminium alloys are also prone to hot cracking during fusion
welding. This totally depends on how the alloy solidifies during the welding process with
the alloying elements which have different susceptibility to hot cracking. This phenomenon
is usually alleviated by adding appropriate alloying additions via filler material in the form
of a consumable wire.
Loss of strength can also occur during the fusion welding process. This totally depends on
the condition of the material (as cast, annealed, work hardened, solid solution hardened,
precipitation hardened) before welding. The nugget zone or the weld zone has properties
similar to that of as­cast part. This can be optimized by selecting appropriate alloying
materials in the consumable wire filler. Heat Affected Zone (HAZ) can also experience
loss of strength in hardened materials. This cannot be optimised by using additives.
• Arc Welding :­ It is probably the best known form of fusion welding processes and
8
==PAGE:19==
is used quite often to join aluminium throughout the world. There are 2 main types
of arc welding i.e. Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW) and Gas Metal Arc Welding
(GMAW). Both are employed to weld aluminium alloys.To break down the oxide
layer from the surface, GTAW is usually used with AC where as GMAW uses DC.
The process has the ability to change the negative polarity of the electrode. This
ability is very useful in welding thin sheet material that might otherwise be severely
distorted during other welding processes.
Figure 2.3: Variable Polarity GMAW ­ the effect of increasing (left to right) electrode neg­
ative polarity from 0% to 30% on aluminium alloy welding.[11]
• Laser and Laser­arc hybrid Welding :­ Laser welding processes combines the
ability to produce deeply penetrating welds with low overall heat input. Aluminium
alloys do present a particular challenge to the laser welding process due to its rel­
atively high reflectivity. A general rule for the process is that, the longer the wave­
length, the higher the reflectivity. Reflectivity along with high thermal conductivity
makes aluminium an unlikely candidate for this process. However, with the introduc­
tion of higher mean power(>3kW),high brightness Neodymium:Yttrium Aluminium
Garnet (Nd:YAG) lasers (1064nm) practical laser welding of aluminium is possible.
The Laser hybrid welding process combines laser welding and the arc welding pro­
cess into one. This process basically enables the addition of metal filler material
during welding process to help control the weld properties.The combination of the
two process greatly increases the volume of the material melted and increases the
welding speed.
(a) Laser welding of 2mm thick alloy 5xxx.
(b) Hybrid laser­arc weld of 2mm 5xxx alloy.
Figure 2.4: Laser and Laser­arc hybrid Welding.[11]
• Resistance spot Welding :­ It is a popular method to join aluminium sheets. The
principle of the operation involves the clamping of the two overlapping sheets be­
tween the electrodes and passing a high current between the electrodes. Resistive
heating causes a small nugget of molten metal to form which than fuses the two
sheets at that spot. The repeatability and the weld quality totally depends on the
9
==PAGE:20==
ability to maintain the geometry of the electrode tips so that sufficient clamping force
is available to ensure good contact always exists between electrode and the sheet.
Figure 2.5: Schematic of Resistance spot welding process.[11]
• Mechanical fasteners :­ They are usually used in the automotive and aerospace
industries and involves self piercing riveting and press joining methods, which can
be automated in a similar way to spot welding. Self piercing riveting involves the
use of a punch and a die to drive a tubular rivet into the sheets to be joined. The
rivet expands in the lower sheet without piercing it and forms a mechanical interlock
as shown in Fig 2.6a.
Press joining is shown in Fig 2.6b involves a similar process operation but without
the rivets. A punch deforms the sheets into a die that is specially designed to permit
interlocking of the sheets in a button formed on one side of the sheet.
(a) Cross­section of a self­piercing rivet.
(b) Clinch joint made between two sheets.
Figure 2.6: Mechanical fastening methods.[11]
• Bonding :­ Bonding two sheets with the help of adhesives is also considered an
important aluminium joining technique that can give excellent performance in ser­
vice. They are also used in combining layers of different materials to form a sheet
of composite material. In recent years, a new method called Surfi­Sculpt has been
introduced that helps in material surface preparation for the bonding process. The
method utilises a scanning electron beam that creates protrusions on the surface of
the metal sheet. These protrusions help the adhesive in bonding more strongly with
the surface of the metal thereby increasing the overall adhesion strength between
the sheets to be joined.
10
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.7: Surfi­Sculpt pattern made in AA6082.[11]
• Friction Stir Welding :­ This is a significant development in the options available in
joining aluminium alloys. It was invented in 1991 and has grown steadily ever since.
The process uses a rotating tool consisting of a central pin with a surrounding shoul­
der that is initially pushed into the surface of the workpiece . The heat generated
by the contact between the tool and the workpiece relative to joint line to produce
a welded joint. Due to the welded material being softened and not melted, degra­
dation of the mechanical properties of the joint such as tensile strength and fatigue
strength etc. can be reduced and can be very close to that of the parent material.
Fig2.8 shows a schematic of the process principles.
Figure 2.8: Schematic of the Friction Stir Welding process.[11]
2.3
Friction Stir Welding
As stated above, Friction Stir Welding is a solid­state joining process that was first demon­
strated at The Welding Institute (TWI, UK) in 1991. It quickly gained prominence and has
been widely researched on aluminium alloys around the world. More recently, other alloy
systems such as iron based, titanium based, nickel based, copper based etc. have also
been subjected to FSW or its derivative processes. In this process, a non consumable
rotating tool made of a harder material than the workpiece with a larger diameter shoulder
and a pin, is pushed into the workpiece to a pre­set depth. The plunging of the rotating
tool into the workpieces generates heat due to friction between the tool shoulder and the
11
==PAGE:22==
workpiece surface. The plastic deformation caused by the rotating pin also produces adi­
abatic heat during the process. The high temperature around the pin causes the material
to soften and move around it. The softened material continues to move around the pin as
it traverses along until the weld is completed. The larger diameter shoulder helps contain
the hot material which could potentially flow out to form flash leading to material loss and
defective weld.
Figure 2.9: FSW Process in the butt configuration.
As the materials do not melt during the process, it has inherent advantages and avoids the
possibility of defects such as segregation, dendritic structure, porosity and hot cracking as­
sociated to fusion based welding techniques. Dissimilar materials can also be joined using
this process. This process has been used for many structural applications in aerospace
and automotive industries. This is also a green process as it only consumes between
2% to 5% of energy consumed by arc­based welding methods. Also the tool used in this
process is non consumable and thus does not require filler material to weld. The most
cited disadvantage this process is the exit hole that is left at the end of the process. But
this can easily be rectified by providing a run off tab in the design that can later be cut or
using a refilling tab or other refill methods.
FSW of aluminium alloys have been in use since the past 20 years. The heat produced
during the process produces some microstructural changes in and around the weld zone.
The microstructure of the weld cross section, the size and distribution of the precipitates
of the weldment, and other microstructural features are dependent on the welding pa­
rameters, tool dimensions, initial microstructure of workpiece material, and temperature
distribution during welding.
2.3.1
Process parameters
FSW involves complex material movement and plastic deformation of material at relatively
high temperatures. For any material, its final mechanical, microstructural and corrosion
properties are heavily reliant on the process parameters of the welding process such as
tool geometry, welding parameters and joint configuration. Thus the process parameters
must be carefully selected in order to obtain the desired properties from the finished weld.
The tool parameters such as rotational speed, shoulder, traverse speed, tilt angle and pin
are the most common parameters that influence the friction based process.
• Tool rotation speed and traverse speed must be selected such that it generates
12
==PAGE:23==
sufficient heat that plasticizes the metal but does not melt it. More grain growth and
material softening was observed on increasing the rotation speed and decreasing
the traverse speed [12]. A combination of high traverse speed and reduced rotation
speed can be formulated to ensure sufficient heat generation to plasticize the metal
[13].
• Tool geometry influences the material flow and the weld properties. Threaded tool
profile gives better results in comparison to non threaded tool profiles. However,
square tool profile yields better mechanical and metallurgical properties [14].
• Tool shoulder and pin diameter are two important factors to consider when de­
signing the tool for application. The heating area increases with the corresponding
increase in the shoulder diameter due to surface area under contact during the pro­
cess. Heat generated is regulated by the force applied by the tool onto the work­
piece. The force applied also translates to weld thinning.
Recent studies have shown that the FSW weld properties are influenced only by the weld­
ing parameters. The corrosion resistance in FSW joints has been improved by adjustment
of process parameters. It was found that the joint corrosion rate decreases as the rota­
tion speed of the tool increases. The rotation speed also improves the material flow in
the joint through the stirring action of the tool [15]. Changes in the tool used for the pro­
cess also has led to changes in the microstructure and properties of the joint. Different
tool configurations alter the amount of frictional heat generated thereby influencing the
mode of deformation in the metal [16]. Most research suggests that in order to reduce
the intermetallic compounds in the FSW, tool should be positioned such that Cu is in the
retreating side [15] [17]. Offsetting the tool in the Al side also reduces the intermetallic
compound thickness and defect formation, and improves bending and tensile properties
of the joint[18]. Studies have also shown that a thin and continuous layer of intermetallic
compounds has improved the bonding strength and mechanical properties of the joint.
Thus, selecting the appropriate tool and positioning it correctly reduces the formation of
IMCs thereby improving the joint strength.
Changes in the weld speed and heat input can also have adverse effect on the joint by
causing discontinuities. Studies have shown that a high welding speeds results in cavity
formation. The effect of a low weld speed was the formation of micro cracks near the Cu
particles along the joint [19]. Kumar et al. [20] conducted FSW on AA6061 and Cu­B370
and found that process parameters had a huge impact on the weld nugget formation during
the welding process. They concluded that the tool rotation speed and welding speed
directly affected the amount of plasticized materials mixing. The formation of cavities
takes place due to inadequate heat input to dilute the metals. The heat generated by the
tool is inversely proportional to the welding speed [21]. In a study it was also found that
at high weld temperatures, cavity formation takes place and at low weld temperatures,
the joint was found to have channel defects. The reason for such defects was the high
diffusion of Cu in the Al sheets.
Thus, it can be clearly seen that the weld parameters influences the properties of the joint
through the formation of IMCs and defects [22]. The main parameters influencing the
Al­Cu joint are:
• Weld speed
• Heat input
• Tool position
13
==PAGE:24==
2.4
Corrosion Analysis
Corrosion is defined as a material degradation process due to chemical interaction with
the environmental. It is a natural process wherein refined metals are reduced into a more
chemically stable oxides. It is an irreversible phenomenon and results from the funda­
mental principle of thermodynamics according to which an isolated material system tends
towards a state of maximum entropy. Corrosion has many consequences to a material
which affects their reliability, safety and operational efficiency. Failure related to corrosion
often leads to expensive repairs and maintenance of structures. The most common kinds
of corrosion result from electrochemical reactions. Most metals are easily oxidized, they
tend to lose electrons to oxygen (and other substances) in the air or in water.
Corrosion of a metal is the result of two simultaneous reactions that are in electric equi­
librium:
• Oxidation of the metal resulting in a loss of electron:
M
Mn+ + ne–
(2.4)
which results in an anodic current ia that flows from the metal to the electrolyte.
• Reduction of an ion present in the electrolyte follows the fundamental reaction:
Xn+ + ne–
X
(2.5)
or
X + ne–
Xn–
(2.6)
which results in a cathodic current that flows from the electrolyte to the metal.
The reactions of oxidation and reduction proceed at distinct sites of the metal surface.
The region where oxidation occurs is known as anode and is generally denoted with a
negative sign (­). The region where reduction takes place is known as cathode and is
denoted using a positive sign (+). The kinetics of the anodic and cathodic electrochemical
reactions is represented by the relationship between the potential E and the reaction rate
of the corresponding electric intensity i.
Figure 2.10: Polarization curve showing both Anodic(A) as well as Cathodic(K) curves.
14
==PAGE:25==
These curves are known as polarization curves and are drawn experimentally. The po­
larization curve are of 2 types :
• Galvanodynamic curves i.e. where electrical intensity (i) varies and we measure
the potential (E).
• Potentiodynamic curves i.e. where potential (E) varies and we measure the elec­
trical intensity (i).
Under natural corrosion condition, i.e without external electrical current source, the system
formed by the metal and water/electrolyte constitutes an open electrical circuit. No current
can be transferred to the metal from the solution or the vice versa i.e. the anodic and
cathodic currents flowing in opposite directions are essentially equal. This point forms the
intersection between the two polarization curves and defines the corrosion potential Ecorr
and the intensity of corrosion icorr.
The mass loss i.e. the corrosion rate can be calculated for a given intensity and a given
time using the Faraday’s law.
m =
1
96500.A
n .It
(2.7)
where
• m is the mass;
• A is the atomic number of the metal;
• n is the valance of the metal;
• I is the intensity (icorr);
• t is the time in seconds.
However, the formula only holds good if the corrosion is uniform. It makes no sense if the
corrosion is localised and develops to form pits which is the case for aluminium in natural
environment where pH is close to neutral. pH of the solution plays an important role
to understand the reactions in the aqueous media. It is a crucial factor in the corrosion
resistance of metals in aqueous solution. With respect to aluminium, it can help us in
understanding the stability of the passivating oxide layer (most stable between the pH
values of 5 & 8) and also the rate of dissolution of the aluminium in the electrolyte.
Some metals acquire a natural passivity or resistance to corrosion. This is caused due to
the metal forming a thin protective corrosion layer that protects it from further oxidation.
Patina that forms on top of copper is one such example of protective oxide layer. The
protection fails when the thin oxide layer is damaged or destroyed due to stresses or
scratching. In the case of aluminium, it can corrode in multiple ways depending on the
environmental conditions[23].
2.4.1
Types of corrosion affecting Aluminium
The following are the types of corrosion methods that can be seen in aluminium and its
alloys,
• Uniform Corrosion[24]
Uniform corrosion or general corrosion results in the even oxidation or reduction
of thickness over the entire surface area of the exposed metal [25]. This occurs
due to the formation of localized anodic and cathodic regions across the surface on
which oxidation and reduction reactions occur simultaneously. Uniform corrosion of
aluminium occurs mainly under extremely acidic or alkaline conditions in which the
15
==PAGE:26==
natural protective oxide layer dissolves. The rate of corrosion can vary from few
micrometers per year to a few micrometers per hour depending on the nature of the
electrolyte. The rate of uniform corrosion can be estimated by measuring the mass
loss or amount of hydrogen evolved [26].
• Pitting Corrosion[24]
Like all passivating metals, aluminium is also sensitive to pitting corrosion, especially
in environments where pH is close to neutral such as tap water, sea water, humid
air etc. Pitting is initiated by localized corrosion of the surface which then forms a
shallow pit that continues to grow. Fig 2.11 shows the process of pit formation in
the presence of chlorine ions and dispersed copper and intermetalic (Al3Fe) particle
on the surface. Corrosion of aluminium always draws attention because the pits
are covered with bulky white corrosion product and gelatinous hydrated alumina
(Al(OH)3).
Figure 2.11: Schematic illustration of the mechanism of pitting corrosion in aluminium.[27]
The mechanism of pitting is a very complex phenomenon and has not yet been fully
understood despite alot of studies conducted on it. However, the conditions required
for it to initiate and spread have been understood. The main stages involved in the
initiation and spreading of pitting are as follows:
– Passivation layer breakdown
– Pit development:
– Pit re­passivation
In the presence of aggressive ions (such as chlorides Cl–) containing electrolyte,
the passive oxide layer is unable to repair itself like it can under general conditions.
Many literature’s point to the ingress of the chlorides in the oxide film being caused
due to flaws in the film itself that become preferential entry points for the ions. These
flaws are generally linked to the heterogeneity of the surface such as the presence of
inclusions, intermetallic particles, fine scratches etc.[28][29]. Literature also points
to the positive charging of the film when immersed in an electrolyte as the driving
force for the chloride ions to penetrate. The penetration of the oxide film allows
the chloride ions to reach the metal­oxide film interface where they can react with
the bare metal and dissolve it. The rupture of the oxide layer happens at defect
points such as inclusion sites, around intermetallic particles[30]. Once pitting is
initiated, the bottom of the pit acts as anode and the metal surface acts as a cathode.
The intermetallic compounds spread across the matrix have different physical and
electrochemical properties with respect to the matrix and thus act as cathodic sites
for the initiation of pits. The aluminium around the intermetallic particles dissolves
where as the intermetallic particle becomes the site for oxygen reduction.
16
==PAGE:27==
• Inter­granular corrosion (IGC)[24]
Inter­granular corrosion (IGC) follows a preferential path and the corrosion pro­
gresses along the grain boundaries. This form of corrosion tends to consume very
little metal so weight loss is not a good method to detect this type of corrosion. When
it branches out deep into the metal matrix, it can adversely affect the mechanical
properties of the part. IGC usually spreads out from pits that can be small and su­
perficial. It is initiated due to the potential difference between the grain itself and
the grain boundary zone. The matrix has α solid solution in which intermetallics are
dispersed. The OCP of the intermetallics is different from that of aluminium matrix.
This caused two types of IGC’s in aluminium.
– Type I :Dissolution of anodic depleted zone bordering the grain boundary.Type I
is usually seen in 2xxx series or in an alloy with 4 wt.% copper. If the quenching
is done slowly, grain boundary precipitation of Al2Cu hardening phase occurs.
The formation of this intermetallic at the grain boundary depletes the copper
from the vicinity of the boundary which leads to the formation of a precipitate
free zone which has a potential lower than that of the grain boundary. [24]
– Type II : Dissolution of anodic intermetallics that precipitated at the grain bound­
aries. Usually occurs in 5xxx series or in alloys with 3.5wt.% or greater of mag­
nesium content. Under heating, precipitation of β­Al3Mg2 phase occurs at the
grain boundary. This precipitate has an OCP value lower than that of the grain
matrix. [24]
Figure 2.12: Types of inter­granular corrosion affecting aluminium (Al). [24]
IGC can be initiated at the grain boundaries of grains that are under stress (tensile
and shear) depending on their orientation. Compressive stress was found to reduce
the penetration depth and distribution of IGC. It was found that having compressive
stress in the material decreased the rate of propagation of IGC in the perpendicular
direction but does not prevent it completely [15]. HAGB are also more susceptible
to IGC when compared to LAGB [31].
• Exfoliating corrosion[24]
Exfoliating corrosion is a type of corrosion that spreads along a multitude of planes
parallel to the direction of rolling or extrusion[32]. This type of corrosion mainly
affects the copper based and zinc based aluminium alloys which are used in aircraft
17
==PAGE:28==
applications. This form of corrosion spreads via inter granular spaces with massive
oxide layer formation that induces a wedging effect as shown in fig. 2.13.
Figure 2.13: Micrographic view of exfoliating corrosion [33].
• Stress cracking corrosion[24]
Stress cracking corrosion can be defined as ”deterioration in materials properties
of the material through the simultaneous action of a static stress and exposure to
corrosion environment that would occur by the separate but additive action of those
agencies” [34]. This form of corrosion results from the combination of mechanical
stress and a corrosive environment. Stress cracking corrosion can end up causing
failure of part in service. Unlike pitting corrosion, stress corrosion does not nec­
essarily cause changes on the surface of the metal which is visible to the naked
eye.
• Corrosion fatigue[24]
Corrosion fatigue is a complex process of material degradation due to the combina­
tion of cyclic mechanical stress and influence of a corrosive environment. Corrosion
fatigue of aluminium alloy occurs at lower stress levels as compared to stress cor­
rosion cracking. Fatigue cracks propagates by the formation of striation which are
quasi cleavages. Anodic dissolution of metal takes place at the bottom of the crack
due to mechanical depassivation. The intensity and the rate of corrosion depends
on the pH and oxygen concentration but anodic dissolution is the main cause of ac­
celerated cracking. The hydrogen produced as part of the cathodic reaction leads
to embrittlement of the metal in the region.
• Filiform corrosion[24]
Filiform corrosion usually attacks painted metal parts. It results in the detachment of
the coating from the metal surface due to the corrosion of the metal at the interface.
It is a superficial corrosion affecting the appearance of the surface but not the me­
chanical properties of the metal. It initiates at the weak points or defects of the paint
or lacquer layer on the metal. It spreads out in the form of a filament irrespective
18
==PAGE:29==
of the properties of the coating applied. The growth direction of the filament is not
predictable.
• Crevice corrosion[24]
Corrosion that occurs in confined spaces that can hold small volume of water is
called crevice corrosion. It can be usually seen under bolt heads, thread or riveted
connections, washers etc. It is seen that this corrosion phenomena is more intense
in the case of metal to metal contact than in a metal to non metal contact. Aluminium
is not very sensitive to crevice corrosion unlike stainless steel. Crevices exposed
to the environment are usually closed by the aluminium corrosion products thereby
preventing further corrosion.
• Fretting corrosion[24]
It is the process of surface degradation caused due to contact between two surfaces
that are under oscillatory movement of small amplitude. This type of corrosion can
be experienced by any part that is subjected to vibratory fields. Preventing such
degradation is difficult to isolate and solve as it involves the whole assembly expe­
riencing the vibratory fields.
• Water­line corrosion[24]
Corrosion that occurs on half submerged metal structure with the area at the water
line experiencing intense corrosion is known as Water­line corrosion. This is mainly
due to difference in aeration between the surface of the liquid and the area just
below. In the case of aluminium, the presence of chloride ions plays an important
role in corrosion rather than the difference in aeration.
• Erosion and cavitation[24]
This type of degradation is usually caused by fluid flow. Erosion occurs when there
is turbulent flow near a metal surface. This causes rapid surface wear due to me­
chanical effect rather than corrosion. Cavitation occurs when bubbles caused by
pressure variation implodes on the metal surface. It is usually seen on the impellers
and guide vanes of pumps and the propellers of ships.
• Microbial influenced corrosion[24]
Microbial influenced corrosion takes place due to the metabolites released by the
microbes which contains various types of organic acids the most frequently cited
ones are formic, succinic, citric, isocitric, oxoglutaric acids. The corrosive effect
decreases with increase in molecular weight of acid. Enzymes associated with the
microbes would preferentially attack zinc and magnesium present in the aluminium
alloys such as 7xxx series [35]. In 2xxx series as well as 7xxx series, the corroded
zones are copper and iron rich regions with zones depleted in zinc, aluminium and
magnesium surrounding them. These types of corrosion is commonly seen in fuel
tanks of aircraft.
• Galvanic corrosion[24]
Galvanic corrosion can be defined as the corrosion that is a result of direct contact
between two dissimilar metals in a conducting liquid. Unlike other corrosion, gal­
vanic corrosion does not rely on the metal’s surface texture, shape, temper etc.. It
only depends upon the placement of the metals in the galvanic series. The more
electro­negative of the two dissimilar metals in contact would act as anode and the
other would act as cathode thus forming a galvanic cell .
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.14: Principle of Battery cell. Arrows indicate the motion of ions, which are re­
leased into the electrolyte by oxidation reactions at the anode and then deposited on the
cathode in reduction reactions.[24]
There are several methods for measuring galvanic corrosion between aluminium
and another metals or alloys:
– Open circuit potential(OCP) measurement : This test gives us the polarity
of the metals or alloys in a proposed assembly. This data allows us to compare
the potential between the metals that are to be used. It can however, not give us
the intensity of the galvanic corrosion and the rate of dissolution of the anodic
metal in the assembly.
– Current Measurements : This can be done by measuring the drop in voltage
across a known resistance.
– Salt spray test : This method is advantageous as a scaled down model of
the actual assembly can be tested. These tests can show the possible risk
of galvanic corrosion and make it possible to study how to protect aluminium.
The test however exaggerates the corrosion results to something that may not
be seen under long duration exposure to general environment due to the salt
deposited on the surface of the sample prior to the test.
– Atmospheric tests : This method utilised ASTM standardised test (ASTM­
G116) to show extent of galvanic corrosion. But the interpretation of the results
can be tricky, as long exposure can lead to slowing of the galvanic corrosion
due to corrosion product build up.
– Tests on mock­ups : This method utilises mock­ups of the assembly and
examines it under environmental conditions. The tests can last a few weeks to
couple of years depending on the requirement.
Conditions required to be met in order to have continuous galvanic corrosion are as
follows :
– Different types of metals : When two dissimilar metals are in contact, galvanic
corrosion is possible. The rate of corrosion can be accelerated if the difference
in the OCP of the two metals in contact is large. Size of the two metals also
plays a role in the rate of corrosion. If the anode is larger than the cathode, the
20
==PAGE:31==
charge density on the surface of the anode would be small thus containing the
corrosion to the contact region of the anode.
– Presence of electrolyte : The contact region of the two metals must be wetted
by a liquid to ensure ionic conductivity. The pH and the temperature of the
electrolyte can alter the rate of corrosion as well. Corrosion of aluminium is
minimum when pH closer to neutral but is accelerated under acidic and alkaline
pH. Increase in temperature can change the OCP values of the metals thereby
accelerating the galvanic corrosion.
– Electrical continuity between the metals : Electrical continuity should re­
main throughout the corrosion cycle. The moment the continuity is broken the
galvanic corrosion will come to a halt.
While in contact with copper or copper based alloys, aluminium does not undergo
appreciable galvanic corrosion under atmospheric conditions, but it is always ad­
visable to have proper insulation between the two metals. Corrosion products of
copper called verdigris tends to attack aluminium and reduces on its surface, leav­
ing behind small copper particles which in turn can lead to localized pitting corrosion
due to galvanic coupling of the two metals.
• Crystallographic Corrosion : This type of corrosion specifically attacks grains with
a certain crystallographic orientation. It has been seen by many researchers that the
crystallographic orientation has a significant influence on the corrosion of crystals
[36].
Figure 2.15: Photo micrograph of etched surface of mono crystalline aluminum approxi­
mately parallel to (100).[36]. Etchant used­ Aqua regia, HF and FeCl3.
The initiation of crystallographic pitting in pure aluminium is a consequence of the
breakdown of the oxide film on the surface. The subsequent propagation is asso­
ciated to the orientation of the grain in the underlying substrate. It is an accepted
notion that pit walls are comprised of {001} plane due to its highest thermodynamic
stability and its slowest dissolution rate relative to {011} and {111} planes due to
which crystallographic corrosion are characterized by a well defined half­cube shape
with sharp edges[37].
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.16: SEM micrographs of the AA2024 alloy after immersion in a 3.5 wt.% NaCl
solution[37].Typical localized corrosion sites after 15 hrs of immersion.
Crystallographic corrosion also occurs in aluminium alloys but are less readily formed
due to the presence of alloying elements as the noble alloying elements could ac­
cumulate at the corrosion front. It was also found in recent studies that, when the
the corrosion front reaches the grain boundary and the crystallographic dissolution
is interrupted due to the absence of a fast dissolving plane on the other side of the
grain boundary, a corrosion front develops that travels along the grain boundary,
penetrating deeper into the alloy instead of crossing the grain boundary resulting in
the morphology of intergranular corrosion [37]
Effect of corrosion on weldments: It is also often found that weldments are more
severely affected than the parent material in an active corrosion environment. This is
known as preferential weld corrosion (PWC). Galvanic action can cause PWC in certain
environments. The problem arises from the fact that weld metal composition tend to be
slightly anodic to the parent material. Preferential corrosion attack on weld region can
occur for a number of reasons [38]:
• Difference in composition between the weld metal and the base metal can generate
a potential difference in certain environments leading to galvanic corrosion.
• Difference in as­welded microstructure could make the weld metal sufficiently differ­
ent and even less corrosion resistant than the base metal.
• Microstructure difference between the base metals and as­welded HAZ can lead to
localized attack on the HAZ.
2.5
Microstructure Analysis
FSW has become an important new technique for joining aluminium alloys as well as
dissimilar metals. The process involves a rotating tool being plunged into solid metal,
heating it sufficiently that the surrounding metal can be mixed together to form a solid
joint. The process essentially induces severe plastic deformation at the weld region that
then induces recrystallization of the deformed area [39].
22
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.17: EBSD scan of the region ahead of the tool. Colours represent crystal orien­
tation and black lines indicate grain HAGB. Pole figures showcase the grain orientation
at different stages.[39].
Figure 2.18: Weld cross section showing various metallurgical zones developed during
FSW of an aluminium alloy[40].
Typically FSW of aluminium alloy results in three different microstructural zones based
on the crystallization experienced as shown in Fig 2.18 i.e. (a) weld nugget (WN), (b)
Thermo­mechanical affected zone (TMAZ), (c) Heat­affected zone (HAZ).
• Heat affected zone :­ HAZ is the region, which lies close to the weld centre. The ma­
terial in this region has experienced thermal cycle that has modified the microstruc­
ture and/or the mechanical properties of the material in the region. But no plastic
deformation occurs in this region.
• Thermo­mechanical affected zone :­ This region in which the FSW tool has plas­
tically deformed the material and the heat generated during the process has also
affected the material. This region lies sandwiched between the HAZ and the WN.
• Weld Nugget :­ This region is completely recrystallised due to significant plastic
strain induced during the process. It is sometimes called as Stir Zone or Stir Nugget
and represents the space through which the FSW tool pin travelled through.
The microstructural evolution in FSW process is highly dependent on the temperature
and the strain evolution endured by the welded materials. The heat source induced by
23
==PAGE:34==
stirring process and plastic deformation leads to temperature changes in the nugget and
the neighboring domains. The friction, large stresses and strains encountered by the ma­
terial induces a complex thermal history as well as residual stresses and distortion which
are at times difficult to control and monitor for manufacturers. All these phenomenon can
be the cause for deterioration of the end use properties in terms of geometry, assembly
quality, mechanical strength and fatigue resistance [41]. Mahoney et al.[42] were the first
to observe and detail the microstructure evolution in FSW. They described the features
in the welded domains also considering fractures observed in tensile test. A reduction in
fine hardening precipitates in the weld nugget was observed to decrease the mechanical
properties of the weld zone. They also mentioned that larger strengthening precipitates
were observed in failure domains which have been developed at the expense of the finest
precipitates. In general, they were able to experimentally prove that evolution of features
in the microstructures through the welding process was a consequence of local tempera­
ture and deformation.
Xue et. al.[18] welded AA1060 aluminium to pure copper and identified many defects in
the weld zone at lower rotation speed of 400rpm whereas at higher rotation speeds of 800
and 1000 rpm, good metallurgical bonding between the Cu pieces and Al matrix was seen.
Esmaeili et. al.[43] joined AA1050 and brass(70% Cu ­ 30% Zn), the results showed a
sturdy weld zone consisting of intermetallics and brass particles in the upper region of
the weld cross section. The intermetallics formed at the interface at rotation speeds of
higher than 450rpm mainly consisted of CuAl, CuAl2 and Cu9Al4. The distribution of the
particles are irregular and in­homogeneous in the weld zone of aluminium. Ouyang et.
al. [44] also conducted dissimilar FSW using AA6061(T6) to Cu. They demonstrated that
the process is difficult to conduct due to the brittle nature of the intermetallics formed in
the weld nugget. The mechanically mixed zone consisted mainly of several intermetallic
compounds such as CuAl2,CuAl and Cu9Al4 together with small amounts of α −Al.
24
==PAGE:35==
3
Methods of Experimentation
3.1
Test samples received
Two sets of FSW samples were sent to us from Hydro A/S with variation in the process
parameters of the FSW process. Set 1 shown in Fig 3.1, consisted of AA6101 alloy with
Cu and Set 2 shown in Fig 3.2, consisted of samples with a material combination of AA
6101 alloy with Cu and AA1370 alloy with Cu. The changes in the process parameters
in both the sample sets are shown below in Tables 3.1 and 3.2 respectively. Chemical
composition of AA6101 and AA1370 is shown in Tables 3.3 and 3.4 respectively.
Figure 3.1: Set 1 of FSW samples received from Hydro made using AA6101 alloy and
Cu.
Table 3.1: Process parameters used to produce Set 1 of FSW samples.
Sample
Force Applied
[Kg]
Feed Rate
[mm/s]
Rotation Speed
[rpm]
Offset from
interface in Al
[mm]
Aluminium used
A
450
6
1500
2
AA 6101
B
450
6
1500
1.6
AA 6101
C
500
6
1500
1.6
AA 6101
D
500
6
1700
1.6
AA 6101
E
500
3
1700
1.6
AA 6101
Figure 3.2: Set 2 of FSW samples received from Hydro made using AA6101 alloy and
AA1370 alloy with Cu.
25
==PAGE:36==
Table 3.2: Process parameters used to produce Set 2 of FSW samples.
Sample
Force Applied
[Kg]
Feed Rate
[mm/s]
Rotation Speed
[rpm]
Offset from
interface in Al
[mm]
Aluminium used
F
450
3
1700
2
AA 6101
G/H
420
3
1700
2
AA 6101
I
420
3
1700
2
AA 1370
J
400
3
1700
2
AA 1370
K/L
350
3
1700
2
AA 1370
Table 3.3: Chemical composition (wt %) of AA6101 aluminium alloy [45].
Si
Fe
Cu
Mn
Mg
Cr
Zn
Ti
B
0.3­0.7
0.5
0.1
0.03
0.35­0.8
0.03
0.1
­
0.06
Table 3.4: Chemical composition (wt %) of AA1370 aluminium alloy [46].
Si
Fe
Cu
Mn
Mg
Cr
Zn
Ti
B
<0.1
<0.25
<0.02
<0.01
<0.02
<0.01
<0.04
<0.02
<0.02
3.2
Gel Experiment
To analyse the part, it was required to first identify localised corrosion susceptibility of
the part and to do that, a Gel Test was conducted [47][48]. The Gel Test also helps
in identifying the regions within the sample that act as anode and cathode through the
change in pH. A NaCl gel was prepared of 0.01M concentration with Universal indicator
(pH range 3 ­ 10) to check the corrosion characteristic of the FSW Al­Cu sample. The
12 samples were prepared by lightly sanding the surface under investigation with 1000
grit and then 4000 grit sandpaper to remove any oxide build­up on the surface. Gel was
applied evenly onto the surface of the samples and the following pictures were taken at
the intervals of 0hr, 2hr, 4hr, 24hr, 48hr and 72hr.
Figure 3.3: Prepared front and back FSW samples and after gel application (Sample A)
26
==PAGE:37==
3.3
Thin film Experiment
To understand the samples corrosion under environmental condition a Thin Film Test was
conducted to identify the mode of corrosion. The test was conducted using the STANAG
category M2 ­ Marine 24hr environmental condition test issued by the Department of De­
fence ­ Material Research Laboratory, Australia (B) for the ambient temperature and hu­
midity values graphed below in Fig.3.5. A solution of 25/75 ml iso­propyl alcohol/water
mixed with 0.06 g NaCl was prepared. The sample surface was prepared by sanding
it with 1000 grit paper followed by 4000 grit paper to remove the oxide layer and then
cleaned with ethyl alcohol. The surface area of the samples were calculated (4.625 cm2)
and the 100 µl of salt solution was evenly deposited on each sample and then allowed to
dry. The salt coating the sample was calculated to be around 50 µg/cm2. The samples
were checked every 24 hrs for corrosion progression for 3 days (total 72 hrs).
Figure 3.4: Prepared front and back FSW samples and after salt deposition (Sample A)
Figure 3.5: STANAG 24hr Marine condition testing profile for the Climatic chamber.
27
==PAGE:38==
3.4
Electrochemical Analysis
Corrosion is essentially an electrochemical process of oxidation and reduction reactions.
As it occurs, electrons are released by the metal (i.e. oxidation) and gained by elements
(i.e. reduction) present in the electrolytic solution. This flow of electrons can be measured
and controlled electronically. Thus a controlled electrochemical experimental method can
be used to characterize the corrosion properties of metals and metallic components in a
combination with various electrolytes that mimic its operating environment.
The potentiodynamic polarization test is one of the most widely accepted methods used
to measure the rate of corrosion for a specimens. In potentiodynamic experiments, po­
tential is measured between the reference and the working electrodes. The difference is
applied between the two electrodes, and the current developed is measured. The current
measured indicates the rate of corrosion taking place on the working electrode in terms of
current per unit area, known as current density [49]. The data is plotted on a current den­
sity vs potential graph. For the Al­Cu busbar, the sample was divided into pure Al sample,
pure Cu sample and FSW region.Localized electrochemical experiments were conducted
using the cell shown in Fig.3.6b. Cathodic and Anodic cycles are applied separately to
obtain the Taffel slope for the respective cycle. The parameters applied for the test are
given below in table 3.5 [47] [48].
Table 3.5: Potentiostat setup parameters
Parameter
Value(s)
Time
:
3600 sec
Electrolyte used
:
3.5% NaCl Soln. (300 ml)
Start Potential
:
50 mV
Reverse Potential
:
­300 mV (Cathodic), ­600 mV (Anodic)
Sweep rate
:
30 mV/min
Cycle
:
0.5
Area of sample exposed to electrolyte
:
varies sample to sample
(a) Potentiostat setup
(b) Potentiostat experimental setup used
Figure 3.6: Potentiostat line diagram and setup used for the experiment
28
==PAGE:39==
The samples are sectioned into Al region, Cu­region and FSW­region for each of them.
Since samples A through E (Set 1) has the same Al (AA 6101) and Cu material, we use
only one set for the electrochemical test. Similarly, for samples F through L (Set 2), 2 dif­
ferent Al alloys are used to prepare the samples (AA1370, AA6101) but since one of them
is also used in Set 1, we picked out the other one for the electrochemical test to prevent
duplication of the test. In total 13 samples are prepared for this test (10 FSW samples + 2
pure Al samples + 1 pure Cu sample). A wire is then stuck to the back side of the sample
using a conductive epoxy so as to attach the sample to the potentiostat apparatus. It is
then cold embedded with the FSW surface at the top of the cold embedding. The surface
of the sample is then sanded using 1000 grit and 4000 grit sand paper followed by polish­
ing until 1µm using alumina slurry as shown in Fig 3.7. The region with the bulk Cu metal
is coated manually with waterproof lacquer to prevent it from influencing the experiment.
The apparatus and the setup used for the experiment is shown in Fig. 3.6b. Ag/AgCl
electrode is used as reference electrode and a mixed metal oxide electrode is used as
counter.
Figure 3.7: Material preparation steps for electrochemical study
3.5
Corrosion Morphology Analysis
Light optical microscopy (LOM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) techniques were
used for the corrosion morphology analysis of the specimens before and after corrosion
tests. A light optical microscope (LOM) was used to for the initial inspection of the spec­
imen surface and its features. A digital light optical microscope (Zeiss) was used to get
quantitative images of the samples at a much higher magnification. Scanning Electron
Microscopy (SEM) was used for the analysis of the corrosion morphology of the spec­
imens cross­section. The sample was retrieved from the Gel test sample of the FSW.
The sample was then cold embedded into resin to ensure the grains within the sample
remain unaffected by any sort of heat as shown in Fig 3.8.The surface of the sample is
then sanded using 1000 grit and 4000 grit sand paper followed by polishing until 1µm
using alumina slurry.
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.8: Material preparation step for microstructure study
3.5.1
Light Optical Microscope (LOM)
The light optical microscope LOM (shown in Fig 3.9) was the basic instrument used for
primary visualization of corrosion on samples after Thin film test and Electrochemical
analysis.
The working principle of LOM is simple. It uses a visible light and system of lenses to focus
light on the specimen, and magnify images of small samples. Microscopic magnification
varies greatly depending on the type and number of lenses that make up the microscope.
Figure 3.9: Zeiss Axio Observer metallography microscope [50].
The Zeiss Axio Observer’s inverted optical design facilitates parallel alignment to the ob­
jective lens. This enables the user to observe more samples in less time. The objective
lenses provided in this LOM are 5x, 10x, 20x, 50x and 100x. The LOM also ensures max­
imum homogeneity and a stray light free image background in bright field and dark field
[50].
30
==PAGE:41==
3.5.2
Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)
The surface microstructure of the samples before and after the corrosion test was studied
using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) shown in the Figure 3.11. The SEM was
used to understand and identify the forms and mechanisms of corrosion on the samples.
Figure 3.10: Electron–sample interaction volume and types of signal generated.
SEM is a widely used technique for studying surface microstructure at the micrometer
and nanometer levels. It uses high vacuum conditions and a focused high voltage elec­
tron beam to scan the surface and create images. Electrons are produced in an electron
gun and narrowed into an electron beam that is scattered over the surface of the sample
through a series of magnetic lenses. The acquired signals from electron sample interac­
tion reveal information about the external morphology and chemical composition of the
observed sample area. Different signals shown in Figure 3.10 are emitted from electron
sample interaction and thus different detectors are utilized to detect secondary electrons,
back scattered electrons, or characteristic x­rays.
Figure 3.11: Quanta FEG­250 ESEM [51]
31
==PAGE:42==
For the microstructural analysis of the FSW cross­section, we use a Quanta FEG­250
ESEM with an additional EDS sensor to detect the composition of the sample. The Quanta
FEG­250 SEM instrument is an environmental Scanning Electron Microscope used for
high­resolution imaging and composition analysis by energy­dispersive X­ray microanal­
ysis (EDS). The FEG column in Quanta 250 allows beam deceleration, which permits to
achieve a resolution of 1.4 nm even at 1 kV electron landing voltage. The Quanta equip­
ment can work under three different pressure ranges, the maximum pressure being 2600
Pa. This permits observation of life­sciences samples without previous metallic coating,
i.e., studies in environmental conditions (ESEM).
The sample were ground using 1000 and 4000 grit sandpaper followed by polishing upto
0.5µm using diamond slurry and alumina slurry. Once polished the sample was thoroughly
cleaned using alcohol and dried. The sample was then mounted onto the SEM and the
images were analysed. EDS was also conducted to evaluated the elements present in
the region of observation.
In this study, BSE and EDS detectors were mainly used for material characterization. The
SEM was operated in a high vacuum with a 10 ­ 15 kV electron beam accelerating voltage.
This mode of SEM requires the samples to be electrically conductive, otherwise, a sharp
image cannot be obtained.
32
==PAGE:43==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Gel Experiment
The results of the gel test are as follows :
In general on the front surface of all the samples, we see (Figure 4.1) a strong anodic
region (red region) form at the Cu and Al interface after 4 hours of application. The dark
blue region symbolises the cathodic region. In some samples, the development of a
second anodic region at the FSW­Al interface can be observed. This can be attributed
to the difference in the microstructure of the heavily plasticized FSW region and the base
Al material. In some cases, the weld flash also causes formation of localized anodic
region. This again can be attributed to the difference in the microstructure of the heavily
plasticized weld flash and the base Al material.
Figure 4.1: Front surface of the samples after 4hrs of exposure to the Gel.
Figure 4.2: Back surface of the samples after 4hrs of exposure to the Gel.
On the back surface of all the samples, it was observed that (Figure 4.2) an orangish
layer developed at the Al­Cu interface indicating that it is an anodically active region. The
remaining surface area on the back side of the sample remains cathodic. This is due
to the fact that the FSW tool pin does not penetrate the sample completely, thus leaving
the back surface in the original condition. It is only effected by the heat generated in the
process.
The formation of strong anodic and cathodic region on the front surface of the sample
suggests strong affinity to corrosion. The gel starts to loose its color after 24hr and then
33
==PAGE:44==
slowly starts drying up. The complete 72hr gel exposure test images of each sample is
attached in Appendix A for reference.
4.2
Thin film Experiment
The results of the thin film experiment are as follows:
The test made sure we achieved a salt deposition of 50μg/cm2 on the sample and then
run it through the STAGNA 24hr climatic test. The test also confirmed the results that was
seen in the previously conducted gel test with corrosion process being more active at the
FSW­Cu interface on the front surface of the sample as shown in Figure 4.3. When the
sample is viewed under the LOM, pitting was observed across the Al region but was more
predominant closer to the interface on the front side of the exposed sample. Pits were
also observed on the grooves left by the FSW process in the FSW region.
Figure 4.3: Front surface of the samples after 72hrs of exposure to the STANAG marine
climatic cycle.
Figure 4.4: Back surface of the samples after 72hrs of exposure to the STANAG marine
climatic cycle.
Similarly, corrosion at and around the Al­Cu interface on the back surface was observed.
Corrosion traces in the Cu region indicated by the bluish green colouration (Figure 4.3
and Figure 4.4) are observed as well. That could be the Cu interacting with the chlorine
ions locally to form CuCl2. When the sample is viewed under the LOM, severe pitting is
observed at the interface region as compared to the remaining area. As seen before in
Gel Test, the interface acts anodically with respect to the rest of the surface thus leading
to a higher density of pits in the region. The Al base metal also sees pit formation as the
Cl– ions attack the protective oxide layer that opens up the Al metal to pitting attack[24].
34
==PAGE:45==
The complete 72hr thin film exposure experiment images for each sample is attached in
Appendix C for reference.
4.3
Electrochemical Analysis
The results of the electrochemical analysis are as follows:
The graph below shows the anodic half cycle graphs of the polarization experiment con­
ducted on the FSW regions of all the samples and pure base materials used in the sam­
ples.
Figure 4.5: Combined anodic polarization curves of all the FSW samples including pure
metal samples.
Since the process parameters for each sample differs from one another, it becomes very
difficult to analyse the relationship between the changes in the process parameters and
corrosion characteristics of the FSW region.
Figure 4.6: Grouping of the sample to evaluate the effect of changes in material, force
applied, tool rotation speed, tool feed rate and tool offset from interface on the corrosion
behaviour of the FSW region.
35
==PAGE:46==
In order to streamline the process of evaluating the effect of process parameters on the
corrosion behaviour of the FSW region, sample with changes in only one parameter are
grouped together for comparison in order to evaluate the contribution of that specific pa­
rameter to the corrosion behaviour as shown in Figure 4.6.
4.3.1
Change in Aluminium
The change in base metal is first taken into consideration. Two samples are considered
for this evaluation, sample G/H and I. The samples have force applied (420 Kg), tool
rotation speed (1700 rpm), tool feed rate (3mm/sec) and tool offset from interface (2mm)
as common with the only difference being in the Al used as base metal.
Figure 4.7: Effect of change of aluminium alloy on the corrosion characteristics of the
FSW region.
Here, the change is in the Al alloy used for the process i.e. AA1370 and AA6101. In the
anodic polarization curve shown above in Fig 4.7, it can be clearly seen that AA6101 alloy
(OCP: ­ 676.3 mV) is slightly higher OCP value when compared with AA1370 alloy (OCP:
­ 684.9 mV) with the difference of 8.58 mV between their OCP values. This means that
AA6101 is slightly noble as compared to AA1370. This can be attributed to the presence
of elements such as magnesium and silicone in the AA6101 alloy that help in corrosion
resistance.
In the comparison image shown below, the anodically active region for both the samples
are at the the FSW­Cu interface as well as the FSW­Al interface. It can also be seen
that the FSW region in both the samples have Cu particles on the surface (seen in the
electrochemical analysis samples of Fig 4.8). In sample G/H, the Cu dispersoids are seen
to be fine and spread along the stir pattern. On the other hand, sample I seems to have
larger sized Cu dispersoids spread across the stir zone of the weld. In the cross­section
image taken using the SEM, it can be seen that the spread of the Cu particles in the base
Al metal is lesser in sample G/H (i.e. AA6101) when compared to sample I (i.e. AA1370).
This can be due to AA1370 alloy being softer in nature, making it easy to stir the Cu into
it when compared with AA6101 alloy.
36
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.8: Set of images showing the difference between sample G/H and I under test
condition.(1st row, Left: Gel Test, Top Right: Thin Film experiment, 2nd row: Electro­
chemical analysis sample, 3rd row: SEM view of cross­section)
4.3.2
Change in Force applied
Next, the change in the force applied by the tool onto the specimen is taken into consider­
ation. Three samples are considered for this evaluation, sample I, J and K/L. All the sam­
ples have, material (AA1370), tool rotation speed (1700 rpm), tool feed rate (3mm/sec)
and tool offset from interface (2mm) as common.
(a) Anodic half cycle
(b) Cathodic half cycle
Figure 4.9: Effect of change of force applied on the corrosion characteristics of the FSW
region in AA 1370.
37
==PAGE:48==
Here, the change is in the force applied for the process i.e. 350 kg, 400 kg and 420 kg.
In the anodic polarization curve shown above in Fig 4.9a, it can be clearly seen that the
OCP values for all the three samples lies close to each other. This can be attributed to
the amount of Cu on the surface of the samples. Cu on the surface also tends to push the
OCP value upwards. The spread of Cu on the surface and along the cross­section can
be clearly seen in Fig 4.10. For the same graph, it can be observed that the increase in
the force applied leads to decrease in corrosion rate. To confirm the trend, the cathodic
half cycle is taken into consideration. It can be found in previous literature that increase in
the heat generated at the weld zone leads to the dissolution of the CuAl2 particles during
the FSW processing which reduces the number of viable sites for galvanic coupling and
hence increases the corrosion resistance. CuAl2 is the predominant intermetallic that is
found which imparts greater strength but reduces the corrosion resistance [52].
In the comparison image shown below, the anodically active region for both the samples
are at the the FSW­Cu interface as well as the FSW­Al interface. It can also be seen
that the FSW region in both the samples have Cu particles on the surface (seen in the
electrochemical analysis samples of Fig 4.10).
Figure 4.10: Set of images showing the difference between sample I, J and K/L under
test condition.(1st row, Left: Gel Test, Top Right: Thin Film experiment, 2nd row: Electro­
chemical analysis sample, 3rd row: SEM view of cross­section)
Samples with AA6101 alloy are also considered to understand the effect of change in the
force applied by the tool onto the specimen. Two samples are considered for this evalua­
tion, sample F and G/H. The samples have, material (AA6101), tool rotation speed (1700
rpm), tool feed rate (3 mm/sec) and tool offset from interface (2 mm) as common. Here
again, the same trend of increase in force applied leads to reduction of anodic nature of
the sample can be observed. The peculiar thing here is that unlike the previous compari­
son, the difference in the OCP value is large. This can be attributed to firstly the presence
38
==PAGE:49==
of more Cu on the surface of sample F as compared to sample G/H.
Figure 4.11: Effect of change of force applied on the corrosion characteristics of the FSW
region in AA6101.
Figure 4.12: Set of images showing the difference between sample F and G/H under test
condition.(1st row, Left: Gel Test, Top Right: Thin Film experiment, 2nd row: Electro­
chemical analysis sample, 3rd row: SEM view of cross­section)
39
==PAGE:50==
In the comparison image shown in Fig 4.12, the anodically active region for both the
samples are at the the FSW­Cu interface as well as the FSW­Al interface. It can also be
seen that the FSW region in both the samples have Cu particles on the surface but the
spread of the particles is much more prominent in sample G/H as compared to sample
F. It can also be seen from the cross­section SEM image, that the dispersion in both the
samples is lesser on the front surface. But in sample F, the Cu dispersoids are much more
spread out within the matrix and larger in size as compared to sample G/H.
4.3.3
Change in Tool rotation speed
Next, the change in the tool rotation speed used for the process is taken into consideration.
Two samples are considered for this evaluation, sample C and D. All the samples have,
material (AA6101), force (500 kg), tool feed rate (6 mm/sec) and tool offset from interface
(1.6 mm) as common.
Here, the change is in the tool rotation speed applied for the process i.e. 1500 rpm and
1700 rpm. In the anodic polarization curve shown in Fig 4.13. A clear offset can be seen
in the OCP value of sample C (­672.0 mV) and sample D (­607.3 mV) with sample D
being more nobler of the two sample in consideration. Increase in the tool rotation speed
translates to increase in the frictional force which in turn translates to higher temperatures
at the weld zone. As discussed in the previous process effects, it is seen that increase in
the weld zone temperatures leads to the dissolution on the CuAl2 intermetallics from the
weld zone. This helps in increasing the corrosion resistance of the region [52].
Figure 4.13: Effect of change of tool rotation speed on the corrosion characteristics of the
FSW region
In the comparison image shown in Fig 4.14, the anodically active region for both the
samples are at the FSW­Cu interface. It can also be seen in the images of the samples
used in the electrochemical analysis that the FSW region in samples C seems to have
more corrosion sites (black spots) as compared to sample D. The SEM cross­section of
the 2 samples shows a sharp interface between Al and Cu base material with almost no
intermixing of material as seen in previously discussed process parameter. The sharp
40
==PAGE:51==
edge does help in reducing possible attacks on the surface but would lead to reduction in
mechanical properties of the joint as material intermixing is closely related to improvement
of mechanical properties of the joint.
Figure 4.14: Set of images showing the difference between sample C and D under test
condition.(1st row, Left: Gel Test, Top Right: Thin Film experiment, 2nd row: Electro­
chemical analysis sample, 3rd row: SEM view of cross­section)
4.3.4
Change in Tool feed rate
Next, the change in the tool feed rate is taken into consideration. Two samples are con­
sidered for this evaluation, sample D and E. All the samples have, material (AA6101), tool
rotation speed (1700 rpm), force applied (500 kg) and tool offset from interface (1.6 mm)
as common.
The tool feed rate used for the process is 6 mm/sec and 3 mm/sec for the respective
samples. In the anodic polarization curve shown above in Fig 4.15a, it can be seen that
there is no big difference in the OCP values of samples with sample D having an OCP of
­ 607.3 mV and sample E having an OCP value of ­ 612.8 mV. For the same graph, it can
be observed that the increase in the tool feed rate leads to reduction of OCP values. It
can also be seen that the rate of corrosion increase with decrease in tool feed rate. This
is confirmed with the cathodic polarization curve as seen in Fig 4.15b. Tool feed rate can
be associated with the heat retention characteristic and material mixing characteristic in
the weld zone. As the feed rate increases, the heat input at the weld zone decreases
41
==PAGE:52==
leading to insufficient plasticity of the material in the weld zone. Though Akinlabi et. al.
[52] concluded that the transverse feed rate has little or no effect on rate of corrosion, we
see that feed rate does have an inverse effect on rate of corrosion (feed rate increase ­
corrosion decrease).
(a) Anodic half cycle
(b) Cathodic half cycle
Figure 4.15: Effect of change of tool feed rate on the corrosion characteristics of the FSW
region.
Figure 4.16: Set of images showing the difference between sample D and E under test
condition.(1st row, Left: Gel Test, Top Right: Thin Film experiment, 2nd row: Electro­
chemical analysis sample, 3rd row: SEM view of cross­section)
42
==PAGE:53==
In the comparison image shown in Fig 4.16, the anodically active region for the samples
are at the the FSW­Cu interface but for sample E the active region also exists on the
FSW­Al interface. The electrochemical analysis sample for both the samples show lesser
amount of corrosion sites (black spots), but sample D seems to have the least. In the
cross­section SEM image, we see that there is a sharp Cu­Al interface with almost no
mixing of the two materials. This is characteristic of high feed rate. On the other hand,
sample E which had a slower feed rate, shows a lot of Cu dispersoids in the Al matrix.
Alot of them are seen on the surface of the weld. This when exposed to the environment
can create localized galvanic cells and increase the corrosion rate of the region. Though
such mixing is detrimental for corrosion characteristics of the weld, but for the mechanical
properties, it is really beneficial.
4.3.5
Change in Tool offset from Al interface
Finally, the change in the tool offset from Al interface is taken into consideration. Here
2 samples are considered for this evaluation, sample A and B. All the samples have,
material (AA6101), tool rotation speed (1500 rpm), tool feed rate (6 mm/sec) and Force
(450 kg) as common.
Figure 4.17: Effect of change of tool offset from interface on the corrosion characteristics
of the FSW region
The tool offset from Al interface used for the process is 2 mm and 1.6 mm for the respective
samples. From the anodic polarization curve shown in Fig 4.17, it can be seen that the
OCP value of sample B (­607.4 mV) is with the offset value of 1.6mm is higher than that
of sample A (­680.8 mV) with offset value of 2mm. This offset can be attributed to the
presence of Cu particles on the surface of sample B as seen in the SEM cross­section
image in Fig 4.18. Xue et al.[18] found that tool offset is an important parameter in FSW
of dissimilar metals. The study showed that good welds are produced under larger tool
offsets into the softer material. When the pin offset was larger, only few Cu pieces with
relatively small size were scratched from the Cu bulk. It was easy for the small Cu pieces
to mix into the Al base and react with the Al base in the nugget zone, and therefore sound
metallurgical bonding would be obtained at the Al–Cu interface. But the same cannot be
said for the present case.
In the comparison image shown in Fig 4.18, the anodically active region for the samples
43
==PAGE:54==
are at the FSW­Cu interface as seen in the Gel Test but the active region in sample B
seems to be a bit more extended as compared to sample A. This can be attributed to
the Cu particles that are dispersed on the surface of sample B as seen in the cross­
section SEM image as well as electrochemical test images. As previously mentioned,
the literature points to increase in tool offset leads to a better mixing of the two materials.
Since that is clearly not seen in this case, we need to consider the factors that have
affected this. The process parameters for these samples were such that they produced
insufficient heat (low force, low rpm and high feed rate) that led to insufficient plasticizing
of the material which ultimately led to sharp interface between the two metals with almost
negligible mixing in both cases. This leads to a weak joint that breaks away along the
sharp interface line.
Figure 4.18: Set of images showing the difference between sample G/H and I under test
condition.(1st row, Left: Gel Test, Top Right: Thin Film experiment, 2nd row: Electro­
chemical analysis sample, 3rd row: SEM view of cross­section)
4.4
Corrosion Morphology Analysis
The morphology of the corroded samples were analysed using LOM after Thin Film Test
as well as Electrochemical Tests and cross­section analysis of the Gel Test samples using
SEM­EDS technique to analyse the corrosion mechanisms active in the specimen.
44
==PAGE:55==
4.4.1
Light Optical Microscopy
Figure 4.19: LOM images of the FSW front surface from Thin film test.
The images shown in Fig 4.19 are of the sample after the conclusion of the Thin Film Test.
The region under focus are the peaks that are left due to the stirring action of the tool as
it traverses the sample. Cu particles, both coarse and fine can be clearly seen on these
peaks. The development of a valley around these particle can also be seen in this case.
This can be attributed to the formation of a localized galvanic cell between the particle and
the matrix leading to the dissolution of the matrix in the immediate vicinity of the particle.
Figure 4.20: LOM images of the FSW front surface taken near the Cu­FSW interface from
Electrochemical analysis test.(5x magnification)
The images shown in Fig 4.20 are of the sample after the conclusion of the Electrochem­
ical analysis. The images have been taken from the region near the Cu­FSW interface.
The Cu particles can clearly be seen in the FSW region. It can be observed that the valley
formation around Cu particles is similar to that seen in the LOM images from the Thin film
test. As discussed previously, this can be attributed to the localized galvanic cell between
the particle and the Al matrix.
Figure 4.21: LOM images of the FSW front surface taken near the FSW­Al interface from
Electrochemical analysis test.
The images shown in Fig 4.21 are of the sample after the conclusion of the Electrochem­
ical analysis. The images have been taken from the region near the FSW­Al interface.
Here, pitting in the AL matrix can be observed. Sharp cubic edges at corrosion sites that is
characteristic of crystallographic corrosion can also be seen in all the images. These sites
also have strand like features which can be seen only in the samples that uses AA6101
alloy as base material.
45
==PAGE:56==
4.4.2
Scanning Electron Microscopy
In this section, the types of corrosion visible along the cross­section of the samples ex­
posed to 0.01M NaCl gel for a period of about 1 month.
The first type of corrosion visible in the samples is due to the galvanic coupling of Cu
(white) and Al (grey) at the Cu­FSW interface. Shown in Fig 4.22, are the EDS elemental
composition maps of corrosion at the interface. It can be clearly seen that the corrosion
products are oxygen rich and grow into the Al matrix. The corrosion front seen here
is covered by a white gelatinous product of Al(OH)3 which solidifies upon drying. The
gelatinous Al(OH)3 which is pumped out by the corrosion front dries up eventually and
cracks in the form of mud­cracking and can be seen in the below image [53].
Figure 4.22: Galvanic corrosion at the Cu­FSW interface seen using BSED imaging in
sample B. EDS map of the same also added showing composition distribution.
Similar corrosion is seen in many other samples. Few have been added in Fig 4.23 for
reference. The initiation points for such corrosion is usually the exposed Cu­Al interface.
The corrosion progression seen here are characteristic to samples with a sharp interface.
It makes it easier for the corrosion to progress. It can be observed in the first image that
the corrosion is initiated at the Cu­FSW interface and then continues along the interface
while also branching out into the Al matrix of the FSW. Similar modes can also be observed
when the attack is from the back face of the FSW. Such attacks weakens the interface and
lead on to cause failure with the two halves separating at the Cu­FSW interface. If this
occurs on a busbar sample, then the build up of corrosion products along the interface
would lead to increase in resistance to the transfer of electricity. This loss is translated to
the heating of the joint which could locally accelerate the corrosion.
46
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.23: More examples of galvanic corrosion at the interface seen using BSED imag­
ing.(Fig: a. Sample C, b. Sample B, c. Sample D, d. Sample C)
Figure 4.24: Galvanic corrosion in the FSW region due to Cu dispersoids seen using
BSED imaging in sample K. EDS map of the same also added showing composition dis­
tribution.
47
==PAGE:58==
The second type of corrosion visible in the samples is due to the galvanic coupling of Cu
particles and Al within the FSW region that were dispersed due to the mixing action of
the tool. Shown in Fig 4.24, are the EDS elemental composition maps of corrosion in the
FSW region. It can be clearly seen that the corrosion propagation across the Al matrix is
also influenced by the Cu dispersoid spread within the FSW matrix. In the above image,
the corrosion travels preferentially from one Cu dispersoid to another. This can lead to the
weakening of the joint that can then fracture. If this occurs on a busbar sample, then the
build up of corrosion products within the joint would lead to increase in resistance to the
transfer of electricity. This loss is translated to the heating of the joint which could locally
accelerate the corrosion.
In Fig 4.25, few more examples of corrosion influenced by Cu dispersoids in the FSW
region are shown. Here, the corrosion initiation can also be seen. It first starts with the
galvanic pairing of a Cu particles on the surface with the Al matrix. This leads to the
dissolution of Al around the Cu particle. The Cu particle then falls out leaving a cavity that
then further exposes more Cu particles that are embedded in the matrix and the process
continues. In some cases, even the flash that overlays the Cu metal surface contains a
lot of Cu dispersoid. This leads to aggressive corrosion of the Al metal in the flash region.
Figure 4.25: More examples of galvanic corrosion in the FSW region due to Cu dispersoids
seen using BSED imaging. (Fig: a. Sample E, b. Sample J, c. Sample I, d. Sample E)
The third type of corrosion visible in the samples is local corrosion of the Al matrix. Shown
in Fig 4.26 are the EDS elemental composition maps of a corrosion site near the FSW­Al
interface. The local corrosion of aluminum alloy is essentially electrochemical corrosion,
and the occurrence of the electrochemical corrosion requires a difference in electrochem­
ical potential as a driving force [54][55]. When a potential difference occurs in a particular
48
==PAGE:59==
part of the alloy, corrosion will immediately occur once the corrosive environment is satis­
fied. It can be seen from the EDS map that the region of concern is free of Cu dispersoids
and is purely Al (AA6101). We also see the corrosion product in the form of Al(OH)3 that
has dried up and is seen in the oxygen map of the EDS scan. The presence of silicon can
be attributed to the sample processing (grinding).
Figure 4.26: Corrosion of aluminium near the FSW­Al interface seen using BSED imaging
of sample D. EDS map of the same also added showing composition distribution.
In Fig 4.27, few more examples of localized corrosion of Al matrix is seen. The first image
shows the formation of a pit on the surface. The consensus of investigators is that the
pitting morphology of aluminum alloys depends upon the electrochemical behavior of ma­
trix, nature of intermetallics, their composition and size of homogeneity of distribution. The
intermetallics provide active sites for pit initiation (when the intermetallic is cathodic with
respect to the Al matrix)[24]. This pit can extend deeper as shown in the second image as
the driving force for such corrosion is the difference in electrochemical potential. Also the
presence of fine grains in the nugget region exacerbates the corrosion progression. The
presence of Cl– ions from the NaCl gel also accelerates the formation of pits in Al alloys
as it easily breaks down the passivation layer that generally is produced by the metal[24].
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.27: More examples of corrosion of aluminium near the FSW­Al interface seen
using BSED imaging from the samples. (Fig: a. Sample D, b. Sample I, c. Sample D, d.
Sample F)
Figure 4.28: Amorphous state of corrosion seen using BSED imaging of sample D.EDS
map of the same also added showing composition distribution.
50
==PAGE:61==
The fourth type of corrosion visible in the samples is matrix dissolution that looks like a
fibrous root system that spreads. Shown in Fig 4.28, are the EDS elemental composition
maps of a corrosion site near the FSW front surface. We also see the corrosion product
in the form of Al(OH)3 that has dried up and is seen in the oxygen map of the EDS scan.
FSW process induces severe plastic deformation in the matrix material. This leads to
effect of grain refinement. Generally, grain­size reduction results in a significant increase
in volume fraction of the intra crystalline regions, such as grain boundaries and triple
junctions which are more chemically active than grain interiors. However, under conditions
where the material undergoes active dissolution, a higher share of inter crystalline regions
may enhance the corrosion rate of Al alloys [56]. It has also been found out that when
grain refinement takes place, there is higher chance of having larger ratios of high angle
grain boundary (HAGB) as compared to low angle grain boundary (LAGB).
In Fig 4.29, few more examples of localized corrosion of Al matrix is seen. Peripherical
corrosion or pit formation around Cu particles occurred in the sample . Additionally, dis­
solution of the matrix in random areas, where no large secondary phase particles were
observed, also occurred. Similar corrosion morphology is seen in Equal Channel Angular
Pressing (ECAP) processed Al as well. ECAP processing also induces ultra fine grain
refinement. It was found in the study that the pit elongation occurs along the forming axis
due to alignment of IMC’s [57]. But in the case of FSW process, the movement of material
is influenced by the shear force applied by the rotating tool as well as the flutes on the
pin. This leads to a complex structure of fine grains within the nugget zone. Thus the
elongation of pits in such cases could be three dimensional.
Figure 4.29: More examples corrosion in the nugget zone of the FSW seen using BSED
imaging.(Fig: a. Sample E, b. Sample F, c. Sample D, d. Sample C)
The fifth and last type of corrosion visible in the samples is crystallographic corrosion.
Shown in Fig 4.30, are the EDS elemental composition maps of a corrosion site near the
Cu­FSW interface.
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.30: Crystallographic corrosion seen using BSED imaging of sample F. ED0S
map of the same also added showing composition distribution.
Figure 4.31: More examples crystallographic corrosion in the FSW region seen using
BSED imaging with magnified view of the characteristic sharp edges.(Fig: a. Sample C,
b. Sample I, c. Sample D, d. Sample K)
52
==PAGE:63==
This type of corrosion specifically attacks grains with a certain crystallographic planes i.e.
{011} and {111}. Orlowska et. al.[58] found that the susceptibility of crystal orientation to
the onset of pitting attack in chloride solution varied in the order {111} > {110} > {100}.
They also found that the trend was evident from the pitting potential values and induction
time data, where the most noble potential value and longest induction time was recorded
for the {100} surface.
In Fig 4.31, few more examples of crystallographic corrosion in the Al matrix are shown.
Xinxin et. al.[37] stated that when the corrosion front reaches the grain boundary and the
crystallographic dissolution is interrupted due to the absence of a fast dissolving plane
on the other side of the grain boundary, a corrosion front develops that travels along the
grain boundary, penetrating deeper into the alloy instead of crossing the grain boundary
resulting in the morphology of intergranular corrosion. This model can be seen in the
images shown above.
53
==PAGE:64==
5
Summary
This thesis project was initiated in September, 2022 with the goal of understanding the
effect of changes on the process parameters with respect to corrosion behaviour and mi­
crostructure of the Al ­ Cu busbars manufactured using friction stir welding process. Appli­
cation of the said busbars is in future electric vehicles designs, as it provides component
level weight reduction and cost reduction. 10 samples of the same was provided for this
study with variation in their process parameters (material used, tool rotation speed, tool
feed rate, downward force applied and tool offset from the Al interface) by Norsk Hydro
A/S, Norway.
In order to understand the corrosion characteristics, the busbar samples were prepared
by sanding the front and back surface in order to expose the Al metal. A Gel Test was
then conducted to understand and visually identify the active regions on both the surfaces
(front and back) of the samples (one surface tested at a time). A gel made of 0.01M
concentration NaCl was spread over all the 10 samples and was left aside for 72 hours.
During this period, it was observed that in the front surface, the interface between Cu­
FSW and in some cases Al­FSW were showing high anodic activity and the Cu region of
the sample was high in cathodic activity. Similar results were found to occur in the back
surface with the anodically active region being limited to the Al­Cu interface.
To study the corrosion of the samples under environmental conditions, Thin Film Exper­
iment was conducted in which 50 µg/cm2 of NaCl was deposited on the front and back
surfaces (one surface tested at a time) of the 10 samples and then placed into the cli­
matic chamber that is programmed to run the STANAG 24 hour marine environment cli­
matic condition. Both the test ran for 72 hours with the samples being checked every
24 hours. It was observed that the FSW region in general was quite active in the front
surface. On analysis using LOM, it was found that the stir marks produced during the
FSW process have Cu particles embedded in them that have peripherical corrosion or pit
formation around Cu particles due to the galvanic coupling of the two metals. General
pitting corrosion is also visible on the FSW region. The Al­Cu interface on the back sur­
face is the active region with visible pitting in the Al region which again can be attributed
to the galvanic coupling of Cu and Al. With this test, it was concluded that the surface of
concern was the FSW surface which was on the front side of the samples.
Electrochemical analysis were then conducted to identify the corrosion characteristic of
the different busbar samples. To do this, FSW sections were prepared from each sample
and were cold embedded with a wire connected to its back surface using silver conduc­
tive epoxy. These samples were then ground and polished upto 1µm to achieve a flat
and clean surface. The samples were then placed in a potentiostat containing 300 ml of
electrolyte (3.5wt% NaCl), a mixed metal oxide counter and Ag/AgCl reference electrode.
The OCP values were found to be ­217.0 mV for Cu base metal, ­704.7 mV for AA1370,
­717.9 mV for AA6101 and between ­600.1 mV to 684.9 mV for the 10 FSW samples. In
order to gain clarity regarding the influence of the changes in the process parameter, the
samples are grouped into 5 groups with each group having variation in only one process
parameter and the rest remaining constant.
• On comparing the samples with change in Al alloy used (AA6101 & AA1370) it
was found that, the OCP values do not have much difference but AA6101 seemed
to have lower corrosion rate. This can be attributed to the presence of alloying
54
==PAGE:65==
elements in the 6000 series that increases the corrosion resistance of the alloy. The
samples were analysed using LOM images as well as SEM of the cross section. It
can be seen that the anodically active zones found in the Gel Test attributed to the
presence of Cu particles in the surface of the FSW region. The spread in AA6101
alloy was seen to be lesser when compared to AA1370 alloy (softer alloy).
• On comparing the samples with change in force applied it was found that, though
change in force applied does not offset the OCP value much for AA1370 alloy, it
does affect the rate of corrosion in the samples. It can be seen that increase in
force applied tends to reduce the rate of corrosion. Increase in the force applied
on the sample translates to increase in frictional force between the tool shoulder
and the sample surface which leads to increase in the heat generated. Many litera­
ture’s stated that increase in heat supplied to the metal during the welding process
translates to the dissolution of CuAl2 intermetallic particles which are responsible
for reduction in corrosion resistance of the welded region. In the case of AA6101
alloy, the same trend is seen i.e. increase in force applied leads to reduction of
rate of corrosion. But, there is a difference of around 76 mV in the OCP value of
the samples, with the sample having higher force applied on it acting nobler to the
other. This jump was attributed to the presence of more Cu than the other sample
(in terms of surface area).
• On comparing the samples with change in tool rotation speed it was found that,
increase in the tool rotation speed led to the reduction of the rate of corrosion as
well as made the sample more noble. Increase in the tool rotation speed translates
to increase in the frictional force which in turn translates to higher temperatures at
the weld zone. As discussed previously, increase in heat supplied to the metal dur­
ing the welding process translates to the dissolution of CuAl2 intermetallic particles
which are responsible for reduction in corrosion resistance of the welded region.
The samples considered for this analysis had their anodically active region at the
Cu­FSW interface. On further analysis using the LOM images as well as cross sec­
tion SEM images, it was noticed that the interface between the two metals is sharp
with almost no mixing. Review of previously published literature shows that such an
interface leads to pure mechanical properties.
• On comparing the samples with change in tool feed rate it was found that, increase
in the tool feed rate led to an increase in the corrosion resistance of the joint. The
joint produced using higher feed rate seemed to be more cathodic than the joint
produced using slower feed rate. Previous research conducted pointed towards the
feed rate not having significant effect on the corrosion characteristic of the joint.
Though the high feed rate joint has a higher OCP value when compared to the
slower feed rate joint, the difference between them is not large (5.44 mV).
• And finally, on comparing the samples with change in the tool offset from Al in­
terface it was found that, reduction in tool offset lead to an increase the cathodic
nature of the joint. Previous literature points towards the opposite i.e. increase in
the offset, increases the cathodic nature of the joint. On further analysis, it could
seen that the other parameters applied on the joints are on the lower end. Thus it
could be concluded that the parameters applied were insufficient to generate heat
required to plasticize the two materials sufficiently to have a proper joint. This was
confirmed by the cross section SEM image of the samples considered for the eval­
uation. It could be clearly seen that there exists a sharp interface between the Cu
and Al base metal with almost negligible interaction of the two material in the weld
55
==PAGE:66==
region.
Corrosion morphology analysis was also conducted to understand the modes of corrosion
on the samples. LOM and SEM were used for this analysis. LOM was used to analyse
the samples used in the Thin Film Test and the Electrochemical analysis. The samples
showed presence of Cu particles on the surface of the FSW region (joint). The particle
forms a galvanic couple with the Al matrix of the FSW region. This then causes periph­
erical corrosion around the particles. The same could be seen in the samples used for
electrochemical analysis. The Al matrix in the joint was prone to crystallographic corro­
sion and pitting corrosion. SEM­EDS analysis was conducted using samples from Gel
Test. The cross section was prepared for analysis by cold embedding them followed by
polishing of the samples to 1µm. Five modes of corrosion were identified in the sample
set.
• The first type was galvanic corrosion of Al due to the close proximity of Cu base metal
and Al base metal. These were seen in samples with sharp interface between the
base metals. The corrosion front seem to penetrate deep into the interface. This
could lead to mechanical failure of the joint as corrosion progresses.
• The second type of corrosion observed in the samples was galvanic corrosion due
to the presence of dispersed Cu particles in the FSW region. The initiation happens
at the surface by either pitting of Al matrix or galvanic coupling of a Cu particle with
the Al matrix. Once the surface Cu particle dislodges from its position it exposed
more Cu particles that are embedded in the matrix. Thus the corrosion front starts
tracking and growing along the edge of the Cu particles and continues to spread
into the Al matrix. This compromises the strength of the joint and could lead to
mechanical failure after a while.
• The third type of corrosion observed in the samples was pitting corrosion of the Al
matrix of the joint. This can occur due to dissimilarity in the electrochemical nature
of the grains in the matrix.
• The fourth type of corrosion observed was matrix dissolution within the nugget zone
of the weld. FSW process was known to induces severe plastic deformation in the
materials. Literature review conducted for this project provided evidence that heat
induced by the process parameters in addition to the plastic deformation leads to
grain refinement of the weld which produces fine equiaxed grains. Grain refinement
led to the formation of many high energy grains that then get corroded preferentially.
• The fifth and the final type of corrosion observed was crystallographic corrosion.
They could be identified by their characteristic sharp and cubic edges. This occurred
when the corrosion front hits the grain with {100} orientation. It was found in the
literature that the {100} orientation plane has high corrosion resistance as compared
to other orientations. The susceptibility of crystal orientation to the onset of pitting
attack in chloride solution varied in the order {111} > {110} > {100}.
56
==PAGE:67==
6
Future Work
The project aimed to establish a thorough understanding on the influence of process pa­
rameter of the FSW process on the corrosion and microstructure of Al­Cu busbars. How­
ever, the time limitation for the project did not provide sufficient scope to further study
the phenomenon observed during the experiments. Therefore, future projects could be
focused on the following topics:
• The same study can be repeated with a larger sample size and variations to show
how the trend of changes to the process parameters effects the corrosion behaviour
of the weld. This will enable us to accurately obtain the optimal parameters for best
performance. This study can also include mechanical performance analysis such as
tensile test and micro hardness test along the weld and XRD analysis of intermetallic
particles to confirm the findings of previously published papers.
• As it is a part to be used within the electrical circuit, the contribution of potential and
current to corrosion can be studied.
• A study on the different corrosion prevention methods can also be conducted to
find the most optimal countermeasure that can help prolong the product life during
application.
• Flow of current can cause the temperature of the component to rise up due to inter­
nal resistance which may lead to changes in micro structure within the weld zone,
which in turn can lead to changes in corrosion characteristics. This too can be an
interesting study.
• An EBSD analysis can also be helpful to understand the ratio of grain with high angle
grain boundaries (HAGB) and low angle grain boundaries (LAGB) within the weld
region. This would give us an idea as to how quickly would the weld deteriorate
under chloride condition applications.
• A study on the influence of variation on the pin geometry and tilt angle can also
be conducted to quantify their influence with respect to other parameters. It can
be seen in available literature that hexagonal pins with a tilt angle of 2◦is able to
produces better results and improve corrosion resistance in AA6082 sheet metal
butt welding.
• A comparative study can also be conducted with HyBond FSW process and the con­
ventional FSW process (used in this study) to identify the better performing process
and to understand the reason behind the performance.
57
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
List of Figures
1.1
Generic copper busbar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Global copper prices from 1986 to 2011 in USD per metric ton.[2] . . . . . .
2
1.3
Friction Stir Welding schematic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Aluminium life cycle [5] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
AA Designation of wrought aluminium and its alloys[7]. . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Variable Polarity GMAW ­ the effect of increasing (left to right) electrode
negative polarity from 0% to 30% on aluminium alloy welding.[11] . . . . . .
9
2.4
Laser and Laser­arc hybrid Welding.[11] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Schematic of Resistance spot welding process.[11] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6
Mechanical fastening methods.[11] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.7
Surfi­Sculpt pattern made in AA6082.[11]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
Schematic of the Friction Stir Welding process.[11] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.9
FSW Process in the butt configuration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.10 Polarization curve showing both Anodic(A) as well as Cathodic(K) curves. . 14
2.11 Schematic illustration of the mechanism of pitting corrosion in aluminium.[27] 16
2.12 Types of inter­granular corrosion affecting aluminium (Al). [24]
. . . . . . . 17
2.13 Micrographic view of exfoliating corrosion [33].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.14 Principle of Battery cell. Arrows indicate the motion of ions, which are re­
leased into the electrolyte by oxidation reactions at the anode and then
deposited on the cathode in reduction reactions.[24] . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.15 Photo micrograph of etched surface of mono crystalline aluminum approx­
imately parallel to (100).[36]. Etchant used­ Aqua regia, HF and FeCl3. . . . 21
2.16 SEM micrographs of the AA2024 alloy after immersion in a 3.5 wt.% NaCl
solution[37].Typical localized corrosion sites after 15 hrs of immersion. . . . 22
2.17 EBSD scan of the region ahead of the tool. Colours represent crystal ori­
entation and black lines indicate grain HAGB. Pole figures showcase the
grain orientation at different stages.[39]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.18 Weld cross section showing various metallurgical zones developed during
FSW of an aluminium alloy[40]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.1
Set 1 of FSW samples received from Hydro made using AA6101 alloy and
Cu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Set 2 of FSW samples received from Hydro made using AA6101 alloy and
AA1370 alloy with Cu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3
Prepared front and back FSW samples and after gel application (Sample A) 26
3.4
Prepared front and back FSW samples and after salt deposition (Sample A) 27
3.5
STANAG 24hr Marine condition testing profile for the Climatic chamber. . . 27
3.6
Potentiostat line diagram and setup used for the experiment . . . . . . . . . 28
3.7
Material preparation steps for electrochemical study . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.8
Material preparation step for microstructure study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.9
Zeiss Axio Observer metallography microscope [50].
. . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.10 Electron–sample interaction volume and types of signal generated. . . . . . 31
3.11 Quanta FEG­250 ESEM [51]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.1
Front surface of the samples after 4hrs of exposure to the Gel. . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Back surface of the samples after 4hrs of exposure to the Gel.
. . . . . . . 33
I
==PAGE:70==
4.3
Front surface of the samples after 72hrs of exposure to the STANAG marine
climatic cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.4
Back surface of the samples after 72hrs of exposure to the STANAG marine
climatic cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.5
Combined anodic polarization curves of all the FSW samples including pure
metal samples. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.6
Grouping of the sample to evaluate the effect of changes in material, force
applied, tool rotation speed, tool feed rate and tool offset from interface on
the corrosion behaviour of the FSW region. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.7
Effect of change of aluminium alloy on the corrosion characteristics of the
FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.8
Set of images showing the difference between sample G/H and I under test
condition.(1st row, Left: Gel Test, Top Right: Thin Film experiment, 2nd row:
Electrochemical analysis sample, 3rd row: SEM view of cross­section) . . . 37
4.9
Effect of change of force applied on the corrosion characteristics of the
FSW region in AA 1370. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.10 Set of images showing the difference between sample I, J and K/L under
test condition.(1st row, Left: Gel Test, Top Right: Thin Film experiment, 2nd
row: Electrochemical analysis sample, 3rd row: SEM view of cross­section) 38
4.11 Effect of change of force applied on the corrosion characteristics of the
FSW region in AA6101. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.12 Set of images showing the difference between sample F and G/H under
test condition.(1st row, Left: Gel Test, Top Right: Thin Film experiment, 2nd
row: Electrochemical analysis sample, 3rd row: SEM view of cross­section) 39
4.13 Effect of change of tool rotation speed on the corrosion characteristics of
the FSW region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.14 Set of images showing the difference between sample C and D under test
condition.(1st row, Left: Gel Test, Top Right: Thin Film experiment, 2nd
row: Electrochemical analysis sample, 3rd row: SEM view of cross­section) 41
4.15 Effect of change of tool feed rate on the corrosion characteristics of the
FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.16 Set of images showing the difference between sample D and E under test
condition.(1st row, Left: Gel Test, Top Right: Thin Film experiment, 2nd
row: Electrochemical analysis sample, 3rd row: SEM view of cross­section) 42
4.17 Effect of change of tool offset from interface on the corrosion characteristics
of the FSW region
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.18 Set of images showing the difference between sample G/H and I under test
condition.(1st row, Left: Gel Test, Top Right: Thin Film experiment, 2nd row:
Electrochemical analysis sample, 3rd row: SEM view of cross­section) . . . 44
4.19 LOM images of the FSW front surface from Thin film test. . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.20 LOM images of the FSW front surface taken near the Cu­FSW interface
from Electrochemical analysis test.(5x magnification) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.21 LOM images of the FSW front surface taken near the FSW­Al interface from
Electrochemical analysis test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.22 Galvanic corrosion at the Cu­FSW interface seen using BSED imaging in
sample B. EDS map of the same also added showing composition distribution. 46
4.23 More examples of galvanic corrosion at the interface seen using BSED
imaging.(Fig: a. Sample C, b. Sample B, c. Sample D, d. Sample C) . . . . 47
II
==PAGE:71==
4.24 Galvanic corrosion in the FSW region due to Cu dispersoids seen using
BSED imaging in sample K. EDS map of the same also added showing
composition distribution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.25 More examples of galvanic corrosion in the FSW region due to Cu dis­
persoids seen using BSED imaging. (Fig: a. Sample E, b. Sample J, c.
Sample I, d. Sample E)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.26 Corrosion of aluminium near the FSW­Al interface seen using BSED imag­
ing of sample D. EDS map of the same also added showing composition
distribution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.27 More examples of corrosion of aluminium near the FSW­Al interface seen
using BSED imaging from the samples. (Fig: a. Sample D, b. Sample I, c.
Sample D, d. Sample F)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.28 Amorphous state of corrosion seen using BSED imaging of sample D.EDS
map of the same also added showing composition distribution. . . . . . . . 50
4.29 More examples corrosion in the nugget zone of the FSW seen using BSED
imaging.(Fig: a. Sample E, b. Sample F, c. Sample D, d. Sample C) . . . . 51
4.30 Crystallographic corrosion seen using BSED imaging of sample F. ED0S
map of the same also added showing composition distribution. . . . . . . . 52
4.31 More examples crystallographic corrosion in the FSW region seen using
BSED imaging with magnified view of the characteristic sharp edges.(Fig:
a. Sample C, b. Sample I, c. Sample D, d. Sample K) . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.1 Gel Experiment progression for Specimen A. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
X
A.2 Gel Experiment progression for Specimen B. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
X
A.3 Gel Experiment progression for Specimen C. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XI
A.4 Gel Experiment progression for Specimen D. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XI
A.5 Gel Experiment progression for Specimen E. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XII
A.6 Gel Experiment progression for Specimen F.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XII
A.7 Gel Experiment progression for Specimen G. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIII
A.8 Gel Experiment progression for Specimen H. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIII
A.9 Gel Experiment progression for Specimen I. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIV
A.10 Gel Experiment progression for Specimen J.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIV
A.11 Gel Experiment progression for Specimen K. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XV
A.12 Gel Experiment progression for Specimen L.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XV
B.1 STANAG Marine 24 hour climatic profile for marine qualification.
. . . . . . XVI
C.1 Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen A along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XVII
C.2 Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen B along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XVII
C.3 Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen C along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XVIII
C.4 Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen D along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XVIII
C.5 Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen E along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIX
C.6 Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen F along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIX
C.7 Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen G along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XX
III
==PAGE:72==
C.8 Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen H along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XX
C.9 Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen I along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXI
C.10 Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen J along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXI
C.11 Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen K along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXII
C.12 Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen L along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXII
D.1 LOM images of Sample A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIII
D.2 LOM images of Sample B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIII
D.3 LOM images of Sample C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIV
D.4 LOM images of Sample D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIV
D.5 LOM images of Sample E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXV
D.6 LOM images of Sample F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXV
D.7 LOM images of Sample G/H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVI
D.8 LOM images of Sample I
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVI
D.9 LOM images of Sample J . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVII
D.10 LOM images of Sample K/L . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVII
E.1 SEM images of Sample A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVIII
E.2 SEM images of Sample B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVIII
E.3 SEM images of Sample C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIX
E.4 SEM images of Sample D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIX
E.5 SEM images of Sample E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXX
E.6 SEM images of Sample F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXX
E.7 SEM images of Sample G/H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXI
E.8 SEM images of Sample I
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXI
E.9 SEM images of Sample J . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXII
E.10 SEM images of Sample K/L . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXXII
IV
==PAGE:73==
List of Tables
3.1
Process parameters used to produce Set 1 of FSW samples. . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Process parameters used to produce Set 2 of FSW samples. . . . . . . . . 26
3.3
Chemical composition (wt %) of AA6101 aluminium alloy [45]. . . . . . . . . 26
3.4
Chemical composition (wt %) of AA1370 aluminium alloy [46]. . . . . . . . . 26
3.5
Potentiostat setup parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
V
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
[1] J. Günter, K. Kundig, and I. C. Association, “Copper: Its trade, manufacture, use,
and environmental status,” Materials Park Ohio: ASM International, vol. 2.03, 1999.
[2] diversitytimes, “Copper price annually and monthly.”
https://divercitytimes.com/
commodity/copper.php, accessed: 12.01.2023.
[3] J. W. Richards, Aluminium; its history, occurrence, properties, metallurgy and appli­
cations, including its alloys. Philadelphia, H. C. Baird co.1, 1896. https://archive.
org/details/cu31924003633751, accessed: 19.10.2022.
[4] Oversigt
over
det
Kongelige
Danske
videnskabernes
selskabs
virksomhed.
Kjövenhavn :
Tryt hos Kgl. Hofbogtrykker Bianco Luno, [1814]­1931.
https:
//babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=osu.32435054254693&view=1up&seq=18, accessed:
19.10.2022.
[5] Norsk Hydro, “Aluminium life cycle.”
https://www.hydro.com/en/aluminium/about-
aluminium/aluminium-life-cycle/, accessed: 12.10.2022.
[6] O. S. I. Fayomi, P. Popoola, and N. Udoye, Effect of Alloying Element on the Integrity
and Functionality of Aluminium­Based Alloy. 12 2017.
[7] European Aluminium Association, “The Aluminium Automotive Manual.”
https://
www.european-aluminium.eu/media/1533/aam-materials-3-designation-system.pdf, ac­
cessed: 07.11.2022.
[8] Smiths Metal Centres, “Aluminium 5000 series.” https://www.smithmetal.com/5000-
series-aluminium-alloys.htm#:~:text=5000%20series%20aluminium%20is%20alloyed,
use%20in%20elevated%20temperature%20service., accessed: 7.12.2022.
[9] Smiths Metal Centres, “Aluminium 6000 series.” https://www.smithmetal.com/6000-
series-aluminium-alloys.htm, accessed: 7.12.2022.
[10] Smiths Metal Centres, “Aluminium 7000 series.” https://www.smithmetal.com/7000-
series-aluminium-alloys.htm, accessed: 7.12.2022.
[11] C. N. D. Peters, “Making the link ­ effective joining technology for aluminium in the
21st century,” Aluminium Surface Science and Technology Conference, 2006.
[12] R. Sathiskumar, N. Murugan, I. Dinaharan, and S. Vijay, “Effect of traverse speed on
microstructure and micro hardness of cu/b 4c surface composite produced by friction
stir processing,” Transactions of the Indian Institute of Metals, vol. 66, pp. 333–337,
2013.
[13] T. Smith, “The effect of tool rotation speed and clamping on deformation in friction
stir welded 6061­t6511 aluminum extrusions,” University of New Orleans Theses and
Dissertations, 2011.
[14] K. Elangovan, V. Balasubramanian, and M. Valliappan, “Effect of tool pin profile and
tool rotational speed on mechanical properties of friction stir welded aa6061 alu­
minium alloy,” Mater Manufacturing Process, vol. 23, pp. 251–260, 2008.
[15] X. Liu and G. Frankel, “Effects of compressive stress on localized corrosion in
aa2024­t3,” Corrosion Science, vol. 48, pp. 3309–3329, 2006.
VI
==PAGE:75==
[16] I. Galvão, R. Leal, A. J. R. Loureiro, and D. M. Rodrigues, “Material flow in het­
erogeneous friction stir welding of aluminium and copper thin sheets,” Science and
Technology of Welding and Joining, vol. 15­8, pp. 654–660, 2010.
[17] C. W. Tan, Z. Jiang, L. Li, Y. Chen, and X. Chen, “Microstructural evolution and
mechanical properties of dissimilar al–cu joint produced by friction stir welding,” Ma­
terials and Design, vol. 51, pp. 466–473, 2013.
[18] P. Xue, D. Ni, D. Wang, B. Xiao, and Z. Ma, “Effect of friction stir welding parame­
ters on the microstructure and mechanical properties of the dissimilar al–cu joints,”
Materials Science and Engineering A, vol. 528, pp. 5723–5727, 2011.
[19] S. Tohid, A. Abdollah­zadeh, and B. Sazgari, “Weldability and mechanical properties
of dissimilar aluminum–copper lap joints made by friction stir welding,” Journal of
Alloys and Compounds, vol. 490(1­2), pp. 652–655, 2010.
[20] A. K. Kadian and P. Biswas, “The study of material flow behaviour in dissimilar mate­
rial fsw of aa6061 and cu­b370 alloys plates,” Journal of Manufacturing Processes,
vol. 34, pp. 96–105, 2018.
[21] G. Yong, F. Hidetoshi, T. Tsumura, K. Toru, and N. Kazuhiro, “Three defect types in
friction stir welding of aluminum die casting alloy.,” Materials Science and Engineer­
ing: A, vol. 415(1­2), pp. 250–254, 2006.
[22] P. Kah, C. Vimalraj, J. Martikainen, and R. Suoranta, “Factors influencing al­cu weld
properties by intermetallic compound formation,” International Journal of Mechanical
and material Engineering, 2015.
[23] The Electrochemical Society, “Corrosion and Corrosion Prevention.” https://www.
electrochem.org/corrosion-science/, accessed: 14.11.2022.
[24] C. Vargel, Corrosion of Aluminium. Elsevier, 2020.
[25] B. Phul, Corrosion Testing and Evaluation, ch. Evaluating uniform corrosion. ASM
International, 2003.
[26] M. Reboul, “Me´thodes de mesure de la corrosion ge´ne´ralise´e de l’aluminium et
de ses alliages,” Revue de l’Aluminium, pp. 419:62–73, 1973.
[27] K. Mutombo and M. Du Toit, Corrosion Fatigue Behaviour of Aluminium 5083­H111
Welded Using Gas Metal Arc Welding Method. 12 2011.
[28] G. Thompson, “Corrosion and filming behavior of aluminium and its alloys,” Materials
Science Forum, pp. 95–106, 1996.
[29] A. Aballe, M. Bethencourt, F. Botana, M. Cano, and M. Marcos, “Influence of the
cathodic intermetallics distribution on the reproducibility of the electrochemical mea­
surements on aa5083 alloy in nacl solutions,” Corrosion Science, pp. 161–180, 2003.
[30] C. Y. Chao, L. F. Lin, and D. D. MacDonald, “A point defect model for anodic passive
films: I. film growth kinetics,” Journal of the Electrochemical Society, pp. 1187–1194,
1981.
[31] S. Kim, U. Erb, K. Aust, and G. Palumbo, “Grain boundary character distribution and
intergranular corrosion behavior in high purity aluminum.,” Scripta Materialia, vol. 44,
pp. 835–839, 2001.
VII
==PAGE:76==
[32] S. Ketcham and I. Shaffer, Localized Corrosion d Cause of Metal Failure, ch. Exfoli­
ation corrosion of aluminum alloys., pp. 3–16. ASTM STP 516, 1972.
[33] G. A.,
“Corrosion intercristalline et corrosion sous contrainte des alliages
d’aluminium.,” Confe´rence Pechiney, 1970.
[34] H. Sutton, E. Liddiard, B. Chalmers, and F. Champion Monthly Journal of the Institute
of Metals, 1945.
[35] V. V. Nelson, O. T. Maria, S. V. Mamiè, and P. C.Maritza, “Microbiologically influenced
corrosion in aluminium alloys 7075 and 2024,” in Aluminium Alloys (S. Sivasankaran,
ed.), ch. 12, Rijeka: IntechOpen, 2017.
[36] H. O. Theodore, “Influence of crystallographic orientation on the corrosion rate of
aluminum in acids and alkalies,” Journal of Research of the National Bureau of Stan­
dards, vol. 58­3, pp. 157–167, 1957.
[37] X. Zhang, X. Zhou, T. Hashimoto, and B. Liu, “Localized corrosion in aa2024­t351
aluminium alloy: Transition from intergranular corrosion to crystallographic pitting,”
Materials Characterization, vol. 130, pp. 230–236, 2017.
[38] TWI Ltd, “SOLVING PREFERENTIAL WELD CORROSION IN C­MN STEELS.”
https://www.twi-global.com/technical-knowledge/faqs/faq-what-are-the-causes-of-
and-solutions-to-the-preferential-weld-corrosion-in-c-mn-steels, accessed: 14.11.2022.
[39] R. Fonda, J. A. Wert, A. Reynolds, and W. Tang, “Initial microstructural evolution
during friction stir welding,” 2007.
[40] H. Sidhar, N. Y. Martinez, R. S. Mishra, and J. Silvanus, “Friction stir welding of al–
mg–li 1424 alloy,” Materials Design, vol. 106, pp. 146–152, 2016.
[41] D. Jacquin and G. Guillemot, “A review of microstructural changes occurring during
fsw in aluminium alloys and their modelling,” Journal of Materials Processing Tech­
nology, vol. 288, p. 116706, 2021.
[42] M. W. Mahoney, C. G. Rhodes, J. G. Flintoff, W. H. Bingel, and R. A. Spurling,
“Properties of friction­stir­welded 7075 t651 aluminum,” Metallurgical and Materials
Transactions A, vol. 29, pp. 1955–1964, 1998.
[43] A. Esmaeili, M. K. B. Givi, and H. R. Z. Rajani, “A metallurgical and mechanical study
on dissimilar friction stir welding of aluminum 1050 to brass (cuzn30),” Materials Sci­
ence and Engineering, vol. 528, pp. 7093–7102, 2011.
[44] J. Ouyang, E. Yarrapareddy, and R. Kovacevic, “Microstructural evolution in the fric­
tion stir welded 6061 aluminum alloy (t6­temper condition) to copper,” Journal of
Materials Processing Technology, vol. 172, pp. 110–122, 2006.
[45] Hydro, “Alloy 6101.” https://www.hydro.com/Document/Index?name=Alloy%206101.
pdf&id=560721, accessed: 14.11.2022.
[46] Lamifil, “ALUMINIUM SPECIALITY WIRES ­ EN AW­1370.”
https://lamifil.be/al-
speciality-wires/en-aw-1370/, accessed: 14.11.2022.
[47] M. Jariyaboon, A. Davenport, R. Ambat, B. Connolly, S. Williams, and D. Price, “Ef­
fect of cryogenic cooling on corrosion of friction stir welded AA7010−T7651,” Anti­
Corrosion Methods and Materials, vol. 57, no. 2, 2010.
VIII
==PAGE:77==
[48] M. Jariyaboon, A. Davenport, R. Ambat, B. Connolly, S. Williams, and D. Price,
“The effect of welding parameters on the corrosion behaviour of friction stir welded
AA202–T351,” Corrosion Science, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 877–909, 2007.
[49] R. Keshavamurthy, C. Ramesh, G. Pradeep Kumar, and V. Tambrallimath, “Chap­
ter 2 ­ experimental investigation of tribocorrosion,” in Tribocorrosion (A. Siddaiah,
R. Ramachandran, and P. L. Menezes, eds.), pp. 17–42, Academic Press, 2021.
[50] Zeiss, “ZEISS Axio Observer for Materials.” https://www.zeiss.com/microscopy/en/
products/light-microscopes/widefield-microscopes/axio-observer-for-materials.html, ac­
cessed: 12.10.2022.
[51] ELECMI, “ENVIRONMENTAL SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPE: SEM­
QUANTA FEG­250 (ESEM).”
https://elecmi.es/en/sem-quanta-feg-250-esem/, ac­
cessed: 12.10.2022.
[52] E. AKINLABI, A. ANDREWS, and S. AKINLAB, “Effects of processing parameters on
corrosion properties of dissimilar friction stir welds of aluminium and copper,” Trans­
actions of Nonferrous Metals Society of China, vol. 24­5, pp. 1323–1330, 2014.
[53] Z. Ahmad, A. Ul­Hamid, and A.­A. B.J, “The corrosion behavior of scandium al­
loyed al 5052 in neutral sodium chloride solution,” Corrosion Science, vol. 43, no. 7,
pp. 1227–1243, 2001.
[54] V. Guillaumin and G. Mankowski, “Localized corrosion of 6056 t6 aluminium alloy in
chloride media,” Corrosion Science, vol. 42­1, pp. 105–125, 2000.
[55] F. Eckermann, T. Suter, P. J. Uggowitzer, A. Afseth, and P. Schmutz, “Investigation
of the exfoliation­like attack mechanism in relation to al–mg–si alloy microstructure,”
Corrosion Science, vol. 50­7, pp. 2085–2093, 2008.
[56] E. Ura­Bińczyk, “Improvement of pitting­corrosion resistance of ultrafine­grained
7475 al alloy by aging,” Materials, vol. 15, no. 1, 2022.
[57] C. Rochet, M. Veron, E. Rauch, T. Lowe, B. Arfaei, A. Laurino, J. Harouard, and
C. Blanc, “Influence of equal­channel angular pressing on the microstructure and
corrosion behaviour of a 6xxx aluminium alloy for automotive conductors,” Corrosion
Science, vol. 166, p. 108453, 2020.
[58] M. Orłowska, E. Ura­Bińczyk, and B. Adamczyk­Cieślak, “Evolution of pitting cor­
rosion resistance and mechanical properties in ultrafine­grained commercially pure
aluminium during annealing.,” Material Science, vol. 56, pp. 16726–16744, 2021.
IX
==PAGE:78==
A
Appendix: Gel Experiment Results
Figure A.1: Gel Experiment progression for Specimen A.
Figure A.2: Gel Experiment progression for Specimen B.
X
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.3: Gel Experiment progression for Specimen C.
Figure A.4: Gel Experiment progression for Specimen D.
XI
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.5: Gel Experiment progression for Specimen E.
Figure A.6: Gel Experiment progression for Specimen F.
XII
==PAGE:81==
Figure A.7: Gel Experiment progression for Specimen G.
Figure A.8: Gel Experiment progression for Specimen H.
XIII
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.9: Gel Experiment progression for Specimen I.
Figure A.10: Gel Experiment progression for Specimen J.
XIV
==PAGE:83==
Figure A.11: Gel Experiment progression for Specimen K.
Figure A.12: Gel Experiment progression for Specimen L.
XV
==PAGE:84==
B
Appendix : STANAG Marine
environment temperature and humidity
profile
Figure B.1: STANAG Marine 24 hour climatic profile for marine qualification.
XVI
==PAGE:85==
C
Appendix : Thin Film Experiment
Results
Figure C.1: Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen A along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
Figure C.2: Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen B along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
XVII
==PAGE:86==
Figure C.3: Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen C along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
Figure C.4: Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen D along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
XVIII
==PAGE:87==
Figure C.5: Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen E along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
Figure C.6: Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen F along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
XIX
==PAGE:88==
Figure C.7: Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen G along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
Figure C.8: Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen H along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
XX
==PAGE:89==
Figure C.9: Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen I along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
Figure C.10: Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen J along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
XXI
==PAGE:90==
Figure C.11: Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen K along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
Figure C.12: Thin Film Experiment progression for Specimen L along with optical mi­
croscopy of Front(Top) FSW region.
XXII
==PAGE:91==
D
Appendix : Light optical microscopy
after Electrochemical analysis
Figure D.1: LOM images of Sample A
Figure D.2: LOM images of Sample B
XXIII
==PAGE:92==
Figure D.3: LOM images of Sample C
Figure D.4: LOM images of Sample D
XXIV
==PAGE:93==
Figure D.5: LOM images of Sample E
Figure D.6: LOM images of Sample F
XXV
==PAGE:94==
Figure D.7: LOM images of Sample G/H
Figure D.8: LOM images of Sample I
XXVI
==PAGE:95==
Figure D.9: LOM images of Sample J
Figure D.10: LOM images of Sample K/L
XXVII
==PAGE:96==
E
Appendix : Scanning Electron
Microscopy
Figure E.1: SEM images of Sample A
Figure E.2: SEM images of Sample B
XXVIII
==PAGE:97==
Figure E.3: SEM images of Sample C
Figure E.4: SEM images of Sample D
XXIX
==PAGE:98==
Figure E.5: SEM images of Sample E
Figure E.6: SEM images of Sample F
XXX
==PAGE:99==
Figure E.7: SEM images of Sample G/H
Figure E.8: SEM images of Sample I
XXXI
==PAGE:100==
Figure E.9: SEM images of Sample J
Figure E.10: SEM images of Sample K/L
XXXII
==PAGE:101==
XXXIII
==PAGE:102==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Produktionstorvet, Building 425
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://construct.dtu.dk/
