==PAGE:1==
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal
growth silicon production
Master Thesis
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
DTU Manufacturing Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
Master Thesis
April, 2023
By
Francesco Tumminello
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, DTU Manufacturing Engineering, Kollegiebakken 13A, 2800
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Semiconductors are required to construct electronic devices.
The majority of
semiconductors are based on monocrystalline silicon which can be obtained with
an high degree of purity thanks to the float-zone method. This technique is based
on the gradual melting and recrystallization of a silicon polycrystal into mono. Dur-
ing the first production stages, it may happen that some oxide forms on the surface
of the polycrystal.
The purpose of this work is to create an automated system based on deep learning
to detect the presence of the oxide layer on the polycrystal surface, and in case
classify it according to the defined types. Given the fact that some oxide layer
types are rarer than others, training a deep learning model to recognize those rare
examples represents a challenge. To deal with this, different learning criteria (loss
functions) have been applied to make the model focus more on the rarest oxide
layer types; also, generative models have been used to create artificial images
of the rarest classes, to increase in this way the number of rare examples from
which the main classification model could learn.
The final results showed how the addition of artificial images increased the per-
formance of the classification model for some configurations, despite the fact that
the generative models were trained with a low number of rare examples.
This methodology allowed designing a classification model matching the perfor-
mance requirements, whose output returns a visual representation of the evolution
of the oxide layer for a certain production run.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Matteo Calaon, Senior Researcher, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engi-
neering - Manufacturing Engineering
Tingting Chen, PhD Student, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering -
Manufacturing Engineering
iv
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Silicon Monocrystal Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Oxide Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Project aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Problem Definition
9
2.1
Setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Related Works
13
3.1
Multi-label Classification Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Methodology
26
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Proposed solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Visual Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Experiments
38
5.1
Experiments Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Experiment Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4
Experimets’ Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Results and Discussion
53
6.1
β-VAE Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Loss Function Parameters Tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3
Comparison of Experiments’ Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.4
Classification Plot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Conclusion
58
Bibliography
59
A Plots and Results
63
A.1 β-VAE Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.2 Loss Function Tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
v
==PAGE:8==
A.3 Model Configurations’ Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
vi
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The importance of semiconductors has risen sharply in the last years because
of the evolution of electronics and optoelectronics. Among semiconductors, the
vast majority are based on monocrystalline silicon [1], which explains why the de-
mand for high-quality monocrystalline silicon wafers is continuously increasing. At
present, the industrial processes dealing with the realization of such monocrystals
are: the Czochralski (CZ) and the float-zone (FZ) methods. The starting point is
always the same: a silicon polycrystal is first melted, then, thanks to a seed 1,
the monocrystal will start growing in the desired direction (the one pointed by the
seed).
1.1
Silicon Monocrystal Production
1.1.1
CZ method
The polycrystal is melted in a crucible, and the seed’s tip is immersed in the liquid.
Once the contact is established, the seed is pulled upwards while rotating around
its main axis, and the crystallization begins (see Figure 1.1).
Figure 1.1: CZ process schematics [2]
1”Seed” stands for a small monocrystal of 4–7 mm in diameter and 5–10 cm in lenght.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
1
==PAGE:10==
At first, the crystal is forced to grow in a thin shape (2-3mm in diameter) in order
to make the dislocations2 grow out. Once all dislocations have been cut out, it is
possible to increase the crystal’s diameter to the desired one.
The problem with the CZ method lies in the degree of purity that is possible to
obtain in the final product. Because of the high melting temperature of silicon
(1414°C), the crucible is often made of silicon dioxide (quartz): the direct con-
tact with the crucible and the very high temperature represents favorable condi-
tions for impurities coming from the crucible itself (mainly oxygen) to contaminate
the molten material [3]. Unfortunately, there are several practical applications
for which an high degree of purity is mandatory. High-power devices in general
present this requirement.
1.1.2
FZ method
Figure 1.2: FZ process detail [4]
The floating zone method has been designed to address the issue of contamina-
tion: the idea is to melt and recrystallize immediately subsequent sections of the
polycrystal into mono in a continuous process. Moreover, the other key factor re-
lies upon the fact that the process goes on without any direct contact, apart from
the one between the holders and the tips of mono and poly. Compared to the
CZ method, here only a small fraction of the feed polycrystal rod is melted and
then recrystallized right away as mono. In addition, the fusion into the crucible is
substituted by induction melting which allows to heat up the poly in a contactless
way.
2Dislocations are generated following the dipping of the seed crystal into the molten material.
2
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.3: FZ process schematics. (1) producing the melt drop, (2) forming the
feed tip, (3) creating the thin neck, (4) making the cone, (5) growing the cylinder
and (6) closing the crystal. [5]
The process takes place inside a protective chamber, which is filled with argon in
order to protect the hot material from oxidation. It can be divided into 6 phases
(Figure 1.3)[5]:
0 The feed rod is pre-heated to increase its electrical conductivity.
1 The lower end of the feed rod is moved toward the inductor. The tip is melted
in order to form a liquid drop of material whose dimension allows it to have
it hanging above the inductor itself.
2 The seed crystal is moved upwards, through the inductor’s hole, and dipped
into the drop of molten material. Then, the seed is heated up in order to melt
its tip together with the drop. The contact between the hot drop and the cold
crystal generates dislocations.
3 To cut off dislocations, it is necessary to make the monocrystal start growing
with a thin neck of a diameter of about 2–3 mm. Molten material will start
flowing through the inductor’s hole, and crystallization starts.
4 Cone phase Once the thin neck has reached a sufficient length of 30 to 50
mm, it is possible to start enlarging the monocrystal’s diameter by adjusting
the process parameters. The diameter will increase up to the desired one.
5 Cylinder phase The crystal grows in this phase with constant diameter. This
is the part that in the end will be sliced to create the wafers.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
3
==PAGE:12==
6 Closing the crystal In this phase, the feed rod is separated from the molten
zone by pulling it upwards.
In Figure 1.4 it is possible to see an example of a feed rod and final product.
Figure 1.4: Polycrystalline silicon feed rod (left) [5]. Silicon monocrystal (right) [5]
1.2
The Oxide Layer
Thanks to the FZ technology, it is possible to create silicon monocrystals of ex-
tremely high quality with minimal impurities, specifically low levels of oxygen.
However, due to the limited capacity of FZ machines and residual impurities within
the machinery, an oxide layer may form on the surface of unmelted polycrystalline
silicon. This is caused by oxygen contamination, and may have a negative impact
on the quality of the final monocrystal. If the final product does not meet the cus-
tomer’s standards, it is considered scrap and must be discarded. To minimize the
waste of materials, time, and energy, it would be desirable to implement an au-
tomated system for oxide layer detection in order to take corrective action at an
early stage.
The FZ process’s cone phase has been chosen as the stage for studying the
oxide layer’s development, as it’s the process’ phase where the formation is most
likely to occur. Each production run is recorded by the integrated camera system in
order to monitor the process and measure all the relevant geometrical quantities.
These production run videos are the main source of data for this work; in fact, all
the images analyzed were sampled from those videos. In Figure 1.5 it is possible
to see a schematic representation from different angles of the chamber in which
the process takes place. The front presents a window that enables operators to
monitor the situation, while on the back, some holes allow the camera system to
actually see the internal side of the chamber and record the production runs.
4
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.5: Schematic representation of the chamber in which the FZ process
takes place (front, back, and side). During the process the polycrystal (top) and
the mono (bottom) are counter-rotating and moving vertically, this is allowed by
the respective holders.
The comparison between a normal image and an abnormal image with an oxide
layer is depicted in 1.6. The normal image displays a polycrystalline silicon surface
that has a uniform texture and intensity. The surface smoothly transitions from a
darker shade on the top side to a brighter one at the melting area. On the other
hand, the abnormal image shows an intensity gradient along the edge of the oxide
layer.
Furthermore, the oxide layer normally presents in different forms. Indeed, four
classes have been identified during this work:
Uniform The polycrystal surface is covered by an uniform oxide layer, which confers
a bright appearance on the camera. See Figure 1.7a
Shadow A patch of oxide of variable geometry and dimension with defined borders
that covers a part of the crystal surface. See Figure 1.7b.
Spot Small circular spots within the oxide film. These spots may overlap, and so
generate different shapes with respect to the pure circular one. In general,
they are located on the lower half of the polycrystal surface, most of the time
on the edge right before the melt area. See Figure 1.7c.
Spot on shadow A patch of oxide with small spots on the bottom edge. Despite ”shadow” and
”spot” are already present as classes, ”spot on shadow” has been inserted
in this framework since a situation like the one described in this case is very
frequent. Also, the spots here are in general smaller compared to the ones
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
5
==PAGE:14==
in the ”spot” class. In addition, the ”spot on shadow” layer is usually present
near the middle of the polycrystal surface, while the ”spot” one is generally
located at the border before the melt area. See Figure 1.7d
These oxide layer types are not mutually exclusive. Instead, they can be present
at the same time in different degrees, but always with the general features previ-
ously described. For instance, in Figure 1.8a it is possible to see both the presence
of ”shadow” and of ”spot”: here the shadow has a different shape with respect to
the one of Figure 1.7b, but still it is a patch of oxide with clear borders. Moreover,
in Figure 1.8d ”shadow”, ”spot” and ”spot on shadow” are present at the same
time. As a matter of fact, there is a uniform film of oxide covering part of the poly-
crystal surface. Also, in some locations, there are small dots on the bottom edge
of the shadow, while in others not; in addition, larger dots are present at the border
with the melt zone.
Different oxide layers and degrees need different corrective operations. An op-
erator should be present to monitor the situation, but since a production run may
last 10–20 hours, this is a cost that is not negligible. On the other hand, there
would also be the human factor to consider, which means that some errors in the
classification of the oxide layer might happen. Hence, it is necessary to achieve
automated oxide layer evaluation, laying the foundation for correlating it with other
data from production. In this way, it would be possible to understand the root
causes leading to these flaws and take action to counter them.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.6: Comparison between a normal image (a) and another image with
oxide layer (b).
1.3
Project aim
The objective of this work is therefore to successfully train a ML model with clas-
sified images coming directly from production.
6
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:15==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1.7: Oxide layer types.
(a) uniform, (b) shadow, (c) spot, (d) spot on
shadow
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1.8: Oxide layer types combinations. (a) shadow + spot, (b) shadow + spot
on shadow, (c) spot on shadow + spot, (d) spot on shadow + shadow + spot
With ”classified images” is intended that each image has, in case oxide is present,
one or more labels pointing out the observed layer types. So, one or more oxide
layer types can be present on the poly surface in the same image: a classification
task like this corresponds to what in literature is called ”multi-label classification
problem”. Hence, at the end of training, the model should be able to automatically
detect the presence of oxide in the input images, and in case classify them by
assigning one or more labels. Once the classification system is set, this can be
fed with images sampled from a production run video. By plotting the predicted
labels of each video frame it would be possible to obtain a visual representation
of the evolution of the oxide layer over time. A visual output like this could allow to
correlate layer observed at a certain time instant with the relative process param-
eters. This would ease the information extraction and so the root cause analysis,
leading in this way to a full understanding of what causes the oxide layer and what
should be done to avoid it.
The next sections are organized as follows:
• Problem Definition explains the main challenges encountered in this work.
• Related Works provides a little bit of background together with a brief view
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.9: Images are sampled from the recordings of the production runs, they
are then fed to the classification model which outputs predictions about the oxide
layer types present in each input image. The predictions are then plotted to have
a visual representation of the evolution of the oxide layer for a production run.
on the state of the art for what concerns image recognition and multi-label
classification.
• Methodology explains the approach followed to reach the objective of this
work.
• Experiments illustrates the setup and the design of the experiments carried
out to get the data on which conclusions are drawn.
• Results and discussion shows the obtained data and their interpretation.
• Conclusion
• Appendix A groups all the results of the experiments and the relative plots.
8
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:17==
2
Problem Definition
2.1
Setting
Topsil GlobalWafers A / S provided videos of the cone phase of some production
runs. Images have been extracted from these videos and then labelled. With
’labelling’ it is intended the assignation of one or more attributes to the images
pointing out the oxide layer types observed in the considered frame. These labels
constitute the ground truth with which the model will deal during the training phase:
the purpose of this is to make the model able to recognize different defect types
automatically once training is finished.
Whit that said, it is possible to see this as a typical multi-label classification
problem (MLC). With ”multi-label classification” is intended a type of classification
task in which each instance of a dataset is associated with one or multiple label-
s/categories. This must not be confused with multi-class classification (MCC)
tasks: as a matter of fact, also in MCC problems there are multiple labels avail-
able, but the difference is that each data point can be assigned to only one class
out of multiple classes; while in MLC tasks, each data point can be assigned to
one or more classes out of multiple classes. See Figure 2.1.
2.1.1
Desired Output
As already said, the object of this project is to provide an automated system for
oxide layer classification. Hence, the final output of the model should be a visual
Figure 2.1: Difference between multi-class classification and multi-label classifi-
cation tasks.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
9
==PAGE:18==
representation of the evolution of the defect over time for a certain production run.
An output like this, besides the useful correlation of the defect with process pa-
rameters discussed in 1.3, would point out also the presence of eventual patterns
in the defect evolution resulting from the comparison of several production runs.
2.2
Challenges
2.2.1
Creating the Dataset
The majority of machine learning models are designed under a supervised learn-
ing framework [6]. This means that all the images fed to the model are labelled
images. Some of the most popular datasets in the state of the art are reported in
Table 2.1: the number of labelled images within each one of them is enormous.
Hence, the first issue with which practical applications have to deal is the con-
struction of a dataset large enough to actually give the possibility to a model to
learn from it.
Unfortunately, in many applications, having an higher number of labelled instances
would be desired, indeed it has been shown how the performance of tasks such
as image classification increases linearly with the size of the training dataset [6].
The fact is that to get labelled items an expert/pool of experts is often required
[7], in addition, collecting such a large amount of data and labelling a sufficient
number of instances is a whole other project.
Name
Size
Description
MNIST
10 classes. 60000 train
samples and 10000 test
samples.
Dataset of handwritten digits.
CIFAR
CIFAR10, 10 classes. 50000
train images and 10000 test
images.
CIFAR100, 100 classes. Each
class has 600 images.
Small-medium size dataset of
RGB images.
ImageNet
14,197,122 images of which
1,034,908 have bounding box
annotations. 1000 classes.
The very large size makes this
dataset the standard one for
deep learning applied to the
image domain.
Table 2.1: General overview of popular datasets
10
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:19==
2.2.2
Unbalance in the data
Standard models usually work on the assumption of balanced class distribution,
which means that each class is equally represented within the dataset, but in real-
world problems, this assumption is often not satisfied. Indeed, in many cases,
datasets are strongly unbalanced towards one or more classes. The central prob-
lem with imbalanced learning is that standard learning algorithms can be severely
affected by imbalanced data, compromising their performance. Within the multi-
label classification problem, there are different perspectives from which unbalance
can be seen: unbalance between labels and unbalance within labels [8].
Unbalance Between Labels
This kind of unbalance is observable in the number of examples for each label
and/or combination of labels. In this case, the result of labelling can be seen in
Figure 2.2. The figure shows the number of examples that each class and combi-
nations of classes present. It is evident how some classes/combinations outnum-
ber others: out of roughly 10.000 labelled images, about a half of them belong
to the ”shadow” class while a quarter of them are just ”normal”1 images. There-
fore all other classes/combinations are concentrated in a quarter of the labelled
dataset.
Figure 2.2: Labels distribution
In the end, a strong unbalance in the dataset prevents the model to learn to rec-
ognize those features that present a very low number of samples compared to
1Images that do not present any oxide layer are labelled as ”normal”
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
11
==PAGE:20==
others. Therefore, the final model’s prediction accuracy may suffer because of
this if nothing is done to address this issue.
Unbalance Within Labels
Consider a single image, in the optics of a multi-label classification problem, this
image presents on average only a couple of features among the ones that the
problem considers, these features are therefore called positives and they repre-
sent the foreground information. On the other hand, the image may have many
other features that are not what the model is looking for: these other features are
called negatives and they represent the background information. The model’s
training is therefore complicated because each image would overwhelm it with
many negatives that do not provide any useful signal. As a matter of fact, it is
likely that such a huge amount of negative examples leads the model to not learn
to distinguish the few positives among them [9].
12
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:21==
3
Related Works
At this time, there are only few studies about FZ process monitoring. For this
reason, this part covers only works related to the multi-label classification problem.
The following sections will give a brief overview of the MLC problem and the ways
in which it is usually addressed, together with a bit of background about machine
learning and deep learning applied to image recognition.
3.1
Multi-label Classification Problem
This is a multi-label classification task, so each image is labelled according to
one or more of the labels previously defined. It is important to have clear that
this is something different from multi-class classification where, despite several
classes are present as in MLC, only one label can be attributed to each image:
this framework would not allow the model to detect multiple oxide layer types on
the same image, and for this reason, this is not the approach followed here.
3.1.1
Targeted at Model Structure
When dealing with multi-label classification problems, there are 2 main approaches
to tackle it: problem transformation methods and algorithms adaptation methods
[10].
Problem Transformation Methods
The idea of problem transformation methods is to reformulate the original multi-
label classification problem into several single-label classification problems.
Binary Relevance (BR) With this approach, a new dataset containing all the in-
stances of the original one is created for each label: a classifier is then trained
on this. Therefore, in case of k labels, there will be k datasets and k classifiers
dealing with binary classification problems. The disadvantage is that in this way
it is completely ignored any correlation between labels [11]. See table 3.1.
Label Powerset (LP) The idea of LP is to consider each combination of labels
in the multi-label problem as a new class and add them to the original labels: the
multi-label task is transformed into a multi-class one. The advantage with respect
to BR is that label correlation is taken into account, but in this way, the number
of labels may increase together with the problem complexity whenever a large
number of labels is present. As a matter of fact, it is likely that many combinations
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
13
==PAGE:22==
Instances
Label 1
Label 2
Label 3
Label 4
X1
0
0
1
1
X2
1
1
0
0
X3
0
1
1
1
Table 3.1:
Original dataset.
Below are reported the
datasets used by each binary classifier for the binary rel-
evance method.
Dataset 1
Instances
Label 1
X1
0
X2
1
X3
0
Dataset 2
Instances
Label 2
X1
0
X2
1
X3
1
Dataset 3
Instances
Label 3
X1
1
X2
0
X3
1
Dataset 4
Instances
Label 4
X1
1
X2
0
X3
1
14
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:23==
will appear as single labels even though their presence in the dataset is very low
[12]. See table 3.2.
Instances
Label 1
Label 2
Label 3
Label 4
X1
0
0
1
1
X2
1
1
0
0
X3
0
1
1
1
Table 3.2: Original dataset. Below the new classes.
Instances
Class
X1
1
X2
2
X3
3
Class
Labels
1
lb3 + lb4
2
lb1 + lb2
3
lb2 + lb3 + lb4
Table 3.3: New labels according to
the LP method.
Random k-Label Sets (RAkEL) The RAkEL method divides a set of labels into
m smaller subsets of k labels on which m classifiers will be then trained according
to the LP framework. The final label assignation will be decided by summing the
number of votes that each label received for a certain instance from all classifiers:
those that do not receive at least t votes will not be considered. Compared to LP,
RAKEL has two advantages: first, the resulting classification tasks are simpler to
compute; second, the class values are more evenly distributed. Anyway, the time
complexity grows as 2k, therefore it is difficult to run the algorithm with large label
sets. Also, this method produces results that are better than those obtained with
LP only for specific combinations of the parameters m, k, t. Therefore tuning is
necessary[13][14].
Pruned Sets (PS) The idea of pruned sets is to apply the concept of LP to get the
relation between labels and then prune (discard) those combinations that do not
appear frequently. An integer parameter p>0 will be set in order to remove from
the labels all those combinations that appear less than p times. The problem is
that in this way much information is potentially lost. Therefore, smaller subsets
appearing more frequently are picked from the pruned ones, but this will increase
too much the training set size and therefore the complexity. Another issue is that
the new examples will have a lower number of labels: this may push the model to
predict a lower number of labels in the classification phase. A trade-off between
the loss of information and these downsides must be found. [12]
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
15
==PAGE:24==
Classifier Chains (CC) The objective of classifier chains is to improve Binary
Relevance (BR) method by taking into account also label correlation. Therefore,
there will be a binary classifier for each label. The classifiers are then put in chain
in order to feed a model with the output of the previous one [11]. See Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Classifier Chains
Ensemble of Classifier Chains (ECC) In normal CC, the classifier has to deter-
mine whether a certain label can be attributed to a particular instance or not. This
classifier will base its decision on the given dataset + the input of the previous
classifier(s). Therefore, the order of classifiers will influence the label assigna-
tion. ECC deals with this by training m CC classifiers C1, ..., Cm where each
Ck is trained with a random chain of labels. Each Ck model will give different
predictions, so in the end, all predictions will be summed by label: those labels
that received a number of votes above a fixed threshold will be finally assigned to
the instance. Ensemble classifier chains are a useful approach for solving com-
plicated problems in which multiple labels need to be predicted, and where the
relationships between these labels are challenging to model using a single chain.
Nevertheless, this method can be computationally demanding and requires pre-
cise tuning of parameters to achieve accurate results. [14]
Ensembles of Pruned Sets (EPS) The limit of PS lies in the fact that it is not
possible to create label combinations that are not observed in the training data.
Therefore, new combinations of labels potentially present in unlabelled data would
not be recognized. To tackle this problem, the PS frameworks in adopted in an
ensemble. As a matter of fact, the idea is to train m classifiers on different parts
of the training data and adopt a voting scheme with a fixed threshold t to obtain
the final predictions [12].
Algorithm Adaptation methods
The idea behind algorithm adaptation methods is to modify single-label classifica-
tion algorithms so that they can effectively handle multi-label datasets.
k-Nearest Neighbor Classifiers (kNN) This method, like many others, is based
on the feature space representation of a dataset of images. With ”feature space”
is intended the mathematical representation of the visual features extracted from
16
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:25==
an image. These features are typically represented as high-dimensional vectors,
where each dimension corresponds to a specific feature such as texture, color,
shape, or edge information.
A kNN algorithm works by assigning multiple labels to a given instance based on
the labels of its nearest neighbors in the feature space. Specifically, for a given
test instance, kNN first finds its K nearest neighbors in the feature space based on
some similarity measure (Euclidean distance for example). It then assigns to the
test instance the labels that are most frequent among the K nearest neighbors [15].
The main advantage of this method is that, despite its simplicity, it can perform as
well as more complex algorithms, sometimes even better. However, tuning the k
parameter is a key issue: a small value may result in underfitting, while a large
value in overfitting1. In addition, the same k value is probably not optimal for the
whole dataset, especially in the case of a large one [15].
3.1.2
Targeted at Feature Extraction from Images
To classify images, a model must understand which features characterize them
in order to be able to apply reasonable distinctions. The following sections give
an overview of simple feature extraction techniques, then a brief introduction to
machine learning and deep learning is provided.
Traditional Feature Extraction Methods
Feature extraction methods are techniques that have the purpose to reduce the
dimensionality of the inputs in order to save computational resources. In other
words, when large datasets of images are involved for example, it may be useful
to consider only some key characteristics for each image: this kind of approach al-
lows to increase the algorithm’s speed without losing important information about
the input data.
There are many techniques following this kind of approach, here a brief overview
of the traditional ones is presented.
The histogram of intensity presents the distribution of pixel intensities in an im-
age. Several intensity levels are defined and the number of pixels belonging to
each level is counted and plotted. The histogram can give a condensed repre-
sentation of features like contrast and brightness [16].
Using Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG), the image is divided into cells.
Considering a single cell, gradient orientation, and magnitude are calculated for
each pixel within it, then, an histogram is created by binning the gradient orien-
tations and weighting it using the magnitude of the gradients. The histograms
of adjacent cells are concatenated forming in this way a vector representing the
1Underfitting happens when the model is too simple to understand the data: this means that it
will fail in capturing the patterns inside the dataset and therefore it will fail the task. Overfitting on
the other hand happens when the model barely memorizes the provided data: as a result, a very
good performance may be obtained on the provided dataset, but at the same time, the model will
have poor results on unseen data.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
17
==PAGE:26==
image [17][18]. The generated features do not change with factors such as light,
rotation, and scale making them useful for object detection tasks.
Local Binary Pattern (LBP) is based on the analysis of the local patterns of in-
tensity variation. Considering a single pixel of an image as the center, a small
number of pixels in the neighborhood are compared to the center in terms of in-
tensity: if the intensity value of the neighbor pixel is lower than the one of the
center, then 0 is assigned, otherwise, the value is 1. The binary values formed in
this way are concatenated forming in this way a binary codification representing
the intensity variations around the center. An histogram is then created using as
bins the possible binary codifications: the resulting value of a bin corresponds
therefore to the number of occurrences of that particular sequence in the image.
Also LBP features are constant while varying parameters like light and contrast:
for this reason, they are well suited for tasks such as object detection [19].
Machine Learning
Machine learning is a field of artificial intelligence that focuses on making ma-
chines learn insights and recognize patterns in data. This has become extremely
useful in the last years as a consequence of the massive amount of data produced
day by day; indeed, ML algorithms allow the extraction of regularities from large
databases, easing in this way decision-making.
Within the broad field of ML, artificial neural networks (ANN) are a family of algo-
rithms that became of particular interest thanks to their flexibility. ANNs have been
inspired by the structure of biological neural networks, indeed, they are composed
of interconnected processing nodes called artificial neurons. Each connection be-
tween neurons transmits signals that can be amplified or attenuated by a weight
which is continuously updated during the training process. Usually, neurons are
organized in layers: an input layer gathers the input data and an output layer
gives the result; in between there may be zero or more hidden layers to eventu-
ally grasp non-linearities in the relation between input and output [20]. The issue
with ML algorithms is that they require structured data, in other words, it is neces-
sary to provide as input hand-engineered features extracted from raw data: data
preprocessing is mandatory.
Deep Learning
Deep learning (DL), on the other hand, is a subset of ML that uses artificial neu-
ral networks with many hidden layers, hence the term ”deep”(see Figure 3.2).
This characteristic allows DL models to ingest and learn features directly from
unstructured data such as images and texts, cutting off in this way part of the pre-
processing that was required by standards ML. In addition, DL models are able
to learn highly complex patterns and relationships in data and can be trained to
perform a large variety of tasks ranging from image classification to speech recog-
nition. The only drawback is that, in order to be trained, such models require a
large amount of labelled data and computational resources.
Deep learning models learn by minimizing a loss function [21]. This function is a
mathematical representation of the error/difference between the output predicted
by the model and the actual output (label, ground truth) relative to a given input.
18
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.2: Example of neural networks
During training, the model parameters are adjusted in such a way as to minimize
the loss function and so to make the model output as close as possible to the
expected one. The most common optimization algorithm is stochastic gradient
descent (SGD): the gradient of the loss function is calculated with respect to the
model parameters which will be then updated in the opposite direction of the men-
tioned gradient, see equations 3.1 and 3.2:
wk −→w
′
k = wk −η ∂L
∂wk
(3.1)
bl −→b
′
l = bl −η∂L
∂bl
(3.2)
In these equations it is possible to see another parameter b called bias: indeed,
each neuron has a certain number of weights and a bias; together, all weights and
biases from all neurons constitute the model parameters which are updated during
training. The other new parameter, η, is called learning rate and it regulates the
magnitude of the parameters’ updating.
The training process is carried out by feeding the model a set of examples with
relative labels: these labels constitute the ground truth, in other words, what is
expected by the model as output for these inputs. The model parameters are so
updated by considering the loss for each of these inputs. This process is repeated
for a certain number of iterations called epochs: in an epoch, the model sees all
the training data.
The learning rate, the number of epochs, the number of hidden layers, and the
number of neurons in each hidden layer are called hyperparameters. Model hy-
perparameters are distinct from model parameters learnt during training such as
weights and biases. These are only some of the most common hyperparameters,
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
19
==PAGE:28==
the ones that usually every model has, but depending on the nature of the prob-
lem there may be also others. In general, hyperparameters are set before model
training and are chosen by means of trial and error processes or optimization tech-
niques. They have a significant impact on the performance of the algorithm since
they can affect factors like learning speed and generalization capacity.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
Convolutional neural networks are a type of neural network capable of accepting
2D data structures like images as input. In CNN, a weighted filter called kernel
slides over the input data producing a feature map, which is a 2D array repre-
senting the response of a particular filter to another 2D array like an image or in
general any 2D data structure.
Figure 3.3: Example of convolutional neural network (CNN) for image classifica-
tion. Here the model tries to understand which handwritten digit is present in the
image [22]
.
In the example presented in Figure 3.3, the first convolutional layer is constituted
by 32 kernels that produce 32 feature maps. Each filter tries to extract from the
input a specific feature like the contrast of an image, or even the edges: each of
these features is then coded within the relative feature map.
When training a CNN, the weights of the kernels are the updated parameters.
3.1.3
Targeted at Lack of Data
The lack of data is often a challenge in the field of machine learning. With ”lack of
data” may be intended both the scarcity of examples in the dataset with which a
model should be trained and the scarcity of labelled examples: it depends on the
context. The literature presents different solutions to address these issues, here
some of them are briefly described.
20
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:29==
Semi-supervised Learning
Machine learning has been widely applied to image recognition tasks in the last
years, however, the majority of models in the state of the art are still developed
under a supervised learning framework2. As already stated in 2.2.1, in real-world
problems creating a dataset from scratch is oftentimes challenging, especially if a
large number of labels has to be assigned. Given this background, the importance
of semi-supervised learning is continuously rising: SSL aims to make use also
of unlabelled data to gain additional information besides what is provided by the
labelled instances and improve in this way the model’s accuracy.
Xie et al. in [23] developed a self-training framework for image recognition in which
the number of unlabelled images is larger than the labelled ones. The idea is to
train a teacher model on labelled data and then use this model to generate pseudo-
labels on unlabelled images, a student model will then be trained on a combination
of labelled and pseudo-labelled images. The student will then become the teacher
in the following iteration.
Generative models
The development of deep learning opened also the possibility to design specific
models for the generation of synthetic data: these kinds of models are indeed
called generative models. Generative models aim to generate data similar to the
ones on which they are trained and they can be used in all those fields for which
obtaining a large number of labelled samples is somewhat difficult. Currently, for
what concerns image generation, there are 2 main types of generative models:
generative adversarial networks (GAN) and variational autoencoders (VAE)
[24][25][26].
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) GANs are deep learning models that
consist of two neural networks, generator and discriminator, that are trained to-
gether in a process called adversarial training.
The generator takes random noise as input and generates new data trying to emu-
late the ones in the training set. The random noise is typically a vector of numbers
drawn from a probability distribution, such as a Gaussian distribution. On the other
hand, the discriminator tries to distinguish between the generated data and real
data from the training set. During training, the generator tries to fool the discrim-
inator by producing samples that are difficult to distinguish from real data, while
the discriminator tries to correctly classify the samples as either real or fake. As
training progresses, the generator learns to produce increasingly realistic sam-
ples, while the discriminator becomes better at distinguishing between real and
fake data: the final goal is to produce samples that are indistinguishable from
real data, allowing the model to generate new data that are similar to the training
set. In other words, during training, both the generator and the discriminator see
their own loss function decreasing until equilibrium is reached, and so none of the
two can improve its loss function unilaterally: this condition is called Nash equi-
librium [28]. Despite GANs can potentially generate very high-quality images,
training them can be very difficult and in some cases is almost an art: reaching
2”Supervised learning” means that all the examples in the dataset are labelled.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.4: Architecture of a GAN [27]
the Nash equilibrium can be extremely hard in many cases and oftentimes more
demanding than training a VAE. [25] [28].
Variational Auto Encoders (VAE) A VAE is a generative model whose archi-
tecture is similar to the one of a classic autoencoder (AE). An AE is a model
comprising 2 networks: an encoder that compresses the input data into a more
compact representation by mapping the input x to a latent variable z ∈Rn, and a
decoder that defines a map from the latent variable z to the input space obtaining
the reconstructed input ˜x. Therefore, the purpose of an AE is to reconstruct the
input while preserving as much information as possible.
If the idea is to build a generative model, replicating exactly the same image given
as input is not what is desired. For this reason, the output of a VAE is constituted
by two vectors of the same size: a vector of means µ ∈Rn and a vector of standard
deviations σ ∈Rn from which it is possible to sample a latent vector z ∈Rn
In other words, the latent variable z in a VAE is distributed according to a prior dis-
tribution pθ(z|x), a multivariate Gaussian distribution: in this way the model learns
the distribution of the input data. The problem is that being the p(x) intractable,
the posterior pθ(z|x) is also intractable (see equation 3.3).
pθ(z|x) = pθ(x, z)
pθ(x)
(3.3)
For this reason, variational inference techniques are used in order to find an ap-
22
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.5: Architecture of an AE
proximated posterior qϕ(z|x) (see equation 3.4), where mean µz and standard
deviation σz are given by the encoder.
qϕ(z|x) = N
(
µz, σz
2I
)
(3.4)
Now, the estimated posterior should approximate well the real one. Kullback-
Leibler divergence can be used to measure how similar two distributions are: in
other words, DKL(X, Y ) quantifies the loss of information in case Y is used to
represent X. Therefore, DKL(qϕ(z|x)|pθ(z|x)) must be minimized with respect to
ϕ. Let’s expand:
DKL(qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z|x)) = log pθ(x) + DKL(qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z)) −Eqϕ(z|x) log pθ(x|z) (3.5)
Rearrange:
log pθ(x) −DKL(qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z|x)) = Eqϕ(z|x) log pθ(x|z) −DKL(qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z)) (3.6)
The left-hand side of 3.6 should be maximized [29]: indeed, log pθ(x) is the log-
likelihood of generating real data, while the second term is the KL divergence
between the real and the estimated posterior.
Therefore, the loss function is:
LV AE(θ, ϕ) = −log pθ(x) + DKL(qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z|x))
= −Eqϕ(z|x)[log pθ(x|z)] + DKL(qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z))
(3.7)
Transfer Learning
Transfer learning is a technique applied in deep learning where a pre-trained
model is used as starting point to solve a different but related task. The idea
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.6: Architecture of a VAE
Figure 3.7: Transfer learning idea
of TL is to leverage the knowledge gained from the resolution of a problem and
apply it to another one: this approach is likely to lead to faster convergence and
better generalization with respect to the case in which a neural network is built
from scratches. Specifically, in the context of image classification, TL can be ap-
plied by using convolutional neural networks (CNN) trained on large datasets such
as ImageNet: in general, the idea is to change the last layer/s of the network with
other layer/s specific for the new task.
This brings advantages because the first layers of the network learn general fea-
tures such as shapes, textures, and edges which can be useful for any task, on
the other hand, the last layers concern features relative to the task for which the
model has been trained in first instance: in the end, reusing those features allows
to reduce the number of parameters that need to be learnt for the new task. Over-
all, TL can significantly improve the performance of the model, especially in cases
24
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:33==
in which there are limited computational resources and a limited amount of data.
In this case, considering the exposed advantages and the relatively low amount
of data, a pre-trained model is used as backbone for the classification model.
3.1.4
Targeted at Data Unbalance Problem
Unbalance is a problem that many ML tasks applied to real-world problems en-
counter, also this work. As mentioned before, unbalance can be seen from differ-
ent points of view: the dataset may contain too many examples of one class with
respect to the others for example, or maybe the information that the model is look-
ing for within an image represents only one of the many features that characterize
it. Here, common techniques to address these problems are briefly exposed.
Unbalance between Labels
Resampling methods are the most popular solution used for dealing with this
kind of unbalance. In general, they consist in adding instances of the minority
classes (oversampling) or removing examples of the majority classes, or even
both at the same time [8]. For what concerns multi-label classification, resampling
methods can be based on the Label Powerset transformation for example (see
3.1.1): label combinations will be treated as single labels. Therefore, some of the
instances with the most common label-set will be removed while instances with
the rarest sets will be added. This represents a simple yet effective approach in
many cases, but it may be hard to tackle the unbalance whenever many different
label sets with a very low number of examples are present.
Unbalance within Labels
Two-stage detectors represent the most popular framework for what concerns
object detection. The first stage generates a set of regions of interest (RoIs) in the
image which are supposed to contain the desired objects/features, at this point
the locations containing negative examples should have been filtered out. The
second stage takes as input the individuated RoIs and classifies them into one or
more categories [9]. By feeding to the second stage accurate RoIs, it is possible to
achieve high accuracy, on the other hand too many potential RoIs may represent
a challenge from the computational point of view, therefore a trade-off must be
found [30].
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
25
==PAGE:34==
4
Methodology
4.1
Overview
The final classifier has to be able to tell if the polycrystal surface presents or not
oxide, and in case, it should also tell which features characterize the oxide layer
by giving proper labels. This is possible only in presence of solutions for the chal-
lenges discussed in 2.2: once a sufficient number of labelled images is available,
the unbalance between different labels and within each image has to be faced.
Figure 4.1: Steps of the work
Starting from the unbalance in the label distribution, in this case, the possible
labels are not so many, therefore, the number of label-sets1 that it is possible
1Combinations of labels that can be assigned to an image
26
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:35==
to observe in the dataset is relatively low. This opens the possibility to train a
generative model, in this case, a β-VAE, for each label/label-set that presents a
low number of samples: the artificial images are used together with the original
ones to train the classification model. With that said, the idea is to create different
configurations for the classification model by varying the loss function and the ar-
chitecture2: indeed, the loss function can be modified in order to force the model
to pay more attention to the rarer samples, while pretrained models may improve
the classifier’s performance thanks to the knowledge gained from previous train-
ing. All of these configurations are then tested on datasets that differ only in the
content of artificial images.
Once all classifier configurations are tested, the resulting performances are com-
pared in order to understand which model gives the best results. This model will
be the classifier used to extract the final visual representation of the evolution of
the oxide layer.
4.2
Proposed solutions
In the last years, deep learning models have become the most widely spread in-
strument to deal with image classification problems. Despite the good results,
these ML algorithms require in most cases a large number of labelled images as-
suming also that the samples from all classes are evenly distributed [24][25]. In
this case, like in many others, these 2 problems are intimately connected: as a
matter of fact, there is a clear relative unbalance between the classes (see 2.2.2)
which means that no matter how many images will be labelled, some classes will
always outnumber all the others. In the common practice, there are two main
groups of solutions to deal with this issue: algorithm-level methods and data-level
methods [24]. Algorithm-level methods try to change the loss function in order
to force the model to learn from minority classes. On the other hand, data-level
methods act on the number of instances by removing majority samples and/or by
adding minority samples, this is called respectively undersampling and oversam-
pling (see 3.1.4). The proposed approach presents elements of both methods:
indeed, the idea is to consider all the possible label-sets as a unique label/class
and to generate artificial images of the minority classes that will be then added
to the dataset. In addition, the loss function of the model is changed in order to
enable it to pay more attention to the minority classes.
4.2.1
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
Convolutional neural networks are chosen as model architecture. As a matter
of fact, the input data in this case are images, and so 2D data structures. The
problem with normal NN is that they use one neuron for each input, for each pixel
in this case: when large images are given, the number of parameters becomes
easily very high and in many cases not possible to manage. Another problem
2The main architecture of a classification model is given by the pretrained convolutional model
used as backbone.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
27
==PAGE:36==
of standard NN is that they are not translational invariant: this means that if
the same feature appears in more images but in different locations, the NN will
struggle to learn from that particular feature, in other words, the model is not able
to generalize it. CNNs address both of these problems: in fact, the kernel scans
the input image producing a feature map. The fact is that the kernel has usually
a smaller dimension with respect to the one of the input, in addition, one scan is
done by passing the same weights all over the input image: this allows to search
for the same feature in different locations of the image [21]. This makes CNNs
translational invariant and also reduces the number of parameters3 compared to
a standard NN used for the same task.
4.2.2
Generation of Artificial Images based on β-VAE
β-VAEs [31] differ from usual VAE models by focusing on obtaining a more dis-
entangled representation of the latent space. Different features in the input data
are represented by separate and independent dimensions in the latent space. A
disentangled representation means that different dimensions of the latent space
capture different features of the input data and these dimensions are not mixed
together. Disentanglement is desirable since it allows to have more interpretable
data, in other words, it allows the model to focus on the most important dimen-
sions/features.
The purpose is always to maximize the probability of generating real data while
keeping a low difference between the approximated posterior and the real one
(under a small constant ϵ).
max
ϕ,θ Ex∼D
[
Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)]
]
subject to DKL(qϕ(z|x)||p(z)) < ϵ
(4.1)
It is possible to rewrite equation 4.14 as a Lagrangian under the KKT conditions
[31]:
F(θ, ϕ, β; x, z) = Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)] −β (DKL(qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z)) −ϵ)
= Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)] −β (DKL(qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z))) + βϵ
≥Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)] −β (DKL(qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z))) sinceβ, ϵ > 0
(4.2)
So, the loss function of β-VAE is defined as:
L(θ, ϕ; β, x, z) = −Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)] + β (DKL(qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z)))
(4.3)
Where the higher is β, the more the model is encouraged in learning a disentan-
gled representation of the data. Note that for β = 1 the loss function becomes
equal to the one of a standard VAE.
3Also the number of biases is reduced since a kernel shares the same bias for each unit that
composes it.
4D is a general set of labelled images x
28
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:37==
Artificial images
The β-VAE model is used to generate artificial images of the classes that present
a low number of samples with respect to the others. To do this, each combination
of classes is considered as a class on its own: as it is possible to see in Figure
4.2, class 2+4 (Spot + Spot on Shadow), and 2+3+4 (Spot + Shadow + Spot on
Shadow) are the ones presenting the lowest amounts of images. For this reason,
these are the classes chosen to be augmented with artificial images generated by
the model.
Figure 4.2: Distribution of labels inside the train split
The idea is to train 2 different models, one of them on a dataset containing only
images from the class ”Spot + Spot on Shadow” and the other on another dataset
containing only images from ”Spot + Shadow + Spot on Shadow”. Artificial images
of the relative classes will be generated by the models once training is concluded.
In Figure 4.3 it is possible to see the polycrystal surface of an artificial image
belonging to the class ”Spot + Spot on Shadow”. Even though the image is blurred,
it contains anyway the features that characterize its own class and for this reason,
its information content is relevant to the algorithm.
In the end, the idea is to study how the performance of the classification model
varies with the content of artificial images within the main dataset.
4.2.3
Pretrained Models
The requirements that must be satisfied by the model are high accuracy and low
computational complexity. The computational complexity of a deep learning model
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.3: Example of artificial image of class ”Spot + Spot on Shadow”
can be estimated by the number of floating point operations per second (FLOPs),
and the number of parameters of the model.
FLOPs refer to the number of mathematical operations (such as additions, multi-
plications, and exponentials) performed by the model in a second. This is a useful
metric to estimate the computational cost on platforms such as CPUs and GPUs:
in general, the higher the number of FLOPs, the higher will be computational com-
plexity.
On the other hand, the number of parameters refers to the number of weights and
biases learnt by the model during training. This measure can be used to estimate
the memory required by the model, and in addition, the higher the number of
parameters, the higher will be the model complexity.
Given this, the chosen models are ResNet50 and InceptionV3. This choice is
motivated by the fact that these models offer high accuracy and computational
efficiency as it is visible in Figure 4.4, which are also the reasons why they are still
popular in the state of the art. The figure shows the top-1 accuracy over ImageNet
1k validation set, ResNet50 and InceptionV3 are both above 75% maintaining
relatively low FLOPs and low number of parameters compared to other models
achieving the same accuracy.
Architectures
ResNet50 is a convolutional neural network consisting of 50 layers. The key con-
cept is the residual connection whose idea is shown in Figure 4.5. Given an
input x and a sequence of layers starting with layer i and ending with layer i + n,
let’s call F the function defined by these layers. Normally, in standard feedforward
neural networks like the one depicted in Figure 4.5, the input x goes through the
layers and produces the output F(x). With residual connection, the same input x
is then added to the output producing F(x) + x [33].
Residual connections are designed to counter the vanishing gradient problem.
As a matter of fact, as a neural network gets deeper, the computed gradients will
become smaller [21]. Therefore, the gradient of the loss function can even tend
to 0, nullifying in this way the parameter’s update (see equations 3.1, 3.2); this
particular condition is called vanishing gradient and it can seriously complicate
the training of the model.
With the help offered by residual connections, the vanishing gradient problem can
30
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.4: Top-1 accuracy over ImageNet 1k validation set for image classifica-
tion vs. floating point operations per second (FLOPs). The larger the ball, the
higher the number of parameters for the model [32].
be mitigated. This is why Resnet50 is constituted by several residual blocks: each
block contains multiple convolutional layers and a residual connection that makes
the input of the block skip one or more layers [33].
InceptionV3 is another deep convolutional neural network comprising 42 layers.
The peculiarity of this model lies in the ”inception module” which constitutes the
main building block of the model. Inception modules combine parallel filters of
different sizes to capture different features. As depicted in Figure 4.6 an inception
module comprises several branches where each one of them presents a series of
convolutional and pooling layers5. The outputs of all branches are then concate-
nated along the channel dimension6 and passed to the next inception module.
This block is repeated in sequence along the network with slight variations de-
5A pooling layer is a layer type inserted after a convolutional layer. The purpose is to reduce
the size of the feature map after the convolution while keeping the most important information.
6A feature map has 3 dimensions: height, width and depth which is the number of channels. A
standard rgb image for example has 3 channels
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.5: Residual connection [34]
pending on the input size and the features to be extracted.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.6: Inception modules. (a) Original inception module. (b) Inception mod-
ule with factorized convolutions. (c) Inception module with asymmetric convolu-
tions[35].
One of the main purposes of this model, besides the will to achieve high accuracy,
is also to reach high computational efficiency. To do that, the first version of the
inception module, visible in Figure 4.6a, has been adapted with different solutions
in order to decrease the number of parameters. Convolutions with large filter sizes
are factorized into a series of convolutions with smaller filters: for example, a con-
volution with a 5x5 filter is substituted with a series of two convolutions having
filters of size 3x3. The final result has the same dimensions but the number of pa-
rameters is lower in the second case (5x5=25 vs 2x(3x3)=18). Finally, asymmetric
32
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:41==
convolutions may be also applied to further decrease the number of parameters:
a 3x3 convolution can be substituted by a series of 3x1 and 1x3 convolutions [35].
Reshape and Finetuning
The final layer of a CNN neural network is usually a fully connected layer7 with a
number of neurons equal to the number of classes in the relative dataset. Both
ResNet50 and InceptionV3 are pretrained on ImageNet (see table 2.1 for details
about the dataset) which has 1000 classes: therefore, the final layers of the mod-
els have 1000 neurons each. In this case, the number of classes is 4, so the final
layers must be reshaped; in other words, the classifier head of the model has to be
adapted. To do this the last layer of the model should be changed in such a way
as to have the same number of inputs as it had before and a number of outputs
equal to the number of classes of this case.
Figure 4.7: Model’s classifier head: last layer of the pretrained model, followed by
an intermediate layer containing 256 neurons and the final output layer.
Before doing this, an additional fully connected layer containing 256 neurons is
added between the last layer of the pretrained model and the output layer. In Fig-
ure 4.7 it is possible to see the configuration of the final layers of the classification
model. Moreover, dropout is applied to the added layer. When dropout is ap-
plied, a certain number of neurons are deleted from the network during training,
specifically, each neuron has a probability p to be deleted. As long as training
goes on, the deleted neurons do not remain cut off from the whole process, but
they come back active, leaving their place to others. So it is like training different
NNs at the same time since there will be many different configurations because
of this, and, since every NN overfits in a different way, dropout helps in reducing
overfitting in the end [21].
7A fully connected layer is a layer constituted only by artificial neurons, it is the basic layer seen
for a standard artificial neural network in 3.1.2
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
33
==PAGE:42==
Finally, the pretrained models should be finetuned for this specific task. As al-
ready said, ResNet50 and InceptionV3 are trained on the ImageNet dataset; those
images and those classes are for sure different from the ones treated here. For
this reason, the model should be adapted to this specific task by finetuning it. As
a matter of fact, finetuning allows recognizing the features and patterns specific
to another dataset while, at the same time, taking advantage of what has been
learnt during the original training. From an operative point of view, finetuning is
carried out by updating all the model parameters for the new task, in other words,
by retraining the whole model [36].
4.2.4
Loss Function
As stated above, the idea is to change the loss function in order to force the model
to pay more attention to the minority features, easing in this way their recognition
within images.
For the sake of clarity, let’s give the following definitions:
• Easy positives/negatives are those elements correctly classified as posi-
tives/negatives within an image.
• Hard positives/negatives are the misclassified elements (a positive which
is classified as a negative or vice versa).
Consider a normal classifier with cross-entropy loss 4.4, where p ∈[0, 1] is the
estimated probability for a detected object within an image to have as label y = 1.
The problem arising when, in an image, a large foreground/background unbal-
ance is present, is that there will be many easy negatives that will overwhelm the
gradient of the loss function. As a result, it will be challenging for the model to
learn from hard samples and also easy positives.
CE(p, y) =





−log(p)
if y = 1
−log(1 −p)
otherwise
(4.4)
The solution to this problem is to scale down the cross entropy loss8 as the model’s
confidence in the prediction increases by adding a factor (1−pt)γ [9]. To ease the
understanding, consider for now:
pt =





p
if y = 1
(1 −p)
otherwise
(4.5)
Therefore, the final loss function will be:
FL(pt) = −(1 −pt)γ log(pt)
(4.6)
8Cross entropy is the standard loss function used in these tasks.
34
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:43==
Equation 4.6 is called focal loss [9]. Thanks to focal loss it is possible to down-
weight the contribution of easy samples giving in this way more importance to the
hard ones: as a matter of fact, in case of easy negatives/positives pt →1 and so
the added factor goes to 0 decreasing in this way the relative loss contribution,
on the other hand, in case of hard samples, the added factor will be close to 1
leaving the loss contribution almost unaltered (see Figure 4.8).
Figure 4.8: Focal loss [9]. As the recognition probability increases the relative
contribution to the loss is down-weighted.
By tuning the parameter γ, also called focusing parameter, it is possible to adjust
the rate at which easy samples are down-weighted: notice that for γ = 0 FL
becomes the usual cross entropy loss (CE).
Now, in order to get the total loss coming from an image, let’s consider this multi-
label classification problem as an ensemble of binary classification problems, one
for each of the possible K labels identified: indeed, the model outputs K predictions
pk ∈[0, 1]. For each class k, there will be the ground truth represented by yk that
can be either 1 if label k has been assigned to the image, or 0 if label k has not
been assigned. Therefore, the total loss will be:
Ltot =
K
∑
k=1
L(pk, yk)
(4.7)
Where L is the contribution to the total loss coming from a single class k of the K
classes:
L = −ykL+ −(1 −yk)L−
(4.8)
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
35
==PAGE:44==
L+ and L−are the loss parts obtainable by expanding pt in 4.69:





L+ = (1 −p)γ log(p)
L−= pγ log(1 −p)
(4.9)
PROBLEM
Although focal loss does a good job in forcing the model to pay more attention to
harder samples, it makes no distinction between positives and negatives. As a
matter of fact, the contribution of easy samples is down-weighted without making
any distinction between easy positives and easy negatives: in this way, since
the negatives are always present in a larger number with respect to positives,
the model would be forced to learn more from negatives. Therefore, it appears
reasonable to decouple the focusing levels of positives and negatives as equation
4.10 shows [37].





L+ = (1 −p)γ+ log(p)
L−= pγ−log(1 −p)
(4.10)
Moreover, given that the purpose of all of this is to force the model to learn to point
out the positives within the images, it is reasonable to put γ−> γ+.
Finally, the last piece of the puzzle is constituted by another asymmetric mecha-
nism: probability shifting[37]. As already said the foreground/background un-
balance within images can be very high, for this reason, it may be useful to intro-
duce another mechanism in order to discard those very easy negatives, in other
words, to discard those samples with a very low p. To this purpose, it is possible
to define:
pm = max (p −m, 0)
(4.11)
The parameter m ≥0 can be tuned to cut off the contribution to the loss function
of the negative samples with a probability lower than m.
By plugging 4.11 into L−of 4.10, the final loss function is obtained:





L+ = (1 −p)γ+ log(p)
L−= pγ−
m log(1 −pm)
(4.12)
By plugging equation 4.12 inside 4.8 and 4.7 the final loss called asymmetric
loss is obtained[37]. Thanks to this it is possible to down-weight the contributions
9The ’-’ sign of 4.6 is accounted directly into 4.8
36
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:45==
of easy negatives and very easy negatives by setting respectively γ−> γ+ and
m ≥0.
4.3
Visual Representation
As stated in 1.3, the final purpose of this work is to provide a visual representation
of the evolution over time of the oxide layer on the polycrystal surface during the
cone phase of a production run, specifically, how the oxide layer type changes over
time. The problem is that the raw images extracted from the videos do not provide
any information about time, but they present another important information: the
monocrystal diameter.
Figure 4.9: Evolution of the monocrystal diameter during the cone phase of two
production runs.
Figure 4.9 shows the evolution of the monocrystal diameter during the cone phase
of a couple of production runs: besides an initial state in which the diameter is 0,
and a small decrease in between, the plots show an increasing trend. So, the
monocrystal diameter is almost always increasing with time: therefore, consid-
ering an image, it is possible to relate the information regarding the oxide layer
type on the polycrystal surface to the monocrystal diameter in that instant and plot
them together.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
37
==PAGE:46==
5
Experiments
5.1
Experiments Setup
5.1.1
Dataset Preparation
The videos from the beginning of the cone phase provided by Topsil GlobalWafers
A / S constitute the starting point of the project. They are the source of the images
with which the classification model is trained.
Image Sampling
51 videos of 10 min each were provided. Despite a framerate of 30 frames/s, the
videos have been sampled by taking 1 image per second since the information
content of 2 consecutive frames was not significantly different. In Figure 5.1 it is
possible to see an image as sampled1: the upper half includes the polycrystal,
while in the bottom one there is the monocrystal. From the process parameters
present on the raw image it is possible to extract the monocrystal diameter.
Image Preprocessing
It would be pointless to feed the algorithm with images like Figure 5.1: they con-
tain useless informations that would significantly slow down the learning process.
As a matter of fact, the oxide layer is only present on the polycrystal surface (up-
per half), and the process parameters are reported on both halves: therefore the
bottom half is cut off. Moreover, the colored lines2 and the process parameters
on the upper half do not provide any useful information for learning, on the con-
trary, they may represent disturbing elements. For these reasons, it is necessary
to preprocess the images before giving them as input to the model. In Figure 5.2
it is visible how images appear before and after preprocessing3.
5.1.2
Image Labelling
As already said, there are different types of oxide layers according to the features
that it is possible to observe. On an image there may be only one of those types or
even a combination: in this case, the defect will present features of multiple types.
1This is a schematic representation of the images as sampled. The original ones are not in-
cluded in this work in order to preserve the company’s industrial secrets
2On the original images there are colored lines given by the camera system’s framing of the
setting.
3The monocrystal diameter is taken from images before the preprocessing.
38
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.1: Images as sampled. The images include: polycrystal surface (green
box), melt area + inductor for induction heating (orange box), monocrystal surface
(blue box), process parameters (red boxes).
Hence, a multilabel framework is adopted, meaning that images are labelled with
one or more labels depending on the detected features. These labels are:
• Normal
• Uniform
• Spot
• Shadow
• Spot on Shadow
Note that, if an image is labelled as ”Uniform”, no other label can be assigned since
the oxide layer covers the whole polycrystal surface. In the end, about 10.000
labelled images are obtained from a total of 30.000: these labelled images are
used to train the classification model under a supervised learning framework.
Specifically, a binary codification system is adopted. Each label is defined by a
binary sequence of 4 digits: 1 in case the relative feature is present and 0 other-
wise, in addition, if all the digits are 0, this means that the image is a ”Normal” one.
The first digit is relative to ”Uniform”, the second to ”Spot”, the third to ”Shadow”
and the fourth to ”Spot on Shadow”. Therefore, the possible labels are:
• 0000 Normal
• 1000 Uniform
• 0100 Spot
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
39
==PAGE:48==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2: (a) Images before preprocessing, (b) Images after preprocessing.
Specifically, (b) is exactly the content that is present in the red box + green box:
process parameters and polycrystal surface. Process parameters are hidden by
a black mask during preprocessing.
• 0010 Shadow
• 0001 Spot on Shadow
• 0110 Spot + Shadow
• 0101 Spot + Spot on Shadow
• 0111 Spot + Shadow + Spot on Shadow
5.1.3
Preprocessing and Data Augmentation
Images are not fed to the model as they are. First of all, they are randomly per-
turbed in brightness and contrast [38]: specifically, this transformation slightly
changes the images from epoch to epoch4 increasing in this way the diversity
4The magnitude of the transformation changes from epoch to epoch
40
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:49==
of the training set, and so increasing the model’s capability of generalization.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3: Examples of images altered in brightness (a) and contrast (b).
Then, images are brought to a smaller size, passing from 1280x480 to 768x320.
This is important because, especially when large datasets are involved, having
smaller images helps in reducing the usage of memory during training.
Parameter
Value
Brightness
0.01
Contrast
0.01
Table 5.1: Parameters for brightness and contrast alteration.
• Brightness is the value defining the range from which the brightness factor
is chosen for an epoch according to [max(0, 1 −brightness), 1 + brightness].
• Contrast See above. [max(0, 1 −contrast), 1 + contrast].
Finally, normalization is applied to the pixel values of the image passing from
intensity values in the range [0, 255] to the range [−1, 1]. This is done in order to
improve the numerical stability of the model and help it to converge faster.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
41
==PAGE:50==
It is important to specify that images are altered in brightness and contrast only
during training. In validation and test phase, images are only resized and nor-
malized. This is done to measure the performance of the model only on original,
unaltered images.
5.1.4
Data Splits
When training a model, there is the risk that the model may overfit the given data.
Overfitting means that the model has a very good performance on training data
but, on the other hand, a bad performance on unseen data. In other words, the
model has no generalization capacity. To cope with this issue, usually, the data
are split into training, validation, and test datasets.
The train set is the largest among the 3 splits and it is used to make the model
learn the features and patterns contained in the data. In each epoch of training,
the model sees all the data in the train split and tunes its weights according to the
value of the loss function, which is related to how close was the model’s prediction
in that epoch to the ground truth represented by the labels.
Moreover, the validation set is always used during training, but in this case only
at the end of each epoch: indeed, it is only used to evaluate the performance
of the model during the training process. This allows to measure how the model
performs on unseen data during training, and so to see whether the model is
overfitting or not. Secondly, the validation set is also used to do hyperparameter
tuning.
Finally, the test split is used to compute the performance of the model once training
is completed. As a matter of fact, the performance of the model during validation
is also used to tune hyperparameters: there may be the possibility that the model
overfits the validation data, so a separate set of unseen data is used to measure
the final performance of the model.
Data Splitting Methods
The way in which data splits are constructed is important too, indeed, there are
several techniques for doing that. The simplest one is random sampling: first,
the instances within the dataset are shuffled, then they are randomly picked and
inserted into the train, validation, and test splits according to the predefined per-
centages. The problem with random sampling is that it cannot handle unbalanced
datasets. For example, assume that a dataset contains only 2 classes distributed
according to a 90% | 10% ratio: with random sampling, it may happen that all
the samples in the train split belong to the first class, and even if the result is not
strictly this, it is likely that the original distribution of classes won’t be preserved
in all data splits. This should be avoided in situations characterized by a natural
unbalance in the data since the model performance should be optimized consider-
ing also this problem, therefore, the original data distribution should be preserved
in all data splits. Stratified sampling is a technique designed for preserving the
original proportions of classes within the dataset, once the data splits are built. In
fact, in the same situation depicted previously, stratified sampling would ensure
42
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:51==
that the distribution 90% | 10% between the two classes is maintained among all
data splits.
Dataset
The dataset has been organized into the usual three splits, specifically, the sizes
are 70% for the train split, 10% for the validation split, and 20% for the test split. In
addition, given the unbalance between classes and their combinations within the
dataset, stratified sampling has been adopted to have the same data distribution
within each split.
5.1.5
Hyperparameters Setting
Before starting the experiments, the remaining classification model’s hyperparam-
eters must be set: they are summed up in table 5.2.
Parameter
Value
Learning Rate (LR)
1e-4
EPOCHS
50
BATCH SIZE (train)
32
BATCH SIZE (test)
8
Confidence Threshold (CT)
0.5
P_dropout
0.2
m
0.05
Table 5.2: Classification model’s hyperparameters
• BATCH SIZE is the number of training samples considered at a time5 [21].
• P_dropout is the probability that a neuron of the 256-fully connected layer
is cut off during part of the training process 4.2.3.
• m is the threshold defined for probability shifting of equaiton 4.11 (value
taken from [37]).
• Confidence threshold (CT) is the threshold determining whether a predic-
tion done by the model can be considered a positive prediction (1), in case
prediction > CT, or a negative one (0).
5It is preferable to take batches of samples rather than considering one sample at a time. This
is valid for all data splits (train test and validation), but different batch sizes may be considered in
different splits.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
43
==PAGE:52==
Also, the learning rate is not constant during training. During the first part of the
process, the LR increases linearly from a starting value until a maximum level
defined in table 5.2 is reached. Then, in the second part, LR decreases linearly
from the maximum to the minimum value which is much lower than the starting
one. Increasing LR is done to speed up the training process at the beginning while
decreasing it should help the model in converging to a better solution [39].
Finally Adam optimizer [40] is used6.
5.2
Evaluation Metrics
To compare the results of the experiments and so different model configurations,
a proper evaluation framework is required. Here the metrics used to measure the
performance of models are described.
Accuracy (ACC)
The accuracy of the model is straightforward:
ACC = correct predictions
total predictions
(5.1)
Where a prediction is correct if and only if, considered an image, all the predicted
labels match correctly the target ones. For example:
• If 0011 is the target label and 0011 is the model’s prediction, then the pre-
diction is correct.
• If 0011 is the target label and 0001 is the model’s prediction, then the predic-
tion will be counted as wrong even if the last label was correctly attributed.
The problem with accuracy is that it does not capture fully the performance of
the model considering an unbalanced dataset. To make it simple, consider a
binary classification problem where the two classes have an unbalance of 10:100,
meaning that in 100 samples there will be 90 examples from the majority class,
and 10 from the minority one. In this case the accuracy would be 90% even if the
model predicted always the majority class for every example in the dataset. The
same reasoning holds also for multi-label classification problems whenever strong
unbalances are present within the dataset, therefore, other metrics to measure the
model’s performance are required.
To this purpose, it is useful to break down the correct and incorrect predictions of
the model, and collect them into the so-called confusion matrix (see Figure 5.4).
• TP (true positive) represents the number of correct positive predictions.
• FP (false positive) represents the number of wrong positive predictions.
6Within NNs, optimizers are algorithms/methods responsible to update the model’s parameters
in such a way to minimize the loss function
44
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:53==
• TN (true negative) represents the number of correct negative predictions.
• FN (false negative) represents the number of wrong negative predictions.
Figure 5.4: Confusion matrix
In this case, since this is a multi-label problem, a confusion matrix is defined for
each defect class, and from them, it is possible to define other metrics specific to
each oxide layer type (uniform, spot, shadow, spot on shadow).
Precision
Precision points out the percentage of true positives out of all the predicted posi-
tives.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(5.2)
Recall
Recall tells the percentage of predicted positives out of all the positives. In other
words, out of the total positives present, how many of them the model was able
to detect.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(5.3)
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
45
==PAGE:54==
F1 Score
F1 score is an indicator that puts together precision and recall by extracting their
harmonic mean.
F1 Score = 2 ∗(Precision ∗Recall)
Precision + Recall
(5.4)
These metrics allow to better understand if the model is going in the right direction
in case of an unbalanced dataset, but still, they are defined for each class sepa-
rately. Therefore, it is useful to aggregate them and define measures to evaluate
the overall performance of the model.
Macro Measures
The term ’macro’ is used to indicate the average of a certain measure over all
classes, for example:
Macro Precision = P Uniform + P Spot + P Shadow + P Spot on Shadow
4
(5.5)
Micro Measures
The micro average of a certain measure is taken by considering all TP, TN, FP,
and FN over all classes, for example:
Micro Precision =
n_classes
∑
i
TPi
n_classes
∑
i
TPi +
n_classes
∑
i
FPi
(5.6)
Mean Average Precision (mAP)
Mean average precision is an indicator that, as macro and micro measures, tries
to give a comprehensive idea of the model’s performance from another point of
view. Here, the key concept is the confidence threshold (CT) with which predic-
tions are translated into labels by the model. To keep it simple, consider a binary
classification task as the one depicted in Table 5.3 where ’Prediction’ is the prob-
ability that the considered example is a positive one: by varying the confidence
threshold, the result of classification varies too.
So, there will be different measures of precision and recall for the two confidence
thresholds. Specifically, the lower CT, the lower will be the number of FN and
so the higher will be recall; on the other hand the number of FP will increase
and so the lower will be the precision. Vice versa, the higher CT, the higher will
be precision while recall will decrease. Therefore, there is a trade-off between
46
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:55==
CT = 0.9
CT = 0.75
Examples
Ground Truth
Prediction
Label
Label
Example 1
1
0.93
1
TP
1
TP
Example 2
1
0.87
0
FN
1
TP
Example 3
0
0.82
0
TN
1
FP
Example 4
1
0.79
0
FN
1
TP
Example 5
0
0.72
0
TN
0
TN
Table 5.3: Label assignation and classification varying the confidence threshold
precision and recall for the value of CT. One way to visualize the trade-off be-
tween precision and recall for different confidence threshold values is through a
precision-recall curve, which plots the precision values against the corresponding
recall values (see Figure 5.5 for an example).
Figure 5.5: An example of precision-recall curve
To define a measure independent from the confidence threshold is therefore very
useful in order to evaluate the model: average precision does the job by con-
densing the precision-recall curve into a scalar value. Indeed, AP is equal to the
area under the curve as 5.7 suggests7.
75.7 can be calculated with numerical methods as the 11-point interpolation [41]
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
47
==PAGE:56==
Average Precision (AP) =
∫1
r=0
p(r) dr
(5.7)
In a multi-label classification framework as this one, AP can be calculated for each
class and then the mean of all these values can be extracted to have a global
measure: this is the definition of the mean average precision (mAP):
mean Average Precision (mAP) =
1
n_classes
n_classes
∑
i
APi
(5.8)
Hamming Score (HA)
The Hamming score is a measure that accounts for partially correct labels. In
other words, if the ground truth for an image is 0110, and the model prediction is
0010, the prediction is neither completely wrong nor completely correct. HA has
not a specific formula, but it is possible to get the idea with the following algorithm:
1. Get predictions and ground truth for every image. For example ground truth
= 0110 and prediction = 0010 for a single image.
2. Split predictions and ground truth into the single parts (in this case the single
digits of the sequences).
3. Compare the corresponding digits of ground truth and relative prediction:
get the number of correct predictions.
4. Divide the number of correct predictions by the number of total predictions.
Metrics Framework
With this said, experiments will be evaluated with the following metrics:
• Mean Average Precision (mAP)
• Accuracy (ACC)
• Hamming Score (HA)
• Micro F1 Score (CF1)
• Macro F1 Score (OF1)
Precision and recall are not reported as they are accounted inside F1 score.
5.3
Experiment Design
5.3.1
Loss Functions Parameters Tuning
The values of γ−and γ+ in 4.12 should be tuned to the optimal value for this case.
Since the two focusing parameters are hyperparameters for the model, the tuning
is carried out on the validation split: in other words, the metrics to compare the
results for different values of the gammas are taken by testing the model on the
validation dataset.
48
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:57==
Gamma Positive γ+
Ben-Baruch et al. in [37] showed how the best results are obtained for γ+ = 0
(see Figure 5.6). Therefore, γ+ = 0 is adopted in all experiments concerning
asymmetric loss (ASL) for both InceptionV3 and ResNet50. Note that for focal
loss there is no distinction between the focusing parameters of negatives and
positives as γ+ = γ−.
Figure 5.6: mAP vs γ+ [37]
Gamma Negative γ−
Gamma negative has to be greater than gamma positive in order to down-weight
more the contribution of the easy negatives than the one of easy positives as dis-
cussed in 4.2.4. For this reason, values from 1 to 3 are tested for both ResNet50
and InceptionV3. Each value of gamma γ−is tested 3 times with three different
random seeds: mean and standard deviation are then taken for each metric (see
table 5.4). All the results are visible in Figure A.2 for ResNet50 and in Figure A.3
for InceptionV3.
5.3.2
β-VAE Tuning
The hyperparameters relative to the β-VAE models should be tuned. These pa-
rameters are chosen by optimizing the mean squared error between the generated
images and the real ones.
MSE = 1
n
n
∑
i
(yi −˜yi)
(5.9)
Indeed, when an image is given to the model, this generates another image trying
to reconstruct the input according to the framework discussed in 3.1.3 for β-VAEs.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
49
==PAGE:58==
Model
Random Seed
mAP
ACC
HA
OF1
CF1
ResNet50
42
0,9483
0,8982
0,9665
0,9273
0,9106
43
0,9445
0,9002
0,9675
0,9291
0,9099
44
0,9557
0,8972
0,9660
0,9262
0,9040
mean
0,9495
0,8986
0,9670
0,9275
0,9082
std
0,0056
0,0015
0,0007
0,0015
0,0037
Table 5.4: Results for ResNet50 with γ−= 1
Obviously, the reconstructed image can’t be equal to the input because of how the
model is designed, this is why it does not tend to 0 as training proceeds(Figure
5.7).
The chosen learning rate is η = 0.002 and the number of epochs is epochs = 400
for both models as the steady state for the reconstruction loss is already reached
by that time as Figure 5.7 shows.
Figure 5.7: Reconstruction loss vs number of epochs for class ”Spot + Spot on
shadow”
The remaining hyperparameters to tune are the latent space dimension and β.
Where β is the weight of the KL divergence within equation 4.3, the higher is β,
the more the model is encouraged in learning a disentangled representation of the
data; and the latent space dimension is the dimension of the inputs encoded, in
other words, the dimensions of the vectors µ and σ (mean and standard deviation).
50
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:59==
5.4
Experimets’ Framework
As mentioned in 4.1, the influence on the performance of the addition of artificial
images is studied by creating different datasets on which models are then trained.
The augmented classes are ”Spot + Spot on Shadow” and ”Spot + Shadow + Spot
on Shadow”, so the datasets differ only in the content of artificial images of those
classes, see table 5.5.
Both of the chosen pretrained models (ResNet50 and InceptionV3) are used with
different loss functions: cross entropy loss8 (equation 4.4), focal loss (equation
4.6), and asymmetric loss (equation 4.12). Moreover, all configurations are tested
with and without pretraining, in other words, in case of no pretraining, the model
has only the architecture proper of ResNet50 and Inceptionv3, without any prior
knowledge coming from past training on other datasets. This is done in order to
understand whether the knowledge gained previously is also applicable to this
task. Finally, in order to have a fair comparison with the state of the art, a baseline
experiment is added: it runs following a powerset approach (see 3.1.1) and it is
powered in one case by ResNet50, and in the other by InceptionV3 to have a
baseline for comparison for both models.
The configurations are summed up in table 5.6
Dataset
Art. Images 2 + 4
Art. Images 2 + 3 + 4
Original Dataset
0
0
Artificial Dataset 1
37
47
Artificial Dataset 2
74
94
Table 5.5: Datasets’ content of artificial images
Model
Loss Function
Pretrain
ResNet50
ASL
TRUE
ResNet50
FL
TRUE
ResNet50
BCE
TRUE
ResNet50
ASL
FALSE
ResNet50
FL
FALSE
8Cross entropy loss (CE) is used for classification tasks having only 2 possible labels. In case
of multi-label classification, the function is adapted in the binary cross entropy (BCE).
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
51
==PAGE:60==
ResNet50
BCE
FALSE
ResNet50
CE(PowerSet)
TRUE
InceptionV3
ASL
TRUE
InceptionV3
FL
TRUE
InceptionV3
BCE
TRUE
InceptionV3
ASL
FALSE
InceptionV3
FL
FALSE
InceptionV3
BCE
FALSE
InceptionV3
CE(PowerSet)
TRUE
Table 5.6: Models’ configurations
Each experiment is carried out 3 times in order to extract the mean and standard
deviation of all metrics. In the end, the configuration showing the best perfor-
mance is used to obtain the desired visual representation of the evolution of the
defect.
52
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:61==
6
Results and Discussion
6.1
β-VAE Tuning
To find the optimal parameters, one is kept still while the other is varied and vice
versa. In Figure A.1 it is possible to see which values of the hyperparameters
minimize the reconstruction loss. In table 6.2 those parameters are summarized.
Class
1
Uniform
2
Spot
3
Shadow
4
Spot on Shadow
Table 6.1:
Class-numbers corrispon-
dence
Class
Beta
Latent Dimension
2 + 4
2
256
2 + 3 + 4
6
256
Table 6.2: Optim hyperparams
For what concerns class 2+3+4, the configuration with the hyperparameters of
table 6.2 is already tested since β = 6 is the value kept fixed for the tuning of
the latent dimension. On the other hand, for class 2+4 the configuration with the
parameters shown in the table is tested: the final reconstruction loss is higher than
the one reported with parameters β = 6 and latent dimension = 256, therefore,
the latter is adopted.
Class
Beta
Latent Dimension
2 + 4
6
256
2 + 3 + 4
6
256
Table 6.3: Tuned hyperparameters for β-VAE models
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
53
==PAGE:62==
6.2
Loss Function Parameters Tuning
For what concerns ResNet50, γ−= 1 seems to be the best choice for all metrics.
On the other hand, InceptionV3 shows higher ACC with γ−= 1, but for mAP and
CF1 γ−= 3 seems to be preferable. HA and OF1 do not show any significant
variation with γ−.
In the end, γ−= 1 is adopted for ResNet50 as all the metrics are higher for this
value, while γ−= 3 is adopted for InceptionV3: indeed, despite a slightly lower
accuracy (it remains over 0.9 in any case) CF1 and mAP are significantly higher:
in multi-label classification, these parameters together with OF1 are the most im-
portant ones as they provide a full description of the model’s performance since
they account for all classes. Note that these are also the focusing parameters
adopted in the focal loss of the respective pretrained models.
Recalling the meaning of the focusing parameter, the higher the value of γ−, the
lower will be the contribution of the easy negatives to the loss function according
to equation 4.12 and Figure 4.8. This suggests that the contribution of easy nega-
tives needs to be down-weighted more for InceptionV3 with respect to ResNet50
when using asymmetric loss.
6.3
Comparison of Experiments’ Results
The best configuration is the one that maximizes mAP, CF1, and OF1 [42]. As a
matter of fact, these are the measures that provide a deeper and more complete
understanding of the model’s performance with respect to other measures like
accuracy. Indeed, accuracy may hide classification errors regarding classes with
few examples with respect to others [43]: this may be one of the reasons why this
metric is not even presented in many MLC works [37][44].
6.3.1
Discussion
Experiment results are grouped by model (ResNet50 or InceptionV3) and by pre-
train1 (True or false). The baselines only have pretrain = true in order to use
them as grounds for comparison between the groups with pretraining and without
pretraining.
General Trends
Starting from this last group, from Figures A.4 and A.5 it is evident how the power-
set baseline dominates all the model configurations with pretrain = False in all the
metrics2. This clearly points out how the knowledge gained from previous training
1The modoels with pretrain = False only have the architecture of ResNet50 or Inception V3.
2Mean average precision (mAP) is not defined for powerset since this is a metric proper of multi
label classification problems. As a matter of fact, according to the powerset approach, the MLC
problem is transformed into a multi class one.
54
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:63==
on different datasets is useful also for different tasks, including this one. Moreover,
it is interesting to notice the difference between the trends of the baseline and the
rest of the models both for the ResNet50 and InceptionV3 groups: the powerset
method has a maximum in correspondence of the Artificial Dataset 1 for all met-
rics, while, all the other models seem to have a minimum except only for BCE in
the InceptionV3 group and ASL in ResNet50 for what concerns CF1. In addition,
remaining in the groups without pretraining, the powerset baseline seems to have
reduced variability when powered by ResNet50 with respect to InceptionV3 while
no significant difference about this is noticed for the other models. This behavior
is confirmed, and magnified, also in the group with pretraining = True, suggesting
in this way that pretraining increases significantly the variability of the baseline.
Moving to the groups with pretraining, even though all models seem to get close
to the baseline for what concerns all metrics, the latter always appears on top in
the correspondence of Art. Dataset 1, confirming in this way that a slight increase
in the number of artificial images can increase its performance. But this is not
true for all the other models, which show again a minimum in that position: this
time the only exception is ASL for what concerns mAP in InceptionV3 which goes
down again also for Art Dataset 2.
Effect of Artificial Images
The groups without pretraining do not show any particular improvement in perfor-
mance with the addition of artificial images. The only configuration that seems to
have an increase in all metrics is the already mentioned baseline with its maxi-
mum at Art. Dataset 1, but, besides that, the others only show an increase when
moving to Art. Dataset 2 that brings the performance back to the original value
for those models that found a minimum in the middle position.
Conversely, in the groups with pretraining, there is a substantial difference in the
behavior between those models powered by ResNet50 and those powered by
InceptionV3. In the first case, except for the baseline, all models see an increase
in all metrics when passing from the original dataset to Art. Dataset 2, while for
InceptionV3, the behavior with the minimum at Art. Dataset 1 is confirmed also
with pretraining.
Loss functions
As for loss functions, pretraining appears to be once again a key factor. when the
models do not have the knowledge from previous training, FOC and ASL are al-
ways at the bottom in all metrics and for both of the architectures. In these cases,
BCE is the one that allows to achieve the highest performance. Conversely, con-
sidering the pretrained architectures, InceptionV3 plots show how ASL manages
to get on top of BCE in some metrics, but only for Art. Dataset 1; but, on the other
hand, with pretrained ResNet50, ASL reaches the top position for almost all met-
rics and for all datasets, in some cases passing even the baseline. Despite this
improvement, ASL is still at the bottom for what concerns ACC and HA together
with FOC: the explanation relies upon how those functions are designed. Indeed,
by down-weighting the contribution of easy samples (both positives and negatives
for FOC and only negatives for ASL), the respective models focus more on learn-
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
55
==PAGE:64==
ing from harder samples; this may result in a slight drop in accuracy (and so also in
the HA score) caused by the fact that, with these arrangements, the model is not
as much capable as it was with BCE in recognizing easy samples like ”Shadow”
and ”Uniform” for example, which represent the vast majority of instances in the
datasets. But, as mentioned before, ACC is not important as the other metrics
given the large unbalance in the dataset.
6.3.2
Model’s Choice
As stated before, the most important metrics to consider when evaluating a MLC
model are CF1, OF1, and mAP; the latter especially is the one that many re-
searchers try to maximize when dealing with this kind of task. For these reasons,
the chosen configuration is the following:
Architecture
Loss function
Pretrain
Trained on
ResNet50
ASL
True
Art. Dataset 2
Table 6.4: Chosen model configuration
This model presents the highest mAP, and the highest average values of OF1
and CF1 scores among all configurations3, considering both ResNet50 and In-
ceptionV3 architectures. Therefore, this is the model used to realize the final
classification plot of the evolution of the oxide layer.
6.4
Classification Plot
The final classification plot is displayed in Figure A.8. A plot like this represents
the classification of the oxide layer types observed in the cone phase of a pro-
duction run. The plot is organized in monocrystal diameter ranges of 2.5mm: all
the labels given to images belonging to a certain range are grouped and repre-
sented in a stacked bar. Within a bar, each color is referred to a different label
according to the legend: by looking at the amplitude of a single bar component
it is possible to have an idea of the number of images presenting that particular
type of oxide layer in that range. Note that, considering a single bar, the sum of
the occurrences of all labels (the bar height) is not equal to the number of images
in that diameter range: this is a multi-label classification problem, therefore, an
image may present a defect of type ”Shadow”, and another of type ”Spot” at the
same time for example; in other words the bar height is equal to the number of
images in that range only in case all those images have only 1 given label (and
they all present oxide layer).
3The OF1 and CF1 scores of the chosen model configuration are 0.1% lower with respect to
the highest OF1 and CF1.
56
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:65==
In Figure A.9 it is possible to see the same plot for another production run. The two
plots show how different production runs may be interested mainly by different ox-
ide layer types. The first one (Figure A.8) seems to have a large presence of ”Spot
on Shadow” defects, especially on the highest diameters, and a little presence of
”Uniform” defects; on the other hand, the second one is dominated by ”Spot” and
”Shadow” defects which were present also before, but in lower measure. More-
over, the second one (Figure A.9) has a content of ”Spot on Shadow” defects
significantly lower with respect to the other, in addition, the ”Uniform” defects are
almost not present.
By correlating simple observations like this with the process parameters of differ-
ent production runs it may be possible to understand what is causing a certain
defect type. Also, comparing plots from different production runs might make
emerge particular patterns like schemes of defects around certain diameters, or
sequences of defects in general. This would ease even more the correlation with
process parameters, and so the root-cause analysis.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
57
==PAGE:66==
7
Conclusion
The purpose of this work was to create an automated system based on deep
learning for the recognition and classification of the oxide layer types observed
during the first phases of the production of silicon monocrystals using the float
zone method. The main obstacle to this was the scarcity of examples for some
classes of defects.
This issue has been addressed by exploring several loss functions: standard Bi-
nary Cross Entropy and novel ones such as Focal Loss and Asymmetric Loss.
They have been tested on different pretrained model architectures. Additionally,
generative models (beta-VAEs) have been used to create artificial images belong-
ing to the minority classes to be added in the training phase of the classification
model.
The results showed how the best performance has been reached using Asymmet-
ric Loss, even though standard Binary Cross Entropy was still a valid option. More-
over, the addition of a small number of artificial images was proven to increase,
even if slightly, the performance of the model, but only for certain architectures
(ResNet50).
The interesting takeaway relies in the generative models: even though the number
of artificial images with which they have been trained is relatively low compared
to the quantity that could be expected when dealing with deep learning models, a
positive effect has been observed for a model architecture following their addition.
This suggests that further works may focus on increasing the number of original
images of the under-represented classes to increase also the training data of the
generative models. In this way, higher-quality artificial images would be available
and they could improve further the performance of the classification model.
In conclusion, the mentioned methodology allowed to design a classification model
which satisfies the requirements in terms of performance, and returns a classifi-
cation plot representing the fingerprint of a production run for what concerns the
evolution of the oxide layer.
58
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Werner Zulehner. “Historical overview of silicon crystal pulling development”.
In: Materials Science and Engineering: B 73.1-3 (2000), pp. 7–15.
[2]
Jasper Kouwenberg. “Fluorescent Nuclear Track Detectors for Alpha Parti-
cle Measurement”. PhD thesis. July 2018.
[3]
Thierry Duffar. Crystal growth processes based on capillarity: Czochralski,
floating zone, shaping and crucible techniques. John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
[4]
G. Müller and J. Friedrich. “Crystal Growth, Bulk: Methods”. In: Encyclope-
dia of Condensed Matter Physics. Ed. by Franco Bassani, Gerald L. Liedl,
and Peter Wyder. Oxford: Elsevier, 2005, pp. 262–274. ISBN: 978-0-12-
369401-0. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B0-12-369401-9/00416-2. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B0123694019004162.
[5]
Nico Werner. “Analysis and automation of the crucible-free Floating Zone
(FZ) growth of silicon crystals”. PhD thesis. Berlin, Technische Universität
Berlin, Diss., 2014, Jan. 2014. DOI: 10.14279/depositonce-4075.
[6]
Hao Wu, Qi Liu, and Xiaodong Liu. “A review on deep learning approaches
to image classification and object segmentation”. In: Computers, Materials
& Continua 60.2 (2019).
[7]
YCAP Reddy, P Viswanath, and B Eswara Reddy. “Semi-supervised learn-
ing: A brief review”. In: Int. J. Eng. Technol 7.1.8 (2018), p. 81.
[8]
Adane Nega Tarekegn, Mario Giacobini, and Krzysztof Michalak. “A review
of methods for imbalanced multi-label classification”. In: Pattern Recognition
118 (2021), p. 107965. ISSN: 0031-3203. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
patcog.2021.107965. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0031320321001527.
[9]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. “Focal loss for dense object detection”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 2017, pp. 2980–
2988.
[10]
Dhatri Ganda and Rachana Buch. “Recent Trends in Programming Lan-
guages A Survey on Multi Label Classification”. In: Recent Trends in Pro-
gramming Languages (2018), pp. 19–23. ISSN: 2455-1821. URL: www .
stmjournals.com.
[11]
A Santos, A Canuto, and Antonino Feitosa Neto. “A comparative analysis of
classification methods to multi-label tasks in different application domains”.
In: Int. J. Comput. Inform. Syst. Indust. Manag. Appl 3 (2011), pp. 218–227.
[12]
Jesse Read, Bernhard Pfahringer, and Geoff Holmes. “Multi-label classifi-
cation using ensembles of pruned sets”. In: 2008 eighth IEEE international
conference on data mining. IEEE. 2008, pp. 995–1000.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
59
==PAGE:68==
[13]
Jesse Read. “A pruned problem transformation method for multi-label clas-
sification”. In: Proc. 2008 New Zealand Computer Science Research Stu-
dent Conference (NZCSRS 2008). Vol. 143150. 2008, p. 41.
[14]
Raed Alazaidah, Fadi Thabtah, and Qasem Al-Radaideh. “A multi-label clas-
sification approach based on correlations among labels”. In: International
Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 6.2 (2015), pp. 52–
59.
[15]
Nicolás García-Pedrajas, Juan Romero, and Gonzalo Cerruela. “A Proposal
for Local k Values for k-Nearest Neighbor Rule”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks and Learning Systems 28 (Dec. 2015), pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.
1109/TNNLS.2015.2506821.
[16]
Eva Cetinic and Sonja Grgic. “Automated painter recognition based on im-
age feature extraction”. In: Proceedings ELMAR-2013. 2013, pp. 19–22.
[17]
N. Dalal and B. Triggs. “Histograms of oriented gradients for human detec-
tion”. In: 2005 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05). Vol. 1. 2005, 886–893 vol. 1. DOI: 10.1109/
CVPR.2005.177.
[18]
Mrinal Tyagi. Hog(histogram of oriented gradients). July 2021. URL: https:
//towardsdatascience.com/hog-histogram-of-oriented-gradients-67ecd887675f.
[19]
Local binary patterns. Oct. 2022. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Local_
binary_patterns.
[20]
Christian Janiesch, Patrick Zschech, and Kai Heinrich. “Machine learning
and deep learning”. In: Electronic Markets 31.3 (2021), pp. 685–695.
[21]
Michael A. Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. misc. 2018. URL:
http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/.
[22]
Vijaya Kumar .R, B. Rao, and K. Raju. “Handwritten Hindi Digits Recognition
Using Convolutional Neural Network with RMSprop Optimization”. In: June
2018, pp. 45–51. DOI: 10.1109/ICCONS.2018.8662969.
[23]
Qizhe Xie et al. “Self-training with noisy student improves imagenet classi-
fication”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition. 2020, pp. 10687–10698.
[24]
Chunkai Zhang et al. “Over-sampling algorithm based on vae in imbalanced
classification”. In: Cloud Computing–CLOUD 2018: 11th International Con-
ference, Held as Part of the Services Conference Federation, SCF 2018,
Seattle, WA, USA, June 25–30, 2018, Proceedings 11. Springer. 2018, pp. 334–
344.
[25]
Ozge Oztimur Karadag and Ozlem Erdas Cicek. “Empirical evaluation of the
effectiveness of variational autoencoders on data augmentation for the im-
age classification problem”. In: International Journal of Intelligent Systems
and Applications in Engineering 8.2 (2020), pp. 116–120.
[26]
Alceu Bissoto, Eduardo Valle, and Sandra Avila. “Gan-based data augmen-
tation and anonymization for skin-lesion analysis: A critical review”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recog-
nition. 2021, pp. 1847–1856.
[27]
Alankrita Aggarwal, Mamta Mittal, and Gopi Battineni. “Generative adver-
sarial network: An overview of theory and applications”. In: International
Journal of Information Management Data Insights 1.1 (2021), p. 100004.
60
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:69==
[28]
Karol Kurach et al. “The gan landscape: Losses, architectures, regulariza-
tion, and normalization”. In: (2018).
[29]
Lilian Weng. From autoencoder to beta-vae. Aug. 2018. URL: https : / /
lilianweng.github.io/posts/2018-08-12-vae/.
[30]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object detection with
region proposal networks”. In: Advances in neural information processing
systems 28 (2015).
[31]
Irina Higgins et al. “beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a con-
strained variational framework”. In: International conference on learning rep-
resentations. 2017.
[32]
Simone Bianco et al. “Benchmark analysis of representative deep neural
network architectures”. In: IEEE access 6 (2018), pp. 64270–64277.
[33]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[34]
Wanshun Wong. What is residual connection? Dec. 2021. URL: https://
towardsdatascience.com/what-is-residual-connection-efb07cab0d55.
[35]
Christian Szegedy et al. “Rethinking the inception architecture for computer
vision”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. 2016, pp. 2818–2826.
[36]
Pytorch. Finetuning torchvision models. URL: https://pytorch.org/tutorials/
beginner/finetuning_torchvision_models_tutorial.html.
[37]
Tal Ridnik et al. “Asymmetric loss for multi-label classification”. In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 2021,
pp. 82–91.
[38]
Colorjitter. URL: https : / / pytorch . org / vision / main / generated / torchvision .
transforms.ColorJitter.html.
[39]
Leslie N Smith and Nicholay Topin. “Super-convergence: Very fast train-
ing of neural networks using large learning rates”. In: Artificial intelligence
and machine learning for multi-domain operations applications. Vol. 11006.
SPIE. 2019, pp. 369–386.
[40]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Opti-
mization. 2017. arXiv: 1412.6980 [cs.LG].
[41]
Rafael Padilla, Sergio L Netto, and Eduardo AB Da Silva. “A survey on
performance metrics for object-detection algorithms”. In: 2020 international
conference on systems, signals and image processing (IWSSIP). IEEE.
2020, pp. 237–242.
[42]
Zhao-Min Chen et al. “Multi-label image recognition with graph convolutional
networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition. 2019, pp. 5177–5186.
[43]
Margherita Grandini, Enrico Bagli, and Giorgio Visani. Metrics for Multi-
Class Classification: an Overview. 2020. arXiv: 2008.05756 [stat.ML].
[44]
Jack Lanchantin et al. General Multi-label Image Classification with Trans-
formers. 2020. arXiv: 2011.14027 [cs.CV].
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:71==
A
Plots and Results
A.1
β-VAE Tuning
(a) Tuning for ”Spot + Spot on Shadow”
(b) Tuning for ”Spot + Shadow + Spot on Shadow”
Figure A.1: β-VAE models tuning
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
63
==PAGE:72==
β-VAE Tuning (Spot + Spot on Shadow)
Reconstruction Loss
Latent Dim
β
39633,4609
256
6
49250,4688
256
2
48418,9414
512
6
41789,6523
512
2
42126,9922
512
4
43695,6133
512
8
48648,2539
1024
6
39722,2617
2048
6
Table A.1: Results from β-VAE tuning on class ”Spot” + ”Spot on Shadow”
β-VAE Tuning (Spot + Shadow + Spot on Shadow)
Reconstruction Loss
Latent Dim
β
57882,4063
256
6
59478,6875
512
6
71900,5938
512
2
96818,3828
512
4
96152,5938
512
8
128688,5000
1024
6
110129,8594
2048
6
Table A.2: Results from β-VAE tuning on class ”Spot” + ”Shadow” + ”Spot on
Shadow”
64
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:73==
A.2
Loss Function Tuning
Gamma Negative Tuning (Original Dataset)
Configuration
mAP
ACC
HA
OF1
CF1
ResNet50
Mean
0,9495
0,8986
0,9667
0,9275
0,9082
ASL
Std
0,0056
0,0015
0,0007
0,0015
0,0037
γ−= 1
ResNet50
Mean
0,9426
0,8901
0,9641
0,9221
0,9010
ASL
Std
0,0103
0,0095
0,0032
0,0068
0,0160
γ−= 2
ResNet50
Mean
0,9378
0,8917
0,9653
0,9252
0,9020
ASL
Std
0,0054
0,0049
0,0004
0,0008
0,0029
γ−= 3
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9349
0,9090
0,9689
0,9319
0,9120
ASL
Std
0,0058
0,0029
0,0009
0,0018
0,0062
γ−= 1
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9330
0,9022
0,9678
0,9299
0,9078
ASL
Std
0,0096
0,0026
0,0011
0,0025
0,0057
γ−= 2
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9426
0,9005
0,9676
0,9297
0,9159
ASL
Std
0,0026
0,0028
0,0009
0,0019
0,0030
γ−= 3
Table A.3: Results from γ−tuning
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.2: Tuning γ−for ResNet50
66
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.3: Tuning γ−for InceptionV3
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
67
==PAGE:76==
A.3
Model Configurations’ Results
Model Configurations’ Results (Original Dataset)
Configuration
mAP
ACC
HA
OF1
CF1
ResNet50
Mean
0,9684
0,9069
0,9696
0,9338
0,9234
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0010
0,0054
0,0014
0,0032
0,0040
ASL
ResNet50
Mean
0,9652
0,9130
0,9690
0,9311
0,9196
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0024
0,0021
0,0004
0,0013
0,0022
FOC
ResNet50
Mean
0,9683
0,9131
0,9705
0,9314
0,9218
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0030
0,0022
0,0006
0,0015
0,0037
BCE
ResNet50
Mean
0,9622
0,8866
0,9638
0,9218
0,9109
Pretrain = false
Std
0,0024
0,0015
0,0003
0,0009
0,0025
ASL
ResNet50
Mean
0,9632
0,8900
0,9638
0,9205
0,9167
Pretrain = false
Std
0,0008
0,0010
0,0005
0,0011
0,0034
FOC
ResNet50
Mean
0,9629
0,8932
0,9650
0,9234
0,9193
Pretrain = false
Std
0,0038
0,0020
0,0004
0,0008
0,0014
BCE
ResNet50
Mean
0,9178
0,9704
0,9305
0,9230
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0022
0,0006
0,0014
0,0041
CE (PowerSet)
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9679
0,9107
0,9711
0,9373
0,9253
68
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:77==
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0008
0,0016
0,0004
0,0010
0,0016
ASL
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9670
0,9093
0,9701
0,9355
0,9209
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0004
0,0032
0,0002
0,0011
0,0019
FOC
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9674
0,9205
0,9720
0,9385
0,9304
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0006
0,0020
0,0004
0,0010
0,0030
BCE
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9652
0,8856
0,9644
0,9238
0,9133
Pretrain = False
Std
0,0032
0,0030
0,0006
0,0011
0,0033
ASL
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9663
0,8929
0,9650
0,9227
0,9159
Pretrain = False
Std
0,0045
0,0030
0,0009
0,0018
0,0020
FOC
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9661
0,8957
0,9658
0,9246
0,9208
Pretrain = False
Std
0,0046
0,0057
0,0019
0,0041
0,0059
BCE
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9198
0,9711
0,9360
0,9238
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0010
0,0005
0,0010
0,0018
CE (Powerset)
Table A.4: Results from model configurations tested on the original dataset.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
69
==PAGE:78==
Model Configurations’ Results (Artificial Dataset 1)
Configuration
mAP
ACC
HA
OF1
CF1
ResNet50
Mean
0,9683
0,9058
0,9693
0,9333
0,9226
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0020
0,0022
0,0009
0,0019
0,0051
ASL
ResNet50
Mean
0,9652
0,9130
0,9702
0,9302
0,9186
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0006
0,0055
0,0014
0,0030
0,0036
FOC
ResNet50
Mean
0,9668
0,9126
0,9705
0,9281
0,9219
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0007
0,0017
0,0007
0,0017
0,0035
BCE
ResNet50
Mean
0,9603
0,8848
0,9632
0,9205
0,9152
Pretrain = false
Std
0,0028
0,0062
0,0014
0,0031
0,0030
ASL
ResNet50
Mean
0,9611
0,8914
0,9640
0,9208
0,9140
Pretrain = false
Std
0,0002
0,0034
0,0015
0,0037
0,0029
FOC
ResNet50
Mean
0,9616
0,8869
0,9632
0,9194
0,9164
Pretrain = false
Std
0,0033
0,0024
0,0007
0,0012
0,0017
BCE
ResNet50
Mean
0,9190
0,9710
0,9361
0,9272
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0025
0,0006
0,0012
0,0019
CE (PowerSet)
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9656
0,9033
0,9692
0,9331
0,9204
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0014
0,0041
0,0013
0,0027
0,0061
70
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:79==
ASL
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9663
0,9025
0,9673
0,9297
0,9154
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0005
0,0021
0,0003
0,0007
0,0001
FOC
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9675
0,9096
0,9720
0,9303
0,9165
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0015
0,0012
0,0002
0,0004
0,0022
BCE
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9644
0,8833
0,9640
0,9227
0,9129
Pretrain = False
Std
0,0002
0,0067
0,0027
0,0061
0,0076
ASL
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9616
0,8882
0,9637
0,9201
0,9072
Pretrain = False
Std
0,0025
0,0024
0,0003
0,0009
0,0061
FOC
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9672
0,8957
0,9664
0,9261
0,9164
Pretrain = False
Std
0,0037
0,0049
0,0015
0,0037
0,0055
BCE
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9195
0,9713
0,9366
0,9244
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0059
0,0018
0,0039
0,0089
CE (Powerset)
Table A.5: Results from model configurations tested on artificial dataset 1.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
71
==PAGE:80==
Model Configurations’ Results (Artificial Dataset 2)
Configuration
mAP
ACC
HA
OF1
CF1
ResNet50
Mean
0,9712
0,9097
0,9705
0,9359
0,9248
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0020
0,0039
0,0010
0,0020
0,0088
ASL
ResNet50
Mean
0,9675
0,9137
0,9708
0,9340
0,9234
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0021
0,0006
0,0012
0,0045
0,0043
FOC
ResNet50
Mean
0,9705
0,9130
0,9705
0,9351
0,9254
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0025
0,0010
0,0008
0,0016
0,0050
BCE
ResNet50
Mean
0,9607
0,8851
0,9636
0,9212
0,9129
Pretrain = false
Std
0,0004
0,0080
0,0021
0,0046
0,0076
ASL
ResNet50
Mean
0,9601
0,8931
0,9652
0,9237
0,9207
Pretrain = false
Std
0,0022
0,0030
0,0013
0,0027
0,0049
FOC
ResNet50
Mean
0,9639
0,8937
0,9656
0,9244
0,9236
Pretrain = false
Std
0,0008
0,0054
0,0016
0,0039
0,0025
BCE
ResNet50
Mean
0,9174
0,9699
0,9337
0,9222
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0021
0,0007
0,0017
0,0056
CE (PowerSet)
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9635
0,9102
0,9708
0,9366
0,9267
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0047
0,0016
0,0006
0,0013
0,0057
72
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:81==
ASL
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9659
0,9152
0,9690
0,9356
0,9244
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0020
0,0017
0,0007
0,0028
0,0032
FOC
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9686
0,9205
0,9722
0,9388
0,9305
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0030
0,0023
0,0007
0,0015
0,0006
BCE
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9655
0,8869
0,9648
0,9242
0,9145
Pretrain = False
Std
0,0045
0,0028
0,0008
0,0017
0,0032
ASL
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9658
0,8901
0,9649
0,9229
0,9149
Pretrain = False
Std
0,0051
0,0050
0,0014
0,0028
0,0030
FOC
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9666
0,8968
0,9659
0,9248
0,9180
Pretrain = False
Std
0,0025
0,0013
0,0003
0,0010
0,0032
BCE
InceptionV3
Mean
0,9152
0,9702
0,9341
0,9213
Pretrain = True
Std
0,0041
0,0013
0,0027
0,0061
CE (Powerset)
Table A.6: Results from model configurations tested on artificial dataset 2.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.4: Results from ResNet50 with no pretraining
74
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:83==
Figure A.5: Results from InceptionV3 with no pretraining
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure A.6: Results from ResNet50 with pretraining
76
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:85==
Figure A.7: Results from InceptionV3 with pretraining
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.8: Classification plot of a production run.
78
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:87==
Figure A.9: Classification plot of another production run.
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
79
==PAGE:88==
80
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:89==
List of Figures
1.1
CZ process schematics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
FZ process detail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
FZ process schematics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Silicon polycrystal and monocrystal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
FZ machine chamber
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Image comparison: normal vs. oxide layer presence . . . . . . . .
6
1.7
Oxide layer types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.8
Oxide layer types combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.9
From images to classification plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1
Multi label and multi-class classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Labels distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1
Classifier Chains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Example of neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Example of CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
GAN model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Architecture of an AE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
Architecture of a VAE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.7
Transfer learning idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1
Steps of the work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Train split distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Artificial image
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Top-1 accuracy vs. computational complexity . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Residual connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6
Inception modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.7
Models’ classifier head . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.8
Focal loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.9
Monocrystal diam. in a production run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1
Images as sampled
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Preprocessing: before and after
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Brightness and contrast variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Confusion matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.5
An example of precision-recall curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.6
mAP vs γ+
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.7
Reconstruction loss
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.1 β-VAE models tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
81
==PAGE:90==
A.2 Tuning γ−for ResNet50 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.3 Tuning γ−for InceptionV3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.4 ResNet50 no pretraining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.5 InceptionV3 no pretraining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.6 ResNet50 with pretraining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.7 InceptionV3 with pretraining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.8 Classification plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
82
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
==PAGE:91==
List of Tables
2.1
General overview of popular datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1
Binary relevance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Label powerset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
New labels according to the LP method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.1
Brightness and contrast params
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Classification model’s hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
CT variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Results for ResNet50 with γ−= 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Datasets overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.6
Models’ configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.1
Class-numbers corrispondence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Optim hyperparams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3
Hyperparams for β-VAE models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.4
Chosen model configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.1 Results from β-VAE tuning 2+4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.2 Results from β-VAE tuning 2+4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.3 Results of γ−tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.4 Results original dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.5 Results art. dataset 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.6 Results art. dataset 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Deep learning monitoring of float-zone crystal growth silicon production
83
==PAGE:92==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kollegiebakken 13A, 2800 Kongens Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
