==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
The use of statistical pair potentials for
prediction of cognate TCR targets
Master thesis
Jeppe Nyg˚ard Samuelsen, s174577
Date: February 22, 2023
Supervisor: Morten Nielsen
Supervisor: Kamilla Kjærgaard Munk
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to give a major thanks to Morten Nielsen for supervising the project,
prodiving great inspiration, knowledge and encouragement. Big thanks to Kamilla Kjærgaard
Munk for supervising and sharing your expertise within structural biology and immunological
modelling. Thanks to the Immunoinformatics and Machine Learning group for great com-
pany and instructive scientific discussions. Lastly, thanks to my parents for proofreading and
support throughout the project.
2
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This paper investigates the molecular interactions that lie beyond T cell mediated immune
activation. Specifically, it explores the process of TCRpMHC I binding and the mechanisms
that are crucial in the maintenance between TCR and peptide. We applied a statistical method
based on structural data of TCRpMHC complexes, estimating binding energy between residue
pairs of the TCR and peptide based on atomic distances. Via this approach unknown TCR tar-
gets were scored and predicted upon, aiming to give high scores to binders and lower scores
to non-binders. Using a biased approach we were able to show significance between positive
and negative structural models. However, when using restricted conditions no clear pattern of
scoring preference between positive and negative models was proven.
Predicting immunological outcomes of unknown antigen’s binding to the TCR has widespread
practical application and is a major step in the field of computational immunology. While this
thesis obtained mixed results we believe that with more structural data and better validation
data this statistical application will have improved use in the future. By this study, we en-
lighten and grasp the amino acid preferences in the interaction between TCR and peptide,
obtaining knowledge for the use of future structural prediction appliances.
3
==PAGE:4==
Resum´e
I denne afhandling undersøges de molekylære interaktioner, der ligger bag T celle baseret im-
mun aktivering. Mere specifikt udforskes TCRpMHC I bindings-processen, herunder mekanis-
merne som er essentielle for opretholdelse af bindingen mellem TCR og peptid. Ved at an-
vende en statistisk metode baseret p˚a strukturel TCRpMHC kompleks data, estimerede vi
bindingsenergier mellem aminosyre par i TCR og peptid baseret p˚a atomiske længder. Med
denne tilgang blev ukendte TCR bindere scoret med m˚alet om at give en høj score til bindere
og en lavere score til ikke-bindere. Ved at bruge en biased fremgangsm˚ade fandt vi signifikant
forskel mellem positive og negative struktur modeller. Imidlertid kunne der ikke p˚avises en
klar preference i scoring af positive og negative modeller under begrænsede forhold.
At kunne forudsige immunologiske udfald af antigeners binding til TCR har udbredte prak-
tiske anvendelser og er et vigtigt skridt indenfor computational immunologi. Denne afhan-
dling opn˚aende blandede resultater, men det er efter vores bedste overbevisning, at denne
metode kan opn˚a forbedrede resultater i fremtiden med større mængder struktur- og eval-
ueringsdata. Med dette studie har vi belyst aminosyrepræferencerne i den grundlæggende
interaktion mellem TCR og peptid, og har opn˚aet viden til brug af fremtidig forskning.
4
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1. Introduction
8
1.1.
Immunological T cell pathways of recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.1.1.
The MHC I-peptide-TCR complex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.
Crystal structures and the PDB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.
Structural modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2. Methods
12
2.1.
Structural data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.
Force field construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1.
Pair potential calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2.
Scoring new TCR-peptide pairs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.
TCRpMHCmodels - constructing models for benchmarking . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.1.
Statistics of model scorings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.
Leave one out and force field restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3. Results
17
3.1.
The energy force field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1.
Energy force field statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.
Evaluating the force field - TCRpMHCmodels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.
Pseudocount contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.
Positional peptide scorings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5.
Model scoring dependencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5.1.
Model variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6.
CDR3 individual region evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4. Discussion
29
4.1.
Predicting on unknown complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.
The statistical use of structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3.
Comparison to associate studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.
Future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5. Conclusion
33
A. Peptide sequences
40
5
==PAGE:6==
B. CDR3 length distribution
41
C. PDB entry IDs
42
6
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
• APC - Antigen Presenting Cell
• BLOSUM - BLOcks SUbstitution Matrix
• CD - Cluster of Differentiation
• CDR - Complementarity Determining Region
• CRT - Calreticulin
• ER - Endoplasmic Reticulum
• ERp57 - Endoplasmic Reticulum Resident Protein 57
• HLA - Human Leukocyte Antigen
• HMM - Hidden Markov Model
• ID - Identity
• IEDB - The Immune Epitope Database
• LYRA - Lymphocyte Receptor Automated Modelling
• MHC - Major Histocompatibility Complex
• PDB - Protein Data Bank
• PLC - Peptide Loading Complex
• RMSD - Root Mean Squared Deviation
• SW - Swapped peptide
• TAP - Transporter Associated With Antigen Processing
• TCR - T Cell Receptor
• WT - Wildtype peptide
7
==PAGE:8==
1. Introduction
Over the last decades many yet unanswered questions within immunology have come closer
to an answer due to the use of computational methods and data. Predicting binding ability
to the TCR for unknown peptides is one of immunology and computational biology’s great
current objectives. This thesis was carried out with the original aim to follow up on Vadim
Karnaukhov and his team’s work of TCRen [1]. TCRen is an energy force field used to score
TCR-peptide amino acid contact pairs. In the article it was shown that there was a clear dif-
ference in the scoring between cognate peptides and non-binding peptides. Grasping whether
an MHC-peptide complex can start an immune reaction by TCR binding is an important mile-
stone towards understanding the molecular reactions that lie beyond activation of T cell medi-
ated immunity. Both in research and in practical applications predicting affinity and activation
ability of an unknown peptide has great opportunities, applying to fields such as vaccine de-
sign, cancer therapy, or infectious diseases [2, 3].
To this day it is the general belief that we have a lot to learn from structural protein data
[4]. If a simple statistical model like in TCRen can be applied successfully with limited data
available, the logic anticipation is that a large amount of information is held within structural
3D data of TCRpMHC complexes. In this paper we aim to use structural data for statisti-
cal predictions of energy binding potentials between unknown peptides and the TCR in the
TCRpMHC complex. The method is based on estimated binding potential enrichments be-
tween amino acid pairs in the active region of the protein complex.
1.1. Immunological T cell pathways of recognition
T cell recognition by APCs is highly dependent on the TCR expressing peptides bound to
MHC I and MHC II molecules. The CD8+ T cells recognize protein-derived peptides from
MHC I cells, while CD4+ T cells recognize peptides bound to MHC II molecules [5]. Some
other T cell types recognize other types of antigens. These include lipid antigens which
are recognized via CD1 receptors. This paper primarily associates and focuses on MHC I
molecules and CD8+ T cells, and they will be the general molecules of consideration.
Humans have three different genes encoding MHC I. These are HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C.
The peptide binding structure of the MHC I is composed of a membrane-distal groove which
is formed by two anti-parallel α helices overlaying an eight-strand β sheet. The groove struc-
ture corresponds to a contiguous amino acid sequence of the N-terminal region in the heavy
8
==PAGE:9==
chain. The peptides that are recognized by the TCR are products of proteolysis in the APCs.
In the cytosol the primary proteolytic mechanism is the proteasome or the 26S proteasome.
This complex is induced by the interferon-γ cytokine and the end products of the 26S protea-
some form the predominant source of peptides for MHC I binding. Once the protein has been
cleaved and peptide generated the MHC I can bind them in the ER following translocation
from the cytosol. MCH I as well as MHC II molecules can access peptides from both endoge-
neous and exogeneous antigens. One aspect which is important for the primary response and
activation of n¨aive CD8+ T cells is the ability of some dendritic cells to bind peptides derived
from exogenous proteins internalized by endocytosis or phagocytosis. This ability is called
cross-priming [6].
Peptide transportation from the ER relies on the TAP transporter. It is a heterodimeric protein,
consisting of the two subunits TAP1 and TAP2. Together with a number of other proteins
the TAP heterodimer forms the PLC. These are the TAP heterodimer, two tapasin-ERp57
conjugates, and up to two CRT molecules and MHC I-β2m dimers. As a general rule, cells
without TAP1 and TAP2 expression do not form MHC I-peptide complexes as no peptides are
imported into the ER [6].
1.1.1. The MHC I-peptide-TCR complex
Activation of the CD8+ T cells relies on the MHC I with a peptide bound to activate the T
cells through T cell receptor binding, employing a response in the T cells. In figure 1.1 the
TCRpMHC complex is visualized. Class I MHC molecules usually bind peptides of 8-10
residues length. The majority of known TCRs have heterodimers, an α and a β chain. These
chains both contact the peptide-MHC complex via three loops named the complementary de-
termining regions (CDRs). While the CDR1 and CDR2 are germline-encoded, the CDR3 is
formed in T cell maturation during a V(D)J-recombination by random selection of the variable
(V), diverse (D) and joined (J) gene segments. Due to this process, there is a great disparity
in the repertoire of TCRs between individuals, providing potential recognition of an extensive
number of antigens, defending the body against pathogens and toxins. The hypervariable re-
gions of the TCR exist in a number of different conformations which are known as canonical
structures [7]. Commonly, the CDR1 and CDR2 loops correspond to the interaction with the
MHC molecule while the interaction to the peptide mainly belongs to the CDR3 loop. The
CDR3 region lengths may vary slightly but the CDR3 α region usually has a length of 12-15
residues, while the CDR3 β region has a length of 13-15 residues [8].
9
==PAGE:10==
Figure (1.1)
The T cell receptor peptide MHC complex. The TCR comprises an α and a β
chain which forms the primary contact to the peptide antigen via the CDR3 region. The
CDR1 and CDR2 regions mainly form contacts to the HLA [9]. The CD3 regions (two CD3ϵ
chains, a CD3δ chain, and a CD3γ chain) associate with the TCR and the CD3ζ region,
generating an activation signal in the T cell [10].
1.2. Crystal structures and the PDB
The protein data bank (PDB) [11] holds all public information about known protein structures.
These include complexes, such as TCRpMHC I complexes. To this day, around 150 of these
complexes are contained within the PDB. Most of these are purified and analysed via X-ray
crystallography. X-ray crystallography is a purification method that exposes a high concen-
tration sample to a X-ray beam to obtain information about the structural symmetry, gained
from the pattern of diffraction spots [12]. These crystal structures come in different quality
determined by their resolution in ˚Angstr¨om ( ˚A). The experimental structures might be pure
and high quality. However, some structures and complexes come with missing residues or
longer stretches of missing sequences. Structural predictions rely heavily on high quantities
and quality of protein complex structures. In this paper the IEDB [13] was used to extract hu-
man TCRpMHC I complexes from the PDB to build a structural data set used for predictions
of binding and activation of unknown peptides.
10
==PAGE:11==
Figure (1.2)
The PDB interface for the structure 1AO7. The interface holds information
about the purification method, structure resolution, and r-value (a measure for the quality of
the atomic model) [14, 15].
1.3. Structural modelling
Few different tools exist to make computational models of protein structures and complexes.
The likes of AlphaFold [16] has revolutionized the protein folding area, managing highly
accurate 3D predictions using just the primary amino acid sequence of proteins. However, Al-
phaFold has difficulties predicting structures of larger protein complexes. The tool TCRpMHC-
models [17] serves to build PDB models of TCRpMHC complexes. It takes a TCR α, TCR
β, MHC and a peptide sequence as input. It then first models the TCR via use of the LYRA
tool [18]. The pMHC complex is modelled together via the MODELLER tool [19]. In the last
step the TCR and pMHC are assembled into the final model of a complex via MODELLER.
The pipeline can be been seen in figure 1.3. TCRpMHCmodels uses databases of known
structures for the template selection. These include one pMHC database, one TCR database
and one TCRpMHC database. The templates are selected to build a structure of the target
sequence. Template selection is based on the total ID to the target, but different weights can
be put on the MHC, peptide, TCR α and TCR β for the contribution to the total sequence ID.
Further, thresholds for sequence ID can be chosen to assist template selection.
11
==PAGE:12==
Figure (1.3)
Flowchart of the TCRpMHCmodels complex modelling procedure. A TCR α,
TCR β, MHC and peptide sequence is required as input. From these the TCR structure is
modelled with LYRA (TCR α depicted in light grey, TCR β depicted in dark grey). The
pMHC structure is modelled with MODELLER (MHC depicted in blue, peptide depicted in
orange). Finally, the TCR and pMHC is assembled together via MODELLER [17].
2. Methods
2.1. Structural data set
The data set consists of 3D structures of TCRpMHC complexes. It is a non-redundant set
of complexes gathered from the IEDB [13], containing human MHC class I complexes (all
HLAs and peptide lengths). The structures were cleaned for heteroatoms, the sequences were
aligned and duplicates removed. Complexes that had longer stretches of missing sequences
were also sorted away. These operations left us with a data set of 103 complexes. An overview
of the structural data set can be seen in table 2.1.
Nr. of 3D complexes
HLA restriction
Purification method
103
Human MHC I
X-RAY diffraction
Table (2.1)
Summary of the 3D crystal structure data used in the project.
12
==PAGE:13==
2.2. Force field construction
The concept of the force field scoring model was to form a matrix composing all residue to
residue pair potentials (a binding energy enrichment value). From the structural data the pair
potentials were estimated and this procedure is described in the following. First of all, LYRA
[18] was used to define the position of the CDR3 α and CDR3 β regions for the structures.
LYRA uses an HMM alignment profile to define the canonical structure of the TCR α and β
region as shown in figure 2.1. Via this definition the CDR3 regions as well as the peptide could
be picked out for each of the complexes for further analysis. We then needed to determine
residue pairs of interactions between CDR3 (both α and β) and peptide. For the work in this
thesis a residue to residue interaction was defined as the following:
A side chain atom from a CDR3 residue and a side chain atom from a peptide
residue are within 4 ˚
A of each other; the two residues are interacting.
Figure (2.1)
LYRA canonical structure assignment. These correspond to the CDR loops in
the TCR α and TCR β. In the above A1 = CDR1 α, A2 = CDR2 α, and A3 = CDR3 α. B1 =
CDR1 β, B2 = CDR2 β, and B3 = CDR3 β [18].
2.2.1. Pair potential calculations
For each of the structure data set complexes a binary contact map was formed, with the pep-
tide residues corresponding to columns and the CDR3 (α and β) residues the rows. A 1
corresponded to an interaction, while a 0 corresponded to no interaction between a pair. All
the binary contact maps were added up together and transformed into a new (now non-binary)
combined interaction map with the 20 different amino acids as rows and columns. This map
represented the raw interaction counts for all possible residue to residue pairs throughout the
structural data set. Due to having low contact counts (or zerocounts) for several pairs, a pseu-
docount value of 1 was added to each of the cells. After this the raw interaction counts (plus
13
==PAGE:14==
pseudocount) were made into frequencies, and an energy function using the Bolzmann rela-
tionship [20] was applied in order to normalize interaction frequencies. The process of going
from structures to energy force field is outlined in figure 2.2. The residue pair frequencies
were normalized via the energy function:
pos(a, b) = lnpobs(a,b)
pexp(a,b)
Here, a corresponds to a residue from the TCR, b corresponds to a residue from the peptide.
pobs corresponds to the observed probability of interaction between residue a and residue b in
the data set. pexp corresponds to the expected probability of interaction between residue a and
residue b, assuming random contact formation. pobs was defined as:
pobs(a, b) =
interactions(a, b)
P
a,b interactions(a, b)
where interactions(a, b) corresponds to the number of interactions observed between residue
a and residue b in the data set plus pseudocount. pexp was defined as:
pexp(a, b) = pobs(a) · pobs(b)
Here, pobs(a) corresponds to the total frequency of residue a and pobs(b) corresponds to the
total frequency of residue b. These are defined as:
pobs(a) =
X
i
pobs(a, i)
pobs(b) =
X
j
pobs(b, j)
Summation is carried out through all 20 amino acids which are denoted by i and j indices.
14
==PAGE:15==
Figure (2.2)
For each TCRpMHC crystal structure binary contact maps were formed. The
contact maps were added up and transformed into a raw interaction pair count map. The
counts were transformed to pair potentials via an energy function using a log transformation
as described in section 2.2.1. For more details on the force field, interaction counts and
values see Results section 3.1.
2.2.2. Scoring new TCR-peptide pairs
After transformation and normalization of the force field new TCR-peptide pairs could be
scored, aiming to give a high (positive) score to peptides with high TCR affinity. The score,
also described as the estimated binding energy enrichment, E, of a new complex, is calculated
as follows:
E =
X
kϵTCR,lϵpeptide
δ(k, l) · e(ak, bl)
Summation is carried out through all residues k in the TCR and all residues in the peptide l.
δ(k, l) = 1 if residues k and l are interacting, δ(k, l) = 0 otherwise. e(ak, bl) corresponds to
the force field value for the residue pair of (k, l).
15
==PAGE:16==
2.3. TCRpMHCmodels - constructing models for benchmarking
The program TCRpMHCmodels [17] was used to construct a data set of computational struc-
tural models to score them and evaluate the force field on unseen models. The target structures
to be used for modelling were found in the IEDB [13]. These were human complexes with
9-mer peptides bound to HLA*02:01 molecules. After cleaning the structures with LYRA, we
ended up with 37 non-redundant wildtype structures. To construct a negative set of models
we made a set with the same 37 structures, but with a swapped peptide from another struc-
ture. These peptides were selected randomly but were restricted to have a maximum of 6/9
ID to the original wildtype peptide. Now, we could model the wildtype and swapped set via
TCRpMHCmodels, creating a positive and a negative validation set for benchmarking. In the
modelling process, we generally restricted the program to only use templates that had maxi-
mum 95 % TCR α as well as β ID, and maximum 6/9 peptide ID (other TCR restrictions were
also tested, peptide restrictions were held constant - see Results section). The models were
made with the template chain weights of 1/3 MHC, 1/3 peptide, 1/6 TCR α and 1/6 TCR β.
An overview of the model evaluation data set can be seen in table 2.2.
Nr. of wildtype models
Nr. of swapped models
HLA restriction
Peptide restriction
Modelling tool
37
37
Human MHC I, HLA*02:01
9-mers
TCRpMHCmodels
Table (2.2)
Summary of the modelled evaluation data used in the project.
2.3.1. Statistics of model scorings
Statistical significance between wildtype and swapped models were evaluated based on the
non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test. The test assesses whether the two groups are likely to
derive from the same population [21]. Significance was decided based on a 5 % significance
level. Tests were examined based on the alternative hypothesis, that the distribution of positive
(wildtype) complexes is higher than the distribution of negative (swapped) complexes:
HA : The median of the positive group is higher than the median of the negative group
2.4. Leave one out and force field restrictions
A concern when working with biological data for predictions is the possibility of bias, poten-
tially leading to misleading results and conclusions. This can often happen if the data set used
has low capacity. If the data contains a clear biological signal, this signal should be observable
16
==PAGE:17==
throughout the data set and not only in smaller parts of the data. This paper states the hypothe-
sis that there is a difference in the scores between a cognate peptide and a non-binding peptide,
and that the difference should be a positive value (∆> 0, wildtype > swapped). Assuming
this is the cause of a biological pattern, we should be able to leave out closely related struc-
tures in the force field (sequence ID based) when scoring new models, keeping the biological
signal. Thus, when using restrictions on the force field we should formulate a new force field
for every model to be scored, specific for just that model. Generally, the force field restrictions
threshold was set to only use structures with TCR α and TCR β sequences of maximum 95 %
(BLOSUM) [22] ID as well as 6/9 peptide ID (for the structures that had 9-mer peptides).
3. Results
The following results section describes the most important findings of this thesis. This in-
cludes a description of the energy force field used to score new peptide-TCR pairs as well as a
statistical assessment of the force field. Further, it includes an assessment of using the energy
force field to score and evaluate modelled structures of wildtypes and models with a randomly
swapped peptide. In section 3.3 the pseudocount contribution to the force field is described.
An analysis of the individual peptide positions in the models is covered, and lastly, the depen-
dencies of model scorings (including the model variations and deviations) are analysed and
the CDR3 regions are evaluated individually.
3.1. The energy force field
The energy force field was constructed as described in section 2.2. Binary contact maps were
formed for each of the structures and an example is shown in figure 3.1. The raw interaction
counts and transformed energy force field for the full structural data set of 103 TCRpMHC
structures are shown in figure 3.2. The force field values correspond to the relative binding
enrichment level. That is, they are the relative enrichment of the interaction between amino
acid A and B compared to A’s interactions with all other amino acids and B’s interactions with
all other amino acids. This can also be described as whether the interaction between A and B
is seen in higher or lower frequency than to be expected by random contact formation. As seen
from the contact map, some amino acids from the CDR3 region are observed in a high abun-
dance of interactions, while some interactions are rarely or never seen within the structural
data set. Isoleucine from the CDR3 region is generally observed to be interacting less than to
be expected by random contact formation whereas asparagine and serine from CDR3 are often
17
==PAGE:18==
observed in more interactions than to be expected by random. Interestingly, no peptide amino
acid has a general enrichment pattern in the interaction with the CDR3. Further, it is clear
that several interactions are not at all contained within the data set (cysteine from the CDR3
region being an example), requiring the need of a pseudocount term to avoid zerocounts, be-
fore transforming counts to frequencies and through the energy function described in methods
section 2.2.1.
Figure (3.1)
3D structure and binary contact map for the 1AO7 complex. The binary
contact maps have the peptide residues on the X axis, and the CDR3 α and β residues on the
Y axis. In the binary contact map a 1 (depicted as black cell) corresponds to a residue to
residue interaction, a 0 (depicted as light cell) corresponds to no residue to residue
interaction.
Figure (3.2)
Left heatmap shows the raw interaction count map (all binary contact maps
added up). From this map the counts were made into frequencies, a pseudocount value was
added, and the values normalized to form the energy force field (right heatmap).
18
==PAGE:19==
3.1.1. Energy force field statistics
Table 3.1 shows an overview of the ten residue to residue interactions that are present in high-
est quantity within the structural data set. Table 3.2 shows an overview of the ten residue
to residue interactions with the highest value after normalization. Figure 3.3 shows the fre-
quencies of chemical property pairs represented within the data set. In the binding groove,
most residue pairs are either formed by nonpolar to nonpolar interaction or nonpolar to polar
interaction.
CDR3 residue
Peptide residue
Nr. of interactions
Glycine
Glycine
22
Aspartic Acid
Glycine
20
Glycine
Isoleucine
19
Serine
Glycine
18
Glycine
Leucine
16
Leucine
Isoleucine
14
Tyrosine
Proline
13
Serine
Phenylalanine
12
Asparagine
Leucine
12
Glycine
Valine
11
Table (3.1)
Summary of the 10 residue interactions with the highest presence in the
structural data set.
CDR3 residue
Peptide residue
Normalized interaction value
Serine
Phenylalanine
1.687729
Aspartic Acid
Arginine
1.552424
Serine
Glycine
1.543971
Serine
Valine
1.535366
Tryptothan
Aspartic Acid
1.489903
Aspartic Acid
Glycine
1.420910
Serine
Proline
1.380913
Asparagine
Serine
1.376575
Aspartic Acid
Lysine
1.335753
Glutamine
Histidine
1.327784
Table (3.2)
Summary of the 10 residue interactions with the highest normalized interaction
value in the structural data set.
19
==PAGE:20==
Figure (3.3)
The chemical properties of amino acid pairs (frequencies) in the structural
data set.
3.2. Evaluating the force field - TCRpMHCmodels
In order to evaluate the force field, a new data set of modelled structures, consisting of 37
wildtype models and 37 swapped negative models were constructed (see also methods section
2.3). The models were constructed via TCRpMHCmodels and used for benchmarking. They
were built from the sequences of 37 PDB structures of HLA*02:01 human complexes with
9-mer peptides. Our statistical hypothesis was that the wildtype models would score higher
than the ”fake” models with a randomly swapped peptide. We tested the force field scoring
via different conditions and restrictions. In the TCRpMHCmodels pipeline, two different
restrictions were changed: 1. The maximum allowed % TCR α / β ID of the target to the
templates selected by the program, 2. The maximum allowed peptide ID of the target to the
templates selected by the program. Likewise, the two same conditions could be changed when
making the force field for each model to be scored - only including complexes from the data
set that were within the restriction thresholds of TCR % ID and peptide ID. In figure 3.4 we
20
==PAGE:21==
evaluated four different restriction methods on the wildtype and swapped models. In the figure,
restrictions correspond to using maximum 95 % TCR ID and maximum 6/9 peptide ID. From
the figure it is apparent that when the force field is unrestricted (every complex in the structure
data set is allowed to take part in the force field) the wildtype models score significantly higher
based on the Mann-Whitney U statistical test. However, as soon as we start restricting the force
field down from the 100 % threshold the difference between the distribution of wildtype and
swapped models becomes small and rather insignificant. Further, we also see a drop-off in the
separation of the two groups when using just the template restrictions in TCRpMHCmodels.
Figure (3.4)
Score distributions for the wildtype and swapped models with different
TCRpMHCmodels and force field restrictions. From left to right: 1. Scorings with no force
field and template restrictions, 2. Scorings with template restrictions but no force field
restrictions, 3. Scorings with force field restrictions and no template restrictions, 4. Scorings
with force field and template restrictions.
Restrictions correspond to 95 % TCR α / β ID, 6/9 peptide ID.
21
==PAGE:22==
In figure 3.5 the p-values are visualized for the alternative hypothesis (WT > SW) - made with
different % ID restrictions of template selection in TCRpMHCmodels. Figure 3.5 (a) is made
with the force field being restricted to only choose structures of maximum 95 % TCR ID and
6/9 peptide ID. Figure 3.5 (b) is made with the allowance of all 103 structures in the force
field when scoring the models. When using a significance level of 0.05 all the p-values in the
restricted force field plot are non-significant. In the non force field restricted plot however, the
p-values are all significant (WT > SW). The sudden shift in significance when allowing all
of the structures to be used in the scoring process might be a signal of high bias towards the
wildtypes.
(a)
(b)
Figure (3.5)
(a) Mann-Whithey U p-values (WT > SW) using different TCRpMHCmodels
TCR % ID restrictions. Scorings made with force field restrictions. (b) Mann-Whithey U
p-values (WT > SW) using different TCRpMHCmodels TCR % ID restrictions. Scorings
made without force field restrictions.
Force field restrictions correspond to 95 % TCR α / β ID, 6/9 peptide ID.
3.3. Pseudocount contribution
The pseudocount term was added to the residue pair counts to account and adjust for the ze-
rocounts in the data set. This approach is also described in the TCRen paper [1]. The data
set in this project holds few data points relatively considered. Thus, the addition of pseudo-
count becomes rather important for the force field values and scorings. The pseudocount was
chosen to be a number in the range [0.001:5] and was evaluated by testing the values when
22
==PAGE:23==
scoring the wildtype and swapped models with restrictions (95 % TCR ID and 6/9 peptide
ID, TCRpMHCmodels and force field). Thus, the pseudocount achieving the lowest Mann-
Whitney U p-value was chosen and used for further analysis. In figure 3.6 the p-values of the
alternative Mann-Whitney U test for different pseudocount values are shown. As shown the
best prediction performance was captured at pseudocount = 1, where the p-value was 0.489.
Thus, the pseudocount value used for force field formulations was chosen to be 1.
Figure (3.6)
Mann-Whitney U p-values for different pseudocount values.
3.4. Positional peptide scorings
To obtain more knowledge about which peptide positions are vital in the direct contact to the
CDR3 region, a positional analysis was carried out. Each peptide position in the modelled
complexes were scored (instead of the combined score for the full peptide). The scorings
clearly show that not all positions in the peptide are of equal importance in the interaction to
CDR3. In figure 3.7 the interaction counts as well as scores are shown for each position of
the wildtype and swapped peptides. Only few (less than 10) interactions are seen for position
1, 2 and 3 while no interactions are observed from position 9. The majority of interactions
from the peptide are held within position 4 and 5 while also position 6, 7 and 8 have more
than 40 interactions. The scores show that position 5 have higher median scores for wildtype
peptides compared to the swapped peptides. For position 4, 6, 7 and 8 the swapped peptide
median scores are higher than the wildtypes. Position 2 and 9 in the peptide are considered to
23
==PAGE:24==
be anchor positions to the MHC [23]. Therefore, it is not surprising that the peptides do not
form interactions with the CDR3 from these positions.
(a)
(b)
Figure (3.7)
(a) Interaction counts of each peptide position for wildtype and swapped
peptides. (b) Scores of each peptide position for wildtype and swapped peptides (using 95 %
TCR α / β ID, 6/9 peptide ID - force field and template restrictions).
3.5. Model scoring dependencies
To get insight on which parameters the scores depend on we visualized the ∆scores (WT
score - SW score) over the ∆best template total % ID (WT best template % ID - SW best
template % ID) of the templates to the target sequence (both the model template restrictions
and the force field restrictions were once again 95 % TCR α / β ID and 6/9 peptide ID).
In figure 3.8 the ∆scores display a positive correlation with the ∆best template % ID. This
correlation indicates that our force field scorings depend on the scored structure’s sequence %
ID to known TCRpMHC complexes. Thus, a factor of high importance for predictions and
statistical significance might be whether the wildtype or the swapped model is more identical
to the known complexes.
24
==PAGE:25==
Figure (3.8)
∆scorings for all wildtype vs swapped models (WT score - SW score) plotted
against ∆best template total % ID (WT best template % ID - SW best template % ID).
Pearson correlation = 0.339, p-value = 0.05.
Figure 3.9 shows the curves of development for the average TCR α, TCR β, peptide and total
IDs when building the models while lowering the maximum allowed TCR % ID for template
selection. As expected, all the IDs are considerably higher for the wildtypes compared to
the swapped when using 100 % TCR ID (no TCR restrictions). This is natural as the target
structures themselves in this case can be used to create the models. When lowering the TCR
% ID from 100 % the swapped models largely get higher sequence IDs to the templates, or
they are equal at best in all of the four different visualizations. Further, the different % IDs
drop quickly to ∼55 % when the % ID threshold is lowered to less than 100 %, suggesting
that TCRpMHCmodels has difficulties making strong and variable models when restricting
the TCR % ID.
3.5.1. Model variation
We calculated RMSDs across all models (74 models, 37 wildtype and 37 swapped) to get
a view of the spacial deviation between them, aiming towards a better understanding of the
variation or lack of variation in the models. The models were rotated onto each other via
25
==PAGE:26==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure (3.9)
Charts showing how the different IDs (to templates) change in
TCRpMHCmodels when lowering the threshold for maximum allowed TCR ID of the
templates. (a) TCR α ID vs TCR ID threshold. (b) TCR β ID vs TCR ID threshold. (c)
Peptide ID vs TCR ID threshold. (d) Total ID vs TCR ID threshold.
26
==PAGE:27==
the Kabsch algorithm [24] in all possible combinations of pairs and the pairwise RMSDs are
shown in the heatmap in figure 3.10. As seen the distances between the models are gen-
erally quite low (∼1-1.2 ˚A) for protein complexes. The vast majority lies within the same
range of deviation to each other. This might infer that TCRpMHCmodels tend to make very
generalized average complexes of TCRpMHC structures when modelling them. Therefore, it
naturally gets harder to distinguish wildtype and swapped models, and the force field scoring
likely becomes more random. This argument is strengthened by the fact that the RMSD be-
tween wildtype and swapped tend to be around the same as the RMSD between wildtype and
wildtype or swapped and swapped. Figure 3.11 shows the structure of the 1AO7 TCRpMHC
complex superimposed in different states. First, the crystal structure is superimposed onto
the wildtype model (RMSD = 1.97). Second, the crystal structure is superimposed onto the
swapped model (RMSD = 2.06). Lastly, the wildtype model is superimposed onto the swapped
model (RMSD = 1.03). As shown, the RMSD between the modelled complexes (wildtype on
swapped) of 1AO7 is reasonably lower than the RMSD between the crystal structure and any
of the two models.
Figure (3.10)
Root mean squared deviation (RMSD) for all pairs of modelled complexes.
Wildtype = red, swapped = blue.
27
==PAGE:28==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure (3.11)
Superimposition of 1AO7 complex in structure (light-brown), wildtype
model (red) and swapped model (blue) states. (a) 1AO7 structure superimposed onto the
1AO7 wildtype model, RMSD = 1.97. (b) 1AO7 structure superimposed onto the 1AO7
swapped model, RMSD = 2.06. (c) 1AO7 wildtype model superimposed onto the 1AO7
swapped model, RMSD = 1.03.
3.6. CDR3 individual region evaluation
In this paper, the CDR3 regions α and β have been treated as an entity (building one force
field for the combined CDR3 α β interactions). However, the binding patterns can often be
quite different in CDR3 α contra CDR3 β. It was tested how the scorings would be distributed
when using CDR3 α and CDR3 β as separate entities when scoring the TCRpMHCmodels
structures as well as making the force field only using the corresponding CDR3 region. Figure
3.12 shows the scoring distributions of CDR3 α and β respectively with force field restrictions
as well as the distributions without any force field restrictions used (using TCRpMHCmodels
template restrictions). As shown in the figure the α region is given higher scorings than the
β region when using force field restrictions. When using no force fields restrictions the β
region (primarily the wildtype) gets higher scorings relatively to the α region. For the β
region without force field restrictions the wildtype models score significantly higher than the
swapped models (Mann Whitney U p-value = 0.00004).
28
==PAGE:29==
(a)
(b)
Figure (3.12)
(a) Wildtype and swapped model scorings for separate CDR3 α and β
scoring schemes. With force field restrictions. (b) Wildtype and swapped model scorings for
separate CDR3 α and β scoring schemes. Without force field restrictions.
Force field restrictions correspond to 95 % TCR α / β ID, 6/9 peptide ID.
4. Discussion
This section will include a brief summary of the major findings and results of the thesis. It will
include a discussion of the result implications as well as a discussion of the limitations of the
methods used. Further, the results will be compared to related studies and recommendations
for future research will be considered.
4.1. Predicting on unknown complexes
This thesis examines the obstacle of predicting peptide binding ability and CD8+ T cell ac-
tivation, using structural data to make estimations of binding energies between residues in
the TCRpMHC binding cleft. Being able to predict on unknown antigens has wide potential.
Clinically it may help understanding the right treatment of immune and cancer patients and
assist in vaccine design [25, 26]. We still have some way to go to understand the important
mechanics and interactions within the peptide-TCR activation procedure. Here, we used the
available structural data for human TCRpMHC I and tried to learn from these complexes by
29
==PAGE:30==
doing predictions on modelled (unknown) complexes. While the results suggest that there is
hope, we were not able to clearly distinguish wildtype models from negative models when us-
ing a non-biased, restricted prediction approach. When allowing all the structures to build the
force field, we were able to show a clear difference in scores for the different groups. These
results imply that there is definite potential of using statistical pair potentials to predict cog-
nate epitopes. However, using this method we are not yet in a state where we can confidently
predict binding of unknown structures.
The use of TCRpMHCmodels to make positive and negative evaluation data gives rise to
consideration as the swapped negative model templates often had a higher total identity to the
target than the wildtype models (section 3.5). In addition, it was shown that there is posi-
tive correlation between the scores and the total identities. Thus, one side of the challenge,
however difficult it is, is our ability to make good prediction evaluation data. The models
we are currently able to make with TCRpMHCmodels often have low variety which can be
realized from the RMSD analysis in section 3.5.1. This means we often end up with some sort
of average model, suggesting the positive and negative models may not differ much in struc-
tural composition, making it difficult for the force field to distinguish the groups. Capturing
a wider range of structural disparity could give us better prediction power as e.g. the CDR3
region of wildtype structures may often have differences due to the variable gene segments
as described in section 1.1.1. That said, when using an unrestricted force field the wildtype
models always score significantly higher than the swapped models, inferring a signal of wild-
type binding motif in the models, though it may be captured due to near neighbor structures
used in the predictions. The concern becomes apparent since the sequence data used to make
the wildtype models are also part of the sequences used in the structural data set, while the
swapped peptides are not in the structural data set. These facts are essential to realize, and the
results do suggest that better evaluation data but also a greater and diverse structural data set
are important steps for the use of statistical pair potentials to predict cognate TCR targets.
4.2. The statistical use of structures
It is to this day still a strong conviction that we have a lot to learn within structural protein
data. The data load is becoming greater during the last decades, yet for TCRpMHC struc-
tures the data is still quite scarce with less than 200 3D structures publicly available. Having
high amounts of data is of great emphasis when applying statistics to make immunological
predictions [4, 27]. When using just the human MHC I data as in this paper (while sorting
30
==PAGE:31==
away structures with missing stretches) we got down to a data set of 103 structures. It is ap-
parent that data quantity might be a point of discussion, especially when restricting the force
field from using all structures when scoring new models. The scorings are significant (WT >
SW) when allowing all structures to be used for prediction, but when using an ID threshold
of anything below 100 % (TCR and peptide) we start to detect the seemingly more random
scores given to wildtype contra swapped models. With force field restrictions used, an im-
portant factor may well be the % IDs of the nearest neighbors in the restricted structure set.
One downside to using the leave out thresholds when working with smaller data sets is the
potential loss of signal, simply from getting too few data points as structures are sorted away.
Thus, if possible we should avoid data bias, but try to keep enough data for meaningful results.
While there are implications that the used predictive method might not be perfect with the
availability of structures, there is plenty relevant lessons to learn regarding the interactions
of the TCR and peptide in the TCRpMHC complex. From the force field we realize which
interactions are seen in highest numbers in the structures, while we calculate which interac-
tions are most enriched in the data by normalization. As seen in the results section, glycine
(CDR3) to glycine (peptide) is the most common interaction in the data, while serine (CDR3)
to phenylalanine (peptide) is the highest normalized interaction. Glycine has been shown
to be abundantly present and engaging in contact from the intermediate regions of both the
CDR3 α and β loops [28]. Some residues have very low counts (or zerocounts) of interac-
tions (cysteine, histidine etc.), resulting in high uncertainty for these residues, and making the
pseudocount term rather important for the scoring scheme of new complexes.
From the results it is clear that position 4-8 (4 and 5 being the highest) in the modelled peptides
hold the vast majority of interactions to the CDR3 region. Position 2 and 9 are known to be
MHC anchor positions [23, 29], resulting in minimal direct interaction to the CDR3 residues.
Thus, the results of having low interactions to the TCR from peptide position 2 and none from
peptide position 9 are in line with known research and literature [23]. The chemical properties
of contacting amino acid pairs show that there is a clear preference in the binding groove of
either nonpolar to polar or nonpolar to nonpolar pairs.
4.3. Comparison to associate studies
The use of structural data is being applied with different aims within the immunological world
of research. A few different studies have tried to use structural data to predict binding affinities
31
==PAGE:32==
and estimate energies within the TCRpMHC complex.
The TCRen paper [1] showed strong results of predicting neo-cancer epitopes. However,
in the paper it wasn’t demonstrated that the TCRen force field also works under restricted
approaches, such as leave one out. The TCRen paper takes an approach of using both MHC I
and MHC II complexes while also including interactions within the CDR1 and CDR2 region
in the predictions. Due to this, it has a wider data set than in this project. Mixing up MHC I /
CD8+ and MHC II / CD4+ interactions in one pot can lead to misleading conclusions, as these
binding patterns are not of the same exact nature [30]. For the pair potential calculations we
used an approach similar to the one used in the TCRen paper. TCRen validates scorings on
a holdout set of newer published PDB TCRpMHC complexes, and scores them high on their
scoring scheme. However, they don’t show that they are able to predict high scores in those
complexes if using a non-biased, restricted force field. The concern regarding this becomes
that scored structures will have one or more close neighbor structures favoring interactions
shared between the scored complexes and the nearest neighbor force field complexes. This is
what we try to avoid by restricting the force field structure selection, such that it can not use
structures too closely related to the complex to be scored and predicted. The differences in
approach provides the differences in results and conclusions to TCRen, and it is our belief that
we still have more work to do in order to provide confident predictions and practical use on
unknown TCR targets.
Another paper [31] strived to use a deep learning AlphaFold TCR pipeline [16] to make struc-
tural models with the aim of predicting TCR-peptide binding when having limited structural
data. They tried to predict by picking out the correct peptide out from a pool via the mod-
elling procedure. While the models and predictions did show some accuracy it was too low
for general conclusions and practical applications. Further, while they tried to avoid bias by
restricting the AlphaFold template assembly, it is still possible that the results are affected
by bias toward native-like conformations. Nonetheless, machine learning approaches do have
huge potential within this area of research and will undoubtedly assist in uncovering the secrets
of TCR-peptide binding and T cell activation, putting an extra layer to pure statistical methods.
It has been studied whether there are general rule markers and breakers that fit to the TCR
recognition of MHC I peptides [32]. Both TCR chains contribute quite equally to the peptide-
MHC I interaction, yet their contribution vary quite a lot from complex to complex (TCR
α: 28-78 % contribution, TCR β: 22-72 % contribution). Structures that have been solved
32
==PAGE:33==
show that the α/β TCR is required to sit on top of the binding cleft. Surprisingly, there have
been examples where the CDR3 loops are ”shifted around” and do not directly contact the
peptide, leaving the germline-encoded CDR1 and CDR2 regions to form the peptide inter-
actions [32]. Also, the TCR may dock onto the MHC I with different spacial angles and
recent findings show that the peptide-MHC I can be highly flexible and dynamic, altering its
shape [33]. The binding groove of the TCRpMHC complex is a very complex mechanistic
interaction, and though high TCRpMHC affinity is consistently correlated to T cell activation,
exceptions have shown that some T cells are able to bind a peptide-MHC complex without
inducing T cell activation [32]. All these elements make it harder to produce reliable predic-
tions with methodologies like the residue to residue distance used in this thesis. In the future,
an expansion with a greater use of mechanistic binding information may give rise to stronger
predictions, uncovering some of the complex secrets of T cell based immune activation.
4.4. Future research
It is our conviction that the concepts and methods used in this paper are legit for estimating
pair potentials of residue interactions in the TCR-peptide binding cleft, and for predicting and
scoring unknown TCR targets. However, it is also clear that there is a demand for some adjust-
ments and improvements in future work. Some of these are reliant on the research community
to acquire more and stronger data and modelling tools. The most important points and needs to
make statistical pair potentials for predictions of unknown TCR targets a sharpened approach,
can be summed up to:
• A need for more and more diverse structural TCRpMHC PDB data. More data will
allow for a better statistical distinguishment between positive and negative targets.
• A need for better modelled structures (this will also follow as a natural side effect from
getting more structural data).
• A greater understanding of decisive molecular aspects and events in the binding groove
of the TCRpMHC complex. This will allow for improved and adjusted pair potential
calculations (different weightings of residue pairs etc.), resulting in stronger predictions.
5. Conclusion
In this thesis, structural protein complex data was used to investigate the interactions and
mechanisms of the TCRpMHC complex. The peptide-MHC activation of the T cell is a crucial
33
==PAGE:34==
step in T cell mediated immune responses, and it is our belief that structural data can enlighten
this process. Based on a promising study from last year, TCRen [1], we wanted to examine
whether it is genuinely possible to use statistical pair potentials as a measure of residue to
residue binding energy between the peptide and the TCR. While our approach showed strong
significant results of predicting the correct models when using a biased, non-restricted force
field, we were not able to display that the force field predicts equally well under restricted
conditions. Realizing the possibility of biased predictions is crucial, notably when working
with a data set of small sample size.
While we can and have learned a lot about the interactions, preferences and mechanisms in the
binding cleft of the TCRpMHC by applying statistical methods to 3D data, we still have steps
to take concerning confident predictions of real, unknown TCR targets. These steps include
having wider structural data sets available and stronger modelling tools.
This thesis shines light on a crucial step in the activation and mediation of the human immune
system, and it is our aspiration and hope that methods used in this study can be applied and
built upon to make use of structural information for epitope predictions, with great potential
in practical applications.
34
==PAGE:35==
References
[1] Vadim K. Karnaukhov, Dmitriy S. Shcherbinin, Anton O. Chugunov, Dmitriy M. Chu-
dakov, Roman G. Efremov, Ivan V. Zvyagin, and Mikhail Shugay. Predicting TCR-
peptide recognition based on residue-level pairwise statistical potential. bioRxiv, page
2022.02.15.480516, 2022.
[2] Lijun Zhao and Yu J. Cao. Engineered T Cell Therapy for Cancer in the Clinic. Frontiers
in Immunology, 10(October), 2019.
[3] Joseph Yunis, Kirsty R. Short, and Di Yu. Severe respiratory viral infections: T-cell
functions diverging from immunity to inflammation. Trends in Microbiology, pages 1–
13, 2023.
[4] Cameron Mura, Eli J. Draizen, and Philip E. Bourne. Structural biology meets data
science: does anything change? Current Opinion in Structural Biology, 52(October):95–
102, 2018.
[5] Jacques Neefjes, Marlieke L.M. Jongsma, Petra Paul, and Oddmund Bakke. Towards a
systems understanding of MHC class i and MHC class II antigen presentation. Nature
Reviews Immunology, 11(12):823–836, 2011.
[6] Kevin Range, Darrin M, and York Adam Moser. NIH Public Access, volume 23. 2012.
[7] Bissan Al-Lazikani, Arthur M. Lesk, and Cyrus Chothia. Canonical structures for the
hypervariable regions of T cell αβ receptors. Journal of Molecular Biology, 295(4):979–
995, 2000.
[8] Markus G. Rudolph, Robyn L. Stanfield, and Ian A. Wilson. How TCRs bind MHCs,
peptides, and coreceptors. Annual Review of Immunology, 24:419–466, 2006.
[9] Yimo Sun, Fenge Li, Heather Sonnemann, Kyle R. Jackson, Amjad H. Talukder, Ar-
jun S. Katailiha, and Gregory Lizee. Evolution of cd8+ t cell receptor (Tcr) engineered
therapies for the treatment of cancer. Cells, 10(9):1–19, 2021.
[10] De Dong, Lvqin Zheng, Jianquan Lin, Bailing Zhang, Yuwei Zhu, Ningning Li,
Shuangyu Xie, Yuhang Wang, Ning Gao, and Zhiwei Huang. Structural basis of as-
sembly of the human T cell receptor–CD3 complex. Nature, 573(7775):546–552, 2019.
35
==PAGE:36==
[11] Stephen K. Burley, Helen M. Berman, Charmi Bhikadiya, Chunxiao Bi, Li Chen, Luigi
Di Costanzo, Cole Christie, Jose M. Duarte, Shuchismita Dutta, Zukang Feng, Su-
tapa Ghosh, David S. Goodsell, Rachel Kramer Green, Vladimir Guranovic, Dmytro
Guzenko, Brian P. Hudson, Yuhe Liang, Robert Lowe, Ezra Peisach, Irina Periskova,
Chris Randle, Alexander Rose, Monica Sekharan, Chenghua Shao, Yi Ping Tao, Yana
Valasatava, Maria Voigt, John Westbrook, Jasmine Young, Christine Zardecki, Marina
Zhuravleva, Genji Kurisu, Haruki Nakamura, Yumiko Kengaku, Hasumi Cho, Junko
Sato, Ju Yaen Kim, Yasuyo Ikegawa, Atsushi Nakagawa, Reiko Yamashita, Takahiro
Kudou, Gert Jan Bekker, Hirofumi Suzuki, Takeshi Iwata, Masashi Yokochi, Nao-
hiro Kobayashi, Toshimichi Fujiwara, Sameer Velankar, Gerard J. Kleywegt, Stephen
Anyango, David R. Armstrong, John M. Berrisford, Matthew J. Conroy, Jose M. Dana,
Mandar Deshpande, Paul Gane, Romana G´aborov´a, Deepti Gupta, Aleksandras Gut-
manas, Jaroslav Koˇca, Lora Mak, Saqib Mir, Abhik Mukhopadhyay, Nurul Nadzirin,
Sreenath Nair, Ardan Patwardhan, Typhaine Paysan-Lafosse, Lukas Pravda, Osman
Salih, David Sehnal, Mihaly Varadi, Radka Vˇarekov´a, John L. Markley, Jeffrey C. Hoch,
Pedro R. Romero, Kumaran Baskaran, Dimitri Maziuk, Eldon L. Ulrich, Jonathan R.
Wedell, Hongyang Yao, Miron Livny, and Yannis E. Ioannidis. Protein Data Bank: The
single global archive for 3D macromolecular structure data. Nucleic Acids Research,
47(D1):D520–D528, 2019.
[12] T. Huxford. X-Ray Crystallography. Brenner’s Encyclopedia of Genetics: Second Edi-
tion, pages 366–368, 2013.
[13] Randi Vita, Swapnil Mahajan, James A. Overton, Sandeep Kumar Dhanda, Sheridan
Martini, Jason R. Cantrell, Daniel K. Wheeler, Alessandro Sette, and Bjoern Peters. The
Immune Epitope Database (IEDB): 2018 update. Nucleic Acids Research, 47(D1):D339–
D343, 2019.
[14] David N. Garboczi, Partho Ghosh, Ursula Utz, Qing R. Fan, William E. Biddison, and
Don C. Wiley. Structure of the complex between human T-cell receptor, viral peptide
and HLA-A2. Nature, 384(6605):134–141, 1996.
[15] Gerard J. Kleywegt and T. Alwyn Jones. Model building and refinement practice. Meth-
ods in Enzymology, 277(1995):208–230, 1997.
[16] John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf
Ronneberger, Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin ˇZ´ıdek, Anna Potapenko,
36
==PAGE:37==
Alex Bridgland, Clemens Meyer, Simon A.A. Kohl, Andrew J. Ballard, Andrew
Cowie, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Stanislav Nikolov, Rishub Jain, Jonas Adler, Trevor
Back, Stig Petersen, David Reiman, Ellen Clancy, Michal Zielinski, Martin Steinegger,
Michalina Pacholska, Tamas Berghammer, Sebastian Bodenstein, David Silver, Oriol
Vinyals, Andrew W. Senior, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Pushmeet Kohli, and Demis Hassabis.
Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature, 596(7873):583–
589, 2021.
[17] Kamilla Kjærgaard Jensen, Vasileios Rantos, Emma Christine Jappe, Tobias Hegelund
Olsen, Martin Closter Jespersen, Vanessa Jurtz, Leon Eyrich Jessen, Esteban Lanzarotti,
Swapnil Mahajan, Bjoern Peters, Morten Nielsen, and Paolo Marcatili. TCRpMHCmod-
els: Structural modelling of TCR-pMHC class I complexes. Scientific Reports, 9(1):1–
12, 2019.
[18] Michael Schantz Klausen, Mads Valdemar Anderson, Martin Closter Jespersen, Morten
Nielsen, and Paolo Marcatili. LYRA, a webserver for lymphocyte receptor structural
modeling. Nucleic Acids Research, 43(W1):W349–W355, 2015.
[19] Introduction Functional. [ 20 ] M odeller : Generation and Refinement of Homology-
Based Protein Structure Models ˇ ali ´ s F iser and A ndrej S By A ndra. 374, 2003.
[20] Jean Marc Dubois, Gilles Ouanounou, and B´eatrice Rouzaire-Dubois. The Boltzmann
equation in molecular biology. Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology, 99(2-
3):87–93, 2009.
[21] Nadim Nachar. The Mann-Whitney U: A Test for Assessing Whether Two Indepen-
dent Samples Come from the Same Distribution. Tutorials in Quantitative Methods for
Psychology, 4(1):13–20, 2008.
[22] William R Pearson. Selecting the Right EMR Vendor Selecting the Right EMR Vendor.
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics, (43):3.5.1–3.5.9, 2013.
[23] Sivanand. HHS Public Access. Physiology & behavior, 176(3):139–148, 2019.
[24] Short Communications, References Constraint, and See Pawley.
j2a . . . . ˜m,( ˜
W,,X.kX,,j+ &j). (6):922–923, 1958.
[25] Carl Britto and Galit Alter. The next frontier in vaccine design: blending immune corre-
lates of protection into rational vaccine design. Current Opinion in Immunology, 78(Jan-
uary), 2022.
37
==PAGE:38==
[26] Xueyin Mei, Pan Gu, Chuanlai Shen, Xue Lin, and Jian Li. Computer-Based Immunoin-
formatic Analysis to Predict Candidate T-Cell Epitopes for SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine De-
sign. Frontiers in Immunology, 13(March):1–13, 2022.
[27] Szilvia Barsi and Bence Szalai. Modeling in systems biology: Causal understanding
before prediction? Patterns, 2(6):100280, 2021.
[28] Kun Yu, Ji Shi, Dan Lu, and Qiong Yang. Comparative analysis of CDR3 regions in
paired human αβ CD8 T cells. FEBS Open Bio, 9(8):1450–1459, 2019.
[29] Malgorzata A. Garstka, Alexander Fish, Patrick H.N. Celie, Robbie P. Joosten,
George M.C. Janssen, Ilana Berlin, Rieuwert Hoppes, Magda Stadnik, Lennert Janssen,
Huib Ovaa, Peter A. Van Veelen, Anastassis Perrakis, and Jacques Neefjes. The first step
of peptide selection in antigen presentation by MHC class I molecules. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 112(5):1505–1510,
2015.
[30] Yanan Wu, Nianzhi Zhang, Keiichiro Hashimoto, Chun Xia, and Johannes M. Dijkstra.
Structural Comparison Between MHC Classes I and II; in Evolution, a Class-II-Like
Molecule Probably Came First. Frontiers in Immunology, 12(June):1–24, 2021.
[31] Philip Bradley. Structure-based prediction of T cell receptor:peptide-MHC interactions.
bioRxiv, page 2022.08.05.503004, 2022.
[32] Christopher Szeto, Christian A. Lobos, Andrea T. Nguyen, and Stephanie Gras. TCR
recognition of peptide–MHC-I: Rule makers and breakers.
International Journal of
Molecular Sciences, 22(1):1–26, 2021.
[33] Jade R Hopkins, Bruce J MacLachlan, Stephen Harper, Andrew K Sewell, and David K
Cole. Unconventional modes of peptide–HLA-I presentation change the rules of TCR
engagement. Discovery Immunology, 1(1):1–11, 2022.
38
==PAGE:39==
39
==PAGE:40==
A. Peptide sequences
PDB ID
Wildtype peptide
Swapped peptide
1ao7
LLFGYPVYV
SLLMWITQC
1bd2
LLFGYPVYV
ILAKFLHWL
1oga
GILGFVFTL
ILAKFLHWL
1qrn
LLFGYAVYV
GILGFVFTL
1qsf
LLFGYPVAV
NLVPMVATV
2bnq
SLLMWITQV
LLFGYAVYV
2bnr
SLLMWITQC
SLYNTVATL
2f53
SLLMWITQC
GILEFVFTL
2gj6
LLFGKPVYV
GLCTLVAML
2p5w
SLLMWITQC
LGYGFVNYI
2pye
SLLMWITQC
AAGIGILTV
2vlj
GILGFVFTL
YLEPGPVTV
2vlk
GILGFVFTL
LLFGYAVYV
2vlr
GILGFVFTL
LLFGFPVYV
3d39
LLFGPVYV
SLYNTIATL
3d3v
LLFGPVYV
GILGLVFTL
3gsn
NLVPMVATV
LLFGYPVYV
3h9s
MLWGYLQYV
LGYGFVNYI
3pwp
LGYGFVNYI
GILEFVFTL
3qdj
AAGIGILTV
SLFNTIAVL
3qeq
AAGIGILTV
MLWGYLQYV
3qfj
LLFGFPVYV
ILAKFLHWL
4ftv
LLFGYPVYV
AAGIGILTV
4mnq
ILAKFLHWL
SLFNTIAVL
5d2l
NLVPMVATV
SLLMWITQC
5d2n
NLVPMVATV
GLCTLVAML
5e6i
GILGFVFTL
AAGIGILTV
5eu6
YLEPGPVTV
GILEFVFTL
5euo
GILGFVFTL
SLYNTVATL
5hhm
GILGLVFTL
LLFGYAVYV
5hho
GILEFVFTL
SLYNTIATL
5isz
GILGFVFTL
SLFNTIAVL
5men
ILAKFLHWL
LLFGYPVYV
5nme
SLYNTVATL
GILEFVFTL
5nmf
SLYNTIATL
NLVPMVATV
5nmg
SLFNTIAVL
SLLMWITQV
5tez
GILGFVFTL
LLFGFPVYV
Table (A.1)
Amino acid sequences for the wildtype and swapped peptides of the evaluation
data set.
40
==PAGE:41==
B. CDR3 length distribution
Figure (B.1)
Distribution of the CDR3 α lengths in the 103 TCRpMHC structures.
Figure (B.2)
Distribution of the CDR3 β lengths in the 103 TCRpMHC structures.
41
==PAGE:42==
C. PDB entry IDs
1ao7
2nx5
3h9s
3qfj
4g9f
4qrr
5e6i
5nmg
6bj3
6rpb
7n1f
1bd2
2p5e
3hg1
3sjv
4jfd
5brz
5e9d
5tez
6bj8
6rsy
7n6e
1lp9
2vlk
3kpr
3uts
4jfe
5bs0
5eu6
5wkf
6d78
6tmo
7rm4
1mi5
2vlr
3kps
3vxm
4jff
5c07
5euo
5wkh
6dkp
6tro
1oga
2ypl
3o4l
3vxr
4jrx
5c08
5hhm
5xot
6eqa
6uon
1qrn
3d39
3pwp
3vxs
4l3e
5c0a
5hho
5xov
6eqb
6vmx
1qsf
3d3v
3qdg
3vxu
4mji
5c0b
5hyj
6am5
6mtm
6vqo
2ak4
3dxa
3qdj
3w0w
4mnq
5c0c
5men
6amu
6q3s
6vrm
2bnq
3ffc
3qdm
4ftv
4qok
5d2l
5nme
6avf
6r2l
6vrn
2gj6
3gsn
3qeq
4g8g
4qrp
5d2n
5nmf
6avg
6rp9
7n1e
Table (C.1)
Entry IDs of all PDB structures used in the structural data set.
1ao7
1bd2
1oga
1qrn
1qsf
2bnq
2bnr
2f53
2gj6
2p5w
2pye
2vlj
2vlk
2vlr
3d39
3d3v
3gsn
3h9s
3pwp
3qdj
3qeq
3qfj
4ftv
4mnq
5d2l
5d2n
5e6i
5eu6
5euo
5hhm
5hho
5isz
5men
5nme
5nmf
5nmg
5tez
Table (C.2)
Entry IDs of all PDB structures used in the modelled validation data set.
42
